A. E. Waite: The Hidden Church of the Holy Graal (1909)
=======================================================
Arthur Edward Waite’s 1909 study of the Grail romances and their esoteric meaning. The definitive Waite Graal work; source: Internet Archive.

HANDBOUND 
AT  THE 


UNIVERSITY  OF 
TORONTO  PRESS 


cijurcl)  of  tyt 
d^raal 


SOME  BOOKS  BY  THE  SAME    WRITER 

STUDIES  IN  MYSTICISM  AND  CERTAIN  AS- 
PECTS OF  THE  SECRET  TRADITION.  Large  demy 
8vo,  los.  6d.  net. 

Part  I.  The  Hither  Side  of  the  Portal.  Part  II.  Vestiges  of  the 
Outer  Ways.  Part  III.  The  Courts  of  the  Temple. 

"  Mr.  Waite  has  penetrated  very  near  to  the  heart  of  his  subject." — Saturday 
Review. 

"A  strange  and  challenging  book." — The  Outlook. 

"There  is  hidden  treasure  in  Mr.  Waite's  pages." — Guardian. 

STRANGE  HOUSES  OF  SLEEP.  With  Frontispiece 
Portrait  of  the  Author.  Foolscap  4to.  Parchment  gilt. 
I2s.  net. 

Part  I.  Shadows  of  Sacraments.  Part  II.  The  Hidden  Sacrament 
of  The  Holy  Graal.  Part  III.  The  Poor  Brother's  Mass  Book.  Part 
IV.  The  Book  of  the  King's  Dole,  and  Chantry  for  Plain  Song :  A 
Greater  Initiation. 

"Through  all  one  comes  in  touch  with  a  fine  spirit,  alive  to  the  glory  of  the 
world  and  all  that  charms  the  heart  and  sense  of  man,  yet  seeing  past  these 
with  something  of  the  soul  of  Galahad.  .  .  .  Rich  in  memorable  verse  and 
significant  thought,  so  closely  wedded  to  emotion  that  each  seems  either." — 
Glasgow  Herald. 

STEPS  TO  THE  CROWN.  Foolscap  8vo,  buckram, 
2s.  6d.  net. 

"Mr.  Waite  has  presented  his  philosophy  of  life  in  a  series  of  aphorisms. 
The  author  of  this  volume  is  well  known  as  one  of  the  best  living  authorities  on 
the  history  of  mysticism,  and  the  point  of  view  here  maintained  is  that  of  an 
initiate.  Man's  highest  destiny  lies — as  St.  Augustine  taught  many  centuries 
ago — in  his  ultimate  union  with  the  Divine  Nature.  There  are  several  hun- 
dreds of  aphorisms  in  this  slender  volume,  all  of  them  terse  and  pregnant." — 
Tke  Tribune. 


=fa      . 


^titotn  Cfmrd)  of 
(Sraal 

Hegentis  anD 


tfje 


Considered  in  their  Affinity  with  Certain  Mysteries 

of  Initiation  and  other  Traces  of  a  Secret 

Tradition  in  Christian  Times 


BY 

ARTHUR  EDWARD  WAITE 


sanctum  mfanit,  foel  sanctum  facit 


LONDON 
REBMAN    LIMITED 

129   SHAFTESBURY  AVENUE,  W.C. 
1909 


fti 


Printed  by  BALLANTYNE,  HANSON  6^  Co. 
At  the  Ballantyne  Press,  Edinburgh 


PREFACE 

IF  deeper  pitfalls  are  laid  by  anything  more  than  by  the 
facts  of  coincidence,  it  is  perhaps  by  the  intimations  and 
suggestions  of  writings  which  bear,  or  are  held  to  bear, 
on  their  surface  the  seals  of  allegory  and,  still  more,  of 
dual  allusion  ;  as  in  the  cases  of  coincidence,  so  in  these, 
it  is  necessary  for  the  historical  student  to  stand  zealously 
on  his  guard  and  not  to  acknowledge  second  meaning 
or  claims  implied,  however  plausible,  unless  they  are 
controlled  and  strengthened  by  independent  evidence. 
Even  with  this  precaution,  his  work  will  remain  anxious, 
for  the  lineal  path  is  difficult  to  find  and  follow.  Per- 
haps there  is  one  consolation  offered  by  the  gentle  life 
of  letters.  In  matters  of  interpretation,  if  always  to 
succeed  is  denied  us,  to  have  deserved  it  is  at  least 
something. 

Among  our  aids  there  is  one  aid  which  arises  from  the 
correspondences  between  distinct  systems  of  allegory  and 
symbolism.  They  are  important  within  their  own  sphere  ; 
and  it  is  by  subsidiary  lights  of  this  nature  that  research 
can  be  directed  occasionally  into  new  tracks,  from  which 
unexpected  and  perhaps  indubitable  results  may  be 
derived  ultimately.  When  the  existence  of  a  secondary 
and  concealed  meaning  seems  therefore  inferentially 
certain  in  a  given  department  of  literature — if  ordinary 
processes,  depending  on  evidence  of  the  external  kind, 
have  been  found  wanting — its  purpose  and  intention  may 
be  ascertained  by  a  comparison  with  other  secret  litera- 
tures, which  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the  firmest 
hermeneutical  ground  in  such  cases  must  be  sought  in 
evidence  which  inheres  and  is  common  to  several  depart- 


Preface 

ments  of  cryptic  writing.  It  is  in  this  way  that  the 
prepared  mind  moves  through  the  world  of  criticism 
as  through  outward  worlds  of  discovery. 

I  am  about  to  set  forth  after  a  new  manner,  and 
chiefly  for  the  use  of  English  mystics,  the  nature  of  the 
mystery  which  is  enshrined  in  the  old  romance-literature 
of  the  Holy  Graal.  As  a  literature  it  can  be  approached 
from  several  standpoints ;  and  at  the  root  it  has  a  direct 
consanguinity  with  other  mysteries,  belonging  to  the 
more  secret  life  of  the  soul.  I  propose  to  give  a  very 
full  account  of  all  the  considerations  which  it  involves, 
the  imperfect  speculations  included  of  some  who  have 
preceded  me  in  the  same  path — writers  whose  interests 
at  a  far  distance  are  not  utterly  dissimilar  to  my  own, 
though  their  equipment  has  been  all  too  slight.  I  shall 
endeavour  to  establish  at  the  end  that  there  are  certain 
things  in  transcendence  which  must  not  be  sought  in  the 
literature,  and  yet  they  arise  out  of  it.  The  task  will 
serve,  among  several  objects,  two  which  may  be  put 
on  record  at  the  moment — on  the  one  hand,  and  quite 
obviously,  to  illustrate  the  deeper  intimations  of  Graal 
literature,  and,  on  the  other,  certain  collateral  intimations 
which  lie  behind  the  teachings  of  the  great  churches  and 
are,  in  the  official  sense,  as  if  beyond,  their  ken.  Of  such 
intimations  is  all  high  seership.  The  task  itself  has  been 
undertaken  as  the  initial  consequence  of  several  first-hand 
considerations.  If  I  note  this  fact  at  so  early  a  stage  as 
the  preface,  it  is  because  of  the  opportunity  which  it  gives 
me  to  make  plain,  even  from  the  beginning,  that  I  hold  no 
warrant  to  impugn  preconceived  judgments,  as  such,  or, 
as  such,  to  set  out  in  search  of  novelties.  In  my  own 
defence  it  will  be  desirable  to  add  that  I  have  not  written 
either  as  an  enthusiast  or  a  partisan,  though  in  honour  to 
my  school  there  are  great  dedications  to  which  I  must 
confess  with  my  heart.  On  the  historical  side  there  is 
much  and  very  much  in  which  some  issues  of  the  evi- 
dence, on  production,  will  be  found  to  fall  short  of  demon- 
stration, and,  so  far  as  this  part  is  concerned,  I  offer  it  at 

vi 


Treface 

its  proper  worth.  On  the  symbolical  side,  and  on  that 
of  certain  implicits,  it  is  otherwise,  and  my  thesis  to  those 
of  my  school  will,  I  think,  come  not  only  with  a  strong 
appeal,  but  as  something  which  is  conclusive  within  its 
own  lines.  I  should  add  that,  rather  than  sought  out, 
the  undertaking  has  been  imposed  through  a  familiarity 
with  analogical  fields  of  symbolism,  the  correspondences 
of  which  must  be  unknown  almost  of  necessity  to  students 
who  have  not  passed  through  the  secret  schools  of 
thought. 

It  will  be  intelligible  from  these  statements  that  it  has 
not  been  my  purpose  to  put  forward  the  analogies  which  I 
have  established  as  a  thesis  for  the  instruction  of  scholar- 
ship, firstly,  because  it  is  concerned  with  other  matters 
which  are  important  after  their  own  kind,  and,  secondly, 
as  I  have  already  intimated,  because  I  am  aware  that  a  par- 
ticular equipment  is  necessary  for  their  full  appreciation, 
and  this,  for  obvious  reasons,  is  not  found  in  the  consti- 
tuted or  authorised  academies  of  official  research.  My 
own  investigation  is  designed  rather  for  those  who  are 
already  acquainted  with  some  part  at  least  of  the  hidden 
knowledge,  who  have  been  concerned  with  the  study  of  its 
traces  through  an  interest  proper  to  themselves — in  other 
words,  for  those  who  have  taken  their  place  within  the 
sanctuary  of  the  mystic  life,  or  at  least  in  its  outer 
circles. 

In  so  far  as  I  have  put  forward  my  thesis  under  the 
guidance  of  the  sovereign  reason,  I  look  for  the  recogni- 
tion of  scholarship,  which  in  its  study  of  the  literature 
has  loved  the  truth  above  all  things,  though  its  particular 
form  of  appreciation  has  led  it  rather  to  dedicate  especial 
zeal  to  a  mere  demonstration  that  the  literature  of  the 
Graal  has  its  basis  in  a  cycle  of  legend  wherein  there  is 
neither  a  Sacred  Vessel  nor  a  Holy  Mystery.  This  not- 
withstanding, there  is  no  scholar  now  living  in  England 
whose  conditional  sympathy  at  least  I  may  not  expect  to 
command  from  the  beginning,  even  though  I  deal  ulti- 
mately with  subjects  that  are  beyond  the  province  in  which 

vii 


Preface 

folk-lore  societies  can  adjudicate,  and  in  which  they  have 
earned  such  high  titles  of  honour. 

After  accepting  every  explanation  of  modern  erudition 
as  to  the  origin  of  the  Graal  elements,  there  remain  various 
features  of  the  romances  as  things  outside  the  general 
horizon  of  research,  and  they  are  those  which,  from  rny 
standpoint,  are  of  the  last  and  most  real  importance.  A 
scheme  of  criticism  which  fails  to  account  for  the  claim 
to  a  super-valid  formula  of  Eucharistic  consecration  and 
to  a  super-apostolical  succession  accounts  for  very  little 
that  matters  finally.  I  have  therefore  taken  up  the  sub- 
ject at  the  point  where  it  has  been  left  by  the  students  of 
folk-lore  and  all  that  which  might  term  itself  authorised 
scholarship.  Ut  adeptis  appareat  me  illis  parem  et  fratrem, 
I  have  made  myself  acquainted  with  the  chief  criticism 
of  the  cycle,  and  I  have  explored  more  than  one  curious 
tract  which  is  adjacent  to  the  cycle  itself.  It  is  with  the 
texts,  however,  that  I  am  concerned  only,  and  I  approach 
them  from  a  new  standpoint.  As  to  this,  it  will  be  better 
to  specify  from  the  outset  some  divisions  of  my  scheme 
as  follows :  ( i )  The  appropriation  of  certain  myths  and 
legends  which  are  held  to  be  pre-Christian  in  the  origin 
thereof,  and  their  penetration  by  an  advanced  form  of 
Christian  Symbolism  carried  to  a  particular  term  ;  (2)  the 
evidence  of  three  fairly  distinct  sections  or  schools,  the 
diversity  of  which  is  not,  however,  in  the  fundamental  part 
of  their  subject,  but  more  properly  in  the  extent  and  mode 
of  its  development ;  (3)  the  connection  of  this  mode  and 
of  that  part  with  other  schools  of  symbolism,  the  evolu- 
tion of  which  was  beginning  at  the  same  period  as  that  of 
the  Graal  literature  or  followed  thereon  ;  (4)  the  close 
analogy,  in  respect  of  the  root-matter,  between  the  catholic 
literature  of  the  Holy  Graal  and  that  which  is  connoted  in 
the  term  mysticism;  (5)  the  traces  through  Graal  romance 
and  other  coincident  literatures  of  a  hidden  school  in  Chris- 
tianity. The  Graal  romances  are  not  documents  of  this 
school  put  forward  by  the  external  way,  but  are  its 
rumours  at  a  far  distance.  They  are  not  authorised,  nor 

viii 


^Preface 

are  they  stolen ;  they  have  arisen,  or  the  consideration 
of  that  which  I  understand  with  reserves,  and  for  want 
of  a  better  title,  as  the  Hidden  Church  of  Sacramental 
Mystery  follows  from  their  consideration  as  something  in 
the  intellectual  order  connected  therewith.  The  offices 
of  romance  are  one  thing,  and  of  another  order  are  the 
high  mysteries  of  religion — if  a  statement  so  obvious  can 
be  tolerated.  There  are,  of  course,  religious  romances, 
and  the  Spanish  literature  of  chivalry  furnishes  a  notable 
instance  of  a  sacred  allegorical  intention  which  reposes  on 
the  surface  of  the  sense,  as  in  the  Pilgrim  s  Progress. 
Except  in  some  isolated  sections,  as,  for  example,  in 
the  Galahad  Quest  and  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval,  the 
cycle  of  the  Holy  Graal  does  not  move  in  the  region 
of  allegory,  but  in  that  of  concealed  intention,  and  it  is 
out  of  this  fact  that  there  arises  my  whole  inquiry,  with 
the  justification  for  the  title  which  I  have  chosen.  The 
existence  of  a  concealed  sanctuary,  of  a  Hidden  Church,  is 
perhaps  the  one  thing  which  seems  plain  on  the  face  of  the 
literature,  and  the  next  fact  is  that  it  was  pre-eminent, 
ex  hypothesis  in  its  possession  of  the  most  sacred  memorials 
connected  with  the  passion  of  Christ.  It  was  from  the 
manner  in  which  these  were  derived  that  the  other  claims 
followed.  The  idea  of  a  Graal  Church  has  been  faintly 
recognised  by  official  scholarship,  and  seeing,  therefore, 
that  there  is  a  certain  common  ground,  the  question  which 
transpires  for  consideration  is  whether  there  is  not  a 
deeper  significance  in  the  claim,  and  whether  we  are  deal- 
ing with  mere  legend  or  with  the  rumours  at  a  distance 
of  that  which  "  once  in  time  and  somewhere  in  the  world  " 
was  actually  existent,  under  whatever  veils  of  mystery. 
Following  this  point  of  view,  it  is  possible  to  collect  out 
of  the  general  body  of  the  literature  what  I  should  term 
its  intimations  of  sub-surface  meaning  into  a  brief  schedule 
as  follows :  (#)  The  existence  of  a  clouded  sanctuary ; 
(£)  a  great  mystery ;  (c)  a  desirable  communication 
which,  except  under  certain  circumstances,  cannot  take 
place ;  (d}  suffering  within  and  sorcery  without,  being 

ix 


Preface 

pageants  of  the  mystery ;  (e)  supernatural  grace  which 
does  not  possess  efficacy  on  the  external  side  ;  (/)  healing 
which  comes  from  without,  sometimes  carrying  all  the 
signs  of  insufficiency  and  even  of  inhibition ;  (^)  in  fine, 
that  which  is  without  enters  and  takes  over  the  charge  of 
the  mystery,  but  it  is  either  removed  altogether  or  goes 
into  deeper  concealment — the  outer  world  profits  only 
by  the  abrogation  of  a  vague  enchantment. 

The  unversed  reader  may  not  at  the  moment  follow 
the  specifics  of  this  schedule,  yet  if  the  allusions  awaken 
his  interest  I  can  promise  that  they  shall  be  made 
plain  in  proceeding.  But  as  there  is  no  one  towards 
whom  I  shall  wish  to  exercise  more  frankness  than  the 
readers  to  whom  I  appeal,  it  will  be  a  counsel  of  courtesy 
to  inform  them  that  scholarship  has  already  commented 
upon  the  amount  of  mystic  nonsense  which  has  been 
written  on  the  subject  of  the  Graal.  Who  are  the 
mystic  people  and  what  is  the  quality  of  their  nonsense 
does  not  appear  from  the  statement,  and  as  entirely  out- 
side mysticism  there  has  been  assuredly  an  abundance  of 
unwise  speculation,  including  much  of  the  heretical  and 
occult  order,  I  incline  to  think  that  the  one  has  been 
taken  for  the  other  by  certain  learned  people  who 
have  not  been  too  careful  about  the  limits  of  the  par- 
ticular term  to  which  they  have  had  recourse  so  lightly. 
After  precisely  the  same  manner,  scholarship  speaks 
of  the  ascetic  element  in  the  Graal  literature  almost  as 
if  it  were  applying  a  term  of  reproach,  and,  again,  it  is 
not  justified  by  reasonable  exactitude  in  the  use  of  words. 
Both  impeachments,  the  indirect  equally  with  the  overt, 
stand  for  what  they  are  worth,  which  is  less  than 
the  solar  mythology  applied  to  the  interpretation  of 
the  literature.  My  object  in  mentioning  these  grave 
trifles  is  that  no  one  at  a  later  stage  may  say  that  he  has 
been  entrapped. 

It  is  indubitable  that  some  slight  acquaintance  with 
the  legends  of  the  Holy  Graal  can  be  presupposed  in  my 
readers,  but  in  many  it  may  be  so  unsubstantial  that 


Preface 

I  have  concluded  to  assume  nothing,  except  that,  as 
indicated  already,  I  am  addressing  those  who  are  con- 
cerned with  the  Great  Quest  in  one  of  its  departments. 
There  is  no  reason  why  they  should  extend  their  dedi- 
cated field  of  thought  by  entering  into  any  technical 
issues  of  subjects  outside  those  with  which  they  may 
be  concerned  already.  I  have  returned  from  investiga- 
tions of  my  own,  with  a  synopsis  of  the  results  attained, 
to  show  them  that  the  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal  is  of 
kinship  with  our  purpose  and  that  this  also  is  ours. 
The  Graal  is,  therefore,  a  rumour  of  the  Mystic  Quest, 
but  there  were  other  rumours. 

In  order  to  simplify  the  issues,  all  the  essential 
materials  have  been  so  grouped  that  those  for  whom  the 
bulk  of  the  original  works  is,  by  one  or  other  reason, 
either  partially  or  wholly  sealed,  may  attain,  in  the  first 
place,  an  accurate  and  sufficing  knowledge  of  that  which 
the  several  writers  of  the  great  cycles  understood  by  the 
Graal  itself,  and  that  also  which  was  involved  in  the  quests 
thereof  according  to  the  mind  of  each  successive  expositor. 
I  have  sought,  in  the  second  place,  to  furnish  an  adequate 
conversance  with  the  intention,  whether  manifest  or  con- 
cealed, which  has  been  attributed  to  the  makers  of  the 
romances  by  numerous  students  of  these  in  various 
countries  and  times.  In  the  third  place  there  is  presented, 
practically  for  the  first  time — pace  all  strictures  of  scholiasts 
—the  mystic  side  of  the  legend,  and  with  this  object  it 
has  been  considered  necessary  to  enter  at  some  length 
into  several  issues,  some  of  which  may  seem  at  first  sight 
extrinsic.  In  pursuance  of  my  general  plan  I  have  en- 
deavoured in  various  summaries :  (#)  To  compare  the 
implied  claim  of  the  Graal  legends  with  the  Eucharistic 
doctrine  at  the  period  of  the  romances ;  (<£)  to  make  it 
clear,  by  the  evidence  of  the  literature,  that  the  Graal 
Mystery,  in  the  highest  sense  of  its  literature,  was  one  of 
supernatural  life  and  a  quest  of  high  perfection ;  (c)  to 
show,  in  a  word,  that,  considered  as  a  mystery  of  illumina- 
tion and  even  of  ecstasy,  the  Graal  does  not  differ  from 

xi 


'Preface 

the  great  traditions  of  initiation.  Whatever,  therefore, 
be  the  first  beginnings  of  the  literature,  in  the  final 
development  it  is  mystic  rather  than  ascetic,  because  it 
does  not  deal  with  the  path  of  detachment  so  much  as 
with  the  path  of  union. 

It  must  be  acknowledged  assuredly  that  the  first 
matter  of  the  legend  is  found  in  folk-lore,  antecedent, 
for  the  most  part,  to  Christianity  in  the  West,  exactly  as 
the  first  matter  of  the  cosmos  was  in  the  TOHU,  BOHU 
of  chaos ;  but  my  purpose  is  to  show  that  its  elements 
were  taken  over  in  the  interest  of  a  particular  form 
of  Christian  religious  symbolism.  That  advancement 
notwithstanding,  the  symbolism  at  this  day  needs  re-ex- 
pression as  well  as  the  informing  virtue  of  a  catholic 
interpretation,  showing  how  the  Graal  and  all  other 
traditions  which  have  become  part  of  the  soul's  legends 
can  be  construed  in  the  true  light  of  mystic  know- 
ledge. 

I  have  demonstrated  at  the  same  time  that  among  the 
romancers,  and  especially  the  poets,  some  spoke  from 
very  far  away  of  things  whereof  they  had  heard  only, 
and  this  darkly,  so  that  the  characteristic  of  the  Graal 
legend  is,  for  this  reason,  as  on  other  accounts,  one  of  in- 
sufficiency. Yet  its  writers  testify  by  reflection,  even  when 
they  accept  the  sign  for  the  thing  signified  and  confuse 
the  flesh  with  the  spirit,  to  a  certain  measure  of  know- 
ledge and  a  certain  realisation.  It  is  only  in  its  mystic 
sense  that  the  Graal  literature  can  repay  study.  All 
great  subjects  bring  us  back  to  the  one  subject  which 
is  alone  great ;  all  high  quests  end  in  the  spiritual  city  ; 
scholarly  criticisms,  folk-lore  and  learned  researches  are 
little  less  than  useless  if  they  fall  short  of  directing  us  to 
our  true  end — and  this  is  the  attainment  of  that  centre 
which  is  about  us  everywhere.  It  is  in  such  a  way,  and  so 
only,  that  either  authorised  scholar  or  graduating  student 
can  reach  those  things  which  will  recompense  knowledge 
concerning  the  vision  and  the  end  in  Graal  literature,  as 
it  remains  to  us  in  the  forms  which  survive — in  which 

xii 


'Preface 

forms  the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Cup  has  been  passed 
through  the  mind  of  romance  and  has  been  deflected  like 
a  staff  in  a  pool. 

I  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  spirit  of  the  Holy  Quest 
may  be  as  much  with  us  in  the  study  of  the  literature  of 
the  Quest  as  if  we  were  ourselves  adventuring  forth  in 
search  of  the  Graai  Castle,  the  Chalice,  the  Sword  and 
the  Lance.  Herein  is  the  consecrating  motive  which 
moves  through  the  whole  inquiry.  So  also  the  mystery 
of  quest  does  not  differ  in  its  root-matter,  nor  consider- 
ably in  its  external  forms,  wherever  we  meet  it ;  there  are 
always  certain  signs  by  which  we  may  recognise  it  and 
may  know  its  kinship.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the 
school  of  Graal  mysticism  enters,  and  that  of  necessity, 
into  the  great  sequence  of  grades  which  constitute  the 
unified  Mystic  Rite. 

If  there  was  a  time  when  the  chaos  magna  et  infirmata  of 
the  old  un- Christian  myths  was  transformed  and  assumed 
into  a  heaven  of  the  most  holy  mysteries,  there  comes 
a  time  also  when  the  criticism  of  the  literature  which 
enshrines  the  secret  of  the  Graal  has  with  great 
deference  to  be  taken  into  other  sanctuaries  than  those 
of  official  scholarship  ;  when  some  independent  watcher, 
having  stood  by  the  troubled  waters  of  speculation,  must 
either  say  :  "  Peace,  be  still  "  ;  or,  indifferently,  "  Let  them 
rave" — and,  putting  up  a  certain  beacon  in  the  darkness, 
must  signal  to  those  who  here  and  there  are  either 
acquainted  with  his  warrants  by  certain  signs,  which  they 
recognise,  or  can  divine  concerning  them,  and  must  say  to 
them  :  "Of  this  is  also  our  inheritance." 

So  much  as  I  have  here  advanced  will  justify,  I  think, 
one  further  act  of  sincerity.  I  have  no  use  for  any  audience 
outside  my  consanguinities  in  the  spirit.  As  Newton's 
Principia  is  of  necessity  a  closed  book  to  those  who  have 
fallen  into  waters  of  confusion  at  the  pons  asinorum  of 
children — and  as  this  is  not  an  impeachment  of  the 
Principia — so  my  construction  of  the  Graal  literature  will 
not  be  intelligible,  or  scarcely,  to  those  who  have  not 

xiii 


Treface 

graduated  in  some  one  or  other  of  the  academies  of  the 
soul ;  it  is  not  for  children  in  the  elementary  classes 
of  thought,  but  in  saying  this  I  do  not  impeach  the 
construction.  The  Principia  did  not  make  void  the 
elements  of  Euclid.  I  invite  them  only  for  their  per- 
sonal relief  to  close  the  book  at  this  point  before  it 
closes  itself  against  them. 

I  conclude  by  saying  that  the  glory  of  God  is  the 
purpose  of  all  my  study,  and  that  in  His  Name  I 
undertake  this  quest  as  a  part  of  the  Great  Work. 


xiv 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

PREFACE  v 


BOOK   I 

THE   ROOTS   OF  THE   HOUSE   OF  MEANING 

SECT. 

I.  SOME  ASPECTS  OF  THE  GRAAL  LEGEND     ...  5 

II.  EPOCHS  OF  THE  LEGEND. 12 

III.  THE  ENVIRONMENT  OF  THE  GRAAL  LITERATURE       .  17 

IV.  THE  LITERATURE  OF  THE  CYCLE       ....  47 
V.  THE  IMPLICITS  OF  THE  GRAAL  MYSTERY  .  61 


BOOK   II 

MTSTERIES   OF   THE  HOLT   GRAAL   IN  MANI- 
FESTATION AND    REMOVAL 

I.  A  PRELIMINARY  ACCOUNT  OF  CERTAIN  ROOT-SECRETS 

INCLUDED    IN    THE   WHOLE    SUBJECT        ...          79 

II.  THE   INSTITUTION   OF   THE   HALLOWS,   AND,   IN   THE 

FIRST     PLACE,     A     GENERAL     INTRODUCTION     CON- 
CERNING   THEM 84 

III.  THE  INSTITUTION  OF  THE  HALLOWS,  AND,  SECONDLY, 

THE  VARIATIONS  OF  THE  CUP  LEGEND       .        .       89 

IV.  THE    GRAAL   VESSEL    CONSIDERED    AS   A   BOWL    OF 

PLENTY 104 

V.  THE  LESSER  HALLOWS  OF  THE  LEGEND    .         .         .114 

(a)  The  Summary  of  these  Matters ;  (b)  Legends  of  the  Sacred 
Lance ;  (c)  The  Broken  Sword  ;  (d)  The  Dish. 

VI.  THE  CASTLE  OF  THE  HOLY  GRAAL    .  .  .  .128 

VII.  THE  KEEPERS  OF  THE  HALLOWS        .  .  .  .134 

VIII.  THE  PAGEANTS  IN  THE  QUESTS         .  .  .  .138 

xv 


Contents 

SECT.  PAGE 

IX.  THE  ENCHANTMENTS  OF  BRITAIN,  THE  TIMES  CALLED 
ADVENTUROUS    AND     THE    WOUNDING    OF    THE 

KING 144 

X.  THE  SUPPRESSED  WORD  AND  THE  MYSTIC  QUESTION  152 

XI.  THE  HEALING  OF  THE  KING 157 

XII.  THE  REMOVAL  OF  THE  HALLOWS       .  .         .  161 


BOOK   III 

THE  EARLY  EPOCHS  OF  THE  QUEST 

I.  THE  ANTECEDENTS  OF  THE  LEGEND  IN  FOLK-LORE  .     171 
II.  THE  WELSH  PERCEVAL 181 

III.  THE  ENGLISH   METRICAL   ROMANCE  OF  SYR  PERCY- 

VELLE 193 

IV.  THE  CONTE  DEL  GRAAL 198 

(a)  Preliminary  to  the  whole  Subject ;  (b)  The  Poem  of  Chretien 
de  Troyes  ;  (c)  The  Extension  of  Gautier  ;  (d)  The  Con- 
clusion of  Manessier ;  (e]  The  Alternative  Sequel  of 
Gerbert ;  (/)  In  which  Sir  Gawain  is  considered  briefly 
as  a  Companion  of  the  Holy  Quest. 


BOOK   IV 

THE   LESSER    CHRONICLES   OF  THE  HOLT  GRAAL 

I.  THE  METRICAL  ROMANCE  OF  JOSEPH  OF  ARIMATH^A     245 
II.  THE  LESSER  HOLY  GRAAL 255 

III.  THE  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  MERLIN      ....     258 

IV.  THE  DIDOT  PERCEVAL 265 

BOOK   V 
THE   GREATER    CHRONICLES   OF  THE  HOLT  GRAAL 

I.  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  HOLY  GRAAL,  AND,  IN  THE  FIRST 

PLACE,  THE  PROLOGUE  THERETO  BELONGING       .     281 

II.  A  NEW  CONSIDERATION  CONCERNING  THE  BRANCHES 

OF  THE  CHRONICLE 287 

xvi 


Contents 

SECT.  PAGE 

III.  THE  MINOR  BRANCHES  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  HOLY 

GRAAL         ........  308 

IV.  SOME  LATER  MERLIN  LEGENDS         .         .         .         .316 

(a)  The  Vulgate  Merlin  ;  (b)  The  Huth  Merlin. 

V.  THE  GREAT  PROSE  LANCELOT 330 

VI.  A  PREFACE  OR  INTRODUCTORY  PORTION  APPERTAINING 

TO    ALL   THE    QUESTS    .             .             .            .             .             .  340 

VII.  THE  LONGER  PROSE  PERCEVAL 344 

VIII.  THE  QUEST  OF  THE  HIGH  PRINCE    ....  352 

IX.  THE  WELSH  QUEST  OF  GALAHAD      ....  365 


BOOK   VI 

THE   GERMAN  CYCLE   OF  THE   HOLT   GRAAL 

I.  THE  PARSIFAL  OF  WOLFRAM  VON  ESCHENBACH          .     375 
II.  GLEANINGS  CONCERNING  THE  LOST  QUEST  OF  GUIOT 

DE  PROVENCE       .......     397 

III.  SIDELIGHTS    FROM    THE    SPANISH    AND    PORTUGUESE 

QUESTS 404 

IV.  THE  CROWN  OF  ALL  ADVENTURES     .         .         .         .407 
V.  THE  TITUREL  OF  ALBRECHT  VON  SCHARFENBERG     .     415 

VI.  THE  DUTCH  LANCELOT 421 


BOOK   VII 

THE  HOLT  GRAAL   IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE 
CELTIC   CHURCH 

I.  STATEMENT  OF  A  POSSIBLE  IMPLICIT  ACCOUNTING  FOR 

ALL  CLAIMS 433 

II.  THE  FORMULA  OF  THE  HYPOTHESIS  SCHEDULED        .     436 

III.  IN  WHAT  SENSE  THE  PLEA  MUST  BE  HELD  TO  FAIL  .     446 

IV.  THE  VICTORY  OF  THE  LATIN  RITE     .         .         .         -459 

xvii  b 


Contents 


BOOK   VIII 

MYSTIC  ASPECTS   OF  THE   GRAAL   LEGEND 

SECT.  PAGE 

I.  THE  INTRODUCTORY  WORDS 469 

II.  THE  POSITION  OF  THE  LITERATURE  DEFINED    .        .476 

III.  CONCERNING  THE  GREAT  EXPERIMENT       .         .         .481 

IV.  THE  MYSTERY  OF  INITIATION 488 

V.  THE  MYSTERY  OF  FAITH 493 

VI.  THE  LOST  BOOK  OF  THE  GRAAL        ....     498 
VII.  THE  DECLARED  MYSTERY  OF  QUEST.         .         .         .     507 

BOOK   IX 

SECRET  TRADITION  IN  CHRISTIAN  TIMES 

I.  PRELIMINARY  TO  THE  WHOLE  SUBJECT       .         .         .521 
II.  SOME  ALLEGED  SECRET  SCHOOLS  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES     524 

III.  THE  LATIN  LITERATURE  OF  ALCHEMY  AND  THE  HER- 

METIC SECRET  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  EUCHARISTIC 

MYSTERY 533 

IV.  THE  KABALISTIC  ACADEMIES      .....  550 
V.  THE  CLAIM  IN  RESPECT  of  TEMPLAR  INFLUENCE       .  555 

VI.  THE    GRAAL    FORMULA    IN    THE    LIGHT   OF    OTHER 

GLEANINGS  FROM  THE  CATHOLIC  SACRAMENTARY     566 

VII.  THE  Lapis  Exilis 571 

VIII.  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  MASONRY   .         .         .         .         -576 

(a)  The  Assumption  of  the  Building  Guild ;  (/>)  Masonry  and 
Moral  Science  ;  (c}  A  Theory  of  Hermetic  Interference ; 
(d)  One  Key  to  the  Sanctuary. 

IX.  THE  HALLOWS  OF  THE  GRAAL  MYSTERY  RE-DISCOVERED 

IN  THE  TALISMANS  OF  THE  TAROT     .         .         .     600 

BOOK   X 

THE   SECRET  CHURCH 

I.  THE  HERMENEUTICS  OF  THE  HOLY  GRAAL        .         .615 

II.  THE  GOOD  HUSBANDMAN 620 

III.  THE  CATHOLIC  SECRET  OF  THE  LITERATURE      .         .     626 

xviii 


Contents 

SECT.  PAGE 

IV.  THE  MYSTERY  WHICH  is  WITHIN        ....  639 

V.  THE  SECLUDED  AND  UNKNOWN  SANCTUARY       .         .  642 
VI.  THE  TRADITION  OF  ST.  JOHN  THE  DIVINE  AND  OTHER 

TRACES  OF  A  HIGHER  MIND  OF  THE  CHURCH  .  66 1 

VII.  THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THIS  HOLY  QUEST     .         .         .  668 


APPENDIX 

THE   BIBLIOGRAPHT  OF  THE   HOLT   GRAAL 

PART  I 
THE  TEXTS 

PART  II 

SOME  CRITICAL  WORKS 

PART  III 
PHASES  OF  INTERPRETATION 


xix 


BOOK    I 

THE  ROOTS  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  MEANING 


THE   ARGUMENT 

Heads  of  a  General  Summary  of  the  whole  subject,  with  the 
analysis  thereof,  including: — I.  SOME  ASPECTS  OF  THE 
GRAAL  LEGEND. — The  word  which  came  forth  out  of 
Qalilee — The  sacramental  vessel — Its  history  and  the  quests 
thereof— The  Graal  in  the  books  of  chivalry — The  Graal  in 
modern  poetry — The  composite  elements  of  the  Legend — The 
Graal  as  a  reliquary .  II.  EPOCHS  OF  THE  LEGEND. — The 
higher  understanding  of  the  Quest — The  outlook  of  roman- 
ticism— The  attitude  of  poetry — The  direction  of  archeology — 
The  prospect  which  is  called  spiritual — The  consideration  oj 
the  present  thesis — The  hidden  motives  of  the  literature — Its 
critical  difficulties — Concerning  the  interpretation  of  Books. 
III.  THE  ENVIRONMENT  OF  THE  GRAAL  LITERATURE. — 
The  Catholic  Doctrine  of  the  Eucharist — The  passage  of 
Transubstantiation  into  Dogma — The  Cultus  of  the  Precious 
Blood — Relics  of  the  Passion,  and,  in  the  first  place,  concern- 
ing those  of  the  Precious  Blood — The  discovery  of  the  Sacro 
Catino — The  invention  of  the  Lance  at  Antioch — The  Sword  of 
St.  John  the  Baptist — The  state  of  the  Official  Church — The 
Church  in  Britain — The  Holy  Wars  of  Palestine — The  higher 
life  of  Sanctity  and  its  annals  in  the  Graal  period — The  sects  of 
the  period.  IV.  THE  LITERATURE  OF  THE  CYCLE. — Its 
various  modes  of  classification  and  that  mode  which  is  most  proper 
to  the  present  inquiry — The  places  of  the  Graal  Legend — The 
Welsh  Peredur  and  the  English  Syr  Percyvelle — The  Conte 
del  Graal— The  Lesser  Chronicles  of  the  Holy  Graal — The 

3 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Greater  Chronicles  of  the  Holy  Graal —  The  German  cycle— 
The  question  which  is  posed  for  consideration.  V.  THE 
IMPLICITS  OF  THE  GRAAL  MYSTERY. — The  first  considera- 
tion concerning  a  concealed  sense  of  the  literature — The  Secret 
Words  of  Consecration  and  what  follows  therefrom,  namely, 
that  a  true  Mass  has  never  been  said  in  the  world  since  the 
Graal  was  taken  away — The  super-apostolical  succession,  the 
peculiar  Divine  Warrant  and  ecclesiastical  pre-eminence 
claimed  for  the  Graal  Keepers — That  these  claims  must  be 
distinguished  from  errors  of  doctrinal  confusion  and  theo- 
logical ignorance,  of  which  there  is  evidence  otherwise — 
That  any  concealed  sense  must  be  held  to  co-exist  with 
manifest  insufficiency,  even  within  its  own  province,  and 
more  especially  regarding  the  Eucharist — That  there  is  no 
intention  to  present  the  Graal  Mystery  as  that  of  a  secret 
process  at  work  outside  the  Church — The  Lesser  Imp ii cits 
of  the  literature. 


BOOK    I 

THE  ROOTS   OF    THE   HOUSE    OF    MEANING 

I 

SOME  ASPECTS  OF   THE   GRAAL   LEGEND 

THE  study  of  a  great  literature  should  begin  like  the 
preparation  for  a  royal  banquet,  not  without  some 
solicitude  for  right  conduct  in  the  King's  palace — which 
is  the  consecration  of  motive — and  not  without  recol- 
lection of  that  source  from  which  the  most  excellent 
gifts  derive  in  their  season  to  us  all.  We  may,  there- 
fore, in  approaching  it  say  :  'Benedic,  Domine,  nos  et  h<ec 
tua  dona,  qu<e  de  tua  largitate  sumus  sumpturi. 

But  in  respect  of  the  subject  which  concerns  us  we 
may  demand  even  more  appropriately :  Mens<e  ccelestis 
participes  facial  nos,  Rex  <etern<z  gloria.  In  this  way 
we  shall  understand  not  only  the  higher  meaning  of  the 
Feeding-Dish,  but  the  gift  of  the  discernment  of  spirits, 
the  place  and  office  of  the  supersubstantial  bread,  and 
other  curious  things  of  the  worlds  within  and  without 
of  which  we  shall  hear  in  their  order.  Surely  the 
things  of  earth  are  profitable  to  us  only  in  so  far  as 
they  assist  us  towards  the  things  which  are  eternal. 
In  this  respect  there  are  many  helpers,  even  as  the  sands 
of  the  sea.  The  old  books  help  us,  perhaps  above  all 
things,  and  among  them  the  old  chronicles  and  the  great 
antique  legends.  If  the  hand  of  God  is  in  history,  it  is 
also  in  folk-lore.  We  can  scarcely  fail  of  our  term, 
since  lights,  both  close  at  hand  and  in  the  unlooked-for 
places,  kindle  everywhere  about  us.  It  is  difficult  to 
say  any  longer  that  we  walk  in  the  shadow  of  death 
when  the  darkness  is  sown  with  stars. 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Now  there  are  a  few  legends  which  may  be  said  to 
stand  forth  among  the  innumerable  traditions  of 
humanity,  wearing  the  external  signs  and  characters  of 
some  inward  secret  or  mystery  which  belongs  rather  to 
eternity  than  to  time.  They  are  in  no  sense  connected 
one  with  another — unless,  indeed,  by  certain  roots  which 
are  scarcely  in  time  and  place — and  yet  by  a  suggestion 
which  is  deeper  than  any  message  of  the  senses  each 
seems  appealing  to  each,  one  bearing  testimony  to 
another,  and  all  recalling  all.  They  kindle  strange 
lights,  they  awaken  dim  memories,  in  the  antecedence 
of  an  immemorial  past.  They  might  be  the  broken 
fragments  of  some  primitive  revelation  which,  except  in 
these  memorials,  has  passed  out  of  written  records  and 
from  even  the  horizon  of  the  mind.  There  are  also 
other  legends — strange,  melancholy  and  long  haunting— 
which  seem  to  have  issued  from  the  depths  of  abori- 
ginal humanity,  below  all  horizons  of  history,  pointing, 
as  we  might  think,  to  terrible  periods  of  a  past  which 
is  of  the  body  only,  not  of  the  soul  of  man,  and 
hinting  that  once  upon  a  time  there  was  a  soulless 
age  of  our  race,  when  minds  were  formless  as  the 
mammoths  of  geological  epochs.  To  the  latter  class 
belongs  part  of  what  remains  to  us  from  the  folk-lore 
of  the  cave-dwellers,  the  traditions  of  the  pre-Aryan 
races  of  Europe.  To  the  former,  among  many  others, 
belongs  the  Graal  legend,  which  in  all  its  higher 
aspects  is  to  be  classed  among  the  legends  of  the  soul. 
Perhaps  I  should  more  worthily  say  that  when  it  is 
properly  understood,  and  when  it  is  regarded  at  the 
highest,  the  Graal  is  not  a  legend,  but  an  episode  in 
the  aeonian  life  of  that  which  "  cometh  from  afar"; 
it  is  a  personal  history. 

The  mystery  of  the  Graal  is  a  word  which  came 
forth  out  of  Galilee.  The  literature  which  enshrines 
this  mystery,  setting  forth  the  circumstances  of  its 
origin,  the  several  quests  which  were  instituted  on 
account  of  it,  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was 

6 


The  Roots  of  the   House  of  Meaning 

from  time  to  time  discovered,  and,  in  fine,  its  imputed 
removal,  with  all  involved  thereby,  is  one  of  such 
considerable  dimensions  that  it  may  be  properly  de- 
scribed as  large.  This  notwithstanding,  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  presenting  its  broad  outlines,  as  they  are 
found  in  the  texts  which  remain,  so  briefly  that  if  there 
be  any  one  who  is  new  to  the  subject,  he  can  be  in- 
structed sufficiently  for  my  purpose  even  from  the 
beginning.  It  is  to  be  understood,  therefore,  that  the 
Holy  Graal,  considered  in  its  Christian  aspects  and 
apart  from  those  of  folk-lore,  is  represented  invari- 
ably, excepting  in  one  German  version  of  the  legend, 
as  that  vessel  in  which  Christ  celebrated  the  Last 
Supper  or  consecrated  for  the  first  time  the  elements 
of  the  Eucharist.  It  is,  therefore,  a  sacramental  vessel, 
and,  according  to  the  legend,  its  next  use  was  to  receive 
the  blood  from  the  wounds  of  Christ  when  His  body 
was  taken  down  from  the  Cross,  or,  alternatively,  from 
the  side  which  was  pierced  by  the  spear  of  Longinus. 
Under  circumstances  which  are  variously  recounted, 
this  vessel,  its  content  included,  was  carried  westward 
in  safe  guardianship — coming,  in  fine,  to  Britain  and 
there  remaining  in  the  hands  of  successive  keepers, 
or,  this  failing,  in  the  hands  of  a  single  keeper,  whose 
life  was  prolonged  through  the  centuries.  In  the  days 
of  King  Arthur,  the  prophet  and  magician  Merlin 
assumed  the  responsibility  of  carrying  the  legend  to 
its  term,  with  which  object  he  brought  about  the 
institution  of  the  Round  Table,  and  the  flower  of 
Arthurian  chivalry  set  out  to  find  the  Sacred  Vessel. 
In  some  of  the  quests  which  followed,  the  knighthood 
depicted  in  the  greater  romances  has  become  a  mystery 
of  ideality,  and  nothing  save  its  feeble  reflection  could 
have  been  found  on  earth.  The  quests  were  to  some 
extent  preconceived  in  the  mind  of  the  legend,  and, 
although  a  few  of  them  were  successful,  that  which 
followed  was  the  removal  of  the  Holy  Graal.  The 
Companions  of  the  Quest  asked,  as  one  may  say,  for 

7 


"The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

bread,  and  to  those  who  were  unworthy  there  was 
given  the  stone  of  their  proper  offence,  but  to  others 
the  spiritual  meat  which  passes  all  understanding. 
That  this  account  instructs  the  uninitiated  person 
most  imperfectly  will  be  obvious  to  any  one  who  is 
acquainted  with  the  great  body  of  the  literature,  but, 
within  the  limits  to  which  I  have  restricted  it  inten- 
tionally, I  do  not  know  that  if  it  were  put  differently 
it  would  be  put  better  or  more  in  harmony  with  the 
general  sense  of  the  romances. 

It  might  appear  at  first  sight  almost  a  superfluous 
precaution,  even  in  an  introductory  part,  to  reply  so 
fully  as  I  have  now  done  to  the  assumed  question : 
What,  then,  was  the  Holy  Graal  ?  Those  who  are 
unacquainted  with  its  literature  in  the  old  books  of 
chivalry,  through  which  it  first  entered  into  the 
romance  of  Europe,  will  know  it  by  the  Idylls  of 
the  King.  But  it  is  not  so  superfluous  as  it  seems, 
more  especially  with  the  class  which  I  am  addressing, 
since  nominally  this  has  other  concerns,  like  folk-lore 
scholarship,  and  many  answers  to  the  question  made 
from  distinct  points  of  view  would  differ  from  that 
which  is  given  by  the  Knight  Perceval  to  his  fellow- 
monk  in  the  poem  of  Tennyson  : — 

"  What  is  it  ? 

The  phantom  of  a  cup  which  comes  and  goes  ? — 
Nay,  monk  !   What  phantom  ?  answered  Perceval. 
The  cup,  the  cup  itself,  from  which  our  Lord 
Drank  at  the  last  sad  supper  with  his  own. 
This,  from  the  blessed  land  of  Aromat   .   .   . 
Arimathaean  Joseph,  journeying  brought 
To  Glastonbury.   .   .  . 
And  there  awhile  it  bode ;  and  if  a  man 
Could  touch  or  see  it,  he  was  heal'd  at  once, 
By  faith,  of  all  his  ills.     But  then  the  times 
Grew  to  such  evil  that  the  holy  cup 
Was  caught  away  to  Heaven  and  disappeared." 

This   is   the   answer  with  which,  in  one  or  another  of 
its  forms,  poetic   or  chivalrous,   every   one   is   expected 

8 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

to  be  familiar,  or  he  must  be  classed  as  too  unlettered 
for  consideration,  even  in  such  a  slight  sketch  as  these 
introductory  words.  But  it  is  so  little  the  only  answer, 
and  it  is  so  little  full  or  exhaustive,  that  no  person 
acquainted  with  the  archaic  literature  would  accept  it 
otherwise  than  as  one  of  its  aspects,  and  even  the 
enchanting  gift  of  Tennyson's  poetic  faculty  leaves — 
and  that  of  necessity — something  to  be  desired  in  the 
summary  of  the  Knight's  reply  to  the  direct  question 
of  Ambrosius.  Those  even  who  at  the  present  day 
discourse  of  chivalry  are  not  infrequently  like  those 
who  say:  "Lord,  Lord!" — but  for  all  that  they  do 
not  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  or  the  more 
secret  realms  of  literature.  And  this  obtains  still  more 
respecting  the  chivalry  of  the  Graal.  In  the  present 
case  something  of  the  quintessential  spirit  has  in  an 
obscure  manner  evaporated.  There  is  an  allusiveness, 
a  pregnancy,  a  suggestion  about  the  old  legend  in  its 
highest  forms :  it  is  met  with  in  the  old  romances,  and 
among  others  in  the  longer  prose  chronicle  of  Perceval 
le  Gallois,  but  more  fully  in  the  great  prose  Quest, 
which  is  of  Galahad,  the  haut  prince.  A  touch 
of  it  is  found  later  in  Tennyson's  own  poem,  when 
Perceval's  sister,  the  nun  of  "  utter  whiteness,"  describes 
her  vision : — 

"  I  heard  a  sound 
As  of  a  silver  horn  from  o'er  the  hills.  .  .   . 

The  slender  sound 

As  from  a  distance  beyond  distance  grew 
Coming  upon  me.  .  .   . 

And  then 

Stream'd  thro*  my  cell  a  cold  and  silver  beam, 
And  down  the  long  beam  stole  the  Holy  Grail, 
Rose-red  with  beatings  in  it." 

And  again  : — 

"  I  saw  the  spiritual  city  and  all  her  spires 
And  gateways  in  a  glory  like  one  pearl.   .   .  . 
Strike  from  the  sea ;  and  from  the  star  there  shot 
A  rose-red  sparkle  to  the  city,  and  there 
Dwelt,  and  I  knew  it  was  the  Holy  Grail." 

9 


"The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

So  also  in  the  chivalry  books  the  legend  is  treated  with 
an  aloofness,  and  yet  with  a  directness  of  circumstance 
and  a  manifoldness  of  detail,  awakening  a  sense  of 
reality  amidst  enchantment  which  is  scarcely  heightened 
when  the  makers  of  the  chronicles  testify  to  the  truth 
of  their  story.  The  explanation  is,  according  to  one 
version  of  the  legend,  that  it  was  written  by  Christ 
Himself  after  the  Resurrection,  and  that  there  is  no 
clerk,  however  hardy,  who  will  dare  to  suggest  that 
any  later  scripture  is  referable  to  the  same  hand.  Sir 
Thomas  Malory,  the  last  and  greatest  compiler  of  the 
Arthurian  legend,  suppresses  this  hazardous  ascription, 
and  in  the  colophon  of  his  seventeenth  book  is  contented 
with  adding  that  it  is  <ca  story  chronicled  for  one  of 
the  truest  and  the  holyest  that  is  in  thys  world." 

But  there  is  ample  evidence  no  further  afield  than 
Sir  Thomas  Malory's  own  book,  the  Morte  cT  Arthur, 
that  the  Graal  legend  was  derived  into  his  glorious 
codification  from  various  sources,  and  that  some  ele- 
ments entered  into  it  which  are  quite  excluded  by  the 
description  of  Sir  Perceval  in  the  Idylls  or  by  the 
colophon  of  Malory's  own  twelfth  book,  which  reads : 
"  And  here  foloweth  the  noble  tale  of  the  Sancgreal, 
that  called  is  the  hooly  vessel,  and  the  sygnefycacyon 
of  the  blessid  blood  of  our  Lord  Jhesu  Cryste,  blessid 
mote  it  be,  the  whiche  was  brought  in  to  this  land  by 
Joseph  of  Armathye,  therefor,  on  al  synful  souls 
blessid  Lord  haue  thou  mercy." 

As  an  equipoise  to  the  religious  or  sentimental  side 
of  the  legend,  it  is  known,  and  we  shall  see  in  its  place, 
that  the  Graal  cycle  took  over  something  from  Irish 
and  Welsh  folk-lore  of  the  pagan  period  concerning  a 
mysterious  magical  vessel  full  of  miraculous  food.  This 
is  illustrated  by  the  Morte  d"  Arthur,  in  the  memorable 
episode  of  the  high  festival  held  by  King  Arthur  at 
Pentecost :  in  the  midst  of  the  supper  "  there  entred  in 
to  the  halle  the  Holy  Graal  couered  with  whyte  samyte, 
but  ther  was  none  mighte  see  hit  nor  who  bare  hit.  And 

10 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

there  was  al  the  halle  fulfylled  with  good  odoures,  and 
euery  knyzt  had  suche  metes  and  drynkes  as  he  loved  best 
in  this  world."  That  is  a  state  of  the  legend  which  has 
at  first  sight  little  connection  with  the  mystic  vessel 
carried  out  of  Palestine,  whether  by  Joseph  or  another, 
but  either  the  simple-minded  chroniclers  of  the  past 
did  not  observe  the  anachronism  when  they  married  a 
Christian  mystery  to  a  cycle  of  antecedent  fable,  or 
there  is  an  explanation  of  a  deeper  kind,  in  which  case 
we  shall  meet  with  it  at  a  later  stage  of  our  studies. 
For  the  moment,  and  as  an  intimation  only,  let  me  say 
that  the  study  of  folk-lore  may  itself  become  a  rever- 
ence of  high  research  when  it  is  actuated  by  a  condign 
motive. 

We  shall  make  acquaintance  successively  with  the 
various  entanglements  which  render  the  Graal  legend 
perhaps  the  most  embedded  of  all  cycles.  I  have  said 
that  the  Sacred  Vessel  is  sacramental  in  a  high  degree ; 
it  connects  intimately  with  the  Eucharist ;  it  is  the  most 
precious  of  all  relics  for  all  Christendom  indifferently, 
for,  supposing  that  it  were  manifested  at  this  day,  I 
doubt  whether  the  most  rigid  of  the  Protestant  sects 
could  do  otherwise  than  bow  down  before  it.  And 
yet,  at  the  same  time,  the  roots  of  it  lie  deep  in  folk- 
lore of  the  pre-Christian  period,  and  in  this  sense  it  is 
a  dish  of  plenty,  with  abundance  for  an  eternal  festival. 
So  also,  from  another  point  of  view,  it  is  not  a  cup  but 
a  stone,  and  it  would  have  come  never  to  this  earth  if 
it  had  not  been  for  the  fall  of  the  angels.  It  is  brought 
to  the  West ;  it  is  carried  to  the  East  again  ;  it  is  assumed 
into  heaven ;  it  is  given  to  a  company  of  hermits ;  for 
all  that  we  know  to  the  contrary,  it  is  at  this  day  in 
Northumbria ;  it  is  in  the  secret  temple  of  a  knightly 
company  among  the  high  Pyrenees;  and  it  is  in  the 
land  of  Presbyter  Johannes.  It  is  like  the  cup  of 
the  elixir  and  the  stone  of  transmutation  in  alchemy 
— described  in  numberless  ways  and  seldom  after  the 
same  manner;  but  it  seems  to  be  one  thing  under  its 

ii 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

various  ways,  and  blessed  are  those  who  find  it.  We 
shall  learn,  in  fine,  that  the  Graal  was  either  a  monastic 
legend  or  at  least  that  it  was  super-monastic — and  this 
certainly. 


II 
EPOCHS   OF   THE  LEGEND 

A  minute  inquiry  into  the  materials,  and  their  sources, 
of  a  moving  and  stately  legend  is  opposed  to  the  pur- 
poses and  interests  of  the  general  reader,  though  to 
him  I  speak  accidentally,  and  apart  from  any  sense  of 
election  I  must  in  honesty  commend  him  to  abstain, 
resting  satisfied  that  for  him  and  his  consanguinities 
the  Graal  has  two  epochs  only  in  literature — those  of  Sir 
Thomas  Malory  and  the  Idylls  of  the  King.  As  Tennyson 
was  indebted  to  Malory,  except  for  things  of  his  own  in- 
vention, so  it  is  through  his  gracious  poems  that  many 
people  have  been  sent  back  to  the  old  book  of  chivalry  from 
which  he  reproduced  his  motives  and  sometimes  derived 
his  words.  But  without  entering  into  the  domain  of 
archaeology,  even  some  ordinary  persons,  and  certainly 
the  literate  reader,  will  know  well  enough  that  there  are 
branches  of  the  legend,  both  old  and  new,  outside  these  two 
palmary  names,  and  that  some  of  them  are  close  enough  to 
their  hands.  They  will  be  familiar  with  the  Cornish  poet 
Robert  Stephen  Hawker,  whose  "  Quest  of  the  San  Graal  " 
has,  as  Madame  de  Stael  once  said  of  Saint-Martin,  "  some 
sublime  gleams."  They  will  have  realised  that  the  old 
French  romance  of  Perceval  le  Gallois,  as  translated  into 
English  of  an  archaic  kind,  ever  beautiful  and  stately, 
by  Dr.  Sebastian  Evans,  is  a  gorgeous  chronicle,  full 
of  richly  painted  pictures  and  endless  pageants.  They 
will  know  also  more  dimly  that  there  is  a  German  cycle 
of  the  Graal  traditions — that  Titurel,  Parsifal,  Lohen- 
grin, to  whom  a  strange  and  wonderful  life  beyond  all 
common  teachings  of  Nature,  all  common  conventions 

12 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

of  art,  has  been  given  by  Wagner,  are  also  legendary 
heroes  of  the  Holy  Graal.  In  their  transmuted  presence 
something  may  have  hinted  to  the  heart  that  the  Quest 
is  not  pursued  with  horses  or  clothed  in  outward  armour, 
but  in  the  spirit  along  the  via  mystica. 

There  are  therefore,  broadly  speaking,  three  points  of 
view,  outside  all  expert  evidence,  as  regards  the  whole 
subject,  and  these  are  : — 

1 i )  The  Romantic,  and  the  reversion  of  literary  senti- 
ment at  the  present  day  towards  romanticism  will  make 
it  unnecessary  to  mention  that  this  is  now  a  very  strong 
point.     It  is  exemplified  by  the  editions  of  the  Morte 
d' Arthur    produced    for    students,    nor    less    indeed    by 
those    which    have    been    modified    in    the    interests    of 
children,  and  in  which  a  large  space  is  given  always  to 
the    Graal    legend.     Andrew    Lang's    Book   of  Romance 
and    Mary    McLeod's    Book    of  King    Arthur    and    his 
Noble  Knights  are  instances  which  will  occur  to  several 
people,  but   there  are  yet  others,  and  they  follow   one 
another,    even    to    this    moment,    a    shadowy    masque, 
not   excepting,   at  a    far  distance,  certain    obscure    and 
truly   illiterate    versions   in    dim    byways   of    periodical 
literature. 

(2)  The  Poetic,  and  having  regard  to  what  has  been 
said  already,  I  need  only  for  my  present  purpose  affirm 
that  it  has  done  much  to  exalt  and  spiritualise  the  legend 
without  removing   the  romantic  element ;    but   I   speak 
here  of  modern   invention.      In   the   case  of  Tennyson 
it  has  certainly  added  the  elevated  emotion  which  belongs 
essentially  to  the  spirit  of  romance,  and  this  saved  English 
literature  during  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury.    But  taking  the  work  at  its  highest,  it  may  still 
be  that  the  Graal  legend  must  wait  to  receive  its  treat- 
ment more  fully  by  some  poet  who  is  to  come.     The 
literary  form  assumed  by  the   Graal   Idyll  of  the   King 
— a  tale  within  a  tale  twice-told — leaves  something  to  be 
desired.     Many  stars  rise  over  many  horizons,  including 
those  of  literature,  but  there  is  one  star  of  the  morning, 

13 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

and  this  in  most  cycles  of  books  is  rather  an  expected 
glory  than  a  dawn  now  visible 

(3)  The  Archaeological,  and  this  includes  naturally 
many  branches,  each  of  which  has  the  character  of  a 
learned  inquiry  calling  for  special  knowledge,  and,  in 
several  instances,  it  is  only  of  limited  interest  beyond 
the  field  of  scholarship. 

Outside  these  admitted  branches  of  presentation  and 
research,  which  lie,  so  to  speak,  upon  the  surface  of 
current  literature,  there  is  perhaps  a  fourth  point  of  view 
which  is  now  in  course  of  emerging,  though  scarcely  into 
public  view,  as  it  is  only  in  an  accidental  and  a  sporadic 
fashion  that  it  has  entered  as  yet  into  the  written  word. 
For  want  of  a  better  term  it  must  be  called  spiritual.  It 
cares  little  for  the  archaeology  of  the  subject,  little  for  its 
romantic  aspects,  and  possibly  something  less  than  little  for 
the  poetic  side.  It  would  scarcely  know  of  Hawker's 
Qjuest — not  that  it  signifies  vitally — and  would  pro- 
bably regard  the  Graal  symbol  as  I  have  otherwise 
characterised  it — as  one  of  the  legends  of  the  soul — I 
should  have  said  again,  sacramental  legends,  but  this 
point  of  view  is  not  usual,  nor  is  it  indeed  found  to  any 
important  extent,  among  those  who  hold  extreme  or  any 
Eucharistic  views.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  specially  a 
high  Anglican  or  a  Latin  interest ;  it  characterises  rather 
those  who  regard  religious  doctrine,  institute  and  ritual, 
as  things  typical  or  analogical,  without  realising  that  as 
such  they  are  to  be  ranked  among  channels  of  grace.  So 
far  as  their  conception  has  been  put  clearly  to  themselves, 
for  them  the  Graal  is  an  early  recognition  of  the  fact 
that  doctrinal  teachings  are  symbols  and  are  no  more 
meant  for  literal  acceptance  than  any  express  fables.  It 
is  also  a  hazardous  inquiry  into  obscure  migrations  of 
doctrine  from  East  to  West,  outside  the  Christian  aspects 
of  Graal  literature.  This  view  appreciates,  perhaps,  only 
in  an  ordinary  degree  the  evidence  of  history,  nor  can 
history  be  said  to  endorse  it  in  its  existing  forms  of 
presentation.  At  the  same  time  it  is  much  too  loose 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

and  indeterminate  to  be  classed  as  a  philosophical  con- 
struction of  certain  facts  manifested  in  the  life  of  a 
literature.  It  is  a  consideration  of  several  serious  but 
not  fully  equipped  minds,  and  in  some  cases  it  has 
been  impeded  by  its  sentimental  aspects;  but  the  re- 
ference which  I  have  made  to  it  enables  me  to  add  that 
it  should  have  reached  a  better  term  in  stronger  and 
surer  hands.  No  one,  however  indifferent — or,  indeed, 
of  all  unobservant — can  read  the  available  romances  with- 
out seeing  that  the  legend  has  its  spiritual  side,  but  it 
has  also,  at  the  fact's  value,  that  side  which  connects 
it  with  folk-lore.  No  further  afield  than  the  Morte 
cT  Arthur,  which  here  follows  the  great  French  Quest 
among  many  antecedents,  it  is  treated  openly  as  an 
allegory,  and  the  chivalry  of  King  Arthur's  Court  passes 
explicitly  during  the  Graal  adventures  into  a  region  of 
similitude,  where  every  episode  has  a  supernatural 
meaning,  which  is  explained  sometimes  in  rather  a 
tiresome  manner.  I  say  this  under  the  proper  reserves, 
because  that  which  appears  conventional  and  to  some 
extent  even  trivial  in  these  non-metaphrastic  portions 
might  prove,  under  the  light  of  interpretation,  of  all 
truth  and  the  grace  thereto  belonging. 

Superfluities  and  interpretations  notwithstanding,  it  is 
directly,  or  indirectly,  out  of  the  recent  view,  thus  tenta- 
tively designated,  that  the  consideration  of  the  present 
thesis  emerges  as  its  final  term,  though  out  of  all 
knowledge  thereof. 

It  has  been  my  object  to  remove  a  great  possibility 
from  hands  which  are  worthy,  and  that  certainly,  but  un- 
consecrated  by  special  knowledge,  and  it  is  my  intention 
to  return  it  thereto  by  a  gift  of  grace  after  changing  the 
substance  thereof. 

In  searching  out  mysteries  of  this  order,  it  must  be 
confessed  that  we  are  like  Manfred  in  the  course  of  an 
evocation,  for,  in  truth,  many  things  answer  us ;  amidst 
the  confusion  of  tongues  it  is  therefore  no  light  task 
to  distinguish  that  which,  for  my  part,  I  recognise  as 

15 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  true  voice.  The  literature  does,  however,  carry  on 
its  surface  the  proof  rather  than  the  suggestion  of  a 
hidden  motive  as  well  as  a  hidden  meaning,  and  three 
sources  of  evidence  can  be  cited  on  the  authority  of  the 
texts :  (#)  Confessed  allegory,  but  this  would  be  ex- 
cluded, except  for  one  strong  consideration.  The  mind 
which  confesses  to  allegory  confesses  also  to  mysticism, 
this  being  the  mode  of  allegory  carried  to  the  ne  plus 
ultra  degree.  (£)  Ideological  metathesis,  the  presence 
of  which  is  not  to  be  confused  with  allegory,  (c] 
Certain  traces  and  almost  inferential  claims  which  tend 
to  set  the  custodians  of  the  Holy  Graal  in  a  position 
superior  to  that  of  the  orthodox  church,  though  the 
cycle  is  not  otherwise  hostile  to  the  orthodox  church. 
It  must  be  understood  that  the  critical  difficulties  of 
the  Graal  literature  are  grave  within  their  own  lines,  and 
the  authorities  thereon  are  in  conflict  over  issues  which 
from  their  own  standpoint  may  be  occasionally  not  less 
than  vital.  This  notwithstanding,  the  elements  of  the 
Graal  problem  really  lie  within  a  comparatively  small  com- 
pass, though  they  are  scattered  through  a  literature  which 
is  in  no  sense  readily  accessible,  while  it  is,  for  the  most 
part,  in  a  language  that  is  not  exactly  familiar  to  the 
reader  of  modern  French.  It  has  so  far  been  in  the 
hands  of  those  who,  whatever  their  claims,  have  no 
horizon  outside  the  issues  of  folk-lore,  and  who,  like 
other  specialists,  have  been  a  little  disposed  to  create,  on 
the  basis  of  their  common  agreement,  a  certain  orthodoxy 
among  themselves,  recognising  nothing  beyond  their 
particular  canons  of  criticism  and  the  circle  of  their 
actual  interests.  To  these  canons  there  is  no  reason  that 
we  should  ourselves  take  exception  ;  they  are  more  than 
excellent  in  their  way,  only  they  do  not  happen  to  signify, 
except  antecedently  and  provisionally,  for  the  higher 
consequence  with  which  we  are  here  concerned.  The 
sincerity  of  scholarship  imputes  to  it  a  certain  sanctity, 
but  in  respect  of  this  consequence  most  scholarship 
has  its  eyes  bandaged. 

16 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

The  interpretation  of  books  is  often  an  essay  in 
enchantment,  a  rite  of  evocation  which  calls,  and  the 
souls  of  the  dead  speak  in  response  in  strange  voices. 
To  those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  mysteries,  perhaps 
there  are  no  books  which  respond  in  the  same  manner  as 
these  old  sacraments  of  mystic  chivalry.  They  speak  at 
the  very  least  our  own  language.  I  conclude,  therefore, 
that  the  most  decorative  of  quests  in  literature  is  that 
of  the  things  that  are  eternal ;  God  is  the  proper  quest 
of  the  romantic  spirit,  and  of  God  moveth  not  only  the 
High  History  of  the  Holy  Graal,  but  the  book  of  enchant- 
ment which  I  have  proposed  to  myself  thereon. 

And  even  now,  as  if  amidst  bells  and  Hosannahs,  a 
clear  voice  utters  the  Sanctus,  Sanctus,  Sanctus — because 
by  this  undertaking  we  have  declared  ourselves  on  God's 
side. 


Ill 

THE  ENVIRONMENT  OF  THE   GRAAL 
LITERATURE 

It  is  useless  to  approach  the  literature  of  the  Holy 
Graal  for  any  purpose  of  special  consideration,  in  the 
absence  of  a  working  acquaintance  with  that  which  en- 
compassed it  externally  in  history,  in  church  doctrine, 
in  popular  devotion  and  in  ecclesiastical  legend.  As 
an  acquaintance  of  this  kind  must  not  be  assumed  in 
my  readers,  I  will  take  the  chief  points  involved  as 
follows  :  (a)  The  doctrinal  position  of  the  Church  in 
respect  of  the  Holy  Eucharist ;  (£)  the  passage  of  tran- 
substantiation  into  dogma,  and  other  circumstances 
which  led  up  to  the  institution  of  the  feast  of  Corpus 
Christi  in  1264;  (<:)  the  cultus  of  the  Precious  Blood; 
(d)  the  mind  exhibited  by  the  higher  life  and  the 
mystical  literature  of  sanctity  ;  (^)  the  standing  of  min- 
strelsy ;  (/)  the  horizon  filled  by  coincident  schools 

17  B 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

of  thought  within  and  without  the  Church ;  (£)  the 
state  of  the  official  Church  itself,  and  more  especially 
(K]  the  position  of  the  Church  in  Britain,  including 
its  connection  with  the  ambition  of  the  English  king  ; 
(/')  the  legendary  history  of  certain  relics ;  (£)  the  voice 
of  Catholic  tradition  regarding  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  ; 
(T)  the  true  attitude  of  coincident  heresies  which  have 
been  connected  with  Graal  literature  ;  (m}  the  discovery 
of  the  Sacro  Catino  in  noi;  (n)  the  invention  of  the 
Sacred  Lance  at  Antioch ;  (0}  the  traditional  history 
of  certain  imputed  relics  of  St.  John  the  Baptist. 

The  consideration  of  some  of  these  points  must 
remain  over  till  we  approach  the  term  of  our  quest, 
but  for  the  working  acquaintance  which  I  have  men- 
tioned the  particulars  hereinafter  following  will  serve 
a  temporary  purpose,  and  will  enable  the  unversed 
reader  to  approach  the  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal 
with  a  knowledge  of  several  elements  which  entered 
into  its  creation  and  were  concerned  in  its  develop- 
ment. 

Man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone,  because  it  is 
certain  that  there  is  the  supernatural  bread,  and  although 
a  great  literature  may  arise  in  part  out  of  folk-lore, 
primeval  fable  and  legend ;  though  in  this  sense  it  will 
have  its  antecedents  in  that  which  was  at  first  oral  but 
afterwards  passed  into  writing,  some  records  of  which 
may  remain  after  generations  and  ages ;  it  does  not 
come  about  that  the  development  can  proceed  without 
taking  over  other  elements.  That  these  elements  were 
assumed  in  the  case  of  the  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal 
is  so  obvious  that  there  could  and  would  be  no  call 
to  recite  the  bare  fact  if  a  particular  motive  were  not 
very  clearly  in  view.  As  regards  this,  I  desire  to 
establish  that  every  student,  and  indeed  many  and  any 
who  are  simple  readers  in  passing,  will  be  aware  that  the 
first  matter  of  the  literature  was,  as  I  have  said,  folk-lore, 
as  if  broken  meat  and  garlic,  standing  for  the  daily  bread 
of  my  first  illustration.  We  shall  see,  in  its  proper 

18 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

place,  that  Celtic  folk-lore — Welsh,  Irish  and  what 
not — had  wonder-stories  of  cauldrons,  dishes  and  gob- 
lets, as  it  had  also  of  swords  and  lances.  Those  who 
in  the  later  twelfth  and  the  early  thirteenth  century 
instituted  the  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal — being,  as 
they  were,  makers  of  songs  and  endless  tellers  of 
stories — knew  well  enough  of  these  earlier  traditions ; 
they  were  the  heritage  of  the  minstrel  from  long  ante- 
cedent generations  of  Druids  and  Scalds  and  Bards. 
But  there  had  come  over  them  another  and  a  higher 
knowledge — a  tradition,  a  legend,  the  hint  of  a  secret 
perpetuated  ;  above  all  and  more  than  all,  there  had 
come  over  them  the  divine  oppression,  the  secret  sense 
of  the  mystery  which  lies  behind  the  surface  declaration 
of  the  specifics  of  Christian  doctrine.  There  was  the 
power  and  the  portent  of  the  great  orthodox  Church, 
there  was  the  abiding  presence  of  the  sacraments,  there 
was  the  unfailing  growth  of  doctrine,  there  was  the 
generation  of  new  doctrine,  not  indeed  out  of  no 
elements,  not  indeed  by  the  fiat  lux  of  the  Seat  of 
Peter,  but  in  the  western  countries  of  Europe — at  so 
great  a  distance  from  the  centre — the  growth  was  un- 
suspected sometimes  and  often  seemingly  unprefaced, 
as  if  there  had  been  spontaneous  generation.  Ever 
magnified  and  manifold  in  its  resource,  there  was  the 
popular  devotion,  centred  about  a  particular  locality, 
an  especial  holy  person,  and  this  or  that  individual  holy 
object.  Under  what  circumstances  and  with  what 
motives  actuating,  we  have  to  learn  if  we  can  in  the 
sequel,  but  we  can  understand  in  the  lesser  sense,  and 
perhaps  too  easily  almost,  how  far  the  singers  and  the 
song  which  they  knew  from  the  past  underwent  a  great 
transformation ;  how  the  Bowl  of  Plenty  became  the 
Cup  or  Chalice  of  the  Eucharist ;  how  the  spear  of 
many  battles  and  the  sword  of  destruction  became  the 
Lance  which  pierced  our  Saviour  and  the  weapon  used 
at  the  martyrdom  of  His  precursor.  I  set  it  down  that 
these  things  might  have  intervened  naturally  as  a  simple 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

work  of  causation  which  we  can  trace  with  comparative 
ease  ;  but  they  would  not  for  this  reason  have  assumed 
the  particular  complexion  which  we  shall  find  to  charac- 
terise the  cycle  ;  we  should  not  have  its  implicits,  its 
air  and  accent  of  mystery,  its  peculiar  manifestation 
of  sacred  objects,  or  its  insistence  on  their  final  removal. 
For  the  explanation  of  these  things  we  shall  have  to  go 
further  afield,  but  for  the  moment  I  need  note  only  that 
the  writers  of  the  literature  have  almost  without  ex- 
ception certified  that  they  followed  a  book  which  had 
either  come  into  their  hands  or  of  which  they  had 
received  an  account  from  some  one  who  had  seen  or 
possessed  a  copy.  We  can  trace  in  the  later  texts  and 
can  sometimes  identify  the  particular  book  which  they 
followed,  but  we  come  in  fine  to  the  alleged  document 
which  preceded  all  and  which  for  us  is  as  a  centre  of 
research. 

Amidst  the  remanents  of  mythic  elements  and  the 
phantasmagoria  of  popular  devotion,  the  veneration  of 
relics  included,  there  stands  forth  that  which  from  Chris- 
tian time  immemorial  has  been  termed  the  Mystery  of 
Faith,  the  grace  not  less  visible  because  it  is  veiled  so 
closely,  and  this  is  the  Real  Presence  of  Christ  in  the 
material  symbols  of  the  Eucharist.  Seeing  that  the 
literature  of  the  Holy  Graal  is,  by  the  hypothesis  of  its 
hallow-in-chief,  most  intimately  connected  with  this 
doctrine  and  the  manifestation  thereto  belonging,  it  is 
desirable  and  essential  before  all  things  to  understand 
the  Eucharistic  position  at  the  period  of  the  development 
of  the  literature.  We  have  the  traces  therein  of  two 
schools  of  thought,  though  the  evidence  of  the  one  is 
clearer  than  that  of  the  other ;  they  are  respectively  the 
school  of  transubstantiation  and  that  which  is  alternative 
thereto,  but  not  in  a  sectarian  sense,  namely,  the  spiritual 
interpretation  of  the  grace  communicated  in  the  palmary 
sacrament  of  the  altar. 

The  means  of  grace  are  infinite,  but  the  recognised 
Sacraments  are  seven,  and  to  each  of  them  is  allocated  a 

20 


'The  Roots   of  the  House   of  Meaning 

locus  which  is  symbolical  of  its  position  in  the  system. 
Baptism  is  conferred  at  the  West  in  the  pronaos  of  the 
temple,  because  it  is  the  rite  of  entrance  and  the  recep- 
tion of  the  postulant.  Confirmation  takes  place  within 
the  sanctuary  itself,  on  the  steps  of  the  altar,  because 
those  who  have  been  received  in  the  body  by  the 
mediation  of  sponsors  are  entitled,  if  they  are  properly 
prepared,  to  their  inheritance  in  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit. 
The  place  of  Penance  is  in  the  sideways,  because  those 
who  have  fallen  from  righteousness  have  become  thereby 
extra-lineal,  having  deviated  from  the  straight  path  which 
leads  to  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  their  rectification  is 
to  come.  The  Eucharist  is  administered  at  the  steps  of 
the  chancel  because  it  is  taken  from  the  hands  of  him 
who  has  received  it  from  the  altar  itself,  and  thus  he 
comes  like  Melchisedech  carrying  bread  and  wine,  or  in 
the  signs  and  symbols  of  the  Mediator.  It  is  symbolical 
of  the  act  of  Christ  in  offering  Himself  for  the  redemp- 
tion of  mankind  ;  He  comes  therefore  half-way  to  the 
communicant,  because  He  was  manifested  in  the  flesh. 
This  is  the  material  sign  of  the  union  which  is  consum- 
mated within,  and  its  correspondence  in  the  Sacraments 
is  Matrimony,  which  is  celebrated  in  the  same  place  and 
is  another  sign  of  the  union,  even  of  the  new  and  eternal 
covenant.  It  is  the  work  of  Nature  sanctified  and  Love, 
under  its  proper  warrants,  declared  holy  on  all  planes. 
The  Sacrament  of  Holy  Orders  is  conferred  on  the  steps 
of  the  altar,  and  it  has  more  than  this  external  corre- 
spondence with  that  of  Confirmation,  of  which  it  is  the 
higher  form  ;  the  latter  is  the  rite  of  betrothal  by  which 
on  the  threshold  of  life  the  candidate  is  dedicated  to  the 
union  and  the  spouse  of  the  union  descends  for  a  moment 
upon  him,  with  the  sign  and  seal  of  possession ;  the 
former  is  the  spiritual  marriage  of  the  priest,  by  which 
he  espouses  the  Church  militant  on  earth  that  the  Church 
triumphant  in  Heaven  may  at  a  proper  season  intervene 
for  the  consummation  of  the  higher  conjugal  rights. 
The  sacrament  of  Extreme  Unction  is  the  last  act  and 

21 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  last  consolation  which  the  Church  can  offer  to  the 
faithful,  and  it  is  performed  outside  the  temple  because 
the  Church  follows  its  children,  even  to  the  gate  of 
death,  that  their  eyes  may  behold  His  salvation,  Who  has 
fulfilled  according  to  His  Word. 

It  is  only  at  first  sight  that  this  brief  interpretation  will 
seem  out  of  place  in  the  section  ;  its  design  is  to  show, 
by  the  ritual  position  in  which  the  sacraments  are  adminis- 
tered, that  the  Holy  Eucharist,  which  has  its  place  of 
repose  and  exposition  at  the  far  East  on  the  Altar,  is  the 
great  palladium  of  the  Christian  mystery,  that  the  Orient 
comes  from  on  high,  moving  to  meet  the  communicant, 
because  God  is  and  He  recompenses  those  who  seek 
Him  out.  The  correspondences  hereof  in  the  romances 
are  (a)  the  rumours  of  the  Graal  which  went  before  the 
Holy  Quests,  and  (F)  the  going  about  of  the  Graal,  so 
that  it  was  beheld  in  chapels  and  hermitages — yes,  even  in 
the  palace  of  the  King. 

The  great  doctrinal  debate  of  the  closing  twelfth 
and  the  early  thirteenth  century  was  that  which  con- 
cerned the  mystery  of  the  Eucharist,  and  in  matters 
of  doctrine  there  was  no  other  which  could  be  called 
second  in  respect  of  it.  It  filled  all  men's  ears,  and 
there  can  be  no  question  that  the  vast  sodality  of  min- 
strelsy was  scarcely  less  versed  than  the  outer  section  of 
the  priesthood  in  its  palmary  elements.  Of  this  debate 
France  was  a  particular  centre,  and  Languedoc,  in  the 
persons  of  the  Albigenses,  was  a  place  of  holocaust,  the 
denial  of  the  Eucharist  being  one  of  the  charges  against 
them.  As  regards  the  question  itself,  I  suppose  it  will  be 
true  to  say  that  it  turned  upon  the  doctrine  of  transub- 
stantiation,  which  was  decreed  by  the  Council  of  Lateran 
in  1215,  under  Pope  Innocent  III.  The  words  of  the 
definition  are :  "  The  Body  and  Blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
are  really  contained  under  the  species  of  bread  and  wine 
in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar,  the  bread  being  transub- 
stantiated into  the  Body  and  the  Wine  into  the  Blood." 
Long  anterior  to  this  promulgation,  there  can  be  no 

22 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

doubt  that  the  doctrine  represented  the  mind  of  the 
Church  at  the  seat  of  its  power.  In  contradistinction 
thereto  were  the  opinions  of  the  protesting  sects,  while 
external  to  both  was  the  feeling  of  a  minority  which  did 
not  object  openly,  yet  did  not  less  strongly  hold  to  a 
spiritual  interpretation  of  the  Real  Presence.  The  ex- 
ternal devotion  to  the  Eucharist  which  was  manifested 
more  and  more  by  the  extremists  on  the  side  of  the 
Church  would  scarcely  be  checked  by  the  exponents  of 
the  middle  way,  and  indeed  it  might  well  have  been 
encouraged,  though  not  with  an  intention  which  could 
be  termed  the  same  specifically.  In  the  thirteenth  cen- 
tury the  elements  were  beginning  to  be  elevated  for  the 
adoration  of  the  people  ;  the  evidence  is  regarded  as 
doubtful  in  respect  of  any  earlier  period.  It  must  have 
become  a  general  custom  in  1216,  for  a  constitution  of 
Honorius  III.  speaks  of  it  as  of  something  which  had 
been  done  always.  In  1229  Gregory  IX.  devised  the 
ringing  of  a  bell  before  consecration  as  a  warning  for 
the  faithful  to  fall  on  their  knees  and  worship  Christ  in 
the  Eucharist.  Still  earlier  in  the  thirteenth  century 
Odo,  Bishop  of  Paris,  regulated  the  forms  of  venera- 
tion, more  especially  when  the  Sacred  Elements  were 
carried  in  procession.  Hubert,  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, had  taken  similar  precautions  at  the  end  of  the 
twelfth  century.  It  seems  to  follow  from  the  constitu- 
tions of  Odo  that  some  kind  of  reservation  was  prac- 
tised at  his  period,  and  I  believe  that  the  custom  had 
descended  from  primitive  times.  There  is  nothing, 
however,  in  the  romances  to  show  that  this  usage  was 
familiar  ;  the  perpetual  presence  was  for  them  in  the  Holy 
Graal,  and  apparently  in  that  only.  Church  and  chapel 
and  hermitage  resounded  daily  with  the  celebration  of  the 
Mass.  In  one  instance  we  hear  of  a  tabernacle  on  the 
Altar,  or  some  kind  of  receptacle  in  which  the  Con- 
secrated Elements  reposed.  The  most  usual  mediaeval 
practice  was  to  reserve  in  a  dove-shaped  repository 
which  hung  before  the  Table  of  the  Lord.  The 

23 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  has,  as  we  shall  see,  a  very 
curious  example  of  reservation,  for  it  represents  a 
Sacred  Host  delivered  to  the  custody  of  a  convert, 
one  also  who  was  a  woman  and  not  in  the  vows  of 
religion.  It  was  kept  by  her  in  a  box,  and  the  infer- 
ence of  the  writer  is  that  Christ  was,  for  this  reason, 
always  with  her.  The  reader  who  is  dedicated  in  his 
heart  to  the  magnum  mysterium  of  faith  will  be  disposed 
to  regard  this  as  something  approaching  sacrilege,  and 
I  confess  to  the  same  feeling,  but  it  was  a  frequent 
practice  in  the  early  church,  and  not,  as  it  might  well 
be  concluded,  a  device  of  romance. 

As  regards  transubstantiation,  the  voice  of  the  litera- 
ture in  the  absence  of  an  express  statement  on  either  side 
seems  to  represent  both  views.  The  Greater  Chronicles 
of  the  Graal  are  as  text-books  for  the  illustration  of  the 
doctrine,  but  it  is  absent  from  the  Lesser  Chronicles,  and 
outside  this  negative  evidence  of  simple  silence  there  are 
other  grounds  for  believing  that  it  was  unacceptable  to 
their  writers,  who  seem  to  represent  what  I  have  called 
already  the  spiritual  interpretation  of  the  Real  Presence, 
corresponding  to  what  ecclesiologists  have  termed  a  body 
of  Low  Doctrine  within  the  Church. 

There  was  another  question  exercising  the  Church  at 
the  same  period,  though  some  centuries  were  to  elapse 
before  it  was  to  be  decided  by  the  central  authority.  It 
was  that  of  communion  in  both  kinds,  which  was  finally 
abolished  by  the  Council  of  Constance  in  1415,  the 
decision  then  reached  being  confirmed  at  Trent  in  1562. 
The  ordination  of  communion  in  one  kind  was  preceded 
by  an  intermediate  period  when  ecclesiastical  feeling  was 
moving  in  that  direction,  but  there  was  another  and  an 
earlier  period — that  is  to  say,  in  the  fifth  century — when 
communion  under  one  kind  was  prohibited  expressly  on 
the  ground  that  the  division  of  the  one  mystery  could 
not  take  place  without  sacrilege.  As  a  species  of  middle 
way,  there  was  the  practice  of  the  intincted  or  steeped 
Host  which  seems  to  have  been  coming  into  use  at  the 

24 


The   Roots  of  the  House   of  Meaning 

beginning  of  the  tenth  century,  although  it  was  pro- 
hibited at  the  Council  of  Brago  in  Galicia,  except 
possibly  in  the  case  of  the  sick  and  of  children.  The 
custom  of  mixing  the  elements  was  defended  by 
Emulphus,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  in  1120,  and  Arch- 
bishop Richard  referred  to  the  intincted  Host  in  1175. 
All  these  problems  of  practice  and  doctrine  were  the 
religious  atmosphere  in  which  the  literature  of  the 
Graal  was  developed.  There  were  great  names  on  all 
sides  ;  on  that  of  transubstantiation  there  was  the  name 
of  Peter  Lombard,  the  Master  of  Sentences,  though  he 
did  not  dare  to  determine  the  nature  of  the  conversion 
— whether,  that  is  to  say,  it  was  "  formal,  substantial,  or 
of  some  other  kind  "  ;  on  the  side  of  communion  under 
one  element  there  was  that  of  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  the 
Angel  of  the  Schools. 

With  an  environment  of  this  kind  it  was  inevitable 
that  poetry  and  legend  should  take  over  the  mystery 
of  the  Eucharist,  and  should  exalt  it  and  dwell  thereon. 
We  shall  see  very  shortly  that  the  assumption  was  not 
so  simple  as  might  appear  from  this  suggestion,  and  that 
something  which  has  the  appearance  of  a  secret  within 
the  sanctuary  had  been  heard  of  in  connection  with  the 
central  institution  of  official  Christianity.  In  any  case, 
from  the  moment  that  the  Eucharist  entered  into  the 
life  of  romantic  literature,  that  literature  entered  after  a 
new  manner  into  the  heart  of  the  western  peoples.  Very 
soon,  it  has  been  said,  the  Graal  came  to  be  regarded  as 
the  material  symbol  of  the  Catholic  and  Christian  faith, 
but  it  was  really  the  most  spiritual  symbol ;  I  believe  that 
it  was  so  considered,  and  the  statement  does  little  more 
than  put  into  English  the  inspired  words  of  the  Ordinary 
of  the  Mass.  In  the  middle  of  the  mistaken  passion 
for  holy  wars  in  Palestine ;  through  the  monstrous 
iniquity  of  Albigensian  Crusades ;  the  ever-changing 
struggle  notwithstanding  between  Pope  and  King  and 
Emperor ;  within  the  recurring  darkness  of  interdict, 
when  the  Sacraments  were  hidden  like  the  Graal ;  the 

25 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Legend  of  the  Holy  Graal  grew  and  brightened,  till  the 
most  stressful  of  times  adventurous,  the  most  baleful  of 
all  enchantments,  shone,  as  it  seemed,  in  its  shining,  and 
a  light  which  had  been  never  previously  on  the  land  or 
sea  of  literature  glorified  the  spirit  of  romance.  It  was 
truly  as  if  the  great  company  of  singers  and  chroniclers 
had  gathered  at  the  high  altar  to  partake  of  the  Blessed 
Sacrament,  and  had  communicated  not  only  in  both  kinds, 
but  in  elements  of  extra-valid  consecration. 

The  thesis  of  this  section  is  that  God's  immanence 
was  declared  at  the  time  of  the  literature,  through  all 
Christendom,  by  the  Mystery  of  Faith  and  that  the 
development  of  Eucharistic  doctrine  into  that  of  tran- 
substantiation  was  a  peculiar  recognition  of  the  corporate 
union  between  Christ  and  His  people.  That  imman- 
ence also  was  declared  by  the  high  branches  of  Graal 
romance,  even  as  by  the  quests  of  the  mind  in  philo- 
sophy— in  which  manner  romance,  in  fine,  became  the 
mirror  of  religion,  and  the  literature  testified,  under 
certain  veils,  to  a  mystery  of  Divine  experience  which 
once  at  least  was  manifested  in  Christendom. 

So  I  who  am  about  to  speak  offer  a  loving  salutation 
to  the  learned  and  admirable  souls  who  have  preceded 
me  in  the  way  of  research.  It  is  because  I  have  ascended 
an  untrodden  peak  in  Darien  to  survey  the  prospect  of 
the  Quest,  and  have  found  that  there  is  another  point 
of  view,  that  I  come  forward  in  these  pages  carrying 
strange  tidings,  but  leaving  to  all  my  precursors  the 
crowns  and  bays  and  laurels  which  they  have  deserved 
so  well,  and  offering  no  contradiction  to  anything  which 
they  have  attained  truly.  How  admirable  is  the  life  of 
the  scholar — how  unselfish  are  the  motives  which  inspire 
him — and  how  earnestly  we  who,  past  all  revocation,  are 
dedicated  to  the  one  subject  desire  that  those  paths  which 
he  travels — when  even  they  seem  far  from  the  goal — may 
lead  him  to  that  term  which  is  his  as  well  as  ours,  for 
assuredly  he  seeks  only  the  truth  as  he  conceives  thereof. 

As  the  theory  of  transubstantiation  did  not  pass  into 

26 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

dogma  till  a  late  period  in  the  development  of  the  canon 
of  the  Graal,  so  it  can  be  said  that  romantic  texts 
like  the  'Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  the  Longer  Prose 
Perceval  and  the  Galahad  Quest,  but  the  last  espe- 
cially, which  contains  the  higher  code  of  chivalry, 
were  instrumental  in  promoting  that  dogma  by  the 
proclamation  of  a  sacrosaintly  feast  of  Corpus  Christi 
maintained  for  ever  in  the  Hidden  House  of  the  Graal, 
till  the  time  came  when  the  great  feast  of  exaltation  and 
the  assumption  into  heaven  of  the  sacred  emblems  was 
held  in  fine  at  Sarras.  There  was,  therefore,  a  correla- 
tion of  activity  between  the  two  sides  of  the  work,  for  it 
was  out  of  the  growing  dogma  that  the  Graal  legend  in 
the  Greater  Chronicles  assumes  its  particular  sacramental 
complexion. 

When  all  has  been  granted  and,  after  granting,  has 
been  exalted  even,  it  remains  that  the  Eucharistic  symbol 
is  so  much  the  greatest  of  all  that  we  can  say  that  there 
is  a  second  scarcely,  because  this  is  the  palmary  channel 
of  grace,  and — in  the  last  resource — we  do  not  need 
another.  If  it  were  not  that  the  literature  of  the  Holy 
Graal  offers  intimations  of  still  more  glorious  things 
behind  this  mystery  than  we  are  accustomed  to  find  in 
theological  and  devotional  handbooks,  I  suppose  that 
the  old  books  would  have  never  concerned  my  thoughts. 
Now  therefore,  God  willing,  I  speak  to  no  one,  in  or  out 
of  churches,  sects  and  learned  societies,  who  docs  not 
realise  in  his  heart  that  the  path  of  the  life  everlasting 
lies,  mystically  speaking,  within  the  consecrated  elements 
of  bread  and  wine,  beyond  which  veils  all  the  high 
Quests  are  followed. 

Passing  from  the  doctrinal  matters  expressed  and  im- 
plied in  the  Graal  literature  to  the  sacred  palladia  with 
which  it  is  concerned  more  especially,  we  enter  into 
another  species  of  environment.  Out  of  the  doctrine  of 
transubstantiation,  and  perhaps  more  especially  out  of  the 
particular  congeries  of  devotional  feelings  connected  there- 
with, there  originated  what  may  be  termed  a  cultus  of 

27 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  body  of  God  and  of  His  blood,  understood  in  the 
mystery  of  the  Incarnation,  and  the  instinct  which  lies 
behind  the  veneration  of  relics  came  into  a  marked  degree 
of  operation.  Such  veneration  is  instinctive,  as  I  have 
just  said,  and  representing  on  the  external  side,  invalidly 
or  not,  the  substance  of  things  unseen  in  religion,  it  is  so 
rooted  in  our  natural  humanity  that  it  would  be  difficult 
to  regard  its  manifestation  in  Christendom  as  characteristic 
more  especially  of  Christianity  than  of  some  other  phases 
of  belief.  The  devotion  which,  because  of  its  excesses,  is 
by  a  hasty  and  unrooted  philosophy  termed  superstition 
— which  no  instinct  can  ever  be — manifested  early  enough 
and  never  wanted  its  objects.  There  can  be  scarcely  any 
call  to  point  out  that  in  the  considerations  which  here 
follow  I  am  concerned  with  questions  of  fact  and  not  with 
adjudication  thereon.  The  veneration  of  relics  and 
cognate  objects,  to  which  some  kind  of  sanctity  was 
imputed,  became  not  only  an  environment  of  Christianity 
at  a  very  early  period,  but  it  so  remains  to  the  present  day 
for  more  than  half  of  Christendom.  It  may  be  one  of 
the  grievous  burdens  of  those  ecclesiastical  systems  about 
which  it  prevails  and  in  which  it  is  still  promoted,  but 
having  said  what  the  sense  of  intellectual  justice  seems  to 
require,  that  it  may  be  exonerated  from  the  false  charge 
of  superstition,  I  have  only  to  add — and  this  is  to  lift 
the  Graal  literature  out  of  the  common  judgment  which 
might  be  passed  upon  memorials  of  relic  worship — that 
the  instinct  of  such  devotions,  as  seen  at  their  best  in  the 
official  churches,  has  always  an  arch-natural  implicit ;  it 
works  upon  the  simple  principle  that  God  is  not  the  God 
of  the  dead  but  of  the  living,  and  the  reverence,  by 
example,  for  the  Precious  Blood  of  Christ  depends  from 
the  doctrine  of  His  immanence  in  any  memorials  which 
He  has  left.  I  need  not  add  that,  on  the  hypothesis  of 
the  Church  itself,  the  sense  of  devotion  would  be  better 
directed,  among  external  objects,  towards  the  Real  Pres- 
ence in  the  symbols  of  the  Eucharist ;  but  in  the  Graal 
literature  it  was  round  about  the  Sacramental  Mystery 

28 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

that  the  Relics  of  the  Passion  were  collected,  operating 
and  shining  in  that  light. 

We  know  already  that  the  Sacred  Vessel  of  the 
legends  was  in  the  root-idea  a  Reliquary,  and  as  such 
that  it  was  the  container  and  preserver  of  the  Precious 
Blood  of  Christ.  The  romantic  passion  which  brought 
this  Reliquary  into  connection  with  the  idea  of  that 
sacrament  which  communicated  the  life  of  Christ's  blood 
to  the  believing  soul,  and  the  doctrinal  passion  which  led 
to  the  definition  concerning  transubstantiation  interacted 
one  upon  another.  John  Damascene  had  said  in  the 
eighth  century  that  the  elements  of  bread  and  wine  were 
assumed  and  united  to  the  Divinity — which  took  place 
by  the  invocation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  the  Spirit 
descends  and  changes.  The  Venerable  Bede  had  said 
that  the  Lord  gave  us  the  sacrament  of  His  flesh  and 
blood  in  the  figure  of  bread  and  wine.  And  again : 
"  Christ  is  absent  as  to  His  Body,  but  is  present  as  to 
His  Divinity."  And  yet  further:  "The  Body  and  Blood 
of  Jesus  Christ  are  received  in  the  mouth  of  believers  for 
their  salvation."  I  do  not  know  whether  the  implicits 
of  this  presentation  have  been  realised  in  any  school  of 
interpreters,  but  there  is  one  of  them  which  covers  all 
phases  of  sacramental  exegesis,  however  variant  from  each 
other,  and  however  in  conflict  with  high  Roman  doctrine 
concerning  the  Eucharist.  I  state  it  as  one  who  after 
long  searchings  has  found  a  hidden  jewel  of  the  sacra- 
ment which  might  be  an  eirenicon  for  all  the  sects  alive. 
It  has  also  the  simplicity  which  Khunrath,  in  expounding 
the  Hermetic  side  of  Eternal  Wisdom,  has  said  to  be  the 
seal  of  Nature  and  Art.  I  testify,  therefore,  that  the 
true  mystery  of  the  Eucharist  resides  in  the  assumption 
by  the  Divine  Life  of  the  veils  of  Bread  and  Wine,  and 
that  even  as  once  in  time  and  somewhere  in  the  world 
that  life  assumed  the  veils  of  flesh  and  blood,  which 
became  the  Body  of  the  Lord,  so  here  and  now — daily 
on  every  worshipful  and  authorised  altar  over  the  wide, 
wide  world — do  those  unspotted  elements  become  again 

29 


The   Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

that  sacred  vehicle,  so  that  he  who  communicates  in  the 
faith  of  spirit  and  of  truth,  receives  that  which  is  not 
less  truly  the  Divine  Body  than  the  especial  polarisation 
of  elements  which  was  born  in  Nazareth  of  the  sacred 
and  glorious  Virgin.  Moreover,  I  am  very  certain  that 
the  one  mystery  was  operated  as  if  in  the  terms  and 
valid  forms  of  the  other  by  the  invocation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  the  utter  consecration  of  the  elements.  The 
reason  is  that  given  by  Leo  the  Great,  or  another,  so 
long  and  long  ago — that  Mary  conceived  in  her  heart 
before  she  conceived  in  her  body.  But  having  so  con- 
ceived, the  elements  within  her  were  transubstantiated 
into  the  Divine  Body.  I  desire  to  add  with  all  venera- 
tion and  homage  that  this  root-mystery  of  redemption 
is  that  which  lies  behind  the  devotion  to  the  Mother  of 
God,  which  has  ascended  to  such  heights  in  the  Latin 
Church.  This  Church  is  the  one  witness  through  the 
ages  whose  instinct  on  the  great  subjects  has  never  erred, 
however  long  and  urgently  the  powers  of  the  deep  and 
the  powers  of  perdition  have  hammered  at  the  outer  gates. 
Among  other  things,  she  has  always  recognised  in  the 
withdrawn  and  most  holy  part  of  her  consciousness  that 
she  who  conceived  Christ — by  the  desire  of  the  mystery 
of  God  satisfied  out  of  all  measure  in  a  consummated 
marriage  of  the  mind — had  entered  through  her  humanity 
into  assumption  with  the  Divine,  and  was  to  be  counted 
no  longer  merely  among  the  elected  daughters  of  Zion. 

To  return  therefore,  those  who  say  that  the  Eucharist 
is  flesh  and  blood  are  speaking  God's  truth,  and  I  ask 
in  examine  mortis — 

"  In  life's  delight,  in  death's  dismay  " — 

that  I  may  never  receive  otherwise.  And  those  who  say 
that  such  things  are  understood  spiritually  say  also  the 
truth  which  is  eternal  after  their  own  manner,  whence 
I  look  to  communicate  with  them  when  "  the  dedely 
flesh"  begins  "to  beholde  the  spyrytuel  thynges  " — or 
ever  I  set  forth  in  that  ship  of  mystic  faith  which  was 

30 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

built  from  the  beginning  of  this  external  order  that  it 
may  carry  us  in  fine  to  Sarras,  though  it  is  known  that 
we  shall  go  further. 

Well,  fratres  carissimi,  sorores  ex  omnibus  dilectissimte,  to 
whom  I  speak  the  wisdom  of  the  other  world  in  a 
mystery — those  who  out  of  all  expectation  translated 
the  deep  things  of  doctrine,  as  they  best  could,  into  the 
language  of  romance — out  of  the  Latin,  as  they  said 
in  their  cryptic  fashion — the  Palladium  of  all  research 
was  that  Vessel  of  Singular  Election  which  contained,  in 
their  ingenuous  symbolism,  the  Blood  of  Christ ;  but 
seeing  that  they  were  in  a  hurry  to  show  how  those  who 
were  worthy  to  receive  the  arch-natural  sacraments  did 
after  some  undeclared  manner  partake  at  the  Graal  Mass 
of  corporeal  and  incorporeal  elements  which  were  fit  to 
sustain  both  body  and  soul,  so  did  the  Reliquary  become 
the  Chalice,  or  alternatively  it  was  elevated  and  the  Christ 
came  down  to  distribute  His  own  life  with  the  osculum 
fraternitatis  and  the  consolamentum  of  all  consolation.  They 
collected,  also,  under  the  ecclesiastical  and  monastic  aegis, 
certain  other  relics  about  the  relic-in-chief.  Now,  the 
point  concerning  all  is  that  most  of  the  minor  Hallows 
were  known  already  as  local  objects  of  sanctity  no  less 
than  the  palmary  Hallow,  but  the  sanctity  ascribed  to 
the  latter  and  the  devotion  thereto  belonging  were 
beginning  to  prevail  generally.  It  is  difficult  to  trace 
the  growth  of  this  kind  of  cultus ;  but  as  to  the  worship 
of  spiritual  devotion  there  was  offered  everywhere  in 
Christendom  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ  in  the  Sacra- 
ment of  the  Altar,  so  at  many  shrines — as  if  the  more 
visible  symbol  carried  with  it  a  validity  of  its  own,  a 
more  direct  and  material  appeal — there  was  the  reputed 
sang  real  of  Christ  preserved  in  a  reliquary.  Some  of 
these  local  devotions  were  established  and  well  known 
before  the  appearance  of  any  text  of  the  Holy  Graal  with 
which  we  are  acquainted — probably  before  those  texts 
which  we  can  discern  behind  the  extant  literature. 

We  have  at  the  present  day  the  Feast  of  the  Precious 

31 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

Blood,  which  is  a  modern  invention,  and  perhaps  for  some 
even  who  are  within  the  fold  of  the  Latin  Church,  it  is 
classed  among  the  unhappy  memorials  of  the  pontificate 
of  Pius  IX.  This  notwithstanding,  it  is  what  may  be 
termed  popular,  and  has  in  England  its  confraternities  and 
other  systems  to  maintain  it  in  the  mind  of  the  laity.  It 
has  the  London  Oratory  as  its  more  particular  centre,  and 
it  is  described  as  an  union  and  an  apostolate  of  inter- 
cessory prayer.  Without  such  assistance  in  the  Middle 
Ages  we  can  understand  that  the  cultus  had  its  appeal  to 
the  devotional  side  of  the  material  mind,  for  which  flesh 
and  blood  profited  a  good  deal,  in  spite  of  asceticism  and 
the  complication  of  implicits  behind  the  counsels  of 
perfection  in  the  religious  life  of  the  age. 

The  historical  antiquity  of  the  local  sanctities  which 
centre  about  certain  relics  is  shrouded  like  some 
Masonic  events  in  the  vague  grandeur  of  time  imme- 
morial, and  a  defined  date  is  impossible.  Because  the 
legends  of  the  Graal  are  connected  with  the  powers  and 
wonders  of  several  hallowed  objects  belonging  to  the 
Passion  of  Christ,  it  is  essential  rather  than  desirable  to 
ascertain  whether  at  the  period  when  the  literature  arose 
—and  antedating  it,  if  that  be  possible  —  there  were 
such  objects  already  in  existence  and  sufficiently  well 
known  to  respond  as  a  terminus  a  quo  in  respect  of  the 
development  of  the  legends.  The  places  which  appear 
as  claimants  to  the  possession  of  relics  of  the  Precious 
Blood  are,  comparatively  speaking,  numerous  ;  among 
others  there  are  Bruges,  Mantua,  Saintes,  the  Imperial 
Monastery  at  Weingarten,  and  even  Beyrout.  According 
to  the  story  of  Mantua,  the  relic  was  preserved  by 
Longinus,  the  Roman  soldier  who  pierced  the  side  of 
Christ.  Within  the  historical  period,  it  is  said  to  have 
been  divided,  and  some  part  of  it  was  secured  by  the 
monastery  of  Weingarten,  already  mentioned.  This 
portion  was  again  subdivided  and  brought  from  Germany 
by  Richard  of  Cornwall,  the  brother  of  Henry  III.  Frac- 
tional as  the  portion  was,  it  is  affirmed  to  have  been  a 

32 


The  Roots  of  the   House  of  Meaning 

large  relic,  and  the  fortunate  possessor  founded  a  religious 
congregation  to  guard  and  venerate  it.  Later  on  it  was, 
however,  divided  again  into  three  parts,  of  which  one  was 
retained  by  the  congregation,  one  was  deposited  in  a 
monastery  built  for  the  purpose  at  Ashted,  near  Berk- 
hampstead,  and  the  third  in  a  third  monastery  erected 
at  Hailes  in  Gloucestershire.  All  these  were  foundations 
by  Richard  of  Cornwall ;  and  to  explain  such  continual 
division,  it  must  be  remembered  that  this  was  a  period 
when  the  building  of  churches  and  religious  houses  was 
prohibited  without  relics  to  sanctify  them.  Now,  the 
story  of  Richard  himself  may  be  accepted  as  tolerably 
well  founded,  but  there  is  much  doubt  concerning  the 
relics  at  Weingarten  and  at  Mantua  itself.  The  alter- 
native statements  are  (i)  that  in  1247  the  Templars  sent 
to  King  Henry  III.  a  vas  vetustissimum^  having  the  appear- 
ance of  crystal  and  reputed  to  contain  the  Precious 
Blood ;  (2)  that  in  the  same  year,  and  to  the  same  King, 
there  was  remitted  by  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem  a 
Reliquary  termed  the  Sangreal,  which  had  once  belonged 
to  Nicodemus  and  Joseph  of  Arimathasa.  Now  it  is 
obvious  that  at  the  period  of  Henry  III.  the  canon  of 
the  Graal  literature  was  almost  closed  ;  the  last  of  these 
stories  is  obviously  a  reflection  of  that  literature ;  it  was 
also  the  time  when  (a)  the  Sacro  Catino  of  Geneva  may 
have  begun  to  be  regarded  as  the  Graal,  and  when  (<£)  a 
similar  attribution  was  given  to  a  sacred  vessel  which  had 
been  long  preserved  at  Constantinople  ;  but  these  objects, 
whether  dishes  or  chalices,  were  not  reliquaries.  It  will 
be  seen  that  the  claim  of  Mantua  remains  over  with 
nothing  to  account  for  its  origin.  Of  Beyrout  I  have 
heard  only,  and  have  no  details  to  offer.  But  the  relic  of 
Bruges  has  a  clear  and  methodical  history,  passing  from 
legend  into  a  domain  which  may  be  that  of  fact.  The 
legend  is  that  Joseph  of  Arimathasa  having  collected  the 
Blood  from  the  wounds  of  Christ,  as  the  literature  of 
the  Graal  tells  us,  placed  it  in  a  phial,  which  was  taken 
to  Antioch  by  St.  James  the  Less,  who  was  the  first 

33  c 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

bishop  of  that  city.  The  possible  historical  fact  is  that 
the  Patriarch  of  Antioch  gave  the  Reliquary  about  1130 
to  a  knight  of  Bruges  who  had  rendered  signal  services 
to  the  church  in  Antioch.  It  was  brought  back  by  the 
knight  to  his  native  place,  and  there  it  has  remained  to 
this  day.  The  dubious  element  in  the  story  is  the  gift 
of  such  a  relic  under  any  circumstances  whatever;  the 
point  in  its  favour  is  that  the  phial  has  the  character  of 
oriental  work,  which  is  referred  by  experts  in  ancient  glass 
to  the  seventh  or  eighth  century. 

Against,  or  rather  in  competition  with,  this  simple  and 
consistent  claim,  there  is  the  monstrous  invention  con- 
nected with  the  monastery  of  the  Holy  Trinity  at 
Fecamp  in  Normandy.  Here  there  is — or  there  was  at 
least  in  the  year  1840 — a  tabernacle  of  white  marble, 
decorated  with  sculptured  figures  and  inscribed  :  "Hie 
SANGUIS  D.N.,  I.H.V.,  X.P.I."  It  is  therefore  called 
the  Tabernacle  of  the  Precious  Blood. 

The  story  is  that  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  removed  the 
blood  from  the  wounds  of  Christ,  after  the  body  had 
been  taken  down  from  the  Cross,  using  his  knife  for  the 
purpose,  and  collecting  the  sacred  fluid  in  his  gauntlet. 
The  gauntlet  he  placed  in  a  coffer,  and  this  he  concealed 
in  his  house.  The  years  passed  away,  and  on  his  death- 
bed he  bequeathed  the  uncouth  reliquary  to  his  nephew 
Isaac,  telling  him  that  if  he  preserved  it  the  Lord  would 
bless  him  in  all  his  ways.  Isaac  and  his  wife  began  to 
enjoy  every  manner  of  wealth  and  prosperity  ;  but  she  was 
an  unconverted  Jewess,  and  seeing  her  husband  per- 
forming his  devotions  before  the  coffer,  she  concluded  that 
he  had  dealings  with  an  evil  spirit,  and  she  denounced  him 
to  the  high  priest.  The  story  says  that  he  was  acquitted, 
but  he  removed  with  the  reliquary  to  Sidon,  where  the 
approaching  siege  of  Jerusalem  was  made  known  to  him 
in  a  vision.  He  therefore  concealed  the  reliquary 
in  a  double  tube  of  lead,  with  the  knife  and  the  head 
of  the  Lance  which  had  pierced  the  side  of  Christ. 
The  tube  itself  he  concealed^  in  the  trunk  of  a  fig-tree, 

34 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

the  bark  of  which  closed  over  its  contents,  so  that  no 
fissure  was  visible.  A  second  vision  on  the  same  subject 
caused  him  to  cut  down  the  tree,  and  he  was  inspired  to 
commit  it  to  the  waves.  In  the  desolation  which  he  felt 
thereafter  an  angel  told  him  that  his  treasure  had  reached 
shore  in  Gaul,  and  was  hidden  in  the  sand  near  the  valley 
of  Fecamp. 

I  do  not  propose  to  recount  the  various  devices  by 
which  the  history  of  the  fig-tree  is  brought  up  to  the 
period  when  the  monastery  was  founded  at  the  end  of 
the  tenth  century.  The  important  points  in  addition 
are  (#)  that  the  nature  of  the  Reliquary  did  not  satisfy 
the  custodians,  and,  like  the  makers  of  Graal  books,  they 
wanted  an  arch-natural  chalice  to  help  out  their  central 
Hallow  ;  (£)  that  they  secured  this  from  the  priest  of 
a  neighbouring  church  who  had  celebrated  Mass  on  a 
certain  occasion,  and  had  seen  the  consecrated  elements 
converted  into  flesh  and  blood ;  (c)  that  a  second  knife 
was  brought,  later  on,  by  an  angel ;  (d)  that  a  general 
exposition  of  all  the  imputed  relics  took  place  on  the 
high  altar  in  1171  ;  (tf)  that  their  praises  and  wonders 
were  celebrated  by  a  guild  of  jongleurs  attached  to  the 
monastery,  which  guild  is  said  to  have  originated  early  in 
the  eleventh  century,  and  was  perpetuated  for  over  four 
hundred  years  ;  (/)  that  the  story  is  told  in  a  mediaeval 
romance  of  the  thirteenth  century,  though  in  place  of 
Joseph  the  character  in  chief  is  there  said  to  be  Nicodemus; 
\g)  that  there  are  other  documents  in  French  and  in 
Latin  belonging  to  different  and  some  of  them  to  simi- 
larly early  periods ;  (h)  that  there  is  also  a  Mass  of  the 
Precious  Blood,  which  was  published  together  with  the 
poem  in  1 840,  and  this  is,  exoterically  speaking,  a  kind 
of  Mass  of  the  Graal,  but  I  fear  that  a  careful  examina- 
tion might  create  some  doubt  of  its  antiquity,  and, 
speaking  generally,  I  do  not  see  (i)  that  any  of  the 
documents  have  been  subjected  to  critical  study  ;  or  (2) 
that  Fecamp  is  likely  to  have  been  more  disdainful 
about  the  law  of  great  inventions  than  other  places  with 

35 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

Hallows  to  maintain  in  Christian — or  indeed  in  any  other 
— times. 

So  far  as  regards  the  depositions  which  it  might  be 
possible  to  take  in  the  Monastery  concerning  its 
Tabernacle ;  and  there  is  only  one  thing  more  which 
need  be  mentioned  at  this  stage.  It  has  been  proved  by 
very  careful  and  exhaustive  research  into  the  extant  codices 
of  the  Conte  del  Graal  that  some  copies  of  the  continua- 
tion by  Gautier  de  Doulens  state  that  the  episode  of 
Mont  Douloureux  was  derived  from  a  book  written  at 
Fecamp.  It  follows  that  one  early  text  at  least  in  the 
literature  of  the  Holy  Graal  draws  something  from  the 
Monastery  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  but,  lest  too  much 
importance  should  be  attributed  to  this  fact,  I  desire  to 
note  for  my  conclusion  :  (#)  that  the  episode  in  question 
has  no  integral  connection  with  the  Graal  itself;  (^)  that 
the  tradition  of  Fecamp,  which  I  have  characterised  as 
monstrous,  by  which  I  mean  in  comparison  with  the 
worst  side  of  the  general  legends  of  the  Precious  Blood, 
is  utterly  distinct  from  that  of  the  Holy  Graal  in  the  texts 
which  constitute  the  literature  ;  and  (c)  that  this  literature 
passed,  as  we  shall  find,  out  of  legend  into  the  annuncia- 
tion of  a  mystic  claim.  It  is  the  nature  of  this  claim,  the 
mystery  of  sanctity  which  lies  behind  it,  and  the  quality  of 
perpetuation  by  which  the  mystery  was  handed  on,  that  is 
the  whole  term  of  my  quest,  and  here  it  stands  declared. 

We  have  seen  how  at  Fecamp  there  occurred  a  very 
curious  intervention  on  the  part  of  an  arch-natural  chalice, 
being  that  vessel  into  which  the  Graal  passes  by  a  kind  of 
superincession,  if  it  does  not  begin  and  end  therein.  But 
there  are  other  legends  of  chalices  and  dishes  in  the 
wide  world  of  reliquaries,  and  in  order  to  clear  the 
issues  I  may  state  in  the  first  place  that  the  Table  of  the 
Last  Supper  is  said  to  be  preserved  at  St.  John  Lateran, 
with  no  history  of  its  migration  attached  thereto.  The 
Church  of  Savillac  in  the  diocese  of  Montauban  has  also, 
or  once  had,  a  Tabula  Ccen<e  Domini  and  the  Bread  used 
at  that  Table.  As  regards  the  chalice  itself,  there  is  one 

36 


The  Roots  of  the    House  of  Meaning 

of  silver  at  Valencia  which  the  Catholic  mind  of  Spain 
has  long  regarded  as  that  of  the  Last  Supper ;  but  I  have 
no  records  of  its  history.  There  is  one  other  which  is 
world-wide  in  its  repute,  and  this  I  have  mentioned 
already,  as  if  by  an  accidental  reference.  The  Sacro 
Catino  is  preserved  in  the  Church  of  St.  Laurence  at 
Genoa,  and  it  is  pictured  in  the  book  which  Fra  Gaetano 
di  San  Teresa  dedicated  to  the  subject  in  1726.  It 
corresponds  by  its  general  appearance — which  recalls, 
broadly  speaking,  the  calix  of  an  enormous  flower — more 
closely  to  the  form  which  might,  in  the  absence  of 
expert  knowledge,  be  attributed  to  a  decorative  Paschal 
Dish  than  a  wine-cup  ;  but  there  is  no  need  to  say  that  it 
is  not  an  archaic  glass  vessel  of  Jewry.  The  history  of 
so  well  known  an  object  is  rather  one  of  weariness  in 
recital,  but  at  the  crusading  sack  of  Cassarea  in  noi  the 
Genoese  received  as  their  share  of  the  booty,  or  in  part 
consideration  thereof,  what  they  believed  to  be  a  great 
cup  or  dish  carved  out  of  a  single  emerald ;  it  was  about 
forty  centimetres  in  height,  and  a  little  more  than  one 
metre  in  circumference  ;  the  form  was  hexagonal,  and  it 
was  furnished  with  two  handles,  polished  and  rough 
respectively.  Now,  Caesarea  was  near  enough  to  the 
Holy  Fields  for  the  purposes  of  a  sacred  identification  in 
the  hearts  of  crusaders,  and  moreover  the  vessel  had  been 
found  in  the  mosque  of  Antioch,  which  might  have 
helped  to  confuse  their  minds  by  suggesting  that  it  was 
a  stolen  relic  of  Christian  sanctity.  But  at  the  time 
when  the  city  was  pillaged  there  is  no  evidence  that  the 
notion  occurred  to  the  Genoese,  unless  it  was  on  some 
vague  ground  of  the  kind  that  at  the  return  of  some  of 
them  it  was  deposited  in  their  church  as  a  gift.  It  may 
well  have  been  a  thank-offering,  and  this  only,  but  I 
confess  to  a  certain  suspicion  that,  vaguely  or  otherwise, 
they  had  assumed  its  sacred  character,  and  that  its  identi- 
fication, not  certainly  with  the  Holy  Graal,  but  with  the 
dish  or  chalice  of  the  Last  Supper,  may  have  begun  earlier 
than  has  been  so  far  supposed — antedating,  that  is  to 

37 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

say,  the  first  record  in  history.  This  record  is  connected 
with  the  name  of  the  author  of  the  Golden  Legend,  Jacobus 
de  Voragine,  at  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century.  There 
is,  however,  some  reason  to  believe  that  the  attribution 
was  common  already  in  Genoa  prior  to  the  period  in 
question.  The  point  which  is  posed  for  consideration  is 
whether  the  wide  diffusion  of  the  Graal  literature  caused 
such  a  claim  to  be  put  forward  by  the  wardens  of  the 
Sacro  Catino.  The  materials  for  a  decision  are  unfor- 
tunately not  in  our  hands.  With  the  Graal  itself  it 
could  not  have  been  connected  properly,  seeing  that  the 
vessel  was  empty  ;  but  perversions  of  this  kind  are  not 
outside  the  field  of  possibility.  Whatever  the  ultimate 
value  of  an  empirical  consideration  like  this,  the  heaviest 
fines,  and  even  death  itself,  were  threatened  against  those 
who  should  touch  the  vessel  with  any  hard  object.  A 
cruel  but  belated  disillusion,  however,  awaited  its  wardens 
when  it  was  taken  to  Paris  in  1816,  and  was  not  only 
broken  on  the  way  back,  but,  having  been  subjected  to 
testing,  was  proved  to  be  only  glass. 

Second  in  importance  only  to  the  vessel  of  the  Holy 
Graal  was  the  Sacred  Lance  of  the  Legend,  and  as  in  the 
majority  of  texts  this  is  also  a  relic  of  the  Passion,  our 
next  task  is  to  ascertain  its  antecedent  or  concurrent 
history  in  the  life  of  popular  devotion.  We  know  already 
of  the  thesis  issued  at  Fecamp,  but  the  claims  are  so 
many  that  no  one  has  cared  especially.  The  shaft  of 
the  spear  used  by  Longinus  when  he  pierced  the  side 
of  Christ  is  preserved  in  the  Basilica  of  St.  Peter. 
According  to  the  Roman  Martyrology,  the  Deicide 
was  suffering  from  ophthalmia  when  he  inflicted  the 
wound,  and  some  of  the  Precious  Blood  overflowing  his 
face,  he  was  healed  immediately — which  miracle  led,  it  is 
declared,  to  his  conversion.  Cassiodorus,  who  belongs 
to  the  fifth  century,  says  that  the  Lance  was  in  his  days 
at  Jerusalem,  but  this  was  the  head  and  the  imbedded 
part  of  the  shaft,  the  rest  being  missing.  He  does  not 
account  for  its  preservation  from  the  time  of  Christ  to 

38 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

his  own.  Gregory  of  Tours  speaks  of  its  removal  to 
Constantinople,  which  notwithstanding  it  was  discovered 
once  more  at  Antioch  for  the  encouragement  of  Crusaders, 
under  circumstances  of  particular  suspicion,  even  in  the 
history  of  relics.  This  was  in  1098.  There  is  also  a 
long  story  of  its  being  pledged  by  Baldwin  II.  to  Venice, 
and  of  its  redemption  by  St.  Louis,  which  event  brought 
it  to  Paris  ;  but  this  is  too  late  for  our  subject.  A  Holy 
Lance  with  an  exceedingly  confused  history — but  identical 
as  to  its  imputed  connection  with  the  Passion — came 
also  into  the  possession  of  Charlemagne.  That  any 
history  of  such  a  hallow  is  worthless  does  not  make  it 
less  important  when  the  object  is  to  exhibit  the  simple 
fact  that  it  was  well  known  in  this  world  before  Graal 
literature,  as  we  find  it,  had  as  yet  come  into  existence. 
According  to  St.  Andrew  of  Crete,  the  head  of  the 
Lance  was  buried  with  the  True  Cross,  but  it  does  not 
seem  to  have  been  disinterred  therewith.  It  is  just  to 
add  that  some  who  have  investigated  the  question  bear 
witness  that  the  history  of  the  Hallow  is  reasonably 
satisfactory  in  the  sixth  century  and  thence  onwards. 

The  next  relic  which  may  be  taken  to  follow  on  our 
list  is  the  Crown  of  Thorns  ;  it  figures  only  in  one 
romance  of  the  Graal,  but  has  an  important  position 
therein.  The  possession  of  single  or  several  Sacred 
Thorns  has  been  claimed  by  more  than  one  hundred 
churches,  without  prejudice  to  which  there  are  those 
which  have  the  Crown  itself,  less  or  more  intact.  This 
also  is  not  included  among  the  discoveries  of  St.  Helena 
in  connection  with  the  True  Cross,  and  there  is  no  early 
record  concerning  it ;  but  it  is  mentioned  as  extant  by 
St.  Paulin  de  Nole  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century. 
One  hundred  years  later,  Cassiodorus  said  that  it  was  at 
Jerusalem  ;  Gregory  of  Tours  also  bears  testimony  to  its 
existence.  In  the  tenth  century  part  of  it  was  at 
Constantinople,  which  was  a  general  centre,  if  not  a 
forcing-house,  of  desirable  sacred  objects.  St.  Germain, 
Bishop  of  Paris,  was  in  that  city  and  received  part  of  it 

39 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

as  a  present  from  the  Emperor  Justinian.  Much  earlier 
the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem  is  supposed  to  have  sent 
another  portion  to  Charlemagne.  In  1106  the  treasure 
at  Constantinople  is  mentioned  by  Alexis  Comnenus. 
Another  Crown  of  Thorns  is  preserved  in  Santa  Maria 
della  Spina  of  Pisa, 

The  Sacred  Nails  of  the  Passion  appear  once  in  the 
Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  these  also  have  an  early 
history  in  relics.  Some  or  all  of  them  were  discovered 
by  St.  Helena  with  the  True  Cross,  and,  according  to  St. 
Ambrose,  one  of  them  was  placed  by  her  in  the  diadem  of 
Constantine,  or  alternatively  in  his  helmet,  and  a  second 
in  the  bit  of  his  horse.  In  the  sixth  century  St.  Gregory 
of  Tours  speaks  of  four  nails,  and  it  seems  to  follow  from 
St.  Chrysostom  that  the  bit  of  Constantine's  charger  was 
coupled  with  the  Lance  as  an  object  of  veneration  in  his 
days.  As  regards  the  diadem  fashioned  by  St.  Helena 
this  was  welded  of  iron  and  became  the  Iron  Crown  of 
Lombardy,  being  given  by  Gregory  I.  to  Theodolinde  in 
recognition  of  her  zeal  for  the  conversion  of  the  Lombard 
people.  Charlemagne,  Sigismund,  Charles  V.  and  Napo- 
leon I.  were  crowned  therewith.  Muratori  and  others 
say  that  the  Nail  which  hallowed  it  was  not  heard  of  in 
this  connection  till  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and 
the  Crown  itself  has  been  challenged.  Twenty-nine  places 
in  all  have  laid  claim  to  the  possession  of  one  or  other  of 
the  four  nails,  and  there  are  some  commendable  devices 
of  subtlety  to  remove  the  sting  of  this  anomaly.  It  is 
sufficient  for  our  own  clear  purpose  to  realise  that  the 
relics,  if  not  everywhere,  were  in  "  right  great  plenty." 

It  is  also  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  there  only,  that 
we  see  for  a  moment,  in  the  high  pageant  of  all,  a  vision 
of  an  ensanguined  Cross,  a  blood-stained  Cincture  and  a 
bended  rod,  also  dyed  with  blood.  Of  the  Crux  vera  and 
its  invention  I  need  say  nothing,  because  its  relics,  imputed 
and  otherwise,  are  treasured  everywhere,  and  I  suppose 
that  their  multiplicity,  even  at  the  earliest  Graal  period, 
made  it  impossible  to  introduce  the  Cross  as  an  exclusive 

40 


The  Roots   of  the  House  of  Meaning 

Hallow  in  the  Sacred  House  of  Relics.  By  the  Cincture 
there  was  understood  probably  that  bandage  with  which 
the  eyes  of  Christ  were  blindfolded,  and  this,  or  its 
substitute,  had  been  in  the  possession  of  Charlemagne 
and  was  by  him  given  to  St.  Namphasus,  who  built  the 
Abbey  of  Marcillac  and  there  deposited  the  relic.  It  is 
now  in  a  little  country  church  called  St.  Julian  of 
Lunegarde.  According  to  St.  Gregory  of  Tours,  the  reed 
and  the  sponge,  which  had  once  been  filled  with  vinegar, 
were  objects  of  veneration  at  his  day  in  Jerusalem.  They 
are  supposed  to  have  been  taken  to  Constantinople,  which 
notwithstanding  an  informant  of  the  Venerable  Bede  saw 
the  sponge  with  his  own  eyes,  deposited  in  a  silver  cup 
at  the  Holy  City.  He  saw  also  the  shorter  reed,  which 
served  as  the  derisive  symbol  of  the  Lord's  royalty. 

The  last  relic  of  the  Passion  of  which  we  hear  in  the 
books  of  the  Graal  is  the  Volto  Santo,  which  all  men  know 
and  venerate  in  connection  with  the  piteous  legend  of 
Veronica.  The  memorials  of  this  tradition  are,  on  a 
moderate  computation,  as  old  as  the  eighth  century,  but 
the  course  of  time  has  separated  it  into  four  distinct 
branches.  The  first  and  the  oldest  of  these  is  preserved 
in  a  Vatican  manuscript,  which  says  that  Veronica  was 
the  woman  whose  issue  of  blood  was  healed  by  Christ, 
and  she  herself  was  the  artist  who  painted  the  likeness. 
She  was  carried  to  Rome  with  the  picture  for  the  healing 
of  the  Emperor  Tiberius.  The  second  branch  is  con- 
tained in  an  Anglo-Saxon  manuscript  of  the  eleventh 
century,  and  this  says  that  the  relic  was  a  piece  of  Christ's 
garment  which  received  in  a  miraculous  manner  the  im- 
pression of  His  countenance.  The  origin  of  the  third 
tradition  seems  to  have  been  in  Germany,  but  it  is  pre- 
served in  some  metrical  and  other  Latin  narrative 
versions.  The  likeness  of  Christ  is  said  to  be  very  large, 
apparently  full  length.  It  was  in  the  possession  of  Ver- 
onica, but  without  particulars  of  the  way  in  which  it  was 
acquired.  In  another  story — this  is  perhaps  of  the  twelfth 
century — the  Emperor  who  was  healed  is  Vespasian,  and 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Christ  Himself  impressed  His  picture  on  the  face-cloth 
which  He  used  when  He  washed  before  supper  at  the  house 
of  Veronica.  She  had  asked  St.  Luke,  whom  tradition 
represents  as  an  artist,  for  a  copy  of  the  Master's  like- 
ness. The  fourth  and  last  variant  is  the  familiar 
Calvary  legend,  wherein  the  holy  woman  offers  in  His 
service  the  cloth  which  she  has  on  her  arm  when  Christ 
is  carrying  the  Cross,  and  she  is  rewarded  by  the  impress 
of  His  countenance  thereon.  The  noticeable  point  is 
that  the  story  of  Veronica,  of  the  Volto  Santo,  and  of  the 
healing  of  a  Roman  Emperor  is  the  root-matter  of  the 
earliest  historical  account  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  this 
fact  has  led  certain  scholars  to  infer  that  the  entire 
literature  has  been  developed  out  of  the  Veronica  legend, 
as  a  part  of  the  conversion  legend  of  Gaul,  according  to 
which  the  holy  woman,  in  the  company  of  the  three 
Maries  and  of  Lazarus,  took  ship  to  Marseilles  and 
preached  the  Gospel  therein.  They  carried  the  Volto  Santo 
and  other  Hallows. 

I  approach  now  the  term  of  this  inquiry,  and  there 
remains  for  consideration  the  Sword  of  the  Graal  legends, 
which  is  accounted  for  variously  in  respect  of  its  history 
and  is  also  described  variously,  but  it  is  not  under  any 
circumstances  a  Hallow  of  the  Passion.  A  romance  which 
stands  late  in  the  cycle,  so  far  as  chronology  is  concerned, 
connects  it  with  the  martyrdom  of  St.  John  the  Baptist. 
I  have  found  no  story  in  the  world  of  relics  to  help  us 
in  accounting  for  this  invention,  though  there  are  traces 
of  a  sword  of  St.  Michael.  In  this  respect,  as  indeed  in 
other  ways,  the  Hallow  is  complicated  in  the  literature. 
It  embodies  (a)  matter  brought  over  from  folk-lore ;  (£) 
deliberate  invention,  as  when  one  story  affirms  it  to  be 
the  sword  of  David,  and  another  that  of  Judas  Maccabasus; 
and  (c)  the  semi-devotional  fable  to  which  I  have  referred 
above,  and  this  must  be  taken  in  connection  with  the 
legends  of  the  head  of  St.  John,  served  to  Herodias  on  a 
charger  to  satiate  her  desire  for  revenge  on  the  precursor 
of  Christ,  he  seeming  to  have  reproached  her  concerning 


The  Roots   of  the  House  of  Meaning 

her  manner  of  life.  It  will  be  plain  from  the  enumera- 
tion subjoined  that  the  relics  of  St.  John  are  compre- 
hensive as  to  the  person  of  his  body.  ( i )  A  martyrology 
tells  us  that  some  of  his  blood  was  collected  by  a  holy 
woman  at  the  time  of  his  decapitation,  was  put  into 
a  vessel  of  silver,  and  was  carried  into  her  country  of 
Guienne ;  there  it  was  placed  in  a  temple  which  she 
erected  to  his  honour.  (2)  The  body  was,  according  to 
one  account,  placed  in  a  temple  at  Alexandria,  which  was 
dedicated  to  the  Saint.  Another  says  that  the  head  was 
first  interred  in  the  sepulchre  of  Eliseus  at  Samaria. 
During  the  reign  of  Julian  the  Apostate  it  was  redeemed 
from  possible  profanation,  and  sent  to  St.  Athanasius,  who 
concealed  it  in  a  wall  of  his  church.  At  the  end  of  the 
fourth  century  the  same  remains  were  removed  to  a  new 
church,  built  on  the  site  of  a  temple  of  Serapis.  Subse- 
quently they  were  divided  and  distributed.  (3)  The 
Caput  Johannis  was  carried  to  Antioch  by  St.  Luke,  or 
alternatively  to  Cassarea.  From  whichever  place,  it  was 
afterwards  removed  to  Constantinople  and  brought  finally 
into  France,  where  it  was  divided  into  three  parts,  one  of 
which  is  at  Amiens,  another  at  Angely  in  the  diocese  of 
Nantes,  and  the  third  at  Nemours  in  the  diocese  of 
Sens.  A  distinct  account  states  that  the  head  was  found 
in  Syria  in  the  year  453,  and  that  the  removal  to  Con- 
stantinople took  place  five  centuries  later.  When  that  city 
was  taken  by  the  French  in  1204,  a  canon  of  Amiens,  who 
was  present,  transported  it  into  France,  where  it  was 
divided,  but  into  two  portions  apparently,  one  being  de- 
posited at  Amiens  and  the  other  sent  to  the  Church  of  St. 
Sylvester  in  Rome.  I  have  also  seen  a  report  of  two  heads, 
but  without  particulars  of  their  whereabouts. 

So  much  concerning  the  Caput  Johannis,  but  I  should 
not  have  had  occasion  to  furnish  these  instances  were  it 
not  for  the  apparition  of  an  angel  carrying  a  head  upon 
a  salver  when  the  wonders  of  the  Holy  Graal  were  first 
manifested  at  Sarras.  But  this  vision  is  not  found  in  the 
story  which  connects  the  Hallowed  Sword  with  the  head 

43 


The   Hidden    Church    of  the   Holy   Graal 

of  St.  John  the  Baptist.  The  Dish,  with  its  content, 
is  supposed  to  be  a  complication  occasioned  by  the  inter- 
vention of  folk-lore  elements  concerning  the  head  of  the 
Blessed  Bran.  The  Dish,  apart  from  the  head,  is  almost 
always  the  fourth  Hallow  in  the  legends  of  the  Graal — 
perhaps,  as  I  shall  indicate  later,  because  the  Sacred 
Vessel,  which  is  the  central  object  of  all,  is  sometimes 
identified  with  the  Paschal  Dish  of  the  Last  Supper  and 
sometimes  with  the  Chalice  of  the  First  Eucharist. 

It  follows  from  the  considerations  of  this  section  that 
although  there  has  been  a  passage  of  folk-lore  materials 
through  the  channel  of  Graal  literature — which  passage 
has  less  or  more  involved  their  conversion — its  real  im- 
portation into  romance  has  been  various  elements  of 
Christian  symbolism,  doctrine  and  legend ;  it  is  these, 
above  all,  that  we  are  in  a  position  to  know  and  account 
for,  and  I  have  made  a  beginning  here.  We  have,  there- 
fore, certain  lines  laid  down  already  for  our  inquiry  which 
assure  that  it  will  have  the  aspect  of  a  religious  and  even 
of  an  ecclesiastical  quest. 

There  is  nothing  on  our  part  which  can  be  added  to 
the  discoveries  of  folk-lore  scholars,  nor  have  we — except 
in  a  most  elementary  manner,  and  for  the  better  under- 
standing of  our  own  subject — any  need  to  summarise  the 
result  even  of  such  researches — as  these  now  stand. 
This  work  has  been  done  too  well  already.  We  are 
entering  a  new  region,  and  we  carry  our  own  warrants. 
I  need  not  add  that  in  assuming  Celtic  or  any  other 
legends,  the  Church  took  over  its  own,  because  she  had 
come  into  possession,  by  right  and  by  fact,  of  all  the 
patrimonies  of  the  Western  world. 

I  want  it  to  be  understood,  in  conclusion  as  to  this 
side  of  the  Hallows  of  the  Holy  Graal,  that  the  literature 
is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  particular  extension  of  the 
history  of  relics,  nor  should  my  own  design  in  presenting 
the  external  history  of  certain  sacred  objects  suffer  mis- 
construction of  this  or  an  allied  kind.  The  compilers  of 
encyclopaedic  dictionaries  and  handbooks  have  sometimes 

44 


The   Roots   of  the   House  of  Meaning 

treated  the  value  of  such  legends,  and  of  the  claims  which 
lie  behind  them,  in  a  spirit  which  has  been  so  far  serious 
that  they  have  pointed  out  how  the  multiplicity  of  claims 
in  respect  of  a  single  object  must  be  held  to  militate 
against  the  genuineness  of  any.  One  Juggernaut  effigy 
of  all  that  is  virulent  in  heresy  took  the  trouble,  centuries 
ago,  to  calculate  how  many  crosses  might  be  formed  full- 
size  from  the  relics  of  the  one  true  Cross  which  were 
then  extant  in  the  world,  and  an  opponent  not  less  grave 
took  the  further  trouble  of  recalculating  to  prove  that  he 
was  wrong.  So  also  Luther,  accepting  a  caution  from 
Judas,  lamented  that  so  much  gold  had  gone  to  enshrine 
the  imputed  relics  of  the  Cross  when  it  might  have  been 
given  to  the  poor.  The  truth  is  that  the  veneration  of 
relics  is  open  to  every  kind  of  charge  save  that  which 
Protestantism  has  preferred,  and  this  an  enlightened  sense 
of  doctrine  and  practice  enables  us  to  rule  out  of  court 
on  every  count. 

It  is  desirable  now  to  notice  a  few  points  which  are 
likely  to  be  overlooked  by  the  informed  student  even, 
while  the  unversed  reader  should  know  of  them  that  he 
may  be  on  his  guard  hereafter,  (i)  The  German  cycle 
of  the  Holy  Graal  has  the  least  possible  connection  with 
Christian  relics ;  speaking  of  the  important  branches,  it 
is  so  much  sui  generis  in  its  symbolical  elements  that  it 
enters  scarcely  into  the  same  category  as  the  Northern 
French  romances,  with  which  we  shall  be  dealing  chiefly. 

(2)  No  existing  reliquary  and  no  story  concerning  one  did 
more  than  provide  the  great  makers  of  romance  with  raw 
materials  and  pretexts ;  the  stories  they  abandoned  in  all 
cases  nearly,  and  the  symbols  they  exalted  by  their  genius. 

(3)  As  I  have  once  already  indicated,  but  not  so  expressly, 
the  knowledge  or  the  rumour  of  some  unknown  book  had 
come  to  them  in  an  unknown  manner,  and  of  this  book 
neither  Fecamp  nor  its  competitive  monasteries,  abbeys 
and  holy  houses  had  ever  heard  a  syllable.     The  general 
conclusion   of  this  part    is  therefore  that   the  growing 
literature  of  the  Holy  Graal  drew  from  the  life  of  devotion 

45 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

in  its  application  to  the  Mystery  of  the  Eucharist  and  to 
the  secondary  veneration  of  relics  at  the  period  ;  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  contributed  something  of  its  own  life 
to  stimulate  and  extend  the  great  doctrine  of  the  mystery, 
and  the  devotion  also.  The  elucidations  which  have  been 
here  afforded  represent  but  a  part  of  the  schedule  with 
which  this  section  opened ;  it  is  that,  however,  which  is 
most  needed  at  the  moment,  and  all  that  remains  will 
find  its  proper  place  in  the  later  stages  of  research. 

About  that  mystery  in  chief  of  the  faith  in  Christ 
which  is  the  only  real  concern  of  the  Holy  Graal,  there 
are  other  environments  which  will  appeal  to  us,  though 
their  time  is  not  yet  in  our  methodical  scheme  of  pro- 
gress. There  is  (a)  the  state  of  the  official  church,  so 
glorious  in  some  respects,  so  clouded  in  others,  like  a 
keeper  of  sacred  things  who  has  been  wounded  for  his 
own  sins,  or  like  a  House  of  Doctrine  against  which  he 
who  sold  God  for  money  has  warred,  and  not  in  vain,  for 
at  times  he  has  invaded  the  precincts  and  entered  even 
the  sanctuary,  though  the  holy  deposit  has  not  been 
affected  thereby,  because  by  its  nature  and  essence  it  is  at 
once  removed  from  his  grasp.  There  is  (£)  the  Church 
in  Britain  and  its  connections  of  the  Celtic  world,  having 
aspirations  of  its  own,  as  there  is  no  question — having  a 
legitimacy  of  its  own,  as  none  can  dare  to  deny — but  with 
only  a  local  horizon,  a  local  mission,  and  used,  for  the 
rest,  as  a  tool  for  ambitious  kings,  much  as  the  orthodox 
claim  of  the  Church  at  large  was  the  tool  of  the  popes 
at  need.  There  is  (c)  the  resounding  rumour  and  there 
is  the  universal  wonder  of  the  high  impossible  quest  of 
holy  wars  in  Palestine,  without  which  we  might  have 
never  had  the  Graal  literature,  the  romances  of  chivalry, 
or  the  secret  treasures  of  the  disdainful  East  brought  to 
the  intellectual  marts  and  houses  of  exchange  in  the  rest- 
less, roving,  ever-curious  kingdoms  of  the  West — king- 
doms in  travail  towards  their  puberty.  There  is  (^/) — and 
of  five  things  to  be  enumerated,  I  count  this  the  head 
and  crown — there  is  the  higher  life  of  sanctity  and  its 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

annals  at  the  Graal  period,  as  the  outcome  of  which  the 
West  went  to  the  East,  carrying  what  it  believed  to  be 
the  missing  talent  of  gold,  without  which,  as  the  standard 
of  all  values,  all  other  talents  were  either  debased  or 
spurious.  It  was  the  age  of  a  thousand  reflections,  at 
centuries  sometimes  of  distance,  from  Dionysius,  Augus- 
tine, and  the  first  great  lights  of  Christendom ;  it  was 
the  age  of  Hugo  de  St.  Victor,  of  Bernard,  of  Bona- 
ventura ;  it  was  the  age  which  Thomas  of  Aquinas  had 
taken  up  as  plastic  matter  in  his  hands,  and  he  shaped 
the  mind  of  the  world  after  the  image  and  the  likeness 
of  his  own  mind  in  the  high  places  of  the  schools ;  it 
was  the  age  of  many  doctors,  who  would  have  known 
in  their  heart  of  hearts  what  was  the  real  message  of  the 
Graal  literature,  and  where  its  key  was  to  be  sought. 
There  is  in  fine  (e}  my  fifth  branch,  but  this  is  the  sects 
of  the  period,  because  more  than  one  division  of  the 
Christian  world  was  quaking  and  working  towards  the 
emancipation  which  begins  by  departing  from  orthodox 
doctrine  in  official  religion,  but  seeing  that  it  begins 
wrongly  and  takes  turnings'  which  are  the  fatalities  of 
true  direction,  so  it  ends  far  from  God.  As  to  all  this, 
it  is  needful  to  say  at  this  moment,  because  it  is  almost 
from  the  beginning,  that  the  Books  of  the  Holy  Graal 
are  among  the  most  catholic  of  literature,  and  that 
reformations  have  nothing  therein.  I  say,  therefore, 
that  the  vessels  are  many  but  the  good  is  one,  of  which 
Galahad  beheld  the  vision. 

IV 
THE  LITERATURE   OF   THE   CYCLE 

The  cycle  of  the  Holy  Graal  is  put  into  our  hands 
like  counters  which  can  be  arranged  after  more  than  one 
manner,  but  that  which  will  obtain  reasonably  for  a  specific 
purpose  may  not  of  necessity  conform  to  the  chrono- 
logical order  which  by  other  considerations  would  be 

47 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy    Graal 

recommended  to  archeological  research.  It  will  be 
pertinent,  therefore,  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  classi- 
fication which  I  have  adopted  for  these  studies,  and  this 
is  the  more  important  because  at  first  sight  it  may  seem 
calculated  to  incur  those  strictures  on  the  part  of  recog- 
nised learning  which,  on  the  whole,  I  rather  think  that 
I  should  prefer  to  disarm.  I  must  in  any  case  justify 
myself,  and  towards  this,  in  the  first  place,  it  should  be 
indicated  that  my  arrangement  depends  solely  from  the 
indubitable  sequence  of  the  texts,  as  they  now  stand,  and 
secondly,  by  an  exercise  of  implicit  faith,  from  several 
palmary  findings  of  scholarship  itself.  It  follows  that 
the  disposition  of  the  literature  which  has  been  adopted 
for  my  own  purpose  is,  on  the  evidence  of  the  texts,  a 
legitimate  way  in  which  to  treat  that  literature.  There 
are  certain  texts  which  arise  out  of  one  another,  and  it  is 
a  matter  of  logic  to  group  them  under  their  proper 
sections.  Comparatively  few  documents  of  the  whole 
cycle  have  reached  us  in  their  original  form,  even  sub- 
sequently to  that  period  at  which  the  legends  were  taken 
over  in  a  Christian  interest,  while  many  of  them  have 
been  unified  and  harmonised  so  that  they  can  stand 
together  in  a  series.  It  is  the  relation  which  has  been 
thus  instituted  that  I  have  sought  to  preserve,  because 
among  the  questions  which  are  posed  for  our  considera- 
tion there  is  that  of  the  motive  which  actuated 
successive  writers  to  create  texts  in  succession  which, 
although  in  many  cases  of  distinct  authorship,  are 
designed  to  follow  from  one  another ;  as  also  to  re-edit 
old  texts ;  and  to  adjust  works  to  one  another  with  the 
object  of  presenting  in  a  long  series  of  narratives  the 
Mystery  of  the  Holy  Graal  manifested  in  Britain.  The 
bulk  of  the  texts  as  they  stand  represents  the  acquisition 
completed  and  certain  intentions  exhibited  to  their  highest 
degree.  Hence  a  disposition  which  shows  this  the  most 
plainly  is  for  my  object  the  reasonable  grouping  of  all, 
that  object  depending  from  almost  the  last  state  of  the 
literature  and  differing  to  this  extent  from  ordinary 


The  Roots  of  the   House  of  Meaning 

textual   criticism,   to   which   the   first  state  is  not  only 
important  but  vital. 

The  Graal  cycle,  as  it  is  understood  and  as  it  will  be 
set  forth  in  these  pages,  belongs  chiefly  to  France  and 
Germany.  Within  these  limits  in  respect  of  place  and 
language,  there  is  also  a  limit  of  time,  for  textual 
criticism  has  assigned,  under  specific  reserves,  the  pro- 
duction of  the  chief  works  to  the  fifty  years  intervening 
between  the  year  1170  and  the  year  1220.  As  regards 
the  reserves,  I  need  only  mention  here  that  the  romantic 
histories  of  Merlin  subsequent  to  the  coronation  of 
Arthur  have  not  so  far  been  regarded  by  scholarship 
as  an  integral  part  of  the  Graal  literature,  while  one 
later  German  text  has  been  ignored  practically  in 
England.  Seeing  that  within  the  stated  period  and 
perhaps  later,  many  of  the  texts  were  subjected,  as  I  have 
just  indicated,  to  editing  and  even  to  re-editing,  it  seems 
to  follow  that  approximate  dates  of  composition  would 
be  the  most  precarious  of  all  arrangements  for  my  special 
design.  As  regards  that  course  which  I  have  chosen,  I 
have  found  that  the  French  romances  fall  into  three 
divisions  and  that  they  cannot  be  classified  otherwise. 
The  elaborate  analysis  of  contents  which  I  have  prefixed 
to  each  division  will  of  itself  convey  the  general  scheme, 
but  I  must  speak  of  it  more  expressly  in  the  present 
case  because  of  the  implicits  with  which  we  shall  be 
concerned  presently. 

We  may  assume,  and  this  is  correct  probably,  that  the 
earliest  extant  romances  of  the  Holy  Graal — the  specula- 
tive versions  which  have  been  supposed  in  the  interests 
of  folk-lore  being,  of  course,  set  apart — are  the  first  part 
of  the  Conte  del  Graal  written  by  Chretien  de  Troyes, 
and  the  metrical  Joseph  of  Arimath<ea  by  Robert  de 
Borron — in  the  original  draft  thereof.  In  the  earlier 
records  of  criticism  the  preference  was  given  to  the  latter, 
but  it  is  exercised  now  in  respect  of  the  former  text. 

Besides  the  folk-lore  and  non-Christian  legends  of 
Peredur  and  the  Bowl  of  Plenty — which  shall  be  con- 

49  D 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

sidered  in  their  proper  place — there  was  another  class  of 
traditions  taken  over  in  the  interests  of  the  Holy  Graal. 
That  the  Arthurian  legend  had  pre-existed  in  another 
form  is  not  only  shown  by  the  early  metrical  literature  of 
northern  and  southern  France  but  by  isolated  English 
texts,  such  as  the  fifteenth-century  Morte  cT  Arthur, 
which  suggest  older  prototypes  that  are  not  now  extant. 
It  is  shown  otherwise  by  the  Welsh  Mabinogion,  which, 
much  or  little  as  they  have  borrowed  in  their  subsisting 
form  from  French  sources,  point  clearly  to  indigenous 
traditions.  The  North  -  French  romances  were  re- 
founded  in  the  interest — whatever  that  was — of  the  Graal 
sub-surface  design.  The  most  notable  example  in  an- 
other sense  was  perhaps  the  Merlin  cycle,  which  took 
over  the  floating  traditions  concerning  the  prophet  and 
enchanter  and  created  two  divergent  romances,  each 
having  the  object  of  connecting  Merlin  with  the  Graal. 
The  general  process  was  something  after  the  manner 
following:  (i)  Lays  innumerable,  originally  oral  but 
drifting  into  the  written  form;  (2)  the  same  lays  re- 
edited  in  the  Arthurian  interest  5(3)  the  Graal  mystery  at 
first  independent  of  Arthurian  legend,  or  such  at  least  is 
the  strong  inference  concerning  it ;  (4)  the  Graal  legend 
married  to  Arthurian  romance,  the  connection  being  at 
first  incidental ;  (5)  the  Arthurian  tradition  after  it  had 
been  assumed  entirely  in  the  interests  of  the  Holy  Graal. 
I  recur,  therefore,  to  my  original  thesis,  that  there  is 
one  aspect  at  least  in  which  for  my  purpose  the  superior 
importance  resides  not  in  the  primordial  elements  of  the 
literature  but  in  their  final  and  unified  form.  As  a 
typical  example,  it  is  customary  to  recognise  that  there 
was  an  early  state  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  which  is 
not  now  extant.  The  text,  as  we  have  it,  is  later  than 
most  of  the  cycle  to  which  it  belongs  properly,  yet  it  poses 
as  the  introduction  thereto.  Now  the  early  draft  may  or 
may  not  have  preceded,  chronologically  speaking,  the 
corresponding  first  versions  of  some  of  the  connecting 
texts,  and  in  either  case  when  the  time  came  for  the 

5° 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

whole  literature  to  be  harmonised  it  was  and  remains 
entitled  to  the  priority  which  it  claimed,  but  that  priority 
is  in  respect  of  its  place  in  the  series  and  not  in  respect 
of  time.  The  re-editing  of  the  romances  in  the  Graal 
interest  must  be,  however,  distinguished  carefully  from 
the  innumerable  alterations  which  have  been  made  other- 
wise but  to  which  no  ulterior  motive  can  be  attributed. 
There  is  further  no  difficulty  in  assuming  (i)  that  the 
passage  of  folk-lore  into  Christian  symbolical  literature 
may  have  followed  a  fixed  plan ;  (2)  that  when  late 
editing  exhibits  throughout  a  number  of  texts  some 
defined  scheme  of  instituted  correlation,  there  may  have 
been  again  a  design  in  view,  and  it  is  this  design  which  is 
the  concern  of  my  whole  research. 

The  places  of  the  Graal  legend,  its  reflections  and  its 
rumours,  are  France,  Germany,  Holland,  Italy,  Spain, 
Portugal,  England  and  Wales. 

In  matters  of  literature  France  and  England  were 
united  during  the  Anglo-Norman  period,  and  when  this 
period  was  over  England  produced  nothing  except  ren- 
derings of  French  texts  and  one  compilation  therefrom. 
Germany  had  an  independent  version  of  the  legend 
derived  by  its  own  evidence  from  a  French  source  which 
is  now  unknown.  The  German  cycle  therefore  differs  in 
important  respects  from  the  French  cycle ;  the  central 
figure  is  a  characteristic  hero  in  each,  but  the  central 
sacred  object  is  different,  the  subsidiary  persons  are 
different  in  certain  cases — or  have  at  least  undergone 
transformation — and,  within  limits,  the  purpose  is  ap- 
parently diverse.  The  Dutch  version  is  comparatively 
an  old  compilation  from  French  sources,  some  of  which 
either  cannot  be  identified  or  in  the  hands  of  the  poet 
who  translated  them  they  have  passed  out  of  recognition. 
Italy  is  represented  only  by  translations  from  the  French 
and  one  of  these  was  the  work  of  Rusticien  de  Pise,  who 
has  been  idly  accredited  with  the  production  of  sources 
rather  than  derivatives  of  the  legend,  and  this  in  the 
Latin  tongue.  There  is  also  another  compilation,  the 

51 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

Tavo/a  Ritonda,  but  in  both  instances  more  than  the 
names  of  the  MSS.  seems  unknown  to  scholars.  The 
Italian  cycle  is  not  of  importance  to  any  issue  of  the 
literature,  either  directly  or  otherwise,  and  so  far  as 
familiarity  is  concerned  it  is  almost  ignored  by  modern 
students.  The  inclusion  of  Spain  in  the  present  schedule 
of  places  might  seem  merely  a  question  of  liberality,  for 
the  Spanish  version  of  the  Graal  legend  exists  only  in 
(i)  the  inferred  allusions  of  a  certain  romance  of  Merlin, 
printed  at  Burgos  in  1498,  and  (2)  in  a  romance  of 
Merlin  and  the  Quest  of  the  Holy  Graal,  printed  at  Seville 
in  the  year  1500.  Of  the  first  work  only  a  single  copy 
is  known  to  exist,  and  no  French  or  English  scholar  seems 
to  have  seen  it ;  the  second  has  so  far  escaped  the 
attention  of  scholarship,  outside  the  bare  record  of 
its  existence.  This  notwithstanding,  according  to  the 
German  cycle,  the  source  of  the  legend  and  its  true 
presentation  in  at  least  one  department  thereof,  are  to  be 
looked  for  in  Spain,  and  the  first  account  concerning  it 
was  received  by  a  Spanish  Jew.  Portugal,  so  far  as  I  am 
aware,  is  responsible  only  for  a  single  printed  text,  but  it 
represents  a  French  original  which  is  otherwise  lost ;  it  is 
therefore  important  and  it  should  receive  full  considera- 
tion at  a  later  stage.  As  regards  Wales,  it  is  very  difficult 
and  fortunately  unnecessary  to  speak  at  this  initial  stage. 
Of  the  Graal,  as  we  find  it  in  France,  there  is  no  in- 
digenous Welsh  literature,  but  there  are  certain  primeval 
traditions  and  bardic  remanents  which  are  held  to  be 
fundamental  elements  of  the  cycle,  and  more  than  one  of 
the  questing  knights  are  found  among  the  Mabinogion 
heroes.  In  the  thirteenth  century  and  later,  the  legend, 
as  we  now  have  it,  was  carried  across  the  marches,  but  it 
is  represented  only  by  translations. 

For  the  purpose  of  the  classification  which  follows,  we 
must  set  aside  for  the  moment  all  whatsoever  that  has 
come  down  to  us  concerning  quests,  missions  and  heroes 
in  which  the  central  object  known  as  the  Holy  Graal 
does  not  appear.  We  shall  deal  with  these  fully  when 


The  Roots   of  the  House  of  Meaning 

we  come  to  the  study  of  the  texts  severally ;  we  are  now 
dealing  generally,  and  there  is  nothing  to  our  purpose 
in  the  Welsh  Peredur  or  in  the  English  Syr  Percyvelle. 
Whatever  its  importance  to  folk-lore,  the  Welsh  Peredur, 
in  respect  of  its  literary  history,  is  a  tangled  skein  which 
it  will  not  repay  us  to  unravel  more  than  is  necessary 
absolutely.  It  has  been  compared,  and  no  doubt  rightly 
enough,  to  the  Lay  of  the  Great  Fool,  but,  whether  we 
have  regard  to  his  foolishness  or  to  the  nature  of  his 
mission,  Peredur  never  interests  and  also  never  signifies. 
His  mission  is  confined  to  the  extermination  of  sor- 
ceresses, and  among  these  of  such  sorceresses  as  those  of 
Gloucester.  On  the  other  hand,  the  English  metrical 
romance  is  entitled  to  less  consideration  except  for  its 
claims  as  literature,  and  it  is  only  in  its  speculative 
attribution  to  a  lost  prototype  that  it  has  concerned 
scholarship.  It  must  be  understood  at  the  same  time 
that  both  texts  are  essential  to  the  literary  history  of  the 
whole  subject  from  the  standpoint  of  folk-lore.  The 
remaining  works  may  be  classified  into  cycles,  according 
either  to  affinities  of  intention  or  to  the  seat  of  their 
origin,  and  among  these  the  Northern  French  texts  fall 
into  three  divisions,  the  distribution  of  two  being,  within 
their  own  lines,  a  chronological  arrangement  strictly. 

The  Conte  del  Graal  is  allocated  properly  after  the 
cycle  of  folk-lore — as  it  is  reflected  at  a  far  distance  in  the 
non-Graal  texts  that  survive.  The  fact  that  the  Lesser 
Chronicles  are  given  a  priority  of  place  in  respect  of  the 
Greater  Chronicles  does  not  for  that  reason  mean  that  all 
their  parts  are  assumed  to  be  older  than  all  the  documents 
contained  in  the  third  division.  In  the  third  division 
itself  the  chronological  arrangement  has  been  abandoned, 
as  it  is  more  important  for  my  purpose  to  show  the 
codification  of  the  documents  by  which  they  have  been 
harmonised  into  a  series  rather  than  to  place  them  in  an 
order  of  dates  which  would  at  best  be  approximate  only 
and  would  represent  the  first  drafts  rather  than  the  texts 
as  they  remain.  The  divisions  are  therefore  as  follows  : — 

53 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

A.  The  Conte  del  Graal.  Let  me  say,  in  the  first 
place,  that  our  problems  are  not  the  authorship  of  an 
individual  prose  or  metrical  romance,  not  even  the  com- 
parative dates  of  certain  documents  as  they  now  stand 
actually,  but  whether  we,  who  as  mystics  have  come  to 
know  the  significance  and  value  of  the  hidden  life  of 
doctrine,  can  determine  by  research  the  extent  to  which 
the  intimations  of  such  doctrine  found  in  the  Graal 
literature  are  true  or  false  lights.  Now,  I  suppose  that 
there  is  no  very  serious  question  as  to  the  literary 
greatness  of  Chretien  de  Troyes,  while  some  of  the 
sequels  and  alternatives  added  to  his  unfinished  poem  are 
not  perhaps  unworthy  to  rank  with  his  own  work  ;  the 
collection,  however,  as  a  whole,  offers  very  little  to  our 
purpose.  So  far  as  Chretien  himself  carried  the  story,  we 
are  not  only  unable  to  gather  clearly  what  he  intended 
by  the  Graal,  but  why  he  had  adventured  so  far  from  his 
proper  path  as  to  plan  and  even  to  begin  such  a  story. 
If  he  had  gone  further,  as  I  believe  personally,  we  should 
have  found  that  the  Sacred  Vessel,  Telesma,  or  Wonder- 
Working  Palladium  carried  with  it  the  same  legend  as  it 
carried  for  most  other  writers ;  but  we  do  not  know  and 
it  matters  less  than  little,  for  the  Conte  del  Graal  at  its 
best  is  Nature  in  the  pronaos  of  the  temple  testifying 
that  she  is  properly  prepared.  If  we  grant  this  claim, 
we  know  that  in  Chretien  at  least,  however  she  may  have 
been  prepared  conventionally,  she  has  not  been  sanctified. 
The  alternative  termination  of  Gerbert  carries  the  story 
up  to  a  higher  level,  moving  it  in  the  direction  of 
Wolfram's  Parsifal,  yet  not  attaining  its  height.  So 
far  as  any  mystic  term  is  concerned,  the  great  Conte  is 
rather  after  the  manner  of  a  hindrance  which  calls  to  be 
taken  out  of  the  way ;  it  is  useless  for  the  higher  issues, 
and  even  for  the  business  of  scholarship  it  seems  of  late 
days  to  have  lapsed  from  its  first  importance. 

The  chief  additamentum  of  this  cycle  is  the  unprinted 
metrical  Perceval,  which  is  preserved  in  the  library  at 
Berne.  The  desire  of  the  eyes  of  students  is  a  certain 

54 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

lost  Provensal  poem,  connected  by  the  hypothesis  with 
Perceval,  as  to  which  we  shall  hear  more  fully  in  con- 
nection with  the  German  cycle  of  the  Holy  Graal. 

The  Chretien  portion  of  the  Conte  del  Graal  was 
written  not  later  than  1189,  and  the  most  recent  views 
assign  it  somewhere  between  that  year  and  1175. 
Manessier  and  Gerbert  are  believed  to  have  produced 
their  rival  conclusions  between  1216  and  1225.  As 
regards  the  Chretien  portion,  it  has  been  recognised, 
and  may  be  called  obvious,  that  it  "  presupposes  an 
early  history."  This  being  so,  it  does  not  seem  un- 
reasonable to  infer  that  the  first  form  of  the  early  history 
was  either  (a)  the  first  draft  of  De  Borron's  poem,  or 
(£)  it  corresponded  to  the  book  from  which  De  Borron 
drew  and  of  which,  Chretien  notwithstanding,  he  is 
probably  the  most  faithful,  perhaps  even  the  only  repre- 
sentative. On  the  other  hand,  if  the  particular  quest 
does  not  draw  directly  or  indirectly  from  the  particular 
history,  then  my  own  view  is  that  in  the  question  of 
date  but  little  can  be  held  to  depend  from  the  priority 
of  Chretien's  poem — which  is  a  quest — or  that  of  De 
Borron — which  is  a  history.  I  have  therefore  no  call  to 
indicate  a  special  persuasion.  For  what  it  is  worth,  the 
inferences  from  admitted  opinion  seem  to  leave  the 
priority  of  De  Borron  still  tenable  in  the  first  form  of 
his  poem,  and  for  the  rest  I  hold  it  as  certain  that  my 
classification,  although  a  novelty,  is  justified  and  even 
necessary ;  but  exact  chronological  arrangement,  in  so 
tinkered  a  cycle  of  literature  as  that  of  the  Holy 
Graal,  is  perhaps  scarcely  possible,  nor  is  it  my  concern 
exactly. 

B.  The  cycle  of  Robert  de  Borron,  being  that  which 
is  connected  more  especially  and  accurately  with  his 
name,  and  herein  is  comprised  : — 

i.  The  metrical  romance  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  in 
which  we  learn  the  origin,  early  history  and  migration 
of  the  Graal  westward,  though  it  does  not  show  that 
the  Sacred  Vessel  came  actually  into  Britain. 

55 


The   Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

2.  The  Lesser  Holy   Graal,  called   usually  Le  Petit 
St.   Graal.     We  have  here  a  prose  version  of  the  poem 
by   Robert  de   Borron,  which    accounts  for   its   missing 
portions,    but    the    two    documents    are    not    entirely 
coincident. 

3.  The  Early  History  of  Merlin,  and  this  represents  in 
full  another  metrical  romance  of  the   same  authorship 
but  of  which  the  first  500  lines  are  alone  extant. 

4.  The  Didot  Perceval,  but    this   text   is  regarded  as 
a   later   composition,  though   it   seems  to  contain  some 
primitive    elements    of    the    quest.     Its    designation    is 
explained   by   the   fact   that  it   was   at   one  time  in  the 
possession  of  M.  Firmin  Didot,  the  well-known  Parisian 
bookseller.     Its   analogies   with    the   poem    of   Chretien 
de  Troyes  are  thought  to  indicate  a  common  source  of 
knowledge  rather  than  a  reflection  or  derivation   from 
one  to  another.     This  romance  has  been  also  somewhat 
generally  regarded  as  the  prose  version  of  another  lost 
poem  by  Robert  de  Borron.     The  additamentum  of  this 
cycle  is  the  fuller  unprinted  codex  of  the  Didot  Perceval 
preserved  in  the  library  at  Modena. 

These  documents  constitute  what  may  be  termed  the 
Lesser  Histories  or  Chronicles  of  the  Holy  Graal. 
Their  characteristics  in  common,  by  which  they  are 
grouped  into  a  cycle,  are  (i)  the  idea  that  certain  secret 
and  sacramental  words  were  transmitted  from  apostolic 
times  and  were  taken  from  East  to  West ;  (2)  the  succes- 
sion of  Brons  as  Keeper  of  the  Holy  Graal  immediately 
after  Joseph  of  Arimathaea. 

The  metrical  Joseph  may  have  been  written  soon  after 
1170,  but  the  balance  of  opinion  favours  the  last  years 
of  the  twelfth  century.  Criticism  supposes  that  there 
were  two  drafts,  of  which  only  the  second  is  extant. 
It  was  succeeded  by  the  early  Merlin.  As  regards 
the  Didot  Perceval,  this  is  known  chiefly  by  a  manuscript 
ascribed  to  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century. 

C.  The  Cycle  of  the  Greater  Holy  Graal  and  the  Great 
Quest,  comprising : — 

56 


The  Roots  of  the  House   of  Meaning 

1 .  The  Saint  Graal,  that  is,  The  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
or  Joseph  of  Arimathxa,  called  also  the  First  Branch  of  the 
Romances  of  the  Round  Table  and  the  Grand  Saint  Graal. 
The  last  designation  is  due  perhaps  to  its  dimensions; 
but  it  may  be  held  to  deserve  the  title  on  higher  con- 
siderations, as  the  most  important  development  of  the 
legend  in  its  so-called  historical  aspects,  by  which  I  mean 
apart  from  the  heroes  of  the  various  quests.     The  work 
has   been  widely  attributed   to   Walter   Map,  sometime 
archdeacon   of   Oxford   and   Chaplain   to  Henry   II.   of 
England.     While   the    trend   of   present    opinion    is   to 
regard  it  as  of  unknown   authorship,  I   think  that  the 
ascription  is  not  untenderly  regarded  by  scholarship,  and 
recognising,   as   we   must,   that    evidence   is   wanting   to 
support  the  traditional  view,  no  personage  of  the  period 
is    perhaps    antecedently    more    likely.       Unfortunately 
more    than    one    other    romance,    which    seems    distinct 
generically  in  respect  of  its  style,  has  received  the  same 
attribution.     The  Greater  Holy  Graal  was  intended  to 
create  a  complete  sequence  and  harmony  between  those 
parts  of   the   cycle  with   which   it   was   more  especially 
concerned,  and  the  Galahad  Quest,  as  we  have  it,  may 
represent  the  form  of  one  document  which  it  intended  to 
harmonise.     The  alternative   is   that  there  was  another 
version  of  the  Quest  which  arose  out  of  the  later  Merlin, 
or  that  such  a  version  was  intended.     I  believe  in  fine 
that  my  order  is  true  and  right. 

2.  The    later    Merlin    romances,    and    because    the 
Vulgate  Merlin  is  in  certain  respects,  though  not  perhaps 
expressly,  a  harmony  of  De  Borron's  cycle  and  that  of 
the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  drawing  something  from  both 
sources,    I    refer    here    more    especially    to    the    Huth 
Merlin  and  the  secret  archives  of  the  Graal  from  which 
it  claims  to  derive.     The  history  of  Merlin  is  taken  by 
the  first  text  up  to  his  final  enchantment  in  the  forest 
of  Broceliande,  and  in  particular  to  that  point  when  the 
knight  Gawain  hears  the  last  utterance  of  the  prophet. 
An  analogous   term   is  reached   by  the   Huth  Merlin   in 

57 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

respect  of  Bademagus,  through  a  long  series  of  entirely 
distinct  episodes ;  it  should  be  stated  that  the  references 
to  the  Holy  Graal  are  few  in  both  romances,  but  they 
are  pregnant  with  meaning. 

As  an  addendum  to  these  branches,  there  is  the  late 
text  called  The  Prophecies  of  Merlin,  which  I  know  only 
by  the  printed  edition  of  Rouen.  It  has  wide  variations 
from  the  texts  mentioned  previously  in  so  far  as  it  covers 
their  ground,  but  it  has  also  its  Graal  references.  It  has 
been  regarded  as  a  continuation  of  the  early  prose 
Merlin,  and  in  this  sense  it  is  alternative  to  the  Vulgate 
and  the  Huth  texts. 

3.  The  great    prose    Lancelot,  which  in    spite    of  its 
subject-matter  is,  properly  understood,  a  book  of  high 
sanctity,  or  it  lies  at  least  on  the  fringe  of  this  description, 
and  towards  the  close  passes  therein. 

4.  The    Longer    Prose    Perceval  le    Gallois,    or    High 
History  of  the  Holy  Graal,  which  offers  a  term  and  con- 
clusion of  the  Graal  mystery  by  way  of  alternative  to  or 
substitute  for  that  of  the  Galahad  quest.     It  is  like  a  rite 
which  has  narrowly  escaped  perfection  ;  it  holds  certain 
keys,  but  the  doors  which  they  open  are  not  doors  which 
give  entrance  to  the  greatest  mysteries.     Herein  the  king 
is  dead,  and  with  all  the  claims  of  Perceval  it  is  a  little 
difficult    to  say    of  him :    Long    live    the    king !     The 
romance  does  not  harmonise  with  the  other  histories  of 
Perceval ;  it  has  elements  which  are  particular  to  itself 
and  the  air  of  an  independent  creation.     It  should  be 
added  that  it  draws  also  from  sources  to  us  unknown 
and   has   haunting   suggestions    of  familiarity  with   the 
source    of  Wolfram.      So    far   as  there    has    been   any 
critical  opinion  expressed  concerning  it   in  England,  it 
must  be  said  that  it  has  missed  the  mark. 

5.  The  Quest  of  the  Holy   Graal,  called  also   The  Last 
Book  of  the  Round  Table,   containing   the   term   of  the 
mystery   as  given  in  the  Chronicle  concerning  Galahad 
the  haul  prince,  and  this  is  the  quest  par  excellence,  the 
head  and  crown  of  the  Graal  legend.     I  know  that  this 

58 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

statement  will  be  challenged  in  certain  high  quarters  of 
special  research,  but  before  any  one  speaks  of  human 
interest  he  should  say,  or  at  least  in  his  heart :  The 
Life  Everlasting ;  and  this  stated,  it  must  be  added  that 
all  which  is  commonly  understood  by  human  interest, 
all  which  has  been  sometimes  regarded  as  characterising 
the  chief  quests  and  one  of  them  in  particular,  is  ex- 
cluded by  the  Great  Prose  Quest.  We  have  in  place 
thereof  a  spiritual  romance,  setting  forth  under  this 
guise  a  mystery  of  the  soul  in  its  progress.  It  is  only 
the  books  of  perfection  which  make  at  once  for  high 
rites  and  gorgeous  pageants  of  literature.  Hereof  is  the 
Galahad  Quest. 

These  five  romances  constitute  what  I  have  termed  the 
Greater  Chronicles  of  the  Holy  Graal.  It  will  have 
been  understood  that  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  and  the 
Great  Prose  Quest  exclude  one  another ;  they  stand  as 
alternatives  in  the  tabulation.  The  characteristics  of  this 
cycle  are  (i)  the  succession  of  Joseph  II.  as  keeper  of 
the  Holy  Graal  immediately  after  his  father  and  during 
the  latter's  lifetime,  this  dignity  not  being  conferred 
upon  Brons,  either  then  or  later;  (2)  the  substitution 
of  a  claim  in  respect  of  apostolical  succession — which 
placed  the  Graal  keepers  in  a  superior  position  to  any 
priesthood  holding  from  the  apostles — for  that  of  a  secret 
verbal  formula  applied  in  respect  of  the  Eucharist. 

The  dates  of  the  texts  which  are  included  in  the 
Greater  Chronicles  differ  widely  so  far  as  the  extant 
manuscripts  are  concerned.  The  canon  of  the  Graal 
literature  was  not  in  reality  closed  till  the  end  of  the 
thirteenth  century  if  these  manuscripts  are  to  be  regarded 
as  the  final  drafts.  The  lost  antecedent  documents 
cannot,  of  course,  be  assigned.  It  is  suggested,  for 
example,  that  the  prototype  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal 
and  the  Quest  of  Galahad  preceded  the  continuations 
of  Chretien.  The  unique  text  comprised  in  the  Huth 
Merlin  has  been  dated  about  1225  or  1230,  the  MS. 
itself  belonging  to  the  last  quarter  of  the  thirteenth 

59 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

century.  There  was  a  fourth  part  which  is  now  wanting  ; 
it  contained  a  version  of  the  Galahad  quest,  and  though 
it  has  been  concluded  that  it  corresponds  to  the  extant 
text,  the  Huth  Merlin  embodies  allusions  to  episodes  in 
the  lost  part  which  are  not  to  be  met  with  in  the  Galahad 
romance  as  it  now  stands. 

The  additamenta  of  this  cycle  are  the  quests  of  the 
Holy  Graal  in  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  versions,  and 
one  rendering  into  Welsh.  There  is  also  material  of 
importance  in  the  draft  of  the  Great  Quest  printed  at 
Rouen  in  1488  together  with  the  Lancelot  and  the 
Morte  <F  Arthur )  as  also  in  the  Paris  edition  of  1533. 
Finally,  the  English  metrical  chronicle  of  Hardyng  con- 
tains a  version  of  the  Galahad  legend  which  differs  in 
some  express  particulars  from  anything  with  which  we 
are  acquainted  in  the  original  romance  texts. 

D.  The  German  Cycle.  The  Parsifal  of  Wolfram 
is  the  high  moral  sense  saying  that  it  has  received  the 
light,  and  I  know  not  how  we  could  accept  the  testi- 
mony even  if  that  which  uttered  it  had  risen  from  the 
dead.  I  am  speaking,  however,  of  the  German  legend 
only  in  one  of  its  phases,  and  at  a  later  stage  I  shall 
exhibit  every  material  which  will  enable  us  to  judge 
of  its  importance.  The  Conte  del  Graal,  except  in  its 
latest  portions,  and  then  by  chance  allusions  or  deriva- 
tions at  a  far  distance,  has  nothing  to  tell  us  of  secret 
words,  Eucharistic  or  otherwise ;  it  has  also  no  hint 
of  any  super-apostolical  succession.  It  is  the  same  with 
Wolfram's  Parsifal;  the  legend,  as  it  stands  therein, 
is  in  fact  revolutionised,  or  rather  it  is  distinct  generi- 
cally,  and  the  quest,  though  it  follows  the  broad  lines 
of  the  other  Percevals,  has  gone  under  I  know  not  what 
greatness  of  alteration.  If  the  Northern  French  stories 
concerning  the  widow's  son  could  be  likened  to  a  high 
grade  in  Masonry,  then  assuredly  the  German  version 
would  be  that  rite  rectified.  The  Titurel  of  Albrecht 
von  Scharfenberg,  which  deserves  a  notice  which  it  has 
never  received  in  England,  seems  to  suggest  that  there 

60 


The  Roots  of  the   House  of  Meaning 

is  a  greater  light  in  the  East  than  has  been  found  as 
an  abiding  presence  in  the  West,  and  except  in  a  very 
high  mystic  sense,  a  sense  much  higher  than  is  to  be 
found  in  any  of  the  romances,  this  suggestion  offers 
the  token  of  illusion.  In  fine,  to  dispose  of  this  cycle, 
let  me  say  that  the  metrical  romance  of  Diu  Crone  by 
Heinrich  von  dem  Turlin  has  no  secret  message,  even  in 
the  order  of  phantasy.  At  this  day  we  rest  assured,  or 
those  at  least  whose  opinion  matters  anything,  that  the 
most  hopeless  of  all  worlds  to  enter  in  search  of  wisdom 
is  the  world  of  ghosts.  It  happens,  however,  that  in 
Heinrich's  poem  ghosts,  or  the  dead  alive,  are  the  cus- 
todians of  the  mysteries.  At  the  same  time  they  may 
hold  the  kind  of  office  which  it  is  possible  to  confer  on 
Sir  Gawain,  who  is  the  hero  of  this  voided  quest.  I 
speak,  of  course,  in  comparison  with  the  palmary  texts 
by  which  the  Quest  itself  has  entered  into  the  holy 
places  of  literature. 

It  will  follow  from  the  above  tabulation  that  while 
the  Graal  literature  is  divisible  into  several  cycles  there 
are  three  only  which  belong  to  our  particular  concern. 
The  classification  which  I  have  made  is  serviceable  there- 
fore in  yet  another  way,  since  it  enables  us,  firstly,  to 
set  apart  that  which  is  nihil  ad  rem  nostram  catholicam  et 
sanctam,  and,  secondly,  to  come  into  our  own. 


THE  IMPLICITS   OF   THE   GRAAL  MTSTERT 

There  are  several  literatures  which  exhibit  with  various 
degrees  of  plainness  the  presence  of  that  sub-surface 
meaning  to  which  I  have  referred  in  respect  of  the 
Graal  legend  ;  but  there,  as  here,  so  far  as  the  outward 
sense  is  concerned,  it  is  nearly  always  suggested  rather  than 
affirmed.  This  additional  sense  may  underlie  the  entire 
body  of  a  literature,  or  it  may  be  merely  some  concealed 
intention  or  a  claim  put  forward  evasively.  The  sub- 

61 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

surface  significance  of  the  Graal  literature  belongs  mainly 
to  the  second  class.  It  is  from  this  point  of  view  that 
my  departure  is  here  made,  and  if  it  is  a  warrantable 
assumption,  some  portion  at  least  of  the  literature  will 
prove,  explicitly  or  otherwise,  to  contain  these  elements 
in  no  uncertain  manner.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  shall 
find  them,  though,  as  I  have  indicated,  it  is  rather  by  the 
way  of  things  which  are  implied,  or  which  follow  as  in- 
ferences, but  they  are  not  for  this  reason  less  clear  or  less 
demonstrable.  The  implicits  of  the  Graal  literature  are, 
indeed,  more  numerous  than  we  should  expect  to  meet  with 
at  the  period  in  books  of  the  western  world.  They  may 
almost  exceed,  for  example,  those  which  are  imbedded 
in  the  alchemic  writings  of  the  late  twelfth  or  early  thir- 
teenth century,  though  antecedently  we  should  be  pre- 
pared to  find  them  more  numerous  in  the  avowedly 
secret  books  of  Hermetic  adepts. 

The  most  important  of  the  Graal  implicits  are  those 
from  which  my  study  depends  in  its  entirety,  but  there 
are  others  which  in  the  present  place  need  only  be  speci- 
fied, as  they  belong  more  properly  to  the  consideration  of 
individual  texts.  There  is,  in  fine,  one  implicit  which  is 
reserved  to  the  end,  because  it  is  that  upon  which  the 
debate  centres. 

The  implicit  in  chief  of  that  cycle  which  I  have  termed 
the  Lesser  Histories,  or  Chronicles  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
is  that  certain  secret  words,  having  an  attributed  appli- 
cation to  the  Sacrament  in  chief  of  the  Altar,  and  to  certain 
powers  of  judgment,  were  communicated  to  Joseph  of 
Arimathaea  by  Christ  Himself,  and  that  these  remained  in 
reserve,  being  committed  from  keeper  to  keeper  by  the 
oral  method  only. 

It  must  be  noted,  though  more  especially  for  con- 
sideration at  a  later  stage,  that  the  secret  words  are  also 
represented  in  the  poem  of  Robert  de  Borron  as  words  of 
power  on  the  material  plane ;  that  is  to  say,  outside  any 
efficacy  which  they  may  be  assumed  to  possess  in  conse- 
crating the  elements  at  the  Mass.  They  are  "  sweet, 

62 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

precious  and  holy  words."  It  is  these  qualities  which 
stand  out  more  strongly  in  the  metrical  romance  than  the 
Eucharistic  side  of  the  formula,  and  there  seems,  there- 
fore, a  certain  doubt  as  to  De  Borron's  chief  intention 
respecting  their  office.  But  in  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal  the 
implicit  of  the  metrical  romance  passes  into  actual  expres- 
sion, and  it  becomes  more  clear  in  consequence  that  the 
secret  words  were  those  used,  ex  hypothesi,  by  the  cus- 
todians of  the  Holy  Graal  in  the  consecration  of  the 
elements  of  the  Eucharist. 

Let  it  be  understood  that  I  am  not  seeking  to  press 
this  inference,  but  am  stating  an  aspect  only.  If  the 
references  to  the  secret  words  in  the  metrical  Joseph 
do  not  offer  a  sacramental  connection  with  full  clearness 
—because  they  are  also  talismanic  and  protective — 
their  operation  in  the  latter  respects  must  be  regarded  as 
subsidiary  and  apart  from  the  real  concern  of  the  Holy 
Graal.  When  all  possible  issues  have  been  exhausted, 
the  matter  remains  Eucharistic  in  the  final  terms  of  its 
appearance,  and  behind  it  there  is  that  which  lies  wholly 
perdu  for  the  simple  senses  in  sources  that  are  concealed 
utterly.  It  is  further  to  be  noted  that  any  Eucharistic 
appearance  has  nothing  to  do  with  transubstantiation, 
of  which  there  is  no  trace  in  the  Lesser  Chronicles. 
Finally,  the  sole  custodian  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  through 
a  period  of  many  centuries  lived  in  utter  seclusion,  and 
after  the  words  were  imparted  to  Perceval  he  was  in- 
terned apparently  for  ever.  The  message  of  the  Lesser 
Chronicles  seems  to  be  that  something  was  brought  into 
Britain  which  it  was  intended  to  manifest,  but  no  mani- 
festation took  place. 

When  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  was  produced  as  an 
imputed  branch  of  Arthurian  literature,  there  is  no  need 
to  say  that  the  Roman  Pontiff  was  then  as  now,  at  least 
in  respect  of  his  claim,  the  first  bishop  of  Christendom, 
and,  by  the  evidence  of  the  traditional  claim,  he  derived 
from  St.  Peter,  who  was  episcopus  primus  et  pontifex 
primordialis.  This  notwithstanding,  the  romance  attri- 

63 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

butes  the  same  title  to  a  son  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea, 
who  is  called  the  Second  Joseph,  and  here  is  the  first 
suggestion  of  a  concealed  motive  therein.  The  Book  of 
the  Holy  Graal 'and  the  metrical  romance  of  De  Borron  are 
the  historical  texts  in  chief  of  their  particular  cycles,  and 
it  does  not  follow,  or  at  least  in  all  cases,  that  their 
several  continuations  or  derivatives  are  extensions  of  the 
implicits  which  I  have  mentioned.  In  the  first  case,  the 
early  prose  Merlin  has  an  implied  motive  of  its  own  which 
need  not  at  the  moment  detain  us,  and  the  Didot  Perceval 
is  of  dubious  authenticity  as  a  sequel,  by  which  I  mean 
that  it  does  not  fully  represent  the  mind  of  the  earlier 
texts,  though  it  has  an  importance  of  its  own  and  also 
its  own  implicits.  On  the  other  hand,  in  what  I  have 
termed  the  Greater  Chronicles  of  the  Holy  Graal  there 
is,  if  possible,  a  more  complete  divergence  in  respect  of 
the  final  document,  and  I  can  best  explain  it  by  saying 
that  if  we  could  suppose  for  a  moment  that  the  Book  of 
the  Holy  Graal  was  produced  in  the  interests  of  a  pan- 
Britannic  Church,  or  alternatively  of  some  secret  school 
of  religion,  then  the  Great  Prose  Quest,  or  Chronicle  of 
Galahad,  might  represent  an  interposition  on  the  part 
of  the  orthodox  Church  to  take  over  the  literature.  At 
the  same  time  the  several  parts  of  each  cycle  under 
consideration  belong  thereto  and  cannot  be  located 
otherwise. 

The  further  divisions  under  which  I  have  scheduled 
the  body-general  of  the  literature,  and  especially  the 
German  cycle,  will  be  considered  at  some  length  in  their 
proper  place,  when  their  explicit  and  implied  motives 
will  be  specified  ;  for  the  present  it  will  be  sufficient  to 
say  that  the  German  poems  do  not  put  forward  the  claims 
with  which  I  am  now  dealing,  namely,  the  secret  formula 
in  respect  of  the  De  Borron  cycle  and  a  super-apostolical 
succession  in  respect  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  that 
which  is  classed  therewith.  We  do  not  know,  at  least 
here  in  England,  that  Wolfram  had  prototypes  to  follow 
outside  those  to  which  he  himself  confesses.  As  to  these 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

he  rejected  one  of  them,  and  we  have  means  only  by 
inference  of  ascertaining  what  he  derived  from  the  other. 
It  may  seem  certain,  however,  for  many  that  his  acknow- 
ledged exemplar  could  not  have  originated  all  those 
generic  distinctions  which  characterise  the  German  Parsifal^ 
and  the  fact  of  what  Wolfram  borrowed  throws  perhaps 
into  clearer  light  all  that  which  he  created,  or  alternatively 
it  indicates  an  unknown  source  the  nature  of  which  we 
can  determine  only  by  reference  to  schools  of  symbolism 
which  cannot  be  properly  discussed  except  towards  the 
close  of  our  inquiry. 

I  have  adopted  what  I  consider  to  be  the  best  way  of 
treating  the  whole  cycle  for  the  purpose  in  view.  I  have 
said  already  that  it  is  not  an  instruction  to  scholarship, 
nor  is  it  an  appeal  thereto,  except  for  reasonable  tolerance 
regarding  an  issue  external  to  its  own,  and  then  even  only 
in  the  sense  of  that  forbearance  which  I  should  be  ex- 
pected to  extend  on  my  own  part  to  the  probability  of  a 
speculative  date,  or  the  existence  of  a  lost  text,  which 
scholars  may  favour  in  a  particular  case. 

If  certain  mystic  sects  took  over  at  a  given  period  the 
hypothesis  and  symbolism  of  alchemy,  if  they  used  them 
as  a  secret  language  to  enshrine  their  researches  and  dis- 
coveries in  a  wholly  different  region,  it  is  obviously 
useless  for  any  one  to  have  recourse  to  the  physical 
alchemists — otherwise  than  as  a  light  on  method  and 
especially  on  the  antithetical  use  of  terms — for  an  ex- 
planation of  the  later  mode  and  intention.  If  also  some 
other  or  any  mystic  sect  appropriated  certain  crude 
legends,  prehistoric  or  what  not,  which  they  magnified, 
developed  and  transformed,  designing  to  use  them  for 
the  furtherance  of  a  particular  scheme  to  which  they  were 
themselves  dedicated ;  it  is  not  then  less  obvious  that  the 
original  form  of  such  legends  will  in  no  wise  help  us  to 
understand  the  later  position  to  which  they  have  been 
assigned  by  that  school.  In  these  few  words  the  whole 
thesis  of  scholarship  concerning  the  sources  of  the  Graal 
elements  is  disposed  of  for  our  purpose,  though  with 

65  E 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

many  titles  of  honour,  and  the  alternative  with  which  we 
are  concerned  can  be  put  no  less  shortly. 

As  regards  both  the  claims  with  which  I  am  at  the 
present  moment  more  especially  concerned,  we  must 
remember  that  although  we  are  dealing  with  a  depart- 
ment of  romantic  literature,  their  content  does  not  be- 
long to  romance  ;  the  faculty  of  invention  in  stories  is 
one  thing,  and  I  think  that  modern  criticism  has  some- 
times made  insufficient  allowance  for  its  spontaneity,  yet 
through  all  the  tales  of  chivalry  it  worked  within  certain 
lines.  It  would  not  devise  secret  Eucharistic  words  or 
put  forward  strange  claims  which  almost  make  void  the 
Christian  apostolate  in  favour  of  some  unheard-of  suc- 
cession communicated  directly  from  Christ  after  Pente- 
cost. We  know  absolutely  that  this  kind  of  machinery 
belongs  to  another  order.  If  it  does  not,  then  the  apo- 
cryphal gospels  were  imbued  with  the  romantic  spirit, 
and  the  explanation  of  Manichean  heresy  may  be  sought 
in  a  flight  of  verse.  In  particular,  the  higher  under- 
standing of  secret  consecration  is  not  a  question  of  litera- 
ture, but  of  the  communication  to  the  human  soul  of 
the  Divine  Nature.  It  lies  behind  the  Eucharistic 
doctrine  of  the  Latin  Church,  but  on  the  external  side 
that  doctrine — and  of  necessity — by  the  hypothesis  of 
transubstantiation,  communicates  the  Divine  Humanity 
rather  than  the  Eternal  and  Divine  Substance. 

I  suppose  that  what  follows  from  the  claims  has  not 
entered  into  the  consciousness  of  official  scholarship,  be- 
cause it  is  otherwise  concerned,  but  it  may  have  entered 
already  into  the  thought  of  those  among  my  readers 
whose  preoccupations  are  similar  to  my  own,  and  I  will 
now  state  it  in  a  summary  manner.  As  the  secret  words 
of  consecration,  the  extra-efficacious  words  which  must 
be  pronounced  over  the  sacramental  elements  so  that 
they  may  be  converted  into  the  arch-natural  Eucharist, 
have,  by  the  hypothesis,  never  been  expressed  in  writing, 
or  alternatively  have  been  enshrined  only  in  a  lost  or 
hypothetical  book,  it  follows  that  since  the  Graal  was 

66 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

withdrawn  from  the  world,  together  with  its  custodians, 
the  Christian  Church  has  had  to  be  content  with  what  it 
has,  namely,  a  substituted  sacrament.  And  as  the  super- 
apostolical  succession,  also  by  the  hypothesis,  must  have 
ceased  from  the  world  when  the  last  keeper  of  the  Graal 
followed  his  vessel  into  heaven,  the  Christian  Church  has 
again  been  reduced  to  the  ministration  of  some  other  and 
apparently  lesser  ordination.  It  follows,  therefore,  that 
the  Graal  literature  is  not  only  a  cycle  of  romance 
originating  from  many  traditions,  but  is  also,  in  respect 
of  those  claims  —  and  even  in  a  marked  manner  —  a 
departure  from  tradition. 

If  I  were  asked  to  adjudicate  on  the  value  of  such 
claims,  I  should  say  that  the  doctrine  is  the  body  of  the 
Lord  and  its  right  understanding  is  the  spirit.  Whoso- 
ever therefore  puts  forward  a  claim  on  behalf  of  secret 
formulae  in  connection  with  the  Eucharistic  Rite  may 
appear  in  the  higher  hermeneutics  to  have  forgotten  one 
thing  which  is  needful — that  there  are  efficacious  consecra- 
tions everywhere.  The  question  of  apostolical  succession 
would  seem  also  in  the  same  position,  because  the  truly 
valid  transmissions  are  those  of  grace  itself,  which  com- 
municates from  the  source  of  grace  direct  to  the  soul ; 
and  the  essence  of  the  sacerdotal  office  is  that  those  who 
have  received  supernatural  life  should  assist  others  so  to 
prepare  their  ground  that  they  may  also  in  due  season, 
but  always  from  the  same  source,  become  spiritually 
alive.  If  there  is  another  and  higher  understanding  of 
any  apostolical  warrant,  I  do  not  know  what  it  is.  It 
remains,  however,  that  the  implicits  with  which  I  have 
been  dealing  are  actually  the  implicits  in  chief  of  the 
Graal  books,  and  that  they  do  not  make  for  harmony 
with  the  teaching  of  the  orthodox  churches  does  not 
need  stating.  From  whence  therefore  and  with  what 
intention  were  they  imported  into  the  body  of  romance  ? 
Before  this  question  can  be  answered  we  shall  have  to  pro- 
ceed much  further  in  the  consideration  of  the  literature. 

The  few  people  who  have  approached  the  Graal  legend 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

with  any  idea  of  its  significance — I  will  not  say  from  the 
mystic  standpoint,  but  from  that  of  a  secret  tradition  per- 
petuated through  Christian  times,  or  a  certain  remanent 
thereof — have  been  wholly  unequipped  in  respect  of 
textual  knowledge  and  in  a  manner  of  official  religious 
training.  They  have,  therefore,  missed  the  points. 
Scholarship,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been  well  trained  in 
its  proper  groove,  but  it  has  had  no  eyes  for  another  and 
more  especially  for  any  mystic  aspect.  I  am  about  to 
tabulate  a  few  facts  and  to  draw  from  them  several 
inferences  which  have  not  been  noted  previously. 

The  Graal  in  the  Graal  Castle  appeared  on  certain 
occasions  in  connection  with  the  Mass,  but  it  was,  for 
the  most  part,  manifested  only  at  a  feast.  There  it 
operated  sometimes  in  relation  to  the  idea  of  sustenance, 
but  seemingly  by  way  of  transmutation.  Subject  to  a 
single  exception,  it  was  not  itself  eaten  or  drunk,  but 
it  was  passed  over  food  and  wine  when  these  were 
available.  When  they  were  not  forthcoming,  it  pro- 
duced the  notion  of  rare  refection.  The  particular 
vessel — understood  usually  as  a  cup  or  chalice — which, 
as  we  shall  see,  was,  under  the  distinctive  name  of  Graal, 
the  chief  Hallow  of  the  Castle,  contained,  however,  blood 
and  water,  without  increase,  of  which  there  is  no  record, 
or  diminution,  of  which  there  is  also  no  record,  though 
on  one  occasion  which  passes  all  understanding  it  might 
have  been  supposed  to  occur.  It  was  therefore  solely  a 
relic  of  great  virtue  and  miraculous  efficacy.  We  shall 
see  in  what  manner,  at  the  end  of  various  quests,  it 
was  taken  to  heaven,  or  at  least  into  deeper  seclusion ; 
but  this,  in  spite  of  the  Eucharistic  implicit,  did  not 
mean,  in  the  minds  of  the  makers  of  romance,  any  sacra- 
mental decrease,  because  it  is  obvious  from  all  the  texts 
that  Mass  was  said  independently  in  church  and  hermitage 
while  the  Graal  was  still  in  the  castle.  The  indubitable 
inference  from  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  indeed  from 
De  Borron's  poem,  is  that  Britain  was  entirely  heathen 
when  Joseph  came  thereto,  and  it  might  therefore  follow 

68 


The  Roots  of  the   House  of  Meaning 

that  its  priesthood  held  subsequently  from  him.  In  the 
later  and  longer  text  the  claim  of  Robert  de  Borron  is 
voided,  or  rather  has  undergone  substitution ;  there  are 
no  secret  words,  of  consecration  or  otherwise  ;  the  Eucha- 
ristic  formula  is  given  in  full,  and  its  variations,  such 
as  they  are,  from  that  of  the  Latin  rite,  bear  traces  of 
oriental  influence  derived  through  a  Gallican  channel 
and  offer  nothing  to  our  purpose.  In  this  case,  and 
so  far  certainly  as  England  was  concerned,  when  the 
time  came  for  the  Graal  to  be  taken  away,  that  removal 
signified  at  most  the  loss  of  a  great  hallow,  a  precious 
relic,  and,  this  granted,  things  remained  as  they  were  for 
all  ecclesiastical  purposes.  In  connection  with  the  re- 
cession, a  period  was  put  to  certain  times  of  adventure, 
aspects  of  enchantment,  inhibition  and  disaster,  much  as 
if  a  sovereign  pontiff  had  laid  the  city  or  land  of  Logres 
under  a  long  interdict  and  had  at  length  removed  it, 
one  only  sanctuary,  during  the  whole  period,  remaining 
free  from  suspension. 

The  question  therefore  arises  as  to  what  was  the 
nature  of  the  pre-eminence  ascribed  to  Joseph  and  his 
line.  I  speak  here  so  far  as  its  object  and  intention  were 
concerned,  and,  of  course,  the  readiest  answer  will  be 
sought  in  the  secret  aspirations  of  the  Celtic  Church ; 
but  we  shall  see  in  the  end  that  they  are  inadequate. 
There  is  another  explanation  which  is  not  only  ready  to 
our  hand,  but  is  so  plausible  that  it  is  desirable  to  exer- 
cise a  certain  caution  against  it.  I  would  say,  therefore, 
that  the  claims  with  which  we  are  concerned  must  be 
distinguished  from  doctrinal  confusions  and  errors  of 
theological  ignorance ;  of  these  we  have  full  evidence 
otherwise.  They  are  to  be  accounted  for  in  the  most 
natural  of  all  manners,  but,  whether  explicit  or  implied, 
the  claims  of  Eucharistic  efficacy  and  supereminence  in 
succession  carry  with  them  an  evidence  of  set  purpose 
which  makes  it  impossible  to  enter  them  in  any  category 
of  mere  blunders.  I  say  this  with  the  greater  certainty 
because  every  concealed  sense  which  we  can  trace  in  the 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

literature  must  be  held  to  co-exist  with  manifest  surface 
insufficiency  even  within  its  own  province,  and  more  espe- 
cially regarding  the  Eucharist.  We  shall  learn  towards 
the  term  of  our  inquiry  that  this  fact  offers  evidence  in 
itself  that  the  real  mystery  of  the  Graal  was  brought 
from  a  great  distance — not  exactly  in  time  or  place,  but 
in  the  matter  of  connection  with  its  source.  I  should  add 
that  other  concealed  literatures  offer  similar  difficulties,  as, 
for  example,  those  which  are  constituted  by  the  grossness 
of  the  Talmud,  the  barbarisms  of  the  Zohar  and  other 
Midrashim,  or  the  scientific  fatuities  of  Latin  alchemy. 
In  conclusion  for  the  moment  as  to  this  part,  if  I  have 
spoken  as  though  there  were  some  fundamental  spirit  of 
rivalry  to  the  external  Church  indicated  by  the  fact  of 
the  romances,  it  is  pre-eminently  desirable  to  state  that 
there  is  no  intention,  at  least  on  my  part,  to  present  the 
Graal  Mystery  as  a  secret  process  at  work  outside  the 
Church.  It  was  assuredly  working  from  within,  as  if  in 
the  opinion  of  those  who  held  its  keys  they  looked  that 
it  would  act  as  a  leaven  and  accomplish  some  modifica- 
tion in  the  entire  mass.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to 
suppose  that  the  Eucharistic  and  super-apostolical  claims 
denied  those  which  have  their  authority  in  the  New 
Testament  and  in  the  outer  offices  of  the  Church. 
The  institutions  of  the  one  remain  as  we  know  it  already 
on  sacred  evidence ;  as  to  the  other,  its  validity  is  in 
no  sense  diminished,  but  the  presence  of  a  still  higher 
or  at  least  of  a  distinct  warrant  is  indicated,  and  it  is  of 
the  essence  thereof  that  it  is  not  in  competition ;  it  is 
a  secret  thing,  but  it  might  have  been  manifested  more 
openly,  if  the  world  had  been  worthy :  the  world,  how- 
ever, was  so  unworthy  that  the  Palladium  was  taken 
still  farther  away.  One  evidence  of  the  whole  position 
is  that  the  apostolate  of  Joseph  II.  is  compared  with  that 
of  the  known  apostles  in  other  countries  than  Britain, 
and  without  diminution  of  either.  This  notwithstanding, 
there  remains  the  irresistible  suspicion  of  the  external 
Church  at  the  suggestion  that  one  who  was  outside  the 

70 


The  Roots  of  the  House  of  Meaning 

chosen  twelve  is  represented  as  the  first  to  consecrate  the 
Eucharist  under  an  imprescriptible  title  and  to  receive 
the  benefit  of  installation  in  the  episcopal  chair ;  Peter, 
who  in  the  days  of  his  Master  understood  so  little,  seems 
to  take  an  inferior  place.  But  if,  as  I  believe,  the  im- 
plicits  of  the  Graal  literature  are  the  rumour  rather  than 
the  replica  of  secret  sanctuary  doctrine,  there  is  pro- 
bably a  better  understanding  of  both  than  can  be  found 
imbedded  in  the  texts.  The  true  intention  may  have 
concerned  a  statement  of  higher  experience  in  the  com- 
munication of  the  Divine  Substance ;  or,  in  still  more 
simple  language,  the  external  Eucharist  conveys  Christ 
symbolically,  but  the  attainment  of  Christ  in  the  higher 
consciousness  offers  a  direct  experience.  The  succession, 
the  modes  of  ordination  in  a  company  of  sanctity  who 
have  thus  attained  is  ex  hypothesi  and  de  facto  of  a  different 
order  than  that  which,  also  ex  hypothesi  and  per  doctrinam 
sanctam,  is  conveyed  from  one  to  another  by  the  episcopal 
intention.  We  have,  however,  to  take  things  as  they  are 
offered  to  us  in  the  official  churches  and  in  the  glorious 
literatures  of  the  soul,  ascribing  to  them  that  sense  in 
which  we  can  understand  them  best,  so  only  that  it  is 
our  highest  sense. 

In  conclusion  as  to  the  greater  implicits,  seeing  that 
the  import  of  the  Secret  Words  in  the  cycle  of  Robert 
de  Borron  has  eluded  critical  analysis,  while  that  of  the 
extra-apostolical  succession  was  appreciated — it  is  sixty 
years  since,  and  has  occasioned  scarcely  a  notice — by  Paulin 
Paris,  there  is  one  thing  at  least  obvious — that  the  second 
is  more  largely  written  on  the  surface  of  the  particular 
texts  than  the  first,  and  when  we  come  to  consider  in 
their  order  the  romances  comprised  in  the  cycle  of  the 
Lesser  Chronicles,  we  shall  find  that  there  are  several 
difficulties.  It  is  only  after  their  grave  and  full  evalua- 
tion that  I  have  put  forward  in  this  section  the  possession 
of  certain  secret  words  in  relation  to  the  Eucharist  as 
being  one  of  the  two  sovereign  implicits  of  the  Graal 
literature. 

71 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

The  lesser  implicits  may,  for  purposes  of  convenience, 
be  tabulated  simply  as  follows  : — 

a.  The  Implicits  of  Moses  and  Simeon. 

b.  The  Implicits  of  the  Merlin  legend. 

c.  The  Implicits  of  the  Graal  keepers. 

d.  The  Implicits  of  the  several  Quests  and   the  dis- 

tinctions thereto  belonging. 

I  recognise  that  the  general  subject  of  these  and  the 
other  subsurface  meanings  is  at  this  stage  much  too 
advanced  for  the  reader,  who  is  perhaps  wholly  unskilled, 
and  hence  those  that  are  major  I  have  sketched  only  in 
outline  and  those  that  are  minor  I  have  limited  to  a 
simple  enumeration :  it  has  been  necessary  to  define  all, 
so  that  the  scope  of  the  literature  may  be  indicated  in 
respect  of  our  proper  concern  even  from  the  beginning. 
After  the  problems  which  they  offer  have  been  studied 
at  length  in  the  light  of  the  texts  themselves,  we  shall 
turn  for  further  help  to  certain  coincident  schools  of 
symbolism. 


72 


BOOK    II 

MTSTER1ES   OF  THE   HOLT  GRAAL   IN 
MANIFESTATION  AND  REMOVAL 


THE    ARGUMENT 

I.  A    PRELIMINARY  ACCOUNT    OF   CERTAIN    ROOT- 
SECRETS    INCLUDED    IN    THE    WHOLE   SUBJECT. — Further 

considerations  concerning  the  several  groups  of  the  literature — 
Quest  versions  and  versions  of  early  history — The  Suppressed 
IVord  of  the  Perceval  Quests — The  suppressed  sacramental 
formula — The  secret  school  of  ordination — The  passing  of  the 
sacraments.  II.  THE  INSTITUTION  OF  THE  HALLOWS, 

AND    IN    THE    FlRST    PLACE    A    GENERAL    INTRODUCTION 

CONCERNING  THEM. — Their  powers  and  offices — Their 
passage  from  East  to  West — The  Hallows  in  Britain — An 
alternative  division  of  the  cycle — Texts  of  the  sacramental 
claims — The  implied  mystery  of  the  Hallows — The  four 
Hallow s-in- chief.  III.  THE  INSTITUTION  OF  THE  HAL- 
LOWS, AND,  SECONDLY,  THE  VARIATIONS  OF  THE  CuP 

LEGEND. — The  Holy  Vessel  in  the  legends  of  Joseph  of 
Arimath<za — The  high  symbolism  of  the  Cup — Sources  of 
information  concerning  the  Sacred  Vessel — Certain  apocryphal 
Gospels  and  certain  chronicles  of  Britain — Variations  of  the 
Conte  del  Graal — The  Cup  in  the  metrical  romance  of  ~De 
Eorron — Its  Rucharistic  character — Philology  of  the  term 
GRAAL — The  Cup  in  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal — In  the 
Early  Prose  Merlin — In  the  Didot  Perceval — The  Cup  in 
the  Hook  of  the  Holy  Graal — The  Chalice  and  the  Paschal 
Dish — References  in  the  later  prose  Merlins — The  Graal  in 
the  Longer  Prose  Perceval — Certain  visions  of  the  Holy  Vessel 
in  the  great  prose  Lancelot — The  Graal  in  the  Quest  of 

75 


The  Hidden  Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Galahad — The  Hallow  In  the  German  cycle — Possible 
hypotheses  regarding  the  Most  Precious  Vessel — The  conclusion 
of  this  matter.  IV.  THE  GRAAL  VESSEL  CONSIDERED  AS 
A  BOWL  OF  PLENTY. — Developments  of  this  tradition  in  the 
Greater  Chronicles — In  the  poem  of  Robert  de  Borron — Of 
spiritual  refreshment — Material  presentation  in  the  Book  of 
the  Holy  Graal — Two  aspects  of  magical  feeding  in  the 
German  cycle.  V.  THE  LESSER  HALLOWS  OF  THE 
LEGEND. — The  Summary  of  these  matters — The  Lance — 
The  Broken  Sword— The  Dish  or  Salver.  VI.  THE 
CASTLE  OF  THE  HOLY  GRAAL. — The  place  of  the  Holy 
Vessel — The  House  of  the  Rich  King  Fisherman — The 
Castle  in  the  Valley— The  Castle  of  Eden— The  Palace 
of  Dead  Men.  VII.  THE  KEEPERS  OF  THE  HALLOWS. 
— Variations  of  tradition  in  respect  of  the  Graal  and  its 
Guardians — How  the  life  of  Brons  was  prolonged  through- 
out the  centuries — The  Keepers  in  the  Greater  Chronicles. 
VIII.  THE  PAGEANTS  IN  THE  QUESTS. — Order  of 
the  Ceremonial  Procession  in  the  Conte  del  Graal — The 
Pageant  in  the  Romance  of  Lancelot — In  the  duest  of 
Galahad — In  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval — In  the  German 
cycle.  IX.  THE  ENCHANTMENTS  OF  BRITAIN,  THE 
TIMES  CALLED  ADVENTUROUS  AND  THE  WOUNDING 
OF  THE  KING. — The  Cloud  upon  the  Sanctuary — The  sus- 
pension of  Nature — Times  of  peril  and  distress — Of  sin 
entering  the  Sanctuary — Of  help  coming  from  without — The 
Dolorous  Stroke.  X.  THE  SUPPRESSED  WORD  AND 
THE  MYSTIC  QUESTION. — One  distinction  between  Perceval 
and  Galahad — Mischances  of  the  Word  in  its  suppression — 
The  Word  in  partial  manifestation — Of  the  causes  of  silence 
— Of  the  plenary  demand.  XL  THE  HEALING  OF  THE 
KING. — How  the  burden  was  lifted  from  old  age — Of 

76 


The  Argument 

anodyne  for  wounding  in  battle — Concerning  the  body  of  the 
healer — Of  absolution  from  sin.  XII.  THE  REMOVAL  OF 
THE  HALLOWS. — How,  according  to  one  text,  they  remain 
in  seclusion — How,  in  another,  there  was  no  recession — How 
the  dead  were  set  free — How  the  Hallows  were  not  seen 
so  openly — How  they  were  taken  to  heaven — Conclusion  as 
to  the  Hallows — Their  hidden  period. 


77 


BOOK    II 

MTSTERIES   OF    THE   HOLT  GRAAL   IN 
MANIFESTATION  AND   REMOVAL 


I 

A  PRELIMINARY  ACCOUNT  OF  CERTAIN  ROOT- 
SECRETS  INCLUDED  IN  THE  WHOLE  SUBJECT 

IT  is  a  very  curious  heaven  which  stands  around  the 
infancy  of  romance-literature,  and  more  than  one  warrant 
is  required  to  constitute  a  full  title  for  the  interpretation 
of  those  strange  signs  and  portents  which  are  seen  in 
some  of  its  zones.  The  academies  of  official  learning 
are  consecrated  places,  and  those  who  have  graduated  in 
other  schools,  and  know  well  that  they  hold,  within 
their  own  province,  the  higher  authority,  must  be  the 
first  to  recognise  and  respect  the  unsleeping  vigilance 
and  patience  of  students  who  are  their  colleagues  and 
brothers  in  a  different  sphere.  In  the  study  of  archaic 
literature,  the  external  history  of  the  texts  and  the 
criticisms  thereto  belonging  are  in  the  hands  of  a  recog- 
nised college,  and  its  authority  is  usually  final ;  but  the 
inward  spirit  of  the  literature  is  sometimes  an  essence 
which  escapes  the  academical  processes.  At  the  same 
time,  any  school  of  criticism  which  should  decide  that 
some  books  of  the  Holy  Graal  do  not  put  forward 
extraordinary  claims  of  the  evasive  kind,  and  do  not  so 
far  contain  the  suggestion  of  an  inward  purpose,  must 
be  held  to  have  failed  even  within  its  own  province. 
Having  indicated  after  what  manner  the  literature 

79 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy    Graal 

with  which  we  are  dealing  falls  readily  into  several 
groups  of  a  distinct  kind  for  the  purpose  of  particular 
classification,  we  are  now  called  to  regard  it  a  little 
differently,  though  without  prejudice  to  the  schedule- 
in-chief  of  my  proper  choice.  The  distinction  between 
quest-versions  and  versions  of  early  history  is  known 
to  students,  and  though  it  is  not  absolutely  definite  in 
itself,  so  far  as  the  intention  of  criticism  is  concerned 
solely,  it  is  important  from  another  point  of  view.  The 
reason  is  that  both  classes  have  their  particular  mystery, 
which  is  not  without  its  antecedents  in  distinct  schools  of 
symbolism.  The  keynotes  of  the  historical  series — to 
make  use  of  the  expression  in  a  sense  which  is  not 
usually  or  so  concisely  attached  to  it — -are  those  which 
have  been  considered  as  the  implicits-in-chief  of  the 
literature.  They  are  two  in  number,  and  they  are  em- 
bodied in  two  palmary  historical  texts,  from  which  they 
were  carried  forward  through  intermediate  documents 
which  answer,  broadly  speaking,  to  the  same  description, 
and  thence  through  certain  quest-versions  by  which  the 
literature  is  taken  to  its  term.  I  am  speaking,  however, 
only  of  those  cycles  which  have  been  classified  in  the 
previous  section  as  the  Lesser  and  Greater  Chronicles  of 
the  Holy  Graal ;  but  it  should  be  understood  that  the 
same  or  analogous  early  histories  are  presupposed  by  the 
later  sequels  to  the  poem  of  Chretien  de  Troyes.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  German  cycle,  as  represented  by  Wolfram 
von  Eschenbach  and  the  author  of  the  later  Titurel,  has 
an  early  history  which  differs  from  all  existing  French 
sources,  though  the  Quest  of  Parsifal  is  in  close  corre- 
spondence with  the  Perceval  quests  current  in  northern 
France. 

We  have  seen,  concerning  the  keynotes  of  the  early 
histories,  that  they  are  : — 

A.  The  suppression  or  concealment  of  a  potent 
sacramental  formula,  in  the  absence  of  which  the  office  of 
the  Christian  ministry  is  not  indeed  abrogated  but  is 
foreshortened  or  has  become  substituted,  so  that  there 

80 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

seems  to  be  something  of  a  vital  character  wanting  to  all 
the  sanctuaries.  Whatever  therefore  the  elements  which 
entered  into  the  composition  of  the  Graal  conception, 
several  versions  of  the  legend  unite  in  relating  it  to 
the  mystery  and  power  of  certain  high  consecrations  or 
of  certain  unmanifested  and  withheld  forms  of  speech. 
Those  who  can  acquire  and  retain  the  words  may  exercise 
at  will  a  strange  power  and  mastery  over  all  about  them, 
and  will  possess  great  credit  in  the  sight  of  God.  They 
need  never  fear  the  deprivation  of  their  proper  rights, 
sufferings  from  evil  judgments,  or  conquest  in  battle,  so 
long  as  their  cause  is  just.  It  is,  however,  as  I  have 
intimated,  either  (i)  impossible  to  communicate  these 
words  in  writing,  or  (2)  they  are  recorded  in  one  place 
only  ;  that  is  to  say,  in  the  secret  archives,  or  great  book 
of  the  Graal.  They  are  too  precious  and  holy  for  com- 
mon utterance,  and,  moreover,  they  are  the  secret  of  the 
Graal  itself,  in  which  a  strange  power  of  speech  also 
resides.  Joseph  was  himself  under  singular  direction  in 
accordance  with  the  preconceived  order  of  the  Mystery, 
for  the  fulfilment  of  its  concealed  term. 

B.  The  removal,  cessation,  or  assumption  of  a  certain 
school  of  ordination,  which  held  from  heaven  the  highest 
warrants,  which  was  perpetuated  from  generation  to 
generation  in  one  line  of  descent,  which  had  the  custody 
of  the  sacred  mysteries,  which,  in  fine,  ordained  no  one ; 
and  the  substitution,  both  concurrently  and  thereafter,  of 
some  other  form  of  succession — venerable  enough  in  its 
way,  and  the  next  surviving  best  after  the  abrogation 
of  the  first,  but  not  the  highest  actuality  of  all,  not  the 
evidence  of  things  unseen  made  spiritually  and  materially 
manifest  as  the  term  of  faith.  To  this  extent  did  the 
powers  of  the  Secret  Sanctuary  differ  by  the  hypothesis 
concerning  it  from  the  powers  of  the  Holy  Church  mani- 
fested in  the  world.  Yet  the  Church  manifest  was  also 
the  Church  Holy. 

In  the  prologue  or  preamble  to  the  Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal,  the  hermit  who  receives  the  revelations  and  the 

81  F 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

custody  of  the  mysterious  Book  of  the  Legend  testifies 
that  the  greatest  secret  of  the  world  has  been  confided  to 
him,  and  the  communication  took  place  amidst  inexpres- 
sible experiences  in  that  third  heaven  to  which  St.  Paul 
was  translated.  The  description  of  his  ecstasy  is  written 
in  fervent  language,  but  in  place  of  an  indicible  formula 
there  is  a  great  mystery  attributed  to  the  entire  text 
of  that  cryptic  record  which,  although  it  is  said  to  be 
translated,  yet  remains  unknown.  The  form  wherein 
we  have  it  is  a  concession  to  human  disqualification  and 
even  to  the  frailty  of  external  Nature.  We  possess  only 
a  substitute.  On  the  other  hand,  the  keynotes  of  the 
French  quests  are  also  of  two  kinds,  by  which — if  it  were 
possible  otherwise — they  might  be  divided  into  two  cycles. 
That  of  the  several  Percevals  is  the  suppression  of  a 
certain  word,  question,  or  formula,  which  suppression,  on 
the  surface  side  of  things,  causes  dire  misery  and  post- 
pones the  advancement  of  the  elect  hero,  but  in  the  end 
it  makes  for  his  further  recognition  and  ensures  his  more 
perfect  calling,  so  that  he  is  crowned  in  fine  as  he  might 
not  have  been  crowned  at  first.  If  at  his  initial  oppor- 
tunity he  had  asked  in  the  Graal  Castle  that  simple 
question  which  covers  the  whole  adventure  with  so  deep 
a  cloud  of  mystery,  he  would  not  have  been  perfected  in 
suffering,  regret  and  exile  ;  some  of  the  quests  would 
have  terminated  almost  at  their  inception,  and  one  in  its 
present  form  could  not  have  existed  at  all. 

The  withheld  word  of  the  Perceval  quests  takes,  as  I 
have  indicated,  the  form  of  a  simple  question — a  ques- 
tion, that  is  to  say,  which  should  have  been  asked  but 
was  not ;  as  such  it  is,  so  to  speak,  the  reverse  side  or 
antithesis  of  the  old  classical  legend  of  the  sphinx.  The 
sphinx  asked  questions  and  devoured  those  who  did  not 
reply  or  whose  answers  blundered.  Perceval  kept  silence 
when  he  should  have  urged  his  inquiries,  sometimes 
through  false  modesty,  sometimes  because  he  had  been 
cautioned  against  idle  curiosity;  but  in  both  cases,  by 
the  working  of  some  apparently  blind  destiny,  the 

82 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

omission  carried  with  it  the  long  series  of  its  disastrous 
consequences.  There  came,  however,  a  time  of  joy  and 
deliverance,  and  it  followed  a  belated  utterance  of  the 
word  ;  thereby  great  enchantments  were  determined,  great 
wrongs  were  redressed,  and  the  wounds  and  sufferings 
endured  through  many  years  were  healed  and  annulled. 
It  follows  that  there  is  a  twofold  mystery  of  words  con- 
nected by  certain  texts  with  the  Quest  of  Perceval.  Its 
higher  sense  is  that  of  the  sacramental  formula,  and  this 
was  interned  with  Perceval  according  to  the  Lesser 
Chronicles.  But  the  word  alternative — that  which  could 
be  reserved  or  uttered — had  performed  in  the  meantime, 
and  was  still  fulfilling,  a  certain  office  of  amelioration,  so 
that  it  is  not  by  a  merely  vain  observance  that,  in  a  sense, 
it  is  replaced  by  the  quests  for  that  unknown  formula 
which  was  reserved  as  the  last  mystery  of  the  Hidden 
Sanctuary.  In  contradistinction  to  this,  there  is  one  quest 
— and  it  is  to  be  noted  that  it  is  one  only — which  depends 
entirely  from  the  second  alternative  of  the  historical 
implicits.  This  is  the  Galahad  Quest,  and  the  keynote 
hereof  is  separate  from  all  mysteries  of  asking,  all  joy 
of  answer,  as  if  these  were  of  the  Lesser  Enigmas,  and 
it  is  uplifted  into  a  great  world  of  holiness,  where  no 
longer  is  there  any  shadow  of  similitude  to  secret  claims 
— doctrinal  or  ecclesiastical ;  but  the  heroism  of  human 
life  is  received  into  the  Divine  Rapture,  so  that  the  last 
formulary  of  the  search  after  and  finding  of  the  Holy 
Graal  is  in  all  truth  that  which  is  expressed  by  the  admir- 
able doctor  Ruysbroeck — in  vastissimum  divinitatis  pelagus 
navigare.  Of  such  is  the  Graal  legend,  and  those  who 
are  acquainted  with  it  in  the  most  elect  of  its  early  forms 
will  agree  not  only  that  many  portions  of  it  are  singularly 
winning,  but  that  it  is  indeed 

"  A  part 
Of  the  hunger  and  thirst  of  the  heart." 

It  is  also  on  the  external  side  a  very  melancholy  legend ; 
it  is  the  passing  of  a  great  procession  and  a  great  sacra- 

83 


The   Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

ment,  which,  owing  to  the  imputed  stress  and  terror  of 
the  time,  is  destined  never  to  return  in  the  same  form  ; 
it  is  a  portion  of  the  loss  of  humanity  on  one  side  of  its 
manhood  ;  and  it  is  no  matter  for  surprise  that  in  these 
late  days,  which  are  so  full  of  the  hunger  and  the  thirst, 
several  persons  have  attempted  to  read  into  it  the  parti- 
cular significance  which  appeals  to  them.  This  has  been 
anything  in  some  cases  but  that  which  could  have  been 
intended  consciously  by  any  maker  of  chronicles,  and  the 
question  of  Perceval  abides  therefore  amongst  us,  but  now 
in  the  reverse  form,  seeing  that  it  is  asked,  and  this  often, 
yet  it  remains  to  this  day  unanswered,  save  in  those  Holy 
Places,  beyond  the  external  voices,  of  which  this  world, 
as  such,  knows  not  anything.  To  the  glory  of  God  and 
to  those  Holy  Places,  within  the  Great  Church  of  the 
Mysteries,  I  dedicate  this  research  as  a  sign  without  of 
the  things  signified  within. 


II 

THE  INSTITUTION  OF  THE  HALLOAS,  AND  IN 
THE  FIRST  PLACE  A  GENERAL  INTRODUC- 
TION CONCERNING  THEM 

Having  thus  indicated  after  what  manner  the  Graal 
legend  and  its  literature  is  tinged  with  mystery  and 
symbolism  a  parte  ante  et  a  pane  post,  the  next  matter 
of  our  inquiry  is  concerned  with  the  Institution  of 
the  Hallows.  In  all  its  forms  indifferently,  the  Legend 
of  the  Holy  Graal  depends  upon  powers  and  offices 
ascribed  to  certain  sacred  objects.  Those  texts  which 
it  has  become  customary  to  term  the  Early  Histories, 
equally  with  those  which  present  the  various  versions 
of  the  Quest,  revolve  about  these  Hallows,  showing  how 
they  were  instituted,  how  they  came  into  Britain,  in 
whose  hands  they  were  preserved  at  first,  to  whom 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

they  were  transmitted   successively,  why  and   by  whom 
they  were  sought,  and  what,  in  fine,  became  of  them. 

Among  the  general  characteristics  of  the  French 
cycle  we  shall  find  that  there  is  the  passage  of  these 
Hallows  from  East  to  West.  They  are  in  hereditary 
keeping,  and  in  the  end,  according  to  certain  ver- 
sions, they  are  again  taken  East.  There  are,  however, 
numerous  phases  of  the  legend,  important  variations  in 
the  Hallows,  while  claims  which  are  manifest  in  certain 
texts  are  in  others  non-existent.  The  cycle  in  Germany 
took  over  the  legend  of  the  Swan  Knight  and  imported 
the  Templar  interest  expressly ;  on  the  other  hand,  the 
introduction  of  certain  highly  ascetic  elements  is  thought 
to  be  characterised  by  the  coming  of  Galahad  into  the 
Graal  Quest.  The  peculiar  ecclesiastical  claims  which 
are  the  subsurface  warrant  of  the  cycle  written  in 
Northern  French  were  never  put  forward  ostensibly,  and 
in  the  Galahad  legend  there  remains  only  the  shadow 
of  those  earlier  designs  which  might  be  constructed  as 
in  dissonance  with  the  Latin  rite. 

The  Quest  of  the  Holy  Graal  and  of  the  other 
Hallows  which  were  from  time  to  time  connected  there- 
with is  followed  by  many  knightly  heroes,  most  of  whom 
are  unsuccessful ;  the  preliminary  conditions  of  attain- 
ment are  purity  and  sanctity,  but  there  is  nothing  to 
show  that  these  were  sufficient  in  themselves,  and  as 
there  were  other  qualifications,  so  in  some  signal  instances 
a  partial  success  was  not  impossible  in  the  absence,  or  at 
least  comparatively,  of  those  warrants  which  in  given 
cases  were  claimed  as  essential.  Once  more,  therefore, 
the  cycle  of  Northern  France  may  be  regarded  as  falling 
into  four  divisions  : — 

(a]  The  Institution  of  the  Hallows,  and  more  especially 
that  which  concerns  the  origin  of  the  Sacred  Vessel. 

(£)  The  circumstances  under  which  the  Hallows  were 
carried  into  Britain,  or  alternatively  were  found 
therein,  and  the  later  circumstances  of  their  partial 
manifestation. 

85 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

(c]  The  details  of  the   search   for  the   Hallows,  and 
other  things  within  and  without  which  led  to 
their  removal  or  recession. 
(d}  The  occasion  of  their  final  departure. 
The  texts,  therefore,  purport  to  provide  the  complete 
History  of  the  Graal,  including  whence  it  came,  where 
it  abode  for  a  while,  and  whither  it  has  gone.     This  is 
not  to  say  that  there  are  express  books  treating  of  each 
section  only.     The  metrical  romance  of  De  Borron  does, 
however,  stand  simply  for  the  first  part,  and  the  same  ap- 
plies to  its  prose  rendering  in  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal.     The 
second  part  is  found  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and 
the  third  in  the  Didot  Perceval,  the  Conte  del  Graal,  the 
Parsifal  of  Wolfram,  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  and  the 
Great  Quest  of  Galahad.     The  German  Perceval  excepted, 
all  these  stories  of  research  give  an  account  of  the  with- 
drawal— some  at  considerable  length,  and  some  briefly. 

Again,  the  later  romances  may  be  divided  into  two 
sections  :  (a)  those  which  speak  of  an  enchantment  fallen 
on  Britain,  and  (£)  those  which  are  concerned  with  the 
termination  of  certain  adventurous  times.  If  the  litera- 
ture follows  any  set  purpose,  a  definable  importance  must 
be  attributed  to  the  meaning  of  that  enchantment  and 
those  adventures.  In  this  manner,  the  chief  questions 
may  be  summarised  alternatively  as  follows : — 

(#)  The  sacramental  claim  and  its  connections,  so  far 

as  these  appear  in  the  Quests. 
(£)  The  qualifications  for  the  Quest. 
(<:)   The  Hereditary  Keepers  of  the  Graal. 
(^)  The  King's  Wounding  and  the  King's  Healing. 
(e)   The  enchantments  of  Britain  in  connection  with 

the  Wounded  Keeper. 

(/)  The  removal  of  the  Graal  and  the  close  of  those 
times  which  the  texts  term  adventurous,  since 
when  there  has  been  silence  on  earth  in  respect 
of  the  Holy  Graal. 

The  sacramental  claim  is  introduced,  among  other 
documents,  in  (a)  the  De  Borron  poem ;  (£)  the  Lesser 

86 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Holy  Graal;  while  its  shadow  is  projected  as  a  secret 
which  cannot  be  told  in  (c)  the  proem  to  the  Conte  del 
Graal.  It  seems  to  be  found  by  a  vague  and  remote 
inference  in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval,  and  it  may  be 
gathered  by  brief  allusions  in  the  early  prose  Merlin. 
In  the  Great  Quest  it  has  been  expunged,  while  it  is 
outside  the  tradition  as  represented  by  Wolfram.  The 
Quest  qualifications  are  vague  in  Chretien  and  exceed 
reason.  They  are  perhaps  what  might  be  termed  ethical 
—but  in  the  high  degree — in  Wolfram,  who  presents  the 
marriage  of  Perceval.  The  so-called  ascetic  element 
appears  fully  in  the  'Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  in  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval,  and  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad.  The 
King's  Wounding  is  accounted  for  differently  in  every 
romance ;  the  withdrawal  of  the  Graal  is  also  told 
differently ;  sometimes  it  passes  simply  into  deeper  con- 
cealment ;  sometimes  it  seems  taken  away  utterly  ;  in  one 
version  there  is  another  keeper  appointed,  but  of  the  realm 
apart  from  the  Hallows ;  it  is  carried  to  the  far  East  in 
another ;  in  two  texts  it  remains  where  it  was. 

If  there  is  a  secret  intention  permeating  the  bulk  of 
the  literature,  again  it  must  partly  reside  in  those  epochs 
into  which  the  literature  falls ;  their  consideration  should 
manifest  it  and  should  enable  us  to  deal,  at  the  close  of 
the  whole  research,  with  the  final  problem,  being  that 
which  is  signified  by  the  departure  of  the  Sacred  Vessel. 

Each  of  the  Hallows  has  its  implied  enigma,  besides 
that  which  appears  openly  in  its  express  nature,  and  as 
we  know  that  the  mysteries  of  God  are  mysteries  of 
patience  and  compassion,  we  shall  be  prepared  to  find  in 
their  reflections  through  the  Graal  Legend  that  even 
some  offices  of  judgment  are  formularies  of  concealed 
mercy.  They  are  therefore  both  declared  and  un- 
declared— that  is  to  say,  understood ;  and  as  there  are 
certain  Hallows  which  only  appear  occasionally,  so  there 
are  suggestions  and  inferences  concerning  others  which  do 
not  appear  at  all.  That  which  was  always  in  evidence  is 
that  to  which  the  distinctive  name  of  Graal  is  applied  in 

8? 


The   Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy    Graal 

every  text,  but  enough  has  been  said  concerning  it  till  we 
come  to  its  exhaustive  consideration  in  the  next  section. 
The  second  and  third  Hallows  are  the  Lance  and  the 
Sword.  The  Lance  is  that  which  was  used  by  the  Roman 
soldier  Longinus  to  pierce  the  side  of  Christ  at  the  Cruci- 
fixion, or  it  is  this  at  least  according  to  the  more  general 
tradition.  Of  the  Sword  there  are  various  stories,  and  it 
is  this  which  in  some  cases  serves  to  inflict  the  wound 
from  which  the  Enchantments  of  Britain  follow.  It  is 
(a)  that  which  served  to  behead  St.  John  the  Baptist,  in 
which  connection  we  can  understand  its  position  as  a 
sacred  object ;  (<£)  that  of  the  King  and  Prophet  David, 
committed  by  Solomon  to  a  wonderful  ship,  which  went 
voyaging,  voyaging  throughout  the  ages  till  it  should  be 
seen  by  Galahad,  the  last  scion  of  the  royal  house  of 
Israel ;  or  (c]  it  is  simply  an  instrument  preserved  as 
a  token  belonging  to  a  legend  of  vengeance,  in  which 
relation  it  was  brought  over  from  folk-lore  and  is  nothing 
to  the  purpose  of  the  Graal. 

The  Dish,  which  is  the  fourth  and  final  object  in- 
cluded among  the  authorised  Hallows,  is  more  difficult 
to  specify,  because  its  almost  invariable  appearance  in 
the  pageant  of  the  high  processions  is  accompanied  by 
no  intelligible  explanation  respecting  it ;  and  although 
it  has  also  its  antecedents  in  folk-lore,  its  mystic  ex- 
planation, if  any,  must  be  sought  very  far  away.  Like 
the  rest  of  the  Hallows,  it  is  described  with  many 
variations  in  the  different  books.  It  may  be  a  salver 
of  gold  and  precious  stones,  set  on  a  silver  cloth  and 
carried  by  two  maidens ;  it  may  be  a  goodly  plate  of 
silver,  or  a  little  golden  vessel,  and  this  simply,  except 
in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval,  which  as  it  multiplies  the 
Hallows  so  it  divides  their  ministry ;  but  here,  as  else- 
where, the  Dish  does  not  embody  apparently  the  feeding 
properties  which  are  one  aspect  of  the  mystery. 

In  summary  therefore  :  subject  to  characteristic  varia- 
tions which  are  particular  to  each  text,  it  will  be  found 
that  the  several  romances  follow  or  forecast  one  general 

88 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy    Graal 

process,  exhibiting  a  general  secret  intention,  manifested 
though  not  declared,  and  it  is  for  this  intention  that 
my  study  has  to  account. 


Ill 

THE  INSTITUTION  OF  THE  HALLOAS,  AND, 
SECONDLT,  THE  VARIATIONS  OF  THE  CUP 
LEGEND 

We  have  seen  that  the  secret  of  the  Graal,  signifying 
the  super-substantial  nourishment  of  man,  was  communi- 
cated by  Christ  to  His  chosen  disciple  Joseph  of  Arima- 
thaea,  who,  by  preserving  the  body  of  his  Master  after 
the  Crucifixion,  became  an  instrument  of  the  Resurrec- 
tion. He  laid  it  in  the  sepulchre,  and  thus  sowed  the 
seed  whence  issued  the  arch-natural  body.  On  Ascension 
Day  this  was  removed  from  the  world,  but  there  re- 
mained the  Holy  Vessel,  into  which  the  blood  of  the 
natural  body  had  been  received  by  Joseph.  Strangely 
endued  with  the  virtues  of  the  risen  Christ  and  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  sustained  him  spiritually,  and  by 
a  kind  of  reflection  physically,  during  forty  years  of 
imprisonment,  through  which  period  he  was  in  that  con- 
dition of  ecstasy  which  is  said  by  the  Christian  masters 
of  contemplation  to  last  for  half-an-hour — being  that  time 
when  there  is  silence  in  heaven.  We  find  accordingly 
that  Joseph  had  no  sense  of  duration  in  respect  of  the 
years ;  he  was  already  in  that  mystery  of  God  into  which 
the  ages  pass.  After  his  release  the  Holy  Vessel  became 
a  sign  of  saving  grace,  instruction  and  all  wonder  to  that 
great  company  which  he  was  elected  to  take  westward. 
He  committed  it  in  fine  to  another  keeper,  by  whom 
it  was  brought  into  Britain,  and  there,  or  otherwhere, 
certain  lesser  Hallows  were  added  to  the  Hallow-m- 
chief,  and  were  held  with  it  in  the  places  of  concealment. 
Those  which  are  met  with  most  frequently,  as  we  have 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

seen,  are  four  in  number,  but  the  mystery  is  really  one, 
since  it  is  all  assumed  into  that  vessel  which  is  known  for 
the  most  part  as  the  Cup  of  legend.  It  is  understood  that 
for  us  at  least  this  Cup  is  a  symbol,  seeing  that  the  most 
precious  of  all  vessels  are  not  made  with  hands.  It  is  in 
such  sense  that  the  true  soul  of  philosophy  is  a  cup  which 
contains  the  universe.  We  shall  understand  also  the 
ministry  of  material  sustenance,  frequently  attributed  to 
the  Holy  Graal,  after  another  manner  than  that  which 
can  be  presumed  within  the  offices  of  folk-lore.  It 
is  in  this  sense  that  the  old  fable  concerning  the 
Bowl  of  Plenty,  when  incorporated  by  the  Graal  Mystery, 
may  prove  to  have  a  profound  meaning.  Some  things 
are  taken  externally ;  some  are  received  within ;  but 
the  food  of  the  body  has  analogies  with  that  of  the 
soul.  So  much  may  be  said  at  the  moment  concerning 
certain  aspects  which  encompass  the  literature  of  the 
Graal,  as  the  hills  stand  round  Jerusalem. 

The  four  Hallows  are  therefore  the  Cup,  the  Lance, 
the  Sword  and  the  Dish,  Paten  or  Patella — these  four, 
and  the  greatest  of  these  is  the  Cup.  As  regards  this 
Hallow-in-chief,  of  two  things  one :  either  the  Graal 
Vessel  contained  the  most  sacred  of  all  relics  in  Christen- 
dom, or  it  contained  the  Secret  Mystery  of  the  Eucharist. 
Now,  the  first  question  which  arises  is  whether  the  general 
description  which  obtains  concerning  it — as  I  was  almost 
about  to  say,  in  the  popular  mind — reposes  on  the 
authority  of  the  texts.  Here  also  will  be  found  our 
first  difficulty.  I  may  not  be  pardoned  such  flippancy, 
but  the  Psalmist  said  :  Calix  meus  quam  inebrians  est,  and 
this  has  rather  a  bearing  on  the  Graal  chalice  ;  for  the 
variety  of  the  accounts  concerning  it  may  produce  in  the 
mind  a  sense  of  having  visited  some  inn  of  strange 
description  where  those  who  come  to  ask  questions  are 
served  with  strong  measures,  and  full  at  that. 

There  are  three  available  sources  of  information  con- 
cerning the  Sacred  Vessel,  including  those  which  are 
purely  of  the  Eucharistic  office,  (i)  The  apocryphal 

90 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

legends  concerning  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  which  are  dis- 
tinct from  those  that  have  been  incorporated  with  the 
romances  of  chivalry  and  with  the  histories  leading  up 
to  these.  (2)  The  romances  themselves  and  their  pro- 
legomena, which  are  the  chief  bases  of  our  knowledge, 
but  on  the  understanding  that  there  is  no  criterion  for 
the  distinction  between  that  which  is  traditional  and 
that  which  is  pure  invention.  (3)  Some  archaeological 
aspects  of  sacramental  practice. 

The  apocryphal  legends  which  connect  Joseph  with 
the  cultus  of  the  Precious  Blood  are  late,  and  they 
lie  under  the  suspicion  of  having  been  devised  in  the 
interests  of  Glastonbury,  or  through  Glastonbury  of 
ecclesiastical  pretensions  on  the  part  of  the  British  Church 
at  or  about  the  period  of  Henry  II.  Above  these  as 
a  substratum  of  solid  fact — I  refer  to  the  fact  of  the 
inventions — there  has  been  of  late  years  superposed 
an  alleged  dream  of  a  pan-Britannic  Church,  which 
belongs,  however,  more  particularly  to  the  romance  of 
history.  The  chivalrous  romances  themselves  have  so 
overlaid  the  Graal  object  with  decorations  and  wonder- 
elements  that  the  object  itself  has  been  obscured  and 
its  nature  can,  in  some  cases,  be  extricated  scarcely. 
Eucharistic  archaeology  remains  as  a  source  of  informa- 
tion on  which  it  is  possible  to  rely  implicitly,  but  while 
this  can  satisfy  us  as  to  the  variations  in  the  form  and 
matter  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  used  in  the  Sacrifice  of  the 
Mass,  it  does  not  offer  us,  except  indirectly,  much  or 
perhaps  any  assistance  to  determine  the  relic  of  legend. 

The  Evangelium  Nicodemi,  Acta  [vet  Gestd\  Pilatiy 
and  some  other  oriental  apocryphal  documents  are  the 
authorities  for  the  imprisonment  of  Joseph  by  the  Jews 
because  he  had  laid  the  body  of  Christ  in  the  sepulchre. 
William  of  Malmesbury,  John  of  Glastonbury  and 
similar  makers  of  chronicles  are  responsible  for  referring 
the  first  evangelisation  of  Britain  to  Joseph  of  Arimathaea. 
From  these,  however,  we  must  except  Geoffrey  of 
Monmouth,  and  William  of  Malmesbury  has  nothing 

9' 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

to  tell  us  of  the  Graal,  though  he  has  the  story  of  two 
phials  containing  the  Precious  Blood.  The  reference  to 
relics  of  any  kind  is  also  late  in  the  chronicles.  An  English 
metrical  life  of  Joseph,  belonging  to  the  first  years  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  but  drawing  from  previous  sources, 
shows  how  the  precious  blood  was  collected  by  that  saint 
and  received  into  two  cruets,  which  we  find  figuring  at 
a  later  period  in  the  arms  of  Glastonbury  Abbey.  One 
of  these  sources,  though  perhaps  at  a  far  distance,  may 
have  been  the  lost  book  attributed  to  Melkin  or  Mewyn, 
which  gives  an  account  of  these  cruets.  The  tradition 
supposes  (i)  that  they  were  buried  at  Glastonbury,  (2) 
that  they  will  be  discovered  concurrently  with  the 
coffin  of  Joseph,  and  (3)  that  thereafter  there  will  be 
no  more  drought  in  Britain.  John  of  Glastonbury  is  one 
of  the  authorities  for  the  existence  of  a  book  of  Melkin 
— sometimes  identified  with  the  Chronicle  of  Nennius. 
The  more  immediate  antecedent  of  the  metrical  story 
is,  however,  the  Nova  Legenda  Anglic  of  Capgrave,  and 
it  represents  Joseph  as  living  with  twelve  hermits  at 
Glastonbury,  where  he  also  died  and  was  buried.  The 
Oxford  Vernon  MS.,  written  in  verse  about  1350,  shows 
that  there  was  a  sacred  vessel  containing  blood.  The 
Chronicle  of  Helinandus  describes  the  Graal  as  a  wide 
and  shallow  vessel,  wherein  meats  in  their  juice  are 
served  to  wealthy  persons.  The  Historia  Aurea,  written 
by  John  of  Tynemouth,  connects  Joseph  with  the  Holy 
Vessel,  which  it  describes  as  that  large  dish  or  platter  in 
which  the  Lord  supped  with  His  disciples,  with  which 
concurs  one  entire  cycle  of  the  legend.  It  may  be 
added,  for  what  it  is  worth,  that  the  Armorican  Gauls 
seem  to  have  had  a  sacred  vessel  used  in  certain  rites 
from  a  very  early  period.  An  object  of  this  kind  is 
thought  to  be  depicted  on  Armorican  coins,  being  semi- 
circular in  shape,  held  by  means  of  thongs  and  devoid  of 
stem  or  base.  Under  Roman  domination  the  vessel  was 
figured  with  a  pedestal. 

We  come  now  to  the  putative  historical  romances  and 

92 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy    Graal 

the  poems  and  tales  of  chivalry  which  contain  the  de- 
veloped legend  of  the  Graal.  The  Conte  del  Graal, 
which  is  the  first  text  for  our  consideration,  has  many 
decorative  descriptions  of  the  Sacred  Vessel,  but  they  pre- 
sent certain  difficulties,  as  will  be  exhibited  by  their  simple 
recitation  in  summary,  (i)  It  was  covered  with  the  most 
precious  stones  that  are  found  in  the  world,  and  it  gave 
forth  so  great  a  light  that  the  candles  at  the  table  were 
eclipsed,  even  as  are  the  stars  of  heaven  in  the  glory  of 
the  sun  and  moon  (Chretien  de  Troyes).  (2)  It  passed 
to  and  fro  quickly  amidst  the  lights,  but  no  hand 
appeared  to  hold  it  (Gautier  de  Doulens,  or,  as  he  is 
now  termed,  Wauchier  de  Denain).  (3)  It  was  borne 
uplifted  by  a  beautiful  maiden,  who  was  discounselled 
and  weeping  (Montpellier  MS.).  (4)  It  was  carried  to 
and  fro  before  the  table  by  a  maiden  more  beautiful 
than  flowers  in  April  (second  account  of  Gautier,  with 
which  compare  the  similar  recital  of  Gerbert).  (5)  It 
was  carried  amidst  a  great  light  by  an  angel,  to  heal 
Perceval  (Manessier).  (6)  It  was  carried  in  the  pageant 
by  a  maiden  through  the  castle  chamber  (ibid.).  (7)  It 
was  carried  openly  at  the  coronation  of  Perceval,  also 
by  a  maiden  (ibid.).  (8)  It  was,  in  fine,  ravished  with 
the  soul  of  Perceval,  and  has  never  since  been  seen 
so  openly : — 

"  Ne  ja  mais  nus  hommes  qui  soit  nes 
Nel  vera  si  apiertement." 

What  follows  from  these  citations  will  have  occurred  to 
the  reader — that  in  all  these  several  sections  of  the  Conte 
del  Graal  there  is  no  intelligible  description  of  the  sacred 
object;  that  the  writers  knew  of  it  at  a  far  distance 
only;  that  some  of  their  references  seem  to  indicate 
a  brilliant  lamp  rather  than  a  chalice  ;  and,  when  they 
allocated  it  to  Christian  symbolism,  that  they  may  have 
wavered  in  their  meaning  between  the  idea  of  the 
Paschal  Dish  and  the  Cup  in  which  Christ  consecrated  the 
wine  of  the  first  Eucharist ;  but  we  cannot  tell.  I  should 

93 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

add  that  the  prologue,  which  is  certainly  the  work  of  a 
later  or  at  least  of  another  hand,  and  embodies  some 
curious  material,  mentions,  but  very  briefly,  the  pageant  of 
the  Graal  procession,  saying  that  the  Vessel  appears  at  the 
Castle  without  sergeant  or  seneschal,  but  again  there  is  no 
description  of  the  Vessel.  In  conclusion  of  this  account, 
the  alternative  ending  of  Gerbert  retells  with  variations 
part  of  the  story  of  Joseph,  and  although  there  is  once 
again  no  intimation  as  to  the  form  of  the  Graal,  an 
account  of  the  service  performed  at  an  altar  over  "  the 
holy,  spiritual  thing  " — the  Vessel  more  beautiful  than 
eye  of  man  has  seen — is  there  recounted,  while  it  leaves 
no  doubt  in  the  mind  that  this  service  was  a  Mass  of  the 
Graal.  It  is  the  only  suggestion  of  the  kind  which  is 
afforded  by  the  vast  poem,  though  the  origin  and  early 
history  of  the  sacred  object  is  in  accordance  with  the 
received  tradition. 

The  fuller  memorials  of  this  tradition  are  embodied, 
as  we  have  seen,  in  two  cycles  of  literature,  but  the  text 
which  is  first  in  time  and  chief  in  importance  is  the 
metrical  Romance  of  the  Graal,  or  Joseph  of  Arimathtea,  by 
Robert  de  Borron.  A  French  and  a  German  critic  have 
said  that  this  is  the  earliest  text  of  the  Graal  literature 
proper,  and  an  English  writer  has  concluded,  on  the  con- 
trary, that  it  is  not :  mats  que  nfimporte  ?  I  will  not  even 
ask  for  the  benefit  of  the  doubt,  so  far  as  enumeration 
is  concerned.  The  metrical  Joseph  says  that  the  Graal 
was  a  passing  fair  vessel,  wherein  did  Christ  make  His 
sacrament.  This  is  vague  admittedly,  and  assuming  a 
certain  confusion  in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  it  might 
have  been  that  Dish  mentioned  by  John  of  Tynemouth 
in  which  the  Paschal  Lamb  was  eaten  by  Christ  and  His 
disciples.  In  place  of  the  words  mout  gent,  which  are 
given  by  the  original  French  editor  of  the  only  text, 
Paulin  Paris,  following  I  know  not  what  authority,  or 
imagining  a  variant  reading,  substituted  the  words  mout 
grant,  which  might  well  apply  to  the  Paschal  Dish.  But 
Robert  de  Borron  certifies  to  his  own  meaning  when  he 

94 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

recites  an  utterance  of  Christ  in  His  discourse  to  Joseph, 
for  it  is  there  said  that  the  vessel  which  has  served  as 
the  reliquary  shall  be  called  henceforth  a  chalice : — 

"  Cist  vaisseau  ou  men  sane  meis, 
Quant  de  men  cors  le  requeilJis, 
Calices  apelez  sera." 

It  is  impossible  to  read  the  later  verses  in  which  the  Euchar- 
istic  chalice  is  compared  with  the  sepulchre  of  Christ, 
the  mass  corporal  with  the  grave-clothes,  and  the  paten 
with  the  stone  at  the  mouth  of  the  tomb,  without  con- 
cluding that  by  the  Graal  was  intended  the  first  Euchar- 
istic  chalice,  and  the  presence  of  this  symbolism  in  the 
mind  of  Robert  de  Borron  suggests  a  symbolical  inten- 
tion on  his  part  in  the  whole  legend  which  he  presented. 
If  it  is  said  that  his  idea  of  a  chalice  does  not  correspond 
to  a  vessel  the  content  of  which  is  sacramental  wine, 
it  should  be  remembered  that  the  ciborium  which  con- 
tains consecrated  Hosts  is  still  at  this  day  replaced  on 
occasion  by  a  chalice  of  the  ordinary  form. 

The  idea  of  the  devotional  poet,  supposing  it  to  have 
been  as  purely  mystical  as  he  was  himself  deeply  re- 
ligious, might  have  embodied  an  attempt  to  shadow 
forth  in  the  perpetuation  of  the  most  precious  of  all 
reliquaries  the  sacramental  mystery  of  the  Real  Presence. 

It  seems  certain,  in  any  case,  that  when  Robert  de  Borron 
speaks  of  the  Graal  as  that  vessel  in  which  Christ  made 
his  sacrament,  this  must  not  be  understood  as  referring 
to  the  Paschal  Dish,  though  one  probable  derivation  of 
the  word  Graal  would  support  the  latter  view.  In  the 
dialect  of  Languedoc,  Grazal  signified  a  large  vessel, 
usually  of  clay ;  in  the  dialect  of  Provence,  Grasal  was 
a  bowl  or  platter ;  in  Anglo-Norman,  or  its  connections, 
Graal  was  a  dish  made  of  some  costly  material  for  the 
purpose  of  great  feasts,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the 
description  of  Helinandus.  With  all  this  some  of  the 
later  romancers  were  dissatisfied,  and,  following  Robert 
de  Borron,  they  exalted  the  vessel  into  a  chalice,  so 

95 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

that  they  might  bring  it  into  line  with  the  Eucharistic 
side  of  the  legend,  with  which  side  a  paschal  dish — 
whether  that  of  Christ  or  another — offered  little  analogy. 
The  material  of  such  a  chalice  would  have  been  probably 
glass.  It  follows  from  Tertullian  that  in  Rome  at  the 
beginning  of  the  third  century  they  used  glass  chalices ; 
so  did  the  Bishop  of  Toulouse  at  the  end  of  the  fourth 
century;  and  about  A.D.  550  the  same  custom  prevailed, 
as  appears  by  the  life  of  Cesarius,  Bishop  of  Aries.  A 
council  of  Rheims  in  the  days  of  Charlemagne  is  said  to 
have  forbidden  glass  chalices  because  they  were  brittle. 

The  Lesser  Holy  Graal  does  not  depart  from  the 
rendering  which  I  have  here  given  in  respect  of  the 
metrical  romance,  but  it  seems  to  make  the  assurance  of 
the  poet  more  certain  by  elucidating  further  the  applica- 
tion of  the  secret  words  to  the  consecration  and  adminis- 
tering of  the  Eucharist.  Where  the  poem  says  that 
there  is  a  great  book  in  which  has  been  written  the 
great  secret  called  the  Graal,  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal  says  : 
This  is  the  secret  uttered  at  the  great  sacrament  performed 
over  the  Graal — that  is  to  say,  over  the  chalice.  The 
vessel  is  otherwise  described  as  the  one  in  which  Christ 
sacrificed,  as  if  He  actually  celebrated  the  first  Mass,  and 
from  the  Eucharistic  standpoint  this  seems  much  stronger 
than  the  corresponding  feisoil  son  sacrement\  which  are  the 
words  of  Robert  de  Borron.  The  repetition  of  the  ex- 
perience of  the  sacred  table  which  is  enjoined  by  Joseph 
in  both  texts  is  in  both  termed  the  service  of  the  Graal, 
but  in  the  prose  version  alone  is  it  adjudged  to  the  hour 
of  tierce,  as  if  the  Mass  of  the  day  were  celebrated,  and 
as  if  certain  persons,  evidently  in  a  state  of  grace,  were 
sustained  in  the  body  by  the  sacramental  nutriment  of 
the  soul.  The  Early  Merlin  and  the  Didot  Perceval 
neither  reduce  nor  increase  the  evidence  ;  but  it  may  be 
hazarded,  for  what  it  is  worth,  that  the  original  disclosure 
of  the  secret  words  may  have  had  some  office  in  pre- 
serving the  content  of  the  great  relic. 

In  the  Early  Merlin  there  is  no  allusion  to  the  office 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

of  secret  words,  and  no  Graal  Hallows  are  mentioned 
excepting  the  Cup,  as  it  is  obvious  that  we  cannot 
include  the  sword  of  Merlin,  through  which  Arthur  was 
chosen  to  be  king.  It  does  not  appear  that  this  weapon 
had  any  antecedent  history.  In  the  Didot  Perceval  the 
rumour  and  the  wonder  of  the  Graal  moves  pageant- 
like  through  all  the  pages,  but  it  is  more  shorn  of 
descriptive  allusions  than  anything  that  has  preceded  it 
in  the  quests.  When  the  predestined  Knight  visits  the 
castle,  tower,  or  hold  in  which  the  Hallow  has  been 
preserved  through  so  many  centuries,  he  sees  it  plainly 
enough  at  the  supper-table,  along  which  it  passes,  carried 
with  no  ostentation  by  a  mere  page  of  the  chamber ;  but 
he  is  said  only  to  hold  a  vessel  wherein  the  blood  of  our 
Saviour  reposed.  This  is  at  the  first  visit,  and  at  the 
second,  when  Perceval  is  initiated  into  the  whole  mystery 
and  becomes  the  Lord  of  the  Graal,  the  description  is 
repeated  merely,  as  if  it  were  a  counsel  of  perfection  to 
maintain  and  even  to  increase  in  the  third  text  of 
the  trilogy  whatsoever  could  be  called  vague  and  dubious 
in  the  first. 

The  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  even  when  it  reproduces  with 
several  variations  the  prose  version  of  Robert  de  Borron's 
poem,  gives,  in  some  of  its  codices,  an  explanation  of  the 
Sacred  Vessel  which  is  the  antithesis  of  his  own.  It  is 
described  as  that  Dish  in  which  the  Son  of  God  partook 
of  the  Last  Supper  before  He  gave  to  the  disciples  His 
own  flesh  and  blood.  It  was,  therefore,  the  Paschal 
Dish.  Certain  manuscripts,  however,  differ  so  widely 
that  it  is  difficult  to  determine  the  original  state  of  the 
text.  Another  codex  follows  the  account  of  the  Lesser 
Holy  Graal.  According  to  a  third  codex,  it  was  the 
content  and  not  the  Vessel  which  was  called  the  Holy 
Graal ;  but,  speaking  generally,  most  versions  concur  in 
describing  it  as  the  Holy  Dish.  The  connection  with 
the  Eucharist  is,  however,  sufficiently  close,  for  he  who 
is  elected  to  say  the  first  Mass  and  to  consecrate  the  un- 
spotted elements  is  he  also  to  whom  by  Divine  instruction 

97  G 


The  Hidden  Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Joseph  surrenders  the  vessel.  But  the  Blessed  Reliquary 
would  seem  to  have  been  rather  the  outward  witness  to 
the  presence  within  those  elements.  For  example,  in  the 
first  unveiled  vision  of  the  Holy  Graal  which  is  granted 
to  any  one  outside  Joseph  himself,  we  hear  of  an  altar, 
on  one  side  of  which  were  the  nails  used  for  the  Cruci- 
fixion, together  with  the  hallowed  Lance ;  on  the  other 
side  was  the  Dish ;  and  in  the  centre  there  was  an  ex- 
ceeding rich  vessel  of  gold  in  the  semblance  of  a  goblet 
— obviously  the  chalice  of  consecration  :  it  had  a  lid  after 
the  manner  of  a  ciborium.  More  astonishing  still,  the 
cup  of  the  Eucharist  is  placed  within  the  Graal  during  a 
ceremony  which  corresponds  to  the  Mass.  In  a  romance 
so  overcharged  with  decoration  and  so  lavish  in  episodes 
of  wonder,  we  should  expect,  and  shall  not  be  disap- 
pointed, that  many  pageants  and  ornaments  would  collect 
about  the  Holy  Vessel,  and  that  it  should  work  many 
marvels.  The  Sacrament  consecrated  within  it  reveals 
the  mysteries  of  Christ  openly  to  chosen  eyes,  but 
thereon  can  no  man  look  until  he  is  cleansed  from  sin. 
It  gives  also  on  occasion  the  vision  of  an  Eternal  Eucharist 
and  a  great  company  sitting  at  the  high  table  in  the 
Paradise  which  is  above.  So  far  as  concerns  the  authority 
of  the  text  itself,  it  would  appear  that  the  Mass  of  the 
Graal  is  not  like  that  of  the  Church  without — an  office 
which  recurs  daily ;  it  is  rather  an  arch-natural  sacrifice, 
at  which  the  incarnate  Christ  figures  as  the  sensible 
oblation  and  subsequently  as  the  Melchisedech  of  the 
rite,  communicating  Himself  to  the  witnesses,  while  a 
thousand  voices  about  him  give  thanks  to  God  amidst 
a  great  beating  of  birds'  wings,  and 

"  Young  men  whom  no  one  knew  went  in  and  out 
With  a  far  look  in  their  eternal  eyes." 

The  texts  of  the  later  Merlin  have  several  refer- 
ences to  the  Graal,  and  it  is  the  chief  purpose  which 
moves  through  the  dual  romance,  leading  up,  as  it  does 
obviously,  to  a  Quest  of  the  Sacred  Vessel ;  but  what  is 


Mysteries   of  the  Holy    Graal 

understood  thereby  must  be  gathered  chiefly  from  its 
reflections  of  the  Joseph  legend.  We  shall  see  that  in 
certain  codices  the  account  differs  from  that  of  Robert 
de  Borron.  The  Vulgate  Merlin  has  one  very  remark- 
able passage,  which  tells  how  the  tidings  of  the  Holy 
Graal  spread  through  the  realm  of  King  Arthur,  and 
how  the  Graal  was  that  Vessel  in  which  Joseph  of  Arima- 
thasa  received  the  blood  from  the  side  of  Jesus  Christ 
when  He  hung  upon  the  Cross.  It  represents,  therefore, 
a  tradition  which  is  familiar  enough  not  only  in  the 
literature  of  romance,  but  in  that  of  religious  legend, 
though  it  is  the  antithesis  of  the  account  given  in  the 
Lesser  Chronicles,  wherein  we  are  told  that  the  blood 
was  drawn  into  the  Vessel  after  Joseph  and  Nicodemus 
had  taken  down  the  Body  of  the  Lord.  Secondly,  the 
Graal  was  that  Holy  Vessel  which  came  from  Heaven 
above  into  the  city  of  Sarras.  We  have  here  a  reflection 
only,  and  that  at  a  far  distance,  of  the  'Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal  in  the  form  which  is  now  extant.  Thirdly,  and 
to  us  most  important,  the  Graal  was  that  Vessel  in  which 
Christ  first  sacrificed  His  Blessed  Body  and  His  Flesh  by 
the  mediation  of  His  bishop,  the  Second  Joseph,  whom 
He  ordained  with  His  own  hands.  According  to  the 
Huth  Merlin  the  Graal  was  that  Vessel  in  which  Jesus 
and  His  Apostles  ate  the  Last  Supper.  It  was  again, 
therefore,  the  Paschal  Dish. 

The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  has  many  descriptions  of 
the  vessel,  all  of  which  are  designed  to  connect  it  with  the 
chalice,  but  they  are  highly  mystical  in  their  nature.  As 
one  of  the  most  express  attempts  to  relate  the  Graal 
with  the  Eucharist,  it  must  be  regarded  as  important 
for  the  subject  of  the  Hallow-in-chief.  This  romance 
and  the  great  Quest  of  Galahad  are  both  texts  of  tran- 
substantiation,  and  they  must  rank  also  among  the  latest 
documents  of  the  literature.  The  Lesser  Chronicles, 
even  in  the  prose  version  of  De  Borron's  poem,  offer  no 
suggestion  concerning  this  doctrine,  the  Graal  Vessel 
being  simply  a  Hallow  containing  a  precious  relic.  About 

99 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  period  of  the  Quest  and  the  High  History,  the  tide 
of  ecclesiastical  feeling,  which  long  previously  had  set 
towards  the  definition  of  the  dogma,  must  have  permeated 
the  mind  of  the  laity,  prepared  as  it  also  was  by  the 
desire  of  things  sensible  and  tangible  in  matters  of  re- 
ligion. It  was,  this  notwithstanding,  still  long  to  the 
establishment  of  the  high,  symbolical  festival  of  Corpus 
Christi,  which  provided  an  external  epilogue  to  the  closed 
canon  of  the  Graal,  as  if  by  a  final  substitution  that 
which  was  taken  away,  or  at  least  ex  hypothesi,  was  to  be  in 
perpetuity  memorialised  about  the  precincts  of  the  gate 
by  the  wardens  thereof.  In  connection  with  transub- 
stantiation,  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  religious  office 
of  Knighthood  was  above  all  things  to  hear  mass,  and, 
next,  to  confess  sins.  There  are  few  records  in  the 
Graal  romances  that  the  chivalry  of  Logres  communi- 
cated, except  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad,  and  then  only  in 
the  case  of  the  elect  knights.  All  high  festivals  were 
observed,  all  penances  fulfilled ;  but  to  participate  in  the 
Eucharistic  mystery  seemed  apart  from  the  life  of  the 
world  and  withdrawn  into  the  sphere  of  sanctity.  How- 
ever this  may  be,  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  has  two 
cryptic  descriptions  of  the  Graal  Vessel,  which,  on  account 
of  their  complexity,  but  for  the  moment  only,  I  must 
present  as  they  stand  actually  in  the  story,  (i)  It  is 
said  concerning  Gawain,  when  he  looked  at  the  Graal  in 
his  wonder,  that  it  seemed  to  him  a  chalice  was  therein, 
"  albeit  there  was  none  at  this  time."  It  was,  therefore, 
an  ark  or  a  tabernacle  which  was  designed  to  contain  a 
cup,  but  when  the  latter  was  removed  it  still  held  the 
shadow  or  semblance  thereof.  (2)  In  the  course  of  the 
same  episode  a  change  was  performed  in  the  aspect  of  the 
external  object,  and  it  appeared  to  be  "  all  in  flesh," 
meaning  that  it  was  transformed  into  a  vision  of  Christ 
crucified.  Towards  the  close  of  the  story,  when  a  certain 
Queen  Jandree  relates  her  visions  to  Perceval,  she  sees, 
in  one  of  these,  an  image  of  the  crucifixion  from  which 
people  collect  the  Blood  into  a  most  Holy  Vessel,  elevated 

100 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

for  that  object  by  one  of  them.  There  are  no  names 
mentioned,  but  for  purposes  of  simplicity  we  may  assume 
that  they  were  Joseph  and  Nicodemus.  In  the  castle  of 
King  Fisherman  the  office  of  the  Cup  was  to  receive  the 
Blood  which  fell  from  the  point  of  the  Sacred  Lance. 
The  priest  who  officiated  at  the  Graal  service  is  said  to 
begin  his  sacrament,  with  which  expression  we  may  com- 
pare the  words  feisoit  son  sacrement,  which  are  those  of 
Robert  de  Borron.  There  is  indubitably  reference  to 
the  Eucharist  in  both  cases,  and  perhaps  the  Graal  Mass 
Book  was  a  traditional  version  of  the  Mass,  supposed, 
ex  hypothesi^  to  follow  the  Last  Supper.  Speaking  gener- 
ally, the  historical  account  of  the  Cup  follows  the  Book 
of  the  Holy  Graal  rather  than  De  Borron's  poem,  for  the 
blood  which  flowed  from  the  wounds  of  Christ  when  He 
was  set  upon  the  Cross  is  said  to  have  been  received  into 
the  Sacred  Vessel.  There  is  no  ministry  in  respect  of 
material  sustenance  attributed  to  the  Graal  in  this 
spiritual  romance. 

It  is,  therefore,  in  one  sense  the  antithesis  of  the 
Quest  of  Galahad,  which  dwells  with  equal  fulness  on 
the  food-giving  properties  of  the  Vessel  and  on  its 
connection  with  the  mystery  of  such  a  mass  and  such  an 
office  of  the  Eucharist  as  never  before  or  after  was  said  in 
the  wide  world,  apart  from  this  sacred  object.  When 
the  Holy  Graal  enters  the  court  of  King  Arthur  and  into 
the  banqueting-hall  it  is  clothed  in  white  samite,  but 
neither  the  Vessel  nor  the  bearer  are  visible  to  human 
eyes.  On  a  later  occasion  it  manifests  as  a  Holy  Vessel 
on  a  table  of  silver  in  an  old  chapel.  Elsewhere  it  is 
observed  that  the  Flesh  and  Blood  of  God  are  present  in 
the  Graal.  When  it  appears  to  Lancelot  in  the  Castle  of 
Corbenic,  it  is  still  upon  a  table  of  silver,  but  this  time 
the  object  is  covered  with  red  in  place  of  white  samite, 
and  it  is  surrounded  by  angels.  In  the  course  of  the 
ceremony  Lancelot  sees  three  men,  who  represent  the 
Trinity,  exalted  above  the  head  of  the  officiating  priest. 
Two  of  them  place  the  youngest  between  the  hands  of 

101 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  priest,  who  again  exalts  him.  On  another  occasion  a 
child  enters  visibly  into  the  substance  of  the  Mass-bread. 
A  man  is  also  elevated,  bearing  the  signs  of  the  Passion  of 
Christ,  and  this  Personage  issues  out  of  the  Vessel,  coming 
subsequently  among  the  knights  present,  and  causing 
them  to  communicate  sacramentally.  It  is  after  this 
episode  that  the  Graal  is  removed  to  the  spiritual  city  of 
Sarras.  There  Christ  appears  to  Galahad  and  his  com- 
panions, and  this  is  the  last  manifestation  in  connection 
with  the  Sacred  Vessel.  It  is  the  viaticum  of  the  haul 
prince^  who  thereafter  exercises  the  high  option  which  has 
been  granted  previously  and  demands  that  he  should  be 
taken  away. 

As  the  chief  Hallow  in  the  Parsifal  of  Wolfram  differs 
from  all  the  other  romances,  it  will  be  left  for  more  full 
consideration  in  dealing  with  the  German  cycle  ;  but  seeing 
that  in  this  cycle  there  are  correspondences  outside  this 
great  poem  with  the  Northern  French  accounts,  one  of 
these  may  be  placed  here  so  as  to  illustrate  the  Germanic 
allusions  to  the  Sacred  Vessel  in  the  general  understanding 
thereof.  Diu  Crbne^  the  poem  of  Heinrich,  says  that  it  was 
borne  on  a  cloth  of  samite  and  had  a  base  of  red  gold,  on 
which  a  reliquary  of  gold  and  gems  was  superposed.  It 
was  carried  by  a  crowned  maiden.  There  is  here,  how- 
ever, a  fresh  departure  from  the  Graal  in  Christian  sym- 
bolism, for  as,  on  the  one  hand,  it  is  the  quest  of  a  feigned 
and  impossible  hero,  so,  on  the  other,  the  content  ascribed 
to  the  reliquary  is  not  the  true  content.  It  holds  the 
semblance  of  bread,  as  if  that  of  the  Divine  Body,  but 
the  wine  or  royal  blood,  which  corresponds  to  the  second 
element  of  the  Eucharist,  is  distilled  from  the  Lance  of 
the  legend. 

We  are  now  approaching  the  term  of  the  inquiry 
allocated  to  this  section,  and  it  will  be  seen  on  reflection 
that  we  have  three  possible  hypotheses  regarding  the 
precious  vessel :  ( i )  that  it  was  a  cruet  or  phial,  wherein 
the  blood  of  Christ  was  reserved  permanently — in  which 
case  we  can  understand  the  legend  on  the  score  of  com- 

102 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

parative  possibility;  (2)  that  it  was  an  open  platter  or 
bowl,  which,  it  is  obvious,  could  have  had  no  permanent 
content,  much  less  the  precious  or  indeed  any  other 
blood ;  (3)  that  it  corresponded  to  the  notion  of  a 
chalice,  but  probably  with  a  cover,  after  the  manner  of  a 
ciborium.  It  is  in  late  texts  that  the  vessel  appears  most 
indubitably  in  connection  with  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass ; 
it  was  and  could  be  only  that  which  was  recognised  by 
Diu  Crttne  of  Heinrich  and  by  John  of  Tynemouth — 
namely,  a  reliquary ;  but  the  mystic  side  of  the  legend, 
reflecting  in  the  minds  of  the  romancers  many  conflicting 
issues,  took  it  over  to  the  Eucharist,  influenced  by  the 
irresistible  connection  between  the  sacramental  blood  and 
the  sang  real  poured  out  at  the  Crucifixion.  There  is 
evidence  that  this  view  is  almost  coincident  with  the 
marriage  of  the  legend  to  romance.  The  mind  of 
romance  connected  the  vessel  and  its  office  with  secret 
words  of  consecration  and  a  wonderful  grade  of  priest- 
hood, the  root-matter  of  which  must  have  been  drawn 
from  some  source  wherein  relics  could  have  counted  for 
little  in  the  presence  of  the  higher  secrets  of  sanctity. 

In  conclusion  as  to  this  matter,  the  Holy  Graal,  accord- 
ing to  the  Greater  Chronicles,  was  not  the  only  Hallow 
which  was  brought  into  Britain  by  those  whose  mission 
was  to  preach  first  the  gospel  therein,  but  it  was  more 
especially  the  exotic  of  the  legend,  as  this  was  developed 
in  Northern  France.  In  several  cases  the  other  Hallows, 
as  we  shall  see,  were  either  present  in  Britain  or  arrived 
some  centuries  later.  As  regards  the  Lesser  Chronicles, 
it  is  warrantable  to  decide  that,  in  the  mind  of  Robert 
de  Borron,  the  Sacred  Vessel  was  a  ciborium  or  covered 
chalice,  and  that  in  some  manner  which  is  not  clearly 
declared  it  was  connected  with  a  sacramental  service  per- 
formed in  great  seclusion.  As  regards  the  Greater 
Chronicles,  it  was  originally  a  Dish,  and  that  Dish  in 
which  the  Paschal  Lamb  was  eaten  at  the  Last  Supper ; 
but  from  the  very  beginning  of  this  ascription  the 
notion  of  a  cup  was  essential  to  the  Eucharistic  office 

103 


The   Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy    Graal 

which  also  resided  in  the  Vessel ;  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal  a  cup  is  inserted  therein,  but  in  later  texts  of  the 
cycle  the  Dish  sometimes  undergoes  transmutation  and 
reappears  as  a  chalice. 


IV 

THE  GRAAL   7ESSEL   CONSIDERED  AS  A 
BOWL   OF  PLENTT 

The  incidental  allusions  which  have  been  made  already 
to  certain  physical  properties  which  are  ascribed  to  the 
Holy  Graal  in  several  branches  of  the  literature  seem 
to  call  at  this  point  for  some  further  explanation,  without 
anticipating  what  will  be  said  at  the  close  as  to  any 
higher  aspects  of  this  tradition  or  exhausting  specifically 
its  connections  with  folk-lore,  which  remain  to  be  stated 
separately.  The  conception  itself  seems  so  repugnant  to 
all  that  we  attach  to  the  Graal  that  it  is  at  least  desirable 
to  ascertain  its  scope  in  the  texts.  As  it  is  acknowledged 
to  embody  a  reversion  from  old  non-Christian  fable,  we 
should  expect  it  to  be  most  prominent  in  those  texts 
which  are  nearest  to  the  transitional  stage,  and  more 
especially  in  the  Chretien  portion  of  the  Conte  del  Graal. 
It  should  be  understood  in  the  first  place — as  indeed  it 
follows  sufficiently  from  previous  sections — that  in  the 
Perceval  quests — one  version  excepted — and  in  more  than 
one  of  the  Gawain  quests  the  visit  to  the  Graal  Castle  is 
followed  by  a  banquet  or  supper,  at  which  the  questing 
knight  is  treated  for  the  most  part  as  an  honoured  guest. 

The  exception  as  regards  Perceval  is  in  the  longer  prose 
romance  or  High  History,  the  action  of  which  is  subse- 
quent to  the  first  visit  of  the  hero,  and  he  does  not  enter  it 
a  second  time  till  he  has  taken  it  by  force  of  arms  out  of 
the  hands  of  God's  enemy  and  the  enemy  of  Holy  Church. 
In  other  cases,  where  the  ceremonial  meal  is  described — 
sometimes  at  considerable  length — it  is  nearly  always  at 

104 


Mysteries  of  the   Holy   Graal 

the  table  and  before  or  in  the  midst  of  the  festival  that 
the  Graal  and  the  other  Hallows  make  their  processional 
appearance,  and  there  are  certain  texts  which  say  that  the 
Sacred  Vessel  serves  the  high  company — sometimes  with 
rarest  meats,  sometimes  also  with  wine.  In  these  specific 
instances  the  manifestation  is  that  which  occurs  first  after 
they  are  seated  at  table.  It  was  to  be  expected,  as  I 
have  said,  that  we  should  hear  of  this  material  efficacy  in 
Chretien,  but  though  the  courses  of  the  banquet  are  de- 
scribed fully,  and  are  rare  and  precious  enough,  it  is  only 
a  high  reverence  in  a  lordly  castle  of  this  world,  and  it 
is  precisely  from  this  text  that  it  proves  wanting.  The 
wonder  resides  in  the  Hallows,  but  they  dispense  nothing 
to  the  body.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  metrical 
romance  of  De  Borron  was  not  written  to  explain  Chretien. 
It  follows  also  that  Gautier  had  no  precedent  in  the  poet 
who  was  his  precursor,  and  it  was  therefore  from  other 
antecedents  that  he  derived  his  notion  of  the  Feeding  Dish 
and  from  yet  others  his  knowledge  of  early  Graal  history 
which  does  not  appear  in  Chretien.  When  Gautier  brings 
Gawain  to  the  Graal  Castle,  he  says  that  the  Sacred  Vessel 
served  seven  courses,  but  the  wine  was  served  by  the 
butlers.  His  idea  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  must  therefore 
have  corresponded  rather  to  the  Paschal  Dish  than  to  a 
Reliquary  of  the  Precious  Blood.  On  the  other  hand,  his 
account  of  Perceval's  second  visit  contains  no  allusion  to 
this  side  of  the  festival.  Manessier,  in  continuation  of  the 
same  visit,  offers  no  suggestion  ;  but  when  the  time  comes 
for  him  to  tell  the  story  of  Perceval's  third  arrival,  the 
Hallows  appear  in  their  order  and  all  are  filled  at  the 
table.  At  the  fourth  and  final  visit,  and  the  coronation 
of  the  questing  knight,  Manessier  recounts  how  the  Graal 
feeds  the  whole  company  with  costliest  meats.  On  the 
other  hand,  Gerbert,  preoccupied  by  far  other  matters, 
gives  no  indication  of  the  kind. 

Except  in  so  far  as  the  Early  History  of  Merlin  repro- 
duces one  episode  from  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal,  it  has  no 
allusion  to  the  properties  under  consideration,  and  they 

105 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

have  passed  out  of  all  recollection  in  the  Didot  Perceval. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Greater  Chronicles,  represented 
by  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  and  the  Quest  of  Galahad, 
embody  a  marked  development  of  this  particular  tradition. 
Between  them  there  is  the  later  Merlin  without  any  refer- 
ence whatever,  the  prose  Lancelot — to  which  we  shall  see 
that  it  is  a  foreign  element — and  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval 
into  the  consciousness  of  whose  author  it  has  never  once  en- 
tered and  by  whom  it  would,  I  think,  have  been  repudiated. 
Its  recurrence,  on  a  single  occasion,  in  the  presence  of 
Galahad,  and  in  connection  with  his  story,  may  seem  un- 
searchable, having  regard  to  the  claims  which  inhere  in 
this  romance,  but  in  the  order  of  the  texts  it  is  explained 
by  the  antecedents  in  the  first  form  of  the  first  document 
of  the  cycle.  We  must  recur,  therefore,  to  the  root- 
matter  of  the  early  histories. 

The  poem  of  Robert  de  Borron  narrates  that  among 
those  who  accompanied  Joseph  westward  a  certain  number 
departed  from  grace  through  the  sin  of  luxury,  but  the 
spiritual  mind  of  the  minstrel  has  spared  us  all  par- 
ticulars. The  result  was  a  famine  in  the  company ;  it 
does  not  appear  that  it  fell  upon  all  without  exception, 
for  the  fact  that  there  was  want  among  the  people  had 
to  be  notified  to  the  leaders ;  but,  these  apart,  good  and 
bad  seem  to  have  suffered  indifferently.  An  appeal  was 
made  to  Brons  that  he  should  take  counsel  with  Joseph, 
which  was  done  accordingly,  and  Joseph  invoked  the 
Son  of  God  on  his  knees  in  the  presence  of  the  Graal, 
reciting  the  petition  of  his  people,  who  were  in  need 
of  bread  and  meat.  He  was  told  in  reply  to  expose  the 
Sacred  Vessel  openly  in  the  presence  of  the  brethren, 
on  a  table  similar  to  that  of  his  own  Last  Supper, — 
by  which  means  the  sinners  will  be  discovered  speedily. 
It  is  Christ  Himself  who  was  speaking,  and  He  ordained 
further  that  Brons  should  repair  to  a  certain  water  and 
there  angle  for  a  fish.  The  first  which  he  caught  must 
be  brought  straightway  to  Joseph,  who,  on  his  part, 
should  place  it  upon  the  Graal  table  over  against  the 

106 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Sacred  Vessel.  The  people  were  then  to  be  summoned 
and  informed  that  if  they  were  true  believers,  who  had 
kept  the  commandments  and  followed  out  the  teach- 
ings of  Christ,  as  given  through  Joseph,  so  that  they 
had  trespassed  in  nothing,  they  would  be  welcome  to  sit 
down  at  the  table.  These  instructions  were  followed, 
with  the  result  that  a  part  only  of  the  company  accepted 
this  invitation.  The  table  was  arranged  duly,  and 
whosoever  was  seated  thereat  had  the  accomplishment 
of  his  heart's  desire,  and  that  entirely.  Petrus,  who 
was  one  of  the  recipients,  asked  the  crowd  who  stood 
about  whether  they  did  not  experience  anything  of  the 
good  which  penetrated  those  at  the  table,  and  they 
answered  that  they  felt  nothing.  Thereupon  Petrus 
denounced  them  as  guilty  of  the  vile,  dolorous  sin,  and 
they  went  forth  out  of  the  house  of  Joseph  covered  with 
shame.  The  poem  says  : — 

"  La  taule  toute  pleinne  estoit, 
Fors  le  liu  qui  pleins  ne  pooit 
Estre ; " 

but  the  experience  of  the  sitters,  thus  collected  together, 
seems  to  indicate  that  they  were  fed  from  within  rather 
than  from  without.  It  will  be  seen  and  we  must  always 
remember  that  the  chief  necessity  and  often  the  chief 
privation  of  early  quests  and  ventures  in  the  voyages 
of  romance  was  that  of  food  in  season,  but  in  this  case 
what  I  have  called  the  spiritual  mind  of  the  poet  could 
not  clearly  connect  the  idea  of  physical  refreshment  with 
the  sacramental  powers  of  the  Relic.  As  regards  the 
elect  who  were  present,  when  the  service  was  finished 
each  of  them  rose  up  and  went  out  among  the  rest, 
Joseph  commanding  that  they  should  return  day  by  day 
to  partake  of  the  grace  administered.  Thus  was  the 
vessel,  says  the  poem,  proved  for  the  first  time.  In 
the  speech  of  Petrus  to  the  people  who  were  rejected 
there  is  further  evidence  that  the  sustenance  was  more 
especially  of  the  spiritual  order,  and  it  is  important 

107 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

to  establish  this  point  from  the  earliest  of  the  Graal 
histories.  He  speaks  of  the  great  delight  experienced 
in  the  Grace  and  of  the  great  joy  with  which  the  com- 
municants were  penetrated.  They  were  filled  as  the 
Psalmist  was  filled  and  she  who  sang  the  Magnificat : 
Esurientes  implevit  bonis.  What  was  filled  was  the  heart 
of  man,  and  what  was  refected  was  the  entire  soul.  My 
contention  is  therefore  that  Robert  de  Borron  had  the 
idea  of  the  Feeding  Dish  present  to  his  mind  when 
he  made  the  scarcity  of  food  for  his  company  an  oppor- 
tunity for  the  discriminating  test  of  the  second  great 
table  of  refection,  but  in  place  of  bodily  meat  and  bread, 
symbolised  by  the  single  fish,  as  something  intentionally 
placed  out  of  all  reasonable  proportion,  he  administered 
extasis.  That  question  of  Petrus  to  the  unworthy  crowd 
about  him  :  Do  you  experience  nothing  ?  is  so  evidently 
impossible,  in  their  case,  as  a  reference  to  eating  and 
drinking  that  there  is  no  need  to  dwell  thereon.  It 
left  no  opportunity  to  the  prose  editors  whose  versions 
complete  the  trilogy,  and  they  lose  all  touch  with  the 
notion. 

As  regards  the  Fish,  by  which  we  shall  be  brought  at 
a  later  stage  to  another  form  of  symbolism  found  in  the 
poem,  the  text  offers  a  comparison  which,  although  a 
little  cryptic,  seems  also  significant.  It  says  that  in  the 
sight  of  the  Graal,  in  its  company  and  the  service  thereof, 
true  believers  experience  as  much  satisfaction  as  a  fish, 
which,  having  been  taken  by  a  man  in  his  hand,  has  con- 
trived to  escape  therefrom  and  again  go  swimming  in 
the  sea.  The  specific  fish  of  the  story  was  placed  before 
the  Sacred  Vessel  exactly  in  the  middle  of  the  table,  and 
was  covered  with  a  cloth.  There  is  no  suggestion  that 
it  was  eaten,  and  it  appears  to  have  remained  as  a  kind  of 
fixed  dish  whenever  the  service  was  celebrated. 

The  noticeable  point  about  the  poem  is  that  the 
material  sustenance  provided  once  only  by  the  sacred 
vessel,  as  something  nihil  ad  rent,  is  passed  over  so 
slightly  and  lightly  that  on  the  face  of  the  text  it  is 

108 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

a  matter  of  inference  whether  the  Company  partook 
(#)  of  anything  physical  at  all,  except  the  broken  meats 
which  remained  in  the  stewardship  of  the  camp ;  or  (£) 
alternately  of  anything  except  the  Eucharist,  which  cer- 
tainly provides  bodily  sustenance  in  the  most  material  of 
the  sacramental  texts.  On  the  other  hand,  all  processes  of 
language  are  enlisted  by  Robert  de  Borron  to  show  that 
they  were  sustained  spiritually.  Further,  the  palmary 
miracle  accomplished  by  the  vessel  on  this  occasion  was 
not  any  kind  of  refreshment,  spiritual  or  corporeal,  but 
that  of  discrimination  between  the  good  and  evil  among 
the  people  :  for  this  kind  of  judgment  the  table  of  Joseph 
was  set  up  and  the  goats  were  separated  from  the  sheep. 
There  was,  I  suppose,  in  the  poet's  mind  no  question 
that  what  could  nourish  the  soul,  which  is  vital,  could 
at  need  refresh  the  body,  which  is  accessory  only.  It 
is  therefore  small  wonder  that  when  the  fountain  text 
says  so  little,  those  which  derive  therefrom  are  content 
to  leave  it  thereat,  and  they  add  nothing.  For  Joseph 
and  his  brethren  it  remained  that  the  Lord  was  the  part 
of  my  chalice,  and  perhaps  in  the  last  understanding 
the  famine  which  fell  upon  the  companions  was  the 
scarcity  of  grace  in  the  soul  rather  than  of  food  in 
the  stomach. 

Now,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  is 
in  one  sense  the  legend  of  the  Feeding  Dish  consecrated 
and  exalted,  and  seeing  that  as  the  texts  stand  it  is  that 
from  which  the  greatest  of  all  quests  and  the  most 
wonderful  version  of  all  the  quests  which  are  accessory 
must  be  supposed  to  derive  ex  hypothesi,  it  is  essential 
that  we  should  understand  its  position  clearly,  and  I  will 
tabulate  the  references  as  follows : — 

(i)  The  people  on  their  way  to  Britain  are  fed 
marvellously  with  all  manner  of  viands,  both  meat 
and  drink,  as,  for  example,  at  houses  by  the  way  and 
at  lordly  castles.  (2)  In  this  primary  allusion  the 
Graal  is  not  said  to  feed  them.  (3)  They  receive 
nourishment  from  the  table  of  the  Graal,  but  this  is 

109 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

the  Eucharist,  and  it  is  expressly  stated  that  the  com- 
pany had  nothing  else  on  that  day.  (4)  At  a  later 
stage,  a  second  instance  is  given  of  this  super-substantial 
refreshment.  (5)  It  is  not  till  we  are  approaching 
comparatively  the  close  of  the  chronicle  that  we  reach 
something  more  definite.  The  company  are  already  in 
Britain,  and  through  the  persecution  of  their  heathen 
enemies  they  are  hungry.  Twelve  loaves  are  obtained ; 
they  are  broken  by  Joseph,  are  placed  in  the  Dish,  and 
they  feed  500  people,  more  than  the  twelve  loaves 
being  left  subsequently.  (6)  It  does  not  prove  food 
of  spiritual  life,  for  those  who  were  filthy  before  are 
filthy  still.  (7)  At  yet  a  later  stage,  the  heathens 
test  the  feeding  powers  of  the  Vessel  by  the  imprison- 
ment of  the  Christians.  In  Wales  the  Vessel  again 
furnishes  all  manner  of  viands,  and  one  fish  is  a  super- 
abundant provision  for  the  whole  company.  After  a 
similar  manner,  they  are  fed  with  all  possible  delicacies 
in  Scotland. 

Passing  over  the  later  Merlin  romances,  which  are 
neither  exactly  Graal  histories  nor  quests,  and  offer 
nothing  to  our  purpose,  we  find  that  the  shadow  of  the 
Quest  is  projected  into  the  prose  Lancelot,  though  there 
is  no  questing  intention,  and  the  visit  of  Gawain  to  the 
Graal  Castle  is  the  one  example  of  indignity  offered 
to  a  guest  therein.  The  responsibility,  however,  does 
not  rest  with  the  royal  and  saintly  host,  whose  "  high- 
erected  thought "  is  "  seated  in  a  heart  of  courtesy." 
There  is  the  flight  of  the  mystical  dove  from  case- 
ment to  inmost  Shrine,  as  if  the  bird  went  to  renew 
the  virtues  of  the  Holy  Graal ;  there  is  the  apparition 
of  the  unattended  damozel,  bearing  that  which  itself 
bore  the  likeness  of  a  chalice ;  there  is  the  genuflection 
of  all  knees  before  the  Holy  Vessel ;  and  there  are 
sweet  odours  with  all  delicacies  lavished  upon  the  great 
table.  But  in  the  feast  which  follows,  the  peer  of 
the  Round  Table  alone  has  an  empty  plate.  It  was 
the  discrimination  and  forejudgment  of  the  Hallow  in 

1 10 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

respect  of  that  Knight,  who,  in  the  days  of  Galahad, 
would  indeed  propose  the  Quest  but  would  not  persevere 
therein. 

In  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval,  after  the  restitution 
of  all  things,  there  is  abundance  everywhere  in  the 
Castle,  a  insomuch  that  there  is  nought  wanting  that  is 
needful  for  the  bodies  of  noble  folk,"  even  as  for  noble 
souls.  But  the  source  of  all  this  plenty  is  in  a  river 
which  comes  from  the  Earthly  Paradise  and  not  in  the 
Holy  Graal.  On  the  occasion  of  Gawain's  visit,  the 
table  is  garnished  richly,  but  it  is  with  game  of  the 
forest  and  other  meats  of  this  world ;  it  is  the  same 
on  the  arrival  of  Lancelot ;  and  then  even  the  earthly 
food  does  not  vary. 

In  the  Quest  of  Galahad  the  manifestations  of  the 
Graal  are  as  follows:  (i)  In  the  banqueting-hall  of 
King  Arthur,  and  it  is  the  only  record  of  its  ap- 
pearance in  any  castle  of  the  external  world,  the  reason 
being  that  the  Graal  is  "  going  about."  On  this 
occasion — yes,  even  in  the  presence  of  Galahad — 
"  every  knight  had  such  meats  and  drinks  as  he  best 
loved  in  this  world."  As  the  table  was  dight  for  the 
festival,  it  seems  to  follow  that  what  was  otherwise 
provided  already  underwent  transformation,  probably 
in  the  minds  of  the  participants.  (2)  At  the  stone 
cross  in  the  forest  and  in  the  waste  land,  where  stood 
the  old  chapel  and  where  in  the  presence  of  Lancelot 
the  sick  knight  was  made  whole  by  the  Precious  Vessel. 
(3)  To  Lancelot  in  the  Graal  Castle,  where  there 
was,  firstly,  a  Mass  of  the  Graal,  and,  secondly,  a 
banquet  at  which  all  were  fed  by  the  Vessel.  (4)  To 
Galahad  and  his  elect  companions  at  the  consummation 
of  the  Quest,  but  the  sweet  meats  were  those  of  the 
Eucharist  exalted  to  the  arch-natural  degree.  (5)  In 
Sarras  at  the  close  of  all,  "  when  the  deadly  flesh  began 
to  behold  the  spiritual  things,"  and  Christ's  transcendence 
was  manifested  in  Christ's  immanence.  Of  these  five 
changes  in  the  exposition  of  the  Holy  Graal,  the  first 

in 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

only  and  the  lowest  was  that  of  earthly  food ;  it  was 
communicated  by  a  special  indulgence,  in  the  palace  of 
a  lord  of  the  world,  as  an  encouragement  to  the  quest  of 
Heaven. 

If  we  turn  to  the  German  cycle,  we  shall  find  that 
the  feeding  qualities  are  before  all  things  obvious  in 
Wolfram.  At  the  first  visit  of  Parsifal,  what  is 
taken  from  the  Graal  is  bread,  but  other  dishes  stand 
before  it  in  right  great  plenty,  both  rare  and  common. 
Some  say  that  there  are  no  such  riches  on  earth,  but 
to  the  poet  this  is  a  word  of  foolishness,  since  the  Graal 
is  the  crown  of  all.  The  wine  also  was  the  gift  of  the 
precious  object,  and  the  cups  on  the  table  were  filled  by 
the  power  thereof.  In  the  great  and  high  festival,  when 
the  questing  Knight  was  crowned  as  King  and  Warden  of 
the  mystery,  even  the  ordinary  fowl  of  the  forest  were 
taken  from  the  Graal.  I  am  afraid  that  such  ministry 
in  the  Parsifal  is  comparable  to  the  procession  therein, 
somewhat  indiscriminate  in  method  and  "  like  a  tale  of 
little  meaning,  though  the  words  are  strong."  In  the 
curious  chronicle  of  Heinrich,  the  service  of  the  table 
is  after  the  manner  born  of  this  world,  but  the  host 
does  not  partake  till  he  is  served  from  the  sacred  Reli- 
quary with  something  which,  by  its  description,  bears 
the  external  semblance  of  the  symbolical  Bread  of 
Heaven.  The  poem,  however,  has  otherwise  no  sacra- 
mental connections,  nor  has  the  Vessel,  strictly  speaking, 
what  is  understood  here  by  feeding  properties. 

It  remains  now  to  sum  up  and  to  ask  in  our  hearts — 
though  the  answer  is  remote  in  our  quest — what  is  the 
meaning  of  all  this  disconcerting  medley,  which  out  of 
the  Holy  Graal,  as  an  issue  in  time  and  place,  brings 
now  the  voice  of  an  oracle,  like  the  classical  Btetylus ; 
now  a  certain  /3ao-ayo?  or  touchstone,  a  criterion  of 
judgment  which  separates  the  good  from  the  evil ;  now 
a  suspended  viaticum,  which  keeps  the  sick  alive  and 
the  dead  in  a  false  life,  but  offers  no  relief  in  suffering ; 
now  manifests  the  corporeal  changes  in  the  growth  of 

112 


Mysteries   of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  Divine  Body ;  now  shows  Christ  crucified ;  and  now 
out  of  all  reason — like  a  coarse  Talmudic  allegory- 
provides  the  game  of  the  forest — all  commonest  and 
rarest  meats ;  yet  in  all  and  through  all  is  (a)  the 
Mystery  of  the  Eucharist,  and  (£)  a  simple  reliquary 
containing  ex  hypothesi  the  Precious  Blood  of  the  Re- 
deemer. At  the  moment  let  us  note  further — and  this 
only — as  a  little  curious,  that  two  out  of  the  three 
express  texts  of  transubstantiation  are  texts  of  the  Feeding 
Dish,  but  the  third  in  the  series  has  spiritualised  all  its 
houses  and  acknowledges  not  the  flesh  or  its  ministry 
except  in  the  Eucharist.  The  Chretien  portion  of  the 
Conte  del  Graal  is  a  pagan  wonder-book  tinctured 
thinly  with  Christianity,  but  it  is  not  nearly  so  gross 
regarding  the  service  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  as  the  Book 
of  the  Holy  Graal  or  the  Great  Quest  itself.  There  is 
more  in  Gautier  than  in  Chretien,  and  very  much  more 
in  Wolfram  than  in  the  putative  Walter  Map.  But 
those  who  continued  and  those  who  finished  the  Conte 
are  fitful  in  their  introduction  of  the  feeding  element,  and 
the  romance  of  Galahad  puts  the  disconcerting  cere- 
monial outside  the  holy  places  of  the  mystic  Castle. 

I  think,  in  conclusion,  that  the  intention  of  the 
Greater  Chronicles  concerning  the  Feeding  Dish  is  to 
be  taken  in  another  sense  of  the  Quest  of  Galahad, 
which  says  of  Lancelot :  "  Yf  ye  wold  aske  how  he 
lyved,  he  that  fedde  the  peple  of  Israel  with  manna  in 
deserte,  soo  was  he  fedde.  For  every  day  when  he  had 
sayd  his  prayers,  he  was  susteyned  with  the  grace  of 
the  Holy  Ghoost."  And,  as  the  Welsh  version  has 
it,  c<  so  that  he  thought  himself  to  be  full  of  the  best 


meats." 


113  H 


'The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy    Graal 


THE  LESSER   HALLOWS   OF   THE  LEGEND 

§  A. — THE  SUMMARY  OF  THESE  MATTERS 

The  Hallows  of  the  Graal  legend  are  the  beginning  of 
its  wonders  and  of  its  meanings  only ;  but,  as  I  have  in- 
timated already,  the  greater  includes  the  lesser,  and  that 
which  is  of  all  the  highest  has  assumed  from  the  be- 
ginning in  its  symbolism  the  things  by  which  it  is  sur- 
rounded. As  it  is  in  the  light  of  man's  higher  part 
that  we  are  able  to  interpret  the  lower,  as  the  body  is 
explained  by  the  soul,  so  even  the  Castle  of  the  Graal 
and  the  great  Temple,  with  all  their  allusions  and  all 
their  sacred  things,  are  resolved  into  the  mystery  of  the 
Cup,  because  there  is  a  cloud  of  witnesses  but  one  true 
voice  which  is  the  spokesman  of  all.  There  is  obviously 
no  need  in  this  place — as  we  are  concerned  with  the 
greater  subjects — to  lay  stress  upon  the  subsidiary  Hal- 
lows as  if  they  were  an  integral  portion  of  the  Holy 
Graal  regarded  symbolically.  They  are  of  the  accidents 
only,  and  as  such  they  are  not  vital.  The  Lance  is 
important  to  the  legends,  but  not  otherwise  than  from 
the  legendary  standpoint ;  the  Sword  is  also  important, 
but  not  in  a  sacramental  sense  ;  the  Dish  signifies  nothing, 
or  next  to  nothing.  The  explanation  is  that  the  French 
literature  of  the  Holy  Graal,  in  its  form  as  now  extant, 
has  on  the  external  side  its  roots  in  traditions  and  memo- 
rials connected  with  the  Passion  of  Christ.  The  different 
cycles  of  the  literature  develop  their  account  of  these 
memorials  with  motives  that  vary,  but  they  combine  there- 
with certain  sacred  objects  derived  from  other  sources  and 
not  belonging  logically  to  the  scheme.  They  worked, 
for  example,  upon  pre-existent  materials  which  were  not 
assimilated  wholly  into  the  matter  of  the  romances,  and 

114 


Mysteries  of  the   Holy   Graal 

it  is  largely  these  portions  for  which,  in  any  scheme  of 
interpretation,  we  shall  be  scarcely  able  to  account  unless 
upon  divergent  lines. 

Speaking  generally  of  the  Lesser  Hallows,  the  follow- 
ing points  are  clear.  The  German  cycle,  as  represented 
by  Wolfram,  derived  its  idea  of  the  Lance  from  a  source 
in  folk-lore  apart  from  the  Graal  legend  as  we  know  it 
in  Northern  French.  The  Northern  French  literature 
is  clear  as  to  those  Hallows  connecting  with  the  Passion 
of  Christ ;  these  are  the  Cup,  otherwise  the  Paschal  Dish, 
and  the  Lance.  It  is  dubious  and  variable  about  the 
Sword  and  Dish  or  Platter,  for  which  there  are  no  ante- 
cedents in  the  Passion.  Several  texts  have  carried  over 
some  of  the  Hallows  without  modification  from  folk-lore, 
even  when  great  Christian  relics  were  ready  to  their  hands. 
For  example,  the  sword  used  by  Peter  at  Gethsemane 
did  not  occur  to  them,  though  it  would  have  been  more 
to  their  purpose,  the  reason  being  that  there  was  no 
official  tradition  concerning  it  in  the  external  life  of  the 
Church.  The  Dish  is  in  the  same  position  of  unmodi- 
fied folk-lore  ;  the  platter  on  which  the  head  of  St.  John 
the  Baptist  was  served  to  Herodias  is  a  chance  missed  even 
by  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval,  despite  its  allocation  of 
the  Sword  to  the  instrument  of  the  Precursor's  martyrdom. 
Other  subsidiary  Hallows,  mentioned  therein,  which  are 
by  way  of  after-thought,  increase  without  exhausting  the 
possible  relics  of  the  Passion — one  of  them  tells  of 
the  Crown  of  Thorns  ;  another  of  the  cloth  with  which 
Christ  was  covered  when  He  was  laid  on  the  sepulchre  ; 
and  yet  another  of  the  sacred  nails  used  at  the  Cruci- 
fixion. I  do  not  remember  that  the  scourge  has  occurred 
to  any  maker  of  texts.  The  Crown  of  Thorns  was 
called  the  Golden  Circle,  having  been  set  in  precious 
metal  and  jewels  by  the  Queen  of  the  Castle  where  it 
was  preserved.  We  have  also  the  pincers  wherewith  the 
nails  were  drawn  from  the  limbs  of  Christ  when  He  was 
taken  down  from  the  Cross.  Finally,  the  shield  of  Judas 
Maccabaeus  is  met  with  in  one  romance,  where  it  is  won 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

in  battle  by  Gawain.  The  Sword  has  been  also  referred 
to  the  same  prince  in  Israel. 

I  suppose  that  the  legend  of  the  face-cloth,  which  is 
part  of  the  Veronica  legend,  is  the  earliest  of  the  Passion 
relics,  and  among  the  evangelisation  traditions,  that  of 
Lazarus  and  his  companions  coming  to  the  South  of 
France,  carrying  the  face-cloth  with  them,  has  the  palm 
of  antiquity  in  the  West.  But  this  relic,  though  it 
occupies  an  important  position  in  the  early  history  of 
the  Graal,  is  not  included  among  the  Hallows  of  the 
Graal  Castle. 

The  metrical  romance  of  De  Borron  has  one  Hallow 
only,  and  this  is  the  first  extant  Graal  history.  The 
first  extant  Quest  is  that  portion  of  the  Conte  del 
Graal  which  we  owe  to  Chretien  ;  so  far  as  his  work 
is  concerned  there  are  four  Hallows — the  Vessel  called 
Graal,  the  Lance,  the  Sword  and  the  Dish.  The 
Lance  has  been  called  his  particular  introduction.  The 
Didot  Perceval,  which  is  thought  to  owe  something  to 
Chretien,  introduces  the  Lance  without  any  explanation 
concerning  it.  The  Chretien  sequels,  the  Longer  Prose 
Perceval  and  the  Galahad  Quest,  lay  stress  upon  the 
Sacred  Sword,  which  is  usually  broken,  and  the  task  of 
the  elect  hero  is  to  re-solder  the  weapon.  In  all  texts 
the  Lance  ranks  next  to  the  Cup  in  importance,  and 
when  the  one  is  removed  to  heaven  at  the  close  of 
the  Galahad  Quest,  it  is  accompanied  by  the  other. 
The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  is  a  very  late  Quest,  and 
it  has  Hallows  innumerable.  The  Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal,  at  least  in  its  present  form,  is  a  very  late  history, 
and  it  introduces  the  Nails  of  the  Passion  ;  it  gives  also 
an  invented  and  artificial  allegory  to  account  for  the 
Sword. 

It  being  obvious,  as  I  have  said,  that  the  Sword  and 
the  Dish  are  but  little  to  the  purpose  of  the  Graal,  it 
will  not  be  difficult  to  understand  that  those  who  took 
over  these  objects  from  antecedent  legends  were  not  of 
one  mind  concerning  them,  more  especially  in  respect 

116 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

of  the  Dish,  which  remains  a  superfluity  in  the  pageant 
and  a  hindrance  in  the  symbolism  as  it  stands.  The 
Sword  in  several  instances  is  important  especially,  as  I 
have  said,  to  the  plot  of  the  story,  but  it  has  no  reason 
in  the  symbolism. 


8  B. — LEGENDS  OF  THE  SACRED  LANCE 
t* 

In  the  Gautier  section  of  the  Conte  del  Graal,  and 
in  the  description  of  Gawain's  visit  to  the  Graal  Castle, 
he  sees  among  the  sacred  objects  a  Lance,  which  bleeds 
into  a  silver  cup,  but  it  is  not  the  Cup  of  the  Graal. 
The  Lance  is  the  weapon  which  pierced  the  side  of 
Christ,  and  it  is  said  that  it  will  bleed  till  Doomsday. 
The  body  of  the  arm  was  of  wood.  The  blade  was  white 
as  snow,  and  the  weapon  was  at  the  head  of  the  master 
dais  ;  it  seems  to  have  reposed  in  the  vessel,  and  two 
tapers  were  burning  before  it.  The  stream  of  blood 
issued  from  the  point  of  the  Lance  and  ran  down 
into  the  vessel,  from  which,  as  it  overflowed,  it  poured 
into  a  channel  of  gold  and  ran  without  the  Hall.  This 
extravagant  description  is  substituted  for  a  much  simpler 
account  in  Chretien's  portion  of  the  poem  ;  there  only 
a  single  drop  of  blood  trickles  down  to  the  hand  of  the 
squire  who  bears  the  weapon  in  the  pageant.  The  fuller 
historical  account  is  found  in  Manessier's  section,  which 
says  that  the  Lance  is  that  of  the  Roman  soldier  who 
pierced  the  side  of  Christ.  According  to  a  Montpellier 
manuscript,  Joseph  of  Arimathasa  was  present  at  the  foot 
of  the  Cross,  and  seeing,  as  the  spear  was  withdrawn,  how 
the  blood  ran  down,  he  collected  it  in  the  Holy  Vessel, 
turning  black  as  he  did  so  with  sorrow.  The  Didot 
Perceval  says  only  that  a  squire  in  the  Graal  Castle 
carried  a  Lance  in  his  two  hands,  that  it  was  that  of 
Longinus,  and  that  a  drop  of  blood  flowed  from  the  sacred 
point.  I  believe  that  this  romance  represents  a  primitive 
state  of  the  Christian  Quest,  though  it  is  late  in  its 

117 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

actual  form,  the  reason  being  that  the  Hallows  of  the 
Passion  are  the  only  wonder-objects  which  belong  pro- 
perly to  the  Quest.  The  wider  field  of  vision  offered 
in  the  Greater  Chronicles  and  the  multiplication  of 
relics  are  indubitable  signs  of  lateness.  In  the  Book  of 
the  Holy  Graal  the  Hallows  which  are  seen  in  the  vision 
preceding  the  ordination  of  the  younger  Joseph  are  a 
great  ensanguined  cross,  three  nails  from  which  blood 
seems  to  flow,  a  Lance  of  which  the  iron  point  is  stained 
also  with  blood,  an  ensanguined  cincture  and  a  bended 
rod  dyed  in  the  same  manner.  It  will  be  seen  that  the 
writer  of  this  romance  knew  well  enough  that  with  the 
Graal  itself  he  could  connect  only  the  things  thereto 
belonging — namely,  the  other  Relics  of  the  Passion,  and 
realising  this  fact  in  later  branches  of  his  Chronicle, 
while  he  perpetuates  other  objects  through  centuries  of 
hidden  life,  he  is  careful  not  to  locate  them  in  the  Graal 
Castle.  The  Ruth  Merlin  is  the  only  legend  of  the 
prophet  which  knows  of  another  Hallow  than  the 
Sacred  Vessel ;  and  this  is  the  Lance,  but  the  circumstances 
under  which  it  is  introduced  and  the  account  which  is 
given  concerning  it  belong  to  a  later  stage  of  our  re- 
search. I  may  say,  however,  that  it  was  an  instrument 
of  mystic  vengeance,  and  as  such  it  reappears  in  the  great 
prose  Lancelot.  It  is  seen  there  by  Gawain,  who  is 
smitten  by  its  blade  of  fire,  and  afterwards  is  healed  by 
the  Graal.  It  is  seen  also  by  Sir  Bors  when  he  visits 
Corbenic  ;  an  old  man  carries  it  in  one  hand,  while  he 
swings  a  censer  with  the  other.  In  the  romance  of 
Galahad,  as  we  know  it,  the  Lance  manifests  twice,  and 
this  is  at  the  end  of  the  Quest,  when  it  is  borne  in  one 
hand  by  an  angel,  who  holds  in  the  other  a  box  to  receive 
the  blood  from  its  point.  The  ipsissima  verba  of  the 
Longer  Prose  Perceval  are  that  of  the  Hallows  there 
are  "  right  great  plenty."  Perceval's  shield  had  in  the 
boss  thereof  some  of  the  Blood  of  our  Lord  and  a  piece 
of  His  garment ;  they  were  placed  therein  by  Joseph  of 
Arimathaea.  As  regards  the  Lance  itself,  the  point 

118 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy    Graal 

bleeds  into  the  Holy  Graal,  and  here  also  the  weapon  is 
one  of  vengeance,  or  rather  of  doom,  for  he  who  is 
elected  to  the  Quest  has  something  to  perform  in  respect 
of  it,  and  he  fails  therein.  This  notwithstanding,  the 
Hallow  in  the  romance  under  notice  serves  little  pur- 
pose, because  it  does  nothing.  For  the  sake  of 
completeness  the  Lesser  Hallows  of  the  German  cycle 
may  be  mentioned  with  great  brevity  in  this  section, 
though  their  history  and  import  must  be  held  over  for  a 
very  long  time  to  come.  In  the  Parsifal  of  Wolfram, 
the  ensanguined  head  of  a  Lance  is  carried  round 
a  certain  chamber  ;  it  has  no  connection  with  the  Pas- 
sion, but  once  more  it  is  a  memorial  of  vengeance,  of 
fatality  which  is  long  and  grievous.  In  Heinrich's  Dili 
Crone,  the  Lance  is  held  by  two  young  men,  and  it 
sheds  three  great  drops  of  blood,  which  are  received  in 
a  salver.  I  should  observe  in  conclusion,  for  the  time 
being,  as  to  this  Hallow  that  the  French  cycle  may  be 
classified  in  three  sections,  of  which  A  does  not  mention 
the  Lance,  B  mentions  but  does  not  explain  its  antecedents, 
and  C  says  that  it  is  the  Lance  of  Longinus  used  at  the 
Crucifixion.  Late  or  early,  there  is  no  other  history 
concerning  it. 


§  C. — THE  BROKEN  SWORD 

The  Graal  Cup  was  not  so  much  connected  with  the 
Passion  as  originated  therefrom,  because  it  is  clear  in 
history  that,  or  ever  Robert  de  Borron  spoke  of  secret 
words,  the  meaning  of  Mass  chalices,  and  the  transit  of 
the  Great  Hallow  from  East  to  West,  the  Precious 
Blood  had  been  brought  already  within  the  wonder-world 
of  relics.  So  also  the  sacred  Lance  had  received  its 
justification  in  tradition  before  it  was  exalted  in 
romance.  The  allocation  of  other  objects  within  the 
same  sphere  of  devotion  was  so  natural  that  it  was  not 
likely  to  be  resisted,  but  it  must  be  observed  that  the 

119 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

attributions  were  inherited  and  not  invented  by  the  makers 
of  books  of  chivalry.  Face-cloth  and  loin-cloth,  nails 
and  crown  of  thorns  had  long  been  included  among 
the  objects  provided  for  veneration  before  the  Book 
of  the  Holy  Graal  or  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  had 
dreamed  of  registering  them  among  the  Hallows  of  the 
Graal  ark,  or  otherwhere  in  their  holy  and  marvellous 
shrines.  That  they  were  capable  of  inventing  relics  is 
shown  by  the  history  of  the  sacred  Sword,  and  such  relics 
had  their  imputed  antecedents  in  Scripture;  but  the  things 
of  the  Passion  of  Christ  were  too  sacred  for  their  inter- 
ference, and  they  were  left  in  the  hands  of  the  Church. 
The  Church  perhaps  was  not  idle,  and  the  Church  did 
not  scruple  perhaps,  but  minstrels  and  weavers  of  stories 
knew  their  proper  limits  and  abode  therein.  Their 
respect  in  the  case  under  notice  guarantees  it  in  yet 
another,  for  which  reason  I  hold  it  as  certain  that  never 
did  Robert  de  Borron  tamper  with  Eucharistic  formulae, 
or,  in  other  words,  that,  whether  from  far  or  near,  he 
inherited  and  did  not  invent  the  sacred  words  of  the 
mystery. 

The  Sword  of  the  Graal  is  considerable  under  two  aspects 
— firstly,  as  a  derivative  from  folk-lore,  which  passes,  as 
we  have  seen,  through  certain  branches  of  the  literature 
without  suffering  an  especial  change  in  its  nature ; 
secondly,  as  a  hallowed  object  having  an  imputed  deri- 
vation from  the  history  of  the  Church  of  God  under  one  of 
its  two  covenants.  In  the  second  case,  we  must  be  prepared 
to  find — and  this  is  natural  also — that  certain  reflections 
from  folk-lore,  as  from  the  earlier  state  of  the  object,  are 
to  be  found  in  its  consecrated  form.  In  the  Chretien 
portion  of  the  Conte  del  Graal  the  Sword  is  sus- 
pended from  the  neck  of  a  page  or  squire  and  is 
brought  to  the  Master  of  the  House  as  a  present  from 
his  niece,  with  leave  to  bestow  it  apparently  howsoever 
he  will,  so  only  that  it  shall  be  well  used.  An  inscrip- 
tion upon  it  says  that  it  will  never  break  except  in  one 
peril,  which  is  known  only  to  the  smith  who  forged  it. 

120 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

In  his  time  as  a  craftsman  he  made  three  such  weapons, 
and  no  others  will  follow.  As  regards  this  particular 
example,  the  belt  was  worth  a  treasure,  the  crosspiece 
was  of  fine  gold,  and  the  sheath  was  of  Venetian  smith's 
work.  It  is  given  to  Perceval  by  the  King  of  the  Graal 
Castle  as  something  to  him  predestined.  But  it  is  only 
at  a  later  stage  that  he  learns  under  what  circumstances 
it  will  fly  in  pieces  and  how  it  may  be  repaired — namely, 
by  plunging  it  in  a  certain  lake  which  is  hard  by  the 
smithy  of  him  who  wrought  it.  The  continuation  of 
Gautier  ignores  these  facts  and  reproduces  the  Sword 
at  the  Castle,  where  it  is  carried  by  a  crowned  knight  ; 
it  is  broken  already  and  Gawain  is  asked  to  resolder  it, 
in  which  task  he  fails.  Perceval  succeeds,  on  the  occa- 
sion of  his  second  visit,  except  for  a  slight  crevice,  thus 
proving  that,  at  least  in  a  certain  measure,  he  is  a  lover  of 
God,  a  true  knight,  and  one  who  loves  also  the  Church, 
which  is  the  Spouse  of  God.  The  conclusion  of  Manes- 
sier  furnishes  the  history  of  the  Hallow  in  full,  though  it 
has  been  the  subject  of  allusion  previously  :  (a)  one  stroke 
was  given  therewith  ;  it  destroyed  the  realm  of  Logres 
and  the  country  thereto  adjacent ;  (V)  this  stroke  was 
inflicted  on  the  King's  brother,  in  the  course  of  a  battle  ; 
(c]  when  the  King  himself  took  up  the  fragments  un- 
warily, he  was  pierced  through  the  thigh,  and  the  wound 
will  be  healed  only  when  his  brother's  death  has  been 
avenged.  In  Chretien,  on  the  contrary,  the  wound  of  the 
Graal  King  is  caused  by  a  spear  which  passes  through  his 
two  thighs.  The  intercalation  or  alternative  conclusion 
of  Gerbert  sends  Perceval  again  into  exile,  because  certain 
imperfections  in  his  life  account  for  the  fact  that  he  cannot 
resolder  the  Sword,  and  the  Quest  must  be  fulfilled  better. 
The  Hallow  remains  in  the  Castle,  but  another  sword  is 
introduced  and  serves  to  indicate  that  behind  the  strange 
memorial  of  this  unknown  poet  there  were  sources  of 
legend  which,  if  we  could  now  recover  them,  might  place 
yet  another  construction  upon  the  root-matter  of  the 
Graal  legend.  In  Gerbert  the  sword  under  notice  is 

121 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy    Graal 

broken  not  in  a  conflict  which  calls  for  a  conventional 
vengeance,  after  the  worthless  motives  of  folk-lore,  but 
in  an  attempt  to  enforce  an  entrance  into  the  Earthly 
Paradise. 

Passing  over  the  Lesser  Chronicles,  which,  although 
in  the  Didot  Perceval  it  is  hinted  on  one  occasion  that 
there  were  many  worthy  relics,  make  no  reference  to  the 
Sword,  and  coming  to  the  Greater  Chronicles  we  find 
that  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  there  is  a  Hallow 
of  this  kind,  and  it  is  very  important  from  the  standpoint 
of  the  romance  itself  and  for  the  Quest  which  follows  there- 
from. It  was  the  sword  of  David  the  King,  and  it  was 
placed,  as  we  have  seen,  by  Solomon  in  a  mysterious  ship 
destined  to  sail  the  seas  for  centuries  as  a  testimony  to 
Galahad  that  his  ancestor  was  aware  of  his  coming  at  the 
end  of  the  times  of  the  Graal.  During  the  course  of  its 
history  more  than  one  wound  is  inflicted  therewith,  and  the 
circumstances  under  which  it  is  broken  are  also  told  vari- 
ously. In  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  there  are  actually  two 
swords ;  to  that  of  David  the  particular  virtue  ascribed  is 
that  no  one  can  draw  it — before  the  predestined  hero  in 
the  days  of  the  Quest — without  being  visited  heavily  for 
his  rashness.  The  doom  works  automatically  even  to  the 
infliction  of  death.  It  is  only  by  a  kind  of  accident  that 
this  sword  is  broken,  and  then  it  is  rejoined  instantly, 
according  to  one  of  the  codices.  In  another  there  is  a 
distinct  account,  which  does  not  say  how  or  whether  the 
sword  was  resoldered  in  fine.  As  regards  the  second  sword, 
it  is  merely  an  ordinary  weapon  with  which  Joseph  II.  is 
smitten  by  a  certain  seneschal  when  he  is  endeavouring  to 
convert  the  prince  of  a  certain  part  of  Great  Britain.  The 
sword  breaks  when  it  pierces  him,  and  the  point  remains 
in  the  wound.  After  various  miracles,  which  result  in 
the  general  conversion  of  the  people,  the  sufferer  places 
his  hand  on  the  point  of  the  sword,  which  is  apparently 
protruding  from  his  thigh  ;  it  comes  out  of  the  wound, 
and  the  place  heals  up  immediately.  Joseph  then  takes 
the  two  portions  of  the  broken  sword  and  says :  "  God 

122 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

grant  that  this  good  weapon  shall  never  be  soldered  except 
by  him  who  is  destined  to  accomplish  the  adventure  of  the 
Siege  Perilous  at  the  Round  Table,  in  the  time  of  King 
Arthur;  and  God  grant  also  that  the  point  shall  not 
cease  to  exude  blood  until  the  two  portions  are  so 
soldered." 

It  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  these  Hallows  should 
prove  a  source  of  confusion  as  to  their  duplication  and 
their  purpose.  I  do  not  conceive  that  the  sword  which  is 
brought  out  of  Fairyland  in  the  Huth  Merlin ,  which  is 
claimed  by  Balan,  which  brings  about  the  Dolorous  Stroke 
—though  this  is  inflicted  actually  by  another  instrument, 
which  in  fine  involves  the  two  brothers  in  mutual  de- 
struction, can  be  connected  with  either  of  the  weapons  with 
which  we  have  been  just  dealing.  The  alternative  later 
Merlin  has  no  mystery  of  swords  which  can  be  identified 
with  the  Hallow  of  the  Graal,  and  the  prose  Lancelot 
knows  nothing  of  that  of  David.  It  speaks,  however,  of 
a  knight  named  Elias,  who  carries  two  swords ;  one  of 
them  is  enclosed  in  a  priceless  sheath,  and  is  said  to  be 
that  which  pierced  the  loins  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  and 
was  broken  therein.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  notice  that 
the  father  here  is  confused  with  the  son.  The  Quest 
of  Galahad  distinguishes  the  two  swords,  except  in  the 
Welsh  version,  which  identifies  them  by  a  natural  mis- 
chance. That  one  of  them  by  which  Joseph  was  wounded 
is  presented  to  Galahad  for  soldering,  and  when  the  elect 
knight  has  performed  the  task,  it  is  given  into  the  charge 
of  Bors,  because  he  was  a  good  knight  and  a  worthy  man. 
After  the  soldering  "it  arose  grete  and  marvellous,  and 
was  full  of  grete  hete  that  many  men  felle  for  drede."  It 
seems  to  follow  that  it  was  brought  back  to  Logres  on  the 
return  of  Sir  Bors  from  Sarras.  The  Sword  of  David  was 
carried  to  Sarras,  as  we  may  infer,  by  Galahad,  but  it  was 
not  taken  to  heaven  with  the  Graal  and  Lance,  the  reason 
being  doubtless  that  it  was  not  a  symbol  of  the  Passion. 
In  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  the  Sword,  as  we  know,  is  that 
with  which  St.  John  the  Baptist  was  beheaded,  and  though 

123 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

there  is,  firstly,  no  attempt  to  account  for  the  presence 
of  this  Hallow  in  England,  nor,  secondly,  any  reference 
to  it  in  early  literature,  the  identification  helps  us  to 
understand  better  its  place  among  the  Hallows,  as  some 
other  swords  met  with  in  the  literature  have  scarcely  a 
title  to  be  included  with  sacred  objects.  The  office  of 
Gawain,  before  he  can  know  anything  of  Graal  mysteries, 
is  to  obtain  this  Sword  from  its  wrongful  keepers,  and 
herein  he  succeeds.  The  scabbard  is  loaded  with  precious 
stones  and  the  mountings  are  of  silk  with  buttons  of  gold. 
The  hilt  has  also  precious  stones,  and  the  pommel  is  a  holy 
and  sacred  stone  set  upon  it  by  a  certain  Roman  Emperor. 
When  the  Sword  came  forth  from  the  scabbard  it  was 
covered  with  blood,  and  this  seems  always  to  have  been 
the  case  at  the  hour  of  noon,  which  was  the  time  of  the 
saint's  martyrdom.  When  noon  has  passed  it  becomes 
clear  and  green  like  an  emerald.  It  is  the  same  length 
as  another  sword,  but  when  sheathed  neither  the  weapon 
nor  the  scabbard  seems  to  be  of  two  spans  length.  It  is 
said  on  the  testimony  of  Josephus  that  the  Old  Law  was 
destroyed  by  a  stroke  of  this  sword  without  recovery,  and 
that  to  effect  the  destruction  our  Lord  Himself  suffered 
to  be  smitten  in  the  side  with  the  Spear.  These  things 
are  not  to  be  understood  on  the  open  sense  of  the  text. 

The  Greater  Chronicles  of  the  Graal  may  be,  as 
they  indeed  are,  upon  God's  side,  but  the  judgment 
concerning  this  sub-section  of  the  Lesser  Hallows  must 
be  that  the  Sword  is  an  impediment  before  the  face  of 
the  symbolism  of  the  cycle,  and  often  an  idle  wonder 
which  we  could  wish  to  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  We 
could  wish  also — or  at  least  I  personally — that  something 
of  the  mystery  behind  the  ascription  of  Gerbert  might 
come  at  this  day  into  our  hands.  In  the  Parsifal  of 
Wolfram  the  hero  of  that  great  Quest  is  refreshed  as  by 
fruits  brought  from  the  Earthly  Paradise  on  the  occasion 
of  his  first  visit  to  the  Temple  of  the  Holy  Graal.  We 
know  not  how  or  why,  but  this  is  another  reflection, 
probably  from  the  source  of  Gerbert,  and  one  which  takes 

124 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

us  no  further,  except  that  from  time  to  time,  by  dim  hints 
and  allusions,  we  see  that  the  legend  of  the  Graal  is  not 
so  far  apart  from  the  legend  of  Eden.  In  this  manner 
we  recur  to  the  German  cycle,  and  there  we  find  that 
there  is  a  sword  of  mark  in  the  Parsifal;  it  is  that 
which  was  given  to  the  hero  by  Amfortas,  the  Graal  King. 
Now  that  this,  amidst  any  variations,  is  the  same  story  as 
that  which  is  told  by  Chretien  is  rather  evident  than  likely. 
Another  sword  broke  when  Parsifal  was  fighting  with  his 
unknown  brother  Feirfis,  because  it  would  not  drink  the 
blood  of  his  kinship,  and  this  is  the  far  antithesis  of  some 
of  the  French  stories.  In  Heinrich's  Diu  Crtine,  a  fair 
youth  of  exalted  mien  carries  a  fair  broad  sword,  which 
he  lays  before  the  King  of  the  Castle,  and  this  sword  is 
given  by  the  King  to  Gawain  after  he  has  asked  the  question 
which  we  know  to  be  all  important. 

In  conclusion  as  to  this  matter,  the  Hallow  of  the 
Sword  is  not  unlike  a  corresponding  weapon  in  some  of 
the  grades  of  Masonic  chivalry ;  in  the  same  way  as  the 
reverend  Knights  therein  do  not,  in  many  cases,  know 
how  to  use  the  symbolic  arm,  so  in  the  Graal  literature 
the  poets  and  romancers  have  accepted  the  custody  of 
something  which  is  so  little  to  their  purpose  that  they 
know  scarcely  what  they  shall  do  therewith  :  had  they 
only  thought  less  of  their  folk-lore  and  hence  omitted 
it  entirely,  they  would  have  told  a  better — aye,  even  a 
truer — story  from  the  standpoint  of  their  own  symbolism. 


§  D. — THE  DISH 

The  Sacred  Dish  being  also,  as  we  have  seen,  rather  an 
unmeaning  mystery,  and  as  although  it  recurs  frequently 
the  descriptions  are  brief  and  the  office  which  it  holds  is 
doubtful,  it  will  be  only  desirable  to  distinguish  those 
texts  in  which  it  is  found.  Subject  to  one  possibility, 
and  this  is  of  the  speculative  order,  it  is,  as  we  have  seen, 
an  unmodified  survival  from  folk-lore ;  we  should  there- 

125 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

fore  expect  it  to  appear  in  the  Chretien  portion  of  the 
Conte  del  Graal,  and  this  is  the  case  actually,  but  it  serves 
therein  a  very  practical  and  mundane  purpose,  being  used 
by  the  King  and  his  guest  to  wash  their  hands.  It  is  a 
silver  plate  and  is  carried  by  a  damsel.  It  reappears  in 
one  codex  of  the  continuation  by  Gautier.  The  conclusion 
by  Manessier  describes  it  after  a  similar  manner,  but  its 
purpose  is  not  delineated  ;  Perceval  asks  all  the  necessary 
questions  regarding  the  Graal  and  Lance  ;  he  asks  also 
concerning  the  Dish,  but  there  is  apparently  nothing  to 
ask,  or  at  least  he  hears  nothing.  At  the  same  time  it 
may  have  had  a  higher  significance  for  this  poet  than  for 
all  the  others,  since  he  causes  the  Holy  Dish  to  follow  Per- 
ceval with  the  other  Hallows  when  he  goes  with  a  hermit 
into  the  wilderness,  where  he  serves  the  Lord  for  ten 
years.  Finally,  he  states  in  his  last  words  that  the  Dish 
was  doubtless  assumed  into  heaven  with  the  other  sacred 
objects,  namely,  the  Lance  and  the  Sword.  According  to 
Gerbert,  a  lady  named  Philosophine,  who  here,  as  in 
another  romance,  figures  as  the  mother  of  Perceval,  came 
over  with  Joseph  of  Arimathasa  bearing  a  certain  plate ; 
another  lady  carried  an  ever-bleeding  lance,  while  Joseph 
himself  bore  a  fairer  vessel  than  eye  had  ever  beheld.  In 
the  Lesser  Chronicles  there  is  only  a  single  reference,  which 
occurs  in  the  Didot  Perceval;  when  the  Graal  and  the 
other  Hallows  are  first  manifested  to  Perceval,  it  is  said 
that  a  damsel  bears  two  silver  plates,  together  with  dra- 
peries. In  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  on  the  occasion 
that  the  Second  Joseph  is  raised  to  the  high  pontificate, 
the  Paschal  Dish  is  seen  on  the  altar,  and  in  the  middle 
place  thereof  is  an  exceedingly  rich  vessel  of  gold  and 
precious  stones.  Here  the  reference  is  probably  to  the 
Sacramental  Cup,  but  the  account  is  confused ;  and  else- 
where the  complex  romance  presents  a  new  aspect  of 
folk-lore,  for  there  is  another  Dish  or  Charger,  bearing  a 
great  and  glorious  head,  about  which  we  have  no  explana- 
tion and  of  which  we  hear  nothing  subsequently,  either  in 
the  text  itself  or  in  the  later  documents  of  the  cycle. 

126 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

The  Dish  also  passes  out  of  the  horizon,  not  only  in 
the  prose  Lancelot  but  also  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad. 
The  German  cycle  speaks  of  a  Golden  Salver  jewelled 
with  precious  stones  and  carried  upon  a  silken  cloth.  It 
is  used  in  Heinrich's  poem  to  receive  the  blood  which 
issues  from  the  Lance. 

It  seems  possible  that  there  was  an  early  tendency  on 
the  part  of  Christian  romancers  to  distinguish  between 
the  chalice — being  the  Cup  in  which  Christ  made  His 
sacrament — and  the  Dish — being  the  vessel  in  which  He 
and  His  disciples  ate  the  Paschal  Lamb.  They  are  to 
some  extent  confused  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
and  the  prose  Lancelot  knows  of  a  single  vessel  only, 
which  is  the  Eucharistic  Cup.  If  such  an  implicit  was 
present  to  the  mind  of  Manessier,  we  can  understand 
why  he  says  that  the  Dish  was  assumed  into  heaven. 

I  wonder  that  it  has  not  occurred  to  some  of  those 
who  have  preceded  me  in  the  tortuous  paths  and  among 
the  pitfalls  of  interpretation,  to  understand  the  four 
Hallows  after  another  and  more  highly  symbolical 
manner,  as  follows  :  (i)  The  Chalice  is  the  Cup  of  the 
Sacrament ;  (2)  The  Dish  is  the  Paten ;  (3)  The  Sword 
symbolises  the  Body  of  Christ ;  its  fracture  is  the  bruising 
for  our  sins  and  the  breaking  for  our  trespasses,  while  at 
some  far  distance  the  resoldering  signifies  the  Resurrec- 
tion ;  (4)  In  another  sense,  the  Spear  is  also  the  wound- 
ing for  our  iniquities,  by  which  the  life  flowed  from  the 
body,  and  the  issue  of  blood  therefrom  is  the  outgoing  of 
the  divine  life  for  our  salvation.  Yet  it  is  not  after  this 
manner  that  we  shall  come  into  the  truth  of  the  Graal, 
while  it  is  likely  enough  that  hereabouts  is  one  of  those 
pits  which  bring  the  unwary  to  destruction. 

We  shall  meet  with  all  the  Hallows  under  a  very 
slight  modification  in  the  most  unexpected  of  all  places, 
but  this  will  be  at  a  later  stage.  We  shall  then  see  that 
the  people  preserved  something  besides  folk-lore,  or  that 
folk-lore  had  other  meanings  behind  it  than  the  recog- 
nised schools  would  be  disposed  to  attribute  thereto. 

127 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

VI 
THE   CASTLE   OF   THE  HOLT  GRAAL 

The  true  legitimacies  are  for  the  most  part  in  exile,  or 
otherwise  with  their  rights  in  abeyance.  The  real 
canons  of  literature  can  be  uttered  only  behind  doors 
or  in  the  secrecy  of  taverns.  The  secrets  of  the  great 
orthodoxies  are  very  seldom  communicated,  even  to 
epopts  on  their  advancement.  The  highest  claims  of 
all  are  not  so  much  wanting  in  warrant  as  wanting  those 
spokesmen  who  are  willing  to  utter  them.  We  shall  not 
be  surprised,  therefore,  to  find  that  the  custodians  of  the 
Holy  Graal,  which  was  a  mystery  of  all  secrecy,  c<  there 
where  no  sinner  can  be,"  despite  the  kingly  titles  ascribed 
to  them,  sometimes  abode  in  the  utmost  seclusion. 

Let  us  seek  in  the  first  instance  to  realise  the  nature 
and  the  place  of  that  Castle  or  Temple  which,  according 
to  the  legend,  was  for  a  period  of  centuries  the  sanctuary 
of  the  Sacred  Vessel  and  of  the  other  hallowed  objects 
connected  therewith.  It  is  in  the  several  locations  of  the 
Hallows  that  we  shall  come  at  a  later  time  into  a  fuller 
understanding  of  their  offices  and  of  the  meanings  which 
may  lie  behind  them.  They  are  not  to  be  regarded 
exactly  as  part  of  the  mystery  of  the  Castle ;  but  at  least 
this  is  more  than  a  casket,  and  between  the  container  and 
the  things  contained,  distinct  though  their  significance 
may  be,  there  are  points  of  correlation,  so  that  the  one 
throws  light  on  the  other. 

We  have  seen  that  the  Vessel  itself  was  brought  from 
Salem  to  Britain,  and  it  follows  from  the  historical  texts 
that  the  transit  had  a  special  purpose,  one  explanation  of 
which  will  be  found  ready  to  our  hands  when  the  time 
comes  for  its  consideration.  The  Castle  is  described 
after  several  manners,  the  later  romances  being  naturally 
the  more  specific,  and  we  get  in  fine  a  geographical  settle- 
ment and  boundary.  In  the  Chretien  portion  of  the 

128 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Conte  del  Graal,  Perceval  discovers  the  Castle  in  av 
valley,  wherein  it  is  well  and  beautifully  situated,  having 
a  four-square  tower,  with  a  principal  hall  and  a  bridge 
leading  up  to  the  chief  entrance.  In  some  of  the  other 
legends  the  asylum  is  so  withdrawn  that  it  is  neither 
named  nor  described.  The  Early  History  of  Merlin 
speaks  of  it  not  less  simply  as  the  place  where  they 
had  the  Holy  Vessel  in  keeping.  According  to  the 
Didot  Perceval,  it  is  the  house  of  the  Rich  King 
Fisherman  ;  it  is  situated  in  a  valley ;  it  has  a  tower,  and 
is  approached  by  a  bridge.  It  might  be  a  tower  merely, 
for  the  description  is  not  less  vague  than  many  accounts 
of  the  Cup.  One  of  the  late  Merlin  texts  says  merely 
that  the  Holy  Vessel  is  in  the  West — that  is,  in  the  Land 
of  Vortigern,  or  that  it  abides  in  Northumbria.  Another 
says  that  the  Castle  is  Corbenic ;  but  though  we  hear  a 
good  deal  concerning  it,  there  is  no  description  whatever. 

The  section  of  the  Conte  del  Graal  which  is  refer- 
able to  Gautier  de  Doulens  says  that  it  is  situated  on  a 
causeway  tormented  by  the  sea.  The  building  is  of  vast 
extent  and  is  inhabited  by  a  great  folk.  We  hear  of  its 
ceiling,  emblazoned  with  gold  and  embroidered  with 
silver  stars,  of  its  tables  of  precious  metal,  its  images  and 
the  rich  gems  which  enlighten  it.  In  a  word,  we  are 
already  in  the  region  of  imaginative  development  and 
adornment,  but  it  is  all  mere  decoration  which  carries 
with  it  no  meaning  beyond  the  heavy  tokens  of  splen- 
dour. Manessier  furnishes  no  special  account,  and  Ger- 
bert,  who  has  other  affairs  at  heart  than  solicitude  about 
a  material  building  or  desire  to  exalt  it  into  allegory, 
leaves  it  unsketched  entirely. 

The  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  is  the  only  French  text 
which  contains  in  a  methodical  account  the  building 
of  the  Holy  House.  The  first  wardens  have  passed 
from  the  land  of  the  living,  and  Alain  le  Gros  is  the 
keeper  of  the  Blessed  Vessel.  The  actual  builder  is  a 
certain  converted  king  of  Terre  Foraine,  and  there  is  a 
covenant  between  him  and  Alain,  one  condition  of  which 

129  i 


The   Hidden  Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

is  that  the  Graal  shall  remain  in  his  kingdom.  The 
Castle  on  its  completion  is  given  the  mystic  name  of 
Corbenic,  in  obedience  to  an  inscription  which  is  found 
blazoned  on  one  of  the  entrance  gates.  The  name  is 
said  to  signify  the  Treasury  of  the  Holy  Vessel.  The 
Graal  is  placed  in  a  fair  chamber  of  the  Castle,  as  if  on 
an  altar  of  repose,  but,  all  his  munificence  notwithstand- 
ing and  all  the  sacramental  visions  which  he  sees  in  the 
Holy  Place,  beating  of  birds'  wings  and  chanting  of 
innumerable  voices,  the  king  is  visited  speedily  for  his 
mere  presence  and  receives  his  death-wound  at  the  very 
altar :  it  is  the  judgment  of  the  sanctuary  on  those  who 
desecrate  the  sanctuary  by  carrying,  however  unwittingly, 
an  unhallowed  past  therein,  and  it  recalls  the  traditional 
conclusion  of  the  Cabiric  Mysteries,  wherein  the  can- 
didate was  destroyed  by  the  gods.  Setting  aside  an 
analogy  on  which  I  am  by  no  means  insisting,  the  event 
was  the  beginning  of  those  wonders  which  earned  for 
Castle  Corbenic  the  name  of  the  Palace  Adventurous, 
because  no  one  could  enter  therein,  and  no  one  could 
sleep,  its  lawful  people  excepted,  without  death  over- 
taking them,  or  some  other  grievous  penalty. 

The  prose  Lancelot  is  in  near  correspondence  with 
Chretien,  representing  the  Castle  as  situated  at  the  far 
end  of  a  great  valley,  with  water  encircling  it.  On 
another  occasion  it  is  named  rather  than  described,  and 
visited  but  not  expounded,  but  we  learn  that  it  is  situated 
in  a  town  which  has  many  dwellers  therein.  In  the  Quest 
of  Galahad  it  is  a  rich  and  fair  building,  with  a  postern 
opening  towards  the  sea,  and  this  was  guarded  by  lions, 
between  which  a  man  might  pass  only  if  he  carried  the 
arms  of  faith,  since  the  sword  availed  nothing  and  there 
was  no  protection  in  harness.  For  the  visitor  who  was 
expected  or  tolerated,  it  would  seem  that  all  doors  stood 
open,  except  the  door  of  the  sanctuary.  But  this  would 
unclose  of  itself ;  the  light  would  issue  from  within  ;  the 
silver  table  would  be  seen ;  and  thereon  the  Holy  Vessel, 
covered  with  drapery  of  samite.  There  also  on  a  day 

130 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy    Graal 

might  be  celebrated,  with  becoming  solemnity,  the  Great 
Mass  of  the  Supersanctified,  and  this  even  in  the  pres- 
ence of  those  who  were  not  clean  in  their  past,  so  only 
that  they  had  put  away  their  sin  when  they  entered  on 
the  Quest.  It  was  thus  beheld  by  Lancelot,  though  he 
lay  as  one  dead  afterwards,  because  of  his  intrusion.  So 
also  the  welcome  guest  had  reason  to  know  that  the 
court  of  King  Pelles  held  a  great  fellowship  in  the  town 
of  Corbenic.  But  there  were  other  visitors  at  times  and 
seasons  who  saw  little  of  all  this  royalty,  like  Hector 
de  Marys,  who — brother  as  he  was  to  my  lord  Sir 
Lancelot — found  the  doors  all  barred  against  him  and 
no  warden  to  open,  long  as  he  hailed  thereat. 

The  most  decorative  of  all  the  accounts  is,  however, 
in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval,  where  the  Castle  is  \j 
reached  by  means  of  three  bridges,  which  are  horrible 
to  cross.  Three  great  waters  run  below  them,  the  first 
bridge  being  a  bow-shot  in  length  and  not  more  than  a 
foot  in  width.  This  is  the  Bridge  of  the  Eel ;  but  it 
proves  wide  and  a  fair  thorough-way  in  the  act  of  cross- 
ing. The  second  bridge  is  of  ice,  feeble  and  thin,  and 
it  is  arched  high  above  the  water.  This  is  transformed 
on  passing  into  the  richest  and  strangest  ever  seen,  and 
its  abutments  are  full  of  images.  The  third  and  last 
bridge  stands  on  columns  of  marble.  Beyond  it  there 
is  a  sculptured  gate,  giving  upon  a  flight  of  steps,  which 
leads  to  a  spacious  hall  painted  with  figures  in  gold. 
When  Perceval  visited  the  Castle  a  second  time  he  found 
it  encompassed  by  a  river,  which  came  from  the  Earthly  V 
Paradise  and  proceeded  through  the  forest  beyond  as  far 
as  the  hold  of  a  hermit,  where  it  found  peace  in  the 
earth.  To  the  Castle  itself  there  were  three  names 
attributed :  the  Castle  of  Eden,  the  Castle  of  Joy 
and  the  Castle  of  Souls.  In  conclusion  as  to  this 
matter,  the  location,  in  fine,  is  Corbenic — not  as  the 
unvaried  name,  but  as  that  which  may  be  called  the 
accepted,  representing  the  Temple  at  its  highest,  and 
corresponding  in  French  romance  to  Montsalvatch  in 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

German — which  our  late  redaction  of  the  Book  of  the 
Holy  Graal  mentions  specifically,  and  which,  all  doubtful 
clouds  of  mystic  adventure  notwithstanding,  looms  almost 
as  a  landmark  in  the  Lancelot  and  the  Quesf  of  Galahad. 

I  must  speak  very  lightly  of  the  German  cycle, 
because,  through  all  these  branches,  it  is  understood 
that  I  shall  deal  with  it  again.  In  the  Parsifal  and 
Titurel  the  Temple  is  completely  spiritualised,  so 
that  it  has  ceased  almost  to  be  a  house  made  with 
hands,  though  the  descriptions  on  the  external  side 
are  here  and  there  almost  severe  in  their  simplicity. 
On  that  side  it  has  the  strength  of  a  feudal  fortress, 
turret  by  turret  rising.  In  the  master-hall  of  the 
palace  there  is  something  of  Oriental  splendour — carpets 
and  couches  and  cushions,  marble  hearths  burning 
strange  fragrant  woods,  and  a  great  blazing  of  lights. 
So  far  the  Parsifal  of  Wolfram,  but  we  must  turn 
to  other  texts  for  the  building  of  the  Temple— 
which  is  after  another  manner  than  anything  told  of 
Corbenic  in  the  Northern  French  cycle.  The  building 
was  the  work  of  Titurel,  the  first  King  of  the  Graal, 
and  in  answer  to  his  prayers  the  High  Powers  of  Heaven 
prepared  the  ground -plan  of  the  Holy  Place  and  fur- 
nished the  raw  material.  Over  the  construction  itself 
the  powers  of  earth  toiled  by  day  and  the  Powers  of 
Heaven  by  night.  The  floor  was  of  pure  onyx;  at 
the  summit  of  the  tower  there  was  a  ruby  surmounted 
by  a  cross  of  crystal,  and  carbuncles  shone  at  the 
meeting-points  of  the  great  arches  within.  The  roof 
was  of  sapphire,  and  a  pictured  starry  heaven  moved 
therein  in  true  order. 

We  are  on  a  different  level  when  we  have  recourse 
to  the  poem  of  Heinrich,  which  presents  several  anoma- 
lies in  respect  of  the  literature  as  a  whole.  The  road 
leading  to  the  Graal  Castle  was  one  of  harsh  and 
hazardous  enterprise — world  without  end  ;  but  it  brought 
the  questing  hero  at  some  far  point  into  a  plenteous  and 
gracious  land,  where  rose  the  Palace  of  Desire,  looking 

132 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

beautiful  exceedingly,  with  a  meadow  before  it  which 
was  set  apart  for  joust  and  tournament.  A  great  con- 
course of  knights  and  gentlewomen  abode  in  the  burg, 
and  for  the  Castle  itself  we  are  told  that  there  was  none 
so  fair.  Though  it  will  be  seen  that  there  is  nothing 
distinctive  in  this  account,  as  it  is  here  reduced  into 
summary,  the  design  is  among  many  things  strange, 
for  if  it  is  not  the  Castle  of  Souls  it  is  that  of  a  Living 
Tomb,  as  the  story  concerning  it  will  show  at  the 
proper  time. 

So  did  the  place  of  the  mysteries,  from  a  dim  and 
vague  allusion,  become 

"  A  wilderness  of  building,  sinking  far 
And  self-withdrawn  into  a  wondrous  depth 
Far  sinking  into  splendour." 

We  can  scarcely  say  whether  that  which  had  begun  on 
earth  was  assumed  into  the  spiritual  place,  or  whether 
the  powers  and  virtues  from  above  descended  to  brood 
thereon. 

I  have  left  over  from  this  consideration  all  reference 
to  another  spiritual  place,  in  Sarras  on  the  confines  of 
Egypt,  where  the  Graal,  upon  its  outward  journey, 
dwelt  for  a  period,  and  whither,  after  generations  and 
centuries,  it  also  returned  for  a  period.  As  this  was 
not  the  point  of  its  origin,  so  it  was  not  that  of  its 
rest ;  it  was  a  stage  in  the  passage  from  Salem  and  a 
stage  in  the  transit  to  heaven.  What  was  meant  by 
this  infidel  city,  which  was  yet  so  strangely  consecrated, 
is  hard  to  determine,  but  its  consideration  belongs  to 
a  later  stage.  It  is  too  early  again  to  ask  what  are  the 
implicits  of  the  great  prose  Perceval  when  it  identi- 
fies the  Castle  of  the  Graal  with  the  Earthly  Paradise 
and  the  Place  of  Souls ;  but  we  may  note  it  as  a  sign 
of  intention,  and  we  shall  meet  with  it  in  another  con- 
nection where  no  one  has  thought  to  look  for  it. 


133 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

VII 

THE  KEEPERS   OF   THE  HALLOWS 

Such  was  the  Abode  of  the  Hallows ;  and  those  who 
dwelt  therein,  the  succession  of  Graal  Keepers,  belong  to 
that  Order  which  we  should  expect  in  such  precincts. 
It  should  be  noted  that  in  the  poem  of  Chretien  the 
Keeper  is  called  the  Fisher  King,  but  his  other  name 
and  his  lineage  are  not  disclosed.  It  is,  however,  the 
beginning  only  of  a  very  long  story,  and  though  it  is 
difficult  to  say  how  the  poet  would  have  carried  it  to  its 
term,  personally  I  do  not  question  that  he  would  have 
borne  no  different  witness  to  the  rest  of  the  Graal  cycle 
in  Northern  French.  By  this,  without  exception,  Joseph 
of  Arimathaea  is  the  first  guardian  of  the  Sacred  Vessel, 
but  either  he  passes  from  the  scene  before  it  has  found 
a  sanctuary  or  he  assumes  a  secondary  position  in  his 
son's  favour.  According  to  the  metrical  romance  of 
De  Borron  and  the  Lesser  Chronicles  generally,  he  was 
succeeded  by  his  son-in-law,  Brons ;  but  according  to 
the  Greater  Chronicles,  as  I  have  termed  them,  he 
was  succeeded  by  his  own  son,  the  second  Joseph, 
who  is  unknown  to  the  other  cycle.  The  Lesser 
Chronicles  bridge  the  centuries  between  that  generation 
which  saw  the  Ascension  of  Christ  and  that  which  was 
to  behold  the  Flower  of  Chivalry  in  Arthur,  by  means  of 
a  single  keeper,  who  was  to  remain  on  earth  until  he  had 
seen  his  grandson,  Perceval,  and  had  remitted  into  his 
hands  the  secrets  and  Hallows  of  which  he  had  been  in 
charge  so  long.  Perceval  is  the  third  who  counts  in  the 
line  of  election  to  complete  the  human  trinity  of  Graal 
guardians,  reflecting,  after  their  own  mystic  manner,  those 
Three  who  bear  witness  in  heaven,  namely,  the  Divine 
Trinity.  To  accomplish  the  hero's  geniture,  Alain,  the 
son  of  Brons,  although  he  had  accepted  celibacy,  married 
in  some  undeclared  manner,  and  it  was  as  his  issue  that 

134 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Perceval  was  born  in  the  fulness  of  the  adventurous  times. 
For  the  Early  History  of  Merlin  the  Keepers  are  those 
who  have  the  Holy  Vessel,  and  the  reticence  in  this  case 
may  seem  like  that  of  Chretien,  but  it  is  not  so  exactly, 
because  the  prose  romance  of  Merlin  follows  directly 
from  the  metrical  romance  of  Joseph.  We  infer  further 
that  the  promise  of  union  with  the  Keepers  is  like  la  joie 
perdurable. 

Gautier's  continuation  of  the  Conte  del  Graal  offers 
no  materials  for  the  identification  of  the  Fisher  King, 
but  the  variants  or  interpolated  passages  in  the  Mont- 
pellier  MS.  follow  the  Lesser  Chronicles,  representing 
him  as  the  father  of  Alain  le  Gros  who  married  Enigea, 
the  sister  of  Joseph.  Manessier  and  Gerbert,  on  the 
other  hand,  reflect  the  Greater  Chronicles,  and  apparently 
some  early  draft  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  for  they 
know  nothing  concerning  the  younger  Joseph. 

From  one  point  of  view,  the  succession,  in  respect 
of  the  Greater  Chronicles,  involves  fewer  difficulties, 
because  it  exhibits  a  rudimentary  sense  of  chronology 
and  develops  in  consequence  a  long  line  of  successive 
custodians.  They  are,  however,  quite  shadowy,  and 
exist  only  to  bridge  the  gulf  of  time  in  the  order 
following:  (i)  Joseph  of  Arimathasa  and  Joseph  II.; 
(2)  Alain,  the  son  of  Brons ;  (3)  Eminadap,  the  son 
of  Joshua,  who  was  himself  a  brother  of  Alain;  (4) 
Carceloys;  (5)  Manuiel ;  (6)  Lambor :  the  last  four 
were  kings,  holding  from  Calafas  of  Terre  Foraine, 
called  Alphasan  in  baptism  ;  (7)  the  King  Pelles. 

So  far  as  regards  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  it 
is  difficult  to  say  what  version  or  prototype  of  this 
text  was  before  the  authors  of  the  Vulgate  and  Huth 
Merlin,  but  whatever  it  was  they  seem  to  have  drawn 
from  the  same  source.  The  Graal  Castle,  as  we  have 
seen,  is  Corbenic  ;  it  is  situated  in  the  realm  of  Listenoys, 
and  the  Keeper  is  King  Pelles.  As  much  and  no  more 
may  be  said  concerning  the  prose  Lancelot.  Enumera- 
tions of  this  kind  serve  very  little  purpose,  and  I  will 

135 


The   Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

speak,  therefore,  only  of  the  alternative  keepers  who 
were  in  evidence  during  the  days  of  quest.  On  the  one 
side,  there  is  Brons,  to  whom  succeeded  Perceval  at  the 
close  of  a  life  of  search  ;  on  the  other,  there  is  King 
Pelles,  of  the  Castle  Corbenic,  whose  daughter,  Helayne, 
gave  Galahad  as  issue  to  Lancelot,  himself  the  lineal 
descendant  of  the  king  reigning  at  Sarras  in  the  days 
of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  and  the  first  flight  of  the  Graal. 
Galahad  was  the  last  Keeper  recognised  by  this  cycle, 
except  in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval,  and  he  seems  to 
have  been  appointed  only  for  the  purpose  of  removing 
the  Vessel.  It  was :  Ite,  missa  esty  and  est  consummatum, 
when  he  died  and  rose  to  the  stars.  As  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval  is  extra-lineal  and  thus  stands  by  itself, 
though  its  antecedents  and  certain  characteristics  have 
involved  its  inclusion  among  the  Greater  Chronicles,  I 
will  say  of  it  only  in  the  present  place  that  the  King's 
title  is  that  adopted  by  Chretien,  or  the  Rich  King 
Fisherman,  and  that  his  name  is  not  otherwise  declared. 
His  successor  is  Perceval,  but  he  enters  into  the  secret 
royalty  after  an  interregnum  only,  and  his  stewardship 
also  is  with  a  view  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  mystery. 
As  regards  the  German  cycle,  which  will  be  dealt  with 
elsewhere,  the  succession  of  Graal  Keepers  are  TitureJ, 
Frimutel  and  Amfortas,  to  whom  succeeds  Perceval. 
Titurel  at  the  beginning  was  a  holy  hero  of  earthly 
chivalry,  to  whom  a  divine  voice  brought  the  strange 
tidings  that  he  had  been  elected  to  guard  the  Holy 
Graal  on  Mont  Salvatch.  His  progenitor  was  a  man 
of  Cappadocia  who  was  attached  to  the  Emperor 
Vespasian,  and  received  for  his  services  a  grant  of  land 
in  southern  France. 

The  hereditary  stewardship  of  the  Holy  Graal  was 
the  most  secret  of  all  mysteries,  and  never  initiated 
any  one  outside  the  predestined  family.  There  is  seclu- 
sion in  all  cases,  but  that  of  the  Brons  keepership  is 
greater  beyond  comparison  than  that  of  Alain  and  his 
successors.  One  explanation  of  this  may  be  sought  in 


Mysteries   of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  simple  fact  that,  as  regards  the  first  case,  several 
intermediate  texts  are  or  may  be  wanting,  and  that 
transparently.  This  is  true  so  far  as  it  goes,  but  in 
the  most  proximate  pre-Arthurian  period,  and  in  the 
time  of  the  king,  we  find  still  the  same  concealment, 
though  it  is  not  quite  so  unvaried  in  the  records  of  the 
Conte  del  Graal  as  it  is  in  the  Early  History  of  Merlin 
and  in  the  Didot  Perceval.  The  comparative  position 
seems  as  another  line  of  demarcation  between  the 
Lesser  and  Greater  Chronicles,  but  always  on  the 
understanding  that  the  allocation  of  the  Longer  Prose 
Perceval  to  the  second  series,  though  it  cannot  be 
placed  otherwise,  and  apart  especially,  is  not  fully  satis- 
factory in  the  nature  of  things.  Speaking  generally, 
the  distinctions  between  the  two  branches  will  be  appre- 
ciated most  clearly  by  a  comparison  between  the  Early 
History  of  Merlin  and  the  later  Vulgate  and  Huth 
texts.  The  sanctuary  is  shrouded  in  the  first,  and 
we  know  only  that  those  who  have  the  Sacred  Vessel 
are  somewhere  in  Northumbria.  In  the  second,  the 
keeper,  King  Pelles,  is  in  continual  evidence.  He  is 
also  a  king  in  warfare,  and  it  is  by  no  means  certain 
that  he  is  always  on  the  side  of  the  over-lord  Arthur. 

It  would  be  easy  to  extend  this  section  very  much 
further  than  I  purpose  doing,  in  view  of  all  that  is 
to  follow ;  my  intention  here  is  a  schedule,  or  this 
mainly ;  and  the  specific  summary  is  as  follows.  There 
are  two  prototypes  of  the  Early  History  versions,  and 
they  are  represented,  firstly,  by  the  original  draft  of 
De  Borron's  metrical  romance,  which  is  much  earlier 
than  any  other  historical  account ;  they  are  represented, 
secondly,  by  the  speculative  prototype  of  the  Book  of 
the  Holy  Graal.  About  this  book  there  are  two  things 
certain :  (a)  that  it  is  very  much  later — or  at  least 
that  it  is  later  certainly — than  the  first  recension  or 
transcript  of  the  book  which  in  some  undeclared  manner 
had  come  into  the  hands  of  Robert  de  Borron  ;  (£)  that 
it  is  a  good  deal  earlier  than  the  Quest  of  Galahad  as  we 

137 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

know  it,  which  involves  also  an  antecedence  in  some  form 
of  the  prose  Lancelot  and  the  Later  Histories  of  Merlin. 
We  are  left  therefore  with  two  claims  which  appear 
to  be  at  the  root  of  the  Mystery  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
as  it  is  manifested  in  the  French  literature  of  the  twelfth 
and  thirteenth  centuries :  these  are  the  claim  of  an 
Eucharistic  formula,  the  validity  and  efficacy  of  which 
transcended  the  words  of  institution  known  by  the 
official  Church,  and  the  claim  of  a  priesthood  which 
did  not  draw  from  the  official  apostolate,  though  it 
did  not  question  its  authority.  These  two  are  one 
probably  in  their  essence,  and  it  is  out  of  these  re- 
spectively that  we  come  to  understand  why  Perceval  is 
withdrawn  into  the  innermost  seclusion  by  the  Lesser 
Chronicles,  and  why  in  the  Greater  Chronicles  Galahad 
is  assumed  into  heaven — both  carrying  their  warrants. 

VIII 
THE  PAGEANTS  IN   THE  QUESTS 

The  presence  of  the  Holy  Vessel  signified  the  Divine 
Presence.  The  Life  of  Life  had  remained  in  the  Pre- 
cious Blood.  The  Voice  of  the  Angel  of  Great  Counsel, 
the  Voice  of  the  Son  and  the  Voice  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
abode  therein,  or  spoke  as  if  from  behind  it.  The  Pres- 
ence was  sacramental,  but  the  Presence  was  also  real, 
and  through  the  soul  it  was  one  which  sustained  the  body 
itself  at  need.  So  far  as  regards  the  Lesser  Chronicles, 
and  in  those  which  I  call  Greater,  there  was  a  reservation 
which  continued  through  centuries,  an  arch-natural  Mass 
— said  from  time  to  time  and  not,  as  we  may  suppose, 
daily — an  unfailing  ministry  to  body  and  soul  alike.  In 
a  word,  the  Last  Supper  was  maintained  for  ever  and  ever. 
It  was  the  sacramental  side  of  the  eternal  festival  of  the 
followers  of  Bran,  and  those  who  say  that  the  roots  of 
the  mystery  are  in  folk-lore  say  only  the  most  negligible 
part  of  the  truth  concerning  it ;  for  if  I  accomplish  by  a 

138 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

secret  science  the  transmutation  of  lead  into  gold,  it  will 
be  useless  for  any  scholarship  of  science  to  depose  that 
the  important  fact  is  the  lead.  The  latter  is  the  ante- 
cedent, and  as  such  is,  of  course,  indispensable,  but  the 
great  fact  is  the  conversion ;  and  I  say  the  same  of  the 
Graal  literature. 

On  this  and  all  other  considerations,  it  will  be  under- 
stood that  the  Mystic  Castle  was  a  place  of  the  highest 
reverence,  and  that  all  things  concerning  the  Sacred 
Vessel  were  done  with  ceremonial  solemnity,  following 
a  prescribed  order.  In  this  way  it  comes  about  that  all 
the  quests  present  the  pageant  of  the  Graal  on  its  mani- 
festation within  the  hall  and  the  shrine  of  the  Castle. 
There  are  instances  in  which  it  is  exceedingly  simple, 
and  others  in  which  it  is  ornate.  It  is  the  former  in  the 
Lesser  Chronicles,  and  demands  scarcely  the  express 
name  of  a  pageant ;  in  the  Greater  Chronicles  it  is  de- 
corative, and  this  term  will  apply  to  some  of  the  mani- 
festations which  are  described  in  the  Conte  del  Graal. 
The  section  which  is  referable  to  Chretien  offers,  how- 
ever, nothing  to  detain  us.  The  procession  enters  the 
hall  in  single  file,  and  consists  in  succession  of  a  page, 
or  squire,  who  carries  the  mysterious  Sword  which  will 
break  in  one  danger  only,  of  another  squire  who  bears 
the  Sacred  Lance  from  which  the  blood  issues,  and  then 
of  two  squires  together,  each  supporting  a  ten-branched 
candlestick.  Between  these  there  walks  the  gentle  and 
beautiful  maiden  who  lifts  up  the  Holy  Graal  in  her  two 
hands ;  she  is  followed  by  another  maiden,  who  carries 
the  Silver  Dish.  The  procession  passes  twice  before  the 
couch  on  which  the  King  of  the  Castle  reclines,  and  it 
is  to  be  noticed  that  whatever  efficacy  and  wonder  may 
reside  in  the  objects  which  are  manifested  thus,  the  office 
of  the  bearers  is  as  purely  ceremonial  as  that  of  the 
acolytes  and  thurifers  at  any  High  Mass  in  the  world. 
When  the  questing  knight  pays  his  first  visit  in  the 
Didot  Perceval,  the  offices  are  transposed  partially  and 
the  Sword  is  missing  from  the  pageant.  He  who  up- 

139 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

raises  the  Lance  enters  in  the  prescribed  manner,  but  he 
carries  it  with  both  hands  and  is  followed  by  a  maiden 
with  two  silver  plates  and  a  napkin  on  her  arm,  while  the 
vessel  containing  the  Precious  Blood  of  our  Saviour,  as  if 
it  were  a  phial  or  reliquary,  is  in  the  charge  of  a  second 
squire.  On  the  occasion  of  the  later  visit,  it  is  said,  still 
more  tersely,  that  the  Graal  and  the  other  venerable  relics 
come  out  from  a  chamber  beyond,  but  we  do  not  learn 
who  carries  them.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  all  the  versions 
that,  even  in  telling  the  same  story,  it  is  done  always 
with  respect  to  a  certain  genius  of  difference  and  a  variant 
intervening  in  the  text.  Gautier  de  Doulens  recounts  in 
two  versions  the  visit  of  Gawain  to  the  Graal  Castle, 
in  the  more  important  case  under  circumstances  of  unex- 
plained mystery,  for  no  one  was  less  on  the  quest.  This  is 
comparable  to  the  reception  of  a  neophyte  who  is  neither  in- 
troduced nor  prepared,  but  is  mistaken  at  first  for  another. 
The  pageant  is  also  dismembered,  for  the  Dish  does  not 
appear,  the  Hallow  of  the  Broken  Sword  is  placed  upon 
the  breast  of  a  dead  body,  which  lies  on  a  rich  bier. 
As  if  it  were  a  subsidiary  Hallow,  a  stately  clerk  carries 
an  enormous  cross  of  jewelled  silver,  and  the  only 
procession  described  is  of  canons  in  silken  copes,  who 
celebrate  the  office  of  the  dead  amidst  thuribles  and 
golden  candlesticks.  The  Graal  itself  does  not  appear 
till  the  supper  is  served  in  the  hall,  but  it  is  held  by  no 
visible  hand  and  no  other  sacred  object  is  seen  in  con- 
nection therewith.  At  a  later  stage  of  the  episode,  the 
Lance  manifests  and  the  blood  which  distils  from  its 
point  is  received,  as  we  have  seen,  in  a  silver  cup ;  the 
Broken  Sword,  in  fine,  reappears  at  the  close ;  it  is  a  very 
curious  and  piecemeal  pageant.  When  Perceval  revisits 
the  Castle,  the  account  of  Gautier  is  in  better  conformity 
with  what  may  be  termed  the  conventional  or  authorised 
ceremonial  type. 

Passing  to  this  point  at  the  term  of  the  continua- 
tion by  Gautier  de  Doulens,  there  is  again  a  very  simple 
pageant,  in  which  the  Graal  comes  first — a  Holy  and 

140 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Glorious  Vessel — under  the  charge  of  a  maiden,  who 
issues  from  the  secret  chamber  and  passes  before  the 
royal  table,  carrying  the  Hallow  exalted.  There  follows 
a  second  maiden,  than  whom  none  is  fairer,  clothed  in 
white  drapery,  and  bearing  the  Lance  from  which  flows 
the  mysterious  blood.  In  fine,  there  enters  the  squire 
exposing  a  naked  sword  broken  in  the  middle  thereof. 
It  is  at  this  point  that,  abruptly  enough,  the  continuation 
reaches  its  term  and  is  taken  up  by  Manessier,  who 
causes  the  Graal  and  the  Lance  to  pass  for  a  second 
time  before  the  King  and  his  guest,  together  with  the 
nobie  Silver  Dish,  which  is  carried  by  a  third  maiden — 
a  procession  of  vestals  only,  seeing  that  the  work  of  the 
Sword — which  has  been  partly  resoldered  by  Perceval- 
has  no  longer  its  place  in  the  pageant.  When  the 
questing  hero  pays  his  third  visit  to  the  Graal  Castle, 
under  the  auspices  of  the  same  poet,  the  Lance  and 
Graal  are  carried  by  two  maidens,  and  a  squire  holds  the 
Silver  Dish,  enveloped  in  his  rich  amice  of  red  samite. 
The  sacred  objects  pass  three  times,  and  return  as  they 
issued  into  the  secret  chamber,  the  mystery  of  which 
is  never  disclosed  fully  by  the  makers  of  this  romance. 
In  fine,  when  Perceval  is  crowned — and  this  is  his  fourth 
visit — a  gentle  maiden  exalts  the  Holy  Vessel,  the  Lance 
is  borne  by  a  squire,  while  another  maiden  holds  the 
Silver  Dish.  It  will  be  seen  that  on  each  occasion  there 
is  some  variation  in  the  offices,  as  if  these  were  deter- 
mined by  accident.  The  alternative  of  Gerbert — which 
seems  interposed  before  the  partial  resoldering  of  the 
sword  by  Perceval  in  the  Gautier  version — some  few 
verbal  modifications  notwithstanding,  gives  the  same 
account  of  the  Graal  procession. 

In  the  prose  Lancelot,  which  prefaces  the  great  and 
glorious  Quest,  the  pageant  has  this  characteristic — 
that  it  is  preceded  invariably  by  a  dove  which  enters 
through  a  window  bearing  a  golden  censer  in  its  beak, 
and  the  palace  fills  thereupon  with  the  eternal  sweetness 
of  the  Paradise  which  is  above.  The  bird  passes  through 

141 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy    Graal 

the  hall  and  from  sight  into  a  chamber  beyond.  Out 
of  that  chamber — as  if  at  a  concerted  signal — almost  as 
if  the  dove  had  suffered  transformation — there  issues 
the  maiden  of  the  Graal,  carrying  the  Precious  Vessel. 
The  manifestation  in  the  prose  Lancelot  is  at  first  on  the 
occasion  of  Gawain's  visit,  and  he  sees  nothing  of  the 
other  Hallows  till  the  Lance  at  a  later  stage  issues  from 
the  chamber  beyond  and  smites  him  between  the 
shoulders.  In  the  middle  of  the  night  of  terror  which 
follows  this  episode,  he  beholds  another  pageant  preceded 
by  a  choir  of  voices.  Once  more  the  maiden  issues  from 
the  hidden  chamber  carrying  the  sacred  vessel,  with 
lights  and  thuribles  before  her,  and  the  service  of  the 
Graal  is  performed  on  a  silver  table  in  the  middle  place 
of  the  hall,  but  there  are  no  other  Hallows.  When 
Lancelot  comes  to  the  Castle — from  which  event  follows 
the  conception  of  Galahad — the  manifestation  of  the 
Graal  is  identical ;  but  because  of  that  which  must  be 
consummated  he  suffers  no  infliction,  and  he  does  not 
therefore  behold  the  avenging  Lance.  It  can  be  said 
scarcely  that  there  is  a  pageant ;  the  dove  enters  and 
vanishes ;  it  passes  within  the  secret  chamber  that  the 
maiden  in  charge  of  the  Vessel  may  come  out  therefrom  ; 
she  appears  accordingly,  bearing  the  Holy  Palladium,  a 
vessel  of  gold,  "  the  richest  thing  that  any  man  hath 
lyving."  She  issues  from  the  secret  chamber,  and  again 
she  returns  therein,  but  not  before  Lancelot — also  for 
that  which  must  follow — is  dazzled  by  her  surpassing 
beauty. 

In  the  time  of  the  great  Quest  there  are,  strictly 
speaking,  no  pageants  in  the  sense  of  the  other  romances, 
for  the  Graal  is  going  about.  Its  apparition  at  the 
Court  of  King  Arthur  is  heralded  by  a  sunbeam  only, 
and  it  is  borne  by  no  visible  hand.  In  Corbenic,  when 
all  things  draw  to  the  holy  marvel  of  their  close,  there 
is  a  solemn  procession  of  angels  to  the  secret  shrine  of 
the  Graal,  two  of  them  bearing  wax  lights,  the  third  a 
cloth,  and  the  last  the  Sacred  Lance,  because  heaven  has 

142 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

come  down  at  the  removal  of  that  which  is  meant  for 
earth  no  more.  In  Sarras,  at  the  last  scene  of  all,  which 
ends  the  strange,  eventful  mystery,  there  is  a  great 
cohort  of  angels ;  but  this  is  the  choir  above  descending 
to  witness  that  which  must  be  done  in  fine  below.  There 
is  no  passing  between  intermediate  spaces. 

In  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  two  damosels  issue 
together  from  a  chapel  which  is  attached  to  the  ban- 
queting-hall,  one  of  them  carrying  the  most  Holy 
Graal  and  the  other  the  Lance,  the  point  of  which 
distils  its  blood  therein.  It  is  suggested  also,  but  as 
if  by  a  dream  within  a  dream,  that  there  are  two 
angels,  bearing  two  candlesticks  of  gold  filled  with 
wax  lights.  The  damosels  move  through  the  hall  and 
pass  into  another  chapel;  again  they  come  forth,  and 
it  seems  then  that  there  are  three  maidens,  with  the 
figure  of  a  child  in  the  midst  of  the  Holy  Graal. 
They  pass  for  a  third  time,  and  then  above  the  Vessel 
there  is  a  Vision  of  the  Crucified  King. 

In  the  Parsifal  of  Wolfram  a  Squire  enters  hurriedly 
bearing  the  Lance,  which  bleeds  profusely  into  his  sleeve 
— an  uncouth  and  ill-begotten  symbol.  Two  gracious 
maidens,  wearing  chaplets  on  their  heads,  follow  with 
flowing  hair ;  they  bear  up  golden  candlesticks.  Two 
other  women,  of  whom  one  is  described  as  a  duchess, 
carry  two  stools  of  ivory,  which  they  place  before  the 
king.  Next  in  order  are  four  maidens  having  as  many 
tapers,  and  four  other  maidens  who  sustain  between 
them  an  oblong  slab  of  jacinth.  There  are  then  two 
princesses  carrying  knivgs  of  silver,  and  these  also  are 
preceded  by  four  maidens.  The  princesses  are  fol- 
lowed by  six  additional  maidens,  holding  tall  glasses 
filled  with  rare  perfumes.  There  is,  in  fine,  the  queen 
of  all,  with  the  Graal  in  the  hands  of  her,  and  be- 
hind is  the  squire  who  carries  the  Sword  of  Legend. 
When  we  come  at  the  proper  time  to  see  how  much 
and  how  little  on  the  surface  sense  of  things  follows 
from  this  cumbrous  display,  we  shall  turn  with  the 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

more  relief  to  versions  that  are  less  decorative,  though 
we  can  understand  and  excuse  also  the  influence  of  the 
oriental  mind  reflected  in  the  Parsifal  from  the  proto- 
type of  Guiot  de  Provence.  Relief  at  the  moment  will 
come  from  the  poem  of  Heinrich,  though  it  is  the  idlest 
of  all  the  quests.  Here  the  procession  is  in  two  parts. 
In  the  first  there  is  a  beautiful  youth  of  highest  mien, 
holding  the  Sword  in  one  hand,  and  followed  by  cup- 
bearers who  serve  wine  at  the  feast.  When  this  is  over 
there  enter  two  maidens  carrying  golden  candlesticks  ; 
behind  them  come  two  youths,  who  lift  up  the  Lance 
between  them ;  they  are  followed  by  other  two  maidens, 
in  whose  charge  is  a  salver  of  jewelled  gold,  borne 
upon  a  silken  cloth.  Behind  these  there  walks  the 
fairest  of  women  holding  the  Precious  Reliquary  of 
the  Graal,  and  after  her  the  last  maiden  of  all,  whose 
hands  are  empty,  whose  office  is  weeping  only — a 
variation  which  will  be  found  also  in  the  Montpellier 
codex  of  the  Conte  del  Graal. 


IX 

THE  ENCHANTMENTS  OF  BRITAIN,  THE  TIMES 
CALLED  ADVENTUROUS  AND  THE  WOUND- 
ING OF  THE  KING 

The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  says  that  the  great  and 
secret  sanctuary  gives  upon  the  Earthly  Paradise,  even 
as  the  visible  world  may  be  said  to  give  upon  the  world 
unseen — a  comparison  which  would  signify  for  us — or 
at  least  by  a  suggestion  to  the  mind — that  the  Temple 
of  the  Hallows  and  all  its  external  splendour  are  the 
adornment  of  the  soul  which  is  within.  Even  apart 
from  such  a  reading,  we  can  understand  that  the  manner 
of  doctrine  put  forward  evasively  in  story-books  by  the 
Graal  literature,  was  sufficient  to  make  the  orthodox 
church  stand  aloof,  but  vigilant  and  dubious.  We  have 

144 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

now  to  consider  how  a  horror  fell  upon  the  Secret  House 
of  God  and  a  subtle  work  of  sorcery  on  the  world  which 
encompassed  it.  All  texts  indifferently  of  the  Northern 
French  cycles  say  that,  as  a  consequence  of  certain  events 
connected  with  the  Castle  of  the  Graal,  there  fell  an 
interdiction  upon  Logres.  In  the  Lesser  Chronicles 
it  is  termed  an  Enchantment,  while  in  the  Greater 
Chronicles  it  is  characterised  as  Adventurous  Times, 
but  the  distinctions  dissolve  into  one  another ;  there 
is  not  less  adventure,  nor  is  it  less  hazardous,  in  the 
texts  of  enchantment,  while  in  the  adventurous  texts 
the  graces  and  terrors  of  sorcery  abound  on  every  side. 
We  can  therefore  consider  them  together,  as  aspects 
of  the  same  subject  which  are  scarcely  so  much  as 
alternative,  and,  in  fact,  on  the  study  of  the  documents 
it  will  be  found  that  the  adventurous  times  are  almost 
too  vague  by  themselves  to  admit  of  being  specified 
separately.  As  regards  the  enchantments,  they  are  a 
consequence  which  works  outward  from  within — that 
is  to  say,  directly  or  indirectly,  something  which  has 
transpired  within  is  responsible  for  the  inhibition  with- 
out. The  enchantments  are  the  result  of  an  evil  which 
has  fallen  on  the  keeper  for  the  time  being  of  the 
Holy  Graal.  They  are  the  exteriorised  sorrow  of  the 
king.  The  action  is,  however,  reciprocal,  for  in  some 
instances  that  sorrow  has  reached  him  by  an  intrusion 
of  the  external  order,  though  in  certain  other  cases 
it  has  arisen  in  his  own  house  or  in  his  own  person. 
It  remains  that  as  enchantment  fell  upon  Merlin,  so 
also  it  has  fallen  about  the  Secret  House  and  has 
entered  into  the  Holy  of  Holies.  Now,  the  places  of 
enchantment  are  also  places  of  sadness,  and  the  nature 
of  the  horror  within,  abiding  as  a  certain  cloud  upon 
the  sanctuary,  is  described  after  several  manners.  In 
one  story,  the  flesh,  which  at  no  time  profits  anything, 
has  smitten  deeply  into  the  life  of  the  Keeper,  who 
has  been  a  victim  of  earthly  passion.  In  another,  he 
is  unable  to  die  till  he  has  seen  the  last  scion  of  his 

145  K 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

house,  and  because  of  the  protraction  of  the  centuries, 
he  is  suffering,  in  the  meantime,  the  heavy  burden  of 
his  great  age.  He  has  alternatively  received  a  dolorous 
stroke,  reacting  on  him  from  the  person  of  one  of  his 
relatives ;  and  as  a  final  explanation  he  is  afflicted  by 
the  failure  of  a  knight  to  ask  the  conventional  question, 
which  is  at  once  vital  and  mystic.  These  things  are 
reflected  upon  the  order  without,  sometimes,  as  it  would 
seem,  only  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  Castle  ; 
more  generally  through  the  whole  of  Logres ;  while  in 
rare  instances  the  world  itself  is  involved,  at  least  by 
imputation. 

The  Perceval  Quests  turn  entirely  on  the  asking  of 
that  question  which  I  have  specified  in  the  previous 
enumeration,  and  the  pivot  of  the  question  itself  is 
the  failure  to  perform  what  is  expected  in  this  respect — 
namely,  to  ask  and  to  receive.  In  the  Chretien  section 
of  the  Conte  del  Graal  the  explanation  of  the  king's 
sickness  is  that  he  was  wounded  by  a  spear  in  battle 
and  hence  is  carried  by  four  sergeants  because  he  has 
no  strength  in  his  bones.  In  the  Didot  Perceval  Brons, 
the  Rich  Fisherman,  is  said  to  be  in  great  infir- 
mity, an  old  man  and  full  of  maladies,  nor  will  his 
health  be  restored  until  the  office  of  the  question  has 
been  fulfilled  in  all  perfection.  But  this  is  not  ordinary 
old  age  ;  rather — as  I  have  just  intimated — it  is  the 
oppression  of  many  centuries.  It  is  clear,  however,  that 
Brons  was  not  suffering  from  any  curse  or  enchantment ; 
he  cannot  depart  from  this  life  until  he  has  communi- 
cated to  Perceval  the  secret  words  pronounced  at  the 
sacrament  of  the  Graal,  which  he  himself  learned  from 
Joseph.  This  and  the  instruction  which  will  follow 
the  question  asked  by  the  hero  shall  put  a  period  to 
the  enchantments  of  Britain.  There  is  a  failure  in  the 
first  instance,  as  in  the  poem  of  Chretien,  and  the  Quest 
in  the  Conte  del  Graal  is  to  some  extent  assumed  by 
Gawain,  who  visits  the  Graal  Castle  in  the  continuation 
of  Gautier  ;  he  does  ask,  and  thereupon  the  king  promises 

146 


Mystertes  of  the  Holy   Graal 

him  that,  subject  to  one  other  condition,  he  shall  hear 
the  great  story  of  the  Broken  Sword  and  of  the  woe 
which  it  brought  upon  the  kingdom  of  Logres — but 
Gawain  fails  and  falls  asleep.  The  failure  of  Perceval  has 
worked  the  destruction  of  kingdoms,  which  may  mean 
certain  petty  principalities  of  Britain  passing  under  this 
name — otherwise  they  cannot  have  been  of  this  world, 
as  the  prophecy  does  not  come  to  pass  here.  On  the 
occasion  of  Perceval's  second  visit,  the  king  is  seated 
on  a  couch  as  before,  and  the  discourse  is  not  closed  in 
the  section  of  Gautier.  The  conclusion  of  Manessier 
recounts  how  the  Broken  Sword  dealt  that  stroke 
which,  prior  to  the  voided  question,  has  destroyed 
the  realm  of  Logres  and  all  the  surrounding  country. 
The  unfinished  inquiry  of  Gawain,  before  he  fell  into 
slumber,  restored  verdure  to  the  land  about  the  Graal 
Castle  and  the  waters  found  their  course.  It  was 
not,  however,  the  keeper  but  his  brother  who  received 
the  Dolorous  Stroke,  being  slain  treacherously  in  a 
battle.  The  sword,  which  broke  in  the  act,  was  placed 
upon  the  bier  when  the  body  was  brought  to  the 
Castle ;  it  was  taken  up  incautiously  by  the  king  and 
in  some  undeclared  manner  it  wounded  him  in  both 
thighs ;  this  wound  could  not  be  healed  till  the  death 
of  his  brother  was  avenged.  For  these  events  the  late 
prologue  to  the  Conte  del  Graal  substitutes  a  desola- 
tion which  fell  upon  Logres  prior  to  the  coming  of  King 
Arthur.  There  were  certain  maidens  who  kept  the 
wells  and  ministered  refreshment  to  travellers  out  of 
golden  cups.  So  admirable  as  was  this  custom,  an  evil 
king  despoiled  the  maidens  and  scattered  them,  after 
which  the  service  ceased.  The  elements  of  the  prologue 
stand  apart  from  the  rest  of  the  literature,  like  an 
allegory  in  another  tongue  ;  and  though  it  is  very  curious 
in  itself,  it  connects  with  nothing  which  follows  in  the 
texts  that  it  is  supposed  to  introduce. 

The  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  like  the  metrical  romance 
of  De  Borron,  antecedes  the  period  alike  of  enchantments 

H7 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  quests ;  but  as,  in  its  present  form,  it  is  later  in  fact 
than  the  chronicles  which  it  is  supposed  to  precede,  so,  as 
a  part  of  its  warrants,  it  forestalls  many  of  their  charac- 
teristics by  a  kind  of  spurious  prophecy.  It  tells  how 
the  younger  Joseph,  the  second  keeper  of  the  Graal,  was 
smitten  in  the  thighs  by  an  angel  for  aiding  certain 
people  who  did  not  embrace  Christianity,  and  it  testifies 
that  the  avenging  spear  with  which  the  wounds  were 
inflicted  will  be  heard  of  again  at  the  beginning  of  those 
marvels  that  shall  occur  in  the  land  of  Britain.  In  this 
manner  it  foreshadows  the  particular  Dolorous  Stroke 
of  which  we  have  a  full  account  in  the  Huth  Merlin 
and  all  the  sorrowful  adventures  which  follow  therein. 
These  are  destined  to  continue  for  twenty-two  years, 
corresponding  to  the  twenty-two  days  during  which  the 
head  of  the  Lance  was  embedded  in  the  flesh  of  Joseph. 

The  Vulgate  Merlin  has  nothing  to  say  concerning 
the  enchantments  of  Britain,  except  that  the  prophet's 
skill  and  discretion  were  gifts  vouchsafed  by  God  so 
that  he  might  accomplish  the  adventures  of  the  Seynt 
Graal.  That  it  was  the  rumour  of  the  Sacred  Vessel 
which  inaugurated  the  time  of  adventure  is  clear  from 
this  passage,  as  it  is  also  from  the  Huth  Merlin, 
which  speaks  of  a  prophecy  written  by  the  enchanter 
on  parchment  and  concerned  with  those  marvels  which 
would  characterise  the  Quest,  encompassing  in  fine  the 
destruction  of  the  marvellous  lion — that  is  to  say,  the 
overthrow  of  King  Arthur.  The  implicits  of  this  state- 
ment are  one  crux  of  the  Merlin  cycle.  It  is  also,  as 
I  have  intimated,  to  the  Huth  Merlin  that  we  owe 
our  acquaintance  with  the  beautiful  story  of  Balyn  and 
Balan,  the  two  brethren  born  in  Northumberland,  who 
were  good  knights,  according  to  Malory.  Balyn  was 
destined  to  inflict  the  Dolorous  Stroke,  which  during 
the  allotted  period  of  twenty-two  years  would  cause 
dire  distress  throughout  three  kingdoms,  for  by  this 
stroke  he  would  pierce  the  most  holy  man  in  the  world, 
and  inaugurate  the  marvels  of  the  Graal  in  Great  Britain. 

148 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy    Graal 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Warden  of  the  Sacred 
Vessel  is  here  the  intended  victim,  and  that  the  stroke 
is  actually  given  in  the  Graal  Castle,  with  the  hallowed 
spear  of  the  legend.  Balyn  himself  nearly  loses  his  life 
in  the  cataclysm  which  follows,  and  is  informed  by 
Merlin  that  he  has  deserved  the  hatred  of  the  whole 
world,  the  obvious  reason  being  that  he  has  desecrated 
the  sanctuary.  The  recipient  of  the  wound  is,  however, 
said  to  be  King  Pellehan,  who  is  the  brother  of  King 
Pelles  the  Keeper.  In  any  chronological  tabulation  this 
event  would  most  likely  precede  the  visit  of  Gawain  to 
the  Graal  Castle  and  indubitably  the  first  arrival  of 
Lancelot  therein.  These  occurrences  are  related  in  the 
prose  Lancelot^  but  in  this  romance  the  Keeper  of  the 
Sacred  Vessel  is,  as  I  have  said,  King  Pelles,  and  he  is 
not  wounded.  Pellehan  reappears  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad 
not  only  as  the  Maimed  King,  but  as  he  who  bears  the 
title  of  the  Rich  Fisher,  which  is  reserved  to  the  royalty 
of  the  Graal  wardens.  It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that 
a  certain  confusion  has  arisen,  owing  to  continuous 
editing,  and  it  may  follow  that  there  was  originally  but 
one  King  in  the  Castle,  that  his  name  was  Pelles,  that 
he  was  wounded  by  the  Dolorous  Stroke,  and  was 
destined  to  be  healed  by  Galahad  at  the  term  of  the 
Quest.  As  it  is,  there  is  actually  a  dual  healing — that 
of  the  King  Pellehan  and  that  of  another  personage 
whose  sin  dates  back  to  the  first  times  of  the  legend, 
being  one  of  unprepared  intrusion  into  the  most  secret 
mysteries  of  the  Graal.  In  the  Quest  of  Galahad 
the  confusion  which  I  have  noticed  is  made  greater  by 
the  story  of  Sir  Perceval's  sister  concerning  the  maiming 
of  King  Pelles,  who  found  the  ship  of  Solomon  towards 
the  coast  of  Ireland.  He  entered  therein  and  drew  the 
sword  of  David  about  half-way  from  its  scabbard.  In 
punishment  of  this  rashness  a  spear  smote  him  through 
both  thighs,  and  never  since  might  he  be  healed,  says 
she,  "to  fore  we  come  to  hym."  None  of  this  takes 
place  actually,  but  it  goes  to  show  that  the  original 

149 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

intention  of  the  story  was  the  intention  of  the  Perceval 
quests — namely,  to  wound  the  keeper  of  the  Graal. 
Speaking  otherwise  of  this  great  romance,  the  whole 
process  of  the  Quest  is  lifted  into  a  high  spiritual  region, 
the  implicits  of  which  will  provide  us  at  a  later  stage 
with  one  key  of  the  mystery. 

In  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  it  is  said  that  there 
shall  be  no  rest  in  the  land  till  the  Graai  has  been 
achieved.  But  here  the  horror  of  the  house  was  the 
failure  of  Perceval  to  ask  that  question  the  simplicity  of 
which  is  the  seal  of  the  whole  enigma.  As  a  con- 
sequence, the  shepherd  has  been  smitten  and  the  sheep 
have  been  scattered.  Those  who  ministered  in  the  Castle 
were  sent  out  by  the  general  fatality  beyond  the  sacred 
precincts,  for  no  other  reason  apparently  than  to  act  as 
witnesses  of  the  woe  abroad  before  the  face  of  the  world ; 
and  so,  therefore,  in  place  of  ceremonial  pageants  within, 
there  are  strange  processions  without. 

In  the  German  cycle,  the  adequate  consideration  of 
which  must  be  referred  as  before  to  a  later  stage,  the 
Parsifal  of  Wolfram  sets  a  blot  on  the  scutcheon  by 
showing  that  sin  entered  the  sanctuary,  and  in  this,  as  in 
other  respects,  the  story  is  set  apart  from  all  else  in  the 
general  pageant  of  the  literature.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  poem  of  Heinrich,  though  its  root-matter  is  almost 
out  of  knowledge,  conforms,  as  it  does  usually,  to  the 
more  normal  tradition  in  points  of  detail,  saying  that  the 
doom  of  the  king  was  the  outcome  of  war  between 
brothers.  With  this,  in  other  connections  and  a  far  other 
sense,  we  have  some  analogy  in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval. 

I  believe  that  the  implicits  of  the  Graal  keepers  must 
rank  among  the  most  important  of  those  which  remain 
for  consideration  in  their  place.  While  they  are  con- 
nected more  especially  with  the  headship  in  the  persons 
of  the  successive  Wardens,  there  are  also  subsidiary 
matters  which  will  arise  in  their  proper  order.  Woe  has 
fallen  on  the  Wardens,  though,  speaking  symbolically, 
they  abide  in  the  place  of  life.  Not  only  is  the  here- 

150 


Mysteries  of  the   Holy   Graal 

ditary  custodian  of  the  secrets  that  person  in  most  of  the 
romances  on  whom  comes  the  symbolic  grief,  but  he  is 
dependent  peculiarly  on  help  expected  from  without,  and 
although  his  sustenance  is  within  his  healing  is  beyond 
the  sanctuary.  Even  such  a  sinner  as  Gawain  can  bring 
him  a  partial  consolation.  He  receives  a  nondescript 
savage  like  Perceval,  as  he  is  depicted  in  the  more 
primitive  stories,  within  the  fold  of  election,  for  doing 
something  after  a  clownish  failure  which  any  child  might 
have  been  expected  to  perform  at  once.  All  this  is  so 
out  of  reason  on  the  surface  that  a  meaning  in  conceal- 
ment seems  inevitable.  Its  investigation  is  reserved  of 
necessity,  but  as  something  consistent  with  the  subject 
down  the  first  vistas  of  which  we  are  looking  only,  it 
may  be  said,  as  the  characteristic  of  every  initiation,  that 
the  candidate  does  not  ask  questions  ;  it  is  he  who  is 
catechised  and  must  answer.  One  key  from  one  point  of 
view  might  again  be  the  counsel :  Ask,  and  ye  shall 
receive.  But  the  Graal  quester  is  to  bestow  before  he 
receives.  The  suggestion  seems  that  if  we  are  dealing 
with  a  rite  which  follows  a  certain  procedure,  it  is  one 
which  works  rather  the  reverse  way,  so  far  as  other 
mysteries  are  concerned.  That  rite  has  been  going  on 
for  generations,  inviting  and  accepting  no  candidate, 
for  it  is  perpetuated  by  hereditary  transmission,  though 
its  treasury  has  been  a  heritage  of  woe.  There  is  no 
symbolical  object  in  all  the  literature  of  romance  to 
compare  with  the  secret  guardianship,  whether  the 
keeper  is  wounded  for  his  own,  or  another's,  and  even 
for  our  transgressions ;  whether  also  the  consideration  of 
his  mystery  arises  from  the  texts  themselves  or  from 
suggestions  belonging  thereto  and  admitted  from  a  very 
high  standpoint.  No  one  could  find  the  Castle,  or  come 
into  the  presence  of  the  king,  except  by  a  special  warrant 
and  sometimes  by  a  congenital  election.  The  Castle  was 
hidden  from  the  world,  like  the  analogous  House  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  the  Rosicrucian  Mystery,  and  he  who 
entered  therein  had  somehow  to  awaken  the  oracle.  The 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

hidden  life  of  the  keepers  passed  in  the  Castle,  but  not  in 
the  visionary  rapture  of  those  who  go  into  Avalon  and 
other  isles  of  the  blessed.  Now,  there  are  two  palmary 
mysteries  connected  with  two  divisions  of  the  Chronicles 
of  Quest — one  is  the  silence  of  Perceval  and  the  other  is 
the  conception  of  Galahad.  By  the  way  of  anticipation 
something  more  will  be  said  of  the  first  in  the  next  section. 


X 

THE  SUPPRESSED   WORD  AND    THE 
MYSTIC   QUESTION 

It  is  agreed  that  the  essential  and  predominant  char- 
acteristic of  the  Perceval  literature  is  the  asking  and 
answering  of  a  question  which  bears  on  its  surface  every 
aspect  of  triviality,  but  is  yet  the  pivot  on  which  the 
whole  circle  of  these  romances  may  be  said  to  revolve. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  question  is  absent  from  the 
Galahad  story,  and  in  place  of  it  we  have  a  stately 
pageant  of  chivalry  moving  through  the  world  of  Logres 
to  find  the  high  mystery  of  sanctity.  But  that  finding 
is  destined  only  to  dismember  the  Arthurian  empire  and 
to  pass,  in  fine,  leaving  no  trace  behind  it,  except  the 
sporadic  vision  of  a  rejected  knight,  which  is  mentioned 
but  not  described,  and  occurs  under  circumstances  that 
justify  grave  doubts  as  to  its  existence  in  the  original 
texts. 

Now,  the  entire  critical  literature  of  the  Graal  may  be 
searched  in  vain  for  any  serious  explanation  as  to  the 
actuating  motive,  in  or  out  of  folk-lore,  concerning  the 
Graal  question.  On  the  part  of  the  folk-lore  authorities 
there  have  been  naturally  attempts  to  refer  it  to  some- 
thing antecedent  within  the  scope  of  their  subject,  but 
the  analogies  have  been  no  analogies,  and  as  much  ex- 
travagance has  resulted  as  we  have  yet  heard  of  in  the 
connection  which  some  scholars  have  vaguely  termed 

152 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

mysticism.  The  symbolical  and  sacramental  value  of 
the  Graal  Quest,  outside  all  issues  in  folk-lore,  is  from 
my  standpoint  paramount,  as  it  is  this  indeed  without  any 
reference  to  the  opinions  which  are  founded  in  folk-lore 
or  to  the  speculations  thereout  arising ;  and  the  fact 
remains  that  the  palmary  importance  of  the  mystic 
question  lapses  with  the  pre-eminence  of  the  Perceval 
Quest.  Initiation,  like  folk-lore,  knows  many  offices  of 
silence  but  few  of  asking ;  and  after  many  researches  I 
conclude — or  at  least  tentatively — that  in  this  respect  the 
Graal  romances  stand  practically  alone.  It  is  therefore 
useful  to  know  that  it  is  not  the  highest  term  of  the 
literature. 

In  the  Conte  del  Graal  of  Chretien,  the  law  and 
order  of  the  Quest  is  that  Perceval  shall  ask  the  meaning 
of  those  wonders  which  he  sees  in  the  pageant  at  the 
Castle  of  the  Quest.  The  references  are  many  in  the 
poem,  but  they  are  merely  repetitions.  Perceval  did  not 
ask  (i)  how  such  things  came  to  pass;  (2)  nor  any- 
thing whatsoever;  (3)  he  did  not  dare  to  ask  about  the 
Graal,  qui  on  en  servoit^  because  his  teacher  in  chivalry 
had  cautioned  him  against  idle  curiosity  and  such  imper- 
tinence, for  which  reason  he  reserved  his  speech.  It  is 
understood  that  through  the  oppression  of  the  centuries 
the  keeper  of  the  Holy  Graal  is,  according  to  the  Didot 
Perceval,  in  a  state  of  distress,  longing  for  his  delayed 
release.  Before  he  can  go  in  peace  he  must  pass  on 
the  divine  tradition  of  the  Secret  Words,  but  before 
he  can  so  transmit  them  he  must  be  asked  a  question. 
That  question  is  :  De  quoi  li  Grans  sen.  It  will  per- 
form a  twofold  office,  firstly,  to  heal  the  king,  and, 
secondly,  to  liberate  his  speech.  Perceval  reaches  the 
Castle,  but  notwithstanding  that  the  voice  of  one  who 
was  invisible  had  announced  at  the  Court  of  King 
Arthur,  in  Perceval's  presence  and  in  that  of  all  the 
knights,  both  the  nature  and  effect  of  the  question,  he 
entreats  nothing  for  fear  of  offending  his  host.  Hence 
he  departs  in  disgrace,  and  the  king  remains  unhealed. 

153 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

Within  the  limits  of  the  Gautier  section  of  the  Conte 
del  Graal  there  are  not  less  than  three  versions  of  the 
visit  of  Gawain  to  the  Graal  Castle,  representing  specific 
variations  of  different  manuscripts.  Without  exercising 
any  discrimination  between  them,  but  rather  by  a  har- 
mony of  all,  it  may  be  said  that  he  does  ask  concerning 
the  Lance  and  Graal,  but  as  he  cannot  re-solder  the  sword, 
he  can  learn  nothing  regarding  the  Sacred  Vessel,  or, 
if  there  is  a  sign  of  willingness  on  the  part  of  the 
Keeper,  he  goes  to  sleep  and  so  escapes  the  story.  The 
result  is  that  the  enchantment  is  in  part  only  removed 
from  the  land.  When  the  same  poet  recounts  the  second 
visit  of  Perceval,  the  knight  on  beholding  the  Hallows 
does  not  know  where  to  begin,  but  at  length  prays  that 
he  may  hear  the  whole  truth  concerning  the  Graal,  the 
Sword  and  the  Lance.  The  condition  of  the  answer,  as 
in  the  case  of  Gawain,  is  that  he  shall  re-solder  the 
Sword,  and  we  have  seen  already  that  in  this  task  Per- 
ceval is  successful  partly,  but  the  king's  healing  does  not 
seem  to  be  effected,  though  the  path  thereof  is  open, 
and  the  knight  has  not  yet  achieved  the  Quest.  The 
result  on  external  nature  is  not  stated  by  Manessier. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  it 
is  said  that  the  reticence  of  the  questing  Knight  at 
the  Graal  Castle  caused  such  mischances  in  Greater 
Britain  that  all  the  lands  and  islands  fell  into  sorrow. 
There  appeared  to  be  war  everywhere,  no  knight  meeting 
another  in  the  forest  without  running  on  him  and  slaying 
him,  if  he  could.  The  King  Fisherman  himself  passed 
into  languishment.  The  question  which  ought  to  have 
been  asked  was :  "  Unto  whom  one  serveth  of  the 
Graal."  Many  penances  will  be  ended,  it  is  said,  when 
he  who  visits  the  Graal  Castle  demands  unto  whom  it 
is  served ;  but  this  event  never  comes  to  pass  in  the 
story.  The  desire  to  ask  questions  seems  to  have  been 
rare  therein,  for  Gawain  when  conversing  with  a 
wandering  damsel,  who  was  formerly  the  bearer  of  the 
Graal,  fails  to  inquire  why  she  carries  her  arm  slung 

154 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

on  her  neck  in  a  golden  stole,  or  concerning  the  rich 
pillow  whereon  her  arm  reposes.  He  is  told  that  he 
will  give  no  greater  heed  at  the  court  of  King  Fisher- 
man. The  King  himself  always  dwells  on  the  mis- 
fortune which  overtook  him  through  the  failure  of 
Perceval.  When  Gawain  actually  reaches  the  mystic 
Castle,  he  sees  the  Graal  and  the  Lance,  but  he  is  lost 
in  a  joy  of  contemplation  and  he  utters  no  word. 

It  has  been  said  that  there  is  a  question  in  the 
Romance  of  Galahad,  and  it  might  have  been  added 
that  there  is  one  in  the  prose  Lancelot;  the  second 
illustrates  the  first,  and  we  shall  find  that  they  are  both 
mere  traces  and  survivals,  as  the  prologue  to  the  Conte 
del  Graal  has  the  shadow  of  the  secret  words,  peculiar 
to  the  cycle  of  De  Borron,  when  it  affirms  that  the 
Graal  secret  must  be  never  disclosed.  I  do  not  think 
that,  as  regards  the  later  instance,  I  should  be  justified 
in  assuming  that  he  who  wrote  this  prologue  was  in 
touch  direct  with  the  implicit  of  the  De  Borron  cycle, 
and  1  do  think  alternatively  that  if  people  were  disposed 
to  lay  stress  on  such  remanents  of  the  question  as  I 
am  citing  here,  they  are  likely  to  find  that  it  will  work 
rather  in  a  reverse  direction.  The  fact  remains  that 
Lancelot  saw  the  Graal  in  one  episode  of  the  great 
story  dedicated  to  him,  that  he  asked  the  question  which 
is  so  important  in  some  other  romances,  that  he  asked 
it  quite  naturally — as  who  would  have  failed  to  do  ? 
—that  he  was  answered  also  naturally,  and  that  nothing 
depended  therefrom.  He  cried  in  his  wonder :  "  O 
Jesu !  what  does  this  mean  ? "  He  was  told  :  "  This 
is  the  richest  thing  in  the  world."  In  the  Galahad 
romance,  when  he  beheld,  by  the  Stone  Cross  in  the 
wild,  a  sudden  passage  of  the  Graal  and  the  healing 
of  a  certain  knight,  it  is  hinted  by  some  texts  that  he 
ought  to  have  asked  something,  despite  the  lesson  which 
he  had  in  the  voiding  of  things  previously ;  but  he  was 
so  far  right  on  the  fact  that  his  imputed  omission 
carried  no  consequence. 

155 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

The  hindrance  to  the  question  in  the  Parsifal  is 
the  same  as  we  have  found  in  Chretien ;  at  all  that 
he  saw  the  knight  of  the  Quest  was  agaze  with  wonder ; 
he  thought  also  that  if  he  refrained  from  asking  he 
would  be  told  eventually.  That  which  followed  here- 
from  was  sorrow  to  the  host,  with  continued  suffering, 
and  woe  also  to  the  guest.  For  this  silence  he  is  always 
represented  in  the  romances  as  earning  reproach  and 
contumely  from  persons  outside  the  Castle,  but  in  the 
German  poem  there  is  no  suggestion  of  an  external 
enchantment.  It  is  to  be  noted  further  that  Parsifal 
has  not  received  a  prefatory  warning  regarding  the 
question,  as  he  has  in  the  Didot  Perceval. 

In  Diu  Crbne  by  Heinrich,  when  the  questing  knight 
has  beheld  the  Reliquary  and  the  Spear,  he  does  the 
opposite  exactly,  for  he  can  no  longer  contain  himself, 
and  so  asks  his  host,  for  the  sake  of  God,  to  tell  him 
what  the  marvels  mean  and  who  also  are  the  great 
company  whom  he  beholds.  Even  as  he  speaks,  all 
present  spring  from  their  seats  with  a  loud  cry  and  the 
sound  of  great  rejoicing.  The  host  tells  them  to  sit 
down  again,  and  then  he  explains  to  the  knight  that  he 
has  seen  the  Holy  Vessel  of  which  he  may  say  nothing, 
except  that  joy  and  consolation  supervene  upon  his  saving 
question.  Many  are  liberated  from  the  bondage  which 
they  have  endured  so  long,  having  little  hope  of  acquit- 
tance. There  was  a  time  when  they  trusted  in  Perceval, 
as  in  one  predestined  to  enter  into  the  knowledge  of  the 
Graal,  as  if  through  everlasting  portals,  but  he  fell  away 
like  a  knight  of  no  spirit  who  dared  and  demanded 
nothing.  Had  he  done  otherwise,  he  would  have 
released  many  from  their  toil  who  remain  in  the 
semblance  of  life  and  are  yet  dead.  The  woe  came 
about  through  the  strife  of  kinsmen,  "  when  one  brother 
smote  the  other  for  his  land."  For  this  disloyalty  the 
judgment  of  God  descended  upon  him  and  his  consan- 
guinities, so  that  doom  overtook  them  all.  The  living 
were  expatriated,  and  the  dead,  under  greater  disaster, 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy    Graal 

remained  in  the  shadow  of  life.  To  end  their  woe  it  was 
necessary  that  a  man  of  their  race  should  seek  an  explana- 
tion of  their  sad,  long-enduring  prodigies.  It  does  not 
appear  that  the  Graal  or  the  Spear  have  any  connection 
with  the  Passion  of  Christ,  and  there  is  no  secret 
communicated,  for  the  history  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  is  not 
recounted  ? 

From  the  consideration  of  this  subject  we  may  come 
away  therefore,  confirmed  in  our  reasonable  certainty  that 
the  question  with  which  we  have  been  dealing  is  unlike 
anything  in  literature.  We  shall  see  ultimately  how  it  is 
accounted  for  by  expert  knowledge  of  folk-lore — con- 
nected or  otherwise  with  quests  and  vengeance  missions 
— in  Welsh  or  English  literature. 


XI 
THE  HEALING  OF  THE  KING 

It  came  about,  therefore,  at  the  end  of  the  Quest,  that 
the  Suppressed  Word  was  at  last  spoken,  that  the  ques- 
tion was  asked  and  answered.  There  are  certain  texts 
in  which  the  asking  and  the  answering  are  all  that  was 
required  by  the  hypothesis,  and  then  it  was  well  in  the 
Secret  House  of  the  Wardens.  There  are  other  texts, 
which  connect  more  directly  with  folk-lore,  in  which  the 
king's  healing  depended  upon  a  dual  office,  of  which  the 
first  part  was  the  question  itself,  as  a  kind  of  interlocutory 
discourse,  and  then  upon  a  mission  of  vengeance.  It  was 
fulfilled  in  either  case.  The  head  of  the  Blessed  Bran 
does  not  appear  in  the  symbolism  of  these  branches,  but 
the  head  as  the  sign  of  the  accomplished  sacrifice  is  an 
essential,  in  these  branches,  of  the  Quest  fulfilled,  and 
this  is  the  characteristic  in  chief  of  the  Conte  del  Graal. 
As  a  Rite  of  the  Observance  with  Mercy,  the  question 
and  its  answer  were  held  to  be  all-sufficient  in  the  Lesser 
Chronicles,  because  the  curse  on  the  Keeper  is  like  that 
on  the  Wandering  Jew — it  is  the  ages  continued  hence- 

157 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

forward,  and  he  comes  at  length  to  his  rest.  The 
Greater  Chronicles  offer  another  pageant  of  the  Quest, 
the  particulars  of  which  are  as  follows  :  ( i )  The  Building 
of  the  Ship  of  the  Secret  Faith,  that  at  the  end  of  a 
certain  time  it  might  carry  into  the  far  distance  the  most 
valid  and  efficacious  symbols  of  the  Mystery  of  Faith  ; 
(2)  the  healing  of  a  King  of  the  East  who  is  not 
to  be  confused  with  the  Keeper  himself,  but  he  dates 
ab  initio  symboli  and  is  doubtless  the  witness  in  chief 
of  the  mystery  even  to  the  times  of  the  Quest : 
concerning  him  it  may  be  said  that  he  tried  to  take 
the  mystery  of  faith  by  violence,  outside  which  his 
existence  is  parallel  to  that  of  the  Keeper  Brons,  having 
been  prolonged  through  the  centuries  from  the  first  times 
of  the  legend  ;  (3)  the  redemption  of  the  Cain  of  the 
legend  who  slew  his  brethren ;  (4)  an  intercalatory  and 
voided  wonder  concerning  the  maiming  of  the  Graal 
King  when  he  drew  the  Sword  of  David. 

The  particulars  in  all  branches  may  be  collected  shortly 
as  follows :  In  the  Conte  del  Graal  Gautier  presents  a 
certain  lifting  of  the  heavy  veil  of  enchantment,  so  that 
the  desert  becomes  the  sown,  and  we  are  enabled  to  com- 
pare how  it  was  in  the  dry  tree  with  that  which  it  is 
in  the  green :  Winter  has  passed,  so  to  speak,  and  the 
voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  again  in  the  land.  In 
Manessier,  the  keeper,  who  has  suffered  from  that 
illogical  maiming  occasioned  by  the  death  of  his  brother, 
is  healed  at  the  sight  of  his  head  who  committed  the 
original  act  of  violence.  The  whole  business  is  foolish, 
and  so  unutterably.  It  was  necessary,  for  some  reason 
that  derived  probably  its  roots  from  folk-lore,  for  the 
king  to  be  smitten  in  his  thighs  ;  the  event  comes  to  pass 
under  circumstances  that  are  quite  and  frankly  impossible; 
and  there  is  also  no  reason  why  the  wound  which  was 
self-inflicted  unconsciously  should  not  have  been  healed 
at  once,  unless  death  intervened  as  the  term.  Assuming 
that  Gerbert  knew  nothing  of  Manessier's  conclusion  and 
that  he  regarded  the  last  words  of  Gautier — in  which  the 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Rich  Fisher  hails  Perceval  as  the  Lord  of  his  house — as 
the  term,  in  fine,  of  the  story,  his  own  intercalation  was 
intended  to  account  for  the  closing  along  better  lines, 
and  he  did  not  concern  himself  with  any  explanation 
of  the  King's  wounding.  On  the  contrary,  his  intention 
was  to  show  that  the  proper  demand  and  reply  exercised 
their  proper  office,  and  that  the  one  thing  which  re- 
mained to  complete  the  whole  was  for  Perceval  to  re- 
deem his  past.  The  poem  does  not  offer  a  termination 
which  follows  from  the  text,  while  that  of  Manessier, 
from  any  explanatory  standpoint,  is  so  much  idle  baggage. 
The  Conte  del  Graal,  considered  as  a  Graal  story, 
is  therefore  at  once  imperfect  and  piecemeal.  The 
Didot  Perceval  is  by  no  means  entirely  satisfactory 
as  a  completion  of  De  Borron's  trilogy,  but  as  a 
simple  term  of  a  quest  which  is  exceedingly  simple, 
it  leaves  nothing  undone.  The  Keeper  of  the  Graal, 
as  we  have  seen,  must  communicate  his  mystery  be- 
fore he  departs  hence.  The  mode  of  communication 
presupposes  the  arbitrary  question  which  is  a  pretext  for 
unveiling  the  mysteries,  and  the  issue,  which  is  clear  from 
the  beginning,  is  not  clouded  subsequently  by  extraneous 
matters.  The  king  is  healed — that  is  to  say,  he  is 
relieved  of  the  long  burden  of  the  centuries,  and  he  is 
enabled  to  pass  in  peace.  In  the  Great  Prose  Quest  it 
is  the  hands  of  Galahad  which  are  the  hands  of  healing. 
The  Hallow  of  the  ensanguined  lance  inflicted  the  wound 
from  which  the  unknown  king  Pellehan  suffered  through 
the  whole  period  during  which  the  Quest  was  prepared 
and  achieved.  The  restoration  was  accomplished  by 
Galahad  with  the  blood  from  the  same  weapon  ;  therewith 
he  anointed  the  king.  It  is  after  this  or  another  manner 
that  the  remedial  elements  are  sometimes  in  the  House 
of  the  Graal,  but  they  must  be  administered  by  one  who 
comes  from  external  places.  It  may  be  admitted  that,  at 
least  on  the  surface,  both  wounding  and  healing  in  the 
Galahad  Quest  are  a  burden  to  the  logical  understanding. 
For  what  it  is  worth — which  is  little — in  other  respects, 

159 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

there  is  on  this  point  a  certain  consistence  in  the  Conte 
del  Graal.  At  the  beginning  it  carries  the  implicit  of 
a  vengeance  legend,  and  though  something  is  forgotten 
in  the  antecedence  by  Gautier  and  something  else  by 
Manessier,  as  if  they  had  not  read  fully  their  precursors, 
that  is  explicated  in  fine  which  was  implied  at  first.  The 
Longer  Prose  Perceval  has  a  root-difficulty,  because  there 
is  no  attempt  to  explain  either  why  the  question  was 
necessary,  when  all  was  well  with  the  king,  or  why — 
whether  necessary  or  not — the  failure  of  Perceval  should 
have  caused  the  Keeper  of  the  Holy  Graal  to  fall  into 
such  languishment  that  ultimately  he  died  unhealed.  For 
these  are  the  distinctions,  among  many,  between  the 
High  History  and  all  other  Perceval  Quests — that  it 
begins  at  the  middle  point  of  the  story  and  that  the 
Keeper  perishes.  Among  the  correspondences  in  the 
reverse  order  of  these  differences  is  the  Quest  of  Gawain, 
according  to  Diu  Crone  by  Heinrich,  where  the  king 
indeed  dies  coincidently  with  his  release,  but  this  is  his 
desired  liberation  from  the  condition  of  death  in  life. 
Speaking  generally,  the  death  of  the  wounded  keeper 
is  designed  thoughout  to  make  room  for  his  successor. 
In  the  Didot  Perceval  he  is  released  according  to  his 
yearning,  and  that  almost  at  once ;  in  the  Conte  del 
Graal  Perceval,  far  from  the  Castle,  awaits  the  keeper's 
demise,  which  occurs  in  the  natural  course.  In  the 
Parsifal  of  Wolfram  there  is  a  kind  of  abdication  by 
Amfortas  in  favour  of  the  Questing  Knight,  but  the  two 
abide  together,  and,  as  in  the  Didot  Perceval,  there  is, 
in  fact,  a  trinity  of  keepers.  In  the  Quest  of  Galahad, 
that  glorious  and  saintly  knight  can  be  called  a  keeper 
scarcely ;  if  I  may  be  pardoned  the  expression,  he  and  his 
companions  act  as  the  transport  agents  of  the  Sacred 
Vessel,  so  far  as  the  term  is  concerned,  though  we  may 
still  regard  Galahad  as  the  keeper  in  heaven.  We  are 
not  concerned  with  the  healing  of  King  Pellehan,  because 
he  is  not  the  keeper  of  the  Graal,  as  the  text  stands, 
though  we  feel  that  some  editor  has  blundered.  I  will 

1 60 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

leave  him  therefore  with  the  last  word  which  he  might 
have  addressed  to  Galahad  :  Domine,  non  sum  dignus  ut 
intres  sub  tectum  meum,  sed  tantum  die  verbo  et  sanabitur 
corpus  meum.  I  will  leave  also  at  this  point  the  mystery 
of  the  healing  of  the  king.  For  us  and  for  our  salvation, 
the  quests  of  the  Graal  are  the  exteriorised  zeal  of  the 
hearts  which  desire  the  bread  of  heaven  and  a  visible  sign 
that  it  is  more  than  the  daily  bread.  Such  a  romance 
of  sanctity  they  appear  in  the  story  of  Galahad,  whose 
kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  ;  he  is  crowned  indeed 
at  Sarras,  but  it  is  contrary  to  the  will  of  him  who 
sought  only  to  be  dissolved  and  to  be  with  Christ. 
The  first  term  of  the  other  quests  sometimes  carried 
with  it  a  species  of  kingship,  and,  as  to  these,  it  was 
on  the  king's  healing  that  it  was  said  of  his  successor : 
Long  live  the  King  ! 


XII 
THE  REMOVAL   OF   THE  HALLOWS 

We  have  now  seen  that  the  Rich  Fisherman,  King  and 
Warden  of  the  Graal,  was  healed  as  the  consequence  of 
the  Quest,  or  that,  this  failing,  a  provision  was  made  for 
his  successor  after  some  other  manner.  Now,  this  is 
the  penultimate  stage  of  the  mystery  regarded  as  a  whole, 
and  the  one  question  which  still  remains  to  be  answered 
is — what  became  of  the  Graal  ?  Subject  to  charac- 
teristic variations  which  are  particular  to  each  text,  it 
will  be  found — as  I  have  said — that  the  several  romances 
follow  or  forecast  one  general  process,  suggesting  a  pre- 
vailing secret  intention,  and  it  is  for  this  intention  that  my 
study  will  have  to  account.  At  the  moment  the  external 
answer  to  the  problem  above  propounded,  resting  on  the 
evidence  of  the  documents,  is  an  example  of  variation- — 
which  tends,  however,  to  one  term  ;  this  term  is  that 
either  the  Holy  Graal  and  the  other  Hallows  of  the 
Passion  were  removed  altogether  or  they  were  takenjjinto 

161  L 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

deeper  concealment.  The  specific  testimonies  are  as 
follows.  After  the  death  of  King  Fisher,  Perceval  in- 
herits his  kingdom — in  the  Conte  del  Graal — and  he  reigns 
for  seven  years.  He  appoints  his  successor,  who  does 
not  become  the  Warden  of  the  Hallows,  and  he  passes 
himself  into  the  seclusion  of  a  hermitage,  where  he 
remains  for  ten  years,  having  been  ordained  a  priest.  The 
Graal  follows  him,  and  he  is  at  length  assumed  into  the 
joy  of  Paradise,  since  which  time  the  Sacred  Vessel  and 
the  other  precious  objects  have  never  been  beheld  so 
openly.  As  a  rider  to  this,  it  is  added  that  no  doubt 
they  were  taken  to  heaven,  which  is  an  argument  from 
the  unworthiness  of  the  world.  In  the  Didot  Perceval 
the  Knight  of  the  Quest  and  a  certain  hermit,  who  is  a 
character  of  importance  in  the  Lesser  Chronicles,  become 
the  guardians  of  the  Graal,  and  the  prophet  Merlin  also 
abides  with  them.  Merlin,  in  fine,  goes  away,  seeking  a 
deeper  seclusion,  and  neither  he  nor  the  Graal  are  heard 
of  subsequently.  The  inference  is  that  the  Graal  re- 
mains in  the  asylum  of  the  Holy  House,  under  the 
charge  of  its  wardens.  The  Longer  Prose  Perceval, 
after  a  faithful  picture  of  the  Questing  Knight  in  lone- 
liness and  rapture,  surviving  all  his  kindred,  says  that 
a  secret  voice  commanded  him  to  divide  the  Hallows 
among  a  certain  company  of  hermits,  after  which  a  mystic 
ship  anchors  by  the  Castle,  and  Perceval,  taking  his  leave 
of  all  those  who  still  remained  about  him,  entered  that 
vessel  and  was  carried  far  over  the  sea,  "  nor  never 
thereafter  did  no  earthly  man  know  what  became  of 
him,  nor  doeth  the  history  speak  of  him  more."  In 
the  Great  Prose  Quest  the  most  holy  companions — 
Galahad,  Perceval  and  Bors — are  conveyed  in  the  ship 
mystic  of  Solomon  to  a  place  in  the  East,  named  Sarras ; 
the  Hallows  with  which  they  are  charged  are  the  Sacred 
Vessel  and  the  Lance,  together  with  the  Sword  of  David, 
wherewith  Galahad  is  girded.  For  a  certain  allotted 
period  of  days  that  are  sad,  consecrated  and  strange,  the 
companions  watch  over  the  Hallows  in  the  city  of  Sarras  ; 

162 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  then  the  call  comes  to  Galahad.  "  There  with  he 
kneled  doune  to  fore  the  table,  and  made  his  prayers, 
and  thenne  sodenly  his  soule  departed  to  Jhesu  Crist  and 
a  grete  multitude  of  angels  bare  his  soule  up  to  Heuen, 
that  the  two  felawes  myghte  wel  behold  hit.  Also  the  two 
felawes  sawe  come  from  heven  an  hand,  but  they  sawe  not 
the  body.  And  thenne  hit  cam  ryght  to  the  vessel,  and 
took  it  and  the  spere  and  soo  bare  hit  up  to  heuen. 
Sythen  was  ther  neuer  man  soo  hardy  to  saye  that  he  had 
sene  the  Sancgreal."  In  the  German  cycle,  the  Parsifal 
of  Wolfram  leaves  the  Graal  where  it  was  always  since  its 
first  manifestation,  but  the  Titurel  of  Albrecht  von  Scharf- 
enberg — a  text  which  is  so  late  that  it  is  excluded 
generally  from  the  canon  of  the  literature — narrates  the 
rise  and  growth  of  an  evil  time,  wherein,  for  its  better 
protection,  Parsifal  and  the  chivalry  of  the  Graal,  bear- 
ing the  Blessed  Palladium,  go  forth  from  Mont  Salvatch 
into  the  far  East,  where  is  the  kingdom  of  Prester  John, 
and  there  it  may  remain  to  this  day — most  surely  in 
another  kingdom  which  is  not  of  this  world.  After 
these  high  memorials  it  is  almost  unnecessary  to  speak 
of  the  Quest  in  Heinrich,  at  the  term  of  which  the 
Graal  and  the  ghostly  company  dissolve  before  the  eyes 
of  the  Questing  Knight,  and  thenceforth  the  tongue  of 
man  cannot  show  forth  the  mysteries. 

Seeing  now  that  the  great  sacraments  do  not  pass  away, 
it  must  follow  that  in  the  removal  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
as  it  is  narrated  in  the  texts,  we  are  in  the  presence 
of  another  mystery  of  intention  which  appears  the  most 
obscure  of  all.  The  cloud  that  dwelt  on  the  sanctuary, 
the  inhibition  which  was  on  the  world  without,  the  hurt 
almost  past  healing  which  overtook  the  hereditary  keeper, 
are  ample  evidence  in  themselves  that  evil  had  entered 
into  the  holy  place,  despite  all  the  warrants  which  it  held 
and  all  the  Graces  and  Hallows  which  dwelt  therein. 
With  one  curious  exception,  the  Keeper  was,  in  fine, 
healed ;  the  enchantment  was  also  removed ;  and  the 
achievement  of  the  last  Warden,  at  least  in  some 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

instances,  must  have  been  designed,  after  a  certain 
manner  and  within  a  certain  measure,  to  substitute 
a  greater  glory  for  the  cloud  on  the  secret  sanctuary. 
All  this  notwithstanding,  the  end  of  the  great  quests,  the 
term  of  the  whole  mystery,  was  simply  the  removal 
thereof.  It  occurs  in  each  romance  under  different 
circumstances,  and  it  was  not,  as  we  shall  learn  more  fully, 
always  of  an  absolute  kind.  In  the  Conte  del  Graal  it  is 
said — and  we  have  seen  previously — that  it  was  taken 
away,  possibly  to  heaven  ;  in  the  Didot  Perceval  it  was  seen 
no  more  ;  in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  it  was  distributed, 
so  far  as  we  can  tell,  with  the  other  Hallows,  to  certain 
hermits,  and  it  ceased  simply  to  manifest ;  in  Wolfram 
the  whole  question  is  left  open  in  perpetuity,  for  at  the 
close  of  the  poem  the  keeper  remains  alive ;  in  the 
Titurel  of  Albrecht  von  Scharfenberg  the  Vessel  was  carried 
eastward  into  the  dubious  realm  of  Prester  John,  and 
there  apparently  it  remains  ;  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad  it  is 
assumed  by  Heaven  itself,  and  the  last  keeper  followed  ; 
but,  in  spite  of  this,  the  lost  recension,  as  represented, 
faithfully  or  otherwise,  by  the  Welsh  Quest,  says  that 
though  it  was  not  seen  so  openly,  it  was  seen  once 
by  Sir  Gawain,  the  least  prepared  and  least  warranted  of 
all  the  Graal  seekers,  whose  quest,  moreover,  was  for  the 
most  part  rather  accidental  than  intended. 

Speaking  now  from  the  mystic  standpoint,  the  removal 
of  the  Holy  Graal  has  in  a  certain  sense  the  character- 
istics of  an  obscure  vengeance.  The  destruction  of  the 
external  order  would  appear  to  have  been  decreed.  The 
Graal  is  carried  away  and  its  custodians  are  translated. 
The  removal  certifies  the  withdrawal  of  an  object  which 
we  know,  mystically  speaking,  is  never  taken  away, 
though  it  is  always  hidden  from  the  unworthy.  In 
respect  of  its  imputed  removal,  it  is  taken  thither  where 
it  belongs  ;  it  is  the  same  story  as  that  of  the  Lost  Word 
in  Masonry.  It  is  that  which  in  departing  hence  draws 
after  it  all  that  belongs  thereto.  In  other  words,  it  goes 
before  the  cohort  of  election  as  the  Pillars  of  Fire 

164 


Mysteries  of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  Cloud  before  Israel  in  the  Wilderness.  The  root 
and  essence  of  the  matter  can  be  put  shortly  in  these 
words :  The  Graal  was  not  taken  away,  but  it  went 
to  its  own  place,  which  is  that  of  every  man. 

The  Galahad  Quest  closes  the  canon  of  the  literature. 
Other  romances  have  said  that  the  Sacred  Vessel  was  not 
seen  so  openly,  or  that  it  was  heard  of  no  more,  or  that 
it  had  passed  into  concealment,  and  so  forth  ;  but  this 
crowning  legend  carries  it  into  complete  transcendence, 
amidst  appropriate  ceremonial,  though  otherwise  it  leaves 
the  Arthurian  sacrament  sufficiently  unfinished.  That  is 
to  say,  it  is  still  to  be  communicated  for  the  last  time  to 
the  whole  world  on  the  return  of  Arthur.  The  Graal  is 
in  hiding,  like  Arthur ;  but  the  Graal  is,  like  Arthur,  to 
return.  Meanwhile,  the  chivalry  of  the  world  is  broken, 
and  the  kingdom  is  destroyed.  The  master  of  all  chiv- 
alry has  received  in  his  turn  a  dolorous  stroke  and  is 
removed  through  a  mist  of  enchantment,  under  dubious 
wardens,  to  the  land  of  the  setting  sun,  even  into  an  exile 
of  the  ages.  But  he  also  is  to  be,  in  fine,  healed  and  to 
return,  though  at  what  time  we  know  not,  for  centuries 
pass  as  days,  within  the  certain  knowledge  of  Ogier  the 
Dane.  So  much  as  this  may  perhaps  be  hazarded  on  the 
point  of  time,  namely,  that  the  King's  rendering  shall  be 
when  the  King's  dark  barge,  sailing  westward,  like  the 
lighter  craft  of  Hiawatha,  shall  meet  with  the  Graal, 
which  set  forth  eastward,  since  the  Graal  must  heal  the 
King,  and  these  shall  meet  truly  when  justice  and  mercy 
kiss.  The  Graal  is  not  therefore  lost,  but  gone  before. 

Of  such  are  the  mysteries  of  the  Graal,  considered  in 
their  manifestation  and  considered  also  in  their  removal. 
I  have  passed  through  many  houses  of  initiation  in 
literature,  but  I  know  of  nothing  in  suggestion  and 
allusion  to  compare  with  the  House  of  the  Graal. 


BOOK  III 

THE  EARLY  EPOCHS  OF  THE  QUEST 


THE   ARGUMENT 

I.  THE  ANTECEDENTS  OF  THE  LEGEND  IN  FOLK- 
LORE.— Old  Celtic  prototypes  of  the  Graal  literature — Some 
unconsidered  specifics  of  this  subject — A  position  by  way  of 
alternative — Elements  of  the  whole  argument — The  Cauldron 
of  the  Dagda — The  Cauldron  of  Bendigeid  Vran — Quests 
which  are  not  of  the  Graal — Druidic  Mysteries — After  what 
manner  these  mysteries  and  their  doctrine  dissolved  into  the 
light  of  Christianity — A  catholic  conclusion  regarding  the  claims 
of  Folk-Lore  —  The  matter  which  is  placed  in  our  hands. 
II.  THE  WELSH  PERCEVAL. — Presence  of  early  elements 
in  a  late  form — Value  as  a  non-Graal  Quest — The  root-matter 
of  the  story — Comparison  with  the  Graal  Quests — Analogies 
with  the  Graal  Hallows — The  Vengeance  Legend — Conclusion 
as  to  this  text.  III.  THE  ENGLISH  METRICAL  ROMANCE 
OF  SYR  PERCYVELLE. — The  archaic  elements  of  this  Quest 
and  its  claims  in  comparison  with  those  of  the  Welsh  Peredur 
—The  story  in  outline — Analogies  in  the  Italian  Carduino 
—Conclusion  as  to  this  text  and  generally  as  to  the  Proto- 
Perceval  Quest  before  the  Holy  Graal  arose  on  the  horizon  of 
literature.  IV.  THE  CONTE  DEL  GRAAL  and  in  the  first 
place — (A)  Preliminary  to  the  whole  subject — (5)  Concern- 
ing the  poetic  romance  of  Chretien  de  Troyes — The  state 
of  the  story  as  one  of  transition  from  the  folk-tale  to  the 
true  romance  of  the  Graal — Its  connections  with  the  mystic 
side  of  the  legend — The  silence  of  Perceval — The  exile  and 
sorrows  of  the  Knight — The  speculative  intentions  of  Chretien 

169 


"The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

— (C)  The  continuation  of  Gautier — The  development  of 
PercevaFs  story — The  point  to  which  it  is  taken — The  his- 
torical texts  of  the  Graal  which  intervened  between  Chretien 
and  Gautier — The  unfinished  duest  in  Gautier — (Z))  The  con- 
clusion according  to  Manessier — Intervention  of  the  Vengeance 
Legend — Elements  of  Graal  history  in  this  conclusion,  and 
inferences  therefrom — The  ordination  of  Perceval  as  a  specific 
departure  from  tradition — The  assumption  of  the  Hallows — 
(£)  The  alternative  conclusion  ofGerbert — The  dual  failure  of 
Perceval — His  penitence  and  expiation — The  conventional  in- 
tention of  his  marriage — His  later  and  higher  intention — An 
adornment  of  a  spiritual  marriage — The  Knight  of  the  Swan — 
An  analogy  with  Alain  le  Gros — The  process  of  departure  from 
Folk-lore  in  the  Conte  del  Graal — Absence  of  the  Vengeance 
Legend  in  Gerbert — Further  consideration  of  the  Prologue  to  the 
whole  story — (F)  In  which  Sir  Gawain  is  considered  briefly 
as  a  Companion  of  the  Holy  Quest — Modern  speculations 
and  inferences  as  to  the  primary  claim  of  this  hero — The 
light  upon  these  which  can  be  gathered  from  the  poem  of 
Heinrich — The  judgment  of  the  prose  Lancelot  and  the 
duest  of  Galahad — Sir  Gawain  in  the  story  of  Chretien — 
The  burden  of  this  duest  in  Gautier — His  recognition  that 
the  courtly  Knight  was  predestined  at  least  to  some  measure 
of  success — How  the  false  experiment  is  not  repeated  by 
Manessier  or  Gerbert — An  Advance  Note  on  Gawain  in  the 
Parsifal  of  Wolfram — The  Knight  of  Courtesy  in  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval. 


170 


BOOK    III 

THE  EARLY  EPOCHS  OF  THE  QUEST 

I 

THE  ANTECEDENTS   OF   THE  LEGEND   IN 
FOLK-LORE 

THE  beginnings  of  literature  are  like  the  beginnings  of 
life — questions  of  antecedents  which  are  past  finding 
out,  and  perhaps  they  do  not  signify  vitally  on  either 
side,  because  the  keys  of  all  mysteries  are  to  be  sought 
in  the  comprehension  of  their  term  rather  than  in  their 
initial  stages.  Modern  scholarship  lays  great  and  almost 
exclusive  stress  on  the  old  Celtic  antecedents  of  the 
Graal  literature,  and  on  certain  Welsh  and  other  proto- 
types of  the  Perceval  Quest  in  which  the  Sacred  Vessel 
does  not  appear  at  all.  As  regards  these  affiliations, 
whether  Welsh,  English  or  Irish,  I  do  not  think  that 
sufficient  allowance  has  been  made  for  the  following 
facts  :  (a}  That  every  archaic  fiction  and  every  legend 
depends,  as  already  suggested,  from  prior  legend  and 
fiction  ;  (£)  that  the  antecedents  are  both  explicit  and 
implicit,  intentional  or  unconscious,  just  as  in  these  days 
we  have  wilful  and  undesigned  imitation ;  (c)  that  the 
persistence  of  legends  is  by  the  way  of  their  transfigura- 
tion. We  have  done  nothing  to  explain  the  ascension 
of  the  Graal  to  heaven  and  the  assumption  of  Galahad 
when  we  have  ascertained  that  some  centuries  before 
there  were  myths  about  the  Cauldron  of  Ceridwen  or 
that  of  the  Dagda,  any  more  than  we  have  accounted 
for  Christianity  if  we  have  ascertained,  and  this  even 

171 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

indubitably,  that  some  ecclesiastical  ceremonial  is  an 
adaptation  of  pre-Christian  rites.  Here,  as  in  so  many 
other  instances,  the  essence  of  everything  resides  in  the 
intention.  If  I  possess  the  true  apostolical  succession, 
then,  ex  hypothesi  at  least,  I  do  not  the  less  consecrate 
the  Eucharist  if  I  use  the  Latin  rite,  which  expresses 
the  words  of  institution  in  the  past  tense ;  or  some 
archaic  oriental  rite,  by  which  they  are  expressed  in  the 
future,  and  to  which  there  is  added  at  some  point  the 
Epiclesis  clause,  being  the  invocation  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

There  is,  in  -any  case,  no  question  as  to  the  Graal 
antecedents  in  folk-lore,  and  I  should  be  the  last  to 
minimise  their  importance  after  their  own  kind,  just 
as  I  should  not  abandon  the  official  Church  because  I 
had  been  received  into  the  greater  Church  which  is 
within.  I  believe  personally  that  the  importance  has 
been  magnified  unduly  because  it  has  been  taken  by 
scholarship  for  the  all  in  all  of  its  research.  But  there 
is  plenty  of  room  for  every  one  of  the  interests,  and  as 
that  which  I  represent  does  not  interfere  with  anything 
which  has  become  so  far  vested,  I  ask  for  tolerance 
regarding  it.  My  position  is  that  the  old  myths  were 
taken  over  for  the  purposes  of  Christian  symbolism, 
under  the  influence  of  a  particular  but  not  an  expressed 
motive,  and  it  was  subsequently  to  this  appropriation 
that  they  assumed  importance.  It  is,  therefore,  as  I 
have  said,  simply  to  clear  the  issues  that  I  place  those 
of  my  readers  who  may  feel  concerned  with  the  subject 
in  possession  of  the  bare  elements  which  were  carried 
from  pre-Christian  times  into  the  Graal  mythos,  as 
follows : — 

i.  We  hear  of  an  Irish  legend  concerning  the 
Cauldron  of  the  Dagda,  from  which  no  company  ever 
went  away  unsatisfied.  It  was  one  of  the  four  talismans 
which  a  certain  godlike  race  brought  with  them  when 
they  first  came  into  Ireland.  As  the  particular  talisman 
in  question,  though  magical,  was  not  spiritual,  it  is 
useless  to  our  purpose  ;  but  it  connects  with  the  palmary 

172 


The  Early   Epochs  of  the  Quest 

Hallow  of  the  Graal  mystery,  because  that  also  is  reputed 
to  have  been  food-giving,  though  this  property  was  the 
least  of  its  great  virtues,  just  as  the  stone  of  transmutation 
by  alchemy  was  classed  among  the  least  possessions  of 
the  Rosicrucian  Fraternity. 

2.  There  is  the  Cauldron  of  Bendigeid  Vran,  the  son 
of  Llyr,  in  one  of  the  old  Welsh  Mabinogion,  the  property 
of  which,  says  one  story,  is  that  if  a  man  be  slain  to-day 
and  cast  therein,  to-morrow  he  will  be  as  well  as  he  ever 
was  at  the  best,  except  that  he  will  not  regain  his 
speech.  He  remains,  therefore,  in  the  condition  of 
Perceval  when  that  hero  of  the  Graal  stood  in  the 
presence  of  the  mystery  with  a  spell  of  silence  upon 
him.  It  follows  that  the  Druidic  Mysteries,  as  we  find 
them  in  Welsh  legend,  are  like  other  initiations  :  the 
candidate  is  passed  through  the  experience  of  a  mystical 
death  and  is  brought  back,  as,  for  example,  by  the 
Cauldron  of  Ceridwen,  to  a  new  term  of  existence  ;  but 
although  in  this  sense  the  dead  are  raised,  they  are  not, 
or  at  least  in  this  case,  restored  with  the  gift  of  tongues — 
life,  but  no  word  of  life.  In  other  language,  the  silence  of 
the  great  pledges  is  henceforth  imposed  upon  them.  The 
dead  rise  up,  but  they,do  not  begin  to  speak.  Except 
in  so  far  as  the  Cup* of  the  Graal  legend  concerns 
a  mystery  of  speech  and  its  suppression,  it  is  difficult 
to  trace  its  correspondence  with  this  cauldron,  which  I 
should  mention,  however,  came  into  Wales  from  Ireland. 
If  these  things  can  be  considered  as  so  much  raw  material 
out  of  which  the  Graal  legend  in  fine  issued,  the  fact 
extends  rather  than  reduces  the  transformation  which 
so  operated  that  the  Holy  Vessel  of  Christian  symbolism 
was  brought  forth  from  a  Druidic  cauldron,  which  is 
sometimes  that  of  Ceridwen  and  sometimes  of  Bendigeid, 
being  at  once  the  fountain  of  Bardic  inspiration  and  the 
provider  of  a  feast  of  good  things.  In  this  connection  we 
may  remember  further  that  the  chief  mystic  hero  of  Wales 
was  not  so  much  King  Arthur  as  Cadwaladr  Fendigeid. 
Paulin  Paris  was  the  first  who  attempted  to  identify  this 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

chieftain  with  Galahad,  but  one  essential  distinction  is 
that  in  the  Welsh  myth  Cadwaladr  is  destined  to  return, 
whereas  in  the  romance  Galahad  comes  no  more. 

It  so  happens  that  institutions  of  analogy  are  made 
occasionally  by  scholarship  on  warrants  which  they  would 
be  the  first  to  repudiate  if  the  object,  let  us  say,  were 
to  establish  some  point  advanced  by  a  mystic.  I  do  not 
reject  them  exactly,  and  I  do  not  intend  to  use  similar 
comparisons  on  evidence  which  appears  so  slight ;  but  I 
must  place  on  record  that  the  derivations  here  mentioned, 
if  true,  are  unimportant,  even  as  it  is  also  unimportant 
that  Adam,  who  received  the  breath  of  life  from  the 
Divine  Spirit,  had  elements  of  red  earth  which  entered 
into  his  material  composition.  The  lights  which  shine 
upon  the  altar  are  not  less  sacramental  lights  because 
they  are  also  earthly  wax  ;  and  though  the  externals  are 
bread  and  wine,  the  Eucharist  is  still  the  Eucharist. 

In  addition  to  analogies  like  those  which  I  have  just 
cited,  there  are  two  versions  of  the  quest  or  mission  of 
Perceval  into  which  the  mystery  of  the  Graal  does  not 
enter  as  a  part.  In  their  extant  forms  they  are  much 
later  than  any  of  the  Graal  literature  in  Northern  French. 
One  is  the  story  of  Peredur,  the  son  of  Evrawc,  in  the 
Welsh  Mabinogion^  and  the  other  is  the  English  metrical 
romance  of  Syr  Percy ve lie.  Scholars  have  compared  both 
to  the  Lay  of  the  Great  Fool,  and  I  think  that  the  analogy 
obtains  not  only  in  the  Welsh  and  English  fables,  but  even 
in  such  masterpieces  of  nature-born  poetry  as  the  work  of 
Chretien  de  Troyes.  On  the  other  hand,  the  English 
poem  is  a  thing  of  no  importance  except  in  respect  of 
its  connections,  its  perfect  form  as  a  narrative,  and  its 
high  literary  value.  These  claims  notwithstanding,  it 
will  be  sufficient  to  say  that  even  scholarship  values  it 
chiefly  for  its  doubtful  traces  of  some  early  prototype 
which  is  lost. 

The  scholarship  of  Dr.  Evans  is  thought  to  account  for 
certain  opinions  which  he  holds  regarding  the  high  im- 
portance of  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval,  but  he  is  correct 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the   Quest 

at  least  in  his  instinct  by  the  consequence  of  its  com- 
parison with  other  quests  outside  the  Parsifal  of  Wolfram 
and  the  Quest  of  Galahad.  The  Welsh  Mabinogi  is  like 
the  wild  world  before  the  institution  of  the  sacraments, 
and  from  any  literary  standpoint  we  shall  see  that  it  is 
confused  and  disconcerting  ;  the  poem  of  Chretien  is  like 
the  natural  world  with  its  interdict  just  beginning  to  be 
removed ;  it  is  also  like  the  blind  man  in  part  restored 
to  sight,  seeing  all  things  inverted  and  devoid  of  their 
normal  proportions.  The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  occupies 
a  middle  position  between  the  Great  Quest  and  Wolfram  ; 
the  enchantment  of  Britain — as  if  Logres  were  this  visible 
Nature — has  dissolved  partly ;  Grace  is  moving  through 
Nature  ;  the  Great  Mystery  is  being  declared  and  testified 
to  everywhere.  In  the  Parsifal  the  things  which  are 
without  have  suffered  a  certain  renewal,  and  yet  the 
German  epic  is  not  the  nearest  correspondence  and 
equivalent  of  the  Galahad  Quest. 

It  follows  from  these  considerations,  so  far  as  they 
have  now  proceeded,  that  the  folk-lore  antecedents  of 
the  Graal  are  Celtic  ;  but  I  should  mention  that  it  has 
not  been  determined  finally  by  scholarship  whether  we 
should  look  to  Wales  through  Norman-French  poets  or 
to  Armorica  through  poets  of  Northern  France  for  the 
primordial  matter  of  romance  in  respect  of  the  literature. 
Such  a  question,  except  as  a  preliminary  gleaning  leading 
up  to  another  concern,  is  a  little  outside  our  horizon, 
but  the  concensus  of  opinion  in  England  and  France 
favours  the  first  alternative.  To  direct  our  attention 
thither  is  by  no  means  to  set  for  our  consideration  a 
clear  vista  or  to  open  an  easy  pathway.  It  happens, 
unfortunately,  that  as  regards  Wales  there  is  as  yet  no 
certain  canon  of  criticism  to  distinguish  the  genuine 
memorials  of  archaic  literature  from  the  vast  mass  of 
false  seeming  which  wears  only  the  vestures  and  mask 
of  antiquity.  It  is  now  many  years  since  M.  Villemarque, 
the  Breton,  illustrated  what  it  was  possible  to  do  in  the 
production  and  extension  of  Armorican  remains,  and  in 

175 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  Principality  there  have  been  more  than  one  Ville- 
marque — -fabulatores  famosi — whose  results  obtained,  if 
they  have  not  been  calculated  to  deceive  even  the  elect, 
have  at  least  made  the  specialist  wary,  sometimes  about 
rejecting,  but  always  of  accepting  anything  in  the  definite 
and  absolute  degree.  Having  regard  to  my  own  limita- 
tions as  one  who  has  observed  the  strife  scarcely,  much 
less  shared  therein,  I  seek  only  to  note  a  single  question 
of  parallel.  The  antecedents  of  folk-lore  passed  into 
the  literature  of  the  Graal  undergoing  great  transmuta- 
tions, and  so  also  did  certain  elements  of  old  Druidism 
merge  into  Christianity  ;  Rite  and  Myth  and  Doctrine 
were  tinged  by  Tradition  and  Doctrine  and  Rite ;  for 
things  which  co-exist  tend  to  dovetail,  at  least  by  their 
outer  edges ;  and  there  are  traces,  I  think,  of  a  time 
when  the  priest  who  said  mass  at  the  altar  was  not  only 
a  Druid  at  heart,  but  in  his  heart  saw  no  reason  also  for 
the  Druid  to  be  priest  any  less.  Long  after  the  conver- 
sion of  the  Celt,  enigmatical  fables  and  mystical  Rites 
lingered  in  Gaul  and  Britain,  and  if  one  could  say  that 
the  Cauldron  of  Ceridwen  was  a  vessel  of  pagan  doctrine, 
then  in  an  equal  symbolical  sense  it  became  a  vessel  of 
hotch-potch  under  the  strange  asgis  of  the  Celtic  Church. 
There  were  masters  of  mysteries  and  secret  scienct,  whose 
knowledge,  it  is  claimed,  was  perpetuated  under  the 
shadow  of  that  Church  and  even  within  the  pale  thereof. 
The  Bardic  Sanctuary,  by  the  evidence  of  some  who 
claimed  to  speak  in  its  name,  opposed  no  precious 
concealed  mysteries,  and  perhaps  on  its  own  part  the 
Church  received  into  its  alembic  much  that  was  not  of 
its  matter  expecting  to  convert  it  therein  and  turn  it 
out  in  a  new  form.  In  the  fourth  century  there  were 
professors  at  Bordeaux  who  had  once  at  least  been 
Druids,  and  for  the  doctrines  of  their  later  reception 
the  heart  of  their  old  experience  may  have  been  also 
an  alembic.  St.  Beuno  in  his  last  moments  is  recorded 
to  have  exclaimed:  "I  see  the  Trinity  and  Peter  and 
Paul,  and  the  Druids  and  the  Saints  !  " — a  choir  invisible, 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the   Quest 

the  recognition  of  which  would,  if  known,  have  imperilled 
his  canonisation,  supposing  that  its  process  had  been 
planned  in  Rome.  At  a  much  later  period,  even  in  the 
twelfth  century,  we  have  still  the  indication  of  perpetuated 
mysteries,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  belief  in  these 
was  promoted  generally  by  the  bards.  The  twelfth 
century  saw  also  the  beginning  of  a  great  revival  of 
literature  in  Wales.  There  are  certain  lolo  manuscripts 
which  are  late  and  of  doubtful  authenticity,  but  accepting 
their  evidence  under  all  necessary  reserves,  they  refer  the 
revival  in  question  to  Rhys  ap  Twdur,  who  assumed  the 
sovereignty  of  South  Wales,  bringing  with  him  "  the 
system  of  the  Round  Table,  as  it  is  with  regard  to 
minstrels  and  bards."  And  when  the  time  came  for 
the  last  struggle  between  the  Celtic  and  Latin  Rites 
for  the  independence  of  the  British  Church,  I  can  well 
believe  that  all  which  remained,  under  all  transformations, 
of  that  old  mixed  wisdom  of  the  West  was  also  fighting 
for  its  life.  When  pseudo-Taliesin  prophesied  the  return 
of  Cadwaladr,  who  had  passed  into  the  unmanifest,  like 
Arthur,  and,  like  Arthur,  was  destined  to  return,  I  believe 
also  that  this  allegory  of  rebirth  or  resurrection,  if  it 
referred  on  one  side  to  the  aspirations  of  the  Celtic 
Church,  did  not  less  embody  on  another  the  desired 
notion  of  a  second  spring  for  the  mysteries  which  once 
dwelt  in  Wales,  which  even  after  many  centuries  were 
interned  rather  than  dead. 

We  can  imagine — though  perhaps  at  a  far  distance — 
what  kinds  of  medley  resulted  from  such  interpenetra- 
tion  of  mysteries  as  I  have  here  indicated :  the  sacrifice 
of  human  victims  in  the  ceremonial  rites,  on  the  one  side  ; 
the  eternal  sacrifice  of  the  Victim  who  was  divine  and 
human,  on  the  other ;  the  renovation  of  the  candidate  as 
the  term  of  symbolical  ritual,  and  the  Resurrection  of 
Christ  as  the  first-fruits  of  the  redeemed  in  the  signal 
degree.  With  these  as  the  analogies  of  opposites,  there 
were  meeting-points  and  enough  in  the  Lesser  Mysteries, 
while  encircling  all  as  an  atmosphere  there  were,  on  the 

177  M 


The   Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy    Graal 

one  hand,  the  presages,  the  signs,  the  omens,  the  vati- 
cinations, the  inspirations,  dark  and  strange,  of  seers  and 
bards ;  but,  on  the  other,  there  were  the  great  consecra- 
tions, the  holy  objects,  the  sacred  traditions,  the  inspired 
writings  and  all  the  annals  of  sanctity.  In  fine,  against 
the  solemn  pageants  of  pagan  ceremonial  performances 
there  was  the  Great  Mystery  of  the  faith  of  Christ,  the 
white  sacrifice  and  the  clean  oblation  of  the  Eucharist. 
I  confess  that  if  there  were  otherwise  any  evidence,  I 
can  imagine  that  secret  words,  exceeding  ex  hypothesi  all 
words  of  institution  in  the  Ordinary  of  the  official  Mass- 
Book,  and  strange  claims  of  a  priesthood  which  had 
never  been  seen  at  Rome,  might  well  issue  from  so 
enigmatic  and  dubious  a  sanctuary. 

From  all  this  matter  of  fact,  matter  of  speculation 
and  high  matter  of  dream,  we  can  infer  that  wherever 
the  cradle  may  be  of  the  true  legend  of  the  Graal — 
Gaul,  Armorica,  or  Wales,  but  the  last  as  a  probability 
apart — there  was  at  work,  less  or  more  everywhere  in 
the  Celtic  world,  what  I  have  called  the  alembic  of 
transmutation.  I  care  not  what  went  therein — Cauldron 
of  Ceridwen,  Cauldron  of  the  Dagda,  head  of  Bran  and 
poisoned  spear  which  smote  him,  Lay  of  the  Great  Fool, 
Expulsion  and  Return  Formula,  Visitations  of  the  Under- 
world, and  so  forward  for  ever  and  ever — but  that  which 
came  out  was  the  Mystery  of  Faith  manifested  after  a 
new  manner,  and  the  search  for  that  sanctuary  wherein, 
among  all  waste  places  of  the  world,  the  evidence  of 
things  unseen  became  palpable  to  the  exalted  senses  of 
the  great  Quest.  Little  and  less  than  little  it  matters 
how  that  began  which  ends  at  this  high  point,  and  for 
us,  therefore,  who  "  needs  must  love  the  highest  when 
we  see  it,"  we  can  only  bless  the  beginning  which 
brought  the  term  we  find;  but  its  work  is  done,  and  it 
is  not  a  concern  of  ours. 

In  our  childhood  we  passed  through  the  realm  of  fables 
from  Bidpai  to  Lafontaine,  but  these  were  not  everlasting 
dwellings.  In  our  youth  there  may  still  have  been  some 


The  Early  Epochs   of  the   Quest 

of  us  who  looked  to  see  great  lights  in  UOrigine  de  tons 
les  Cultes  and  in  The  Ruins  of  Empires,  but  again  there  was 
no  abiding  place.  At  this  day  it  seems  weariness,  as  it 
is  indeed  idleness,  to  go  back  to  the  solar  mythologies, 
or  otherwise  than  with  great  caution  to  folk-lore,  when 
in  far  different  flights  we  have  touched  the  hem  of  His 
garment.  I  do  not  propose  to  include  the  study  of  folk- 
lore in  the  same  category  as  the  imaginings  of  Dupuis, 
Volney  and  Godfrey  Higgins ;  but  unless  we  can  pre- 
suppose a  certain  enlightenment,  it  proves  a  morass 
sometimes  rather  than  a  pathway.  However  this  may 
be  regarded,  in  establishing  a  new  scheme  of  interpre- 
tation, it  is  perhaps  necessary  rather  than  desirable  that 
a  beginning  should  be  made  by  doing  justice  to  old 
schemes,  the  office  of  which  is  at  once  recognised  and 
reduced  by  the  entrance  of  an  overlord  into  his  proper 
patrimony.  I  wish,  therefore,  to  say  that  the  appeal  of 
scholarship  to  the  derivation  of  the  legends  from  folk- 
lore and  the  anxious  collection  of  fresh  data  from  this 
source  have  acted  in  the  past  upon  several  groups  of 
students  like  the  head  of  Braid's  lancet-case  on  his 
hypnotic  subjects.  They  are  pretexts  which  have 
entranced  them.  There  was  never  an  occasion  in 
which  folk-lore  was  more  important  at  the  beginning 
and  mattered  in  finality  so  little  ;  it  is  a  land  of  en- 
chantment, withal  somewhat  dreary,  and  through  it 
the  unspelling  quest  passes  laboriously  to  its  term. 

An  old  metaphorical  maxim  of  one  of  the  secret 
sciences  once  said  :  "  The  stone  becomes  a  plant,  the 
plant  an  animal,  and  the  animal  a  man "  ;  but  it  did 
not  counsel  its  students  to  consult  the  stone  that  it 
might  better  understand  a  man,  though  the  stone  re- 
mains a  proper  subject  of  investigation  within  its  own 
limit.  I  leave  it  to  readers  who  are  after  my  own  heart 
and  within  the  classes  of  my  proper  school  to  apply  this 
little  parable  to  the  question  which  is  here  at  issue  in 
respect  of  the  Graal  in  folk-lore.  It  remains  to  be  said 
that  one  field  of  Celtic  research  has  been  so  far  neglected 

179 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

by  scholarship,  and  it  is  that  precisely  which  throws  light 
on  the  Christian  aspects  of  the  Graal  legend  apart  from 
the  aspects  of  old  non-Christian  myth.  If  there  are 
analogies  in  the  root-matter  between  the  Hallows  of  Cup 
and  Lance  and  folk-lore  talismans,  there  are  others  which 
are  far  more  intimate  between  the  lesser  matters  of  the 
literature  and  Celtic  Christian  hagiology.  But  this  is  a 
point  which  I  note  only,  because  it  belongs  to  the  close 
rather  than  the  beginning  of  our  research.  It  seems 
a  commonplace  to  add  at  the  moment  that  particular 
Christian  tradition  has  for  its  environment  the  general 
traditions  of  Christianity,  and,  for  explanatory  purposes, 
that  may  be  best  which  lies  the  nearest  to  hand,  but  at 
least  it  enters  reasonably  into  the  full  consideration  of 
the  whole  subject. 

Apart  from  the  fixed  purpose  in  the  direction  which 
I  have  specified — that  purpose  which  having  exhausted, 
and  this  too  easily,  the  available  fields  of  evidence,  begins 
to  imagine  new — apart  from  the  thousand  and  one  things 
which,  by  the  hypothesis,  would  be  referable  to  folk-lore 
if  the  wreckage  of  that  world  had  not  been  disintegrated 
so  thoroughly  by  the  mills  of  the  centuries,  the  ante- 
cedents of  the  Graal  legend  in  folk-lore  have  been  a  wide 
field  for  patient  research,  nor  is  that  field  exhausted  ; 
it  has  also  offered  an  opportunity  for  great  speculations 
which  go  to  show  that  the  worlds  of  enchantment  are 
not  worlds  which  have  passed  like  the  Edomite  kings;  but 
as  I  know  that  there  was  a  king  afterwards  in  Israel,  I 
have  concluded  at  this  point  to  abandon  those  quests 
which  for  myself  and  those  whom  I  represent  are  with- 
out term  or  effect,  and  to  hold  only  to  the  matter  in 
hand,  which  is  the  development  of  a  sacramental  and 
mystical  cosmos  in  literature  out  of  the  strange  elements 
which  strove  one  with  another,  as  in  the  time  of  chaos 
so  also  in  pre-Christian  Celtic  folk-lore. 


1 80 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 
II 

THE   WELSH  PERCEVAL 

This  is  one  of  the  two  texts  which  have  been  held  to 
offer  independent  traces  of  a  pre-Christian  and  pre-Graal 
period  of  the  Quest,  but  in  their  present  state  they  are 
among  the  latest  documents  of  the  literature.  It  is 
perhaps  more  difficult  to  speak  of  the  Mabinogi  con- 
cerning Peredur,  the  Son  of  Evrawc,  than  of  anything  in 
the  Graal  literature ;  its  elements  are  simple,  its  dimen- 
sions small,  but  its  difficulties  seem  almost  insuperable. 
The  Red  Book  of  Hergest^  of  which  it  forms  one  of  the 
stories,  is  found  in  a  Welsh  manuscript  which  belongs 
probably  to  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century,  but  the 
contents  of  the  collection  are  held  to  have  existed  in 
a  much  earlier  form,  and  this  is  now  unknown.  The 
voice  of  criticism  concerning  the  Peredur  has  become 
less  assured  of  late  years,  but  in  matter  and  manner 
the  story  exhibits  some  elements  which,  even  to  the 
unversed  mind,  might  suggest  its  correspondence  in 
essentials  with  the  claim  which  is  made  concerning  it — 
or  that  it  is  among  the  oldest  of  the  quests.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  is  little  to  support  the  unimaginative  and 
frigid  criticism  which,  because  the  plot  turns  on  a  con- 
ventional and  not  very  purposeful  vendetta,  terms  the 
narrative  logical  and  straightforward.  I  have  intimated 
already  that  it  is  really  confused  and  disconcerting.  It 
is,  indeed,  the  idlest  of  all  stories,  and  it  leaves  several 
of  its  episodes  unfinished.  We  can  accept,  however,  the 
alternative  construction  which  criticism  has  placed  upon 
the  document ;  it  may  be  either  an  intermediate  between 
folk-lore  and  Graal  literature,  or  otherwise  a  chaotic  re- 
flection from  French  sources.  Probably  it  is  a  combina- 
tion of  both.  The  question  is  very  interesting  from  some 
points  of  view,  but  hereto  it  matters  little.  The  Mabinogi 
contains  in  any  case  the  root-matter  of  the  Perceval 

181 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

legend,  and  it  includes,  therefore,  some  part  of  those 
elements  which  were  taken  over  by  the  Graal  literature 
and  were  perpetuated  through  all  the  Graal-Perceval 
quests,  though  some  part  was  abandoned  when  that  quest 
was  carried  into  transcension.  For  example,  the  personal 
history  of  the  hero  has  certain  uniform  elements  which 
persist  throughout ;  the  Peredur  is,  moreover,  a  pure 
vengeance  legend,  which  characteristic  prevails  in  the 
Conte  del  Graal,  but  has  been  eliminated  from  the 
Longer  Prose  Perceval.  I  should  add  that  the  Didot 
Perceval  stands  apart  from  the  other  texts  not  only 
by  the  absence  of  any  vengeance  motive,  but  by  the 
fact  that  its  early  history  of  the  hero  must  be  held  to 
differ  in  totality. 

Whether  regarded  as  a  sacrament  or  a  talisman,  it  is 
understood  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  Welsh  Perceval 
which  answers  to  the  Holy  Graal,  but  it  enters  into  the 
category  of  the  literature  for  three  palmary  reasons  :  ( i ) 
Because  it  embodies  the  idea  of  a  quest ;  (2)  because 
this  quest  is  connected  with  asking  a  conventional 
question  concerning  certain  talismans;  (3)  because  these 
talismans  are  in  the  house  of  a  king  or  lord  who  is 
maimed  and  whose  healing  would  have  resulted  from  the 
question.  Outside  these  specific  correspondences,  it  is 
obvious  that  Peredur  of  Wales  is  the  Perceval  le  Gallois 
of  the  Conte  del  Graal  and  the  other  Graal  romances, 
while,  all  variations  notwithstanding,  the  history  of  the 
one,  in  a  broad  sense,  is  also  the  history  of  the  other. 
Some  important  details  on  these  several  points  may 
be  scheduled  as  follows:  (i)  The  motive  of  the  Quest 
does  not  enter  into  the  story  until  nearly  its  very  end  ; 
(2)  the  question  is  never  asked  ;  (3)  there  is  no  record 
that  the  king  is  ever  healed ;  (4)  the  one  accredited 
talisman  of  the  whole  story  does  not  figure  as  that 
weapon  which  caused  the  maiming  of  the  story. 

It  should  be  noted,  however,  with  due  consideration 
for  what  has  been  said  to  the  contrary  by  criticism, 
that  shadows  of  the  characteristic  Graal  Hallows  are  to 

182 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the   Quest 

be  found  in  the  story,  but  they  serve  no  real  purpose 
therein.  (a)  THE  CUP  :  there  are,  in  fact,  two  cups, 
both  filled  with  wine  and  presented  with  their  contents 
to  Perceval,  on  condition  that  he  fights  with  their 
bearers.  (£)  THE  BOWL,  also  filled  with  wine,  and  this 
passes  on  similar  conditions.  Perceval  slays  the  bearers, 
and  we  shall  see  that  he  is  afterwards  entertained  by 
an  Empress  for  fourteen  years.  This  incident  has  no 
analogy  with  anything  in  the  other  documents,  (c)  THE 
STONE,  which  is  guarded  by  a  serpent  and  is  carried  on 
the  tail  of  the  reptile.  The  virtue  of  this  stone  is  that 
whosoever  possesses  it  and  holds  it  in  one  hand  may  have 
in  the  other  as  much  gold  as  he  desires.  The  analogy 
is  therefore  rather  with  the  purse  of  Fortunatus  than 
with  a  Feast  of  Good  Things,  but  incidentally  it  recalls 
the  latter,  (d)  THE  SPEAR  :  this  is  of  mighty  size, 
with  three  streams  of  blood  flowing  from  its  point  to 
the  ground.  It  is  the  only  so-called  talisman  of  the 
story,  and  its  purpose  is  to  occasion  the  question  which, 
if  answered,  will  lead  to  the  king's  healing.  Why  it 
is  a  spear  and  why  it  distils  blood  the  story  does  not 
explain.  It  has  either  been  transferred  from  some  other 
legend,  as,  for  example,  a  genuine  Graal  romance,  and 
placed  without  much  reason  in  its  present  setting,  or 
there  is  no  better  instance  of  such  an  alleged  transfer  in 
the  whole  cycle.  The  spear  is  seen  once  only,  and  on 
that  occasion  is  accompanied  by  a  large  salver  in  which 
is  a  man's  head  surrounded  with  a  profusion  of  blood. 

The  question  which  Perceval  should  have  asked  was 
the  meaning  and  the  cause  of  these  wonders.  He  is 
cursed  the  next  morning  by  his  foster-sister,  but  it  is 
not  because  he  forbears  at  the  instance  of  his  maternal 
uncle.  It  is  only  after  long  years  that  his  silence  is 
denounced  by  a  boy  disguised  as  a  laidly  woman,  but  at 
the  end  of  the  whole  business  the  question  is  never  asked. 
Apparently  it  is  too  late,  and  Perceval  had  only  a  single 
chance, as  he  had  in  the  poem  of  Heinrich  and, after  another 
sense,  in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval.  The  penalty  of  his 

183 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

failure  is  that  "  the  lame  king  will  have  to  endure 
battles  and  conflicts,  and  his  knights  will  perish,  and 
wives  will  be  widows,  and  maidens  will  be  left  portion- 
less." It  does  not  appear  that  any  of  these  disasters 
come  to  pass,  but  certain  sorceresses  of  Gloucester,  who 
caused  the  king's  lameness  among  other  misdeeds,  are 
destroyed,  which  does  not  heal  the  king,  so  that  the 
vendetta  is  a  vain  affair. 

The  father  of  Peredur  was  Evrac,  who  owned  the 
earldom  of  the  North  and  had  seven  sons,  with  six 
of  whom  he  was  slain,  for  they  began  in  the  folly  of 
tournaments  and  so  ended.  Peredur,  the  surviving  and 
youngest  son,  was  taken  by  his  mother  into  the  wilder- 
ness, where  he  could  see  neither  horses  nor  arms,  lest  he 
also  should  become  a  great  warrior  before  the  face  of 
the  Lord,  and  die  in  battle,  with  all  that  violence  which 
signified  the  perfection  of  valour  in  those  days  of  harsh 
adventure.  His  companions  were  the  women  of  his 
mother,  with  some  boys  and  spiritless  men.  In  spite 
of  such  precautions  he  was  destined,  however,  to  depart 
from  the  house  of  his  childhood  in  the  wild  and  solitary 
ways,  where  the  life  which  he  led  was  like  that  of  a 
savage  hermit.  He  was  the  cutting  of  a  fruit-tree  and 
was  sadly  in  need  of  grafting :  grafted  he  was  in  the 
end  on  the  great  tree  of  Knighthood,  yet  he  behaved 
throughout  with  the  thoughtlessness  of  the  impassioned 
man.  It  is  only  in  the  Graal  romances  that  he  puts 
forth  many  blossoms,  and  sometimes  splendidly,  but 
even  then  he  does  not  bear  the  good  fruit  after  its  own 
kind  in  anything  but  the  latest  texts. 

One  day  Peredur  saw  three  knights,  but  his  mother 
said  that  they  were  angels.  He  decided  to  become  an 
angel,  but  the  questions  which  he  put  to  them  subse- 
quently having  obtained  a  more  reliable  account,  he 
resolved  further  to  follow  their  vocation.  Finding 
that  she  could  not  dissuade  him,  his  mother  gave 
him  some  notable  instructions,  as,  for  example,  that 
he  should  pay  court  to  a  fair  woman,  whether  she 

184 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

would  or  no,  and  that  if  he  obtained  anything  precious 
he  should  bestow  it,  and  so  earn  fame  for  his  largesse. 
In  fine,  she  told  him  to  repair  to  the  court  of  King 
Arthur.  He  mounted  a  sorry  hackney  and  began  a  long 
journey.  Arriving  at  a  rich  tent,  he  mistook  it  for  a 
church  and  repeated  his  Pater  noster,  for  he  had  little 
knowledge  of  religion  ;  but  the  tent  contained  a  beautiful 
lady,  who  gave  him  refreshment  and  allowed  him  to  take  a 
ring  from  her  hand.  Now,  the  lord  of  the  glade  became 
angry  because  of  Peredur,  and  said  that  the  lady,  who 
was  his  wife,  should  not  rest  two  nights  in  the  same 
house  till  he  had  visited  vengeance  upon  him. 

As  the  youth  drew  towards  the  court  of  King  Arthur,  a 
Red  Knight  entered  the  palace,  and  seeing  how  the  Queen 
was  served  with  wine  by  a  page  from  a  golden  goblet, 
he  dashed  the  liquor  in  her  face  and  smote  her  on  the 
face  also ;  but,  despite  his  challenge,  such  was  the  un- 
knightly  condition  of  the  Round  Table  that  all  present 
feared  to  avenge  the  insult,  believing  that  the  aggressor 
had  magical  protection ;  and  so  he  retired  with  the 
vessel.  Peredur  then  rode  in,  and  asked  for  the 
honour  of  knighthood ;  but  because  of  his  outlandish 
appearance,  he  was  treated  with  indignity  by  Kay  and 
others  of  the  household.  A  male  and  female  dwarf,  who 
had  dwelt  in  the  palace  for  a  twelvemonth,  uttering  no 
word,  found  their  tongues  suddenly  to  praise  him  as  the 
flower  of  chivalry,  for  which  they  were  beaten  by  Kay. 
When  Peredur  demanded  the  accolade,  he  was  told 
jeeringly  to  follow  the  Red  Knight,  recover  the  goblet, 
and  possess  himself  of  his  horse  and  armour.  He  found 
no  difficulty  in  obeying,  and  by  slaying  the  Knight  he 
accomplished  'his  first  mission  of  vengeance,  which  con- 
tains a  more  important  implicit  than  the  vindication  of 
Arthur's  Queen ;  for,  unknown  to  himself,  the  Red 
Knight  was  he  who  had  slain  his  father.  The  removal 
of  the  armour  he  could  not  accomplish  till  Sir  Owain 
of  the  Round  Table  came  to  his  help,  after,  which  he 
assumed  it  and  mounted  the  dead  man's  horse.  He 


The   Hidden    Church   oj   the   Holy   Graal 

restored  the  goblet  to  Owain ;  but  to  return  and  receive 
knighthood  at  the  King's  hands  he  refused  until  he  had 
punished  Kay  for  the  insult  which  he  had  offered  to 
the  dwarfs.  In  this  manner  he  began  his  second  mission 
of  vengeance,  the  implicit  whereof  involved  his  own 
vindication,  because  he,  too,  had  been  treated  injuriously. 
After  various  encounters,  the  result  of  which  is  that 
many  are  sent  to  place  themselves  at  King  Arthur's 
mercy,  on  account  of  the  dwarfs,  he  met  with  an 
ancient  man,  richly  vested,  whose  attendants  were  fishing 
on  a  lake,  and  who  was  therefore  the  substituted  Rich 
Fisher  of  the  Graal  stories. 

It  does  not  seem  to  follow  that  the  servants  caught 
anything,  but  if  they  did  it  was  not  to  our  purpose. 
The  ancient  man  was  lame,  and  he  is  therefore  an  alter- 
native of  the  maimed  king.  He  retired  into  a  castle 
at  hand,  whither  Peredur  followed,  and  being  there 
welcomed  he  learned  that  the  host  was  his  own  uncle. 
By  him  he  was  taught  chivalry,  was  cautioned,  for 
no  apparent  reason,  against  asking  questions,  and  was 
assured  that  any  reproach  involved  by  his  silence  should 
not  fall  on  the  boy  but  on  himself  only.  It  was  as  if 
this  uncle  said  :  "  Do  not  explore  the  concealed  mysteries  : 
I  will  account."  He  accounts  so  badly,  however,  that 
the  disgrace  is  ultimately  on  Peredur. 

The  next  day  the  youth  reached  another  castle, 
where  he  found  a  second  uncle,  at  whose  bidding  he 
smote  a  great  staple  three  times  with  a  sword,  and 
both  things  were  shattered.  The  first  and  second  time 
he  rejoined  the  pieces  of  the  sword,  and  the  staple  was 
also  made  good,  as  if  automatically.  The  third  time 
neither  would  unite,  and  we  thus  have  an  alternative 
of  the  Broken  Sword  in  the  Graal  legends  ;  but  nothing 
follows  in  the  Welsh  story,  nor  is  the  weapon  heard  of 
afterwards.  What  next  occurred  at  the  castle  was  a 
Rite  as  of  a  Lodge  of  Mourning.  Two  youths  entered 
the  hall  bearing  the  mighty  spear,  from  which  poured 
torrents  of  blood,  and  at  the  sight  of  this  all  the  company 

186 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the   Quest 

fell  into  grievous  lamentation.  Two  maidens  followed 
carrying  a  large  salver,  whereon  was  the  man's  head ;  and 
this,  which  was  swimming  in  blood,  as  we  have  heard, 
caused  another  great  outcry.  Peredur,  however,  had 
been  well  counselled,  and  he  asked  nothing  concerning 
these  marvels,  which  fact  constitutes  the  great  mystery  of 
the  voided  question  and  the  prolonged  sorrow  of  the  lord. 
Now,  either  the  two  uncles  are  distinct  persons  inhabiting 
two  castles,  in  which  case  (#)  the  story  afterwards  identifies 
them,  although  vaguely,  and  (£)  the  relations  are  working 
one  against  the  other,  unless  there  was  some  cryptic 
understanding  between  them  ;  or  they  are  one  person 
strangely  confused,  while  the  castles  are  one  castle,  in 
which  case  the  lame  uncle  himself  issues  that  decree 
of  silence  which  will  delay  his  healing  indefinitely  and 
testifies  to  his  separate  existence  as  the  brother  first  seen 
by  his  guest.  Whatever  alternative  is  chosen,  the  story 
rests  distracting. 

On  the  morning  which  followed  these  occurrences 
Peredur  rode  away  from  the  castle,  and  while  still  in 
its  vicinity  he  came  upon  a  beautiful  maiden,  who  was 
watching  by  the  side  of  her  dead  husband.  She  told  the 
youth  that  she  was  his  foster-sister,  that  he  was  re- 
sponsible for  his  mother's  death  because  of  his  desertion, 
and  that  he  had  therefore  become  accursed. 

We  shall  see  in  the  sequel  that  he  was  under  interdict 
after  two  manners,  but  in  neither  case  does  it  appear  to 
carry  a  consequence.  After  this  meeting,  in  which  he 
does  everything  to  assist  the  distressed  lady,  and  to  recog- 
nise a  relationship  for  which  there  is  nothing  to  account 
in  the  story,  he  continued  his  journey  and  reached  a  castle, 
wherein  was  another  maiden,  also  in  stress  and  besieged  by 
an  earl  whom  she  would  not  consent  to  wed.  The  un- 
welcome suitor  was  vanquished  by  Peredur,  who  sent 
him  to  the  court  of  King  Arthur,  restored  all  her  pos- 
sessions to  the  despoiled  lady,  and  after  the  space  of 
three  weeks  again  rode  away.  It  should  be  noted  that 
this  maiden  is  the  Blanchefleur  of  the  Perceval -Graal 


The   Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

romances,  the  bride-elect  of  the  hero  in  some  parts  of 
the  Conte  del  Graal,  his  wife  in  the  conclusion  of  Gerbert, 
and  so  also  in  the  Parsifal  of  Wolfram. 

The  distress  of  damsels  is  a  lesser  keynote  of  the  story, 
and  Peredur  met  now  for  a  second  time  the  lady  of  the 
tent  and  pavilion,  only  to  find  her  in  sorry  straits  through 
her  lord's  treatment,  owing  to  the  intrusion  of  the  youth 
in  the  early  part  of  the  story.  He  overcame  the  knight 
in  due  course,  enforced  the  usual  pilgrimage,  and  pledged 
him  to  deal  loyally  with  the  lady  in  future,  she  having 
been  at  fault  in  nothing.  In  the  adventure  which  next 
followed,  he  found  that  a  whole  country  had  been  wasted 
by  nine  sorceresses  of  Gloucester,  and  they  were  now 
attacking  the  sole  remaining  castle.  Over  one  of  them 
Peredur  prevailed,  and  she — though  aware  from  of  old 
of  all  that  they  must  suffer  at  his  hands — invited  him  to 
their  palace.  During  three  weeks  he  led  a  hidden  life 
among  them  for  the  ostensible  purpose  of  learning 
chivalry,  which  he  knew  already  by  its  practice  and 
otherwise  by  the  instruction  of  his  uncle  ;  it  is  thus 
certain  that  they  could  teach  him  little  thereof,  and  of 
sanctity  nothing.  The  episode  remains  so  unreasonable 
that  almost  surely  it  must  have  followed  some  prototype 
embodying  another  motive.  By  this  time  Peredur  had 
sent  so  many  knights  as  hostages  to  Arthur's  court,  in 
part  to  justify  the  dwarfs,  that  the  king  determined  to 
seek  for  him.  The  search  began  accordingly,  and  after 
he  had  taken  leave  of  his  imputed  instructors,  the  youth 
was  found  by  the  companions  of  the  Round  Table  at 
the  moment  when  he  was  wrapped  in  a  love-trance, 
thinking  of  the  lady  of  his  heart.  This  incident,  so 
trivial  in  itself,  is  included  here  because  all  the  romances 
repeat  it  in  one  or  another  form.  Kay,  among  others, 
disturbed  Peredur  rudely,  and  was  chastised  with  violence. 
In  this  manner  was  accomplished  the  second  mission  of 
vengeance,  or  rather  its  implied  part.  Gwalchmai,  who 
is  Gawain,  approached  Peredur  gently  and  courteously, 
and  so  brought  him  to  the  king.  All  went  to  Caerleon, 


The  Early  Epochs   of  the   Quest 

and  there  Peredur,  who,  by  inference  from  his  trance  and 
a  certain  period  of  tarrying,  may  be  supposed  to  have 
loved  previously  the  lady  of  the  castle,  became  deeply 
enamoured  of  another  maiden  ;  but  seeing  that  she  failed 
to  respond,  he  vowed  himself  to  silence  in  all  Christendom 
till  she  should  love  him  above  every  man.  He  left 
King  Arthur's  court  and  passed  through  various  ad- 
ventures, from  which  little  follows  in  respect  of  the 
other  romances.  The  time  came  when  he  yearned  to 
revisit  Caerleon  and  again  have  the  maiden's  society, 
besides  that  of  the  knighthood.  At  the  court  on 
account  of  his  silence  he  suffered  further  indignity, 
still  on  the  part  of  Kay ;  but  after  many  signal  examples 
of  chivalry,  the  lady  of  his  affections,  although  she  did 
not  recognise  him,  confessed  that  if  only  he  could  speak, 
she  should  love  him  best  of  all  men,  as  she  did  indeed 
already,  his  dumbness  notwithstanding.  So  was  his  vow 
fulfilled ;  and  as  he  had  sent  many  living  gifts  to  the 
male  and  female  dwarfs,  after  a  votive  manner,  it  is  to 
be  inferred  that  his  second  vengeance  was  further  and 
fully  accomplished  by  the  disgrace  which  his  deeds  re- 
flected upon  the  unworthy  Kay. 

At  a  later  period,  he  being  again  on  his  travels, 
Peredur  arrived  at  a  castle,  where  the  lord  was  a  black 
man  who  had  lost  one  of  his  eyes,  and  it  was  his  custom 
to  destroy  every  visitor  who  went  to  the  place  unasked. 
One  of  the  lord's  daughters  interceded  vainly,  for  he 
who  at  the  time  of  need  neglected  to  question  his  own 
uncle  now  demanded  an  explanation  of  the  circumstances 
under  which  his  present  host  had  been  deprived  of  his 
eye.  For  this  he  was  informed  that  he  should  not 
escape  with  his  life.  However,  in  due  course,  he  con- 
quered the  Black  Master  of  the  House  and  slew  him, 
after  learning  his  secret.  That  secret  caused  him  to 
visit  another  castle,  the  knights  in  which  rode  out  daily 
to  do  battle  with  an  obscure  monster,  which  is  termed 
an  Addanc  in  the  story ;  their  bodies  were  brought  back 
by  the  horses,  and  they  themselves  were  raised  up  again 

189 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

nightly  by  the  women  of  the  household.  Peredur,  as  will 
be  expected,  went  forth  to  destroy  the  monster  and,  in 
return  for  the  pledge  of  his  future  love,  he  was  presented 
by  a  strange  woman  with  a  stone  which  ensured  his  success. 
As  regards  the  covenant  between  them,  he  was  told  when 
he  next  sought  her  to  seek  in  the  East — that  is  to  say,  in 
India.  Omitting  an  intermediate  episode  on  which  nothing 
depends,  he  came  to  the  Mound  of  Mourning,  where  three 
hundred  nobles  guarded  a  serpent  until  the  time  should 
come  for  it  to  die.  The  explanation  is  that  the  tail  of 
the  serpent  contained  that  mysterious  stone  to  which  I 
have  referred  already — the  stone  of  wealth  inexhaustible 
— and  the  intent  of  the  whole  company  was  to  compete  for 
this  jewel.  Peredur  destroyed  the  serpent,  which  they  did 
not  dare  to  attempt,  and,  having  compensated  the  other 
seekers,  he  bestowed  the  prize  on  a  knight  who  had  been 
in  his  service,  thus  fulfilling  one  behest  of  his  mother. 
He  next  reached  a  galaxy  of  tents,  gathered  about  the 
pavilion  of  the  Empress  Cristinobyl,  who  was  resolved  to 
wed  the  most  valiant  man  in  the  world,  and  him  only. 
This  was  the  unknown  enchantress  by  whose  aid  he  was 
enabled  to  conquer  the  Addanc.  The  place  was  filled 
with  competitors  for  her  hand,  but  Peredur  overcame 
them  all,  and  was  entertained  by  the  Empress  for  four- 
teen years,  as  the  story  is  said  to  relate ;  it  is  the  only 
appeal  to  some  antecedent  source  which  occurs  in  the 
whole  text.  In  this  way  the  hero's  variable  affections 
find  their  rest  for  a  period — by  inference,  in  such  a  fairy- 
land as  was  visited  by  Ogier  the  Dane. 

Peredur  came  back  at  length  to  the  Court  of  King 
Arthur,  without  having  attracted  apparently  any  sur- 
prise at  his  absence ;  and,  almost  immediately  after, 
the  palace  was  visited  by  a  laidly  damosel,  through 
whom  it  transpired  what  misery  followed  the  failure 
to  ask  the  question  at  the  Castle  of  the  Lame  King. 
It  is  to  be  noted  that  so  only,  almost  at  the  end  of 
the  story,  does  the  hero  learn  anything  concerning  his 
omission  and  the  fatality  which  it  involved.  He  was 

190 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

reproached,  as  we  have  seen,  bitterly  by  his  foster- 
sister,  but  not  about  this  matter ;  and  the  inference 
is  that  so  far  he  had  only  reason  for  satisfaction  in 
having  followed  the  counsel  of  his  first  uncle — until 
the  time  came  when  he  forgot  the  injunction  at  the 
castle  of  the  one-eyed  lord.  Being  now  undeceived, 
he  vowed  to  rest  never  until  he  knew  the  story  of  the 
Lance.  He  departed  accordingly,  while,  at  the  sugges- 
tion of  the  same  visitant,  Gawain  went  in  quest  of  a 
castle  on  a  high  mountain,  wherein  it  is  said  that  there 
was  a  certain  maid  in  prison,  and  the  fame  of  the  world 
was  promised  to  him  who  released  her.  This  is  the 
only  instance,  and  a  shadow  at  that,  in  which  any  quest 
is  allotted  to  the  hero  of  all  gallantry  in  this  story, 
though  his  adventures  occupy  so  large  a  space  in  other 
romances  of  Perceval.  We  hear  nothing,  however,  as 
to  the  term  reached  by  Gawain.  Peredur,  after  long 
wanderings  in  search  of  the  laidly  maiden,  whom  he 
seems  to  have  regarded  as  a  guide,  was  accosted  by 
a  hermit,  who  upbraided  him  for  bearing  arms  on  so 
holy  a  day  as  Good  Friday.  Recalled  to  that  sense 
of  religion  which  he  had  forgotten  apparently,  he 
responded  in  a  becoming  manner  and  received  some 
directions  which  brought  him  ultimately  to  the  Castle 
of  Wonders.  The  first  marvel  which  he  saw  therein 
was  a  chess-board,  whereon  automatic  pieces  were 
playing  the  game  by  themselves.  The  side  which  he 
favoured  was  defeated,  and  in  his  anger  he  cast  both 
board  and  men  into  a  lake.  The  laidly  maiden  appeared 
thereupon  and  reproached  him.  He  was  set  certain 
tasks,  under  the  pretext  of  recovering  the  playthings ; 
they  included  that  adventure  of  stag  and  hound  with 
which  we  shall  be  concerned  later  ;  but  the  term 
of  all  was  to  bring  him  for  a  second  time  to  the 
castle  of  his  maimed  uncle  and  to  the  end  of  his 
quest.  Thither  Gawain  had  preceded  him,  and  in  this 
manner,  as  in  several  of  the  Graal  romances,  the  knight 
of  earthly  courtesy  is  somehow  connected  with  the 

191 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

quest — whether    he    has    undertaken   it    himself,   or  by 
accident,  as  in  this  instance. 

Peredur  found  no  Lance  and  he  asked  no  questions, 
but  he  was  told  by  a  yellow-haired  youth,  who  begged 
the  boon  of  his  friendship  since  they  two  were  cousins, 
that  it  was  he  who  in  the  far  past  carried  the  ensanguined 
talisman,  that  he  bore  also  the  salver,  and  at  the  end  of 
long  years  of  adventure,  long  years  of  faerie  life,  that 
he  appeared  as  the  laidly  maiden.  As  the  question  had 
passed  into  desuetude  and,  all  his  vow  notwithstanding, 
as  he  learned  nothing  concerning  the  Lance,  it  is  pos- 
sible, as  I  have  suggested,  that  the  opportunity  of 
asking  and  of  receiving  knowledge  was  not  granted  a 
second  time  to  the  seeker.  With  these  things  also 
the  head  in  the  dish  of  blood  passed  into  the  limbus  of 
desuetude,  like  the  foster-sister  of  Peredur  and  his  dubious 
alternative  uncle ;  no  one  thought  further  about  them, 
though  the  seeker  did  learn  that  the  head  was  that  of 
another  cousin,  who  was  killed  by  the  sorceresses  of 
Gloucester.  It  was  they  also  who  lamed  his  uncle,  and 
for  this  he  was  to  wreak  vengeance  upon  them.  Here, 
therefore,  was  the  third  and  final  vendetta  which  Peredur 
accomplished,  with  the  assistance,  curiously  enough,  of 
Arthur  and  all  his  household,  by  the  destruction  of  the 
nine  priestesses  of  evil  magic.  Whether  this  healed  his 
uncle  or  relieved  the  land  and  the  people  is  not  told  in 
the  story,  nor  do  we  learn  anything  further  concerning 
the  hero,  or  what,  in  fine,  became  of  him.  Perhaps  in 
the  castle  of  his  uncle  he  completed  a  third  period  of 
hidden  life. 

I  have  not  entered  into  the  Quest  of  the  Holy  Graal 
for  the  unsatisfying  purpose  of  reproducing  the  romances 
in  synopsis,  and  those  more  especially  which  are  outside 
the  high  issues  of  my  real  concern.  But  in  respect  of 
the  claims  which  have  been  and  are  still  advanced  con- 
cerning it,  as  the  last  reflection  of  some  primordial  type 
of  quest,  the  Welsh  Perceval  seems  to  call  for  presenta- 
tion adequately,  that  my  readers  may  understand,  firstly, 

192 


The  Ear/y  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

the  scope  of  the  points  of  contact,  and,  secondly,  may 
thus  appreciate  the  better  those  greater  points  of  diver- 
gence between  this  text  and  the  true  traditional  tales  of 
the  Holy  Vessel.  The  same  motive  will  occasion  the 
same  treatment  of  the  next  and  more  excellent  version, 
which  is  now  posed  for  our  consideration. 


Ill 

THE  ENGLISH  METRICAL   ROMANCE   OF 
STR   PERCY TELLE 

Among  the  extrinsic  evidences  that  the  Welsh  non-Graal 
quest  of  Peredur  contains  the  fibrous  roots  of  a  legend  which 
was  earlier  than  the  Graal  period  of  literature,  there  is 
the  analogical  story  of  Syr  Percy  velle,  which  belongs  in  its 
present  form  to  the  fifteenth  century,  being  therefore  far 
later  than  the  Mabinogion,  though  there  is  an  Italian  story 
which  is  even  later  still.  Among  the  intrinsic  evidences 
are  the  wild  elements  which  characterise  the  Mabinogion 
generally  of  the  Red  Book  of  Hergest,  suggesting  an 
archaic  state.  I  do  not  know  that  the  last  word  has 
been  said  upon  either  testimony,  but  I  do  know  that 
the  Peredur  is  not  a  Graal  story,  and  if  its  roots  could 
be  traced  to  Atlantis  it  would  still  be  nothing  to  our 
purpose.  When  the  bells  began  to  ring  at  the  outset 
of  our  great  speculation,  we  said  in  our  hearts :  Sanctus, 
Sanctus,  Sanctus.  We  look,  therefore,  for  the  elevation 
of  the  Graal  on  our  high  altar  of  research,  and  our  pass- 
word is,  Sanctum  Graal. 

There  is  very  little  question  that  this  poem  is  in  the 
position  described  by  scholarship — that  is  to  say,  it  is  a 
fifteenth-century  presentation  of  a  legend  which  may 
be  far  older  than  any  of  the  Graal  quests  in  which 
Perceval  is  the  hero.  Its  elements  are  simple  and  primi- 
tive. They  are  much  simpler  and  perhaps  far  more 
primitive  than  are  those  of  the  Welsh  Peredur,  while 
they  are  less  disconcerting  and  aimless.  The  poem  is 

193  N 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

in  perfect  harmony  with  itself;  it  has  a  conclusion  proper 
to  its  beginning  and  intervening  incidents  which  so  work 
that  the  term  indicated  at  the  start  is  brought  logically 
about. 

It  is  the  antithesis  of  any  of  the  Graal  romances — there 
is  scarcely  any  quest  at  all ;  secondly,  there  is  no  ques- 
tion ;  there  are  no  hallows  of  any  kind,  either  Lance 
or  Sword  or  Cup  ;  finally,  there  is  no  enchantment  of 
Britain.  It  is  a  savage  story — naked  and  not  ashamed  ; 
it  calls  on  the  kingdom  of  blood  to  be  manifested  about 
the  hero,  and  he  ensures  its  coming. 

The  mere  skeleton  of  the  poem  will  exhibit  its  points 
of  contact  with  the  Welsh  Perceval  and  those  of  its 
divergence  therefrom.  The  father  of  Perceval,  who  had 
also  the  same  name,  was  for  his  valiant  deeds  married 
to  the  sister  of  King  Arthur.  She  bore  him  only  the 
one  son,  for  a  great  tourney  was  held  to  celebrate  the 
birth,  and  thereat  the  father  was  slain  by  a  knight  in 
red  armour.  As  in  the  previous  story,  his  widow  fled 
into  the  wilderness,  taking  the  child  with  her,  so  that 
he  should  know  nothing  of  deeds  of  arms.  He  was 
brought  up  in  the  wild  wood,  with  the  wild  beasts  for 
his  companions.  However,  as  the  boy  grew  up  the 
mother  gave  him  a  small  Scotch  spear,  and  with  this 
he  became  so  dexterous  that  nothing  could  escape  him. 
He  was  clothed  in  skins,  and  for  a  long  time  seems 
to  have  been  reared  as  a  heathen ;  but  it  came  about 
at  length  that  the  lady  taught  him  some  prayers  to  the 
Son  of  God,  and  shortly  after  he  met  with  three  knights 
of  King  Arthur's  court,  one  of  them  being  Gawain  and 
another  Kay.  He  inquired  which  of  them  was  the 
great  God  about  whom  his  mother  had  taught  him,  and 
threatened  to  slay  them  if  they  refused  to  answer.  He 
was  told  who  they  were,  and  then  asked  whether  King 
Arthur  would  knight  him  also.  He  obtained  a  sorry 
horse,  took  leave  of  his  mother,  and  rode  to  court  clothed 
in  his  skins  of  beasts,  and  nourishing  a  firm  resolution 
to  slay  the  king  if  he  would  not  grant  his  request.  At 

194 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

parting  the  mother  gave  him  a  ring  to  be  kept  as  a  token, 
and  she  promised  that  she  would  await  his  return.  On 
his  road  he  reached  a  pavilion  wherein  was  a  lady  asleep. 
He  kissed  her  and  exchanged  a  certain  ring  which  she 
wore  for  the  one  that  had  been  given  to  himself.  He 
arrived  at  the  court  of  all  chivalry,  and  King  Arthur 
recognised  the  boy's  likeness  to  that  older  Perceval  who 
had  received  his  own  sister  as  wife.  The  king,  however, 
and  apparently  the  whole  chivalry  had  been  reduced 
to  recurring  distress  through  fear  of  the  Red  Knight, 
who  came  regularly  to  rob  the  king  of  the  cup  out  of 
which  he  was  drinking.  Perceval's  arrival  was  coincident 
with  another  visitation  of  this  kind,  being  the  fifth  during 
as  many  years.  The  Cup  was  of  red  gold,  and  it  was 
seized  while  the  king  was  in  the  act  of  putting  it  to  his 
lips.  Perceval,  who  was  a  witness,  offered  to  bring  back 
the  vessel  if  the 'king  would  knight  him,  and  the  king 
promised  to  do  so  on  his  return.  He  went  to  fetch 
armour  for  the  child,  but  Perceval  in  the  meantime 
departed.  The  Red  Knight  did  not  wish  to  do  battle 
with  so  sorry  an  opponent,  but  in  the  end  there  was  a 
momentary  combat,  Perceval  slaying  the  champion  by 
throwing  his  dart,  which  passed  through  one  of  his  eyes. 
For  what  it  is  worth,  we  have  here  an  instance  of  that 
vengeance  legend  of  which  folk-lore  traces  examples  in 
the  Graal  literature.  It  is  true  that  Perceval  slays  the 
Red  Knight,  but,  as  in  the  Welsh  Peredur,  he  does  so 
without  knowing  that  his  victim  was  responsible  for  his 
father's  death  ;  his  sole  and  simple  object  is  to  wipe  out 
the  affront  offered  to  the  king.  After  the  encounter 
Perceval,  with  the  assistance  of  Gawain,  who  had  followed 
and  come  upon  the  scene,  stripped  the  body  of  the  armour, 
and  the  youth  was  clothed  therein.  He  did  not  return 
to  claim  the  promised  reward  of  knighthood,  and  Gawain 
was  the  bearer  of  the  Cup  to  the  king.  His  next  office 
was  to  destroy  a  witch  who  was  the  mother  of  the  Red 
Knight,  and  on  account  of  his  armour  he  was  taken  then 
and  subsequently  for  that  personage  himself.  He  arrived 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

at  a  castle,  to  which  there  came  presently  from  the 
Maiden  Land  a  messenger  who  was  on  his  way  to  King 
Arthur  entreating  assistance  for  his  mistress,  the  Lady 
Lufamour.  She  was  being  oppressed  by  a  sultan  who 
desired  her  for  his  wife,  and  because  of  her  refusal  he 
had  slain  her  father  and  brother  and  had  wasted  her 
lands,  so  that  she  had  only  one  castle  left  in  which  to 
take  refuge.  To  this  castle  Perceval  asked  the  way  of 
the  messenger,  with  the  intention  of  destroying  the 
Saracen,  but  the  messenger  preferred  to  continue  his  own 
road  and  get  help  from  the  king.  Perceval,  on  his  part, 
determined  to  discover  it  for  himself,  and  the  three 
sons  of  his  host  insisted  on  accompanying  him,  which  they 
did  for  a  certain  distance,  after  which  he  contrived  to 
shake  them  off.  Meanwhile  the  messenger  reached  the 
court  and  had  a  very  indifferent  answer  from  the  king, 
who,  together  with  his  knights,  appears  in  rather  a 
pitiful  light  throughout  all  the  early  portion  of  the 
story.  The  king,  in  fact,  tells  him  that  there  is  no 
lord  in  his  land  who  is  worthy  to  be  called  a  knight. 
However,  on  hearing  of  the  description  of  the  chivalrous 
youth  who  was  seen  by  the  messenger  from  the  castle  on 
his  road  to  court,  the  king  concluded  that  this  was 
Perceval,  and  called  for  horses,  arms  and  companions  of 
his  table  to  follow  in  quest  of  the  hero,  fearing  that  he 
might  be  slain  before  they  could  reach  him.  By  this  time 
Perceval  had  arrived  at  the  Maiden  Land,  and  found  a 
host  of  tents  marshalled  about  a  city.  He  set  to  and  slew 
many,  his  ingenuous  warcry  being  apparently  that  he  had 
come  to  destroy  a  soldan.  He  slept  in  the  open  field, 
with  his  dead  round  him.  The  Lady  Lufamour  came 
to  survey  the  slaughter  from  the  height  of  her  walls, 
and  descried  the  knight  whom  she  supposed  to  have 
effected  it.  She  sent  her  chamberlain  to  bring  him 
into  the  city ;  therein  she  made  him  good  cheer,  and 
fell  in  love  at  first  sight.  He  returned  to  do  battle  in 
her  cause,  she  promising  herself  and  the  kingdom  if  he 
destroyed  the  soldan.  He  behaved  in  a  manner  which 

196 


The  Early   Epochs   of  the   Quest 

recalls  the  worst  combats  in  the  Spanish  romances  of 
chivalry,  wherein  one  knight  scatters  a  thousand  paynims. 
Meanwhile,  King  Arthur  and  his  companions  arrived,  but 
were  mistaken  by  Perceval  for  enemies,  and  he  fought 
with  Gawain.  However,  ultimately  they  recognised  each 
other  and  embraced.  All  proceeded  to  the  castle,  and 
Arthur  recounted  to  the  lady  the  early  history  of  Perceval. 
The  next  morning  he  was  knighted  by  the  king,  and  again 
went  forth  against  the  soldan,  whom  he  slew  finally.  He 
was  made  king  of  the  country,  and  wedded  Lufamour. 
He  was  still  in  the  first  year  of  his  marriage  when  he  re- 
membered his  mother,  and  rode  away  to  find  her.  This 
is  the  quest  of  the  story,  and  on  the  way  he  had  to 
champion  the  lady  of  the  pavilion,  who  had  fallen  into 
the  hands  of  her  husband  for  the  business  of  the  ring. 
He  reconciled  them  vi  et  armis,  and  learned  that  the  ring 
which  he  had  borrowed  had  such  virtues  that  the  wearer 
could  be  neither  slain  nor  wounded.  He  proposed  to 
exchange  again,  but  the  husband  had  given  that  which 
was  Perceval's  to  the  lord  of  the  land,  a  giant  of  whom 
none  would  dare  to  ask  it  :  he  was,  indeed,  the  brother 
of  the  soldan,  but  there  is  no  need  to  say  that  Perceval 
in  due  course  not  only  defeated  but  dismembered  him. 
He  recovered  his  ring  at  the  giant's  castle,  and  learned 
from  the  seneschal  that  his  master  had  offered  it  to  a  lady 
whom  he  besought  in  marriage  ;  that  she  recognised  it 
as  her  son's  ring,  and,  supposing  that  he  had  been  slain 
by  the  giant,  she  fled  distracted  into  the  forest  hard  by. 
Perceval  was  now  close  on  the  track  of  his  quest-object ; 
he  assumed  a  garment  of  skins,  that  she  might  know  him 
the  more  easily  ;  and  it  was  not  long  before  the  mother  and 
son  met  and  were  henceforth  reunited.  They  repaired 
to  the  giant's  castle,  till  the  lady  was  restored  to  health 
and  sanity.  In  fine,  he  carried  her  home,  where  she  was 
welcomed  by  his  queen  and  the  great  lords.  This  was 
the  good  end  of  Perceval's  mother,  and  in  this  way  the 
story  describes  its  perfect  circle.  The  end  of  Perceval 
himself  was  in  the  Holy  Land. 

197 


The   Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy    Graal 

IV 

THE   CONTE  DEL   GRAAL 
§  A. — PRELIMINARY  TO  THE  WHOLE  SUBJECT 

The  elements  of  Robert  de  Borron's  poem  are  those  of 
the  apocryphal  gospel  rather  than  of  the  romance,  as 
we  now  understand  that  term.  I  do  not  wish  to  be  con- 
strued too  expressly,  as  I  am  simply  creating  a  compari- 
son or  instituting  a  tolerable  approximation.  In  the  Conte 
del  Graal  of  Chretien  de  Troyes  and  the  group  of  poets 
who  continued  what  his  zeal  had  begun,  we  enter  into  a 
different  atmosphere  from  that  of  the  two  texts  with  which 
we  have  been  concerned  previously,  and  yet  it  has  analo- 
gies therewith.  As  a  whole,  it  is  the  sharpest  possible  con- 
tradistinction to  the  hypothetical  non-Graal  quest;  but  in 
its  first  part,  being  that  which  was  furnished  by  Chretien,  it 
represents  more  especially  the  transition  from  the  folk-tale 
to  the  true  Graal  romance,  and  it  offers  in  itself  a  certain 
typical  specimen  of  the  developing  process.  There  is 
therefore  little  which  distinguishes  especially  and  signally 
this  branch  from  the  old  tale  of  Peredur,  as  we  can  con- 
ceive it  in  its  original  form ;  there  is  a  great  deal  by 
which  several  parts  of  Manessier's  conclusion  are  dis- 
tinguished from  both,  and  still  more  the  alternative 
rendering  of  Gerbert.  Between  all  of  them  and  the 
Quest  of  Galahad  it  is  understood,  this  notwithstand- 
ing, that  the  deep  abyss  intervenes.  The  elements  of 
Chretien's  poem  are  perhaps  the  most  natural  born  that 
it  has  entered  into  the  heart  to  conceive.  The  narrative 
is  beautiful,  or  perhaps  I  should  say  that  it  is  charming, 
after  the  manner  of  Nature ;  it  is  like  a  morning  in 
spring.  It  has  something  more  than  the  touch  of  Nature 
which  takes  us  at  once  into  its  kinship ;  it  seems  actually 
Nature  speaking ;  and  so  much  of  the  Graal  Mystery  as 
can  be  said  to  enter  within  its  dimensions  is  that  Mystery 
expressed  in  the  terms  of  the  outside  world,  though  still 

198 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

bearing  a  suggestion  of  translation  direct  from  a  strange 
and  almost  unknown  tongue.  The  poem,  taken  as  a 
whole,  has  few  symbolic  elements,  and  they  are  so 
entirely  of  the  natural  sacraments  that  it  is  difficult  to 
recognise  one  touch  of  grace  therein.  Again,  I  except 
from  this  description  what  is  termed  the  interpolation 
of  Gerbert,  which  in  comparison  with  the  rest  is  like  a 
Masonic  tracing-board  lecture  compared  with  an  essay  of 
Goldsmith.  This  analogy  is  instituted  expressly  to  show 
that  in  the  widest  construction  Gerbert  is  also  far  from 
the  goal. 

Well,  the  Conte  is  a  product  of  successive  generations, 
but  this  granted  it  is  the  work  of  a  single  epoch.  If  it 
be  approached  simply  from  the  poetic  standpoint,  there 
is  no  doubt  much  to  repay  the  reader,  if  he  be  not  de- 
terred by  the  difficulties  of  extremely  archaic  French 
verse.  But  of  the  odor  suavitatis  of  the  sanctuary,  of 
that  which  criticism  has  agreed  to  describe  as  the  ascetic 
and  mystic  element,  of  that  element  which  I  and  those 
whom  I  represent  desire  and  look  for,  there  is  so  little 
that  it  can  barely  be  said  to  exist.  Many  who  know  and 
appreciate  the  sacramental  mystery  which  attaches  in 
certain  parts  to  the  Graal  Quest  in  Malory  and  to  the 
Longer  Prose  Perceval,  which  has  been  termed  The  High 
History  of  the  Holy  Graal^  by  Dr.  Evans,  its  translator, 
will  appreciate  exactly  this  contrast,  and  will  understand 
that  in  Chretien  de  Troyes  there  is  little  of  the  secret 
once  delivered  to  the  saints  of  any  sanctuary,  though 
he  made  use  of  materials  which  may  have  carried  this 
suggestion  with  them.  He  is  described  by  his  one  editor 
as  the  poet  of  love,  and  as  the  poet  who  created  the 
poetry  of  sentiment.  He  is  fresh,  natural,  singularly 
direct,  and  he  carried  his  intention  very  plainly  on  the 
surface  in  respect  of  his  presentation  of  the  story,  so 
far  as  he  is  known  to  have  taken  it.  To  put  it  briefly, 
anything  that  is  recondite  in  its  significance  is  that  which 
is  typical  of  the  entire  cycle,  while  that  which  is  obvious 
is  of  the  poet. 

199 


The   Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

The  Conte  del  Graal  was  begun,  approximately  speak- 
ing, about  the  third  quarter  of  the  twelfth  century,  and 
this  metrical  romance  is  the  longest  of  the  whole  cycle, 
unless  we  elect  to  include  the  compilation  which  passes 
under  the  name  of  the  Dutch  Lancelot.  It  is  the  work 
of  several  hands,  first  among  whom,  both  as  to  time  and 
merit,  is  Chretien  de  Troyes.  He  derived  his  materials 
from  a  source  which  is  no  longer  extant,  and  is  respon- 
sible for  something  less  than  one-eighth  of  the  entire 
medley,  unless,  indeed,  his  editor,  M.  C.  Potvin,  is  cor- 
rect in  his  opinion  that  certain  preliminary  and  certain 
subsequent  matter,  now  regarded  as  later,  should  be  in- 
cluded in  his  work.  But  this,  I  believe,  is  rejected  with 
no  uncertain  voice  by  all  later  criticism. 

Speaking  generally  of  those  quests  of  the  Holy  Graal 
into  which  we  are  here  entering  by  a  kind  of  anticipation, 
in  order  to  dispose  of  one  which  offers  too  little  to  our 
purpose,  it  is  not  very  difficult  to  follow  the  mind  of 
romance  in  its  choice  one  after  another  of  several  heroes, 
though  these  are  exclusive  of  each  other.  In  a  subject 
of  this  kind,  I  care  little  for  antecedents  in  folk-lore  as 
such,  and  many  speculative  constructions  of  scholarship 
may  also  be  set  aside  reverently.  It  does  not  appear,  for 
example,  by  the  texts  themselves  that  Sir  Gawain  was  at 
any  time  the  typical  hero  of  the  quest,  not  even  in  the 
mind  of  Chretien,  though  I  have  said  that  he  was  after 
the  manner  born  of  Nature  in  his  general  treatment  of 
the  theme.  There  are  two  heroes  only,  whether  typical 
or  otherwise,  and  these  are  Perceval  and  Galahad,  but 
among  these  Perceval  is  neither  the  ideal  questing  Knight 
nor  one  who  can  be  called  possible  until  he  has  under- 
gone the  transmuting  process  of  the  later  texts.  Perhaps 
at  the  highest  he  represents  the  spirit  of  romance  when 
it  was  tinctured  only  in  part  by  sacramental  mystery ; 
Galahad  represents  that  spirit  when  it  has  undergone  the 
complete  change.  From  this  point  of  view,  we  may  say 
that  there  are  three  epochs  of  the  Quest  in  Northern 
France : — 

200 


The   Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

(a)  The  epoch  of  Chretien,  all  continuations  included, 
and  of  the  T)idot  Perceval  considered  as  a  derivative  of 
Robert  de  Borron,  one  of  growth  and  development  after 
its  own  manner. 

(£)  The  epoch  of  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval,  deriving 
from  the  putative  Walter  Map  and  the  later  Merlin 
romances. 

(c]  The  epoch  of  the  Great  Prose  Lancelot  and  the 
Quest  of  Galahad. 

It  is  understood  that  I  am  using  the  term  epoch  to 
characterise  a  condition  of  mind  rather  than  one  of  time, 
and,  secondly,  that  the  German  cycle  of  the  Holy  Graal 
remains  over  for  consideration.  It  should  be  observed 
in  the  first  epoch  that  Chretien  and  Gautier  are  the  only 
French  writers  who  tolerate  the  notion  of  an  alternative 
Graal  hero  in  the  person  of  Gawain.  In  the  second  epoch 
there  is  Perceval  shining  in  the  kind  of  light  which  is 
native  only  to  Galahad,  for  the  visit  which  is  paid  by 
Gawain  to  the  Graal  Castle  is  not  a  part  of  the  Quest 
but  a  pure  matter  of  chance,  and  he  is  reflected  in  a 
high  mirror  of  idealism.  In  the  third  epoch  we  have 
the  Quest  in  its  final  exaltation,  and  there  are  many 
heroes,  each  of  whom  is  dealt  with  according  to  his 
merits,  with  Galahad  as  the  Morning  Star  among  all  the 
lesser  lights.  Gawain  "  died  as  he  had  lived,  in  arms  " 
and  spiritual  inhibition.  It  is  in  the  Conte  del  Graal,  the 
Longer  Prose  Perceval  and  in  more  than  one  dubious  text  of 
the  German  cycle  that  he  is  represented  as  an  intentional 
Graal  quester.  It  is  true  that  he  proposes  the  experiment 
in  the  prose  Galahad,  but  he  takes  none  of  the  instituted 
precautions,  and  he  abandons  it  easily  and  early.  Those 
who  imputed  a  certain  righteousness  to  Nature  allowed 
him  some  qualified  success  within  the  measure  of  their 
capacity,  but  it  came  about  that  the  mystic  mood  inter- 
vened and,  having  found  that  Nature  was  of  no  effect, 
the  Quest  was  transferred  thenceforward  into  the  world 
of  mystery. 

201 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 


§  B. — THE  POEM  OF  CHRETIEN  DE  TROVES 

By  our  previous  considerations  we  have  ascertained 
that  after  certain  preliminary  matters  which  are  curious, 
but  late  in  comparison  and  dubious,  the  Conte  del  Graal 
was  opened  in  ample  form  by  a  master-singer  of  his  period 
—that  is  to  say,  by  Chretien  de  Troyes.  Now,  if  it  be 
agreed  that  the  Peredur  and  Syr  Percyvelle  are  reflections  of 
a  lost  primordial  quest,  it  is  desirable  to  note  that  they 
offer  nothing  concerning  the  feast  of  good  things  and  the 
Bowl  of  Plenty.  How,  therefore,  from  the  standpoint 
of  scholarship,  did  this  element,  confessedly  foreign 
thereto,  in  the  beginning  of  things,  come  to  be  imported 
therein  ?  There  is  no  trace  of  it,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the 
long  section  of  that  great  poem  which  is  now  set  for  our 
consideration,  though  it  is  supposed  to  have  heralded 
and  inaugurated  everything  which  belongs  to  the  seeking 
part  of  the  Graal  literature.  It  was  not  evidently  from 
this  source  in  folk-lore  that  Chretien  derived  his  know- 
ledge of  that  mysterious  object  which  he  calls  a  Graal 
and  from  which  was  diffused  so  great  a  light,  though 
nowhere  in  his  long  contribution  does  he  term  it  the 
Holy  Graal.  It  was  carried  by  the  maid  who  had  charge  of 
it  in  her  two  hands,  from  which  it  may  follow  either  that  it 
was  a  heavy  object,  as  might  be  a  large  dish,  or  something 
exceedingly  sacred — to  be  exalted  with  reverence — as  it 
might  be,  an  Eucharistic  Chalice  or  a  most  holy  Reliquary. 
That  it  was  not  certainly  the  first  of  these  objects  is  made 
evident  by  the  fact  that  a  Dish  was  carried  separately  in 
the  pageant  at  the  Graal  Castle.  We  know  further  from 
the  brief  description  that  it  was  a  jewelled  vessel : — 

"  Pieres  pressieuses  avoit 
El  graal,  de  maintes  manieres, 
Des  plus  rices  et  des  plus  cieres 
Qui  el  mont  u  en  tiere  soient ; 
Tote  autre  pieres  pasoient 
Celes  dou  greal,  sans  dotance." 
202 


The  Early  Epochs   of  the  Quest 

That  it  connects  with  the  second  or  the  third  in  my  enu- 
meration of  possible  objects  is  shown  at  a  much  later  stage 
to  Perceval  in  the  narrative  of  his  uncle  the  hermit,  who 
tells  how  some  hidden  King  of  the  Graal  is  sustained  and 
comforted  by  a  Sacred  Host  therein.  Whencesoever  the 
German  poet  Heinrich  drew  his  materials,  it  is  obvious 
that  he  and  Chretien  speak  of  the  same  vessel  and,  as  I 
have  shown  otherwise,  rather  of  a  ciborium  than  a  Reli- 
quary. The  essence  of  a  Reliquary  is  that  it  should 
contain  an  invariable  sacred  deposit,  as,  for  example,  the 
Precious  Blood  of  our  Saviour  or  the  liquefying  blood  of 
St.  Januarius.  We  are  therefore  at  once  in  the  region  of 
great  sacramental  wonders.  The  legends  of  sanctity  had 
already  in  far  other  texts  borne  witness  to  those  cases  in 
which  the  supersensual  Bread  of  Life  had  served  for  the 
saints  as  their  only  daily  nourishment.  This  is  therefore 
the  manner  in  which  Chretien  de  Troyes  understood — 
had  he  indeed  heard  of  them — the  feeding  properties  of 
the  Graal.  It  follows — and  we  shall  see  duly — that 
three  poets — Wolfram,  Heinrich  and  Chretien — who  are 
at  the  poles  sometimes  in  variance  over  matters  of  sym- 
bolism, do  yet,  in  the  most  important  of  all  their  con- 
cerns, tell  the  same  story.  And  we  who  know  better 
than  they  could  have  ever  known  all  that  is  involved  in 
the  root-matter  of  their  testimony,  can  say  in  our  hearts, 
even  when  we  hear  these  dim  echoes  which  are  far  from 
the  term  of  the  Quest : — 

"  Tu  qui  cuncta  scis  et  vales, 
Qui  nos  pascis  hie  mortales, 
Tuos  ibi  commensales, 
Cohaeredes  et  sodales 
Fac  sanctorum  civium." 

We  have  no  doubt  as  to  the  service  or  the  table,  and  can 
bear  witness  on  our  own  part  that  "  many  men,  both  of 
high  and  low  condition  in  these  last  years  past,"  have  to 
our  knowledge  seen  the  mystery  of  all  sacredness  and 
sweetness  unveiled  before  their  spiritual  eyes.  It  follows 
that  if  there  were  many  antecedents,  the  Graal  is  still  one, 

203 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

and  that  even  at  the  epoch  of  Chretien  the  true  nature 
of  the  Sacred  Vessel  was  known,  and  that  clearly.  Of 
himself  the  poet  knew  nothing,  but  in  some  book  which 
he  followed  there  must  have  been  strange  materials.  One 
of  the  keynotes  may  be — among  many  others — that 
Hugh,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  investigated  about  1 140  a  case 
of  miraculous  sustenance  by  the  Eucharist. 

As  regards  the  source  of  his  story  the  poet  himself 
gives  us  an  exceedingly  simple  explanation.  He  says 
that  he  wrote  by  command  of  a  certain  Count — that  is  to 
say,  Count  Philip  of  Flanders.  The  order  was  :— 

"  A  rimoir  le  mellor  conte 
Qui  soit  contes  en  court  roial." 

The  materials  were  written  materials,  namely,  li  contes  del 
Greal,  as  to  which  //  Quens  li  bailla  le  livre.  Such  was 
the  source  of  the  earliest  Quest-matter ;  and  the  earliest 
extant  History-matter  depends  also  from  a  great  book, 
wherein  great  clerks  wrote  "  the  great  secrets  which  are 
called  the  Graal  "  :— 

"  Ge  n'ose  center  ne  retreire, 
Ne  ge  ne  le  pourroie  feire, 
Neis,  se  je  feire  le  voloie, 
Se  je  le  grant  livre  n'avoie 
Ou  les  estoires  sunt  escrites, 
Par  les  granz  clers  feites  et  dites : 
La  sunt  li  grant  secre  escrit 
Qu'en  nvmme  le  Graal  et  dit." 

Whereas  therefore  his  patron  communicated  to  Chretien, 
it  was  Robert  de  Borron  who  communicated  to  Walter 
Montbeliard,  in  whose  service  he  was.  We  see  in  this 
manner  that  the  first  poet  of  the  Conte  del  Graal  depended 
on  antecedent  authority  which  was  not  of  the  oral  kind ; 
by  one  stage  the  question  of  source  raised  here  has  been 
moved  back,  and  there  must  be  left  for  the  present. 

We  saw  in  the  Welsh  Perceval  that  there  was  a  sword 
which  broke  and  was  rejoined,  but  in  the  stress  of  the 
last  trial  it  was  shattered  beyond  recovery.  The  episode 
in  Chretien  which  corresponds  hereto  is  represented 

204 


"The  Early   Epochs   of  the  Quest 

sufficiently  for  my  purpose  by  the  details  already  given 
when  considering  the  Hallows  of  the  Legend.  I  may  add 
only  that  while  certain  codices  make  no  attempt  to  account 
for  the  return  of  the  Broken  Sword  to  the  Graal  Castle, 
there  are  others  which  illustrate  the  foreknowledge  of 
the  king  by  his  despatch  of  a  messenger  to  follow  Per- 
ceval in  his  travels  till  the  mischance  of  the  promised 
peril  overtakes  him.  In  yet  others  the  fragments  of 
the  mystic  weapon  seem  to  have  been  spirited  away.  It 
will  be  seen  that  in  the  Welsh  Perceval  there  is  nothing 
to  connect  the  maiming  of  the  Lord  of  the  Castle  with 
the  gigantic  Lance  which  is  carried  about  therein.  The 
connection  remains  naturally  a  reasonable  inference,  but 
we  cannot  tell.  The  Sword  certainly  serves  no  purpose 
but  that  of  a  trial  of  strength.  In  Chretien  it  appears, 
on  the  other  hand,  almost  as  a  part  of  the  plot,  and  the 
scheme  is  carried  out  by  the  sequels  in  accordance  with 
so  much  as  may  be  called  manifest  in  the  intention  of 
the  first  poet. 

Turning  from  the  Hallows  of  the  story,  it  so  happens 
that  it  is  after  the  manner  of  Chretien  to  furnish  his 
most  important  elucidations  with  the  least  suggestion 
of  intention.  I  have  spoken  of  the  mystery  of  that 
Chamber  wherein  the  Graal  enters  or  re-enters  after  its 
manifestation  in  the  pageant,  or  into  which  alternatively 
the  dove  flies  in  one  Quest  of  the  Greater  Chronicles, 
before  the  Sacred  Vessel  is  displayed.  It  is  Chretien 
only  who  discloses  the  secret  of  the  hidden  place,  or 
at  least  manifests  up  to  what  point  he  understands  it 
himself,  when  he  says  of  the  king,  whom  I  interpret  as 
sometime  king  of  the  Graal : — 

" .  xx  .  ans  i  a  estet  ensi. 
Que  fors  de  la  cambre  n'issi 
U  le  Greal  veis  entrer." 

It  was  the  bedchamber  of  that  Warden  of  the  Hallows 
who  was  far  more  concealed  than  he  who  is  called  or 
miscalled  the  Rich  Fisher  in  the  same  text.  The 
further  question  which  arises  for  our  consideration 

205 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

concerns,  therefore,  this  nameless  being  who  is  the 
father  of  the  king  in  evidence.  The  allusions  to  him 
are  so  brief  and  so  vague  that  those  who  continued 
the  story  thought  it  best  to  ignore  them,  though  I 
hold  it  as  certain  that  Gautier  had  the  elements  of  an 
explanation  in  his  hands.  Without  forestalling  what 
there  is  to  say  on  this  point  in  the  next  sub-section, 
I  will  refer  back  to  an  earlier  part  of  our  inquiry, 
when  it  was  noted  that  the  quest  in  Chretien  presup- 
poses an  early  history  and — notwithstanding  certain 
confusions,  as,  for  example,  regarding  the  origin  of 
the  title  King  Fisherman — that  this  history  may  have 
corresponded,  in  respect  of  its  essence,  to  the  first  draft 
of  the  metrical  romance  by  Robert  de  Borron,  or  alter- 
natively to  the  source  from  which  the  latter  drew,  and 
in  which  it  may  be  hazarded  that  there  seem  to  have  been 
several  histories.  It  is  too  early  to  speculate  whether 
the  texts  which  had  come  into  the  possession  of  the  pious 
minstrel  included  the  single  story  which  the  Count  of 
Flanders  placed  in  the  hands  of  Chretien,  but  there 
must  have  been  a  general  prototype.  Apart  from  the 
Longer  Prose  Perceval,  which  is  extra-lineal  in  most  details 
of  its  tradition,  there  are  three  persons  connected  im- 
mediately with  the  Graal  in  the  various  quests.  In  the 
Parsifal  of  Wolfram  there  are  (a)  Titurel — precisely  in 
the  position  of  the  mysterious  king  in  Chretien,  and 
like  him  abdicated  ;  (#)  the  reigning  king  Amfortas, 
who  is  fed  by  the  Graal ;  and  (c)  Parsifal,  the  king 
who  is  to  come.  In  the  quest  of  Galahad  there  are 
(a)  the  maimed  king,  Pellehan  ;  (£)  the  reigning  king, 
Pelles ;  and  (<:)  Galahad,  the  king  who  is  to  come. 
In  the  Didot  Perceval  there  are  (#)  Brons,  who  is  sick 
of  the  centuries,  but  still  the  Graal  king ;  (£)  his 
son  Alain,  but  in  this  case  he  dies,  without  it  being 
possible  for  us  to  assign  his  special  place  in  the 
mystery ;  and  (<:)  Perceval,  as  a  coming  king  who  is 
in  the  warfare  of  his  training.  Now,  this  notion  of  a 
triple  guardianship  was  first  put  forward  in  the  romance 

206 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

of  De  Borron,  and  is  evidently  one  of  the  root-ideas  of 
the  historical  branches ;  and  if  in  a  certain  sense  it  is 
broken  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  to  establish  some 
phantom  of  a  chronological  succession,  the  Quest  which 
follows  therefrom  recurs,  as  we  see,  thereto.  I  should 
add  that  the  Royal  Family  of  the  Holy  Graal — in  the 
story  of  Chretien  and  its  sequels — has  no  names  in  the 
canonical  texts  till  Perceval  comes  into  his  own,  but 
there  is  a  variant  or  interpolation  in  a  Berne  manu- 
script which  follows  the  keepership  in  De  Borron. 

Separating  from  the  poem  of  Chretien  not  merely  the 
prologue,  which  is  by  another  hand,  but  an  introductory 
part  which  is  also  of  uncertain  authorship,  while  it  has 
elements  in  rather  close  correspondence  with  the  Welsh 
Mabinogi  of  Peredur,  and  adhering  to  the  more  authentic 
poem  itself,  there  is  a  diversity  of  the  circumstances  under 
which  Perceval  was  born  whereby  it  is  set  apart  from  the 
Welsh  story  and  from  theEnglishpoem.  Intheintroduction 
there  are  variants  from  these,  but  they  are  matters  of  detail. 
According  to  Chretien,  it  is  the  maiming  of  Perceval's 
father  which  takes  the  family  into  the  woods.  Perceval 
is  the  youngest  of  three  sons,  and  the  time  comes  for  the 
others  to  be  sent  into  the  world.  They  are  commissioned 
to  the  courts  of  two  kings,  where  they  are  both  knighted 
on  the  same  day,  and,  though  widely  separated,  both  are 
also  slain.  It  is  this  misfortune  which  causes  the  death 
of  the  father  and  the  desire  on  the  mother's  part  to 
isolate  her  remaining  boy  from  all  knowledge  of  chivalry. 
While  the  result  is  a  certain  inexperience,  he  does  not 
seem  so  savage  or  untrained  as  in  the  texts  which  we 
have  considered  previously,  and  the  surroundings  of  his 
father's  house  are  those  of  a  knight  who  has  retired 
to  a  country  estate  on  account  of  his  health.  Seeing 
that  there  is  nothing  so  little  to  my  purpose  as  to  be 
at  any  unnecessary  pains  regarding  the  conventional 
story  part  of  successive  texts,  I  shall  deal  very  shortly 
with  points  of  minor  variation  in  the  life  and  adventures 
of  the  hero,  and  as  regards  the  major  episodes,  they  may 

207 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

be  thus  recited  in  summary : — The  adventure  of  the 
Pavilion ;  the  initial  visit  to  the  Court  of  King  Arthur ; 
the  struggle  with  the  Red  Knight ;  the  sojourn  with  an 
instructor  in  chivalry ;  the  liberation  of  that  Lady  of  the 
Castle  who  is  here  named  Blanchefleur ;  the  first  visit  to 
the  House  of  the  Graal ;  the  meeting  with  Perceval's  kins- 
woman afterwards ;  the  exoneration  of  the  Lady  of  the 
Pavilion ;  the  search  of  the  King  and  his  knights  after 
the  hero  whom  they  had  once  rejected  almost ;  the 
love-trance  ;  the  denunciation  of  Perceval  by  the  laidly 
damosel  ;  his  godless  wanderings ;  the  episode  of  Good 
Friday ;  the  renewal  of  grace  which  he  receives  at  the 
hands  of  a  hermit,  who — in  this  case — is  his  uncle  :  all 
these  follow  in  due  order,  and  though  it  is  not  throughout 
the  exact  order  which  we  find  in  the  Welsh  Mabinogi,  that 
text  remains  the  artificial  prototype  representing  the  early 
narrative  portion,  and  to  this  Chretien  has  added  the  Holy 
Graal  as  his  ostensible  motive  in  chief.  The  first  sojourn 
of  Perceval  at  the  Graal  Castle  takes  place  in  the  absence 
of  any  design  on  the  part  of  the  hero ;  he  is  not, 
in  other  words,  on  the  Quest  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  and 
he  knew  nothing  about  it.  When  he  has  liberated 
Blanchefleur  from  her  thraldom  in  the  castle  of  Beau- 
repaire,  his  avowed  quest  is  that  which  will  bring  him  to 
his  mother,  but  when  he  has  found  her  he  will  return 
to  the  maiden,  will  marry  her  and  share  her  rule. 
The  other  maiden  who  reproaches  him  for  his  failure 
immediately  after  his  departure  from  the  Graal  Castle 
is  his  cousin-german  instead  of  his  foster-sister,  and  in 
addition  to  his  responsibility  in  respect  of  his  mother's 
death,  she  denounces  him  for  not  asking  the  redeeming 
questions  concerning  the  Vessel  and  the  Lance.  In  this 
manner  the  subsequent  reproaches  of  the  laidly  damosel 
at  the  Court  of  King  Arthur — which  is  in  camp  on  the 
quest  of  Perceval,  and  not  at  Caerleon — concern  a  twice- 
told  tale.  The  adventures  of  Perceval  are  carried  by 
Chretien  as  far  as  his  visit  to  that  uncle  who  has  em- 
braced the  life  of  a  hermit. 

208 


The   Early  Epochs   of  the   Quest 


§  C. — THE  EXTENSION  OF  GAUTIER 

It  is  certain  that  the  poet  who  took  up  the  thread  of 
the  story  which  was  left  by  Chretien  had  antecedent  texts 
to  go  upon  outside  the  work  of  his  predecessor,  and  that 
one  at  least  of  these  is  not  to  be  identified  with  purely 
folk-lore  materials.  It  is  considered  that  the  metrical 
romance  of  De  Borron  was  not  one  of  his  documents, 
and  on  the  hypothesis — or  perhaps  I  should  say  on  the 
theory — of  a  primordial  non-Graal  Quest — as  reflected 
into  the  Welsh  Mabinogi  and  the  English  Syr  Percyvelle 
—it  would  follow  that  he  had  seen  this.  Now,  there 
are  traces  in  the  Mabinogi  of  an  intention  which  might 
have  led  up  to  the  marriage  of  Perceval  and  Blanchefleur, 
if  his  enchantment  by  the  empress  had  not  extended  over 
a  period  which  put  such  a  possibility  out  of  the  question. 
In  the  English  metrical  story  the  marriage  is  a  natural 
conclusion,  and  we  have  seen  that  it  takes  place  accord- 
ingly. In  Chretien  there  are  the  same  traces,  and  they 
reappear  more  strongly  in  Gautier,  but  the  term  of  his 
intention  is  unmanifest  because  he  failed  to  conclude. 
The  common  consent  of  scholarship  would  hold  probably 
that  the  prototype  of  both  poets  celebrated  a  bridal  at  its 
end.  It  contained  also  the  widely  diffused  story  of  the 
maiden  and  the  hound,  or  bracket,  which  I  have  held  over 
from  the  Welsh  story  to  speak  of  in  this  place.  Finally, 
in  some  form  it  had  the  curious  episode  of  the  chess- 
board. But,  fully  developed  as  they  are  in  the  long 
extension  of  Gautier,  these  things  are  of  his  accidents 
only,  while  of  the  essence  is  his  zeal  of  the  Graal  Quest, 
which  overrules  all  things  else  in  his  ingarnering  of 
diverse  memorials.  Of  that  quest  he  has  practically  two 
heroes,  and  though  a  superior  success  attends  the  search 
of  Perceval  the  adventures  of  his  alternate  Gawain  are 
recounted  at  still  greater  length.  This  latter  part,  taken 
over  from  the  first  poet  of  the  Conte,  at  once  so  extended 

209  o 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  so  important  in  its  Graal  elements,  is  postponed  for 
consideration  separately,  registering  here  the  bare  fact 
only  that  in  the  section  of  Gautier  and  in  the  additamenta 
thereto  belonging,  Gawain  appears  most  expressly  as  one 
of  the  heroes  connected  with  the  vision  of  the  Holy 
Vessel.  Of  their  comparative  merits  there  need  be  no 
question,  as  the  grace  of  sanctity  had  not  entered  into  the 
heart  of  the  poet  who  began  or  of  him  who  extended 
the  Graal  story.  The  Sacred  Vessel  was  glorieus  and  the 
Sacred  Vessel  was  sains,  but  the  election  thereto  was  that 
of  the  best  Knight  in  the  world,  or  his  nearest  co-heritor 
in  chivalry,  and  not  of  him  who  was  resplendent  in  the 
arms  of  spiritual  achievement.  Gawain  was  therefore,  in 
this  sense,  scarcely  less  eligible  than  Perceval,  and  the 
ground  of  his  comparative  failure  was  either  an  implied 
incapacity  from  the  fact  that  he  was  not  of  the  Keeper- 
ship  lineage  or  that  for  some  reason  it  had  been  decided 
to  regard  Perceval  as  the  more  elect  hero  among  two 
exotic  flowers  of  Knighthood. 

Of  Perceval  himself,  however,  who  for  the  purpose  of 
introducing  Gawain  had  been  left  far  behind  in  the  nar- 
rative of  Chretien,  we  hear  no  single  word  till  nearly  half 
the  work  has  been  accomplished  by  Gautier.  His  story 
is  then  resumed  at  the  point  when  the  hero  has  departed 
from  the  hermitage  of  that  uncle  who  has  brought  him 
into  a  tolerable  state  of  repentance,  purging  him  by  the 
offices  of  the  Church,  and  has  communicated,  as  if  it 
were  in  secret  Mass  or  sacred  Eucharist,  the  first  mys- 
teries of  the  Graal.  Perceval  had  been  denounced  pre- 
viously for  the  omission  which  he  had  almost  covenanted 
to  make,  and  no  hope  had  been  extended  that  he  should 
yet  act  as  repairer  in  fine,  so  that  from  initial  point  to 
term,  as  he  could  then  perceive  it,  some  blind  and  im- 
placable fatality  appeared  to  have  been  at  work  alone. 
Now,  on  the  other  hand,  and  if  not  all  too  plainly,  it 
looked  as  if  there  followed  by  inference  that  a  high  hope 
of  achievement  was  held  out  to  him  by  his  uncle's  words  ; 
he  resolved  therefore  that  he  would  not  return  to  King 

2IO 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

Arthur's  court  till  he  had  revisited  the  Fisher  King's 
Castle  and  inquired  concerning  the  Graal.  But  all  with- 
out that  secret  fastness  was  not  only  beset  by  perils 
and  hard  encounters,  but  it  turned  in  a  glass  of  strange 
vision  and  great  deception.  Once  more,  I  am  not  con- 
cerned in  summarising  the  story  to  take  in  all  its  details, 
because,  as  usual,  several  of  its  episodes  are  idle  and  ex- 
trinsic in  respect  of  our  proper  purpose.  The  Castle  of 
all  Desire  moved  near  or  far  upon  the  confused  horizon 
of  adventure,  and  at  a  certain  point  Perceval  reached  a 
river,  beyond  which  he  was  assured  that  the  bourne  rose  up 
grandly,  in  a  rich  and  peopled  land ;  but  he  could  find 
no  means  of  crossing.  The  day  passed  from  noon  to 
vespers,  and  still  on  the  further  side  he  came  to  a  vacant 
palace,  beautiful  exceedingly  in  situation,  moult  Men  seant, 
but  now  standing  drearily  in  ruins.  There  he  found  a 
maiden  who  was  prepared  to  show  him  a  place  of  cross- 
ing and  mounted  her  mule  for  the  purpose,  but  her  in- 
tention was  only  to  drown  him.  Unless  we  can  connect 
this  incident  with  something  which  will  follow  presently, 
I  find  nothing  therein  except  an  unmeaning  hindrance, 
and  the  same  may  be  said  of  an  episode  which  occurs 
hereabouts  in  certain  manuscripts,  being  the  meeting 
between  Perceval  and  a  huntsman  who  reproached  him 
for  the  fatality  of  the  unasked  question  at  the  Graal 
Castle.  It  shows  only  that  the  rumour  of  the  ill-starred 
visit  had  gone  about  the  district,  which  was  acquainted 
otherwise,  and  too  well,  with  the  sorrows  of  the  Holy 
House  and  their  effects  beyond  the  precincts.  As  regards 
the  maiden  and  the  mule,  I  would  note  further  that  in 
the  Conte  del  Graal  there  is  a  curse  on  Logres  which 
occupies  a  middle  term  between  times  of  adventure  and 
times  of  enchantment,  and  one  inference  may  be  that 
Perceval  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  water-fairy, 
belonging  to  the  kelpie  type,  as  the  malice  of  an  earthly 
maiden  could  be  assumed  scarcely  in  connection  with 
such  a  meeting  between  complete  strangers ;  or — that 
which  is  still  more  probable — the  brief  occurrence  may  be 

211 


The   Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

due  only  to  the  sporadic  invention  of  the  writer.  In 
any  case,  the  Knight,  having  been  better  counselled, 
learned  of  a  ford,  and  so  entered  presumably  on  the 
direct  road  which  led,  by  the  hypothesis,  to  the  desired 
House  of  Great  Hallows.  Yet  he  was  still  far  from  his 
term,  and  many  adventures  in  the  vicinity  intervened 
without  him  reaching  the  goal.  First  among  these  was 
a  visit  to  another  deserted  castle — such  desolation  being 
perhaps  a  part  of  the  curse — and  therein  he  found  the 
chess-board  of  which  we  have  heard  something  in  the 
metamorphoses  and  adventures  of  the  Welsh  Peredur. 
Here  it  was  no  hideous  damosel  who  came  in  to  upbraid 
him,  but  a  maid  of  great  beauty,  who  rose  from  the  midst 
of  the  lake  into  which  Perceval  had  proposed  to  cast  the 
board  and  pieces.  The  fact  that  she  held  his  hands 
substituted  another  quest  for  that  of  their  recovery  in  the 
alternative  story.  A  white  stag  ranged  in  the  park  of 
the  castle,  and  if  the  knight  would  receive  those  favours 
which  her  beauty  led  him  to  demand  he  must  bring  her 
the  head  of  this  animal,  to  facilitate  which  she  lent  him  a 
hound  with  express  injunctions  to  return  it.  I  do  not 
propose  to  follow  the  adventures  which  arise  out  of  this 
undertaking.  The  favours  involved  by  the  covenant 
had  unhappily  been  granted  to  Perceval  in  the  case  of 
Blanchefleur,  though  not  perhaps  when  her  distress,  at 
their  first  meeting,  had  brought  her  to  his  bedside,  and 
into  his  arms  afterwards,  through  the  whole  night.  Her 
true  love  was  to  follow  her  liberation  by  him  from  the 
violence  of  an  undesired  suitor.  But  it  was  granted 
indubitably  in  the  plenary  sense  when  he  reached  her 
castle  unexpectedly  for  the  second  time.  Still  it  was 
under  circumstances  which  do  not  occur  commonly  in 
romances  of  chivalry  unless  the  consummation  of  marriage 
is  intended  at  the  close  of  all.  That  she  was  a  bride 
elect  is  clear  beyond  all  in  the  poem,  and  in  yielding,  it 
was  to  her  husband  that  she  yielded  only,  which  makes 
one  later  episode  in  Perceval's  story  the  more  iniquitous 
for  this  reason.  That  Perceval  was  self-devoted  to 

212 


The  Early  Epochs   of  the   Quest 

Blanchefleur  follows  from  the  episode  of  the  love-trance, 
but  his  inclinations  are  variable  in  the  Conte,  as  they  are 
in  the  Welsh  story ;  for  the  love  of  the  Lady  of  the 
Chess-board  he  goes  through  long-enduring  quests  which 
so  end  that  at  length  he  attains  his  desires.  In  all  this 
there  are  only  two  points  that  concern  us — firstly,  that 
the  attainment  involves  the  desertion  of  Blanchefleur 
under  circumstances  that  for  the  knight  are  disgraceful ; 
and,  secondly,  that  the  prolongation  of  the  adventures 
which  follow  the  slaying  of  the  stag  are  due  to  the 
daughter  of  the  Fisher  King,  or  at  least  in  part,  and 
are  designed  to  punish  Perceval  for  not  having  asked 
the  question. 

I  have  said  that  the  locality  of  the  Graal  Castle  is  as 
if  it  were  a  place  in  flux ;  there  is  nothing  in  the  opening 
of  the  story  to  lend  colour  to  the  supposition  that  the 
Sacred  Vessel  and  the  Mystery  and  the  House  of  these 
were  close  to  the  manorial  residence  and  rural  retreat 
wherein  Perceval  passed  his  childhood  ;  hence  it  is  doubt- 
less by  reason  that  the  Castle  was  here  to-day  and  gone 
to-morrow  that  they  are  brought  suddenly  into  com- 
parative proximity.  Perceval  was  still  in  the  course 
of  his  stag  adventures  and  still  seeking  the  prize  which 
was  to  follow  their  completion  ;  still  also  he  was  hearing 
casually  concerning  the  Graal,  or  at  least  was  in  occasional 
speculation  regarding  its  whereabouts  ;  when  he  found 
himself,  without  expectation  and  without  intention,  at  the 
door  of  his  old  home,  for  the  first  time  only  in  ten 
years.  There  he  entered,  there  he  tarried  but  too  briefly, 
and  there  he  met  with  his  sister — of  whom  Chretien 
knows  nothing,  even  as  Gautier  elects  to  ignore  entirely 
the  cousin-german  of  the  earlier  poet.  He  seems,  how- 
ever, to  have  been  following  some  earlier  stage  of  the 
legend,  to  which  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  and  the  Great 
Quest  also  conform,  and  in  that  last  and  glorious  text 
the  personality  of  the  sister  is  exalted  to  a  high  grade  of 
sanctity,  of  which  we  find  nothing  but  the  first  traces — 
for  the  first  traces  are  present — in  the  account  of  Gautier. 

213 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Herein  she  is  a  spirit  of  recollection  and  a  meditative 
recluse — 

"  Une  moult  tr£s  cointe  puciele, 
Blanc  com  flours  en  may  novele." 

But  she  is  clothed  richly  withal  and  encompassed  by  a 
fair  retinue,  so  living  sad  and  unfriended  in  the  wood- 
land, lamenting  the  loss  of  her  brother,  of  whose  fate 
she  had  heard  nothing.  When  Perceval  declared  himself 
there  was  great  joy  between  them,  and  of  her  he  learned 
the  particulars  of  their  mother's  death,  through  the  love 
and  the  loss  of  him.  Together  they  visited  a  hermit 
uncle  who  is  not  to  be  identified  with  the  former, 
being  on  the  father's  side  ;  to  him  Perceval  made  his 
confession — though  of  all  prayers  he  knew  only  the 
Pater  noster — heard  at  his  celebration  a  Mass  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  knelt  at  the  tomb  of  their  mother,  and  of 
his  uncle  prayed  piteously  that  he  might  learn  con- 
cerning the  Graal  and  the  other  Hallows.  But  his  uncle 
would  tell  him  nothing  at  that  time,  though  he  gave 
him  high  instruction  regarding  holy  mysteries  of  re- 
ligion. That  the  heart  of  Perceval  was  not  reached, 
his  reverence  notwithstanding,  was  too  soon  made  evident 
by  the  fact  that  he  bequeathed  his  sister  to  renewed 
isolation,  with  a  mere  promise  to  return  which  is  never 
fulfilled,  and  soon  or  some  time  afterwards  he  was  in  a 
position — as  we  shall  see — to  claim  and  receive  his  dues 
from  the  Lady  of  the  Chess-board. 

Neither  sin  of  concupiscence  nor  sin  of  desertion  have 
disqualified  him  for  the  Quest  of  the  Graal  in  the  opinion 
of  Gautier,  and  he  was  still  less  or  more  on  that  Quest 
when  he  came  to  a  Castle  of  Maidens,  who  were  reputed 
to  have  raised  the  beautiful  edifice  with  their  own  hands — 

"  Ains  le  fisent  .  mi  .  pucieles, 
Moult  avenans  et  moult  tres  bieles." 

Of  these  things  he  heard  the  story,  though  he  was  weary 
and  looked  rather  for  rest.  So  was  he  delivered  to  his 

214 


The  Early   Epochs  of  the   Quest 

slumber,  but  the  place  was  all  work  of  faerie,  and  he 
reposed  in  enchantment  that  night.  Faerie  houses  are, 
however,  like  faerie  gold — dead  leaves  and  dry  in  the 
morning,  or  mere  shadow  and  rainbow  semblance  which 
dissolve  in  the  eastern  light.  So  Perceval  woke  in  a 
meadow  with  an  oak  murmuring  above  him.  From  all 
this  there  follows  nothing,  but  it  is  designed  that  the  next 
adventure  should  take  him  a  further  step  in  the  direction 
of  his  term.  It  seems  that  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
Graal  Castle  there  was  always  a  river  to  cross,  and  as  on 
the  first  occasion  he  met  with  a  lady  and  a  mule  from  whom 
followed  his  destruction  almost,  so  now  there  was  another 
maiden  with  a  similar  beast  in  her  charge,  thus  creating 
a  kind  of  equilibrium  between  false  and  true  assistance. 
The  story  is  very  long,  and  much  of  it  is  outside  the 
object,  but  it  may  be  reduced  under  three  heads:  (i) 
Perceval  was  riding  with  the  lady,  whom  he  lost  at  night 
in  the  forest.  Alone  and  so  lost,  he  beheld  a  great  light 
— very  clear  and  very  resplendent — but  it  was  followed 
by  tempest.  (2)  In  the  morning  he  recovered  the  damosel, 
who  said  that  it  was  the  light  of  the  Graal,  which  the 
Rich  King  Fisher  was  accustomed  to  carry  in  the  forest, 
so  that  no  infernal  temptation  should  have  power 
over  him.  In  the  Conte  therefore,  as  in  the  Quest  of 
Galahad,  the  Graal  goes  about,  but  it  is  not  for  the  same 
reason.  (3)  The  maiden  described  the  Vessel  as  that 
which  contained  the  glorious  blood  of  the  King  of  Kings 
which  was  received  therein  as  He  hung  upon  the  cross. 
This  is  rather  the  account  of  the  Vulgate  Merlin  than  of 
Robert  de  Borron,  but  the  distinction  is  one  of  detail, 
and  it  follows  that  the  Early  History  which  was  known 
to  Gautier  was  that  of  a  relic  of  the  Passion.  (4)  More 
than  this  the  lady  would  not  reveal,  because  it  was  a  thing 
too  secret  for  dame  or  damosel  to  recount ;  it  was  also 
a  tale  of  terror,  though  a  man  of  holy  life  might  express 
the  marvels.  (5)  That  which  she  could  do  she  would 
do,  however — namely,  lend  him  her  white  mule — the 
beast  which  another  romance  declares  to  be  on  God's 

215 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

side — and  she  would  lend  him  also  her  ring,  by  which 
the  mule  was  governed.  Thus  assisted,  he  would  be  able 
to  cross  a  certain  bridge  of  glass,  from  which  he  might 
travel  direct  to  the  King's  Castle.  Thereafter  the  mule 
would  return  of  itself.  He  was  not  all  the  same  destined 
to  continue  the  journey  far  beyond  the  waterside.  He 
was  riding  the  mule,  and  leading  his  horse  by  the  bridle, 
when  he  encountered  a  knight  who  gave  him  news  of  a 
tourney  about  to  be  held  by  King  Arthur,  and — ignoring 
his  original  resolve — he  turned  aside  from  the  straight 
path  to  attend  it.  The  digression  delayed  his  achieve- 
ment, but  it  left  him  the  best  knight  of  the  world,  and 
this  was  a  condition  of  the  achievement.  It  did  not, 
however,  meet  the  views  of  the  damosel  who  was  owner 
of  the  mule  and  the  ring,  for  she  reappeared  and  de- 
manded their  return,  on  ascertaining  that  his  Quest  was 
not  achieved.  They  were  both  delivered,  and  thereafter 
— without  salutation  or  farewell — he  was  left  to  shift  as 
he  might  on  the  way,  now  all  unknown,  to  the  Holy 
House.  It  was  at  this  time,  as  if  once  more  without 
God  in  the  world,  that  his  road  took  him  to  the  Castli 
of  the  Chess-board,  for  during  all  these  scenes  and  times 
he  had  carried  the  stag's  head  and  the  dog  of  the  damosel. 
The  term  of  this  foolish  business  should  have  increased 
the  difficulties  of  his  Quest,  but — on  the  contrary — the 
lady  was  to  a  certain  extent  his  conductress  in  place  of 
the  maiden  of  the  mule,  for  she  it  was  who  took  him 
again  to  the  waterside  and  to  a  great  boat  there  at  hand 
which  carried  him — horse  and  all — to  the  opposite  shore, 
beyond  which  stretched  that  broad  way  which  led  to  the 
Court  of  King  Fisher. 

The  subsequent  occurrences  are  all  intended  to  connect 
intimately  with  his  arrival  thereat  and  with  the  Rite  of 
Questioning  which  is  his  prime  object,  but  we  shall  see 
in  their  later  understanding  that  they  are  fantastic  rather 
than  important,  which  also  appears  on  their  surface. 
He  found  a  child  of  apparently  five  years  old,  clothed 
in  rich  vestments  and  seated  on  a  branch  of  a  tree 

216 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the   Quest 

higher  than  any  lance  could  reach.  Of  him  Perceval, 
now  full  of  his  mission,  inquired  concerning  the  Fisher 
King  but  was  told  only  that  if  he  would  learn  news 
which  might  prove  good  and  pleasant  he  must  go  to  the 
Mount  Dolorous,  after  which  the  speaker  put  a  period 
to  further  questioning  by  ascending  higher  in  the  tree 
and  thence  vanishing.  Perceval  reached  the  mountain 
and  met  with  a  maid  coming  down  on  a  palfrey  who 
counselled  him  against  the  adventure,  but  he  began 
the  ascent  and  at  the  summit  found  fifteen  crosses,  of 
which  five  were  white,  five  red  and  five  blue.  These 
encircled  a  pillar,  to  which  he  must  fasten  his  steed. 
To  fail  was  to  lose  reason.  The  achievement  seems 
childish,  but  it  was  a  proof  of  valour  devised  of  old 
by  Merlin  in  order  that  the  flower  of  chivalry  should 
alone  serve  King  Arthur,  and  the  maid  who  told  this 
story  was  Merlin's  daughter,  of  whom  we  find  nothing 
otherwise  in  the  canonical  romances  of  the  Graal.  Seeing 
that  very  few  knights  of  the  Round  Table  ever  heard  of 
Mount  Dolorous  and  much  less  of  the  testing,  the 
account  seems  an  idle  invention,  but  it  is  regarded  as 
important  for  early  Arthurian  history.  Perceval  being 
still  on  his  journey,  at  the  conclusion  of  this  adventure, 
came  next  to  a  great  tree  which  was  illuminated  by 
innumerable  candles,  like  a  high  altar  at  the  exposition 
of  the  Most  Holy  Sacrament.  It  was  the  spectacle  of 
a  moment  only,  for  the  lights  vanished  on  his  approach, 
and  he  found  himself  at  a  wonderful  chapel,  where  a 
dead  knight  lay  in  repose  on  the  altar  and  a  black 
hand,  appearing  behind  the  altar,  extinguished  one 
great  light  thereon.  The  significance  of  these  things 
appears  in  the  sequel  and  does  not  signify  especially. 
In  fine,  Perceval  arrived  at  the  Graal  Castle,  wherein 
he  found  the  King  and  told  him  of  his  latest  adventures, 
namely,  those  on  his  way  to  the  Castle.  The  Hallows 
appeared,  and  for  the  first  time  in  the  poem  the  expres- 
sion Saint  Greal  is  used  in  connection  with  the  actual 
vision  of  the  object.  When  the  procession  had  passed 

217 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  repassed,  Perceval  asked,  as  we  know,  the  required 
questions,  whereat  the  King  told  him  that  these  were 
great  matters,  and  in  the  first  place  he  recounted  the 
meaning  of  the  child  seated  on  the  branch  of  that 
tree  which  the  knight  passed  on  his  way  thither. 
Perceval  did  not  learn  what  he  wanted,  because  of  his 
sins,  and  the  episode  as  a  whole  indicated  that  the 
thought  of  man  should  be  raised  towards  his  Creator — 
an  allegorical  trifle  which  is  after  the  manner  of  Masonic 
teaching,  as  this  appears  on  the  surface,  or  much  ado 
about  little.  Before  he  could  hear  further  Perceval  was 
invited  to  piece  the  broken  sword  together,  which  he  did, 
apparently  by  the  power  of  his  magnetism  as  the  best 
knight  in  the  world.  He  left  only  a  slight  crevice  at 
the  point  of  junction,  which  I  should  account  for  as 
signifying  that  other  point  in  time  at  which  the  sin 
of  sense  entered  into  his  life — but  this  is  without  pre- 
judice to  the  explanation  provided  in  one  of  the  sequels 
which  stand  over  for  consideration.  The  partial  success 
led  the  Keeper  of  the  Hallows  to  hail  Perceval  as  one 
of  the  lords  of  the  House,  though  he  was  told  at  the 
same  time  that  the  Quest  was  yet  unfinished.  As  Gautier 
dwells  more  especially  on  the  resoldering  of  the  Broken 
Sword,  it  may  be  inferred  that  what  still  remained  was 
the  perfect  completion  of  this  work.  The  next  teller 
of  the  story  will  be  found,  however,  to  import  another 
element,  which  so  far  may  have  been  an  implicit  of  the 
poem  but  has  not  been  explicated.  For  the  rest,  Gautier 
explains  nothing  concerning  that  withdrawn  and  abdicated 
king,  of  whom  we  hear  something  in  Chretien,  nor  does 
he  make  more  than  the  one  reference,  which  I  have  cited, 
to  the  daughter  of  the  Rich  Fisher,  except  that  to  all 
appearance  she  continued  her  office  as  Bearer  of  the 
Holy  Graal. 


218 


The  Early  Epochs   of  the  Quest 


§  D. — THE  CONCLUSION  OF  MANESSIER 

There  is  a  disposition  to  think  that  the  extension  of 
Gautier  broke  off  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence,  which  was 
brought  by  the  poet  who  followed  him  to  its  due  point, 
and  the  narrative  continues  thereafter,  in  his  hands  re- 
maining to  the  very  end.  This  poet  was  Manessier. 
We  have,  however,  to  remember  that  at  or  about  the 
alleged  break  there  intervened  another  singer,  who  in- 
tended, almost  certainly,  to  furnish  an  alternative  or  inde- 
pendent conclusion,  the  term  of  which  may  have  been 
by  possibility  at  the  penultimate  completed  sentence  of 
Gautier's  version,  wherein  the  Fisher  King  calls  Perceval 
to  enter  within  the  fold  of  the  house — 

"  Sires  soies  de  ma  maison, 
Je  vos  mec  tout  en  abandon 
Quan  que  jou  ai,  sans  mil  dangler ; 
A  tous  jours  vos  arai  plus  cier 
Que  nul  homme  qui  ja  mais  soit." 

It  would  be  in  this  case  much  the  same  ending  as  that 
of  the  Berne  Perceval.  Alternatively,  there  may  have 
been  some  further  extension  which  is  not  now  extant,  or 
Gerbert,  on  his  own  part,  may  have  failed  to  complete 
as  he  proposed.  I  speak  with  considerable  diffidence, 
because  the  only  editor  of  the  text  has  given  such  a 
vague  account  of  that  which  preceded  the  interpolation 
and  followed  it  that  it  is  impossible  to  decide  whether 
he  has  mistaken  the  line  of  Gautier,  which  is  said  to  be 
the  point  of  intervention,  or  whether  the  experiment  of 
the  Broken  Sword  is  repeated  a  second  time — with 
glaring  inconsequence — and  proves  a  failure,  soon  after 
it  was  resoldered  in  Gautier's  text.  Again,  the  welcome 
among  his  household  by  the  Fisher  King  is  repeated  at 
the  end  in  the  one  manuscript  which  gives — according 
to  the  editor — the  narrative  of  Gerbert  in  extenso.  There 
is,  of  course,  another  alternative  which  would  exonerate 

219 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

M.  Potvin — the  editor  in  question — and  this  is  that  the 
scribe  of  the  codex  brought  in  the  Gerbert  version  at  an 
arbitrary  point  without  reference  to  that  which  went 
before  and  came  after  in  the  text  of  Gautier.  The  two 
poets  are  in  any  case  of  one  mind  as  to  the  unfinished 
state  of  the  Quest,  and  so  also  is  Manessier,  but  the 
latter  is  of  opinion  evidently  that  Perceval  has  accom- 
plished enough  to  have,  on  taking  up  the  thread  of  the 
narrative,  as  much  information  concerning  the  Graal 
and  Lance  as  he  intends  to  provide  under  any  circum- 
stances whatever,  together  with  so  exhaustive  a  history 
of  the  Broken  Sword  that  the  hero  shall  be  equipped  fully 
for  the  undertaking  which  remains  to  be  accomplished.  I 
have  said  that  Gautier  is  concerned  more  especially  with 
the  resoldering  of  this  weapon,  and  it  is  out  of  the  same 
talisman  that  Manessier  obtains  his  keynote,  or  that  which 
concerns  himself  in  the  palmary  sense — namely,  the  ven- 
geance-legend. It  was  the  sword  which  inflicted  the 
dolorous  stroke  and  by  fraud  encompassed  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  king's  brother.  It  was  the  sword  which 
wounded  the  king  himself  by  a  chance  in  which  lurked  a 
fatality,  and  his  healing  depended,  as  we  know,  on  the  visi- 
tation of  tardy  wrath  and  delayed  justice  upon  him  who 
used  and  misused  the  weapon.  With  the  explanation  of 
the  Graal  and  the  Lance  we  are  already  acquainted,  but 
the  inter-relation  between  the  two  Hallows  is  much  closer 
in  Manessier  than  it  is  in  some  other  versions ;  as  the 
Sacred  Spear  penetrated  the  side  of  Christ,  the  Graal  was 
raised  up  to  receive  it,  and  the  historic  account  which 
follows  shows  that  the  poet  was  acquainted  with  some 
early  rendering  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  which  differed 
materially  from  the  now  extant  form,  as  it  knew  nothing 
of  the  Second  Joseph — the  son  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea, 
to  whom  such  prominence  is  given  in  the  later  text.  It 
was  the  elder  or,  for  the  early  version,  the  only  Joseph 
of  the  Graal,  who  brought  the  Hallows  into  Britain,  who 
erected  the  Manor  or  Castle  in  which  the  King  was  now 
speaking  to  Perceval,  and  the  speaker  was  of  his  own 

220 


The  Early   Epochs  of  the   Quest 

lineage.  If  there  were  any  comparative  connection  in  the 
romances,  it  would  follow  that  the  Castle  was  Corbenic 
and  that  the  king  was  Pelles ;  but  as  the  latter  is  not 
certainly  this  personage,  so  in  the  former  case  there  is 
tolerable  reason  to  suppose  that  the  nameless  House  does 
not  correspond  to  the  mighty  pile  built  of  old  by  a  con- 
verted pagan  ruler,  for  which  he  was  visited  so  heavily. 
After  allowance  has  been  made  for  several  obvious  dis- 
parities, it  remains  of  no  little  importance  that  the  early 
history  of  the  Graal,  so  far  as  it  is  given  in  the  Conte,  is 
not  that  of  Robert  de  Borron  but  of  the  putative  Walter 
Map,  and  that  in  the  sequence  of  texts  as  we  have  them 
the  source  of  this  Early  History  leads  up  to  the  Quest  of 
Galahad  and  not  to  that  of  Perceval.  Apart  from  the 
German  cycle,  for  which  there  appear  to  be  two  sources 
— the  one  being  in  Northern  French  and  the  other  in 
something  so  far  untranslatable — the  root-matter  of 
Graal  history  was  a  text  which  corresponded  of  all  things 
most  closely  with  the  metrical  romance  of  De  Borron. 
It  was  sometimes  reflected  through  that  medium  and 
at  others  through  the  early  form  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal — and  this  history  was  one  of  Christian  symbolism 
and  religious  legend,  not  one  of  folk-lore — by  the  elements 
of  which  it  was  contaminated  in  the  course  of  develop- 
ment in  romance. 

Perceval,  on  the  great  night  of  his  visit  to  the  Graal 
Castle,  heard  other  wonders  than  those  of  the  Relics  of 
the  Passion  and  the  Sword  of  wrath  and  vengeance.  He 
heard  that  the  maiden  who  carried  the  Graal  was  of  royal 
lineage  and  so  also  was  she  who  bore  the  salver,  but  the 
former  was  the  King's  daughter.  He  heard  that  the 
illuminated  tree  which  he  passed  in  his  journey  was  the 
Tree  of  Enchantment,  where  the  fairies  assemble  ;  for  the 
powers  of  the  height  and  the  powers  of  the  deep  and 
the  powers  of  the  intermediate  world  encompassed  the 
Graal  Castle,  that  the  times  of  enchantment,  times  of 
adventure,  times  of  wonder  might  be  illustrated  by  abun- 
dant pageants.  He  heard,  in  fine,  of  the  Chapel  and  the 

221 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

Black  Hand,  to  which  I  have  alluded  as  a  tale  of  little 
meaning,  wherein  the  Graal  has  no  part,  and  there  is  no 
need  to  repeat  the  explanation  here. 

After  all  these  narratives,  Perceval  covenanted  to  visit 
the  death  of  the  King's  brother  on  the  person  who  accom- 
plished it.  On  the  morning  following  he  took  his  leave, 
commending  his  host  to  God  and  refusing  all  invitations 
to  tarry.  Perhaps  Manessier  did  not  know  what  to 
do  in  order  to  retard,  for  the  purpose  of  story- 
telling, the  accomplishment  of  his  Vengeance  Quest. 
Alternatively,  perhaps  he  regarded  it  as  a  point  of  honour 
to  follow  his  precursors  by  giving  an  inordinate  space  to 
the  adventures  of  Gawain,  with  whom  he  couples  those 
of  Saigremor,  another  knight  of  fame  in  Arthurian 
romance.  In  any  case,  there  are  various  digressions  at 
this  point  which  account  for  one  half  of  the  poem. 
When  the  story  returns  ultimately  to  Perceval  he  was 
again  in  the  Chapel  which  he  had  visited  previously — 
that  of  the  Black  Hand,  the  extinguished  candle  and  the 
corpse  on  the  altar.  He  did  battle  with  and  expelled 
a  demon,  purified  the  place  and  slept  therein.  The  next 
day  he  assisted  three  hermits  to  bury  the  body  of  the 
person  whom  the  Black  Hand  had  slain.  All  this  not- 
withstanding— indeed,  perhaps  because  of  it — for  a  con- 
siderable part  of  his  mission  the  powers  of  the  deep 
attacked  him.  On  one  occasion  the  Accuser,  in  the  form 
of  a  horse,  endeavoured  to  carry  him  to  hell,  but  he  was 
saved  by  the  sign  of  the  Cross.  Later  on  he  arrived  at 
that  river  which  he  had  crossed  originally,  and  there  the 
demon  sought  once  more  to  deceive  him,  assuming  the 
guise  of  Blanchefleur  coming  to  him  in  a  wherry.  But  at 
the  right  moment  another  vessel  appeared,  with  sails  of 
samite,  bearing  a  holy  man,  and  Perceval  took  refuge 
therein. 

It  is  evident  that  the  story  has  reached  that  point  when 
its  proper  term  is  on  the  threshold  rather  than  in  sight 
merely,  and  the  various  delays  which  intervene  can  be 
dealt  with  in  a  few  words,  if  we  omit  miscellaneous 

222 


The  Early   Epochs  of  the  Quest 

adventures  which  serve  no  important  object,  as  they  are 
nothing  to  do  with  the  Graal.  The  most  purposeful 
of  all  was  the  arrival  of  a  messenger  from  Blanchefleur, 
who  was  again  in  peril,  and  so  he  paid  his  third  visit  to 
Beaurepaire,  which  he  delivered  duly  and  again  departed 
from  the  lady,  but  this  time  in  all  chastity  and  reserve. 
She  who  had  declared  to  him  her  love,  now  in  the  far 
past,  she  who  expected  to  wed  him,  was  destined  to  see 
him  no  more.  The  next  most  important  episode  was 
a  stormy  encounter  with  Hector  of  the  Round  Table,  as 
a  result  of  which  both  were  destroyed  nearly  ;  but  in 
the  dark  of  the  midnight  there  shone  a  great  light  about 
them,  which  was  the  Graal  carried  by  an  angel,  and 
thereby  they  were  again  made  whole.  It  follows,  once 
more,  that  here,  as  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad,  the  Graal 
was  going  about,  at  least  on  occasion,  and  we  have  had 
an  instance  previously  in  connection  with  the  wanderings 
of  the  Fisher  King.  Like  all  hallows  the  efficacy  of  which 
is  transcendent  and  even  of  the  absolute  degree,  there 
was  no  active  ministry  on  the  part  thereof  and  nothing 
was  done  by  the  angel.  He  moved  simply  about  them, 
holding  the  Precious  Vessel,  and  their  wounds,  with  the 
pains,  left  them.  Doubtless  after  such  manner  was  the 
company  of  the  Blessed  Joseph  sustained  and  fed  in  the 
wilderness. 

After  this  miraculous  healing,  Perceval,  departing 
from  Hector,  as  those  who  after  great  experiences  have 
quenched  all  hatred  in  their  heart,  continued  his  way,  as 
we  may  suppose,  concerned  now  only  with  the  accom- 
plishment of  his  mission  ;  and  so  in  the  fulness  of  time 
he  reached  that  castle  wherein  there  dwelt  the  knight 
who  slew  the  brother  of  the  Fisher  King.  Sorrow  and 
outrage  had  the  evil  master  of  chivalry  brought  to  his 
intended  victim,  and  more  even  than  that  to  the  keeper 
of  the  Sacred  Vessel.  Why  it  had  entailed  such  con- 
sequences nobody  knows — perhaps  also  no  one  would 
care  to  speculate.  The  Graal  had  healed  Perceval,  and  it 
had  healed  Hector,  even  in  the  absence  of  any  desert  on 

223 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

his  own  part,  for  he  was  the  unworthy  kinsman  of 
Lancelot ;  but  its  own  custodian  it  could  not  cure  of  the 
wound  which  a  mere  accident  had  inflicted.  After  a  long 
encounter,  Perceval  despatched  the  worker  of  this  mis- 
chief and  started  on  his  return  journey  to  the  Graal 
Castle,  carrying  the  head  of  the  destroyer  with  him.  His 
mission  once  accomplished,  all  the  hard  and  doubtful 
roads  ran  behind  the  hoofs  of  Perceval's  horse  ;  all  the 
hindrances  were  taken  out  of  the  way.  Of  that  way  he 
knew  nothing  probably,  and  there  was  no  need  that  he 
should.  To  the  right  he  went  and  the  left,  with  a 
certain  sense  of  questing ;  the  moons  of  the  magical 
summer  waxed  and  waned  above  him ;  and  all  suddenly 
the  Castle  rose  up  before  him.  A  herald  on  the  walls 
without  beheld  his  approach  and  hurried  to  the  Master 
of  the  House,  not  so  much  with  the  news  of  his  coming 
as  of  that  which  he  bore  slung  from  the  front  of  his 
saddle  ;  whereupon  the  Fisher  King  rose  up  healed — with 
a  great  cry.  Perceval  presented  his  terrible  gift,  and  it  was 
fixed  on  the  summit  of  the  tower  belonging  to  that  Castle 
which  so  far  was  a  place  of  vengeance  rather  than  of 
mercy.  Thus  finished  the  last  and  crowning  adventure. 
Whether  it  was  the  implicit  of  Chretien  that  the  question 
properly  put  would  have  restored  all  things  within  and 
without  the  Castle  we  cannot  say ;  perhaps  it  would 
only  have  led  to  the  vengeance  quest,  but  again  we  can- 
not say.  There  is  nothing  in  Chretien  to  make  us  infer 
that  quest  and  in  the  Didot  Perceval — the  prose  romance 
which  corresponds  in  the  French  cycle  most  nearly  to  the 
first  portion  of  the  Conte  del  Graal — the  whole  mission  is 
one  of  asking  and  receiving  a  true  answer.  The  relation- 
ship between  the  King  and  the  knight  was  now  for  the 
first  time  declared  by  one  to  another  ;  the  King  appointed 
his  lands  to  the  hero,  promising  to  make  him  King  in 
succession  at  Pentecost — as  one  who  devises  to  an  heir, 
or  perhaps  as  if  he  also  were  a  priest  having  power 
to  consecrate.  To  this,  however,  Perceval  would  not 
accede  so  long  as  his  uncle  was  alive,  and  he  was  also 

224 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

under  covenant  to  visit  the  court  of  King  Arthur,  which 
he  departed  to  fulfil  accordingly.  He  was  still  there 
when  a  maiden  arrived  with  the  news  that  the  Fisher 
King  was  dead,  and  that  there  was  a  vacancy  of  the  royal 
office  in  the  House  of  the  Graal. 

King  Arthur  accompanied  Perceval  to  the  Castle  with 
all  the  chivalry  of  the  Round  Table — remaining  a  full 
month  and  being  served  daily  by  the  Sacred  Vessel.  It 
does  not  appear  who  consecrated  Perceval,  whether  this 
was  effected,  in  the  ordinary  way,  by  a  prelate  of  the 
church,  or  whether  the  office  itself  carried  with  it  its 
own  anointing.  The  text  says  only  that  he  was 
crowned  at  the  Feast  of  All  Saints.  After  seven 
long  years  of  reign  in  peace  he  bequeathed  the  lands 
in  turn,  and  the  official  part  of  his  royalty,  to  the  King 
of  Maronne,  who  had  married  the  daughter  of  King 
Fisher ;  but  the  Hallows  he  did  not  bequeath.  He  re- 
tired into  a  hermitage,  whither  the  Graal  followed  him. 
By  a  departure  from  tradition,  he  was  consecrated  acolyte, 
sub-deacon,  deacon,  and,  in  five  years,  he  was  ordained 
priest  and  sang  Mass.  Thereafter  so  did  he  serve  God 
and  so  love  Him  that  he  was  called  at  length  from  this 
world  into  the  joy  of  Paradise.  During  the  last  period 
of  his  earthly  life  one  codex  says  that  he  was  fed  only  by 
the  Holy  Graal — that  is  to  say,  by  the  Eucharist. 


§  E. — THE    ALTERNATIVE    SEQUEL    OF    GERBERT 

It  will  be  seen  that  in  his  wonderful  kingdom 
Perceval  had  entirely  neglected  Blanchefleur,  who  is 
no  longer  even  mentioned :  he  went  into  his  own, 
and  his  own  seem  to  have  received  him  with  no 
interrogation  of  the  past.  Had  his  sins  been  scarlet, 
the  fulfilment  of  the  vengeance  mission  and  the  conse- 
quent healing  of  the  King  would  have  made  them  white 
as  snow,  so  far  as  we  can  follow  Manessier ;  and  yet  in 
some  obscure  manner  the  poet  knew  that  the  things  which 

225  P 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

he  dealt  in  were  sealed  with  holiness  and  that  the  office 
of  the  Warden,  if  it  did  not  begin  with  priesthood,  and 
all  its  sanctity,  must  end  therein.  The  sense  of  poetical 
justice  might  have  suggested  another  conclusion,  and 
so  did,  but  this  was  not  to  the  mind  of  Manessier. 
There  is,  as  we  are  aware,  a  long  and  long  sequel  by 
another  writer  which  interpenetrates  the  last  lines  of 
Gautier,  and  it  is  a  romance  truly  which  is  full  of 
entrancements  and  hints  of  spiritual  meaning.  It  has 
been  summarised  very  fully  indeed  by  the  one  editor  of 
the  Conte  del  Graal,  but  it  has  never  been  printed  in 
full,  as  it  demands  and  deserves.  I  do  not  know 
what  Gerbert  thought  of  the  chessboard  episode  and 
that  which  followed  thereafter  as  the  term  of  the 
whole  adventure.  He  seems  to  have  isolated  it  from 
his  mind  and  thus  contrived  to  ignore  it.  Certainly  a 
subsequent  action,  or  a  denial,  as  I  should  say  rather, 
which  he  attributes  to  his  hero,  seems  to  assume  tacitly 
the  previous  continence  of  his  life.  Putting  aside  this 
question  of  an  implicit,  there  are  three  express  pre- 
occupations to  which  the  poem  confesses :  (a)  that  the 
desertion  of  Perceval's  mother  was  an  offence  which 
called  for  expiation ;  (£)  that  the  neglect  of  his  sister 
must  be  overglossed  by  proper  care  in  the  future  ;  and 
(c)  that  the  rest  of  his  life  must  atone  for  all  his  pre- 
vious deficiences  in  respect  of  Blanchefleur,  who — as  I 
do  not  doubt  that  he  determined  in  his  secret  mind — 
must  be  united  through  him  with  the  Graal.  Of  such 
was  his  programme,  and  after  what  manner  he  fulfilled 
it  can  be  told  shortly.  Perceval  had  reason  to  say  in 
his  heart :  mea  culpa^  mea  culpa,  mea  maxima  culpa — for 
three  offences  and  of  these  one  was  the  greatest.  I 
have  indicated  that  in  the  midst  of  the  editor's  con- 
fusion, or  at  least  as  the  allocation  is  found  in  the  printed 
text,  it  is  difficult  to  understand  whether  it  is  assumed 
by  Gerbert  that  the  Broken  Sword  had  been  resoldered 
partially  before  he  begins  his  narrative,  but  even  in 
this  case  it  was  clear  to  Gautier  that  the  task  of  his 

226 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the   Quest 

hero  was  unfinished.  That  which  he  intended  to  do 
with  him  subsequently,  there  is,  of  course,  no  means 
of  knowing ;  what  he  ought  to  have  done,  Gerbert 
has  designed  to  illustrate.  Perceval  was  to  be  treated, 
in  the  first  instance,  precisely  as  we  shall  find  that 
Gautier  presents  the  treatment  of  Gawain  over  his 
particular  failure — he  was  not  to  know  the  truth 
concerning  the  Graal — the  mystery,  that  is  to  say,  of 
all  secrecy.  A  state  more  approaching  perfection  was 
to  deserve  so  high  a  prize.  The  King,  who  pronounced 
the  judgment,  consoled  him,  and  him  counselled,  after 
which  the  knight  was  left  to  his  repose  in  the  holy 
and  glorious  Castle.  The  night  of  sleep  was  a  night 
also  which  was  intended  to  recall  him  to  the  sense  of 
his  first  duty.  The  clear  strokes  of  a  clock,  pro- 
claiming the  hour  of  midnight,  awoke  him ;  he  saw 
a  great  light  and  he  heard  sweet  singing,  after  which 
came  the  voice  of  one  who  was  unseen,  warning  him 
concerning  his  sister,  who  was  encompassed  by  great 
danger  in  the  manorial  house  of  their  mother.  He 
passed  again  into  deep  wells  of  slumber,  and  again 
— but  now  in  the  morning — he  awoke,  as  others  had 
awakened  previously,  to  find  himself  lying  on  green- 
sward, since  the  Castle  had  passed  for  the  time  being 
beyond  the  witness  of  the  senses.  He  mounted  his 
horse,  which  stood  caparisoned  and  ready ;  he  went 
forward,  and  soon — as  it  might  seem,  suddenly — a 
wonder  of  great  wonders  awaited  him.  It  took  the 
form  of  crystal  walls,  within  which  he  heard  all  manner 
of  instruments  making  a  joyful  music.  The  door  in  the 
hither  wall  being  fastened,  he  smote  it  three  times  with 
increasing  vehemence,  using  his  sword  for  the  purpose. 
It  should  be  noted  that  this  weapon  neither  was  nor 
could  have  been  the  Graal  Hallow,  but  on  the  third 
occasion  it  broke  with  a  great  clatter.  Thereupon  the 
door  moved  back,  and  one  who  was  in  white  shining 
appeared  and  challenged.  For  Perceval  it  was  a  rebuff 
in  more  senses  than  he  could  understand  at  the  moment, 

227 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

and  though  he  entreated  earnestly,  not  only  was  he 
denied  entrance,  but  he  was  told  by  one  who  knew 
all  his  failure  and  success  at  the  Graal  Castle,  that 
this  his  business  with  the  sword  must  cost  him  another 
seven  years  of  quest  and  exile.  Apparently  for  the 
King's  sake  and  the  relief  of  him,  he  had  striven  in 
the  first  place,  though  the  measure  of  his  intention 
was  small;  now  it  was  his  own  purification  that  was 
the  chief  work  in  hand.  So  he  knocked  and  he  did 
not  enter,  even  as  in  the  youth  and  inexperience  of 
his  brave  spirit  he  saw  the  Pageant  and  the  Hallows, 
but  asked  nothing  concerning  them.  On  both  occa- 
sions, it  was  accounted  to  him  as  if  he  had  sinned 
with  knowledge.  The  truth  is  that  the  counsels  of 
prudence  do  not  obtain  in  the  presence  of  the  Mysteries, 
nor  do  the  high  conventions  of  good  conduct,  at  least 
utterly.  This  was  in  the  earlier  case,  and  in  the  present 
one,  while  it  is  true  that  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is 
taken  by  violence,  no  one  can  enter  unwarranted  into 
the  secret  sanctuaries  that  have  been  instituted  on 
earth  to  guard  the  memorials  of  the  Kingdom  which 
as  yet  is  not  upon  earth,  though  with  harp  and  viol 
and  lute,  and  with  all  manner  of  music  and  psaltery, 
we  pray  that  it  may  come  quickly. 

What,  it  will  be  asked,  was  this  enclosure — within 
walls  as  the  luminous  shadow  of  the  Jerusalem  which  is 
above  ?  What  manner  of  castle  was  this  which  resounded 
with  the  hallowings  and  enchantments  of  melody  ?  Was 
it  not,  indeed,  the  Graal  Castle,  to  which  he  had  returned 
unwittingly  by  a  devious  way  ?  According  to  the  answer 
which  the  text  furnishes,  it  was  the  Earthly  Paradise,  but 
another  text  tells  us  that  among  the  added  names  of 
the  Graal  Shrine  there  was  to  be  included  the  Castle  of 
Eden,  that  it  was  the  Castle  of  Joy  also — as  of  music  for 
ever  sounding — and  that  behind  it  there  was  the  Earthly 
Paradise,  one  of  the  rivers  of  which  encircled  the  sacred 
enclosure.  Therefore  I  leave  those  who  will  to  draw  the 
conclusion  which  pleases  them,  knowing,  as  at  least  I  do, 

228 


The  Early  Epochs   of  the   Quest 

that  places  of  this  unquestionable  order  may  be  now  on 
the  crown  of  a  causeway  which  the  sea  lashes,  and  again 

"  •!•  clos  de  mur  fait  a  crestiax." 

Perceval  retired  discounselled,  but  had  he  been  advanced 
further  in  the  knowledge  of  secret  things,  he  would  have 
recognised  perhaps  that  there  was  encouragement  and 
high  hope  which  he  could  put  to  his  heart  because  he 
had  not  been  met  by  swords  of  fire,  keeping  the  way  of 
the  Tree  of  Life,  but  by  one  in  his  own  likeness,  exalted 
gloriously,  who  had  said  to  him  :  Not  yet !  Moreover, 
at  the  end  of  the  terse  interlocutory  discourse,  he  was 
given  what  is  termed  in  the  poem  a  Brief,  Charter  or 
Warranty,  which — so  long  as  he  bore  it — would  ensure 
that  through  all  his  subsequent  exile  he  should  suffer  no 
grievous  harm,  for  thereby  was  he  rendered  invincible. 
We  see  in  this  manner  that  all  kinds  of  miracle  in  medi- 
cine and  every  form  of  palladium  were  available  there 
and  here  for  knights  of  quest  and  pilgrimage ;  that  they 
seemed  to  be  reflections  or  radiations  from  the  central 
star  of  the  Holy  Graal ;  and  hence  that  when  he  who 
was  served  thereby  and  maintained  thereof  could  find  not 
even  a  palliative  in  its  vision  and  mystery,  the  explana- 
tion can  only  be  that  his  sickness  was  not  of  this  world. 

Thus  equipped,  Perceval  resumed  his  pilgrimage,  much 
as  the  novice  in  some  temple  of  the  Instituted  Mysteries 
circumambulates  the  Hall  of  Reception  under  the  guidance 
of  its  Wardens,  having  only  a  vague  notion  of  what  is 
the  intention  and  the  term,  but  still  progressing  thereto. 
Again  the  road  was  strewn  with  wonders  before  him,  but 
to  his  exaltation  on  this  occasion.  The  world  itself  had 
assumed  an  aspect  of  May-time  on  a  morning  of  Fairy- 
land, and  hold  and  keep  and  city  poured  out  their  gar- 
landed trains,  as  with  bells  and  banners  and  thuribles,  to 
honour  and  acclaim  him.  Of  the  reason  no  one  knew 
less  than  Perceval,  or  divined  as  little,  but  he  had  asked 
the  question  at  the  Castle,  and  although  it  had  not  been 
answered,  although  he  had  learned  nothing  of  Graal  and 

229 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Lance,  and  was  therefore  less  instructed  than  Gawain,  the 
interdict  had  been  lifted  from  Nature,  the  winter  was  over 
and  done,  and  all  the  cushats  and  turtles  in  all  green 
places  of  the  land — and  all  the  ballad  voices — broke  into 
joy  and  melody,  as  if  the  Rite  of  Marriage  had  been 
celebrated  between  Heaven  and  Earth.  He  was  clothed 
at  castles  in  rich  vestments,  and  from  high-born  maiden 
to  simple  peasant  all  hearts  were  his  and  all  welcome. 

It  must  be  said  at  this  point  that  we  know  little,  and 
so  little,  of  Gerbert  that  it  may  be  reasonably  a  matter 
for  speculation  whether  the  place  at  which  his  sequel  is 
introduced  by  the  scribes  of  certain  codices  corresponds 
or  not  to  his  intention.  There  are  some  respects  in 
which  it  could  be  allocated  better  if  it  were  possible  to 
suppose  that  it  was  part  only  of  a  Graal  poem  which  was 
meant  to  follow  immediately  from  the  section  of  Chre- 
tien ;  a  very  pertinent  case  in  favour  of  this  view  is  the 
palmary  fact  that  Gerbert  seems  to  assume  almost  certainly 
the  virginity  of  Perceval  up  to,  and,  as  we  shall  see,  after 
his  marriage  night,  which  supposition  is  doubly  impossible 
in  view  of  the  Gautier  section.  It  must  further  be  noted 
that  in  one  remarkable  reference  to  Crestiens  de  Troie,  he 
speaks  of  himself  as  the  poet  who  resumed  the  task,  fol- 
lowing the  true  history  : — 

"  Si  com  li  livres  li  aprent, 
Ou  la  matiere  en  est  escripte." 

I  feel  that  in  making  this  suggestion  I  am  exceeding  my 
proper  province,  which  is  not  that  of  textual  criticism, 
and  I  recognise  that  it  has  its  difficulties,  assuming,  as  it 
does,  that  the  Gerbert  sequel  must  have  existed  in  a  much 
more  extended  form,  because  at  the  opening  Perceval  is 
at  the  Graal  Castle  for  a  second  time,  which  is  either 
pursuant  to  the  account  of  Gautier  or  to  some  unknown 
portion  of  his  own  narrative.  If,  however,  he  followed 
Gautier,  then  he  chose  to  forget  or  ignore  him  at  several 
crucial  moments.  Sometimes  he  seems  to  forget  Chretien 
himself,  for  except  on  this  hypothesis  it  is  difficult  to 

230 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

understand  his  introduction  of  another  Broken  Sword, 
being  that  which  was  shattered  on  the  door  of  the  Earthly 
Paradise.  Now  we  have,  in  all  respects,  to  remember 
that  the  putative  Hallow  which  causes  this  confusion  is 
in  the  position  that  we  should  expect  it  to  occupy,  seeing 
that  it  has  no  true  place  in  the  Legend  of  the  Holy  Graal. 
Not  only  does  its  history  differ  in  every  quest,  but  within 
the  limits  of  the  Conte  del  Graal  it  is  contradictory  under 
circumstances  which  exclude  one  another.  At  the  poem's 
very  inception  the  weapon  is  adjudged  to  Perceval  and 
he  carries  it  away.  In  certain  codices  the  only  further 
reference  made  to  the  Hallow  by  Chretien  is  found  in 
the  warning  which  the  questing  knight  receives  from  his 
cousin-german  immediately  after  his  departure  from  the 
Castle ;  in  others  we  hear  how  the  Sword  splinters  in 
the  hands  of  Perceval,  and  thereafter  how  it  is  restored 
to  the  Castle.  It  is  there,  in  any  case,  not  only  on  the 
hero's  revisit  but  long  previously — in  connection  with  the 
arrival  of  Gawain.  Manessier  tells  a  story  concerning  it 
from  which  it  follows  that  in  breaking  it  occasioned  the 
wounding  of  the  King  at  a  period  which  was  antecedent 
to  all  the  quests.  Therefore  it  could  not  have  been  at 
any  time  offered  to  Perceval,  but  must  have  remained 
in  the  Castle,  with  its  resoldering  always  as  the  test  of 
success  in  the  case  of  each  questing  knight.  Now,  either 
Chretien  had  conceived  a  different  history  of  the  Hallow 
or  he  told  the  wrong  story,  for  the  cousin-german  of 
Perceval  testifies  in  his  poem  that  the  Rich  King  Fisher 
was  wounded  in  the  thigh  with  a  spear.  When  Ger- 
bert  intervened  he  left  Chretien's  intention  dubious,  and 
substituted  another  sword,  which  was  not  a  Hallow, 
though,  like  that  of  his  predecessor,  it  was  one  that  had 
been  forged  specially — would  break  in  one  peril  only 
and  must  be  re-soldered  where  it  was  made.  After  the 
triumph  of  his  welcome,  as  related  already,  Perceval 
came  to  a  castle  in  which  the  smithy  was  set  up  under  the 
guard  of  serpents,  for  there  were  reasons  why  the  crafts- 
man who  forged  the  weapon  did  not  wish  it  to  be  mended, 

231 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  the  duty  of  the  serpents  was  to  destroy  any  one  who 
brought  the  pieces  to  the  smithy.  These  reasons  are  not 
explained  by  Gerbert,  but — as  we  have  seen — in  certain 
codices  of  Chretien  the  life  of  the  smith  is  somehow  de- 
pendent on  the  sword,  and  its  reforging  foreshadows  his 
death  approaching.  If  we  can  suppose  that  Gerbert's  con- 
tinuation began  at  a  much  earlier  point  than  is  now  estab- 
lished, some  explanation  might  be  possible,  though  his 
own  evidence  seems  to  be  against  this  view.  Perceval  con- 
quered the  serpents,  and  the  weapon  was  therefore  re- 
forged.  It  does  not  appear  to  serve  him  in  any  special 
event  subsequently,  and  as  thus  nothing  follows  from 
the  episode  we  must  conclude  that  its  introduction  is 
idle,  that  in  this  respect  Gerbert  did  not  know  what  to 
do  with  the  materials  which  had  come  into  his  hands ; 
and  this  is  perhaps  the  conclusion  that  we  should  desire 
in  respect  of  the  Sword. 

The  next  episode  in  Gerbert  is  a  kind  of  addendum  to 
that  of  Mount  Dolorous  in  Manessier,  and  to  this  again 
no  consequence  attaches,  except  that  it  is  an  accident  by 
which  the  hero  is  brought  to  Caerleon  and  to  the  court 
of  King  Arthur,  when  the  poet  gives  us  a  new  and  revo- 
lutionary explanation  concerning  the  Siege  Perilous  of 
Arthurian  romance.  The  Siege  is  a  decorative  chair 
of  jewelled  gold  sent  from  Fairyland — possibly  that 
of  Avalon — for  occupation  by  the  best  knight  in  the 
world,  and  by  him  only  with  safety.  For  others  who 
sit  therein,  the  earth  opens  and  swallows  them.  This 
chair  is  taken  by  Perceval,  as  at  a  great  Rite  of 
Exaltation,  and  the  earth  does  open ;  but  the  Siege 
remains  suspended  in  middle  air,  and  the  result  of 
this  achievement  is  that  the  previous  ill-starred  heroes, 
who  have  been  engulphed  but  not  destroyed,  are  re- 
stored to  light  and  air.  Perceval's  next  adventure  is 
intended  to  illustrate  his  continence  when  tempted  by 
a  demon  in  the  guise  of  a  very  fair  woman.  He 
emerged  unsullied,  and  reached  the  abode  of  his  sister, 
to  her  unspeakable  joy  and  comfort.  They  visited  the 

232 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

tomb  of  their  mother,  and  then  set  forth  together.  Some 
time  after  they  arrived  at  the  Castle  of  Maidens,  where 
Perceval  in  fine  left  her  in  hands  of  safety.  Here  there 
was  another  office  of  healing,  which  is  of  medicine  rather 
than  of  anodyne ;  but  though  all  the  ways  of  wonder 
lead  to  and  from  the  Castle  of  the  Holy  Graal,  the 
King  of  that  Castle  knew  too  well  the  fatality  by 
which  he  was  encompassed  to  seek,  for  he  would  have 
sought  vainly,  his  relief  thereat.  Within  the  merciful 
precincts  of  her  new  asylum  Perceval's  sister  was  en- 
rolled henceforth  as  a  ministering  spirit,  and  thereat 
the  questing  knight  learned  something  more  concerning 
the  antecedents  of  his  Quest  and  also  of  his  own  family. 
The  Castle  of  Maidens  received  wanderers,  but  sheltered 
in  its  ordinary  course  women  only,  and  a  reverend 
dame — under  whose  rule  the  whole  company  abode — 
declared  herself  a  kinswoman  of  Perceval,  being  his 
mother's  cousin.  The  name  of  his  mother  was  Philoso- 
fine,  and  they  two  had  entered  Logres  together,  carrying 
the  Sacred  Hallow ;  but  this  event  of  the  past  was 
evidently  a  part  of  the  historical  mystery,  and  was  not 
to  be  declared  even  to  the  knight  of  Quest  until  he 
had  proved  himself.  He  knew  now  that  even  from  his 
very  beginning  he  was  a  scion  of  the  Sacred  House,  and 
he  might  have  rested  content  in  his  heart  that  the 
house  would  at  length  receive  him.  He  knew  also 
that  it  was  the  sinful  state  of  the  land  which  had 
caused  the  Holy  Graal  to  be  placed  in  a  concealed 
sanctuary  under  the  ward  of  the  good  King  Fisher. 

Meanwhile  the  closing  had  been  taken  in  the  degree 
of  his  duty  towards  his  sister,  and,  in  the  next  place  he 
was  called  to  a  subsidiary  work  in  the  region  of  filial 
duty.  With  whatever  offence  he  could  be  charged  in 
respect  of  his  mother,  she  was  past  the  reach  of  his 
atonement ;  but  his  father  in  chivalry,  now  in  the 
distress  of  sorcery — as  at  the  hands  of  the  sorceresses 
of  Gloucester  in  the  Welsh  romance — demanded  his 
vengeance.  This  incident  is  one  of  many  which  would 

233 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

make  the  investigation  of  Gerbert's  materials  a  quest 
of  high  enchantment  if  only  the  road  were  open.  Of 
the  duty  which  was  thus  imposed  and  accepted  in  all 
the  honour  of  his  knighthood,  Perceval  acquitted  him- 
self with  credit,  his  brief  from  the  Earthly  Paradise 
coming  to  his  aid,  and  the  providence  attached  thereto ; 
though — differing  from  the  putative  archaic  romance — the 
event  did  not  lead  to  the  utter  destruction  of  the  people  of 
the  witch-craft,  but  of  their  military  hirelings  only.  The 
episode,  however,  has  a  second  object,  more  important  to 
Perceval  than  itself,  which  is  to  aid  in  recalling  a  re- 
lationship between  Blanchefleur  and  his  father  in  Chivalry 
— as  the  same  is  recorded  by  Chretien — and  so  forward 
to  the  root-matter  of  the  poem,  which  is  the  marriage 
of  Perceval.  As  regards  this  marriage  there  are  two 
noticeable  points,  outside  the  fact  that  the  union  itself 
was  the  head  and  crown  of  exile  ordeal.  There  is 
(a)  the  ideal  set  before  the  poet,  which  was  to  preserve 
the  virginity  of  Perceval  till  he  had  accomplished  the 
Quest  of  the  Graal ;  and  (£)  the  promise  that  at  some 
time  subsequently — when  that  was  removed  which  hin- 
dered the  consummation  of  the  marriage  in  chastity — 
there  should  arise,  as  issue  from  those  high  nuptials, 
the  mystic  genealogy  of  the  Swan  Knight,  whereby 
the  Holy  Sepulchre  would  be  delivered.  It  is  for  this 
reason  that — by  a  convenant  which  was  made  between 
them — Blanchefleur  remained  a  maid  on  the  night  of 
her  bridal.  Of  such  was  the  marriage  of  Perceval, 
and  thereafter  he  who  was  lord  henceforth  of  all  her 
lands,  holding  the  sworn  fealty  of  many  princes  and 
barons,  went  forth  again  into  the  world  to  prosecute 
the  Great  Quest.  Of  the  virgin  bride  we  hear  nothing 
further,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  if  he  had 
finished  with  her,  as  he  seems  to  have  planned,  Gerbert 
would  have  recounted,  and  did  perhaps,  the  re-union  of 
Blanchefleur  and  Perceval. 

I  do  not  conceive   that  there   is   any  object   in   pro- 
longing this  summary  of  a  narrative  which  is  protracted 

234 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the   Quest 

in  various  ways,  but  has  reached  its  proper  term.  Some 
of  its  later,  and,  as  one  would  say,  redundant  episodes 
occur  or  recur  in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval,  but  we 
have  no  criterion  of  judgment  by  which  to  decide 
whether  one  drew  from  another  or  both  from  that 
common  source  to  which  they  appeal  both.  At  the 
end  of  his  probation  Perceval  is  again  at  the  Graal 
Castle,  ostensibly  for  the  third  time,  and  the  last 
lines  of  Gerbert  repeat,  as  they  stand  in  my  text, 
those  which  are  last  of  Gautier.  I  have  stated  my 
opinion  already,  under  the  necessary  reserves,  that 
Gerbert  carried  his  sequel  further  and  produced  a 
conclusion  which  did  not  impose  upon  Perceval — 
under  the  genius  of  Manessier — two  other  pilgrimages 
outwards,  but,  as  in  the  Parsifal  of  Wolfram,  reconciled 
his  own  institution  in  the  Graal  Castle  with  the  healing 
and  concurrent  prolongation  of  the  old  king's  life.  As 
regards  the  sources  of  the  Conte  del  Graal  in  what  is 
termed  early  historical  matter,  it  is  only  at  a  late 
period  that  we  reach  accounts  which  are  not  interpo- 
lated obviously,  and  then  they  connect  with  the  Book 
of  the  Holy  Graal  and  not  with  the  simpler  history  of 
De  Borron.  This  is  true  of  Manessier  and  true  in 
part  of  Gerbert,  but  on  the  understanding  that  the 
story  of  Perceval's  mother — in  the  latter  case — does 
not  represent  any  other  extant  narrative,  more  especially 
in  respect  of  the  circumstances  under  which  the  Fisher 
King  became  the  guardian  of  the  Graal.  On  the  other 
hand,  Gautier  gives  a  few  indications  which  are  of  the 
matter  of  the  putative  Walter  Map. 


§  F. — IN  WHICH  SIR  GAWAIN  is  CONSIDERED  BRIEFLY 
AS  A  COMPANION  OF  THE  HOLY  QUEST 

There  are  three  that  give  testimony  on  earth  concern- 
ing the  Mystery  of  the  Graal — Perceval,  Bors  and  Galahad 
—and  the  greatest  of  these  is  Galahad.     This  notwith- 

235 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

standing,  as  there  are  persons  who,  through  a  certain 
mental  deviation,  turn  aside  from  the  highways  of 
Christendom  and  look  for  better  paths,  out  of  the 
beaten  track,  in  the  issues  of  obscure  heresy,  so  it  has 
happened  that  scholarship,  without  setting  aside  the 
great  heroes  of  research,  has  discovered  some  vague 
predilection  for  the  adventurous  and  courtly  Sir  Gawain. 
They  have  been  led  even  to  think  that  he  was  the 
first  popular  hero  of  the  Great  Quest.  If  the  evidence 
can  be  held  as  sufficient — and  it  is  tolerable  in  certain 
directions — I  suppose  that  I  should  waste  my  time 
by  saying  that  it  does  not  signify,  any  more  than  the 
preference  of  Jewry  for  Barabbas  rather  than  Christ 
could  accredit  the  Jewish  robber  with  a  valid  or  pos- 
sible title.  In  order  to  strengthen  the  view,  scholarship 
has  supposed  certain  speculative  versions,  now  more  lost 
than  regrettable,  which  present  Gawain  more  fully  as  the 
quest-hero  than  any  document  which  is  extant.  In  such 
event  these  versions  were  like  the  poem  of  Chretien  de 
Troyes,  as  it  was  judged  by  Wolfram — that  is  to  say,  they 
told  the  wrong  story.  At  the  same  time  there  are  several 
accessory  considerations  which  call  for  mention.  Gawain 
was  exactly  the  kind  of  character  who  would  be  disposed 
to  initiate  and  undertake  all  kinds  of  quests,  high  and 
low.  That  he  was  a  popular  Graal  hero  might  mean 
that  some  of  his  chroniclers  did  not  see  exactly  why  his 
methods  and  mode  of  life  should  create  a  barrier.  It 
must  be  admitted  also  that  for  many  purposes  of  the 
Greater  Mysteries  it  is  possible  that  the  merely  continent 
man  requires  a  more  express  preparation  than  one  of 
the  opposite  tendency  in  certain  cases.  I  think  further 
that  the  old  romancists  had  in  their  minds  a  distinction 
between  the  continuity  of  the  sin  in  Lancelot  and  the 
sporadic  misdemeanours  of  Gawain,  as  also  between  the 
essential  gravity  of  the  particular  offence  in  the  two  con- 
trasted instances.  There  is  the  fullest  evidence  of  this  in 
respect  of  Guinevere,  when  considered  side  by  side  with 
other  heroines  of  the  cycles.  Moreover,  the  romances 

236 


The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

reflected  the  unquestioned  concensus  of  opinion  at  the 
period  regarding  the  barren  woman,  and  it  seems  clear 
that  the  unfailing  fidelity  with  which  plenary  favours  were 
granted  by  maidens  in  the  matter  of  a  covenant  fulfilled, 
and  the  frankness  which  permitted  such  favours  to  rank 
as  the  term  of  reward,  had  its  root  in  the  sentiment  that, 
except  in  houses  of  religion,  the  womb  which  bore  no 
fruit  was  under  a  greater  interdict  than  that  which  con- 
ceived without  consecration  by  the  sacred  offices  of  the 
Church.  This  must  be  remembered  when  the  literature 
suggests,  as  it  will,  that  the  chivalry  of  King  Arthur's 
court  translated  in  an  inverted  manner  the  institutes  of 
heaven ;  that  it  was  not  very  particular  about  marrying 
and  giving  in  marriage ;  and  that  it  seemed  to  have  as- 
sumed to  itself  an  indulgence,  both  general  and  particular, 
to  follow  the  untinctured  office  of  Nature  without  much 
consciousness  of  a  stigma  attaching  thereto.  Finally,  it 
is  just  to  add  that  the  later  romances  manifest  a  set 
purpose  to  depict  Gawain  in  blacker  colours  exceedingly 
than  the  earlier  texts  warrant. 

For  the  rest,  and  from  the  mystic  standpoint,  it  seems 
pertinent  to  say  that  while  there  is  no  period  at  which  it 
was  customary  on  the  part  of  the  Church  to  impose 
celibacy  as  an  ideal  on  those  who  lived  in  the  world,  and 
while  from  most  of  the  higher  standpoints  the  grace  of 
chastity  is  less  in  its  simple  possession  than  in  its  im- 
passioned recovery,  we  have  to  remember  that  the  great 
masters  do  not  marry  because  of  the  Divine  Union.  The 
connection  in  Chretien  between  Gawain  and  the  Graal 
Quest  arises  out  of  a  challenge  which  he  had  accepted  to 
clear  himself  of  a  charge  of  murder,  as  to  which  it  was 
a  matter  of  agreement  that  if  he  could  find  and  bring 
back  the  Lance  which  bleeds  he  should  be  excused  from 
returning  to  withstand  the  ordeal  by  battle.  Out  of  this 
condition  certain  codices  present  the  visit  of  Gawain  to 
the  Graal  Castle  very  early  in  the  version  of  Gautier.  He 
beheld,  firstly,  a  bier  and,  secondly,  all  the  Hallows,  asked 
the  required  question,  and  was  told  by  the  Royal  Warden 

237 


"The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

that  if  he  could  resolder  the  Broken  Sword  he  should 
know  (a)  why  the  beautiful  maiden  who  carried  the 
Sacred  Vessel  was  dissolved  in  tears ;  (£)  why  a  bier 
formed  part  of  the  pageant ;  and  (<:)  whose  body  was  laid 
thereon.  These  points  are  peculiar  to  Gautier  and  his 
connections.  The  experiment  with  the  Sword  proved, 
however,  a  failure ;  Gawain  learned  nothing  ;  he  fell 
asleep  after  hearing  the  discourse  of  the  King,  who  ex- 
plained what  was  wanting  in  him  ;  and  on  awaking  next 
morning  he  discovered  himself  in  the  open  country,  with 
his  horse  and  his  arms  close  by  him.  It  is  obvious  that 
he  had  found  the  Lance,  but  he  had  not  carried  it  away, 
and  for  this  reason  he  set  out  to  take  up  the  challenge. 
King  Arthur,  however,  intervened,  and  the  matter  was 
settled  in  peace. 

The  codices  which  embody  this  account  give  much 
more  extended  particulars  of  another  visit  which  was 
paid  by  Gawain  to  the  Castle ;  but  it  is  obvious  that 
they  are  exclusive  mutually,  and  the  alternative  texts 
which  omit  the  first  visit,  and  determine  in  a  different 
sense  the  question  of  the  accusation  and  the  ordeal,  are 
for  the  quest  of  Gawain  the  logical  and  preferable  texts. 
Second  or  first,  on  this  occasion,  nothing  was  further 
from  the  mind  of  the  character  in  chief  than  to  go  on 
the  Quest  of  the  Graal,  nor  was  he  concerned  with  the 
covenant  of  any  challenge.  He  assumed  the  responsi- 
bility of  a  knight  who  was  slain  by  a  hand  invisible  when 
riding  under  his  safe  conduct.  The  identity  of  this 
knight  is  never  disclosed,  but  Gawain  wore  his  armour 
and  was  carried  by  his  steed,  who  had  mysterious  fore- 
knowledge of  the  way,  to  a  destination  of  which  he  him- 
self could  dream  nothing.  He  arrived  at  his  term  in 
due  course,  but  what  took  place  was  the  reception  of  a 
masquerading  neophyte,  who  was  unintroduced,  un- 
warranted and  unqualified.  In  place  of  being  he  that 
was  to  come,  they  had  still  to  look  for  another ;  but 
his  harness  for  a  moment  deceived  the  company  about 
him. 

238 


'The  Early  Epochs  of  the  Quest 

Chretien  knew  nothing  of  a  bier  and  a  dead  body,  in 
that  place  where  the  sign  of  arch-natural  life  abode  in 
perpetuity ;  those  who  took  up  the  story  in  the  footsteps 
of  Gautier  knew  nothing  also,  and  agreed  to  ignore  his 
intimations  of  unexplained  disaster.  But  Gautier  or 
another,  the  bier  was  again  seen  at  this  visit  of  him  who 
was  unexpected,  and  a  procession  of  canons  and  clerks 
recited  thereover  the  Holy  Office  for  the  Dead,  with  a 
great  ceremony  of  solemn  voices  intoning.  The  King 
also  visited  the  bier  and  lamented  over  it.  The  pageant 
of  the  Graal  was  manifested,  after  the  manner  which  I 
have  described  elsewhere,  and  Gawain  saw  it  openly.  At 
the  conventional  feast  it  was  the  Sacred  Vessel  which 
served  so  far  as  the  food  was  concerned,  but  the  sacra- 
mental communication  was  in  one  kind  only,  since  the 
wine,  as  we  have  seen,  was  brought  round  by  the  butlers. 
Gawain,  as  in  the  previous  case,  asked  all  the  necessary 
and  saving  questions,  and  was  invited  to  solder  the  Sword, 
but  he  failed,  as  before,  in  this  ordeal  and  learned  only 
concerning  its  history.  A  stroke  which  was  dealt  there- 
with destroyed  the  realm  of  Logres  and  all  the  surround- 
ing country.  In  the  midst  of  this  narrative  Gawain  fell 
asleep  at  the  table,  and  was  left  to  repose.  When  he 
awoke  there  was  neither  hall  nor  castle,  neither  King 
nor  chivalry  about  him,  but  a  fairly  garnished  land  lying 
on  the  brink  of  the  sea  and  restored  by  so  much  of  the 
belated  question  as  he  had  asked  the  King.  The  common 
folk  blessed  him,  and  the  common  folk  accused  him, 
because  he  had  not  finished  his  work  or  insured  their  full 
felicity. 

Of  such  is  the  Quest  of  Gawain  as  it  appears  in  the 
Conte  del  Graal^  even  as  the  pillars  of  a  temple  which  was 
never  finished.  It  intervenes  between  the  first  and 
second  visit  of  Perceval  to  the  High  House  of  the 
Hallows,  but  on  Perceval's  own  Quest  it  has  no  effect 
whatever,  and  the  narrative  of  the  one  ignores  that  of  the 
other.  It  is  said  in  some  old  fable — which  is  not,  I 
think,  of  the  Graal, — that  Arthur  and  Gawain  at  last  re- 

239 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

posed  in  Fairyland.  There  are  two  classes  of  Knighthood 
— that  which  goes  in  and  returns,  and  thereof  is  Ogier  ; 
that  which  enters  but  does  not  come  back  evermore,  and 
thereof  is  Launfal.  Now,  Arthur  returns  in  the  fulness 
of  the  times  that  are  to  come,  and,  however  these  dreams 
may  be,  it  is  certain  that  the  Peace  of  the  King  is  not  the 
peace  of  Gawain.  In  conclusion  as  to  the  Conte  del  Graal, 
after  every  allowance  has  been  made  for  one  statement 
in  Chretien,  from  which  it  follows  that  the  father  of  the 
Fisher  King  was,  as  we  have  seen,  sustained  by  a  Sacred 
Host  taken  from  the  Holy  Graal,  the  keynote  of  the 
whole  cycle  is  that  it  has  no  sacramental  connections 
such  as  we  find  elsewhere  in  the  literature.  On  this 
account,  if  indeed  on  no  other,  the  Conte  del  Graal  has 
nothing  to  tell  us  which  signifies  in  respect  of  our  true 
affair,  except  by  way  of  its  echoes  and  reflections  from 
sources  which  do  concern  us  nearly,  and  are  better  and 
fuller  witnesses.  It  has  every  title  to  possess  in  per- 
petuity the  kind  of  Perceval  which  it  has  helped  materi- 
ally to  create  -in  whom  the  Parsifal  of  Wolfram  has 
little  and  the  transfigured  Knight  of  the  High  History  has 
next  to  nothing  at  all. 


240 


BOOK     IV 

THE  LESSER    CHRONICLES   OF  THE 
HOLT  GRAAL 


THE    ARGUMENT 

I.  THE  METRICAL  ROMANCE  OF  JOSEPH  OF  ARIMA- 
. — The  characteristics  of  Robert  de  Borron — The 
Metrical  Romance  presented  in  general  synopsis — Specific 
considerations  of  the  story — The  source  of  the  text — The 
Sacred  Vessel  as  it  is  understood  in  the  poem — The  Divine 
Communion  in  the  tower  of  Joseph — The  Sacred  Words  and 
the  theological  position  of  the  text — The  Institution  of  the 
Holy  Table — The  mystery  and  fate  of  Moses — The  branches 
to  follow  —  The  marriage  of  Alain  and  the  succession  of 
Keepers.  II.  THE  LESSER  HOLY  GRAAL. — Its  critical 
and  literary  position  in  respect  of  the  Metrical  Romance — 
The  distinctions  on  matters  of  importance  between  the  two  texts 
— Concerning  the  Sacramental  occurrences  at  the  Last  Supper 
— Concerning  the  Secret  Words  and  their  written  form — Con- 
cerning the  triple  guardianship — Of  words  in  Eucharistic 
consecration — Concerning  Joseph  of  Arimathxa — The  Con- 
version of  Britain.  III.  THE  EARLY  HISTORY  OF 
MERLIN. — In  what  sense  this  branch  follows  from  the 
Metrical  Romance  of  Joseph — The  bare  outlines  of  the  story 
— The  story  as  a  general  introduction  to  the  Romances  of 
the  Round  Table — Its  palmary  characteristics  as  an  inter- 
mediate Graal  romance — The  hermit  Blaise — The  Graal 
in  Northumbria — The  Secret  records  of  the  Hermitage— 
The  Round  Table,  its  imputed  connection  with  that  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  and  with  the  table  of  Joseph — The  Void 
Seat — The  lacuna  in  the  succession  of  texts — Of  him  who 

243 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

was  to  come^  and  whether  Galahad  or  another — Some  implicit* 
of  the  Legend.  IV.  THE  DIDOT  PERCEVAL. — The  higher 
considerations  of  the  Quest — The  outlines  of  this  Quest — 
Points  of  correspondence  with  the  early  epochs — Place  of  this 
quest,  if  any,  in  the  triad  of  Robert  de  Borron — Claims  of 
the  Questing  Knight — Analogies  with  preceding  texts  of  the 
trilogy — Discrepancies  in  the  legend  of  Moses — Of  Merlirfs 
close  in  sanctity  and  not  in  enchantment — Conclusion  as  to 
the  Lesser  Chronicles. 


2  44 


BOOK    IV 

THE   LESSER    CHRONICLES   OF    THE 
HOLT  GRAAL 


I 

THE  METRICAL   ROMANCE   OF  JOSEPH  OF 
ARIMATH&A 

ROBERT  DE  BORRON  was  imbued,  and  even  deeply,  with 
the  religious  spirit  of  his  period.  I  think  also  that  in 
him  there  was  a  spiritual  tincture  which  must  have  been 
a  little  rare  at  that  epoch  among  courtly  minstrels.  He 
had  seen,  according  to  his  story,  some  part  at  least  of  the 
Great  Book  of  the  Legend,  and  perhaps  it  had  changed 
his  life.  After  the  manner  of  his  time,  he  was  attached 
to  a  patron,  and  he  wrote  his  poem  for  the  preux  and 
noble  chevalier  Walter  Montbeliard — a  crusader  when 
the  Temple  was  at  its  glory.  The  poem  opens  with  an 
account  of  the  circumstances  which  led  ultimately  to  the 
incarnation  of  Christ  and  is  based  on  the  fact  that  prior 
to  this  event,  and  prior  indeed  to  the  descent  of  Christ 
into  Hades,  good  and  bad  were  alike  in  Hell  and  less  or 
more  in  the  power  of  the  evil  hierarchy.  The  root-matter 
of  the  story  can  be  expressed  in  a  few  words,  and  may  be 
so  offered  to  simplify  the  issues  which  are  important  to 
our  purpose  and  must  be  dealt  with  therefore  more  fully. 
The  vessel  in  which  Christ  prepared  His  sacrament, 
according  to  those  words  of  the  text  with  which  we  are 
already  acquainted,  was  taken  from  the  house  of  Simon 
by  a  Jew  and  delivered  into  the  hands  of  Pontius  Pilate. 

245 


The   Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  with  the  assistance  of  Nicodemus 
and  by  permission  of  Pontius  Pilate,  took  down  the  body 
of  Jesus  after  the  Crucifixion.  The  permission  was  a 
reward  asked  by  Joseph  in  return  for  years  of  military 
service,  and  Pilate  gave  him  in  addition  the  vessel  which 
the  Jew  had  brought  him.  In  that  vessel  Joseph  received 
the  Blood,  which  was  still  flowing  from  the  wounds  of 
Christ  when  the  body  was  being  prepared  for  burial.  He 
laid  the  body  in  a  sepulchre  prepared  for  himself,  and  he 
concealed  the  vessel  in  his  house.  After  the  Resurrection 
the  Jews  sought  Nicodemus,  who  eluded  them  by  flight, 
and  Joseph,  whom  they  seized  and  imprisoned  in  a  dark 
tower  ;  the  only  issue  therefrom  was  at  the  summit,  and 
this  was  sealed  effectually  by  a  heavy  stone.  Christ  came 
to  Joseph  in  the  tower,  brought  him  the  Sacred  Vessel 
and  communicated  to  him  certain  secret  words  which  were 
the  grace  and  power  thereof.  Joseph  remained  for  forty 
years  in  his  prison  and  was  sustained  by  the  Blessed  Vessel, 
as  if  in  a  condition  of  ecstasy  and  apart  from  any  normal 
consciousness  concerning  the  flight  of  time.  Towards 
the  end  of  that  period,  Vespasian,  the  son  of  Titus,  being 
afflicted  with  leprosy — and  a  pilgrim  who  reached  Rome 
having  recounted  the  wonderful  miracles  of  Jesus  of  which 
he  had  heard  in  Palestine — a  commission  was  sent  to 
Jerusalem  to  bring  back  some  relic  of  the  Master,  if  the 
report  of  His  death  were  true.  The  commission  in  due 
time  returned  with  St.  Veronica,  who  carried  the  Volto 
Sanfo,  or  Sacred  Face-cloth,  and  this  effected  the  desired 
cure  immediately.  Titus  and  Vespasian  proceeded  with 
an  army  to  Palestine  to  avenge  the  death  of  Jesus.  It 
was  in  this  manner  that  Vespasian  found  Joseph  still  alive 
in  the  tower ;  the  stone  was  removed  from  his  sepulchre, 
and  he  who  had  been  entombed,  like  Christ,  like  Christ 
also  arose ;  after  this  rescue  was  effected,  the  Emperor's 
son  was  converted  by  Joseph. 

The  vengeance  on  the  Jews  being  in  fine  accomplished, 
Joseph  collected  his  relatives  and  many  companions  who 
had  embraced  Christianity  at  his  instance,  and  by  the  will 

246 


The  Lesser   Chronicles 

of  God  the  party  started  westward,  carrying  the  Holy 
Graal.     For  a  considerable  period  they  took  possession  of 
a  certain  district   and  placed  it  under  cultivation.     At 
length  a  part  of  the  company  fell  away  from  grace,  with 
the  result  that  a  scarcity  followed  in  the  land,  and  the 
vessel  was  used  to  separate  the  good  from  the  evil  within 
the  ranks  of  the  people.     For  this  purpose  a  table  was 
dight  after  the   manner   of  that  which   served  for  the 
Lord's  Supper,  and  the  vessel  was  set  thereon.     Before  it 
there  was  placed  a  single  fish,  which  the  Divine  voice  of  the 
Graal  had  directed  Brons,  who  was  the  brother-in-law  of 
Joseph,  to  catch  in  a  neighbouring  water.    Between  Joseph 
and  Brons  there  was  left  a  vacant  seat  corresponding  to 
that  which  had  been  made  void  by  the  defection  of  Judas 
Iscariot.     Under  circumstances  which   remain  vague   in 
the  story,  a  certain  part  of  the  company,  being  those  who 
had  kept  in  a  state  of  grace,  sat  down  at  the  table,  and 
the  rest  who  gathered  about  were  of  those  who  had  lapsed 
into  sin.     The  good  people  experienced  all  spiritual  de- 
light and  inward  refreshment,  but  the  evil  were  not  filled, 
and  they  beheld  nothing.     When  a  question,  put  to  them 
by  one  who  was  named  Petrus,  had  elicited  this  fact,  they 
were    denounced    as    those  who    were  guilty,  and    they 
departed  in  shame.     It  is  indeed  quite  clear  that  they 
seem  to  have  separated  from  the  company  once  and  for  all. 
The  exception  was  a  certain  Moses,  who  manifested  great 
sorrow,  though  he  was  really  an  unbeliever  at  heart.     His 
prayers  in  fine  obtained  him  permission  to  take  a  place  at 
the  table,  but  the  void  seat  was  the  one  which  alone  was 
available,  and  when  he  sat  down  thereon,  the  Siege  and  its 
occupants  were  both  swallowed  by  an  abyss  which  opened 
beneath  them.     Meanwhile  the  office  of  the  table  had 
become  a  daily,  as  it  were,  a  divine  service,  and  so  con- 
tinued till  the  company  was  divided  further  to  continue 
the  journey  westward  in  successive  parties.     Alain,  the 
son  of  Brons,  and  his  eleven  brothers  under  his  guidance 
were  the  first  to  start,  he  carrying  a  certain  proportion 
of  what  must  be  termed  the  revealed  knowledge  of  the 

247 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Holy  Graal,  but  it  did  not  include  apparently  the  Secret 
Words.  The  communication  which  had  been  made  to 
Alain  was  because  when  the  time  came  for  Brons  and  his 
wife  to  seek  for  their  twelve  boys  some  kind  of  settlement 
in  life,  the  eleven  had  elected  to  marry  and  were  there- 
fore provided  with  wives,  but  he  who  was  the  youngest 
of  all  chose  a  life  of  celibacy ;  he  was  therefore  put  over 
his  brethren,  and  was  taken  by  Joseph  into  his  heart  after 
a  special  manner.  This  party  was  followed  by  that  of 
Petrus,  whose  connection  with  the  family  of  Joseph, 
if  any,  is  not  stated ;  but  he  was  favoured  in  another 
manner  which  would  seem  to  be  more  distinctive,  since 
he  carried  a  brief  or  warrant  sent  down  from  heaven 
itself,  but  of  its  contents  or  their  purport  there  is  no 
account  given.  His  destination  was  the  Vaux  d'  Avar  on. 
The  last  to  depart  was  Brons,  apparently  with  the  rem- 
nant of  the  people,  and  to  him  Joseph,  by  the  divine 
ordination,  delivered  the  Sacred  Vessel  and  communicated 
the  Secret  Words.  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  seems  to  have 
remained  behind — though  the  text  is  corrupt  at  this  point 
—his  mission  being  accomplished,  and  it  would  follow  in 
this  case  that  shortly  after  he  was  taken  into  la  joie  per- 
durable of  the  Paradise  which  is  above. 

The  theology  is  in  part  of  the  popular  legendary  char- 
acter and  may  seem  a  little  fantastic  even  within  these 
limits.  For  the  early  church  and  the  writers  thereto 
belonging  in  places  remote  from  the  centre,  the  world  of 
Christian  doctrine  was  a  world  not  realised,  and  Rome 
might  well  have  been  astonished  at  certain  things  which 
were  said  and  sometimes  taught  with  all  innocence  of 
intention  on  the  verges  of  the  horizon  westward.  It 
would  be  easy  to  furnish  examples  of  elements  in  De 
Borron  which  are  not  less  than  heretical  from  the  doc- 
trinal standpoint,  but  there  are  indications  also  of  curious 
learning  and  traces  of  strange  sympathies.  Among  the 
latter  may  be  mentioned  a  certain  tenderness  towards 
Pontius  Pilate,  the  difficulty  of  whose  position  as  the 
Procurator  of  Judaea,  when  acting  almost  under  the 

248 


The  Lesser   Chronicles 

compulsion  of  a  Jewish  faction,  was  from  any  point  of 
view  undeniable.  The  important  point,  however,  is  that 
the  sympathy  reflects  at  a  far  distance  the  apocryphal 
legends  which  represent  Pilate  as  one  who  was  converted 
ultimately,  who  became  a  bishop  of  the  Church  and 
sealed  his  testimony  with  martyrdom.  More  noticeable 
than  this,  perhaps,  for  the  ordinary  reader  is  the  writer's 
seeming  ignorance  concerning  the  Jewish  doctrine  of  rest 
in  the  bosom  of  Abraham  for  those  at  least  of  the  faith- 
ful departed  who  died  in  the  peace  of  Israel. 

In  the  kind  of  research  with  which  we  are  concerned 
here,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  mistake  the  unintended 
blunder  for  the  express  statement.  As  a  rule,  it  is  easy 
to  distinguish  the  simple  errors,  but  occasionally  a  specific 
point  may  puzzle  the  most  careful  reader.  While  De 
Borron  seems  wholly  unconscious  of  opposition  to  the 
claims  of  Rome,  there  is,  of  course,  very  full  indication 
of  a  secret  which  inheres  in  the  Graal  and  some  ground 
for  thinking  that  the  rumour  of  this  secret  had  gone 
forth  abroad  in  the  world  prior  to  his  poem.  It  is, 
however,  a  verbal  formula,  not  apparently  a  doctrine. 
"Those  who  can  learn  and  retain  these  words/'  says 
Christ  to  Joseph,  "  shall  be  virtuous  among  people  and 
pleasant  unto  God ;  they  shall  not  be  forejudged  in 
court,  nor  conquered  in  battle,  so  only  that  their  cause 
is  just."  There  is,  however,  a  particular  point  which  is 
a  little  opposed  to  my  general  view  herein.  Speaking  of 
the  common  hell  into  which  all  souls  went  prior  to  the 
coming  of  Christ,  De  Borron  says :  "  It  was  necessary 
that  the  ransom  of  our  first  fathers  should  be  provided 
by  the  Three  Divine  Persons  who  are  one  only  and  the 
same  substance."  Now,  the  identity  of  the  Three  Persons 
in  Christ  is  unquestionably  a  heresy,  but,  as  it  so  happens, 
this  is  the  express  teaching  of  Swedenborg,  for  whom 
Christ  was  the  manifested  Trinity.  It  is  curious  to  recall 
the  analogy,  but  such  a  notion  could  at  no  time  have 
formed  part  of  any  secret  doctrine,  supposing  that  this 
were  otherwise  to  be  found  or  expected  in  De  Borron. 

249 


The  Hidden  Church  of  the   Holy    Graal 

So  also  we  must  not  interpret  as  a  trace  of  any  secret 
doctrine  the  implicit  of  his  comparison  between  the  con- 
ception of  Eve  and  the  most  Holy  Virgin.  He  says  in 
effect  that  Eve  conceived  in  suffering,  that  the  posterity 
of  our  first  parents  were,  like  them,  doomed  to  die,  and 
that  the  possession  of  their  souls  was  claimed  by  the 
demon  as  his  right.  To  purchase  them  from  hell  our 
Saviour  was  conceived  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  Mary, 
and  in  this  manner  the  sin  of  generation  according  to  the 
common  course  of  Nature  was  annulled  by  a  virginal 
conception.  But  in  the  analogy  there  is  no  ulterior 
motive,  no  arriere  pensee. 

The  apostolic  priority  of  Peter  seems  to  underlie 
the  following  statement,  which  is  put  into  the  mouth  of 
our  Saviour :  "  I  leave  this  example  to  Peter  and  to  the 
ministers  of  the  Church."  Comparatively  early  criticism 
looked  upon  this  as  equivalent  to  an  acknowledgment  of 
St.  Peter  as  the  official  chief  of  the  Catholic  Holy 
Assembly,  and  remarked  that  no  such  admission  is  found 
in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  which,  it  should  be  said,  is 
however  untrue.  If  we  pass  now  to  the  consideration  of 
the  Sacred  Vessel  and  to  the  question  what  De  Borron 
designed  to  signify  thereby,  we  may  note  in  the  first 
place  that,  by  the  hypothesis  of  the  poem,  it  is  not 
visible  to  evil-livers,  though  it  is  evident  that  they  en- 
circled the  table  at  which  they  could  not  sit  on  the 
occasion  when  it  was  first  manifested  to  the  elect.  The 
correspondence  of  this  will  be  found  much  later  on  in  the 
Parsifal  of  Wolfram,  wherein  the  object  which  corre- 
sponds to  the  Graal  was  invisible  to  a  pagan,  though  he 
was  a  man  of  noble  life  and  a  kinsman  of  the  Secret 
House.  De  Borron  speaks  (a)  of  a  vessel,  not  other- 
wise named,  in  which  Jesus  washed  the  feet  of  His 
disciples  ;  (#)  of  that  passing  fair  vessel,  already  described, 
in  which  Christ  made  His  sacrament,  but  the  institution 
of  the  Eucharist  is  not  mentioned  more  specifically ;  (c) 
of  the  use  by  Pilate  either  of  this  vessel  or  another — for 
the  text  seems  doubtful — when  he  washed  his  hands  to 

250 


The  Lesser   Chronicles 

signify  that  he  was  not  responsible  for  the  judgment 
which  he  had  pronounced  unwillingly.  As  regards  (£) 
I  have  explained  in  the  summary  that  a  Jew  carried  it 
from  the  house  of  Simon,  when  Jesus  had  been  led  forth 
therefrom,  and  brought  it  to  Pilate.  At  a  later  stage 
Pilate  took  the  vessel,  and  remembering  thereof  that  it 
was  beautiful,  he  gave  it  to  Joseph,  saying  :  "  Much  hast 
thou  loved  this  man."  Joseph  answered  :  "  Thou  hast 
said  truly."  But  the  gift  was  less  an  instance  of  gener- 
osity than  of  the  procurator's  desire  to  retain  nothing 
which  had  belonged  to  Jesus,  whereby  it  was  possible 
that  he  might  be  accused.  Either  the  present  state  of 
the  text  or  the  poet's  method  of  expression  leaves  things 
so  much  in  confusion  that  a  further  question  has  arisen 
whether  the  piscina  used  for  the  washing  of  the  feet  was 
identical  with  that  vessel  which  became  ultimately  the 
Graal.  It  has  been  suggested  that  for  the  last  word  in 
the  line 

"Ou  Criz  feisoit  son  sacrement," 

what  was  written  and  intended  originally  was  the ,  word 
lavement^  but  this  is  extremely  unlikely  in  view  of  the 
general  content  and  is  not  countenanced  certainly  by  the 
Lesser  Holy  Graal.  It  has  been  suggested  further  that  ( i ) 
St.  John  does  not  mention  the  Institution  of  the  Eucharist 
and  is  the  only  Evangelist  who  does  describe  the  washing 
of  the  Apostle's  feet;  (2)  Robert  de  Borron  knew  only 
the  Fourth  Gospel,  possibly  through  that  of  Nicodemus 
in  the  Christian  Apocrypha.  But  all  these  questions  are 
settled  by  the  text  itself  in  the  discourse  of  Christ  to 
Joseph  at  the  beginning  of  his  imprisonment  in  the  tower. 
It  is  there  said  ( i )  that  at  the  Last  Supper  on  the  Thursday 
Christ  blessed  the  bread  and  the  wine  and  told  His 
disciples  that  they  partook  in  those  elements  of  His  flesh 
and  blood  ;  (2)  that  the  table  of  that  Supper  should  be 
represented  in  many  countries  ;  (3)  that  the  sacrament 
should  never  be  consecrated  without  commemoration  of 
Joseph,  who  had  taken  down  the  Divine  Body  from  the 

251 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

Cross  and  laid  it  in  the  Sepulchre ;  (4)  that  this  tomb 
should  be  signified  by  the  Altar;  (5)  that  the  winding- 
sheet  in  which  the  Body  was  wrapped  should  be  called 
the  corporal ;  (6)  that  the  Holy  Vessel  in  which  Joseph 
received  the  Blood  should  be  called  the  chalice  ;  (7)  that 
the  stone  with  which  the  sepulchre  was  sealed  should  be 
signified  by  the  paten.  Nothing  can  be  more  express,  both 
as  to  the  Mass  and  the  Eucharist.  Unfortunately,  nothing 
can  be  clearer  also  in  the  mind  of  the  poet  than  the  con- 
tent of  the  Palladium  of  his  legend — being  the  blood  of 
Three  Persons  in  one  God.  And  this,  I  think,  is  all  that 
need  be  said  in  this  place  concerning  the  Cup  of  the 
Holy  Graal  in  Robert  de  Borron. 

That  Christ  had  in  nowise  forgotten  one  who  had  at 
need  befriended  Him  was  shown  by  Him  bringing  it  into 
the  prison,  holding  it  in  the  hands  of  Him,  while  the  whole 
tower  was  illuminated  by  its  great  light,  for  it  was  all 
full  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

The  Divine  Discourse  which  occurs  in  this  tower 
between  the  visionary  Christ  and  Joseph  is  remarkable 
from  several  points  of  view,  and  especially  by  the  cate- 
gorical assurance  that  the  Risen  Saviour  brought  none 
of  His  disciples  to  the  conference,  because  none  were 
acquainted  with  the  great  love  which  subsisted  between 
Himself  and  His  auditor.  It  seems,  however,  to  have 
been  a  prototype  of  that  love  which  is  the  immanence 
of  Christ  in  the  believing  soul,  and  the  palladium  in 
Joseph's  case  was  the  symbol  of  the  Redeemer's  death, 
as  it  is  the  Eucharist  in  the  external  church.  The 
specific  and  material  explanation  is  that  Joseph  took 
down  the  body  of  Jesus  from  the  Cross,  and  for  this 
reason  he  was  to  be  a  partaker  in  all  glory.  Of  the 
colloquy  there  were,  in  any  case,  no  witnesses,  and  the 
Gospel  narratives  could  offer  no  contradiction.  I  suppose 
that  I  should  add  an  implicit  which  seems  almost 
evidently  to  have  been  in  the  poet's  mind — that  Joseph 
had  made  the  Resurrection  more,  humanly  speaking, 
possible  by  preserving  the  body  as  nearly  intact  as  the 

252 


The  Lesser   Chronicles 

circumstances  of  the  Crucifixion  would  permit.  The 
difficulty  which  seems  to  have  been  present  to  the  sub- 
surface mind  of  De  Borron  was  perhaps  not  unknown  to 
one  Gospel  narrative,  which  is  careful  to  indicate  that  the 
bones  of  Christ  were  not  broken  on  the  Cross. 

The  especial  direction  to  Joseph  was  that  he  should 
guard  well  the  Sacred  Vessel,  committing  it  only  to  those 
persons  who  were  designed  thereto,  and  by  these  it 
should  be  taken  as  given  in  the  Name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  possessors 
were  to  be  three  and  no  more,  because  of  the  Trinity ; 
they  were  :  (a)  Joseph  ;  (F)  Brons ;  and  (c)  the  grandson 
of  Brons,  who  was  to  be  born  in  the  fulness  of  time.  It 
must  be  said  that  this  enumeration  appears  to  omit  one 
person  who,  according  to  the  text  itself,  was  intended 
for  some  high  office.  When  Joseph  prayed  before  the 
Cup  for  guidance  over  the  future  of  his  company, 
recalling  an  ordinance  which  had  told  him  that  at  what 
time  soever  he  desired  secret  knowledge,  he  should  come 
into  the  presence  of  the  Reliquary  wherein  was  the 

g'orious  blood,  he  was  answered  by  the  Voice  of  the 
raal  that  the  celibate  son  of  Brons  was  to  be  shown 
the  Sacred  Vessel  so  that  he  could  see  the  content  thereof. 
Now  this  son  was  Alain,  and  it  might  be  supposed  that 
the  venerable  charge  would  pass  to  him  from  his  father, 
more  especially  as,  in  spite  of  his  choice,  he  was  to  beget 
the  keeper  in  fine,  and  was  not  dedicated  therefore  to 
permanent  celibacy,  but  held  rather  in  maidenhood  for  a 
marriage  which  was  predestined  already.  The  instruction 
to  Petrus  announced  that  he  was  to  await  the  arrival  of 
Alain's  son,  who  would  reveal  to  him  the  virtues  of  the 
Holy  Vessel — being  something  omitted  apparently  in  his 
undeclared  brief  or  charter — and  would  make  known  to 
him  what  had  become  of  Moses. 

As  to  this  ill-starred  personage,  who  had  suffered  so 
strangely  for  parading  a  spurious  election  with  intent 
to  deceive  those  who  were  chosen  in  truth  and  faith,  it 
is  decreed  that  he  shall  be  heard  of  no  more  in  song  or 

253 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

fable  till  the  knight  comes  who  will  fill  the  void  seat.  In 
this  dubious  manner  it  seems  to  be  indicated  that  the 
wrath  of  the  Graal  would  not  be  visited  to  everlasting. 

After  the  departure  of  the  several  bands  of  pilgrims, 
the  poem  comes  to  its  conclusion  for  want  of  written 
materials.  The  author  had  carried  it  so  far  on  the 
evidence  of  the  sacred  book  to  which  I  have  cited  already 
the  chief  reference.  He  leaves  it  in  the  expectation  that 
he  will  recount  later  on  as  follows  : — 

(a)  What  became  of  Alain,  whither  he  went,  whom 
he  married,  and  what  heir  was  born  to  him. 

(£)  Whither  Petrus  proceeded. 

(<:)  The  fate  of  Moses,  so  long  lost. 

(d)  The  destination  of  Brons,  who,  outside  all  infer- 
ences of  the  logical  understanding,  had  received 
the  title  of  the  Rich  Fisher,  on  account  of  that 
single  occasion  when  he  angled  in  a  certain  water 
and  caught  one  fish. 

Meanwhile,  De  Borron  had  apparently  the  records  of 
the  Fifth  Branch,  and  to  that  he  passed  on,  so  producing 
a  metrical  romance  concerning  the  prophet  Merlin.  Let 
us  therefore  on  our  part  conclude  also  as  follows : 
(i)  The  formulary  which  incorporated  the  Great  Secret 
of  the  Graal  was,  without  evasion  apparently,  recorded 
in  the  prototypical  chronicle  by  which  the  poet  was 
guided.  (2)  The  Secret  was  itself  denominated  the 
Graal,  as  if  by  a  general  title,  the  name  not  being  applied 
exclusively  to  the  Sacred  Vessel.  (3)  The  last  directions 
to  Joseph  regarding  Brons,  the  second  keeper,  are  these  : 
Tell  him  how  God  did  communicate  unto  thee  the  Holy 
Words,  which  are  sweet  and  precious  and  gracious  and 
piteous,  which  are  properly  called  and  named  the  Secret 
of  the  Graal. 

Hereto,  therefore,  as  the  obiter  dicta  at  this  still  pre- 
liminary stage,  the  English  Syr  Percyvelle  may  be  the 
nearest  reflection  of  the  quest-element  in  folk-lore,  but 
the  Metrical  Romance  of  Joseph  is  the  nearest  and  earliest 
reflection  of  all  that  which  could  have  been  imputed  as 

254 


The  Lesser   Chronicles 

historical  in  any  lost  book.  It  is  unalloyed  by  folk-lore 
admixtures,  for  no  two  things  can  be  well  less  alike 
than  the  pre-Graal  Feeding-dish  and  the  Hallow  of 
De  Borron's  Christian  legend.  The  distance  between  the 
old  myths  and  this  devotional  poem  is  too  great  for  us 
to  say  that  the  latter  is  the  archetypal  state  of  this  mythos 
after  assumption  by  Christianity.  There  is  no  kinship. 
It  is  that  from  which  the  Lesser  Chronicles  and  the  Greater 
Chronicles  draw  at  their  respective  distances,  though  from 
otherwhere  they  gathered  many  elements.  Here  at  least 
there  are  no  adventitious  Hallows ;  it  is  the  Graal  as  the 
one  thing  only.  And  the  Holy  Graal  is  a  symbol  of  the 
Angel  of  Great  Counsel  made  visible. 


II 

THE  LESSER   HOLT  GRAAL 

The  first  and  only  editor  of  this  text  put  it  forward  as 
the  original  prose  romance  from  which  the  poem  was 
produced  subsequently  by  some  unknown  hand,  not  so 
much  writing  ostensibly  under  the  name  of  Robert  de 
Borron  as  reflecting  in  rhymes  and  measures  the  actual 
words  of  the  original.  This  view  did  not  obtain  at  its 
period  any  special  acceptance  and  has  been  long  abandoned. 
The  codex  as  it  stands  is  an  accurate  rendering  of  the 
poem,  plus  certain  variations  and  expansions,  of  which 
some  are  important  to  our  purpose  and  must  be  recited 
briefly.  But  any  literary  or  other  distinction  between  the 
metrical  story  and  its  disposition  in  another  vesture  leaves 
the  narrative  untouched,  both  versions  working  from  the 
same  beginning  to  the  same  term,  so  that  any  general 
description  of  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal  would  be  superfluous 
in  this  place. 

The  circumstances  under  which  certain  secret  words 
were  communicated  originally,  their  transit  westward,  and 
the  scheme  designed  for  their  perpetuation,  constitute  the 

255 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

mystery-in-chief  of  the  metrical  romance,  and  we  have 
brought  away  from  it  an  irresistible  inference  that  these 
words  were  a  formula  of  Eucharistic  consecration.  The 
negative  proof  is  that  they  were  not  used  by  Joseph  when 
he  had  occasion  to  appeal  for  guidance  to  the  Divine 
Voice  which  spoke  from  within  or  about  the  Sacred 
Vessel,  or  when  he  separated  the  grain  from  the  tares  in 
his  band  of  pilgrims.  The  proof  which  assumes  some 
aspect  of  a  positive  kind  is  that  wonderful  analogy  which 
the  text  indicates  between  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar  and 
the  Vessel,  with  its  antecedents  and  environments.  But 
the  Eucharistic  character  of  the  Secret  Words  is  made 
much  more  explicit  in  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal^  for  it  is  said, 
speaking  of  the  Discourse  in  the  tower  :  "  Thereupon  did 
Christ  Jesus  teach  him  those  words  which  cannot  be 
spoken  or  written,  should  any  one  wish  to  do  so,  except 
he  have  read  the  great  book  wherein  they  are  recorded, 
and  this  is  the  secret  which  is  uttered  at  the  great 
sacrament  performed  over  the  Graal,  that  is  to  say,  over 
the  chalice,  and  I — Robert  de  Borron — do,  for  God's  love, 
pray  all  those  who  shall  hear  this  present  book  in  the 
reading  thereof  that  they  ask  no  further  herein  con- 
cerning the  said  matter,  for  he  who  should  try  to  say 
more  might  well  lie  concerning  it,  since  more  he  could  in 
nowise  tell,  and  such  falsehood  would  profit  him  nothing." 
That  the  Secret  Words  were  therefore  committed  to 
writing  follows  from  both  versions,  and  the  suggestion 
of  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal  is  that  the  Great  Book  was 
written  by  Joseph  himself.  The  additional  light  which 
is  gained  concerning  the  Holy  Vessel  is  (i)  that  it  was 
the  blessed  and  very  object  wherein  Christ  sacrificed ; 
but  this  is  less  express  than  the  words  feisoit  son  sacrement, 
which  I  have  quoted  more  than  once  from  the  poem  ; 
(2)  on  the  other  hand,  the  prose  version  makes  it  plainer 
than  the  poem  that  the  Vessel  brought  by  the  Jew  was 
given  to  Pilate  after  the  death  of  Christ,  or  coincidently 
therewith,  for  which  reason  it  could  not  have  been  used 
by  the  procurator  to  wash  his  hands  before  he  pronounced 

256 


The  Lesser   Chronicles 

sentence ;  (3)  the  Vessel  is  described  by  Christ  as  la 
senefiance  de  ma  mort. 

Among  points  left  dubious  in  the  poem  we  have  seen 
that  there  is  the  question  whether  Joseph  of  Arimathasa 
remained  where  he  was,  not  proceeding  further  westward 
than  the  point  of  separation  determined  for  the  whole 
company.  It  would  follow  in  this  case  either  that  one 
legend  concerning  the  evangelisation  of  Britain  was  un- 
known to  Robert  de  Borron  or  that  it  was  by  him  ignored. 
Now  that  which  is  left  doubtful  in  the  poem  is  carried 
into  triple  confusion  by  the  prose  version.  One  of  its 
codices  says  that  Joseph  went  into  that  country  wherein 
he  was  born  ;  another  says  that  he  departed  and  came  to 
his  term  in  the  land  whither  he  was  sent  by  Jesus  Christ, 
yet  it  seems  to  follow  from  this  second  text  that  the 
whole  company  was  already  in  la  bloie  Eretagne  and  that 
Joseph  had  converted  it  newly  to  the  belief  in  Jesus 
Christ. 

It  will  serve  no  purpose  of  mine  to  enlarge  upon 
minor  debatable  points  which  occur  in  the  prose  version, 
as,  for  example,  on  the  doubt  which  it  creates  whether 
(a)  the  third  keeper  of  the  Graal  will  be  the  son  of 
Brons,  by  which  we  should  understand  Alain  ;  (£)  whether 
he  shall  be  the  son  of  his  son,  as  in  the  metrical  romance  ; 
and  (c]  whether  the  triple  guardianship,  corresponding 
to  the  Holy  Trinity,  should  be  enumerated  after  Joseph 
has  surrendered  the  symbol  of  his  mission,  which  is  the 
reading  of  one  codex  and  follows  also  from  the  metrical 
romance.  It  is  sufficient  to  state  in  conclusion  that 
as  regards  the  second  table,  and  the  reason  why  it 
was  established,  the  texts  in  verse  and  prose  are  both 
in  agreement  that  whatever  the  needs  of  the  com- 
pany there  was  (a)  no  miracle  in  the  multiplication  of 
food  ;  (£)  only  a  spiritual  refection  ;  (c)  the  essence  of 
which  was  to  fill  the  participants  with  grace ;  (d]  one 
proof  being  that  the  fish  of  Brons  becomes  wholly  sym- 
bolical and  figures  continually  at  the  service. 

257  R 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

III 

THE  EARLY  HISTORT  OF  MERLIN 

The  Mystery  of  the  Holy  Graal  was  a  mystery  of 
grace  behind  Arthurian  literature  till  the  time  came  for 
it  to  be  manifested  at  the  period  of  the  Quests,  and 
among  the  texts  in  which  it  is  exhibited  as  if  working 
from  afar  and  vaguely  there  is  that  which  I  have  termed 
for  convenience  the  Early  History  of  Merlin,  being  the 
transcript  in  prose  of  another  metrical  romance  by  which 
Robert  de  Borron  proceeded,  for  want  of  intermediate 
materials,  from  the  history  of  Joseph  to  the  period  which 
just  antedated  the  birth  and  life  of  King  Arthur.  The 
tradition  of  the  one  romance  is  carried  over  by  the  other, 
and  as  such  it  is  at  once  interesting  extremely  and  im- 
portant for  our  purpose.  With  the  story  itself  we  are 
concerned  only  in  the  least  possible  degree.  It  narrates, 
in  the  first  place,  a  conference  of  demons  that  seems  to 
have  been  summoned  immediately  after  the  Descent  of 
Christ  into  hell  to  consider  the  best  means  of  reducing  to 
a  minimum  the  opportunity  of  human  redemption  which 
had  been  inaugurated  by  the  sudden  translation  of  all  the 
just  of  old  from  the  supposed  power  of  Infernus  into 
the  joy  of  Paradise.  The  conclusion  attained  was  that  if 
only  some  emissary  of  theirs  could  be  born  on  earth, 
having  for  his  father  one  of  the  evil  person*  and  for  his 
mother  a  woman  in  the  flesh,  they  would  recover  some 
part  at  least  of  the  patrimony  which  they  claimed  in  souls. 
There  was  one  in  the  council,  belonging  to  that  averse 
hierarchy  which  is  termed  the  Powers  of  the  Air,  who 
had  the  gift  under  certain  conditions  to  make  earthly 
women  conceive,  and  he  went  forth  upon  this  mission. 
What  he  did,  however,  was  to  surprise  a  pure  maiden, 
apart  from  all  knowledge  of  hers,  at  an  unwary  moment. 
After  this  manner  was  Merlin  born  into  the  world,  in 
the  accomplishment  of  which  plot  we  are  translated,  with 

258 


The  Lesser   Chronicles 

no  suggestion  or  manifest  sense  of  the  intervening  cen- 
turies, from  the  days  which  preceded  the  Ascension  to 
the  reign  of  Vortigern  in  Britain.  The  device  of  per- 
dition had  gone,  as  usual,  astray,  and  that  utterly  ;  for 
the  mother  was  saved  spiritually  by  her  innocence  and,  on 
the  discovery  of  her  predicament,  by  recourse  immediately 
to  the  offices  of  holy  religion.  She  was  accused  indeed 
before  the  judges  of  the  country,  but  the  child  himself 
saved  her,  for,  being  a  babe,  he  yet  spoke — now  with  the 
cunning  which  might  be  ascribed  to  his  father  in  Sheol, 
and  now  with  the  subtlety  and  foresight  which  suggested 
the  intervention  of  another  and  higher  power,  as  if  this 
had  taken  him  for  its  own  purpose  into  its  safe  custody. 

Throughout  the  story  Merlin,  in  virtue  of  his  dual 
origin,  is  in  part  true  steel  and  in  part  clay.  Robert 
de  Borron  borrowed  from  antecedent  materials  which  we 
can  trace  in  their  larger  proportion,  but  the  high  spirit 
of  his  religious  disposition  worked  upon  that  which  he 
assumed,  and  wrought  a  great  change  therein.  His 
Merlin  has  come  really  as  if  in  the  power  of  a  mission 
which  had  been  imprinted  with  a  Divine  seal,  and  though 
he  is  at  best  an  admixture,  and  though  the  character 
of  some  of  his  actions  is  stained  enough,  he  who  has 
created  him  in  literature  more  even  than  he  has  derived, 
does  not  weary  of  saying  that  God,  who  spared  Merlin's 
mother  in  the  body  of  her  was  able  to  save  him  in  the 
soul,  or  at  least  contribute  thereto,  because  of  her  perfect 
reconciliation  with  Holy  Church.  She  had  indeed  sinned 
not  at  all,  but  had  once,  under  great  stress,  forgotten  to 
pray,  and  the  visitation  which  came  upon  her  was  the 
hand  of  a  providence  rather  than  a  hand  which  chastised. 
According  to  one  text,  with  which  we  shall  deal  later, 
she  became  at  length  a  nun,  and  so  passed  in  sanctity. 
To  pass  thus  also  was  evidently  De  Borron's  intention 
as  to  the  son's  destiny,  and  at  the  end  of  the  Lesser 
Chronicles  we  shall  see  how  it  was  fulfilled.  Meanwhile, 
the  expressed  mission  of  Merlin  was  after  an  unwonted 
manner  to  teach  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  life 

259 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

everlasting.  The  note  of  this  intention  occurs  early  in 
the  story,  when  it  is  said  that  God  took  the  fiend-born 
child  to  His  own  use,  though  the  mystery  is  the  manner 
of  that  use  ;  his  double  nature  was  such  and  so  granted 
that  he  might  yield  to  God  His  part  and  -to  the  fiend  also 
his  own.  There  are  other  stories  which  tell  how  Merlin 
dwelt  amidst  illusion,  and  how  at  the  end  he  passed 
therein,  but  these  are  not  of  Robert  de  Borron. 

The  exigencies  of  intention  rather  than  of  the  story 
itself  take  Merlin  to  Britain  at  a  period  which,  according 
to  his  years,  would  be  early  out  of  reason  for  his  work, 
but  he  who  was  never  a  child  was  more  already  than  a 
man.  There  is  no  need  to  recite  under  what  circum- 
stances, initial  and  successive,  he  became  the  high  coun- 
cillor and  worker  of  many  miracles  to  four  kings, 
each  after  the  other :  Vortigern,  Pendragon,  Uther 
Pendragon  and  Arthur.  What  remains  to  be  said  of 
his  history  will  best  fall  under  the  considerations  which 
now  follow. 

It  is  perhaps  the  Merlin  cycle  which  offers  the  most 
curious  among  what  I  have  termed  the  Lesser  Implicits 
of  the  Graal  literature.  I  must  put  them  at  a  certain 
length  because  of  their  apparent  importance,  and  will 
say  in  the  first  place  that  on  Robert  de  Borron's  part, 
as  on  that  of  certain  other  and  unknown  writers,  there 
were  two  tangible  purposes  in  full  view :  ( i )  To 
connect  Merlin  with  all  that  Graal  Mystery  which  was 
antecedent  to  the  ascribed  times  of  the  prophet;  (2)  to 
identify  his  function  with  the  termination  of  the  Graal 
marvels  under  the  pretext  of  times  of  enchantment  or 
times  adventurous.  We  are  drawn  through  far  tracts 
of  speculation  in  seeking  to  understand  what  sub-surface 
disposition  of  mind  could  have  actuated  these  purposes, 
but  at  the  moment  we  are  concerned  in  ascertaining  how 
they  are  carried  out  in  the  story. 

There  was  a  hermit  named  Blaise,  to  whom  the  mother 
of  Merlin  had  recourse  in  her  unexpected  difficulties, 
who  had  been  also  her  spiritual  adviser  previously.  The 

260 


'The  Lesser   Chronicles 

text  says  that  this  hermit  was  an  exceeding  good  clerk 
and  subtle,  for  which  reason  Merlin  prayed  that  he 
would  become  his  recorder-in-chief,  not  only  of  all  his 
deeds,  but  of  things  heard  and  seen  which  he  might  well 
think  that  no  creature  could  express.  A  consent  was 
obtained  only  after  the  holy  man  had  conjured  the 
querent  in  the  Name  of  the  Divine  Trinity  that  he 
should  deceive  him  in  nowise ;  but  Merlin  answered 
that  the  records  would  rather  keep  him  from  sin  than 
dispose  thereto.  It  is  in  this  way  that  Blaise  is  one 
of  its  characters  even  from  the  beginning  of  the  romance, 
but  his  chronicle  itself  began  long  prior  to  the  birth 
of  Merlin,  for  at  the  instance  of  him  who  was  to  prove 
himself  a  prophet  in  Britain,  he  wrote  first  of  the  great 
love  between  Christ  and  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  of  the 
lineage  of  Joseph,  the  names  of  those  who  were  to  be 
the  guardians  of  the  Graal,  of  Alain  and  his  companions 
and  whither  they  journeyed,  of  the  departure  of  Peter 
westward,  of  the  transmission  of  the  Holy  Vessel  from 
Joseph  to  Brons,  and  of  the  death  of  Joseph.  The 
history  of  these  things  was  to  be  joined  with  that  of 
Merlin,  and  the  two  recitals  were  to  form  a  single  book, 
complete  in  respect  of  everything,  save  only  the  Secret 
Words  revealed  to  Joseph  by  Christ,  whereof  Merlin 
could  say  nothing — the  reason  of  which  is  to  be  inferred 
from  the  Quest-matter  of  the  Lesser  Chronicles,  namely, 
that  he  had  not  received  them. 

In  accordance  with  the  general  trend  of  the  earlier 
history  and  of  the  personages  concerned  therein,  Merlin 
announced  his  intention  to  go  west — that  is,  apparently 
out  of  Brittany  into  the  land  of  Vortigern,  or  Greater 
Britain,  and  Blaise  was  also  to  follow,  betaking  himself  to 
Northumbria,  where  it  is  said  that  the  guardians  of  the 
Graal  were  then  dwelling,  though  they  are  not  specified 
by  name.  The  first  recompense  of  Blaise  in  this  life  was 
to  be  united  with  these  Wardens,  but  thereafter  it  was  to 
be  joie  perdurable.  The  Graal  is  the  talisman  of  the 
whole  story,  and  hereof  is  the  repose  of  the  Graal — that 

261 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

they  who  have  achieved  the  search  shall  have  rest  in  the 
term  thereof.  And  the  book  made  by  Blaise  was  to  be 
called  while  the  world  endured  the  Book  of  the  Seynt 
Graal.  In  this  manner  did  Merlin,  though  he  was  not 
in  any  sense  a  custodian  of  the  Hallows,  make  a  certain 
claim  upon  them  in  the  dispensation  of  their  graces  and 
rewards.  It  was  not,  in  the  symbolical  sense,  of  an  idle 
nature,  not  the  artifice  of  an  impostor ;  rather  it  was  of 
set  purpose  and  as  if  the  external  sign  of  some  secret 
warrant,  in  virtue  of  which  the  highest  branch  of  the 
Graal  history  is  connected  indissolubly  with  Merlin.  He 
laid  the  scheme,  and  the  Hallows  conformed  thereto,  the 
end  being  the  termination  of  those  dubious  times,  the 
dereliction  of  which  we  have  heard  of  so  often  and  can 
as  yet  understand  so  little. 

Of  such  is  the  Graal  in  the  Early  History  of  Merlin. 
But  this  is  also  the  first  romance  which,  in  the  chrono- 
logical succession  of  texts,  apart  from  priority  in  time  of 
literary  production,  introduces  the  Third  Table  and  the 
mystery  of  the  Siege  Perilous.  It  may  be  held  to  con- 
stitute another  side  of  its  particular  claim  concerning  the 
British  prophet.  Those  who  have  followed  so  far  the 
history  of  the  Second  Table  will  perhaps  have  recalled 
already  that  a  vacant  seat  was  left  of  old  at  the  Passover 
for  the  unexpected  guest,  and  it  is  still  left  by  the  Jews. 
There  is  also  that  custom,  beautiful  and  piteous,  of 
leaving  a  vacant  seat  for  the  Angel  of  Peace.  I  do  not 
know  what  memories  of  this  kind  were  present  to  the 
mind  of  De  Borron  when  he  borrowed  from  those  who 
had  preceded  him  the  idea  of  the  Round  Table  and 
attributed  its  foundation  to  Uther  Pendragon,  not  to 
King  Arthur,  Merlin,  however,  being  in  either  case  the 
instigator  of  its  institution.  With  his  reflex  of  the  spirit 
of  sanctity,  as  conceived  by  the  British  prophet,  the 
knightly  table  was  something  more  than  a  substitute,  and 
assuredly,  in  some  later  aspects,  it  reflected  on  earth  that 
which  belongs  to  heaven. 

In    the    course    of  his   proposal,  Merlin    told    Uther 

262 


The  Lesser   Chronicles 

Pendragon  the  story  of  Joseph  of  Arimathasa,  and  how  in 
the  desert  places,  the  sowing  of  which  had  become  void 
through  the  sin  of  some  who  went  forth,  the  Second 
Table  had  been  instituted  to  separate  the  good  from  the 
evil.  The  Third  was  to  be  established  by  Uther  in  the 
Name  of  the  Trinity,  and  it  was  to  be  set  up  at  Cardoil 
in  Wales  for  a  certain  Feast  of  Pentecost — that  is  to  say, 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  there  was  a  place  that  was  void 
at  the  Table  of  Joseph  so  there  was  to  be  one  now,  which 
should  not  be  filled  in  the  days  of  Uther  Pendragon,  but 
of  the  king  who  was  to  come  after  him.  The  knight 
who  would  then  fill  it  was  not  as  yet  born,  which  is 
colourable  enough  as  a  pretence  in  respect  of  the  Perceval 
who  was  to  follow  as  questing  knight  according  to  the 
Lesser  Chronicles.  But  the  codices  have  been  edited  in 
variant  interests  and  the  English  rendering,  represented 
by  an  unique  text  and  drawing  from  what  source  I  know 
not,  adds  words  as  follows  which  could  apply  only  to 
Galahad  :  "  Ne  he  that  shall  hym  engendere  shall  not 
know  that  he  shall  hym  engendere."  On  the  other  hand, 
the  Huth  Merlin  says  that  he  will  be  engendered  by  him 
who  ought  so  to  engender  him,  but  as  yet  he  has  not 
taken  a  wife,  nor  does  he  know  that  he  ought  to  engender 
him — a  passage  which,  after  much  circumlocution,  comes 
to  nothing.  The  text  suggests  otherwise  that  before  the 
predestined  hero  takes  the  void  seat  he  must  accomplish 
the  adventures  of  the  Graal,  which  is  contrary  to  all  the 
texts,  historical  and  otherwise.  The  Vulgate  Merlin  says 
in  effect  that  he  who  fills  the  one  will  fulfil  the  other.  And 
the  English  version  :  "  And  he  that  shall  a-complysshe  that 
sete  must  also  complysshe  the  voyde  place  at  the  table  that 
Joseph  made."  This  seems  to  create  on  the  surface  an 
almost  insoluble  difficulty,  but  the  meaning  is  probably 
that  in  the  secret  and  holy  place  where  the  Graal  abides, 
the  service  of  the  Second  Table  is  held  still,  as  it  was  in 
the  days  of  Joseph,  that  he  who  enters  into  the  House 
shall  take  the  seat  reserved  for  him,  and  that  the  Table 
shall  be  in  fine  complete. 

263 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Of  such  was  the  second  mission  of  the  prophet  Merlin  ; 
but  the  third  was  the  conception  of  Arthur  and  the 
conduct  of  all  those  events  which  should  lead  to  his  high 
coronation  as  King  of  Britain.  I  need  not  reproduce  in 
this  place  the  familiar  story  of  Ygerne,  the  faithful  wife 
of  the  Duke  of  Tintagel,  and  of  the  sorcery  by  which  she 
received  Uther  Pendragon  in  the  likeness  of  her  husband 
and  so  brought  forth  the  great  king  who  was  to  come. 
The  circumstances  of  the  imbedded  sword  which  led  to  his 
ultimate  recognition,  though  he  had  been  reared  as  the 
reputed  son  of  a  simple  knight,  are  or  ought  to  be 
familiar.  It  was  to  achieve  his  prophetic  purpose  that 
Merlin  assisted  Uther  over  those  things  which  led  up  to 
the  conception  of  Arthur,  since  the  latter  was  to  con- 
summate the  great  intent  of  the  Round  Table  which  was 
begun  by  his  father.  The  conception  was  one  of  a  triad 
— of  Merlin,  of  Arthur,  of  Galahad — which  all  took 
place  under  false  pretences.  Merlin  was  conscious  that 
he  had  sinned  in  respect  of  this  business,  and  apparently 
he  sought  to  make  amends  by  assisting  the  subsequent 
marriage  between  Uther  and  Ygerne  and  by  his  arrange- 
ments in  respect  of  the  charge  of  Arthur  in  childhood. 

It  should  be  noted  in  fine  (a)  that  no  Keeper  of  the 
Graal  is  mentioned  in  the  Early  History  of  Merlin^  though 
the  locality  of  its  abode  is  indicated  ;  ($)  that  there  is  only 
a  covert  reference  to  Moses ;  (<:)  that  certain  sources  are 
obvious  for  certain  texts,  but  there  are  important  respects 
in  which  all  the  early  romances  seem  echoes  from  far 
away  of  a  book  that  had  never  been  seen  by  their  writers, 
though  it  had  been  heard  of  by  a  general  report ;  and 
(d)  that  this  statement  is  intended  to  override  all  their 
reference,  actual  or  imaginary,  to  mysterious  sources  of 
information  which  are  not — if  they  were  ever — extant. 


264 


The  Lesser  Chronicles 
IV 

THE  DIDOT  PERCEVAL 

Without  instituting  in  the  present  stage  of  the  question 
more  than  a  parallel,  the  Quest  of  the  Graal  is  the 
adventurous  mission  of  those  who  go  forth  out  of 
earthly  houses,  who  depart  from  tables  of  wonder,  from 
the  enchantments  and  illusions  of  magicians  after  the 
manner  of  Merlin — when  Merlin  was  not  at  his  highest— 
and  issue  into  strange  lands,  some  unprepared  enough, 
but  some  under  spiritual  guidance,  observing  the  ordi- 
nances of  instructors  and  looking  for  a  mystical  place. 
Few  are  destined  for  the  perfect  fulfilment  of  their 
object,  but  that  which  opens  for  these  is  the  path  of 
heaven.  Though  time  and  place  are  imputed,  and  this 
of  necessity,  it  can  be  said  scarcely  that  such  limits  are 
native  to  this  manner  of  research.  There  is,  according 
to  the  Hebrews,  a  palace  at  the  centre  which  sustains  all 
things,  and  in  the  terms  of  another  symbolism  it  is  the 
sanctuary  of  that  which  in  later  times  was  called  the  Holy 
Graal.  The  first  consideration  which  must  be  kept 
present  to  the  mind,  as  if  here  were  also  an  implicit,  in 
dealing  with  our  whole  subject,  is  that  nothing  on  its 
surface  differs  in  doctrine  or  in  specific  institutes  from 
the  beaten  tracks  of  the  faith  delivered  to  the  saints,  and 
yet  all  undergoes  a  great  transfiguration.  There  are 
many  quests  in  folk-lore  which,  in  their  bare  outlines,  are 
analogous  to  this  quest,  with  due  allowance  for  the  dis- 
tinction of  motive  and  all  that  belongs  to  the  class  of 
voided  marvels.  There  is  also  the  great  debate  concern- 
ing initiation  and  its  purport,  which  seems  to  hold  a 
middle  place  between  that  which  is  below — and  is  noth- 
ing— and  that  which  is  above — and  is  all,  tending  to  the 
same  term  as  the  higher,  and  exhibiting  after  what  manner 
that  which  is  mortal  puts  on  immortality  in  virtue  of 
high  election.  It  is  well  to  recall  these  things,  because 

265 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  text  with  which  we  are  dealing,  though  it  has  its 
claims  and  intentions,  is  far  from  this  term. 

From  the  Merlin  there  follows  directly  the  Didot 
Perceval  as  the  Merlin  Quest  par  excellence,  but  it  gleams 
dimly  through  a  vague  species  of  cloud ;  and  as  there  is 
much  which  preceded  the  romance  of  the  prophet,  and 
remains  among  the  implicits  of  the  literature,  so  there  is 
much  which  might  be  supposed  to  come  after  the  Quest, 
as,  for  example,  the  rewards  which  are  somewhere  held 
in  reserve  for  those  who  practise  holiness. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  up  to  a  certain  point  the  Didot 
Perceval  connects  logically  with  the  two  poems  which,  by 
the  particular  hypothesis,  were  designed  to  lead  up  there- 
to. Its  ascription  to  Robert  de  Borron,  by  the  secondary 
and  reflective  way  of  a  prose  version,  has  been  rejected  by 
certain  students  in  the  past,  but  the  state  of  the  case  is 
doubtful  and  opinions  vary.  It  is  almost  impossible  to 
read  the  opening  portion  without  feeling  that  here  is  the 
genuine  third  part  of  the  trilogy  ;  while  the  fact,  so  fre- 
quently exemplified,  that  Perceval  remains  throughout  a 
virgo  Intacta,  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  mind  of 
the  metrical  romance.  The  Early  History  or  first  part 
of  the  Vulgate  Merlin  follows  directly  from  the  poem 
of  Joseph  of  Arimathasa,  and  so  far  as  we  can  ascertain  it 
closed  for  Robert  de  Borron  at  that  stage,  when  it  could, 
without  any  violation,  be  merged  in  the  Perceval  legend, 
by  which  the  tradition  is  continued  without  a  break  of 
any  kind.  One  other  favourable  point,  and  assuredly 
these  points  are  many,  is  that — unlike  the  'Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal,  which  makes  an  effort  in  this  direction  but  fails 
manifestly — it  does  not  seek  to  fill  the  gap  left  by  De 
Borron's  missing  branches ;  it  does  not  mention  Petrus, 
his  Brief  notwithstanding ;  as  to  Brons,  it  says  only  that 
he  is  old  and  full  of  infirmity ;  as  to  Akin,  he  is  dying. 
All  this  tends  to  show  that  the  intermediate  promised 
branches  were  non-existent  rather  than  lost,  and  I  say  this 
remembering  that  one  of  the  unprinted  Merlin  codices 
speaks  of  a  text  which  contains  the  marriage  of  Alain. 

266 


The  Lesser   Chronicles 

To  conclude  as  to  this  question,  the  early  history  of  the 
prophet  specifies  at  the  term  thereof  that  Arthur,  after 
his  coronation,  held  the  kingdom  of  Logres  long  in  peace, 
while  it  leaves  Merlin  as  his  councillor.  The  Perceval 
opens  with  an  account  of  the  prophet's  instruction  to  the 
King  concerning  the  Round  Table  and  the  Graal  mys- 
teries which  went  before  its  institution ;  it  is  only  at  the 
term  of  the  Quest  that  Merlin  passes  into  voluntary  and, 
as  one  would  think,  ascetic  retirement,  free  from  personal 
enchantment  and  having  delivered  Britain  from  spell. 
The  later  Merlin  texts,  on  the  contrary,  intern  the 
prophet,  and  then,  and  not  after,  lead  up  to  the  Galahad 
Quest.  It  is  difficult  therefore  to  say  that  the  Didot 
Perceval  does  not  reflect,  from  at  hand  or  afar,  the  lost 
romance  which  completed  the  trilogy  of  De  Borron. 

Perceval  was  the  son  of  Alain  le  Gros,  the  grandson 
of  Brons,  and  the  third  of  that  earthly  trinity  which 
was  destined  to  possess  the  Graal.  While  Arthur  was 
holding  high  festival  at  London  and  was  listening  to  the 
counsel  of  Merlin,  the  voice  of  the  Holy  Spirit  spoke  to 
Perceval's  father — he  being  near  his  end — and  informed 
him  that  Brons,  the  Rich  Fisherman  and  the  Warden 
of  the  Graal,  was  in  the  isles  of  Ireland,  and  that  the 
Holy  Vessel  was  with  him.  He  was  old,  as  I  have 
said  already,  but  he  could  not  seek  refuge  in  death 
till  he  was  found  by  the  son  of  Alain,  had  communicated 
to  this  son  the  grace  of  that  vessel,  and  had  taught 
him  the  secret  words  which  he  learned  himself  from 
Joseph.  To  express  it  more  nearly  in  language  of 
romance,  the  Quest,  which  is  the  intention  of  the 
story,  must  be  fulfilled  in  all  perfection.  Thereafter 
his  infirmity  would  be  healed,  apparently  by  the  medicine 
of  eternity,  or,  as  the  text  says,  by  his  entrance  into  the 
great  joy  of  that  Father  in  Heaven  whom  he  had  served 
always  in  time.  The  youth,  Perceval,  was  therefore 
directed  to  repair  to  the  court  of  King  Arthur,  and  it 
was  promised  him  that  in  this  place  he  should  hear  such 
tidings  that  he  would  be  brought  in  due  season  to  the 

267 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

house  of  the  Rich  Fisher.  When  Alain  had  received 
this  direction,  he  bowed  his  head  and  entered  himself, 
as  one  who  arrives  beforehand,  into  the  Company  of 
Christ. 

Perceval,  in  his  outward  seeming,  has  little  title  to 
participate  in  the  mysteries,  except  the  title  of  his  geniture. 
He  is  brave,  savage  and  imperious ;  he  is  also  chivalrous, 
but  he  is  without  the  spiritual  chivalry  which  we  find 
in  the  great  Quest.  He  was  then  living  with  his 
mother,  who,  as  we  can  infer  subsequently,  sought 
to  dissuade  him  from  the  journey ;  but  obeying  the 
Divine  Voice,  which  had  come  also  to  him,  he  set  out 
for  the  court  of  King  Arthur ;  there  he  abode  for  a 
season ;  there  he  received  the  grade  of  chivalry.  At 
the  court  he  saw  Aleine,  the  niece  of  Gawain,  the 
niece  also  of  the  King,  and  the  text  says  that  she 
loved  Perceval  with  all  love  that  was  possible,  because 
in  addition  to  his  bravery  he  was  also  beautiful.  It 
came  about  that  she  sent  him  red  armour  to  wear 
on  her  behalf  at  a  tournament ;  in  this  manner  he 
was  accounted  her  knight,  and  she  shared  in  the  glory 
of  his  achievements.  But  hereafter  nothing  follows  con- 
cerning her.  Perceval  was  proclaimed  the  best  knight 
of  the  world  after  overcoming  Lancelot  and  others 
of  the  high  company  at  the  joust,  it  being  then  the 
Feast  of  Pentecost.  There  was  high  feasting  in  the 
hall  after  the  tournament,  and  Perceval,  who  was  to 
some  extent  exalted,  desired  to  occupy  the  seat  left 
vacant  at  the  Round  Table  for  the  predestined  third 
custodian  of  the  Holy  Graal.  King  Arthur  endeavoured 
to  dissuade  him,  remembering  the  fate  of  Moses,  but 
the  prayers  of  Gawain  and  Lancelot  prevailed  with  the 
monarch.  A  tremendous  confusion  ensued  notwith- 
standing, over  which  rose  the  voice  of  an  invisible 
speaker,  bearing  once  more  the  same  witness  which 
the  Voice  of  the  Spirit  had  borne  recently  to  Alain, 
but  revealing  further  that  the  healing  of  the  Rich  Fisher 
depended  on  a  visit  to  his  castle  which  must  be  paid 

268 


The  Lesser   Chronicles 

by  the  best  knight  of  the  world,  who  must  ask  further 
concerning  the  secret  service  of  the  Graal.  By  the 
instructions  which  would  follow,  a  period  should  be 
put  to  the  enchantments  of  Britain.  The  voice  also 
spoke  of  the  dolorous  death  of  Moses,  who,  according 
to  the  text  otherwise,  was  to  remain  in  the  abyss  until 
the  days  of  Anti-Christ.  The  Quest  was  undertaken 
by  Perceval,  and  there  were  others,  Gawain  included, 
who  also  ventured  forth  therein,  but  it  is  stated  that 
of  how  they  fared  the  book,  which  is  the  proto- 
type, says  nothing.  Our  text,  however,  shows  on  its 
own  part  that  one  of  the  knights  was  slain.  King 
Arthur  deplored  the  Quest,  as  he  does  in  the  romance 
of  Galahad. 

The  course  of  Perceval's  adventures  covers  many  of 
those  incidents  with  which  we  are  acquainted  already  in 
the  Welsh  Peredur  and  the  Conte  del  Graal.  There  is,  for 
example,  the  visit  to  that  strange  castle  wherein  he  plays 
chess  with  an  invisible  opponent,  and  is  mated.  From 
this  follows  some  part  of  the  episodes  which  concern  the 
quest  of  the  Stag's  Head  in  company  with  a  hound 
belonging  to  a  maiden  of  the  Castle.  For  our  purpose 
it  is  more  pertinent  to  mention  that  Perceval  visited  his 
sister,  from  whom  he  learned  the  story  of  their  father, 
his  own  early  history,  and  the  prophecy  concerning  the 
Graal.  He  heard  further  that  his  mother  was  dead  at 
grief  for  his  departure,  and  though,  under  the  direc- 
tion received,  he  cannot  be  said  to  have  deserted  her, 
it  is  accounted  to  him  somehow  as  a  sin  after  the  con- 
fused manner  of  materials  drawn  from  many  sources. 
He  visited  also  his  uncle,  the  hermit,  who  is  the  brother 
of  Alain,  and  is  seemingly  one  of  the  twelve  brethren  who 
were  children  of  Brons.  It  is  obvious  therefore  that  the 
note  of  time  is  again  wanting  entirely,  as  for  any  purpose 
of  the  story  this  perpetuation  of  ordinary  life  through  the 
centuries  has  no  meaning.  Perceval  confessed  to  his  uncle 
and  heard  from  him  that  at  the  table  instituted  by  Joseph 
—he  also  assisting — the  Voice  of  the  Spirit  commended 

269 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

them  to  journey  far  into  the  countries  of  the  West,  and 
ordained  in  particular  that  the  Rich  Fisher  should  go  forth 
into  those  parts  where  the  sun  set.  In  fine,  the  hermit  told 
him  how  the  son  of  Alain  le  Gros  would  perform  such  feats 
of  chivalry  that  he  should  be  called  the  best  knight  of  the 
world.  It  is  obvious  that  this  information  does  not  cor- 
respond very  closely  with  any  extant  text  of  Graal  history. 
The  uncle  continued  to  speak  of  that  peculiar  and  holy 
service  to  which  the  youth  had  been  called,  and  counselled 
him  to  be  pure  in  his  life ;  but  he  did  not,  as  in  other 
quests,  advise  him  to  beware  of  idle  speaking  or  of  the 
curiosity  which  leads  to  questioning.  After  these  things 
Perceval  continued  the  Quest,  and  among  other  adventures 
he  met  with  a  knight  who,  owing  to  this  encounter,  had 
missed  by  seven  days  the  crown  of  the  world's  knighthood, 
but  who  ultimately  vanished  from  sight.  He  saw  further 
the  wonder  of  two  children  disporting  themselves  in  a 
tree ;  they  spoke  to  him  of  the  Terrestrial  Paradise  and 
of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  they  also  directed  him  on  his  Quest, 
so  that  he  fared  better  according  to  this  story  than  he 
did  in  the  corresponding  episode  of  the  Conte  del  Graal. 
Perceval  reached  in  fine  the  Castle  of  his  grandfather, 
the  Rich  Fisher,  where  he  was  received  after  the  mode 
of  chivalry,  and  the  Warden  of  the  Graal  was  borne 
into  his  presence  in  the  arms  of  sergeants.  They 
sat  down  to  table  and  the  procession  of  the  Hallows 
entered  in  the  accustomed  manner.  Perceval  was  said, 
however,  to  remember  one  counsel  of  caution  which  he 
had  received  from  his  uncle  in  the  matter  of  questioning, 
from  which  it  is  certain  that  the  text  follows  some 
prototype  which  it  does  not  reproduce  faithfully.  He 
was  also  outwearied  by  vigils  on  two  previous  nights,  and 
his  host,  when  he  noticed  this,  directed  the  table  to  be 
removed  and  a  bed  to  be  prepared  for  the  knight,  who 
retired  thinking  deeply  of  the  Lance  and  the  Graal,  pro- 
mising himself  that  he  would  inquire  of  the  pages  to- 
morrow. The  voice  of  the  invisible  speaker  which  had 
directed  him  and  the  others  with  such  utter  plainness  at 

270 


'The  Lesser   Chronicles 

the  court  of  King  Arthur  had  lapsed  apparently  from  his 
mind,  and  from  that  fatal  inattention  he  passed  into  the 
forgetfulness  of  sleep.  On  the  morrow  he  went  down 
into  the  courtyard,  to  find  his  horse  and  arms  awaiting 
him,  but  there  was  no  one  else  to  be  seen.  He  was 
cursed  by  a  maiden  in  a  forest  adjoining  the  Castle,  and 
was  told  that,  so  only  that  he  had  asked  the  question,  the 
prophecy  of  our  Saviour  to  Joseph  would  have  been 
accomplished  ;  but  of  this  prophecy  we  find  no  particulars 
in  the  antecedent  texts.  The  Fisher  King  would  have 
been  restored  to  health,  and  there  would  have  ceased  those 
enchantments  of  Britain  the  nature  and  cause  of  which 
still  fail  to  appear.  Perceval  sought  in  vain  to  rediscover 
the  Castle,  for  over  the  whole  land  he  could  find  its  trace 
no  longer.  As  in  previous  texts,  he  returned  to  the 
maiden  of  the  chess-board,  with  the  dog  to  her  belonging 
and  a  stag's  head.  She  desired  him  to  remain  in  her 
company,  but  he  left,  with  a  promise  to  return,  saying 
that  otherwise  he  would  be  false  to  the  vow  which  he  had 
made.  I  infer  that  in  this  manner  he  preserved  his  de- 
sired purity,  but  he  fell  into  other  evils  during  a  pilgrimage 
of  seven  years  which  followed  thereafter.  Through 
distress  at  being  unable  to  find  the  Fisher  King,  he  lost 
all  memory  of  God  until  he  met  with  the  pilgrim 
company  on  Good  Friday,  who  asked,  as  in  previous 
texts,  why  he  rode  armed  for  purposes  of  destruc- 
tion on  such  a  sacred  day.  His  better  nature  then 
returned  to  him,  and  before  long  he  was  knocking  once 
more  at  the  door  of  his  uncle  the  hermit,  to  whom  he 
confessed  all.  It  was  his  intention  to  revisit  his  sister, 
but  he  was  told  that  she  was  dead  these  two  years  past. 
After  certain  further  episodes  he  met  with  Merlin,  who 
reproached  him  for  neglecting  the  Quest,  much  as  he  was 
reproached  by  a  certain  hutsman  in  one  of  the  additamenta 
to  the  poem  of  Gautier.  Perceval  heard  also  that  the 
health  of  the  Rich  Fisher  was  still  such  that  he  remained 
at  the  point  of  death,  though  he  could  not  pass  away. 
But  his  prayers  were  going  up  for  his  grandson,  and  by 

271 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

the  will  of  God  he  was  to  be  the  guardian  of  the  Precious 
Blood.  The  authority  throughout  is  the  record  of  Blaise, 
to  whom  Merlin  returned  after  this  conversation  and 
recounted  that  which  had  passed,  as  he  does  so  continually 
in  the  course  of  his  own  romance. 

Perceval  at  last  reached  the  Castle  of  the  Rich  Fisher  for 
the  second  time ;  again  he  beheld  the  Graal,  and  on  this 
occasion  asked  concerning  its  service,  at  which  the  King 
was  cured,  and  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
all  was  changed  about  him.  The  relationship  between 
them  was  declared,  and  Perceval  being  instructed  in 
the  history  of  the  Hallows  was  led  into  the  presence  of 
the  Holy  Vessel,  where  the  Voice  of  High  Counsel  told 
Brons  to  communicate  the  Secret  Words.  In  the  fulfil- 
ment of  this  command  the  ancient  Warden  might  have 
been  still  speaking  when  the  soul  passed  from  his  body, 
and  Perceval  saw  how  the  angels  bore  it  to  the  kingdom 
of  Heaven,  unto  the  Father  whom  he  had  served  so  long. 
Perceval  remained  in  the  Castle,  practising  wisdom,  and 
there  was  an  end  to  the  enchantments  of  Britain.  It  was 
as  if  an  interdict  had  been  imposed  and  a  legate  had 
removed  the  interdict. 

While  things  were  so  ordered  in  the  secret  sanctuary, 
there  were  events  in  the  outer  world  which  led  up  to  the 
passing  of  Arthur,  who  was  carried  into  Avalon  to  be 
healed  of  his  grievous  wounds  by  his  sister  Morgan  le 
Fay.  Merlin  was  still  in  evidence,  passing  to  and  fro 
between  the  king's  court  and  the  sanctuary  of  the  Holy 
Vessel,  where  then,  as  subsequently,  Perceval  seems  to 
have  divided  his  office  of  Warden  with  the  scribe  of  the 
records  thereof.  After  the  death  of  Arthur,  Merlin 
appeared  for  the  last  time,  recounting  the  woes  which 
had  befallen,  whereat  the  place  of  the  Hallows  became 
a  house  of  mourning  and  a  chapel  for  the  office  of  the 
dead.  The  prophet  took  leave  of  the  Wardens,  because 
it  was  God's  will  no  longer  that  he  should  go  to  and  fro 
in  the  world,  and  he  would  therefore  betake  himself,  as 
if  for  a  last  refuge,  to  a  hermitage  in  the  forest  which 

272 


The  Lesser    Chronicles 

encompassed  the  castle.  It  follows  that  the  term  of 
Merlin  is  revolutionised  in  this  romance  ;  he  does  not 
pass  in  enchantment,  inhibition  and  the  folly  of  morganatic 
ties,  but  seeking  the  peace  of  God,  and  choosing  the  life 
of  contemplation.  Thereafter  he  was  seen  no  longer, 
and  there  was  no  further  story  concerning  the  Holy 
Graal. 

The  Didot  Perceval  and  the  Parsifal  of  Wolfram  are 
the  only  texts  which  leave  the  last  Warden  alive  and 
dwelling  in  the  sanctuary.  It  should  be  noted  further 
that  the  Quest  in  this  instance  does  not  involve  the 
destruction  of  Logres  or  a  fatality  to  the  Round  Table, 
though  this  fatality  occurs.  The  point  is  important, 
because  it  is  another  note  of  the  correspondences  between 
the  Didot  Perceval  and  the  Early  Merlin.  The  secret 
conspiracy,  planned,  as  one  might  say,  in  the  sanctuary, 
against  the  great  chivalry  was  undreamed  of  by  Robert 
de  Borron  and  is  peculiar  to  the  Greater  Chronicles. 
The  unanimity  of  the  Lesser  Chronicles  resides,  among 
other  things,  in  the  fact  that  they  are  all  texts  of  the 
Secret  Sanctuary,  and  they  emanate  by  the  hypothesis 
therefrom.  They  suggest  no  public  office  ;  there  is  no 
travelling  of  the  Graal.  Britain  suffers  during  the  Quest 
period  from  an  enchantment,  but  it  is  not  described,  and 
it  is  to  be  doubted  whether  Britain  knew  of  it.  It  is  the 
most  occult  of  all  processes  and  the  most  withdrawn  of 
all  localised  mysteries.  Brons  and  Alain  have  done  nothing 
in  the  land  ;  they  are  aliens  of  sanctity,  with  the  burden 
of  the  years  of  the  Juif  errant  upon  them  ;  and  they  abide 
in  seclusion. 

The  Didot  Perceval  is  scarcely  at  peace  with  itself  over 
some  of  its  elements,  nor  is  it  at  peace  with  those  texts 
antecedent  from  which  it  follows  that  the  third  keeper 
will  (a)  meet  with  Petrus,  who  carries  the  Sacred  Brief, 
and  with  him  compare  their  knowledge  in  common  of 
the  Graal  Mystery ;  (£)  find  Moses,  and  this  under 
circumstances  which  suggest  some  palliation  at  least  of 
that  which  he  has  suffered  through  the  ages.  I  do  not 

273  s 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

think  that  these  points  make  void  its  place  in  the  trilogy, 
because  there  are  several  respects  in  which  all  the  Graal 
books,  like  other  romances  of  chivalry,  are  conven- 
tions of  the  cohorts  of  sleep,  and  there  is  sometimes  a 
distracting  spirit  moving  through  the  great  dream. 


274 


BOOK    V 

THE   GREATER    CHRONICLES   OF  THE 
HOLT  GRAAL 


THE   ARGUMENT 

I.  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  HOLY  GRAAL  AND,  IN  THE  FIRST 
PLACE,  THE  PROLOGUE  THERETO  BELONGING. — The  claims 
and  defects  of  the  Text  regarded  generally — The  secret 
of  this  cycle — Its  imputed  authorship — Its  hypothetical 
divisions — The  Hermit  of  the  Legend — What  he  read  and 
saw  at  a  Mass  of  the  Presanctified — Disappearance  of  the 
Secret  Book — The  Quest  of  its  recovery — The  time  for  the 
transcript  thereof.  II.  A  NEW  CONSIDERATION  CONCERN- 
ING THE  BRANCHES  OF  THE  CHRONICLE  AND  CONCERNING 
ITS  MAJOR  BRANCHES. — Divergence  of  the  extant  manu- 
scripts— The  incorporation  of  De  Borron  elements — The 
point  at  which  their  tradition  is  broken,  and  this  completely 
— The  arrival  at  Sarras — Events  which  lead  up  to  the  con- 
version of  this  city — The  Spiritual  Palace — The  ordination 
of  Joseph  II. — His  later  life — Of  Evalach,  the  King  of 
Sarras,  who  was  afterwards  Mordrains  —  Of  Queen 
Sarracinte  —  Of  Seraphe,  who  was  also  Nasciens  —  Of 
Celidoine,  the  son  of  Nasciens — The  Ship  of  Solomon — The 
Building  of  Corbenic.  III.  THE  MINOR  BRANCHES  OF  THE 
CHRONICLE. — The  Later  History  of  Joseph  of  Arimathes a 
— The  Life  of  Petrus  in  Britain — Of  Brons  and  Alain — 
Variations  in  the  History  of  Moses — Of  Simeon  and  his 
Brethren — Concerning  the  first  Galahad — The  Genealogies 
— Conclusion  as  to  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal.  IV.  SOME 
LATER  MERLIN  LEGENDS. — And  firstly  as  to  the  scope  of 
these  Texts — (A)  The  Vulgate  Merlin — Its  Antecedents  in 

277 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy    Graal 

History  —  Merlin  as  the    chief  promulgator  of  the  Graal 
Mystery — The  House  of  the  Holy  Vessel — Of  the  second 
Nasciens  and  his  history — King  Pelles  of  Lytenoys — The 
Maimed  King — The  Daughter  of  the  House — A  son  of  King 
Pelles— Tidings  of  the  Graal  in  Britain— (H)  The  Huth 
Merlin — Its  false  ascription — Its  consideration  as  a  stately 
romance — The  intention  of  the  story — Of  secret  records— 
The  branches  of  the  story — The  Internment  of  Merlin — 
Concerning  the  father  of  Perceval — The  Institution  of  the 
Round  Table — The  Vacant  Seat — The  Hidden  Life  of  the 
Holy  House — The  Dolorous  Stroke — The  Secret  Powers  of 
Avalon.     V.  THE  GREAT  PROSE  LANCELOT. — The  ante- 
cedents of  the  story — An  undeclared  Mystery  of  the  Graal 
— Of  Perceval  in  the  Great  Quest — Particular  Graal  tra- 
ditions—  Missing   elements  of  Quest — The   Genealogy   of 
Lancelot — His  life  in  Faerie — Of  Moses  and  Simeon — Of 
Gawain  at  Castle  Corbenic — Of  Lancelot  and  the  Lady  of  the 
Bath — Helayne,  the  Maiden  of  the  Graal — The  conception 
of  Galahad.     VI.  A  PREFACE  OR  INTRODUCTORY  PORTION 
APPERTAINING  TO  ALL  THE  QUESTS. — Claims  of  the  questing 
Knights — And  further  concerning  Gawain — A  pentagram  of 
chivalry — The  Mystery  of  Divine  Providence  manifested  in 
flesh.     VII.  THE  LONGER  PROSE  PERCEVAL. — Its  imputed 
antecedents — The  initial  point  which  constitutes  a  departure 
from  tradition — After  what  manner  the  departure  is  per- 
petuated throughout  —  Of  pageants  abroad  in  the  land — 
The  Earthly  Paradise — The  state  of  King  Arthur — Of 
Gawain' s  visit   to   the   Graal  —  And  that  of  Lancelot— 
The  death  of  Guinevere — Visions  of  the  King — The  King 
of  Castle  Mortal — The  death  of  King   Fisherman — The 
capture  of  the  Graal  Castle — The  removal  of  the  Hallows — 
The  siege  and  victory  by  Perceval — The  reign  of  the  last 
Keeper — The  distribution  of  the  Hallows — The  departure 

278 


The  Argument 

of  Perceval.  VIII.  THE  QUEST  OF  THE  HIGH  PRINCE.— 
Of  the  generation  of  Galahad — Of  some  things  which 
followed  thereafter — The  circumstances  of  his  first  mani- 
festation— Its  mystic  environment — Of  the  Eucharist  in  the 
Quest — Of  arch-natural  feasting — The  Quest  in  brief  outline 
— The  liberation  of  Simeon — The  release  of  King  Mor  drains 
— The  voyage  in  the  Ship  of  Solomon — The  term  of  Quest  at 
Corbenic — The  Mystery  unveiled — The  Ascent  of  Galahad 
— The  doom  of  earthly  Knighthood.  IX.  THE  WELSH  QUEST. 
— The  position  of  this  version — Its  variations  in  summary — 
Wanderings  of  the  Graal — The  Dolorous  Stroke — Specifics 
of  the  last  scene — Additamenta  to  the  Greater  Chronicles. 


279 


BOOK  V 

THE  GREATER  CHRONICLES  OF  THE 
HOLT  GRAAL 


I 

THE  BOOK  OF  THE  HOLT  GRAAL  AND,  IN  THE 
FIRST  PLACE,  THE  PROLOGUE  THERETO 
BELONGING 

THE  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  is  the  most  conscious,  most 
cumbersome,  most  artificial  romance  in  the  literature.  It 
is  that  also  which  is  beyond  all  prodigal  of  wonders,  and 
its  wonders  are  the  least  convincing.  In  so  far  as  con- 
cerns the  history  of  the  Sacred  Vessel,  it  must  be  said 
that  it  materialises  the  symbol  and  it  also  distracts  the 
legend.  Robert  de  Borron  finished  his  metrical  romance 
by  confessing  that  for  want  of  materials  he  must,  for  the 
time  being,  hold  over  those  branches  of  his  chronicle 
which  were  intended  to  deal  with  the  further  adventures 
of  Brons,  Alain,  Petrus  and  the  connected  characters  of 
the  story.  In  the  meantime  he  proceeded  to  the  life 
of  Merlin,  bridging  the  gulf  of  centuries  by  a  promise 
to  retrace  the  path  when  he  had  obtained  the  necessary 
data,  though  it  is  possible  enough  that  the  intervening 
distances  of  time  may  have  spelt  little  to  his  mind.  All 
that  could  be  construed  as  wanting  is  supplied  by  the 
Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  leaving  nothing  undone,  but 
working  through  I  know  not  what  mazes  of  great  en- 
chantment. I  have  said  that  the  artifice  of  the  design — 
which  obtains  also  for  its  expression — stands  forth  in 

281 


The   Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

full  manifestation,  even  upon  its  surface.  A  hand  more 
sparing  might  have  worked  greater  marvels  and  left  some 
sense  of  realism,  at  least  in  the  order  of  faerie.  And  yet 
the  prolix  history  has  a  certain  touch  of  enchantment, 
all  paths  of  disillusion  notwithstanding. 

From  whatever  point  of  view  it  is  approached,  the 
entire  text  will  prove  to  be  sown  with  difficulties — curious 
things  in  truth  of  the  worlds  within  and  without,  but 
even  as  difficulties  these  have  also  their  secret  charm.  It 
has  vast  sections  of  unnecessary  matter  which  suggest  an 
imperfect  art  of  mere  story-telling,  and  it  also  deals  with 
materials  which  do  not  belong,  more  especially  at  its  own 
period,  to  the  horizon  confessed  by  that  art.  Moreover, 
nothing  is  really  finished,  for,  as  one  of  its  sub-titles 
indicates,  it  is  the  first  branch  of  the  romances  of  the 
Round  Table,  or  it  is  rather  the  prolegomenon  to  these. 
A  cycle  of  the  literature  of  chivalry  is  supposed  to  follow 
thereafter,  which  may  mean  that  the  writer  had  a  mind 
to  go  further,  or,  alternatively,  that  his  intention  was  to 
present  the  collated  antecedents  leading  up  to  other  docu- 
ments which  in  one  or  another  form  were  there  already 
in  being.  Accepting  either  alternative,  this  prolix  in- 
troduction in  general,  which  presupposes  and  from  which 
ex  hypothesi  there  follows  so  great  a  cloud  of  romance, 
offers  herein  a  first  point  of  distinction  from  the  trilogy 
ascribed  to  Robert  de  Borron.  The  latter  lies,  compara- 
tively speaking,  within  such  a  narrow  compass  and  yet 
has  a  claim  to  completeness  within  its  own  lines  and 
measures.  There  are  other  distinctions,  however,  which 
are  not  less  marked  in  their  character  and  are  very  much 
more  important.  The  account  which  I  propose  of  the 
document  will  differ  from  ordinary  critical  and  textual 
apprehension  by  way  of  direct  summary,  since  it  is  actuated 
by  exclusive  objects  which  connect  with  the  design  of  my 
study. 

As  the  Lesser  Chronicles  of  the  Holy  Graal  are  con- 
cerned with  the  reservation  of  a  great  secret  or  sacra- 
mental formula,  so  there  is  also  a  secret  in  the  Book  of 

282 


The   Greater  Chronicles 

the  Holy  Graal,  and  herein  is  the  second  distinction  which 
we  are  called  to  make  between  them.  That  particular 
form  of  the  Eucharistic  mystery  which  we  find  in  Robert 
de  Borron  and  his  line  of  anonymous  successors  is  made 
void  by  the  later  romance ;  as  if  it  had  planned  to  show 
that  there  were  no  secret  words  of  consecration,  the  actual 
mass-words  are  given  in  full,  and  although  they  are  those 
of  a  liturgy  which  differs  from  the  formula  of  the  Latin 
rite  and  betrays  oriental  influences,  the  variations  are 
local  and  accidental,  and,  except  for  liturgical  history, 
they  wear  no  aspect  of  importance.  At  the  same  time, 
when  the  Hermit  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  is  first 
received  into  that  state  of  vision  from  which  the  tran- 
script of  the  text  follows,  what  he  is  promised  by  Christ 
is  the  revelation  of  the  greatest  secret  of  the  world.  But 
this  is  the  book  itself,  which  is  invariably  spoken  of  as 
very  small — so  small  indeed  that  it  can  lie  in  the  hollow 
of  his  hand.  This  notwithstanding,  it  is  the  greatest 
marvel  that  man  can  ever  receive.  In  its  original  form 
it  was  written  by  Christ  Himself,  who  committed  to 
writing  only:  (a)  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal;  (£)  the 
Lord's  Prayer  ;  (c)  the  words  written  in  the  sand,  accord- 
ing to  the  New  Testament.  To  pronounce  aloud  the 
words  contained  in  the  book  would  convulse  the  ele- 
mental world,  and  it  must  therefore  be  read  with  the 
heart. 

Not  exactly  on  this  consideration  but  not  for  less 
cogent  reasons,  the  first  thing  which  is  apparent  con- 
cerning it  is  that  although  the  Hermit  is  covenanted  to 
transcribe  it  and  to  occupy  in  this  task  the  period  which 
intervenes  between  the  fifteenth  day  after  Easter  and 
the  day  of  the  Ascension ;  although  further  he  states 
expressly  that  what  he  wrote  down  is  that  which  follows 
his  prologue  ;  the  secret  book  committed  to  his  charge 
is  not  that  which  he  transmits  as  a  memorial  for  those 
who  come  after  him.  I  suppose  that  in  registering  this 
with  a  certain  touch  of  fantastic  gravity,  my  motive  can 
be  scarcely  misconstrued ;  we  are  dealing  with  a  parable 

283 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

or  pretence,  and  the  point  is  that  it  is  not  especially  con- 
sistent within  its  own  lines.  After  making  every  allow- 
ance for  the  variations  of  late  editing,  both  intentional 
and  otherwise,  it  remains  that  the  text  of  the  story  voids 
the  claim  of  the  prologue,  and  this  to  such  an  extent 
that  a  substitute  only  is  offered  for  that  which  was 
brought  from  heaven  for  the  assumed  illumination  of 
Logres. 

The  Book  of  the  Transcript  is  by  the  hypothesis  of 
the  prologue  divided  into  four  branches,  of  which  the 
first  concerns  the  lineage  of  the  Hermit  himself ;  and  on 
the  assumption  that  the  Ruth  Merlin  is  correct  in  identify- 
ing the  latter  with  that  second  Nascien,  who,  in  the  days 
of  the  enchanter  and  those  of  Uther  Pendragon,  was  at 
first  of  the  order  of  chivalry  and  afterwards  a  holy  recluse, 
it  will  follow  that  the  entire  romance  corresponds  to 
this  designation  rather  than  an  individual  part.  The 
second  branch  is  that  of  the  Holy  Graal,  which  is  the 
title  of  the  collection  itself:  Li  Litres  du  Saint  Graal, 
and  it  cannot  be  allocated  to  a  section.  The  third  branch 
is  called  the  beginning  of  the  Terrors,  and  the  fourth  is 
that  of  the  Marvels,  which  in  like  manner  will  not  assist 
towards  any  logical  classification,  as  we  are  concerned 
with  something  which  answers  in  all  its  modes  to  the  title 
of  a  wonder-book. 

The  most  express,  most  ordered,  most  reasoned  part 
of  the  entire  history  is  assuredly  what  is  termed  the  pro- 
logue ;  it  is  there  that  the  Hermit  accounts  for  the  manner 
in  which  he  came  for  a  period  into  the  possession  of  the 
original  text.  It  reads  in  certain  passages  like  a  story  of 
initiation.  The  parti  pris  is  quick  to  self-deception,  and 
one  sees  too  easily  that  for  which  one  is  looking ;  but 
here  are  words  which  are  exceedingly  like  the  sign  of 
recognition  in  a  secret  society :  "  The  first  Knight,"  says 
the  Hermit,  who  has  found  refuge  in  a  house  of  chivalry, 
"recognised  me,  as  he  believed,  .by  a  sign  which  I  bore 
about  me ;  he  had  seen  me  in  a  place  which  he  named." 
But  the  Hermit  evaded  disclosures,  for  he  was  bent  on 

284 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

concealing  his  mission,  even  as  through  the  whole  of  his 
narrative  he  veils  also  his  personality,  though  perhaps  for 
the  express  object  that  it  should  transpire  in  the  subse- 
quent texts. 

The  circumstances  under  which  he  came  to  begin  his 
story  took  place  in  Britain,  717  years  after  the  Passion  of 
Christ.  It  is  to  be  inferred  that  prior  to  his  mission  he 
knew  nothing  concerning  the  Mystery  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
though  he  did  know  of  his  lineage,  which  may  be  intended 
according  to  the  flesh  or  according  to  the  mystical  spirit, 
if  its  reference  is  to  the  grades  of  his  initiation.  On 
Maunday  Thursday,  after  the  office  of  Tenebra^  the 
Grand  Master  awoke  him  from  sleep  and  gave  him  a 
book  to  ease  his  doubts  on  the  subject  of  the  Trinity. 
His  immediate  experience  thereafter  was  the  possession  of 
a  further  gift,  which  was  that  of  an  infinity  of  tongues. 
He  began  reading  the  book  and  continued  till  Good 
Friday,  when  he  celebrated  a  Mass  of  the  Presanctified ; 
between  the  breaking  of  the  Host  over  the  Chalice  and 
his  reception  of  the  elements  he  was  transported  to  the 
Third  Heaven,  and  there  was  enabled  to  understand 
the  Trinitarian  Dogma  by  the  dilucid  contemplation  of 
the  Blessed  and  Glorious  Trinity,  with  its  distinction  of 
Persons  combined  in  the  mystery  of  their  Unity.  In 
other  words,  this  was  the  ecstasy  of  the  Eucharist  conse- 
quent upon  his  initiation  into  the  sacramental  power  and 
grace  enshrined  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal.  After 
Mass  he  placed  the  book  in  the  Eucharistic  dovecote,  or 
tabernacle,  with  the  intention  not  to  reopen  it  till  Easter 
Sunday,  when  he  found  that  it  had  been  abstracted 
strangely,  and  he  undertook  a  wonderful  pilgrimage  in 
search  of  it.  The  explanation  of  this  disappearance  is 
perhaps  that  the  Mystery  of  the  Graal  is  of  that  which 
was  buried  with  Christ  and  with  Him  rises,  and  the  sub- 
sequent communication  of  the  priest  signifies  that  Christ 
is  placed  spiritually  in  many  sepulchres. 

That  he  might  be  directed  rightly  on  his  journey,  the 
Hermit  was  led  by  an  animal  which  combined  the  charac- 

285 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

teristics  of  the  lamb,  the  dog,  the  fox  and  the  lion  ;  it 
was  in  fact  that  questing  beast  which  reappears  in  later 
romance,  and,  according  to  its  mystical  sense,  is  explained 
by  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval.  Ultimately  he  recovered  the 
book  ;  and  this  restoration  was  followed  by  a  vision  of  our 
Saviour,  who  ordained  its  transcription,  and  on  Ascension 
Day  the  original  was  reassumed  into  heaven.  It  will  be 
seen  that  no  pains  are  spared  to  exalt  the  work  which 
follows  this  introduction ;  it  is  of  mysterious  and  divine 
origin ;  a  parchment  copy  is  produced  for  earthly  pur- 
poses by  the  highest  of  all  ordinations  ;  and  as  regards 
its  source  and  nature  it  takes  precedence  of  everything, 
even  the  canonical  gospels. 

The  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  was  the  great  crux  and 
mystery  which  seems  to  have  exercised  the  minds  of 
those  who  had  entered  the  Path  of  Sanctity  at  the  period 
immediately  preceding  the  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal. 
It  was  the  triumph  of  Faith  to  accept  it,  and  he  for  whom 
it  presented  no  difficulties  had  attained  a  very  high  grade 
of  illumination.  The  hermit  of  the  prologue  to  the 
Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  is  moved  profoundly  by  the 
question,  and  its  solution  is  the  great  incentive  which  is 
offered  him  when  he  sets  out  on  his  pilgrimage  to  recover 
the  vanished  book,  which,  in  spite  of  the  content  exhibited 
by  its  assumed  transcript,  is  intended  of  itself — as  we 
have  seen — to  allay  his  doubts  on  the  subject.  We 
should  remember  that  in  the  year  1150  the  Church  had 
established  the  Festival  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity,  and 
it  was  a  quarter  of  a  century  later  that  the  transformed 
Graal  legends  began  to  manifest  on  the  horizon  of 
romantic  literature. 


286 


The   Greater   Chronicles 


II 

ANEW  CONSIDERATION  CONCERNING    THE 
BRANCHES   OF   THE   CHRONICLE 

Not  the  least  difficulty  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graa/, 
regarded  as  a  work  of  "  truth  in  the  art  "  of  its  particular 
mystery,  is  the  divergence  exhibited  by  the  extant  manu- 
scripts. These  differences  meet  us,  perhaps  chiefly, 
at  the  inception  of  the  story,  though  they  are  with  us 
even  at  the  end.  In  respect  of  the  latter  there  are  texts 
which  incorporate  a  distinct  romance  which  is  impertinent 
to  the  design  of  the  story.  In  respect  of  the  former,  it 
should  be  understood  that  it  is  of  the  essence  of  the 
whole  design  to  make  a  beginning  from  the  same  point 
of  departure  at  which  Robert  de  Borron  started  his 
metrical  romance,  and  all  recensions  present  therefore 
some  kind  of  prose  version  reflecting  his  narrative.  One 
of  them — and  it  is  the  most  available  of  the  printed  texts 
— has  only  moderately  grave  variations  from  the  Lesser 
Holy  Graal  up  to  that  epoch  of  the  story  when  the  com- 
pany of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  set  out  on  their  journey 
westward  ;  but  another  presents  a  brief  summary  which 
scarcely  stands  for  the  original.  It  is  not  part  of  my 
province  to  express  opinions  belonging  to  the  domain  of 
textual  criticism,  but  I  think  that  the  design  of  the  Book 
of  the  Holy  Graal  is  represented  better  and  more  typically 
by  a  manuscript  like  that  which  was  made  use  of  by  Dr. 
Furnivall  for  the  Early  English  Text  Society,  and  this  is 
the  summarised  form,  than  it  is  by  a  manuscript  like 
that  which  Hucher  selected  for  the  first  printed  edition, 
and  this  is  the  extended  version. 

The  incorporation  of  De  Borron  elements  serves  one 
purpose  which  is  material  from  my  own  point  of  view,  as 
it  sets  in  relief  the  distinction  ab  origine  symboli  between 
the  actuating  motives  of  the  two  cycles  of  literature.  It 
will  be  remembered  that  in  the  metrical  romance  and  its 

287 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

later  reflections  the  narrative  is  broken  rudely  at  that 
moment  when  the  horizon  has  begun  to  expand  by  an 
inspired  resolution  of  the  company  to  part  into  several 
groups  and  proceed  westward  separately.  Three  subse- 
quent divisions  were  involved  hereby,  and  these  Robert 
de  Borron  promised  to  expound  in  their  proper  order 
when  he  received  true  reports  concerning  them.  The 
author  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  undertook  to 
supply  these  missing  branches,  but  as  the  results  differ, 
and  in  no  light  manner,  from  the  manifest  intent  of  De 
Borron,  it  may  be  deduced  that  they  are  not  the  real 
history,  as  this  might  have  been  set  forth  by  the  pious 
minstrel.  On  his  part  there  was  probably  no  design  to 
bring  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  either  to  the  Vaux  d*  Avar  on 
or  another  part  of  Britain.  The  doubtful  meaning  of 
some  of  his  lines  must  be  taken  in  connection  with  the 
general  scheme  of  his  narrative.  That  scheme  was  to 
establish  the  mystery  of  sanctity  in  great  seclusion  under 
the  government  of  a  single  keeper,  with  a  life  protracted 
through  the  centuries,  until  the  time  of  its  possible  mani- 
festation came.  The  Lesser  Holy  Graal  is  a  reasonably 
faithful  version  of  his  nearly  complete  poem,  though  it 
is  doubtful  regarding  Joseph's  final  destination.  The 
Early  History  of  Merlin  is  also  faithful  to  what  remains 
of  De  Borron's  second  metrical  romance.  Of  the  Didot 
Perceval  we  cannot  speak  so  certainly,  but  in  several 
points  about  which  we  have  materials  for  judgment — 
and  more  especially  regarding  Moses — it  does  not  corre- 
spond properly.  It  is  even  possible  that  the  Didot 
Perceval  is  a  speculative  completion  of  the  trilogy, 
characterised  by  remarkable  insight,  and  yet  without  any 
accurate  notion  of  De  Borron's  design,  this  being  mani- 
fested imperfectly  by  his  extant  literary  remains. 

It  will  be  understood,  therefore,  that  the  Book  of  the 
Holy  Graal,  or  the  great  romance  which  follows  the 
parable  of  the  prologue,  begins,  in  the  codex  here  followed, 
with  a  short  account  of  the  chief  incidents  in  the  life  of 
our  Saviour  and  the  condition  of  Palestine  at  the  period. 

288 


The   Greater  Chronicles 

It  repeats  the  familiar  story  of  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal, 
but  sometimes,  as  we  have  seen,  only  by  way  of  summary, 
and  always  with  many  variations.  The  fact  that  Joseph 
is  married  and  has  a  son  in  his  infancy  at  the  time  of  the 
Passion  of  Christ  may  be  taken  as  the  first  important 
point  of  difference ;  he  is  named  after  his  father,  and  to 
distinguish  between  them  the  orthography  adopted  by  the 
romance  to  designate  the  son  is  Josephes,  for  which  in 
the  present  account  I  shall  substitute  Joseph  II.  The  next 
point  of  difference,  with  which  we  are  also  acquainted 
already,  concerns  the  identification  of  the  Holy  Graal 
with  the  dish  of  the  Paschal  Supper — en  quoi  li  fiex  dieu 
avoit  mangle — instead  of  with  the  Eucharistic  vessel  of 
sacrifice ;  but  it  should  be  said  that  there  is  another  text 
which  follows  the  description  in  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal. 
The  circumstances  under  which  the  Great  Hallow  was 
discovered,  after  the  apprehension  of  Christ,  also  vary, 
and  in  place  of  its  abstraction  by  a  Jew,  who  carries  the 
Hallow  to  Pilate,  it  is  found  by  Joseph  himself  in 
the  house  where  the  Pasch  was  eaten,  and  is  removed 
by  him  to  be  kept  for  a  memorial  of  the  Master.  As 
in  the  other  romances,  it  is  used  to  collect  the  blood, 
which,  however,  is  done  no  longer  on  Calvary,  but  in  the 
sepulchre  itself.  The  general  lines  established  by  Robert 
de  Borron  are  followed  as  regards  the  imprisonment  of 
Joseph,  the  circumstances  under  which  he  was  released 
by  Vespasian  after  a  term  of  forty-two  years,  and  the 
vengeance  wreaked  upon  the  Jews.  All  lapse  of  years 
notwithstanding,  Joseph  is  reunited  to  his  wife  and  son, 
is  baptized,  with  a  great  number  of  his  relatives,  and  he 
is  directed  by  Christ  to  go  with  those  who  will  follow 
him  into  distant  countries,  carrying  neither  gold,  silver, 
nor  any  material  possession  except  the  Holy  Graal.  It  is 
after  this  point  that  the  prototype  of  Robert  de  Borron 
is  abandoned  once  and  for  all.  The  first  destination- 
reached  by  way  of  Bethany  and  the  Wood  of  Ambush- 
is  the  city  of  Sarras,  situated  in  a  country  of  the  same 
name  on  the  confines  of  Egypt.  From  this  land  it  is 

289  T 


The   Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

stated  that  the  Saracens  originated;  the  people  are  described 
as  worshippers  of  the  sun,  moon  and  planets.  It  is  also 
this  place  which  is  termed  in  later  romances  the  spiritual 
city,  though  it  is  not  on  account  of  the  faith  found  in  its 
citizens — who  appear  to  have  been  a  perverse  nation  at  the 
beginning  and  end — but  because,  according  to  the  story, 
it  contained  the  palais  esperiteus,  which  name  was  given  it 
by  the  prophet  Daniel,  who  emblazoned  it  on  the  door 
thereof.  The  story  is  apocryphal,  but  the  design  is  to 
show  that  even  the  seers  of  Israel  were  aware  of  the 
coming  of  the  Graal,  for  it  was  in  this  palace  that  the 
Eucharist  was  first  consecrated.  It  was  the  witness  on 
the  dry  land,  as  the  ship  of  Solomon  was  the  witness  on 
the  open  sea. 

At  Sarras  Joseph  found  Evalach,  its  aged  king,  in 
great  trouble  through  an  invasion  of  his  country  by  the 
Egyptians  under  Ptolemy.  Joseph  commended  his  con- 
version as  a  certain  guarantee  of  his  victory,  but  the 
king,  though  not  disinclined,  was  not  baptized  actually 
until  his  enemies  were  dispersed  with  final  slaughter. 
The  power  operating  in  his  favour  rested  chiefly  in  a 
cross  painted  on  his  shield  by  Joseph.  The  story  of  the 
war  and  its  wonders  occupies  a  substantial  part  of  the 
narrative,  and  before  Joseph  departed  on  his  further 
journey  westward  the  whole  population  of  the  country 
appears  to  have  embraced  Christianity.  Several  churches 
were  built  in  the  city  or  its  vicinity,  bishops  and  priests 
were  ordained,  and  masses  were  celebrated  therein. 

England  is  the  Promised  Land  which  the  special 
providence  of  the  story  has  allocated  to  the  spiritual  and 
material  lineage  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea ;  and  after  the 
departure  from  Sarras  the  sole  concern  of  all  the  involved 
adventures  is,  separately  or  collectively,  to  bring  the 
various  characters  to  this  country  and  to  reunite  them 
therein,  the  evangelisation  of  the  existing  inhabitants  being 
the  palmary  term  of  all.  Speaking  of  the  rank  and  file, 
apart  from  several  of  the  more  important  personages, 
the  good  Christians  are  transported  hither  miraculously 

290 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

on  a  garment  belonging  to  the  second  Joseph,  but  those 
who  are  imperfect  come  by  ship.  Some  of  the  great 
heroes  arrive  independently  under  circumstances  which 
I  shall  describe  in  the  considerations  to  each  allotted. 
Joseph  of  Arimathasa  reaches  the  general  bourne,  and 
though  the  superior  importance  of  his  son  causes  him  to 
be  almost  effaced,  we  hear  of  him  from  time  to  time 
during  long  years  of  continued  existence.  At  length  he 
left  this  world  to  be  united  with  Christ,  to  whom  all  his 
love  was  dedicated.  He  was  buried  at  the  Abbey  of 
the  Cross  in  Scotland,  for  which  one  codex  substitutes 
Glastonbury. 

There  is  a  general  sense  in  which  the  Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal — like  the  metrical  romance  of  De  Borron — is  the 
Book  of  the  Divine  Voice  which  speaks  from  the  Sacred 
Vessel,  though  this  is  not  used  to  pronounce  oracles  or  to 
separate  the  good  from  the  evil  as  it  does  in  the  earlier 
text.  The  difficulties  which  are  raised  by  the  story 
regarding  that  Mystery  of  Faith  which  it  exists  to  show 
forth  are  so  grave  and  so  numerous  that  I  must  be 
satisfied  with  the  registration  of  the  fact  and  its  illustra- 
tion by  one  instance.  The  whole  notion  of  the  Eucharist 
is  changed  by  the  supposition  that,  on  occasion,  it  is 
administered  to  angels,  for  by  no  hypothesis  can  Christ 
be  regarded  as  their  Saviour. 

Seeing  that  there  is  no  clear  division  of  episodes  in  the 
story,  so  that  one  section  can  be  separated  definitely  from 
another,  I  shall  attempt  only  a  general  grouping.  The 
master-branch  of  the  whole  prodigal  romance  is  that 
which  embraces  the  mission  of  Joseph  II. — this  is  of  the 
essence,  and  all  else  is,  in  comparison,  of  the  accidental 
order.  About  this  central  figure  the  wonder  of  the 
Graal  converges  and  the  confused  cloud  of  marvellous 
incidents ;  from  the  first  even  to  the  last,  he  is  thus 
steeped  in  a  light  of  mystery  that  "  never  was  on  land  or 
sea."  Prior  to  the  arrival  at  Sarras  a  command  was  re- 
ceived from  the  Son  of  God  to  build  an  ark,  similar  to 
that  of  the  Old  Covenant,  for  the  reception  of  the  Holy 

291 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

Graal.  Public  devotions  were  to  take  place  before  it, 
but  only  Joseph  and  his  son  had  a  right  to  open  the 
Shrine,  to  look  into  the  Reliquary  and  to  take  it  in  their 
hands.  Two  chosen  men  were  deputed  to  carry  the 
Ark  on  their  shoulders  when  the  company  was  on  the 
march.  The  intention  was  evidently  to  invest  the  new 
symbol  with  the  same  authority  as  that  palladium  which 
once  belonged  to  Israel.  To  provide  sustenance  for  the 
band  during  the  journey,  each  disciple — after  the  daily 
service  of  prayer — found  in  his  lodging  the  food  which 
he  desired  in  abundance,  but  it  is  not  said  that  it  was 
provided  by  the  Holy  Graal. 

While  the  conversion  of  the  King  and  the  issue  of  the 
war  were  still  pending  at  Sarras,  things  of  far  other  im- 
portance were  taking  place  in  respect  of  the  Sacramental 
Mystery  under  the  charge  of  Joseph  and  his  son.  The 
pilgrims  on  their  advent  had  been  lodged  in  that  building 
which  was  named  the  Spiritual  Palace.  The  inhabitants 
of  Sarras  did  not  know  why  it  had  received  this  desig- 
nation, but  the  arrival  of  the  Christian  cohort  was  to 
reveal  the  prophetic  mystery — firstly,  by  the  presence 
of  the  Ark  and  the  Graal  therein,  and,  secondly,  by  the 
sacred  wonders  which  accompanied  the  ordination  of 
Joseph  II.,  with  Christ  manifested  visibly  as  the  Celebrant- 
in-chief.  In  that  Palace,  on  the  day  following  their 
arrival,  the  Holy  Spirit  advised  Joseph  the  father  that 
his  son  had  been  chosen  to  guard  the  Graal,  as  the  Aaron 
of  the  new  Rite,  that  he  was  to  be  ordained  by  the 
highest  consecration,  and  was  to  transmit  the  priesthood 
to  those  whom  he  deemed  worthy  thereof.  Joseph  II. 
received  also  the  power  to  hand  on  the  Sacred  Vessel  to 
whomsoever  he  would,  and  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  he 
committed  everything  in  the  plenary  sense — as  if  Christ 
said  to  His  successor  :  "  My  peace  I  leave  with  you  ; 
My  peace  I  give  unto  you." 

When  the  company  were  worshipping  before  the  Ark  in 
the  Spiritual  Palace,  the  Holy  Spirit  descended  in  still  fire, 
as  at  another  Pentecost,  and  entered  into  the  mouth  of  each 

292 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

one  of  them,  like  the  Eucharist  of  some  final  dispensation 
which  has  not  been  declared  on  earth.  Jt  communicated, 
however,  the  gift  of  silence  instead  of  the  gift  of  tongues. 
A  Voice  also  spoke  and  though  apparently  it  was  that  of 
the  Spirit,  it  was  also  the  voice  of  Christ.  The  discourse 
was  memorable  enough,  but  I  can  speak  only  of  its 
end,  when  the  younger  Joseph  was  directed  to  approach 
and  receive  the  most  great  honours  which  could  be 
conferred  on  earthly  creature.  He  opened  the  door 
of  the  Ark  and  beheld  a  man  clothed  in  a  terrible 
vestment  of  scarlet  flame.  There  were  also  five  angels 
apparelled  after  the  same  manner,  each  having  six  wings 
of  fire,  like  the  vision  of  Ezekiel.  In  their  right  hands 
they  held  various  symbols  of  the  Passion — about  which  we 
have  heard  already — and  each  in  his  left  carried  an  en- 
sanguined sword.  The  human  figure  was  that  of  Christ, 
with  the  five  wounds  upon  Him.  It  is  said  by  the  text 
that  the  Ark  had  been  magnified  strangely,  so  that  it 
would  hold  the  Divine  Personalities  of  the  vision  :  but  I 
conclude  rather  that  when  the  door  was  opened,  those 
who  were  empowered  to  behold  looked  as  into  a  seering- 
glass,  which  contains  at  need  the  earths  of  the  universe 
and  the  earths  of  the  starry  heavens,  with  all  that 
dwell  thereon.  The  state  of  the  second  Joseph  is  shown 
by  the  words  addressed  to  his  father,  praying  that  he 
should  touch  him  in  nowise,  lest  the  speaker  be  drawn 
from  the  joy  of  his  entrancement.  That  which  he  next 
beheld  was  the  crucifixion  itself,  presented  in  ritual  form, 
with  the  angels  for  the  actors  therein.  It  seemed  even 
as  in  one  of  the  Greater  Mysteries  which  I  have  seen  with 
my  own  eyes,  when  the  Adept  Master  is  set  on  a  cross 
of  dedication  and  the  officers  of  the  high  ceremonial  are 
those  who  combine  to  immolate  him.  But  the  design 
in  the  case  under  notice  was  rather  to  certify  concerning 
the  Vessel  of  the  Graal,  for  the  side  of  Christ  was 
pierced  and  the  sang  real  poured  therein.  The  scene 
closed  and  a  new  scene  was  opened,  this  time  more 
especially  before  the  eyes  of  Joseph  the  father.  What 

293 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

he  beheld  was  an  altar  within  the  Ark  draped  in  white 
over  red,  bearing  the  Sacred  Dish,  the  nails  of  transfixion 
and  the  ensanguined  head  of  the  Lance.  These  objects 
were  arranged  on  the  epistle  and  gospel  sides,  but  in 
the  centre — or  place  of  consecration — covered  with  a 
white  corporal — there  was  a  rich  golden  vessel  with  a 
covercle,  also  of  gold,  and  it  is  recorded  that  all  pre- 
cautions were  taken  that  the  contents  should  remain 
hidden.  A  procession  of  angels  entered  with  lights, 
aspergillus,  thurible,  incense-boat,  and  then — out  of  all 
knowledge — one  carrying  a  head,  as  I  suppose,  on  a 
salver,  and  another  with  a  drawn  sword.  This  pageant 
went  about  the  house,  as  if  for  a  Rite  of  Consecration, 
the  Graal  being  also  carried,  and  Christ  entered,  even 
as  the  Priest  of  the  Rite,  clad  in  sacramental  robes  for 
the  celebration  of  Mass.  The  circumambulation  being 
finished  for  the  cleansing  of  the  whole  place — which,  in 
spite  of  its  name,  had  been  the  abode  of  evil  and  the 
spirit  thereof — Christ  told  Joseph  II.  that  he  was  to 
receive  the  Eucharist,  and,  as  if  constituted  a  secret 
pope,  he  was  made  and  ordained  sovereign  bishop  reign- 
ing over  the  world  of  Christendom.  He  was  clothed 
with  rich  episcopal  vestments  and  set  in  an  episcopal 
chair,  which  the  text  says  was  still  preserved  at  Sarras, 
where  it  proved  to  be  another  Siege  Perilous  and 
whosoever  sat  therein  was  maimed  or  destroyed  utterly. 
Joseph  was  anointed  by  Christ,  and  with  the  oil  which  was 
used  for  this  purpose  the  Kings  of  England  were  con- 
secrated in  later  years  up  to  the  time  of  Uther  Pendragon  ; 
but  it  was  missing  at  his  coronation.  The  ring  of 
investiture,  given  to  the  prelate  thus  hallowed  strangely, 
could  be  counterfeited  by  no  human  skill,  nor  could 
words  express  the  virtues  contained  in  its  jewel. 

When  the  ceremony  was  at  length  over  and  the  divine 
discourse  had  explained  one  by  one  the  spiritual  signi- 
ficance of  each  part  of  his  clothing,  Joseph  II.  was 
instructed  by  Christ  to  consecrate  the  sacred  elements, 
and  it  thus  came  about  that  the  people  of  the  new 

294 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

exodus  communicated  for  the  first  time :  but  the  Host 
which  was  elevated  by  Joseph  was  the  body  of  a  child  and 
that  which  was  received  by  the  faithful,  in  the  mouth  of 
each  one  among  them,  was  living  and  undivided  flesh.  The 
administration  to  the  cohort  of  worshippers  was,  however, 
performed  by  angels,  one  of  whom  took  the  paten  to- 
gether with  the  chalice  and  placed  both  of  them  in  the 
Holy  Vessel  of  the  Graal.  Whether  the  Precious  Blood 
adhered  to  the  Eucharistic  Vessel  and  the  content  of  the 
Reliquary  thus  suffered  diminution  we  do  not  know, nor  the 
purpose  otherwise  of  the  ceremony,  which,  fortunately  for 
the  spiritual  side  of  la  haute  convenance,  is  not  repeated 
either  in  the  romance  itself  or  anywhere  in  the  literature. 
Thus  was  the  second  Joseph  consecrated  in  the  super- 
apostolical  degree,  and  thus  did  he  see — at  least  in  the 
sense  of  the  story — all  Christ's  mysteries  openly.  The 
issues  which  are  raised  by  the  narrative  are  much  more 
complicated  than  will  be  gathered  from  the  preceding 
summary.  Scholarship  has  paid  little  heed  to  the  im- 
portance of  the  sacramental  question  and  all  connected 
therewith,  but  it  has  not  overlooked  the  pontifical  supre- 
macy which  is  ascribed  to  the  reputed  founder  of 
Christianity  in  Britain.  While  the  ecclesiastical  con- 
sequence to  these  islands  is  perhaps  the  only  thing  which 
can  be  said  to  stand  forth  clearly,  it  must  be  added 
that  if  the  intention  was  to  make  void  one  claim  of  the 
Papacy,  there  was  never  a  design  so  clouded  and  veiled 
so  sedulously.  The  brief  for  any  secret  pontificate  is 
proclaimed  much  less  openly  than  the  general  brief  for 
the  official  Church,  with  all  its  ways  and  laws,  as  we  are 
acquainted  with  its  body — politic  and  spiritual — at  the 
period.  Still  it  is  said  expressly,  in  words  ascribed  to  the 
Master  :  (a)  that  Joseph  has  been  chosen  as  the  first  pastor 
of  a  new  flock  ;  (£)  that  his  eminence  is  comparable  ex- 
plicitly in  the  New  Law  with  that  of  Moses,  the  Leader  of 
Israel,  in  the  Law  which  had  been  now  superseded ;  (^) 
that  wherever  he  went,  converting  people  and  places, 
he  was  there  to  consecrate  bishops  and  ordain  priests,  who 

295 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

would  have  power  to  bind  and  loose,  even  as  the 
apostles ;  and  that,  in  fine  (^/),  to  the  younger  Joseph  was 
committed  the  government  of  souls,  but  to  the  elder 
that  of  bodies — the  spiritual  and  temporal  powers.  It 
does  not  appear  especially  that  the  latter  ever  exercised 
his  prerogative ;  but  it  may  be  recalled  that  whereas 
the  first  issue  of  the  temporal  power  was  after  the 
spiritual  kind,  the  second  was  after  the  material — on 
the  one  hand,  Joseph  II.,  who  never  married,  whose 
office  was  devised  by  election ;  on  the  other,  Galahad  le 
Fort,  who  became  an  earthly  King,  who  was  anointed  with 
the  mystic  oils  by  his  brother  Joseph,  and  who  reigned 
gloriously.  We  may  speculate,  but  it  will  be  all  in  vain, 
as  to  what  was  in  the  mind  of  the  author  when  he  sub- 
stituted a  son  for  the  father,  and,  as  if  further  to  confuse 
the  issues,  gave  both  of  them  the  same  name.  What- 
ever the  explanation  may  be,  from  that  moment  when 
the  younger  man  assumed  the  reins  of  government  in 
the  spiritual  degree,  the  older  ceased  to  retain  even  the 
shadow  of  power.  As  regards  Galahad  le  Fort,  his  birth 
took  place  in  Britain,  and  it  was  foretold  to  his  brother 
in  a  vision  that  he  would  be  the  ancestor  of  a  holy  lineage 
of  many  men  of  religion,  who  should  maintain  the  name 
of  our  Saviour  in  all  honour  and  all  power  throughout 
these  islands. 

His  great  election  and  his  association  in  the  highest 
notwithstanding,  the  second  Joseph  was  not  intended  to 
escape  without  the  purgation  of  suffering.  When  he 
and  his  company  were  at  Orcauz,  in  the  district  of  Sarras, 
he  was  punished  for  attempting  to  bind  a  devil  who 
was  hovering  over  the  dead  bodies  of  certain  Saracens  ; 
for  this  indiscretion,  a  great  vindicating  angel,  with  a 
marvellous  countenance,  drove  a  spear  into  his  thighs  and 
left  the  weapon  therein.  Subsequently,  he  was  healed  by 
another  angel,  who  drew  out  the  head  of  the  spear.  That 
which  Joseph  II.  should  have  contrived  was  apparently 
the  conversion  of  the  heathen,  and  in  this  having 
failed  he  was  not  to  intervene  between  the  destroyer  and 

296 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

the  victims.  I  mention  these  matters,  firstly,  because  the 
office  of  wounding  in  the  thighs  recurs  so  continually  in 
the  romances,  and,  secondly,  to  note  that  for  some  obscure 
reason  the  injury  in  question  never  befalls  the  questing 
knights.  The  Lance  used  on  this  occasion  is  also  im- 
portant because  of  its  after-history,  for  it  was  destined 
to  prove  the  beginning  of  those  great  marvels  which 
would  occur  in  the  land  of  Britain.  At  that  time  it  is 
said  that  the  Lance  will  drop  blood  and  will  strike — also 
in  both  thighs — another  personage  of  the  mystery,  a 
knight  full  of  charity  and  chastity,  who  will  suffer  for 
as  many  years  as  Joseph  had  carried  the  weapon  in  his 
own  wound  for  days.  These,  on  the  computation  of  the 
victim,  proved  to  be  twenty-two.  The  reference  is  here 
to  King  Pellehan,  whose  wounding  is  narrated,  as  we 
know,  in  the  Huth  Merlin,  and  who  is  healed  in  the  Quest 
of  Galahad ;  the  wounding  in  question  is  the  Dolorous 
Stroke  inflicted  by  the  poor  knight  Balyn  ;  and  it  follows 
that  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  gives  an  origin  of  the 
Lance-Hallow  which  either  differs  from  that  of  all  other 
texts  or  it  has  omitted  to  mention  that  the  angel  of  the 
judgment  used  the  Spear  of  the  Passion. 

When  the  company  of  pilgrims  at  length  reached  the 
sea-shore,  from  which  they  must  cross  over  to  Britain, 
those  who  bore  the  Ark  of  the  Graal  on  their  shoulders 
walked  over  the  intervening  waters  as  if  upon  the  dry 
land  ;  of  the  others,  those  who  were  in  a  state  of  grace 
crossed  on  the  shirt  of  the  second  Joseph,  as  if  on  a  raft ; 
but  the  evil  livers  were  left  to  fare  as  they  could  till  ships 
could  be  found  to  carry  them.  I  am  not  concerned  with 
the  events  which  followed  the  arrival  of  all  and  sundry  in 
the  promised  land  of  their  inheritance,  but  as  regards 
Joseph  II.,  his  evangelical  journeys  through  England, 
Scotland,  Wales,  Ireland  and,  as  it  is  said,  other 
strange  countries,  continue  through  the  rest  of  the  narrative, 
till  at  last  he  visits  King  Evalach  in  an  abbey  which  had 
been  founded  by  the  latter  and  informs  him  of  his  own 
immediate  death  on  the  following  day.  This  occurs 

297 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy    Graal 

accordingly  at  the  hour  of  prime  next  morning,  and  he 
was  buried  in  the  abbey.  So  was  Joseph  II.  gathered 
into  the  Kingdom  of  the  Father,  and  I  pass  now  to  the 
history  of  one  who  was  designed  as  a  witness  through 
the  centuries  to  that  mystery  which  was  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Christian  times,  who,  in  fine,  could  enter  into 
his  rest  only  through  the  arms  of  Galahad. 

King  Evalach  received  the  name  of  Mordrains  in 
baptism,  and  he  remained  in  his  kingdom  after  Joseph 
and  his  company  continued  their  journey  westward.  The 
design  of  the  story,  as  we  have  seen,  is,  however,  to 
bring  all  its  characters  into  la  bloie  Bretagne,  and  with  this 
object  it  puts  the  most  complicated  machinery  in  motion 
for  some  of  the  palmary  heroes.  I  must  speak  only  con- 
cerning the  term  in  its  attainment,  omitting  in  the  pre- 
sent case  the  visions  and  the  bodily  transportations  which 
befell  Mordrains  for  his  further  instruction  and  purga- 
tion. He  left  Sarras  ultimately  and  for  ever,  taking  his 
wife  with  him  and  three  hundred  barons,  and  proceeding 
to  the  rescue  of  Joseph,  whom  a  revelation  had  told  him 
was  imprisoned  by  the  King  of  North  Wales.  His  own 
realm  was  committed  to  the  charge  of  the  good  knight 
Aganore,  who  was  to  be  King  in  his  place  and  so  to 
remain  if  he  did  not  return  himself.  He  carried  with 
him  the  white  shield  by  the  help  of  which  he  overcame 
the  powers  of  Egypt,  so  that  this  also  passed  into  the 
West  and  was  kept  in  perpetuity  as  one  of  the  Lesser 
Hallows.  The  journey  took  place  by  ship  in  the 
ordinary  way ;  Joseph  and  his  people  were  rescued  in 
due  course,  and  of  all  their  enemies  not  one  was  left  alive. 
For  this  providence  public  thanksgivings  took  place  in 
the  presence  of  the  Graal,  the  Ark  of  the  New  Covenant 
being  set  open  for  the  purpose.  Evalach,  who  had  ex- 
perienced already  the  delicious  effects  which  followed  an 
exposition  of  the  Sacred  Vessel,  desired  to  see  with  his 
own  eyes  the  interior  of  that  Sanctuary  from  which  the 
grace  appeared  to  emanate.  Though  incapacitated  by 
wounds  received  in  the  recent  combats,  he  went  to  the 

298 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

door  of  the  Ark  and  looked  in.  He  saw  the  Holy  Dish 
and  the  Chalice  used  for  Eucharistic  purposes.  He  saw 
also  Bishop  Joseph  clothed  in  the  beautiful  vestments  in 
which  he  had  been  consecrated  by  Christ.  The  romance 
says  that  no  mind  could  conceive  and  much  less  the 
tongue  express  all  that  which  was  discovered  to  him.  So 
far  he  had  been  kneeling  with  head  and  shoulders  bent 
forward,  but  he  now  arose  and  pressed  nearer.  In  vain 
a  voice  issued  from  a  burning  cloud  and  warned  him  to 
desist ;  he  advanced  his  head  further,  when  paralysis  and 
blindness  overtook  him.  Of  all  his  members  he  pre- 
served only  the  use  of  his  tongue,  and  the  first  words 
which  he  pronounced  were  those  of  adoration,  even  for 
the  misfortune  which  had  befallen  him  and  which  he 
also  recognised  that  he  deserved  for  surprising  Divine 
Secrets.  Even  at  the  price  of  his  health,  and  of  age-long 
suffering  thereafter,  he  would  not  have  renounced  the 
knowledge  which  he  had  attained  in  the  Ark.  One  of 
the  spectators  asked  what  he  had  seen,  and  he  answered  : 
u  The  end  of  the  world,  the  Marvel  of  all  marvels,  the 
Wisdom  which  is  above  wisdom,  the  King  of  every  king." 
The  last  wish  recorded  on  the  part  of  Evalach,  who 
henceforth  was  to  be  termed  Mehaigne — that  is  to  say, 
the  Maimed  King — was  that  he  should  be  carried  to 
a  hermitage  far  from  other  habitation,  as  the  world  and 
he  had  no  further  need  for  one  another.  The  second 
Joseph  approved,  because  the  day  of  Evalach's  death  would 
not  be  witnessed  even  by  his  children's  children.  He  was 
carried  on  a  litter  to  the  hermitage  and  placed  before 
the  altar,  where  he  would  be  in  the  presence  of  the  Body 
of  the  Lord  whenever  Mass  was  celebrated  thereat. 
Upon  the  site  of  the  hermitage  a  fair  abbey  was  built 
subsequently,  and  there  Mehaigne  remained  till  the  com- 
ing of  the  younger  Galahad — or,  as  the  chronology  of  the 
story  states,  for  200  years.  On  the  day  which  preceded 
the  death  of  Joseph  II.  that  First  Bishop  of  Christendom 
anointed  the  King's  White  Shield  with  his  own  blood, 
thus  making  a  second  cross  upon  it.  It  was  reserved  for 

299 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  Knight  Galahad,  and  should  any  one  attempt  to  use  it 
in  the  meantime  he  would  repent  it  quickly.  Mehaigne 
regained  his  sight  so  that  he  could  behold  this  shield  and 
the  ceremony  of  the  Unspotted  Sacrifice. 

With  the  story  of  Evalach  there  is  connected  that  of 
his  wife,  Queen  Sarracinte.  While  her  husband  was  in 
warfare  with  the  hosts  descended  from  Egypt,  she  sent 
for  Joseph  to  ask  news  concerning  him,  praying  the 
apostle  to  intercede  with  God  and  to  turn  him  to  her 
own  belief.  Her  mother  had  been  converted  through  the 
offices  of  a  certain  hermit,  and  this,  assisted  by  a  vision, 
led  to  her  own  christening.  Thereafter  she  was  per- 
mitted to  see  a  white  box  which  was  kept  by  the  elder 
lady  among  treasures  of  jewels,  and  on  being  opened  it 
proved  to  contain  our  Saviour  under  the  element  of 
bread.  The  mother  received  the  Host,  for  it  proved 
that  she  was  departing  this  life,  and  she  charged  her 
daughter  to  keep  the  box  secretly,  and  so  have  Christ 
every  day  in  her  company,  as  by  a  high  dispensation  had 
been  permitted  in  her  own  case.  When  she  was  dead 
Queen  Sarracinte  went  to  the  hermit,  obtained  Christ 
from  him,  as  a  sacred  treasure,  received  the  Host  in  the  secret 
tabernacle  and  performed  her  devotions  in  Its  presence. 
Outside  this  amazing  reservation,  the  point  of  impor- 
tance is  that  although  Joseph  II.  was,  by  the  hypothesis 
of  the  story,  the  first  priest  to  consecrate  the  elements  of 
the  Eucharist,  this  was  being  done  already — apparently 
long  before — by  a  hermit  in  Sarras,  who  must  have 
derived  from  the  ordinary  apostles.  There  is  a  suggestion 
of  strange  implicits  in  the  names  of  the  next  character 
which  I  have  placed  on  my  list  for  inclusion  in  these 
major  branches.  He  was  Seraphe  in  his  days  as  a  paynim, 
carrying  an  axe  keen  as  a  serpent  of  fire  and  evoking  in 
his  need  out  of  the  invisible  the  vision  of  a  white  Knight 
mounted  on  a  white  horse,  from  which  he  dealt  arch- 
natural  destruction.  In  baptism,  with  the  others  who 
elected  to  be  redeemed  out  of  Sarras,  he  assumed  the 
name  of  Nasciens,  as  if  in  a  new  generation  he  had  been 

300 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

received  into  the  militia  crucifera  evangelica,  with  a  mission 
to  enter  the  West  and  preach  the  Gospel  with  his  sword. 
Seraphe  was  the  son-in-law  of  Evalach  the  king — a  large 
man,  strong-boned  and  broad-shouldered.  Great  and 
many  were  the  miracles  which  brought  him  by  slow  stages 
to  the  Isles  of  Britain,  but  I  will  speak  only  of  his  sojourn 
on  the  Turning  Island,  from  which  he  was  rescued  by 
that  Mystic  Ship  of  Solomon  which  fills  so  important  an 
office  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad. 

Nasciens  watched  the  vessel  coming  to  him  fast  over  the 
sea ;  it  was  richer  than  any  other  in  the  world,  but  no 
one  was  visible  therein.  He  prepared  to  go  on  board, 
when  he  saw  golden  letters  in  the  Chaldaic  tongue  giving 
warning  that  those  who  entered  must  be  full  of  faith  and 
clean  in  every  respect.  He  was  deterred  at  first,  but 
after  fervent  prayer  he  entered,  believing  that  it  had 
been  sent  by  God.  He  found  therein  a  mysterious 
couch,  having  at  its  head  a  crown  of  gold  and  at  the 
foot  a  marvellous  sword,  which  was  drawn  ten  inches 
out  of  the  scabbard.  Connected  with  the  bed  there 
were  three  spindles  of  strange  colourings,  though  not 
as  the  result  of  artificial  tincture ;  one  was  red,  another 
white,  and  the  third  green.  The  story  of  the  Ship  is 
recounted  at  great  length,  and  to  express  it  as  shortly 
as  possible,  the  royal  prophet  of  Israel  had  learned  by 
a  message  from  heaven  that  the  last  knight  of  his  lineage 
would  exceed  all  other  chivalry  as  the  sun  outshines 
the  moon.  By  the  sage  counsel  of  his  wife,  he  built 
this  ship  to  last  for  4000  years,  with  the  double  object 
of  making  known  to  Galahad  not  only  the  royalty  of 
his  descent,  but  the  fact  that  the  wise  king  was  aware  of 
his  birth  in  due  time.  The  building  was  accomplished 
in  six  months,  and  then  the  Queen  told  him  to  provide 
King  David's  sword  as  an  arm  of  might  for  his  descen- 
dant. It  was  adorned  with  a  new  handle,  pommel  and 
sheath — all  of  great  virtues — and  a  writing  about  it  said 
that  no  man  should  draw  it  with  impunity,  save  one  who 
passed  all  others  in  prowess  and  perfection  of  virtue. 

301 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy  Graal 

Solomon  would  have  also  provided  rich  hangings,  but 
was  deterred  by  his  wife,  who  testified  that  they  must 
be  foul  and  of  her  own  making,  till  another  woman 
should,  in  the  coming  time,  provide  draperies  that  were 
glorious.  The  high  office  was  reserved  therefore  for  the 
most  fair,  faithful  and  unearthly  sister  of  Perceval. 
In  this  connection,  I  may  say  that  one  of  the  side- 
problems  of  the  whole  narrative  is  that  in  spite  of  the 
wonderful  counsel  which  Solomon  receives  from  his  wife, 
and  in  spite  of  the  sacred,  exalted  meaning  attached  to 
the  ship  which  was  built  by  her  directions,  she  is 
described  as  a  woman  who  had  deceived  him  and  had 
embittered  him  regarding  her  sex. 

The  wooden  bed  seen  by  Nasciens  was  also  placed 
in  the  Ship,  and  the  sword  was  laid  thereon  as  well  as 
the  crown,  which  was  also  that  of  David.  By  the  same 
unaccountable  directions  the  three  spindles  were  of  wood 
derived  from  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  in  the  manner 
here  following.  Adam  and  Eve  ate  the  forbidden  fruit ; 
the  apple  which  she  gathered  brought  with  it  a  branch ; 
the  fruit  was  separated  by  Adam  and  the  branch  remained 
with  Eve,  who  preserved  it  in  their  exile  as  a  memorial 
of  her  misfortune.  It  was  planted  by  her  and  became 
a  great  tree,  which — both  within  and  without — was 
white  as  snow.  One  day,  when  they  were  seated  beneath 
it  lamenting  their  unfortunate  condition,  Eve  called  it 
the  Tree  of  Death,  but  a  voice  bade  them  comfort  one 
another,  for  life  was  much  nearer  than  death — whereupon 
they  termed  it  by  substitution  the  Tree  of  Life.  They 
planted  cuttings  thereof,  which  grew  and  flourished  ; 
these  were  white  like  the  parent  tree,  but  after  the 
conception  of  Abel  they  all  turned  green,  bearing  flowers 
and  fruit.  It  was  under  the  first  tree  that  Abel  was  mur- 
dered— when  it  changed  from  green  to  red  and  no 
longer  bore  flowers  or  fruit ;  in  later  times  it  was  called 
the  Tree  of  Counsel  and  of  Comfort. 

When  the  Ship  was  fully  garnished,  Solomon  placed 
a  letter  beneath  the  crown,  giving  warning  to  his  de- 

302 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

scendant  against  the  wiles  of  women  and  asking  to 
be  held  in  his  remembrance ;  he  recounted  also  the 
building.  The  Ship  was  launched  ;  the  king  saw  in  a 
vision  how  a  great  company  of  angels  descended  and 
entered  therein,  as  it  sailed  far  out  of  sight. 

Nasciens  learned  further  that  the  Ship  typified  the 
Holy  Church  of  Christ,  and  as  the  latter  has  only 
faith  and  truth  therein,  so  in  its  symbol  no  faithless 
men  could  have  part ;  confession  and  repentance  were 
necessary  qualifications  to  enter  Church  or  Ship.  The 
inscriptions  in  the  Vessel  were  Holy  Scripture ;  in  a 
word,  as  the  text  suggested,  it  was  a  symbol  rather  than 
a  ship.  The  sea  over  which  it  sailed  signified  the  world  ; 
the  bed  was  the  Holy  Altar,  on  which  the  Divine  Son 
is  consecrated  and  offered  daily ;  in  another  sense,  it 
was  also  the  Cross  of  Christ.  The  white  spindle  meant 
Christ's  virginity,  the  red  one  His  humility  and  love, 
while  the  green  one  signified  His  patience. 

So  far  as  regards  the  Ship  of  Solomon,  and  in  respect 
of  Nasciens  himself,  before  closing  his  story,  I  must  speak 
of  two  visitations  which  befell  him.  Soon  after  his 
conversion  he  was  filled  with  the  same  desire  to  know 
.the  Mysteries  of  the  Graal  for  which  Mordrains  paid 
afterwards  so  heavily  and  yet  was  so  well  recompensed ; 
he  raised  up  the  paten  which  covered  the  Sacred  Vessel 
and  by  his  own  account  he  beheld  the  foundations  of 
knowledge  and  religion,  the  beginning  of  all  bounty 
and  all  gentility.  We  may  remember  here  the  old 
poet  who  said  that  Christ  was  uThe  first  true  gentle- 
man that  ever  breathed  "  ;  and  doubtless  the  sacramental 
mystery  is  also  a  mystery  of  courtesy.  Nasciens  was 
blinded  for  his  presumption  and  remained  in  this  afflic- 
tion till  the  healing  of  Joseph  II.  from  the  wounding  of 
the  angel.  His  second  visitation  occurred  on  board  the 
Ship  of  Solomon,  wherein  he  had  been  united  with  his 
son  and  subsequently  with  King  Mordrains.  To  the  latter 
he  showed  the  Sword  of  David,  but  when  the  King  took 
it  in  his  hands  the  weapon  broke  in  two  pieces  and  re- 

303 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

joined  as  suddenly.  At  this  moment  they  were  warned 
to  leave  the  Ship,  and  in  the  act  of  obeying  Nasciens  was 
wounded  grievously  between  the  shoulders  by  the  Sword. 
He  regarded  this  as  a  chastisement  in  loving-kindness 
for  his  sins,  but  the  episode  is  made  more  intelligible  by 
another  codex,  which  shows  how  he  was  tempted  to  draw 
the  Sword  from  its  sheath  and  use  it  as  his  defence  against 
a  giant  when  no  other  weapon  was  available.  It  broke  in 
the  mere  brandishing  and  so  remained,  but  it  was  rejoined, 
unaccountably  enough,  by  the  handling  of  Mordrains. 
Towards  the  close  of  the  story,  a  certain  King  Varlans 
too  finds  the  Sword  of  David  in  the  Ship  of  Solomon  and 
uses  it  to  slay  Lambor,  who  was  one  of  the  twelve  sons 
of  Brons  and  at  that  time  Keeper  of  the  Graal.  There 
followed  great  sorrow  and  suffering  in  the  lands  of  both 
rulers ;  both  were  ruined  by  the  stroke  ;  and  Varlans,  on 
restoring  the  weapon  to  the  Ship  and  therein  sheathing  it, 
fell  down  dead.  It  will  be  seen  that  a  kind  of  enchant- 
ment thus  befalls  these  parts  of  Britain,  though  the  Book 
of  the  Holy  Graal  is  rather  the  cycle  of  adventures  than 
that  of  enchantments.  The  Sword  was  to  remain  sheathed 
until  drawn  by  a  maiden — that  is  to  say,  by  the  sister  of 
Perceval. 

There  is  another  story  of  a  sword  which  belongs 
properly  to  a  different  branch  of  the  romance,  but  it 
may  be  mentioned  in  this  place.  Joseph  of  Arimathasa 
is  wounded,  as  usual,  in  the  thigh  by  a  false  steward, 
leaving  half  of  the  sword  in  the  wound.  With  the  upper 
half  Joseph  heals  a  Saracen  Knight,  whom  he  has  converted 
newly,  and  then  uses  it  to  withdraw  the  point  from  his 
own  flesh ;  it  comes  out  unstained  by  blood,  and  Joseph 
foretells  that  the  two  parts  shall  not  be  joined  together 
till  he  arrives  who  shall  end  the  adventures  of  the  Graal. 
This  is  the  Hallow  which  is  resoldered  by  Galahad  at 
Corbenic  when  the  Holy  Quest  has  ended. 

So  far  as  Nasciens  is  concerned  the  remainder  of  the 
story  deals  more  especially  with  his  deeds  of  valour  in 
connection  with  the  conversion  of  Britain,  which  he 

3°4 


The   Greater    Chronicles 

reached  at  length  by  ship  and  was  instrumental  in  bring- 
ing over  those  who  had  been  left  on  the  further  shore  by 
reason  of  their  departure  from  grace.  His  death  took 
place  prior  to  that  of  the  second  Joseph,  and  he  was  buried 
in  the  abbey  of  white  monks  where  Mordrains  awaited 
his  end. 

Celidoine,  the  son  of  Nasciens,  is  in  one  sense  a  lesser 
character,  but  in  the  symbolism  of  the  story  he  seems  to 
stand  for  something  that  is  important.  He  is  said  to 
have  been  born  under  the  happiest  of  starry  influences 
and  was  himself  a  reader  of  the  stars,  from  which  he 
drew  presages  and  on  one  occasion  ensured  a  Christian 
victory  in  consequence.  The  meaning  of  his  name  itself 
is  explained  to  be  the  Gift  of  Heaven.  One  day  Mor- 
drains had  a  vision  concerning  him,  and  therein  he  was 
represented  by  a  lake,  into  which  Christ  came  and  washed 
His  hands  and  feet.  This  signified  that  God  visited 
Celidoine  daily  because  of  his  good  thoughts  and  actions. 
Nine  streams  issued  from  the  lake,  typifying  the  boy's 
descendants.  Into  eight  of  them  Christ  also  passed  and 
made  a  similar  lustration.  Now  the  ninth  was  troubled 
at  the  beginning — foul  even  and  turbulent — but  in  the 
middle  it  was  translucent  as  a  jewel  and  at  the  mouth 
more  sweet  and  pleasant  than  thought  can  picture. 
Before  entering  this  stream  Christ  laid  aside  all  His  vest- 
ments and  was  immersed  wholly — that  is  to  say,  in  the 
good  works  of  Galahad.  The  troubled  source  signified 
the  stain  on  that  knight  by  reason  of  his  conception,  and 
the  removal  of  the  vestments  meant  that  Christ  would  dis- 
cover to  the  haut  prince  all  his  mysteries,  permitting  him 
in  fine  to  penetrate  the  entire  secrets  of  the  Graal. 

The  external  life  of  Celidoine,  who  reached  Britain 
by  himself  in  a  boat,  does  not  concern  us  except  in 
broadest  outline.  As  his  father  wrought  with  the  sword 
of  earthly  knighthood  in  the  cause  of  Christ,  so  did  the 
son  fight  with  the  sword  of  the  spirit — that  is  to  say, 
with  the  tongue  of  eloquence,  and  paynim  clerks  and 
sages  could  not  withstand  him.  Among  many  others  he 

305  u 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

converted  the  Persian  King  Label  and  was  married  to  his 
daughter.  As  he  was  a  prodigy  from  the  beginning  and 
was  knighted  in  his  eighth  year,  he  is  comparable  to  a 
sanctified  Merlin. 

One  section  of  the  romance  which  certainly  calls  to  be 
included  among  the  major  branches,  and  may  even  be 
considered  by  some  as  important  of  all,  has  been  reserved 
here  till  the  last,  and  this  is  the  permanent  House  of  the 
Holy  Graal.  During  the  keepership  of  Joseph  II.  the 
Vessel,  and  the  Ark  which  contained  it,  shared  in  the 
travels  of  the  apostolate,  but  it  found  a  place  of  rest 
during  the  reign  of  his  successor — who  was  Alain,  as  we 
shall  learn  later.  With  a  hundred  companions  he  had 
proceeded  to  the  realm  of  Forayne,  where  the  King  was 
a  knight  of  worth,  but  a  paynim  and  also  a  leper.  He 
inquired  whence  his  visitors  came,  and  was  told  from 
Jerusalem  ;  he  asked  further  whether  his  disease  could  be 
cured,  and  was  assured  that  it  was  more  than  possible  if 
he  forsook  the  evil  law  and  became  a  Christian.  To  this 
the  King  consented,  and  after  his  conversion  and  baptism 
he  was  healed  by  the  sight  of  the  Graal,  this  being  the 
only  occasion  on  which  the  Vessel  was  shown  to  a  stranger. 
It  is  important  also  to  note  that  though  Alain  was  the 
Keeper  of  the  Hallows,  he  was  not  an  ordained  priest 
and  he  employed  one  for  the  purpose  of  baptizing.  It 
follows,  therefore,  that  the  episcopal  functions  of  Joseph 
II.  did  not  devolve  on  his  successor,  and  it  is  certain  also 
that  there  was  no  sacerdotal  character  attributed  to  the 
still  later  wardens — or,  among  others,  to  King  Pelles, 
who  was  the  Keeper  in  the  days  of  Galahad.  The  new 
convert  was  christened  Alphasan,  and  he  proposed  to 
build  a  castle  for  the  reception  of  the  Graal,  to  marry  his 
daughter  to  Joshua,  the  brother  of  Alain,  and  to  make 
him  the  heir  of  his  kingdom,  if  the  Graal  remained 
therein.  Hereto  Alain  consented  ;  the  castle  was  built ; 
and  at  its  completion  they  found  an  instruction  em- 
blazoned in  red  letters  on  one  of  the  gates,  saying  that  it 
should  be  called  Corbenic,  the  meaning  of  which,  as  we 

306 


The   Greater  Chronicles 

know,  is  the  Treasury  of  the  Holy  Vessel.  This  is  on  the 
authority  of  the  text  and  it  is  not  an  unreasonable  persua- 
sion to  believe  that  the  author  knew  what  he  intended  to 
convey  by  the  word  which  he  seems  to  have  compounded  ; 
but  as  it  has  not  given  universal  satisfaction  we  have 
variants,  of  which  some  are  as  follows  :  Carbonek  =  Caer 
Banawc — the  Castle  of  the  Corners,  or  the  Square  Castle, 
but  this  has  nothing  to  commend  it ;  Corbenic  =  De  Corpore 
Benedicto,  which  is  high  phantasy,  but  is  charming  in  that 
sense  ;  Cor-arbenig  =  the  Sovereign  Chair,  which  is  perfect 
past  all  desiring  if  the  House  of  the  Graal  was  the  seat  of 
a  secret  doctrine. 

The  Holy  Vessel  was  placed  in  a  fair  chamber,  as  if  on 
an  Altar  of  Repose,  and  on  the  next  Sunday  Joshua  was 
married  to  the  King's  daughter.  His  coronation  also 
took  place,  and  in  the  feast  which  followed  the  company 
was  replenished  by  the  grace  of  the  Graal  with  all 
manner  of  delicacies.  That  same  night  the  King  made 
the  fatal  mistake  of  sleeping  in  the  palace  which  he  had 
built,  and  he  awakened  to  witness  a  Mass  of  the  Graal, 
celebrated  in  his  room  apparently.  It  was,  I  suppose,  at 
the  term  of  the  service  that  the  Vessel  is  said  to  have 
been  removed  suddenly,  and  there  appeared  one  wearing 
the  likeness  of  humanity  but  composed  as  if  it  were  of 
flame.  He  upbraided  the  King  for  reposing  in  a  House 
so  holy  as  that  where  the  Vessel  was  worshipped,  and  as 
a  warning  to  all  who  should  come  after  he  smote  him 
through  both  thighs  with  a  sword.  The  sword  was  with- 
drawn, the  figure  vanished,  and  Alphasan  died  ten  days 
afterwards.  It  was  in  this  way,  and  at  first  by  the  voice 
of  the  victim,  that  Corbenic  came  to  be  called  the  Palace 
of  Adventure ;  many  knights  attempted  to  sleep  therein 
subsequently,  but  they  were  always  found  dead  in  the 
morning,  one  strong  hero  of  Arthur's  chivalry  excepted, 
and  he  suffered  for  it  otherwise. 


307 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 


III 

THE  MINOR  BRANCHES  OF  THE  BOOK 
OF  THE  HOLT  GRAAL 

The  things  which  remain  over  from  the  last  section  for 
consideration  at  the  term  of  this  inquest  are  chiefly 
derivatives  from  the  metrical  romance  of  De  Borron, 
including  those  further  adventures  and  histories  which 
he  promised  to  provide  if  he  could.  It  was  not  sufficient 
for  the  putative  Walter  Map  that  England  was  the 
spiritual  patrimony  guaranteed  to  the  eldest  son  of  the 
new  Church  of  Christ  and  the  first  Bishop  of  Christen- 
dom, but  that  he  might  exalt  it  further  he  transferred 
thereto  several  palmary  episodes  which  in  the  work  of 
his  precursor  had  been  allocated  to  the  regions  on  the 
hither  side  of  Syria,  or  wherever  he  brought  the  company 
of  Joseph  to  its  first  prolonged  halt.  The  most  im- 
portant of  these  postponements  is  the  doom  which  befell 
Moses ;  it  is  also  told  differently,  and  is  connected  with 
a  collateral  story  concerning  one  who  was  fated  to  suffer  a 
similar  punishment,  of  which  the  Lesser  Chronicles  know 
nothing.  This  personage  is  Simeon,  who  is  sometimes 
said  to  be  the  father  of  Moses,  and  he  is  first  referred  to 
when  the  company  are  crossing  the  channel  on  their  way 
to  Britain.  Simeon  and  his  son  sink  then  into  the  water 
because  they  have  broken  their  vows  of  purity,  and  they 
have  to  be  saved  by  the  others.  Long  after  the  arrival 
of  the  whole  fellowship  at  the  term  of  their  voyaging 
we  hear  first  of  the  Graal  table,  at  which  Joseph  II.  and 
Brons  sit  together  with  a  wide  space  between  them  ;  but 
the  explanation  of  the  empty  seat  differs  from  that  of 
De  Borron,  signifying  the  place  occupied  by  Christ  at  the 
Last  Supper.  It  can  be  so  occupied  only  by  one  of  greater 
sanctity  than  are  those  at  the  Second  Table.  It  follows 
that  for  the  purposes  of  this  romance  the  consecration 
of  Galahad  was  greater  than  that  of  the  first  Bishop  of 

308 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

Christendom,  who  held  the  warrant  of  his  ordination 
from  Christ  Himself.  When  the  information  was  made 
public,  Simeon  and  Moses  speculated  as  to  its  truth  and 
reason.  Being  sinners,  they  regarded  it  as  false,  and 
Moses  undertook  to  occupy  the  seat  if  permission  could 
be  obtained  from  Joseph  II.  The  latter  was  told  by 
those  who  were  parties  to  the  conspiracy  that  a  man 
counted  among  the  sinners  was  worthy  to  take  his  seat 
at  the  Graal.  Joseph  was  much  astonished,  knowing 
under  what  circumstances  he  had  crossed  over  to  Britain, 
but  his  informants  persisted,  and  though  he  could  not 
believe  in  the  goodness  of  Moses,  he  gave  him  leave  to 
try.  This  was  without  reference  to  the  voice  of  the 
Graal,  which  was  consulted  on  the  occasion  according  to 
Robert  de  Borron,  and  it  illustrates  my  previous  state- 
ment that  in  the  later  romance  the  Sacred  Vessel  does  not 
pronounce  oracles  or  act  as  a  touchstone.  Joseph,  how- 
ever, warned  Moses  himself,  when  the  time  came  for  the 
trial,  not  to  make  the  attempt,  unless  he  knew  that  he 
was  worthy,  as  he  would  repent  thereof,  seeing  that  it 
was  the  place  of  the  Son  of  God.  Moses  was  struck  with 
terror  but  still  persisted,  and,  before  he  had  sat  long, 
seven  burning  hands  came  from  Heaven,  set  him  on  fire 
like  a  dry  bush,  and  carried  him  off  through  the  air. 
Shame  fell  upon  his  sinful  companions,  who  inquired 
whether  he  was  lost  or  saved  ;  they  were  told  that  they 
should  see  him  again,  and  that  then  they  would  know 
his  fate. 

At  a  later  period,  when  the  company  were  approaching 
the  forest  of  Darnantes,  they  were  directed  that  they 
must  enter  therein,  and  were  told  that  they  should  see 
Moses.  In  a  valley  they  came  presently  upon  a  great 
house  and,  passing  through  open  gates,  they  entered  a 
great  hall,  wherein  burned  a  great  fire.  Out  of  the  fire 
came  a  voice,  which  begged  Joseph  to  pray  for  the 
speaker,  that  his  sufferings  might  be  alleviated  by  the 
mercy  of  God.  This  was  the  voice  of  Moses.  Joseph  II., 
who  was  present,  demanded  whether  he  was  saved  or  lost, 

3°9 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  the  answer  was  that  still  he  had  hope  of  grace.  He 
had  been  transported  by  devils,  who  meant  certainly  to 
plunge  him  in  hell ;  but  a  hermit  compelled  them  to 
release  him,  as  in  spite  of  his  sin  he  had  not  deserved 
endless  torment.  The  fire  was  destined  to  encompass 
him  till  he  was  delivered  by  that  good  knight  who  would 
end  the  adventures  of  the  Graal.  Alain,  who  was  also 
present,  asked  more  specifically  who  he  was,  and  was  told 
that  it  was  his  cousin  Moses.  Simeon  also  spoke  to  him, 
when  he  was  advised,  and  Canaan — another  of  the  evil 
fellowship — that  they  should  seek  to  be  better  than 
they  were,  and  to  be  cleansed  from  sin  by  the  Bishop. 
Joseph  II.  and  Alain  prayed  for  Moses,  that  his  suffering 
might  be  lessened.  A  beneficent  rain  then  came  down 
into  the  fire,  softening  its  fervour  by  extinguishing  half 
thereof,  so  that  the  poor  sufferer  was  eased  greatly. 
Simeon  inquired  how  long  such  flames  might  endure, 
and  was  told  by  Moses  that  it  would  not  be  so  long  as 
he  deserved,  because  he  would  be  released  by  Galahad, 
who  would  not  alone  end  the  adventures  of  the  Graal 
but  all  those  of  Britain. 

In  spite  of  the  warning  which  came  to  them  from  a 
source  that  illustrated  so  bitterly  the  neglect  of  warnings, 
Simeon  and  Canaan  not  only  remained  without  grace  but 
made  haste  to  complete  with  that  which  remained  for  them 
to  do  in  the  order  of  heinous  offence.  Joseph  of  Arima- 
thasa  and  some  part  of  the  Christian  cohort  had  now  entered 
Scotland,  where  we  have  seen  long  ago  that  they  were 
sustained  by  the  Holy  Graal.  In  this  benefit  of  refec- 
tion Simeon  and  Canaan  were  precluded  by  their  condition 
from  sharing,  with  the  result  that  they  had  nothing  to  eat 
for  two  days  and  nights.  Simeon  claimed  that  he  had 
done  more  for  God  than  either  Joseph  or  Petrus,  and 
that  he  was  suffering  for  their  sins ;  on  the  other  hand, 
Canaan  declared  that  he  was  punished  for  the  deficiencies 
of  his  own  immediate  kindred.  Simeon  covenanted  to 
take  vengeance  on  Petrus  and  Canaan  on  his  brethren. 
The  issue  was  that,  grievously  and  almost  incurably, 

310 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

Petrus  was  wounded  in  the  neck  with  a  poisoned  knife,  and 
the  twelve  brothers  of  Canaan  were  despatched  with  a 
sword.  The  visitation  of  these  crimes  is  varied  strangely 
in  respect  of  severity,  and  it  illustrates,  I  think,  some 
vague  and  undeclared  sanctity  in  the  mission  of  Petrus. 
If  so,  it  is  a  reflection  from  Robert  de  Borron,  though  in 
the  later  story  there  is  no  brief  from  Heaven,  or  other  war- 
rant, as  the  evident  seal  of  mission.  In  any  case,  he  who  only 
wounded  Petrus  was  transported,  like  Moses,  by  spirits  of 
fire,  while  he  who  was  a  twelve-fold  fratricide  was,  by  the 
comparative  mercy  of  earthly  judgment,  only  buried 
alive,  with  time  to  repent  before  death  overtook  him 
almost  in  the  ordinary  course.  Long  and  long  afterwards, 
when  Galahad  le  Fort,  who  had  become  King  of  Wales,  was 
riding  through  that  country,  he  saw  a  great  fire  burning 
in  a  dry  ditch.  A  voice  came  therefrom  which  proved 
to  be  that  of  Simeon,  who  was  expiating  in  this  manner 
his  outrage  on  Petrus.  At  the  same  time — and  again 
like  Moses — he  was  not  beyond  redemption,  and  he  en- 
treated his  auditor  to  found  a  place  of  religion,  wherein 
monks  could  pray  for  his  soul.  Galahad  le  Fort 
promised  to  erect  an  abbey  and  to  be  buried  himself 
therein.  Simeon  said  further  that  his  torment  would 
cease  when  a  pure  and  worthy  knight  should  come  and 
extinguish  the  flames.  This  would  be  he  by  whom  the 
adventures  of  the  Holy  Graal  should  be  brought  at  last 
to  their  term. 

It  is  towards  the  close  of  the  story  that  Petrus  is  first 
mentioned  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  the  reference 
is  at  that  point  which  corresponds  rather  thinly  to  the 
institution  of  the  Second  Table.  It  is  he  who  inquires 
why  there  is  a  vacant  seat  left  thereat,  and  who  is  told  that 
it  is  the  place  of  Christ.  After  the  assault  of  Simeon,  the 
wound  of  Petrus  was  examined  and  a  healing  by  herbs 
was  attempted,  but  this  did  more  harm  than  good.  He 
was  at  length  left  in  the  charge  of  a  single  priest,  while 
the  company  proceeded  on  their  way ;  but,  seeing  that 
he  expected  to  die,  he  asked  to  be  carried  to  the  seashore 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  to  be  placed  in  a  ship  which  was  found  lying  thereby, 
with  its  sails  set.  The  priest  was  not  allowed  to  go 
further,  and  the  vessel  put  out  presently  with  its  solitary 
occupant.  He  was  taken  to  the  Isle  of  Orkney,  where 
ruled  the  pagan  King  Orcaut,  whose  daughter  witnessed 
his  arrival.  She  went  on  board  the  ship  and  so  contrived 
that  Petrus  was  healed  in  the  end  by  a  Christian  prisoner 
who  was  in  the  hands  of  her  father.  As  the  issue  of  the 
whole  adventure  the  heathen  King  was  converted  ;  Petrus 
married  the  daughter ;  he  lived  a  long  and  worthy  life  as 
the  successor  of  Orcaut ;  and  he  had  a  valiant  knight  for 
his  own  heir.  He  died  in  fulness  of  years  and  was 
buried  at  Orkney,  in  the  church  dedicated  to  St.  Philip. 

It  will  be  seen  that  if  the  author  of  the  Book  of  the 
Holy  Graal  designed  in  this  account  to  supply  the  missing 
branch  of  Robert  de  Borron  concerning  Petrus,  he  again 
—and  quite  manifestly — told  the  wrong  story,  for  setting 
aside  all  question  of  the  written  warrant,  the  true  des- 
tination of  Petrus  was  not  Orkney  but  Avalon,  and  there 
is  no  correspondence  otherwise. 

In  nearly  all  those  incidents  which,  from  other  points 
of  view,  are  similar  to  some  of  Robert  de  Borron,  the  part 
assigned  by  the  poem  to  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  is  trans- 
ferred to  the  son  in  that  prose  romance  which  is  its 
wresting  rather  than  its  extension.  A  notable  instance 
is  the  demand  for  advice  by  Brons  concerning  his  twelve 
boys.  It  is  late  in  the  story  and  long  after  the  arrival  of 
the  pilgrims  in  Britain  that  the  question  arises  which 
appears  pregnant  with  consequence  in  the  metrical  romance. 
Brons  has  been  himself  so  insignificant  throughout  that 
his  name  appears  scarcely,  though  he  is  entitled  to  sit 
with  Joseph  II.,  each  on  one  side  of  the  vacant  seat  at  the 
Second  Table.  As  in  the  earlier  text,  eleven  of  the  sons 
expressed  a  desire  to  marry,  while  the  twelfth  elected  to 
lead  a  life  of  virginity.  Joseph  II.  manifested  great  joy 
at  the  choice  thus  made  and  foreshadowed  the  reward 
which  was  to  follow.  It  is  indicated  further  by  the  fact 
that  the  son,  and  not  Brons,  was  directed  to  fish  in  the 

312 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

lake  and  obtain  that  slender  catch  which  gave  him  thence- 
forward the  title  of  the  Rich  Fisher.  In  this  case,  how- 
ever, it  was  used  by  a  miracle  to  feed  those  whose  desert 
did  not  allow  them  to  share  in  the  graces  and  favours  of 
the  Holy  Table.  When  Joseph  II.  was  dying  there  stood 
Alain  by  his  bedside,  and,  being  asked  why  he  was  weeping, 
he  answered  that  it  was  because  he  was  to  be  left  like  a 
sheep  that  has  lost  its  shepherd.  He  was  then  told  that 
he  should  be  the  shepherd  after  Joseph,  having  the  lord- 
ship of  the  Sacred  Vessel,  with  power  to  deliver  subse- 
quently to  another  inheritor  full  of  grace  and  goodness, 
on  condition  only  that  the  Hallow  remained  in  the  land. 
We  come  in  this  manner  to  speak  of  the  successions 
and  genealogies,  and  in  the  first  place  concerning  the 
Keepers  of  the  Graal.  Alain,  by  a  curious  disposition, 
died  on  the  same  day  as  Alphasan,  the  builder  of 
Corbenic,  and  they  were  both  buried  in  the  church  of  that 
city  dedicated  to  Our  Lady.  The  text  at  this  point  is  a 
little  vague  in  expression  and  has  been  interpreted  wrongly, 
but  the  succeeding  warden  was  evidently  Joshua — that 
brother  of  Alain  who  was  most  loved  by  him.  He  was 
succeeded  in  due  course  by  his  son  Eminadap,  who 
married  the  daughter  of  a  King  of  Great  Britain  and  had 
Carceloys  as  issue.  He  in  turn  begot  Manuiel,  and  from 
him  sprang  Lambor,  whose  death  and  that  which  followed 
I  have  mentioned  previously.  This  was  the  first  Maimed 
King  of  the  Graal,  and  on  him  followed  immediately 
one  who  was  the  Maimed  King  par  excellence  of  suffering 
and  miracle  of  final  healing — that  is  to  say,  Pellehan.  But 
the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  says  that  his  wounding  was  in 
the  battle  of  Rome,  and  it  knows  nothing  therefore  of  the 
Dolorous  Stroke  inflicted  by  Balyn.  Seeing,  however, 
that  both  texts  testify  that  Galahad  will  heal,  and  he  only, 
I  think  it  must  be  inferred  that  the  two  accounts  refer  to 
the  same  person,  who  must  be  distinguished  from  King 
Pelles,  though  there  is  an  inclination  in  some  criticism  to 
conclude  otherwise,  and  I  have  shared  it  tentatively.  The 
genealogy  is  quite  clear  that  King  Pelles  was  son  of 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

Pellehan,  and  there  is  not  any  real  difficulty  about  the 
son  succeeding  in  the  life  of  the  father,  as  this  occurs  in 
the  case  of  Joseph  II.  and  is  the  rule  rather  than  the  ex- 
ception in  the  counter-succession  of  the  Perceval  Quests. 
It  follows  from  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  that  four  of  the 
Kings  whom  I  have  enumerated  were  termed  Rich  Fishers 
in  succession  and  that  all  of  them  reigned  in  Terre 
Foray  ne,  which  the  Vulgate  Merlin  terms — or  for  which  it 
substitutes — Lytenoys. 

The  other  genealogies  are  useful  only  in  so  far  as  they 
show  the  descent  of  the  persons-in-chief  who  appear  in 
the  Greater  Chronicles.  The  most  important  is  that  of 
Nasciens,  which  leads  up  through  many  names — but  they 
are  names  only — to  King  Ban  of  Benoic,  the  father  of 
Lancelot,  and  hence  to  Lancelot  himself,  as  well  as 
Galahad.  The  haut prince  was  therefore  descended  on  the 
male  side  from  the  royal  line  of  Sarras,  over  which  he 
reigned  himself  after  the  Quest  was  finished  ;  on  the 
female  side  he  was  descended  from  Joseph  of  Arimathaea, 
through  Galahad  le  Fort,  as  the  Romance  of  Lancelot  shows. 
Sir  Gawain  is  also  represented  as  coming  from  this  root, 
which  was  that  of  King  David,  but  his  descent  was  through 
Petrus,  the  genealogy  of  whom  is  clouded  rather  deeply 
in  the  text,  as  it  is  indeed  in  the  romance  of  De  Borron. 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  the 
story  professes  to  turn  to  the  life  of  Merlin.  Two  of  its 
codices  contain  a  long  interspersed  digression  concerning 
the  two  countries  belonging  to  Mordrains  and  Nasciens 
after  they  had  departed  therefrom.  Their  power  and 
influence  were  much  increased  under  Grimaud,  the  son 
of  Mordrains.  When  Sarras  was  destroyed,  with  the 
exception  of  the  Spiritual  Palace,  it  was  rebuilt  more 
splendidly  than  ever.  These  things  do  not  concern  us, 
for  in  dealing  with  the  great  prolix  romance  I  think 
that  my  summary  has  been  confined,  in  accordance  with 
my  design,  to  those  matters  which  belong  to  the  Mystery 
of  the  Graal  as  it  is  manifested  in  the  Greater  Chronicles, 
and  where  it  has  been  possible  to  the  Eucharistic  side  of 

3*4 


'The  Greater   Chronicles 

that  Mystery  as  the  most  holy  motive  of  all  my  long 
research.  On  this  subject  there  is  one  thing  further  to 
say.  The  doctrine  of  transubstantiation,  as  it  is  presented 
in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  its  continual  transition 
into  the  notion  of  physical  sustenance,  are  things  which 
scandalise  rather  than  discounsel  the  soul ;  but  as  we  saw 
in  the  poem  of  De  Borron  that  Eucharist  and  Reliquary 
were  alike  understood  spiritually,  so  here  it  will  be  found 
in  the  last  sifting  that  the  spiritual  side  also  emerges  and 
becomes  at  times  prominent.  When  Joseph  II.,  in  obedi- 
ence to  the  heavenly  voice,  departed  from  Sarras  and  its 
King,  that  he  might  preach  the  new  faith  to  the  Gentiles, 
it  came  about  in  the  course  of  the  journey  that  provisions 
were  wanting.  In  this  extremity  he  knelt  before  the  Ark, 
wherein  was  the  Holy  Vessel,  and  implored  the  help  of 
God.  Following  the  directions  which  he  received,  cloths 
were  laid  on  the  greensward,  and  the  people  took  their 
places.  The  elder  Joseph,  pursuing  his  care  of  the 
physical  bodies,  ordained  that  his  son  should  take  the 
Graal  in  his  hands  and  follow  him  round  the  cloths 
while  he  circumambulated  three  times,  when — this  being 
accomplished — all  who  were  pure  of  heart  would  be  filled 
with  the  rare  sweetness  of  the  world.  This  office  took 
place  at  the  hour  of  prime  ;  the  father  and  son  sat  down 
with  a  vacant  place  between  them — as  if  something  were 
lacking  which  at  a  fitting  time  subsequently  would  make 
perfect  all  holy  ministry ;  the  Vessel  was  covered  with 
paten  and  corporal  ;  and  the  result  was  that  those  who 
were  privileged  to  take  part  were  filled  with  Divine 
Grace,  "  so  that  they  could  neither  conceive  nor  desire 
anything  beyond  it."  That  was  a  refection  in  which 
material  nourishment  shared  not  at  all,  and  though  the 
episode  does  not  occur  in  all  the  codices,  there  is 
something  that  corresponds  to  its  equivalent.  An  in- 
stance in  point  is  found  in  Mordrains,  the  King,  who, 
after  he  has  attained  all  earthly  knowledge,  and  has 
received  as  the  price  of  attainment  the  orbicular  wound 
of  Plato,  is  maintained  through  the  centuries  by  the 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

Eucharist,  as  Amfortas  in  the  German  cycle  and  the  alter 
ego  of  both  in  the  Conte  del  Graal.  There  are  other- 
wise indications,  and  they  obtain  through  the  Greater 
Chronicles,  that  the  proximity  of  the  Holy  Graal  trans- 
formed the  earthly  festival  into  an  experience  in  extasis 
and  the  good  things  here  below  become  the  bona  Domini 
in  terra  viventium. 


IV 

SOME  LATER  MERLIN  LEGENDS 
§  A. — THE  VULGATE  MERLIN 

There  are  many  questions,  and  some  of  them  may  be 
insoluble,  which  are  concerned  with  or  arise  out  of  the 
legend  of  Merlin,  but  there  is  perhaps  one  only  which 
enters  at  all  deeply  into  the  collateral  legend  of  the 
Graal ;  it  is  why  the  British  prophet,  partly  magician  and 
enchanter,  but  in  part  also  God's  messenger,  with  his 
consequent  strange  mixture  of  motives,  should  have 
been  selected  in  the  mind  of  romance,  or  in  any  more 
withdrawn  mind,  as  the  promulgator  of  the  Graal 
Mystery  in  Great  Britain — perhaps  more  correctly — as 
the  semi-supernatural  power  which  was  at  work  in  con- 
nection therewith  ;  why  also  it  was  he  who  brought  about 
the  institution  of  the  Third  Symbolical  Table,  and  set 
up  that  Siege  Perilous  which  was,  in  the  first  place,  to 
terminate  the  enchantments  of  Britain,  and,  in  the  second, 
by  the  alternative  intervention  of  the  adventurous  times, 
to  make  void — but  this  is  long  after  he  has  himself 
passed  away — the  high  mystery  of  chivalry  so  far  as 
the  Round  Table  was  concerned.  The  Didot  Perceval 
intervened  in  respect  of  the  latter  vocation,  with  results 
which  we  have  seen  already,  but  in  this  respect  it  is 
scarcely  the  voice  of  the  literature. 

There  are  those  who  maintain  that  the  late  prophecies 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

of  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  attributed  to 
Merlin  were  produced  with  a  political  object ;  but  the 
object  of  the  Graal  was,  speaking  broadly,  mystical,  and 
as  regards  the  literature  which  embodies  it,  this  is  either 
the  reflection  at  a  distance  of  secret  sanctuary  doctrine, 
or  it  stands  in  some  dubious  manner  for  the  aspirations 
of  the  Celtic  Church,  and  admits  therefore  a  political 
object  to  the  extent  that  such  aspirations  responded  to 
particular  ambitions  which  we  know  to  have  been 
cherished  by  English  kings  at  or  about  the  period  during 
which  the  literature  was  developed.  There  are  those  who 
look  to  Armorica  for  the  original  book  of  the  legend,  and 
say  that  this  was  latinised  by  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  ;  but 
the  question  as  to  the  origin  of  the  romance  elements  is 
too  complicated  for  so  simple  a  settlement,  and  if  it  had 
ever  a  single  source  in  writing,  it  was  at  a  period  when  it 
was  apart  from  romance,  and  personally  I  do  not  question 
that  it  was  in  the  Latin  tongue.  There  are  those  who 
consider  that  Scotland  was  the  home  of  the  Arthurian 
myth,  but  the  land  of  second  sight  is  not  really  that  of 
the  Mysteries,  and  though  the  old  Cumbrian  kingdom 
may  have  contributed  to  the  story  of  Merlin,  the  latter 
must  have  been  enriched  from  other  sources.  It  was 
transported,  we  have  been  told,  into  Brittany,  and  there 
it  may  have  undergone  an  express  transformation ;  but, 
in  common  with  so  much  of  the  Arthurian  cycle,  it  was 
codified,  extended  and  enriched  by  the  process  of  late 
editing  in  some  particular,  though  unexplained,  interest, 
the  method  adopted  by  which  was  the  collection  of  all  the 
great  texts  of  Arthurian  literature  about  the  Holy  Graal. 
The  hypothetical  book  of  that  legend  was  the  central 
sacred  point,  and  all  the  extant  texts  stand  about  it  like 
subsidiary  Hallows. 

The  break  between  the  Early  History  of 'Merlin ,  which 
ends  by  saying  that  King  Arthur  held  his  land  and 
kingdom  long  in  peace,  and  the  Vulgate  Merlin,  which 
begins  by  reciting  how  the  nobles  who  had  acknowledged 
him  unwillingly  went  against  him  into  prolonged  re- 

31? 


The  Hidden  Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

bellion,  is  sufficient  in  itself  to  open  a  new  branch  of  the 
literature.  My  classification,  however,  does  not  make  it 
impossible  that  the  later  text  should  reflect  something 
from  the  Lesser  Chronicles,  two  of  the  texts  in  which 
are  by  necessity  the  root-matter  of  all  the  Greater 
Chronicles ;  but  its  more  important  derivations  are  from 
the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  and  the  appurtenances  thereof, 
including  the  prose  Lancelot.  We  are  only  concerned 
with  the  text  in  respect  of  its  Graal  references,  and  of  its 
content  otherwise  it  will  be  sufficient,  therefore,  to  say 
that  it  embodies  an  exhaustive  account  of  King  Arthur's 
wars  with  the  Saxons,  a  certain  group  of  adventures  of 
the  less  indubitably  romantic  kind,  and  thereafter  the 
various  circumstances  which  led  up  to  the  internment  of 
Merlin.  In  this  manner  it  is  the  close  of  the  prophet's 
chronicle,  though  it  is  still  only  the  early  history  of 
Arthur. 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  the  re-editing  of  romances  in  the 
Graal  interest  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  innumerable 
alterations  made  otherwise  by  intelligent  and  other  tran- 
scribers, but  to  which  no  ulterior  motive  need  be  attributed. 
Perhaps  the  most  signal  instance  of  all  the  major  editing 
is  the  production  of  two,  if  not  three,  sequels,  executed 
independently,  to  the  Merlin  of  Robert  de  Borron,  both  of 
which  were  less  or  more  exclusively  made  in  the  interest 
which  I  have  mentioned,  while  both  are  also  ascribed 
falsely  to  Robert  de  Borron.  We  could  better  under- 
stand the  Vulgate  Merlin  and  the  Huth  Merlin  could  one 
of  them  be  accepted  as  carrying  further  forward  the  De 
Borron  tradition,  and  thus  leading  up  to  a  Perceval  Quest, 
whether  that  of  the  Didot  manuscript  or  another ;  but 
the  derivatives  of  both  texts  make  insuperable  difficulties 
in  respect  of  this  course.  At  the  same  time  the  process 
of  codification  is  nowhere  complete  in  the  literature.  We 
must  assume,  for  example,  on  the  basis  of  textual  criti- 
cism, that  the  prose  Lancelot  had  in  some  form  already 
enriched  the  cycle  when  the  Vulgate  Merlin  came  into 
existence,  but  in  several  particulars  the  Merlin  allusions 

318 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

in  the  Lancelot  do  not  correspond  with  anything  in  those 
later  Merlin  stories  with  which  we  are  here  concerned. 
These,  on  the  other  hand,  when  they  reflect  elements 
which  are  particular  to  the  Lancelot,  may  be  reproducing 
in  summary  merely,  or  they  may  offer  new  materials  by 
way  of  variation  over  details. 

The  Vulgate  Merlin  says  that  God  has  given  to  the 
prophet  that  skill  and  discretion  which'  he  possesses  so  to 
assist  him  that  he  shall  in  fine  accomplish  the  adventures 
of  the  Holy  Graal,  which  adventures  are  predestined  to 
take  place  in  the  time  of  King  Arthur,  and  Blaise,  the 
hermit  and  scribe,  shall  live  to  behold  the  end.  This  is 
true  in  respect  of  the  Didot  Perceval,  but  not  of  the  other 
quests,  in  which  this  personage  is  forgotten,  or  is  lost,  at 
least,  among  many  recording  clerks.  But  as  it  follows 
from  the  reference,  by  implication,  that  Merlin  will  not 
himself  survive,  the  Vulgate  text  cannot  be  said  to  lead 
up  to  that  document.  In  the  interminable  account  of 
the  wars  with  the  King  Rion,  there  is  some  stress  laid  on 
the  achievements  of  Nasciens,  who  is  the  second  of  that 
name,  and  was  a  young  knight  at  the  time  in  question. 
He  was  a  cousin  of  Perceval  le  Gallois,  and  was  of  near 
kinship  to  Joseph  of  Arimathasa,  as  also  a  cousin  of 
Celidoine.  Here  the  derivation  is  from  the  Book  of  the 
Holy  Graal,  but  the  genealogy  is  a  little  distracted. 
Subsequently  Nasciens  had  Galahad  in  his  keeping, 
which  statement  is  reflected  into  the  Welsh  Quest. 
When  he  left  chivalry,  Nasciens  became  a  hermit  and 
was  taken  by  the  Holy  Ghost  into  the  Third  Heaven, 
where  he  beheld  unveiled  the  Divine  Persons  of  the 
Trinity.  He  had  subsequently  the  story  in  his  charge, 
and  by  the  ordinance  of  the  Great  Master  he  announced 
that  which  he  had  read  therein — that  is  to  say,  in  the 
Record  of  Blaise.  It  follows  that  the  secret  chronicle 
which,  according  to  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  had  been 
written  by  Christ  Himself,  was  in  reality  the  work  of 
the  hermit  performed  under  the  dictation  of  Merlin, 
and  that  the  anonymous  author  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy 

319 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

Graal  is  here  identified  by  the  device  of  another  author, 
who  is  himself  also  anonymous. 

There  is  one  reference  to  Helayn,  the  daughter  of 
King  Pelles,  of  the  Castle  Corbenic,  the  niece  of  King 
Fisher  and  of  Alain  who  was  wounded  through  both 
thighs  by  the  avenging  spear.  She  was  the  fairest  lady  in 
the  land,  and  had  the  Blessed  Vessel  in  her  keeping  till 
the  time  of  Galahad's  conception.  After  what  manner 
Helayn  was  dispossessed  of  her  high  office  the  text 
covenants  to  declare  at  a  later  time,  but  seeing  that  it 
fails  herein,  it  is  reserved  on  my  own  part  for  the  branch 
which  belongs  to  Galahad.  We  learn  also  concerning  a 
son  of  King  Pelles,  who — as  in  the  romance  of  Lancelot 
— is  named  Eleazar.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  years  he  told 
his  father  that  he  would  never  be  made  a  knight  till  the 
best  knight  of  the  world  should  give  him  his  arms  and 
the  accolade  after  three  years  of  service.  In  return  for 
the  dignity  of  chivalry,  he  believes  that  he  shall  take  the 
knight  to  the  country  of  King  Pelles  and  the  place  of  the 
Graal.  At  this  time  the  king's  daughter,  though  the 
bearer  of  the  Sacred  Vessel,  is  only  seven  years  old.  See- 
ing that  Galahad  during  his  brief  career  of  knighthood 
does  not  confer  the  high  degree  on  any  squire  of  his 
service,  save  only  Melyas  de  Lyle,  the  son  of  the  King 
of  Denmark,  and  much  less  on  one  who  would  be  his 
uncle  according  to  the  flesh,  whom  also  he  was  destined 
to  meet  in  the  Graal  Castle  at  the  term  of  all,  we  have 
here  the  source  of  a  legend  which  differs  in  certain  respects 
from  any  extant  chronicle  of  the  perfect  knight.  But  it 
should  be  understood  that,  in  the  end,  Eleazar  serves 
Gawain  and  receives  the  accolade  from  him. 

I  do  not  know  what  construction  is  to  be  placed  upon 
the  position  of  King  Pelles ;  to  all  intents  and  purposes 
he  is  the  Warden-in-chief  of  the  Graal  in  the  Quest  of 
Galahad,  but  neither  there  nor  in  the  Vulgate  Merlin  is  he 
called  the  Rich  Fisher,  which  is  the  characteristic  title  of 
the  Warden.  The  romance  with  which  we  are  here  and 
now  concerned  tells  us,  this  notwithstanding,  that  he 

320 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

is  spoken  of  as  the  Rich  King,  which  seems  by  way  of 
alternative ;  he  is  also  a  full  noble  king  and  a  true  one. 
But  there  is  under  his  charge  King  Pellenore  of  the 
Welsh  Lands,  that  is  to  say,  Pellehan,  who  is  sick  and 
will  never  be  healed  till  he  is  manifested  who  shall  bring 
to  an  end  the  adventures  of  the  Holy  Graal.  This  comes 
to  pass  at  the  close  of  the  times  of  Galahad.  But  there 
is  another  brother,  who  is  Alain  of  the  Forayn  Lands ; 
he  is  in  sickness  also,  and  will  never  be  cured  till  the 
best  knight  of  all  Britain  shall  ask  him  why  he  is  stricken 
by  that  malady  and  what  it  is  that  will  help  him.  It 
follows  that  there  is  here  the  analogy  of  Perceval's 
question,  but  it  is  never  asked  in  the  sequel,  nor  do  we 
hear  further  of  Alain. 

In  the  Vulgate  Merlin  the  place  of  the  Graal  is  Cor- 
benic ;  it  is  situated  in  the  realm  of  Lytenoys,  which 
might  signify  Lyonesse ;  and  just  as  we  know  that  the 
Castle  is  one  of  perilous  and  even  fatal  adventure,  so  the 
kingdom  to  which  it  belongs  is  in  nowise  a  region  of 
peace,  and  I  have  said  already  that  its  ruler  is  a  king  in 
warfare.  The  great  romance  contains  few  other  refer- 
ences to  the  Sacred  Vessel  and  the  history  or  the  quest 
thereof.  The  tidings  of  the  Graal  in  Britain  are  still 
tidings  only ;  the  Quest  is  still  not  a  search  after  the 
place  of  the  Hallows,  but  of  knights  who  are  proper  to 
undertake  it.  On  matters  of  so-called  early  history  we 
hear  that  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  received  the  blood  from 
the  side  of  Christ  into  the  Sacred  Vessel  when  the  body 
was  still  hanging  on  the  Cross — representing  a  tradition 
that  differs  from  the  Lesser  Chronicles,  though  it  is 
reflected  from  one  of  the  visions  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal.  We  hear  further  that  the  Graal  came  from 
heaven  above  into  the  city  of  Sarras,  which  may  be  a 
description  by  inadvertence,  or  it  may  represent  a  reflec- 
tion from  some  source  which  corresponds  to  the  antece- 
dents of  Wolfram.  The  spear  which  opened  the  side 
of  Christ  was  brought  to  Logres,  presumably — for  it 
is  not  stated — by  him  who  was  the  first  to  consecrate 

321  x 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  offer  the  Eucharist,  that  is  to   say,  by  the   second 
Joseph. 

So  far  in  fine  as  the  Vulgate  Merlin  can  be  said  to  end 
at  all — seeing  that  it  stops  or  breaks  off  without  redeem- 
ing its  pledges — the  close  is  taken  soon  after  the  enchant- 
ment of  Merlin  by  arts  of  his  own  instruction  given  to 
the  Lady  of  the  Lake ;  the  record  of  Blaise  ceases  for 
want  of  materials ;  but  in  the  meantime  the  clerks  of  the 
court  of  King  Arthur  have  taken  up  the  story  in  a  sense, 
though  their  task  is  confined  to  the  registration  of  the 
prowess  exhibited  by  those  who  are  admitted  newly  to 
the  fellowship  of  the  Round  Table,  and  are  therefore 
at  once  postulants  of  earthly  chivalry  spiritualised  and 
possible  seekers  for  the  Graal. 

§  B. — THE  HUTH  MERLIN 

I  speak  under  correction  in  respect  of  all  matters  which 
are  not  in  the  kinship  of  near  consanguinity  with  my 
proper  subject,  but  there  is  one  thing,  I  think,  which  may 
occur  to  many  who  make  acquaintance  with  the  Merlin 
sub-cycle  in  the  original  texts,  and  this  is,  that  despite  all 
the  archaism  of  its  language  and  the  consequent  diffi- 
culties which  it  must  cost  to  the  English  reader,  the 
method  and  the  atmosphere  of  the  whole  seem  modern 
in  comparison  with  the  books  of  the  Lesser  Chronicles. 
The  devices  and  conventions  suggest  a  later  period,  all 
which  may  perhaps  seem  to  follow  from  its  express 
attempt  to  codify  a  number  of  traditions  and  weld  them 
into  a  harmonious  whole.  The  Huth  manuscript  is  for 
our  purpose  one  of  considerable  and  occasionally  of  great 
importance.  Criticism  speaks  of  it  in  much  the  same 
strain  as  it  has  spoken  once  or  twice  of  the  Longer  Prose 
Perceval,  which  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  it  misses  some 
vital  points  in  a  judicial  appreciation  of  its  merits  on 
grounds  that  are  within  measure  of  the  literary  order  or 
in  respect  of  the  claims  put  forward  concerning  its  author- 
ship. As  regards  the  second  point,  there  are  two  false 

322 


The   Greater  Chronicles 

Roberts  de  Borron,  being  him  of  the  Vulgate  and  him  of 
the  Huth  Merlin,  but  the  claim  of  the  latter  is  interesting 
from  my  standpoint  perhaps  for  the  very  reason  which 
makes  it  suspected  by  the  official  critic.  The  inexpress 
collaboration  which  it  indicates  between  its  unknown 
author  and  another  who  is  also  unknown,  though  not 
indeed  unnamed — that  is,  Helie  de  Borron — is  exactly 
after  the  manner  of  codifications  of  this  kind  at  that 
period,  thus  providing  us  with  a  putative  concordat  on 
the  external  side  of  the  literature  as  an  equipoise  to  the 
mystical  concordat  between  Merlin  and  Blaise.  In  this 
manner  it  suggests  more  than  it  expresses,  but  in  virtue 
of  their  supposed  understanding  the  Graal  Mystery  was 
more  especially  in  the  charge  of  that  other  artist  Elias 
of  whom  the  later  Paracelsus  had  not  dreamed.  The  date 
to  which  the  work  is  assigned  somewhat  speculatively  is 
between  1225  and  1230,  and  it  is  divisible  for  our  pur- 
pose into  four  sections:  (i)  the  prose  version  of  De 
Borron's  Joseph  of  Anmathaa ;  (2)  the  constituents  of 
what  is  held  to  be  the  prose  version  of  De  Borron's 
metrical  romance  of  Merlin;  (3)  that  later  history  of 
Merlin  which  is  exclusive  to  this  manuscript ;  (4)  a  Quest 
of  the  Holy  Graal,  but  this  has  not  come  down  to  us — 
at  least  in  the  French  language.  We  know  that  it  was  a 
Quest  of  Galahad,  and  we  are  enabled  to  follow  some  of 
its  variations  from  the  extant  Galahad  romance  by  the 
allusions  in  the  Huth  Merlin,  and  not  by  these  only,  for 
it  is  supposed  that  the  Vulgate  Merlin  also  borrowed  there- 
from, that  it  was  consequently  an  anterior  document,  so 
that  the  two  later  competitive  Merlin  codices  had  texts 
which  were  identical  at  the  beginning  and  a  text  which 
was  the  same  at  the  end.  As  regards  the  intermediate 
portions  which  differ  so  completely,  their  distinction  is 
without  prejudice  to  the  fact  that  the  prime  inspiration 
of  both  is  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  that  both  in  a 
subsidiary  sense  are  indebted  to  the  Lancelot. 

The  express  purpose  which  has  been   noticed  in  the 
Vulgate  Merlin  is  present  in  the  alternative  text,  and  is 

323 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

indeed  marked  more  strongly.  It  may  be  accepted  that 
the  first  part,  as  we  have  agreed  to  call  it,  offers  no 
deviation  of  importance  from  other  texts  of  the  Lesser 
Holy  Graal)  and  that  it  therefore  reflects  almost  literally 
the  metrical  romance  of  De  Borron.  It  has  not,  how- 
ever, been  printed.  In  the  second  part  there  are  also  no 
really  important  deviations,  but  when  Blaise  is  engaged 
by  the  prophet  to  write  the  history  of  Joseph,  and  there- 
with to  incorporate  his  own  proposed  records,  it  appears 
that  the  custodians  of  the  Graal  had  their  independent 
memorials,  to  which  access  was  apparently  possible,  and 
these  also  were  to  be  embodied  by  the  scribe.  In  other 
words,  he  kept  the  minutes  of  the  Mystery,  and  the 
claim  is  that  there  was  therefore  a  great  Graal  book  in 
the  form  of  a  general  prototype.  As  regards  the  third 
part,  with  which  we  are  concerned  henceforward  in  the 
present  section,  it  may  be  said  generally  that,  in  place  of 
the  unending,  sanguinary  battles  with  so-called  Saxon 
Saracens,  we  are  brought  into  the  world  of  romance,  high 
enchantments  and  pageants  marshalled  gorgeously ;  after 
what  manner  this  distinction  appealed  to  those  who  came 
after  is  evident  from  the  use  which  was  made  of  the  text 
by  Malory. 

We  are  concerned  as  before  only  with  the  intimate 
things  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  and  the  appurtenances  thereof, 
but  as  to  the  latter  the  undivided  text  might  be  embodied 
almost  in  any  complete  schedule.  Merlin  moves  through 
the  story  as  the  ambassador  rather  than  the  messenger  of 
those  who  are  the  custodians  of  the  Graal,  but  the  adver- 
tisements concerning  it  are  still  as  of  a  Parnassus  which 
is  remote.  About  the  time  of  a  certain  tourney  held  in 
Logres,  a  great  rumour  passed  over  the  land  regarding 
the  Sacred  Vessel  and  its  location  in  Britain.  Where  it 
abode  was  unknown — for  if  Merlin  spoke  in  season,  he 
told  little — but  the  grace  of  its  discovery  and  the  limit 
of  the  adventurous  times  were  reserved  for  the  best 
knight  of  the  world.  The  Companions  of  the  Round 
Table  set  themselves — as  they  do  also  in  the  Vulgate — to 

324 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

follow  the  Quest,  and — as  again  they  do  therein — to 
report  concerning  any  Good  Knight  unknown  heretofore 
among  them.  If  such  were  found,  he  was  straightway  led 
to  the  Court,  his  chivalry  was  proved — as  if  a  stranger 
knocked  for  admission  at  a  lodge  of  the  craft  degrees — 
and  on  withstanding  the  tests,  he  was  received  into  the 
great  company.  Each  Knight  who  returned  from  the 
Quest  recited  his  adventures,  and  these  were  reduced 
into  writing  by  four  clerks  retained  in  the  service  of  the 
Queen.  In  this  manner  they  were  transmitted  to  later 
times.  It  was  an  age  of  secret  chronicles,  of  their  sealing 
and  the  breaking  of  the  seals.  On  the  pre-viewed 
approach  of  his  doom,  and  before  finally  parting  from 
Blaise,  Merlin  indited  that  prophecy  concerning  the  times 
of  the  Quest,  to  which  I  have  referred  previously.  It 
opened  as  follows  :  "  This  is  the  beginning  of  the  adven- 
tures in  the  land  of  Britain,  whereby  the  mighty  Lion 
shall  be  overthrown :  these  adventures  shall  be  taken  to 
their  term  by  a  King's  son,  who  shall  be  chaste,  and  the 
best  Knight  of  the  world."  After  this  manner  did  he 
who  instigated  the  Quest  seem  thereby  to  encompass 
rather  than  foresee  the  destruction  of  the  Round  Table, 
its  king  also  and  its  chivalry.  It  is  said  further — and 
still  on  the  ground  that  he  had  not  much  longer  to 
remain  in  the  world — that  Merlin  engaged  King  Arthur 
to  record  all  the  occurrences  which  took  place  at  the 
royal  Court,  and  that  fifty  clerks  were  set  aside  for  this 
office.  Finally,  as  regards  such  memorials,  another  book 
was  written  by  the  own  hand  of  the  prophet,  giving 
before  the  event  an  account  of  the  death  of  Arthur  and 
of  Gawain.  It  was  in  the  keeping  of  Morgan  le  Fay, 
but  with  its  contents  she  was  not  acquainted,  and  it  was 
presumably  therefore  a  cipher  manuscript. 

The  Hidden  Life  of  the  Holy  House  is  a  prolonged 
mystery  of  the  ages  through  all  the  literature,  and  if  one 
corner  of  the  veil  is  lifted  for  a  few  moments  by  the 
Vulgate  Merlin  in  its  unconcerted  allusions  to  King 
Pelles,  the  Huth  manuscript  does  not  compete  with 

325 


The  Hidden  Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

even  this  vague  quality  of  candour,  nor  is  there  any 
certain  ray  of  light  cast  upon  the  Graal  itself.  It  is 
only  the  two  great  texts  of  transubstantiation  in  the  days 
of  quest  which  claim  to  have  drawn  aside  the  curtains 
of  the  Temple  and  to  have  manifested  the  secret  things, 
though  they  continue  to  say  that  these  should  be  kept 
covertly,  and  thus  even  in  the  unveiling  they  suggest 
that  there  is  a  deeper  hiding.  In  the  Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal  Corbenic  is  not  more  accessible  because  it  is  por- 
trayed so  openly,  and  it  is  not  perhaps  more  withdrawn 
because  it  is  in  nowise  named  by  the  Huth  Merlin.  This 
text  has  allusive  and  hinting  methods  which  are  particular 
to  itself,  and  there  is  one  among  them  which  seems  to 
suggest  a  wilderness  of  strange  meaning  behind  its  simple 
words.  When  Bademagus,  like  other  of  the  knights  to 
whom  no  attainment  was  destined,  was  concerned  for  a 
period  in  the  Quest,  he  found  a  branch  of  an  holy  herb, 
which  was  a  sign  of  the  San  Greal,  and  no  knight  came 
upon  such  token  unless  his  life  was  good. 

The  tradition  of  the  Third  Table  is  carried  over  from 
the  Early  History  of  Merlin,  in  which  Robert  de  Borron 
is  credited  with  inventing,  rather  idly,  its  institution  by 
Uther ;  but  all  discrepancy  notwithstanding,  the  Huth 
text,  following  the  prose  Lancelot,  refers  it  to  King  Leode- 
gan  of  Carmelide,  the  father  of  Guinevere,  in  which  case 
it  would  seem  to  be  independent  of  the  prophet  and  of 
all  logical  Graal  connections.  The  apparent  discrepancy 
is  explained,  however,  by  the  Vulgate  Merlin,  which  says 
that  the  Knights  of  the  Round  Table,  being  weary  of  the 
evil  estate  into  which  all  the  country  had  fallen,  retired 
to  the  realm  of  King  Leodegan.  It  does  not  say  what 
appears  to  follow  from  the  text  of  the  Huth  Merlin, 
namely,  that  the  material  table  itself  is  in  the  palace  of 
the  King  of  Carmelide.  The  story  of  the  Siege  Perilous 
is  given  much  after  the  usual  manner,  and  stress  is  laid 
upon  the  fact  that  each  Knight  on  rising  from  the  table 
finds  his  name  inscribed  miraculously  upon  the  seat  to 
him  belonging — an  incident  which,  according  to  the  mind 

326 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

of  the  romance,  exhibits  the  high  pleasure  taken  by  God 
in  the  institution  of  the  Round  Table. 

Among  the  signs  and  tokens  which  go  before,  or  are 
conterminous  with  the  Quest,  there  is  the  appearance  of 
a  strange,  nondescript  animal,  which  is  a  combination  of 
many  creatures,  and  because  within  her  there  is  the  noise  of 
hounds  baying,  she  is  called  the  Questing  Beast.    In  the 
Huth  Merlin  she  appears,  as  if  it  were  out  of  due  season, 
during  the  reign  of  Uther,  who  is  told  by  his  great  coun- 
sellor that  she  concerns  one  of  the  adventures  of  the  Graal, 
which  will  be  explained  to  him  by  Perceval  le  Gallois,  who 
will  be  the  son  of  the  knight  that  at  that  time  is  chas- 
ing the  beast  in  question.     As  Perceval  is  therefore  un- 
born, and  as  Uther  dies  on  his  day,  the  prophecy  does 
not  come  to  pass,  but  it  serves  to  introduce  Pellinore, 
who  is  now  represented  as  a  king  and  again  as  a  knight, 
and  he  it  is  who  follows  the  Questing  Beast.     After  his 
death,  we  know  from  Malory  that  she  was  long  followed 
by  Palamedes,  in  both  cases,  to  no  purpose  apparently, 
for  nothing  comes  therefrom.     It  is  only  in  the  Longer 
Prose    Perceval  that  the  mystical   interpretation   of  the 
interminable  pursuit  is  given  to   Perceval  himself.     At 
this   time  I   have   said  that  Pellinore  had  not  begotten 
Perceval,  and  though  on  his  first  introduction  in  the  days 
of  Arthur,  his  jousting  seems  to  have  constituted  a  kind 
of  guerilla  warfare  against  the  chivalry  of  the  Court,  he  is 
married  ultimately  to  one  of  the  King's  sisters,  and  when 
the  Round  Table  is  sent  by  Leodegan  of  Carmelide  as  his 
daughter's  dowry,  he  is  chosen  by  Merlin  to  fill  one  of 
two  vacant  seats  which  were  left  thereat  by  the  prophet's 
ordinance.     Moreover,  when  other  seats  fall  vacant,  owing 
to  death,  he  assists  the  king  to  fill  them,  and  he  serves 
him  also  in  warfare.     Pellinore  was  in  fine  slain  by  Gawain, 
whose  father  had  fallen  at  his  hands.     It  will  be  seen  that 
the  genealogy   of  Perceval,  according   to  this  romance, 
makes  void  that  of  the  Lesser  Chronicles,  as  it  does  also 
the  corresponding  account  in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval. 
These  things  connect  with  the  Holy  Graal,  though  it 

327 


"The   Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

is  in  the  subsidiary  sense  only,  but  the  root  and  centre  of 
the  story  is  the  great  device  by  which  the  Huth  Merlin 
brings  war  upon  the  House  of  the  Hallows,  devastation 
on  the  surrounding  country,  and  a  living  death  upon  one 
of  the  Hereditary  Wardens  by  means  of  the  Dolorous 
Stroke.  Of  this  fatality  I  have  given  some  account 
already  in  a  previous  section,  and  I  must  speak  of  it 
here  without  covering  precisely  the  same  ground.  The 
romance  shows  that  the  Secret  Powers  of  Avalon  were 
hostile  in  respect  of  King  Arthur  even  from  the  beginning. 
From  those  realms  of  dream  and  faerie  the  Lady  Lilith 
or  Lylle  brought  a  mysterious  sword  to  the  royal  court, 
then  being  held  at  London.  The  weapon  was  her  great 
encumbrance,  but  she  was  condemned  to  carry  it  till  some 
knight  should  succeed  in  unsheathing  it.  Arthur  and  all 
his  companions  made  the  attempt  in  vain,  but  the  poor 
Knight  Balyn,  who  had  just  been  released  from  prison, 
fulfilled  the  task  easily.  He  refused  to  restore  the  sword 
to  the  damosel,  and  though  he  was  told  that  it  would 
cause  his  own  destruction,  he  agreed  to  take  the  risk. 
Thereupon  a  Lady  of  the  Lake  entered  and  demanded 
either  the  head  of  the  knight  who  had  won  the  sword  or 
that  of  the  maiden  who  brought  it.  Balyn,  however,  cut 
off  her  own  head,  saying  that  he  had  been  in  quest  of  her 
these  three  years  past,  she  having  slain  his  mother  by  her 
arts  of  enchantment.  In  this  manner  he  saved  the  other 
damosel,  though  Merlin  showed  that  she  was  of  evil  ways 
and  life,  never  appearing  for  good,  but  for  great  harm 
only.  So  begins  the  story  of  Balyn  and  Balan,  as  a  tale 
of  dole  from  the  first,  and  such  it  remains  to  the  end. 
But  the  Dolorous  Stroke  itself  came  about  through  a 
knight  who  had  the  power  to  ride  invisible,  and  thus  had 
others  at  his  mercy.  Balyn  was  in  chase  of  this  knight, 
to  put  an  end  to  his  evil  deeds,  and  after  the  episode  of 
the  sword  he  overtook  him  in  the  castle  of  his  brother, 
who  is  the  King  Pellehan.  There  he  destroyed  him  in 
open  court  at  a  festival,  and  he  was  pursued  by  the  king 
from  room  to  room  of  the  building  to  avenge  what 

328 


T'be   Greater   Chronicles 

appeared  to  be  an  act  of  wanton  murder.  They  met  in 
a  richly  dight  bedchamber,  where  there  was  a  table  of 
gold  on  four  pillars  of  silver,  and  on  the  table  a  marvellous 
spear  strangely  wrought.  Therewith  Balyn  smote  his 
pursuer,  who  fell  down  in  a  swoon.  The  castle  roof  and 
walls  broke  and  caved  in.  Merlin  appeared  and  pro- 
phesied that  the  King  Pellehan  would  remain  sorely 
wounded  for  many  years — that  is  to  say,  until  Galahad 
healed  him  in  the  Quest  of  the  Holy  Graal.  Merlin  said 
also  that  there  was  preserved  in  the  castle  a  part  of  the 
Precious  Blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  Joseph 
of  Arimathaea  had  brought  into  this  land,  while  the 
spear  was  that  of  Longinus,  and  the  king  himself  was 
nearly  of  Joseph's  kindred.  Balyn  rode  subsequently 
through  fair  lands  and  cities,  of  which  many  inhabitants 
were  slain  on  all  sides,  while  those  who  remained  cried 
out  piteously  against  him.  Such  was  the  visitation  of 
the  Graal — a  strange  and  unheard  of  enchantment.  The 
story  continues,  multiplying  dole  and  doom,  with  greater 
doom  foretold,  till  the  two  brethren,  Balyn  and  Balan, 
destroy  one  another  unwittingly — truly  adventurous  times, 
from  which  all  might  pray  to  be  delivered. 

The  opening  incidents  of  this  story  are  found  in  the 
Chevalier  aux  deux  epeesy  and,  so  far  as  these  are  concerned, 
it  may  have  drawn  from  some  unknown  source  which  is 
common  to  both.  On  the  other  hand,  the  passing  of 
Merlin  through  the  arts  of  Vivien  or  Nivienne,  that  Lady 
of  the  Lake  who  was  the  foster-mother  of  Lancelot, 
owes  something  to  the  great  romance  which  is  concerned 
with  his  story.  When  of  his  entombment  the  story 
ceases  to  speak,  it  promises  henceforth  to  be  concerned 
with  the  Graal  only,  but  in  the  imperfect  state  that  we 
possess  the  text  it  ceases  to  speak  at  all.  As  a  final 
word  on  my  own  part,  the  fact  may  be  cited  that  the 
Knight  Pelleas  is  said  to  be  one  of  great  worship,  and 
one  also  of  those  four  who  achieved  the  Holy  Graal.  It 
follows  herefrom  that  the  missing  Quest  of  the  Huth 
Merlin  had  grave  variations  from  that  with  which  we  are 

329 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

acquainted,  because  it  is  not  to  be  assumed  that  he  was 
one  of  the  nine  knights,  mostly  unknown,  who  presented 
themselves,  demanding  and  receiving  admission,  in  the 
Graal  Castle  at  the  term  of  the  Holy  Quest. 


THE  GREAT  PROSE  LANCELOT 

By  many  ways  do  all  the  antecedent  texts  of  the  Greater 
Chronicles  lead  up,  in  the  hands  of  their  editors,  to  the 
romance  of  Lancelot.  Therefrom,  or  therein,  all  reflect, 
according  to  their  respective  measures,  and  itself  is  the 
great  text  which  goes  before  the  romance  of  Galahad,  as 
a  royal  prince  may  herald  the  king  of  all.  The  prototype 
of  the  story  in  respect  of  early  Graal  history  is  the  Book 
of  the  Holy  Graal^  but  some  of  its  references  have  no 
authority  in  that  document.  In  comparison  with  its  vast 
extent,  the  allusions  to  the  Sacred  Vessel  are  rare  and 
brief.  I  will  take  all  the  necessary  points  in  their  order, 
beginning  with  two  pregnant  statements,  the  first  of  which 
is  conclusive  as  to  the  historical  source,  for  it  is  said  that 
the  Holy  Graal  was  that  Dish  in  which  Christ  ate  the 
Paschal  Lamb  with  His  disciples.  But  the  story  is  late 
chronologically  in  the  sequence ;  it  reflected  much ;  its 
ambition  was  to  include  all  Arthurian  chivalry  in  its  pro- 
vince ;  and  none  knew  better  than  the  successive  authors, 
who  are  thought  to  have  welded  it  into  one  whole,  that  the 
true  service  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  took  place  at  no  festival 
of  earthly  meats,  but  at  an  arch-natural  mass.  It  is  haunted 
therefore  with  the  same  idea  as  we  shall  find  in  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval^th&t  what  besides  it  was,  the  Graal  was  also 
a  chalice,  and  it  is  so  described  accordingly  in  one  of  the 
later  branches.  In  evidence  of  this  it  may  be  noted  that 
it  is  apparently  the  dove's  censer  in  the  story  of  Lancelot 
which  brings  the  good  meat  and  drink.  The  second 
statement  occurs  in  a  printed  codex,  and  scholarship,  which 

330 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

misses  so  little  within  its  own  province,  has  somehow  over- 
looked this  :  the  book  says,  however,  that  the  natural 
Graal  is  to  be  distinguished  from  that  which  is  super- 
natural, and  this  I  take  to  mean  that  on  the  one  side 
there  is  the  festival  of  the  Feeding  Dish  and  on  the 
other  the  Feast  mystical  of  Transubstantiation,  at  the 
revelation  of  the  whole  mystery  in  the  Quest  of  Galahady 
foreshadowed,  as  a  thing  done  out  of  due  season,  at  the 
ordination  of  Joseph  II.  in  the  old  time  of  Sarras. 

It  will  not  be  found,  otherwise  than  as  I  have  here 
specified,  that  the  Graal  elements  differ  so  much  from 
the  earlier  versions  as  the  actuating  sentiments  regarding 
the  heroes  of  the  Quest  and  the  qualifications  thereto 
belonging.  A  certain  new  spirit  has  entered — perhaps 
even  a  higher  quality  of  the  secret  life  of  the  Church — 
and  it  has  moderated,  among  other  things,  the  final  aim 
regarding  the  Stewards  of  the  Graal  and  the  persons  with 
and  for  whom  it  is  represented  as  sojourning  on  earth. 
Speaking  of  the  romance  as  a  whole,  it  may  be  said  that 
it  is  a  Wonder-Book  rather  than  a  Book  of  Initiation, 
though  at  certain  points  it  embodies  very  high  mysteries. 
According  to  its  own  description,  it  is  a  branch  of  the 
great  book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  but  the  implied  reason  is 
that  Lancelot  was  the  father  of  Galahad.  Make  as  it 
may  for  confusion,  it  is  just  to  add  here  that,  in  this 
connection,  one  of  the  unprinted  manuscripts  speaks  of 
Perceval  as  the  leader  and  term  of  all  stories  told  about 
other  knights  ;  it  was  he  who  achieved  the  Great  Quest, 
but  his  story  also  is  a  branch  of  the  high  story  concerning 
the  Graal,  which  is  the  head  and  crown  of  all  stories. 
This  would  seem  to  indicate  that  Galahad  was  not  the 
final  hero  of  the  Quest,  so  far  as  this  codex  is  concerned, 
but  it  may  also  and  more  probably  mean  that  he  had  his 
own  great  place  at  the  last  consummation,  or  that  he  was  an 
intermediate  seeker,  as  were  Lancelot  also  and  Gawain. 

We  have  seen  in  the  Huth  Merlin,  firstly,  that  it  has 
allusions  to  various  occurrences  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad 
which  are  not  found  in  the  extant  romance,  and,  secondly, 

331 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

that  much  of  its  material  is  derived  from  the  Great  Prose 
Lancelot ;  so  also  in  this  text  there  are  references  to  the 
succeeding  branch  of  the  Quest  which  we  have  now  no 
means  of  checking,  but  they  are  not  identical  throughout 
with  those  in  the  Huth  Merlin.  It  is  said  (a]  that  the 
story  will  recur  in  this  part  to  the  Knight  Meliadus,  but 
we  hear  nothing  concerning  him ;  (^)  that  it  will  speak 
of  Helain  the  White,  who  became  Emperor  of  Constan- 
tinople, but  this  it  does  not  do ;  (^)  that  many  marvels 
concerning  the  Tower  of  Merlin  will  be  recounted  therein, 
but  we  hear  nothing  ;  (<^)  that  Orpheus,  a  certain  en- 
chanter, is  doomed  to  remain  in  the  Castle  of  the  Holy 
Graal,  with  two  snakes  about  his  neck,  until  the  Quest 
has  been  achieved,  but  he  is  forgotten  entirely  therein. 
These  items  may  be  contrasted  with  those  which  have 
been  specified  in  respect  of  the  Vulgate  and  the  Huth 
Merlin;  if  there  are  others,  as  a  more  exhaustive 
analysis  would  find,  and  this  assuredly,  I  believe  that  my 
purpose  has  been  served  within  the  measure  of  reason, 
and  I  will  turn  therefore  to  some  further  Graal  references 
found  in  the  Lancelot,  and  of  which  we  hear  otherwise. 

There  are  several  intimations  concerning  the  close  of 
the  adventurous  times  in  Great  Britain,  and  the  occu- 
pation of  the  Siege  Perilous  at  the  Round  Table ;  the 
commencement  of  these  times  was  on  the  occasion  of  the 
war  declared  by  Uther  Pendragon  against  King  Urien. 
There  is  also  a  certain  knight,  named  Elias,  who  carried 
two  swords,  after  the  manner  of  Balyn  ;  one  of  them 
was  enclosed  in  a  priceless  scabbard,  and  is  said  to  be 
that  in  the  old  days  which  pierced  the  loins  of  Joseph  of 
Arimathaea  and  was  broken  therein,  as  narrated  in  the 
Book  of  the  Holy  Graal.  It  was  destined  not  to  be  re- 
soldered  except  by  the  Lord  of  Chivalry,  who  was  to  put 
an  end  to  the  adventurous  times,  with  all  the  wonders 
and  mysteries  of  the  Holy  Vessel. 

A  few  other  points  will  be  best  taken  with  the 
personal  history  of  Lancelot,  though  it  is  not  within  my 
province  to  provide  a  formal  analysis  of  the  romance 

332 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

itself.  Lancelot  was  the  son  of  King  Ban  of  Benoic, 
and  his  mother  Helen  was  of  the  race  of  Joseph  of  Ari- 
mathaea,  through  whom  she  was  of  the  line  of  King  David. 
It  is  therefore  said  that,  through  his  mother,  Lancelot 
had  the  same  blood  in  his  veins  as  the  King  of  Heaven 
Himself  had  deigned  to  take. 

His  baptismal  name  was  Galahad,  and,  according  to 
the  Huth  Merlin,  Lancelot  was  that  which  he  received 
in  confirmation,  though  I  find  no  record  concerning 
this  sacrament  in  his  own  romance.  He  was  carried 
away  in  his  infancy  by  one  of  the  Ladies  of  the  Lake  ; 
she  is  really  that  Vivien  who  deceived  Merlin,  and  who, 
under  a  cloud  of  poetic  modernism,  is  familiar  to  the 
readers  of  Tennyson.  The  part  which  she  plays  through 
all  the  tale  of  chivalry  is  out  of  true  kinship  with  what 
we  have  been  disposed  to  conceive  as  she  is  pictured  in  the 
laureate's  glass  of  vision.  By  the  knowledge  which  she 
derived  from  Merlin  she  entered  that  unincorporated 
hierarchy  of  fairyland  of  which  we  hear  in  the  books  of 
chivalry  ;  she  became  a  fay-lady,  which  signifies  not  an 
extra-human  being  of  some  minor  or  elemental  order, 
but  a  woman  proficient  in  magic.  It  should  be  noted 
here  that  whereas,  in  the  ordinary  acceptation,  a  fairy 
may  correspond  either  to  male  or  female,  the  term 
is  never  used  in  the  Arthurian  books  except  with 
reference  to  a  woman.  For  example,  the  Fountain  of 
Fairies,  which  is  mentioned  Once  in  the  Lancelot,  received 
that  name  because  beautiful  unknown  ladies  had  been  seen 
thereat.  The  Lake  into  which  the  child  was  carried  was 
therefore  a  Lake  of  Magic,  concealing  from  public  view 
the  palace  or  manor  in  which  his  guardian  dwelt,  and 
the  great  park-land  about  it.  The  account  of  the  region 
within  this  water  of  enchantment  recalls  one  of  the 
romantic  episodes  in  the  Le  Roman  de  Jaufre,  and,  speaking 
generally,  there  are  distinct  analogies  between  this  com- 
paratively unknown  Provencal  poem  and  other  tales  of  the 
Round  Table. 

Lancelot  remained  in  the  charge  of  the  Lady  of  the 

333 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

Lake  until  he  was  eighteen.  About  this  period  she 
told  him  the  story  of  his  ancestor  Joseph,  and  also  of 
Joseph's  son,  the  first  Galahad,  who  became  the  King  of 
that  country  which  was  afterwards  called  Wales.  She 
referred  to  King  Pelles  of  Lytenoys  and  his  brother, 
a  second  and  later  Alain  le  Gros,  who  had  never  ceased 
to  maintain  themselves  in  high  honour  and  glory  before 
the  world  and  in  the  sight  of  God.  As  regards  his  own 
future  course,  she  told  him  that  he  was  called  to  carry  to 
their  term  many  wonderful  adventures,  while  those  which 
he  did  not  achieve  would  remain  over  for  a  knight  who 
was  yet  unborn,  that  is  to  say,  for  the  last  and  true 
Galahad.  But  of  the  Graal  she  did  not  tell  him,  though 
at  a  later  time  he  heard  of  the  tomb  of  Lucan,  connected 
with  a  house  of  religion,  wherein  was  buried  the  godson 
of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  who  was  once  charged  with  the 
guardianship  of  the  Sacred  Vessel.  The  Huth  Merlin 
says,  however,  that  it  was  a  granddaughter  of  the 
First  Keeper,  which  seems  to  accord  better  with  the 
general  tradition. 

Before  parting  with  Lancelot,  the  Lady  of  the  Lake 
gave  him  a  wand  or  ring — for  the  codices  differ — which 
had  the  power  of  dissolving  enchantments,  presumably 
other  than  her  own,  and  it  served  him  in  good  stead  at 
many  junctures.  Thus  equipped,  he  went  forth  into  the 
world,  followed  by  her  secret  providence,  and  repaired  to 
the  Court  of  King  Arthur,  where,  in  due  time,  he  was 
entered  as  a  Companion  of  the  Round  Table,  a  recep- 
tion which  was  characterised  by  considerable  ceremonial 
grandeur.  So  passed  he  into  the  world  of  chivalry, 
but  through  the  glory  of  his  after-life,  and  through  the 
scandal  of  his  unhappy,  over-measured,  too  faithful 
love,  we  have  no  call  to  follow  him.  Before  we  come — 
in  another  section — to  the  great  event  of  his  history, 
outside  these  particular  vocations,  there  are  only  three 
further  points  to  be  noted.  On  one  occasion  he  has  a 
vision  of  his  ancestors,  namely,  Nascien,  Celidoine,  the 
second  Nascien,  Alain  le  Gros  and  Jonas,  who  begot  the 

334 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

first  Lancelot,  who  was  himself  father  to  King  Ban  of 
Benoic ;  but  it  will  be  observed  that  this  is  on  the  male 
side,  and  is  therefore  without  prejudice  to  his  derivation 
on  the  mother's  side  from  the  radix  Jesse.  On  another 
occasion  Lancelot  visited  the  tomb  of  the  first  Galahad, 
King  of  Wales.  He  saw  also  the  burning  sepulchre  of 
Simeon,  and  spoke  with  that  victim  of  the  centuries, 
who  told  him  that  the  knight  who  should  deliver  him 
would  be  of  his  own  kindred,  and  as  nearly  as  possible 
the  very  flesh  of  Lancelot.  It  is  said  in  explanation 
that  Simeon  was  the  father  of  Moses  and  the  nephew  of 
Joseph,  all  which  is  in  opposition  to  Robert  de  Borron, 
though  it  reproduces  literally  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal. 
Moses  was  tormented  in  a  similar  tomb,  but  owing  to 
the  prayers  of  Lancelot  both  experienced  a  certain  miti- 
gation, and  their  delivery  in  thirty  years  was  insured 
further.  Lancelot  removed  the  body  of  the  first  Galahad, 
which  was  transported  to  Wales  and  reinterred  with  great 
honour.  The  third  point  concerns  the  visit  of  Gawain 
and  Hector  to  a  graveyard  which  they  are  counselled  not 
to  enter  unless  one  of  them  is  the  recreant  knight  whose 
evil  living  has  caused  him  to  forfeit  the  honour  of  achiev- 
ing the  adventures  of  the  Graal.  The  reference  is  to 
Lancelot,  and  the  graveyard  is  said  to  contain  Simeon, 
Canaan  and  the  twelve  brothers  whom  they  immolated. 
But  this  does  not  seem  to  correspond  with  the  previous 
account  of  Simeon's  tomb.  It  is  conclusive,  however,  as 
to  the  disqualification  of  Lancelot  for  the  Great  Quest. 
Had  he  never  loved  the  Queen,  he  would  not  have  be- 
gotten Galahad,  for  whom  no  office  would  have  remained, 
seeing  that  he  himself  was  the  exotic  flower  of  chivalry, 
palm  of  faith  and  cedar  of  purity.  But,  as  things  were, 
the  great  light  of  Lancelot  was  clouded  deeply,  nor  ever 
shone  freely  until  that  term  of  all  when  he  was  received 
into  the  priestly  sanctuary  of  the  official  church  and  was 
clothed  at  last  in  incense.  It  is  certain  that,  speaking 
generally  of  the  Greater  Chronicles,  there  was  no  true 
light  of  Gawain,  though  some  of  the  romances  issued 

335 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

from  the  ministry  of  Nature  have  pictured  him  in 
glowing  colours.  Subject  to  one  great  and  cryptic 
exception,  the  day  of  Chretien  and  Gautier  had  given 
way  to  the  day  of  the  prose  Lancelot,  and  Gawain  had 
been  stripped  of  nearly  all  his  graces,  a  process  first 
begun  in  the  Romance  of  Tristram.  Perhaps  it  may  be 
said  that  although  he  saw  something  according  to  the 
Conte  del  Graal^  therein  is  an  episode  of  personation,  on 
which  I  have  dwelt  shortly,  though  it  was  not  consciously 
to  the  hero  himself.  In  Heinrich's  poem  he  enters  only 
into  a  world  of  ghosts.  In  the  prose  Lancelot  he  is 
characterised  by  a  constitutional  incapacity,  to  which  the 
Galahad  Quest  adds  impenitence  in  evil-doing.  The 
picture  of  Sir  Bors  is  one  of  great  beauty,  but  it  does  not 
carry  with  it  any  particular  significance,  except  that  of  a 
witness  on  his  way  back  into  the  world.  Among  the 
Graal  heroes  we  are  therefore  reduced,  as  we  have  seen 
and  shall  otherwise  see  further,  to  Perceval  and  Galahad. 
Of  these  two  there  is  little  doubt  that  Perceval  was  the 
first  in  time,  or  that  in  a  certain  sense  Galahad  was  an 
afterthought.  I  use  the  expression  so  that  I  may  in- 
troduce the  more  probable  theory  that  this  elect  knight 
represents  a  later  but  exceedingly  express  intention,  as  if 
it  were  the  design  of  the  legend  to  say  that  a  day  would 
come  when  that  Arthurian  sacrament  of  which  I  have 
spoken  previously,  would  not  only  be  communicated  at 
last  to  the  world  without,  but  that  the  official  church  would 
receive  also,  on  its  knees,  acknowledging  that  there  are 
great  consecrations.  If,  without  seeming  too  fantastic,  I 
may  refer  to  an  old  symbol  which  has  no  special  con- 
nection with  the  present  order  of  ideas,  Galahad  is  like 
the  horn  of  the  quintessence  in  the  microcosmic  and 
alchemical  star,  and  the  four  other  horns  are  the  four 
aspects  of  the  symbolical  legend  of  Perceval,  being  (#) 
the  Didot  Perceval ;  (b)  the  Conte  del  Graal ;  (c]  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval;  and  (d)  the  Parsifal  of  Wolfram.  It 
does  no  real  outrage  to  the  order  of  time  if  I  say  that 
these  aspects  represent,  symbolically  speaking,  the  growth 

336 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

of  the  tradition.  The  Didot  Perceval  may  be  doubtless 
later  than  Chretien,  and  from  him  may  have  borrowed 
something,  but  the  two  texts  are  near  enough  in  time  to 
make  the  question  of  priority,  at  least  to  an  extent,  unim- 
portant. Let  me  endeavour  to  compare  for  a  moment 
the  intention  of  this  strange  pentagram  in  literature. 
Collectively  or  individually  its  documents  are  best  taken 
in  connection  one  with  another,  and  in  conjunction  also 
with  those  which  lead  up  to  them.  It  is  only  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval  which  stands  to  some  extent  alone  in  the 
Northern  French  cycle,  though  it  has  certain  connections 
with  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal.  In  the  German  cycle 
the  Parsifal  is  by  no  means  without  antecedents,  for  we 
can  trace  the  hand  of  Guiot  up  to  a  certain  point,  and 
we  can  trace  also  the  analogies  with  Chretien,  though 
Wolfram  scouted  his  version.  Finally,  we  have  the 
Galahad  legend,  as  if  the  closing  were  taken  in  a  super- 
lative grade  of  romance. 

As  in  the  Conte  del  Graal,  so  in  the  romance  of  Lance- 
lot, there  is  one  visit  paid  by  Gawain  to  the  Graal  Castle, 
and  it  begins  abruptly  with  an  adventure  at  a  pavilion  by 
a  certain  fountain.  Gawain,  who  is  the  actor-in-chief, 
reached  a  castle  subsequently  in  some  annex  or  quarter  of 
which  he  found  a  maiden  in  the  durance  of  a  scalding 
bath,  wherefrom  no  one  could  save  her  except  the  highest 
typical  example  of  earthly  knighthood.  Gawain  was  not 
Lancelot — for  whom  the  adventure  was  reserved — and 
he  failed  therefore,  for  which  he  was  promised  shame 
to  ensue  quickly.  He  was  received  with  pomp  in  the 
castle,  and  came  into  the  presence  of  the  king,  by  whom 
he  was  welcomed  after  the  true  manner  of  chivalry.  In 
a  word,  he  was  at  Corbenic,  the  Graal  Castle,  and  the 
herald  of  the  secret  ministry  entered  in  the  shape  of  a 
dove,  bearing  a  censer  in  its  beak.  This  vision  was 
momentary  only,  and  was  not  repeated,  but  it  served  as 
a  sign  for  the  company  to  take  their  seats  at  the  tables, 
and  this  was  followed  by  the  entrance  of  a  maiden — 
that  daughter,  fairest  among  women — who  carried  the 

337  Y 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

chalice  of  the  Graal,  in  her  passage  through  the  hall 
replenishing  the  dishes  and  filling  the  place  with  sweet 
odours.  After  what  manner  this  multiplication  of  loaves 
and  fishes  takes  place  does  not  appear — a  feature  which 
characterises  nearly  all  the  coincident  legends  of  this 
particular  type.  It  is  worth  a  passing  note  that  it  is 
perhaps  the  only  instance  in  which  the  Graal  bearer  is 
unaccompanied  entirely.  So  much  was  Gawain  bespelled 
by  the  maiden's  beauty  that  he  had  no  eyes  for  anything 
else.  She  departed  at  length,  and  he,  coming  to  himself, 
found  that,  for  some  fault  which  he  could  not  identify, 
he  only  was  left  without  refection  of  any  kind — even  as 
the  evil  livers  in  the  company  of  Joseph.  The  meal  pro- 
ceeded in  complete  silence,  and  was  disconsolate  enough 
for  the  hero,  who  already  began  to  feel  the  working  of 
that  shame  which  was  promised  him.  At  the  end  of 
the  supper  the  whole  company  departed,  still  without 
any  word,  and  a  dwarf — who  tried  to  chastise  him,  because 
of  his  presence  in  that  part  of  the  building — bade  him  at 
length  go  in  search  of  some  other  chamber,  where  no 
one  would  see  him.  He  remained,  however,  in  the  hall, 
and  there  had  a  certain  partial  vision  of  a  Graal  service. 
The  presence  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  healed  him  not  only  of 
a  grievous  wound  which  he  had  received  from  a  spear  a 
little  earlier  in  the  narrative,  but  also  of  various  hurts  in 
a  long  combat  with  an  unknown  knight  in  the  hall.  I 
omit  any  special  account  of  this  meeting,  except  that  here 
again  Gawain  was  attacked  because  he  refused  to  depart. 
I  omit  also  a  clumsy  parable  concerning  a  dragon  who 
gave  birth  to  a  vast  progeny  and  afterwards  strove  with 
a  leopard,  only  to  be  destroyed  in  the  end  by  her  own 
children,  who  likewise  perished  in  the  struggle.  In  a 
state  of  exhaustion  Gawain  at  length  fell  asleep,  and 
found  on  waking  in  the  morning  that  he  was  being 
drawn  through  the  public  streets  of  the  city  in  a  vile 
cart.  After  being  pelted  with  filth,  he  was  released 
ultimately,  and  arrived  at  the  hold  of  one  whom  men 
termed  the  Secret  Hermit.  From  him  he  ascertained 

338 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

that  he  had  been  at  the  Graal  Castle,  which  appears 
to  be  new  tidings ;  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  and  its  mys- 
teries he  learned  nothing,  though  it  was  foretold  that 
he  should  know  soon,  but  this  does  not  seem  to  come 
to  pass. 

Of  such  is  the  message  of  the  literature  as  it  moved 
towards  the  greater  heights  of  its  root-conception.  It 
should  be  added  that  whereas  in  the  prose  Lancelot 
Gawain  is  thus  covered  with  disdain,  the  romance  of 
Galahad  paints  him  in  darker  colours.  But  between  the 
one  and  the  other  I  propose  to  introduce  a  different  picture 
in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval.  Meanwhile,  I  do  not  know 
why  there  was  such  a  revulsion  of  feeling  in  respect  of 
one  who  in  certain  texts  appears  as  the  knight  of  earthly 
courtesy,  and  who  assuredly  in  the  Conte  del  Graal  is  not 
less  entitled  to  consideration  than  Perceval  himself. 

After  another  manner  is  it  dealt  to  another  knight, 
who  visited  the  castle  also,  but  he  was  the  diadem  of 
chivalry  which  at  that  time  had  been  exalted  in  the  world 
of  Logres.  By  this  I  mean  that  he  was  Lancelot,  and  he 
arrived  not  only  as  an  expected  guest,  but  as  one  whose 
advent  had  been  decreed  and  led  up  to  from  the  first 
times  of  the  mystery.  It  was  then  that  the  great  parable 
of  the  adventurous  times  passed  into  that  other  parable 
concerning  the  times  of  enchantment,  because  it  was  under- 
stood before  everything,  and  was  also  accepted,  that  the 
faith  of  King  Ban's  son  was  with  the  heart  of  the  Queen 
forever,  and  so  utterly  that,  in  the  sub-surface  mind  of 
romance,  it  had  even  moved  somewhere  as  if  towards  the 
sacramental  order ;  or  without  being  condoned  therein 
it  was  believed  to  have  carried  within  it  an  element  of 
redemption.  Dedicated  and  vowed  as  he  was,  no  other 
willing  union  was  possible ;  hence  therefore  the  office  of 
enchantment  to  bring  about  the  conception  of  Galahad 
by  the  daughter  of  the  House  of  the  Graal,  with  Lancelot 
as  the  morganatic  father,  thus  ensuring  the  genealogical 
legitimacy  of  the  last  recipient  of  the  mysteries. 

Of  this    conception    I    propose  to  speak   in  another 

339 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

section,  because  the  Lancelot  dissolves  into  the  Quest,  of 
which  the  first  condition  is  the  birth  of  Galahad. 


VI 

A  PREFACE   OR   INTRODUCTORT  PORTION 
APPERTAINING    TO  ALL    THE   QUESTS 

There  is  a  certain  sense  in  which  we  can  say  that  the 
knight  of  old  was  consecrated  like  the  priest  of  old,  and 
we  can  picture  the  whole  ceremony  as  if  it  were  included 
in  some  unwritten  part  of  the  Pontificate  Romanum.  The 
institution  of  chivalry  existed  for  a  particular  impression 
of  ecclesiastical  idealism  on  one  domain  of  the  life  in  the 
world.  It  was  as  if  it  were  the  outcome  of  some  unde- 
clared design  to  dedicate  even  warfare  to  the  high  ends 
of  the  Church,  as  if  the  implied  covenant  of  battle  were 
that  a  man  should  be  so  prepared  through  all  his  days 
that  no  sudden  and  violent  death  should  find  him  unfitted 
for  his  transit.  The  causes  of  strife  are  many,  and  some 
of  them  are  doubtful  enough,  but  so  clothed  in  the 
armour  of  salvation  the  natural-born  hero  experienced 
a  kind  of  rebirth  and  came  forth,  so  far  as  he  himself 
was  concerned,  a  soldier  of  the  cross.  One  section  at 
least  in  the  romantic  literature  of  chivalry  was  devoted 
to  this  ideal,  and  better  than  any  formal  catechism  of 
doctrine  and  conduct  did  it  uphold  the  authority  of  the 
Church  and  illustrate  the  principles  of  its  practice.  That 
section  was  the  quest  of  the  Holy  Graal  in  its  proper 
understanding,  and  on  the  authority  of  this  fact  I  can 
say  that  this  branch  became  a  search  after  high  sanctity 
expressed  in  the  form  of  romance ;  as  such  it  does  not 
differ  from  the  quest-in-chief  of  holiness.  It  has  been 
rendered  after  more  than  one  manner  out  of  the  con- 
secrated implicits  imbedded  in  consciousness,  as  if  this 
were  the  rare  and  secret  book  from  which  the  texts, 
almost  indifferently, claim  to  have  derived  their  knowledge, 
and  it  happens — for  our  greater  misdirection — that  some 

340 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

of  the  modes  of  transcript  are  like  F  rater  Pereclinus  de 
Faustis  in  the  old  mystery  of  salvation — that  is  to  say, 
they  are  far  from  the  goal. 

These  statements — which  are  introduced  like  an  inter- 
lude in  a  section  apart  and  as  if  extrajudical — will  sound 
strangely  in  the  ears  of  those  who  have  preceded  me,  and 
it  must  be  understood  that,  of  course,  I  am  speaking  of 
things  as  they  are  found  at  their  highest  in  the  great 
texts  ;  but  the  evidence  is  there  ;  it-  is  there  also  in  terms 
that  it  is  impossible  to  elude  and  impossible  also  to 
discount.  In  respect  of  the  Conte  del  Graal,  we  must 
surrender  to  Nature  the  things  which  are  Nature's ;  but 
the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  says  that  of  God  moveth  its 
High  History,  and  I  say  likewise — but  in  a  more  exalted 
degree  still — concerning  the  Quest  of  Galahad.  Were  it 
otherwise,  the  literature  of  the  Graal  would  be  like  the 
records  of  any  other  princes  of  this  world,  and  my  pre- 
dilections would  have  nothing  therein.  My  true  intent 
from  the  beginning  of  my  life  in  letters  has  been  for  the 
delight  of  the  soul  in  God,  and  I  have  not  consented 
with  my  heart  to  the  making  of  books  for  another  and 
lesser  end. 

It  was  only  by  slow  stages  that  the  course  of  the 
literature  rose  up  to  that  height  at  which  it  found  rather 
than  created  the  ideal  of  Galahad.  We  may  take  as  our 
most  obvious  illustration  of  the  developing  process  one 
crucial  point  which  characterises  the  Perceval  quests,  and 
this  is  the  loves  of  the  hero.  The  earlier  branches  of  the 
Conte  del  Graal  show  little  conscience  on  the  subject  of 
restraint,  the  deportment  of  the  hero  being  simply  a 
question  of  opportunity.  I  know  that  we  are  dealing 
with  a  period  when  the  natural  passions  were  condoned 
rather  easily,  though  the  Church  had  intervened  to  con- 
secrate the  rite  of  marriage  after  an  especial  manner. 
Hence  it  was  little  stigma  for  a  hero  of  chivalry  to  be 
born  out  of  lawful  wedlock,  or  to  beget  sons  of  desire 
who  would  shine  in  his  light  and  their  own  subsequently. 
The  ideal  of  virginity  remained,  all  this  notwith- 

341 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

standing,  so  that  the  makers  of  romance  knew  well 
enough  where  the  instituted  counsels  of  perfection  lay. 
It  is  comparatively  late  in  the  cycles  that  ascetic  purity 
became  an  indefectible  title  to  success  in  the  Quest  of  the 
Holy  Graal,  about  which  time  Gawain  and  Lancelot 
were  relegated  to  their  proper  places — ridicule  and  con- 
fusion, in  the  one  case,  and  final,  though  not  irreverent, 
disqualification  in  the  other. 

The  Didot  Perceval  offers  a  frigid  quality  of  abstin- 
ence, apart  from  either  sympathy  or  enlightenment,  and 
without  one  touch  of  grace  to  make  it  kindred  with  the 
ardours  and  solitudes  of  the  Divine  Life.  The  poem 
of  Gerbert  preserves  the  hero's  virginity  even  on  his 
marriage  night,  but  the  precaution — considering  the  texts 
which  he  had  elected  to  follow — has  the  aspect  of  a  leap 
in  the  dark.  Wolfram  insures  the  chastity  of  Perceval 
by  introducing  the  marriage  of  his  questing  knight  at  an 
early  stage.  The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  is  like  heaven, 
knowing  neither  marriage  nor  giving  in  marriage,  or  at 
least  nuptials  are  so  utterly  made  in  heaven  that  they 
are  not  reflected  on  earth.  Blanchefleur  has  disappeared 
entirely,  and  it  is  never  supposed  that  the  Quest  would 
be  achieved  in  perfection  by  one  who  was  not  a  virgin. 
If  we  turn  now  to  the  story  of  Galahad,  we  shall  find 
that  the  Quest  of  the  Holy  Graal  has  become  an  un- 
earthly experiment.  There  is  illumination,  there  is 
sanctity,  there  is  ecstasy,  and  the  greatest  of  these  is 
ecstasy,  because  it  is  the  term  of  the  others.  All  the 
high  researches  end  in  a  rapture,  and  thereby  is  that 
change  of  location  which  does  not  mean  passage  through 
space.  I  believe  that  the  author  of  the  Great  Quest 
knew  what  he  was  doing  when — leaving  nothing  outside— 
he  so  transmuted  all,  and  assuredly  in  the  order  of 
romance  he  spoke  as  no  man  had  spoken  before  him. 

Now,  seeing  that  all  subjects  bring  us  back  to  the  one 
subject ;  that  in  spite,  for  example,  of  any  scandalous 
histories,  every  official  congregation  returns  us  to  the 
one  official  Church ;  so,  at  whatever  point  we  may  begin, 

342 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

I  affirm  that  every  quest  takes  us  ultimately  to  that  of 
Galahad.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  this  is  the 
crown  of  all.  If  Galahad  had  come  in  the  good  time 
instead  of  in  the  evil,  the  Graal  would  have  been  set  up 
for  adoration  before  the  whole  face  of  Logres.  But  the 
Quest  says  that  the  world  was  not  worthy,  though  the 
Parsifal  seems  to  say  :  "  Behold,  I  am  with  you  always." 
Of  Perceval  and  his  great  experiment  there  are  several 
phases ;  but  this  is  the  lesser  Quest.  Of  Galahad  there 
is  one  phase  only,  led  up  to  by  many  romances,  but  re- 
presented in  fine  by  a  single  transcendent  text.  This  text 
is  the  quintessence  and  transmutation  of  everything, 
allocating  all  seekers — Perceval,  Bors,  Lancelot,  Gawain 
— to  their  proper  spheres,  over  whom  shines  Galahad  as 
an  exalted  horn  in  the  great  pentagram  of  chivalry.  Of 
the  Perceval  Quest  there  are  two  great  versions ;  one  of 
them,  as  I  have  already  noted,  is  an  alternative  conclusion 
to  the  cycle  of  the  Greater  Chronicles  ;  and  one — which 
is  the  German  Parsifal — all  antecedents  notwithstanding, 
is  something  set  apart  by  itself  in  a  peculiar  house  of 
mystery.  It  is  the  story  of  the  natural  man  taken 
gradually  to  the  heights.  There  is  also  a  third  quest,  that 
of  the  Didot  Perceval,  which,  amidst  many  insufficiences, 
is  important  for  several  reasons  after  its  own  manner— 
that  is  to  say,  because  of  its  genealogy.  The  fourth  is 
the  Conte  del  Graal,  and  this — apart  from  Gerbert — is  of 
no  importance  symbolically,  though  it  is  a  great  and 
powerful  talisman  of  archaic  poetry.  The  truth  is  that 
for  all  the  high  things  there  are  many  substitutes,  after 
the  manner  of  colourable  pretences,  and  many  transcripts, 
as  out  of  the  language  of  the  angels  into  that  of  man, 
after  the  same  way  that  the  great  external  churches  have 
expressed  the  mysteries  of  doctrine  in  words  of  one  syl- 
lable for  children  who  are  learning  to  read.  But  the  ab- 
solute and  direct  message  of  the  things  most  high,  coming 
in  the  name  of  these,  is  alone  commonly.  In  fine,  it 
sometimes  happens  that  as  from  any  corner  of  the  veil 
the  prepared  eyes  can  look  through  and  perceive  some- 

343 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

thing  of  the  immeasurable  region  which  lies  beyond 
the  common  faculties  of  sense,  so  there  are  mysteries  of 
books  which  are  in  no  way  sufficient  in  themselves,  but 
they  contain  the  elements  and  portents  concerning  all 
those  great  things  of  which  it  is  given  the  heart  to  con- 
ceive. Among  these  are  the  Graal  books  in  the  forms 
which  present  the  legend  at  its  highest. 


VII 
THE  LONGER  PROSE  PERCEVAL 

Amidst  much  that  is  dubious  and  belonging  to  the 
seeming  of  enchantment,  one  thing  is  certain — that  the 
Perceval  Quests  leave  behind  them  the  Graal  Castle  and 
that  nothing  is  taken  absolutely  away,  for  even  the  Conte 
del  Graal  presents  the  removal  of  the  Hallows  as  a  point 
of  speculation  rather  than  a  thing  of  certitude.  So  much 
is  true  also  of  the  only  Perceval  romance  in  the  Northern 
French  cycle  which  leans  towards  greatness.  I  have  given 
it  a  name  which  is  descriptive  rather  than  its  exact  title, 
for,  like  the  Conte,  it  is  Perceval  le  Gallois,  the  Perlesvaux 
for  modern  scholarship,  while  for  him  who  in  recent 
years  recreated  rather  than  rendered  it,  the  proper  desig- 
nation is  The  High  History  of  the  Holy  Graal.  By  its  own 
hypothesis,  it  is  based  upon  and  was  drawn  into  romance 
out  of  a  Latin  book,  said  to  have  been  written  by  Josephus, 
which  scribe  is  meant  possibly  to  be  Joseph  II.  of  the 
Book  of  the  Holy  Graal — that  first  priest  who  sacrificed 
the  Body  of  our  Lord.  So,  therefore,  as  the  Lesser 
Chronicles  derive  from  a  Secret  Book  allocated  to  the 
first  Joseph,  does  this  reflection  of  the  legends  which  are 
called  greater  draw  from  the  records  of  his  son.  But  the 
one  is  not  rendered  into  the  other,  for  the  other  derives 
from  the  one  many  points  of  reference  which  it  does  not 
set  forth  actually. 

The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  is  an  echo  of  many  texts, 
including  the  Conte  del  Graal,  and  of  things  unknown 

344 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

which  suggest  Guiot  de  Provence,  or  the  group  which 
is  covered  by  his  name.  It  would  seem  also  that  the 
author,  though  there  was  much  that  he  remembered, 
had  either  forgotten  not  a  few  episodes  of  the  antecedent 
legends,  or  alternatively  he  scouted  some  things  and  was 
bent  on  inventing  more.  We  have  seen  that,  according 
to  Gautier,  the  failure  of  Perceval  to  ask  the  vital  ques- 
tion involved  the  destruction  of  kingdoms,  but  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval  is  the  one  story  in  the  whole  cycle  which, 
firstly,  accounts  for  the  king's  languishment,  by  this 
failure,  as  the  sole  actuating  cause,  and,  secondly, 
represents  King  Fisherman  as  dying  in  the  middle  way 
of  the  narrative,  unconsoled  and  unhealed,  before  the 
word  of  power  is  spoken.  Further,  it  is  the  only  story 
which  describes  the  Secret  Sanctuary  as  the  Castle  of 
Souls,  or  which  specifies  an  evil  brother  of  King  Fisher- 
man under  the  title  of  the  King  of  Castle  Mortal, 
though  this  character  has  analogies  with  the  Klingsor 
of  Wolfram. 

There  is  little  need  to  speak  of  the  story  itself,  which 
is  available  to  every  one  in  the  best  of  all  possible  versions, 
but  it  should  be  understood  that  its  entire  action  is  sub- 
sequent to  the  first  visit  paid  by  Perceval  to  the  Graal 
Castle  and  the  consequent  suppression  of  the  Word.  In 
the  course  of  the  story  such  suppressions  are  several. 
For  example,  when  the  dismembered  pageant  of  the  Graal 
is  going  about  in  the  land,  a  certain  Damosel  of  the  Car 
wanders  from  place  to  place,  carrying  her  arm  slung  at 
her  neck  in  a  golden  stole,  and  lying  on  a  rich  pillow. 
Sir  Gawain,  who  meets  and  converses  w  h  her,  fails  to 
inquire  the  reason,  and  is  told  that  no  greater  care  will 
be  his  at  the  court  of  the  Rich  King  Fisherman.  That 
reason  is,  however,  explained  to  him  subsequently,  namely, 
that  she  was  the  bearer  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  on  the  occa- 
sion of  Perceval's  visit,  and  nothing  else  wi]]  she  carry  till 
she  returns  to  the  Holy  House.  It  will  be  seen  that  the 
romance  has  strange  vicarious  penances  besides  its  strange 
quests.  It  does  not  appear  why  the  Damosel  of  the  Car 

345 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

is  constrained  to  wander  on  account  of  Perceval's 
silence.  But  we  are  moving  throughout  the  narrative  in 
a  high  region  of  similitude,  and  although  it  is  concerned 
so  chiefly  with  the  perpetuation  of  a  mystery  which  is  so 
divine,  it  creates  no  secret  from  the  beginning  as  to  the 
nature  and  origin  of  that  mystery,  nor  does  it  fail  to 
make  plain  the  fact  of  the  mystical  significance  which 
underlies  many  of  its  episodes  and  adventures.  Some- 
times its  dealings  in  allegory  are  drawn  from  materials 
belonging  to  another  side  of  the  Graal  legend,  as  in  one 
reference  to  King  Pelles,  who  for  the  great  love  of  his 
Saviour  had  renounced  his  kingdom  and  entered  into  a 
hermitage.  It  is  said  that  his  son  Joseus  slew  his  own 
mother  at  a  certain  castle,  which  from  that  time  forward 
continued  burning,  burning,  and  it  is  testified  that  from 
this  hold  and  from  one  other  there  will  be  enkindled 
the  strong  flame  which  in  fine  shall  consume  the  world. 

Again,  there  are  many  intimations  concerning  the 
Earthly  Paradise,  which  lay  behind  the  Castle  of  the  Graal, 
showing  that  this  House  was  really  a  place  of  initiation— 
the  gate  of  something  that  was  beyond  it.  According  to 
Josephus,  the  soul  of  any  person  who  passed  through  the 
Castle  went  to  Paradise,  from  which  those  who  are  quali- 
fied may  infer  what  grades  of  initiation  were  conferred 
within  its  penetralia.  The  true  spiritual  place  was  there- 
fore not  at  Sarras — which  in  this  story  has  gone  utterly 
out  of  being — but  at  the  Graal  Castle,  though  before  the 
Earthly  Paradise  becomes  the  Home  of  Souls  it  must 
be  assumed  into  the  higher  Garden  of  Eden.  There  is 
another  facet  of  this  jewel  of  meaning  which  says  else- 
where that  the  Red  Cross  symbolises  the  redeeming  blood, 
meaning  that  it  is  the  tincture  of  the  Divine  Virtue  by 
which  the  tree  of  the  universal  disaster  becomes  the  Tree 
of  Life.  There  are  further  allusions  designed — as  one 
would  imagine — to  exhibit  the  proximity  of  this  world 
to  the  next,  and  it  happens  sometimes  that  one  side  of 
the  world  beyond  thus  realised  is  not  of  a  desirable  kind. 
Perceval  visits  a  certain  Castle  of  Copper,  which  is  a 

346 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

stronghold  of  evil  faith  and  an  abode  of  perverse  spirits. 
Beside  it  there  rages  a  water  called  the  River  of  Hell, 
which  plunges  and  ploughs  into  the  sea  with  a  fell  hiss- 
ing, so  that  it  is  a  place  of  danger  to  those  who  sail  by 
the  stars. 

The  story  has  many  questers,  and  he  who  attains  to 
the  Keepership  is  not  he  who  can  be  said  to  enter  the 
Mysteries  at  a  saving  time.  As  King  Arthur  is  accused 
at  the  beginning  of  falling  into  a  supine  state,  ceasing 
from  deeds  of  chivalry  and  scattering  the  flock  of  his 
knighthood,  so  a  certain  poetical  justice  is  done  to  him 
by  the  assignment  of  an  important  place  of  vision  in  the 
finding  of  the  Graal.  As  regards  the  questers  generally, 
prior  to  the  death  of  King  Fisherman,  the  latter  received 
a  visit  from  Gawain,  who,  in  accordance  with  the  prophecy 
uttered  by  the  Damosel  of  the  Car,  failed  in  his  turn  to 
ask  the  vital  question,  though  scarcely — as  the  romance 
confesses — through  his  own  fault,  for  at  the  sight  of  the 
Graal  and  the  Lance  he  fell  into  an  ecstasy,  and,  for  the 
first  and  only  time  recorded  of  him  in  all  the  literature, 
the  thought  of  God  overflowed  his  whole  consciousness. 
Lancelot  also  visited  the  Castle  prior  to  the  King's  death, 
but  there  was  no  manifestation  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  on 
this  occasion,  because  of  that  which  had  been  and  was 
between  him  and  Arthur's  royal  consort,  the  reason 
apparently  being  less  on  account  of  the  past  than  of  his 
long  impenitence  in  the  heart.  By  the  evidence  of  several 
texts  Gawain  also  had  led  an  evil  life,  but  at  least  for  the 
purposes  of  the  Quest  he  had  here  put  it  from  him  in 
confession.  It  is  just  to  add  that  the  exalted  legend  of 
Galahad  is  not  so  severe  upon  Lancelot,  permitting  him 
to  see  all  save  the  inmost  heart  of  the  mystery.  For  such 
a  measure  of  success  as  inhered  in  his  presence  and  vision 
at  the  Graal  Castle,  Gawain  was  indebted  to  the  prowess 
by  which,  as  a  preliminary  condition,  he  was  enabled  to 
wrest  from  an  unlawful  custodian  the  Sword  of  St.  John 
the  Baptist.  Speaking  generally,  he  was  the  favoured 
recipient  of  many  episodical  mysteries  in  this  romance,  to 

347 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

each  one  of  which  a  suitable  interpretation  is  allocated ; 
in  one  case  his  adventures  proved  to  be  an  excursion  into 
the  mystical  domain  of  the  Fall  of  Adam  and  that  of  the 
scheme  of  Redemption ;  in  another  he  beheld  three 
maidens  grouped  about  a  fountain  who  dissolved  ulti- 
mately into  a  single  maiden,  as  though  they  were 
another  symbol  of  the  Holy  Trinity  and  the  superinces- 
sion  of  the  three  Divine  Persons.  If,  this  notwithstand- 
ing, he  was  allotted  no  better  success  than  Perceval  on 
his  first  visit,  he  learned  much,  and  more  indeed  than 
he  was  qualified  to  understand  fully. 

The  High  Quest  is  dolorous  enough  in  its  conse- 
quences even  to  worthy  heroes  and  others  illustrious  who 
undertake  it  without  indubitable  election.  The  realm  of 
Arthur  was  left  sufficiently  discounselled  when  he  set 
forth  on  that  great  errand  ;  he  suffered  even  the  death  of 
his  Queen,  in  defiance  of  the  whole  tradition  of  the  cycle. 
He  is  a  pathetic  and  haunting  figure  moving  through  the 
pageant  of  that  one  romance  which  has  enrolled  him 
among  the  Knights  of  Quest,  and  though  he  saw  the 
Graal  in  its  processional  travels  when  it  was  uplifted  like 
a  monstrance  over  the  world  of  Logres,  he  did  not  reach 
the  Castle  till  after  the  second  entry  of  Perceval,  as 
another  king  in  warfare,  had  been  ratified  by  the  return 
of  the  Hallows.  Then  he  was  welcomed  by  Perceval  and 
was  led  into  the  presence  of  the  Graal,  or  at  least  into  the 
chapel  where  it  abode  and  was  accustomed  to  appear  at 
the  serving  of  the  Mass.  It  is  at  this  point  that  the 
mystery  of  the  subject  deepens  and  that  he  is  said  to 
have  beheld  the  five  changes,  corresponding  to  the  five 
wounds  which  Christ  received  upon  the  Cross.  But  the 
vision  had  a  more  withdrawn  meaning,  which  is  held  in 
utter  reserve,  because  it  is  the  secret  of  the  sacrament.  It 
was  through  his  experiences  in  the  Hidden  House  that 
Arthur,  on  his  return  to  Cardoil,  was  enabled  to  furnish, 
as  we  are  told,  the  true  pattern  for  Eucharistic  chalices, 
previously  unknown  in  his  kingdom,  and,  in  like  manner, 
of  bells  for  church  offices. 

348 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

It  is  possible  scarcely  to  say  that  the  numerous  allusions 
to  the  Sacred  Vessel  tend  to  the  increase  of  our  know- 
ledge on  the  descriptive  side  of  the  object,  but  on  that 
which  may  be  called  historical  there  is  ample  evidence 
that  the  story  draws  from  some  form  of  The  Book  of  the 
Holy  Graal,  while  its  specific  additions  and  extensions  do 
not  distract  its  harmony  in  respect  of  this  source.  It  is 
clear  from  several  statements  that  there  is  to  be  no  rest 
in  the  land  until  the  Graal  has  been  achieved,  but  the 
tremor  of  adventure  and  enchantment  which  stirs  Logres 
in  its  dream  is  not  characterised  clearly  by  either  of 
those  diagnoses  which  are  found  in  the  Greater  or  Lesser 
Chronicles.  Prior  to  the  first  arrival  of  Perceval,  and 
during  his  keepership  subsequently,  those  maidens  and 
holy  hermits  who,  in  one  or  another  way,  have  been 
concerned  with  the  Graal  service  have  a  devotional 
refuge  therein  which  carries  with  it  a  species  of  youth 
renewal.  Yet  the  vessel  itself  still  lies  under  a  certain 
cloud  of  mystery,  and  during  the  period  of  research  there 
is  no  man,  however  well  he  may  be  acquainted  himself 
therewith,  who  can  instruct  another  in  the  quest  or  in 
the  attainment  of  the  Castle  of  Desire.  The  will  of  God 
alone  can  lead  the  seeker. 

Though  encompassed  by  sacramental  protections,  the 
Graal  and  its  companion  Hallows  were  not  without 
danger  from  the  assaults  of  workers  of  evil.  We  learn 
early  in  the  story  that  King  Fisherman  is  challenged 
by  the  King  of  Castle  Mortal  in  respect  of  the  Graal 
and  Lance.  The  fact  of  this  claim  and  the  partial 
success  which  follows  it  constitutes  a  departure  from 
the  tradition  of  the  whole  French  cycle,  in  so  far  as 
it  is  now  extant ;  but  we  shall  meet  with  its  corre- 
spondences in  the  German  cycle,  and  shall  find  that,  as 
they  do  not  derive  from  one  another,  they  are  branches 
with  a  common  root  which  lies  beneath  the  surface  of 
the  literature.  The  King  of  Castle  Mortal  is  described 
as  he  who  sold  God  for  money ;  but  although  there  is  a 
full  account  of  the  evil  ruler  taking  possession  of  the 

349 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Graal  Castle,  we  know  nothing  of  his  antecedent  life, 
except  that  he  was  a  brother  of  him  who  was  sealed  with 
sanctity  and  the  rightful  custodian  therefore  of  the 
sacred  objects.  It  follows  from  this  that  he  was  reared, 
so  to  speak,  in  the  sanctuary  and  must  have  either  be- 
trayed the  sanctuary  or  have  been  cast  out  therefrom. 
The  usurpation  takes  place  after  the  death  of  King 
Fisherman,  which  seems  to  have  created  the  opportunity  ; 
but  when  the  enemy  of  the  Laws  of  Light  entered  into 
the  place  of  God,  the  Chapel  of  the  Holy  Graal  was 
emptied  of  its  Hallows,  which  were  taken  into  deeper 
retreat.  The  sanctuary  was  not  destined,  however,  to 
remain  under  the  powers  of  the  darkness,  and  as  in  the 
other  romances  Perceval  returns  in  fine  to  ask  the 
postponed  question ;  as  by  so  doing  he  restores  health 
to  the  King  and  joy  to  the  Hidden  House  ;  so  here 
he  visits  the  usurper  with  arms  of  the  body,  arms  of 
the  soul  in  purity,  invincible  arms  of  grace,  and  by 
his  conquest  of  the  Castle  he  reads  himself  into  the 
Kingdom,  while  the  self-destruction  of  the  false  King 
follows  on  that  victory.  The  Hallows  are  then  restored, 
though  the  witness  does  not  say  whether  by  hands  of 
men,  hands  of  angels,  or  borne  by  the  wind  of  the  Spirit. 
The  sepulchre  of  King  Fisherman  was  before  the  altar, 
and  it  was  covered  with  the  jewelled  tabernacle,  which 
seems  to  have  been  moved  by  a  miracle. 

Perceval  abode  in  the  Castle,  except  in  so  far  as  his 
toilsome  life  called  him  temporarily  away,  and  there 
also  were  his  mother — who  did  not  die  at  the  beginning 
of  his  adventures,  as  in  several  of  the  other  texts — and 
his  virgin  sister,  till  they  were  called  at  length  from 
earth.  The  call  came  also  to  Perceval,  but  not  in  the 
guise  of  death.  He  was  instructed,  as  we  have  seen  in 
another  branch  of  our  inquest,  to  divide  the  Hallows 
between  certain  hermits  who  possessed  the  "  building 
word"  for  churches  of  all  things  holy  and  houses  dedicated 
to  sanctity.  From  this  it  follows  that  the  Graal  in  this 
story  may  not  in  reality  depart,  but  is  removed  and 

350 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

remains — as  it  would  seem — in  some  undeclared  sanctuary 
of  Britain.  Perceval  was  not  instructed,  and  made  no 
disposition  in  respect  of  his  kingdom  or  the  Castle,  for 
there  began  the  ringing  of  certain  joyful  bells,  as  if  for  a 
bridal.  Into  the  harbour  there  entered  a  ship  with  white 
sails  emblazoned  with  the  Red  Cross,  and  therein  was  a 
fair,  priestly  company,  robed  for  the  celebration  of  Mass. 
The  anchor  was  cast,  and  the  company  went  to  pray  in 
the  Chapel  of  the  Holy  Graal,  bearing  with  them  glorious 
vessels  of  gold  and  silver,  as  if  on  the  removal  of  those 
things  which  were  without  price  in  the  order  of  the 
spirit  there  were  left,  as  a  sign  of  goodwill,  the  external 
offerings  of  precious  metals  of  this  world.  Perceval 
took  leave  of  his  household  and  entered  the  ship, 
followed  by  those  whose  high  presence  made  his  de- 
parture a  pageant.  It  is  said,  thereupon,  that  the  Graal 
would  appear  no  more  in  the  Chapel  or  Castle,  but 
that  Perceval  would  know  well  the  place  where  it 
would  be. 

There  can  be  no  question  that  in  spite  of  several 
discrepancies  this  version  of  the  Quest  is  the  most  signi- 
ficant of  all  its  renderings  into  the  fair  language  of 
romance,  that  being  excepted  only  which  is  the  exalted 
Quest  of  all.  I  record  in  conclusion  as  follows : 
(i)  That  there  is  no  genealogy  given  of  the  Graal 
Keeper  ;  (2)  that  among  the  discrepancies,  or  as  some- 
thing that  is  out  of  reason,  there  must  be  included  the 
allocation  of  the  King's  illness  to  the  paralysed  inqui- 
sition of  Perceval ;  (3)  that  so  far  as  enchantments 
of  Britain  are  mentioned  in  this  text,  the  Longer  Prose 
Perceval  draws  a  certain  reflection  from  the  Lesser 
Chronicles ;  (4)  that  the  final  abrogation  of  the  question 
through  the  King's  death  in  misease,  and  the  winning 
of  the  Graal  by  the  chance  of  war,  are  things  which 
place  this  branch  of  the  Graal  literature  apart  from  all 
other  branches;  (5)  accepting  the  judgment  of  scholar- 
ship that  the  Mabinogi  of  Peredur  and  the  English  Syr 
Percyvelle  are  the  last  reflections  of  some  primeval  non- 
351 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Christian  quest,  before  all  marriage  with  the  Graal,  it 
is  desirable  to  note  that  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  shares 
with  them  one  characteristic  in  common,  that  in  none  of 
them  is  the  question  asked  ;  and  late  though  it  be  other- 
wise, as  those  texts  are  late,  this  also  seems  to  embody  a 
primitive  element.  I  should  mention  further  that  the 
shield  borne  by  Perceval  is  said  to  have  been  the  shield 
of  that  Joseph  who  "  took  down  the  Saviour  of  the  world 
from  hanging  on  the  rood,"  and  that  Joseph  set  in  the 
boss  thereof  a  relic  of  the  Precious  Blood  and  a  piece  of 
our  Lord's  garment.  It  seems  obvious  that  this  is  a  re- 
flection from  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  concerning  the 
shield  of  Evalach,  but  this  was  reserved  for  Galahad. 
And  in  fine,  as  regards  the  question,  with  all  that  followed 
in  respect  of  the  King's  languishment,  it  should  be  noted 
— as  a  suggestion  of  deeper  mystery  behind  one  unac- 
countable mystery — that,  on  the  evidence  of  King  Fisher 
himself,  he  would  have  been  whole  of  his  limbs  and  his 
body,  had  he  known  that  the  visitor  at  the  Graal  Castle 
was  Perceval,  and  his  own  nephew. 


VIII 
THE  QUEST  OF  THE  HIGH  PRINCE 

Having  passed  through  many  initiations,  I  can  say  with 
the  sincerity  which  comes  of  full  knowledge  that  the 
Graal  legend,  ritually  and  ceremonially  presented,  is  the 
greatest  of  all  which  lies  beyond  the  known  borders  of 
the  instituted  mysteries.  But  it  is  exalted  in  a  place  of 
understanding  of  which  no  one  can  speak  in  public,  not 
only  because  of  certain  seals  placed  upon  the  sanctuary, 
but  more  especially,  in  the  last  resource,  because  there 
are  no  listeners.  I  know,  however,  and  can  say  that  the 
Cup  appears ;  I  know  that  it  is  the  Graal  cup ;  and  the 
wonders  of  its  manifestation  in  romance  are  not  so  far 
removed  from  the  high  things  which  it  symbolises, 

352 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

whence  it  follows  that  the  same  story  is  told  everywhere. 
It  is  in  this  way  that  on  these  subjects  we  may  make  up 
our  minds  to  say  new  things,  but  we  say  only  those  which 
are  old,  because  it  would  seem  that  there  are  no  others. 
If  Guiot  de  Provence  ever  affirmed  that  the  Graal  legend 
was  first  written  in  the  starry  heavens,  he  testified  to  that 
which  is  the  shadow  of  the  truth,  or  more  properly  its 
bright  reflection. 

Let  us  now  set  before  our  minds  the  image  of  the 
Graal  Castle,  having  a  local  habitation  and  a  name  on 
the  mountain-side  of  Corbenic.  The  inhabitant-in-chief 
of  this  sanctuary  is  the  Keeper  of  the  Hallows,  holding 
by  lineal  descent  from  the  first  times  of  the  mystery. 
This  is  the  noble  King  Pelles,  behind  whom  is  that  un- 
declared type  of  the  consecrated  royalty  which  was — the 
maimed  King  Pellehan,  whose  hurt  has  to  be  healed  by 
Galahad.  The  maiden  who  carries  the  Sacred  Vessel  in 
the  pageant  of  the  ceremonial  rite  is  the  reigning  king's 
daughter,  the  virgo  intacta  Helayne.  To  the  Castle  on  a 
certain  occasion  there  comes  the  Knight  Lancelot,  who  is 
the  son  of  King  Ban  of  Benoic,  while  his  mother  Helen  is 
issued  from  the  race  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  and  through 
him  is  of  the  line  of  King  David.  It  is  known  by  the 
Keeper  Pelles  that  to  bring  to  its  final  term  the  mystery  of 
the  Holy  Graal,  his  daughter  must  bear  a  child  to  Lancelot, 
and  this  is  accomplished  under  circumstances  of  enchant- 
ment which  seem  to  have  eliminated  from  the  maiden  all 
sense  of  earthly  passion.  It  cannot  be  said  that  this  was 
the  state  of  Lancelot,  who  believed  that  his  partner  in 
the  mystery  of  union  was  the  consort  of  Arthur  the 
King,  and  to  this  extent  the  sacramental  imagery  offers 
the  signs  of  failure.  In  the  case  of  Helayne  the  symbo- 
lism only  deflects  from  perfection  at  a  single  point,  which 
is  that  of  a  second  meeting  with  Lancelot  under  almost 
similar  circumstances.  I  must  not  specify  them  here, 
except  in  so  far  as  to  say  that  there  was  a  certain  in- 
cursion of  common  motive  into  that  which  belonged 
otherwise  to  the  sacramental  side  of  things,  so  far  as  she 

353  * 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

was  concerned.  I  can  imagine  nothing  in  the  whole 
course  of  literature  to  compare  with  the  renunciation  of 
this  maiden,  on  whom  the  pure  light  of  the  Graal  had 
fallen  for  seasons  and  years,  and  who  was  called  upon  by 
the  exigencies  of  the  Quest  to  make  that  sacrifice  which 
is  indicated  by  the  great  romance.  It  is  at  this  point 
that  the  Book  of  the  Knight  Lancelot  sets  aside  finally 
all  sense  of  triviality  and  is  assumed  into  the  Kingdom 
of  the  Mysteries. 

The  motherhood  of  King  Pelles'  daughter,  because  of 
her  consanguinity  with  the  mysteries,  of  which  she  is  an 
assistant-guardian  under  the  Hereditary  Keeper,  occurs 
as  the  result  of  an  intercourse  which  has  some  aspects  of 
a  magical  marriage,  and,  considering  all  its  circumstances, 
it  is  difficult  at  this  stage  to  speculate  about  all  that 
which  lies  behind  it.  We  may  almost  say  that  the  Lesser 
Mysteries  took  flesh  for  a  period  under  an  ordained  en- 
chantment and  were  ill  at  ease  in  their  envelope.  Having 
regard  to  Galahad's  election,  the  response  which  he  made 
thereto,  and  the  achievement  which  in  fine  crowned  it, 
the  manner  of  his  birth  is  no  longer  even  a  stain ;  it  is 
a  triviality,  the  sufficing  cause  of  which  removes  the 
suggestion  of  profanation  in  respect  of  the  Holy  Place 
which  by  that  unusual  conception  drew  to  the  term  of 
its  ministry.  I  can  understand  that  the  mind  unversed 
in  the  harmony  of  the  whole  scheme  may  think  that  the 
generation  of  Galahad  should  have  been  left  in  a  cloud  of 
uncertainty  and  himself  without  declared  father  or  mother, 
like  the  mystic  King  of  Salem.  We  have,  however,  to 
remember  that  what  we  now  term  bastardy  does  not  rank 
in  the  romances  exactly  as  a  stain  upon  origin  ;  it  is  almost 
a  conventional  mode  of  begetting  heroes-in-chief,  and 
that  which  obtains  for  Galahad  obtains  for  the  ideal  hero 
and  king  who  was  the  son  according  to  the  flesh  of  Uther 
Pendragon.  As  no  romances  ascribe  a  higher  importance 
to  chastity,  and  even  to  virginity,  than  the  Graal  legends, 
so — antecedently  at  least — their  writers  had  every  reason 
to  attach  its  proper  degree  of  value  to  the  pre-eminence 

354 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

and  sanctity  of  the  nuptial  bond ;  but  there  was  that  in 
the  antecedents  of  Lancelot  which  made  him  the  only 
possible  father  for  the  most  exotic  flower  of  chivalry 
who  was  the  predestined  Graal  winner,  but  at  the  same 
time  nothing  could  insure  that  possibility,  except  in  the 
absence  of  his  marriage. 

So,  therefore,  Galahad  is  begotten  in  the  fulness  of  time, 
and  over  all  connected  therewith  falls  suddenly  the  veil  of 
concealment.  Though  on  one  occasion  he  was  seen  as  a 
babe  by  Sir  Bors  in  the  Holy  Place,  we  do  not  know  certainly 
where  he  was  born  or  by  whom  nurtured ;  but  if  we  are 
guided  by  the  sequel,  as  it  follows  in  the  Great  Quest, 
it  was  probably  away  from  the  Graal  Castle  and  with 
mystic  nurses.  When  we  first  meet  him  he  is  among 
the  pageants  and  holy  places  of  the  mysteries  of  official 
religion.  Subsequently  he  is  led  towards  his  term  by 
one  who  seems  a  steward  of  other  mysteries,  and  when 
the  quest  begins  he  passes  at  once  into  the  world  of 
parable  and  symbol,  having  firstly  been  consecrated 
as  a  knight  by  his  own  father,  who  does  not  apparently 
know  him,  who  acts  under  the  direction  of  the  stewards, 
while  Galahad  dissembles  any  knowledge  that  he  might 
be  assumed  to  possess.  He  has  come,  so  far  as  we  can 
say,  out  of  the  hidden  places  of  the  King.  He  bears 
the  outward  signs  of  the  Mysteries,  and  has  an  imputed 
prescience  of  events  in  a  certain  chain  of  cause  and  effect. 
He  passes  through  adventures  as  a  man  passes  through 
visions,  and  he  has  many  combats,  but  they  are  chiefly  of 
such  an  order  that  the  alternative  title  of  the  Great  Quest 
might  well  be  the  Spiritual  Combat.  In  the  quests  which 
he  undertakes,  although  there  is  nominally  one  castle  in 
which  the  Graal  has  its  normal  abode,  it  is  yet  a  moving 
wonder,  and  a  studied  comparison  might  show  that  it  is 
more  closely  connected  with  the  Eucharistic  mystery  than 
it  is  according  to  the  other  romances,  the  Longer  Prose 
Perceval  excepted.  Still,  an  efficacious  mass  is  being  said 
everywhere  in  the  world.  The  Graal  is  more  especially 
the  secret  of  high  sanctity.  Galahad  himself  is  the 

355 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

mystery  of  spiritual  chivalry  exemplified  in  human  form  ; 
his  history  is  one  of  initiation,  and  his  term  is  to  see 
God.  As  compared  with  the  rest  of  the  literature, 
we  enter  in  his  legend  upon  new  ground,  and  are  on 
the  eminence  of  Mont  Salvatch  rather  than  among  the 
normal  offices  of  chivalry.  It  is  more  especially  this 
legend  which  is  regarded  by  scholarship  as  the  last  out- 
come of  the  ascetic  element  introduced  into  the  Graal 
cycle ;  but  it  is  not  understood  that  throughout  the 
period  of  the  middle  ages  the  mystic  life  manifested  only 
under  an  ascetic  aspect,  or  with  an  environment  of  that 
kind.  The  Galahad  romance  is  not  ascetic  after  the 
ordinary  way,  or  as  the  term  is  commonly  accepted ;  it 
has  an  interior  quality  which  places  it  above  that  degree, 
and  this  quality  is  the  open  sense  of  the  mystic  life.  But 
the  gate  of  the  mystic  life  is  assuredly  the  ascetic  gate, 
in  the  same  manner  that  the  normal  life  of  religion  has 
morality  as  the  door  thereof.  Those  who  have  talked 
of  asceticism  meant  in  reality  to  speak  of  the  super- 
natural life,  of  which  the  Galahad  romance  is  a  kind  of 
archetypal  picture.  Though  Wolfram,  on  the  authority 
of  Guiot,  may  have  told  what  he  called  the  true  story, 
that  story  was  never  recited  till  the  creation  of  the 
Galahad  legend.  The  atmosphere  of  the  romance  gives 
up  Galahad  as  the  natural  air  gives  up  the  vision  from 
beyond.  It  is  the  story  of  the  arch-natural  man  who 
comes  to  those  who  will  receive  him.  He  issues  from 
the  place  of  the  mystery  as  Lancelot  came  from  fairyland, 
or  at  least  a  world  of  enchantment.  The  atmosphere  is 
that  of  great  mysteries,  the  odour  that  of  the  sanctuary 
withdrawn  behind  the  Hallows  of  the  outward  Holy 
Places.  Galahad's  entire  life  is  bound  up  so  completely 
with  the  Quest  to  which  he  is  dedicated  that  apart  there- 
from he  can  scarcely  be  said  to  live.  The  desire  of  a 
certain  house  not  made  with  hands  has  so  eaten  him  up 
that  he  has  never  entered  the  precincts  of  the  halls  of 
passion.  He  is  indeed  faithful  and  true,  but  earthly 
attraction  is  foreign  to  him,  even  in  its  exaltation.  Even 

356 


The   Greater    Chronicles 

his  meetings  with  his  father  are  shadowy  and  not  of  this 
world — a  characteristic  which  seems  the  more  prominent 
when  he  is  the  better  fulfilling  what  would  be  under- 
stood by  his  filial  duty.  It  is  not  that  he  is  explicitly 
outside  the  sphere  of  sense  and  its  temptations,  but  that 
his  actuating  motives  are  of  the  transmuted  kind.  In 
proportion,  his  quest  is  of  the  unrealised  order ;  it  is  the 
working  of  a  mystery  within  the  place  of  a  mystery  ;  and 
it  is  in  comparison  therewith  that  we  may  understand 
the  deep  foreboding  which  fell  upon  the  heart  of  Arthur 
when  the  flower  of  his  wonderful  court  went  forth  to 
seek  the  Graal.  In  this  respect  the  old  legend  illustrates 
the  fact  that  many  are  called  but  few  are  chosen ;  and 
even  in  the  latter  class  it  is  only  the  rarest  flower  of  the 
mystic  chivalry  which  can  be  thought  of  as  chosen  among 
thousands.  Of  the  Perceval  Quest  there  are  many  ver- 
sions, but  of  Galahad  there  is  one  story  only.  So  are  the 
peers  of  the  Round  Table  a  great  company,  but  Galahad 
is  one.  So  also,  of  the  high  kings  and  princes,  there  are 
some  who  come  again,  and  of  such  is  the  royal  Arthur ; 
but  there  are  some  who  return  no  more,  and  of  these  is 
Galahad.  He  has  not  been  understood  even  by  great 
poets,  for  there  could  be  scarcely  a  worse  interpretation 
of  his  position  than  a  poem,  like  that  of  Tennyson,  in 
which  he  celebrates  his  strength  on  the  ground  that  his 
heart  is  pure.  Let  me  add,  in  conclusion  of  this  part, 
that  at  the  time  of  his  coming  the  Graal  went  about  in 
the  land,  looking  for  those  it  belonged  to,  and  that  in 
this  respect  Galahad  had  the  true  secret  of  Le  Moyen  de 
paruenir.  It  has  its  secret  place  of  abiding,  its  altar  of 
repose,  at  Corbenic,  the  Graal  Castle,  but  it  appears  at 
the  King's  court — and  this  is  exclusive  to  the  story.  The 
voice  of  the  Quest  passed  through  all  Britain,  in  part  by 
common  report — because  all  the  Arthurian  knighthood 
bound  itself  to  assume  the  task — but  in  part  also  by  the 
miracle  of  unknown  voices  and  of  holy  fore-knowledge. 
The  Graal  itself  is  not  the  official  sacrament,  or  it  is  that 
and  something  which  exceeds  it.  If  it  were  otherwise 

/-»    r  — • 

JO  / 


'The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

there  would  be  no  sense  in  the  declaration  made  by  a 
hermit  that  certain  knights  may  seek  but  shall  never  find 
it.  On  the  Eucharistic  side,  it  is  the  vision  of  Christ 
Himself,  and  the  mystery  of  Divine  Providence  is  mani- 
fested strangely  therein ;  it  works  through  faith,  repre- 
sented as  the  way  of  vision  and  the  gate  of  things  unseen. 
In  the  poem  of  De  Borron  and  other  early  versions,  the 
Sacred  Vessel  is  invisible — and  that  utterly — to  persons 
of  evil  life ;  but,  though  still  under  its  due  veils,  it  is 
shown  in  the  Quest  more  openly,  and  on  one  occasion 
even  to  all  who  are  present — good  knights  and  indifferent. 
The  vision  imposes  silence,  and  this  seems  to  have  been 
always  its  office,  but  it  is  that  kind  of  silence  which  comes 
about  by  the  mode  of  ecstasy,  and  in  the  case  of  Lancelot 
it  is  described  rather  fully,  as  if  there  were  a  particular 
intention  discernible  in  his  advancement  through  those 
grades  of  his  partial  initiation,  when  he  sees  without 
participating.  One  form  of  this  ecstasy  seems  to  be 
connected  with  the  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  But 
there  is  no  assurance  to  be  inferred  from  favour  to 
further  favour,  since,  on  another  occasion,  the  Graal  is 
invisible  to  Lancelot  when  it  is  seen  at  the  same  time 
and  in  the  same  place  by  a  company  of  white  knights. 

Of  such  is  the  Vessel  of  the  legend  and  as  regards 
the  search  after  it,  the  elect  knight  is  told  that  God 
entered  into  this  world  to  free  men  from  the  wearisome 
adventures  which  were  on  them  and  from  the  evil  belief. 
A  close  parallel  is  instituted  between  the  Knight  and 
Christ,  since  Galahad  came  to  terminate  the  adventurous 
and  evil  destinies  in  this  island  of  Britain.  For  this 
reason  he  is  likened  to  the  Son  of  the  High  Father,  who 
brought  souls  out  of  thrall,  and  even  a  demon  confesses 
to  him  as  the  way  of  truth. 

I  conceive  that  there  is  little  occasion  to  recite  the 
story  of  the  Quest  which  is  available  after  so  many 
manners  of  English  vesture  to  young  and  old  alike.  At 
the  Vigil  of  Pentecost,  Lancelot  was  carried  by  a  gentle- 
woman to  a  Holy  House,  where  he  was  required  to 

358 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

knight  the  son  of  his  own  body,  but,  as  we  have  seen, 
without  learning  his  name  or  recognising  him  after  any 
manner.  Galahad,  who  "  was  semely  and  demure  as  a 
dove,  with  all  maner  of  good  features,"  was  acquainted, 
undoubtedly,  with  his  geniture,  but  he  made  no  claim 
on  his  father.  After  this  mode,  at  the  beginning  of  his 
progress,  was  he  consecrated  by  the  secular  order  and 
received  into  the  degree  of  chivalry.  He  came  forth 
from  the  sacred  precincts,  being  a  convent  of  white 
nuns,  wherein  it  is  said  that  he  had  been  nourished,  and 
was  brought  to  the  Court  of  King  Arthur  by  "  a  good 
old  man  and  an  auncyent  clothed  al  in  whyte,"  who 
saluted  the  company  at  table  with  words  of  peace. 
Against  this  arrival  the  palace  had  been  prepared 
strangely  by  the  emblazonment  of  letters  of  gold  on  the 
Siege  Perilous — testifying  that  the  time  had  come  when 
it  should  be  at  length  occupied — and  by  the  appear- 
ance of  a  great  stone  in  the  river  outside,  with  a  sword 
embedded  therein,  which  none  present  could  withdraw. 
The  ancient  man  uplifted  the  draperies  of  the  chair,  and 
there  was  found  a  new  emblazonment :  <l  this  is  the 
sege  of  Galahalt  the  haute  prynce."  The  youth  is  seated 
accordingly,  as  a  prince  who  was  not  of  this  world,  and 
it  was  seen  that  he  was  clothed  in  red  arms,  though 
without  sword  or  shield.  But  he  had  begun  to  move 
amidst  enchantments ;  the  sword  implanted  in  the  stone 
was  to  him  predestined,  and  by  him  it  was  withdrawn, 
after  which  he  revealed  by  the  word  of  his  own  mouth 
that  it  was  that  weapon  wherewith  the  good  Knight 
Balyn  had  slain  Balan,  his  brother.  At  the  festival  which 
followed  this  episode  the  Graal,  under  its  proper  veils, 
appeared  in  the  hall,  illuminating  all  things  by  the  grace  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  imposing  that  sacred  silence — already 
mentioned — in  the  presence  of  the  Great  Mysteries.  As 
the  light  enlightened  them  spiritually,  and  to  each  up- 
lifted the  countenance  of  each  in  beauty,  so  the  sacred 
vision  fed  them  abundantly  in  their  bodies  ;  but  because 
of  those  draperies  which  shrouded  the  vessel,  the  great 

359 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

chivalry  vowed  to  go  in  quest  thereof,  that  they  might 
see  it  more  openly.  After  this  manner  began  the  mystic 
inquisition  which,  by  a  messenger  from  Nascien  the 
Hermit — who  was  the  early  Keeper  of  Galahad  according 
to  the  Vulgate  Merlin  and  the  recipient  of  those  revelations 
contained  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal — was  forbidden 
to  natural  women,  like  that  of  Masonry,  though  the 
ministers  of  the  Graal  were  maidens,  and  if  Masonry  had 
retained  its  secrets  in  conscious  memory  they  would  be 
served  by  women  who  were  virgins. 

The  first  adventures  of  Galahad  were  those  which 
befell  him  at  an  Abbey  of  white  monks,  when  he  who 
was  as  yet  without  shield  received  that  which  Joseph  II. 
gave  in  the  far  past  to  Evalach  that  he  might  prevail 
against  the  King  of  Egypt — that  also  which  Joseph 
crossed  with  his  blood  on  his  death-bed.  It  was  a  sign 
that  the  evil  adventures  would  be  ended  by  Galahad. 
Previously,  it  had  been  a  shield  perilous  to  all  who  used 
it,  because  it  was  predestined  to  one,  but  I  do  not 
find  that  it  had  a  special  office  in  the  later  part  of  the 
legend. 

Of  the  Graal  and  the  other  Hallows,  of  their  ministry 
and  mystery,  and  of  all  things  connected  therewith,  we 
have  heard  in  their  proper  sections  otherwise.  After 
what  manner  Lancelot,  Perceval  and  Bors  passed  through 
worlds  of  parable — as  through  places  of  purification— 
I  do  not  speak  here,  and  even  in  respect  of  the  High 
Prince,  I  am  concerned  only  in  so  far  as  his  story  com- 
pletes the  things  which  were  left  over  from  other  branches 
of  the  Greater  Chronicles  ;  the  healing  of  Mordrains,  the 
King — penitent  of  all  the  centuries;  the  release  of  Simeon  ; 
and  the  manumission  of  the  unfaithful  Moses.  But  of 
this  last  I  find  nothing  in  the  Quest.  As  regards  Simeon, 
the  abbey  which  was  visited  by  Lancelot  was  reached  by 
Galahad  towards  the  close  of  his  time  of  quest,  and  there 
he  beheld  a  burning  wood  in  a  croft  under  the  minster, 
but  the  "  flammynge  faylled,  and  the  fyre  staunched"  as 
he  drew  thereto,  and  there  paused  for  a  space.  The 

360 


The   Greater    Chronicles 

voice  of  Simeon  from  within  greeted  him  in  a  good  hour 
when  he  was  to  draw  a  soul  out  of  earthly  pain  into  the 
joy  of  Paradise.  It  said  also  that  he  who  spoke  was  of 
his  kindred,  and  that  for  three  hundred  and  fifty-four 
years  he  had  been  thus  purged  of  the  sin  which  he  had 
done  against  Joseph  of  Arimathaea.  Galahad  took  the 
body  in  his  arms,  bore  it  into  the  minster,  had  service 
said  over  it,  and  interred  it  before  the  high  altar.  Of 
such  was  the  rest  of  Simeon. 

It  was  at  another  abbey  that  he  came  upon  the  age- 
long vigil  of  King  Mordrains.  Galahad  had  the  hands 
of  healing,  and  seeing  that  he  was  born  in  the  sanctuary, 
it  may  be  said  that  in  this  romance  the  healing  comes 
from  within.  These  were  the  words  of  the  King : 
"  Galahad  the  seruant  of  Jhesu  Cryst  whos  comynge 
I  haue  abyden  soo  longe,  now  enbrace  me  &  lete  me 
reste  on  thy  breste,  so  that  I  may  reste  bitwene  thine 
armes,  for  thou  art  a  clene  vyrgyn  aboue  all  Knyghtes 
as  the  floure  of  the  lely,  in  whome  vyrgynyte  is  sygne- 
fyed,  &  thou  art  the  rose  the  whiche  is  the  floure  of  all 
good  vertues,  &  in  coloure  of  fyre.  For  the  fyre  of  the 
holy  ghoost  is  taken  so  in  thee  that  my  flesshe  which 
was  of  dede  oldnesse,  is  become  yong  ageyne."  When 
Galahad  heard  his  words,  he  covered  his  whole  body  in 
a  close  embrace,  in  which  position  the  King  prays  Christ 
to  visit  him,  wherein  and  whereafter  the  soul  departed 
from  his  body.  So  was  the  curious  impertinent,  who 
had  been  called  but  not  chosen  at  that  time,  after  his 
long  penance,  at  length  forgiven  the  offence,  and  was 
taken  into  the  great  peace,  fortified  with  all  Rites  of 
the  most  secret  and  Holy  Church  of  the  Hidden 
Graal. 

The  Ship  of  Solomon  had,  prior  to  these  episodes, 
conveyed  the  questing  knights — Galahad,  Perceval  and 
Bors — from  point  to  point  of  their  progress ;  it  had 
taken  Lancelot  a  certain  distance  in  his  son's  company, 
till  they  commended  each  other  to  God  for  the  rest  of 
their  mortal  life  ;  it  had  borne  the  sister  of  Perceval, 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

who  of  her  own  hair  and  of  silk,  combined  with  precious 
stones,  had  braided  the  true  and  proper  girdle  for  the 
Sword  of  David,  to  replace  the  mean  girdle  attached 
to  it  by  the  wife  of  Solomon.  But  she  had  yielded 
her  life  before  the  healing  and  passing  in  God  of  Mor- 
drains,  and  had  been  placed  by  her  proper  desire  in 
another  ship,  with  a  covenant  on  her  part  that  it  should 
meet  the  questers  at  Sarras,  when  the  Ship  of  Solomon 
brought  them  to  that  bourne  of  their  voyaging.  It  re- 
mained only  that  those  three  should  now  gather  at  Cor- 
benic  for  the  healing  of  the  maimed  King  Pellehan, 
about  whose  place  and  identity  we  have  seen  that  the 
text  offers  some  elements  of  minor  confusion.  This  is 
he  whom  we  must  suppose  to  have  received  the  Dolorous 
Stroke  at  the  hands  of  Balyn. 

As  the  path  of  quest  drew  towards  its  central  point,  the 
three,  who  had  traversed  various  converging  roads,  met, 
as  it  is  said,  at  travers,  knowing  that  the  adventures  of 
Logres  were  at  last  achieved.  They  entered  within  the 
Castle,  and  King  Pelles  greeted  them  with  great  joy.  In 
this  as  in  some  other  romances  grave  importance  is 
attached  to  resoldering  the  Broken  Sword,  and  that  which 
was  brought  by  Eleazer,  the  King's  son,  was  that  with 
which  Joseph  II.  was  once  stricken  through  the  thighs. 
It  was  set  perfectly  by  Galahad  when  the  others  had 
essayed  in  vain,  and  was  then  given  to  Bors,  as  a  good 
knight  and  a  worthy  man.  What  followed  thereon  was 
the  sustenance  of  the  elect  Graal  knights 'after  a  spiritual 
manner,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  general  assembly,  who 
were  dismissed  from  the  presence.  Those  who  remained 
were  three  and  three,  namely,  Galahad,  Perceval  and 
Bors,  for  the  first  triad  ;  King  Pelles,  his  son  Eleazar, 
and  a  maiden  who  was  the  King's  niece,  for  the  second 
triad.  To  these  were  joined  certain  pilgrims  who  were 
knights  also,  namely,  three  of  Gaul,  three  of  Ireland, 
and  three  of  Denmark.  Finally,  there  was  brought  in 
the  maimed  King,  and  thereon  a  voice  said  that  two 
of  those  who  were  present  did  not  belong  to  the  Quest, 

362 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

at  which  words  King  Pelles — although  he  was  the 
Keeper — rose  up  with  his  son  and  departed.  They  were, 
therefore,  thirteen  in  all,  and  one  of  these  was  a  woman, 
who  was  present  with  them  when  Joseph  of  Arimathaea, 
the  first  Bishop  of  Christendom,  came  down  with  angels 
from  heaven,  and  celebrated  an  arch-natural  Mass  in  the 
Holy  Place.  After  the  Kiss  of  Peace  given  to  Galahad, 
and  communicated  by  him  to  his  fellows,  the  celebrants 
dissolved,  but  out  of  the  Graal  itself  there  came  the 
Saviour  of  all,  with  the  signs  of  His  passion  upon  Him, 
and  communicated  to  them  all  in  the  Eucharist.  He  also 
vanished,  and  Galahad,  who  had  received  his  instructions, 
went  up  to  the  maimed  King  and  anointed  him  with  the 
blood  flowing  from  the  Hallowed  Spear.  Thereupon, 
he,  being  healed,  rose  up  and  gave  thanks  to  God.  It  is 
said  that,  in  the  sequel  of  time,  he  united  himself  to  a 
company  of  white  monks. 

"  Sir,"  said  Galahad  to  the  Great  Master  at  the  close 
of  the  Mysteries,  "  why  shalle  not  these  other  felawes 
goo  with  us  ? "  —that  is  to  say,  unto  Sarras,  the  reference 
being  to  the  nine  mysterious  knights.  The  answer 
hereto  was  significant :  "  For  this  cause :  for  ryght  as 
I  departed  my  postels,  one  here  and  another  there  soo  I 
will  that  ye  departe,  and  two  of  yow  shall  dye  in  my 
servyse,  but  one  of  you  shal  come  ageyne  and  telle 
tydynges."  So,  therefore,  the  company  of  the  adepts 
dissevered  ;  but  we  have  seen  how  Galahad,  Perceval 
and  Bors  were  carried  by  the  Ship  of  Solomon  to  Sarras, 
"in  the  p^rtyes  of  Babylone,"  called  an  island  in  the 
Quest.  There  met  them,  in  accordance  with  her  cove- 
nant, that  other  vessel,  which  carried  the  body  of 
Perceval's  most  holy  sister.  We  have  seen  also  how 
the  soul  of  Galahad  departed,  and  it  rests  only  to  say 
that  Perceval  died  in  a  hermitage,  but  Sir  Bors  returned 
to  Logres,  bearing  the  messages  of  his  brethren,  but 
especially  of  Galahad  to  his  father  :  "  And  whanne  he 
had  said  these  wordes  Galahad  went  to  Percyual  and 
kyssed  hym  &  commaunded  hym  to  God,  and  soo  he 

363 ' 


'The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

went  to  sire  Bors,  &  kyssed  hym,  and  commaunded  hym 
to  God,  and  sayde  :  Fayre  lord,  sale  we  me  to  my  lord 
syr  launcelot  my  fader.  And  as  soone  as  ye  see  hym, 
byd  hym  remember  of  this  unstable  world." 

The  bodies  of  Perceval  and  Galahad  were  buried  in 
the  spiritualities  of  Sarras,  which  may  have  been  in  some 
sense  a  city  of  initiation,  though  until  their  coming 
it  was  ruled  by  evil  rather  than  good.  It  was  not  the 
abiding  place,  but  that  of  the  final  trial  for  the  stewards 
of  the  Mystery,  and  at  first  they  were  imprisoned  therein  ; 
but  Galahad  was  afterwards  made  King.  The  Spear  was 
taken  into  heaven,  together  with  the  Holy  Vessel,  but 
Bors  returned — as  it  has  been  intimated — carrying  the 
re-soldered  Broken  Sword,  as  if  grace  had  been  removed, 
but  not  that  which  now  may  have  symbolised  the  coming 
destruction  of  the  Round  Table.  Of  the  Sword  of 
David  we  hear  nothing  further,  nor  do  we  know  what 
became  of  the  Ship  of  Solomon.  As  the  symbol  of  Faith, 
it  may  have  continued  voyaging,  but  on  other  considera- 
tions it  had  done  its  work :  there  was  no  reason  why  it 
should  remain  when  Galahad  had  gone. 

But  perhaps  the  saddest  mystery  of  all  is  the  end  of 
King  Pelles  himself,  and  how  it  fared  with  him  after 
the  departure  of  the  Graal.  It  will  be  seen  that  the 
Quest  versions  offer  many  alternatives,  but  there  is  one 
text  only  which  says  that  the  Hereditary  Keeper  was 
dispossessed  utterly  and  left  in  an  empty  sanctuary. 

We  have  now,  and  in  fine,  to  account  as  we  can  for  the 
great  disaster  of  the  whole  experiment.  The  earthly 
knighthood  undertakes,  in  despite  of  the  high  earthly 
king,  a  quest  to  which  it  is  in  a  sense  perhaps  called  but 
for  which  it  is  in  no  sense  chosen.  The  result,  as  I  have 
said,  is  that  the  chivalry  of  the  world  is  broken  and  the 
kingdom  is  destroyed,  while  the  object  of  all  research  is 
said  to  be  taken  away.  It  was  not,  therefore,  the  conceal- 
ment of  the  Sacred  Vessel,  but  its  manifestation  rather, 
which  brought  ruin  to  the  Round  Table.  It  went  about 
in  the  world  of  Logres,  and  the  ruin  followed,  because  the 

364 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

world  was  not  worthy.  In  a  certain  manner  it  is  the 
mystery  of  the  Graal  itself  which  gives  forth  Galahad  as 
its  own  manifestation,  in  the  order  of  the  visible  body,  and 
sends  him  on  designed  offices  of  healing,  with  a  warrant  to 
close  a  specific  cycle  of  times.  When  the  Graal  romances 
say  that  the  Sacred  Vessel  was  seen  no  more,  or  was  carried 
up  to  heaven,  they  do  not  mean  that  it  was  taken  away, 
in  the  sense  that  it  had  become  unattainable,  but  that  it 
was — as  some  of  them  say  also — in  concealment.  It  is 
certain  that  the  great  things  are  always  in  concealment, 
and  are  perhaps  the  more  hidden  in  proportion  to  their 
more  apparently  open  manifestation.  In  this  respect,  the 
distinction  between  the  natural  and  supernatural  Graal, 
which  is  made  by  the  prose  Lancelot,  has  a  side  of  highest 
value.  Let  us  reserve  for  a  moment  the  consideration 
of  the  Hallows  as  mere  relics,  and  in  so  far  as  the  Cup 
is  concerned,  let  us  remember  the  two  forms  of  sus- 
tenance which  it  offered  —  in  correspondence  closely 
enough  with  the  ideas  of  Nature  and  Grace.  It  should 
be  understood,  however,  that  between  the  mysteries 
themselves  there  is  a  certain  superincession,  and  so  also 
there  is  in  the  romances  what  the  light  heart  of  criticism 
regards  as  un  pen  confus,  namely,  some  disposition  to  talk 
of  the  one  office  in  the  terms  of  the  other.  At  the  same 
time  certain  romances  give  prominence  to  the  greater  and 
others  to  the  lesser  office. 


IX 

THE    WELSH  QUEST  OF  GALAHAD 

It  is  considered  that  this  translation,  which  is  referable 
to  the  early  part  of  the  fifteenth  century,  was  made  from 
another  codex  than  that  which  was  used  by  Malory  for 
the  Morte  a"  Arthur,  but  it  embodied  material  from  the 
Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  which  may  mean  that  the 
anonymous  author  of  the  rendering  was  either  the  com- 

365 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

piler  of  a  harmony  or  the  simple  translator  of  a  manu- 
script corresponding  to  the  texts  followed  by  Dr. 
Furnivall  in  his  edition  of  the  Quest.  At  the  same  time, 
outside  all  evidences  of  mistranslation,  the  Welsh  version 
of  the  Quest  itself  differs  unquestionably  in  several  par- 
ticulars from  all  codices  which  are  known  to  scholarship, 
and  it  seems  quite  certain  that  the  variations  are  not  those 
of  invention.  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  a  certain  slight 
attenuation  of  the  mystic  atmosphere,  though  the  general 
features  remain ;  for  example,  that  enhanced  knowledge 
of  one  another  which  is  attributed  to  the  knights  who 
saw  the  Holy  Vessel,  under  the  veils  thereof,  at  the 
King's  table,  is  unmentioned  in  the  Welsh  text.  Alter- 
natively, there  are  other  respects  in  which  there  is  an 
added  disposition  to  lean  on  the  spiritual  side  of  things, 
and  this  is  manifested  plainly  in  a  few  crucial  cases.  The 
Table  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  described  as  that  which 
fed  the  body  and  the  soul  with  heavenly  food,  while 
the  Graal  itself  is  said  to  provide  a  spiritual  nourish- 
ment, which  is  sent  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  him  who 
seeks  in  grace  to  sit  at  the  table  thereof.  The  close 
connection  between  the  Sacred  Vessel  and  the  office  of 
the  Divine  Spirit — which  is  so  evident  in  the  metrical 
romance  of  De  Borron — is  also  apparent,  and  one  who 
is  on  the  quest  is  told  that  by  falling  into  sin  he  will 
fail  to  see  that  Spirit,  even  as  Lancelot  failed.  Outside 
those  wanderings  of  the  Holy  Graal  which  are  recorded 
in  the  French  texts,  there  are  references  to  its  mani- 
festation at  sundry  places  in  Logres — or  there  more 
especially,  but  not  there  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other 
countries.  Finally  as  to  this  part,  I  recognise  a  note  of 
undeclared  mystery  as  regards  the  House  of  the  Hallows. 
There  was  the  permanent  shrine  of  the  Holy  Vessel,  but 
whether  it  was  visible  always  to  those  who  dwelt  within 
or  at  certain  times  and  seasons  is  not  apparent,  and  remains 
indeed  doubtful  on  the  evidence  of  all  the  literature.  It 
is  therefore  open  to  question  whether  it  was  the  daily 
nourishment  of  the  House,  or  whether  its  varied  ministry 

366 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

was  contingent  on  the  arrival  of  a  stranger  who  was  pre- 
pared so  far  sufficiently  that  he  was  admitted  within  the 
gates.  It  was  the  latter  probably,  because  Lancelot  rested 
there  for  four  days ;  but  it  was  not  until  the  fifth  day, 
and  then  in  the  midst  of  the  supper,  that  the  Graal  ap- 
peared and  filled  all  with  the  meats  most  loved  by  them. 

The  Welsh  Quest,  like  its  prototype  of  Northern 
France,  draws  then  from  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  but 
not  from  one  of  those  codices  with  which  we  have  been 
made  acquainted  so  far  by  the  pains  of  scholarship.  For 
example,  the  account  of  the  Second  Table  is  given  with 
specific  variations,  though  there  is  nothing  to  justify  their 
enumeration  in  this  place,  except  that  the  son  of  Joseph 
is  said  to  have  occupied  the  seat  which  corresponded  to 
that  of  Christ,  and  no  one  ventured  to  take  it  after  him. 
It  was  not  so  occupied  in  the  parent  historical  text,  and 
we  know,  of  course,  that  the  Siege  Perilous  in  other 
presentations  of  the  legend  is  that  of  Judas  Iscariot. 

What  appears  to  be  the  Dolorous  Stroke  in  the 
Welsh  Quest  is  exceedingly  involved,  but  the  account 
is  as  follows :  (#)  King  Lambor  was  father  of  the  Lame 
King,  and  was  at  war  with  King  Urlain,  formerly  a 
Saracen.  (£)  Lambor  was  forced  to  flight,  and  in  doing 
so  reached  the  seashore,  where  he  found  the  Ship  of 
Solomon.  (<:)  He  took  up  the  Sword  therein  and  smote 
Urlain,  so  that  he  and  his  horse  were  cut  in  two  pieces. 
This  occurred  in  England,  and  was  the  first  blow  that 
was  ever  given  with  the  weapon.  (^/)  The  King  who  was 
slain  is  said  to  have  been  so  holy  that  great  vengeance 
was  taken  by  God  for  that  blow,  (e)  In  neither  kingdom 
for  a  long  time  was  there  found  any  fruit,  everything 
being  dried  up,  so  that  the  land  is  called  to  this  day  the 
Decayed  Kingdom.  It  will  be  seen  that  this  is  in  direct 
contradiction  to  the  particulars  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal  concerning  the  death  of  Lambor,  the  keeper  at 
that  time  of  the  Sacred  Vessel.  It  follows  also  that  the 
story  of  Balyn  and  Balan  was  unknown  to  the  Welsh 
translator. 

36? 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

The  Lame  King  was  the  Uncle  of  Perceval,  and  so 
good  was  his  manner  of  living  that  his  like  could  not  be 
found  in  the  world.  One  day  he  was  hunting,  and  came 
to  the  seashore,  where  he  also  found  the  ship.  In  spite 
of  the  warning  written  therein,  he  entered  without  fear, 
and  drew  the  Sword  partly  from  the  scabbard.  He  was 
struck  by  a  spear  in  the  thigh,  and  was  maimed  from  that 
time  forward.  In  the  French  Quest  of  Galahad  this 
episode  is  attributed  to  King  Pelles. 

As  an  illustration  of  general  intention  prevailing 
through  the  Welsh  Quest,  a  hermit  reminds  Gawain  that 
the  dignity  of  knighthood  was  conferred  upon  him — 
among  other  things — for  the  defence  of  the  Church,  and 
as  this  specific  statement  is  part  only  of  the  general 
atmosphere  through  which  the  romance  moves,  it  is  itself 
an  eloquent  comment  on  the  alleged  underlying  hostility 
to  official  ecclesiasticism  which  is  sometimes  traced  in  the 
literature.  The  condition  of  Wales  at  the  time  of  the 
Quest,  as  it  is  depicted  in  the  Welsh  text,  is  not  an 
encouraging  report  regarding  the  last  stronghold  of  the 
Celtic  Church,  but  it  is  possible  that  the  worst  particulars 
are  things  which  the  translator  has  interpolated. 

Whether  in  their  agreement  or  variation,  the  details  of 
the  story  do  not  call  to  be  scheduled  here,  but  there  are 
a  few  points  which  may  be  noted  with  all  brevity. 
Galahad  is  described  as  the  foster-child  of  the  abbey 
where  Lancelot  finds  him,  and  he  is  commanded  to 
watch  his  arms  prior  to  receiving  knighthood.  He  is 
introduced  at  the  Court  of  King  Arthur  as  the  desired 
Knight  descended  from  the  line  of  the  prophet  David 
and  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  :  on  him  rest  all  the  adven- 
tures and  wonders  of  Great  Britain  and  all  countries.  He 
is  called  the  son  of  the  daughter  of  King  Pelles,  but  the 
later  story  speaks  invariably  of  the  Graal  Castle  as  that 
of  King  Pelour,  whom  I  should  identify  as  the  maimed 
and  abdicated  Keeper  who  was  healed  by  Galahad  in  the 
French  version,  of  which,  however,  there  is  no  mention 
in  the  Welsh  Quest.  The  manifested  festival  of  the 

368 


The   Greater   Chronicles 

Graal  in  the  hall  of  Arthur  is  heralded  by  an  unknown 
messenger — a  lady  vested  in  white  on  a  white  palfrey, 
who  gives  warning  concerning  its  advent,  and  this  is 
found  also  in  Malory's  version,  but  he  follows  a  defective 
text,  for  in  him  the  prophecy  is  uttered  after  the  event 
itself.  So  great  are  the  delicacies  at  the  table,  by  the 
provision  of  the  Sacred  Vessel,  so  much  are  they  dwelt 
on  in  the  Welsh  version,  that  the  resolution  of  the  knights 
in  respect  of  the  coming  Quest  has  the  aspect  of  material 
appetite,  and  they  resolve  not  to  rest  till  they  can  eat  at 
another  table  where  they  will  be  fed  as  rarely.  According 
to  Gawain,  there  is  no  such  place  on  earth  except  the 
Court  of  King  Peleur.  When  the  Quest  is  thus  under- 
taken Galahad  says  nothing.  All  this  is  an  accident  of 
aspect,  for  elsewhere  it  is  stated  (#)  that  no  one  shall  see 
the  Holy  Graal  except  through  the  gate  which  is  called 
Confession,  and  this  is  obviously  the  gate  of  the  Eucha- 
rist ;  (£)  that  the  final  return  of  Bors  was  designed  to 
exhibit  the  spirituality  of  that  good  which  at  the  last  end 
of  things  was  lost  by  so  many  on  account  of  their  sins. 

The  time  comes  when  Galahad  swears  upon  the  relics 
with  the  others  to  maintain  the  Quest,  and,  apart  from 
this  position — which  has  not  been  understood  by  scholar- 
ship— there  are  episodes  and  intimations  which  seem  in- 
tended to  show  that  the  natural  child  of  the  sanctuary 
was  not  permitted  to  know  all — though  he  had  that 
which  was  implied  in  his  heirship — until,  in  common 
with  the  others,  he  undertook  the  great  enterprise.  The 
Knights  proceeded  on  their  journey  weeping  and  in  great 
sorrow — that  is  to  say,  with  failing  hearts,  foreboding 
the  discounselling  of  so  many  and  all  the  disaster  coming 
after  :  Euntes  ibant  et  flebant. 

There  is  one  reference  to  Eleazar,  the  son  of  King 
Pelles,  and  one  to  a  Knight  named  Argus,  who,  by  an 
unthinkable  confusion,  is  said  to  be  the  son  of  Helayne, 
as  if  this  daughter  of  the  House  had  married  or  begotten 
subsequently.  The  hermit  Nasciens,  whose  identity  is 
so  important  for  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  is  described 

369  2  A 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

as  the  son-in-law  of  Evalach,  instead  of  his  brother  by 
marriage,  as  he  appears  in  the  extant  text.  He  is  found 
on  one  occasion  by  Gawain  in  a  very  poor  cell  or  hermitage, 
with  a  small  chapel  attached. 

When  the  questing  Knights  arrive  at  the  Graal  Castle, 
it  is  not  said  that  they  see  either  Pelles  or  Peleur,  nor 
are  these  or  Eleazar  present  at  the  manifestation  of  the 
Holy  Graal.  The  maiden  who  remains  in  the  text  of 
Malory  is  also  bidden  to  depart,  following  in  this  respect 
the  chief  French  manuscripts.  He  who  comes  down  from 
Heaven  as  the  first  Bishop  of  Christendom  is  distin- 
guished rightly  from  Joseph  of  Arimathasa,  and  is  there- 
fore the  second  Joseph.  When  he  celebrates  the  secret 
mass  of  the  Graal,  he  takes  out  a  wafer  from  the  Vessel, 
which  shows  that  it  was  used  as  a  ciborium.  In  the 
divine  discourse  thereafter,  it  is  said  by  Christ  that  many 
a  good  man  has  come  to  the  Castle  through  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  As  regards  the  nine  mysterious 
Knights  who  are  not  to  accompany  the  three  on  their 
journey  to  Sarras,  the  parting  of  those  with  these  takes 
place  amidst  great  brotherhood,  and  each  of  them  says 
who  he  is,  but  the  nine  are  not  named  in  the  text. 
Galahad  asks  them  to  salute  Arthur  if  they  go  to  his 
Court,  and  they  reply  that  they  shall  do  so  gladly,  but 
they  do  not  say  that  they  will  go.  Probably  they  went 
back  by  another  way  into  their  own  countries. 

Now,  these  are  the  chief  points  which  I  promised  to 
set  forth ;  and  there  is  one  thing  more  only — that  the 
Spear  was  not  taken  to  Sarras,  nor  was  it  removed  to 
Heaven  with  the  Sacred  Vessel.  In  conclusion  as  to  the 
Quest  of  Galahad,  the  presence  of  that  maiden  who  was 
niece  of  King  Pelles  at  the  great  vision  of  the  Graal 
seems  without  authority  in  extant  French  texts ;  it  is 
therefore  peculiar  to  Malory  and  the  version  which 
he  followed.  If  it  were  possible  to  trace  the  variations 
of  the  Quest  through  developments  of  the  Tristram 
cycle,  we  should  meet  with  very  curious  details,  but  they 
are  not  necessary  to  our  subject. 


BOOK    VI 

THE   GERMAN   CYCLE   OF    THE 
HOLT   GRAAL 


THE    ARGUMENT 

I.  THE  PARSIFAL  OF  WOLFRAM  VON  ESCHENBACH. — 

Its  valuation  by  recognised  criticism — Alleged  theological  and 
ecclesiastical  position — Evidence  of  the  surface  sense — Specific 
analogies  with  French  romances  of  the  Perceval  cycle — The 
triad  in  the  Keeper  ship  of  the  Graal — Geniture  of  Parsifal 
— Of  Gamuret  and  Herzeleide — Of  Parsifal's  cousin  Sigune 
—At  the  Court  of  King  Arthur— The  Red  Knight— The 
Brother  of  the  Graal  King — Queen  Kondwiramur — The 
marriage  of  Parsifal — The  Fisher  King — The  Castle  of  Mont 
Salvatch — The  pageant  and  bewrayed  question — Of  things 
which  followed  thereafter — Of  Kundrie,  the  Graal  Messenger 
— Parsifal  hardens  his  heart — The  pilgrim  band — The 

J  JT      o 

Hermit's  story  of  the  Graal — Parsifal's  election — The  King's 
Healing — Specific  Distinctions  from  romances  of  the  French 
cycle — The  morganatic  union  of  Gamuret — The  history  of 
Kundrie — The  magician  Klingsor — Of  Feirfeis,  the  brother 
of  Parsifal — His  union  with  the  maiden  of  the  Graal — Of 
Pr ester  John — The  history  of  Lohengrin — The  Graal  in 
Wolfram's  poem — Its  sacramental  connections — Its  feeding 
qualities — Its  antecedent  history — The  bleeding  Lance — The 
Kings  wounding — Of  the  Duchess  Orgeluse — The  Castle  and 
its  chivalry — The  source  of  Wolfram — The  story  of  Guiot 
de  Provence — The  judgment  on  Chretien  de  Troyes — The 
Lapis  Exilis — Of  a  second  sense  in  the  Parsifal.  II. 
GLEANINGS  CONCERNING  THE  LOST  QUEST  OF  GUIOT 
DE  PROVENCE. — Evidence  of  the  Saone  de.Nausay/br  the 

373 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

existence  of  Guiofs  'poem — His  alleged  identity  with  a 
Bishop  of  Durham — What  follows  therefrom — The  source 
of  Chretien — The  Graal  in  Guiot  and  Wolfram — The  reli- 
gious position  of  Guiot — His  curious  learning — An  illus- 
tration from  Kabalism.  III.  SIDELIGHTS  FROM  THE 
SPANISH  AND  PORTUGUESE  QUESTS.  —  The  Spanish 
Merlin  and  Quest  of  Galahad — The  Portuguese  Quest — 
A  Viennese  manuscript — An  inference  from  these  docu- 
ments. IV.  THE  CROWN  OF  ALL  ADVENTURES. — The 
Quest-in-chief  of  G aw ain — Heinrich  and  Chretien — Hein- 
rich  and  Guiot — Keynote  of  the  story — The  House  of 
Glass — The  companions  of  the  Quest — The  House  of 
Death — Its  dream  of  splendour — The  Order  of  the  Ban- 
quet—  The  Graal  Vision — The  Kings  sustenance — Wine 
of  forge tf nines s — The  Question  asked — The  Hidden  Secret 
—The  Kings  release — The  departure  of  the  Graal — Con- 
clusion as  to  this  Quest.  V.  THE  TITUREL  OF  ALBRECHT 
VON  SCHARFENBERG. — Literary  history  of  the  'poem — The 
incorporations  from  Wolfram — Its  reversion  to  the  cycle  of 
Northern  France — The  Graal  as  a  chalice — Pretensions  of 
the  'poem  as  a  complete  history  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  and 
its  Wardens — Ascetic  aspects — Removal  of  the  Graal  to 
the  Land  of  Pr ester  'John — Subsequent  removal  of  the 
ancient  Sanctuary — Parsifal  as  the  heir  of  the  Priest- 
King — The  Kings  legend — King  Arthur  s  search  for  the 
Graal.  VI.  THE  DUTCH  LANCELOT. — Date  of  this 
compilation — Outline  of  its  contents — The  Quest  of  Per- 
ceval— His  failure  and  'penitence — His  restitution — His 
inclusion  with  Galahad  in  the  Quest — Summary  as  to  the 
Dutch  Lancelot — Conclusion  as  to  the  German  cycle. 


374 


BOOK    VI 

THE   GERMAN   CYCLE   OF    THE   HOLT 
GRAAL 


I 

THE  PARSIFAL   OF  WOLFRAM  FON 
ESCHENBACH 

THOSE  who  in  recent  times  have  discussed  the  poem  of 
Wolfram  with  titles  to  consideration  on  account  of  their 
equipment  have  been  impressed  not  alone  by  the  signal 
distinctions  between  this  German  poem  and  the  Perceval 
legends  as  we  know  them  in  Northern  France,  but  by 
a  superiority  of  spiritual  purpose  and  a  higher  ethical 
value  which  are  thought  to  characterise  the  knightly 
epic.  For  the  moment,  at  least,  it  can  be  said  on  my 
own  part  that  we  are  in  the  presence  of  a  poet  whose 
work  is  full  of  gorgeous  pictures,  all  rude  diction  not- 
withstanding, and  all  contemporary  reproaches  made 
upon  that  score.  To  me — but  as  one  who  on  such 
subjects  speaks  with  a  sense  of  remoteness — the  traces  of 
Oriental  influence  seem  clear  in  the  poem,  partly  in  its 
decorative  character  and  partly  in  its  allusions  to  places 
— after  every  allowance  has  been  made  for  geographical 
confusions.  Such  traces  are  allowed,  and  they  are  referred 
to  the  source  of  Wolfram,  about  which  I  must  say 
something  in  this  section  to  introduce  the  separate 
inquiry  which  will  follow  hereafter.  But  we  are  asked 
in  our  turn  to  recognise  that  the  Parsifal  is  the  most 
heterodox  branch  of  the  whole  Graal  cycle,  though  it 

375 


The   Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy    Graal 

is  said  to  be  the  work  of  an  ecclesiastic.  This  idea  is 
represented  by  authoritative  statements  on  the  part  of 
scholars  who  have  scarcely  produced  their  evidence,  and 
by  sporadic  discursive  remarks  on  the  part  of  some  other 
writers  who  could  have  been  better  equipped.  In  this 
manner  we  have  (#)  the  negative  inference  drawn  from 
a  simple  fact — as,  for  example,  that  the  Parsifal  does  not 
exhibit  that  hostility  towards  Mohammedan  people  and 
things  which  characterised  Crusading  times — but  as  much 
might  be  said  about  other  texts  of  the  Graal ;  (£)  the 
positive  opinion  that  the  chivalry  of  the  Graal  Temple 
resembles  an  association  formed  without  the  pale  of  the 
Church  rather  than  within — which  on  the  authority  of 
the  poem  itself  seems  untrue,  and  this  simply.  Those 
who  expound  these  views  look  for  an  explanation  to  the 
influences  exercised  theoretically  by  Knights  Templars 
and  the  sects  of  Southern  France — which  possibilities 
will  be  considered  in  their  proper  place  in  respect  of  all 
the  literature.  As  a  preliminary,  by  way  of  corrective, 
I  desire  to  record  here  that  if  the  Parsifal  is  heterodox, 
its  elements  of  this  order  have  been  imbedded  below 
the  surface,  and  then  deeply,  but  whether  it  implies  in 
this  manner  any  secret  religious  claims  which  are  not 
of  sect  or  heresy  is  another  question.  On  the  surface  it 
would  be  easy  to  make  a  tabulation  of  many  points 
which  manifest  an  absolute  correspondence  with  Church 
doctrine  and  ordinance ;  but  it  will  be  sufficient  for  the 
moment  to  say  that  Mass  is  celebrated  and  heard  as  it 
is  in  the  other  romances ;  that  confession  is  not  less 
necessary ;  and  so  far  as  there  is  allusion  in  particular 
to  dogmatic  teaching,  that  it  is  of  the  accepted  kind, 
as  of  the  conditions  and  day  of  salvation :  Mary  is  the 
Queen  of  Heaven,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  dies  as  man  on 
the  Cross ;  the  Divinity  of  Three  Persons  is  included 
in  one  God.  Sometimes  there  is  an  allusion  which 
looks  dubious,  but  it  is  mere  confusion,  as  when  a 
hermit  speaks  of  a  soul  being  drawn  out  of  hell,  where 
the  reference  is  of  course  to  the  purgatorial  state. 

376 


The   German    Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

The  story  of  the  Quest  in  Wolfram  may  be  con- 
sidered in  the  interests  of  clearness  under  two  heads,  the 
first  of  which  is  designed  to  develop  the  specific  analogies 
with  other  romances  of  the  Perceval  cycle,  while  in  the 
second  there  are  exhibited  the  specific  points  of  dis- 
tinction. As  regards  the  analogies,  it  is  to  be  under- 
stood that  I  reserve  the  right  to  omit  any  or  every 
episode  which  does  not  concern  my  purpose.  It  is  to 
be  understood  further  that  all  analogies  are  under  their 
own  reserve  in  respect  of  variation.  Let  it  be  recalled, 
in  the  first  place,  that  the  historical  side  of  the  Perceval 
legend  in  the  Conte  del  Graal  of  Chretien  is  in  a  certain 
state  of  confusion.  That  poet  left  so  much  to  be  desired 
on  the  score  of  clearness  about  the  early  life  of  his  hero 
that  another  poet  prepared  some  antecedent  information, 
but  he  spoke  according  to  tradition  and  forgot  that  the 
matter  with  which  he  intervened  was  not  in  complete  ac- 
cordance with  Chretien's  own  account,  so  far  as  he  had  one. 
All  continuations  of  the  Conte  were  either  too  late  for 
Wolfram  or  were  for  some  other  reason  unknown  by  him  ; 
but  it  may  be  said  that  Gautier  and  Manessier  produced 
their  romantic  narratives  following  several  prototypes,  not 
of  necessity  connected  with  their  character-in-chief  ab 
origine  symboli.  Gerbert,  who  was  evidently  under  the 
obedience  of  a  prototype  which  was  peculiar  to  himself 
in  the  Northern  French  cycles,  had  perhaps  some  lost 
Perceval  Quest,  if  not  that  actually  which  we  connect 
with  the  name  of  Guiot.  With  the  Didot  Perceval 
Wolfram  has  only  those  points  of  concurrence  which 
belong  to  the  common  primordial  source,  and  with  the 
Longer  Prose  Perceval  his  features  of  likeness  are  in  so 
far  as  both  texts  stand  together  by  themselves.  Under 
these  qualifications,  the  salient  lines  of  correspondence  by 
way  of  likeness  with  the  French  cycle  may  be  collected 
as  follows. 

The  genealogy  in  the  Parsifal  is  simple  ;  it  is  the 
triad,  which  is  permanent  on  earth  as  the  Holy  and 
Undivided  Trinity  is  eternal  in  Heaven.  But  in  most 

377 


"The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

texts  the  Trinity  of  the  Graal  Keepership  is  by  way  of 
succession  and  therefore  feeble ;  Wolfram,  on  the  other 
hand,  ends  with  a  perfect  symbol  in  the  union  of  those 
who  have  reigned  with  him  who  shall  reign  henceforward, 
whereas  all  other  quests  of  Perceval  leave  him  alone 
in  his  kingdom  at  the  end  absolute  of  the  great  adven- 
ture. The  German  Kings  of  the  Graal  are  Titurel, 
Frimutel  and  Amfortas.  The  first  is  the  founder  of 
the  dynasty — in  respect  of  the  Graal  Keepership — and 
he  remains  alive,  like  Brons  in  Robert  de  Borron,  the 
maimed  King  Pellehan  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad,  and 
that  nameless  hidden  sovereign  who  anteceded  King 
Fisherman  in  the  Conte  del  Graal.  The  second  has 
died  in  war,  which  was  not  in  the  cause  of  the  Graal, 
and  it  is  partly  for  this  reason  that  Perceval  must  inter- 
vene to  renew  the  triad.  The  nearest  analogy  to  this 
is  in  the  Didot  Perceval,  which  after  the  achievement  of 
the  Graal  pictures  the  questing  knight  abiding  in  the 
place  of  the  Hallows  with  Blaise  and  Merlin  as  two 
substituted  keepers,  though  at  the  close  it  detaches  the 
prophet  and  puts  him  into  mystic  retreat,  as  if  at  the 
term  of  the  ages — when  Avalon  gives  up  its  exiles — he 
might  again  manifest  and  testify.  There  is  also  another 
analogy,  but  this  is  of  the  implied  kind,  for  in  the 
Parsifal  and  the  Didot  Perceval  he  who  has  achieved  the 
Quest  remains,  and  the  Sacred  Vessel — in  apparent 
perpetuity — that  is  to  say,  in  the  House  of  the  Hidden 
Hallows.  Both  elect  knights — shadows  of  a  single  per- 
sonality— arrived,  that  they  might  stay  in  fine. 

The  father  of  Parsifal  was  a  king's  son — as  he  is 
occasionally  in  the  other  romances — and  it  is  said  in  more 
than  one  place  that  he  came  of  the  fairy  lineage.  It  was 
on  the  mother's  side  that  the  youth  was  by  generation 
a  son  of  the  house,  and  therefore  entitled,  supposing 
that  he  was  otherwise  prepared,  to  return  therein.  She 
was  Herzeleide,  sister  of  the  Graal  King  and  Queen, 
in  her  own  right,  not  only  of  Wales  but  Anjou.  The 
father  was  named  Gamuret,  but  in  the  course  of 

378 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

knightly  adventure  he  was  slain  shortly  after  his 
marriage  and  the  birth  of  his  only  son  in  respect  of 
this  union.  That  he  may  be  saved  from  the  fatal 
knowledge  which  in  those  days  was  involved  by  the  life 
of  chivalry,  there  follows — with  many  variations — the 
concealment  of  Parsifal  by  his  mother  in  the  wild  places 
and  woodlands.  It  does  not  appear  what  she  did  to 
insure  the  rule  of  the  kingdoms,  but  her  result  was 
that  the  two  countries  fell  into  other  hands.  She  who 
had  been  born,  as  one  may  suppose,  in  that  secondary 
light  which  is  the  shadow  of  the  Holy  Graal — since 
she  does  not  seem  to  have  been  an  inbred  Daughter 
of  the  House — might  have  acted  better  and  more 
wisely  to  have  reared  her  son — in  the  spirit  and  intention 
at  least — as  a  child  of  the  Sacred  Talisman  instead  of 
a  wild  boy  of  the  woods.  Far  otherwise  than  she  did 
the  twice-born  Hermit  Nasciens,  who  had  Galahad  in 
his  keeping  ;  far  otherwise  did  they  of  the  White  Abbey, 
among  whom  Galahad  was  found  by  Lancelot.  But 
the  fatality  was  working  with  greater  power  because  she 
strove  the  more  ;  Parsifal  met  all  the  same  with  the 
knights  of  King  Arthur's  Court,  and  rode  forth  as  usual 
—not  with  her  consent  indeed,  but  with  the  dangerous 
folly  of  her  cautions — in  search  of  the  Grade  of  Chivalry. 
Almost  immediately  after  her  parting  with  Parsifal,  she 
died  in  the  grief  of  his  loss.  He,  as  in  other  stories, 
reached  the  pavilion  of  the  Sleeping  Lady,  and  he  took 
not  her  ring  only  but  also  a  buckle.  In  this  instance 
she  seems  to  have  been  unwilling  throughout,  and  the 
youth  behaved  brutally. 

Before  reaching  the  Court  of  King  Arthur  he  met 
with  his  cousin  Sigune,  and  it  should  be  noted  here 
that  there  is  no  sister  in  this  version  of  the  Quest.  Of 
her  he  learned  his  proper  name  and  so  much  of  his 
genealogy  as  was  requisite  to  assure  him  that  he  was 
the  legitimate  King  of  Wales,  in  the  defence  of  which 
right  there  perished  her  own  lover,  whose  body  remained 
in  her  charge  after  the  mad  manner  of  the  romances. 

379 


The   Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

As  geographical  names  signify  little  or  nothing,  the 
court  of  King  Arthur  was  held  at  Nantes,  and  on  his 
arrival  thither  the  old  episode  of  the  dwarfs  was  ex- 
changed for  that  of  a  maiden  who  could  not  laugh 
until  she  beheld  the  best  knight  in  the  world.  She 
was  struck  and  insulted  by  Kay  for  paying  this  honour 
to  one  of  Parsifal's  outlandish  appearance,  and  a  con- 
siderable part  of  the  story  is  concerned  incidentally 
with  the  youth's  resolution  to  avenge  her  and  a  certain 
silent  knight  who,  after  the  manner  of  the  dwarfs,  found 
speech  to  hail  his  advent  and  was  also  chastised.  The 
Red  Knight  appeared  as  usual  and  Parsifal  obtained 
his  armour,  the  grievance  being  that  the  knight  had 
taken  a  cup  from  the  Round  Table  and  spilt  wine 
upon  the  robe  of  the  Queen.  But  the  secondary  detail 
was  a  matter  of  accident  and  one  regretted  deeply,  for 
in  this  story  only  the  Red  Knight  is  a  hero  after  the 
true  manner ;  he  is  also  the  youth's  kinsman,  and  his 
death — which  occurs  as  usual — is  a  stain  on  Parsifal 
rather  than  to  the  glory  of  his  prowess. 

So  proceeds  the  story,  and  so  far  as  it  follows  the 
long  weariness  of  the  worn  way,  even  its  decorations 
can  lend  it  only  a  secondary  interest.  I  think  also, 
and  it  must  be  said,  that  even  in  his  exaltation  the 
hero  kindles  little  sympathy,  whereas  Galahad  enthrals 
for  ever.  The  next  incident  in  our  scheme  is  Parsifal's 
instruction  in  chivalry,  which  took  place  at  the  castle 
of  Gurnemanz,  who  was  the  brother  of  the  Graal  King, 
but  this  relation  was  not  declared  to  his  pupil.  As 
in  the  Peredur,  he  is  responsible  for  the  fatality  of 
the  unasked  question,  and  in  both  cases  there  is  the 
same  want  of  logic  on  the  surface  which  probably  covers 
a  secret  intention.  The  result  otherwise  of  the  instruc- 
tion was  that  Parsifal  ceased  from  his  folly. 

This  experience  completed,  he  asked  his  teacher  at 
their  parting  to  give  him  his  daughter  when  he  had 
done  something  to  deserve  her ;  but  it  appears  to  have 
been  more  in  conformity  with  her  father's  implied  wish 

380 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

than  through  a  keen  desire  of  his  own,  and  we  hear 
nothing  further  of  either.  His  next  task  brought  him 
to  Belrepaire — in  siege  by  sea  and  land  and  wasted  by 
famine.  There  he  succoured  the  Queen  Kondwiramour, 
who  corresponds  to  Blanchefleur,  and  there  also  he 
married  her.  We  are  now  in  that  region  which  we 
know  to  have  been  travelled  by  Gerbert,  and  as  for 
him  the  espousals  left  the  lovers  in  virginity,  so,  accord- 
ing to  Wolfram,  the  marriage  was  not  consummated  till 
the  third  night.  But — whereas  a  high  motive  actuated 
the  two  parties  in  the  French  romance — in  the  German 
poem  there  was  no  mutual  concordat  but  a  kind  of 
spurious  chivalry  on  the  hero's  side  which  he  overcame 
in  the  end.  Parsifal,  however,  was  still  espoused  only 
to  the  notion  of  adventure,  on  which  he  again  set  forth, 
this  time  to  meet  with  the  Fisher  King  and  to  learn 
that  the  Graal  Castle  was  close  at  hand,  like  all  things 
that  are  greatest.  As  regards  his  qualifications  for  the 
visit,  it  would  seem  that,  even  in  the  Holy  Place,  he 
thought  chiefly  of  knightly  combats  and  wondered  how 
he  should  find  them  in  such  surroundings.  The  Fisher 
King  was  Amfortas,  the  Maimed  King,  and  the  procession 
was  that  which  I  have  described  previously  and  at  needed 
length.  The  Castle  was  full  of  splendour  and  chivalry, 
but  it  was  also  full  of  sadness :  the  story  is  one  of  suf- 
fering and  sorrow.  The  relation  between  host  and  guest 
was  that  of  uncle  and  nephew,  but  as  usual  it  did  not 
transpire  on  this  occasion.  Parsifal  also  failed  to  ask 
the  vital  question,  but  it  should  be  noted  that,  although 
grievous  sin  was  attributed  to  him  on  this  account, 
he  had  not  been  warned  so  distinctly — either  here  or 
in  the  Conte  del  Graal — that  there  would  be  a  question 
to  ask  as  he  was  in  the  Didot  Perceval.  He  went  forth 
unserved  from  the  Castle,  but  there  is  no  suggestion 
of  any  external  enchantment,  nor  did  he  find  that 
the  whole  country  had  been  laid  under  a  mysterious 
interdict  which  had  rendered  it  utterly  waste,  or  that 
the  inhabitants  were  abandoned  to  various  forms  of 

3*' 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

distress.  On  account  further  of  the  normal  offices  of 
Nature,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  he  left  the  Castle 
as  a  knight  who  has  finished  his  visit — that  is  to  say, 
he  rode  away ;  it  was  not  the  Castle  which  left  him 
by  a  sudden  process  of  vanishing.  In  the  world  outside 
he  was  reproached  by  his  kinswoman  Sigune,  who  still 
had  the  body  of  her  lover. 

The  familiar  pursuant  adventures  must  be  mentioned 
briefly.  The  Lady  of  the  Pavilion  was  fairly  exonerated 
by  Parsifal  and  sent  with  her  vanquished  lord  to  the 
woman  who  could  not  laugh  at  the  court  of  King 
Arthur,  where  she  proved  to  be  the  knight's  sister,  so 
that  Kay  was  put  to  shame.  Arthur  rose  up  and  set  forth 
on  the  quest  of  Parsifal,  who  was  found  in  the  love-trance 
and  brought  to  the  royal  tent.  There  he  was  made  a 
Knight  of  the  Round  Table,  and  thither  came  the  laidly 
Kundrie — that  baleful  messenger  of  the  Graal,  who  was 
also  God's  minister — to  curse  and  denounce  him  for  his 
ill-fated  course  at  the  Castle.  She  told  him  much  which 
belongs  to  the  second  branch  of  our  subject,  but  also  of 
his  mother's  death,  by  which  news  he  was  overwhelmed, 
and  by  the  shame  of  the  messenger's  wrath  tempestuous. 
He  departed  from  that  court  as  a  man  who  had  lost  his 
faith,  yet  he  went — pro  forma  at  least — on  the  Quest  of 
the  Graal.  After  long  wanderings  he  met  again  with  his 
cousin  Sigune,  whose  lover  had  found  a  sepulchre,  near 
which  she  lived  as  an  anchoress  and  received  food  from 
the  Graal  which  was  brought  her  by  the  sorceress  Kundrie. 
At  a  later  period,  Parsifal,  being  still  in  his  sins,  and 
cherishing  no  thought  of  God,  met  with  the  pageant  of 
pilgrims  on  Good  Friday,  but  his  better  nature  did  not 
return  to  him  so  quickly  as  in  the  other  stories.  In  due 
course  he  reached  the  hold  of  a  hermit,  who — here  as 
there — was  his  uncle,  to  whom  he  confessed  everything 
and  from  whom  he  learned — subject  to  certain  variations 
— the  story  of  the  Graal  in  full. 

When  he  is  heard  of  next  in  the  poem,  the  chance 
of  war  had  brought  Parsifal  in  collision  with  Gawain, 

382 


The   German    Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  they  failed  to  recognise  each  other  until  the  latter 
suffered  defeat.  The  victor  was  restored  in  this  manner 
to  the  court  of  King  Arthur,  passing  henceforth  to  and 
fro  between  that  world  and  the  more  external  world 
of  adventure.  To  the  court  on  a  certain  occasion,  with 
no  preface  or  warning,  there  again  came  Kundrie,  sor- 
ceress and  messenger,  carrying  the  news  of  Parsifal's 
election  to  the  Holy  Kingdom  of  the  Graal.  Thereat 
he  rose  to  his  feet  and  recited  the  secret  story  of  the 
great  Palladium,  as  he  had  learned  it  from  the  lips  of 
the  hermit ;  he  told  how  none  could  attain  it  unless 
he  were  called  thereto ;  and  in  virtue  of  that  calling,  in 
his  own  case,  he  took  leave  of  the  chivalry  for  ever. 
He  reached  the  Consecrated  Castle,  beheld  the  Hallows 
therein,  and  asked  the  necessary  question,  to  the  king's 
healing  and  the  joy  of  those  who  were  delivered  from 
the  thrallj  of  his  long  suffering. 

I  have  left  out  of  this  consideration  all  reference  to 
Gawain,  who  occupies  a  third  part  of  the  whole  story, 
and  whose  marriage  is  celebrated  therein.  He  undertook 
the  Quest  of  the  Graal,  and  though  much  followed  there- 
upon in  the  matter  of  high  adventure  he  did  not  attain 
the  term.  To  say  this  is  to  indicate  in  one  word  an 
important  point  of  difference  between  this  text  and  the 
stories  which  have  been  studied  already.  There  are 
other  variations,  but  I  will  mention  one  of  them  only, 
that  I  may  have  done  with  this  extraneous  matter ;  it 
concerns  the  character  of  Gawain,  which  is  one  of  knightly 
heroism  and  all  manner  of  courtesy  and  good  conduct. 
Wolfram  knew  nothing  apparently  of  that  later  fashion 
of  calumny  which  was  set  by  the  Romance  of  Lancelot. 

The  reader  is  now  in  a  position  to  understand  how  far 
this  summary  corresponds  with  the  general  outline  of  Chre- 
tien and  with  the  brief  quest  in  the  Didot  Perceval.  He 
will  also  trace  the  salient  analogies  with  the  Welsh  Peredur, 
and,  in  a  lesser  degree,  with  the  English  Syr  Percyvelle. 
In  fine,  he  will  see  that  so  far  as  the  schedule  reaches,  it 
has  no  correspondence  in  adventure  with  the  Longer  Prose 

383 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

Perceval,  which  is  the  second  part  only  of  the  knightly 
Quest.  I  have  mentioned,  however,  that  the  last  text 
has  vague  reminiscences  of  a  source  which  may  have  been 
that  of  Wolfram,  and  the  two  romances  converge  in  the 
path  of  their  greatest  divergence  from  other  texts.  We 
have  now  to  consider  the  points  of  distinction  in  the 
Parsifal — which  are  a  much  more  serious  question — and 
I  shall  do  so  under  three  subdivisions,  the  first  of  which 
will  deal  with  the  romantic  episodes,  the  second  with 
the  Graal  itself,  including  its  concomitants  in  symbolism, 
and  the  third  with  the  source  of  Wolfram,  thus  leading 
up  to  the  considerations  of  my  next  section. 

A  morganatic  union  was  contracted  by  the  father  of 
Parsifal,  prior  to  his  marriage  with  Herzeleide,  as  one 
consequence  of  a  journey  eastward  in  search  of  adventure. 
He  was  the  means  of  salvation  to  a  heathen  Queen 
Belakane,  whose  throne  he  shared  for  a  period,  and 
although  no  rite  of  wedlock  is  mentioned,  she  is  described 
as  his  wife  invariably.  The  inference  is  that  this  union 
was  not  one  which  the  Church  would  recognise ;  but 
Gamuret  is  not  exculpated,  because  it  is  quite  clear  that 
he  had  every  opportunity  to  convert  her  and  to  lay  the 
Christian  religion  like  a  yoke  on  the  neck  of  her  king- 
dom. He  would  be,  therefore,  responsible  for  not  making 
the  attempt,  an  episode  which  does  not  correspond  to  a 
very  high  sense  of  honour,  while  his  subsequent  marriage 
— which  is  not  challenged  by  the  poet — would  be  thought 
little  less  than  disgraceful  if  the  hypothesis  of  scholarship 
had  not  allocated  the  poem  of  Wolfram  to  so  high  an 
ethical  level.  The  fruit  of  the  first  union  was  the  pagan 
prince  Feirfeis,  who,  being  born  in  the  East  under  such 
circumstances,  is  harlequined — that  is  to  say,  is  repre- 
sented as  half  black  and  half  white,  to  indicate  his  dual 
origin.  The  death  of  Gamuret  was  the  result  of  a  second 
visit  to  the  East.  He  heard  that  the  King  of  Bagdad 
was  beset  by  the  princes  of  Babylon,  and  having  served 
him  in  his  youth  he  was  impelled  to  go  forth  to  his 
rescue.  In  one  of  the  ensuing  battles  he  took  off  his 

384 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

helmet  and  laid  it  down  for  a  few  moments  on  account 
of  the  heat.  A  pagan  knight  poured  thereon  the  blood 
of  a  he-goat,  and  that  which  was  previously  like  diamond 
in  its  hardness  became  soft  as  sponge.  The  result  was 
that  the  King  of  Alexandria  cut  with  his  spear  through 
the  helmet  and  penetrated  the  brain. 

I  have  mentioned  here  the  first  point  of  distinction 
between  the  more  narrative  part  of  the  poem  and  the 
other  quests  of  Perceval ;  the  second  concerns  Kundrie, 
who  acts  as  the  messenger  of  the  Graal.  She  is  described 
as  faithful  and  true,  possessing  all  knowledge — according 
to  the  institutes  of  the  period — and  speaking  all  tongues. 
But  she  was  repellent  in  appearance  beyond  the  physical 
issues  of  Nature,  as  a  combination  indeed  of  gruesome 
symbolic  animals.  She  was  a  sorceress  also,  as  we  have 
seen,  though  this  is  perhaps  a  technical  description  of  the 
period,  expressing  only  the  sense  of  her  extraordinary 
knowledge.  She  is  not,  however,  to  be  identified  with 
the  evil  side  of  the  powers  of  Avalon,  concerning  which 
we  hear  so  much  in  the  Lancelot  and  later  Merlin  texts, 
nor  is  she  exactly  a  fay  woman — that  is  to  say,  the 
Daughter  of  a  School  of  Magic — as  conceived  by  the 
French  romancers,  since  she  does  not  practise  magic  or 
weave  enchantments.  Her  impeachment  of  Parsifal  at 
the  Court  of  King  Arthur  turned  wholly  on  his  failure 
at  the  Graal,  and  was  interspersed  with  prophecy  which 
future  events  made  void.  I  must  say  that  her  discourse 
reads  only  as  the  raving  of  one  distracted,  and  that  by 
which  she  was  distracted  was  the  sorrow  in  the  House  of 
the  Graal.  As  Parsifal  might  have  disarmed  her  by  the 
simplest  of  all  explanations — being  that  which  he  gave 
subsequently  to  the  Round  Table  itself — and  as  thus  he 
had  at  least  his  personal  justification  reposing  in  his  own 
heart — it  is  curious,  and  particular  to  the  story,  that  he 
should  take  her  reproaches  so  deeply  into  his  inward 
nature  that  he  held  himself  shamed  almost  irretrievably, 
though  the  court  did  not  so  hold  him.  The  effect  was 
greater  than  this,  for  it  hardened  his  heart  against  God 

385  2  B 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  converted  one  who  had  never  been  ardent  in  faith, 
who  had  never  so  far  experienced  a  touch  of  Divine 
Grace,  into  an  utterer  of  open  blasphemy.  Other  stories 
say  that  he  had  forgotten  God,  but  in  Wolfram  he 
remembers  and  rebels. 

The  Parsifal  does  not  give  us  an  intelligible  history  of 
Kundrie ;  it  does  not  explain  why  the  messenger  of  the 
Graal  was  or  had  become  unlovely ;  or  why  it  connects, 
however  remotely,  that  sacred  object  with  one  whom  it 
terms  a  sorceress.  We  only  see  that  she  comes  and  goes 
as  she  pleases,  or  is  thereby  commissioned,  in  and  about 
the  Holy  House :  she  carries  the  palliatives  administered 
to  the  wounded  King  to  a  place  where  they  become 
available  for  Gawain,  and  she  brings  the  food  of  the 
Graal  to  Parsifal's  cousin,  Sigune. 

The  intervention  of  the  magician  Klingsor  in  the 
story  leaves  us  also  in  doubt  as  to  what  he  represents 
in  the  scheme.  He  came  of  the  race  of  Virgil — whom 
mediaeval  tradition  presents  as  a  potent  enchanter — and 
was  originally  a  duke  of  noble  life  till  he  was  en- 
snared by  unholy  passion,  for  which  he  was  heavily 
visited,  being  deprived  of  the  instruments  of  passion. 
Those  who  know  anything  of  occult  traditions  will  be 
aware  that  this  affliction  would  have  been  an  almost  in- 
superable barrier  to  his  success  in  magic,  but  Wolfram, 
who  knew  only  by  hearsay,  and  then  at  a  very  far  dis- 
tance, says  that  he  was  made  a  magician  by  his  maiming, 
meaning  that  he  visited  the  secret  city  of  Persida,  the 
birthplace  of  magic — on  its  averse  side  apparently — and 
received  initiation  in  full,  so  that  he  could  work  all 
wonders.  He  erected  Chateau  Merveil,  which  is  a  sort  of 
contradiction,  in  terms  of  diabolism,  to  the  Castle  of  the 
Holy  Graal,  as  his  own  life  is  an  analogy  by  travesty 
of  that  of  the  King  of  the  Graal,  who  had  also  sinned  in 
his  senses,  at  least  by  the  desire  of  his  heart.  Chateau 
Merveil,  however,  seems  to  lack  intention,  for  the  magic 
which  built  it  was  not  proof  against  the  personal  bravery 
of  Gawain,  who  put  an  end  to  the  enchantments  and 

386 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

became  the  lord  of  the  fortress.  It  should  be  added  that 
Klingsor  himself  does  not  appear  in  the  poem,  so  that 
he  is  a  king  in  hiding. 

I  have  little  cause  to  delay  over  the  history  of  Feirfeis, 
the  brother  of  Parsifal,  who  came  with  a  great  host  west- 
ward in  search  of  chivalry  and  his  father,  only  to  learn 
that  the  latter  was  dead  when  he  and  Parsifal  had  nearly 
slain  each  other.  Feirfeis  married  before  leaving  his 
native  land,  but  as  Wolfram  von  Eschenbach  begins  his 
knightly  epic  with  one  cruel  adultery,  so  he  ends  it  with 
another,  eclipsing  his  previous  record  by  uniting  Feirfeis, 
within  the  sacred  walls — after  his  baptism — to  the  pure 
and  wonderful  maiden  who  through  all  her  virgin  days 
had  carried  the  Holy  Graal.  Now,  I  pray  that  God  may 
preserve  us  from  these  high  ethical  values  which  we  have 
known  under  rougher  names.  To  make  bad  worse, 
when  the  wedded  pair  proceed  on  their  journey  eastward, 
the  news  of  his  first  wife's  death  was  brought  to  Feirfeis, 
which  caused  him  to  rejoice  in  the  journey,  though  it 
seems  an  indecent  satisfaction.  I  have  read  some  weird 
criticisms  which  are  designed  to  depreciate  it,  but — while 
God  continues  willing — I  set  my  own  heart  on  the 
Quest  of  Galahad.  In  fine,  as  regards  this  marriage  the 
issue  was  a  son,  who  received  a  name  the  equivalent  of 
which  was  'Jean  le  pretre — that  is  to  say,  Prester  John,  the 
great,  legendary,  sacerdotal,  Christian  King  of  the  furthest 
East,  the  rumour  concerning  whom  went  forth  over 
Europe  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century. 

After  the  union  of  all  the  characters  of  the  story — who 
are  within  the  sphere  of  election — at  the  Castle  of  the 
Graal,  which,  as  in  Chretien  so  here  also,  is  never  the 
Holy  Graal,  the  poet  passes  to  the  history  of  Lohengrin 
— the  son  of  Parsifal  and  Kondwiramour.  He  became  the 
Knight  of  the  Swan,  whose  legend  was  transferred  by 
Wolfram  from  what  is  termed  the  Lorraine  epic  cycle. 
We  shall  hear  further  concerning  him  and  the  transmission 
of  the  Sacred  Talisman  to  Prester  John  in  the  Younger 
Titurel  of  Albrecht  von  Scharfenberg.  Kardeiss,  the 

38? 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

second  of  Parsifal's  twin  sons,  was  crowned  in  his 
infancy  as  King  of  those  countries  which  were  the  more 
earthly  heritage  of  his  father. 

A  few  matters  of  lesser  importance  may  be  grouped 
here  together :  ( i )  There  is  an  account  of  the  mother  of 
King  Arthur  which  is  the  reverse  of  the  other  legends ; 
it  is  said  that  she  fled  with  a  clerk  who  was  versed  deeply 
in  magic — one  would  have  thought  a  reference  to  Merlin, 
who  otherwise  at  least  is  unknown  to  Wolfram.  Arthur 
is  said  to  have  pursued  them  for  three  years.  (2)  There 
is  no  Siege  Perilous  and  no  reference  to  Lancelot.  (3) 
Parsifal  is  elected  to  his  kingdom  by  the  fiat  of  the 
Graal  itself.  (4)  The  mystic  question  in  Wolfram  seems 
to  be  the  most  natural  and  ineffective  of  the  literature, 
its  words  being  :  What  aileth  thee  here,  mine  uncle  ?  (5) 
It  is  essential  that  this  question  should  not  be  prompted, 
but  Parsifal's  uncle  on  the  mother's  side  gives  him  the 
information  in  full  and  so  makes  void  the  condition ;  yet 
Parsifal  asks  in  the  end,  and  all  is  well  with  the  King. 

I  pass  now  to  the  matter  of  the  Graal  itself,  to  the 
Hallows — imputed,  or  otherwise — connected  therewith, 
and  the  subsidiary  subjects,  in  so  far  as  they  have  not 
been  treated  in  the  considerations  of  the  second  book. 
It  will  clear  the  important  issues  in  respect  of  implicits 
if  I  say  that  in  the  German  cycle  there  are  no  secret 
words,  there  is  no  strange  sacerdotal  succession,  while 
the  religious  side  of  the  mystery  is  distinct,  and  so  utterly, 
from  that  of  the  French  romances.  The  Graal  is  not 
a  chalice — and  much  less  a  chalice  containing  the  Blood 
of  Christ :  it  is  a  stone,  but  this  is  not  described  specifi- 
cally when  it  is  first  beheld  by  Parsifal.  It  is  carried  on 
a  green  cushion  and  is  laid  on  a  jacinth  table  over  against 
the  Warden.  It  is  called  the  crown  of  all  earthly  riches, 
but  that  is  in  respect  of  its  feeding  properties,  of  which 
I  shall  speak  presently.  It  is  not  termed  a  stone,  which 
is  the  current  account  regarding  it,  till  the  Knight  hears 
its  history  from  the  lips  of  his  uncle  Trevrezent.  The 
names  which  are  then  applied  to  it  are  Pure  and  Precious, 

388 


The   German    Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Lapis  exilis  (literally,  Lapis  exilix,  but  this  is  a  scribe's 
mistake  and  is  nonsense),  and  it  is  also  that  stone  which 
causes  the  phoenix  to  renew  her  youth.  No  man  can  die 
for  eight  days  after  he  has  seen  it,  and — although  this 
virtue  is  forgotten  in  the  case  of  Titurel,  who  is  de- 
scribed as  an  ancient  of  days — those  who  can  look  on 
it  daily  remain  in  the  appearance  of  youth  for  ever.  It  is 
subject,  apparently,  to  a  periodical  diminution  of  virtue, 
and  it  is  re-charged  like  a  talisman  every  Good  Friday 
by  the  descent  of  a  dove  from  heaven  carrying  a  Sacred 
Host :  she  deposits  it  thereon,  and  so  returns  whence  she 
came.  It  follows  that  the  mystery  of  the  Parsifal  is 
certainly  an  Eucharistic  mystery,  although  at  a  far  distance, 
seeing  that  it  never  communicates  supersubstantial  bread. 
What  it  does  distribute  actually  we  have  learned  else- 
where, for  at  the  supper-table  in  the  Castle  it  acts  as  an 
inexhaustible  larder  and  superb  hotch-pot,  furnishing  hot 
or  cold,  wild  and  tame,  with  the  wine-cups  of  an  eternal 
tavern.  As  a  peace-offering  to  the  rational  understanding, 
there  is  a  vague  suggestion  that  the  stewards  of  the 
Castle  provide  the  salt,  pepper  and  sauces.  Wolfram 
von  Eschenbach  describes  this  abundance  as  (#)  earthly 
delight  in  the  plenary  realisation  thereof,  and  (<£)  joy 
which  he  is  justified  in  comparing  with  the  glories  of 
heaven's  gold  bar.  Long  researches  dispose  the  heart 
towards  patience — perhaps  because  of  their  weariness ; 
let  me  be  satisfied  therefore  with  registering  the  bare  fact 
that  this  story  is  supposed,  by  those  who  know,  to  be 
the  high  spiritual  quest  of  all,  on  which  authority  I  am 
casting  about  me  for  the  arch-natural  side  of  an  alder- 
man's dinner.  The  writing  on  the  Graal  Stone  might 
well  be :  esurientes  imp/evit  bonis.  I  note  also  that  in 
the  pageant  a  stone  is  put  upon  a  stone,  but  those  who 
remember  super  hanc  -petram  tedificabo  ecclesiam  meam  may 
be  asked  to  desist. 

The  sacred  character  of  this  wonderful  object — which 
solves  for  those  who  are  called  the  whole  difficulty  of 
getting  a  material  living — is  explained  by  the  antecedent 

389 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

part  of  its  history.  It  was  brought  to  this  earth  by  a 
company  of  angels,  who  gave  it  into  the  charge  of  certain 
baptized  men,  the  first  of  whom  was  Titurel.  In  the 
Northern  French  cycle  the  origin  of  the  Sacred  Vessel 
is  explained  in  a  manner  which,  within  its  own  limits, 
is  quite  intelligible ;  it  may  be  almost  said  to  begin  in 
Nature,  though  it  ends  in  the  Great  Mystery.  To  the 
Cup  used  by  Christ  at  the  Last  Supper  no  unusual  qualities 
attach ;  Robert  de  Borron  says  that  it  was  mout  genfy 
but  it  is  only  in  the  sense  of  an  utensil  at  the  period. 
This  is  probably  the  earliest  description  which  we  have,  and 
it  is  left  by  most  of  the  later  texts  in  similar  comparative 
simplicity.  The  arch-natural  character  resided  solely  in 
the  content.  To  sum  up,  the  chalice  of  the  French  cycle 
began  on  earth  and  was  taken  to  heaven,  but  the  history 
of  the  German  Hallow  is  the  converse  of  this ;  its  origin 
is  celestial,  but  in  the  end  it  is  left  on  earth.  Let  it  be 
remarked  in  conclusion  that  there  is  no  reason  assigned 
for  the  bringing  of  the  Graal  to  earth,  nor  do  we  hear  of 
its  purpose  or  nature  prior  to  this  event. 

The  Lesser  Hallows  of  the  story  have  scarcely  a  title 
to  the  name,  as  they  have  no  connection  with  the  Passion 
of  Christ  or  any  other  sacred  history.  The  Graal  King 
was  wounded  in  ordinary  warfare  by  a  poisoned  spear,  and 
this  was  exhibited  in  the  Castle,  but  not  as  a  memorial 
or  a  symbol  of  vengeance  to  come,  for  the  heathen  who 
smote  him  died  at  his  hands  in  the  joust.  We  know 
already  that  the  Lance  has  a  prodigal  faculty  of  bleeding, 
but  it  is  to  no  purpose.  The  Sword  seems  to  be  merely 
an  ordinary  weapon  of  excellent  quality  and  temper ;  it 
was  used  by  the  King  before  he  fell  into  sickness ;  it 
is  given  to  Parsifal  as  a  mark  of  hospitality  apparently  ; 
it  will  break  in  one  peril,  but  somehow  the  poet  for- 
gets and  the  event  does  not  come  to  pass.  No  Dish  is 
specified  as  part  of  the  official  procession  ;  and  the  two 
silver  knives,  though  they  have  a  certain  history,  for  they 
were  made  by  the  smith  Trebuchet,  serve  only  some 
dubious  purpose  in  connection  with  the  King's  sufferings. 

390 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

As  regards  these,  we  know  that  the  sin  of  Amfortas,  for 
which  he  has  been  punished  full  long  and  in  which  he 
awaits  the  help  of  the  mystic  question,  was  a  sin  of  earthly 
passion.  The  Graal  is  an  oracle  in  Wolfram,  as  it  is  in 
Robert  de  Borron,  but  according  to  the  latter  it  spoke, 
while  here  it  writes  only.  In  this  manner  it  calls  maidens 
and  men  from  any  place  in  the  world  to  enter  its  service, 
but  the  maidens  it  calls  openly  and  the  men  in  secret. 
It  also  appoints  the  successor  of  the  reigning  King  and 
the  wife  whom  he  must  take  unto  himself.  With  his 
exception,  the  life  of  celibacy  is  imposed  on  all  the 
chivalry  of  the  Castle.  With  the  women  it  seems  to 
have  been  different,  but  those  who  married  went  out 
into  the  world.  The  sin  of  Amfortas,  which  led  to  his 
grievous  wound,  was — as  I  have  just  said — a  sin  of 
earthly  passion,  but  not  apparently  of  that  kind  which  is 
consummated  in  shame.  The  Graal  had  not  announced 
that  this  keeper  should  take  a  wife,  and  he  had  gone 
before  its  judgment  by  choosing  a  lady  for  his  service,  in 
whose  honour  he  went  beyond  the  precincts  of  his  king- 
dom in  search  of  knightly  deeds.  She  was  the  Duchess 
Orgeluse,  who  became  subsequently  the  wife  of  Gawain. 
In  accepting  the  service  of  Amfortas,  as  later  that  of  her 
future  husband,  she  was  pursuing  only  a  mission  of 
vengeance  on  one  who  had  destroyed  the  prince  to  whom 
her  love  had  been  dedicated  from  the  first  days  of  desire. 
The  King  of  the  Graal  was  abroad  on  these  ventures 
when  he  met  in  a  joust  with  a  heathen,  who  had  come 
from  the  region  about  the  Earthly  Paradise  with  the 
ambition  of  winning  the  Graal.  We  have  seen  that  the 
unqualified  aspirant  after  the  secret  knowledge  died 
in  the  tourney,  but  Amfortas  went  home  carrying  the 
poisoned  spear-head  in  his  flesh,  and  thereafter  he  abode 
as  the  King  in  suffering  and  even  in  punishment.  It 
follows  that  the  cause  of  battle  was  true  and  righteous, 
but  the  motive  which  created  the  place  was,  I  suppose, 
the  root  of  offence,  and  for  that  he  was  bruised  grievously. 
All  the  resources  of  healing  were  sought  in  the  world  of 

391 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Nature  and  that  of  magical  art :  the  Graal  itself  in  vain ; 
in  vain  the  waters  of  Paradise ;  the  blood  of  the  Pelican, 
the  heart  of  the  Unicorn,  that  bough  which  the  Sybil 
gave  to  u^Eneas  as  a  palladium  against  Hades  and  its 
dangers,  and  the  magic  herb  which  springs  from  the 
blood  of  a  dragon — but  these  too  in  vain.  Finally,  the 
appeal  was  referred  to  the  Sacred  Talisman  by  offices  of 
prayer,  and  a  writing  which  appeared  thereon  announced 
the  condition  of  healing — to  wit,  the  visit  of  a  knight 
who  should  demand  knowledge  concerning  the  woe  of 
the  Castle.  It  is  the  only  version  in  which  this  Mystic 
Question  is  shown  to  originate  from  the  Graal  itself.  It 
is  also  the  only  version  in  which  sin  enters  the  Sanctuary, 
and  it  is  therefore  important  to  show  that  it  is  a  sin  of 
sense  in  the  lowest  degree ;  it  is  rather  a  transgression  of 
obedience.  There  are  stated  periods  in  the  story  for 
the  increase  of  the  King's  suffering,  being  the  close  of 
the  wandering  of  Saturn,  causing  frost  and  snow  in 
summer  on  the  heights  where  the  kingdom  is  situated. 
The  cold  is  agony  to  the  Keeper,  and  it  is  then  that  the 
poisoned  spear  is  used  to  pierce  him  again ;  it  re-opens 
the  wound,  but  it  keeps  him  alive,  for  it  draws  out  the 
frost  in  crystals — which  crystals  are  removed  apparently 
from  the  weapon  by  the  silver  knives  of  Trebuchet. 

The  Castle  in  Wolfram  is  supposed  to  have  been 
situated  on  the  northern  slope  of  the  mountains  of 
Gothic  Spain,  while  on  the  southern  side,  or  in  Moorish 
Spain,  was  the  Castle  built  by  Klingsor — that  is  to  say, 
Chateau  Merveil,  containing  the  Lit  Mervei!  of  the 
other  romances.  The  name  allocated  to  the  first  was 
that  of  the  eminence  itself — Mont  Salvaage,  Salvasch,  or 
Salvatch.  There  is  no  account  of  the  building  or  of  the 
incorporation  of  the  chivalry ;  but  (a)  the  Graal  Knights 
are  chosen,  as  we  have  seen,  by  the  Graal  itself  as 
opportunity  offers  or  circumstances  seem  to  require ;  (^) 
they  may  be  elected  in  childhood ;  (^)  they  constitute 
an  aggressive  military  order,  going  sometimes  on  long 
missions ;  (^/)  they  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  perfect  nor 

392 


The   German    Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

yet  as  an  invincible  chivalry,  for  one  of  them  is  over- 
thrown by  Parsifal  in  combat,  when  on  his  quest  of  the 
Castle ;  and  here,  as  in  other  respects  (i)  they  recall  and 
are  practically  identified  by  Wolfram  with  the  Knights 
Templars,  having  also  the  same  order  name.  Scholars 
who  have  investigated  this  part  of  the  subject  trace  a 
distinct  connection  between  the  House  of  Anjou  and  the 
Graal  Brotherhood  ;  it  should  be  added  that  the  line- 
age of  Anjou  is  the  subject  of  continual  reference  in 
Wolfram's  poem,  and  Parsifal  is  of  that  legitimacy. 

At  the  beginning  of  his  chronicle  Wolfram  testifies  to 
a  single  prototype  from  which  alone  he  drew ;  he  cites  its 
authority  continually  in  the  course  of  his  poem  ;  in  one 
place  he  gives  a  very  full  account  of  it ;  and  he  testi- 
fies concerning  it  at  the  end.  He  knew  otherwise  of 
Chretien's  version,  but  he  suggests  that  it  was  the  wrong 
story,  with  which  the  fountain-head  might  be  reasonably 
indignant.  The  authentic  text  was  the  work  of  Guiot 
de  Provence,  and  from  that  region  it  was  brought  into 
the  German  fatherland.  It  was  not  invented  by  Guiot, 
but  was  found  by  him  under  circumstances  the  account 
of  which  is  in  one  respect  a  little  out  of  harmony  with 
itself.  It  lay  rejected  or  forgotten  in  the  city  of  Toledo, 
and  being  in  the  Arabic  tongue,  the  first  task  of  Guiot 
was  to  learn  that  language.  This  he  accomplished  by 
the  sacramental  grace  of  baptism  and  the  holy  illumi- 
nation of  faith.  Without  these  aids  to  interpre- 
tation the  tale  would  have  remained  in  concealment, 
for,  according  to  its  own  testimony,  no  pagan  talents 
could  have  expressed  the  great  mystery  which  reposes 
in  the  Graal.  This  is  so  far  clear,  but  the  difficulty  is 
that  it  was  written  in  the  first  place  by  one  who  ranks 
as  a  heathen  for  Wolfram — that  is  to  say,  one  who  on 
the  father's  side  was  a  worshipper  of  idols,  though  on  the 
mother's,  apparently,  of  the  royal  line  of  Solomon.  This 
was  in  the  days  which  preceded  Christ,  and  the  Jew  was 
the  first  in  this  world  who  ever  spoke  of  the  Graal. 
That  which  enabled  him  to  do  so  was  his  gift  of  reading 

393 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  stars,  wherein  he  saw  wondrous  secrets,  for  the  story 
of  the  Graal  was  written  in  a  celestial  galaxy.  On  this 
basis  the  scribe  wrote  more  especially  concerning  the 
descent  of  angels  to  earth  carrying  the  sacred  object  and 
concerning  certain  baptized  men  who  were  placed  in 
charge  thereof.  This  being  the  record  attributed  to  a 
Jew  before  the  first  dispensation  had  suffered  super- 
session, no  one  will  be  surprised  to  learn  that  his  name 
was  Flegetanis  ;  but  here  ends  the  account  concerning  him. 
Guiot  may  have  been,  reasonably  or  not,  dissatisfied  with 
the  transcript  from  the  starry  heavens,  but  he  confesses 
only  to  anxiety  about  the  identity  of  those  who  had  been 
appointed  the  wardens,  and  after  consulting  old  Latin 
works,  he  went  in  quest  of  them  through  France,  Britain 
and  Ireland,  but  did  not  attain  what  he  wanted  until  he 
arrived  in  Anjou,  where  he  found  the  story  of  the 
Keepers  faithfully  and  truly  registered — that  is  to  say, 
concerning  Titurel,  Frimutel  and  Amfortas.  It  is  clear 
therefore  that  the  Jew  of  Toledo  told  the  early  history 
of  the  Graal  but  gave  no  version  of  the  Quest.  I  deduce 
from  these  data  two  conclusions,  one  of  which  is  specu- 
lative and  personal  to  myself  at  the  moment :  (a)  The 
appeal  of  Guiot,  like  all  the  other  romancers,  is  to 
an  antecedent  authority  and,  like  some  of  them,  to  a 
primordial  text ;  (b)  the  story  of  Flegetanis  has  suffered 
what  is  termed  contamination  by  the  introduction  of 
extraneous  matter,  being  all  that  which  was  not  included 
in  the  record  of  the  starry  heavens,  for  which  reason  I 
set  down  as  a  tolerable  presumption  that  neither  Guiot 
nor  Wolfram  told  the  true  story,  however  ample  the 
evidence  on  which  the  version  of  Chretien  was  con- 
demned. I  suppose  that  I  shall  be  accused  of  fooling  or 
alternatively  of  preternatural  gravity,  but  I  mention  these 
matters  because  of  what  will  be  said  hereafter  concerning 
a  lost  book  of  the  Graal.  Three  points  remain  to  be 
mentioned  here:  (i)  Guiot  seems  to  have  cautioned 
those  who  reproduced  his  story  to  hide  the  chief  matters 
until  the  end  thereof,  and  this  is  cited  by  Wolfram, 

394 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

though  it  can  be  said  scarcely  that  he  carried  out  the 
injunction  ;  (2)  if  Wolfram  followed  Guiot,  and  him 
only,  it  seems  certain  that  Guiot  himself  recounted 
several  adventures  to  which  his  translator  alludes  merely 
in  passing;  however,  they  do  not  concern  us;  (3)  the 
authority  of  Guiot,  though  often  held  to  be  an  invention 
of  Wolfram  to  conceal  his  indebtedness  to  Chretien,  has 
of  late  years  been  demonstrated. 

The  consideration  of  the  Graal  as  a  stone  belongs  to  a 
later  book  of  my  experiment,  but  that  the  coming  event 
may  cast  its  shadow  on  these  particular  pages,  I  will  add 
here  a  few  subjects  of  reflection ;  they  will  prepare  the 
ground  for  those  who  have  ears  to  hear  me,  even  if  they 
are  as  a  rock  of  offence  to  some  others  who  are  impatient 
of  ways  in  thought  which  they  have  not  sought  to  enter. 
(A)  For  Lapis  exilis — in  any  higher  sense — I  should  read 
only  Lapis  angularis,  but  this  is  put  forward  rather  by 
way  of  interpretation  than  of  alternative  or  amendment. 
We  have  seen  that  the  term  exilis  is  the  speculative  con- 
struction of  a  nonsensical  word,  and  as  such  it  does  not 
help  towards  understanding ;  if  there  were  authority  to 
support  it,  one  would  recall  that  passage  in  Wolfram's 
Quest  which  says  that  in  the  hands  of  her  who  was 
qualified  by  grace  to  carry  it,  the  Graal  was  a  light 
burden,  but  it  was  heavy  beyond  endurance  for  those 
who  were  unworthy.  In  this  respect  it  was  like  the 
Liber  exilis,  which  was  held  by  the  hermit  of  the  Book 
of  the  Holy  Graal  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  but  this 
unrolled  in  his  rendering  till  it  grew  to  be  a  goodly 
folio.  (5)  Whosoever  says  Lapis  angularis  in  this  con- 
nection should  add  super  hanc  petram.  (C)  It  is  true 
also  that  he  who  wrote  Lapis  exilis — if  indeed  he  wrote 
it — implied  as  its  complement :  nobis  post  hoc  exilium 
ostende.  (D)  This  stone  is  the  head  of  the  corner  and 
the  key  of  the  Royal  Arch.  (£)  The  Stone  which  tinges 
is  also  the  Stone  which  burns ;  if  not,  the  Phoenix  would 
fail  of  rebirth.  (F)  There  is  another  form  of  the  Graal 
Mystery  in  which  men  ask  for  Bread  and  are  given  a  Stone, 

395 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

but  this  is  Lapis  exilii — a  healing  nutriment,  and  it  is 
designed  to  restore  the  Banished  Prince  on  his  return 
home.  (G)  It  can  be  well  understood  that  the  stars  over 
the  Graal  speak  in  a  strange  language.  (//)  I  rule  there- 
fore that  much  remains  to  be  said  for  the  clear  sight  of 
that  Son  of  Israel  and  Paganism  who  found  the  Graal- 
record  in  a  galaxy  of  stars,  and  though  the  method  by 
which  that  record  is  decoded  will  not  be  found  in  the 
course  of  a  day's  reading  at  any  observatory,  I  am  quite 
sure  that  the  stars  still  tell  the  same  story,  that  it  is  also 
the  true  story,  which  owes  nothing  to  the  Chronicles 
of  Anjou.  (/)  When  the  Jew  of  Toledo  read  in  the  great 
sky,  as  in  a  glass  of  vision,  it  does  not  mean  that  he 
arranged  the  fixed  lights  into  conventional  forms,  but  that 
he  divined  as  a  devout  astronomer.  (J)  The  Mystery 
which  the  stars  expressed  is  that  by  which,  in  the  last  con- 
sideration, all  the  material  planets  are  themselves  ruled. 

Let  those  who  will  chide  me  on  the  ground  that  .1 
"  sit  and  play  with  similes,"  but  this  is  the  kind  of 
symbolism  which  Guiot  de  Provence  might  have  brought 
over  from  the  place  which  he  terms  Toledo,  and  this  the 
imputed  Jew  of  that  city  might  have  read  in  the  starry 
heavens.  In  the  chronicles  of  Anjou,  or  their  substi- 
tutes, Guiot  might  have  found  the  remanents  of  the  Bowl 
of  Plenty  and  even  some  far-away  fable  concerning  a 
certain  Stone  of  which  Templar  initiation  could  speak  to 
the  higher  members  of  that  Order  of  Chivalry ;  but  the 
two  notions  do  not  stand  even  in  the  remote  relation 
which  subsists  between  Aleph  and  Tau. 

Lastly,  and  that  I  may  act  on  myself  as  a  moderator, 
if  there  or  here  I  should  seem  to  have  suggested  that  an 
enthusiasm  has  exaggerated  the  Parsifal,  I  have  spoken  of 
things  as  they  appear  on  the  surface  and  as  they  have  been 
understood  thereon  by  those  who  have  preceded  me.  We 
shall  see  in  its  place  whether  there  is  another  sense,  and 
the  readers  to  whom  I  appeal  may  have  marked  enough 
in  my  bare  summary  of  the  text  to  conclude  that  there  is. 
I  place  it  at  the  moment  only  as  a  tolerable  inference. 

396 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy    Graal 


II 

GLEANINGS  CONCERNING  THE  LOST  QUEST 
OF  GUIOT  DE  PROVENCE 

Astronomers  have  recognised  in  the  past  the  in- 
fluence of  certain  planets  prior  to  their  discovery,  and 
subsequently  this  has  verified  their  prescience.  In  like 
manner,  the  influence  of  that  French  poem  which  is 
ascribed  to  the  Provencal  Guiot  is  discernible  after 
several  modes  in  the  German  cycle,  and  the  fact  is  no 
less  important,  even  if  the  providence  of  books  should 
not  in  fine  lead  us  to  the  discovery  of  the  missing  text. 
It  is  at  present  a  lost  planet  which  will  not  "  swim  into 
our  ken."  I  think  that  there  are  difficulties  in  Wolfram's 
references  to  the  poem  which  may  be  classed  as  almost 
insuperable  by  persons  who  are  unacquainted  with  the 
literature  of  hidden  traditions :  to  these  they  are  the 
kind  of  difficulties  which — as  Newman  once  said  in 
another  connection — do  not  make  one  doubt.  At  the 
same  time  the  legend  of  the  lost  story  occupies  a  position 
in  the  cycles  which,  without  being  in  any  way  abnormal, 
is  in  several  respects  remarkable.  In  the  past,  as  I  have 
said,  there  was  one  phase  of  criticism  which  regarded 
the  whole  crux  as  nothing  more  than  the  invention  of 
Wolfram  to  conceal  the  real  fact  that  he  borrowed  from 
Chretien.  Being  the  finding  of  certain  German  scholars 
concerning  the  work  of  their  countryman,  it  was  entitled 
to  a  tempered  respect  antecedently,  but  it  was  at  no  time 
tolerable  in  its  pretension  and  has  been  since  made  void. 
Wolfram  lays  claim  to  nothing  so  little  as  origination, 
and  I  know  not  why  his  literary  vanity  should  have  been 
consoled  better  by  a  false  than  a  true  ascription  in  respect 
of  his  source,  more  especially  as  in  either  case  he  would 
be  confessing  to  a  French  poet.  The  suggestion,  in  fine, 
would  account  only  for  a  part  of  the  field  which  he 

397 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

covered,   as  we  know  that    Chretien   fell  far   short    of 
completing  his  task. 

The  bare  facts  of  the  existence  of  Guiot  and  his  poem 
were  determined,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  for  the  first  time, 
and,  as  it  is  thought,  indubitably,  by  the  publication  of 
the  Saone  de  Nausay  in  1902.  It  has  attracted  little  atten- 
tion, but  the  fact  of  its  existence  and  the  important  evi- 
dence which  it  offers  to  our  particular  subject  have  been  at 
least  stated  in  England.  It  is  an  exceedingly  curious  text, 
and  in  respect  of  Graal  matters  it  has  weird  and  scoriated 
reflections  of  the  Joseph  legend.  But  one  reference  to 
his  son  as  the  first  consecrated  bishop  indicates  that  cycle 
of  French  texts  into  which  it  would  fall  if  there  were 
occasion  to  class  it.  The  Graal  is  represented  in  the 
light  of  a  general  healing  vessel,  which  we  know  other- 
wise to  be  in  a  sporadic  sense  its  office,  though  it  could 
do  nothing  within  the  charmed  circle  of  its  own  sanctuary 
for  those  who  belonged  thereto. 

Much  about  the  time  that  this  poem  was  put  at  the 
disposition  more  especially  of  German  scholarship,  there 
was  an  attempt  in  the  same  country  to  show  that  the 
reputed  Provencal  Guiot  was  a  priest  of  the  Church  in 
Britain,  and  that  he  died  Bishop  of  Durham.  I  do  not 
know  how  this  opinion  may  have  impressed  those  who 
are  most  qualified  to  judge,  but  at  least  in  France  and 
England  it  was  passed  over  in  complete  silence. 

The  evidences  and  speculations  with  which  we  have 
been  just  dealing — while,  on  the  one  hand,  they  satisfy 
us  regarding  the  existence  of  Guiot  and  the  poem 
connected  with  his  name,  and,  on  the  other,  create  some 
bare  and  tentative  presumption  regarding  his  identity — 
are  of  no  material  assistance  in  respect  of  the  problems 
which  are  raised  by  his  work  as  it  is  reflected  in  the  Quest 
of  Wolfram.  If  we  accept  the  Durham  hypothesis  of  Dr. 
Paul  Hagan  it  follows  not  only  that  Guiot  de  Provence  no 
doubt  anteceded  Chretien  de  Troyes,  but — so  doing — that 
he  was  the  first  recorded  writer  who  told  the  history  of 
the  Graal,  regarded  as  a  Christian  Hallow,  and  the  Quest 

398 


The   German    Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

thereof.  If  we  set  aside  this  hypothesis,  I  suppose  that 
it  is  an  open  question  as  to  the  succession  of  the  two 
poets  in  time,  and  whether  one  derived  from  another  or 
both  from  a  common  source.  There  is  a  disposition 
— if  speaking  of  it  be  worth  while,  when  the  subject  is 
so  precarious — to  regard  Guiot  as  first  in  the  point 
of  time.  We  know  only  that  both  poets  appealed  to 
a  source,  and  that,  on  the  surface  at  least,  the  appeals 
are  exclusive  mutually.  To  his  authority  Wolfram 
seems  to  refer  as  if  he  were  an  old  writer,  but  in 
ascriptions  of  this  kind  the  years  tend  to  dissolve 
rather  rapidly  into  generations.  If,  however,  we  assign 
the  superior  antiquity  to  Guiot,  it  may  be  thought  not 
unreasonably  that  the  alleged  source  of  Chretien — the 
mellor  conte  qui  sou  contes  en  court  roial — was  actually  the 
Quest  of  the  Provengal.  Textual  scholarship,  however, 
which  is  much  the  best  judge  in  these  matters,  is  tempted, 
I  believe,  to  conclude  that  it  was  not  a  quest  at  all. 
On  the  other  hand,  except  for  personal  predispositions 
— to  one  of  which  I  have  confessed — there  is  little  to 
warrant  the  supposition  that  it  was  a  pious  local  legend, 
like  that  which  was  produced  at  Fecamp,  because  in 
Chretien,  as  in  Guiot,  the  Graal  Hallows  are  not  relics 
of  the  Passion.  There  is  an  inclination  at  the  present 
day  to  account  for  Chretien's  vagueness  regarding  his 
central  sacred  or  talismanic  object  by  assuming  that  he 
had  heard  only  vaguely  concerning  it  on  his  own  part ; 
that  he  introduced  it  in  an  arbitrary  manner ;  and  that  it 
was  quite  purposeless  in  his  Quest.  I  do  not  think  that 
this  will  bear  examination,  more  especially  in  the  light 
of  Guiot,  who,  as  we  have  seen,  counselled  those  who 
followed  him  to  hide  the  tale  at  the  beginning  till  it 
was  unfolded  gradually  in  its  narration.  In  accordance 
with  this,  Wolfram  is  not  much  more  explanatory  at 
the  beginning  than  his  antecedent  in  Northern  France, 
though  the  latter  falls  short  at  the  point  where  the  Ger- 
man poet  himself  begins  to  develop — that  is  to  say,  in 
the  interview  between  Perceval  and  his  hermit  uncle. 

399 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

However  this  may  be,  it  is  most  important  to  note  (a)  the 
absence  of  the  Passion-relics  in  both  poets,  and  (£)  the 
absence  of  the  feeding  qualities  of  the  Graal  in  Chretien, 
thus,  in  my  opinion,  (<:)  disposing  of  any  theory  that 
he  derived  from  Guiot,  supposing  that  these  elements 
were  present  in  Guiot's  text.  On  this  last  point,  as  the 
evidences  which  can  be  extracted  from  Wolfram  leave 
much  to  be  desired  in  respect  of  fulness,  the  question 
remains  open.  While  he  states  in  the  first  place  that  he 
knows  of  no  other  witness,  the  third  book  seems  to  speak 
in  the  plural  of  those  who  told  the  story  before  him  and, 
at  the  same  time,  having  regard  to  his  judgment  con- 
cerning Chretien,  he  can  scarcely  have  held  that  it  was 
recited  to  any  purpose  by  him.  The  Provencal,  on  the 
German's  authority,  gave  it  to  the  very  end — which, 
I  suppose,  means  to  the  winning  of  the  Graal  by  Parsifal. 
Yet  it  is  certain  on  the  text  only  that  he  is  responsible 
for  (i)  The  Arabian  source  of  the  Graal  story;  (2)  the 
names  of  its  appointed  Keepers;  (3)  the  history  of 
Gawain,  or  at  least  some  part  thereof;  and  (4)  the 
kinship  of  Parsifal  and  Sigune.  It  is  difficult  in  several 
respects  to  follow  Guiot  as  he  is  represented  by  Wolfram 
solely,  though  additamenta  gathered  from  later  sources  lie 
under  the  suspicion  of  false  and  invented  ascriptions. 
The  Graal  itself  is  a  case  in  point ;  there  is  a  later  report 
that  it  was  originally  a  stone  in  the  crown  of  Lucifer, 
which  I  do  not  find  in  the  Parsifal.  Assuming  that  this 
account  was  derived  from  Guiot,  one  is  inclined  to 
speculate  whether  the  feeding  properties  of  the  talismanic 
object  could  have  been  a  part  of  his  scheme,  as  the 
two  notions  are  quite  foreign  to  each  other,  and  yet 
the  Dish  of  Plenty  looms  so  largely  in  Wolfram  that  it 
is  difficult  to  predicate  its  absence  in  his  palmary  source. 
At  the  same  time,  though  Wolfram  acknowledged,  as 
I  have  said,  no  other  exemplar,  he  did  adopt  extrinsic 
materials,  as,  for  example,  the  legend  of  Lohengrin  from 
the  Lorraine  epic  cycle.  To  increase  the  confusion, 
the  stone  is  identified  in  Parsifal  with  the  fabulous  or 

400 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

symbolic  Phoenix,  and  thus  recalls  the  Phenicite  Stone 
of  Dioscorides.  In  this  connection,  it  has  not  been  noticed 
that  one  of  the  myths  incorporated  by  the  Book  of 
the  Holy  Graal  concerns  a  bird  similar  to  the  Phoenix,  but 
more  extravagantly  described.  After  laying  her  eggs  this 
bird  is  said  to  make  use  of  a  stone  called  Piratite,  found 
in  the  valley  of  Hebron,  the  property  of  which  is  to  burn 
anything  that  rubs  it,  and  it  is  supposed  to  consume  the 
bird.  It  is  not  the  Lapis  Judaicus  or  Thecolithos^  but 
apparently  the  Black  Pyrites,  which,  according  to  Pliny, 
burns  the  hand  when  touched.  The  same  fable  says 
that  the  name  given  to  the  bird  is  Serpelion,  but  hereto 
I  find  no  reference.  Neither  on  this  nor  on  another 
consideration  can  Wolfram's  historical  account  of  the 
Graal  be  held  to  explain  its  imputed  sacred  character,  and 
it  is  not  surprising  that  no  spiritual  exaltation  seems  to 
follow  its  presence.  If  the  vague  story  does  not  imply 
the  later  legend  of  the  Crown  of  Lucifer,  there  is  no 
explanation  of  its  origin  or  of  its  supposed  custody  by 
the  fallen  angels  of  the  air,  though  part  at  least  of  this 
story  is  repudiated  afterwards  by  the  person  who  relates 
it  to  Parsifal.  Why  it  was  sent  by  God,  what  purpose 
was  served  by  its  presence  on  earth,  in  what  sense  the 
stone  which  consumes  the  Phoenix  is  identical  with  the 
talisman  which  supplies  inexhaustible  delicacies  ready 
dressed  and  cooked  at  a  banquet — these  things  remain 
a  mystery,  and  if  any  explanation  were  possible  on  the 
assumption  of  a  subsurface  sense,  the  presentation  would 
remain  and  is  the  worst  form  of  the  legend  on  the  official 
and  extant  side. 

Fortunately,  its  mere  presentation  disposes  of  the 
suggestion  that  Guiot  was  heretical  in  his  tendencies. 
This  has  arisen  in  part  out  of  the  Templar  element, 
which  is  so  obvious  in  the  Parsifal,  and  for  the  rest  out  of 
the  Albigensian  implications,  which  may  be  thought  to 
underlie  at  the  period  any  text  connected,  directly  or 
otherwise,  with  the  South  of  France.  We  have  seen 
that  the  charge  against  Wolfram  is  without  foundation, 

401  2  c 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  utterly.  There  is  no  Mass  of  the  Graal  in  the 
Parsifal,  no  priestly  character  in  the  Wardens,  no  kind 
of  competition  with  Church  claims,  no  interference  with 
ecclesiastical  matters.  If  it  be  said  that  the  arch-con- 
secrated Host  brought  down  from  Heaven  to  renew  the 
virtues  of  the  Graal  constitutes  a  questionable  element, 
that  must  depend  upon  the  general  context,  and  in  the 
light  of  this  it  raises  no  difficulty.  There  is  a  significant 
absence  of  suggestion  that  souls  are  sustained  through 
the  Graal  from  a  superior  channel  of  grace  than  can 
be  claimed  by  the  official  Church,  for  on  the  surface  sense 
of  the  text  it  is  the  bodies  of  the  confraternity  which, 
owing  to  the  Graal  and  its  annual  renewal,  were  fed  by  the 
Host,  while  the  recipients,  including  the  Keepers,  were  not 
preserved  thereby  in  a  catholic  state  of  sanctity.  This  is 
folly  and  all  confusion,  but  it  is  not  heresy  by  intention  ; 
it  is  a  muddled  thesis  concerning  a  grotesque  object,  of 
all  things  least  sacred  in  the  world  of  imaginative  writing  ; 
it  is  worse  than  the  Fecamp  reliquary  as  compared  with 
other  legends  of  Joseph  of  Arimathasa  ;  in  a  word,  it  is 
on  a  due  and  just  level  with  the  moral  elevation  which  is 
ascribed  spuriously  to  the  epic.  The  story  of  Perceval  was 
never  written  at  all  till  the  task  was  undertaken  by  the 
unknown  author  of  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval,  and  so  far 
as  we  can  trace  the  hand  of  Guiot  in  Wolfram,  those  so- 
called  Chronicles  of  Anjou  must  have  taken  him  far  from 
the  term. 

Varied  and  considerable  learning  is  ascribed  to  Guiot 
de  Provence,  and,  among  many  indirect  evidences,  this 
is  suggested  by  the  circumstances  under  which,  in  his 
own  turn,  he  claims  to  have  derived  the  fundamental 
part  of  his  story.  We  know  that  his  alleged  source  was 
written  in  the  Arabic  tongue  ;  that  the  recipient  inprimis^m 
far  pre-Christian  days,  was  a  Jew  who  on  one  side  of  his 
parentage  was  also  of  pagan  stock ;  and  that  in  fine  the 
old  and  old  chronicle  was  lying  neglected  and  forgotten 
among  the  undemonstrable  archives  of  Toledo.  We  have 
seen  further  that  above  this  story  on  earth  there  was  an 

402 


The   German    Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

eternal  story  in-  heaven,  as  the  last  possible  antecedent  of 
all  records,  and  it  was  therein  that  the  Jew  read,  while 
the  beating  of  his  own  pulses  alone  throbbed  in  the  silent 
spaces.  But  as  it  is  desirable  to  give  a  certain  local  touch 
to  these  abstruse  matters,  I  have  mentioned  that  the  Jew's 
name  was  Flegetanis,to  increase  the  verisimilitude  of  which 
we  may  memorise  the  fact  that  he  wrote  in  Arabic  rather 
than  m  Hebrew.  The  baths  of  disillusion  are  colder  than 
those  of  Apollo,  and  from  all — if  any  there  be — who  can 
dream  that  these  things  were  possible  individually  before, 
or  collectively  after,  the  manifested  Light  of  the  World, 
we  may  well  cry  with  devotion  our  Libera  nos,  Domine. 
The  fact  which  remains  is  that  Flegetanis  read  in  the 
starry  heavens,  and  that  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal 
a  person  of  this  name,  or  nearly,  was  the  mother  of 
Celidoine,  who  was  born  under  such  high  stellar  auspices 
and  himself  divined  by  the  stars.  In  such  strange  ways 
does  one  of  the  latest  histories  seem  to  draw  from 
another  which  is  earliest  by  the  high  imputation  of  things  ; 
only  these  two  texts  contain  the  Celtic  name  in  question, 
and  these  only  produce  from  their  hidden  source  in 
common  the  myth  which  exceeds  explication  concerning 
the  Phoenix  bird  and  the  ardent  stone.  It  is  in  connections 
of  this  kind  that  one  occasionally  obtains,  out  of  all 
expectation,  a  certain  extrinsic  light.  The  suggestion 
that,  at  however  far  a  distance,  there  may  have  been 
the  hand  of  Jewry  in  the  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal 
might  well  be  a  source  of  scandal.  But  the  Provengal 
Guiot  was,  as  we  have  seen,  a  man  of  curious  learning, 
and  by  a  somewhat  precarious  induction  it  is  supposed 
that  he  was  a  student  at  Toledo  in  those  days  when  the 
relations  between  Southern  France  and  Northern  Spain 
may  be  described  as  intimate.  Whatever  be  the  merits 
or  otherwise  of  this  supposition,  it  is  certain  that  in  one 
curious  respect  he  gives  evidence  of  an  acquaintance 
with  the  secret  ways  of  Israel.  One  of  the  interminable 
discourses  comprised  in  the  collection  of  the  Zohar  states 
that  in  the  whole  extent  of  the  heavens,  the  circumference 

403 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

of  which  surrounds  the  world,  there  are  figures  and  there 
are  signs  by  means  of  which  the  deepest  mysteries  may  be 
discovered.  These  figures  are  formed  by  galaxies  and  con- 
stellations of  stars,  which  are  for  the  sage  a  subject  of  con- 
templation and  a  source  of  mysterious  delights.  The 
simple  indication  in  the  great  canon  of  the  Kabalah  is  the 
root-matter  of  all  Hebrew  astrology,  and  the  reader  who 
is  sufficiently  curious  may  consult  on  the  whole  subject 
certain  Unheard-of  Curiosities  collected  by  James  Gaffarel, 
where  he  will  find  the  celestial  constellations  expressed  by 
Hebrew  characters  and  the  celestial  Hebrew  alphabet. 
It  follows  that  all  mysteries  resident  in  the  letters  and 
their  combinations  would  be  indubitably  in  the  starry 
heavens,  and  the  mysterious  inspiration  which,  according  to 
Guiot's  story,  fell  on  the  Jew  of  Toledo  represents  a  mode 
of  divination  which  in  that  place  was  well  known  and  in 
practice  at  that  period.  It  will,  I  hope,  be  understood 
that  nothing  follows  from  this  fact  except  that  by  a 
curious  instance  I  have  illustrated  the  curious  learning 
which  must  have  been  possessed  indubitably  by  the 
Proven9al  poet. 

The  considerations  of  this  section  are  far  indeed  from 
our  term,  but,  as  seen  already,  something  remains  to  be 
said,  when  the  pageant  draws  to  its  close,  concerning  the 
second  sense  of  Guiot  and  his  German  reflection. 


Ill 

SIDELIGHTS   FROM   THE   SPANISH  AND 
PORTUGUESE   QUESTS 

The  German  cycle  of  the  Holy  Graal  owes  nothing  to 
the  romances  of  Merlin,  and  it  embodies  no  attempt  to 
incorporate  Arthurian  history,  except  in  so  far  as  this  is  in 
close  consanguinity  with  its  own  purpose.  A  few  frag- 
ments make  it  evident  that  archaic  Proven9al  literature 
once  included  some  translation  of  Merlin,  but  whether  it 

404 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

exceeded  the  point  reached  by  the  poem  of  Robert  de 
Borron  or  its  prose  rendering  there  is  no  evidence  to 
show.  Speaking  antecedently,  from  the  great  body  of 
romance  which  was  produced  in  Spain,  we  might  have 
expected  many  reflections  therein,  but  we  know  only 
(a)  of  simple  allusions  scattered  through  the  interminable 
books  of  chivalry,  and  (b)  of  three  printed  texts,  two  of 
which  I  have  cited  by  a  bare  allusion  already.  El  baladro 
del  sabio  Merlin  is  in  substance  a  rendering  of  the  Huth 
manuscript,  and  all  that  we  have  heard  concerning  it  has 
been  given  us  by  Gaston  Paris.  The  second  text  is  Merlin 
y  demanda  del  Santo  Grial,  so  that  the  Quest — and  it  is 
the  Great  Quest — did  enter  the  Peninsula.  I  do  not  know 
under  whose  eyes  it  has  fallen  in  these  places  of  the 
world,  and  it  is  only  from  sparse  references  in  German 
authors  that  I  have  been  able  to  certify  even  to  this 
extent.  There  is,  however,  La  Demanda  del  santo  Grial, 
which  appeared  at  Toledo  in  1515,  of  which  I  shall 
speak  in  the  Appendix. 

Portugal  had  also  its  solitary  version  of  the  Galahad 
Quest,  and  probably  it  is  much  more  important  than  that 
which  we  meet  with  in  Spain,  for  it  has  been  found  to 
contain  the  missing  final  part  of  the  Huth  Merlin.  Some 
years  ago  an  attempt  was  made  to  re-edit  it,  not  from 
the  printed  version,  but  from  a  Viennese  manuscript.  I 
cannot  trace  that  the  task  was  ever  completed,  and  in  so 
far  as  the  text  is  available  in  this  fragmentary  manner, 
the  variations  from  the  normal  versions  of  the  Quest, 
though  interesting  to  textual  scholars,  are  not  important 
to  us.  The  Viennese  manuscript  seems  to  have  included 
also  some  form  of  the  Morte  d  Arthur.  It  may  be  termed 
composite  in  character,  as  it  introduces  matter  which 
seems  extraneous  to  the  Quest.  It  is  also  in  another 
key ;  there  is  even  a  wooing  of  Galahad  ;  Palamades 
reappears  therein ;  so  also  does  Tristram.  As  a  note  in 
fine  on  the  whole  subject,  it  should  be  said  that,  all  com- 
munications notwithstanding  between  Southern  France  and 
Spain  and  all  Spanish-Oriental  allusions  reflected  into  the 

405 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

Parsifal  of  Wolfram  from  the  Quest  of  Guiot,  the  rumour 
of  the  Graal  which  reached  the  Peninsula  was  of  Galahad 
rather  than  another.  The  Tcmplcisin,  the  Stone,  the 
hierarchy  of  fallen  angels,  have  no  part  therein.  And 
so,  as  I  have  just  hinted,  there  is  a  certain  intellectual 
consolation  in  knowing  that  the  Quest  of  Galahad  did 
pass  into  the  life  of  Spanish  romantic  chivalry.  One 
would  have  thought  that  it  must  have  had  a  great  vogue 
where  the  sons  and  daughters  of  desire  accepted  so 
easily  in  their  hearts  some  phase  at  least  of  desire  in  the 
life  of  devotion.  This,  of  course,  was  not  to  be  expected 
at  the  period  of  its  production,  but  in  that  much  later 
century  when  the  literature  of  chivalry  itself  began  to 
assume  the  official  draperies  of  religion.  The  new  aspect 
was  unfortunately  at  once  conventional  and  extravagant, 
and  perhaps  the  Quest  was  too  spiritual  in  the  tran- 
scendental degree  for  it  to  be  quite  within  the  compass  of 
the  Iberian  mind.  The  tendency  which  produced  The 
Book  of  Celestial  Chivalry  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth 
century  originated  much  earlier,  and  that  which  made 
Esplandian  or  Don  Belianis  of  Greece  as  if  it  were  peers 
of  Christ,  when  Christ  became  a  knight-errant,  had  long 
before  registered  the  vocation  of  Galahad  as  a  thing  un- 
realisable.  Whether  the  Quest  was  known  to  Cervantes 
is  interesting  at  once  and  insoluble,  for  it  did  not  enter 
into  the  catalogue  of  Don  Quixote's  library,  either  for 
praise  or  blame.  However  this  may  be,  those  who  are 
acquainted  with  the  Book  of  Celestial  Chivalry  and  kindred 
productions  will  be  in  a  position  to  appreciate  the  kind 
of  inhibition  which  seems  to  have  befallen  the  flights  of 
romance  when  they  sought  to  body  forth  the  aspirations  and 
emotions  towards  things  unseen.  It  is  a  condition  which  is 
the  more  curious  when  we  remember  the  Ascent  of  Mount 
Carmel)  the  Dark  Night  of  the  Soul  and  all  that  which  is 
told  us  of  worlds  too  seldom  realised  by  Peter  de  Avila 
and  Molinos.  In  some  of  the  books  which  are  attributed, 
falsely  enough,  to  Raymond  Lully — but  for  which  a 
Spanish  source  can  perhaps  be  predicated  reasonably — and 

406 


The   German    Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

in  the  theosophical  quests  and  ventures  through  the 
tangled  skein  of  the  Zohar,  there  is  more  of  the  true  spirit 
of  romance  than  in  all  Spanish  tales  of  chivalry,  if  we  set 
aside  those  of  Amadis  and  Palmerin.  All  that  follows 
thereafter  shows  only  that  there  were  other  and  drearier 
enchantments  than  those  of  Logres. 

The  claims  of  this  sub-section  cannot  be  regarded  as 
high  in  respect  of  sidelights,  but  seeing  that  my  least 
concern  of  all  is  to  establish  an  exhaustive  scheme  of 
texts,  it  follows  that  I  must  confess  to  some  other  motive 
for  its  inclusion,  restricted  as  in  space  it  is.  My  purpose 
is  therefore  to  show  that  to  none  of  the  romance  coun- 
tries— France  excepted — did  the  cycle  of  Perceval  ap- 
peal, and,  I  believe,  for  another  cause  than  the  mere 
fact  that  the  later  Merlin,  the  Lancelot,  the  Quest  of  Gala- 
had were  in  prose,  while  some  of  the  Perceval  stories 
were  cast  in  verse,  which  may  have  offered  a  difficulty. 
Even  if  the  fact  were  due  to  the  accidents  of  that  which 
was  most  available,  I  hold  it  a  felicitous  accident  that 
only  Seville  produced  a  quest  of  Perceval. 


IV 

THE   CROWN  OF  ALL  AD7ENTURES 

The  implicit,  I  must  suppose,  of  each  succeeding  quest 
was  that  the  earlier  singer  of  le  meilleur  conte  qui  soit  conte 
en  cour  royale  had  told  the  wrong  story,  and  that  some 
far  higher  flight  of  pure  romance  must  justify  the  material 
which  came  into  the  hands  of  each.  The  most  interesting 
contrasted  instance  is  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  put  for- 
ward as  an  alternative  to  the  Quest  of  Galahad,  as  if  by 
one  who  cleaved  to  the  old  tradition  concerning  the  hero 
of  the  achievement  and  yet  had  every  intention  of  pro- 
fiting by  the  high  light  of  sanctity  which  overshone  the 
symbol  of  Galahad.  The  least  comprehensible  contrasted 
instance  is  the  competition  instituted  in  the  name  of 
Gawain  by  Heinrich  von  dem  Turlin  in  his  poem  of  Diu 

407 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Crone.  The  ambition  seems  so  impossible  after  the  Parsifal 
of  Wolfram,  but  that  poem  was  not  appreciated  —  on 
account  of  its  setting  chiefly — by  the  general  profession 
of  minstrelsy.  The  instance  further  was,  in  its  way,  a 
certain  justification  of  Chretien,  who  was  followed  in 
several  respects  and  often  appealed  to  by  Heinrich.  Diu 
Crfine  owes  something  also  to  the  lost  poem  of  Guiot,  but 
whether  by  derivation  through  Wolfram  or  in  a  more 
direct  manner  is  uncertain.  That  it  justifies  any  claim  to 
existence  I  do  not  think,  but  this  notwithstanding  it  is  a 
very  curious  romance,  so  much  under  the  veils  of  enchant- 
ment that  the  whole  action  seems  transferred  into  a  land 
of  faerie,  while  the  gifts  and  dotations  which  are  offered 
to  the  elect  hero  might  have  made  any  quest  of  the  Graal 
almost  a  work  of  superfluity  on  his  part.  In  place  of  the 
Castle  of  Maidens  there  is  pictured  a  wandering  island  of 
the  sea  wherein  dwell  virgins  only,  and  the  queen  of  this 
wonderful  people,  exercising  a  royal  privilege,  offers  the 
possession  of  herself  in  marriage  and  the  rule  of  her 
kingdom  to  Gawain  as  her  chosen  knight ;  yet  if  this  be 
incompatible  with  his  purpose,  she  will  tolerate  their  part- 
ing at  need  and  will  bestow  upon  him,  as  her  token  of 
goodwill,  an  elixir  of  unfading  youth.  The  hero  exercises 
his  admitted  power  of  choice  in  favour  of  the  second 
alternative,  and  with  good  reason  probably,  since  the 
island  was  doubtless  one  of  those  dreaming  places  where 
a  thousand  years  are  even  as  a  single  day,  and  after  a 
moon  of  sorcery  he  might  have  issued  bearing  on  his 
shoulders  an  age  past  all  renewing,  even  by  the  Holy 
Graal. 

The  keynote  of  the  story  is  in  one  sense  the  dis- 
qualification of  Perceval,  who — because  he  had  failed  once 
—had  forfeited  his  vocation  forever.  The  opportunity 
is  transferred  to  Gawain,  and  Heinrich  is  indebted  to 
Chretien  for  the  substance  of  those  inventions  by  which 
he  is  covenanted  to  enter  on  the  Quest  of  the  Holy 
Graal.  We,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be  indebted  to  his 
own  imagination  for  the  aids  that  the  powers  of  Fairyland 

408 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

combine  to  provide  by  means  of  telesmas  and  other 
wonder-working  objects  which  safeguard  the  way  of  the 
Quest.  Seeing  that  the  failure  of  Perceval  to  ask  the  all- 
important  question  is  held  insufficient  as  a  warning  in  the 
case  of  Gawain,  when  he  seeks  to  follow  in  his  footsteps, 
he  is  reinforced  by  a  particular  caution  at  the  Castle  of 
Wonders.  What  he  receives  is  indeed  a  dual  counsel : 
he  is  not  only  to  ask  and  to  learn,  but,  in  order  that  he 
may  behold  the  Graal,  he  is  urged  to  abstain  at  the  table 
from  all  refreshment  in  wine.  The  maiden  who  proffers 
this  advice  proves  to  be  her  who  carries  the  Sacred  Vessel 
in  the  pageant  at  the  Castle  thereof.  The  analogy  by 
opposition  hereto  is  Gautier's  story  of  the  trick  played 
upon  Perceval  by  the  Daughter  of  the  Fisher  King  when 
she  carries  off  the  stag's  head  and  brachet  to  punish 
Perceval  for  not  asking  the  question. 

We  have  had  full  opportunity  to  appreciate  Gawain's 
share  in  the  great  adventurous  experiment  within  the 
horizon  of  Wolfram's  poem ;  we  have  seen  also  in 
Chretien  how  and  why,  as  a  part  of  his  own  vindication, 
he  set  forth  to  seek  the  Bleeding  Lance,  but  the  quest 
proved  a  failure.  Except  the  promiscuous  proposal  and 
fleeting  undertaking  in  the  Galahad  Quest,  Gawain  does 
not  figure  as  a  knight  in  search  of  the  Graal  in  the  French 
romances  till  we  come  to  the  period  of  the  Longer  Prose 
Perceval.  Even  in  Gautier  the  fullest  account  of  his  visit 
to  the  Castle  of  Hallows  is  apart  from  all  notion  of 
intention,  as  he  is  simply  a  gallant  of  the  period  in 
attendance  on  Guinevere,  who  herself  is  awaiting  the 
return  of  King  Arthur  after  the  reduction  of  Castle 
Orguellous.  On  the  other  hand,  Heinrich's  Diu  Crone 
pictures  him  expressly,  and  as  if  in  real  earnest,  seeking  to 
achieve  the  Graal,  enduring  also  many  adventures  because 
of  it.  After  the  poem  of  Wolfram,  his  success  does  not 
seem  to  improve  upon  his  failure  in  the  other  stories ;  it 
is  by  way  of  superfluity,  and  it  may  be  said  almost  that 
Heinrich  takes  him  for  another,  as  he  was  also  hailed 
for  a  moment  in  Gautier's  poem. 

409 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

In  the  course  of  his  progress  Gawain  arrived  at  a  boun- 
tiful and  smiling  land,  as  if  it  were  the  precincts  of  an 
earthly  paradise,  and  on  the  further  borders  thereof  he 
beheld  a  vast  fiery  sword  keeping  the  entrance  to  a 
fortress  with  walls  translucent  as  glass.  I  do  not  know, 
because  it  is  difficult  always  to  adjudicate  in  his  case,  why 
he  should  have  regarded  this  wonder  in  the  light  of  an 
evil  omen,  but  this  is  how  it  impressed  him,  and  he  missed 
perhaps  one  among  the  greatest  adventures  when  he 
retired  so  incontinently — whether  it  was  a  way  of  entrance 
into  the  higher  Eden  or  into  the  fascination  of  a  false 
paradise.  Great  as  are  the  accomplished  enterprises  of 
Graal  literature,  I  think  that  greater  still  are  some  of  those 
which  therein  are  hinted  only,  remaining  unachieved  or 
unrecorded.  It  seems  clear  that  this  fortress,  at  no  inde- 
finite distance  from  the  Graal  Castle,  is  that  which  Perceval 
would  have  entered  in  Gerbert's  poem,  and  his  incontinent 
eagerness  contrasts  favourably  with  the  terror  and  the 
flight  of  Gawain.  The  Knight  continued  to  traverse  a  land 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  and  he  rode  for  yet  twelve 
days,  when  he  came  upon  Lancelot  andCalogreant — another 
companion  of  the  Round  Table— both  in  a  manner  on  the 
Quest.  So  these  three  shadows  of  those  who  should 
finish  the  experiment  in  utter  reality  came  at  last  to  their 
bourne.  It  may  have  been  a  region  of  sorcery  which 
encompassed  that  abode,  which  we  know  to  have  been  the 
House  of  the  Dead,  but  it  was  assuredly  like  the  inter- 
mediate region  between  the  life  of  this  world  and  the  life 
everlasting.  There  are  few  things  in  literature  which 
savour  so  strangely  of  that  visionary  astral  region,  full 
of  great  simulations  and  full  of  false  joy,  which  does 
not  attempt  to  conceal  the  bitter  heart  of  sorrow.  The 
knightly  company  depicted  on  the  meadow  without  the 
burg,  performing  evolutions  in  pastime,  was  like  the 
"  midnight  host  of  spectres  pale  "  which  "  beleaguered  the 
walls  of  Prague."  But  the  places  of  death  are  not 
places  of  silence ;  the  burg  itself  had  a  noisy  throng 
within  it,  and  so  had  the  castle  or  palace — that  Ghost's 

410 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy    Graal 

House  and  House  of  the  Dead  alive.  The  companions 
were  brought  under  safe  guidance  into  the  hall  in 
chief,  which  was  like  the  Kabalistic  sphere  of  Venus — a 
pomp  of  external  splendour,  heavy  with  the  crushed-out 
fragrance  of  heaped  roses  —  as  some  mansion  in  an 
eastern  fairyland.  In  the  Hall  of  Roses  there  was  seated 
the  host  who  was  to  receive  them  —  another  patient 
sufferer  of  the  ages,  diverted  in  his  pitiful  weariness  by 
youths  playing  chess  at  his  feet.  That  game  is  a  feature 
which  in  one  or  another  form  is  inevitable  in  all  the  stories 
till  the  highest  of  the  high  quests  intervenes  and  makes 
void  so  many  of  the  old  elements.  It  is  played  elsewhere 
by  pieces  having  self-moving  powers,  but  here  it  is  played 
by  the  dead  amidst  shadowy  sport  and  raillery ;  betwixt 
the  one  and  the  other  there  is  perhaps  suggested  some 
vaguely  mystic  side  of  the  old  war  in  mimicry. 

The  questing  knights  had  not  been  received  to  no  pur- 
pose ;  there  was  a  work  which  they  were  required  to 
perform,  supposing  that  they  were  properly  prepared ; 
for  the  unspelling  quest  is  followed  even  to  the  grave. 
Lord  or  prince  of  the  Castle,  it  is  not  said  till  the  close 
whether  the  host  is  old  or  young ;  he  is  not  termed  the 
Rich  Fisher  and  his  genealogy  is  unknown.  So  also  are 
most  antecedents  of  the  Hallows.  The  guests  were 
treated  royally  and  were  entertained  at  a  banquet,  but 
at  that  time  the  Master  of  the  House  neither  ate  nor 
drank.  On  his  part,  remembering  the  warning  which  he 
received,  Gawain  ate  only,  and  this  in  spite  of  solicitations 
on  his  entertainer's  side,  the  doom  of  whom  seems  to 
have  been  working  strongly,  seeing  that  it  drew  to  its 
term,  and  he  was  compelled  to  entreat  that  which  would 
operate  against  his  salvation.  Lancelot  and  the  other 
companion  quenched  their  thirst  with  wine,  which  over- 
came them  immediately,  as  if  it  were  nepenthe  devised 
for  that  express  purpose,  and  they  fell  asleep.  The 
lord  of  the  Castle  fulfilled  his  office  zealously,  and  again 
tempted  Gawain ;  but,  finding  no  better  success,  he  desisted, 
and  thereafter  began  the  high  pageant,  the  foremost  in 

411 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

which  were  maidens,  and  she  who  was  fairest  among  all 
— the  crowned  priestess  who  carried  the  Most  Holy 
Reliquary — was  recognised  as  her  who  had  counselled 
him  previously  in  the  Quest — counselled  him  above  all, 
as  did  other  wandering  messengers  in  the  romances  of 
Perceval — not  to  forget  the  question  did  ever  he  come  to 
the  place.  If  he  could  not  be  compelled  therefore,  he 
could  at  least  be  prompted,  and  the  convention  recalls 
that  indicible  word  which  ex  hypothesi  cannot  be  spoken 
or  written  and  yet  is  communicated  to  the  initiate  of 
many  mysteries,  when  he  finds  that  he  has  been  acquainted 
always  therewith. 

Before  the  company — which  was  numerous  within  as 
without — had  taken  their  places  at  the  table,  a  page 
of  the  chambers  brought  in  the  Hallow  of  the  Sword 
and  laid  it  at  the  feet  of  the  Master.  The  inference  is 
that  this  was  the  fatal  weapon  which,  in  the  midst  of  the 
strife  of  kinsmen,  had  somehow  brought  woe  on  the 
Castle,  but  the  particulars  are  not  given,  and  of  itself  the 
weapon  would  be  nothing  to  our  purpose,  except  that  it 
is  the  antithesis  of  other  swords  in  the  legends.  Not 
only  was  it  perfect  then  but  would  so  remain  for  ever ; 
it  was  adjudged  to  the  successful  quester  and  would 
break  in  no  peril — an  office  of  relaxed  observance  which 
shortened  and  simplified  the  Quest. 

Now,  the  company  in  the  Castle  had  feasted  gallantly, 
like  the  guests  who  sat  with  the  Master ;  though  dead, 
they  yet  spoke — and  that,  it  would  seem,  volubly — 
interchanging  questions  and  answers,  as  if  in  mockery 
of  the  real  question ;  but  the  strong  wine  of  the  banquet 
had  no  effect  on  them,  and  the  Lord  of  the  plenty  mean- 
while, as  I  have  said,  had  fasted.  But  the  appearance 
of  the  Graal  procession  was  the  signal  that  he  was  to 
receive  a  certain  shadow  of  nourishment — as  if,  after 
some  necromantic  supper,  a  disqualified  Eucharist  were 
communicated  to  one  who  had  not  partaken  previously. 
We  know  already  that  the  Reliquary  contained  the  sem- 
blance of  a  Host,  as  from  the  Lance  there  exuded  blood— 

412 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

neither  more  nor  less,  in  this  case,  than  those  three 
mystic  drops  which  ensanguine  all  the  legends  and 
connect  them,  as  if  undesignedly,  with  other  and  older 
mysteries.  In  the  story  of  Wolfram  the  first  nourish- 
ment drawn  from  the  Graal  at  the  banquet  in  the  Castle 
Hall  is  described  as  bread,  and  Heinrich — following  the 
prototype  of  Guiot  or  profiting  by  a  caution  in  respect 
of  the  Feeding  Dish — converts  the  sacred  object  into  a 
simple  ciborium.  The  Master  of  the  Castle  received 
therefore  in  bread  and  in  the  colouration  of  wine ;  but 
of  the  bread  he  took  only  a  third  part,  as  if  it  were  the 
efficient  oblation  at  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass.  There  is 
no  reason  to  think  that  these  were  consecrated  elements, 
but  there  seems  to  have  been  a  substituted  Eucharist,  in 
which  the  dead  might  be  supposed  to  share,  so  that, 
prince  or  lord — or  whatever  it  is  right  to  term  him — he 
was  fed  sacramentally  and  super-substantially  in  some 
sense,  for  this  his  only  nourishment  was  administered 
once  in  a  year.  Therefore  Gawain  arrived  at  a  happy 
season,  to  see  and  to  speak ;  and  on  seeing  these  things, 
he  overflowed  in  himself  with  the  wonder  and  the 
mystery  of  it  all,  so  that,  acting  on  the  spur  of  the 
moment,  importunately  he  asked  that  which  was  vital 
to  those  who  were  suffering  from  death  in  life — the 
mystic  question,  the  most  conventional  of  all  formulae : 
What  does  it  mean  ?  There  was  no  effect  to  begin  with 
—no  sudden  change,  I  mean,  as  from  life  to  death  or 
from  death  to  life  ;  but  if  before  there  was  the  chaffer 
and  traffic  of  light  talk  at  a  feasting,  now  it  was  the 
hubbub  of  a  joy  beyond  suppression,  as  if  the  closing  at 
last  were  taken  in  a  great  grade  of  long  sorrow. 

Gawain  has  asked  indeed,  but  as  regards  the  secrets 
of  the  Graal  he  is  not  told  anything ;  it  has  come  forth 
out  of  mystery  and  it  passes  away  therein.  It  is  said  to 
be  God's  mystery — one  of  the  Secrets  of  the  King,  and 
Heinrich  has  written  about  it — abscondere  bonum  est.  Of 
the  woe,  the  wasting  and  the  endurance,  when  brother 
warred  upon  brother,  he  learned  something,  and  we  have 

413 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

heard  enough ;  of  Perceval's  failure  and  the  deepened 
misery  therefrom  he  was  told  also,  and  the  condition  of 
release  resident  in  the  question.  But  the  king  himself 
was  guiltless,  and  so  also  were  the  maidens ;  he,  however, 
was  dead  with  all  the  men  of  his  household,  but  they 
were  alive  in  the  flesh  and  they  would  go  forth  in  the 
morning.  When  that  dawned  presently,  the  released 
speaker  vanished,  the  Graal  also  with  him,  and  its  mystery, 
never  to  be  seen  more. 

The  following  points  may  be  noticed  in  conclusion  of 
this  part :  (#)  There  is  no  question  anywhere  of  feeding 
properties  in  the  Sacred  Reliquary,  except  as  regards  the 
king — and  him  it  feeds  sacramentally ;  (^)  the  Spear 
does  not  distil  blood  until  it  is  laid  on  a  table,  with  the 
head  apparently  over  the  salver ;  (c)  the  recession  of  the 
Graal  seems  to  have  been  adjudged  because  it  has  per- 
formed its  work  of  feeding  the  dead  Master,  keeping 
him  in  the  semblance  of  life,  and  once  this  office  was 
perfected  it  went  like  a  ghost.  After  what  manner  the 
variations  which  are  introduced  thus  into  the  shifting 
pageant  of  the  legend  can  be  said  to  elucidate  its  object 
will  not  be  determined  easily.  The  doom  that  involves 
the  dwellers  in  the  Castle  changes  the  symbolism  but 
certainly  does  not  exalt  it.  The  romance,  for  the  rest,  is 
the  work  of  one  who  has  resolved  to  give  the  palm  to 
Gawain  at  the  express  expense  of  Perceval,  to  the  knight 
of  this  world  in  place  of  the  knight  celestial.  It  is  the 
experiment  of  an  inventor  who  has  adapted  some  old 
materials  to  another  purpose,  at  once  indeterminate  and 
undesirable. 

The  date  ascribed  to  the  poem  is  about  1220,  and  its 
ingarnering  as  a  whole  is  regarded  as  a  little  chaotic.  It 
reaches  some  30,000  verses,  and  though  we  hear  generally 
concerning  King  Arthur's  Court  and  the  Round  Table, 
Gawain  is  the  hero-in-chief.  After  his  completion  of  the 
Graal  Quest,  various  pageants  of  chivalry  bring  him  back 
to  his  uncle  and  the  fellowship,  the  story  in  this  manner 
reaching  its  natural  close. 

414 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

V 

THE   TITUREL   OF  ALB  REG  HT  PON 
SCHARFENBERG 

The  secret  doctrine  of  Guiot  de  Provence  and  the  high 
tradition  of  the  starry  heavens  not  only  failed  to  convince 
the  minstrel  world  in  Germany  concerning  the  indefectible 
titles  of  Parsifal,  with  its  root-matter  written  in  the 
starry  heavens — of  which  our  example  is  Heinrich — but 
it  failed  to  hold  even  those  who  had  no  alternative  and 
more  elect  hero  to  offer — of  which  the  example,  within 
certain  limits,  is  Albrecht.  It  came  about  that  at  the 
end  of  that  century  which  had  seen  the  light  of  Wolfram 
there  arose  the  succeeding  light  of  him  who  was  to  follow, 
and,  having  regard  to  the  welcome  which  he  received,  the 
German  world  was  evidently  looking  for  another.  He 
came  to  announce — like  the  French  romances  before  him 
— that  the  Graal  was  taken  away.  Albrecht  von  Schar- 
fenberg  was  a  Bavarian  poet,  who  wrote  about  1270.  He 
undertook  to  carry  the  whole  experiment  to  its  term, 
which  he  did  in  a  vast  poem  of  45,000  verses,  written 
in  the  obscure  style  of  his  predecessor-in-chief,  whence — 
and  for  other  reasons — the  distinct  individualities  were  con- 
fused for  a  considerable  period.  He  incorporated  various 
materials,  for  there  was  firstly  the  intervention  of  an 
anonymous  and  unknown  poet,  who  seems  to  have  under- 
taken but  not  completed  the  task,  and,  secondly,  there  were 
certain  so-called  Titurel  fragments  which  were  the  work 
of  Wolfram  himself.  Of  the  first  I  can  say  nothing, 
except  that  he  is  believed  to  have  projected  a  complete 
chronicle  of  the  Graal  and  its  keepers,  drawing  for  this 
purpose  on  the  source  used  by  Wolfram.  It  is  a  matter 
of  speculation  at  what  point  he  broke  off  and  for  what 
reason,  but  his  mantle  fell  upon  Albrecht.  Of  the 
materials  left  by  Wolfram  we  know  all  that  is  needful, 

415 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  they  are  quite  unconsonant  with  our  purpose.  They 
are  two  in  number,  and  the  opening  lines  of  the  first 
fragment  explain  why  they  have  been  termed  a  Titurel 
poem.  They  are  really,  by  Wolfram's  evidence,  parts  of 
the  early  history  of  Sigune  and  Schionatulander — respec- 
tively, the  cousin  of  Parsifal  and  her  lover,  whose  em- 
balmed body  she  carries  with  her  so  long  in  the  Parsifal 
poem.  Contrary  to  the  evidence  of  this,  it  appears  from 
the  fragments  that  the  lover  met  his  death  in  satisfying  a 
whim  of  his  mistress.  Albrecht,  or  his  precursor,  incor- 
porated these  fragments,  and  in  many  ways  otherwise  the 
Younger  Titure/,  as  it  is  called,  while  it  covers  the  same 
ground,  also  supplants  the  earlier  knightly  epic  and 
carries  the  history  of  the  Graal — as  I  have  indicated — to 
its  final  term.  I  have  explained  that  the  lateness  of  the 
poem  has  excluded  it,  in  the  mind  of  scholarship,  from 
the  canon  of  the  Graal  ;  but  it  has  some  aspects  of  im- 
portance, and  its  consideration  will  help  us  better  to 
understand  the  position  and  claim  of  the  German  cycle. 
To  that  cycle  it  makes  a  real  contribution,  and  it  differs 
in  this  respect  from  the  metrical  romance  of  Lohengrin, 
which  is  ascribed  to  the  year  1300.  This  is  an  important 
document  for  the  legend  of  the  Swan  Knight,  but  its 
allusions  to  the  Holy  Graal  are  mostly  of  the  occasional 
kind.  As  such,  however,  they  offer  a  complete  revolution 
of  the  whole  Arthurian  cycle  in  respect  of  the  close  in 
disaster  of  all  those  gracious  times  of  chivalry.  The 
star  of  the  king's  destiny  does  not  close  in  blood  and 
warfare — 

"  In  dark  Dundagel  by  the  northern  sea  "- 

owing  to  that  frightful  fatality  by  which  Arthur  begat 
Mordred  on  the  body  of  his  own  half-sister.  Other  stars 
intervened  in  their  power  to  avert  the  doom  and  ven- 
geance for  that  which  was  done  in  ignorance.  In  place 
of  the  dubious  mercy  of  healing  at  the  hands  of  Morgan 
le  Fay  in  the  mystic  island  of  Avalon,  the  king — at  the 
head  of  his  whole  chivalry — carries  the  Graal  to  India, 

416 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  he  and  they  are  its  guardians  even  to  this  day  in 
the  remote,  undeclared  places  of  the  eastern  world. 

The  Titurel  differs  also  from  that  interned  manuscript 
concerning  Parsifal  and  the  Round  Table  which  is  preserved 
among  the  treasures  of  the  Vatican — being  the  sole  copy 
that  is  known.  It  was  written  a  little  earlier  than  the  year 
1336,  and  it  incorporates  Manessier's  conclusion  of  the 
Conte  del  Graal  with  materials  derived  from  the  Parsifal 
and  Titurel.  It  is  therefore  a  work  of  compilation,  and 
does  not  as  such  concern  us. 

Now,  one  important  point  with  regard  to  the  poem 
of  Albrecht  is  that  he  rejected  the  antecedent  history  of 
the  Holy  Graal  bequeathed  by  his  earlier  German  peer 
in  poetry  and  reverted  for  his  thesis  concerning  it  to  the 
more  orthodox  traditions  of  Northern  France.  In  a  word, 
the  sacred  object  is  no  longer  a  stone,  whether  that  in 
the  crown  of  Lucifer  or  that  which  consumes  the  Phoenix 
and  at  the  same  time  incubates  the  egg  which  the  bird 
has  laid.  It  is  the  Eucharistic  vessel  of  Joseph,  with 
whom  its  history  begins,  so  that  once  again — and  but 
once  in  the  German  cycle — we  can  kneel  in  spirit  while 
Mass  is  being  said  in  the  Sanctuary,  looking  towards  that 
time  when  we  also,  at  the  secret  words  of  consecration, 
shall  behold  the  five  changes. 

The  Titurel  claims  to  give  the  perfect  and  rectified 
history  of  the  Vessel  and  its  Wardens  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end  thereof.  Considering  that  the  first  Graal  King 
is  the  real  centre  of  interest,  an  excessive  space  is  devoted 
to  Sigune  and  her  lover — but  this  I  refer  to  the  anony- 
mous poet  who  preceded.  At  the  inception  it  gives 
the  generations  of  the  secret  dynasty  from  the  days  of 
Vespasian,  when  Berillus  the  Cappadocian,  who  had 
great  possessions  and  was  moreover  of  the  Christian  faith, 
took  service  with  the  Roman  general  at  the  siege  of  Jeru- 
salem and  followed  in  his  train  subsequently  when  he 
was  called  to  the  throne  of  the  empire.  Berillus  married 
Argensilla,  the  daughter  of  the  emperor,  and  a  con- 
siderable part  of  France  was  thereafter  assigned  to  him  in 

417  2  D 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

fief.  He  had  as  issue  Titurisone,  who  married  Elizabel 
of  Aragon  and  of  her — after  long  years  and  precious 
offerings  in  pilgrimage  at  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  because 
of  their  childless  condition — there  was  born  Titurel,  this 
name  being,  as  one  writer  has  indicated,  a  contraction 
of  the  parental  names.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  genealogy 
takes  back  the  so-called  Angevin  dynasty  to  a  very  early 
period  of  the  Christian  centuries,  as  well  as  to  those 
districts  which  abut  on  the  Holy  Fields.  The  remaining 
succession  in  the  keepership  follows  the  indications  of 
Wolfram,  and  the  main  outlines  of  the  Quest  are  also 
followed  in  substance,  with  no  remarkable  exception. 
Wolfram  knew  nothing  of  that  sister  of  Parsifal  who 
attained  to  such  spiritual  heights  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad^ 
and  Albrecht — who  knew  indeed,  since  he  had  fair  op- 
portunity to  be  acquainted  with  the  whole  cycle — does 
not,  if  I  remember,  mention  her ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
he  has  not  elected  to  ignore  the  marriage  of  Parsifal  or 
all  reference  to  Kondwiramur.  It  follows  that,  in  dedi- 
cating that  hero  to  the  great  exaltation,  he  considered 
that  his  virgin  celibacy  was  not  a  first  qualification  within 
the  domain  of  Nature.  And  these  words  may  be  called 
an  introduction  to  a  short  statement  concerning  the 
ascetic  aspects  of  Die  Jungere  Titurel.  They  are  sup- 
posed to  be  somewhat  pronounced,  and  to  impress 
upon  the  poem  a  peculiar  ecclesiastical  aspect,  which 
I  interpret  as  meaning  that  it  carries  the  seal  of 
sanctity  rather  than  the  seal  of  ethics  and  other  pre- 
liminary exercises  in  the  school  without  the  gates.  At 
the  same  time,  I  see  nothing  in  the  poem  to  connect 
it  with  the  mystical  degrees,  and  I  see  nothing  to  indicate 
the  conscious  existence  on  the  part  of  the  author  of  any 
subsurface  sense.  It  lends  itself  to  a  construction  of 
this  kind  only  in  the  way  that  all  great  books  of  romance 
— and  greater  than  is  this  book — speak  otherwise  than  in 
the  external  tongues  to  the  higher  part  of  our  nature. 
It  is  only  by  reflection  from  the  sources  in  Northern 
France  that  the  Titurel  reproduces — as  we  shall  see  that 

418 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

it  does — the  recession  of  the  Graal.  Perhaps — but  I  do 
not  know — Albrecht  may  have  divined  dimly  that  the 
heaven  of  Galahad's  attainment  and  the  land  of  Prester 
John  are  neither  of  them  out  of  this  world,  and,  so  far 
as  distance  goes,  not  especially  more  remote  than  the 
corner  of  the  nearest  street.  In  such  case,  by  saying  that 
it  went  to  India  he  would  know  that  he  was  telling  the 
same  story  as  he  who  testified  that  the  hand  which  had 
no  body  came  right  to  the  vessel  and  so  took  it  and  bore 
it  up  to  heaven.  Perhaps — in  the  alternative  sense — the 
episode  spelt  nothing  more  for  the  poet  than  a  good 
illustration  of  that  which  follows  from  the  common  un- 
worthiness  of  the  world.  He  describes  the  evil  time  which 
fell  upon  things  outside  the  precincts  of  the  Temple,  and 
it  was  in  pursuance  of  their  own  counsels  of  prudence, 
rather  than  by  an  instruction  from  within,  that  the  Keepers 
of  the  Holy  Vessel  in  fine  convened  the  cohort  of  the 
Templar  chivalry  and  that  Parsifal,  accompanied  by  them 
and  carrying  the  Hallows  of  the  House,  went  in  quest 
of  his  brother  Feirfeis,  so  reaching  India. 

The  Parsifal  of  Wolfram  indicates  that  Prester  John  was 
the  issue  of  this  brother ;  but  the  Titurel  represents  him 
as  an  independent  ruler  in  the  East,  despite  his  attributed 
genealogy,  and  gives  such  an  account  of  himself  and  his 
wonderful  kingdom  that  the  reigning  keeper  is  minded, 
and  indeed  prompted  by  Feirfeis,  to  bequeath  the  Graal 
to  his  care.  When,  however,  he  came  into  his  august 
presence,  bearing  the  Holy  Vessel,  the  Priest-King  offered 
his  realm  and  crown  to  him  who  was  the  Graal  King. 
Parsifal,  on  his  part,  desired  to  enter  his  service,  for 
report  had  well  assured  him  that  all  material  and  spiritual 
riches  abode  with  Prester  John,  even  the  Seven  Gifts  and 
the  Twelve  Fruits  of  the  Divine  Spirit  of  Counsel.  But 
the  decision  was  not  between  them,  for  there  was  an 
intervention  on  the  part  of  the  Graal,  by  which  it  was 
ordained  that  Parsifal  should  remain  as  he  was,  the 
Guardian  of  the  Holy  Vessel.  He  'became  therefore 
the  heir  of  Prester  John  and  assumed  his  name.  At  the 

419 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

prayers  of  the  keeper,  the  Castle  and  the  Sanctuary  of 
Mont  Salvatch  were  transported  in  a  single  night  to  India, 
like  a  mystic  city  of  Irem,  so  that  the  great  Palladium 
had  again  its  proper  asylum.  It  was  this,  I  conclude, 
that  led  to  the  whole  chivalry  remaining  as  they  were  in 
the  East,  whereas,  if  they  had  relinquished  their  trust,  they 
would  have  returned  whence  they  came.  So  does  the 
House  of  the  Doctrine  follow  the  transit  of  Doctrine,  as 
the  house  of  man  at  his  highest  is  wherever  the  highest 
is  attained.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  Wisdom  has  finished 
its  temples,  seeing  that  its  proper  habitations  are  waiting 
all  over  that  world  which  once  was  built  in  Wisdom. 

It  is  to  Ethiopia  or  Turkey  that  other  legends  refer 
the  retreat  of  Prester  John,  which  really  was  "  built  in  the 
unapparent."  There  is  therefore  no  need  to  co-ordinate 
rival  versions,  nor  would  such  a  task  be  possible  in  the 
conflicting  accounts  of  Albrecht  and  Wolfram.  To 
vary  the  issues  of  confusion,  I  will  mention  only  that, 
according  to  the  Dutch  Lancelot,  the  Priest-King  appears  to 
have  been  Perceval's  son.  It  is  thought  that  the  reticence 
of  Wolfram  on  the  whole  subject  is  explicable  by  the  fact 
that  there  were  few  materials  at  his  period,  while  in  the 
fifty  subsequent  years  the  rumours  of  the  eastern  legend 
had  extended  and  was  available  to  Albrecht.  But  it 
should  be  mentioned  that  the  first  rumour  is  referable  to 
1156,  and  before  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  it  had 
the  support  of  Maimonides  as  well  as  of  the  wandering 
Israelite,  Benjamin  of  Tudela.  The  seat  of  Peter  had 
done  more  than  confess  to  an  attraction  when  an  embassy 
was  sent  to  Prester  John  bearing  a  written  communication 
from  Alexander  III. ;  and  before  1180,  or  at  and  about 
this  time,  the  Emperor  of  Constantinople  is  supposed  to 
have  received  the  celebrated  letter  in  which  the  mysterious 
potentate  announced  his  own  existence  with  consummate 
grandiloquence.  It  was  a  pretentious  and  impossible  docu- 
ment in  the  worst  style  of  false-seeming,  but  it  created 
great  interest  and  great  wonder.  It  concerns  us  only 
because  it  may  have  provided  certain  materials  both  for 

420 


The    German    Cycle  of  the   Holy   Graal 

Wolfram  and  Albrecht.  The  palace  of  Prester  John  is 
like  the  Castle  of  Mont  Salvatch  drawn  out  into  a  greater 
wilderness  of  building,  and  the  Parsifal  allusions  to 
the  Earthly  Paradise  are  recalled  by  the  account  of  that 
spring  which  is  three  days'  journey  from  the  Garden 
of  Eden.  Whosoever  can  drink  of  its  water  will  have, 
through  all  his  later  life,  the  aspect  of  thirty  years — 
precisely  that  period  which  was  maintained  by  the 
Templar  chivalry  owing  to  the  presence  of  the  Graal. 
The  myth  has  been  noticed  exhaustively  by  several 
writers ;  it  never  required  exploding,  but  that  work  was 
done  in  the  seventeenth  century  by  Julius  Bartolocci 
in  his  Magna  Bibliotheca  Rabbinica. 

I  have  only  to  add  concerning  Albrecht  and  his  Titurel 
(#)  that  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  fourteenth  century  it 
was  not  only  allocated  to  Wolfram,  as  we  have  seen,  but 
was  held  to  be  his  master  work ;  (£)  that  all  assertions 
notwithstanding,  the  hypothesis  of  Albrecht's  acquaintance 
with  the  poem  of  Guiot  is  regarded  as  precarious  ;  (c)  that 
the  Titurel  represents  King  Arthur  and  his  knights  as 
travellers  in  search  of  the  Graal  after  it  had  been  taken 
away :  it  was  a  vain  journey,  of  which  Parsifal  had 
calculated  the  probabilities  beforehand  when  he  took 
leave  of  the  Round  Table ;  but  the  adventure — as  we 
have  seen — is  the  root-matter  of  that  other  fable  which 
was  conceived  subsequently  by  the  author  of  the  metrical 
Lohengrin. 


VI 

THE  DUTCH  LANCELOT 

The  quest  undertaken  in  our  work  of  high  research  is 
long  enough,  and  it  is  also  toilsome  enough,  to  spare  us 
from  the  consideration  in  full  of  any  extraneous  issues, 
though  these  are  yet  of  our  kinship ;  but  I  am  speaking 
of  a  great  literature  to  those  who  are  unversed  therein, 
albeit  they  are  not  otherwise  unacquainted  with  the  mys- 

421 


The    Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

terious  ways  in  which  God  declares  Himself.  I  am  called 
upon  therefore  to  say  something  of  all  the  branches,  but 
must  touch  lightly  where  we  are  not  concerned  deeply. 
The  Dutch  Lancelot  is  a  compilation  which  is  known  only 
by  a  single  text,  and  this  is  incomplete,  unfortunately,  the 
first  part  out  of  four  original  parts  being  now  wanting. 
The  authorship  is  unknown  and  so  is  the  date  of  com- 
position ;  but,  by  those  who  are  competent  to  speak,  the 
extant  manuscript  has  been  assigned  to  the  early  part  of 
the  fourteenth  century.  Were  it  otherwise,  it  might  be 
said  with  greater  certainty  than  is  now  possible  that  it  had 
taken  the  chief  field  of  Graal  romance  for  its  province. 
The  missing  first  volume  must  have  contained  indubit- 
ably the  earlier  life  of  Lancelot,  and  it  may  have 
included  by  inference  some  part  of  the  quest  and 
initial  failure  of  Perceval  at  the  Graal  Castle.  The 
second  book  contains  the  adventures  of  Agravain,  the 
brother  of  Gawain,  a  knight  of  pride  and  violence ; 
but  this  is  already  late  in  the  history  of  the  hero-in- 
chief,  and  it  is  in  the  so-called  Agravain  section  that 
Lancelot  pays  his  first  visit  to  Castle  Corbenic  and  that 
the  conception  of  Galahad  is  encompassed.  The  poem 
reverts  thereafter  to  dealings  with  Perceval,  and  has  traces 
of  a  tradition  which  is  not  extant  in  the  romances  of 
Northern  France.  There  are  variations,  for  example,  in 
the  development  of  the  tasks  proposed  by  the  messenger  of 
the  Holy  Graal  to  the  knights  of  King  Arthur's  Court. 
Correspondences  are  traced  :  (#)  with  the  variations  in 
the  Montpellier  MS.  of  the  Conte  del  Graal;  (V)  with 
the  Vatican  German  Perceval ;  and  (c]  at  a  distance,  with 
Wolfram's  Parsifal.  The  Quest  of  Galahad  occupies  the 
third  book,  and  the  fourth  brings  all  to  its  term  in  the 
Morte  d  Arthur.  The  Dutch  romance  is  a  poem,  and 
even  in  this,  its  present  dismembered  form,  it  is  a  work  of 
vast  extent.  As  in  respect  of  my  own  province  I  have 
not  assumed  all  languages,  I  know  the  original  only  by  the 
collation  of  available  channels  of  research.  That  which 
has  impressed  me  concerning  it  is  the  important,  though 

422 


The   German   Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

fluidic,  analogy  which  it  offers  to  the  poem  of  Heinrich 
in  its  judgment  on  Perceval.  Therein  the  Lord  of  the 
Hallows  and  those  by  whom  he  was  engirded  had  great 
hopes  of  the  latter,  but  because  he  had  entered  the  Castle 
and  did  not  ask  the  question  he  was  discarded  once  and 
for  all.  Now,  the  Dutch  Lancelot,  at  the  conclusion  of 
the  second  book,  has  a  text  of  unknown  origin  which  I 
have  held  over  in  my  previous  enumeration  to  speak  of 
more  adequately  here.  This  is  the  episodic  or  biographi- 
cal romance  of  Morien,  the  son  of  Agloval  and  the  nephew 
of  Perceval,  a  b'ack  knight,  corresponding  to  Feirfeis,  who 
is  Perceval's  haf-brother  in  the  romance  of  Wolfram. 
Morien  is,  however,  a  Christian  when  he  arrives  in  the 
realms  of  the  W^st,  and  he  is  in  search  of  his  father, 
to  whom  he  is  in  f.ne  united.  It  is  in  the  course  of  his 
story,  which  is  otherwise  unimportant  to  our  purpose, 
that  we  learn  as  fohows  concerning  the  Holy  and  Sacra- 
mental Mystery : — 

(i)  King  Arthur — who  here,  as  otherwhere,  manifests 
his  unfailing  love  and  \nxiety  for  Perceval — is  represented 
lamenting  his  loss  beciuse  he  had  gone  in  search  of  the 
Graal  and  the  Sacred  lance,  but  there  were  no  news  con- 
cerning him.  Now,  the  ;ext  states — and  this  is  on  the  part 
of  the  King,  by  the  way  rf  foreknowledge  or  prophecy— 
that  he  will  never  find  ttem — that  is  to  say,  upon  earth. 
(2)  The  same  conviction  may  have  entered  into  the 
proper  heart  of  the  Son  of  the  Widow  Lady ;  but  Sir 
Gareth,  the  brother  of  GaVain,  is  he  who  announces  the 
reason,  which  is  not  on  account  of  his  failure  but  because 
Perceval  sinned  in  leaving  his  mother  to  die  of  grief  at 
his  absence.  On  this  accom  he  might  search  till  the 
Kingdom  which  is  above  Descends  on  the  Kingdom 
which  is  below  but  his  pains  would  be  his  only  meed.  We 
see  here  that  a  responsibility  which  is  of  right  made 
transient  only  becomes  perrunent  and  insuperable  for 
a  moment — but  this  is  in  appeaance  solely.  (3)  Perceval, 
on  his  part,  has  been  convi  ced  of  his  sin  and  has 
embraced  the  life  of  a  hermt  as  the  proper  path  of 

423 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

atonement.  (4)  But  Arthur  and  Gareth  notwithstanding, 
the  intention  of  the  tale  is  to  restore  Perceval  forgiven  to 
the  higher  life  of  chivalry,  and  we  have  accordingly 
(5)  the  vision  of  Sir  Agloval,  the  brother  of  Perceval, 
who  speaks  of  a  Golden  Staircase  seen  therein,  which, 
by  interpretation,  is  more  than  the  sunbeam  whereon  the 
Graal  enters  in  the  Great  Quest,  for  it  symbolises  the 
Sacred  Vessel  as  another  ladder  of  Jacob  leading  to  the 
Throne  and  the  Kingdom,  and  this  is  also  for  Perceval 
as  the  days  of  the  life  of  him.  It  Mowed  that  he 
should  yet  have  his  place  in  the  Quest,  and  it  was 
foretold  that  in  such  high  service  he  should  pass  to  his 
reward  on  high.  That  which  is  here  foretold  is  of  course 
fulfilled  to  the  letter  in  the  part  which  /follows  thereafter 
— that  is  to  say,  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad. 

The  Dutch  Lancelot  is  in  some  respects  that  which  I 
indicated  at  the  beginning,  an  attempt  to  harmonise  all 
the  cycles  by  dealing  (a)  with  the  Quest  of  Perceval  and 
its  initial  failure  ;  (£)  with  that  of  Gawain,  corresponding 
to  the  Montpellier  intercalation  of  the  Conte  del  Graal ; 
and  (<:)  finally  with  the  union  of  Galahad,  Perceval  and 
Bors,  according  to  the  plenary  inspiration  of  the  Great 
Quest.  I  recur  now  to  the  poiat  which  I  made  at  the 
close  of  the  third  section.  The  Dutch  Lancelot  offers  the 
position  of  a  text  which  had  e^ry  opportunity  to  profit 
in  universals  and  not  in  particvlars  only  by  the  poem  of 
Wolfram ;  but,  though  it  is  uader  the  obedience  of  the 
prototype  created  by  the  Parsral  and  the  Conte  del  Graal 
for  the  early  history  of  Perceval,  it  redeems  him  only  at 
the  close,  by  a  kind  of  tour  fe  force ,  in  its  adaptation  of 
the  story  of  stories.  •  / 

The  conclusion  of  all  tl/is  inquiry  into  the  German 
cycle  of  the  Holy  Graal  fe  that  the  hand  of  Guiot  is 
traceable,  at  whatever  distance,  through  all  its  length  ; 
at  times  it  is  the  ruling  haid,  at  others  it  intervenes  for 
a  moment.  He  seems  also  reflected  into  the  Greater 
Chronicles  in  Northern/ French ;  for,  setting  aside 
those  almost  accidental  connections  which  are  found  in 

424 


The   German    Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  there  are  the  similitudes, 
which  I  have  termed  haunting,  in  the  Longer  Prose 
Perceval.  The  King  of  Castle  Mortal  is  drawn  in  much 
darker  colours  than  Klingsor,  the  magician  of  Wolfram, 
but  they  derive  from  the  same  root. 

It  is  obvious  that  in  such  a  summary  account  of  the 
German  cycle  there  are  points,  and  they  are  indeed 
manifold,  which  have  been  omitted  from  the  foregoing 
sections.  Those  who  have  preceded  me  in  England 
with  valuable  and  extended  monographs  on  individual 
texts  and  with  studies  of  particular  groups  will  be  the 
first  to  dispense  generosity  towards  a  work  which  em- 
braces the  whole  literature  in  a  single  volume,  more 
especially  if  they  are  able  to  realise  that  I  am  not  ad- 
dressing their  audience,  but  rather  a  school  set  apart 
and  among  whom  no  knowledge  of  the  subject  can  be 
presupposed  safely.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  have 
had  to  recover  the  same  ground  on  several  occasions, 
increasing  the  difficulty  of  my  task,  as  it  was  not  less 
important  to  avoid  verbal  repetition  in  devotion  to  the 
high  canons  of  literature  than  to  spare  my  readers  the 
weariness  of  continual  reference  to  anterior  sections  or 
books.  Before  leaving  the  German  cycle,  I  will  embrace 
in  a  brief  schedule  certain  accessory  matters,  belonging  to 
its  several  parts,  which — without  being  essential  thereto 
— are  of  sufficient  interest  to  demand  inclusion. 

The  Parsifal  of  Wolfram. — It  should  be  noted  (i) 
that  there  is  no  passage  of  Hallows  from  East  to  West ; 
there  is  no  enchantment  of  Britain ;  and  there  are  no 
times  which  are  termed  specially  adventurous;  (2)  that 
Parsifal's  uncle,  Trevrezent,  confessed  to  having  tampered 
with  the  truth  in  respect  of  his  Graal  history,  so  as  to 
dissuade  the  hero  from  the  Quest,  and  that  this  is  pos- 
sibly the  root-reason  of  the  uncle's  misdirections  in  all 
the  romances. 

The  Lost  Quest  of  Guiot. — (i)  There  was  a  great 
movement  of  literature  from  Southern  to  Northern  France 
and  through  Northern  France  to  England  at  the  period 

425 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

of  Henry  II.  He  married  Eleanor  of  Guienne,  who  is 
said  to  have  brought  Provensal  poets  in  her  train.  If 
therefore  we  can  suppose  that  Guiot  de  Provence  and 
his  poem  antedated  all  other  Graal  literature,  they  may 
have  become  known  in  this  manner,  and  it  will  then 
seem  at  first  sight  that  we  have  accounted  for  the 
appearance  subsequently  of  Graal  literature  in  Northern 
French.  But  this  is  an  explanation  with  the  disadvan- 
tage of  a  fatal  facility,  because  Guiot,  as  we  can  divine 
concerning  him,  is  incapable  of  accounting  for  Graal 
romance  outside  the  one  text  that  we  know  him  to  have 
influenced  in  Germany.  (2)  It  was  on  an  illusory  assump- 
tion of  this  kind  that  the  Perceval  legend  was  classed  as 
Celtic  by  Schulze,  but  the  Graal,  on  the  other  hand,  as 
Proven9al.  The  first  statement  is  true  obviously,  but 
the  Graal  of  Guiot  is  not  the  Graal  of  Northern  France. 
The  marriage  of  Schulze's  two  classes  is  said  to  have  been 
contracted  about  1150;  but  I  do  not  believe  that  any  sacra- 
mental mystery  was  incorporated  by  southern  romance  ; 
only  the  shadow  of  the  Eucharist  is  found  in  Wolfram.  (3) 
The  test  of  such  a  possibility  is  the  affirmed  traditional 
hostility  to  the  Church  of  Rome  on  the  part  of  most 
troubadours.  Northern  French  romance  had  no  such 
implicit :  it  is  a  literature  written  round  the  great 
heart  of  Christian  catholicity.  (4)  The  analogy  of  trou- 
badour poetry  with  Graal  literature  is  slight  after  all. 
If  we  set  aside  the  Conte  del  Graal,  love,  for  example, 
is  only  an  accident  of  the  cycle,  and  it  is  totally  absent 
from  two  of  the  highest  texts.  The  mystic  side  of 
human  love  in  poetry  and  its  Proven9al  reflections  are 
a  light  of  Moslem  ecstasy.  (5)  Scholarship  holds  that 
Wolfram  and  Chretien  drew  from  the  same  source,  more 
especially  as  regards  the  adventures  of  Gawain.  This 
raises  a  question  respecting  the  identity,  language  and 
real  locality  of  Guiot.  It  is  acknowledged  on  all  sides 
that  if  he  had  written  in  the  langue  a"oc,  he  would  not 
have  been  understood  by  Wolfram.  One  speculation  iden- 
tifies him  with  the  author  of  the  Bible  Guiot,  but  this 

426 


The   German    Cycle  of  the  Holy   Graal 

person  was  of  Provins  in  the  Alsace-Lorraine  district. 
The  suggestion,  I  suppose,  is  that  Provins  was  mistaken 
for  Provence  by  Wolfram.  Had  Guiot  promulgated 
in  the  South  so  wonderful  a  legend  as  that  of  the  Graal, 
it  is  incredible  that  his  name  should  never  have  tran- 
spired among  his  contemporaries  ;  though  his  poem  is 
now  lost,  his  memory  should  at  least  have  lingered. 

The  Spanish  Cycle. — (i)  We  have  seen  that  Spain 
has  no  indigenous  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal ;  it  has 
only  accidental  reflections  by  way  of  translation,  and 
with  all  deference  to  the  curious  implicits  connected  with 
the  Jew  of  Toledo,  I  think  that  this  is  final  as  to  any- 
thing of  prototypical  matter  of  the  Graal  having  come  out 
of  the  Peninsula.  (2)  This  notwithstanding,  if  ever  the 
missing  Guiot  should  be  discovered  in  fine,  it  will  be 
probably  in  a  Spanish  monastery.  Whatever  language 
he  wrote  in,  the  poet  had  evidently  Provencal  sym- 
pathies, interests  and  erudition,  and  we  know  that  in 
1820,  on  the  evidence  of  Fr.  Jayme  de  Villanueva,  there 
were  large  collections  of  unedited  Provencal  poets  in 
the  archives  of  Spanish  churches.  This  is  readily  ex- 
plained (#)  by  the  intimate  union  between  the  court  of 
Provence  and  that  of  Barcelona  ;  (£)  by  the  union  of  the 
crown  of  Provence  and  the  crown  of  Aragon  in  the 
person  of  Alphonso  the  Second,  and  it  is  Aragon  that 
once  at  least  was  especially  rich  in  such  manuscripts ; 
(r)  by  the  popularity  of  Provencal  poetry  in  Catalonia 
during  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries.  A  poem 
breathing  the  Provencal  atmosphere  and  inspired  by  the 
Proven9al  spirit,  though  not  actually  in  the  langue  d'ocy 
may  well  have  drifted  into  Spain  from  Provence  without 
leaving  traces  behind  it  at  either  point. 


427 


BOOK    VII 

THE  HOLT   GRAAL   IN   THE   LIGHT  OF 
THE   CELTIC   CHURCH 


THE    ARGUMENT 

I.  STATEMENT  OF  A  POSSIBLE  IMPLICIT  ACCOUNTING 
FOR  ALL  CLAIMS. — The  Celtic  Church  as  an  environment 
of  the  Graal  literature — Its  traces  of  Eastern  influence — Of 
the  spirit  of  the  East  in  the  Graal  Legend — Its  implicit* 
as  reflections  of  the  Celtic  Church — The  source  of  British 
Christianity  independent  of  Rome — Reference  to  the  Johannine 
Rite — Certain  considerations  which  would  determine  the 
present  inquiry.  II.  THE  FORMULA  OF  THE  HYPOTHESIS 
SCHEDULED. — Of  Britain  as  a  microcosm  of  the  world — 
An  analogy  from  the  Apocalypse — Celtic  religious  sympathies — 
The  hypothesis  under  review — Celtic  origin  of  the  Graal 
Legend — The  Legend  as  an  ecclesiastical  growth — The 
Graal  Church — St.  David  and  his  miraculous  Altar — The 
Fish  Symbol  and  the  Rich  Fisherman — The  Secret  Words  as 
an  evasive  reference  to  the  Epiclesis  clause — Nature  of 
this  clause  in  Eucharistic  consecration — Celtic  Hereditary 
Keepers  of  Relics — General  characteristics  of  the  Celtic  Relic 
—Of  Mass  Chalices — Of  mystic  and  holy  cups — Of  the 
Columbarium  and  the  Graal  Dove — The  disappearance  of 
St.  David's  Altar — Withdrawal  of  the  Celtic  Rite — The 
Celtic  Church  and  the  Druids — Cadwaladr  and  Galahad — 
The  return  of  the  British  King — Claims  connected  with 
Glastonbury — The  substitution  of  Joseph  of  Arimathtea  for 
St.  David — Further  concerning  Fish  symbolism — And  con- 
cerning Mass  chalices — Of  Mystic  Bells — A  Church  conse- 
crated by  Christ — Super-Apostolical  succession — The  House  of 

43 ! 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Anjou — A  mystery  of  the  Celtic  Mass — Summary  of  the 
whole  matter — The  Celtic  Book  of  the  Graal  and  the  Secret 
Mass-Book.  III.  IN  WHAT  SENSE  THE  PLEA  MUST  BE 
HELD  TO  FAIL. — Some  preliminary  admissions — The  Secret 
Tradition  of  the  Epoch — Further  concerning  Super- Apostoli- 
cal Succession — History  of  the  Church  in  Britain — Further 
concerning  the  Johannine  Rite — Absence  of  Passion-Relics 
in  the  Welsh  Church — The  Epiclesis  clause  does  not  explain 
the  Secret  Words — Greek  mode  of  consecration — Distinctions 
between  Cadwaladr  and  Galahad — Fantasy  of  the  VIR 
AQUATICUS — The  Altar  of  St.  David  a  false  ground  of 
comparison — Substitutes  for  the  sacramental  Cup — True  posi- 
tion of  the  Glastonbury  claim — No  substitution  of  Joseph  for 
St.  David — The  Second  Joseph — Another  light  on  King 
Arthur  s  chalice — And  on  the  Mystery  of  the  Celtic  Mass 
— Further  concerning  a  Secret  Book  of  the  Mass — The  Pan- 
Britannic  Church  and  the  Graal  literature — The  Celtic 
Church  and  the  liternture.  IV.  THE  VICTORY  OF  THE 
LATIN  RITE. — Of  Rome  and  the  other  Assemblies — Why 
Rome  prevailed — The  conclusion  that  we  must  go  further. 


432 


BOOK    VII 

THE    HOLT  GRAAL   IN  THE   LIGHT  OF  THE 
CELTIC   CHURCH 


I 

STATEMENT  OF  A  POSSIBLE  IMPLICIT 
ACCOUNTING   FOR   ALL   CLAIMS 

AMONG  all  external  organisations  there  is  one  institution 
— and  there  is  one  only — which,  on  the  principle  that  the 
best  is  the  nearest,  might  be  expected  to  offer  some  of 
those  signs  and  warrants  that  we  should  expect  in  a 
society,  a  sodality,  a  body — let  me*  say,  at  once,  in  a 
church — which  could  and  did  connect  with  the  idea  of 
the  Holy  Graal — as  something  nearest  to  its  source,  if 
not  indeed  that  centre  from  which  the  entire  mystery 
originated. 

The  early  history  of  the  Holy  Graal,  as  distinguished 
from  the  several  quests  undertaken  for  the  discovery  of 
that  sacred  object,  is  one  of  Christianity  colonising.  We 
know  in  the  French  cycle,  by  the  universal  voice  of  the 
texts,  that  it  was  a  mystery  which  was  brought  into 
Britain,  and  seeing  that  the  legend,  as  a  whole,  is — 
apart  or  otherwise  from  anything  involved  by  the  im- 
plicits  thereof — assuredly  of  Celtic  origin,  its  religious 
elements,  in  the  absence  of  any  special  and  extrinsic 
claims,  must  be  accounted  for  most  readily  by  the 
characteristics  of  the  Celtic  Church. 

It  is  much  closer  to  our  hands  than  anything  which  has 
been  suggested  alternatively,  and  it  was  unquestionably 

433  2  E 


The   Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy    Graal 

that  environment  in  which  some  of  the  legends  developed. 
Those  who  have  previously  recognised,  in  their  imperfect 
and  dubious  way,  that  the  great  legends  have  a  mystic 
aspect,  and  that  hence  they  are  probably  referable  to  some- 
thing in  instituted  mysticism,  have  put  forward  bare  possi- 
bilities, and,  independently  of  these,  scholarship  has  itself 
gone  much  further  afield.  It  has  thought  of  the  Far  East 
as  the  home  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  some  who  are 
mystics  by  more  than  a  predisposition  on  the  surface, 
know  certainly — even  if  it  is  in  a  certain  sense  only — that 
there  is  a  country  deep  in  Asia.  Now,  albeit  the  limits  of 
our  evidence  concerning  the  Celtic  Church  are  circum- 
scribed somewhat  narrowly,  there  seems  no  doubt  that 
this  Church  bore  traces  of  Eastern  influence — by  which  I 
mean  something  stronger  and  plainer  than  resides  in  the 
common  fact  that  Christianity  itself  came  to  us  from  the 
oriental  world.  If,  therefore,  the  Holy  Graal  has  any 
marks  and  spirit  of  the  East,  it  might  be  accounted  for 
in  this  manner  by  way  of  the  most  colourable  inference. 
If,  however,  we  prefer  to  consider  without  any  further 
preface  what  is  the  palmary  claim  of  all,  and  if  therefore 
we  appeal  to  the  veiled  suggestion  of  pre-eminence  in  the 
Graal  priesthood  in  respect  of  an  extra-valid  form  of  conse- 
crating the  Eucharistic  elements  and  of  a  super-apostolical 
succession,  it  may  be  advanced  that  here  is  simply  an  ex- 
aggerated reflection  of  that  which  was  actually  claimed  by 
the  Celtic  Church  and  more  especially  by  that  Church  in 
Wales.  The  claim  was  that  it  had  a  title  to  existence 
independently  of  Rome,  Christianity  having  been  estab- 
lished in  these  islands  for  a  long  period  prior  to  the 
arrival  of  St.  Augustine,  which  arrival,  from  this  point  of 
view,  was  an  incursion  upon  territory  already  conquered 
and  held  to  a  defined  extent  rather  than  a  sacred  en- 
deavour to  spread  the  gospel  of  Christ ;  thus  it  brought 
spiritual  war  rather  than  the  light  of  truth.  I  have 
classed  these  two  points  together — that  is  to  say,  the 
alleged  oriental  origin  and  the  original  independence  of 
Rome — not  because  I  regard  the  second  as  important  in 

434 


The  Light   of  the    Celtic   Church 

comparison  with  the  first,  but  because  as  a  fact  we  know 
that  the  Celtic  Church  had  a  certain  autonomous  exist- 
ence long  before  the  legend  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  was 
devised  in  the  local  interests  of  Glastonbury.  It  was  not, 
therefore,  at  the  beginning  any  question  of  Angevin  ambi- 
tion. Further,  we  can,  I  think,  understand  very  well  how 
this  claim  may  have  been  exaggerated  in  legend,  so  as  to 
cover — as  I  have  said — the  special  implicits  which  I  have 
traced  in  the  Graal  literature,  and  therefore  to  account  for 
it  within  as  the  general  characteristics  of  the  Celtic 
Church  may  account  for  it  reasonably  without.  I  pro- 
pose now  to  set  forth  some  other  specific  analogies,  from 
which  we  shall  be  enabled  in  fine  to  draw  a  general 
conclusion  whether  we  can  be  satisfied  with  the  evidence 
as  it  so  stands,  or  whether  we  must  go  further.  Let  us 
remember,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  earlier  point,  if  it 
can  be  taken  apart  from  the  later,  would  mean  probably 
an  origin  for  the  Holy  Graal  independent  of  Celtic  en- 
vironment, like  that  of  some  Eastern  heretical  sects  which 
passed  into  southern  France ;  otherwise  a  derivation 
through  Spain ;  or,  as  an  alternative  to  both,  the  transit, 
for  example,  of  the  Johannine  tradition  westward.  But  if 
we  abandon  the  earlier  and  are  compelled  to  have  recourse, 
or  this  mainly,  to  the  later  point,  then  the  legend  of 
the  Holy  Graai — because  it  contains  elements  which  are 
foreign  to  the  mind  of  romance,  though  it  is  expressed 
in  the  romance  form — must  belong  to  that  class  of  fable 
which  has  been  invented  in  an  external  interest,  and  its 
position  is  not  much  better  than  one  of  forged  decretals ; 
it  is,  indeed,  a  decretal  in  literature,  put  forward  in  many 
forms  and  with  many  variants,  and  it  would  be  useless  to 
look  therein  for  any  secret  intention  beyond  that  of  the 
particular  pretension  which  it  was  designed  to  support. 
With  the  merits  and  defects  of  Celtic  Christianity  in 
Britain,  we  are  sufficiently  acquainted  to  deal  rather 
summarily  respecting  the  value  of  any  mystical  sugges- 
tions which  are  discernible  in  the  cycles  or  remanents  of 
literature  which  must  be  regarded  as  belonging  thereto. 

435 


'The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

The  suggested  implicit  with  which  I  am  dealing,  if 
found  to  obtain,  would  signify  therefore  the  closing  of 
the  whole  inquiry. 


II 

THE   FORMUL/E   OF   THE   HYPOTHESIS 
SCHEDULED 

There  are  traces  in  the  Anglo-Norman  romances  of  a 
certain  fluidic  sense  in  which  Britain  and  its  immediate 
connections,  according  to  the  subsurface  mind  of  their 
writers,  stood  typically  for  the  world.  They  were  familiar 
enough  with  the  names  of  other  regions — with  Syria, 
Egypt,  Rome — above  all,  with  the  Holy  Places  in  the 
Jerusalem  which  is  below ;  but  their  world  was  the  Celtic 
world,  comprised,  let  us  say,  between  Scotia  and  Ireland 
on  the  one  side  and  central  France  on  the  other.  This 
region  came,  I  think,  to  signify  symbolically,  and  so  we 
hear  that  the  failure  to  ask  a  one  little  question  "  involved 
the  destruction  of  kingdoms,  while  the  belated  inter- 
rogation seems  to  have  lifted  the  veil  of  enchantment 
from  the  world  itself.  The  cloud  upon  the  sanctuary 
was  a  cloud  over  that  world  ;  its  lifting  was  a  glory 
restored  everywhere.  But  as  the  enchantment,  except 
within  very  narrow  limits,  and  then  ex  hypothesi,  was  only 
of  the  imputed  order,  so  the  combined  restoration  of 
Nature  in  common  with  Grace  was  but  imputed  also  ;  the 
woe  and  inhibition  were  removed  as  secretly  as  they  were 
imposed.  So  again,  when  the  chivalry  of  the  Round  Table 
— in  the  Greater  Chronicles — covenanted  to  go  forth  on 
the  Quest  of  the  Holy  Graal,  the  universal  and  pro- 
claimed object  was  to  terminate  the  hard  times  of  adven- 
ture, which  had  become  intolerable :  pour  deliveir  noire 
fais  des  grans  mervelles  et  des  estrainges  auentures  qui  tant 
y  sont  auenues,  lone  tans  a.  The  whole  position  reminds 
one  of  that  chapter  in  the  Apocalypse  which  presents  a 

436 


\ 


The  Light  of  the   Celtic   Church 

sheaf  of  instructions  to  the  Seven  Churches  of  Asia.  No 
one  knew  better  than  the  Jews  not  only  concerning  Rome, 
Greece  and  Alexandria,  but  of  the  world  extended  further; 
this  notwithstanding,  when  the  great  book  of  the  secret 
Christian  mystery  was  first  written,  the  world  of  Christen- 
dom was  confined  chiefly  within  narrow  limits  in  Asia,  and 
this  was  the  world  of  the  Apocalypse.  It  was  actually  all 
Assiah  of  Kabalism,  though  the  few  who  have  dared  to 
institute  a  philological  connection  between  the  one  name 
and  the  other  have  gone,  as  usual,  astray.  Recurring  to 
the  fact  out  of  which  this  analogy  arises,  let  me  add,  as  a 
matter  of  justice  to  an  hypothesis  which  I  seek  to  present 
adequately,  that  within  this  Celtic  world  the  first  and 
most  natural  sympathies  in  the  religious  order  would  be 
indubitably  with  its  own  aspirations,  and  I  set  aside  there- 
fore for  the  time  being  all  speculation  as  to  anything  rich 
and  strange  in  Rite  and  Doctrine  which  may  have  been 
brought  from  the  Eastern  world  by  those — whoever  they 
were — who  first  planted  Christianity  on  the  known  con- 
fines of  the  Western  world.  The  chief  points  of  the 
hypothesis  may  be  collected  into  a  schedule  as  follows:— 

1.  It  is  certain  that   the   Graal   Legend   is   of  Celtic 
origin  and  making,  because  of  the  Celtic  attributions  of 
the  romances  and  their  Celtic  mise-en-scene  and  characters  ; 
because   of  the  Celtic   names,  disguised    and   otherwise, 
which  are  found  in  the  romances,  even  in  those  which 
belong  to  the  Teutonic  cycle ;  and  because  of  the  un- 
doubted derivations  into  the  Graal  Legend  from  Welsh 
folklore.     This  is  agreed  on  all  hands,  and  will  therefore 
call  of  necessity  for  no  extension  or  comment  in  this  place. 

2.  The  romance   of  the   Holy   Graal,   regarding   the 
cycles  synthetically,  is  a  glorified  ecclesiastical  legend  of 
Celtic  origin ;  there  are  other  ecclesiastical  legends,  refer- 
able to  the  same  source,  which  suggest  the  Graal  atmos- 
phere.    The  "  Graal  Church  "  was  in  its  earlier  stages 
the  Celtic  Church  contrasted  with  the  Saxo-Roman. 

3.  The   nucleus   is  to  be   found  in  the  story  of  St. 
David  and  his  miraculous  altar.     The  apostle  of  South 

437 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Wales,  with  some  other  saints,  made  a  pilgrimage  in  the 
legend  to  Jerusalem,  where  the  patriarch  of  the  Holy  City 
invested  him  as  archbishop  and  gave  him  "  a  consecrated 
altar  in  which  the  body  of  our  Lord  once  lay."  It  was 
transported  to  Wales,  performed  innumerable  miracles, 
but  after  the  death  of  St.  David  it  was  covered  with  skins 
and  was  never  seen  by  any  one.  According  to  a  variant 
of  the  legend,  this  altar — and  possibly  some  other  Hallows 
— was  carried  through  the  air  to  Britain,  and  hence  was 
often  described  as  e  coelo  veniens.  Though  apparently 
it  was  the  rock-hewn  sepulchre  mentioned  in  the  New 
Testament,  no  man  could  specify  its  shape,  its  colour, 
or  of  what  material  it  was  fashioned  ;  in  addition  to  its 
other  wonders,  it  gave  oracles — that  is  to  say,  a  voice 
spoke  therein,  as  it  did,  according  to  the  romances,  in  the 
Graal  itself.  St.  David  died  about  601  A.D.  ;  he  gave 
the  Mass  to  Britain  ;  he  was  of  the  lineage  of  Our  Lady  ; 
and  his  birth  having  been  foretold  by  the  finding  of  a 
great  fish,  he  was  termed  the  Waterman — vir  aquations — 
which  recalls  the  Rich  Fisherman  of  the  later  legends.  It 
might  be  said  that  this  title  was  applicable  especially  to 
him,  as  one  who  was  rich  in  the  conversion  of  souls  to 
Christ  and  in  the  greater  gifts  of  sanctity.  His  ancestors 
bore  the  name  of  Avallach,  whence  that  of  the  king  of 
Sarras  seems  to  be  derived  certainly ;  and  he  is  said  to 
have  provided  sacred  vessels  for  the  celebration  of  the 
Eucharist. 

4.  The  secret  words  of  the  Robert  de  Borron  cycle 
refer  to  the  Epiclesis  of  the  Celtic  Rite.  The  form  of 
Eucharistic  consecration  in  the  Latin  Rite  is  actually  the 
words  of  Institution — that  is  to  say,  the  New  Testa- 
ment's account  of  the  Last  Supper.  In  the  East,  how- 
ever, consecration  is  effected  by  addition  of  the  Epiclesis 
clause — that  is,  by  the  invocation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  In 
its  more  usual  form,  it  is  a  petition  for  the  descent  of  the 
Comforter,  firstly,  upon  the  worshippers,  and,  secondly, 
upon  the  Altar  gifts,  that  the  elements  may  be  converted 
into  the  Divine  Body  and  Blood.  The  liturgy  of  St. 

438 


The   Light   of  the   Celtic  Church 

John  Chrysostom  may  be  consulted  on  this  point ;  indeed, 
from  one  passage  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  what  was 
communicated  was  the  Holy  Ghost,  an  idea  in  which  all 
that  is  usually  attached  to  the  Eucharistic  office  seems  to 
dissolve  in  a  higher  light.  The  evidence  is,  however, 
confessedly  somewhat  indirect,  as  no  Gallican  or  other 
connected  liturgy  gives  the  words  of  institution,  but  they 
are  found  in  full  in  a  North  Italian,  perhaps  a  Milanese, 
liturgy,  and  elsewhere,  as  we  shall  see  shortly.  It  has 
been  said  that  between  750  and  820  A.D.  certain  words 
in  the  Celtic  Rite  vanished  from  the  consecration  of 
the  Eucharist,  which  would  correspond,  I  suppose,  ex 
hypothesi^  to  the  intervention  of  the  Roman  Rite.  The 
Celtic  was  abolished  formally  about  850,  but  is  said  to 
have  survived  to  the  period  of  the  Graal  literature.  The 
Welsh  would  have  learned  from  the  Crusades  that  the 
Liturgy  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  still  used  in  the  East. 

5.  The  hereditary  Graal  Keepers,  so  strongly  em- 
phasised in  the  romances,  are  derived  from  the  Hereditary 
Relic  Keepers  of  the  Celtic  Church.  Mr.  J.  Romilly 
Allen,  in  his  Monumental  History  of  the  Early  British 
Church,  has  said  :  "  The  vicissitudes  through  which  the 
relics  passed  in  the  course  of  centuries  were  often  of  a 
most  romantic  description.  The  story  was  generally  the 
same.  The  book,  bell  or  crozier  belonging  to  the  founder 
of  the  Church  was  supposed  to  have  acquired  peculiar 
sanctity  and  even  supernatural  properties  by  association 
with  him  ;  and  after  his  death  it  was  often  enclosed  in 
a  costly  metal  shrine  of  exquisite  workmanship.  Each 
relic  had  its  hereditary  custodian,  who  was  responsible 
for  its  safe  keeping  and  who  in  return  received  certain 
privileges,  such  as  ...  the  title  to  inherit  certain  land, 
of  which  the  relic  constituted  the  tenure."  The  pre- 
servation of  relics  under  hereditary  guardianship  seems 
to  have  been  common  among  Celtic  families — as,  for 
example,  the  banner  of  St.  Columba.  So  also  the  relics 
of  certain  saints  belonging  to  the  Scoto-Irish  Church 
were  placed  in  the  care  of  families  of  hereditary  keepers  ; 

439 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

these  were  consecrated  objects,  not  human  remains,  and 
they  were  regarded  as  of  great  virtue  when  borne  in 
battle  by  a  person  who  was  free  from  any  deadly  sin. 
Sometimes  a  venerable  cup  was  deposited  in  a  special 
shrine  ;  sometimes  the  book  of  the  gospels  was  enclosed 
in  triple  cases — as  of  wood,  copper  and  silver.  The 
custody  of  such  an  object  became  an  office  of  dignity 
from  generation  to  generation  in  a  single  family.  The 
general  characteristics  of  the  Celtic  relic  may  be  enu- 
merated as  follows,  but  it  is  not  intended  to  say  that 
every  sacred  object  possessed  all  the  qualities  :  (a)  It  came 
from  heaven,  like  the  Graal ;  (b)  it  was  of  mysterious  and 
incomprehensible  matter  ;  (c)  it  was  oracular ;  (d)  like 
the  Graal,  it  had  the  power  of  speech ;  (e)  it  healed  the 
sick,  as  the  Graal  did  also  occasionally,  though  this  was 
not  its  specific  office ;  (f)  like  the  Graal,  it  must  not  be 
seen  by  unqualified  persons ;  (g)  it  had  the  power  of 
miraculous  self-transportation,  and  the  Holy  Cup,  in 
certain  romances,  was  also  a  wandering  vessel ;  (7z)  it  acted 
as  a  guide ;  (/)  it  was  a  palladium ;  (k)  it  executed  judg- 
ment on  the  wicked  and  profane,  which  is  the  charac- 
teristic in  chief  of  the  Graal  in  the  metrical  romance  of 
De  Borron. 

6.  In'  the  Panegyric  of  St.  Columba,  a  document  ascribed 
to  the  last  years  of  the  eleventh  century,  it  is  recorded 
among  his  other  good  works  that — like  his  peer,  St.  David 
of  Wales — he  provided  a  Mass  Chalice  for  every  Church 
— presumably  within  his  special  sphere  of  influence  or 
perhaps  even  in  the  islands  generally.  Readers  of  the 
prose  Perceval  Le  Gallois  will  remember  that  chalices  were 
so  uncommon  in  Arthurian  days  that  the  King,  during 
a  certain  quest,  seems  to  have  met  with  one,  and  that 
miraculously,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life.  The  ex- 
planation is  that  wooden  bowls  may  have  been  used 
previously  for  purposes  of  consecration.  This  was  at 
the  Mass  of  the  Graal  which  Arthur  was  permitted  to 
see  in  the  course  of  his  travelling.  We  should  remem- 
ber at  this  point  that  it  is  only  at  the  close  of  the  cycle 

440 


The  Light   of  the   Celtic   Church 

in  Northern  French — that  is  to  say,  in  the  romance  which 
I  have  just  mentioned,  in  that  of  Galahad  and  in  the 
Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  that  the  Sacred  Vessel — its  other 
uses  notwithstanding — is  connected  expressly  and  indu- 
bitably with  the  administration  of  the  Eucharist,  though 
it  is  not  always  the  vessel  of  communion. 

7.  There  are  historical  memorials  of  mystic  and  holy 
cups,  possessing  great  virtues  and  preserved  in  old  Welsh 
families.     Among  these  is  the  Holy  Cup  of  Tregaron, 
which  was  made  of  the  wood  of  the  True  Cross  and  its 
healing  virtues  were  manifested  so  recently  as  the  year 
1901.     The  curious  thing  in  the  romances  is  that  the 
Holy  Graal  heals  every  one  except  the  Keeper  himself, 
who  in  the  Perceval  cycle  can  be  cured  only  by  a  question, 
and    in    the   Galahad    legend — but  here  it  is  a   former 
Keeper — by  the  magnetic   touch   of  his   last   lineal  de- 
scendant. 

8.  In  England  during  the  Middle  Ages — but  this  is  a 
side-issue  which  is  mentioned  only  for  its  possible  greater 
antiquity  and  origin  in  Celtic  times — the  Eucharist  was 
reserved,  as  we  have  seen  otherwise,  in  a  Columbarium, 
or  Dove-House,  being  a  vessel  shaped  like  a  dove.     This 
was  the  Tabernacle  of  its  period,  and  it  recalls  (<?)  some 
archaic    pictures   of  a   Cup  over  which  a  dove  broods ; 
(#)  the  descent  of  a  dove  on  the  Graal  stone  in  Wolfram's 
poem ;  (^)  the  passage  of  symbolic  doves  in  connection 
with  the  Graal  procession  as  told  by  several  romances, 
but  especially  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad ;  and  (d)  the  office 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Graal  legend.     But  it  is  also 
suggested — and  this,  I  believe,  is  by  Huysman — that  the 
Tabernacle  was  frequently  in  the  form  of  an  ivory  tower 
to  symbolise  Christ  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin,  who  is 
herself  called  Turris  eburnea. 

9.  The  vanishing  of  the  Graal  refers  (a)  to  the  actual 
disappearance  of  St.  David's  altar  after  the  death  of  its 
custodian  ;  (£)  to  the  disappearance  of  the  Celtic  Church 
before   the  Roman ;   and  (<:)  to  the  subjugation  of  the 
British   by   the  Saxons.     The  Welsh   Church   was   pre- 
441 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

eminently  a  monastic  church,  and,  in  spite  of  the  existence 
of  bishops,  its  government  was  in  the  hands  of  monks. 
The  claim  of  the  ancient  British  Church  generally,  in- 
cluding its  legend  that  the  first  Church  of  Glastonbury 
was  consecrated  by  our  Lord  Himself,  may  help  us  to 
explain  the  undertone  of  dissent  from  Rome  which  has 
been  noted  here  and  there  in  the  subsurface  of  the  Graal 
literature,  but  especially,  as  it  has  been  thought,  in  the 
Longer  Prose  Perceval.  To  appreciate  the  position  fully, 
we  have  to  remember  that  the  Latin  rite  gained  ground 
and  influence  with  the  Norman  Conquest,  though  inde- 
pendently of  that  rite  there  were  monasteries  in  remote 
valleys  where  the  old  liturgy  and  the  ancient  form  of 
consecration  may  have  been  still  used  and  where  also  the 
ancient  wisdom  of  the  Druids  was  preserved,  though — in 
spite  of  certain  testimonies — it  could  have  been  scarcely 
considered  consistent  for  a  man  to  be  a  mystic  Druid 
and  also  a  Christian.  The  Druidic  secret  was  symbolised 
by  the  term  Afalon,  which  means  the  Apple  Orchard. 
The  last  Welsh  Archbishop  of  St.  David's  died  in  1115, 
and  was  succeeded  by  a  Norman,  that  is  to  say,  by  a 
Roman  prelate. 

10.  Cadwaladr  is  Galahad.  Galahad  took  away  the 
Holy  Graal,  because,  according  to  the  Welsh  Quest,  the 
world  was  not  worthy.  His  prototype,  in  despair  of  his 
country,  removed  certain  relics,  and,  by  the  testimony  of 
one  tradition,  he  died  in  the  Holy  Land,  as  if  he  also 
had  departed  to  Sarras,  with  the  intention  of  proceeding 
further.  Another  story  says  that  he  projected  the  re- 
conquest  of  Britain  in  a  fleet  furnished  by  his  kinsman 
Alain  of  Brittany,  where  he  was  then  in  exile  ;  but  an 
angel  warned  him  to  desist.  He  was  to  seek  the  Pope 
and  confess,  and  he  would  be  canonised  after  his  death 
— which,  according  to  this  legend,  occurred  at  Rome. 
This  chieftain,  who  loomed  so  largely  in  the  Welsh 
imagination,  who,  like  Bran  of  pre-Christian  legend,  was 
termed  the  Blessed,  was  regarded  as  of  the  royal  line  of 
David  ;  he  is  thought  to  have  been  the  custodian  of  holy 

442 


The  Light   of  the    Celtic   Church 

relics  belonging  to  his  family  before  him,  and  when  he 
died,  in  reality,  as  it  seems,  of  the  Yellow  Sickness,  in  664, 
his  return  was  confidently  expected.  So  many  legends 
grew  up  around  him  that  he  appears  to  have  gathered  up 
in  himself  all  the  aspirations  of  Celtdom.  His  return  is 
associated  with  the  second  manifestation  of  his  relics  and 
with  the  final  felicity  of  the  Celts.  Awaiting  that  event, 
the  entire  British  Church,  for  some  reason  not  otherwise 
explicable,  began  to  droop  and  decay.  But  I  may  note 
here  that  a  great  Welsh  revival  was  inaugurated  in  the 
year  1077  A.D.  by  the  return  of  Rhys-ap-Tewdwr  from 
Brittany.  Bards  and  Druids  were  at  white  heat,  and 
Rhys  himself  was  a  descendant  traditionally  of  Cadwaladr 
the  Blessed,  who  was  to  restore  all  things.  He  even 
claimed  identity  with  that  departed  hero. 

1 1 .  When  the  particular  set  of  claims  connected  with 
Glastonbury  began  to  be  manufactured  about  1150,  to 
centralise  a  wide  field   of  interests   at  a  defined   point, 
Joseph    of  Arimathaea    was    substituted    for  St.   David. 
There  was  the  supposed  body  of  Joseph,  there  the  phial 
which  he  brought  containing  the  Precious  Blood,  there 
also  the  body  of  King  Arthur,  and  by  imputation  the 
Sapphirus,  the  lost  altar  of  the  Welsh  apostle,  the  last 
of  these  recalling  rather  plausibly,  and  accounting  for,  the 
Lap  sit  exillis^  or  exilix^  of  Wolfram.     From  this  point  of 
view  it  is  worthy  of  close  attention  (a)  for  its  sacramental 
connection  ;  (Z>)  for  its  association  with  the  body  of  our 
Lord  ;  and  (<:)  for  the  mystery  attaching  to  its  form,  with 
which  we  may  compare  the  vagueness  which  characterises 
nearly  all  the  descriptions  of  the  Graal  vessel. 

12.  The    descent   of    the   Graal  prima    materia    from 
folk-lore  no  more  explains  the  Christian  legend  of  the 
Graal  than   the  words   vir  and   virtus  explain   the   par- 
ticular significance  attaching  to  the  term  virtuoso.     The 
mythological  Salmon  of  Wisdom  as  a  prototype  of  the 
Fish  in  De  Borron's  poem  is  a  case  in  point.     The  real 
approximate  progenitor  is  the  primitive  Christian  symbol, 
which  was  familiar  to  Celtic  Christianity,  and  seeing  that 

443 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  latter  was  much  like  the  Church  at  large  of  several 
centuries  earlier,  so  it  may  have  preserved  things  which 
elsewhere  had  passed  out  of  memory — the  Ichthus  symbol 
among  them.  This  signified  Christ,  and  especially  the 
Eucharistic  species.  It  also  symbolised  the  Disciplina 
Arcani  and  was  the  most  general  of  Christian  emblems ; 
it  passed  into  a  specific  form  of  expression  for  the  conceal- 
ment of  the  more  interior  mysteries,  and  to  partake  of  the 
Fish  was  an  evasion  for  the  reception  of  the  sacrament. 

13.  His  connection  with  the  Quest  of  the  Graal  not 
only  enabled  King  Arthur  to  furnish  chalices  for  churches 
but  bells  also,  which  seem  to  have  been  unknown  pre- 
viously in  Logres.     In  the  Celtic   veneration  for  relics 
they  bear,  however,  a  conspicuous  part,  the  examples  being 
far  too  numerous  for  recitation  in  this  place.     I  can  say 
only  that  their  cultus,  their  care,  the  keeperships  instituted 
in   connection    and    the    wonders  ascribed  to   them    are 
common  to  ancient  Wales,  Scotland  and  Ireland. 

14.  Reverting  once  more  to  St.  David,  it  is  reported 
traditionally   that   the   first   church  which   he   built  was 
situated    at    Glastonbury,    and    in    connection   with    this 
ascription,  it  is  said  to  have  been  consecrated  by  Christ 
Himself,  so  that  in  more  senses  than  in  one  sense  merely  the 
place  was  a  source  and  fountain  of  all  religion  in  the  King- 
dom of  Britain,  as  affirmed  by  William  of  Malmesbury. 
It  was  therefore  among  ecclesiastical  structures  what  the 
second  Joseph  was  among  the  bishops  of  Christendom. 
If  ever  there  was   an  arch-natural  Mass  celebrated  and 
a   noumenal  Eucharist  administered  at  a   specific   place 
in  Logres,  assuredly  with  these  warrants  it  would  have 
been  only  at  Glastonbury,  the  connection  of  which  with 
St.  David  raises  one  further  point.     The  Celtic  Church 
held   that  the  Roman   Pontiff  was  the  successor  of  St. 
Peter,    but    the  patriarch    of  Jerusalem — who    ordained 
the    Apostle    of  Wales — was   the    successor    of   Christ. 
The    subsurface    intention    which    created    this    legend 
seems  to  have    been    nearly  identical    with    that    which 
put   forward   the  super-apostolical  succession  of  Joseph 

444 


The  Light   of  the   Celtic    Church 

II.,  and  it  follows  that  Celtic  imagination  at  work 
in  the  field  of  hagiology  furnished  the  makers  of 
romance — and  the  author  in  particular  of  the  Book  of  the 
Holy  Graal — with  an  ample  groundwork.  The  substitu- 
tion of  the  man  of  Arimathaea  for  the  original  patron  of 
Wales  was  the  appropriation  of  an  independent  legend, 
which  served  the  ecclesiastical  side  of  Angevin  ambition 
without  affording  a  handle  to  the  troublesome  principality 
on  the  western  side  of  the  vast  dominions  of  Anjou. 

15.  There  are  "  distinct  traces  of  something  '  queer '  in 
the  Masses  of  the  earliest  Celtic  Church — before  the  com- 
ing of  St.  David  in  Wales  or  of  St.  Columba  in  Scotland 
and  Ireland."    An  allusion  to  the  "  queerness  "  in  question 
may  be  found  in  the  following  passage  of  the  Lesser  Holy 
Graal,  forming  part  of  the  discourse  of  Christ  to  Joseph  of 
Arimathaea  when  He  brought  the  Holy  Graal  to  console 
the  prisoner  in  his  tower :   "  Et  ensinc  con  ge  lou  dis  a 
la  table^  seront  -pluseurs  tables  establies  a  moi  sacrefier^  qui 
senefiera   la  croiz,  et  lov  vaissel   la   ou  Fan  sacrefiera  et 
saintefiera^  la  fierre  ou  tu  meis  mon  cors,  que  li  caalices 
senefiera  oil  mes  cors  sera  sacrez,  en  samblance  cfune  o'iste, 
et  la  'platainne  qui  sera  dessus  mises  senefiera  lou  couvercle 
de  coi  tu  me  covris"  &c.     Alternatively,  seeing  that  there 
is  no  mention  of  the  Blood,  it  may  be  "  a  manifesto  of 
the  party  who  wished  the  chalice  to  be  denied  the  laity," 
or,  finally,  the  utterance  of  some  obscure  party  or  sect. 
"  The   latter  view  finds   some  support  in  the   Hermit's 
story " — referring  here  to  the  Prologue  of  the  Book  of 
the  Holy  Graal — "  of  his  meeting  with  a  knight  who  had 
seen  him  in  a  place  that  he  named." 

1 6.  And  now  as  regards  the  summary  of  the  whole 
matter,  the  position  may  be  expressed  as  follows :    (a) 
The    Graal    legend    is    demonstrably    of    Celtic    stuff- 
in    part    of  Celtic    folk-lore   which    has    turned    good 
Christian,  but  more  largely  of  ecclesiastical  legend ;  (£) 
it  derives  from  the  story  of  St.  David  and  his  altar ;  (c} 
the  original  Graal  book  was  probably  a  legend  following 
a  special  and  peculiar  Liturgy ;  (d)  the  legend  told  of 

445 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  Christianising  of  Britain  by  St.  David,  the  celebration 
of  the  Christian  Mysteries  on  the  saints'  miraculous 
altar,  which  was  actually  the  sepulchre  of  our  Lord,  of 
the  wonders  wrought  by  this  altar,  of  the  coming  of  the 
heathens,  the  ruin  of  Britain,  the  flight  of  its  King — who 
was  St.  David's  last  descendant — bearing  with  him  the 
altar  relic  to  the  East.  There  he  died,  thence  he  shall  yet 
return,  again  bearing  the  relic  ;  the  Britons  shall  triumph, 
the  Saxons  shall  suffer  expulsion,  and  the  mystic  words 
shall  be  uttered  once  more  over  the  Thaumaturgic  Altar. 
It  is  obvious  that,  according  to  this  hypothesis,  the  book, 
which  was  far  older  than  any  Graal  literature,  remained 
in  concealment  in  Wales  and  perhaps  was  unearthed  at 
the  Norman  Conquest  of  Glamorganshire,  when  it  was 
modified,  varied,  exalted,  transformed  and  allegorised  by 
successive  makers  of  romance,  being  adapted  specifically 
as  an  aid  to  the  House  of  Anjou,  in  its  struggle  with  the 
Pope,  by  the  author  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal — 
whether  Walter  Map  or  another.  But  Rome  proved 
more  than  one  part  too  strong  and  by  more  than  one 
interest  too  many  for  the  ambition  of  Henry  II.,  while  as 
regards  Wales,  it  had  long  and  long  already  succumbed 
to  the  Latin  Rite. 


Ill 

IN  WHAT  SENSE   THE  PLEA  MUST  BE   HELD 
TO   FAIL 

It  is  indubitable,  and  we  have  seen  in  the  plenary  sense, 
that  folk-lore  provided  its  elements  as  the  crude  matter 
of  the  scheme  of  the  Holy  Graal.  It  is  true,  and  also 
indubitable,  that  many  accidentals  of  the  Celtic  Church 
became  accidentals  of  the  literature ;  they  were  worked 
into  the  Graal  cycle  as  well  as  the  pre-Christian  elements, 
the  process  arising  in  the  most  natural  of  all  possible 
manners.  It  was  not  exactly  that  the  most  early  romancers 
took  the  matter  which  was  nearest  to  their  hands,  but 

446 


The  Light   of  the   Celtic  Church 

rather  that  there  was  no  other ;  the  external  aspect  of 
religion  was  of  necessity  therefore  a  reflection  of  the  Celtic 
Church.  But  as  folk-lore  does  not  explain  the  Christian 
Graal  and  the  high  experiments  of  sanctity  therewith 
connected,  so  the  contributory  memorials  on  the  Celtic 
ecclesiastical  side  do  not  explain  it  either.  Behind 
all  there  lies  the  secret  tradition  of  the  epoch,  and  it  is 
this  precisely  which  makes  the  whole  research  so  remote 
and  intractable  in  respect  of  its  final  issues.  I  need 
hardly  say  that  the  secret  tradition  had  no  claim  to  put 
forward  in  respect  of  super-apostolical  succession  in  the 
form  belonging,  as  we  find,  to  the  Graal  literature,  though 
it  had — ex  hyfiothesi — its  own  Divine  Warrants.  This 
claim  may  represent  therefore,  by  a  hazardous  ascrip- 
tion, the  ecclesiastical  political  programme  of  the  Anjou 
dynasty  in  England,  and  it  would  be  in  this  way  a 
separable  element  in  the  literature.  There  is  no  other 
sense  than  this  in  which  a  Britannic  Church  shows  any 
true  correspondence  with  Graal  subsurface  intention, 
because  that  intention  had  neither  hostility  to  Rome  nor 
a  plea  to  put  forward  in  respect  of  religious  indepen- 
dence and  the  institution  of  an  autonomous  pan-Britannic 
Church.  It  follows  that  the  secret  tradition  and  the 
glimpse  which  we  obtain  thereof  in  the  Graal  books  are 
either  a  mere  dream,  or  the  point  of  departure  for  this 
sub-section  must  be  a  total  denial  of  all  that  has  been  put 
forward  previously  in  regard  to  St.  David's  legend.  As  it 
is  premature,  however,  to  make  it  a  point  of  departure,  I 
must  lead  up  to  it  from  other  considerations,  and  I  will 
therefore  say  a  few  further  words  concerning  the  Church 
itself  in  Britain,  not  that  they  are  essential  to  the 
subject  but  for  the  information  of  those  of  my  readers 
who  may  have  had  no  call  to  consider  it. 

Brief  as  it  is,  the  following  schedule  will,  I  think,  be 
sufficient  for  the  purpose,  and  I  note  :  (a)  that  Christianity 
existed  in  Britain  during  the  Roman  occupation,  and  that 
three  British  bishops  were  present  at  the  council  of  Aries, 
about  350  A.D  ;  (Z>)  that  the  extent  of  its  diffusion  is 

447 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

doubtful,  but  it  was  probably  the  religion  of  Romans  and 
Romanised  Britons  in  and  about  the  garrison  towns ;  (<:) 
that  it  became  universal  early  in  the  fifth  century,  which 
was  the  beginning  of  the  age  of  Saints ;  (d)  that  it  is 
doubtful  whether  the  Celtic  Church  at  this  period  was 
a  descendant  of  the  Roman-British  Church  or  a  colonisa- 
tion de  novo  from  Gaul,  but  it  may  have  combined  both 
sources ;  (e)  that  an  episcopal  mission  from  Gaul  into 
Britain  is  certain,  and  its  object  is  supposed  to  have  been 
the  extinction  of  Pelagian  heresy,  or  Pagan,  as  it  has 
been  suggested  alternatively ;  (/)  that  the  derivation  ab 
origine  symboli  was  possibly  from  Ephesus  through  the 
Johannine  Rite  into  Southern  Gaul,  and  thence  into 
Britain ;  (g)  that,  also  possibly,  there  were  other 
Oriental  influences,  and  particularly  from  Egypt,  in  the 
fifth  century,  the  evidence  being:  (i)  The  derivation 
of  Celtic  ornament  from  Egyptian  ornament ;  (2)  the 
commemoration  in  ancient  Irish  books  of  "  Holy  Egyptian 
hermits "  buried  in  Ireland ;  (3)  the  correspondences 
between  the  Celtic  monastic  system  and  that  of  Egypt ; 
(4)  the  practice,  attributed  to  St.  Columba,  of  removing 
his  sandals  before  entering  the  sanctuary,  a  practice  known 
otherwise  only  in  Egypt. 

As  regards  the  hypothesis  put  forward  in  the  previous 
sub-section,  it  is  observable  that  we  have  not  been  invited 
to  consider  in  the  Celtic  Church  any  traces  of  a  parti- 
cular theological  or  doctrinal  tradition — such  as  might, 
for  example,  be  inferred  from  the  Johannine  Rite — or 
of  an  evasive  or  concealed  claim  ;  it  is  not  suggested  that 
in  Wales,  Scotia  or  Ireland  there  is  any  trace  of  an 
ecclesiastical  legend  concerning  a  relic  which  at  any  dis- 
tance might  be  held  to  offer  a  real  correspondence  with 
that  of  the  Holy  Graal  or  its  companion  Hallows,  because 
the  essential  condition  of  the  analogy  must  be  indubitably 
the  existence  of  memorials  of  the  Passion  of  our  Lord. 
Of  these  it  is  certain  that  there  were  none,  because  other- 
wise it  is  certain  that  they  would  be  adduced.  We  are 
asked,  on  the  contrary,  to  assume  that  a  variant  liturgical 

448 


The  Light  of  the   Celtic   Church 

reading,  the  legend  of  an  historical  apostle  after  passing 
under  a  specific  transmutation,  and  the  mythical  restitu- 
tion of  a  Welsh  King  are  the  first  matter  in  combination 
of  the  complex  cycles  of  literature  which  are  comprised 
in  the  Graal  legend.  If  this  hypothesis  can  be  taken 
with  such  high  seriousness  that  we  may  suppose  it  put 
forward — shall  I  say  ? — as  an  equivalent  by  analogy  for 
that  which  has  offered  St.  Dominic  and  the  enchanting 
fable  of  a  question  which  should  have  been  put  to  the 
Pope  as  a  real  explanation  of  the  Perceval-Graal  myth, 
it  will  be  sufficient,  I  think,  to  deal  with  it  on  general 
lines  rather  than  by  an  exhaustive  process  of  criticism  in 
detail.  Let  us  put  aside,  in  the  first  place,  all  that  part 
which  is  purely  in  the  region  of  supposition,  and  take  the 
actual  facts  as  things  for  valuation  in  the  schedule. 
Question  of  Epiclesis  or  question — as  we  shall  see  presently 
— of  a  particular  tense,  it  is  obvious  that  the  oriental 
terms  of  consecration,  when  those  prevailed  in  the  West, 
were  the  secret  of  no  particular  sanctuary  as  distinguished 
from  all  other  holy  places  in  Britanny,  Britain  and 
Wales.  They  were  catholic  to  these  countries  and  also 
to  a  great  part  of  that  which  we  understand  by  Scotia, 
Ireland  and  Gaul.  They  connect  in  themselves  with 
no  keepership  and  with  no  Hallows.  We  know  that 
the  Roman  rite  colonised  all  these  countries,  and 
that  in  the  course  of  time  it  prevailed.  But  the 
period  between  the  public  use  of  the  words  now  in 
question  and  their  final  abrogation  was  one  of  cen- 
turies, and  although  during  a  portion  thereof — ex 
hypothesi — they  may  have  been  perpetuated  in  conceal- 
ment, there  is  no  doubt  that  they  had  fallen  into  com- 
plete desuetude  long  before  the  third  quarter  of  the 
twelfth  century.  It  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  there 
was  at  that  time  any  one  concerned  in  their  perpetuation 
sufficiently  to  put  them  forward  as  a  great  mystery  of 
sanctity  inherent  in  the  heart  of  Christianity,  and  it  is 
impossible,  mystically  speaking,  that  they  should  carry 
this  significance.  The  secret  words  do  not  appear  in  the 

449  2  F 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

metrical  romance  of  Joseph  as  in  any  sense  the  material 
of  romance ;  they  appear  with  all  the  marks  of  a 
particular  claim  advanced  for  a  special  reason  and 
maintained  through  more  than  one  generation  by  the 
successive  production,  firstly,  of  a  prose  version  of  the 
early  metrical  Merlin,  and,  secondly,  by  the  similar 
derivation  or  independent  invention  of  the  Didot  Perceval, 
which  carried  on  the  same  tradition,  though  it  seems  left 
unfinished,  perhaps  from  the  standpoint  of  narrative  and 
assuredly  of  the  term  of  its  intention.  In  the  second 
place  two  concurrent  claims  appear,  and  the  second — 
which  is  stronger  than  the  first — abandons  the  claim  in 
respect  of  secret  words.  It  does  this  so  explicitly  that  it 
makes  public  the  words  of  consecration,  by  which  we  are 
enabled  to  see  at  once  how  little  they  could  have  ever 
signified,  if  indeed  it  were  possible  to  suppose  that  these 
are  the  lost  words  of  Graal  literature.  Moreover,  by  a 
particular  fatality,  they  do  not  happen  to  contain  the 
Epiclesis  clause.  In  its  place,  as  we  know  so  well  already, 
we  have  the  claim  to  a  super-apostolical  succession — as  I 
have  said,  a  much  stronger  claim  and  one  for  which  there 
is  little  precedent  in  the  dubious  history  of  the  Celtic 
Church.  It  is  out  of  this  pretension  that  the  Galahad 
Quest  arises,  though  at  a  period  when  the  claim  itself  ap- 
pears to  have  lapsed.  We  are  agreed  that,  so  far  as  there 
is  a  true  story  at  all,  it  is  that  of  Galahad,  and  the  ques- 
tion of  secret  words  never  entered  into  the  heart  thereof. 
It  is,  therefore,  useless  to  put  forward  the  assumed  fact  of 
their  existence  in  the  Celtic  Rite  of  Institution  as  some- 
thing which  is  explanatory  of  the  literature.  In  this 
connection  it  is  of  importance  to  remember  (a)  that  the 
only  prose  Perceval  which  is  of  any  importance  mysti- 
cally is  that  which  depends  from  the  Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal,  not  from  Robert  de  Borron ;  and  (b)  that  the 
only  metrical  romance  of  Perceval  which  mystically 
may  be  also  important  is  that  of  Wolfram.  The  first 
has  abandoned  the  words  and  the  second  nearly  all 
Eucharistic  connection.  The  first  puts  the  Roman  dogma 

45° 


I 


The  Light  of  the   Celtic   Church 

of  transubstantiation  in  its  most  materialised  possible 
form.  It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  the  Celtic  hypo- 
thesis fails  along  what  must  be  regarded  as  the  most 
important  line.  I  submit,  therefore,  that  the  preten- 
sion to  a  super-apostolical  warrant  is  either  part  of  a 
fraudulent  scheme  of  pre-eminence  as  an  argument  for 
autonomy  on  the  part  of  the  British  Church,  with  the 
advisers  of  a  King  for  its  spokesmen,  or  it  belongs  to 
another  order  of  concealed  sentiment  and  event,  the 
details  and  motives  of  which  are  wanting  on  the  historical 
side  of  things.  In  the  former  case  it  is  not  of  our  con- 
cern, and  it  is  explanatory  only  of  one  branch  in  a  large 
literature  ;  in  the  latter,  we  must  go  much  further,  and,  if 
we  can  supply  the  missing  events  and  motives,  from 
certain  hidden  sources,  we  shall  be  in  possession,  for  the 
time  being  at  least,  of  a  provisional  explanation  concerning 
things  which  are  most  important  in  the  literature,  and — 
donee  de  medio  fiat — it  must  be  allowed  to  hold. 

The  distinctive  note  of  the  Latin  Eucharistic  Rite  is 
that,  like  the  gospels  of  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark,  it 
gives  the  first  words  of  institution  thus :  Acctyite  et  man- 
ducate  ex  hoc  omnes.  Hoc  est  enim  corpus  meum  ("Take 
and  eat  ye  all  of  this.  For  this  is  My  body  ").  Hereto 
certain  oriental  rites  added  other  words  which  should 
read  in  Latin  :  Quod  pro  multis  confrangetur  ("  Which  shall 
be  broken  for  many  ").  The  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  gives  : 
Venes^  si  mangles  et  chou  est  li  miens  cors  qui  pour  vous  et 
pour  maintes  autres  gens  sera  livres  h  martire  et  a  torment — 
the  substantial  equivalent  of  pro  multis  confrangetur.  Com- 
pare the  gospel  of  St.  Luke  in  the  Latin  Vulgate,  which 
uses  the  present  tense :  quod  pro  vobis  datur. 

So  far  as  regards  the  really  trivial  question  of  tense. 
The  mode  of  consecration  by  Epiclesis,  or  the  Invoca- 
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit,  may  be  unknown  to  some  of  my 
readers,  and  I  extract  it  therefore  from  the  Liturgy  of  St. 
John  Chrysostom. 

THE  PRIEST  (saith). — Blessed  art  Thou,  Christ  our  God,  who  didst  fill 
the  fishermen  with  all  manner  of  wisdom,  sending  down  upon  them  the 

45 1 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Holy  Ghost,  and  by  them  hast  brought  the  whole  world  into  Thy  net, 
O  Lover  of  men :  Glory  be  to  Thee. 

J&.     Both  now  and  ever,  &c. 

THE  PRIEST  (saith). — When  the  Highest  came  down  and  confounded 
the  tongues,  He  divided  the  nations ;  when  He  distributed  the  tongues 
of  fire,  He  called  all  to  unity ;  and  with  one  voice  we  praise  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

The  Deacon,  -pointing  to  the  Holy  Bread,  saith  in  a  low  voice : 
DEACON. — Sir,  bless  the  Holy  Bread. 

The  Priest  standeth  up,  and  thrice  maketh  the  sign  of  the  Cross  on  the 
Holy  Gifts,  saying  : 

PRIEST. — And  make  this  bread  the  Precious  Body  of  Thy  Christ. 

DEACON. — Amen.     Sir,  bless  the  Holy  Cup. 

PRIEST. — And  that  which  is  in  this  Cup  the  Precious  Blood  of  Thy 
Christ 

DEACON. — Amen.  (And  pointing  with  his  stole  to  both  the  Holy  Things] 
Sir,  Bless. 

PRIEST. — Changing  them  by  Thy  Holy  Ghost. 

DEACON. — Amen,  Amen,  Amen. 

PRIEST. — (after  a  pause)  So  that  they  may  be  for  purification  of  soul, 
forgiveness  of  sins,  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  &c. 

I  believe  that  in  the  Mozarabic  Rite,  which  is  thought 
to  be  in  near  consanguinity  with  the  Celtic,  the  Epiclesis 
formula  is  used  on  occasions  only.  It  is  missing  alto- 
gether from  the  so-called  Liturgy  of  St.  Dionysius, 
which  only  survives  in  the  Latin.  I  should  add  that 
the  existence  of  the  clause  in  the  Celtic  Rite — whatever 
the  strength  of  the  inferences — is  a  matter  of  speculation, 
for  the  simple  reason  that  no  such  liturgy  is  extant. 

The  other  analogies  and  possibilities  are  a  little  attrac- 
tive on  the  surface,  and  are  of  the  kind  which  are  caught 
at  rather  readily ;  but  they  seize  upon  a  single  point 
where  they  can  be  made  to  apply,  and  the  other  issues 
in  a  long  sequence  are  ignored.  The  name  Cadwaladr 
naturally  suggests  that  of  Galahad,  and  on  the  appeal 
to  certain  laws  of  permutation,  it  seems  for  a  moment 
justified  ;  but  it  is  not  justified  in  the  legends.  The  last 
King  of  the  Britons  had  indeed  the  hallows  of  his  family 
by  the  right  of  inheritance,  but  there  was  no  antecedent 
keeper  whom  he  was  required  to  heal,  and  there  was  no 

452 


The  Light  of  the   Celtic   Church 

quest  to  undertake  in  order  that  he  might  secure  his 
own.  But  this  healing  and  this  quest  inhere  in  the 
Graal  legend,  and  are  manifestly  at  the  .root  of  the 
design,  so  that  there  is  no  connection  possible  between 
the  two  cases.  Moreover,  Cadwaladr  is  destined  by 
his  legend  to  return,  while  it  is  of  the  essence  of  that 
of  Galahad  that  he  comes  back  no  more.  The  same 
remarks  will  apply  to  all  traceable  instances  of  here- 
ditary Keepership  in  Celtic  families,  whatever  the  object 
reserved.  It  is  even  more  certain  that  any  com- 
parison of  St.  David  the  Waterman  with  the  Rich 
Fisherman  who  is  wounded  is  highest  fantasy ;  neither 
physically  nor  symbolically  did  the  Saint  suffer  any 
hurt,  but,  again,  one  of  the  foremost  Graal  intentions 
resides  in  the  King's  wounding.  The  symbolical  term 
Fisherman  signifies  the  guardian  of  the  Holy  Mysteries ; 
it  can  have  nothing  to  do  with  DEVERUR  =  Waterman. 
We  do  not  know  why  a  great  fish  is  said  to  have 
heralded  the  birth  of  the  Welsh  Apostle.  To  help 
out  the  argument,  we  may  affirm  that  he  was  a  guardian 
of  the  Christian  Mysteries  in  the  land  to  which  he  was 
commissioned,  but  we  do  not  in  this  manner  account, 
either  in  the  historical  or  symbolical  sense,  for  the  fishing 
of  Brons  or  Alain  in  the  lake,  or  for  the  title  of  Rich 
Fisherman  applied  to  the  Wardens  of  the  Graal.  It  is 
true  that  they  also  were  Guardians  of  Mysteries,  but  this 
is  an  instance  of  concurrence  and  not  of  derivation.  The 
Lesser  Holy  Graal  may  create  a  comparison  between  the 
Sacred  Vessel  and  the  Sepulchre  in  which  Christ  was 
laid ;  but  it  does  not  for  this  reason  institute  any 
analogy  between  that  vessel  and  St.  David's  altar,  nor 
is  the  appeal  to  Wolfram  useful  except  in  the  opposite 
sense,  for  the  Graal  stone  of  the  Parsifal,  whether  or  not 
it  was  once  in  the  crown  of  Lucifer,  can  tolerate  still  less 
the  institution  of  its  likeness  to  "a  sepulchre  that  was 
hewn  in  stone,  wherein  never  man  before  was  laid." 
The  altar  of  St.  David  is  an  interesting  fable  of  its 
type,  as  preposterous  as  that  of  Fecamp,  and  between 

453 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the    Holy   Graal 

the  tomb  of  Christ,  ex  hy-pothesi,  transported  to  Wales, 
and  the  sacramental  ciborium  likened  to  the  Holy 
Sepulchre  there  is  no  analogy  in  any  world  of  corre- 
spondences. 

It  remains  therefore  that  in  this  literature  we  have 
shown  how  evil  fell  upon  the  House  of  the  Doctrine  ; 
how  it  overtook  also  the  Keeper  of  secret  knowledge ; 
after  what  manner  he  was  at  length  healed ;  how  the 
hidden  treasures  passed  under  the  care  of  his  saviour ; 
and  how  at  the  term  of  all  they  were  removed  because 
of  a  fell  and  faithless  time.  That  would  be  a  very 
pleasant  scheme  of  interpretation  which  could  say  that 
the  House  of  Doctrine  was  the  Celtic  Church  and  that 
the  wounded  Keeper  signified  the  Church  in  desolation, 
but  it  remains  that  we  must  go  further  in  our  search  for 
a  key  to  these  mysteries. 

If  the  legend  of  the  Holy  Graal  were  the  last  light  of 
the  Celtic  Church  before  it  expired  in  proscription,  one 
would  confess  that  it  was  glorious  in  its  death.  But  the 
most  that  we  can  actually  say  is  that  it  left  elements 
which  in  fine  served  a  better  purpose.  The  Longer  Prose 
Perceval,  the  poem  of  Wolfram,  and  the  sacred  and 
beautiful  Quest  of  Galahad,  these  are  three  records  which 
bear  witness  on  earth  of  the  secret  things  which  are 
declared  only  in  the  heavens.  There  are  three  taber- 
nacles wherein  transfiguration  takes  place. 

In  the  extrinsic  Celtic  remains,  the  only  substitute 
which  offers  for  the  great  legend  of  the  Holy  and  Sacra- 
mental Cup  is  an  obscure  and  nameless  vessel  which  is 
subject  in  its  latest  history  to  the  irreverence  of  a  pedlar, 
and  this  it  was  deemed  worth  while  to  avenge.  From 
such  inefficiencies  and  trifles  it  is  certain  that  we  must 
have  recourse,  even  if  for  a  moment  only,  to  the  Glaston- 
bury  legend,  which  did  invent  high  fictions  to  glorify  the 
British  Church.  This  resource  must  however  in  its  turn 
fail  us,  because  Glastonbury  is  (a)  of  very  small  moment 
throughout  the  Graal  literature ;  (&)  is  never  the  place 
of  the  sacred  vessel,  for  even  its  most  mythical  allocations 

454 


The  Light  of  the   Celtic   Church 

— as,  for  example,  Corbenic — cannot  be  identified  there- 
with ;  and  (r)  it  knows  nothing  of  the  second  Joseph. 
The  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  does,  in  one  of  its  codices, 
speak  of  Glastonbury  as  the  burial-place  of  the  elder 
Joseph,  but  it  only  says  Glas  in  England,  for  which  other 
texts  substitute  Scotland.  I  doubt  very  much  whether 
the  Glastonbury  legend  was  intended  for  more  than  the 
praise  of  a  particular  monastery ;  it  represents  Joseph  of 
Arimathaea  as  the  chief  among  twelve  apostles  sent  by 
St.  Philip  to  Britain,  and  they  carried  a  phial  or  phials 
containing  the  Precious  Blood.  The  Graal  notion  may 
have  gratified  Henry  II.,  who  concerned  himself  with 
things  Arthurian,  but  beyond  this  we  have  only  romance 
of  history.  It  is  certain  in  any  case  that  St.  David  was  not 
transformed  into  Joseph  of  Arimathaea,  so  far  as  Glaston- 
bury is  concerned.  He  and  his  apostoli  coadjutor 'es,  his 
staff  and  his  relics,  belong  to  another  story  brought  over 
from  the  Continent  when  St.  David  had  passed  into  des- 
uetude. Even  so,  of  the  Joseph  claim,  as  we  have  it  in 
the  Graal  romances,  there  is  little  enough  trace  in  the 
historical  writers  of  the  time.  The  abbey  of  Noirmoutier 
in  France  laid  claim  to  the  original  possession  of  Joseph's 
body,  but  it  disappeared,  or  was  stolen — as  some  said — 
by  the  monks  of  Glastonbury.  If  it  be  affirmed  that  the 
second  Joseph,  who  is  a  creation  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal,  signifies  some  move  in  the  strange  ecclesiastical 
game  which  was  played  by  Henry  II.,  the  evidence  is  in 
the  opposite  direction,  so  far  as  it  can  be  said  to  exist ;  it 
is  obvious  that  any  game  would  have  worked  better  with 
the  original  apostolical  Joseph  than  with  his  imaginary 
son. 

It  is  time  to  close  these  reflections,  and  there  are  only 
two  points  which  remain,  as  I  have  not  covenanted  to 
deal  with  the  minima  as  a  whole.  If  King  Arthur  was 
enabled  to  make  chalices  for  ordinary  sacramental  uses  in 
official  churches  from  the  prototype  which  he  saw  in  his 
vision,  being  a  chalice  that  was  arch-natural  wholly,  this 
occurred  after  the  same  manner  that  the  Pilgrim  Masons 

455 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

who  discovered  the  body  of  the  Master  Builder  were 
enabled  to  bring  away  certain  things  in  substitution  for 
the  secrets  that  were  lost  at  his  death,  and  there  are 
thus  other  analogies  than  the  natural  and  reasonable 
gifts  of  the  Welsh  Apostle,  but  there  is  no  need  to  dwell 
upon  them  in  this  place. 

The  quotation  which  I  have  given  from  the  Lesser 
Holy  Graal  raises  an  interesting  point,  and,  without  being 
versed  in  the  ecclesiastical  side  of  things,  we  can  all  of  us 
believe  that  a  church  so  strange  as  that  which  once 
ministered  in  Wales  had  also  some  curious  things  belong- 
ing to  the  liturgical  world  ;  but  the  extract  in  question 
must  be  read  in  connection  with  the  original  metrical 
romance,  where  the  symbolism  is  expressed  differently. 

"  Aussi  sera  representee 
Cele  taule  en  meinte  contree. 
Ce  que  tu  de  la  crouiz  m'ostas 
Et  ou  sepulchre  me  couchas, 
C'est  Pauteus  seur  quoi  me  metrunt 
Cil  qui  me  sacrifierunt. 
Li  dras  ou  fui  envolepez, 
Sera  corparaus  apelez. 
Cist  veissiaus  ou  men  sane  meis 
Quant  de  men  cors  le  requeillis, 
Calices  apelez  sera. 
La  platine  ki  sus  girra 
lert  la  pierre  senefiee 
Qui  fu  deseur  moi  seelee, 
Quant  ou  sepulchre  m'eus  mis." 

The  Blood  is  therefore  mentioned  and  the  analogy  is 
complete ;  it  is  also  gracious  and  piteous,  as  the  poem 
might  say  itself;  and,  in  fine,  it  is  a  true,  catholic  and 
efficacious  comparison,  which  exhibits  for  those  who  can 
read  in  the  heart  one  other  side  of  secret  Eucharistic 
symbolism — even  the  deep  mystery  of  that  mystical 
death  which  is  suffered  by  the  Lord  of  Glory  in  the 
assumption  of  the  veils  of  bread  and  wine,  that  He 
may  arise  into  a  new  life  in  the  soul  of  the  reborn 
communicant. 

456 


The  Light   of  the  Celtic  Church 

I  do  not  propose  to  speak  of  the  original  Graal  book, 
because  this  is  for  another  consideration,  but  if  there  was 
a  secret  liturgy  or  missal  at  the  root  of  the  legend, 
I  know  that  it  was  not  especially  Celtic  and  still  less 
Welsh  especially.  Behind  the  hypothesis  of  the  Epidesis 
clause  there  lies  a  deeper  speculation,  for  there  are  traces 
of  a  very  wonderful  and  super-efficacious  Office  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  here  and  there  in  the  Graal  literature,  and  I 
believe  that  this  is  one  of  the  keys  as  to  its  source  in 
doctrine.  We  shall  open  hereafter  another  gate  which 
may  bring  us  back  to  the  Johannine  Rite. 

I  have  indicated  already  that  if  we  accept  the 
hypothesis  of  a  Pan-Britannic  Church,  it  has  no  operation 
outside  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal.  Of  Chretien's 
intention  we  can  discern  little,  nor  does  it  signify  ;  it 
seems  fairly  clear  that  he  had  no  religious,  much  less 
ecclesiastical,  implicits.  Gautier  is  in  the  same  position ; 
Manessier  was  merely  a  story-teller ;  Gerbert  offers  a 
few  allusions,  but  we  cannot  tell  where  he  began,  and 
his  end  is  a  thing  frustrated.  There  is  nothing  so 
remote  from  all  ecclesiastical  programme  in  the  official 
order  as  the  Lesser  Chronicles,  and  the  Parsifal  of 
Wolfram — which  renders  to  God  all  that  can  be  offered 
in  ethics — like  another  Cain,  though  not  of  necessity 
rejected,  offering  the  fruits  of  the  earth — and  to  the 
spiritual  Caesar  seeming  to  deny  nothing — if  the  Parsifal 
has  an  ulterior  motive,  it  is  not  of  the  Celtic  Church  nor 
yet  of  the  House  of  Anjou,  about  which  methinks  that 
it  protests  too  much,  either  for  the  Provencal  Guiot  or 
the  lord  of  Eschenbach.  There  remain  therefore  only 
the  Greater  Chronicles  and  outside  the  primary  text  in 
place,  which  happens  to  be  last  in  time — here,  for  the 
hypothesis  in  question,  a  moment  surrendered  formally 
— I  know  that  of  God  moveth  the  High  History  and 
the  Galahad  of  the  King  of  all. 

I  do  not  much  care  on  what  materials  the  makers 
of  the  Graal  romances  may  be  agreed  to  have  worked, 
since  it  is  clear  that  they  imported  therein  a  new  spirit. 

457 


The   Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

If  any  one  should  like  still  to  say  that  Cadwaladr  who 
went  to  Rome  or  Jerusalem  is  to  be  identified  with 
Galahad  who  went  to  heaven,  they  can  have  it  that  way 
since  they  so  please,  understanding  that,  on  my  part, 
I  may  reserve  my  judgment.  I  know  that  the  one  has 
suffered  a  high  change  before  he  has  passed  into  the 
other.  I  know  that  every  literature  has  its  antecedents 
in  some  other  literature,  and  that  every  religion  owes 
something  to  a  religion  that  preceded  it.  Sometimes  the 
consanguinity  is  close  and  sometimes  it  is  very  far  away. 
Only  those  who  affirm  that  the  one  accounts  for  the 
other,  and  this  simply  and  only,  seem  to  be  a  little 
unwise.  Christianity  arose  within  Jewry  and  doctrinally 
out  of  Jewry,  but  this  fact  only  brings  their  generic 
difference  into  greater  relief.  So  also  the  Graal  literature 
rose  up  in  the  Celtic  Church ;  its  analogies  are  many 
therein ;  they  are  many  also  in  folk-lore ;  but  there 
are  also  as  many  ways  in  which  the  one,  as  we  know 
it,  does  not  account  for  the  other,  as  we  have  it  actually. 
The  Celtic  Church  has,  however,  assisted  us  to  see  one 
thing  more  plainly,  though  we  know  it  on  other  con- 
siderations, namely,  that  in  fine  there  is  but  a  single  quest, 
which  is  that  of  Galahad.  We  must  make  every  allowance 
for  the  honest  findings  of  scholars,  for  whom  the  Holy 
Graal,  as  it  was  and  it  is,  has  never  spoken,  for  whom 
it  is  only  a  feeding-dish  under  a  light  cloud  of  imagery, 
and  by  whom  it  is  thought  perhaps  in  their  hearts  that 
the  intervention  of  Christianity  in  the  wild  old  pagan 
myth  is  on  the  whole  rather  regrettable.  They  turn 
naturally  to  those  quarters  whence  issue  the  voices 
of  purely  natural  life,  and  therefore  they  prefer  Gawain 
and  Perceval  in  his  cruder  forms,  because  these  speak 
their  own  language.  It  is  to  be  trusted,  and  this 
devoutly,  that  they  will  find  more  and  more  evidences 
for  the  maintenance  of  their  particular  view.  Unmani- 
fested  now  but  still  discerned  darkly,  if  the  true  proto- 
Perceval  should  be  at  length  found,  that  which  went 
before  the  Peredur  and  the  English  metrical  romance, 

4S8 


The  Light   of  the   Celtic   Church 

and  if,  as  there  is  no  doubt,  it  should  be  devoid  of  all 
elements  belonging  to  Graal  or  quester,  our  case  will  be 
the  better  proved  which  is  (i)  the  natural  succession 
of  the  Galahad  Quest  after  the  Graal  history  in  its 
longer  recension;  (2)  the  succession  of  Perceval  in  the 
sequence  of  Robert  de  Borron,  but  rather  as  the  scion  of  a 
dubious  legitimacy  ;  (3)  the  introduction  of  the  late  prose 
Perceval  le  Gallois  as  a  final  act  of  transmutation  in 
the  Anglo-Norman  cycle,  which  so  far  assists  our  case 
that  it  manifests  the  unfitness,  realised  at  that  period,  of 
Perceval  as  he  was  known  by  the  earlier  texts ;  (4) 
the  derivation  of  the  Wolfram  Parsifal  in  part  from 
Celtic  elements,  in  part  from  some  which  are,  or  may 
have  been,  Teutonic,  but  also  with  derivatives  through 
Provence  from  Spain. 


IV 
THE  VICTORY  OF  THE  LATIN  RITE 

I  have  now  put  forward  the  hypothesis  of  the  Celtic 
Church  as  it  has  never  been  expressed  previously ;  I 
have  diminished  nothing,  and  any  contrary  inferences 
have  been  proposed  so  far  temperately ;  but  the  issues  are 
not  entirely  those  of  the  Graal  legend,  and  in  view  of 
all  that  comes  after  a  few  words  in  conclusion  of  this 
part  may  perhaps  be  said  more  expressly.  It  should  be 
on  record,  for  those  who  have  ears,  that  the  Welsh 
Church,  with  its  phantom  and  figurehead  bishops,  its 
hereditary  priesthood,  its  fighting  and  sanguinary  pre- 
lates, and  its  profession  of  sanctity  as  others  profess 
trades,  seems  a  very  good  case  for  those  who  insist 
that  the  first  Christianity  of  Britain  was  independent 
of  St.  Augustine,  which  it  was,  and  very  much  indeed, 
but  on  the  whole  we  may  prefer  Rome.  When  we  have 
considered  all  the  crazes  and  heresies,  all  the  pure,  pri- 
mitive and  unadulterated  Christianities,  being  only  human 

459 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

and  therefore  disposed  to  gratitude,  it  is  difficult  not  to 
thank  God  for  Popery.  But  it  would  also  be  difficult 
to  be  so  thankful,  that  is  to  say,  with  the  same  measure 
of  sincerity,  if  we  were  still  in  the  school  courses  and 
belonged  officially  thereto.  I  mean  to  say,  although 
under  all  reserves,  that  there  is  always  some  disposition 
to  hold  a  fluidic  brief  for  Rome  in  the  presence  of  the 
other  assemblies.  William  Howitt,  the  historian  of 
priestcraft  a  rebours,  once  said  :  "  Thanks  be  to  God 
for  the  mountains ! "  It  is  well  to  quote  from  our 
enemies,  but  not  in  the  sense  of  our  enemies,  and 
hence  I  read  by  substitution  the  seven  hills  and  the 
city  built  thereon.  Let  therefore  those  who  will  strive 
with  those  who  can  over  the  dismembered  relics  of 
apostolical  Christianity ;  but  so  far  as  we  are  con- 
cerned the  dead  can  bury  their  dead.  We  have  left 
the  Celtic  Church  as  we  have  left  carved  gods.  A 
Pan-Britannic  Church  might  have  been  the  dream  of 
one  period,  and  were  that  so,  seeing  that  it  never  came  to 
fulfilment,  we  could  understand  why  it  is  that  in  several 
respects  the  Graal  literature  has  now  the  aspect  of  a 
legend  of  loss  and  now  of  a  legend  of  to-morrow. 
The  Anglican  Church  seems  in  this  sense  to  recall  for 
a  moment  that  perverse  generation  which  asked  for  a 
sign  and  was  given  the  sign  of  Jonah.  It  has  demanded 
apostolical  evidences  to  enforce  its  own  claim  and  it  has 
been  given  the  Celtic  Church.  Let  us  therefore  sur- 
render thereto  the  full  fruition  thereof.  There  may 
be  insufficiencies  and  imperfect  warrants  in  the  great 
orthodox  assemblies,  but  in  the  Celtic  Church  there  is 
nothing  which  we  can  regret.  Gildas  and  St.  Bernard 
are  eloquent  witnesses  concerning  it.  The  Latin  rite 
prevailed  because  it  was  bound  to  prevail,  because  the 
greater  absorbs  the  lesser.  On  the  other  hand,  and  now 
only  in  respect  of  the  legends,  let  us  say  lastly  that  the 
ascension  of  Galahad  is,  symbolically  speaking,  without 
prejudice  to  the  second  coming  of  Cadwaladr.  It  does 
not  signify  for  our  purpose  whether  Arthur  ever  lived, 

460 


The  Light   of  the   Celtic   Church 

and  if  so  whether  he  was  merely  a  petty  British  prince. 
The  Graal  is  still  the  Graal,  and  the  mystery  of  the 
Round  Table  is  still  the  sweet  and  secret  spirit  of 
universal  knighthood. 

It  follows,  in  fine,  that  we  must  go  further,  and  in 
the  next  section,  as  one  who  has  been  in  exile  among 
disjecta  membra,  like  Marius  among  the  ruins  of  Car- 
thage, I  shall  re-enter  into  my  own  patrimony.  To 
my  old  friend,  Arthur  Machen,  himself  of  Caerleon- 
upon-Usk,  I  owe  most  of  the  materials  which  have 
been  collated  for  the  presentation  of  the  hypothesis 
concerning  the  Graal  and  the  Celtic  Church.  He  col- 
lected them  in  my  interest  out  of  his  good  heart  of 
brotherhood,  and  I  trust  that  in  the  time  to  come  he 
will  extend  them  further  in  his  own. 


461 


BOOK  VIII 

MTSTIC  ASPECTS  OF  THE  GRAAL  LEGEND 


THE  ARGUMENT 

I.  THE  INTRODUCTORY  WORDS. — The  Quest  of  the 
Holy  Graal  considered  as  a  religious  experiment — Counsels 
of  Perfection  in  the  Quest — Of  -poverty,  obedience  and 
virginity — Of  -partial  success  in  their  absence — Peculiarities 
in  the  election  of  Galahad — The  state  of  sanctity — The 
descent  of  Grace — Perpetuity  of  conditions  for  the  experi- 
ment— Further  as  regards  virginity  in  respect  of  the  Quest 
— The  mystical  idea  of  union — The  term  of  the  Quest — 
Separation  of  transubstantiation  marvels  from  the  final  vision 
of  the  Graal — The  experience  of  Nasciens — Collateral  ex- 
perience of  the  Mystics — After  what  manner  grace  mani- 
fested through  the  Eucharist — Of  a  gate  of  knowledge  in 
the  Eucharist — Declaration  of  the  Graal  in  its  mystic 
aspects.  II.  THE  POSITION  OF  THE  LITERATURE  DE- 
FINED.—  A  distinction  concerning  the  literature  —  Of 
allegory  in  the  Great  Quest — A  particular  form  of  de- 
velopment in  the  Graal  Legend — The  Graal  and  the  Official 
Church — The  case  concerning  that  Church — The  implicits 
of  the  literature  as  elements  of  the  mystic  aspects — The 
Recession  of  the  Graal — How  this  symbol  was  -perpetuated 
from  the  beginning — A  light  from  the  Quest  of  Guiot — 
Meaning  of  the  Stone  in  the  Crown  of  Lucifer — The  Graal 
and  Eucharistic  Wisdom.  III.  CONCERNING  THE  GREAT 
EXPERIMENT. — The  wonder  of  all  sacredness  as  the  term  of 
Quest — An  analogy  from  Ruysbroeck — Term  of  the  Ex- 
periment— External  places  of  the  Quest — Of  helpers  therein 

465  2  G 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

— Of  Secret  Orders — Communication  of  Divine  Substance 
— The  Channel  of  the  Eucharist — Of  Integration  in  Secret 
Knowledge — The  Office  of  the  Quests — Of  Popular  De- 
votions in  the  Church  and  of  such  Fatalities — Our  Inherit- 
ance  from    the    Past — The    open    Secret    of    Tradition — 
Of  things  that  stand  in  the  way  in  respect  of  Christian 
Mysticism — Latin    Christianity — The    true   way    of   Ex- 
perience— An  eirenicon  in  doctrine.     IV.  THE  MYSTERY  OF 
INITIATION. — Of  the  Graal  in  its  correspondence  with  in- 
stituted Mysteries — The  mind  of  scholarship  on  this  subject 
— Analogies  from   the  literary   history   of  Kabalism   and 
Alchemy — The  sacramental  message  of  the  Graal — Points 
of  comparison  between  Graal  literature  and  other  cycles  of 
books — A   distinction  on   the  question  of  Initiation — The 
Hidden  Knowledge — An  illustration  from  Masonry — Of  a 
certain  leaven  working  in  the  texts  of  the  Graal — Testimony 
to  the  existence  of  the  Great  Experiment — The  jailure  of  the 
external  world — A  caution  in  respect  of  interpretation— 
The  indubitable  subsurface  sense  of  Graal  books.     V.  THE 
MYSTERY  OF  FAITH. — A  first  summary  of  the  whole  subject 
— The  Graal  Mystery  as  a  declared  pageant  of  the  Eucharist 
— Its  distinctions  from  the  official  Sacrament — A  profound 
symbolism — Of  secret  memorials — The  Five  Changes  of  the 
Graal — Of  what  remains  over  from  the  findings  of  scholar- 
ship— The  Church  teaching  on  the  Eucharist — Limitations 
of  Graal  books — And  of  books  of  the  Mystics.     VI.  THE 
LOST  BOOK  OF  THE  GRAAL. — Suggestion  concerning  a  con- 
cealed Liturgy  or  Mass-Book — Superfluity  of  this  hypothesis 
in  respect  of  the  present  interpretation — General  testimony 
of  the  literature  to  a  primordial  text — The  schedule  thereof 
— Whether  the  evidences  are  applicable  to  one  book — The 
results  obtained  therefrom — Conclusion  that  the  literature 
could  not  have  arisen  from  a  single  prototype — Of  admitted 

466 


The   Argument 

and,  indisputable  'prototypes — The  alleged  Latin  source — 
Southey^s  opinion — Statement  of  the  Comte  de  Tressan — 
Middle  ground  occupied  by  Paulin  Paris — A  lesson  from 
the  literature  of  Alchemy — Of  all  which  remains  after 
abandoning  the  hypothesis  of  a  single  prototype  in  the 
ordinary  sense — Further  concerning  the  implicits  and 
strange  rumours  present  in  Graal  literature — Proof  that 
these  were  not  inventions  of  romance — Hypothesis  of  a 
Sanctum  Graal  which  contained  these  elements — The 
negative  view  of  its  content — The  positive  view — The 
book  not  seen  by  those  who  wrote  the  romances — The  pre- 
sumable custodians  thereof — The  rumours  thereof — How 
their  prevalence  does  not  involve  the  existence  of  any  book. 
VII.  THE  DECLARED  MYSTERY  OF  QUEST. — Exotics  of 
the  whole  subject — Of  faith  and  experience — Errors  of  the 
Mystic  Quest — The  Open  Door — The  Gates  and  their 
Wardens — A  condition  of  progress  in  the  Quest — The 
declared  and  the  hidden  knowledge — Suddenness  of  the 
Graal  Wonders — Obiter  Dicta — The  expression  of  the 
whole  Quest  after  a  new  manner. 


467 


BOOK    VIII 

MTSTIC   ASPECTS    OF    THE    GRAAL   LEGEND 

I 

THE  INTRODUCTORT  WORDS 

SEEING  therefore  that  we  have  not  found  in  the  Celtic 
Church  anything  which  suffices  to  explain  the  chief  im- 
plicits  of  the  literature  and  that  the  watchwords  call 
us  forward,  there  remains  another  method  of  research, 
and  of  this  I  will  now  proceed  to  make  trial.  I  suppose 
that  there  is  no  need  to  exhibit  in  formal  words  after 
what  manner  the  Quest  of  the  Holy  Graal  became  in 
the  later  texts  a  religious  experiment,  and  thus  justified 
the  titles  from  which  it  began  in  that  story  of  Robert 
de  Borron  which  is  the  earliest  extant  history.  Any 
one  who  has  proceeded  so  far  in  the  present  inquisition 
as  to  have  reached  these  lines — even  if  he  is  wholly 
unfamiliar  with  the  old  treasury  of  books — will  be  aware 
that  the  Quest  was  ruled  throughout  by  the  counsels  of 
perfection.  These  ruled  in  fact  so  strongly  as  to  have 
reached  that  stage  when  two  of  them  were  implied  only 
—that  is,  they  were  taken  for  granted  :  (#)  Voluntary 
poverty,  for  the  knights  possessed  nothing,  and  what- 
ever came  into  their  hands  was  distributed  there  and 
then ;  (£)  entire  obedience,  in  dedication  to  the  pro- 
posed term,  and  all  the  ships  of  the  world  burnt  with 
fire  behind  them ;  when  change  came  there  followed 
complete  avortement,  as  that  of  Gawain  in  the  Great 
Quest ;  (c]  perpetual  chastity,  as  the  only  counsel 

469 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

which  stands  declared — and  in  this  connection  it  will 
be  remembered  that  Bors  returned  to  Logres.  The 
zeal  of  these  counsels  does  not  appear — as  I  have  said — 
to  guarantee  election  utterly :  it  is  rather  the  test  of 
merit.  And  I  have  said  also  that  there  may  be  a 
certain  success  without  their  fulfilment  in  the  absolute 
degree.  In  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  Gawain  received 
signal  favours,  yet  it  is  admitted  that  he  was  want- 
ing in  purity,  and  hence  he  could  make  no  response 
when  the  questionable  mystery  appeared  once  in  his 
presence.  The  King  also  beheld  the  arch-natural 
Eucharist  on  the  manifested  side  thereof:  but  Perceval 
alone  possessed  the  plenary  qualifications  in  this  text.  On 
the  other  hand,  in  the  story  of  stories  there  was  one 
who  surpassed  him,  but  not  so  utterly  that  they  were 
otherwise  than  classed  together  as  companions  of  the 
Quest.  The  distinction  seems  to  have  been  that  Gala- 
had dissolved  temptation,  as  one  more  than  human. 
Perceval  carried  within  him  the  latent  desires  of  the 
body,  and  after  beholding  the  Graal  he  required  the 
purgation  of  a  hermit's  life  before  he  entered  into  the 
true  inheritance  of  those  thrones  which  are  above.  By 
some  of  my  fellowship  in  research  it  has  been  said  most 
truly,  though  they  do  not  understand  Galahad,  that  the 
haut  prince  was  just  as  fit  for  the  Quest  at  its  beginning 
as  he  was  at  its  end.  Now,  that  is  exactly  the  sign  of 
perfect  vocation — of  election  as  well  as  calling ;  the 
criterion  of  those  who  are  meant  for  heaven  is  that 
they  might  ascend  thither  at  any  moment.  Another 
test  of  Galahad  was  that  he  knew  really  from  the 
beginning  the  whole  mystery  by  the  tradition  thereof. 
I  am  enumerating  here  the  general  implicits  of  the 
subject  which  should  be  latent  in  the  minds  of  those 
whom  I  address ;  they  do  not  constitute  a  question 
put  forward  for  sifting  with  a  view  to  a  settlement, 
but  of  fitness  and  power  to  see — of  the  verus  certusque 
intuitus  animi)  in  some  degree  and  proportion.  This 
being  passed  by  those  who  can  suffer  the  ruling,  it 

470 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

will  be  obvious  that  the  religious  experiment  about 
which  I  begin  to  speak  can  depend  only  from  two  con- 
siderations:  (i)  the  attainment  of  the  sanctified  state  in 
the  Questing  Knights,  and  (2)  the  descent  of  a  peculiar 
Grace  upon  them.  I  enumerate  both  points,  though  it  is 
obvious  that  one  of  them  has  in  another  form  but  now 
passed  through  review,  but  in  dealing  with  a  very  diffi- 
cult subject  it  is  necessary  to  look  at  it  in  more  than  a 
single  light,  and  I  wish  to  make  it  clear  that  the  specifics 
of  the  sanctified  state — by  which  I  mean  the  counsels  of 
perfection — are  not  things  that  are  determined  in  the 
given  case  by  a  trend  of  thought  and  emotion  at  the 
given  period,  and  are  not  therefore  to  be  dismissed  as 
a  presentation  of  the  ascetic  life  or  as  the  definition 
of  canons  which  have  now  passed  into  desuetude. 
The  same  experiment  always  demands  the  same  con- 
ditions for  its  success,  and  to  set  aside  these  is  really 
to  renounce  that,  or  in  this  instance  it  is  to  reject  the 
experiment  as  one  of  the  old  ecstasies  which  never  came 
to  a  term.  On  the  contrary,  the  experiment  of  sanctity 
is  always  approximating  to  a,  term,  and  the  measure  of 
success  is  the  measure  of  zeal  in  its  pursuit.  I  propose 
therefore  to  look  a  little  closer  at  one  of  the  counsels  of 
perfection.  The  essential  point  regarding  the  condition 
of  virgo  intacta — not  in  respect  of  the  simple  physical 
fact,  which  has  no  inherent  sanctity,  but  in  respect  of 
its  conscious  acceptance  at  what  cost  soever — is  that 
there  neither  was  nor  can  be  a  more  perfect  symbol  of 
the  prepared  matter  of  the  work.  It  is  the  analogy 
in  utter  transcendence  of  that  old  adage :  Mens  sana  in 
corpore  sano,  and  its  nearest  expression  is :  Anlma  imma- 
culata  in  corpore  dedicate,  ex  hoc  nunc  et  usque^  &c.  In 
other  words,  the  banns  of  marriage  in  the  higher  degrees 
cannot  be  proclaimed  till  the  contracting  parties  are  war- 
ranted in  their  respective  orders  to  have  that  proportion 
and  likeness  apart  from  which  no  union  could  be  effected. 
The  consummated  grade  of  sanctity  is  an  intimate  state 
of  union,  and  the  nearest  analogy  thereto  is  found  in 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

human  marriage ;  as  the  latter  presupposes  in  the  sac- 
ramental order  an  antecedent  or  nominal  purity,  and 
has  for  its  object  the  consecration  of  intercourse  which 
in  its  absence  is  of  the  animal  kind,  so  the  antecedent 
condition  in  sanctity — or  the  life  of  perfect  dedication 
— is  in  correspondence  with  the  state  of  virgo  intacta. 
I  need  not  say  that  because  these  things  are  analogical 
so  the  discourse  concerning  them  partakes  of  the 
language  of  symbolism  or  that  the  state  itself  is  a 
spiritual  state.  Entire  obedience  involves  no  earthly 
master ;  voluntary  poverty  is  of  all  possibility  in  a 
palace,  and  the  law  would  not  deny  it  at  the  head- 
quarters of  an  American  Trust ;  as  regards  chastity, 
that  is  guaranteed  to  those  who  receive  the  sacrament 
of  marriage  worthily,  and  it  is  to  be  noted  that  this 
sacrament  differs  from  baptism,  which  is  administered 
once  and  for  all,  while  marriage,  in  the  effects  thereof, 
is  administered  in  continuity  as  an  abiding  presence 
and  a  grace  abounding  daily  so  long  as  its  covenants 
are  observed.  On  the  other  hand,  the  perpetuity  of 
spiritual  chastity  in  the  life  within  does  not  mean  of 
necessity  that  man  or  woman  has  never  known  flesh 
in  the  physical  order.  Galahad  in  the  story  had  the 
outward  signs  as  well  as  the  inward  grace.  His  Quest 
was  an  allegory  throughout  and  sometimes  the  allegorical 
motive  obtrudes  into  the  expressed  matter,  which  is  an 
error  of  art. 

The  term  which  is  proposed  in  the  Quest,  as  the  con- 
sideration thereof,  will  be  best  given  in  the  words  of  the 
Quest  itself.  "  Now  at  the  yeres  ende  and  the  self  daye 
after  Galahad  had  borne  the  croune  of  gold,  he  arose  up 
erly  and  his  felawes,  and  came  to  the  palais,  and  sawe  to 
fore  hem  the  holy  vessel,  and  a  man  knelynge  on  his 
knees  in  lykenes  of  a  Bisshop  that  had  aboute  hym  a 
grete  felaushyp  of  Angels  as  it  had  ben  Jhesu  Cryst 
hym  self,  &  thenne  he  arose  and  beganne  a  masse  of  oure 
lady.  And  whan  he  cam  to  the  sacrament  of  the  masse, 
and  had  done,  anone  he  called  Galahad  and  sayd  to  hym 

472 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

come  forthe  the  servaunt  of  Jhesu  Cryst  and  thou  shalt 
see  that  thou  hast  moche  desyred  to  see,  &  thenne  he 
began  to  tremble  ryght  hard,  when  the  dedely  flesshe 
beganne  to  beholde  the  spyrytuel  thynges.  Thenne  he 
held  vp  his  handes  toward  heuen,  and  sayd  lord  I  thanke 
the,  for  now  I  see  that  that  hath  ben  my  desyre  many  a 
daye.  Now  blessyd  lord  wold  I  not  lenger  lyue  yf  it 
myghte  please  the  lord,  &  there  with  the  good  man 
tooke  our  lordes  body  betwixe  hys  handes,  and  profered 
it  to  Galahad,  and  he  receyued  hit  ryghte  gladly  and 
mekely.  .  .  .  And  there  with  he  kneled  doune  to  fore 
the  table,  and  made  his  prayers,  and  thenne  sodenly  his 
soule  departed  to  Jhesu  Crist  and  a  grete  multitude  of 
Angels  bare  his  soule  vp  to  heuen,"  &c.  In  this  citation 
the  most  important  point  for  our  purpose  at  the  living 
moment  rests  neither  in  that  which  it  expresses  nor  in 
that  which  it  conceals :  it  is  assumed  and  realised  that 
such  a  term  is  always  hidden  because  it  always  exceeds 
expression,  and  is  the  closer  veiled  wherein  it  is  announced 
the  most.  But  here  was  the  consummation  of  all,  and 
here  was  that  more  open  seeing  than  was  granted  at 
Corbenic  wherein  all  the  outward  offices  of  things  arch- 
natural  were  set  aside  utterly.  Herein  therefore  was  no 
vision  of  transubstantiation  changes,  and  as  evidence  that 
this  was  of  concert  and  not  of  chance,  I  have  the  same 
report  to  make  concerning  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval; 
when  the  questing  knight  comes  to  his  own  therein  no 
signs  and  wonders  are  connected  with  the  Holy  Graal. 
As  regards  the  vision  itself,  we  may  remember  the  words 
of  Nasciens  when  he  attempted  to  penetrate  the  secrets 
within  the  new  Ark  of  the  Covenant.  "  Et  Nasciens 
dist  que  il  Fen  descouverroit  tant  comme  nule  mortieus 
langue  em  porroit  descouvrir,  ne  deveroit.  Je  ai,  dist-il, 
veut  la  coumenchaille  dou  grant  hardiment,  Pocoison  des 
grans  savoirs,  le  fondement  des  grans  religions,  le  des- 
sevrement  des  grans  felonnies,  la  dtmoustranche  des  grans 
mierveilles,  la  mervelle  de  totes  les  altrez  mervelles,  la 
fin  des  bontes  et  des  gentilleces  vraies"  This  extract 

473 


'The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

from  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  is  thus  rendered  in  the 
halting  measures  of  Lovelich  : 

"  '  I  have  sein,'  quod  the  sire  Nasciens, 
'  Of  alle  manere  of  wykkednesse  the  defens ; 
Of  alle  boldnesse  I  have  sene  the  begynneng, 
Of  all  wittes  the  fowndyng. 
I  have  sein  the  begynneng  of  Religeown 
And  of  alle  bowntes,  bothe  al  &  som, 
And  the  poyntes  of  alle  gentrye, 
And  a  merveil  of  alle  merveilles  certeinlye.'  ': 

Other  masters  have  expressed  the  same  wonder  in  other 
terms,  which  are  the  same — as,  for  example :  qua  dam 
-prtelibatio  teternce  vittet  gustus  et  suavitas  spiritualis, 
mentis  in  Deum  suspensa  elevatio,  &c. 

The  qualifications  of  Galahad  and  Perceval  in  the  Great 
Quest  are  not  therefore  things  which  are  the  fashion  of  a 
period,  like  some  aspects  of  what  is  termed  the  ascetic 
mind,  but  they  obtain  from  Aleph  to  Tau,  through  all 
grades  of  expression.  Those  who  speak  of  the  ethical 
superiority  of  the  Parsifal  are  saying  that  which,  in  all 
moderation  and  tenderness,  signifies  that  they  are  still 
learning  the  elements  of  true  discipline. 

I  have  now  dealt  with  the  indispensable  warrants  of 
the  state,  and  the  mode  of  the  descent  of  Grace  belongs 
to  the  same  category ;  it  was  a  manifestation  to  the 
spiritual  flowers  of  Christian  knighthood  through  the 
Eucharist — the  form  of  symbolism  made  use  of  for  this 
purpose  being  that  of  transubstantiation.  I  have  already 
set  down  what  I  believe  to  be  the  Divine  Truth  on  this 
subject,  but  here  again  we  must  as  our  research  proceeds 
approach  it  from  various  standpoints ;  and,  for  the  rest, 
it  must  be  obvious  that  of  all  men  I  at  least  should 
have  no  call  imposed  on  me  to  speak  of  the  Holy  Graal 
were  it  not  for  its  connection  with  the  Blessed  Sacrament. 
It  is  the  passage  of  the  putative  reliquary  into  the  Chalice 
of  the  Eucharist,  the  progressive  exaltation  of  its  cultus  and 
the  consequent  transfiguration  of  the  Quest  which  have 
substituted  insensibly  a  tale  of  eternity  for  a  mediaeval 

474 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

legend  of  the  Precious  Blood  ;  in  place  of  the  Abbey  of 
Fecamp,  we  have  Corbenic  and  Mont  Salvatch  shining  in 
the  high  distance,  and  where  once  there  abode  only  the 
suggestion  of  some  relative  and  rather  trivial  devotion, 
we  have  the  presence  of  that  great  sign  behind  which 
there  lies  the  Beginning  and  the  End  of  all  things. 

The  romance-writers,  seeking  in  their  symbolism  a 
reduction  to  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  selected  and 
exaggerated  the  least  desirable  side  of  Eucharistic  dogma  ; 
but  we  have  no  occasion  to  dispute  with  them  on  that 
score,  seeing  that  —  for  the  skilled  craftsman  —  any 
material  will  serve  in  the  purposes  of  the  Great  Work. 
The  only  point  which  stands  out  for  our  consideration 
is  that — following  the  sense  of  all  doctrine  and  the  testi- 
mony of  all  experience — the  gate  by  which  faith  presses 
into  realisation  is  the  gate  of  that  Sacrament  from  which 
all  others  depend — of  that  Sacrament  the  institution  of 
which  was  the  last  act  of  Christ  and  the  term  of  His 
ministry  ;  thereafter  He  suffered  only  until  He  rose  in 
glory.  When  therefore  the  makers  of  the  Graal  books 
designed  to  show  after  what  manner,  and  under  what 
circumstances,  those  who  were  still  in  flesh  could  behold 
the  spiritual  things  and  have  opened  for  them  that  door 
of  understanding  which,  according  to  the  keepers  of  the 
Old  Law,  was  not  opened  for  Moses,  they  had  no 
choice  in  the  matter,  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  they 
represent  the  Bread  of  Life  and  the  Chalice  of  the  Ever- 
lasting Testament  as  being  lifted  up  in  the  secret  places 
of  Logres,  even  in  the  palais  esperiteux. 

Hereof  are  the  mystic  aspects  of  the  Great  Quest,  and 
it  seems  to  follow  that  the  secret  temple  of  the  soul  was 
entered  by  those  who  dwelt  in  the  world  of  romance  as 
by  those  in  the  world  of  learning.  The  adepts  of  both 
schools  were  saying  the  same  thing  at  the  same  period, 
seeing  that  during  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries, 
which  moved  and  had  their  being  under  the  wonderful 
aegis  of  the  scholastic  mind,  there  began  to  arise  over  the 
intellectual  horizon  of  Europe  the  light  of  another  ex- 

475 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

perience  than  that  of  spiritual  truth  realised  intel- 
lectually ;  this  was  the  experience  of  the  mystic  life, 
which  opened — shall  we  say? — with  the  name  of  Bona- 
ventura  and  closed  for  the  period  in  question  with  that 
of  Ruysbroeck. 


II 

THE  POSITION   OF   THE  LITERATURE  DEFINED 

The  books  of  the  Holy  Graal  are  either  purely  of 
literary,  antiquarian  and  mythological  interest,  or  they 
are  more.  If  literary,  antiquarian  and  mythological  only, 
they  can  and  should  be  left  to  the  antiquaries,  the  critics 
and  the  folk-lore  societies.  But  if  more  it  is  not  im- 
probable antecedently,  having  regard  to  the  subject,  that 
the  excess  belongs  to  the  mystics,  and  to  those  generally 
who  recognise  that  the  legends  of  the  soul  are  met  with 
in  many  places,  often  unexpectedly  enough,  and  wherever 
found  that  they  have  issues  outside  that  which  is  under- 
stood commonly  and  critically  by  the  origin  of  religious 
belief.  The  ascetic  and  mystic  element — to  repeat  the 
conventional  description  —  outside  the  considerations 
which  I  have  put  forward,  is  for  those  of  all  importance, 
and  it  is  otherwise  and  invariably  the  only  thing  that 
is  really  vital  in  legends.  The  impression  which  is  left 
upon  the  mind  after  the  conclusions  of  the  last  sub-section 
is  assuredly  that  the  "  divine  event "  is  not  especially,  or 
not  only,  that "  towards  which  creation  moves,"  but  a  term, 
both  here  and  now,  towards  which  souls  can  approximate 
and  wherein  they  can  rest  at  the  centre.  Over  the  thres- 
hold of  the  Galahad  Quest  we  pass  as  if  out  of  worlds  of 
enchantment,  worlds  of  faerie,  worlds  of  the  mighty 
Morgan  le  Fay,  into  realms  of  allegory  and  dual  mean- 
ing, and  then — transcending  allegory — into  a  region 
more  deeply  unrealised ;  so  also,  after  having  reflected 
on  the  external  side  of  the  romances  and  the  preliminary 
analogies  of  things  that  are  inward,  we  pass,  as  we  approach 

476 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

the  end  of  our  research,  into  a  world  of  which  nothing 
but  the  veils  and  their  emblazonments  have  been  so  far 
declared.  No  other  romances  of  chivalry  exhibit  the 
characteristics  which  we  discern  in  the  perfect  and  rectified 
books  of  the  Holy  Graal,  but  if  we  do  not  know 
categorically  why  romance  came  to  be  the  vehicle  for  one 
expression  of  man's  highest  experience,  we  have  reasons 
— and  more  than  enough — to  determine  that  it  was  not 
automatic,  not  arbitrary,  and  yet  it  was  not  fortuitous  ;  it 
came  about  in  the  nature  of  things  by  the  successive  ex- 
altation of  a  legend  which  had  the  capacity  for  exaltation 
into  transcendence.  The  genesis  of  the  story  of  Gala- 
had is  not  like  the  institution  of  the  ritual  belonging  to 
the  third  craft  grade  in  Masonry,  which  seems  without 
antecedents  that  are  traceable  in  the  elements — actual  or 
symbolical — of  the  early  building  guilds.  By  successive 
steps  the  legend  of  the  Graal  was  built  till  it  reached  that 
height  when  the  hierarchies  could  begin  to  come  down 
and  the  soul  of  Galahad  could  go  up.  It  is  important  for 
my  own  purpose  to  establish  this  fact,  because  in  that  which 
remains  to  be  said  I  must  guard  against  the  supposition 
that  a  conventional  secret  society  or  a  sect  took  over  the 
romances,  edited  them  and  interpenetrated  the  texts  with 
mystic  elements.  That  is  the  kind  of  hypothesis  which 
occult  interests  might  have  manufactured  sincerely  enough 
in  the  old  days,  and  it  would  have  had  a  certain  warrant 
because  there  is  ample  evidence  that  this  is  exactly  the 
kind  of  work  which  in  given  cases  was  performed  by  the 
concealed  orders.  The  Graal,  as  a  literature,  came  into 
other  hands,  which  worked  after  their  own  manner,  and 
worked  well. 

There  is  another  fact  which  is  not  less  important 
because  of  certain  tendencies  recognisable  in  modern 
criticism.  I  will  mention  it  only  at  the  moment,  that 
the  reader  may  be  put  on  his  guard  mentally ;  there  is 
no  single  text  in  the  literature  which  was  or  could  have 
been  put  forward  as  a  veiled  pronunciamento  against  the 
reigning  Church  on  the  part  of  any  historical  sect,  heresy, 

477 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

or  rival  orthodoxy.  The  pure  Christianities  and  the 
incipient  principles  of  reform  took  their  quack  processes 
into  other  quarters.  The  voices  which  spoke  in  the 
books  of  the  Holy  Graal  as  no  voices  had  ever  spoken  in 
romance  were  not  putting  forward  a  mystery  which  was 
superior  specifically  to  the  mysteries  preserved  by  the 
official  Church.  They  trended  in  the  same  direction  as 
the  highest  inquisitions  move,  and  that  invariably.  The 
most  intelligent  of  all  the  heresies  is  only  the  truth  of 
the  Church  foreshadowed  or  travestied.  The  reforms  of 
the  Church  are  only  its  essential  lights  variously  refracted. 
Even  modern  science,  outside  the  true  prerogatives  of 
its  election  as  our  growing  physical  providence,  is  the 
notification  of  the  things  which  do  not  ultimately  matter 
in  comparison  with  the  science  of  the  Church,  which  is 
that  of  the  laws  ruling  in  the  search  after  the  eternal 
reality.  The  Graal  at  its  highest  is  the  simulacrum  or 
effigy  of  the  Divine  Mystery  within  the  Church.  If  she, 
as  an  institution,  has  failed  so  far — and  as  to  the  failure 
within  limits  there  is  no  question — to  accomplish  the 
transmutation  of  humanity,  the  explanation  is  not  merely 
that  she  has  been  at  work  upon  gross  and  refractory 
elements — though  this  is  true  assuredly — but  that  in  the 
great  mystery  of  her  development  she  has  still  to  enter 
into  the  fruition  of  her  higher  consciousness.  Hereof 
are  the  wounds  of  the  Church,  and  for  this  reason  she 
has  been  in  sorrow  throughout  the  ages. 

So  far  I  have  defined,  but  in  one  sense  only,  the 
position  of  the  literature.  It  remains  to  be  said  that 
what  I  have  termed  from  the  beginning  the  major 
implicits,  as  they  project  vaguely  and  evasively  upon 
the  surface,  are  integral  elements  of  the  mystic  aspects. 
But  they  must  be  taken  here  in  connection  with  one 
feature  of  the  quests  which  is  in  no  sense  implied,  because 
this  will  concern  us  in  a  very  important  manner  in  the 
next  book.  I  refer  to  the  Recession  of  the  Graal.  I 
have  no  need  to  remind  any  one  after  so  many  enumera- 
tions that  the  final  testimony  of  all  the  French  Quests 

478 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

is  that,  in  one  or  another  way,  the  Graal  was  withdrawn. 
It  is  not  always  by  a  removal  in  space  ;  it  is  not  always 
by  assumption  to  heaven.  In  the  German  cycle  the 
Temple  was  inaccessible  from  the  beginning  and  the 
Palladium  never  travelled,  till — once  and  for  all — it 
was  carried  in  a  great  procession  to  the  furthest  East. 
Wolfram  left  it  in  primeval  concealment ;  but  this  did 
not  satisfy  one  of  the  later  poets,  who  married — as  we 
have  seen — the  Graal  legend  to  that  of  Prester  John. 
Now,  it  might  be  more  easy  to  attain  translation,  like 
St.  Paul,  than  to  find  that  sanctuary  in  India  where,  by 
the  assumption,  it  must  be  supposed  to  remain.  But 
having  regard  to  the  hidden  meaning  which  seems  to 
lie  behind  Wolfram's  source  he  was  within  the  measures 
of  his  symbolism  when  he  left  the  Graal  at  Mont  Sal- 
vatch,  not  removing  to  the  East  that  which  in  his  case 
did  not  come  therefrom.  Albrecht,  who  tells  of  the 
transit,  first  took  the  precaution  to  change  the  hallowed 
object.  I  believe  that  the  testimony  to  removal  was 
inherent  to  the  whole  conception  from  the  beginning, 
concurrently  with  the  Secret  Words,  and  that  the  latter 
were  reflected  at  a  later  period  into  the  peculiar  claim 
concerning  sacerdotal  succession.  They  were  all  Euchar- 
istic  in  their  nature.  The  testimony  itself  is  twofold, 
because,  in  addition  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  Living 
Sign,  the  texts  tell  us  of  the  House  that  is  emptied  of 
its  Hallows ;  these  are  in  particular  the  Longer  Prose 
Perceval  and  the  Quest  of  Galahad.  There  is  also 
Manessier's  conclusion  of  the  Conte  del  Graal,  but 
no  very  important  inference  is  to  be  drawn  therefrom. 
One  of  our  immediate  concerns  will  be  to  find  the 
analogies  of  this  prevailing  conception  elsewhere  in  the 
world ;  the  present  study  of  Graal  mystic  aspects  is 
simply  preliminary  thereto,  and  the  eduction  of  the 
significance  behind  the  major  implicits.  It  is  at  this 
point  curiously  that  one  element  of  Graal  history  which 
has  been  somehow  ascribed  to  Guiot  comes  to  our 
'assistance,  providing  an  intermediary  between  the  litera- 

479 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy    Graal 

ture  of  mystical  romance  and — as  we  shall  learn — the 
obvious  text-books  of  the  secret  schools.  It  opens,  I 
think,  strange  vistas  of  intellectual  wonder  and  enchant- 
ment. We  have  heard  already  that  the  Stone  which  is 
identified  with  the  Graal  in  Wolfram  was  at  one  time 
a  stone  in  the  crown  of  Lucifer,  and  seeing  that,  accord- 
ing to  other  legends,  the  thrones  left  vacant  by  the 
fallen  angels  are  reserved  for  human  souls,  it  becomes 
intelligible  why  the  Graal  was  brought  to  earth  and  what 
is  signified  by  the  mystic  jewel.  The  Stone  in  the 
crown  of  Lucifer  symbolises  the  great  estate  from  which 
the  archangel  fell.  It  was  held  by  the  fathers  of  the 
Church  that,  when  still  in  the  delights  of  Paradise, 
Lucifer  was  adorned  by  all  manner  of  precious  stones, 
understanding  mystically  of  him  what  in  the  text  of 
the  prophet  Ezekiel  is  said  literally  of  the  Prince  of 
Tyre  :  In  deliciis  paradisi  Deifuisti  ;  omnis  lapis  preciosus 
operimentum  tuum :  sardius,  topazius,  et  jaspis^  chryso- 
lithus,  et  onyx,  et  beryllus,  sapphirus,  et  carbunculus^  et 
smaragdus — nine  kinds  of  stones,  according  to  Gregory 
the  Great,  because  of  the  nine  choirs  of  angels.  And 
Bartolocci,  the  Cistercian,  following  all  authorities,  under- 
stands these  jewels  to  signify  the  knowledge  and  other 
ornaments  of  grace  with  which  Lucifer  was  adorned  in 
his  original  state  as  the  -perfecta  similitude  Dei — in  other 
words,  the  light  and  splendour  of  the  hidden  knowledge. 
It  follows  on  this  interpretation  ( i )  That  the  Graal  Stone 
in  no  sense  belongs  to  folk-lore;  (2)  that  it  offers  in 
respect  of  its  origin  no  connection  with  the  idea  of 
physical  maintenance,  except  in  the  sense  that  the  things 
which  sustain  the  soul  maintain  also  the  body,  because 
the  panis  quotidianus  depends  from  the  panis  supersub- 
stantialis ;  (3)  that  the  wisdom  of  the  Graal  is  an 
Eucharistic  wisdom,  because  the  descent  of  a'n  arch- 
natural  Host  takes  place  annually  to  renew  the  virtues 
thereof;  (4)  that  the  correspondence  of  this  is,  in  other 
versions  of  the  legend,  the  Host  which  is  consecrated 
extra-validly  by  the  Secret  Words,  and  so  also  the  cor- 

480 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

respondence  of  the  Stone  which  comes  from  heaven  is 
the  Cup  which  goes  thereto;  but  in  fine  (5)  that  the 
jewel  in  the  crown  of  Lucifer  is  called  also  the  Morning 
Star,  and  thus  it  is  not  less  than  certain  that  the  Graal 
returns  whence  it  came. 


Ill 

CONCERNING    THE   GREAT  EXPERIMENT 

If  there  be  any  who  at  this  stage  should  say  that  the 
term  of  the  Holy  Graal  is  not  the  end  of  the  mysteries — 
which  is  the  Vision  that  is  He — I  would  not  ask  him  to 
define  the  distinction,  but  the  term  in  either  case,  for  that 
which  must  be  said  of  the  one  is  said  also  of  the  other, 
and  if  he  understands  the  other  it  is  certain  that  he 
understands  the  one.  The  Quest  of  the  Holy  Graal  is 
for  the  wonder  of  all  sacredness,  there  where  no  sinner 
can  be.  The  provisional  manifestation  is  in  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval  and  the  full  disclosure — not  as  to  what  it 
is  but  as  to  what  it  is  about — is  in  the  romance  of 
Galahad.  If,  after  the  haut  'prince  had  given  his  final 
message,  "  Remember  of  this  unstable  world,"  he  had 
been  asked  what  he  had  seen  which  led  him  to  exercise 
his  high  prerogative  and  call  to  be  dissolved,  he  might 
have  answered  :  Visi  sunt  oculi  mei  salutare  suum,  yet  he 
would  have  said  in  his  heart :  "  Eye  hath  not  seen."  But 
it  has  been  divined  and  foretasted  by  those  who  have 
gone  before  the  cohorts  of  election  in  the  life  that  is 
within  and  have  spoken  with  tongues  of  fire  concerning 
that  which  they  have  seen  in  the  vista.  One  approxi- 
mation has  told  us  that  it  is  the  eternal  intercourse  of  the 
Father  and  the  Son  wherein  we  are  enveloped  lovingly  by 
the  Holy  Spirit  in  that  love  which  is  eternal.  And  him 
who  said  this  the  wondering  plaudits  of  an  after-age 
termed  the  Admirable  Ruysbroeck.  He  knew  little  Latin 
and  less  Greek,  and,  speaking  from  his  own  root,  he 
had  not  read  the  authorities ;  but  he  had  stood  upon 

481  2  H 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

that  shore  where  the  waves  of  the  divine  sea  baptize  the 
pilgrim,  or  in  that  undeclared  sphere  which  is  Kether,  the 
Crown  of  Kabalism,  whence  those  who  can  look  further 
discern  that  there  is  A  in  Soph  Aour>  the  Limitless  Light. 
The  equivalent  hereof  is  in  that  which  was  said  by  Jesus 
Christ  to  the  men  of  the  Quest :  "  My  Knyghtes  and  my 
seruantes  &  my  true  children  whiche  ben  come  oute  of 
dedely  lyf  in  to  spyrytual  lyf  I  wyl  now  no  longer  hyde 
me  from  yow,  but  ye  shal  see  now  a  parte  of  my  secretes 
&  of  my  hydde  thynges."  And  in  the  measure  of  that 
time  they  knew  as  they  were  known  in  full,  that  is,  by 
participation  in,  and  correspondence  with  the  Divine 
Knowledge.  Meat  indeed :  it  is  in  that  sense  that 
Christ  gave  to  Galahad  "  the  hyghe  mete  "  and  "  then  he 
receyved  his  saueour."  The  monk  who  wrote  this  might 
have  exhausted  all  the  language  of  the  schools,  but  he 
also  knew  little  Latin  and  less  Greek,  if  any,  so  he  said 
only  of  the  communicants  :  "  They  thoughte  it  soo  swete 
that  hit  was  merveillous  to  telle."  And  of  Galahad  he 
said  later  :  "  He  receyued  hit  ryghte  gladly  and  mekely." 
But  yes,  and  that  is  fuller  and  stronger  than  all  the 
eloquence  of  the  Master  of  Sentences.  It  is  the  voice  of 
Ruysbroeck — but  further  simplified — saying  the  same 
thing:  "And  he  tastes  and  sees,  out  of  all  bounds,  after 
God's  own  manner,  the  riches  which  are  in  God's  own 
self,  in  the  unity  of  the  living  deep,  wherein  He  has 
fruition  of  Himself,  according  to  the  mode  of  His  un- 
created essence." 

This  is  the  Great  Term  of  the  Great  Experiment 
followed  by  the  Mystic  Schools,  and  here  by  its  own 
words  the  Graal  legend  is  expressed  in  the  terms  of  this 
Experiment.  It  has  been  made,  within  their  several 
measures,  by  all  churches,  sects  and  religions,  for  which 
reason  I  have  said  elsewhere  that  the  skilled  craftsman 
does  not  quarrel  with  his  tools.  All  materials  are 
possible ;  the  ascent  to  eternal  life  can  be  made  by  any 
ladder,  assuming  that  it  is  fixed  in  the  height ;  there  is 
no  need  to  go  in  search  of  something  that  is  new  and 

482 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

strange.  And  those  who  can  receive  this  assurance  will, 
I  think,  understand  why  it  is  that  the  Church  of  a  man's 
childhood — assuming  that  it  is  a  Church  and  not  a 
latitudinarian  chapel  of  ease  or  a  narrow  and  voided  sect 
— may  and  perhaps  should  contain  for  him  the  materials 
of  his  work,  and  these  he  will  be  able  to  adapt  as  an 
efficient  craftsman.  There  is  neither  compulsion  nor 
restraint,  but  the  changes  in  official  religion,  the  too 
easy  transition  from  one  to  another  kind,  taking  the 
sanctuaries  as  one  takes  high  grades  in  Masonry,  are  a 
note  of  weakness  rather  than  a  pledge  of  sincerity,  or  of 
the  true  motive  which  should  impel  the  soul  on  its  quest. 
There  are,  of  course,  many  helpers  of  that  soul  on 
that  progress : 

"  We,  said  the  day  and  the  night 

And  the  law  of  gravitation ; 
And  we,  said  the  dark  and  the  light 

And  the  stars  in  their  gyration ; 
But  I,  said  Justice,  moving 

To  the  right  hand  of  the  Throne ; 
And  I,  said  Fate,  approving ; 

I  make  thy  cause  mine  own." 

Among  these  there  are  certain  of  the  secret  orders — 
those,  I  mean,  which  contain  the  counterparts  of  the 
Catholic  tradition — and  it  is  necessary  to  mention  them 
here  because  of  what  follows.  They  offer  no  royal  road, 
seeing  that  such  roads  there  are  none ;  but  they  do  in 
cases  shorten  some  of  the  preliminaries,  by  developing 
the  implicits  of  a  man's  own  consciousness,  which  is  the 
setting  of  the  prepared  postulant  on  the  proper  path. 
There  are,  of  course,  some  who  enter  within  them  having 
no  special  call,  and  these  see  very  little  of  that  which  lies 
behind  their  official  workings,  just  as  there  are  many  who 
have  been  born  within  the  Church,  as  the  body  of  Christ, 
but  have  never  entered  into  the  life  which  is  communi- 
cated from  the  soul  of  Christ.  They  remain  the  children 
of  this  world,  participating — as  we  hope — according  to 
their  degree,  in  so  much  of  grace  and  salvation  as  is 

483 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

possible  at  the  particular  time.  There  are  others  who, 
out  of  all  time,  have  received  a  high  election,  and  for 
them  the  subject  is  often — in  its  undivided  entirety — 
found  resident  in  that  state  of  external  religious  life  in 
which  it  has  pleased  God  to  call  them. 

The  Secret  Doctrine  in  the  religions  equally  and  the 
schools  is  that  of  the  communication  of  Divine  Substance. 
I  speak  of  it  as  secret  in  both  cases,  though  it  is  obvious 
that  in  the  official  church  there  is  no  instituted  reservation 
or  conscious  concealment  on  any  point  of  doctrine  or 
practice ;  but  the  language  of  the  heights  is  not  the 
language  of  the  plains,  and  that  which  is  heard  in  the 
nooks,  byways  and  corners,  among  brakes  and  thickets, 
is  not  the  voice  of  the  rushing  waters  and  the  open  sea. 
That  is  true  of  it  in  the  uttermost  which  was  said  long  ago 
by  Paracelsus  :  Nihil  tarn  occultum  erit  quod  non  revela- 
bitur  ;  but  as  there  are  few  with  ears  to  hear,  it  remains 
a  voice  in  the  wilderness  crying  in  the  unknown  tongue. 
We  know  only  that,  according  to  high  theology,  the  Divine 
Substance  is  communicated  in  the  Eucharist — normally 
in  the  symbolical  manner,  but,  in  cases,  essentially  and 
vitally  according  to  the  true  testimonies.  It  is  therefore 
as  if  the  elements  were  at  times  consecrated  normally  and 
at  times  by  other  words,  more  secret  and  efficient  arch- 
naturally.  Then  the  enchantments  terminate  which  are 
the  swoon  of  the  sensitive  life  in  respect  of  the  individual, 
who  enters  into  real  knowledge — the  soul's  knowledge 
before  that  supervened  which  is  termed  mystically  the  fall 
into  matter.  The  Great  Experiment  is  therefore  one  of 
reintegration  in  the  secret  knowledge  before  the  Fall,  and 
when,  or  if,  the  Holy  Graal  is  identified  with  the  stone  in 
the  crown  of  Lucifer,  that  which  is  indicated  thereby  is  (#) 
the  perpetuation  of  this  secret  knowledge,  and  (&)  that 
under  all  circumstances  there  is  a  way  back  whence  we 
came.  So  close  also  those  times  of  adventure  which — 
among  other  things  and  manifold — are  the  life  of  external 
activity  governed  by  the  spirit  of  the  world,  and  this  is 
accomplished  by  taking  the  great  secret  into  the  heart 

484 


Mystic  Aspects   of  the   Graal  Legend 

of  the  heart,  as  if  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  truly  and 
virtually,  into  the  inmost  being. 

Of  such  is  the  office  of  the  Quests,  but  it  is  understood 
that  it  is  not  of  my  concern  to  enumerate  these  particulars 
as  present  consciously  in  the  minds  of  the  old  monastic 
scriptores,  who  wrote  the  greatest  of  the  books  ;  they  spoke 
of  the  things  which  they  knew ;  without  reference  or 
intention  they  said  what  others  had  said  of  the  same 
mysteries,  and  the  testimony  continued  through  the 
centuries.  The  story  of  the  assumption  of  Galahad 
draws  into  romance  the  hypothesis  of  the  Catholic  Church 
concerning  the  term  of  all  sanctity  manifested  ;  in  both 
it  is  attained  through  the  Eucharist.  I  mean  to  say 
that  this  is,  by  the  hypothesis,  the  normal  channel  of  the 
Divine  Favour,  and  the  devotion  which  was  shown  by  the 
saints  to  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar  was  not  like  the 
particular,  sentimental  disposition  in  minds  of  piety  to 
the  Precious  Blood  or  the  Heart  of  Jesus.  Concerning 
these  exercises  I  have  no  call  to  pronounce,  but  among 
the  misjudgments  on  spiritual  life  in  the  Roman  com- 
munion has  been  the  frittering  of  spiritual  powers  in  the 
popular  devotion.  If  the  Great  Mysteries  of  the  Church 
are  insufficient  to  command  the  dedication  of  the  whole 
world,  then  the  world  is  left  best  under  interdict,  just  as 
no  pictures  at  all  are  better  than  those  which  are  bad  in 
art,  and  no  books  than  those  which  are  poor  and  trivial. 

There  is  one  point  more,  because  here  we  have  been 
trending  in  directions  which  will  call  for  more  full  con- 
sideration presently.  I  have  mentioned  Secret  Orders,  and 
I  cannot  recall  too  early  that  any  Secret  Tradition — either 
in  the  East  or  the  West — has  been  always  an  open  secret 
in  respect  of  the  root-principles  concerning  the  Way,  the 
Truth  and  the  Life.  We  are  only  beginning,  and  that 
by  very  slow  stages,  to  enter  into  our  inheritance  from 
the  past ;  and  still  perhaps  in  respect  of  the  larger  part 
we  are  seeking  far  and  wide  for  the  mystic  treasures  of 
Basra.  It  is  therefore  desirable  to  remember  that  the 
great  subjects  of  preoccupation  are  all  at  our  very  doors. 

485 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

One  reason,  of  which  we  shall  hear  again  in  another  con- 
nection, is  because  among  the  wise  of  the  ages,  in  whatso- 
ever regions  of  the  world,  I  do  not  think  that  there  has  been 
ever  any  difference  of  opinion  about  the  true  object  of 
research ;  the  modes  and  form  of  the  Quest  have  varied, 
and  that  widely,  but  to  a  single  point  have  all  the  ways 
converged.  Therein  is  no  change  or  shadow  of  vicissi- 
tude. We  may  hear  of  shorter  roads,  and  we  might  say 
at  first  sight  that  such  a  suggestion  must  be  true  indubit- 
ably ;  but  in  one  sense  it  is  rather  a  convention  of  lan- 
guage and  in  another  it  is  a  commonplace  which  tends  to 
confuse  the  issues.  It  is  a  convention  of  language,  because 
the  Great  Quests  are  not  pursued  in  time  or  place,  and  it 
would  be  just  as  true  to  say  that  in  a  journey  from  the 
circumference  to  the  centre  all  roads  are  the  same  length, 
supposing  that  they  are  straight  roads.  It  is  a  common- 
place, because  if  any  one  should  enter  the  byways,  or 
return  on  his  path  and  restart,  it  is  obvious  that  he  must 
look  to  be  delayed.  Furthermore,  it  may  be  true  that 
all  paths  lead  ultimately  to  the  centre,  and  that  if  we 
descend  into  hell  there  may  be  still  a  way  back  to  the 
light :  yet  in  any  house  of  right  reason  the  issues  are  too 
clear  to  consider  such  extrinsic  possibilities. 

On  this  and  on  any  consideration,  we  have  to  lay 
down  one  irrevocable  law — that  he  who  has  resolved- 
setting  all  things  else  aside — -to  enter  the  path  of  the 
Quest  must  look  for  his  progress  in  proportion  as  he 
pursues  holiness  for  its  own  sake.  He  who  in  the  Secret 
Orders  dreams  of  the  adeptship  which  they  claim,  ex 
hypothesiy  to  impart  to  those  who  can  receive,  and  who' 
does  not  say  sanctity  in  his  heart  till  his  lips  are  cleansed, 
and  then  does  not  say  it  with  his  lips,  is  not  so  much 
far  from  the  goal  as  without  having  conceived  regarding  it. 

Now,  it  is  precisely  this  word  sanctity  which  takes  us 
back,  a  little  unintentionally,  to  the  claim  of  the  Church, 
and  raises  the  question  whether  we  are  to  interpret  it 
according  to  the  mind  of  the  Church  or  another  mind. 
My  answer  is  that  I  doubt  if  the  Great  Experiment  was 

486 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the  Graal  Legend 

ever  pursued  to  its  term  in  Christian  times  on  the  part 
of  any  person  who  had  once  been  incorporated  by  the 
mystical  body  but  subsequently  had  set   himself  aside 
therefrom.     When  the  Quest  of  the  Holy  Graal  was  in 
fine  achieved,  there  were  some  who,  as  we  know,  were 
translated,  but  others  became  monks  and  hermits ;  they 
were  incorporated,  that  is  to  say,  by  the  official  annals 
of  sanctity.     I  am  dealing  here  with  what  I  regard  as 
a  question  of  fact,  not  with  antecedent  grounds,  and  the 
fact  is  that  the  Church  has  the  Eucharist.     It  may  in 
certain  respects  have  hampered  Christian  Mysticism  by 
the  restriction  of  its  own  consciousness  so  especially  to 
the   literal  side ;    it   may,   on   the   historical    side,   have 
approached  too  often  that  picture  of  a  certain  King  of 
Castle    Mortal,   who   sold   God   for   money ;  it   may   in 
this  sense  have  told  the  wrong  story,  though  the  elements 
placed  in   its   hands   were  the  right  and  true  elements. 
But  not  only  is  it  certain  that  because  of  these  elements 
we  have  to  cleave  as  we  can  to  the  Church,  but — speak- 
ing  as   a   doctor  dubitantium — I   know  that  the  Church 
Mystic  on  the  highest  throne  of  its  consciousness  does 
not  differ  in  anything   otherwise   than  per  accidentia — 
or  alternatively,  the  prudence  of  expression — from  formal 
Catholic  doctrine.     It  can  say  with  its  heart  of  know- 
ledge what  the  ordinary  churchman  says  with   his  lips 
of  faith ;    the  Symbolum  remains ;   it  has   not   taken   on 
another   meaning ;    it    has   only   unfolded   itself,   like   a 
flower,  from  within.     The  Christian  Mystic  can  there- 
fore recite   his  Credo  in  unum  Deum  by  clause  and  by 
clause,   including  in  unam  sanctam   catholic  am  et  apos- 
tolicam    ecdesiam,   and    there    is    neither  heresy    in    the 
construction  nor  Jesuitry  in  the  arrive  -pens'ee.     Above 
all,  the  path  of  the  mystic  does  not  pass  through   the 
heresies.     It  has  seemed  worth  while  to  make  this  plain, 
because  the  Holy  Graal  is  the  Catholic  Quest  drawn  into 
romance. 


487 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

IV 

THE  MTSTERT  OF  INITIATION 

The  Mystic  Aspects  of  the  Graal  legend  having  been 
developed  up  to  this  stage,  the  question  arises  whether 
they  have  points  of  correspondence  with  any  scheme 
of  the  Instituted  Mysteries,  whether  any  element  which 
is  present  in  the  romances  can  be  regarded  as  a  faint  and 
far  off  reflection  of  something  which  at  that  time  was 
known  and  done  in  any  secret  schools.  The  possibility  has 
presented  itself  already  to  the  mind  of  scholarship,  which, 
having  performed  admirable  work  in  the  study  of  the 
Graal  texts,  is  still  in  search  of  a  final  explanation  con- 
cerning them.  The  shadow  of  the  old  Order  of  the 
Temple  has  haunted  them  in  dreams  fitfully,  and  they 
have  lingered  almost  longingly  over  vague  imagined  re- 
flections of  the  Orgies  of  Adonis  and  Tammuz.  As 
behind  the  Christian  symbolism  of  the  extant  literature 
there  spreads  the  whole  world  of  pagan  folk-lore,  sc- 
at least  antecedently — there  might  be  implied  also  some 
old  scheme  of  the  epopts.  It  seems  permissible  there- 
fore to  offer  an  alternative,  under  proper  judgments  of 
reserve,  as  something  which — if  otherwise  considerable 
— may  be  held  tentatively  until  later  circumstances  of 
research  either  lead  it  into  demonstration  or  furnish 
a  fitting  substitute.  The  Graal  legends  are  comparable 
to  certain  distinct  literatures  with  which  the  theory  here 
put  forward  will  connect  them  by  a  twofold  con- 
sanguinity of  purpose.  Scholarship  had  scarcely  troubled 
itself  with  the  great  books  of  Kabalism  till  it  was  found 
or  conceived  that  they  could  be  made  to  enforce  the 
official  doctrines  of  Christianity.  Many  errors  of  enthu- 
siasm followed,  but  the  books  of  the  mystery  of  Israel 
became  in  this  manner  the  public  heritage  of  philosophy, 
and  we  are  now  able  to  say  after  what  manner  it  enters 
into  the  general  scheme  of  mystic  knowledge.  The 

488 


Mystic   Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

literature  of  alchemy,  in  like  manner,  so  long  as  it  was 
in  the  hands  of  certain  amateurs  of  infant  science  and  its 
counterfeits,  remained  particular  to  themselves,  and  out- 
side a  questionable  research  in  physics  it  had  no  office  or 
horizon  until  it  was  discovered  or  inferred  that  many 
curious  texts  of  the  subject  had  been  written  in  a  Ian- : 
guage  of  subterfuge,  that  in  place  of  a  metallurgical 
inteiest  it  was  concerned  in  its  way  with  the  keeping  of  ' 
spiritual  mysteries.  There  were  again  errors  of  enthu- 
siasm, but  a  corner  of  the  veil  was  lifted.  Now,  it  is 
indubitably  the  message  of  the  Graal  that  there  is  more  - 
in  the  Eucharist  than  is  indicated  by  the  sufficing  graces  ^ 
imparted  to  the  ordinary  communicant,  and  if  it  is 
possible  to  show  that  behind  this  undeclared  excess  there 
lies  that  which  has  been  at  all  times  sought  by  the  Wise, 
that  est  in  sacramento  quicquid  qu&runt  sapientes,  then  the 
Graal  literature  will  enter  after  a  new  manner  into  our 
heritage  from  the  past,  and  another  corner  of  the  veil 
will  be  lifted  on  the  path  of  knowledge.  It  will  be  seen 
that  the  literature — contrary  to  what  it  appears  on  the 
surface — is  not  without  points  of  comparison  in  other 
Christian  cycles — that  it  does  not  stand  exactly  alone, 
even  if  its  consanguinities,  though  declared  by  official 
religion,  are  not  entirely  before  the  face  of  the  world  but 
within  the  sanctuaries  of  secret  fraternities.  To  suggest 
this  is  not  to  say  that  these  stories  of  old  are  a  defined  part 
or  abstract  of  any  mysteries  of  initiation ;  they  are  at 
most  a  byway  winding  through  a  secret  woodland  to  a 
postern  giving  upon  the  chancel  of  some  great  and 
primeval  abbey. 

Those  who  have  concerned  themselves  with  the 
subject  of  hidden  knowledge  will  know  that  the  secret 
claims  have  been  put  forth  under  all  manners  of  guises. 
This  has  arisen  to  some  extent  naturally  enough  in  the 
course  of  the  ages  and  under  the  special  atmosphere  of 
motives  peculiar  to  different  nations.  It  has  also  come 
about  through  the  institution  of  multiples  of  convention 
on  the  part  of  some  who  have  become  in  later  times  the 

489 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

custodians  of  the  mysteries,  such  wardens  having  been 
actuated  by  a  twofold  purpose,  firstly,  to  preserve  their 
witness  in  the  world,  and,  secondly,  to  see  that  the 
knowledge  was,  as  far  as  might  be,  kept  away  from  the 
world.  This  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the  paramount 
law  of  silence  has  of  necessity  a  permanent  competitor 
in  the  law  of  the  sign.  We  may  take  the  readiest 
illustration  in  the  rituals  of  Craft  Masonry.  They 
contain  the  whole  marrow  of  bourgeoisie,  but  they  con- 
tain also  the  shadow  of  the  great  mysteries  revealed 
occasionally.  The  unknown  person  or  assembly  which 
conceived  the  closing  of  the  Lodge  according  to  one 
of  the  grades  had  a  set  of  moral  feelings  in  common 
with  those  of  all  the  retired  masters  in  the  craft  of 
joinery,  and  a  language  like  a  journeyman  carpenter,  but 
this  notwithstanding  the  words  of  the  adepts  had  passed 
over  them  and  they  spoke  of  the  Hidden  Token  as 
no  one  had  ever  spoken  before.  That  closing  gives 
the  true  explanation  of  the  secret  which  cannot  be 
told  and  yet  is  imparted  quite  simply ;  of  that  mystery 
which  has  never  been  expressed  and  can  yet  be  recited  by 
the  least  literate  occupant  of  the  chair  placed  in  Wisdom. 
Nor  does  it  prove  in  communication  to  be  anything  that 
is  strictly  unfamiliar.  And  yet  the  explanation,  so  far 
from  making  the  concealed  part  of  the  rite  familiar 
and  a  thing  of  no  moment,  has  built  about  the  conceal- 
ment a  wall  of  preservation  which  has  made  its  real 
significance  more  profound  and  in  the  minds  of  the 
adepts  more  important. 

The  Graal  literature  is  open  to  a  parallel  criticism, 
and  the  result  is  also  the  same.  Whatever  disappoint- 
ment may  await,  in  fine,  the  pursuit  of  an  inquiry  like 
the  present,  partly  on  account  of  the  uncouth  presenta- 
tion of  important  symbolism  to  the  mind  of  the  early 
romancist,  partly  by  reason  of  the  inherent  defect 
of  romance  as  a  vehicle  of  symbolism,  and  more  than 
either  by  the  fatal  hiatus  brought  about  through  the  loss 
of  the  earliest  documents,  there  is  enough  evidence  to 

490 


Mystic  Aspects   of  the   Graal  Legend 

show  that  a  very  strange  leaven  was  working  in  the 
mass  of  the  texts.  Let  me  add  in  respect  of  it,  with 
all  necessary  reservations  and  in  no  illiberal  spirit,  that 
the  quality  of  this  leaven  can  be  appreciated  scarcely  by 
those  who  are  unacquainted  (a)  with  the  inward  phases 
of  the  life  of  Christian  sanctity  during  the  Middle  Ages, 
after  which  period  the  voices  sound  uncertain  and  the 
consciousness  of  experience  more  remote,  and  (b)  with 
the  interior  working  of  those  concealed  orders  of  which 
the  Masonic  experiment  is  a  part  only,  and  elementary 
at  that.  The  most  important  lights  are  therefore  either 
in  the  very  old  books  or  in  the  catholic  motive  which 
characterises  secret  rituals  that,  whether  old  or  not,  have 
never  entered  into  the  knowledge  of  the  outside  world. 

The  testimony  is  of  two  kinds  invariably — first  of  all, 
to  the  existence  of  the  Great  Experiment  and  the  success 
with  which,  under  given  circumstances,  it  can  be  carried 
to  its  term,  and,  secondly,  to  a  great  failure  in  respect  of 
the  external  world.  The  one  is  reflected  by  the  achieved 
Quest  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  the  other  by  the  removal 
of  the  Graal.  In  respect  of  the  one  it  is  as  if  a  great 
mystery  had  been  communicated  at  one  time  in  the 
external  places,  but  as  if  the  communication  had  after- 
wards been  suspended,  the  secret  had  as  if  died.  In 
respect  of  the  other,  it  is  as  if  the  House  of  Doctrine 
had  been  voided.  Did  these  statements  exhaust  the  con- 
tent of  the  alternatives,  the  testimony  might  be  that  of 
a  sect,  but  we  shall  see  at  the  proper  time  after  what 
manner  they  conform  to  external  doctrine,  even  if  the 
keepers  of  that  doctrine  should  themselves  be  unable 
to  see  the  law  of  the  union. 

The  great  literatures  and  the  great  individual  books 
may  be  often  at  this  day  as  so  many  counters  or  heaps  of 
letters  put  into  the  hands  of  the  mystic,  and  he  inter- 
prets them  after  his  own  manner,  imparting  to  them  that 
light  which,  at  least  intellectually,  abides  in  himself.  I 
make  this  formal  statement  because  I  realise  that  it  is 
perilous  for  my  position  and  because  it  enables  me  to 

491 


The   Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

add  that  though  literatures  may  be  clay  in  our  hands,  we 
must  not  suppose  that  they  who  in  the  first  place  put  a 
shape  of  their  own  kind  on  the  material  which  they  had 
ingarnered  were  invariably  conscious  that  it  would  bear 
that  other  seal  and  impression  which  we  set  upon  it  in  our 
own  minds  as  the  one  thing  that  is  desirable.  It  is  too 
much  to  suppose  that  behind  the  external  sense  of  texts 
there  was  always  designed  that  inward  and  illusory  signi- 
ficance which  in  some  of  them  we  seem  to  trace  so  in- 
dubitably. The  Baron  de  la  Motte  Fouque  once  wrote  a 
beautiful  and  knightly  romance  in  which  a  correspondent 
discovered  a  subtle  and  complete  allegory,  and  the 
author,  who  planned,  when  he  wrote  it,  no  subsurface 
meaning,  did  not  less  sincerely  confess  to  the  additional 
sense,  explaining  in  reply  that  high  art  in  literature  is 
true  upon  all  the  planes.  There  are  certain  romances 
which  are  found  to  connect  in  this  manner  with  the 
mystery  of  our  science — that  is  to  say,  in  the  non-inten- 
tional way,  and  we  must  only  be  thankful  to  discern  that 
there  is  the  deep  below  the  deep,  without  pressing  inter- 
penetration  into  a  formal  scheme.  It  is  well  to  notice  this 
position  and  thus  go  before  a  criticism  which  presents 
itself  rather  than  calls  to  be  sought  out.  The  books  of 
the  Holy  Graal  are  not  exactly  of  this  kind.  A  text 
which  says  that  certain  secret  words  were  once  imparted 
under  very  wonderful  and  exceptional  circumstances  is 
certainly  obtruding  a  meaning  behind  meaning ;  another 
which  affirms  that  a  certain  mythical  personage  was  or- 
dained secretly,  owing  to  a  similar  intervention,  and  was 
made  thereby  the  first  Bishop  of  Christendom,  manifests 
an  ulterior  motive,  or  there  are  no  such  motives  in  the 
world.  And  further,  when  the  two  great  Quests  of  the 
whole  literature  are  written  partly  in  the  form  of  con- 
fessed allegory,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  infer  that  they 
had  some  such  motive  throughout ;  while,  in  fine,  as  their 
express,  undisguised  intention  is  to  show  the  existence  of 
an  arch-natural  Mass,  the  graces  and  the  mysteries  of 
which  can  be  experienced  and  seen  by  some  who  are  of 

492 


Mystic  Aspects   of  the    Graal  Legend 

perfect  life,  then  the  interpretation  which  illustrates  this 
intention  by  the  mystic  side  of  Eucharistic  doctrine  in 
the  Church  offers  a  true  construction,  and  its  valid  criti- 
cism is  vere  dignum  et  justum  £f£>  eequum  et  salutare.  I 
will  pour  three  cups  to  the  health  and  coronation  of 
him  who  shall  discover  the  speculative  proto-Perceval  of 
primeval  folk-lore,  yet  on  the  present  subject  let  him  and 
all  other  brethren  in  the  holy  places  of  research  keep 
silence,  unless  God  graces  them  with  agreement.  The 
unknown  writers  of  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  and  the 
Quest  of  Galahad  spoke  of  the  Great  Experiment  as 
those  who  knew  something  of  their  theme  and  bore  true 
witness  on  the  term  of  the  research. 

We  know  in  our  own  hearts  that  eternity  is  the  sole 
thing  which  signifies  ultimately  and  great  literature  should 
confess  to  no  narrower  horizon.  It  happens  that  they 
begin  sometimes  by  proposing  a  lesser  theme,  but  they 
are  afterwards  exalted ;  and  this  was  the  case  with  the 
Graal  books,  which  were  given  the  early  legends  of  Per- 
ceval according  to  the  office  of  Nature,  but  afterwards 
the  legend  of  Galahad  according  to  the  Law  of  Grace. 


THE  MTSTERT  OF  FAITH 

We  have  now  reached  a  certain  definite  stage  in  the 
high  debate  and  can  institute  a  preliminary  summary 
of  the  whole  subject.  It  is  known  that  the  mystery  of 
faith  in  Christianity  is  above  all  things  the  Eucharist,  in 
virtue  of  which  the  Divine  Master  is  ever  present  in  his 
Church  and  is  always  communicated  to  the  soul ;  but 
having  regard  to  the  interdictions  of  our  age-long  exile 
we  receive  only  a  substituted  participation  in  the  life  of 
the  union.  The  Graal  mystery  is  the  declared  pageant 
of  the  Eucharist,  which,  in  virtue  of  certain  powers  set 
forth  under  the  veil  of  consecrating  words,  is  in  some 
way,  not  indeed  a  higher  mystery  than  that  of  the 

493 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

external  church,  but  its  demonstration  in  the  transcendant 
mode.  We  have  only  to  remember  a  few  passages  in  the 
Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval^  and 
in  the  Quest  of  Galahad  to  understand  the  imputed  dis- 
tinction as :  (a)  The  communication  in  the  Eucharist 
of  the  whole  knowledge  of  the  universe  from  Aleph  to 
Tau ;  (b)  the  communication  of  the  Living  Christ  in 
the  dissolution  of  the  veils  of  Bread  and  Wine  ;  (c)  the 
communication  of  the  secret  process  by  which  the  soul 
passes  under  divine  guidance  from  the  offices  of  this 
world  to  heaven,  the  keynote  being  that  the  soul  is  taken 
when  it  asks  into  the  great  transcendence.  This  is  the 
implied  question  of  the  Galahad  legend  as  distinguished 
from  the  Perceval  question.  There  are  those  who  are 
called  but  not  chosen  at  all,  like  Gawain.  There  are 
those  who  get  near  to  the  great  mystery  but  have  not 
given  up  all  things  for  it,  and  of  these  is  Lancelot. 
There  is  the  great  cohort,  like  the  apocalyptic  multitude 
which  no  man  can  number — called,  elected  and  redeemed 
in  the  lesser  ways,  by  the  offices  of  the  external  Church — 
and  of  these  is  the  great  chivalry  of  the  Round  Table. 
There  are  those  who  go  up  into  the  Mountain  of  the 
Lord  and  return  again,  like  Bors ;  they  have  received  the 
last  degrees,  but  their  office  is  in  this  world.  In  fine, 
there  are  those  who  follow  at  a  long  distance  in  the 
steep  path,  and  of  these  is  the  transmuted  Perceval  of 
the  Galahad  legend.  It  is  in  this  sense  that,  exalted 
above  all  and  more  than  all  things  rarefied  into  a  great 
and  high  quintessence,  the  history  of  the  Holy  Graal 
becomes  the  soul's  history,  moving  through  a  profound 
symbolism  of  inward  being,  wherein  we  follow  as  we  can, 
but  the  vistas  are  prolonged  for  ever,  and  it  well  seems 
that  there  is  neither  a  beginning  to  the  story  nor  a 
descried  ending. 

We  find  also  the  shadows  and  tokens  of  secret 
memorials  which  have  not  been  declared  in  the  external, 
and  by  the  strange  things  which  are  hinted,  we  seem  to 
see  that  the  temple  of  the  Graal  on  Mont  Salvatch  is 

494 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

not  otherwise  than  as  the  three  tabernacles  which  it  was 
proposed  to  build  on  Mount  Tabor.  Among  indications 
of  this  kind  there  are  two  only  that  I  can  mention.  As 
in  the  prologue  to  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  we  have 
heard  that  the  anonymous  but  not  unknown  hermit  met 
on  a  memorable  occasion  with  one  who  recognised  him  by 
certain  signs  which  he  carried,  giving  thus  the  unmistak- 
able token  of  some  instituted  mystery  in  which  both 
shared  :  as  in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  we  have  seen 
that  there  is  an  account  of  five  changes  in  the  Graal 
which  took  place  at  the  altar,  being  five  transfigurations, 
the  last  of  which  assumed  the  seeming  of  a  chalice,  but 
at  the  same  time,  instead  of  a  chalice,  was  some  unde- 
clared mystery :  so  the  general  as  well  as  the  particular 
elements  of  the  legend  in  its  highest  form  offer  a  mystery 
the  nature  of  which  is  recognised  by  the  mystic  through 
certain  signs  which  it  carries  on  its  person  ;  yet  it  is  de- 
clared in  part  only  and  what  remains,  which  is  the  greater 
part,  is  not  more  than  suggested.  It  is  that,  I  believe, 
which  was  seen  by  the  maimed  King  when  he  looked 
into  the  Sacred  Cup  and  beheld  the  secret  of  all  things, 
the  beginning  even  and  the  end.  In  this  sense  the  five 
changes  of  the  Graal  are  analogous  to  the  five  natures 
of  man,  as  these  in  their  turn  correspond  to  the  four 
aspects  of  the  Cosmos  and  that  which  rules  all  things 
within  and  from  without  the  Cosmos.  I  conclude  there- 
fore that  the  antecedents  of  the  Cup  Legend  are  (i) 
Calix  meus  quam  inebrians  est ;  (2)  the  Cup  which  does 
not  pass  away;  (3)  the  vas  insigne  electionis.  The 
antecedent  of  the  Graal  question  is :  Ask,  and  ye  shall 
receive.  The  antecedent  of  the  Enchantment  of  Britain 
is  the  swoon  of  the  sensitive  life,  and  that  of  the  adven- 
turous times  is  :  I  bring  not  peace,  but  a  sword ;  I  come 
to  cast  fire  upon  the  earth,  and  what  will  I  but  that  it 
should  be  enkindled  ?  The  closing  of  these  times  is 
taken  when  the  Epopt  turns  at  the  altar,  saying  Pax  Dei 
tecum.  But  this  is  the  peace  which  passes  understand- 
ing and  it  supervenes  upon  the  Mors  osculi — the  mystic 

495 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

Thomas  Vaughan's  "  death  of  the  kiss  " — after  which  it 
is  exclaimed  truly  :  "  Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in 
the  Lord  from  henceforth  and  for  ever."  It  follows 
therefore  that  the  formula  of  the  Supernatural  Graal  is  : 
Panem  ccelestem  accipiam  ;  that  of  the  Natural  Graal, 
namely,  the  Feeding  Dish,  is  :  Panem  nostrum  quotidianum 
da  nobis  hodie ;  and  the  middle  term  :  "  Man  doth  not 
live  by  bread  alone."  I  should  add  :  These  three  there 
are  one  ;  but  this  is  in  virtue  of  great  and  high  transmu- 
tations. So,  after  all  the  offices  of  scholarship — pursued 
with  that  patience  which  wears  out  worlds  of  obstacles — 
it  proves  that  there  is  something  left  over,  that  this  some- 
thing bears  upon  its  surface  the  aspects  of  mystic  life, 
that  hereof  is  our  heritage,  and  that  we  can  enter  and 
take  possession  because  other  claimants  there  are  none. 
The  books  of  the  Holy  Graal  do  tell  us  of  a  sanctuary 
within  the  sanctuary  of  Christendom,  wherein  there  are 
reserved  great  sacraments,  high  symbols,  relics  that  are 
of  all  most  holy,  and  would  be  so  accounted  in  all  the 
external  ways ;  but  of  these  things  we  have  heard  other- 
wise in  certain  secret  schools.  It  follows  therefore  that 
we  as  mystics  can  lift  up  our  eyes  because  there  is  a 
Morning  Light  which  we  go  to  meet  with  exultation, 
portantes  manipulos  nostros.  We  shall  find  the  paths 
more  easy  because  of  our  precursors,  who  have  cleared 
the  tangled  ways  and  have  set  up  landmarks  and  beacons, 
by  which  perchance  we  shall  be  led  more  straightly  into 
our  own,  though  in  their  clearing  and  surveying  they  did 
not  at  all  know  that  they  were  working  for  us. 

It  is  recognised  by  the  Catholic  Church  that  the 
Eucharist  is  at  this  time  the  necessity  of  our  spiritual 
life,  awaiting  that  great  day  when  our  daily  bread  shall 
itself  become  the  Eucharist,  no  longer  that  substitute 
provided  in  our  material  toil  and  under  the  offices  of 
which  we  die.  The  body  is  communicated  to  the  body 
that  the  Spirit  may  be  imparted  to  the  soul.  Spiritus 
ipse  Christi  animce  infunditur^  and  this  is  the  illustration 
of  ecstasy.  But  in  these  days — as  I  have  hinted — it 

496 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

works  only  through  the  efficacy  of  a  symbol,  and  this  is 
why  we  cannot  say  in  our  hearts :  A  carne  nostro  caro 
Christi  inefabile  modo  sentitur,  meaning  Anima  s-ponsce 
ad  flenissimam  in  Christum  trans formationem  sublimatur. 
Hence,  whether  it  is  St.  John  of  the  Cross  speaking  of 
the  Ascent  of  Mount  Carmel  or  Ruysbroeck  of  the  Hidden 
Stone,  the  discourse  is  always  addressed  to  Israel  in  the 
wilderness,  not  in  the  Land  of  Promise.  Hence  also  our 
glass  of  vision  remains  clouded,  like  the  sanctuary  ;  and 
even  the  books  of  the  mystics  subsist  under  the  law  of 
the  interdict  and  are  expressed  in  the  language  thereof. 
Those  of  the  Holy  Graal  are  written  from  very  far  away 
in  the  terms  of  transubstantiation,  presented  thaumaturgi- 
cally  under  all  the  veils  of  grossness,  instead  of  the  terms 
of  the  Epiclesis  in  the  language  of  those  who  have  been 
ordained  with  the  holy  oils  of  the  Comforter.  In  other 
books  the  metaphysics  of  the  Lover  and  the  Beloved  have 
been  rendered  in  the  tongue  of  the  flesh,  forgetting  that 
it  bears  the  same  relation  to  the  illusory  correspondence 
of  human  unions  that  the  Bread  of  the  Eucharist  bears  to 
material  nutriment.  The  true  analogy  is  in  the  contra- 
distinction between  the  elements  of  bodies  and  minds. 
The  high  analogy  in  literature  is  the  Supper  at  the  Second 
Table  in  the  poem  of  Robert  de  Borron.  That  was  a 
spiritual  repast,  where  there  was  neither  eating  nor  drink- 
ing. For  this  reason  the  symbolic  fish  upon  the  table 
conveyed  to  the  Warden  the  title  of  Rich  Fisher,  and  it  is 
in  this  sense — that  is  to  say,  for  the  same  reason — that 
the  saints  become  Fishers  of  Men.  We  shall  re-express 
the  experience  of  the  mystic  life  in  terms  that  will  make 
all  things  new  when  we  understand  fully  what  is  implied 
by  the  secret  words :  Co-o-pertus  et  absconditus  sponsus. 


497 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

VI 

THE  LOST  BOOK  OF  THE  GRAAL 

We  have  seen,  in  considering  the  claim  of  the  Celtic 
Church  to  recognition  as  a  possible  guiding  and  shaping 
spirit  of  the  Graal  literature,  that  one  speculation  regard- 
ing it  was  the  existence  in  concealment  of  a  particular 
book,  a  liturgy  of  some  kind,  preferably  a  Book  of  the 
Mass.  I  have  no  definite  concern  in  the  hypothesis,  as  it 
is  in  no  sense  necessary  to  the  interpretation  which  I  place 
upon  the  literature ;  but  the  existence  of  one  or  more 
primordial  texts  is  declared  so  invariably  in  the  romances 
that,  on  the  surface  at  least,  it  seems  simpler  to  presume 
its  existence,  and  it  becomes  thus  desirable  to  ascertain 
what  evidence  there  is  otherwise  to  be  gleaned  about 
it.  As  it  has  been  left  so  far  by  scholarship,  the 
question  wears  almost  an  inscrutable  or  at  least  an 
inextricable  aspect,  and  its  connection  with  the  mystic 
aspects  of  the  Holy  Graal  may  be  perhaps  rather 
adventitious  than  accidental,  but  it  is  introduced  here 
as  a  preliminary  to  those  yet  more  abstruse  researches 
which  belong  to  the  ninth  book. 

We  must  in  the  first  place  set  aside  from  our  minds 
the  texts  which  depend  from  one  another,  whether  the 
earlier  examples  are  extant  or  not.  The  vanished  Quest 
of  Guiot — priceless  as  its  discovery  would  be — is  not  the 
term  of  our  research.  We  must  detach  further  those 
obviously  fabulous  chronicles  by  the  pretence  of  which 
it  is  supposed  that  the  several  quests  and  histories  were 
perpetuated  for  the  enlightenment  of  posterity.  No  one 
is  wondering  seriously  whether  the  knightly  adventures 
of  the  Round  Table  were  reduced  into  great  chronicles 
by  the  scribes  of  King  Arthur's  court,  for  which  assur- 
ance we  have  the  evidence  of  the  Huth  Merlin — among 
several  deponents.  There  are  other  sources  which  may 
be  equally  putative,  but  it  is  these  which  raise  the  ques- 

498 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the  Graal  Legend 

tion,  and  I  proceed  to  their  enumeration  as  follows : 
(i)  That  which  contained  the  greatest  secret  of  the 
world,  a  minute  volume  which  would  lie  in  the  hollow 
of  a  hermit's  hand — in  a  word,  the  text  presupposed  by 
the  prologue  to  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal ;  (2)  that  which 
is  ascribed  to  Master  Blihis — the  fabulator  famosus — by 
the  Elucidation  prefixed  to  the  Conte  del  Graal ;  (3)  that 
which  is  called  the  Great  Book  by  Robert  de  Borron, 
containing  the  Great  Secret  to  which  the  term  Graal 
is  referred,  a  book  of  many  histories,  written  by  many 
clerks,  and  by  him  communicated  apparently  to  his 
patron,  Walter  Montbeliard  ;  (4)  that  which  the  Count 
of  Flanders  gave  to  Chretien  de  Troyes  with  instructions 
to  retell  it,  being  the  best  story  ever  recited  in  royal 
court ;  (5)  that  which  the  Hermit  Blaise  codified  with 
the  help  of  the  secret  records  kept  by  the  Wardens  of 
the  Graal ;  (6)  that  which  the  author  of  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval  refers  to  the  saintly  man  whom  he  calls 
Josephus  ;  (7)  that  which  the  Jew  Flegitanis  transcribed 
from  the  time-immemorial  chronicles  of  the  starry 
heavens. 

The  palmary  problem  for  our  solution  is,  whether  in 
the  last  understanding  a  mystery  book  or  a  Mass  book, 
these  cryptic  texts  can  be  regarded  as  "  seven  and  yet 
one,  like  shadows  in  a  dream" — or  rather,  as  many  in- 
ventions concerning  one  document.  If  we  summarise 
the  results  which  were  obtained  from  them,  we  can 
express  them  by  their  chief  examples  thus:  (i)  From 
the  prototype  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  came 
the  super-apostolical  succession,  the  ordination  of 
Joseph  II.,  the  dogma  of  transubstantiation  manifested 
arch-naturally,  and  the  building  of  Corbenic  as  a  Castle 
of  Perils  and  Wonders  girt  about  the  Holy  Graal ;  (2) 
from  the  prototype  of  the  Elucidation  we  have  the  in- 
dicible  secret  of  the  Graal,  the  seven  discoveries  of  its 
sanctuary,  the  account  of  the  Rich  Fisherman's  skill  in 
necromancy  and  his  protean  transformations  by  magical 
art ;  (3)  from  the  prototype  of  Robert  de  Borron  we 

499 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

have  the  Secret  Words,  by  him  or  subsequently  referred 
to  Eucharistic  consecration ;  (4)  from  the  prototype  of 
Chretien  we  have  the  history  of  Perceval  le  Gallois,  so 
far  as  it  was  taken  by  him  ;  (5)  from  the  putative  chro- 
nicle of  Blaise  and  his  scribes,  antecedent  and  concurrent, 
we  have  all  that  which  belongs  to  the  history  of  Merlin, 
the  foundation  of  the  Round  Table  and  the  Siege 
Perilous ;  (6)  from  the  prototype  of  the  Longer  Prose 
Perceval  we  have  Perceval's  later  history,  his  great  and 
final  achievements — unlike  all  else  in  the  literature,  more 
sad,  more  beautiful,  more  strange  than  anything  told 
concerning  him ;  (7)  from  the  prototype  of  Guiot, 
we  have  the  Graal  presented  as  a  stone,  and  with  an 
ascribed  antecedent  history  which  is  the  antithesis  of 
all  other  histories.  Had  I  set  up  these  varying  ver- 
sions in  the  form  of  seven  propositions  on  the  gates 
of  Salerno  or  Salamanca  and  offered  to  maintain  their 
identity  in  a  thesis  against  all  comers,  I  suppose  that  I  could 
make  out  a  case  with  the  help  of  scholastic  casuistry  and 
the  rest  of  the  dialectical  subtleties  ;  but  in  the  absence  of 
all  motive,  and  detached  as  regards  the  result,  I  can  only 
say  in  all  reason  that  the  quests  and  the  histories  as  we 
have  them  never  issued  from  a  single  quest  or  a  single 
history.  We  may  believe,  if  we  please,  that  the  book  of 
the  Count  of  Flanders  was  really  the  Quest  of  Guiot, 
reducing  the  sources  to  six,  and  a  certain  ingenuity 
— with  courage  towards  precarious  positions — may  help 
us  to  further  eliminations,  but  the  root-difficulty  will 
remain — that  the  Quests,  as  we  have  them,  exclude  one 
another  and  so  also  do  some  of  the  histories.  It  follows 
that  there  were  many  prototypes,  or  alternatively  that 
there  were  many  inventions  in  respect  of  the  sources. 
In  respect  of  the  Perceval  legends  there  was  the  non- 
Graal  folk-lore  myth,  which  accounts  for  their  root- 
matter  but  not  for  their  particular  renderings  and 
their  individual  Graal  elements ;  the  nearest  approxi- 
mation to  these,  myths  and  their  nearest  issue  in  time 
may  have  been  the  Quest  of  Guiot.  One  general 

500 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the  Graal  Legend 

source  of  De  Borron  was  transparently  the  Evangelium 
Nicodemi,  complicated  by  later  Joseph  legends,  including 
the  tradition  of  F6camp,  but  more  than  all  by  another 
source,  of  which  he  had  heard  at  a  distance  and  of  which 
I  shall  speak  at  the  close.  The  Quest  of  Galahad  makes 
no  claim  to  a  prototype,  but  it  reflects  extant  manu- 
scripts of  the  Greater  Chronicles ;  for  the  rest,  its 
own  story  was  all  important ;  it  cared  nothing  for 
antecedents,  and  it  is  only  by  sporadic  precaution, 
outside  its  normal  lines,  that  it  registers  at  the  close 
after  what  manner  it  pretended  to  be  reduced  into 
writing.  The  prototypes  of  this  text  are  in  the  annals 
of  sanctity,  except  in  so  far  as  it  reflects — and  it  does 
so  indubitably — some  rumours  which  Robert  de  Borron 
had  drawn  into  romance.  As  regards  Galahad  himself, 
his  romance  is  a  great  invention  derived  from  the  prose 
Lancelot.  The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  is  an  invention 
after  another  manner ;  there  is  nothing  to  warrant  us 
in  attaching  any  credit  to  the  imputed  source  in 
Josephus,  but  the  book  drew  from  many  places  and 
transmuted  that  which  it  drew  with  a  shaping  spirit ; 
it  is  an  important  text  for  those  rumours  to  which  I 
have  referred  darkly.  It  works,  like  the  Quest  of 
Galahad,  in  a  high  region  of  similitude,  and  its  pre- 
tended source  is  connected  intimately  with  the  second 
Joseph  of  the  Greater  Chronicles. 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  deal  with  a  further  ascrip- 
tion which  is  so  general  in  the  literature  and  was  once 
rather  widely  accepted — namely,  that  of  a  Latin  source. 
It  will  be  noted  that  this  is  a  simple  debate  of  language 
and  it  leaves  the  unity  or  multiplicity  of  the  prototypes  an 
open  question.  It  is  worth  mentioning,  because  it  enters 
into  the  history  of  the  criticism  of  Graal  literature. 
There  is  no  need  to  say  that  it  is  now  passed  over  by 
scholarship,  and  the  first  person  to  reject  it  was  Robert 
Southey  in  his  preface  to  the  edition  of  Sir  Thomas 
Malory's  Morte  d*  Arthur  which  passes  under  his  name, 
though  he  had  no  hand  in  the  editing  of  the  text 

501 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

itself.  "  I  do  not  believe,"  he  says,  "  that  any  of  these 
romances  ever  existed  in  Latin, — by  whom,  or  for  whom, 
could  they  have  been  written  in  that  language  ? "  For 
the  romances  as  romances,  for  Meliadus  de  Leonnois^ 
Gyron  le  Courtois,  and  so  forth,  the  question  has  one 
answer  only,  the  fact  notwithstanding  that  the  prologue 
to  Gyron  draws  all  the  prose  tales  of  the  Round  Table  from 
what  it  terms  the  Latin  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal.  There 
is  one  answer  also  for  any  version  of  the  Graal  legend,  as 
we  now  know  it.  Even  for  that  period,  the  Comte  de 
Tressan  committed  a  serious  absurdity  when  he  affirmed 
that  the  whole  literature  of  Arthurian  chivalry,  derived 
by  the  Bretons  from  the  ancient  and  fabulous  chronicles 
of  Melkin  and  Tezelin,  was  written  in  Latin  by  Rusticien 
de  Pise,  who  was  simply  a  compiler  and  translator  into 
the  Italian  tongue  and  was  concerned,  as  such,  chiefly 
with  the  Tristram  cycle.  At  the  same  time  it  is  possible 
to  take  too  extreme  a  view.  In  his  preface  to  another 
work,  Palmerin  of  England,  Southey  remarks  that  "  every 
reader  of  romance  knows  how  commonly  they  were 
represented  as  translations  from  old  manuscripts,"  and 
that  such  an  ascription,  "  instead  of  proving  that  a  given 
work  was  translated,  affords  some  evidence  that  it  is 
original."  The  inference  is  worded  too  strongly  and  is 
scarcely  serious  as  it  stands,  but  the  fact  itself  is  certain; 
and  indeed  the  Graal  romances  belong  to  a  class  of  litera- 
ture which  was  prone  to  false  explanations  in  respect 
both  of  authorship  and  language.  Still,  there  is  some- 
thing to  be  said  for  the  middle  ground  suggested,  now 
long  ago,  on  the  authority  of  Paulin  Paris,  that  while 
it  is  idle  to  talk  of  romances  in  the  Latin  language,  there 
is  nothing  impossible  in  the  suggestion  that  the  sacra- 
mental legend  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  and  his  Sacred 
Vessel  may  have  existed  in  Latin.  From  his  point  of 
view  it  was  a  Gradual,  and  he  even  goes  so  far  as  to 
speculate  (a)  that  it  was  preserved  at  Glastonbury  ;  (£) 
that  it  was  not  used  by  the  monks  because  it  involved 
schism  with  Rome  ;  and  (r)  that,  like  the  Jew  of  Toledo's 

502 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

transcript,  it  was  forgotten  for  three  centuries — till  it 
was  recalled  by  the  quarrel  between  Henry  II.  and  the 
Pope.  This  is,  of  course,  fantasy,  but  the  bare  suppo- 
sition of  such  a  Latin  legend  would  account  in  a  natural 
manner  for  an  ascription  that  is  singularly  consistent, 
while  it  would  not  pretend  to  represent  the  lost  imagi- 
nary prototypes  of  the  whole  complex  literature. 

In  this  connection  we  might  do  worse  than  take 
warning  by  one  lesson  from  the  literature  of  alchemy. 
The  early  writers  on  this  subject  were  in  the  habit  of 
citing  authorities  who,  because  they  could  not  be  identi- 
fied, were  often  regarded  as  mythical ;  but  all  the  same 
they  existed  in  manuscript ;  they  might  have  been  found 
by  those  who  had  taken  the  trouble ;  and  they  are  now 
familiar  to  students  by  the  edition  of  Berthelot.  In 
matters  of  this  kind  we  do  not  know  what  a  day  may 
bring  forth,  and  from  all  standpoints  the  existence  of  a 
pious  legend — orthodox  or  heretical,  Roman  or  Breton — 
concerning  Joseph  and  his  Hallow  would  be  interesting, 
as  it  must  also  be  valuable.  Unfortunately,  the  Quest 
of  the  Holy  Graal  in  respect  of  its  missing  literature 
is  after  the  manner  of  a  greater  enterprise,  for  there  are 
many  who  follow  it  and  few  that  come  to  the  term  of  a 
new  discovery.  There  are  authorities  now  in  England 
to  whom  the  possibility  of  such  a  text  might  not  be 
unacceptable,  though  criticism  dwells  rightly  upon  the 
fact  that  there  is  no  mention  of  the  Holy  Vessel  in 
the  earliest  apocryphal  records  of  the  evangelisation  of 
Britain  by  Joseph.  We  have  heard  already  of  one  Latin 
memorial  among  the  archives  of  Fecamp,  but  of  its 
date  we  know  nothing,  and  its  conversion  legend  does 
not  belong  to  this  island. 

Having  thus  determined,  as  I  think,  the  question  of 
a  single  prototype  accounting  for  all  the  literature,  we 
have  to  realise  that  everything  remains  in  respect  of  the 
mystery  of  origin — now  the  wonder  element  of  things 
unseen  and  heard  of  dimly  only,  sometimes  expressed 
imperfectly  in  Nature  poems,  which  have  no  concern 

5°3 


The   Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

therein ;  now  what  sounds  like  a  claim  on  behalf  of  the 
Celtic  Church ;  now  sacramental  legends  incorporated 
by  Latin  Christianity  into  the  great  body  of  romances. 
But  I  speak  here  of  things  which  are  approximate  and 
explicable  in  an  atmosphere  of  legend  married  to  a 
definite  world  of  doctrine.  There  is  nothing  in  these  to 
explain  (a)  the  report  of  a  secret  sanctuary  in  all  the  texts 
without  any  exception  whatever,  for  even  the  foolish 
Crown  of  all  Adventures  allocates  its  house  of  ghosts  to 
the  loneliest  of  all  roads ;  (b)  the  Secret  Words  of 
Consecration ;  (c)  the  arch-natural  Mass  celebrated 
three  of  the  texts ;  (d)  the  hidden  priesthood ;  (e) 
claim  to  a  holy  and  hidden  knowledge ;  (/)  the  removal 
of  this  knowledge  from  concealment  to  further  conceal- 
ment, because  the  world  was  not  worthy.  These  are  the 
rumours  to  which  I  have  alluded  previously,  and  I  have 
attached  to  them  this  name,  because  there  is  nothing  more 
obvious  in  the  whole  cycle  of  literature  than  the  fact  that 
those  who  wrote  of  them  did  not — for  the  most  part- 
know  what  they  said.  Now,  it  is  a  canon  of  reasonable 
criticism  that  writers  who  make  use  of  materials  which 
they  do  not  understand  are  not  the  inventors  thereof. 
It  had  never  entered  into  the  heart  of  Robert  de  Borron 
that  his  Secret  Words  reduced  the  ordinary  Eucharist  to 
something  approaching  a  semblance ;  to  the  putative 
Walter  Map  that  his  first  Bishop  of  Christendom  put 
the  whole  Christian  apostolate  into  an  inferior  place  ;  to 
any  one  of  the  romancers  that  his  Secret  Sanctuary  was 
the  claim  of  an  orthodoxy  in  transcendence ;  to  the 
authors  in  particular  of  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  and 
the  Quest  of  Galahad  that  their  implied  House  of  the 
Hallows  came  perilously  near  to  the  taking  of  the  heart 
out  of  Christendom.  So  little  did  these  things  occur 
to  them  that  their  materials  are  mismanaged  rather 
seriously  in  consequence.  Had  the  first  Bishop  of 
Christendom  ordained  those  whom  he  intended  to  suc- 
ceed him,  I  should  not  bring  this  charge  against  the 
author  of  that  text  which  presents  the  consecration  of 

504 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the  Graal  Legend 

the  second  Joseph  in  all  its  sanctity  and  wonder.  But, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  custody  of  the  Holy  Graal  passed 
into  the  hands  of  a  layman,  and  we  are  offered  the 
picture  of  a  priest  anointed  by  Christ  who  does  not  even 
baptize,  a  hermit  on  one  occasion  being  obtained  to  ad- 
minister this  simplest  of  all  the  sacraments.  And  yet 
this  first  bishop  of  Christendom  had  ordained  many 
and  enthroned  some  at  Sarras.  There  is  a  similar  crux 
in  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal  and  its  companion  poem.  One 
•ould  have  thought  that  the  possession  of  the  Secret 
t/ords  would  be  reserved  to  those  bearing  the  seal 
if  the  priesthood ;  but  it  is  not  suggested  that  Joseph 
of  Arimathasa  was  either  ordained  by  Christ  or  by 
any  bishop  of  the  Church ;  his  successor,  Brons,  was 
simply  a  disciple  saved  out  of  rejected  Jerusalem ;  and 
Perceval,  the  tiers  bons,  was  a  knight  of  King  Arthur's 
court.  Of  two  things,  therefore,  one  :  either  the  makers 
of  romance  who  brought  in  these  elements  knew  not 
what  they  said,  and  reflected  at  a  far  distance  that  which 
they  had  heard  otherwise,  or  the  claims  are  not  that  which 
they  appear  on  the  surface ;  beneath  them  there  is  a 
deeper  concealment;  there  was  something  behind  the 
Eucharistic  aspect  of  the  mysterious  formula  and  some- 
thing behind  the  ordination  in  transcendence  ;  there  was 
in  fine  a  more  secret  service  than  that  of  the  Mass.  I 
accept  the  first  alternative,  but  without  prejudice  to  the 
second,  which  is  true  also,  as  we  shall  see  later,  still 
on  the  understanding  that  what  subtended  was  not  in  the 
mind  of  romance. 

If  it  is  necessary  or  convenient  to  posit  the  existence 
of  a  single  primordial  book,  then  the  Sanctum  Graal, 
Liber  Gradalis,  or  Missa  de  Corpore  Cbristi  contained 
these  elements,  and  it  contained  nothing  or  little  of  the 
diverse  matter  in  the  literature.  It  was  not  a  liturgy 
connected  with  the  veneration  of  a  relic  or  of  certain 
relics ;  it  did  not  recite  the  legend  of  Joseph  or  account 
in  what  manner  soever  for  the  conversion  of  Britain.  It 
was  a  Rite  of  the  Order  of  Melchisedech  and  it  com- 

5°5 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

municated  the  arch-natural  sacrament  ex  hypothesi.  The 
prologue  to  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  has  what  one 
would  be  inclined  to  call  a  rumour  of  this  Mass,  after 
which  there  supervened  an  ecstasy  as  a  foretaste  of  the 
Divine  Rapture.  The  term  thereof  was  the  Vision 
which  is  He,  and  the  motive  of  the  dilucid  experience 
is  evaded — consciously  or  not,  but,  I  say,  in  truth  uncon- 
sciously— by  the  substitute  of  reflections  upon  difficulties 
concerning  the  Trinity.  No  Graal  writer  had  ever  seen 
this  book,  but  the  rumour  of  it  was  about  in  the  worlot 
It  was  held  in  reserve  not  in  a  monastery  at  Glastonburn 
but  by  a  secret  school  of  Christians  whose  position  ie 
respect  of  current  orthodoxy  was  that  of  the  apex  to  the 
base  of  any  perfect  triangle — its  completion  and  not  its 
destruction.  There  was  more  of  the  rumour  abroad  than 
might  have  been  expected  antecedently,  as  if  a  Church  of 
St.  John  the  Divine  were  planted  somewhere  in  the  West, 
but  not  in  the  open  day.  There  was  more  of  the  rumour, 
and  some  makers  of  texts  had  heard  more  than  others. 
We  know  that  in  the  prologue  to  the  Book  of  the  Holy 
Graal  there  is  what  might  be  taken  as  a  reference  to  this 
company,  the  members  of  which  were  sealed,  so  that  they 
could  recognise  one  another  by  something  which  they  bore 
upon  their  persons.  When,  in  the  Quest  of  Galahad,  the 
nine  strange  knights  came  from  the  East  and  the  West 
and  the  North  and  the  South  to  sit  down,  or  to  kneel 
rather,  at  the  Table  of  the  Graal,  they  entered  without 
challenge,  they  took  their  proper  places  and  were  saluted 
and  welcomed,  because  they  also  bore  the  seal  of  the 
secret  order.  King  Pelles  went  out  because  he  was  not 
on  the  Quest,  because  his  part  was  done,  because  he  had 
attained  and  seen,  for  which  reason  he  departed  as  one 
who  says  :  Nunc  dimittis  Servum  tuum,  Domine,  secundum 
verbum  tuum  in  pace :  quia  viderunt  oculi  mei — else- 
where or  earlier — salutare  tuum.  The  minstrels  and 
romancers  knew  little  enough  of  these  mysteries,  for  the 
most  part,  and  on  the  basis  of  the  rumours  of  the  book 
they  superposed  what  they  had  heard  otherwise — the 

506 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

legend  of  Joseph,  the  cultus  of  the  Precious  Blood, 
clouds  of  fables,  multiples  of  relics,  hoc  genus  omne. 
But  it  is  to  be  noted  in  fine  that  the  withdrawal  into 
deeper  concealment  referred  more  especially  to  the  com- 
pany as  a  hidden  school,  which  would  be  sought  and  not 
found,  unless  God  led  the  quester.  And  perhaps  those 
who  came  into  contact  by  accident  did  not  always  ask 
the  question  :  Who  administers  the  Mysteries  ?  Yet,  if 
they  were  elected  they  were  brought  in  subsequently. 

It  will  be  observed  that  in  this  speculation  the  exis- 
tence of  the  rumours  which  were  incorporated  does  not 
in  a  strict  sense  involve  the  existence  of  any  book  to 
account  for  their  comparative  prevalence. 


VII 

THE  DECLARED  MTSTERT  OF  QUEST 

There  follow  in  this  place  certain  exotics  of  the  subject 
which  are  not  put  forward  as  an  integral  part  thereof, 
but  are  offered  to  those  only  who  are  concerned  in  the 
rumour  of  the  Graal  literature — as  expressed  in  this 
book — so  far  as  it  incorporates  that  literature  in  the 
annals  of  Christian  sanctity.  They  will  know  that  the 
sins  and  imperfections  of  this  our  human  life  are  attenuated 
by  the  turning  of  our  intellectual  part  towards  the 
Blessed  Zion,  and  that,  next  after  leading  the  all-hallowed 
life,  the  making  of  holy  books  to  formulate  the  aspira- 
tions of  our  best  part  in  its  best  moments  is  counted  in 
a  man  towards  righteousness.  It  is  well,  indeed,  for 
him  whose  life  is  dedicated  to  the  Quest,  but  at  least — 
in  the  stress  and  terror  of  these  our  wayward  times — in 
the  heart  and  the  inmost  heart  let  us  keep  its  memory 
green. 

i.  Faith  is  the  implicits  of  the  mind  passing  into 
expression  formally,  and  knowledge  is  the  same  im- 
plicits certified  by  experience.  It  is  in  this  sense  that 

507 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

God  recompenses  those  who  seek  Him  out.  The 
Mystery  of  the  Holy  Graal  is  the  sun  of  a  great  im- 
plicit rising  in  the  zones  of  consciousness. 

2.  If,    therefore,    from    one    point    of   view    we    are 
dealing  with    great    speculations,   from   another  we   are 
truly    concerned    with    great    certainties ;     and   Galahad 
did  not  question  or  falter. 

3.  There  is  nothing   in   the  world  which  has  less  to 
do  with  a  process  or  other  conventions  and  artifices  than 
the   ascent   of  a  soul   to   light.     Thus,   the   Quest  had 
no  formulae. 

4.  The    mistake  which    man  has  made    has   been  to 
go  in  search  of  his  soul,  which  does  not  need  finding 
but  entering  only,  and  that  by  a  certain  door  which  is 
always   open   within   him.     All   the    doors  of  Corbenic 
were    open    when    Lancelot    came    thereto,    even    that 
sanctuary    into    which    he    could    look    from    afar    but 
wherein    he   could    not    enter.     The    chief  door    is    in- 
scribed :    Sapida  notitia  de  Deo. 

5.  It   is  understood,   however,   that   before  the   door 
is  reached  there  are  gates  which  are  well  guarded.     So 
on   a   night   at   midnight,  when   the   moon  shone  clear, 
Lancelot  paused  at  the  postern,  which   opened  toward 
the  sea,  and  saw  how  two  lions  guarded  the  entrance. 

6.  It    is    true    also    that    the    gates    are    not    opened 
easily   by  which  the  King  of  Glory  comes  in  ;    yet  we 
know   that   the   King   comes.     The   key  of  these  gates 
is  called  Voluntas  infiammata.     This  will  works  on  the 
hither  side,   but  there  is  another  which  works   on    the 
further,  and  this  is  named  Benrplacitum  termino  carens. 
When  the  gates  open   by   the   concurrence  of  the  two 
powers,  the  King  of  Salem  comes  forth  carrying  Bread 
and  Wine.     Of  the  communication  which  then  follows 
it  is  said  :  Gustari  potzst  quod  ex-plicari  nequit.     Galahad 
and  his  fellows  did  taste  and  saw  that  the  Lord  is  sweet. 

7.  For  the  proselytes  of  the  gate  which  is  external  and 
the  postulants  at  the  pronaos  of  the  temple,  the  Cruci- 
fixion took  place  on  Calvary.     For  the  adepts  and  the 

508 


Mystic  Aspects  of 'the   Graal  Legend 

epopts,  the  question,  if  it  can  be  said  to  arise,  is  not 
whether  this  is  true  on  the  plane  of  history,  but  in  what 
manner  it  signifies,  seeing  that  the  great  event  of  all 
human  history  began  at  the  foundation  of  the  world, 
as  it  still  takes  place  daily  in  the  soul  of  every  man  for 
whom  the  one  thing  needful  is  to  know  when  Christ  shall 
arise  within  him.  It  is  then  that  those  on  the  Quest  can 
say  with  Sir  Bors :  "  But  God  was  ever  my  comfort." 

8.  All  that  we  forget  is  immaterial  if  that  which  we 
remember  is  vital,  as,  for  example,  the  Lord  of  Quest, 
who  said  :   "  Therefore  I  wote  wel  whan  my  body  is  dede, 
my    sowle    shalle    be   in   grete  joye   to    see    the  blessid 
Trynyte    every    day,    and     the    mageste    of  oure    lord 
Jhesu  Cryst " — in  other  words,  Contemplatio  perfectissima 
et  altissima  Dei. 

9.  The  first  condition  of  interior  progress  is  in  detach- 
ment from  the  lesser  responsibilities  which — because  they 
have  not  entered  into  the  heart  of  hearts — are  external 
to  our   proper  interests  and   distract   from    those    high 
and   onerous   burdens  which   we   have   to   carry  on  our 
road  upward,  until  such  time  as  even  the  road  itself — 
and  the   burdens  thereto  belonging — shall  assume  and 
transport  us.     From  the  greatest  even  to  the  least  the 
missions  of  knight-errantry  were  followed  in  utter  de- 
tachment, and  those  who  went  on  the   Quest  carried  no 
impedimenta.     So  also  is  the  great  silence  ordained  about 
those  who  would  hear  the  interior  Dei  locutio  altissimi. 

10.  The  generation  of  God  is  outward  and  so  into  the 
estate  of  man  ;    but   the   generation   of  man — which  is 
called   also  rebirth — is  inward,  and  so   into  the   Divine 
Union.     The  great  clerks  wrote  the  adventures  of  the 
Graal  in  great  books,  but  there  was  no  rehearsal  of  the 
last  branch,  the  first  rubric  of  which  would  read  :    De 
felicissima  animce  cum  Deo  unione. 

1 1 .  Most   conventions   of  man  concern   questions  of 
procedure,  and  it  is  so  with  the  things  which  are  above, 
for    we    must    either    proceed    or    perish.      Sir    Gawain 
turned  back,  and  hence  he  was  smitten  of  the  old  wound 

509 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

that  Lancelot  gave  him ;    but  no  knight  who  achieved 
the  Quest  died  in  arms,  unless  in  Holy  War. 

12.  In   the  declared  knowledge  which  behind  it   has 
the  hidden  knowledge,  blood  is  the  symbol  of  life,  and 
this  being  so  it  can  be  understood  after  what  manner  the 
Precious    Blood    profiteth    and    the    Reliquary    thereof. 
The  other  name  of  this  Reliquary  is  Holy  Church.     But 
such  are  the  offices  of  its  mercy  that  in  examine  mortis 
even  Gawain  received  his  Saviour. 

13.  The    root    from    which    springs    the    great    tree 
of  mysticism  is  the  old  theological  doctrine  that  God  is 
the  centre  of  the  heart.      He  is  by  alternative  the  soul's 
centre.     This  is  the  ground  of  the  union  :  'per  charitatem 
justi  uniuntur  cum  Deo.     Gawain  entreated  Lancelot  to 
"  praye  some  prayer  more  or  lesse  for  my  soule ; "  King 
Arthur  as  he  drifted  in  the  dark  barge  said  to  Bedivere  : 
"And  yf  thou   here   neuer  more  of  me  praye  for  my 
soule,"  but  Perceval  and  Galahad  knew  that  their  reward 
was  with  them ;  they  asked  for  no  offerings  and  no  one 
wearied  Heaven. 

14.  In  the  soul's  conversion  there  is  no  office  of  time, 
and  this  is  why  the  greatest  changes  are  always  out  of 
expectation.     The    Graal    came    like    angels — unawares. 
The    castissimus   et    purissimus    amplexus  and    the  jelix 
osculum  are  given  as  in  the  dark  and  suddenly.     There 
is    further    nothing    in    the    wide    world    so    swift    and 
so  silent  as  the  illapsus  Cbristi  in  centrum  animcz.     So 
also  it  is  said  of  Galahad  that  "  sodenely  his  soule  de- 
parted." 

15.  The  five  changes  of  the  Graal  are  analogous  to 
the  five  natures  of  man,  and  these  in  their  turn  corre- 
spond to  the  four  aspects  of  the  cosmos  and  that  which 
rules  all  things  within  and  from  above  the  cosmos. 

1 6.  The    consideration   of  eternity  arises    from    that 
of  the  Holy  Graal,  as  from  all  literature  at  its  highest, 
and  if  I  have  set  it  as  the  term  of  my  own  researches, 
in  this  respect,  it  is  rather  because  it  has  imposed  itself 
than  because  I  have  sought  it  out. 

510 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

Obiter  Dicta. 

And  now  as  the  sum  total  of  these  mystical  aspects, 
the  desire  of  the  eyes  in  the  seeking  and  finding  of  the 
Holy  Graal  may,  I  think,  be  re-expressed  as  follows  :— 

Temple  or  Palace  or  Castle — Mont  Salvatch  or  Corbenic 
— wherever  located  and  whether  described  as  a  wilderness 
of  building,  crowded  burg  or  simple  hermit's  hold — 
there  is  one  characteristic  concerning  the  sanctuary  which, 
amidst  all  its  variations  in  the  accidents,  is  essentially 
the  same ;  the  Keeper  of  the  great  Hallows  has  fallen 
upon  evil  days ;  the  means  of  restoration  and  of  healing 
are,  as  one  would  say,  all  around  him,  yet  the  help  must 
come  from  without ;  it  is  that  of  his  predestined  suc- 
cessor, whose  ofHce  is  to  remove  the  vessel,  so  that  it 
is  henceforth  never  seen  so  openly.  Taking  the  Quest 
of  Galahad  as  that  which  has  the  highest  significance 
spiritually,  I  think  that  we  may  speak  of  it  thus : — We 
know  that  in  the  last  analysis  it  is  the  inward  man  who 
is  really  the  Wounded  Keeper.  The  mysteries  are  his ; 
on  him  the  woe  has  fallen ;  it  is  he  who  expects  healing 
and  redemption.  His  body  is  the  Graal  Castle,  which 
is  also  the  castle  of  Souls,  and  behind  it  is  the  Earthly 
Paradise  as  a  vague  and  latent  memory.  We  may  not 
be  able  to  translate  the  matter  of  the  romance  entirely 
into  mystical  symbolism,  since  it  is  only  a  rumour  at 
a  distance  of  life  in  the  spirit  and  its  great  secrets. 
But,  I  think,  we  can  see  that  it  all  works  together  for 
the  one  end  of  all.  He  who  enters  into  the  considera- 
tion of  this  secret  and  immemorial  house  under  fitting 
guidance  shall  know  why  it  is  that  the  Graal  is  served 
by  a  pure  maiden,  and  why  that  maiden  is  ultimately 
dispossessed.  Helayne  is  the  soul,  and  the  soul  is  in 
exile  because  all  the  high  unions  have  been  declared 
voided — the  crown  has  been  separated  from  the  kingdom, 
and  experience  from  the  higher  knowledge.  So  long  as 
she  remained  a  pure  virgin,  she  was  more  than  a  thyrsus 
bearer  in  the  mysteries,  but  the  morganatic  marriage  of 

511 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

mortal  life  is  part  of  her  doom.  This  is  still  a  high 
destiny,  for  the  soul  out  of  earthly  experience  brings  forth 
spiritual  desire,  which  is  the  quest  of  the  return  journey, 
and  this  is  Galahad.  It  is  therefore  within  the  law  and 
the  order  that  she  has  to  conceive  and  bring  him  forth. 
Galahad  represents  the  highest  spiritual  aspirations  and 
desires  passing  into  full  consciousness,  and  so  into 
attainment.  But  he  is  not  reared  by  his  mother,  be- 
cause Eros,  which  is  the  higher  knowledge,  has  dedicated 
the  true  desire  to  the  proper  ends  thereof.  It  will  be 
seen  also  what  must  be  understood  by  Lancelot  in  secret 
communication  with  Helayne,  though  he  has  taken  her 
throughout  for  another.  The  reason  is  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  marry  even  in  hell  without  marrying  that 
seed  which  is  of  heaven.  As  she  is  the  psychic  woman, 
so  is  he  the  natural  man,  or  rather  the  natural  intelli- 
gence which  is  not  without  its  consecrations,  not  without 
its  term  in  the  highest.  Helayne  believes  that  her  desire 
is  only  for  Lancelot,  but  this  is  because  she  takes  him 
for  Eros,  and  it  is  by  such  a  misconception  that  the 
lesser  Heaven  stoops  to  the  earth  ;  herein  also  there  is 
a  sacred  dispensation,  because  so  is  the  earth  assumed. 
I  have  said  that  Lancelot  is  the  natural  man,  but  he  is 
such  merely  at  the  highest ;  he  is  born  in  great  sorrow, 
and  she  who  has  conceived  him  saves  her  soul  alive 
amidst  the  offices  of  external  religion.  He  is  carried 
into  the  lesser  land  of  Faerie,  as  into  a  garden  of  child- 
hood. When  he  draws  towards  manhood,  he  comes 
forth  from  the  first  places  of  enchantment  and  is  clothed 
upon  by  the  active  duties  of  life  as  by  the  vestures  of 
chivalry.  He  enters  also  into  the  unsanctified  life  of 
sense,  into  an  union  against  the  consecrated  life  and 
order.  But  his  redeeming  quality  is  that  he  is  faithful 
and  true,  because  of  which,  and  because  of  his  genealogy, 
he  is  chosen  to  beget  Galahad,  of  whom  he  is  otherwise 
unworthy,  even  as  we  all,  in  our  daily  life,  fall  short 
of  the  higher  aspirations  of  the  soul.  As  regards  the 
Keeper,  it  is  certain  that  he  must  die  and  be  replaced  by 

512 


Mystic  Aspects  of  the   Graal  Legend 

another  Keeper  before  the  true  man  can  be  raised,  with 
the  holy  things  to  him  belonging,  which  Hallows  are 
indeed  withdrawn,  but  it  is  with  and  in  respect  of  him 
only,  for  the  keepers  are  a  great  multitude,  though  it 
is  certain  that  the  Graal  is  one.  The  path  of  quest  is 
the  path  of  upward  progress,  and  it  is  only  at  the  great 
height  that  Galahad  knows  himself  as  really  the  Wounded 
Keeper  and  that  thus,  in  the  last  resource,  the  physician 
heals  himself.  Now  this  is  the  mystery  from  everlasting, 
which  is  called  in  the  high  doctrine  Schema  misericordicz. 
It  is  said  :  Latet,  ceternumque  latebit,  until  it  is  revealed 
in  us  ;  and  as  to  this  :  Te  rogamus,  audi  nos. 


513  2    K 


BOOK    IX 

SECRET  TRADITION  IN  CHRISTIAN  TIMES 


THE  ARGUMENT 

I.  PRELIMINARY  TO  THE  WHOLE  SUBJECT. — The  atmos- 
phere of  the  Middle  Ages — After  what  manner  the  sub- 
surface meanings  in  Graal  books  suggest  the  possibility  of 
other  concealments  in  literature  about  the  same  period — 
Medieval  mystic  thought — Independent  schools — The  pur- 
pose of  the  present  consideration — The  assumption  of  a 
Secret  Tradition — A  question  which  arises  therefrom — 
Multiplicity  of  traditions — A  distinction  between  occult  and 
mystic  schools.  II.  SOME  ALLEGED  SECRET  SCHOOLS  OF 
THE  MIDDLE  AGES. — Albigensian  sects  and  the  misconcep- 
tions concerning  them — Foolish  attempt  to  connect  them 
with  the  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal — The  test  question  of 
Eucharistic  doctrine  in  heresies — The  Eucharist  among  the 
Manichczans — Albigenses  from  a  Protestant  standpoint — 
Various  forms  of  the  heresy — Persecution  of  all  and  sundry 
— The  crusade  under  Innocent  III. — Documentary  evidence 
concerning  points  of  Albigensian  belief — The  hostile  evidence 
— On  either  assumption  the  Albigenses  offer  nothing  to  our 
purpose — The  doctrine  of  transubstantiation — The  specu- 
lations of  Aroux — And  those  of  the  elder  Rossetti — The 
argument  from  the  Divine  Comedy — Confusions  on  the 
subject  of  the  Graal — Thesis  concerning  chivalry — An 
analogy  from  another  controversy — General  conclusion  on 
the  subject.  III.  THE  LATIN  LITERATURE  OF  ALCHEMY 
AND  THE  HERMETIC  SECRET  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE 
EUCHARISTIC  MYSTERY. — Development  of  two  concurrent 

S1? 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

secret  schools  at  the  -period  of  the  Graal — The  claim  of 
alchemy  on  the  surface — 'The  subsurface  claim  developed 
in  later  times — Declared  object  of  the  present  research — 
Analogies  of  the  arch-natural  Eucharist — Correspondence 
with  the  notion  of  a  voided  House  of  Doctrine — Position 
of  alchemy  in  respect  of  the  first  instance  and  of  Kabalism 
in  respect  of  the  second — The  period  of  transition  in  Her- 
metic literature — Byzantine  Alchemy — Difficulties  of  the 
subject — The  two  schools  of  the  Art — Their  modern  repre- 
sentatives— The  terminology  common  to  both — The  one  vessel 
— The  alchemical  matter — The  Three  Principles — Corre- 
spondences with  the  Holy  Eucharist — Further  concerning  the 
alchemical  matter — The  Art  as  a  Mystery  of  the  Soul — Of 
purgations  in  Alchemy — Their  correspondence  in  the  ex- 
perience of  conversion — The  Hermetic  Stone — The  Elixir— 
Of  man  as  the  whole  Subject  of  the  Art — Schedule  of  the 
chief  process — Further  concerning  Eucharistic  analogies- 
Distinctions  in  the  order  of  symbolism — Summary  of  the 
catholic  interpretation.  IV.  THE  KABALISTIC  ACADEMIES. 
— Of  the  Secret  Language — The  Mystery  of  Loss — The 
early  schools  of  Kabalism — Its  Theosophical  Scheme — Of 
that  which  was  taken  from  the  Sanctuary  of  Israel — 
Analogies  with  Graal  legend — The  Holy  Name — Acci- 
dental analogies  between  Graal  and  Kabalistic  legend — 
Absence  of  all  communication  between  the  school  of  theosophy 
and  the  school  of  romance — Of  Jewry  in  Spain  and  Southern 
France  during  the  Middle  Ages — Practical  independence 
of  all  the  coincident  schools — The  mind  of  Kabalism. 
V.  THE  CLAIM  IN  RESPECT  OF  TEMPLAR  INFLUENCE.— 
An  illustration  of  the  romance  of  history — The  Templars 
and  the  Latin  Church — After  what  manner  the  Temple 
has  been  brought  within  the  chain  of  the  Secret  Tradition— 
The  Graal  and  Templarism — Nature  of  one  hypothesis — 


The  Argument 

Templar  symbolism  in  Graal  literature — The  Temple  and, 
the  Parsifal — What  is  actual  in  the  alleged,  connection — 
The  Templars  and,  Catholicism — The  Graal  and  the 
Church — Questions  of  heresy — A  matter  of  personal  con- 
fession— Summary  of  the  Templar  hypothesis  in  respect  of 
the  Graal  literature — Conclusion  from  the  charges  against 
the  Order — Its  true  position — The  ideal  regarding  it — 
The  hypothesis  abandoned.  VI.  THE  GRAAL  FORMULA 
IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  OTHER  GLEANINGS  FROM  THE  CATHOLIC 
SACRAMENTARY. — The  Secret  Orders  and  the  Life  of 
Sanctity — Depth  and  wonder  of  the  Catholic  Mass — 
Further  concerning  the  verbal  formula  of  consecration — 
Some  errors  of  enthusiasm — Limitations  of  the  Graal  epoch 
— Traditional  wonders  of  the  Eucharist — Another  side  of 
the  food-giving  powers  of  the  Graal — The  first  of  the 
Divine  Mysteries.  VII.  THE  LAPIS  EXILIS. — Dimen- 
sions of  the  Graal  Stone — The  Latin  term  of  Wolfram — 
Renderings  that  are  possible  in  the  mystic  sense — Stone  and, 
Chalice — Some  scriptural  analogies — T^oharic  evidence — 
The  Lost  Word — Analogies  that  are  far  from  the  goal. 
VIII.  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  MASONRY. — (A)  The  Assump- 
tion of  the  Building  Guild — The  true  values  of  genealogy — 
One  point  of  correspondence  between  the  Graal  legends  and, 
Freemasonry — Romance  of  archaeology — Historical  side  of 
Masonry — The  minima  of  Masonic  research — A  distinc- 
tion concerning  three  classes — An  alternative  concerning 
Masonry.  (B)  Masonry  and  Moral  Science — The  ethical 
position — That  this  is  an  unfit  subject  of  symbolism — 
Comparative  failure  of  the  proposed,  instrument — Intima- 
tion that  there  is  another  side  of  Masonry.  (C)  A  Theory 
of  Hermetic  Interference — Concerning  early  Craft  records- 
Voyages  of  speculation — The  authority  of  Ragon — After 
what  manner  he  recites  the  invention  of  the  symbolical 


The    Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

grades — Their  true  understanding  stated  apart  from  their 
origin.  (D)  One  Key  to  the  Sanctuary — Craft  and  High 
Degrees — Conclusion  concerning  ethical  doctrine — Of  certain 
studies  recommended  to  the  candidate  by  Masonry — After 
what  manner  we  are  to  understand  the  symbolism  of  build- 
ings— Of  spiritual  temples — The  House  of  Doctrine — The 
Master  and  the  question  proposed  to  him — How  the  House 
of  Doctrine  was  built  on  a  different  plan — The  Secret  of  the 
King — The  Temple  in  the  heart — Concerning  Rites  of 
Initiation — The  Tables  of  the  Law — A  secret  deposit  in 
Jewry — The  Voided  House  in  Masonry — The  Masonic 
House  of  Christian  Doctrine — A  legend  of  Templar  ven- 
geance— An  illustration  from  the  High  Degrees — The  vacant 
sepulchre — Testimony  of  another  High  Grade — Masonic 
Orders  of  Chivalry — The  Voided  House  of  Christian 
Doctrine — Concurrence  of  Graal  literature  and  Masonic 
implicits — The  position  of  Masonry  in  respect  of  official 
religion — Conclusion  as  regards  Masonry.  IX.  THE 
HALLOWS  OF  THE  GRAAL  MYSTERY  RE-DISCOVERED  IN  THE 
TALISMANS  OF  THE  TAROT. — Of  sudden  lights  seen  in  un- 
looked-for places — Of  playing-cards  and  the  Book  of  Thoth 
— Concerning  Tarot  symbols  as  a  treasure  of  the  secret 
schools — Of  available  handbooks — Particulars  concerning 
Tarot  cards — The  four  palmary  symbols — Their  substantial 
identity  with  Graal  Hallows — General  conclusion  as  to  the 
schools  of  symbolism — Secret  doctrines  and  secret  schools — 
Of  one  withdrawn  school — Loss  and  gain — The  restoration 
of  all  things. 


520 


BOOK    IX 

SECRET   TRADITION  IN   CHRISTIAN   TIMES 

I 
PRELIMINARY   TO    THE    WHOLE    SUBJECT 

THOUGHT  in  the  Middle  Ages  moved,  like  external 
science,  through  a  world  of  mystery,  and  the  Christ- 
light  moved  through  the  mist-light  filling  the  bounds 
of  sense  with  the  shapes  and  symbols  of  vision.  It 
follows,  and  this  naturally,  that  most  things  seemed 
possible  at  a  period  when  all  things  were  dubious  in 
respect  of  knowledge  and  apart  from  the  power  of 
religion,  which  tinged  life  itself  with  the  lesser  elements 
of  ecstasy,  there  was  the  kind  of  enchantment  which 
dwells  always  about  the  precincts  of  unknown  vistas. 
Apart  also  from  the  shapes  of  imagination,  there  were 
the  extravagances  of  minds  seeking  emancipation  from  law 
and  authority,  more  especially  in  the  matters  of  faith. 
The  Books  of  the  Holy  Graal  do  not  belong  to  the  last 
category,  but  after  their  own  manner  they  are  like 
echoes  from  far  away,  because  even  as  the  secrets  of 
the  Greater  Mysteries  have  not  been  written,  and  the 
Holy  Assemblies  do  not  issue  proceedings,  so  the  higher 
life  of  sanctity  and  the  experiment  towards  that  term, 
whether  manifested  in  books  of  mystical  theology  or  in 
books  of  romance,  reach  only  a  partial  expression.  The 
value  of  the  Graal  legends  is  like  the  value  of  other 
legends — I  mean,  in  the  mind  of  the  mystic  at  this 
day  :  it  is  resident  in  the  suggestions  and  the  lights 

521 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

which  it  can  afford  us  for  the  maintenance  of  the  great, 
implied  concordat  which  constitutes  the  Divine  Alliance. 
Having  found  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  body  of  writing 
which  puts  forth  the  rumour  of  strange  claims  and 
suggests  concealed  meanings,  having  found  also  that  it 
is  a  literature  which  was  acquired  as  if  almost  with  a 
conscious  intention  to  develop  these  particular  interests, 
and  being  desirous  of  knowing  the  kind  of  intervention 
and  the  particular  motives  which  were  at  work,  if  this 
indeed  be  possible,  we  are  naturally  disposed  to  ask 
whether  there  were  other  concealed  literatures  at  the 
same  period,  and  what  light — if  any — they  cast  upon 
these  questions.  The  great  school  of  Christian  mystic 
thought  within  the  official  church  was  concerned  wholly 
with  a  mystery  of  sanctity,  the  term  of  which  was 
identical  with  the  object  that  I  have  sought  to  put 
forward  as  the  term  of  the  Graal  quest ;  but  it  had  no 
secret  claim  and  no  concealed  motive.  We  cannot, 
therefore,  explain  the  one  in  a  complete  simplicity  by 
the  other,  though  we  know  in  a  general  sense  that  it 
was  from  the  other  that  the  one  issued.  There  were, 
however,  independent  schools  of  literature  belonging 
to  the  same  period  which  do  give  us  certain  lights, 
because,  in  the  last  resource,  they  did  come,  one  and 
all,  out  of  the  same  sanctuary ;  and  it  is  obviously 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  so  far  as  there  are  difficulties 
in  the  one  path  we  may  receive  help  from  the  collateral 
paths  and  thus  attain  some  better  understanding  of  the 
whole.  If  a  particular  spirit  or  secret  mind,  school  or 
sodality,  took  over  the  old  folk-lore  legends,  infusing  a 
new  motive  therein,  which  motive  is  akin  to  the  purpose 
discernible  in  coincident  literatures,  that  which  inter- 
vened in  the  one  case  was  probably  in  relation  with  the 
others.  I  propose,  therefore,  to  consider  these  extrinsic 
schools  shortly,  and  to  show  that  throughout  a  number 
of  centuries  we  can  trace  successively  the  same  implicits, 
it  being  understood  that  they  are  always  put  forward 
in  a  different  way.  In  this  manner  we  shall  come  to 

522 


Secret    Tradition  in   Christian    Times 

see  that  there  have  been  several  interventions,  but 
taking  place  under  such  circumstances  that  those  who 
intervened  may  have  been  always  the  same  secret  school, 
on  the  understanding  that  this  school  does  not  correspond 
to  a  corporate  institution  and  never  spoke  officially.  It  is 
necessary,  however,  to  deal  in  the  first  place  with  one  at- 
tempt to  account  for  the  Graal  literature  which  has  been 
already  put  forward,  because  there  are  certain  directions  in 
which  it  is  idle  to  look  and  it  is  well  to  know  concerning 
them.  Prior  to  the  settlement  of  this  preliminary  ques- 
tion in  the  section  that  next  follows,  there  is  a  specific 
point  that  demands  our  attention  at  the  moment,  and  it 
can  be  stated  in  a  few  words.  On  the  assumption  that 
there  has  been  a  Secret  Tradition  perpetuated  through 
Christian  times,  the  place  of  which  is  in  the  West,  it 
seems  desirable  to  understand  what  part  of  it  matters 
vitally  in  respect  of  our  own  subject.  There  are  several 
schools  of  secret  literature,  and  each  of  them,  under  its 
proper  veil,  has  perpetuated  something  belonging  to  its 
particular  order.  There  are,  for  example,  the  schools 
of  magic,  and  it  is  these  precisely  that  embody  nothing 
to  our  purpose ;  they  constitute  heresies  of  occult 
practice  which  find  their  strict  correlation  in  the  external 
heresies  of  doctrine,  wherein  also  there  is  no  light,  as 
we  shall  see  immediately.  If  the  resolution  has  not  been 
made  already,  and  that  definitely,  it  is  time — and  it 
is  high  time — that  the  whole  domain  of  phenomenal 
occultism  should  be  transferred  to  the  care  of  psycho- 
logical science,  with  the  hope  that  it  will  pursue  that 
path  of  research  into  the  nature  of  man  and  his  environ- 
ment which  less  accredited  investigations  of  the  past 
have  proved  productive.  They  are  no  part  of  the 
mystic  work  and,  having  regard  to  the  extent  of  our 
preoccupations,  it  is  fortunate  that  neither  approxi- 
mately nor  remotely  do  they  enter  into  the  subject  of 
those  schools  of  thought,  the  remains  of  which  may 
cast  a  certain  light  upon  the  greater  implicits  of  the 
Graal  literature. 

523 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 


II 

SOME    ALLEGED    SECRET   SCHOOLS    OF    THE 
MIDDLE    AGES 

Perhaps  no  Christian  sect  has  been  the  subject  of  more 
foolish  misapprehension  than  the  Albigenses,  and  this 
on  all  sides,  but  more  especially  on  the  part  of  writers 
who  represent  the  borderland  of  mystic  thought. 
Against  the  iniquity  of  Albigensian  persecution  in  the 
past,  we  have  later  the  folly,  not  unmixed  with  dis- 
honesty, of  the  Protestant  apologists  ;  but  worse  perhaps 
than  the  rest  is  that  folly  which  has  attempted  to  connect 
the  sect  and  its  exponents  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth 
centuries  with  the  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal.  The 
initial  impulse  in  this  direction  is  found  in  speculations, 
criticisms  and  modes  of  interpretation  with  which 
France  made  us  familiar  about  the  middle  of  the  nine- 
teenth century,  and  this  leading  has  been  followed  by  a 
few  writers  in  England  who  scarcely  know  their  subject, 
and  offer  reflections  of  opinion  which  has  risen  up  in 
obscure  and  unaccepted  places.  For  the  purpose  of  this 
investigation  I  care  nothing  whether  the  Albigenses 
were  pure  Christians,  as  pure  Christianity  is  understood 
according  to  sectarian  canons,  or  whether  they  were 
Manichaeans.  The  all-important  question  is  the  light 
under  which  they  presented  Eucharistic  doctrine,  and 
from  this  standpoint  it  is  certain  that  they  could  have 
had  no  connection  with  the  development  of  the  Graal 
cycle.  If  they  were  Manichaeans,  they  had  a  voided 
and  tinkered  Eucharist,  from  which  nothing  follows  in 
connection  with  that  mystery.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
they  were  the  Protestants  of  their  period,  they  would 
as  such  deny  most  of  the  sacraments,  and  in  respect  of 
doctrine,  at  least,  they  would  have  tampered  doub'lefs 
with  the  Eucharist.  Setting  aside  for  a  moment  some 

524 


Secret  Tradition   in    Christian    Times 

French  speculations  which  have  nothing  to  tell  us  regard- 
ing Albigensian  teachings,  and  deal  only,  as  we  shall  see 
later,  with  a  particular  construction  of  a  great  body  of 
romantic  literature,  it  may  be  said — and  is  necessary  to 
note  in  order  to  clear  the  issues — that  the  Protestant 
standpoint  in  all  matters  of  this  kind  has  been  naturally 
one  of  opposition  to  the  Latin  Church,  and  to  the  Church 
theory  that  the  Albigensians,  including  the  Paulicians, 
who  were  their  predecessors,  were  Manichaeans,  while  the 
connected  sect  of  Waldenses,  or  disciples  of  Peter  Valdo, 
were  originally  Donatists.  With  these  questions  in 
themselves  we  have  no  concern,  nor  yet  with  the  old 
egregious  contention  that  there  was  a  line  of  succession 
in  perpetuity  from  Apostolic  times  through  the  Wal- 
densians.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the 
hypothesis  was  true,  and  it  matters  little  if  it  was.  I 
place  in  the  same  category  one  not  less  preposterous 
supposition — that  the  Vaudois  had  been  located  in  the 
Cottian  Alps  since  the  times  of  the  Apostles,  and  that 
their  system  had  never  varied  from  the  tenets  and 
practices  of  primitive  Christianity.  It  is  not  of  necessity 
a  seal  or  mark  of  favour  if  these  facts  are  undoubted  ; 
actually,  they  are  questionable  enough,  like  the  apolo- 
getical  Apiece  de  resistance  which  accounts  for  the  small- 
ness  of  the  Vaudois  community  by  inferring  from  the 
Apocalypse  that  the  Church  during  a  certain  disastrous 
period  would  be  reduced  within  very  narrow  limits,  and 
that  for  this  reason — among  reasons  not  less  logical — 
Vaudois,  Waldenses  and  Albigenses  constituted  during 
such  period  the  sole  and  truly  Catholic  Church.  If 
majorities  are  usually  in  the  wrong,  it  is  not  less  true 
that  some  minorities  are  foolish  and  wild  in  their 
notions,  as  expressed  by  those  who  are  their  mouthpiece. 
Another  contention  connects  the  so-called  Waldensian 
Church  with  the  Church  Primitive  through  the  Albi- 
genses, and  if  the  last  sect  had  really  the  Paulicians  for 
their  ancestors  they  date  back  to  a  considerable  antiquity, 
while,  as  regards  distribution,  it  is  said  that  the  earlier 

525 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

heresy  had  its  conventicles  established  all  the  way  from 
Thrace  to  Gascony.  They  came  from  the  East  originally, 
or  this  is  their  legend,  but  their  traces  have  disappeared, 
supposing  that  the  story  is  true  outside  the  imagination 
of  apologists.  However  this  may  be,  the  Paulicians,  so 
far  as  history  is  concerned,  arose  in  Armenia,  where  they 
were  founded  by  one  Constantine  about  the  middle  of 
the  seventh  century.  They  were  mixed  up  with  the 
Milesians,  who  made  common  cause  with  Constantine, 
but  they  were  proscribed  by  the  Emperors  of  Byzantium 
and  the  heretic  was  himself  put  to  death.  The  same 
Paulicians  have  been  identified  with  the  Cathari,  and  these 
are  said  to  have  been  in  union  with  the  Waldenses,  whose 
first  stronghold  was  among  the  Alpine  valleys  of  Pied- 
mont. On  the  other  hand,  the  Paterins,  whose  chain 
of  dissemination  is  affirmed  to  have  extended  from 
Bulgaria  through  Lombardy  to  the  Atlantic,  have  been 
represented  as  a  variety  of  the  Albigensian  sect,  if  not 
identical  therewith.  These  views  constitute  a  cloud 
upon  the  dubious  sanctuary,  in  respect  of  its  origin. 
Other  accounts  say  that  they  appeared  in  Italy  during 
the  first  years  of  the  eleventh  century,  with  which  may 
be  compared  the  counter-suggestion  that  their  most 
probable  founder  was  Peter  of  Lyons  more  than  a 
hundred  years  later.  Persecution  may  well  have  joined 
distinct  elements  of  sect  till  they  became  merged  in  one 
another  ;  it  caused  them  also  to  move,  like  the  Graal, 
westward,  and  thus  they  entered  Southern  France, 
where  those  who  had  pre-existed  under  more  than  one 
name  received  the  title  of  Albigenses — as  it  is  thought, 
from  their  headquarters  at  Albi.  Here  also  they  fell 
under  proscription,  and  because  at  that  period  men 
believed — and  never  more  strongly — that  they  were 
doing  God's  work  by  annihilating  those  who  worshipped 
Him  under  another  code  of  doctrine,  we  learn  of  St. 
Dominic  fighting  the  heresy  with  other  weapons  than 
the  Sword  of  the  Spirit — in  the  belief  that  there  also 
might  be  either  the  Word  of  God,  or  its  convenient 

526 


Secret   Tradition  in   Christian    Times 

substitute.  This  was  under  Innocent  III.,  who  pro- 
claimed the  first  crusade  against  the  Albigenses,  its 
leader  being  Simon,  Count  of  Montfort.  The  crusade 
began  about  1213,  and  Folquet — the  troubadour  Bishop 
of  Marseilles — was  one  of  its  most  violent  partisans. 
It  was  in  the  course  of  this  villainous  business  that  the 
Castle  of  Montseques — or  Mont  Segur — which  a  few 
zealous,  indiscriminating  minds  have  sought  to  identify 
with  Mont  Salvatch — was  stormed  and  burnt  with  many 
of  the  Perfect  Brethren,  including  the  Lady  Esclair- 
monde.  So  do  official  churches  illustrate  their  con- 
struction of  the  mystic  paradox  concerning  the  Prince 
of  Peace,  who  came  with  a  sword.  That  the  gates  of 
hell  do  not  prevail  against  the  true  Church  seems  without 
prejudice  to  the  counter-fact  that  there  are  times  and 
seasons  when  perdition  itself  rises  up,  as  one  might  say, 
in  the  external  sanctuary  itself,  and  God  knows  that  if 
ever  there  was  a  period  when  the  mystery  of  all  iniquity 
came  from  the  deeps  in  its  power,  the  time  was  the 
thirteenth  century,  and  the  places  were  Provence  and 
Languedoc. 

If  we  set  aside  every  thesis  of  apologists,  it  is  possible 
to  obtain  from  documents  a  certain  first-hand  impression 
concerning  Albigensian  beliefs.  On  the  basis  of  their 
own  confessions  they  denied  Manichaean  connections 
and  principles,  claiming  to  follow  primitive  Christian 
teaching  as  they  constructed  it  from  the  New  Testament 
or  certain  parts  thereof,  since  it  does  not  appear  that 
they  accepted  all  the  epistles.  It  is  possible,  however, 
that  their  real  views  were  concealed  even  in  their  con- 
fessions, and  though  to  us  the  question  does  not  signify 
in  either  alternative,  it  is  out  of  this  view  that  the 
counter-hypothesis  arises,  which  is  that  of  the  accusing 
voice  testifying  in  the  church  that  destroyed  them. 
A  Dominican  missionary  and  inquisitor,  who  recounted, 
in  a  poem  which  has  survived,  his  controversy  with  an 
Albigensian  theologian,  accuses  the  sect  (i)  of  denying 
baptism  and  regarding  Satan  as  the  creator  of  this  world  ; 

527 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

(2)  of  rejecting  confession  and  teaching  that  those  who 
had  sons  and  daughters  were  outside  the  pale  of  salva- 
tion ;  (3)  of  claiming  inspiration  from  the  Holy  Spirit 
and  making  a  traffic  therein  amongst  its  disciples ; 
(4)  of  denying  the  resurrection  and  affirming  that  the 
souls  of  the  redeemed  would  assume  a  new  body,  having 
a  certain  resemblance  to  the  old  and  yet  differing  there- 
from ;  and  in  fine  (5)  of  maintaining  that  the  souls  of 
men  are  those  of  lost  angels — the  difficulty  about  this, 
in  the  mind  of  the  Dominican,  being  apparently  that 
we  have  no  recollection  of  our  past.  The  importance  of 
this  text  is  that  although  it  embodies  accusations  included 
in  the  proscription  of  the  sect  it  may  also  have  reflected 
current  fluidic  opinions  in  orthodox  circles  at  the  period. 
Other  accusations  affirm  (a)  that  the  Baptism  which 
was  recognised  by  the  Albigenses  was  that  of  Fire  or 
of  the  Spirit,  recalling  the  mysterious  office  of  the 
Paraclete  which  is  often  a  subject  of  reference  in  the 
Graal  literature  ;  (b)  that  the  wandering  preachers  of 
the  sect  distributed  nourishment  for  the  body  as  well 
as  the  Bread  of  Angels — here  recalling  the  twofold 
ministry  of  the  Graal ;  (c)  that  they  rejected  the  books 
of  Moses ;  (d)  that  they  regarded  this  sublunary  world 
as  the  only  hell ;  (e)  that  their  subsurface  working  was 
that  of  a  new  and  secret  priesthood  which  was  to  dis- 
possess and  succeed  the  papal  hierarchy,  as  if  here  also 
there  was  a  special  succession  from  the  apostles  having 
kinship  with  the  super-apostolical  succession  of  the 
Graal  priesthood. 

Such  fantastic  analogies  notwithstanding,  it  is  clear 
that  the  sects  of  Southern  France — as  presented  by 
either  hypothesis — offer  nothing  to  our  purpose.  From 
eclectic  Gnosticism,  which  took  over  from  Christianity 
that  which  coincided  with  its  purpose,  to  Vaudois  and 
Lollards,  there  is  not  one  which  sought  to  develop  or 
exalt  the  sacramental  teaching  of  the  ancient  Church. 
I  know  that,  on  the  authority  of  Origen,  the  Marcionites 
taught  the  communication  to  the  soul  of  man  of  a 


Secret  Tradition   in   Christian   Times 

Divine  and  Sanctifying  Spirit  added  by  the  Redeemer, 
Who  imparted  it  in  the  Eucharist,  and  if  this  meant  the 
descent  of  the  Paraclete,  the  perpetuation  of  such  a 
doctrine  might  help  us  to  understand  why  the  Voice 
of  the  Graal  was  that  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  yet  in 
some  mysterious  way  was  that  also  of  Christ.  But  of 
such  perpetuation  there  is  no  trace  whatever.  As 
regards  the  Albigenses,  it  is  certain  historically  that  they 
denied  transubstantiation,  though  they  accepted  some 
qualified  sacramental  teaching  concerning  the  Lord's 
Supper,  which  they  commemorated  in  the  woods  and 
forests  on  a  cloth  spread  upon  the  ground.  It  is  worse 
than  idle  to  suppose  that  they  had  any  connection  with 
the  Graal  cycle,  and  this  would  remain  substantially  true 
if,  by  a  wild  supposition,  we  elected  to  suppose  that 
Guiot,  with  his  Provencal  connections,  was  a  member  of 
their  sect,  and — going  still  further — if  we  suggested  that 
his  poem  conveyed,  after  some  hidden  manner,  a  part 
of  Albigensian  teaching.  That  it  did  nothing  of  the 
kind  is  clear  on  the  evidence  of  Wolfram.  The  poem 
is  lost,  or  at  least  withdrawn  for  a  period,  like  the  Graal 
itself,  and  though  we  cannot  speak  certainly  on  most 
matters  which  concern  it,  on  this  one  matter  there  does 
not  seem  room  for  doubt. 

For  the  rest,  the  Albigenses  were  a  sect  without  a 
literature,  except  in  so  far  as  that  of  the  Troubadours 
at  the  period  may  have  been — and  this  is  likely  enough 
— an  occasional  spokesman  among  them.  Contemporary 
chroniclers  estimated  that  all  the  principal  minstrels, 
except  two,  were  on  the  side  of  the  sect ;  these  excep- 
tions were  Izarn  and  Fulke.  The  conquest  of  Toulouse 
extinguished  the  literature  and  even  the  language  of 
Southern  France,  as  also  its  chivalry. 

I  should  now  be  justified  in  regarding  the  whole 
matter  as  determined  in  the  negative  sense,  but  a  word 
must  be  said  to  dispose  of  that  other  claim  to  which  I 
adverted  at  the  beginning.  It  took,  as  I  have  hinted, 
all  chivalrous  romance  for  its  province,  and  it  claimed  to 

529  2  L 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

have  demonstrated  that  a  vast  European  literature  had 
been  written  by  Albigenses  for  the  edification  of  Albi- 
genses  and  to  put  forth  in  a  veiled  manner  Albigensian 
doctrine.  There  are  certain  precursors  who  do  not 
prepare  the  way,  but  they  open  up  issues  which  end 
either  in  a  cul  de  sac  or  take  the  seeker  through  by- 
paths which  can  be  followed  interminably  without 
leading  to  a  true  goal.  The  author  of  this  demon- 
stration was  E.  Aroux,  who  published  in  1858  the 
Mysteries  of  Chivalry  and  of  Platonic  Love  in  the  Middle 
Ages.  Its  inspiration  in  chief  was  derived  from  Gabriele 
Rossetti  and  particularly  from  the  Anti-papal  Spirit 
which  preceded  the  Reformation.  Both  works  have 
exercised  an  influence  on  certain  schools  of  occult 
thought  in  England  ;  but  Rossetti  does  not  speak  of 
the  Graal,  and  hence  there  is  no  call  that  here  I  should 
speak  of  him.  The  monument  of  M.  Aroux  was  preceded 
by  other  of  his  works  designed  to  show  that  Dante 
was  (a)  heretical,  revolutionary  and  socialistic ;  (£)  con- 
nected with  an  alleged  fusion  between  the  Albigenses, 
Templars  and  Ghibellines  for  the  creation  of  Free- 
masonry ;  (c)  himself  so  far  implicated  in  Freemasonry 
that  the  Divine  Comedy  is  really  Masonic  in  its  purpose. 
In  further  support  of  these  views  Aroux  had  translated 
the  whole  Commedia  into  literal  French  verse  and  had 
commented  on  it  "  according  to  the  spirit."  Finally, 
he  had  instituted  comparisons  between  Dante  and  the 
writers  of  the  Graal  cycle.  It  thus  came  about  that 
the  products  of  this  cycle  were  included  by  his  general 
ingarnering,  but  he  shows  little  familiarity  with  his 
subject,  and  he  wrote  at  a  period  when  the  literature 
was  still  practically  unprinted.  He  affirms,  absurdly 
enough,  that  the  Holy  Graal  was  a  mysterious  associa- 
tion and  that  the  mission  of  its  initiates  was  "  to  recover 
the  vessel  of  truth  with  luminous  characters  wherein 
was  received  the  Precious  Blood  of  the  Saviour."  Ac- 
cording to  his  peculiar  canon  of  criticism  this  signified 
the  design  of  "  leading  back  the  Christian  Church  to 

530 


Secret  Tradition   in    Christian    Times 

apostolic  times  and  the  faithful  observation  of  the 
Gospel  precepts."  M.  Aroux  wrote  as  a  defender  of 
the  Roman  Church,  and,  after  all  that  has  been  said 
and  done  upon  the  whole  subject,  it  has  not  occurred 
to  any  one — perhaps  least  of  all  to  him — that  the  true 
mission  of  the  Church  may  have  been  to  get  away  from 
apostolic  times  and  to  put  aside,  like  St.  Paul,  in  its 
maturity  the  things  which  belong  to  the  child.  For  the 
rest,  M.  Aroux  confused  in  a  grotesque  manner  the 
Graal  knights  with  those  of  the  Round  Table,  and 
appeared  to  suppose  that  the  Parsifal  and  liturel  are 
representative  of  the  entire  literature. 

As  regards  chivalry,  his  thesis  can  be  stated  shortly  : 
The  actual,  historical,  feudal  chivalry  was  an  institution 
more  or  less  savage,  and  the  chivalry  set  forth  in  the 
romances  had  no  existence  on  earth.  This  is  equivalent 
to  saying  that  the  heroes  and  heroines  of  Mrs.  Radcliffe, 
the  modes  and  manners  which  she  depicts,  the  spirit 
which  characterises  her  episodes,  perhaps  even  the  scenes 
which  she  describes  so  graphically  at  hearsay,  are  never 
found  in  real  life,  though  sentimentalism  is  always 
sentimentalism,  mountains  are  always  mountains,  and 
as  regards  the  Pyrenees  in  particular  they  are  situated 
indubitably  between  France  and  Spain.  The  thing 
goes  without  saying  in  each  case,  for  the  romance,  one 
would  say,  is — well,  precisely  a  romance.  But  on  the 
basis  of  this  transparent  fact,  M.  Aroux  builds  his  theory 
that  the  books  of  chivalry  were  the  corpus  doctrinale 
and  literary  body-politic  of  the  Protestantism  of  its 
period,  reduced  to  this  resource  because  of  the  intolerant 
powers  that  were.  And  this  is  just  what  appears  to  be 
so  highly  ridiculous,  not  because  a  literature  cannot  have 
concealed  motives,  or  that  of  the  Graal  among  them, 
but  because  it  could  be  shown  in  a  still  more  conclusive 
manner  that  the  Confessional  of  the  Black  Penitents  was 
the  final  rescript  of  the  followers  of  Manes.  And  this 
seems  to  be  intolerable. 

Speaking  generally  as  to  the  canon  of  criticism,  it  is 

531 


The   Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy    Graal 

in  all  respects  like  that  of  the  late  Mrs.  Henry  Pott  in 
the  Bacon  and  Shakespeare  controversy  :  he,  as  she, 
proves  far  too  much  for  his  own  credit.  If  the  canons 
of  Mrs.  Pott  demonstrate  that  Bacon  was  the  concealed 
author  of  the  disputed  plays,  then  the  same  canons 
show  that  he  must  have  written  the  works  of  Marlowe, 
Massinger,  Ford,  and  nearly  all  Elizabethan  literature. 
In  the  same  way,  the  evidences  adduced  by  M.  Aroux 
are  either  insufficient  to  prove  his  point,  or  alternatively 
a  similar  scheme  has  given  us  the  Nights  of  Straparola, 
the  Nibelungen  Sagas,  the  Romance  of  the  Rose,  and  the 
entire  literature  of  the  Troubadours,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  Welsh  Mabinogion,  Reynard  the  Fox,  and  things 
innumerable  of  the  German  Minnesingers.  This  is 
indeed  the  express  thesis  of  M.  Aroux,  and  the  only 
reason  that  he  omitted  the  Latin  literature  of  alchemy  is 
because  he  had  not  come  across  it.  There  is  no  need  to 
outline  the  nature  of  his  evidences,  but,  to  speak  gener- 
ally concerning  it,  the  same  canons  might  be  applied 
with  the  same  success  to  Mrs.  Radcliffe's  Romance  of 
the  Forest  and  to  the  Mysteries  of  Udol-pho.  The  prin- 
ciple, in  other  words,  repeats  itself. 

I  should  not  have  dealt  with  these  fantastic  matters 
except  for  the  interest  which  they  once  raised  in  schools 
which  draw  from  my  own  and  because  in  the  last  resource 
they  are  an  attempt,  after  their  own  manner,  to  show 
the  hand  of  supposed  secret  schools  in  the  development 
of  the  Graal  literature.  I  now  conclude  as  follows  : 

(a)  That  the  chivalry  of  all  the  romances  was  an  ideal 
conception,  corresponding  as  much  and  as  little  to  the 
subject-matter   of    any   other   cycle   of    romance  ;     and 

(b)  that  the  historical  chivalry  of  the  period  corresponded 
to  the  idea  which  we  obtain  of  the  period  by  reading 
old   chronicles,   like   those   of   Froissart.     For   the   rest, 
M.  Aroux's  canon  of  interpretation  is  simple  exceedingly  : 
(a)  any  heroine  of  the  romances  signifies  the  Albigensian 
pseudo-church  ;    (b)  any  hero  signifies  one  of  its  apostles 
or  teachers ;    (c)  the  enemies  of  both  are  the  dominant, 

532 


Secret   Tradition   in   Christian    Times 

opposing  Church  ;  (d)  the  Holy  Vase  of  the  Graal  is 
its  divine  and  hidden  doctrine.  I  can  imagine,  in  byways 
of  literature,  the  stories  of  Captain  Macheath,  Claude 
Duval  and  Richard  Turpin  interpreted  along  analogous 
lines — for  example,  as  the  records  of  a  secret  attempt  to 
re-establish  the  Roman  hierarchy  in  England. 


Ill 

THE    LATIN    LITERATURE    OF    ALCHEMY    AND 
THE    HERMETIC    SECRET    IN     THE    LIGHT 

OF  THE   EUCHARISTIC  MTSTERT 

It  will  be  understood  that  the  sects  of  Southern  France, 
holding  various  offices  of  protestation,  testified  by  act 
and  word  that  the  gates  of  hell  had  prevailed  against 
the  Latin  Church  and  that  the  efficacious  doctrines, 
the  plenary  rights,  were  in  their  hands.  In  other  words, 
they  had  a  special  office  in  religion,  and,  I  must  add, 
the  fatality  of  a  superior  process — all  which  instructs 
us  precisely  and  fully  why  the  Mystery  of  the  Holy 
Graal  was  beyond  their  horizon  and  why  they  form  no 
part  of  the  Secret  Tradition  in  Christian  times.  Their 
exponents — it  is  all  as  you  please — were  kings  or  rebels 
in  warfare  ;  they  were  unaccredited  and  disputatious 
doctors  ;  they  were  errant  preachers  of  a  new-fangled 
scheme  for  the  improved  spiritual  housing  of  priest- 
ridden  classes.  They  trafficked — if  you  please  otherwise 
—in  Brummagem  wares  of  apostolic  Christianity  ;  they 
were  pedlars,  and  they  carried  no  licence  ;  their  goods 
were  either  contraband  or  they  were  put  forward  under 
false  marks.  But  if  you  prefer  an  alternative — since 
nothing  in  respect  of  them  carries  the  least  consequence 
—they  handed  down,  diluted  or  otherwise,  the  remanents 
of  some  earlier  heresy,  gnosis,  or  occult  confection  of 
dogma,  and  if  in  respect  thereof  they  concealed  their 
real  beliefs,  nothing  which  signifies  in  respect  of  our 

533 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy    Graal 

proper  concern  reposes  behind  the  evasion.  If  I  have 
any  view  on  the  subject — and  honestly  I  have  next  to 
none — they  were  perhaps  the  Protestants  of  their  period, 
dealing  in  poisonous  nostrums  of  pure  doctrine,  simple 
faith,  Bible  Christianity,  and  they  circulated  uncorrupted 
interpretations  of  the  Word  of  God — all  horrors  of  that 
spurious  simplicity  which  takes  the  wayfaring  man  into 
the  first  pit.  We  who  know  that  omnia  exeunt  in 
mysterium  have  recited  long  since  our  Asperge  and  have 
turned  aside  from  such  blasphemous  follies. 

Outside  these  sects,  there  were  two  great  concurrent 
schools  of  secret  thought  which  were  developing  in 
Europe  at  the  period  of  the  Graal ;  there  was  the  wonder 
and  the  rumour  of  alchemy  and  there  was  the  great 
sacred  mystery  of  Kabalistic  Jewry.  The  first  was 
scattered  all  over  the  western  countries,  and  its  reflection 
at  the  period  in  England  was  Roger  Bacon,  though, 
as  it  so  happens,  he  signifies  nothing  for  our  purpose. 
The  chief  seat  of  the  other  was  in  Spain,  but  it  had 
important  academies  coming  into  being  in  the  South  of 
France.  I  shall  take  my  first  illustration  from  Alchemy, 
and  it  must  be  understood  that  on  the  surface  it  claims 
to  put  forward  the  mystery  of  a  material  operation, 
behind  which  we  discern — but  this  is  not  invariably 
— another  subject  and  another  intention.  Speaking 
generally,  the  evidences  of  a  Secret  Tradition  are  very 
strong  in  alchemy  and  they  are  strong  also  in  other 
schools  of  thought  which  will  remain  subsequently  for 
our  consideration.  But  seeing  that  it  may  strike  the 
unversed  student  as  not  less  than  fantastic  that  I  should 
choose  the  old  and  dubious  science  of  metallic  trans- 
mutation to  cast  light  upon  the  Eucharistic  side  of  the 
Graal  Mystery,  I  must  in  the  first  place  explain  that 
two  governing  motives  will  actuate  the  whole  inquest 
which  follows  hereafter  :  (i)  To  ascertain  whether  the 
concurrent  or  succeeding  schools  of  secret  thought,  which 
appeared  in  Europe  before  or  after  the  canon  of  the 
Graal  was  closed,  offered  any  analogies  to  the  notion  of 

534    ' 


Secret  Tradition  in    Christian   Times 

an  arch-national  Eucharist,  or — in  other  words — to  the 
existence,  prosecution  and  success  of  the  Great  Experi- 
ment ;  and  (2)  whether  they  offered  anything  which 
corresponds  with  the  alternative  notion  of  a  voided 
House  of  Doctrine.  The  concurrence  or  competition 
which  may  subsist  between  the  two  theses  will  be  men- 
tioned at  the  term  of  the  research.  It  is  obvious, 
meanwhile,  that  we  shall  not  expect  to  find  secret  words 
of  consecration  or  some  concealed  form  of  the  Mass, 
because  we  are  investigating  the  analogies  of  intention 
which  may  be  imbedded  in  distinct  literatures.  If  we 
came  across,  for  example — as  we  might,  if  we  cared  to 
seek — an  occult  requiem  for  the  soul  of  a  dead  alchemist, 
we  should  set  it  aside  simply  as  impertinent  rather  than 
relative.  It  will  prove — and  quite  naturally — that  such 
literatures  will  contain  many  secret  verbal  formulae  but 
not  those  which  we  should  require  if  our  zeal  went  before 
our  discretion  and  we  sought  after  secret  words — as, 
for  example,  a  super-efficacious  version  of  the  Epiclesis 
clause.  The  same  counsels  of  prudence  will  teach  us  not 
to  expect  in  the  other  schools  a  replicated  claim  regarding 
super-apostolical  succession  ;  it  is  sufficient — and  it  does 
not  concern  us  either — that  the  epopts  of  these  imbedded 
Christian  and  cognate  mysteries  were  ordained  specially 
and  strangely  in  the  paths  which  they  followed  for  the 
proper  term  thereof — but  this  is  of  election  to  the 
mysteries.  Lastly,  we  shall  not  look  to  find  a  plainer 
expression  than  we  have  met  with  already  in  the  rumours 
of  the  Graal  sanctuary,  but  though  we  are  dealing  in 
some  cases  with  the  most  cryptic  of  all  literatures  and 
in  others  with  elusive  forms  of  initiation,  we  shall  find 
as  a  fact  that  there  is  less  room  for  misconception  than 
—all  things  considered — might  be  expected.  I  premise, 
therefore,  that  the  great  Eucharistic  experiment,  con- 
cealed under  the  supposition  of  a  secret  consecration 
formula,  has  its  strict  analogy  in  the  second  sense  attri- 
buted to  the  doctrines  and  processes  of  alchemical 
transmutation ;  while  the  loss  of  the  Graal — or  its 

535 


The    Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

counterpart,  the  loss  of  the  gracious  and  piteous  words 
— has  its  analogy  in  the  loss  of  the  word  in  Kabalism 
and  in  the  symbolical  science  of  Masonry.  We  have 
seen  already  that  the  analogies  of  the  Graal  Quest  are 
in  the  annals  of  sanctity  and  the  present  researches  are 
the  other  side  of  the  same  annals.  It  follows  that 
there  is  a  super-incession  between  all  the  schools,  but 
it  is  of  the  ideological  order  only  and  of  the  experience 
thereto  belonging,  and  not  of  successive  derivation. 
Perhaps  I  ought  to  add  that  the  true  interpretation  of 
alchemy  depends  upon  a  construction  of  symbolism 
which  has  not  entered  previously  into  the  heart  of 
criticism. 

At  the  period  of  the  Holy  Graal  the  books  of  the 
Hermetic  Adepts  were  in  a  state  of  transition,  or  alter- 
natively they  corresponded  to  the  elements  of  folk- 
lore before  the  Great  Christian  Hallow  reigned  in  the 
Kingdom  of  Romance.  In  other  words,  the  Secret  School 
of  alchemy  began  in  an  experimental  operation  pursued 
on  material  things,  but  the  school  was  taken  over  sub- 
sequently, though  at  a  time  when  the  Graal  literature 
was  only  a  sacred  memory.  It  is  this  mystery  which 
was  the  next  witness  in  the  world. 

Alchemy  may  not  have  originated  much  further  East 
than  Alexandria,  or,  alternatively,  it  may  have  travelled 
from  China  when  the  port  of  Byzantium  was  opened  to 
the  commerce  of  the  world.  In  either  case  its  first 
development,  in  the  forms  with  which  we  are  acquainted, 
is  connected  with  the  name  of  Byzantium,  and  the 
earliest  alchemists  of  whom  we  have  any  particulars  and 
any  remains  in  literature  constitute  a  class  by  themselves 
under  the  name  of  Byzantine  alchemists.  The  records 
of  their  processes  went  further  eastward,  into  Syria 
and  Arabia,  where  they  assumed  a  new  mode,  which 
bore,  however,  all  necessary  evidence  of  its  origin.  In 
this  form  the  texts  do  not  appear  to  have  had  a  specific 
influence  upon  the  cor-pus  doctrinale  of  later  days.  The 
records  were  also  taken  West,  like  other  mysteries  of 

536 


Secret  Tradition   in    Christian    Times 

varying  importance,  and  when  they  began  to  assume  a 
place  in  western  history  this  was  chiefly  in  France, 
Germany  and  England.  In  other  words,  there  arose 
the  cycle  of  Latin  alchemy,  passing  at  a  later  date,  by 
the  way  of  translation,  into  the  vernaculars  of  the  re- 
spective countries,  until  finally,  but  much  later,  we 
have  original  documents  in  various  almost  modern 
languages.  It  follows — but  has  not  been  noticed  so 
far — that  the  entire  literature  is  a  product  of  Christian 
times  and  has  Christianity  as  its  motive,  whether  sub- 
consciously or  otherwise.  This  statement  applies  to  the 
Latin  Geber  and  even  the  tracts  which  are  ascribed  to 
Morien  and  Rhasis.  The  dubious  and  the  certain  ex- 
ceptions which  prove  the  rule  are  the  colloquy  of  the 
Turba  Pbilosopborum — about  which  it  is  difficult  to  specu- 
late in  respect  of  its  source — and  the  Kabalistic  jEsh 
Mezarept — which  we  know  only  by  fragments  included 
in  the  great  collection  of  Rosenroth.  I  suppose  that 
there  is  no  labyrinth  which  it  is  quite  so  difficult  to 
thread  as  that  of  the  Theatrum  Chemicum.  It  is  beset 
on  every  side  with  pitfalls,  and  its  clues,  though  not 
destroyed  actually,  have  been  buried  beneath  the  ground. 
Expositors  of  the  subject  have  gone  astray  over  the 
generic  purpose  of  the  art,  because  some  have  believed 
it  to  be  (a)  the  transmutation  of  metals,  and  that  only, 
while  others  have  interpreted  it  as  (b)  a  veiled  method 
of  delineating  the  secrets  of  the  soul  on  its  way  through 
the  world  within,  and  besides  this  nothing.  We  have 
on  our  part  to  realise  that  (a)  there  were  two  schools 
making  use  of  the  same  language  in  a  distinct  sense, 
the  one  branch  seeking  the  transmutation  of  metals  and 
the  art  of  prolonging  life,  the  other  branch  investigating 
the  mysteries  of  arch-natural  life  ;  and  that  (b)  more 
than  one  text-book  of  physical  alchemy  would  seem  to 
have  been  re-edited  in  this  more  recent,  exotic  interest.  It 
is  to  the  latter  that  I  refer  when  I  speak  of  an  intervention 
in  alchemy  by  which  it  was  assumed,  and — while  pre- 
serving the  same  veils  of  language — was  transformed  in 

537 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

respect  of  its  purpose.  I  deal  therefore  with  the  corpora 
spiritualfa  of  the  mystic  school ;  we  can  leave  to  the 
physical  alchemists  those  things  of  Caesar  which  belong 
to  them,  retaining  the  things  which  concern  the  mys- 
teries of  divine  symbolism. 

The  true  philosophers  of  each  school  are  believed 
to  have  taught  the  same  thing,  with  due  allowance  for 
the  generic  difference  of  their  term,  and  seeing  that 
they  used — as  I  have  said — the  same  language,  it  would 
seem  that,  given  a  criterion  of  distinction  in  respect  of 
the  term,  this  should  make  the  body  of  cryptogram 
comparatively  easy  to  disentangle.  But  as  one  of  the 
chief  problems  is  held  to  reside  in  the  fact  that  many 
text-books  do  not  begin  at  the  same  point  of  the  process, 
this  advantage  of  uniformity  is  cancelled  largely.  There 
are  affirmed  to  be  experimental  schools  still  existing  in 
Europe  which  have  carried  the  physical  work  much 
further  than  it  is  ever  likely  to  be  taken  by  an  isolated 
student ;  but  this  must  be  accepted  under  some  notable 
reserves,  or  I  can  at  least  say  that,  having  better  occa- 
sions than  most  people  of  knowing  the  schools  and  their 
development,  I  have  so  far  found  no  evidence.  But 
there  are  known  otherwise  to  be — and  I  speak  here  with 
the  certainty  of  first-hand  acquaintance — other  schools, 
also  experimental,  also  existing  in  Europe,  which  claim 
to  possess  the  master-key  of  the  mystical  work.  How 
far  they  have  been  successful  in  using  that  key,  and 
whether  it  opens  all  locks,  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  say, 
for  reasons  which  those  who  are  concerned  will  regard 
as  obvious.  It  so  happens,  however,  that  the  mystery 
of  the  process  is  one  thing  and  that  which  lies  on  the 
surface,  or  more  immediately  beneath  the  externals  of 
concealed  language,  is  fortunately  another  thing.  And, 
as  in  this  case  it  occurs  for  our  salvation,  the  enlightening 
correspondences  are  offering  their  marks  and  seals,  if 
not  at  our  very  doors,  at  least  in  the  official  churches. 
Among  all  those  places  that  are  holy  there  is  no  holy 
place  in  which  they  do  not  abide,  a  mane  usque  ad  vesper- 

538 


Secret   Tradition   in   Christian   Times 

tinum,  and  the  name  of  this  correspondence  is  the  Holy 
Eucharist. 

Before  entering  further  into  this  matter,  I  propose 
to  tabulate  certain  palmary  points  of  terminology  which 
are  common  to  all  the  adepts — including  both  schools 
indifferently,  though  we  are  dealing  here,  and  this  is 
understood  fully,  with  the  process  of  one  school.  By 
the  significance  of  these  terms  we  shall  see  to  what  extent 
the  symbolism  of  the  Higher  Alchemy  is  in  conformity 
with  mystic  symbolism  and  with  the  repose  of  the 
life  of  the  Church  in  God.  We  shall  see  further  in 
respect  of  the  operations  that  some  are  in  correspondence 
with  that  High  Mass  which  was  once  said  in  Corbenic. 
It  should  be  realised,  however,  that  there  is  nothing  so 
hard  and  so  thankless  as  to  elucidate  one  symbolism 
in  the  words  of  another,  and  this  notwithstanding  the 
identity  which  may  be  indicated  as  the  term  of  each. 
It  should  be  understood  further,  and  accepted,  that 
all  alchemists,  outside  the  distinctions  of  their  schools, 
were  actuated  by  an  express  determination  to  veil  their 
mystery,  and  that  seemingly  they  had  recourse  for  this 
purpose  to  every  kind  of  subterfuge. 

At  the  same  time  they  tell  us  that  the  whole  art  is 
contained,  manifested  and  set  forth  by  means  of  a 
single  vessel  which,  amidst  all  manner  of  minor  varia- 
tions, is  described  with  essential  uniformity  throughout 
the  multitude  of  texts.  This  statement  constitutes  a 
certain  lesser  key  to  the  art ;  but  as  on  the  one  hand 
the  alchemists  veil  their  vas  insigne  by  reference,  in 
spite  of  their  assurance,  to  many  pretended  vessels,  so 
has  the  key  itself  a  certain  aspect  of  subterfuge,  since 
the  alleged  unity  is  in  respect  only  of  the  term  final  of 
the  process  in  the  unity  of  the  recipient.  This  unity 
is  the  last  reduction  of  a  triad,  because,  according  to 
these  aspects  of  Hermetic  philosophy,  man  in  the  course 
of  his  attainment  is  at  first  three — body,  soul  and  spirit — 
that  is,  when  he  sets  out  on  the  Great  Quest  ;  he  is  two 
at  a  certain  stage — when  the  soul  has  conceived  Christ, 

539 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

for  the  spirit  has  then  descended  and  the  body  is  for 
the  time  being  outside  the  Divine  alliance  ;  but  he  is 
in  fine  one — that  is  to  say,  when  the  whole  man  has  died 
in  Christ — which  is  the  term  of  his  evolution.  So  in 
the  Graal  Mystery  there  are  three  seekers  who  attain 
after  their  own  measure — Perceval,  Bors  and  Galahad — 
who  are  distinguished  from  the  hereditary  incapacity 
of  Gawain,  from  the  particular  inhibition  of  Lancelot, 
and  from  the  external  election  of  the  King. 

The  black  state  of  the  alchemical  matter,  on  which 
the  process  of  the  art  is  engaged,  is  the  body  of  this 
death — "  the  dedeley  flesshe  " — from  which  the  adepts 
have  asked  to  be  detached.  It  is  more  especially  our 
natural  life.  The  white  state  of  the  Stone,  the  con- 
fection of  which  is  desired  as  a  chief  term  of  the  art, 
is  the  vesture  of  that  immortality  with  which  the  epopts 
are  clothed  upon. 

The  Salt  of  the  Philosophers  is  that  savour  of  life 
without  which  the  material  earth  can  neither  be  salted 
nor  cleansed.  The  Sulphur  of  the  Philosophers  is  the 
inward  substance  by  which  some  souls  are  saved,  yet 
so  as  by  fire.  The  Mercury  of  the  Sages  is  that  which 
must  be  fixed  and  volatilised — naturally  it  is  fluidic  and 
wandering — but  except  under  this  name,  or  by  some 
analogous  substitute,  it  must  not  be  described  literally 
outside  the  particular  circles  of  secret  knowledge.  It  is 
nearer  than  hands  and  feet. 

Now,  the  perfect  correspondence  of  these  things  in 
the  symbolism  of  official  Christianity,  and  the  great 
mystery  of  perfect  sanctification,  is  set  forth  in  the  great 
churches  under  the  sacramentalism  of  the  Holy  Eucharist, 
behind  which  we  see  in  the  liturgies  and  ritual  of  the 
Graal  a  high  rendering  of  the  same  subject  under  the 
same  terms,  as  if  there  were  secret  wardens  who  were 
aware  of  certain  insufficiencies  and  of  the  way  in  which 
they  might  be  rectified.  The  same  exalted  mystery 
which  lies  behind  the  symbols  of  Bread  and  Wine, 
behind  the  undeclared  priesthood  which  is  according 

540 


Secret   Tradition   in    Christian    Times 

to  the  Order  of  Melchisedech,  was  expressed  by  the 
alchemists  under  the  guise  of  transmutation  ;  but  it  is 
understood  that  I  refer  here  to  the  secret  school  of 
adeptship  which  had  taken  over  in  another  and  tran- 
scendent interest  the  terminology  and  processes  of 
occult  metallurgy.  The  confusion  of  distinct  symbol- 
isms signifying  the  same  thing  makes  for  no  illumina- 
tion ;  but  because  of  the  identity  in  the  term,  because 
both  schools  deal  with  the  same  thing,  and  because  the 
same  thing  is  everywhere,  the  natural  analogy  of  these 
symbolisms,  distinct  as  they  are,  can,  by  maintaining 
their  distinction — that  is,  without  mutation  of  the 
accidents — be  made  to  elucidate  each  other.  In  the 
last  resource,  therefore,  the  physician  heals  himself  ;  but 
I  am  speaking  here  of  that  which  wise  men  have  termed 
the  Medicine. 

The  vessel  is  consequently  one,  but  the  matter  thereto 
adapted  is  not  designated  especially,  or  at  least  after 
an  uniform  manner  ;  it  is  said  to  be  clay  by  those  who 
speak  at  times  more  openly  in  order  that  they  may  be 
understood  the  less,  as  if  they  also  were  singing  in  their 
strange  chorus  : 

"  Let  us  be  open  as  the  day 
That  we  may  deeper  hide  ourselves." 

It  is  most  commonly  described  as  metallic  because  on 
the  surface  of  the  literature  there  is  the  declared  mystery 
of  all  metals,  and  the  concealed  purpose  is  to  show  that 
in  the  roots  and  essence  of  these  things  there  is  a  certain 
similarity  or  analogy.  The  reason  is  that  the  epopt 
who  has  been  translated  again  finds  his  body  after  many 
days,  but  under  a  great  transmutation,  as  if  in  another 
sense  the  pants  quotidianus  had  been  changed  into  the 
-panis  vivus  et  vitalis,  but — as  I  have  just  said — without 
mutation  of  the  accidents.  The  reason  is  also  that  in 
normal  states  the  body  is — here  and  now — not  without 
the  soul,  nor  can  we  separate  readily,  by  any  intellectual 
process,  the  soul  from  the  spirit  which  broods  there- 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

over,  to  fertilise  it  in  a  due  season.  There  is,  however,  one 
vessel,  and  this  makes  for  simplicity  ;  though  it  is  not 
by  such  simplicity  that  the  art  is  testified  to  be  a  Indus 
^uerorum.  The  contradistinction  hereto  is  that  it  is 
hard  to  be  a  Christian,  which  is  the  comment  of  the 
man  born  blind  upon  the  light  that  he  cannot  see.  It 
is  the  triumphant  affirmation  of  the  mystical  counter- 
position,  that  to  sin  is  hard  indeed  for  the  man  who 
knows  truly.  The  formula  of  this  is  that  man  is  born 
for  the  heights  rather  than  the  deeps,  and  its  verbal 
paradox  is  :  facilis  ascensus  su'perno.  The  process  of  the 
art  is  without  haste  or  violence  by  the  mediation  of  a 
graduated  fire,  and  the  seat  of  this  fire  is  in  the  soul. 
It  is  a  mystery  of  the  soul's  love,  and  for  this  reason  she 
is  called  "  undaunted  daughter  of  desire."  The  sense 
of  the  gradation  is  that  love  is  set  free  from  the  im- 
petuosity and  violence  of  passion,  and  has  become  a 
constant  and  incorruptible  flame.  The  formula  of 
this  is  that  the  place  of  unity  is  a  centre  wherein  there 
is  no  exaggeration.  That  which  the  fire  consumes  is 
certain  materials  or  elements  which  are  called  recrementa, 
the  grosser  parts,  the  superfluities  ;  and  it  should  be 
observed  that  there  are  two  purgations,  of  which  the 
first  is  the  gross  and  the  second  the  subtle.  The  first 
is  the  normal  process  of  conversion,  by  which  there  is 
such  a  separation  of  components  seemingly  external  that 
what  remains  is  as  a  new  creature,  and  may  be  said  to  be 
reborn.  The  second  is  the  exalted  conversion,  by  which 
that  which  has  been  purified  is  so  raised  that  it  enters 
into  a  new  region,  or  a  certain  heaven  comes  down  and 
abides  therein. 

It  is  not  my  design  in  this  place  to  exhaust  the  sources 
of  interpretation,  because  such  a  scheme  would  be 
impossible  in  this  sub-section,  and  I  can  allude  therefore 
but  scantily  to  the  many  forms  of  the  parables  which 
are  concerned  with  the  process  up  to  this  point.  The 
ostensible  object — which  was  material  in  the  alternative 
school — was  the  confection  of  a  certain  Stone  or  Powder, 

542 


Secret   Tradition   in    Christian   Times 

which  is  that  of  projection,  and  the  symbolical  theorem 
is  that  this  powder,  when  added  to  a  base  metal,  per- 
forms the  wonder  of  transmutation  into  pure  silver  or 
gold,  better  than  those  of  the  mines.  The  Stone  trans- 
mutes what  is  base,  but  in  its  own  elements  it  has  under- 
gone transmutation  itself,  from  what  is  base  to  what  is 
perfect.  In  another  form  it  prolongs  life  and  renews 
youth  in  the  adept  philosopher  and  lover  of  learning. 
In  this  case  it  is  spoken  of  usually  as  an  elixir,  but  the 
transmuting  powder  and  the  renewing  draught  are  really 
one  thing  with  the  spiritual  alchemists.  As  it  is  certain 
that  under  any  light  of  interpretation  the  Stone  of 
the  Graal  is  not  actually  and  literally  a  stone — nor  found 
in  the  nest  of  the  phoenix — it  may  be  held  to  follow 
as  a  reasonable  inference  that  the  Cup  or  Chalice  is 
not  a  cup  actually  or  literally,  much  less  a  vessel  which 
contains  blood,  sang  real  or  otherwise.  In  like  manner, 
if  there  is  one  thing  which  appears  than  another  more 
clearly  in  the  books  of  the  Philosophers,  it  is  that  the 
Stone  of  alchemy  is  not  a  stone  at  all,  and  that  the 
Elixir  of  alchemy  is  not  a  brew  or  an  essence  which  can 
be  communicated  in  ewers  or  basins.  The  Stone,  on  one 
side  of  its  symbolism,  represents  more  especially  the 
visible  sign  of  the  mystery,  and  it  is  spoken  of  as  offering 
two  phases — of  which  one  is  white  and  the  other  red. 

It  must  be  affirmed  further  that  in  virtue  of  a  very 
high  mysticism  there  is  an  unity  in  the  trinity  of  the 
stone — or  powder — the  metal  and  the  vase.  The  vase 
is  also  the  alchemist,  for  none  of  the  instruments,  the 
materials,  the  fires,  the  producer  and  the  thing  produced 
are  external  to  the  one  subject.  At  the  same  time 
the  inward  man  is  distinguished  from  the  outward 
man  ;  we  may  say  that  the  one  is  the  alchemist  and  the 
other  the  vessel ;  it  is  in  this  sense  that  the  art  is  termed 
both  physical  and  spiritual.  But  the  symbolism  is  many 
times  enfolded,  and  the  gross  matter  which  is  placed 
within  the  vessel  is  the  untransmuted  life  of  reason, 
motive,  concupiscence,  self-interest  and  all  that  which 

543 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

constitutes  the  intelligent  creature  on  the  normal  plane 
of  manifestation.  Hereof  is  the  natural  man  enclosed  in 
an  animal  body,  as  the  metal  is  placed  in  the  vessel,  and 
from  this  point  of  view  the  alchemist  is  he  who  is  some- 
times termed  arrogantly  the  super-man.  But  because 
there  is  only  one  vessel  it  must  be  understood  that 
herein  the  Stone  is  confected  and  the  base  metal  is 
converted.  The  alchemist  is  himself  finally  the  Stone, 
and  because  many  zealous  aspirants  to  the  Art  have  not 
understood  this  they  have  failed  in  the  Great  Work  on 
the  spiritual  side. 

The  schedule  which  now  follows  may  elucidate  this 
hard  subject  somewhat  more  fully,  if  not  indeed  more 
plainly  :  There  are  (a)  the  natural,  external  man,  whose 
equivalent  is  the  one  vessel ;  (b)  the  body  of  desire 
which  answers  to  the  gross  matter  ;  (c)  the  aspiration, 
the  consciousness,  the  will  of  the  supernatural  life ; 
(d)  the  process  of  the  will  working  on  the  body  of  desire 
within  the  external  vessel ;  (e)  the  psychic  and  tran- 
scendental conversion  thus  effected  ;  (/)  the  re-action  of 
the  purified  body  of  desire  on  the  essential  will,  so  that 
the  one  supports  the  other,  the  will  is  again  exalted, 
and  therefrom  follows  this  further  change — that  the 
spirit  of  a  man  puts  on  a  new  quality  of  life,  becoming 
an  instrument  which  is  at  once  feeding  and  itself  fed  ; 
(g)  herein  is  the  symbol  of  the  Stone  and  the  Great 
Elixir  ;  (h)  the  spirit  is  nourished  from  above  by  the 
analogies  of  Eucharistic  ministry — that  is  to  say,  the 
Dove  descends  from  Heaven  carrying  the  arch-natural 
Host  to  renew  the  virtues  of  the  Stone  ;  (z)  the  spirit 
nourishes  the  soul,  as  by  Bread  and  Wine — that  is,  the 
Bread  is  taken  from  the  Graal ;  (k)  the  soul  effects  the 
higher  conversion  in  the  body  of  desire  ;  (/)  it  comes 
about  thus  that  the  essence  which  dissolves  everything 
is  still  contained  in  a  vessel,  or  alternatively  that  God 
abides  in  man. 

This  process,  thus  delineated  exhaustively  in  the 
parables  of  alchemy,  is  put  with  almost  naked  simplicity 

544 


Secret   Tradition  in    Christian    Times 

by  Eucharistic  doctrine — which  says  that  material  lips 
receive  the  super-substantial  Bread  and  Wine,  that 
the  soul  is  nourished  and  that  Christ  enters  the  soul. 

The  Eucharistic  Bread  signifies  the  super-substantial 
sustenance,  and  the  Wine  is  arch-natural  life.  It  is 
for  this  reason  that  the  Alchemical  Stone  at  the  red 
has  a  higher  tingeing  and  transmuting  power  than  the 
Stone  at  the  white.  The  first  matters  of  the  alchemical 
work,  to  make  use  of  another  language  of  subterfuge, 
are  Sulphur,  Mercury  and  Salt ;  but  these  are  the 
elements  of  the  Philosophers  and  not  those  of  the 
ordinary  kind.  In  other  words,  common  Sulphur  and 
Mercury  correspond  to  the  Bread  and  Wine  before 
consecration,  and  the  philosophical  elements  are  those 
which  have  been  transubstantiated  by  the  power  of 
the  secret  words.  That  which  is  produced  is  called 
Panis  Fivus  et  Fitalis  and  Vinum  Mirabile^  instead  of 
the  daily  meat  and  drink  by  which  we  ask  to  be  sustained 
in  the  Lord's  Prayer.  The  Salt  is  that  which  is  called 
the  formula  of  consecration  ;  it  is  that  which  salts  and 
transmutes  the  natural  earth.  When  Christ  said  :  "  If 
the  Salt  lose  its  savour,  wherewith  shall  it  be  salted  ?  " — 
this  can  be  understood  of  the  super-excellent  and  extra- 
valid  consecration  ;  the  removal  of  the  Graal  signifies 
that  of  a  certain  arch-natural  salting,  yet  the  salt  of  suffic- 
ing grace  remains,  like  that  of  nature,  and  in  its  way 
also  it  communicates.  Christ  further  said  :  "  You  are 
the  salt  of  the  earth  " — and  this  is  the  true  priesthood. 

That  which  the  text-books  have  agreed  from  time 
immemorial  to  term'  a  Stone  is  that  also  which  we  find 
in  greater  Gospel  books,  where  it  is  described  as  a  Stone 
not  made  with  hands,  and  the  transmutation  performed 
thereby  is  the  work  of  inward  conversion,  resulting  in 
the  condition  which  one  of  the  adepts  recommends  to 
his  disciples  when  he  exclaims  :  "  Transmutemini,  trans- 
mutemini  h  lapidibus  mortuis  in  la-pides  vivos  philosophiccs" 
The  possession  of  the  Stone  is,  in  other  words,  the 
possession  of  the  tingeing  Christ. 

545  2  M 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

It  should  be  understood,  therefore,  that  the  First 
Matter  in  transcendence — that  is,  in  the  state  of  the 
Stone — must  be  taken  to  signify  the  elements  after  con- 
version has  been  operated  by  the  secret  words  of  con- 
secration. But  the  words  signify  here  the  Divine  Life, 
and  the  process  which  really  takes  place  is  represented 
by  the  most  sacramental  of  all  words  :  Et  verbum  caro 
factum  est  (And  the  Word  was  made  flesh).  In  this  new 
light  of  alchemy  we  may  continue,  if  we  please,  to  regard 
the  elements  of  the  Graal  as  the  communication  of  the 
Eucharist  in  exaltation,  of  which  our  own  Eucharist  is 
only  a  shadow  and  substitute  ;  or  we  can  do  what  is  the 
same  thing  and  is  preferable  in  respect  of  finality,  that 
is,  we  can  transfer  the  entire  symbolism  to  man  who 
is  the  recipient  of  the  Eucharist,  the  vessel  of  reception, 
the  subject  of  conversion,  the  container  which  in  the 
outward  order  is  less  than  the  thing  contained,  the  life 
which  receives  the  life  above  all  life  that  is  manifest 
and  known.  Without  man  the  conversion  and  trans- 
mutation of  elements  would  be  void  of  all  office,  since 
there  would  be  no  terminus  ad  quern. 

Prior  to  the  efficacious  consecration  we  may  assume 
that  the  simple  elements  are  those  substances,  or,  if  we 
prefer  it,  are  that  one  substance  variously  manifested, 
which,  as  the  alchemists  tell  us  so  expressly,  may  be 
found  everywhere.  It  is  of  no  account  till  the  Wise 
have  introduced  their  mystical  ferment  therein.  Having 
concealed  it  under  a  thousand  names,  they  say  in  their 
strange  manner  that  it  is  known  by  these  ;  and  so  also 
some  of  them  have  declared  in  their  derision,  as  against 
all  the  untutored  material  operations  which  involve  a 
prodigal  outlay,  that  he  who  spends  upon  the  Great 
Work  more  than  thirty  thalers — not  including  the  cost 
of  personal  maintenance — has  already  passed  aside  from 
the  whole  truth  of  the  process.  It  follows  from  these 
elucidations  that  the  higher  understanding  of  the 
Eucharist  and  the  mystic  side  of  alchemy  are  concerned 
with  the  same  subject,  that  is  to  say,  with  man,  his 

546 


Secret    Tradition   in    Christian    Times 

conversion  and  transfiguration  :  the  implicits  are  there- 
fore the  same,  and  of  these  things  alchemy  was  the  next 
witness  in  the  world  after  the  epoch  of  the  Holy  Graal. 

But  though  it  seems  therefore  within  all  reason  and 
all  truth  to  testify  that  the  panis  vivus  et  vitalis  is  even 
as  the  transmuting  Stone  and  that  the  Chalice  of  the 
New  and  Eternal  Testament  is  as  the  renewing  Elixir, 
the  witness  is  subject  to  the  reserve  of  my  previous 
indication  ;  the  closer  the  analogies  between  distinct 
systems  of  symbolism  the  more  urgent  is  that  prudence 
which  counsels  us  not  to  confound  them  by  an  inter- 
changeable use.  The  priest  as  priest  neither  dealt  in 
the  symbolism  of  alchemy  nor  assumed  its  external  offices ; 
the  alchemist  as  alchemist  did  not  celebrate  Mass.  It 
is  true  notwithstanding  that  all  Christian  mysticism — 
whatever  its  vestures — came  out  of  the  Mass-Book,  and 
it  is  true  that  it  returns  therein.  But  the  Mass-Book 
in  the  first  instance  came  out  of  the  heart  mystic  which 
had  unfolded  in  Christendom.  The  nucleus  of  truth  in 
the  Missal  is  :  Dominus  -prope  est.  The  Mass  shows  that 
the  Great  Work  is  in  the  first  sense  a  work  of  the  hands 
of  man,  because  it  is  he,  officiating  as  a  priest  in  his  own 
temple,  who  offers  the  sacrifice  which  he  has  purified  ; 
but  the  elements  of  that  sacrifice  are  taken  over  by  an 
intervention  from  another  Order,  and  that  which  follows 
is  transfusion. 

Re-expre3sing  all  this  now  in  a  closer  summary,  the 
apparatus  of  mystical  alchemy  is  indeed,  comparatively 
speaking,  simple.  The  first  matter  is  myrionymous  and 
is  yet  one,  corresponding  to  the  unity  of  the  natural 
will  and  the  unlimited  complexity  of  its  motives,  dis- 
positions, desires,  passions  and  distractions — on  all  of 
which  the  work  of  wisdom  must  operate.  The  vessel  is 
also  one,  for  this  is  the  normal  man  complete  in  his  own 
degree.  The  process  has  the  seal  of  Nature's  directness  ; 
it  is  the  graduation  and  increasing  maintenance  of  a 
particular  fire.  The  initial  work  is  a  change  in  the 
substance  of  will,  aspiration  and  desire,  which  is  the 

547 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

first  conversion — or  transmutation  in  the  elementary 
sense.  But  it  is  identical,  even  to  the  end,  with  the 
term  proposed  by  the  Eucharist,  which  is  the  modifica- 
tion of  the  noumenal  man  by  the  communication  of 
Divine  Substance.  Here  is  the  lapis  qui  non  lapis,  lapis 
tingens,  lapis  angularis,  lapis  qui  multiplicatur,  lapis  per 
quern  Justus  tzdificabit  domum  Domini,  et  jam  valde  cedi- 
ficatur  et  terram  possidebit  per  omnia,  &c.  When  it  is 
said  that  the  Stone  is  multiplied,  even  to  a  thousand- 
fold, we  know  that  this  is  true  of  all  seed  which  is  sown 
upon  good  soil. 

So,  therefore,  the  Stone  transmutes  and  the  Eucharist 
transmutes  also ;  the  philosophical  elements  on  the 
physical  side  go  to  the  making  of  the  Stone,  which  is 
also  physical,  and  the  sacramental  elements  to  the  genera- 
tion of  a  new  life  in  the  soul.  He  who  says  Lapis  Philo- 
sophorum  says  also  :  My  beloved  to  me  and  I  to  him. 
Christ  is  therefore  the  Stone,  and  the  Stone  in  adept 
humanity  is  the  Union  realised,  while  the  Great  Secret 
is  that  Christ  must  be  manifested  within. 

Now,  it  seems  to  me  that  it  has  not  served  less  than 
an  useful  purpose  to  establish  after  a  new  manner  the 
intimate  resemblance  between  the  higher  understanding 
of  one  part  of  the  Secret  Tradition  and  the  fuller  inter- 
pretation of  one  Sacrament  of  the  Church.  We  are  not 
dealing  in  either  case  with  the  question  of  attainment. 
The  analogy  would  remain  if  Spiritual  Alchemy  and 
Christian  Sacramentalism  abode  in  the  intellectual  order 
as  theorems  only  which  have  been  never  carried  into 
experience.  And  further  it  is  not  affirmed  that  the 
Hermetic  symbolism  has  attained  a  grade  of  perfection. 
When  Christian  symbolism  took  over  the  old  legends 
and^created  out  of  them  the  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
the  work  was  not  done  perfectly,  and  it  is  the  same  with 
alchemical  books.  It  remains  that  the  doctrine  of 
sanctity  offered'a  Divine  Experience,  to  those  who  entered 
the  pathway  of 'sanctity,  as  a  foretaste*in  this  life  of  the 
union  which  is  consummated  in  eternity,  or  of  that  end 


Secret  Tradition  in    Christian   Times 

beyond  which  there  is  nothing  whatever  that  is  con- 
ceivable. We  know  from  the  old  books  that  "  it  hath 
not  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,"  but  the  heart  which 
has  put  away  the  things  of  sense  may  at  least  conceive 
it  by  representations  and  types.  This  is  the  great 
tradition  of  that  which  the  early  alchemists  term  Truth 
in  the  Art  ;  the  experience  is  representation  after  its 
own  kind  rather  than  felicity,  but  the  representation  is 
of  that  grade  which  begins  in  ecstasy  and  ends  in 
absorption.  Let  no  man  say  therefore  that  he  loses 
himself  in  experiences  of  this  order,  for  perchance  it  is 
then  only  that  he  finds  himself,  even  in  that  way  which 
suggests  that  after  many  paths  of  activity  he  is  at  length 
coming  into  his  own. 

The  alchemical  maxim  which  might  be  inscribed  on 
the  gate  of  the  Calais  espiriteus  or  any  Castle  of  the  Graal 
should  be  : 

"  Est  in  Mercuric  quicquid  quarunt  sapientes." 

The  Eucharistic  maxim  which  might  be  written  over  the 
laboratory  of  the  alchemist,  in  addition  to  Laborare  est 
orare,  is  : 

"  Et  antiquum  documentum 

Novo  cedat  ritui  : 
Presstet  fides  supplementum 
Sensuum  defectui." 

The  maxim  which  might  be  written  over  the  temples  of 
the  official  churches  is  Corporis  Mysterium — that  the 
mystery  of  the  body  might  lead  them  more  fully  into 
the  higher  mystery  of  the  soul.  And  in  fine  the  maxim 
which  might  and  would  be  inscribed  over  the  one  Temple 
of  the  truly  Catholic  Religion  when  the  faiths  of  this 
western  world  have  been  united  in  the  higher  conscious- 
ness— that  is  assuredly  Mysterium  Fidei — the  mystery 
which  endures  for  ever  and  for  ever  passes  into  ex- 
perience. 

Within  the  domain  of  the  Secret  Tradition  the  initia- 
tions are  many  and  so  are  the  schools  of  thought,  but 

549 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

those  which  are  true  schools  and  those  which  are  high 
orders  issue  from  one  root.  Est  una  sola  res,  and  they 
whose  heart  of  contemplation  is  fixed  upon  this  one 
thing  may  differ  but  can  never  be  far  apart.  Personally 
I  do  not  believe — and  this  has  the  ring  of  a  common- 
place— that  they  will  be  found  to  differ  widely.  I  know 
not  what  systems  of  the  aeons  may  intervene  between 
that  which  is  imperishable  within  us  and  the  union 
wherein  the  universe  will  in  fine  repose  at  the  centre. 
But  I  know  that  the  great  systems — aye,  even  the  great 
processes — of  the  times  that  are  gone,  as  of  those  which 
now  encompass  us,  do  not  pass  away,  because  that  which 
was  from  the  beginning  is  now  and  ever  shall  be — is 
one  motive,  one  aspiration,  one  term  of  thought  remain- 
ing, as  if  in  the  stillness  of  an  everlasting  present.  We 
really  understand  one  another,  and  our  terms  are  terms 
over  which  our  collective  aspirations  are  united  world 
without  end. 


IV 
THE  KABALISTIC  ACADEMIES 

We  have  now  dealt  with  the  testimony  of  the  chief 
witness  to  the  perpetuity  and  perfection  of  the  Great 
Experiment,  and  if  it  be  necessary — as  it  is  at  times 
and  seasons — to  conceal  or  re-express  things  in  an 
artificial  and  evasive  language,  I  do  not  know  of  a  more 
convincing  substituted  terminology  than  that  of  trans- 
mutation by  alchemy  as  a  high  analogy  of  God's  work 
in  the  soul.  Other  analogies  there  are,  but  for  the  most 
part  unrealised,  as,  for  example,  the  sublime  clause  of 
the  Apostle's  Creed  :  "  Et  expecto  resurrectionem  mor- 
tuorum  et  vitam  venturi  sceculi"  which,  as  it  stands,  is 
a  testimony  to  the  prospect  and  not  the  attainment. 
The  motives  which  lead  to  the  adoption  of  artificial 
language  and  the  circumstances  which  may  help  to 
justify  it  belong  to  the  term  of  our  inquiry,  of  which 

550 


Secret    Tradition  in   Christian    Times 

this  is  the  penultimate  stage  only.  We  have  now 
finished  for  the  present  with  the  Mystery  of  Attainment 
— or  why  it  was  necessary  to  seek  and  find  the  Holy 
Graal  in  order  that  the  spiritual  knight  might  in  fine 
be  assumed  into  Heaven,  carrying  the  Palladium  with 
him  into  those  stars  whence  it  first  descended  ;  and  we 
have  next  to  determine  whether  there  are  other  traces 
which  may  help  us  to  understand  better  the  Mystery 
of  Loss,  or  the  meaning  of  the  Voided  Sanctuary.  It 
is  admitted  out  of  hand  that  the  first  indications  are 
placed  here  in  respect  of  the  order  of  time,  and  that 
they  are  introductory  and  subsidiary  only — a  place  of 
sidelights  and  incidental  correspondences.  The  reason 
is  that,  although  the  root-matters  must  be  identical 
when  the  term  in  finality  is  one,  we  are  dealing  in  respect 
of  the  Graal  with  a  manifestation  in  Christendom  but 
here  with  a  manifestation  in  Israel. 

The  schools  of  Kabalism  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have 
done  more  than  emerge  partly  into  public  existence 
when  the  canon  of  the  Graal  literature  had  already 
closed ;  in  these  schools  there  were  great  masters  of 
mystic  thought,  though  more  especially  on  the  intellectual 
side.  Now,  in  its  own  way,  the  theosophical  scheme  of 
Jewry  in  exile  is  a  story  of  loss  like  the  Graal,  though 
it  is  one  which  ends  in  expectation — or,  as  I  should  say, 
in  certainty.  The  loss  in  external  history  and  in  national 
life  was  counterpoised  by  a  loss  in  the  sanctuary,  as  if 
the  arch-natural  Eucharist,  the  Graal  which  is  of  all 
things  holy,  had  been  taken  therefrom.  It  was  that 
which  of  old  was  written  not  only  in  one  galaxy  of 
stars  but  by  the  power  of  which  the  worlds  themselves 
were  made.  The  substitution  which,  according  to  the 
Graal  legends,  was  left  with  the  Christian  Church  in 
place  of  the  living  sanctities  is  paralleled  closely  by  that 
other  legend  which  tells  how  the  stress  and  inhibition  of 
Israel  is  because  the  Divine  Word  has  been  withdrawn 
from  the  Holy  Place,  and  instead  of  the  true  Tetragram, 
the  voice  of  the  priest  only  pronounces  now  the  name 

55' 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Adonai.  But  the  Eucharist,  as  I  have  said,  is  still  the 
Eucharist,  the  House  from  which  the  Graal  has  departed 
is  still  the  Holy  House,  and  all  sanctity  attaches  in  like 
manner  to  the  substituted  sacred  Name  and  to  the 
cortex  of  those  letters  which  now  represent  the  Tetra- 
gram — mn\  There  was  a  time  when  this  name  in 
its  true  form  was  pronounced  by  the  High  Priest  once 
annually  in  the  sanctuary ;  it  restored  the  people  of 
God  and  maintained  the  Inmost  Shrine,  keeping  open 
the  channels  of  grace,  even  as  the  heavenly  dove,  descend- 
ing on  Good  Friday,  renewed  the  virtue  of  the  Graal. 
Afterwards,  as  I  have  indicated,  there  came  another 
time  when  disaster  fell  upon  Israel,  with  the  result 
that  the  essential  elements  of  the  Name,  in  which  its 
true  pronunciation  was  involved,  became  lost  even  to 
the  sanctuary. 

It  should  be  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  I  am  not 
putting  forward  the  hypothesis  of  a  channel  of  com- 
munication by  which  something  was  derived  into 
romance  literature  from  implicits  which  about  the  same 
time  or  subsequently  were  developed  into  Zoharic 
books.  I  know  that  behind  the  Graal  Castle — according 
to  the  Longer  Prose  \Perceval — there  was  the  Earthly 
Paradise,  and  that  the^House  of  the  Holy  Vessel  was  also 
the  Castle  of  Souls.  I  know  that,  according  to  the 
Zohar,  the  Garden  of  Eden  is  placed  in  a  position  which 
corresponds  to  that  of  the  Graal  itself.  I  know  that 
both  were  removed — the  Graal  into  the  heavenly  regions 
and  the  Garden  of  Eden  into  that  which  is  no  longer 
manifest.  The  latter  place  was  connected  nearly  in 
Kabalism  with  the  Great  Sanctuary — truly  a  Castle  of 
Souls — wherein  all  those  who  are  to  come  await  incar- 
nation in  turn,  for,  according  to  Jewish  theosophy,  the 
creation  of  souls  is  not  successive,  or  dependent  on 
earthly  generation,  but  eternal  in  the  heavens.  I  know 
that  there  is  nothing  in  literature  so  like  the  departure 
of  Galahad  as  that  of  R.  Simeon  ben  Jochai ;  and  in 
spite  of  great  divergences,  of  distinctions  in  the  root- 

552 


Secret  Tradition   in    Christian    Times 

matter,  the  Mystery  of  the  Holy  Graal  has  its  sub- 
surface analogy  with  the  Mystery  of  the  Lesser  Holy 
Assembly.  I  know  that  the  Greater  and  Lesser  Sanhedrim 
sound  like  oracular  voices  speaking  in  an  unknown 
tongue  concerning  the  Holy  House,  and  we  feel  that 
behind  the  outward  offices  of  religion  there  was  an 
Inner  Church  of  Israel.  I  know  that,  according  to  the 
involved  scheme  of  the  Sepbiroth,  the  Waters  of  Life  are 
in  Knowledge,  which  is  also  the  place  of  the  Cup,  and 
this  is  reserved  always  for  those  who  are  athirst.  But 
these  things,  with  others  and  many  others,  do  not 
constitute  the  lightest  shadow  of  transmission.  No 
French  poet  could  be  expected  to  know  thereof  ;  no 
exponent  of  Christian  legend,  even  when  interpreted 
mystically,  ever  looked  to  Israel  for  light  and  leading  in 
those  internecine  days — however  much  the  name  of 
Provence  may  suggest  a  certain  difference  in  mind  from 
the  prevalent  orthodoxy  of  the  age.  That  there  may 
be  no  mistake  on  this  subject  among  those  whom  I 
address  more  especially,  I  note  further  that  the  peculiar 
presentation  of  Graal  symbolism  which  is  connected 
with  the  name  of  the  reputed  Provencal  Guiot — who 
of  all  only  might  confess  to  some  curious  memories 
from  a  course  of  study  at  Toledo — is  precisely  that 
presentation  in  which  the  sanctuary  is  not  voided  and 
the  Graal  is  not  taken  away. 

It  is  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  that  at  the 
period  in  question  Spain  was  one  place  in  the  world 
where  the  Jews  were  not  merely  free  from  raging  perse- 
cution but  where  worldly  positions  of  importance  were 
open  to  their  competition.  We  know  further  that  a 

treat  light  of  Moslem  learning  shone  forth  in  some 
panish  academies.  We  know  finally  or  may  learn  that 
another  light  had  kindled  therein  among  the  chosen 
people  themselves.  Palestine  and  the  East  generally 
thereabouts  may  have  contributed  its  portion,  and  did 
indeed  do  so,  but  the  heart  and  marrow  of  Kabalism 
was  in  Spain.  The  Jews  of  Cordova,  the  Jews  of  Toledo 

553 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

and  of  other  places  in  the  Peninsula  look  great  figures 
in  the  literature,  and  so  also  do  certain  academies  of 
Southern  France,  though  there  the  Jews  did  not  find 
the  same  peace  in  their  abodes.  For  them  the  asylum 
was  Spain,  and  that  indeed  must  have  been  little  less 
than  a  Terrestrial  Paradise  realised.  And  as  between 
the  South  of  France  and  Spain  the  channels  of  com- 
munication stood  wide  open,  as  Provence  is  the  legendary 
place  of  the  first  Graal  quest,  as  the  Ideal  Castle,  the 
Holy  Place,  Mont  Salvatch,  had  its  abode  unapproachable 
in  the  Pyrenees,  so  the  imaginative  mind  may  perhaps 
incline  to  say  that  behind  the  strange  legend  of  the 
Jew  of  Toledo  there  is  something  undemonstrable  of 
a  lost  Graal  connection  ;  yet  this  is  the  stuff  only  of 
which  dreams  are  made,  and  it  is  well  for  my  own  case. 
The  analogy  between  all  the  schools  in  succession  is 
the  testimony  which  they  bear  in  common,  and  if  after 
other  manners  they  reflected  one  into  another  the 
witness  would  be  weaker  in  proportion.  There  is  no 
concert,  there  is  no  debt  in  literature,  there  is  no  result 
in  fine,  as  by  a  course  of  development  from  cycle  to 
cycle  of  books.  The  scheme  of  theosophical  Kabalism 
is  distinct,  and  absolutely,  from  that  of  metaphysical 
alchemy  ;  it  is  the  evidence  of  two  schools  which  did 
not  know  one  another,  and,  although  at  the  root  their 
evidence  is  of  the  same  kind,  the  relation  between  them 
is  that  of  the  pairs  of  opposites.  So  also  when  another 
and  no  less  noteworthy  voice  began  to  speak  within  the 
body-legendary  of  symbolical  Masonry,  it  said  what 
Kabalism  had  said,  but  it  was  not  Kabalism  speaking 
behind  a  later  mask.  As  I  must  look  to  be  challenged 
in  the  gate  over  the  thesis  of  this  book,  I  assume  at  this 
point  so  much  harness  as  will  suffice  to  dissuade  the 
gentlemen  of  the  counter-guard  from  considering  that 
I  am  open  to  attack  as  one  who  seeks  to  explain  that 
generic  literature  A  is  the  concealed  father  of  generic 
literature  B,  though  I  speak  more  seriously  as  a  counsel 
to  some  of  the  confraternities  with  which  I  am  affiliated 

554 


Secret   Tradition  in   Christian    Times 

in  thought  and  the  pursuit  of  a  term  in  common.  When 
it  is  said  that  God  so  loved  the  world,  the  counterpart 
in  Kabalism  is  that  the  Kingdom  is  in  no  sense  apart 
from  the  Crown,  and  that  the  progression  from  Aleph 
to  Tan  is  complete  without  break  or  intermission ; 
but  St.  Paul  is  not  for  that  reason  a  precursor  of  the 
Zohar.  So  also  when  the  Arabian  Academies  of  Spain 
became  the  resort  of  Christian  scholars — "  men  of  curious 
inquiry,"  as  one  has  said  concerning  them — it  does  not 
mean  that  from  such  schools  they  brought  back  Sufic 
mysticism  and  translated  it  into  romance.  It  does  not 
mean  that  there  also  they  met  with  the  corpus  materiale 
of  the  Kabalah,  a  final  receptacle  of  the  dtbris  and 
drift  of  all  the  old  theogonies,  theosophies  and  occult 
knowledge  of  many  places  and  periods,  or  that  learning 
there  how  the  Daughter  of  the  Voice  was  withdrawn 
from  the  sanctuary  of  Israel,  they  told  in  another 
tongue  how,  after  the  departure  of  the  Graal,  the 
dwelling  of  King  Fisherman  "  began  to  fall,"  though 
the  chapel  thereto  belonging  never  "  wasted  nor  de- 
cayed." The  voices  say  one  thing,  but  they  do  not 
speak  in  concert.  We  know  only  and  realise  that  Israel 
is  waiting  by  the  waters  of  Babylon,  and  it  has  come  to 
pass  that,  though  we  draw  from  far  other  places,  we  are 
also  beside  her,  remembering,  perhaps  more  dimly  and 
yet  with  deeper  yearning,  the  glory  that  once  was  in 
Zion. 

Of  such  was  the  mind  of  Kabalism,  its  appanage,  its 
baggage  and  its  quest. 


THE  CLAIM  IN  RESPECT  OF  TEMPLAR 
INFLUENCE 

I  suppose  that  there  is  no  one  at  this  day,  even  on  the 
outermost  fringes  of  the  wide  world  of  books,  who  will 
need  to  be  acquainted  with  the  fact  that  the  old  chivalry 

555 


'The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

of  the  Temple  was  instituted  as  a  protection  to  the 
Christian  pilgrims  who  visited  the  Holy  Places  of  Jeru- 
salem in  the  first  quarter  of  the  twelfth  century.  It  was 
a  military  and  religious  organisation  ab  origine  symboli, 
differing  as  such  from  the  Hospital  of  St.  John,  which 
at  its  incorporation  was  a  healing  fraternity,  and  only 
assumed  arms  following  the  example  of  the  Militia 
Crucifera  Evangelica  which  had  arisen  suddenly  at  its 
side.  Templar  history  is  a  great  storehouse  of  enchant- 
ing hypothesis  and  also  of  unreclaimed  speculation 
repeated  from  writer  to  writer.  I  know  no  greater  sea 
on  which  ships  of  imagination  and  fantasy  have  launched 
more  boldly  ;  if  they  have  reached  no  final  harbour, 
they  have  paused  to  take  in  further  stores  at  innumerable 
"  summer  isles  "  of  an  imaginary  Eden  "  lying  in  dark 
purple  spheres  of  sea,"  and  if  in  some  undemonstrable 
way  they  have  slipped  their  cables  and  eluded  sporadic 
hostile  vessels,  this  has  been  because  the  equipment  of 
the  latter  has  not  been  better  than  their  own,  white  as 
regards  credentials  the  letter  of  marque  carried  by  the 
unwelcome  visitor  would  often  not  bear  much  closer 
inspection  than  their  own  unchartered  licence.  Now, 
an  Order  which  was  established  in  the  East  for  a  specific 
Christian  purpose,  which  embodied  ideas  of  devotion 
that  were  ecclesiastical  as  well  as  religious,  which  accepted 
monastic  vows — even  those  counsels  of  perfection  that 
qualified  for  the  Quest  of  the  Graal — yet,  in  spite  of  these, 
which  became  wealthy  in  the  corporate  sense  beyond 
the  dreams  of  avarice,  insolent  and  haughty  beyond 
the  prerogatives  of  feudal  royalty,  and  had  darker  charges 
looming  against  it,  does  assuredly  offer  a  picture 
to  research  the  possibilities  of  which  are  likely  to  be 
exploited  in  all  directions.  The  story  of  the  brother- 
hood and  the  things  implied  therein  have  been  therefore 
approached  from  many  points  of  view,  enforced  by 
many  considerations  and  by  much  which  passes  for 
evidence.  I  speak — as  it  will  be  understood — here  of 
the  things  recognised  or  divined  beneath  its  external 

55* 


Secret  Tradition   in    Christian   Times 

surface,  for  on  that  side  there  is  nothing  more  direct 
and  more  simple.  We  know  that  the  Latin  Church 
has  a  heavy  account  to  balance  in  respect  of  the  Order, 
and  by  the  characteristics  of  the  charges  preferred  it  is 
also  responsible  for  having  brought  it — whether  warrant- 
ably  or  otherwise,  but  at  least  all  unwittingly — within 
the  dubious  circle  of  the  Secret  Tradition  in  Christian 
times,  for  a  considerable  proportion  of  those  who  recog- 
nise the  fact  of  the  Tradition.  It  remains,  however, 
that  from  this  standpoint  the  story  has  never  been  told 
at  all  by  any  one  who  spoke  with  knowledge  on  so 
involved  a  subject.  Here  there  is  no  place  to  attempt 
it,  but  the  Mystery  of  the  Temple  in  a  minor  degree 
interpenetrated  the  Mystery  of  the  Graal,  and  some- 
thing must  be  said  concerning  it  in  this  connection. 
There  is  at  the  present  time  in  England  (a)  an  extending 
disposition  to  appreciate  remotely  and  dimly  an  im- 
bedded evidence  that  the  romance-literature  did  some- 
how shadow  forth  an  initiatory  process — but  this  I  have 
hinted  previously  ;  and  (b)  that  in  some  manner  not 
yet  understood  the  Knights  Templars  and  the  Graal 
legend  grew  up  together,  and  will  answer  with  strange 
voices  if  set  to  question  one  another  across  the  void 
which  intervenes  between  an  externalised  chivalry  in 
fact  and  an  ideal  knighthood  in  books.  In  a  word,  the 
literature  has  been  held  sometimes  to  represent,  within 
clouds  and  under  curious  veils,  something  of  the  imputed 
Templar  subsurface  design,  or  alternatively  certain 
Graal  texts  do  at  least  indubitably  reflect  in  their  own 
manner,  on  their  own  authority,  the  Knighthood  of  the 
Morning  and  of  Palestine  raised  from  the  world  of 
reflections  into  the  world  of  the  archetype.  The  Longer 
Prose  Perceval  is  not  only  a  work  with  an  allegorical  and 
also  a  mystic  motive  ;  it  is  not  only  the  story  of  a  sup- 
pressed word,  of  the  sorrow  and  suffering  which  were 
wrought  by  that  suppression,  and  the  joy  and  deliver- 
ance which  followed  the  recovery  of  the  word  ;  it  is 
not  only  the  prototypical  correlative  of  the  legend  of 

557 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

the  Royal  Arch  and  the  eighteenth  degree  in  a  form  not 
less  clear  because  it  can  be  traced  only  by  a  specialist ; 
but — at  least  in  adventitious  ways — it  has  ever-recurring 
characters  of  Templar  symbolism.  But  that  which 
wears  herein — and  so  through  the  French  cycle — little 
more  than  the  aspect  of  accident,  passes  in  the  Parstfal 
of  Wolfram  into  the  appearance  of  a  preconceived  plan. 
Herein  is  the  story  of  a  confraternity,  partly  military 
but  in  part  also  religious,  connecting  by  the  legend  of 
its  lineage  with  a  kind  of  secret  history  in  Christendom 
written  under  the  guise  of  knight-errantry  ;  it  is  the 
romance  of  an  Order  of  the  Holy  Graal  whose  members 
are  chosen  out  of  thousands,  dedicated,  set  apart,  and 
sometimes  terrible  in  power,  almost  "  like  Cedron  in 
flood."  I  do  not  wonder  that  before  the  face  of  this 
picture  the  criticism  of  the  Graal  literature  has  been 
haunted  here  and  there  with  the  dream  of  Templar 
intervention,  and  the  only  question  which  concerns  us 
is  the  extent  to  which  such  an  hypothesis  can  be  justified. 
Even  in  the  least  illuminated  circles  the  possibility  is 
regarded  with  increasing  respect,  and  apart  from  any 
claims  on  its  own  basis  it  would  be  difficult  for  this 
reason  to  pass  it  over  entirely.  The  imputed  fact,  or  the 
likelihood,  that  the  literature  was  a  vehicle,  officially  or 
otherwise,  of  some  mystical  tradition,  without  depending 
for  any  one  on  the  merits  of  this  hypothesis,  would  in 
certain  minds  be  enhanced  substantially  thereby.  But 
it  is  desirable  to  note,  in  the  first  place,  that  it  is  now 
an  old  speculation  ;  secondly,  that  recent  years  have 
not  brought  to  light,  that  I  am  aware,  any  new  facts  on 
the  subject ;  and,  lastly,  that  in  so  far  as  the  contention 
is  put  freshly  there  is  a  disposition  to  dwell  on  the 
<7 'em-pleisen  depicted  in  the  Parsifal  as  not  only  a  militant 
body  but  also  a  governing  theocracy,  and  one  which 
above  all  things  was  not  ecclesiastical.  It  is  just  this 
which  impresses  me  as  perhaps  a  little  exaggerated  in 
tone  :  I  do  not  know  that  Amfortas  and  his  chivalry 
can  be  called  a  governing  power  any  more  than  the 

558 


Secret  Tradition   in    Christian   Times 

company  over-ruled  by  King  Pelles  of  Lytenoys,  of 
whose  warfare  we  hear  in  the  Vulgate  Merlin.  If 
Mont  Salvatch  was  anything  of  the  kind,  it  was  obviously 
a  secret  kingdom,  and  as  much  might  be  said  of  Corbenic 
and  the  realm  to  which  it  belonged.  Seeing  also  that 
the  keepers  of  the  Graal  and  the  cohort  of  their  ministers 
had  at  no  time  a  sacerdotal  aspect — some  express  claims 
notwithstanding  as  to  their  geniture  and  their  ministers — 
the  ecclesiastical  note  therein  is  wanting  through  all  the 
cycles ;  the  distinction  in  chief  between  the  Templeisen 
and  the  other  knights  of  the  Graal  is  that  in  Wolfram  the 
former  are  elaborately  organised,  while  the  latter  are 
either  an  inchoate  gathering  or  they  are  merely  the 
retinue  which  would  be  attached  to  a  feudal  castle. 
In  one  case,  which  is  that  of  the  Didot  Perceval,  the 
House  Mystic  is  perhaps  a  simple  tower,  which,  from 
all  that  we  learn  by  the  context,  might  be  little  more 
than  a  hermit's  hold. 

It  is  obviously  one  thing  to  say  that  Wolfram  modelled 
his  chivalry  on  the  prototype  of  the  Knights  Templars — 
which  is  an  interesting  fact  without  consequence — and 
another  that  the  modelling  was  inspired  by  a  familiarity 
with  Templar  secret  intention,  and  it  is  on  this  point, 
which  is  obviously  the  hypothesis  in  its  motive,  that 
reasonable  evidence  is  wanted.  The  next  step  is  to 
recognise  tendances  suspectes  in  the  poem  of  Wolfram, 
to  predicate  them  of  Guiot,  his  precursor,  and  to  regard 
the  Templar  design — whatever  otherwise  it  was — as 
anti-Catholic  in  its  spirit.  With  the  first  ascription  I 
have  dealt  in  discussing  the  German  cycle  in  general ; 
of  the  second  we  can  divine  little,  and  then  but  darkly ; 
while  in  respect  of  the  third  I  recur  to  that  canon  of 
criticism  which  has  served  me  well  already  :  in  so  far 
as  the  Templar  Order  is  held  to  be  anti-Catholic,  it  is 
antecedently  and  proportionately  unlikely  that  any 
evidence  will  connect  it  with  the  Graal  literature. 
Whatever  the  origin  of  that  literature,  as  we  now  have 
it,  in  one  and  all  its  forms,  it  is  not  merely  a  Catholic 

559 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

legend,  but  it  seems  so  to  have  issued  from  the  heart 
and  centre  of  Catholicity  that  it  is  almost  in  the  likeness 
of  an  exotic,  as  if  from  some  sanctuary  behind  the 
external  and  visible  sanctuary  of  the  universal  Church. 
If  this  is  the  heart  of  romance  going  out  in  its  yearning 
towards  God,  there  was  never  a  heart  in  Christendom 
"  which  warmer  beat  and  stronger."  It  is  like  the 
voice  of  that  ideal  city,  the  first  city,  the  spiritual  city, 
of  which  Wagner  spoke,  and  it  is  seldom  heard  on  earth  ; 
it  seems  to  speak  from  the  pictured  home  of  the  soul, 
the  place  of  pre-existence,  with  all  the  mystery  and 
wonder  of  enchanted  Hud  and  of  Ir6m  in  the  Land  of 
the  Morning.  And  in  the  melody  of  that  voice,  within 
the  verbal  message  thereof,  we  know  that  the  country 
deep  in  Asia  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  Highlands  beyond 
the  Himalayas,  or  in  the  fabled  Sarras.  Again,  it  is 
the  country  of  the  soul  and  of  the  soul's  legend  ;  it  is 
the  Kabalistic  place  of  the  palaces  at  the  centre  of  the 
dimensions,  sustaining  all  things.  We  know  also  that 
we  shall  look  vainly  for  Corbenic  on  the  wild  coast  of 
Wales,  and  for  the  local  habitation  of  the  Graal  Castle 
of  Mont  Salvatch  at  any  of  the  grand  passes  of  the 
Pyrenees  into  Spain  ;  for  this  also  is  like  the  Rosicrucian 
mountain  of  Abiegnus  and  the  mystic  Fir-Cone,  a 
mystery  enfolded  within  and  without  by  many  meanings. 
But  if  such  is  the  position  in  respect  of  the  Holy 
Graal,  and  if  it  follows  therefrom  that  in  some  hands  it 
has  rested  under  a  serious  cloud  of  misapprehension, 
there  is  something  to  be  said  on  the  same  subject,  though 
not  in  the  same  sense,  in  respect  of  the  Knights  Templars. 
The  eye  which  has  turned  from  the  Graal  literature  to 
the  records  of  the  great  chivalry  has  been  drawn  in  that 
direction  because  of  the  charge  of  heresy  which  was 
preferred  of  old  against  it.  I  am  not  designing  to 
suggest  that  the  side  of  criticism  which  is  prominent  in 
the  open  day  is  interested — or  much  less  concerned 
seriously — in  heresy  as  such,  though  I  confess — if  it  be 
fitting  to  say  so — that  next  to  the  truth  which  is  of  God 

560 


Secret  Tradition   in    Christian    Times 

and  the  deeps  therein,  whereof  simple  minds  dream 
nothing,  I  am  conscious  of  few  things  more  fascinating 
than  the  story  of  the  bad  old  doctrines  and  of  those 
who  loved,  followed  and  honoured  them.  It  draws  the 
mind  for  ever  with  vague  and  preposterous  hopes  ;  and 
seeing  further  that  I  am  on  the  side  of  the  orthodox 
faith  only  in  so  far  as  the  old  mule  which  carries  the 
mysteries  can  be  shown  to  be  on  God's  side — as  the 
High  History  testifies — I  do  not  doubt  that  many  are 
the  choses  suspectes  which  might  be  gleaned  from  this 
book,  and  many  there  may  still  be  who  could  wish  to 
include  its  writer  in  the  annals  carried  forward  of 
Smithfield  or  Tyburn  and  those  who  went  thither  in 
the  days  of  Mary  or  Elizabeth. 

Here  is  cleansing  confession  ;  but  scholarship,  as  I 
have  intimated,  is  detached,  subject  to  its  inoculation 
by  the  notion  of  pagan  faiths  perpetuated  through 
Christian  centuries — the  stilettos  of  which  virus  have 
pierced  me  also  in  both  arms.  But  I  believe,  apart 
from  such  images,  that  I  carry  a  lamp  which  enlightens 
these  obscure  ways,  and  much  as  I  may  love  their 
crookedness,  they  do  not  deceive  me.  It  is  on  this 
account  precisely  that  the  heresy  of  the  Temple,  so 
far  as  it  concerns  the  Graal,  can  be  dealt  with  shortly 
here,  for  which  purpose  I  will  go  back  as  early  as  my 
knowledge  of  the  criticism  extends  along  these  lines. 

The  summary  of  the  particulars  in  chief  may  be  grouped 
together  as  follows  :  (i)  In  the  year  1825,  Von  Hammer, 
an  orientalist  of  the  period,  identified  certain  baptismal 
fonts  or  vases — which  he  included  among  antique 
memorials  of  the  Templars — as  examples  of  the  true 
San  Graal  vessels,  and  as  he  connected  Templar  secret 
doctrine  with  that  of  the  Gnostics,  he  remembered  that, 
according  to  Epiphanius,  the  Marcosians  made  use  of 
three  large  vases  in  their  celebration  of  the  Eucharist. 
These  were  filled  with  white  wine,  which  was  supposed 
to  undergo  a  transformation  of  colour  and  other  magical 
changes.  (2)  In  the  year  1828,  the  Abbe"  Gr£goire 

561  2  N 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

expressed  a  conviction  that  Christ  transmitted  to  St. 
John  the  Evangelist  a  secret  doctrine  which  descended 
ultimately  to  the  Templars.  (3)  In  the  year  1834 
Gabriele  Rossetti  affirmed  that  the  Templars  belonged 
to  secret  societies,  and  that  they  professed  doctrines 
inimical  to  Rome  ;  but  though  much  has  been  hazarded 
concerning  their  opinions,  nothing  has  been  ascertained 
conclusively.  He  held  further  that  they  were  of  Egyptian 
derivation  and  that  from  them  the  Albigenses  emanated. 
Here  I  am  reminded  of  a  rumour  regarding  a  manu- 
script said  to  be  in  the  Louvre,  but  of  which  I  know 
nothing,  either  as  to  title  or  claims ;  it  is  reported  to 
state  that  the  Templars  originated  from  a  more  ancient 
Order,  called  the  Magian  Brothers.  (4)  In  the  year 
1854  it  was  sustained  by  Eugene  Aroux  that  all  the 
archaic  romances  of  the  Holy  Graal  were  written  to 
glorify  the  Order  of  the  Temple  and  to  present  its 
doctrine  in  the  form  of  romance.  (5)  In  the  year  1858 
the  same  writer  went  further  and  suggested  that  the 
Templars  were  parties  to  a  concealed  programme  for  the 
creation  at  Jerusalem  of  a  religious  and  military  rival  of 
the  power  and  orthodoxy  at  Rome.  (6)  In  the  year 
1842  Dr.  K.  Simrock  expressed  an  opinion  that  the 
doctrine  and  tradition  of  the  Templars  were  based  on 
the  tradition  of  the  Graal ;  that  Christ  had  been 
instructed  by  the  Essenes  ;  that  he  confided  a  secret 
knowledge  to  some  of  his  disciples ;  and  that  this  was 
imparted  subsequently  to  the  priests  of  the  Temple 
chivalry.  (7)  In  1844,  writing  on  the  influence  of 
Welsh  tradition,  it  was  hazarded  by  A.  Schulze  that 
the  symbols  and  doctrines  of  the  Templars  might  have 
been  borrowed  from  the  Graal.  (8)  In  1865  Louis 
Moland  in  his  Origines  Littlraires  considered  that  the 
Graal  legend  and  the  Templar  Order  were  expressions 
in  literature  and  life  of  the  same  ideal,  being  the  union 
of  knighthood  with  sanctity,  and  he  further  stated 
(a)  that  there  was  a  strange  Templar  reflection  in  a 
literature  which  was  unquestionably  and  closely  related 

562 


Secret   Tradition   in   Christian    Times 

with  the  principles  of  that  Order  ;  (b)  that  the  Roman 
Curia  interdicted  the  Graal  romances  coincident!/  with 
the  suppression  of  the  knightly  Order.  It  will  be  seen 
that  the  root  of  this  thesis  is  identical  with  that  of 
Schulze. 

The  summary  above  has  of  necessity  omitted  many 
allocations  and  many  hazards  of  hypothesis  which  might 
have  been  collected  from  other  sources.  Our  next  step 
is  to  ascertain  from  the  charges  against  the  Templars  in 
the  course  of  the  processes  instituted  by  the  ecclesi- 
astical Courts  of  France,  and  elsewhere,  what  were  the 
heresies  of  doctrine  and  practice  imputed  to  the  chivalry. 
Setting  aside  those  which  constituted  infringements  of 
the  Decalogue  and  sins  crying  to  heaven  for  vengeance, 
the  major  accusations  were  two — that  candidates  for 
reception  into  the  Order  were  required  to  deny  Christ 
and  offer  a  ceremonial  outrage  to  the  Cross,  as  the 
symbol  of  his  Passion.  The  minor  accusations  were 
many,  but  after  disentangling  the  alleged  cultus  of  the 
Baphometic  head  and  some  other  things  which  I  rule 
outside  our  concern,  they  are  reducible  also  to  two, 
being  (i)  the  secular  absolution  from  sin  which  was 
said  to  be  given  by  the  Grand  Master  in  open  chapter, 
or  alternatively,  I  believe,  by  the  preceptors  of  local 
commanderies  and  encampments ;  (2)  a  practice  in 
respect  of  the  Eucharist  which  did  not  involve  exactly 
a  denial  in  doctrine,  but  exhibited  hostility  thereto. 
The  first  is  important  because  in  a  qualified  form  it 
was  the  only  charge  which  was  held  proven  against 
the  Templars  as  a  result  of  the  examinations  in  Eng- 
land ;  but  it  is  on  the  second  that  the  whole  thesis  with 
which  we  are  concerned  breaks  down.  The  accusation 
was  that  in  consecrating  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  the 
necessary  and  efficacious  words  were  omitted.  The 
evidence  adduced  on  this  question  included  that  of  an 
English  priest  who  had  once  officiated  for  the  Templars 
and  who  was  forbidden  to  recite  the  Clause  of  Institution. 

I  do  not  propose  to  report  upon  the  validity  of  the 

563 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

charges  in  whole  or  in  detail ;  those  who  are  concerned 
must  be  referred — if  they  can  summons  such  patience 
for  their  aid — to  the  Latin  process  of  the  trial,  which 
was  published  many  years  since  in  France.  The 
Templars  have  been  accused  by  learned  people  of 
Gnosticism,  Manichaeanism,  Albigensianism,  on  the 
authority  of  those  memorials ;  but  there  is  no  evidence 
for  such  charges ;  it  is  wanting  also  for  the  other  specu- 
lations which  are  included  in  my  summary  above  ;  and, 
in  fine,  there  is  none  also  for  the  suggested  Graal  con- 
nections, though  I  confess  that  my  researches  were  begun 
in  an  expectation  of  the  kind.  The  Templars,  if  guilty, 
as  affirmed  of  old  on  the  worst  of  all  possible  authority, 
were  in  the  position  of  the  heresies  in  Southern  France  ; 
they  reduced,  denied,  derided,  or  stood  in  fear  of  the 
Eucharist,  and  therefore  the  abyss  intervenes  between 
them  and  a  literature  which  existed  to  exalt  it.  As 
regards  the  German  Parsifal,  it  possesses  the  putative 
tendances  suspectes  to  which  I  have  referred  in  more  than 
one  connection.  It  may  be  said  that  the  Host  which  came 
from  heaven  was  a  designed  antithesis  to  the  Host  con- 
secrated on  earth,  but  I  believe  that  this  is  fantasy, 
because  to  hear  an  ordinary  Mass  was  as  much  a  duty 
of  knighthood  according  to  Wolfram,  as  we  find  it  in 
the  Quest  of  Galahad,  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  and 
any  of  the  other  romances.  I  believe  in  my  heart  that 
the  instituted  analogy  between  the  T emfleisen  of  Mont 
Salvatch  and  the  great  Order  of  Chivalry  was  natural 
and  irresistible  in  the  mind  of  the  poet  who  conceived 
it — whether  Wolfram  or  Guiot ;  I  believe  that  it  is 
the  only  connection  and,  as  I  have  said,  that  nothing 
follows  therefrom.  I  believe  that  the  sole  Eucharistic 
privilege  enjoyed  by  the  Templars  was  a  decree  which 
permitted  them  to  celebrate  one  Mass  annually  in  places 
under  interdict ;  that  they  were  militantly  papal ;  that 
there  were  next  to  no  instances  in  which  they  renounced 
their  faith,  much  as  they  may  have  dishonoured  it  by  their 
lives  ;  and  that  their  foundation  under  the  patronage  of 

564 


Secret    Tradition   in    Christian   Times 

la  doce  mere  de  Dieu  represented  their  ecclesiastical  ideal. 
I  believe  in  fine  that  their  first  principles  were  expressed 
on  their  behalf  in  the  Epistle  of  St.  Bernard  ad  Milites 
Templi.  It  was  written  at  the  instance  of  Hugo,  the  first 
Commander,  and  this  fact  is  all  that  need  be  derived  from 
the  prologue.  The  text  itself  exhorts  the  new  institu- 
tion to  strive  with  intrepid  souls  against  the  enemies  of 
the  Cross  of  Christ,  because  those  to  whom  death  is  a 
reward  and  life  is  Christ  need  fear  nothing.  Let  them 
stand  for  Christ  therefore,  rather  desiring  to  be  dis- 
solved, that  they  may  be  with  Him.  Let  them  live  in 
good  fellowship,  having  neither  wives  nor  children.  A 
later  section  concerns  that  external  Temple  from  which 
their  particular  title  was  taken,  and  it  compares  the 
glories  of  the  House  built  by  Solomon  with  the  inward 
grace  of  that  to  which  the  Order  was  attached  in  the 
spirit.  In  other  words,  this  was  for  St.  Bernard  a  house 
not  made  with  hands,  since  the  chivalry  was  itself  a 
Temple,  and,  like  that  of  Masonry,  the  edifice  was  erected 
in  the  heart.  The  brethren  are  in  fact  described  as  a 
Holy  City  ;  they  are  connected  with  the  idea  of  the 
Church  itself  ;  and  the  enumerated  details  of  the  Holy 
Place  are  used  for  spiritual  exhortation  addressed  to  the 
knighthood.  The  promise  to  Zion  that  its  wilderness 
shall  become  an  abode  of  all  delights,  its  solitude  a 
garden  of  the  Lord  echoing  with  joy  and  gladness,  with 
thanksgiving  and  the  voice  of  praise,  is  said  to  be  the 
heritage  of  the  Order,  and  to  watch  over  their  heavenly 
treasure  should  be  their  chief  care — so  acting  that  in 
all  things  He  should  be  pleased  Who  guides  their  arms 
to  the  battle  and  their  hands  to  the  warfare. 

Whether  it  profits  to  add  more  I  question,  but  this  I 
will  say  at  least — that  I  am  sacrificing  all  my  predilections 
and  making  my  task  in  the  next  book  much  harder  by 
throwing  over  the  Templar  hypothesis,  not  alone  in  its 
connection  with  the  Graal  on  the  historical  side,  but  as 
one  of  the  channels  through  which  the  Secret  Tradition 
may  have  passed  in  Christian  times.  I  cannot  say  even 

565 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

that  I  speak  under  correction,  for  I  question  that  correc- 
tion is  possible.  I  have  searched  many  of  these  byways 
with  an  anxious  eye  for  the  evidence,  and  I  have  been 
haunted  with  the  dreams  of  those  who  went  before  me 
in  the  way,  but  I  have  returned  so  far  with  hands  empty. 
I  can  therefore  say  only  :  magis  arnica  veritas. 


VI 

THE  GRAAL  FORMULA  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF 
OTHER  GLEANINGS  FROM  THE  CATHOLIC 
SACRAMENTART 

The  Secret  Orders  illustrate  the  realised  life  of  sanctity 
on  the  plane  of  symbolism,  but  if  it  were  tolerable  to 
suppose  that  the  literature  of  alchemy  was  put  forward 
by  an  instituted  confraternity,  then  that  would  be  the 
one  association  which  "per  doctrinam  sanctam  had  gone 
apparently  beyond  symbolism  and  reached  the  catholic 
heart  of  all  experience.  On  the  question  of  fact,  I 
believe  that  the  Hermetic  adepts  had  a  via  secretissima 
which  was  communicated  from  one  to  another  under 
self-enforcing  covenants — because  it  was  Sacramentum 
Regis — and  that  at  least  the  best  among  them  were  not 
incorporated  formally.  The  adepts  of  the  physical  work 
had  successive  fellowships — and  so  also  had  the  seekers 
thereafter — which  we  can  trace  at  different  periods  ;  but 
these  do  not  concern  us.  The  others  exchanged  the 
watchwords  of  the  Night  and  the  vision  of  Aurora 
breaking  in  the  soul ;  they  left  their  memorials  in  books 
as  guides  one  to  another,  saying  what  they  best  could 
about  that  which  was  never  expressed  openly  and  caring 
little,  except  under  God's  will,  whether  there  were  any 
listeners,  since  it  could  not  fail  that  the  light  should 
remain  somehow  in  the  world.  Outside  the  wisdom  of 
the  very  Church  itself,  they  are  the  greatest  witnesses 
in  the  age  of  Christ  to  the  truth  of  its  greatest  experi- 

566 


Secret   Tradition   in    Christian    Times 

ment.  The  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal — in  some  of 
its  aspects — is  also  a  witness,  and  chiefly  to  the  depth 
and  wonders  of  the  Catholic  Mass.  After  all  the  worlds 
of  language  have  been  exhausted,  I  conceive  that  we 
have  approximated  only  to  those  wonders  and  have 
sounded,  here  and  there,  only  with  short  lines  and  un- 
adapted  plummets  those  immeasurable  deeps.  The 
keyword  of  the  whole  Mystery  is  sacramentum  mirabile. 
O  mirabile  indeed  and  sacramentum  in  all  truth,  but 
because  of  the  words  that  fail  us,  we  must  perforce  fill 
the  great  intervening  breaks  even  with  the  little  books 
of  popular  devotion  ;  and  when  the  dark  sayings  of 
Paracelsus  in  De  Caena  Domini  have  failed  to  satisfy  us, 
we  must  even  see  whether  the  learned  Dr.  Ralph 
Cudworth  on  The  Lord's  Supper — demonstrating  many 
follies — may  not  have  a  chance  word  there  or  here  in 
his  pages  which  will  open,  outside  all  knowledge  of  his 
own,  some  gate  that  we  had  passed  without  thinking ! 
Here  therefore  are  a  few  gleanings  from  the  Catholic 
Sacramentary  as  further  sidelights  on  the  most  catholic 
of  all  experiments — the  Quest  of  the  Graal. 

If  ever  there  was  a  verbal  formula  of  Eucharistic  con- 
secration concealed  by  some  school  in  the  Church — if 
ever  a  time  came  when  there  was  something  missing 
from  any  Mass,  Celtic  or  another — I  believe  that  God 
has  filled  the  vacant  space  with  channels  of  sufficing 
grace,  and  that  grace  efficacious  is  not  so  very  far  away 
from  any  illuminated  heart.  The  fact  however  remains 
that  it  is  not  ready  to  our  hands,  and  that  though  we 
say  Introibo  we  do  not  enter  and  go  in,  except  into  the 
outer  sanctuary.  For  this  reason  we  feel  a  divine  and 
loving  envy  when  we  hear  what  Galahad  and  Perceval 
saw  after  the  material  visions  had  passed  away,  when 
there  was  no  longer  any  doctrine  of  transubstantiation 
made  sensible,  but  only  les  esperitueus  choses.  So  also 
the  gracious  and  piteous  legend  haunts  us  for  ever,  and 
we  are  aware  that  we  have  dwelt  overlong  in  Logres  and 
know  the  loss  thereof. 

567 


The   Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

It  has  been  said,  I  believe,  by  a  certain  school  of 
interpretation,  which  has  not  so  far  satisfied  the  other 
schools  in  respect  of  its  titles,  that  the  Graal  vessel  is 
that  which  contains  the  universe.  There  is  unfortu- 
nately some  disposition  to  put  forward  suppositions  on 
the  basis  of  research  in  other  fields,  and  without  specific 
acquaintance  with  the  field  covered  by  the  speculation 
taken  thus  lightly  in  hand.  The  statement  in  question 
is  not  true  in  the  sense  that  is  intended,  though  it  is 
exhaustive  in  its  accuracy  from  another  standpoint,  and 
this  in  a  dual  manner  :  (a)  because  those  who  receive  that 
Eucharist  of  which  it  is  the  symbol,  in  the  highest  grade 
and  manner  of  reception,  do  behold  the  beginning  and 
the  end ;  and  (b)  because  man  in  this  manner  enters  into 
the  consciousness  of  himself  as  being  actually  the  vessel 
of  reflection  which  testifies  of  everything  without  to 
the  centrum  concentratum  within.  In  such  sense  we 
may  all  pray  that  the  time  shall  come  when  man  will 
reflect  in  his  universal  glass  of  vision  that  truth  which 
is  within  the  universe  and  not  only  its  external  im- 
pressions. When  this  comes  to  pass  it  can  be  said  of 
him,  as  it  was  said  once  of  Perceval :  Et  li  seintimes  Greax 
ne  s'aperra  plus  fa  dedanz,  ;  mes  vos  sauroiz  bien  trus- 
qu?a  brief  la  ou  il  iera — And  the  most  Holy  Graal  shall 
appear  herein  no  more,  but  in  a  brief  space  shall  you 
know  well  the  place  where  it  shall  be. 

The  age  which  saw  the  production  of  the  Graal 
literature  was,  in  all  the  public  places,  far  from  this 
goal  like  ourselves  ;  the  communication  of  Him  who  is 
Alpha  and  Omega,  who  brings  with  Him  the  knowledge 
of  the  beginning  and  the  end,  took  place  in  the  symbol, 
not  in  the  life  essential,  and  the  first-hand  revelation 
of  Mysteries  was  therefore  wanting.  That  which 
doctrine  and  ordinary  devotional  practice  contrived  to 
impress  upon  men's  memories  and  to  impose  on  their 
faith  offered  an  exercise  to  their  intelligence,  but  in  the 
activity  intelligence  was  baffled.  The  sword  of  the 
spirit  broke  upon  the  ineffable  mystery  of  the  Kingdom 

568 


Secret   Tradition   in    Christian    Times 

of  Heaven,  as  the  symbolic  sword  of  Perceval  broke 
upon^the  gate  of  entrance  to  the  Earthly  Paradise.  The 
hermit-priest  who  tells  his  wonderful  story  at  the  in- 
ception of  the  Book  of  the  Holy\Graal  is  in  labour  with 
the  problem  of  the  Trinity,  and  when  his  praying  and 
longing  have  carried  him  to  the  Third  Heaven,  it  is 
this  secret  of  the  Eternal  Sanctity  which  is  unveiled 
before  the  eyes  of  his  soul.  Many  noble  and  learned 
clerks,  hermits  and  anchoresses  innumerable,  did  not 
toil  less  hard,  but  without  reaping  so  high  a  reward. 
They  also  who  wrote  of  these  wonders  in  the  best  sense 
thereof  had  their  limitations,  and  keenly  defined  enough. 
It  is  so  that  we  must  account  for  certain  grave  confusions 
in  respect  of  the  Divine  Personality  of  Christ,  and 
perhaps  not  differently  for  those  vague  traces  of  doctrine 
belonging  to  a  very  early  period  and  abandoned  as  the 
mind  of  the  Church  grew  clearer  in  the  comprehension 
of  her  own  dogmas. 

It  is  so  also  that  I  account  personally  for  the  material 
side  of  the  Graal  wonders  ;  to  say  that  they  have  come 
over  from  folk-lore  is  a  statement  of  fact  simply,  and 
does  not  explain  their  toleration  not  only  by  side  and  by 
side  therewith  but  as  a  part  of  the  Mystery  of  Faith.  Yet 
there  was  also  a  superincession  of  the  gross  old  pagan 
myth  and  the  recognised  implicit  of  Eucharistic  doctrine 
that  the  nourishment  of  the  soul  has  a  reflex  action  by 
which  it  contributes  to  physical  welfare.  The  man 
who  attends  Mass,  prepared  suitably  thereto,  profits  in 
all  degrees,  and  for  him  who  communicates  in  the 
higher  state  of  grace  it  must  be  remembered  that  the 
consecrated  symbols  of  Bread  and  Wine,  through  which 
the  Divine  is  conveyed  to  the  man  within,  pass  through 
the  mouth  and  the  reins  and  may,  as  tradition  and 
experience  have  testified,  convey  to  the  natural  humanity 
some  part  and  reflection  of  that  grace  which  is  declared 
abundantly  in  the  other  side  of  his  being.  It  is  in  this 
sense  that  the  body  as  well  as  the  soul  can  testify  at 
the  altar  rails  that  it  is  good  to  be  here.  A  very  subtle 

569 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

point  is  developed  in  this  connection  by  the  mystic  and 
theologian  GOrres,  who  affirms  that  in  ordinary  nourish- 
ment he  who  eats  being  superior  to  that  which  is  eaten 
assimilates  the  elements  which  he  receives,  but  in  the 
Eucharist  the  transmuted  nourishment  is  more  potent 
than  is  he  who  partakes,  and  instead  of  being  assimilated 
by  him,  it  is  the  nutriment  which  assimilates  the  man 
and  raises  him  to  a  superior  sphere.  Because  of  the 
solidarity  between  body,  soul  and  spirit,  I  say  therefore 
that  the  solus,  honor,  virtus  quoque  which  descend  upon 
our  higher  part  have  also  their  operation  below.  The 
food-giving  powers  of  the  Graal  are  not  therefore  a 
reflection  of  the  e-pulum  ex  oblatis  but  a  reductio  ad 
fabulam  of  the  spiritual  truth  that  Grace  sustains  Nature, 
and  a  guarantee  in  perpetuity  that  the  Quest  of  the 
Kingdom  of  God  will  never  fail  for  the  want  of  external 
taverns  carrying  a  full  licence  at  all  points  of  the  way. 
The  Dish  of  Plenty  is  therefore  the  simulacrum  of 
Manna  abscondita,  and  the  priest  who  says  Mass  in  his 
chapel  carefully  and  recollectedly,  and  with  illumina- 
tion, by  word  and  by  word,  turning  at  the  due  time  to 
utter  his  sursum  corda  in  the  right  sense,  is  doing  more 
in  the  fellowship  of  humanity  than  all  the  corporal 
works  of  mercy  pressed  down  and  overflowing.  He 
will  be  assuredly  inspired  in  his  reason  to  organise 
charity,  so  that  his  people  shall  be  fitly  prepared  to 
receive  the  Eucharist  worthily,  that  he  may  give  it 
freely  with  open  and  venerable  hands.  As  regards  the 
lesser  and  material  side  of  charity,  the  broken  meats 
and  the  garlic,  with  the  tokens  of  Caesar,  he  will  pro- 
bably adopt  some  rule  of  relaxed  observance,  as  it  is 
good  enough  in  these  minima  for  God  to  find  out  His 
own,  and  He  will  give  anywhere. 

In  respect  further  of  the  Manna  itself,  the  Longer  Prose 
Perceval  gets,  sacramentally  speaking,  nearest  of  all  to  the 
Mystery  when  it  indicates  the  exaltation  of  the  recipient 
by  five  in  the  five  manifested  changes.  The  text  indeed 
is  like  a  prolonged  Hosannah  or  a  Gloria  in  excelsis  chanted 

570 


Secret   Tradition   in   Christian    Times 

from  scene  to  scene  in  a  great  cycle  of  questing.  The 
same  note  runs  through  all  the  legends,  and  its  last  echo 
is  heard  faintly  in  the  late  Lohengrin  romance.  In  this 
Swan  story,  the  chain  of  one  of  the  Swans  was  made 
into  two  chalices,  and,  Mass  being  said  therein,  the  bird 
was  restored  to  his  proper  and  human  form.  This  is 
an  Eucharistic  allegory  concerning  the  deligation  of  the 
body  by  Divine  Substance  communicated  to  the  soul, 
putting  a  period  to  the  enchantments  and  sorceries  of 
the  five  senses. 

I  conclude  therefore  with  St.  Dionysius  that  the 
Eucharist  is  the  first  of  the  Divine  Mysteries  which 
now  are ;  with  the  Paraphrase  of  St.  Maximus,  that  it 
is  the  consummation  of  all  other  sacraments  ;  and  with 
official  doctrine  in  the  Latin  Church,  that  it  operates 
by  intrinsic  efficacity,  ex  of  ere  o-perato,  in  virtue  of  its 
institution  by  Christ. 


VII 

THE   LAPIS   EXILIS 

According  to  Wolfram  von  Eschenbach,  the  Graal  was 
the  crown  of  desire  understood  on  the  material  plane, 
but  it  would  also  respond  to  the  title  which  was  given 
by  Heinrich  to  his  independent  version  of  the  legend, 
for  it  was  certainly  the  crown  of  adventure,  and  on  more 
planes  than  one.  It  was  borne  aloft  on  a  green  cushion 
by  the  maid  who  was  chosen  for  the  office,  and  this 
suggests  that  the  object  was,  speaking  comparatively, 
small — that  is  to  say,  portable.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
whole  poem  to  make  us  connect  it  with  a  jewel  in  the 
conventional  sense,  and  it  is  nowhere  described  actually  : 
it  is  simply  that  object  of  wonder  to  which  the  name  of 
Graal  is  given.  It  was  light  as  wool,  as  we  have  seen, 
in  the  hands  of  its  licensed  bearer,  but  an  unprepared 
person  could  not  move  it  from  the  place  of  its  repose. 


The   Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

This  is  rather,  however,  a  question  of  magic  than  of  varia- 
tion in  specific  gravity.  Ex  hypothesi,  it  was  large  enough 
on  one  specific  occasion  to  hold  a  considerable  inscription 
on  its  surface — that  is  to  say,  when  the  King's  healing 
was  promised  as  the  reward  of  the  mystic  question.  At 
the  same  time  its  possible  dimensions  were  restricted  by 
the  counter  fact  that  it  could  and  did  repose  in  the  nest 
of  a  bird  which  tradition  describes  as  about  the  size  of 
an  eagle.  Indeed,  the  stone  which  renewed  the  phoenix 
recalls  the  Lapis  Aquilce,  which,  according  to  another 
tradition,  was  sought  by  the  eagle  and  used  to  assist  the 
hatching  of  its  eggs. 

This  enumeration  is  made  to  preface  some  reflections 
upon  the  Latin  term  which  Wolfram    applied   to    his 
talisman.     What    he    wrote — or   his    scribe    rather — we 
have  to  divine  as  we  can  from  the  choice  of  impossibilities 
which  are  offered  by  the  extant  manuscripts,  and  that 
which  has  received  most  countenance  among  the  guess- 
work readings  is  Lapis  exilis,  meaning  the  slender  stone. 
The  scholia  of  lexicographers   on  the   second  of  these 
words  indicate  some  difference  of  opinion  among  the 
learned  on  the  question  of  its  philology — de  etymo  mire 
se   torquent  viri  docti — and  as    an    additional   quota    of 
confusion  one  of  them  has  placed  the  significance  of 
slender  upon  the  word  exile  as  it  is  used  in  English.     I 
do  not  know  of  such  an  adjective  in  our  language  and 
still  less  of  one   bearing  this  interpretation  ;    but   this 
apart  it  would  seem  that  the  slender  stone  connecting 
with  the  conception  of  the  Graal  is  even  more  discon- 
certing than  any  philological  difficulty.     Further,   the 
word  exilis  suffers  the  meaning  of  leanness,  and  this  in 
connection  with  a  stone  of  plenty  which  paints  in  the 
Parsifal  an  eternal  larder,  a  parte  ante  et  a  parte  post, 
is  not  less  than  hopeless.     It  may  be  said  that  Wolfram's 
intention  was  to  specify  by  Lapis  exilis  that  his  talisman 
was  least  among  stones  in  dimension  yet  great  in  its 
efficacy,  even  as  the  Scriptures  tell  us  that  the  rriustard 
seed  is  least  among  grains  and  yet  becomes  a  great  tree. 

572 


Secret   Tradition   in    Christian    Times 

There  is  a  certain  plausibility  in  this,  and  students  of 
another  school  will  know  that  Lapis  exilis  is  a  term  which 
corresponds   wholly   to   the   great   talisman   of   metallic 
transmutation,  for  no  adept  experienced  any  difficulty 
when  he  carried  the  powder  of  projection — which,  as  we 
have  seen,  was  in  fact  the  Stone — in  his  wallet,  or  even 
his  girdle,  yet  this  was  also  great  in  its  efficacy,  as  there 
is  no  need  to  insist.     The  explanation  is  shallow  notwith- 
standing, when  we  know  that  the  true  description  of  the 
Graal  Stone  on  the  historical  side,  or  rather  the  accurate 
statement  of  fact,  would  be  e  ccelo  veniens.  But  it  is  under- 
stood of  course  that  this  does  not  enter  the  lists  as  a  con- 
struction of  the  chaotic  readings  found  in  the  manuscripts. 
Their   only   possible   rendering  to   preserve   the  verbal 
similarity  with  a  reasonable  consonance  in  the  root-idea 
of  the  subject  is  Lapis  exilii  =  th.e  Stone  of  Exile,  or  Lapis 
exsulis  =  ihe  Exile's  Stone.     The  correspondence  is  here 
twofold,  for  in  the  first  place  there  is  the  exile  of  Lucifer, 
who — if  the  jewel  was  once  in  his  crown — lost  it  on  ex- 
pulsion from  heaven,  and  in  the  second  place  there  is 
the  exile  of  humanity,  which  is  ex  bypothesi  a  derivation 
from  the  fall  of  the  angels.     It  was  given  to  men  as  a 
palladium — perhaps  even  as  a  gage  of  their  final  exalta- 
tion to  the  thrones  vacated  above.     It  so  happens  that 
there  are  some  curious  lights  of  symbolism  which  illus- 
trate a  reading  that  I  put  forward  under  every  reserve 
and  tentatively.     No  one  will  believe  at  first  sight  that 
the  Graal  Stone  and  the  Graal  Chalice  can  have  any 
affinity  between  them,  unless  indeed  the  cup  was  hewn — 
let  us  say — out  of  jasper  or  chalcedony.     This  notwith- 
standing, we  shall  find  the  analogy  rather  in  unlooked-for 
places.     Let  us  recur  for  a  moment  to  the  Lesser  Holy 
Graal  and  its  comparison  of  the  Mystic  Vessel  to  the 
Stone  in  which  Christ  was  laid — an  imputed  analogy 
which  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Master  when  He 
discourses    to    Joseph    of    Arimathaea,    delineating    the 
purport  and  perfection  of'the  whole  mystery.     It  seems 
assuredly   the   most   extraordinary   analogy  which   it   is 

573 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy  Graal 

possible  to  institute,  and  I  do  not  pretend  that  it  assists 
us  to  understand  the  substitution  of  a  Stone  for  a  Chalice 
in  Wolfram's  version  of  the  legend,  which  is  devoid  of 
any  connection  between  the  Graal  and  the  Passion  of 
Christ — almost  as  if  the  Repairer  had  returned  to  the 
heights  after  the  institution  of  the  Eucharist  and  hence- 
forward Himself — as  Pontifex  futurorum  bonorum — sent 
down  the  efficacious  sacrament  for  the  sustenance  of  his 
chosen  people.  In  the  ordinary  Eucharistic  Rite  one 
would  tolerate  the  comparison  in  respect  of  the  Pyx, 
though  the  elucidation  of  things  which  ex  bypothesi  are 
alive  by  means  of  things  which  are  dead  is  scarcely  in  the 
order  of  enlightenment.  One  thing  at  least  seems  to 
follow  from  all  the  texts,  and  this  is  that  the  sacramental 
Chalice  in  the  Graal  Mass  was  rather  the  receptacle  of 
the  Consecrated  Bread  than  of  the  Consecrated  Wine. 
The  Chalice,  which  corresponds  to  a  Stone,  and  this  Stone 
the  Rock  in  which  Christ  was  laid,  must  symbolise  the 
Vessel  of  the  Bread.  In  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  and  in 
the  Quest  of  Galahad,  Hosts  were  taken  from  the  Chalice  ; 
in  the  Parsifal,  Bread  in  the  first  instance  was  taken  from 
the  Talismanic  Stone ;  in  Heinrich,  that  Reliquary 
which  was  itself  the  Graal  had  a  Host  reposing  therein  ; 
Chretien  is  vague  enough,  but  his  undeclared  Warden  in 
prostration  seems  to  have  been  nourished  after  the  same 
manner  as  Mordrains  and  Heinrich's  ghostly  Keeper. 

The  analogy  of  these  things,  by  which  we  are  helped 
to  their  understanding  at  least  up  to  a  certain  point, 
is  Scriptural,  as  we  should  expect  it  to  be  ;  it  connects 
with  that  other  Stone  which  followed  the  people  of 
Israel  during  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  and  the 
interpretation  is  given  by  St.  Paul.  "  Our  fathers  .  .  . 
did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual  meat ;  and  did  all  drink 
the  same  spiritual  drink  :  for  they  drank  of  that  spiritual 
Rock  that  followed  them  :  and  that  Rock  was  Christ." 
It  will  be  inferred  that  the  root-idea  of  the  story  is 
based  upon  the  natural  fact  that  torrents  or  streams 
flow  occasionally  through  rocky  ground,  but  the  masters 

574 


Secret   Tradition  in    Christian    Times 

in  Israel  knew  of  the  deeper  meaning,  or  divined  it  at 
least  in  their  subtlety,  seeing  that  their  whole  concern 
was  with  a  spiritual  pilgrimage.  It  is  said  in  the  Zoharic 
tract  entitled  The  Faithful  Shepherd,  that  a  Stone  or 
Rock  is  given,  and  yet  another  Stone  is  given, 
the  Name  of  which  is  the  Name  of  Tetragram- 
maton.  Now,  this  is  a  reference  to  the  Prophecy  of 
Daniel  which  says  that  the  Stone  which  struck  the 
statue  became  like  a  mountain  and  filled  the  whole 
earth.  It  is  applied  to  Messias  and  his  Kingdom  by 
the  preface  to  the  Zohar,  which  says  further  that  the 
Israelites,  during  their  exile  in  Egypt,  had  lost  the 
Mystery  of  the  Holy  Name.  When,  however,  Moses 
appeared,  he  recalled  this  Name  to  their  minds.  It 
follows  herefrom  that  we  are  dealing  with  another  legend 
of  the  Lost  Word,  and  of  course  if  Christ  was  the  Rock 
or  Stone  which  supplied  sustenance  to  the  Jews,  we 
can  understand  in  a  vague  manner  not  only  the  corre- 
spondence between  the  Graal  and  a  Mystic  Stone  but 
also  the  manner — otherwise  of  all  so  discounselling — in 
which  the  cycle  ascribes  to  its  Great  Palladium,  whether 
Stone  or  Cup,  a  marvellous  power  of  nourishment. 
The  allusion  is  therefore  to  the  Corner  Stone,  which 
is  Christ  and  which  became  the  head  of  the  building. 
It  is  the  old  Talmudic  and  Kabalistic  tradition  that  the 
Lapis  fundamentalis  was  set  in  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem 
under  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  even  as  the  Rock  of 
Calvary,  by  another  legend,  is  called  the  centre  of  the 
world.  All  these  stones  in  the  final  exhaustion  of 
symbolism  are  one  Stone,  which  does  not  differ  from 
the  white  cubic  stone  which  the  elect  receive  in  the 
Apocalypse  together  with  the  New  and  Secret  Name 
written  thereon.  This  stone  in  its  symbolic  form  would 
no  doubt  be  the  least  possible  in  cubic  measurement — 
that  is  to  say,  in  the  correspondence  between  things 
within  and  without,  even  as  that  which  is  given, 
strangely  inscribed  within,  to  the  recipient  in  one  of 
the  most  deeply  symbolic  of  the  Masonic  High  Grades. 

575 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

Analogies  are  subtle  and  analogies  are  also  precarious, 
but  those  which  I  have  traced  here  are  at  least  more  in 
consonance  with  the  spirit  of  the  Graal  literature  than 
(i)  The  Sacred  Stone,  called  the  Mother  of  the  Gods, 
which  is  mentioned  by  Ovid  and  of  which  Arnobius 
tells  us  that  it  was  small  and  could  be  carried  easily  by 
a  single  man  ;  (2)  the  Roman  Lapis  manalis,  which 
brought  rain  in  drought,  as  it  might  have  brought  food 
in  famine  ;  (3)  the  Bcetilus  or  Oracular  Stone  which 
gave  oracles  to  its  bearer,  speaking  with  a  still  small  voice. 


VIII 

THE  ANALOGIES   OF  MASONRT 
§  A.  THE  ASSUMPTION  OF  THE  BUILDING  GUILD 

The  interpretation  of  doctrine  is  good,  but  the  thing 
which  is  essential  is  life,  and  thereafter  those  measures 
of  experience  which  are  proper  to  the  degree  of  life. 
In  like  manner,  there  is  the  study  of  the  symbolism 
which  is  outside  doctrine  but  gives  evidence  of  its 
inward  sense  ;  herein,  as  I  believe,  there  are  the  keys 
of  many  sanctuaries,  or  at  least  of  many  gates  leading 
to  the  holy  places  ;  but  again  it  is  a  certain  quality  of 
life — and  this  only — which  sheds  light  upon  symbolism, 
or  by  which  there  is  an  entrance  effected  beyond  the 
threshold  or  artificial  and  corporate  part  of  secret  know- 
ledge and  much  more  therefore  into  the  Holy  of  Holies. 
It  is  in  this  sense  that  it  is  said  in  the  old  Scriptures  : 
"  He  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead  but  of  the  living." 

As  regards  the  keys  and  the  secrets,  it  is  necessary 
also  that  we  should  distinguish  between  life  and  its 
records.  The  latter  remain  as  examples, 'as  traces,  as 
evidences,  and  no  one  should  presume  to  affirm  that 
they  are  not  of  high  value.  It  is,  however,  after  their 

576 


Secret   'Tradition   in   Christian   Times 

own  manner,  and  although  the  bodies  of  the  dead  may 
be  embalmed,  though  they  may  be  laid  under  all  con- 
secrations in  the  places  of  rest,  and  though  there  is  a 
certain  very  true  and  very  high  manner  in  which  we 
should  look  for  their  glorious  resurrection,  they  remain 
dead  bodies  until  the  Word  shall  pass  above  them, 
crying  :  "  Let  these  bones  live." 

It  is  especially  over  the  place  and  importance  of 
certain  literatures  which  contain  a  hidden  meaning,  and 
over  certain  unmanifested  confraternities  which  com- 
municate mysteries  other  than  political  in  their  com- 
plexion, that  the  memorials  of  the  past  sometimes  prove 
to  be  as  lavender  laid  among  linen — fragrant,  as  it  may 
perhaps  be,  but  dead  as  the  past  which  has  buried  them. 
So  long,  for  example,  as  our  great,  authorised  scholar- 
ship— holding,  though  it  does,  all  warrants  of  textual 
research — has  recourse  only  to  pre-Christian  Celtic 
records  for  an  explanation  of  the  Graal  and  its  literature, 
so  long  it  will  have  nothing  to  give  us  but  the  dry  bones 
of  things  antecedent  in  semi-savage  folk-lore,  and  not 
the  essence  which  is  alive.  Again,  while  other  experts 
in  research  seek  among  the  trade  guilds  of  the  Middle 
Ages  for  the  sources  of  that  which  is  termed  Masonry, 
they  will  find  nothing  that  will  communicate  to  them 
either  life  or  the  life  of  life.  Of  the  latter  it  should  be 
added  that  scholarship  is  not  in  search,  and  at  its  sudden 
manifestation  the  old  students  might  be  perplexed,  and 
that  certainly.  I  am  writing,  however,  for  those  who 
in  literature  and  in  secret  association  would  look  in- 
differently for  some  signs  of  that  quest  which  they  are 
themselves  pursuing — I  mean,  the  Divine  Quest.  To 
these  I  can  say  plainly  that  out  of  the  mere  things  of 
genealogy  there  is  nothing  that  can  rise  again.  It  is 
only  under  high  light  and  guidance  that  the  gift  of 
interpretation,  acknowledging  all  antecedents  which  have 
been  demonstrated  in  the  historical  order,  can  relegate 
them  to  their  proper  sphere,  and  can  say  at  need  to 
others,  as  they  have  said  Ipng  since  to  themselves  : 

577  2  o 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

"  Seek  not  the  living  among  the  dead  ;   this  has  risen  ; 
it  is  not  here." 

I  have  bracketed  for  the  moment  the  external  history 
of  the  Holy  Graal  with  that  of  Freemasonry,  because 
although  the  analogy  between  them  is  of  one  kind  only 
it  is  an  analogy  of  great  importance.  As  a  time  came 
when  the  old  Celtic  folk-tales  were  taken  over  in  a 
Christian  and  indeed  in  a  mystic  interest,  as  it  is  only 
subsequently  to  this  acquisition  that  the  literature  of 
the  Holy  Graal  can  be  said  properly  to  exist,  so  also 
came  that  hour  when  the  mystery — such  as  it  was — of 
the  old  building  guild  was  assumed  by  another  mystery, 
as  a  consequence  of  which  it  was  re-expressed  with  a 
different  intention,  and  it  is  thus,  and  so  only,  that,  as 
a  shadow  of  things  beyond  it,  there  came  into  being 
the  association  which  we  understand  as  symbolical 
Masonry.  So  far  as  we  can  regard  it  under  the  aspect 
of  a  succeeding  or  co-incident  witness,  the  epoch  of 
Kabalism  was  prolonged  by  the  scholiasts  of  the  Zohar, 
until  that  period  when  the  next  witness  was  beginning 
to  emerge.  After  this  manner  I  return  to  my  initial 
statement  that  the  gift  of  interpretation  is  good,  but 
that  which  is  essential  is  life.  It  is  only  the  spirit  of 
life  which  can  account,  in  whatever  form  it  was  mani- 
fested, for  the  assumption  either  of  the  romance- 
literature  or  the  particular  craft.  Without  it  we  have 
indeed  interpretations,  as  we  have  also  hypotheses  of 
origin,  but  they  are  devoid  of  true  roots.  As  a  species 
of  extra-illustration  in  the  first  case,  there  have  been 
various  hypotheses  put  forward  which  are  neither 
countenanced  by  the  records  of  the  past  nor  charac- 
terised by  a  gift  of  understanding  ;  while  in  the  second 
case  we  have  had  simply  the  romance  of  archaeology  or 
that  alternative  gift  which  fills  gaps  in  history  by 
arbitrary  suppositions  masqued  thinly  in  the  guise  of 
fact.  Official  authorities  may  be  sometimes  short  of 
sight,  as  they  are,  outside  their  horizon,  but  these  un- 
accredited intermediaries  have  brought  their  subjects 

578 


Secret   Tradition   in   Christian   Times 

into  something  approaching  disdain,  though  a  sense  of 
justice  inclines  me  to  add  that  creators  of  wild  hypothesis, 
with  all  their  distracted  material,  sometimes  make  shots 
in  the  dark  which  come  nearer  to  the  true  goal  than 
the  more  sober  skill  which  aims  only  in  one  direction, 
but  at  what  happens  to  be  a  false  object. 

The  historical  side  of  Masonry  has  at  this  day  its 
expositors  and  students  who  are  characterised  by  the 
same  patient  and  untiring  spirit  which  supports  other 
branches  of  research.  They  have  done  valuable  work  in 
the  past  and  again  will  do  so  in  the  future,  but  at 
present  all  zeal  is  held  in  suspension  by  the  exhaustion 
of  materials — I  speak  here  of  the  things  which  are  or 
would  be  of  living  and  high  importance,  not  of  those 
which  are  subsidiary  or  accidental.  These  too  serve 
their  purpose,  but  they  have  little  or  no  office  in  the 
larger  issues ;  they  keep  green  the  spirit  of  inquiry, 
which  takes  into  its  field  the  things  that  signify  little 
and  so  keeps  its  hands  on  the  plough.  It  is  better  for 
that  spirit  to  investigate  at  need  the  memorials  of  local 
lodges  than  to  perish  of  enforced  inanition.  It  is  excus- 
able also,  and  in  a  sense  it  is  even  good,  to  exaggerate  in 
one's  mind  the  importance  of  such  tasks,  to  make  much 
of  the  little  till  the  great  comes  in  our  way,  and  then 
to  make  more  of  that.  But  some  things — and  these 
vital — which  exceed  the  sphere  understood  as  that  of 
research,  pass  out  of  sight  in  this  manner,  because, 
excepting  for  very  gifted,  very  keen — may  I  say  ? — illumi- 
nated minds,  a  dry  stick  in  the  hand,  though  it  has  no 
probability  of  blooming  like  Aaron's  rod,  is  for  some 
practical  purposes  more  convenient  than  a  live  sapling 
at  the  top  of  an  inaccessible  hill.  This  is  rather  the 
position  of  those  things  out  of  sight  which  I  have  at 
the  moment  mentioned ;  the  lesser  memorials  and 
their  aspects  tend  to  keep  them  where  they  are — in 
remote  and  unnoticed  distances.  It  is  not  my  design  to 
impeach  the  historical  sense — to  which  all  exaltations 
and  crowns ! — but  there  is  a  dual  difficulty  in  the  path  of 

579 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  perfect  term,  for  the  heart  of  imagination — and  those 
orders — is  inhibited  by  this  sense,  while  imagination,  in 
the  excess  of  its  enthusiasm,  takes  the  heart  out  of  history 
and  sets  in  its  place  I  know  not  what  spirit  of  fantasy. 
Between  these  gulfs  on  either  side  of  the  prudent  way, 
to  be  an  historian  is  hard. 

For  myself — if  I  may  be  permitted  to  say  so — I  present 
the  first  consideration  of  the  Holy  Graal  from  a  mystic 
standpoint,  which,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  is  founded  on  the 
requisite  knowledge  of  every  existing  text.  It  is  such 
knowledge  or  its  result  that  enables  me  to  take  the  via 
'prudentice  which  I  have  mentioned,  and  to  find  that, 
accepting  most  statements  made  by  official  scholarship 
with  any  show  of  evidence,  all  the  important  points 
remain  in  my  hands  unaffected.  In  exactly  the  same  way 
we  can  afford — and  that  gladly — to  let  the  Masonic 
authorities  prosecute  their  search  for  still  earlier  records 
of  the  building  guilds,  while  in  the  absence  of  fresh 
materials  we  can  sympathise  with  their  sorrow  and 
aspiration.  If  things  much  more  archaic  than  have  been 
so  far  found  should  in  fine  reward  their  vigilance,  it  will 
be  all  honour  to  their  industry,  but  it  will  be  also  small 
concern  of  ours.  Let  us  make  a  ceremonial  obeisance 
before  anything  of  this  kind  which  may  yet  transpire, 
as  we  do — and  also  gladly — before  the  records  of  Mary's 
Chapel.  I  know  beforehand  the  best  that  can  be  said 
about  those  which  are  possibly  to  come,  as  I  know  of 
those  which  are  among  us.  They  will  be,  as  these 
others  are,  excellent  and  valuable  within  their  own 
degree,  but  they  will  not  signify  beyond  it,  and  they 
will  not  serve  any  purpose  which  I  can  claim  to  cherish 
in  common  with  those  to  whom  my  appeal  is  made 
herein.  The  Elohim  may  have  formed  Adam  of  the 
dust  of  the  earth,  but  it  is  useless  to  question  that  dust 
concerning  man  who  was  created  male  and  female,  as 
the  sign  of  life  and  its  perpetuity.  It  is  useless  equally 
to  question  the  old  craft  guild  concerning  symbolical 
Masonry,  since  it  was  not  by  a  natural  development 

580 


Secret   Tradition  In   Christian   Times 

that  the  one  was  transformed  into  the  other  ;  the  seeds 
of  the  transformation  were  brought  from  very  far  away, 
or,  to  express  it  more  correctly,  the  craft,  as  we  have  it, 
is  not  an  example  of  growth  after  the  ordinary  kind  but 
of  an  exceedingly  curious  grafting.  The  ground  of  con- 
tention is  not  that  things  of  handicraft  could  never  have 
developed  by  possibility  into  allegory  and  symbolism, 
but  that  they  could  not,  as  the  result  of  that  process, 
have  produced  the  synthesis  and  summary  of  all  past 
initiation  which  we  find  in  the  symbolical  degrees.  Now, 
it  is  at  the  point  of  grafting,  or  taking  over,  and  this 
because  of  the  results  which  I  have  just  specified,  that 
we,  as  transcendentalists  or  mystics,  become  concerned — 
and  then  only — in  Masonry. 

For  the  better  illustration  of  my  purpose  let  me  now 
make  a  short  distinction  concerning  three  classes  : 

(1)  There  are  those  who  have  a  love  for  the  minima  of 
instituted  mystery  ;    who,  if  they  are  carefully  sifted, 
would  be  found  to  attach  some  importance  to  the  posses- 
sion in   common  with  B  and  C  of  certain  titles,  signs 
and    passwords    which    are    unknown    to    X    and    Y ; 

(2)  there  are  those  who  believe,  and  this  in  all  honesty, 
that  morality  is  enhanced  when  expressed,  let  us  say, 
in  parables ;   when  materialised  by  analogical  represen- 
tation ;    when    decorated    by   a    ceremonial    pageant ; 

(3)  there  are,  in  fine,  those  who  are  looking  for  the  real 
things,  among  whom  we  ask  to  be  inscribed — at  least 
as   the   lovers   of  truth,    if  we   cannot  with   the   same 
boldness  demand  to  be  classed  among  those  who  love 
God.      This   lesser — or    is   it   an    equivalent  ? — nomen- 
clature we  require  on  the  faith  that  our  certain  criteria 
enable  us  at  least  to  know  in  what  directions,  and  under 
what  circumstances,  it  is  useless  to  go  in  search  of  real 
things. 

It  will  be  agreed  that  the  first  class  does  not  call  for 
our  serious  attention ;  they  are  children,  with  full 
licence  to  take  all  joy  in  their  play.  The  second  class 
is  entitled  to  a  measure  jf  our  respect,  for  they  are  at 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

least  on  the  side  of  the  natural  goodness,  andfthey  re- 
cognise in  their  own  mode  that  it  is  not  exactly  in  a 
position  to  stand  alone.  At  the  same  time  they  mis- 
take a  means  for  an  end,  and  they  do  not  know  where 
to  turn  for  the  only  efficacious  consecrations  ;  so  that 
these  also  signify  only  in  the  lesser  degree.  I  have 
indicated  already  that  it  is  to  the  third  class  that  all 
my  thesis  is  addressed  ;  its  members  are  in  a  position  to 
appreciate  the  historical  aspects  at  their  proper  value, 
giving  to  this  natural  Caesar  all  that  belongs  to  Caesar, 
yet  confessing  to  some  great  reservations,  which  are  not 
less  than  the  things  that  concern  God. 

Speaking  therefore  in  the  interests  of  this  class,  and  in 
terms  which  they  will  understand,  there  is  a  sharp 
alternative  as  follows :  Masonry  is  either  consanguineous 
by  the  root-meaning  of  its  symbols  and  legends  with 
schools  of  real  experience  ;  either  it  shows  forth  the 
one  thing  about  which  we  have  been  in  labour  from 
the  beginning,  or  it  returns  in  the  last  resource  into  the 
category  of  the  Worshipful  Company  of  Vintners,  of 
Cardmakers,  of  Fishmongers,  and  so  forth.  These  are 
admirable  institutions,  and  to  be  free  of  them,  which 
is  not  easy,  is  no  less  than  a  civic  distinction.  So  also 
are  the  friendly  societies,  in  their  way,  excellent,  in- 
cluding that  Order  of  Buffaloes  which,  perhaps  because 
it  is  late  in  its  series,  is  termed  antediluvian  ;  but  if  we 
are  incorporated  by  these  it  is  for  much  the  same  reason 
that  we  may  be  members  of  a  Ratepayers'  Association, 
namely,  for  benefit  and  protection  in  common.  These 
are  good  reasons,  but  it  is  not  on  account  of  eternal 
life  that  they  move  us  in  a  given  direction. 

Eternal  Life — initiates,  companions  and  brethren  of 
all  the  sodalities ! — I  know  well  that  from  the  mere 
reference  there  will  follow  the  irresistible  question  : 
What  is  there  in  Masonry,  or  in  any  of  the  allied  Orders, 
which  can  justify  us  in  suggesting  that  they  might  or 
could  be  taken  up  in  conjunction  with  a  quest  after 
eternal  life  ?  Now,  the  most  pertinent  questions  are  those 

582 


Secret   Tradition  in    Christian    Times 

which  have  replied  to  themselves  already  in  the  mind  of 
the  speaker,  and,  in  this  case,  the  persons  who  would 
ask  might  answer  :  Masonry  is  obviously  the  remanent 
of  a  trade  guild,  which  once  had  its  trade  secrets  and 
covenanted  those  whom  it  received  to  divulge  nothing 
in  respect  of  its  mystery  to  any  who  were  outside  the 
particular  craft  of  building.  They  would  not  conclude 
at  this  point,  but  we  may  intervene  for  a  moment  with 
an  observation  on  our  own  part.  Assume  that,  so  far 
as  it  has  proceeded,  this  is  a  correct  answer,  and  what 
then  follows  ?  It  is  not  now  a  building  guild  ;  it  has 
no  longer  any  trade  secrets ;  there  is  perhaps  no  class 
of  society  which  would  be  more  utterly  discounselled 
by  the  suggestion  that  it  should  design  edifices,  or 
should  even  dig  foundations  and  lay  bricks.  To  this 
extent  therefore,  as  the  inheritors  of  a  building  guild, 
the  Order  is  apparently  stultified.  It  has  as  little  part 
in  its  antecedents  and  precursors  as  had  the  Christ  of 
the  fourth  gospel  in  the  coming  Prince  of  this  world. 
The  proper  answer  of  symbolical  Freemasonry  as  to 
the  operative  art  might  well  be  :  In  me  it  hath  not 
anything. 

Those  even  who  are  acquainted  merely  with  the 
rituals  of  craft  Masonry — and  they  may  be  numerous 
enough  outside  the  ranks  of  the  brotherhood — will  here 
intervene  and  say,  in  continuation  of  that  answer  which 
I  have  so  far  given  in  part  :  That  is  true,  or  at  least  in  a 
certain  sense  ;  but  the  old  craft  guild  became  symbolised, 
and  its  instruments,  and  ritual  procedure,  were  taken 
over — since  you  emphasise  the  term — by  the  genius  of 
allegory,  so  that  things  which  were  originally  physical 
were  exalted  into  the  moral  order,  and  thus  they  remain 
till  to-day,  as  the  rites,  teachings  and  documents  prove 
indubitably.  This  is  estimable  and  convincing  in  its 
way  ;  it  so  happens,  however,  that  an  appeal  of  the 
kind  is  going  to  prove  too  much  ;  and  yet  it  is  by 
such  a  clear  issue  that  we  shall  reach  one  term  of  our 
subject. 

583 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 


§  B.  MASONRY  AND  MORAL  SCIENCE 

I  must  put  my  first  point  somewhat  roughly  and 
crudely,  with  an  apology  for  the  frankness  which  it 
involves  ;  decoration  is  here  impossible,  and  on  account 
of  so  much  that  will  yet  remain  to  say  after,  I  believe 
that  I  shall  be  exonerated  in  the  end.  The  ethical 
position  is  then,  so  far  as  Masonry  is  concerned,  a  sincere 
attempt — and  this  simply — to  effect  a  sanctification  of 
things  which  of  necessity  and  essentially  are  obvious  in 
moral  teachings.  No  one  challenges  these  teachings, 
and  in  the  world  about  us  no  one  cares  anything.  It 
cannot  be  less  than  regrettable  if  any  person  should  join 
either  one  or  another  confraternity  with  the  idea  of 
improving  his  ethical  position,  not  because  the  design 
is  anything  except  highly  laudable,  but  because  his 
most  proper  incentives  are  in  himself  and  his  daily  life. 
No  association  has  anything  to  tell  him  which  he  does 
not  know  already,  and  this  from  his  earliest  childhood. 
If  I  may  speak  my  whole  mind,  after  having  followed  many 
highways  and  byways,  I  should  say  that  his  best  and 
only  necessary  guides  are  the  official  religions,  the  gate 
of  which  is  morality,  as  I  have  striven  to  make  plain 
elsewhere.  It  is  they  that  provide  the  spirit  and  reason 
which — unless  he  is  called  to  go  further,  and  that 
journey  will  be  further  within  them — should  actuate  his 
conduct,  just  as  the  laws  of  his  country  take  charge  of 
the  letter  thereof,  and  see  that  it  shall  be  constructed 
after  their  manner  and  not  according  to  his  own. 

From  this  view  it  is  impossible  to  derogate,  and  it  is 
difficult,  in  respect  of  it,  to  qualify  ;  but  there  is  one 
matter  over  which  misconception  may  be  avoided. 
Let  it  be  understood  therefore  that  I  do  not  take 
exception  to  the  ethical  value  of  Masonic  or  the  other 
laws — in  those  matters  which  belong  to  the  conduct  of 
life — because  it  is  so  obviously  identical  with  the  written 
or  unwritten  law  of  all  civilised  conscience ;  but  I 

584 


Secret  Tradition    in    Christian    Times 

affirm  that  a  knowledge  which  is  possessed  indepen- 
dently by  all,  which  is  mainly  derived  from  unassisted 
lights  of  Nature,  which  no  one  disputes  seriously,  which 
is  withal  so  simple  that  there  is  no  difficulty  in  teaching 
it  directly,  which  in  fine  has  been  taught  us  in  our 
catechisms,  even  at  the  knees  of  our  mothers — I  affirm 
that  this  knowledge  does  not  require  an  allegorical  and 
ceremonial  system  of  considerable  complexity  to  explain 
or  enforce  it.  There  is  above  all  no  evident  warrant 
for  secrecy  and  mystery  in  the  plain  basis  of  individual 
and  social  morality.  It  must  be  added  that,  on  the 
evidence  of  their  own  history,  the  associations  included 
by  my  category  have  not  succeeded  in  developing  a 
more  perfect  moral  man  than  has  any  other  system  of 
ethical  discipline  which  is  now  at  work  in  the  world. 
They  do  not  therefore  possess  a  more  powerful  instru- 
ment than  are  other  instruments  with  which  we  may 
be  acquainted  independently.  When  it  is  said  that  a 
Mason,  for  example,  who  abides  scrupulously  by  the 
rule  of  his  Order,  cannot  fail  to  be  a  good  man,  such  a 
statement  may  be  accepted  without  reserve  ;  but  since 
the  laws  of  Masonry  are  simply  the  expression  of  an 
universal  ethical  standard,  as  much  may  be  declared  of 
any  person,  initiated  or  not  initiated,  who  elects  to 
guide  his  life  by  the  recognised  code  of  morality  and 
goodwill,  more  especially  as  the  element  of  esprit  de 
corps  scarcely  enters  into  questions  of  this  nature. 

A  certain  severity  will  be  read  into  these  strictures, 
more  especially  as  the  majority  of  Masons  have  never 
supposed  that  their  association  could  offer  a  higher 
light  than  that  of  good  conduct  in  exaltation,  and  I 
ought  therefore  to  add  that  if  this  were  really  the  limit 
of  its  horizon,  so  far  as  they  are  concerned,  the  craft 
as  such  is — in  one  sense — amply  justified.  That  which  is 
desirable  for  them,  that  which  for  them  is  the  term  and 
aim  of  goodness  may  not  only  be  their  strong  incentive 
but  a  necessity  in  the  lesser  degree.  Moreover,  on  broader 
grounds  it  is  no  matter  of  pretence,  for  it  has  never, 

585 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

except  in  some  spurious  high  grades,  which  are  its  burden 
and  not  its  possession,  offered  more  than  it  can  give.  It 
is  not,  therefore,  as  it  was  described  by  De  Quincey,  the 
great  imposture  of  the  modern  world  ;  and  if  it  be 
an  error  of  enthusiasm  to  put  forward  an  ideal  of  natural 
goodness  in  the  guise  of  a  mystery  of  knowledge,  one 
can  only  wish  that  the  effect  had  been  to  make  that 
ideal  an  actuality  over  the  whole  world. 

All  this  notwithstanding,  its  success  or  failure  along 
these  lines  could  be  scarcely  a  special  concern  of  ours, 
who  know  of  ways  as  excellent  after  its  own  kind  and 
of  better  ways  beyond  them.  I  return  therefore  to  my 
previous  proposition — that  Masonry  can  interest  us  so 
far  only  as  it  enshrines  something  more  than  an  ethical 
doctrine  and  instruction.  This  other  thing  is  not, 
however,  by  way  of  addit amentum,  but  by  way  of  essence. 
The  recognition  of  such  an  essence  will  enable  us  to 
understand  more  clearly  some  of  the  lesser  processes,  or 
at  least  to  tolerate  them  more  patiently,  as  first  stages 
in  a  history  of  development  which  have  also  the  heights 
as  their  term.  I  may  alienate  the  sympathies  of  some 
of  my  readers,  seeing  that  there  are  so  many  listeners, 
but  the  explanation  of  this  last  point  lies  to  my  mind 
in  the  fact  that  the  raison  d'etre  of  all  natural  goodness 
must  be  sought  in  the  law  of  grace.  So  also  it  remains 
that  the  churches  are  still  the  accredited  guides  because 
grace  has  its  channels  therein,  or  so  at  least  till  we  trans- 
mute the  official  beliefs  into  direct  experience  and 
thus  enter  not  into  that  which  is  apart  from  them, 
but  that  which  is  their  wider  consciousness.  In  the 
meantime,  all  that  is  innocent,  all  that  is  blameless,  all 
that  is  of  fair  repute  makes  in  fine  for  goodness ;  and 
if  that  goodness  is  natural  in  the  first  degree,  it  has 
also  a  mode  of  dissolution  into  the  goodness  which 
transcends  Nature.  If  therefore  the  laws  of  brotherly 
love  are  maintained  and  promoted  in  a  lodge  of  Masons, 
as  they  certainly  are,  it  is  all  honour  to  Masonry,  and 
so  much  towards  the  reign  of  peace  on  earth.  But  it  is 

586 


Secret   Tradition   in   Christian   Times 

not  less  true  that  it  is  easy,  and  very  easy,  to  reach 
those  limits  beyond  which  it  has  scarcely  entered  into 
the  heart  of  Masonry  to  conceive — by  which  I  mean 
as  it  is  so  far  understood  in  the  lodges  ;  as  it  is  to  be 
judged  by  its  literature  ;  and  as,  outside  all  personal 
initiation,  we  may  know  it  in  the  life  of  its  members. 
It  is  at  this  point  that  some  who  are  on  higher  quests 
than  those  of  conduct  must  part  with  it,  leaving  their 
benedictions  behind  them ;  or  that  they  must  find 
therein,  after  all  the  horizon  of  ethics  has  been  at  last 
traversed,  some  region  beyond  the  ordinary  ken  which 
may  prove  the  land  of  their  desire.  Beyond  the  seven 
bands  which  comprise  the  spectrum  of  the  corporal 
works  of  mercy,  there  are  other  rays  of  light,  and  in 
Masonry  also  there  are  rays  beyond  the  violet.  We 
may  glean  something  concerning  them  from  its  history, 
but  we  must  seek  above  all  in  its  symbolism  and  in  the 
proper  meaning  of  its  legends.  To  conclude  as  to  this 
part,  Masonry  either  belongs  to  the  secret  tradition  or 
it  is  for  us  made  void. 

§  C.  A  THEORY  OF  HERMETIC  INTERFERENCE 

Having  given  an  example  of  the  manner  in  which 
symbolical  Masonry  explains,  as  if  almost  on  its  own 
part,  how  the  old  craft  guild  was  taken  over  and  trans- 
formed, and — although  it  is  by  no  means  suggested  that 
Mary's  Chapel  and  Canongate  Kilwinning  should  burn 
their  earliest  records — having  seen  that  the  surface 
explanation  is  characterised  by  great  insufficiency,  I 
will  now  show  another  side  of  the  same  subject,  prior 
to  which  it  is  assumed  that  even  if  craft  Masonry  may 
be  subject  to  certain  errors  of  enthusiasm,  it  has 
always  good  faith  on  its  side.  On  the  other  hand, 
outside  its  records  and  their  inferences,  and  shipped 
upon  the  great  sea  of  speculation,  I  have  seldom  met 
with  any  subject  which  has  produced  more  explicit 
falsehood  in  the  manufacture  of  historical  materials 

58? 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

than  has  the  question  of  the  origins  of  Masonry.  There 
is  no  need  to  specify  the  mendacious  legends  of  some 
of  the  high  degrees,  for  they  carry  their  proper  seals 
and  marks  upon  their  mere  surface.  Let  us  rather  take 
for  our  illustration  one  great  name  in  the  literature  of 
the  craft,  for  I  suppose  that  there  is  none  more  respected 
in  its  own  country  than  is  that  of  J.  M.  Ragon  among 
the  Masons  of  France.  I  believe  that,  on  questions  of 
historical  fact,  his  authority  has  been  regarded  as  almost 
final.  He  appears  indeed  as  a  sober  and  careful  recorder, 
though  it  is  obvious  that  he  had  several  strong  pre- 
judgments  interleaving  his  notes  of  researches,  and  these 
would,  in  any  case,  make  his  impartiality  doubtful.  It 
must,  however,  be  said  that  between  his  materials, 
some  of  which  must  have  come  to  him  already  tinkered, 
and  his  peculiar  construction  of  facts,  it  is  almost  pure 
incautiousness  to  take  anything  that  he  says  unverified. 
He  is  at  the  same  time  the  one  writer  in  modern  times — 
that  is  to  say,  in  and  about  the  year  1853 — who  has 
spoken  with  the  most  unhesitating  voice  on  the  origin 
of  symbolical  Masonry  outside  any  natural  development 
of  the  old  craft  mystery.  In  order  that  I  may  do  no 
unconscious  injustice,  I  will  put  his  thesis  as  nearly  as 
possible  in  his  own  words. 

"  Philosophical  Masonry,"  he  says,  "  which  neither  in 
fact  nor  in  name  had  any  existence  previously,  was  con- 
ceived and  embodied  in  three  rituals,  in  the  year  1646, 
by  Elias  Ashmole,  who  rediscovered  antique  initia- 
tion, as  Mesmer  rediscovered  magnetism  "  (Orthodoxie 
Maconnique,  p.  5).  "  It  is  from  this  primitive  source 
that  the  Masonic  world  has  drawn  that  light  which 
illuminates  its  labours  "  (ib.).  In  the  same  year,  being 
that  which  saw  the  reception  of  Ashmole  into  the  old 
building  guild,  a  society  of  Rosicrucians,  formed  on  the 
plan  of  Bacon's  New  Atlantis,  assembled  at  Freemason's 
Hall,  London.  Ashmole  and  the  other  brethren  of  the 
Rose-Cross,  seeing  that  speculative  Masons  already  ex- 
ceeded the  diminishing  remnant  of  operative  members, 

588 


Secret  Tradition   in   Christian   Times 

concluded  that  the  time  had  come  to  abrogate  the  old 
form  of  reception  and  to  substitute  a  written  method 
of  initiation,  based  upon  the  Ancient  Mysteries,  and 
especially  those  of  Egypt  and  Greece.  "  The  first 
grade  was  composed,  substantially  as  we  now  have  it  " 
(p.  29).  It  received  the  approbation  of  the  initiates, 
and  the  grade  of  Fellow-Craft  was  devised  in  1648, 
being  followed  by  the  Grade  of  Master  a  short  time 
subsequently.  The  specific  object  of  Ashmole  was  to 
regenerate,  under  the  veil  of  architecture,  the  mysteries 
of  ancient  Indian  and  Egyptian  initiation  and  to  provide 
the  new  association  with  a  bond  of  union,  fraternity, 
perfection,  equality  and  science,  grounded  upon  the 
laws  of  Nature  and  the  love  of  humanity  (ib.,  p.  99). 
The  learned  alchemist  codified  all  the  oral  traditions  ; 
they  assumed  a  form  and  body  ;  and  this  was  the  true 
and  proper  beginning  of  Freemasonry,  as  we  now  have 
it  (ib.,  p.  292). 

It  will  be  seen  that  I  have  not  overestimated  the 
force  and  finality  of  these  statements  ;  it  would  appear 
almost  incredible  that  they  could  be  a  pure  invention  of 
Ragon,  or  a  mere  fable  which  he  took  over  from  some 
earlier  source  that  cannot  now  be  identified  ;  yet  this 
is  the  case  actually,  and  outside  the  bare  fact  that 
Ashmole  was  received  into  the  old  craft  guild,  as  he 
records  in  a  few  cold  and  detached  lines  of  his  private 
diary,  there  is  no  particle  of  evidence  to  support  it. 
That  it  were  otherwise  I  could  well  desire,  for  I  have 
said  that  the  craft  was  acquired,  and  that  which  took  it 
over  knew  well  enough  the  purport  of  the  Ancient 
Mysteries,  or,  under  all  its  veils  and  subterfuges,  we 
could  never  have  had  the  legend  of  the  Chief  Degree, 
nor  the  equally  memorable  closing  which  is  attached 
thereto.  But  the  bodies  of  tradition,  which  may  coin- 
cide, and  that  closely — which  may  reflect  on  one  another 
— which  may  independently  testify  to  each  other — are 
not  derived  from  one  another,  and  the  Alchemists,  as 
such,  did  not  invent  Masonry.  I  do  not  propose  to  go 

589 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

over  the  ground  which  I  have  traversed  in  some  previous 
writings  and  in  particular  to  recite  the  conclusions  of  my 
Studies  in  Mysticism  as  to  spiritual  rebirth  in  connection 
with  Masonic  Doctrine  and  Symbolism.  That  herein 
lies  the  true  understanding  of  the  Craft  Degrees,  I  am 
entirely  certain,  and  it  is  to  this  point  that  the  grades 
lead  up  from  the  beginning.  That  the  mysteries  which 
we  call  ancient — though  I  think  that  in  some  form  they 
are  always  in  the  world — were  concerned  with  no  other 
subject,  I  am  not  less  certain.  Outside  all  offices  of 
Masonry  there  are  derivations  of  the  Rosy  Cross  which, 
although  at  a  great  distance,  testify  concerning  the  same 
doctrine  and  the  same  high  experience ;  the  old  records 
of  the  brotherhood  also  testify  ;  and  as  there  is  at  least 
one  school  of  alchemical  literature  which  has  inwritten 
the  secret  life  of  the  soul  under  the  veil  of  metallic 
transmutation,  there  would  be  no  cause  for  surprise  if 
we  could  trace  the  interference  of  one  or  other  of  the 
Hermetic  fraternities  in  the  transformation  of  the  build- 
ing guild  into  symbolical  Freemasonry.  But  the  evidence 
of  fact  is  wanting,  either  by  the  way  of  record  or  other- 
wise ;  while  as  regards  the  change  in  itself,  this  is  much 
too  general  in  its  character  to  show  the  hand  of  an 
individual  school.  We  must  be  content  therefore  with 
the  voice  of  the  grades  themselves,  with  the  legends  and 
the  symbolism  which  they  involve. 

§  D.  ONE  KEY  TO  THE  SANCTUARY 

It  should  be  understood  that  I  am  speaking  at  the 
present  moment  only  of  the  craft  degrees.  I  have  every 
reason  to  know  that  the  high  grades  do  not  deserve  the 
unqualified  condemnation  with  which  they  have  been 
set  aside  by  writers  like  Ragon  and  by  certain  expositors 
of  the  German  school  of  Masonic  thought.  Several  of 
them  are  great  rites  which  embody  important  mystic 
teaching,  and  without  some  of  them  I  regard  the  craft 
degrees  as  offering,  mystically  speaking,  an  unfinished 

590 


Secret   Tradition  in   Christian   Times 

experience.  Those,  however,  who  are  familiar  with  the 
craft  rituals — about  which  I  do  not  intend  to  speak 
otherwise  than  by  assuming  such  knowledge — will  be 
in  a  position  to  realise  how  far  they  can  be  said  to 
embody  an  ethical  doctrine,  except  as  side-issues  of  their 
mystery.  There  is,  of  course,  a  very  plain  inculcation 
of  certain  obvious  virtues,  but  it  is  all  so  slight,  and  it  is 
all  so  obvious,  that  to  speak  of  it  as  an  ethical  system 
seems  to  magnify  the  subject  out  of  all  due  proportion. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  do  find  certain  provinces  of 
knowledge  recommended  to  the  study  of  the  candidate 
at  one  stage  of  his  advancement.  We  find  also  certain 
illustrations  of  a  great  mystery  of  building,  certain 
references  to  a  secret  which  has  been  lost,  and  a  great 
legend  concerning  the  destruction  of  a  master  of  know- 
ledge who  took  away  with  him  that  secret,  and  except 
under  very  deep  veils,  outside  all  craft  Masonry,  it  has 
not  been  since  recovered.  As  I  have  quoted  Ragon  in 
a  connection  which  was  necessarily  unfavourable,  let 
me  now  cite  him  in  a  different  sense.  He  has  said  that 
when  we  find  in  Masonry  and  in  some  other  secret  ways 
of  the  past  a  reference  to  building — whether  of  temples, 
palaces,  or  towns — what  is  intended  is  that  there  was 
a  manifestation  of  doctrine  ;  in  other  words,  there  was 
an  ordered  communication  of  mysteries.  As  to  the 
great  majority  of  instances,  I  believe  in  this  as  little  as 
I  believe  that  Troy  town  was  a  solar  mythos  ;  but  in 
respect  of  craft  Masonry  it  is  the  one  note  of  illumina- 
tion in  Ragon's  great  wild  of  speculation  and  discursion 
on  the  degrees,  high  and  otherwise,  of  the  fraternity. 
We  may  be  quite  certain  that  those  who  transformed 
the  building  guild  did  not  intend  to  put  forward  an 
historical  thesis.  The  change  which  took  place  pre- 
supposes such  a  spiritualisation  of  the  traditional  temple 
that  it  passes  into  the  world  of  symbolism,  becoming 
itself  a  House  of  Doctrine.  If,  apart  from  the  question 
of  mystical  death  and  rebirth,  which  I  have  set  aside 
from  consideration  in  this  paper,  we  are  to  look  any- 

591 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

where  for  another  clue,  it  is  in  the  amazing  inference 
which  follows  from  the  craft  legend  concerning  the 
stultification  of  the  House  of  Doctrine  before  its  erection 
was  finished.  Those  who  are  familiar  with  the  rituals 
will  understand  exactly  what  I  mean,  and  I  give  this 
as  the  key  by  which  any  one  who  is  properly  qualified, 
and  who  chooses,  may  really  open  one  of  the  secret 
sanctuaries.  We  know  that  the  Master  was  asked  one 
little  question,  and  that  for  one  little  answer  which  he 
declined  to  make  the  traditional  founder  of  doctrine 
came  to  an  end  of  violence  ;  the  mysteries  which  he 
reserved  perished  in  his  person,  and  although  it  has 
never  been  noticed  so  far  by  any  Masonic  writer  in  the 
living  world,  it  follows  therefrom  that  the  Great  Symboli- 
cal Temple  was  not  finished  according  to  the  original 
plans.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  symbolically,  if  not 
actually,  the  True  Temple  still  remains  to  be  erected. 
Meanwhile,  in  Masonry,  as  in  other  institutions,  we  rest 
content  as  we  can  with  certain  conventional  proxies  in 
which  we  suppose,  by  a  precarious  hypothesis,  which  has, 
however,  a  profound  meaning  imbedded,  that  some 
analogy  inheres.  It  is  understood  that  two  kings  who 
represented  at  one  time  the  royal  houses  of  official  Grace 
and  Nature  knew  the  canonical  answer  to  the  question, 
supposing  that  this  had  been  put  under  the  due  warrants, 
but  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  it  was  the  verbal  formula 
and  not  the  ground-plan  of  the  mystic  building.  In 
any  case  it  remained  Sacramentum  Regis,  the  Secret  of 
the  King,  and  it  follows,  still  speaking  symbolically,  that 
all  Masonry  derives  not  from  a  lodge  of  Masters  but  from 
that  of  an  inferior  grade.  The  missing  formula  was  a 
word  of  life,  and  the  locum  tenens,  by  a  contradistinctive 
analogy,  is  a  word  of  death.  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
the  whole  corporate  fraternity  undertakes  a  Quest  which 
is  in  rigid  correspondence  with  that  of  the  Round  Table, 
but  they  move  in  the  opposite  direction  to  that  in  which 
the  Mysteries  repose.  It  is  the  most  mystical  of  all 
inquests,  for  it  is  the  history  of  our  human  life.  But 

592 


Secret  Tradition  in   Christian   Times 

there  is  an  Orient  from  on  high  which  in  fine  rises  on 
the  soul ;  the  soul  turns  in  that  light  and  moves  thence- 
forward in  the  true  and  one  direction. 

It  is  possible  to  express  what  follows  from  these  facts 
in  terms  of  comparative  simplicity,  for  even  as  Moses 
came  down  from  the  mountain  of  God  with  a  veil  upon 
the  face  of  him,  so  have  I  been  speaking  thus  far  to  the 
mixed  assembly  of  my  readers  under  the  veil  of  a  careful 
reservation,  because  these  things  are  not  to  be  discussed 
in  public  without  changing  the  voice.  Let  me  say  now 
more  openly,  since  this  is  permitted,  that  the  ideal  of 
the  True  Temple  is  in  our  hearts,  and  it  is  there  that 
we  rebuild  it.  We  do  this  daily  by  all  the  aspirations 
of  our  nature,  but  for  want  of  the  lost  designs  we  have 
not  been  able  to  externalise  it.  No  doubt  we  have  not 
led  the  life  which  entitles  us  to  know  of  the  doctrine  ; 
we  feel  that  it  is  implied  and  latent  in  all  the  roots  of 
our  being  ;  and  we  seem  to  die  with  it  on  our  lips.  It 
speaks  in  our  dreams  but  it  uses  an  unknown  language, 
and  if  heart  utters  it  to  heart,  it  is  only  in  oracles.  But 
we  have  conceived  enough  regarding  it  to  be  aware  that 
the  Spiritual  Temple  is  a  House  not  made  with  hands. 
And  so  neither  Masonry  nor  any  other  one  of  the  great 
instituted  Mysteries  has  designed  a  rebuilding  of  material 
holy  places.  The  rites  of  initiation  may  deal — as  they 
do  certainly — in  parables  and  in  allegories ;  they  may 
present — and  they  do  also — their  particular  forms  of 
thought  in  the  guise  of  a  legend  of  yesterday,  but  they 
are  really  the  legends  of  to-morrow,  the  expressed  heart 
of  expectation  and  not  a  retrospective  review.  But  if 
this  be  the  case — as  it  is  indeed  beyond  challenge — what 
part  have  we  otherwise  in  Masonry,  seeing  that  we  have 
come  out  of  Jewry  as  others  came  out  of  Egypt  ?  If 
this,  I  say,  be  the  case,  what  manner  of  House  was  that 
which  was  planned  of  old  in  wisdom  and  was  afterwards 
finished  as  it  best  could  be,  because  treason  fell  upon 
the  keeper,  because,  in  the  absence  of  preparation  and 
title,  there  had  been  an  attempt  to  take  the  Kingdom  of 

593  2  P 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

Heaven  by  violence  ?  Let  us  seek  our  first  illustrative 
answer  from  an  episode  of  the  Law  which  was  once 
promulgated  in  Israel.  Moses  the  prophet  came  down 
in  his  glory  from  Mount  Sinai  bringing  with  him  the 
Tables  of  the  Law,  but  he  found  his  rebellious  people 
unqualified  for  the  high  knowledge,  and  before  the  face 
of  them  he  broke  those  tables.  Afterwards  he  gave 
them  indeed  certain  commandments,  but  I  do  not  doubt 
that  they  were  the  shadows  of  the  others  only — the  code 
of  unruly  children,  not  of  the  elected  truly.  The  world 
was  not  worthy.  And  the  second  example  is  that  which 
we  know  already — that  the  Graal  was  taken  away,  that 
something  was  missing  thereafter  from  the  House  of 
Quest,  that  again  the  world  was  not  worthy.  The 
three  stories  are  therefore  one  story,  and  the  same  thing 
is  everywhere.  It  is  so  much  everywhere  that  the 
knowledge  which  remained  with  Moses  was  not  with- 
drawn utterly  by  him — according  to  the  tradition  of 
Israel — when  he  went  up  the  mountain  in  fine,  when  no 
man  living  followed  him,  when  he  did  not  return  ever 
more.  It  has  been  held  always  in  Jewry  that  there 
were  certain  elders  who  received  the  secret  deposit 
and  transmitted  it  in  their  turn  in  secret,  so  that  it  was 
perpetuated  from  generation  to  generation  till  it  became 
known  to  the  world  at  large,  but  only  in  an  imperfect 
form,  about  the  middle  period  of  the  Christian  centuries. 
The  original  Zobar  is  reported  by  a  paradox  to  have 
been  a  sufficient  load  for  twelve  camels,  and  the  extant 
Zobar  is  on  its  own  showing  a  substitute.  The  corre- 
spondence in  Graal  literature  is  the  disparting  of  the 
Hallows  among  certain  holy  hermits  and  the  removal  of 
the  Sacred  Vessel  to  that  place  of  which  Perceval  should 
know  surely  and  with  all  speed. 

That  which  was  made  void,  according  to  the  great 
craft  legend,  was  a  non-Christian  House  of  Doctrine. 
The  step  beyond  this  is  to  show  that  there  is  a  parallel 
in  Masonry  concerning  Christian  doctrine,  but  it  is 
found  in  high  degrees  and  in  those  which  are  militantly 

594 


Secret   Tradition  in   Christian   Times 

Christian.  If  I  were  asked  to  speak  frankly,  I  should  call 
it  a  concealed  legend  of  Templar  vengeance.  It  is  an 
old  story  in  the  high  grades  that  the  murder  of  Jacques 
de  Molai  was  destined  to  be  avenged  heavily,  and  one 
section  of  criticism  has  concluded  that  this  was  effected 
ultimately  by  the  decapitation  of  Louis  XVI.  ;  but  this 
is  romance  of  Faerie.  Whether  the  supposed  vengeance 
came  otherwise  to  anything  I  am  not  prepared  to  say, 
but  I  can  show  that  the  secret  plan  was  more  deeply 
laid,  though  it  may  have  been  actuated  by  far  different 
motives  than  inhere  usually  in  the  idea  of  vengeance. 
The  plan  is  not  illustrated  by  any  legend  of  murder 
or  by  anything  that,  remotely  or  approximately,  can 
suggest  a  vendetta  ;  but  in  one  Masonic  grade  which, 
by  the  hypothesis,  is  the  last  transformation  of  the 
Templars,  the  fact  is  shown  forth  by  the  silent  eloquence 
of  symbolism.  As  in  the  craft  degrees  we  learn  how  the 
vital  secret  was  taken  away,  so  here  the  rite  sets  before 
us  a  picture  of  all  Christendom,  personified  by  the  flower 
of  its  chivalry,  standing  guard,  amidst  the  adjuncts  of 
pomp  and  ceremony,  over  a  vacant  sepulchre — the  shrine 
from  which  a  God  has  departed.  Could  anything 
signify  more  profoundly  the  bereavement  and  widow- 
hood of  the  Christian  House  of  Doctrine  ?  Could 
anything  indicate  more  pregnantly  the  presence  of  a 
sub-surface  design  among  the  old  Knights  Templars, 
supposing  that  this  grade  were  really,  at  some  far  dis- 
tance, descended  therefrom  ?  Would  it  not  seem  like  a 
challenge  by  the  way  of  evasion,  saying  to  the  modern 
world  :  "  Do  you  suppose,  in  your  fondness,  that  about 
those  hallows  of  the  past  our  intention  was  ever 
centralised  except  to  conceal  it  ?  " 

Our  next  step  takes  us  to  a  grade  which  is,  com- 
paratively speaking,  obscure,  though  it  is  still  worked  in 
England.  It  is  one  the  position  and  claim  of  which  is 
a  little  difficult  to  determine,  whether  as  to  origin  or 
history.  On  the  surface  its  similarity  to  the  eighteenth 
degree  of  Rose  Croix  has  caused  many  persons  to 

595 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

repudiate  it  as  a  mere  copy.  The  better  view  is,  how- 
ever, to  infer  that  both  rites  originated  from  a  common 
prototype,  and  I  may  mention  here  that  there  are  not 
only  several  variants  of  the  eighteenth  degree  incor- 
porated by  other  systems,  but  there  have  also  been 
Rosicrucian  degrees  current  from  time  to  time  in  Masonry 
which  have  very  slight  correspondence  with  the  grade 
supereminent  of  the  Ancient  and  Accepted  Scottish 
Rite.  This  question  apart,  the  particular  chivalrous 
and  Masonic  Order  is  rendered  important  to  our  present 
purpose  because  it  gives  the  symbolical  counterpart  by 
alternative  of  that  intimation  which  is  conveyed  in  the 
analogous  grade.  The  latter  represents  a  particular 
state  of  the  assumed  case  at  the  period  of  the  Crusades, 
the  former  at  an  epoch  which — on  account  of  several 
historical  confusions,  having  an  appearance  of  design 
— is  scarcely  possible  to  determine.  In  any  event  it 
dissolves  at  a  certain  stage  into  yet  another  degree,  and 
between  the  successive  points  of  the  two  rituals  the 
candidate  is  brought  to  a  period  when  all  earthly  Houses 
of  Doctrine  have  given  place  to  the  high  spiritual 
House  of  Eternal  Wisdom.  As  a  preliminary  to  this, 
the  externalised  House  of  Doctrine,  represented  by  the 
Holy  Sepulchre,  is  made  subject  to  a  simple  visitation, 
with  the  result  that  it  is  found  empty,  and  those  who 
look  therein  are  told  in  a  veiled  manner  that  in  such 
a  place  it  is  useless  to  go  in  quest  of  lost  secrets,  because 
the  Divine  Warden  thereof  has  risen  and  gone  away. 
As  the  candidate — and  this  of  necessity — is  left  always 
in  the  position  of  Satan  after  his  lectures  at  Salamanca, 
that  is  to  say,  with  the  shadow  instead  of  the  substance, 
so  here  the  chivalry  of  the  sepulchre  has  to  be  content 
with  what  it  has — with  the  rumour  of  the  resurrection 
constructed  into  glad  tidings,  though  it  remains  that 
the  place  of  the  Hallows  is  now  an  empty  place. 

Our  last  step  takes  us  again  to  the  literature  of  the 
Holy  Graal,  which  depicts  a  House  of  Doctrine,  like  the 
temples,  towns  and  palaces  of  which  we  have  been 

596 


Secret   Tradition  in   Christian  Times 

speaking  previously.  It  shows  how  that  House  was  in 
the  first  place  visited  by  sin  and  sorrow  ;  how  secondly 
it  was  made  void,  the  secret  things  thereto  belonging 
being  transferred  therefrom.  Symbolism  has  some- 
times the  way  of  sparing  nothing,  and  probably  the 
makers  of  the  legend  intended  only — as  some  expressly 
say — to  show  how  the  realm  of  Logres  had  become 
unworthy  of  the  most  holy  things  ;  but  the  House  of 
the  Doctrine  is  involved  in  the  common  ruin. 

The  question  which  now  supervenes  is  one  which 
will  occur  spontaneously  to  all  those  who  have  followed 
this  account.  Is  it  intended  to  suggest — shall  I  say  ? — 
that  the  secret  of  Masonry  is  anti-Jewish  and  anti- 
Christian,  or,  to  put  it  better,  that  the  interests  which 
took  over  the  building  guild  had  either  never  entered 
into  those  holy  places  of  the  past  or  had  come  forth 
therefrom  ?  The  answer  is  a  decisive  negative.  It 
follows  from  all  the  legends,  all  the  symbolism,  or  that 
part  at  least  which  is  other  than  accidental,  and  in  fine 
from  all  the  rituals  of  Masonry,  that  those  who  set 
forth  the  widowhood  of  the  House  of  Doctrine  spoke 
not  from  without  it  but  from  within  ;  that  they  looked 
for  the  return  of  that  which,  for  the  time,  had  been 
taken  away  ;  that  when  they  speak  to  us  of  what  was 
lost  to  Jewry,  they  were  never  more  assured  of  the 
wisdom  which  once  dwelt  in  Israel ;  that  when  they 
mourn  over  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  they  were  never  more 
certain  that  what  has  been  removed  is  alive  ;  and  as  all 
the  degrees  end  in  a  substituted  restoration  it  is  also 
certain  that  thither  where  the  truth  and  beauty  had  been 
taken  they  looked  also  to  go.  In  other  words,  it  is 
the  intimation  of  the  secret  schools  that  somewhere  in 
time  and  the  world  there  is  that  which  can  confer  upon 
the  candidate  a  real  as  well  as  a  symbolical  experience. 
And  this  is  the  identical  message  of  the  Graal  literature  ; 
it  speaks  too  from  within  the  official  House  of  Christian 
Doctrine  concerning  that  which  once  inhered  therein 
and  is  now  in  the  state  of  withdrawal  or  profound 

597 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

latency  ;  but  it  offers  all  honour  and  devotion  to  the 
substituted  sanctuary  which  remains,  as  Masonry  offers 
it  in  the  higher  understanding  both  to  Jew  and  Christian. 
Here  therefore  is  no  enemy  setting  to  at  the  work  of 
destruction,  but  here  rather  are  the  rumours  and  voices 
as  if  of  Unknown  Superiors,  like  a  power — which  makes 
for  righteousness — between  the  seat  of  Peter  and  the  seat 
of  the  chief  Patriarch,  as  if  something  were  guiding  and 
consoling  all  the  keepers  of  the  keys,  but  dissuading  them 
at  the  same  time  from  the  opening  of  certain  doors  till 
that  which  has  been  lost  is  at  length  restored  to  the 
sanctuaries.  It  is  in  this  sense  only  that  we  shall  ever 
get  to  understand  the  inner  Mystery  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
the  Mystery  of  the  Craft  Degrees,  and  of  the  great, 
disordered  cohort  of  things  from  near  and  far — reflec- 
tions, rumours,  replicae  and  morganatic  descents  from 
older  Mysteries — which  make  up  the  cloud  of  witnesses 
in  the  high  degrees.  The  work,  not  indeed  of  the  same 
hands  but  of  many  at  the  same  work,  is  therefore 
everywhere,  the  traces  of  the  same  high  intention,  the 
evidence — not  less  strong  because  it  is  not  declared 
openly — of  masters,  who  are  also  our  brothers,  watching 
haply  over  the  quests  of  humanity  and  shaping  them, 
at  proper  seasons,  to  the  true  ends. 

I  conclude  therefore  (i)  that  Masonry  is  herein  re- 
ferred to  its  true  place  and  is  saved  otherwise  from  the 
category  of  vain  observances  that  are  consecrated  by 
good  intention,  because  it  leads  us  back,  after  many 
travellings,  to  the  one  subject  ;  (2)  that  it  is  an  index- 
finger  pointing  to  other  rites,  to  pure  and  exalted  cere- 
monies, which — somewhat  shadowy,  somewhat  dubious, 
yet  distinguishable  as  to  their  purpose — remain  among 
the  records  of  the  past,  not  without  suggestions  that, 
even  at  this  day,  the  Mysteries  have  not  died  utterly. 

I  have  made  it  plain  already  that  in  so  far  as  there 
is  mystic  purpose  or  hidden  doctrine  in  the  Graal  litera- 
ture it  is  at  most  an  echo  from  afar — a  rumour,  a  legend 
which  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  romancers.  It  is  as 

598 


Secret   Tradition  in   Christian   Times 

if  Sir  Walter  Montbeliard,  the  patron  of  Robert  de 
Borron,  being  by  the  hypothesis  a  Templar,  had  told  a 
strange  story  to  the  poet  of  things  which  he  also  had 
heard  from  afar  concerning  the  Sons  of  the  Valley  ;  it 
is  as  if  Guiot  de  Provence,  having  seen  a  transcript  from 
Toledo,  had  compared  it  with  some  Templar  records 
belonging  to  the  house  of  Anjou.  These  are  not  the 
directions  of  research,  but  they  stand  for  more  likely 
ways,  and  I  put  forward  as  so  many  materials  of  assist- 
ance, so  many  traces  of  the  same  implicits  perpetuated 
through  several  centuries — (a)  the  Sacramental  Mystery 
of  Alchemy  as  corresponding  to  the  Eucharistic  Mystery 
of  the  Holy  Graal ;  (b)  the  mystical  pageant  of  Kabalism 
as  analogical  to  the  Graal  pageant ;  (c)  certain  quests  in 
Masonry  as  synonymous  with  the  Graal  Quest.  The  con- 
clusion is  that  from  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century, 
and  so  forward,  there  has  been  always  a  witness  in  the 
world  that  the  greatest  and  the  highest  among  the  holy 
things  have  been  represented  by  a  certain  substitution 
within  the  official  churches.  The  churches  have  not 
been  made  void  ;  they  are  still  "  those  holy  fields  "  ; 
but  they  bear  the  same  relation  to  the  sacred  mystery 
behind  them  that  Sinai  and  Horeb,  Tabor  and  Carmel, 
Gethsemane  and  Calvary,  bear  to  the  official  churches. 
Remember  that  the  highest  office  in  no  sense  makes 
void  the  second  best  among  any  offices  that  are  inferior. 
The  Supernatural  Graal  is  without  prejudice  to  the 
instituted  sacrament,  even  as  the  transliterations  and 
complexities  of  Kabalistic  interpretation  reduce  nothing 
in  the  literal  word. 


599 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 


IX 

THE  HALLOWS  OF  THE  GRAAL  MTSTERT  RE- 
DISCOVERED IN  THE  TALISMANS  OF  THE 
TAROT 

To  restate  the  fact  that  the  canonical  Hallows  of  the 
Graal  legend  are  the  Cup,  the  Lance,  the  Sword  and  the 
Dish  will  seem  almost  impertinent  at  this  stage  ;  the 
least  versed  of  my  readers  will  regard  it  as  a  weary  re- 
iteration, for  he  and  they  all  are  in  plenary  possession  of 
whatever  need  be  said  upon  the  subject.  I  must  specify 
the  bare  fact,  this  notwithstanding,  because  of  what 
follows  hereafter.  And  it  may  seem  to  arise  from  the 
repetition  if,  further,  I  recall  to  their  minds — and  my 
own  memory — one  experience  which  comes  to  us  all,  and 
startles  us  when  it  does  come,  revealing  the  fund  of 
unobservance  to  which  we  must  confess  by  necessity. 
When  any  of  us  have  been  studying  exhaustively — as  we 
think — a  given  subject  and  are  surfeited  in  our  familiarity 
therewith,  it  may  happen  that  we  alight  unawares  on 
something  which  had  escaped  us  utterly.  It  may  be 
through  the  random  remark  of  a  stranger,  through  an 
apparently  detached  sentence  in  a  forgotten  or  unknown 
book,  but  the  well  of  other  waters  is  opened  and  we  see 
the  whole  thing  under  a  new  aspect.  On  the  surface  this 
illustrates  the  difficulty  with  which  we  notice  anything 
that  is  ever  so  little  outside  our  special  groove  ;  but 
there  are  times  when  it  seems  to  have  a  deeper  root, 
and  we  realise  in  our  hearts  that  anything  may  serve  as 
a  pretext  to  open  another  horizon — "  a  flower,  a  leaf, 
the  ocean  "  may  touch  and  kindle  "  the  electric  chain 
wherewith  we  are  darkly  bound."  So  falls  the  "  spark 
from  heaven."  Now,  as  an  example  to  the  purpose  in 
hand,  I  wonder  how  many  critical  works  have  been 
written  on  the  Holy  Graal,  and  yet  it  has  occurred  to 

600 


Secret   Tradition   in   Christian   Times 

no  one  that  its  Hallows,  under  a  slight  modification,  may 
be  somewhere  else  in  the  world  than  in  those  old  books 
of  romance,  I  might  have  shown  that  their  bases  are  in 
modern  high  grades  of  Masonry,  but  I  can  understand  how 
this  has  been  missed,  and  my  default  means  that  I  have 
not  attached  undue  importance  to  the  fact.  But  they  are 
to  be  found  also  in  the  most  unexpected  of  all  places, 
outside  the  grades  of  literature,  and  they  have  existed 
there  from  what  would  be  termed  masonically  time 
immemorial.  They  are  in  the  antecedents  of  our  playing- 
cards — that  is  to  say,  in  the  old  Talismans  of  the  Tarot. 
These  are  things  which,  in  a  sense,  are  almost  of  world- 
wide knowledge,  which  have  interested  innumerable 
people,  which  still  constitute,  as  they  have  constituted 
for  generations  and  centuries,  the  most  prolific  form  of 
divination  and  the  vagrant  art  of  fortune-telling.  We 
know  nothing  concerning  their  origin  and  of  their  dis- 
tribution little  enough.  I  trust  that  I  am  least  disposed 
of  any  one  to  assume  the  antiquity  of  doubtful  documents 
or  to  predate  traditions  on  the  basis  of  their  uncertain 
origin.  I  leave  to  those  whom  it  may  concern  the 
history  of  playing-cards  and  their  precedents,  this  so-called 
Book  of  fbotb,  nor  do  I  need  to  recite,  even  shortly, 
what  has  been  assumed  regarding  it,  because  one  class 
of  scholarship  which  has  dealt  more  particularly  with 
the  question  of  historical  antiquity  in  these  matters  is 
that  precisely  which  lies  under  most  suspicion  on  the 
ground  of  its  enthusiasm.  In  particular  the  measures 
on  the  side  of  speculation  are  pressed  down  and  running 
over  with  every  kind  of  folly  and  extravagance.  The 
uttermost  of  all  hazards  is  expressed  in  the  language  of 
certitude,  even  as  J.  M.  Ragon  expressed  the  hazard 
of  a  root-connection  between  Elias  Ashmole  and  the 
institution  of  speculative  Masonry.  There  is  another 
order  of  learning  which  has  confined  itself  to  the  simple 
archaeology  of  the  subject  with  sober  and  valuable 
results  ;  by  such  people  I  shall  be  challenged  scarcely 
if  I  say  that  there  are  traces  of  the  Tarot  cards  in  the 

60 1 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

fourteenth  century,  prior  to  which  they  are  not  of 
necessity  non-existent  because,  like  the  Graal  itself,  they 
are  lost  to  sight. 

Archaeology  is,  however,  its  own  term,  so  that  usually 
there  is  nothing  beyond  it ;  and  therefore,  having  so  far 
distinguished  between  two  schools,  I  must  say  that 
there  is  yet  another  side  which  might  rivet  attention 
generally  if  it  were  possible  to  speak  fully  concerning  it. 
I  record  in  the  first  place  (a)  that  the  correspondence  of 
certain  Tarot  symbols  with  those  of  the  Holy  Graal 
stands  rather  in  the  light  of  a  discovery  without  a  con- 
sequence which  I  can  pretend  to  develop  here ;  and  (b) 
the  reason  will,  I  think,  be  evident  because  this  side 
which  I  have  mentioned  reposes  in  certain  secret  schools 
now  existing  in  Europe.  In  these  the  Talismans  of  the 
Tarot  have  been  pressed  into  the  service  of  a  logical,  con- 
structed system  of  symbolism  with  results  that  are  very 
curious.  It  might  or  might  not  be  useless  to  speak  about 
the  system  in  public,  supposing  that  this  were  possible,  but 
I  think  that  there  are  considerations  involved  which 
would  be  almost  an  unknown  language  to  people  who  have 
not  had  their  training  in  a  particular  school  of  thought. 
Those  who  know  regard  the  results  as  important,  yet 
those  who  see  the  importance  have  not  in  most  cases 
any  idea  of  the  term.  As  I  must  now  say  that  this 
term  belongs  under  one  of  its  aspects  to  the  domain  of 
occultism,  it  should  be  understood  that  my  strictures  on 
wild  Tarot  speculations  ought  to  carry  a  certain  weight 
because  those  speculations  are  of  the  occult  order.  If 
any  of  my  readers  should  wish  to  look  a  little  further 
into  a  strange  and  problematical  subject,  they  may  be 
recommended  to  consult  one  book  called  Le  Tarot  des 
Bohemiens,  issued  by  the  French  school  of  philosophical 
Martinism.  I  can  tell  them  for  their  consolation  that 
from  root  to  branch  it  is  a  tissue  of  errors,  because  this 
school  has  not  the  true  reading,  while  specific  alternative 
readings  in  other  academies  are  also  wrong.  Except  in 
purely  archaeological  aspects,  the  inquirer  can,  however, 

602 


Secret   Tradition  in   Christian   Times 

get  nothing  better  than  the  content  of  this  work,  and  if 
he  misses  the  major  sacraments  he  will  find  a  limited 
quantity  of  fortune-telling  rubbish  therein  which  is 
altogether  diverting  and  may  be  mastered  with  a  little 
trouble. 

It  must  be  explained  that  the  old  sheaf  of  oracles 
consists  of  seventy-eight  cards,  of  which  fifty-six  are 
the  equivalents  of  ordinary  playing-cards,  plus  four 
knights  ;  and  the  remaining  twenty-two  are  pictorial 
keys,  the  symbolical  nature  of  which  is  seen  on  their 
surface,  though  it  must  be  understood  that  hereon  all 
of  them  are  conventional  and  many  are  grotesque,  as 
if  they  were  coarse  allegories.  The  keys  are  allocated 
by  interpretation  in  various  orders  to  the  letters  of  the 
Hebrew  alphabet,  and  herefrom  as  a  root  many  insti- 
tuted analogies  with  Kabalism  have  been  devised  by 
the  divergent  schools  which  have  devoted  their  atten- 
tion to  the  pictures.  The  Sephirotic  attributions  which 
have  been  obtained  in  this  way  are  especially  remark- 
able. I  offer  my  assurance,  as  one  who  has  more  to 
lose  than  to  gain  by  making  the  statement,  that  certain 
secret  schools  have  developed  their  scheme  of  symbolic 
interpretation  to  a  very  high  point  by  the  allocation  of 
these  cards  according  to  a  system  which  is  not  known 
outside  them. 

Having  made  this  explanation,  my  next  point  is  to 
state  that  the  four  palmary  symbols  of  the  Tarot  are — 

1.  The  Cup,  corresponding  to  Hearts  in  the  common  signs  of  cards. 

2.  The  Wand,  corresponding  to  Diamonds  in  the  common  signs  of 
cards. 

3.  The  Sword,  corresponding  to  Spades  in  the  common  signs  of  cards. 

4.  The  Pentacle,  corresponding  to  Clubs  in  the   common  signs  of 
cards. 

The  Wand  is  alternately  a  sceptre  in  the  Tarot 
descriptions,  but  its  proper  alternative  in  the  symbolism 
is  a  spear  or  lance,  the  misdescribed  Diamond  in  the 
modern  suit  being  obviously  the  head  of  the  weapon. 
In  respect  of  the  Pentacle  that  which  is  depicted  under 

603 


The    Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

this  name  answers  to  a  dish,  usually  after  the  outline  of 
a  four-leaved  shamrock,  or  alternatively  of  a  circle.  In 
either  case  the  emblem  is  also  misdescribed  under  the 
term  Pentacle,  which  must  have  five  angles  or  flanges. 
With  these  modifications,  which  are  in  no  sense  of  an 
arbitrary  kind,  the  Tarot  suits  are  actually  the  Graal 
Hallows. 

And  now,  to  move  one  step  forward,  being  the  last 
point  to  which  I  can  take  the  subject  :  The  place  of 
the  Cup  in  the  extension  of  the  symbolism  under  the 
light  of  all  its  analogies,  corresponds  to  the  place  of 
spiritual  life  ;  to  the  rest  of  knowledge  ;  to  the  receptacle 
of  the  graces  which  are  above  and  to  the  channel  of  their 
communication  to  things  which  are  below  ;  but  this 
is  the  equivalent  ex  hypothesi  of  the  arch-natural 
Eucharist.  In  a  word,  it  is  the  world  not  manifested, 
and  this  is  the  world  of  adeptship,  attained  by  sanctity. 
In  so  far  therefore  as  it  can  be  said  in  the  open  day, 
hereof  is  the  message  of  the  Secret  Tradition  in  Christian 
times — as  it  remains  among  the  guardians  thereof— on 
the  subject  of  the  Graal  Mystery.  So  also  under  a 
certain  transfiguration  does  the  Graal  still  appear  in 
the  Hidden  Sanctuaries. 

But  now  in  conclusion  generally  as  to  all  the  schools 
of  symbolism,  successive  or  coincident  :  it  follows  from 
the  considerations  which  I  have  developed  in  what 
approaches  an  exhaustive  manner  that  we  are  con- 
fronted by  two  theses,  from  the  first  of  which  it  follows 
that  the  Mystery  of  Divine  Attainment  is  of  that 
order  which  passes  into  experience,  while  dubiously 
and  elusively  its  traces  are  met  with  even  in  the  modern 
world,  though  it  does  not  say  "  Come  quickly  "  to  the 
majority  of  aspirants.  From  the  second  it  follows  that 
the  great  secret — at  least  so  far  as  its  specific  declaration 
and  visible  existence  are  concerned — has  passed  into 
abeyance  in  the  external  sanctuaries.  I  can  scarcely 
conceive  of  a  clearer  issue  established  by  way  of  contrast. 
Several  accredited  scholars  have  recognised  the  evidences 

604 


Secret  Tradition   in    Christian   Times 

of  secret  doctrine  in  the  Graal  literature,  more  especially 
in  respect  of  the  Eucharist,  but  some  of  them  have 
been  disposed  to  account  for  its  presence  by  a  familiarity 
with  obscure  apocryphal  gospels.  This  is  a  source  in 
legend,  and  of  sources  in  the  experiences  of  sanctity 
or  of  perpetuated  secret  doctrine  they  knew  little 
enough.  In  particular  they  did  not  dream  that  such 
perpetuation  could  have  taken  place  except  in  heretical 
schools.  They  appreciated  the  concealment  of  sects 
which  carried  their  lives  in  danger,  but  not  the  conceal- 
ment of  the  sanctuary.  There  is,  however,  the  vision 
of  the  Third  Heaven,  about  which  it  is  not  lawful  to 
speak,  the  reason  being  that  it  exceeds  expression,  and 
utterance  is  therefore  only  by  way  of  similitude  and 
approximation.  The  secret  school  for  which  I  look 
and  of  which  I  recognise  the  existence  did  not  differ 
in  doctrine  from  the  external  ways  of  salvation,  but  it 
opened  out  the  infinite  world  which  lies  behind  the 
manifest  life  of  teaching — that  world  which  was  recog- 
nised by  St.  Augustine  when  he  said — as  we  have  seen 
— that  the  definition  of  Three  Persons  subsisting  in  one 
God  was  not  an  expression  which  satisfied  the  mind, 
but  that  some  kind  of  expression  is  necessary.  This 
school  never  came  forward  with  improvements  on 
doctrine,  with  proposals  to  reduce  doctrine,  or  with 
new  opinions  on  the  Eucharist.  It  carried  the  implicits 
of  religious  teaching  to  their  final  issue  ;  the  implicits 
were  Catholic  and  the  issue  was  also  Catholic. 

Therefore  so  it  remains  to  this  day,  while  we  in  our 
spiritual  isolation  are  conscious  of  loss  everywhere. 

The 'great  rites  are  celebrated,  the  high  offices  con- 
tinue, the  moving  liturgical  formulae  are  recited  from 
day  to  day  and  year  after  year  ;  we  pass  hurriedly 
through  the  crowded  streets,  over  the  quiet  country- 
sides ;  we  pause  by  solitary  seas.  The  veiled  voices 
signify  the  Presence,  yet  the  Master  is  taken  away,  and 
we  know  not  where  they  have  laid  Him.  The  great 
legends  tell  us  that  He  has  been  assumed  into  Heaven 

605 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

because  of  the  evil  times,  or  that  He  is  in  a  place  of  con- 
cealment, or  that  He  is  not  seen  so  openly.  Prohibited, 
spoliated  and  extirpated  with  fire  and  sword,  the  memory 
of  the  dead  sects  of  Southern  France  can  offer  us  at 
their  highest  only  the  lips  of  the  noble  lady  Esclair- 
monde  communicating  the  osculum  fraternitatis — con- 
solamentum  of  all  things  saddest — through  the  flames 
of  the  auto-da-fe.  One  Masonic  chivalry  consents  to 
protect  us  from  the  insidious  attacks  of  the  infidel  if 
we  visit  the  holy  fields,  but  it  is  confessed  that  the 
sepulchre  is  empty  and  we  know  that  the  worst  danger 
is  from  the  infidel  who  is  within.  A  later  and  more 
obscure  chivalry,  with  a  vainer  office  of  observance, 
keeps  ritual  guard  over  the  shadow  of  a  sacred  legend, 
we  asking  the  daughters  of  Zion  whether  there  is  any 
greater  desolation.  It  pledges  us  to  maintain  the 
Sepulchre  when  it  is  agreed  that  the  Master  is  not  there, 
and  we  continue  to  say  with  our  lips :  Et  unam  sanctam 
catholicam  et  apostolicam  ecclesiam,  with  a  certain  uncon- 
scious relief  that  the  word  Credo  stands  far  away  in 
the  symbol.  Saddest  and  proudest  of  all,  the  great 
craft  legends  of  Masonry  tell  us  that  until  that  which 
from  time  immemorial  has  been  lost  in  the  secret  places 
is  at  length  restored  to  the  mysteries,  the  true  temple 
can  only  be  built  in  the  heart.  The  Kabalistic  sages 
are  also  waiting  for  the  word,  that  there  may  be  mercy 
on  every  side,  and  the  stress  and  terror  of  the  centuries 
is  because  Adonai  has  been  substituted  for  Jehovah  in 
the  true  form  thereof.  It  is  only  the  higher  side  of 
alchemy  which,  without  faltering,  has  continued  to 
point  the  path  of  attainment,  speaking  of  no  change, 
no  substitution  therein — telling  us  of  the  one  matter, 
the  one  vessel,  the  one  way  of  perfection,  yet  also  saying 
that  except  the  Divine  Guidance  lead  us  in  the  path 
of  illumination,  no  man  shall  acquire  the  most  hidden 
of  all  secrets  without  a  Master,  which  is  another  mode 
of  expressing  the  same  thing.  I  suppose  that  there  is 
no  more  unvarying  witness  continued  through  the  ages, 

606 


Secret   Tradition  in   Christian   Times 

amidst  all  which  we  have  felt,  as  we  still  feel,  that  only 
a  small  change  in  the  axis  of  inclination  would  transform 
the  world  of  greatest  inhibition  into  that  of  the  greatest 
grace.  It  is  as  if  we  were  in  the  position  of  Perceval, 
according  to  the  High  History — as  if  we  had  failed  only 
on  account  of  "  one  little  question."  But  we  do  not 
know  what  it  is,  or  rather  we  know  it  only  in  its  ex- 
ternal and  substituted  forms.  We  go  on,  therefore,  sadly 
enough  and  slowly,  yet  in  a  sense  we  are  haunted  men, 
with  a  voice  saying  ever  and  again  in  our  ears  :  "  Ask, 
and  ye  shall  receive  " ;  search  your  heart,  for  the  true 
question  is  within  and  the  answer  thereof. — A  sad  and 
strange  enchantment  has  fallen  even  over  the  animal 
world,  and  all  the  gentle  creatures  with  kind  eyes  are 
waiting  with  us  for  the  close  of  the  adventurous  times, 
the  term  of  enchantment  in  Logres,  and  the  unspelling 
quest.  Of  these  three  things,  two  are  of  the  Order  of 
Mercy  and  one  is  of  the  High  Order  of  the  Union. 
All  this  is  not  to  say  that  the  high  offices  fail,  that  the 
great  conventions  are  abrogated,  that  the  glorious  sense 
of  chivalry  towards  our  second  mother  in  those  sodalities 
which  are  external — but  yet  in  that  order  are  some 
intellectual  and  some  also  spiritual — that  this  sense  is 
not  of  the  highest  counsel.  But  a  time  comes  when 
the  "  glory  to  God  in  the  highest,"  having  been  declared 
sufficiently  without,  is  expressed  more  perfectly  within, 
and  we  know  in  fine  that  this  glory  is  to  be  revealed. 

The  same  story  of  loss  is  therefore  everywhere,  but 
it  is  never  told  twice  in  the  same  way.  Now  it  is  a 
despoiled  sanctuary ;  now  a  withdrawn  sacramental 
mystery ;  now  the  abandonment  of  a  great  military 
and  religious  order  ;  now  the  age-long  frustration  of 
the  greatest  building  plan  which  was  ever  conceived; 
now  the  Lost  Word  of  Kabalism  ;  now  the  vacancy  of 
the  most  holy  of  all  sepulchres.  But  the  sanctuary  is 
sacred,  the  king  is  to  return,  the  Order  of  Chivalry 
has  not  really  died ;  at  some  undeclared  time,  and 
under  some  unknown  circumstances,  the  Word  which 

607 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

gives  the  key  to  some  treasure-house  of  the  building 
plan  will  be  restored  in  full,  and  meanwhile  the 
quest  is  continued  for  ever ;  the  true  Word  will 
also  be  restored  to  Israel,  and  so  from  age  to  age  goes 
on  the  great  story  of  divine  expectation.  Meanwhile 
the  Christian  mystics  say  :  "  Take  no  thought  for  the 
morrow,  because  it  is  here  and  now  "  ;  and  to  this  grand 
antiphon  the  response  of  the  Hermetic  Mystery  is  : 
"  Even  so,  in  the  place  of  wisdom  there  is  still  the  Stone 
of  the  Wise." 


608 


BOOK  X 

THE   SECRET   CHURCH 


THE   ARGUMENT 

I.  THE    HERMENEUTICS    OF    THE    HOLY    GRAAL. — A 

summary  of  previous  considerations — The  way  of  attain- 
ment in  the  Secret  Schools — Of  the  Interior  Mass — Other 
gleanings  concerning  the  Epiclesis  clause — That  the  Secret 
Tradition  does  not  impeach  the  official  Church — Position  of 
the  several  schools  on  this  subject — There  is  no  competitive 
orthodoxy — The  eulogy  of  the  external  Church — Of  what  is 
to  be  understood  by  its  desolation — Of  its  restrictions  at 
this  day — The  sects  and  the  Church.  II.  THE  GOOD 
HUSBANDMAN. — The  Graal  legends  and  the  Divine  Alliance 
— That  there  is  one  Sanctuary — That  the  House  of  Doctrine 
is  one — Of  that  which  is  behind  the  Visible  Church — 
Graal  literature  as  the  spiritual  emotion  of  the  Church — 
Its  high  texts  as  products  of  monasticism — The  maiming 
of  the  outer  Church — The  inner  priesthood  and  the  secret 
Mass — The  universal  experiment — One  of  its  concealments 
— Further  concerning  its  rumours — Peculiar  use  of  Eucha- 
ristic  transubstantiation — The  official  Church  and  the 
seat  of  its  power — Testimony  of  certain  prelates  in  respect 
of  Papal  Rome — The  yoke  and  the  burden — Strictures  on 
altered  procedure  in  respect  of  the  Eucharist — Traces  of  a 
school  of  patience  and  a  school  of  higher  experience — Of  its 
connection  with  the  life  of  the  world  within  and  without 
the  Church.  III.  THE  CATHOLIC  SECRET  OF  THE  LITERA- 
TURE.— Question  as  to  the  Custodians  of  the  Secret  Tradition 
—The  Consensus  Spiritus  Sancti — The  two  apparent 

611 


"The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

schools  of  the  Secret  Tradition — Further  concerning  spiritual 
alchemy — The  Quest  of  the  Graal — Of  Kabalism  and 
Masonry — The  proper  understanding  of  a  doctrine  of  loss  in 
the  Church — The  Church  as  the  House  of  Souls — Orthodoxy 
of  the  Graal  literature — Its  branches  from  this  point  of  view 
— That  its  rumours  and  implicits  are  not  the  voice  of  a 
rival  Christian  conclave  working  in  the  hidden  places — The 
same  is  to  be  said  of  Kabalism  and  Masonry — The  position 
of  Alchemy — Removal  of  a  certain  interdict  on  speech  and 
thought — Councillor  Karl  von  Eckartshausen — The  Cloud 
on  the  Sanctuary — Loupoukine — His  Characteristics  of 
the  Interior  Church — The  conception  of  a  Holy  Assembly— 
The  sodality  of  a  consciousness  in  common — The  rise  of  a 
more  express  witness — A  confusion  in  respect  of  the  evidence 
— An  illustration  from  the  natural  world — The  Visible 
Church  in  connection  with  the  doctrine  of  a  Holy  Assembly 
— Comparison  of  the  Secret  Church  to  a  School  of  the 
Prophets — Inferences  from  secret  fraternities — Testimony 
of  the  Sons  of  the  Valley — Specific  claim  put  forward  by 
The  Cloud  on  the  Sanctuary — Its  reduction  into  a  com- 
plete schedule — The  similar  evidence  of  Loupoukine — 
Errors  of  expression  in  both  witnesses — That  the  Secret 
Church  is  an  arbitrary  name — Definition  of  the  mystic 
life — Of  certain  elements  in  the  hands  of  the  Graal 
romancers — That  the  Secret  Church  recognises  the  external 
Church — The  consensus  of  sanctity — That  the  Secret  Church 
is  not  an  instituted  Assembly — Of  Mass  in  the  Secret 
Church — Of  certain  limits  to  expression — The  Graal 
literature  as  a  rumour  of  Sanctuary  Doctrine — Mystery 
concerning  the  rumour — How  the  official  Sanctuary  is  made 
void.  IV.  THE  MYSTERY  WHICH  is  WITHIN. — The  Secret 
Church  as  an  hypothesis,  an  implicit  and  a  truth — Condi- 

612 


"The  Argument 


tions  of  its  membership — That  it  has  not  issued  manifestoes 
— In  what  sense  the  evidence  is  misleading  concerning  it — 
The  silence  of  its  work — Its  chief  mystery  as  that  of  Divine 
Communication — Its  connection  with  the  Eucharist — The 
Secret  Church  as  an  integration  of  believers  in  the  higher 
consciousness.  V.  THE  SECLUDED  AND  UNKNOWN  SANC- 
TUARY.— An  alternative  for  the  romances  of  the  Graal — A 
further  summary  concerning  the  Secret  Tradition — The 
mystery  of  love  and  the  world  of  grace — Another  reconsidera- 
tion of  the  literature — A  new  comparison  from  alchemy — 
The  Graal  romances  as  an  implied  impeachment  of  Rome — 
Whether  the  Graal  Church  stood  for  official  Christianity — 
The  Rich  Fisherman  from  this  point  of  view — Difficulties 
of  this  assumption — Conclusion  that  the  Hidden  Sanctuary 
could  not  represent  the  Visible  Church  of  Rome — Evidence 
of  the  literature  itself  on  this  subject — Whether  the  litera- 
ture was.,  in  some  other  sense,  hostile  to  Rome — Assumption 
that  the  Graal  sanctuary  was  really  the  Celtic  Church — 
Evidence  of  the  literature  from  this  standpoint — The  claim 
of  the  Lesser  Chronicles  is  in  conflict  with  the  assumption — 
The  Greater  Chronicles  are  in  some  respects  militantly 
Roman — One  text  only  may  be  concerned  with  the  aggran- 
disement of  British  Christianity — A  note  on  the  German 
cycle — Of  certain  plain  stories  told  by  the  Graal  texts — 
The  mystery  of  the  Graal  Sanctuary — The  makers  of  the 
literature  did  not  dream  of  a  pan-Britannic  Church — 
Clearness  of  its  concern  at  the  highest — A  lesson  of  these 
considerations — Its  various  counsels  of  caution — The  true 
Question  of  the  Graal — The  literature  as  a  witness  of  the 
Church — Of  experience  in  transcendence — The  harmony  of 
all  quests  and  histories  outside  the  terms  of  romance — The 
Hidden  Church  of  the  Holy  Graal — The  hope  of  Western 

613 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

Mysticism — The  Secret  Tradition  in  Catholic  Experience. 
VI.  THE  TRADITION  OF  ST.  JOHN  THE  DIVINE. — That 
the  Secret  Tradition  in  Christian  times  was  never  'put  into 
official  language  as  by  one  instituted  school  which  stood  for 
the  whole — Eckartshausen  approximated  only — Loupoukine 
expressed  probably  a  strong  intellectual  sentiment — Were 
there  no  traces  in  the  annals  of  the  Church  itself  ? — The 
Disciplina  Arcani — Whether  this  was  imbedded  in  the 
tradition  of  St.  John  the  Divine — The  Eucharist  and  the 
beloved  disciple — Traditions  concerning  St.  John — The 
rumour  of  his  secret  knowledge — In  what  manner  he  was 
assumed  by  the  physical  alchemists — The  search  after 
heresy — Some  previous  speculations — One  suggested  alterna- 
tive— Of  so-called  Johannine  Christians — Traditions  con- 
cerning St.  John — Traces  of  a  higher  Gnosis — An  unfinished 
Quest.  VII.  THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THIS  HOLY  QUEST. — 
Of  certain  unfulfilled  covenants — Preliminary  remarks — 
The  Veil  of  the  Eucharist — The  French  and  German 
Percivals — Collectanea  Mystic  a — The  Lost  Book — The 
Great  Experiment — The  Inner  House  of  Doctrine — The 
world  of  attainment — Of  the  highest  symbols  as  pretexts 
— The  Mystic  Quest — A  praise  of  scholarship — But  of  that 
also  which  remains  after — And  this  as  a  Spiritual  Sun — 
The  monastic  Graal — Of  that  which  may  be  superadded  to 
the  official  consciousness  of  the  Church — The  many  voices 
of  tradition — The  one  testimony — An  end  of  these  pleadings 
— The  colophon. 


614 


BOOK   X 

THE   SECRET   CHURCH 

I 
THE  HERMENEUTICS   OF  THE  HOLT  GRAAL 

Two  things  follow  from  the  considerations  of  the  ninth 
book  :  (a)  That  there  are  or  there  have  been  custodians 
of  secret  knowledge  in  Christian  times,  but  I  express 
only  my  personal  view  if  I  say  that  they  remain  to  this 
day  ;  (b)  that  the  term  of  their  purpose  does  not  differ 
in  kind  from  that  of  the  external  Churches  ;  but  (c)  by 
their  claim  they  had  carried  the  Great  Experiment  further. 
Their  testimony  offers  therefore  (i)  deeper  intimations 
of  Church  doctrine  ;  (2)  a  contribution  in  concealment 
to  the  annals  of  the  life  of  sanctity  ;  (3)  by  the  remem- 
brance— in  perpetuity  of  dedication — that  there  is  one 
thing  needful ;  (4)  and  this  is  to  partake,  if  it  be  pos- 
sible, of  Divine  Substance — that  is,  spirit  and  life — of 
which  the  impermanent  consubstantiation  with  Divine 
Humanity  in  the  official  Eucharist  is  the  vestige  in 
symbolism  only.  The  way  of  attainment  must  have 
had  its  doctrinal  correspondence  in  the  Descent  of  the 
Paraclete.  It  does  not  follow  that  the  custodians 
celebrated  what  we  understand  by  a  Mass,  but  it  is 
impossible  to  delineate  their  process  by  a  stricter  analogy. 
After  exhausting  all  other  considerations  we  can  speak 
of  it  only  in  this  manner.  I  suggest  that  it  was  said 
in  the  heart,  and  that  Christ  came  down  into  the  heart. 
It  follows  that  for  those  unseen  masters,  as  for  us  also, 
the  Mysterium  Fidel  was  the  Eucharist.  The  Greek 

615 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

Epiclesis  clause  may  pass,  therefore,  among  official  things 
as  the  nearest  approach  to  a  rite  above  all  things  valid, 
that  is,  manifesting  supernaturally.  Its  history  is  one 
of  the  most  interesting  in  the  wild  garden  of  liturgical 
formulae.  It  should  be  understood,  in  this  connection, 
that  during  the  earlier  days  of  the  Church  there  was 
not  a  method  of  consecration  which  prevailed  every- 
where ;  the  Latin  rite  held,  with  certain  variations, 
to  the  canonical  words  of  institution,  as  I  have  shown 
in  a  previous  section  ;  but  there  are  traces  of  instances  in 
which  it  was  performed  by  the  recitation  of  an  Gratia 
Dominica — possibly  the  Pater  noster  over  the  elements, 
thus  by  the  hypothesis  converting  the  daily  bread  into 
heavenly  manna.  By  the  hypothesis  also,  the  Epiclesis 
clause  brought  down  upon  the  elements  the  influence 
and  even  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  it  must 
be  admitted  that  this  contains,  ritually  speaking,  a  very 
high  suggestion.  At  the  Council  of  Florence  the  Latins 
required  the  Greeks  to  expunge  the  Epiclesis,  with  all 
forms  of  invocation,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
they  were  doctrinally  and  technically  correct,  within  the 
convention  of  their  own  order,  because  it  was  admitted 
on  all  hands  that  the  words  of  institution  produced  a 
valid  Eucharist,  and  the  principle  of  invocation  was  to 
give  the  officiating  priest  within  the  range  of  the  con- 
vention an  express  and  personal  part  in  the  mystery  of 
consecrating,  which,  by  the  same  hypothesis,  must  be 
regarded  as  superfluous,  though  we  can — on  our  own 
part — discern  a  deeper  reason.  The  clause  remains  to 
this  day  in  the  Greek  Church,  and  for  those  who  lay 
stress  on  its  efficacy  that  Church  has  therefore  the  words 
but  not  seemingly  more  than  the  outward  sign  of  that 
life  which  should  be  resident  therein. 

If  it  be  said  that  in  these  considerations  the  Churches 
are  impeached  collectively,  and  because  the  literature  of 
the  Graal  creates  exactly  the  same  contrast  in  the  same . 
manner  exactly,   that  it  therefore  concurs  in  the  im- 
peachment,  the   conclusion   on   the   surface   may   seem 

616 


The  Secret  Church 

almost  irresistible,  but  that  it  is  untrue  is  my  whole 
contention.  The  facts  which  here  follow  must  be  held 
to  silence  any  voices  of  dissent.  We  have  seen  that 
there  are  three  literatures  which  testify  concerning 
the  voided  House  of  Doctrine,  (a)  The  first  is  the 
Graal  literature,  and  in  no  uncertain  way  does  it  bear 
witness  that  the  official  Church  has  the  efficacious 
means,  (b)  The  second  is  Zoharic  Kabalism,  with  all 
its  connections,  but  while  it  tells  of  the  cloud  on  the 
official  sanctuary  of  Israel,  this  also  bears  witness  (i)  that 
Israel  is  of  God  ;  (2)  that  the  Church  in  Israel  contains 
the  Words  of  the  Mystery,  with  the  reflection  at  least  of 
the  cohabiting  glory,  and  (3)  that  the  way  of  salvation 
is  that  Law  by  which  the  world  was  made  in  Mercy. 
(c)  The  third  is  Masonry,  and  in  the  dual  schools  thereof 
—which  are  the  Craft  and  High  Degrees — it  bears  the 
same  witness  :  (i)  that  the  Symbolic  Temple  is  the 
Holy  Place,  but  the  Spiritual  Temple  is  to  come  ; 
(2)  that  the  Lord  has  risen  truly,  and  though  at  the 
present  time  we  do  not  know  certainly  where  we  shall 
find  Him,  we  are  on  the  Quest  which  does  not  fail.  I 
say  therefore  again  that  there  has  been  no  more  faithful 
testimony  throughout  the  centuries.  It  does  not  concern 
a  competitive  orthodoxy  or  a  distinct  process,  but  the 
development  of  the  same  doctrine  and  the  extension  of 
the  same  process  to  what  is  called  in  Masonry  the  ne 
-plus  ultra  degree.  It  is  not  that  anything  exists  outside 
the  Church,  but  that  more  subsists  within  it  than  is 
comprehended  by  the  lower  grades.  The  equivalent  is 
that  the  Law  of  Nature  reflects  the  Law  of  Grace, 
and  the  perfect  paradox  that  Nature  imitates  Grace. 

The  external  Church  is  therefore,  and  so  it  remains, 
that  body  in  which  the  first  work  of  regeneration  takes 
place — and  this,  as  one  may  say,  of  necessity  ;  it  is  the 
reflection  of  life  everlasting  projected  on  the  perishable 
plane.  It  is  in  this  sense  the  condign  and  legitimate 
governor  of  all  holy  external  places.  The  Church  is  the 
good  husbandman  who  prepares  the  ground  and  tills 

617 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  earth  of  humanity.  It  fertilises  that  earth  after 
various  manners,  as,  for  example,  by  the  laws  of  moral 
conduct,  by  the  great  literatures,  by  the  high  consecra- 
tion of  the  seven  sacraments,  by  the  water,  the  oils  and 
the  wine.  In  all  these  ways  it  sows  with  a  generous  hand 
the  seeds  of  secret  life.  But  the  earth  is  hard  and  the 
earth  is  also  unresponsive.  The  seed  will  germinate  in 
many  directions,  and  the  earth  will  therefore  be  irradiated 
by  a  certain  undeclared  presence  of  the  secret  life  ;  but 
it  issues  above  the  ground  only  in  a  few  cases,  and  then 
the  individual  enters  into  the  manifested  life  of  sanctity. 
It  is  a  question  thereafter  of  the  particular  quality  of 
the  earth  and  the  environment  of  the  life.  Generally 
the  growth  is  stunted  and  too  weak  to  put  forth  its 
powers.  It  is  only  on  rare  occasions  that  they  spring  up 
into  the  high  light  and  the  clear  air,  lifting  the  radiant 
glory  of  a  perfect  head  amidst  their  peers. 

The  hidden  life  of  the  soul  is  well  known  to  the 
doctors  of  the  soul,  and  the  Church  has  also  its  hidden 
life,  wherein  it  communicates  with  all  things  nearest 
to  the  Divine  in  the  higher  consciousness.  Official 
doctrine  is,  however,  in  the  same  position  as  normal 
consciousness  ;  it  covers  a  part  of  the  field  only.  There 
is  therefore,  on  both  sides,  a  certain  sense  of  the  incom- 
mensurate, and  assuredly  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the 
Churches  are  desolate  ;  such  desolation  is,  however,  on 
account  of  that  which  is  in  hiding,  not  of  that  which 
is  withdrawn.  The  offices  are  not  abrogated  and  the 
sacraments  are  still  administered,  being  also  efficacious 
up  to  a  determined  point.  Perhaps  indeed  the  desolation 
is  not  less  especially  in  ourselves,  so  that  it  is  we  who 
individually  and  collectively  have  helped  to  make  void 
the  House  of  Doctrine.  The  fact  that  the  external 
Church  is  from  this  point  of  view  in  widowhood  makes 
its  desertion  a  grave  offence  against  the  high  unwritten 
code  of  chivalry,  just  as  a  dereliction  of  masonic  good 
conduct  is  implied  in  forsaking  one's  mother  lodge. 
At  the  same  time  the  great  work  can  sometimes  be  done 

618 


The  Secret   Church 

from  without  as  well  as  from  within,  but  in  this  case  that 
work  is  an  approximation  towards  a  higher  side  of  the 
Church. 

It  follows  that  the  official  Church  can  act  only  up  to 
the  extent  of  its  consciousness,  and  the  side  on  which  it 
has  derogated  has  been  the  side  of  policy  and  conduct. 
We  can  account  in  this  manner  for  all  its  imperfections, 
for  that  which  we  term  its  abuses,  but  there  will  remain 
the  glories  of  its  doctrine  as  things  which,  in  their  proper 
understanding,  emerge  apart  and  unaffected.  These  are 
the  treasures  which  it  was  instituted  to  preserve,  and 
if  it  has  added  some  things  to  the  jewel-house  which  are 
of  secondary  or  even  dubious  value,  our  part  is  to  wait 
for  its  wakening  in  the  higher  mind.  The  Greek  Rite 
has  slept  over-long  therein,  and  the  Roman  Rite  has  had 
nightmares,  but  the  happy  Prince,  who  is  a  true  Son  of 
the  House,  will  arrive  one  of  these  days  and  will  ask  the 
unspelling  question.  Meanwhile,  the  individual  man 
must  be  appraised  at  his  highest  only,  so  far  as  that 
highest  has  been  indicated,  and  it  is  the  same  with  the 
Church.  The  lower  standards  are  deceptive,  and  it 
is  for  this  reason  that  conduct — as  we  understand  it 
conventionally — is  comparatively  of  less  importance  ; 
it  is  that  which  maintains  the  world  and  not  that  which 
renews  it.  There  is  also  the  irrefutable  consideration  of 
all  those  unhappy  sects  which  exist  for  the  dissemination 
of  a  contracted  symbolism  under  the  guise  of  pure 
doctrine,  thinking  that  the  situation  can  be  ameliorated 
by  taking  in  their  fairyland.  The  undue  multiplication 
of  symbols  tends,  of  necessity,  to  attenuate  their  force 
by  spreading  it  over  too  large  a  surface,  but  it  is  not 
to  be  compared  with  the  malefic  dismemberment  of 
symbolism,  which  produces  its  paralysis,  for  the  loss  of 
so  many  limbs  causes  the  body  to  decay  and  puts  an  end 
to  the  office  of  the  Wardens. 


619 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

II 

THE   GOOD  HUSBANDMAN 

At  the  risk  of  some  repetition  on  a  subject  of  all  so 
vital,  I  will  put  the  position  thus  from  another  stand- 
point. The  value  of  the  Graal  legends  resides  in  their 
suggestions  and  lights  towards  a  concordat  of  Divine 
Alliance,  while  the  Graal  Castle  is  the  House  of  Alliance 
and  of  the  doctrine  thereto  belonging.  The  same 
description  applies  to  the  Sanctuaries  of  the  other 
schools,  on  the  understanding  that  in  the  last  resource 
all  the  Sanctuaries  are  one.  They  do  not  differ  from 
the  external  Houses  of  Doctrine  into  which  we  were 
born  and  wherein  we  were  first  nourished  by  the  food 
of  souls.  Here  also — if  we  set  apart  innumerable 
temples  of  the  fantastic  spirit — the  House  of  Doctrine 
is  one,  and  the  official  does  not  differ  from  the  mystical ; 
but  in  the  one  House  there  are  many  chambers,  being 
those  of  the  soul's  advancement,  and  the  soul  in  response 
to  its  election  proceeds  by  stage  and  by  stage  on  the 
ascent  upward — or  beyond  and  further  beyond  into 
that  more  secret  place  which  lies  behind  the  sanctuary  of 
the  Visible  Church.  The  correspondence  in  identity 
hereto  is  the  oratory  of  the  spiritual  alchemist,  who 
testifies  by  first-hand  experience  at  the  Fountain  of 
Nature  and  Grace  that  nothing  has  been  lost,  that  he 
has  himself  recovered  the  working  process  in  which  the 
Trinity  is  manifested  and  the  plan  of  redemption  is 
exhibited. 

The  Graal  literature  was  the  spiritual  emotion  of 
the  Church  expressed  in  romance.  The  texts  which  do 
not  correspond  to  this  description  are  of  no  importance 
as  mystic  texts  of  the  legend.  I  set  apart,  however,  the 
lost  poem  of  Guiot,  which  will  be  considered  in  another 
section.  The  high  texts  of  all  are  products  of  monas- 
ticism,  and — as  they  are  extant  among  us — the  vision 

620 


The  Secret  Church 

which  is  the  true  Graal  came  out  of  cells  and  scriptoria. 
We  must  not  go  further  for  that  which  is  ready  to  our 
hand  in  the  nearest  places.  The  monks  conceived  the 
high  miracle  of  sanctity  and  connected  it  with  a 
wonderful  and  pious  legend.  They  knew  so  much  that 
they  knew  also  the  void  in  the  heart  of  the  age  and  the 
maiming  of  the  outer  Church.  The  efficacious  Graal 
— that  which  alone  profits  us — came  out  of  their  fasts, 
watches  and  prayers.  They  did  not  invent  the  Secret 
Words  and  the  super-apostolical  priesthood,  but  they 
knew  of  these  rumours  ;  they  knew  that  many  strange 
quests  were  pursued  about  them ;  they  dreamed  of 
mysteries  of  sanctity  which  they  had  not  fathomed,  and 
we  can  well  understand  that  the  story  of  Prester  John 
re-expressed  the  dream  after  a  manner  of  parable  in 
their  yearning  minds.  WThen  they  left  the  House  of 
Doctrine  void  in  respect  of  its  chief  Hallow,  they  meant 
only  that  the  Church  shared  on  its  manifest  side  the 
inhibition  of  the  age  ;  they  felt  all  that  was  wanting 
thereto.  But  the  first  makers  of  texts  had  heard  of 
those  things  more  plainly — that  is,  of  a  priesthood  within 
the  priesthood,  of  a  Mass  behind  the  Mass,  or  rather  the 
equivalents  of  these  by  the  pursuit  of  an  experiment 
which  was  identical  with  that  of  the  Church  carried— 
as  I  have  said — to  an  advanced  degree.  The  putative 
letter  of  Prester  John  was  perhaps  inventeS  expressly  to 
put  this  claim  forward  in  a  singularly  evasive  manner,  but 
one  certain  to  attract  universal  interest  and  attention. 

The  experiment  had  been  pursued  everywhere,  the 
aphorism  which  ruled  it  being  omnia  exeunt  in  mysterium, 
the  pursuit  of  that  Mystery  to  which  St.  Augustine 
alluded  when  he  said  that  Christianity  had  been  always 
in  the  world — to  which  the  New  Testament  itself 
alluded  when  speaking  of  the  Lamb  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  cosmic  order.  It  follows  that  any 
one  who  suggests  that  the  experiment  or  the  school 
became  Christian  at  a  certain  epoch  is  in  error  over 
the  elements  of  that  subject  to  which  must  be  attri- 

621 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

buted  in  a  superlative  sense  the  locus  communis  of  the 
ecclesiastical  test  :  Quod  semper,  quod  ubique,  quod  db 
omnibus.  We  should  remember  that  things  which  concur 
with  one  another  do  of  necessity  find  one  another  at  a 
certain  point  of  their  extension  ;  the  one  Quest  adopts 
many  veils,  but  without  diminution  of  identity.  It  has 
been  disguised  very  often  under  the  old  formula  con- 
cerning words  of  power,  but  though  this  is  a  necessary 
illustration,  it  carries  a  suggestion  of  fatality,  because  in 
no  instance  did  the  sign  survive  the  idea — and  so  lapse 
into  superstition — more  frequently  or  with  greater 
facility.  In  its  proper  understanding  it  corresponds 
to  the  idea  of  an  union  between  the  expressed  con- 
sciousness of  the  soul  and  the  Word  of  God — the  verbum 
caro  factum,  declaring  itself  in  the  world  and  in  the 
heart  of  man.  Robert  de  Borron  heard  or  read  of  the 
rumour  in  some  such  form  and  he  combined  it  with  secret 
words  of  Christ.  He  knew  so  little  of  its  horizon  that 
he  left  it  an  open  question  whether  the  words  were 
Eucharistic  or  not.  Those  who  converted  his  work 
into  prose  concluded  that  they  could  have  no  other 
office,  and  so  allocated  them  accordingly.  The  author 
of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  having  certain  materials, 
including  those  which  were  incorporated  in  his  prologue, 
put  forward  the  rumour  in  the  guise  of  a  sacerdotal 
mystery  and  followed  those  who  had  preceded  him  in 
developing  the  conversion  legend.  Guiot  de  Provence 
represented  the  secret  custodians  as  an  autonomous 
chivalry  after  the  model  of  the  Knights  Templars,  bring- 
ing into  it  materials  from  oriental  sources.  Other 
traditions  had  already  presented  Joseph  of  Arimathaea 
as  the  Grand  Master  of  an  instituted  knighthood.  The 
authors  of  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  and  the  Quest  of 
Galahad  saw  that  the  whole  subject  belonged  to  the 
Church,  and  they  connected  it  with  Eucharistic  tran- 
substantiation  as  the  most  approximate  gate  through 
which  supernatural  faith  could  follow  those  things  which 
issue  in  mystery.  They  were  glad  enough  when  their 

622 


The  Secret   Church 

symbolism  had  served  its  purpose  to  allow  its  dissolution, 
as  I  have  shown,  and  it  has  been  in  no  sense  my  design 
to  suggest  that  they  had  overcome  all  burdens  of  their 
period  by  an  excess  of  wisdom  ;  the  glass  through  which 
they  looked  was  clouded  and  scoriated  enough,  and  in 
manifesting  the  doctrine  as  they  did  I  suppose  that  its 
intolerable  sense  had  never  occurred  to  them.  It  is 
sufficient  for  our  purpose  that  they  discerned  something 
of  the  secrets  which  lay  beyond,  to  do  which  they 
must  have  travelled  far.  I  am  sure  also  that  in  common 
with  the  independent  schools  of  concealment  they 
distinguished  between  the  Church  as  the  custodian 
of  Rite,  Symbol  and  Doctrine  and  the  seat  of  govern- 
ment at  Rome.  In  this  connection  it  is  wholesome 
to  remember,  among  many  other  points  that  might 
be  enumerated  :  (i)  That  before  1000  A.D.  Claudius, 
Archbishop  of  Turin,  characterised  the  censure  pro- 
nounced on  his  anti-papal  writings  as  the  voice  of  the 
members  of  Satan  ;  (2)  that  Arnulph,  the  Bishop  of 
Orleans,  at  the  Council  of  Rheims  pointed  to  the  Roman 
Pontiff,  saying  :  "  Who  is  that  seated  upon  a  high  throne 
and  radiant  with  purple  and  gold  ?  ...  If  he  thus  follow 
uncharitableness,  ...  he  must  be  Antichrist  sitting  in 
the  Temple  of  God  ;  (3)  that  Everard,  Bishop  of  Salzburg, 
said  much  later  :  "  He  who  is  the  servus  servorum  Dei 
desires  to  be  lord  of  lords  ;  he  profanes,  he  pillages,  he 
defrauds,  he  robs,  he  murders,  and  he  is  the  lost  man 
who  is  called  Antichrist ;  (4)  that  Cardinal  Benno, 
speaking  of  Sylvester  II.,  said  that  by  God's  permission 
he  rose  from  the  abyss ;  (5)  that  the  same  pope  was 
described  at  the  Council  of  Brixen  as  the  false  monk 
and  the  prince  of  abomination.  These  were  the  accusa- 
tions of  prelates  and  with  them  may  be  compared  the 
opinion  of  Figueiras  the  troubadour,  who  described 
Rome  as  an  immoral  and  faithless  city,  having  its  seat 
fixed  in  the  depths  of  hell ;  that  of  Petrarch,  who  called 
Avignon  the  western  Babylon,  and — as  a  comparison  by 
way  of  antithesis  with  the  Rich  Fisherman — exclaimed  : 

623 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

"  Here  reigns  a  proud  race  of  fishermen  who  are  poor 
no  longer  ;  "  and  that  of  the  same  poet  who  described  the 
papal  court  as  a  people  who  follow  the  example  of  Judas 
Iscariot — in  other  words,  selling  God  for  money,  like 
the  King  of  Castle  Mortal.  So  also  St.  Bridget  termed 
Rome  the  whirlpool  of  hell  and  the  house  of  mammon, 
wherein  the  devil  barters  the  patrimony  of  Christ. 

I  think  it  has  been  indicated  abundantly  in  the  course 
of  this  work,  but  more  especially  in  the  present  sections, 
that  the  high  truth  is  in  all  Church  doctrine,  and  there- 
fore in  citing  these  instances  I  also  am  far  from  expressing 
the  spirit  of  impeachment  ;  but  on  the  side  of  policy, 
apart  from  that  of  teaching,  there  is  evidence  enough 
that  the  yoke  was  no  longer  easy  nor  the  burden  light. 
It  is  conceivable  that  the  symbol  of  the  voided  House 
of  Doctrine  was  an  appeal  against  the  Church  in  so  far 
as  it  had  been  unfaithful  to  itself,  a  protest  against  the 
spirit  of  the  world  which  had  invaded  the  sanctuary. 
The  admission  of  these  facts  does  not  derogate  from 
the  claim  that  the  Church  had  all  the  means.  Even  in 
new  definitions  and  altered  practice  there  may  h'ave  been 
a  guiding  hand.  It  will  be  suggested,  I  know,  that  at 
the  period  of  the  Graal  literature  two  unhappy  ferments 
were  working  in  the  Western  branch  :  (i)  The  denial 
of  the  chalice ;  (2)  the  various  doctrinal  tendencies 
which  resulted  in  the  definition  of  transubstantiation. 
From  this  point  of  view  the  wound  of  the  Latin  Church 
would  be  that  it  misconstrued  the  Mysterium  Fidei ; 
that  it  had,  in  fact,  five  wounds  corresponding  to  the 
five  changes  of  the  Graal.  Of  these  changes  the  last 
only  seemed  to  be  a  chalice,  for  at  that  time  it  is  said 
that  there  was  no  chalice,  and  the  mystic  reason  of  this 
is  that  the  Dominus  qui  non  pars  est  sed  totum  is  not  con- 
tained in  a  chalice  though  the  Lord  is  Pars  hereditatis 
mece  et  calicis  mei.  The  Latin  Church  cannot  be  accused 
of  having  failed  to  discern  the  Body  of  the  Lord,  but 
it  may  be  advanced  that  its  discernment,  like  that  of  the 
Greek  orthodoxy,  was  apart  from  the  life  which  their 

624 


The  Secret  Church 

own  scriptures  tell  them  is  resident  in  the  blood — that 
is  to  say,  it  is  the  symbolical  seat  thereof.  And  yet 
on  the  basis  of  transubstantiation  it  is  difficult  to  reject 
the  Roman  plea,  that  he  who  receives  the  Body  receives 
also  the  Blood,  because  that  which  is  communicated  in 
the  Eucharist  is  the  living  Christ  made  Flesh.  To  this 
it  may  be  rejoined  that  the  implicit  of  the  symbolism  is 
really  in  the  contrary  sense,  that  the  elements  are  dual 
to  show  how  the  flesh  of  itself  profits  nothing,  while  the 
spirit  and  the  truth  are  in  the  communication  of  Divine 
Life.  By  those  who  regard  transubstantiation  as  the 
burden  of  the  Church  which  defined  it,  there  is  a  dis- 
position to  consider  the  Latin  Eucharist  as  only  a  dis- 
membered sacrament ;  by  those  who  look  upon  it 
simply  as  a  memorial,  all  subtleties  notwithstanding, 
there  is  a  feeling  that  the  memory  is  broken  and  that 
the  isolated  sign  does  not  signify  fully.  On  the  other 
hand,  that  view  which  belongs  more  especially  to  the 
Mystics,  namely,  that  the  covenant  of  Christ  to  his 
followers  concerns  what  I  have  called  so  frequently  the 
communication  of  Divine  Substance,  will,  I  think,  be 
aware  that  the  accidents  of  such  a  communication  are 
not  of  vital  consequence  ;  that  perhaps  the  official 
Church  was  even  more  subtle  than  it  knew,  because 
it  is  certain  that  transposition  or  substitution  in  the 
external  signs  cannot  occasion  even  the  shadow  of 
vicissitude  in  the  mystery  which  is  imparted.  In  fine, 
to  extinguish  these  questions,  those  wrho  speak  of  Christ's 
spiritual  presence  say  well,  but  the  mystery  of  abiding 
redemption  is  the  perpetuity  of  the  incarnation  in  that 
Church  to  which  Christ  came  in  flesh. 

In  conclusion,  I  do  not  confess  that  it  would  be 
putting  the  case  truly  if  it  were  said  that  at  the  period 
of  the  Graal  literature  the  highest  minds  of  the  Church 
had  grown  weary  of  the  Vatican  and  all  its  ways.  I 
think  that  for  long,  and  for  very  long  indeed,  there  had 
existed  an  uncompetitive  stream  of  tendency  which 
raised  no  voice,  but  pursued  its  path  unobtrusively 

2  R 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

towards  a  very  high  term.  It  had  no  remedies  to  offer 
on  the  practical  side  of  things  and  it  was  too  wise  to 
denounce  abuses  which  it  was  powerless  to  remedy- 
even  as  I  who  write,  supposing  that  I  had  attained  the 
term  of  the  Great  Experiment,  should  not  for  that 
reason  be  qualified  to  purify  the  commercial  houses  of 
exchange.  That  term  belongs  to  a  region  about  which 
it  is  idle  to  speak  in  connection  with  schemes  of  amelio- 
ration or  the  raising  of  the  masses.  So  far  as  those 
who  have  pursued  or  do  now  follow  it  have  led  or  to-day 
lead  the  life  of  the  world,  it  is  implied  in  their  calling 
that  they  should  do  what  to  do  is  given  them,  but  in 
respect  of  the  Experiment  itself,  those  who  attain  can 
lead  others  on  the  way,  but  they  do  not  bring  back 
helping  hands  for  the  furtherance  and  welfare  of  the 
body  politic.  So  much  for  the  stream  of  tendency  in 
the  earlier  times.  At  a  later  period  I  do  think  that  the 
unknown  mystics  who  wrote  upon  spiritual  alchemy  had 
got  to  see  not  only  where  the  path  of  sanctity  led,  but 
that  the  Church  as  a  whole  had  lost  the  power  of  leading. 
They  were  made  circumspect  by  the  anxiety  of  their 
position,  and  they  spoke  only  in  parables. 


Ill 
THE  CATHOLIC  SECRET  OF  THE  LITERATURE 

But  if  there  were  custodians  of  a  Secret  Tradition 
at  any  time  during  the  Christian  centuries  there  arises 
the  inevitable  question  :  Who  were  these  mysterious 
Wardens  and  also  where  were  they  ?  Can  we  learn 
anything  about  them  ?  What  was  this  strange  power 
or  influence  working  within  the  Church  ?  Well,  in  the 
first  place,  it  was  not  a  power  at  all  in  any  acting, 
governing,  or  intervening  sense.  When  I  speak  about 
the  region  of  a  higher  consciousness  behind  the  manifest 
mind  of  the  Catholic  Church,  it  is  equivalent  to  saying 

626 


The  Secret  Church 

that  in  the  uttermost  degrees  of  sanctity,  the  consensus 
omnium  sanctorum  does  by  a  certain  participation  become 
the  sensus  Spiritus  Sancti.  It  is,  again,  as  if  within  the 
Church  Militant  there  had  been  always  a  little  body 
which  had  pursued  a  peculiar  path  and  had  travelled  a 
great  distance,  making  no  obvious  sign.  We  are  faced, 
however,  by  the  apparent  problem  of  two  schools  which 
seem  to  bear  testimony  in  conflict,  and  there  is  the 
witness  to  both  in  the  Graal  literature.  The  first  is 
that  of  spiritual  alchemy,  which  knows  not  the  voice 
of  faltering  concerning  the  terra  viventium  and  the 
Eona  Domini  therein.  Its  correspondence  in  the  Graal 
literature  is  the  grace  and  secret  knowledge  behind  the 
Eucharist,  when  the  sensible  veils  of  bread  and  wine  and 
the  ultra-sensible  veils  of  thaumaturgic  transubstantia- 
tion  have  utterly  dissolved,  and  God  is  revealed  in 
Christ.  The  second  is  the  testimony  of  Kabalism  and 
Masonry  to  the  glory  departed  from  the  Sanctuary,  and 
hereof  the  Graal  correspondence  is  the  dispartition  of 
the  Hallows,  the  removal  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  and  the 
voiding  of  the  Holy  House.  Looking,  it  will  be  said, 
on  either  side  ;  on  the  experiment  of  alchemy,  than 
which  nothing  seems  lost  more  obviously  at  this  late  day  ; 
on  the  Quest  of  the  Graal,  over  which  the  chivalry  of 
Logres — except  for  twelve  knights — broke  and  went  to 
pieces  utterly  ;  on  the  theosophy  of  Israel,  all  dead  and 
all  forgotten  ;  on  the  sad  confession — ab  origine  symboli — 
of  loss  and  dereliction  in  Masonry  ;  how  is  there  any 
choice  to  be  taken  between  either  school  ?  If  "  green's 
forsaken  and  yellow's  forsworn,"  in  virtue  of  what 
melancholy  persuasion  can  we  exercise  a  preference 
among  them  ?  Surely  beneath  the  title  of  this  book 
there  should  be  written  the  word  Ichabod,  "  the  glory 
has  departed."  On  the  contrary  I  have  written  :  Vel 
sanctum  invenit,  vel  sanctum  facit,  for  the  implicits  of 
the  Graal  literature  are  the  shadowed  secrets  of  a  Holy 
School,  or  rather  their  inexpress  formulation.  I  confess 
that  in  either  school  it  may  seem  difficult  on  the  surface 

627 


The   Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

to  suppose  another  construction  than  that  of  a  treasure 
which  there  was  but  a  treasure  which  is  now  withdrawn. 
And,  as  if  to  accentuate  the  position,  I  have  said  on  my 
own  part  that  the  official  sanctuary  has  closed  down  on 
its  higher  consciousness.  But  in  so  recording  I  have 
testified  in  the  same  terms  that  everything  remains. 
The  house  is  not  less  mine  because  I  have  locked  its 
doors  on  the  outer  side  ;  the  ancestral  heirlooms  are 
still  in  my  keeping,  though  I  have  not  opened  the  secret 
chambers  for  so  many  moons  or  years  that  I  have  forgotten 
the  fact  of  the  keys  still  hanging,  with  many  others,  from 
my  girdle.  The  Church,  in  like  manner,  is  still  the 
House  of  Souls  ;  the  Castle  behind  which  there  is  the 
Earthly  Paradise  and  Eden  ;  the  Temple  with  a  Sanctuary 
on  the  other  side  of  which  there  is  the  Ark  of  the  New 
Covenant — the  Hidden  Altar  of  Repose,  wherein  is  the 
Sacred  Vessel.  It  is  obvious  therefore  that  no  other 
House  of  God  is  possible  in  this  age,  and  that  if  I  or 
another  were  to  institute  a  Church  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
dedicated  to  the  Quest  of  the  Sacred  Vessel,  and  in 
hope  of  the  grace  thereof,  I  should  have  my  pains  for 
my  recompense  and  I  should  communicate  nothing 
therein.  Our  part  is  therefore  one  of  watching  and 
prayer  until  such  time  as  the  Church  herself  unfolds 
from  within  and  all  the  doors  are  opened. 

In  harmony  herewith,  the  characteristic  of  the  Graal 
literature  is  its  great  ostensible  orthodoxy,  and  that 
which  is  ostensible  I  regard  also  as  implied  and  involved 
within.  Here  and  there  we  discern  a  dubious  hint 
which  might  signify  a  subdued  hostility  towards  Rome  ; 
but  its  sacraments  are  still  the  sacraments  ;  its  doctrines 
are  true  doctrines,  and  its  practices  are  the  code  of 
spiritual  life.  The  metrical  romance  of  De  Borron  is 
a  Catholic  poem,  and  if  the  Early  Merlin  and  the  Didot 
Perceval  are  scarcely  religious  works,  there  is  no  tincture 
of  dissent  from  either  institution  or  dogma  ;  there  are 
only  the  Secret  Words  and  what  is  signified  therein. 
The  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  is  a  religious  romance,  and 

628 


The  Secret  Church 

its  one  questionable  element  is  the  meaning  of  the 
Super-Apostolical  Succession.  The  zeal  of  the  Graal 
has  eaten  up  the  later  Merlin  in  both  the  texts  thereof. 
The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  is  the  Church  of  chivalry 
spiritualised.  The  Romance  of  Lancelot  is  the  ideal 
spirit  in  the  exile  of  a  morganatic  marriage,  but  still 
remembering  Zion.  The  Quest  of  Galahad  is  of  him 
who  came  forth  from  Jerusalem  and  returned  thereto  ; 
he  was  born  in  the  place  of  the  Great  Mystery,  but  it 
was  necessary  that  he  should  be  put  outside  the  gates 
thereof  and  should  win  his  way  back  ;  he  is  the  only 
seeker  who  belonged  to  the  House  from  his  beginning. 

There  is  another  point  which  is  not  of  less  importance, 
and  I  hope  that  this  also  will  be  seen  to  follow  with 
clearness  from  what  has  been  said  previously.  The 
rumours  and  implicits  of  the  Graal  literature  being  in 
no  sense  the  voice  of  any  Christian  conclave  speaking  on 
its  own  authority  from  the  hidden  places  ;  and  Kabalism 
—though  it  bears  the  same  testimony — being  a  con- 
fession of  insufficiency  on  the  part  of  a  cognate  but 
non-Christian  school,  and  therefore  only  an  accessory 
deponent  ;  it  should  be  understood  further  that  the 
voice  of  Masonry  is  also  not  the  authoritative  voice  of 
such  a  conclave  ;  it  is  the  testimony  of  those  who  knew, 
who  derived  their  symbolism  from  the  old  mysteries  of 
spiritual  rebirth,  and,  for  the  rest,  on  their  own  warrants 
made  an  experiment  on  the  mind  of  their  age.  The 
one  voice  which  we  can  and  must  recognise  as  the  most 
approximate  echo  or  replica  of  the  Unknown  Voice  is 
that  of  alchemy — which  only  adored  and  exemplified  in 
respect  of  Church  doctrine.  It  is  understood  that  I 
do  not  put  forward  the  literature  of  spiritual  alchemy 
as  the  cor-pus  doctrinale  of  those  who  in  Christian  times 
were  the  Wardens  of  the  Secret  Tradition.  Masonry, 
Kabalism,  the  root-matter  of  a  few  Graal  books  are  all 
in  their  special  manner  and  under  their  particular 
reserves  the  independent  channels  of  the  doctrine. 
Deeply  imbedded  in  the  higher  side  of  the  Hermetic 

629 


The    Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

works  I  believe  that  we  get  nearest  to  the  Secret  Tradi- 
tion. A  time  came  when  the  bare  possibility  of  speaking 
more  openly  led  to  more  open  speaking,  and  so  in  the 
eighteenth  century  and  the  first  flush  of  the  age  which 
followed  thereafter,  we  have  two  or  three  text-books 
wherein  are  put  forth  the  most  express  intimations  on 
the  subject  which  have  so  far  transpired  in  the  world. 
I  will  speak  only  of  two,  which  were  at  once  independent 
and  concurrent — Eckartshausen's  Cloud  on  the  Sanctuary 
and  Characteristics  of  the  Interior  Church,  attributed 
to  a  Russian  named  Lopoukine  and  said  to  be  translated 
from  the  Russian.  The  dates  of  these  works  are  respec- 
tively 1800  and  1 80 1. 

Such  as  are  acquainted  with  the  literature  of  the 
mystic  life  will  not  be  unfamiliar  with  the  conception 
of  a  Holy  Assembly  in  the  hands  of  which  the  guidance 
of  the  Christian  Church  is  thought  to  have  rested  during 
the  ages  of  Christendom.  It  is  not,  by  the  claim  put 
forward,  more  especially  a  corporate  union  than  the 
life  of  humanity  at  large  on  this  earth  is  also  a  corporate 
union.  It  will  not  have  occurred  of  necessity  to  my 
colleagues  in  thought,  but  they  will  understand  what 
is  meant  when  I  say  that  the  hypothetical  Holy  Assembly 
should  perhaps  be  described  as  the  sodality  of  a  con- 
sciousness in  common,  and  as  I  have  spoken  already  of  a 
consciousness  behind  the  Church  as  of  a  region  now  un- 
trodden, it  will  be  understood  that  on  the  present  sup- 
position this  region  is  not  vacant.  As  we  have  inferred 
further  from  the  researches  of  the  ninth  book  that  there 
are  in  specific  literatures  the  records  of  a  Secret  Tradition 
in  Christian  times,  the  written  veils  of  which  are  actually 
those  literatures,  so  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Holy 
Assembly  we  find  a  late,  sporadic,  but  unusually  definite 
witness  which,  after  an  entirely  new  manner,  is  saying 
the  same  thing.  I  believe  that  the  mode  in  which  this 
claim  has  been  advanced,  though  in  one  sense  it  is  the. 
most  temperate  and  moderate  of  all,  does  tend  towards 
a  certain  confusion  because  two  streams  of  influence 

630 


The  Secret  Church 

are  identified  therein — one  being  the  holy,  exalted  and 
saving  mind  of  the  official  Church  at  its  own  highest  in 
the  manifest,  and  the  other  that  of  the  Hidden  School 
itself  as  this  is  presented  in  the  claim.  The  inference, 
moreover,  seems  to  be  that  the  Holy  Assembly  is  a  kind 
of  head  in  concealment,  and  this  I  reject  because  of  the 
misconception  which  it  tends  to  induce  of  necessity. 
If  we  could  suppose  for  a  moment  that  man  is  the  last 
development  and  issue  from  the  anthropoid  ape — 
much  as  one  might  agree  to  regard  the  story  of  the 
princess  who  came  out  of  the  water  as  a  little  chronicle 
of  fact — that  point — and  whatever  that  point  might 
be — at  which  the  animal  consciousness  passed  into  the 
human  consciousness  would  represent  the  analogical 
kind  of  transition  by  which  the  members  of  the  mystical 
body  enter — if  they  do  enter — into  the  consciousness 
of  the  Holy  Assembly.  But  the  human  being  is  not 
leading  the  anthropoid  ape,  nor  are  the  adepts  who 
devised  symbolical  Masonry  ruling  the  Craft  from  a 
specific,  unseen  centre.  The  worst  of  all  illustrations 
would  be,  in  like  manner,  to  say  that  the  Visible  Church 
is  the  body  and  the  Secret  Church  is  the  head.  The 
Visible  Church  has  been  described  most  truly  as  the 
mystical  body  of  Christ,  and  the  Real  Presence  in  the 
Eucharist  is  the  mystical  communication  in  perpetuity 
of  Christ's  life  to  that  body  ;  but  this  is  on  the  under- 
standing that  the  body  is  the  incorporation  of  souls  in 
sanctity.  In  respect  of  the  Holy  Assembly  a  similar 
description  may  obtain,  but  also  on  the  understanding 
that  it  is  a  generic  union  of  illuminated  spirits  in  Christ — • 
making  use  of  the  term  spirit  in  that  sense  which  attri- 
butes to  man  the  possession  of  a  higher  soul.  The  head 
is  Christ  in  both  cases  indifferently,  but  in  the  case  of 
the  Secret  Church  that  Divine  Union,  which  here  is  of 
faith  or  imputation,  has  been  established  there  under 
the  sun  of  consciousness. 

Perhaps,  within  the  more  familiar  forms  of  expression, 
the  idea  of  the  Secret  Church  corresponds  most  closely 

631 


"The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy    Graal 

with  that  which  is  understood  by  a  school  of  the  prophets, 
though  the  term  describes  an  advanced  spiritual  state 
by  one  only  of  the  gifts  which  belong  thereto.  The 
gift  itself  has  little  connection  with  the  external  meaning 
of  prophecy  ;  it  is  not  especially  the  power  of  seeing 
forward,  but  rather  of  sight  within.  In  subjects  of 
this  kind,  as  in  other  subjects,  the  greater  includes  the 
lesser — it  being  of  minor  importance  to  discern,  for 
example,  the  coming  of  Christ  in  a  glass  of  vision  than 
to  realise,  either  before  or  after,  the  deep  significance 
of  that  coming.  So  also  the  interpretation  of  doctrine 
is  not  manifested  so  much  by  the  exhibition  of  meaning 
behind  meaning  as  of  truth  understanding  truth. 

I  suppose  that  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to 
undertake  a  more  arduous  task  than  that  which  is 
imposed  on  me  in  these  sections  of  this  last  book.  My 
experience  in  the  secret  fraternities  is  that  those  which 
work  under  any  warrants,  and  with  any  shadow  of  tradi- 
tion behind  them,  suggest,  in  spite  of  their  divergences, 
a  single  root  of  all,  and  this  is  so  patent  that  even  in 
exoteric  circles  the  hand  of  the  Hermetic  brotherhoods 
has  been  surmised  in  Craft  Masonry  ;  of  the  Rosicrucians 
in  the  high  grades  ;  of  so-called  Magian  adepts  in 
Knight  Templary — and  hence  onward  and  onward. 
The  root  fact  at  the  back  of  all  these  dreams  is  the 
actuality  of  an  experiment  which  has  always  existed  in 
the  world,  which  has  never  changed,  which  has  been 
pursued  unceasingly  by  a  few,  the  rumours  of  which  are 
everywhere,  which  has  many  literatures,  and  all  these 
literatures  are  veils.  When  the  German  poet  Werner 
produced  his  wonderful  legend  concerning  the  Sons  of 
the  Valley  as  the  guiding  hand  behind  the  old  Order 
of  the  Temple  ;  when  he  told  how  it  was  afterwards 
withdrawn,  so  that  they  were  left  to  their  fate  in  the 
power  of  the  French  King  and  the  miserable  pontiff  ; 
he — Werner — was  dreaming  of  this  Experiment  and 
those  who  pursued  it.  In  after-days  he  struck  out  this 
hypothesis  and  all  element  of  life  from  his  two  strange 

632 


The   Secret  Church 

plays  ;  but  apart  from  any  Templar  hypothesis  he 
knew  that  he  was  on  the  right  track,  in  the  light  of 
which  knowledge  he  took  the  path  of  Lancelot  and 
died  as  a  priest  of  the  Latin  Church,  having  sung  Mass 
for  I  know  not  how  many  moons.  When  Eckartshausen, 
who  had  been  born  in  the  sanctuary  and  was  filled 
with  the  spirit  of  the  sanctuary,  made  an  end  of  com- 
posing little  books  of  popular  devotion  which  took 
Germany  and  France  by  storm,  he  saw  that  the  Great 
Experiment  and  its  great  tradition  were  in  truth  the 
secret  of  the  sanctuary  and  the  heritage  thereof.  People 
who  did  not  understand  him  said  :  "  This  is  Deism  " — 
but  it  was  the  higher  mystery  of  the  Eucharist  in  the 
adyta  of  a  conceived  Holy  Assembly,  and  he  it  was — 
as  I  have  hinted — who,  on  the  intellectual  side,  drew 
nearest  of  all  to  the  heart  of  truth  within. 

The  scheme  of  his  interpretation  of  those  Mysteries 
of  Compassion  which  summarise  God's  providence 
towards  man  for  the  fulfilment  of  our  return  into  union 
may  be  divided  into  a  part  of  preamble  and  a  part  of 
definition.  The  preamble  announces  the  conditions  by 
which  an  entrance  is  hypothetically  possible  into  the 
communion  of  saints.  The  requisite  faculty  is  the  in- 
terior sense  of  the  transcendental  world,  and  the  opening 
of  this  sense  is  the  beginning  of  Regeneration,  under- 
stood as  the  eradication  of  that  virus  which  entered  into 
man  at  the  Fall.  Rebirth  has  three  stages — that  of  the 
intelligence,  that  of  the  heart  and  will,  but  that  in  fine 
which — seeing  that  it  embraces  the  entire  being — is 
called  corporeal  rebirth,  because  the  beast  is  also  saved 
together  with  the  man,  and  the  Great  Quintessence  by 
which  the  soul  is  converted  transmutes  the  body  as 
well.  It  is  held  to  follow  herefrom  that  union  with 
God  is  possible  in  this  life  in  the  opening  of  the  world 
within  us  by  a  triple  gradation  through  the  moral,  meta- 
physical and  plenary  worlds,  wherein  is  the  Kingdom 
of  the  Spirit.  This  is  the  process  of  Regeneration  ex- 
pressed in  other  terms.  So  far  as  regards  the  preamble, 

633 


The   Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy    Graal 

but  the  dogmatic  part  affirms :  (i)  that  an  advanced 
school  has  existed  from  the  beginning  of  our  history, 
deriving  directly  from  Christ,  as  He  in  Whom  there 
dwells  substantially  the  whole  plenitude  of  God  ;  (2)  that 
this  is  the  enlightened  community  of  the  interior  Church, 
disseminated  throughout  the  world  and  governed  therein 
by  one  spirit  ;  (3)  that  it  is  the  most  hidden  of  sodalities  ; 
(4)  that  the  outer  school,  which  is  the  visible  Church, 
is  founded  thereon,  and  by  its  symbols  and  ceremonies 
it  gives  an  external  utterance  to  the  truth  which  abides 
in  the  Hidden  Sanctuary  ;  (5)  that  the  work  of  the 
Interior  Church  has  been  the  building  of  a  Spiritual 
Temple  of  regenerated  souls  ;  (6)  that  it  possesses  the 
direct  knowledge  of  those  means  by  which  man  is  restored 
to  his  first  estate  ;  (7)  that  the  external  Church  became 
a  subsequent  necessity  by  the  frailty  of  man  as  a  whole  ; 
(8)  that  the  external  worship  fell  away  automatically 
from  the  service  within  ;  (9)  that  the  Church  which 
was  founded  in  Abraham  was  raised  to  perfection  in 
Christ ;  (10)  that  the  Inmost  Sanctuary  is  without 
change  or  shadow  of  vicissitude;  (11)  that  it  is  the 
union  of  those  who  have  received  the  light  and  share  in  the 
communion  of  saints  ;  (12)  that  it  unites  the  science 
of  the  old,  external  Covenant  with  that  of  the  new  and 
interior  Covenant  ;  (13)  that  it  has  three  degrees  cor- 
responding to  the  stages  of  Regeneration ;  (14)  that 
herein  repose  the  mysteries  of  all  true  knowledge  ; 
(15)  that  it  resembles  no  secret  society,  for  all  external 
forms  have  passed  utterly  away  ;  (16)  that  the  path 
thereto  is  Wisdom  and  the  way  is  Love  ;  (17)  that 
although  the  Inner  Sanctuary  has  been  separated  from 
the  Temple,  they  are  destined  for  reunion  ;  (18)  that 
the  Way  which  is  Wisdom  and  Love  is  also  Christ  ; 
(19)  that  the  Mystery  of  the  Incarnation  is  the  deep 
Mystery  of  re-union  with  God  ;  (20)  that  man  in  his 
first  estate  was  the  Temple  of  Divinity,  and  God  in 
His  wisdom  has  projected  the  rebuilding  of  this  Temple  ; 
(21)  that  the  plans  of  His  scheme  are  in  the  Holy 

634 


The  Secret   Church 

Mysteries  and  constitute  the  secret  of  Regeneration, 
which  is  the  royal  and  sacerdotal  science  ;  (22)  that 
man  approximates  to  Regeneration,  and  does  in  fine 
attain  it,  by  the  discernment  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of 
Christ,  or,  as  I  have  myself  expressed  it  continually 
throughout  this  work,  by  the  Mystery  of  the  Eucharist. 

The  same  testimony  was  given  independently  at  the 
same  time  by  the  Chevalier  Loupoukine  in  his  little 
tract  on  the  Characteristics  of  the  Interior  Church.  He 
defined  the  higher  spiritual  mind  as  that  of  conscious- 
ness in  grace  only,  by  which  those  who  participate 
therein  become  that  which  Christ  is  by  His  nature. 
Here  also  the  Great  Work  is  that  of  Regeneration, 
which  is  accomplished  in  Christ,  and  the  Church  within 
has  the  keys  of  the  process.  The  testimony  is  also 
identical  as  to  the  sanctity  and  indefectible  character 
of  the  external  Church,  which  is  the  means  of  entrance 
into  the  Church  of  Christ  unseen.  The  way,  again,  is 
Love,  as  the  essence  of  the  Body  of  Christ ;  by  Regene- 
ration that  Body  is  reborn  in  us  ;  and  so  the  whole 
process — though  in  neither  case  is  the  truth  stated 
expressly — becomes  the  arch-natural  Mystery  of  the 
Eucharist. 

There  are  errors  of  expression  in  both  these  works, 
and,  as  I  have  said,  there  is  a  certain  confusion  ;  they 
are  not  to  be  taken  by  themselves  or  in  connection 
simply  with  one  another  ;  but  it  will  be  evident  that, 
after  their  own  manner,  they  bear  the  same  testimony 
as  the  schools  of  tradition  in  Christian  time  and  as  the 
higher  literature  of  the  Graal. 

It  will  be  seen  otherwise  that  the  Secret  Church  is 
an  arbitrary  name  adopted  to  describe  the  penetralia 
of  the  tradition  in  secret  ;  the  idea  itself  does  not 
correspond  to  any  titular  description,  and  in  adopting 
of  necessity  some  distinguishing  name,  I  have  chosen 
one  which  in  several  respects  is  perhaps  the  most 
arbitrary  of  all ;  but  it  serves  to  particularise  the  school 
as  essentially  Christian.  Whether  in  the  East  or  the 

635 


The   Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

West,   I   believe    that   there  are  still  custodians  in  the 
world,  for  the  hidden  truth  does  not  perish.     It  is  not 
a  sectarian  school,  and  I  think  that  it  has  even  abandoned 
all  those   Houses   of   Initiation,  the   fact   of  which  has 
transpired  in  the  outer  world.     Its  reflections,  however, 
remain  imbedded  therein.    For  those  secret  fraternities  at 
the  present  day  which  confess  to  two  incorporated  orders 
and  to  have  recipients  in  both,  it  corresponds  to  that 
third   Order  from  which  they  claim   to  hold — though 
how  they  do  not  know.     For  those  Masonic  Rites  of 
the  past  which  were,  by  their  own  imputation,  under 
the  obedience  of  Unknown  Superiors,  whom  they  never 
saw    probably,    these    Superiors    would    answer    to    the 
Holy  School.     It  is  the  Holy  Assembly  of  Eckartshausen 
and    the    Interior    Church    of    Loupoukine ;     it    is    the 
Crowned    Masters    of   Alchemy ;     it    is    the    Unknown 
Philosopher  of  early  Martinism,  but  for  Martinism  this 
Leader   was  the  Repairer  Himself,  who  is  certainly  the 
first-fruits    of    the    Great    Transfiguration.      I    believe 
that  if  any  member  of  this  school  were   authorised  to 
manifest,  he   would  come — and  this  I  shall  reiterate- 
like  Melchisedech    out    of    Salem,    carrying    Bread    and 
Wine.     Meanwhile,  their  old  rumours   are  everywhere, 
and  it  is  not  curious  that  they  are  in  the  Graal  literature  ; 
having  regard  to  its  subject-matter,  it  would  be  more 
curious   if  they  were  not.     The  mystic  life  is  the  way 
of  the  Secret  Sanctuary  ;    it  is  the  way  of  the  opening 
of  consciousness   towards   the   things   that   are   Divine. 
The  makers  of  the  Graal  books  found  certain  elements 
to  their  hands,  and  they  incorporated  them  as  they  best 
could.     The  literature   expresses   after  several  manners 
its  absolute  belief  in  the  truth  of  doctrinal  Christianity, 
but  also  that  behind  all  doctrine  there  was  something 
great    and    undemonstrable,    the    direct    knowledge    of 
which  had  departed  because  the  world  was  unworthy. 
Like  the  Graal  literature,  the  Secret  Church  recognises 
fully  the  external  Church  and  presents  something  from 
within  it.     I  conclude  that  a  valid  Mass  has  always  been 

636 


The  Secret   Church 

said  in  Rome  and  the  other  assemblies,  but  unfortunately 
at  the  present  time  it  is  a  memorial  rather  than  a 
realisation.  Transubstantiation  and  reservation  are  the 
nearest  approaches  to  the  idea  of  the  arch-natural 
Eucharist.  There  is  also  in  the  Christian  Church 
generally  a  consensus  of  sanctity  at  the  height,  and  it  is 
the  reflected  glory  of  a  greater  height  beyond.  But 
this  is  only  an  affirmation  on  the  testimony  of  all  the 
saints,  after  every  deduction  has  been  made  for  the 
decorative  renunciations  and  denials  of  the  self-abnegating 
mind. 

By  summary,  therefore,  the  term  of  research  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  Secret  Church  is  no  instituted  Assembly 
— not  even  an  orthodoxy  in  ascension.  It  does  not 
mean  that  another  Mass  is  said  than  that  which  is 
celebrated  daily  at  any  high  altar  in  Christendom ; 
it  does  not  mean  that  other  elements  are  used  or  that 
the  words  of  consecration  differ  in  kind  or  genus.  The 
Secret  Church  is  our  own  Church  when  it  has  entered 
into  the  deeper  understanding  of  its  proper  implicits. 
In  so  far  as  it  can  be  said  that  external  forms  may  remain 
at  all,  I  conceive  that  it  uses  the  same  forms,  but  in 
virtue  of  interior  organs  which  receive  more  fully  from 
the  immanence  of  the  Divine  Will,  so  that  the  priest 
who  begins  by  reciting  Introibo  ad  altar e  Dei  has  the 
direct  experience  that  God  is  truly  at  His  altar,  and 
thus  he  ascends  the  steps,  discerning  the  Presence  with 
his  eyes  in  the  spiritual  part  of  his  nature,  rather  than 
with  faith.  I  would  that  it  were  here  and  now  given 
me  to  say  how  this  condition  is  reached  in  the  term  of 
sanctity  ;  but  I  think  that  it  is  by  the  imagination  raised 
in  ecstasy.  In  the  normal  sense  there  is  imagination, 
but  it  is  not  a  pure  and  constant  fire  ;  there  is  also 
ecstasy  in  many  stages,  and  some  of  these  are  experienced 
in  the  devout  life  apart  from  any  shaping  spirit.  I  put 
it  forward  tentatively  as  a  high  speculation  that  the 
union  of  which  I  have  spoken  is  consummated  in  the 
higher  consciousness,  so  that  the  priest  prepared  thereto 

637 


The   Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

enters  and  attains.  What  he  celebrates  there  is  a  Mass 
of  the  Beatific  Vision  ;  but  this  is  the  Mass  of  the  Graal. 
At  that  Veni  Creator  the  Lord  Christ  comes,  and  the 
Comforter.  I  believe  further  that  these  things  are 
done  in  the  sanctuary  of  a  man's  own  spirit,  as  in  an 
Ark  of  the  Graal. 

It  is  obvious  that  this  is  the  limit  of  things  at  which 
expression  suffers  a  complete  paralysis.  If  I  say  with 
Elias  Ashmole  that  of  what  is  beyond  I  know  enough 
to  hold  my  tongue  but  not  enough  to  speak,  even  then 
it  is  obvious  that  I  exceed  my  narrow  measures :  "  I 
know  not,  God  knoweth."  It  is  useless,  in  any  case,  to 
pursue  the  evidential  questions  further  than  I  have 
taken  them  up  to  this  point.  I  might  have  begun  by 
saying  that  what  I  proposed  to  present  was  an  hypothesis 
only  ;  the  true  evidences  of  the  Secret  Tradition  are 
in  the  Secret  Schools,  and  of  these  it  is  idle  to  think  that 
one  can  produce  more  than  the  rumour  in  the  open 
day.  I  have  left  nothing  unstated  that  it  has  been  in 
any  sense  possible  to  adduce  ;  those  of  my  own  tradition 
will  understand  what  remains  over  and  what  is  indeed 
involved.  I  put  forward  no  claims  ;  that  day  has  passed 
long  since  when  one  man  could  be  so  much  as  desired 
to  believe  on  the  authority  of  another  where  things 
vital  are  involved.  I  invite  no  verdict ;  I  care  utterly 
nothing  for  the  impression  which  the  considerations  of 
this  book  may  occasion  in  the  academies  of  external 
thought,  and  in  the  words  of  one  who  has  preceded  me 
carrying  no  warrants  but  those  of  his  own  genius  :  in 
any  case  whatsoever,  I  shall  not  on  my  own  part  be 
"  the  less  convinced  or  the  more  discouraged."  The 
rumours  of  Graal  literature  are  a  part  of  sanctuary 
doctrine.  I  do  not  know  how  they  transpired  ;  I  am 
not  certain  that  the  question  is  much  of  my  concern  ; 
no  doubt  in  the  historical  sense  I  could  desire  that  I  did 
know.  I  am  certain  that  the  spiritual  alchemists  were 
men  after  the  heart  of  Christ ;  I  am  not  less  certain 
that  those  who  created^symbolical  Masonry  were  the 

638 


The  Secret   Church 

members  of  a  lower  grade  ;  and  when  the  Quest  of 
Galahad  takes  that  high  prince  and  king  among  all 
anointed  through  the  veils  of  transubstantiation  into 
the  Divine  Vision,  I  know  that  the  sanctuary  is  made 
void  for  him  who  has  so  achieved,  the  curtains  are  parted, 
and  it  is  given  him  to  depart  hence,  for  there  is  nothing 
left  to  detain  him. 


IV 
THE  MTSTERT  WHICH  IS   WITHIN 

On  the  historical  side  the  Secret  Church  is  then  the 
shadow  of  an  hypothesis  at  best  ;  on  the  spiritual  side  of 
the  intellect  it  is  an  implicit,  but  it  is  that  irresistibly; 
mystically  it  is  a  truth  which  is  not  less  than  obvious, 
but  it  should  be  understood — and  I  repeat  therefore — 
that  it  is  apart  from  all  forms,  conventions  and  instituted 
existence.  When  in  our  highest  moments  we  conceive 
with  least  unworthiness  of  the  Church  on  the  ideal 
plane,  we  approximate,  but  still  under  the  reserves  of 
our  own  insufficiency,  to  the  Holy  Assembly.  It  is 
the  unity  of  arch-natural  minds.  It  is  that  in  which, 
by  the  mediation  of  the  creeds,  we  confess  our  beliefs 
daily — the  communion  of  saints.  If  we  like  to  express 
it  in  such  words — and  they  are  excellent  apart  from 
their  unhappy  associations — it  is  the  choir  invisible. 
It  is  even  like  the  priesthood  of  the  Graal  sanctuary, 
as  we  judge  by  the  romances  concerning  it  ;  it  does 
not  ordain  or  teach ;  it  fulfils  its  office  sufficiently 
because,  speaking  symbolically,  it  is  "  in  the  foremost 
files  of  time."  It  is  like  Saint-Martin — its  feet  are  on 
earth  and  its  head  is  in  Heaven. 

The  Secret  Church  has  said  therefore  :  "  Introibo  ad 
altare  Dei"  and  it  has  entered  and  gone  in.  When  it 
comes  out,  in  the  person  of  one  of  its  members,  it  carries 
bread  and  wine,  like  Melchisedech.  The  conditions  of 
its  membership  correspond  to  the  conditions  of  finding 

639 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

the  Holy  Graal,  as  described  in  the  German  Parsifal. 
If  it  were  possible  to  regard  it  as  an  Order,  it  might  be 
said  that  its  device  is  :  "  Behold,  I  am  with  you  always, 
even  unto  the  consummation  of  the  world."  It  is  the 
place  in  which  Mary  conceived  in  her  heart  before  she 
conceived  in  her  body.  As  already  indicated,  it  has 
not  issued  manifestoes,  or  we  should  be  in  a  better 
position  to  judge  regarding  it  ;  it  has  not  had  its  docu- 
ments abstracted,  or  we  should  not  have  had  the  Graal 
romances  extant  in  their  present  form.  But  things 
have  transpired  concerning  it,  and  thus  we  have  the 
Characteristics  of  the  Interior  Church  by  Loupoukine, 
the  Cloud  upon  the  Sanctuary  by  Eckartshausen,  Werner's 
Sons  of  the  V  alley  >  the  Eucharistic  side  of  Alchemy  and 
the  rumour  of  the  Holy  Quest.  It  gives  to  those  who 
can  receive  it  a  full  answer  to  the  question  :  "  Art  thou 
He  that  is  to  come,  or  do  we  look  for  another  ?  J!  In  a 
word,  the  natural  Graal  is  everywhere  but  the  super- 
natural Graal  is  in  the  Secret  Church. 

So  far  as  there  has  been  any  evidence  offered  on  the 
hypothesis  concerning  it,  this  has  gone  entirely  astray, 
because  it  has  assumed  that  we  are  concerned  with 
some  corporate  and  organised  body,  whereas  we  are 
concerned  only  with  the  course  of  experience  in  the 
higher  consciousness.  Now,  if  there  is  no  such  experi- 
ence, the  claim  of  the  official  Church  is  at  once  voided. 

The  presence  of  the  Secret  Church  is  like  that  of 
angels  unawares.  In  the  outer  courts  are  those  who 
are  prepared  for  regeneration,  and  in  the  adyta  are  those 
who  have  attained  it  :  these  are  the  Holy  Assembly. 
It  is  the  place  of  those  who,  after  the  birth  of  flesh, 
which  is  the  birth  of  the  will  of  man,  have  come  to  be 
born  of  God.  It  is  in  the  persons  of  those  who  are 
regenerate  that  the  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against 
the  Church.  The  place  of  the  Holy  Assembly  is  the 
place  of  Eden  and  Paradise  ;  it  is  that  whence  man 
came  and  whither  he  returns.  It  is  also  that  place 
from  which  the  Spirit  and  the  Bride  say  "  Come  "  ; 

640 


The  Secret   Church 

or  it  is  the  place  of  the  Waters  of  Life,  with  power  to 
take  freely.  It  is  like  the  still,  small  voice  ;  it  is  heard 
only  in  the  midst  of  the  heart's  silence,  and  there  is  no 
written  word  to  show  us  how  its  rite  is  celebrated. 
Its  work  upon  things  without  is  a  work  of  harmony, 
wherein  is  neither  haste  nor  violence.  There  are  no 
admissions — at  least  of  the  ceremonial  kind — to  the 
Holy  Assembly,  but  in  the  last  instance  the  candidate 
inducts  himself.  There  is  no  sodality,  no  institution, 
no  order  which  throughout  the  Christian  centuries  has 
worked  in  such  silence.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  it 
remains  an  implicit  in  mystic  literature  rather  than  a 
formal  revelation  ;  it  is  not  a  revelation  but  an  infer- 
ence ;  when  it  is  not  an  inference  it  is  an  attainment. 
It  is  neither  an  interference  nor  a  guidance  actually ;  it 
is  better  described  as  an  influence.  It  does  not  come 
down  ;  more  correctly  it  draws  up,  but  it  also  inheres. 
It  is  the  place  of  those  who  have  become  transmuted 
and  tingeing  stones. 

The  mystery  in  chief  of  the  Secret  Church  is  that 
of  Divine  communication,  of  which  it  has  the  sanctifying 
sacraments ;  but,  once  more,  so  far  as  these  are  typified 
symbolically  it  can  have  no  more  efficient  and  unspotted 
outward  signs  than  the  bread  and  wine  for  oblation. 
It  is  in  this  sense  that  it  connects  more  especially  with 
the  Eucharist.  Christian  temples  are  oriented  to  show 
that  there  is  a  light  behind,  and  by  all  previous  con- 
siderations churches  with  open  doors  are  the  thresholds 
of  the  Church  which  is  not  entered  by  doors  because 
it  has  not  been  built  with  hands.  The  Secret  Church 
is  the  manifest  Church  glorified  and  installed  in  the 
spiritual  kingdom,  as  this  was  first  set  over  the  kingdom 
of  the  visible  world.  It  is  therefore  the  withdrawn  spirit 
of  the  outward  Holy  Assembly,  and  it  would  be  un- 
reasonable for  those  who  acknowledge  the  visible  body 
to  deny  that  which  transcends  it.  But  to  speak  of  a  spirit 
which  thus  transcends  a  body  is  still  to  say  that,  because 
the  lesser  is  contained  by  the  greater,  the  latter  is  until 

641  2  S 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

now  not  exactly  without  the  former  nor  apart  therefrom, 
and  its  mode  of  manifestation,  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  said 
to  manifest,  is  not  otherwise  than  from  within.  There  is 
no  separate  incorporation.  It  has  no  ambassadors  nor 
charges  d'affaires  at  any  court  of  the  hierarchies,  nor  does 
it  send  out  visible  physicians  and  healers,  for  it  has  no 
conventional  offices  either  in  the  interests  of  things  above 
or  even  of  those  below.  If  some  have  spoken  of  it  as 
leading  the  official  Church,  there  is  here  an  imperfection 
of  expression,  because  it  is  speaking  after  a  formal  manner 
concerning  modes  which  are  apart  from  all  whatsoever 
that  we  understand  by  convention.  Without  in  any 
sense  representing  and  much  less  exhausting  the  process, 
I  have  indicated  that  it  draws  rather  than  leads,  and 
if  I  may  attempt  one  further  definition,  as  the  synthesis 
of  all  my  statements — echoing  and  reflecting  all — I  would 
describe  the  Secret  Church  as  the  integration  of  believers 
in  the  higher  consciousness. 


THE  SECLUDED    AND    UNKNOWN  SANCTUART 

It  is  obvious  that  the  romances  of  the  Graal  are 
either  legendary  histories  of  religion  on  the  external 
side,  and  as  such  are  concerned  with  the  quest  of  con- 
version— that  is,  Christianity  colonising — or  they  are 
spiritual  histories  with  a  strong  individual  element 
but  a  wide  field  of  application  on  the  universal  side, 
corresponding  to  the  province  of  mysticism — such  as  the 
legend  of  the  Church  in  the  world  and  the  soul  in  its 
progress.  The  first  class  would  include  the  metrical 
Joseph  of  Arimathtza  and  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
while  the  most  notable  examples  of  the  second  class  are 
the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  and  the  Quest  of  Galahad. 
The  idea  of  their  secret  meaning  must  be  held  to  reside, 
as  regards  the  first  class,  in  the  claims  which  they  'put 
forward,  and,  as  regards  the  second,  in  the  special  appli- 

642 


The  Secret  Church 

cation  of  the  stories.  In  our  consideration  of  certain 
successive  literatures  which  came  into  existence  during 
the  Christian  centuries,  we  have  seen  that  the  books 
of  the  Graal  do  enter  into  a  particular  scheme,  and  they 
are  the  first  in  time  therein.  They  tell  us — now  that 
the  secret  words,  which  were  of  the  essence  of  the 
Mystery  of  Faith,  had  passed  out  of  all  common  know- 
ledge ;  now  that  the  true  succession  from  Christ  had 
been  resumed  into  Heaven ;  again  that  the  sacred 
mysteries  were  reserved  in  an  inaccessible  mountain 
from  all  but  the  highest  sanctity,  or  alternatively  that 
the  House  of  Doctrine  stood  vacant  as  a  testimony  to 
the  external  world.  There  was  also  the  literature  of 
alchemy,  saying  that  He  is  truly  here  but  that  the  way 
of  His  attainment  comes  only  by  the  revelation  which 
He  gives,  and  for  all  else  there  are  only  the  age-long 
processes  of  Nature.  There  was  further  the  literature 
of  Israel  in  exile,  saying  :  "  By  the  Waters  of  Babylon  " 
— yet  also  to  those  who  could  hear  it  :  "  Enter  into  the 
nuptial  joys  of  Rabbi  Simeon."  There  was,  lastly,  as 
there  is  also,  the  great  witness  of  Masonry,  saying  : 
"  Not  yet,  in  quiet  lie  " — to  every  heart  of  aspiration 
seeking  to  build  the  temple  otherwise  than  in  the  heart. 
And  so  from  age  to  age  the  story  of  substitution  con- 
tinues, but  with  a  hint  everywhere  that  still  there  is 
known  somewhere  that  which  the  sign  signifies.  The 
Wardens  are  withdrawn,  but  they  are  alive.  There 
is  a  cloud  upon  the  Sanctuary,  but  the  Sanctuary  is 
within  the  Church,  and  other  rumours  distinguishable 
throughout  the  centuries  speak  of  a  Holy  Place  which 
is  behind  the  manifest  Altar,  of  a  deeper  mystery  of 
love  behind  the  world  of  grace — a  rumour,  a  legend,  a 
voice,  an  unknown  witness  testifying  concerning  a  more 
Holy  Assembly  and  an  Interior  and  more  Secret  Church. 
So  far  therefore  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  justify 
the  hypothesis  that  there  were  rumours  abroad  in  the 
world  which  entered  into  houses  of  romance  and  account 
for  the  implicits  which  have  been  traced  in  the  Graal 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

literature.  All  that  which  lay  behind  the  rumour — an 
undeclared  region,  giving  forth  strange  portents  under 
a  cloud  of  mystery — was  apart,  and  that  utterly,  from 
the  connections  of  romance,  and  the  story-tellers,  work- 
ing under  their  proper  warrants,  went  their  own  way, 
incorporating,  as  we  have  seen,  from  all  quarters.  We 
get  in  this  manner  the  three  schools  which  I  mentioned 
at  the  beginning  :  (a)  the  school  of  transition  from 
folk-lore  ;  (b)  the  school  of  Guiot  de  Provence  ;  and 
(c)  the  monastic  school.  The  end  of  these  considerations 
is  now  upon  the  very  threshold,  but  before  I  take  the 
closing  it  is  desirable  to  set  out  briefly  some  possible 
hypotheses  in  divergence  and  decide  how  far  they  have 
any  claim  on  our  attention.  When  the  alchemists  of 
old  intended  more  than  usually  to  confuse  their  various 
issues  in  unversed  minds,  and  to  distract  the  curiosity- 
monger  regarding  that  Mystery  which  has  been  termed 
throughout  all  Hermetic  times  the  First  Matter  of  the 
Philosopher,  they  had  recourse  to  concealment  by 
application  thereto  of  almost  opprobrious  epithets.  It 
was  a  vile  and  unclean  matter,  a  thing  of  no  account 
and  despised,  an  object  that  was  found  everywhere  and 
trodden  under  the  feet  of  the  wayfarer.  The  uninitiated 
went  astray  accordingly  in  foolish  and  revolting  processes. 
I  do  not  know  whether  a  similar  subtlety  might  have 
commended  itself  to  the  writers  of  Graal  romances- 
supposing  that  there  had  been  a  common  understanding 
between  them  for  the  attainment  of  a  specific  end- 
but  having  regard  to  the  enormous  machinery  which  was 
put  in  operation  to  determine  the  enchantments  of 
Britain,  "  the  desolation  which  fell  upon  Logres  "  and 
the  adventurous  times,  it  is  natural  to  look  about  for 
a  causation  in  proportion  thereto — for  instance,  some 
event  in  history ;  but  nothing  emerges  in  response 
except  a  possible  conspiracy  in  matters  of  religion. 
We  will  therefore  begin  by  assuming  that  for  what 
purpose  soever  the  literature  concealed  in  part  but  in 
part  also  put  forward  an  attack  upon  the  Roman  Church. 

644 


The  Secret  Church 

The  first  observation  to  make  in  this  connection  is  that 
those  who  were  concerned  with  the  movement  out  of 
which  the  impeachment  originated  must  have  accepted 
the  sacraments  and  the  body  of  ecclesiastical  procedure. 
This  is  therefore  assumed  tacitly,  as  there  would  be 
otherwise  no  working  agreement  possible. 

Now,  seeing  that  in  one  case  the  keeper  of  the  Graal 
is  supposed  to  have  fallen  from  righteousness,  and  that 
— obscurely  enough  in  respect  of  logic  in  the  scheme — 
he  could  only  look  for  healing  outside  his  own  House 
of  Doctrine,  one  might  be  disposed  at  first  sight  to 
conclude  that  the  Graal  Church  may  stand  for  Latin 
Christianity  and  the  Rich  Fisherman  for  its  central 
seat  of  authority.  He  is  the  Keeper  of  the  Divine 
Mysteries,  the  possessor  of  the  valid  forms,  but  he  and 
his  environment  have  been  laid  waste  by  the  spirit  of  the 
world.  Alternatively,  it  might  be  a  confession  of  apparent 
failure  in  respect  of  God's  work  in  the  world.  From 
either  point  of  view  the  literature  would  be  concerned 
with  the  amelioration  of  the  Latin  Church  by  recalling 
it  to  its  higher  part.  The  position,  however,  becomes 
involved  curiously,  and  that  at  once,  for  the  presence 
of  the  Hallows  may  preserve  the  king  alive,  but  otherwise 
they  cannot  help  him.  No  recitation  of  the  putative, 
all-powerful  words  can  ever  relieve  his  sickness,  and 
the  House  of  God  is  therefore — as  it  long  remains — in 
mourning.  Here  also  the  difficulty  of  the  unasked 
question — of  that  question  which  seems  exclusive  in 
symbolism — intervenes  for  our  further  confusion.  What 
purpose,  in  this  connection,  could  it  serve  the  Hereditary 
Keeper  of  the  Graal,  that  an  apparent  stranger  should 
visit  him  and  ask  the  meaning  of  the  Graal  and  its 
pageant  ?  We  remember  the  question  in  Masonry 
which  is  one  of  violence,  doing  outrage  to  the  law  and 
the  order  and  voiding  the  erection  of  a  true  temple  : 
there  it  is  simple  in  symbolism,  and  thus  transparent 
in  meaning  ;  but  here  is  a  question  which  is  necessary  in 
some  utterly  mystical  manner,  belonging  to  the  law  and 

645 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

the  order,  and  one  by  which  the  Warden  is  restored  : 
it  is  less  intelligible  on  this  hypothesis  than  are  darker 
corners  of  thought.  It  follows,  however  this  may  be, 
that  there  is  a  heavy  cloud  on  the  Sanctuary,  and  if 
the  symbolism  belongs  simply  to  the  official  Church, 
it  has  the  Words  of  Life,  but  is  still,  after  some  manner, 
inhibited  ;  it  must  be  challenged  before  it  can  speak 
and  it  must  communicate  before  it  can  be  healed.  The 
Quests  are  so  far  external  that  they  involve  transit  from 
place  to  place,  as  a  pageant  passes  through  a  temple  ; 
but  the  question  is  an  intellectual  research.  The  heroes 
of  research  offer  no  light  on  the  subject,  because  Perceval 
at  his  highest  does  not  ask  in  the  end  and  the  romance 
of  Galahad  confesses  to  no  question.  The  Didot  Perceval 
leaves  the  new  Keeper,  with  all  to  him  belonging,  in 
final  seclusion,  where  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen 
is  put  away  from  the  eyes  of  all,  and  it  is  impossible 
therefore  that  the  Hidden  Sanctuary  should  represent 
an  official  Church.  To  express  it  in  another  way,  the 
Son  of  the  Doctrine  was  received  into  the  House  of 
the  Doctrine  and  had  the  great  secret  imparted  to  him. 
Faintly  and  far  away  the  Didot  Perceval  shows  how  the 
aeonian  Keeper  has  waited  in  the  castle  of  the  soul  till 
the  natural  man,  who  is  the  scion  of  his  house,  comes  in 
and  asks  the  question  of  the  union.  The  natural  man 
understands  nothing  and  does  not  ask  till  he  is  driven, 
but  he  is  driven  at  last.  As  faintly  and  still  further 
away,  the  Conte  del  Graal  tells  the  same  symbolical 
story,  with  many  variations ;  but  as  it  reaches  no  term 
till  a  later  period  in  time,  when  it  is  simply  a  reflection 
of  other  texts,  and  has  hence  no  independent  implicits, 
there  is  no  call  to  examine  it  in  this  connection.  It  may 
be  noted,  however,  that  the  prologue,  which  is  regarded 
as  its  latest  part,  tells  of  things  which  exceed  experience 
— that  is  to  say,  evidence — of  sins  against  spiritual  life 
and  of  return  to  the  House  of  the  Father,  as  aspiration 
returns  to  its  source.  But  it  is  difficult  to  connect  it 
with  any  sanctuary  doctrine.  The  German  Parsifal 

646 


The  Secret  Church 

tells  how  the  House  is  always  in  the  world,  but  that  it 
is  only  attainable  by  great  sanctity,  which  is  sufficient 
to  show  that  it  does  not  symbolise  the  institutes  of 
external  religion.  It  has,  however,  a  strange  sacramental 
side,  which  seems  to  indicate  that  the  Eucharist  in  its 
highest  efficacy  comes  down  from  Heaven  direct.  It 
therefore  incorporates  not  indeed  a  distinct  motive  but 
the  terms  of  another  school.  To  conclude  concerning 
it,  it  is  obvious  from  the  beginning  that  the  Keepers  of 
Mont  Salvatch  were  a  secret  order  of  chivalry,  after 
the  manner  of  the  Templars.  The  Titurel  recites  the 
building  of  the  Spiritual  House  in  beauty  as  a  Palace  of 
Art ;  and  its  meaning  is  that  the  Mystery  of  Knowledge 
was  in  the  custody  of  a  special  election,  though  there  is 
nothing  to  suggest  that  it  was  opposed  to  the  official 
Church.  The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  lifts  up  a  different 
corner  of  the  veil,  telling  how  one  Keeper  died  unhealed 
and  that  the  last  Warden  of  the  Mysteries  was  taken 
away,  though  the  Holy  Things  remained.  We  have 
now  only  the  great  and  paramount  Quest  left  for  con- 
sideration, which  is  that  of  Galahad,  and  it  tells  how 
the  Warden  of  the  Mysteries,  together  with  the  Holy 
Things,  was  removed  once  and  for  all,  as  if  the  House 
of  Doctrine  were  itself  nothing  and  the  term  of  research 
everything.  The  Great  Quest  was  written  with  the 
highest  sanctity  as  its  actuating  motive,  and  we  can 
do  no  otherwise  than  accept  it  as  an  instance  of  the 
literature  at  its  greatest.  It  forms  with  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval  the  consummation  of  the  cycle.  These 
quests  are  mirrors  of  spiritual  chivalry,  mirrors  of  per- 
fection, pageants  of  the  mystic  life,  and  it  does  not 
matter  what  the  legend  was  prior  to  their  appearance. 
They  are  the  teaching  of  the  Church  spiritualised,  if  I 
may  be  pardoned  such  a  term,  and  they  offer  in  romance 
form  a  presentation  of  the  soul's  chronicle. 

So  far  therefore  from  the  Graal  sanctuary  representing 
the  Latin  or  any  other  external  Church,  we  find  that 
the  mystery  of  the  sanctuary  within  is  written  through 

647 


The  Hidden  Church  of  the   Holy    Graal 

all  the  romances,  though  it  is  in  the  words  of  the  sanctuary 
without  and  the  savour  of  the  external  incense  is  more 
noticeable  in  some  quests  than  in  others. 

In  this  light  we  shall  still  find  the  Didot  Perceval  a 
little  wanting  in  meaning  and  the  Conte  del  Graal  too 
composite  to  reflect  a  full  light  of  intention.  As  regards 
the  German  cycle,  it  shows  how  the  great  mystery 
descends  and  abides  in  us.  The  High  History  empties 
the  House  of  Doctrine  and  leaves  it  as  a  vacant  sign 
before  the  face  of  the  world.  The  Galahad  Quest  says 
that  the  world  was  not  worthy.  Yet  in  a  sense  all 
this  is  comparative,  constituting  the  several  presenta- 
tions and  various  aspects  of  that  which  is  one  at  the 
root,  for  the  Secret  Church  does  indeed  say :  Mysterium 
Fidei,  and  the  official  Church  says :  Corpus  Domini;  but 
these  two  are  one. 

It  will  be  agreed  on  these  considerations  that  we 
can  only  contemplate  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 
as  a  mystery  of  secrecy,  but  it  can  be  assumed  that  in 
this  sense  it  may  either  have  been  hostile  to  Rome  or 
at  peace  in  its  mind  concerning  it.  In  connection  with 
the  first  alternative,  let  us  imagine  for  a  moment  that 
the  Welsh  or  some  other  Celtic  Church  was  making 
through  the  medium  of  the  romances  a  last  bid  for 
recognition.  If  the  prevalence  of  the,  Roman  Rite 
constituted  the  enchantment  and  desolation ;  if  the 
questioning  of  the  Wardens  of  the  Mystery,  on  the 
Mystery  itself  manifested,  signified  the  illumination  of 
the  elect  concerning  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the 
Celtic  saints  and  now  in  danger  of  extinction  ;  we 
should  have  a  design  adequate  to  the  machinery,  and 
should  be  able  to  understand  the  magnitude  of  the 
claims  in  conjunction  with  the  follies  which  abound 
in  the  form  of  its  expression,  for  it  seems  difficult  to 
say  that,  for  example,  the  Sanctuary  in  Wales  had  a 
wise  church  built  about  it.  It  was  chaotic  rather  than 
in  confusion,  and  in  respect  of  its  working  was  almost 
a  prolonged  abuse.  The  suggestion  is  otherwise  pre- 
648 


The  Secret   Church 

posterous  ;  but  British  Christianity  generally,  and  its 
desire  for  independence,  centralised,  by  example,  in  the 
crown  at  the  period  of  Henry  II.,  may  be  said  to  account 
for  a  certain  complexion  sometimes  discerned  in  the 
literature  in  respect  of  Rome,  and  to  explain  why,  this 
notwithstanding,  it  is  otherwise  so  catholic  at  heart.  The 
speculation  at  the  present  time  has  a  certain  presumption 
in  its  favour  because  a  section  of  scholarship  is  inclined 
thereto,  but  a  slight  study  of  the  texts  must,  I  think, 
dispose  of  it,  once  and  for  all. 

The  short  recension,  comprised  in  the  Lesser 
Chronicles,  tells  how  a  warranted  company  came  west- 
ward ;  how  it  abode  for  many  centuries  in  a  Veiled 
Sanctuary ;  how  -  the  Quest  for  this  Sanctuary  was 
instituted  ;  how  it  failed  in  the  first  instance,  but  was 
achieved  subsequently  ;  how  the  secrets  of  the  Sanctuary 
were  learned ;  how  he  who  learned  them  remained 
within  the  Sanctuary,  and  there  is  no  story  afterwards. 
The  metrical  romance  of  De  Borron  and  the  Lesser  Holy 
Graal  are  not  a  legend  concerning  the  conversion  of 
England,  but  the  prolegomena  thereto.  They  leave 
the  real  intention  doubtful  outside  the  bare  fact  that 
something  would  be  brought  into  Britain  which  was 
unknown  to  the  Church  at  large,  for  the  canonical 
apostles  were  not  present  when  his  great  mission  was 
conferred  on  Joseph  by  Christ.  There  is  nothing  on 
the  mere  surface  to  show  that  any  priesthood  followed 
the  possession  of  the  Graal  Vessel  or  the  knowledge  of 
the  Secret  Words.  Yet  these  are  Eucharistic  ;  accord- 
ing to  the  Lesser  Holy  Graal  they  are  a  formula  of  con- 
secration ;  and  in  a  sense  Joseph  must  have  been 
ordained,  because  it  is  obvious  that  at  need  he  could 
recite  the  words  effectually.  It  is  certain,  moreover, 
that  Joseph  and  his  company  carried  no  official  priests 
westward.  A  great  lacuna  follows,  and  then  comes 
the  Early  Merlin,  showing  that  the  Secret  Sanctuary  is 
in  Britain,  that  a  firebrand  prophet  is  going  about  in 
the  land,  carrying  the  warrants  of  the  Graal,  and  is 

649 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

bent  upon  fulfilling  prophecy  by  instituting  the  Third 
Table  for  the  completion  of  the  Graal  Trinity.  \  There 
are  no  claims  put  forward  regarding  the  sanctuary, 
and  the  same  statement  holds  for  the  Didot  Perceval. 
It  remains  that  the  Lesser  Chronicles  generally  intimate 
the  existence  of  a  particular  Eucharistic  knowledge, 
but  not  of  a  Church  demanding  recognition  thereon. 
As  secrecy  is  the  primary  seal,  it  is  obvious  that  the 
Graal  Church  is  not  the  Church  in  Britain,  nor  do  the 
texts  contain  any  counter-picture,  object,  or  character 
which  might  by  possibility  correspond  to  the  official 
Church  apart  from  that  notion  of  enchantment  which, 
in  the  absence  of  any  warrant,  it  is  arbitrary  to  explain 
along  these  lines.  For  example,  it  would  be  madness  to 
suggest  that  Moses,  who  was  interned  in  secrecy,  repre- 
sents the  Latin  Church  in  apostasy  or  rejection.  It  is 
obvious,  in  fine,  that  Robert  de  Borron  was  acquainted 
with  no  tradition  which  connected  Joseph  of  Arimathsea 
with  Glastonbury  or  even  with  Britain.  In  the  poem,  he 
remains  where  he  was  or  returns  to  Syria,  as  Moses  the 
Law-giver  went  up  the  holy  mountain. 

The  Greater  Chronicles  bear  the  same  witness,  but 
the  evidence  of  transubstantiation  and  other  matters  of 
doctrine  indicate  that  the  major  texts  are  typically  and 
militantly  Roman.  The  long  recension  tells  how  the 
same  company,  strangely  extended,  arrived  in  Britain 
and  there  established,  in  the  person  of  Joseph  II.,  the 
beginnings  of  a  supreme  orthodoxy,  so  that  nothing 
which  came  after  in  the  name  of  the  Gospel  could 
abide  in  competition  therewith ;  how  the  prophet  and 
enchanter  Merlin  carried  a  strange  warrant  to  connect 
his  work  with  the  Mystery  of  the  Holy  Graal ;  how  he 
possessed  from  the  beginning  of  his  symbol  the  power 
to  promise  Blaise  that  he  should  be  united  with  the 
secret  assembly  ;  how  the  Castle  of  the  Graal,  though 
not  altogether  hidden  from  the  world,  was  encompassed 
with  perils  and  difficulties,  which  notwithstanding 
there  were  wars  or  the  rumour  of  wars  about  it.  The 

650 


The   Secret    Church 

Book  of  the  Holy  Graal  narrates  the  conversion  of  Britain 
by  those  who  carried  the  license  of  super-apostolical 
succession,  the  design  of  which  may  have  been  pan- 
Britannic,  or  conceivably  the  implicit  of  a  plan  of 
campaign  against  papal  claims  over  Britain.  It  is  at 
least  the  legend  par  excellence  which,  if  any,  would  be 
regarded  as  devised  in  this  interest  ;  and  it  would  stand 
alone  as  such  among  the  Anglo-Norman  texts.  The 
colonisation,  whatever  its  design,  conquered  all  Britain 
in  all  publicity.  When  however  the  later  Merlin  texts 
enter  the  field,  everything  has  passed  into  seclusion,  and 
the  prophet's  personation  of  the  character  of  messenger 
does  not  carry  public  knowledge  concerning  the  Graal 
further  than  an  echoing  rumour.  Outside  the  sacro- 
saintly  character  of  ordinary  Church-practice,  the  texts 
offer  no  ecclesiastical  element  but  the  implications 
which  are  resident  in  the  notion  of  the  adventurous 
times  and  the  preparation  at  the  royal  court  for  the 
Quest  of  the  Sacred  Vessel,  the  term  of  which  is  to 
break  up  the  Round  Table.  The  intermediate  prose 
Lancelot  follows  the  Merlin  texts,  working  for  the  same 
end,  and  we  are  already  at  a  far  distance  from  the  letter 
and  spirit  of  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal.  In  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval  the  term  is  to  strip  the  sanctuary,  but 
it  remains  a  consecrated  place,  and  those  who  enter 
therein  become  thereafter  men  of  holy  lives  and  saints 
of  the  official  Church.  The  Quest  of  Galahad  offers 
in  the  term  thereof  the  instance  of  a  Keeper  who 
is  dispossessed  without  any  intimation  of  his  end.  It 
may  be  said  that  he  is  treated  with  something  almost 
approaching  contumely.  There  is  an  apparent  equiva- 
lent of  an  expulsion  of  the  profane  in  that  command 
for  those  to  withdraw  who  are  not  in  the  Quest  of  the 
Graal.  But  behind  this. and  behind  the  unnamed  yet 
acknowledged  warrant  of  the  Knights  from  Gaul,  Ireland 
and  Denmark,  there  is  some  mystery  concealed  deeply  ; 
the  latter  took  away  from  their  high  experience  the 
memory  of  a  glorious  vision  which  could  well  serve  as  the 

651 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

basis  of  a  tradition  thereafter  in  various  parts  of  the 
world  ;  but  they  had  not  received  communication  of  the 
last  secrets.  The  hidden  life  of  the  Holy  Graal  during  the 
Arthurian  period  seems  next  after  one  the  most  wonderful 
of  all  hidden  lives.  What  could  King  Pelles,  with 
whom  the  Graal  had  abode  for  years,  and  it  may  be  for 
centuries,  whose  daughter  had  also  borne  it  through 
all  the  secret  rites  from  her  childhood,  what  could  he 
learn  from  the  Quest  ? 

I  conclude  therefore  as  regards  the  Greater  Chronicles 
that  they  offer  in  one  text,  which  is  one  of  the  latest, 
a  certain  aggrandisement  of  British  ecclesiastical  tradi- 
tion by  the  incorporation  of  a  rumour  which  belonged 
in  its  root-matter  to  a  different  concern  totally  ;  but 
the  remaining  branches  have  little  part  in  the  scheme. 
The  Graal  Church  is  held  in  secrecy  and  mystery,  and 
when  the  Quest  of  Galahad  certifies  that  a  certain  Joseph, 
not  otherwise  particularised,  was  the  first  bishop  of 
Christendom,  there  is  no  longer  any  consequence  in- 
volved in  the  ecclesiastical  order. 

In  the  German  cycle  the  Graal  has  nothing  to  do 
with  any  conversion  legend  and  nothing  to  do  with 
Britain ;  that  country  is  not  entered  at  all  in  the 
Parsifal.  The  assumption  of  a  particular  concern  in 
the  aspirations  or  ambitions  of  the  House  of  Anjou  is 
an  irresistible  inference  from  that  portion  which  contains 
the  Angevin  elements ;  but  it  is  accidental  and  not 
essential  to  the  design  of  the  poem,  and  is  not  its 
inspiration  but  its  burden.  The  poem  is  to  be  judged 
wholly  by  other  standards. 

It  must,  I  think,  be  concluded  from  this  brief  and 
literal  schedule  that,  except  by  a  bare  possibility  in  a 
single  sporadic  instance,  we  are  not  dealing  in  the 
Graal  literature  with  an  ecclesiastical  conspiracy  for  the 
furtherance  of  any  independence  in  matters  of  religion  ; 
the  scheme  of  the  whole  mystery  is  opposed  to  such 
a  supposition.  It  seems  impossible  to  affirm  that  the 
Graal  writers  were  working  a  similar  scheme  under  a 

652 


The  Secret   Church 

common  agreement,  as  if  all  were  imbued  by  a  pan- 
Britannic  fever,  or  were  the  concealed  disciples  of  an 
obscure  sect  in  religion.  There  are  few  consecutive 
documents  which  offer  so  little  trace  of  a  concerted 
effort.  Some  writers  manifest  a  very  high  purpose  and 
some  no  purpose  at  all,  beyond  the  true  intent  which  is 
all  for  our  delight  in  story-telling.  Otherwise  than  by 
simple  predilection,  we  shall  never  understand  why 
these  chose  for  their  subject  a  Mystery  like  that  of  the 
Graal.  But  the  rumours  and  implicits  run  through  all 
the  texts,  as  an  echo  perpetuated,  and  in  their  several 
degrees  the  stories  are  plain  concerning  them.  Even 
the  'Conte  del  Graal  enshrines  them  after  its  own 
manner,  in  spite  of  a  piecemeal  tradition.  Apart 
from  this  text,  the  Didot  Perceval  tells  a  plain  story 
by  interning  the  Warden-in-chief,  with  the  Hallows, 
in  that  place  which  it  never  names  ;  but  it  knows 
nothing  of  the  House  made  void.  The  German  Par- 
sifal tells  a  plain  story  by  leaving  the  great  chivalry 
in  the  great  Temple,  all  things  completed  and  all 
things  as  they  were  at  the  beginning.  Again  there  is 
nothing  made  void.  The  removal  of  the  Mystery  in 
the  Titurel  and  the  transport  of  the  Sacred  House  can- 
not signify  more  than  a  change  of  imputed  location  and  a 
further  withdrawal.  The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  tells  a 
plain  story,  but  it  leaves  the  voided  Castle  as  a  public 
sign  to  the  nations,  taking  the  Keeper  and  the  Hallows 
into  that  great  distance  which  is  not  in  time  or  place. 
The  Quest  of  Galahad,  in  fine,  tells  a  plain  story  also 
of  the  voided  House  and  its  vacated  offices,  but  it  has 
byways  of  allusion  from  which  the  infinite  opens. 

Now,  the  mystery  which  covers  the  sanctuary  is  never 
drawn  away  in  the  Lesser  Chronicles.  We  know  only 
that  the  weight  of  many  centuries  presses  heavily  upon 
the  Keeper.  We  infer  that  the  hermit,  Blaise,  was 
taken  into  the  choirs  of  heaven  according  to  the  promise 
of  Merlin,  and  is,  therefore,  in  la  joie  -perdurable.  But 
we  know  not  of  any  messenger  who  has  relieved  Perceval ; 

653 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

so,  therefore,  in  eternal  virginity  and  in  utter  loneliness 
he  is  waiting  till  the  world  shall  be  worthy.  His  place 
is  not  known  ;  he  does  not  come  out  therefrom  ;  and 
there  is  none  that  goes  in. 

But  in  the  Greater  Chronicles  there  is  another  version 
of  his  legend  which  says  very  surely,  although  by  impli- 
cation only,  that  the  Didot  Perceval  is  not  the  whole 
story,  and  therein  indeed  Perceval  is  taken  away,  for 
the  Red  Cross  ship  carries  him,  as  the  dark  barge  bears 
King  Arthur.  This  story  stands  apart  almost  from 
everything  and  is  very  difficult  to  account  for,  since  all 
things  fail  therein.  The  king  dies,  the  question  is  not 
asked,  the  Hallows  are  parted  from  one  another,  the 
Castle  of  Souls  and  the  Gate  of  Paradise  are  left  utterly 
vacant,  as  a  sign  of  wrath  to  the  centuries,  and  the  hands 
of  Perceval  are  empty  as  he  passes  into  the  unseen.  We 
learn  only  that  he  goes  through  a  golden  distance  and 
that  he  knows  that  which  awaits  him. 

I  have  said  that  there  are  wars  and  rumours  of  wars 
about  Corbenic  in  the  Galahad  Quest,  yet  is  it  found 
by  grace  only,  or  special  license,  and  it  is  a  house  of 
terrors  and  of  marvels.  Under  these  reserves,  it  is  a 
house  of  many  visitations,  nor  is  it  therefore  so  utterly 
unknown  as  is  that  of  the  Lesser  Chronicles.  Its  build- 
ing is  described  at  large,  as  is  that  of  the  Temple  in  the 
Titurel,  and  if  its  location  remains  a  mystery  we  are 
not  without  some  materials  for  reconstructing  its  broad 
environment. 

We  have  now  made  a  circuitous  journey  and  we 
return  to  our  starting-point,  being  the  evidences  of 
a  concealed  claim,  presupposing  its  proper  custodians 
working  within  the  Church  and  in  no  sort  setting  it 
aside.  We  have  found — as  I  at  least  should  have  expected 
to  find  antecedently — the  rationale  of  that  Mystery  of 
Faith  which  tells  us  that  the  Lamb  was  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world.  The  makers  of  the  Anglo- 
Norman  Graal  cycle  had  heard  in  some  undeclared 
manner  of  the  secret  tradition,  and  they  were  so  far 

654 


The  Secret  Church 

properly  informed  that  they  allocated  it  to  the  Holy 
Eucharist,  some  of  them  reflecting  it  as  secret  words 
used  in  consecrating  the  elements.  They  knew  also 
that  it  was  a  mystery  of  orthodox  tradition  and  therefore 
some  others  perhaps  reflected  it  as  super-apostolical 
succession,  but  this  particular  rumour  fell  speedily  out  of 
sight.  The  writers  did  not  register  their  remembrance 
of  the  Epidesis  clause  in  a  Celtic  liturgy  ;  they  never 
dreamed  of  a  pan-Britannic  Church,  though  one  text 
may  have  reflected  hostility  to  the  executive  of  Rome. 
Nothing  could  be  less  in  correspondence  with  such 
an  ambition  than  their  conception  of  a  Mystery  of 
Grace  which  was  at  no  time  intended  to  prevail 
in  public.  Notwithstanding  a  certain  quasi-publicity 
during  the  adventurous  times,  to  the  end  it  remained 
a  mystery.  There  is  no  suggestion  that  any  sect, 
company,  or  institution  was  intended  to  replace  some 
public  institution,  church,  company,  or  sect.  Amidst 
all  the  diadems  and  emblazonments  of  the  great,  won- 
derful literature,  its  concern  at  the  highest  emerges 
in  the  uttermost  clearness,  being  a  tradition  of  the 
panis  vivus  in  its  deeper  understanding.  The  Mass 
went  on  for  ever  in  the  lands  and  the  islands  ;  but 
in  a  place  apart  and  out  of  all  declaration  there  was 
a  Secret  Ark  of  Alliance,  and  those  who  could  be 
present  at  its  service  beheld,  in  a  heart  of  revelation, 
how  Christ  was  manifested  in  the  heart  and  administered 
His  own  Eucharist,  as  He  did  at  the  Last  Supper.  There 
is  no  other  message  put  forward  by  the  still  more  secret 
literatures,  for  these  testify  that  he  who  desires  to  be 
dissolved  shall  be  actually  with  Christ — but  whether  in 
passing  through  literal  or  mystical  death  is  a  great 
question.  Every  document  comprised  in  the  Lesser 
and  Greater  Chronicles  may  be  regarded  as  beginning 
in  sanctity  and  culminating  in  greater  sanctity,  which 
term  is  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  of  the  Catholic 
Church.  In  the  last  resource,  even  Secret  Words  and 
super-apostolical  succession"  mean  only  the  mind  of  the 

655 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

Church  entering  into  its  higher  part,  and  all  the  com- 
panies of  epopts  are  joined  therein  in  a  common  act  of 
experience.  The  official  Church  at  its  greatest  is  not 
apart  really  from  the  Secret  Church,  and  the  one  is 
wounded  in  the  other,  nor  will  they  be  disjoined  in 
their  healing.  The  Graal  is  the  sacred  legend  of  the 
Eucharist,  but  as  behind  its  Castle  of  Souls  there  was 
a  hidden  Paradise,  so,  as  a  Graal  which  is  behind  the 
Holy  Graal,  there  is  an  inward  or  transcendent  sense  of 
the  entire  Mystery. 

The  first  lesson  which  we  must  put  to  heart  from 
these  considerations  is  one  of  great  caution  in  applying 
the  actual  or  possible  implicits  of  the  Graal  literature. 
We  may  suggest  in  the  exercise  of  our  ingenuity  that 
Logres  stands  for  the  colonies  of  Christianity,  as  the 
lesser  stands  for  the  greater,  but  we  shall  not  be 
counselled  wisely  if  we  think  that  the  enchantment  of 
Logres  was  the  prevalence  of  the  official  Churches, 
whether  these  were  Roman  or  Welsh.  We  may  say 
that  the  King's  wounding  sometimes  signified  the 
dereliction  of  the  Great  Experiment  in  the  isolation 
of  its  concealment ;  but  the  King's  healing — when  it 
happens  that  he  is  healed — was  not  a  dream  of  some 
triumph  of  doctrine  over  other  doctrines  in  the  world 
at  large.  We  may  say  that  the  supersanctified  Mystery 
of  Faith  located  in  the  House  of  Doctrine  is  like  the 
Supernal  Sephiroth  of  Kabalism  separated  from  the 
Sephiroth  below  by  the  serpent  spirit  of  the  world ; 
but  if  we  chance  to  be  Kabalists  we  shall  remember 
that  Daath  remains  as  a  channel  of  indirect  communica- 
tion without  break  or  intermission.  We  must  not  say 
that  the  removal  of  the  Great  Palladium  signifies  the 
complete  denudation  of  the  official  Church,  but  we 
may  "  remember  of  this  unstable  world  "  and  the  spirit 
thereof.  When  we  say  that  the  House  of  Doctrine  is 
voided,  we  must  not  mean  that  the  official  Church 
has  ceased  to  be  holy  in  its  teaching,  or  that  the  King 
of  Castle  Mortal  is  the  Judas  spirit  of  Rome.  Seeing 

656 


The  Secret  Church 

that  the  Graal  Castle  is  the  House  of  the  Great  Experi- 
ment and  that  King  Fisherman  is  the  custodian  of  the 
hidden  knowledge  concerning  it,  we  may,  however, 
regard  the  higher  Perceval  as  the  mystic  spirit  and  the 
chivalry  of  sanctity.  The  question  that  he  ought  to 
have  asked  concerned  the  Greater  Office  of  the  Eucharist. 
This  would  have  caused  the  Mystery  to  manifest.  His 
failure  brought  the  House  of  Sanctity  into  desolation, 
because  there  was  no  heir  found  to  carry  on  the  great 
tradition.  But  when  the  Keeper  of  the  Hallows  perished 
and  the  Holy  Place  fell  to  the  enemies  thereof,  the 
tradition  did  not  die,  and  in  the  end  it  was  restored 
thereto.  The  supplement  to  these  things  is  the  complete 
agreement  in  the  romances  with  all  church  doctrine 
and  practice,  from  the  least  even  to  the  greatest.  They 
have,  at  the  same  time,  their  own  insufficiencies,  and  it 
is  for  this  reason  that  they  lend  themselves  readily  to 
misconstruction.  When  rumours  came  into  the  hands, 
let  us  say,  of  some  mere  neophyte,  as  it  might  be  Guiot 
de  Provence,  we  can  understand  his  misconception  and 
confusion,  including  why  he  went  further,  as,  for 
example,  to  the  Chronicles  of  Anjou ;  in  other  words, 
to  the  events  of  the  outside  world  for  the  explanation 
of  that  which  happened  only  in  the  secret  world  of 
initiation.  He  was  in  the  position  of  some  who  at  this 
day  go  to  "  those  holy  fields  "  for  living  evidence  con- 
cerning Him  "  who  brought  life  and  immortality  to 
light."  We  can  understand  also  that  various  successive 
translators  and  independent  tellers  of  the  legend  did 
also,  after  their  own  fashion,  go  further  astray,  losing 
all  touch  with  the  centre,  till  the  official  Church,  at  once 
jealous  and  zealous,  stepped  in  and  took  over  the  dis- 
membered body  of  the  legend,  putting  it  to  its  own 
use.  It  discerned  something  which  belonged  properly 
to  itself,  collected  it  accordingly  out  of  the  debris  of 
romance-literature  and  put  it  again  into  romance.  Of 
such  is  the  Quest  of  Galahad  and  of  such  is  the  Longer 
Prose  Perceval.  The  Mystery,  qua  Mystery  of  Experience 

657  2  T 


The  Hidden  Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

in  transcendence,  was  reflected  from  scoriated  glass  to 
scoriated  glass,  giving  us  indeed  here  and  there  high 
intimations  of  the  original,  but  not  a  true  likeness,  so 
that  we  are  constrained,  like  Guiot,  to  look  elsewhere  for  a 
fuller  explanation,  not  indeed  in  Chronicles  of  Anjou,  but 
in  unofficial,  fragmentary  and  elusive  traces  of  the  true 
legitimacy  in  religion  which  can  be  excavated  by  those 
who  seek  them  from  the  tombs  of  other  dead  literatures. 
It  is  after  this  manner  that  we  reach  by  insensible 
stages  that  point  at  which  the  imperfect  testimonies 
of  romance  are  transferred  altogether  in  our  minds,  by 
the  light  shining  from  those  higher  fields  of  consciousness 
in  the  mystery  of  religion  ;  and  allowing  them  to  dissolve 
for  a  moment,  but  in  consequence  setting  aside  the 
literature  on  its  romantic  side,  there  emerge  the  grades 
of  the  Graal  subject  in  the  harmony  of  all  quests  equally 
with  all  histories.  The  inward  man,  as  I  have  said,  is 
the  wounded  Keeper,  and  he  is  indeed  in  the  Castle 
of  Souls,  which  is  the  Graal  Castle,  as  it  is  also  Eden, 
Paradise  and  the  Body  of  Man.  That  is  to  say,  it  is 
the  Earthly  Paradise,  but  behind  it  there  is  another 
Eden.  The  Keeper  has  been  (a)  wounded  for  im- 
memorial sin  ;  (b)  he  is  infirm  by  reason  of  his  long 
exile  ;  (c)  he  has  become  maimed  for  some  obscure 
profanation  of  the  mysteries,  in  the  unsanctified  warfare 
of  this  world  ;  or  (ct)  he  suffers  from  the  failure  to  ask 
one  little  question.  This  question  is  :  Who  is  served 
of  the  Graal  ? — as  of  those  who  attain  the  Divine  Life 
even  in  the  body  of  them.  What  part  is  the  Lord  ? 
Art  thou  He  that  is  to  come  ?  Who  goeth  into  the 
Mountain  of  the  Lord  ?  The  answer  to  this  last  is  : 
The  innocent  of  hands  and  clean  of  heart.  The  Keeper 
is  in  fine  healed  and  set  free  by  those  who  come  from 
without — by  Perceval  and  Galahad,  who  lay  down 
their  arms  in  a  state  of  purity.  Gawain  cannot  help 
him,  because  he  is  the  natural  man  unconverted,  and  the 
day  of  Sir  Bors  is  not  yet.  After  the  former  Keeper's 
healing,  he  sometimes  remains  with  the  new  Keeper, 

658 


The  Secret  Church 

his  successor,  whom  he  has  incorporated  into  the 
mysteries,  and  this  represents  one  stage  of  the  progress ; 
in  others  he  passes  away  and  is  forgotten.  The  explana- 
tion in  either  case  is  that  the  bondage,  the  desolation, 
the  lapse  of  the  immortal  spirit  into  earthly  life  is  here 
shadowed  forth,  in  which  state  he  can  only  be  helped 
from  without — that  is  to  say,  by  his  mortal  half,  his 
external  nature  ;  and  his  great  deliverance  is  in  such  a 
transfiguration  that  the  one  is  succeeded  by  the  other 
or  the  two  are  joined  henceforth.  Hereof  is  the 
tradition  of  a  secret  sanctuary,  and  its  application  may 
be  found  by  those  who  will  take  out  the  details,  seeing 
that  it  prevails  through  all  the  quests.  There  will  be 
no  need  to  say,  even  to  the  unversed  student,  that  in 
the  wilderness  of  this  mortal  life  that  which  maintains 
the  spirit  is  that  which  is  involved  by  the  higher  under- 
standing of  the  Holy  Graal.  But  at  the  same  time  it  is 
also  a  Feeding  Dish,  a  Dish  of  Plenty,  because  the  life 
of  the  body  comes  from  the  same  source.  When  the 
natural  man  undertakes  the  great  quest,  all  the  high 
kingdoms  of  this  world,  which  cannot  as  such  have  any 
part  therein,  look  for  the  ends  of  everything.  It  is  the 
quest  for  that  which  is  real,  wherein  enchantments 
dissolve  and  the  times  of  adventure  are  also  set  over. 
The  enchantments  are  in  the  natural  world,  and  so 
again  are  the  adventures,  but  the  unspelling  quest  is  in 
the  world  of  soul.  The  witness  of  this  doctrine  has 
been  always  in  the  world  and  therein  it  has  been  always 
secret.  The  realisation  of  it  is  the  Shekinah  restored 
to  the  Sanctuary  ;  when  it  is  overshadowed  there  is  a 
Cloud  on  the  Sanctuary.  It  is  the  story  of  the  individual 
man  passing  into  the  concealment  of  the  interior  and 
secret  life,  but  carrying  with  him  his  warrants  and  his 
high  insignia.  In  a  word,  it  is  that  doctrine  the  realisa- 
tion of  which  in  the  consciousness  I  have  called,  under 
all  reserves  and  for  want  of  a  better  term,  the  Secret 
Church,  even  the  Holy  Assembly — I  should  say  rather, 
the  cohort  of  just  men  made  perfect. 

659 


The   Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

The  Graal  literature  is  not  only  one  of  growth,  with 
a  great  mixture  of  elements  from  the  standpoint  of 
folk-lore  and  official  scholarship,  but  it  is  such  also  from 
the  ecclesiastical  and  mystical  standpoint.  Many  lights 
of  the  past  thereon  have  proved  illusory — as,  for  example,- 
the  western  manifestation  of  Manichaean  elements ;  but 
the  Hidden  Church  of  the  Holy  Graal  is  the  reasonable 
deduction  drawn  out  of  certain  implied  claims  which, 
are  supported  by  identical  inferences  from  independent 
evidence,  and  they  do  not  signify  that  the  rumours  with 
which  we  are  now  so  familiar  were  more  than  rumours 
or  the  romances  more  than  romances,  except  in  so  far 
as  some  of  them  embody  the  high  life  of  sanctity  mani- 
fested in  that  vehicle.  We  have  seen  that  the  Secret 
Church  is  a  term  of  exaggeration,  but  it  is  difficult  to 
characterise  exactly  by  any  formal  title  the  Holy  School 
which  perpetuated  the  mystery  of  the  Great  Experiment. 
In  that  Experiment  lies  the  hope  of  Western  Mysticism, 
but  it  does  not  follow  from  this  statement  that  I  hold 
a  brief  for  Eckartshausen  or  for  others  who  in  the  past 
have  put  forward  on  their  own  basis  the  claim  of  a 
Secret  Church  up  to  the  point  that  they  have  conceived 
thereof.  The  shadows  of  the  Great  Experiment  which 
are  found  in  the  Graal  literature  bear  witness  to  that 
Quest,  to  the  Mystery  of  Initiation  and  advancement 
contained  therein,  but  we  know  otherwise  concerning 
it.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  against  all  the  wonders  of  a 
world  no  longer  realised,  the  lost  legends  of  folk-lore, 
the  putative  liturgies  which  have  vanished,  the  implicits 
in  the  villainous  transactions  of  Henry  II.,  the  power — 
possibly  unscrupulous — behind  the  fidelity  to  death  of 
St.  Thomas  a  Becket,  the  sectarian  ravings  concerning 
Protestant  succession  from  apostolic  times,  the  great 
dream  of  undemonstrable  archaic  heresy  behind  the 
Knights  Templars,  and  the  other  visions  -per  omnia 
scecula  sceculorum^  I  set  the  reasonable  and  veridic  inti- 
mation of  a  secret  tradition  in  Catholic  experience,  the 
equivalents  of  which  are  the  super-valid  Eucharistic  Rite 

660 


The  Secret  Church 

and  the  direct  succession  from  Christ.  If  in  fine  it  be 
said  that  I  have  "  sat  and  played  with  similes,"  my 
rejoinder  is  that  they  have  not  been  "  loose  types  of 
things  in  all  degrees,"  but  rather  consanguinities  of 
the  spirit  in  the  following  of  one  quest — we  also — unto 
this  last — seeking  le  moyen  de  ^arvenir. 


VI 

THE  TRADITION  OF  ST.  JOHN  THE  DIVINE 
AND  OTHER  TRACES  OF  A  HIGHER  MIND 
OF  THE  CHURCH 

I  have  set  aside  in  succession  every  school  of  tradition 
in  Christian  times  as  an  exclusive  mouthpiece  of  the 
tradition  in  its  root-matter  ;  the  most  catholic  of  all 
is  the  literature  of  spiritual  alchemy,  and  it  occupies  a 
very  high  place,  being  especially  a  strong  contrast  to  the 
scheme  of  symbolical  Masonry,  which  is  a  legend  of 
loss  only.  I  think  that  the  alchemists  had  the  matter 
of  the  whole  work,  by  which  I  mean  the  Scriptural 
Mystery  of  being  born  again  of  water  and  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  the  fact — if  I  am  right  in  the  fact — that  they 
did  not  give  under  their  particular  veils  an  accredited 
exposition  of  the  Great  Experiment,  according  to  the 
canons  of  the  Art  and  the  tradition  which  reposed  in  its 
Wardens,  is  positive  proof  to  myself  that  it  was  never 
put  into  official  language.  I  am  not  less  certain  that 
Eckartshausen  approximated  only,  and  that  if  he  had 
been  fully  qualified  he  would  have  dwelt  more  expressly 
upon  the  Eucharist.  Loupoukine  at  his  highest  is  an 
interesting  and  beloved  ghost  expressing  a  remote  annunci- 
ation dictated  perhaps  by  a  strong  sentiment  rather  than 
a  certain  knowledge  in  the  heart  or  even  in  the  head. 
We  remain  therefore  with  all  the  counters  in  our  hands, 
and  perhaps  some  day  they  will  be  rearranged  in  yet 
another  manner  as  the  time  approaches  when  nibil  tarn 

66 1 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

occultum  erit  quod  non  reveldbitur.  Meanwhile,  it  seems 
not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  several  minds  will 
have  raised  already  the  question  whether  there  are  no 
traces  in  the  annals  of  the  Church  itself.  On  the 
assurance  that  the  Great  Experiment  does  not  set  the 
Church  aside,  surely  outside  the  official  records  and 
first-hand  memorials  of  sanctity  there  may  be  some 
vestiges  of  the  secret  school  in  the  East  or  the  West. 
When  Origen  denied  in  all  truth  and  sincerity  that 
Christian  doctrine  was  a  secret  system,  he  made  haste 
to  determine  the  subsistence  of  an  esoteric  part  which 
was  not  declared  to  the  multitude,  and  he  justified  it  not 
only  by  a  reference  to  the  more  secret  side  of  Pytha- 
gorean teaching,  but  by  the  secrecy  attaching  to  all 
the  Mysteries.  The  question  therefore  arises  whether 
the  discipline,  arcani,  which  is  usually  referred  to  the 
Eucharist,  because  to  all  else  it  must  be  foreign,  may 
not  be  imbedded  in  that  tradition  of  St.  John  the 
Divine  of  which  we  have  traces  certainly.  I  set  aside 
without  any  hesitation  the  obvious  objection  that  the 
Fourth  Gospel  has  no  Eucharistic  memorial,  and  its 
inference,  that  for  St.  John  less  than  for  the  other 
evangelists  did  the  flesh  profit  anything.  The  great 
contention  of  the  Gospel  is  that  the  Word  became  flesh, 
and  if  it  fails  to  recite  the  high  office  and  ceremonial 
of  the  Last  Supper,  it  announces  in  the  words  of  the 
Master  (a)  that  this  is  a  "  meat  which  endureth  unto 
everlasting  life ; "  (£)  that  Christ  is  "  the  living  bread 
which  came  down  from  heaven ; "  and  (c)  that  "  he  that 
eateth  thereof  shall  live  for  ever."  In  other  words, 
the  doctrine  concerning  the  communication  of  Divine 
Substance  is  taught  more  explicitly  by  St.  John  than 
by  the  rest  of  the  evangelists. 

The  traditions  concerning  the  beloved  disciple  are 
numerous  in  the  Christian  Church,  and  on  the  thau- 
maturgic  side  they  issue  from  the  evasive  intimation  of 
his  gospel  that  he  was  to  remain  on  earth  until  the 
Second  Coming  of  the  Saviour.  From  his  ordeal  of 

662 


The  Secret   Church 

martyrdom  he  therefore  came  forth  alive,  according  to 
his  legend,  and  so  he  remained,  in  the  opinion  of 
St.  Augustine,  resting  as  one  asleep  in  his  grave  at 
Ephesus.  St.  Cyril  also  testifies  that  he:- never  died. 
But  it  is  Ephrem,  I  believe,  who  offers  an  explicit  account 
of  St.  John's  interment  by  his  own  will  at  the  hands 
of  his  disciple,  after  giving  them  the  last  instructions 
on  the  mysteries  of  faith.  The  grave  was  dug  in  his 
presence  ;  he  entered  therein  ;  it  was  sealed  by  the 
disciples,  who  returned  as  commanded  on  the  day 
following,  opened  the  sepulchre  and  found  only  the 
grave-clothes.  This  story  represents  an  alternative 
legend  of  St.  John's  translation  to  heaven  in  the  flesh 
of  his  body.  From  the  place  where  he  had  rested  so 
briefly  an  oil  or  manna  was  collected  and  was  used  for 
healing  diseases. 

That  which  did  actually  survive  was  the  tradition  of 
his  secret  knowledge,  the  implicit  of  which  is  that  he 
who  reposed  on  the  breast  of  his  Master  did  not  arise 
and  go  forth  without  an  intimate  participation  in  the 
Mysteries  of  the  Sacred  Heart.  Again,  the  tradition 
has  many  forms ;  and  seeing  that  St.  Isidore  of  Seville 
in  the  sixth  century  tells  how  St.  John  not  only  broke 
and  rejoined  certain  precious  stones  but  converted  the 
branches  of  a  tree  into  golden  boughs  and  changed 
pebbles  into  jewels,  reconverting  both  at  the  end ; 
seeing  also  that  Adam  de  St.  Victor  commemorated 
one  of  these  miracles  in  a  prose  of  his  period  : 

"  Cum  gemmarum  partes  fractas 
Solidasset,"  &c.— 

it  is  not  surprising  that  alchemists  who  had  heard  of 
these  things  adopted  the  belief  that  he  was  a  great 
master  of  metallic  transmutation — by  which  I  speak  of 
the  material  side  and  not  of  the  spiritual  work. 

There  is  no  need  to  say  that  this  is  fantasy  of  its  period, 
and  it  is  cited  only  as  such.  The  legends  and  inventions 
— but  it  should  be  understood  that  there  are  many 

663 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

others — are  the  mere  rumours,  and  so  being  are  less 
even  than  intimations,  concerning  a  traditional  influence 
exercised  by  St.  John,  of  which,  as  I  have  said,  there  are 
traces.  But  it  has  proved  impossible  in  the  past  for 
researches  into  a  concealed  side  of  Christian  doctrine 
to  be  actuated  by  another  expectation  than  the  dis- 
covery of  obscure  heresy,  and  it  is  important  that  we 
on  our  part  should  again  make  it  plain  to  ourselves  that 
there  is  nothing  to  our  purpose  in  any  devious  ways  of 
doctrinal  thought,  nor  do  those  who  pursue  them,  under 
the  banner  of  the  Graal  and  its  quest,  carry  any 
antecedent  warrant  in  the  likelihood  of  things.  It  is 
said,  for  example,  that  there  is  a  chain  of  evidence 
passing  through  Spain  and  the  Knights  Templars  to 
St.  John  the  Divine,  so  onward  to  the  Essenes,  after 
whom  there  is  the  further  East.  This  is  the  pleasing 
fable  of  a  few  who  look  to  India  as  the  asylum-in-chief  of 
all  the  veridic  mysteries ;  but  it  has  been  found  more 
convenient  to  state  the  fact  of  the  evidence  than  to 
produce  it.  Much  further  back  in  the  past  the  Abbe 
Gregoire  affirmed  that  our  Saviour  placed  His  disciples 
under  the  authority  of  St.  John,  who  never  quitted  the 
East  and  from  whom  certain  secret  teachings  were  handed 
on  to  his  successors,  the  Johannine  Christians,  leading 
after  many  centuries  to  the  institution  of  the  Templars. 
Again,  the  evidence  is  wanting  in  respect  of  the  last 
statement.  The  general  hypothesis  has  found  some 
favour  with  the  critics  of  the  Graal  literature,  and 
Simrock  in  particular,  as  we  have  seen,  put  forward 
the  tradition  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  as  the  root-matter  of 
alleged  Templar  secrets.  He  also  suggested  a  connection 
between  the  chivalry  and  the  Essenes  as  the  repositories 
of  a  concealed  science  confided  by  Jesus  to  His  disciples 
and,  in  fine,  by  them  communicated  to  Templar  priests. 
We  hear  otherwise  of  another  unbroken  chain  of  tradi- 
tion hallowed  by  age,  an  esoteric  oral  tradition,  revealing 
"  the  sacred  lore  of  primaeval  times,"  intimations  concern- 
ing which  are  to  be  found  in  the  Johannine  Apocalypse. 

664 


The  Secret  Church 

Some  have  referred  it  to  the  antecedents  of  the  Anti- 
christ myth,  to  which  allusions  are  supposed  in  one  of 
St.  Paul's  epistles ;  but  there  is  a  wider  horizon  within 
which  the  whole  subject  calls  to  be  regarded  anew. 
Several  of  the  speculative  directions  in  which  light  has 
been  sought  thereon  are  difficult  and — so  long  as  we  do 
not  exaggerate  the  evidential  possibilities — unnecessary 
to  set  aside.  The  Essenian  consanguinities  suggest 
themselves  in  connection  with  that  which  could  have 
been  only  a  contemplative  school,  the  possible  repository 
of  the  mystic  experience  which  in  early  times  lay  behind 
external  Christianity.  Thebaid  solitaries,  children  of 
the  valley,  so-called  penitents  of  the  desert,  Eckarts- 
hausen,  Lopoukine,  sons  of  the  Resurrection,  and 
others  too  many  for  simple  recitation  here,  are  offered 
to  the  mind  in  their  order  as  a  possible  channel  of 
tradition  from  age  into  age.  We  can  only  say  in  our 
restraint  that  as  there  were  so  many  sects  with  variations 
in  doctrine,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  there 
may  have  been  one  in  seclusion  having  a  difference, 
by  the  way  of  extension,  concerning  that  spiritual 
practice  which  is  called  the  science  of  the  saints. 

When  I  have  spoken  of  the  Johannine  tradition  in 
previous  sections,  I  must  not  be  understood  as  referring 
to  a  specific  external  community,  such  as  that  which 
has  been  popularly  described  in  the  past  as  Johannine 
Christians.  The  information  concerning  them,  and 
reproduced  by  one  writer  from  another,  is  based  upon 
exceedingly  imperfect  research,  but  among  some  of  my 
readers,  who  have  not  entered  these  paths,  it  may  remain 
in  some  vague  sense.  It  supposed  an  obscure  sect  which 
we  are  enabled  to  separate  at  once  from  all  that  we 
should  ourselves  understand  by  a  connection  with  the 
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved.  Their  patriarchs  or  pontiffs 
are  said  to  have  assumed  the  title  of  Christ,  as  Parsifal, 
with  a  higher  warrant,  took  that  of  Presbyter  Johannes  ; 
but  the  Christ  of  their  spurious  legend  is  neither  King  nor 
Lord,  and  with  an  irony  all  unconscious  he  is  disqualified 

665 


"The  Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

from  the  beginning  by  their  own  tinkered  gospel,  which 
substitutes  simple  illegitimacy  for  the  virginal  and 
supernatural  conception  of  the  Holy  Canon.  Virus  of 
this  kind  suggests  inoculation  from  the  Sepher  Toldosh 
Jeshu  rather  than  from  any  Christian — as,  for  example,  a 
Gnostic — sect. 

It  must  be  confessed  that  the  traditional  sources  con- 
cerning St.  John  are  chiefly  the  apocryphal  texts,  and  they 
lie,  one  and  all,  under  the  suspicion  of  heresy.  Leucius— 
sometimes  called  pseudo-Luke — who  is  said  to  have  been 
a  disciple  of  Marcion,  wrote,  among  other  apocrypha, 
the  Acts  of  John,  the  particulars  of  which  claim  to 
be  drawn  from  the  apostle  himself.  Now  there  is,  I 
suppose,  no  question  that  fabulatores  famosi  of  this  kind 
were  not  unlike  Master  Blihis ;  if  for  some  things  they 
depended  on  their  invention,  they  drew  much  more 
from  floating  tradition,  and  it  is  obvious  on  every  con- 
sideration that  round  no  evangelist  and  no  apostle  were 
legends  so  likely  to  collect  as  the  apocalyptic  seer  of 
Patmos.  We  shall  therefore  deal  cautiously  with  the 
criticism  which  suggests  that  fathers  of  the  Church  like 
Tertullian  drew  their  mythical  accounts  of  St.  John 
from  heretical  texts,  for  it  is  equally  and  more  likely  that 
the  two  schools  drew  from  a  source  in  common.  The 
perpetual  virginity  of  St.  John,  which  entitled  his  body 
to  translation  or  assumption,  on  the  ground  that  virginity 
is  not  subject  to  death,  is  a  case  in  point.  The  Catholic 
Church  did  not  derive  the  counsels  of  perfection  from 
Encratites  or  Manichees,  and  St.  Jerome,  who  tells  this 
story,  would  not  owe  it  to  pseudo-Luke,  though  Abdias 
— a  very  different  narrator — in  all  probability  did. 

Speaking  generally  of  the  Johannine  traditions,  these 
represent  the  apostle  as  a  saint  of  contemplation  who 
transmitted  directly  from  Christ,  and  as  it  is  clear  from 
his  own  gospel  that  he  regarded  the  Eucharist,  inter- 
preted after  a  spiritual  manner,  as  the  condition  of 
Divine  Vision,  we  shall  be  antecedently  prepared  for  the 
fact  that  there  is  an  Eucharistic  tradition  concerning 

666 


The  Secret  Church 

him.  It  is  said  that  when  preparing  for  translation  he 
took  bread,  blessed,  broke  it  and  gave  it  to  his  disciples, 
exactly  after  the  manner  of  his  Master,  but  what  he 
asked  with  uplifted  eyes  was  that  each  of  the  brethren 
might  be  worthy  of  the  Eucharist  of  the  Lord  and  that, 
in  such  case,  his  portion  might  be  also  with  theirs.  It 
does  not  signify  that,  according  to  orthodox  canons,  this 
comes  from  a  dubious  source  in  doctrine  ;  the  Eucharistic 
connection  was  not  devised  by  that  source,  and — though 
it  scarcely  signifies  for  my  purpose — I  suppose — and  it 
is  interesting  to  note — that  herein  is  the  first  recorded 
instance  of  communion  in  one  kind. 

The  last  asylum  of  St.  John  was  Ephesus,  which  was 
a  great  house  of  theosophical  speculations,  and  though 
the  pivot  and  centre  of  the  fourth  gospel  is  that  the 
Word  was  made  flesh,  that  composite  and  wonderful  text 
bears  all  the  marks  of  being  written  in  a  Gnostic  atmos- 
phere. From  that  which  it  was  intended  to  denounce, 
it  has  been  thought  to  derive  something  in  the  higher 
part  of  the  old  eclectic  dream,  and  as  the  personal  influ- 
ence of  the  writer  must  have  been  great,  so  also  it  is 
reasonable  to  think  that  it  did  not  pass  with  him  utterly 
away.  The  notion  that  he  communicated  something, 
and  that  this  something  remained,  is  so  recurring,  and 
amidst  so  many  divided  interests,  that  it  is  hard  to 
reject  it  as  a  fiction  ;  it  is  hard  even  to  say  that  no  Knight 
Templar  sojourning  in  the  East  did  never,  in  late 
centuries,  hear  strange  tidings.  Apart  from  this  last, 
too  curious  dream,  it  will  be  seen  that  here  is  slender 
ground  on  which  to  affirm  that  the  Secret  Tradition 
connected  more  closely  with  the  Church  side  of  Chris- 
tianity at  a  Johannine  point  of  contact ;  but  it  is  good 
to  remember  that  not  only  has  the  last  word  not  been 
said  on  the  subject,  but  that  we  have  listened  here  and 
there  only  to  a  strange  rumour.  I  conclude  that  he 
who  reported  the  deepest  and  most  sacramental  words 
which  are  on  record  from  the  mouth  of  Christ  :  "  My 
flesh  is  meat  indeed  and  my  blood  is  drink  indeed  "  is  our 

667 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy  Graal 

first  historical  witness  to  the  Eucharistic  side  of  the 
Secret  Tradition  in  Christian  times.  There  are  strange 
indications  of  sources  behind  the  Gospel  according  to 
St.  John.  Behind  the  memorials  of  the  Gnosis  there  are 
also  indications  of  a  stage  when  there  was  no  separation 
as  yet  of  orthodox  and  heretical  schools,  but  rather  an 
union  in  the  highest  direct  experience,  as  if  mysteries 
were  celebrated,  and  at  a  stage  of  these  there  was  the 
presence  of  the  Master.  But  the  presence  of  the  Master 
was  the  term  of  experience  in  the  Graal.  I  leave  there- 
fore the  Johannine  tradition,  its  possible  perpetuation  all 
secretly  within  the  Church  and  its  possible  westward 
transition,  as  a  quest  so  far  unfinished  for  want  of 
materials. 


VII 
THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THIS  HOLT  QUEST 

And  now,  seeing  that  the  end  of  all  is  upon  the  very 
threshold,  that  the  keepers  of  the  paths  of  quest  have 
sounded  the  horns  for  our  retirement,  and  that  the  hour 
has  also  struck  when  we  must  turn  down  the  glass  of 
vision,  it  remains  as  a  last  duty  to  gather  up  certain 
threads  which  have  been  left  under  a  covenant  to  recur, 
and  these  in  their  turn  involve  other  considerations 
which  must  be  treated  shortly.  The  result  of  necessity 
is  an  attempt  to  codify  things  which,  for  the  most  part, 
are  detached  and  even  disjointed,  yet  some  of  them  will 
be  found  to  overlap  under  any  mode  of  grouping. 

Preliminary  and  General. — Setting  aside  its  sacramental 
part,  the  literature,  as  literature,  is  Celtic  in  its  elements 
and  atmosphere  ;  but  this  is  the  body  and  the  environ- 
ment in  which  the  spirit  of  the  mystery  reposes.  The 
Graal  itself  is  in  the  root  a  reliquary  legend.  This 
legend  was  taken  over  and  connected  with  rumours  of 
secret  doctrine  concerning  the  Eucharist  and  the  priest- 
hood, being  part  of  a  tradition  handed  down  within  the 

668 


The  Secret  Church 

Church,  but  unconsciously  to  the  Church  at  large.  It 
passed  into  romance  and  incorporated  many  folk-lore 
elements  which  seemed  adaptable  to  its  purpose.  They 
are  naturally  its  hindrance.  In  the  hands  of  the 
Northern  French  writers,  it  got  further  away  from  the 
Celtic  element  as  it  drew  towards  its  term.  We  cannot 
therefore  explain  the  French  cycles  and  much  less  the 
German  Graal  literature  by  means  of  the  Celtic  Church. 
The  secret  doctrine  reflected  into  the  literature  abode 
in  a  secret  school.  Out  of  this  school — but  not  in  an 
official  sense — there  developed  at  later  periods  spiritual 
alchemy,  symbolical  craft  Masonry,  certain  Rosicrucian 
institutions  and  certain  Christian  high  grades  of  Masonic 
complexion,  as  successive  veils.  It  was  a  school  of 
Christian  mystics,  and  it  was  Latin  for  a  long  time  on  its 
external  side.  It  is  of  necessity  catholic  at  heart.  The 
doctrine  concerning  it  is  that  there  are  High  Princes  of 
the  Spirit  whose  experiences  surpass  not  only  those  of 
devout  souls  but  of  many  of  the  great  saints.  Their 
time  was  not  "  about  half-an-hour,"  but  an  experience 
in  perpetuity.  The  school  said  that  the  way  of  the 
Church  was  the  true  way  and  not  a  good  one  only,  but 
also  that  the  heights  are  still  the  heights.  It  comes 
about  thus  that  the  message  of  the  Secret  Words  and  the 
Super-Apostolical  Succession  is  that  until  we  enter  the 
paths  of  sanctity  and  reach  a  defined  term  therein,  we 
have  only  the  shadow  of  the  real  things ;  but  that 
shadow  is  a  sacred  reflection.  On  the  surface  the  claim 
concerning  them  sounds  like  a  word  written  against  the 
Church,  but  it  is  really  a  call  to  go  forward.  Those 
who  are  satisfied  with  the  literal  sense  of  sacred  things 
are  not  defrauded  thereby,  but  receive  ministry  therein. 
Yet  the  second  sense  remains,  which  is  brought  from 
very  far  away,  because  it  draws  from  the  sanctuary  of 
the  soul.  Where  there  is  no  consciousness  of  this  sense, 
and  of  the  deep  implicits  of  doctrine,  the  Graal  is  said 
to  be  removed,  yet  all  things  remain  and  are  waiting 
to  manifest.  The  mystery  which  the  school  celebrated 

669 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

corresponded,  as  I  have  said,  to  a  Mass  of  the  Beatific 
Vision.  It  is  obvious  that  this  was  celebrated  by  the 
Hermit  in  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal.  He  carried  its 
signs  on  his  person ;  but  they  Were  not  the  badge, 
symbol,  or  token  of  an  instituted  Order.  The  prologue 
to  this  book  is  the  nearest  that  we  are  likely  to  get  to  the 
expressed  side  of  the  mystery.  The  event  in  history 
which  is  parallel  to  the  removal  of  the  Graal  is  the 
entrance  of  the  spirit  of  the  world  into  the  instituted 
House  of  Doctrine.  The  Mass  of  the  Graal  is  recover- 
able, but  it  is  understood  that  it  is  celebrated  only  in 
the  Secret  Church  and  that  Church  is  within.  When  the 
priest  enters  the  Sanctuary  he  returns  into  himself  by 
contemplation  and  approaches  the  altar  which  is  within. 
He  says  :  Introibo.  When  he  utters  the  words  which  are 
spirit  and  life,  the  Lord  Christ  comes  down  and  com- 
municates to  him  in  the  heart ;  or,  alternatively,  he  is 
taken  up  into  the  Third  Heaven  and  enjoys  the  dilucid 
contemplation.  But  I  do  not  put  it  in  this  way  because 
I  am  satisfied  with  the  expression  :  only  we  must  have 
some  expression. 

The  Veil  of  the  Eucharist. — It  has  been  said  that, 
as  the  supreme  mystery  of  the  Christian  Church,  the 
Eucharist  was  the  last  ceremony  of  initiation  and  con- 
stituted the  final  enlightenment  of  the  neophyte.  The 
terms  of  expression  may  here  be  exaggerated,  but  those 
who  were  stewards  of  the  Christian  Mystery  had  in  many 
cases  received  the  Mysteries  of  the  Gentiles  and  may 
have  adapted  some  of  their  procedure.  The  rumour 
which  came  into  romance — and  this  in  the  natural 
manner  that  official  religion  permeated  romance  every- 
where— was  a  mystery  of  the  Eucharist,  and  in  the  minds 
of  external  piety  it  translated  itself  into  memorials  of 
the  Divine  Body  and  the  Precious  Blood.  It  would  be 
idle  to  suggest  that  any  higher  school  of  religion  was 
concerned  with  the  veneration  of  relics.  The  desire 
was  to  behold  in  the  Eucharist  that  which  the  faithful 
believed  to  repose  in  the  Eucharist.  Beyond  the  know- 

670 


The  Secret   Church 

ledge  of  the  outside  world  there  is  another  knowledge, 
but  it  abides  in  concealed  sources  which  are  outside  all 
reach  of  the  senses,  and  in  simple  Eucharistic  terms  it 
is  called  the  communication  of  Christ.  In  the  deeper 
speculation  behind  the  E-piclesis  clause,  it  is  the  Descent 
of  the  Comforter  within.  The  missing  events  and 
motives  behind  Super-Apostolical  Succession  are  the 
Great  Event  and  the  Divine  Reason.  He  who  has 
performed  the  one  rigorously  scientific  experiment  and 
has  opened  the  Holy  Place  does  go  in  and  celebrate  his 
Mass  in  virtue  of  a  warrant  which  is  not  necessarily  that 
of  the  official  priesthood,  but  it  does  not  set  it  aside  or 
compete  therewith.  I  say  that  this  interpretation  re- 
mains donee  de  medio  fiat,  but  it  will  not  be  taken  out  of 
the  way.  Herein  is  the  experiment  which  I  believe  to 
be  performed  even  now  in  the  world,  because  the  great 
mysteries  of  experience  do  not  die.  I  have  found  that 
the  Graal  romances  in  their  proper  understanding — but 
chiefly  because  of  their  implicits — are  a  great  introduc- 
tion to  the  whole  great  subject.  They  testify  after 
many  ways.  The  Graal  is  a  guide  of  the  distressed  in 
the  Lesser  Chronicles.  They  represent  that  Mystery 
which  is  implied  in  the  Hidden  Voice  of  Christ  and  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  Their  Secret  Words  were  words  of 
power,  because  that  which  rules  above  rules  also  below. 
As  such  the  Lesser  Chronicles  did  not  derive  from 
F£camp,  which  —  like  the  Greater  Chronicles  —  put 
forward  the  wonder-side  of  transubstantiation.  But  the 
Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  which  cuts  short  the  discourse 
between  Christ  and  Joseph  in  the  tower  and  so  suppresses 
all  reference  to  the  communication  of  Secret  Words, 
can  derive  no  more  than  a  reflection  from  this  source, 
and  even  that  little  may  be,  alternatively,  drawn  from 
general  tradition.  I  should  state  in  this  connection 
that  the  insufficiency  of  transubstantiation  is  on  the 
external  side  mainly  ;  on  the  spiritual  side  the  arch- 
natural  body  is  communicated  to  the  human  body  and 
the  Divine  Life  to  the  human  spiritual  part.  This  is 

671 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

the  deeper  aspect  not  only  of  the  Blessed  Sacrament  but 
of  the  Bowl  of  Plenty.  Every  text  of  the  French  cycles 
is  confused  and  discounselled  by  this  extraneous  element, 
for  which  reason  I  have  called  it  foreign,  for  example, 
to  the  Romance  of  Lancelot.  I  do  not  mean  that  the 
feeding  properties  are  never  introduced  therein,  but  that 
the  writer  was  dubious  as  to  their  proper  place  and 
ministry.  The  meats  and  the  spicery  now  follow  the 
dove — as  in  the  case  of  Lancelot's  visit  to  the  Castle  and 
that  of  Sir  Bors — but  now  follow  the  Vessel— as  in  that 
of  Gawain.  The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  hints,  as  we  have 
seen,  at  a  secret  of  the  sacrament  which  was  held  in 
utter  reserve.  It  tells  us  by  inference  that  it  was  the 
revelation  of  Christ  in  His  own  person,  behind  which 
there  is  another  mystery.  Only  in  the  texts  of  tran- 
substantiation  do  we  find  these  deep  allusions.  The 
Conte  del  Graal  has  not  heard  of  them  ;  the  Didot 
Perceval  is  aware  of  an  undeclared  mystery,  but  has  no 
license  to  speak;  the  German  Parsifal  has  chiefly  an 
office  of  concealed  mercy  amidst  suffering,  and  hereof  is 
Heinrich  a  shadow.  Yet  all  of  them,  in  their  several 
manners,  are  haunted  from  far  away  :  Joseph  II.  began 
in  priesthood  and  therein  ends  the  Perceval  of  Manessier, 
as  if  he  too  discerned  that  those  who  attained  the 
Great  Mystery  were  thereby  Pontifices  maximi.  I  think 
also  that  the  Fish  in  the  Metrical  Joseph  has  curious 
sacramental  intimations ;  it  is  the  sign  of  spiritual 
sustenance,  of  Christ's  presence  among  His  faithful,  and 
hence  of  the  Eucharist.  In  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal 
it  only  duplicates  one  part  of  a  canonical  miracle.  The 
master-key  of  the  Mystery  is  most  surely  provided  by  the 
Quest  of  Galahad,  where,  after  the  magical  marriage  of 
High  Art  and  Nature  has  taken  place  in  transubstantia- 
tion,  the  questing  knight  bows  his  head,  utters  his  con- 
summatum  est,  and  is  dissolved.  I  conclude  that  the 
Christian  and  Graal  Mystery  of  the  Eucharist  was  a  veil 
which  could  at  need  be  parted  by  warranted  hands,  and 
that  behind  it  there  was  then  found  the  path  which 


The  Secret   Church 

leads  to  the  Union.  The  knowledge  of  that  path  arose 
within  the  Church  but  led  behind  it,  the  Church  re- 
maining the  gate  by  which  man  enters  into  salvation. 
The  romance-literature  of  the  Graal  worked  towards 
the  consciousness  of  the  path,  reaching  its  term  in  the 
last  texts  of  quest. 

The  French  and  German  Percevals. — The  notion  of  an 
exalted  hero  is  given  in  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval^  but 
he  does  not  attain  the  highest  vision,  as  Galahad  does. 
The  return  of  the  Graal  to  the  Castle  after  his  induction 
is  only  like  the  return  of  a  Reliquary.  By  the  evidence 
of  the  text  itself,  he  saw  less  than  Arthur.  Wolfram's 
Parsifal  is  indeed  a  dream  of  Eden,  for  that  which  is 
likened  to  the  glory  of  the  celestial  height  is  truly  of 
the  supernal  Paradise.  It  is  to  be  understood — without 
exhausting  the  subject — that  the  poet's  religious  claim 
depends  from  the  genealogy  of  the  Stone,  which  is  that 
whereby  we  are  enabled  to  make  the  best  of  both  worlds 
through  a  participation  in  the  world  which  signifies  in 
the  absolute  degree.  I  have  said  that  Wolfram,  Chretien 
and  Heinrich  are  agreed  over  the  most  important  of 
their  concerns,  for  the  wonders  of  the  Feeding  Dish  in 
the  Parsifal  are  only  a  gross  exaggeration  of  miraculous 
sustenance  by  the  Host.  The  point  which  remains  for 
our  solution  is  after  what  manner  did  Wolfram  and  his 
source  draw  from  the  Secret  Tradition.  The  answer  is 
that  their  Graal  is  the  Stone  of  Knowledge,  and  the 
hidden  meaning  behind  the  non-removal  of  the  Graal 
is  the  perpetuity  of  the  Secret  Tradition  somewhere  in 
the  world.  The  Mystic  Question  itself  is  only,  and 
can  be,  the  search  after  knowledge.  The  Keeper  is  in 
travail  therewith — he  must  communicate,  but  he  must 
be  asked.  The  sense  is  that,  in  the  order  of  human 
prudence,  the  tradition  is  in  danger  of  perishing,  and  the 
Keeper  must  remain,  like  the  Master  of  a  Craft  Lodge, 
till  his  successor  is  appointed.  The  same  idea  may  lie 
behind  the  Questiones  Druidicce,  or  tests  of  proficiency 
which  were  put  by  the  Druids  to  the  Bards.  The  key 

673  2  u 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

to  the  meaning  of  the  Stone  of  Knowledge — that  testi- 
mony of  main  importance  which  we  know  to  have  existed 
in  Guiot — is  that  the  Graal  was  written  in  the  heavens 
and  remains  therein  ;  for  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  stars 
tell  the  same  story.  In  allegories  of  this  kind  the 
hindrance  to  attainment  inheres  in  its  necessary  condi- 
tions. The  keeper  in  Heinrich  must  press  Gawain  to 
drink,  and  the  brother  of  the  Rich  Fisher  must  persuade 
Perceval  not  to  ask  questions. 

Collectanea  Mystica. — (a)  The  Lesser  Hallows. — The 
Lance  renewed  the  Graal  in  some  of  the  legends,  but 
the  places  of  the  Hallows  are  in  certain  symbolical 
worlds  which  are  known  to  the  Secret  Tradition.  The 
Dish,  which,  as  I  have  said,  signifies  little  in  the 
romances,  has,  for  the  above  reason,  aspects  of  importance 
in  the  Tarot.  It  was  never  pretended  in  any  Church 
legend  that  the  Sacred  Lance  was  in  England.  The 
Sword  of  St.  John  the  Baptist  was  not  a  relic  of  the 
Celtic  or  indeed  of  another  Church.  The  subsidiary 
Hallows  of  the  Lesser  Chronicles  therefore  arrived  later 
than  the  Graal  in  Britain,  but  we  do  not  know  how  or 
why.  In  the  Greater  Chronicles  many  sacred  relics  were 
displayed  at  the  ordination  of  Joseph  II.,  and  they  were 
evidently  brought  over  in  the  Ark  of  the  Graal.  (b)  The 
Implicits. — Those  of  the  Graal  Keepers  are  of  in- 
heritance by  genealogical  legitimacy,  in  or  out  of 
marriage.  This  is  simply  the  succession  of  initiation. 
Masonry  recites  the  order  in  the  same  manner  with  the 
same  kind  of  variations.  There  are  three  keepers  in 
the  Lesser  Chronicles,  and  there  are  three  archetypal 
Craft  Lodges.  There  are  nine  keepers  in  the  Greater 
Chronicles  and  there  are  nine  Masonic  Wardens  who  pre- 
served the  Secret  Tradition.  (2)  Merlin  is  the  sorcery  of 
the  sensitive  life,  which — because  of  its  mixed  nature — is 
of  the  serpent  on  one  side  and  of  Eve  on  the  other,  who 
is  a  virgin.  The  admixture  makes  therefore  for  righteous- 
ness, and  the  true  son,  after  having  been  nurtured  therein, 
is  called  out  of  its  Egypt  ;  but  it  makes  also  for  delusion, 

674 


The  Secret   Church 

and  when  the  spirit  of  the  world  intervenes  all  is  with- 
drawn. (3)  Moses  is  the  intrusion  of  heretical  Chris- 
tianity into  the  Holy  Place  on  the  ground  that  it  has 
the  signs.  His  redemption  is  promised,  but  this  does 
not  take  place,  because  it  is  found  afterwards  that  "  the 
end  is  everywhere,"  and  the  Church  itself  is  not  spared. 
(4)  As  regards  the  destruction  of  the  Round  Table,  with 
all  its  chivalry  and  kinghood,  I  must  register,  with 
some  reluctance,  that  it  seems  to  convey  chiefly  a  very 
simple  and  also  obvious  lesson,  being  that  of  the  fatality 
of  trespass  and  the  poison  instilled  into  those  who  partake 
of  the  evil  fruit  ;  but  in  so  far  as  in  some  of  the  texts  it 
appears  predetermined  by  Merlin,  it  is  not  accounted 
for  so  simply.  I  think  that  it  may  be  left  at  this  point, 
because  we  have  no  criterion  for  distinction  between  the 
enchanter's  prophetic  foresight  and  his  formal  intent. 
We  should  remember,  however,  (5)  that  the  meaning  of 
the  enchantments  and  adventures  is  identified  by  the 
Quest  of  Galahad  with  the  prevalence  of  an  evil  time  and 
forgetfulness  of  the  great  things.  It  was  for  much  the 
same  reason  that,  according  to  the  Vulgate  Merlin,  the 
Round  Table  was  removed  to  the  Kingdom  of  Leodegan 
prior  to  the  coming  of  Arthur.  (6)  Sarras  was  the 
place  of  exit  on  the  outward  journey,  and  was  thus  the 
point  at  which  the  holy  things  began  to  manifest  in  the 
world  ;  but  it  was  this  also  on  the  return  journey,  when 
they  issued  forth  in  mysterium.  The  transit  westward 
is  here  of  the  soul  outward.  (7)  It  must  be  admitted 
that  the  Lesser  Chronicles  are  in  some  sense  a  failure  : 
they  seem  to  hold  up  only  an  imperfect  and  a  partial 
glass  of  vision.  But  they  are  full  testimony  to  the 
secrecy  of  the  whole  experiment ;  they  are  also  the  most 
wonderful  cycle  by  way  of  intimation.  Their  especial 
key-phrase  is  my  oft-quoted  exeunt  in  mysterium.  How 
profited  the  Secret  Words  to  the  interned  Perceval  ? 
It  is  the  most  ghostly  of  all  suggestions  concerning  that 
which  is  done  in  the  heart. 

The  Lost  Book. — I  have  said  that  Chretien  must  have 

675 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

followed  some  book  which  had  strange  materials.  I  do 
not  mean  that  it  was  an  authorised  text  of  Secret  Tradi- 
tion, but  that  there  were  many  rumours  oral  and  written, 
and  that  this  was  one  of  the  latter.  The  speculation 
concerning  it  is  like  the  warrant  of  the  nine  knights— 
that  is  to  say,  we  can  speculate,  but  we  cannot  find  out. 
The  alleged  document  which  went  before  the  tradition 
at  large  may  have  been  the  rumour  of  the  tradition 
itself.  We  have  seen  that  the  Huth  Merlin  speaks  of  a 
Book  of  the  Sanctuary,  as  of  records  continued  hence- 
forward, like  a  Calendar  of  the  Saints  ;  but  it  is  to  be 
understood  that  this  is  romance  and  not  a  dark  allusion. 
If  I  must  admit  speculation  on  my  own  part  and  suppose 
that  there  was  any  written  legend  of  the  Graal  $er  se 
in  noo,  vel  circa,  I  should  say  that  this  was  a  Mass-Book 
and  there  is  a  hypothetical  possibility  of  such  a  document ; 
but  I  do  not  think  in  my  heart  that  it  ever  existed.  If 
it  did,  I  have  indicated  that  it  was  concerned  with  such 
a  Mass  as  might  have  been  assumed  to  follow  the  Last 
Supper — when  Christ  gave  Himself  visibly,  and  the 
priest  served  like  the  altar-boy.  I  conclude  that,  in  or 
out  of  such  a  text,  the  epochs  of  the  literature  are  those 
of  origin,  manifestation  and  removal  in  respect  of  the 
Graal.  As  to  the  first,  it  was  part  of  the  mystery  of  the 
Incarnation  ;  as  to  the  second,  there  was  a  manifestation 
intended,  but  it  did  not  take  place  because  the  world 
was  not  worthy  ;  so  the  third  epoch  supervened,  and  the 
Graal  was  said  to  be  removed.  This  is  the  secret  inten- 
tion, exhibited  but  not  declared. 

The  Great  Experiment. — To  those  who  have  studied 
the  secret  literatures  with  something  of  the  spirit  in 
themselves  by  which  those  literatures  are  informed,  it 
becomes  a  matter  of  assurance  that  the  signs  of  the 
Stewards  of  the  Mysteries  have  never  been  wanting  in 
the  world.  The  Masonic  High  Grades  suggest  that 
they  became  Christian,  but  this  is  an  error  of  expression  : 
it  was  the  Official  Mysteries  that  became  Christian  : 
the  Stewards  had  always  known  that  their  Redeemer 

676 


The  Secret    Church 

liveth.  Again,  therefore,  it  is  not  surprising  that  a  time 
came — and  it  was  in  many  ways  a  remarkable  time — 
when  the  rumours  passed  into  romance.  I  speak  here 
of  the  encompassing  circle  of  wisdom  which  stands 
round  the  Great  Experiment  and  not  of  the  things  which 
lie  too  deep  for  words.  The  memorials  of  that  which 
has  never  been  uttered  because  it  is  entombed  in  mani- 
festation are  about  us  in  all  our  ways,  and  for  ever  and 
ever  goes  out  the  yearning  of  the  heart  in  the  presence 
of  these  silent  witnesses.  The  genius  of  romance  drew 
all  things  from  all  quarters  to  serve  its  purpose,  and 
there  is  no  question  that  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  and 
the  Quest  of  Galahad  incorporated  some  of  this  yearning  ; 
but  I  refer  more  especially  to  the  rumours  of  the  Holy 
Threshold.  In  this  connection  it  is  most  important  to 
understand  that  their  makers  neither  were  nor  could  be 
the  spokesmen  of  a  secret  school.  They  had  heard  only, 
and  it  was  but  dimly  that  they  grasped  what  they  heard. 
Otherwise,  they  would  have  scarcely  put  forward  the 
arch-natural  side  of  relics.  The  office  of  minstrelsy  and 
romance  was  to  collect  traditions,  to  express  the  current 
motive  and  sentiment.  They  became  the  mirror  of 
their  period  and  had  therefore  their  religious  side,  which 
was  accentuated  sometimes,  as  when  abbeys  like  Fecamp 
kept  a  court  of  song  attached  to  them.  A  time  came, 
however,  when  the  consciousness  of  express  intention 
intervened  ;  it  is  prominent  in  the  Graal  cycles,  and  it 
accounts  for  the  great  process  of  editing,  harmonising 
and  allegorising  upon  earlier  texts.  The  normal  limits 
of  the  horizon  in  romance  were  not,  however,  broken  up 
except  by  the  latest  quests.  These  had  also  their 
restrictions,  as  I  have  tried  to  show  previously,  and  the 
complexity  of  their  symbolic  machinery  has  tempted 
me  to  add  that  alchemy — sealed  house  of  darkness  as  it 
is — seems  in  a  manner  more  simple.  The  vessel,  the 
matter  and  the  fire  are  the  three  which  give  testimony 
therein  on  the  physical  side,  and  these  are  one  on  the 
spiritual.  Its  literature  had  also  restrictions,  more 

677 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

especially  in  its  use  of  artificial  language  to  conceal  the 
real  sense.  It  is  high  commonplace  to  say  that  the 
device  is  justified  when  it  is  dangerous  to  speak  openly 
because  the  rulers  of  the  Church  or  the  world  are  jealous, 
or  when  the  things  which  exceed  common  understanding 
are  proscribed  thereby.  I  say  therefore  that  conceal- 
ment is  justified  when  it  is  to  hide  the  Secret  of  the  King. 
The  Inner  House  of  Doctrine. — I  have  promised  to 
show  whether  there  is  commerce  or  competition  between 
the  theory  of  the  Great  Experiment  and  that  of  the 
Voided  House,  but  I  believe  that  it  has  been  made  clear 
abundantly  in  much  that  has  preceded.  The  position 
is  indeed  simple,  for  the  Great  Experiment  exists,  but 
it  is  not  remembered  in  the  world  at  large  :  it  is  in  this 
sense  that  the  House  is  made  void.  It  may  well  be  that 
those  who  said  it  in  romance  had  imagined  an  instituted 
House,  while  those  others  who  said  in  effect  :  "  Lift 
up  your  eyes,  for  your  salvation  is  both  there  and  here," 
were  aware  that  the  roots  of  the  House  are  not  in  this 
world.  The  explanation  is  that  the  location  of  the 
Secret  Church  is  in  that  ineffable  region  which  lies, 
behind  dogma,  in  glorious  sanctuaries.  It  is  not  a 
repository  of  relics,  and  the  reliquary  is  the  husk  only 
of  the  Holy  Graal,  which  is  a  mystery  of  the  Eucharist 
in  its  essence  and  not  a  legend  of  the  preservation  of  the 
Precious  Blood.  The  location  of  that  Church  and  the 
places  of  the  Hallows  therein  will  be  understood  by 
saying  that  it  is  entered  sometimes  in  an  ecstasy  through 
the  eastern  side  of  the  plainest  external  sanctuary.  It 
may  be  thought  that  on  the  evidence  of  the  romances  it 
is  the  Secret  Church  which  itself  is  made  void.  But 
after  the  departure  of  the  Supreme  Mystery,  what 
remains  is  the  official  Church.  This  does  not  mean 
that  the  Graal  Castle  or  Temple  signifies  the  official 
Church  during  an  age  of  perfection.  It  is  the  inward 
mystery  of  doctrine.  So  long  as  it  remained  there, 
however  hard  of  entrance,  there  was  a  way  in — as 
Pausanias  tells  us  that  there  was  a  way  into  the  Garden 

678 


The  Secret  Church 

of  Venus.  It  died,  however,  in  the  consciousness  except 
of  a  few  faithful  witnesses  who  knew  after  what  manner 
it  was  still  andHs  ever  possible  to  lie,  like  St.  John,  on 
the  breast  of  the  Master. 

The  remembrance  of  the  one  thing  needful  is  starred 
over  all  the  secret  literatures.  Their  maxim  is  not  so 
much  that  God  encompasses  as  that  God  is  within  ; 
and  in  virtue  hereof  they  could  say  in  their  hearts  what 
they  said  with  their  lips  so  often  :  Absque  nube  'pro  nobis. 
I  affirm  on  the  authority  of  research  and  on  other 
authority  and  on  that  which  I  have  seen  of  the  Mysteries 
and  on  the  high  intimations  which  are  communicated  to 
those  who  seek,  that  the  Great  Experiment  subsists, 
that  those  exist  who  have  pursued  it,  and  that  behind 
the  Secret  Orders  which  are  good  and  just  and  holy, 
we  discern  many  traces  of  the  Veiled  Masters.  The  term 
of  quest  in  those  orders  is  the  term  of  the  Graal  Quest, 
and  the  sacraments  of  procedure  are  not  otherwise 
therein.  The  path  of  the  instituted  Mysteries,  it  should 
be  understood,  is  in  no  sense  the  only  path,  but  it  is  one 
of  the  nearest,  because  the  mind  is  trained  therein, 
firstly,  in  the  sense  of  possibility,  and,  secondly,  in  the 
direction  of  consciousness,  so  that  it  may  be  overflowed 
by  the  experience  of  the  experiment.  It  was  carried  on 
in  the  secret  schools  ;  but  at  this  day  the  great  instituted 
Rites  are  like  the  Rich  King  Fisherman,  either  wounded 
or  in  a  condition  of  languishment,  and  it  is  either  for  the 
same  symbolic  reason — namely,  that  few  are  prepared 
to  come  forward  and  ask  the  required  question — the 
equivalent  of  which  is  to  beget  Galahad  on  the  daughter 
of  King  Pelles — or  the  consciousness  of  the  Great  Experi- 
ment has  closed  down  upon  the  Wardens  of  the  Rites 
and  they  stand  guard  over  its  memorials  only.  It  has 
been  pursued  also  in  the  official  Churches,  which  are 
permanent  witnesses  to  its  root-matter  in  the  world. 
The  two  constitute  together  a  great,  holy,  catholic  and 
apostolic  Church,  which  is  empowered  to  say  :  Signatum 
est  super  nos  lumen  vultus  tui.  But  seeing  that  it  is  more 

679 


The  Hidden  Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

than  all  signatum,  we  have  to  look  in  the  deep  places  for 
its  hidden  virtue.  The  key  which  we  must  take  in  our 
hands  is  that  God  is  everywhere  and  that  He  recom- 
penses those  who  seek  Him  out.  But  we  do  not  look  to 
find  Him  more  especially  in  the  Master's  chair  of  a 
Craft  Lodge  or  the  pulpit  of  a  popular  preacher,  and 
hence  those  who  are  on  the  quest  of  the  Veiled  Masters 
will  do  well  to  release  themselves  from  the  notion  of 
any  corporate  fellowship  as  a  sine  qud  non.  I  say  now 
truly  and  utterly  that  the  Veiled  Master  is  in  the  heart 
of  each  one  of  us  and  the  path  to  his  throne  is  the  path 
to  the  Secret  Church.  Some  say  that  the  Pearl  without 
Price  is  here,  some  that  it  is  there,  some  that  it  has 
been  taken  into  hiding,  and  some  that  it  is  withdrawn 
into  heaven ;  which  things  are  true  and  without  let  or 
hindrance  of  my  own  testimony  ;  wherefore  I  add  that 
if  any  one  can  exclaim  truly  :  Nunc  dimittis,  Domine, 
servum  tuum  secundum  verbum  tuum  in  'pace,  it  is,  and  this 
only,  quoniam  vidit  oculus  meus  salutare  tuum,  and  he 
then  also  has  seen  the  Graal. 

If  I  have  not  spoken  my  whole  mind  on  certain  aspects 
and  memorials  of  the  Secret  Tradition  which  do  now 
repose  in  the  instituted  but  veiled  sanctuaries,  it  is 
because  I  am  conscious  of  several  inherent  difficulties, 
and  I  remember  many  covenants.  If,  therefore,  recog- 
nising this,  some  voice  in  the  cloud  of  listeners  should 
intervene  and  say  :  "  But  again,  where  are  they — the 
Stewards  ?  " — I  should  answer,  as  I  could  answer  only  : 
"  I  have  brought  back  from  a  long  and  long  journey 
those  few  typical  memorials  which  I  have  interwoven 
in  this  book  for  the  encouragement  of  some  of  my 
kinship,  that  where  I  have  been  they  may  enter  also  in 
their  time — supposing  that  they  are  called  in  truth.  If 
they  see  at  the  end  only  the  trail  of  the  garments  of  some 
who  elude  them  at  a  distant  angle  of  the  vista,  they  may 
at  least  confess  with  me  that  Titans  have  gone  before  and 
have  cast  their  shadows  behind.  To  whatever  such 
quest  might  lead  in  one  case  or  another,  be  it  understood, 

680 


The  Secret   Church 

and  this  clearly,  that  in  assuming  the  legends  of  the  Holy 
Graal  as  a  sacred  and  beautiful  opportunity  to  speak  of 
the  Eucharist  and  other  divine  things  connected  with 
and  arising  therefrom,  I  have  put  forward  no  personal 
claim.  If  I  have  dwelt  in  the  secret  places  it  has  not 
been  to  return  and  testify  that  no  others  can  enter  ;  and 
I,  least  of  all,  am  the  authorised  spokesman  of  Stewards 
behind  the  veil.  But  that  which  it  has  been  given  me 
to  do,  I  have  done  faithfully,  within  the  measure  of  my 
knowledge  :  I  have  indicated  the  stages  of  reception, 
or  the  golden  links  of  the  chain,  from  Christian  High 
Grades  of  Masonry  to  the  Craft  Grades,  from  the  Rosy 
Cross  to  the  spiritual  alchemists,  and  from  these  to  the 
Graal  literature.  Behind  all  this  I  should  look  assuredly 
to  the  East,  in  the  direction  of  that  pure  catholic 
gnosticism  which  lies  like  a  pearl  of  great  price  within 
the  glistening  shell  of  external  Christianity,  which  is  not 
of  Marcion  or  Valentinus,  of  Cerinthus  and  all  their 
cohorts,  but  is  the  unexpressed  mystery  of  experience  in 
deep  wells  whence  issues  no  strife  of  sects. 

We  know  that  in  its  higher  grades  the  spirit  of 
imagination  moves  through  a  world  not  manifest,  and 
this  is  the  world  of  mystery  ;  it  is  that  also  in  which 
many  are  initiated  who  are  called  but  not  chosen  utterly  ; 
yet  it  is  that  in  which  the  epopt  is  at  last  enthroned — 
that  world  in  which  the  Graal  Castle,  Corbenic  or  Mont 
Salvatch,  the  most  holy  temple  and  secret  sanctuary, 
are  attainable  at  any  point,  all  points  being  out  of  time 
and  place.  It  is  the  world  of  Quest,  which  is  also  the 
world  of  Attainment.  There  in  fine,  at  the  striking  of 
a  certain  mystic  hour,  that  translation  takes  place  in 
which  the  soul  is  removed,  with  the  Graal  thereto 
belonging,  and  it  is  idle  for  any  one  to  say  that  it  is 
shown  henceforth  so  openly.  It  is  there  that  the 
offices  of  all  the  high  degrees  meet  in  the  term  of  their 
unity,  and  the  great  systems  also,  at  which  height  we 
understand  vitally  what  now  we  realise  intellectually — 
that  the  great  translation  of  alchemy,  the  passage  from 

681 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

kingdom  to  crown  in  Kabalism,  the  journey  through 
Hades  to  Elysium  in  the  Greek  Mysteries  and  in  Dante 
as  their  last  spokesman,  and  lastly  the  great  Quest  of 
Galahad,  are  the  various  aspects  and  symbolical  pre- 
sentations of  one  subject. 

At  this  stage  of  the  interpretation  I  shall  not  need 
to  point  out  that  in  the  final  adjustments  even,trj.e 
highest  symbols  are  merely  pretexts ;  they  are  tokens, 
"  lest  we  forget  "  ;  and  this  is  for  the  same  reason  that 
neither  chalice  nor  paten  really  impart  anything.  They 
are  among  the  great  conventions  to  which  the  soul 
confesses  on  the  upward  path  of  its  progress,  but  within 
their  proper  offices  they  are  not  to  be  set  aside.  The 
explanation  is  less  that  they  impart  as  that  through 
them  the  high  graces  communicate  in  proportion  to  the 
powers  of  reception.  The  soul  which  has  opened  up 
the  heights  of  the  undeclared  consciousness  within  par- 
takes as  a  great  vessel  of  election,  while  another  soul, 
which  is  still  under  seals,  may  receive  nothing. 

Independently  of  corporate  connections,  the  Mystic 
Quest  is  the  highest  of  all  adventures,  the  mirror  of 
all  knighthood,  all  institutes  of  chivalry.  And  this 
Quest  is  also  that  of  the  Graal,  but  written  after  another 
manner.  The  makers  of  the  mighty  chronicles  said 
more  than  they  knew  that  they  were  saying,  but  they 
knew  in  part  and  they  saw  through  a  glass  darkly.  We 
are  "  full  of  sad  and  strange  experience,"  though  we 
have  not  come  to  our  rest,  and  for  this  reason  we  are  in 
a  better  position  to  understand  the  old  books  than  when 
they  were  first  drawn  into  language.  Better  than  they 
who  wrote  them  in  their  far  past  do  we  now  know  after 
what  manner  the  highest  things  go  forth  into  mystery  ; 
but  of  the  gate  they  knew  and  of  the  way  also.  Chivalry 
was  a  mystery  of  idealism  and  the  Graal  a  mystery  of 
transfiguration,  but  when  it  was  removed  from  this 
world  it  was  not  any  further  away. 

We  have,  on  these  considerations,  and  many  others, 
every  cause  to  be  thankful  to  those  learned  persons  who 

682 


The  Secret  Church 

have  gone  before  us,  taking  such  lamps  as  they  have 
been  licensed  to  carry  ;  but  in  the  last  resource  the  term 
of  learning  is  attained,  after  which  there  is  only  the 
great  light  which  can  be  made  to  enlighten  every  man 
who  comes  into  this  world.  It  is  that  sun  which  shines 
in  Mont  Salvatch,  in  Sarras,  the  spiritual  city,  and  in  the 
place  of  rest  which  is  Avalon.  It  exhibits  the  abiding 
necessity  of  the  sacraments  as  well  as  their  suspension  ; 
it  exhibits  that  priesthood  which  comes  rather  by 
inward  grace  than  by  apostolical  succession,  albeit  those 
who  deny  the  succession  are  usually  far  from  the  grace. 

The  monks  sat  in  their  cells  and  stalls  and  scriptoria 
during  the  great  adventurous  times  when  the  rumour 
of  the  Holy  Graal  moved  through  the  world  of  litera- 
ture ;  they  dreamed  of  a  chivalry  spiritualised  and  a 
church  of  sanctity  exalted  :  so  came  into  being  the 
Longer  Prose  Perceval,  the  Quest  of  Galahad  and  the 
Parsifal  of  Wolfram.  Whether  in  the  normal  conscious- 
ness I  know  not  or  in  the  subconsciousness  I  know  not 
—God  knoweth — that  dream  of  theirs  was  of  the  super- 
concealed  sanctuary  behind  the  known  chancel  and  the 
visible  altar.  This  is  the  sense  of  all  that  which  I  under- 
stand concerning  the  traces  of  the  Secret  Church  in 
the  Graal  literature.  As  before,  I  am  not  speaking  of 
formal  institutions,  of  esoteric  brotherhoods,  or  incor- 
porations of  any  kind  ;  it  is  a  question  of  the  direction 
of  consciousness  and  of  its  growth  in  that  direction. 
A  man  does  not  leave  the  external  church  because  he 
enters  into  the  spiritual  Church  ;  Ruysbroeck  does  not 
cease  to  say  Mass  because  he  has  been  in  those  heights 
and  across  those  seas  of  which  we  hear  in  his  Adornment 
of  the  Spiritual  Marriage.  At  the  same  time  his  language 
is  not  exactly  that  of  the  official  Church  in  its  earliest 
.  or  latest  encyclical ;  it  is  not  like  that  of  St.  Irenaeus 
writing  against  heresies  or  Pius  X.  denouncing  the  spirit 
of  modernism.  It  is  something  the  same  as,  if  one  may 
say  it,  in  the  brotherhood  of  Masonry.  The  craft 
degrees  are  the  whole  summary  of  Masonry,  but  there 

683 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy  Graal 

is  a  certain  distinction  between  him  who  has  taken  these 
only  and  him  who  has  added  thereto  the  eighteenth 
degree  of  Rose  Croix,  or  the  still  more  exalted  and  now 
almost  secret  grade  of  Knights  Beneficent  of  the  Holy 
City  of  Jerusalem.  Yet  the  one  is  a  Mason  and  the  other 
is  not  more  than  a  Mason,  but  there  are  or  at  least 
there  may  be  degrees  of  consciousness  in  the  Mysteries. 
So  also  the  lay  member  of  any  one  among  the  official 
Churches  whose  instruction  has  scarcely  exceeded  the 
catechisms  of  Christian  doctrine  is  not — or  need  not 
be  at  least— less  a  Christian  than  he  who  has  studied 
Summa,  but  again  there  are  degrees  of  consciousness  in 
the  mystery  of  the  faith. 

Now  the  Secret  Tradition  in  Christian  times  is  the 
rumour  of  the  Secret  Sanctuary,  and  this  tradition  has 
many  voices.  The  voice  of  spiritual  alchemy,  succeeding 
that  of  the  Graal,  is  the  voice  of  the  Graal  literature 
under  another  veil,  but  it  says  that  He  is  there  ;  and 
after  its  departure  it  is  known  and  recorded  that  many 
earnest  and  holy  persons  beheld  the  Vessel  of  Singular 
Devotion  :  yet  there  is  something  wanting  in  the 
official  sanctuaries.  The  voice  of  the  Temple,  reflected 
in  its  later  revival,  says  that  He  is  risen  and  gone  away. 
The  voice  of  Masonry  says  that  the  old  Temple  was  not 
built  according  to  the  true  and  original  plan.  The 
voice  of  the  Rosy  Cross  says  that  in  places  withdrawn 
He,  being  dead,  yet  testifies.  The  voice  of  St.  John  on 
Patmos  says  that  he  was  given  a  book  to  eat,  and  that 
in  his  mouth  it  was  sweet  but  in  his  belly  it  was  bitter — 
because  thenceforward  he  was  in  travail  with  the  Secret 
Doctrine.  The  witness  of  the  Graal  literature  heard 
something  at  a  very  great  distance,  and  to  decorate 
what  they  had  heard  the  artists  of  the  literature  gathered 
from  the  four  quarters  of  romance  and  legend  and 
folk-lore.  As  such  their  reflection  is  a  failure.  The 
witness  of  alchemical  books  chose  a  worse  medium,  but 
they  made  it  serve  their  purpose  more  expressly.  The 
voice  of  Masonry  created  a  great  legend  to  commemorate 

684 


The  Secret    Church 

an  universal  loss,  and  testified  that  the  Quest  would 
never  end  till  the  speculative  Masons  found  that  which 
was  once  among  them.  The  Voice  of  the  Rosy  Cross 
said  that,  having  found  the  body  of  the  Master,  the 
brethren  again  closed  the  sepulchre  and  set  their  seals 
thereon,  though  they  also  looked  for  a  great  resurrection. 
The  voice  of  St.  John  reflected  the  last  message  of  the 
Master  :  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly."  And  all  Christendom 
has  resounded  since  with  the  anthem  :  "  Amen,  even  so, 
come,  Lord  Jesus."  The  Hidden  Voice  of  Christ  is  in 
the  Secret  Literature,  and  I  have  therefore  written  this 
book  as  the  text-book  of  a  Great  Initiation.  Mean- 
while, the  Churches  are  not  made  void,  but  they  are  in 
widowhood  and  desolation,  during  which  time  our  place 
is  with  them,  that  we  may  offer  them  comfort  in  their 
sorrow,  without  being  deceived  by  their  distractions. 
It  is  certain  also  that  His  reflections  abide  with  them. 
Chretien  may  have  drawn  from  an  episodic  romance  of 
adventure  in  the  possession  of  the  Count  of  Flanders. 
Master  Blihis,  the  great  maker  of  fables,  may  have  recited 
things,  with  or  without  consequence,  concerning  Sanctum 
Graal.  Neither  these  nor  others  that  could  be  men- 
tioned are  the  books  concerning  the  Secret  Words  of 
the  Eucharist  or  the  text  of  Secret  Ordination.  The 
legends  of  Welsh  saints  may  tell  us  of  Sacred  Hosts 
coming  down  from  heaven,  but  the  Epiclesis  clause,  if 
the  Welsh  had  it,  in  their  book  of  the  Mass,  is  not  the 
Lost  Word  which  we  seek  like  the  Mason.  They  may 
tell  us  also  of  holy  personages  who  were  consecrated  by 
Christ,  and  the  fables  may  be  famous  indeed,  but  they 
want  the  motive  which  fills  the  Greater  Chronicles  of 
the  Holy  Graal  with  meaning  and  suggestions  of  mean- 
ing. Therefore  I  still  hear  and  listen  with  all  my  ears 
while  the  voices  of  many  traditions  say  the  same  things 
differently.  The  Holy  Sepulchre  is  empty  ;  the  Tomb 
of  C.  R.  C.  in  the  House  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  sealed  up  ; 
the  Word  of  Masonry  is  lost  ;  the  Zelator  of  alchemy 
now  looks  in  vain  for  a  Master.  The  traditional  book 

685 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy    Graal 

of  the  Graal,  by  whatever  name  of  convention  we  may 
choose  to  term  it — Liber  Gradalis  or  Sanctum  Graal— 
is    not  only  as  much  lost  as  that  which  was  eaten  by 
St.  John,  though  it  might  not  be  so  difficult  to  conjecture 
the  elements  in  the  one  as  in  the  other  case. 

And  now  to  make  an  end  of  these  pleadings  :  I  have 
chosen  to  give  some  account  of  the  Holy  Graal  as  it 
was  and  as  it  is,  that  I  could  lead  up  to  what  it  might 
be,  that  is  to  say,  how  it  could  be  realised  in  high 
literature,  because  in  other  respects  some  things  which 
might  be  in  the  ideal  order  are  those  also  which  are— 
and  God  redeems  the  future  as  well  as  the  past.  As 
regards  therefore  the  true  theory  of  this  mystery,  with 
others  of  the  mystic  school,  we  may  hope  in  the  Lord 
continually,  even  as  one  who  believes  that  he  will  not 
be  confounded  unto  eternity.  Reason  has  many  palaces, 
but  the  sovereign  peace  rules  in  a  single  place.  Dilated 
in  the  mystery  of  cloud  and  moisture  and  moonlight, 
the  Graal  appears  even  now,  and  that  suddenly.  It 
abides  in  the  memory  for  those  who  can  live  in  its  light, 
and  it  is  elevated  in  the  light  for  those  who  can  so  keep 
it  in  the  high  spirit  of  recollection  that  it  has  become 
their  guide  and  their  nourishment.  For  myself  it  is  in 
virtue  of  many  related  dedications  that  I  have  allocated 
a  great  experiment  in  literature  to  a  great  consanguineous 
experiment  in  spiritual  life.  I  have  not  so  much  demon- 
strated the  value  of  a  pure  hypothesis  as  elucidated  after 
what  manner  those  who  are  concerned  with  the  one 
subject  do  from  all  points  return  triumphantly  thereto. 
As  a  seeker  after  the  high  mysteries,  at  this  last  I  testify 
that  whosoever  shall  in  any  subject  offer  me  daily  bread,  I 
will  say  to  him  :  "  But  what  of  the  Panis  vivus  et  vitalis  P 
What  of  the  supersubstantial  bread  ?  "  And  if  there  be 
any  one  who  deals  therein,  under  what  rules  soever  of 
any  houses  of  exchange,  I  will  have  him  know  that  if 
he  sells  in  the  open  market,  even  I  am  a  buyer.  So 
therefore  the  author  of  this  book  gives  thanks  that 
he  has  written  concerning  the  romance-pageants  and 

686 


The  Secret  Church 

sanctity  as  of  the  catholic  and  eternal  secrets  of  religion. 
Quod,  erat  demonstrandum  :  it  is  written  for  those  alone 
who  in  the  silence  of  the  heart  and  in  a  sacred  suspension 
of  the  senses  have  heard  the  voice  of  the  Graal. 

In  the  great  desolation  of  Logres  I  hear  also — I  hear 
and  I  hear — the  penitent  Knight  Lancelot  singing  his 
twelve-month  Mass.  So  also  till  he  turns  at  the  Altar 
saying  :  lie,  Missa  est,  because  the  King  himself  is  coming 
in  the  morning  tide,  I  will  respect  all  the  findings  of 
scholarship  concerning  quests  which  are  not  of  the 
Graal  and  Cups  which  contain  no  sacrament,  but  I  am 
on  the  quest  of  the  Graal  and,  Master  of  True  Life, 
after  all  and  all  and  all,  it  is  not  so  far  to  Thee.  And 
even  Gwalchmai  saw  it. 


colopjjon  of  tfjfc  fioofe 

to  all  totjom  it  map 
concern  on   tfje  ©treat  Ctuetft, 


687 


APPENDIX 

A   BRIEF   METHODISED   BIBLIOGRAPHY   OF 

THE   HOLY   GRAAL 
IN    LITERATURE   AND   CRITICISM 

Comprising  a  Key  to  the  Study  of  the   Texts  and  the 
Several  Schools  of  Interpretation 

PART   I 

THE    TEXTS 

IT  is  desirable  in  fairness  to  myself,  but  more  especially  out  of 
justice  to  my  readers,  that  the  limitations  of  these  sections  should 
be  made  plain  from  the  beginning.  A  complete  bibliography  of 
the  Holy  Graal  in  literature  and  criticism  should  assuredly  in- 
clude, so  far  as  the  texts  are  concerned,  at  least  a  sufficient  study 
of  the  chief  manuscripts  ;  and  in  respect  of  the  critical  works  it 
should  embrace  a  survey  of  continental  periodical  literature — 
chiefly  French  and  German — wherein  a  very  important  part 
is,  and  will  remain,  imbedded.  The  large  knowledge  which  is 
necessary  in  one  of  these  cases,  the  opportunity  in  the  other,  and 
the  space  in  regard  to  both,  would — I  must  confess — fail  me,  were 
so  ambitious  a  research  called  for  ;  but  it  exceeds  the  scope  of  my 
purpose,  as  it  would  have  little  or  no  appeal  to  those  whom  I 
address.  I  have  confined  myself,  therefore,  to  particulars  of  the 
printed  texts,  to  the  most  important  of  the  critical  works,  and 
to  a  few  characteristic  essays  towards  interpretation  along  inde- 
pendent lines,  because  these — whatever  their  value — will  be  of 
interest  to  mystic  students,  if  only  as  counsels  of  caution.  As 
regards  the  intermediate  group,  I  have  sought  in  a  few  words  to 
indicate,  where  possible,  certain  points  of  correspondence  with 
my  own  thesis.  If,  therefore,  it  be  inferred  that  this  section  is 
written  in  the  spirit  and  exists  in  the  interests  of  a  partisan,  I 
shall  neither  dissuade  nor  protest  ;  but  rather — that  I  may  do  all 
things  sincerely  within  my  particular  field — I  will  begin  by 
assuming  that  the  matter  of  my  own  research,  having  to  be 
judged  by  unusual  canons,  would  be  unlikely,  in  any  case,  to 
receive  the  imprimatur  of  the  existing  schools.  In  so  far  as  my  book 

689  2  X 


The  Hidden   Church  of  the   Holy    Graal 

has  been  done  zealously  and  truly,  I  believe  that  it  will  engage 
their  interest,  at  whatever  cost  of  disagreement,  and  my  debt  of 
gratitude  to  their  great,  patient  and  productive  research  may  be  a 
little  reduced  should  any  of  them  here  and  there  feel  that  a  new 
vista  has  been  opened.  They  also  know  that  although  the  Graal 
literature  began  in  folk-lore  it  did  not  end  therein  ;  and  if  its 
consanguinities — actual,  but  yet  remote — with  secret  ways  of 
thought  and  strange  schools  of  experience  should  be  naturally  out- 
side their  sphere,  it  may  even  be  that  the  end  which  I  descry  is  not 
so  foreign  after  all  but  that  they  have  almost  caught  at  it  in  dreams. 

A.  EARLY  EPOCHS  OF   THE   QUEST,    being  documents   that 
embody  materials  which  have  been  elsewhere  incorporated  into 
the  Graal    legends,   but   do  not    themselves   refer   to   the    Holy 
Vessel ;   in   their  extant  form  these   texts  are  much  later   than 
the  rest  of  the  literature. 

1.  Peredur  the  son  of  Evrawc^  first  printed,  with  the  Welsh 
text,  translation  and  notes,  in  the  Mabinogion,  by  Lady  Charlotte 
E.  Guest,  3  vols.,  1849  ;  a  second  edition,  without  the  text  and 
with    abridged    notes,  appeared    in    1877.      The   collection    has 
since    been    reissued    in    many    forms,    and    is    available    in    the 
Temple   Classics  and    another   popular  series.     The  edition    of 
Mr.  Alfred  Nutt,  first  published  in  1902,  with  notes  by  the  editor, 
has  an  appeal  to  scholars.     The  Mabinogion  have  been  also  trans- 
lated into  French  and  German. 

2.  The  Romance  of  Syr  Percyvelle  of  Galles,  included  in    The 
Thornton  Romances,  edited  by  J.  O.  Halliwell,  and  published  by 
the  Camden  Society  in   1844.     The  manuscript  is  preserved  in 
the    Library  of  Lincoln    Cathedral,  and   Robert  Thornton,   its 
scribe,  is  thought  to  have  compiled  the  collection  about  1440. 
The  year  mentioned  is  speculative  in  two  ways  :  (a)  because  the 
Thornton    volume    can    only   be    dated    approximately,  and    (/>) 
because  the  poem  with  which  we  are  concerned  is  almost  un- 
questionably a  transcript   from   an   unknown  original.     By  the 
evidence  of  language  and  style  it  is  thought,  however,  to  belong 
to  the  approximate  period  of  its  transcription.     Syr  Percyvelle  is 
a  rhymed  poem  of  2228  lines. 

B.  LE   CONTE  DEL  GRAAL. — I.  Le  Poeme  de  CHRETIEN  DE 
TROYES  et  de  ses  continuateurs  d'apres  le  manuscrit  de  MONS,  being 
vols.  2  to  6  of  Perceval  le  Gallois,  ou  le  Conte  du  Graal — vide  infra 
for  the  first  volume,  containing  the  romance  in  prose.     This  is 
so  far  the  only  printed  edition,  and  it  was  produced  under  the 
auspices  of  C.  Potvin    for  the    Societe  des  Bibliophiles  Beiges.     It 
appeared   from    1866  to   1871,  and  copies  are  exceedingly  rare. 
The  text  is  that  of  a  manuscript  in  the  Bibliotheque  Communale 

690 


Appendix 


fie  MONS,  and  ft  is  considered  unfavourably  by  scholarship.  The 
equipment  of  the  editor  has  been  also  regarded  as  insufficient, 
but  the  pains  which  made  the  poem  available  deserve  our  highest 
thanks,  and  the  gift  has  been  priceless.  I  believe  that  a  new 
edition  is  promised  in  Germany.  It  may  be  useful  to  mention  that 
the  work  of  Chretien  is  held  to  have  ended  at  line  10,601  ;  that 
of  Gautier — but  here  opinions  differ — at  line  34,934  ;  while  the 
conclusion  of  Manessier  extends  the  work  to  45,379  lines,  not 
including  the  fragment  of  Gerbert,  which  exceeds  15,000  lines. 
The  excursus  which  M.  Potvin  appended  to  his  last  volume  is 
still  pleasant  reading,  but  it  represents  no  special  research  and  at 
need  is  now  almost  negligible.  It  seems  to  look  favourably  on  the 
dream  of  a  Latin  primordial  Graal  text ;  it  affirms  that  the  Conte 
was  called  the  Bible  du  demon  by  Gallic  monks  of  old,  and  that 
Lancelot  of  the  Lake  was  placed  on  the  Index  by  Innocent  III. 

II.  The  Berne  Perceval.     Our  chief  knowledge   of  this   un- 
printed  text  is  due  to  Alfred  Rochat,  who  gave  extracts  therefrom 
in  Veber  elnen  bisher  unbekannten  Percheval  li  Gallois  (Zurich,  1855). 
It  has  variations  which  are   important  for  textual  purposes,  but 
the  conclusion   only   is   of  moment   to  ourselves.      In   the   first 
place,  it  is  an  attempt  to  complete  the  Quest  of  Perceval  prac- 
tically within  the  limits  of  Gautier's  extension,  which  it  does, 
in  a  summary  manner,  by  recounting  how  the  Fisher  King  dies 
within  three  days  of  Perceval's  second  visit  and  how  the  latter 
becomes  Keeper  of  the  Graal.    The  version  follows  the  historical 
matter  of  the  Lesser  Chronicles,  which  is  of  interest  in  view 
of  my  remarks  on  pp.  207  and  235.     The  Fisher  King  is  Brons  ; 
he  is  the  father  of  Alain  le  Gros  ;  and  his  wife  is  sister  to  Joseph 
of  Arimathaea.     It  will  be  noted  that  this  is  the  succession  of  the 
Didot  Perceval^  the  Keepership  not  passing  to  Alain. 

III.  Tresplaisante  et  Recreative  Hystoire  du  trespreulx  et  vaillant 
chevallier  Perceval  le  Galloys  .  .  .  lequel  acheva  les  adventures  du 
Sainct   Graaly    &c. — Paris,   1530.     This  is   the   prose  version   of 
the  Conte  del  Graal,  the  summaries  of  which  are  given  among 
the  marginal  notes  of  Potvin's  text  of  the  poem.     It  includes,  in 
certain  copies,  the  important  Elucidation^  which  was  long  thought 
to  exist  only  in  this  form.    The  object  which  actuated  the  edition 
is  stated  very  simply — namely,  to  place  a  work  which  had  long 
become  archaic  in  an  available  form.     As  such,  it  might  appeal 
to  some  readers  who  would  be  hindered  by  the  difficulties  of  th 
original,  but  it  is  available  only  in  a  few  great  libraries. 

The  Conte  del  Graal  is  said  to  have  been  translated  into 
Spanish  and  published  at  Seville  in  1526.  We  may  assume,  in 
this  case,  that  it  is  in  prose,  and  the  interesting  point  concerning 

691 


The  Hidden    Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

it  would  then  be  that  it  anteceded  the  French  prose  version.  I 
do  not  think  that  its  existence  detracts  from  my  general  con- 
clusion that  the  Quest  of  Perceval  had  little  appeal,  during  that 
period  when  the  literature  of  chivalry  reigned,  in  Spain  and 
Portugal.  The  full  title  is  Historia  de  Perceval  de  Gaula,  Ca- 
ballero  de  la  Tabla  Rotonda,  but  at  a  later  period  it  has  been 
suggested  alternatively  that  it  is  really  a  Spanish  version  of  the 
Longer  Prose  Perceval.  No  one  seems  to  have  seen  it.  A 
Flemish  and  an  Icelandic  version  remain  unprinted. 

C.  THE  LESSER  CHRONICLES. — It  is  understood  that  I  have 
adopted  this  title  as  comprehensive  and  suitable  for  my  purpose, 
but  there  is  no  collection  of  manuscripts  which  bears  the  name. 

I.  Le  Roman  du  Saint  Graal,  public  pour  la  premiere  fois  d'apres 
un  manuscrit  de  la  Bibliotheque  Royale,  par  FRANCISQUE  MICHEL, 
Bordeaux,  1841.  The  manuscript  in  question  is  unique  and  the 
poem  which  is  now  under  consideration  consists  of  3514  lines. 
There  is  a  lacuna  between  lines  2752  and  2753,  being  at  and 
about  that  point  when  destruction  overwhelms  the  false  Moses  in 
the  prose  version.  The  metrical  romance  was  reprinted  in  the 
Dictionnaire  des  Ltgendes,  forming  part  of  Migne's  Troisieme  .  .  . 
Encyclopedic  Theologique,  and  in  this  form  is  still,  I  believe,  avail- 
able. It  was  also  included  by  Dr.  Furnivall  in  his  edition  of  the 
Seynt  Graal  or  the  Sank  Ryal,  printed  for  the  Roxburgh  Club, 
2  vols.,  1861-63. 

It  seems  desirable  to  couple  with  this  text  certain  archaic 
English  versions  of  the  Joseph  legend  :  (a)  The  alliterative 
poem  of  Joseph  of  Aramathie,  otherwise,  the  Romance  of  the  Seint 
Graa/y  known  only  by  the  Vernon  MS.  at  Oxford,  which  belongs 
to  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century.  It  is  a  summary  of  the 
Book  of  the  Holy  Graal^  beginning  with  the  release  of  Joseph 
from  the  tower  and  ending  with  the  departure  from  Sarras.  It  is 
imperfect  at  the  inception,  and,  of  course,  breaks  off  far  from  the 
term.  (b)  The  Lyfe  of  Joseph  of  Armathy^  printed  by  Wynkyn  de 
Worde  and  corresponding  to  the  account  given  by  Capgrave  in 
his  Nova  Legenda  Anglice.  It  pretends  to  be  founded  on  a  book 
discovered  by  the  Emperor  Theodosius  at  Jerusalem.  It  is 
evident,  however,  that  this  is  really  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
though  the  account  of  Joseph's  imprisonment  follows  the  Apo- 
cryphal Gospel  of  Nicodemus  and  there  is  no  reference  to  the 
Holy  Vessel,  (c)  The  Lyfe  of  Joseph  of  Armathia^  believed  to  have 
been  written  about  the  year  1502,  and  first  printed  in  1520. 
The  authorship  is  entirely  unknown  and  so  are  manuscripts  prior 
to  publication.  It  is,  of  course,  much  too  late  to  possess  any 
historical  importance.  It  is  exceedingly  curious,  and,  in  spite  of 

692 


Appendix 


its  rude  verse  and  chaotic  manner,  is  not  without  a  certain 
pictorial  sense  and  vividness.  In  place  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  of 
Reception  there  are  two  cruets  substituted  in  which  the  blood  of 
Christ  was  collected  by  Joseph.  These  fragments  are  all  included 
by  the  Rev.  W.  W.  Skeat  in  his  Joseph  of  Arimathie,  published  for 
the  Early  English  Text  Society,  1871. 

II.  The  Lesser  Holy  Graal,  i.e.  Le  Petit  Saint  Graal,  ou  Joseph 
d? Arimathie^  is  known  by  a  number  of  MSS.,  one  of  which  is 
called  Cange  ;  it  belongs  to  the  thirteenth  century  and  is  preserved 
in  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale  at  Paris.     Two  codices,  together 
with  a  version  in  modern  French,  are  included  in  the  first  volume 
of  Le  Saint  Graal,  published  by  Eugene  Hucher,  3  vols.,  Paris, 
1874.     This  text  was  regarded  by  the  editor  as  De   Borron's 
original  work,  from  which   the  metrical  version   was  composed 
later  on  by  an  unknown  hand. 

III.  The  Early  Prose  Merlin.     We  have  seen  that  the  metrical 
Romance    of  Joseph  concludes  at  line  3514,  after  which   the 
unique  MS.  proceeds,  without  any  break,  to  the  life  of  Merlin, 
reaching  an  abrupt  term  at  line  4018,  all  being  missing  thereafter. 
This  fragment  is  included  in  the  text  of  Michel.     The  complete 
prose  version  forms  the  first  part  of  the  Vulgate  and  the  second  of 
the  Huth  Merlin,  the   bibliographical   particulars   of  which  are 
given  later.     It  follows  from  one,  and  apparently  one  only,  of 
the  Early  Merlin  codices  that  Robert  de  Borron  proposed  as  his 
next  branch  to  take  the  life  of  Alain,  and  in  so  stating  he,  or  his 
personator,  uses  some  of  the  words  which  occur  in  the  colophon 
of  his  Joseph  poem.     It  appears  further  that  the  Alain  branch  was 
intended  to  show  how  the  enchantments  fell  upon  Britain. 

IV.  The   Didot   Perceval^  i.e.   Perceval^  ou  la   Quete  du  Saint 
Graa/y  par  Robert  de  Borron.     This  text  is  included  in  the  first 
volume  of  Hucher's  collection,  with  a  summary  prefixed  thereto. 
The  date  borne  by  the  MS.  is  1301.     The  root-matter  of  the 
romance    is,    of  course,   the   non-Graal   myth   of  Perceval,   the 
existence    of  which    is    posited    on    such    excellent   grounds   by 
scholarship.     Critical  opinion  is  perhaps  equally  divided  on  the 
question  whether  the  Didot  Perceval  does  or  does  not  represent 
the  third  part  of  De  Borron's  metrical  trilogy.     The   name  of 
Gaston  Paris  must  be  ranged  on  the  affirmative  side,  and  on  the 
negative  that  of  Mr.  Alfred  Nutt. 

D.  THE  GREATER  CHRONICLES. — It  is  again  understood  that 
this  title  is  merely  a  matter  of  convenience  in  connection  with 
my  particular  classification  of  texts. 

I.  The  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  i.e.  Le  Saint  Graal  ou  Joseph 
d'Arimathie.  There  are  several  MSS.,  among  which  may  be 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

mentioned  that  of  the  Bibliotheque  de  la  Vtlle  de  Mam,  which  is 
referred  to  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century.  Other  codices 
are  at  Cambridge  and  in  the  British  Museum.  It  was  first  edited 
by  Furnivall  (op.  «'/.),  from  the  MSS.  preserved  in  England,  and 
subsequently  by  Hucher,  forming  vols.  2  and  3  of  his  collection, 
as  described  previously.  Dr.  Furnivall  also  included  the  English 
rendering  called  The  Seynt  Graal  or  Sank  Ryal,  known  by  a  single 
MS.  attributed  to  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century.  The  work 
is  in  conventional  verse  of  very  poor  quality,  the  author  being 
Henry  Lovelich  or  Lonelich,  described  as  a  skinner,  but  of  whom 
no  particulars  are  forthcoming.  It  is  a  rendering  by  way  of 
summary  extending  to  nearly  24,000  lines,  with  several  extensive 
lacunae.  Outside  the  testimony  of  its  existence  to  the  interest  in 
the  Graal  literature,  as  illustrated  by  the  pains  of  translation  at  a 
length  so  great,  it  has  no  importance  for  our  subject.  It  was 
again  edited  by  Dr.  Furnivall  (1874—78)  for  the  Early  English 
Text  Society,  but  after  thirty-four  years  it  remains  incomplete, 
no  titles  or  a  satisfactory  introduction  to  the  text  having  been 
produced. 

II.  The  Vulgate  Merlin,  i.e.  Le  Roman  de  Merlin,  or  the 
Early  History  of  King  Arthur.  The  available  French  text  is  that 
which  was  edited,  in  1884,  by  Professor  H.  Oskar  Sommer  from 
the  Add.  MS.  10292  in  the  British  Museum.  It  is  ascribed  to 
the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century.  The  prose  version  of 
Robert  de  Borron's  substantially  lost  poem  is  brought  to  its  term 
in  this  edition  at  the  end  of  Chapter  V.  With  this  the  reader 
may  compare,  and  is  likely  to  use  at  his  pleasure,  Merlin,  or  the 
Early  History  of  King  Arthur,  edited  for  the  Early  English  Text 
Society  by  Mr.  Henry  B.  Wheatley,  1865-99,  which  during 
another  modest  period  of  thirty-four  years  has  certainly  produced  a 
satisfactory  and  valuable  edition  of  the  anonymous  rendering  of 
the  Vulgate  Merlin  preserved  in  the  unique  MS.  of  the  University 
Library,  Cambridge.  This  text  is  allocated  to  A.D.  1450-60,  and 
as  a  translation  it  is  fairly  representative  of  the  French  original.  A 
metrical  rendering  has  been  edited  from  an  Auchinleck  MS.  by 
Professor  E.  Koelling  in  his  Arthour  and  Merlin,  Leipsic,  1890. 

I  have  spoken  of  Les  Propheties  de  Merlin,  which  appeared  with 
no  date  at  Rouen,  but  probably  in  1520  or  thereabouts.  It 
claims  to  be  translated  from  the  Latin,  and  contains  episodes  of 
Merlin's  history  which  are  unlike  anything  in  the  canonical  texts. 
A  few  points  may  be  enumerated  as  follows  :  (a)  In  place  of  the 
faithful  Blaise  of  the  other  chronicles,  there  is  a  long  list  of  the 
scribes  employed  by  Merlin  to  record  his  prophecies,  being  (i) 
Master  Tholomes,  who  subsequently  became  a  bishop  ;  (2)  Master 

694 


Appendix 


Anthony  ;  (3)  Meliadus,  the  brother  of  Sir  Tristram  and  paramour 
of  the  Lady  of  the  Lake  ;  (4)  the  sage  clerk,  Raymon  ;  (5)  Rubers, 
the  chaplain.  (£)  The  prophet  in  this  curious  romance  is  unbridled 
in  his  amours,  (c]  The  account  of  his  internment  by  the  Lady  of 
the  Lake  recalls  the  parallel  story  in  the  Huth  Merlin,  but  differs 
also  therefrom,  (d)  There  is  a  full  portrayal  of  Morgan  le  Fay, 
her  early  life  and  her  transition  from  beauty  to  ugliness  through 
evil  arts  of  magic,  (e)  The  sin  and  suffering  of  Moses  are  also 
recounted.  (/)  The  Siege  Perilous  at  the  Third  Table  is  said  to 
have  been  occupied,  with  disastrous  results,  by  a  knight  named 
Rogier  le  Bruns.  (g)  There  is  a  summary  of  the  circumstances 
under  which  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  and  his  son  Joseph  II.  came 
to  Britain  for  its  conversion,  (h)  But  perhaps  the  most  remarkable 
episode  is  that  of  the  meeting  between  King  Arthur  and  a  damosel 
in  the  church  of  St.  Stephen.  She  came  sailing  over  the  land  in 
that  ship  which  afterwards  carried  Arthur  to  Avalon. 

The  early  printed  editions  of  the  Vulgate  Merlin,  which 
appeared  at  Paris  from  1498  and  onward,  have  variations  from 
the  textus  receptus,  representing  the  ingenuities  of  successive 
editors.  An  Italian  Merlin  was  issued  at  Venice  and  again  at 
Florence  towards  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century.  I  shall  speak 
later  of  texts  printed  in  Spain. 

III.  The    Huth    Merlin,    i.e.    Merlin — Roman    en   prose    du 
Xllle  slecle,  pub  lie   avec   la   mise  en  prose  du  poeme  de  Merlin  de 
Robert  de  Boron,   d'apres   le   manuscrit  appartenant   a   M.   Alfred 
H.    Huth,  par   Gaston    Paris    et   Jacob   Ulrich.     2   vols.,   Paris, 
1886.     The   position   and   content   of  this   romance   have   been 
dealt  with  so  fully  in  the  text  that,  although  much  rests  to  be 
said  in  a  complete  analysis,  it  will  be  sufficient  for  my  purpose  to 
enumerate  three  casual  points:   (a)  The  unique  portion — which 
is  the  great  bulk  of  the  story — is  believed  to  have  been  composed 
after  the  Lancelot ;  (b)  it  is  perhaps  for  this  reason  that  it  shares 
responsibility  for  the  unfavourable  portraiture  of  Gawain  which 
characterises  most  of  the  Greater  Chronicles ;  (c]  in  some  undecided 
way  the  death  of  a  lady  who  killed  herself  over  the  body  of  a 
knight,  slain  by  Balyn  in  self-defence,  is  said  by  Merlin  to  involve 
the  latter  in  dealing  "  the  stroke  most  dolourous  that  ever  man 
stroke,  except  the  stroke  of  our  Lord." 

IV.  The    Great    Prose    Lancelot.     The    importance    of    this 
romance    is    fully    recognised    by    scholarship,    and    the    careful 
collation  of  the  numerous   manuscripts  is  desired,  but   so  far  it 
remains   a   counsel  of  perfection.     No  text    has    been   edited    in 
modern  days,  and  though   the  reissue  of  one  of  the  old  printed 
versions,  on  account  of  their  great  extent,  was  unlikely  under  any 

69S 


V 

The  Hidden   Church  of  the  Holy   Graal 

circumstances,  it  is  singular  that  not  even  a  satisfactory  modernised 
rendering  has  been  so  far  produced.  In  1488  the  Lancelot 
appeared  at  Paris  in  three  folio  volumes,  and  as  there  were  other 
editions  it  is  only  necessary  to  mention  that  of  1533,  which 
bears  the  imprint  of  Philippe  le  Noir,  because  great  stress  has 
been  laid  thereon.  In  his  Studies  on  the  Sources  of  Malory's  Morte 
a"  Arthur,  Dr.  Sommer  has  taken  as  his  basis  the  edition  of  1513, 
but  without  expressing  preference.  It  appears  from  this  text 
(a)  that  Galahad  was  acquainted  with  his  paternity  even  in  his 
childhood,  and  (b)  that  he  was  sent  to  the  abbey  of  white  nuns 
by  King  Pelles,  his  grandfather.  The  omission  of  these  details 
by  Malory  enhances  the  sacred  mystery  of  the  story. 

V.  The   Longer    Prose    Perceval.     This    text   constitutes    the 
first  volume  of  Potvin's  Conte  del  Graal,  as  described  in  section  B. 
Of  its  translation  by  Dr.  Sebastian  Evans  under  its  proper  title  of 
The  High  History  of  the  Holy   Graal,  I   have  said  sufficient   to 
indicate  the  gratitude  which  is  due  to  a  new  sacrament  in  litera- 
ture from  those  who  are  in  the  grace  of  the  sacraments.     The 
original  is  known  in  textual  criticism  as  Perceval  li  Gallois  and 
Perlesvaux.    The  date  of  composition  is  referred  by  its  first  editor 
to  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  but  later  authorities  assign  it  to 
a  period  not  much  prior  to  1225.     The  manuscript  itself  is  allo- 
cated broadly  to  the  thirteenth  century,  and  is  preserved  in  the 
Bibliotheque  de    Bourgogne    at    Brussels.     The   second    of    the 
Hengvvrt    Graal   texts,    of  which    we    shall    hear    shortly,    is   a 
Welsh  version  of  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  and   is  a  short  re- 
cension which  abounds  in  mistranslations,  but  at  the  same  time  it 
supplies  a  missing  portion  of  the  manuscript  to  which  we  owe 
the  story  in   its  printed    form.     If  some  of  its  variations  were 
important,  they  might  lie  under  a  certain  suspicion  on  account  of 
the  translator's  defects,  but  I  do  not  know  that  there  is  anything 
which  need  detain  us  concerning  it.     I  will  add  only  that  a  Berne 
MS.  contains  two  fragments,  some  account  of  which  has  been 
given  by   Potvin  and  Dr.  Evans.     It  should  be  noted,  however, 
that  since  the  edition  of  Potvin  appeared  in  1866,  several  other 
codices  have  come  to  light,  but  it  has  not  been  suggested  that 
they  offer  important  variations.     A  French  text  is  also  supposed 
to  have  been  printed  in  1521. 

VI.  The   Quest  of  Galahad,   otherwise   La    Queste  del  Saint 
Graal,  the  head  and  crown  of  the  legend,  is,  in  the  early  printed 
texts,  either  incorporated  with  the  prose  Lancelot,  as  in  the  edition 
of  1513,  already  mentioned,  or  with  the  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
as  in   the   Paris  edition  of  1516,  which  is  called:    Uhystoire  du 
sainct  Greaal,  qui  est   le  premier  livre  de   la    Table   Ronde.    .    .    . 

696 


Appendix 

Ensemble  la  Queste  dudict  sainct  Greaal,  ffaicte  par  Lancelot,  Galaad, 
Boors  et  Perceval  qui  est  le  dernier  livre  de  la  Table  Ronde,  &c. 
But  that  which  is  available  more  readily  to  students  who  desire 
to  consult  the  original  is  La  Queste  del  Saint  Graal :  Edited  by 
F.  J.  Furnivall,  M.A.,  for  the  Roxburghe  Club,  London,  1864. 
Every  one  is,  however,  aware  that  the  great  prose  Quest  was 
rendered  almost  bodily  into  the  Morte  d  Arthur  of  Sir  Thomas 
Malory,  first  printed  by  Caxton  in  the  year  1485,  as  the  colophon 
of  the  last  book  sets  forth.  The  full  title  is  worth  reproducing 
from  the  edition  of  Robert  Southey,  as  follows  :  The  Byrth,  LyJ, 
and  Actes  of  Kyng  Arthur ;  of  his  Noble  Knyghtes  of  the  Rounde 
Table,  theyr  merveyllous  enquestes  and  aduentures,  thachyeuyng  of 
the  Sane  Greal ;  and  In  the  end  LE  MORTE  DARTHUR,  with  the 
Dolourous  Deth  and  departyng  out  of  thys  worlde  of  them  all.  Dr. 
H.  Qskar  Sommer  has  of  recent  years  (1889  91)  faithfully  re- 
printed the  Caxton  Malory  in  three  volumes  of  text,  introduction 
and  studies  on  the  sources.  This  constitutes  the  textus  receptus. 
Other  editions,  abridgments  and  modern  versions  are  too  numer- 
ous for  mention. 

VII.  The  Welsh  Quest,  i.e.  T  Selnt  Great,  being  the  Adventures 
of  King  Arthur's  Knights  of  the  Round  Table,  In  the  Quest  of  the 
Holy  Greal,  and  on  other  occasions.  Edited  with  a  Translation  and 
Glossary,  by  the  Rev.  Robert  Williams,  M.A.,  London,  1876. 
This  is  the  first  volume  of  Selections  from  the  Hengwrt  MSS.,  the 
second  appearing  in  1892  and  containing  the  Gests  of  Charlemagne, 
with  other  texts  outside  our  particular  subject.  The  Welsh  Quest 
is  entitled  simply  The  Holy  Greal  and  is  divided  into  two  parts, 
of  which  the  first  concerns  Galahad  and  his  peers,  the  second 
being  that  recension  of  The  Longer  Prose  Perceval  to  which  refer- 
ence has  been  made  above. 

E.  THE  GERMAN  CYCLE. — As  the  French  legends  of  the 
Holy  Graal  are  reducible  in  the  last  resource  to  the  Quest  of 
Galahad,  so  are  those  of  Germany  summed  up  in  the  epic  poem 
with  which  we  are  now  so  well  acquainted  and  which  here 
follows  in  my  list. 

I.  The  Parsifal  of  Wolfram  von  Eschenbach  was  written 
some  time  within  the  period  which  intervened  between  1200 
and  1215,  the  poet  dying,  as  it  is  believed,  about  1220,  while 
towards  the  close  of  his  life  he  was  occupied  with  another  long 
composition,  this  time  on  the  life  of  William  of  Orange.  I  con- 
ceive that  in  respect  of  the  German  Cycle  I  shall  have  no 
occasion  to  speak  of  early  printed  editions,  so  I  will  name  only 
(a)  The  critical  edition  based  on  various  manuscripts,  by  Karl 
Lachmann,  a  fourth  issue  of  which  appeared  at  Berlin  in  1879; 

697 


The   Hidden    Church  of  the   Holy   Graal 

(/>)  the  text  edited  by  Karl  Bartsch  and  published  in  Deutsche 
Classiker  des  Mittelalters,  vols.  ix.-xi.,  1875-9;  (c)  the  metrical 
rendering  in  modern  German,  published  from  1839  to  1841  by 
A.  Schulz,  under  the  name  of  San  Marte ;  (d)  the  modern 
version  by  Simrock,  1842  ;  (e)  that  of  Dr.  Botticher  in  rhyme- 
less  measures,  1880  ;  (/)  and  in  fine  the  translation  into  English 
of  Parzival :  a  Knightly  Epic,  by  Miss  Jessie  L.  Weston,  2 
vols.,  London,  1894. 

II.  The   poem  of   Heinrich   von   dem   Tiirlin,  entitled   Dm 
Crone.     Of  this  text  there  was  a  servicable  edition  published  at 
Stuttgart  in  1852,  under  the  editorship  of  G.  H.  F.  Scholl,  who 
prefixed  a  full  introduction.    The  work  forms  the  twenty-seventh 
volume  of  the  Bibliothek  des  Lltterarhchen   Vereins.     It  was  again 
edited  in  1879. 

III.  The    Titurel  of    Albrecht   von   Scharfenberg — i.e.   Der 
Jungcre  Titurel — was  edited  in  1842  for  the  Bibliothek  der  Deutschen 
National  Litter atur  by  K.  A.  Hahn.     It  was  also  edited  by  E. 
Droyran  in  1872  under  the  title  Der  Tempel  des  Heiligen  Graal. 
In  my  account  of  this  poem — but  presumably  because  the  parti- 
cular legend  is  scarcely  within  my  subject — I   have  omitted  to 
mention  that  the  history  of  Lohengrin  is  given   in  a  more  ex- 
tended form  than  that  of  Wolfram,  and  the  catastrophe — which 
is  also  different — involves  the  destruction  of  the  Swan  Knight. 

IV.  The  Dutch  Lancelot.     Seeing  that  the  extant  text  of  this 
compilation  exceeds  90,000  lines,  it  will  be  understood  that  the 
task  of  editing  and  carrying  it  through  the  press  was  not  likely  to 
be  attempted  on  more  than  a  single  occasion,  the  heroic  scholar 
being   M.   Jonckbloet.     The   Morten  section   was   subsequently 
treated  separately  by  M.  T.  Winkel.     The  few  to  whom  it  is 
accessible  assign  to  the  whole  poem  a  place  of  importance  as  a 
reflection   in   part  of  materials  which  are  not  otherwise  extant. 
There  was  also  a  German  Lanzelet^  by  Ulrich  von  Zatzikhofen, 
whose  work  is  usually  ascribed  to  the  end  of  the  twelfth  or  the 
beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century  :    in   this  case   he   preceded 
Wolfram,   which   theory   recent   criticism   is,    however,   inclined 
to  question.     Ulrich  followed  a  French  model. 

F.  THE  SPANISH  AND  PORTUGUESE  CYCLES. — Among  the 
more  popular  historians  of  Spanish  literature,  it  is  customary  to 
pass  over  the  texts  of  romantic  chivalry  with  the  citation  of  a  few 
typical  examples,  such  as  Amadis  of  Gaul,  Palmerin  of  England  and 
Don  Belianis  of  Greece.  I  speak  under  all  reserves,  having  no 
special  knowledge  of  the  subject,  but  as  a  comprehensive  analysis 
of  the  vast  printed  literature  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
attempted,  except  in  Spanish,  so  it  seems  reasonable  to  speculate 

698 


Appendix 


that  there  may  be  many  texts  in  manuscript  still  practically 
entombed  in  public  and  monastic  libraries,  and  their  discovery 
might  extend  our  scanty  knowledge  concerning  Spanish  books  of 
the  Graal.  The  same  observation  may  apply  also  to  Portugal ;  but 
in  the  absence  of  all  research  we  must  be  content  with  the  little 
which  has  been  gleaned  from  the  common  sources  of  knowledge. 

I.  El  Baladro  del  Sabio  Merlin  con  sus   Profcias,   printed  at 
Burgos  in  1498,  of  which  there  is  a  single  extant  copy,  preserved 
in  a  private  library  at  Madrid.    The  analysis  of  contents  furnished 
to  Gaston  Paris  shows  it  to  contain  :  (a)  The  Early  Prose  Merlin 
of  Robert  de  Borron  :  (/>)  the  continuation  of  the  Huth  Merlin, 
so  far  as  the  recital  of  the  marriage  of  Arthur  and  Guinevere,  or 
a  few  pages  further  ;  and  (c)  three  final  chapters  which  are  un- 
known in  the  extant  Merlin  texts,  but  are  thought  to  be  derived 
from  the  lost  Conte  du  Brait  of  the  so-called  Helie  de  Borron. 

II.  Merlin  y  demanda  del  Santo  Grial,  Seville,  1500.      But  of 
this  text  I  find  no  copy  in  English  public  libraries,  and  there  are 
few  particulars  available.     It  is  mentioned  by  Leandro  Fernandez 
de   Moratin   in   his    Origines  del   Teatro   Espanol,   Madrid,    1830. 
I  suggest,  however,  that  it  may  have  been  reprinted  in 

III.  La  Demanda  del  Sancto  Grial :  con  los  marvillosos  fechos  de 
Lancarote  y  de  Galas  su  hijo,  Toledo,  1515.     This  is  now  in  the 
British  Museum,  but  was  once  in  the  collection  of  Heber,  who 
had  heard  of  no  other  copy.     It  is  divided  into  two  parts,  being 
respectively  the  Romance  of  Merlin  and  a  version  of  the  Quest  of 
Galahad.     The  first  part  corresponds  to  the  Burgos  El  Baladro, 
as  we  know  this  by  the  analysis  of  its  contents,  and  I  believe  the 
texts  to  be  substantially  identical,  though  that  of  Toledo  is  much 
longer  and  is  divided  into  numbered  paragraphs,  or  short  sections, 
instead  of  into  forty  chapters.     But  the  reference  to  El  Baladro 
in  the  Libros   de   Caballerias   by  Pascual   de   Gayangos,  Madrid, 
1857,  seems  to  show  that  these   chapters  were  subdivided  into 
sections  or  paragraphs.  The  first  part  is  therefore  based  on  the 
Huth  Merlin,  and  the  second  seems  to  represent  the  lost  Quest 
attached  thereto.     It  is  indeed  nearly  identical  with 

IV.  El  Historia  dos  Cavalleiros  da  Mesa  Rcdonda  e  da  Demanda 
do  Santo  Graal,  which  is  the  Portuguese  Quest  of  Galahad,  partly 
printed    from    a  Viennese    manuscript    by   Carl  von    Rein  hard  - 
stoellner   in    Handschrift   No.   2594   der   K.    K.    Hofbibliothek   zu 
Wien,  1887.     The  points  concerning  it  are  (a)  that  it  is  attributed 
to  Robert  dc  Borron  ;  (/>)  that  it  contains  things  missing  from  the 
extant  French  Quest ;  (c)  that  it  mentions  the  promised  wounding 
of  Gawain    because   he   attempted   to    draw   from   the   block   of 
marble  that  sword  which  was  intended  for  Galahad  alone  ;  (d) 

699 


The  Hidden    Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

that  it  narrates  the  murder  of  Bademagus  by  Gawain  ;  and  (e) 
that  generally  it  seems  to  correspond  with  the  indications  con- 
cerning the  missing  Quest  which  were  gleaned  from  various 
sources  by  Gaston  Paris,  and  included  in  his  Introduction  to  the 
Huth  Merlin,  §  v.,  La  Quete  du  Saint  Graal,  vol.  i.  pp.  1— Ixii. 

G.  ADDITAMENTA. — The  following  brief  particulars  may 
interest  some  of  my  readers,  (i)  As  regards  the  Saone  de  Nausay, 
this  Northern  French  poem  of  21,321  lines  was  edited  by  Moritz 
Goldschmid,  and  forms  the  2 1 6th  publication  Der  Litter  arischen 
Vereins  in  Stuttgart.  Saone,  or  Sone,  who  is  the  hero,  received 
the  communication  of  the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Graal,  and  was 
the  means  of  saving  Norway  with  the  help  of  a  sword  which 
once  belonged  to  Joseph  of  Arimathasa.  He  married  the  king's 
daughter,  and  reigned  after  him.  The  Holy  Palladium  is  described 
as  //  vaisseau  .  .  .  qui  jadis  fu  grealz  nomrncs.  (2)  As  Sir  Tristram 
went  in  search  of  the  Graal,  according  to  some  of  the  French 
romances,  those  who  are  disposed  to  go  further  into  this  side- 
issue  may  consult  the  extended  analysis  of  the  Roman  de  Tristan, 
which  forms  Fascicule  82  of  the  Bibliotheque  de  PEcole  des 
Hautes  Etudes,  Paris,  1890-91.  He  will  there  find  Galahad 
among  the  other  peers  of  the  Quest,  but  he  is  no  longer  more 
than  a  shadow  of  the  perfect  Knight.  (3)  The  nearest  approach 
to  the  Perceval  question  is  in  the  sense  of  its  antithesis,  and 
perhaps  the  most  express  form  hereof  is  in  the  old  Provencal 
metrical  romance  which  has  been  translated  into  modern  French 
by  Mary  Lapon  as  Les  ^ventures  du  Chevalier  Jaufre  ct  de  la 
Belle  Brunissende,  Paris,  1856.  Violence  and  contumely  befall 
the  hero  every  time  that  he  asks  a  specific  question,  being  why  at 
a  certain  period  of  the  day  every  inhabitant  of  a  given  district, 
from  peasant  to  peer,  falls  into  loud  lamentation.  A  fatality 
leads  him,  however,  to  go  on  asking,  just  as  another  fatality 
prevents  the  Graal  question.  The  explanation  in  the  present 
case  is  that  a  knight  has  been  wounded,  and  that  whenever  the 
hurt  heals  it  is  reopened  by  the  cruelty  of  his  enemy.  Sir  Jaufre, 
or  Geoffrey,  is  the  son  of  Dovon,  and  he  is  known  in  the  French 
cycle  of  Arthurian  romance. 


PART    II 

SOME   CRITICAL   WORKS 

It  should  be  understood  that  the  editors  of  the  various  texts 
mentioned  in  Part  I.  have  prefixed  or  appended  thereto  intro- 
ductory matter  of  a  less  or  more  elaborate  kind,  and  that  they  are 

700 


Appendix 


therefore,  within  their  measure,  to  be  regarded  as  critical  editions. 
To  these  introductions  I  do  not  propose  to  refer  in  the  present 
section,  nor  do  I  lay  any  claim  either  to  analysis  of  contents 
or  exhaustive  bibliographical  enumeration.  The  list  will  be 
useful  for  those  who  desire  to  carry  their  studies  further,  more 
especially  along  textual  lines,  and  it  has  no  higher  pretension. 
As  it  follows,  within  certain  limits,  a  chronological  arrangement, 
it  will  help  to  indicate  the  growth  of  the  criticism. 

Joseph  Gorres  :  Lohengrin,  ein  alt  Deutsche  Gedicht,  &c.,  1813. 
The  introduction  is  sympathetic  and  interesting  as  an 
early  study  of  the  Graal  literature.  The  text  is  a  Vatican 
MS.  It  may  be  mentioned  that,  according  to  Gorres,  Mont 
Salvatch  stands  in  Salvatierra,  in  Arragonia,  at  the  entrance 
into  Spain,  close  to  the  Valley  of  Ronceval. 

Le  Roux  de  Lincy  :  Analyse  critique  et  litteraire  du  Roman  de 
Garin,  &c.,  1835.  And  Essai  historique  et  litteraire  sur 
lyabbaye  de  Fecamp,  1840. 

This  author  also  was  a  student  of  the  subject,  and  his  later 
work  is  still  our  authority  for  the  Fecamp  legend. 

Paulin  Paris  :  Les  Manuscrits  fran^ois  de  la  Bibliotheque  du  Roi, 
7  vols.,  1836—48,  and  Les  Romans  de  la  Table  Ronde,  5  vols., 
1868-1877. 

In  the  first  work  is  contained  what  I  believe  to  be  the 
earliest  account  of  certain  unprinted  Graal  texts.  The 
second  has  modernised  versions  of  The  Metrical  Joseph,  The 
Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  The  Early  Prose  Merlin,  The  Pulgate 
Merlin  and  the  romance  of  Lancelot  of  the  Lake.  The  long 
introduction  is  still  interesting  and  valuable  reading.  Paulin 
Paris  considered  that  The  Metrical  Joseph  was  founded  on  a 
Breton  Gospel-legend,  and  that  the  original  Graal  text  was 
a  Latin  Gradual. 

Francisque  Michel  and  Thomas  Wright  :  Vie  de  Merlin,  attribute 
a  Geoffroy  de  Monmouth,  1837. 

The  elaborate  introduction  is  useful  for  Merlin  literature 
and  for  allusions  to  the  prophet  in  other  poems  and  romances. 

San  Marte,  i.e.  A.  Schulz,  Der  Mythus  van  Heiligen  Graal,  1837, 
regarded  at  one  time  as  the  best  survey  of  the  subject ; 
the  Parzival  of  Wolfram  von  Eschenbach,  in  modern 
German,  1836-1842;  Die  Arthur-Sage  und  die  Mahrchen 
des  rothen  Buchs  von  Hergest,  1841  ;  Die  Sagen  von  Merlin, 
1853  ;  with  other  works  and  numerous  contributions  to 
periodical  literature. 

San   Marte   considered  :    (a]  that  the  Lapis  Exilis  was  the 
701 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

Stone  of  the  Lord,  which  at  the  beginning  of  all  things  was 
with  God  ;  (b)  that  the  passage  of  the  Graal  to  the  Kingdom 
of  Prester  John  was  itself  a  suggestion  of  heresy,  interior 
Asia  being  filled  with  numerous  Christian  sects  ;  (c)  that 
Wolfram  depicted  a  Christian  Brotherhood,  or  Kingdom 
of  the  Faithful,  apart  from  pope  and  priesthood  ;  (d)  that  the 
Graal  was  not  a  Christian  relic  ;  and  (e)  that  Wolfram's  Pro- 
vencal Kyot  may  have  been  Guiot  de  Provins,  that  monk  of 
Clairvaux  who  wrote  the  Bible  Guiot  and  had  himself 
visited  Jerusalem. 

Karl  Simrock  :  The  Parzival  of  Wolfram  von  Eschenbach 
translated  into  modern  German,  1842,  immediately  after 
the  completion  of  San  Marte's  enterprise  and  traversing  his 
most  important  veiws  ;  Parzival  und  Titurel,  1857. 
This  writer  maintained  :  (a)  That  the  original  Graal 
Legend  was  connected  with  St.  John  Baptist,  whose  head 
was  enshrined  at  Constantinople  and  was  used  to  maintain 
the  life  of  a  dying  emperor  in  the  eleventh  century  ;  (b]  that 
the  Templar  connections  of  the  Parsifal  were  a  mere  re- 
flection ;  (c)  that  the  Templeisen  were  the  Knights  of  San 
Salvador  de  Mont  R6al — founded  in  1120  ;  and  (d)  that  the 
Graal  and  its  veneration  suggest  the  Gnostic  body  called 
Christians  of  St.  John. 

T.  H.  de  la  Villemarque  :  Les  Romans  de  la  Table  Ronde  et  les 
contes  des  anciens  Bretons,  1842  ;  Contes  Populaires  de  la 
Bretagne,  2  vols.,  1846  (fourth  edition) ;  Myrdhinn  ou  FEn- 
chanteur  Merlin  (new  edition),  1861. 

In  the  last  work  Merlin  is  treated  as  a  mythological, 
historical,  legendary  and  romantic  character.  It  is  enter- 
taining, but  largely  fantastic,  and  at  the  present  day  it  is 
difficult  to  accept  anything  advanced  by  this  writer  without 
careful  verification.  He  considered  that  a  pagan  tradition 
was  received  from  the  bards  and,  in  combination  with  a 
particular  presentation  of  the  Eucharistic  mystery,  was  passed 
on  to  the  romancers  of  northern  France.  The  Graal  is 
Celtic,  and  the  word  signifies  a  basin. 

Reichel  :  Studien  zu  Parzival,  1856. 

This  work  was  written  in  opposition  to  San  Marte,  and 
it  denied  that  the  theology  of  the  twelfth  century  should  be 
applied  to  the  interpretation  of  the  poem. 

Louis  Moland  :   Origines  litteraires  de  la  France,  1862. 

(a)  The  old  history,  the  high  history,  was  contained  in  a 
Latin   book  ;   (b)  it  embodied  that  chivalrous  ideal  which  it 
was  sought   to  realise   in   the  Temple ;    (c)   this   was  con- 
702 


Appendix 

nected  with  another  idea,  namely,  that  of  communion  apart  ; 
(d)  the  vast  cycle  formed  a  systematic  allegory  ;  (e)  but 
folk-lore  intervened  and  a  strange  admixture  followed ;  (f)  it  is 
doubtful  whether  the  books  of  the  Holy  Graal  can  rank  as 
orthodox;  (g)  beneath  the  allegory  there  are  tendances  suspectes ; 
(h)  the  errors  diffused  among  the  Templars  may  have  been 
reflected  into  works  which  evidently  embody  their  principles. 

S.  Baring-Gould  :   Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages,  1867. 

At  the  period  of  its  publication  the  essay  on  the  Sangreal, 
contained  herein,  provided  a  certain  knowledge  in  a  populai 
form,  but  at  this  day  it  is  without  office  or  appeal. 

F.  G.  Bergmann  :    The  San  Greal,  1870. 

I  think  that  this  account  was  the  first  to  offer  in  English 
an  outline  of  the  Later  Titurel,  by  A.  von  Scharfenberg. 
The  two  sources  of  all  Graal  romances  are  the  Quest-poem 
of  Guyot  and  a  Graal-history  written  in  Latin  by  Walter 
Map.  The  tract  is  translated  from  the  French,  but  the 
fact  is  not  specified. 

Gustav  Oppert  :  Der  Presbyter  Johannes  in  Sage  und  Geschichte,  1870. 
An  interesting  summary  of  the  known  facts  concerning  this 
mythical  personage. 

Zarncke  :  Zur  Geschichte  der  Gralsage,  1876. 

So  far  from  being  Proven9al  or  Celtic,  Graal  literature 
has  its  source  in  the  legends  concerning  Joseph  of  Ari- 
mathaea.  The  metrical  romance  of  De  Borron  is  the  earliest 
in  point  of  time  and  Chretien  drew  therefrom,  but  also  from 
the  Quest  of  Galahad,  which  itself  was  preceded  by  some  form 
of  The  Book  of  the  Holy  Graal.  Guiot  was  an  invention  of 
Wolfram. 

A.  Birch-Hirschfeld  :  Die  Sage,  vom  Gral,  1877  ;  Ueber  die  den 
provenzalischen  Troubadours  des  xii.  und  xiii.  Jahrunderts,  1878. 
The  first  work  created  a  strong  impression,  and  exercised 
great  influence  at  its  period.  The  history  of  Robert  de 
Borron  preceded  Chretien,  who  drew  from  De  Borron's  Per- 
ceval-Quest, on  which  Gautier  also  depended.  The  Longer 
Prose  Perceval  drew  from  the  Quest  of  Galahad  and  The  Book 
of  the  Holy  Graal.  The  Graal  is  not  Celtic,  and  Robert  de 
Borron  followed  the  Vindicta  Sahatoris  and  the  Gesta  Pilati. 
His  Sacred  Vessel  is  one  of  sacramental  grace.  There  is  a 
powerful  defence  of  the  Didot  Perceval,  in  which  De  Borron 
ingarnered  Breton  legends.  The  source  of  Wolfram  was 
Chretien,  and  him  only. 

E.  Martin  :  The  decisive  findings  of  Birch-Hirschfeld  were 
opposed  by  this  writer  in  a  German  Journal  of  Archeology,  1878, 

7°3 


The  Hidden   Church   of  the   Holy   Graal 

and  in  Zur  Gralsage,  Unterschungen,  1 880.  He  maintained  the 
Celtic  origin  of  the  legend,  the  possibility  of  a  Latin  version, 
the  unlikelihood  that  the  Dldot  Perceval  belongs  to  the  De 
Borron  trilogy,  and  that  the  derivation  of  Wolfram  was 
from  a  source  other  than  Chretien. 

C.  Domanig  :  Parzival-Studien  (Two  Parts),  1878— 80. 

A  defence  of  Wolfram  as  an  adherent  of  the  Catholic  faith. 

G.  Botticher  :  Die  Wolfram  Literatur  sett  Lachmann,  1880. 

A  consideration  of  the  argument  for  and  against  the  in- 
debtedness of  Wolfram  to  no  source  but  that  of  Chretien 
and  tending  to  the  conclusion  that  another  source  is  probable. 

J.  Van  Santen  :  Zur  Beurtheilung  Wolfram  von  Eschenbach,  1882. 
A  hostile  criticism  of  the  poet's  ethical  position,  founded, 
however,  not  on  the  limitations  of  the  Parsifal,  but  on 
Wolfram's  general  concessions  to  the  morality  of  his  time. 

W.  Hertz  :   Sage  vom  Parziva/  und  dem  Gral,  1882. 

The  , motive  of  the  legends  must  be  sought  in  the  anti- 
Papal  spirit  of  the  British  Church,  within  which  it  was,  for 
this  and  other  reasons,  developed. 

Paul  Steinbach  :   fber  dem  Einfluss  des  Crestien  de  Troies  auf  die 
altenglische  Literatur,  1885. 

An  exhaustive  study  of  the  debt  due  to  Chretien  and 
Breton  tradition  by  the  Thornton  Syr  Percyvelle. 

M.  Gaster  :  Jewish  Sources  of  and  Parallels  to  the  Early  English 
Metrical  Legends  of  King  Arthur  and  Merlin,  1887. 
The  contention  is  that  the  commerce  between  women 
and  demons  has  its  authority  in  the  Talmud,  to  which  I 
might  add  that  the  legendary  orgies  of  the  mediaeval  Black 
Sabbath  have  some  of  their  roots  therein.  I  do  not  think 
that  comparisons  of  this  kind  serve  much  purpose. 

Gaston  Paris  :  La  Litterature  fran^aise  au  moyen-age,  1888  ;  Histoire 
Litter  air  e  de  la  France,  vol.  xxx.,  1888. 

I  cite  two  instances  only  from  the  long  literary  record  of  this 
excellent  and  charming  scholar.  It  is  impossible  in  a  brief 
note  to  speak  of  his  whole  achievement.  I  will  specify  only 
one  point  with  which  I  have  just  made  acquaintance,  and  this 
is  that,  in  his  opinion,  as  independently  in  my  own,  the  begin- 
ning and  the  end  of  Gerbert's  alternative  sequel  to  the  Conte 
del  Graal  may  have  suffered  alteration. 

Alfred  Nutt  :   Studies  on  the  Legend  of  the  Holy  Graal,  1888. 

The  sub-title  adds — "with  special  reference  to  the  hypothesis 
of  its  Celtic  origin."  It  was  this  work  which  paved  a 
way  for  the  criticism  of  the  Graal  literature  in  England,  and 
I  am  certain  that  no  more  welcome  offering  could  be  made  to 
704 


Appendix 


scholars  everywhere  than  the  issue  of  a  new  edition,  with  such 
extension  and  revision  as  would  be  warranted  by  the  present 
state  of  our  knowledge.  Mr.  Nutt  has  done  more  than  any 
one  in  this  country  to  promote  the  acceptance  of  the  Celtic 
source  in  legend,  but  he  has  the  gift  of  treating  all  the  com- 
petitive hypotheses  on  every  side  of  the  subject  with  modera- 
tion and  fairness.  He  regards  the  De  Borron  story  as  the  start- 
ing-point of  Christian  transformation,  and  of  late  years  he  has 
shown  some  disposition  to  accept  the  possibility  of  Templar 
influence  on  the  development  of  the  literature.  In  1902 
Mr.  Nutt  published  a  pamphlet  on  the  Legends  of  the  Holy 
Graa/ which  offers  a  serviceable  summary. 

Professor  Rhys  :   Studies  in  the  Arthurian  Legend,  1891. 

A  development  of  Welsh  analogies,  a  theory  of  Celtic 
origins,  tinctured  with  the  old  dream'  of  solar  myths  at  the 
root  of  many  of  the  stories. 

Richard  Heinzel  :    Ueber  die  franzoezischen  Gralromane,  1891. 

An  elaborate  and  careful  examination.  The  Longer  Prose 
Perceval  is  said  to  depend  from  Gerbert,  and  the  priority  of 
the  Quest  is  rejected. 

G.  M.  Harper  :    The  Legend  of  the  Holy  Graal,  1893. 

Though  it  can  be  scarcely  regarded  as  a  work  of  original  re- 
search there  is  here  an  useful  resumption  of  results  obtained  by 
scholarship,  showing  an  acquaintance  with  the  original  docu- 
ments of  the  literature.  The  Graal,  as  typifying  the  Eucharist, 
was  the  beginning,  middle  and  end  of  all  the  cycles.  "It  is 
as  if  a  Divine  hand  had  been  holding  the  hands  of  all  the 
writers  of  these  books." 

Miss  Jessie  L.  Weston  :  I  have  mentioned  already  the  English 
translation  of  the  Parsifal,  which  has  only  one  disadvantage, 
being  its  unfortunate  metrical  form.  Since  the  period  of  its 
publication,  Miss  Weston  has  written  :  (i)  The  Legend  of 
Gawain,  1897  ;  (2)  The  Legend  of  Sir  Lancelot  du  Lac,  1900  ; 
(3)  The  Three  Days'  Tournament,  1902  ;  (4)  The  Legend  of 
Perceval,  vol.  i.,  1906.  These  are  individual  monographs,  and 
the  two  last  are  of  particular  and  high  importance.  Miss 
Weston  has  also  translated  several  Arthurian  texts  not  in- 
cluded in  the  great  collection  of  Malory,  and  among  these  I 
will  mention  (5)  the  episode  of  Moricn,  1901,  derived  from 
the  Dutch  Lancelot,  and  (6)  Sir  Gawain  at  the  Grail  Castle, 
1903,  being  extracts  from  the  Conte  del  Graal,  Diu  Crone,  by 
Heinrich,  and  the  prose  Lancelot.  The  others  are  not  of  our 
concern  exactly. 

Among  English  writers,  Miss  Weston  is  our  foremost  textual 
70S  2Y 


'The  Hidden    Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 

scholar  in  respect  of  the  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal.  In  the 
Legend  of  Sir  Lancelot  she  has  dwelt  upon  the  necessity  of  col- 
lating the  numerous  manuscripts  of  this  vast  romance  with  a 
view  to  the  production  of  a  sound  text.  Whether  she  her- 
self projects  this  undertaking  there  is  no  means  of  knowing  ; 
perhaps  it  would  be  possible  only  to  a  concerted  effort,  but 
there  is  no  single  student  who  is  better  fitted  for  the  task.  In 
the  Legend  of  Perceval  she  has  made  an  important  first-hand 
study  of  texts  now  extant  of  the  Conte  del  Graaly  and  the 
results  are  with  us.  It  is  to  her  that  we  owe  the  discovery 
of  the  Fecamp  reference  in  Manessier.  The  place  of  that 
abbey  in  the  reliquary-history  of  the  Precious  Blood  has 
been  known,  of  course,  to  students  since  the  collection  of 
documents  included  by  Leroux  de  Lincy  in  his  account  of 
the  ancient  religious  foundation. 

Dr.  Sebastian  Evans  :  In  Quest  of  the  Holy  Graal,  1898. 

An  amazing  dream,  which  identifies  Innocent  III.  with 
the  Rich  Fisherman,  the  Emperor  with  the  King  of  Castle 
Mortal,  St.  Dominic  with  Perceval,  the  Interdict  of  1208 
with  the  languishment  and  enchantments  of  Britain,  and 
the  question  which  should  have  been  asked,  but  was  not,  with 
an  omission  of  St.  Dominic  to  secure  the  exemption  of  the 
Cistercians  from  certain  effects  of  the  Interdict.  Lancelot  is 
the  elder  Simon  de  Montfort ;  Gawain  isFulke  of  Marseilles  ; 
Alain  le  Gros  is  Alanus  de  Insulis,  the  universal  Doctor  ; 
Yglais,  the  mother  of  Perceval,  is  Holy  Church.  The  Graal 
is,  of  course,  the  Eucharist,  which  is  denied  to  Logres.  The 
speculation  is  founded  on  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval^  so  that 
no  distraction  is  caused  by  the  presence  of  Blanchefleur,  but 
as  all  French  texts  of  quest  speak  of  the  removal  or  intern- 
ment of  the  Sacred  Vessel,  it  is  a  pity  that  the  ingenuity  which 
has  woven  this  wonderful  web  should  have  passed  such  a  point 
in  silence.  I  fear  that  in  all  truth  Dr.  Evans  has  not  succeeded 
in  creating  more  conviction  than, I  suppose,  has  Dr.  Vercoutre ; 
but  he  has  gifts  in  literature,  gifts  of  entertainment  and  gifts  of 
subtlety  which  are  wanting  to  his  French  confrere. 

Dr.  Wendelin  Foerster — who  projected  a  complete  edition  of  the 
works  of  Chretien  de  Troyes — has  published  several  texts, 
including  (i)  Erec  und  Enid^  1896;  (2)  Cligh,  1901; 
(3)  Tvain,  1902. 

As  regards  the  Conte  del  Graa/y  he  considered  that  its 
confessed  prototype,  the  book  belonging  to  Count  Philip  of 
Flanders,  was  not  a  quest  of  the  Sacred  Vessel  but  a  prose 
account  of  the  Palladium. 


Appendix 

Paul  Hagan  :  Der  Graal,  1900. 

This  study  has  been  welcomed  warmly  by  scholars  ;  it  is 
valuable  in  many  respects,  but  more  particularly  for  the. 
German  cycle,  Guiot  de  Provence  and  his  eastern  elements 
Dr.  Hagan  suggests  a  Persian  origin  for  the  name  Flegi- 
tanis  =  Felek  thani  =  sphtera  altera. 

Dr.  A.  T.  Vercoutre  :   Origine  et  Genese  de  la  Legende  du  Saint 
Graal,  1901. 

This  tract  claims  to  offer  the  solution  of  a  literary  prob- 
lem. The  legend  of  the  Graal  is  based  upon  an  error 
of  translation.  The  supposed  Vessel,  or  Vas,  is  the  Celtic 
Vasso,  and  the  romances  really  commemorate  the  Gaulish 
Temple  of  Puy  de  Dome,  mentioned  by  Gregory  of  Tours. 
It  was  originally  Gaulish  and  dedicated  to  Lug,  but  it  was 
Roman  subsequently,  and  was  then  sacred  to  Mercury.  It 
was  a  place  of  initiation  and  as  such  hidden  from  the  world, 
like  the  Graal.  The  Temple  was  unearthed  in  1873.  This 
appears  to  be  a  frantic  hypothesis. 

W.  A.  Nitze  :    The  Old  French  Graal  Romance,  1902. 

Here  is  an  attempt  to  determine  more  fully  the  relation 
of  the  Longer  Prose  Perceval  to  Chretien  and  his  continuators. 
Mr.  Nitze  agrees  that  we  have  no  certain  knowledge  as  to 
the  original  form  of  Gerbert's  poem. 

C.  Macdonald  :   Origin  of  the  Legend  of  the  Holy  Graal,  1903. 

This  is,  unfortunately,  an  introduction  only  to  a  large 
projected  work,  but  the  death  of  the  author  intervened. 
There  is  an  interesting  account  of  early  apocryphal  and  later 
traditions  concerning  Joseph,  Nicodemus,  Pilate,  Veronica, 
&c.  The  intention  was — at  the  term  of  a  full  inquiry  into 
the  documentary  sources — to  consider  whether  the  Graal 
tradition  at  its  core  was  known  under  another  form  before  it 
was  adapted  to  Christian  symbolism,  "  having  been  borrowed 
from  a  system  of  which  it  was  a  legitimate  and  undoubted 
growth  and  which  presented  many  points  in  common  with 
the  hagiology  and  ritual  of  both  eastern  and  western 
churches." 

Dorothy  Kempe  :  Legend  of  the  Holy  Graal,  1905. 

This  pamphlet  was  written  to  accompany  the  History  of 
the  Holy  Graal  of  Lovelich  or  Lonelich.  The  prospectus 
of  the  Early  English  Text  Society  describes  it  as  a  capital 
summary.  It  is  a  reflection  of  previous  English  authorities. 


707 


The   Hidden   Church   of  the  Holy   Graal 
PART   III 

PHASES   OF   INTERPRETATION 

The  few  works  which  will  be  included  in  this  section  lie 
outside  the  ordinary  range  of  scholarship,  and  for  this  reason — 
whatever  their  merits  or  defects — I  have  placed  them  under  a 
sub-title  which  is  designed  to  mark  their  particular  distinction 
of  motive. 

I.  Eugene    Aroux  :    (a)    Dante,    Heretique,    Revolutionnairey    et 

Socialiste  :  Revelations  (Fun  Catholique  sur  le  Moyen  Age, 
1854  ;  (b)  Les  Mysteres  de  la  Chevalerie  et  de  F  Amour 
Platonique  au  Moyen  Age,  1858. 

There  are  others,  but  these  will  suffice,  and  I  have  dealt 
with  the  author's  standpoint  sufficiently  in  the  text  of  the 
present  work.  As  instances  of  criticism  moving  under  heavy 
spells  of  sorcery,  as  phenomena  of  reverie  in  research,  I  know 
few  things  so  profoundly  entertaining.  The  section  entitled 
La  Massenie  du  Saint  Graal  in  the  later  work  deserves  and 
would  receive  a  crown  in  any  Academy  of  Fantasy. 

II.  F.  Naelf:   Opinions  Religieuses  des  Templiers,  1890. 

The  Graal  is  the  symbol  of  mystic  wisdom  and  of  the 
communion  between  God  and  Man.  It  is  affirmed  that  the 
Templars  perpetuated  a  secret  doctrine  which  did  not  perish 
with  them,  if  they  indeed  perished  ;  it  passed  afterwards 
through  Masonry  and  is  there  still  embedded.  The  position 
of  the  Johannine  sect  is  considered  in  the  same  connection. 
On  our  own  part,  we  have  already  appreciated  and  set  aside 
these  interesting  views. 

III.  Emile  Burnouf :  Le  Vase  Sacre  et  ce  qu'il  contienty  1896. 
The   legend  of  the  Holy  Graal  contains  certain  essential 
elements  of  the  universal  cultus  which  prevailed  among  the 
Aryan  peoples — which  elements  are  identical  with  those  of 
India,  Persia  and  Greece.     The  romances  are  not  important 
for  the  religious  history  of  the  Sacred  Vessel ;  for  that  in  its 
Christian  aspects  we  must   have  recourse  to  the  liturgical 
texts  and  ceremonies  of  the   Catholic  Church.     The  true 
legend  of  the  Graal  goes  back,  however,  through  Christian 
times,  and  thence  through  the  great  faiths  of  the  East,  to 
the  Vedic  Hymns,  wherein  its  explanation  is  found — other- 
wise, in  that  vase  which  contains  Agni  under  the  appearance 
of  Soma, 

708 


Appendix 

IV.  Isabel  Cooper-Oakley  :  Traces  of  a  Hidden  Tradition  in 
Masonry  and  Medieval  Mysticism,  1 900. 
Mrs.  Cooper-Oakley's  chief  authorities  are  Gabriele  Ros- 
setti  and  Eugene  Aroux.  This  is  in  respect  of  her 
views  on  Masonic  tradition,  but  unfortunately  neither  of 
these  writers  was  acquainted  at  first-hand  with  the  subject, 
seeing  that  neither  were  Masons.  As  regards  the  literature 
of  the  Holy  Graal,  a  considerable  acquaintance  is  shown 
with  the  German  cycle,  though  the  writer  prefers  to  depend 
on  her  somewhat  doubtful  precursors  rather  than  on  her 
own  impressions.  In  this  way  she  reflects  the  opinions  of 
Burnouf  as  expressed  in  Le  Pase  Sacre.  She  has  written 
some  interesting  papers,  but  they  do  not  carry  us  further 
than  the  pre-occupations  of  those  whom  she  cites.  She  is 
right  on  the  fact  that  there  is  assuredly  a  tradition  in 
Masonry  and  a  tradition  in  the  literature  of  the  Holy  Graal, 
but  on  the  nature  of  that  tradition  she  is  of  necessity  far 
from  the  goal  because  those  are  far  whom  she  follows. 
A.  L.  Cleather  and  Basil  Crump  :  Parsifal,  Lohengrin  and  the 
Legend  of  the  Holy  Graal,  1 904. 

We  have  here  a  summary  of  Wagner's  two  operatic 
dramas  from  the  standpoint  of  Wagner  himself,  or,  as  the 
sub-title  says,  "described  and  interpreted"  in  accordance 
with  his  own  writings.  The  Graal  in  Wagner  is  like  the 
Arthurian  chronicles  in  Tennyson,  a  high  and  uplifting 
ceremonial,  but  not  more  faithful  to  the  matter  of  the 
German  cycle  than  is  the  English  poet  to  Malory  whom  he 
followed.  In  their  account  of  the  sacramental  legend,  apart 
from  Wagner,  Miss  Cleather  and  her  collaborator  have 
been  guided  in  part  by  accepted  critics  of  the  literature,  like 
Nutt  and  Simrock,  whose  views  they  have  combined  with 
those  of  Mrs.  Cooper-Oakley  and  her  sources.  It  is  said 
that,  according  to  tradition,  the  abode  of  the  Holy  Graal  is 
on  a  lofty  mountain  of  India — being,  I  suppose,  a  reference 
to  the  realm  of  Prester  John.  It  came  also  originally  from 
the  East,  probably  from  the  Himalayas.  It  connects  with 
Johannine  tradition  and  Templar  chivalry. 

It  should  be  added  that  I  published  in  seven  successive  issues 
of  Mr.  Ralph  Shirley's  monthly  magazine,  The  Occult  Review,  some 
articles  on  the  Graal  and  its  literature  which  constituted  a  first 
draft  or  summary  of  the  present  work.  They  appeared  from 
March  to  September  1907.  Two  of  these  issues  also  contain 
some  particulars  concerning  an  alleged  discovery  of  the  Holy 
Graal  at  Glastonbury,  with  remarks  upon  the  claim  and  its  value. 

709 


INDEX 


ABDIAS,  666 

Adam  de  St.  Victor,  663 

Adonis  and  Tammuz,  488 

Aesh  Mezareph,  537 

Alain  and  Alain  le  Gros,   135,  247, 

248,  254,  257,  267,  270,  273,  306, 

310,  313,  334 
Albigenses    and    connected    sects, 

524  et  seq. 
Alchemy ;    for    interpretation   and 

Graal    analogies,    533-550;     for 

minor  references,  62,  65,  532,  629, 

685 

Alphasan,  306,  307,  313 
Amadis  of  Gaul,  407 
Amfortas,  316,  378,  381,  391,  394 
Anjou,  House  of,  393,  418,  446,  657, 

658 
Ark  of  the  Graal,  291,  292,  293,  294, 

297.  315.  655 
Aries,  Council  of,  447 
Arthur,    King,    his    court   and   the 

Round  Table,   7,    185,    186,    188, 

189,  211,  216,  225,  267,  270,  325, 

347.  379,  380,  388,  409,  422,  423, 

443,  444,  455,  505 
Ashmole,  Elias,  588,  60 1 
Augustine,     St.,    434,     459  ;      the 

Great  Doctor,  605 
Avalon,  152,  272,  312,  328,  416,  442 

BALYN  and  Balan  ;  for  the  story  of 
the  Dolorous  Stroke,  328-329  ; 
for  minor  references,  297,  313, 

359 
Ban  of  Benoic,  King,  314,  332,  333, 

335.  353 

Bardic  Sanctuary,  176 
Bartolocci,  Julius,  421 
Bede,  Venerable,  29 
Belianis  of  Greece,  Don,  406 
Bible  Guiot,  426 
Blaise,  260,  262,  324,  499,  653 
Blanchefleur,    187,    208,   209,    226, 

234.  38i 

Blihis,  Master,  499,  666,  685 
Book  of  Celestial  Chivalry,  406 
Book  of  Thoth,  60 1 


Book  of  the  Holy  Graal,  57,  59,  63, 
68,  81,  86,  87,  97,  99,  101,  104, 
106,  109,  113,  116,  118,  120,  122, 
126,  129,  132,  135,  137,  147,  220, 

221,   235,   250,   266,   28l-3l6,   318, 

321,  330,  335,  337,  344,  352,  360, 
367,  403,  441,  450,  455,  474,  494, 
495.  499.  506,  622,  642,  651,  670, 
671,  672 

Bors,  343,  360,  369,  470,  494,  509 
Bran,  The  Blessed,  138,  157,  178 
Brons,  106,  136,  146,  158,  247,  253, 
254,  273,  312 

CADWALADR,    173,    177,    442,    443, 

453.  458 
Capgrave,  92 

Castle  Mortal,  King  of,  345,  656 
Castle  of  Souls,  345,  346 
Cauldron  of  Bendigeid  Vran,  173  ; 

of  Ceridwen,    171,    176,    178  ;    of 

the  Dagda,  171,  172,  173,  178 
Celidoine,  305,  334 
Celtic  and  British  Church,  69,  91, 

469,    648,    649,    652,    655.     See 

Book  VIII.  passim 
Chess-Board  Episode,  191,  214,  216 
Chevalier  aux  deux  £ptes,  329 
Chretien  de  Troyes,  49,  56,  80,  93, 

113,  116,  120,  121,  126,  139,  146, 

153,  198,  205,  207,  208,  209,  236, 

237,  499 

Chrysostom,  St.  John,  438,  439,  451 
Columba,  St.,  439,  440,  445 
Conte  del  Graal,  for  plenary  descrip- 
tion and  summary,  198-240  ;   for 
other  and  minor  references,    54, 
55,  60,  86,  87,  93,  104,  113,  116, 
117,  120,  126,  129,  135,  137,  139, 
146,  147,  153,  155,  157,  158,  159, 
160,  162,  164,  182,  188,  269,  270, 
316,  336,  337.  339.  34L  343.  344. 
377.  378,  381,  422,  424,  426,  479, 
499,  646,  648,  653,  672 
Corbenic,   135,   136,  306,   307,  320, 
321,  353.  357.  422,  511,  654,  681 
Crusades,  46 
Cup  of  Tregaron,  Holy,  441 


710 


Index 


DAVID,  St.,  437,  438,  441,  443,  444, 
445,  447,  453,  455 

De  Borron,  49,  55,  57,  62,  71,  95, 
96,  105,  106,  108,  109,  116,  119, 
137,  147,  155,  204,  206,  209,  215, 
221,  235,  282,  283,  287,  288,  308, 
311,  312,  315,  323,  335,  358,  366, 
390,  391,  499,  501.  See  Book  IV. 
passim 

De  Borron,  Helie,  323 

Didot  Perceval,  for  descriptive  ac- 
count, 265-274  ;  for  minor  refer- 
ences, 56,  64,  86,  96,  97,  106,  116, 
117,  122,  126,  129,  137,  139,  153, 
156,  159,  160,  162,  164,  182,  224, 
288,  316,  319,  337,  342,  343,  377, 
378,  381,  383,  628,  646,  648,  650, 

654 

Dionysius,  St.,  452 

Dish,  The  Hallowed,  88,  114,  115, 
1 1 6,  139,  140,  141,  600,  604,  and 
Book  II.,  V.,  §  D 

Diu  Crdne  and  Heinrich,  for  descrip- 
tive account,  407-414  ;  for  minor 
references,  61,  102,  103,  119,  125, 
132,  144,  150,  156,  160,  163,  504, 

673 
Dolorous    Stroke,     149,    313,     367. 

See  Balyn  and  Balan 
Don  Quixote,  406 
Dutch  Lancelot,  51,  200,  421-424 

EARTHLY  Paradise,   133,  228,  234, 

270,  346 
Eckartshausen,   K.  von,   630,   633, 

636,  640 

Eleazar,  320,  362,  369 
Elizabel  of  Arragon,  418 
Epiclesis,   172,  438,  449,  457,   535, 

616,  655,  671,  685 
Esplandian,  406 
Eucharist,   20,   22,   23,   24,   25,   27, 

28,  29,  31,  66,  291,  300,  389,  426, 

451,  454,  474,  475,  485,  487,  492, 

535.  544.  599,  605,  625,  635,  637, 

647,  649,  655,  670-673 
Evalach,   290,   297,   298,   300,   314, 

315,  352,  362 
Evans,  Dr.  Sebastian,  12 

FEAST  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity, 

286 
Fecamp,  Abbey  of,  34,  35,  36,  402, 

453,  503 
Feeding  Dish,    5,    10,    19,    104-113, 

255,  331,  659 
Feirfeis,  384,  387,  419 
Fish,  Symbolic,  106,  108,  443 


Fisher  King,  134,  136,  146,  161,  205, 
206,  215,  218,  219,  231,  267,  271, 
272,  313.  314,  345.  347.  349,  35O, 
352,  381,  409,  497,  499,  645.  657. 
679 

Flegetanis,  394,  403 

Fouque,  La  Motte,  492 

Frimutel,  378,  394 

GAFFAREL,  404 

Galahad,  for  the  French  Quest, 
352-365  ;  for  the  Welsh  Quest, 
365-370  ;  for  other  versions,  405- 
407  ;  for  discursive  and  minor  re- 
ferences, 58,  59,  64,  83,  85,  86,  87, 
99,  100,  101,  106,  in,  113,  116, 
123,  127,  130,  132,  137,  140,  148, 
149,  152,  155,  159,  160,  161,  162, 
165,  174,  198,  201,  213,  215,  297, 
301,  314,  320,  323,  331,  335,  340, 
341,  370,  378,  418,  453,  454,  455. 
457,  460,  470,  472,  474,  476,  479, 
493,  494,  501,  504,  506,  512,  513, 
629,  642,  647,  648,  652,  653,  654, 
657,  672,  673,  677,  682,  683 

Galahad  le  Fort,  311 

Gamuret,  378,  387 

Gareth,  423 

Gautier  de  Doulens,  36,93,  105,  117, 
121,  126,  129,  135,  140,  147,  154, 
158,  209-218,  219,  377,  409.  457 

Gawain,  61,  124,  140,  146,  147,  151, 
191,  200,  209,  210,  235-240,  268, 
337-339,  347,  3^9,  3^2,  383,  407- 
414,  423,  426,  469,  470 

Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  317 

Gerbert,  93,  94,  105,  121,  126,  135, 
188,  225-235,  343,  377,  457 

Glastonbury,  91,  444,  454,  455 

Graal,  Holy,  passim  throughout  the 
work  and  special  references  as 
follows  ;  a  legend  of  the  soul,  6  ; 
connection  with  the  Last  Supper, 
7  ;  sacramental  value,  1 1  ;  its 
transits,  ib.  ;  allegorical  aspects 
of  the  quests,  15  ;  orthodox 
position  of  the  claim,  16  ;  as  a 
reliquary,  28,  99,  412  ;  its  litera- 
ture and  the  life  of  devotion,  45, 
46  ;  description  of  the  vessel,  93, 
94  ;  Graal  and  Eucharist,  95,  97  ; 
as  a  ciborium,  95,  98,  103  ;  mean- 
ing of  the  word,  95  ;  an  eternal 
Eucharist,  98  ;  one  hypothesis, 
102,  103  ;  in  the  Castle  pageant, 
139-144;  Herb  of  the  Graal, 
326  ;  the  Graal  Dove,  205,  337  ; 
as  a  Reliquary,  103,  510  ;  an  image 


711 


Index 


of  the  Divine  Mystery  within  the 

Church,  478  ;    its  departure,  161 

et  seq.,  171,  350,  364 
Grand  St.  Graal.     See  Book  of  the 

Holy  Graal 
Greater  Chronicles,  53,  59,  80,  103, 

124,  135,  138,  145,  158,  205,  360, 

436,  654.     See  Book  V. 
Great  Experiment,   615,   626,   633, 

656,  and  Book  VIII.,  3 
Gregory  of  Tours,  39,  41 
Gregory  the  Great,  480 
Guinevere,  185,  335,  339,  347 
Guiot  de  Provence,  345,  353,  356, 

393,  394,  395.  397~4O4,  425.  426, 

427,  498,  500,  599,  644,  657 
Gurnemanz,  380 
Gyron  le  Courtois,  502 

HARDYNG,  Chronicle  of,  60 
Hawker,  R.  S.,  12 
Head  on  Salver,  43,  294 
Helayne,  320,  339,  353,  511,  512 
Helinandus,  Chronicle  of,  92,  95 
Henry  II.,  426,  446,  455,  649 
Herzeleide,  378,  379,  382,  384 
Higgins,  Godfrey,  179 
House  of  Doctrine,  454,  491 
Howitt,  William,  460 
Hugh,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  204 
Hugo  de  St.  Victor,  47 

IMPLICITS,  Lesser,  72,  674,  675 

Irem,  420 

Isidore  of  Seville,  St.,  663 

JACOBUS  de  Voragine,  38 

Januarius,  St.,  203 

Jerome,  St.,  666 

Johannine  Tradition,  448,  457,  506, 

661-668 

ohn  Damascene,  29 
ohn  of  Glastonbury,  92 
ohn  of  the  Cross,  St.,  497 
ohn  of  Tynemouth,  92,  103 
ohn  the  Baptist,  St.,  42-44 
oseph  of  Arimathaea,    33,  49,    55, 
56,  62,  81,  83,  91,  92,  94,  98,  101, 
106,  107,  117,  123,  135,  136,  146, 
245-257,  261,  289,  290,  291,  310, 
312,  319,  321,  323,  329,  334,  353, 
361,  368,  370,  402,  443,  455,  502, 
503,  505,  642,  672 
Joseph   II.,    59,    69,    70,    122,    220, 
289,  291,  292,  296,  297,  298,  299, 
306,  308,  309,  312,  313,  315,  322, 
33i.  334-  363,  492,  499,  652,  674 
Joshua,  306,  307 


KABALISM,  for  Tradition  in  Israel, 
550-555  ;  for  Zoharic  allusions, 
70,  403,  404,  407  ;  for  other 
references,  482,  603,  617,  629, 
656 
Kay  the  Seneschal,  185,  186,  189, 

382 

Kilwinning,  Canongate,  587 
Klingsor,  345,  386,  387,  392 
Kondwiramour,  381,  387,  418 
Kundrie,  382,  383,  385,  386 

LAFONTAINE,  178 

Lance,  as  a  Graal  Hallow,  88,  101, 
117-119,  129,  154,  157,  159,  183, 

192,    194,   205,   220,   237,   270,  409. 

See  Passion  Relics 
Lancelot,    for    the    prose   romance, 
330-340  ;     for    allusions    to    the 
Knight  and   his   story,    58,    106, 
no,  118,  123,  127,  130,  135,  138, 

142,  155,  200,  314,  318,  319,  320, 

323,  326,     355,    356,    383,    385, 
407,  422,  501,  512,  629,  651,  672, 
687 

Lapis  Exilis,  389,  395,  396,  443, 
571-576 

Lapis  Judaicus,  401 

Launfal,  240 

Lay  of  the  Great  Fool,  53,  174 

Lazarus,  116 

Leodegan  of  Carmelide,  327 

Lesser  Chronicles,  see  243-274,  and 
for  other  references,  53,  71,  80, 
99,  103,  122,  135,  138,  145,  157, 
261,  282,  321,  322,  457,  653, 

655 

Lesser  Holy  Graal,  56,  63,  86,  87, 
96,  97,  105,  251,  287,  288,  289, 

324,  453,    456,    505,     649;     see 
also  255-257 

Leucius,  666 

Lohengrin,  Romance  of,  416,  421 

Lombard,  Peter,  25,  482 

Longer  Prose  Perceval,  58,  59,  86, 
87,  88,  99,  100,  104,  106,  in,  115, 
116,  118,  120,  123,  131,  136,  137, 

143,  144,  150,  162,  164,  174,  175, 
182,  199,  201,  206,  213,  235,  240, 
286,  322,  327,  330,  337,  339,  341, 
342,  355,  377.  383,  402,  425,  442, 
454,  457,  470,  473,  479.  481,  493. 
494,  495,  499,  500,  501,  504,  629, 
642,  647,  648,  651,  653,  657,  672, 
677,  683 

Lost  Book,  498-507,  675,  676 
Lost  Word,  164,  607 
Louis  XVI.,  595 


712 


Index 


Loupoukine,    630,    635,    636,    640, 

665 
Lucifer,   Crown  of,  400,   401,  417, 

480,  481 

Lufamour,  The  Lady,  196,  197 
Lully,  Raymond,  406 
Luther,  45 

Mabinogion,  Welsh,  50,  173,  174, 
175  ;  Mabinogi  of  Peredur,  49, 
53,  181-193,  202,  204,  205,  207, 
209,  212,  269,  351,  380,  458 

Manessier,  93,  105,  117,  121,  126, 
135,  147,  154,  159,  219-225,  226, 
231.  235,  377,  417,  457,  479 

Map,  Walter,  57,  221,  235,  308,  504 

Marcion,  528,  68 1 

Martinism,  602,  636  ;  Saint  Martin, 
12 

Mary's  Chapel,  580,  587 

Masonry,  for  the  Secret  Tradition, 
Book  IX.,  VIII.  ;  for  other  refer- 
ences, 490,  491,  536,  579,  606, 
629,  631,  632,  669,  681,  683,  684 

Mass.     See  Eucharist 

Melchisedech,  98,  505,  541 

Meliadus  de  Lttonnois,  502 

Melyas  de  Lyle,  320 

Merlin,  the  prophet,  49,  50,  58, 
217  ;  the  texts  generally,  98, 
135  ;  Early  History,  56,  58,  64,  96, 
105,  129,  258-264,  273,  288,  317, 
324,  326,  450,  628,  649  ;  Hutk 
Merlin,  57,  58,  99,  118,  123,  135, 
137,  138,  148,  284,  297,  318,  322- 
330,  33L  332,  333.  334,  498,  676  ; 
Vulgate  Merlin,  57,  58,  99,  123, 
135,  137,  I38>  !48>  215,  266,  314, 
318,  320,  325,  326,  360,  385 

Molai,  Jacques  de,  595 

Molinos,  406 

Montbeliard,  Walter,  204,  245,  499 

Mont  Salvatch,  136,  356,  421,  475, 
479,  511,  68 1 

Mor drains.     See  Evalach 

Morgan  le  Fay,  325,  476 

Mors  O sculi,  495 

Morte  cT Arthur,  of  Malory,  10,  12, 
15,  365,  369.  370,  405,  501  ; 
English  metrical  romance,  50 

Moses,  72,  247,  253,  254,  264,  268, 
273,  308,  309,  335,  360,  650,  675 

Mozarabic  Rite,  452 

Mysterium  Fidei,  20,  615,  624,  and 
493-497 


NASCIENS,  300,  301,  303,  304,  305, 
334 


Nasciens  II.,  319,  334,  360,  379 

Nennius,  92 

Nicodemus,  91,  101,  246,  251 

OGIER  the  Dane,  190 
Origen,  528 

PALACE  of  Adventure.   See  Corbenic 

Palamedes,  405 

Palmerin  of  England,  502 

Paris,  Paulin,  502 

Parsifal,  the  German,  and  Wolfram 
von  Eschenbach,  60,  65,  80,  102, 
112,  119,  125,  132,  143,  150,  156, 
160,  164,  175,  188,  206,  235,  240, 
250,  273,  321,  336,  337,  343,  356, 
400,  401,  406,  409,  415,  422,  424, 
425,  450,  453,  457,  459,  474,  479, 
480,  529,  531,  653,  673,  683  ;  and 
Book  VI.,  I. 

Paschal  Dish,  93,  94,  97,  103,  289, 
330 

Passion  Relics  and  Hallows  ;  for  the 
Holy  Cincture,  40,  41  ;  Crown  of 
Thorns,  39,  40,  115  ;  Lance,  19, 
34,  38,  39,  88,  101,  117-119, 
139,  154,  157,  159,  183,  193,  194, 
205,  220,  237,  270,  294,  347,  409  ; 
Longinus,  7,  329  ;  Sacred  Nails, 
40,  115,  116,  294;  Pincers,  115  ; 
see  also  28,  36,  40,  44,  45,  46, 
299,  400,  448 

Pelican,  392 

Pelleas,  329 

Pellehan,  King,  149,  159,  160,  321, 

329 

Pellenore,  King,  321 

Pelles,  King,  135,  137,  149,  221, 
306,  320,  325,  346,  353,  362,  363, 
368,  369,  370,  506,  679 

Perceval,  for  minor  references,  83, 
146,  147,  150,  153,  327;  Per- 
ceval's sister,  149,  187,  213,  214, 
226,  232,  233,  269,  350,  361,  362 

Perlesvaux.  See  Longer  Prose  Per- 
ceval 

Peter  de  Avila,  406 

Peter  of  Lyons,  526 

Petrus,  107,  108,  247,  248,  253,  254, 
281,  310,  311,  312 

Philip  of  Flanders,  Count,  204,  500 

Philip,  St.,  455 

Philosofine,  233,  235 

Phoenix,  395,  401,  403,  417 

Pilate,  Pontius,  91,  245,  246,  248, 
249,  251,  289 

Potvin,  M.  C.,  200,  220 

Precious  Blood,  31,  32,  33,  34,  91, 


713 


2   Z 


Index 


119,  203,  329,  352,  455,  475,  485, 
507,  Sio,  530 

Prester,  John,  n,  387,  419,  420, 
421,  621,  665 

QUESTING  Beast,  327 

Question,  for  summary  account, 
152-157  ;  for  suppression  and 
final  acting,  see  Perceval  quests, 
passim ;  for  some  minor  refer- 
ences, 82,  146,  147,  150,  151,  159, 
160,  345,  646,  658,  673 

Questiones  DruidiccB,  673 

RAGON,  588,  590,  591,  601 

Red  Book  of  Hergest,  181,  193 

Red  Knight,  185,  195,  208,  380 

Regeneration,  633,  635 

Rhys  ap  Tewdr,  177 

Rosicrucian  Mystery,  151,  596,  632, 

669,  684,  685 

Rosenroth,  Knorr  von,  537 
Rusticien  de  Pise,  51 
Ruysbroeck,  83,  481,  683 

SACRAMENTS,  Seven,  20,  22 

Sacro  Catino,  33,  37 

Saone  vel  Sone  de  Nansay,  398 

Sarracinte,  300 

Sarras,  27,  102,  133,  136,  289,  290, 

362,  363,  364,  370 
Secret  Words,  viii.,  62,  66,  71,  80, 

81,  119,  248,  256,  438,  449,  450, 

504.  535.  567,  622,  645,  649,  650, 

655,  671,  675 
Seraphe.     See  Nasciens 
Siege  Perilous,   123,  232,  262,  263, 

308,  309,  316,  359 
Sigune,  379,  382,  416,  417 
Simeon,  72,  308,  310,  335,  360,  361 
Simon  de  Montfort,  527 
Solomon,    Ship    of,    149,     301-304, 

361,  363,  364 
Southey,  Robert,  502 
Stone   of  the   Graal,    n,    388-390, 

395.  396,  400,  401,  403,  417,  480 
Super- Apostolical  Succession,  viii., 

64,  67,  69,  70,  71,  81,  295,  434, 

444,  447,  450,  451,  504,  621,  622, 

671 
Swan  Knight,  234,  416 


Swedenborg,  249 

Sword,  Hallowed,  for  general  varia- 
tions, 119-125;  for  particular 
references,  19,  88,42,  43,  44,  114, 
116,  123,  139,  140,  141,  147,  154, 

194,   205,   220,   238,   301,   304,   307, 

362,  364 

Syr  Percyvelle,  174,  193-197,  202, 
209,  35L  383 

TALIESIN,  pseudo-,  177 

Talmud,  70 

Tavolo  Ritonda,  52 

Templars,  for  general  accounts  of, 
some  claims  in  their  respect,  555- 
566  ;  for  casual  references,  393, 
396,  401,  595,  632,  660,  664 

Tennyson  and  the  Holy  Graal,  8,  9, 
12,  13 

Thecolithos,  401 

Thomas,  St.,  25 

Thomas  a  Becket,  St.,  660 

Titurel,  for  the  romance  of  Albrecht 
von  Scharfenberg,  410-421  ;  for 
minor  references,  60,  132,  163, 
164,  378,  387,  394,  479,  531,  653 

Titurisone,  418 

Toledo,  393,  396,  402,  437 

Trevrezent,  388 

Tristram  and  his  story,  336,  405 

Turba  Philosophorum,  537 

UTHER  Pendragon,  262-264,  326, 
327.  332,  354 

VAUGHAN,  Thomas,  496 
Veronica,  41,  42,  116,  246 
Vespasian,  136,  246,  289 
Villanueva,  Jayme  de,  427 
Villemarque,  175,  176 
Virginity,  241,  342,  471,  472 
Vivienne,   The  Lady  of  the  Lake, 

329.  333.  334 
Volney,  179 
Volto  Santo,  41,  42,  246 

WAGNER,  13 

Welsh  Quest,  164,  365-370 
Werner,  Ludwig,  640 
William  of  Malmesbury,  444 


Printed  by  BALLANTYNE,  HANSON  6*  Co. 
Edinburgh  &  London 


BINDING  SECT.  MAY  1  7  1968 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


PN 

686 

G7W3M 

1909 

C.I 

ROBA 


