4

• •

SECRETS OF NATURE

• • ••

•ASTR(3»Lb£Y AND ALCHEMY. .

IN EARLY MODERN EUROPE

• •

edited by WILLIAM R. NEWMAN 
and ANTHONY GRAFTON

Secrets of Nature

Transformations: Studies in the History of Science and Technology

Jed Buchwald, general editor

Sungook Hong, Wireless: From Marconi’s Black-Box to the Audion

Myles Jackson, Spectrum of Belief: Joseph von Fraunhofer and the Craft 
of Precision Optics

William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton, editors, Secrets of Nature: 
Astrology and Alchemy in Early Modern Europe

Alan J. Rocke, Nationalizing Science: Adolphe Wurtz and the Battle for 
French Chemistry

Secrets of Nature

Astrology and Alchemy in Early Modern Europe

edited by William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

The MIT Press 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 
London, England

© 2001 Massachusetts Institute of Technology

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any 
electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or 
information storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the 
publisher.

This book was set in Sabon by Graphic Composition, Inc. and was printed and 
bound in the United States of America.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Secrets of nature: astrology and alchemy in early modern Europe / edited by 
William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton, 
p. cm. — (Transformations)

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 0-262-14075-6 (alk. paper)

1. Astrology — Europe — Elistory. 2. Alchemy — Europe — Elistory.

I. Newman, William R. II. Grafton, Anthony. III. Transformations 
(M.I.T. Press)

BF1676 .S43 2001 
133'.094 — dc21

2001030602

Contents

1 Introduction: The Problematic Status of Astrology and Alchemy in 
Premodern Europe 1

William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

2 “Veritatis amor dulcissimus”: Aspects of Cardano’s Astrology 39

Germana Ernst

3 Between the Election and My Hopes: Girolamo Cardano and Medical 
Astrology 692 “Veritatis amor dulcissimus”: Aspects of Cardano’s Astrology 39

Germana Ernst

3 Between the Election and My Hopes: Girolamo Cardano and Medical 
Astrology 69

Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

4 Celestial Offerings: Astrological Motifs in the Dedicatory Letters of 
Kepler’s Astronomia Nova and Galileo’s Sidereus Nuncius 133 
H. Darrel Rutkin

5 Astronomia inferior: Legacies of Johannes Trithemius 
and John Dee 173

N. H. Clulee

6 The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 235

Didier Kahn

7 “The Food of Angels”: Simon Forman’s Alchemical Medicine 345

Lauren Kassell

8 Some Problems with the Historiography of Alchemy 385

Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

Contributors 433 
Index 435

Frontispiece: Chart of alchemical elections from Thomas Norton, Ordinal of 
Alchemy, found in British Library MS. Add. 10302, late fifteenth century.

This page intentionally left blank

This page intentionally left blank

1

Introduction: The Problematic Status of 
Astrology and Alchemy in Premodern Europe

William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

The Position of AstrologyThis page intentionally left blank

1

Introduction: The Problematic Status of 
Astrology and Alchemy in Premodern Europe

William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

The Position of Astrology

One night in 1631, a young Jesuit lay sleeping in his order’s college at 
Wurzburg. He slept the sleep of the just, not only because he had found a 
scholarly vocation, but even more because the Holy Roman Empire had 
reached an uneasy state of truce. The emperor had conquered his Prot- 
estant enemies; no one, the Jesuit later recalled, could even imagine that 
heresy would revive. Suddenly a bright light filled the room. Waking, he 
leapt out of bed and ran to the window. He saw the open square before the 
college full of armed men and horses. Hurrying from room to room, he 
found that everyone else was still deeply asleep and decided that he must 
have been dreaming. So he ran to the window, where he saw the same ter- 
rifying vision. But when he woke someone to serve as a witness, it had van- 
ished. In the next few days, he became a prey to fear and depression and 
ran about, as he later recalled, “like a fanatic,” predicting disaster. The oth- 
ers made fun of him — until, with satisfying rapidity, invaders materialized 
and the city fell. Suddenly, the prophet was treated with respect in his own 
country. Since he taught, among other subjects, mathematics, his friends 
inferred that he must have used one of his technical skills to forecast the 
invasion. Surely, they argued, he had used the art of astrology to make his 
prediction. Nothing else could explain his ability to foresee so unexpected 
a turn of events. 1

The young Jesuit, Athanasius Kircher, had actually foreseen the future 
through direct divine inspiration, a fact he carefully concealed. What mat- 
ters, from our point of view, is the reaction of his friends. As late as the 
1630s, the most highly educated young men in south Germany still found

2 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton2 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

it rational to believe that astrology could enable Kircher to predict vital po- 
litical and military events. Evidently astrology still enjoyed a level of cred- 
ibility that now seems hard to fathom, and that in a highly educated and 
deeply Christian milieu. Kircher, who became not only a brilliant archae- 
ologist and Oriental scholar, but also a practitioner of natural science so 
adept that his public demonstrations won him at least one charge of be- 
ing a magician, evidently agreed with his friends’ belief in the ancient art 
of predicting the future through the stars, even though he had not had re- 
course to it in this case. 2 Astrology was not classified as occult or dismissed 
as superstitious: it was, in fact, a recognized, publicly practiced art.This story illustrates the principle, as vital as it is easily ignored, that the 
past is another country. In educated circles in the United States and Eu- 
rope, astrology seems merely risible now. No member of the elite wants to 
be caught with an astrologer. The revelation that former U.S. President 
Ronald Reagan and his wife, Nancy, regularly consulted the astrologer 
Joan Quigley was trumpeted by their liberal critics and ignored by their 
conservative allies. And when the Economist noted, a few years ago, that 
a Brazilian stock advice service that relied on the stars had made enormous 
profits for its customers, it covered the phenomenon only in order to heap 
ridicule on all concerned, although the service had scored multiple suc- 
cesses. Astrology has, and can have, no currency in our skeptical, myth- 
shredding intellectual economy. Even the most astute scholars share these 
views. Theodor Wiesengrund Adorno, for example, argued that only cred- 
ulous fools with authoritarian personalities would resign psychic con- 
trol over their lives to the stars. That explained, in his view, the fact that 
the art flourished in Los Angeles. Only in the German preface to his essay, 
originally written in English, on the Los Angeles Times’ astrology column 
was Adorno honest enough to admit that the Germans of the 1920s and 
1930s had exhibited similar tendencies themselves. 3

No one who starts from presuppositions like this can hope to under- 
stand the pull of astrology in the present, to grasp and explain the fact that 
between 20 and 50 percent of the population of the world’s developed 
countries, in western Europe, North America, and Asia, believe mildly or 
strongly in astrology, right now. 4 It is all the more necessary, then, to adopt 
a different attitude when we turn toward the nature and role of astrology 
and related disciplines in the past. What E. R Thompson magisterially 
condemned as “the enormous condescension of posterity” can only hin-Introduction 3

der us from understanding the beliefs and practices of practitioners of as- 
trology and those who used their services.Introduction 3

der us from understanding the beliefs and practices of practitioners of as- 
trology and those who used their services.

Renaissance astrologers, for example, drew up luxurious, custom-made 
manuscript genitures for the rulers of Renaissance Europe: not only for 
their spouses and children, but also, of course, for their enemies. They tab- 
ulated the births and fates of men, women, and monsters in collections of 
genitures, first in manuscript and then in print. 5 On request, they investi- 
gated what the planets had to foretell at a particular moment about spe- 
cific marriages, journeys, and investments or about their clients’ physical 
and mental health. 6 Often they stalked city streets and squares, hawking 
almanacs: pamphlets, usually of eight or sixteen pages, in which they 
explained why planetary conjunctions or eclipses foreshadowed disaster. 7 
Astrological doctrines inspired some of the most spectacular works of 
Renaissance art, from the frescoes of the Palazzo Schifanoia in Ferrara to 
Albrecht Diirer’s Melencolia I. 8 Astrological practices influenced and some- 
times ruled behavior in the most modern, forward-looking sectors of 
Renaissance culture. At the court of the Estensi in the 1440s, the brilliant 
young Marquis Leonello changed his clothes according to an astrologi- 
cally determined rhythm, choosing each day a color that would draw down 
the favorable influence of a particular planet. In Republican Florence, in 
the same years, the mercenary captains who led the city’s armies received 
their batons of command at an astrologically determined time. 9 In much 
of early modern Europe, in other words, astrology was a prominent fea- 
ture of the practice of everyday life. A good many of the most eminent pro- 
tagonists of the Scientific Revolution, finally, joined in the production of 
genitures and almanacs, and a number, including Kepler, worked hard to 
reform the art in the light of philosophical criticisms and new scientific 
data. 10Yet few historians are willing, even now, to give astrology its due. Tra- 
dition weighs heavily against doing so. Even before Friedrich von Bezold, 
Aby Warburg, and other pioneers began to study the subject systemati- 
cally in the last years of the nineteenth century, Jacob Burckhardt had 
described the humanists who revived the art as so many sorcerers’ ap- 
prentices. They wished to find in ancient culture ways to express their 
new, objective understanding of the world around them and their new, 
subjective understanding of their own individuality. Sadly, they made the 
error of believing that astrology was one of these. In fact, the revival of this

4 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

fetid, authoritarian superstition led them both to misread the cosmos as a 
whole and to subjugate the individual to universal laws. Astrology, in other 
words, hampered the rise of a new culture — until Pico della Mirandola 
gave the superstition its death blow with his brilliant dialogues. 11Warburg knew far more than Burckhardt about astrology; he knew, for 
example, that it permeated European society at every level long after Pico’s 
death. Yet he inherited not only the great Swiss historian’s method, but 
also his attitude to superstition. Warburg found the primitive elements in 
advanced systems of thought as terrifying as they were fascinating. He re- 
garded astrology as a threat to reason, one against which philosophers and 
theologians had had to struggle, in antiquity and in the Renaissance. He 
himself, during the mental crisis caused by World War I, wandered the 
streets of Hamburg looking for dark-faced, “Saturnian” children to whom 
he would give chocolates in the hope of warding off the threat posed by 
the most malevolent of planets. Warburg saw astrology as incoherent and 
debased and its practitioners as credulous. For all the fascination with 
which he studied ancient images of stellar demons, the Table Talk of 
Martin Luther, who denounced astrologers as incompetent, inspired the 
warmest enthusiasm in him. Luther mocked the genitures that Italian as- 
trologers had put into circulation and that connected his birthday with ce- 
lestial portents like the great conjunction of 1484. After all, he pointed 
out, the date of his own birth was uncertain even to him. Luther showed 
himself even more intolerant when a conjunction in the sign of Pisces, 
which took place in 1524, led many astrologers to predict that a second 
universal flood would take place, but none of them foresaw the Peasants’ 
Revolt of 1525. Astrology was related to reason, Warburg thought, only 
because it provoked the exercise of that all too rare faculty. It belonged to 
that “Jerusalem” of Eastern superstitions that, over the centuries, had re- 
quired all the efforts of “Athenian” critical reason to dispel them. 12 Simi- 
lar prejudices recur regularly in some of the best modern studies.Thus, the Bologna historian Ottavia Niccoli has brilliantly explicated 
the large role that astrology played in that curious, enormous literature of 
threat and promise, the dozens of pamphlets that bearded, ragged itiner- 
ants hawked and preached through the streets and squares of Italian cities 
in the years around 1500. But her heart also clearly lies with the represen- 
tatives of reason: sophisticated urbanites, in this case, many of them poor 
as well as skeptical, who mocked the flood when it did not happen on time.

Introduction 5

She eloquently evokes the public derision they directed toward astrologers 
and their clients in the form, for example, of carnival plays that made fun 
of the credulity of the clerics who had ordered penitential processions and 
of the ordinary citizens who had fled their homes for high ground. These 
rituals, Niccoli holds, deprived the figure of the prophet, in Italy, of much 
of its cultural prominence: after the 1530s, no deluge. Once again, skepti- 
cism and realism accompany the attack on astrology; credulity and super- 
stition explain its continued practice. But in fact, prophets inspired by 
astrology flourished in Italy throughout the sixteenth century. 13 Astrolog- 
ical portents helped Tommaso Campanella decide that the time was ripe 
for the Calabrian conspiracy he led in the years just before 1600, and as- 
trological eugenics and medicine played a central role in his blueprint for 
a new and just society, the City of the Sun. 14

Astrology formed more than a set of abstract theories and beliefs. It was 
also a coherent body of practices, strongly supported by institutions. Mod- 
ern economists retain their value to employers even when events overtake 
or refute their concrete forecasts about currency, interest rates, and stock 
markets. Similarly, the Renaissance astrologer retained his perceived au- 
thority and utility even when his individual predictions failed.Two brief case studies, one drawn from Italy, the other from the Holy Ro- 
man Empire, may suggest a new way of looking at early modern astrology: 
not as a fatty blockage of the intellectual arteries, a bit of philosophical 
detritus inadvertently fished up from the past along with Aristotelian and 
Stoic theories about matter and the cosmos, but as one of the many highly 
practical sets of intellectual tools that Renaissance thinkers forged and 
honed for dealing with the same problems that they also attacked with 
what now seem the shinier tools of social and political analysis.

No Renaissance text offers a richer or more unexpected peep into the 
astrologer’s atelier than Leon Battista Alberti’s dialogues On the Family. In 
book 4 of this famous description of the life and beliefs of a great Floren- 
tine clan, Piero Alberti explains how he won favor at the court of Gian- 
galeazzo Visconti, duke of Milan and inveterate enemy of the Florentines. 
Piero had used every technique known to Renaissance analysts of the ways 
of courts — or to modern sociologists specializing in network theory — to 
haul himself up the greasy rope of court favor. Unexpectedly, his deep 
knowledge of Italian literature gave him his main chance. By reciting po- 
ems, he attracted the attention of someone who already stood high at the

6 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton6 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

Visconti court, Francesco Barbavara. This was no easy feat. Like Saint- 
Simon 250 years later, Piero noted that the courtier must never leave the 
presence of power. Accordingly, he had spent whole days without food, 
“pretending to have other concerns,” just waiting “to encounter and greet” 
his patron, even though Barbavara was already on the lookout for talented 
men to support, since his own high position at court rested on his ability 
to dispense help from his favor bank to those who clung to lower rungs on 
the ladder. 15 Only precisely calibrated, pragmatic social tactics like these 
could have enabled Piero, a poor man, to become the friend of Barbavara, 
who, in turn, brought him to Giangaleazzo’s attention.

Piero, himself an exile from Florence, found the duke gracious and ea- 
ger to befriend him. But he did not have to depend on his family name or 
his knowledge of the sonnet form to ingratiate himself. “At that time,” he 
recalled, “the learned astronomers were anxiously expecting some sort of 
great trouble, for the sky showed them clear indications of upheaval, par- 
ticularly of the overthrow of republics, governments and persons in high 
command. It was their almost unanimous opinion that the comet which 
shone brightly in the middle of the sky and was for months visible even in 
the daytime would not be shining so long if it did not portend, as comets 
usually do, the end and death of some famous, powerful prince, like the 
duke himself.” 16 Giangaleazzo met this prediction with an impressive, even 
princely mixture of pride and resignation: “The heavenly intelligences’ 
concern to give him a rare and marvelous omen and sign, he said, surely 
proved to the world that the divine and immortal spirits in the skies were 
interested in his life and death.” 17Piero, however, divined that Giangaleazzo’s bravado masked “some con- 
siderable inward anxiety.” 18 Fortunately, he had information at his dis- 
posal that enabled him to allay it. The Alberti firm, which had played a 
prominent role for more than a century in the medieval Mediterranean 
trading system, had offices throughout the world, from England, Flanders, 
and France in the north to Catalonia, Rhodes, Syria, and Barbary in the 
south and east. These branches, like those of all Florentine firms, were nor- 
mally headed by members of the family and remained in constant com- 
munication, using their own highly efficient private message services. They 
kept Piero “well informed of the revolts, mobilization of ships and men, 
shipwrecks, or whatever was going on in those regions worth knowing.” 19 
In this case, the Rhodes office called Piero’s attention “on the instant” to

Introduction 7

the death of Timur, the ruler of the great city of Samarkand. Piero was able 
to show Giangaleazzo that the comet had betokened the death of another, 
even greater prince. His deft rereading of the portent kept the duke 
“benevolent” to his servant. 20 Skillful interpretation of the astrologers’ 
predictions, combined with skillful sifting of the news, made it possible to 
climb the court ladder.The story cannot be taken literally. Timur actually died in 1405, three 
years after Giangaleazzo. Piero, or the author, may have confused the 
death of Timur with the capture of Bayazid, which took place at the battle 
of Angora in July 1402, a few months before Giangaleazzo died. Or Al- 
berti may simply have invented the anecdote he needed. 21 But the form in 
which Piero’s story appears matters more to the cultural historian than its 
factual correctness. When Alberti wrote book 4 of On the Family, he was 
already embarked on a dazzling career as a court adviser on matters sci- 
entific and architectural. He would become a favorite of Leonello d’Este, 
Federigo da Montefeltro, and Ludovico Gonzaga, among other rulers 
with advanced artistic and literary tastes. 22

Like his friend Lapo da Castiglionchio, who wrote his bitter dialogues 
on The Advantages of Life in the Papal Curia in 1438, Alberti brought to 
bear on his subject all the bitter realism of the outsider. 23 A special para- 
noid, microscopic attentiveness to the unspoken rules of social success 
enables such observers to grasp and describe the norms of a hierarchical 
society more vividly and fully than more successful insiders can. Unlike 
Lapo, moreover, this outsider became an insider and thus benefited from 
direct, close-up observation of the phenomena he hoped to understand.Leon Battista made, as he explained in his autobiography, a conscious 
decision to transform his life into a performance. He concentrated, he re- 
called, on performing public acts in a way that would win the respect of 
all beholders and transmuted his ways of walking, riding and conversing 
into dazzling works of art. 24 His ability to frame and apply the arcane pre- 
cepts that could turn ordinary conduct into something of aesthetic value 
has been emblematic for a century and a third — ever since Burckhardt — 
of the new objectivity that characterized the period, the new ability to ob- 
serve manners and mores that formed an essential part of “the discovery 
of the world and of man.”

Burckhardt, as we have seen, regarded astrology and objectivity or real- 
ism as radically opposed. Astrology subordinated individuals and nations

8 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

to larger, impersonal forces embodied in the revolutions of the planets. 
It rested on traditional, unverified beliefs rather than empirical evidence. 
And it treated its subjects not as individuals, to be understood through the 
new tools of introspection, but as types. True Renaissance intellectuals, 
like Pico, fought against astrology’s influence on behalf of the real and the 
individual.For Alberti, however, or at least for his imaginary character, astrologi- 
cal investigations evidently did not conflict with hard-nosed realism. Piero 
did not mock Giangaleazzo for his credulity; he argued that the duke and 
his advisers had misinterpreted a true portent. And elsewhere in Alberti’s 
dialogue, another character made the implications of the author’s view of 
astrology even clearer. Lionardo, a young, learned member of the family, 
asks his older relative Adovardo to explain the nature of friendship. 
Drawing on the ancient historians and philosophers, Lionardo cites num- 
erous classical models for making, retaining, and ending friendships. And 
he suggests that general precepts could be drawn from these. Adovardo 
demurs:Ah, Lionardo, what a mass of further information would be needed before one 
could really discuss this matter in its breadth and extent. It is as though some stu- 
dent had heard from the astronomers that Mars disposes the force of armies and 
the outcome of battles, Mercury establishes the various branches of knowledge 
and governs the subtlety of minds and marvelous skills, Jove controls ceremonies 
and the souls of religious men, the sun reigns over worldly offices and principali- 
ties, the moon precipitates journeys and the fluctuations of spirit among women 
and mobs, Saturn weighs down and slows our mental processes and undertak- 
ings — and so he would know the character and power of each. But if he did not 
know how to evaluate their effect according to their place in the sky and their ele- 
vation, and what favorable or unfavorable effect their rays have on each other, and 
how their conjunctions are able to produce good or ill fortune, surely that student 
would be no astrologer. The mere recognition of those bare principles is indispen- 
sable to any understanding of the art, but even with them you have only just en- 
tered the domain of other, almost innumerable laws necessary if you would foresee 
and understand the things which they sky tends to produce. Similarly, these very 
useful and numerous examples and sayings, which you say are so amply provided 
by the best authors, do not give us all the help we need . 25

Alberti depicts astrology here as the model for a rigorous art of social re- 
lations. It rests on clear general principles, but it also explains in detail 
how these interact with one another in everyday life. Instead of naming 
single influences, the astrologer must trace and evaluate the whole com- 
plex web of influences spun by the planets and the stars. And only an anal-

Introduction 9

ysis of friendship like this — one based on general principles, but as applied 
to minutely particular cases — could be really useful.Introduction 9

ysis of friendship like this — one based on general principles, but as applied 
to minutely particular cases — could be really useful.

Alberti believed these sentiments as firmly as the characters into whose 
mouths he set them. He exchanged astrological letters with the well- 
known Florentine medical man and astronomer Paolo Toscanelli, a seri- 
ous observer of comets. In these letters Alberti predicted the immediate 
future of the Roman church. He dated and timed the points when he 
began and completed a number of his written works, not just to the day 
but to the hour, probably, so Riccardo Fubini has suggested, in order to 
connect them to the configurations of the planets that accompanied his 
work. 26 In On the Art of Building he described how ancient founders had 
started to build the walls of cities at astrologically propitious times, a rule 
actually followed for some of the most prominent building projects of the 
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. 27 Alberti prided himself, as readers of On 
the Family and On Fainting know, on his realism, his ability to portray the 
human body and human society as they really were. Evidently, he saw 
the astrological techniques that he had mastered and continued to apply 
throughout his life as neither a delusion or a diversion, but a natural con- 
tinuation of his efforts to master the laws that formed cities, clans, and 
individuals.Similar considerations ensured that astrologers like Cardano and Gau- 
rico would find a welcome at many courts, where aspiring courtiers ea- 
gerly read their work. Cardano, in fact, not only drew up genitures for 
important men and inserted them in his commentary on Ptolemy’s text- 
book, but also composed, at the end of his life, a brilliant and much- 
discussed manual for courtiers. Here he told them, in language like that of 
Gracian, how to build a hard, featureless shell around themselves to com- 
pete effectively with others while giving nothing at all away. 28 Astrology 
did not represent a failure of objectivity but exemplified it in action.

A second scene from astrological life took place in historical time rather 
than the literary imagination. To be more precise, it was enacted in the im- 
perial free city of Augsburg, where Hieronymus Wolf sat down, in 1564, 
to write an autobiography. 29 Wolf is no longer a household name, even in 
learned households. In his own time, however, he enjoyed a considerable 
reputation as a popularizer if not as a scholar. A pupil of the great hu- 
manist and astrologer Joachim Camerarius, he attracted the qualified 
admiration of Philipp Melanchthon. Wolf met with misfortunes of many

1 0 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

kinds, from hazing in his schoolboy days to abuse from scholarly col- 
leagues, and he gave detailed accounts of his woes in his picaresque Latin 
account of his life. But he also achieved a great deal. He translated the 
Attic orators Demosthenes and Isocrates into Latin, taught rhetoric and 
poetics, and produced an indispensable — if very faulty — edition of early 
astrological texts in 1559. 30Wolf did more than edit Greek commentaries on Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos, 
however. For all his good Protestant’s confidence in salvation, he also be- 
lieved in the uses of astrology. In fact, Wolf had been asked by friends to 
write his autobiography even before he started to do so in 1564, so that he 
could rebut his detractors and preserve the memory of his life. But he 
waited to begin until he reached the age of forty-eight, only one year short 
of the year that astrologers had defined as the dangerous climacteric, forty- 
nine, when he feared he might die. 31 He started his work by considering 
the positions of the stars at his birth. When the position of the horoscope, 
the point on the zodiac that was actually rising at his birth, did not seem 
to him to match the actual course of his life, he decided that the clock had 
been wrong and considered whether the standard procedures astrologers 
regularly applied to adjust times when they drew up genitures might yield 
better results. 32 Wolf was not certain that the many cruel and violent events 
he experienced really reflected the malevolent influence of Mars or that the 
many vicious attacks he underwent really resulted from the equally malev- 
olent influence of Saturn. After all, he admitted, divine providence or hu- 
man magic accounts for many of the events predicted by genitures. 33 But 
he clearly began his self-examination by poring over the stars that had 
presided over his birth.Wolf’s reading of his own geniture cannot be fully reconstructed, for rea- 
sons that are revealing in themselves. The eighteenth-century scholar Jo- 
hann Jacob Reiske, who published Wolf’s autobiography, omitted the rest 
of this passage, which he described as “a long passage full of astronomi- 
cal and horoscopic rubbish,” so as not to bore his readers. The twentieth- 
century Byzantinist Hans-Georg Beck, who translated the original Latin 
text into German, left out even the truncated horoscope analysis that 
Reiske had seen fit to print. 34

For all Wolf’s own doubts and the retrospective censorship carried out 
by his modern students, however, the main point emerges clearly. At some 
point Wolf, who was himself no astrologer, had a professional draw up a

Introduction 1 1

full-scale analysis of his own geniture. Dozens of these documents survive, 
in print and manuscript, in libraries and archives across Europe; they 
formed a principal source of income for astrologers like the historical Nos- 
tradamus, who, as Jean Dupebe and Pierre Brind’Amour have shown, cre- 
ated an efficient little boutique where genitures for clients across Europe 
were drawn up and interpreted . 35

Genitures normally laid out the positions of the planets at the moment 
of the client’s birth. They explained what consequences these would have 
for his health, his wealth, his travels, his marriage, his fortune, and his 
death. And they often included “revolutions”: analyses of the positions of 
the planets at the anniversary of his birth, year by year for fifty or sixty 
years. Genitures in effect amounted to graphical representations of the 
client’s future bodily and mental health, travels, and career. The client 
could compare them, detail by detail, to his subjective sense of his own 
experiences.In fact, the subjects of such genitures often scrutinized them carefully. 
Machiavelli’s friend Francesco Guicciardini, to cite an example recently 
studied in detail, showed acid skepticism toward astrology in his Ricordi, 
where he insisted that the art survived only because of the human tendency 
toward confirmation bias: both the astrologers and their clients remem- 
bered only the successful predictions and forgot the more numerous false 
ones. But he had his geniture drawn up by an astrologer, Ramberto Mala- 
testa, a small-scale feudal lord who fell back on this profession after mur- 
dering his wife and being driven from his estate. And he annotated it, 
expanding the astrological signs into full names of planets and signs — 
surely a sign of interest . 36

Others did far more. Cardano brooded so systematically on his geniture 
that he wrote three full-scale commentaries on it, one after another, all 
dedicated to showing how precisely the events of his life bore out what the 
stars had foretold. Ultimately he produced a kind of astrological autobi- 
ography: a full-scale account of his own life that began from his geniture 
and was organized, like a horoscope, topically rather than chronologi- 
cally . 37 Sir Thomas Smith, Queen Elizabeth’s ambassador to France and 
the author of a famous Aristotelian study of the English constitution, 
wrote a very similar self-analysis . 38 These astrological autobiographies rank 
among the frankest works of introspection, the most richly vivid confes- 
sional texts, written in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Their authors

12 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton12 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

freely discussed their physical ailments, including venereal diseases and 
torrential flows of urine; their personal defeats, including the derision they 
had experienced from social superiors and intellectual enemies; and their 
character traits, including shyness, awkward conduct, and a tendency to 
alienate others. Astrology did not, as Burckhardt thought it should, hin- 
der self-scrutiny. On the contrary, it promoted introspection, providing the 
astrologer’s clients with a template of questions to ask themselves about 
their personalities, their everyday lives, and the larger trajectories of their 
careers.Throughout his text, Wolf drew correlations between his ailments and 
misfortunes and the stars in their courses. But he also made clear that he — 
and his father before him — consulted astrologers regularly for advice on 
matters large and small. Wolf’s father, for example, said one day that he 
would have to make way for his son, who had already grown so large that 
he could wear the shoes he would inherit: this perhaps showed, Wolf 
thought, that he had consulted an astrologer about his life chances . 39 Wolf 
himself described more than one strategically placed conversation with 
an astrologer. In fact, astrologers became his principal authority figures. 
When he found himself besieged by magically caused noises and misfor- 
tunes, he recalled that he had run into the astrologer Georg Joachim 
Rheticus (better known as the first popularizer of Copernicus) in the 
street. Rheticus had read his palm and told him to expect trouble from a 
woman . 40 When he finished writing his most ambitious commentary, the 
astrologer Cyprian Leowitz (better known as the author of a famous trea- 
tise on the great conjunctions of Jupiter and Saturn) told him that his work 
would make him rich . 41 Others, whom Wolf did not name, advised him 
about the astrological causes of the case of gonorrhea that he contracted 
though still a virgin, since Venus resented the fact that he neglected her in 
favor of Mercury . 42In each case the practices Wolf described were widely disseminated, 
even standard. As Keith Thomas and Michael MacDonald showed long 
ago in classic works, the default occupation of the Renaissance astrologer 
was not drawing up full-scale genitures but providing small-scale, short- 
term advice in the form of “elections” and “interrogations”: precise coun- 
sel, based on the position of the heavens at a given moment, about the 
likely outcome of a particular enterprise. Such advice giving could be 
risky: Cardano, for example, counseled the astrologer against trying to use

Introduction 13

the stars to tell a client if a given child was his own or someone else’s, since 
violence could ensue. But it was also highly reasonable, in a world that 
lacked statistics, tables, and insurance policies, to try to use the best math- 
ematical techniques available to foresee, and thus control, the future. Car- 
dano, for example, though he felt considerable distaste for interrogations, 
still saw them as a reasonable way to determine the gender of a fetus in the 
womb. The only alternative to reading the heavens, after all, was reading 
the pregnant woman’s body to find the angle at which her fetus hung, a dif- 
ficult proposition at the best of times, and one whose results were no eas- 
ier to interpret than the planets . 43Though Wolf earned his bread translating and teaching the classics and 
regretted the time and eyesight he had to waste on barbarous Byzantine 
Greek, he was not a cloistered, credulous figure. His library, on which he 
spent such money as he had, became an encyclopedic collection, stuffed 
with up-to-date theology and philosophy as well as costly Aldine Greek 
texts. When he tried to diagnose his ailments, he used the modern medical 
theories of Paracelsus as well as the ancient ones of Hippocrates and Galen. 
When he continually checked his bodily and mental health against the 
movements of the planets, he followed the advice of Marsilio Ficino, widely 
disseminated in the Holy Roman Empire. According to Ficino, the scholar’s 
body was vulnerable, even labile: planetary influences washed constantly 
through it, like the tides, causing health and illness, inspiring exaltation 
and depression. Only an astrologically regulated regime of self-medication 
could keep these influences — from which Ficino himself suffered griev- 
ously — under control . 44 In Wolf’s own circle, Philipp Melanchthon taught 
astrology, Joachim Camerarius edited astrological classics, and Caspar 
Peucer argued that even the devils and angels who sat on the shoulders of 
every Christian used astrology to unlock the secrets of their characters and 
lead them more effectively into salvation or damnation . 45

Wolf’s example, like Alberti’s, shows astrology in an unfamiliar light. In 
each case, astrology emerges not as the object of contempt or ridicule but 
as a rational art of living, comparable to and compatible with the more 
obviously modern arts of pragmatic politics and courtiership on the one 
hand and Paracelsian medicine on the other. In the one case astrology 
helped one to see the world as it really was; in the other, to see inside the 
darkest recesses of the psyche. These testimonies deserve to be heard. As- 
trology in the early modern world was not a pathological, but a normal,14 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

piece of intellectual equipment. One could use it to find one’s way through 
the dangerous labyrinths of public and private life, to form one’s charac- 
ter, and even to devise therapies for one’s illnesses. Literati and natural 
philosophers worked with and tried to improve the tools that astrology af- 
forded them, believing implicitly, in many cases, that human lives were tied 
to the movements of the planets. Trying to understand the society and 
culture of early modern Europe without taking astrology into account 
is exactly as plausible as trying to understand modern society without 
examining the influence of economics and psychoanalysis.

Astrology and Alchemy as Celestial and Tellurian TwinsAstrology and Alchemy as Celestial and Tellurian Twins

In 1564, the same year that Hieronymus Wolf began his autobiography, the 
English astrologer and polymath John Dee was seeing his Monas hiero- 
glyphica through its printing in Antwerp. The Monas contains a long and 
detailed apology, written in the form of a dedication to Maximilian of 
Habsburg, soon to become Emperor Maximilian II. In this introduction, 
Dee claims that the astrological sign for Mercury could form the basis of 
a new scientific language in which alchemy too would figure prominently. 
Here Dee was able to combine his own ideas about an astrology reformed 
along lines supplied by natural philosophy and optics with an alchemy 
that had undergone recent refurbishing at the hands of Marsilio Ficino, 
Agrippa von Nettesheim, and Paracelsus. Just as early modern astrology 
was not the pallid caricature that we find in modern newspapers, so Re- 
naissance alchemy was a very distant cousin of the burlesque parody that 
modern culture has inherited from the scornful dismissals of the Enlight- 
enment philosophes. It was not the Art without art, whose beginning is ly- 
ing, whose middle is labor, and whose end is beggary, of a contemptuous 
Nicolas Lemery, writing at the end of the seventeenth century. 46 We can- 
not, like Lemery and his colleagues at the Academie des sciences, create a 
special dustbin for alchemy and astrology as equally egregious examples 
of arrant nonsense.

At the same time, early modern alchemy was not a contemplative disci- 
pline focusing on internal spiritual development, an idea that would be 
popularized by nineteenth-century occultists and their later followers. The 
Mary Anne Atwoods and Eliphas Levis of the occult revival were quite 
content to see both astrology and alchemy as encoded forms of wisdom

Introduction 15Introduction 15

whose real goal was the rechanneling of an internal “Mesmeric fluid,” ex- 
pressed in the form of planetary and metallurgical symbols. And yet it is 
clear that Renaissance figures such as Dee did see some reason for relating 
the two fields. But what precisely was that reason? Was it simply the obvi- 
ous fact that the all-pervasive realm of astrology could be used to find fa- 
vorable times to begin alchemical operations, in the same way that it could 
provide the best times for purging a patient, building a building, or start- 
ing a war? Or did Dee and other alchemists have something else in mind 
when they spoke of alchemy as astronomia inferior and referred to the 
science of the stars as a sort of celestial alchemy? Did the disciplines of 
alchemy and astrology have a privileged and integral relationship with one 
another that distinguished them from other fields? The quest for an answer 
supplies the problematic of this book. 47Let us clarify the issues as follows. Astrology was a form of divination 
along with oneiromancy, arithmology, and a host of other techniques for 
auguring and at times altering the future, whereas alchemy was an arti- 
sanal pursuit concerned with the technologies of minerals and metals. The 
fundamental practices of the two fields were vastly different. Furthermore, 
if we withdraw our minds from the modern cultural stereotype of “the oc- 
cult sciences,” it is not immediately obvious that the two fields shared a 
closely related theoretical framework. Already in the second century of 
our era, the Alexandrian mathematician Claudius Ptolemy observed that 
astrology was a natural part of mathematical astronomy. Whereas astron- 
omy predicted the positions of the planets, astrology predicted their effects 
on the earth: Both sciences were therefore part of a larger endeavor con- 
cerned with celestial prognostication. 48 Alchemy, on the other hand, had 
close ties to Aristotelian and Stoic theories of matter, and its early practi- 
tioners were enamored of religious themes drawn from what John Dillon 
has called “the underworld of Platonism.” 49 In the Middle Ages, alchemy 
was not usually considered a mathematical science at all but found itself 
subordinated to the study of natural philosophy and often compared to the 
science of medicine. 50

And yet, if we turn to early modern writers on alchemy and astrology, 
we shall see that John Dee was not the only figure to view the two fields as 
part of an overarching discipline in a way that suggests something more 
than a casual overlap. In his Theatrum chemicum britannicum of 1652, 
the antiquarian and founding member of the Royal Society Elias Ashmole

1 6 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton1 6 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

had the following to say about the relationship of alchemy and astrol- 
ogy: “In the operative part of this Science [i.e., alchemy] the Rules of 
Astronomie and Astrologie (as elsewhere I have said) are to be consulted 
with. ... So that Elections, (whose Calculatory part belongs to Astron- 
omie, but the Judiciary to Astrologie) are very necessary to begin this 
work with .” 51

Ashmole supported himself with a neoplatonic view of the cosmos in- 
herited in large part from the magical writer Agrippa von Nettesheim, ac- 
cording to which the universe is divided into supercelestial, celestial, and 
natural realms and the sublunary world is the final recipient of divine ideas 
transmitted by the planets and stars . 52 The secret virtues of material things 
are infused and stirred to action by the celestial bodies, which are the prox- 
imal agents of mundane generation and corruption. Hence it seems per- 
fectly natural that Ashmole would invoke the rules of catarchic astrology 
in a discussion of alchemy: Since the ingredients of the philosophers’ stone 
are subject to the influences of the heavens, one should time one’s alchem- 
ical endeavors so that they fall under propitious celestial configurations. 
Indeed, Ashmole continues, the astrology of elections should be employed 
in virtually all terrestrial pursuits, including “Dyet, Building, Dwelling, 
Apparell,” the planting of crops, and of course, the manufacture of 
talismans . 53Yet despite the seductive logic of a view that subordinates all sublunary 
activities to astrological planning, it was not a conclusion to which al- 
chemists as a whole subscribed. The two disciplines had led separate lives 
too long for their marriage to be an easy one. Indeed, a few years before 
Ashmole was burning his fingers in casting talismans of caterpillars, 
moles, and rats , 54 his contemporary and fellow Royalist Thomas Vaughan 
wrote a critique of such practices: “The common Astrologer, he takes a 
stone, or some peece of Metall, figures it with ridiculous Characters, and 
then exposeth it to the Planets, not in an Alkemusi, but as he dreams him- 
self, he knows not how. ... It is just thus with the common Astrologer, he 
exposeth to the Planets a perfect compounded Body, and by this means 
thinks to performe the Magician ’s Gamaea, and marry the Inferior and Su- 
perior Worlds. It must be a Body reduc’d into Sperm, that the Heavenly 
Feminine moysture which receives and retains the Impresse of the Astrall 
Agent, may be at Liberty, and immediately expos’d to the Masculine Fire 
of Nature. ” 55 Even though Vaughan, like Ashmole, was an apostle of

Introduction 1 7

Agrippa, he denied the efficacy of normal talismanic magic and by impli- 
cation traditional astrology as a whole. Metals, even when molten, were 
“perfect, complete bodies,” which could not receive the stellar influx. 
Vaughan thus argued that fully formed matter cannot be imprinted by 
celestial influences: it must first be reduced to a “nonspecificated” form 
approaching the Aristotelian first matter . 56 The means of attaining this 
mysterious substance, which was also the initial ingredient of the philoso- 
phers’ stone, was alchemy.The historian is presented here with a peculiar dilemma. On the one 
hand we have Ashmole claiming that alchemy, along with most other phys- 
ical pursuits, depends on astrologically determined times. On the other 
hand we have Vaughan asserting that such propitious moments are with- 
out significance unless the alchemist has already produced an inchoate 
“sperm” for the stars to work upon. In the one case alchemy presupposes 
astrology, in the other, the contrary. The two followers of Agrippa have ar- 
rived at exactly opposite conclusions. What are we to make of this per- 
plexing situation?The problem is not without significance for the modern understanding 
of the “occult sciences.” It is commonly supposed that the view held by 
Ashmole was uniformly represented in astrology, alchemy, and natural 
magic over the longue duree. The final chapters of Keith Thomas’s de- 
servedly famous Religion and the Decline of Magic, for example, are built 
on the assumption that astrology served as the basis and justification of the 
other “occult sciences .” 57 Hence when astrology declined, it was only nat- 
ural that belief in alchemy should crumble as well. Brian Vickers takes a 
more ambitious position, arguing that alchemy and astrology, as well as 
the other occult sciences, shared a common “mentality” characterized by 
such traits as a tendency to heap up symbols “paratactically” rather than 
employing critical thinking, an inability to distinguish object from signi- 
fier, and a stagnation of ideas over time. Like Thomas, Vickers adopts as- 
trology as his model, arguing that alchemy and the other occult sciences 
formed a “unified system” of belief . 58 The same assumption, that alchemy 
and astrology formed part of a seamless garment, often seems to underlie 
the research of Frances Yates as well. Although Yates employed her cus- 
tomary modesty when approaching the technical details of the disciplines, 
it is clear that her notion of a “Hermetic-Cabalist tradition” included 
alchemy and astrology as sister sciences . 59

1 8 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

The “Unity of the Occult Sciences” Reexamined1 8 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

The “Unity of the Occult Sciences” Reexamined

Given the position of such prominent scholars, it may come as a surprise 
to learn that Vaughan’s dismissal of traditional astrology was not a mi- 
nority view among alchemists. From the time of its entrance into the Latin 
West of the twelfth century, alchemy as a discipline was notably cool to as- 
trology. It is true that the Latin alchemists acquired the Arabic (and ulti- 
mately Greek) practice of substituting the planetary names for the metals, 
so that gold became sol, silver lima, copper venus, iron mars, tin jupiter, 
lead saturn, and quicksilver mercury. Yet this simple substitution code was 
only one element in a complex and variant set of Decknamen or “cover 
names” alchemists used. In the rich alchemical glossaries of the Middle 
Ages, quicksilver’s planetary designation had to compete with such names 
as “the fleeting,” “the runaway,” “the fugitive slave,” “the cloud,” “the 
lightning,” “the heavy water,” “the spirit,” “the fluid,” and “water of life,” 
to name but a few . 60 The same was true of the other metals.The use of planetary Decknamen did not necessarily signal the depen- 
dence of alchemy upon astrology It is true that alchemy was sometimes 
called astronomia inferior or astronomia terrestris in the Middle Ages, in 
reference to the planetary Decknamen, but this implied only a very superfi- 
cial relationship . 61 Let us consider an influential Latin text of the early thir- 
teenth century the De perfecto magisterio of pseudo-Aristotle. The author 
first announces that alchemy should be called “inferior astronomy” as a 
point of comparison to “superior astronomy” because alchemy deals with 
stones that are “fixed” in the fire (i.e. nonvolatile) just as astronomy deals 
with stars that are “fixed in the fiery firmament.” Similarly both disciplines 
deal with planets, which are erratic, and are borne in a direction contrary to 
the firmament . 62 He continues: “The stones that are called stars, are sol, luna, 
mars, saturn, jupiter, venus, niter, calx, carbuncle, emerald, and the other 
stones that do not flee the fire; but the stones that are called planets are 
quicksilver, sulfur, arsenic, sal ammoniac, tutia, magnesia, and marchasite. 
For these do not withstand the fire, but gradually flee upwards and escape .” 63

Despite his elaboration of this trope, the author then presents copious 
alchemical recipes without any further appeal to the heavens. Here he dis- 
plays considerable mineralogical skill, giving workable recipes for refining 
the precious metals and purifying salts, but is entirely unconcerned with 
employing elections. This is in fact the usual case with medieval alchemy

Introduction 19Introduction 19

If we consider the rather idiosyncratic Liber secretomm alchimie of 
Constantine of Pisa, apparently written in the mid-thirteenth century, a 
still greater divergence between astrological theory and alchemical prac- 
tice appears. In its modern edition, the author expends some five pages in 
describing the need for the alchemist to observe lunations in congealing 
mercury, but in the twenty-five pages of recipes that follow, no further 
mention is made of any astrological theme. 64 Evidently the author felt no 
need to link his allegiance to astrological theory to actual alchemical prac- 
tice. Another illuminating case may be found in the Ars alcbemie attri- 
buted to Michael Scot, the famous astrologer and philosopher of Frederick 
II von Hohenstaufen. The text is of early date and may contain elements 
going back to the genuine Michael Scot. It is all the more surprising, then, 
that only one recipe out of the thirty or so contained therein has any ref- 
erence to astrology. 65 This recipe advises that “if you wish to make luna 
from mercury, then put the mercury in a furnace on the day of luna (i.e., 
Monday) in the hour of luna, and do this in the augmentation of luna.” 66 
The recipe contains some further elaborations, but the astrological import, 
if it can be called that, is clear: To make silver from quicksilver, one must 
begin the process on the hour and day of the moon when the moon is wax- 
ing. If this is astrology, it is of a type that bears little relation to Elias Ash- 
mole’s complex nativities and elections. The directions require neither 
astronomical tables nor any technical knowledge to be carried out. One 
need only know the day of the week, the time of day in the system of 
planetary hours, and the approximate phase of the moon. This has more 
relationship to the age-old common sense of the farmer than to the so- 
phisticated astrological knowledge of an Albumasar or an Alchabitius.Let us consider one more instance of an alchemist making use of astrol- 
ogy, this time on the threshold of the Renaissance. The late-fifteenth- 
century Ordinall of Alchimy by the Bristol alchemist Thomas Norton 
(P1433-1513 or 1514) contains a striking illustration of four alchemical 
elections for beginning different operations in the “great work,” which is 
reproduced in Ashmole’s Tbeatrum. There is strong evidence that Ash- 
mole’s illustration is based on a presentation copy prepared by Norton 
himself, and a similar presentation manuscript is still extant in MS Add. 
10302 in the British Library in London: Hence we can assume that Nor- 
ton oversaw the making of the manuscript illuminations. 67 The illustration 
is followed in Ashmole’s text by these comments of Norton’s: “Wherof

20 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton20 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

Concord most kindly and convenient / Is a direct and firie Ascendent, / Be- 
ing signe common for this Operation, / For the multitude of their Itera- 
tion: / Fortune your Ascendent with his Lord also, / Keeping th’aspect of 
Shrewes them fro; / And if thei must let, or needly infect, / Cause them to 
looke with a Trine aspect. / For the White ivarke make fortunate the 
Moone, / For the Lord of the Fourthe house likewise be it done; / For that 
is the Thesaurum absconditum of olde Clerks; / Soe of the Sixt house for 
Servants of the Werks; / Save them well from greate impediments, As it is 
in Picture, or like the same intents.” 68 All of this sounds at first like a seri- 
ous commitment to catarchic astrology on Norton’s part, but a close in- 
spection of the illustration to which he refers reveals a different story 
altogether. All four elective schemes are constructed for a latitude of about 
52°N, a good approximation for Bristol, and all four employ the Alch- 
abitius house system. 69 The four schemes also agree in placing the ascen- 
dent in Sagittarius, which is indeed a member of the fiery triplicity, as 
Norton advises. In all four schemes, likewise, Jupiter will be the Lord of 
the Ascendent, since Sagittarius is one of his two domiciles. Since Jupiter 
is found “bodily” in Sagittarius in two of the four schemes (the second and 
third, reading clockwise from the top left), and in his other domicile, 
Pisces, in the first, it is clear that Norton was trying to put him in a propi- 
tious spot. It is not so easy, then, to understand why the second and possi- 
bly the third scheme have put the maleficent Saturn in conjunction with 
Jupiter or why the fourth scheme has Jupiter situated in Leo, in the sixth 
house, and possibly in conjunction with Saturn as well. 70 In the second in- 
stance, and perhaps the third and fourth as well, the Lord of the Ascen- 
dent, Jupiter, has surely been put into aspect with a “shrewe.”But these violations of Norton’s rules raise trivial inconveniences com- 
pared to the insurmountable fact that three of the four figures are obviously 
impossible from an astronomical point of view. In the first scheme, Venus 
and the sun have an angular separation of 114°, in the second they are 
separated by 176°, and in the third by either 113° or 143° (depending on 
whether one interprets the figure to mean that Venus is in Aries or Pisces). 
As Ashmole admits in his commentary, these schemes therefore exceed the 
actual maximum separation of Venus from the sun, for which he gives the 
figure 48°. 71 Ashmole was also forced to point out that even if one disre- 
garded the problems posed by Venus, the planetary positions Norton gave 
for the superior planets and the sun did not correspond to any period within

Introduction 21Introduction 21

the time when Norton could have written his book . 72 As Ashmole put it, 
“Withall, the Planets as they stand here placed in Signes and Houses are not 
so that these Figures were the Elected times for the Authors owne Opera- 
tions (or any others in that Faculty) but are rather fained and invented, onely 
to bring them within the compasse of his Rules. And to satisfie my selfe 
herein, I have taken some paines to Calculate the places of the Planets for 
severall years about the Authors time, but cannot find the three Superiors 
and place of the [sun] to be in those Signes wherein he has posited them .” 73 
Despite Ashmole’s acumen, he was not able to bring himself to the evident 
conclusion that Norton was an astrological incompetent. Commenting on 
the unorthodox planetary symbols employed by Norton, Ashmole used 
their “hieroglyphic” character as evidence that Norton was “a learned As- 
trologian” who would not divulge his secrets to the vulgar but instead em- 
ployed “Vailes and Shadows, as in other parts of the Mistery.” The very 
presence of seeming mistakes in Norton’s elections could be used as evidence 
that the Bristol alchemist was not a “vulgar Plumet,” but a Hermetic sage. 
Such an attitude does not accord well with historical scholarship.In the case of Norton, then, what seems at first a serious commitment 
to catarchic astrology turns out to be mere window dressing, for Norton’s 
elections are manifestly unworkable. All the evidence considered up to 
now points to the conclusion that alchemy and astrology were two quite 
distinct disciplines in the Middle Ages, although on some occasions they 
overlapped, as indeed astrology overlapped with medicine, architecture, 
and a host of other pursuits. This impression is heightened by the fact that 
alchemists did not merely ignore astrology as a rule: In some famous in- 
stances they openly expressed their disregard for or even hostility to it. 
One trend-setting instance of trivializing astrology can be found in the 
Summa perfection is of pseudo-Geber, written around the end of the thir- 
teenth century by an occidental. The text was one of the most influential 
works of alchemy produced in the Middle Ages and was still widely cited 
in the seventeenth century . 74 The Summa contains a long scholastic intro- 
duction in which various objections to alchemy are first raised, then sys- 
tematically rebutted. One of these objections is the following:

And similarly, being and perfection are given by the stars, as it were by the first 
things perfecting and moving the matter of generation and corruption to the being 
and not-being of species. This, moreover, happens in an instant, when one or many 
stars from its own motions arrives at a determinate position in the firmament, by

22 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton22 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

which is bestowed perfect being, because everything acquires being for itself from 
a certain position of the stars in a moment. And there is not one position only but 
many mutually diverse ones just as their effects are diverse. And we cannot know 
thoroughly their diversity and distinction, for they are unknown and infinite. How 
therefore will you correct the defect of your work from your ignorance of the di- 
versities among the stellar positions due to their motion? 75

This attack on alchemy argues that the unknowable and indeed infinite 
crowd of celestial configurations makes exact prediction of their effects on 
matter impossible. Such an argument presupposes that astrology itself is 
invalid, for what is true of stellar effects on alchemical ingredients must be 
true a fortiori of stellar effects in general. Hence we might expect the 
Summa to reply with a defense of astrological prognostication. If so, we 
must be prepared for a rude shock, for “Geber’s” response is quite the con- 
trary of our expectations:And if they should say that the perfection of the metals is derived from the position 
of one or more stars, which perfection we do not know, we say it is not necessary 
for us to know this position, since there is no species of generables and corrupt- 
ibles in which the generation and corruption of each of its individuals fails to oc- 
cur every day, whence it is manifest that the position of the stars is every day 
perfective and corruptive of whatever species of individuals. It is not therefore nec- 
essary for us to wait for this position of the stars, even if it should be useful. But it 
is sufficient merely to arrange the matter for nature so that she, herself wise, in turn 
coordinate it with the suitable positions of the mobile bodies. . . . For we see, when 
we want to lead a worm into being from a dog, or other putrescible animal, [that] 
we do not consider immediately the position of the stars, but rather the disposition 
of the ambient air, and other causes of putrefaction in that. 76

The gist of “Geber’s” argument is that nature herself induces perpetual 
generation and corruption on earth, in every sort of mutable being, with- 
out waiting for specific celestial aspects . 77 His reference to the artificial 
spontaneous generation of worms without regard to astrological elections 
shows that the significant factor in generation is the ambient air and other 
proximal causes — not the celestial bodies themselves. Possibly the author 
thinks that the celestial rays are collected in the ambient and then absorbed 
by a given type of matter in accordance with its particular characteristics. 
At any rate, he is quite willing to sacrifice the election of times by admit- 
ting that it is at best otiose and at worst impossible. Instead of defending 
catarchic astrology, he rejects it.

The presence of such anti-astrological arguments in the Summa is of the 
highest significance because of the text’s gargantuan influence. One author

Introduction 23The presence of such anti-astrological arguments in the Summa is of the 
highest significance because of the text’s gargantuan influence. One author

Introduction 23

who seems to have taken these clues to heart and developed them further 
is Bernard of Trier, whose Epistola ad Thomam de Bononia is one of the 
lesser classics of alchemical literature. Bernard’s letter, which sometimes 
bears the date 1385, is addressed to Thomas of Bologna, physician to 
Charles V and VI of France and the father of the well-known writer Chris- 
tine de Pizan. 78 Thomas, who had fallen under suspicion for sending a du- 
bious medicine to the French king and to the dukes of Burgundy and Berry, 
wrote to Bernard in the apparent hope of gaining support for his recipe. In 
the course of his letter, Thomas refers to the generation of metals beneath 
the surface of the earth. This offers Bernard the opportunity of launching 
into a veritable tirade on the subject of astral causation.Bernard begins his attack by affirming the traditional alchemical theory 
that metals are generated out of sulfur and mercury. He vehemently denies 
the notion of “some” that the main agency in congealing mercury is the 
sun rather than sulfur. Indeed, Bernard states, the form of gold is not per- 
fected by the heat of the sun in mines as some say, but rather by the power 
of the motion of the sun’s orb. It is not even a heat from the sun’s own 
sphere that perfects gold, but rather from all the celestial spheres together 
(; universaliter totius coeli ). 79 The sun’s rays per se do not penetrate the 
earth at all, nor does any other influence, although the motion of the orbs 
is indeed the cause of heat. Consequently, there is no connection between 
gold and the sun except that the sun is the hottest of the planets and gold 
the hottest of the metals. The Deckname “sol” has been given to gold in 
recognition of this fact, which has led fools to think that “each of the seven 
planets generates one metallic species by its own proper influence to which 
species it agrees in property and nature.” 80

Bernard’s argument, which he develops into an interesting discussion of 
the reflection of the stellar rays by the elementary spheres, draws on a tra- 
ditional argument that the sun heats by the motion of its sphere, rather 
than by means of its rays. 81 What is of interest to us, however, is the fact 
that Bernard uses this argument in a fashion reminiscent of his anti- 
astrological contemporary Nicole Oresme to deny the significance of cau- 
sation by celestial influences. Although Bernard restricts himself to a 
rejection of planetary rays in the formation of metals, by implication the 
alchemist who is intent on reproducing the natural generation of metals by 
artificial means can also ignore elections.

24 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton24 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

We have seen that the alchemists of the Middle Ages often disregarded, 
and in some instances even attacked, astrology. Alchemy and astrology 
were widely recognized to be distinct disciplines with their own respective 
methods and goals. How then could Elias Ashmole state in the 1650s 
that “ ludiciall Astrologie is the Key of Naturall Magick, and Naturall 
Magick the Doore that leads to this Blessed Stone [i.e., the philoso- 
phers’ stone]”? 82 The answer, of course, lies in the conceptual universe 
that Ashmole inhabited, a world vastly different from that of the medieval 
alchemists. Although ostensibly commenting on the Ordinall of Thomas 
Norton, Ashmole had in fact imported the neoplatonic magic of Marsilio 
Ficino and his acolytes, above all Agrippa von Nettesheim.

Several major changes in the standard view of alchemy can be traced 
directly to Ficino and Agrippa. First, in his De vita coelitus comparanda, 
Ficino explicitly linked the vital spirit of the cosmos with the alchemi- 
cal quintessence, a physical substance that could be extracted by means of 
distillation and other techniques. As Ficino himself says,between the tangible and partly transient body of the world and its very soul, 
whose nature is very far from its body, there exists everywhere a spirit, just as there 
is between the soul and body in us, assuming that life everywhere is always com- 
municated by a soul to a grosser body. . . . When this spirit is rightly separated and, 
once separated, is conserved, it is able like the power of seed to generate a thing like 
itself, if only it is employed on a material of the same kind. Diligent natural 
philosophers, when they separate this sort of spirit of gold by sublimation over fire, 
will employ it on any of the metals and will make it gold. This spirit rightly drawn 
from gold or something else and preserved, the Arab astrologers call Elixir. But let 
us return to the spirit of the world. The world generates everything through it 
(since, indeed, all things generate through their own spirit); and we can call it both 
“the heavens” and “quintessence .” 83

Ficino’s brief reference to alchemy in De vita had an influence out of all 
proportion to its length. 84 The association that the prominent neoplaton- 
ist drew between the alchemical quintessence and the spirit of the world 
gave alchemy a cosmic character that it had lacked in the Middle Ages, 
when it was seen primarily as a pursuit devoted to metals, minerals, and 
items of chemical technology. The claim that alchemy could isolate the vi- 
tal principle of the world was something new. 85

Ficino’s follower, Agrippa von Nettesheim, appropriated and expanded 
Ficino’s linkage of the alchemical quintessence to the spiritus mundi , S6 
adding another important feature to the new understanding of alchemy in 
the form of an alchemically colored treatment of the four elements. Rely-

Introduction 25Introduction 25

ing on his teacher Johannes Trithemius of Sponheim, Agrippa argued that 
each of the four elements was actually “threefold” and contained its purer 
and simpler cognates within itself. Agrippa stated clearly that without 
direct knowledge of these simpler elements, one could not obtain success 
in natural magic. 87 He further asserted the cosmic significance of alchemy 
in the second book of De occulta philosophia, where he supplied a list of 
correspondences to the number one, or monas. In the elementary world, 
Agrippa argued that the number one is represented by “the philosophers’ 
stone — the one subject and instrument of all natural and trans-natural 
virtues.” 88 The accompanying text supports this statement further: “There 
is one thing created by God, the subject of all the wonderfulness on earth 
or in the heavens: this thing is itself animal, vegetable, and mineral in actu, 
it is found everywhere yet known to very few, mentioned by none under its 
proper name but veiled in innumerable figurae and enigmas, without 
which neither alchemy, nor natural magic can attain its complete goal.” 89 
Agrippa’s description of the “one thing,” replete with language tradition- 
ally used for the philosophers’ stone, reinforced the new status that Fi- 
cino had imparted to alchemy. It also made it possible to interpret one of 
the hallowed texts of alchemy, the Tabula smaragdina or Emerald Tab- 
let of “Hermes Trismegistus,” in a new light, albeit one inherited from 
Trithemius.The Emerald Tablet is first found in the Kitab sin al-khallqa or Book 
of the Secret of Creation attributed to “Balinas” (pseudo-Apollonius of 
Tyana, ca. 8th c.). Hermes there says that “that which is above is the same 
as that which is below” and follows this cryptic utterance with still more 
obscure material about the conversion of the “one thing” into earth by 
means of fire and a descent from heaven into earth. Medieval authors usu- 
ally saw an encoded alchemical recipe in these lines, but in the sixteenth 
century the Emerald Table served as one basis for the comprehensive uni- 
fication of alchemy and a neoplatonizing cosmology under discussion. 
Trithemius, whom Agrippa follows, took it literally as a cosmological 
statement concerning the soul of the world.

Elias Ashmole presented this neoplatonic view of alchemy as a sister sci- 
ence to natural magic in his Theatrum chemicum britannicum. The al- 
chemist and the catarchic astrologer were no longer the representatives of 
distinct fields who might on occasion interact. They were now the same fig- 
ure, the Hermetic sage who held the key to occult wisdom in its entirety.

26 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

Ashmole himself expresses nicely, in his commentary on Norton, the ideal 
of the universal archimagus who, like Prospero, controls the whole of na- 
ture: “ Wisemen conceive it no way Irrationall that it should be possible for 
us to ascend by the same degrees through each world, to the very Originall 
world it selfe, the Maker of all things and first Cause. But how to conjoyne 
the Inferiours with the vertue of the Superiours (which is marrying Elmes 
to Vines) or how to call out of the hidden places into open light, the dis- 
persed and seminated Vertues, (i.e. Virtutes in centro centri latentes,) is the 
work of the Magi, or Hermetick Philosophers onely; and depends upon 
the aforesaid Harmony .” 90The Renaissance integration of the occult sciences that Ashmole repre- 
sents should not make us forget, however, that that other follower of 
Agrippa, Thomas Vaughan, disparaged the practices of contemporary as- 
trologers. For it was possible, of course, to interpret Agrippa’s comments 
to mean that the science of celestial influence was invalid unless one had 
already acquired the first matter of the philosophers’ stone. This was the 
conclusion that Vaughan drew, and on the basis of Agrippa’s text alone, it 
was perfectly legitimate. Even during the heyday of Renaissance neopla- 
tonism, astrology and alchemy lived independent lives, despite the vast 
inkwells devoted to the rhetorical embellishment of occult philosophy.A particularly enlightening example of the alchemists’ view of astrology 
in this period can be seen in a Munchausen-like story told by one “Ed- 
wardus Generosus,” who claimed to have created two philosophers’ 
stones, one for the sun and the other for the moon. The stone of the sun 
was intensely hot, whereas the lunar stone concentrated the light and 
frigor of the moon. Hence it could be used to freeze small animals, and the 
author describes at length the great sport he had in this pursuit. First, like 
a small boy playing pranks with a flashlight under his blanket, Edward em- 
ployed the lunar stone to freeze fleas beneath the sheets of his bed. Having 
had such success on minute vermin, Edward then tells us how he gradu- 
ated to larger animals. He expresses this experiment in astrological terms: 
“Then I bethought me of a new device. Now I will make such a strange 
conjunction as neither Haly, Guido, Bonatus or their M r Ptolomaeus ever 
saw y c like in all y e conjunctions of y e stars. I first took a quick live mouse, 
an Humble Bee, & a nimble frogg, & all these I put into a fine bowl glass 
together, having that care that none should either creep leap or fly away 
w th out my leave. Then I held my glass w th my nimble quick A creatures A

Introduction 27Introduction 27

[water deleted] in it directly under y e beam of my fair beautiful [luna] till 
she had benummed all their vitall spirits to death, making them A all A as 
cold as any lead quickly.” 91 Despite the farcical dispatching of Edward’s 
nimble creatures, the passage says something significant about the rela- 
tionship of alchemy and astrology in the early modern period. Edward’s 
jocular “conjunction” is not one of stars or planets but of the small ani- 
mals that he elects to torment. Although few alchemists followed Edward 
in turning astrology into a burlesque, their astrological allusions were 
often of a similarly analogical nature rather than a practical one. Even 
the widely revered description of alchemy as terrestrial astronomy was a 
tropological association, comparing one discipline to the other rather than 
using the tools of the former in the operation of the latter.

The Chapters in This VolumeThe Chapters in This Volume

As we have urged in the foregoing, the association between alchemy and as- 
trology is problematic rather than transparent. The two disciplines diverge 
from one another in at least as many instances as they have points of inter- 
section. For this reason, the remaining seven chapters in this book do not 
uniformly concern both alchemy and astrology, but for the most part treat 
one or the other pursuit independently. The subject of the first two papers, 
Girolamo Cardano (1501-76), was one of the most famous astrologers of 
the Renaissance. Germana Ernst’s contribution in chapter 2 gives a com- 
prehensive overview of Cardano’s career as an astrologer, emphasizing his 
attempts to purify the discipline by returning it to its Ptolemaic roots. Writ- 
ing after the devastating attack on astrology by Giovanni Pico della Mi- 
randola and dissatisfied with the current status of the discipline as a realm 
for unlearned and opportunistic diviners, Cardano wanted to restore the 
Ptolemaic linkage of astrology to natural philosophy. Yet Cardano was not 
merely a natural philosopher, but a trained practitioner of medicine as well. 
Hence chapter 3, by Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi, examines the 
links between Cardano’s medicine and his astrology. Astrology had been 
taught as an adjunct to academic medicine since the High Middle Ages, so 
there was a long-standing tradition of connecting the two at Cardano’s dis- 
posal. And yet, as Grafton and Siraisi show, the Italian polymath made sur- 
prisingly little of astrological medicine. For the most part, he seems to have 
viewed the fields of astrology and medicine as separate disciplines with

28 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton28 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

their own theoretical (and practical) bases. It is worth adding here that the 
same bifurcation applied a fortiori when Cardano considered alchemy. De- 
spite his deep allegiance to the “occult” science of astrology, he had little 
sympathy for alchemical practice, lumping it together with such nefarious 
arts as poisoning and the invocation of demons. 92

Chapter 4, by Darrel Rutkin, is a study of Johann Kepler’s dedication to 
the Astronomia Nova of 1609. Although considerable scrutiny has fo- 
cused recently on the astrological motifs Galileo employed in his own ded- 
icatory letter to Cosimo II in the Siderius nuncius of 1610, Rutkin shows 
that Kepler had already employed similar astrological conceits in his ded- 
ication to the Holy Roman Emperor, Rudolph II. This raises the inter- 
esting possibility, which Rutkin explores in some depth, that Galileo 
borrowed the dedicatory use of a ruler’s natal chart from Kepler himself. 
Although the evidence of such influence remains inconclusive at present, 
the very fact that two such eminent astronomers framed their scientific dis- 
coveries within the borders of natal astrology gives further testimony to 
the infiltration of genethlialogy into every aspect of Renaissance culture. 
It should not surprise us that the same astronomer who predicted Count 
Wallenstein’s victories on the battlefield should also seek success in the 
Martial horoscope of his ruler.Despite their profound awareness of astrological matters, neither Kepler 
nor Galileo seems to have found much fascination in alchemy. This cannot 
be said of the subject of the chapters by Nicholas Clulee and Didier Kahn, 
namely the anonymous Rosicrucians who burst upon the European scene 
in the second decade of the seventeenth century. Clulee’s contribution in 
chapter 5 considers the claims Frances Yates made for the Elizabethan ma- 
gus John Dee in setting the stage for the Rosicrucian movement. Basing 
herself in part on a pseudonymous document attributed to one “Philippus 
a Gabella,” Yates maintained that Dee’s visit to the Continent in the 1580s 
had planted the seeds for a scientific and religious upheaval that would 
emerge with the publication of the Rosicrucian manifestos in 1614-16. 
Clulee argues that the treatise attributed to Gabella, although published 
with the second of the Rosicrucian treatises, was tangential to the move- 
ment and extremely derivative. It does not provide evidence of Dee as the 
hidden patriarch of Rosicrucianism, a negative inference certified both by 
the eclecticism of its borrowings and its apparent ignorance of the major 
themes of Rosicrucianism. Despite Gabella’s shortcomings as an inter-

Introduction 29

preter of Dee, however, he does provide compelling evidence for the 
dispersion of Dee’s ideas. In particular, Gabella transmits the notion of 
alchemy as inferior astronomy, which we have discussed above. Clulee 
shows at length how Dee appropriated this idea from sources such as Tri- 
themius and Agrippa and passed it on to writers who were more con- 
cerned with practical alchemy, such as Gabella.Kahn’s contribution in chapter 6 also concerns the Rosicrucian move- 
ment, but within the specific context of France during the 1620s. To be 
exact, Kahn discusses the origin and effects of the sensational posting 
of Rosicrucian broadsheets in Paris in 1623. In magisterial detail, Kahn 
shows that the originator of this Rosicrucian hoax was a teenage prankster 
named Etienne Chaume. Trying to beguile the contemporary Lullists and 
other aficionados of arcane knowledge, Chaume managed to create an in- 
cendiary situation in which charges of libertinism, atheism, and malefi- 
cium came to be intertwined. The astonishing ramifications of Chaume’s 
boyhood prank have carried on even into the twentieth century, for a mul- 
titude of sober scholars have accepted on scanty evidence that such lumi- 
naries as Descartes and Gassendi were embroiled in the Rosicrucian scare. 
Here and elsewhere Kahn throws new light on the dense thicket of intel- 
lectual and religious controversy that surrounded the Rosicrucian move- 
ment in early modern France.As Kahn points out in his chapter, the Rosicrucian literature was deeply 
pervaded by alchemical ruminations but more concerned with millenari- 
anism and Biblical prophecy than with the details of technical astrology. 
Such a relative disregard for mathematical astrology cannot be imputed to 
the subject of Lauren Kassell’s chapter 7, namely Simon Forman (1552- 
1611). Forman’s fusion of alchemy, astrology, and cabala paralleled the in- 
terests of his older contemporary John Dee as well as those of the younger 
aspirant to secret wisdom, Elias Ashmole. The integrated vision of the oc- 
cult sciences propounded by Agrippa von Nettesheim thoroughly condi- 
tioned all three authors. Unlike Dee and Ashmole, however, Forman was 
an autodidact, having risen from an impoverished background to become 
a famous purveyor of the occult to those who could afford his services. 
Kassel provides a densely documented record of Forman’s reading prac- 
tices, showing how he fused practical alchemy, heterodox Biblical inter- 
pretation, medicine, and astrology into a characteristic brew that would 
impress his clients and feed his own appetite for secret wisdom.

30 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton30 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

The final chapter, by Lawrence Principe and William Newman, provides 
an extended criticism of the existing historiography of alchemy. As 
Principe and Newman argue, much of the contemporary historical writ- 
ing on alchemy has unwittingly absorbed themes drawn from nineteenth- 
century occultism. Anachronistic promoters of so-called spiritual alchemy 
in that period, such as Mary Anne Atwood and Ethan Allen Hitchcock, 
avoided the embarrassing fact that many alchemical recipes do not make 
obvious chemical sense by arguing that such recipes were really not about 
chemistry at all, but veiled prescriptions for perfecting the alchemist’s soul. 
Twentieth-century apologists of the mysteries, such as Carl Gustav Jung 
and Mircea Eliade, adopted this viewpoint and put it into the language 
of psychology and anthropology. Historians of alchemy have in turn em- 
ployed the views of Jung and Eliade as interpretive tools without realiz- 
ing their dubious origins. The result is a remarkable incursion of occultist 
beliefs into the very framework of historiography, a situation possibly 
unparalleled in other fields of research.In conclusion, the surprising new material provided by many of the 
chapters in this volume should help to dispel the myopic stereotypes that 
have come to dominate the historical study of the occult sciences since its 
revival in the 1960s. We can no longer accept the pansophic optimism of 
an Elias Ashmole as reflecting the common situation of alchemical and as- 
trological practitioners in his own time, not to mention the longue duree. 
Only by dropping the blinders acquired from studying Agrippa and Dee, 
influential though they were, will we be able to understand the diversity of 
interests displayed by single-minded aficionados of one or another branch 
of the occult sciences. The Ashmolean image of the universal mage is as 
absent from such astrological experts as Kepler and Galileo as it is from 
alchemical mavens of the stamp of a Boyle or Newton. In short, the chap- 
ters in this volume present a much-needed new perspective on the histori- 
cal study of the so-called occult sciences.

Notes

1. Athanasius Kircher, Vita a semetipso conscripta, Vienna, Osterreichische Na- 
tionalbibliothek, MS 13752, 18-20, at 19-20: “Vnde multi secreto examinantes, 
qua ratione Vrbis invasionem tam constanter praedixissem, putabant Astrologiae 
id arte factum fuisse, sed, uti ad visionem aperiendam non obligabar, ita alto silen- 
tio rem repressi, relinquendo unicuique potestatem de praedictione judicandi quod 
vellet.”

Introduction 31

2. On Kircher, see, e.g., T. Leinkauf, Mundus combinatus (Berlin: Akademie,

1993) ; P. Findlen, Possessing Nature (Berkeley: University of California Press,

1994) .

3. T. W. Adorno, The Stars down to Earth and Other Essays on the Irrational in 
Culture, ed. S. Crook (London and New York: Routledge, 1994).

4. H. Wiesendanger, Zivischen Wissenschaft und Aberglaube (Frankfurt: Fischer, 
1989).4. H. Wiesendanger, Zivischen Wissenschaft und Aberglaube (Frankfurt: Fischer, 
1989).

5. See, e.g., A. Geneva, Astrology and the Seventeenth-Century Mind (Manches- 
ter: Manchester University Press, 1995); A. Grafton, Cardano’s Cosmos (Cam- 
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999).

6. See, e.g., K. Thomas, Religion and the Decline of Magic (London: Scribner, 
1971); M. MacDonald, Mystical Bedlam (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1981).

7. See, e.g., P. Zambelli, ed., “Astrologi ballucinati”: Stars and the End of the 
World in Luther’s Time (Berlin and New York: de Gruyter, 1986); O. Niccoli, 
Prophecy and People in Renaissance Italy, trans. L. G. Cochrane (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1990); R. Barnes, Prophecy and Gnosis (Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 1988); R. Westman, “Copernicus and the Prognostica- 
tors: The Bologna Period, 1496-1500,” Universitas, (December 1993): 1-5.

8. See esp. the classic essays of A. Warburg, The Renewal of Pagan Antiquity, 
ed. K. W. Forster, trans. D. Britt (Los Angeles: Getty Research Institute, 1999).

9. E. Casanova, “L’astrologia e la consegna del bastone al capitano generale della 
repubblica fiorentina,” Archivio storico italiano, 5th ser., 7 (1891): 134-44.

10. M. E. Bowden, “The Scientific Revolution in Astrology” (Ph.D. diss., Yale 
University, 1974); J. V. Field, “A Lutheran Astrologer: Johannes Kepler,” Archive 
for History of Exact Sciences, 31 (1984): 225-68; B. Bauer, “Die Rolle des Ho- 
fastrologen und Hofmathematicus als fiirstlicher Berater,” in Hofischer Humanis- 
mus, ed. A. Buck (Weinheim: VCH, 1989), 93-117; G. Ernst, Religione, ragione e 
natura (Milan: Franco Angeli, 1991).

11. J. Burckhardt, Die Kultur der Renaissance in Italien: Ein Versuch (Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1955).11. J. Burckhardt, Die Kultur der Renaissance in Italien: Ein Versuch (Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1955).

12. See esp. Warburg’s great study Heidnisch-antike Weissagung in Wort und 
Bild zu Luthers Zeiten, Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissen- 
schaften, 1919 (Heidelberg: Winter, 1920); trans. in Warburg, The Reneival of 
Pagan Antiquity, 597-697.

13. See Niccoli, Prophecy and People, and the important review by J.-M. Sall- 
mann, Annales: Economies, Societes, Civilisations, 47 (1992): 144-46.

14. See Ernst, Religione, ragione e natura, and the older study by G. Bock, 
Thomas Campanella (Tubingen: Niemeyer, 1974).

15. L. B. Alberti, The Society of Renaissance Florence, trans. R. Neu Watkins 
(Columbia, S.C.: University of South Carolina Press, 1969), 256; I libri della 
famiglia, in Opere volgari, ed. C. Grayson (Bari: Laterza, 1960-73), I, 274.

16. Alberti, Society, 256; Opere volgari, I, 274: “Erano in que’tempo gli animi de’ 
dotti astronomi solliciti e pieni di varia espettazione, quanto el cielo porgea loro

32 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

manifesti indizii di permutazioni ed eversioni di republiche, stati e summi magis- 
trate; e quasi comune sentenza, statuivano non poter lungi essere che quella Stella 
crinita, quale a mezzo il cielo splendidissima e diurna continuati i di appariva in 
que’ mesi, per sua notata consuetudine predicesse fine e morte di qualche simile al 
Duco famosissimo e supremo principe.”17. Alberti, Society, 256; Opere volgari, I, 274-75: “E gia era chi di questa pro- 
mulgata opinione forse fatto avea al Duca certo; a cui, magnifica risposta, dicono, 
e degna di principe, rispose el Duca: se non acerbo cadere dai mortali, ove cost resti 
persuaso se essere stato al cielo tanto a cura, e parerli morte gloriosa questa, ove 
doppo a se poi viva diuturna fama; che quelle intelligenze celeste cosi per se es- 
posero raro e maraviglioso segno e indizio, onde manifesto ciascuno compreenda 
che que’ lassu divini animi immortali di sua vita e morte stati erano curiosi.”

18. Alberti, Society, 256-57; Opere volgari, I, 275: “Ma pur credo per questo 
tenea qualche ad altri poco manifesta, ma dentro in se non piccola agitazion 
d’animo . . .”

19. Alberti, Society, 256; Opere volgari, I, 274: “Questi nostri Alberti 
d’Inghilterra, di Fiandra, di Spagna, di Francia, di Catalogna, da Rodi, di Soria, di 
Barberia, e di que’ tutti luoghi ove oggidi ancora reggono e adirizzano mercantia, 
quanto gli avea per mie lettere pregati, cosi o tumulti, armate, esserciti o legge 
nuove, affinita fra principi, publice amicizie, armi o incendii, naufragi, o qual- 
unque cosa accadesse per le provincie nuova e degna di memoria, subito me 
ne faceano certo.”

20. Alberti, Society, 257; Opere volgari, I, 275.

21. See Alberti, Society, 257, translator’s note.

22. See A. Grafton, Leon Battista Alberti (New York: Hill & Wang, 2000), 
chap. 6.

23. For an edition, translation, and study of Lapo’s text, see C. S. Celenza, Re- 
naissance Humanism and the Papal Curia (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press, 1999).

24. See R. Fubini and A. N. Gallorini, “F’autobiografia di Feon Battista Alberti: 
Studio e edizione,” Rinascimento, ser. 2, 12 (1972):21-78; and R. Neu Watkins, 
“F. B. Alberti in the Mirror: An Interpretation of the Vita with a New Transla- 
tion,” Italian Quarterly, 30 (1989): 5-30.25. Alberti, Society, 272; Opere volgari, I, 291-92: “Eh! Quanti precetti qui nec- 
essari mancherebbono, Fionardo, a chi volesse lato e diffuso disputarne! come se 
chi forse avesse dagli astronomi udito che Marte disponga impeto di esserciti e 
furore d’arme, Mercurio instituisca varie scienze e suttilita d’ingegno e mar- 
avigliose arte, Giove moderi le ceremonie e animi religiosi, el Sole conceda degnita 
e principati, la Funa conciti viaggi e movimenti feminili e plebei, Saturno aggravi 
e ritardi nostri pensieri e incetti; e tenesse di tutti cosi loro natura e forza, dove nolli 
fusse noto in qual parte del cielo e in quanta elevazione ciascuno per se molto o 
meno vaglia, e con che razzi l’uno all’altro porga amicizia o inimicizia, e quanto 
coniunti possano in buona o mala fortuna, certo sarebbe non costui astrologo. Ma 
quella semplice cognizione di que’ nudi principii, a volere bene in quella arte venire

Introduction 33

erudito, sara tale che senza esse nulla potra; con esse non pero ara che introito ad 
aprendere l’altre quasi infinite ragioni a prevedere e discernere le cose, a quale il 
cielo tende per produrle. Cost qui ora que’ tutti essempli e sentenze, quali affermo 
sono apresso gli ottimi scrittori utilissimi e copiosissimi, non pero prestano quanto 
aiuto ci bisogna.”

26. See Fubini and Gallorini, “L’autobiografia.”

27. L. B. Alberti, De re aedificatoria, 4.3, ed. G. Orlandi, trans. P. Portoghesi, I, 
288-97.

28. Grafton, Cardano’s Cosmos, chaps. 7, 9.

29. H. Wolf, “Ad Io. Oporinum commentariolus de vitae suae ratione ac potius 
fortuna,” in Oratores Graeci, ed. J. J. Reiske, vol. 8 (Leipzig: Sommer, 1773), 772- 
876; German translation in H.-G. Beck, Der Vater der deutschen Byzantinistik 
(Munich: Institut fur Byzantinistik, 1984), 1-144.

30. See Beck, “Nachwort,” in Der Vater der Byzantinistik; H. R. Velten, Das 
selbst geschriebene Leben (Heidelberg: Winter, 1995), 94-101.30. See Beck, “Nachwort,” in Der Vater der Byzantinistik; H. R. Velten, Das 
selbst geschriebene Leben (Heidelberg: Winter, 1995), 94-101.

31. Wolf, “Commentariolus,” 773: “Id ego turn, cum neque recepissem, neque re- 
cusassem, in hoc usque tempus, klimaketron enestoton, bos fasin hoi peri ta astra 
deinoi, prorogavi.”

32. Ibid., 781: “Quod si horologium fefellit (ut saepe fit, ac potius plerumque) po- 
tuit rneus natalis paulo esse maturior, ut ex trutina Hermetis, quam vocant, 
Aquarii 14 horoscopet, vel in septimam incidere, ut initium Geminorum ex 
antegressa oppositione secundum Ptolemaicam correctionem tenuerit orientem. 
Caeterum utramque hanc rationem non contemnendis argumentis evertit Ant. 
Montulmius.” On these procedures, see J. North, Horoscopes and History (Lon- 
don: Warburg Institute, 1986).

33. Wolf, “Commentariolus,” 781: “lam quod ad investigationem puncti horo- 
scopantis ex eventibus attinet, ei quoque rei haud scio quantum sit tribuendum. 
Nam tametsi martialia pleraque subita, violenta et cruenta, Saturnia vero in- 
sidiosa, virulenta, luctuosa, diuturna perhibentur, tamen et eundem casum ob alias 
causas non sine rationibus accommodari video, et multis seu divinitus seu magikos 
evenerunt, quorum significationes in genesi apparent.”

34. Ibid., 781-82 n.: “Hie longum locum, astrologicarum et horoscopicarum nu- 
garum plenum omisi, ne taedio lectoribis et derisui essem, neu bonum Wolfium 
fannis exponerem”; Beck, Der Vater der Byzantinistik.

35. See M. de Nostradamus, Lettres inedites, ed. J. Dupebe (Geneva: Droz, 1983); 
P. Brind’ Amour, Nostradamus astrophile (Ottawa and Paris: University of Ottawa 
Press, 1993).

36. R. Castagnola, ed., I Guicciardini e le scienze occulte, (Florence: Olschki, 
1990).

37. Grafton, Cardano’s Cosmos, chap. 10.

38. London, British Library MS Sloane 325; J. G. Nichols, “Some Additions to 
the Biographies of Sir John Cheke and Sir Thomas Smith,” Archaeologia, 38 
(1859): 98-127 at 103-12, 116-20.38. London, British Library MS Sloane 325; J. G. Nichols, “Some Additions to 
the Biographies of Sir John Cheke and Sir Thomas Smith,” Archaeologia, 38 
(1859): 98-127 at 103-12, 116-20.

34 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

39. Wolf, “Commentariolus,” 808: “Interdum etiam iocabatur in staturam meam 
proceriorem, quum diceret, dandum mihi esse locum, cui sui calcei iam essent apti 
(fortassis enim ex Astrologo audierat, cum eo usque vixisset, receptui cavendum 
fore) . .

40. Ibid., 831: “Nec multo ante, cum in platea in Georgium loach. Rhaeticum in- 
cidissem, isque inter alia etiam Chiromantiae facta mentione, manum meam in- 
spexisset: brevi, inquit, magnum tibi a muliere periculum impendet.”

41. Ibid., 860: “Multo autem ante Cyprianus Leovitius inspecta conversione an- 
nalium (quos iam turn confectos habebam ad annum aetatis sexagesimum usque) 
subita mihi et opum et dignitatis incrementa promitti affirmabat.”

42. Ibid., 797: “nec prius tamen voti compos fio, quam in morbum incidissem, in- 
dignatione Veneris, ut opinor (neque enim accusandi sunt, quos criminis convin- 
cere non possumus) immissum, quae se prae Mercurio a me negligi videret.”

43. See A. Grafton and N. Siraisi, ‘“Between the Election and My Hopes,’” 
chap. 3 in this volume.

44. See, e.g., M. Ficino, Three Books on Life, ed. and trans. J. V. Clark and

C. Kaske (Binghamton, N.Y.: Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies, 1989).

D. R Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic from Ficino to Campanella (London: 
Warburg Institute, 1958); W.-D. Miiller-Jahncke, Astrologisch-magische Theorie 
und Praxis in der Heilkunde der friihen Neuzeit, Sudhoffs Archiv, Supplement 
(Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1985).

45. See Barnes, Prophecy and Gnosis; S. Kusukawa, The Transformation of Nat- 
ural Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995); and the forth- 
coming Habilitationsschrift by B. Bauer,45. See Barnes, Prophecy and Gnosis; S. Kusukawa, The Transformation of Nat- 
ural Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995); and the forth- 
coming Habilitationsschrift by B. Bauer,

46. William R. Newman and Lawrence Principe, “Alchemy versus Chemistry: The 
Etymological Origins of a Historiographic Mistake,” Early Science and Medicine, 
3 (1998): 32-65, cf. 61.

47. Although the literature devoted to alchemy and astrology hardly touches upon 
the problematic interaction between these two subjects, a first effort has been made 
by Joachim Telle, “Astrologie und Alchemie im 16. Jahrhundert,” in Die okkulten 
Wissenschaften in der Renaissance, ed. August Buck (Wiesbaden: Harrasowitz, 
1992), 227-53. See also Jacques Halbronn, “Les resurgences du savoir as- 
trologique au sein des textes alchimiques dans la France du XVIIe siecle” in As- 
pects de la tradition alchimique au XVII siecle, ed. Frank Greiner (Paris: S.E.H. A., 
1998), 193-205.

48. Claudius Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, trans. and ed. F. E. Robbins (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1940), 2-3. Ptolemy does not, of course, employ 
Greek terms equivalent to our “astronomy” and “astrology.” Both practices are 
part of astronomia, and their primary difference lies in the two realms that make 
up their respective purviews: the superlunary and sublunary regions.

49. John Dillon, The Middle Platonists: A Study of Platonism (80 B.c. to a.d. 
220) (London: Duckworth, 1977), 384.

50. See Petrus Bonus, Margarita pretiosa, in Lazarus Zetzner, ed., Theatrum 
chemicum (Strasbourg: Eberhard Zetzner, 1660), 5:511-713, cf. 508, 513, 528.

Introduction 35

See also Dominicus Gundissalinus, De divisione pbilosopbiae, ed. Ludwig Baur 
(Muenster: Aschendorff, 1903), 20-24, and Thomas Aquinas, In librum Boetbii 
de trinitate, in S. Thomae Aquinatis opera omnia, ed. Robert Busa (Stuttgart-Bad 
Canstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, 1980), 4:533.51. Elias Ashmole, Theatrum chemicum britannicum, ed. A. G. Debus (New 
York: Johnson Reprint Corporation, 1967; facsimile of London, 1652), 450.

52. Ashmole, Theatrum, 446.

53. Ibid., 451. For Ashmole’s talismans of vermin, see C. H. Josten, Elias Ashmole 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1966), 2:537, 619, and 4:1697.

54. Josten, Elias Ashmole, 4:1679.

55. Thomas Vaughan, Eumen de lumine (London: H. Blunden, 1651), 19-20.

56. William R. Newman, Gehennical Fire: The Lives of George Starkey, an Amer- 
ican Alchemist in the Scientific Revolution (Cambridge: Harvard University Press), 
213-22.

57. Keith Thomas, Religion and the Decline of Magic (New York: Scribner’s 
1971), 631-32.

58. Brian Vickers, “On the Function of Analogy in the Occult,” in A. G. Debus 
and Ingrid Merkels, eds., Hermeticism in the Renaissance (Washington: Folger 
Books, 1988), 265-92. For the claim that astrology’s demise sounded the death 
knell for the other occult sciences, see 286.

59. Frances Yates, The Rosicrucian Enlightenment (London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, 1972), xi-xii, 17, and passim.

60. Julius Ruska, “Al-Razi’s Buch Geheimnis der Geheimnisse,” Quellen und Stu- 
dien zur Geschichte der Natunvissenschaften und der Medizin, 6 (1937): 1-246, 
cf. 15-16. See also G. Carbonelli, Sulle fonti storiche della chimica e delTalchimia 
in Italia (Rome: 1925), 192-200, where a number of glosarii are reproduced.

61. For the expressions astronomia inferior and astronomia terrestris, see Julius 
Ruska, Turba philosophorum: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Alchemie, in 
Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften und der Medizin, 1 
(1931): 80.

62. pseudo-Aristotle, De perfecto magisterio, in Bibliotheca cbemica curiosa, 
ed. J. J. Manget (Geneva: Chouet, G. de Tournes, Cramer, Perachon, Ritter, & 
S. de Tournes, 1702), 1:638.62. pseudo-Aristotle, De perfecto magisterio, in Bibliotheca cbemica curiosa, 
ed. J. J. Manget (Geneva: Chouet, G. de Tournes, Cramer, Perachon, Ritter, & 
S. de Tournes, 1702), 1:638.

63. Ibid. In at least one fourteenth-century manuscript of the De perfecto magis- 
terio, the normal Latin names for the seven metals are given, instead of the plane- 
tary Decknamen (Yale MSS, New Haven, Conn., Mellon 2, fol. lr, 11. 30-31).

64. Constantine of Pisa, The Book of the Secrets of Alchemy, ed. Barbara Obrist 
(Leiden: Brill, 1990), pp. 75-79, 106-31. Obrist suggests on p. 35 that Constan- 
tine’s advice that an amalgam be buried in dung when the sun is in Gemini or Leo 
should be considered astrological. It seems more likely that the recipe is simply call- 
ing for the process to be carried out in the hot weather of summer.

65. S. Harrison Thomson, “The Texts of Michael Scot’s Ars Alchemie,” Osiris, 5 
(1938): 523-59: The first six of the thirty-six numbered headings do not consist of

36 William R. Newman and Anthony Grafton

recipes per se, although they do contain interesting directions for identifying 
“salts” and testing them for purity.

66. Thomson, “Scot’s Ars Alchemie,” p. 556.

67. John Reidy, Thomas Norton’s “Ordinal of Alchemy” (Oxford: Oxford Uni- 
versity Press, 1975), xiv.

68. Ashmole, Theatrum, 100. The critical text supplied by Reidy in his excellent 
edition of Norton is substantially the same, although it employs a more archaic 
spelling. See Reidy, “Ordinal,” 91.

69. John North, Chaucer’s Universe (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988), 79-85, 
where North shows how to arrive at the Alchabitius houses by using the unequal 
hour lines of an astrolabe. North gives another exposition of the Alchabitius or 
“standard” system in his Horoscopes and History (London: Warburg Institute, 
1986), 3-6.70. Although the printed illustration in Ashmole gives no degrees for Jupiter in the 
second and third scheme, British Library MS Add. 10302 in the second scheme 
gives 6° Sagittarius for Jupiter, and Saturn is accompanied by the number “2,” ev- 
idently meaning 2° Sagittarius, despite the fact that Saturn has been placed in the 
twelfth house.

71. Ashmole, Theatrum, 452. It is not clear why Ashmole states that all four of 
the schemes err in the maximum elongation of Venus, however, for the fourth has 
Venus and the sun separated by only 31°.

72. Reidy, “Ordinal,” lii, shows that 1477, the date that Norton gives at the end 
of the text as the year he began its composition, is very likely correct. If we follow 
Ashmole’s procedure over the period of Norton’s life (P1433— 1513 or 1514) and 
employ Bryant Tuckerman’s Tables, Ashmole’s statement will be found to be 
correct.

73. Ashmole, Theatrum, 452.

74. William R. Newman, “L’influence de la Summa perfectionis du pseudo- 
Geber,” in Alchimie et pbilosophie a la renaissance, ed. Jean-Claude Margolin and 
Sylvain Matton (Paris: Vrin, 1993), 65-77; “The Alchemical Sources of Robert 
Boyle’s Corpuscular Philosophy,” Annals of Science, 53 (1996): 567-85.

75. William R. Newman, The “Summa perfectionis” of pseudo-Geber (Leiden: 
Brill, 1991), 643-44.

76. Ibid., 649.

77. The Summa does not of course deny the role of the celestial bodies in induc- 
ing sublunary generation and corruption. But it is one thing to assert that the su- 
perlunary regions are responsible for this and quite another thing to claim that 
man can make precise predictions about terrestrial events on the basis of that 
knowledge. The Summa admits in effect that man cannot make such predictions 
but then asserts that it is unnecessary to do so at any rate, since nature will join the 
appropriate matter to the appropriate rays.78. Lynn Thorndike, A History of Magic and Experimental Science (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1934), 3:611-27. For a recent treatment of Christine

Introduction 37

de Pizan, see Joan Cadden, “Charles V, Nicole Oresme, and Christine de Pizan: 
Unities and Uses of Knowledge in Fourteenth-Century France,” in Texts and Con- 
texts in Ancient and Medieval Science, ed. Edith Sylla and Michael McVaugh (Lei- 
den: Brill, 1997), 208-44.

79. Bernardi Trevirensis ad Thomam de Bononia Medicum Caroli octavi Franco- 
rum Regis Responsio, in Manget, Bibliotheca, 2:399-408, cf. 403. In MS Paris 
Bibliotheque nationale 11201, fol. 26r, of the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris, the 
passage reads substantially the same.

80. Bernard, Epistola, 403. Bibliotheque Nationale, MS 11201, fol. 26r-v: “ex 
quo surgit error stultorum. credunt enirn quod quilibet septem planetarum generat 
specialiter per suam propriam influentiam unam speciem metallicam cui specie)?] 
in proprietate convenit et in natura assimilatur.”

81. Edward Grant, Planets, Stars, and Orbs: The Medieval Cosmos, 1200-1687 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 611-15.

82. Ashmole, Theatrum, 443.

83. Marsilio Ficino, Three Books on Life, ed. and trans. Carol V. Kaske and John 
R. Clark (Binghamton, N.Y.: Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies, 1989), 
255-57.

84. Sylvain Matton, “Marsile Ficin et l’alchimie: sa position, son influence,” in 
Margolin and Matton, Alchimie et philosophie, 123-92.

85. Matton makes a compelling case for this in “Marsile Ficin et l’alchimie”; see 
164-90. At the same time, Roger Bacon was a prominent medieval forerunner of 
Ficino ’s position. See William Newman, “The Philosophers’ Egg: Theory and Prac- 
tice in the Alchemy of Roger Bacon,” Micrologus, 3 (1995): 75-101.

86. Cornelius Agrippa, De occulta philosophia libri tres, ed. V. Perrone Compagni 
(Leiden: Brill, 1992), 113-14.

87. Ibid., 91. For a treatment of this passage, see Newman, Gehennical Fire, 
213-21.87. Ibid., 91. For a treatment of this passage, see Newman, Gehennical Fire, 
213-21.

88. Agrippa, De occulta philosophia, 257.

89. Ibid., 256: “una res est a Deo creata, subjectum omnis mirabilitatis, quae in 
terris et in coelis est: ipsa est actu animalis, vegetalis et mineralis, ubique reperta, 
a paucissimis cognita, a nullis suo proprio nomine expressa, sed innumeris figuris 
et aenigmatibus velata, sine qua neque alchymia neque naturalis magia suum com- 
pletum possunt attingere finem.”

90. Ashmole, Theatrum, 446.

91. Cambridge, Cambridge University, Kings College MS 22, p. 13.

92. Thorndike, A History of Magic and Experimental Science, 5:564, 571.

This page intentionally left blank

2

“Veritatis amor dulcissimus”: Aspects of 
Cardano’s Astrology

Germana Ernst

Toward Scotland

The most finished product of Girolamo Cardano’s work on astrology was 
his commentary on the Quadripartitum of Ptolemy. He was led to under- 
take this by a combination of curious and unexpected circumstances in 
which, as in other cases, chance and an obscure providential design some- 
how intersected. In April 1552, Cardano was in Lyons, about to depart for 
Paris, and from there for far-off Scotland, where Archbishop John Hamil- 
ton, who suffered from a particularly stubborn form of asthma, anxiously 
awaited him. Cardano had become acquainted with a schoolmaster who, 
after asking for a medical opinion, insisted on bringing him to his house, 
where he promised to show him a boy who could see demons in a vessel. 1 
The visions turned out to be nonsense, but at the man’s house Cardano en- 
countered Antonio Gogava’s translation of the two last — and very diffi- 
cult — books of Ptolemy’s Quadripartitum. 1 Seized by a sudden feeling of 
desire and inspiration, Cardano asked for and obtained a copy of the text. 
On the ship that took him up the Loire to Paris, he began to work with 
feverish intensity on a project that he found absolutely urgent.The work was published at Basel in 1554, with a dedication to the Scot- 
tish archbishop. It took the form of a splendid folio volume, with which, 
Cardano declared, he was entirely satisfied. 3 A Lyon edition followed, very 
similar in content but more modest in form. The last edition appeared 
posthumously at Basel in 1578 and was reprinted in volume 5 of Car- 
dano’s Opera omnia. It departed considerably from the other two. Car- 
dano enlarged and reworked a good many passages but he also mutilated 
or deleted many others. The most famous of these — but not the only

40 Germana Ernst

ones — were those that discussed the horoscope of Christ. 4 These final 
changes in the text may well have been the result of a late effort at self- 
censorship that Cardano was forced to undertake. If so, they were inspired 
by the same considerations that led to the disappearance of Ptolemy’s 
name from Cardano’s curious “classification” of the greatest geniuses of 
all times in De subtilitate, where Ptolemy had previously occupied an hon- 
orable second position, after Archimedes and before Aristotle. 5

The Twelve Horoscopes

The “great voyage” that Cardano began on February 23, 1552, and that 
kept him away from home for about ten months gave him the opportunity 
not only to visit strange places and cities, but also to meet illustrious indi- 
viduals. Many of these individuals presented him with gifts and indications 
of their esteem, which to some extent made up for the incomprehension 
and persecution he had experienced at home.But honors and money were not the only benefits that Cardano received 
on his voyage. He also had the opportunity to frequent courts and other 
high social circles, to gain an intimate knowledge of the life and habits 
of important people, and to gather a rich harvest of astrological data. Car- 
dano appended to the Commentary on Ptolemy twelve genitures to serve 
as examples of a particularly rich and meaningful kind. They were meant 
to embody and to confirm the theoretical principles stated in the text. 
Cardano described them as, among other things, “worthy of admira- 
tion, made famous by events, and calculated with the utmost precision.” 
The first five belonged to persons he had met for the first time on his 
voyage. 6

The series began with the controversial geniture of Edward VI. When 
Cardano encountered the young king, whose precocious erudition filled 
him with astonishment and admiration, in London, he uttered a series of 
reassuring predictions. But Edward’s premature death in July 1553 — offi- 
cially from phthisis, though Cardano suspected poison — refuted these in a 
most embarrassing way. Cardano found himself compelled to reexamine 
the astral data and their interpretation so that he could account for these 
events. He also added a page in which he explained and justified the ex- 
treme reticence he himself had shown on this occasion. By revealing his 
own fears, he might have provoked public disturbances or encountered

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

41

personal danger, like earlier astrologers who had imprudently ventured 
to predict unhappy ends for their sovereigns. Cardano had left the English 
court as rapidly as possible, disgusted and frightened because he had per- 
ceived, through political acumen rather than astrological expertise, the 
dangers posed by the insidious traps of power. 7Next came the genitures of Hamilton; of Claude de Lavalle, the French 
ambassador in London; and of the Hellenist and royal tutor John Cheke, 
who, after various vicissitudes, suffered disaster on the accession of Mary 
Tudor. His horoscope included disquieting references to the dangers that 
threatened him. In the fifth place appeared another geniture which would 
cause Cardano no little embarrassment: that of Aimar de Ranconnet, a 
prominent member of the Parlement of Paris who was strongly linked to 
him by esteem and friendship. The two redactions of Ranconnet’s horo- 
scope, that of 1554 and that of 1578, were very different. 8 In the first, 
Cardano showed the highest admiration for someone who combined the 
gravity of public office with unusual gifts of humanity and learning. He ex- 
pressed his deep gratitude for the warm greeting that he had received from 
Ranconnet, even though he had appeared before him poorly dressed and 
had spoken to him very simply. The incident showed that Ranconnet was 
endowed with a rare capacity to see past appearances: he could actually 
read minds.

But once again, as a result of Ranconnet’s tragic death in 1559, Cardano 
was forced to revise his text. He had to inform the reader that his illustri- 
ous friend had been imprisoned on the infamous charge of incest and had 
died mysteriously in prison. Some said that he had committed suicide out 
of shame, others that he had been strangled, and still others that he had 
been burned at the stake, at night and under a false name — astrologically, 
the most plausible hypothesis. Despite Cardano’s warm feelings for his 
friend, his respect for the truth of astrology compelled him to record this 
dishonorable end, one entirely unworthy of such a person.The other seven horoscopes came from Cardano’s earlier works. One of 
them belonged to the soldier of fortune Giovan Giacomo Medici, whose 
portrait, as a bold man of arms, was the precise image of a disillusioned 
Machiavellian hero. His brilliant career began with a crime, which he 
later entirely justified by the outstanding virtues that he showed. Anyhow, 
as Cardano observed, no one had ever risen to power unless some crime 
opened the way: “Who ever moved from the rank of private citizen to that

42 Germana Ernst

of a prince without committing a crime? . . . Only crime ever enabled any- 
one to attain the highest honors, by opening the way: if virtue and fortune 
then stand by him, the way to power is clear .” 9 In the eighth place appeared 
the very detailed horoscope of the author himself, to which we will return, 
between those of two of his closest friends, the doctor Guglielmo Casanate 
and Cardinal Francesco Sfondrato. The latter passed, in the space of a few 
years, from the rank of private citizen to that of bishop, then to that of car- 
dinal, only to miss, by a hair, being elected pope on the death of Paul III. 
He then died, a few months later, from uncertain causes (“Is this not a 
marvellous and unusual story?” commented Cardano ). 10The tenth and eleventh horoscopes were closely connected. They be- 
longed to Paul III and his natural son Pier Luigi Farnese, prince of Parma 
and Piacenza, who could not avoid dying, skewered by the daggers of 
conspirators, even though insistent rumors had predicted the event. When 
Cardano drew up the pope’s horoscope, he underlined the great man’s 
strong predilection for predictions of every kind, copying out and com- 
menting on a prognostication by Paris Ceresarius. This Mantuan astrol- 
oger, with his red hair and beard, tall, handsome, and rich, had passed 
at a relatively late age from the study of law and the classics to that of as- 
trology, as we are told by Luca Gaurico, who pointed out with some con- 
tempt that Cardano had borrowed Paris’s imprecise method of laying out 
the astrological houses. In the prognostication, Paris had predicted, very 
precisely and many years in advance of the event, that Cardinal Farnese 
would be elected pope, as well as the precise moment of his death. Car- 
dano added some personal reminiscences that offer us, in passing, a view 
of a court filled with anxieties and buzzing with divinatory practices of all 
kinds. Cardano says that he saw with his own eyes a text in which a demon 
confirmed Ceresarius’s predictions. His extraordinary ability at prediction 
gave rise to the rumor that his mantelpiece held marble heads that alerted 
him to coming disasters . 11

Cardano chose this series of twelve genitures to reveal the connections 
between the stars and remarkable events that happened in the lives of out- 
standing individuals. They made it possible to provide concrete applica- 
tions and verifications of Ptolemy’s principles, explaining not only cases of 
extraordinary virtue and the peaks of success and power, but also painful 
diseases, reversals of fortune, dangers, and the threat of violent death. The 
series ended in a highly appropriate way with the geniture of Erasmus.

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

43Veritatis amor dulcissimus

43

Here Cardano underlined the contrast between the obscurity of his sub- 
ject’s origins and the splendor of his learning, which induced popes and 
princes to compete to show him their favor.

Cardano’s Astrological Works

Cardano’s commentary on Ptolemy represented the end of a long journey 
that had begun when he was very young. The lessons he had learned from 
his father as a young boy included the elements of astrology, based on the 
Arabic texts that he later rejected. 12 From the start the young astrologer re- 
vealed a sharp interest in analyzing his own personality. He began at a very 
young age laying out the self-portrait to which he would devote decades of 
work, making it more and more extensive and precise. 13

As an adult, Cardano received his strongest inducement to study astrol- 
ogy from Filippo Archinto, the future apostolic protonotary and arch- 
bishop of Milan. In his early period of residence at Gallarate, in 1532-33, 
Cardano planned and wrote, at Archinto ’s behest, the first sketch of his 
text De iudiciis astrorum, which he would enlarge in later years. Archinto 
was also responsible for Cardano’s obtaining a post in 1534 that required 
him to teach arithmetic, geometry, and astrology in the Scuole Piattine in 
Milan, though only on feast days and for a small stipend. Doing so earned 
Cardano a dubious reputation as an astrologer. 14It was no accident that Cardano’s first surviving publication was an 
astrological Pronostico that seems, on internal evidence, to have been 
directed at Pope Paul III and perhaps written at his request. 15 The most 
striking quality of this text, which refers the reader to a larger, forthcom- 
ing Latin Pronostico, “which will cover more years and do so more exten- 
sively,” is the extreme reticence Cardano showed about it. So far as I know, 
he never cited it explicitly, as if he wished to delete it from the list of his 
works. 16 Still, within the rather conventional framework of general pre- 
dictions about important events connected with the five great European 
powers (the pope, the emperor, the king of France, the king of Venice, and 
the Turkish sultan), the short text reveals some striking features.

This early work marked the beginning, for example, of Cardano’s effort 
to reclaim the dignity of astrological prediction, when correctly under- 
stood and practiced, and of his polemic against the “crazy diviners” who, 
in their ignorance or in their desire to flatter princes, had corrupted “this

44 Germana Ernst

noble art of astrology” and “defiled its doctrines.” The more ignorant they 
were, Cardano claimed, the more eagerly “they play at divination, where 
they have not a leg to stand on, with their light heads, vile arrogance and 
beastial audacity.” But his most important remarks had to do with religion. 
Cardano evoked the terrible decadence of his age and pointed out the need 
for a deep spiritual renewal (“Both Sacred Scripture and astrology make it 
absolutely clear that this insatiable greed of ours must have an end.”). But 
he also pointed out that no one should cherish illusions about the ease 
with which this could be brought about and maintained that matters 
would go from bad to worse in the future: “there was little faith in the past, 
less and almost none now; in future it will be completely destroyed.”Paul Ill’s strong interest in the study of the stars induced Cardano to 
continue down this road. In 1538 he completed and published at Milan 
two “libelli” that were presented as the first fragments of his great project, 
the De judiciis astrorum: the De supplemento Almanack and the De resti- 
tutione temporum et motuum coelestium. The last chapter of the second 
text set out ten genitures, five for princes and five for scholars: the first of 
a long series. In the two dedicatory letters to Archinto, Cardano distanced 
himself from his envious critics and from the “criminal incompetence” of 
those who tried to discredit his work, driven as they were by greed to dis- 
seminate their own impostures. 17

The two works were reprinted, in a revised and corrected form, at Nu- 
remberg in 1543, accompanied by a new dedicatory letter to Archinto. 
Cardano also added a considerable number of genitures — the total now 
reached 67 — and his Encomium Astrologiae. The most interesting aspect 
of this section of the work lay in the fact that Cardano based his praise of 
astrology as “the most excellent of the sciences” on the euhemerist and al- 
legorical interpretation of mythical characters and stories. Cardano main- 
tained that those who had studied the stars in antiquity had become the 
rulers of their communities and were venerated as divinities after their 
deaths. This befell the Egyptian Hermes Trismegistus, the Chaldean Bero- 
sus, and the Greek Orpheus, whose lyre with seven strings, raised to the 
heavens as a constellation, clearly referred to the seven planets and the 
harmony of the universe. The myths about Phaeton, Endymion, Atlas, 
Daedalus and Icarus, and Bellerophon concealed the same meanings. The 
bisexuality of the most famous ancient prophet, Tiresias, referred to the di- 
vision of the planets into masculine and feminine; the expedition of the

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

45Veritatis amor dulcissimus

45

Argonauts in search of the Golden Fleece — one of the fables most beloved 
of alchemists, who saw it as adumbrating the most secret operations of 
their art — had to do with the competition among rulers to establish the ex- 
act moment of the spring equinox. Even the quarrels of the gods in Homer 
and Vergil, their councils, and their choosing to favor one hero or an- 
other — stories that would be silly and worthless if taken literally, and as 
absurd and laughable as a vain chimera, and thus entirely unworthy of el- 
evated poets, if they lacked some such hidden meaning — had in fact to be 
understood as references to the various celestial influences on the world of 
men. 18The reference to Icarus, “who tumbled into the sea of ignorance because 
he had not entirely mastered his father’s art,” suggests that Cardano’s in- 
terpretations of ancient fables probably also represented a cloaked 
polemic against Andrea Alciato. This famous jurist and close friend of 
Cardano’s was also the declared enemy of all occult interests, as is clear 
from the enlightened position he adopted with regard to witchcraft, and a 
sharp opponent of astrology, as Cardano himself recorded, with some 
regret, in his comments on Alciato’s geniture. 19 This attitude is clearly re- 
vealed by two of Alciato’s Emblems, destined to become extremely famous 
and to serve as the prototype for an enormously successful literary genre. 
One of these represented Prometheus, chained and mutilated. It warned 
men not to indulge themselves in the desire of elevating their minds to in- 
accessible forms of knowledge, pointing out that “what is above us does 
not pertain to us.” The other, entitled Against the Astrologers, showed 
Icarus falling into the ocean after the wax of his wings had melted. The 
verses that commented on the image cautioned the astrologers against suf- 
fering the same end. As Icarus, “who flew too high,” had fallen, “so ruin 
threatens the wise man who tries to fly to God’s lap in the heavens, because 
he wants to know secrets to which our merits do not rise. The higher the 
rash man rises, the greater the splash he will make when he falls.” 20

In the new edition of Cardano’s Libelli that appeared at Nuremberg four 
years later, in 1547, the collection of works had become even larger: Car- 
dano added De iudiciis geniturarum and De revolutionibus to his two ear- 
lier works. The genitures, now assembled in a separate book, had reached 
the final and definitive number of 100. The volume also included one of 
Cardano’s most successful astrological works, the Astrologicorum apho- 
rismorum segmenta septem. Thanks to their sharp, aphoristic style and46 Germana Ernst

their strictly technical content, these came to be considered particularly 
useful for the concrete practice of astrology. In the Peroratio of this work 
Cardano clearly enunciated the project that he would systematically pur- 
sue in his commentary on Ptolemy’s Quadripartitum: to rescue astrology 
from the infamy into which it had fallen by organizing its valid elements, 
correcting errors, and eliminating vain superstitions in such a way as to 
make clear its full right to be considered part of natural philosophy. 21Once again Cardano rewrote his dedicatory letter to Archinto, which 
took on a special pathos in this version. In the introductory section, he 
outlined the history of astrology, refuting the popular schema according to 
which it had originally existed in a state of purity and perfection. At first, 
he argued, men basically resembled animals; the more difficult and noble 
any form of knowledge, accordingly, the later they arrived at it, and with 
more difficulty. From these premises he sharply rejected the views of the 
critics and detractors of astrology, from Pico onward. He rebutted their 
chief objections and insisted that no one could deny the natural causal ac- 
tion of the stars. As such, this causal action could be altered or blocked by 
the interference of other causes. Ptolemy reigned supreme in this disci- 
pline; the texts written by others “depart so far from the truth that they 
rather resemble fables.” After having asserted the excellence of the art once 
more, Cardano warmly praised the generous patronage available in Ger- 
many, which had enabled such studies to flourish enormously. He felt com- 
pelled to lament the unhappy state of Italy, where no one could distinguish 
true science from fake and only vulgar imitators found any support. His 
own experiences, the long series of difficulties and enmities that he had en- 
countered, offered eloquent testimony to the truthfulness of what he said. 
Cardano admitted that he had had to have recourse to dissimulation to 
protect himself against the violence and enmity of his enemies: “I had to 
remind myself how great was the envy of these apes who have rebelled 
against true honor and erudition.” 22

The Dignity of the ArtThe Dignity of the Art

In a passage in his commentary that disappeared, not by chance, from the 
edition of 1578, Cardano pointed out that Ptolemy’s Quadripartitum was 
the one canonical text of astrology. Only Ptolemy had had the mastery of 
astronomy needed to create this body of extremely subtle and difficult

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

47

principles. If his book had not been written or had not been preserved, as- 
trology itself would not exist . 23

Cardano’s dedicatory letter to Hamilton included a similarly warm pas- 
sage in praise of Ptolemy and his work as well as of his modern commen- 
tator, who had rescued this wonderful text from oblivion:

Ptolemy, thanks to his wonderful art, great diligence, and extraordinary effort, and 
aided by his good health and very long life, not only described the movements of 
the fixed stars and planets, their sizes and qualities, but also their decrees and pre- 
dictions — and did so with such intellectual subtlety that he frightened many away 
from the art and attracted no one to it. This gave birth to the hosts of vicious char- 
latans, while the discipline — like Ptolemy’s own book — lay buried in darkness and 
oblivion. Ptolemy understood perfectly well that this would happen to him, but he 
preferred to write the truth in an obscure way, rather than to write deceptive false- 
hoods in a clear way: he did so in the hope that someday, someone would come 
along who was fully equipped to explicate his monuments . 24

Cardano, in other words, portrayed himself as the most authoritative rep- 
resentative of a line that maintained that a “return to Ptolemy” was nec- 
essary to restore dignity and rigor to a discipline seriously corrupted by the 
“follies” of the Arabs’ manuals, which Cardano criticized for offering 
rules as manifold and minute as they were unfounded and useless.The demand for a philological and substantive recovery of the Ptolemaic 
text had been raised as early as the beginning of the sixteenth century. 
Albertus Pighius, for example, assigned the guilt for the degradation of 
astrology to those who composed annual prognostications. Ignorant of 
mathematics and committed only to the superstitious nonsense of the 
Arabs, they spread innumerable and unbearable lies throughout the one 
true kind of astrology. He dedicated his work to Agostino Nifo, whom he 
urged to requite him with the favor of translating Ptolemy’s work . 25

In his preface to Gogava’s aforementioned translation of Ptolemy, 
Gemma Frisius also denounced the folly of the moderns, who rejected the 
ancient texts in order to accept only new ones, as others rejected normal 
foods in their quest for exotic and extravagant ones. In fact, he argued, 
none of those who had written after Ptolemy had rivaled him. The Quadri- 
partitum remained the only foundation and the indispensable point of ref- 
erence for any serious student of astrology.

Cardano maintained, in his program for the redefinition of astrology 
as “the conjectural part of natural philosophy,” that astrologers must 
above all free themselves from all the ballast of the various “Albumasars,

48 Germana Ernst

Abenragels, Alchabitiuses, Abubatres, Zaheles, Messahalas, and 
Bethenes .” 26 But he also criticized the classical works of Firmicus Mater- 
nus and Guido Bonatti, which claimed to offer astrological predictions of 
particulars so minute and contingent that no scientific account of them 
could be given. Even the very popular Centiloquium, generally attributed 
to Ptolemy, was spurious and made astrology “a form of evil magic” by in- 
cluding “interrogations” as well as “genitures .” 27Following the line laid out in the Ptolemaic text itself, which he para- 
phrased at length, Cardano set out, in the introduction and conclusion of 
his Commentary, to give a precise account of the status of astrology. He 
described both the dignity and the limitations of the art and at the same 
time defended it against the accusations of its attackers.

Cardano felt compelled to admit that the situation was genuinely diffi- 
cult and that the critics of astrology had it all too easy. The discipline had 
in fact been discredited and corrupted, and by its own practitioners. Car- 
dano condemned not the art, but the artisans: they were the ones who 
failed to bring to its study the attention, effort, and mental profundity a 
discipline of its nobility and difficulty required. Moved either by greed or 
by ambition, they claimed to possess knowledge that they did not have 
and promised to give answers that an astrologer could not provide. They 
continually invented new expedients, taking shameless advantage of the 
ambiguous and profitable area of “elections and interrogations.” One par- 
ticularly greedy and ignorant astrologer, for example, had forced Lu- 
dovico Sforza to follow minute rules, even making him and his courtiers 
ride horseback in rain and mud . 28

Astrology, Cardano admitted, was not an “absolutely precise” form of 
knowledge, endowed with absolute certainty and rigor. But that did not 
mean that it was “a superstition, a form of prophecy, magic, vanity, an or- 
acle or a presage.” It was a natural, conjectural art that set out to formu- 
late probable judgments about future events. There was no reason to deny 
the legitimacy of doing so, especially when it was granted to doctors, 
sailors, farmers, and miners . 29The one basic presupposition on which astrology rested was the reality 
of the influence that the celestial bodies exercised on the sublunary world. 
These influences, obvious in the case of the sun and the moon, which were 
the supreme rulers of the life of the universe, undeniably also belonged by 
extension to the planets and the stars, which had the same basic nature . 30

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

49

Cardano discussed the question of these influences at length. He tried both 
to prove their existence, with a plethora of examples, and to identify the 
paths by which they were propagated and the ways in which they affected 
the sublunary world. Only repeated observations could provide the basis 
for a body of theory as elaborate as that of Ptolemy, which could be con- 
firmed, enlarged, and corrected in its turn by the observation of further 
facts.

In antiquity, to be sure, Favorinus had raised a tricky objection, one that 
even possessed a certain persuasive power: Even if astrology were true, it 
would be useless, because the prediction of bad events would enhance the 
subject’s fear and that of good ones would diminish his happiness. But 
Cardano refuted this, since prediction actually helps us to accept both the 
good and the bad with equal moderation. Moreover, not all events pre- 
dicted for the future must necessarily come to pass: Some can be changed. 
Future events do not exist “per se” but “in relation”: If I foresee that my 
sheep may die of thirst because of the great heat, I can avert this end by dig- 
ging a shelter and a spring for them. Astrology was to natural philosophy 
as the books of Hippocrates and Galen on prognostication were to medi- 
cine. Future events are distinguished from present ones not by species and 
genus, but by the element of time, which is connected to them as an 
accident . 31More generally, the tripartite Aristotelian division of all goods into 
those of the soul, the body, and wealth and honors clarified the utility of 
astrology as an art. Like philosophy, astrology was not “profitable” in it- 
self, like medicine and trade. Nor did it promise glory, unlike military and 
legal pursuits. Nonetheless, it could provide excellent tools for attaining 
all these goods. Many philosophers had become so famous as to be im- 
mortalized, and in recent times some had become very rich as well. In the 
same way, many astrologers had used their art, however false it was, to en- 
rich themselves.

If, on the other hand, contemplation is really the highest and most di- 
vine human activity, then astrology must take its place at the top of the 
hierarchy of the sciences. For it studied celestial things and future events, 
that is, the rarest, noblest, and most desirable objects, “as if one took part 
in the banquets of the gods.” To be sure, the weakness of the human mind 
sometimes overturned this natural ordering: “astrology is very beautiful, 
but extremely difficult and demanding .” 32

SO Germana Ernst

Large-Scale Events and “Laws”SO Germana Ernst

Large-Scale Events and “Laws”

The second book of Cardano’s commentary dealt with large-scale events. 
Commenting on its relatively modest length — as compared to that of the 
third and fourth books, which dealt with the genitures of individuals — 
Cardano explained that this was due to the much smaller amount of 
knowledge that we possess about the general constitutions of the stars. Ac- 
cordingly, these had to be discussed in a suitably modest way. Nonetheless, 
a treatment of this subject naturally preceded that of horoscopic astrology, 
since “universal causes are more powerful than particular ones.” By mak- 
ing this distinction between two levels of causality, one could both avoid 
many errors and answer the objection of those who claimed that collective 
disasters, like shipwrecks, wars, and plagues, brought people with totally 
different genitures together in a common death.As is well known, Ptolemy emphasized, in his discussion of large-scale 
events, the importance of eclipses and comets. By contrast, he was far 
more reticent about other factors: for example, the “great conjunctions” 
so widely discussed in the Arabic tradition. Cardano evidently oscillated 
between strict adherence to Ptolemaic orthodoxy and the temptation to 
make room for other suggestions that could fill out the rather meager the- 
ory of eclipses and comets, though he also evinced a rather cautious atti- 
tude toward the great conjunctions, which he described as “very famous” 
but also, in reality, as “of no great importance.” In themselves, they could 
offer only very general indications. For example, when they were found in 
the watery signs of the zodiac, which formed the trigon dominated by 
Mars, there would be wars, new mechanical inventions, contagious dis- 
eases, and heresies. Muhammad and his law belonged to this trigon. But 
when they were found in the fiery signs, where the Sun and Jupiter exer- 
cised a predominant influence, they would bring about monarchies, peace- 
ful periods, and wise men, as, for example, in the time of the monarchy of 
the Medes, that of Christ, and that of Charlemagne. He dealt with the airy 
and watery signs in the same way . 33

Cardano clearly felt the need, however, to fill out Ptolemy’s discussion, 
as is clear from the fact that he did not hesitate, in his discussion of the rise 
and fall of different “laws,” to draw heavily on the commentary of the Ara- 
bic astrologer Haly. Cardano’s deep interest in these problems is evident 
from the fact that he did not quote passages from Haly word for word but

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

51

reworked those that he found useful “for using the stars to predict the 
events that bring about laws, changes, and heresies.” 34Veritatis amor dulcissimus

51

reworked those that he found useful “for using the stars to predict the 
events that bring about laws, changes, and heresies.” 34

Cardano’s discussion based itself on the correspondences that Ptolemy 
had established between peoples, climatic zones, and astral influences. He 
proposed an elegant and ingenious division of the inhabited world into 
four quadrants, each subdivided in turn into eight triangles, each of which 
was subject to particular planetary influences, following precise rules. 
These endowed each people with particular characteristics related to the 
triangle it inhabited, but also with shared ones due to the common domi- 
nance of the sun and moon: “No people is so barbarous that it can be to- 
tally free of the effects and customs of the sun and moon.”According to the doctrines that Cardano claimed to derive from Haly, 
laws have their origin in the central triangles, which are dominated by 
Mercury, and then spread into the peripheral ones. Mercury is necessary 
for every law, since these require “much speech and argument and changes 
in the ordering of one’s life” (in the 1554 text Cardano wrote, more nega- 
tively: “and lies, when they are necessary, and lightness of brain”), but it is 
not sufficient to bring them into being on its own. Its associations with the 
planets that rule different triangles produce the different laws. When Mer- 
cury comes into conjunction with Saturn, for example, it will produce the 
Hebrew law, which will correspond to the characteristics of the planet. On 
the one hand, it will be “impious and extremely shameful, and will allow 
avarice and divorce and illicit unions [according to the original text, it will 
also be “full of lies and abominations”] and leprosy and impurity.” But it 
will also be stable and constant. When Mercury is in conjunction with 
Jupiter, it will bring Christianity into being. “This is the law of purity, of 
piety, of chastity, of mercy, of honesty, in which there were many kingdoms 
and a priesthood deserving of every form of honor,” since Jupiter presides 
over the priesthood. When Mercury is in conjunction with Mars, it means 
the law of Muhammad, and arms, and wars, violence, and cruelty: In con- 
junction with Venus, it means the law of the idolaters, with all its indul- 
gence in the pleasures of the flesh. 35

According to Cardano, the equinoctial signs are also connected with the 
laws. These signify not popular consent, as Haly claimed, but sudden 
changes of opinion, which are one of the factors most strongly character- 
istic of the advent of a new law. These erupt into the world of men with the 
scorching violence of a burning torch, overturning customs, emotions, and

52 Germana Ernst52 Germana Ernst

well-established social institutions: “It is like a torch lit in the minds of 
men, which descends from heaven and moves with the greatest imaginable 
speed. Men greet it with open mouths, despising the fear of death and the 
favor of princes, their own interests and those of their sons, to such an ex- 
tent that some, in violation of every sense of humanity, have to be punished 
by the executioner for love of the laws.” 36

Though Cardano did not underestimate the importance of eclipses and 
comets, the powerful effects of which he actually illustrated with a large 
number of examples, he saw a wide variety of astral factors as relevant to 
understanding and explaining large-scale events. He gave a long list of 
these. At this point, in his treatment of the “events of the most general 
kind, which are of the greatest importance,” he considered it appropriate 
to insert, as the most effective possible example to support his point, the 
“Birth of the Savior,” which became one of the most often cited, sharply 
criticized, and misunderstood passages in his works.

The Horoscope of Christ

Cardano was conscious of the risk that he was taking when he published 
the geniture of Christ. He admitted that he had drawn it up more than 
twenty years earlier but had hesitated, out of religious scruples, to publish 
it. 37 His fears were not without foundation. As early as 1556, Adrien 
Turnebe used the preface to his edition of Plutarch’s De defectu oraculo- 
rum to denounce in no uncertain terms the revival of interest in astrology. 
He showed special distaste for the “vile and criminal madness” of those 
who, reaching levels of impiety previously undreamt-of, dared to set out 
the geniture of the Savior himself, and those who subjected to the stars the 
One who had created them. 38The accusation was regularly repeated, with little variation. Among the 
criticisms that Francisco Sanches leveled at Cardano in his De divinatione 
per somnum was that he had made the stars superior to “our Savior, the 
Lord of all things in heaven, on earth and in the underworld.” Joseph 
Scaliger recalled the audacity, at once impious and foolish, of that “ cym - 
balum astrologorum ” who had published the horoscope of Christ, deduc- 
ing all the events of his life from the position of the stars. De Thou reproved 
the “extreme madness” and “impious audacity” with which Cardano had 
subjected the Creator to the stars. 39

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

53

The argument became a commonplace in the critical literature on as- 
trology, one designed to show whether the author was an atheist or super- 
stitious, and the fact that Naude discussed the question at some length in 
his biography of Cardano reinforced this tendency. To restore the scan- 
dal — and the supposed originality and dubious fame of the author of the 
pages in question — to their true dimensions, Naude pointed out to other 
critics that the topic was hardly new. Albertus Magnus, who cited Albu- 
masar in his turn, had already dealt with it, as had Cardinal Pierre d’Ailly. 
So had, more recently, an unprejudiced pupil of Agostino Nifo, the Cal- 
abrian Tiberio Russiliano Sesto, who had discussed the question at such 
length as to make it surprising that Cardano had found anything to add. 
Naude concluded that the clever Milanese astrologer had pretended not to 
be familiar with these precedents, more or less famous as they were, since 
he would rather be accused of impiety than risk losing the fame that his 
pages on the horoscope had won him . 40In fact, Cardano did put forward, in a number of passages, precise re- 
marks and distinctions that clarified his intentions and offered a defense 
against potential charges of impiety. In the fourteenth geniture, for ex- 
ample, he discussed one point quite explicitly. Since Spica Virginis came up 
for discussion, Cardano made clear that the one who created the stars had 
no need of them, as he had had no need of fasting and prayer. Nonetheless, 
he had taken in what was best in them, without making any change what- 
ever in the natural order of causality that he had established. Jesus as- 
sumed, that is, the temperament and appearance that they produced, but 
not because they were necessary to his “bodily balance,” as was main- 
tained by a certain “complete madman,” who claimed that Christ’s partic- 
ular physical constitution had enabled him to walk on water. Cardano 
confessed that the impurity of his times forced him to make this digression 
and these distinctions, since some were trying to force astrology to yield 
unacceptable naturalistic theories, and others took even what was human 
as divine: “Some make the powers of natural bodies so great that they 
make astronomy produce wild theories. Others claim that what is human 
is also divine, since they confuse the prerogatives of man with those of 
God .” 41

The whole issue of relations between the human and the divine and their 
delicate equilibrium came into question here, since the problem of the 
horoscope of the man/God seemed to shatter it. But as Cardano pointed

54 Germana Ernst54 Germana Ernst

out, acutely, in another passage, although it was doubtless heretical to 
deny the divinity of Christ, it was equally so to try to make him completely 
exempt from mortality and all other links to mortality, as others did in 
their desire to exalt his divinity . 42 The human part of the Savior was clearly 
subject to the influence of the stars, like every other created being. This did 
not mean that the stars had made Christ divine, produced his miracles, or 
brought about the promulgation of his law. But it did mean that God had 
designed the positions of the stars in advance in such a way that they 
proved appropriate for this geniture, in which ten very rare and unusual 
factors came together. The bare diagram of the geniture was a sort of icon, 
which represented, in advance, miracles that had been determined from 
eternity: “And those are the ten very rare and unusual factors in this geni- 
ture, whose almost divine conjunction provides a kind of advance image 
of the miraculous works that had been predetermined from eternity .” 43The astrologer’s job was simply to decode the geniture, to make mani- 
fest what was implicit in it, and to reveal the precise correspondence be- 
tween the aspects of the stars and the life of the man Christ on earth. A 
close analysis would yield a great many forms of confirmation and expla- 
nation, on the natural plane, for the law that Christ promulgated, which 
was “by nature” the law “of piety, justice, faith, simplicity, charity, and 
was established in perfect form, and would not come to an end, at least un- 
til the ecliptics come back together and the universe enters a new state.” It 
would also provide these for the personal qualities and experiences of the 
man himself: not only for his “natural” ability to know the future, his elo- 
quence, his precocious wisdom, and his brilliant intellect, but also for his 
melancholy character, his freckled complexion, his poverty, the plots 
against him, the risks he ran, and his violent death.

The text certainly seems audacious, despite the protests that the author 
made and the passionate defense he offered in his preface to the reader . 44 
For it is, in the end, quite simply a horoscope: a horoscope in which Car- 
dano quietly follows out the thread of the events of Christ’s life, continu- 
ally noting that Saturn was retrograde, that the Sun was in opposition to 
Mars, that Saturn and Jupiter came into conjunction in Aries. The perfect 
“congruency” of stars and events, Cardano argued, provided yet one more 
confirmation of Ptolemy’s basic veracity. He concluded, accordingly, with 
a cry of triumph — and of defiance of the enemies of the art: “let those who 
deny the truth of the art see if I have changed the times, or miscalculated

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

55

the positions of the stars, or departed in any way from the teachings of 
Ptolemy in my explication of what they portended.”Veritatis amor dulcissimus

55

the positions of the stars, or departed in any way from the teachings of 
Ptolemy in my explication of what they portended.”

Cardano was perfectly aware that the theologians were hostile and 
knew the risks he would run. From the time of Pico onward, sharp attacks 
on astrology had tried not only to undermine its claims to possess a “sci- 
entific” foundation, by insisting repeatedly that its principles lacked any 
foundation or consistency, but also to denounce and condemn any effort 
to reconcile astrology with theology. From Pico’s point of view, the worst 
offender — even worse than the Arabs, with their superstitious “fables” — 
was the very authoritative Cardinal Pierre d’Ailly, for he had tried in 
a number of different works to prove the harmony of theology with 
astrology. 45

The polemic against astrology took place on an increasingly theological 
plane. Savonarola translated Pico’s Disputationes into Italian and summa- 
rized them to make them accessible to ordinary people. 46 Gianfrancesco 
Pico took up his uncle’s arguments in book 5 of his De praenotione, and 
in his De veris calamitatum nostri temporis causis he sharply attacked 
Nifo, who had held that there were connections between the positions of 
the stars and calamities on earth. Fie insisted that all disasters were caused 
exclusively by divine initiative and providence, which used them to punish 
mankind for their sins. 47 These polemics were designed above all to keep 
supernaturally inspired prophecy and other divine gifts absolutely free 
from any contamination whatever from astrology.Against these positions, Cardano argued that astrology and religion not 
only did not conflict with one another, but were in basic agreement. From 
the very start of his dedicatory letter to Archbishop Hamilton, he not only 
celebrated the “excellence” of the art, but also defended its piety. Con- 
templation of the order and harmony of the celestial spheres and the whole 
great “machinery of the world” would make man conscious that a single, 
sovereign intelligence existed. No branch of learning was better equipped 
than astrology to make man recognize the wisdom, power, and love of 
God. 48

Naturally Cardano had in mind a deep and intimate form of religion, 
one that had nothing in common with the false religiosity so prevalent in 
the world and so often found in the highest circles. Julius II, for example, 
had spread innumerable quarrels and caused a vast number of wars. One 
could properly call him a weapon sent by God to punish the sins of men.

56 Germana Ernst

He was responsible, in the first instance, for the ruin of the Roman church 
and of Christianity as a whole — and of the many shepherds who had 
changed into wolves, so that the members of Christ lay even more blood- 
ied than they had been on the cross: “Are the blood of Christ and the di- 
vine law granted for man’s benefit destroyed by you, who should guard the 
flock? And those members of Christ lie there more bloody than they did 
on the cross. He was nailed to the cross by his own will, for the benefit of 
a great many: but you keep on tormenting him.” 49

Other HoroscopesOther Horoscopes

As is clear from the twelve exemplary genitures that accompanied the 
Commentary on Ptolemy, Cardano felt that an intensive effort at “exper- 
imentation” and verification had to accompany his exposition of theoret- 
ical principles. As early as 1543, in his first prefatory letter to Filippo 
Archinto, he declared that the sixty-seven genitures he was publishing 
were meant to provide a body of examples offering significant information 
about fundamental aspects of horoscopic astrology. He intended to con- 
sider different types of birth (twins, monsters, bastards, difficult births) 
and death (by poison, thunderbolt, water, capital punishment, arms, 
falling, and illness); the variety of human tendencies and habits, since he 
would analyze the genitures of men who were timid, rash, stupid, prudent, 
possessed by demons, deceitful, simple, heretical, thieves, robbers, and 
adulterers; as well as the whole range of professions and possible out- 
comes in life. He would provide genitures for men who had killed their 
wives, had suffered exile or imprisonment, had become apostates, had 
fallen from the highest honors into the lowest possible position, or vice 
versa. The collection of genitures included those of certain princes, which 
posed more serious problems than the genitures of private citizens. In the 
first place, more supraindividual factors connected with the kingdoms that 
they governed interfered with these men: Thus it could be hard for a king 
to avoid flattery or risky situations if evil was predicted. That was why Fir- 
micus Maternus had made rulers exempt from the predictions that held for 
ordinary mortals. But Cardano disagreed: That position might have been 
acceptable for pagan rulers, who loved to be believed to be divine and to 
make themselves appear so, but it was unacceptable for Christians, ani- 
mated by true piety, who see nothing superstitious in the stars but also nat-

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

57Veritatis amor dulcissimus

57

ural causes. After all, every man, without exception, was subject to the 
changes the stars brought about, just as every man was subject to heat, 
cold, and suffering.

More than once Cardano found himself forced to confess his own satis- 
faction when genitures and theoretical principles coincided perfectly. He 
defied the denigrators of astrology to show that its principles were not cer- 
tain: “from this it is clear that even if Pico came back to life, astrology 
would not be uncertain”; “even if you don’t believe in astronomy, this 
one geniture will convince you — unless you are an ass — that the art is not 
empty”; “let the enemies of astrology come and provide answers for hu- 
man experiences as remarkable as these, unless they claim that I invented 
these genitures which I drew from public sources, or that I adapted the 
planetary positions to fit fictitious places. For the life corresponds ab- 
solutely perfectly with the predictions that follow from the horoscope.” 50Astrology is the most sublime of arts. Like that of the jeweler, it is inex- 
haustibly rich. But it calls for more than knowledge of a complex body of 
theory. The astrologer must also have special gifts, must be endowed “with 
a special kind of acumen, with a great deal of experience, with a mind that 
seeks only the truth.” 51 Cardano knew that he himself possessed these 
qualities. With obvious pride he described how he had met Georg Joachim 
Rheticus at Milan on March 21, 1546. Rheticus, who had heard of Car- 
dano’s predictive abilities, wanted to put them to the test. He showed Car- 
dano the geniture of an unknown individual, inviting him to comment on 
it. Cardano analyzed the individual elements of the geniture, inferred the 
personality of the subject, and then deduced, step by step, to the growing 
amazement of his interlocutor, that the subject in question had been ac- 
cused and convicted of forgery and then publicly burned. Rheticus, who 
demanded an explanation for every single statement, became more and 
more amazed. But he had to confirm that the subject in question had been 
a counterfeiter, who had been condemned to exactly the punishment pre- 
dicted by Cardano. For his part, Cardano, almost incredulous about a pre- 
diction so accurate that it seemed comparable to those of the ancients, 
actually consulted the judge to ask for confirmation of the facts. 52

A comparison with Luca Gaurico makes it clear that scientific questions 
played the central role in Cardano’s research. Paul III made Gaurico a 
bishop, even though Cardano considered him one of the charlatans who 
brought the art into discredit (Gaurico himself insisted, in his celebratory

58 Germana Ernst58 Germana Ernst

geniture of the pope, that he had not asked for this high office ). 53 Gaurico’s 
Tractatus astrologicus contains long series of horoscopes for popes, princes, 
men of letters, and men who died by violence. The actual technical el- 
ements of these are few and rather general, but the kinds of details that 
would fill a gossipy chronicle are very plentiful. These naturally make the 
text highly interesting but contrast sharply with the scientific austerity 
shown by Cardano, who consistently remained intent on understanding 
and explaining every fact, even the most trivial or unusual ones, in the light 
of the configurations of the heavens.

In Gaurico’s geniture of Pier Luigi Farnese, for example, he mentioned 
that the tyrant was stabbed while indulging himself with three youths, and 
then discussed in some detail the ways in which the corpse was disfigured. 
Equally terrible is his account of the end of his “black soul” Apollonio — 
“deformed, dark, his hair black and curly like that of an Ethiopian, with- 
out his left eye, a traitor” — who, imprisoned and tortured, died, buried 
alive, in a ditch within the prison . 54 Also worthy of mention is Gaurico’s 
portrait of a criminal named Raimondo, a Celestine friar, who ended his 
days at age twenty-six, stabbed and then burned, because he had not hes- 
itated, in his “love for a boy,” to engage in blasphemous and disgusting 
practices. In his cell he kept a wooden statue of Christ, upside down and 
bound by the feet, which he struck with a whip. After he had consecrated 
the hosts, he fed some of them to a chicken and fried some in boiling oil . 55Cardano’s collection also included individuals like this: for example, the 
Servite friar Ciriaco, who enjoyed the favor of powerful men and was ven- 
erated like a saint by the people, though in reality he was a man of terrible 
character and a great hypocrite. After amassing an immense amount of 
wealth by every imaginable sort of crime, he put an end to his own life, 
committing suicide in prison . 56 But these details are not ends in them- 
selves: They acquire their meaning from the astrological perspective, which 
enabled Cardano to explain their behavior and habits, analyze their 
darkest passions, and unmask their fictions.

The pinnacle of Cardano’s intensive efforts at exploration took the form 
of his own geniture, on which he worked continually from his youth until 
his old age, and which formed the astrological backbone of his autobi- 
ography. This autobiography, as Alfonso Ingegno has rightly observed, has 
the structure of a detailed horoscope . 57 The geniture itself was continually 
enlarged, evolving from the first meager versions until it reached its final,

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

59

full form, which modified and updated all the rest, in the last edition of the 
twelve genitures . 58Veritatis amor dulcissimus

59

full form, which modified and updated all the rest, in the last edition of the 
twelve genitures . 58

Cardano justified adding his own geniture to the other exemplary ones 
partly from the rigor with which he had studied the facts: “this,” he wrote, 
“is the most precisely executed geniture, and the one which I have worked 
out with the greatest care.” But he also cited the variety of experiences that 
had characterized his strange and contradictory life, one in which good 
and bad events occurred in the most unexpected circumstances: “Good 
and bad things have never happened to anyone in so unexpected a way”; 
“often, a great good has come about from great evils, or, on the contrary, 
great disasters have befallen me out of great goods .” 59 It seems paradoxi- 
cal that Cardano, who always set out to control events in one way or an- 
other, emphasized so strongly the unpredictability of his own life.

Astrological analysis, rooted in the period between life and death, cen- 
tered on three basic nuclei: close study of the subject’s body and tempera- 
ment; reconstruction of the family structures to which he belonged, from 
the parents to children and grandchildren; and the recounting of external 
events (profession, honors, wealth). With regard to the first cluster of ques- 
tions, which is also the most interesting from our point of view, Cardano 
admitted that he ran a considerable risk in revealing his most secret im- 
pulses, thoughts, and passions. But he did not hesitate to set himself up as 
the object of scientific verification, since the love of truth and research out- 
weighed any human reservation:I could not know the mind, customs, secret deeds of anyone else as well as I knew 
my own thoughts, appetites, desires, and the movements of my soul. . . . If I set out 
to praise or criticize myself, will I not seem stupid or insane? If I remain mute, what 
help can I bring to the students of this discipline? Let the love of truth and the gen- 
eral welfare win out, then. . . . And if I also confess my vices, what evils will result? 
Am I not a man? And it is more worthy of a man to confess openly than to dis- 
simulate. Things dissimulated become hidden, while those which we acknowledge 
can be confessed and avoided. Let the sweet love of truth, accordingly, win the 
day . 60

This perspective — the need to overcome worldly conventions in order to 
attain the level of sincerity required to verify the truth of astrology — pro- 
vides the context for the collection of impulses and habits that Naude 
found so disconcerting and inappropriate. As Cardano saw it, he was sub- 
ject to mixed planetary influences: It took him sixty adjectives just to re- 
flect the variegated tendencies that the mingled influences of Venus,

60 Germana Ernst

Mercury, and Saturn conferred on him. Naude, who discussed only the last 
set of impulses, the most “Saturnine” ones, remarked that Cardano would 
have done better to publish only those of his desires that could be recon- 
ciled with his reputation, veiling the less edifying ones in a discrete si- 
lence. 61 Evidently he did not realize that Cardano was not engaging in 
some foolish or shameless form of exhibitionism but following scientific 
necessity. The point at issue was not decorum but truthfulness.The second nucleus of the horoscope had to do with family structures 
and the connections between the genitures of different members of the 
family. Cardano divided up the phases of his own life in accordance with 
the impact of these genitures on it and found only one of the nine phases 
that he listed to be genuinely happy. The central line of his analysis con- 
nected Cardano’s geniture, on one side, to that of his father, whom he cer- 
tainly esteemed and revered but also found a little bit overwhelming; on 
the other side, to those of his sons, on whom, as late as 1553, he had re- 
posed the highest imaginable hopes. From his daughter he expected more 
problems than benefits, but the genitures of his sons promised “many 
goods and few evils.” Female personalities played less significant, or nega- 
tive, roles: from his mother, “small, fat, and devout,” continually afflicted 
with attacks of hysteria and therefore not very affectionate, to his wife, 
who remains for the most part in the shadows after her first, luminous pre- 
monitory appearance in a dream, to his sterile daughter, down to the 
“shameless” daughter-in-law who was the main cause of Cardano’s fam- 
ily tragedies.The tragedy of his elder son’s condemnation for murder took place be- 
tween the two Basel editions of Cardano’s Commentary . 62 As in the cases 
of Edward VI and Aimar de Ranconnet, Cardano found himself forced to 
modify and add to the data and their interpretation, tormentedly doing 
and redoing the calculations, in order to understand and explain what had 
happened. Detractors of astrology like the Jesuit Alessandro De Angelis 
would make excellent use of the episode: De Angelis recounted the tragic 
story in every detail and then addressed himself, with brutal directness, to 
Cardano: “Why didn’t you keep the axe from your son’s neck? ” 63 Cardano, 
who had analyzed 100 genitures of princes and kings, who had explored 
the darkest recesses of nature, had not been able to foresee his own family 
tragedy, or at least had not been able to prevent it. What better proof could 
there be that astrology was false and useless?

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

61Veritatis amor dulcissimus

61

Cardano played the role of the restorer of a noble discipline, one who 
hoped to restore it to its ancient dignity, from the shameful and decadent 
condition to which it had fallen. In truth, even though his harshest critics 
recognized that he was the greatest astrologer of the sixteenth century, his 
art was inexorably being marginalized. The ninth rule of the Tridentine In- 
dex condemned divinatory practices and theories. In the solemn preamble 
of his bull Coe// et terrae of 1586, Sixtus V proclaimed that knowledge of 
future events was reserved exclusively for God. All theories that aspired to 
such knowledge, including astrology, were to be rejected as deceptive. 64 In 
the same period, the “repentant” astrologer Sixtus ab Hemminga exam- 
ined thirty famous genitures, showing that they were full of contradictions 
and imprecise statements. The most respected astrologers of the sixteenth 
century, with Cardano at their head, came in for sharp criticism. 65 At the 
end of the century, the Spanish Jesuit Benito Pereyra brought out a very 
successful attack, Adversus f allaces et superstitiosas artes, against magic, 
dreams, and astrology, areas of learning that were all generated by the 
same mad desire to know the future and therefore could produce only il- 
lusions and deceit. 66De Angelis, a professor at the Collegio Romano, showed a lack of gen- 
erosity in his diligent and well-documented attack on astrology, as when 
he reproached Cardano because he had failed to predict the death of his 
son. On the other hand, when he spoke of the impossible labyrinths of ju- 
dicial astrology, he was simply reflecting the growing intolerance for a dis- 
cipline that was becoming more and more incomprehensible, a spider’s 
web so complicated and subtle that in the end, by trying to explain too 
much, it explained nothing. 67 On the eve of the trial of Galileo, in 1631, 
Urban VIII — who, “though very expert in astrology, forbade others to 
pursue it” — confirmed in his bull Inscrutabilis that the human intellect, 
“imprisoned in the shadows of the human body,” was prohibited from rais- 
ing itself to the “secrets” of God. 68

The complex and fragile scaffolding of astrology rapidly turned into a 
useless relic, a self-enclosed device, individual parts of which could hardly 
prove of any use. Vanini and others who tried to find in it some inspiration 
for their own corrosive impiety were generally disappointed. The best they 
could find in their exploration of Cardano’s astrological work was the 
Arabic theory of the succession of “laws.” They found the horoscope of 
Christ, basically, silly, and the whole technical apparatus seemed to them

62 Germana Ernst

incomprehensible and abstruse. Once astrology was no longer scientific 
and not impious enough, it lost any interest.62 Germana Ernst

incomprehensible and abstruse. Once astrology was no longer scientific 
and not impious enough, it lost any interest.

Cardano’s discussions of astrology can reveal a great deal to anyone 
who wants to become acquainted with an incredibly elusive personality: 
that of one who confessed that he was the despair of any artist who tried 
to reproduce his features. Of all the disparate features of his personality 
mentioned in his interminable list of his own qualities, the last is probably 
the most valid of all: that he remained unknowable even for those who 
lived on intimate terms with him. In another passage Cardano reiterated 
that the harder he tried to fix his own coherent identity, the less he 
succeeded . 69

Cardano believed firmly that astrology could provide him with the 
thread that would orient him in the labyrinth of life. It would give him the 
tools with which he could interpret and comprehend the obscure and dis- 
orderly world of his emotions. Though Cardano had some elements of su- 
perstition, they were not especially prominent in his books on astrology, in 
which his desire to rationalize what was disorderly and unpredictable pre- 
vailed. The motive that permeates and unifies his innumerable works — the 
desire for knowledge, which is at one and the same time the highest activ- 
ity of man and the most effective way to exorcise suffering — confronts us 
in his astrological works as well.Astrology serves as a kind of “link” between heaven and earth, as the 
border between the agitation and confusion of this world and the “secrets 
of eternity,” where everything is clear and bright. It enables us to have a 
more distanced and coherent vision of man, to project his brief, restless ex- 
istence on earth onto the background of a higher world. As we contem- 
plate the heavens “these things will appear to our mind: the memory of 
eternity, the fragility of our condition, the vanity of ambition, the bitter 
recollection of our sins. Hence our disdain for so short a life. Even if it 
should last a hundred years, what is that in comparison with the vast ex- 
tent of eternity? Is it not as a point to a circle? What is all the happiness of 
man? If anyone has felt it, even you, is it not all wind, smoke, dreams ?” 70

Notes

1. Cf. G. Cardano, Liber de libris propriis (1554) and (1562), in his Opera omnia 
(Lyons, 1663; reprinted, Stuttgart-Bad Canstatt: Frommann, 1967), I, 72, 89-94, 
109-10, 136-37; In Cl. Ptolemaei Pelusiensis IIII de astrorum iudiciis aut . . .

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

63Veritatis amor dulcissimus

63

Quadripartitae constructionis libros commentaria (Basel, 1554) (cited below as In 
Quadrip. [1554]; when cited without a date, the reference is to the text in Car- 
dano, Opera omnia, V), dedicatory letter to John Hamilton, A 3r, 126. For a pleas- 
ant reconstruction of Cardano’s consultation with his illustrious patient, see C. L. 
Dana, “The Story of a Great Consultation: Jerome Cardan Goes to Edinburgh,” 
Annals of Medical History, 3 (1921): 122-35. Recent studies on Cardano appear 
in E. Kessler, ed., Girolamo Cardano: Pbilosopb, Naturforscber, Arzt (Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz, 1994); M. Baldi and G. Canziani, eds., Girolamo Cardano: Le 
opere, le fonti, la vita (Milan: Franco Angeli, 1999). For a bibliography of the sec- 
ondary literature on Cardano, including his astrology, see I. Schiitze, “Bibliografia 
degli studi su Girolamo Cardano dal 1850 al 1995,” Bruniana & Campanelliana, 
4 (1998): 2, 449-67.

2. Ptolemy, Opus quadripartitum, adiectis libris posterioribus, trans. A. Gogava; 
with De sectione conica ortbogona, quae parabola dicitur deque specido ustorio 
(Louvain, 1548). The first two books of the Greek text had been available since 1535 
in a Latin translation by Joachim Camerarius (Nuremberg, 1535). Before that time, 
the medieval Latin translations of the Arabic text had been available. On Cardano’s 
commentary — and, more generally, on his astrological theories — see A. Ingegno, 
Saggio sulla filosofia di Cardano (Florence: La Nuova Italia, 1980), esp. 41ff., 272ff.

3. Cardano, De libris propriis. Opera, I, 72. The second edition of Cardano’s 
Commentary (Lyons, 1555) does not seem markedly different from the first. But 
the second Basel edition does show clear differences, as the author himself stated 
it did: “ita castigavi et auxi ut maxime studiosis satisfacere possit” (Cardano, 
Opera, I, 110).4. Cardano’s “Christi nativitas admirabilis” appeared in the first edition, In 
Quadrip. (1554), 163-66. It reappears in the text in the Opera omnia. The deci- 
sion to reinstate it was clearly made at the last moment, since the printer simply in- 
serted a new pair of pages, 221 and 222, to avoid having to interrupt or redo the 
existing page numbering.

5. J.-C. Margolin, “Cardan interprete d’Aristote,” Platon et Aristote a la Renais- 
sance, XVIe Colloque International de Tours (Paris: Vrin, 1976), 307-33. For in- 
teresting discussions of Cardano’s astrology, see also Margolin, “Rationalisme et 
irrationalisme dans la pensee de Jerome Cardan,” Revue de VUniversite de Brux- 
elles, 21 (1969): 89-128, and J. Ochman, “II determinismo astrologico di Giro- 
lamo Cardano,” in Magia, astrologia e religione nel Rinascimento (Wroclaw: Wy- 
dawnicwo Polskiej Akademii nauk, 1974), 123-29.

6. Cardano, Liber duodecim geniturarum. Opera, V, 503.

7. Ibid., 508. For the voyage to Scotland, see also G. Aquilecchia, “L’esperienza 
anglo-scozzese di Cardano e l’lnquisizione,” in Baldi and Canziani, Cardano, 
379-91.

8. These differences have already been pointed out by F. Secret, “Jerome Cardan 
en France,” Studi francesi, 30 (1966): 480-82; see Cardano, In Quadrip. (1554), 
422-44, and Opera, V, 513.

9. This geniture had already appeared at the end of Cardano’s Apborismorum as- 
trologicorum segmenta septem (Nuremberg, 1547); cf. Opera, V, 514.

64 Germana Ernst

10. Opera, \ 5 15.

11. L. Gaurico, Tractatus astrologicus (Venice, 1552), 65 v; Cardano, Opera, V, 
548.

12. Cardano, De propria vita. Opera, I, 36.

13. Cardano claimed in his Liber de exemplis centum geniturarum, xix, Opera, 
V, 469, that he had worked on his own geniture “for more than thirty years.” A few 
lines below, in listing certain astrological data, he mentioned that he was 44 years 
old. Evidently, then, he began to study his own geniture as an adolescent.14. Cardano, Libellus de libris propriis, cui titulus est Ephemeras, Opera, I, 56- 
57; further details on this work, which he continued to enlarge, in De libris pro- 
priis, 63. Archinto’s geniture appears in the Liber centum geniturarum. Opera, V, 
477-78. On his connections with Cardano, see F. Secret, “Filippo Archinto, Car- 
dano et Guillaume Postel,” Studi francesi, 39 (1965): 173-76. For Cardano’s rep- 
utation as an astrologer, see De libris propriis. Opera, I, 64, 100. And for another 
redaction of this text, see M. Baldi and G. Canziani, “Una quarta redazione del De 
libris propriis,” Rivista di storia della filosofa, 53 (1998): 767-98.

15. Pronostico o vero iudicio generale composto per lo eccelente messer Eli- 
eronymo Cardano phisico milanese dal 1534 insino al 1550 con molti capitoli ec- 
cellenti (Venice, 1534). The only known copy of the text is apparently that kept in 
the Bibliotheque Nationale de France in Paris (Res. V, 1179); I have now edited it: 
“Astri e previsioni: II Pronostico di Cardano del 1534,” in Baldi and Canziani, Car- 
dano, 457-75 at 46 Iff. In certain passages Cardano addresses the pope directly, as 
if he had written this prognostication at his request, perhaps as a sort of act of 
homage responding to his election to the papal throne: “Circa el stato clericale 
sono apparuti molti segni . . . quali lasso a sua Santita interpretare”; Cardano adds 
that he could not say anything about the time of his death “per non aver la sua geni- 
tura” (464).16. In addition to the surviving Pronostico, another Pronostico del anno 1535 
(Milan, 1535) is mentioned by Ingegno, Saggio, 23 (cf. G. W. Panzer, Annales ty- 
pographic i ab anno MDI ad annum MDXXXVI continuati [Nuremberg, 1801], 
IX, 92). Cardano connected his ambiguous reputation as an “astrologer” with his 
teaching in the Scuole Piattine and with the writing of the De iudiciis astrorum (De 
libris propriis. Opera, I, 65). It is not clear if the prognostications fell within the 
scope of this project, though Cardano alluded explicitly to the two short Fatin 
works on astrology that appeared in 1538 as the beginning of the De iudiciis. In 
the Ephemeras, Opera, I, 57, Cardano stated that he had written two short med- 
ical works, De malo medendi usu and the De simplicium medicinarum noxa, 
which was connected with it, to defend himself from the charge of taking an ex- 
cessive interest — or being only interested — in astrology and maintained that these 
were the first of his works to appear. One might see a very vague reference to the 
prognostications in De propria vita. Opera, I, 16, where Cardano admitted that 
he had survived hard economic times by, among other things, composing 
ephemerides.

17. In the Ephemeras, Opera, I, 57, Cardano claimed that he had completed the 
two works in fifteen days, “intelligens Pontificem astronomia delectari.”

“Veritatis amor dulcissimus” 65

18. Cardano, Encomium astrologiae. Opera, V, 727-28.

19. Cardano, De exemplis centum geniturarum, xiii, Opera, V, 466. Alciato in- 
sisted, against those who maintained that witches’ pact with the devil really en- 
abled them to engage in “flight” by night, that such trips were really hallucinations 
and imaginary. See his Parergon iuris, VIII, 22; Omnia opera (Basel, 1582), IV, 
499.20. I cite Diverse imprese accomodate a diverse moralita con versi che i loro signi- 
ficati dichiarano insieme con molte altre nella lingua italiana non piu tradotte 
tratte da gli Emblemi di Alciato (Lyons, 1549), 69-70.

21. Cardano, Peroratio, Opera, V, 90-92.

22. Cardano, Libelli quinque (Nuremberg, 1547), A 2v, A 4v.

23. Cardano, In Quadrip. (1554), 126.

24. Ibid., A 2v. This important prefatory letter, like the other introductory letters 
in this and other works, was omitted from the Opera. In my view, one of the most 
important limitations of this edition lies in the fact that it presents the texts entirely 
wrenched out of their original contexts.

25. A. Pighius, Adversus prognosticatorum vulgus qui annuas praedictiones 
edunt, et se astrologos mentiuntur astrologiae defensio (Paris, 1518 [1519]). 
L. Thorndike underlines the importance of this work in the huge debate that blew 
up a little later about the flood that was predicted for 1524. See his History of Ma- 
gic and Experimental Science, 8 vols. (New York: Columbia University Press, 1923- 
58), 5:184ff. On the enormous burst of pamphlet literature generated by this event, 
see the works of Paola Zambelli, esp. “Fine del mondo o inizio della propaganda?” 
in Scienze, credenze occulte, livelli di cultura (Florence: Olschki, 1982), 291-368.

26. Cardano, In Quadrip. (1554), A 2v.

27. Cardano, Opera, V, 356.

28. Ibid., 104.

29. Cardano, “Prooemium,” In Quadrip. (1554), A 4v.

30. See, e.g., Opera, V, 99.

31. Ibid., 93, 97. The arguments of Favorinus (second century) form the conclu- 
sion of the anti-astrological Dissertatio recorded by Aulus Gellius (Noctes Atticae,

14.1).

32. Cardano, Opera, V, 110; Aphor. astr., I, 34; Opera, V, 31.14.1).

32. Cardano, Opera, V, 110; Aphor. astr., I, 34; Opera, V, 31.

33. Ibid., 73-74. The theory of the “great conjunctions,” which was disseminated 
above all by the works of Albumasar, connected the main events of human history, 
including the birth and passing of religions, with the entry of the superior planets 
(Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn) into particular signs. It thus offered an interesting key 
to the understanding of universal history and a naturalistic interpretation of reli- 
gion. See E. Garin, Lo zodiaco della vita (Bari: Laterza, 1976), chap. 1. On the the- 
ories of the great conjunctions in the Middle Ages, see J. D. North, “Astrology and 
the Fortunes of Churches,” Centaurus, 24 (1980): 181-211;T. Gregory, “Temps as- 
trologique et temps chretien,” in Le temps chretien de la fin de I’Antiquite au Moyen 
Age (Paris: Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, 1984), 557-73, reprinted in

66 Germana Ernst

Gregory, “Mundana sapientia”: Forme di conscenza nella cultura medievale 
(Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura 1992), 329-46. For Cardano’s theory of the 
leges (religions), see J. Ochman, “Les horoscopes des religions etablis par Jerome 
Cardan (1501-1576),” Revue de Syntb'ese, ser. Ill, 77-78 (1975): 33-51.

34. Cardano, Opera, V, 188. For the commentary of Hali ibn Rodoan (11th cen- 
tury), see, for example, the text of the Quadripartitum included in the astrological 
miscellany printed “Venetiis, sumptibus haeredum Octaviani Scoti, 1519.”35. On the importance of Mercury and the great conjunctions in Hali’s theory, see 
Quadripartitum (Venice, 1519), 28v, 32v, 38v. The sections of Cardano’s com- 
mentary that dealt with changes in the leges were among those most attentively 
studied by all who hoped to find in astrology hints for a sharp critique of religion: 
e.g., Giulio Cesare Vanini, who cited substantial passages in his Amphitheatrum 
aeternae Providentiae (Fyons, 1616), 53ff. (cf. G. Ernst, Religione, ragione e 
natura [Milan: Franco Angeli, 1991], 233-36); and the anonymous author of that 
summa atheistica, the Theophrastus redivivus, ed. G. Canziani and G. Paganini 
(Florence: Fa Nuova Italia, 1981-82), 2:398ff., 460ff., where the whole horoscope 
of Christ is also cited. For the connections between this text and Cardano — and 
some insightful remarks on astrological points — see G. Canziani, “Une ency- 
clopedic naturaliste de la Renaissance devant la critique du XVIIe siecle: le 
‘Theophrastus redivivus’ lecteur de Cardan,” XVIIe siecle, 36 (1985): 379-406.

36. Cardano, Opera, V, 199. For Hali’s opinion on the equinoctial signs, see 
Quadripartitum (Venice, 1519), 36r; cf. Ingegno, Saggio, 275.

37. Cardano, Opera, V, 221.

38. Plutarch, De oraculomm defectu (Paris, 1556), A ii verso.37. Cardano, Opera, V, 221.

38. Plutarch, De oraculomm defectu (Paris, 1556), A ii verso.

39. F. Sanches, Opera philosophica, ed. J. de Carvalho (Coimbra, 1955), 103. 
J. Scaliger, Prolegomena de astrologia veterum Graecorum, in M. Manilius, Astro- 
nomica, ed. Scaliger (Feiden, 1599), B 3v (cf. Ernst, Religione, ragione e natura, 
234). J.-A. de Thou, Historiae (Paris, 1620), I, 155, including the story that Car- 
dano starved himself to death to avoid contradicting the astrological prediction of 
the date of his death, a story that would be repeated many times, by Naude and 
others, down to Bayle. J. Brucker spent a considerable portion of his chapter on 
Cardano discussing the horoscope of Christ, the reception of which he traced in its 
basic outlines: Historia critica philosophiae (Feipzig, 1766), IV, pt. 2, 75-77.

40. G. Naude, Vita Cardani, Cardano, Opera, I, [4r-v], Cf. Albertus Magnus, 
Speculum astronomiae, ed. S. Caroti, M. Pereira, and S. Zamponi under the di- 
rection of P. Zambelli (Pisa: Domus Galilaeana, 1977), 36-37; cf. nowP. Zambelli, 
The “ Speculum astronomiae” and Its Enigma (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1992). On 
Pierre d’Ailly, see note 45. On Tiberio Russiliano Sesto and his very rare work 
Apologeticus adversus cucullatos, see P. Zambelli, “Una disputa ereticale proposta 
nelle Universita padane nel 1519,” in II Rinascimento nelle corti padane (Bari: De 
Donato, 1977), 495-528 [and, more recently, Zambelli, Una reincarnazione di 
Pico ai tempi di Pomponazzi (Milan: II Polifilo, 1994), including an edition of the 
Apologeticus]. For an English translation of the horoscope of Christ with com- 
mentary, see W. Shumaker, Renaissance Curiosa (Binghamton, N.Y.: Center for 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 1982), 53-90.

Veritatis amor dulcissimus

67Veritatis amor dulcissimus

67

41. Cardano, Liber centum geniturarum, xvi, Opera, V, 466. Cardano drew his 
allusion to the “complete madman” from Pietro d’ Abano, Conciliator, differentia 
xx (Venice, 1565), 32r. Pietro reported the view of the medical man Gentile da 
Foligno, who held that Elijah and Christ both owed their special abilities to the 
“temperamentum” of their bodily constitutions. The passage naturally received a 
critical note from Symphorien Champier (ibid., 274r). Cardano discussed the 
question of the “temperatura aequalis” in Contradicentium medicorwn libri, 
I.vi.9, Opera, VI, 411-13. On this point see Ingegno, Saggio, 257ff.

42. The originators of this heresy were the Docetists, who drew on Gnostic doc- 
trines and tended to deny that Christ had had a true body of flesh and blood and 
that he had undergone real sufferings.

43. Cardano, Opera, V, 222.

44. Cardano, In Quadrip. (1554), A 5r; see his entire Ad pium lectorem praefatio.

45. G. Pico della Mirandola, Disputationes adversus astrologiam divinatricem, 
ed. E. Garin, 2 vols. (Florence: Vallecchi, 1946-52), 1:566-84. Cardinal Pierre 
d’Ailly (1350-1420), who played a major role at the Council of Konstanz, had 
written important works in which he tried to maintain the “concord” of theology 
and astrology. He took a special interest in problems of chronology and eschatol- 
ogy, hoping to produce well-founded estimates for the dates of the advent of the 
Antichrist and the fate of Christianity.

46. G. Savonarola, Tractato contra gli astrologi (Florence, 1497). Reprinted un- 
der the title Opera singolare contra I’astrologia divinatrice, this work was trans- 
lated into Latin by the Dominican Tommaso Boninsegni: Opus eximium adversus 
divinatricem astronomiam (Florence, 1581). In his prefatory Apologeticus, Bonin- 
segni tried to blunt the sharpest points in the anti-astrological polemics of Pico and 
Savonarola.47. G. Francesco Pico, De return praenotione, V: “De superstitiosa praenotione 
contra astrologiam divinatricem,” Opera omnia (Basel, 1573; reprinted, Turin: 
Bottega d’Erasmo, 1972), 504 ff. Pico’s little work De veris calamitatum nostro- 
rum temporum causis was a polemic directed against Agostino Nifo’s De nos- 
trarum calamitatum causis (Venice, 1505). In his Praefatio, 2r-v, Nifo confessed 
that he had once believed that all the disasters that had recently befallen Italy — 
plagues, deaths of rulers, massacres, famines — were the result of divine wrath. Af- 
ter making a careful analysis of various celestial phenomena, however, including 
eclipses, comets, and conjunctions, he had changed his opinion and decided that 
these were the general causes of the misfortunes in question. He claimed to follow 
Ptolemy, “the prince of the mathematicians” as Aristotle was the god of the 
philosophers, inasmuch as he had been the only one to combine astronomy with 
natural philosophy. Nifo described the “astrologastri” who departed from 
Ptolemy’s principles as mere “fabulatores circulatoresque.”

48. Cardano, In Quadrip. (1554), A 2r.

49. Cardano, Liber centum geniturarum, xlviii, Opera, V, 484.

50. Ibid., 473, 477, 481.

51. Ibid., 471.

68 Germana Ernst

52. Cardano, Aphorism, astr., VII, Opera, V, 85-86.

53. Gaurico, Tractatus, 2 lr-v.

54. Ibid., 109r-v.

55. Ibid., 99r-v.

56. Cardano, Aphorism, astr., VII, Opera, V, 83. In Cardano’s eyes, Gaurico 
apparently was the embodiment of the bad astrologer, venal and entirely without 
scientific rigor.

57. See A. Ingegno, “Prefazione,” in G. Cardano, Della mia vita (Milan: Serra e 
Riva, 1982).

58. For Cardano’s geniture see Liber centum geniturarwn, xix, Opera, V, 468-72, 
and the two versions found in the Liber duodecim geniturarum: In Quadrip. 
(1554), 430-75, and Opera, V, 517-41.

59. Ibid., 468-469, 517.

60. Ibid., 523.

61. Naude, Vita Cardani, Cardano, Opera, I [lr-v].59. Ibid., 468-469, 517.

60. Ibid., 523.

61. Naude, Vita Cardani, Cardano, Opera, I [lr-v].

62. The two versions show notable divergences. The most striking naturally have 
to do with the events surrounding the tragic death of Cardano’s son, which took 
place after he drew up the first version, but many passages on Cardano’s honors, 
wealth, and other fortunes are also substantially changed.

63. A. De Angelis, In astrologos coniectores (Rome, 1615), 302.

64. Index librorum prohibitorum cum regulis confectis per Patres a Tridentino 
Synodo delectos (Rome, 1596), 32; for the text of the bull, see Magnum Bullariwn 
Romanum (Lyons, 1592), II, 515-17.

65. Sixtus ab Hemminga, Astrologiae ratione et experientia confutatae liber 
(Antwerp, 1583).

66. The work, which takes the form of an elegant, though not especially original, 
collection of the arguments against the occult sciences, was reprinted a number of 
times in the 1590s; see Ernst, Religione, ragione e natura, 265-70.

67. De Angelis, In astrologos, 235.

68. G. Gigli, Diario romano (1608-1670), ed. G. Ricciotti (Rome: Tuminelli, 
1958), 253. For the bull see Magnum Bullarium, V, 173f.

69. Cardano, De propria vita. Opera, I, 5; ibid., V, 523, 524.

70. Cardano, In Quadrip. (1554), A 2r.

3

Between the Election and My Hopes: 
Girolamo Cardano and Medical Astrology

Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

Cardano and Medical Interrogations

Early in the seventeenth century, three short texts by Girolamo Cardano 
caught the attention of Giovanni Antonio Magini, a Paduan professor 
who was expert in both astronomy and medicine . 1 He included them in a 
collection of similar analyses:

Third Observation from Cardano

The onset of disease of Giovanni Antonio de Campioni

10 May 1553 8 pmThird Observation from Cardano

The onset of disease of Giovanni Antonio de Campioni

10 May 1553 8 pm

Giovanni Antonio de Campioni, at the age of around thirty, fell ill after a journey. 
He seemed mildly ill in the first instance, down to the fourth day, because the moon 
was in sextile [a benign aspect] to Venus [a benign planet] and Venus received it; 
for Venus was in her dignities [in Taurus, her mansion].

And because the moon was quite slow in her course, the disease seemed not to 
become more serious, since Venus, as I said, held it back. The moon reached the 
twenty-fifth degree of Gemini in around three days and eighteen hours, since its 
motion was so slow, and therefore the fourth day was drawn out. But then there 
took place a conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in Leo, and with the humid stars. 
This produced a great fire and turbulence in his urine, though these seemed, be- 
cause of the extension of the fourth day, to begin on the fifth. Now in the seventh 
day, the disease became worse, since the moon had not yet reached a distance of 
90° because of the slowness of its motion, but was in a very bad situation at the be- 
ginning of Leo, since it did not strike any beneficent star. Indeed, it struck an anti- 
scion [a degree under the influence] of the sun, which was in the sixth house, and 
the dragon’s head [the ascending node of the moon’s path]. Similarly, the disease 
became more serious on the eighth and ninth days, because the moon came into 
conjunction with Jupiter and Mars, themselves in conjunction, and because they 
were among the humid stars, he underwent a sweat. For heat, combined with hu- 
midity, creates sweat and much urine, which he passed. On the eleventh day he 
sweated, but it was with great effort, for the moon overcame Saturn, which was in 
opposition to it, but there followed a conjunction with Venus.

70 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi70 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

On the twelfth day he seemed to be very ill, because he raved a great deal. But 
nevertheless because of the conjunction with Venus his urine appeared concocted. 
On the thirteenth, since the moon was in quartile to [90° away from] Mercury (for 
he is the enemy of the horoscope) he was no worse, because he was now moved to- 
wards health. But he was also no better, because of Mercury. On the fourteenth he 
had another sweat, and felt better. But he could not find release from the disease, 
because the moon had covered only 174° 22’, and the disease had to be prolonged 
to the seventeenth day. But in the fourteenth day the moon reached sextile to [60° 
away from] Jupiter and Mars and quartile to Venus. Therefore he had a sweat. On 
the seventeenth he was freed from the disease, since the moon had now passed op- 
position with its [original position] and reached trine to [120° away from] Venus.

Fourth observation, from Cardano

The onset of disease for the same man, who died on the 14th day 
23 May 3 pmFourth observation, from Cardano

The onset of disease for the same man, who died on the 14th day 
23 May 3 pm

From the start he had the moon quartile to Venus. Lack of temperance in food and 
drink made him ill, and his condition quickly worsened because of the rapid mo- 
tion of the moon. On the seventh day he felt considerably worse, for the moon was 
with the dragon’s tail [the descending node of its path], and devoid of any aspect 
with Jupiter, and moving towards opposition to Venus and the sun was afflicted by 
the square of Saturn. On the eighth he seemed to be relieved by a flow of blood 
from the nostrils, but his strength declined because of the moon’s opposition to 
Venus. On the ninth he seemed to breathe a little because the moon was trine to 
[120° away from] the sun. The tenth took the place of the eleventh, since the moon 
had reached the angle, that is, the beginning of Pisces, in opposition to Jupiter and 
Mars. On the eleventh day it was reasonable for him to die, since the moon had 
come into conjunction with Saturn at the tenth hour, and into quartile to [90° 
from] the sun at the eighteenth hour. He died on June 5, three hours before noon, 
and it was the beginning of the fourteenth day, and the moon had arrived at the 
point exactly opposed to its [original] position.

Fifth observation from Cardano

The beginning of an illness from the transfixion of the arm of Battista Cardano, 
which caused his death 
1552 19 December 4:32 pmFifth observation from Cardano

The beginning of an illness from the transfixion of the arm of Battista Cardano, 
which caused his death 
1552 19 December 4:32 pm

This other patient was my relative, a man of sixty when he was wounded. The 
moon was apart from Mars, and Mars was with the dragon’s head [the ascending 
node of the moon’s [path], and the moon with the dragon’s tail [the descending 
node], and it applied to [approached] Saturn and opposition to Jupiter, which was 
then unfortunate. But he did not immediately suffer, because the moon was going 
towards sextile to Mercury, and the wound was the transfixion of an arm. On the 
fourth day he suffered because the moon was quartile to the sun, but he had no 
fever because none of the malevolent planets attacked him. For that reason he im- 
proved greatly up until the tenth day, so much so that he was able to rise. On the 
eleventh day he suffered at the third hour of the night, when the moon moved to- 
wards opposition with the sun. But this was deadly, since it was the lord of the place 
opposed to the moon. And afterwards the moon moved towards opposition with 
Mercury. He was therefore laid low by fever and hemorrhage on the fourteenth day,

Between the Election and My Hopes 71

which was January 2. At the third hour of the day, when the moon was in exact 
conjunction with Mars, he died. 2Between the Election and My Hopes 71

which was January 2. At the third hour of the day, when the moon was in exact 
conjunction with Mars, he died. 2

Couched in the almost-forgotten language of astrology, these texts 
served as the captions for figures that Cardano erected and Magini repro- 
duced: quick-paced narratives of celestial developments that took place 
over a given short period, rather than the formal analyses of horoscopes 
that Cardano collected and published in two of his most influential writ- 
ings. To Magini, whose training and practice brought him far closer than 
any modern reader can hope to be to Cardano’s intellectual and profes- 
sional world, they seemed very revealing, even typical of the balance that 
Cardano tried to hold in his everyday practice between the two predictive 
arts of medicine and astrology. We hope in this chapter to pose the ques- 
tion of whether he was right.Decipherment, naturally, must precede discussion and interpretation. 
Let us begin by supplying at least some of the glosses needed to follow Car- 
dano through his analytical work. Consider, for example, the third and 
simplest of the figures. Cardano needed to explain why his relative Battista 
Cardano became ill and eventually died, some days after being wounded 
in the arm. Laying out the positions of the sun, moon, and planets for the 
moment when the wound was inflicted, Cardano arranged them in the 
houses of an astrological figure laid out in the standard square form: as 
twelve triangles, superimposed on the twelve signs of the zodiac, begin- 
ning from the left at nine o’clock. Then he analyzed their relationships and 
effects, using a rich and well-established technical vocabulary and follow- 
ing with special care the way the moon, moving rapidly along the zodiac, 
altered these configurations and thus exerted different effects . 3 In this case, 
Cardano began from a series of astronomical facts singled out without ex- 
planation as significant and given astrological meaning:

the moon and Mars are 180° away from one another on the zodiac, the moon with 
the descending and Mars with the ascending node of the lunar path (the tail and 
head of the dragon)

the moon, moreover, is coming into conjunction with Saturn, a malevolent planet, 
and opposition with Jupiter, a benevolent one; and the moon is moving towards 
sext with Mercury (60° of separation)

Accordingly, he inferred, the prospects were generally bad. The moon, a 
neutral planet, underwent the influence of Mars or Saturn, both malevo- 
lent planets, whose properties it may share in such circumstances. But it

72 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

also entered into a benign relation with Mercury, which postponed the 
predicted ill effects and accounted for the anomaly that this sexagenarian 
did not fall ill until four days after being wounded.As the moon moved toward quartile to the sun, or 90° of separation 
from it, a malign aspect, the old man felt worse, but since none of the ac- 
tively malevolent planets attacked him, he remained free from fever and his 
condition improved gradually. On the eleventh day, however, as the moon 
reached another malign aspect with the sun, opposition, he felt ill at night. 
And when the moon went into opposition, a malign aspect, to Mercury, 
Battista showed the symptoms of mortal illness, fever and hemorrhage.

The other two analyses closely resemble this one. In each case, Cardano 
describes the course of an illness, with all the deadpan — or bedpan — de- 
tail one might expect from a faithful reader of the Epidemics of Hip- 
pocrates. In each case, he pays special attention to the rhythms of the 
patient’s suffering, trying to identify the individual days on which he took 
a distinct turn for the better or the worse. And in each case he traces coun- 
terparts to the tossings and turnings of the fevered sufferer in the positions 
and movements of the stars above. The movement of the moon, in partic- 
ular, imparts a clear, quantitative order to the qualitative data: Like a mod- 
ern chart of fever or weight loss, it provides a continuous, measurable 
armature to which the attending astrologer or medical practitioner can at- 
tach other data. Not interrogations in the normal sense — figures erected 
to give a prognosis — these brief astrological case histories retroject the 
movements of the stars into the story of a sickness already endured. The 
only motive for compiling them would have been personal or scientific cu- 
riosity: They could serve no immediate practical end.The form of analysis Cardano employed here seems at once strange and 
familiar. It seems strange because Cardano unselfconsciously applied a 
highly sophisticated set of hermeneutical rules to interpret the positions of 
the planets, without explaining or even explicitly appealing to them. He 
knew, without explaining why, that each planet, each house of the figure, 
and each geometrical figure had certain properties. His rapid-fire astral 
commentary on the course of each illness has, accordingly, something of 
the gruff impenetrability of speech barked in an unknown language.

In another sense, however, the outlines of Cardano’s enterprise are 
hauntingly familiar to anyone interested in the Renaissance. He clearly 
hoped to use the astrological conditions obtaining at a given series of mo-

Between the Election and My Hopes 73

ments to explain the course of the diseases his patients actually endured. 
And this general project, if not its technical details, is exactly what one 
would expect of a mid-sixteenth-century medical man like Cardano. His- 
torians of science and literature, in fact, have long treated medical astrol- 
ogy as one of the characteristic sciences of Cardano’s period. Over and 
over again, historians have called attention to the large number of medical 
men who also studied and practiced astrology, to the many textbooks that 
explained the principles of astrological medicine and how to apply them, 
and to the widespread polemics that attended such efforts to solve con- 
tested problems like that of the origins of syphilis.Many primary sources support this general picture. “It is accepted,” 
Magini wrote, in an introductory statement that has many earlier and later 
parallels, “in accordance with the common opinion of all excellent practi- 
tioners of the art of astrology, both astrologers and physicians, that one 
should construct a celestial figure for the onset of each disease, to make it 
possible to predict its essence, its critical days, the varieties of its accidents, 
and finally its outcome. For we can use such a celestial figure to work out 
whether an illness is lethal or will end in health, long-lasting or short .” 4 
Many modern secondary works echo or expand on these statements, ar- 
guing unequivocally that surgeons carried out operations, pharmacists 
readied prescriptions, and medical practitioners recommended regimens 
as their celestial informants dictated.

Magini, who began his work with a detailed and precise bibliography of 
earlier publications, referred to Cardano as a special authority in the field, 
one who had discussed the astrological determination of critical days and 
related problems at length in his commentary on the standard ancient as- 
trological work, Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos, and elsewhere . 5 The reader would 
naturally infer that Cardano generally agreed with Magini on the need to 
use astrological means for treating a vast range of diseases and disabilities, 
taking into account the patient’s geniture, its “revolution” (the astrologi- 
cal configuration of the corresponding day and time) for the year in ques- 
tion, and the immediate astral circumstances of the illness . 6

Cardano, as Magini did not need to point out, was both one of the most 
prolific and prominent medical writers and one of the most influential as- 
trologers of the sixteenth century. His works include commentaries on the 
classics of ancient medicine and astrology, systematic treatises, and short 
consilia and horoscopes produced for individual patients and clients. It74 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

seems reasonable, accordingly, to take Magini at his word, accepting Car- 
dano as an authoritative witness to the principles and practices of medical 
astrology in the sixteenth century. 7 That is what we propose to do here, but 
we intend to do it in a highly economical and carefully defined way. We will 
begin by making as few assumptions as possible. We will use Cardano’s 
works and those of others not to prove that medical astrology was com- 
monly practiced, but to see how one well-known expert practitioner car- 
ried out the task, millennia old in his time, of combining medical and 
astrological data and techniques. And we will try to remain open to the 
possibility that medical astrology was in fact less ubiquitous in practice 
than modern historians have tended to believe and less central to Car- 
dano’s own work and thought than anyone would expect.

Cardano Interrogates the InterrogationsCardano Interrogates the Interrogations

Literal explication of these texts, obviously, requires patience and some 
knowledge of classical astrology. But locating their place in Cardano’s 
larger medical and astrological practice is a more complex, even baffling, 
enterprise. Cardano regularly insisted that astrologers must be dignified 
figures, remote and learned, not ambulance chasers eager to make a few 
shillings by predicting the likely outcome of a case of housemaid’s knee. 
True, he devoted a short treatise — the last section of his enormous com- 
mentary on the largest ancient manual of astrology, Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos, 
which appeared in 1554 — to the uses of interrogations (figures erected to 
clarify astrological conditions at a given moment). But his attitude toward 
them was distant, even stern. At the end of the treatise, giving a list of nine 
commandments for good astrological practice, Cardano made clear that 
he saw the making of full-scale horoscopes as the astrologer’s proper oc- 
cupation. He counseled the reader interested in practicing to avoid ever 
erecting a figure for a skeptic or for widespread public consumption (the 
latter, to be sure, a warning that he himself did not heed very well). 8

Only after devoting a long digression to the natal charts that accounted 
for the undying love of Henry II and Catherine de Medicis did Cardano fi- 
nally manage to discuss the sorts of short-term astrological inquiry that he 
carried out ex post mortem in the cases from which we began. He admit- 
ted that he had condemned the making of astrological “interrogations” in 
the past and insisted that many predictions could be made only on the ba-

Between the Election and My Hopes 75Between the Election and My Hopes 75

sis of a full birth horoscope . 9 He rebuked those — and there were many of 
them — who believed that an interrogation could reveal whether a theft 
had taken place, or if the stolen goods could be recovered. The stars, he in- 
sisted, “are causes, not signs; they are bodies, they are noble, they are pow- 
erful and strong .” 10 To tie them to the trivial details of medical practice was 
clearly an abuse of celestial patience.

Cardano admitted that interrogations had their uses. They could pro- 
vide information on one’s prospects when sowing seed or making a bet, 
though not on anything that might be determined by other factors, such as 
one’s upbringing and education (thus Cardano excluded marriage from 
the list of possible interrogations ). 11 They determined the best times for ad- 
ministering medicine and carrying out surgery: “It has been discovered by 
direct experience,” wrote Cardano, echoing a classic work of Arabo-Latin 
astrology, the Centiloquium ascribed to Ptolemy in the Islamic world, 
“that if such operations are carried out when the moon is in possession of 
the sign that is connected with the bodily limb in question, it cannot take 
place without harm befalling someone .” 12 Interrogations, in other words, 
really did, in Cardano’s estimation, form part of the art of astrology, 
“which,” he asserted, could be practiced “with no less glory and profit 
than the medical men in our time practice their art of medicine .” 13

At the same time, however, Cardano also indicated that the art of the in- 
terrogation was most appropriate to those medical questions for which he 
could offer no rigorous way of obtaining an answer. Consider, for ex- 
ample, the question — a classic for makers of interrogations — of what sex 
an unborn child would belong to. “The safest way to determine this,” Car- 
dano said, even though he was writing a treatise on astrology,is from examination of the belly. For Hippocrates says that male babies hang to the 
right, female to the left. This can also be inferred from the difference in the breasts. 
But even though this sign, and the last one, are very sure and hardly ever fool you, 
it is often very ambiguous, since the difference is so small that it can be recognized 
only by long habitual training. It is like knowledge of jewelry. One must put the 
woman down on her back, very precisely and, as in dislocation of the foot, make 
a meticulously precise comparison of the sides. Here, as I said, expert physicians 
often go wrong when the feet are out of joint. Hence it is hardly surprising that 
when the difference is smaller, and experience has been much rarer, men hesitate. 
Yet it happens — though barely once among twenty pregnant women — that the 
right side is more swollen and yet she has a girl in her womb, or vice versa. The 
same holds for the breasts. But this falls outside the art [of astrology]. To the art 
belong the directions, the progresses, and the entry into masculine signs for male

76 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

babies, and female ones for female babies, for the mother or the father, and with 
more security if for both. But if you lack this aid then take the hour of conception, 
erect a figure, and see which planets dominate the ascendant and the Medium 
coelum, and how they are affected with regard to the double form of sex. Some 
think that when siblings are born after brothers or sisters, they are male when the 
moon is moving toward New Moon and female when it moves towards Full 
Moon. 14It seems unlikely that Cardano (or any other male medical practitioner) 
had much experience with direct examination of women’s breasts and bel- 
lies of the sort he describes here. Indeed, his very next sentence gives the 
game away, since he explains that the desire for information of this kind, 
however obtained, stemmed not from the existence of scientific means to 
gain a reliable answer but from the simple desire to gain money by betting. 
“You had better practise this before you make judgments, or the art will 
bring you harm, not profit. The merchants of Antwerp and Lyons make a 
habit of betting large sums of money on this, for the sake of the competi- 
tion .” 15 Cardano, in short, offered the interrogation as a counsel of de- 
spair, for the physician who wished to invest in male or female baby futures 
but could not obtain access to the prospective mother’s belly or breasts.Interrogations, in other words, do not sound very reliable, even in the 
context of a book dedicated to their study. And the reason may not be far 
to seek. Cardano warns, early in the treatise, that some believe that the fig- 
ure of the interrogation itself could have a positive effect on a sufferer. Af- 
ter all, “some figures seem to help somewhat with pains of the kidneys and 
stone.” But the figure, he insisted, “as a product of art, has no power of ac- 
tion.” Trying to erect figures in order to influence the heavens was, as 
Aquinas had said, mere superstition . 16 Here Cardano suggests that many 
patients — whose concern, of course, was not to preserve the integrity of 
the astrologer’s discipline but to be cured — saw interrogations as counter- 
parts to the figures engraved on magical amulets: not images of the skies 
as they were but tools for manipulating them to draw down favorable and 
avert unfavorable influences. One hears the faint, lost echo here of argu- 
ments between the astrologer, insisting on the limits of his art, and his des- 
perate clientele. The evidence, in short, seems puzzling, even contradictory. 
To solve the puzzles with which it presents us, we must examine the Ozy- 
mandian monoliths of Cardano’s medical and astrological texts. How far 
do these complement, qualify, or refute Magini’s version of Cardano or 
Cardano’s own presentation?

Between the Election and My Hopes 77

Astrology in Cardano’s Medical WritingsBetween the Election and My Hopes 77

Astrology in Cardano’s Medical Writings

In his writings on medical theory and practice, Cardano showed remark- 
able restraint on the subject of medical astrology. His copious published 
medical works not only lack examples of horoscopic astrology such as 
those just analyzed or expositions of techniques of astrological prediction. 
They also contain relatively little extended discussion of any topics that 
can be construed as in some broad sense astrological and only occasion- 
ally refer to diagnosis, prognosis, or therapy based on astrological presup- 
positions. For the general term “medical astrology” in fact embraces a 
number of different concepts and procedures. In the strictest sense it refers 
to the use of technical astrology involving the erection of a figure and the 
systematic use of tables to obtain the positions of the planets for the sake 
of guidance in diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy. Medical astrology of this 
type could, in turn, take a number of different forms and be employed for 
several different purposes besides the use of interrogations like those de- 
scribed above to analyze the cause and progress of an individual’s particu- 
lar episode of illness. Astrology could be used to predict expected health 
conditions for an entire community or explain the causes of epidemics. For 
an individual client or patient (who was not necessarily ill at the time), the 
physician-astrologer could cast a nativity in which the patient’s lifelong 
prospects for health and illness formed a particular focus of attention . 17 In 
the case of a sick patient, interrogation of a figure erected for the time of 
the onset of illness could be used as a means of prognosis: in order to as- 
certain the expected outcome for the disease, the physician, and the pa- 
tient, as one physician-astrologer put it . 18 Any conscientious and scientific 
medical astrologer who employed interrogations of this kind was ex- 
pected to take great care to ascertain the time of onset of disease as accu- 
rately as possible and preferably to use these precise data in conjunction 
with careful study of the patient’s nativity . 19 Given the difficulty in many 
cases of determining the precise moment of the onset of disease, some 
sixteenth-century experts, like their medieval predecessors, thought it al- 
lowable to cast an election or interrogation for the moment at which the 
practitioner was first consulted or when someone brought him the pa- 
tient’s urine or an object touched by the patient; another view regarded 
this practice as superstitious nonsense that the scientific (and Christian) 
medical astrologer should eschew . 20 Renaissance differences of opinion78 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

over this issue seem to mirror the process whereby the traditional medical 
procedure of inspection of urines itself, once the badge of the respected 
medieval medical practitioner, came over the course of the sixteenth cen- 
tury to be the mark of the quack. 21 Technical medical astrology could of 
course also be used retroactively — for example, to explain past epidemics 
or the cause of death of patients (or historical figures).

In a broader sense, medical astrology also encompassed other beliefs 
and practices that did not involve the casting and interpretation of horo- 
scopes but presumably, at least in principle, required the consultation of 
astronomical tables. These included the theory that critical days in illness 
depended on the phases of the moon and or positions of other planets and 
the idea that choice of times for administration of therapy (usually med- 
ication or phlebotomy) required attention to the planetary positions (some 
held that even the mixing of compound medicines should take place at as- 
trologically propitious times). 22 Also drawn into medical astrology during 
the Renaissance was the Hippocratic idea that the physician should pay at- 
tention to star risings and settings, as these affected climate and, conse- 
quently, health.Other astrological ideas in medicine were considerably more general 
and less technical. As is well known, the underlying concept of all astrol- 
ogy — namely, that the heavenly bodies exercised influence on bodies in the 
terrestrial world — was systematized into a network of supposed corre- 
spondences between planets, houses, and zodiacal signs on the one hand 
and parts of the body, temperamental qualities, humors, virtues, phases of 
pregnancy, diseases, and varieties of medicinal action (purging, strength- 
ening, and so on) on the other. These commonplace and traditional for- 
mulae, often expressed in visual images or tables, appeared in simplified 
medical handbooks, almanacs, and so on throught the later Middle Ages 
and Renaissance. 23 Finally, at least in the view of the astrologer Symon de 
Phares, who included Marsilio Ficino in his list of important astrologers, 
medical astrology extended to the astral magic and doctrines of sympa- 
thies and affinities between planets and herbs, talismans, colors, sounds, 
and odors espoused by that Florentine neoplatonist. 24

Cardano’s published medical writings fill almost five large, double- 
columned, folio-sized volumes and include most of the main types of con- 
temporary medical literature: commentaries, treatises on various branches 
of theoria and practica, and consilia for individual patients. In them the

Between the Election and My Hopes 79Between the Election and My Hopes 79

number, extent, and level of detail of allusions to all the aspects of medical 
astrology just outlined fall well within the normal range for these genres, 
which was small. Despite the assertions about the importance of astrology 
for medicine iterated countless times between the thirteenth and the sev- 
enteenth centuries, in general medical works the subject of astrology usu- 
ally appears only in specific, restricted contexts. 25 Where theoretical 
discussion was concerned, the standard contexts of extended exposition 
included consideration of the ancillary sciences necessary to medicine or 
the place of medicine among the arts and sciences, the astrological causes 
of epidemics, and, above all, the concept of critical days of illness. Disqui- 
sitions on some of these topics — notably critical days and the usefulness 
of astrology for medicine — can, of course, be found not only in the med- 
ical writings of Cardano’s contemporaries, but also in the works of earlier 
scholastic physicians going back at least to Pietro d’Abano (d. 1316). 26But although the rich heritage of medieval astrology continued to be 
drawn on in Cardano’s day, both the biological and the intellectual envi- 
ronment of medical astrology was now very different from that of the 
Middle Ages. In general terms, the menace of new or apparently new and 
terrifying epidemic diseases, especially plague and syphilis, appears to 
have played a major part in stimulating the widespread and intense inter- 
est in astral influences, and especially the role of the heavenly bodies in 
health and disease, characteristic of the late fourteenth to seventeenth cen- 
turies in Europe. In both astrology and medicine, Renaissance editions 
and translations facilitated a new attention to and reevaluation of ancient 
sources. Furthermore, although Marsilio Ficino’s own view of astrology 
was in some respects ambivalent, book 3 of his De vita constituted an el- 
egant and powerful restatement of fundamental concepts about celestial 
and planetary influences on human health by an author of great prestige. 27

More specifically, four aspects of the relation of astrology and medicine 
acquired a new urgency in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. 
In the first place, improved access to the texts of the Flippocratic corpus, 
which contains a number of statements about the influence of the stars on 
climate, environment, and health, raised the question of the extent to 
which Hippocrates had actually known or endorsed astrology. 28 Secondly, 
vigorous debates about the causation and transmission of epidemic dis- 
ease became a central topic of medical discussion from the 1490s through 
the end of the sixteenth century. 29 Thirdly, and perhaps most importantly,

80 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi80 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

Pico della Mirandola’s withering treatment of the claims of astrology 
called the entire basis of medical astrology into question . 30 Pico’s repudia- 
tion of astrology touched off several generations of debate about all as- 
pects of the subject, of which the medical consequences were only one 
small part. Nevertheless, Pico’s denunciations were especially provocative 
where medicine was concerned, because unlike various other medieval and 
Renaissance critics of astrology who routinely excluded the usefulness of 
astrology for medicine, along with navigation and agriculture, from their 
strictures, Pico explicitly and in detail repudiated specific medical doc- 
trines rooted in astrology (notably that of critical days, to which we shall 
return shortly). Finally, the general tendency of humanist medicine both to 
seek authentic ancient sources and to confront them with nature seems 
to have been associated with a new demand for a medical astrology that 
worked, one that would be based simultaneously on correct astrological 
techniques and observed consequences for patients. All of these develop- 
ments affected the discussions of astrology by Cardano’s medical contem- 
poraries. One notable result of the new situation — and perhaps also of the 
opportunities offered by the age of print — was the proliferation of a new 
generation of specialized treatises on medical astrology written by physi- 
cians. But Cardano, surely one of the people best qualified to write such a 
treatise, was not among these authors.The limited attention to astrology in Cardano’s medical works is in fact 
quite striking. He certainly perceived parallels and connections between his 
commitment to the restoration of Ptolemaic astronomy and his attempt to 
identify himself with a “new” Hippocratic medicine, an endeavor that de- 
pended entirely on the full access to the Hippocratic corpus that sixteenth- 
century editions and translations afforded for the first time . 31 His selection 
of Hippocratic treatises on which to comment — notably Airs Waters Places, 
the Epidemics, and On the Seven-Month Child — seems in itself to reflect 
connections between his medical and his astrological interests . 32 In his most 
exalted mood he was capable of assuring his readers that the knowledge of 
a wise physician encompassed the content of other arts and sciences ranging 
from theology through architecture, natural history, natural magic, meteor- 
ology, and cooking, and including astrology . 33 Moreover, he assured his 
medical readers that Hippocrates had taught that the heavens were divine 
and that astrology was necessary, not just useful or desirable, for the physi- 
cian . 34 Cardano, who also commented on Prognostic, evidently perceived

Between the Election and My Hopes 81Between the Election and My Hopes 81

parallels between Hippocratic medical prognostication and astrology, both 
true and ancient though difficult and uncertain or conjectural forms of pre- 
diction and explanation. On several occasions, he compared the degree of 
certainty of the procedures available to the physician and the astrologer. 
Thus he pointed out that the astrologer had to study conjunctions that lasted 
only a moment but was not expected to have any effect on them, whereas 
the medicus was supposed to influence a body that he had to judge from 
sense and not from truth — a thoroughly noncommittal comment. 35 De- 
pending on the mood of the moment and perhaps on the audience for which 
he was writing, he asserted that now one, now the other of the two arts was 
more certain. In the opening pages of his commentary on Prognostic he 
stated that “medicine alone makes reliable predictions and teaches proce- 
dures and times, and brings and shows certain and evident causes of those 
things.” He added that medicine was more certain than natural philosophy, 
because medical demonstrations were “similar to mathematical ones and 
from causes.” 36 As we shall see, when writing in an astrological context he 
took a different view. A few pages later on in his discussion of Prognostic, 
he grouped medicine among other predictive arts — not only astrology, but 
physiognomy and dream interpretation — without identifying any one of 
them as the most certain. 37 In the preface to his commentary on the Hippo- 
cratic Epidemics, which he regarded as a work from which one could learn 
how to prognosticate, he asserted that medical prognostication was con- 
nected with divination, one of the branches of which was astrology. 38 In ex- 
pounding book 4 of Airs Waters Places, which is in reality mostly about the 
influence of weather, he pointed out that this section had much pertinence 
for astrologers but added that for physicians the usefulness of such knowl- 
edge was glory for the physician himself. 39But as all these remarks indicate, Cardano also maintained a clear dis- 
tinction between astrological and medical procedures. Thus despite his 
admiration for Hippocrates and conviction that he had attributed great 
importance to astral or celestial influences, he did not ascribe to Hip- 
pocrates knowledge of all of astrology. For example, “Hippocrates did not 
mean” that purges should be prescribed when the moon was in a watery 
sign but referred only to changes in the weather. Rather, the knowledge 
that the moon had different qualities in each of its phases and different ef- 
fects on the therapeutic environment was derived from the astrological 
teaching of Ptolemy. 40

82 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi82 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

Moreover, the actual discussion of any topics relating to the stars, much 
less predictive astrology strictly defined, in Cardano’s commentaries on 
Hippocratic texts is no more extensive than in other contemporary expo- 
sitions of the same Hippocratic works. For example, both Pedro Jaime Es- 
teve, a physician of Valencia, in his commentary on Epidemics 2, and 
Adrien L’Alemant, a professor of medicine at Paris, in his commentary on 
Airs Waters Places, used references to the stars in their Hippocratic texts 
to support the idea that medical astrology should study chiefly the influ- 
ence of the fixed stars on the weather. Esteve prefaced his commentary 
with eighteen pages of exhortation and information about the importance 
of astronomy for the physician. He devoted special attention to precession, 
since he thought it vital to explain to his medical readers that the positions 
of the fixed stars in relation to the signs of the zodiac had changed since 
the time of Ptolemy. As he pointed out, “although very famous men who 
lived a little before us, such as Regiomontanus, the glory and outstanding 
ornament of all mathematicians . . . followed through this with accurate 
diligence, since their writings are not at hand for everyone, I thought it 
would be a very useful work indeed if I were to set forth what I had sedu- 
lously noted with long attention from their writings.” 41 A long list, care- 
fully adjusted to the 1570s, enabled readers to predict the risings of the 
more prominent fixed stars and thus to foresee their effects on weather and 
health. Cardano himself complained about the material from his own 
commentary on Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos that L’Alemant inserted into his 
commentary on Airs Waters Places; L’Alemant also enriched that work 
with many pages of significationes for the weather of the fixed stars 
throughout the year, drawn directly and with acknowledgment from 
Ptolemy’s work on the phases of the fixed stars, which had been translated 
into Latin by Nicolo Leoniceno. 42 In his own commentaries on both Airs 
Waters Places and the Aphorisms, Cardano introduced into his discussion 
of climate, weather, and seasons a few pages of technical explanation 
(with diagrams) of star risings and settings and of the annual motion of the 
sun. In this context, perhaps in rebuttal of the views of Esteve and L’Ale- 
mant, he also took care to assure the reader that the effect of the heavenly 
bodies on disease was not merely a consequence of their effect on the 
weather but rather a result of occult influence, even though this might 
work by means of changes in heat, cold, moisture, and dryness. In the 
commentary on the Aphorisms he added a jibe at the laughable ignoranceBetween the Election and My Hopes 83

about star risings and settings of the celebrated contemporary writer on 
materia medica Antonio Musa Brasavola of Ferrara. 43

Nor did Cardano pay much attention in his published medical writings 
to the topic of the astrological causation of epidemics. He devoted ex- 
tended discussion to epidemics and their causation and transmission on 
two occasions: in his treatise on poisons, published in its final version in 
1564, but like many of his writings probably long in preparation, and in a 
work entitled Liber de providentia ex anni constitutione, written in 1563. 
In the former, one short passage in the single chapter devoted to the causes 
and varieties of poison contracted from air and water gives the influence 
of the stars as a cause of the corruption of the air responsible for pesti- 
lential fevers. Yet he also stated that the stars are only one of several pos- 
sible causes of pestilence, the others being winds, waters — and chance. In 
that chapter, Cardano explained that Ptolemy attributed the causes of epi- 
demics to eclipses or unfavorable positions of the luminaries, whereas oth- 
ers thought conjunctions of the planets were responsible, and that both 
parties spoke the truth. Certainly, the eclipse of the sun that had taken 
place in June of the year in which he was writing was a bad sign, given 
the planetary positions at the time. But great conjunctions had been re- 
sponsible for a number of epidemics. Cardano mentioned the one that 
had occurred in 1504-5, the one in 1524 that had caused an epidemic 
“throughout the whole world,” so serious indeed that its effects were pow- 
erful as late as 1528, “such that the memory of that year will endure for 
many centuries,” and the one in 1544, as well as the outbreak of syphilis 
(1504, 1524, and 1544 were indeed great conjunction years). 44Cardano thus signaled not only his adherence to a reformed, classiciz- 
ing astrology based on Ptolemy, but also his unwillingness to abandon the 
theory of influence of conjunctions derived from Arabic astrology, which 
had been used since the fourteenth century to explain the occurrence of 
plague and which various early writers on syphilis also espoused. 45 An- 
other brief passage in his commentary on the Epidemics shows his adher- 
ence to conjunction theory. He noted, a little pretentiously, that Erasmus 
Reinhold’s recent Prutenic Tables showed that a conjunction of Saturn and 
Jupiter would take place in the very year in which he was writing. This was 
the first of a series of great conjunctions in the fiery trigon (Leo, Aries, 
Sagittarius), indicating pestilence to come, as the famous conjunction of 
1484 had announced the arrival of the “Indian pestilence” (syphilis) — a

84 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

remark that is one of very few actual astrological predictions to be found 
in Cardano’s medical works. 46 Yet when he appended to his consilia a de- 
scription of an epidemic that occurred in Milan and Pavia in the spring and 
summer of 1545 and, according to him, attacked only young girls, he 
made no attempt to assign astrological or any other causes and was con- 
tent merely to describe the outbreak as obscurissimus. 47Even more strikingly, Cardano opened his treatise on the constitution of 
the year with an explicit announcement of his intention to exclude “the 
dogma of the astrologers” and rely solely on the teaching of Hippocrates 
about the effect of weather conditions on disease. 48 The title of the work 
alludes to the “constitutions” in the Hippocratic Epidemics. Perhaps Car- 
dano’s seventeenth-century editor Charles Spon expected a work with 
such a title to be analogous to a “judgement of the year” and astrological 
in content, for he placed the treatise in a volume mainly filled with astro- 
logical works. 49 In fact the work matches excerpts from Airs Waters Places 
and the Epidemics with descriptions of the respective climatic conditions 
favorable to epidemics in Rome and other Italian cities (as Cardano said, 
even though he had never been to Rome, he knew enough to characterize 
the physical location, water supply, and climatic environment of both the 
ancient and the modern city). 50 The procedure is a good example of the 
way in which he attempted to use these Hippocratic works as guides to 
diagnosis and prognosis and, indeed, of his presentation of himself as a 
truly Hippocratic physician. 51 He illustrated his account of the fluxiones 
(that is, discharges of any kind) characteristic of autumn in Milan with 
descriptions of individual cases of these complaints. Being Cardano, 
he could not resist putting his own experience first, in a decidedly un- 
Hippocratic fashion: He had had a discharge from his right ear so severe 
that he was afraid he was going to go deaf. More Hippocratic in character 
are the following accounts of several cases that had led to fatal outcomes. 
Most of these capsule case histories end with a postmortem dissection in 
which Cardano took part. His participation doubtless consisted of being 
present to offer expert analysis, not of doing the actual cutting, which in 
one case was performed by Gabriel Cuneo. Among the patients were the 
Milanese nobleman Cesare Brippio, who was found to have much sanies 
between the liver and the ribs; Pietro Casato, a boy of fourteen, whom, as 
he was very rich, his relatives suspected of having been poisoned, although 
Cardano pronounced that he had died ex fluxione; the noble Alvise Gon-Between the Election and My Hopes 85

zago, who died on the seventh (i.e., a critical) day of his illness, exactly at 
the time Cardano prognosticated that he would; and a thirteen-year-old 
girl, the only daughter of a very noble and very wealthy family and a great 
heiress, whose relatives also wrongly suspected poison. These cases show 
that Cardano’s interest in anatomy had progressed beyond reading ana- 
tomical books and advocating anatomical study on the human cadaver 
to active involvement in dissection even before he moved to Bologna and 
came into contact with well-known anatomists there. They also reveal so- 
cial characteristics of Cardano’s medical practice in Milan, among them 
the ready recourse to postmortem dissection of deceased relatives, notably 
women and children, among upper-class families and the way in which 
anxieties centered on poisoning . 52 But they show little or no interest in ap- 
plying astrology to medicine.The remainder of the treatise includes a discussion of contagion, in 
which Cardano cited Fracastoro’s De contagione with approval , 53 but at- 
tributed outbreaks of bubonic, as distinct from other forms of pestilence, 
directly to the will of God . 54 Cardano concluded that there were four kinds 
of pestilence. The first was “common pestilence,” which resulted from cor- 
ruption of the air or water; this was “impressed by the stars” and was ul- 
timately “from God and from the heavens.” But the mutation of this type 
of illness into the other three kinds required terrestrial causes: exhalation 
of poisonous vapor, contagion, or the consumption of rotten food. Thus, 
bubonic plague itself, Cardano explained, “was not caused by the heavens, 
nor by the air .” 55 Modern scholars share Cardano’s view that not all 
sixteenth-century outbreaks his contemporaries described as “pestilence” 
were of bubonic plague, or bubonic plague alone, but rather encompassed 
a variety of epidemic diseases . 56 More striking, however, is Cardano’s ex- 
plicit elimination of celestial causation from a major category of contem- 
porary epidemic disease. It is unclear whether Cardano’s remarks about 
the astrological causes of specific epidemics in De venenis, a treatise sev- 
eral times referred to in the work now under discussion, mean that he did 
not think those particular epidemics were outbreaks of bubonic plague or 
are just another example of his fine indifference to consistency. Whatever 
the case, he reinforced his determination to exclude astrological expla- 
nations from De providentia ex anni constitutione with the remark in 
the concluding section that “[i]t is necessary only to observe those things 
that have evident qualities and perceptible, strongly established, and firm,

86 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

long-lasting constitutions, lest a very beautiful discovery be fouled in the 
manner of astrologers.” 5786 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

long-lasting constitutions, lest a very beautiful discovery be fouled in the 
manner of astrologers.” 57

Probably the astrological topic to which Cardano recurred most fre- 
quently in his medical works was that of critical days. Both Hippocrates 
and Galen supplied powerful medical authority for the idea that diseases 
reached a critical turning point for good or ill after a certain, fixed num- 
ber of days. The Hippocratic corpus provided both examples of events 
that took place on a specific number of days from the onset of illness 
recorded in the case histories in the Epidemics and, in the aphoristic 
works, cryptic general rules about the importance of numbering days. 
One of the most important statements of the general idea occurred in 
Aphorisms 2.24, which asserted that “[t]he fourth of the set of seven is 
indicative. The eighth is the beginning of another set of seven. But the 
eleventh is also worthy of consideration; for it is the fourth of the second 
set of seven. But again the seventeenth will also be considered; it indeed 
is the fourth from the fourteenth, but the seventh from the eleventh.” 58 
Whatever the original basis of these and similar statements, the concept 
of critical days had already received astrological treatment in Galen’s De 
diebus decretoriis, book 3 of which links them primarily to the motions 
of the moon. Galen held that the moon’s influence on the atmosphere, and 
consequently on human health, varied according to its position both in 
relation to the signs of the zodiac and to the sun, being strong at quadra- 
ture: hence the importance of the seventh and fourteenth days. 59 Thus 
in medical tradition the theory of critical days had a double basis. The 
actual occurrence of critical days was regarded as empirically determined 
by “observation” of the sick — one of many instances in which repeated 
assertions in authoritative texts that something was so were held to con- 
stitute empirical evidence — and codified into rules by Hippocrates. As- 
trology, for its part, provided an explanation of the phenomenon. Hence 
discussion of the subject might involve technical astrological exposi- 
tion or controversy but did not necessarily do so. Indeed, no less an au- 
thority than Avicenna had advised that it was sufficient for the medicus 
to know that critical days occurred and that their cause lay outside the art 
of medicine, or that if the cause should be sought the proper approach 
was a medical one via sense and experience. 60 Yet Avicenna had also mit- 
igated the effect of this excellent advice by including a certain amount of 
astrological discussion of the subject.Between the Election and My Hopes 87

The doctrine of critical days provided endless opportunity for elabora- 
tion and controversy, as the existence of numerous treatises on the sub- 
ject written between the thirteenth and the fifteenth century attests. 61 In 
the early fourteenth century, Pietro d’Abano had already accused Galen of 
astronomical ignorance because his formulations were based on the as- 
sumption that the motion of the moon was uniform and on an artificial 
“medicinal month.” 62 Other problems included inconsistencies among the 
actual numbers in different Hippocratic texts, whether some critical days 
were more indicative than others, why Galen had said crisis occurred on 
the twentieth rather than the twenty-first day, whether crisis could occur 
on days adjacent to the supposed critical days, whether the day was a day 
of twenty-four hours, whether crisis was better at night, and what was the 
total number of days of illness through which the pattern of critical days 
could be expected to recur.In Cardano’s lifetime, however, the subject of critical days took on a new 
and urgent importance among medical men. The earlier literature was not, 
of course, forgotten. Although writers of treatises published after 1500 
paid little attention to the body of scattered and largely anonymous short 
medieval treatises on the subject, the views expressed in the standard 
works of such major authorities as Avicenna, Avenezra, and Pietro d’A- 
bano continued to be cited — in praise or blame — with some frequency. 63 
Works on astrological medicine by well-known medical astrologers of the 
fifteenth century were reprinted in the sixteenth. 64 But Pico della Miran- 
dola’s rough handling of astrological critical-day theory in his Disputa- 
tiones adversus astrologiam divinatricem, published in 1496, provided a 
new and more challenging context for all subsequent discussion. Though 
accepting the occurrence of critical days in illness, Pico entirely repudiated 
their astrological causation. In the course of a long and penetrating anal- 
ysis, he pointed out, among many other more recondite objections, the ob- 
vious difficulty, with respect to ascribing an astrological cause to critical 
days, that people did not necessarily fall ill in synchrony with the phases 
of the moon. 65 Pico’s onslaught brought forth a number of efforts to re- 
state the astrological theory of critical days in a way that would place it on 
an unimpeachably sound footing. One of the first and most important au- 
thors to attempt this task was Agostino Nifo, a practicing physician as well 
as a philosopher (his most famous patient was the Spanish general and 
governor of Naples Gonsalvo Fernandez, known as the Great Captain). 66

88 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi88 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

Nifo’s preface lined up revered ancients in favor of the rational analysis of 
critical days and medieval Arabs and empirics against, thus leaving no hu- 
manist reader in doubt as to where sympathies should lie. He described his 
work as mixed, in that it would treat the subject from the standpoint of 
both medical observations and astrological reasons. 67 In the medical por- 
tion, Nifo described various subcategories of critical days, explained the 
periods of the circuits ascribed, under separate planetary influences, to 
each of the humors, and stressed the importance (and difficulty) of de- 
termining the time of the onset of illness with sufficient precision for as- 
trological purposes. The astrological section is essentially an elementary 
survey of the subject. But after repudiating the objections of Pico, vir gra- 
vissimus, to the theory that the planets governed the motions of the hu- 
mors as well as to some of the formulations of Galen, Nifo remarked that 
“Pietro d’Abano and Pico wrote many things against Galen that are frivo- 
lous, which are overthrown by my book.” 68 In this work, dedicated to a 
Venetian patrician, Nifo thus signaled a classicizing revision of the theory 
of critical days that, having discarded the errors of Galen, medieval in- 
terpretations, and the objections of astrology’s strongest modern critic, 
would rest securely on the foundations of a purified astrology: namely, as 
he made clear in another work, that of Ptolemy. 69But Pico’s views on critical days found supporters as well as opponents 
among the medical profession. Cesare Ottato, a physician from Naples, in- 
sisted on the reality and medical importance of critical days in illness, con- 
firmed both by authority and “the experience of both former and present 
practitioners,” and expatiated at length on subcategories, days of occur- 
rence, and so on. 70 Nor did he repudiate all medical astrology, since he 
thought that knowledge of a patient’s geniture helped the physician to 
judge a crisis. 71 But he was emphatic that “we do not wish to admit these 
aspects of hostile stars, not angles, not masculinity or feminity, not cold- 
ness, etc., which, with their mathematical precisions, are all vain.” 72 As a 
result, “the sayings of physicians in prognosticating about crisis are arbi- 
trary and vain” and, even more bluntly, “physicians who actually practice 
in great cities and public hospitals say that they never find any perceptible 
difference at all in giving medication or phlebotomizing if the moon is full 
or in conjunction or at any other time of opposition or consummation of 
the moon etc., or of the other stars.” 73 This last comment produced an in- 
dignant rebuttal from Federico Grisogono, who remarked that every

Between the Election and My Hopes 89

washerwoman knew enough to avoid washing clothes at the new moon, 
when they would rot . 74Between the Election and My Hopes 89

washerwoman knew enough to avoid washing clothes at the new moon, 
when they would rot . 74

Giovanni Mainardi’s denunciations of all kinds of medical astrology, 
disseminated in a number of editions, are likely to have been considerably 
more influential than Ottato’s litle treatise on critical days. Both Leoniceno 
and his disciple Mainardi, two of the most important medical humanists, 
had personal contacts with Pico and shared his views on medical astrol- 
ogy. Mainardi had used one of his widely circulated Epistolae medicinales 
to denounce both medical astrology in general and reliance on the scholas- 
tic Pietro d’Abano in particular . 75 On the subject of critical days, Mainardi 
included a telling anecdote about an occasion on which both Francesco 
Benzi, his own teacher, and the celebrated astrologer Girolamo Manfredo 
of Bologna were apparently attending the same patient. According to 
Manfredo, the impending conjunction of the luminaries portended death 
to the sufferer, but Dr. Benzi prescribed him some medicine and he 
promptly recovered . 76 Yet another medical author who repudiated astro- 
logical explanations of critical days was Girolamo Fracastoro, who offered 
the opinion that medical men had been “seduced and persuaded” by as- 
trologers. Attributing the origin of the idea that the moon controlled crit- 
ical days in illness to Egyptian astrologers, Fracastoro remarked, “[Ejven 
if some Egyptian god, either Anubis or Osiris, tells me these things, I will 
not easily believe .” 77 For the astrological causation of critical days in ill- 
ness, the actual occurrence of which he did not question, he substituted a 
theory of his own. According to Fracastoro, critical days in illness were 
caused by fluctuations in morbid humors, which had their own deter- 
mined periodic rhythms . 78 Of course, this explanation, just as much as the 
astrological one, postulated the existence of occult mathematical rhythms 
in nature.But wholesale repudiation of astrological explanations seems to have 
been a minority view among sixteenth-century medical writers on the the- 
ory of critical days. Most were concerned with justifying astrological cau- 
sation while introducing new refinements into the way in which critical 
days were categorized or astrologically linked. As already noted, Cardano 
was not among the authors who devoted entire treatises to this enter- 
prise . 79 But he did dedicate six of his Contradictiones to the subject, as well 
as short sections in various other works . 80 Cardano, like Fracastoro, was 
critical of Galen’s account of astrological causation, but unlike Fracastoro

90 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi90 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

he was not prepared to discard astrological causation as such. Instead, he 
set out to correct Galen’s astrology. He took up the by now usual criticisms 
of Galen’s “medicinal month,” suggesting that this section of De diebus de- 
cretoriis was so puerile that Galen could not actually have written it. 81 
In general, Cardano’s treatments of the subject compare various Hippocra- 
tic and Galenic statements about the days to be considered critical and 
attempt to iron out apparent inconsistencies either among various Hip- 
pocratic texts, especially among the descriptions of various cases in the 
Epidemics and the general statements in the Aphorisms and Prognostic, or 
between Hippocrates and Galen. As on many other topics, he strove to jus- 
tify Hippocrates in the light of his own ideas and freely criticized Galen. 
Thus he maintained that a Hippocratic cycle of 120 days of illness during 
which critical days were identified corresponded to (approximately) one 
third of the solar year and hence was based on the motion of the sun; 
Galen’s mistake had been to concentrate excessively on the connection of 
critical days with the moon. 82 According to Cardano the true doctrine of 
critical days was Hippocratic and Ptolemaic and would be properly un- 
derstood only if Galen’s errors and confusion were cleared out of the way: 
“Here therefore is the whole account of critical days — number, order, ex- 
planation, and cause — according to truth and the opinion of Hippocrates, 
which Galen falsely, confusedly, and inconsistently wrapped up in so much 
obscuration that those who tried to follow it could never find an end.” 
Thus, “I say that no one can resolve this difficulty unless he commands the 
Hippocratic art of Ptolemy.” 83If the discussions of medical astrology in Cardano’s medical writings are 
in some respects more limited in scope than those of his contemporaries, 
they have in common with many of them a primary concern with theory 
rather than practice. In this body of literature, theoretical discussion seems 
considerably more abundant than detailed examples of or instruction in 
the actual practice of astrological medicine. Many works purport to give 
brief, easy instruction in the art for medical doctors (of whom, according 
to the author of one such handbook, scarcely one in a hundred actually 
knew how to make astrological judgments, although they all knew the tag 
that said “it is no use to medicate without the counsel of the stars” ). 84 But 
even some of these give only general outlines of astrology or describe the 
supposed qualitative attributes and influences of the planets and signs of

Between the Election and My Hopes 91

the zodiac: Hands-on techniques were presumably left for direct personal 
instruction.Between the Election and My Hopes 91

the zodiac: Hands-on techniques were presumably left for direct personal 
instruction.

In Cardano’s published medical works, allusions to the actual practice 
of astrological medicine are even more restrained than his discussions of 
theory. This restraint cannot be attributed to his status as a professor 
of theoretical medicine. Throughout his career, Cardano emphasized his 
skills as a medical practitioner and freely incorporated anecdotes about 
his medical practice into his work (to a notably greater extent than many of 
his contemporaries). But among his collection of 100 errors in the practice 
of modern physicians, just two refer to astrological ineptitude; in them he 
accused his colleagues of unnecessarily avoiding giving medicine during 
certain phases of the moon and misjudging which days were critical. 85 On 
another occasion he ruminated, “But as for whether it is true that the head 
is threatened when the moon is in Aries, and the neck when it is in Taurus, 
and the chest when it is in Cancer, and the heart when it is in Leo, and the 
viscera when it is in Virgo, I really think I have not been able to pay atten- 
tion to the matter with enough diligence so that I could either affirm or 
deny it. Because of that it is better not to condemn that opinion, especially 
since it is very widely held.” 86Writing in his medical capacity, Cardano was capable not just of am- 
bivalence, but of sweeping skepticism about the practical usefulness for 
medicine of the theory of critical days. In one of his tirades against Galen, 
he wrote, “The unskilled will be outraged because I rend their Galen so 
openly. . . . But whence does he have so much glory? What does this man 
have to offer except his critical days, whose cause he did not indeed un- 
derstand (as I have often taught elsewhere). And even if really they were a 
thousand times true, what usefulness do they have for the physician? ” 87 He 
also expressed the opinion that ill-informed recourse to astrology on the 
part of physicians did more harm than good, both because it produced 
mistaken diagnosis and because it brought the art of astrology into dis- 
credit. Thus, he took Adrien L’Alemant — a favorite target because he had 
managed to get his commentary on Airs Waters Places out before Car- 
dano’s own — to task for claiming that a woman had died because she was 
given cassia nigra when the moon was in the fifteenth degree of Capricorn: 
“It would be better to look for the cause in the medicine or in the disease, 
and not in the stars . . . nor did he know how the power of the stars should

92 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

be interpreted. . . . [T]his is a cause absurd and unworthy of such a great 
man, since a thousand [other] people took medicine made from scammony 
on that day who were indeed completely uninjured [thereby]. Therefore I 
regret that that he gave the unskilled a reason to laugh.” 88Still more notable by its absence from the medical works is Cardano’s 
own practice of astrological medicine. Nothing in his published medical 
writings remotely resembles the series, collected by Thomas Bodier, of 
more than fifty horoscopes for patients ranging from a nobleman to a 
peasant. Bodier seems to have collected these horoscopes, each cast for the 
moment of the onset of illness, for the purpose of retroactive analysis of 
the astrological causes for the outcome of his cases; many record the 
deaths of the patients. 89 By contrast, the series of Cardano’s marvelous 
cures and prognostications, which he published in several different ver- 
sions, appear to contain only two brief references to astrological factors, 
one noting that a patient fell ill on one of the critical days and another that 
bystanders thought a patient might have been affected by the stars. There 
are no extended examples of astrological diagnosis, prediction, or choice 
of times for therapy. 90 The few allusions to astrology in Cardano’s consilia 
are equally concise and uninformative. Thus, for example, in a consilium 
for a patient suffering from shortness of breath that occupies sixteen 
double-columned folio pages, Cardano devotes one short paragraph to the 
appropriate astrological times for purgation. Similarly in the thirty pages 
of the famous consilium for Archbishop Hamilton of St. Andrews — to 
prescribe for whom he traveled from Milan to Scotland — one sentence 
mentions the positions of the moon associated with accessions of fever. 91 
(Nor, as we shall see, was the horoscope that he also cast for the arch- 
bishop very explicit in terms of medical prognostication or advice.) So 
much, then, for the role of astrology in Cardano’s medical writings. Let us 
now turn to the part played by medicine in his astrology.

The Role of Medicine in Cardano’s AstrologyThe Role of Medicine in Cardano’s Astrology

Renaissance astrology was as deeply and controversially involved with 
medicine as medicine was with astrology, and Cardano’s career as a med- 
ical man actually began, or so it seems, with the study and practice of 
astrology. Cardano had apparently begun erecting and interpreting as- 
trological figures for clients by the early 1530s. He had studied natural

Between the Election and My Hopes 93

philosophy and medicine in Padua and Pavia and was living in the small 
town of Gallarate, outside Milan, trying to make headway as a medical 
practitioner. But the College of Physicians of Milan had refused his ap- 
plication for membership, causing him both professional difficulties and 
financial hardship. 92 How Cardano learned the technical methods of as- 
trology we do not know. His father, Fazio, who taught mathematics in 
Milan, may have instructed him; Nostradamus, another famous medical 
man and astrologer whose career offers many parallels to his, claimed to 
have learned special techniques from his father and grandfather, and Car- 
dano lost no occasion to praise his father’s predictive gifts. 93 But Cardano 
may also have mastered astronomy and astrology as a medical student. 
Unlike Nostradamus, whose critics ridiculed his inability even to use an 
almanac without making elementary errors, he mastered the basic tech- 
niques for finding the positions of the ascendant and the planets and lay- 
ing out the houses of the horoscope, as well as for interpreting these 
quantitative data. 94Several independent pieces of evidence suggest that Cardano saw and 
used astrology as a way to solve his professional difficulties. In 1534 he is- 
sued a short Pronostico in Italian in which he predicted a variety of events 
for the subsequent two decades, ranging from the weather to the likely 
fates of the pope, the church, the Holy Roman Emperor, and the major Eu- 
ropean states. 95 Medical doctors in Bologna and elsewhere, as we have 
seen, regularly issued pamphlets like this one, and Cardano made his con- 
nection to medicine clear by describing himself, on the title page of his 
work, as a Milanese physician — though he had not yet gained formal ad- 
mission to the College of Physicians. 96 It seems likely that Cardano hoped 
to attract the attention of potential patients, and perhaps that of medical 
colleagues, with his astrological prowess. Complementary evidence sug- 
gests that he succeeded. The collection of horoscopes that he issued, in 
progressively larger versions, in 1538, 1543, and 1547 includes figures ev- 
idently erected in the 1530s for a considerable number of patients and 
other contemporaries: for example, the horoscope of Francis I, on whom 
the stars inflicted “numerous bodily ills”; that of an infant born in 1534 
who died of a wasting disease; and that of a woman who died from poi- 
son in 1535, as well as a number of others. 97 At least some of Cardano’s 
clients were prominent figures in Milanese circles: for example, the hu- 
manist writer Gualtiero Corbetta, for whom he drew up an elaborate

94 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

horoscope that he published in 1538, in his first collection, a year after 
Corbetta’s death, and the historian Galeazzo Capella. 9894 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

horoscope that he published in 1538, in his first collection, a year after 
Corbetta’s death, and the historian Galeazzo Capella. 98

Cardano himself tells us that in this early stage of his career he worked 
closely with older medical men who were expert in astrology. In more than 
one work he cited horoscopes drawn up or interpreted by members of the 
Castiglione family, notably that of a child born in 1509, on whose fate 
“Giovanni Antonio Castiglione, my fellow-citizen, and a royal physician 
and a man of great excellence” had pronounced." In his treatise De iu- 
diciis genituramm Cardano analyzed the horoscope of a man “born from 
very humbly-born parents, who was called Niccolo; but when he left his 
fatherland, he changed his name to Costanzo, and at Milan he was called 
Costanzo. At Bologna, however, he was called Niccolo, from the de Symis 
family.” This Costanzo, Cardano remarked with unusual enthusiasm, had 
the good fortune to have Mercury as the lord of the ascendant in his na- 
tivity. Accordingly, “though because of poverty he had not studied letters 
until his twenty-eighth year, he was so brilliant that he gained a modest 
knowledge of the humanities. He became a geometer, a mathematician, 
but above all a famous astrologer, so that he taught those arts publicly at 
Milan for several years.” 100Costanzo or Niccolo de Symis left a number of astronomical and astro- 
logical works, including an unpublished prognostication for the same year 
as Cardano’s first publication, 1534. 101 Cardano dramatically describes a 
consultation that they held in the next year for a patient of considerable 
social eminence, Paolo Sforza: “Weakened by loss of blood from his lungs 
and more or less wasting away, he had consulted Costanzo de Symis of 
Bologna as to whether the emperor would make him ruler of Milan in 
place of his brother. When he showed me the figure, I said that he would 
die in that year. For the moon was among the Pleiades in the sixth house, 
in quartile to Mars and Jupiter, which were moving through the fixed 
house of Saturn. And accordingly he died suddenly of suffocation while 
traveling.” 102

Several points call for comment here. Evidently Paolo asked medical 
men for astrological advice; to judge by Cardano’s testimony, however, he 
wanted to know not whether he would recover from his pulmonary ail- 
ment, but whether he would be made ruler of Milan. When the physician 
acted as an astrologer, in other words, he might be called on to offer pre- 
dictions about any of the many aspects of the client’s life that horoscopes

Between the Election and My Hopes 95Between the Election and My Hopes 95

normally covered: not just health, but wealth, marriage, children, jour- 
neys, and much more. Yet Cardano read the figure in question, or claimed 
to, as offering an urgent and irreversible medical prognosis, which he gave. 
The astrologer sought to apply the rules of his art properly, whether or not 
these yielded the answer his client wanted or a cure for the client’s disease. 
Some years after this early time of struggle, Cardano recalled that some 
Milanese physicians had criticized him for devoting himself entirely to 
mathematical studies. 103 Taken together with the other evidence, this re- 
mark confirms that he became known, in the first instance, as a medical 
man who was especially expert in astrology and that his astrological pur- 
suits did not always yield medical results.The few records that survive of the cases that Cardano took on in his as- 
trological capacity support this analysis. Evidently he was called in when 
someone felt the need to explain or predict events that seemed, for one rea- 
son or another, outside the reach of normal medical practice: to identify 
the cause of death for a woman, which he took as poison, or to offer a 
prognosis for a child failing to flourish. In the first case, astrology played 
the same role that autopsy often played in similar cases: It offered a retro- 
spective explanation for a devastating event. In the second case, it offered 
a prediction based, so both the astrologer and his clients might think, on 
much richer data than a medical doctor could lay claim to. For a baby, af- 
ter all, the doctor had no case history to draw on and few signs to inter- 
pret; the astrologer, by contrast, could lay out exactly the same planetary 
and stellar data as for a grown adult. The evidence, however, does not in- 
dicate that Cardano saw these predictions, which were explicitly medical, 
as more particularly his province than ones in which the cause of death 
was not medical in any identifiable sense: for example, why Galeazzo Ca- 
pella was run over by a mad horseman. Astrology might win clients and 
make a reputation for a young physician whose practice was not growing; 
but just as Cardano did not apply his astrological tools to the bulk of his 
medical work, so he did not ask medical questions about the bulk of his 
early astrological subjects.

The course of Cardano’s astrological work in the late 1530s and 1540s 
amply confirms this diagnosis. His major publication in the field took the 
form of a series of short texts on aspects of astrology and astronomy ac- 
companied by the protean and ever-expanding mass of his horoscope col- 
lection. The texts showed more interest in reforming astronomy than in

96 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi96 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

applying it to problems of health and sickness: In one, Cardano devised 
one of the numerous schemata of his period for astrological history. And 
even Cardano’s analyses of the horoscopes he collected showed no more 
interest in medicine than in a variety of other subjects. Of the sixty-seven 
genitures that appeared in his 1543 collection, fewer then twenty dis- 
cussed medical questions; of the thirty-three new ones that he added in 
1547, only ten did so. 104 In many cases, moreover, the medical point at 
issue was only one of many topics Cardano touched on. His analysis of 
the horoscope of the magus Henry Cornelius Agrippa is typical in this 
respect. Cardano found in it clear evidence that Agrippa had a brilliant 
intellect, that he would die poor, that he would undergo torture and im- 
prisonment, that he was not handsome, that he would die of poison or 
strangulation, that he could work with his hands like a skilled craftsman, 
and, at the very end, that he was “incontinent” with regard to women 
and that he “took more pleasure than was proper in four-footed animals”: 
a ha’pennyworth of medical characterology to offset an intolerable deal 
of prediction about very different questions. 105Cardano’s collections, which were printed by the prestigious firm of 
Joannes Petreius in Nuremberg, the publisher of Copernicus, brought his 
work as an astrologer to the attention of a broad public in northern Eu- 
rope. Early in the 1550s he followed his books north, traveling first to Paris 
and then to Edinburgh to treat the Scottish cleric John Hamilton, from 
whom he received an enormous fee. In the course of his time in France and 
the British Isles, Cardano carried out astrological consultations for a num- 
ber of very elevated clients: not only his most notorious subject, the young 
King Edward, for whom he predicted, with reservations, a long life, but 
also the great French lawyer Aimar de Ranconnet; the French ambassador 
to England, Claude Baduel; and the English humanist and statesman John 
Cheke. Where Cardano’s geniture collections had offered relatively brief 
explications of figures, many of which were for celebrities past or present 
whom he had never met, for these clients he not only cast figures but in- 
terpreted them at substantial length, analyzing in detail their physical ap- 
pearance, their temperaments, and the likely courses of their careers. But 
in these cases, too, health played only a limited role. 106

In analyzing Baduel’s geniture, for example, Cardano found in it reason 
to think that his client’s mother would have a short life and his father 
would be troubled by disease and other sorrows; that he would have one

Between the Election and My Hopes 97Between the Election and My Hopes 97

brother and three sisters; that he would have difficulties with nourishment 
in his early life but eventually grow to be very large; that he might, but 
would not necessarily, die by violence that involved bloodshed; that he 
would be brilliant, magnanimous, closely linked by friendship to his king 
and able to serve him effectively as an adviser. He also found it possible to 
predict, from the presence of Jupiter, the lord of the ascendant, in the hu- 
mid sign of Gemini, that Baduel would be immensely large and fat. To 
prove the causal relationship he cited a parallel. Frederick of Saxony, he 
pointed out, was “so obese and heavy that there is hardly a horse that can 
carry him.” He too had Jupiter in Gemini, in opposition to his ascendant 
in Sagittarius . 107 The horoscope, in other words, had substantial medical 
content. But it did not concentrate exclusively on such points.

Cardano’s analysis reached its climax, in fact, with a character analysis, 
not a medical prognosis. He portrayed his client, in a series of Mannerist 
paradoxes, as a man of contradictions — and also, perhaps, as the ideal 
embodiment of the late Renaissance ideal ambassador, the man of deep 
mind sent to lie abroad for his country:

On his profession. He will be desirous of secret things; he will take pleasure in 
beautiful things, in gems, in clothing, in paintings, in images, and in the liberal dis- 
ciplines; but, being noble, he will not work at any of these.

On his journeys. He will not be more successful at anything, or better fitted, 
than for journeys, embassies, and expeditions, in the course of which he will en- 
dure risks and slanders because of others’ envy. But he will attain the highest of- 
fices. This horoscope contains some contrary indications: for example, a good 
temperament and a life full of disease; loss of a spouse even though he is married; 
a fat body and a sharp intellect; good deeds and suffering slander. 108Even when analyzing the horoscope of a client who clearly suffered from 
a pathological condition of overweight, in other words, Cardano devoted 
only part of his attention to medical questions. Similarly, his analysis of the 
horoscope he drew up for the most important medical patient of his ca- 
reer, John Hamilton, dwelt as lovingly on the astral causes for Hamilton’s 
love for Cardano as on those of his respiratory problems . 109 Like the horo- 
scope he also drew up for Gulielmus Casanatus, Hamilton’s physician, 
who had invited him to undertake his great journey to the north in the first 
place, Cardano’s horoscope for Hamilton seems more designed to estab- 
lish its author’s mastery of technique — and to establish a sound celestial 
basis for his relationship with the other — than to yield results in concrete 
terms for either man’s regimen . 110 At least once, moreover, Cardano

98 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

explicitly confessed that he had treated a patient suffering from the rare 
disease of “Diabetes” even though he knew he had almost no chance of 
success, simply because he wanted so much to have the patient’s horo- 
scope — clear evidence of a separation, at least for pragmatic purposes, be- 
tween medical treatment of a case and the use of astrology to understand 
it. 111Solid precedents supported Cardano’s apparent effort to separate astrol- 
ogy from medicine for analytical purposes, and contemporary parallels 
show that his practice was not unique. Even Ficino, usually hailed as the 
one who definitively formulated the theory of astrological medicine for the 
Renaissance, warned his readers to distinguish between what they should 
seek to learn from the “medicus” and what they should seek to learn from 
the “astrologus,” and at least one reader made a note of the point in his 
copy. 112 Nostradamus, who ran an astrological boutique for wealthy Ger- 
man merchants and French bourgeois, received numerous letters beseech- 
ing him to draw up horoscopes and interpret them. Fike Cardano, he was 
a medical man, trained at Montpellier, a fact that his correspondents often 
referred to in the respectful headings of their letters. Fike Cardano, too, 
however, Nostradamus analyzed far more than his clients’ prospects for 
health and long life. He was as ready to direct the mining operations of a 
client in far-off Styria as to analyze the life chances of his sons. 113 True, Nos- 
tradamus was no normal astrologer, as he continually insisted and his 
clients confirmed, when they begged him to express himself more clearly. 
But a wide range of elaborate horoscopes like Cardano’s, drawn up by 
his rival Fuca Gaurico, his well-known central European contemporary 
Cyprian Feowitz, and others, survive, most of them still in the elegant pres- 
entation manuscripts that were evidently the usual form in which the as- 
trologer passed them to his client. These closely resemble Cardano’s in their 
attention to the whole range of questions traditional in horoscopic astrol- 
ogy. 114 Through the mid-1550s, in other words, the evidence of Cardano’s 
astrological practice shows only a professional, not a theoretical, connec- 
tion between “the art” and the other art of medicine.

The Commentary on Ptolemy’s TetrabiblosThe Commentary on Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos

Fike many of his other works, Cardano’s commentary on Ptolemy owed 
its origins to supernatural inspiration. In this case, an accidental encounter

Between the Election and My Hopes 99

in Lyons resulted in his being given a copy of the work unexpectedly. Then 
his chance decision to go up the Rhone on a boat, rather than to travel on 
horseback, provided the necessary time to begin serious work. Cardano 
knew that these coincidences spelled out the vital point: Higher authority 
wanted him to write the first proper commentary on Ptolemy’s astrology. 
As so often, Cardano found himself untrammeled by previous writers in 
the same field, for whom he felt chiefly contempt, as he claimed to be of- 
fering his readers something radically new. The finished commentary was 
as thick with technical detail of many kinds as any of Cardano’s earlier 
works. In it, as never before, he mingled the medical with the astrological 
in a systematic way.

From the outset, Cardano drew connections between Ptolemy and 
Galen. He was, of course, hardly the first to do so. The anonymous pref- 
ace to the Greek commentary on Ptolemy translated into Latin by Giorgio 
Valla, one of the few earlier sources at Cardano’s disposal, made the basic 
point that the great astronomer and the great physician were contempo- 
raries: “Ptolemy, easily the greatest of all mathematicians, lived, so some 
have written, in the time of Hadrian and survived to that of Antoninus. 
They say that Galen, the famous medical author, flourished at this time, as 
well as Herodian the grammarian and Hermogenes the rhetorician, who 
left some worthy books on the art of rhetoric .” 115 But the editor made 
nothing further of the point, moving instead into a doxographical account 
of the early history of Greek astronomy . 116Cardano, by contrast, set Ptolemy’s text into a richly detailed historical 
context. When explaining why Ptolemy had found it necessary to argue at 
such length for the status of astrology as an art, he drew on another 
learned source of the same period, the Noctes Atticae of Aulus Gellius, to 
identify the nature of the opposition that astrologers faced in the second 
century A.D. “In Gellius, Phavorinus, who flourished just before Ptolemy, 
a philosopher of great reputation, made the art of astrology infamous in 
the way that the ambitious will .” 117 If Cardano’s sharply polemical account 
did little justice to the views of the Stoic Favorinus, he nonetheless made 
clear that Ptolemy conceived his text in a world in which his art had come 
in for strong criticism from authoritative thinkers. In a more sustained and 
absorbing discussion of the astrological rhythms of cultural history, Car- 
dano showed that he saw Ptolemy and Galen, as well as other writers, as 
belonging to a single coherent cultural moment. He quoted the long

1 00 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi1 00 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

digression in which the Roman historian Velleius Paterculus described how 
all the arts and sciences had flourished in the Athens of the fifth century 
B.c. and in the Rome of the late Republic. Then Cardano pointed out how 
unusual moments like this were in the human history: “For from the time 
of Augustus down to the beginning of our own splendid period, which 
was around A.D. 1440, some 1,400 years passed in which nature produced 
nothing of miraculously outstanding quality — except in the time of An- 
toninus. For then there flourished, simultaneously, Alexander of Aphro- 
disias, Ptolemy of Pelusium, and Galen of Pergamum, and a little before 
that were Caius Pliny and Plutarch of Chaeronea, the teacher of Trajan. 
Hence it is clear that such phenomena are caused by the general configu- 
rations of the heavens.” 118 Like modern historians, in other words, Car- 
dano saw the imperial period as a high point in the development of ancient 
science and one in which Ptolemy and Galen claimed equally high status 
as well as simultaneity, even if he invoked astrological rather than socio- 
logical considerations to account for their joint success.Cardano also identified substantial similarities between the arts that 
Ptolemy and Galen practiced, though his evaluation of them fluctuated in 
a manner characteristic of this man of supremely protean opinions. At 
the start of the Tetrabiblos commentary, Cardano compared astrology 
to prognostics, pointing out that neither could properly be described as a 
science: “This art is the prognostic part of philosophy, which teaches us 
to know in advance. Accordingly, it is not a science in the true sense, but 
as the predictive work of Hippocrates or Galen is to the whole body of 
medicine, so is astrology to the whole body of philosophy. For every art 
that treats natural phenomena by adopting the method of explicating the 
causes of present things also teaches the causes of future ones. For future 
things differ from present ones not in species or in genus, but in time, 
which is an accidental adjunct of theirs.” 119 Astrology, in other words, 
might reasonably be compared to the part of classical medicine that dealt 
with prognostics — if not to anatomy or regimen.

But this modest claim did not suffice to carry out the immemorial task 
of the preface writer: boasting about the unique qualities of the art that he 
was about to profess. For all Cardano’s dedication to medicine — his prin- 
cipal profession throughout his life, and the source of the invitation to 
travel to the north that led to his writing this commentary — he felt himself 
compelled in this context to assert that Ptolemy’s art was superior to

Between the Election and My Hopes 101Between the Election and My Hopes 101

Galen’s. Medicine, after all, was merely a hermeneutical art, one whose 
practitioner read the signs written on a patient’s body. Astrology, by con- 
trast, afforded causal insights into the processes it analyzed, since the stars 
whose movements its votaries interpreted were not just signs, but causes, 
of events on earth: “The arts that teach knowledge of the future are agri- 
culture, navigation, medicine, physiognomies and its parts, the interpreta- 
tion of dreams, and natural magic, and astrology. The noblest of these is 
astrology. For it deals with everything, while each of the rest has its own 
specific area of competence. It also always works through causes, and the 
noblest of them, while none of the others always does so; but it also 
teaches how to read the future through signs. But those who think that sys- 
tematic knowledge of astrology is systematic knowledge of fate are wrong. 
But the configuration of the stars is a major part of fate .” 120 Far from be- 
ing the equivalent to prognostics alone, astrology claimed a universality 
that even medicine as a whole could not hope to attain (although on an- 
other occasion, as already noted, Cardano described medicine as the most 
universal of studies).

Yet this burst of optimism — or megalomania — did not last. Later in the 
same paragraph, in fact, Cardano acknowledged that “[t]he science of fate 
is as obscure as it is certain and noble .” 121 In a still later passage, he drew 
the implications of this concession for astrology. In nobility and certitude 
of subject matter, he still insisted, astrology reigned supreme among the 
arts. But mortal men, unfortunately, lacked direct and reliable access to 
the realm of perfect truths. Accordingly, medicine easily outdid astrology 
in the human realm of competition for respect and rewards, where mere 
human standards obtained:But when we take account of the weakness of our intellect, matters turn out in the 
opposite way, not by their nature, but because it is so weak. For, leaving mathe- 
matics aside, the most certain of the arts is medicine, then natural philosophy, and 
then comes astrology, and the last of them all is theology. That explains why in our 
time medical men of high spirit, like Galen, still have the authority of prophets, and 
their predictions are taken as so many oracles. That is why the pronouncements of 
medical men about the future have nothing vain about them, as if they were 
founded on rock-solid reasoning, whereas those of the natural philosophers, and 
even more the astrologers and theologians, are empty and such that not even one 
of them agrees with another . 122

Even in the heart of his commentary on Ptolemy, in other words, Cardano 
admitted that Galen’s art of medicine enjoyed higher prestige than astrology.

1 02 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

It is not surprising, then, that he borrowed more than one tool from what he 
himself acknowledged to be the better-developed discipline.1 02 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

It is not surprising, then, that he borrowed more than one tool from what he 
himself acknowledged to be the better-developed discipline.

Cardano imitated Galen, in the first place, in setting out to use the 
medium of a commentary on a classical text as a central genre of natural 
science or philosophy. Though numerous commentaries on and summaries 
of Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos had been written in antiquity, the Middle Ages, 
and the early Renaissance, Cardano had access to few of these documents 
in the early 1550s. Ptolemy, moreover, gave very little sense of how he him- 
self had read the predecessors from whose work he took both data and 
models. It was not at all clear what a Ptolemaic commentary would look 
like. Galen, by contrast, Cardano knew intimately. And Galen, as Vivian 
Nutton and others have pointed out, was as systematic and prolific a com- 
mentator on texts as he was an anatomist and physiologist. He dedicated 
a large part of his activity as a writer to explicating texts by Hippocrates, 
often in mind-numbing detail. 123Cardano’s normal relation to Galen, like that of many Renaissance writ- 
ers to their ancient models, involved more emulation than adulation. He 
regularly criticized Galen, in fact, for lacking the solid expertise that 
would have enabled him to know which of Hippocrates’ teachings de- 
served special support and which did not, for failing to carry out the 
sort of experimenta that would have enabled him to attain to knowledge 
of “difficult things,” and — most remarkably of all — for limiting the task of 
the commentator to nothing more than explicating the ideas of the author 
on whom he wrote. 124 In explicating Ptolemy, however, Cardano showed 
himself more impressed by Galen’s utility as a model than by his inade- 
quacy as a scholar. Here, he approvingly quoted Galen’s dictum that “the 
task of the commentator is not to give arguments for what the author says, 
or to criticize him if what he says is wrong, but to give a clear explanation 
of his words and sentences,” though Cardano then went on to promise his 
readers precisely the sorts of correction and supplement that Galen had de- 
nied an expositor should provide. 125

He also modeled a number of his own procedures on Galen’s. For ex- 
ample, after carefully considering the works ascribed to Ptolemy in his 
time, he rightly argued that the most popular of them all, the Arabo-Latin 
Centiloquium, could not be authentic. The methods and opinions put for- 
ward in it often did not match those found in the Tetrabiblos and the Al- 
magest, and the prologue to the text, which mentioned Ptolemy’s other

Between the Election and My Hopes 103Between the Election and My Hopes 103

works, was clearly not by the same author as the genuine ones. Galen had 
regularly deployed philological arguments like these in his own effort to 
purify the Hippocratic canon. And Cardano made clear his intellectual 
debt when he drew on Galen to explain the origin of the forgery: “But 
Galen explains this when he says: ‘In the old days, when kings bought the 
writings of famous men at vast prices to fit out their libraries, they were 
responsible for men’s attributing their own works to the ancients.’” 126

Most strikingly of all, Cardano borrowed from Galen what could be de- 
scribed without too much exaggeration as a rule of charity in interpreta- 
tion. After posing the question why Ptolemy had denied that astrology 
yielded wealth or glory, when in fact it had often had this effect in antiq- 
uity, Cardano answered that he had omitted the point as obvious: “For just 
as Galen says of Hippocrates, in his commentary on the books on difficulty 
in breathing, so we too must think of Ptolemy: that is, that he wrote noth- 
ing at all which was common, or widely known, but everything that was 
unique and profound.” 127 In another passage, Cardano went further. No 
one, he said there, who had not worked through Ptolemy’s own massive 
technical work on astronomy, the Almagest, could hope to grasp the pro- 
fundity and subtlety of his thought or the miraculous artfulness of his as- 
trological textbook. 128 Galen had set himself up as the master of a 
particular Hippocratic tradition in medicine. Cardano portrayed himself 
as the master of a particular Ptolemaic tradition in astrology. Anyone who 
wanted to erect a single proper Ptolemaic horoscope, he claimed, must 
read, mark, and completely master both the Tetrabiblos and Cardano’s 
commentary, which formed “a single coherent corpus, without any re- 
dundancy.” 129Cardano’s Galenic emphasis, finally, had an impact on the substance 
as well as the method of his Ptolemaic commentary. For Cardano used 
Galen’s model of a fully developed art again and again to demonstrate in 
detail the perfection of Ptolemy’s astrology. Like Galen, Ptolemy pro- 
ceeded as a philosopher. He did not simply list the effects of stars and plan- 
ets randomly, as Firmicus Maternus and the Arabs had, but explained the 
ways in which different combinations of primary qualities — hot and cold, 
dry and wet — produced similar results, just as Galen had when examining 
the properties of simples. 130 Philosophical astrology, like philosophical 
medicine, was honest about its limitations. Like the author of book 7 of 
the Hippocratic Epidemics, Cardano pointed out, Ptolemy acknowledged

1 04 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

that “predictions sometimes fail” but still rightly insisted that individual 
errors did not detract from the truth and beauty of the art as a whole 
(1.2). 131 Ptolemy also acknowledged that no single treatise could include 
all the details of his art, with its spiderweb profusion of intersecting influ- 
ences and qualities: “It is of course a hopeless and impossible task to men- 
tion the proper outcome of every combination [of planetary influences] 
and to enumerate absolutely all the aspects of whatever kind, since we can 
conceive of such a variety of them” (2.8). Cardano warmly agreed, citing 
the parallel acknowledgments of Galen and Avicenna to support his au- 
thor’s decision to remain on the clear level of generality. 132Above all, philosophical astrology, like philosophical medicine, was sys- 
tematic in its procedures. The art of medicine, Galen taught, was estab- 
lished “in two ways, by reason and experimentum ; just so, Ptolemy 
teaches by experimentum and by reason that the stars have effects on this 
inferior world.” The physician, as Hippocrates and Galen both showed, 
took his patient’s temperament as a baseline, which they used to assess 
health or illnesses throughout life. Just so, the astrologer took the patient’s 
horoscope (which, of course, accounted for his temperament in the first 
place) as a baseline for further prediction and analysis. The medical man 
postponed certain highly refined problems to a relatively late position in 
his treatment of his subject; so did the astrologer. Ptolemy’s astrology, in 
other words, emerged from Cardano’s analysis as an art comparable to 
classical medicine: comparable in the lucidity of its structure, the solidity 
of its foundations, and the evident intelligence and good faith of its chief 
ancient practitioner.

It is certainly possible, moreover, that Cardano had undertaken well 
before the Ptolemy commentary appeared to reshape astrology on the last 
offered him by the classical medical tradition. In his commentary on the 
Tetrabiblos, he noted that Ptolemy must have drawn upon the work of 
early Roman astrologers, like Thrasyllus, who saved his own life by pre- 
dicting the future for Tiberius. “Unfortunately,” Cardano noted, “he did 
so with such brevity that the bulk of the art is missing. It would have been 
better if he had followed the example of the great Hippocrates. After he 
had transformed the data into a systematic art, he should also have writ- 
ten a book of individual examples on the model of the Epidemics.” 133 
Cardano’s own collections of genitures may well have represented his at- 
tempt to produce the astrological counterpart to the Epidemics and thus

Between the Election and My Hopes 105Between the Election and My Hopes 105

to reconstitute a vital, lost part of classical astrology. In that case, the med- 
ical emphasis of the commentary on the Tetrabiblos merely made this side 
of his enterprise more explicit.

In insisting that Ptolemaic astrology compared well with Galenic medi- 
cine (and, like Galenic medicine, needed a dash of Hippocratic reform), 
Cardano emphatically did not mean that the astrology normally practiced 
in his day could claim such high status. For a decade and more before 
the Ptolemy commentary appeared, he had been embroiled in polemic 
with the most prominent astrologer in Italy, Luca Gaurico, whose work 
Cardano dismissed as technically unsound. Worse still, he had been sur- 
rounded by quacks. Physicians like Cardano — university graduates who 
belonged to the official Colleges of Physicians in Milan and elsewhere — 
constantly had to compete with unlicensed empirics (quacks in the eyes of 
the elite medici) who offered their patients not the officially sanctioned 
remedies of high medicine but the promise of a cheaper, and perhaps a 
surer, cure . 134 Similarly, astrologers like Cardano — astrologers who be- 
lieved in applying the full range of techniques and questions sanctioned by 
Ptolemy, establishing the geniture of a client in all its detail before even be- 
ginning to offer advice — constantly had to compete with men they saw as 
quacks — medical men and astrologers who would quickly compute an in- 
terrogation for a given client, using the minimal and fragmentary infor- 
mation it provided to prescribe regimens and remedies . 135

Cardano declared that he hoped to bring about nothing less than the 
restoration of an art that had become contemptible, a restoration compa- 
rable in drama and pathos to the revival of medicine that had taken place 
in Galen’s time:It is not only the errors of the practitioners, and their negligence, or also their dis- 
honesty, that has so harmed astronomical divination — so much that it has become 
an object of contempt in our time. The determined malfeasance of the practition- 
ers has ruined the art. Ordinary men generally agree that what an astronomer says 
is foolish, stupid, insane. Yet this is no reason to give up hope that the glory of the 
art can be restored. And no one should think this to be the fault of the art of as- 
trology rather than the times. Galen attests that in his time medicine would have 
been lost, if some god had not taken pity on the human race and restored it, and 
yet in the recent past it has revived and is now flourishing. Similarly, it is hardly out 
of place for this art, which flourished so greatly in the times of the two Gordians, 
senior and junior, to be restored someday to its original worth. And my efforts, by 
themselves, have attained at least part of that goal: if the art could not yet be glo- 
rious again, given its parlous state, at least it will no longer be a source of shame . 134

1 06 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

Cardano did not leave matters at that: He also identified at least some 
of the practices he condemned. The astrologers of his day wrote “long, 
complicated, problematic texts, full of contradictions and obscurity.” 137 
They also made snap judgments, like the “ridiculous doctor and incom- 
petent astrologer” who almost killed Cardano in suggesting, on too little 
evidence, a cure for his enormous flux of urine. 138 Haly, the author of 
the medieval commentary on the Tetrabiblos that had circulated widely 
among astronomers and astrologers, had taken the Centiloquium as a gen- 
uine work of Ptolemy’s and had wondered why it recommended the prac- 
tices of interrogations and elections but the Tetrabiblos did not mention 
them. Cardano explained why:Haly raises a superfluous question: that is, why Ptolemy did not deal with interro- 
gations and elections. For interrogations are entirely magical and unworthy, not 
only of a Christian, but also of a good man. Elections, similarly, were devised be- 
cause of the greed of the astrologers rather than because they do any good to the 
one making the election. And if they have some true content, it is so minor and ab- 
stract that it seems unworthy to be part of the art. For the art deals with obvious 
things and things that can be obtained with profit. Since these have neither, they 
have no art — just as there is no art of making images in the clouds, as if in a mir- 
ror. True, they can be made, but they belong to no art, since they are both very hard 
and almost useless . 139

Cardano’s whole commentary on Ptolemy, in other words, like the earlier 
horoscope collections to which he regularly referred, amounted to an at- 
tack on what he saw as the standard, and scandalous, practices of other 
astrologers.

Accordingly, it occasions little surprise that Cardano devoted to inter- 
rogations only a short and grudging treatise at the end of his big book. The 
three figures that Magini pulled from the body of Cardano’s work and pre- 
sented as typical, in some ways, of medical astrology could hardly be less 
typical of Cardano’s own approach to the subject. They illustrate a digres- 
sion in the Ptolemy commentary. In 2.12 Ptolemy offers three ways of in- 
vestigating the weather of a given lunar month: by erecting a figure like a 
horoscope for the new or full moon; by examining the new moons that 
take place in particular signs of the zodiac, as well as the planetary posi- 
tions that accompany them; and by observing “even more minutely” the 
moon’s quarters and movements, as well as the new and full moons. Car- 
dano took the third method as offering not only the weather predictions 
Ptolemy promised, but also “a way of determining the critical days ofBetween the Election and My Hopes 107

health or death, the length or brevity of an illness, its wickedness or ease.” 
This, he thought, could reveal “marvelous things” to the astrologer who 
compared the figures in question over time, following and evaluating the 
moon’s movements. 140 The determination of the moon’s deleterious effects 
on three patients, in other words, formed only part of an excursus, a few 
pages in Cardano’s big book. It offered only a new theoretical basis for the 
study of critical days, nothing more; and it was hardly large or impressive 
enough to offset the general bias of Cardano’s works toward assigning far 
more weight to horoscopes than to any other form of astrological inquiry. 
The fact that the first patient’s second disease turned out to have begun be- 
fore he recovered from the first one, as acute readers will have noticed, 
shows how theoretical and retrospective Cardano’s considerations were. 
Theoretical in character, small in scale, peripheral to Cardano’s main con- 
cerns, the figures Magini emphasized do not confirm his view that Car- 
dano regularly practiced astrological medicine.

The Uses of Medical AstrologyThe Uses of Medical Astrology

In all his concerns, Cardano was profoundly introspective and self ref- 
erential. Astrology, dream interpretation, physiognomy, and medicine 
served him not only as predictive and diagnostic arts but also as tools of 
self-analysis, as both his use of his own experiences as examples in works 
on these subjects and his well-known Liber de propria vita abundantly 
testify. It comes as no surprise, therefore, to learn that some of his most 
extended examples of astrological analysis of health and disease occur 
in narratives that explicate versions of his own horoscope. Beginning in 
middle age, Cardano seems to have adopted the practice of reviewing his 
natal horoscope at approximately ten-year intervals, using each occasion 
to analyze afresh the unfolding history of his own life. He wrote in- 
terpretations of his own horoscope in 1545 and again, at much greater 
length, in 1554 (when he also erected a new figure on different technical 
principles), and revised the latter interpretation once more about 1564 or 
1565. 141 The details of the health history that these narratives relate have 
recently been discussed elsewhere and need not be repeated here. 142 With 
their extended portrayal of the changing nature of Cardano’s health over 
time, as he moved from being a somewhat sickly child to a fairly healthy 
adult to an elderly man “infirm of body,” these accounts may provide the

1 08 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi1 08 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

best example of Cardano’s use of astrology as a tool of medical analysis. 
They show that he interpreted every episode of acute illness and every 
minor chronic affliction in terms both of his nativity and of the planetary 
positions at the time of onset; the latter practice also implies that he 
habitually noted the times when he fell ill for the purpose of subsequent 
astrological analysis. But at the same time, they reveal the limitations of 
the role that Cardano assigned to astrology in medicine. In them, as in 
other horoscopic narratives, health and disease form only one of several 
standard categories of analysis. Moreover, they present the influence of 
the stars on Cardano’s individual body as only one factor among several 
affecting his health. Especially in the two later interpretations, Cardano 
also assigned an important role to family predisposition or inheritance 
and the presence of epidemic disease. And in his view epidemic disease 
was, as we noted earlier, only sometimes caused by the stars.When faced with a patient who demanded astrological help and re- 
assurance, Cardano could be actively discouraging, even dismissive. One 
such request came from a patient who suffered from deafness of a type that 
Cardano diagnosed as incurable. Accordingly, and perhaps conscien- 
tiously, he so informed the patient and prescribed only the most general 
regimen. But the patient wanted to know whether any help could be 
expected from the stars. The hopeful question reveals the very different 
expectations of patient and physician. As Gianna Pomata has pointed 
out with regard to other types of early modern medical practice, patients 
looked for cure from anyone by any means available, whereas elite physi- 
cians generally tried to provide them with rational analysis, scientific ex- 
planation, and professional authority . 143 For the physician-astrologer the 
stars were either causes or signs, which of the two being a subject of aca- 
demic debate . 144 But in either case, he read a cosmic map solely in order to 
analyze — and hence predict — its influence on effects or events on earth. 
Wise use of knowledge thus gained might help him prescribe medication 
for patients at appropriate times or enable them to avoid the worst effects 
of malign astral conditions. Since the stars did not control human free will, 
moreover, but affected only bodies, a wise patient might hope to act in 
such a way as to avoid astrologically predicted ill health, for as the saying 
went, “the wise man dominates the stars .” 145

But Cardano’s patient’s request for help from the stars implies that the 
heavenly bodies are ensouled beings who can be expected to be responsive

Between the Election and My Hopes 109But Cardano’s patient’s request for help from the stars implies that the 
heavenly bodies are ensouled beings who can be expected to be responsive

Between the Election and My Hopes 109

to prayer. Versions of this belief, which reflects the association of the plan- 
ets with the deities of classical mythology and perhaps also some aspects 
of Christianized neoplatonism, apparently permeated many levels of Re- 
naissance society. Marsilio Ficino’s famous discussions of how the an- 
cients called down the spirits, or daimons, of the stars into statues suggest 
one way — a classicizing, learned, refined, and highly intellectual way — of 
manipulating ensouled astral powers. Agrippa’s De occulta philosophia 
offered less-refined means to achieve the same end, and Benvenuto Cellini’s 
sorcerer friend from Norcia no doubt offered less-refined ones still . 146 Car- 
dano’s patient, probably not learned or refined, seems to have hoped that 
the mere erection of an astrological figure would serve as a magical talis- 
man that might help to persuade the stars to restore his hearing. His or her 
request for “help from the stars” thus exemplifes a particular kind of haz- 
ard involved in the actual practice of astrological medicine. What patients 
wanted was not learned analysis but help. Probably, most medical practi- 
tioners who drew up interrogations did not offer this. Bodier’s collection 
of horoscopes that explained the course and outcomes of his patients’ dis- 
eases did nothing for his patients beyond analyzing their sufferings. But 
the kind of help patients expected to get from the stars could only too 
easily lure the medical astrologer into practices that were both frankly 
magical (and thus potentially likely to incur religious censure) and plainly 
unsuitable to the dignity of a learned physician.For these or other reasons, the patient’s request gave Cardano pause. 
Without addressing the subject of whether or not the stars, or the figure, 
could be expected to “help,” he responded with a little lecture on the in- 
adequacies of current astrological understanding as a predictive system for 
medicine. Yet in it he could not resist including both his own prescriptions 
for the reform of astrology and a declaration that the planets and zodiacal 
signs, even as currently understood, did after all “adumbrate” something 
about health and disease:

The astrology of our age is not true because it is not known. For those principles 
of Ptolemy are different from what is seen and happens. There are besides errors in 
the movements and places of the stars, as is apparent from the Prutenic Tables, 
which are the only ones that agree with experience. Besides it would be necessary 
to know the manner of their movements. For I declared in Paralipemenon 15 that 
what appears in the stars cannot be saved either by eccentrics or by epicycles or 
both, and unless we know why, for example, the moon is diminished by half, we 
cannot know what it indicates. What is clear, however, is that when the sun and

110 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

the rest of the planets are in Pisces they indicate the occurrence of deafness and 
dumbness, for fish do not hear much and have no voice. . . . [A]nd therefore since 
the art is imperfect, although it will adumbrate something, yet it is more a cause of 
errors than help to us. And also this contemplation is outside medicine. And yet I 
might also consider more diligently whether there were any hope in this. 147At this high point in Cardano’s career, long after Copernicus and others 
had undertaken the reform of astronomy that he had once hoped to carry 
out, his attitude toward medical astrology remained as complex and puz- 
zling as at any other time. No doubt, however, he would agree with us on 
one point: Generalizations about medical astrology in the Renaissance 
should be discouraged.

Notes

1. Magini was a professor of mathematics at Padua from 1588 to 1617; see Lynn 
Thorndike, A History of Magic and Experimental Science, 8 vols. (New York: Co- 
lumbia University Press, 1923-58), 5:250-51.

2. G. A. Magini, De astrologica ratione ac usu dierum criticorum sen decretorio- 
rum (Venice, 1607), 81r-v:2. G. A. Magini, De astrologica ratione ac usu dierum criticorum sen decretorio- 
rum (Venice, 1607), 81r-v:

Tertia observatio ex Cardano. Decubitus loan. Antonii de Campionibus . . . Io. 
Antonius de Campionibus (ait Cardanus) annorum circiter triginta ex itinere ae- 
grotavit, primum quidem ut visus est leviter usque ad quartam diem, quod Luna 
esset in sextili Veneris et Venus illam reciperet; nam Venus erat in suis dignitatibus. 
Et quia Luna erat cursu valde tarda, morbus non est visus accipere incrementum, 
remorante ut dixi Venere, quae Luna attigit partem vigesimam quintam Gemino- 
rum in diebus tribus horis 18. ferme, ob motus tarditatem, unde protracta est 
quarta dies; tunc vero occurrit Iovis et Martis coniunctio in Leone, et cum stellis 
humidis, ideo factum est incendium magnum, et turbulentia in urina, quae ob pro- 
tensam quartam diem visa sunt habere initium in quinta. In septima vero cum non- 
dum pervenisset ad nonagesimum gradum distantiae ob motus tarditatem, sed 
ad Leonis initium tantum deterrime se habuit, quoniam nulli beneficae occurrit 
(immo incidit in antiscio Solis existentis in sexta domo, et in caput draconis) 
similiter in octava et nona morbus augebatur: quia tunc Iovi et Marti iunctis iunge- 
batur, et quia erant inter humidas Stellas, sudavit. Calor enim cum humido su- 
dorem creat, et urinam multam, quam reddidit. In undecima sudavit, fuit tamen 
cum magno labore: nam Luna oppositum Saturni superavit, sed ei successit coni- 
unctio Veneris.

Duodecima aegre se habere visus est, quia multum deliravit. Sed tamen ob 
Veneris coniunctionem urinae concoctae apparuere. Decimatertia ob Mercurii 
quadratum (quia inimicus est horoscopi) nihilo deterius se habuit, quia erat motus 
iam ad salutem; sed nec melius ob Mercurium: decimaquarta sudavit iterum, et 
melius se habuit. In ea non potuit solvi morbus, quia Luna non peragraverat nisi 
partes 174. minuti 22. et oportuit extendi morbum ad 17. usque. In decimaquartaBetween the Election and My Hopes 111

tamen occurrit luna sextili Iovis et Martis, et quadrato Veneris, ideo sudavit, deci- 
maseptima liber evasit, cum iam Luna oppositum loci superasset, et trino Veneris 
applicuisset. Hactenus Cardanus 
82r-v:

Quarta observatio ex eodem Cardano. Decubitus eiusdem, qui mortuus est die dec- 
ima quarta. . . . Hie Lunam ab initio habuit in quadrato Veneris, ex intemperie cibi 
et potus aegrotavit, celeriter gravatus est ob motum Lunae velocem, in septima de- 
terius valde se habuit, nam Luna erat cum cauda, et vacua a Iovis aspectu ibat ad 
oppositionem veneris et tunc Sol quadrato Saturni affligebatur. Octava levari visus 
est fluente e naribus sanguine, sed tamen virtus cecidit ob Veneris oppositum. Nona 
aliqualiter respirare visus est ob trinum solis. Decima fuit loco undecimae, cum ad 
angulum, idest Piscium initium pervenisset ad oppositionem Iovis et Martis.

In undecima par erat ilium mori, cum ad Saturni coniunctionem hora decima, 
ad Solis quadratum hora decima octava pervenisset. Mortuus est quinta Iunii h. 3 
ante meridiem et fuit initium decimae quartae, et Luna pervenerat ad oppositum 
loci sui ad unguem. Hactenus Cardanus 
82v-83r:Quinta observatio ex eodem Cardano. Initium aegritudinis ex transfossione 
brachii Baptistae Cardani, ex qua obiit. Hie alter (ait Cardanus) affinis rneus erat 
et vir sexagenarius cum vulneratus est, Luna a Marte separabatur, et Mars cum 
capite erat, et Luna cum cauda, et applicabat Saturno et Iovis infelicis opposito, 
non tamen statim gravatus est, quia Luna ibat ad sextilem Mercurii, et vulnus erat 
bracchii transfossio. Quarta gravatus est propter Solis quadratum, caruit tamen 
febre quia nulla malefica oppugnabat, ob id usque ad decimam adeo levatus est, ut 
surgeret. In undecima gravatus est hora noctis tertia, cum Luna ad oppositum So- 
lis tenderet. Hie autem erat anaereta, dominus siquidem oppositi loci Lunae. Et 
post Luna ad Mercurii oppositum ibat. Febre igitur, et sanguinis profluvio correp- 
tus est 14. die, quae fuit secunda Ianuarii hora diei tertia cum Luna corpore Marti 
iungebatur, expiravit. Haec Cardanus.

3. The best introduction to the techniques of early modern astrology is J. C. Eade, 
The Forgotten Sky (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984); more detailed information is 
provided by J. D. North in two works of great erudition, Horoscopes and History 
(London: The Warburg Institute, 1984) and Chaucer’s Universe (Oxford: Claren- 
don Press, 1986). The fullest analysis of any Renaissance horoscope is W. Hart- 
ner, “The Mercury Horoscope of Marcantonio Michiel,” Vistas in Astronomy, 1 
(1955) = Hartner, Oriens-Occidens (Hildesheim: G. Olms, 1968-84), 440-95. On 
medical astrology see Karl Sudhoff, Iatromathematiker, vornehmlich im 15. und 
1 6, Jahrbundert (Breslau: Kern, 1902), and Wolf-Dieter Miiller-Jahncke, Astrolo- 
gisch-magische Theorie und Praxis in der Heilkunde der friihen Neuzeit, Sudhoff s 
Archiv, Beiheft 25 (Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag, 1985).4. Magini, De astrologia ratione, 58r-v: “Communi omnium turn Astrologo- 
rum, turn Medicorum, qui hanc artem, Astrologiam dico, praeclare exercent, 
opinione receptum est, construendam esse figuram coelestem ad morbi cuius- 
cunque initium, ut eiusdem turn essentia, turn dies critici, turn accidentium vari- 
etates, et denique exitus praevideri queant; si quidem ex tali coelesti schemate,

1 12 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

sitne aegritudo lethalis vel ad salutem terminans, diuturna vel brevis facillime ra- 
tiocinari possumus.”

5. Ibid., b3v (an epistle to the candid reader incorporating a lengthy bibliography of 
earlier works and authors on medical astrology). Of Cardano, he says: “Hieronymum 
Cardanum Mediolanensem praetereo perinde, ac omnibus notum, quando ipse, cum 
alibi turn in secundum Ptolemaei librum de Astrorum iudiciis, de schemate octo lat- 
erum ad dies criticos morbique progressum cognoscendum, pluribus tractavit.”

6. For a list of the areas in which Magini thought the use of medical astrology use- 
ful, see ibid., 40r-v.

7. There is no full study of Cardano’s work as a natural philosopher. See in gen- 
eral Dictionary of Scientific Biography, s. v. Cardano, by M. Gliozzi (New York: 
Scribner, 1970-80, 1990); Dizionario biografco degli italiani, s. v. Cardano, by 
G. Gliozzi (Rome: Istituto della Encyclopedia Italiana, I960-); O. Ore, Cardano, 
the Gambling Scholar (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1954); A. Ingegno, 
Saggio sulla filosofia di Cardano (Florence, La Nuova Italia: 1980); and E. Kessler, 
ed., Girolamo Cardano: Philosoph, Naturforscher, Arzt (Wiesbaden: Harrossowitz 
Verlag, 1994). On his medical writing and practice, see N. Siraisi, The Clock and 
the Mirror (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997); on his astrology see G. 
Ernst, ‘“Veritatis amor duleissimus’: Aspects of Cardano’s Astrology,” chap. 2 in 
this volume, and Anthony Grafton, Cardano’s Cosmos (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1999).8. Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, ed. G. Cardano (Basel, 1578), 715 = Cardano, Opera 
Omnia (Lyons, 1663; reprinted, New York: Johnson Reprint Corp., 1967), 5:560:

Primum igitur ad praedicendum ne accedas, nisi perfecte instructus in his quae hie 
traduntur, et illis necessariis ut supra ostensum est. Vt quod cognoscas statim cum 
Planetae sunt aucti cursu, quod sunt in superiore parvi circuli parte, cum diminuti in 
inferiore, praeter Lunam: Et plura praedicendi tecum experimenta feceris. Secun- 
dum, ut in praedicendo amoveas timorem, odium, et amorem. Ilia enim etiam no- 
lentem errare faciunt. Tertium ut ne artem profitearis in triviis, nec coram populo, 
nec aedas quicquam publicum. Tales enim artem et se ipsos infamia aspergunt, eti- 
amsi vera praedicant. Quanto magis ridiculi hunt cum falsi deprehenduntur? Quar- 
tum ne praedices tentanti nec dubiam habenti genesim, nec sine pretio, nec cum 
exiguo pretio, nec deridenti artem: Nam vilipenditur in omnibus his ars, daturque 
errandi occasio cum levibus laboribus magna praedicere conamur, et inventu diffi- 
cilia. Ego bis centum coronatos pro una genesi perficienda respui. Vide rnodo an tu 
me sis exercitatior. Quintum ne praedixeris, nisi omnibus diligenter consideratis et 
bene discussis, ad unguem usque, et ratione habita conditionis hominis, familiae, re- 
gionis, legis, aetatis, ac talium. Sextum, homini improbo et malo ne ulla ratione 
praedixeris quicquam. Ex his sequitur ut ne ignoto: multo minus Principi saevo. Sep- 
timum, in praedicendo soli illi qui te rogat dixeris, non in populum praedictiones dif- 
funde. Nec de minutis respondebis, sed maximis tantum et evidentibus. et breviter, 
non ut impleas folia, nec per ambages, nec contradicentia scribas. Sed pure, nitide, 
caste, rnunde, breviter, dare. Exemplum de hoc habes in decima genesi.

9. Ibid., passim.

10. Ibid., 708 = Opera 5:556: “Furtum quis fecerit ? an invenietur ?

Between the Election and My Hopes 1139. Ibid., passim.

10. Ibid., 708 = Opera 5:556: “Furtum quis fecerit ? an invenietur ?

Between the Election and My Hopes 113

Adeo desipiunt homines, ut res, non a veritate, sed pollicitis, aestiment. Nulla 
prorsus est via, ut hoc haberi possit, cum praeter id multa mala subsequantur. 
Quidam enim ex interrogatione hoc venantur. Sed quid habet interrogatio cum re 
ipsa, quae iam praecessit? Saepius diximus astra esse causas non signa. Sunt cor- 
pora, sunt nobilia, sunt potentia et valida.”

11. Ibid., 713 = Opera 5:559-60.

12. Ibid., 714 = Opera 5:560: “ De medicatione per ferrnm vel ignem 
Experimento deprehensum est, quod tales operationes si fiant Luna signum illud, 
quod membrum respicit corporis, possidente, non sine evidenti noxa opus id fieri. 
Praesertim si in sectione Saturno aut ustione Marti societur. Et si male dispositi 
sint, non absque periculo.”

13. Ibid.: “nec minore cum gloria ac utilitate quam medici nostri aevi suam artem 
medicam.”13. Ibid.: “nec minore cum gloria ac utilitate quam medici nostri aevi suam artem 
medicam.”

14. Ibid., 712 = Opera 5:559: “Tutissima via ex ventris inspectione habetur, in- 
quit enim Hippocrates masculi in dextris, foeminae in sinistris. Quod etiam ex 
mamillarum differentia dignoscitur. Sed hoc et praecedens signum ut certissimum 
est, et vix unquam fallit, ita plerisque anceps, cum discrimen hoc tam exiguum sit, 
ut non nisi longa consuetudine dignosci queat: Estque velut gemmarum notitia. 
Collocare oportet mulierem supinam ad amussim, et ut in luxatis pedibus exquisi- 
tissime laterum comparationem habere. Quae, ut dixi, cum medicos expertos in 
luxatis fallat, nihil mirum, si ubi obscurius est discrimen, et experientia longe rar- 
ior, homines haesitent. Contingit tamen, licet vix in viginti praegnantibus unam, 
dextrum latus turgidius, et tamen femellam in utero habere, aut converso modo. 
Idem de mammis. Sed haec extra artem. Ex arte sunt directio, processus et ingres- 
sus in loca masculina pro masculinis, in foeminina pro foemininis, pro patre aut 
matre, tutius pro utroque. Aliud si hoc praesidio careas horam conceptionis 
habeto, erige ascendens, et vide qui Planetae loco ascendentis et Medii coeli 
dominentur, et qualiter affecti iuxta duplicem modum sexus. Quidam existimant 
succedentes fratribus aut sororibus natis, Luna tendente ad novilunium masculos 
esse, ad plenilunium foeminas. Melior ratio habetur ex nativitate fratrum praece- 
dentium, ad quos Luna applicat, si masculini sint natura, signo, quo ad mundum, 
et quo ad Solem, aut foeminini. Et similiter dominos loci Lunae et coeli Medii 
coniectura accipere oportet, non solum secundum quatuor modos sexum decer- 
nentes, sed et magnitudinem illorum aut intensionem qualitatis.”15. Ibid.: “Exerceri autem prius in his oportet quam iudices, ne damno tibi sit ars 
non lucro. Solent enim Antverpiae et Lugduni mercatores magnas circa hoc de- 
ponere pecunias, certandi causa.” Cf. ibid., 712-13 = Opera 5:559, on determin- 
ing legitimacy, which makes the social context of the drawing of elections even 
clearer: “Quod ars haec coniecturalis sit, et hominum comparatione ambigua, 
saepe diximus, quo fit ut apud multos talia damno fuerint. Iniicere autem suspi- 
tionem filii spurii, adulterii uxoris, neque tutum est, nec sapientis officium. 
Propterea etiam si ars ad huiuscemodi extendatur, haud tutum est ei aut pruden- 
tis insistere. Inde enim caedes, suspitiones, veneficia, abiectionesque filiorum ex- 
oriuntur. Invisa fuit mathematica olirn propter hoc, et nunc quoque si talibus

114 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

studeamus, astrologia. Quamobrem omnis scientia bona, non omnis suspitio aut 
coniectura. Hoc igitur unum est ex his quae nescire praestat . .

16. Ibid., 708 = Opera 5:556-57: “Electiones an prosint ?16. Ibid., 708 = Opera 5:556-57: “Electiones an prosint ?

Simili ratione quaesitum est an electiones prosint? Videtur enim quod prosint quo- 
niam figurae quaedam aliquid facere videntur ad renum dolores et calculum. 
Praeterea in monomachia diximus si dies congruat primae deliberationi, bonum 
esse: At constat diem eligi posse. Sed figura ut figura est artificiosa, vim agendi non 
habet: quomodo igitur electio proderit? Dicemus igitur actionem in substantiam 
cum electione aliquid posse, non quia figura est, sed quia actio. Seu enim canem 
seu leonem seu montem ea hora sculpseris, idem erit. Si figurae confidas, non 
solum vanus es, sed superstitiosus: Quod et B. Thomas sensisse videtur. In mono- 
machia aliquid facit electio, sed non secundum diem, verum quia ante vel post ad- 
ventum directionis aut processus aut ingressus. Sed et utriusque ratio habenda est. 
Est igitur hoc infinitum et incomprehensibile. Vt amissa occasione saepius damna 
quam utilitatem afferat. Verum in annis et actionibus naturae etiam momentaneis 
magnam afferre potest utilitatem. Veluti si hoc anno, non praecedenti, volo qui- 
escere in patria. Est et hoc difficile propter concursus. Ob id in naturalibus electio 
manifeste prodest. Vt si quis aestate serat aut putet, rideatur. In voluntariis si felix 
sit sequatur naturae et animi impetum: Si infelix frangat et fugiat: non solum oc- 
casionem sed etiam persaepe rem ipsam.

17. See the discussion of the horoscope drawn up by Conrad Heingarter (fl. 1440- 
after 1483), physician and astrologer to Louis XI of France, to the Due de Bourbon, 
and to other notables, for his friend Jean de la Goutte in 1469 in Maxime Preaud, 
Les astrologues a la fin du Moyen Age (Paris: Lattes, 1984), 71-94 and 177-86. On 
Conrad Heingarter, see also Thorndike, A History of Magic, 4:374-85.18. “Erecta figura (hora qua nuntius ad medicum venit) planetisque in ea cum for- 
tunae, vitae, mortis et planetae interficientis partibus debite collocatis: Ascendens, 
dominus ascendentis: Luna et dominus domus Lunae aegroto pro significatoribus 
dandi sunt. Significator etiam qui iudiciariae astrologiae authoribus figurae domi- 
nus sive significator caeli praecipuus dicitur, aegroto tribuitur. . . . Sexta vero do- 
mus eius dominus et planeta a quo separatur dominus ascendentis, vel is qui ab eo 
separatur, morbo et morbi causis dantur. Septima cum suo rectore medicum respi- 
ciunt.” Claude Dariot, Ad astrorum indicia facilis introductio . . . Eiusdem tracta- 
tus de electionibus principiorntn idoneornm rebus inchoandis. Quibus accessit 
fragmentum de morbis et diebus criticis ex astrorum motu cognoscendis (Lyon, 
1557), 78.

19. See, for example, Magini, title of book 2, chap. 14, of De astrologia ratione, 
“De momento temporis, quo quis primum decubuit, diligenter observando,” 58r, 
and “Constructa itaque ad morbi initium coelestis figura diligenter conferenda est 
cum figura nativitatis aegri, et cum revolutione anni illius, in quo natus de- 
cubuerit. . . .” 58v, which, though late, is representative.

20. According to Auger Ferrier, “Ubi hora primi insultus haberi non potest, 
confugiant astrologi ad quaestionum, seu interrogationum artem. Allata enim ae- 
grotantis urina, aut accedente aliquo, qui pro aegrotante medicum accersat, eo 
momento figuram coelestem erigunt.” Auger Ferrier, De diebus decretoriis (Lyon,

Between the Election and My Hopes 115Between the Election and My Hopes 115

1549), 120. Ferrier was perhaps somewhat uneasy about this recommendation, 
since he added on 121-22 that erudite doctors of the Hebrews, Ptolemy, the Chris- 
tian Albertus Magnus, the Platonist Marsilio Ficino, the physician Arnald of Vil- 
lanova, and the distinguished philosopher Pietro d’ Abano had all followed this 
practice and that it was legitimate provided questions involving the soul or free will 
were avoided; he reinforced his orthodoxy by continuing on 123-30 with a de- 
nunciation of medical magic using charms said over herbs, geomancy, and seals. 
Magini would have no truck with Ferrier’s relaxed view of interrogations of this 
kind:Sed aliorum quorundam curiosam superstitionem maxime redarguendam censeo, 
qui aegritudinis principium ignorantes, ad damnatam quaestionum seu interroga- 
tionum artem confugiunt, et figuram coelestem interrogationis erigunt ad illud 
temporis momentum, quo urina aegri ipsis oblata est, aut quo de morbi auxilio ab 
aegroto consuluntur; et de hac figura non secus iudicium ferunt, quam si exactum 
primi decubitus punctum obtinuissent. Atque haec Arabum quondam et Iudaeo- 
rum Astrologorum fuit amentia, quos nescio quo consilio neotherici complures 
sectantur, ut Albertus Magnus, Marsilius Ficinus, Villanovanus, Apponensis, 
Boderius, aliique. Quinimo et Augerius Ferrerius perversa aliorum opinione induci 
se est passus, ut crederet tolerandam esse hanc doctrinam, dummodo Medicus ho- 
ram interrogationis non deliberato animo, sed quasi interrupto sortiatur. Scribit 
enim in haec verba in libello de diebus decretoriis. Putant Astrologi repentinos il- 
los incautosque animi motus e Coelo promanare, Coelumque et ad accersendum 
Medicum, et aegrotantis amicos et ministros eo modo impellere. Verum enimvero 
nos superstitiones hasce, apparenti aliqua veritatis umbra, seu superinducto il- 
linimento contectas, omnino repudiandas censemus, et rationabilia artis prin- 
cipia tantum retinenda, non minus enim hanc interrogationum Astrologicorum 
vanitatem, quam Geomantiae frivolam superstitionem a bonis omnibus merito 
damnatam, explodendam iudicamus. (Magini, De astrologica ratione, 58v.)

21. See Vivian Nutton, “Idle Old Trots, Coblers and Costardmongers: Pieter Van 
Foreest on Quackery,” in Petrus Forestus Medicus, ed. Henriette A. Bosman- 
Jelgersma (Amsterdam: Stichtung AD&L, 1996), 243-56.22. “Opera quidem ad salutem mira, quae a medicis in astrologia peritis per res 
ex multa compositas, id est pulveres, liquores, unguenta, electuaria fieri possunt, 
probabiliorem in se rationem et notiorem quam imagines habere videntur, turn 
quia pulveres, liquores, unguenta, electuaria opportune confecta coelestes influxus 
facilius citiusque suscipiunt quam materiae duriores ex quibus imagines fieri con- 
sueverunt . . .” Marsilio Ficino, De vita libri tres 3.13, in idem, Three Books on 
Life, ed. Carol V. Kaske and John R. Clarke (Binghamton, N.Y.: Medieval and Re- 
naissance Texts and Studies in Conjunction with the Renaissance Society of Amer- 
ica, 1989), 306.

23. See Miiller-Jahncke, Astrologisch-magische Theorie, 153-84.

24. “Marsilius Fiscinus, Florentin, grant philosophe, medecin et astrologien et le 
plus que l’on sache de sont temps s^avant divers langaiges, comme grec, caldee, 
arabic, ebreu et latin. Cestui a bien monstre en ses euvres qu’il estoit souverain as- 
trologien, part expecial en ung traicte qu’il a compose et intitulle De vita sana, de

116 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

vita longa et de vita celesti .” Simon de Phares, Le recited des plus celebres astro- 
logues et quelques hommes doctes, ed. Ernst Wickersheimer (Paris: H. Champion, 
1929), 266 (new ed., ed. Jean-Patrice Boudet, [Paris: H. Champion, 1997], 1).

25. Andrew Wear, “Galen in the Renaissance,” in Galen: Problems and Prospects, 
ed. Vivian Nutton (London, Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine 1981), 
229-62 at 245-50, is one of the very few scholars to have drawn attention to the 
restricted role of astrology in general works on medicine, even during the period 
in which European culture was most thoroughly astrological and the usefulness of 
astrology for medicine was most frequently and emphatically asserted.26. See Pietro d’Abano, Conciliator: Ristampa fotomeccanica dell’edizione 
Venetiis apud luntas 15 65, ed. Ezio Riondato and Luigi Olivieri (Padua: Editrice 
Antenore, 1985), differentia 10, “Utrum quis medicus existens per scientiam as- 
tronomiae, possit conferre in salutem aegroti necne,” 15v-18r, and differentiae 
103-6, 153r-57v, all of which are on critical days. See also Graziella Federici 
Vescovini, “La place privilegiee de l’astronomie-astrologie dans l’encyclopedie des 
sciences theoriques de Pierre d’Abano,” in Historia philosopbiae Medii Aevi: Stu- 
dien zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, ed. Burkhard Mojsisch and 
Olaf Pluta, 2 vols. (Amsterdam: Gruner, 1991), 1:259-69.

27. De vita was first published in 1489. On Ficino’s ideas regarding astrology, see 
G. Zanier, La medicina astrologica e la sua teoria: Marsilio Ficino e i suoi critici 
contemporanei (Rome: Edizioni dell’atteneo & Bizzarri, 1977), and Melissa M. 
Bullard, “The Inward Zodiac: A Development in Ficino’s Thought on Astrology,” 
Renaissance Quarterly, 43 (1990): 687-708, which offers a full bibliography of 
earlier studies.

28. The Hippocratic corpus as a whole contains only a very slight amount of 
astronomical material, but of what there is, much is concentrated in the Epi- 
demics and Airs Waters Places; see Otta Wenskus, Astronomische Zeitangaben 
von Homer bis Tbeopbrast. Hermes: Zeitschrift fiir klassiscbe Pbilologie, 
Einzelschriften 55 (Stuttgart: Steiner, 1990), 90-123.

29. On these debates see Vivian Nutton, “The Seeds of Disease: An Explanation 
of Contagion and Infection from the Greeks to the Renaissance,” Medical History, 
27 (1983): 1-34, and idem, “The Reception of Fracastoro’s Theory of Contagion: 
The Seed That Fell among Thorns,” Osiris, 6 (1990): 196-234; also Jon Arriza- 
balaga, John Henderson, and Roger French, The Great Pox: The French Disease 
in Renaissance Europe (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1997), 56-126.30. See Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, Disputationes adversus astrologiam div- 
inatricem 3.16-19, ed. Eugenio Garin (Florence: Vallecchi, 1946), 2:322-63. The 
work was first published in 1496.

31. A considerable number of Hippocratic treatises were available in Latin trans- 
lation in the Middle Ages, but by no means the whole corpus; see Pearl Kibre, Hip- 
pocrates latinus (New York: Fordham University Press, 1985). Some humanist 
translations of individual treatises began to appear in the late fifteenth century, but 
the first Latin translation of the Hippocratic corpus as a whole was Hippocrates, 
Octaginta volumina . . . per M. Fabium Calvum . . . Latinitate donata (Rome, 
1525). The Aldine edition of the Greek text followed in 1526. Subsequently, an-

Between the Election and My Hopes 117

other translation was made by Janus Cornarius: Opera quae apud nos extant om- 
nia. (Basel, 1546). The complete Epidemics was one of the most important works 
first made widely available in print by Calvi’s translation.

32. Girolamo Cardano, In Hippocratis Coi prognostica, opus divinum . . . Item 
in libro Hippocratis de septimestri et octomestri partu . . . (Basel, 1568) (no com- 
mentary on De octomestri partu is included; De septimestri partu = Opera 9:1- 
35); idem, Commentat 'd in Hippocratis de aere, aquis et locis opus (Basel, 1570) = 
Opera 8:1-212. Cardano’s commentary on Epidemics 1 and 2 was not printed in 
his lifetime; it survives in manuscript (Vatican City: Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana 
vat.lat. 5848) as well as in his Opera 10:168-387. In their final form, almost all of 
Cardano’s Hippocratic commentaries reflect his lectures at Bologna in the 1560s, 
but they were also part of a larger project on which he had begun working many 
years earlier. See Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror, chap. 6.33. Cardano, Encomium medicinae, in his Quaedam opuscula, artem medicam 
exercentibus utilissima (Basel, 1559), 135-36 (Opera 6:6-7, quoted with transla- 
tion, in Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror, 228-29).

34. “At meo iudicio, Hippocrates nunquam diceret aerem divinum esse, sed 
coelum: Id enim aperte dicit in libro de Carnibus (Pag. 2) dicitque sempiternum, et 
quod est calidum, et omnia novit. In libro vero de Aere, Aquis ac locis (Pag. 2) 
turn in primo de Diaeta (Pag. 2) dicit, Astrologiam esse Medico necessariam, 
oportereque ilium noscere ortus, et occasus syderum, plurimumque hoc conducere 
ad artis gloriam.” Cardano, comm. Prognostica 1.5, 6, 7 [division of Cardano’s 
commentary; he is commenting on Prognostic 1, according to the reckoning of 
modern editors], 15 = Opera 8:594. Cardano often cited De carnibus and De di- 
aeta (= Regimen ) as important authorities for some of his philosophical ideas; see 
Ingegno, Saggio sulla filosofia di Cardano, 226-27, and Siraisi, The Clock and the 
Mirror, 67 and note.

35. Cardano, Contradicentium medicorum liber continens contradictiones cen- 
tum octo (Venice, 1545), 1.6.10, 165r = Opera 6:415. On the publication history 
of this work, see Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror, 43-44.

36. “Sola enim medicina constantem facit praedictionem, modumque docet, tern- 
pus ac eorum omnium certas et evidentes causas affert, atque ostendit.” Cardano, 
comm. Prognostica, dedicatory epistle, *3v Opera = 8:583. Cf.: “Et ob hoc intel- 
ligimus, medicinam esse certiorem naturali philosophia, cum naturalis philosophia 
semper procedat ab effectibus ad causas, medicina vero persaepe a causis supra ef- 
fectus. Et ob id dicebat Galenus primo artis curandi (cap. 4) quod demonstrationes 
medicae sunt similes mathematicis, et a causis.” Cardano, comm. Prognostica 
proem. 2 (Opera 8:585).37. “Reliquum est, ut videamus de stellis, physiognomia, chyromantia, somniis, et 
fato, seu ordine causarum: sub his enim quinque continentur omnia genera prae- 
dictionum communia. Et dico, quod de stellis eatenus, quatenus agunt calore et lu- 
mine, dubium non est: sed haec, si rite extendantur, etiam influxus continent. 
Fatum quoque pro ordine causarum admittitur ab Augustino, in opere de Civitate 
Dei. Physiognomia quoque haud dubie magnam continet veritatem. Chyromantia 
est alterius rationis, nec potest adeo reduci ad causam seu causas naturales. Somnia

118 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

probat Hippocrates, et lex utraque, antiqua et nova. Ideo videntur, posse facere 
praecognitionem adeo certam, ut medicina. Itaque in universum quo scientia est 
unius generis, eo certior est in praedicendo.” Ibid., 8 (Opera 8:589).

38. Opera 10:194.

39. Cardano, comm. De aere, aquis et locis, 103 [mispagination for 119]-20 = 
Opera 8:102-3.

40. “Secundo devenit ad placita medicorum, utpote quod in purgando debeamus 
observare quod luna sit in signis aqueis, et hoc credo non intellexisse Hippocratem, 
sed potius de his tribus ut apparet ab illo, et est Astrologia naturalis rationi conve- 
niens et vera: primum, ratione temporum. . . . Secundum quod recipitur ab Hip- 
pocrate est ex aeris qualitate quae manifeste est calida, frigida, humida et sicca, 
quia in temporibus humidis securiores sunt omnes operationes evacuandi. . . . Ter- 
tium est aliquo modo extra medicinam, non tamen prorsus, velut quod prima 
quadra lunae a coniunctione est calida et humida, secunda calida et sicca, tertia 
frigida et sicca, quarta frigida et humida. Et ideo in prima et quarta maxime con- 
veniunt evacuationes scilicet in prima per sectionem venae, in quarta per purga- 
tioneni (2. Apothelesmatum cap).” Cardano, comm. De aeris, aquis et locis 1.12, 
p. 25 = Opera 8:21-22.41. “ Primum igitur quantum nostris temporibus astrifera ilia sphaera senserit mu- 
tationis, diligenter explanandum est; Quod tametsi viri aliquot ante nos per- 
celebres, ut Regiomontanus Mathematicorum omnium decus et ornamentum 
eximium, Iacobus Zieglerus Laudanus, Gemma etiam Phrysius, ac Ruellius Sues- 
sionensis, accurata diligentia sint persecuti, quoniam ipsorum monumenta non ad 
manum cuivis sunt, maximum sane operae precium me facturum sum arbitratus, 
si quod longa animadversione observatum a me sedulo est, scriptis mandaretur.” 
Pedro Jaime Esteve, Hippocratis Coi medicorum omnium principis Epidemion 
liber secundus . . . Latinitate donatus, et fusissimis commentariis illustratus . . . 
(Valencia, 1551), 5v. The entire discussion occupies 4r-13v. According to Esteve, 
citing Galen, “erubescere quivis [medicus] huius scientiae [astronomiae] ignarus 
deberet.” Ibid., 4v.

42. Adrien L’Alemant, Hippocratis medicorum omnium principis, de aere, aquis 
et locis liber . . . (Paris, 1557), 30v-42v. On Ptolemy’s Pbaseis aplanon asteron, a 
work transmitting one of the oldest forms of Greek interest in the stars, which long 
predated planetary astronomy, see Dictionary of Scientific Biography, s.v. Ptolemy, 
by G. J. Toomer.43. Cardano, comm. De aeris, aquis et locis 4.1-2 (lectiones 55-56), 103 [mispagi- 
nation for 1 19]— 124 (Opera 8:102-4); regarding the occult influence of the heavens, 
ibid., 1.11-12 (lectio 12), 25-26 (Opera 8.21); in Septem Aphorismorum Hip- 
pocratis particulas commentaria . . . (Basel, 1564), 3.14, 253-62 (Opera, 8:322- 
27). “Quae vero nugatur Brasavola circa astrorum ortum et occasum, quanto plura, 
tanto magis risum moveat,” ibid., 4.5 (Opera 8:353). On Brasavola, see Dizionario 
biografico degli Italiani, s.v. Brasavola (Brasavoli), Antonio, by G. Gliozzi. On Bra- 
savola’s astronomical or astrological interests centered on the work of Manilius, 
see Anna Maranini, “La tradizione degli ‘Astronomica’ di Manilio nell’ambiente 
Ferrarese,” in Alla corte degli Estensi, ed. Marco Bertozzi (Ferrara: Universita degli 
Studi, 1994), 425-45.

Between the Election and My Hopes 119Between the Election and My Hopes 119

44. “Febres pestilentes fiunt, aqua vel aere corruptis. Aer corrumpitur ob siderum 
dispositionem, aut ventos, aut aquas, aut casum, ut in strage hominum, in abun- 
dantia locustarum mortuarum, in copia reptilium. et quod ad sidera attinet, 
Ptolemaeus hoc refert maxime in eclipses luminarium: et hoc, cum loco dominan- 
tur maleficae. Et cum haec scriberem, facta est eclipsis Solis vigesima Iunii, et luna 
fuit in nodo australi, et fuit in octava parte Cancri: et Iupiter ac Saturnus fuerunt 
occidentales in ipso Cancro, et procul dubio non est bona. Sed alii referunt in mag- 
nas coniunctiones. Et utrique dicunt verum. Nam vidimus ex coitu Saturni et Iovis 
in Cancro, anno 1504, inchoatam febrern pestilentem cum maculis, pulicum mac- 
ulis similibus: quae, ut ait Fracastoreus, satis bonus observator talium, erat mor- 
bus antea solum endemius Cypro et vicinis insulis, ut anno 1505 saevierit in Italia. 
Et ex alio congresso eorundem cum aliis omnibus planetis, anno 1524 per totum 
orbem, adeo anno 1528 invaluere, ut memoria illius anni multis saeculis sit 
celebranda. Cum vero congressus fuerit in signo piscium patet trigonum aqueum 
totum esse huiusmodi morbis corruptionis obnoxium. Ab anno autem 1544 in 
Scorpione conversa est ad dissidia potius legis, ex quibus eversa est tota Gallia. 
Modo praesenti anno transit haec magna coniunctio ad trigonum igneum 
signumque leonis. Est igitur eclipsis haec ex his quae pertinent ad morbos pesti- 
lentes in proprios locis. Et anno 1484 ostendit adventum pestis Indicae, quae 
subsecuta est generalis, et invisa nostro toti orbi.” Cardano, De venenorum 
differentiis, viribus, et adversus ea remediorum praesidiis . . . (Basel, 1564), 1.9, 
876 (Opera 7:285-86). The work is printed in 1564 in the same volume as Car- 
dano’s commentary on the Aphorisms, with continuous pagination.45. For example, Symon Pistoris, a medical professor at the University of Leipzig, 
who was the particular target of one of Giovanni Mainardi’s sharpest attacks on 
medical astrology. On this dispute see Paola Zambelli, “Giovanni Mainardi e la 
polemica sull’astrologia,” in L’ opera e il pensiero di Giovanni Pico della Mirandola 
nella storia dell’umanesimo (Florence: Nella sede dell’Instituto, 1965), 2:205-79, 
with an edition of the text of Mainardi’s letter to Martin Mellerstadt at 260-79. 
On astrological explanations of plague in the fourteenth century, see Anna M. 
Campbell, The Black Death and Men of Learning (New York: AMS, 1966, reprint 
of 1931 edition), 14-17 and 37-44; Campbell attributes the spread of astrological 
explanations of plague largely to the influence of the Compendium de epidemia 
produced in October 1348, in response to the request of Philip VI of France, by the 
faculty of medicine of Paris, which emphasized the role of a conjunction of the 
three superior planets. On the debate over the astrological causes of syphilis, see 
Miiller-Jahncke, Astrologisch-magische Theorie, 193-207; see also Arrizabalaga 
Henderson, and French, The Great Pox, 107-12.

46. “Ultimo vero et magis serio reditum coniunctionis duorum superiorum qui fit 
per trigona singulis viginti annis, ita ut in uno trigono maneat plusquam per 
ducentos annos, velut nostra aetate, et hoc etiam anno iuxta veram supputationem 
tabularum Prutenicarum facta est ultima coniunctio trigoni aquei, Saturni et Iovis 
in fine cancri, et per hos ducentos et amplius generati sunt morbi contagiosi ut lues 
Indica. ... At in trigono igneo hunt morbi proprii magis non serpentes graviores, 
tamen et non venenosi. . . . Erunt ergo sterilitates et siccitates maximae et bella, 
quia Leo et Sagittarius et Aries sunt signa pugnacia, et Leo significat cor. Et ita

120 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi120 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

erunt morbi pernitiosi absque veneno tamen. Et incipient ab anno MDLXXXIV 
quo anno transibit haec coniunctio a trigono aqueo ad igneum, et erit in Ariete; 
nec statim sentietur, sed ut reliqua naturalia sensim invalescet, incipiet incremen- 
tum post annum domini MDCXXIV.” Cardano, comm. Epidemics 1, 2.40 ( Opera 
10:272).

47. “Historia morbi validissimi,” Cardano, Consilia ( Opera 9:245-46).

48. “sed si intelligit quod influant, hoc est solum dogma astrologorum, quos pro 
nunc mittamus: quandoquidem sufficiunt nobis praecepta Hippocratis ad veri- 
tatem eruendam.” Cardano, De providentia ex anni constitutione liber (Basel, 
1564), 1042 (Opera 5:16). The work is printed in 1564 in the same volume with 
Cardano’s commentary on the Aphorisms and De venenis, with continuous pagi- 
nation.

49. Statutes of the University of Arts and Medicine of Bologna dated 1405 require 
the professor of astrologia to prepare a indicium anni for each year; see Carlo 
Malagola, ed., Statuti delle Universita e dei collegi dello studio bolognese 
(Bologna, 1888), 264. The practice was still being observed at Bologna in the six- 
teenth century; see Thorndike, A History of Magic, 5:235-45, which describes a 
collection of such prognostications made during the years 1500-40, as well as 
scattered similar items from later decades. See also Robert Westman, “Copernicus 
and the Prognosticators: The Bologna Period, 1496-1500,” Universitas: News- 
letter of the International Centre for the History of Universities and Science 
[Bologna], no. 5 (December 1993): 1-5.

50. “Propter hoc satis erit, si dicam de Roma; excusatum tamen me habebunt, 
quod Romam non viderim. sed si vera est imago antiquae et novae urbis. . . .” De 
providentia ex anni constitutione liber, 1048 (Opera 5:18).

51. See Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror, chap. 6.51. See Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror, chap. 6.

52. Cardano, De providentia ex anni constitutione liber, 1051-53 (Opera 5:19- 
20). On Cardano and anatomy, see Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror, chap. 5. 
These cases, not discussed in that chapter, supplement the account there. Gabriel 
Cuneo was the first holder of a chair in anatomy at the University of Pavia, being 
appointed in 1554. See Memorie e documenti per la storia dell’Universitd di Pavia 
e degli uomini piu illustri che v’insegnano (Pavia, 1878), 127. On the readiness 
with which elite families in Renaissance Italy had recourse to postmortem dissec- 
tion for family members, see Katharine Park, “The Criminal and the Saintly Body: 
Autopsy and Dissection in Renaissance Italy,” Renaissance Quarterly, 47 (1994): 
1-33, at 8-9.

53. “Hieronymus Fracastoreus (vir nostra aetate insignis, et praeter medicinam, 
etiam in mathematicis rebus subtiliter exercitatus, et huic negocio totus intentus, 
ut qui tres libros in hac materia luculenter scripserit, inscriptos de Morbis conta- 
giosis). . . .” Cardano, De providentia ex anni constitutione, 1055 (Opera 5:21).

54. “Quare concludo, quod generalis pestilentia aeris non potest generaliter 
facere pestem buboniam, sed potest ex effectibus producere causam pestis bubo- 
niae: id est, quae ex conversatione contrahitur. Et hoc fecit Deus Gloriosus: quia si 
pestis communis posset per se transire in buboniam, cum quae ab aere fit ali- 
quando sit communis toti orbi (ut de ilia quae fuit tempore Antonini et Galieni, et

Between the Election and My Hopes 121

ea quae fuit anno mcccxxxix et perseveravit quindecem annis) posset et secunda 
esse communis toti orbi: et ita interiret totum humanum genus, quia non possent 
[s/c] se tueri ab uno et altero simul.” Ibid., 1057 (Opera 5:22).55. “Ex quo patet, quod sunt quatuor genera pestis: Commune, quod fit ex cor- 
ruptione aeris, vel aquarum, quod (ut dixi) est contagiosum, id est ab aere: et etiam 
a consuetudine, sed leviter, et est impressio ab astris, et non potest gigni (ut putant 
stulti) neque ob inopiam rei frumentariae, neque alia causa, sed est a Deo, et coelo. 
Secundum est ex cadaverum multitudine, exhalatione terrae, et locustis: et hoc fit 
ex vaporibus et est contagiosum ab aere, non a consuetudine, sed persaepe generat 
pestem buboniam. Differt a primo, quia est in vaporibus, non in aere, vel aqua. 
Tertium est ex consuetudine, et contactu, et est bubonia pestis: et est cum ultima 
putredine, et potest generare secundum genus, et inficere aerem vaporibus lethal- 
ibus, et est pessimum celeritate mortis, et multitudine morientium: et quia pau- 
ciores servantur. Quartum est, quod fit ex fame: et si comedant cibaria agrestia, 
non permutatur, nisi quandoque in secundum genus. Si autem comedant res cor- 
ruptas, et maxime ex animalibus, permutatur in buboniam . . . Et sicut primum 
genus non potest fieri ab aliis unquam, sed potest esse causa omnium aliorum, ut 
dictum est: ita bubonia pestis necessario fit ab una aliarum semper, et per accidens. 
Et hoc declaratur, quia cum non fiat a coelo, nec aere, nec sit perpetua igitur 
oportet ut oriatur casu ex aliis, vel etiam per putredinem linteorum, sepultorum, 
vel exhalatione alicuius corruptione.” Ibid., 1066-67 ( Opera 5:25).

56. See Ann Carmichael, “Diseases of the Renaissance and Early Modern Eu- 
rope,” in The Cambridge World History of Human Disease, ed. Kenneth F. Kiple 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 279-87.

57. “Oportet autem solum tamen eas observare, quae evidentes habent qualitates, 
et conspicuas constitutiones validas et firmas, ac diuturnas: ne pulcherrimum in- 
ventum astrologorum more foedetur.” Cardano, De providentia ex anni constitu- 
tion liber, 1072 (Opera 5:27).58. “Septenorum quartus est index. Alterius septimane octavus principium. Est 
autem et undecimus consideratione dignus: ipse enim est quartus secundae septi- 
manae. Rursus vero et decimus Septimus considerabitur: ipse siquidem quartus est 
a quartodecimo, septimus vero ab undecimo.” Aphorisms 2.24, according to the 
lemma from the text of the Latin version used by Cardano in his commentary (Car- 
dano, comm. Aphorisms, 157 [Opera 8:282-83]). A modem English translation 
from the Greek runs as follows: “The fourth day is indicative of the seven; the eighth 
is the beginning of another week; the eleventh is to be watched, as being the fourth 
day of the second week; again the seventeenth is to be watched, being the fourth from 
the fourteenth and the seventh from the eleventh.” (Trans. W. H. S. Jones, Hippoc- 
rates, Loeb Classical Library [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979, 
first printed 1931] 4:115). For a collection of some of the remarks in the Epi- 
demics that were held to provide empirical examples, see Galen, De diebus decre- 
toriis 2.3, in his Opera omnia, ed. C. G. Kuhn, 20 vols. (Leipzig, 1821-33), 9: 
848-52.

59. Galen, De diebus decretoriis 3, in Opera omnia, 9:900-41. The first two 
books of this treatise (ibid., 769-899) establish the existence of critical days on the 
basis of cases in the Hippocratic Epidemics and attack other views on the subject.

122 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

The astrological material is mostly to be found in chapter 9 of book 3 (ibid., 928- 
33). In addition to being included in Renaissance editions of Galen’s Opera, the 
work was several times published as an independent treatise during the sixteenth 
century in a translation by Guenther of Andernach. A thorough historical study of 
the development of the doctrine of critical days is Karl Sudhoff, “Zur Geschichte 
der Lehre von den kritischen Tagen im Krankheitsverlaufe,” Wiener medizinische 
Wochenschrift, 52 (1902): 210-13, 272-75, 321-25, 371-74.60. “Et super medico quidem non inest, nisi ut cognoscat quod egreditur cum 
crisibus pluribus: et non pertineat ei ut sciat quae sit causa eius, quum declaratio 
illius causae extrahat turn ad artem aliam: imo oportet, ut sit sermo de diebus crisi, 
sermo quum loquimur secundum semitam experientiae aut secundum viam posi- 
tionis et axiomatum.” Avicenna, [Canon] 4. 2.2. 2, ed. Giovanni Costeo and Gio- 
vanni Paolo Mongio (Venice, 1595), 2:103.61. See the index entries under “critical days” in Lynn Thorndike and Pearl Kibre, 
A Catalogue of Incip its of Mediaeval Scientific Writings in Latin, 2nd ed. (Cam- 
bridge, Mass.: The Medieval Academy of America, 1963). For an example of this 
literature, see Cornelius O’Boyle, Medieval Prognosis and Astrology: A Working 
Edition of the Aggregationes de crisi et creticis diebus: With Introduction and 
English Summary (Cambridge: Wellcome Unit for the History of Medicine, 1991). 
According to the editor, this treatise survives in eleven manuscripts and was prob- 
ably composed shortly after Galen’s De diebus decretoriis was translated into Latin 
for the first time in the second half of the thirteenth century, possibly by William 
of Moerbeke. But long before the transmission of Galen’s treatise, short texts as- 
sociating the days of the lunar month with health and disease had circulated in Eu- 
rope; see Christoph Weisser, Studien zum mittelalterlichen Krankheitslunar: Ein 
Beitrag zur Geschichte laienastrologischer Facbprosa, Wiirzburger medizinhis- 
torische Forschungen 21 (Pattensen: H. Wellm, 1981), which lists more than 130 
manuscripts dating from between the ninth and the sixteenth century in various 
European languages. On astronomical knowledge and astrological beliefs in the 
early Middle Ages, see Bruce S. Eastwood, Astronomy and Optics from Pliny 
to Descartes: Texts, Diagrams, and Conceptual Structures (London: Variorum, 
1989), and Valerie J. Flint, The Rise of Magic in Early Medieval Europe (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1991).62. “Quapropter Galenus et alios multos medicorum motum hunc lunae non tal- 
ker distinguentes, sed simpliciter confundentes tanquam uniformem in eorum 
crisibus plerumque errare contingit. . . . Tertius [mensis] autem compositus est, 
qui secundum phantasiam Galeni ex mense peragrationis, sive propriae impressio- 
nis et mense communis ill[umin]ationis conficitur: coniungunt namque isti duo 
menses invicem: et quod resultat ex eis sunt 53 dies, et 22 horae: huius quidem ag- 
gregationis medietas sunt 26 dies, et 22 horae. Et hie mensis medicinalis a Galeno 
appellatus existit.” Pietro d’Abano, Conciliator, differentia 104, fols. 154v-155r. 
See also De diebus decretoriis 3.9, in Opera omnia, 9:932.

63. Avicenna’s Canon continued to be a standard medical authority and was fre- 
quently reprinted during the sixteenth century; see Nancy G. Siraisi, Avicenna in Re- 
naissance Italy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987). The astrological works

Between the Election and My Hopes 123

of Avenezra (Abraham ben Meir Ibn Ezra, ca. 1090-ca. 1164-67) were translated 
into Latin during the thirteenth century (via an intermediary French translation 
made by a Jewish scholar) and appeared in early printed editions; see Dictionary of 
Scientific Biography, s. v. Ibn Ezra, Abraham ben Meir, by Martin Levy. Pietro d’A- 
bano’s Conciliator retained its status as an authoritative work on many topics, and, 
unlike most other works of scholastic medicine, continued to be reprinted into the 
second half of the sixteenth century (as in the example in note 26).

64. For example, the Amicus medicorum of Jean Ganivet (fl. ca. 1431-34) and the 
latromatematicae of Girolamo Manfredi (1455-92), each issued in a number of 
early printed editions. See Miiller-Jahncke, Astrologisch-magische Theorie, 137.65. “Sed si quis aegrotet pridie quam Luna coeat habeatque diem septimam creti- 
cam, quomodo id erit ex influentia potestatis, tarn a Sole receptae, quam a signis? 
Cum maximam partem eorum dierum, sicuti non viderit, ita solari virtute Luna 
nos non affecerit, auctore ipso Galeno.” Pico, Disputationes adversus astrologiam 
divinatricem, 3.16, 1:330-32. The whole chapter, which is entirely devoted to de- 
molishing Galen’s astrological theory relating critical days of illness to the moon, 
occupies 322-48.

66. At different times in his career Nifo (ca. 1469/70-1538) taught philosophy, 
medicine, or both at the universities of Padua, Naples, Salerno, and Rome. He 
wrote a number of commentaries on Aristotle and was involved in philosophical 
controversies, as well as being a member of the humanist circle of Giovanni Pon- 
tano at Naples. See “Nifo,” Dictionary of Scientific Biography, s. v. Nifo, Agostino, 
by Edward P. Mahoney. At the time of Nifo’s attendance on the Grand Captain in 
1504-5 (ibid., 10:122), the task must have been a demanding one, as Gonzalo 
Hernandez, then just taking up his position as the new Spanish viceroy of Naples, 
was a sick man; see Gerald de Gaury, The Grand Captain: Gonzalo de Cordoba 
(London: Longmans, Green, 1955), 110-11.

67. Agostino Nifo, De diebus criticis seu decretoriis aureus liber (Venice, 1519), 
2r. An earlier edition of the work appeared in 1504.

68. “Multa Apponensis et Picus contra Galenum scribunt quae frivola sunt et 
nostro libro deiecta.” Ibid., 8v. The repudiation of Pico’s demolition of the 
planets/humors theory is on 6v.

69. Agostino Nifo, Ad Apotelesmata Ptolemaei eruditiones (Naples, 1513). This 
work, too, repudiates Pico.69. Agostino Nifo, Ad Apotelesmata Ptolemaei eruditiones (Naples, 1513). This 
work, too, repudiates Pico.

70. “Et hi [dies critici] sunt in primo mense lunari ornnes septenarii. 7. 14. 20. 27. 
Ut experientia gravissimorum medicorum Hippocratis in primis. . . . Similiter et 
aliorum experientia qui praxim exercuerunt et exercent,” Cesare Ottato, Opus tri- 
partitum de crisi, de diebus criticis: et de causis criticorum (Venice, 1517), 7v.

71. “Et vere mihi videtur etiam quod opinio Conciliatoris et astrologorum esset 
vera. quod nullum possit fieri iudicium de crisi bona vel mala nisi habita ratione 
nativitatis etgeniture.” Ibid., lOv.

72. “Sed nolumus admittere aspectus illos astrorum inimicorum. non angulos non 
masculinitatem vel feminitatem. non frigiditatem, etc., que omnia vana sunt cum 
illis suis mathematicis precisionibus.” Ibid., llv.

124 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

73. “sequitur dicta medicorum esse arbitraria et in pronosticis vana valde de 
crisi,” ibid., 12r; and “medici exercitati in magnis civitatibus et hospitiis publicis 
dicunt nullam penitus invenisse differentiam sensibilem in pharmacando: vel flo- 
botomando. sive in plenilunio sive in coitu lune sive alio tempore oppositionis: vel 
consummationis lune etc. vel aliorum astrorum,” ibid., 12r.

74. “Quero tamen ab ipso: si ille sit unus de illis sic exercitatis et bonis medicis: 
qui non adinvenit diversitatem in flobotomando et pharmacando suos infirmos in 
plenilunio vel novilunio. Caveat dicere quod sic: quia viles muliercule levantes [la- 
vantes] pannos: essent magis prudentes ipso: quae novilunium vel coitum lune cum 
sole observant: ne panni in ilia hora loti corrodantur.” Federico Grisogono, De 
modo collegiandi: prognosticandi: et cnrandi febres (Venice, 1528), 7v. The work 
is dedicated to Doge Andrea Gritti.75. In addition to the items in note 29, see Wear, “Galen in the Renaissance,” 246- 
49, and Alessandra Preda, “La peste astrologica, ovvero il dibattito circa la 
‘scienza dei cieli’ tra Symphorien Champier e Giovanni Mainardi,” in Bertozzi, 
Alla corte degli Estensi, 323-43. On the printing history of Mainardi’s epistles, see 
Zambelli, “Giovanni Mainardi,” 256-58. For Leoniceno’s views, see Daniela 
Mugnai Carrara, La biblioteca di Nicolo Leoniceno (Florence: Leo S. Olschlei, 
1991), 41-42, 73, 82-84. But as the same author demonstrates, although Leoni- 
ceno repudiated astrological prediction in medicine, he was deeply interested in the 
stars.

76. “Semel evenit ut, cum praestantis cuiusdam viri curationi, una cum Hi- 
eronymo Manfredo, astrologo sui temporis famatissimo, Bononiae interesset, im- 
mineretque simul et solvendi occasio et luminarium coitus, astrologo reclamante 
et aegrotanti mortem minitante, potio tamen ad Bencii imperium exhibita est 
infirmusque per earn e gravi morbo convaluit.” Giovanni Mainardi, letter to Mar- 
tin Mellerstadt, in Zambelli, “Giovanni Mainardi,” 278. Francesco Benzi was 
the third son of one of the most celebrated of all scholastic physicians, Ugo Benzi 
(d. 1439).

77. “nedum si Aegyptius aliquis astrologus, sed si Aegyptius aliquis deus, aut 
Anubis, aut Osiris haec mihi dixerit, non facile credam.” Girolamo Fracastoro, De 
causis criticorum dierum libellus, in his Opera omnia (Venice, 1584), 48v-56r, at 
48v.

78. Fracastoro ’s theory is analyzed in detail in Sudhoff, “Zur Geschichte der Lehre 
von kritischen Tagen ,” 322-23.78. Fracastoro ’s theory is analyzed in detail in Sudhoff, “Zur Geschichte der Lehre 
von kritischen Tagen ,” 322-23.

79. For example, Federico Grisogono, as in note 74; Johannes de Indagine, 
Canones astrologici, de iudiciis aegritudinum, part 3 of his Chiromantia ( [NP], 
1547); Auger Ferrier, as in note 20; Thomas Bodier, De ratione et usu dierum criti- 
corum opus (Paris, 1555); Claude Dariot, as in note 18; and Giovanni Antonio 
Magini, as in note 2. On the work of Indagine, Bodier, Dariot, and Magini (and 
others), see Miiller-Jahncke, Astrologisch-magiscbe Theorie, 146-53; see also 
P. Ulvioni, “Astrologia, astronomia e medicina nella Repubblica veneta tra Cinque 
e Seicento,” Studi Trentini di Scienze Storicbe, 61 (1982): 1-69 at 15-23, on the 
defense of astrology, and especially medical astrology, against Pico, by the empiric 
medical practitioner Tommaso Zefriele Bovio (1521-1609).

Between the Election and My Hopes 125

80. Passages on critical days in Cardano’s medical works include Contradicentium 
medicorum liber 1. 3.2-7, 55v-66v ( Opera 6:337-44) (except in the first of this set, 
much of the discussion is, however, purely medical and includes citations of such 
medieval medical authorities as Rasis, Taddeo Alderotti, and Gentile da Foligno 
on 65v-66r [344]); comm. Aphorisms, 2.24, 157-58, and 4.36, 387-92 (Opera 
8:283 and 381-83); comm. Prognostic, 3.1-5 (fourth section of commentary), 
462-76 (Opera 8:741-46); comm. Epidemics, 1, 2.33, 2.52, and 3.53 (Opera 
10:267, 282-84, and 324); comm. Epidemics, 2, 2.23 (Opera 10:375). The fore- 
going is not necessarily an exhaustive list.81. “At vero miscere rem imaginariam cum re naturali, adeo puerile est ac 
indignum Galeni autoritate, ut malim totum quod superest a capite octavo supra 
tertii libri de Diebus iudicatoriis superadditum ab aliquo existimare, quam 
autoritatem tarn gravis viri violatam videri.” Cardano, Contradicentium . . . liber 
1.3.2, 56r-v (Opera 6:337). Cardano was probably wrong, since Galen mentioned 
writing the work in three books in De libris propriis chap. 5, in Opera omnia, 
19:32. We are grateful to Vivian Nutton for drawing our attention to this reference.

82. “Habes igitur totam rationem deductam ex loco solis, nam ut centesimus- 
vigesimus dies est tertia pars totius anni, ita quadragesimus centesimavigesimae, et 
vigesimus dimidium quadraginta, et quatuordecim tertia pars, et septem dimidium 
quatuordecim. Quae omnia cum ignoraverit Galenus, longe petitis auxiliis a luna 
hanc doctrinam dierum criticorum totam confudit, nec sibi nec Hippocrati con- 
cors. Constat ergo, Hippocratem a circuitu solis hanc rationem deducere.” Car- 
dano, comm. Aphorisms, 4.36, 390-91 (Opera 8:383).

83. “Haec igitur est summa dierum criticorum, numerus, ordo, explicatio, causa, 
iuxta veritatem, et Hippocratis sententiam, quam Galenus tot nugis involuit false, 
confuse, inconstanter, adeo ut qui earn secuti sint, finem nullum invenire po- 
tuerunt.” Cardano, comm. Prognostic, 3.1 (fourth commentary), 465 (Opera 8: 
741). And “Dico ergo, quod nemo potest dissolvere hanc difficultatem, nisi qui 
calleat artem Hippocraticam Ptolomei.” Ibid., 3.5, 476 (Opera 8:741, 746).84. “Stultum haec medicorum vulgus quod nostro seculo sic videmus insolescere, 
atque imponere nobis purpura sua, cum sibi ab autoribus suis praeceptum sciant, 
qui absque astrorum consilio nulli medicetur: et tam longe ab medicina est, qui as- 
trologiae ignarus est, ut non medicus dici debeat sed et impostor: tamen eo nunc 
ventum est, ut e centum vix unum aut alterum reperias, qui vere sciat diiudicare, 
quo tempore quaelibet medicina adhibenda sit.” Johannes de Indagine, Canones 
astrologici, de iudiciis aegritudinum, 63v-71r, in his Chiromantia ([Paris], 1546), 
at 63v.

85. Cardano, De malo recentiorum medicorum medendi usu libellus, centum er- 
rores illorum continens (Venice, 1536), chap. 24 and 55 (32-33 and 59). The work 
was subsequently incorporated as part 1 of Cardano’s De methodo medendi, and 
as such these chapters appear in Opera 7:211 and 220. On the publication history 
of this work, see Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror, xiv and 28-9.

86. “Utrum vero verum illud sit quod luna in ariete capite minetur, et in Tauro 
collo, et ita in cancro pectore, in leone cordi, et in virgine visceribus, vere fateor 
nondum diligenter adeo animadvertere potui ut affirmare possim vel negare.

126 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

Quamobrem tutius est non contemnere, maxime cum ea opinio etiam apud nos 
percrebuerit.” Cardano, comm. De aeris aquis et locis, 1.11-12 (lectio 12), 25 
(Opera 8:22).

87. “Indignabuntur imperiti, quod tam aperte lacessam Galenum suum. . . . Unde 
illi tanta gloria? Quid hie affert nisi suos illos dies Iudicatorios, quorum causam 
ne novit (ut alias saepe docui) quidem: Et si verae millies essent, quid medico util- 
itatis afferunt?” Cardano, comm. Epidemics, 1, 3.53 (Opera 10:324).88. “Circa causam huius Alemanus nihil dicit, sed multa tamen (15) e quibus 
unum ridiculum, quod data cassia nigra cum manna dum luna esset in XV parte 
Capricorni mulier una in operatione periit. Sed melius fuisset quaerere causam in 
medicamento aut in morbo, et non in astris. Fieri potest ut materia veneni non ex- 
pers mota sit, aut quod inclitum sit venenum, aut quod laboraret abscessu aliquo 
prope cor aut in cerebro ei incognito, e tribus enim unum fuit non ex astris, neque 
enim novit vim astrorum quomodo sit sumenda, ut video ex omnibus primum 
aut saltern potentioribus et convenientibus inter se, et postmodum comparatis ad 
hominem hunc, et in hoc tempore: dico iuxta genethliace, ut quatuor necesse sit 
concurerre ad tales effectus repentinos. Et licet hoc acciderit anno MDLI, ut col- 
ligitur ab eo, quia dicit quod fuit die XI Augusti, turn Mars esset infelix in Libra 
respiciens quadrato Lunam, est tamen causa absurda et indigna tanto viro, cum 
mille homines acceperint medicamenta ea die ex scammonio, etiam qui ne ungue 
quidem laesi sunt. Ideo doleo illius causa quod occasionem dederit imperitis irri- 
dendi, cum alioquin sit peritus. . . .” Cardano, comm. De aere aquis et locis, 4.13 
(lectio 65), 139 (Opera 8:120).

89. Bodier, De ratione et usu, 17v-51v. On Bodier, see Thorndike, A History of 
Magic, 5:301-3. Bodier’s work is dedicated to Oronce Fine.

90. Cardano, De methodo medendi sectiones quatuor (Paris, 1565), section 3, cu- 
ratio 18, p. 230 (Opera 7:253-64, at 256 and 258). Cardano collected accounts 
of his cures throughout his life, publishing them in several different versions. See 
Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror 29 and 235-36.91. Cardano, Consilia, nos. 19 and 22 (Opera 9:102 and 124). The largest collec- 
tion of Cardano’s consilia is the fifty-three included in his Opera, of which only a se- 
lection had previously appeared in works published during Cardano’s lifetime. For 
example, three lengthy consilia formed one section of his collection of short medical 
treatises, Quaedam opuscula (Basel, 1559); in this copiously indexed volume there 
are no index entries for astra, crisis, dies critici, sidera [sydera], luna, or stellae.

92. See Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror, 4-5, with references to the earlier liter- 
ature on Cardano’s career.

93. See J. Dupebe’s introduction to his edition of Nostradamus, Lettres inedites 
(Geneva: Librarie Droz, 1983), 18 and n. 43, and P. Brind’Amour, Nostradamus 
Astrophile (Ottawa: Presses de l’Universite d’Ottawa, 1993), 318-19, 372-73.

94. For Nostradamus’s incompetence, see Brind’Amour, Nostradamus, esp. 70- 
78.

95. G. Cardano, Pronostico o vero judicio generate (Venice, 1535), ed. G. Ernst, 
in Marialuisa Baldi and Guido Canziani, Girolamo Cardano: le opere, le fonti, la 
vita (Milan: F. Angeli, 1999); cf. Ernst’s discussion of this important document.

Between the Election and My Hopes 127

96. I. Maclean, “Cardano and His Publishers 1534-1663,” in Kessler, Girolamo 
Cardano, 313.

97. Cardano published ten genitures with his Libelli duo (Milan, 1538); sixty- 
seven in the reprint of this work (Nuremberg, 1543), and 100 in the expanded Li- 
belli quinque (Nuremberg, 1547). The cases cited here are numbers 8, 56, and 59 
in the collection of 100 genitures, to be found in Opera 5:458-502.

98. Ibid., genitures 5 and 21. On Corbetta and Capella, see S. Albonico, II rugi- 
noso stile (Milan: F. Angeli, 1990).

99. Geniture 55 (Opera 5:486): “loan. Antonius Castiloneus, civis noster, re- 
giusque medicus et vir insignis, cum hanc vidisset genituram, dixit puerum hunc 
nutriri non posse . . .”

100. Opera 5:436.100. Opera 5:436.

101. See Thorndike, A History of Magic, 5:244-47, though he understandably 
failed to see that Niccolo and Costanzo were one and the same astrologer.

102. Cardano, Apborismi astronomici (Opera 5:56): “Hie debilis ex reiectatione 
sanguinis ex pulmone, et quasi tabificus, cum consuluisset Constantium Bonon- 
iensem de Symis, an adepturus esset a Caesare regnum loco fratris, dixi ego illo 
ostendente figuram, moriturum eo anno, nam Luna inter Pleiades erat in sexta, in 
quadrato Martis et Iovis in fixa Saturni domo peregrinantium, et sic repente in 
itinere suffocatus est.”

103. “. . . multi invidi dicerent me literas medicinae nescire quod totus mathe- 
maticis viderer intentus,” Cardano, Ephemeras, de libris propriis, 1544 (Opera 
1:57).

104. The following genitures have medical content (often minimal or tangential): 
3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 12, 19, 20, 21, 22, 43, 45, 50, 51, 52, 55, 56, 57, 59, 67, 68, 73, 75, 
77,81,86, 92, and 94.

105. Geniture 67 (Opera, 5:491).

106. Cardano’s Liber xii geniturarwn contains his surviving large-scale horo- 
scopes and analyses. It first appeared with his edition of Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos in 
1554 and is to be found in Opera 5:503-52.

107. Ibid., 510-11.

108. Ibid., 511: “De opificio. Erit cupidus secretarum rerum, delectabitur pulchris 
rebus, genimis, vestibus, picturis, imaginibus: et liberalibus disciplinis, nec tamen 
quicquam horum ob nobilitatem exercebit.

De itineribus. Nulla in re aut felicior, aut aptior quam in itineribus, legationibus 
et expeditionibus, in quibus et pericula et calumnias patietur ob invidiam. Ad max- 
imas tamen administrationes perveniet. Complectitur autem haec genesis con- 
traria quaedam simul, velut bonam temperiem et vitam morbosam, orbitatem cum 
sit uxoratus, obesum habitum et ingenium acre, benefacere et calumniam pati.”

109. Ibid., 508-10.

110. Ibid., 510: “Causa concordiae cum octava genesi et amoris erga nos quintu-109. Ibid., 508-10.

110. Ibid., 510: “Causa concordiae cum octava genesi et amoris erga nos quintu-

plex est . . 541-44 at 544. Cardano’s advice for Casanatus sounds exactly like

the sort of vague astrologer’s chat that he elsewhere condemned. He predicted that

128 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

he had chances “Ab ascendente autem iuxta 28. annum rixae peregrinationis acu- 
tae febris et iuxta 50. submersionis, Mortem quidem evadere poterit, periculum 
non. Vel erit suffocatio ex morbo, ut asthma, vel attonitus. Generaliter autem si 
non violenta morte moriatur erit satis longaevus” (545) — a fair sample of Car- 
dano’s predictions of life chances, mingling the medical freely with the accidental 
and hedging both.

111. Cardano, Aphorismi astronomici, 1547 (Opera 5:85): “Huncegocurandum 
suscepi, levi spe, praesertim cum immensis distinear negotiis. Desiderium tamen 
habendae geniturae ad hoc me impulit.”

112. “Vitam vero longam non solum ab initio semel fata promittunt, sed nostra 
etiam diligentia praestat. Quod et astrologi confitentur, ut de electionibus et imag- 
inibus agunt, et medicorum cura diligens experientiaque confirmat.” Ficino, Three 
Books on Life, 2.1, p. 166. A reader of a copy of the first edition of De vita (Flo- 
rence, 1489); Floughton, Inc 6151 (A), emphasized the words “Quotiens septimo 
cuilibet propinques anno, consule diligenter astrologum” (2.19, [e v] recto [Fi- 
cino, Three Books on Life, 2.20, p. 232]) by writing a marginal note: “Consulere 
astrologum.”

113. Nostradamus, Lettres, 94-101.113. Nostradamus, Lettres, 94-101.

114. For comparison we have used, inter alia, Luca Gaurico’s revolution for 
1532-33 for Ferdinand, King of the Romans (Vienna, Osterreichische National- 
bibliothek, MS 7433); his horoscope for one Stephen of Nuremberg (Paris, Biblio- 
theque Nationale, MS lat. 7385, 332r-370v); Bartholomaus Reischer’s horoscopes 
for the members of the house of Austria (Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, MS 
10754); Cyprian Leowitz’s horoscope for Adam von Dietrichstein (Bibliotheque 
Nationale, MS lat. 7443A). Thorndike, A History of Magic, vols. 5-6, still offers 
the fullest guidance through the jungles of this unstudied literature. For published 
samples of period horoscopes and revolutions, see the fascinating work of 
R. Castagnola, I Guicciardini e le scienze occidte (Florence: Leo S. Olschlei, 1990), 
which prints, among other documents, the horoscope drawn up for Francesco 
Guicciardini by Ramberto Malatesta, and W. Pirckheimer, Briefivechsel, ed. E. Re- 
icke et al. (Munich: Beck, 1940-89), 2:362-73.

115. Praeclarissimi viri Georgii Valle Commentationes in Ptolemei Quadriparti- 
tum inque Ciceronis Partitiones et Tusculanas questiones ac Plinii Naturalis 
historie librwn secundum (Venice, 1502), ep. ded., [A vo]: “Ptolemaeus mathe- 
maticorum omnium facile princeps ut quidam scripsere Adriani vixit temporibus 
ad Antoniumque usque pervenit: quo tempore Galenum inclitum medicinae auc- 
torem perhibent floruisse: necnon Herodianum grammaticum et Hermogonem 
rhetorem: qui de arte rhetorica libros reliquit non contemnendos.”

116. Ibid.: “Primus autem apud Graecos traditur Chius Oenopides de astrologia 
scripsisse nonnulla . . .”116. Ibid.: “Primus autem apud Graecos traditur Chius Oenopides de astrologia 
scripsisse nonnulla . . .”

117. Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, ed. G. Cardano (Lyons, 1554), 3 = Opera 5:94: 
“Namque ut apud Gellium Phavorinus qui parum ante Ptolemaeum floruit famo- 
sus philosophus, more ambitiosorum artem astrologiae infamem reddiderat.” For 
Favorinus’s critique of astrology, see A. Bouche-Leclercq, L’astrologie grecque 
(Paris, 1899), 571ff.

Between the Election and My Hopes 129

118. Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, 28 = Opera 5:113: “Cum igitur eodem tempore non 
unum genus artis floreat, utpote militaris disciplina, poesis, eloquentia, pictura, 
plastica, musica, medicina, philosophia, simul quoque desinant, ut Alexandri 
et Augusti et nostra etiam aetate, cum tamen ab Augusto ad initium nostrae floren- 
tis aetatis, quod fuit circa annum salutis 1440, fluxerunt anni intermedii circiter 
mille quadringenti, nihil egregium pro miraculo natura produxerit in lucem, 
praeterquam Antonini tempore cum tunc etiam floruissent simul Alexander Aphro- 
disaeus, Ptolemaeus Pelusiensis et Galenus Pergamenus, et parum ante id etiam 
C. Plinius et Plutarchus Cheroneus Traiani magister, manifestum est ex gener- 
alibus constitutionibus coeli principaliter ista pendere.” Here Cardano intro- 
duced astrological questions into a discussion usually conducted on a different 
level, as Michael Baxandall has shown. See his Giotto and the Orators (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1971) and A. Grafton, Defenders of the Text (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1991), chap. 7.119. Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, “Prooemium expositors, ” 1 = Opera 5:93: “Est autem 
ars haec philosophiae pars prognostica et praecognoscere docens, unde non vere 
scientia, sed ut ad medicinam se habet liber praedictionum Hippocratis aut Galeni, 
ita hie ad totam Philosophiam. Vnaquaeque enim ars quae de naturalibus tractat 
ea ratione, quae causas praesentium rerum explicat, docet et futurorum, nam fu- 
tura a praesentibus non specie nec genere differunt, sed tempore, quod illis ut ac- 
cidens adiungitur.”

120. Ibid. 5:94: “Artes autem quae futura hoc modo cognoscere docent, sunt Agri- 
cultura, Nautica, Medicina, Physiognomia et illius partes, Somniorum interpreta- 
tio, et Magia naturalis, ac Astrologia. Harum nobilissima astrologia est, quia de 
omnibus est, alia autem sunt certi generis. Est etiam per causas semper atque eas 
nobilissimas, reliquarum nulla semper, sed etiam per signa docet futura praedicere. 
Non est autem ut quidam existimant scientia Astrologiae, Fati scientia, sed Fati 
pars constitutio astrorum est.”

121. Ibid., 2 = Opera 5:94: “Porro quanto Fati scientia certior atque nobilior, 
tanto etiam obscurior.”

122. Ibid., 77= Opera 5:206.

123. Vivian Nutton, ‘“Prisci dissectionum professores’: Renaissance Humanists 
and Anatomy,” in The Uses of Greek and Latin, ed. Carlotta Dionisotti, Anthony 
Grafton, and Jill Kraye (Fondon: The Warburg Institute, 1988), 11-26. W. Smith, 
The Hippocratic Tradition (Ithaca and Fondon: Cornell University Press, 1979), 
122-72.

124. Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror 138-41.124. Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror 138-41.

125. Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, “Prooemium expositors, ” 2 = Opera 5:93-94: “Non 
est officium expositoris, ut Galen, inquit, vel reddere rationem dictorum ab au- 
thore, vel si qua non placeant reprehendere, sed verba illius ac sententias dilucide 
explicare; nos tamen non propriam faciemus expositionem, sed conabimur de- 
clarare causas dictorum a Ptolemaeo, et quae ab ipso obscure dicta sunt, clariora 
reddere, quae breviter ac circumcise, perficere, quae dubie, determinare.” But with 
his usual indifference to consistency, on another occasion Cardano sharply criti- 
cized Galen for precisely the same approach to commentary: “Interrogo te, o

130 Anthony Grafton and Nancy Siraisi

Galene, in quo opus est medico ad interpretationem librorum medicinae si solum 
verba auctoris sunt explicanda? Nam si de dictionibus agendum est ac sensibus 
grammatici hoc opus est.” Cardano, comm. Aph. 6.42 [6.44] ( Opera 8:513).

126. Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, 198 = Opera 5:242: “Sed huius rationem reddit 
Galenus, dicens: Olim reges ut instruerent bibliothecas magno pretio emendo il- 
lustrium virorum scripta, causam dedisse ut sua veteribus attribuerent.”

127. Ibid., 24 = Opera 5:110: “Nam quemadmodum Galenus de Hippocrate in- 
quit, in libros quos de difficultate spirandi conscripserat, ita nos de Ptolemaeo ex- 
istimare oportet: nihil, scilicet, ilium scripsisse commune aut vulgare, sed omnia 
singularia atque recondita.”

128. Ibid., 64 = Opera 5:141-42; 218 = Opera 5:257: “quod Ptolemaeus mira 
arte usus sit in hoc libro.”

129. Ibid., 257: “. . . unum corpus absque repetitione. Vt siquis velit per eum 
facere genituram, necesse est, ut totum bene perlegerit, intellexerit, et mente te- 
neat, aliter millies errabit.”

130. Ibid., 4 = Opera 5:95-96.

131. Ibid., 17 = Opera 5:105: “Nam et in septimo Epidemiarum quicumque illius 
libri author fuit (et certe vir egregius fuit) ingenue fassus est deceptum se sutura 
capitis.”131. Ibid., 17 = Opera 5:105: “Nam et in septimo Epidemiarum quicumque illius 
libri author fuit (et certe vir egregius fuit) ingenue fassus est deceptum se sutura 
capitis.”

132. Ibid., 146 = Opera 5:204: “Dicit ergo quod hanc mistionem vel remissionem 
qualitatum aut argumentum impossibile est penitus describere: quod etiam Ga- 
lenus in libris methodi et Avicenna quarta primi testati sunt.”

133. Ibid., 33-35 = Opera 5:117.

134. G. Pomata, La promessa di guarigione (Rome and Bari: Laterza, 1994); 
translated into English as Contracting a Cure (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer- 
sity Press, 1998).

135. There must have been many practitioners in Italy whose work consisted 
largely of drawing up interrogations for a mixed clientele, like Richard Napier, 
whose work is studied by Michael Macdonald in Mystical Bedlam (Cambridge: 
1981), though without discussion of the astrological details of his technique. We 
know of no published studies, however, indicating the survival from Italy of any 
notebooks of rapid interrogations like Napier’s, preserved in the Bodleian library.

136. Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, 17 = Opera 5:105.

137. Ibid., 230 = Opera 5:267: “post longa scripta perplexa dubia qualia solent 
facere astrologi nostri temporis, plena contradictionibus et obscuritate” — a criti- 
cism that certainly held for the eminently fashionable Nostradamus; see Dupebe’s 
edition of Nostradamus’s Lettres and Brind’Amour, Nostradamus Astropbile.

138. Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, 252 = Opera 5:282.

139. Ibid., 198 = Opera 5:242.

140. Ibid., 173-75 = Opera 5:234-36.

141. Cardano’s first horoscope is included in Libelli quinque. . . . V. De exemplis 
centum geniturarum (Nuremberg, 1547), no. 19 (Opera 5:468-72); the date of

Between the Election and My Hopes 131141. Cardano’s first horoscope is included in Libelli quinque. . . . V. De exemplis 
centum geniturarum (Nuremberg, 1547), no. 19 (Opera 5:468-72); the date of

Between the Election and My Hopes 131

composition is given by the remark “pervenisset caput ad Lunam in 43 annis [of 
Cardano’s life] iam, id est anno praeterito.” The second is no. 8 in . . . Geniturarum 
XII . . . utilia exempla, printed with his commentary on Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos in 
the Basel, 1554, edition. Cardano revised both figure and narrative once more, 
stating, “Patior etiam in sinistro oculo lachrymam, quae eo anno coepit quo et 
podagra. Anno 64” (Opera 5:523, the entire horoscope occupying 517-41).

142. See Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror chap. 10.

143. Pomata, La promessa di guarigione, chaps. 3 and 5.

144. See Zanier, La medecina astrologica.

145. For a helpful account of theological positions on this issue, see Laura 
Smoller, History, Prophecy and the Stars: The Christian Astrology of Pierre 
d’Ailly, 1350-1420 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994), chap. 2.

146. See the classic work of D. P. Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic from Ti- 
cino to Campanella (London: The Warburg Institute, 1958). The precise nature of 
Ficino’s views on talismans and their use is hotly disputed by the leading authori- 
ties, B. P. Copenhaver and P. Zambelli, whose L’ambigua natnra della magia (Mi- 
lan: II Saggiatore, 1991) should be read against Copenhaver’s “Lorenzo de’Medici, 
Marsilio Ficino, and the Domesticated Hermes,” in Lorenzo il magnifico e il suo 
mondo, ed. G. C. Garfagnini (Florence: Leo S. Olschlei, 1994), 14-34.147. “Et quia requiris ultra hoc, an ex astris hoc decernatur, et an ab illis passio 
petat auxilium? Respondeo quod astrologia nostrae aetatis non est vera, quia non 
est cognita. Principia enim ilia Ptolemei evariant ab eo quod videtur et contingit. 
Sunt praeterea errores in motibus ac locis astrorum, ut apparet ex tabulis Pruteni- 
cis, quae solae consentiunt cum experimento. Praeterea oporteret scire modum 
motuum illorum. Declaratum est enim a nobis in Quinrodecimo [s/c] Par- 
alipomenon quod neque per excentrices [sic] neque parvos circulos neque per 
utrosque possunt servari quae apparent in astris, et nisi sciamus cur, gratia exem- 
pli luna sit dimidia, non possumus scire quid decernat. Quod tamen est per- 
spicuum, est quod sol et caeteri Planetae cum sint in piscibus decernunt surditates 
et mutitates, Pisces enim parum audiunt et voce carent. Et sol in oppposito Saturni 
infelicis tale incommodum significabat. Et effectus apparuerunt annis MDXXII, 
XXIII, et XXX, cum Saturnus premebat Iovem ac Mercurium et ideo cum ars sit 
imperfecta licet adumbret aliquid, potest tamen magis esse causa erroris quam iu- 
vare nos. Et etiam hanc contemplatio est extra medicinam. Nec video auxilium ex 
directione Iovis ad Venerem, quae enim apud nos sunt tametsi illis subiiciuntur 
tamen sunt certiora. Et si spes etiam aliqua in hoc diligentius etiam consid- 
erassem.” Cardano, Consilia, no. 12 (Opera 9:78). In Cardano’s Opera, book 15 
of his Paralipomena (not printed in his lifetime) is about the lives of illustrious 
men; book 8 is about the stars but does not appear to contain anything relating to 
this consilium.

This page intentionally left blank

4

Celestial Offerings: Astrological Motifs in the 
Dedicatory Letters of Kepler’s Astronomia 
Nova and Galileo’s Sidereus Nuncius

H. Darrel RutkinThis page intentionally left blank

4

Celestial Offerings: Astrological Motifs in the 
Dedicatory Letters of Kepler’s Astronomia 
Nova and Galileo’s Sidereus Nuncius

H. Darrel Rutkin

The years 1609 and 1610 saw the publication of two epoch-making works 
in the history of astronomy and in the history of science overall: Johannes 
Kepler’s Astronomia Nova (1609) and Galileo Galilei’s Sidereus Nnn- 
cius (1610). The revolutionary contributions of these works are too well 
known to require retelling here. 1 In this chapter, I shall focus, rather, on 
their dedicatory letters.

Mario Biagioli has recently called attention to Galileo’s scientific pro- 
duction and its presentation within the context of the overall design of his 
scientific career — his socioprofessional self-fashioning — in the courtly 
milieu of an absolute prince. 2 Biagioli pays particular attention to recon- 
structing Galileo’s patronage situations within the broader culture of early 
modern Europe, where patronage concerns to a great extent conditioned 
the social system within which the practice of science took place. 3 Specif- 
ically, Biagioli reconstructs the patronage situation most relevant to our 
purposes, in which Galileo tried to woo Cosimo II de Medici, who had just 
succeeded to the grand duchy of Tuscany. Galileo had been his tutor in 
mathematics for the prior several years, during the summers, in the time 
off from his teaching duties as a professor of mathematics at the Univer- 
sity of Padua in the Venetian Republic. 4In chapter 2 of his book, Biagioli focuses his account on the patronage 
strategies that surrounded the publication — and presentation — of the 
Sidereus Nuncius to Cosimo II. In the dedicatory letter, Galileo fashioned 
his discovery of the satellites of Jupiter into Medicean stars in a spectacu- 
larly successful attempt to raise his status from that of professor of math- 
ematics at a university to that of court mathematician and philosopher of 
an absolute prince. 5 Biagioli argues that Galileo’s receipt of patronage

134 H. Darrel Rutkin

from an absolute prince significantly augmented the epistemological legit- 
imization he so greatly desired. 6 Even if one does not accept every detail of 
his attempt to tie the contents of the preface into a purported Medicean 
dynastic mythology, 7 Biagioli has been quite successful in showing how 
Galileo skillfully related his “gift” 8 of Jupiter’s stars to Cosimo II person- 
ally by the device of relating Jupiter, and thereby Galileo’s discoveries, to 
Cosimo ’s natal horoscope.Galileo thus associated his epoch-making telescopic discovery of the 
moons of Jupiter with the astrological nativity of his intended patron. Not 
only was Galileo, then, ingenious in his artful prefatory invention, he was 
also brilliantly successful in his intended grab for patronage. His gambit 
worked spectacularly well, but was it original? Did he invent this brilliant 
literary conceit, or did he, rather, skillfully adapt an already existing model 
in an act of literary imitatio? 9 I will argue in this chapter that Galileo 
probably did borrow at least one of the central structures of his pref- 
ace: the association of his planetary astronomical discovery with his pa- 
tron’s astrological nativity. Indeed, he seems to have borrowed this device 
from the almost exactly contemporaneous — and also epoch-making — 
astronomical contribution of the imperial mathematician, Johannes Kep- 
ler: the Astronomia Nova of 1609. The chronology, as we will see in more 
detail below, admits the possibility; the content and structure argue the 
probability.

Furthermore, in looking for other examples of the particular astrologi- 
cal device in question, 10 it seems obvious to examine Tycho Brahe’s dedi- 
catory letters, since it is well known that he was a serious astrologer 11 (as 
well as an alchemist). 12 In particular, one thinks of his dedicatory letter to 
the Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica (1598), also dedicated to Rudolf 
II. Although there is nothing obviously astrological there, let alone an ear- 
lier example of the device in question, the letter does contain what may be 
the model Galileo used for the first part of his dedicatory letter to Cosimo, 
for which Kepler provided the model of the second part, especially of its 
astrological centerpiece.The chapter will begin with a detailed treatment of the first part of 
Galileo’s dedicatory letter; then I turn to Tycho’s preface and argue that it 
provides Galileo’s model therefor. The next part of the chapter treats the 
second part of Galileo’s preface, where we meet our crucial astrological 
passage. I then present Kepler’s dedicatory letter, also in some detail, and

Celestial Offerings 135

argue on several counts that it provides the model for the central device 
around which Galileo structured his dedicatory rhetorical tour de force. 
The concluding section will shore up these arguments with some chrono- 
logical considerations. The fact that these prefaces happen to have been 
written by three of the most important astronomers in the history of sci- 
ence makes an investigation into their literary qualities a worthwhile en- 
deavor; 13 the additional fact that those by Galileo and Kepler also have 
astrological motifs at their centers makes their interest even more com- 
pelling. 14

Excursus on Dedicatory Prefaces

Dedicatory letters played many roles in Renaissance books. 15 They could 
justify the work as a whole, suggest a way to read it, or create a relation- 
ship between the author and the dedicatee — or carry out all three tasks 
at once. They thus offered authors a kind of performance space in which 
they had more room for innovation and creativity than was often available 
in the text proper. 16 What follows is meant to be preliminary, to indicate 
some basic patterns that may then allow a fuller picture to emerge in con- 
sidering the possibilities of this literary genre. 17I will first characterize certain features of what may transpire in this 
performative space — this public stage, 18 as it were — which is placed at 
the very beginning, before the hard work of the treatise (or dialogue) 19 
proper. The dedicatory letter, first of all, is just that, a letter. 20 There ap- 
pear to be two quite different kinds or styles — “modes” in Brian Vickers’s 
sense — of dedicatory letters: (1) a more straightforward style in which, 
for example, the author either tries to defend what has been done in the 
body of the work or introduces it by describing some of the circumstances 
of its investigation and composition, 21 and (2) a more artificial, highly 
elaborated composition in which the mode appears to be much less that 
of forensic oratory than of a type of epideictic “show” oratory. 22 Several 
of Kepler’s other dedicatory letters are of the first, more straightforward 
type, where he describes in propria persona the nature of his research di- 
rectly to the patron in question; 23 he often treats the issue of financial sup- 
port openly in his dedicatory letters. 24 Neither of our featured prefaces by 
Galileo or Kepler, 25 however, falls into this category; rather, they are both 
highly ornate literary productions of a rather tall order, which, though

136 H. Darrel Rutkin

they function quite effectively as dedicatory letters, have much more of a 
novelistic or dramatic flavor.136 H. Darrel Rutkin

they function quite effectively as dedicatory letters, have much more of a 
novelistic or dramatic flavor.

One of the most important social functions that took place within the 
dedicatory letter’s communicative space concerned patronage dynamics, 
many fine discussions of which have appeared in recent years . 26 We shall 
not explore directly in this chapter the intricacies of patronage dynamics 
beyond attempting to gain a deeper appreciation of one of the central lit- 
erary spaces within which patronage relations were expressed, and thereby 
constituted, in the public sphere . 27 These dedicatory letters seem, further- 
more, not only to provide a public demonstration of their authors’ abili- 
ties, but also to publicize the magnificence of the dedicatee. This feature, 
especially when a prince is the dedicatee, seems to drive the dedicatory let- 
ter almost into the domain of courtly — and more public — entertainments, 
much like those reconstructed by Roy Strong . 28

We shall also be well served by paying close attention to the rhetorical 
practice whereby the author persuades the reader by (selectively) inform- 
ing him and thereby shaping how he reads the work overall . 29 This aware- 
ness is essential for understanding how the author purposefully crafts the 
narrative to inform the particular way that the intended primary reader — 
the dedicatee — will read and react to what the narrator presents. We shall 
find some striking examples in what follows. These, then, are some of the 
basic patterns that can help us see more clearly what the dedicatory letter 
was and how it functioned, and, most importantly, how our historical au- 
thors used them.

Galileo (I)Galileo (I)

Let us now examine the dedicatory letter to Galileo’s Sidereus Nuncius. 
The only historical context I wish to provide at the outset is simply that 
Galileo, the author/dedicator, presented this work to the historical dedi- 
catee, the nineteen-year-old newly crowned grand duke of Tuscany, Co- 
simo II de Medici, whom Galileo had recently tutored in mathematics . 30 
That Galileo in his mid-forties was writing to his teenage ex-pupil is not 
without significance for the narrative strategy he develops in the dedica- 
tory letter.

First, let us begin to characterize the narrative situation of the dedica- 
tory letter . 31 Some of its distinctive features will come out more clearly by

Celestial Offerings 137

our contrasting them to the narrative situation of the dedicatory letter 
to Kepler’s Astronomia Nova. 32 The historical author, Galileo, begins by 
adressing the dedicatory letter to Cosimo II de Medici, the fourth grand 
duke of Tuscany; he does this in the dative case as is normal in epistolary 
addresses. 33 This address to the historical Cosimo has no explicit connec- 
tion, qua narrative, with the narrative itself; it simply announces the his- 
torical dedicatee, who then does not figure in the narrative for quite a 
while. The dedicatee leaves no explicit linguistic trace in the text until the 
thirty-third line of the dedication. We shall explore the rhetorical effect of 
such a strategy as we go through the text. Kepler by contrast develops a 
rather different structure in the dedicatory letter of the Astronomia Nova, 
where he also at first addresses the historical dedicatee, Rudolf II, in the 
dative case. 34 But then the narrator immediately addresses Rudolf in the 
vocative case (in the first line of the text of the dedicatory letter proper 
[7,5]). 35 Kepler then refers to him three more times in the next four lines 
(7,6-9) in the genitive case, using a standard imperial formula. 36After this disconnected address, Galileo begins the dedicatory letter 
proper with a highly impersonal construction. Van Helden captures this 
well: 37 “A most excellent and kind service has been performed by those who 
defend from envy the great deeds of excellent men and have taken it upon 
themselves to preserve from oblivion and ruin names deserving of immor- 
tality” (29). 38 Indeed, the entire first paragraph and, in fact, the entire first 
part of the dedicatory letter (2, 5-3, 5) is presented in this completely imper- 
sonal narrative style, which is wholly uncommitted, within the text itself, 
with respect to the identities of both the narrator and the intended audience. 
The narrator speaks only in impersonal, third-person utterances, 39 in the 
manner of one speaking general truths. The tone, furthermore, is quite di- 
dactic, much like that of an older, more experienced teacher instructing 
a pupil. We happen to know, of course, that Galileo, more than twice 
Cosimo ’s age, had recently been his tutor, so this didactic tone appears to be 
perfectly in keeping with the tenor of their historical relationship. Further- 
more, the subject at hand — how to memorialize effectively a great ruler’s 
actions and his name — would be of great concern to a young prince. This 
strikes us, then, as a perfectly sound strategy on the historical Galileo’s part 
to capture the attention and goodwill of the historical dedicatee.

The actual content of the narrative, on the other hand, the picture 
that Galileo builds up of how great rulers’ names and deeds are to be

138 H. Darrel RutkinThe actual content of the narrative, on the other hand, the picture 
that Galileo builds up of how great rulers’ names and deeds are to be

138 H. Darrel Rutkin

memorialized, is also significant in shaping how Cosimo is to read and un- 
derstand what follows in the remainder of the dedicatory letter. This is, af- 
ter all, a rhetorical structure designed to influence and persuade. 40 Indeed, 
Galileo presents a graduated model of how this feature of the patronage 
game has been played in the past and is played in the present, that is, the 
different ways in which patrons’ virtues can be memorialized and the rel- 
ative value, closely related to permanence, of these different ways. Kepler 
also touches on these themes, but in a much less overtly didactic manner. 41

Let us now look at the graduated model: “Because of this {bine), images 
sculpted in marble or cast in bronze are passed down for the memory of 
posterity; because of this {bine), statues, pedestrian as well as equestrian, 
are erected; because of this {bine), too, the cost of columns and pyramids, 42 
as the poet says, 43 rises to the stars; and because of this, finally {bine 
denique), cities are built and adorned by the names of those who grateful 
posterity thought should be commended to eternity” (29). 44 Thus we have 
a fourfold series, with each stage marked by its own reiterated bine. First, 
the material nature of the monument is emphasized, then the types of ma- 
terial monuments to memory, in ascending order of magnitude: statues, 
columns or pyramids, and cities.

The narrator then drives home the point with a reflection on human na- 
ture, much like our own saying “out of sight, out of mind”: “For such is the 
condition of the human mind that unless continuously struck by images of 
things rushing into it from outside, all memories easily flee from it” (29). 45Let us now turn to the second series in Galileo’s model (2,16-3,5). Flere, 
the narrator presents a second type of memorialization, which he contrasts 
with the first — literally monumental — series. Fie contrasts literal monu- 
ments with literary monuments, beginning this second series with a strong 
contrast — “But others {Verum alii) looking to more permanent and longer 
lasting things, have entrusted the eternal celebration of the greatest men 
not to marbles and metals but rather to the care of the Muses and to in- 
corruptible monuments of letters” (29). 46

Flaving evoked this contrast, which serves as an introduction to the sec- 
ond series, the narrator peeks his head out from behind the wings, as it 
were (or lifts his eyes up to the audience), and speaks in his own voice for 
the very first time: At quid ego ista commemoro ? (But why do I recall these 
things?) Fie then immediately disappears again as unobtrusively as before 
and returns to his objective, authoritative, didactic voice, deepening the

Celestial Offerings 139

theme just mentioned: “But why do I recall these things as though human 
ingenuity, content with these [earthly] realms, has not dared to go beyond 
them? Indeed, looking far ahead, and knowing full well that all human 
monuments ( omnia humana monumenta ) perish in the end through vio- 
lence (vi), weather (tempestate) or old age ( vetustate ), it [human in- 
genuity] contrived more incorruptible symbols (incorruptiora signa 47 
excogitavit ) against which voracious time and envious old age ( Tempus 
edax atque invidiosa Vetustas) 4S can lay no claim” (29-30). 49Now that Galileo has begun to reorient our thinking about commemo- 
rations from the material and perishable to the literary and — paradoxi- 
cally — less perishable, we should look more closely at the brief poetic 
passage that Galileo inserted, with no explicit attribution, 50 in the third 
stage of the series of material commemorations. 51 1 will not tell a definitive 
story here, which would take us too far afield for our present purposes. 52 
Even penetrating a little below the surface, however, can provide a deeper 
appreciation of Galileo’s artistry.

Let us look at some of the resonances of the poem that Galileo has 
quoted: Propertius’s Elegies III, 2. 53 One of the ironies resounding in Gali- 
leo’s quotation of Propertius in this context is that Propertius described 
not a literary monument to the name or deeds of a man renowned for vir- 
tus, but one to his girlfriend, and in a programmatic poem for a book 
of erotic elegies. Nevertheless, the ideas presented in both are indeed 
parallel: Propertius considers his poems to be a monument to her beauty 
(i carmina erunt formae tot monumenta tuae, 18), where, for Galileo, the 
eternal celebration of the best men ( aeternum summorum virorum prae- 
conium) are immortalized in the incorruptible monuments of letters (in- 
corruptis litterarum monumentis).

Galileo quotes line 19 from Propertius: nam neque pyramidum sump- 
tus ad sidera ducti . 54 Indeed, the full line of Galileo’s: bine Columnarum 
atque Pyramidum, ut inquit ille, sumptus ad sidera ducti (2,10-11) also 
has a resonance with line 11 of Propertius: quod non Taenariis domus est 
mihi fulta columnist Likewise Galileo’s sed Musarum custodiae, et in- 
corruptis litterarum monumentis consecrarunt (2,17-18) has much simi- 
larity to Propertius’s lines 15-18 (which occur directly before the line 
Galileo quoted):

at Musae comites et carmina cara legenti,

et defessa choris Calliopea meis.

140 H. Darrel Rutkinat Musae comites et carmina cara legenti,

et defessa choris Calliopea meis.

140 H. Darrel Rutkin

fortunata, meo si qua es celebrata libello!

carmina erunt formae tot monumenta tuae . 56

Finally, some of the ideas in the last section of Galileo we examined, om- 
nia humana monumenta vi, tempestate, ac vetustate tamen interire . . . 
Tempus edax atqne invidiosa Vetustas nullum sibi ius vindicaret (2,21- 
24), are closely paralleled in Propertius’s lines 23-24:

aut illis flamma aut imber subducet honores

annorum aut ictu, pondere victa, ruent . 57

The ideas are similar, to be sure, but the language reads more like a para- 
phrase than an exact reminiscense. But when we look at the poem by Ho- 
race on which Propertius’s elegy was modeled, 58 Ode III, 30, 59 we see that 
the language in Horace’s poem oddly seems to be more exactly the lan- 
guage that Galileo used — and to reflect the ideas more precisely — than 
that from Propertius’s poem, which he actually quoted. The lines in ques- 
tion from Horace are the first five: 60

Exegi monumentum aere 61 perennius 
regalique situ pyramidum altius, 
quod non imber edax, non Aquilo impotens 
possit diruere aut innumerabilis 
annorum series et fuga temporum . 62Exegi monumentum aere 61 perennius 
regalique situ pyramidum altius, 
quod non imber edax, non Aquilo impotens 
possit diruere aut innumerabilis 
annorum series et fuga temporum . 62

Why would Galileo have done this? Was it to dazzle us with his virtuos- 
ity: to quote a line from a poem, one of whose invoked resonances in the 
mind of a well-informed reader would be not only to the poem actually 
quoted, but also to the poem on which the quoted poem was modeled? 
Yes, but not only. A further motivation, I think, is that the line from Prop- 
ertius’s poem contains a term utterly central to Galileo’s concerns that is 
not found in Horace’s poem and that the narrator has not yet mentioned 
up to the time of the quotation. The same term then also serves to fore- 
shadow the second, and most significant, series in Galileo’s continuing 
informative description of his model: the term sydera. That this term, 
furthermore, was introduced in the only text explicitly quoted in the nar- 
ration further adds to its emphasis.

Let us return to Galileo’s preface. His next phrase, In coelum itaque 
migrans, directs our attention to the ultimate realm where Galileo, via 
the narrator, has been heading for the entire time. Now that he has directed 
us there — toward the heavens — and has prepared the ground of our un- 
derstanding, he goes into much more detail than before. He informs us

Celestial Offerings 141

explicitly what the incorruptiora signa are that have just been contrasted 
with the corruptible omnia bnmana monumenta: “And thus, moving to 
the heavens, it assigned to the familiar and eternal orbs of the most bril- 
liant stars the names of those who, because of their illustrious and almost 
divine exploits, were judged worthy to enjoy with the stars an eternal 
life” (30). 63Human ingenuity (bumana solertia) continues to be the subject of this 
new sentence, carrying over from the beginning of the prior rather long 
sentence (2,15-20), but without being explicitly reiterated. This human in- 
genuity consigns the names ( nomina consignavit ) of those who are deemed 
worthy (digni habiti sunt) — based on their extraordinary, almost divine 
deeds (ob egregia ac prope divina facinora) — to the stars. The narrator 
thus picks up again and reiterates the central theme of this entire first part 
of the dedicatory letter: how to commemorate the deeds (res gestae) of 
men who excel in virtus ( excellentium virtute virorum) and whose names 
are worthy of immortality (immortalitate digna nomina). 64 Galileo’s nar- 
rator has now linked the names and deeds of great men with the stars, 
which are not man-made — in contrast to omnia bumana monumenta — 
and which have perpetual (i.e., incorruptible) orbits.

The narrator then explicitly spells this out. Galileo in his didactic nar- 
rative voice does not want his privileged audience to miss the point: “For 
this reason, the fame of Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, Hercules, and other he- 
roes after whom the stars are named will not be obscured before the splen- 
dor of the stars themselves is extinguished” (30). 65 The fame of those 
heroes, for whom the stars are named ( quorum nominibus stellae appel- 
lantur), will thus not fade out before the radiance of their stars (ipsorum 
syderum) fades out. Galileo seems to be following here a euhemerist tra- 
dition that would have been well known to him. 66 We should note once 
again that, besides the brief aside at 2,18-19, our narrator is still speaking 
in a completely impersonal, objective, third-person narrative voice.Our narrator then presents a very conspicuous example of this process 
of naming, conspicuous both in its protagonists — Julius and Augustus 
Caesar — and in its failure. The relationship that he establishes here is cen- 
tral to Galileo’s rhetorico-didactic purposes, central, that is, to the narra- 
tive strategy that informs how Cosimo is supposed to understand his own 
relationship with Galileo. Indeed, this relationship is one virtually guar- 
anteed to appeal to the sense of historical destiny of a nineteen-year-old

142 H. Darrel Rutkin

grand duke, especially of such a distinguished city-state: “This especially 
noble and admirable invention of human sagacity, however, has been out 
of use for many generations, with the pristine heroes occupying those 
bright places and keeping them as though by right. In vain, Augustus’s 
affection tried to place Julius Caesar in their number, for when he wished 
to name a star (one of those the Greeks call Gometa and we call hairy) 
that had appeared in his time the Julian star, it mocked the hope of so much 
desire by disappearing shortly” (30). 67

Having established this relationship, then, and the failed attempt at pro- 
viding such an incorruptible commemoratory gift, and with this failed gift 
presented by one of the greatest rulers the world had ever known, Galileo 
makes his next crucial rhetorical move, which thus inaugurates the second 
(and final) part of the preface. The narrator at this point, after speaking 
only in the impersonal mode, finally turns toward and explicitly addresses 
the dedicatee, Cosimo II: Atqui longe veriora ac feliciora, Princeps Sere- 
nissime, Celsitudini tuae possumus augurari. Nor is this change in tone 
transitory. But before we turn in detail to this second part of Galileo’s 
dedicatory letter — and the passage of most concern for our central argu- 
ment — let us consider a text that Galileo may well have used as the model 
for the first part of his dedicatory letter to Cosimo.Tycho

With Tycho Brahe’s dedicatory letter to Rudolf II in his Astronomiae In- 
stauratae Mechanica 6S of 1598, 1 will not go into nearly as much detail. 
I would only like to suggest that Galileo may have taken over certain 
patterns from Tycho’s preface for his own purposes. I begin with Tycho’s 
narrative strategy, which is even more extreme than Galileo’s. After the 
address to Rudolf II, for which he used an ad + accusative construction in- 
stead of the usual dative case construction, 69 Tycho begins with a similar 
objective, didactic narrative tone in which neither the narrator nor the 
dedicatee appears in any significant way until 6,25 for the narrator, after 
60 lines of folio text, but for two faint premonitions, 70 and not until 9,8, 
after 160 lines of text, for the dedicatee, Rudolf II.

In addition, Tycho, in the early part of his objective, didactic narrative, 
brings up columns (5,19) and expensive pyramids (sumptnosissimae Pyra- 
mides; 5,22), which some memoriae causa ad posteros inscripsisse (5,21).

Celestial Offerings 143

The concern with memory is not in itself particularly revealing, but that it 
appears together with columns and pyramids suggests that it may relate 
more closely to Galileo’s preface. And to top it all off, the passage even be- 
gins with bine. 71Further, apropos of memory, there is another striking similarity to Ga- 
lileo’s preface where Tycho as narrator, in discussing the memoria and 
fama of Rudolf II, says that his will endure as long as the sun and stars will: 
“In addition, may your Imperial Majesty’s memory and fame, since they 
are so excellent and altogether the most important among worldly con- 
cerns, not be weighed down by the tasks of preserving, protecting, and 
promoting, and, for this reason, may they shine brightly and endure for all 
posterity, as long as the sun and stars remain.” 72 To be sure, this could eas- 
ily have been a common trope that any astronomer would have placed 
close to the front of his rhetorical arsenal, but I am not familiar with any 
other examples.

Finally, only when Tycho made the analogy between Rudolf’s memory 
and the celestial bodies, both of which would endure forever, did he first 
explicitly mention Rudolf. Similarly, Galileo compared the longevity of 
Cosimo’s fame to that of Jupiter and its satellites soon after his master first 
appeared in the text. But Tycho’s comparison was cast in general terms; he 
did not discuss any individual planet or Rudolf’s geniture.

To summarize, none of these themes, taken in isolation, would provide 
a strong argument for Galileo’s use of Tycho’s dedicatory letter as a model 
for the first part of his own; collectively, however, the similarities are sug- 
gestive enough to warrant serious consideration of the possibility. In addi- 
tion, the subject of Tycho’s work overall was instrument making, a central 
concern of Galileo’s during his Padua years. Indeed, Sidereus Nuncins 
would not have been possible without Galileo’s own significant improve- 
ment on a recent, epoch-making astronomical instrument, the telescope. 
This adds external support to my argument, in that it makes it likely that 
Galileo would have read Tycho’s book, published twelve years before, with 
close attention. 73

Galileo (2)Galileo (2)

Let us now return to Galileo’s preface to the Sidereus Nuncius: “But now, 
Most Serene Prince, we are able to augur truer and more felicitous things

144 H. Darrel Rutkin

for Your Highness, for scarcely have the immortal graces of your soul be- 
gun to shine forth on earth than bright stars offer themselves in the heav- 
ens which, like tongues, will speak of and celebrate your most excellent 
virtues for all times” (30-31). 74 In this opening section of part 2, Galileo’s 
narrator directly addresses Cosimo II for the first time. In this first passage, 
he describes the bright stars that have offered themselves like tongues, 
which will sing out his outstanding virtues (praestantissimas virtutes 75 
tuas) for all time (in omne tempus). The stars, which he has not yet de- 
scribed, have thus appeared and offered themselves just at the time when 
Cosimo ascended to the grand duchy. Biagioli calls this a fateful conjunc- 
ture. 76 Galileo thus begins to associate the stars with Cosimo, and in a 
manner that relates closely to the patterns set up at the end of the didactic 
first part of the dedicatory letter, where the stars and planets were associ- 
ated also with praising gods and heroes in euhemerist fashion and where 
we met a significant historical example of a failed attempt at such an 
association.In the next passage, Galileo gives us our first information about the stars 
themselves: “Behold, therefore, four stars reserved for your illustrious 
name, and not of the common sort and multitude of the less notable fixed 
stars, but of the illustrious order of wandering stars, which, indeed, make 
their journeys and orbits with a marvellous speed around the star of Ju- 
piter, the most noble of them all, with mutually different motions, like 
children of the same family, while meanwhile all together, in mutual har- 
mony, complete their great revolutions every twelve years about the center 
of the world, that is, about the sun itself” (31). 77 There are four stars 
and they circle around Jupiter, the most noble of the planets ( Stella . . . 
nobilissima) . Furthermore, these stars have been reserved for his glorious 
name ( tuo inclyto nomine reservata ). By whom they have been reserved is 
nowhere mentioned; we can only assume that it is by the Syderum Opifex 
of the following passage.

We should note also the long delay before Galileo has the narrator ac- 
tually mention what the gift is. Nevertheless, Galileo has not yet fully con- 
ditioned and personalized his gift for his intended patron; but he is almost 
there. First he set up the situation by educating Cosimo as to the ranks of 
gifts that may be given. Now he alludes to the gift, which he has almost 
completely finished preparing. Kepler, too, in his preface, delays for quite 
a long while the revelation of his planetary gift to his princely patron.

Celestial Offerings 145Celestial Offerings 145

Galileo as narrator then emphasizes his own not insignificant role as he 
provides the last preparation for our crucial passage: “Indeed, it appears 
that the Maker of the Stars himself, by clear arguments, admonished me 
to call these new planets by the illustrious name of Your Highness ( inclito 
Celsitudinis tuae nomini) before all others” (31). 78 Thus, none other than 
the maker of the stars himself has persuaded our narrator with crystal 
clear arguments (perspicuis argumentis ) that he should affix to these new 
planets Cosimo’s illustrious name. 79 Biagioli seems to have gotten Galileo’s 
role here as intermediary between God and Cosimo just right. 80 Further- 
more, Galileo has placed himself in the role of Augustus Caesar in so far 
as he attempted (albeit in vain) to honor his divine forebear with a stellar 
commemoration. Galileo even lets Cosimo know, however subtly, that he 
could well have given this supremely noble gift to some other patron.

What then are these crystal clear arguments ? Galileo presents the first 
as follows, and with a somewhat complex, highly rhetorical structure 
(3,19-33): “For as these stars, like the offspring worthy of Jupiter, never 
depart from his side except for the smallest distance, so who does not 
know the clemency, the gentleness of spirit, the agreeableness of manners, 
the splendor of the royal blood, the majesty in actions, and the breadth of 
authority and rule over others, all of which qualities have found a domi- 
cile and exaltation for themselves in Your Highness. Who, I say, does not 
know that all these emanate from the most benign star of Jupiter, after 
God the source of all good?” (31). 81Galileo here, at the beginning of the first perspicuous argument, associ- 
ates the spatial proximity of the new planets to Jupiter with the noble 
virtues that likewise surround Cosimo. He then further associates Cosimo 
with Jupiter by identifying those very virtues, which everyone knows Co- 
simo possesses, with the virtues that everyone also knows emanate 
precisely from Jupiter himself. Galileo uses a tamquam-ita construction 
for the basic simile, which he embellishes with a long two-part rhetorical 
question for the ita clause on Cosimo and his virtues. The rhetorical ques- 
tion is of the quis ignorat type. This is a very powerful form of rhetorical 
argument, for very few people will nod internal assent to a question such 
as: Who is so ignorant as to x? He repeats this question again within the 
same sentence for further emphasis as he identifies Cosimo’s virtues as 
those that indeed come from Jupiter. This passage, further, provides the 
sort of fulsome rhetoric that one would expect from a courtier. Indeed, this

146 H. Darrel Rutkin

sort of praise is what characterizes epideictic rhetoric, concerned as it is 
precisely with praise and blame, as we find in its classic definition. 82

With this twofold association of Cosimo with Jupiter and their associ- 
ated virtues and satellites, respectively, Galileo now presents the crux of 
his first argument and our crucial passage: “It was Jupiter, Jupiter I say, 83 
who at Your Highness’s birth, having already passed through the murky 
vapors of the horizon, and occupying the midheaven and illuminating the 
eastern angle from his royal house, looked down upon Your most fortu- 
nate birth from that sublime throne and poured out all his splendor and 
grandeur into the most pure air, so that with its first breath Your tender 
little body and Your soul, already decorated by God with noble orna- 
ments, could drink in this universal power and authority” (31-32). 84Galileo further emphasizes here the relationship between Cosimo and 
Jupiter developed in the first movement of this argument by means of the 
device of emphasizing the role of Jupiter in Cosimo II’s natal horoscope. 
Evidently Galileo drew up two horoscopes for Cosimo II: He drew the 
extant one, the one that is described in the text here and was published 
by Righini, on the back of one of his drawings of the mountains on our 
moon. 85 Furthermore, Galileo here associates Jupiter only with Cosimo II 
personally vis-a-vis his horoscope and not with any sort of Medicean 
dynastic imagery. 86 Indeed, the only mention whatsoever of Cosimo’s il- 
lustrious forebears occurs toward the very end of the preface, where the 
narrator explicitly states that he will remain silent about them (4, 12-15).

Galileo has thus, in a rhetorically emphatic way, associated Jupiter, and 
his own discoveries, with Cosimo’s natal horoscope, and thereby person- 
alized the gift for his patron. But then Galileo makes a rather odd rhetor- 
ical move, at least to my lights. He almost makes it a throwaway: “But why 
do I use probable arguments when I can deduce and demonstrate it from 
all but necessary reason?” (32). 87 The narrator makes this transition with 
his most prominent intrusion into the text as well — with three instances: 
a first-person personal pronoun (ego) and two first-person singular verbal 
forms (utor, queam); he also expresses it, once again, as a rhetorical ques- 
tion. But what is even more odd than the throwaway nature of the astro- 
logical crux is what he throws it away for. We might expect, indeed as we 
find in Kepler, that Galileo would turn from a conjectural astrological ar- 
gument to a certain astronomical argument of some sort. This relationship 
between astrology and astronomy concerning their relative certainty had

Celestial Offerings 147Celestial Offerings 147

been central to their disciplinary configuration already from the time of 
Ptolemy. 88 Further, the certitude of mathematics in general, including 
mathematical astronomy, was a central concern of sixteenth- and seven- 
teenth-century mathematicians and figured prominently in their justifica- 
tions for the epistemological superiority of their discipline in relation to 
the less certain but more powerful discipline of natural philosophy. 89

Contrary to this expectation, however, Galileo presents his necessary 
argument in providential, existential terms: for example, that it was evi- 
dently by divine inspiration that Galileo became Cosimo’s tutor and that 
it was under Cosimo’s auspices that Galileo made his astronomical dis- 
coveries. 90 Even though the particulars of this existential argument are not 
of central concern to us, the rhetorical structure of Galileo’s presentation 
of this astrological motif and then his abrupt turning away from it for a 
more certain form of demonstration certainly is of paramount interest in 
our attempt to ascertain Galileo’s use of his dedicatory predecessors.

KeplerKepler

Let us now turn to Kepler’s preface. Kepler, unlike Galileo, immediately 
provides a great deal of information toward setting the dramatic stage of 
his dedicatory letter: “Most August Emperor. In order that there be hap- 
piness and prosperity for the most serene Name of Your Holy Imperial 
Majesty and for the entire House of Austria, I am now finally, at long last, 
exhibiting for public view a most Noble Captive, who has long since been 
captured by me in a difficult and laborious war waged under Your Maj- 
esty’s auspices” (30). 91 In this first sentence, Kepler establishes his most 
important structures and themes: (1) his privileged reader, the dedicatee, 
the Most August Emperor, Rudolf II, whom he had just named above 
in the formal address. Then, in rapid succession, 92 he presents (3 a ) the 
narrator, Kepler’s dramatic personality for the purposes of this dedicatory 
letter, (3 b ) exhibiting (4) a noble captive, not yet defined, 93 (2) who is to 
be publicly viewed, that is, by a much broader audience in addition to 
the emperor.

As we saw, Galileo, in contrast, did not focus on the narrator nor on the 
dedicatee until well into his preface. Likewise, he did not mention the gift 
itself, except in the most allusive way, until rather far along in the preface. 
Kepler, on the other hand, although neither specific nor full of information,

148 H. Darrel Rutkin

at least points to his gift (albeit under cover) as a noble captive; he, too, 
holds off fully revealing the nature of the captive for quite a while as he art- 
fully builds up quite a good measure of rhetorical anticipation in the reader, 
spinning metaphor after playful metaphor on a martial theme. In retrospect 
we will be able to see that Kepler also dropped many hints as to where he 
was going.I would also like to note the explicitly public nature of Kepler’s exhibi- 
tion of the gift. He develops this theme further just below, and in a way that 
relates directly to Galileo’s model of public commemorations of the names 
and deeds of great men: 94 “The renown (celebritas) of this spectacle could 
not be greater than if I were to write a panegyric upon this most distin- 
guished captive, and proclaim it publicly” (30). 95 Here our narrator dis- 
cusses both composing and publicly proclaiming 96 an epideictic oration in 
praise of the captive to publicize the spectacle 97 in the most effective way 
possible. To be sure, although Kepler is not here making a contrast be- 
tween different types of commemorations, that is, between material and 
literary, he certainly is valuing a type of literary commemoration very 
highly indeed: panegyric oratory. 98

Kepler then turns to the second section of his preface, where he treats 
another type of literary composition, historiography, in quite a clever and 
rhetorically powerful way. Historiography, like panegyric, is also deeply 
concerned with commemorating both the names and deeds of great 
men. It is worthwhile to look at these passages in some depth: They de- 
velop the military theme further, and, more importantly, in a way that 
would appeal directly both to the emperor’s current grave concerns and 
to the deeper patterns of his mentality; their rhetorical presentation also 
is quite striking.Kepler as narrator now makes a segue to the historians’ treatment: “I 
therefore leave it to the writers of history books to describe the greatness 
of our Stranger, which he acquired in the art of war” (30). 99 He follows this 
introduction with two more-detailed passages, each of which begins with 
dicant and proceeds, in oratio obliqua, with hnnc esse . . . , where hunc 
refers to the noble captive. Dicant is, of course, in the subjunctive mood 
and indicates what the historians would say in Kepler’s hypothetical situ- 
ation. At the end of the two small historiographical paragraphs, the nar- 
rator then returns the spotlight to himself and thus to the primary level in 
the narrative.

Celestial Offerings 149

Let us now hear what these historians would say about the greatness of 
Kepler’s stranger:

They would certainly say that it is he through whom all armies conquer, all mil- 
itary leaders triumph, and all kings rule, without whose aid no one ever honorably 
took a single captive. Let them now feast their eyes with looking at him, captured 
through my martial effort ( meo Marte captum).

Those who admire Roman greatness would say that he is the begetter of the 
Kings Romulus and Remus, the preserver of the City, protector of the Citizens, 
Supporter of the Empire, by whose favor the Romans discovered military disci- 
pline, improved and perfected it, and subjugated the orb of the world. Let them 
therefore give thanks at his being confined and at his being acquired as a happy 
omen for the House of Austria. 100 (30-31)This captive is, then, he through whom ( hunc per quem ) all armies are 
victorious (onmes exercitus vincant ), all leaders in war triumph ( omnes 
belli duces triumph ent) and all kings rule ( omnes Reges imperent). In ad- 
dition to the fact that these three parallel structures reflect good rhetorical 
technique, they also directly address issues of central concern to the his- 
torical dedicatee at this particular, increasingly beleaguered moment in his 
long reign, which was soon to end. 101 Furthermore, by casting the captive 
as the preserver of the City [conservator em Urbis), protector of the Citi- 
zens ( protectorem Quiritium), and Supporter of the Empire (Statorem 
Imperii ), and as he by whose favor the Romans discovered, improved, and 
perfected military discipline and conquered the world, Kepler would be 
magnifying Rudolf’s interest in this gift to quite an extent. That Rudolf 
as Holy Roman Emperor considered himself heir to the Roman emperors 
would have further focused his desire in that he would have considered this 
gift, fashioned thus, as his own proper inheritance, and one that would be 
coming at a particularly propitious time (1608-9) in relation to both ex- 
ternal affairs (that ever present menace, the Turk) and internal (the deeply 
troubling situation with his brother Matthias). 102 Kepler, as one of Ru- 
dolf’s trusted advisers, would have known this very well. 103 As it turned 
out, Rudolf was forcibly relieved of his empire in May 161 1, 104 which 
presented its own set of difficult ramifications for Kepler’s career. 105

Furthermore, these military and political concerns would have been di- 
rectly connected to another central feature of Rudolf’s psyche: his intense 
interest in magic and the other occult sciences, including astrology and 
alchemy. 106 Indeed, Kepler seems to be shaping his gift to Rudolf as a sort 
of magical talisman, which he describes as having been a source of great

150 H. Darrel Rutkin150 H. Darrel Rutkin

power for the Romans and which would also, therefore, be so for Rudolf 
himself. That this power is also deeply astrological might further evoke a 
resonance in Kepler’s treatment with one of the most important genres of 
medieval prose literature, the mirror of princes, especially its most popu- 
lar representative, the pseudo- Aristotelian Secret of Secrets, which had as 
its most central secret precisely the use of astrologically charged talismans 
to achieve political ends. 107 Rudolf’s curiosity, piqued to such an intensity, 
would surely be wondering at this point what precisely Kepler had in 
mind; the imperial mathematician knew his patron very well indeed.After this hypothetical historical brief, the second form of commemora- 
tive rhetoric touched upon (along with panegyric), Kepler now turns to his 
more familiar domain of professional expertise. Here we meet our crucial 
passage. The rhetorical legerdemain here especially, but also throughout 
the preface more generally, seems to me worthy in many respects of Ci- 
cero’s finest performances. 108 Kepler now makes the transition from the 
historical section — and thus from the first, introductory part of the dedi- 
catory letter — into the main body of the preface. The narrator intrudes 
himself rather strongly into the text at this moment to pull the reader out 
of the historians’ rhetorical grasp and, now, back into his own. Ego me are 
the first two words: “I, for my part, retreat hence to other ground better 
suited to my powers. Nor will I make a stand in that part of my profession 
in which strife arises between me and my fellow soldiers” (31). 109 We can 
also see that Kepler continues to develop his military metaphor. We should 
also note that even though Kepler explicitly referred to Rudolf II immedi- 
ately at the start of the preface, he has not actually resurfaced overtly since 
the first four lines of the first paragraph. Nevertheless, Kepler has certainly 
done his best to keep Rudolf’s interest deeply engaged, as we have seen. 
He will reappear directly in the text proper, and in a rhetorically pow- 
erful manner guaranteed to continue keeping Rudolf’s attention fully 
captivated.So Kepler has moved from a discussion of historians to that of members 
of his own profession, which, as he says, is more suited to his own powers. 
He then immediately sets up two camps within his own discipline and pro- 
ceeds forthwith to present the views of his fellow metaphorical comrades 
in arms. We will note that he presents their views in much the same style 
as he presented the historians’ views: 110 “They, for their part, would 
surely rejoice with a different joy: he has been restrained by the bonds of

Celestial Offerings 151

Calculation, who, so often escaping their hands and eyes, was accustomed 
to deliver vain prophecies of the greatest moment, concerning War, Victory, 
Empire, Military Greatness, Civil Authority, Sport, and even the cutting 
off or calling forth of Life itself” (31). 111 Here Kepler begins the narrator’s 
presentation of the astrologers. He treats here again certain of the themes 
and the language of the passage on the historians: the prognostications are 
made de Bello, de Victoria, de Imperio, de Dignitate militari. Moreover, in 
the opening moment of our crucial passage, Kepler uses exactly the same 
verb in exactly the same form — gratulentur (8,3) — to introduce the horo- 
scope passage, just as he did to end the historical (7,30), thus further ty- 
ing the two sections together.The second movement presents us with our crucial passage: “Let them 
congratulate Your Majesty that the lord of Your geniture has been brought 
under control and even made to be friendly, for by their account Mars rules 
Scorpio, which has the Heart of Heaven [i.e., the midheaven]; in Capri- 
corn, which is rising, he is exalted; in Cancer, into which the moon has en- 
tered, he customarily plays the triangular game with knucklebones; 112 in 
Leo, where the Sun plays host, he is recognized as being one of the family; 
and finally, he is the ruler of Aries, beneath whose power Germany is sup- 
posed to be, over which he rules in complete harmony with Your Holy 
Imperial Majesty” (31 ). 113 In this discussion of Rudolf’s nativity Kepler 
finally identifies the noble captive for the first time. 114 But what is even 
more important for our purposes is the way that Kepler, even if not in the 
narrator’s own voice, 115 associates Mars with Rudolf’s nativity. Indeed, 
he has personalized his gift to Rudolf by the device of discussing certain 
features of Rudolf’s horoscope 116 in a way that is strikingly similar to, but 
by no means identical with, the way that Galileo will also do so a scant six 
months later. This is not the only similarity, however, as we shall see just 
below.

But before we examine these other important similarities, we should 
first look more closely at the details of the different ways that Kepler and 
Galileo related their respective planetary gifts to their respective patrons. 
How, particularly, does Kepler relate his gift of Mars to Rudolf’s nativity? 
He says that the (hypothetical) astrologers will congratulate him (Rudolf) 
that the lord of his geniture has been returned into his power (brought un- 
der control) and even made friendly. 117 Determining the lord of the geni- 
ture, that is, the planet that “rules” the horoscope overall, and thus the

152 H. Darrel Rutkin152 H. Darrel Rutkin

native himself, is one of the most important procedures used in interpret- 
ing a horoscope. The procedure itself is based on a series of simple calcu- 
lations meant to determine the overall strengths and weaknesses (dignities 
and debilities) of each planet. These strengths and weaknesses are mea- 
sured, based essentially on where each planet falls in a chart — what sign 
and house it is in and also what angular relationship it bears with its 
fellow planets — and also, as in Kepler’s treatment of Rudolf’s chart, on 
which planet rules the sign of the ascendent and the midheaven. The planet 
that acquires the largest relative score is thus determined the lord of the 
geniture, the ruling planet of the nativity overall. 118Indeed, Kepler’s treatment of Rudolf’s horoscope centers completely on 
his establishing the fact that Mars — his gift, after all — is indeed also the 
lord of Rudolf’s geniture. He works to establish this important fact by enu- 
merating five positive features that Mars has in Rudolf’s chart: (1) Mars 
rules Scorpio, which is in the midheaven; 119 (2) Mars is exalted in Capri- 
corn, which is Rudolf’s rising sign; 120 (3 ) Mars, which rules Scorpio, is thus 
in a trine (120°) relationship to Rudolf’s Moon, which is in Cancer; 121 (4) 
Mars, which also rules Aries, 122 a fire sign, is in a familial relationship with 
the Sun, which rules Teo, another fire sign, that is, they are both members 
of the fiery triplicity, along with Sagittarius. 123 Finally (5) Mars rules Aries, 
and Aries is the sign that rules Germany; thus both Rudolf and Aries co- 
rule Germany together in harmony. 124 I must note at this point one very 
conspicuous absence from Kepler’s presentation of some of the details of 
Rudolf’s horoscope: He has somehow neglected to mention one minor de- 
tail, that is, where the planet Mars actually is in Rudolf’s nativity! True 
enough, his first two points are indeed strong indicators for the influence 
of Mars as lord of Rudolf’s geniture, but his failure to mention where 
Mars actually was points rather strongly toward a rhetorical cover-up. But 
Kepler is not interested in presenting a complete and accurate picture of 
Rudolf’s nativity, warts and all. He has a well-conceived rhetorical strat- 
egy in which Mars plays a leading role in both his own researches and in 
their presentation to Rudolf; both then interconnect in this rhetorically 
conditioned representation of Rudolf’s nativity.Galileo uses a rather different approach, and here, perhaps, we might 
catch him red-handed in the act of astrologico-literary variatio. Galileo 
had better luck than Kepler, since the astrological details of his patron’s 
geniture corresponded precisely with his rhetorical intentions. Jupiter was

Celestial Offerings 1S3

perfectly placed in Cosimo’s horoscope for Galileo’s purposes: in the mid- 
heaven. 125 Galileo points to only this one significant feature of Cosimo’s 
nativity — and with a bright rhetorical spotlight — which he then describes 
with colorful rhetorical adornment as pouring forth his benevolent in- 
fluences on Cosimo’s tender newborn body ( tenerum corpusculum) at the 
same time as God provided Cosimo’s soul. 126

Nevertheless, even though Kepler and Galileo constructed their astro- 
logical devices rather differently, the similarities — that they both person- 
alized their epoch-making planetary gifts to their respective patrons by 
means of a rhetorically conditioned astrological device that related their 
respective gifts to important features of their patrons’ respective nativi- 
ties — are far more significant than the comparatively minor rhetorico- 
astrological variatio.

With respect to Rudolf’s nativity, once again, we should also note that 
it is precisely in this passage that Rudolf also reappears explicitly in the 
text for the first time since the opening paragraph. What then is the nar- 
rative structure into which Kepler has so effectively led us? The narrator 
does not narrate this astrological passage in his own voice, the emphatic ego 
me notwithstanding. It is HH — the astrologers — who would rejoice (in the 
subjunctive, gaudeant ) and who would congratulate (gratulentur) Rudolf 
for realizing these specific features of his birth chart.The narrator then leads us back from where he had taken us, back, that 
is, to his own primary narrative voice: “Let them be occupied in this part 
of the triumph; I do not mind. I shall give them no cause for quarreling on 
such a festive day: let this impertinence pass as a soldiers’ joke. I myself 
shall occupy myself with Astronomy, and, riding in the triumphal chariot, 
will display the remaining glory of our captive, which is known particu- 
larly to me, and every aspect of the war, as it was waged and completed” 
(3 1 ). 127 Having thus presented their views, he then distances himself from 
his hypothetical copractitioners: “Let the astrologers have that part of the 
triumph.” In this way, Kepler skillfully moves the rhetorical structure of the 
narrative forward from the different ways that the captive could be praised 
(i.e., by historians and astrologers) to the particular way that Kepler will 
in fact do so. At the same time, Kepler also thickens the play on the mili- 
tary theme 128 by describing himself and his professional fellow soldiers as 
all participating in a triumph. Triumphs, which were central to Roman 
military pageantry in both the Republic and the Empire, were hardly only

154 H. Darrel Rutkin

of antiquarian interest by Rudolf’s time. Indeed, triumphs a Vantique had 
become central to early modern ceremonial displays of power, especially 
since the time of the Emperor Charles V, as Roy Strong has brought out so 
vividly. 129After this brief transitional aside, however, Kepler turns to his main 
point: Ipse ad Astronomiam vertar, curruque triumphali invectus (8,13). 
Kepler now portrays himself playfully as the Triumphator himself, but 
with the important courtier’s caveat, as he emphasized before — but not 
now — that he waged the war under Rudolf’s patronal auspices (7,8-9). He 
will now reveal the rest of his captive’s glory, which is known especially to 
him. Kepler here sets up the same type of special relationship between 
Rudolf and his noble captive as did Galileo with Cosimo II and Jupiter’s 
stars, that of a privileged mediator.

Indeed, Kepler then immediately invokes the aeternus mundi huius 
arcbitectus, communisque Siderum Hominumque Pater ]ova (8,16-17), 
much like Galileo’s invocation of the Syderum Opifex (3,18), but we shall 
not follow him any further in his splendid rhetorical performance. Let us 
rather look in detail at what he has just done and compare it with Galileo’s 
strikingly similar use of the very same literary device and examine also his 
use of a very similar structural presentation.Kepler turns from astrology to astronomy, but not without first associ- 
ating his noble captive, his scholarly gift, with the details of Rudolf’s na- 
tivity, exactly as Galileo does with Cosimo II’s. At the same time, however, 
he distances himself from this very same astrological approach by the nar- 
rative technique of having the narrator not describe the astrological sit- 
uation in propria persona, but rather by having him present it “as the 
astrologers would say,” using the subjunctive mood. No one should be 
deceived by what Kepler does here. He employs a very effective rhetorical 
device, praeteritio, to create an effect much like the one whereby the ora- 
tor says that he is not going to do something, and in the process of saying 
that he is not going to do it actually does what he said he was not going to 
do: in this case, provide an astrological interpretation that would link 
the noble captive, Mars, to the emperor’s nativity. 130 Cicero often made 
this sort of move in his courtroom oratory.

In addition to this rhetorical and narratological distancing, Kepler also 
moves away from the astrological association of his gift with Rudolf II in 
a structure that is exactly parallel to the way in which Galileo makes the

Celestial Offerings 155Celestial Offerings 155

same kind of transition. They both personalize their gifts for their patrons 
by means of their patrons’ horoscopes; then they both turn away from this 
device to pursue rhetorical strategies that they both consider more power- 
ful. Kepler turns from astrology to astronomy, which is where he will play 
his role in the triumph; but he also graciously permits the astrologers their 
place, however less exalted. Galileo, on the other hand — and here, I think, 
we can catch him once again in the act of literary variatio — makes the 
same structural move as Kepler, also distancing himself from the astrolog- 
ical argument, which Galileo characterized as a conjectural type of argu- 
ment, by moving to a necessary argument, albeit of a very different stripe 
than Kepler’s. Galileo’s move, then, is similar in structure to Kepler’s, not 
only in the movement away from astrology per se, but also in the move- 
ment away from a conjectural art (as astrology is) to a necessary or certain 
art (as mathematical astronomy is). But Galileo’s necessary argument in 
the preface decidedly does not proceed from mathematico-astronomical 
bases, even though the content of the work overall is solidly based on ob- 
servational astronomy. His argument proceeds from more circumstantial 
and existential considerations, specifically, that God had established him 
as Cosimo’s tutor, on the one hand, and, on the other, that he had discov- 
ered the satellites of Jupiter very soon after Cosimo became grand duke, 
thus establishing the certainty — rhetorical, at any rate — of his argument. 
This would be Galileo’s literary transformation (variatio) of Kepler’s con- 
tent and structure, if I am correct in the overall thrust of my argument, that 
is, that Galileo did indeed borrow and adapt this material from Kepler’s 
Astronomia Nova. In fine, the similarity in content and structure of 
Galileo’s use of an astrological device to link his astronomical gift to 
Cosimo II is so strikingly similar to Kepler’s that it is hard to believe that 
this was a historical accident.Chronological Considerations

If we now consider the chronological circumstances of the composition 
and publication of these two works, we will find that they definitely allow 
for the historical possibility of my argument. Certain circumstances push 
this possibility further into the realm of plausibility. The internal evidence 
from the dedicatory letters themselves provides further weight. Whatever 
the historical situation actually was, however, it is striking that both

156 H. Darrel Rutkin

Galileo and Kepler used extraordinarily similar astrological motifs in pre- 
senting their works to their respective absolute princes.

It is difficult to find precise information on the publication and imme- 
diate reception of Astronomia Nova 131 beyond the well-known fact that 
Kepler had still not received it back from the printer by 1 September 1609, 
even though it had apparently reached the Frankfurt book fair by that 
point. 132 Evidently there were difficulties both in the publication and the 
distribution, with Kepler ultimately selling the stock of the small print run 
to the printer himself. 133 There is, however, some interesting evidence in 
Kepler’s letters (both to and from him) that provides very helpful, precise 
information concerning the earliest reception of Astronomia Nova. We 
shall find this very useful indeed for our purposes.

Our first bit of evidence overall, and our terminus post quem, is Kepler’s 
letter to Thomas Harriot (September 1, 1609), where we find that the 
book is for sale at the Frankfurt book fair, but that Kepler does not yet 
have a copy. It appeared in the catalogue for the Fall book fair. 134In a letter of September 25, 1609, from the rector, chancellor and doc- 
tors of the University of Tubingen, Kepler’s beloved alma mater, we get our 
first evidence for the actual reception of Astronomia Nova. They wrote a 
very friendly letter about having received the book that day in which they 
confirm that they immediately dispatched a remittance of the five-ducat 
price. 135

Our second piece of evidence for the reception and our first evidence for 
an actual reader comes from a letter of December 3, 1609, from Nicholas 
Vicke to Kepler. 136 He found part of the Astronomia Nova difficult to un- 
derstand, so he made a somewhat detailed query to Kepler, the details of 
which do not concern us.

Martin Horky’s letter of January 12, 1610, provides our third piece of 
unambiguous 137 evidence for the reception of Astronomia Nova, although 
it appears unlikely that he actually read it. Horky wrote from Bologna, 
where, after much travel, he was currently staying with Giovanni Antonio 
Magini. While there, he was able to see a copy, 138 most likely the same copy 
about which Magini wrote three days later.

Our last and most important piece of evidence, for both reception and 
reading, comes from Magini himself, also from Bologna, dated January 
15, 1610. 139 The volume he saw was brought to Bologna from Venice for 
a nobleman by a Bolognese bookseller. Magini examined it quickly, dur-

Celestial Offerings 157

ing the one day that he had access to it. He also discusses a problem he 
found in the Astronomia Nova, the details of which, once again, do not 
concern us. But having solid evidence that Magini, professor of mathe- 
matics at Bologna, had access to the Astronomia Nova, in Bologna, by 
January 15, 1610, certainly does concern us, as we shall see in some detail 
below.Galileo’s side of the historical equation, on the other hand, is much bet- 
ter known. 140 During the composition and publication of the Siderens 
Nuncius, Galileo was living and working in Padua, where he had been a 
professor of mathematics at the university for almost twenty years (from 
1592). We have good evidence that Galileo turned his new, improved tele- 
scope 141 from a military 142 to an astronomical purpose sometime in the au- 
tumn of 1609. 143 He first paid most attention to the irregular surface of 
our moon; 144 soon after, on January 7, 1610, with a telescope that magni- 
fied thirty times, he discovered the satellites of Jupiter: “By 15 January at 
the latest he had the solution . . . : Jupiter had four moons!” 145 By January 
30, he had composed Sidereus Nuncius and gone to Venice to have it pub- 
lished. 146 It was only “after February 13,” however, that he fashioned the 
satellites of Jupiter into Medicean stars. Sidereus Nuncius was published 
in early March 1610. The last observation was dated March 2. 147 The ded- 
icatory letter was dated March 12, 1610. On the next day he sent an un- 
bound copy to the Tuscan court with a letter. Finally, on March 19 he sent 
off a properly bound copy in company with the very telescope he had used 
to make his epoch-making discoveries. 148The only external evidence I know of for Galileo’s having access to As- 
tronomia Nova is circumstantial; it is not, however, insignificant. 149 
Padua, where Galileo had lived and worked for almost twenty years, was, 
of course, the main university for the Venetian Republic, with the city of 
Venice itself one of the major centers of book production and trade. 150 Fur- 
ther, considering that Kepler was probably the most famous mathe- 
matician/astronomer in all of Europe at that time, 151 it would be highly 
probable that Galileo would have had at least some access to Kepler’s 
work. We know that Galileo had known of Kepler’s work since at least 
1597, when Kepler sent him a copy of Mysterium Cosmograpbicum, to 
the substance of which Galileo apparently never replied. 152 Galileo un- 
doubtedly knew about Astronomia Nova by late April 1610, upon receiv- 
ing Kepler’s reply to the Sidereus Nuncius. 153 One piece of possibly useful

158 H. Darrel Rutkin

positive evidence (although by itself not very strong) comes from Galileo’s 
letter to Giuliano de Medici, Florentine resident ambassador at Prague, 154 
dated October 1, 1610. Galileo requests that Giuliano procure for him 
two of Kepler’s works mentioned in Kepler’s personal letter to Galileo, 
dated April 19, 1610, just before the Dissertatio cum nuncio sidereo was 
published: the De Stella nova (1606) and the Optica (1604), 155 to which 
he stated he did not then have access. 156 We can reasonably infer that 
Galileo did not also ask in the same letter for the Astronomia Nova be- 
cause he already had access to it by then (October 1610); on the basis of 
this evidence we cannot speculate soundly any further. Perhaps he had ac- 
cess to it much earlier — that is, at some time after September 1, 1609 — 
and perhaps not. Favaro notes that Galileo did indeed possess a copy of 
Astronomia Nova at some point, but he provides no indication as to when 
Galileo had it, or if he annotated it. 157But if Magini — professor of mathematics at the University of Bolo- 
gna — had access to Astronomia Nova by January 15, 1610, in Bologna, 
it seems to me even more likely that Galileo — professor of mathemat- 
ics at the University of Padua — would also have had access to it at that 
time in Venice, especially since the Bologna copy had itself been brought 
there from Venice. Likewise, Galileo would almost certainly have known 
of Astronomia Nova earlier from its advertisement in the general cata- 
logue of the fall 1609 Frankfurt book fair, 158 where it had been for sale 
since at least September 1, 1609. We know, further, that Galileo was 
keenly interested in Kepler’s response to his own Sidereus Nuncius. In this 
light, it seems rather likely that Galileo, during the prior six months, 
would have had some rather intense interest in Kepler’s most recent work, 
which promised nothing less than a new astronomy.

The combined weight of this admittedly circumstantial evidence makes 
it highly likely that Galileo both knew about and had access to Astrono- 
mia Nova at the time he wrote his dedicatory letter to the Sidereus Nun- 
cius. Indeed, the internal evidence from the dedicatory letters themselves 
seems to be the strongest evidence that Galileo did have access to, and ac- 
tually read, Astronomia Nova between September 1, 1609, and March 12, 
1610. But perhaps this motif of associating an astronomical discovery, or 
something else for that matter, with a dedicatee’s horoscope was common 
in early modern dedicatory letters. 159 Kepler mentions astrology in several 
of his pre-1609 prefaces, 160 but there is no mention whatsoever of a pa-

Celestial Offerings 159Celestial Offerings 159

tron’s horoscope, besides the De Stella nova of 1606, which I discussed 
above. At any rate, the De Stella nova, apparently, could not have been a 
model for Galileo’s Sidereus Nuncius because as late as October 1610, as 
we saw, he claims that he did not yet have access to it in Padua or Venice. 
Tycho also discusses astrology in some of his prefaces, but again with no 
reference to a patron’s horoscope.

Indeed, it might even be more striking to find out, especially in lieu of any 
examples to the contrary, that Galileo had in fact not had access to the As- 
tronomia Nova before the composition and publication of Sidereus Nun- 
cius; that somehow he and Kepler both came up with an extraordinarily 
similar astrological device employing distinctive structural similarities and 
yet in complete and utter ignorance of each other’s work. This would be very 
striking indeed, however unlikely, and points to the need to investigate fur- 
ther the dedicatory letters of early modern writings, scientific and otherwise. 
Be the precise details of the actual historical situation as they may, we are left 
with the singular fact that these two epoch-making works in the history of 
astronomy used prominent astrological devices of essentially similar content 
and structure in the dedicatory letters to their princely patrons.

Acknowledgments

My thanks to Mario Biagioli and Robert Westman for their helpful an- 
swers to inquiries, to Daniel Stolzenberg for the title, and especially to 
Domenico Bertoloni-Meli and the editors of this volume for their careful 
reading and insightful criticism.

NotesNotes

1. Inter (multa) alia, for Kepler: Alexandre Koyre, The Astronomical Revolution: 
Copernicus-Kepler-Borelli, trans. R. E. W. Maddison (New York: Dover, 1992), 
119ff.; for Galileo: Galileo Galilei, Sidereus Nuncius or the Sidereal Messenger, 
trans. with introduction, conclusion, and notes by Albert van Helden (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1989), intro., vii-viii.

2. Mario Biagioli, Galileo Courtier: The Practice of Science in an Age of Abso- 
lutism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993). See also Nicholas Jardine’s 
review essay, “A Trial of Galileo’s,” Isis, 85 (1994): 279-83.

3. Especially in chap. 1, “Galileo’s Self-Fashioning,” 11-101.

4. See also Richard S. Westfall, “Science and Patronage: Galileo and the Tele- 
scope,” Isis, 76 (1985): 11-30 at 14-16.

1 60 H. Darrel Rutkin

5. Biagioli, Galileo Courtier, 127-33.

6. Ibid., 1-10; cf. also Robert S. Westman, “The Astronomer’s Role in the Six- 
teenth Century: A Preliminary Study,” History of Science, 18 (1980): 105-47.

7. Biagioli Galileo Courtier, esp. 106-12. Cf. Michael H. Shank, “Galileo’s Day 
in Court,” Journal for the History of Astronomy, 25 (1994): 236-43; Mario Bia- 
gioli, “Playing with the Evidence,” Early Science and Medicine, 1 (1996): 70-105; 
Michael H. Shank, “How Shall We Practice History? The Case of Mario Biagioli’s 
Galileo Courtier Early Science and Medicine, 1 (1996): 106-50, esp. 110-40. 
For another perspective, see Horst Bredekamp, Florentiner Fuflball. Die Renais- 
sance der Spiele: Calcio als Feste der Medici (Frankfurt: Campus, 1985).

8. Specifically, 130; at 36-54 Biagioli reconstructs the cultural context of gift ex- 
change in early modern Europe. See also Karl Schottenloher, Die Wid- 
mungsvorrede im Buch des 16. Jahrhunderts (Munster: Aschendorf, 1953), 194. 
Westfall, “Science and Patronage,” 22 and 26 speaks in these terms as well.9. I am unaware of any such discussion in the secondary literature; cf. Galileo, 
Siderius Nuncius; Galileo Galilei, Le Messager Celeste, ed. and trans. Isabelle Pan- 
tin (Paris: Belles lettres, 1992); Biagioli, Galileo Courtier.

10. I have yet to find any prior examples; the authors I have examined so far are 
discussed below.

11. See Victor E. Thoren, The Lord of Uraniborg: A Biography of Tycho Brahe 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), index, s. v. “astrology.”

12. Indeed, a question on the astrological impact of a new star took him away 
from his alchemical work, as he describes in a different preface — to De nova Stella, 
1573 (Tychonis Brahe Dani opera omnia, ed. J. L. E. Dreyer, 15 vols. [Copen- 
hagen: Gyldendal, 1913-29], 1:9, 27-31). For Tycho as an alchemist, see, in ad- 
dition to Thoren, The Lord of Uraniborg, Alain P. Segonds, “Tycho Brahe et 
l’Alchimie,” in J.-C. Margolin and Sylvain Matton, eds., Alchimie et Philosophie 
d la Renaissance (Paris: J. Vrin, 1993), 365-78.

13. Galileo Literator is well known; cf., e.g., Leonardo Olschki, “Galileo’s Liter- 
ary Formation,” in E. McMullin, ed., Galileo: Man of Science (New York: Basic 
Books, 1967), 140-59. For Kepler, see Anthony Grafton, “Humanism and Science 
in Rudolphine Prague: Kepler in Context,” in his Defenders of the Text: The Tra- 
ditions of Scholarship in an Age of Science, 1450-1 800 (Cambridge: Harvard Uni- 
versity Press, 1991), 178-203.

14.1 should note that I will not discuss in this chapter the important topic of Kep- 
ler’s and Galileo’s actual views about, and practice of, astrology; see J. V. Field, 
“A Lutheran Astrologer: Johannes Kepler,” Archive for History of Exact Sciences, 
31 (1984): 189-272; and G. Simon, Kepler Astronome Astrologue (Paris: Galli- 
mard, 1979). The situation with Galileo is less well known and perhaps more com- 
plex; see, e.g., Galileo, Le Messager Celeste, n. 22 (53-54). I am currently engaged 
in research on this most interesting topic.15. Considering the importance of this literary genre for both literary and his- 
torical concerns, it seems surprisingly understudied. I found Schottenloher, Die 
Widmungsvorrede, and Robert S. Westman, “Proof, Poetics, and Patronage: 
Copernicus’s Preface to De revolutionibus in D. C. Lindberg and R. S. Westman,

Celestial Offerings 161

eds., Reappraisals of the Scientific Revolution (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1990), 167-205, the most useful. Cf. also Kevin Dunn, Pretexts of Author- 
ity: The Rhetoric of Authorship in the Renaissance Preface (Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 1994); Jean Dietz Moss, Novelties in the Heavens: Rhetoric and 
Science in the Copernican Controversy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1993); and Biagioli, Galileo Courtier, 128-32. Furthermore, with respect to the 
study of prefatory matter in scientific works by historians of science, even Asger 
Aaboe admits that much may be learned from a nuanced appreciation thereof; see 
his comments in R. Palter, ed., The Annus Mirabilis of Sir Isaac Newton, 1666- 
1966 (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1970), 86-87.

16. Cf. Schottenloher, Die Widmungsvorrede, 2 and 4.

17. Schottenloher’s first chapter in Die Widmungsvorrede, “Die Widmungs- 
vorrede als Humanistisch-Literarisch Erscheinung,” 1-4, provides basic 
information on the structure of dedicatory letters, based on his extensive 
acquaintance with the printed book of the sixteenth century. His emphatic introduc- 
tory statement is well worth heeding:Wer sich viel mit dem Schrifttum des 16. Jahrhunderts beschaftigt, begegnet auf 
Schritt und Tritt der Widmungsvorrede, die in den meisten Schriften der eigentlichen 
Veroffentlichung wie ein Herold vorausgeht und diese in Gestalt eines erlauternden 
Briefes ankiindigt, dariiber aber hinaus mit alien moglichen Mitteilungen ihre eigene 
Wege geht und damit eine gewisse Selbststandigkeit erlangt. Sie kehrt so haufig 
wieder und hat so ausgepragte Formen, dal? sie als standige Zugabe des damaligen 
Buches, ja mit ihrem haufig recht bedeutsamen Inhalt als selbststandige literarische 
Erscheinung des 16. Jahrhunderts mit eigenen Lebensgesetzen bezeichnet werden 
kann und damit unsere voile Aufmerksamkeit verdient. (1)

18. Cf. Schottenloher, Die Widmungsvorrede, 194.

19. For a stimulating, sophisticated discussion of the dialogue in the Renaissance, 
see Virginia Cox, The Renaissance Dialogue: Literary Dialogue in Its Social and 
Political Contexts, Castiglione to Galileo (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1992).

20. Schottenloher, Die Widmungsvorrede, 2; see also Paul Grendler, Schooling in 
Renaissance Italy: Literacy and Learning, 1300-1 600 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1989), esp. chap. 8, “Rhetoric,” 203-34. I subscribe to Brian 
Vickers’s further refinement, which applies perfectly as well to dedicatory letters 
(Brian Vickers, “Epideictic Rhetoric in Galileo’s Dialogo,” Annali dell’Istituto e 
Museo di Storia della Scienza di Firenze, 8 [1983]: 69-102 at 70): “‘Form’ is not 
quite enough, however, as an analytic concept. We must also distinguish ‘mode.’ 
The form or genre is obviously the dialogue [epistle] . . . but within this form the 
mode is that of epideictic rhetoric, the techniques of praise and blame.”21. Schottenloher, Die Widmungsvorrede, 2: “Sie (sc. die Widmungsvorrede) 
kann die eigentliche Veroffentlichung erlautern und begriinden”; and it can show 
“seine Stellungnahme zu wissenschaftlichen Fragen.” This applies closely to 
Copernicus’s dedicatory letter to De rev.

22. Schottenloher does not discuss this beyond referring in general terms to the 
possibilities of the genre. Epideictic as a rhetorical/literary genre is much more

1 62 H. Darrel Rutkin

characteristic of the Roman Empire, especially the Second Sophistic (2nd century 
C.E.), than of the Roman Republic, where forensic and deliberative oratory held 
the field; for our period, see Vickers, “Epideictic Rhetoric,” 69-102, esp. 71-77, 
where he provides a useful history and a rich bibliography.

23. Of the dedicatory letters Kepler wrote before that for Astronomia Nova 
(1609), those for the Ad Vitellionem paralipomena (1604) and the De Stella nova 
(1606) fit this description most closely. The dedicatory letter to De fundamentis as- 
trologiae certioribus (1602) fits somewhat less well, in that it is a defense, after a 
fashion, of what Kepler intends to do in the treatise, but the narrative structure is 
not as straightforward. That for Mysterium Cosmograpbicum ( 1596), on the other 
hand, is more a small, elaborate essay than a defense speech — yet another “mode” 
perhaps. There is nothing straightforward, however, in Kepler’s highly elaborate 
prose style in the dedicatory letters.

24. E.g., Myst. Cosm. 8,16; Ad Vit. par. 7,35; De Stella nova, 151,11.

25. Nor that by Tycho.

26. See e.g., Westfall, “Science and Patronage”; Westman, “The Astronomer’s 
Role” and “Proof, Poetics, and Patronage”; and Biagioli, Galileo Courtier. Schot- 
tenloher, Die Widmungsvorrede, also has much of interest; see 175, 195 and 
chap. 5, “Widmungsempfanger,” and 6, “Widmungen und Mazenatentum” (177- 
194, passim).

27. See Schottenloher, Die Widmungsvorrede, 3, 194-96.27. See Schottenloher, Die Widmungsvorrede, 3, 194-96.

28. Roy Strong, Splendor at Court: Renaissance Spectacle and the Theater of 
Power (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1973). Schottenloher develops this public side 
of the dedicatory letters at some length in Die Widmungsvorrede, 1-3.

29. For stimulating comment, see Westman, “Proof, Poetics, and Patronage.”

30. See Westfall, “Science and Patronage,” 15-16. Cosimo became grand duke in 
February 1609.

31. I use Pantin’s Latin text (Galileo, Le Messager Celeste) and her very useful 
notes. Also helpful is Van Helden’s English translation (Galileo, Siderius Nuncius) 
with introductory and supplementary essays.

32. I have found it useful to analyze these dedicatory letters as a species of narra- 
tive. For a brief exposition of narrative theory with further bibliography, see John 
J. Winkler, Auctor and Actor: A Narratological Reading of Apuleius’s Golden Ass 
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1985).

33. “Serenissimo/Cosmo Medices II./Magno Haetruriae/Duci IIII.” (2,1-4).

34. “D. Rudolpho II./Romanorum Imperatori Semper Augusto./Germaniae, 
Hungariae, Bohemiae &c. Regi./Archiduci Austriae &c.” (7,1-4). References to 
Kepler’s Latin texts are to Johannes Kepler Gesammelte Werke (Munich: C. H. 
Beck, 1937-). Astronomia Nova is in vol. 3.

35. “Augustissime Imperator.”

36. “S ae . C“. M tis . V ae . (Sacrae Caesareae Maiestatis Vestrae)” (7,6); “M tis . V ae .” 
(7,7); “M tis . V“.” (7,9).

37. I follow Van Helden’s translation for the most part, sometimes with noted, 
sometimes with silent changes.

Celestial Offerings 1 63

38. “Praeclarum sane, atque humanitatis plenum eorum fuit institutum, qui 
excellentium virtute virorum res praeclare gestas ab invidia tutari, eorumque 
immortalitate digna nomina ab oblivione atque interim vindicare conati sunt” 
(2,5-8).

39. With one, very minor exception, as we will see below.

40. See Westman, “Proof, Poetics, and Patronage.”39. With one, very minor exception, as we will see below.

40. See Westman, “Proof, Poetics, and Patronage.”

41. This less didactic tone seems appropriate, too, given the historical actors’ rel- 
ative ages and statures. The situations are very different.

42. This is probably meant to refer to obelisks, as often in the sixteenth century.

43. This is a slight overtranslation of the Latin nt inquit ille; I discuss this poetic 
allusion below.

44. “Hinc ad memoriam posteritatis proditae Imagines, vel marmore insculptae, 
vel ex aere fictae; hinc positae Statuae tarn pedestres, quam equestres; hinc Colum- 
narum, atque Pyramidum, ut inquit ille, sumptus ad Sydera ducti; hinc denique 
urbes aedificatae, eorumque insignitae nominibus, quos grata posteritas aeterni- 
tati commendandos existimavit” (2,8-13).

45. “Eiusmodi est enim humanae mentis conditio, ut nisi assiduis rerum simu- 
lacris in earn extrinsecus irrumpentibus pulsetur, omnis ex ilia recordatio facile ef- 
fluat” (2,13-15).

46. “Verum alii firmiora, ac diuturniora spectantes, aeternum summorum viro- 
rum praeconium non saxis, ac metallis, sed Musarum custodiae, et incorruptis lit- 
terarum monumentis consecrarunt” (2,16-18).

47. It should be noted that signa can also refer to physical memorials.

48. In a fine chiastic structure.

49. “Quasi vero humana solertia his contenta regionibus, ulterius progredi non sit 
ausa; attamen longius ilia prospiciens, cum optime intelligeret omnia humana 
monumenta vi, tempestate, ac vetustate tandem interire, incorruptiora signa ex- 
cogitavit, in qua Tempus edax atque invidiosa Vetustas nullum sibi ius vindicaret” 
(2,19-24; the first set of brackets in the translation is Van Helden’s).

50. ut inquit ille is all Galileo wrote.50. ut inquit ille is all Galileo wrote.

51. Neither Pantin nor Van Helden discusses the significance of the quotation nor 
its placement at this point in the narrative. Pantin simply gives a reference in 
her note ad loc. to a passage of Propertius: “Properce, 111,2,17” (51, n. 11). Van 
Helden gives a slightly fuller reference and then quotes a relevant passage (lines 19- 
26) in translation (29, n. 6).

52. This would require checking contemporary editions for the allusions and ref- 
erences therein, etc., as Westman (“Proof, Poetics, and Patronage,” 182ff.) did so 
effectively in discussing Copernicus’s unacknowledged use of Horace’s Ars Poetica 
in the dedicatory letter to De rev.

53. The textual references are to Sexti Properti Elegiarum Libri IV, ed. Paulus 
Fedeli (Stuttgart: B. G. Teubner, 1984). The translation, with minor modifications, 
comes from Propertius, The Poems, trans. Guy Lee (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1994), 73-74.

164

H. Darrel Rutkin

54. “Neither the expense of Pyramids raised to the stars/”

55. “Though my house is not supported on Taenarian columns/”

56. “Still the Muses befriend me, my songs are dear to readers / And Calliope un- 
wearied by my dances. / Lucky you, the girl who is celebrated in my book; / Each 
song will be a monument to your beauty.”

57. “Or flame or rain will dispossess their honour, or / They’ll fall by thrust of 
years and their own weight.”

58. “II, On the power of poetry to immortalize its subjects and its author. . . . Lines 
19ff. echo Hor. Od. Ill, XXX, Iff.” From the commentary to Propertius, Elegies, 
book 3, ed. W. A. Camps (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1966), 59.

59. Q. Horati Flacci Opera, ed. Fridericus Klingner (Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 
1959). The translation is from The Odes of Horace, trans. Lord Dunsany (London: 
Heinemann, 1947), 132.

60. In a first asclepiadic meter.60. In a first asclepiadic meter.

61. Compare this with the line from the first movement of the material model: 
“Hinc ad memoriam posteritatis proditae Imagines, vel marmore insculptae, vel 
ex aere fctae” (2,8-9).

62. “A monument more durable than bronze, / Rising above the regal pyra- 
mids, / have I erected, which no rain nor wind, / Nor centuries unnumbered, could 
destroy, / Nor all the flights of seasons.”

63. “In Coelum itaque migrans, clarissimorum Syderum notis, sempiternis illis or- 
bibus eorum nomina consignavit, qui ob egregia, ac prope divina facinora digni 
habiti sunt, qui una cum Astris aevo sempiterno fruerentur” (2,24-27).

64. 2,6-7.

65. “Quam ob rem non prius Iovis, Martis, Mercurii, Herculis, caeterorumque 
heroum, quorum nominibus Stellae appellantur, fama obscurabitur, quam ipso- 
rum Syderum splendor extinguatur” (2,27-29).

66. For a rich historical discussion of euhemerism, see Jean Seznec, The Survival 
of the Pagan Gods: The Mythological Tradition and Its Place in Renaissance Hu- 
manism and Art, trans. B. F. Sessions (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1961).

67. “Hoc autem humanae sagacitatis inventum cum primis nobile, ac mirandum 
multorum iam saeculorum intervallo exolevit, priscis heroibus lucidas illas sedes 
occupantibus, ac suo quasi iure tenentibus: in quorum coetum frustra pietas Au- 
gusti Iulium Caesarem coaptare conata est: nam cum Stellam suo tempore exor- 
tam, ex iis, quas Graeci Cometas, nostri Crinitas vocant, Iulium Sydus nuncupari 
voluisset, brevi ilia evanescens, tantae cupiditatis spem delusit” (2,30-3,5; Van 
Helden’s parentheses in translation).

68. Tycho Brahe, Opera omnia, v. V, 5-10.

69. “Ad Augustissimum Imperato-/rem Rudolphum Secundum/Tychonis 
Brahe/Praefatio” (5,1-4). Ad + accusative is equivalent in construction to using the 
dative case for an address; this is Tycho’s substantively insignificant variatio. Sty- 
listically, however, it might have raised a few eyebrows.70. inquam at 5,8 and invenio at 6,1.

Celestial Offerings 1 65

71. 5,19-22: “Hinc sunt illae columnae, quas Iosephus Iudaicarum rerum scrip- 
tor refert, Adae Nepotes in Syria extruxisse, iisque sua inventa memoriae causa ad 
Posteros inscripsisse. Hue pertinent Aegyptiorum et aliarum gentium altissimae et 
sumptuosissimae Pyramides[.]”

72. “Tuaeque insuper Caes. Majestatis memoria et fama, quod haec tam excel- 
lentia, et in rebus Mundanis ferme praecipua, conservare, tueri, et promovere non 
degravetur, ad omnem Posteritatem, quoad Sol et Sidera durabunt, eo illustrior ful- 
geat et perduret” (9,30-34; my translation).

73. Antonio Favaro, “La Libreria di Galileo Galilei,” Bullettino di Bibliografa e 
Storia delle Scienze Matematicbe e Fisiche, 19 (1886): 219-93, notes that Galileo 
had a copy at some point, but with no further details (no. 168).

74. “Atqui longe veriora ac feliciora, Princeps Serenissime, Celsitudini tuae 
possumus augurari; nam vix dum in terris immortalia animi tui decora fulgere 
coeperunt, cum in Coelis lucida Sydera sese offerunt, quae tanquam linguae 
praestantissimas virtutes tuas in omne tempus loquantur ac celebrent” (3,5-10).

75. We will recall that the preface overall is motivated in the opening sentence by 
a discussion of the kinds of memorials for the deeds of men excellent in virtus: “ex- 
cellentium virtute virorum” (2,6).

76. Biagioli, Galileo Courtier, 128.

77. “En igitur quattuor Sydera tuo inclyto nomine reservata, neque ilia de gre- 
gario, ac minus insigni inerrantium numero, sed ex illustri vagantium ordine, quae 
quidem disparibus inter se motibus circum Iovis Stellam caeterarum nobilissimam, 
tanquam germana eius progenies, cursus suos, orbesque conficiunt celeritate 
mirabili interea dum unanimi concordia circa mundi centrum, circa Solem nempe 
ipsum, omnia simul duodecimo quoque anno magnas convolutiones absolvunt” 
(3,10-17).78. “Ut autem inclito Celsitudinis tuae nomini prae caeteris novos hosce Planetas 
destinarem, ipsemet Syderum Opifex perspicuis argumentis me admonere visus 
est” (3,17-19).

79. Galileo uses a similar manner of speaking in his letters of January 30, 1610, 
and February 13, 1610, (quoted in Galileo, Sidereus Nuncius, 17-18). He also 
refers to his power as discoverer to name them. There are quite a few thematic sim- 
ilarities with the dedicatory letter, especially in the letter of February 13, but de- 
cidedly not with respect to the astrological device.

80. Biagioli, Galileo Courtier, 129.

81. “Etenim quemadmodum hae stellae tamquam love digna proles nunquam ab 
illius latere, nisi exiguo intervallo discedunt; ita quis ignorat clementiam, animi 
mansuetudinem, morum suavitatem, regii sanguinis splendorem in actionibus 
maiestatem, authoritatis, et Imperii in alios amplitudinem, quae quidem omnia in 
tua Celsitudine sibi domicilium ac sedem collocarunt, quis inquam ignorat haec 
omnia ex benignissimo Iovis Astro, secundum Deum omnium bonorum fontem, 
emanare?” (3,19-26).

82. "Nunc ad demonstrativum genus causae transeamus. Quoniam haec causa di- 
viditur in laudem et vituperationem. ...” Rbetorica ad Herennium, trans. (with

1 66 H. Darrel Rutkin

copious annotations) Harry Caplan (Cambridge: Harvard University Press [The 
Loeb Classical Library], 1954), III,vi,10 (172). The author discusses epideictic at 
172-85.

83. Jupiter inquam here picks up the quis inquam ignorat of two lines before, ty- 
ing this passage to the previous rhetorical question (and especially its second move- 
ment) and at the same time moving the stream of thought into the next emphatic, 
highly charged passage.84. “Iuppiter, Iuppiter inquam, a primo Celsitudinis tuae ortu turbidos Horizon- 
tis vapores iam transgressus mediumque coeli cardinem occupans, Orientalem- 
que angulum sua Regia illustrans, foelicissimum partum ex sublimi illo trono 
prospexit, omnemque splendorem, atque amplitudinem suam in purissimum 
aerem profudit, ut universam illam vim, ac potestatem tenerum corpusculum una 
cum animo nobilioribus ornamentis iam a Deo decorato, primo spiritu hauriret” 
(3,26-33).

85. G. Righini, “L’oroscopo Galileiano di Cosimo II de’Medici,” Annali (1976): 
29-36. Pantin corrects his account on several points of detail (Galileo, he Messager 
Celeste, n. 22, 53-54). I discuss this further below.

86. See note 7.

87. “Verum quid ego probabilibus utor argumentationibus, cum id necessaria 
propemodum ratione ac demonstrate queam?” (3,33-35).

88. Tetrabiblos 1,1. This is an important — and understudied — issue that requires 
further treatment.

89. See Paolo Mancosu, Philosophy of Mathematics and Mathematical Practice 
in the Seventeenth Century (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), esp. 
10-33.

90. 3,35ff.

91. I use Donahue’s translation, sometimes with minor, sometimes with major 
modifications. The Latin text is from Kepler, Gesammelte Werke, vol. 3: 
“AUGUSTISSIME IMPERATOR, Quod S“- C“- M“- V“- [Sacrae Caesareae Maies- 
tatis Vestrae], totiusque adeo Domus Austriacae serenissimo Nomini foelix faus- 
tumque sit, imperiis M ,is ' V ar - tandem aliquando publice spectandum exhibeo 
Captivum Nobilissimum, jam pridem auspiciis M t,s - V ac - bello difficili et laborioso 
a me acquisitum” (7,5-9).

92. I present them here in what seems a more natural order of exposition. The 
numbering refers to the actual order in the sentence: (2) publice spectandum (3) 
exhibeo (4) Captivum Nobilissimum.

93. It will turn out to be Kepler’s “gift” to Rudolf once it has been fully rhetori- 
cally conditioned and personalized.93. It will turn out to be Kepler’s “gift” to Rudolf once it has been fully rhetori- 
cally conditioned and personalized.

94. I should note that Kepler also emphasized Rudolf and his house’s name in the 
first sentence.

95. “Huius vero spectaculi non major poterit esse celebritas, quam si panegyricum 
captivo praestantissimo scribam publicaque voce pronunciem” (7,19-20).

96. Donahue rather overtranslates publica voce pronunciem as “shout it out 
loudly and publicly.”

Celestial Offerings 167

97. spectaculum here picks up publice spectandwn in the first sentence.

98. On panegyrics, see F. J. Stopp, The Emblems of the Altdorf Academy: Medals 
and Medal Orations, 1577-1626 (London: Modern Humanities Research Associ- 
ation, 1974). For an earlier period, see also Sabine MacCormack, Art and Cere- 
mony in Late Antiquity (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 
1981).

99. “Itaque relinquo scriptoribus historiarum explicandam Hospitis nostri mag- 
nitudinem, re bellica comparatam” (7,19-20).

100. “Dicant illi sane, hunc esse, per quem omnes exercitus vincant, omnes belli 
duces triumphent, omnes Reges imperent; sine cuius ope nemo unquam quenquam 
captivum cum laude abduxerit. Hunc jam meo Marte captum spectando, suos illi 
oculos exsatient.

“Dicant Romanae magnitudinis admiratores, hunc esse satorem Regum Romuli 
et Remi, conservatorem Urbis, protectorem Quiritium, Statorem Imperii: quo pro- 
pitio Romani militarem disciplinam invenerint, auxerint, perfecerint, Orbemque 
Terrarum subjugaverint. Hunc igitur circumscriptum, Domuique Austriacae 
foelici omine nunc acquisitum gratulentur” (7,21-30; Donahue’s capitalizations, 
which follow the typography of Caspar’s text).

101. For Rudolf II overall, see R. J. W. Evans, Rudolf II and His World: A Study in 
Intellectual History, 1576-1612, corrected ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984).101. For Rudolf II overall, see R. J. W. Evans, Rudolf II and His World: A Study in 
Intellectual History, 1576-1612, corrected ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984).

102. See Barbara Bauer, “Die Rolle des Hofastrologen und Hofmathematicus als 
fiirstlicher Berater,” in A. Buck, ed., Hofischer Humanismus (Wienheim: VCH, 
1989), 93-117 at 105ff.; Evans, Rudolf II and His World, index s. v. “Turks” and 
“Matthias, H.R.E. 1612-1619” and Max Caspar, Kepler, trans. and ed. C. Doris 
Heilman, with new introduction and references by Owen Gingerich (New York: 
Dover, 1993), 186-89, 203-4.

103. See esp. Bauer, “Die Rolle des Hofastrologen,” particularly 102ff.

104. Caspar, Kepler, 203.

105. Caspar, Kepler, 186-88, 204ff. This could be another reason why Kepler was 
so full of praise for Galileo in the Dissertatio cum nuncio sidereo (1610), where 
Kepler seems to have been seeking Giuliano de Medici’s patronage. Notwith- 
standing the difficult political situation at the time, it should also be noted that 
there is an important difference between Kepler’s and Galileo’s overall patronage 
strategies: Galileo was trying to move up in the world by his particular patron- 
grabbing strategy; Kepler, on the other hand, already had his top position as im- 
perial mathematician, even though this position was becoming increasingly 
precarious.

106. Evans, Rudolf II and His World, esp. chaps. 6 and 7: “Rudolf and the Oc- 
cult Arts” (196-242), and “Prague Mannerism and the Magic Universe” (243-74); 
see also Bauer, “Die Rolle des Hofastrologen,” 102ff.

107. See W. F. Ryan and Charles B. Schmitt, eds., Pseudo-Aristotle, The Secret of 
Secrets: Sources and Influences (London: Warburg Institute, 1982), with its exten- 
sive bibliography.

108. For a penetrating evaluation of Kepler as a humanist, see Grafton, “Hu- 
manism and Science,” 178-203.

1 68 H. Darrel Rutkin108. For a penetrating evaluation of Kepler as a humanist, see Grafton, “Hu- 
manism and Science,” 178-203.

1 68 H. Darrel Rutkin

109. “Ego me hinc ad alia recipio, quae sunt viribus meis accommodatiora. 
Neque tamen in ea professionis meae parte pedem figam, in qua mihi simultas in- 
tercedit cum commilitonibus” (7,31-33).

110. The narrator began his presentation of the historians thus: Dicant illi sane, 
etc. He now begins to present the astrologers thus: Illi sane gaudium aliud licet 
gaudeant.

111. “Illi sane gaudium aliud licet gaudeant: constrictum vinculis Calculi, qui 
toties ipsorum manus et oculos effugiens, irrita solitus est reddere vaticinia max- 
imi momenti: quippe de Bello, de Victoria, de Imperio, de Dignitate militari, de 
Magisterio, de Lusu, de ipsa denique Vita abscindenda vel proroganda” (7, 
34-8,3).

1 12. The translator acknowledges ad loc. (n. 1) that he could not find information 
on the “astragalis lusum trigonicum. ”

113. “Illi M ri - V”- gratulentur de Domino Geniturae in potestatem redacto, imo 
vero conciliato; quippe illis testibus Mars Scorpioni dominatur, qui cor Coeli ha- 
bet; in Capricorno exaltatur, qui oritur; in Cancro, in quern Luna ingressus est, 
ludere solet astragalis lusum trigonicum; in Leone, quo Sol utitur hospitio, famil- 
iariter notus est; Ille denique et Arietis est dominus, cui subesse creditur Germa- 
nia, planeque concurrens cum S a - C a M te - V a - habet imperium” (8,3-10).

1 14. Actually the first time directly: Kepler mentions Mars furtively at 7,24 when 
he notes that the captive was meo Marte captum.

115. As I discuss more fully below.1 14. Actually the first time directly: Kepler mentions Mars furtively at 7,24 when 
he notes that the captive was meo Marte captum.

115. As I discuss more fully below.

116. Kepler also discusses Rudolf’s nativity in the dedicatory letter, also to 
Rudolf, of De Stella nova (1606). Although the basic idea is similar — associating 
something with Rudolf’s nativity — it is executed rather differently. The treatment 
in De Stella nova is in the most general terms, whereas, in Astronomia Nova, Kep- 
ler treats Rudolf’s horoscope in some detail: “Nullum umquam coeleste Thema 
Genethliacum tarn pulchre adumbrare creditum est cujusquam hominis fortunam, 
quam ad S. C. Majest. V a '- gravissimarum occupationum successus, studiorum As- 
tronomicorum cursus et fortuna sese accommodavit hactenus” (1,152,3-6). Kep- 
ler then proceeds to correlate the phenomena in the heavens with the events of 
Rudolf’s public life, but without discussing the details of his nativity. This preface 
is quite interesting in itself and worthy of further study.

117. “Illi M ri - V ac - gratulentur de Domino Geniturae in potestatem redacto, imo 
vero conciliato” (8,3-4).

118. See J. C. Eade, The Forgotten Sky: A Guide to Astrology in English Litera- 
ture (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984). Lor a simplified method of arriving at the 
“lord of the geniture,” see 88-89; for the details of how to calculate dignities and 
debilities, see 59-88.

119. “Mars Scorpioni dominatur, qui cor Coeli habet” (8,5).

120. “in Capricorno exaltatur, qui oritur” (8,5-6).

121. “in Cancro, in quern Luna ingressa est, ludere solet astragalis lusum trigo- 
nicum” (8,6-7). The lusum trigonicum refers to the trine relationship. Kepler 
seems to be stretching here: He is not saying that Mars in Rudolf’s chart is actually

Celestial Offerings 1 69Celestial Offerings 1 69

in Scorpio and thus trines Rudolf’s Moon in Cancer; rather, that Rudolf’s Moon, 
by virtue of being in Cancer, trines Rudolf’s midheaven in Scorpio, and since Mars 
rules Scorpio, Mars gets some extra points thereby. This appears to be a rhetorical 
bending of the rules.

122. Each of the planets, except the Sun and Moon, rule two signs each: Mars 
rules Aries and Scorpio.

123. “in Leone, quo Sol utitur hospitio, familiariter notus est” (8,7-8). Kepler is 
stretching here again, trying to associate Mars with the other of the two luminar- 
ies, but here he stretches even further, because he is not even talking (apparently) 
about the placement of the Sun in Rudolf’s horoscope, but rather about the ruler- 
ship of the Sun in general; nor is he talking about either the placement of Mars or 
the location of Aries in Rudolf’s horoscope, but just about the fact that Mars rules 
Aries in general. Mars apparently gets these extra points in Rudolf’s chart as a 
fringe benefit of his having Scorpio in the midheaven, which Mars co-rules. We 
should probably refer this rather creative “dignity” accounting to Kepler’s rhetor- 
ical license. No wonder he distances himself from the practice of such astrologers.

124. “Ille denique et Arietis est dominus, cui subesse creditur Germania, planeque 
concurrens cum S a - C a - M tc - V a - habet imperium” (8,8-10). The study of astrologi- 
cal rulership of geographical regions goes back to antiquity. Ptolemy treats this 
topic in book 2 of the Tetrabiblos. Franz Boll discusses this in some depth; 
“Studien fiber Claudius Ptolemaus. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Griechischen 
Philosophie und Astrologie,” Jahrbuch fur Klassiscbe Pbilologie, Supplementband 
21:51-243.

125. At least this was the case in the second horoscope that Galileo cast. One won- 
ders what he found the first time.125. At least this was the case in the second horoscope that Galileo cast. One won- 
ders what he found the first time.

126. “Juppiter, Juppiter inquam, a primo Celsitudinis tuae ortu turbidos Hori- 
zontis vapores iam transgressus mediumque coeli cardinem occupans, Orien- 
talemque angulum sua Regia illustrans, foelicissimum partum ex sublimi illo trono 
prospexit, omnemque splendorem, atque amplitudinem suam in purissimum 
aerem profudit, ut universam illam vim, ac potestatem tenerum corpusculum una 
cum animo nobilioribus ornamentis iam a Deo decorato, primo spiritu hauriret” 
(3,26-33). One of the compromises with astrological doctrine in the Middle Ages 
was that astrological influences could affect the body but not the soul; for a recent 
orientation, see Laura A. Smoller, History, Prophecy, and the Stars: The Christian 
Astrology of Pierre d’Ailly, 1350-1420 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1994), 29-32.

127. “Hanc igitur triumphi partem illi licet occupent; nullam ipsis tarn festo die 
rixandi causam exhibebo: transeat haec licentia inter jocos militares. Ipse ad As- 
tronomiam vertar, curruque triumphali invectus, reliquam captivi nostri gloriam, 
mihi peculiariter notam, omnesque adeo belli gesti confectique rationes ex- 
plicabo” (8,11-15).

128. The entire preface can be considered a iocus militaris, which is indeed how 
Kepler himself describes it in the preface to his Dissertatio cum nuncio sidereo (IV, 
286, 19-23), esp. 21-22: “Lusus enim seu iocus militaris, quo sum usus in opere 
illo publico (sc. Astronomia Nowr)[.]”

170 H. Darrel Rutkin170 H. Darrel Rutkin

129. Strong, Splendor at Court, 25-37, with many illustrations. Furthermore, it is 
worth noting the dynamic nature of Kepler’s preface, with all its movement and 
celebration, which is in stark contrast to Galileo’s much more static preface. In- 
deed, Kepler’s preface seems to be almost a literary rendering of the magnificent 
illustrations of recent imperial triumphal processions, but with Kepler as Tri- 
umphator instead of Rudolf.

130. Perhaps Kepler distanced himself also because astrologically speaking, as he 
would have well known, the case for Mars really being the lord of Rudolf’s geni- 
ture is questionable at best, as our analysis indicated.

131. For the publication history, see Friedrich Seek, “Johannes Kepler und der 
Buchdruck: Zur aufieren Entstehungsgeschichte seiner Werke,” Archiv fur 
Geschichte des Buchwesens, 11 (1970): 610-728, esp. 643-48; and Caspar, Kep- 
ler, 139-42, 177, 187 and 194, which is essentially a minor expansion of his 
treatment in Bibliographia Kepleriana. Wilbur Applebaum, “Keplerian Astron- 
omy after Kepler: Researches and Problems,” History of Science, 34 (1996): 451- 
504 at 456ff., is quite helpful on the reception in general, although not for our 
particular questions; see also Massimo Bucciantini, “Dopo il Sidereus Nuncius: 
II Copernicanesimo in Italia tra Galileo e Keplero,” Nuncius, 9 (1994): 15-35, 
also for a slightly later period of the reception, i.e., after the publication of Si- 
dereus Nuncius.

132. In Kepler’s letter (no. 536) to Thomas Harriot, dated September 1, 1609 (in 
Gesammelte Werke, 16:251, 11. 49-51): “Quaeris de studiis meis. Commentaria de 
Marte titulo Astronomiae novae aitiologetou, seu Physicae coelestis, prostant jam 
Francofurti. Exempla nondum habeo.”133. This last information comes from Kepler’s letter to Magini of February 1, 
1610 (letter 551, in Gesammelte iverke, 16:279, 11. 33-35): “At quia strenue me es- 
urire patitur, coactus sum vendere typographo, sine exceptione. Pro tribus tamen 
florenis hie Pragae habere possum unum.” Caspar tells of the publication problems, 
especially Tengnagel’s obstructions and Rudolf’s inconsistent financing, in Kepler, 
139-42.

134. Seek, “Johannes Kepler und der Buchdruck,” 645: “Am I. September hat Kep- 
ler seine Exemplare noch nicht bekommen; das Buch ist aber zu dieser Zeit schon 
in Frankfurt kauflich und erscheint im Kataloge der Herbstmesse. Es war demnach 
im Juli oder August 1609 ausgedruckt.”

135. Letter 540 (in Gesammelte iverke, 16:254-55): “Es hat unns diser tagen der 
Ehrwurdig unnd hochgelert Herr Matthias Hafenreffer, der heiligen Schrifft 
Doctor unnd Professor, unnfier freiindtlicher lieber Collega, del? Herrn in offnen 
Truckh aul?geverttigten Commentarium de motibus Stellae Martis praesentirt 
unnd angezeigt, dal? wir selbigen von del? Herrn wegen in gemeiner Universitet 
Bibliothec zu guttem angedenckhen verwahren und offhallten sollen.

Wann wir dann hieraul? del? Herrn gegen unns habende gutthertzige affection 
im Werckh verspiiren: Alll? thun wir unns solches verehrten Commentarii ganz 
freiindtlich bedanckhen, unnd demselben hingegen eingeschlol?ne fiinff Ducaten 
verwahrlich ubersenden” (11. 3-12).

136. Letter 542 (in Gesammelte werke, 16:256-59): “Incidi in doctissimum tuum 
librum de motu Martis, ex cuius lectione tanta affectus sum voluptate, ut vix

Celestial Offerings 171

supra; sed cum quaedam intellectu mihi difficilia occurrerint, te Virum doctissi- 
mum amicum meum honorandum consulendum duxi” (11. 8-11).Celestial Offerings 171

supra; sed cum quaedam intellectu mihi difficilia occurrerint, te Virum doctissi- 
mum amicum meum honorandum consulendum duxi” (11. 8-11).

137. I say unambiguous because letter 545, written by Kepler to an anonymous 
recipient at an indeterminate time (but we may assume after September 1, 1609), 
refers to Astronomia mea ( 1 ) and immediately begins discussing a problem that the 
current recipient of Kepler’s letter had apparently raised originally.

138. Letter 547 (in Gesammelte werke, 16:267-70): “Vestrae Excellentiae opus 
insigne de motu Martis oculis meis maxime placet, sed loculis displicet: Nimis 
enim care venit in Italiis, et pro uno exemplari librarii nostri 6 aureos demandant. 
Reversus sun theoi ad patres lares credo me precio viliori adsecuturum.” Appar- 
ently he thinks he can get a better price back home.

139. Letter 548 (in Gesammelte iverke, 16:270-74): “Vidi nuper insigne tuum 
opus de motu Martis a librario quodam Bononiensi hue pro nobili viro Venetia al- 
latum, et mutuo quidem mihi ad unicam diem concessum percurri breviter, quan- 
tum scilicet per angustiam temporis mihi concessum fuit” (11. 2-5).

140. This paragraph depends heavily on the treatments in the introduction to 
Galileo, Siderius Nuncius, and on Westfall, “Science and Patronage.”

141. Galileo, Siderius Nuncius, 6.

142. Ibid., 7 and esp. 9.

143. Westfall, “Science and Patronage,” 18, n. 23: “probably near the end of 
November.”

144. Galileo, Siderius Nuncius, 9: “Between 30 November and 18 December he 
observed and drew our satellite as it went through its phases, leaving no fewer than 
eight drawings.”

145. Van Helden tells this story on ibid., 15ff. This quotation is from 16.

146. Westfall, “Science and Patronage,” 19.

147. Galileo, Siderius nuncius, 19.

148. Westfall, “Science and Patronage,” 21.146. Westfall, “Science and Patronage,” 19.

147. Galileo, Siderius nuncius, 19.

148. Westfall, “Science and Patronage,” 21.

149. Galileo’s letters during this period cast no light whatsoever on our central 
questions; there are no references at all to Kepler, to Astronomia Nova, to 
Cosimo’s horoscope, or to the Frankfurt Book Fair in the correspondence (to or 
from Galileo) between September 1, 1609 (letter 235 is the earliest, September 4), 
and March 12, 1610 (letter 268); A. Favaro, ed., Edizione Nazionale delle Opere 
di Galileo Galilei, 20 vols (Florence: G. Barbara, 1890-1909), 10:256-87.

150. See, e.g., Martin Lowry, Power, Print and Profit: Nicholas Jenson and the 
Rise of Venetian Publishing in Renaissance Europe (Oxford: B. Blackwell, 1991) 
and The World of Aldus Manutius: Business and Scholarship in Renaissance 
Venice (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1979); Brian Richardson, Print Culture in 
Renaissance Italy: The Editor and the Vernacular Text, 1470-1600 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1994); and Paul F. Grendler, The Roman Inquisition 
and the Venetian Press, 1540-1605 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977).

151. See Applebaum, “Keplerian Astronomy,” 455: “By virtue of his title of court 
astronomer to the Holy Roman Emperor and successor to Tycho Brahe, he was re- 
garded as the leading astronomer in Europe.” See also 455 for some general notes

1 72 H. Darrel Rutkin

on the relation of Galileo and Kepler, none of which are directly relevant to our 
concerns.

152. Caspar, Kepler, 69-70; and for much more detail on the reception of the Mys- 
terimn Cosmographicum, see James R. Voelkel, “The Development and Reception 
of Kepler’s Physical Astronomy” (Ph.D. diss., Indiana University, 1994).153. Kepler presented Giuliano de Medici with his epistolary response to Galileo 
on April 19, 1610; it was then delivered to Galileo. On May 3, Kepler published 
it, with additional prefatory matter, including a dedication to Giuliano himself, for 
the benefit of a broader readership; see Kepler’s Conversation with Galileo’s Side- 
real Messenger, trans. E. Rosen (New York: Johnson Reprint Corp., 1965), xiv.

154. This same Giuliano had mediated Galileo’s earlier letter to Kepler requesting 
his response to Sidereus Nuncius; see ibid.

155. Galileo’s reference is to the Ad Vitellionem paralipomena, quibus astrono- 
miae pars optica traditur (1604) and not to the Dioptrice of 1601; pace Favaro, 
Edizione 10:322, n. 1.

156. “Io prego V.S. Ill. ma a favorirmi di mandarmi l’Optica del S. Keplero e il trat- 
tato sopra la Stella Nuova, perche ne in Venezia ne qua gli ho potuti trovare. 
Desidererei insieme un libro che lessi due anni sono sul catalogo di Francofort, il 
quale, per diligenza fatta con librari di Venezia, che mi promessero farlo venire, 
non ho mai potuto havere: io non mi ricordo del nome dell’autore, ma la materia 
e de motu terrae; et il S. Keplero ne havere notizia. Mi fara insieme favore av- 
visarmi della spesa, la quale rimborsero qua in casa sua, o dove mi ordinera” 
(ibid., 10: 402, 11. 45-52).

157. Favaro, “Fa Fibreria di Galileo Galilei,” no. 115.157. Favaro, “Fa Fibreria di Galileo Galilei,” no. 115.

158. From the letter to Giuliano quoted above, we have good evidence based on 
Galileo’s actual scholarly practice that he read the Frankfurt catalogues and then 
tried to locate in Venice the books mentioned therein that he found of interest. The 
dating of the letter (October 1610) makes this evidence directly pertinent to our 
question. The advertisement for the fall 1609 book fair was in no sense conspicu- 
ous among the listing of Libri Pbilosopbici. The entire entry ran as follows: As- 
tronomia nova AEtiologitos sen Pbysica coelestis tradita comentariis de motibns 
Stella [sic] Martis ex observationibus Tychonis Brahe, jussu & sumptibus Rudol- 
pbi IL Rom. Imp. elaborata a loanne Keplero Mathematico Caesareo. Prostat 
Francof. apud Godf. Tambacb, & Pragae in taberna Marneana in fol.

159. Schottenloher, Die Widmungsvorrede, does not mention any such motif. So 
far I have examined the pre-1609 prefaces of Kepler, Tycho, Regiomontanus, 
Schoner, Cardano, Magini, and Maurolico that I have had access to. The conclu- 
sions presented here are admittedly tentative; only further research will reveal ad- 
ditional examples, if there be any.

160. Most obviously in De fundamentis astrologiae certioribus (1602), passim, 
but also in Mysterium Cosmographicum (1596), 5,15. And since Kepler’s astrol- 
ogy is based on a geometrical optical model of astrological action, the De Stella 
nova’s dedicatory letter (1606) also has material relevant to his astrology, at least 
to its natural philosophical foundations, at 8,19; 9,13; etc.

5

Astronomia inferior: Legacies of Johannes 
Trithemius and John Dee

N. H. Clulee5

Astronomia inferior: Legacies of Johannes 
Trithemius and John Dee

N. H. Clulee

John Dee’s Monas hieroglyphica of 1564 confronts us with a particularly 
sharp paradox. The Monas, with its symbol of the monas, was clearly 
Dee’s best known and most influential work, yet in his day as well as ours 
it has been noted for its difficulty, opacity, and obscurity. Besides the fas- 
cination it has elicited among modern occultists, alchemists, and faddists, 
Dee’s symbol of the monas was borrowed, the text was cited and quoted, 
and the ideas and concepts were employed surprisingly often in the cen- 
tury after its publication. 1 On the other hand, not only have modern au- 
thors sympathized with Josten’s experience that the Monas “resisted the 
onslaught of historical research” and concurred in his conclusion that 
“the specific message which Dee tried to convey by his symbol of the mo- 
nad, and by the treatise thereon, is lost,” contemporaries of Dee roundly 
criticized the work for its unintelligibility. 2 Clearly, for the Monas to 
have had the impact it did, some readers must have found it significant de- 
spite its difficulties. A text as opaque as the Monas may attract attention for 
a variety of reasons because it lends itself to a number of significations. This 
chapter will examine one of these reasons: Dee’s elaboration of alchemy 
as an astronomia inferior and some peculiarities of its transmission 
and reception in the early seventeenth century.

The idea that alchemy was a type of “inferior” or earthly astronomy, or 
even a terrestrial astrology, was a standard theme in alchemy, but it took 
on a more developed and potent connotation in the sixteenth century as a 
result of Johannes Trithemius’s interpretation of the Emerald Tablet, one 
of the touchstone texts of Western alchemy. 3 Trithemius’s concept of al- 
chemy as an astronomia inferior was based on his interpretation of the 
Emerald Tablet of Hermes Trismegistus as representing a cosmological174 N. H. Clule e

process and not just an alchemical recipe. John Dee was one of Tri- 
themius’s most creative heirs. This chapter will look first at Dee’s Monas 
and how it embodied a peculiarly sharp, rich, and graphic development of 
Trithemius’s concept of alchemy as a terrestrial astrology. It will then ex- 
amine one of Dee’s legacies as a transmitter of Trithemius’s ideas: the Se- 
cretioris pbilosopbie consideratio brevis of Philipp a Gabella. Associated 
with the Rosicrucian tracts of 1614-15, Gabella reflects one of the curious 
paths of the influence of Dee’s Monas hieroglypbica as well as the limita- 
tions Dee’s readers had in fully understanding that text.

John Dee, the Monas, and astronomia inferiorJohn Dee, the Monas, and astronomia inferior

Throughout his life Dee assumed that there was a relationship between the 
heavens and the earth, between astronomy and astronomia inferior; 
that is, between astronomy/astrology and alchemy. In his first work, the 
Propaedeumata apboristica of 1558, he developed a theory of the opera- 
tion of astrological influences on the terrestrial sphere based on the ema- 
nation of celestial virtues as rays that propagate in the same way as visible 
light. Because of this, celestial virtues may be studied and manipulated 
through the science of optics. This feature of nature makes possible the 
“greatest part of the natural magic of the ancient wise men” — the im- 
printing of heavenly rays upon terrestrial matter — which Dee links with 
“the very august astronomy of the philosophers, called inferior.” 4 Al- 
chemy, therefore, as astronomia inferior, or lower/terrestrial astronomy, 
is a branch of natural magic. Dee also indicates that the symbols of this 
terrestrial astronomy are included in his monad represented on the title 
page of the Propaedeumata (figure 5.1). 5 Subsequently, in the 1568 edition 
of the Propaedeumata, Dee indicated that this symbol was previously ex- 
plained in another work, the Monas hieroglypbica of 1564 (figure 5. 2). 6 
In the twenty-four quasi-Euclidian “theorems” of Dee’s Monas this sym- 
bol of the monad, or monas (figure 5.3), is geometrically constructed, and 
then its disassembled parts, both singly and as variously recombined, are 
shown to have cosmological, astronomical, numerological, alchemical, 
magical, and mystically spiritual meanings.

What made and still makes the Monas such a challenging text to un- 
derstand is that it combines in novel ways and gives idiosyncratic twists 
to a number of very common themes in intellectual fashion during the

T,rrn

* - J ”j» l

m

Wffi

!5®Cj|S

«BiS r :

Figure 5.1T,rrn

* - J ”j» l

m

Wffi

!5®Cj|S

«BiS r :

Figure 5.1

Title page, John Dee, Propaedenmata apboristica, 1558 (Beinecke Rare Book and 
Manuscript Library, Yale University)

176 N. H. Clule e

MONAS HIEROGLYPHICA

IOANNIS DEE, LONDINENSIS,

, T>

MAXI MI LI AN VM, DEI GRATIA

ROMA.NOR.VM, BOHEMIA ET HVNCAH.1A 
AlGlM 5AH IMUMMVJI.

Culiel.Silvius Typog.RtfgTuA, Excud.Aniucrpi*, i j 6 4 .

Figure 5.2

Title page, John Dee, Monas bieroglypbica, 1564 (Beinecke Rare Book and Man- 
uscript Library, Yale University)

Astronomia inferior

177

MONAS 
HIERO. 
G L YP HI- 
CA.

Figure 5.3

The monas hieroglyphica, John Dee, Monas hieroglyphica, fol. 12 (Rare Book and 
Special Collections Division, Library of Congress)

Renaissance. The explication of the symbol of the monas in the Monas in- 
volved several levels. Dee considered the most novel contribution of the 
Monas to be its presentation of a new and sacred art of writing, a writing 
that embodied the pristine divine language through which the essential re- 
ality of creation was communicated . 7 To emphasize the unique character 
of this writing embodied in the monas, which is a “holy language,” Dee 
calls it a “real” cabala. Whereas other languages and Hebrew cabala are 
merely grammars of “that which is said,” Dee’s is a cabala of “that which 
is” because it corresponds to the “written memorial . . . which from the 
Creation has been inscribed by God’s own fingers on all Creatures” and 
which therefore speaks of “all things visible and invisible, manifest and 
most occult, emanating by nature or art from God himself .” 8At the second level, Dee claims that his new art of writing transcends 
and reforms all that is currently known in all the intellectual and scientific 
disciplines. Not only does this new language supersede and replace the 
“vulgar” linguistic disciplines of grammar and Hebrew cabala; it tran- 
scends and almost makes obsolete the traditionally legitimate disciplines 
of arithmetic, geometry, music, astronomy, optics, and so on while at the 
same time legitimating and elevating in status esoteric disciplines, includ- 
ing alchemy, divination, and magic, that were traditionally considered il- 
legitimate and marginalized . 9 At the root of this reform is the claim that 
the new writing of the monas reforms the basic cosmological framework 
in which all specific intellectual disciplines operate: Dee’s uniquely modi- 
fied symbol of Mercury is the “rebuilder and restorer of all astronomy .” 10

178 N. H. Clule e

By implication all astronomy encompasses both the celestial and the ter- 
restrial, both astronomy and alchemy. Fundamental in accomplishing this 
reform, the basic precepts of the Tabula smaragdina can be heard speak- 
ing through this new language of the monas.

Monas, Language, and CosmosMonas, Language, and Cosmos

The ultimate basis for Dee’s claim that the monas is the sacred art of writ- 
ing the pristine divine language was his conviction that the shapes of the 
“first and mystical letters of the Hebrews, the Greeks, and the Latins,” 
given directly to mankind by God, “were produced from points, straight 
lines, and the circumferences of circles.” 11 Likewise, Dee’s monas is gener- 
ated from a point, lines, a circle, and semicircles (figure 5.4), but it can 
claim priority over all other languages because it bears a more direct cor- 
respondence to creation (figure 5.5). This is because the construction of 
the monas has a clearly cosmological character. The point represents the 
earth and the circle represents the sun and also the entire frame of the heav- 
ens surrounding the earth. The semicircle represents the moon, and the 
double semicircle at the base represents Aries, the first sign of the zodiac 
and the sign under which creation took place, and can be taken as an ana- 
log of the entire zodiac and the fixed stars. Whereas the circular compo- 
nents of the monas relate to the heavens, Dee relates the cross, composed 
of straight lines, to the sublunary realm of the elements. 12

The structure of the monas not only epitomizes the structure of the cos- 
mos; it also embodies a cosmogony insofar as the genesis of the symbol 
mirrors the mathematical genesis of the universe. This correspondence of 
both the construction of the monas to divine creation and of the derived 
components and meanings to constituents and processes of the natural

Figure 5.4

Point, line, and circle, John Dee, Monas hieroglypbica, fol. 12 (Rare Book and Spe- 
cial Collections Division, Library of Congress)

Astronomia inferior 1 79

w

L V N a.

O

Sox.

1-

Element a.

I c N I s.

Figure 5.5

Monas and cosmos, John Dee, Monas hieroglyphica, fol. 13v (Rare Book and Spe- 
cial Collections Division, Library of Congress)w

L V N a.

O

Sox.

1-

Element a.

I c N I s.

Figure 5.5

Monas and cosmos, John Dee, Monas hieroglyphica, fol. 13v (Rare Book and Spe- 
cial Collections Division, Library of Congress)

world is the key to Dee’s central claim to have discovered a new and sacred 
art of writing or language that is an alphabet of nature and a “writing 
of things.” The straight line and the circle represent nature because “the 
first and most simple manifestation” of things happened by means of 
the straight line and the circle, but, since the line is generated by the point 
and the circle by a line rotated around a point, “things first began to be by 
way of a point and a monad .” 13

As a single symbol, the monas represented to Dee a powerful hieroglyph 
revealing the unity of created nature and embodying the unity of knowl- 
edge about the unity of creation that had clear parallels with the Tabula 
smaragdina (the Emerald Tablet) of Hermes. Just as the Tabula indicates 
that “the world was created” and “all things were made from the one by 
the contemplation of the one, so all things are born of this one thing by 
adaptation,” the Monas represents the cosmos as a monadic unit both in 
the genesis of all things from the point or monad and in its presentation of 
all things in a single symbol. Yet, although all parts of the monas derive 
from the point and the line just as all things in the cosmos have a common 
origin, the symbol also reflects the qualitative division of the universe into 
the celestial and the elemental realms. Whereas the geometric progression 
from point to line to circle culminates in the heavenly spheres, genesis 
in the terrestrial realm progressed only so far as the line, which, as the

180 N. H. Clule e

analog to the dyad, pertains to imperfection and change, but the celestial 
realm progressed beyond the line to the circle, which is monadic and there- 
fore perfect.180 N. H. Clule e

analog to the dyad, pertains to imperfection and change, but the celestial 
realm progressed beyond the line to the circle, which is monadic and there- 
fore perfect.

The elemental realm, however, is the domain of a pattern of numerical 
relations familiar as the “Pythagorean” tetractys and frequently associ- 
ated with a numerological portrayal of cosmogony in the Renaissance. 14 
Just as rectilinear motion is proper to sublunary bodies, so the lines of 
the elements (figure 5.5) are produced by the “flowing of a point” and 
arranged as a cross corresponding to the pattern of the four elements 
(earth, air, fire, and water) and the four qualities (cold, hot, dry, and 
moist). With four arms and four right angles, the cross embodies the num- 
ber four, or the quaternary, which in Pythagorean cosmology was the 
source of hosts of patterns of fours. 15 Besides the number four, the cross 
also embodies the preceding numbers. The point is a monad and corre- 
sponds to one; the flowing point produces a line that, as bounded by two 
points and capable of division, is a dyad and corresponds to two; and the 
two segments of the line, when crossed, have one point in common and so 
correspond to the ternary, or three. The cross of the elements thus corre- 
sponds to the sequence from one to four, the sum of which is the denary, 
or ten. 16As an embodiment of the Pythagorean tetractys (1 + 2 + 3 + 4 = 10), 
Dee’s cross of the elements resonates with the host of meanings that were 
associated with it. The monad, as the primeval unit that is the source of all 
numbers but not a number itself, and the analogous point, which is a di- 
mensionless unit with position, were associated with God. The number 
two, which is even and divisible, corresponds to the unlimited, formless 
original matter and to the single dimension of the line. Three points define 
a triangle and the first surface, and the number four, besides correspon- 
ding to numerous quaternaries, defines the first solid body through the 
four points that mark out a solid angle. The progression from one through 
four thus corresponds to the generation of the physical world and also sets 
the limit to that creation, because through addition this series produces 
ten, by means of which the progression returns to unity, perfection, and ul- 
timate stability (10=1 + 0 = 1). These Pythagorean associations were also 
associated with a conception of the created world as the product and man- 
ifestation of the ideas in the mind of the divine creator. The universe was 
actually created by numbers, which are the intelligible principles under-

Astronomia inferior 181

lying the flux and imperfections of the sensible world, and through the 
progression of the tetractys the actual unfolding of creation took place. 
The tetractys, therefore, is not merely a symbol; in a very real way it is the 
universe, and understanding it provides access to the actual thoughts of 
God. 17The cabalistic exegetical techniques of notarikon, tsiruf, and gematria 
can be applied to the monas and its components, as a “cabala of the real” 
or a “cabala of that which exists,” to reveal an esoteric knowledge of cre- 
ation. 18 With written texts, notarikon finds in letters and punctuation 
marks abbreviations that point to other meanings. In the case of the 
monad, notarikon involves taking geometrical components of the total 
symbol as abbreviations representing words or concepts. So when Dee has 
the point represent the earth, this is a kind of notarikon. Likewise, in the 
construction of the monas, the circle with the point at the center represents 
both the sun and the geocentric universe, the upper semicircle represents 
the moon, the cross represents the elements, and the double semicircle rep- 
resents Aries (figure 5.5). In addition to being signs of astronomical things, 
these same components also had alchemical significance. Thus, in al- 
chemical discourse the sun was commonly the symbol for gold and the 
moon represented silver. More fundamentally, the sun and moon also re- 
ferred to the philosophical or sophic sulfur and mercury that were the fun- 
damental principles of all metals according to the dominant alchemical 
theory of the West. 19 Because Aries is also the first sign in the triad of con- 
stellations corresponding to the element fire, the double semicircle also 
represents fire. 20Whereas notarikon considers parts of words, or in Dee’s case parts of 
the monas, as abbreviations, through tsiruf the individual letters of words 
are rearranged to discover other words, or with the monas, parts can be re- 
combined to yield other symbols and meanings. 21 The upper part of the 
monas, combining the sun and the moon, represents the evening and 
morning of the day of genesis on which the “light of the philosophers was 
made.” 22 Dee considers the same part of the monas to represent the sign of 
Taurus and the exaltation of the moon. 23 Through various other recombi- 
nations of components of the monas Dee is able to construct the signs for 
all the planets in addition to the sun and the moon (figure 5.6). 24

Dee employs the final cabalistic technique, gematria, the use of the 
numerical equivalents of letters to reveal hidden meanings, extensively.

182 N. H. Clule e

*

S animus.

|X

04

Man.

if

Iupiter.

$

Venus.

¥

Mcrcurius.

9

Mcrcurius.

Figure 5.6

Signs of the planets generated from the monas, John Dee, Monas hieroglypbica, 
fol. 14 (Rare Book and Special Collections Division, Library of Congress)¥

Mcrcurius.

9

Mcrcurius.

Figure 5.6

Signs of the planets generated from the monas, John Dee, Monas hieroglypbica, 
fol. 14 (Rare Book and Special Collections Division, Library of Congress)

Numbers associated with individual letters not only had mystical signifi- 
cance, but if the sum of the numerical values of the letters of two words 
was the same, the two words could be considered identical in meaning. In 
the monas, numerical interpretation is applied largely to the cross of the 
elements. We have already noticed how the cross represents various num- 
bers, but through these numbers, according to Dee, the cross also reveals 
the rationale behind both the shape and the placement of various letters in 
the Latin alphabet, establishing the roots of the alphabet in the funda- 
mentals of creation . 25 Through the numerical equivalents of the cross, Dee 
also discovers which “useful offices in Nature were assigned by God to the 
numbers” derived from the monas “when elements are to be weighed, 
when measures of time are to be determined, and finally when the power 
and virtue of things have to be expressed in certain degrees .” 26 Thus, by 
gematria, the numerical equivalents of the monas and their permutations 
yield numbers corresponding to natural processes and reveal hidden ex- 
planations of nature’s mysteries.

Monas and astronomia inferior

Since the construction of the monas mirrors divine creation and the com- 
ponents and the meanings derived from the monas correspond to the con- 
stituents and the processes of the natural world, this new form of writing is 
a cabala of that which exists. As it turns out, this cabala serves to explicate 
the alchemical cosmology of the Emerald Tablet. As a mirror of the cos-

Astronomia inferior 1 83Astronomia inferior 1 83

mos, the very arrangement of the components of the monas not only de- 
velops more explicitly alchemy’s dependence on the heavens, which is only 
a cliche in most alchemical texts, but also reveals the true natures and in- 
terrelations of the planets in the light of their correspondence to alchemi- 
cal processes. Dee’s claim that “celestial astronomy is like a parent and 
teacher to inferior astronomy” evokes the Tabula ’ s precept that “what is 
below is like that which is above, and what is above is like that which is be- 
low, working the miracle of the one thing.” 27 The earth, at the center, is en- 
circled by the sun and the orbits of all the planets on whose influences it is 
dependent. The moon is represented as a semicircle, because it emulates 
and is dependent on the sun. 28 Of all the planets these two are explicitly rep- 
resented because the “Sun and Moon infuse their corporeal virtues into all 
inferior bodies that consist of elements in far stronger manner than do all 
the other planets.” 29 This strongly echoes a similar aphorism in Dee’s ear- 
lier Propaedeumata, but here the corporeal virtues of the sun and the moon 
are not merely the vivifying heat and moisture of the previous work. 30 In the 
monas the “aqueous moisture of the Moon” and the “fiery liquid of the 
Sun” are revealed through the “magic” of the elements: the analysis by fire 
of corporeal things, symbolized by the sign of Aries. 31 This separation of 
the sun and the moon by the “magic” of the four elements of the cross adds 
an alchemical dimension to the monas. The sun and moon not only are 
symbols of those planets but are also alchemical symbols for both gold and 
silver and, as a “fiery liquid” and an “aqueous moisture,” for the sulfur and 
mercury that are the principles of gold and silver and of the philosophers’ 
stone. Dee’s title page evokes the four elements and depicts drops of liquid 
descending from the sun and the moon, and the quotation from Genesis 27 
at the foot of the title page referring to the “dew of heaven” and “the fat of 
the earth,” which are alchemical references to mercury and sulfur, respec- 
tively, completes the alchemical motif (figure 5. 2). 32 Incorporating a direct 
quotation from the Tabula, Dee summarizes these celestial-alchemical re- 
lations when he says “this whole magisterial work depends upon the Sun 
and the Moon, which a long time ago that thrice-great Hermes admonished 
us when he asserted that the Sun is its father, and the Moon its mother; and 
we know that it is nourished in Lemnian earth by lunar and solar rays 
which exert a singular influence around it.” 33Although quite abstract, these associations reflect the concrete alchemi- 
cal background to the Monas, which is the sulfur-mercury theory of the

184 N. H. Clule e

generation of metals. This mercury and sulfur are not the ordinary sub- 
stances of those names, but hypothetical intermediary substances, often 
called philosophical or sophic mercury and sulfur, whose purity and nature 
are only approximated by those of ordinary mercury and sulfur. Under the 
influence of the planets, different metals result from the combination of 
mercury and sulfur depending on their relative purity and differences in the 
proportion of the two principles in the combination. If perfectly pure and 
combined in perfect equilibrium, they produce gold, otherwise one of the 
inferior metals results. Yet, since all metals have the same constituents as 
gold, purification and readjustment of the proportion of the constituents by 
means of suitable elixirs should transform the inferior metals into gold . 34

The problem for the alchemist was how to imitate the natural process 
and speed up nature in its production of gold. In most views this involved 
the creation of an elixir or the “philosophers’ stone,” which had the power 
to rapidly transform large quantities of imperfect metals by rectifying 
their imperfect composition . 35 The philosophers’ stone is either a blend 
of philosophical mercury and philosophical sulfur, or, as the “mercury- 
alone” theory of the pseudo-Geber suggests, it is philosophical mercury 
containing an inner and nonvolatile or nonflammable sulfur . 36 In either 
case, philosophical mercury is a mercury from which the fluidity and hu- 
midity have been removed. Philosophical or inner sulfur likewise has had 
its flammability and earthiness removed . 37The actual process involved taking some substance, which could be any 
common substance, breaking it down into its constituent qualities, and 
subjecting these qualities to a series of operations through which acciden- 
tal imperfections are purged and the remaining purified substances are 
combined and unified, first into philosophical sulfur and mercury and then 
into the stone. As pseudo-Geber expressed it: “imperfect bodies have su- 
perfluous humidities and combustible sulfurity, with blackness corrupting 
them, an unclean, feculent, combustible and very gross earthiness,” but the 
“spoliation” of these accidental parts of bodies through the use of fire will 
yield a substance in which only mercury and sulfur remain . 38

The exact process for the production of the stone varied from author to 
author, usually involving some sequence of standard chemical operations, 
including such things as calcination, solution, sublimation, distillation, 
and fermentation . 39 This sequence was frequently presented as following 
some kind of cycle that corresponded to some natural pattern. The text

Astronomia inferior 1 85

that comes closest to the Monas is Thomas Norton’s presentation of the 
process in the The Ordinall of Alchemy. Presaging Dee’s discussion of sym- 
bolic numbers as revealing numbers, weights, and measures, Norton’s 
process begins with breaking down the beginning matter into the four 
elements, whose qualities are then recombined

... by ponders right,

With Number and Measure wisely sought,

In which there resteth all that God wrought:

For God made all things, and set it sure,

In Number Ponder and in Measure,

Which numbers if you do chaunge and breake,

Upon Nature you must doe wreake. 40For God made all things, and set it sure,

In Number Ponder and in Measure,

Which numbers if you do chaunge and breake,

Upon Nature you must doe wreake. 40

The process by which this recomposition occurs involves seven circula- 
tions of the elements presided over by the astrological influences of the 
planets. The seven circulations are divided into two sequences. The first 
begins with (1) fire acting on (2) earth producing (3) pure water, leading 
to (4) air. The second sequence begins with (5) air and leads through (6) 
clean earth to return to (7) fire. 41

In carrying out this process the alchemist is thus an imitator of the cre- 
ator and alchemy a replication of creation on a local scale. Dee’s quo- 
tation/paraphrase from the Tabula, indicating that the “una res,” the 
philosophers’ stone, “is nourished in Lemnian earth by lunar and solar 
rays” (the stone’s mother and father), suggests that in the Monas, elemen- 
tal earth is the basic matter of the alchemical process, through which 
philosophical mercury (the moon) and philosophical sulfur (the sun) are 
drawn forth, refined, and generate the “stone.” More than just a concate- 
nation of astronomical/alchemical symbols, Dee derives from the writing 
of his monas an account of the process of the alchemical work resembling 
Norton’s model. In his first ten theorems, for instance, the hieroglyphic 
writing of the monas yields the message that “the sun and the moon of this 
monad desire their elements, in which the denarian proportion will be 
strong, to be separated, and that this be done with the aid of fire.” 42This message results from applying the technique of tsiruf to the monas, 
by which the symbols for all the planets are constructed from components 
of the monas. This technique yields alchemical significance in revealing by 
analysis both the astral and the elemental components of the philosophers’ 
stone and astronomical significance in revealing the character and interre- 
lationships of the planets. Dee divides the planets into a lunar group and

186 N. H. Clule e

Figure 5.7

The genesis of lunar mercury, John Dee, Monas bieroglyphica, fol. 14 (Rare Book 
and Special Collections Division, Library of Congress)

a solar group based on the presence of the symbol of the moon or of the 
sun in their symbols. The lunar group, displaying the cross of the elements 
and a semicircle, comprise the sequence of Saturn, Jupiter, Moon, and 
Mercury, represented by the unconventional symbol of a semicircle on top 
of a cross (figure 5.7). As the diagram indicates, each successive symbol in 
the series is related to the one before it in being a simple rotation of the 
symbol or the addition or subtraction of parts, implying, according to Dee, 
that these four lunar planets constitute a hierarchy in which the shared lu- 
nar quality is progressively enhanced. Reference to this sequence as the re- 
sult of four revolutions of the lunar nature around the earth, in which the 
work of “albification” (whitening) is carried out by applying the moon to 
the elements, invokes the alchemical dimension. The moon has already 
been identified with mercury, and what seems to be at work here is the sep- 
aration and purification (albification) of the mercurial or lunar principle 
from the elements to yield lunar mercury, represented by the cross topped 
by the lunar crescent. 43Mars and Venus, along with the Sun, are solar planets interrelated by a 
shared characteristic and their sequence, from Mars through Venus, in- 
volves a similar progressive enhancement of the solar principle, or sulfur, 
inherent in the elements. These three solar revolutions of the elements, 
when joined to the previous lunar revolutions, unite lunar mercury with 
solar sulfur to yield the conventional symbol for mercury, containing both 
the lunar semicircle and the full solar circle. Driving home the theme of as- 
tronomia inferior, Dee labels the diagram illustrating this process the 
“principal monadic anatomy of the totality of astronomia inferior” (fig-

Astronomia inferior 187

¥

3

m

* «

d

*

tr^lt

4 -

sA

2

o

m

■

■

Figure 5.8

The seven stages: the “principal monadic anatomy of the totality of astronomia 
inferior,” John Dee, Monas bieroglypbica, fol. 14v (Rare Book and Special Col- 
lections Division, Library of Congress)The seven stages: the “principal monadic anatomy of the totality of astronomia 
inferior,” John Dee, Monas bieroglypbica, fol. 14v (Rare Book and Special Col- 
lections Division, Library of Congress)

ure 5.8). 44 Through an egg-shaped figure, Dee evokes both a common 
alchemical image and the notion found in some sixteenth-century astro- 
nomical texts that Mercury’s deferent was oval shaped (figure 5.9). 45 
Within the egg the seven planets are in their Ptolemaic order and follow 
geocentric paths, but in addition the Sun and the solar planets Mars and 
Venus are shown within the yolk, whereas the Moon, lunar Mercury, 
Jupiter, and Saturn are shown within the white. In Dee’s suggested inter- 
pretation, the shell, which commonly represented earth, is dissolved by 
heat and compounded with the lunar mercury of the white, then that mix- 
ture is saturated with the solar sulfur of the yolk through repeated rota- 
tion. 46 These rotations, echoing the seven revolutions previously discussed, 
are represented in another figure (figure 5.10) as a spiral through which the 
“terrestrial center” of the monas ascends through seven stages correspon- 
ding to the planets. Thus, in representing the planets and the metals and 
embodying the essence of the alchemical work, the egg is an analog of the

188 N. H. Clule e

Figure 5.9

The celestial egg, John Dee, Monas hieroglyphica, fol. 17 (Rare Book and Special 
Collections Division, Library of Congress)

Figure 5.10

The seven celestial revolutions, John Dee, Monas hieroglyphica, fol. 1 8 (Rare Book 
and Special Collections Division, Library of Congress)

Astronomia inferior 189

monas, which itself is a hieroglyph of the cosmos and the alchemical work 
rather than a component of either.Astronomia inferior 189

monas, which itself is a hieroglyph of the cosmos and the alchemical work 
rather than a component of either.

The murkiest astronomical/alchemical interpretation of the monas 
comes when Dee inverts the symbol. Again he is able to derive the signs 
of the planets from parts of the symbol, but in this case they emerge in 
the order Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, Sun, and Moon, which 
he says is the order Plato ascribes to them. 47 In this form Dee is able to 
derive the order of the planets accepted by Plato, Aristotle, and others 
earlier than the second century b.c.e. Although placing Venus and Mer- 
cury above the Sun runs counter to the traditional Ptolemaic order, there 
was in fact fair leeway in the order of the planets in a geocentric universe, 
because there was no reliable way of determining the relative sizes and 
distances of the planets. 48 It is difficult to know what Dee intends by this 
rearrangement, since he defers treating the astronomical issue to another 
place, but he does say that this inverted arrangement is meaningful. 49 He 
places the Sun and Moon, which as sulfur and mercury are the most 
powerful influences both astrologically and alchemically, closest to the 
earth, and the other planets are farther away in decreasing order of im- 
portance. He also shows how, in addition to those of Jupiter and Saturn, 
the sign for Venus can be made from the inverted cross by closing the 
semicircles of Aries at its top. Since this circle is smaller than that of 
the Sun, however, this appears to imply that Venus by itself cannot yield 
true gold (Sun). 50 The enigmas of the inverted monas are not yet ex- 
hausted, for they reappear later in the context of the mystical dimension 
of the Monas.The monas also contains the sign for Aries, which is the house of Mars 
(strength) and the exaltation of the Sun, and the sign of Taurus, which is 
the house of Venus (love) and the exaltation of the Moon (figure 5.11). 
Thus, after telling us to separate the elements of the Sun and the Moon by 
means of fire, the monas summarizes the remainder of the alchemical 
process as the “exaltations of the Moon and the Sun by means of the sci- 
ence of the elements.” 51 This idea of the monas as a hieroglyphic writing 
containing a discourse on alchemy and its celestial correspondences 
also emerges in the “magic parable” of the letter of dedication to King 
Maximilian II Habsburg. Here Dee says that the monas “teaches without 
words” how the terrestrial body at its center is to be actuated by a divine 
force and united with the generative lunar and solar influences that have 
been separated both in the heavens and on earth. 52

190 N. H. Clule e

Taurus

T

Ariel

. I

LvHAI BXAl* 
T A I I O.

Elimikta.

S O L I I * X AL- 
TA T 1 O. |

Figure 5.11

The “exaltation of the moon and the sun by the science of the elements,” Dee, 
Monas hieroglyphica, fol. 15 (Rare Book and Special Collections Division, Library 
of Congress)

In just this fashion Dee’s Monas is rooted in the Tabula smaragdina. Be- 
yond the idea of alchemy as an astronomia inferior reflecting the precept 
of the Tabula that “what is below is like that which is above, and what is 
above is like that which is below,” Dee’s monas, as the monad, the una res, 
“is the father of all works of wonder in the world” from which “proceed 
the miracles.” It “has the supreme power because it conquers all subtle 
things and penetrates all solid things.” In particular, Dee’s monas pre- 
scribes that it turn “toward the earth,” “separate the earth from the fire, 
the subtle from the gross,” “ascend from the earth to heaven, and then 
again descend to earth and unite together the power of the superiors and 
the inferiors .” 53Serving as an “astronomical messenger” of a new art of writing, the 
monas therefore rebuilds and restores all astronomy, both inferior and 
superior, by making explicit the intimate similitude and correspondence 
between celestial astronomy and elemental alchemy . 54 With these corre- 
spondences revealed, the “common astronomical symbols of the planets 
(instead of being dead, dumb, or, up to the present hour at least, quasi- 
barbaric signs)” assume the status of “characters imbued with immortal 
life and should now be able to express their properties most eloquently in 
any tongue and to any nation .” 55

Astronomia inferior 191

Trithemius and the Tabula smaragdinaAstronomia inferior 191

Trithemius and the Tabula smaragdina

In its alchemical dimension, the Monas bieroglypbica is clearly a presenta- 
tion of Geberian alchemy in the framework of a cosmology based on the 
Tabula smaragdina. Dee did not come to this entirely on his own. His in- 
terest in the Tabula was undoubtedly related to the fact that the text of the 
Tabula occurs within Roger Bacon’s text and commentary on the Secretum 
secretorum, from which Dee derived some of his idea of the adept and cer- 
tainly his aspiration to the status of the “British Aristotle.” 56 The fun- 
damental inspiration for the formulation of alchemy in the Monas was, 
nonetheless, Johannes Trithemius’s concept of an alchemical magic devel- 
oped in the context of a commentary on the Tabula, presented in a well- 
published and frequently cited letter of August 24, 1505, to Germanus de 
Ganay. 57 Trithemius’s treatment of the Tabula has rightly been seen as sig- 
nificant in a number of contexts. Noel Brann found it to be a fundamental 
expression of Trithemius’s progression from a mystical theology to a mag- 
ical theology incorporating an esoteric occultism and the association of the 
alchemical process with the purification of the soul as it ascends the ladder 
of being. 58 This is a magical theology, because the miraculous ascent of the 
soul is presented as a series of “inward alchemical transformations” em- 
bodying the magical power and “miracle of the one thing” at the center of 
the elevation of the earth to the heavens in the Tabula. 59 In this fashion, 
Trithemius develops what Brann calls an “introverted Hermeticism” fo- 
cused more on internal spiritual transformation, where any external oper- 
ation on the world of nature depends on a previous internal transformation 
of the mind through illumination by divine light. 60 Thus, Trithemius says, 
“our philosophy is celestial, not worldly, in order that we may faithfully be- 
hold that principle which we call God, by an intuition through faith and 
knowledge, as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, one principle, one God, and 
one highest good in a trinity of eternal persons.” 61 Focusing on Trithemius’s 
import for alchemy itself, William Newman has emphasized Trithemius’s 
transformation of the conception of the Tabula from a cryptic recipe into 
an embodiment of the alchemical work as a cosmic process. 62 The ascent of 
earth to the heavens and its return, in this interpretation of the Tabula, also 
underpinned the central position assumed by elemental earth as the basic 
ingredient in alchemy throughout the Renaissance. 63Dee’s Monas reflects both of these features of Trithemius’s alchemical 
magic/magical theology. We have seen how the alchemical discourse gen- 
erated by the writing of the monas conveys the process by which the

192 N. H. Clule e

“terrestrial center” (elemental earth) of the monas is actuated. Although 
Dee claimed that this writing was a “cabala of the real” that applied to 
physical phenomena, the Monas, in the style of Trithemius’s “introverted 
Hermeticism is almost entirely confined to the internal and abstract op- 
erations of the monas symbol within the intellect, which must be divinely 
inspired . 64 Further, Dee associates with this alchemical process a spiritual 
ascent of the adept from the terrestrial to the supercelestial spiritual realm 
above the “horizon of eternity .” 65 Beyond these two features, there is a fur- 
ther key element in Trithemius’s magical theology that is perhaps most 
central to the attraction Trithemius had for Dee’s and to Dee’s expression 
of the cosmological interpretation of the Tabula in the Monas: Tri- 
themius’s numerology.The occasion for Trithemius’s letter to Ganay was a request from Ga- 
nay for Trithemius to explain the “very rare and admirable philosophy, 
shrouded in numbers, elements, and enigmas, and abstruse with arcane 
words” that Ganay had read of in a letter he had come upon from 
Trithemius to a disciple, Johann Steinmoel . 66 In reply, Trithemius pro- 
claims that understanding the return of all things to unity by the ternary 
encompasses the mysteries of the “fundamentum arcani .” 67 It is to expli- 
cate this core secret of his philosophy that Trithemius introduces the Tab- 
ula smaragdina, giving a verbatim version of the text interspersed with 
additions and emendations relating the precepts of the Tabula to the pro- 
cess of recovering the simplicity and purity of unity. He begins by saying 
that “the unit is not a number, but from it all numbers arise. By discarding 
the binary, the ternary will be convertible to unity.” Continuing, with ital- 
ics indicating Trithemius’ additions and brackets indicating modifications 
to the original precepts of the Tabula, Trithemius says that thistruth, Germanus, as Hermes said, [is] without falsehood, [the] certain and most 
true relative of unity. ... LI] What is below is like that which is above, and what is 
above is like that which is below, because all numbers consist only of unities, work- 
ing the miracle of the one thing. [2] Is it not true that all things flow from one thing, 
from the goodness of the One, and that ivhatever is joined to Unity cannot be di- 
verse, but rather fructifies by means of the simplicity and adaptability of the 
One?[3 ] What is born from Unity ? Is it not the ternary ? Take note: Unity is un- 
mixed, the binary is compounded, and the ternary is reduced to the simplicity of 
Unity. I, Trithemius, am not of three minds, but persist in a single integrated mind 
taking pleasure in the ternary, which gives birth to a marvelous offspring. Its fa- 
ther is the Sun, its mother the Moon; the wind carried it in her breast; the earth 
nourished it. [4] It is the father of all works of wonder in the world. [5] Its power is

Astronomia inferior 193Astronomia inferior 193

complete and immense. If it is turned toward the earth[6] it will separate the earth 
from the fire, the subtle from the gross, [7] and when the ternary has at last returned 
to itself it may, by an inner disposition and great delight, ascend from the earth to 
heaven, and again, after it has been adorned with virtue and beauty, descend to the 
earth, and receive the powers of things superior and things inferior; thus it will be 
made powerful and glorious in the clarity of Unity, demonstrate its ability to bring 
forth every number, and put to flight all obscurity.[8] The One is the pure origin of 
all things, the binary, by departing from unity, is compounded, so the binary can- 
not be a principle. Only, therefore, when the sacred, excellent, and potent ternary 
surmounts the binary and returns to unity, not in its original nature, but by par- 
ticipation in similitude, does the mind understand ivithout contradiction all the 
mysteries of the excellently arranged arcanum. This one thing, which has the 
supreme power and the most noble virtue, conquers all worldly things and pene- 
trates every solid body, touching all with its desirable excellence.[9] 6>l

Trithemius thus enhances the centrality of the una res of the Tabula and 
suggests that the ascent and descent of the one thing, and its acquisition 
thereby of magical power by uniting the celestial and the terrestrial, car- 
ries out the fundamental arcanum of the restoration of diversity to unity 
through the ternary. This establishes the importance of considering the 
heavens ( astronomia superior) for true alchemy and distinguishes it 
from false alchemy . 69 This is also the context in which Trithemius states that 
“our philosophy is celestial, not terrestrial,” and invokes “Father, Son, and 
Holy Spirit, one principle, one God, and one highest good in a trinity of 
eternal persons,” thus linking alchemy and magic through his numerology 
to his mystical theology . 70Later in the same letter to Ganay, Trithemius develops the importance 
of number for alchemy and natural magic further, since number is the root 
of the order and measure that govern the celestial harmonies and establish 
the concord between terrestrial and heavenly things . 71 Magic — the philos- 
ophy that is celestial — is nothing other than a wisdom founded upon the 
celestial harmonies of number, measure, and order . 72 In another letter to 
Johannes von Westenburg, Trithemius makes the connection of these ideas 
to alchemy even more concrete. Alchemy may imitate nature only through 
an understanding of numbers, weights, and measures, because the de- 
scent from unity by the binary to the ternary and the return to simplicity 
through the ternary and the quaternary govern all natural operations . 73 
The first principle of magic, through which all natural wonders are pro- 
duced, is the restoration of purity in unity, which in essence is the re- 
capturing of the monadic origin of things through the Pythagorean

194 N. H. Clule e

progression of the tetractys. 74 Applied to the magician, “whoever has be- 
come elevated to the uncompounded pure state of utter simplicity may be 
perfect in every natural science, may bring to pass marvelous works, and 
may discover amazing effects.” 75 Applied to alchemy, this natural magic 
entails the reduction of composites of the elements by fire to purity, sim- 
plicity, and unity from the diversity and compoundedness arising from the 
binary. 76 In this context Trithemius specifically discusses earth, which in 
being composed of pure, simple, and unitary elements, is itself compound, 
diverse, and impure but can be reduced to simplicity by fire. 77

John Dee and TrithemiusJohn Dee and Trithemius

In his first indication of an interest in Trithemius in 1563, Dee coupled him 
with his own search for insight into “the Science De numeris formalibus, 
the Science De ponderibus mysticis, and the Science De mensuris divinis: 
by which three the huge frame of the world is fashioned,” an interest that 
reached fruition in the numerology of the Monas. 7S This numerology 
yielded the numbers useful “when elements are to be weighed, when mea- 
sures of time are to be determined, and finally when the power and virtue 
of things have to be expressed in certain degrees,” which echo both Nor- 
ton’s “by ponders right, With Number and Measure wisely sought,” and 
Trithemius’s celestial harmonies of number, measure, and order as the ba- 
sis of his natural magic. 79 Dee was clearly familiar with Trithemius’s let- 
ters, and in an annotation to Trithemius’s phrase, “a ternario in vnitatem 
per binarium divisum,” he associates the symbols for mercury, salt, and 
sulfur with the ternary, compounds of mercury-salt and sulfur-salt with 
the two units of the binary, and his monas symbol with the unity that re- 
sults form the union of these. 80 In the Monas Dee evokes not only themes 
from the Tabula but also the numerological magic of Trithemius by show- 
ing how the elements of the earth, through the separation of the sun and 
the moon and the elimination of impurities, are restored through the bi- 
nary, ternary, and quaternary to a purified unity.

Going far beyond mere numbers, the most involved integration of 
Trithemius’s numerological alchemy with Dee’s concept of the monas 
emerges in Dee’s geometrical discussion of the cross of the elements, where 
the Trithemian idea of the restoration of unity from the binary through the 
ternary that resides in the binary is related to the elements and alchemy. 
The two lines that represent the binary of material creation are formed

Astronomia inferior 195Astronomia inferior 195

into a cross to signify the four elements. This cross contains the ternary 
hidden within it, because what makes it a cross is not just the two lines, 
but also the point where they cross. This point, making the ternary, is in- 
trinsic to the binary nature of the cross, because removing it would destroy 
the binary and produce the quaternary. 81

From another perspective, considering the cross as a quaternary, the 
central point is superfluous. When this central point is removed, the qua- 
ternary “in the realm of the four elements” is more distinct. The point, 
therefore, which is not superfluous in the “divine” ternary, becomes, in 
the terrestrial sphere of the four elements, “feculent, corruptible, and full 
of darkness” and must be removed. 82 By proceeding in these ways, the 
“monas is restored through the binary and ternary to its oneness in a pu- 
rified quaternary. . . . During this process our monad does not admit any 
external units or numbers, because it suffices to itself most precisely, com- 
plete in all its numbers. ... It is restored to its first and own matter, while 
in the meantime the impurities that have nothing to do with its genuine 
and inherited proportion have in every way and carefully been cut off and 
removed forever.” 83Besides explicating the core alchemical process of the cosmos and 
thereby revealing the unity of astronomy and alchemy, the sacred art of 
writing of the cabala of the real also encompasses the dimension of spiri- 
tual ascent in Trithemius’s magical/mystical theology. By mastering this 
language the natural philosopher gains access to the innermost secrets of 
the cosmos, elevating the philosopher to the level of “adeptship.” Adept- 
ship grants the philosopher command of a cabalistic magic that includes 
mastery of the “magic of the elements” (alchemy) as well as a spiritual 
magic directed toward the healing of the soul that opens the way to the 
celestial rather than the terrestrial. 84 Dee presents a diagram (figure 5.12) 
presenting the mystical ascent to the supercelestial realm as an integral 
part of this magic. Various parts of this scheme are disposed according to 
the ternary, the septenary, the octonary, and the denary derived from the 
quaternary of the cross of the elements, which also figures prominently 
here. This diagram graphically represents a metamorphosis leaping from 
the temporal to the eternal and supercelestial realm beyond the “horizon 
aeternitatis” when the monas, after being “correctly, wholly, and physi- 
cally restored to itself” in perfect unity, undergoes four “supercelestial 
revolutions.” 85 Dee’s philosophy in the Moms thus bears a resemblance to

1Q\|M|C0

196 N. H. Clule e

HORIZON aeternitatis-

Figure 5.12

“Horizon aeternitatis,” John Dee, Monas hieroglypbica, fol. 27 (Rare Book and 
Special Collections Division, Library of Congress)

Trithemius’s “introverted Hermeticism,” in which internal illumination 
takes precedence over the external world and mystical ascent to and 
knowledge of God is an integral part of and the culmination of the attain- 
ment of an integral knowledge of the cosmos.Trithemius’s philosophy of natural magic, which includes alchemy, and 
his magical theology are together, therefore, one of the foundations of the 
Monas. To this Dee has added the other major foundation: the idea of a 
geometrically based hieroglyphic writing. Inspired by his study of cabala, 
Dee claims this writing to be a divine language of creation because of 
its derivation from the geometrical and numerological processes through 
which creation took place. As a “real character” and a “cabala of that 
which exists,” this writing reforms all the disciplines because it reveals the 
unity of all knowledge, particularly the unity among astronomy, alchemy, 
and magic in an occult philosophy. The monas’s ability to explicate the ma- 
terials and sequential process of traditional alchemy by reference to as- 
tronomy as a celestial alchemy, as well as providing insight into cosmology 
as analogous to alchemy, in a way that reflects the Emerald Tablet serves

Astronomia inferior 197

to validate for Dee his claim about the power of his new language and links 
these two foundations.

John Dee redivivus: Philipp a Gabella’s Consideratio BrevisAstronomia inferior 197

to validate for Dee his claim about the power of his new language and links 
these two foundations.

John Dee redivivus: Philipp a Gabella’s Consideratio Brevis

Philipp a Gabella’s Secretions Pbilosopbiae Consideratio Brevis is perhaps 
the most extensive but least studied instance of the influence of Dee’s 
Monas. 86 This text is quite rare — I have found no copy of it in North 
America — and notable because it was published in 1615 with the original 
publication of the Confessio Fraternitatis R.C., the second of the two 
Rosicrucian “manifestos.” 87 Nothing is known of Gabella himself, and 
most writers on the Rosicrucian phenomenon, considering Gabella as not 
integral to the original tracts, quite rightly as we will see, do not discuss 
the text at all. 88 Frances Yates has made rather more of this text. Pointing 
out that the Consideratio quotes from the first thirteen theorems of Dee’s 
Monas, Yates adduces these quotations to support the inference that 
Gabella’s Consideratio was the product of a school of disciples that re- 
mained from Dee’s activities in eastern Europe in the 1580s. She has also 
considered this text to be integral to the Rosicrucian “movement” as the 
articulation of the “more secret philosophy” behind the manifestos. 89 In 
the combination of these two premises Yates finds the key evidence that 
Dee was the original inspiration for the Rosicrucian movement and its 
“mentality.” 90 Yates did not study the Consideratio or its relation to Dee 
in any depth, so the Consideratio may have been just another text that the 
editors or publishers of the Confessio, for reasons now known only to 
themselves, included with the manifestos despite only marginal connec- 
tions to the original Rosicrucian documents. 91Yates’s suggestions, however, have subsequently provoked more serious 
consideration of Gabella’s place within the Rosicrucian context. The name 
Philipp a Gabella, with its apparent allusion to Cabala, has the markings 
of a pseudonym. The publication of the Consideratio by Wilhelm Wessel, 
who was court printer to Landgraf Moritz of Hesse-Kassel, and its dedi- 
cation to Bruno Carolus von Uffel, a Hessen nobleman who once pro- 
posed an alchemical recipe to Moritz and later held an administrative post 
at court, suggest more than a hint of a connection with Moritz’s court. 92 
Bruce Moran has argued that Raphael Eglinus, an alchemist Moritz

198 N. H. Clule e

patronized, was the Consideratio’s author, whereas Carlos Gilly has sug- 
gested Johannes Rhenanus, another member of Moritz’s scientific en- 
tourage. 95 Besides writing to Moritz in 1595, Dee had direct connections 
with the court at Kassel under Wilhelm IV, Moritz’s predecessor, so there 
is a basis for a Dee legacy at Moritz’s court, including some of Dee’s writ- 
ings, that would have been available to Eglinus or Rhenanus, although nei- 
ther likely ever met Dee personally. 94 Moran has found these associations 
supportive of Yates’s contentions, whereas Gilly has been more dismissive, 
verdicts deriving from differing readings of the Consider atio. 95 For our 
purposes here, the character of the Consider atio' s Rosicrucian connec- 
tions are of only slight importance; I shall be primarily interested in how 
the Consideratio uses Dee and reflects the theme of astronomia inferior of 
the Tabula and Trithemius as mediated by Dee. We will return to the Rosi- 
crucian connection at the end of the chapter, because the Dee connection 
does bear on Yates’s claim that Dee was the progenitor of Rosicrucianism. 
It turns out that any lingering suspicions of a formative connection of ei- 
ther Gabella or Dee with Rosicrucianism will ultimately dissipate.Gabella’s text is most interesting as an attempt to explicate alchemical 
ideas through an elaboration of the Emerald Tablet by means of very close 
borrowings from John Dee, borrowings so extensive that the Consideratio 
may appear almost a reincarnation of John Dee’s early natural philosophy. 
Because of Gabella’s use of Dee, the Consideratio evokes something of 
Trithemius’s interpretation of the Tabula but with significant limitations 
because Gabella did not know Trithemius directly and had only a narrow 
understanding of Dee’s ideas limited by his own concrete focus on 
alchemy.

Although the Consideratio closes with a prayer signed “Philemon 
Philadelphiae R.C.,” the dedication to Bruno Carolus von Uffel expresses 
the hope that this treatise “may be decorated by the deeds, the enthusiasm 
and the diligence of the Rosicrucian Brotherhood.” This suggests that, 
rather than being a member of the proclaimed brotherhood or associated 
with the authorship of the Fama and the Confessio, Gabella was publish- 
ing one of the earliest expressions of interest in the supposed brotherhood 
that appeared in response to the Fama Fraternitatis of 1614. 96 This would 
explain the signs of great haste in the composition of the Consideratio. 
The first indication of this haste is that the text seems to have little co- 
herent structure. Although the entire text deals with alchemy or topics of

Astronomia inferior 199Astronomia inferior 199

alchemical import and each of the nine chapters is related to alchemy in 
a general way, the flow from one to the next of the nine chapters is not 
always evident, and there is little sense of a progressive development 
within the text as a whole. It is almost as if it were a series of separate con- 
siderations, reminiscent of texts such as the Rosarium pbilosopborum 
and the Turba pbilosopborum, each of which is a compilation of excerpts, 
or apparent excerpts, from ancient and classical alchemical and “philo- 
sophical” sources, all dealing with alchemy, but often without clear inter- 
connections or progression. These analogies point to another feature of 
the Consideratio that contributes significantly to its disjointed character: 
It is highly derivative. Major sections, as we shall explore later, are direct 
quotations from other authors. Like those in the Rosarium and the Turba, 
these extracts often seem to shift topics abruptly, but unlike them, Gabella 
rarely attributes his extracts to their actual authors. Other indications 
of haste are the crude character of the figures and careless typography 
and orthography.

The Consideratio is a primer by Gabella, as a teacher of the “pyronomic 
art,” on alchemical wisdom. In it, he exhorts “whoever wishes to know the 
daughter of alchemical wisdom, resplendent in her brilliant white dress,” 
to prepare for an arduous struggle 97 in which alchemical books contain the 
foundations of wisdom and can drive out ignorance but are, Gabella ad- 
mits, frequently obscure and require the guidance of a teacher. Still, he cov- 
ers his bases by saying that if he leaves anything obscure, it is the result of 
the sources, of whom he mentions Hermes, Plato, and Seneca as well as 
“many other philosophers,” upon which his contemplation is founded . 98Gabella’s demurral is both well taken and disingenuous: well taken be- 
cause the Consideratio is in large part a compilation of massive quotations 
from others’ writings rather than Gabella’s expert explication of those 
books and disingenuous because the sources of Gabella’s quotations are 
mostly modern authors; any lingering obscurity should not be laid at the 
feet of the authors Gabella mentions, such as Hermes and Plato, but at- 
tributed to the sources of Gabella’s extensive quotations, who are rarely 
cited. Though bowing to contemporary cultural icons and citing “ancient 
philosophers,” Gabella prefers modern authors on principle. Despite his 
professed homage to the ancients, Gabella says that “if Hermes, the father 
of philosophy, were to be brought back to life today, there is no doubt that 
he would be laughed at by the alchemists ,” 99 because skill and knowledge

200 N. H. Clule e

are enhanced over time; so “the wise of today far excel their predeces- 
sors .” 100 This produces the very curious product of a text patterned on a 
very ancient but unacknowledged structure, the Tabula smaragdina, pre- 
tending to be an original explication of the ideas of “ancient philoso- 
phers,” such as Hermes and Plato, but constituted almost entirely of a 
patchwork of quotations from unacknowledged modern authors.Although Gabella’s direct expropriation of other texts raises red flags 
to modern sensibilities, it may well be only an example of a work con- 
structed by drawing upon the compilation of commonplaces, which was 
a standard part of humanist education. Commonplace books, recording 
quotations, facts, and observations of various sorts, became important 
tools for storing and organizing information in the Renaissance . 101 Ann 
Blair and others have pointed to the “reprocessing” of others’ texts from 
synthesis to quotation that this method of compilation facilitated and to 
the attendant juxtaposition of positions, inconsistencies, and credulity 
coexisting with observation and cautious assessment that was apparent 
in the resultant works . 102 One problem with commonplace collections is 
that their quotations were often so removed from their original contexts 
that they often bear meanings alien to the original when they are used in 
the production of new texts . 103 Gabella’s Consideratio exhibits many of 
these characteristics.

Although the Consideratio may be a patchwork of extracts and echoes 
of other texts, Gabella was not a slave to their meaning. For instance, his 
comment on Hermes being laughed at by the alchemists has a possible 
foundation in Michael Sendivogius’s Novum lumen cbemicum : 104

Consideratio 
sig. Dl v

Quod si hodie Hermes, philosopho- 
rum pater, reviviscat, proculdubio ab 
Alchymistis irrideretur. Quemad- 
modum ipsum Daedalum, sculptores 
ajunt, si reviviscens, talia fabricaret, 
qualia quondam, ex quibus sibi glo- 
riam comparavit, ridiculum fore.

Novum lumen chemicum 
465Novum lumen chemicum 
465

Si hodie revivisceret ipse Philosopho- 
rum pater Hermes, & subtilis ingenii 
Geber, cum profundissimo RAI- 
MUNDO LULLIO, non pro Phil- 
osophis, sed potius pro discipulis 
a nostris Chemistis, haberentur: 
Nescirent tot hodie usitatas distilla- 
tiones, tot circulationes, tot calci- 
nationes, tot alia innumerabilia 
Artistarum opera, quae ex illorum 
scriptis hujus saeculi homines in- 
venerunt & excogitarunt.

Astronomia inferior 201

Not only has Gabella abbreviated Sendivogius’s passage, he has eliminated 
the irony, and ultimately the intent, of the original as well. This should cau- 
tion us that, just because Gabella may have extracted passages from other 
authors, he has not always done so with the intention of communicating 
their meaning faithfully.

Consideratio and Tabula

These observations aside, there is a larger structure behind the scattered 
appearance of Gabella’s considerations. Gabella presents himself to the 
reader as a teacher who will guide the reader in the quest for the “pyro- 
nomic art.” 105 In carrying this out, Gabella shaped the general structure 
of the Consideratio to reflect the basic themes of the Tabula smaragdina. 
Because of its extremely concise and pithy character, the Tabula is often 
cryptic and subject to many interpretations, but Gabella develops sev- 
eral themes among the scattered statements of the Tabula reflecting the 
cosmological foundations of the alchemical process developed by Trithe- 
mius and embodied in Dee’s Monas. The precepts, indicated in brackets, 
that Gabella develops as his themes are

1. Truth: The precepts of the Tabula are true and certain [1 J.1. Truth: The precepts of the Tabula are true and certain [1 J.

2. Cosmology: All things are related to a primal monad (the una res) from 
which all has been created by the action of the one [supreme] being [3]; the 
terrestrial world and the celestial world are mutually interrelated in carry- 
ing out the miracles of this one thing [2], which was born of the Sun (its 
father), the Moon (its mother), the air (its womb), and the earth (its nurse) 
[4]; the world originated from this process [10].

3. Alchemy: This primal monad with its magical powers is the implied 
aim of the alchemical work; it requires uniting the celestial and the terres- 
trial to accomplish the miracle of the monad [2], turning it toward the 
earth [6] and separating the earth from fire and the subtle from the gross 
with prudence and ingenuity [7].

Although the Consideratio does not precisely follow the Tabula and at 
times jumps around among these themes, thinking of it as developing con- 
siderations on them helps draw out some of what might have been 
Gabella’s objective.

In actually developing his instruction in the “pyronomic art,” Gabella 
begins his first chapter echoing the first precept of the Tabula with an as- 
sertion that he is presenting a Truth that will end uncertainty:

202 N. H. Clule e

Consideratio Tabula

sig. Bl r no. 1

Veritatem, (Mortales) cujus splendor Verum, sine mendacio, certum et

ambiguitates omnes propellit, non verissimum. 10,;

mendacium quod earn in profundo 
penitus abstrusit, vobis trado. . . .Veritatem, (Mortales) cujus splendor Verum, sine mendacio, certum et

ambiguitates omnes propellit, non verissimum. 10,;

mendacium quod earn in profundo 
penitus abstrusit, vobis trado. . . .

With confidence that time reveals all things and that all secret things will 
be brought to light, Gabella states that his aim is to investigate the causes 
and reasons of secret matters and above all to attain knowledge of “M .” 107 
What this “M” might be is not the last of the obscurities of Gabella’s text. 
It may well be the philosophers’ stone or the una res of the Tabula, since 
later in the text when discussing philosophical mercury as the prime ma- 
terial of all things Gabella says that “without it M. cannot exist .” 108 What 
“M.” may be an abbreviation for is less certain. Possibilities include Dee’s 
Monas, which figures so prominently later in the text and has associations 
with the philosophers’ stone and the una res, or the magisterium, refer- 
ring to the culmination of the alchemical art. Since the Consideratio may 
be a response to the Tama Fraternitatis, this may also refer to the “Liber 
M” referred to in the Fama, where “M” most likely denotes “mundi .” 109 
Whatever the case may be, Gabella says that this “M.” has “its origins 
in the heavens,” so in conjunction with his conviction that understanding 
of the hidden and secret origins of natural things requires tracing their 
origin, derivation, and development, this leads to a consideration of 
cosmology . 110

Cosmology, the Tabula, and DeeCosmology, the Tabula, and Dee

Gabella’s exposition develops a number of cosmological themes reflecting 
the Tabula’s precepts that the world and all things are derived from the pri- 
mal monad through the action of the supreme being, that the terrestrial 
world and the celestial world are mutually interrelated and their connec- 
tions are essential to the miracles of the una res, and that the Sun, the 
Moon, the air, and the earth are key elements in the process . 111 Gabella 
starts by dealing with the heavens, based on John Dee’s Propaedeumata 
apboristica, and immediately presents us with how massively Gabella has 
excerpted others’ writings. Dee was particularly sensitive to others’ unac- 
knowledged use of his work, having criticized Offusius for plagiarizing his 
Propaedeumata and taken offense at Gerhard Dorn’s use of his monas

Astronomia inferior 203

symbol. 112 Imagine, then, his reaction upon reading the opening passage

of chapter 2 of the Consideratio:

Consideratio 
sig. B2 r/V

A capite autem mortales, arcessere, sic 
accipite. Lux & motus, sunt 
coelestium corporum maxime propria: 
Inter planetas, Sol, luce propria, 
omnes alios superat: Et Luna, proprii 
motus pernicitate reliquos omnes 
vincit. Merito igitur hi duo, omnium 
planetarum, excellentissimi censentur.

Propaedeumata 
CII ( 1 83) 113

Ut Lux Sc Motus sunt caelestium cor- 
porum maxime propria, ita inter plan- 
etas, SOL, LUCE propria omnes alios 
superat: Sc LUNA, proprii MOTUS 
pernicitate, reliquos omnes vincit. Hi 
ergo duo, omnium planetarum excel- 
lentissimi, merito censentur.All of chapter 2, with the exception of one passage and a few transitional 
words, is in fact entirely made up of quotations from Dee’s Propaedeumata 
apboristica, originally published in 1558. Dee reissued this in 1568 with 
changes reflecting the ideas of the Monas, and Gabella uses this edition. 
There is very little evidence that the Propaedeumata had much of an audi- 
ence, so it is of some interest to find it so extensively used almost fifty years 
after its last printing. Although Gabella’s extensive quotation — some 
might be tempted to say plagiarism — makes the Consideratio highly de- 
rivative, there is nonetheless a formative process at work, for Gabella does 
not slavishly follow just one work or author, but in the first half of the 
Consideratio he at least pieces passages together to develop his own pres- 
entation of alchemy and the Tabula.

Gabella’s use of the Propaedeumata is exemplary of this process. He does 
not attempt to present all of Dee’s ideas and material; there is no treatment 
of the technical aspects of astronomy, or of the need to calculate the sizes and 
distances of the planets and stars, or of the principles and mechanics of cal- 
culating the relative power of celestial influences, or of the physics of light 
that is the basis of Dee’s astrological theory. Gabella begins not at the start of 
the Propaedeumata, where Dee lays down the foundations of his astrology, 
but toward the end, with a group of Dee’s aphorisms that echo the “Pater ejus 
est Sol, mater ejus Luna” of the Tabula. Following the opening quotation in- 
dicating that the Sun and Moon are the most excellent among the planets be- 
cause they surpass all others respectively in their light and motion, which 
“are the most distinctive properties of heavenly bodies,” Gabella continues 
by developing their influence. Whereas the Sun, through its light, governs vi- 
tal heat, the Moon’s dominion over humidity is linked to its swift motion:

204 N. H. Clule e204 N. H. Clule e

Consideratio 
sig. B2 V

Luna potentissima est, humidarum 
rerum moderatrix, humiditatisque 
excitatrix, & effectrix.

Consideratio 
sig. B2 V

Ut igitur Solis, excellentem lucem, 
praecipuum vitalis caloris comitatur: 
ita, cum Lunae motu, mira quadam 
analogia, conjuncta est ejus vis humid- 
itatis effectiva, & moderatrix. 114

Propaedewnata 
CIII (184)

LUNA, potentissima est humidarum 
rerum moderatrix: humiditatisque 
excitatrix & effectrix.

Propaedewnata 
CIIII (184)

UT Solis excellentem LUCEM, prae- 
cipuum vitalis caloris moderamen 
comitatur: ita cum LUNAE MOTU, 
mira quadam analogia, coniuncta est 
eius vis, humiditatis effectiva & 
moderatrix.

Gabella concludes this by quoting Dee’s extended aphorism in which the 
generation of all primary qualities is attributed to the sun’s heat, which 
regulates the cycle of the year as well as the analogous course of the day 
from morning (spring), through afternoon (summer), evening (autumn), 
and night (winter ). 115 Presaging what increasingly appears to be his me- 
chanical quotation of other sources, Gabella even quotes, without any ef- 
fort at elucidation, Dee’s obscure injunction at the end of this aphorism for 
those “who investigate the physical mysteries in the unity of the Trinity” 
and those who seek to hide their work to “apply this aphorism to higher 
matters”:

Consideratio 
sig. B3 r

Has philosophorum considerationes, 
ad altiora traducas, & maximum se- 
cretum habes, tu, qui trinitatis in uni- 
tate Mysteria tractas Physica, & ad 
noctis multi coloris, nigredinem opus 
tuum involvendum, ratione, anhelas.

Propaedewnata 
CVII (186)

Aphorismum istum ad altiora tradu- 
cas, & maximum Secretum habes, Tu, 
qui Trinitatis in unitate, mysteria trac- 
tas physica: & ad Noctis multicoloris 
Nigredine, Opus involvendum tuum, 
anhelas.Aphorismum istum ad altiora tradu- 
cas, & maximum Secretum habes, Tu, 
qui Trinitatis in unitate, mysteria trac- 
tas physica: & ad Noctis multicoloris 
Nigredine, Opus involvendum tuum, 
anhelas.

Gabella jumps from this to a very early group of Dee’s aphorisms deal- 
ing with the behavior of created substance that is the foundation of the 
mutual interrelation of all creation, including the interdependence of ter- 
restrial and celestial. Creation includes not only what is apparent but also 
occult and seminal things. All things spherically emit rays of their species 
so that the entire universe is filled with the rays of all things. The efficacy 
of these species varies, with substantial species exceeding those of acci-

Astronomia inferior 205

dents, and the species of spiritual substance exceeding those of corporeal 
substance:

Consideratio 
sig. B3 V

Non solum enim ea tantum esse, 
asserendum est, quae actu in rerum 
natura sunt conspicua notaque: Sed 
ilia quoque, quae quasi seminaliter, in 
naturae latebris extare, sapientes, non 
ignorantes, docere possunt.

Consideratio 
sig. B3 V

Nam quicquid actu existit, radios 
orbiculariter ejaculatur, in singulas 
mundi partes, qui universum mundum 
suo modo replent. Unde omnis locus 
mundi radios continet, omnium rerum 
in eo actu existentium.

Consideratio 
sig. B3 v -B4 r

Sed, tarn substantia, quam accidens, 
suam a se speciem exerunt? substantia 
vero omnis, multo excellentius est 
quam accidens: substantiarum, enim 
ilia quae corporea & spiritualis est,

(vel quae spiritualis facta est) in hoc 
munere, longe superat illam, quae est 
corporea, ac ex fluxis coagmentata im- 
puris elementis.

Propaedeumata 
III (122)

NOn solum ea Esse asserendum est, 
quae Actu in rerum natura sunt con- 
spicua, notaque: Sed & ilia quoque 
quae quasi Seminaliter, in naturae late- 
bris, Extare, Sapientes docere possunt.

Propaedeumata

1111 ( 122 )Propaedeumata

1111 ( 122 )

QUicquid Actu existit, Radios orbicu- 
lariter eiaculatur in singulas mundi 
partes, qui universum mundum suo 
modo replent. Unde omnis locus 
mundi radios continet omnium rerum 
in eo Actu existentium.

Propaedeumata 
V (122-24)

TAm Substantia quam Accidens, suam 
a se Speciem exerunt: Sed Substantia 
omnis, excellentius multo quam acci- 
dens. Et Substantiarum quidem, ilia 
quae incorporea & spiritalis est, (vel 
quae Spiritalis facta est) in hoc munere 
longe superat illam quae est corporea, 
ac ex fluxis coagmentata elementis.

The foundation for these interrelationships via rays derives from 
the fundamentally geometrical nature of creation, since the first 
manifestation of things was produced from the straight line and the 
circle. This observation marks the transition between the first part of 
Gabella’s chapter dealing with the sun and moon and this second part. 
This is also the only passage not quoted directly from Dee’s Propae- 
deumata. Gabella has not, however, been struck with a fit of creativity; 
he is merely quoting from his other major Dee source, the Monas 
bieroglyphica:

206 N. H. Clule e

Consideratio 
sig. B3 r

Sed porro ex hac consideratione, 
per lineam circulumque, Prima, sim- 
plicissimaque fuit rerum, turn non ex- 
istentium, turn in natura latentium, 
involucris, in lucem productio ac 
repraesentatio.

Monas bieroglypbica 
Theorema I, fol. 12r 
(154/55)

Per Lineam rectam, Circulumque, 
Prima, Simplicissimaque fuit Rerum, 
turn, non existentium, turn in Naturae 
latentium Inuolucris, in Lucem Pro- 
ductio, representatioque.

Not only does this process of creation link the action of the sun’s heat in 
generating the primary qualities with the mechanism of occult interaction 
among the species of created things, Gabella also sees it as the basis for the 
ability to produce wonders by artificially manipulating nature through the 
principles of pyronomia:

Consideratio 
sig. B3 r/VConsideratio 
sig. B3 r/V

Nam ex linea & circulo, mirabiles re- 
rum naturalium metamorphoses, fieri 
a nobis in rei veritate possent, si artifi- 
ciose naturam ex Pyronomiae institutis 
recte urgeremus.

Propaedeumata

11 ( 122 )

Mirabiles ergo rerum naturalium 
Metamorphoses fieri a nobis, in rei 
veritate possent, si artificiose Naturam 
ex pyronomiae Institutis urgeremus.

This capability resonates with the suggestions of magic in the Tabula, 
where the miracle of the one thing is “the father of all works of wonder in 
the world” and “has the supreme power because it conquers all subtle 
things and penetrates all solid things .” 116 These powers, however, are not 
supernatural; they only apply to nature, which is only what has been cre- 
ated by the will of God. To emphasize that such power works within and 
only changes nature, but can never overturn creation or rival divine power, 
Gabella quotes Dee’s very first aphorism:

Consideratio 
sig. B4 r

Sed ut Deus (quod nostrum non est 
considerare) ex nihilo, contra rationes 
& naturae leges, cuncta creavit, ita in 
nihilum rerum, aliqua nunquam 
potest, nisi contra rationis naturaeque 
leges, per super naturalem ejus poten- 
tiam fiat.

Propaedeumata

1 ( 122 )

UT DEUS, EX NIHILO, CONTRA ra- 
tiones & naturae leges, cuncta creavit: 
ita in Nihilum abire, rerum creaturum 
aliqua nunquam potest, nisi contra ra- 
tionis Naturaeque leges, per Supernat- 
uralem Dei potentiam fiat.

Nature has not existed from all eternity, nor is it the result of accident or 
some natural mechanism; it is the miraculous work of the will of God.

Astronomia inferior 207

Equally important, however, is the implication that unless God intervenes, 
nature and creation have a stability and are entirely regular and predictable 
in the normal course of their operation because they are governed by ra- 
tional natural laws. 117To incorporate the earth along with the sun, the moon, and the heavens 
into this geometrical cosmology derived from and governed by the straight 
line and the circle, Gabella turns to Dee’s Monas. Again there is no ac- 
knowledgment of Dee, and Gabella gives a more concrete cast to the ideas 
by replacing the term “monas” with “star” and “hieroglyphic star,” rep- 
resented by his own diagram instead of Dee’s famous symbol (figure 5.13; 
cf. figure 5.3). This is clearly intentional, because later in the Consideratio 
Gabella employs figures that are quite similar to Dee’s (figure 5.20, com- 
bining elements of figure 5.5, and figure 5.18, which can be found in fig- 
ure 5.8). It would appear, therefore, that Gabella was not without models 
of Dee’s original figures. Carlos Gilly has noted the similarity of Gabella’s 
“stella” with the symbol for vitriol, an association that seems to have been 
intentional, because later in the text Gabella gives a formula for the dis- 
covery of the true medicine, the initials of which spell VITRIOLVM. 118 
Replacing Dee’s symbol of the monas with that of vitriol, however, has 
some curious effects on Gabella’s use of the Monas. First of all, eliminat- 
ing the very term “monas” obscures the core idea of unity at the heart 
of creation, even though this is what Gabella seeks to establish through 
his use of Dee. Second, the various numerological analogies Dee devel- 
ops in the Monas have some rationale in relation to the fundamental unit 
of the monas, but they seem arbitrary when Gabella uses them. Gabella’s

Figure 5.13

Stella hieroglyphica, Gabella, Secretioris Pbilosopbiae Consideratio Brevis, sig. 
B4r (by permission of the British Library, from shelfmark 1033.H.6.(4.))

208 N. H. Clule e

different symbol also seems impoverished; without the separate lunar 
semicircle and the Aries element, it does not as clearly support some of the 
manipulations and interpretations as did Dee’s original.Continuing from the previous reference to “the first and most simple 
manifestation” of things happening by means of the straight line and the 
circle, Gabella takes up his “star,” saying

Consideratio 
sig. B4 r,v

. . . nec sine recta circulus nec sine 
puncti [sic], recta artificiose fieri potest 
linea. Puncti proinde stellae, ratione 
res &C esse cseperunt primo &C quae pe- 
riphera sunt affectae (quantocunque 
fuerint) centralis puncti, nullo modo 
carere possunt ministerio.

Consideratio 
sig. B4 V

Stellae itaque hyeroglyphicae, con- 
spicuum centrale punctum, terram 
refert, circa quam, turn Sol, turn Luna, 
reliquique planetae, suos conficiunt 
cursus, Sc impressiones.

Monas

11(154/55)

At nec sine Recta, Circulus; nec sine 
Puncto, Recta artificiose fieri potest. 
Puncti proinde, Monadisque ratione, 
Res, Sc esse coeperunt primo: et quae 
peripheria sunt affectae, (quantae- 
cunque fuerint) Centralis Puncti nullo 
modo carere possunt Ministerio.

Monas 
III (154/55)

Monadis, Igitur, Hieroglyphicae Con- 
spicuum Centrale Punctum, Terram 
refert, circa quam, turn Sol turn Luna, 
reliquique Planetae suos conficiunt 
Cursus.

Gabella here echoes the clearly cosmological character of the construction 
of Dee’s monas: The point represents the earth, and the circle represents 
both the sun and also the entire frame of the heavens surrounding the 
earth. Dee then followed this with a discussion of the lunar semicircle, but 
since Gabella has eliminated this part of the symbol, he truncates and 
modifies Dee’s next aphorism in a way that makes it quite ambiguous:

Consideratio 
sig. B4 V

Solaribus ita tandem imbui radiis ap- 
petat, ut in eundem quasi transfor- 
mata, toto dispareat Caelo: donee 
aliquot post diebus, omnino hac qua 
depinximus figura appareat.

Monas 
IIII (156/57)Solaribus ita tandem imbui radiis ap- 
petat, ut in eundem quasi transfor- 
mata, toto dispareat Caelo: donee 
aliquot post diebus, omnino hac qua 
depinximus figura appareat.

Monas 
IIII (156/57)

Solaribusque ita tandem inbui Radijs 
appetat, vt in eundem quasi Transfor- 
mata, toto dispareat Caelo: donee 
aliquot post Diebus, omnino hac qua 
depinximus, appareat corniculata 
figura.

In the context of Gabella’s text the central point, or earth, is the most prox- 
imate object desiring to be imbued by solar rays, but the disappearance 
and reappearance of the earth and its depiction by Gabella’s lens-shaped

Astronomia inferior 209

Figure 5.14

Lens-shaped luna, Gabella, Secretions Philosopbiae Consideratio Brevis, sig. B4v 
(by permission of the British Library, from shelfmark 1033.H.6.(4.))

figure makes little sense (figure 5.14). Only by quoting in modified form 
Dee’s next aphorism does Gabella make it clear that he has the moon in 
mind.

Consideratio 
sig. B4 V

Ex Lunari certa simulacra, & solare 
complementum perducto: factum 
sit vespere & mane dies unus, qui 
est primus, quo lux, philosophorum 
apparuit.

Monas 
V (156/57)

Et Lunari certe Semicirculo ad Solare 
complementum perducto: Factum est 
Vespere & Mane Dies vnus. Sit ergo Pri- 
mus, quo Lvx est facta Philosophorum.

This observation links the genesis of the “star” with the first day of Gene- 
sis and marks the conclusion of the creation of the universe’s circular and 
celestial components as well as of light, which is so preeminently con- 
nected with the role of the sun and moon as Gabella has already developed 
them. In fact, at this point he quite cleverly explicates the “light of the 
philosophers” with a reference to Dee’s Propaedeumata:

Consideratio 
sig. B4 V

Nam sicut primi motus privilegium 
est, ut sine eo, torpeant omnes reliqui, 
sic primae & praecipuae formae sen- 
sibilis (nimirum lucis) ea est facultas, 
ut sine ea ceterae formae omnes agere 
nihil possint.Propaedeumata 
XXII (130)

Sicut primi motus privilegium est, ut 
sine eo torpeant omnes reliqui, sic pri- 
mae & praecipuae Formae sensibilis, 
(nimirum LUCIS) ea est facultas, ut 
sine ea caeterae formae omnes agere 
nihil possint.

Gabella quotes here the crucial passage in the Propaedeumata evoking 
the physics of light, which Dee derived from Roger Bacon, al-Kindi, 
and Robert Grosseteste. This physics was the basis for Dee’s theory of as- 
trology, because it establishes that all influences, including the occult,

210 N. H. Clule e

propagate and behave just as light does and so can be studied using the 
principles of geometric optics. 119 The diffusion and interaction of rays of 
influence from all created objects, both celestial and terrestrial, is for Dee 
the key mechanism interconnecting and unifying all creation. Gabella’s us- 
age of this in conjunction with Dee’s Monas serves as a quite appropriate 
embodiment of the precepts from the Tabula that “what is below is like 
that which is above, and what is above is like that which is below,” “and as 
all things were made from the one by the contemplation of the one, so all 
things are born of this one thing by adaptation.” 120Although the circular components of the Gabella’s star and Dee’s monas 
relate to the heavens, Gabella continues with his direct quotations from the 
Monas and follows Dee in relating the sublunar elements to straight lines, 
for just as the flowing of a point defines a line, the elements follow straight 
lines as they return to their natural seats when displaced. Gabella’s hiero- 
glyphic star thus includes a cross, representing the four elements (earth, 
air, fire, water) and the four qualities (cold, hot, dry, moist) (figures 5.15 
and 5.13). Because of the relation of the lines composing the cross of the 
elements to the diameter of the solar circle, the proportions of Gabella’s 
star embody the relation of the elements to the sun and moon. Here we get 
the first hints of alchemical implications, since these lines, by dividing the 
circle, suggest how the “magic of these four elements” serves to separate 
the sun and the moon into their own lines. 121

In quoting Dee’s aphorisms on the cross of the elements in their entirety, 
Gabella repeats Dee’s numerological interpretation of the cross, in which the 
four arms and the point joining them can variously refer to the ternary, the 
quaternary, the septenary, the octonary, and, through the “Pythagorean”

Figure 5.15

Star with cross, Gabella, Secretions Philosophiae Consideratio Brevis, sig. B4v 
(by permission of the British Library, from shelfmark 1033.H.6.(4.))

Astronomia inferior 211Figure 5.15

Star with cross, Gabella, Secretions Philosophiae Consideratio Brevis, sig. B4v 
(by permission of the British Library, from shelfmark 1033.H.6.(4.))

Astronomia inferior 211

tetractys, the denary. 122 Here Gabella’s rather mechanical compilation of ex- 
tracts begins to appear arbitrary. Although the “Pythagorean” tetractys and 
the numerological portrayal of cosmogony popular in the Renaissance are 
not entirely foreign in the framework of Gabella’s cosmology, they are much 
less intrinsically motivated than in Dee’s case, in which a numerological di- 
mension is implicit in the concept of the monas from the start. Gabella’s rep- 
etition of Dee’s association of the numerological values of various Roman 
numerals with the rationale for the placement of these letters within the al- 
phabet makes even less sense. Gabella completely misses or ignores the di- 
mension of the Monas presenting a new kind of writing embodied in the 
symbol of the monas and the rules for its manipulation. The numerology also 
does not carry through and inform the rest of Gabella’s discussion as it does 
in the Monas, and Gabella misses the “a ternario in vnitatem per binarium 
divisum” that links Dee’s discussion of the tetractys to the Trithemian Tab- 
ula, which suggests that Gabella was not directly aware of Trithemius’s inter- 
pretation. Rather, the majority of his embodiment of the Trithemian sense of 
the Tabula derives from Dee’s Monas: By adopting parts of the Monas he has 
also picked up some of the resonance of Trithemius, but because he shows no 
direct knowledge of Trithemius and he has used Dee so selectively, he misses 
the full import of both Dee’s Monas and the Trithemian Tabula.The final piece of Dee’s monas is the symbol for Aries, evoking the 
beginning of creation as the first sign of the zodiac, the vernal equinox, 
and the fiery trigon, signifying the use of fire. Gabella’s “hieroglyphic 
star” lacks this piece, but, continuing to quote from the Monas, he fol- 
lows through paralleling the construction of the monas to its conclusion 
by generating this element from the two halves of his solar circle joined by 
a point (figure 5. 16). 123 The culmination of Gabella’s “hieroglyphic star”

Figure 5.16

Aries, Gabella, Secretions Pbilosopbiae Consideratio Brevis, sig. C4v (by permis- 
sion of the British Library, from shelfmark 1033.H.6.(4.))

212 N.H. Clule e

as embodying all of cosmology in its combination of sun, moon, elements, 
and Aries is that the hieroglyphic signs of all of the other planets may be 
constructed from combinations of components of the “star,” as taught by 
the wise magicians (actually John Dee):

Consideratio 
sig. Dl r

Unde sapientes magi, recte nobis 
quinque planetarum tradidere notas 
hieroglyphicas, compositas autem 
omnes, ex Lunae vel Solis charac- 
teribus cum elementorum aut arietis 
hieroglyphico signo.

Monas 
XII (160)

Antiquissimi Sapientes Magi, quinque 
Planetarum, nobis tradidere Notas Hi- 
eroglyphicas: Compositas quidem 
omnes, ex Lunae vel Solis Charac- 
teribus: cum Elementorum aut Arietis 
Hieroglyphico Signo.

How this actually works is not clear from Gabella’s cryptic symbols (fig- 
ure 5.17); Dee follows this with a detailed diagram (figure 5.6) and dis- 
cussion, but, in contrast to the aphorisms on the numerology of the cross, 
where Gabella includes material he never develops, in one of the rare times 
Gabella does not quote the entirety of Dee’s aphorism, he seems to cut 
things short prematurely and provides less development than available in 
Dee.Gabella does not exclusively quote from Dee; in certain passages he seems 
to develop his own discussion, although in some of these instances it turns 
out he is also excerpting other sources. If the Consideratio is the hastily 
composed text that it seems to be and draws liberally on Gabella’s compi- 
lations of commonplaces, much of the Consideratio may be entirely a pas- 
tiche of extracts, some of which I have been able to recognize or to find and 
some of which have, until now, eluded me but may be identified in the fu- 
ture. Dee’s Monas treats what are supposed to be concrete natural pro- 
cesses in an extremely abstract fashion, so in these other passages, Gabella

Figure 5.17

Signs of planets? Gabella, Secretions Pbilosopbiae Consideratio Brevis, sig. Dlr 
(by permission of the British Library, from shelfmark 1033.H.6.(4.))

Astronomia inferior 213Figure 5.17

Signs of planets? Gabella, Secretions Pbilosopbiae Consideratio Brevis, sig. Dlr 
(by permission of the British Library, from shelfmark 1033.H.6.(4.))

Astronomia inferior 213

elaborates on the implications of this cosmology, “fleshing out” the Tab- 
ula’s very sparse precepts and the abstract concepts that Trithemius and 
Dee built on those precepts. The first and foremost of these implications is 
the unity and interconnectedness of creation: The abundance and multi- 
plicity found in nature are encompassed within a larger unity because, 
echoing the Tabula’s “all things were made from the one,” “nothing is born 
without unity or without the point .” 124 Despite the separation and the ap- 
parently radical difference between the elements of the terrestrial sphere 
and the heavens, both are equally part of the universe, without which it 
could not exist . 125 Serving as the medium joining these is the element air. 
Although this element separates the heavens and the earth, it also joins 
them and is the basis for their concourse. Air “receives a virtue from the 
earth below, and at the same time hermetically transfuses the strength of 
the stars to the earth .” 126 Gabella here echoes Cornelius Agrippa’s com- 
ments on air, which played a prominent role in some pseudo-Paracelsian 
tracts as well, within Agrippa’s discussion of the features applicable to 
the practice of magic within the elemental world. Agrippa notes that air 
has been considered the medium of the other elements and the “spiritus 
mundi” in that it accepts and transmits the influx of celestial and other 
species and thus serves as the instrument by which the “anima mundi” ex- 
ercises its influence throughout the world . 127In all, Gabella’s cosmology seems to embody the Tabula’s assertion that 
“what is below is like that which is above, and what is above is like that 
which is below” and its prescription to “ascend from the earth to heaven, 
and then again descend to earth, and unite together the power of the su- 
periors and the inferiors.” This interconnectedness on the cosmic level is 
also reflected in the microcosm, that is, humankind, in which the various 
parts are united by blood, spirit, and other humors flowing through veins 
and arteries. Similarly, the earth itself is also something of a microcosm 
writ large, since it has its own channels like veins and arteries through 
which flow various humors . 128

Alchemy

This last observation provides a transition to the alchemical parts of the 
Consideratio, for the flow of these humors through the interior of the 
earth evokes an idea of the formation of the metals that was at the heart 
of several related conceptions of the foundation of alchemy in the West.

214 N.H. Clule e

Gabella says that in containing the four elements, these humors contain 
the seeds of all things, some of which are turned to stone by a petrifying 
liquid and some of which are hardened to become the earth of the met- 
als . 129 What Gabella echoes here evokes several possible strands of al- 
chemical theory available in the early seventeenth century. Because of the 
shifting and derivative character of Gabella’s text, it is difficult to identify 
a definitive commitment on his part to a single theory of alchemy. Like his 
quotations, Gabella’s theoretical evocations span a range of ideas available 
in the early seventeenth century.At his most basic, Gabella’s ideas reflect the hint in Aristotle that min- 
erals and metals are the product of the exhalation of an “earthy smoke” 
and a “watery vapor” from inside the earth. When these become impris- 
oned within the earth and combined, they formed various metals and min- 
erals according to the different proportions of smoke and vapor . 130 Arabic 
alchemists of the eighth and ninth centuries elaborated these ideas into 
what became known as the mercury-sulfur theory of the metals. In the 
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries these ideas were taken up in the West 
and became the core of Latin alchemy, most importantly in the Summa 
perfectionis of pseudo-Geber, which is perhaps one of Gabella’s major al- 
chemical sources.According to the mercury-sulfur theory, Aristotle’s earthy smoke and 
watery vapor were first transformed into sulfur and mercury, respectively, 
which then combined in the earth under the influence of the planets to 
form metals . 131 Reflecting this more developed theory, Gabella says that 
the search for the One Medicine should begin with the sources of metals 
and minerals: sulfur and mercury, which are essential principles, not ordi- 
nary elements . 132 From these the alchemist attempts to produce an elixir or 
the “philosophers’ stone,” or the “Universal Medicine,” the “One Medi- 
cine,” or “M” as Gabella variously calls it. Gabella’s “philosophers’ mer- 
cury,” as the first matter of all things suggests a view similar to that of the 
“mercury-alone” theory of pseudo-Geber that the philosophers’ stone is 
philosophical mercury containing an inner and nonvolatile or nonflam- 
mable sulfur, rather than a mixture of philosophical mercury and philo- 
sophical sulfur, which was the more common belief. In either case, to 
transform them into their philosophical forms, the earthly forms of mer- 
cury and sulfur had to be rid, through spoliation, of their impure charac- 
teristics (fluidity and humidity for mercury, flammability and earthiness

Astronomia inferior 215

for sulfur). As pseudo-Geber expressed it: “imperfect bodies have super- 
fluous humidities and combustible sulfurity, with blackness corrupting 
them, an unclean, feculent, combustible and very gross earthiness.” Spoli- 
ation yields a substance in which only mercury and sulfur remain . 133The alchemist’s job was, thus, to use a series of standard chemical opera- 
tions through which accidental imperfections were purged and the remain- 
ing purified substances were combined and unified, first into philosophical 
sulfur and mercury and then into the stone. This is the essence of Gabella’s 
definition of alchemy, or the “spagyric art,” as that which “teaches how to 
distinguish the pure from the unpure, . . . and how to separate and recom- 
pose substances according to the course of nature.” ft “distinguishes the clear 
from the confused, the subtle from the gross, the light from the heavy, fire 
from air, air from water, and water from earth” just as the creator did in the 
first creation. The alchemist is thus an imitator of the creator, and alchemy 
a replication of creation on a local scale . 134 The association of alchemy and 
creation brings us back to the cosmological dimension of the Tabula.This cosmological dimension is also prominent in Michael Sendivogius’s 
Novum lumen chemicum, another of Gabella’s alchemical sources. Mer- 
cury and sulfur are key elements in Sendivogius’s work as well, with a 
philosophical mercury taking the leading role as the product of the seed 
(sperma) injected into the central cavity of the earth by the elements that 
yield a “sal nitrum,” or univarsal salt, as the principle of all things. Every- 
thing originates from this universal seed, because nature is “one, true, 
simple, and self-contained,” reflecting the “una res” of the Tabula . 135 This 
seed, after digestion in the earth’s womb, is driven up through pores and 
veins as a vapor — philosophical mercury — leaving behind rocks, minerals, 
and metals depending upon its contact with philosophical sulfur in the 
soil, differences in heat, and the presence of impurities. On the earth’s sur- 
face this philosophical mercury nourishes plants and, under the influence 
of celestial rays, is drawn up into the atmosphere where it receives “the 
power of life from the air.” This process produces a “water” in which the 
sal nitrum of the earth is imbued with the “power of life” and returns to 
earth to combine with “the fatness of the earth”; that is, philosophical sul- 
fur. Sendivogius thus introduces an important vitalist element to alchemy 
and through this becomes the root of a school of alchemical thought that 
sought the principle of the metals in a “universal salt” usually identified 
with saltpeter or sal nitrum . 136

216 N. H. Clule e216 N. H. Clule e

I have noted above a possible reflection of Sendivogius in Gabella’s com- 
ment on Hermes’ being eclipsed by modern alchemy. Gabella’s definition 
of nature as the will of God and the role he attributes to celestial rays, 
which he elaborates through the material from Dee’s Propaedeumata, are 
also found in Sendivogius. 137 Gabella reflects Sendivogius’s alchemy when 
he advises the alchemist not to seek the essential principles of things in ex- 
isting substances because they are already “dead.” The alchemist, in con- 
tradiction to what was implied above, must not extract this principle 
through the decomposition of existing things. He must, instead, find it in 
the “dew of heaven”: the vapors that have been generated from the “sem- 
ina” of the elements in the center of the earth, driven to the surface puri- 
fied of their excrements, elevated through the atmosphere and exposed to 
celestial rays, from which they return to earth actuated by the heavens to 
work the miracle of the “one thing.” 138In a comment summarizing the genesis of the “one thing” — the philoso- 
phers’ stone — that integrates the alchemical process with his evocation of 
the Tabula through Dee’s Propaedeumata and Monas, Gabella indicates 
that fully refined philosophical mercury, “the mercury of Hermes and of 
all the Philosophers ... is water, the water that falls from the sky as rain 
and which the Sun, as its father, extracts from the earth each day in a very 
fine vapor and takes up into the region of the air where impressions are 
made, and here by the same force by which the moon, its mother, controls 
things below, it condenses into rainwater and falls in drops by its own 
weight. It is moved around willy-nilly by the air or the wind (which is, af- 
ter all nothing but the movement of the air) until it lands upon its central 
point, that is the earth, its nursemaid, who then carries it in her lap.” 139 
This process is similar in a general way to that depicted in Sendivogius’s 
discussion of the ascent and celestial actuation of philosophical mercury, 
which he presents in a context where he also quotes the Tabula’s “its fa- 
ther is the sun, its mother is the moon, and the wind has borne it in her 
womb.” 140 Gabella concludes his observations on water as philosophical 
mercury with a passage drawn directly from Sendivogius to the effect that 
“all water that is without spirit may be congealed by heat, and that which 
has spirit may be congealed by cold. He who understands how water can 
be congealed by heat and how the spirit can be joined with it, will certainly 
discover something a thousand times more precious than gold or anything 
else. Therefore, the alchemist should separate the spirit from the water and

Astronomia inferior 217

allow it to decay so it a seed appears. After discarding the waste, he should 
reintroduce the spirit into the water from above, and effect a conjunc- 
tion between the two, which will generate an offspring different from its 
parents .” 141Consideratio 
sig. El r

Sed ex praxi certum est, quod omnis 
aqua, calore congeletur, si est sine 
spiritu, Sc congeletur frigore, si habet 
spiritus. Qui vero scit aquam congelare 
calido, Sc spiritum cum ea jungere, 
certe, rem inveniet millefies pretio- 
siorem, auro Sc omni re. Igitur efficiat 
Spagyrus, ut separetur spiritus ab 
aqua, Sc putrescat, ut granum ap- 
pareat, postea rejectis faecibus, redu- 
cat spiritum ex alto in aquam, & 
faciat conjungere simul, ista enim con- 
junctio, sive digestio, generabit ramum 
dissimilem forma parentibus.

Novum lumen chemicum 
467

Congelatur enim omnis aqua calore si 
est sine spiritu, congelatur frigore si 
habet spiritum; sed qui scit congelare 
aquam calido, Sc spiritum cum ea 
jungere, certe rem inveniet millefies 
pretiosiorem auro Sc omni re. Efficiat 
igitur ut separetur spiritus ab aqua, ut 
putrescat, & appareat granum; postea 
rejectis faecibus reducat spiritum ex 
altro in aquam, & faciat conjungere 
simul: ilia enim conjunctio generabit 
ramum dissimilem forma parentibus.This presentation of Gabella’s discussion of alchemy is somewhat mis- 
leading, because it may give the impression of coherence. It is, however, 
difficult to determine what he is presenting. Identification of his sources, 
as in the case of Sendivogius, is no reliable guide to what he believed. As 
with the parallel references to Hermes that have very different meanings, 
Gabella ignores or strips Sendivogius’s alchemy of key elements. In partic- 
ular, he makes no reference to a “central salt” or sal nitrum or aerial nitre 
as the first matter of metals . 142 We cannot assign him with any assurance 
to a Sendivogian school that sought the ultimate principle in a “univer- 
sal salt .” 143 The last several chapters of the Consideratio actually cover 
what seem to be the same ground several times with slight variations 
interspersed with passages that sound like recipes, analogies to natural 
phenomena that serve as examples of the “Great Work,” comments on con- 
cealing alchemical secrets, and criticism of Galenists and academic 
doctors. This further suggests that the later parts of Consideratio are 
as much a compilation of extracts or paraphrases of other sources as are 
the sections derived from Dee. A particularly striking instance of this fol- 
lows Gabella’s criticism of the Galenists’ rejection of distillation and his re- 
jection of what he considered Paracelsus’s cures of disease by magical

218 N. H. Clule e

“characters, words, and spoken formulae.” 144 After these comments comes 
an extended quotation from the commentary of Jacques Gohory, writing 
as Leo Suavius, on the fifth chapter of the fifth book of Paracelsus’s De vita 
longa, a section of an obscure work that Gohory admits is particularly dif- 
ficult and obscure. 145This quotation is odd in a number of ways. It seems to be about the ex- 
tent of Gabella’s knowledge of Paracelsus; that is, a second-hand knowl- 
edge through fragmentary extracts from a commentary on Paracelsus. 
Despite several mentions of Paracelsus, these extracts are not always com- 
plimentary, and when they are, they seem to pander to the references to 
Paracelsus in the Rosicrucian tracts. This selective and isolated use of Go- 
hory also reinforces Gabella’s lack of a direct knowledge of Trithemius’s 
treatment of the Tabula, because Gohory defends Trithemius extensively 
against detractors who charged him with illicit magic, in the course of 
which he also mentions Trithemius’s concept of the numeric progression 
from and return to unity: “per similitudunem binarij a ternario redierit in 
vnitatem, deinceps iam facile in denarium consurget.” 146 Gohory admit- 
tedly does not discuss this aspect of Trithemius extensively; Gohory was 
always more interested in the magic of the Steganographia and the Poly- 
graphia than in Trithemius’s “alchemical magic.” 147 Nonetheless, Go- 
hory’s work contains indications of Trithemius’s numerological alchemical 
magic, but Gabella makes no use of them, just as he does not follow 
through on the numerology of Dee’s monas to Dee’s evocation of the 
Trithemian association of alchemy with the progression of the tetractys to 
the restoration of unity.

In the passage from Gohory quoted by Gabella, commenting on Par- 
acelsus’s treatment of the magical preservation of health of the human 
soul — man’s “praeternatural” body — Gohory relates the highly figurative 
and metaphorical language Paracelsus uses in dealing with this magic to 
the alchemical process and Geber’s idea of three orders of the Great Work:in the fourth chapter it says that the Necrolii are forbidden a long life, that is, they 
are barred from the Great Work, which Geber calls the Third Order. The elemen- 
tal substances in their crude state of blackness (according to Raymond Lull they 
are of a blackness blacker even than black) can produce a solution for the dead. 
The Scaiolae are the four elements in the vitriol of Venus after they have been pu- 
rified. In the Necrolii, that is the First Order of the Work, are contained ridiculous 
travesties, sophistical preparations indeed, that do not withstand the test of fire. 
Yet they do shed light on the Cyphant, in other words, on the formation of the em-

Astronomia inferior 219

bryo or infant (as Arnold and Lull refer to it), and which Geber refers to when he 
says that the instruction is not complete until the preparations of the first order 
have been made. [Gabella inserts the aside that these preparations were adequately 
shown in the previous chapter.] Those who get to this stage who do not advance to 
the other orders and therefore do not produce the pyraustae are referred to as Al- 
loeani by Paracelsus, since they are superficial changers of the form and sophisti- 
cal white-washers of the tinctures of Venus and the Moon. 148

Consideratio 
sig. E4 v -Fl rConsideratio 
sig. E4 v -Fl r

Necrolii sive Necrolici, capite iiii ex- 
cluduntur cancellis longae vitae, id 
est operis magni qui tertii ordinis a 
Gebro nuncupatur. Nam materiae 
elementares, rudes & nigrae, a Rey- 
mundo, Nigrum nigrius nigro, solu- 
tionem mortis ferunt. Scaiolae, sunt 
elementa quatuor in vitriolo Veneris, 
depurata. In Necroliis, id est, primo or- 
dine in sunt hypermenica figmenta, seu 
praeparationes Sophisticae, quae judi- 
cium cineritii non sustinent: aperiunt 
tamen fenestram in Cyphanto, id est, 
ad formationem nostri Embrionis seu 
infantis (ut Arnoldus & Lullius loqu- 
untur) quod sic Gebor exponit: Sine 
praeparationibus prirni ordinis, non 
perficitur Magisterium. . . . Qui in his 
figunt pedem, nec ad alios ordines pro- 
grediuntur, ut pyraustas habeant, hi ap- 
pellantur a Paracelso Alloeani id est, 
immutatores formarum superficiales & 
dealbatores Veneris & Tinctores Lunae 
sophistici.

Gohory, Scholia 
313

Necrolij siue Necrolici cap. iiij. ex- 
cluduntur cancellis longae vitae, id est, 
operis magni qui tertij ordinis a Gebro 
nuncupatur. Nam materiae ele- 
mentares rudes & nigrae, a Ray- 
mundo, Nigrum nigrius nigro, 
solutionem mortis ferunt. Scaiolae vi- 
dentur elementa quatuor depurata. In 
Necrolijs, id est, primo ordine in sunt 
ypermenica figmenta, seu praepara- 
tiones sophisticae, quae iudicium 
cineritij non sustinent: aperiunt tamen 
fenestram in Cyphanto, id est, ad for- 
mationem nostri Embryonis seu infan- 
tis (ut Arnaldus & Lullius loquuntur) 
quod sic Geber exponit: Sine praepara- 
tionibus primi ordinis, non perficitur 
magisterium. Qui in his figunt pedem, 
nec ad alios ordines progrediuntur, ap- 
pellantur a Paracelso Allaeani, id est, 
immutatores formarum superficiales, 
vt dealbatores veneris & tinctores lu- 
nae sophistici.I quote at length to give some sense of the character of the language that 
Gabella seems to adopt without much prior preparation, suggesting little 
prior thought. Although this material is opaque and seems to veer in a very 
different direction from earlier parts of the Consideratio, and Gabella sug- 
gests that the preparations of the first order are those he has previously dis- 
cussed (even though they seemed complete in his earlier discussions), he 
appears to have found in Gohory’s comments an expression of some pro- 
gression of stages in the great work corresponding to Geber’s three stages. 
So we find, among others, a further veiled indication relating to the ad- 
vancement of mercury to the second and third orders: “but if the Sun or

220 N. H. Clule e

the Moon is to be added to this crude preparation something must first be 
removed, in other words, the receiving material must be prepared by trans- 
mutation: this is the extent of the medicine of the second order. But the 
greatest Adech exceeds even this with the medicine of the third order, for 
Mercury is first prepared philosophically and then accurately and fully 
gathered together.” 149

Consideratio 
sig. Fl v -F2 r

Quibus si rudi praeparatione inseratur 
Sol, vel Luna, esset aliquid excipien- 
dum, id est, necessaria esset praepara- 
tio materiae recipientis projectionem, 
nempe in medicina secundi ordinis 
tantum. Sed maximus Adech antever- 
tit, id est, in tertii ordinis medicina,

Mercurius philosophice praeparatus,

& circulatus ad amussim omnibus suis 
numeris, deducit propositum nostrum, 
quippe eandem materiam propositam 
(secundum Gebrum) ducit in operis 
progressum. . . .& circulatus ad amussim omnibus suis 
numeris, deducit propositum nostrum, 
quippe eandem materiam propositam 
(secundum Gebrum) ducit in operis 
progressum. . . .

Gabella’s extract continues with what seem to be several additional stages 
and transformations of the “Nymphidic spring water,” the actions of the 
“water of the Scaolii” and the “lightening of the Scaolii,” the cooperation 
of the “White Sun” with the Moon, and the “King” turning red. 150 We are 
then brought up short when Gabella seems to undercut the entire Gohory 
extract by including an indication of Gohory’s despair over making sense 
of Paracelsus’s statements, since Gohory says that “all that is written at the 
close of the book concerning travesties and the Nymphidic spring water 
lead to obscurity, since they pervert the traditional order.” 151

Or is he just mechanically quoting? Gabella does not seem to acknowl- 
edge Gohory’s skepticism. He links Gohory’s hints of some progression 
to a celestial cycle as the model for terrestrial astronomy by returning to 
Dee’s Monas, picking up where he had left off some ways back with the 
idea that the signs of all five planets can be derived from elements of the 
monas symbol suitably arranged (figure 5. 18). 152 It is almost as if Gabella 
returned to Dee for an intelligible explanation of the mystifications of the 
Gohory passages, because his quotations from Dee include Dee’s associa- 
tion of the sequence of these planetary transformations of the monas with

Gohory, Scholia 
316

Quibus si rudi praeparatione inseratur 
Sol vel Luna, esset aliquid excipien- 
dum, id est, necessaria esset praepara- 
tio materiae recipientis proiectionem, 
nempe in medicina secundi ordinis 
tantum. Sed maximus Adech anteuer- 
tit. Id est, in tertii ordinis medicina 
Mercurius philosophice praeparatus & 
circulatus ad amussim omnibus suis 
numeris deducit propositam (secun- 
dum Gebrum) ducit in operis progres- 
sum. . . .

Astronomia inferior 22 1

Figure 5.18Astronomia inferior 22 1

Figure 5.18

Lunar mercury, Gabella, Secretions Pbilosopbiae Consideratio Brevis, sig. F3r 
(by permission of the British Library, from shelfmark 1033.H.6.(4.))

f

Figure 5.19

“Albification” — Lunar venus, Gabella, Secretions Pbilosopbiae Consideratio Bre- 
vis, sig. F3r (by permission of the British Library, from shelfmark 1033.H.6.(4.))

the series of revolutions of the alchemical process. He thus repeats the 
connection of the sequence of Saturn, Jupiter, Moon, and Mercury with 
the four revolutions of the lunar nature around the earth, by which appli- 
cation of the moon to the elements produces “albification” (figure 5.19):

Consideratio 
sig. F2 v -F3 r

Lunaris enim aquosa natura, dum per 
Scaiolorum scientiam, circa nostram 
sit semel revoluta terram, Saturnus 
mystice dicitur. Et eadern de causa Jo- 
vis quoque habet nomen. Sed Lunam, 
tertia elementatam vice, obscurius sic 
notamus, quern Mercurium Vocare so-

Monas 
XII (162)

Lunaris nostra Natura, dum per Ele- 
mentorum scientiam, circa nostram 
sit semel reuoluta Terram, Saturnus 
mystice dicebatur. Et eadem de causa, 
Iovis quoque habebat nomen: is- 
tamque retinebat figuram secretiorem. 
Et Lunam, tertia elementatam vice,

222 N. H. Clule e

lent: qui quam sit Lunaris videtis. Is- 
tum quarta revolutione produci, licet 
quidem Velint Sophi, nostro Secreto 
proposito tamen non erit id contrar- 
ium. Modo purissimus spiritus Magi- 
cus, loco Lunae, Trjg XevKcxvoeoq 
administrabit opus. Et sua virtute spir- 
ituali, nobiscum Solus, per medium 
quasi naturalem diem, sine verbis, 
hyeroglyphice loquatur: in purissimam 
simplicissimamque & albissimam a 
nobis praeparatam terram, geogamicas 
istas quatuor introducens, imprimen- 
sque figuras. Vel illarum loco illam al- 
teram proximam.obscurius sic notabant. Quern, Mer- 
curium vocare solent. Qui, quam sit 
Lunaris, videtis. Istum, Quarta Reuo- 
lutione produci, licet Quidem velint 
Sophi: nostro Secreto proposito tamen, 
non erit id Contrarium: Modo Spiritus 
Purissimus Magicus, loco Lunae, xng 
^euKavaeoi; administrabit Opus: & sua 
virtute Spirituali, nobiscum Solus, per 
Mediam quasi Naturalem diem sine 
verbis, Hieroglyphice loquatur: in 
Purissimam Simplicissimamque, a no- 
bis praeparatam Terram, Geogamicas, 
istas 4 introducens, Imprimensque fig- 
uras: vel illaram loco, illam alteram.

Gabella continues by excerpting the subsequent aphorism (XIII) of Dee’s 
Monas that continues the work into three solar revolutions, from Mars to 
Venus and the Sun, which unite the lunar mercury with solar sulfur, com- 
pleting the lunar and solar magic of the elements (figure 5. 20). 153 He thus 
returns, through Dee, to the inspiration of a cosmological interpretation 
of the Tabula smaragdina for an understanding of the alchemical process.

He also links this with Sendivogius, by incorporating at the end of this 
same chapter a quotation from the Novum lumen, in which he inserts an 
explicit reference to Vitriol:

care, therefore, must be taken when such an operation takes place in the Vitriol to 
ensure that the central heat can change water into air, so that it can spread out over 
the flat earth and scatter residue, with the aid of the rain, throughout the channels 
of the earth. Linally, the opposite will also come about: the air will turn to water 
of a particularly fine type. This occures if you bring about the overwhelming of the 
gold and silver by the Old Man, that is, our aqueous Mercury, so that the water 
consumes them: eventually he will die and be consumed as well. The ashes of the

Ligure 5.20

Rehabilitation of the metals by the Solar revolution, Gabella, Secretioris 
Philosophiae Consideratio Brevis, sig. L3v (by permission of the British Library, 
from shelfmark 1033. H. 6. (4.))Rehabilitation of the metals by the Solar revolution, Gabella, Secretioris 
Philosophiae Consideratio Brevis, sig. L3v (by permission of the British Library, 
from shelfmark 1033. H. 6. (4.))

Astronomia inferior 223

gold are then to be sprinkled on the water, and the water boiled until it is ready. 
You will then have a medicine for curing leprosy. But take care that you do not use 
cold instead of hot, or hot instead of cold. Mix like natures togeather, but if you 
must use a substance that does not occur in nature, then separate it until it re- 
sembles a natural substance. In the end — by the Will of God — the Great Work is 
achieved not by hand but by fire. 154

Consideratio 
sig. F4 r/V

Igitur Cura, ut operatio in Vitriolo 
talis sit, nimirum ut Calor Centralis, 
aquam possit mutare in aerem, ut in 
planitiem mundi egrediatur, & 
residuum beneficio Diluvii, per poros 
Terrae spargat, Et tunc in opposito, 
aer Vertetur in aquam, multo subtil- 
iorem. Hoc nimirum sit, si Seni sive 
Mercurio nostro aquoso, aurum, & 
argentum deglutire dabis, ut aqua con- 
sumat ilia & tandem ille etiam moritu- 
rus comburatur: Cineres vero auri 
spargantur in aquam, postea coquito 
ea, donee satis est. Et habebis medici- 
nam Curandi lepram. Cave tamen ne 
frigidum pro calido aut calidum pro 
frigido sumas. Naturas naturis misce, 
si aliquid est, quod contarium naturae, 
(si quidem una tibi est necessaria) sep- 
ara illud, ut natura naturae similis sit, 
Quod tandem Volente Deo Op. M. fit 
igne non manu.

Novum lumen chemicum 
471Novum lumen chemicum 
471

Fac igitur ut operatio in talis in terra 
nostra sit, ut calor centralis aquam 
possit mutare in aerem, ut in planitiem 
mundi egrediatur, & residuum, ut dixi, 
per poros terrae spargat, & tunc in 
opposito aer vertetur in aquam multo 
subtiliorem quam fuit prima: & hoc 
sic fiet, si seni nostro aurum, & argen- 
tum deglutire dabis, ut ipse consumat 
ilia, & tandem ille etiam moriturus 
comburatur, cineres ejus spargantur in 
aquam, coquito earn donee satis est, & 
habes medicinam curandi lepram. Hoc 
saltern animadverte, ne frigidum pro 
calido, vel calidum pro frigido accip- 
ias, naturas naturis misce, si aliquid est 
quod contarium naturae, (siquidem 
una tibi est necessaria) separa illud, ut 
natura naturae similis sit, hoc fac igne 
non manu, & scito si non sequeris nat- 
uram vana esse omnia: & hie tibi dixi 
per sanctum Deum quod pater filio 
debet: qui habet aures audiat, & qui 
habet sensus animum advertat.

Once again, Gabella has borrowed directly from Sendivogius but blended 
the extract into his own structure, ignoring or expunging ideas unique to 
Sendivogius and incorporating phrasing concordant with his own appar- 
ent commitment to a theory centered on vitriol.

This is driven home in Gabella’s last chapter, devoted entirely to vitriol 
or “chalcantum” as the “lunarium” of the philosophers, reflecting the im- 
portance of vitriol in the alchemical thought at the court of Hesse . 155 “All 
metals can be reduced to a vitriol, resembling their aqueous source,” thus 
emphasizing the importance of water as the fundamental material. Within 
the earth, metals are formed from the vapors released as this vitriol boils. 
Through this stone — vitriol — therefore, the alchemist knows the bowels of

224 N. H. Clule e

the earth, and by purifying it the “Hidden Stone,” the “True Medicine,” is 
discovered. 156

Conclusion224 N. H. Clule e

the earth, and by purifying it the “Hidden Stone,” the “True Medicine,” is 
discovered. 156

Conclusion

Dee’s Monas hieroglyphica and Gabella’s Consideratio brevis, both em- 
bodying the idea of alchemy as an astronomia inferior, provide interesting 
interrelated cases of the transmission and development of ideas in the Re- 
naissance. The idea of an interrelation of the celestial and the terrestrial pro- 
vided a powerful inspiration for Dee from the beginning of his career. His 
discovery of Trithemius’s idea of alchemy as a magic grounded in this inter- 
relation was a galvanizing experience. Trithemius’s commentary on the Tab- 
ula smaragdina confirmed Dee’s idea that the arrangement and course of 
the celestial bodies directed terrestrial events and modeled the alchemical 
processes in the elemental realm, but that the alchemical processes of the 
terrestrial sphere revealed fundamentals of cosmic genesis, structure, and 
interrelationships. What Dee perhaps focused on most in Trithemius was 
his numerology: Trithemius’s numerology provided a springboard for Dee’s 
pursuit, as a mathematician convinced of the importance of numbers as re- 
vealing the essential features of the cosmos, of the numbers behind creation. 
In the Monas Dee built on the Tabula and Trithemius’s interpretation but 
added elements of his own interest in mathematics, particularly geometry, of 
which Trithemius had no idea, as well as Dee’s recent studies of Hebraic ca- 
bala. With these elements, Dee constructed a natural philosophy integrating 
a language of creation through his own “cabala of the real,” which provided 
both a total reform of all intellectual disciplines based on a knowledge of na- 
ture and, from this, both a formula for carrying out alchemical work and the 
key to the structure of the cosmos.Gabella, despite his haphazard and derivative construction of the Con- 
sideratio by reprocessing others’ texts for his own program, pursued a 
project similar to Dee’s in that his overall objective seems to have been 
to ground traditional ideas of the alchemical process in a larger cosmic 
framework derived from the nature of creation. That Gabella based his 
project on works of Dee, which have never been considered to have had the 
wide readership and influence of the better-known works of Renaissance 
occultism, is of some interest. Most interesting is Gabella’s use of Dee to 
evoke a cosmological interpretation of the Tabula smaragdina deriving ul-

Astronomia inferior 225

timately from Trithemius but without direct knowledge of Trithemius 
himself. Gabella clearly knew the Tabula itself and was quite perceptive in 
picking up its development in the Monas and in relating this to his aware- 
ness of Sendivogius. Even more surprising, he knew Dee’s Propaedeumata 
and saw how it could be related to the Monas and even to the Novum lu- 
men. But it is also clear that Gabella’s major interest was in alchemy alone, 
because he drew very selectively from Dee, showing no interest in or even 
understanding of Dee’s ideas of the cabala of the real, the monas as a writ- 
ing, the reform of the disciplines, the spiritual and religious themes asso- 
ciated with adeptship, or even of astronomy as a celestial alchemy. His 
adoption of Sendivogius was equally selective.This observation of Gabella’s limited understanding of Dee and the 
complete reinterpretation of Dee’s symbol that Gilly notes call into ques- 
tion Frances Yates’s suggestion that Dee and Gabella had connections with 
the Rosicrucian phenomenon . 157 If the Consideratio brevis was the prod- 
uct of a disciple Dee recruited during his travels in eastern Europe, or even 
of the student of such a disciple, we ought to expect a much more faithful 
sense of the really unique elements of Dee’s natural philosophy. Gabella’s 
use of the Monas, however, seems to draw on elements that accord most 
easily with readily available understandings of alchemy through the Tab- 
ula while ignoring or not fully understanding Dee’s most novel contribu- 
tions. Although Gabella does include elements of Dee’s numerology, this is 
a result of apparently hasty copying, since he does not follow through on 
it, indicating that he has neither an interest in how it functions in the 
Monas nor any inkling of how central it was in Trithemius’s conception of 
the Tabula.

The other part of the Rosicrucian connection is equally tenuous. Not 
only is there little evidence of a direct connection of Gabella with Dee, 
there is likewise little evidence that Gabella was an integral part of the 
genesis of the Rosicrucian texts. He shows little interest in medicine and 
healing, which are an important part of the humanitarian agenda of the 
Rosicrucian texts. Whereas the neo-Paracelsian character of the alchemy 
and medicine of the Rosicrucian texts is well established, Gabella’s rela- 
tionship to Paracelsus is notably ambiguous. Although he pays homage to 
the name at strategic points in his text, Gabella criticizes Paracelsus on 
critical points and in others presents a post-Paracelsian alchemy despite 
any homage he may pay to the name.

226 N. H. Clule e226 N. H. Clule e

The Rosicrucian manifestos also suggest that the movement that they 
proclaim was grounded in a spiritual renewal based in some special divine 
revelation, but Gabella seems more interested in concrete alchemical pro- 
cesses. Ultimately, to use Brann’s terminology, Gabella’s hermeticism is ex- 
troverted rather than introverted. Although the sources he uses hint at the 
need for divine illumination, Gabella does not emphasize this, nor does he 
emphasize that the process he presents has any spiritual dimension either 
in transforming the soul of the alchemist or in facilitating spiritual ascent 
to divine illumination. He is most interested in translating the ideas of the 
Tabula into concrete operations in the material sphere, thus reverting to 
the older notion of the Tabula as a veiled recipe.

Notes

1. Originally published in 1564, the Monas was reprinted at Frankfurt in 1591 
and was included in both the 1602 and the 1659 editions of the Theatrwn 
Chemicum. Besides this, there are a number of manuscript copies of the Latin text 
as well as manuscript translations into German and English, suggesting that the 
Monas was sought after and cherished in certain circles. The work, or more espe- 
cially, Dee’s unique symbol of the hieroglyphic monad, seen inside the oval form on 
the title page (figure 5.2), was widely cited and adopted. C. H. Josten, “Introduc- 
tion,” in “A Translation of John Dee’s Monas Hieroglyphica, Antwerp, 1564, with 
an Introduction and Annotations,” Ambix, 12 (1964): 90-99. The following list 
of manuscript copies and translations is not necessarily exhaustive: Milan, Am- 
brosiana MS S97 Sup; Florence, Biblioteca Nazionale MS Magi. XVI 65; Rome, 
Vatican MSS Reg. Lat. 1266 & 1344; Austria, Schlierbach MS 8; and Glasgow, 
Ferguson MS 21.

2. Josten, “Introduction,” pp. 84-85; Nicholas H. Clulee, John Dee’s Natural 
Philosophy: Betiveen Science and Religion (London: Routledge, 1988), 120.2. Josten, “Introduction,” pp. 84-85; Nicholas H. Clulee, John Dee’s Natural 
Philosophy: Betiveen Science and Religion (London: Routledge, 1988), 120.

3. William R. Newman, “Thomas Vaughan as an Interpreter of Agrippa von 
Nettesheim,” Ambix, 29 (1982): 129-30; Noel Brann, “George Ripley and the Ab- 
bot Trithemius: An Inquiry into Contrasting Medical Attitudes,” Ambix, 26 
(1979): 213-15.

4. John Dee, Propaedeumata aphoristica (London, 1558), LII; in Wayne Shu- 
maker, ed. and trans., John Dee on Astronomy: “Propaedeumata aphoristica” 
(1558 and 1568) Latin and English, (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of 
California Press, 1978), 148-49.

5. Ibid.

6. Dee, Propaedeumata, note to LII: Shumaker, John Dee on Astronomy, 224.

7. John Dee, Monas Hieroglypica (Antwerp, 1564), in Josten, “A Translation of 
John Dee’s Monas Hieroglyphica, Antwerp, 1564, with an Introduction and An-

Astronomia inferior 227

notations,” Ambix, 12 (1964): 114-21. Clulee, John Dee’s Natural Philosophy, 
82-86.

8. Dee, Monas, 124-25.

9. Ibid., 136-41. Clulee, John Dee’s Natural Philosophy, 83-86.

10. Dee, Monas, 122-23.

11. Ibid., 126.

12. Ibid., 154-61.

13. Ibid., 154-55.

14. S. K. Heninger, Jr., Touches ofSiveet Harmony: Pythagorean Cosmology and 
Renaissance Poetics (San Marino: Huntington Library, 1974), 78-84.

15. Heninger, Sweet Harmony, 158-77.

16. Dee, Monas, 156-59, 180-87.

17. F. M. Cornford, “Mysticism and Science in the Pythagorean Tradition,” Clas- 
sical Quarterly, 17 (1923): 1-3; Heninger, Sweet Harmony, 78-84, 146-94.

18. Dee, Monas, 132-35.

19. Clulee, John Dee’s Natural Philosophy, 97-99.

20. Dee, Monas, 160-61.

21. Ibid., 160-65, 194-97.

22. Ibid., 156-57.

23. Ibid., 166-67.

24. Ibid., 160-63.

25. Ibid., 158-59, 168-73.

26. Ibid., 172-75, 208-13.20. Dee, Monas, 160-61.

21. Ibid., 160-65, 194-97.

22. Ibid., 156-57.

23. Ibid., 166-67.

24. Ibid., 160-63.

25. Ibid., 158-59, 168-73.

26. Ibid., 172-75, 208-13.

27. Ibid., 174-75; Julius Ruska, Tabula smaragdina: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte 
der Hermetischen Literatur (Heidelberg: Carl Winter, 1926), 2; John Read, 
Prelude to Chemistry: An Outline of Alchemy, Its Literature, and Relationships 
(London: G. Bell and Sons, 1961), 54, gives a translation.

28. Dee, Monas, 156-59.

29. Ibid., 180-81.

30. John Dee, Propaedeumata, in Shumaker, John Dee on Astronomy, 179-85.

31. Dee, Monas, 180-81, 160-61.

32. Ibid., 164-67.

33. Ibid.

34. William R. Newman, Gehennical Fire: The Lives of George Starkey, an 
American Alchemist in the Scientific Revolution (Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1994), 96; Geber, Summa perfectionis, in William R. Newman, The 
“Summa perfectionis” of Pseudo-Geber: A Critical Edition, Translation and 
Study (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1991), 645-46. See also Read, Prelude to Chemistry, 17- 
18, 119-20; E. J. Holmyard, Alchemy (Baltimore: Penguin 1957), 74-75; idem,

228 N. H. Clule e

“Introduction,” in Geber, The Works of Geber, trans. Richard Russell (London: 
Dent 1928), xi-xiii.

35. Read, Prelude to Chemistry, 130-33.

36. Newman, Gehennical Fire, 96-97.

37. [Pseudo-] Geber, The Investigation of Perfection, in The Works of Geber, 
9-11.

38. Geber, Summa perfections, 664-68, 749-51; [Pseudo-] Geber, The Investiga- 
tion, 9.

39. Read, Prelude to Chemistry, 136-42.

40. Thomas Norton, The Ordinall of Alchemy, in Elias Ashmole, ed., Theatrum 
Chemicum Britannicum (London, 1652), 57-58.

41. Norton, The Ordinall, 82-85.

42. Dee, Monas, 160-61.

43. Ibid., 160-63.

44. Ibid., 164.

45. Ibid., 176-77; J. Peter Zetterberg, “Hermetic Geocentricity: John Dee’s Ce- 
lestial Egg,” Isis, 70 (1979): 391-92.

46. Dee, Monas, 176-79; H. J. Sheppard, “Egg Symbolism in Alchemy,” Ambix, 
6 (1958): 140-48.

47. Dee, Monas, 186-87.46. Dee, Monas, 176-79; H. J. Sheppard, “Egg Symbolism in Alchemy,” Ambix, 
6 (1958): 140-48.

47. Dee, Monas, 186-87.

48. Albert van Helden, Measuring the Universe: Cosmic Dimensions from 
Aristarchus to Haley (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985), 9, 20-23.

49. This order is found in Plato, Timaeus, in Plato’s Cosmology, trans. F. M. 
Cornford (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1937), 38C-D; and Plato, Republic, trans. 
Paul Shorey, in Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns, eds., The Collected Dia- 
logues of Plato, Bollingen Series, vol. 71 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1961), 616E-617B. See also J. L. E. Dreyer, A History of Astronomy from Thales 
to Kepler, 2d ed. (New York: Dover Publications, 1953), 44, 168-69.

50. Dee, Monas, 188-93.

51. Ibid., 168-69.

52. Ibid., 134-35.

53. Ruska, Tabula smaragdina, 2; Read, Prelude to Chemistry, 54, for a transla- 
tion.

54. Dee, Monas, 122-23.

55. Ibid., 120-21.

56. Clulee, John Dee’s Natural Philosophy, 125-28.

57. Johannes Trithemius, letter to Germanus de Ganay, August 24, 1505, in Jo- 
hannes Trithemius, De septem secundadeis, id est intelligentiis sive spiritibus orbis 
post deum moventibus (Nuremberg, 1522), 65-76. This is also included in Jo- 
hannes Trithemius, Epistolarum familiarium libri duo (Haganau, 1536), 89-94. 
For Trithemius, see Noel L. Brann’s recent book, Trithemius and Magical Theol-

Astronomia inferior 229

ogy: A Chapter in the Controversy over Occult Studies in Early Modern Europe 
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1999), which appeared too late for 
extensive use in this study.

58. Noel L. Brann, “The Shift from Mystical to Magical Theology in the Abbot 
Trithemius,” in Studies in Medieval Culture (Western Michigan University Me- 
dieval Institute), 11, (1977): 148.

59. Ibid., 154.

60. Noel L. Brann, “Was Paracelsus a Disciple of Trithemius?” Sixteenth Century 
Journal, 10 (1979): 76-77, 80.59. Ibid., 154.

60. Noel L. Brann, “Was Paracelsus a Disciple of Trithemius?” Sixteenth Century 
Journal, 10 (1979): 76-77, 80.

61. Trithemius to Ganay, 69-70; translated by Brann, “The Shift,” 154.

62. Newman, “Thomas Vaughan,” 130; Gehennical Fire, 215-16.

63. Newman, “Thomas Vaughan,” 128, 129.

64. Dee, Monas, 122-23, 198-201,218-19.

65. Ibid., 214-17.

66. Brann, “George Ripley,” 213.

67. Trithemius to Ganay, 66.

68. Trithemius to Ganay, 66-69; Brann, “George Ripley,” 213-14, from which I 
have adapted the translation.

69. Trithemius to Ganay, 69.

70. Ibid., 69-70.

71. Ibid., 72-73.

72. Ibid., 72.

73. Trithemius, letter to Johannes von Westenburg, May 10, 1503, in De septem 
secundadeis, 86-87.

74. Ibid., 92-93.

75. Ibid., 82-83; translation from Brann, “The Shift,” 155.

76. Trithemius to von Westenburg, 94-95.

77. Ibid., 83-84.

78. John Dee, letter to Sir William Cecil, February 16, 1562, Bibliographical and 
Elistorical Miscellanies (Philobiblion Society), 1, no. 12 (1854): 1-16.

79. Dee, Monas, 212-13.

80. Jacques Gohory, De usu & mysteriis notarum (Paris, 1550), sig. H.iv.

81. Dee, Monas, 180-83.

82. Ibid., 184-85.

83. Ibid., 184-87.

84. Clulee, John Dee’s Natural Philosophy, 110-14.

85. Dee, Monas, 214-17; Clulee, John Dee’s Natural Philosophy, 111-14.

86. Philippus a Gabella, Secretioris Philosophiae Consideratio Brevis (Cassel: 
William Wessel, 1615). I have used a microfilm of the copy in the British Library, 
shelf mark 1033.H.6(4.). An English translation of this by Christopher Atton is

230 N. H. Clule e

available at <http://www.levity.com/alchemy/consider.html>. It is a bare transla- 
tion, not providing the original text, any of the diagrams, or any annotations.

87. The full title is Secretions Philosophiae Consideratio Brevis a Philippo a 
Gabella Philosophiae St. conscripta, & nunc primum und cum Confessione Fra- 
ternitatis R.C. in lucem edita.87. The full title is Secretions Philosophiae Consideratio Brevis a Philippo a 
Gabella Philosophiae St. conscripta, & nunc primum und cum Confessione Fra- 
ternitatis R.C. in lucem edita.

88. Arthur Edward Waite, The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross (Secaucus, N.J.: 
University Books, 1961), 17-18, 143-46, says that “the Consideratio itself is not 
of our especial concern”; Will-Erich Peuckert, Das Rosenkreutz, 2d ed. (Berlin: 
Erich Schmidt, 1973), does not mention Gabella’s Consideratio.

89. Yates, Rosicrucian Enlightenment, 45-47.

90. Ibid., 30-40, 220-22.

91. George M. Ross, “Rosicrucianism and the English Connection,” Stadia leib- 
nitiana 5 (1973): 244.

92. Bruce Moran, The Alchemical World of the German Court: Occult Philoso- 
phy and Chemical Medicine in the Circle of Moritz of Hessen (1572-1632), Bei- 
heft 29 of Sudhoff’s Archiv, (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1991), 94, 48-49, 100.

93. Moran, Alchemical World, 92-101 and 40-49; Carlos Gilly, ed., Cimelia 
Rhodostaurotica: Die Rosenkreuzer im Spiegel der zwischen 1610 und 1660 ent- 
standenen Handschriften und Drucke, 2d ed. (Amsterdam: In de Pelikaan, 1995), 
73-74.

94. Clulee, John Dee’s Natural Philosophy, 226-27; Moran, Alchemical World, 
93-101.

95. Moran, Alchemical World, 98-100; Gilly, Cimelia Rhodostaurotica, 22, 74.

96. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. G3v, A2v.

97. Ibid., sig. A4r.

98. Ibid.

99. Ibid., sig. Dlv.

100. Ibid., sig. Blr; Dlr-D2r.

101. Ann Blair, “Humanist Methods in Natural Philosophy: The Commonplace 
Book,” Journal of the History of Ideas, 53 (1992): 541-42; Ann Moss, Printed 
Commonplace-Books and the Structuring of Renaissance Thought (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1996), vii, 134.

102. Blair, “Humanist Methods,” 544-50.

103. Moss, Printed Common place-Books, 198.102. Blair, “Humanist Methods,” 544-50.

103. Moss, Printed Common place-Books, 198.

104. I want to thank William R. Newman for suggesting the possibility of refer- 
ences to Sendivogius. On Sendivogius, see Rafat T. Prinke, “The Twelfth Adept,” 
in Ralph White, ed., The Rosicrucian Enlightenment Revisited (Hudson, N.Y.: 
Lindisfarne Books, 1999), 141-92. Prinke suggests (p. 182-83) that Sendivogius 
might actually have been the author of the Consideratio. The echoes of Sendivogius 
are actually more extensive than Prinke realises, as we shall see.

105. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. A4r.

106. Ruska, Tabula smaragdina, 2.

Astronomia inferior 23 1

107. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. Blv: “Nam, Philosophare, aliud mihi non est, 
quam Caelum intueri, rerum abditarum & secretarum, investigare causas, & ra- 
tiones, ante omnia autem notitiam M. habere. . . .”

108. Ibid., sig. G3v.

109. “[T]he year following he translated the book M. into good Latin,” Fama Fra- 
ternitatis, trans. Thomas Vaughan, in Yates, Rosicrucian Enlightenment, 239. 
Roland Edighoffer, “Le ‘Liber M.’” Aries, 15 (1993): 78-83.

110. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. A2r, Blv-B2r.

111. Ruska, Tabula smaragdina, 2: “2. Quod est inferius, est sicut quod est su- 
perius, et quod est superius, est sicut quod est inferius, ad perpetranda miracula rei 
unius. 3. Et sicut omnes res fuerunt ab uno, meditatione unius: sic omnes res natae 
fuerunt ab hac una re, adaptatione. 4. Pater ejus est Sol, mater ejus Luna; portavit 
illud ventus in ventre suo; nutrix ejus terra est. 10. Sic mundus creatus est.”

112. Nicholas H. Clulee, “John Dee and the Paracelsians,” in Allen G. Debus and 
Michael T. Walton, eds., Reading the Book of Nature: The Other Side of the Sci- 
entific Revolution, vol. 41 of Sixteenth Century Essays & Studies, (St. Louis, Mo.: 
Sixteenth Century Journal Publishers, 1998), 111-32.113. References to the Propaedeumata are to the aphorism number and the page 
number in Shumaker, John Dee on Astronomy.

114. Gabella’s text in Consideratio lacks “moderamen.”

115. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. B2v-B3r; quoting Dee, Propaedeumata, CVII 
(184-86).

116. Ruska, Tabula smaragdina, 2: “5. Pater omnis thelesmi totius mundi est 
hie. ... 9. Hie est totius fortitudinis fortitudo fortis: quia vincet omnem rem sub- 
tilem, omnemque solidam penetrabit.”

117. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. Elr-E2v; Clulee, John Dee’s Natural Philosophy, 
43.

118. Gilly, Cimelia Rhodostaurotica, 74; Gabella, Consideratio, sig. Glr: “Vis- 
itetis Interiora, Terrae, Rectificando, Invenietis Occultum Lapidem Veram Medic- 
inam.”

119. Clulee, John Dee’s Natural Philosophy, 46-47, 52-56.

120. Ruska, Tabula smaragdina, 2.

121. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. C3r, C4r; cf. Dee, Monas, 158-61.

122. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. Clr; Dee, Monas, 156-59.

123. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. C4v-Dlr; quoting Dee, Monas, X (160) and XII 
(160).

124. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. Clv-C2r.

125. Ibid., sig. C2r.

126. Ibid., sig. Civ.

127. Cornelius Agrippa, De occulta philosophia, Libri Tres, ed. V. Perrone Com- 
pagni, vol. 48 of Studies in the History of Christian Thought (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 
1992), 96-98; Newman, Gehennical Fire, 214-15; Walter Pagel, Paracelsus: An

232 N. H. Clule e

Introduction to Philosophical Medicine in the Era of the Renaissance, 2d rev. ed. 
(Basel, Switzerland: Karger, 1982), 140, 298-99.

128. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. C2v.

129. Ibid., sig. C3r.

130. Read, Prelude to Chemistry, 17-18.

131. Gebet, Summa perfections, 645-46.

132. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. C3r, D3r-v, Glr-v.

133. Geber, Summa perfectionis, 664-68, 749-51; [Pseudo-] Geber, The Investi- 
gation, 9.

134. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. D2r-v.

135. Michael Sendivogius, Novum lumen chemicum, in Jean-Jaques Manget, ed., 
Bibliotheca Cbemica Curiosa (Geneva, 1702), 465.134. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. D2r-v.

135. Michael Sendivogius, Novum lumen chemicum, in Jean-Jaques Manget, ed., 
Bibliotheca Cbemica Curiosa (Geneva, 1702), 465.

136. Newman, Gehennical Fire, 87-89, 212.

137. Sendivogius, Novum lumen chemicum, 465, 466.

138. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. D3r-D4v.

139. Ibid., sig. D4v.

140. Sendivogius, Novum lumen chemicum, 472.

141. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. Elr.

142. Newman, Gehennical Fire, 87-89, 212, 216-17.

143. Ibid., 212.

144. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. E3v-E4r.

145. Jacques Gohory, In Libros Quatvor Ph. Theoph. Paracelsi de Vita Longa 
Scholia, in Theophrastus Paracelsus . . . Compendium. Ex optimis quibusque eius 
libris: Cum scholijs in libros IIII eiusdem De vita longa, Plenos mysteriorum, 
parabolarum, cenigmatum, (Basel, 1568), 304.

146. Gohory, Scholia, 195.

147. D. P. Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic from Ficino to Campanella 
(Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1975; reprint of original 1958 edi- 
tion), 96-106.

148. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. E4v.

149. Ibid., sig. Flv-F2r.

150. Ibid., sig. F2r.

151. Gohory, Scholia, 317: “Quae iam disserit in exitu libri de figmentis, deinde 
de Nymphidica, tiatepov jtpotepov est, ordine traditionis praepostero ad tenebras 
offundendas. . . .” Cf. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. F2r.

152. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. F2v; Dee, Monas, 160-62.

153. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. F2v-F4r; Dee, Monas, 162-64.

154. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. F4r-v.

155. Moran, Alchemical World, 40-46.

Astronomia inferior 233

156. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. Glr-v.154. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. F4r-v.

155. Moran, Alchemical World, 40-46.

Astronomia inferior 233

156. Gabella, Consideratio, sig. Glr-v.

157. Gilly, Cimelia Rhodostanrotica, 22, 74. T. M. Luhrmann, “An Interpretation 
of the Fama Fraternitatis with Respect to Dee’s Monas Flieroglypbica,” Ambix, 33 
(1986): 1-16, recognizes that Yates did not successfully support her claims with 
her references to Gabella’s Consideratio brevis in her Rosicrucian Enlightenment. 
Luhrmann attempts to rectify this by arguing a connection with the actual Rosi- 
crucian texts, specifically the Fama Fraternitatis. This approach, however, has two 
limitations. It requires relying on evidence from analogies rather than any direct in- 
fluences. It also requires considering Rosicrucianism as deriving from a Hermetic- 
Cabalistic philosophy, which has been disputed: see Ross, “Rosicrucianism,” 242.

This page intentionally left blank

6

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24)

Didier Kahn

There was a young man . . . who was looking for us everywhere. He had said first 
that he was one of our own and that, having lingered along the way, he had gotten 
lost, but then he had begun to cry and admitted that he had been unfaithful to us 
and had fled, but that now he saw that he could no longer live outside of the Or- 
der. . . . This story was told to us here and there, more or less everywhere; wher- 
ever we went, the unfortunate man had just passed through there. We asked the 
speaker what he thought of this and what was going to come of it. “I don’t believe 
that he will find us,” was all the speaker said.

— Hermann Hesse, Die Morgenland Fabrt (1932)— Hermann Hesse, Die Morgenland Fabrt (1932)

The incident of the Rosicrucian placards of Paris is well known. During 
the summer of 1623, posters were put up at the crossroads and upon the 
church doors of Paris, proclaiming the presence of some “representa- 
tives of the Principal College of the Brothers of the Rose-Cross” endowed 
with marvelous powers and desirous of saving their fellow men from “er- 
ror and death.”

This episode, and the confusion that apparently ensued in the French 
capital, has been touched upon for decades, if not for centuries, in nearly 
all the works devoted to the Rose-Cross, as well as in many other works 
devoted to Descartes. Each author favored his own point of view, however, 
and this variety of critical sources, combined with the historical vague- 
ness resulting from the small number of established certainties as to 
the fictitious fraternity, has dissuaded most authors from proposing an 
interpretation of the event, compromising until now the possibility of 
offering a satisfactory synthesis of this case. 1 The recent discoveries of Car- 
los Gilly on the German Rosicrucian movement, as well as Francois Se- 
cret’s older discovery concerning this modern “incident of the placards” of 
Paris, allow us henceforth to venture a consideration of the event as a

236 Didier Kahn236 Didier Kahn

whole, with the intention of placing it in the various contexts from which 
it derives its meaning. Who wrote and who put up the 1623 placards, and 
with what aim? Were there several texts, distinct from one another? What 
exactly were the reactions that they provoked? The many responses to this 
last question make us take into account the stakes of the affair on the so- 
ciopolitical level, particularly in the context of the libertine hunt, while at 
the same time considering this phenomenon as an episode and a caricature 
of the reception of Paracelsus in France. An investigation into the differ- 
ent sources — literary, historical, medical, and scientific — prior to 1624 al- 
lows us, moreover, to follow the destiny of the Rosicrucian episode in France 
until the eighteenth century and to try to measure its impact. Perhaps, once 
the affair has been put back into the historical continuum that witnessed its 
birth, it will then be possible to propose an interpretation of it.

Before all else, it seems prudent to take stock of the certainties acquired 
up to now concerning the Rosicrucian movement and its twists and turns.

Present State of Research on the Rosicrucian MovementPresent State of Research on the Rosicrucian Movement

Even if the many works of Frances Yates have often shown themselves to 
be beneficial, and even if several of these works are now considered clas- 
sics, there is no choice but to accept that The Rosicrucian Enlightenment, 
published in 1972, has scarcely done anything but add to the reigning con- 
fusion on the topic. In this book, Yates assigned British origins to the Ger- 
man movement, relying especially on the symbolism of the Order of the 
Garter and on the influence exerted by the Monas hieroglyphica of John 
Dee in Germany at the beginning of the seventeenth century. What is more, 
the marriage of the future “Winter King,” Friedrich V von der Pfalz, with 
King James I of England’s own daughter Elizabeth (1613) raised great 
hopes, in the Calvinist party. And through these sometimes millenarian 
hopes in the events that preceded the Thirty Years War, the Rosicrucian 
movement came to constitute, according to Yates, the mystical back- 
ground “of a vast reform movement whose nature was magical, hermetic 
and alchemical, in every respect comparable to that which John Dee had 
propagated in Bohemia [between 1583 and 1589].” 2 Yates thus discovered 
an active sympathy at the level of politics between the Calvinists and the 
Rosicrucian movement. Dee became “a towering figure in the European 
scene,” the German Rosicrucian movement, “in one sense an export of the

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 237

Elizabethan period and of the inspirations behind it, scientific, mystical, 
poetic.” The word “Rosicrucian” itself henceforth evoked “both English 
chivalric influences and a Dee influence behind them.” 3Equipped with all the authority that her preceding works had justly 
earned her, the author of Giordano Bruno succeeded, with The Rosicru- 
cian Enlightenment, in establishing in a large part of the scholarly, non- 
specialist world a theory that was at least stimulating, if not original, 4 but 
unfortunately founded on too many hypotheses and too little critical doc- 
umentary research to resist for long the assaults of scholars who, in the 
1970s and 1980s, embarked upon shedding an ever more precise light 
upon the origins and the true stakes of the Rosicrucian manifestos. Ten 
years after Yates’s work, Roland Edighoffer expressed his criticism as fol- 
lows: “How to delimit and define with precision that which is elusive? 
With an accomplished art of persuasion, Frances Yates expounds theories 
that are capable of seducing the reader, but which remain hypotheses.” 5

More recently, Gilly, incontestably the best present-day specialist on the 
topic, 6 has taken care to refute Yates’s theories each time that the oppor- 
tunity for doing so has presented itself — an eminently beneficial task, 
given the very wide audience that these theories have received until now, if 
not as a result of Dee’s magic, then because of the very name of the author, 
hastily promoted to the rank of indisputable authority on the subject.Synthesizing the different contributions of the most recent research and 
adding to it his own contributions, Gilly has now established on a sound 
basis the reconstruction of a rather large part of the genesis and history of 
the movement. Entirely rejecting the idea according to which the very term 
“Rosicrucian” was supposedly exported from Elizabethan England, Gilly 
takes away from John Dee the central position too often accorded to him 
in the birth of the movement since The Rosicrucian Enlightenment and 
brings his role back to its proper place, “scarcely more important” in this 
genesis, Gilly says, “than that of a Paracelsus, a Lautensack, a Suchten, a 
Brocardo, a Castellion, an Arndt, a Croll or the author of the Cyclopaedia 
Paracelsica Christiana all authors who constitute, with many others, the 
vast hydrographic network of wellsprings that irrigate the native compost 
of the Rosicrucian manifestos. 7

We know that with the “general reform of the divine and the human” 
announced by the Rosicrucian manifestos, “it was, in the last analysis, 
very much a question of a radical change of values in religion, in science

238 Didier Kahn238 Didier Kahn

and in politics”; in fact, “between the dates of 1614 and 1625 alone, more 
than 400 writings appeared which, coming from the most diverse circles, 
assumed their position in relation to the Rosicrucian phenomenon.” 8 We 
know as well that these manifestos, which are completely imbued with a 
“harmonious philosophy,” 9 were produced by a circle of friends of whom 
the best known, from the point of view of the Rosicrucian movement, were 
named Tobias Hess (1568-1614), Christoph Besold (1577-1638) and Jo- 
hann Valentin Andreae (1586-1654). If the conception of the first of the 
Rosicrucian manifestos, the Fama Fraternitatis (Echoes of the Fraternity 
of the Admirable Order of the Rose-Cross, Written to All the Scholars and 
Leaders of Europe), must be attributed in a collective manner to the circle 
of Tobias Hess, its composition, on the other hand, is the work of Andreae 
alone, who is also the author of the Confessio Fraternitatis and the 
Chymische Hochzeit ( The Chemical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz, 
in the year 1459). 10 This last treatise, published in 1616, which exerted 
only a very small influence, is the first in the order of composition; Andreae 
probably composed it in 1607. 11 The composition of the Fama can be 
dated to approximately 1608; 12 although the Confessio affirmed that the 
Fama had been diffused in five languages, only the original German ver- 
sion was actually circulated. 13 Adam Haslmayr, the very first witness of the 
propagation of this text, stated that he saw it in Tyrol as early as 1610; in 
1611, he referred to it implicitly and on New Year’s Day of 1612, he gave 
a copy of it to his protector August von Anhalt (1575-1653), declaring 
that he had received it from Tobias Hess, a doctor from Tubingen. 14 For 
his part, the Danish doctor Ole Worm (1588-1654), at that time traveling 
in Europe, received a copy of it in 1611, probably from Johann Hartmann 
(1561-1631), professor of chymiatria at the University of Marburg since 
1609. We are currently aware of four handwritten copies prior to the edi- 
tio princeps (1614), which permits the reconstitution of the text in its orig- 
inal form, since this edition was made without the authors’ knowledge. 15In 1612, August von Anhalt, having heard about the Rosicrucians from 
Haslmayr and having received from him a copy of the Fama, was seized 
with a passion for the Fraternity and had a letter of inquiry sent to Tobias 
Hess to find out more, particularly about the unattainable Confessio an- 
nounced first in the Fama Fraternitatis. This step remained fruitless, “per- 
haps for the very simple reason that the Confessio Fraternitatis had not yet 
been written.” 16 Gilly has shown that Haslmayr — who presented himself

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 239The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 239

as a disciple of Paracelsus and cultivated a rather heterodox doctrine called 
“Theophrastia Sancta, ” tying together mystic theology, philosophy of na- 
ture, medicine, and alchemy, which he sometimes epitomized by affirm- 
ing his knowledge of the elementi verbique mirifici sacramentum, “the 
secret of the element of nature and of the word of Creation” 17 — tried with 
all his might during that time to persuade August von Anhalt to assume 
the role of political champion of the future universal reformation advo- 
cated by the Rosicrucians. Anhalt, however, quite lucid concerning his 
own lack of power on the political level, did not wish in any way to do so. 
From 1603, the prince had indeed renounced the direction of the princi- 
pality of Anhalt to the advantage of his brother Christian, in order that 
he might dedicate himself in all tranquility to alchemy and the circulation 
of Paracelsian, Weigelian, and mystical writings; a general reform of the 
world seemed impossible to him without great bloodshed, thus he pre- 
ferred to leave that up to God. 18 In fact, “Prince August entertained the 
project of publishing, while managing to bypass any censorship, not only 
the works of Valentin Weigel, but also the theological writings of Paracel- 
sus, the commentary on the Apocalypse of Paul Lautensack, the Offen- 
bahrung Gottlicber Majestat by Aegidius Gutman or the prophetic texts 
of Helisaeus Roslin.” He then had the idea in 1611 of installing a secret 
printing house next to his alchemy laboratory in Zerbst, whose supervi- 
sion he envisioned entrusting to Haslmayr. 19 We know little about the ac- 
tivity of this secret printing house, for August von Anhalt was forced to 
use great caution; but it is certain that he himself, in March 1612, had 
printed at his own expense scarcely 100 copies of Haslmayr’s Response to 
the Fama Fraternitatis, which Haslmayr had sent him two months prior. 
Although August ultimately gave up supporting this publication by en- 
hancing it with his own princely authority, he printed it in the hope of 
inciting the brothers of the Rose-Cross finally to emerge from their reti- 
cence — at least if the brotherhood did really exist, which August won- 
dered about early on, although his doubts were subsequently erased little 
by little. 20As for Haslmayr, fortified by a blind trust in his local lord, Archduke 
Maximilian of Austria — who was completely devoted to the Jesuits and 
the Inquisition — he naively told him about his many Paracelsian, theo- 
sophical and Rosicrucian speculations to clear himself of accusations of 
heresy and charlatanism leveled at him by a former student of the Jesuits,

240 Didier Kahn240 Didier Kahn

Hippolytus Guarinoni, doctor in the city of Hall and fiercely anti- 
Paracelsian. Haslmayr went so far as to ask the archduke, in August 1612, 
for a “small travel fund” to go in search of the brothers of the Rose-Cross, 
whom he thought he would find mainly around Montpellier. “Haslmayr,” 
Gilly writes, “received these small provisions, this travel money, from the 
Archduke, not to seek out the Rosicrucians in the region of Montpellier, 
but rather to row as a galley slave for four and a half years on the open seas 
of Genoa.” 21 Haslmayr later refused to describe “out of consideration for 
chaste ears,” “what sort of existence one leads on the galleys, savage, with- 
out rest, monstrous, hopeless and sodomitical,” 22 “and all that only,” he 
added, “for having admitted myself to be a poor Theophrastic Christian,” 
or more precisely, for having been held in suspicion, notably on the 
strength of his printed response to the Fama Fratemitatis, of having sought 
“to introduce into Tyrol a new sect or heresy.” 23 
While Haslmayr was rowing on the open seas of Genoa, the seizure of 
his papers allowed the Tyrolian authorities to discover several letters from 
one of his friends, the German Paracelsian Benedictus Figulus (1567- 
1624), who was at that time staying at Freiburg-im-Breisgau, a city under 
the control of the Austrian Habsburgs, which permitted an order for his 
arrest to be issued. Figulus took flight, abandoning in spite of himself his 
project to edit the “cabalistic and theological books” of Paracelsus, as well 
as his project for a continuation of the greatest alchemical printed collec- 
tion of the time, namely the famous Theatrum Chemicum, and leaving 
some of his manuscripts at Marburg and Strasbourg before finally being 
imprisoned until 1617 in an undisclosed place. 24 Meanwhile, in March 
1614, the Fama Fratemitatis had been published in Kassel, against the will 
of its authors, who found themselves forced to confront the new situation 
its publication engendered. 25 The Fama was accompanied by Haslmayr’s 
Response, which was announced right from the title page: “With a short 
response by Mr. Haselmeyer, who was because of it imprisoned by the Je- 
suits and chained up on a galley.” 26 It is not known who edited the work, 
but given the place and the printer, it could only have been with the con- 
sent of Moritz, the landgrave of Hessen-Kassel. 27 It is also not known how 
the editor knew Haslmayr’s fate. Carlos Gilly has put forward the hypoth- 
esis that Figulus could have left in Kassel a copy of the Fama made from 
the manuscript Haslmayr possessed, which would explain the long-lasting 
wrath of Johann Valentin Andreae toward Figulus. 28 As for the Confessio,The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 241

August von Anhalt obtained a manuscript of it as early as September 
1614, which constitutes chronologically the first account of its actual ex- 
istence, from an individual whom Gilly is strongly tempted to identify as 
Johannes Rhenanus, a doctor of the landgrave of Hessen-Kassel. This Rhe- 
nanus could well be the “Philippus a Gabella” who published in March 
1615 the first edition of the Confessio, once again at Kassel, on printing 
presses controlled by the landgrave. 29

Studying the implications of these historical data, Gilly has refuted the 
idea — dear to Frances Yates and, he specifies, to some contemporaries, 
Lutheran as well as Catholic, of Andreae — that the “Rose-Croix mani- 
festos allegedly prepared ideologically the Calvinist Friedrich V von der 
Pfalz’s political venture in Bohemia.” Indeed, if in the Confessio the eagle’s 
feathers obviously designate “the house of Austria, that is above all the 
monarchy of Spain in its role as the only and last supporter of the falter- 
ing Papacy,” the lion, on the other hand, is “neither that of the Palatinate 
nor that of Bohemia, nor that of the Low Countries (nor is it any more the 
lion of alchemy who engulfs the eagle’s head), but rather the lion of the 
Bible, that spoken of by Isaiah and Micah, the Fourth Book of Esdras and 
the Apocalypse: the one who will come to open the book, break the seven 
seals and introduce a New Age.” This is indeed the lion that appeared 
to Tobias Hess in 1605, in a vision that nourished his later chiliastic 
concerns, which subsequently earned him accusations from the Faculty of 
Theology of Tubingen. The prophetic lines of the Confessio concerning 
the role of this lion — putting an end to the tyranny of the papacy — coin- 
cide with those of Hess’s vision, even the detail of the eagle’s losing its 
feathers little by little. 30According to Gilly, there could not be any sort of original sympathy, 
and still less a complicity on the political level, between the Calvinists and 
the Rosicrucian and Weigelian movement. 31 Gilly first points out that the 
Calvinists who from 1618 intervened in the Rosicrucian quarrels by tak- 
ing sides in favor of Friedrich V von der Pfalz — in pamphlets, moreover, 
that Frances Yates does not account for — would have supported any other 
prince as well, provided that he was opposed to the rise of power of the 
Habsburgs and the Jesuits in central Europe. Gilly then indicates that this 
propaganda, which moreover came belatedly, played no role in the birth 
of the Rosicrucian movement: quite the contrary, since the Lutheran, not 
Calvinist, princes Friedrich von Wurttemberg and August von Anhalt,

242 Didier Kahn242 Didier Kahn

respectively, were the ones whom Tobias Hess in 1605 and Adam Hasl- 
mayr in 1611 endeavored to set up as political leaders of the future uni- 
versal reform. 32 As for the court of Heidelberg, it was scarcely, if at all, 
interested in the Rosicrucian movement, and when it became interested, 
it was not to support it, but to condemn it as a whole. It is moreover in 
the reformed University of Marburg and on the order of the Calvinist 
landgrave Moritz von Hessen-Kassel that in 1619-20, the first trial for 
Weigelianism, Rosicrucianism and other “errors” stemming from the “The- 
ophrastic mob” took place. Three years later (1623), a new trial took 
place at the Lutheran university in Giessen, brought against Heinrich Nol- 
lius for Rosicrucianism and Weigelian fanaticism. 33 The first of these tri- 
als concluded with the chief person accused, Philipp Homagius — who 
was moreover the son-in-law of the first printer of the Rosicrucian mani- 
festos — being condemned to life in prison, upon the express order of the 
landgrave Moritz, “in order to discourage all those who pass themselves 
off as highly enlightened beings and as prophets or apostles sent to us, or 
who promise by a false and vain hope the philosophers’ stone and other 
great secrets, the great delight and blessing of God.” We see that the posi- 
tion of the landgrave with regard to the Rose-Cross, far from being uni- 
form, deserves to be carefully reconsidered. 34

Faced with the surprising complexity of these doctrines, these inextri- 
cable entanglements of facts and publications, we can only feel a heavy dis- 
appointment when we now turn to the tragicomic Parisian episode of the 
Rosicrucian placards. This episode has nevertheless caused too much ink 
to flow for us to allow ourselves to neglect it, as much in the framework of 
the study of Paracelsianism as in that of the history of ideas in France at 
the time of Louis XIII.The Incident of the Parisian Placards of the Rose-Cross

One morning in June or July of 1623, Parisians discovered to their surprise 
posters put up at the street corners and on the church doors, written in these 
words: “Nous deputez du College principal des Freres de la Roze-Croix, 
faisons sejour visible &c invisible en cette ville, par la grace du Tres-haut, vers 
lequel se tourne le coeur des Justes. Nous monstrons &c enseignons sans 
livres ny marques a parler toutes sortes de langues des pays ou voulons es- 
tre, pour tirer les hommes nos semblables d’erreur <&> de mort.” 35

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 243The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 243

The exact date of these posters is difficult to pinpoint. Gabriel Naude, 
who obtained the King’s privilege for his Instruction a la France on No- 
vember 13, 1623, situates the event as occurring “approximately three 
months ago,” which would place it in the month of August. 36 If we submit 
to the evidence, this dating must be pushed back slightly, for on exactly 
August 3, 1623, the scholar Peiresc writes from Paris to his friend the 
painter Rubens, who is living in Anvers: “nous avons eu ici certains autres 
sectaires nouveaux de la Rose-Croix, assez celebres en Allemagne, qui sont 
peut-etre les memes que ceux de Seville. Ils songerent a afficher sur les 
murs dans la rue certains papiers ou avis dans lesquels ils promettaient au 
public en quatre lignes la connaissance de la divinite et l’invisibilite per- 
sonnels et cela au nom des freres de la Rose-Croix.” 37 There is no doubt: 
It is definitely on the subject of the placards of Paris, and these lines situ- 
ate them in July at the latest, on an unspecified date. The month of July 
was also suggested, although without justification, by the editors of the 
Correspondence of Mersenne, perhaps based on the pamphlet Effroyables 
Pactions, rather eccentric but published shortly after the event, in Novem- 
ber or December 1623, which placed the arrival of the supposed “Invisible 
ones” in Paris around July 14 and the posting of the placards some time 
later. 38 A manuscript of Peiresc again places the posting of the text that he 
reproduced in July. 39 However, a Latin document preserved in the manu- 
scripts of Theodore Turquet de Mayerne is dated June 13, 1623, 40 and 
the Mercure frangois places the circulation of the posters “in the spring,” 
without any further precision: “11 s’est tousjours trouve des esprits curieux 
de s^avoir toutes sortes de nouvelles, ce qui leur fait passer autant de 
temps; & d’autres qui leur en donnent a garder, & s’en donnent du plaisir. 
Ceux-cy voyant le change du Palais de Paris sans nouvelles, 41 au Printemps 
de ceste annee, s’adviserent d’y faire trotter de main en main plusieurs pe- 
tits billets manuscrits, & en afficherent aux Carrefours, qui contenoient, 
Nous Deputez du College Principal [etc.].” 42 
Visibly inspired by Naude in many details, the article of the Mercure, 
published in 1624, is the most belated of the accounts of the time; it can- 
not be neglected, but can it be considered a model of accuracy? It must 
certainly be admitted that using the month of July alone would simplify 
everything. Indeed, retaining the months of June and July as the most prob- 
able dates would amount to admitting that the placards were posted several 
times in the capital with an interval of a few weeks between postings; yet,244 Didier Kahn

once a first posting had been carried out, would it not have been excessively 
dangerous to be caught, even by a local inhabitant, in the process of a sec- 
ond posting campaign? Still, the case is such that in the absence of other 
criteria of assessment, there is no choice but to confine ourselves to the 
hypothesis of a posting in several stages, carried out between June 13 and 
the end of July 1623.

In what form were these posters presented? According to Naude’s ac- 
count, confirmed by the author of Effroyables Pactions, they were simply 
a “note containing six handwritten lines.” 43 As for the Mercure Francois, 
which also refers to “small notes” that it says trotted “from hand to hand,” 
it specifies in a similar fashion that they were “handwritten.” 44 It is there- 
fore useless to look for printed copies of them. If one explores, on the other 
hand, some handwritten collections and some contemporary accounts, 
one obtains curious results, of which this divergence among sources lets us 
have a premonition: Several posters seem to have circulated. Before exam- 
ining them, it is worthwhile to ask questions concerning their source, since 
this is an area that we can clarify.

The Author of the Posters

The first commentators of the incident immediately thought it was a trick: 
So said the Mercure Francois in 1624. The preceding year, Naude had al- 
ready written:The Author of the Posters

The first commentators of the incident immediately thought it was a trick: 
So said the Mercure Francois in 1624. The preceding year, Naude had al- 
ready written:

Toutesfois si nous voulons passer plus avant, & rechercher precisement la pre- 
miere cause de cette bourrasque, laquelle souffle maintenant dans nos campagnes, 
nous trouverons que le bruit de cette confraternite s’estant espandu depuis peu par 
l’Allemagne, quelques Professeurs, Medecins & personnes studieuses de cette ville, 
avoient eu cette curiosite que d’en rechercher la cognoissance, par le moyen des 
livres nouveaux qui leur estoient communiquez par les Libraires apres leur retour 
de la foire de Francfort, lesquels neantmoins n’y recognoissans rien que des 
chimeres & fanfaronneries, aimoient beaucoup mieux en attendant la farce pren- 
dre le plaisir de cette Comedie,

quam protinus urbi / Pandere, res alta sylva & caligine mersas, 45

& mettre leurs renommees en compromis pour en estre les premiers denoncia- 
teurs, jugeans qu’il y avoit assez de fols dans Paris pour ne laisser croupir cette 
marote. Et de faict il y a environ trois mois que quelqu’un d’iceux voyant que le 
Roy estant a Fontainebleau, le Royaume tranquille, & Mansfeld trop esloigne pour 
en avoir tous les jours des nouvelles , 46 l’on manquoit de discours sur le Change , 47 
& par toutes les compagnies, s’advisa pour vous en fournir de placarder par les 
carrefours ce billet contenant six lignes manuscrites, duquel j’ay juge estre a pro- 
pos de vous communiquer la copie, pour soulager une infinite de personnes qui ne 
Pont veue, d’en barboiiiller leurs tablettes . 48

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 245The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 245

By the same token, at the end of the century, Adrien Baillet did not hesitate 
to say that the poster was the product of “some buffoon’s imagination.” 49 
No serious mind was therefore prepared to see in this affair anything else 
but a trick. The poster’s author, however, remained unknown.

It is no longer a mystery, nor has it been one for more than a quarter of 
a century. As soon as 1971, one year before The Rosicrucian Enlighten- 
ment, Francois Secret exhumed an account by Nicolas Chorier that estab- 
lished the origin of the placards. 50 Secret himself, it is true, expressed some 
doubts about the authenticity of this account, dictated more by his histo- 
rian’s prudence than by the quality of the testimony. Furthermore, the ac- 
count was given in Latin, without a French translation and accompanied 
by very little commentary. Finally, Secret’s article was published in a jour- 
nal devoted not to the seventeenth century, but rather to the Renaissance, 
which can be easily justified as long as one understands the rather vague 
notion of the Renaissance in its broadest sense. For all that, it is still not 
any less surprising that since 1971, only two researchers, Carlos Gilly and 
Lorenzo Bianchi, have taken notice of this fortunate discovery. 51

As Secret has shown, then, in 1680 the scholar Nicolas Chorier, a lawyer 
and historian but also the clandestine author of a famous Neo-Latin erotic 
poem, Aloysia Sigea, devoted a work to his protector, the duelist and aca- 
demician Pierre de Boissat (1603-62), as well as to de Boissat’s friends. 52 
Among these was found a certain Etienne Chaume, a doctor from Mont- 
pellier, to whom Chorier devoted an entire article:ETIENNE CHAUME died some years before Boissat, who would still be alive, 
if Chaume had lived. This man, admirably well-versed in the art of medicine, used 
to wrest away from death those whom the force of illness condemned to die. Born 
in Vienne, he had learned medicine in Montpellier and had practiced it in Paris for 
a few years; it is in this capital of the kingdom of France that he had resolved to set- 
tle. The story got in the way.

At the time many things were being said on the subject of the enlightened broth- 
ers of the Rose-Cross, (as they were called ): 51 that these men had knowledge of 
whatever they wished to know — learned and popular languages, arts and sci- 
ences — at will, without any work and in a few days; that starting with the most 
base metals, in an admirable manner they fabricated from them more noble ones, 
and even that they changed them into gold; that finally since the eternal spirit of 
the divinity refused them nothing, they immediately obtained what they desired, 
whether it be for themselves or for others. Pure nonsense. But treatises written 
on this matter by some authors, among whom were included Paulus Didisus , 54 
Theophilus Schweighart , 55 Eucharius Cygnaeus (fictitious names) and Heinrich 
Neuhus from Dantzig , 56 brought to these imaginary stories the weight of a great 
authority.

246 Didier Kahn246 Didier Kahn

Driven by youthful jocularity and a juvenile spirit, Chaume added to this a great 
deal of his own invention, particularly the fact that this type of man was, at will, 
capable of seeing without being seen; that it was possible for those who found it to 
be in their interest to travel freely to all the innermost recesses of a residence after 
entering it; that they could be located, without being seen, next to guests in the 
process of dining, near people conversing with their dear ones, near sick people. 
Among Chaume’s companions , 57 three or four were in the habit of seeing him reg- 
ularly. In the Latin tongue, he produced posters exposing these chimeras and this 
empty balderdash, and the idea came to these men of exposing the posters on the 
street corners, the church doors and the busiest places. Those who had the desire 
to live well and blessedly were invited to this brotherhood and fortunate if they 
were initiated into these mysteries. The place, the time, the day and the hour were 
indicated on the posters.

The common people of France are rather credulous, but those of Paris are more 
so than all the others. There are no other people on earth who allow themselves to 
be fooled more easily, and who accept having been deceived more calmly once the 
deception is known . 58 Once these placards were posted, surprise seized the Pari- 
sians at first, followed by the most intense emotion. Fear, distress, indignation in- 
vaded nearly every house. People did not feel safe under their own roofs. People 
therefore dared neither to speak freely to their own families, nor to devote them- 
selves to their affairs according to their desire. This panic of the citizens could 
not fail to attract the attention of the magistrate. The latter therefore demanded in- 
quiries as to the authors, and even, if those who were sought were taken, that they 
be dealt with ruthlessly . 59Chaume, at first, was very astonished that what he had dreamed up would up- 
set minds in such a general way. He laughed about it. But when he saw that very 
scrupulous inquiries of the incident were undertaken by people to whom power 
had been given to do so, he attended to his reputation and to his salvation by flee- 
ing; prudently eluding danger, he returned to Vienne. He hid himself entirely in the 
breast of the Muses, and in a short number of years, having placed neither limits 
nor an end to his studies, he brought from his sleepless nights and his uninter- 
rupted work those fruits of erudition which are amply sufficient for the honor, 
benefit, and usefulness of any man who is very absorbed by life. What he did not 
know, no other doctor would have known . . . He excelled in the Latin tongue . . . ; 
you would have said that he spoke it as his native language. ... He died, having 
passed his fiftieth year, to the great grief of all and still more to my own. When, 
thanks to his care, I was restored from my troubles, with my strength having re- 
turned, he accepted for himself no payment from me, except (as he said) my good 
graces, which he requested of me. Any other payment was, in his eyes, not only con- 
temptible to scholars and unworthy of a well-read doctor, but even, according to 
him, something absolutely dishonorable . 60

What must be retained from this beautiful portrait concerning the inci- 
dent of the placards of 1623? Let us begin with some observations. Pierre 
de Boissat having died in 1662, Etienne Chaume, who supposedly pre- 
ceded him to the tomb by a few years at fifty-plus years of age, must have

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 247The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 247

been born between 1603 and 1606, which would place his death between 
1656 and 1659, at between fifty and fifty-three years of age. If he were 
born later, he would have been rather young to play, in 1623, the role de- 
scribed by Chorier; if he were born earlier, his life would have ended nearly 
ten years before Boissat’s, which would no longer agree with Chorier’s 
story. He was therefore between seventeen and twenty years old in 1623. 61

But given these conditions, how could he have studied medicine before- 
hand in Montpellier and practiced it in Paris for some years? There is no 
choice but to suppose that on this point his biographer is mistaken. The 
archives of the University of Montpellier confirm this hypothesis: Only af- 
ter the Parisian adventure, in December 1623, did Chaume enrol in the 
Faculty of Medicine in Montpellier. 62 It is therefore highly possible that he 
never practiced in Paris, unless one accepts that he went back there later, 
upon the completion of his studies and before settling definitively in 
Vienne.This is not the only point on which Chorier’s story can be seen as defi- 
cient. Chorier in fact left handwritten memoirs, addressed to his son, that, 
although they were interrupted after 1681, nonetheless cover the entire 
duration of Chaume’s life and beyond. These memoirs being nothing other 
than an autobiography, one cannot expect to discover there a new telling 
of the Rosicrucian episode; Chaume himself only appears in it one time in 
1646 or 1647, in reference to Chorier’s illness. 63 Chaume, here, is far from 
having the role that Chorier attributed to him in the De Petri Boessatii 
vita. Far from saving Chorier’s life, he saw no danger in his illness, which 
another physician considered very serious. It is readily conceivable, in 
these conditions, that he refused any salary from Chorier, having probably 
cared for him, but not cured him. The portrait of Chaume Chorier paints 
in the context of De Petri Boessatii vita, necessarily related to the praise 
genre, must therefore be viewed with caution.

In the Rosicrucian incident, two details in particular contradict the most 
known facts: Naude’s account seems to exclude the composition of the 
posters in Latin, which is quite natural according to Chorier; moreover, 
would not the Latin language have created an obstacle to the scope of cir- 
culation of the posters among the Parisians? Furthermore, these placards, 
as they are transmitted by Naude, do not contain — far from it — all the de- 
tails Chorier notes on the supposed invisibility of the Rose-Croix, to the 
point that one must wonder if Chorier did not assist his memory, after so

248 Didier Kahn248 Didier Kahn

many years, by using the text of the Effroyables Pactions. In this pamphlet, 
the necromancer Respuch promises the imprudent people who have 
agreed to sign his pact “also to render them invisible, not only in private 
but also in public, and to enter and exit Palaces and Houses, Rooms and 
Closets although all may be closed and locked with one hundred locks.” 64

Writing sixty years after the fact, Nicolas Chorier could have confused 
the various facts of the incident and constructed his account, as Baillet 
did ten years later in his Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, by substituting as- 
sertions with an authentic appearance for his doubts or for unknown 
elements.The question emerges again with another document recently brought to 
light, for this one happens to agree, in its main points, with Chorier’s story: 
an autograph note by John Locke (1632-1704), discovered by William 
Newman in one of the philosopher’s numerous notebooks kept at Ox- 
ford. 65 Classified under the heading Rosicrucians, this note reproduces an 
anecdote told to Locke by Nicolas Thoynard (1628-1706), his friend and 
most assiduous correspondent, whose acquaintance the philosopher had 
made in Paris in 1677 in one of the capital’s learned circles. 66 Thoynard 
himself heard this anecdote, according to his note, from the chief protag- 
onist, a certain Mr. “Pallieure” or “Pailleure,” none other than the math- 
ematician Jacques Le Pailleur (P-1654), a member of the Mersenne 
Academy since 1637, a great friend of Blaise Pascal’s father and of Gedeon 
Tallemant Des Reaux, a great lover of pranks, rather a skeptic and a sup- 
porter of “learned ignorance” as opposed to the credulity of excessively pi- 
ous and superstitious people; the Mersenne Academy continued at his 
home after the death of the Minim scientist (1648). 67 One must therefore 
admit that the young Thoynard necessarily collected this story before Te 
Pailleur’s death (1654), when Thoynard was 26, at most. The extent of 
time between this terminus a quo and the rather belated date when he 
shared it with Tocke (not before 1677) perhaps explains the fact that some 
inaccuracies, and even some peculiarities, are to be found in it. But here is 
the anecdote:About the year 1618 or 20 Mr Pallieure who is mentioned in the preface of Mr 
Pascal’s Hydrostaticks going to see one of his friends at his lodging in Paris found 
him Sc another of his acquaintance writeing but so as at his entrance they shufled 
aside the paper as unwilling to have known what they were about. After a litle 
while one of them says why should not Mr Pallieure make one. Agreed replys the 
other Sc upon that they produce their paper w ch was the draught of a program to

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 249

be posted up in Paris to tell the people that there were certain persons of a broth- 
erhood come to town to cure all diseases & doe other rare things amongst the rest 
make them that desired it invisible. And that these Adepti were to be found such a 
day every week in such a place, nameing a street in the Fauxbourg St Marceau 
where indeed there was no such street. And there lying on the table the Theatrum 
honoris of Rodolphus Conradus they subscribed their affiche R.C. These bills were 
posted up & downe all about Paris & had the [des deleted] effect they designed w ch 
was to make themselves sport by seeing people & amongst them some of their ac- 
quaintance flock to the fauxbourg St Marceau in quest of these brothers RC. 68That w ch put them first upon doing this was to play a trick to Lullyists who were 
then in vogue at Paris & cried up as men that had more then ordinary skill in the 
secrets of nature. & therefor they presumed that this bill would be taken to be 
theirs. But that w ch was a consequence of it w ch [they did deleted] the contrivers did 
not designe nor forsee was that there spread thereupon an opinion that there was 
a brotherhood or society of men that could be when they pleased invisible & had 
other great secrets w ch they called brothers of the Rosie crosse. who first gave this 
imaginare society y' name Mr Pallieure (who counted this story to Mr Toynard) 
could not tell but concluded it to have been an interpretation of the R.C. w ch was 
subscribed.

And thus began the invisible society of the Rosicrucians w ch made such a noise 
at Paris & through all France that Naudaeus a little after writ a book ag' them. And 
the world have soe much talked of since without knowing any thing of them or 
their original.

Mr Pailleure going not long after into Brittany at Vannes met with a young gent, 
with whome talking of News was told thus, that he y e young gent had receivd news 
from Paris of the Rosycrucians of whom all y c world talk J strange things, espetially 
of their being invisible. w dl the hostesse hearkening to as they were discoursing of 
it at table told them that there had been two of them lately at her house, who hav- 
ing dined vanishd soe that she & her people could not perceive w ch way they were 
gon. A pleasant instance how easily people resigne up their beliefe to common 
fame & adde each one their testimony to a Lie that is once current. 69We must begin with certain surprising details in this story. From a purely 
chronological point of view, the date 1618 or 1620 is of course erroneous: 
there were not two sessions of Rosicrucian posters in the capital at an in- 
terval of a few years, but only one in 1623: Otherwise, the previous post- 
ing could not have failed to be mentioned in 1623. What are we to think, 
furthermore, of the episode of the signature “R.C.,” which was inspired, if 
we are to believe Le Pailleur’s story, by the simple initials of “Rodolphus 
Conradus,” an individual said to be the author of a Theatrum Honoris ? It 
may first be noted that neither Thoynard nor Locke seem to have been 
aware that the Brotherhood of the Rose-Cross was famous in Germany as 
early as 1614, which would have been sufficient to ruin his explanation of 
the initials “R.C.” and the rather belated origins of the Brotherhood. But

250 Didier Kahn250 Didier Kahn

if one researches more deeply, one quickly discovers that this very name, 
“Rodolphus Conradus,” or whatever variants are given for it (Cunrad, 
Cunrat, Konrad, Konraedt, etc.) appears in no biographical dictionary, 
from Jocher to the Index notorum hominum. On the other hand, a famous 
work exists with nearly the same title: the Ampbitbeatrum Honoris by 
Father Charles Scribani (1561-1629). But this anti-Protestant pamphlet, 
published on Plantin’s printing press in Anvers in 1605 under a false ad- 
dress, appeared under the pseudonym “Clarius Bonarscius,” which is very 
different from “Roldolphus Conradus.” 70 This episode was therefore quite 
probably embellished and deformed after the event by Jacques Le Pailleur, 
whose memory was perhaps at fault and whose facetious nature would 
have enjoyed elaborating these fictitious origins of the Rose-Cross. But if 
we let the context of the time guide us, it is not impossible that Heinrich 
Khunrath’s alchemical work Ampbitbeatrum Sapientiae Aeternae (1609, 
first ed. 1595), very much in fashion in France at that time and whose au- 
thor was often spelled Conrad, especially by Naude, 71 was hidden behind 
the vague memory of a Rodolphus Conrad and a Theatrum Honoris.One detail, on the other hand, rings true in this version of the origins of 
the Rose-Cross: the fact that the posters had a great deal more success than 
they had anticipated. This unexpected success is also found in Chorier’s 
story. In fact, the significance of Le Pailleur’s recollection resides in its con- 
firmation — or rather completion — of several aspects of Chorier’s version. 
The latter showed Etienne Chaume making the posters himself, in the 
company of some friends, with the sole goal of laughing at the effect of 
these placards on the Parisians. Le Pailleur presents, without giving any 
names, the same version of the facts. Everything therefore leads to the be- 
lief that it was indeed Chaume whom he visited that day, which permits us 
to identify Le Pailleur himself as one of the friends of Chaume Chorier 
mentions.

The stories have other points in common: the idea of invisibility and that 
of the fictitious meeting set at the bottom of the poster. Here is the oppor- 
tunity to raise the question of the contents of these placards. Since Le 
Pailleur’s story confirms that they developed the theme of invisibility more 
than is seen in the version Naude kept, and since this story adds the idea 
of treating all illnesses — a central theme, as we know, of the Rosicrucian 
myth but absent from Naude’s version — must we not think that there was 
not one version, but instead several separate posters? This would confirm

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 251

the sentence uttered by Chaume or his friend in Le Pailleur’s story: “Why 
should not Mr. Pallieure make one?” although it is possible to understand 
“one” as a copy of the poster and not a poster of his own invention. This 
point will therefore call for some clarification below.By the same token, what are we to think of the Lullists Le Pailleur men- 
tions to justify the fabrication of the posters? This detail seems parallel to 
the one in Chorier’s story, according to which the idea for these posters was 
allegedly engendered in Chaume by the fact that the Rosicrucians were in 
fashion then. In Le Pailleur’s story, the Lullist vogue inspired the idea for 
them, with the ulterior motive that the posters would be attributed to them 
(the Lullists). Therefore the two stories contradict each other on this point. 
It seems to me, however, that far from contradicting each other, they could 
well be complementary: If, for example, Chaume and his friends gener- 
ally shared some skepticism similar to Naude’s concerning the “sciences 
curieuses,” 72 they could well have intended to mock the Lullists and the 
Rosicrucian supporters at once. Is this to say that Lullism was very much 
in fashion in 1623? We cannot doubt it: In a general way, the beginning of 
the seventeenth century marks a high point in the destiny of this movement 
of ideas: a publisher from Strasbourg, Lazarus Zetzner, re-edited Ramon 
Lull’s works simultaneously with the enormous task of publishing the 
Theatrum Chemicum, whereas Giordano Bruno’s philosophy, as well as 
alchemy and the Christian cabala, welcomed Lull’s doctrines. 73More precisely, we know that at the beginning of the seventeenth 
century, there existed in Paris several groups of Lullists who were often 
concerned with alchemy. One of these groups left its memories in a vast 
handwritten collection — the Caprara collection in Bologna — assembled 
in Paris and its surroundings between 1617 and 1645. J. N. Hillgarth 
turned up the traces of another group in his synthetic study on Lullism in 
France. 74 Do we wish to have names? There is Pierre Morestel, who pub- 
lished in Paris in 1621 an Artis Kabbalisticae Academia that was quite a 
lot closer to Lull than to the cabala. 75 There is Jean Belot, author in 1623 
of L’Oeuvre des Oeuvres on le plus parfaict des sciences paulines, ar- 
madelles et lullistes, pinpointed by Naude two years later in his Apolo- 
gie. 76 There is Robert Le Foul, sieur de Vassy, “General Secretary and 
Lullist Doctor, member of the Order, Militia and Religion of the Holy 
Spirit,” who most notably translated in 1634 Le grand et dernier art de 
M. Raymond Lulle. 77 Thus we should scarcely be astonished to see Gisbert

252 Didier Kahn

Voet, in the Admiranda Methodus of 1643 directed against Descartes, de- 
nounce the entire group of anti- Aristotelian innovators by naming them in 
the same breath — a rather revealing combination: “the group of Lullists 
and Paracelsians and the imaginary troop of the Brothers of the Rose- 
Cross.” 78It is therefore rather plausible that Chaume and his friends aimed their 
posters at both the Parisian Lullists and the followers of the Rose-Cross at 
the same time, which tends to substantiate Le Pailleur’s story. Another point 
is worth noting: the prudence that Chaume and his friend seem to have 
shown upon Le Pailleur’s entrance, which led them momentarily to hide the 
poster they were composing. Indeed Chorier, for his part, insists upon the 
proceedings to which Etienne Chaume then exposed himself, and that led 
him to flee the capital. It seems, if this detail of Le Pailleur’s story is reliable, 
that Chaume was aware of this danger right from the start of the venture.

Finally, Locke, following Thoynard, has noted that Le Pailleur, shortly 
afer the posting of the placards, went to Brittany; this voyage itself is at- 
tested to by Tallemant Des Reaux: “He led a life of debauchery in Paris for 
a rather long time. Weary of this life, he went to Brittany with the Count 
of Saint-Brisse, First Cousin of the Duke of Ret/.” 79 We can therefore situ- 
ate this voyage in the second half of 1623, and we see that Le Pailleur’s 
story finds a number of confirmations in its main points. It agrees on the 
whole, in spite of some divergences, with Chorier’s story.From these two accounts, if their questionable aspects are eliminated for 
the time being, it emerges that the principal author of the posters was Eti- 
enne Chaume, a future student of medicine. It was a matter of a simple stu- 
dent’s hoax, inspired by the sensation that the Lullists and Rosicrucians 
were then arousing in France (this last point calls for clarification below). 
One text was written, or maybe several, which Chaume and some friends, 
including Jacques Le Pailleur, copied over many times; these friends helped 
him post them in the busiest places in the city, and the agitation that re- 
sulted, attested to by all the sources of the time, was so intense and so 
widespread that the Parlement ordered an investigation. 80 Chaume, wor- 
ried by the turn the events had taken, then prudently left Paris.

Now that the author has been identified, there still remains the task of 
determining the posters’ exact content. Must we content ourselves with 
the version indicated by Naude, or should we take into account the differ- 
ent versions passed on by other sources and trust the stories of Chorier and 
Le Pailleur?

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 253

The Content of the Posters

If we return to Peiresc’s account, which is the earliest of all those that can 
be dated precisely and therefore one of the most reliable, we will observe 
that Peiresc summarizes the poster in a way that already diverges from 
Naude’s text: The Rosicrucians, according to Peiresc, “in four lines prom- 
ised the general public the knowledge of divinity and personal invisibility.” 
Nothing of this is seen in Naude’s version, unless one extrapolates from his 
text; rather than a summary, then, Peiresc must have given an interpreta- 
tion, quite removed from the poster’s literal meaning. On the other hand, 
Peiresc’s summary agrees extremely well with another version, that passed 
on by the Effroyables Pactions:Nous Deputez du College de Roze-croix donnons advis a tous ceux qui de- 
sireront entrer en nostre societe & congregation, de les enseigner en la parfaicte 
cognoissance du Tres-hault, de la part duquel nous ferons ce jourd’huy assemblee, 
& les rendrons comme nous de visibles invisibles, & d’invisibles visibles, & seront 
transportez par tous les pais estrangers ou leur desir les portera . 81 Mais pour par- 
venu- a la cognoissance de ces merveilles, nous advertissons le lecteur que nous 
cognoissons ses pensees, que si la volonte le prend de nous voir par curiosite seule- 
ment, il ne communiquera jamais avec nous, mais si la volonte le porte reellement 
&C de fait de s’inscrire sur le registre de nostre confraternite nous qui jugeons des 
pensees, nous luy ferons voir la verite de noz promesses, tellement que nous ne met- 
tons point le lieu de nostre demeure puisque les pensees jointes a la volonte reelle 
du lecteur seront capables de nous faire cognoistre a luy & luy a nous . 82

The poster summarized by Peiresc, if we are to believe him, only contained 
four lines. In fact, that is exactly what we get if we limit the text of the Ef- 
froyables Pactions to its first sentence, and if we attribute the following lines, 
which are rather awkward moreover, only to the creativity of this pamphlet’s 
author. Thus the accounts of Peiresc, Chorier, and Le Pailleur could be con- 
nected: far from it being a case of Chorier’s embellishing on the text of the 
Effroyables Pactions, it would be on the contrary a case of this pamphlet’s us- 
ing the authentic posters. From this we would have to conclude that Chaume 
and his friends indeed composed several posters, and not only one as Naude 
leads us to believe. Considered from the angle of perpetrating a hoax, mul- 
tiple versions were certainly more apt to hold the Parisians’ curiosity.Following this hypothesis, Le Pailleur’s story would then attest to the ex- 
istence of one poster of which there is no other evidence, that which an- 
nounced a meeting in a fake street of the Faubourg Saint-Marceau. But 
even if this story remains the only trace of such a poster, other texts, on the 
other hand, have come to us in handwritten form. We must now examine 
these.

254 Didier Kahn

Two manuscripts, one kept in Paris, the other in London, present other 
versions of the posters. The Paris manuscript, which dates from the first 
half of the seventeenth century, is found in a collection of pieces from the 
former collection of Philippe de Bethune (1561-1649), the brother of Sully 
and the governor and first Gentleman of the Bedchamber of the king’s sec- 
ond son, Gaston d’Orleans. Philippe De Bethune, whose doctor was Eti- 
enne de Clave, the chief protagonist in the incident of the Parisian theses 
of 1624, 83 was also the owner (and possibly the writer) of a group of more 
than 75 manuscripts that form a series of encyclopedic miscellanies in- 
cluding rather numerous notes on natural philosophy and alchemy, taken 
particularly from Heinrich Khunrath and Jean d’Espagnet. 84 In the man- 
uscript that concerns us, one page alone is of interest. First of all, we find 
a copy of the version of the poster communicated by Naude, with several 
variants:

Affiches des Chevalliers de la Croix rose

Par permission de nostre College des freres Europeans nous faisons nostre sesjour 
visible et invisible en cette ville. Nous scavons parler les langues des pays ou nous 
voullons estre. Et par la grace du Tres hault qui attire a soy les coeurs des justes 
sans marques, figures ny billetz nous enseignons aux hommes noz semblables a se 
retirer d’erreur & de mort . 85If we compare this text with Naude’s, we see that it is made of nearly the 
same elements, but that they are arranged in a completely different order, 
without, however, lacking coherence. Below that text, this one is found:

Autre des mesmes

Habitans depuis peu nostre Palais de France nous faisons estat d’enseigner les sages 
& les combler de felicitez pour plusieurs siecles sans qu’ilz soient obligez a la ne- 
cessite de mourir. Nous donnons les biens & la vye sans fantosmes & illusions de 
la seulle grace de celluy qui conserve l’Estre des choses . 86

As for this version, it is entirely different from the others. It reminds us, 
however, of a part of what Chorier wrote describing Chaume’s posters: 
“those who had the desire to live well and blessedly [ bene beateque vi- 
vendi\ were invited into this brotherhood,” a theme that does not appear 
in the other versions. It is therefore highly possible that these texts cir- 
culated, too, in the same way as those of Naude and the Effroyables 
Factions.

The other manuscript likely to interest us, that in London, contains cor- 
respondence of the Paracelsian physician and alchemist Theodore Turquet

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 255The other manuscript likely to interest us, that in London, contains cor- 
respondence of the Paracelsian physician and alchemist Theodore Turquet

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 255

de Mayerne (1573-1655). Established in London since 1611 as the first 
physician of James I of England and his wife, Mayerne had kept his French 
title of ordinary physician of the king after the death of Henry IV, and his 
correspondence shows that he continued to maintain close ties with France 
while in London, and occasionally, with Louis XIII himself. 87 His only 
well-documented trips to France during these years date from 1618 and 
1625, but one of his best biographers suggests the possibility of other trips 
carried out in 1621 and 1623. 88 It is therefore possible that Mayerne, too, 
saw the posters with his own eyes. If we bear in mind his keen interest for 
these types of subjects and his vast circle of connections — which, more- 
over, included Rubens himself, who at least was attested as such in 1630 — 
Mayerne could also have received the documents presented below from 
one of his correspondents as well.These documents bear no date, and the fact that the manuscript con- 
taining his correspondence does not follow a chronological order hardly 
allows us to remedy this. We are forced to confine ourselves to the texts as 
they stand in the manuscript. The whole of what interests us fits on a single 
page. 89 Under the general heading of “Fratres Societatis Roseae Crucis,” 
Mayerne first notes a version of the poster close to that kept by Naude: 
“Nous deputez de nostre College principal des freres de la Croix Rosee 
faisons sejour visible & invisible en cette ville par la grace du Tres hault, 
vers qui se trouve le coeur des justes. Nous enseignons sans livres, sans 
marques ny signes & parlons les langues des pays, ou nous voulons estre, 
pour tirer d’erreurs & de mort les hommes nos semblables.” This text, per- 
haps noted from memory rather than copied, 90 is followed by an astonish- 
ing list of ten questions bearing essentially on cabalistic themes that is 
highly problematic. Its source remains to be determined. 91 But its relation 
to the Parisian placards of 1623 is certain. On August 10, 1623, Peiresc in- 
deed writes to Rubens: “I am sending you the little memoir of Mr. Pigno- 
rius on the hieroglyphic hand and at the same time some writings 
concerning the sect of the Rose-Cross, which were found in the room of a 
fugitive, & in which the rubbish and the astonishing stupidity of their ca- 
balistic and alchemical mysteries is shown.” 92

Let us admit that it is very tempting to identify this “fugitive” as Etienne 
Chaume, although nothing allows us to be certain of this. 93 Still, a copy of 
these cabalistic questions, almost identical to that kept by Mayerne, is 
found among Peiresc’s papers kept in Carpentras, in a group of letters and

256 Didier Kahn256 Didier Kahn

miscellanies Peiresc himself collected. 94 Here we find first, a few variants 
aside, the text of Naude’s poster (the brothers of the Rose-Cross are called 
freres Roses). 95 This is the very manuscript the editors of the Mersenne 
correspondence allude to in these terms: “Peiresc was able to obtain, per- 
haps before his departure from Paris, the copy of another document con- 
taining “Certains articles des propositions des Freres-Roses, ’’ and dealing 
with the doctrine of the Sephirots, necessary for understanding the Zobar 
and for being enlightened by divine wisdom.” 96 
All of the details gathered here lead one to ask — though it is scarcely 
possible to acquire the certainty of it — if Mayerne did not become aware 
of this document through Rubens himself. However that may be, the doc- 
ument focuses on the existence, the origins, the nature and the role of the 
ten sephiroth, those divine attributes Gershom Scholem has defined as 
“the ten spheres of divine manifestation in which God leaves His secret 
dwelling,” the ensemble of which form “the unified universe of God’s life” 
and upon which a large part of the cabala’s speculations lie. 97 Here is this 
document, in the version kept by Mayerne: 98

Articles de propositions faites par les freres de la Croix Rosee"

1. Si le monde a un, ou plusieurs coadjuteurs. 100

2. Par quelle necessite on peut dire, qu’il y a des Zephirots, car l’on n’eu peu 
soustenir, qu’il n’y a 101 que l’infini.

3. S’il est necessaire qu’il y ait des Zephirots, comment il sera necessaire, qu’ils 
soyent dix, Sc que neantmoins les dix ne soyent, qu’une seule puissance.

4. D’ou se justifiera que les Zephirots sont emanez, Sc non creez, comme les 
creatures.

5. Comment on pourroit dire qu’il y en a eut 102 jusques a dix, & qu’ils s’immis- 
cent; car en cecy est le secret des secrets.5. Comment on pourroit dire qu’il y en a eut 102 jusques a dix, & qu’ils s’immis- 
cent; car en cecy est le secret des secrets.

6. Attendu qu’il y a indubitablement dix Zephirots, Sc qu’ils sont emanez ou in- 
fluez, & non creez, Sc que le nombre n’est qu’une seule faculte, l’on 103 demande, 
pourquoy leur a este donne une borne, mesure Sc definition.

7. Si les Zephirots sont irradiez de tout temps en quelque maintien 104 proche de la 
creation du monde.

8. Quelle est leur substance.

9. Quelle est la raison de leurs noms, Sc de leurs lieux.

10. Que chacun des dix a soubs soy cent, & c’est le sens de Moyse de cent bases, 
qu’il avoit faict, Sc le sens 105 du verset qui dit, que toutes rivieres retournent en la 
mer. 106

In the absence of any additional explanation, it is quite difficult to grasp 
what link could attach these “propositions” to the brothers of the Rose-

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 257

Cross, unless it has to do with an extract from one of the countless trea- 
tises of Rosicrucian literature published before 1623. In Mayerne’s man- 
uscript, these ten articles are all the more astonishing in that they are 
followed by this note, written in English, probably a commentary by May- 
erne himself, who in his manuscripts freely uses Latin, French, English, 
and sometimes even German (then substituting Fraktur for his usual hand- 
writing): “This beinge fastned in diverse parts of Paris, there is strigt order 
given, to inquire, after these pretended brothers; but yf they keepe them 
selves upon the invisible in their propositions, I doubt not, but they will 
bee thougt as well, imperceptible in their Cabalisticall propositions.” 107The irony of this commentary cannot make us lose sight of the questions 
it raises: Must we understand that not only was the well-known broadside 
posted, but also the cabalistic propositions that follow it in the manu- 
script? If we are to establish a connection between Mayerne’s testimony 
and Peiresc’s concerning the documents discovered in Paris at a fugitive’s 
home relating to “cabalistic and alchemical mysteries” of the Rose-Croix, 
must we admit instead that these propositions, if they were not actually 
posted, were at least intended to be? But their rather technical nature, the 
desire displayed therein to examine thoroughly very precise points of the 
cabala, separate them quite a bit from the facetious and superficial char- 
acter of the other posters encountered until now. In another respect, the 
detail noted by Mayerne concerning the investigation ordered by the Par- 
lement lends a certain authenticity to his testimony and leads to the belief 
that it was contemporary to the facts.

The question resurges again with the last document contained in May- 
erne’s manuscript. Following the lines we have just read there is indeed 
found a new text, this time written in Latin, of which the translation 
follows:

May what folloivs be told to the most penetrating professor of the most excellent 
and most difficult science, to the most ardent defender of the Society of the Rose- 
Cross, to the brother worthy of being honored with all sorts of good offices.Your great devotion to our society, the noble and numerous sleepless nights you 
have devoted to upholding its grandeur, are well-enough known to our primates, 
thanks to the distinguished benevolence of which, remarkable testimonies under 
the form of serious recommendations of your virtues, have very often reached us, 
the members of this noble mystical body. There are posted by our people for your 
aid, in the street corners of the very famous city of Paris, theses and problems filled 
with a more-than-Platonic spirit; the ability to penetrate their hidden meaning to

258 Didier Kahn

the marrow is given only to an Oedipus, that of extracting their core is given only 
to a disciple of the rosy Society. Our invisible college scorns the vile minds of crawl- 
ing men, disdains the crooked minds of the Beotians. The doors of the sacred sanc- 
tuary only open for the lynxes, among whose number we acknowledge you and 
congratulate you upon your election and send you — who are now our cross- 
bearing brother of a crimson brighter than the bright red color of the physical sala- 
mander — secrets to elucidate, and just as you are expected to reveal your feeling 
on them, by the same token it is right and appropriate for you to send us your prin- 
ciples in return. Farewell, and may the sevenfold ennead of the Sephiroth, an as- 
sistant in your efforts with the cabalistic decade of prime spirits in its concentric 
homogeneity, intervene in your plans with good fortune by the powerful rays of its 
influence. Be well and live. Done at our place, June 13, 1623.

YourP. <f N. 2 S. h.

Your brothers by the mandate of W. 0. ” wsYourP. <f N. 2 S. h.

Your brothers by the mandate of W. 0. ” ws

Even if the Fama Fraternitatis obviously inspired the play on initials that 
signs this text, it seems vain to wish to find in it a meaning that escapes us 
for want of being better informed. Beyond the enigmas it presents to the 
reader, the chief question that this document raises is whether it is an au- 
thentic poster, a plan for a poster, or perhaps a new hoax, possibly thought 
up by Mayerne himself, who, as a good alchemist, left in his papers proof 
of his mastery in this type of language and indications of his taste for such 
enigmas. 109 Moreover, one must acknowledge that this text is not found 
among the previously mentioned papers of Peiresc. Nevertheless, two de- 
tails stand out: This text, intended to accompany the cabalistic theses that 
it follows, stands either as a message destined to the most interested on- 
lookers — but must we emphasize the danger involved in having such notes 
circulate from one hand to another? — or as a new poster; what is more, 
it seems to attest that the cabalistic theses were indeed posted in Paris — 
and before June 13th — as problems submitted to the “initiables” by those 
signing the note. A third detail could furnish a response to the questions 
raised: This document is the only text written in Latin among those of 
the 1623 posters. Now, we remember that Nicolas Chorier affirmed that 
Etienne Chaume composed his posters in Latin. This document could 
be a remnant of this, either a plan for posters or posters actually put 
up on the walls. The hypothesis seems all the more tempting since the 
style is somewhat mannered, which would go along with the talents 
Chorier attributed to Chaume as a Latinist. Mayerne enjoyed the same 
gifts, but it is difficult to see why and with what goals he would have 
taken the trouble to elaborate such a hoax, for the well-established pru-

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 259The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 259

dence of this quinquagenarian could hardly have led him to distribute such 
texts by a means other than private correspondence, and the indications 
that have come to us on his type of spirituality betray no penchant for the 
cabala. 110 A last detail argues for the authenticity of this text. Chorier 
summarized the posters’ content in these terms: “Those who desired to live 
well and blessedly were invited to this brotherhood & were fortunate if 
they were initiated into these mysteries.” The second clause of this sentence 
corresponds quite well to the above note, which is the only one to express 
this idea of fortunate election. This common point, combined with the 
preceding one, inclines us to take Mayerne’s manuscript seriously.

At the conclusion of this investigation concerning the text of the posters, 
some certainties at last seem to be acquired. Etienne Chaume must have 
created several distinct posters:

1. The one we have from Gabriel Naude; this version, also mentioned im- 
plicitly in the Effroyables Pactions , m was reprinted in the “Preface to the 
Reader” in the French version of Neuhus’s work published in the autumn of 
1623 112 and taken up again in the Examen sur I’lnconnue et Nouvelle Ca- 
balle des Freres de la Croix Rosee , 113 in the Mercure Francois, 114 then in the 
Tresor chronologique by Pierre Guillebaud, 115 and later still by Adrien Bail- 
let; 116 it was also copied over in a number of manuscripts: those of Peiresc, 
Turquet de Mayerne, and Philippe de Bethune, to which we will add a man- 
uscript coming from President Achille III of Harlay (1639-1712). 117

2. The poster transcribed in the Effroyables Pactions, which agrees with 
the remarks Peiresc made to Rubens in his August 3, 1623, letter, as well 
as with Chorier’s and Le Pailleur’s stories.

3. The poster in Philippe de Bethune’s manuscript, which, in accordance 
with Chorier’s story, promises bliss to the wise.3. The poster in Philippe de Bethune’s manuscript, which, in accordance 
with Chorier’s story, promises bliss to the wise.

4. Probably the ten cabalistic propositions kept by Turquet de Mayerne 
and Peiresc, if we are to believe Mayerne on this score and if this is the 
sense in which we are to interpret Peiresc’s account in his August 10, 1623, 
letter to Rubens.

5. Finally, probably the long text in Fatin kept by Mayerne, which is the 
only trace left of the use of Fatin by Etienne Chaume, whose content 
agrees with that of part of the summary of the posters’ text as given by 
Chorier.

From this we see that the accounts of Chorier and Fe Pailleur, albeit rather 
divergent from the version of the facts presented by Naude, are compatible 
with the facts gathered through the other accounts of the time, which ar- 
gues still more in favor of their authenticity.

260 Didier Kahn

The First Reactions to the Posters: Hasty Associations?260 Didier Kahn

The First Reactions to the Posters: Hasty Associations?

How did contemporaries react to the posters? We have already seen this in 
part. Their discovery clearly provoked intense emotion in the capital. We 
also know from certain accounts that various swindlers quickly profited 
from rumors caused by the event, immediately passing themselves off as 
Rosicrucians in the opinion of credulous people to squeeze money out of 
them. 118 Their victims seem often to have been men of the law, which is 
indeed plausible if one considers that news circulated a great deal at 
the Palace of Justice Exchange. 119 Finally, we know that men like Peiresc 
echoed the matter in their correspondence. But the posters evoked differ- 
ent reactions by means of printed matter as well: The publication of sev- 
eral disturbing pamphlets was one of the causes that ultimately pushed 
Naude to react. Furthermore, the coincidences of current events brought 
about confusion, and even associations, between the Rosicrucians and the 
Enlightened Ones of Spain, and even between the Rosicrucians and the lib- 
ertine circle of Theophile de Viau.

An Irrational Rash of PamphletsAn Irrational Rash of Pamphlets

One of the first reactions by means of printed matter seems to have been 
the translation of Heinrich Neuhus’s work, through the initiative of an 
anonymous individual eager to “serve the public.” This anonymous indi- 
vidual affirmed only that his “profession had always been to handle 
weapons more than books,” although he knew Eatin quite well and, if he 
is to be believed, he would have preferred to compose “some new work in 
accordance with his temperament” rather “than to subjugate himself to 
the forced translation of others’ ideas.” 120 The work must have been pub- 
lished in the autumn, since the translator hoped to satisfy the people 
enough not to have to regret “the small amount of time that I will have 
wasted in this harvest season telling you news of Germany and making you 
aware of those who in Paris are held to be Invisible.” 121 His choice was 
clever, for although Neuhus, in 1618, scarcely sought more than to show 
the Rosicrucians to be “Anabaptists, or Socinians,” 122 the title of his book, 
accurately translated into French ( Advertissement Pieux & tres utile, Des 
Freres de la Rosee-Croix: A sgavoir, S’il y en a ? Quels ils sont? D’oii ils out 
prins ce nom ? Et a quelle fin ils ont espandu leur renommee ?), was quite 
apt for making it sell in Paris scarcely a few weeks after Chaume’s posters.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 261

Even if the translation of Neuhus’s work had commercial motivations, 
such was not the case for other reactions. Two venomous pamphlets fol- 
lowed each other in the month of November or December: 123 the Effroy- 
ables Factions and the Examen sur Vlnconnue et Nouvelle Caballe des 
Freres de la Croix Rosee. Both, related to the “rag” genre, 124 exploited the 
event in its most sensational dimensions by diabolizing it to the extreme, 
as we will see below.Very shortly thereafter, toward mid-December, Gabriel Naude pub- 
lished his Instruction a la France sur la verite de I’histoire des Freres de la 
Roze-Croix. 125 The year was then nearing its end, but the public’s curios- 
ity was not, which explains why each of these works was put on the mar- 
ket again in 1624 with a new title page. Neuhus’s Advertisement and the 
Effroyables Pactions were thus again put on sale, to which must be added 
another edition without title of the latter, as well as a pirated edition of 
Naude’s work. 126 As for the Examen sur Vlnconnue et Nouvelle Caballe, 
three separate editions of it, all from Paris, were already in existence in 
1623. One was said to be printed “for Pierre de La Fosse. With Permis- 
sion”; 127 another was published by David Ferrand, without permission, 
but in every way identical to the preceding one; 128 the last was published 
without an editor’s name, without permission, with a different pagination, 
and bearing everywhere “Rozee-Croix” instead of “Croix Rosee;” 129 this 
one was put on sale again in 1624. 130Finally, Wallace Kirsop gave in his 1960 dissertation the title of another 
pamphlet published by Pierre Chevallier in 1624: the Traicte des Atheistes, 
Deistes, Illuminez d’Espagne, et nouveaux pretendus Invisibles, dits de 
la Confrairie de la Croix-Rosaire. Elevez depuis quelques annees dans 
le Christianisme. 131 This quarto pamphlet of fifty-six pages is not easy to 
identify, for far from figuring today among the anonymous works of the 
largest Parisian libraries, it is found only at the conclusion of Claude 
Malingre’s continuation of Florimond de Raemond’s Fiistoire generale du 
progrez et decadence de I’Heresie moderne. Announced on the title page, 
it can be attributed to Malingre himself. 132 After a preface by the latter, the 
brochure offers three successive chapters devoted to atheists, deists, and 
the Enlightened Ones of Seville; the fourth chapter, devoted to the Rosi- 
crucians, is nothing other than Naude’s work. 133

The privilege of Malingre’s work dates from March 14, 1624: This 
shows that the matter of the Rosicrucians created an uproar for nearly

262 Didier Kahn

nine months. But in exactly what senses were Etienne Chaume’s posters 
interpreted?262 Didier Kahn

nine months. But in exactly what senses were Etienne Chaume’s posters 
interpreted?

In The Rosicrucian Enlightenment, Frances Yates considered quite 
rightly that the stir created by the Rosicrucians, particularly Father Ga- 
rasse’s work (La Doctrine curieuse, of which I have not yet said anything) 
and the Effroyables Factions, were an attempt to launch a witch-hunt 
against the fictitious Brotherhood in France. 134 Naturally, Yates, with as 
much caution as insistence, connected this repressive fervor with her own 
interpretation of the end of the movement in Germany. 135 She then strayed 
into entirely erroneous views concerning Gabriel Naude, misinterpreting 
his text as well as his thought, 136 for, by interpreting his Instruction a la 
France in the retrospective light of the Apologie pour tous les grands per- 
sonnages qui ont este faussement soupgonnez de magie (1625), a text 
whose true intention she did not grasp, perhaps because she did not know 
Rene Pintard’s book, Le Libertinage erudit, she saw in Naude a secret de- 
fender of the Rosicrucians, particularly well-informed concerning them 
but constrained by the repressive tendency of those years to hide his true 
opinions. 137 Nothing could be further from the position taken by Naude, 
who, even if he was surely one of the best-informed Frenchmen of his time 
concerning the Rosicrucians, obviously did not know any more than what 
was contained in the various treatises that he had been able to read; 138 he 
was particularly unaware of the reality of Adam Flaslmayr’s destiny 139 and 
seems not to have been acquainted with Johann Valentin Andreae’s work, 
certain aspects of which would not have failed to strike him. As an ex- 
ample, Andreae, in a work published in 1617, denied that magic was an 
art that came from the devil and could be learned in a very brief amount 
of time, declaring that on the contrary, “there is no magic other than the 
assiduous study of numerous and varied arts”: 140 Without going into de- 
tail concerning the latent conceptions underlying this phrase, we must ad- 
mit that a more likely position to attract the future author of the Apologie 
of 1625 could not have been invented.But this is not yet the moment to study Naude’s position. To understand 
properly the reactions provoked by Chaume’s posters, we should point out 
four repressive currents in France at the time that often combined with each 
other but that nevertheless did not aim at the same targets: far from it. 141 
The French hostility to the Rosicrucians first fed on hasty associations. 
Even before it was a question of posters, a Jesuit apologetic treatise, that of

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 263

Father Gaultier, had already denounced the German Rosicrucians as a new 
Protestant sect, designating them for Catholic hatred. Then the Rosicru- 
cians of Chaume’s posters had scarcely appeared when they were assimi- 
lated in the public’s mind with the Alumbrados of Seville and considered to 
be a sect of heretics. As for Father Garasse, solely for the need of his polemic 
against Theophile de Viau and his libertine circle, he had established a 
parallel between the Rosicrucians and those “atheists”; the image of the 
Rosicrucians then suffered, in the public’s mind, the consequences of an 
association with Theophile’s trial. But most often, the diverse comments on 
the fictitious Brotherhood especially fed the anti-Paracelsian polemic that 
had been latent in France uninterrupted since 1578. These different griev- 
ances, leveled against the Rosicrucians as Protestants, Alumbrados, athe- 
ists, and Paracelsians, most often combined with each other, but we see 
clearly that they did not answer to the same motives.

Protestants and RosicruciansProtestants and Rosicrucians

As early as 1621, a great Jesuit controversialist, Father Jacques Gaultier 
(1562-1636), at the time a professor of theology at the College of the Trin- 
ity in Lyon, mentioned the German Rosicrucians in his Table cbrono- 
graphique. Contrary to what this shortened title might lead us to assume, 
it is in no way a historic work, but rather an apologetic book comparing 
all heresies to Protestantism, from the beginning of the Christian era to the 
seventeenth century, and showing the continuity of Catholicism through 
the centuries. 142 Presenting the Rosicrucians in the light of Michael Maier’s 
Themis aurea (1618), Gaultier concludes: “Tous ces propos, partie enig- 
matiques, partie temeraires, partie heretiques, partie suspects de magie, 
nous donnent occasion de conjecturer que ceste Pretendue Fraternite n’est 
pas si ancienne qu’elle se faict, ains que c’est un rejetton du Lutheranisme, 
meslange par Satan d’empirisme & de Magie pour mieux decevoir les es- 
prits volages & curieux.” 143

Lutherans, empirics, and witches: According to Father Gaultier, the 
Rosicrucians indeed deserved the pyre’s flame. Even without exaggerating 
the importance of this passage, which is buried in a controversial work of 
enormous size, we still must realize that Father Garasse would soon make 
good use of it, and that Naude, and then the Mercure Tranqois, would in 
turn cite it in their bibliographies. 144 Let us now tackle the very period of 
Etienne Chaume’s posters.

264 Didier Kahn

Enlightened Brothers of the Rose-Cross and the Alumbrados of Seville

In 1691, in his Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, Adrien Baillet agilely depicted 
the reception of the Rosicrucians in France in 1623:Enlightened Brothers of the Rose-Cross and the Alumbrados of Seville

In 1691, in his Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, Adrien Baillet agilely depicted 
the reception of the Rosicrucians in France in 1623:

II s’etoit fait un changement considerable depuis l’Allemagne jusqu’a Paris sur 
les sentimens que le Public avoit des Rose-croix. On peut dire qu’a la reserve de 
M. Descartes & d’un tres-petit nombre d’esprits choisis, 1’on etoit en 1619 assez 
favorablement prevenu pour les Rose-croix par toute l’Allemagne. Mais ayant eu 
le malheur de s’etre fait connoitre a Paris dans le meme terns que les Alumbrados, 
ou les Illuminez d’Espagne, leur reputation echoiia des l’entree. On les tourna 
en ridicule, & on les qualifia du nom d ’Invisibles; on mit leur histoire en romans; 
on en fit des farces a l’hotel de Bourgogne; & on en chantoit deja les chansons sur 
le Pont-neuf, quand M. Descartes arriva a Paris. 145

It is only too easy to criticize this description, which is of a more light- 
hearted nature than its reality: Naude was in fact the only one who pub- 
licly ridiculed the Rosicrucians of Paris; even if it is true that they were 
called “invisible,” this was not always in an ironic manner, far from it; the 
only “novels” concerning them were two pamphlets that were as violent 
as they were vehement, the Effroyables Factions and the Examen; as for 
the farces of the Hotel de Bourgogne and the songs sold on the Pont-Neuf, 
they stem directly from Baillet’s imagination. 146 But there is, on the other 
hand, one point that Baillet touched upon correctly: the association made 
early on between the French Rosicrucians and the Alumbrados.The incident of the Alumbrados of Seville seems to have exploded in the 
spring of 1623. It involved a sect of spiritualists whom the Spanish Inqui- 
sition immediately repressed. 147 The news appeared in Paris a short time 
later: The edict pronounced by the Inquisition was translated and printed 
there, 148 and the majority of the contemporary sources do not fail to men- 
tion the matter. The connection with the Rosicrucians — at least with the 
German ones — did not boil down solely to the notion of clandestine meet- 
ings. The Alumbrados, like most of the German authors involved in the 
Rosicrucian movement, did not acknowledge any church other than an 
internal one, claiming themselves to draw from the Holy Spirit. Indeed, 
Baillet did not exaggerate. From August 3, 1623, in the earliest of the 
accounts that we have at our disposition concerning the reception of 
Chaume’s posters, Peiresc responds to Rubens in these words:

The news of the Basilidians of Seville had not yet reached me and we would have 
looked willingly at the edict concerning them. But on the other hand we have had 
here certain other new Rosicrucian sectarians, who are rather famous in Germany

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 265

and who are perhaps the same as those of Seville. They thought up the idea of post- 
ing certain papers or notices on the streetwalls, in which they promised the general 
public, in four lines, the knowledge of divinity and personal invisibility and this in 
the name of the brothers of the Rose-Cross. 149

We see here that even in the eyes of the most cultivated public, Rosicru- 
cians and Alumbrados of Seville were easily confused with each other in 
the tangle of sects. Rubens himself who, since he lived in Antwerp, had 
heard of the Alumbrados — here jokingly called “Basilidians” in reference 
to the second-century Gnostic sect whose gems both men studied — before 
Peiresc had, answered his correspondent in the following week:For the time-being, it will be difficult to obtain the decree promulgated by the 
Inquisition against the Basilidians in Seville. As far as I know, we have received only 
one copy here. We will nevertheless do everything in our power to get it.

The Rosicrucian sect is already old in Amsterdam, and I remember having read, 
three years ago, a little book published by their society, in which we found the glo- 
rious and mysterious life and death of their first founder, as well as all of their 
statutes and orders. I saw in all this nothing more than alchemists, pretending to 
possess the philosophers’ stone, and it is indeed a pure imposture. 150

This time, Rubens distinguished clearly between the Rosicrucians and 
the Alumbrados. Nonetheless, these two matters would still appear in his 
correspondence with Peiresc up to 1624, and in a systematically contigu- 
ous manner, as if one necessarily led to the other. 151 Such a connection is 
observed almost uniformly in the majority of contemporary accounts. In 
the autumn of 1623, here is how the translator of Neuhus’s work painted 
the picture of the religious context of his time:au lieu de nous humilier devant Dieu & le servir selon ses commandemens, 
paroissent une infinite de nouvelles gens, les uns desquels souz pretexte, de je ne 
s^ay quelle reforme, convertissent l’ancienne religion de nos Peres en un certain cult 
exterieur, auquel ils attachent entierement nostre salut: Les autres qui par une ex- 
treme impiete ont contraint les Magistrats d’uzer du glaive que Dieu leur a mis en 
main pour venger 1’injure faicte a Dieu & a ses saincts bien-heureux, a la terreur 
de ceux qui desja par un desir de vivre licentieusement se laissoient emporter a 
l’Atheisme. En mesme temps on nous a apporte d’Espagne les nouvelles d’une secte 
Epicurienne de gens qui neantmoins se qualifient, Los Alombrados, ou Illuminez, 
que la Sacrosaincte Inquisition a bien de la peine d’exterminer. Puis d’une mesme 
volee se sont mis sur le tapis ces Freres de la Rozee-Croix, que l’on dit estre venus 
d’Allemagne. 152

Garasse in turn painted a picture closely inspired by this text in his 
Apologie at the very beginning of 1624. 153 Shortly thereafter, an author 
who was himself inspired by Garasse, Claude Malingre, exercised the

266 Didier Kahn266 Didier Kahn

same association in volume 3 of his Histoire de nostre temps. After re- 
producing the May 29, 1623, edict against the Alumbrados, Malingre 
continued as follows: “Or puis que nous sommes icy sur le traict de ces 
nouvelles sectes qui se sont ainsi elevees dans le Christianisme depuis 
quelques annees, il est bien seant de rapporter en ce lieu, la naissance, le 
progrez, la doctrine, & facons de faire d’une autre secte endiablee qui 
paroist en nos jours en plusieurs lieux de la Chrestiente, particulierement 
en France, c’est de certains personnages originaires d’Allemagne qui se dis- 
ent Confraires de la Confrairie & College de la Croix Rosaire.” 154 And 
Malingre did the same in his brochure that was published simultaneously 
with the eloquent title: Traicte des Atheistes, Deistes, Illuminez d’Es- 
pagne, et nouveaux pretendus Invisibles, dits de la Confrairie de la Croix- 
Rosaire. Chapter 3 of this pamphlet, “Des Freres de la Confrairie de los 
Alumbrados ou Illuminez d’Espagne, & de leur profession empeschee par 
l’lnquisition Apostolique,” is again only a reproduction of the edict of May 
29, 1623, and immediately precedes the chapter devoted to the Rosicru- 
cians. 155 A few months later, the Mercure Francois in turn dealt with 
the Alumbrados and the Rosicrucians successively, going on about the 
latter in these words (I emphasize the first words): “En France aussi il se 
veit plusieurs livrets contre une Fraternite pretendue, appellee de la Rose- 
Croix, que l’Allemagne a produitte depuis quelques annees, les Confreres 
de laquelle furent appellez les Invisibles, par les faiseurs de nouvelles qui 
se vendent sur le pont neuf a Paris.” 156The same remark is valid for the 1626 edition of the Table ckrono- 
graphique by Father Gaultier: inside of the passage on the Rosicrucians in 
the 1621 edition, Gaultier added fifteen lines on the episode of the Parisian 
placards, referring notably to the Mercure Frangois and to Father Garasse; 
then, scarcely two pages later, he came to the “Enlightened Ones [of 
Spain].” 157 There is even a fictitious collection in the Mazarine Library in 
Paris, composed in the seventeenth century, that bears witness to this as- 
sociation: The collection contains successively the Effroyables Pactions, 
the Edict d’Espagne contre la detestable Secte des Illuminez, the Examen 
sur Vlnconnue et Nouvelle Caballe des Freres de la Croix Rosee, and 
Neuhus’s Advertisement Pieux & tres-utile. 15S Such an association made 
the Rosicrucians themselves seem a sect deserving of the Inquisition’s light- 
ning bolts. The height of the confusion was reached, a quarter of a century 
later, by the historian and philosopher Scipion Dupleix (1569-1661), the 
king’s historiographer.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 267

In his Continuation de I’histoire du regne de Louys le Juste (1648), Du- 
pleix constantly confused the Rosicrucians with the Alumbrados, and in 
the exposition of their doctrines he borrowed nearly verbatim from the 
Mercure Francois five of the articles of the edict pronounced by the Inqui- 
sition against the Alumbrados, while at the same time condensing several 
other articles; he even extended his confusion to the Enlightened Ones 
of Picardy, or “Guerinets,” who appeared between 1620 and 1630, whose 
doctrines, it seems, consisted of “distorted simplifications of themes de- 
veloped by the mystics of the North: Ruysbroeck, Tauler, Benoit de Can- 
field.” 159 Here is Dupleix’s story:During this pontificate [that of Urban VIII (1568/1623-1644)] a new sect ap- 
peared in France, that was named Enlightened Ones or Invisible Ones, some called 
it Rose-Cross; it had caused a stir in Spain as early as the year 1623, at which time 
the seven original authors of this accursed Heresy were condemned by an Edict, 
with an injunction to all those who might be affected to purge themselves to the 
Inquisition in the thirty days following the publication of the Edict, and this with 
grievous penalties for the offenders.

This Edict reports seventy errors that this immodest Cabala received as prin- 
ciples of its doctrine; but our Enlightened Ones of France had reduced them to 
eight or ten which were neither to obey nor acknowledge any Secular or Ecclesias- 
tic Superior at the expense of contemplation. That one can see the divine Essence 
during this life and know the secrets of the Holy Trinity. That the Holy Spirit di- 
rectly governs those in their sect. That meditation on the sufferings of Jesus Christ 
was useless to them. That their perfect ones did not need to do good deeds, and 
that they were no longer obliged to go to Mass, nor to fast, nor to fulfill any prac- 
tice that may exist, these precepts of God or the Church being for those who are 
not yet raised to this sublime state. That being taken over by the spirit and the love 
of God, they were no longer subject to the Laws: upon which they founded the ba- 
sic article of their sect, which is to let the body give in to all its desires, even the 
most filthy contacts and the most abominable excesses of the flesh, because, they 
said, since they were in the perfect state of children, they should not be restrained 
to the servitudes of slaves, and because the operations of the body, whatever they 
may be, are rendered holy by the application of the spirit of man to the spirit of 
God, and of his own will to His love.This sect, which favored the senses, made a great deal of progress in a short 
amount of time, particularly towards Picardy and Beauce, where some weak and 
sensuous minds had so entirely given themselves over to these infamous practices, 
that it was difficult to turn them away from them, because the flesh prevailed over 
the mind, under the handsome pretext of perfection and refined spirituality; in 
such a way that whatever haste was brought to them through preaching, and 
through lectures, and through assault and corporal punishment, this evil fire was 
not so well extinguished that some sparks do not remain even yet: for, when I was 
in Paris in 1643, 1 saw two of them at the prison of the Conciergerie, and conversed 
for more than an hour with them, in the presence of the Bishop of Grenoble, 160 who 
had brought me there because one was the brother of his Chaplain; but I found that

268 Didier Kahn

they were more Jewish than Christian, and considered one to be suspect of Magic. 
Anyway, as they were sought by the Law, they dissipated without a sound, vanished 
and rendered themselves truly invisible.

This last detail consummates the tenuous connection between the En- 
lightened Ones of Spain or Picardy and the Rosicrucians: in Scipion Du- 
pleix’s work, which thus crowns an entire historiographical tradition, the 
association between the two is absolute. But this is only one aspect of 
the reception of Etienne Chaume’s posters.

The Rosicrucians and Theophile’s TrialThe Rosicrucians and Theophile’s Trial

Among the 1623 works mentioning the Rosicrucians, we find that of 
Jesuit Father Francois Garasse, La Doctrine curieuse des beaux Esprits 
de ce temps, directed primarily against the libertine poet Theophile de 
Viau, his friends and (if possible) his protectors. 161 In a recent article, Louise 
Godard de Donville brought to the fore the ties insidiously woven by 
Garasse in this book between the “clever minds of this time” and the 
Rosicrucians, with the obvious goal of discrediting Theophile by plac- 
ing him parallel to the diabolized characters of the brothers of the Rose- 
Cross. 162 It must be realized that by doing so, Garasse inscribed himself 
in an anti-Rosicrucian campaign undertaken in 1618 by another mem- 
ber of his order, Father Jean Roberti, a campaign that I will discuss 
below. Moreover, he did not restrict his association of Theophile with 
the Rosicrucians to La Doctrine curieuse; in January 1624, he also 
linked Theophile, the Rosicrucians, and the Alumbrados in his Apolo- 
gie, his attempt to reply to the attacks in the Jugement et Censure du 
Livre de la Doctrine Curieuse published by Francois Ogier three months 
prior. 163

Now Theophile de Viau, when he was at last interrogated in 1624 after 
a long period of detention, was briefly suspected of having written or hav- 
ing had printed a book entitled Les Enffans de la Croix Roze “which is full 
of impiety,” found in his trunk at the moment of his arrest, in September 
of the preceding year, and to which it was believed he had alluded based 
on some words written in his hand “mentioning the children of the Rose- 
Cross.” Theophile responded that he had never seen this book, nor had he 
himself placed it in his trunk, and that he had never written anything on 
the Rose-Cross except according to what he had “heard said without how- 
ever having seen it.” 164 It is indeed conceivable that someone — by Garasse’sThe Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 269

order? — had placed the book, whatever book it may have been, in Theo- 
phile’s possessions, in the hope of compromising the poet. 165 We also 
know how Theophile himself reacted to the posters: finding himself 
charged, shortly before the incident with the book, with lines written 
in his hand in the margin of a handwritten piece in which he mocked 
some Parlement members’ belief in the existence of the Rosicrucians, he 
answered that his mockery only aimed at discrediting the Rosicrucians, 
“whose posters he [called] ‘game-flushers,’ that is to say, traps for inter- 
cepting the impious curiosity of those who enjoy them.” 166 Theophile, 
in other words, perhaps aware of Garasse’s maneuver, thought that the 
posters were perhaps an ambush the authorities had set to trap the unwise 
who might have declared their sympathy toward the Rosicrucians.Would this suspicion have been justified? In his letter to Rubens on Au- 
gust 3, 1623, Peiresc, after having put forward the hypothesis of an iden- 
tity between the Alumbrados and the Rosicrucians of Paris, continued in 
these terms: “Someone inquired about them [i.e., the Rosicrucians] and a 
certain Theophile, a courtier suspected of atheism, was put in prison, and 
will be put on trial for another charge, since no proof can be found that he 
belongs to the sect of the Rosicrucians.” 167 From this surprising account, it 
seems that the suspicions of Rosicrucian sympathy that weighed upon 
Theophile de Viau in 1624 could have been born as early as the period of 
the Parisian posters one year earlier, and directly in connection to these 
posters. If one takes into account the exaggeration in Peiresc’s story — we 
know well that it is not this suspicion that incited the Parlement to order 
the poet’s arrest on July 11, 1623 168 — the fact remains that the pieces con- 
cerning the Rosicrucians about which Theophile was interrogated in June 
1624 had been seized, or perhaps planted in his belongings, as early as his 
arrest in 1623. Of course one must not exclude the possibility that Peiresc, 
confronted with the influx of news coming from all sides, mixed up dis- 
tinct incidents and melded them into one. Nevertheless, he insisted on this 
point in the continuation of his correspondence, establishing a direct cor- 
relation between La Doctrine curieuse and the Rosicrucian matter. Thus 
on September 17, 1623, one month after his departure from Paris, here is 
what he wrote to Rubens:

I saw a very meticulous account of the interrogations performed by the Inqui- 
sitors of the Adombrados [s/'c] or Denudos of Lisbon, who, under the guise of 
congregation and piety committed the most abominable obscenities [ sporchezze

270 Didier Kahn

nefandissime]. If you do not have it, I will have it sent to you from Provence along 
with the commission of the Inquisitor Bishop.270 Didier Kahn

nefandissime]. If you do not have it, I will have it sent to you from Provence along 
with the commission of the Inquisitor Bishop.

I am very obliged to you for your opinion on the Rosicrucians, against whom 
Father Garasse is having a very handsome book printed, which has not yet been 
published, at least it was not during my stay in Paris. 169

Peiresc therefore made Garasse’s work (at least such as he had heard 
of it) into a treatise directed against the Rosicrucians, which proves that 
section 14 of La Doctrine curieuse, the only one devoted to the Rosicru- 
cians, must have caused a certain stir even before its publication. The Rosi- 
crucians were thus implicitly assimilated with the libertines even beyond 
Garasse’s book. Moreover, this association had almost started with Father 
Gaultier’s Table cbronographique, in which the chapter on the “Fraternity 
of R.C.” already appeared, rather significantly, between “Marc Antoine de 
Dominis Apostat” and “Lucilius the Atheist,” that is, the famous Vanini 
tortured and executed in Toulouse in 1619, whom Garasse later presented 
as Theophile’s primary inspirer.

But the most obvious tie between the matter of the Parisian posters 
and La Doctrine curieuse is found precisely in one of the pamphlets these 
posters brought about: We have only to reread the Effroyables Pactions to 
recognize indeed the very essence of Garasse’s thought, pushed here to a 
paroxysm that only the anonymous genre of rags could unleash. 170Taking over from Gaultier and Garasse, the Effroyables Pactions, chal- 
lenging the common opinion that tended to assimilate the Rosicrucians 
with the Alumbrados, on the contrary distinguished carefully between the 
two sects, which instantly permitted the author to situate the Rosicrucians 
directly in the tradition of Vanini: “On tient que les Illuminez d’Espagne, 
& les Invisibles de France n’ont rien de commun en leur croyance, ains 
qu’elle est differente grandement de l’un a l’autre: les Illuminez croyent 
l’immortalite de Fame, & noz Invisibles n’en croyent point: Toute leur 
croyance n’est qu’Epicurienne, enseignent la mesme leqon & la mesme 
methode que ce Philosophe Italien qui fut brule a Thoulouze en la place de 
Salin par Arrest du Parlement dudit lieu, en l’annee 1619.” 171 The term 
“Epicurean” is in no way innocent: It is not only the chief complaint of the 
sixth book of La Doctrine curieuse and one of the significant traits of the 
sect of “clever minds” Garasse constantly brought up, here fallaciously at- 
tributed to the Rosicrucians; it is also, let us not forget, the theme of one 
of Chaume’s posters, preserved in one of the manuscripts of Philippe de

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 271

Bethune — a prince who had become Theophile’s friend just at the start of 
the years 161 6-1 7. 172 The Effroyables Factions did not strike at random, 
and here Etienne Chaume made himself, without being aware of it, the 
objective ally of Garasse’s side, providing supplementary material for the 
“insidious parallel” between the Rosicrucians and the libertines, which 
perhaps justified Theophile de Viau’s mistrust toward these posters he 
called “game-flushers.”The Effroyables Pactions does indeed develop the theme of the Rosi- 
crucians’ Epicureanism. But beforehand, the author takes care to identify 
his target by name. According to the fanciful story implemented in this 
pamphlet, six Rosicrucians had been sent to France by the Devil to preach 
a new religion there; they found accommodations in various places on the 
edges of the capital: “La proposoient les lemons qu’ils devoient faire en 
particulier avant de les rendre publiques, & de la difficulte qu’il y avoit 
d’enseigner une nouvelle religion a Pairis [sic], tant a cause des livres 
Theophiliques, que de tant de Predicateurs qui ne demandent autre chose 
que d’entrer dans le combat de la verite pour confondre les ennemis de la 
Religion & les fleaux ou plustost les bourreaux de la vertu.” 173 Thus two 
types of obstacles conflicted with the teaching of the new Rosicrucian re- 
ligion: works of Christian apologists, and the “Theophilic books,” that is, 
those that exposed the “curious doctrine” of the libertines. In other words, 
the Devil had to confront two distinct adversaries: the theologians, who 
were his natural enemies, and the followers of Theophile, who found him- 
self set up as Satan’s rival in the work of the corruption of souls.

A little later in the pamphlet, the Rosicrucians had finally succeeded in 
trapping “a Lawyer of the Parlement of Paris” — which raises some thorny 
questions for us; 174 they taught him, made him take an oath of fidelity and 
undertook with him a rite of sorcery: “Toutes ces ceremonies faictes, on 
commence a boire & manger a l’Epicurienne aux despens de l’Advocat qui 
n’espargnoit rien de ce qu’il possedoit pour traicter ses compagnons.” 175 
The repetition of the term “Epicurean” clearly marks the desire to insist 
upon the Rosicrucians’ Epicureanism, so that a reader of Garasse could 
not fail to establish a connection with that of the “beaux Esprits.”And what are we to say about these words concerning the powers con- 
ferred upon the Rosicrucians by Astaroth, which seem to echo the very 
title of La Doctrine curieuse: “Item je leur donne parole qu’ils seront ad- 
mirez des Doctes, &c recherchez des Curieux en telle sorte que l’on les

272 D idler Kahn

recognoistra pour estre plus que les Prophetes Antiens qui n’ont enseigne 
que des fadaises .” 176 There are yet other similarities between these two 
texts. In La Doctrine curieuse, Garasse entered into a polemic against the 
mockeries of the libertines concerning the resurrection of the dead; the 
polemic prepared vengeful sections against Vanini’s ideas on this theme. 
Moreover Garasse attacked, in passing, alchemists who claimed “to show 
that Resurrection is an act as natural as the birth of a chicken .” 177 This 
theme is found again in the Effroyables Pactions, applied to the Rosicru- 
cians: “Puis-je passer soubz silence ceste abjuration qu’ils font de la Res- 
urrection de la chair, veu que les plus infidelles, les plus Payens, & les plus 
incredules y ont aucunement adjouste foy .” 178 Here the author writes ex- 
actly as if the denial of the resurrection was a commonplace of the Frater- 
nity, which is of course not the case. It is, on the other hand, a reproach 
that goes without saying in La Doctrine curieuse.A. E. Waite saw, quite rightly, “the work of a venal pamphleteer” in 
these Effroyable Pactions ; 179 it now seems obvious that this pamphleteer 
could only have been in the pay of Garasse, whose chapter on the Rosi- 
crucians in La Doctrine curieuse found in the Effroyables Pactions its 
most convenient and most natural continuation. We can ask ourselves if 
the same pen did not compose the Examen sur I’Inconnue et Nouvelle Ca- 
balle des Freres de la Croix Rosee. This pamphlet was by far the most vi- 
olent of those directed against the Rosicrucians. The author first attacked 
those whom he named the “Cabalists,” in whom he saw only “Satan’s Van- 
guard ”: 180 by the same token, the Rosicrucians became witches. The au- 
thor called upon the king himself to dispense justice concerning these:

Et vous Louys le Juste, sera t’il dit qu’en la Metropolitaine de vostre Royaume, 
a la barbe du plus Auguste de vos Parlements, sejour ordinaire de vostre Sacree 
Majeste tels endiables ozent jetter leurs envenimees racines pour y commencer 
le Regne des fils de perdition? Est point parvenu jusqu’en vostre Louvre le bruit 
commun Des Freres de la Croix Rosee, Bande infernalle, mortes-payes de Sathan, 
brigade abandonnee, sortie ces derniers temps des Manoirs Plutoniques pour 
achever de corrompre un tas de desbauches qui courent le grand galop aux Enfers, 
&c dont les brutalles actions font voir combien peu ils estiment le salut de leurs 
ames. 181

Even if it is perhaps too risky to identify this “heap of debauched persons” 
with the libertines Garasse denounced, we cannot, on the other hand, 
avoid recognizing in the expression “these handsome Dogmatists,” used 
later on to designate the Rosicrucians , 182 the very term Garasse used con-

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 273The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 273

stantly in La Doctrine curieuse to designate the libertine followers of 
Theophile. 183 And yet another significant detail is that Theophile himself 
took up the term “dogmatists” in 1624 to speak of the Rosicrucians. 184

Having called upon the king in this way, the author of the Examen de- 
nounced the turpitude that he attributed to the brothers of the Rose-Cross, 
namely the various crimes attributed to witches, and he concluded with a 
direct attack against Theophile, whom he avoided calling by name:

Voyla les fruicts plus suaves de ceste abominable Magie, puis les bons com- 
pagnons demandent s’il est loisible de les faire mourir, si l’on doit proceder judi- 
ciairement contre eux, & s’il n’est pas plus a propos de les renvoyer a leurs 
Pasteurs & Curez, comme gens estropiez de cervelle, que regler leur procez a 
l’extra-ordinaire.

0 Ames peu zelees de l’honneur de Dieu sgachez que l’heresie & la Sorcellerie 
sont deux monstres qu’on doit estouffer au ber^eau. . . . C’est pourquoy les SS. 
Cayers en conseillent l’extirpation en ces termes expres, Maleficos non patieris 
vivere. 185

These “good companions” were none other than Theophile and his com- 
rades. Theophile had indeed given his verdict in 1620 about a case of de- 
monic possession in Agen, in which he concluded the absence of all things 
supernatural, and he had cited it in his published works, a fact that 
Garasse had not failed to bring to the foreground. 1861 will finish my observations of the supreme confusion between the Rosi- 
crucian issue and that of Theophile by pointing out the surprising way sev- 
eral historians of the time presented the events of 1623 to posterity. In his 
Thresor de I’histoire generate de nostre temps, published in the spring of 
1624, the historian M. Gaspard expressed himself thus: “En ce temps icy 
[by August 6, 1 623 ] courut le bruit de diverses sortes de sectes incogneues, 
nouvellement souslevees dans le Christianisme, principalement en France, 
Espagne & Allemagne: En Espagne le seminaire des Illuminez: En Alle- 
magne des Deistes ou des croix Rosaires: En France des mesmes croix Ro- 
saires, Atheistes & esprits curieux du temps.” 187 Here Gaspard confused 
purely and simply the Rosicrucians of Etienne Chaume and the “beaux 
Esprits” of La Doctrine curieuse. His confusion is explained somewhat 
when we observe that with regard to the Rosicrucians, Gaspard limited 
himself to copying a highly significant paragraph of the Effroyables Pac- 
tions. 188 Gaspard seems in fact to have been above all directly inspired 
by the much more complete books by Claude Malingre, published almost 
at the same time.

274 Didier Kahn274 Didier Kahn

In his Histoire de nostre temps, Malingre, as we have seen, reproduced 
the edict of May 29, 1623, against the Enlightened Ones of Spain and 
continued with another “secte endiablee:” the Rosicrucians. The latter 
were presented as “personnages originaires d’Allemagne qui se disent 
Confraires de la Confrairie & College de la Croix Rosaire, dont le pere 
Garasse Jesuite a parle en sa doctrine curieuse, personnages qui se nom- 
ment invisibles, mais plustost Magiciens, Necromanciens & endiablez, 
ainsi que le discours suivant fera cognoistre.” Malingre next reproduced 
the text of the Effroyables Pactions, then added a commentary conspicu- 
ously directed against the curieux and the doctes: “Je concluray done en 
Chrestien par les regrets que je regois en Fame, de voir tant de pauvres es- 
prits curieux se precipiter d’eux mesmes dans le gouffre de l’enfer. . . . 
Bien heureux sont les pauvres d’esprit, puisque le plus souvent nous 
voyons abysmer dans les ondes infernales les doctes & les plus relevez en 
doctrine.” 189

The report of Theophile’s trial, however, came only much later in the 
work, 190 and the lines we have just read did not designate Theophile by 
name. The association between the Rosicrucians and the targets of La 
Doctrine curieuse, however, is evident in them. Moreover, it appears bet- 
ter still in the Traicte des Atbeistes, Deistes, Illuminez d’Espagne, et nou- 
veaux pretendus Invisibles, published by Malingre at the same time, 191 as 
we will see below when we study Gabriel Naude’s position.Another revealing connection can be inferred from the texts accompa- 
nying the pages that preserve, in a manuscript of literary and historical 
miscellanies, a copy of the Rechercbes sur les Rose-Croix hastily attrib- 
uted by some historians to Jacques Dupuy (1586-1656). We find there 
successively the interrogation of a magician in June 1623, led by Gilbert 
Gaulmin, then the criminal lieutenant of Moulins; 192 then two letters of 
Theophile de Viau; 193 then a translation of the theses of Jean Bitaut, An- 
toine de Villon and Etienne de Clave, announced but banned on August 
24, 1624; 194 and finally the pages on the Rosicrucians. 195 Thus one finds 
reunited in a fairly cohesive ensemble documents concerning magic and 
sorcery, libertinism, alchemy, anti-Aristotelianism, materialism, and atom- 
ism as well as the Rosicrucian Fraternity, the whole forming an asso- 
ciation characteristic of the confusion of the time.

We see then how the incident of Etienne Chaume’s placards is inextri- 
cably intertwined with other events of the time. Theophile’s trial, or rather

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 275We see then how the incident of Etienne Chaume’s placards is inextri- 
cably intertwined with other events of the time. Theophile’s trial, or rather

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 275

the crusade Garasse undertook against him, seems particularly to have 
contaminated the incident of the brothers of the Rose-Cross, to such a 
point that everything happens as though the two violent pamphlets writ- 
ten about the latter had only aimed, under the appearance of aiming at the 
Rosicrucians, at Theophile alone, thus dangerously prolonging “the insid- 
ious parallel” of Father Garasse. Nevertheless, we would be mistaken if we 
attributed the task of diabolizing the Rosicrucians, at work in these pam- 
phlets, to the strategies of La Doctrine curieuse alone. This task of diabo- 
lizing comes from further back: Its origins are found in a quarrel that, from 
1615, set the Jesuit Father Jean Roberti against the Paracelsian Rudolph 
Goclenius and later Jean-Baptiste van Helmont. Thus we can also regard 
the episode of Chaume’s posters as a specific moment in the reception of 
Paracelsus in France.

An Episode and a Caricature of the Reception of Paracelsus in FranceAn Episode and a Caricature of the Reception of Paracelsus in France

From 1578, Paracelsianism was in France the occasional object of vio- 
lent polemics capable of exceeding by far its medical context. Far from 
being limited to the quarrel over antimony, as modern historiography is 
still pleased to think, 196 Paracelsus’s reception in France, as in Germany, 
touched upon the latent quarrel of the ancients and the moderns as well as 
the problem of religious orthodoxy. In 1578, the proceedings started by 
the Faculty of Medicine in Paris against the Norman Paracelsian Roch Le 
Baillif led the Sorbonne itself to censor some sixty propositions of Paracel- 
sus as impious, and Etienne Pasquier accepted the role of defending Roch 
Le Baillif before the Parlement in large part because this cause was also 
that of the moderns of the time. 197 This abscess opened in the Faculty’s side 
by the ghost of Paracelsus, temporarily closed after this case in 1581, was 
opened again in 1603, and, although more or less scarred over in 1607 still 
suppurated until 1610, inciting an extremely prolix battle — at the cost of 
thousands of pages, several solemn censures, and resounding exclusions — 
between the Faculty of Medicine and various doctors (including members 
of its own body), of whom the best known were two of the king’s doctors, 
Joseph Du Chesne and Theodore Turquet de Mayerne. 198 Paracelsianism 
in France had thus become a sensitive subject if ever there was one in the 
medical circle, and we must now situate the episode of the placards of 
1623 in this extremely controversial context.

276 D idler Kahn

A Favorable Context for an Anti-Paracelsian Reaction276 D idler Kahn

A Favorable Context for an Anti-Paracelsian Reaction

When Etienne Chaume and his friends came up with the idea for their 
trick, the Rosicrucians were already newsworthy, even in France, because 
of a quarrel of an entirely Paracelsian nature. Since 1615, the Jesuit Jean 
Roberti had been confronting a professor from Marburg, Rudolph Gocle- 
nius the younger (1572-1621), on the theme of the “magnetic” curing of 
wounds. 199 The therapy advocated by Goclenius, stemming from a pseudo- 
Paracelsian text, the Archidoxes magicae, consisted of preparing an oint- 
ment (the unguentum armarium ) with the help of the victim’s blood and 
applying it not to the wound, but to the weapon that had caused it. The 
idea governing this curious therapy was that of a “magnetic” or “sympa- 
thetic” force, present in all of nature, and capable of uniting and connect- 
ing the most distant objects to each other; the cure therefore operated, 
according to Goclenius, in a natural way. This idea was the very object of 
the controversy.Roberti was fiercely opposed to the idea that inert material could be 
invested with spiritual qualities, except through demonic activity. The 
anonymous author of the Archidoxes magicae had foreseen this objection, 
maintaining, as Paracelsus himself would have done, that the therapeutic 
powers of this type of remedy were proof enough of their divine, not dia- 
bolical, origins. 200 But in Roberti’s eyes, attributing such an act to natural 
causes denied the presence of the supernatural. The polemic thus raised the 
question of naturalism, one of the major problems Paracelsianism posed 
in the eyes of the theologians, on the basis of which the Sorbonne had pro- 
nounced most of its censures in 1578, anticipating by several years the 
placing of Paracelsus’s works on the Index. 201 Either Goclenius was mak- 
ing himself guilty of demonic magic, practicing cures that could only be 
explained by the activity of the Devil, or his therapy was ineffective; but in 
either case, he incurred an accusation of atheism, for he upheld theories 
that denied the supernatural. When Jean Baptiste van Helmont in turn 
took part in the polemic with the publication — voluntary or not — of his 
De Magnetica vulnerum curatione in 1621, his views, which were scarcely 
different from those of Goclenius, as well as his sarcastic remarks against 
the Jesuits, earned for him, thanks to Roberti, a long Inquisition trial that 
could have ended very badly.

This quarrel became associated with the Rosicrucian Fraternity in 1 61 8, 
when Roberti, in his Goclenius Heautontimorumenos, indulged himself in

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 277This quarrel became associated with the Rosicrucian Fraternity in 1 61 8, 
when Roberti, in his Goclenius Heautontimorumenos, indulged himself in

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 277

a digression in which he fulminated against the Rosicrucians, who he 
claimed were guilty of magic just as Goclenius was. The success of this di- 
atribe in France was not immediate, 202 but it was undeniable. In the course 
of the first six months of 1623, no fewer than three works referred to it. 
Not surprisingly, their authors were all theologians.

The first of these authors was Mersenne in his Quaestiones celeberrimae 
in Genesim, whose printing was completed February 1, 1623. Quaestio 
53 of this work consisted of finding out “if the blood from Abel’s cadaver 
had gushed forth onto Cain, and if this happens in the murderer’s presence, 
as it is commonly said.” 203 This very banal question was constantly de- 
bated at the time, notably in the context of the explanations the Paracel- 
sians provided, for it too came down to the dilemma between natural and 
supernatural causes. Andreas Libavius had devoted a treatise to it in 
15 94, 204 and as late as 1640 the Bureau d’Adresse of Theophraste Renau- 
dot made it again the subject of one of its lectures. 205

In article 5 of his quaestio, Mersenne, as expected, examined the hy- 
pothesis according to which “this gushing of blood must be attributed to 
a natural cause,” and in the context of the impious theme of the soul of 
the world, brought about by the Paracelsian explanations of Johann Ernst 
Burggraf, Goclenius, and others, Mersenne, relying especially on what Ro- 
berti had said in his Goclenius Heautontimorumenos, launched invec- 
tives against the heretical and impious Rosicrucians, “who at nearly every 
one of the fairs of Frankfurt introduce into the Christian world pamphlets 
smelling of impiety.” 206A few months later, toward June 1623, it was the turn of a fanatical for- 
mer member of the Catholic League, Jean Boucher, previously a Parisian 
priest at Saint-Benoit and a refugee at Tournai since Henry IV’s abjuration, 
to mention the Rosicrucians in the course of his Couronne mystique. 207 In 
every place where heresy — that is, Protestantism — had gotten a foothold, 
atheism and magic, if we are to believe Boucher, were multiplying. Witness 
“two new monsters of magic”: Goclenius with his magnetic cure — Bou- 
cher added to it the “perpetual lamp of Paracelsus” — and the “Fraternite 
des Rosecrucians.” 208 Boucher’s admitted source here was Roberti’s Go- 
clenius Heautontimorumenos. The Rosicrucians, he continued, blas- 
phemed in addressing the promise of the Evil One — Eritis sicut Dei — to 
princes and kings, and the idea of attributing so much power to remedies 
like the unguentum armarium amounted to clearing a path for atheism

278 Didier Kahn

(Boucher here confused Goclenius and the Rosicrucians in the same anath- 
ema). 209 Furthermore, the “Rosecruceans,” like Goclenius himself, were 
heretics, which was the “source of this evil.” 210

Here Father Gaultier’s tradition meets that of Father Roberti. The latter 
had already denounced the underlying Protestantism in Goclenius’s natu- 
ralism, recognizing its mark in his obstinacy in denying miracles. But 
Gaultier, by qualifying the Rosicrucian movement in 1621 as “the child of 
Lutheranism, mixed with empiricism and Magic by Satan,” gave primacy 
to the reformed religion, in accordance with the overall intention of his 
book. In the Couronne mystique, Boucher offered a synthesis of these two 
attitudes: The accusation of magic, developed through Roberti, brought 
Goclenius and the Rosicrucians to the edge of atheism, but in the final 
analysis Boucher attributed the origin of their “monstrosity” to their 
“heresy”: Protestantism.For his part, Father Garasse scarcely insisted upon the Protestant reli- 
gion, yet one of his targets of choice, in the chapter of La Doctrine curieuse 
devoted to the Rosicrucians. But his sources were nonetheless (besides 
Michael Maier) Goclenius, Roberti, and Gaultier himself. 211

Let us add in a more general way that the Rosicrucians smacked of 
heresy in a large part of Catholic Europe. Not only had Adam Haslmayr 
and Benedictus Figulus found themselves condemned in 1612 by a power 
entirely devoted to the Jesuits of Tyrol and Austria, but from the beginning 
of the 1620s, one of the inspirers of the Rosicrucian manifestos, Christoph 
Besold himself, barely converted to Catholicism, began to revise his works 
in a Catholic sense, notably by hiding as well as he could his own partici- 
pation in Rosicrucian matters; and although Naude believed that he had 
reproduced Campanella’s opinion on the fictitious Fraternity as an appen- 
dix to his Instruction a la France, we have recently learned from Michel- 
Pierre Lerner that this negative judgment reproduced by Naude should 
be attributed, according to all probability, not to Campanella, whose real 
opinion on the subject is unknown, but to Besold himself. 212

In the years preceding the incident of Chaume’s placards, a number of 
works likely to feed the anti-Paracelsian hostility had been issued suc- 
cessively in Paris itself. The year 1621 saw the appearance of the De 
Magnetica vulnerum curatione by Jean Baptiste van Helmont and, under 
an identical title, a new edition of the treatise by Goclenius (who died that 
year). 213 The books of two of Mersenne’s future targets were also pub-

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 279The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 279

lished in 1620 and 1621: the Traictez du vray Sel secret des Philosophes, 
et de I’Esprit universel du Monde by Clovis Hesteau de Nuysement, and 
the last volume of the Utriusque Cosmi Historia by Robert Fludd. 214 Al- 
though the following year was marked by the deaths of Saint Francois de 
Sales and Jacques-Auguste de Thou — and of Michael Maier — it saw 
above all, in the domain of alchemy, a new edition of the Traicte du feu et 
du sel by Vigenere, quoted in 1623 by Gabriel Naude in his Instruction a 
la France, 215 to say nothing of the Problemata by Georgius Venetus, which 
Mersenne would attack as well. Let us add that in that year in Strasbourg 
the fifth volume of the Theatrum Chemicum was published, and that 
among the minor Parisian publications, which were quite likely to irritate 
a man like Naude, was found a curious Interpretation des secrets He- 
brieux, Chaldees & Rabins, du prince Dorcas, Philosophe Ethiopien, pour 
augmenter l’ or & V argent a dix pour cent de profit cbaque semaine . 21<s Fur- 
thermore, we know that the plague was raging in Paris in 1622; there was 
a fresh outbreak in August of 1623, and probably for this reason a frag- 
mentary new edition of a treatise on the plague, more than forty years old, 
by Roch Le Baillif himself was published. 217There is still more: on April 8, 1623, that is, between the Quaestiones 
in Genesim by Mersenne and the Couronne mystique by Jean Boucher, the 
printing was completed in Paris, of La petite Cbirurgie, autrement ditte 
la Bertheonee, de Philippe Aoreole [sic] Theophraste Paracelse grand 
Medecin & Philosophe entre les Allemans, translated by a certain Daniel 
Du Vivier, “Surgeon and Barber of the King,” who dedicated this thick 
volume of 750 pages to the young Charles of Schomberg (1601-56), the 
future duke of Halluyn, cared for by Du Vivier during the siege of Som- 
mieres (1622). An interesting detail: The editor himself emphasized that 
this translation, produced “in order to give this pleasure to the importu- 
nity of those who for twenty years have done nothing but ask for it in our 
Shops,” had been undertaken several times already and abandoned be- 
cause of the difficulties of Paracelsus’s language. 218 The book, apparently 
very long awaited, opened with “the Basel program,” the June 1527 man- 
ifesto by which Paracelsus had announced to the students of Basel the ori- 
entation of the courses that he was preparing to give. Printed here in large 
italic characters under the title Paracelse aux Estudians, Salut, this text 
contained most notably these words: “car ce n’est pas le titre, les ornemens 
du langage, la cognoissance des langues, ou la lecture de plusieurs Livres

280 Didier Kahn

[quoy que ces choses soient a priser] qui rendent un Medecin capable en 
son art: mais la profonde cognoissance de la nature des choses, & des 
mysteres plus cachez qui suppleent au defaut de tout le reste.” 219We can easily imagine the Faculty of Medicine’s reaction when con- 
fronted with such a publication, especially as the latter clearly involved 
the king’s immediate entourage. 220 The translator, fully aware of the 
work’s subversive potential, had moreover warned Schomberg that this 
book might be subject to a rather hostile reception, “because of the novelty 
of its doctrine, known by few people, which however has always allowed 
me to succeed when other remedies could not do anything, or seemed to me 
more delayed than they should have been.” 221 And Naude may have been 
thinking precisely of these lines of the “Basel program” when he listed 
ironically in his Instruction a la France “la quint’essence, Medecine uni- 
verselle, pierre des Philosophes, signature des choses, thresors, pianettes, 
intelligences, Magie, Cabale, Chymie, & mysteres les plus cachez.” 222 We 
see at least that the currency of the Parisian book scarcely allowed one to 
forget the existence of Paracelsianism and the quarrels it raised.

As for the works by Mersenne, Boucher, and Garasse, although all three 
had been published in 1623, none of them mentioned Chaume’s posters, 
nor could they have done so: the latest of them, Boucher’s work, must have 
appeared at the latest in June, just before the Parisian placards or perhaps 
just at the same time. 223 Thus we see the exact context that must have given 
Chaume the idea for his posters, which also explains to a large extent the 
reactions that they elicited. Let us recall indeed that the theories of Gocle- 
nius referred all of the polemicists to one and the same source: Paracelsus 
himself.

The Anti-Paracelsianism of Garasse and MersenneThe Anti-Paracelsianism of Garasse and Mersenne

In fact, Garasse and Mersenne had indeed identified Paracelsus as the main 
person responsible for the naturalism of the doctors and alchemists, and 
several passages of La Doctrine curieuse and the Quaestiones in Genesim 
indeed fulminated against him. In the eyes of Garasse, the atheist Vanini, 
Theophile’s intellectual master, was only a summary of Paracelsus, Pom- 
ponazzi, Cardano, and Agrippa. This curious shrinkage is found in an at- 
tack by Garasse on the critics of demonic possession: “je trouve qu’il y 
a cinq meschans & pernicieux Escrivains, qui ont tasche de rendre cette 
verite mesprisable & profane, par leurs mal-heureuses inventions, s$a-

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 281

voir, Paracelse, Pomponace, Cardan, Agrippa, & Lucilio Vanino. Para- 
celse estoit un resveur hypocondriaque, Pomponace un Atheiste parfaict, 
Cardan un profane, Agrippa un endiable, Lucilio Vanino l’abbrege des 
autres quatre.” 224

It is a most striking thing to see Paracelsus associated here with the most 
notorious and the most frequently denounced representatives of liber- 
tinism at the time (only Charron is missing). Paracelsus is labeled only 
a “delusional dreamer,” which remains far short of the invectives usu- 
ally launched against the Swiss doctor. But later on, Garasse clarifies his 
thoughts. In the Section dixiesme. Quels sont les Livres Cabalistiques de 
nos nouveaux Dogmatizans, he compares Theophile’s friends’ imaginary 
library to that of the Rosicrucians, and he situates Paracelsus on the first 
shelf, this time between Pomponazzi and Machiavelli:II n’est pas jusques aux Boemiens, aux Gueux & aux Couppeurs de bourses qui 
n’ayent leurs livres confidens & cabalistiques. Les Freres de la Croix de Roses, 
qui sont de pauvres gueux, ont leur Bibliotheque au rapport de Goclenius, Sc la de- 
dans ils gardent quatre ou cinq volumes de grande recommandation: Le premier 
s’appelle, Fama: Le second, Axiomata: Le troisiesme, Proteus: Le quatriesme, 
Rotae. . . . Cela suppose je voy cinq ou six especes de livres, qui font comme la 
Bibliotheque des Libertins, laquelle je desire parcourir pour en dire mon advis.

Le premier rang contient le Pomponace, le Paracelse, Sc Machiavel. . . .

Paracelse est plustost un resveur, Sc Alchymiste dangereux, qu’un Atheiste ou 
Libertin, il est neantmoins tres-defendu, d’autant que ses curiositez, & douces 
resveries Pont porte hors des bornes de la science naturelle, quoy qu’a mon advis 
il fust comme Cosme Ruggeri, plus ignorant qu’on ne pense, nommement au faict 
de la Magie, ainsi qu’il se void par quelques lambeaux rapportez dans les Disqui- 
sitions de Martin Delrio; car il semble en les lisant que la teste de cet homme 
fust comme une vive lanterne remplie d’estranges fantaisies, & d’imaginations 
frenetiques. 225

This opinion, moderate in appearance, has a high probability of being that 
of Garasse himself. The Jesuit priest, by his very anti-Protestant fanati- 
cism, had excluded himself from having recourse to a prime source: the 
Disputationes de Medicina nova Philippi Paracelsi by Thomas Erastus 
(published in 1571-73), used all along by the Sorbonne in 1578, then by 
Mersenne himself in his Quaestiones in Geneshn. 226 This gap in Garasse’s 
sources probably explains the verbal indulgence he displays toward the 
Swiss doctor, although in his eyes Paracelsus, when all was said and done, 
was no less deserving of the stake than Pomponazzi or Machiavelli. 
Paracelsus’s writings seem particularly to have disconcerted Garasse. But

282 Didier Kahn282 Didier Kahn

it is quite possible, on the other hand, that the work of another Jesuit 
Father, Martin Del Rio, had suggested to him his way of associating Para- 
celsus with Pomponazzi, Agrippa, Cardano, and Vanini. When examin- 
ing the illicit remedies, Del Rio gave indeed examples of superstitious 
therapies and magic remedies taken from pagan authors, then added this: 
“Those who have been baptized are not any more exempt from these su- 
perstitions. Indeed, we meet many of them in Pomponazzi’s works, many 
in Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa’s works, but even more still in Philip Aure- 
olus’, also known as Bombast Paracelsus, in a number of his works, the 
reading of all of which has been prohibited by the Church .” 227

Erastus had already named Pomponazzi beside Paracelsus in several 
places in his Disputationes . 228 Del Rio remembered this and added a com- 
panion to them who was nearly unavoidable in this context: the author of 
De occulta pbilosopbia. Pomponazzi, Agrippa, Paracelsus: We have here 
something like a sketch of the association Garasse later effectuated.

Del Rio then reproached Paracelsus for his recourse to demons by the 
application of seals, images, and monstrous characters, quoted his ex- 
hortations to frequent old women of the countryside rather than univer- 
sity professors, and finally denounced the naturalism the Swiss doctor 
professed through his magic; and, citing the apocryphal objection of the 
Archidoxes magicae according to which an effective remedy cannot come 
from the Devil, he commented on it in these words: “Impure mouth! As if 
it were not up to theologians alone to judge what is against God and what 
is not against God! It is in this way that the vile charlatan claims the court 
of Faith for himself .” 229We see that Father Garasse, in his verbal moderation, certainly remained 
very far short of his sources. Father Mersenne, on the other hand, had read 
with care Erastus’s Disputationes, citing them by name in two separate 
places. First taking up the attacks of the German doctor against the natu- 
ralistic explanations of Paracelsus concerning the resurrection of the dead, 
he followed this diatribe as he raged against the alchemization of the 
mysteries of religion : 230 This passage, well known in Mersenne’s work 
but rarely placed into its context , 231 is directly connected, in fact, to the 
Minim’s anti-Paracelsian polemic, of which it is only the continuation on 
another level. The common target of these two attacks is nothing other 
than naturalism scandalously applied to sacred mysteries.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 283The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 283

Later on, Mersenne again took up Erastus’s attacks, on a theme every 
bit as important: the creation of the world. Now all of Paracelsus’s con- 
ceptions found themselves questioned, and the mysterium magnum was 
in the front line. 232 In the course of these attacks in which, as we know, 
Mersenne advocated that the alchemists be thrown into the sea with a mill- 
stone attached to their necks, the Minim scarcely restrained himself from 
using violent invectives against Paracelsus, calling him, on the occasion of 
a passage on the homunculus, “the Germanic monster.” 233 
The novelty of these anti-Paracelsian attacks by Mersenne and Garasse 
must be emphasized above all. Before 1623, such offensives are scarcely 
found in France outside of the medical domain. With Fathers Garasse and 
Mersenne, the polemic against Paracelsus suddenly crosses beyond the 
walls of the Faculty of Medicine and finds itself projected into the public 
sphere, exposed to the full light of day by the theologians’ pens. Only the 
trial of Roch Le Baillif, followed by hundreds of people, had previously at- 
tained this degree of diffusion; but at that time the matter had remained 
innocuous: It was only a matter of whether or not to ban an empirical doc- 
tor, of defending or condemning the new medicine, of whether or not to 
pronounce themselves in favor of the moderns, and the Sorbonne’s censure 
had then not carried weight in the eyes of the Parlement. In 1623, on the 
other hand, the theologians were the ones to take the matter in hand, and 
this was not the least of the factors that would push Naude to react.

Gabriel Naude’s PositionGabriel Naude’s Position

As Louise Godard de Donville has recently remarked, it seems legitimate 
to consider Naude’s Instruction a la France a reply to Garasse’s attacks. 234 
Still we must not lose sight of the other dimensions of this work, which, 
in spite of its conciseness, is as dense as we have the right to expect from 
such a sedulous disciple of Seneca. Lorenzo Bianchi has characterized the 
Instruction a la France as one of the first manifestations of Naude’s po- 
litical thought and has emphasized the importance of Naude’s medical 
training in his attitude toward alchemy and Paracelsianism, even if this 
attitude corresponded as well and above all to choices of a philosophical 
nature. 235 If therefore we wish to appreciate Naude’s position from all its 
angles, nothing remains but to let each of these different facets shine in its

turn.

284 Didier Kahnturn.

284 Didier Kahn

A Reaction against “La Doctrine curieuse” One of the best arguments 
for establishing the connection between Naude’s Instruction a la France 
and La Doctrine curieuse is the scarcely disguised comment on the poet 
Guillaume Colletet with which the Instruction a la France concluded: 
Naude vigorously took up the defense of the poet (“le sieur C.”) against 
Garasse, testifying to Colletet’s orthodoxy and making himself the guar- 
antor of it. 236 Let us recall, indeed, that the order of the Parlement of July 
11, 1623, decreed the arrest not only of Theophile, but also of Colletet, 
Frenicle and Berthelot, considered to be the primary authors of the Par- 
nasse des Poetes Satyriques. In a similar fashion, on August 18, the order 
that condemned Theophile to the stake also banished Colletet from the 
kingdom for nine years (though he exiled himself only to Saint-Denis, just 
outside of Paris, where several members of his family occupied positions 
of some importance in the famous abbey). 237 To defend Colletet was thus 
to align oneself with the party opposed to Garasse. In fact, the presence of 
Colletet took up so to speak the whole of the Instruction a la France: Not 
content with providing his conclusion to Naude’s work, Colletet also gave 
him a prefatory sonnet as an opening, signed with his initials, in which 
are found — thumbing his nose at Garasse’s attacks against the “beaux 
Esprits” — these verses in carefully weighted terms:

Continue then, bel Esprit, purge this universe,

As Hercules did formerly, of these varied monsters,

Who produce everywhere such harmful effects

(Poursuy done, bel Esprit, purge cet univers,

Comme Hercule jadis, de ces monstres divers,

Qui produisent par tout des effects si nuisibles) 238Who produce everywhere such harmful effects

(Poursuy done, bel Esprit, purge cet univers,

Comme Hercule jadis, de ces monstres divers,

Qui produisent par tout des effects si nuisibles) 238

When we consider that Colletet himself wrote — but published a long 
time after — an epigram against “Ragasse” (Garasse) and that it was one 
of his friends, Francois Ogier, who, in October 1623 struck the Jesuit 
priest with the blows that were to ensure the decline of La Doctrine 
curieuse in public opinion, 239 we are no longer in doubt concerning the 
motivations that pushed Naude to publish the Instruction a la France. In- 
deed, Naude was situated on the side of the scholars, traditionally opposed 
to the Jesuits, 240 and he made this quite clear, for example, by including in 
his book an emphatic praise of Guillaume Postel, whose follies he 
nonetheless denounced, but whom he revered as an individual who was 
“eminent in knowledge, elevated in doctrine and admirable in reputation”

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 285

if ever there was one, “the great doctrine of whom is worthy of every kind 
of excuse .” 241 Thus we discover in his book a number of veiled attacks 
against Garasse and the Jesuits.if ever there was one, “the great doctrine of whom is worthy of every kind 
of excuse .” 241 Thus we discover in his book a number of veiled attacks 
against Garasse and the Jesuits.

Naude’s irony exerts itself against the Jesuits in disguised terms when 
he benignly embarks upon clearing, with as much zeal as calculated 
weightiness, “three Holy Fathers of the Company of Jesus” — Fathers 
Gaultier, Roberti, and Garasse — of having believed the ridiculous fable 
of the Rosicrucians and “followed in this the stupidity of the popu- 
lace .” 242 Naude finishes this passage by discreetly taking a dig at Garasse’s 
bloodthirsty zeal by means of a Latin quotation from Tertullian on “the 
wholly merciful Church,” which should seek less to make the blood of 
heretics flow than to spread shame in their souls . 243 Other cutting re- 
marks respond with exactitude to La Doctrine curieuse. Garasse, for 
example, had assumed that the libertines, incapable of perceiving their 
crimes, judged that they had been punished for nothing, and he was iron- 
ical concerning this Nothing, making a show of speaking knowledgeably 
about it. Naude seems to have this in mind when in one breath he cites, 
among the examples of man’s folly, “[Jean] Demons [amusing himself] by 
philosophizing on the quarter of Nothing,” and a little below Charles de 
Bovelles for “the excellent treatise he composed de plusquam nihilo .” 244 
Elsewhere, Garasse had praised the Jesuits of Tyrol for having con- 
demned Adam Haslmayr: Therefore Naude, in his desire to reduce the 
Rosicrucians to a ridiculous fable, hastens to deny — quite wrongly, more- 
over — that Haslmayr’s zeal for the supposed Fraternity had been the true 
cause of this condemnation . 245 At the end of the Instruction, the attack 
becomes sharper. Delicately tossing a bit of oil onto the fire, Naude oblig- 
ingly emphasizes the major defect of La Doctrine curieuse: He pretends 
to get indignant that the libertines of the time, “with an unequaled rash- 
ness and impudence,” describe Garasse’s work “with the very pernicious 
title of Atheism reduced to art.” Thus discrediting the treatise of the Je- 
suit priest, Naude works in the very direction of the Jugement et Censure 
published by Francois Ogier at the same time; but by choosing dissimu- 
lation, he adopts, yet without spelling it out, the attitude Ogier displayed 
in broad daylight, making himself also appear — but implicitly — “more 
pious than the spokesperson for the pious” and stabbing Garasse while 
seeming to defend him, which allows him to support Guillaume Colletet 
all the better . 246286 Didier Kahn

The Instruction a la France met with a most unexpected destiny. Partly 
directed against Garasse, the book was carelessly re-published by a mem- 
ber of the devout party in a brochure entirely devoted to upholding and 
prolonging the crusade of La Doctrine curieuse’s author. Ogier’s jugement 
et Censure, not content with provoking a reply from Garasse, had indeed 
stimulated the zeal of the Jesuit priest’s partisans, among whom Claude 
Malingre himself was not the least active. Not content with reactivating in 
his Histoire de nostre temps the parallel Garasse had established between 
atheists and Rosicrucian sorcerers, Malingre wanted to intensify the effect 
by having his Traicte des Atheistes, Deistes, Illuminez d’Espagne, et nou- 
veaux pretendus Invisibles published at the same time. This brochure 
opened with an anonymous “Preface,” probably attributable to Malingre 
himself, in which the latter, taking up Garasse’s quarrel as his own, de- 
plored the number of his enemies with loud cries:mais quoy, le monde ne peut supporter ces lumieres, les medisans politiques de- 
ployent tous leurs efforts contre ces veritez: mais sur tous les Athees, les Deistes & 
autres sectes infernales, comme particulierement interessez en la descouverte de 
leurs impietez, s’esmeuvent en ce temps, fremissent d’horreur, & se lancent au- 
jourd’huy contre ceux qui esclairent de trop prez leurs Atheismes &C horribles def- 
fauts. . . . C’est pourquoy . . . Je veux en ce Traicte . . . ruyner les desseins du 
Diable, les Athees & Heretiques modernes ses suposts, qui luy [ i.e God] veulent 
non seulement ravir sa toute-puissance, sa providence, sa bonte, sa misericorde, 
son eternite, voire jusques a son essence que les Athees luy ostent, que les Deistes 
partagent, que les Illuminez mesprisent, & les Croix Rosaires supposent faire 
servir en l’execution de leurs prestiges. C’est de ces quatre sortes de nouvelles 
sectes eslevees en ces derniers temps dans 1’Empire Chrestien, dont je traicteray icy 
fort succinctement. 247

Malingre was obviously reacting in this case to the attacks against Garasse 
by Ogier and, perhaps, by Guy de La Brosse ; 248 perhaps, too, without 
being aware of it, he was reacting to Naude’s work: the term “political 
slanderers” can quite easily be applied to each of these authors. As in 
the Histoire de nostre temps, Malingre abstained at any rate from naming 
Theophile explicitly. But the first chapter of his brochure, “On the Athe- 
ists of Our Time,” was nothing other than an apologetic and edifying 
assembly of extracts from La Doctrine curieuse, perhaps mixed in with 
passages attributable to Malingre himself, in any case devoid of any am- 
biguity concerning their intent. Thus the final lines read: “Dieu soit loiie 
qu’en ce temps les Cours de Parlements de France &c Messieurs les Magis- 
trats, conformement aux loix divines & les commandemens de sa Majeste

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 287The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 287

tres Chrestienne & tres-pieuse, se sont saisis d’aucuns Atheistes recens, ont 
faict brusler leurs livres & travaillent journellement a faire recherche des 
lieux ou s’enseignoit cette doctrine impie, & des Autheurs d’icelle qui des- 
bauchoient sa Noblesse Catholique par la publication de leurs detestables 
maximes.” 249

Chapter 2, “On Deists or Trinitarians, Also Called New Arians,” 
although borrowed from Father Gaultier’s Table chronographique and 
referring to the years 1564-66, was an extremely clear allusion to the 
crusade Mersenne led against the “deists” at the time. 250 Chapter 3 repro- 
duced the edict of May 29, 1623 against the Alumbrados, and chapter 4, 
under the misleading title, “On the Brothers Who Claim to Be Invisible & 
Enlightened of the Croix-Rosaire, on Their College, Meetings and Doc- 
trine,” reproduced Naude’s Instruction a la France without the author’s 
name and without its true title, an incredibly stupid blunder if Malingre’s 
intent with this publication was in fact, as we have good reason to believe, 
to take up Garasse’s defense. 251

A Discreet Manifesto of Libertinism Naude’s attitude in the Instruction 
a la France, so prudently hostile to the Jesuit priest and his order that Ma- 
lingre did not understand an ounce of it, revealed itself as well by some 
typically libertine features here and there. We have just seen how Naude 
opposed the merciful attitude of the Church Fathers to the murderous 
zeal of Garasse, advocating persuasion rather than the stake. Elsewhere, 
Naude dared to take up as his own some lines of Lucretius against religion 
itself:

n’est-ce pas une chose surpassante la portee de nostre esprit, qu’un Arius, un 
Luther, un Calvin, . . . ayent arme le fils contre le pere, bouleverse les plus grandes 
Monarchies, &C pense esteindre la race du genre humain, Sc occasionne de si grands 
malheurs & calamitez, que je suis contraint de dire avec Lucrece,Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum. 
ou plus veritablement,

Relligio peperit scelerata & impia facta. 151

Whether they signify a sign of recognition or a discreet profession of liber- 
tine doubt, these cleverly executed lines can be added to other evidence. 
Thus we can see a frank irony in the use Naude made of two authorities: 
Pierre Charron and Pierre de Lancre, mentioned to justify a depiction of 
the diversity of beliefs in the domain of religion: “Charon ayant recueilli les

288 Didier Kahn

diverses & monstrueuses opinions des hommes es loix & statuts, & de l’Ancre 
vous ayant faict voir diverses extravagances de leurs actions; il ne me resteroit 
qu’a vous representer comme en deux belles pieces de tapisserie les diversitez 
qui se rencontrent tous les jours es deux dernieres sources de tant de caprices, 
sgavoir la profession du culte divin, & le cercle de toutes les sciences.” 253

Without lingering to identify more precisely the sources of this new 
veiled attack on religion, let us note that Pierre de Lancre, the bloodthirsty 
magistrate who specialized in witchcraft trials, seems to have had a highly 
amicable relationship with Garasse, whereas Charron with his Sagesse, 
“bible of the libertines,” was nothing other than one of the chief betes 
noires of La Doctrine curieuse (and also of Mersenne). 254 By juxtaposing 
them, Naude armed himself with the poison and the antidote at the same 
time, neutralizing the sulfurous exhalations of the one, pace Garasse, with 
the orthodoxy of the other. It is moreover not a coincidence if, at the same 
time, Francois Ogier took up Charron’s defense against Garasse, to the 
great indignation of the author of La Doctrine curieuse; 255 and further- 
more, we know that Naude, in 1625, composed his Apologie against 
Pierre de Lancre himself, whom he designated by name. 256We also know that Naude intended, in his Instruction, “to set all things 
evenly at the level of reason”; the sentence has been rightfully pointed out 
as an indication of a “rationalistic and skeptic attitude.” 257 Now one pas- 
sage from the Instruction has preserved a remnant of an opinion on the 
true nature of the Rosicrucians that must, from this point of view, have es- 
pecially attracted Naude. This passage is found at the end of a whirlwind 
of contradictory opinions concerning the Fraternity:

je conjecturay incontinent que suivant cette opinion le venerable Pere illumine 
premier autheur de la Congregation . . . devoit estre principalement redevable au 
Reverend Pere endiable Picatrix. . . . Mais la verite de cette conjecture & interpre- 
tation estant difficile a persuader a la trop grande incredulite de quelques uns qui 
estans accoustumez a telles fictions & narrations fabuleuses, bustorwn formi- 
damina, noctium occursacula, larvarum terriculamenta, nocturnos lemures, 
portentaque Thessala risu excipiunt. . . , 2SS Je me suis persuade que l’opinion de 
ceux-la estoit plus recevable qui ont estime que c’estoit une Compagnie de gens 
doctes & curieux, lesquels desirans par la communication qu’ils avoient ensemble 
parvenir a la cognoissance des secrets les plus cachez de la nature, . . . nous ont 
plustost par leur Manifeste & Confession represente le modele des choses qu’ils 
devoient rechercher, que non pas le catalogue de celles qui estoient en leur puis- 
sance, & lesquels ne se vouloient embarquer a la conqueste de cette toison d’or 
qu’apres avoir authorise, comme d’autres Argonautes, le dessein de leurs voyages 
du favorable tiltre de quelque Compagnie ou Congregation . . . : laquelle opinion

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 289The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 289

est authorisee par le consentement du Sieur Adami Gentilhomme Allemand, 
auquel nous serons perpetuellement obligez pour les oeuvres de ce phoenix de tous 
les Philosophes & Politiques Thomas Campanella, ausquelles il sert tous les jours 
de sage femme . . . ; car en l’une de ses Epistres manuscrites, de laquelle j’ay la 
copie, addressee au defunct Pere Baranzani, il parle expressement d’eux en ces 
termes: Votum forte fuit hominum bonorum, qui communicationem in Uteris 
desiderabant , 2S9

But Naude immediately rejected this hypothesis in the name of an argu- 
ment that was for him irrevocable, inspired by right reason: “Neant- 
moins si cette Compagnie estoit telle que porte cette conjecture, il faudroit 
dire . . . que ne respirant rien autre chose que le bien, & instruction d’une 
fourmiliere d’esprits qui perdent tous les jours leur temps a la recherche de 
ce qui leur est impossible de conduire a perfection, . . . elle les auroit voulu 
retirer de cette queste, les engageant a une autre de bien plus grand merite 
& consequence, & par mesme moyen exercer nostre jugement a des- 
couvrir sans aucunes conjectures le lieu de leur demeure & invisible Con- 
gregation.” 260 The goal of a company desirous of establishing more 
communication in the scholarly world obviously not being to mislead the 
learned, Naude could only reject the attractive advice of Tobias Adami, 
“set evenly at the level of reason.”There is another indication of this attitude: Naude, as aware as he was 
of living in a time rich in discoveries and upheavals, nevertheless displayed 
a resolute hostility toward millenarianism, whose inner workings he pa- 
tiently dismantled. 261 And the lesson of the Instruction a la France can be 
summarized by the following absolute rebuttal, more clearly expressed still 
in the Mascurat in 1650, but concerning which Naude had not changed his 
mind since 1623: “This is why I affirm to you again that Magic is an empty 
science, & incapable of producing any effect, the same as Alchemy.” 262

This position of Naude as a philosopher is also that of Naude as a 
scholar with a medical education. A reaction against the dangerous zeal of 
Father Garasse, a sign of recognition and a discreet manifesto of libertin- 
ism, the Instruction a la France for all that still bears, in more than one 
place, the anti-Paracelsian trademark of an author educated at the Faculty 
of Medicine in Paris.

Naude’s Anti-Paracelsianism: A Typical Feature from the Faculty of Med- 
icine Naude’s teacher Rene Moreau, who crossed the pages of the Instruc- 
tion more than once, was one of the regents of the Faculty. He most likely

290 Didier Kahn290 Didier Kahn

shared his colleagues’ fierce opposition to Paracelsus, without necessarily 
lapsing into caricature, as Guy Patin did. He had at the very least demon- 
strated in his Ecole de Salerne the impossibility of extending life, and 
Naude, in 1625, willingly referred the Apologie ’ s readers to that work. 263 
Highly knowledgeable in the topic of alchemy, Naude himself was not to 
be outdone in producing an entire arsenal of anti-alchemical sources. 264 In 
fact, in his Instruction, he identified the origins of the entire Rosicrucian 
movement with a primary cause that he denounced without delay: Paracel- 
sus himself. Indeed Naude related the millenarianism of the Rosicrucian 
movement first of all to Paracelsus’ Helias Artista prophecy, and this was 
the first target he chose in dismantling the myth of the Fraternity, distort- 
ing the Swiss doctor’s name (Hohenheim) in a ridiculous onomatopoeia:

C’a este une des principales resveries de cet Hermite Philippe Bombast, Aureole, 
Theophraste, Paracelse, de Hohenhehin, lequel sorti d’un des Cantons de Suisse, 
s’est voulu signaler par la multitude de ses noms, aussi bien que par la pernicieuse 
nouveaute de sa doctrine, de nous vouloir persuader qu’il n’estoit que le precurseur 
d’un certain Helie Artiste, lequel devoit venir apres luy & esclater au monde fourny 
du secret veritable de la transmutation des metaux, & de toutes les sciences, pour 
reformer la corruption qui par laps de temps s’estoit glissee en icelles. . . . Voila, 
Messieurs, la base de cette Confrairie, l’origine de ce Manifeste, la cause de tant de 
chimeres, & le gond sur lequel tournent tant de fantaisies. Cette source estant tarie 
les ruisseaux se secheront: cette racine coupee les branches se fanneront: ce fonde- 
ment sappe adieu tout l’edifice, Hie Rhodus, hie Saltus, hoe opus hie labor est. 265Here we see Naude’s skeptical and rationalist tendencies, which made him 
the enemy of every millenarianism, united with his nearly professional 
hostility to the doctrine of Paracelsus. We could rightly be astonished that 
a skeptic like Naude, having grasped extremely well how far the polemic 
of Roberti went along with that of Garasse, 266 did not have more sym- 
pathy for the Paracelsians’ naturalism, which, after all, amounted to deny- 
ing the reality of miracles. This naturalism however, rested on foundations 
that Naude could only reject as being superstitious; moreover, this liber- 
tine never did risk upholding naturalistic theories openly, even if they were 
of Aristotelian inspiration, preferring the historical method to them by far 
and, as Rene Pintard said, “dissolving philosophy in history.” 267

Later Naude, so that no one might remain unaware of it, again desig- 
nated Paracelsus as “the fundamental stone of all this Congregation” and 
launched a classic invective against him: “Voire mesme cette marque de 
division est si essentielle au mensonge, que Paracelse, le Luther de la

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 291The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 291

Medecine, a plustost este diversifie par Crollius, du Chesne, Hartman, & 
une infinite d’autres, que nous n’avons recognu par l’intelligence de ses 
oeuvres, les blasphemes & absurditez de sa nouvelle doctrine.” 268 “The 
Luther of Medicine” — this epithet was at the time frequently used for 
Paracelsus, and the usage had started in his lifetime. In 1600, the reformed 
alchemist Bernard G. Penot had used it in praise, arguing against Andreas 
Libavius that Paracelsus had been to medicine what Luther was to theol- 
ogy, impelled by God to bring new remedies to new ills. 269 But in France, 
Henri de Monantheuil, dean of the Paris Faculty of Medicine at the time 
of the proceedings instituted against Roch Le Baillif, had, completely on 
the contrary, employed it as an invective at the heart of two speeches, one 
at the University and the other in the open Parlement. 270 It was a cutting 
invective indeed, for Paracelsus himself, in the Paragranum, had risen up 
against the epithet “Luther of the doctors” that his enemies let fly at him, 
replying to them with haughtiness: “I will make life difficult, for him and 
for you! ” 271 In fact, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, the Luther- 
ans themselves considered the Swiss doctor an atheist. 272 To reactivate this 
epithet in Paris in 1623 with regard to the Rosicrucians was not only to 
link oneself to Father Gaultier’s anti-Protestant movement: It was above all 
to reveal a resurgence of the anti-Paracelsianism characteristic of the Paris 
Faculty of Medicine, a bastion of orthodoxy as much in the domain of 
medicine as in that of Catholic faith — although this last, as we know, mat- 
tered little to Naude in and of itself. 273A Reaction against Popular Agitation But if the opposition to Paracelsus 
is definitely one of the various motives that pushed Naude to denounce the 
Rosicrucian myth, at the very heart of which he had seen the shade of the 
Swiss doctor in the position of a protective spirit, this fact does not exhaust 
the richness of the Instruction a la France. Warned of the danger of sedi- 
tious pamphlets and aware of the perils that they were likely to produce to 
the security of the State — we know that Naude himself had criticized in Le 
Marfore all those pamphlets who were aiming at Luynes in 1620 — the au- 
thor of the Instruction reacted in 1623 in an apparently similar manner: 
He rose up against the madness that seemed to have seized the people of 
Paris after the posting of Etienne Chaume’s placards and endeavored to 
fight against a disorderly production of pamphlets and opinions that 
threatened the social order, going as far as to print in his book the text of

292 Didier Kahn

the poster “to relieve the infinite number of people who have never seen it, 
from scribbling it in their tablets,” that is, to attempt to contain the un- 
controllable proliferation of manuscripts, in which seditious texts risked 
being still more dangerously distorted. 274Lorenzo Bianchi has explained extremely well how certain passages of 
the Instruction a la France anticipated Naude’s Considerations politiques 
sur les coups d’estat of 1639, showing the people as a weak and idiotic 
mass lost in the “orchestra pit of lies,” in great need of being enlightened 
by the learned, whose role was to denounce the superstitions and prophe- 
cies that were likely to attract the people and thereby bring trouble into the 
kingdom. Naude’s position can then be stated in the following manner: 
Hostile to Paracelsus in the name of reason and not that of religion, Naude 
could not tolerate that the denunciation of the Swiss doctor and his fol- 
lowers who were disguised as Rosicrucians — a denunciation that was in 
principle salutary — had turned, as was the case with the pamphlets that 
were circulating, into a witch-hunt, and he rose up precisely against this 
caricature of anti-Paracelsianism. From this point of view, his Instruction 
a la France was simultaneously aimed at three targets: Paracelsus and his 
sectarians, whose absurdities must be denounced; those who condemned 
them in the name of religion, for they were the primary dupes of these ab- 
surdities and made others (such as Theophile, Colletet, and their friends) 
suffer the consequences of them; and those who exploited the situation in 
an extremely dangerous manner by publishing pamphlets like the Effroy- 
ables Pactions, for these pamphlets risked frightening the people to the 
point of inciting riots.And if the Instruction a la France did not yet offer views on the interest 
and the necessity of absolutism and religion in the preservation of states, 
at least Naude knew where to find gripping words for endeavoring to send 
the supposed Rosicrucian Fraternity back to the void, and with it not only 
all the Etienne Chaumes, capable of troubling the social order, but also all 
the Harasses and hired pamphleteers who, pandering to the obsessions of 
the people, dangerously misjudged the people’s propensity for mounting 
Pegasus, or who on the contrary exploited it without restraint at the risk 
of bringing about “the complete ruin” of the State:

Genereux esprits transcendans & eslevez par les aisles de vostre jugement au 
dessus du commun d’une populace, & qui comme du theatre de la verite contem- 
plez une infinite d’esprits qui perdent leur credit dedans le parterre du mensonge,

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 293

c’est a vous a qui il appartient de leur donner a cognoistre comme tous ces faux 
bruits, nouveautez, propheties & opinions anticipees, ont tousjours este cause 
de la subversion des Estats &C entiere ruine des plus grandes Monarchies. . . . Et 
moy j’adjousteray, [que les nouveautes] ayans este cause en ce Royaume de quatre 
batailles donnees, un million d’hommes occis, trois cens villes surprises, cent cin- 
quante millions despensez pour le payement seul de la gendarmerie, neuf villes, 
quatre cens villages, & dix mille maisons tout a faict bruslees ou rasees; le ressou- 
venir d’une calamite si estrange nous devroit faire dresser les cheveux a la teste aux 
premiers bruits de telles superstitions &C nouveautez, lesquelles comme tres- 
pernicieuses ont tousjours este defendues par les loix Imperiales, qui ont prefix cer- 
taines peines a ceux qui s’efforcent d’estonner les autres par quelque vaine 
superstition. 275By giving this horrific account of the wars of religion in the declamatory 
conclusion of the Instruction a la France, Naude might hope to produce 
some effect on a generation who, in the beginning of the 1620s, had not 
finished warding off its obsessive fear of an Iron Age that was still quite 
close in its collective memory. 276 The outer fringes, at least, of the opinions 
closest to power seem to have heard him, since in 1624, having given a 
summary of Father Gaultier, Naude, and Garasse, the Mercnre Franqois 
turned to the Instruction a la France to conclude its article devoted to 
Chaume’s placards, precisely with Naude’s idea that the Rose-Cross was 
only an imposture, which, for this reason, “had been unable to find a 
foothold for establishing itself in France.” 277

This research into the incident of the Rosicrucian placards considered 
as an episode in the reception of Paracelsus in France has thus revealed sev- 
eral important points. In France, as soon as 1621, there existed a trend 
hostile to the Rosicrucians within the Jesuit milieu. This hostility, which 
could be called endemic within the Company of Jesus if we only recall the 
condemnation of Adam Haslmayr in 1612, generated in France a quarrel 
which had begun in Germany between Father Roberti and the Paracelsian 
Goclenius, and it instantly adopted that quarrel’s characteristic marks, de- 
nouncing the Rosicrucians as guilty of diabolic magic and atheism. In the 
French religious milieu, Father Gaultier made himself the first echo of this 
in 1621, followed in the first part of 1623 by three theologians of whom 
the first was Mersenne, eager to fight against naturalism in all its forms 
and especially against that of the Paracelsians; the second, Jean Boucher, 
a former member of the Holy League and prior of the Sorbonne with ex- 
treme Roman tendencies, who took refuge in Tournai for having refused 
to acknowledge the legitimacy of Henry IV after the latter’s conversion;

294 Didier Kahn294 Didier Kahn

and the third, Father Garasse, scarcely less hostile toward naturalism than 
Mersenne, who saw in the Rosicrucian matter an additional means of dis- 
crediting Theophile by placing him in parallel with the diabolized threat of 
the brothers of the Rose-Cross.Most likely this very context inspired in the young Etienne Chaume the 
idea for his placards, for we do not see that Rosicrucians were in any other 
way an issue in France until shortly before the spring of 1623. And this 
context again certainly explains to a great extent the violent reactions 
the posters provoked. The coincidences of current events, about which 
Chaume had probably scarcely worried, led to a double association: on the 
one hand between the Rosicrucians and the heretical sect of the Alumbra- 
dos of Seville, on the other hand between the former and Theophile’s trial. 
The first of these associations resulted in the assimilation of the Rosicru- 
cians in public opinion with a sect of heretics; Garasse (or pamphleteers 
in his command) immediately exploited the second association in a ver- 
itable enterprise to demonize the Rosicrucians by means of two widely 
diffused pamphlets, the Effroyables Pactions and the Examen sur I’ln- 
connue et Nouvelle Caballe des Freres de la Croix Rosee. Whereas Theo- 
phile thought he saw in the Rosicrucian placards yet another trap set by 
Garasse’s party, Naude, watching the matter take on disturbing propor- 
tions, finally decided to take up his pen shortly after his friend Francois 
Ogier to fight Garasse in his turn, by casting disrepute upon La Doctrine 
curieuse, but also to stop a proliferation of pamphlets that threatened the 
social order, by denouncing the follies characteristic of occult sciences, 
prophecies, and superstitions. Naude sought at the same time to dis- 
possess the theologians of a quarrel, that of Paracelsianism, that was ex- 
tremely dangerous in their hands, for by adopting it as his own, with an 
almost professional hostility inherited from his medical education, he 
meant to settle it in the name of reason and not religion.

The Impact of the Incident of the Rosicrucian PlacardsThe Impact of the Incident of the Rosicrucian Placards

Etienne Chaume’s placards doubtless produced still other reactions in 
France after 1624. Not only did they belatedly give birth to a myth, or 
rather to a pair of myths, those of Descartes and Mersenne as Rosicrucian 
brothers, but we can even follow their impact in various forms in France 
until the eighteenth century.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 295The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 295

Twin Myths: Descartes and Mersenne as Rosicrucian Brothers 
We know the anecdote, reported by Adrien Baillet and repeated a hun- 
dred times, according to which Rene Descartes’s stay in Germany al- 
legedly earned for him, upon his return to Paris in 1623, the suspicion of 
belonging to the brothers of the Rose-Cross. Henri Gouhier carried out a 
critical analysis of Baillet’s story, accompanied by an equally critical in- 
spection of his sources, in 1 95 8, and subsequent research has not brought 
any new information concerning the incident to light. 278 Here we will 
limit ourselves to comparing Baillet’s account, clarified by Henri Gouhier, 
with the various known elements of the matter of the Parisian placards to 
determine whether Baillet’s story has any degree of plausibility. While do- 
ing this, we will guard against intervening on the no less controversial 
question of a possible influence of the Rosicrucian movement on Des- 
cartes’s thought, which extends far beyond the subject of the present 
chapter. Let us observe only that from a methodological point of view, in 
light of Carlos Gilly’s research, it appears extremely difficult to bring out 
any so-called “Rosicrucian” thought from a text other than the Fama and 
the Confessio, for how is one to favor, among the some 400 writings pro- 
voked by these two manifestos, this one or that one as representative of 
the thought of a Brotherhood that, as we well know, never really existed? 
The same remark applies to the Cbymische Hochzeit by Andreae, still 
cited rather recently, for example, by Paul Arnold: 279 Whatever the unde- 
niable literary value of this text may be, it is difficult to see why a domi- 
nating role of importance should be attributed to it since at the time, 
it scarcely exercised more than a very modest influence within German 
Rosicrucian literature and had absolutely no influence in France and En- 
gland until quite a long time later. As for the dreams of Descartes, is there 
really any need to seek a precise source for them when the seventeenth 
century abounds in dreams of this type, as Sylvain Matton has well dem- 
onstrated, and as is exemplarily shown in a dream, well studied by Rob- 
ert Halleux, that came to the young van Helmont, of which Descartes 
could not have been aware? 280To return to the anecdote Baillet reported, we know that according to 
him, Descartes, coming back from Germany, left the Spanish Low Coun- 
tries for France at the beginning of February 1622. Toward mid-March he 
was in Rennes, having decided to avoid Paris, since the city was not yet 
“free of the contagion with which it had been infected for two years.” Only

296 Didier Kahn

at the end of February in 1623 did he go there “to see his friends again, 
and to learn the news of the State and of literature.” Well informed con- 
cerning Germany’s affairs, Descartes was able to satisfy his friends on this 
point. 281

In Baillet’s mind, these friends could hardly have been other than My- 
dorge and Mersenne. According to Baillet, in 1613, when Descartes went 
to Paris for the first time, he made the acquaintance of Claude Mydorge, 
ten years his senior, and struck up a friendship with Mersenne, nearly eight 
years his senior, whom he had met at the school of La Fleche and who 
was called to Nevers in 1614. They apparently saw each other again only 
in 1623. 282 This chronology, rendered doubtful by the difference in age 
between Descartes and the other two, has been unanimously refuted 
by Charles Adam, Gustave Cohen, Cornelis de Waard, Robert Lenoble, 
Henri Gouhier, and Genevieve Rodis-Lewis: The relationship between 
Mersenne and Descartes in fact began only after his return from Germany, 
when he came to Paris in 1623. 283 Baillet continues his story:En revanche ils luy firent part d’une nouvelle qui leur causoit quelque chagrin, 
toute incroyable qu’elle leur parut. Ce n’etoit que depuis tres-peu de jours qu’on 
parloit a Paris des Confreres de la Rose-croix, dont il avoit fait des recherches in- 
utilement en Allemagne durant 1’hiver de Pan 1619: & l’on commengoit a faire 
courir le bruit qu’il s’etoit enrolle dans la confrerie. M. Descartes fut d’autant plus 
surpris de cette nouvelle, que la chose avoit peu de rapport au caractere de son es- 
prit, Sc a Pinclination qu’il avoit toujours eue, de considerer les Rose-croix comme 
des imposteurs ou des visionnaires. II jugea aisement que ce bruit desavantageux 
ne pouvoit etre que de Pinvention de quelque esprit mal intentionne, qui auroit 
forge cette fiction sur quelque-une des lettres qu’il en avoit ecrites a Paris trois ans 
auparavant, pour informer ses amis de l’opinion qu’on avoit des Rose-croix en 
Allemagne, & des peines qu’il avoit perdues a chercher quelqu’un de cette secte 
qu’il put connoitre. 284II s’etoit fait un changement considerable depuis P Allemagne jusqu’a Paris sur 
les sentimens que le Public avoit des Rose-croix. On peut dire qu’a la reserve de M. 
Descartes & d’un tres-petit nornbre d’esprits choisis, l’on etoit en 1619 assez fa- 
vorablement prevenu pour les Rose-croix par toute PAllemagne. Mais ayant eu le 
malheur de s’etre fait connoitre a Paris dans le meme terns que les Alumbrados, 
ou les Illuminez d’Espagne, leur reputation echoiia des P entree. On les tourna en 
ridicule, Sc on les qualifia du nom d’ Invisibles ; on mit leur histoire en romans; on 
en fit des farces a l’hotel de Bourgogne; & on en chantoit deja les chansons sur le 
Pont-neuf, quand M. Descartes arriva a Paris. II en avoit regu la premiere nouvelle 
par une affiche qu’il en avoit lue aux coins des rues Sc aux edifices publics, des son 
arrivee. L’affiche etoit de l’imagination de quelque bouffon, Sc elle etoit congue en 
ces termes. Nous Deputez du college principal des Freres de la Rose-croix, faisons 
sejour visible & invisible en cette ville. . . Nous montrons & enseignons sans livres

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 297

ni marques a parler toutes sortes de Langnes des pays ou nous kabitons. Sur la foy 
de cette affiche, plusieurs personnes serieuses eurent la facilite de croire qu’il etoit 
venu une troupe de ces Invisibles s’etablir a Paris. On publioit que de 36 deputez 
que le chef de leur societe avoit envoyez par toute I’Europe, il en etoit venu six en 
France; qu’apres avoir donne avis de leur arrivee par l’affiche que nous venons de 
rapporter, ils s’etoient logez au Marais du Temple; qu’ils avoient ensuite fait af- 
ficher un second placart portant ces termes. . . , 285Le hazard qui avoit fait concourir leur pretendue arrivee a Paris avec celle de M. 
Descartes, auroit produit de facheux effets pour sa reputation, s’il eut cherche a se 
cacher, ou s’il se fut retire en solitude au milieu de la ville, comme il avoit fait avant 
ses voyages. Mais il confondit avantageusement ceux qui vouloient se servir de 
cette conjoncture pour etablir leur calomnie. Il se rendit visible a tout le monde, & 
principalement a ses amis, qui ne voulurent point d’autre argument pour se per- 
suader qu’il n’ etoit pas des Confreres de la Rose-croix ou des Invisibles: & il se 
servit de la meme raison de leur invisibilite, pour s’excuser aupres des curieux, de 
n’en avoir pu decouvrir aucun en Allemagne.

Sa presence servit sur tout a calmer l’agitation ou etoit l’esprit du Pere Mersenne 
Minime son intime ami, que ce faux bruit avoit chagrine d’autant plus facilement, 
qu’il etoit moins dispose a croire que les Rose-croix fussent des Invisibles, ou des 
fruits de la chimere, apres ce que plusieurs Allemands & Robert Fludd Anglois 
avoient ecrit en leur faveur. Ce Pere ne put tenir secrete la joye qu’il avoit de revoir 
&c d’embrasser M. Descartes. 286

This is, it must be acknowledged, a case par excellence for applying the his- 
torical method specially implemented by Gabriel Naude in his Apologie 
pour tous les grands personnages qui ont este faussement soupgonnez de 
magie.If we establish a connection between Baillet’s story and the currently 
known facts concerning the incident of the Rosicrucian placards, the story 
gains elements of plausibility that it did not possess before. For example, 
it might initially appear astonishing that the suspicion of belonging to 
the Rosicrucian Brotherhood appeared to be so serious to the friends of 
Descartes. But in the climate of widespread mistrust that successively mo- 
tivated Etienne Chaume’s flight, Theophile de Viau’s mistrust and Gabriel 
Naude’s reaction, we scarcely have any difficulty in envisioning the danger 
of such a suspicion and its seriousness, for example, in the eyes of a man 
such as Mersenne.

It is unfortunate that a large part of Baillet’s story relies precisely upon 
the reaction of the “friends” of Descartes; yet we have just seen that these 
friends, in Baillet’s mind, could only have been Mydorge and Mersenne, 
and that this hypothesis proves to be inadmissible in the light of modern 
criticism. Thus a part of Baillet’s story crumbles.

298 Didier Kahn298 Didier Kahn

Nevertheless Baillet relies upon one source that he names: the work of 
Father Poisson, published in 1670. Henri Gouhier has checked this source 
and remarked that Poisson in no way mentioned the 1623 Parisian 
episode. He concluded with a great deal of plausibility that Baillet, “a 
scrupulous scholar and a suspect historian,” “does not know how to re- 
main silent when his documentation leaves lacunae”; as he desires to write 
“a biography without gaps,” he gathers information about the time and 
“shows, according to plausibility, what could have happened.” 287 Let us 
add to this that Baillet treated his information in a curious manner: Bas- 
ing a part of his story on the 1624 article in the Mercure Frangois, 2SS he 
distorted it by embellishing it with several details so as to ridicule the 
Parisian episode, by which he produced without realizing it a serious mis- 
interpretation; in a similar fashion, he retained from the Effroyables 
Pactions only certain colorful elements, eliminating any trace of witchcraft 
found in this pamphlet. In a word, Baillet handled his sources with the 
greatest of liberties.

With Mersenne’s trail having stopped short and the verification of Bail- 
let’s sources having ended only by making him highly suspect of fabrica- 
tion, very little remains of Baillet’s story, as we can see. One last question, 
however, remains: When exactly did Descartes come to Paris in 1623?Baillet is reasonably precise on this point. It appears to be established 
that the philosopher went to Paris a first time from the end of February to 
the beginning of May in 1623, that is to say, some time before the posting 
of Chaume’s placards. 289 Leaving Paris in early May, then passing through 
Rennes, Descartes stayed in Poitou from May to July. We know that on 
July 8, he signed there a sales contract with a gentleman of the region. 290 
Baillet asserts, or at the very least he supposes, that Descartes stayed in 
Poitou during all of July, for in his summary of the philosopher’s life, he 
writes: “Having returned to Paris in the month of August. . . .” 291 Des- 
cartes left for Italy in September 1623. 292 It therefore seems certain, as 
far as we can trust Baillet on this point — and he is unfortunately the only 
known source — that Descartes was in Paris again in August of 1623, at the 
very heart of what Frances Yates has called “the Rosicrucian scare.” In this 
case, however, we have the right to wonder what Baillet’s remark is worth 
concerning the plague that dissuaded Descartes from going to the capital 
the year before. In effect, on August 18, 1623, the epidemic was raging to 
the point that only a few magistrates had remained at their post to proceed

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 299

with the expeditious judgment of Theophile. In September it had scarcely 
calmed down: On the advice of the civil lieutenant, the start of the school 
year was delayed until November 5. 293 If Descartes was in Paris at that time 
(did he have to pass through there to go to Italy?), we know nothing of his 
reaction to Chaume’s posters, for the story of it Baillet gives, in spite of its 
praiseworthy attention to plausibility, appears to be based on no authen- 
tic elements and, because of this, is not admissible. We thus see with what 
prudence it should be considered, which unfortunately is not always the 
case. 294The most curious thing is that after this story by Baillet, used toward 
satirical ends starting the following year by Huet in the Nouveaux me- 
mories pour servir a Vhistoire du cartesianisme, 295 another serious author 
invented a similar anecdote about one of Descartes’s contemporaries. In 
1709, Father Thuillier, in his biography of Mersenne, related what follows 
with regard to a stay that Mersenne had made in the countryside shortly 
after the printing of the Quaestiones celeberrimae in Genesim (February 
1, 1623):

Meanwhile, the rumor of the brothers of the Rose-Cross being spread in the city 
gave certain idle and turbulent individuals the opportunity to denigrate Mersenne, 
whose writings had stung when he had drawn his pen against the atheists. They 
slandered him by presenting him as one of the members of this brotherhood, ar- 
guing above all from the fact that he had not been seen for a few days; as nothing 
about these Roses was in effect so notorious as their aptitude for becoming invis- 
ible at will, they persuaded themselves that the absence of Mersenne was a solid 
enough argument to convince people to pay attention to it. This tale, when 
Mersenne heard it upon his return, inflamed him and not without reason, and so 
that the authors might not peddle it with impunity, he came to avenge himself in a 
noble manner by the French work which he called L’Impiete des deistes, des athees 
et des plus subtils libertins de ce temps, combattue et renversee point par point par 
des arguments tires de la pbilosopbie et de la theologie. 196Thuillier thus attributed this highly improbable accusation, obviously 
inspired by Baillet, to Theophile’s clan. And under the influence of Baillet’s 
authority, not yet refuted by Flenri Gouhier, Robert Lenoble in turn was 
not afraid to echo the story in 1943. 297 Yet Lenoble had just shown what 
he thought of another fanciful explanation by Thuillier, put forward with 
regards to the composition of the Quaestiones celeberrimae in Genesim : 
According to Thuillier, this vast treatise could have had only one goal at 
the outset: the refutation of the arts of magic and divination. But Father 
Rangueil allegedly made Mersenne observe that this intent would force

300 Didier Kahn

him to make these doctrines known, at the risk of propagating the taste for 
them; Mersenne then supposedly decided to wrap them in “the scholarly ap- 
parel” of a biblical commentary. A simple comparison of dates made short 
work of this story, as Lenoble has shown. 298 Yet Thuillier’s intent is more 
or less the same concerning LImpiete des Deistes: If he is to be believed, 
Mersenne supposedly composed this new book to exact vengeance on the 
libertines who had tried to pass him off as a Rosicrucian. Unfortunately for 
Thuillier’s story, Mersenne obtained the permit to print the work as soon as 
June 12, 1623, which puts the date of its composition well before the post- 
ing of Chaume’s placards. 299 Furthermore, if I am not mistaken, L’Impiete 
des Deistes contains not a single word about the Rosicrucians.

This example, as well as that of Baillet’s untrue anecdote about Des- 
cartes, both products of a somewhat excessive rationalistic zeal, are still 
striking testimonies of the destiny of the 1623 episode in France. There 
were many others up to the time of the Enlightenment.

Some Aspects of the Fortunes of the Rose-Cross in France in the 
Seventeenth and Eighteenth CenturiesSome Aspects of the Fortunes of the Rose-Cross in France in the 
Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries

Is it possible that Etienne Chaume’s hoax contaminated Holland as well? 
According to the editors of Mersenne ’s Correspondence, on June 19, 
1625, the counsels of Holland, Zealand, and Frisia invited the magistrate 
from Haarlem to take precautions against the brothers of the Rose-Cross 
“who, having stayed in Paris, have now come to Holland.” 300 This infor- 
mation, cited without reference but borrowed from Gustave Cohen, came 
from a book by Willem Meijer that referred to the Historisch Verhael by 
Nicolaes Janszoon van Wassenaer, for the years 1624-25. 301 Although a 
brief examination of this book, analogous to the Mercure Francois, did 
not allow for the verification of Meijer’s assertion, the link established be- 
tween these Rosicrucians of Holland and those of Paris could nevertheless 
reveal a certain diffusion of the rumor.

Numerous manuscripts and various printed materials testify to the 
fortunes of Chaume’s posters, almost to the end of the Ancien Regime. 
Among the manuscripts, a copy of Van Helmont’s De Magnetica vul- 
nerum curatione, unfortunately difficult to date accurately, nevertheless 
attests to the interest aroused in France by the debate over the unguentum 
armarium. 302 A collection of handwritten extracts of German Rosicrucian 
treatises that presents the same difficulties in dating proves at least, if proof

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 301The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 301

is needed, that these texts of German origin circulated without difficulty 
in seventeenth-century France; 303 furthermore we are aware of the exis- 
tence of a French version of the Speculum Rhodostauroticum by The- 
ophilus Schweighart [Daniel Mogling], shown to Gabriel Naude in 
1623 by a Parisian bookseller of his acquaintance who had had it made for 
his own use. 304 Let us add to these points of interest the numerous copies 
of the anonymous Recherches sur les Rose-Croix, rashly attributed to 
Jacques Dupuy by Marion Kuntz following the catalogues of the Dupuy 
collection of the BNF, on the authority of one of these copies written in 
Jacques Dupuy’s own hand. 305 These Investigations, whose guiding prin- 
ciple seems to have been to accumulate as many data as possible (even if 
they were contradictory), are either contemporary with or come soon af- 
ter the posters of 1623. Indeed, they contain the following: “Ils ont promis 
par leurs affiches de se faire voir dans peu de jours, lors que le periode du 
temps qui leur a este prefix par leurs restaurateurs, seroit escheu; cepen- 
dant ils s’assemblent visiblement ou invisiblement par toute la terre, atti- 
rans a leur opinion les esprits les plus credules flattez par les promesses 
qu’ils font de l’immortalite, laquelle fait acquerir une perseverance aus 
labeurs, & une agitation continuelle cent ans durant, au bout desquels il 
est permis de se reveler.” 306

The accusation of naturalism, characteristic of the quarrels of the time 
against Paracelsianism and of Mersenne’s attacks against the alchemists is 
also found therein:The accusation of naturalism, characteristic of the quarrels of the time 
against Paracelsianism and of Mersenne’s attacks against the alchemists is 
also found therein:

Les auteurs qui ont escrit de cette societe disent qu’elle est aussi antienne que le 
monde. Qu’Adam, Seth, Noe, Abraham, Moyse, David, Salomon ont receu les ad- 
mirables secrets de leurs sciences par tradition de Pun a Pautre. Que c’est par une 
occulte intelligence des merveille[s] de la nature qu’Elie a este ravi; que saint Jean 
est immortel, & que Moyse parut a la transfiguration du Christ, porte dans le vuide 
de Pair, soustenu de son propre poids, quoi qu’il y parust revestu d’un corps vis- 
ible. Que depuis Pabsence de ce Christ plusieurs grands personages illuminez ont 
opere divers miracles parmi les hommes, qui pourtant n’estoient que purs effets de 
la nature bien comprise. Que les Arabbes sont demeurez possesseurs de ces sou- 
veraines vertus jusques en Pan 1413, auquel temps leur doctrine fut communiquee 
aus estrangers par ce moien [here folloivs a brief summary of the myth of Chris- 
tian Rosenkreutz, taken from the Fama Fraternitatis].

. . . Quand a la religion, il y a apparence qu’ils pretendent a un changement ou 
a la nullite: ils tirent a leur sens [that is, toward alchemy ] les passages de la Genese, 
de la Sapience & des Pseaumes de David, avec des conceptions si formelles qu’il 
semble que ces grands personnages n’ayent escrit que pour auctoriser leur croiance, 
en quoi ils s’aident fort de la racine des langues.

302 Didier Kahn

En fin ce sont gens tres dangereux, ingenieux en meschancete, grands seducteurs 
de peuples, perturbateurs d’Estat, & precurseurs d’une abominable secte; ce qui se 
voit par quelques articles de leur foy, & par leur serment de fidelite . 307One last manuscript, this one from the eighteenth century, is worth our 
attention. 308 It is by the philologist Jean Boivin de Villeneuve, keeper of the 
manuscripts of the King’s Library (1663-1726). Containing only thirteen 
pages, it is entitled Des Freres de la Roze Croix and bears at the end the 
date of April 24, 1717. “Ce sont ici,” Boivin writes, “les premieres reflex- 
ions qui me sont venues sur ces ecrits, a mesure que je les transcrivois. On 
en peut corriger quelques unes, on y en peut ajouter d’autres.” 309 After giv- 
ing the text of the poster as presented by Gabriel Naude, Boivin offers his 
opinion as follows (1): “Les freres de la Roze Croix ne sont autres que tous 
les corps des Pretendus Reformez. . . . Calvinistes, Lutheriens, Zvingliens 
&c. Toutes ces especes conviennent a briser les croix, &c les images. En cela 
elles se ressemblent: ils sont tous freres. Tous sont Brise-Croix. C’est ce que 
signifie Roze en hebreu ysn: & au feminin, a cause de croix, rwjn. Ainsi 
Roze-Croix, ou Rosea Crux, c’est Brise-Croix. C’est pour cela qu’il est 
ecrit par un z qui repond a la lettre hebrai'que y. Mr Naude a ainsi ecrit 
Roze, sur l’affiche qu’il a copiee.” Here we recognize the tradition of the 
Table chronograpbique by Father Gaultier, which reduced the Rosicru- 
cians to a Protestant sect. Boivin, commenting sentence by sentence upon 
the summary of the Fatna provided by Naude, gives according to this sur- 
prising key an interpretation of the origins of the Fraternity that is not de- 
void of ingenuity, by applying his theory in a systematic manner to the 
smallest details of the myth. His exegesis contains some gems. Here is 
his delectable manner of explaining the role of Paracelsus in the Rosicru- 
cian legend: “II y avoit [dans la grotte abritant le corps de Christian 
Rosenkreutz] des liures de diverses sortes, & entre autres le Dictionnaire 
des mots de Paracelse, c’est a dire, des mots pour rire: c’est ce que signifie 
ici Paracelse, mot hybride, moitie Grec &c moitie Hebreu: 7tapa ohp.” 310 
Erudition and fantasy are here in the service of apologetics and rational- 
ism: The supposed mysteries of the Rosicrucians, all related to the re- 
formed religion, are explained in a manner that deprives them of any 
magical or supernatural dimension.Among printed texts, we find traces of the episode of Chaume’s posters 
in all sorts of works published or composed between 1623 and 1771. At 
least one of Theophile’s friends, the poet Saint-Amant — who was more-

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France ( 1623-24 ) 303

over close to Mr. de Saint-Brice, the duke of Retz’s cousin, whom Jacques 
Le Pailleur himself had followed to Brittany toward the autumn of 1623 — 
left in his works a memory of the incident. He seems only to have retained 
the colorful aspect of the association between Rosicrucians and witches, 
within a satire composed between 1623 and 1629, aimed at an old 
woman:

Mais qu’est-ce-cy mes camarades?

Voicy d’estranges algarades!

On nous en bailie, on nous en vent,

Nous ne bernons plus que du vent,

Et le Demon qui la possede 
Mieux qu’il ne fit jamais Salcede,

La rendant ainsi que vous trois 
De l’ordre de la Rose-crois,

Droit aux Enfers l’a transportee,

Pour estre si bien tourmentee,

Qu’au prix d’elle les Gaufridis 
Penseront estre en Paradis . 311

Although in 1627 Garasse’s friend Pierre de Lancre limited himself to re- 
producing the article of the Mercure Frangois in his work Du Sortilege, oil 
il est traite, s’il est plus expedient de supprimer et tenir sous silence les 
abominations et malefices des sorciers, que de les publier et manifester, 31 2 
other authors betrayed here and there some more expressive recollections 
of the poster incident. Thus in 1629, obviously with reference to the Par- 
isian incident, Pierre Gassendi ironically mentioned “these fortunate 
crucirose brothers who, as if protected by the ring of Gyges, fly around us, 
always invisible,” with an untranslatable play on words involving the two 
possible meanings of invisi: “invisible” or “hateful.” 313A few years later, the 199th conference of Theophraste Renaudot’s 
Bureau d’Adresse (May 16, 1639) dealt with The Brothers of the Rose- 
Cross. 314 Renaudot began the conference by justifying the fact that he dis- 
played here “un titre dont la profession estoit criminelle en cette ville il n’y 
a pas long temps: me souvenant que quelques-uns furent emprisonnez 
pour s’estre vantez d’estre de cette societe, & dits invisibles.” Then he 
listed, according to some of the books published by the Rosicrucians, all 
of the secret societies that had preceded them since Antiquity, taking up in 
this context the entire tradition of the prisca theologia. The second speaker 
summarized the Rosicrucian myth according to the Symbola Aureae Men- 
sae by Maier. The third — probably a member of the Faculty of Medicine

304 Didier Kahn

in Paris — mainly gave his verdict against Paracelsus’s medicine, which he 
considered to be the Rosicrucians’ most noticeable characteristic, and par- 
ticularly against antimony, which he designated in an allusive yet clear 
manner. 315 Here is the speech of the fourth speaker:Le 4 C , qui se professoit ouvertement estre Pun des freres de cette societe dist, Que 
le Chevalier Anglois Flud n’a pas mauvaise grace d’interpreter ces trois lettres F 
fide, R religione, C charitate: la commune opinion toutesfois a prevalu, qui veut 
qu’elle[s] signifient, Fratres Roseae Crucis. Mais aucune de ces interpretations ne 
peut passer pour grand secret. C’est pourquoi il en faut cercher un autre: dans 
lequel examen nous trouverons que la croix est veritablement de la partie, mais en 
un autre sens; qui est que dans cette + le mot LUX se trouve: d’ou l’on croid que 
ces freres ont pris en Espagne le mot d’llluminez. Mais ozeroy-je passer outre sans 
rompre le seau celeste, mettre Diane tout a nud, & la clef du cabinet de la nature 
entre les mains du vulgaire? Oiiy, puisque les sages nous Pont promis au declin des 
siecles ou nous sommes. La rosee (qui est le plus puissant dissolvant de l’or entre 
les corps naturels & non corrosifs) n’est autre chose que cette lumiere espoissie & 
rendue corporelle: laquelle estant ciiite & digeree artistement par un temps con- 
venable, en son propre vaisseau, est le vray menstrue du dragon roux; c’est a dire 
de l’or, veritable matiere des Philosophes. Duquel secret cette societe ayant voulu 
laisser a la posterite dans son nom des marques qui ne peussent estre effacees par 
le temps, a retenu celui des freres de la Rozee ciiite. C’est pourquoi la benediction 
de Jacob a Esau ne contenoit que ces deux matieres, de Rore coeli & pinguedine 
terrae det tibi Deus. Au reste ce qu’on impute a cette compagnie d’estre invisible, 
s’entend de ce qu’elle n’a pas des marques visibles, & qui la distinguent des autres, 
comme le reste des societez, telles que sont les diverses couleurs & fagons d’habits; 
mais n’est conniie & visible qu’a ceux de la societe mesmes. 316The fifth lecturer responded to this discourse by arguing for a moderate 
position, open to new ideas, most notably in the subject of medicine, but 
resolutely hostile to an excessive enthusiasm that would make the Rosi- 
crucians “the only wise men & the darlings of nature”: “De fait, quelle ap- 
parence qu’une matiere si volage que la rozee fust la medecine de ces trois 
corps si differens [vegetables, animals, and minerals ]? & pourquoi elle 
plustost que la pluye; voire plustost que la manne, qui est cette rozee toute 
ciiite par la nature ? Ces freres n’ont done rien de recommandable en eux 
que l’amour qu’ils professent de sagesse, & la recherche des secrets de la 
nature, que nous recherchons a la verite trop negligemment.” But having 
produced nothing until present except their promises, the brothers of the 
Rose-Cross had scarcely given any reasons for being taken seriously, the 
same as the “neant de la pierre Philosophale.” 317

One month later (June 20, 1639), the 203rd conference had as its theme: 
Qu’est-ce qu’a voulu entendre Paracelse par le livre Mi' 318 This title be-

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France ( 1623-24 ) 305

trayed an error on the part of Theophraste Renaudot: In fact Paracelsus 
was not the one who mentioned the Liber M., but rather it was the text of 
the Lama Fraternitatis, which portrayed Christian Rosenkreutz as so rapid 
in his progress in Arabic at Damcar that after one year he even found him- 
self able to translate into Latin the Liber M. As for this Liber M. (habit- 
ually understood as the Liber Mundi, “Book of the World”), the Lama 
specified however that in it Paracelsus “was able to inflame and sharpen 
his genius.” 319 Renaudot was therefore not entirely mistaken; his error 
showed above all to what degree the Rosicrucians found themselves, in the 
minds of Renaudot and his contemporaries, bound up with and insepara- 
ble from Paracelsianism.Among the speakers of this session, we find the alleged Rosicrucian of 
the May 16 meeting. Once again he was the fourth speaker:

Le 4 e dist, Que ce livre M ne sgauroit estre celui du Monde, puisque le Monde 
ne peut estre tourne d’Arabe en Latin, estant leu egalement de tous peuples. . . . 
Que s’il est permis de parler en figure: je trouve bien plus d’apparence a dire, que 
ce livre n’est autre chose qu’une figure ou charactere talismanique grave en un ca- 
chet, dont les freres de la Rose-croix se servent pour s’entreconnoistre, appellee le 
livre M; pource qu’elle represente une M croizee avec quelques autres lettres, de la 
combination desquelles resulte le mistere du grand oeuvre: qui designe sa matiere, 
son vaisseau, son feu, & ses autres circonstances: La premiere desquelles est la 
rosee, le vrai menstriie, ou dissolvant du dragon roux, qui est l’or. Bref, dans cette 
figure sont comprises tant de choses, par la diverse combination des lettres qui y 
sont representees, qu’elle merite bien d’estre appellee un livre. 320

But the following speaker mocked him:

Le cinquiesme dist, Que si c’estoit la le secret des freres de la Rose-croix, qu’ils 
estoient invisibles en toutes leurs procedeures: pource qu’il ne se void point la de 
secret, mais force absurditez . . . puis que dans ces trois lettres sic, diversement 
couppees & appliquees les unes aux autres, vous y rencontrez non seulement 
toutes les lettres mais encor par leur combination, tous les livres & toutes les 
choses qui sont au monde. Ou il n’y a pas plus d’industrie qu’a faire entonner 
toutes sortes de notes a un flageolet. . . . Disons done plustost . . . qu’au lieu que 
nous avons estime que cette M signifiast Mons, nous voyons maintenant qu’elle ne 
signifie rien davantage que Mus. 321Of course, these two conferences must be put into context, as they are 
quantitatively negligible in the midst of all those held in the setting of the 
Bureau d’Adresse between 1633 and 1642; Howard Solomon indicates, 
however, that among the 460 subjects debated therein, the session devoted 
to the Rosicrucians was among only three to which eight pages were de- 
voted, instead of the four pages usually reserved for each theme. 322

306 Didier Kahn

One would scarcely have to look very long before discovering in France 
all sorts of allusions to the Rosicrucians in the years 1640 to 1660. We 
know, for example, that the libertine Nicolas Le Gras cherished the dream, 
very close to the ideal set out in the Fama Fraternitatis, of “founding a sect 
or an order composed only of doctors and which, by distributing its care 
to all the nations of the world, would restore the state of nature to entire 
humankind.” 323 And, without saying anything about the attacks coming 
from La Mothe Le Vayer, who was visibly inspired by Naude and Gas- 
sendi, we find precise allusions to the episode of Chaume’s placards in 
Father Le Moyne, who, in 1640, in his Feintures morales, betrayed clear 
recollections of the quarrels of 1623-25, detecting in the “Secte des Esprits 
Forts” the worthy successors of the “Cabala of those of the Rose.” 324 Var- 
ious works of ecclesiastical history from the same time preserve the mem- 
ory of the Parisian incident of 1623. Those of the Feuillant monk Pierre 
Guillebaud (1647) and of Scipion Dupleix (1648) have already been men- 
tioned: They contributed, probably along with others that a new inves- 
tigation would easily unearth, to saving the event from oblivion (while 
distorting it) for it is clear that the most read pages of these books were 
those that dealt with the seventeenth century.In a manner that is equally close to that of the Parisian posters, here is 
how, in Les Estats et Empires de la Lune, the Genius of Socrates recounted 
his travels in Europe to Cyrano de Bergerac: “J’y vis Agrippa, l’abbe Tri- 
teme, le docteur Fauste, La Brosse, Coesar, et une certeine caballe de gens 
que le vulgaire a connus sous le nom de chevaliers de la Rose Croix, a qui 
j’enseigne quantite de soupplesses et de secrets naturels, qui sans doute les 
auront faict passer chez le peuple pour de grans magiciens.” 325 In this typ- 
ically libertine passage that strips magic of any supernatural traces, the as- 
sociation between the Rosicrucians and magic, as well as the mention of 
Guy de La Brosse, a friend of Theophile, refer directly to the Parisian 
episode of 1623. Let us note in passing that a close association between 
alchemy and witchcraft is found in Cyrano in his letter “On Behalf of 
Witches.” 326 But the context, which is entirely literary, is that of a brilliant 
stylistic exercise: Cyrano moreover knew full well how to establish the di- 
vision between these two disciplines, as is shown not only in the other in- 
stances of alchemical themes in his work, 327 but also in the letter “Against 
Witches,” which is symmetrical to the preceding one but of an entirely dif- 
ferent nature. In that letter, the author categorically denies the supernatu-

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France ( 1623-24 ) 307

ral effects attributed to the devil and to the supposed witches and the pos- 
sessed. 328The Rosicrucian Hoax in France ( 1623-24 ) 307

ral effects attributed to the devil and to the supposed witches and the pos- 
sessed. 328

The quarrel between Fludd, Mersenne, and Gassendi equally contrib- 
uted to the fortunes of the Brothers of the Rose-Cross in France. In 
1662, the authors of the Logique de Port-Royal, above all by basing them- 
selves on Gassendi’s examination of Fludd’s philosophy, in a long tirade 
against unintelligible style became indignant at seeing “appliquer ce que 
l’Ecriture dit des vrais Chretiens, qu’ils sont la race choisie, ... a la 
chimerique confrerie des Rosecrois, qui sont selon eux, des Sages qui sont 
parvenus a l’immortalite bienheureuse, ayant trouve le moyen par la pierre 
philosophale de fixer leur ame dans leurs corps, d’autant, disent-ils, qu’il 
n’y a point de corps plus fixe & plus incorruptible que l’or.” 329 Arnauld and 
Nicole thus took up as their own the type of criticism formulated by 
Mersenne against certain alchemists, starting with the Quaestiones cele- 
berrimae in Genesim. But whereas the context of the Quaestiones situated 
this attack in the wake of Mersenne’s anti-Paracelsian polemic, Arnauld 
and Nicole came, by means of Gassendi, to apply it more specifically to the 
brothers of the Rose-Cross.This constant, albeit diffuse, presence of the Rosicrucian myth in French 
literature throughout the seventeenth century explains why in 1681, 
Thomas Corneille, Donneau de Vise, and perhaps Fontenelle based their 
comedy The Philosophers’ Stone in part on the Rosicrucian Fraternity. 
This play was inscribed in the sinister context of the “Affaire des Poisons” 
(1679-82), in which more than 400 people from every level of society, 
from the lowest to the highest, were implicated in all sorts of criminal acts: 
counterfeiting, fraud, abortion, infanticide, poisoning, and possible plots 
against the king’s life, as well as kidnappings and sacrifices of children, 
trade in human blood, Satanism, and celebrations of black mass. The large 
majority of these acts were hidden behind practices of a considerably more 
innocent appearance: particularly divination, alchemy, and searches for 
hidden treasures. The principal defendants who had to answer to the in- 
terrogations cited these very pretexts, for as we can imagine, the creation 
of poisons and abortifacient powders scarcely necessitated equipment dif- 
ferent from that of an alchemist. 330 In November 1679, the police lieu- 
tenant La Reynie, wishing to ruin the Parisians’ belief in fortune-tellers, or, 
more probably, concerned with interposing “between the public and the 
sordid reality” “the painted canvases, the palettes, the gold and the lights

308 D idler Kahn308 D idler Kahn

of enchantment,” ordered two authors who were in vogue, Thomas 
Corneille and Donneau de Vise, to create a spectacular play entitled La 
Devineresse ou les Faux Enchantements. De Vise probably accepted all the 
more easily since his own brother had lost two successive wives in the 
Affaire des Poisons. 331 This play had a run of five months. Thus the same 
team was ready to have another go in February 1681, perhaps assisted by 
Fontenelle on this occasion. This play was La Pierre philosophale, which 
met with resounding failure. 332 This failure can be explained in various 
ways: Perhaps the play was too scholarly, for had it not incorporated too 
many allusions that were inaccessible to the general public, leaving them 
cold while amusing only the connoisseurs ? After the failure of the first two 
performances, its costly luxuriousness probably precluded the possibility 
of cherishing any hope that the public might be awakened, and thus the 
play had to be abandoned immediately. Finally, perhaps the play came at a 
time when the Affaire des Poisons, then stagnant but having already lasted 
for two years, had exhausted and disgusted an audience that was hence- 
forth overwhelmed by horrors. 333 Yet the authors had neglected nothing: 
machines, a score by Marc-Antoine Charpentier; all the enchantments of 
the Comte de Gabalis (a great success at the bookstores), which was 
adapted to the theater for the first time; and the colorful aspect of the 
brothers of the Rose-Cross. 334The authors of La Pierre philosophale referred directly to the 1623 
episode in the play. In the preface to the reader, they cited in turn Naude, 
then Garasse, then Scipion Dupleix. 335 On the other hand, they were care- 
ful not to exploit the association between Rosicrucians and witchcraft pre- 
sented by the Effroyables Pactions, probably trying to create above all an 
effect of ridicule and not to feed the audience’s fears, which current events 
already provoked and justified only too much. Thus, at the very time in 
which this association was taking shape in a sinister way, the authors, who 
were in charge of amusing the general public, eliminated it entirely and 
substituted in its place the marvelous enchantment of elementary spirits 
borrowed from the Comte de Gabalis, although the source of this fantas- 
tic element — the De Nymphis by Paracelsus — would have possessed 
enough subversive energy in the beginning of the seventeenth century to 
provoke accusations of demonic magic against those who made use of it.

It would be wrong to think that 1681 brought an end to this subversive 
potential thanks to the triumph of reason. To do so we would have to for-

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 309It would be wrong to think that 1681 brought an end to this subversive 
potential thanks to the triumph of reason. To do so we would have to for-

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 309

get the fact that individuals of every social class ran the risk, at exactly the 
same time, of being burned alive for having taken part in bloody black 
masses, to which reason had failed to put a stop. If the enchantments of el- 
ementary spirits could take on a fairylike character at this point in time, it 
was more probably due to their erudite nature. This type of magic, which 
had become too scholarly to cause worry, was the concern of another time, 
of the dusty world of learned men that Les Provinciales had, not so long 
before, contributed to discrediting with so much brilliance, imposing on 
the public the taste for common sense against an erudition that was ac- 
cused of pedantry and left to the specialists alone: The black masses did 
not demand so much knowledge. Paradoxically, this scholarly dimension 
both permitted the plot of the Comte de Gabalis to be brought to the stage 
and at the same time contributed to the failure of the play.Ten years later, in 1691, an anonymous collection on alchemy published 
in Paris, the Traitez du Cosmopolite Nouvellement decouverts, an- 
nounced with a great uproar the existence of a supposed society of “un- 
known Philosophers,” obviously inspired by the Rosicrucian myth. 336 This 
is probably the society that the physician Francois Alary was thinking of 
some time later, when in the preface of one of his anonymous works, Le 
Texte d’Alchymie, et le Songe-verd, he openly displayed his submission to 
the “Brothers of the true Rose-Cross”: “Mais comme ce n’est que par la 
Croix que doivent etre eprouvez les veritables Fideles, c’est a vous, Freres 
de la vraye Rose-Croix, qui possedez tous les tresors du Monde, c’est a 
vous a qui j’ai recours. Je me soumets entierement a vos pieux & sages con- 
seils. . . . Tout est a vous, tout vient de vous, tout retournera done a vous. 
Recevez (Messieurs) cet Acte de soumission que je vous fais aujourd’hui. 337 
Furthermore, it is this author’s double fascination with Paracelsus and 
with the Rosicrucian myth that allowed for his recent identification. 338 
Not very common in his time, at least in France, this fascination is in fact 
as noticeable in another one of his anonymous works as in a prophecy 
published under his own name in Paris in 1701, which moreover earned 
him some difficulties with the government: the Prophetie du Comte Bom- 
bast Chevalier de la Rose-Croix, Neveu de Tbeopbraste Paracelse, Publiee 
en I’annee 1609. Sur la Naissance miraculeuse de Louis Le Grand. Here 
the connection to the incident of Chaume’s placards is entirely lost: There 
remains only the original solidarity between the figure of Paracelsus and 
the Rosicrucian myth.

310 Didier Kahn310 Didier Kahn

The other anonymous work by Alary was none other than Le Parnasse 
assiege on La Guerre declaree entre les Philosophes Anciens & Modernes, 
published in Lyon in 1697. The goal of this curious alchemical contribu- 
tion to the quarrel of the ancients and the moderns was to “demonstrate 
the reality of the science of Hermes, & the truth of the medicine of Paracel- 
sus.” 339 Alary imagined that after the death of Apollo, the master of Par- 
nassus, “ce fut a qui de toutes les sectes des Philosophes, y etabliroit la 
premiere le trone de sa reputation.” But since Parnassus, surrounded by 
thick clouds, was turning out to be impregnable, the siege was quickly de- 
generating into a civil war in which the majority of schools were con- 
fronting one another. Only the Gassendists and the Cartesians succeeded 
in advancing. Aristotle then sent the greatest orators of Antiquity to exhort 
the “peuple Philosophique” to make peace. Once this peace was obtained, 
a scout who had been sent to Parnassus on reconnaissance came back in 
the company of four spies, who informed the attackers about the mysteri- 
ous enemies who were occupying and defending Parnassus. Having ex- 
plained that only the philosophers from the school of Hermes knew how 
to dissipate the fog and reach the summit, the spies were questioned con- 
cerning the fortifications: one of them “responded wisely that the true 
mark of the perspicacity of Hermes consisted only of the three letters 
F.R.C. painted on the banners that his officers bore”: 340 Thus the disciples 
of Hermes who were occupying and defending the summit of Parnassus 
were none other than the brothers of the Rose-Cross. Here again, we are 
quite far from the 1623 episode.A last survival of this period is found considerably later and in a rather 
unexpected place: in a work directly inspired by the Faculty of Medicine 
of Paris, the Dictioimaire historique de la medecine ancienne et moderne 
by Eloy (1778), under the entry “Croix (Les Freres de la Rose ).” 341 Eloy 
gave an extremely critical brief review of the fraternity, including it only 
because of its links with medicine, which shows that the Faculty, even at 
the very end of the eighteenth century, had not renounced its hostile posi- 
tion toward any manifestation of Paracelsian doctrines.

As we can see from the number and variety of the works discussed in this 
section, the impact of the incident of 1623 was on the whole rather last- 
ing and contributed to the ongoing presence of the Rosicrucian myth in 
French literature in a more or less continuous manner until the end of the 
eighteenth century, in forms both favorable and unfavorable to the Rosi- 
crucian Fraternity, in recollections of Theophile’s trial, in Mersenne’s or

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 311

the Faculty of Medicine’s anti-Paracelsianism, or even in the libertine and 
naturalistic forms that Mersenne himself had fought. As for the anecdote 
invented by Baillet, it has probably been, from 1623 on, one of the most 
definite means of transmitting the recollection of Chaume’s posters to the 
scholars up to our time.This hoax involving the Rosicrucian placards posted on the streets of Paris 
in the summer of 1623, conceived merely as a piece of adolescent humor, but 
taking place in a context loaded with polemics, must be seen as the very first 
manifestation of the association, typical of those years, between Paracel- 
sianism and libertinism. The hunt for libertines that began when Vanini was 
burned at the stake (1619) did not intensify until Theophile de Viau’s trial: 
Only then did religious authorities in France notice to what extent Paracel- 
sianism was an objective ally of irreligion and attack it as such. These attacks 
reached their highest point in 1625: Alchemy and Paracelsianism — refuted 
by Naude in his Apologie, partially condemned by Father Mersenne in La 
Verite des sciences for their impiety and the obscurity of their language, 
censured by the Sorbonne in a ruling pronounced against Khunrath’s Am- 
phitheatrum sapientiae aeternae, and attacked by the Inquisition in the pro- 
ceedings started against Jean Baptiste van Helmont — then encountered a 
crisis that has not yet been analyzed in depth, the stakes and consequences 
of which it would be beneficial to measure. 342 The religious issue, deferred 
until then for all sorts of reasons, played a dominating role in this, and the 
Rosicrucian incident of 1623 was its first symptom.

Acknowledgment

This chapter synthesizes several portions of my doctoral dissertation, 
“Paracelsisme et alchimie en France a la fin de la Renaissance (1567- 
1625),” Universite de Paris IV, 1998, to be published in a revised form by 
Droz Editions (Geneva) in 2002. My sincere thanks go to the editors of 
this volume, who had the present chapter translated, and to the copy- 
editor for his skill and effort in preparing the final version.

Notes

This chapter was translated by Laura Dennis-Bay.Notes

This chapter was translated by Laura Dennis-Bay.

1. See Carlos Gilly, Cimelia Rhodostaurotica : Die Rosenkreuzer im Spiegel der 
zwischen 1610 nnd 1660 entstandenen Handschriften und Dmcke. Ausstellung 
der Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica Amsterdam and der Herzog August

312 Didier Kahn

Bibliothek Wolfenbiittel. 2. verbesserte Auflage (Amsterdam: In de Pelikaan, 
1995), 7. On the Rose-Cross in France, see especially Paul Arnold, Histoire des 
Rose-Croix et les origines de la Franc-Magonnerie (Paris: Mercure de France, 
1955), 7-20. Other bibliographic indications will be found below.

2. I quote the summary of Roland Edighoffer, Rose-Croix et societe ideale selon 
Johann Valentin Andreae, 2 vols. (Neuilly-sur-Seine: Arma Artis, 1982-87), 1:221.

3. Frances A. Yates, The Rosicrucian Enlightenment (London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, 1972; reissued, London-New York: ARK Paperbacks, 1986), 221 
(French translation, La Lumiere des Rose-Croix: L’illuminisme rosicmcien [Paris: 
CELT, 1978; re-ed. Paris: Retz, 1985], 252). The French translation is weighed 
down by mistranslations and approximations, each one more absurd than the 
next.

4. Carlos Gilly has recently observed that in 1786, J. S. Semler had also proposed 
the idea, sustained by Yates and already shared by certain of Andreae’s contempo- 
raries, Lutheran as well as Catholic, of complicity between the Calvinists and the 
Rosicrucian movement. Cf. Gilly, Cimelia Rhodostaurotica, 75-76; also 
“ Theophrastia Sancta: Der Paracelsismus als Religion im Streit mit den offiziellen 
Kirchen,” in J. Telle, ed., Analecta Paracelsica: Studien zum Nachleben Theophrast 
von Hohenheims im deutschen Kulturgebiet der friihen Neuzeit, Heidelberger Stu- 
dien zur Naturkunde der friihen Neuzeit, no. 4 (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 
1994), 425-88, at 469 and n. 97.

5. Edighoffer, Rose-Croix et societe ideale, 1:222.5. Edighoffer, Rose-Croix et societe ideale, 1:222.

6. On the thesis of John Warwick Montgomery (Cross and Crucible: Johann 
Valentin Andreae (1585-1654), Phoenix of the Theologians, 2 vols. [La Haye: 
Martin Nijhoff, 1973]), stained by an “apologetic zeal” that compels its author to 
“put on Manichean glasses,” see the criticism of R. Edighoffer, Rose-Croix et so- 
ciete ideale, 1:223 (see also, for example, 190). It is better to say nothing about a 
more recent article of Montgomery’s (“The World-View of Johann Valentin An- 
dreae,” in Das Erbe des Christian Rosenkreuz: Vortr'dge gehalten anlafUich des 
Amsterdamer Symposiums 18-20 November 1986 [Amsterdam: In de Pelikaan, 
1988], 152-69).

7. Gilly, Cimelia Rhodostaurotica, 22 and 74.

8. Ibid., 16-11 . Gilly makes clear (77) that the success of the Rosicrucian mani- 
festos was due not only to their mythical attire (without which they could have pro- 
voked only scant interest) but also and above all to the fact that they had presented 
the Fraternity as already formed and that they had invited scholars and princes of 
the time to respond through the channels of printed matter.

9. On the exact content of this philosophy, see the quotations from the original 
text of the Fama Fraternatis as Gilly has collected them, ibid., 77.

10. Ibid., 78-79 and 45-47 on Tobias Hess. On the evolution of Christoph 
Besold, cf. Carlos Gilly, “Iter Rosicrucianum: Auf der Suche nach unbekannten 
Quellen der friihen Rosenkreuzer,” in Die Erbe des Christian Rosenkreuz, 63-89, 
at 72.

11. Gilly, Cimelia Rhodostaurotica, 82; cf. Edighoffer, Rose-Croix et societe 
ideale, 1:230-31. Let us remember that the Chymische Hochzeit, composed in

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 313

German, never had a Latin translation. It was translated only into English in 1690 
and into French not before 1928.

12. Gilly, Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 1.

13. Ibid., 29.German, never had a Latin translation. It was translated only into English in 1690 
and into French not before 1928.

12. Gilly, Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 1.

13. Ibid., 29.

14. Ibid., 29-31. On the Tyrolian Adam Haslmayr (1562-1630), organist, school- 
master, and an enthusiastic Paracelsian, see Carlos Gilly, Adam Haslmayr: Der er- 
ste Verkiinder der Manifeste de Rosenkreuzer, Texts and Studies published by the 
Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica, no. 5 (Amsterdam: In de Pelikaan, 1994) to 
be corrected by Gilly, Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 30, as to his date of birth.

15. Gilly, Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 29.

16. Ibid., 40-41.

17. Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 18, 48, and 187-201; see also his “Tbeophrastia 
Sancta. ”

18. Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 89; Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 36. On August von 
Anhalt, see also Julian Paulus, “Alchemie und Paracelsismus um 1600: Siebzig 
Portrats,” in Telle, Analecta Paracelsica, 335-406, at 343-44.

19. Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 125-26.

20. Ibid., 127-28, 123, 134-36. Gilly found Haslmayr’s text, which previously 
could not be located, in Weimar and reproduced it in facsimile; ibid., 69-80 
(A. Haslmayr, Antwort An die lobwiirdige Bruderscbafft der Theosophen von 
RosenCreutz N. N. vom Adam Haselmayr Archiducalem Alumnum, Notarium 
sen Judicem ordinarium Caesareum, der zeyten zum beyligen Creutz Dorflein bey 
Hall in Tyroll wohnende. Ad Famam Fraternitatis Einfeltigist geantwortet. Anno 
1612 [s.l. [Halle ?], s.n.e. [Joachim Krusicke ?], 1612]); cf. Gilly, Adam Hasl- 
mayr, 22.

21. Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 32-67; Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 32-33.21. Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 32-67; Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 32-33.

22. Quoted by Gilly, Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 34: “Was aber fur ein Ruehloi?, 
whuestes, ungeheurigs, verzweifeltes, Sodomitisches Leben auf den Galern, von 
den Welschen Gefangnen sonderlich, ist gefhiert worden, ist daher wegen der 
keuschen ohren nicht zu schreiben. . . . und ist All mein Schrifft, darumb ihr mich 
verdambt, nichts anders, auf kein andern weg nicht gemeint, als dal? ich mich einen 
armen Theophrastischen Christen bekenne.”

23. Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 59-60.

24. Ibid., 98-99; Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 38. On Figulus (Benedikt Topfer), see 
also Joachim Telle, “Benedictus Figulus: Zu Leben und Werk eines deutschen 
Paracelsisten,” Medizinhistorisches Journal, 22 (1987): 303-26; Paulus, “Alchemie 
und Paracelsismus um 1600,” 352-54.

25. Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 142-43; Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 70.

26. Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 84 (facsimile of the title page of the editio princeps of 
the Fama ): “Aucb einer kurtzen Responsion, von dem Herrn Haselmeyer gestel- 
let / welch er dejlwegen von den Jesuitern ist gefanglich eingezogen / und auff eine 
Galleren geschmiedet. ”

27. Gilly, Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 70.

314 Didier Kahn

28. Gilly, “Iter Rosicrucianum, ” 82; Adam Haslmayr, 99; Cimelia Rhodostaurot- 
ica, 38 and 70.

29. Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 143-45 and 150, n. 32.

30. Ibid., 85-90; Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 43 and 75-76.29. Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 143-45 and 150, n. 32.

30. Ibid., 85-90; Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 43 and 75-76.

31. Gilly, “Tbeopbrastia Sancta,” 469-72. There is insufficient space here to sum- 
marize the contributions of other recent works on some of the figures traditionally 
attached to the Rosicrucian movement. See among others Karin Figala and 
Ulrich Neumann, “A propos de Michel Maier: quelques decouvertes bio- 
bibliographiques,” in D. Kahn and S. Matton, eds., Alcbimie: art, histoire et mythes: 
Actes du I" colloque international de la Societe d’Etude de I’Histoire de V Alcbimie 
(Paris-Milan: S.E.H.A.-ARCHE, 1995), 651-64; Ulrich Neumann, “Mogling” 
in Traugott Bautz, ed., Biograpbiscb-Bibliograpbisches Kirchenlexikon, vol. 5 
(Herzberg: 1993), col. 1582-84, and in the Neue Deutsche Biographie, vol. 17 
(Munich: C. H. Beck, 1994), 613-14; idem, “Olim, da die Rosen Creutzerey noch 
florirt, Theophilus Scbweigbart genant: Wilhelm Schickards Freund und Briefpart- 
ner Daniel Mogling (1596-1635),” in Friedrich Seek, ed., Zum 400. Geburtstag 
von Wilhelm Scbickard. Zweites Tiibinger Schickard-Symposion 25. bis 27. Juni 
1992, Contubernium: Tiibinger Beitrage zur Universitats- und Wissenschafts- 
geschichte, no. 41 (Sigmaringen: Jan Thorbecke Verlag, 1995), 93-115.

32. On this point see also Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 89.

33. Cf. Gilly, Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 156-157, no. 278.

34. Quoted by Gilly, “Tbeopbrastia Sancta,” 471, n. 99. See also his Adam 
Haslmayr, 109 and 114-15, notes 14-19. Gilly emphasizes in passing that this trial 
tarnishes somewhat the brilliant picture of the “hermetic patronage” of Moritz 
von Hessen-Kassel, far more interested in the possible practical alchemical success 
of the Rosicrucians than in their spiritual aspirations. See Bruce T. Moran, The Al- 
chemical World of the German Court: Occult Philosophy and Chemical Medicine 
in the Circle of Moritz of Hessen (1572-1632), Sudhoffs Archiv, Beiheft 29 
(Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1991).35. Quoted by Gabriel Naude, Instruction a la France sur la verite de I’histoire des 
Freres de la Roze-Croix (Paris: Francois Julliot, 1623; reprinted, Paris: Gutenberg 
Reprint, 1979), 27. Naude’s text bears “d’erreur de mort”; I am correcting it: see 
below, note 144. Nearly all the sources studied here have already been inventoried 
by Rene Pintard, Le Libertinage erudit dans la premiere moitie du XVIIe siecle 
(1943, re-ed. and extended, Geneva-Paris: Slatkine, 1983), 584-85 (n. 4 on 48).

36. Naude, Instruction a la France, 26.

37. Peter Paul Rubens, Correspondance de Rubens et documents epistolaires con- 
cernant sa vie et ses oeuvres, ed. Max Rooses and Ch. Ruelens, vol. 3, Du 27 juil- 
let 1622 au 22 octobre 1626 (Anvers: Jos. Maes, 1900), 224. The original text is 
in Italian. The correspondence between Peiresc and Rubens concerning the Rosi- 
crucians has already been put to good use by Robert Halleux, “Helmontiana,” 
Academiae Analecta: Mededelingen van de Koninklijke Academie voor Weten- 
schappen, Letteren en Schone Kunsten van Belgi'e. Klasse der Wetenschappen, 45, 
no. 3 (1983), 35-63, esp. 60-61.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 315

38. Mrs. P. Tannery, C. de Waard and R. Pintard, eds., Correspondance du 
P. Marin Mersenne, religieux Minime, vol. 1 (1617-27) (Paris: Gabriel Beauchesne 
& fils, 1932), 154; Effroyables Pactions Faictes entre le diable & les pretendus In- 
visibles: Avec lews damnables Instructions, perte deplorable de leurs Escoliers, & 
lew miserable fin (s.l., s.n.e., 1623; reprinted in G. Naude, Instruction a la France, 
1979, 3e pagination), 15 (see infra for the dating of this pamphlet). Basing his ar- 
gument on the Instruction by Naude, Henri Gouhier situates the placards in the 
month of August, but the letter of Peiresc positively contradicts this dating; cf. Les 
Premieres pensees de Descartes: Contribution a I’histoire de l' Anti-Renaissance, 
De Petrarque a Descartes, no. 2 (Paris: Vrin, 1958), 125-26.39. Carpentras, Bibliotheque Inguimbertine, MS 1777, fol. 475r: “Coppie d’une 
affiche mise par les carrefours de Paris en juillet 1623.” See the analysis of this doc- 
ument below.

40. See below the analysis of this other document.

41. The Exchange (“La place au Change”), equivalent to the Stock Exchange 
(“La Bourse”), was located “in the courtyard of the Palace, beneath the ‘salle 
Dauphine’” (that is, the Palace of Justice [“Palais de Justice”]). It was until 1700 
“the meeting place of the merchants ‘to deal in trade and bills of exchange, every 
day at noon”’ (Rene Pillorget, Nouvelle histoire de Paris: Paris sous les premiers 
Bourbons, 1594-1661 [Paris: Hachette, 1988], 185).

42. Mercure Francois, vol. 9 (1622-24) (Paris: Jean & Etienne Richer, 1624), 371.

43. Naude, Instruction a la France, 26; Effroyables Pactions, 17. There were four 
lines according to Peiresc, who does not specify whether the posters were hand- 
written or printed.

44. The fact that they trotted “from hand to hand” (to which no other source has 
attested) could seem quite plausible; upon further consideration, however, it was 
quite risky to have notes circulated in such an ill-concealed manner, notes that we 
know were very quickly considered by the authorities to be seditious. This detail 
could therefore be nothing but an embellishment, added after the fact by the writer 
from the Merc we and brought about by the mention of the “Change du Palais” 
which stems from Naude’s story, as we will see.

45. “Rather than uncovering immediately in the city the things buried in the shad- 
owy depths of the forest” (Virgil, Aeneid, VI, 267).45. “Rather than uncovering immediately in the city the things buried in the shad- 
owy depths of the forest” (Virgil, Aeneid, VI, 267).

46. Count Ernst von Mansfeld (c. 1580-1626), a mercenary at the beginning of 
the Thirty Years War, had become the military leader of Protestantism in Germany. 
In 1622, during a campaign of Louis XIII against the Protestants of the South of 
France, Mansfeld, in order to relieve the latter, had created a diversion by having 
his troops enter Champagne. It was necessary to negotiate with him in order to 
turn him away from the kingdom. A short time after, by the Treaty of Paris (Feb- 
ruary 1623), Mansfeld had passed into France’s service and from then on fought 
in Flanders against the Spanish. See Victor L. Tapie, La France de Louis XIII et de 
Richelieu (Paris: Flammarion, 1967; reissue 1980, coll. “Champs,”) 129-34; The 
New Cambridge Modern History, vol. 4, J. P. Cooper (ed.), The Decline of Spain 
and the Thirty Years War, 1609-48/59 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,

316 Didier Kalm

1970), 309-24; and the article by Reinhard R. Heinisch, “Mansfeld,” in the Neue 
Deutsche Biograpbie, vol. 16 (Munich, 1990), 80-81.

47. See the text of the Mercure Francois quoted above: “Ceux-cy voyant le change 
du Palais de Paris sans nouvelles . . .”

48. Naude, Instruction a la France, 25-26 (follows the text of the poster).

49. [Adrien Baillet], La Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, 2 vols. (Paris: Daniel 
Horthemels, 1691), 1:107.

50. Francois Secret, “Notes sur quelques alchimistes de la Renaissance. I: Un te- 
moignage oublie sur l’episode des placards des Freres de la Rose-Croix,” Biblio- 
tbeque d’Humanisme et Renaissance, 33 (1971): 625-26.51. Cf. Gilly, “Iter Rosicrucianum, ” 83 and 89, n. 48; Lorenzo Bianchi, “Gabriel 
Naude critique des alchimistes,” in J.-C. Margolin and S. Matton, eds., Alchimie 
etphilosophie a la Renaissance: Actes du colloque international de Tours (4-7 dec. 
1991), De Petrarque a Descartes, no. 57 (Paris: Vrin, 1993), 405-21, at 411, n. 20; 
Bianchi, Rinascimento e libertinismo: Studi su Gabriel Naude (Naples: Bibliopo- 
lis, 1996), 185, n. 23 (I thank Alain Mothu for having provided me with this 
work).

52. Nicolas Chorier, De Petri Boessatii, Equitis et Comitis Palatini viri clarissimi. 
Vita amicisque litteratis. Libri duo (Grenoble: Fr. Provensal, 1680). On Chorier 
(1612-92), see Jean Serroy’s notice in G. Grente, dir., Dictionnaire des Lettres 
frangaises: Le XVlIe siecle (1954), new ed., dir. P. Dandrey, in series Encyclopedies 
d’aujourd’hui (Paris: La Pochotheque, 1996), 281; see also Philippe Tamizey de 
Larroque, Quatre lettres inedites de Jacques Gaffarel, extract from Annales des 
Basses-Alpes, Bulletin de la Societe scientifque etlitteraire de Digne (Digne, 1886) 
22. On Chorier’s erotic poem Aloysia Sigea (c. 1660), see the praises of Friedrich- 
Karl Forberg, Manuel d’erotologie classique (1824), French transl. (1882); reis- 
sued (Paris: La Musardine, 1996), 64. On Pierre de Boissat, a colorful individual 
and one of the first members of the Academie Frangaise, see the bibliography given 
by Secret, “Un temoignage oublie sur l’episode des placards,” 625. A handwritten 
French translation exists of the section of Chorier’s book concerning the friends of 
Pierre de Boissat (Grenoble, Bibliotheque municipale, MS 2357, XIX th century). I 
did not have the opportunity to consult it.

53. See, for example, Eucharius Cygnaeus (cited infra), 5: “Verum vos, Illumi- 
natissimi Fratres, . . .”; Naude, Instruction a la France, 40 and passim.53. See, for example, Eucharius Cygnaeus (cited infra), 5: “Verum vos, Illumi- 
natissimi Fratres, . . .”; Naude, Instruction a la France, 40 and passim.

54. Pauli di Didis A. M. A. Xo(j>ia Ilavapemg Qua spiritu & ritu, norma & 
forma, filo & stylo, aura & auro Gratiosi Ordinis Fratrum Rosatae Crucis ad 
Beatam & Bonam vitam itur & pervenitur, Dei & hominum gratia conciliatur & 
impetratur (s.l.n.d. [1618]). Cf. Gilly, Cimelia Rhodostaurotica, 110-11, no. 150.

55. It should be the following work: Theophilus Schweighart [Daniel Mogling], 
Speculum Sophicum Rhodo-Stauroticum, Das ist: Weitlauffige Entdeckung deft 
Collegii unnd axiomatum von der sondern erleuchten Fraternitet Cbrist- 
RosenCreuz: alien der wahren Weighed Begirigen Expectanten zu fernerer 
Nachrichtung, den unverstandigen Zoilis aber zur unaufldscblicher Scbandt und 
Spott. Durch Theopbilum Scbweigbardt Constantiensem (s.l., s.n.e., 1618). Cf.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 317

Gilly, Cimelia Rhodostanrotica, 131, no. 204; but see also 130-31, no. 202, 
another work by Schweighart/Mogling: Sub umbra alarum tuarum Jehovah. 
Pandora Sextae aetatis, Sive Speculum gratiae [. . .] (s.l.n.d. [1617]), as well as a 
pseudo-Schweighart who is no other than his adversary Friedrich Grick (Gilly, 
Cimelia Rhodostanrotica, 129, no. 201). On Daniel Mogling (1596-1635), doc- 
tor and astronomer, friend of J. V. Andreae, see Ulrich Neumann, “Mogling” and 
“Olim, da die Rosen Creutzerey nocb florirt.”56. Heinrich Neuhus, Pia & utilissima admonitio, De Fratribus Rosae-Crucis, 
Nimirum, An sint ? Quales sint ? Unde nomen illud sibi asciverint ? & quo fine ejus- 
modi famam sparserint ? Conscripta, & Publicae utilitatis causa in lucem emissa 
Ab Henrico Neuhusio Dantiscano, Medicinae & Philosophiae Magistro, P. in 
Morbisch H. (s.l. [Dantzig]: Christoph Vetter, 1618). The work of Cygnaeus is a 
reply to the work of Neuhus: Eucharius Cygnaeus, Conspicilium notitiae, In- 
serviens oculis aegris, qui lumen veritatis ratione subjecti, objecti, medii & finis 
ferre recusant. Opposition Admonitioni futili, Henrici Neuhusii De Fratribus R. C. 
An sint? Quales sint? Unde nomen illud sibi asciverint? Et quo fine ejusmodi 
Famam sparserint? Et ex Fama, Confessione, & veritatis fonte filiis doctrinae ex- 
hibition, ab Euchario Cygnaeo Philadelpho & Philalitheo (s.l.n.d. [1619]). Cf. 
Gilly, Cimelia Rhodostanrotica, 164-65, nos. 296 and 297.

57. One could also read “Among the affiliate members,” but that reading would 
go against what precedes it.

58. Naude does not say anything different (Instruction a la France, 5): “C’est 
toutesfois ce que vous faittes & pratiquez journellement, sans que vostre trop 
grande credulite, estant tous les jours accusee Sc convaincue de faux par le temps, 
grand maistre Sc censeur de la verite, vous ayez le regret en Fame Sc la honte sur le 
front.”

59. Chorier’s text shows certus. I am correcting this by certius.

60. Chorier, De Petri Boessatii vita, 248-52:59. Chorier’s text shows certus. I am correcting this by certius.

60. Chorier, De Petri Boessatii vita, 248-52:

STEPHANUS Chaumeus, aliquot ante annos, vita exierat, quam Boessatius; qui, si 
ille vixisset, etiam viveret. Nam medicam artem mirabiliter edoctus leto eripiebat, 
quos vis morbi ad mortem damnabat. Viennae natus medendi artem Monpelii 
didicerat, quam Parisiis, nonnullos per annos, exercuerat: In ea Imperii Gallici 
Metropoli, stabiles sibi sedes, ponere, cum animo suo, constituerat. Fabula obsti- 
tit. Varia de Roseae Crucis illuminatissimis Fratribus (sic loquebantur) per id tern- 
pus, jactabantur: Homines esse qui quaecunque scire vellent, seu eruditas 
vulgaresque linguas, seu artes & scientias, nullo labore, quam vellent, paucos post 
dies, quam concupiissent, notitiam haberent; ex vilioribus meliora, mirum in 
modum, metalla conflarent, atque adeo in aurum mutarent: Demum, nihil negante 
aeterna numinis mente, quae vel sibi, vel aliis cuperent illico consequerentur. 
Merae nugae. At commentitiae fabulae scripti a nonnullis, de ea re, tractatus, quo- 
rum in numero Paulus Didisus, Theophilus Schweighartius, Euchariusque Cyg- 
naeus (ficta nomina) ac Henricus Neuhusius Dantiscanus fuerunt, magnum 
authoritatis pondus afferebant. De suo Chaumeus, per ludum & jocum, juve- 
nilemque lasciviam, multa adjecit; hocque maxime, id hominum genus, cum vel- 
lent, videre, nec videri; quorum, si e re sua esset, ingressi essent domos, omnes

318 Didier Kahn318 Didier Kahn

pervagari libere per angulos; coenantibus, colloquentibus cum domesticis, cuban- 
tibus adesse nec videri. Ex sodalibus, tres quatuorve convenire Chaumeum soliti 
erant. Latina lingua, qui commenta haec nugasque frivolas enarrarent, libellos 
confecit. Illis vero ad compita, aedium sacrarum fores, & loca quae plurimum fre- 
quentarentur, proponere venit in mentem. Quibus bene beateque vivendi libido es- 
set ad id sodalitium invitabantur; felices his si sacris initiarentur futuri: Locus, 
tempus, dies, hora indicebatur. Credulae admodum in Galliis sunt plebes, at om- 
nium plurimum, Parisiensis. In Terris sane nulla est, quae verba dari sibi facilius 
patiatur, cognitaque fraude, aequiori se esse illusam animo ferat. Proscriptis his 
tabulis admiratio primum ac dein ingens perturbatio Parisienses cepit. Metus, luc- 
tus, indignatio omnes plerasque domos invasit. Suis se in tectis securos non puta- 
bant. Igitur nec libere cum domesticis loqui, nec rebus suis operam dare, pro 
arbitrio, audebant. Consternationem civium fieri non potuit, quin Magistratus an- 
imadverteret. Igitur in auctores inquiri jubet, etiam, investigati si deprehendantur, 
saevire cert[i|us. Principio Chaumeus, quae excogitasset, tanto opinionum pro- 
gressu omnium fere animos perculisse, mirabatur. Ridebat. Verum, ab iis, quibus 
potestas data esset, cum diligentissimas iniri quaestiones de re videret, famae salu- 
tique fuga consuluit; periculo se prudens subduxit; Viennam rediit. Totum se in 
Musarum sinum abdidit; & paucos intra annos, cum nullus studiorum modus fin- 
isque esset, eos ex vigiliis, non intermissisque laboribus, eruditionis fructus retulit, 
qui omni abunde vitae occupatissimo, ad laudem, compendiumque & utilitatem, 
sufficerent. Quod nesciret, nullus medicorum noverat. . . . Latinam linguam. . . . 
optime callebat. Vernacula & propria lingua, cum latino sermone uteretur, loqui 
dixisses. . . . Quinquagesimum aetatis annum praetergressus, magno omnium, 
meoque maximo dolore, mortem obiit. Honorarium sibi a me nullum, postquam 
refectis viribus, e morbis, sua ope, convaluissem, meam praeter benevolentiam, 
quam optabat, ut loquebatur, volebat. Aliam a litteratis viris mercedem, non in- 
honestum modo & turpe litterato medico, sed & prorsus flagitiosum quid arbi- 
trabatur.61. The same type of reasoning, founded exclusively on the facts furnished by 
Chorier, caused Adolphe Rochas to say: “[Chaume] died toward 1660, at the age 
of fifty or sixty years.” (Biographie du Dauphine, contenant I’bistoire des hommes 
ties dans cette province qui se sont fait remarquer dans les lettres, les sciences , les 
arts, etc., avec le catalogue de leurs ouvrages et la description de leurs portraits, 2 
vols. [Paris, 1856-60; reprinted, Geneva: Slatkine, 1971], 1:153).

62. Montpellier, Ribliotheque interuniversitaire de medecine, Archives de la Lac- 
ulte de medecine, S 20, fob 192v: “Ego Stephanus Chaume Viennensis examina- 
tus fui a reverendis dominis procuratoribus et ab amplissimo domino Ranchino 
cancellario relatus in numerum studiosorum soluto prius universitatis jure et 
praestito juramento de observandis statutis. Actum in Collegio papae die octava 
decembris 1623. S. Chaume.”

63. Memoires de Nicolas Chorier, de Vienne, sur sa vie et ses affaires, trans. 
L. Crozet (extract from the Bulletin de l’ Academic Delphinale, sessions of April 
12 and December 20, 1867) (Grenoble: Prudhomme, 1868), 36-37. We learn in 
this book that Chorier met Moliere in Vienne and in Lyon (ibid., 150).

64. Effroyables Pactions, 10.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 319

65. I am indebted to William Newman, whom I thank very warmly here, for all 
the information concerning this manuscript and its origins.The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 319

65. I am indebted to William Newman, whom I thank very warmly here, for all 
the information concerning this manuscript and its origins.

66. It was Henri Justel’s circle. On Thoynard, see Antoine Adam, Histoire de la li- 
terature frangaise au XVIIe siecle, 3 vols. (1948, new ed. 1962), Bibliotheque de 
I’Evolution de I’Humanite, nos. 24-26 (Paris: Albin Michel, 1997), 3:402, n. 2; 
Alexandre Cioranescu, Bibliographie de la literature frangaise du dix-septieme 
siecle, 2d ed. (Paris: Editions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
1969), 3:1914; Maurice Cranston, John Locke: A Biography (London: Longmans, 
1957; new ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985), 174 and passim; and es- 
pecially E. S. De Beer, ed., The Correspondence of John Locke, 8 vols. (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1976-89), 1:579-82.

67. On Jacques Le Pailleur, see Gedeon Tallemant Des Reaux, Historiettes, ed. 
Antoine Adam (Paris: Bibliotheque de la Pleiade, 1960-61), passim, esp. 2:99-101 
and 1000; Adam, Histoire de la literature frangaise, 1:384, n. 3; Robert Lenoble, 
Mersenne ou la naissance du mecanisme (1943; re-ed., Paris: Vrin, 1971, 591); 
Rene Pintard, Le Libertinage erudit, 91 and 349-50; and especially Jean Mesnard, 
“Pascal a l’Academie Le Pailleur,” in L’Oeuvre scientifique de Pascal, Centre inter- 
national de Synthese, section d’histoire des sciences (Paris: Presses Universitaire de 
France, 1964), 7-16, essential for this highly interesting but unfortunately poorly 
documented individual.68. Cf. Louis Sebastien Mercier, Le Tableau de Paris (1st ed. 1781), 1, chap. 85: 
“Le Faubourg Saint-Marcel”, ed. J.-C. Bonnet et al., 2 vols. (Paris: Mercure de 
France, 1994), 1:217 (and 1:1554 sq., n. 4): “C’est dans ces habitations eloignees 
du mouvement central de la ville, que se cacheat les hommes ruines, les misan- 
thropes, les alchimistes, les maniaques, les rentiers bornes, et aussi quelques sages 
studieux, qui cherchent reellement la solitude, et qui veulent vivre absolument ig- 
nores et separes des quartiers bruyants des spectacles.” This is the neighborhood 
where Jacques Gohory held his “Lycium philosophal” in 1572.

69. Oxford, Bodleian Library, MS Locke c. 42, 70 of the second pagination. I re- 
produce here the transcription done by William Newman, to whom I again extend 
all my gratitude for having so generously passed this text on to me.

70. Clarius Bonarscius [Charles Scribani], Amphitheatrum Honoris in quo 
Calvinistarum in Societatem Jesu criminationes jugulatae (Palaeopoli Aduatico- 
rum [Anvers]: Alexander Verheyden [ex officina Plantiniana], 1605). Cf. Carlos 
Sommervogel, Bibliotheque de la Compagnie de Jesus, new ed., vol. 7 (Brussels- 
Paris: O. Schepens-A. Picard, 1896), cols. 982-83.

71. Naude, Instruction a la France, 97-105. See the chapter devoted to Khunrath 
in my dissertation (“Paracelsisme et alchimie en France a la fin de la Renaissance 
(1567-1625),” Universite de Paris IV, 1998), to be published by Droz Editions 
(Geneva) in 2002.

72. See Gabriel Naude, Advis pour dresser une bibliotheque Presente a Mon- 
seigneur le President de Mesme (1627) (Paris: Rolet Le Due, 1644; reprinted, Paris: 
Klincksieck, 1990 and 1994), chap. 4, 51, classifying pell-mell “the Cabala, artificial 
Memory, Art of Lull, Philosophers’ Stone, Divinations, & other similar subjects”

320 Didier Kahn

among those that “teach nothing but vain and useless things” but that nonetheless 
must be collected in every scholarly library.320 Didier Kahn

among those that “teach nothing but vain and useless things” but that nonetheless 
must be collected in every scholarly library.

73. Rita Sturlese, “Lazar Zetzner, ‘Bibliopola Argentinensis’: Alchimie und Lullis- 
mus in Stralsburg an den Anfangen der Moderne,” Sudhoffs Archiv, 75 (1991): 
140-62; Francois Secret, Les Kabbalistes chretiens de la Renaissance (1965), ed. 
extend. (Milan-Neuilly-sur-Seine: Arche-Arma Artis, 1985), 288-91.

74. Michela Pereira, The Alchemical Corpus Attributed to Raymond Lull, War- 
burg Institute Surveys and Texts, no. 18 (London: The Warburg Institute, 1989), 
30; D. Kahn, “Le fonds Caprara de manuscrits alchimiques de la Bibliotheque 
Universitaire de Bologne,” Scriptorium, 48 (1994): 62-110; J. N. Hillgarth, Ra- 
mon Lull and Lullism in Fourteenth-Century France, Oxford-Warburg Studies (Ox- 
ford: Clarendon Press, 1971), chap. 7 (“Epilogue”), 294-311.

75. Secret, Les Kabbalistes chretiens de la Renaissance, 288; [idem], Kabbale et 
pbilosophie hermetique. Exposition a I’occasion du Festival International de 
I’Esoterisme, Carcassonne, 17-19 novembre 1989 (Amsterdam: Bibliotheca 
Philosophica Hermetica, s.d. [1989]), 64-67.

76. Secret, Les Kabbalistes chretiens de la Renaissance, 290-91.

77. Robert Le Foul, sieur de Vassy, Le Grand et Dernier Art de M. Raymond 
Lulle, AT. es Arts liberaux, et tres Illustre Professeur dans la sacree Theologie 
(Paris: Louis Boulanger, 1634). On this individual, see Hillgarth, Ramon Lull and 
Lullism in Fourteenth-Century France, 294-311, as well as the chapter of my dis- 
sertation, “Paracelsisme et alchimie en France,” devoted to Khunrath.

78. Rene Descartes, Oeuvres, ed. C. Adam and P. Tannery, 13 vols. (1897-1914; 
rev. ed., ed. B. Rochot & P. Costabel, 9 vols., 1964-74) (reprinted, Paris: Vrin, 
1996) 8/2: 27-28, note a.78. Rene Descartes, Oeuvres, ed. C. Adam and P. Tannery, 13 vols. (1897-1914; 
rev. ed., ed. B. Rochot & P. Costabel, 9 vols., 1964-74) (reprinted, Paris: Vrin, 
1996) 8/2: 27-28, note a.

79. Tallemant Des Reaux, Historiettes, 2:99. This Saint-Brice also numbered in 
his circle the poet Saint-Amant; cf. Saint-Amant, Oeuvres, ed. Jacques Bailbe, in 
series Societe des Textes Frangais Modernes (Paris: Marcel Didier, 1967-71), 1:252 
and n. 57.

80. This investigation could be probably documented by means of a research into 
the judicial archives of the time. But confirmation of it will be found below.

81. The text gives here not a period, but rather a question mark. I made the 
correction.

82. Effroyables Pactions, 16-17. Fet us remember that this pamphlet could only 
have come into being in November or December 1623: Peiresc’s letter, dated Au- 
gust 3, is clearly earlier.

83. I owe this information to Antonio Clericuzio, who is preparing a study on Eti- 
enne de Clave for his book Elements, Particles, and Atoms: A Study of Seven- 
teenth-Century Chemistry and Corpuscular Philosophy (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 
2001, forthcoming).

84. More details on this ensemble will be found in my doctoral dissertation, 
“Paracelsisme et alchimie en France.” Fet me only point out here that one of these 
manuscripts, MS fr. 2528 in the Bibliotheque Nationale de France (BNF) in Paris,

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 321

entitled “Effetz de nature, I" volume” (the second volume is MS fr. 2529), contains 
in fol. 141r-143r, under the title of “Rose Croix,” some brief and hasty reading 
notes on the Rosicrucian movement in general.

85. BNF, MS fr. 3653 (anc. 10344), fol. 46r. On the origins of this manuscript, 
cf. Henri Omont, Anciens inventaires et catalogues de la Bibliotheque nationale, 
vol. 4: La Bibliotheque royale a Paris au XVIIe siecle (Paris: Ernest Leroux, 
1911), 166, no. 10344, and 238.

86. BNF, MS fr. 3653, fol. 46r.86. BNF, MS fr. 3653, fol. 46r.

87. Here I can only refer to my dissertation (“Paracelsisme et alchimie en 
France”), in which (based upon a suggestion from Antonio Clericuzio, for which I 
am very grateful) I studied in detail the circle of Turquet de Mayerne through his 
many manuscripts.

88. Irene Scouloudi, “Sir Theodore Turquet de Mayerne, Royal Physician and 
Writer, 1573-1655,” Proceedings of the Huguenot Society of London, 16 (1940): 
301-37, at 304, n. 4. 1 warmly thank Julian Paulus for this precious reference.

89. London, British Library, Add. MS 20921, fol. 58r.

90. As is suggested by the few variants it presents from that of Naude: vers qui se 
trouve instead of vers qui se tourne, which is much better; d’erreurs & de mort les 
homines nos semblables instead of the inverse in Naude’s case (les hommes nos 
semblables d’erreur [&] de mort).91. I have not had enough time to peruse the 440 columns published by Mersenne 
following his Quaestiones in Genesim under the heading Observationes, et emen- 
dationes ad Francisci Georgii Veneti Problemata. In hoc opere Cabala evertitur; 
editio imlgata, et inquisitores Sanctae fidei catholicae ab Haereticorum, atque 
Politicorum calumniis accurate vindicantur (Paris: Sebastien Cramoisy, 1623). It 
would probably be especially necessary to consult the German Rosicrucian litera- 
ture. The ten questions asked, however, do not betray a very advanced knowledge 
of the cabala and could have arisen from themselves — except the last one — on the 
occasion of a simple meeting with the doctrines of the Zohar. On the vast diffusion 
of the cabala in France at the beginning of the seventeenth century, see Secret, Les 
Kabbalistes chretiens de la Renaissance, esp. 333-52. See also BNF, MS fr. 19948 
(anc. St. Germain, 1909): Double du livre de la Caballe des Hebrieux. Livre entien 
et trouve depuis pen de temps, contenant plusieurs grands et admirables secretz de 
la theologie et philosophic (inc.: “Quand j’eu bien profondement panse en moy 
mesme la briesvete, temperie et inconstance de tous hommes . . .”). This manu- 
script was copied between September 23 and December 14, 1623, by an individ- 
ual whose name has been completely scratched out and replaced by the name 
“Hermes” (fol. lllv). The reverse side of the last page bears the name and the sig- 
nature “Rossignol.” This could be Nicolas Rossignol, procurer at the Grand 
Chatelet in Paris, the copyist of several manuscripts on alchemy, on which see my 
article “Notre-Dame de Paris et l’alchimie: un traite inedit du debut du XVIIe sie- 
cle, le Discours des visions sur I’oeuvre,” Chrysopoeia, 5 (1992-96): 443-52.

92. M. Rooses and C. Ruelens, eds., Correspondance de Rubens et documents 
epistolaires concernant sa vie et ses oeuvres, 3:239.

322 Didier Kahn92. M. Rooses and C. Ruelens, eds., Correspondance de Rubens et documents 
epistolaires concernant sa vie et ses oeuvres, 3:239.

322 Didier Kahn

93. An investigation into the judicial archives of the time would perhaps allow it.

94. Carpentras, Bibliotheque Inguimbertine, MS 1777, fols. 475r-477r (see the 
description in M. Duhamel & M. Liabastres, Catalogue general des manuscrits des 
bibliotheques publiques de France. Departements, vol. 35 [Paris: Plon, 1899], 225- 
34, esp. 232). A microfilm of this manuscript, which can be consulted at the Insti- 
tut de Recherche et d’Histoire des Textes in Paris, fortunately helped me to avoid 
submitting to the exorbitant prices of reproduction imposed by the current man- 
agement of the Bibliotheque Inguimbertine, which seems to do its best to increase 
the difficulties inherent in this type of research.

95. Carpentras, Bibliotheque Inguimbertine, MS 1777, fol. 475r: “Coppie d’une 
affiche mise par les carrefours de Paris en juillet 1623. Nous deputez de nostre Col- 
lege principal des freres Roses faisons sejour visible & invisible en cette ville par la 
grace du Tres hault, vers qui se tourne le coeur des justes. Nous enseignons sans 
livres, marques ny signes & parlons les langues des pays, ou nous voulons estre, 
pour tirer les hommes nos semblables d’erreur & de mort.”

96. Tannery, de Waard, and Pintard, Correspondance du P. Marin Mersenne, 
1:154. See also Pintard, Le Libertinage erudit, 48.

97. Gershom G. Scholem, Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism (1941), French 
trans. Les Grands courants de la mystique juive, in series Bibliotheque scientifique 
(Paris: Payot, 1968), chap. 6, esp. 229.97. Gershom G. Scholem, Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism (1941), French 
trans. Les Grands courants de la mystique juive, in series Bibliotheque scientifique 
(Paris: Payot, 1968), chap. 6, esp. 229.

98. London, British Library, Add. MS 20921, fol. 58r. I give here the variations 
between this manuscript and Bibliotheque Inguimbertine, MS 1777, fol. 477r. (In 
the following notes, the text on the left side of the colon gives the reading from the 
manuscript in the British Library, and the text on the right side presents the corre- 
sponding variant from the manuscript in the Bibliotheque Inguimbertine.)

99. “Articles . . . Rosee”: “Certains articles des propositions faites par les freres 
Roses.”

100. “coadjuteurs”: “conducteurs”; the ten propositions are not numbered in the 
Bibliotheque Inguimbertine manuscript.

101. ‘Ton n’eu”: “on eust eu”; “n’y a”: “n’y a rien.”

102. “on pourroit”: “ne pourront”; “eut” is omitted in the Bibliotheque Inguim- 
bertine manuscript.

103. ‘Ton”: “je.”

104. “maintien”: “maintenant.”

105. “sens”: “secret” (in both occurrences in item 10).

106. Cf. Exodus 38:27: “The 100 talents of silver were used to cast the bases for 
the sanctuary and for the curtain — 100 bases from the 100 talents, one talent for 
each base.” Ecclesiastes 1:7: “All streams flow into the sea, yet the sea is never full. 
To the place the streams come from, there they return again.”

107. London, British Library, Add. MS 20921, fol. 58r.

108. Ibid.: “LECTISSIMAE ET ABSTRUSISSIMAE SCIENTIAE ACUTISSIMO 
professori, Societatis Roseae Crucis defensori acerrimo, fratri omni officiorum 
genere colendo tradantur.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 323The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 323

Quam sis addictus societati nostrae, quot & quantis majestatem ipsius fulcire lu- 
cubrationibus conatus sis, primatibus nostris notum satis, a quibus benevolentia 
insignis eximia per serias virtutum tuarum commendationes, testimonia, ad nos 
corporis illius mystici membra saepissime pervenerunt. En tibi a nostris Lutetiae 
Parisiorum per celeberrimae urbis compita theses affixas, & plus quam Platonico 
genio turgida problemata, quorum medullitus reconditos sensus soli Oedypo pen- 
etrare, soli roseae societatis alumno enucleare datum. Viles reptilium hominum 
mentes despicit invisibile nostrum collegium & Boeotica ingenia naso adunco sus- 
pends. Sacrarii augusti solis lynceis valvae patent. In quorum numerum ascitum te 
ut agnoscimus, sic gratulamur inaugurationi tuae, tibique tanquam fratri crucigero 
& rnurice nostro supra Salamandrae physicae colorem roseum fulgenti, enodanda 
arcana mittimus, de quibus ut tuam aperire teneris sententiam, sic te ad nos tua re- 
mittere placita aequum & decorum est. Salve. Et Zephyrotarum septupla enneas 
cum concentrica in homogeneitate sua spirituum principum Cabalistica decade 
conatuum tuorum coadjutrix, per energeticos influentiarum suarum radios sese 
tuis coeptis foeliciter immisceat. Vale & vive. Datum apud nos, Eid. Junii 1623. 
Tui P. cf N. 3 S. h .

Confratros tui 
Ex mando [sic] W. O.”

109. See, for example, the same manuscript (Add. MS 20921), fols. 17r-18r, con- 
taining a letter from 1632 (it can be found transcribed as an appendix to my 
“Paracelsisme et alchimie en France.”)109. See, for example, the same manuscript (Add. MS 20921), fols. 17r-18r, con- 
taining a letter from 1632 (it can be found transcribed as an appendix to my 
“Paracelsisme et alchimie en France.”)

110. Among the manuscripts of Mayerne there is a text in Dutch entitled De Ca- 
bala van de philosophe Isaac den Hollander int cort. (London, British Library, MS 
Sloane 2097, fols. 56v-78v), but we know that only treatises of alchemy circulated 
with the name of Isaac Hollandus, and it is doubtful that this text would be an 
exception to the rule. Another manuscript (MS Sloane 2100, fols. 117r-141v) 
contains a Tabula revelationis majestatis divinae comprebensae capite primo 
Geneseos. In qua indicatur; quomodo Dens in principio semetipsum omnibus 
creaturis suis patefecerit re et verbis, et qua ratione omnia opera sua, eorumque 
naturas, proprietates, virtutes, atque operationes in brevem scripturam compen- 
diose redegerit, atque haec omnia primo homini quem ipse ad imaginem suam con- 
didit, tradiderit, ita ut ad nos etiam hucusque ilia dimanarint. This text, preserved 
in a manuscript supposed to have belonged to Mayerne himself, is composed only 
of questions, as if it were the table of contents for a considerably larger book (like 
Mersenne’s Quaestiones in Genesim) that was probably never written. Each series 
of questions is organized successively around each word of the first chapter of Gen- 
esis. In it are found many metaphysical questions and also numerous questions of 
an alchemical nature: nothing, in any case, that relates to the cabala.

111. This pamphlet does not cite the text of the poster; but when it goes on to 
comment on the one he is recommunicating, the author writes (17): “everyone is 
astonished by this invisibility and by the perfect ability in speaking all kinds of lan- 
guages.” Now the theme of the knowledge of languages only appears in the poster 
preserved by Naude.1 12. Heinrich Neuhus, Advertissement Pieux & tres utile, Des Freres de la Rosee- 
Croix: A sf avoir, S’il y en a ? Quels ils sont ? D’ou ils ont prins ce nom? Et a quelle

324 Didier Kahn

fin ils ont espandu leur renommee ? Escrit, & mis en lumiere pour le bien public 
(Paris: s.n.e. [“Et se vendent au Palais”], 1623; reprint, Paris: Gutenberg Reprint, 
1979, following the Instruction by Naude), “Adresse au lecteur,” 3. See below my 
remarks on the dating of this book.

113. Examen sur I’Inconnue et Nouvelle Caballe des Freres de la Croix Rosee, 
habituez depuis pen de temps en la Ville de Paris. Ensemble I’Histoire des Moeurs, 
Coustumes, Prodiges, & particularitez d’iceux (Paris: for Pierre de La Fosse, 
1623), 14.

114. Mercure Francois, vol. 9 (1622-24), 371. The only variant in comparison 
with Naude’s version is the reading “ou nous habitons” instead of “ou voulons es- 
tre.” The Mercure then (371-72) commented upon the reading “d’erreur de mort,” 
which is that of Naude and which the Mercure kept: “Aucuns en les transcrivant 
[i.e., the posters ] y meirent d’erreur, & de mort: Tellement que les Curieux de nou- 
velles eurent de quoy discourir de ces nouveaux Illuminez & Immortels .” In fact, 
all the other printed and handwritten sources give the reading “d’erreur & de 
mort.”115. Pierre Guillebaud (in religion, Pierre de Saint-Romuald), Tresor chronolo- 
gique et bistorique contenant ce qui s’est passe de plus remarquable & curieux 
dans I’Estat, tant Civil qu’Ecclesiastique, depuis Pan de Jesus-Cbrist 1200 jusqu’a 
Pan 1647, 3 vols. (Paris: Antoine de Sommaville, 1647), 3:831. On the incident of 
the placards of 1623 (which Guillebaud placed in 1622), see ibid., 858-59. An er- 
ror by Guillebaud curiously transformed the name of Michael Maier into “Ma- 
jerne” (859). All of his information is drawn from Naude. Guillebaud (158 5— 
1667) was a Feuillant monk who strove to publish historical works compiling the 
most diverse of sources; see the article “Guillebaud” by M. Standaert in the Dic- 
tionnaire d’histoire et de geographie ecclesiastiques, vol. 22 (Paris: Letouzey & 
Ane, 1988), cols. 1053-54.

116. [Baillet], La Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, 1691, 1:107-8.

117. Paris, BNF, MS fr. 15777 (17th c.; papers concerning various religious or- 
ders), fols. 83r-84v: Extraictz tirez des livres qui traictent des freres de la Rose 
Croix, here fol. 84v. Cf. Leopold Delisle, Le Cabinet des Manuscrits de la Biblio- 
theque Nationale (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1868-81), 2:100-1.

118. Neuhus, Advertisement Pieux & tres utile, “Adresse au lecteur,” 5-6. See 
also the end of Jacques Le Pailleur’s story, as well as the account of Theophraste 
Renaudot in 1639, reproduced below in the last part of this chapter.

119. Neuhus, Advertissement Pieux & tres utile, 5: “a lawyer;” cf. Effroyables 
Pactions, 17-20: “a Lawyer of the Parlement of Paris.”

120. Neuhus, Advertissement Pieux & tres utile, “Adresse au lecteur,” 7-8.

121. Ibid., 8; see also 6: “Et de fait m’en allant aux champs en la saison des ven- 
danges, je l’emportay [i.e., the book by Neuhus] avec moy [. . .]”

122. Ibid., 56.

123. The author of the Effroyables Pactions mentions, 21-22, two adventures 
that happened “in the month of last October.”122. Ibid., 56.

123. The author of the Effroyables Pactions mentions, 21-22, two adventures 
that happened “in the month of last October.”

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 325

124. Cf. Alain Mothu, “Une petite satire de l’alchimie sous Louis XIII: Le vray se- 
cret et invention de la Pierre Philosopbale, tronvee dans I’escuelle de Bois,” 
Chrysopoeia, 5 (1992-96): 669-73.

125. We read in fol. [i4|r that Naude, on December 1, 1623, accorded the benefit 
of his privilege to the bookseller Francois Julliot.

126. H. Neuhus, Advertissement Pieux & tres utile, 1624; shelfmark BNF: Res. 
H. 2134 (2); another copy: Bibliotheque de l’Arsenal, shelfmark: 8° S. 12952 (1). 
Effroyables Pactions, 1624; shelfmark Bibliotheque de l’Arsenal: 8° S. 12952 (2). 
The Effroyables Pactions are also found, without their title, in [Claude Malingre], 
Troisiesme Tome de I’Histoire de nostre temps, ou Suitte de I’Histoire des guerres 
contre les Rebelles de France, ez annees 1623. & 1624. (Paris: Jean Petit-Pas, 
1624), 99-124 (I will return to this below). The 1624 edition of Naude’s work, 
which is impossible to find using the habitual methods as it is anonymous and 
without its title, is attested to by the Catalogus omnium operum Gabrielis Nau- 
daei, of which Lorenzo Bianchi has edited some extracts (Rinascimento e liber- 
tinismo. Studi sit Gabriel Naude, 276), thanks to which I succeeded in locating this 
edition in the Traicte des Atheistes pointed out by Wallace Kirsop (see below, note 
131).

127. Shelfmark BNF: Hp. 681. Another copy: Paris, Bibliotheque Mazarine, 
shelfmark: 36683, no. 5. This is the edition I am citing throughout the chapter.

128. Bibliotheque Mazarine, shelfmark: 37231, no. 13.

129. Bibliotheque Mazarine, shelfmark: Res. 37206, no. 5. Another copy: BNF, 
Hp. 1134.

130. There are two copies of the 1624 issue at the BNF (shelfmarks Y 2 75469 and 
Hp. 1135).129. Bibliotheque Mazarine, shelfmark: Res. 37206, no. 5. Another copy: BNF, 
Hp. 1134.

130. There are two copies of the 1624 issue at the BNF (shelfmarks Y 2 75469 and 
Hp. 1135).

131. Wallace Kirsop, “Clovis Hesteau, sieur de Nuysement, et la litterature 
alchimique en France a la fin du XVIe et au debut du XVIIe siecle,” 2 vols. (Ph.D. 
diss., Universite de Paris, 1960), 2: 153, n. 109.

132. [Claude Malingre], Traicte des Atheistes, Deistes, Illwninez d’Espagne, et 
nouveaux pretendus Invisibles, dits de la Confrairie de la Croix-Rosaire. Elevez 
depuis quelques annees dans le Christianisme (s.L, s.n.e. [Paris: Pierre Chevalier], 
1624), in [Claude Malingre], Histoire generale du progrez et decadence de I’Here- 
sie moderne. Tome second. A la suite du premier de M. Florimond de Raemond. 
Conseiller du Roy en sa Cour de Parlement de Bordeaux . . . Plus un traicte des 
Atheistes, Deistes, Illuminez d’Espagne, et nouveaux pretendus de la Croix- 
Rosaire (Paris: Pierre Chevalier, 1624). On Malingre, novelist and historian 
(c. 1580-c. 1653), see the entry in the Dictionnaire des Lettres frangaises. Le 
XVIIe siecle, 805. Only the Catalogus omnium operum Gabrielis Naudaei edited 
by Lorenzo Bianchi allowed me, thanks to a reference to Malingre, to locate 
this brochure.

133. “Des Freres pretendus Invisibles & Illuminez de la Croix-Rosaire, de leur 
College, assemblees & doctrine,” in [Malingre], Traicte des Atheistes, Deistes, 
Illuminez d’Espagne, et nouveaux pretendus Invisibles, 21-55.

134. Yates, The Rosicrucian Enlightenment, ed. 1986, 103 and 104-5 (French 
trans., ed. 1985, 135 and 136-37).

326 Didier Kalm

135. Ibid., 106 (French trans., 138).

136. Ibid., for example, 107-8 (French trans., 139-40), misunderstanding of 
15-16 of Naude, to whose irony Yates has remained hopelessly deaf.

137. Ibid., 107-11 (French trans., 139-42).136. Ibid., for example, 107-8 (French trans., 139-40), misunderstanding of 
15-16 of Naude, to whose irony Yates has remained hopelessly deaf.

137. Ibid., 107-11 (French trans., 139-42).

138. In his Instruction a la France, Naude shows that he has at least read treatises 
by F. G. Menapius [Friedrich Grick], by Michael Maier (Verum Invention, Silen- 
tium post clamores, Themis aurea, Symbola aureae mensae. Arcana arcanissima 
and De volucri arborea) and by Heinrich Neuhus, Eucharius Cygnaeus, Ludwig 
Combach, Michael Potier, Theophilus Schweighart [Daniel Mogling], Rudolph 
Goclenius, Georg Molther, and Andreas Libavius. See the epigram by Menapius 
reproduced after the privilege of the Instruction, fol. [i4]r-v; for the other authors, 
cf. ibid., 54-59, 64, 90, and 96. See also the “Catalogue des Livres qui sont en l’es- 
tude de G. Naude a Paris” (before 1642), partially edited by Bianchi, Rinascimento 
e libertinismo. Studi su Gabriel Naude, 253-270, esp. 264-65. Naude also pos- 
sessed information passed on to Father Baranzano by Tobias Adami: I will come 
back to this. On the works by Friedrich Grick, see Gilly, Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 
78-79; 129, no. 201; 131, no. 203; 132-37, nos. 205-18; and 140-41, no. 229.

139. Naude, Instruction a la France, 62.

140. Johann Valentin Andreae, Institutio magica pro curiosis (c. 1609-11), pub- 
lished in his Menippus Sive Dialogorum Satyricorum centuria inanitatum nos- 
tratium Speculum (s.L, s.n.e. [Strasbourg: heirs of Lazarus Zetzner], 1617), 200 
and following (quoted by Gilly, Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 51).

141. In what follows I will go more deeply into the connections already estab- 
lished by Halleux, “Helmontiana,” 58-61.141. In what follows I will go more deeply into the connections already estab- 
lished by Halleux, “Helmontiana,” 58-61.

142. Jacques Gaultier, Table cbronographique de I’estat du Christianisme, Depuis 
la naissance de Jesus-Christ, jusques a I’annee M. DCXX. Contenant en douze 
colomnes les Papes, & Antipapes: les Conciles & Patriarches des quatre Eglises 
Patriarchales: les Escrivains sacrez, & autres Saincts & Illustres personnages: les 
Empereurs & Roys, tant de nostre France, qu’Estr angers: les Autheurs Profanes, 
les Heretiques, & les Evenemens remarquables de chasque Siecle, ou Centurie. 
Ensemble le rapport des vieilles Heresies aux modernes de la Pretendue Reforma- 
tion: Et douze des principals Veritez Catholiques attestees contre le Calvinisme, 
par TEscriture Saincte, & de Siecle en Siecle par les Saincts Peres & Docteurs 
de ce temps-la (Lyon: Pierre Rigaud, 1621). On Lather Gaultier, see A. Boland, 
“Gaulthier,” in Dictionnaire d’histoire et de geographie ecclesiastiques, vol. 20 
(Paris: Letouzey and Ane, 1984), cols. 59-60.

143. Gaultier, Table cbronographique, 875.

144. On Garasse, see below, note 161; Naude, Instruction a la France, 59-60; 
Mercure Francois, vol. 9 (1622-24), 374 ff. Gaultier’s article was again summa- 
rized by Henry de Sponde in his continuation of the Annales of Baronius: Annal- 
ium Emin"" Cardinalis Caes. Baronii Continuatio, ab anno M.C. XCVII. quo is 
desiit, ad finem M. DC. XL., vol. 3 (Paris: Denis de La Noue, 1641), 871.

145. [Baillet], La Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, 1691, 1:107.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 327145. [Baillet], La Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, 1691, 1:107.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 327

146. Baillet must have embellished upon the text of the Mercme Frangois. The lat- 
ter, after discussing the Parisian placards, added that other people “pour en faire 
encor plus accroire,” had written the Effroyables Pactions and the Examen; the 
Mercure then gave a summary of these two pamphlets, then concluded thus: “C’est 
ce qui s’est escrit boufonnesquement de ces Invisibles, ou Freres de la Rose-Croix, 
pour donner de l’esbat aux esprits curieux” (Mercure Frangois, vol. 9 [1622-24], 
372-74). See below as well the mention of Pont-Neuf in the Mercure Frangois.

147. Alvaro Huerga, Historia de los Alumbrados ( 1570-1630 ), vol. 4: LosAlum- 
brados de Sevilla ( 1605-1630 ) (Madrid: Fundacion Universitaria Espanola, 
1988), 238 ff. Cf. the pamphlet by Antonio Farfan de las Godos, Discurso . . . en 
defensa de la religion catolica contra la secta de los Alumbrados (Seville, 1623).

148. Edict d’Espagne contre la detestable Secte des llluminez. Eslevez es 
Archevesche de Seville & Evesche de Cadiz. Traduict sur la coppie Espagnole im- 
primee en Espagne (s.l., s.n.e., 1623) (Bibliotheque Mazarine, shelfmark: 36683, 
no. 4). This is the text that the Mercure Frangois took up again the following year.

149. Rooses and Ruelens, Correspondance de Rubens et documents epistolaires 
concernant sa vie et ses oeuvres, 3:224; quoted and commented upon by Halleux, 
“Helmontiana,” 60-61.

150. Rooses & Ruelens, Correspondance de Rubens et documents epistolaires 
concernant sa vie et ses oeuvres, 3:230 (August 10, 1623).

151. See below the quotes concerning Theophile.

152. Neuhus, Advertissement Pieux & tres utile, “Adresse au lecteur,” 4.

153. I will come back to this point below.

154. [Malingre], Troisiesme Tome de I’Histoire de nostre temps, 82-98 (see also 
779-81) and 98-99 (quote). The privilege of this book bears the date March 7, 
1624.154. [Malingre], Troisiesme Tome de I’Histoire de nostre temps, 82-98 (see also 
779-81) and 98-99 (quote). The privilege of this book bears the date March 7, 
1624.

155. [Malingre], Traicte des Atheistes, Deistes, llluminez d’Espagne, et nouveaux 
pretendus Invisibles, 13-20. The privilege for Malingre’s continuation of Flori- 
mond de Raemond’s Histoire generale du progrez et decadence de I’Heresie mod- 
erne, in which this brochure was inserted, dates from March 14, 1624.

156. Mercure Frangois, vol. 9 (1622-24), 354-70 (Alumbrados) and 371-87 
(Rosicrucians), here 371.

157. Jacques Gaultier, Table chronographique . . .jusquesdl’anneeM.DC.XXV. 
(Lyon: Pierre Rigaud et associes, 1626), 877-78 and 880 ff.

158. Bibliotheque Mazarine, shelfmark 36683, nos. 3, 4, 5 and 6.

159. Scipion Dupleix, Continuation de I’histoire du regne de Louys le Juste, 
treiziesme du nom (Paris: Claude Sonnius & Denis Bechet, 1648), 406 (heading 
“Estat de l’Eglise”, XXXIIX-XL). Dupleix has taken up the text of articles 4, 9, 
10, 17, and 18 of the edict, which consists of seventy-six articles. On the Enlight- 
ened Ones of Picardy or Guerinets, see Pillorget, Nouvelle histoire de Paris: Paris 
sous les premiers Bourbons, 608-10.

160. Pierre Scarron (1584-1668).

328 Didier Kahn160. Pierre Scarron (1584-1668).

328 Didier Kahn

161. Francois Garasse, La Doctrine curieuse des beaux Esprits de ce temps, ou 
pretendus tels. Contenant plusieurs maximes pernicieuses a la Religion, a I’Estat, 
& aux bonnes Moeurs. Combattue et renversee par le P. Francois Garassus, de la 
Compagnie de Jesus (Paris: Sebastien Chappelet, 1623; reissue, Paris: Sebastien 
Chappelet, 1624). On Father Garasse (1585-1631) and his La Doctrine curieuse, 
see Francois Berriot, Atheismes et atheistes an XVIe siecle en France, 2 vols. (Paris: 
Editions du Cerf, s.d. [1977]), 2:753-74; Marc Fumaroli, L’Age de I’eloquence: 
Rhetorique et res literaria de la Renaissance au seuil de Vepoque classique, Biblio- 
theque de l’Evolution de 1’Humanite, no. 4 (Geneve: Droz, 1980; reprint, Paris: 
Albin Michel, 1994), esp. 326-34; Louise Godard de Donville, Le Libertin des 
origines a 1665: un produit des apologetes (Paris-Seattle-Tiibingen: Papers on 
French Seventeenth Century Literature, 1989) (Biblio 17, no. 51), and the review 
of Godard de Donville’s book by Jean Jehasse in XVIIe siecle, no. 172 (1991): 
300-2.

162. Louise Godard de Donville, “Theophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose- 
Croix: un insidieux ‘parallele’ du pere Garasse,” in Wolfgang Leiner and Pierre 
Ronzeaud, eds., Correspondances. Melanges offerts a Roger Duchene, Etudes lit- 
teraires fran^aises, no. 51 (Tubingen/ Aix-en-Provence: Gunter Narr Verlag/Publi- 
cations de l’Universite de Provence, 1992), 143-54. 1 warmly thank Michel-Pierre 
Lerner for having pointed this article out to me.

163. Francois Garasse, Apologie du Pere Francois Garassus de la Compagnie de 
Jesus, pour son Livre contre les Atheistes & Libertins de nostre siecle. Et Response 
aux censures et calomnies de I’Autheur Anonyme (Paris: Sebastien Chappelet, 
1624) (privilege dating January 10, 1624), 5-6.164. Frederic Lachevre, ed., Le Libertinage devant le Parlement de Paris, Part 1: 
Le Proces de Theophile de Viau (1 1 juillet 1 623-ler septembre 1 625). Publication 
integrale des pieces inedites des Archives nationales (Paris: Honore Champion, 
1909), vol. I, 453 and 500. See also Antoine Adam, Theophile de Viau et la libre 
pensee franpaise en 1620 (Paris: E. Droz, 1935), 389-90. 1 do not understand how 
Godard de Donville, “Theophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 144, can 
deny the existence of this book and its supposed discovery in Theophile’s belong- 
ings, which have been clearly established by the terms of the interrogation edited 
by Lachevre.

165. Garasse, La Doctrine curieuse, 83-91, calls the Brotherhood of the Rose- 
Cross “La Confrerie de la Croix de Roses.” He is about the only one who trans- 
lated in this manner the words Fraternitas Rosae [or Roseae] Crucis: His 
contemporaries used the terms “Roze-Croix” (Naude, the Effroyables Pactions 
and Mercure Francois), “Rosee-Croix” (the translator of Neuhus, and one of the 
editions of the Examen sur I’lnconnue et Nouvelle Caballe), “Croix Rosee” (the 
manuscript of Turquet de Mayerne, the Examen sur I’lnconnue et Nouvelle Ca- 
balle), “croix Rosaires” (Gaspard: see below, note 187), “Rosecrucians” or 
“Rosecruceans” (Boucher: cf. infra, note 208), “Freres Roses” (the manuscript of 
Peiresc in the Bibliotheque Inguimbertine in Carpentras). We find, however, 
“Chevalliers de la Croix rose” in the manuscript of Philippe de Bethune (see above, 
note 85), which is closer to the terms figuring in Theophile’s interrogation. See be- 
low, note 172.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 329

166. Lachevre, he Libertinage devant le Parlement de Paris, Part 1: he Proces de 
Theophile de Viau, vol. 1, 436 and 444; vol. 2, 397. The handwritten piece in ques- 
tion began with these words: “Quoy qu’on me puisse veoyr accable de mal- 
heurs . . .” It has not been located.167. Rooses and Ruelens, Correspondance de Rubens et documents epistolaires 
concernant sa vie et ses oeuvres, 3:224. This testimony, not taken into account by 
the historians of Theophile de Viau, even the most recent ones, has on the other 
hand been well brought out and commented on by Halleux, “Helmontiana,” 60- 
61, in which we already find all the imperative connections between Theophile and 
the Rosicrucians.

168. The pretext the Parlement put forward was the publication of the Parnasse 
des Poetes Satyriques, of which Theophile was considered to be one of the princi- 
pal authors (Lachevre, Le Libertinage devant le Parlement de Paris, Part 1: Le 
Proces de Theophile de Viau, vol. 1, 131-32).

169. Rooses & Ruelens, Correspondance de Rubens et documents epistolaires 
concernant sa vie et ses oeuvres, 3:247 (“de la barque sur la Garonne, pres de 
Cadillac”). The printing of Garasse’s work was completed on August 18, the exact 
day of Peiresc’s departure and of the first ruling of the Parlement that condemned 
Theophile. Peiresc’s term “Adombrados” is not a slip of the tongue: It is found, for 
example, under Naude’s pen, Instruction a la France, 113. In February 1624, 
Peiresc still had not been able to read La Doctrine curieuse ; he wrote to Rubens on 
February 12 (Rooses & Ruelens, Correspondance, 3:287, from Aix-en-Provence): 
“I am sending to you the copy of the poster of the Adombrados and of a letter that 
I recently wrote to a friend in Italy concerning a fragment of Egyptian antiquity 
along with the drawing of this piece. Father Garasse’s book has still not reached 
me from Paris.”170. Frances Yates, who had already hinted at it, was nonetheless not able of es- 
tablishing the link with the polemic directed against Theophile and limited herself 
to associating the author of the Effroyables Pactions with Garasse in their com- 
mon effort to launch a witch-hunt against the Rosicrucians ( The Rosicrucian En- 
lightenment, ed. 1986, 105; French trans., ed. 1985, 137).

171. Effroyables Pactions, 6.

172. Adam, Theophile de Viau et la libre pensee frangaise en 1620, 71, 103, and 
408-9. Theophile and Bethune were close enough that in 1626, on the path to ex- 
ile, the poet enjoyed the hospitality of the latter’s son, Hippolyte de Bethune, at his 
chateau in Selles. Furthermore, the term “Croix Roze” used in the questionings of 
Theophile is only found once, to my knowledge, in the very manuscript that comes 
from Philippe de Bethune (“Affiches des Chevalliers de la Croix rose"). Could it 
be that these posters were collected by Theophile himself?

173. Effroyables Pactions, 15.

174. Theophile reproached the members of the Parlement for believing in the 
Rosicrucians. But this could not explain the implication, here, of the Parlement of 
Paris, expressly designated. Could it be a matter of settling a score that escapes us, 
or of an individual scandal that was widely but only briefly discussed? The lawyer 
is indeed presented as being pursued by the police, hence his desire to make him-

330 Didier Kahn

self invisible, in the same way as in the Examen sur I’Inconnue et Nouvelle Caballe 
des Freres de la Croix Rosee, in which a similar adventure takes place with a lawyer 
in distress over debts.

175. Effroyables Pactions, 17-19, at 19.175. Effroyables Pactions, 17-19, at 19.

176. Ibid., 10 (emphasis added). Let us recall, after Louise Godard de Donville, 
that “in the title of La Doctrine curieuse, ‘curieuse’ means (among other things) 
‘magic.’” The repetition of this word is therefore less innocent than it seems. Cf. 
Godard de Donville, “L’oeuvre de Theophile de Viau aux feux croises du ‘liberti- 
nage’,” Oeuvres et Critiques, 20, no. 3 (1995): 185-204, at 201. On the notion of 
“curiosite,” “already laden with a long history of reprobation in secular and Chris- 
tian literature,” cf. Jean Dupebe, “Curiosite et magie chez Johannes Trithemius,” 
in Jean Ceard, ed., La Curiosite a la Renaissance (Paris: Societe d’Edition de l’En- 
seignement Superieur, 1986), 71-97, as well as the thoughts of Jean Ceard at the 
beginning of the same volume, 14-18 (cf. 16 his quote from Martin Del Rio: some- 
times “ curiosus pro malefico seu mago accipitur”).

177. Garasse, La Doctrine curieuse, 296-99.

178. Effroyables Pactions, 9.

179. Arthur Edward Waite, The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross (1924; reprinted, 
Secaucus, N.J.: University Books, 1973), 360: “the work of a venal pamphleteer 
who saw money in the madness and fed it with incredible stories of drowning and 
suicide which followed the experiences of initiation.”

180. Examen sur Vlnconnue et Nouvelle Caballe des Freres de la Croix Rosee, 
8-10: “Founders de Sathan.”

181. Ibid., 10-11.

182. Ibid., 14: “ces beaux Dogmatiseurs.”

183. See, for example, the very title of the chapter on the Rosicrucians (Garasse, 
La Doctrine curieuse, 83-91): “Section Quatorziesme. La Secte de nos beaux 
Esprits dogmatisans en cachettes, est semblable a la faction de ces gens qui s’ap- 
pellent, La Confrerie de la Croix de Roses.”

184. Lachevre, Le Libertinage devant le Parlement de Paris, Part 1: Le Proces de 
Theophile de Viau, vol. 1, 444.184. Lachevre, Le Libertinage devant le Parlement de Paris, Part 1: Le Proces de 
Theophile de Viau, vol. 1, 444.

185. Examen sur I’Inconnue et Nouvelle Caballe des Freres de la Croix Rosee, 16. 
The pamphlet ends with this recommendation. The “SS. Cayers” are the Holy 
Scriptures.

186. On this matter see Lachevre, Le Libertinage devant le Parlement de Paris, 
Part 1: Le Proces de Theophile de Viau, vol. 1, 49-51, and Garasse’s allusion 
pointed out below, note 224.

187. M. Gaspard, Thresor de Vhistoire generale de nostre temps. De tout ce qui 
s’ est fait & passe en France soubs le regne de Louis le Juste. Depuis la mort de- 
plorable de Henry le Grand jusques a present. Contenant les troubles arrivez au 
Royaume durant la Regence de la Royne sa Mere, dans la Majorite du Roy, & pen- 
dant les guerres de la Rebellion, jusques apres la Paix donnee par sa Majeste a ses 
subjects de la Religion pretendue reformee. Par M. Gaspard, N. Historien.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 331

Troisiesme edition, reveue & augmentee par I’Autheur (Paris: Joseph Bouillerot, 
1624) (Bibliotheque de 1’ Arsenal, shelfmark: 8° H. 6965), 671. This edition com- 
piles a registry of current events until March 10, 1624. The 1623 edition, that can 
be consulted at the BNF, contains nothing on the Rosicrucians.

188. Ibid., 692-93 = Effroyables Pactions, 6: “It is held that the Enlightened Ones 
of Spain, & the Invisible Ones of France . . .” (text already quoted in part above, 
270). The reader will not be surprised to learn that Gaspard’s passage on the Rosi- 
crucians is framed by those that concern the Enlightened Ones of Spain (671-92) 
and Theophile’s trial (693-96). Gaspard was to be followed by the Table chrono- 
grapbique of Gaultier, who was no less confused in the 1626 edition; cf. Godard 
de Donville, “Theophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 148.189. [Malingre], Troisiesme Tome de I’Histoire de nostre temps, 98-99, 99-124 
(Effroyables Pactions ) and 124-25. Let us remember that the privilege of this book 
is dated March 7, 1624.

190. Ibid., 330-47: report of Theophile’s trial (August 1623) and his arrest (Sep- 
tember 1623).

191. Let us remember that the privilege for Malingre ’s continuation of Florimond 
de Raemond’s Histoire generale du progrez et decadence de 1’Heresie moderne, in 
which this brochure is located, dates from March 14, 1624.

192. BNF, MS fr. 19574 (XVIIth c.), fols. 28r-61v. On this questioning, see 
among others Robert Mandrou, Magistrats et sorciers en France an XVIIe si'ecle. 
Une analyse de psychologie historique, in series L’Univers historique (Paris: Seuil, 
1980), 105; 27, no. 19; and passim.

193. BNF, MS fr. 19574, fols. 61r-62v.

194. Ibid., fols. 65r-68v. On this incident, I refer once more to my dissertation, 
“Paracelsisme et alchimie en France.” See also D. Kahn, “Entre atomisme, alchimie 
et theologie: la reception des theses d’Antoine de Villon et Etienne de Clave contre 
Aristote, Paracelse et les ‘cabalistes,’” Annals of Science, 58 (2001), forthcoming.

195. BNF, MS fr. 19574, fols. 69r-72v.

196. A characteristic example of this shortcoming is provided by Allen G. Debus’s 
The French Paracelsians: The Chemical Challenge to Medical and Scientific Tra- 
dition in Early Modern France (Cambridge-New York-Melbourne: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991). The author, in spite of constant efforts to widen his per- 
spectives in the manner of his work The Chemical Philosophy (New York: Science 
History Publications, 1977), comes back steadily, as if it were a leitmotiv, to a mere 
account of the stages of the too-famous quarrel.197. I discuss this matter at length in “Paracelsisme et alchimie en France.” See 
also Kahn, “La Faculte de medecine de Paris en echec face au paracelsisme: enjeux 
et denouement reels du proces de Roch Le Baillif,” in Heinz Schott and liana 
Zinguer, eds., Paracelsus und seine international Rezeption in der friiben Neuzeit. 
Beitrdge zur Geschichte des Paracelsismus, Brill’s Studies in Intellectual History, 
vol. 86 (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1998), 146-221.

198. These various episodes are also discussed in my dissertation, “Paracelsisme 
et alchimie en France.”

332 Didier Kahn

199. On this quarrel, cf. Walter Pagel, Joan Baptista Van Helmont, Reformer of 
Science and Medicine, Cambridge Monographs on the History of Medicine (Cam- 
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 8-12; Halleux, “Helmontiana,” 51-57 
and 61; Moran, The Alchemical World of the German Court, 36-39; Wolf-Dieter 
Muller-Jahncke, Astrologisch-magische Theorie und Praxis in der Heilkunde der 
friihen Neuzeit, Sudhoffs Archiv, Beiheft 25 (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1985), and 
his “Magische Medizin bei Paracelsus und den Paracelsisten: Die Waffensalbe,” in 
P. Dilg and H. Rudolph, eds., Resultate and Desiderate der Paracelsus-Forschung, 
Sudhoffs Archiv, Beiheft 30 (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1993), 43-55, at 47-54; and 
my dissertation, “Paracelsisme et alchimie en France.”

200. See the beginning of the Archidoxes magicae in Theophrast von Hohenheim, 
gen. Paracelsus, Sdmtliche Werke, ed. Karl Sudhoff (Munich-Berlin: R. Olden- 
bourg, 1933), I, 14: 448; on this text published for the first time in 1570 in Gerard 
Dorn’s Latin translation, cf. ibid., xxv-xxviii.201. See on this topic Ralf Georg Bogner, “Paracelsus auf dem Index. Zur kirch- 
lichen Kommunikationskontrolle in der friihen Neuzeit,” in Telle, Analecta 
Paracelsica, 489-530; D. Kahn, “59 theses de Paracelse censurees par la Faculte 
de theologie de Paris le 9 octobre 1578,” in S. Matton, ed., Documents oublies sur 
I’alchimie, la kabbale et Guillaume Postel offerts, pottr son 90' anniversaire, a 
Frangois Secret par ses eleves et amis (Geneva: Droz, 2001), forthcoming.

202. Is this what incited an Italian prelate, Agesilao Marescotti, to ask Peiresc 
about the Rosicrucians on June 13, 1619? See BNF, MS fr. 9540, fol. 184r: “Mi 
resta da supplicar’ il signor di Peiresc . . . di raccogliermi tutto cio che appartiene 
alia societa della Rosea Croce” (pointed out by Pintard, Le Libertinage erudit, 48 
n. 4, and 584).

203. Marin Mersenne, Quaestiones celeberrimae in Genesim, cum accurata tex- 
tus explicatione. In hoc volumine Athei, et Deistae impugnantur, & expugnantur, 
& Vulgata editio ab haereticorum calunmiis vindicatur. Graecorum, & Hebraeo- 
rum Musica instauratur. Francisci Georgii Veneti cabalistica dogmata fuse 
refelluntur, quae passim in illius problematibus habentur. Opus Theologis, 
Pbilosopbis, Medicis, Jurisconsultis, Mathematicis, Musicis vero, & Catoptricis 
praesertim utile (Paris: Sebastien Cramoisy, 1623), quaestio LIII (An e cadavere 
Abelis sanguis adversus Cain proruperit, & an id fiat homicida praesente, ut vttlgo 
affirmant).

204. Andreas Libavius, Tractatus duo physici; prior de impostoria vulnerum per 
unguentum armarium sanatione Paracelsicis usitata commendataque. Posterior 
de cruentatione cadaverum in justa caede factorum praesente, qui occidisse credi- 
tur. . . . His accessit epistola de examine Panaceae Amwaldinae . . . (Frankfurt: Jo- 
hann Saur for Peter Kopff, 1594), 140-392.205. It is the 241st conference of the Bureau d’Adresse, on March 19, 1640 (Qua- 
triesme Centurie des questions traitees aux conferences du Bureau d’Adresse, 
1641, 209 [recte: 213]-216: “Why dead bodies bleed in the presence of their mur- 
derers”). See on this subject Alain Boureau, “La preuve par le cadavre qui saigne 
au XIII' siecle: entre experience commune et savoir scolastique ,” Micrologus, 7 
(1999), 24-81.

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France ( 1623-24 ) 333

206. Marin Mersenne, Quaestiones celeberrimae in Genesim, quaestio LIII, art. 
5 (Si ilia sanguinis ebullitio naturali tribuenda est, cui potissimum, ac probabilius), 
col. 1452: “qui fere quibuslibet nundinis Francofurtensibus libellos impietatem 
redolentes in orbem Christianum inducunt.”

207. Jean Boucher, Couronne mystique ou Armes de piete, contre toute sorte 
d’impiete, heresie, atheisme, schisme, magie, & Mahometisme. Par un signe ou hiero- 
glyphique mysterieux, fait en forme de Couronne, autant rare & ancien, que di- 
vinement descouvert en nos jours. Avec dessein sur ce sujet, de milice ou 
chevallerie Chrestienne, contre tons mescreans. Specialement contre le Turc. Oeu- 
vre plein de variete et meslange, tant de doctrine divine & humaine, que d’histoire 
sacree & prophane, & remarque de choses rates. Le tout divise en V. Livres. Aux 
Rois & Princes souverains. Et specialement aux deux freres doublement alliez, les 
deux plus grands Rois de Chrestiente (Tournai: Adrien Quinque, 1623; reissue, 
1624). Boucher transferred the privilege, which bears the date April 24, 1623, to 
the publisher on May 1: The work was therefore published at the end of May or 
the beginning of June. On Jean Boucher (c 1548-1644 or 1646), see the article 
“Boucher” by J. Dedieu in the Dictionnaire d’histoire et de geographie ecclesias- 
tiques, vol. 9 (Paris: Letouzey & Ane, 1937), cols. 1457-60, and the notice in the 
Dictionnaire des Lettres franfaises. Le XVIIe si'ecle, 191.208. Boucher, Couronne mystique, reissue 1624, 551, 552, 553-54.

209. Ibid., 553.

210. Ibid., 554.

211. Garasse, La Doctrine curieuse, 83-91.

212. On Besold’s attitude toward the Rosicrucian movement, cf. Gilly, “Iter Rosi- 
crucianum, ” 11. On Besold as the translator into German of Campanella’s Monar- 
chy di Spagna (translation published in 1620 and reissued in 1623), and on the 
addition to this text reproduced by Gabriel Naude and attributable to Besold him- 
self, see Michel-Pierre Lerner, Tommaso Campanella en France au XVIIe siecle, 
Lezioni della Scuola di Studi Superiori in Napoli, no. 17 (Naples: Bibliopolis, 
1995), 34-36.

213. Jean Baptiste van Helmont, De Magnetica vulnerum curatione. Disputatio, 
Contra opinionem D. Joan. Roberti, Presbyteri de Societate Jesu, Doctoris The- 
ologi, in brevi sua anatome sub censurae specie exaratam (Paris: Victor Le Roy, 
1621) (the printer’s address to the reader is dated from Lyon, “ex typis nostris, ” in 
the year 1620). Rudolph Goclenius, De magnetica vulnerum curatione (Paris: 
Samuel Celerius, 1621) (pointed out by Robert Halleux, “Helmontiana,” 53 and 
n. 122).

214. Cf. Lenoble, Mersenne ou la naissance du mecanisme, reissue 1971, XLVI. 
The alleged “Jacques de Nuysement” found in nearly every recent work on seven- 
teenth-century alchemy never existed: This author was no other than the poet and 
alchemist Clovis Hesteau de Nuysement, as Wallace Kirsop showed forty years 
ago. “Jacques” is a modern bibliographic error.

215. Naude, Instruction a la France, 14. Cf. Blaise de Vigenere, Traicte du feu et 
du sel (“A Paris, En la boutique de L’Angelier. Chez Claude Cramoisy au premier

334 Didier Kahn215. Naude, Instruction a la France, 14. Cf. Blaise de Vigenere, Traicte du feu et 
du sel (“A Paris, En la boutique de L’Angelier. Chez Claude Cramoisy au premier

334 Didier Kahn

pilier de la grand’Salle du Palais. 1622. Avec privilege du Roy”) (copy in London, 
British Library, shelfmark 1033.L8). This edition is but the posthumous edition of 
1618 being put back on sale; the privilege is the same, and with good reason: It was 
accorded for ten years. Only the title page was modified, with an omission: “Blaise 
Vigenere” (the particle “de” is missing). Cf. [Secret], Kabbale et philosophie her- 
metique. Exposition a I’occasion du Festival International de I’Esoterisme, 66, 
ill. 25.

216. This book by a certain de Merac (?), published by Pierre Ramier, is pointed 
out by Pierre Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, sen Catalogus librorum pbilosophico- 
rum hermeticorum (Paris: Charles Du Mesnil & Thomas Jolly, 1654; 2nd ed., Hei- 
delberg: Samuel Brown, 1656; reprint, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1969), 246.

217. he veritable et souverain remede pour la maladie Pestilentieuse. Extraict des 
oeuvres de M. Roch le Baillif, Sieur de la Riviere Conseiller & Medecin ordinaire 
du Roy (Paris: Gervais Aliot, 1623). This is a simple little book of eight pages that 
reproduces a fragment of the Traicte du remede a la peste by Le Baillif (Paris, 1580) 
starting with fol. 20r (“Faut prendre une once poisant de vieil theriaque de 
Venise . . .”). On the plague in Paris in 1623, see the passage on Descartes below.218. Paracelsus, La petite Chirurgie, autrement ditte la Bertheonee, de Philippe 
Aoreole Theophraste Paracelse grand Medecin & Philosopbe entre les Allemans. 
Plus les traittez du mesme Autbeur, des Apostemes [,] syrons ou noeuds, des ou- 
vertures du cuir, des ulceres, des vers, serpens, taches ou marques qui viennent de 
naissance, & des contractures. Avec notes & explications des termes & mots plus 
diffciles. Table des Cbapitres, &matieres (Paris: Olivier de Varennes, 1623) (Paris, 
Bibliotheque Ste-Genevieve, shelfmark: T. 8° 1751 inv. 4549 FA), fol. a2r-v. This 
work is described by Karl Sudhoff, Versucb einer Kritik der Echtheit der Paracel- 
sischen Scbriften, vol. 2: Paracelsus-Handschriften (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1899), 
“Nachtrage zum ersten Bande,” 803-4 = no. 323.

219. Paracelsus, La petite Chirurgie, fol. a3v-a4r. Here is the original in Latin: 
“Non titulus, non eloquentia, non linguarum peritia, nec multorum librorum 
lectio, etsi haec non parum exornent, in medico desideranda, sed summa rerum 
ac mysteriorum cognitio, quae una facile aliorum omnium vices agit” (Th. von 
Hohenheim, gen. Paracelsus, Sdmtlicbe Werke, ed. Sudhoff, I, 4 [Munich-Berlin: 
R. Oldenbourg, 1931], 3).

220. The publisher, Olivier de Varennes, had just published at Louis XIII’s ex- 
pense Marino’s L’Adone, adorned with the king’s coat of arms (cf. M. Fumaroli, 
L’lnspiration du poete de Poussin. Essai sur Vallegorie du Parnasse, Les Dossiers 
du Departement des Peintures, no. 36 [Paris: Reunion des Musees Nationaux, 
1989], 52). As for the dedicator, Schomberg, he was at the time very close to Louis 
XIII.

221. Paracelsus, La petite Chirurgie, fol. [J4]r.

222. Naude, Instruction a la France, 64 (emphasis added).

223. As for the first book of La Doctrine curieuse, Louise Godard de Donville re- 
minds us that it was composed at the beginning of March at the latest (“Theophile, 
les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 143).

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France ( 1623-24 ) 33SThe Rosicrucian Hoax in France ( 1623-24 ) 33S

224. Garasse, La Doctrine curieuse, 849. This should be connected to the attack 
by the Examen sur ITnconnue et Nouvelle Caballe des Freres de la Croix Rosee, 
studied above, 273, against the “good companions” who doubt the reality of de- 
monic possession.

225. Garasse, La Doctrine curieuse, 1010-17, here 1012-13. Cf. Martin Del Rio, 
Disquisitionum magicarum Libri sex: Quibus continetur accurata curiosarum ar- 
tium, & vanarum superstitionmn confutatio; utilis Theologis, Jurisconsultis, 
Medicis, Philologis (1599), book VI, chap. II, sect. I, quaest. 1 (ed. Lyon: Jean Pille- 
hotte, 1612, 405-6). On Del Rio and Paracelsus, see the analysis by Halleux, “Hel- 
montiana,” 54-56.

226. We will see this below. Let us point out that the Sorbonne’s censure against 
Paracelsus had remained very little known outside of the Faculty of Medicine of 
Paris. See Kahn, “59 theses de Paracelse censurees par la Faculte.”

227. Del Rio, Disquisitionum magicarum Libri sex, ed. cited, 405: “Nam nec ii, 
qui Baptismate tincti; satis horum immunes. Nam multa occurrunt apud Pom- 
ponatium, multa apud Henricum Cornelium Agrippam; sed plura apud Philippum 
Aureolum, alias Bombastum Paracelsum variis ejus operibus, quorum omnium 
libri prohibitae per Ecclesiam sunt lectionis.” Banned for the first time in 1580 in 
the Parme Index, Paracelsus had particularly appeared in the Tridentine Index of 
Pope Clement VIII, published in Rome in 1596. See Bogner, “Paracelsus auf dem 
Index” and Kahn, “59 theses de Paracelse censurees par la Faculte.”

228. Thomas Erastus, Disputationum de Medicina nova Philippi Paracelsi Pars 
prima . . . Pars quarta et ultima, 4 vols. (Basle: Pietro Perna, 1571-73); see, for ex- 
ample, 1: 54.

229. Del Rio, Disquisitionum magicarum Libri sex, ed. cited, 405: “Os impurum! 
quasi non sit Theologorum judicare; quid contra Deum, quid non contra Deum sit. 
Sic agyrta nequissimus Fidei tribunal sibi vendicat.”230. Mersenne, Quaestiones celeberrimae in Genesim, cols. 576-77 (start of the 
polemic) and cols. 649-54 (text of the actual polemic).

231. See especially Sylvain Matton, Introduction to: Dom Belin, Les Aventures du 
pbilosophe inconnu (1646;Paris: Retz, 1976) (coll. “Bibliotheca Hermetica”), 13- 
69, at 31-32; Matton, “Creations microcosmique et macrocosmique. La Cabala 
Mineralis et l’interpretation alchimique de la Genese,” in Simeon Ben Cantar, 
Cabala Mineralis (Paris: J.-C. Bailly Editeur, 1986), 25-33, esp. 26-29, which does 
not, however, cite the passage of the Quaestiones celeberrimae in Genesim under 
discussion here; W. L. Hine, “Mersenne and Alchemy,” in Z. R. W. M. von Mar- 
tels, ed., Alchemy Revisited: Proceedings of the International Conference on the 
History of Alchemy at the University of Groningen, 1 7-19 April 1989, Collection 
de travaux de l’Academie Internationale d’Histoire des Sciences, no. 33 (Leiden: 
E. J. Brill, 1990), 188-91, esp. 191, also does not cite the Quaestiones celeberri- 
mae in Genesim; Armand Beaulieu, “L’attitude nuancee de Mersenne envers la 
chymie,” in Margolin and Matton, Alchimie et philosophie a la Renaissance, 395- 
403, at 396-97.

232. Mersenne, Quaestiones celeberrimae in Genesim, cols. 711-18 (esp. cols. 
711-12). Sylvain Matton has pointed out that Mersenne at first criticized, without

336 Didier Kalm

naming his source, a text that is in fact by Robert Fludd (“Creations microcos- 
mique et macrocosmique: La Cabala Mineralis et ^interpretation alchimique de la 
Genese,” 26-27).

233. Mersenne, Quaestiones celeberrimae in Genesim, col. 651.

234. Godard de Donville, “Theophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” esp. 
148-54.

235. Lorenzo Bianchi, “Gabriel Naude critique des alchimistes;” idem, Rinasci- 
mento e libertinismo. Studi su Gabriel Naude, passim.235. Lorenzo Bianchi, “Gabriel Naude critique des alchimistes;” idem, Rinasci- 
mento e libertinismo. Studi su Gabriel Naude, passim.

236. Naude, Instruction a la France, 114-15; already pointed out by Godard de 
Donville, “Theophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 152-53. For a com- 
mentary on this passage of Naude’s Instruction, cf. Pintard, Le Libertinage erudit, 
161; 166, n. 5; and 601.

237. Lachevre, Le Libertinage devant le Parlement de Paris, Part 1: Le Proces de 
Theophile de Viau, vol. 1, 131-32 and 141-43; Josephine de Boer, “Colletet’s Exile 
after His Condemnation in 1623,” Modern Language Notes, 47 (1932): 159-62; 
Pasquale Aniel Jannini, Verso il tempo della ragione. Studi e ricerche su Guillaume 
Colletet (1965), vol. 28 of Biblioteca della Ricerca, Cultura Straniera (reprinted, 
Fasano: Schena Editore, 1989), 74-80.

238. Emphasis added. See Naude, Instruction a la France, fol. [e3]v, sonnet signed 
“G. C. P. A.,” that is, “Guillaume Colletet, Parisien, Advocat.” Josephine de Boer 
cites four of Colletet’s poems signed, in 1619, in the same way but with the signa- 
ture written out in full (“Colletet’s Exile After His Condemnation in 1623,” 159, 
n. 5). Furthermore, Colletet repeated this sonnet in his Divertissemens of 1631. 
In 1625, he honored in the same way the Apologie by Naude. See Jannini, Verso 
il tempo della ragione. Studi e ricerche su Guillaume Colletet, 139-40 and 155, 
nn. 33 and 35.

239. See Jannini, Verso il tempo della ragione. Studi e ricerche su Guillaume Col- 
letet, 77-78, and, on the quarrel between Ogier and Garasse, Fumaroli, L’Age de 
V eloquence, 329-34. Louise Godard de Donville rightly reminds us that Guy de La 
Brosse joined forces with Naude and Ogier in the attack directed against Garasse 
(“Theophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 153-54).

240. Godard de Donville, “Theophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 152; 
Fumaroli, L’Age de I’eloquence, for example, 252-56.240. Godard de Donville, “Theophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 152; 
Fumaroli, L’Age de I’eloquence, for example, 252-56.

241. Naude, Instruction a la France, 49-52.

242. Ibid., 59-60; already pointed out by Godard de Donville, “Theophile, les 
‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 149.

243. Naude, Instruction a la France, 60; already pointed out by Godard de 
Donville, “Theophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 149, n. 18.

244. Naude, Instruction a la France, 14-15. On Garasse and Nothing, see 
Lachevre, Le Libertinage devant le Parlement de Paris, Part 1: Le Proces de 
Theophile de Viau, vol. 1, 173-74.

245. Garasse, La Doctrine curieuse, 90-91. Naude, Instruction a la France, 62: 
“voire mesme l’industrie de l’architecte de tous ces mensonges [i.e., the author of

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France ( 1623-24 ) 337

the Fama] a este si per^ante en la Preface de son Manifeste, que de nous vouloir 
persuader qu’un Adamus Haselmeyer (condamne pour ses malefices) avoit este en- 
voye aux galeres a cause que par un zele & trop grande devotion a cette compag- 
nie, il avoit avance quelques paroles a sa louange, esperant par cette terreur de 
supplice avoir une excuse legitime de ne se manifester plus a descouvert.”

246. Naude, Instruction a la France, 114-15. See Marc Fumaroli’s analysis of 
Ogier’s reply to Garasse (L’Age de {’eloquence, 329-32).

247. [Malingre], Traicte des Atheistes, Deistes, Illuminez d’Espagne, et nouveaux 
pretendus Invisibles, dits de la Confrairie de la Croix-Rosaire, 3.

248. I was unable to determine the exact publication date of Guy de La Brosse’s 
Traicte contre la mesdisance. Cf. Adam, Theophile de Viau et la libre pensee 
frangaise en 1620, 379 and 413-14.

249. [Malingre], Traicte des Atheistes, Deistes, Illuminez d’Espagne, et nouveaux 
pretendus Invisibles, dits de la Confrairie de la Croix-Rosaire, 4-11, here 11.249. [Malingre], Traicte des Atheistes, Deistes, Illuminez d’Espagne, et nouveaux 
pretendus Invisibles, dits de la Confrairie de la Croix-Rosaire, 4-11, here 11.

250. Ibid., 11-13. The dedication to Richelieu of the first part of L’lmpiete des 
Deistes is dated June 8, 1624, but the approval of the Minims, Fathers Claude 
Rangueil and Jacques Bremant, dates from January 25.

251. Ibid., 21-55.

252. Naude, Instruction a la France, 30. The verses from Lucretius (I, 83, and 
101) mean: “Religion has been able to counsel so many crimes” and “Religion is 
what gave birth to criminal and impious actions.”

253. Ibid., 10-11.

254. On Garasse and de Lancre, see Godard de Donville, Ee Libertin des origines 
a 1665, 153 and n. 3; Pintard, Le Libertinage erudit, 442. For some violent pas- 
sages directed against Charron, see Garasse, La Doctrine curieuse, for example, 
27-29 or 1015; Marin Mersenne, L’lmpiete des Deistes, Athees, et Libertins de ce 
temps, combatue, & renversee de point en point par raisons tirees de la Pbiloso- 
pbie, & de la Theologie. Ensemble la refutation du Po'eme des Deistes (Paris: Pierre 
Billaine, 1624), chap. 9 (180-210); Lenoble, Mersenne ou la naissance du mecan- 
isme, 64 and 204.

255. See Garasse’s reply to Ogier: Apologie du Pere Frangois Garassus, chaps. 21 
and 22 (259-85).

256. Gabriel Naude, Apologie pour tons les grands personnages qui ont este 
faussement soupgonnez de magie (Paris: Francois Targa, 1625), Preface, fol. [a5]r— 
v. On the Apologie, besides Rene Pintard (Le Libertinage erudit) and Lorenzo 
Bianchi (Rinascimento e libertinismo), see Anna Lisa Schino, Tradizione ermetica 
e astrologia giudiziaria in Gabriel Naude (Florence: Olschki, 1992), esp. 133-227 
(I thank Robert Halleux for this reference).

257. Naude, Instruction a la France, 64. Cf. Pintard, Le Libertinage erudit, 446; 
Bianchi, “Gabriel Naude critique des alchimistes 412; idem, Rinascimento e lib- 
ertinismo. Studi su Gabriel Naude, 186-87.258. “Welcome with laughter the cadavers in frightening shapes, the apparitions 
of the night, the spectral bogeymen, the nocturnal ghosts and the wonders of Thes- 
saly.” (Apuleius, Apologia sive de Magia, 64).

338 D idler Kahn

259. “It was perhaps a wish emanating from good men who wished for commu- 
nication in literature.” Cf. Naude, Instruction a la France, 77-79. On Naude’s re- 
lations with Father Redento Baranzano (1590-1622) and Tobias Adami, see 
Pintard, Le Libertinage erudit, 133-34, and especially Lerner, Tommaso Cam- 
panella en France an XVIIe siecle, 33-34 and n. 53 (on Baranzano, add the bibli- 
ography of Kurd Lasswitz, Geschichte der Atomistik vom Mittelalter bis Newton, 
2 vols. [Hamburg-Leipzig: Leopold Voss, 1890], 1:330-31, n. 12). Thanks to 
Adami, Naude had fairly good information at his disposal: see the Instruction a la 
France, 88, in which Naude cited a letter from Adami on October 15, 1622, that 
declared with regards to the Rosy-Cross: fabula ista jam fere peracta est (“This 
fable is almost over already”).

260. Naude, Instruction a la France, 79.

261. Ibid., 22-24 and 42-48. On Naude’s complete historical awareness, see 
Bianchi, Rinascimento e libertinismo. Studi su Gabriel Naude, 96-97.

262. [Gabriel Naude], Jugement de tout ce qui a este imprime contre le Cardinal 
Mazarin, Depuis le sixieme Janvier, jusques a la Declaration du premier Avril mil 
six cens quarante-neuf [ also called the Mascurat] (s.l.n.d. [Paris, 1650]), 469.

263. Naude, Instruction a la France, for example, 51 and 84; Apologie pour tons 
les grands personnages, 365.

264. Naude, Instruction a la France, 49.263. Naude, Instruction a la France, for example, 51 and 84; Apologie pour tons 
les grands personnages, 365.

264. Naude, Instruction a la France, 49.

265. Ibid., 42-48, at 42 and 44. On the prophecy of Helias Artista, see Eugene 
Olivier: “Bernard G[illes] Penot (Du Port), medecin et alchimiste (1519-1617),” 
Chrysopoeia, 5 (1992-96): 571-668, at 611-12 (with bibliography); William R. 
Newman, Gebennical Fire: The Lives of George Starkey, an American Alchemist 
in the Scientific Revolution (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1994), 3-4.

266. Naude, Instruction a la France, 59-60.

267. Pintard, Le Libertinage erudit, 449 (quotation) and 443-44, 447, 467-68.

268. Naude, Instruction a la France, 59-60, 105, and 75.

269. See Olivier, “Bernard G[illes] Penot (Du Port), medecin et alchimiste (1519- 
1617),” 620.

270. See Kahn, “La Faculte de medecine de Paris en echec face au paracel- 
sisme,” 160.

271. Quoted by Gilly, “Theophrastia Sancta,” 426.

272. On the hostility toward Paracelsus in the Lutheran circles, see the significant 
reactions of the Faculty of Medicine of Tubingen between 1599 and 1609 against 
Tobias Hess, accused of having made himself “the disciple of the atheist Paracel- 
sus” (Gilly, “Iter Rosicrucianum, ” 70-71; Cimelia Rbodostaurotica, 45-47).

273. On the importance of the Faculty of Medicine of Paris in Naude’s intellectual 
development, see Pintard, Le Libertinage erudit, 158-59. Elsewhere Naude 
describes the Paracelsian physicians and the iatrochemists as fumivenduli Para- 
celsistae, Hermetici medicastri, Basilicae Crollianae fautores, & id genus 
omne Medicorum; cf. Lorenzo Bianchi, “Renaissance et libertinage chez Gabriel 
Naude,” in Antony McKenna and Pierre-Fran^ois Moreau, eds., Libertinage et

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 339

philosophic au XVIIe siecle, Part 2: La Mothe Le Vayer et Naude (Saint-Etienne: 
Publications de l’Universite de Saint-Etienne, 1997), 75-90, at 79.The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 339

philosophic au XVIIe siecle, Part 2: La Mothe Le Vayer et Naude (Saint-Etienne: 
Publications de l’Universite de Saint-Etienne, 1997), 75-90, at 79.

274. Naude, Instruction a la France, 26. See the judicious parallel established in 
this respect by Lorenzo Bianchi between Le Marfore and the Instruction d la 
France ( Rinascimento e libertinismo. Studi sit Gabriel Naude, 89-92).

275. Naude, Instruction a la France, 108 and 110. Cf. Pintard, Le Libertinage 
erudit, 542-43; Bianchi, “Gabriel Naude critique des alchimistes,” 414-15; idem, 
Rinascimento e libertinismo. Studi su Gabriel Naude, 190-92.

276. See Marc Fumaroli, “Sous le signe de Protee, 1594-1630,” chap. 1 (“Saturne 
et les remedes a la melancolie”) in Jean Mesnard, dir., Precis de litterature frangaise 
du XVIIe siecle (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1990), esp. 41-42.

277. Mercure Francois, vol. 9 (1622-24), 374-87. 1 do not know how Godard de 
Donville can write that the Mercure, in this article, “gives Garasse the last word” 
(“Theophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 150).

278. Gouhier, Les Premieres pensees de Descartes, esp. 121-27.

279. Arnold’s Histoire des Rose-Croix had a second edition in 1990. On the sup- 
posed analogies between the dreams of Descartes and the Chymische Hochzeit, see 
Fernand Hallyn’s brief refutation of Arnold: “Une ‘feintise,’” in F. Hallyn, ed., Les 
“Olympiques” de Descartes, Romanica Gandensia, no. 25 (Geneva: Droz, 1995), 
91-111, at 101-3.280. Sylvain Matton, “Le reve dans les ‘secretes sciences’: spirituels, kabbalistes 
chretiens et alchimistes,” Revue des Sciences Humaines, no. 211 (July-September 
1988): Rever en France au XVIIe siecle, 153-80 (179-80 on Descartes); Robert 
Halleux, “Helmontiana II: le prologue de I’Eisagoge, la conversion de Van Hel- 
mont au paracelsisme, et les songes de Descartes,” Academiae Analecta. Med- 
edelingen van de Koninklijke Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schone 
Kunsten van Belgie. Klasse der Wetenschappen, 49, no. 2 (1987): 18-36.

281. [Baillet], La Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, 1691, 1:105-6 and 107.

282. Ibid., 1:36-37.

283. Gouhier, Les Premieres pensees de Descartes, 126, n. 35, taking sides with 
Cornelis de Waard’s opinion in Tannery, de Waard, and Pintard, Correspondance 
du P. Marin Mersenne, 1:149; Genevieve Rodis-Lewis, Descartes. Biographie 
(Paris: Calmann-Levy, 1995), 87.

284. Baillet indicates here: “Le P. Poiss. Rem. sur la Meth. de Desc. part. 2, 
pag. 30. 31. 32.” This passage from Poisson is reproduced in the Oeuvres of Des- 
cartes (ed. Adam and Tannery), 10:197-98, note a.

285. Baillet cites here the text of the poster transmitted in the Effroyables 
Pactions.

286. [Baillet], La Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, 1691, 1:107-8. Baillet indicates 
here: “Hil. de Cost, vie de Mers. pag. 15. 16.,” but there is nothing about Descartes 
in these pages of the book of [Hilarion de Coste], La Vie du R. P. Marin Mersenne 
theologien, philosophe et matbematicien de POrdre des Peres Minimes (Paris: 
Sebastien & Gabriel Cramoisy, 1649).

340 Didier Kahn

287. Gouhier, Les Premieres pensees de Descartes, 20 and 124; also Rodis-Lewis, 
Descartes. Biograpbie, 13.340 Didier Kahn

287. Gouhier, Les Premieres pensees de Descartes, 20 and 124; also Rodis-Lewis, 
Descartes. Biograpbie, 13.

288. We become certain of this thanks to a variant in the text of the first Rosicru- 
cian poster: Only the Mercure Francois gives, as Baillet does, the reading “in which 
we live” instead of “in which <we> wish to be.” See above, note 146, for the anal- 
ysis of Baillet’s use of the Mercure.

289. [Baillet], La Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, 1691, 1:106 and 116; Descartes, 
Oeuvres (ed. Adam and Tannery), 1:2-4; Mrs. Tannery, de Waard, and Pintard, 
Correspondance du P. Marin Mersenne, 1:149. In his abridged version of the life 
of Descartes (1693), Baillet specifies: “M. Descartes fut deux mois et quelques 
jours a Paris,” which agrees with these dates (Adrien Baillet, Vie [abridged] de 
Monsieur Descartes [Paris: La Table Ronde, 1946, reissued 1992], 55).

290. [Baillet], La Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, 1691, 1:116; Descartes, Oeuvres 
(ed. Adam and Tannery, 1:2; Baillet, Vie [abridged] de Monsieur Descartes, 55: 
“De la il alia en Poitou, et pendant les mois de juin et de juillet qu’il y demeura, il 
vendit, du consentement de son pere, la plus grande partie des biens qui lui etaient 
venus du cote de sa mere.”

291. Baillet, Vie [abridged] de Monsieur Descartes, 5 5-56.

292. [Baillet], La Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, 1691, 1:118.

293. Besides Frederic Lachevre’s Le Libertinage devant le Parlement de Paris, part 
1: Le Proces de Theophile de Viau, 1:141, cf. Arlette Lebigre, “Les proces de 
Theophile de Viau,” in Jean Imbert, dir., Quelques proces criminels des XVIIe et 
XVIIIe siecles, Travaux et recherches de la Faculte de droit et des sciences 
economiques de Paris, Serie “Sciences historiques,” no. 2 (Paris: Presses Universi- 
taires de France, 1964), 29-43, here 37; Charles Jourdain, Histoire de I’Universite 
de Paris, au XVIIe et au XVIIIe ■ siecle, 2 vols. (Paris: Hachette, 1888), 1:190.294. A number of scholars accept this story in spite of or in complete ignorance 
of Gouhier’s serious objections. See, for example, William R. Shea, The Magic of 
Numbers and Motion: The Scientific Career of Rene Descartes (New York: Science 
History Publications, 1991), 95-96 and 109-15; Debus, The French Paracelsians, 
67, and even Rodis-Lewis, Descartes. Biograpbie, 59. For her part, Louise Godard 
de Donville goes further still, claiming that “if Naude affects [in his Instruction a 
la France] to have no tie with Germany, ... it is for fear of meeting with the mis- 
fortune of a Descartes” (“Theophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 152).

295. See Gouhier, Les Premieres pensees de Descartes, 127-29.

296. Rene Thuillier, Diarium Patrum, Fratrum et Sororum Ordinis Minimorum 
Provinciae Franciae sive Parisiensis Qui religiose obierunt Ab Anno 1506 ad An- 
num 1700 (Paris: Pierre Giffart, 1709), 2:96: “Haud paulo post cum Rangolio in 
Merianum Domini Peschei viri bello egregii Arcis & Urbis Guisiacae Praefecti 
praedium abiit; interim vulgata per urbem Fratrum Roseae Crucis fabula, locum 
dedit obtrectandi Mersenno quibusdam otiosis & inquietis hominibus quos sua 
dum in Athaeos stilum stringit, scripta pupugerant. Diffamatus scilicet ab eis est, 
tanquam unus aliquis ex ea sodalitate, vel hoc maxime argumento quod ab 
aliquibus diebus visus non fuisset; cum enim nihil aeque in Rosanis illis notatum

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 341

sit, quam quod pro suo nutu fierent inaspectabiles, Mersenni absentiam satis fir- 
mum sibi esse argumentum rati sunt, ut factum esse in conspicuum persuaderent. 
Hoc ludibrium, ut in reditu audiit Mersennus, non immerito exarsit, &C ne id im- 
pune ferrent autores, liberali ultionis genere vindicatum ivit, scripto gallice libro 
quern inscribit Impietas Deistarum & Atheorum ac maxime subtilium hujus aevi 
libertinorum articulatim expugnata, & eversa ductis ex Philosophia & Theologia 
argumentis.”297. Lenoble, Mersenne ou la naissance du mecanisme, 31 (referring to Thuillier): 
“Descartes was accused of being one of them [i.e., the Rosicrucians]. There were 
even hoaxers who launched suspicions against Father Mersenne, the sworn enemy 
of the sect. Upon his return from a short sojourn that he had made in the country 
with Father Rangueil, he learned that someone had made the rumor circulate that 
he had fled with the mysterious Brothers. It was obviously a farce, but it seemed to 
him to be in poor taste.”

298. Ibid., 25.

299. Mrs. Tannery, de Waard, and Pintard, Correspondance du P. Marin Mer- 
senne, 1:148-49.

300. Ibid., 1:155.

301. Gustave Cohen, Ecrivains franqais en Hollande dans la premiere moitie du 
XVIIe siecle (Paris: Edouard Champion, 1920), 388. Willem Meijer, De 
Rozekruisers of de Vrijdenkers der XVIIde eeuw (Haarlem, the Netherlands: 
F. Bohn, 1916), 66. 1 was unable to consult this latter work, which is not found in 
the BNF, and I admit to having retreated when faced with a complete perusal of 
Van Wassenaer’s text, which is prolix and written in a language of which I have 
hardly any mastery.

302. Paris, Bibliotheque Sainte-Genevieve, MS 2237 (XVIIth c.), fols. lr-56r 
(without any mention of the author). It is apparently a transcription of the printed 
version.302. Paris, Bibliotheque Sainte-Genevieve, MS 2237 (XVIIth c.), fols. lr-56r 
(without any mention of the author). It is apparently a transcription of the printed 
version.

303. Paris, Bibliotheque Sainte-Genevieve, MS 2240 (XVIIth c.). This volume 
contains inter aha extracts of the Nucleus Sophicus sive Explanatio in Tincturam 
Physicorum Theophrasti Paracelsi of Liberius Benedictus (Frankfurt: Lucas Jen- 
nis, 1623) and even a transcription of Haslmayr’s “Charakter Cabalisticus oder 
paracelsischer Signatstern” (cf. Gilly, Adam Haslmayr, 18 and 203; idem, Cimelia 
Rhodostaurotica, 31, ill. 29). It also contains extracts from the Cabala artis & nat- 
urae (Augsburg, 1615), wrongly attributed to Stephan Michelspacher, who is only 
its editor (cf. Gilly, Cimelia Rhodostaurotica, 107). See the description of the 
whole manuscript by Marie-Therese d’Alverny and Fran^oise Hudry, “Al-Kindi, 
De radiis,” Archives d’histoire doctrinale et litteraire du Moyen-Age, 4 (1974): 
139-260, at 203-4.

304. Naude, Instruction d la France, 58. This translation could be one and the 
same as the French version of the Speculum Rhodostauroticum that is found in 
BNF, MS fr. 17154 (first half of the XVIIth c.), fols. 33r-44r.

305. BNF, MS Dupuy 550, fols. 70r-73r, edited only in part in Descartes, Oeuvres 
(ed. Adam and Tannery), 10:199n., and in full by Marion Kuntz, “The Rose-Croix

342 Didier Kahn305. BNF, MS Dupuy 550, fols. 70r-73r, edited only in part in Descartes, Oeuvres 
(ed. Adam and Tannery), 10:199n., and in full by Marion Kuntz, “The Rose-Croix

342 Didier Kahn

of Jacques Dupuy (1585-1656),” Nouvelles de la Republique des Lettres, 2 
(1981): 91-103; see on this subject Gilly, “Iter Rosicrucianum,” 89, n. 48. Other 
copies can be found in the BNF: MS fr. 15777, fols. 83r-84v (this is the manuscript 
coming from President Achille III de Harlay); MS fr. 19574, fols. 69r-72v (in this 
manuscript these Recherches come after a few pages on an incident of witchcraft, 
two letters from Theophile, and the 1624 theses of Etienne de Clave and Antoine 
de Villon). Gilly (“Iter Rosicrucianum”) points out another copy in the manu- 
scripts of Jean Vauquelin des Yveteaux (microfilms can be consulted at the Institut 
de Recherche et d’Histoire des Textes [Paris], Section latine).

306. BNF, MS Dupuy 550, fols. 70v-71r. In my transcription I do not reproduce 
the underlining and the punctuation added on the manuscript in black ink.

307. Ibid., fol. 70r and fols. 72v-73r.

308. We can disregard BNF, MS fr. 14778 (XVIIIth c.), entitled in the BNF’s cat- 
alogue Dictionnaire de Geomancie et des Rosecroix: Actually the last three words 
reproduced in the catalogue title were added later and seem only to attest to a great 
confusion, for the manuscript does not seem to contain anything other than 
geomancy.

309. BNF, MS fr. 15250 (II), 12. Rene Pintard had given the following reference: 
BNF, MS lat. 5506 A (Le Libertinage erudit, 585, line 1), but this manuscript has 
changed shelfmark in the meantime.

310. BNF, MS fr. 15250 (II), 9. The Fama’s commented sentences are in italics. Fet 
us observe that the Hebrew roots as indicated by Boivin do possess indeed the 
meaning that he attributes to them. I warmly thank Jean-Pierre Brach for having 
checked them for me.311. Antoine Girard, sieur de Saint-Amant, “Fa Berne,” in Les Oeuvres du sieur 
de Saint-Amant (1629). Cf. Saint-Amant, Oeuvres, 1:240.

312. Pierre de Fancre, Du Sortilege, 25, as cited in Godard de Donville, “The- 
ophile, les ‘Beaux Esprits’ et les Rose-Croix,” 150 and n. 19.

313. Pierre Gassendi, Epistolica Exercitatio (against Fludd) (Paris: Sebastien 
Cramoisy, 1630), cited in Mrs. Tannery, de Waard, and Pintard, Correspondance 
du P. Marin Mersenne, 2:183: “beatissimi isti fratres Crucirosei, qui ut Gygis an- 
nulo tuti nos semper invisi circumvolitant.” On the Rosicrucians, see especially 
this work by Gassendi, 188-274.

314. [Theophraste Renaudot], Quatriesme Centurie des questions traitees aux 
conferences du Bureau d’Adresse, depuis le 24” Janvier 1639. jusques au 10 e Juin 
1641 (Paris: Au Bureau d’Adresse, 1641), 53-60.

315. Ibid., 53-55, 55-57, 57-58.

316. Ibid., 59.

317. Ibid., 59-60.

318. Ibid., 73-76.

319. Cf. Bernard Gorceix, La Bible des Rose-Croix. Traduction et commentaire 
des trois premiers ecrits rosicruciens (1614-1615-1616), Collection Hier (Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France, 1970), 5 and 7. The beautiful translation by Gor-

The Rosicrucian Hoax in France (1623-24) 343

ceix, which is quite sufficient here, is unfortunately not literal enough. On Paracel- 
sus and the Liber M., see Roland Edighoffer, “Le Liber M.,” ARIES, no. 15 
(1993): Magie du livre, livres de magie, 74-84, esp. 78-83.

320. [Renaudot], Quatriesme Centime des questions traitees aux conferences du 
Bureau d’Adresse, 75.

321. Ibid., 75-76 (Mons: “mountain”; Mus: “mouse”).

322. Howard M. Solomon, Public Welfare, Science, and Propaganda in Seven- 
teenth Century France: The Innovations of Theophraste Renaudot (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1972), 93. On the Bureau d’Adresse, see also Lerner, 
Tommaso Campanella en France au XVIIe siecle, 57, n. 24.323. Rene Pintard, “Les problemes de l’histoire du libertinage. Notes et reflex- 
ions” (1980), republished in Le Libertinage erudit, xiii-xliii, here xxii.

324. Cited in ibid., xxxvi-xxvii; ibid., 175 and 653 (note 6 of 543) on La Mothe 
Le Vayer.

325. Cyrano de Bergerac, L’Autre monde ou les Estats et Empires de la Lune 
(composed in 1650, 1st ed. 1657), ed. Madeleine Alcover, Societe des Textes Pran- 
gais Modernes (Paris: Honore Champion, 1977), 66-67; Cyrano de Bergerac, 
Oeuvres completes, ed. Jacques Prevot (Paris: Belin, 1977), 377-78.

326. Cyrano de Bergerac, “Pour les sorciers” (1654), in Lettres satiriques et 
amoureuses, eds. J.-C. Darmon & A. Mothu (Paris: Desjonqueres, 1999), 79-84.

327. Lor example, Cyrano de Bergerac, Oeuvres completes, 115, 378, 498.

328. Lettres satiriques et amoureuses, 85-93.

329. Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole, La Logique ou Part de penser, critical ed. 
by Pierre Clair and Pramjois Girbal, Le mouvement des idees au XVIIe siecle, no. 
3 (Paris: Presses Universitaires de Prance, 1965), 93; ed. Charles Jourdain (1865), 
reprinted in series Tel (Paris: Gallimard, 1992), 85.

330. See Arlette Lebigre, L’ Affaire des Poisons, 1 679-1 682, in series La Memoire 
des Siecles (Paris: Editions Complexe, 1989).

331. Ibid., 94.

332. On La Pierre philosophale, see my article “L’alchimie sur la scene frangaise 
auxXVIe et XVIIe siecles,” Chrysopoeia, 2 (1988): 62-96, here 66-76; on this play 
and on La Devineresse, cf. Lebigre, L’ Affaire des Poisons, 82 and 125 (quotation 
82); on the possibility of Pontenelle’s collaboration, cf. Alain Niderst, Fontenelle a 
la recherche de lui-meme (1657-1702) (Paris: Nizet, 1972), 24-25 and 104-9.333. This is the opinion of Lebigre, L’Affaire des Poisons, 125: “Occultism was 
no longer a big success at the box office, the ‘Affaire’ had made the public sick of 
it, the magicians were in prison and no one knew when and how the interminable 
drama would be resolved.” When we know what sinister dramas were concealed 
behind the theme, harmless in appearance, of the search for treasures, we can un- 
derstand that the audience was scarcely disposed to laugh at it: see L’Affaire des 
Poisons, esp. 117 and 113.

334. Nicolas Montfaucon de Villars, Le Comte de Gabalis, ed. Roger Laufer 
(Paris: Nizet, 1963). On Charpentier’s collaboration, noted also by Lebigre

344 Didier Kahn

(L’Affaire des Poisons, 125), see Catherine Cessac, “Elements pour une biogra- 
phie,” L’Avant-Scene Opera, 68 (October 1984): 4-22, at 12 (I warmly thank Jean- 
Noel Laurenti for this reference).

335. See my “L’alchimie sur la scene franchise aux XVIe et XVIIe siecles,” 69-71.

336. Traitez dn Cosmopolite Nouvellement decouverts. Ou apres avoir donne 
une idee d’une Societe de Philosopbes, on explique dans plusieurs Lettres de cet 
Anthem ■ la Theorie & la Pratique des Veritez Hermetiques (Paris: Laurent 
d’Houry, 1691). On this work, see Robert Amadou, “Le ‘Philosophe Inconnu’ et 
les ‘Philosophes Inconnus.’ Etude historique et critique,” Les Cahiers de La Tour 
Saint-] deques, 7 (1961): 65-138, at 90-103.

337. [Francois Alary], Le Texte d’Alchymie, et le Songe-verd (Paris: Laurent 
d’Houry, 1695), Preface, 25-28.

338. See my article “Litterature ou alchimie? A la recherche de 1’authentique 
Songe vert,” in D. Garrioch, H. Love, B. McMullin, I. Morrison, and M. Sherlock, 
eds., The Culture of the Book. Essays from Two Hemispheres in honour of Wal- 
lace Kirsop (Melbourne: Bibliographical Society of Australia and New Zealand, 
1999), 218-31.339. [Francois Alary], Le Parnasse assiege ou La Guerre declaree entre les 
Philosophes Anciens & Modernes (Lyon: Antoine Boudet, 1697), Preface, fol. A2r. 
On this text, see Allen G. Debus (who was unaware of the author’s name), “The 
Paracelsians in Eighteenth Century France: A Renaissance Tradition in the Age of 
the Enlightenment,” Ambix, 28 (1981): 36-54, here 38-39, repeated in Debus, 
The French Paracelsians, 164-65.

340. [Alary], Le Parnasse assiege, 1, 3-5, 6, 9-10, and 14-15.

341. N. F. J. Eloy, Dictionnaire historique de la medecine ancienne et moderne 
(Mons: H. Hoyois, 1778), 1:734-35.

342. More facts will be found about the years 1623-1625 in my doctoral disser- 
tation, “Paracelsisme et alchimie en France.”

7

“The Food of Angels”: Simon Forman’s 
Alchemical Medicine

Lauren Kassell7

“The Food of Angels”: Simon Forman’s 
Alchemical Medicine

Lauren Kassell

Simon Forman is infamous for his astrology, notorious for his magic, and 
legendary for his sexual exploits. 1 He was born in Wiltshire in 1552, re- 
ceived little education, and spent his early life acting as a tutor and school- 
teacher, occasionally practicing medicine, and studying astronomy, 
astrology, medicine, magic, and alchemy. He moved to London in 1591, 
within a few years established an immensely popular astrological practice, 
and became the self-appointed nemesis of the London College of Physi- 
cians. Forman styled himself as an astrologer-physician, but until Cam- 
bridge granted him a license to practice physic and astronomy in 1603, he 
had no official credentials to practice any sort of medicine. 2 He argued that 
astrology, which was conventionally one of the tools of physicians, should 
determine all medical diagnoses and therapies. 3 He had arrived at this po- 
sition not through formal study, but from eclectic reading. His knowledge, 
he thought, was divinely ordained, and for him astrology was one of a 
handful of hermetic arts that he aspired, and strove, to achieve. 4 On one 
occasion he described himself as “a god among men” and “borne to find 
out arte and to make yt perfecte.” 5 Accordingly, he wrote numerous, 
lengthy astrological treatises. 6 Around 1606 he began a treatise on the 
philosophers’ stone, but after writing that this was intended to preserve 
knowledge for posterity, “wherin they shall see the course of natur and fa- 
cility of things done in tyme with discretion,” he left off. 7 Forman had be- 
gun drafting this tract on pages that contained an unfinished transcript of 
a treatise attributed to Hermes Trismegistus, and this likewise remained 
incomplete. However inspired Forman might have been, he failed to artic- 
ulate in a coherent text his ideas on the philosophers’ stone and on the re- 
lationship between alchemy and medicine.346 Lauren Kassell

Forman’s industrious pursuit of the secrets of the philosophers’ stone 
falls into two phases. 8 During the first phase, which was underway by the 
mid-1580s and lasted a decade, Forman transcribed more than a hundred 
alchemical texts. 9 As with many Elizabethans, Forman’s pursuit of alchemy 
did not depend solely on printed texts, of which there were very few in the 
vernacular, but on the circulation of manuscripts. 10 The second phase in 
Forman’s study of alchemy was the compilation of three commonplace 
books. 11 Forman’s first volume dates from around 1597, when he began 
reorganizing and synthesizing his alchemical notes under subject head- 
ings covering alchemical materials, preparations, and principles, arranged 
loosely alphabetically in a volume on the “Principles of Philosofi.” 12 This 
enormous volume was at some point conceived of as a whole. Between 
c. 1607-9 Forman compiled an even larger alchemical volume, “Of Appot- 
icarie Druges,” in which he incorporated most of the information from the 
earlier volume. 13 A third, shorter commonplace book has no title and no 
date. 14 The entries in this volume were organized according to preparations 
and principles, and, unlike in the other volumes, specific chemical and 
other substances were not discussed under their own headings.Why did Forman engage in this extensive project of compiling alchemical 
manuscripts? He was not a gentleman or an academic like John Dee, Robert 
Fludd, or Girolamo Cardano; Forman did not draft a text for the printing 
presses or even to be circulated in manuscript. 15 While studying these texts 
he established an astrological practice in which he was consulted many times 
a day. Most of the questions that he was asked were medical. His copying, 
annotating and recopying of these alchemical manuscripts document an as- 
sociation between medicine and alchemy, and reveal a definition of hermetic 
knowledge in which alchemy, astrology, and magic were integral to med- 
ical diagnoses and therapies. His alchemical notes were more than idle 
doodlings, and his medicine more than quackery. 16 Forman saw himself as 
a magus, divinely chosen to possess knowledge that others could not. How- 
ever hubristic Forman’s self-portrayal, his manuscripts reveal a culture of 
the occult in Elizabethan Tondon that centered on medicine. 17

“Of Cako,” or Alexander von Suchten’s “Second Treatise on Alchemy”

The numerous copies of alchemical treatises that Forman made during the 
1580s do not constitute evidence that he conducted alchemical experi-

'The Food of Angels” 347The numerous copies of alchemical treatises that Forman made during the 
1580s do not constitute evidence that he conducted alchemical experi-

'The Food of Angels” 347

ments at that time. An alchemist needed time, money, and space, and For- 
man was not born with any of these. The earliest evidence of Forman’s 
chemical pursuits dates from after the time he moved into his own rooms 
in London in 1592. In 1593 he recorded that he earned much money by 
distilling strong waters. 18 When he was first interviewed before the Lon- 
don College of Physicians, he claimed that he had cured twenty-three 
people of a fever by giving them an electuary of syrup and roses with 
wormwood water. In December 1594 he was involved in an elaborate pro- 
cedure for distilling argentum vivum , 19 In April 1595 Forman noted mak- 
ing syrup of violets, and at Lent he wrote, “I began y e philosophers ston & 
befor mad my furnes and all for yt, as in my other bock yt aperes. I mad 
many sirups & drugs & distilled many waters &C bought stills.” 20 The fol- 
lowing September Forman noted, “I drempt of 3 black cats, and of my 
philosophical powder which I was distiling.” 21 Like many magi Forman 
frequently recorded his dreams, and in October 1595 he recorded one in 
which a man wrote some words about the philosophers’ stone on Forman’s 
coat and gave him two kinds of white powder. 22 The following December 
he noted that he had been very unlucky, broken “two glasses and lost the 
water.” 23 Three months later, in April 1596, Forman recorded another 
dream in which a friend gave him some of the philosophers’ stone in liq- 
uid form. Forman took it in his hand, and before he could find a glass to 
hold it, it ran through his fingers. 24 His pursuit of the philosophers’ stone 
continued, and in March of 1596 he noted that “[i]n subliming of O & 5 
my pot & glasse brokee & all my labour was lost per lapidem.” 25 In No- 
vember 1598 Forman was more successful. He and an unnamed associate 
made an amalgam of gold and silver, then philosophical mercury, iron and 
“cako.” This went through several operations, and a few days later was put 
into “our ege.” 26 These disparate notes illustrate that Forman was engaged 
in distilling herbal preparations and conducting alchemical experiments, 
though they contain no evidence that Forman’s alchemy had any bearing 
on his medicine. For this we must turn to Forman’s copying of alchemical 
texts.The same month as Forman had included “cako” in an alchemical 
preparation, November 1598, he had also transcribed a short treatise 
“On Cako” and interjected his alchemical experiences and observations 
throughout the text. 27 Although Forman did not know who the author 
of this text was, it was to become well known in the next century as

348 Lauren Kassell

Alexander von Suchten’s “Second Treatise on Antimony.” 28 Suchten was 
a Prussian follower of Paracelsus. 29 Although Suchten’s treatises on 
alchemy were not published in English until 1670, manuscript transla- 
tions of the second treatise had been circulating since the 1570s. 30 For- 
man’s text differed from other English versions of Suchten’s text in two 
ways. First, Forman’s text was not attributed to Suchten or anyone else; 
Forman simply noted “authoris incogniti.” Second, in Forman’s text an- 
timony was referred to throughout as “cako,” and the word antimony 
was omitted. 31 This word, which was of Hebrew origin, did not appear 
in any of the other versions of Suchten’s text or in other alchemical 
works. 32In addition to these differences, Forman’s copy of Suchten’s text (which 
we will call “Text A”) diverged in content from the other English versions. 
First, Forman’s text was framed by a different beginning and a different 
ending. Forman’s copy began with a description of cako in the florid lan- 
guage of medieval alchemy, which might have been drawn from an older 
text. With a series of tropes it outlined the preparation of cako in the lan- 
guage of life and death. In contrast, the 1575 translation had an epistolary 
opening in which Suchten stressed that he would write about common an- 
timony in a plain style. Once he had described the manual operations for 
preparing antimony, he would leave it up to the reader to decide if this was 
the medicinal arcanum of which the old magi and Paracelsus had writ- 
ten. 33 Furthermore, Forman’s text continued with a lengthy section headed 
“Opus Magnum” that contained more preparations for cako, most of 
which employed florid alchemical language. Second, most of the refer- 
ences to Paracelsus had been omitted from the text that Forman had 
copied, though the attacks on “Galenists” were preserved. It appears that 
Suchten’s text had been subsumed within an older alchemical tradition, 
and Forman had copied it in this form.

Unlike most of the alchemical tracts that Forman had copied, Suchten’s 
“Second Treatise on Antimony” was explicit about the medicinal virtues 
of alchemical preparations. He described how antimony came out of the 
mine in a crude form and had to be purged and cleansed in a series of four 
operations in order to reduce or mature it into a series of purer substances 
and ultimately into gold. Three quarters of the way through this tract there 
was a section on “what medicine ther is in vulgar Cako.” 34 Suchten stated 
that many men had prepared antimony and used it in medicines, but none

'The Food of Angels” 349'The Food of Angels” 349

had perceived the medicinal secret because the antimony of physicians was 
not the same thing as the antimony of philosophers. In Forman’s text 
Suchten’s explanation of the medicinal virtues of antimony read as follows: 
“For in the cako of philosophers ar all the medicins potentiall and for that 
cause it is called quintessence. But in the Cako vulgar is not the quintes- 
sence medicinalle but the elemente and the matter only of the Quintes- 
sence. The which essence is a medison againste all diseases which proceed 
of the her of the lyttle wordle [sic ].” 35 This was elucidated by an analogy: 
“Ther is a her within the wood, which we must have in our kytchens for 
to dress our meate. Soe ther is a her in Cako, by which we dresse our medi- 
son, the which by it receyveth the essence, and by the same essence extin- 
guishethe the elementalle heate in our diseases.” The cako of physicians 
was an ordinary and crude substance; philosophical cako rendered sub- 
stances medicinal by purifying them and making them essential, and an es- 
sential substance restored health. This, according to Suchten, was contrary 
to the practices of Galenic physicians, who did not believe in the virtue of 
purity and were forever combining substances in juleps and masking their 
natures with honey. Furthermore, the alchemist differed from the Galenist 
in his theory of medicine: “The Gallienestes doe boaste them selves to doe 
awai the heate [of diseases] with endive and poppie and nightshade and 
with other cold simples, which they cannot doe, unlesse the heat doe nat- 
urally cease of it self .” 36 The virtue of cako was that it caused the body to 
purify itself by the natural means of sweating, not by altering the balance 
of the humors with purges or emetics . 37 In these passages Suchten outlined 
some of the tenets of Paracelsian medicine . 38Forman copied most of Text A into “Principles of Philosofi” under the 
heading “Cako,” which will henceforth be referred to as “Text B .” 39 He 
signaled the importance of cako to the alchemist in a verse preface to this 
commonplace book. The verses of this preface were written in the lan- 
guage of marriage commonly used by alchemists, and Cako, Mars, Mer- 
cury, and Luna played the leading roles . 40 In incorporating the text on cako 
into this commonplace book, Forman significantly altered it in two ways.

First, he replaced the opening section of Text A with a more lucid defi- 
nition: “Of this Cako corns the great secreate of philosophers. For from 
Cako commeth Regulus, and well yt may be called soe for yt ruleth and 
governeth all the reste. For by this regulus is drawen forth the Sulfur of all 
mettalls apt to the philosophers stone, and with out the which yt cannot

350 Lauren Kassell

be done.” Forman then, perhaps referring to the opaque description at the 
beginning of his initial copy of this text (Text A), proceeded to explain that 
cako was a philosophers’ secret that was not written down in books but 
transmitted by tradition from generation to generation; when it had finally 
been written about, endless tropes had been used to obscure it from pos- 
terity. Forman drew on his experience to support this:I cam to the knowledge therof and with my owne handes and eyes. I sawe and 
proved the experience ther of at my owne coste and charges secretly for yt was the 
will of god yt should be soe. For in all my practizes and and [s/c] workings I never 
came to any knowledge, but only by the will of god and by my owne industry Sc 
coste. Neither had I any frinds that ever gave me 40s. in all my life. Not that they 
could not — but because they wold not, but put me to live and shifte for my selfe 
when I was but 12 years old. Yet when they all forsoke me for that I was soe moch 
bent to my bocke — god toke me to his grace and delivered me from hunger penury 
and mysery, and from imprisonments sclanders death Sc sicknes, and from infinit 
of other trobles and from many enimies which wer very mightie and strong as from 
Lawiars Councellors Justics Judges bishops and many others. And this had I by the 
will and grace of god. . . . 41

Forman signed his name at the bottom of this passage. In addition, he re- 
moved the final section on “Opus Magnum.” He also removed the evi- 
dence that he engaged with this text as a reader by omitting the passages 
that he had interjected into Text A. In other words, Text B is almost the 
same as Text A, except that it appears to be written by Forman.Second, in copying Text A to Text B Forman introduced a section of 
“notes.” He sympathized with the anti-Galenic sentiment Suchten ex- 
pressed and took this further by adding a section on philosophical medi- 
cine. Forman described how the life of a substance could be revived “of 
and in the multiplication of the forme and not of the matter of mettalls :” 42 
“for all the mistery of nature doth issue out of on fountaine & ar on 
essence, but miraculosly severed according to the will of god, the which is 
a specifica of all his creatures which is not comprehensible more then god 
is .” 43 No dead thing could be raised without the addition of this soul, and 
any who taught to the contrary was not a complete philosopher : 44 “And yt 
followeth that in a lyving thinge ther be a nature & fashion of the thinge 
which should be raised again. For yt is the will of god that all things shall 
dye and that is the specifick of nature, the which after the death is multi- 
plied infinitly. For his mortalytie doth put one ymmortallity and his cor- 
ruption doth put one incorruption and his mortall body after his 
resurrection, is becom a glorified body able to give life to ded things .” 45 He

'The Food of Angels” 351

elucidated this with an organic metaphor: “As youe see that a grain caste 
into the earth is made quicke by the water, vz that in the grain is a ded wa- 
ter by which the water becommeth again a lyvinge water and it is a ferment 
of waters. Vz. yt giveth to the water his nature specifick, thus of on grain 
then groweth other infinite. So moste youe understand in this worke $ of 
cako in h was his death.” 46 With this section, Forman added a hermetic 
component to this text, a component previously effaced by the removal of 
references to Paracelsus. Thus Forman reconstructed this text to make it 
appear that he was its author, while at the same time strengthening the 
anti-Galenic, even Paracelsian, sentiments that it expressed.Forman transformed this text further. Although in Forman’s copy of 
Suchten’s treatise cako directly replaced antimony, there is no evidence in 
Texts A or B that Forman equated these substances. For instance, the 1575 
version of this text explained that crude antimony had to be purified into 
the regulus of antimony; Text A described the same sequence in terms of 
changing cako into regulus. 47 Then, in Text B, Forman attempted to relate 
cako and antimony by replacing this passage with an account of changing 
cako into antimony, then regulus. 48 Text B was recorded in “Principles of 
Philosofi,” which has a separate entry for antimony that does not mention 
cako. 49 In “Of Appoticarie Druges” there is no entry for cako, and the en- 
try for antimony notes that from antimony was made cako, and from 
cako, regulus, thus reversing the relationship between antimony and cako 
depicted in Text B. 50

The progression from “Of Cako” to the entry of antimony in “Of Ap- 
poticarie Druges” is clear: In the first stage, Forman copied another au- 
thor’s text, adding notes of his experiments; in the second stage, Forman 
recopied the text and made several changes, including adding a section 
on philosophical medicine with hermetic elements; in the third stage, 
Forman reclassified cako under antimony, though he continued to define 
them as different substances. This is only one example of Forman’s pro- 
cesses of compiling alchemical commonplace books. In this case he ap- 
propriated a text that, though he did not know it, was authored by a 
prominent Paracelsian physician, and despite Suchten’s suggestions 
about the medicinal virtues of antimony and Forman’s experiments with 
what he thought was cako and with antimony, there is no evidence that 
Forman used remedies made from antimony or other metals in his med- 
ical practice. In what follows first I will look more closely at Forman’s

352 Lauren Kassell352 Lauren Kassell

engagement with hermeticism and Paracelsianism and the status of these 
subjects in England, then I will assess the role of alchemy in Forman’s 
medical practice.

In the Beginning

In 1599 Forman transcribed the “Fife of Adam and Eve” (hereafter “the 
Fife”), 51 which, unlike most of the texts he copied, was not alchemical. It 
was written around the second century A.D. and was part of the tradition 
of the apocryphal texts known as the Books of Adam and Eve. It recounted 
the legend of Adam and Eve from their expulsion from the garden to their 
deaths. 52 Although many variants of the Fife circulated throughout me- 
dieval Europe, there has so far been no study of the circulation of this text 
in Eatin or in English in sixteenth-century England. 53 Most extant manu- 
scripts of the Life produced in England date from the fifteenth century. 54 1 
have identified four versions of the Life in English, all dating from the late 
fourteenth or fifteenth centuries. 55 Forman’s copy of the Life seems to be 
the only extant sixteenth-century copy of English origin in English or 
Latin. 56For our purposes, a structural comparison between Forman’s copy of 
the Life and the Latin and English versions is instructive. 57 Forman’s copy 
is in three parts. The first part (A) recounts the creation of Adam, then that 
of Eve, and their expulsion from paradise. This section is not present in the 
standard Latin version of the Life. The fifteenth-century versions of the 
Life of English provenance begin with the creation of Adam and Eve but 
do not contain as much detail as Forman’s text. 58 The remaining sections 
are consistent with the other versions. The second part (B) “showeth what 
became of Adam after he was caste out of paradice.” The third and final 
part (C) narrates “[hjowe Adam calleth together all his children and en- 
formeth them of many things, and also telleth them that he is nere his 
death.” 59 Here Forman’s version contains elaborate details of the afflictions 
of the Fall and provides an extensive lists of diseases. In all cases ex- 
cept one, Forman’s text has more detail than either the English or Latin 
versions. 60

Forman not only copied the Life, he read it closely, 61 as is evident from 
his marginal notes. Marginalia are often intractable and difficult to discuss 
because they are not simply linear sequences; as in the following cases, a

'The Food of Angels” 353

passage was often extracted from one context and aligned with another. 
The majority of Forman’s annotations to the Life concern either the ge- 
nealogy of knowledge or the nature of Adam and Eve before the Fall. We 
will look at each of these in turn. Forman wrote these marginalia by leaf- 
ing through, juxtaposing and physically manipulating the Life and numer- 
ous other texts, many of which were alchemical . 62 The result was a 
conglomeration of hermetic ideas about the creation of the world and the 
macrocosm-microcosm analogy with a Paracelsian emphasis on the causes 
of disease.To begin with, Forman annotated the margins of the Life with mythical 
details about the genealogy of knowledge. For instance, Forman anno- 
tated the passages describing Adam’s knowledge with more particulars. 
Next to the passage in the Life describing how “god did replenishe him 
[Adam] with all kinds of wisdom Arte and Conninge and in the Science of 
Astrologie and knoweledg of the stars,” Forman noted that after the Fall 
the angel Raziel gave Adam a book of astronomy and magic . 63 Later in the 
text, next to passages about the trials of Adam and Eve after the Fall, For- 
man gave further details about these books. Adam and Eve were discov- 
ered by Solomon, and

[w]hen Cabrymael the Angell byd him loke secretly in the Arke of the testament of 
god in the which he found all the boockes of Moyeses and Aron, and the bocks of 
Noah and of Jerimy and of the other profets the which Sallomon had long tyme 
sought for, and therin alsoe he found the boock which was called Raziel, the which 
god gave unto Adam, by the Angell Raziell, when Adam was dryven out of 
paradice. And he found also therin on another bocke named the Semiphoras which 
god alsoe gave unto Adam in paradice. And also he found therin another bocke 
that god gave unto Moyses in the Mounte Synay after Moises had fasted 40 dais Sc 
40 nights. Therin did he find alsoe the rod of Moyses which was changed into a 
serpente and from a serpent again to a rod. 64

This time capsule also contained the tablets on which the commandments 
were written, a square, golden table inlaid with fourteen precious stones, 
and a box inscribed with the seven great names of God. Forman had 
collected this information from a variety of sources, including Josephus, 
Augustine, and a popular fifteenth-century world chronicle, Werner 
Rolewinck’s Fasciculus Temporum . 65The genealogy of knowledge was a common theme among alchemists. 
For instance, in a text that Forman transcribed and claimed to have cor- 
rected, Bernard of Treves, the late-fourteenth-century physician, gave the

354 Lauren Kassell

following history of alchemy: “The firste inventers of this arte as youe shall 
reed in the artes of memory: in the auncient gests of the remains, in the im- 
periall bockes, and in the exposision of Alevetus upon the tables, and in 
many other boocks, was Hermes Trismegistus: for he made and composed 
the bocks of the 3 kinds of naturall philosophic, that is to say, vegitable, 
minerall & animall.” 66 Another text that Forman copied conceded that 
God made “the first mane Adam perfecte in all naturall things, and didest 
endue him with sufficient knowledge.” The text then outlined how this 
knowledge was imparted to the rest of mankind throughout the ages, be- 
ginning with “Beraliel” and “Abholiab” receiving the knowledge to invent 
metalwork. 67

Whereas the philosophers’ stone was conventionally divided into three 
types, animal, vegetable, and mineral, in “Of Appoticarie Druges” For- 
man recorded a four-part scheme according to which each type had a dif- 
ferent history. Hermes had the animal, or angelic stone; Moses had the 
magical, or prospective stone; Solomon had the vegetable, or growing 
stone; and Lull, Ripley, and others had the mineral stone. Forman con- 
cluded, “The angellical stone is true medison to mans bodie against all in- 
firmities and makes a man live longe and by that stone he obteined wisdom 
and knowledge of thinges in dreams & otherwise.” 68 We will return to this 
below.In collecting these details Forman was engaging with debates about the 
genealogy of alchemical knowledge. All accounts agreed that this knowl- 
edge was divinely imparted, but when and to whom was uncertain. One of 
the greatest points of contention was whether Adam had the knowledge of 
alchemy. 69 This was the subject of the earliest theoretical alchemical text 
printed in English, Richard Bostocke’s The Difference Betwene the Aun- 
cient Phisicke . . . and the Latter Phisicke (1585). 70 Bostocke constructed 
an iatrochemical genealogy beginning with Adam. He challenged the as- 
sertion that Paracelsus promoted a new physic. In his scheme, medicine 
had become corrupt since the Fall, and Galenic medicine perpetuated this 
corruption. Paracelsus had restored knowledge of the original, true, and 
ancient physic. 71 The year after Bostocke’s text was published, a similar 
text appeared, likewise printed in English: A Coppie of a Letter ... by a 
Learned Physician (1586), by I. W., who, like Bostocke, to whom he re- 
ferred, argued that Paracelsianism was not “a new sect.” Rather, “it had 
his beginning with our first father Adam, and so from that time to time

'The Food of Angels” 355

hath continued untill this day: but indeed so amplified and enlarged of 
late, and brought unto every mans sight (that hath both his eies) by the 
long labour and infinite paines of Paracelsus, that it seemeth to be borne 
a new with, him .” 72 These treatises were printed during the period when 
Forman was pursuing alchemy, and he may have read them . 73The issue of whether Adam had scientific knowledge (which was con- 
ventionally expressed as astronomy and natural history, not alchemy) had 
theological importance . 74 When knowledge was imparted to Adam and 
what this knowledge constituted (the fall of angels, the Fall and redemp- 
tion of man) had ramifications for the interpretation of free will. The sig- 
nificance of Adam’s knowledge for alchemists was that it potentially 
contained the secrets of the relationship between the microcosm (man’s 
body) and the macrocosm (the universe). The Fall resulted in the corrup- 
tion of life, in disease, and in the loss of the prime substance. For Paracel- 
sus and his followers, the pursuit of the philosophers’ stone was the 
pursuit of the prime substance, the material from which the universe was 
made. Accordingly, the theme of creation, which is prominent in hermetic 
texts, became a constant point of reference for alchemists, especially 
Paracelsus . 75 The operations for creating the philosophers’ stone were 
analogous to those undertaken by God in the creation of the world.Before returning to Forman’s version of the Life, we should note that al- 
though some alchemists discussed creation, few English alchemical writ- 
ers seem to have turned from the alchemical analogy with creation to 
general expositions on creation. Forman did this in “Upon the firste of 
Genesis .” 76 Fie began with definitions of God and creation, then discussed 
the creation of heaven and earth and when and of what they were created. 
He structured this tract like a conventional Biblical commentary, quoting 
a verse and then expanding on it. He drew on a range of authorities, in- 
cluding Augustine, Nicholas de Lyra, and the Picatrix. Forman narrated 
how God had created something out of nothing, which was God’s prerog- 
ative . 77 According to Forman, God spoke the word “fiat” and “of this 
word fiat came the chaos. For as the breath in cold weather goinge out of 
a mans mouth becommeth thicke and is seen: and is condensate to a cloud 
or water which riseth like a miste from the mouth of a man and after 
dropeth downe and ys seen which before was nothinge: soe lykewise of 
that worde fiat beinge once pronounsed cam firste an Invisible Substance 
by power Imperiall of the Creator .” 78 This was more than a simile. The

356 Lauren Kassell

second part began with a description of how and of what God had created 
the heavens and the earth: “The heavens firste as chife and principalle 
Agente and father of all thinges superioure, and the Earth as principall 
passive mother of all thinges inferioure .” 79 The macrocosm-microcosm 
analogy was implicit in this statement. An explicit analogy between the 
creation of the world and the art of the alchemist followed:Then was the sprite of the Lord borne upon the face of the waters which was the 
liquide forme of thinges and the moste apteste to make moste formes shapes and 
creatures of. As for example a man taketh a great pote & filles yt with water honni 
oylle wine verjuce milke and such lyke lyquid thinges, and he setes yt on her to dis- 
till howe many sortes of water may he drawe out of this smalle Chaos, & every on 
better then other. And yet in thend [sic] ther is dregs lefte, which may be Congealed 
into a thicker or harder masse, out of which again also, a man may drawe or make 
divers other thinges, and formes.

Soe was yt with god in his huge Chaos, out of which by his worde he drewe all 
the formes in the wordle [sic]. 80

The text is rich with alchemical meaning in its description of the division 
of the waters, the creation of the eighth heaven, and further analogies to 
minerals . 81 This followed alchemical tradition, and Forman’s attention to 
it was marked by his frequent note of “chaos” in the margins of the texts 
he had copied . 82 Under the headings for “Chaos” in his commonplace 
books Forman gave a very similar account of creation . 83 One of the defi- 
nitions of Genesis was “The trewe knowledge, wherof to many is rare 
which moch may healpe thee in tyme of need .” 84 The extent to which Gen- 
esis contained the secrets of alchemy, the secrets of life and death, was 
manifest in Forman’s annotations to the Life on the subject of the nature 
of Adam and Eve at creation and the corruption that ensued with the Fall.Forman’s copy of the Life began with an account of the creation of 
Adam similar to that in his “Upon the firste of Genesis.” The first sentence 
of Forman’s copy of the Life stated that when God had made heaven and 
its ornaments he saw that they were good. The he made man out of noth- 
ing, in his own image and likeness. This fell within the boundaries of the 
debates about whether man had one spirit or three . 85 In this version Man 
was like God in three things: “The first like unto his ymage: for at that 
tyme he had put him selfe in the same ymage wherin he made Adam, that 
ys to say in ye ymage of a man: The second was, he made him to his liknes: 
That is to saie In Righteousnes and puer hollynes. For Adam was right- 
eouse Innocente and holy. The Thirde, he made him like unto himselfe in

'The Food of Angels” 357

Eternity, for he breathed into his nostrels the breath of life, and made him 
a lyvinge soule, to live for evermore.” 86 The similarities between God and 
Adam in substance, appearance, and eternity corresponded to the three 
parts of the soul: animate, sensitive, and rational. Adam, furthermore, was 
created out of red earth, the slime of the earth, and the quintessential sub- 
stance. 87 In the margin, next to this description, Forman added a passage 
defining the relation of the body, soul, and spirit and the composition of 
each. 88 At the bottom of the page he added a description of the three parts 
of the body of man — natural, animal and vital — and the same parts of the 
soul of man. Thus, Adam shared being with inanimate things, life with 
plants, sense with animals, and mind and intelligence with angels.This annotation was very similar to passages in Forman’s “Of Appoti- 
carie Druges” under the heading “Anima & Spiritus.” 89 The entry began 
with a discussion of whether man had only a soul or a soul and a spirit. In 
a passage almost identical to the one that flanks the composition of Adam 
in the Fife, Forman stated that every man was composed of three things: 
body, soul and “sprite.” 90 Next Forman outlined the relationships between 
these three things. Forman concluded “Anima & Spiritus” with a direct 
citation of almost the entire chapter from Cornelius Agrippa von Net- 
tesheim’s De occulta philosophia on the joining of man’s soul with his 
body (book 3, chapter 37). 91 Agrippa described how, according to the Pla- 
tonists, the soul proceeded immediately from God and was linked to the 
body by a “celestial vehicle of the soul”: the spiritus mundi, “the quasi- 
material vehicle for the anima.” The soul was thereby infused into the 
middle of the heart, from which it was diffused throughout the body. If dis- 
ease (or “mischief”) impeded the mediating force, the soul retracted to the 
heart. When the heart failed, the soul left the body. Thus an ethereal body 
was joined to a gross body. It seems that Forman, like Thomas Vaughan, 
read Agrippa’s De occulta as a text sympathetic to and informative about 
alchemy. 92 These passages served as the introduction to a number of al- 
chemical procedures, and Forman effected an abrupt transition, noting, 
“Now we com to speak of the soulle and sprite in mineralles and metalles 
and metal, animals & vegitable philosophically.” 93

In the margins of the Fife, Forman was silent about Agrippa and named 
Paracelsus. Although Forman referred to Paracelsus throughout his al- 
chemical notes, this was the only instance in which he singled out Paracel- 
sus from the herd of alchemical magi. In 1591 Forman had copied an

358 Lauren Kassell358 Lauren Kassell

English translation of a pair of works by Paracelsus. 94 Although Forman 
had engaged with these texts by adding many of his experiences to them, 
he did not rely on them any more than on the other alchemical texts he had 
transcribed. His notes reveal that he had access to other texts attributed to 
Paracelsus, some genuine, others spurious. In “Of Appoticarie Druges” 
Forman cited Paracelsus more than in his earlier texts, though he did not 
give him any particular authority. Since many of these references are drawn 
from the eleventh volume of Zaccharias Palthen’s edition of the writings 
of Paracelsus, printed in 1605, Forman may have owned a copy of this 
volume. 95Forman read texts attributed to Paracelsus and Agrippa’s De occulta as 
containing information about creation. He synthesized these ideas, it 
seems, in a treatise on the microcosm that is now missing. Forman referred 
to the chapters in this work on the eighth, ninth, and tenth heavens through- 
out “Anima & Spiritus.” A section of notes headed “microcosmos” is pre- 
served, and it begins with an account of creation and concludes with an 
exposition on natural magic, drawing on Hermes, Paracelsus, the Picatrix, 
and other sources. 96 In this fragment, as in his other alchemical and related 
notes, Forman gives Paracelsus no special authority. Forman’s annotations 
to the Fife on the subject of the nature of Adam, however, cite Paracelsus 
at length. Above the description of the creation of Adam, Forman noted: 
“Pa[ra]celsus: The materiall seed of microcosmus was taken out of all the 
elements from all the places of the whole wordle [sic] into on place, and 
created man out of it and yt was don upon the water (which was matrix 
majoris mundi) and out of all thes did god mak man even of the vertu of 
all things.” 97 Next to the description of God breathing into Adam’s nostril 
Forman added definitions of the divine and animal souls that he attributed 
to Paracelsus. 98 The divine soul was eternal, only the imagination of man 
could kill it; the animal or elemental soul died with the body. At the bot- 
tom of the page Forman added a description of Adam as born with eter- 
nal life, power over all creatures, and “altitude”: “that is the heighte and 
glory of all thinges. For when he was created ther was noe creatur in beuty 
shape and wisdom like to Adam. For the upper parte of Adam from the 
girdle upwards was in heaven in respecte of his purity and beinge. And the 
lowar parte from the girdle downwards was on earth, till he had broken 
the commandments. And before his fall he had no genitors, but after he 
was put forth of paradice, his genitors began to growe forth of him.” 99 In'The Food of Angels” 359

these annotations Forman was drawing on the pseudo-Paracelsian “Liber 
Azoth.” This text appeared in Palthen’s eleventh volume of the works of 
Paracelsus, which Forman seems to have owned, and if this is the version 
of the text that Forman used, then these annotations can be dated to some- 
time after 1605. 100

The annotations continued. The naming and composition of Adam was 
flanked by a note that glossed the story of creation, beginning by describ- 
ing Adam and Eve as created “Angelically with the necrocomish soulle, 
that is with a soulle puer righteouse & undefiled & ymortalle.” The de- 
scription continued with gnostic terminology, recording that Adam and 
Eve had “a peculiar and dyvine Lymbus which was separated and did dif- 
fer from the Lymbus of the earthy [sic\ Adam.” Limbus, a margin between 
the eternal and the concrete, was a gnostic concept that pervaded Paracel- 
sian texts. 101 The annotation continued: when Adam and Eve were in the 
Garden, “they did feed and eate angelically of divine food, wherin ther was 
noe corruption poison nore infection of mortallity nor eternall death. For 
they eat of all the trees of the garden that wer good, A after their nature, A 
and ther was noe tre evill nor infected with dedly poison, but the tree of 
good and evill. For Adam & Eve were made good and did knowe nothing 
but good.” God had put a commandment on this tree:youe shall eat of all the fruits of the garden but only of [excluding?] this tre. For in 
this tree is good and evill life and deth, honny and galle, good meat & poison that 
will infecte thee with a contynuall sicknes and diseas therfore take heed of yt. So 
Adam & Eva did eat good fruite in which was noe poison nor evil to troble their 
bodies, as men use to eat good and holsom meats & never feell sicknes nor diseas, 
nor distemper of their bodies. But yf they eat the appell colloquitida or som rubarb 
ellebor agarick or som such thinge wherin ther is a poisoned substance (although 
yt show well) then theyr stomakes, bowells and whole bodi is sick & sore trobled, 
by which they presently knowe they have eaten som poysoened & evill thinge, 
wherby they presently knowe that ther ar bad meats as well as good.

But one could not know that there were poisonous as well as wholesome 
meats by being told; this knowledge had to be learned through experience. 
Adam could not have understood the poison until he had tasted it:

But then yt is to late. The poison & venom hath taken hould and root in them and 
they most die or be deformed or become monsters, for then their bodies swell and 
becom full of sore botches and blains and soe they ar altered and presently from 
their firste form & shape, as Adam was, which was first dyvine and had a heavenly 
form, but after he had eaten he was poisoned with sinn and felt the operation of 
the apple in his hart & body wherby he knewe he had don evill. . . . For his bodie

360 Lauren Kassell

being poisoned wth sinne he becam monstrouse and lost his first form and shape 
divine & heavenly and becam earthy [s/c] full of sores and sicknes for evermore. 
And soe as a leprose man is chased or expelld out of the company of good hole and 
sound men leste they should be infected by him, even soe was Adam cast out of 
paradice . 102In his reading of the Life Forman combined gnostic, hermetic, and Paracel- 
sian ideas about the origins of disease.

“The Food of Angels”

Disease was a major theme within the text of the Life. From his deathbed 
Adam called his children together (chapter 30). They asked him why he 
was lying in bed, and Seth asked if he could get him anything. Adam 
replied: “Sonne I desier nothinge but I wax full sicke and have greate 
sorowe and penance in my bodie.” 103 Seth said that he did not understand. 
So Adam recounted the story of the Fall and God’s anger. God had said 
that for having forsaken his commandments, “I shall caste into thy bodie 
seventy wondes A & too A of divers sorowes, from the crowne of the head 
unto the soule of thy feete, and all in divers members of thy bodie, be 
they tormented with soe many sicknises thou and thyne offspringe 
forevermore.” 104In addition to the description of disease as the effect of the Fall, the phys- 
ical condition of Adam and Eve, especially with reference to food, was writ 
large. 105 When they were expelled from Paradise, Adam and Eve went west 
and built a tabernacle where they stayed for seven days lamenting their 
Fall, “for losinge and wantinge their naturalle foode.” 106 They had noth- 
ing to eat and were very hungry, so Adam began to look for food but could 
find none. This caused discord between them, and they searched together 
but could find nothing except herbs and grass such as beasts ate. And 
Adam said to Eve: “Our lorde god delyvered meate to beastes but to us he 
delivered meate of angells, the which he hath nowe deprived us of: and 
given us over to feed with the beastes of the filde.” 107 After the births of 
Cain and Abel, Adam led them into the east, and God sent Michael to 
teach Adam to “worke & to till ye lande, and to provide fruite to live by” 
(Life, chapter 22). Forman’s text continued with further details that were 
in neither the Latin nor the English versions. Adam’s descendants lived by 
tilling the ground until after the flood. They ate herbs and fruit and roots 
but not flesh. It never rained, and the ground was moistened with mist. 108

'The Food of Angels” 361

Lastly, at the end of the Life, Adam told Seth that he had this information 
because “I had my knowinge and my understandinge of things that is to 
com, by eatinge, that I eate of the tree of understandinge.” 109In the sixteenth century food was central to interpretations of the Fall. 
The eating of the apple and the necessity to work for bread were integral 
to theological definitions of free will and knowledge. The questions of 
what man ate before the Fall and when man began to eat meat and dis- 
cussions of the meaning of the necessity to till the ground and the longevity 
of the patriarchs figured in Biblical commentaries of the time. These 
themes were prominent, for instance, in the printed English commentaries 
by two Elizabethan divines, Gervase Babington and Nicholas Gibbens.

In Certain Blaine, Briefe, and Comfortable Notes, Upon Every Chapter 
of Genesis (1596), Babington included a section entitled “How dooth God 
appoint man foode before his fall”:

Man is appointed heere his foode of God that he should eate, and some moove the 
question how that shall be. For if man were created immortall if he sinned not, 
what needed he any meate to be appointed for him, since yet he had not sinned. 
Answer is made by some, that there be two kindes of Immortall, one that cannot 
die but ever live, an other that may may live for ever, a condition being observed, 
and die also if that condition be broken. One imortall after the first sort needeth 
no meate, but he that is immortall after the second sort dooth neede, and such was 
Adam: if he had not sinned he had not dyed, but sinning he was so made, that he 
might die, and therefore his flesh and nature not such that could live without 
meate. Others answer that this appointment of meate was made by God in respect 
of their fall, which he knew would bee. Howsoever it was, curiositie becometh us 
not: but this comfort we may rightlie take by it, that what the Lord hath made, he 
will maintaine and nourish, and casteth for them his providence ever to that end . 110Likewise, Gibbens’s Questions and Disputations Concerning the Holy 
Scripture (1602) discussed the significance of food and the longevity of the 
patriarchs. Gibbens asked whether God showed his liberality as much in 
providing food for Adam and Eve as in creating them. 111 He argued that 
man did not have flesh to eat, “which while mens bodies were immortall, 
because they were void of sinne, was no convenient foode to nourish 
them.” 112 He answered the question “wherein consisteth the punishment 
of Adam?” with an exposition of “in sorrow thou shalt eate thereof [the 
ground]” (Genesis 3.17), explaining that Adam became proud, and God, 
like a physician, administered “a potion of humilitie, wherby man being 
dailie emptied of his old corruptions, might with hunger and thirst, gaspe 
for the death of Christ, which is the fruit of life.” 113 He then outlined

362 Lauren Kassell

Adam’s tripartite punishment: “the curse of the earth; the miserie of life; 
and the end therof by death.” Whereas before the Fall the earth had 
brought forth fruit of its own accord, it had been corrupted by sin; where 
once wheat had grown now grew weeds. This curse was man’s misery: 
Working the soil bridled him from waxing proud. Other afflictions ac- 
companied work and included bodily diseases and mental vexations. 114Gibbens elaborated these final points in the answer to the question of 
why the patriarchs lived so long. The answer was that it was “of the wise- 
dom of the Lord for the disposition of his counsailes, for our sinnes, and 
the weakenes of our bodies, that we cannot now live so long as they.” He 
explored this point further, noting the argument that over time the human 
body has become increasingly corrupt and unable to resist disease. More- 
over, he gave two further reasons for the longevity of the patriarchs. First, 
“because they were of temperate and sober diet, not given so much to 
fleshlie appetite, nor mixing their meat with such varieties, but content 
with simple food, which the aboundance of the earth brought forth unto 
them.” Second, “because the fruits of the earth were much more nourish- 
able and healthfull before the floud, then afterward they were, either thor- 
ough the waters of the sea, bringing barrennes and saltnes to the earth, and 
to the fruits therof; or for that the Lord had given unto man more libertie 
of food, the fruite of the field was not so necessarie.” 115 Although Forman 
did not necessarily read these commentaries, they demonstrate that within 
Elizabethan theology food and disease were current and associated 
themes. 116The food of angels, as a phrase or a concept, appeared throughout me- 
dieval religious texts. 117 There was also a medieval tradition, prominent in 
the writings of Roger Bacon, 118 of associating the prolongation of life with 
Adam and Eve. Food, furthermore, was central to the ideas attributed to 
Paracelsus and his followers. According to his doctrine of “Tartar,” in sim- 
plified terms, food consisted of parts that were pure and impure, and the 
body could use only those that were pure. The impurities remained in the 
body, causing obstructions and resulting in disease. 119 Similarly, the Life 
explained disease as originating with the Fall. In the Garden Adam and 
Eve had consumed the food (or meat) of angels, but once they had tasted 
the forbidden fruit, their bodies and souls were corrupted, and man had 
thereafter suffered disease. Such a Paracelsian history of disease was artic- 
ulated by Robert Bostocke in The Difference Betwene the Auncient

'The Food of Angels” 363

Phisicke . . . and the Latter Phisicke and by I. W. in A Coppie of a Let- 
ter ... by a Learned Physician. It should be remembered that while Bo- 
stocke and I. W. gave clear formulations of these ideas, Forman did not.In his second chapter, “the originall causes of all diseases in the greate 
worlde, and the little worlde, which is man,” Bostocke recounted the story 
of the Fall in order to demonstrate that the binary principle of Galenic 
medicine, which employed opposites, was corrupt. He named the serpent 
that engineered the Fall “Binarius” and explained how he had persuaded 
man to eat the apple. 120 Adam had eaten, “[wjhereupon by the curse of 
God impure Seedes were mingled with the perfect seedes, and did cleave 
fast to them, and doe cover them as a garment: and death was joyned to 
life.” This impurity was in all things, depending on the nature of the soil in 
which they grew or the food on which they fed, as experience showed: 
“But the foode and nourishments for mans body, though they have in them 
mingled, venemous, sickly or medicinable properties, yet for all that, by 
reason of that mixture with their good seedes, as long as unitie and con- 
cord is kept betweene them, they be tempered, seperated, resolved and ex- 
pelled out of mans body.” If this did not work, “the seedes of diseases do 
then take roote in mans body.” If this did not work, “the seedes of diseases 
do then take roote in mans body.” Man knew by the ancient art and by ex- 
perience how to separate the good from the bad and the life from the death 
in all things. Thus, diseases proceeded from the breach of unity, and only 
in unity could they be cured. 121I. W. explained, “Now we may see that before the fall of Adam all 
thinges were good, all things came unto him and were bred unto his hand 
without his labour. But afterward part of it was joyned to poison, part of 
it so fast lockt up, that without great sweate of browes he should not eat 
of it.” He took this opportunity to accuse the humanist physicians of re- 
gressive conservatism and laziness: “And in these our latter dayes sloth is 
growen so strong &c idlenes hath gotten such masterie, that there are very 
few which will let one drop fal from their browes to seeke this bread, but 
indevour by all methodicall meanes to maintaine this idlenes.” They sat on 
cushions in their chambers and wrote prescriptions for apothecaries to 
fill. 122 The original food, or “bread,” was the philosophers’ stone, which 
medical men should be seeking. He continued “If you had bestowed but 
half of your study in the first booke of Moses, which youe spent in the fool- 
ish Philosophic of Aristotle, you had espied your errors long agoe . . . for

364 Lauren Kassell

the offence of our first parents, death was not onely laid upon them, but 
for the same transgression God planted a death in every thing he had 
made, in every thing he put a death able to destroy such a life.” 123 Genesis, 
then, taught good medicine.

Aside from Forman’s copy of the Life, I have located only two other six- 
teenth-century texts referring specifically to the food of angels. The first is 
an eclectic manuscript on physic owned by Forman that includes a chro- 
nology of the afflictions of man and the discoveries of the knowledge to 
remedy them. For instance, in the year 3616 God had given Moses the 
commandments and had struck those who would not obey them with nu- 
merous infirmities, none of which could be helped with medicine. Those 
who were obedient were fed with “mana or angells food.” 124A second sixteenth-century English manuscript referred to the food of 
angels as a form of the philosophers’ stone: “The Epitome of the Treasure 
of all Welth,” written in 1562 by one “Edwardus Generosus Anglicus In- 
nominatus.” 125 According to this text, St. Dunstan had departed from the 
standard description of a tripartite philosophers’ stone (animal, vegetable, 
mineral) by adding a fourth type and redefining the other three. 126 Edwar- 
dus described the angelic stone as “preservative to the state of mans body,” 
“by this stone shall mans body be kept from corrupcion also he shalbe [sic] 
endued with divine giftes & foreknowledge of things by dreames and rev- 
elations.” 127 It was invisible and aromatic; it could also be tasted: “ & there- 
fore in St Dunstans worke itt is said that Solomon King David’s sonne did 
call itt the foode of Angell, because a man may live a long time without any 
food having som taste of this stone.” 128 This is the same scheme that, as 
noted above, Forman recorded in “Of Appoticarie Druges.” Although 
there is no evidence that Forman read Edwardus’s treatise or St. Dunstan’s 
work on the angelic stone, somewhere he encountered St. Dunstan’s defi- 
nition of it. He did have a copy of an alchemical text attributed to St. Dun- 
stan, which he recopied in 1608. 129 This text had a long history, Forman’s 
copy being one of the three earliest. 130 It may be related to the work that 
Edwardus described as St. Dunstan’s. Its subject was the mineral stone, and 
it did not mention the angelic stone. Elias Ashmole used St. Dunstan’s de- 
scription of the philosophers’ stone, as recounted by Edwardus, almost a 
century later in the prolegomenon to his collection of English alchemical 
poetry, Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum , 131

'The Food of Angels” 365'The Food of Angels” 365

In whatever text or in whatever form Forman encountered the descrip- 
tion of the angelic stone as the food of angels, his reading of the Life is ev- 
idence that he engaged with an alchemical tradition concerned with 
health. In addition to annotating this text with alchemical notes, Forman 
expanded further on the theme of corruption by inserting a list of diseases 
in the section of the Life (chapter 34) that described Adam’s deathbed 
scene. Adam had announced that God had inflicted seventy-two diseases 
on him and his offspring for the Fall. In the Latin and English versions the 
narrative continued with Adam’s expression of sorrow and pain to his chil- 
dren (chapter 35). Forman interrupted the narrative and inserted a list of 
diseases divided according to physiology and sex. 132 Twenty-one of these 
diseases afflicted both men and women alike and might occur in all parts 
of the body; twelve occurred only in the head; three diseases affected the 
throat; four each affected the breast and stomach; two affected the left 
side; four were diseases of the heart; three were of the bowels; twelve were 
diseases of the reins (kidneys); and fourteen afflicted only women. That 
Forman inserted this list into his transcript of the Life is clear from his 
changes to the numbers of diseases and the shifts in format and script. The 
number of diseases listed, for instance, adds up to seventy-five, not sev- 
enty-two. The list began: “Of thes diseases ther be 21 that be generalle 
both to man and woman.” The “1” of the “21” was crossed through and 
a “2” was inserted so that it read “22.” Twenty-three diseases were then 
actually listed, though the twenty-second and twenty-third extended into 
the margin. Forman’s hand became less neat as the list proceeded, and he 
left blank spaces for the numbers of diseases to be inserted.Whether Forman devised this list or derived it from another text, it 
might not have been a coincidence that two similar lists appeared in tracts 
published in England around this time. The first was in A Coppie of a Let- 
ter by I. W., discussed above, which explained that causes of disease were 
not “humors intemperie & obstructions”; humors were “the fantasticall 
inventions of an idle head, having no foundation or ground in nature.” A 
list of twenty-nine diseases followed, most of which also appeared in For- 
man’s list. I. W. concluded: “This is the cause that man dieth such sundry 
deaths, because hee eateth in his bread the death of all other things, which 
when perfect separation is not made, bringeth foorth fruit according to his 
kinde. Over these deaths hath the Physician power, and not over that

366 Lauren Kassell

which was injoyned to the body of man particularly.” 133 Therefore the 
above diseases listed were curable, because they were diseases of the fruits 
of the world and not of man: They did not grow naturally in man but came 
to him through transplantation. Again, whereas I. W. articulated a Para- 
celsian definition of disease, Forman did not.The association between disease and the Fall in the late sixteenth cen- 
tury was evident in a work of another genre. It appeared in Guillaume 
Saluste Du Bartas’s Divine Weeks and Works, in the third part of the first 
day of the second week, “The Furies.” Josuah Sylvester’s translation of this 
section into English was printed in 1599, the same year Forman copied his 
treatise on Adam and Eve. Du Bartas recounted how after the Fall man 
was beset by three furies, sickness, war, and dearth. Sickness was described 
as attacking Adam in a mock-heroic battle, beginning with diseases of the 
head and moving down the body. 134 Du Bartas did not, however, describe 
Adam’s deathbed scene, though the “Flandicrafts” concluded with Adam 
near death from the sadness of his vision of the destructions of the 
future. 135

Whether or not Du Bartas or I. W. influenced Forman’s taxonomy of dis- 
ease, their texts demonstrate that there were precedents in Forman’s time 
for cataloguing the diseases that afflicted man after the Fall. No precedent 
for these diseases being catalogued in Adam’s deathbed scene, however, 
has been identified. There are alchemical elements to Du Bartas’s text, and 
thus it is possible that Forman, I. W. and Du Bartas were all influenced by 
similar texts and traditions. Whether or not the associations are purely co- 
incidental, the presence of these lists in this range of literature in late- 
sixteenth-century England indicates that Forman was not alone in 
associating the Fall, disease, and alchemy. When Adam and Eve ate the 
fruit of the tree of knowledge, they sowed the seeds of disease within their 
bodies. When God expelled them from paradise, Adam and Eve kept free 
will and the knowledge of good and evil, the two vehicles, it seems, by 
which man had thereafter tried to return to the tree of life, once again to 
eat the food of angels and to achieve eternity.Forman’s annotations to the Life, and to his alchemical notes, contained 
the same blend of alchemy and the Fall. It does not require a leap of the 
imagination to envisage Forman with his copy of the Life, perhaps the 
1605 volume of works attributed to Paracelsus, his notes on creation, and 
“Of Appoticarie Druges” simultaneously opened in front of him, each in-

'The Food of Angels” 367

fluencing how he read and annotated the others . 136 For Forman, the 
philosophers’ stone was the food of angels, and its secrets lay in Genesis.

Magic and Medicine

Forman’s annotations to the Life and his copying and modifying of 
Suchten’s treatise on antimony are evidence that he subscribed to a Paracel- 
sian philosophy of medicine; they do not reveal whether these ideas went 
beyond the academic and had some bearing on his astrological physic. Ac- 
cording to Forman, his therapies differed from those of humanist physi- 
cians in that he looked to the stars for the cause of the disease and for the 
timing of the treatment. As recorded in his casebooks, his prescriptions 
and therapies were conventional: Sometimes he evacuated superfluous hu- 
mors by phlebotomy, purging, or vomiting; sometimes he recommended a 
fortifying drink . 137 There is, moreover, no evidence in Forman’s notes that 
his alchemical pursuits produced chemical medicines; rather, alchemical 
philosophy informed, or even inspired, Forman’s use of magic as a means 
of performing medical diagnoses and treatments . 138For Forman, alchemy and magic, along with astrology and geomancy, 
were kindred arts. In an outline of the types of knowledge, Forman defined 
what he termed “astromagic” and “alchemagic” as the operative compo- 
nents of astronomy . 139 Astromagic involved the use of amulets and other 
objects to harness the power of the stars. Alchemagic was defined baldly 
as the means of transmuting metals and making the philosophers’ stone. 
This sort of operative magic was the culmination of hermetic philosophy. 
The magus could employ his knowledge of the cosmos, through rituals and 
amulets, to make interventions in the workings of the world . 140 Forman’s 
papers provide an unusual example, shrouded in secrecy, of the actual uses 
of operative and revelatory magic . 141 His activities involved a combination 
of cabala, amulets, sympathetic magic, and angel calling. His use of magic 
linked his hermetic philosophy and his medical practices.

In Elizabethan England the question was debated as to whether dis- 
eases caused by witchcraft and possessions had natural or supernatural 
causes . 142 Some scholars had argued that supernatural diseases existed 
that had natural manifestations, though this position seems to have been 
uncommon in England . 143 Forman held a similar position. Fie divided 
the causes of diseases into three categories, natural, “unnatural,” and

368 Lauren Kassell368 Lauren Kassell

supernatural. Unnatural diseases had supernatural causes but were mani- 
fested naturally. According to Forman, God allowed evil people to do evil 
deeds, and the devil to do his will, but they could only work by natural 
means. 144 Although the physician was not to intervene in supernatural dis- 
eases, he could do so for unnatural and natural diseases, provided that he 
consulted the stars to assess what sort of disease he was dealing with and 
to determine whether to use natural remedies, supernatural remedies, such 
as amulets and prayers, or a combination of the two. 145 Supernatural 
remedies relied on natural magic. They were used to influence nature, via 
the stars, and to effect things that might not have occurred naturally in a 
certain time or place but were within the scope of natural possibilities. For 
instance, in a section on sigils in “The Astrologicalle Judgmentes of 
Phisick and Other Questions” (c.1599), Forman, probably following 
Paracelsus, noted that oranges did not naturally grow in England, but, 
with the use of appropriate amulets, could be made to do so. 146In practice Forman did not draw a strict line between therapies for nat- 
ural and unnatural diseases. Discovering the cause of a disease could be 
difficult, and there was always room for doubt about whether the causes 
were natural, unnatural, or supernatural, especially when the patient’s dis- 
ease did not respond to therapy. For instance, in December 1598 Nicholas 
Chapman consulted Forman a number of times. Initially Forman deter- 
mined that Chapman’s disease was natural, but he later decided that it was 
caused by witchcraft. 147 Another example is the case of Jackamyne Vamp- 
enathe (or Vampena), a 47-year-old Dutch woman who first came to For- 
man in June 1601 suffering from melancholy. Ten days later she consulted 
Forman again, and he noted “she despairs in god.” Three weeks later she 
was no better, and her husband, John Stockbridge, a merchant, agreed to 
pay Forman £12 if he could cure her. Forman recorded an extensive phar- 
macy in his attempts to purge and to sedate this woman. He gave her five 
types of pills and seven types of strong water over the next two weeks. The 
“ingredients” of one of the waters included the immersion of a ring en- 
graved with the symbol of Jupiter. 148

Forman had designed numerous amulets and rings, which he also re- 
ferred to as “sigils,” “laminas,” and “characts.” He commissioned other 
people to make them and oversaw the process. 149 These objects often in- 
cluded astrological, cabalistic, and other magical symbols and had to be 
made at astrologically propitious moments. In Forman’s words, as part of

'The Food of Angels” 369'The Food of Angels” 369

the definition of astromagia, these objects “enclosed som parte of the 
vertue of heaven and of the plannets according to the tyme that [they are] 
stamped caste or engraven or writen in.” 150 As already noted, Forman was 
familiar with numerous magical and cabalistic texts, including the Pica- 
trix, Agrippa’s De occulta philosophia, and texts attributed to Paracelsus, 
and he might also have been influenced by Trithemius’s Steganograpbia. 151

Forman often specified the medicinal powers of amulets. In 1611 he sent 
Richard Napier, the rector of Great Linford, Buckinghamshire, and For- 
man’s astrological protege, some molds and in the accompanying letter 
noted the following: “Yf youe have them, and can tell howe to use them 
youe have a good thinge aswelle for the cueringe of diseases as for divers 
other purposes.” 152 In 1609, among his notes on cabala, Forman copied 
extensive passages from Agrippa’s De occulta philosophia, added his re- 
visions, and specified that these symbols could be used in cases of dis- 
eases. 153 In notes on “electrum,” an amalgamation of two or more metals, 
Forman recorded Paracelsus’s description of the virtues of rings made of 
electrum against poisons and witchcraft. If such a ring was worn on the 
“heart finger” it prevented cramps and the falling evil and would change 
color when sickness or evil was directed at the wearer. 154 Forman was also 
interested in more traditional sympathetic magic. He made notes describ- 
ing how to use a homunculus, or a small clay or wax image of a person, 
for healing and other types of magic at a distance. 155 In 1603 he recorded 
the case of a man imprisoned for bewitching the son of Sir John Harris and 
found in possession of a seven-inch, hirsute mandrake that moved, spoke, 
and drank blood. 156As already noted, Forman’s interest in amulets was more than academic. 
In 1583 he had a ring made with the “eagle stone,” which may have had 
some magical properties. 157 In his November 1597 casebook he recorded 
a design for a sigil. 158 That year he had lost a gold lamina that he had worn 
on his chest. 159 In April 1598 he infused a ring with astral properties, and 
that summer he made several more. 160 In 1599 Forman had an amulet with 
a coral stone made, as well as rings for himself and for Mrs. Blague. 161 One 
of these rings had a piece of parchment inserted beneath the stone on 
which was written the names of the stars underneath which Forman was 
born. It was designed to be worn on the little finger of his left hand and 
would protect him against witchcraft and other ills as well as giving 
“favour & credit & to make on famousse in his profession &C to overcom

370 Lauren Kassell

enimies.” 162 A decade later, in March 1609, Forman drew a series of char- 
acters on his left arm and right breast in semipermanent ink to alter his 
destiny. 163 In April 1601 Forman designed an amulet for Martha Shackle- 
ton, perhaps one of his clients. 164Although Forman used operative magic for medical and other purposes, 
he also practiced revelatory magic by calling angels. In 1588 he first “be- 
gan to practice foiygomercy [s/c] and to calle angells & sprites,” and a boy 
named Steven skryed for him. 165 In 1590 Forman noted that he “entred a 
cirkell for nicromanticall spells.” 166 In notes on invoking apparitions and 
spirits Forman included many examples of questions about whether he 
would achieve the power of necromancy as well as records of his attempts. 
For instance, in September 1591, he recorded that a spirit did not ap- 
pear. 167 Again Forman’s dreams are revealing, and in August 1 5 94 he noted 
that he dreamed a spirit appeared in three shapes in three different glasses 
and that his three companions could see it, but he could not. 168 Four days 
later Forman recorded, “I drempt I did see in a glas when I did call and that 
I did heare alsoe & that yt was the first tim that ever I did heare or see & 
I was annswered directly of all things.” 169 The next month Forman 
dreamed that he was lost on a highway and the angel Michael appeared to 
him to show him the way. 170 In the late 1590s Forman used John Goodage, 
“a gelded fellowe,” as a skryer. 171 On October 29, 1597, “the sprite came 
and shook the bed for or five times and cast out such a fire and brimstone 
that it stank mightily and that night he kept much adoe and rored might- 
ily but I saw him not. but I sawe the fire & then sawe him in a kind of shape 
but not perfectly.” Two days later it appeared again; this time it cast out 
much fire but could not be brought to a human form: Instead it took the 
form of a large black dog. In another account of the same session Forman 
recorded that he heard the spirit but could not see it. 172 In 1599 Forman 
simply noted “I had a sear sometimes to call,” and in August of that year 
he dreamed about one John Ward calling angels in a church. 173These examples reveal that Forman tried to call angels but say little 
about how he did it, what he hoped to achieve, or if he succeeded; if For- 
man, like John Dee, recorded his conversations with angels, these notes are 
missing. A manuscript that Forman copied and recopied contains instruc- 
tions for how to call angels for particular purposes, including medical di- 
agnoses. In his diary entry for the year 1600, Forman noted, “This yere I 
wrote out the 2 boocks of de Arte memoratum of Appolonius Niger

'The Food of Angels” 371

drawen with gould of the 7 liberal sciences.” 174 This was the Solomonic 
text known as the Ars Memoriae, or Ars Notoria, with a commentary by 
Apollonius. 175 Forman copied this text at least three times and illuminated 
it at least twice. 176 It began with an account of the history of how God se- 
lected Solomon as a recipient of his wisdom, knowledge, and grace. He 
sent an angel, Phanphilius, to Solomon with some golden tablets on which 
were written orations containing the names of holy angels in Chaldean, 
Greek, and Hebrew. The orations were prayers invoking the names of an- 
gels and of God. They were inscribed in images of angels in various posi- 
tions. Phanphilius taught Solomon how to use these tablets, and, following 
the angel’s instructions, Solomon obtained all wisdom and knowledge. 
This art was then passed to Apollonius, a learned doctor and philosopher, 
who translated the orations into Latin and wrote a commentary on them. 
He who rehearsed these prayers in the appropriate sequence and at the ap- 
propriate times would achieve the understanding of all sciences, a perfect 
and enduring memory, and the eloquence with which to express such 
knowledge. This was the first step. The adept could then proceed to the 
knowledge of the seven liberal sciences, again by speaking the orations and 
observing the images at the correct moments over a period of time. 177 This 
was angel magic.Although Forman’s copies of many alchemical texts and of the Life are 
fair copies, it is unclear why he made multiple, illuminated copies of the 
Ars Notoria. 178 One copy, which is now in Jerusalem, included only a 
single interjection by Forman, an astrological note, and was probably the 
most similar to the parent text. 179 The colophon read, “This booke and al 
the figures and signs therin contained as youe here find yt was drawen out 
& written according to the old coppie by Simon Forman gentleman and d. 
of physick with his own hand 1600 Anno Eliz 42 June.” 180 The other two 
copies were working texts. The copy that is now at Trinity College, Cam- 
bridge, had no illustrations and was dated June 28, 1600, the same month 
as the Jerusalem copy. It also contained a lengthy gloss, in English, on the 
text. At the end Forman added a number of prayers from other texts, in- 
cluding some from printed books, and others that “I toke out of the other 
bock that was writen in paper that Mr Conie brought me.” 181 The copy of 
the manuscript that is now in the Jones collection in the Bodleian, Oxford, 
was in progress between 1600 and 1603, and in it Forman incorporated 
his notes among the text.

372 Lauren Kassell372 Lauren Kassell

Unlike his annotated copies of the Life, Forman’s copies of the Ars No- 
toria contain few clues as to how he read it. The text itself nonetheless 
contains evidence of a link between Forman’s hermetic ideas and his as- 
trological physic. Each of the angelic figures represented a different art, 
and one of them was devoted to physic. This figure was accompanied by 
the following instructions, with the precept that these operations were to 
be done only by someone who had achieved the preliminary knowledge. 
While standing at the sickbed, the oration was to be spoken with great rev- 
erence and in a low voice: “by and by it shalbe [sic] declared to thee and 
suggested in thy minde by angelical vertues wheather that sicke partie shall 
recover health or die of that same sickness.” 182 Forman often sought an an- 
swer for the same question in the stars. This oration had further medical 
uses. To determine whether a woman was pregnant, the practitioner was 
to stand in front of her and to utter the prayer. The voices of angels would 
reveal whether she was with child, and if so, what sex it was. Likewise for 
the question of a woman’s virginity. These were three questions an as- 
trologer-physician frequently asked. 183 Whereas the astrologer mapped the 
heavens at the time of the question and judged the answer according to a 
set of rules, the Solomonic adept performed the required ritual and was in- 
spired with knowledge about the patient. The ritual for an astrological in- 
terview and a magical action were almost the same.To conclude that Forman called angels in his consulting room would be 
to overstate the case. There is no evidence that he, or any of the authors 
whom he followed, did this. 184 Forman’s philosophy of medicine is most 
evident in how he responded to questions about disease. He calculated an 
astrological, or on occasion a geomantical, figure for the time at which he 
was consulted and read this for the cause of the disease or to foresee its 
outcome. He may then have negotiated his conclusions with the patient or 
the person who had asked the question. If he judged the disease to be nat- 
ural or unnatural, he might treat it with herbal or magical remedies, all 
of which had to be administered at astrologically propitious moments. All 
of Forman’s medical activities relied on an analogy between the microcosm 
and the macrocosm and on his role as a magus in possession of celestial 
and supercelestial knowledge. This knowledge was recorded in texts and 
revealed in dreams, and Forman thought it enabled him to read the stars 
and to hear the voices of angels. Forman’s astrological expertise, pursuit of 
the philosophers’ stone, and magic were components of hermeticism.

'The Food of Angels” 373

Through his copying and recopying of “Of Cako,” annotations to the Life, 
and attention to the Ars Notoria, we have charted Forman’s pursuit of the 
hermetic and Paracelsian secrets of medicine. Forman was neither an in- 
novative alchemist nor a rigorous scholar; his study of alchemy, however, 
was inscribed in his medical practice. For Forman the spiritual pursuits of 
the magus were grounded in the mundane ambitions of making a living as 
an astrologer-physician.

AcknowledgmentsAcknowledgments

I am indebted to David Colclough, Tony Grafton, Nick Jardine, William 
Newman, Margaret Pelling, Joad Raymond, and Charles Webster for com- 
ments on various versions of this chapter. Early versions received many 
helpful comments from audiences at seminars at All Souls’ College, Ox- 
ford, and the Wellcome Unit, Manchester. This chapter was written before 
I was able to make full use of the work of Deborah Flarkness, David Har- 
ley, Michela Pereira, and Lawrence Principe, citations of which can be 
found in the notes. Most of my research on Simon Forman has been 
funded by the Wellcome Trust.

Notes

1. William Lilly, History of His Life and Times, ed. Charles Burman (London, 
1774), 15-23; Michael MacDonald, “The Career of Astrological Medicine in En- 
gland,” in Ole Grell and Andrew Cunningham, eds., Religio Medici: Medicine and 
Religion in Seventeenth Century England (Aldershot: Scolar, 1996), 62-90; A. L. 
Rowse, Simon Forman: Sex and Society in Shakespeare’s Age (London: Weiden- 
feld and Nicolson, 1974); Keith Thomas, Religion and the Decline of Magic, 2nd 
ed. (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1973), 356-82 passim. These accounts draw on For- 
man’s autobiographical writings and casebooks. For a full study of Forman’s man- 
uscripts, see my “Simon Forman’s Philosophy of Medicine: Medicine, Astrology 
and Alchemy in London, c. 1580-1611” (Oxford University, D.Phil. diss., 1997).

2. Oxford, Bodleian Library, Ashmole MS 208, Item 13, fol. 225v; 802, Item 13, 
fol. 133 (hereafter Ashm.). The license is Ashm. 1301, and Ashm. 1763 is Ash- 
mole’s copy of this.

3. For astrological medicine, see Allan Chapman, “Astrological Medicine,” in 
Charles Webster, ed., Health, Medicine and Mortality in the Sixteenth Century 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979), 275-300.

4. The word “hermetic” is used to denote Forman’s engagement with the tradi- 
tion of occult ideas that were attributed specifically to Hermes Trismegistus. For

374 Lauren Kassell4. The word “hermetic” is used to denote Forman’s engagement with the tradi- 
tion of occult ideas that were attributed specifically to Hermes Trismegistus. For

374 Lauren Kassell

discussions of this terminology, see Brian Copenhaver, “Natural Magic, Hermeti- 
cisrn, and Occultism in Early Modern Science,” in David Lindberg and Robert 
Westman, eds., Reappraisals of the Scientific Revolution (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1990), 261-301.

5. Ashm. 1491, fob 1248.

6. “The Grounds of Arte Gathered Out of Diverse Authors,” 1594-95 (Ashm. 
1495); “Liber Juditiorum Morborum,” 1600 (Ashm. 355; for an exact copy by 
Thomas Robson see Ashm. 1411). There are several versions of “The Astrologi- 
calle Judgmentes of Phisick and Other Questions,” c.1599 (Ashm. 403, Ashm. 
389, Ashm. 363; London, British Library, Sloane MS 99 (hereafter Sloane)). Ashm. 
363 is the most complete version.

7. Ashm. 1433, Item 2, fol. 23r-v.

8. This is based on the dated, extant manuscripts.

9. These are contained in twelve notebooks, now bound in Ashm. 208, 1423, 
1433, and 1490.

10. Charles Webster, “Alchemical and Paracelsian Medicine,” in Webster, Health 
Medicine and Mortality in the Sixteenth Century, 301-34. Contrast Allen Debus, 
The English Paracelsians (London: Oldbourne, 1965), and Paul Kocher, “Paracel- 
sian Medicine in England: The First 30 Years,” Journal of the History of Medicine, 
2 ( 1 947): 45 1-80. For recent works on manuscript culture, see David Carlson, En- 
glish Humanist Books: Writers and Patrons, Manuscript and Print, 1475-1525 
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1993); Harold Love, Scribal Publication in 
Seventeenth-Century England (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993); Arthur Marotti, 
Manuscripts, Print, and the English Renaissance Lyric (Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 1995); and Henry Woudhuysen, Sir Philip Sidney and the Circulation of 
Manuscripts, 1558-1640 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996).1 1 . For an introduction to commonplace books as kept by John Dee and his Cam- 
bridge contemporaries, see William Sherman, John Dee: The Politics of Reading 
and Writing in the English Renaissance (Amherst: University of Massachusetts 
Press, 1995), 59-65. See also Ann Moss, Printed Common-Place Books and the 
Structuring of Renaissance Thought (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996). 
Forman’s commonplace books were paginated or foliated through at some point, 
and according to this pagination each has had a third of its pages extracted. This 
was probably done by Forman as part of the process of compiling and recopying.

12. Ashm. 1472. This is the heading of the first entry, and as the subsequent en- 
tries are alphabetically organized, it is probably a prefatory section. The title suits 
the volume and will be used to refer to it.

13. Now bound in two volumes: Ashm. 1494 and 1491.

14. Ashm. 1430.

15. None of his works, with the exception of The Groundes of Longitude (Lon- 
don, 1591), a pamphlet advertising a hermetic method for calculating longitude, 
was printed.

16. For the assertion that Forman’s “escapades” might even have deterred other 
Elizabethans from an interest in alchemy, see Debus, English Paracelsians, 102.

'The Food of Angels” 375

17. Most histories of occult subjects in Elizabethan England focus on John Dee, 
and, following Frances Yates, subordinate issues of spiritualism and improve- 
ment to medicine. See esp. Yates’s Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition 
(Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1964), 60-61. For studies of Dee see Nicholas 
Clulee, John Dee’s Natural Philosophy: Between Science and Religion (London: 
Routledge, 1988); Peter French, John Dee: The World of an Elizabethan Magus 
(London: Routledge, 1972); Deborah E. Harkness,/o/>« Dee’s Conversations with 
Angels: Cabala, Alchemy and the End of Nature (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press, 1999); and Sherman, John Dee.

18. Ashrn. 208, Item 1, fol. 49r-v.18. Ashrn. 208, Item 1, fol. 49r-v.

19. Ashm. 1472, fol. 56.

20. Ashm. 208, Item 1, fols. 53v, 54.

21. Ibid., fol. 54v.

22. Ashm. 1472, fol. 809. Cf. Nancy Siraisi, The Clock and the Mirror: Girolamo 
Cardano and Renaissance Medicine (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997), 
175-76.

23. Ashm. 208, Item 1, fol. 55.

24. Ashm. 1472, fol. 809.

25. Ashm. 208, Item 1, fol. 57.

26. Ashm. 195, fol. 203v.

27. Ashm. 208, Item 2, fols. 78-93v. Parts of a rough copy and parts of another 
fair copy of this text in Forman’s hand are bound in Ashm. 1486, Item 3, fols. 7— 
11, 12-20. Some of these pages are damaged.

28. Alexander von Suchten, Of the Secrets of Antimony: In Two Treatises (Lon- 
don, 1670). This treatise was printed in German in 1570 and in Latin in 1575.

29. J. R. Partington, A History of Chemistry, vol. 2 (London: Macmillan, 1961), 
156. For a discussion of Suchten’s influence on the tracts by George Starkey, alias 
Eirenaeus Philalethes, see William Newman, Gehennical Fire: The Fives of George 
Starkey, an American Alchemist in the Scientific Revolution (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1994), 135-41, and idem, “Prophecy and Alchemy: The Origin 
of Eirenaeus Philalethes,” Ambix, 37 (1990): 102-6.

30. A text copied by Thomas Robson was dated 1575, the year of the Latin pub- 
lication (Ashm. 1418, Item 3, fols. 17-30). Ashmole in turn copied Robson’s text 
(Ashm. 1459, Item 2, fols. 136-61v). Another text, which has not been examined, 
is in the Hartlib Papers (University of Sheffield, 16/1/48-63). Robson also copied 
Forman’s copy of this text, without noting the similarities between it and the 
Suchten text (Ashm. 1421, fols. 29-34v).

31. Though on fol. 84v it is noted along with other metals.

32. I am indebted to David Katz for explaining that the Hebrew word “kochav” 
means “star” and to William Newman for explaining that Forman probably used 
this word to indicate the star-regulus of antimony.

33. Ashm. 1818, fol. 17r-v.33. Ashm. 1818, fol. 17r-v.

34. Ashm. 208, Item 2, fol. 83v.

376 Lauren Kassell

35. Ibid.

36. Ibid.

37. Ibid., fol. 83.

38. Massimo Bianchi, “The Visible and the Invisible: From Alchemy to Paracel- 
sus,” in Piyo Rattansi and Antonio Clericuzio, eds., Alchemy and Chemistry in the 
Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1994), 17-50.

39. Ashm. 1472, fols. 136-41.

40. Ibid., fol. 6v.

41. Ibid., fol. 200.

42. Ibid., fol. 206.

43. Ibid., fol. 205.

44. Ibid. In a later version Forman added divines, physicians, and astrologers to 
this (Ashm. 1494, fol. 56v).

45. Ashm. 1472, fol. 205. This is elaborated on in Ashm. 1494, fol. 59.

46. Ibid., fol. 206.

47. Ashm. 1418, Item 3, fol. 17v; 208, Item 2, fol. 78. Forman does not note that 
this is the regulus of antimony, and it is not clear whether he used the word “regu- 
lus” to mean pure antimony or something else.

48. Ashm. 1472, fol. 200.

49. Ibid., fol. 136.

50. Ashm. 1494, fol. 53. It is clear that the notes on cako in “Of Appoticarie 
Druges” were copied from Text B, not Text A, because the marginal notes in Text 
B were subsumed directly into “Of Appoticarie Druges.”

51. Ashm. 802, Item 2. This is the title used by modern scholars of pseudo- 
epigraphical texts.

52. H. F. D. Sparks, ed., The Apocryphal Old Testament (Oxford: Oxford Uni- 
versity Press, 1984), 141-67, and R. H. Charles, ed., The Apocrypha and Pseu- 
depigrapha of the Old Testament in English (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1913), 123-54. Recent scholarship on this text has been summarized by Michael 
E. Stone, A History of the Literature of Adam and Eve (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1994).53. Sparks, Apocryphal Old Testament, 143. According to Charles, this text cir- 
culated widely in England, among other places, in the sixteenth century (Apoc- 
rypha and Pseudepigrapha, 124). Charles probably concludes this from Meyer, 
who drew attention to the vernacular versions (M. E. B. Halford, “The Apoc- 
ryphal Vita Adae et Evae: Some Comments on the Manuscript Tradition,” Neu- 
philologische Mitteilungen, 82 [1981]: 417).

54. Halford, “Apocryphal Vita Adae et Evae,” J. H. Mozley, “The ‘Vita Adae,’” 
Journal of Theological Studies 30 (1929): 121-49.

55. These are as follows: Oxford, Bodleian Library, Bodley MS 596 (hereafter 
Bodley) is a prose version, of the late fourteenth or early fifteenth century; Cam-

'The Food of Angels” 377

bridge, Trinity College MS R.3.21, Item 48, fols. 249-57, is virtually identical to 
Bodley MS 596 (and was owned by John Stowe); London, British Library, Addi- 
tional MS 35,298, fols. 162-65 is also in prose; Oxford, Trinity College MS 57, 
fol. 157v is in verse.

56. This impression may be distorted by the failure of manuscripts to survive and 
the difficulty in identifying postmedieval as well as Biblical manuscripts in cata- 
logues. There are numerous sixteenth-century copies of the Life on the Continent 
(Stone, Literature of Adam and Eve, 9). The Life was printed in Latin in the late 
fifteenth century and in 1518.

57. The following chapter designations are taken from Sparks, Apocryphal Old 
Testament.57. The following chapter designations are taken from Sparks, Apocryphal Old 
Testament.

58. Forman’s text closely resembles two fifteenth-century manuscripts of the Life, 
Bodley 596 and Cambridge, Trinity College MS R.3.21, and he was probably 
copying a related manuscript. Moreover, the way in which Forman ruled his text 
with wide margins, rubricated it, and wrote in a upright hand might indicate that 
he was mimicking a fifteenth-century manuscript. For details on the creation of 
Adam and Eve in other versions of the Life, see Halford, “Apocryphal Vita Adae et 
Evae,” 420, n. 11; S. Harrison Thomson, “A Fifth Recension of the Latin ‘Vita Ade 
et Eve,’” Studi Medievali, N.S. 6 (1933): 271-78; Sparks, Apocryphal Old Testa- 
ment, 161, n. 1. Mozley identified a tradition, which he called the Arundel class, 
of English manuscripts that have these details at the end. These include descrip- 
tions of the eight substances out of which Adam was made and his naming after 
the four cardinal points (Halford, “Apocryphal Vita Adae et Evae,” 419; Stone, 
Literature of Adam and Eve, 17).

59. The sections are as follows: A (fols. l-8v), B (fols. 9-20), C (fols. 20-30).

60. Forman’s text does not contain Satan’s description of his rebellion (Life, chaps. 
14 and 15). This is present in both the English versions and the Latin Life.60. Forman’s text does not contain Satan’s description of his rebellion (Life, chaps. 
14 and 15). This is present in both the English versions and the Latin Life.

61. This discussion is restricted to a textual analysis of the Life. This text demon- 
strates a recording and transforming of legendary elements, particularly aspects of 
the Holy Rood. There is some evidence that versions of the Life persisted in Cor- 
nish creation plays through the sixteenth century (Stone, Literature of Adam and 
Eve, 16). John Aubrey recorded the following note as potentially relevant to For- 
man: “My grandfather Lyte told me that at his Lord Maier’s shew there was the 
representation of the creation of the world, and writ underneath, ‘and all for 
man.’” (John Aubrey, The Natural History of Wiltshire, ed. John Britton [London, 
1847] [written between 1656 and 1691], 79).

62. For other reading practices, see Anthony Grafton and Lisa Jardine, “‘Studied 
for Action’: How Gabriel Harvey Read His Livy,” Past and Present, 129 (1990): 
30-78; Sherman, John Dee, chaps. 3 and 4.

63. Ashrn. 802, Item 2, fol. 3v.

64. Ibid., fol. 14r-v.

65. See also ibid., fols. 15v-16, 28v, 29.

66. Bernard of Treves, “The most excellent and true booke” (Ashm. 1490, Item 
81, fol. 222v).

378

Lauren Kassell

67 . “A dialogue of Egidius de Vadius [sz'c]” (ibid., Item 1, fols. 28-36v).

68. Ashm. 1494, fol. 623.

69. Arnold Williams, The Common Expositor: An Account of the Commentaries 
on Genesis, 1527-1633 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1948), 
82.

70. Sections of Bostocke’s text are edited by Allen Debus in “An Elizabethan His- 
tory of Medical Chemistry,” Annals of Science, 18 (1962): 1-29.70. Sections of Bostocke’s text are edited by Allen Debus in “An Elizabethan His- 
tory of Medical Chemistry,” Annals of Science, 18 (1962): 1-29.

71. Richard Bostocke, The Difference Betwene the Auncient Phisicke . . . and the 
Latter Phisicke [London, 1585], sigs. Fiiii, viii. For arguments that Bostocke’s text 
was an anomaly, see Debus, English Paracelsians, chap. 2; Kocher, “Paracelsian 
Medicine in England,” 465. See also David Harley, “Rychard Bostok of Tanridge, 
Surry (c. 1530-1605), M. P., Paracelsian Propagandist and Friend of John Dee”; 
Aubix, 47 (2000), 29-36.

72. I. W., A Coppie of a Letter Sent by a Learned Physician to His Friend (Lon- 
don, 1586), sig. Alv.

73. For a mocking of the notion that Adam was the first alchemist, see Conrad 
Gesner, The Treasure of Euonymus, trans. Peter Morwyng (London, 1559), sig. 
Alv. In Ben Jonson’s The Alchemist there is a joke about Adam’s writing a treatise 
on the philosophers’ stone in High Dutch (Act II, scene i, 84-86).

74. See Williams, Common Expositor.

75. Charles Webster, From Paracelsus to Newton: Magic and the Making of Mod- 
ern Science (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 49. See also Norma 
Emerton, “Creation in the Thought of J. B. van Helmont and Robert Fludd,” in 
Rattansi and Clericuzio, Alchemy and Chemistry, 85-101.76. For instance, within the thousands of papers in the Ashmole collection there 
are only two manuscript commentaries on Genesis, one of which was by Forman 
(Ashm. 802, Item 1; 766, Item 6). The two parts of Forman’s text are now inversely 
bound. The original foliation makes it clear that in its initial form this text began 
with “Upon the firste of Genesis” (now fols. 3-12) and was followed by “the 
heaven and the earth and what the heavens are that were first created” (now fols. 
1-2). In the original foliation the first item is fols. 1-6 and the second fols. 9 and 
10, which indicates that two pages (7 and 8) are missing. The hand and inks are 
consistent throughout, and the catchwords conform to this reading. It is unclear 
whether this is the introduction to what was intended as a long tract or is most of 
it. Some of Forman’s related notes, in rough format, are now bound in his copy of 
The Hystory of Kyng Boccus and Sydrack (1537?) (St. John’s College, Oxford). 
These notes are on the birth of Lucifer, which figures in Forman’s creation tract as 
the beginning of supercelestial time (fols. 5-6). For a printed version of these notes 
see Philip Bliss, “Extracts from a Manuscript of Dr. Simon Forman,” Censura Lit- 
erae, 8 (1807): 409-13.

77. See Williams, Common Expositor, 44-45.

78. Ashm. 802, Item 1, fol. 4v; see also fol. 8.

79. Ibid., fol. 1.

'The Food of Angels” 379

80. Ibid., fol. 2.

81. For conflict between theologians and alchemists on the subject of creations, 
see Williams, Common Expositor, 46.

82. See his transcripts, in chronological order from 1585: Ripley (Ashm. 1490, 
Item 44), Bernard of Treves (Ashm. 1490, Item 81), J. J. (Ashm. 1490, Item 83), 
Henry Lock (Ashm. 1490, Item 84), Egidius Devadis (Ashm. 1490, Item 1), and 
Blomfild (Ashm. 1490, Items 67 and 68).83. Ashm. 1430, fols. 26-33; 1472, fol. 178; 1494, fols. 473-78. For a version of 
this in verse, see Ashm. 240, fols. 33-35v. For an edition of these verses, see Robert 
M. Schuler, ed., Alchemical Poetry, 1575-1700: from Previously Unpublished 
Manuscripts (New York: Garland, 1995), 49-70.

84. Ashm. 1430, fol. 26. This phrase also appeared in Forman’s creation tract 
(Ashm. 802, Item 1, fol. 8).

85. Williams, Common Expositor, 77.

86. Ashm. 802, Item 2, fol. lr-v.

87. Ibid., fol. l v . In the text of Forman’s copy of the Life, Adam was made of nine 
things: the slime of the earth, the sea, stones, clouds, winds, sun, light of the world, 
the Holy Ghost, and fire (ibid., fols. 2v-3). Cf. Owen Hannaway, The Chemists and 
the Word: The Didactic Origins of Chemistry (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer- 
sity Press, 1975), 27-28.

88. See also Ashm. 1472, fol. 64; 1494, fol. 190.

89. See also Ashm. 1472, fols. 64-66; 1494, fols. 190-200, 218.

90. Ashm. 1494, fol. 191.

91. Ibid., fols. 190-200, 218. Forman used the 1567 Paris edition of De occulta, 
and he probably owned a copy. In his manuscripts he often noted to look further 
in Agrippa, and gave book, chapter, and folio references.

Agrippa’s previous chapter was about the creation of man, after the image of 
God. There were some similarities between this and the beginning of Forman’s en- 
try on “Anima & Spiritus,” though here Forman was not following Agrippa di- 
rectly. Forman’s notes on cabala, which include extracts from Agrippa, were also 
written in 1610 and, perhaps coincidentally, are now bound with the notes on the 
motions of the heavens (Ashm. 244).

92. William Newman, “Thomas Vaughan as an interpreter of Agrippa von 
Nettesheim,” Aubix, 29 (1982), 125-140.

93. Ashm. 1494, fol. 196.92. William Newman, “Thomas Vaughan as an interpreter of Agrippa von 
Nettesheim,” Aubix, 29 (1982), 125-140.

93. Ashm. 1494, fol. 196.

94. These had been printed in German in 1573, and the second has never appeared 
in print in English: Ashm. 1490, Items 79 and 80. Charles Webster has identified 
this text as Karl Sudhoff, Bibliographia Paracelsica, vol. 1 (Berlin, 1894), no. 145.

95. Paracelsus, Operum medico-chimicorum sive paradoxorum, tomus genuinus 
undecimus, trans. Zacharias Palthenius, vol. 11 (Frankfurt, 1605). I am indebted 
to Charles Webster for this identification. Almost no printed books bearing marks 
of Forman’s ownership have been identified.

380 Lauren Kassell

96. Sloane 3822, Item 2, fols. 68-75. See also Forman’s notes on the celestial heav- 
ens (Ashm. 244, fols. 35-60).

97. Ashm. 802, Item 2, fol. 2.

98. Ibid., fol. 3.

99. Ibid., fol. 2.

100. Paracelsus, Operum medico-chimicorum 11:66-110.

101. Walter Pagel, Paracelsus: An Introduction to Philosophical Medicine in the 
Era of the Renaissance (Basel, Switzerland: Karger, 1958), 83, 228.

102. Ashm. 802, Item 2, fols. 2v-3.

103. Ibid., fol. 21.

104. Ibid., fol. 21v. Some versions of the Life gave the number of diseases God had 
inflicted on Adam as seventy, some as seventy-two.

105. These elements appear in other Books of Adam and Eve. See for instance 
S. C. Malan, ed., The Book of Adam and Eve (London, 1882).

106. Ashm. 802, Item 2, fol. 9.

107. Ibid., fols. 9v-10.

108. Ibid., fol. 15v.

109. Ibid., fol. 18v (Life, chap. 24). Another medicinal theme in the Life, this of 
Christian origin, was the oil of mercy (ibid., fols. 23v, 25r-v; Life, chap. 36). For- 
man’s text contained additions about the tree of mercy, which seem to have been 
drawn from the gospel of Nicodemus.

110. Gervase Babington, Certain Plaine, Briefe, and Comfortable Notes, Upon 
Every Chapter of Genesis (London, 1596), 14-15.110. Gervase Babington, Certain Plaine, Briefe, and Comfortable Notes, Upon 
Every Chapter of Genesis (London, 1596), 14-15.

111. Nicholas Gibbens, Questions and Disputations Concerning the Holy Scrip- 
ture (London, 1602), 39-42.

112. Ibid., 39.

113. Ibid., 161.

114. Ibid., 162-63.

115. Ibid., 218-19; for antediluvian vegetarianism see also 361-65.

116. Gibbens’s inclusion of Jean Fernel in his sources further illustrates the over- 
lap between theology and medicine. For recent work on Fernel, see Lawrence 
Brockliss and Colin Jones, The Medical World of Early Modern France (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1997), 128-38; Stuart Clark, “Demons and Disease: The 
Disenchantment of the Sick,” in Marijke Gijswijt-Hofstra, Hilary Marland, and 
Hans de Waardt, eds., Illness and Healing Alternatives in Western Europe (Lon- 
don: Routledge, 1997), 38-58; Linda Deer Richardson, “The Generation of Dis- 
ease: Occult Causes and Diseases of the Total Substance,” in A. Wear, R. K. French, 
and I. M. Lonie, eds., The Medical Renaissance of the Sixteenth Century (Cam- 
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), 175-94; Siraisi, Cardano and Renais- 
sance Medicine, 158-61.

117. The phrase appeared in verses entitled “Christ’s Affliction” following one of 
the English versions of the Life in a contiguous script (Bodley 596, fols. 12v-13).

The Food of Angels ” 381

118. Roger Bacon, Opus Majus, ed. John H. Bridges (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1900), 204-13; William Newman, “The Philosopher’s Egg: Theory and Prac- 
tice in the Alchemy of Roger Bacon,” Micologus: Nature, Sciences and Medieval So- 
cieties, 3 (1995): 75-101. See also Michela Pereira, “ Mater Medicinarum: English 
Physicians and the Alchemical Elixir in the Fifteenth Century,” in Roger French, Jon 
Arrizabalaga, Andrew Cunningham, and Luis Garcia-Ballester, eds., Medicine 
from the Black Death to the French Disease (Aldershot: Ashgate, 1998), 26-52.

119. Pagel, Paracelsus, 153-58.119. Pagel, Paracelsus, 153-58.

120. Agrippa, then Vaughan, used this term. See Newman, “Thomas Vaughan,” 
132, n. 68.

121. Bostocke, Auncient Phisicke, sigs. Biiii— [vi] v.

122. I. W., Coppie of a Letter, sig. [B6]v.

123. Ibid., sig. [B7]v.

124. Ashm. 1429, fol. 77. William Black, A Descriptive, Analytical and Critical 
Catalogue of the Manuscripts Bequeathed unto the University of Oxford by Elias 
Ashmole (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1845), attributed this text to Forman, 
though his only evidence is the following, probably written by Richard Napier: 
“September 1611. Doctor Formans booke for the use of Clement his sonne.” This 
appears at the front of the volume. The title page is missing, and there are no ref- 
erences to Forman in the text.

125. Ashm. 1419, fols. 57-82v; for another copy of this text, made by Isaac New- 
ton, see Cambridge, King’s College, Keynes MS 22. 1 am indebted to William New- 
man for identifying this text for me and for pointing me in the direction of 
Lawrence Principe’s discussion of it in The Aspiring Adept: Robert Boyle and his 
Alchemical Quest (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998), p. 198. I have 
explored the “food of angels” further in “Reading for the philosophers’ stone” in 
Marina Frasca-Spada and Nick Jardine, eds., Books and the Sciences in History 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 132-50.

126. Ashm. 1419, fols. 63-64v.

127. Ibid., fol. 63v.

128. Ibid., fol. 64.

129. Ashm. 1433, Item 1. 1 do not know when he made his initial transcript.126. Ashm. 1419, fols. 63-64v.

127. Ibid., fol. 63v.

128. Ibid., fol. 64.

129. Ashm. 1433, Item 1. 1 do not know when he made his initial transcript.

130. Very few manuscripts of Dunstan’s alchemical tract seem to have survived. 
There are three copies in the Ashmole collection, made by Forman, Thomas Rob- 
son, and Ashmole. Ashmole noted that Sir Thomas Browne had a Latin copy, 
which was confirmed by a letter from Brown to Ashmole (Elias Ashmole, Autobi- 
ographical and Historical Notes, Correspondence, and Other Sources, ed. C. H. 
Josten [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1966], 2:755, n. 2). Brown had sent Ash- 
mole a list of alchemical manuscripts and was inviting Ashmole to look at them. 
This letter is from January 1659. Josten identifies the Dunstan text as possibly 
Sloane MS 1255, Item 2. See also Sloane MSS 1744 (which also contains some For- 
man and some Robson), 1876, 3738, and 3757. Oxford, Corpus Christi College, 
MS 128, is the only medieval copy identified. It may have been owned by John Dee 
and is listed in Julian Roberts and Andrew Watson, eds., John Dee’s Library Cat- 
alogue (London: Bibliographical Society, 1990) as DM [129].

382 Lauren Kassell

131. Elias Ashmole, Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum (London, 1652), sig. Blv. 
Ashmole recorded that he compared the copy of Edwardus’s manuscript now 
bound in Ashm. 1419 with one in the hand of its author (Ashm. 1419, fol. 82v). 
Josten thought that Ashmole might have learned this scheme from Father Back- 
house: Ashmole, Autobiographical and Historical Notes, 1:86.

132. Ashm. 802, Item 2, fols. 21v-23.

133. I. W., Coppie of a Letter, sig. B7r-v.132. Ashm. 802, Item 2, fols. 21v-23.

133. I. W., Coppie of a Letter, sig. B7r-v.

134. The tradition of using medical and scientific material in Hexamera was pres- 
ent in St. Ambrose, who probably drew on Cicero’s De natura deorum (Nancy Sir- 
aisi, Medieval and Early Renaissance Medicine [Chicago: Chicago University 
Press, 1990], 7-8). The critical edition of Sylvester’s translation of Du Bartas’s text 
defers sources to the critical edition of the original text (Susan Snyder, ed., The Di- 
vine Weeks and Works of Guillaume de Saluste Sieur du Bartas, trans. Josuah 
Sylvester [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979]). In the introduction to this, the 
editors point to the problems of identifying sources for Hexamera, and in the sec- 
tion of the Furies here at issue (beginning line 305), they note that “[t]he list of dis- 
eases which Du Bartas now gives cannot be traced to any particular source. It is 
probable that he used the works of Hippocrates” (Urban T. Holmes, John C. 
Lyons, and Robert W. Linker, eds., The Workes of Guillaume de Salluste [Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1935-40], 733). Ashmole described an 
old Latin text, owned by Dr. Barlow, Bishop of Lincoln, which he thought Du Bar- 
tas simply translated and published as his own (Ashm. 826, fol. 119).

135. “Heere sorrow stopt the doore / Of his sad voice, and almost dead for 
woe, / The prophetizing spirit foresooke him so” (“The Handicrafts,” lines 772- 
74, in Snyder, Divine Weeks).

136. The hands and inks in each are very similar.

137. For Forman’s treatments and recipes see his casebooks, Ashm. 234, 226, 195, 
219, 236, and 411 passim. See also the notes of his assistant and illegitimate son, 
Josuah Walworth, Cambridge, Trinity College MS 0.2.59, Item 4, fols. 121-49.

138. Although Basil Valentine used antimonial leads for amulets, there is no evi- 
dence that Forman did this (Partington, Chemistry, 2:198).

139. Ashm. 392, fol. 46.138. Although Basil Valentine used antimonial leads for amulets, there is no evi- 
dence that Forman did this (Partington, Chemistry, 2:198).

139. Ashm. 392, fol. 46.

140. D. P. Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic from Ticino to Campanella (Lon- 
don: Warburg Institute, 1958); Webster, From Paracelsus to Neivton; Yates, Gior- 
dano Bruno.

141. Yates, Giordano Bruno. John Dee’s conversations with angels have received 
considerable attention. The most recent study is Harkness, Dee’s Conversations. 
Harkness, “The Scientific Reformation.”

142. Michael MacDonald, Witchcraft and Hysteria in Elizabethan London: Ed- 
ward Jorden and the Mary Glover Case (London: Routledge, 1991).

143. Clark, “Demons and Disease,” 38-44; idem, Thinking with Demons: The 
Idea of Witchcraft in Early Modern Europe (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1997), 195-98; Brian Copenhaver, Symphorien Champier and the Reception of 
the Occidtist Tradition in Renaissance France (The Hague: Mouton, 1978, 227-

'The Food of Angels” 383

28); MacDonald, Witchcraft and Hysteria, xxxii; Siraisi, Cardano and Renais- 
sance Medicine, chap. 7.

144. This is most evident in Forman’s treatises on plague: Ashm. 208, Item 8, fols. 
110-34; 1403; 1436.

145. Ashm. 1495, fols. 4v, 32; 363, fols. 272-82, [309],

146. Ashm. 363, fols. 69v-71v; see also Ashm. 431, fols. 145-46. Ashmole at- 
tributed a note to Forman to the effect that the heavens move in three ways, one of 
which was natural, and two against nature (Ashm. 421, fols. 149r-v).

147. Ashm. 195, fols. 210, 218.

148. Ashm. 411, fols. 95, 99v, 115, 118v.

149. In one of his commonplace books he recorded a detailed account of several 
methods for casting things and noted a method that one “Mullenax” used to cast 
things in plaster (Ashm. 1494, fol. 324). This might be Emery Molyneaux, the 
globe maker, whom Forman knew in the early 1590s.

150. Ashm. 392, fol. 46. See also Ashm. 390, fol. 30.150. Ashm. 392, fol. 46. See also Ashm. 390, fol. 30.

151. In his diary for 1600 Forman noted that he “copied out also the 4 boocks of 
steganographia and divers other bocks” (Ashm. 208, Item 1, fol. 62v). For For- 
man’s notes on the Picatrix see, for instance, Ashm. 244, fols. 45, 97; 431, fol. 
146r-v; 1491, fol. 1 128. Pingree has identified Napier’s copy of the Picatrix, which 
might be a transcript of Forman’s copy (David Pingree, ed., Picatrix: The Latin Ver- 
sions of the Ghayat al-hakim. Studies of the Warburg Institute, vol. 39 [London: 
Warburg Institute, 1986], xix, liii-lv).

152. Ashm. 240, fol. 106. Michael MacDonald states that Forman taught Napier 
to use amulets in 1611 ( Mystical Bedlam: Madness, Anxiety, and Healing in Sev- 
enteenth-Century England [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981], 294, 
n. 195). He does not include this letter in his evidence, and although the manu- 
scripts to which MacDonald refers are evidence that Napier was constructing 
amulets by 1611, there is no indication that he learned how to do so from Forman.

153. Ashm. 244, Item I, fols. 6v, llv.

154. Ashm. 1494, fol. 484. Forman cites Paracelsus, “Archidoxes,” fol. 15, and al- 
though this text is included in Palthenius’s vol. 1 1 of translation of Paracelsus’s 
Operum medico-chimicorum, the page citation does not match, and Forman was 
probably using a different edition.

155. Ashm. 1494, fol. 574-75.

156. Ashm. 1491, fol. 679.

157. Ashm. 208, Item 1, fol. 37v. For rings that might have been magical, see ibid., 
fol. 49.

158. Ashm. 226, fol. 249v.

159. Ashm. 205, fol. 23.

160. Ashm. 195, fols. 29v, 56v-57v, 58.

161. Ibid., fol. 223v; 219, fol. 48.

162. Sloane 3822, fol. 11.

163. Ashm. 1494, fol. 586v. For the recipe for the ink, see ibid., fol. 402.

384 Lauren Kassell161. Ibid., fol. 223v; 219, fol. 48.

162. Sloane 3822, fol. 11.

163. Ashm. 1494, fol. 586v. For the recipe for the ink, see ibid., fol. 402.

384 Lauren Kassell

164. Ashm. 411, fol. 58v. This might be the same Mrs. Shackelton whose coat of 
arms Forman described as having been made for her burial on January 7, 1608 
(Ashm. 802, Item 37, fol. 207v).

165. Ashm. 208, Item 1, fol. 43v. Forman wrote the word “foiygomercy” in bold, 
distinct and upright letters.

166. Ibid., fol. 46v.

167. Ibid., fol. 59v.

168. Ashm. 1472, fol. 813 (August 19, 1594).

169. Ibid. (August 23, 1594).

170. Ibid. (September 8, 1594). The text of this dream is incomplete.

171. This is probably the same man as “John Good,” who came to live with For- 
man in 1598 and who later confessed to robbing his study (Ashm. 208, Item 1, fol. 
59v; 392, fol. 136).

172. Ashm. 354, fols. 236-37.

173. Ashm. 219, fols. 135, 136.

174. Ashm. 208, Item 1, fol. 62v.

175. Lynn Thorndike, A History of Magic and Experimental Science (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1934), 2:281-83.

176. Bodleian Library, Jones MS 1; Cambridge, Trinity College MS 0.9.7; Jeru- 
salem, National Library, Yahuda MS VAR. 34. For Forman’s drafts of the draw- 
ings see Ashm. 820, Item 3. Other copies of this text include Bodley MS 951; 
London, British Library, Harleian MS 181; and Sloane MS 1712. A translation of 
this text, without the illustrations, appears to be in the hand of Richard Napier 
(Ashm. 1515).

177. Ashm. 1515, fol. 23v.

178. In “Of Appoticarie Druges” Forman included a section entitled “Writing of 
Books” in which he outlined the ritual constituents that Raziel told Solomon were 
necessary for wills and petitions to be fulfilled. These included using pure, virgin 
parchment and special inks. This may have been why Forman made the effort to 
write some manuscripts on parchment (Ashm. 1491, 1303-9).

179. Jerusalem, National Library, Yahuda MS VAR. 34, fol. 8.

180. Ibid., fol. 21.179. Jerusalem, National Library, Yahuda MS VAR. 34, fol. 8.

180. Ibid., fol. 21.

181. Cambridge, Trinity College MS 0.9.7, fols. 107v, 115.

182. Ashm. 1515, fol. 34.

183. See Forman’s guide to astrological physic, Ashm. 363, and his casebooks, 
Ashm. 234, 226, 195, 219, 236, and 411.

184. Cf. Yates, Giordano Bruno, 151.

8

Some Problems with the Historiography 
of Alchemy

Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman184. Cf. Yates, Giordano Bruno, 151.

8

Some Problems with the Historiography 
of Alchemy

Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

The well-recognized complexity and opacity of alchemical literature has long 
constituted a barrier to its proper understanding. Indeed, since the eigh- 
teenth-century disappearance of its last serious practitioners within the com- 
munity of chemists, alchemy has been the subject of several radically distinct 
schools of historical interpretation. The current understanding of alchemy 
among historians of science, not to mention the general public, remains 
strongly colored by one or more of these divergent schools of interpretation, 
which stem, respectively, from the Enlightenment rejection of obscurity and 
the later Romantic disenchantment with Newtonian science that led to a new 
embrace of the occult . 1 At present, when historical interest in alchemy is in 
the ascendant, it is appropriate to reexamine the content, origins, effects, and 
validity of these interpretations. We will argue in this chapter that none of 
these established interpretive schools is satisfactory, for none represents 
alchemy in a way that is consistent with the historical record, and all severely 
distort the content and context of the discipline. As we will show, this dis- 
tortion is often the inevitable consequence of the adoption, frequently un- 
witting, of principles derived from nineteenth-century occultism, which have 
become widespread tenets in the historiography of alchemy. We hope, there- 
fore, to clear away some of the detritus that has gradually accumulated 
around the topic, enabling scholars more accurately to chart and later to fol- 
low a path through what remains a partly uncharted domain and thus arrive 
finally at a clearer and more accurate understanding of alchemy.

The Eighteenth-Century View of AlchemyThe Eighteenth-Century View of Alchemy

The increasing rejection of traditional alchemy during the eighteenth cen- 
tury is generally well known, even though more detailed studies would be

386 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

beneficial to define the exact course and means of that repudiation. In- 
creasingly from the beginning of the century there was a tendency to se- 
quester the “older” alchemy from the “newer” science of chemistry, and 
this divorce appears clearly in the etymological distinctions between 
“alchemy” and “chemistry,” which became entrenched in the first decades 
of the eighteenth century. As we have shown elsewhere, the words 
“alchemy” and “chemistry” were used interchangeably to refer to the same 
body of activities throughout most of the seventeenth century, and only 
during the eighteenth century were distinctions similar to those in com- 
mon modern usage rigidly drawn between the two. In the early eighteenth 
century, the domain of “alchemy” was for the first time widely restricted 
to gold making — or what had previously been termed “chrysopoeia” or 
alcbemia transmutatoria — and many writers (such as the Lemerys, Geof- 
frey, and Fontenelle) focused ever more exclusively on the cheating prac- 
tices of alchemical charlatans, eventually indicting the whole subject as a 
fraud . 2 Indeed, for most writers and thinkers of the eighteenth century, 
alchemy was synonymous with gold making and fraud.By the middle of the eighteenth century, “alchemy” was in fairly uni- 
versal disrepute among scientific authors, save for scattered continuing 
support from a few writers particularly in Germany. In the lingering Ger- 
man debates over the validity of alchemical transmutation (which contin- 
ued until the end of the century), the opponents of chrysopoeia continued 
to insist upon alchemy’s putatively fraudulent character. These Enlighten- 
ment writers drew heavily on metaphors of light and darkness to describe 
the dawning of chemistry out of the misty obscurity of the medieval delu- 
sion of alchemy . 3 This strongly negative viewpoint endured well after 
alchemy ceased to be a topic of actual debate, being adopted wholesale by 
many members of the early generation of chemical historians including Jo- 
hann Friedrich Gmelin and Thomas Thomson. Indeed, judgments drawn 
in the eighteenth century persist to the present day, even among some 
historians of science . 4 In protecting the developing discipline of mod- 
ern chemistry from the censures to which traditional alchemy (i.e., 
chrysopoeia) was liable, the Enlightenment writers produced the appear- 
ance of a radical disjunction in the history of chemistry, as if the newly 
redefined “alchemy” and “chemistry” were only marginally contiguous. 
This movement paralleled the attempts of early eighteenth-century chem- 
ical practitioners to legitimize their discipline and enhance their status by

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 387

divorcing themselves sharply from the foregoing alchemical tradition, 
which had fallen into disrepute. The recasting of alchemy as “other” rela- 
tive to chemistry was to have significant consequences in the nineteenth 
century and thence to the present day.Alchemical symbolism continued to survive in some nonscientific quar- 
ters, however, even after alchemy itself was no longer reputable. For ex- 
ample, during the eighteenth century the Pietists both in Germany and in 
America propagated in a spiritual setting the alchemical imagery em- 
ployed by Jakob Boehme in expounding his ecstatic visions. 5 The mystical 
brands of alchemical thought propounded by Heinrich Khunrath and the 
Rosicrucian enthusiast Robert Fludd persisted among several secret soci- 
eties. The Gold- und Rosencrentz of the eighteenth century relied heavily 
on alchemical symbolism and made at least rhetorical gestures toward the 
importance of alchemical practice. The “Convent of the Philalethes,” a 
Parisian masonic order sharing its name with one of the seventeenth cen- 
tury’s most popular alchemical writers, took up alchemy along with other 
“occult sciences.” 6 The secrecy universally connected with earlier alchem- 
ical writers and practices facilitated a juxtaposition of alchemy with dif- 
ferent sorts of “secret knowledge” such as natural magic. Alchemical 
works deliberately written to be obscure and secretive in their own age 
sometimes became meaningless in the next. Such obscurity was a boon to 
those striving to display the fraudulent and “nonscientific” character of 
alchemy, as in the case of Johann Christoph Adelung, whose Geschichte 
der menschlichen Narrheit casts together magicians, soothsayers, and al- 
chemists into a common bin. 7At the beginning of the nineteenth century, references to alchemy were 
to be found predominantly in association with magic, witchcraft, and the 
other practices commonly grouped together as “occult,” topics that the 
eighteenth-century “triumph of reason” had ridiculed. Thus, when occult 
revivals began in the early nineteenth century, alchemy received new at- 
tention not so much in itself but as one of a number of “occult” sciences. 
The work of the occult writer Francis Barrett, whose 1801 The Magus in- 
volved alchemy along with natural magic, astrology, and demonology as 
“a complete system of occult philosophy,” provides one example. This 
book was followed some years later by Lives of the Alchemystical 'Writers, 
often ascribed to Barrett as well, the very orthography of whose title sig- 
nals its author’s tendencies. 8 This yoking of alchemy to such disciplines as

388 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

natural magic, astrology, and theurgy, although already begun in some 
quarters during the Renaissance (see chapter 1 of this volume), was con- 
summated only during the final years of the ancien regime in France, at the 
time when Franz Anton Mesmer was disseminating his pneumatic “sci- 
ence” to the world. 9 Mesmerism, as we shall see, laid the foundations for 
the mid-nineteenth-century success of the “spiritual” interpretation of 
alchemy.

The “Spiritual” Interpretation of AlchemyThe “Spiritual” Interpretation of Alchemy

Although nineteenth-century occultism is a complex subject in its own 
right, it is possible to distinguish a set of characteristic features of a “spir- 
itual” interpretation of alchemy in this period. The esoteric or occultist 
school, which interpreted alchemy in this spiritual way, held (and holds) 
that the operations recorded in alchemical texts corresponded only tan- 
gentially or not at all to physical processes. 10 Although it was in fact a com- 
monplace of the early modern period to build extended religious conceits 
on alchemical processes and to draw theological parallels therefrom — an 
aspect of alchemical writing Luther praised in passing 11 — the occultists of 
the nineteenth century went much further to claim that alchemy itself was 
an art of internal meditation or illumination rather than an external ma- 
nipulation of apparatus and chemicals. Nineteenth-century occult writers 
claimed that the alchemists did not aim primarily at changes of a chemical 
kind but rather used chemical language and terminology only to couch 
spiritual, moral, or mystical processes in allegorical guise. The alchemists’ 
important goals were supramundane. The transmutation of base metals 
into noble ones is thus to be read as a trope or allusive instruction for the 
transcendental transformation of the alchemist himself, or of all mankind 
through him, from a base, earthly state into a more noble, more spiritual, 
more moral, or more divine state. The philosophers’ stone that effects this 
transmutation/transformation may be corporeal or noncorporeal but in ei- 
ther case represents a mystical or spiritual power either intrinsic or extrin- 
sic to the contemplative spiritual alchemist. This point of view, which we 
shall refer to as “spiritual alchemy,” sees alchemical adepts as possessors 
of vast esoteric knowledge and spiritual enlightenment.The nineteenth-century focus on “spiritual alchemy” succeeded in 
bringing about a massive transformation in the general perception of

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 389

alchemy. Although the more extreme exponents of this school are rather 
easily relegated to places beyond the fringes of respectability, the overall 
impact of the esoteric school on present-day perceptions of alchemy, even 
among historians of science, remains significant. When Herbert Butter- 
field famously derided historians of alchemy as being “tinctured with the 
same type of lunacy they set out to describe,” it is likely that he had this es- 
oteric/occultist interpretation in mind. 12 The two most seminal figures in 
the history of the “spiritual” interpretation of alchemy date from the 
middle of the nineteenth century. Mary Anne Atwood in England and 
Ethan Allen Hitchcock in the United States independently produced spir- 
itual explanations of alchemy in the 1850s, and they were rapidly joined 
by many others caught up in the Victorian fascination with the occult.Mary Anne Atwood was born in 1817, daughter of Thomas South, a 
gentleman of Hampshire. At their home of Bury House in Gosport, father 
and daughter studied classical and esoteric literature together and became 
involved in animal magnetism, Mesmerism, and other manifestations of 
occultism then in vogue. In 1846, Thomas South, probably in collabora- 
tion with his daughter, published a small tract entitled Early Magnetism, 
in its Higher Relations to Humanity as Veiled in the Poets and Prophets 
(under the anagram ©not; Mayoi;). This treatise is an early example of the 
Souths’ reading of esoteric subtexts into historical literature, in this case 
the supposed allusive revelation of animal magnetism in the Homeric 
Hymns. Thereafter, the two read alchemical literature, and believing they 
had found therein great esoteric spiritual knowledge and practice in alle- 
gorical guise, settled upon writing two expositions, the father writing in 
verse and the daughter in prose. In 1850, Mary Anne’s treatise was com- 
pleted, sent to the press, and published as A Suggestive Inquiry into the 
Hermetic Mystery. Immediately upon publication, however, the author 
and her father recalled the book and, on the lawn of Bury House, burned 
all of the copies plus South’s notes and unfinished poetical work. 13 Only 
the few copies that had already been purchased or sent out to libraries sur- 
vived. These few examples do seem to have been eagerly read and cited by 
occultists in the latter half of the nineteenth century. It remains open to 
question whether this recall and destruction arose from a “moral panic” 
upon a sudden “realization of the sanctity of the Art” and a fear of being 
“betrayers of the sacred secret,” as claimed by Atwood’s followers, or was 
instead intended to excite future interest in the volume. 14

390 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman390 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

The balance of Atwood’s life was without further authorship; she mar- 
ried Rev. Alban Thomas Atwood, vicar of Leake, Yorkshire, in 1859, with 
whom she bore no children, and who died in 1883. Atwood herself died 
in 1910 and bequeathed her papers and few copies of the Suggestive In- 
quiry (bearing her revisions) to her friend and confidante Isabelle de 
Steiger. From these copies a new edition was produced in Belfast in 1918, 
introduced and edited by Walter Leslie Wilmshurst, an editor of esoter- 
ica. 15 It has remained in print almost continuously ever since.

The Inquiry begins with a cursory (and naive) history of alchemy from 
Egyptian antiquity to the seventeenth century, when a “mistrust, gather- 
ing from disappointment” generated the “absolute odium” under which 
alchemy and its practitioners had lain since the Enlightenment. 16 Atwood 
gives special place to Eugenius Philalethes (alias Thomas Vaughan) but re- 
serves her highest (and lengthiest) praise for Jakob Boehme (1575-1624), 
the Lutheran cobbler-mystic, whom she calls “the plainest, simplest, and 
most confidential exponent” of all. She adds to her praise of Boehme a sur- 
viving fragment of her father’s immolated versification that declares that 
the accumulated wisdom and esoteric knowledge of Orpheus, Zoroaster, 
Pythagoras, Plato, and every other “saint and sage”

fn Bohme’s wondrous page we view 
Discovered and revealed anew . 17fn Bohme’s wondrous page we view 
Discovered and revealed anew . 17

Atwood concludes that the world is “fully ignorant of the genuine doc- 
trine” of alchemy because the adepts’ recipes “though at variance with all 
common-sense probability, have been the means of surrounding many a 
literal soul with stills, coals, and furnaces, in the hope by such lifeless in- 
struments to sublime the Spirit of nature, or by salt, sulphur and mercury, 
or the three combined with antimony, to extract the Form of gold.” 18 
What appear to be laboratory operations are but “wisdom’s envelope, to 
guard her universal magistery from an incapable and dreaming world.” 19 
Such laboratory processes were doomed from the start, according to At- 
wood, because although the adepts could in fact transmute base metals 
into gold, that was the lowest form of their craft and was not accom- 
plished by means of normal chemical operations. The physical transmu- 
tation of metals required that the alchemist first transform himself so that 
he could operate in a quasi-magical and pneumatic fashion. The materi- 
alist recipes of the alchemists were purely delusory: in fact, they were win- 
dow dressing.

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 391Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 391

The balance of Atwood’s treatise presents her thesis wrapped in a dense 
and often incoherent hodgepodge of decontextualized and often unattrib- 
uted quotations from alchemical and classical authors, piled high with ob- 
scure assertions, enraptured exclamations, and bizarrely twisted scientific 
notions. 20 Atwood asserts that the alchemists’ prime matter, philosophical 
mercury, primordial chaos, or Spirit of Life is an imponderable incorpo- 
real ether. The alchemical vessel is man himself, and when in a trancelike 
state, the adept can “magnetically” draw in this ether or primordial light 
and condense it into the philosophers’ stone, “pure Ethereality of Nature” 
or “Light inspissate,” a noncorporeal agent of universal change and exal- 
tation dwelling within the enlightened adept: 21 “Man is the true laboratory 
of the Hermetic Art; his life the subject, the grand distillatory, the thing dis- 
tilling and the thing distilled, and Self-Knowledge [is] at the root of all Al- 
chemical tradition.” 22

The alchemical process thus involved a self-purification and exaltation 
to a “higher plane of existence.” Simultaneously, the spiritualized esoteric 
adept could also manipulate matter by the application of the same forces, 
advancing lead into gold by purely spiritual means. Atwood declares an 
underlying unity of creation and the ability of all its manifestations — min- 
eral, vegetable, animal, or spiritual — to be exalted within their sphere by 
the same power. Clearly alchemy is totally distinct from chemistry: “No 
modern art or chemistry, notwithstanding all its surreptitious claims, has 
any thing in common with Alchemy.” 23Atwood’s exposition of the “Hermetic Mystery” is intimately bound up 
with her early enthusiasm for Mesmerism. The ether that forms the foun- 
dation of hermetic manipulations is the same medium by which Mesmer’s 
planetary influences and animal magnetism were transmitted. Atwood 
claims that the trancelike state necessary for self-purification and the con- 
centration or manifestation of the “matter” was achieved in ancient times 
by the devotees of the Eleusinian mysteries and contemporaneously by the 
practitioners of Mesmerism — “the first key opening to the vestibule of this 
Experiment.” 24 She is generally dismissive of modern science, considering 
it too intent upon the physical, lower order of things and its practitioners 
thereby both unfitted and unable to ascend to the ancient and eternal 
mysteries.

Shortly thereafter, Ethan Allen Hitchcock (1798-1870), a general in the 
U.S. Army, propounded a considerably different, but still spiritual, view of

392 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. NewmanShortly thereafter, Ethan Allen Hitchcock (1798-1870), a general in the 
U.S. Army, propounded a considerably different, but still spiritual, view of

392 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

alchemy. His Remarks upon Alchymists was a short work published in 
1855, attempting to show “that the philosopher’s stone is a mere symbol 
signifying something which could not be expressed openly without incur- 
ring the danger of an auto da fed After an unfavorable review of the book, 
Hitchcock issued a response two years later in the form of the longer and 
more detailed Remarks upon Alchemy and the Alchemists , 25 Hitchcock’s 
reading of alchemical texts is moral and Christian, arguing that they are 
allegories or veiled descriptions of the moral life. He asserts that the al- 
chemists actually did nothing akin to chemistry and that “ Man was the 
subject of Alchemy; and that the object of the Art was the perfection, or at 
least the improvement, of Man.” 26 Philosophical Mercury is a clean and 
pure conscience, difficult to obtain but potentially available everywhere, 
and once obtained it leads easily (through “women’s work and children’s 
play”) to the philosophers’ stone, which is the consummate moral life. The 
true nature of the alchemical quest was hidden in secrecy owing to the “in- 
tolerance of the Middle Ages . . . known to every one.” Hitchcock casts the 
alchemists as “Reformers” and asserts that an “open expression of their 
opinions would have brought them into conflict with the superstition of 
the time, and thus exposed them to the stake”; unfortunately, he never ex- 
plains exactly why an exhortation to Christian morality would have been 
viewed as heretical. 27Hitchcock indulges in none of the bizarre occultism of Atwood’s ex- 
travagant thesis. For Hitchcock, improvement of the human being comes 
not by psychic exaltation to higher planes of existence but rather through 
the practice of true religion and morality. He interprets the substances, the- 
ories, and operations of the alchemists allegorically after the manner of a 
preacher unfolding a scriptural parable. For Hitchcock, alchemy is wholly 
a dimension of orthodox religion. Accordingly, Hitchcock’s work, al- 
though cited frequently by the close of the nineteenth century, did not cre- 
ate the furor that followed upon Atwood’s more daring Suggestive Inquiry.

These midcentury interpretations fed a general revival of alchemy 
among spiritualists and occultists in both Europe and America in the late 
nineteenth century. In France, a broad esoteric movement followed the 
occultist Eliphas Tevi (alias Alphonse Louis Constant, 1810-75), and in 
England, occultist groups grew and flourished. 28 The esoterics Anna 
Kingsford (1846-88) and Edward Maitland (1824-97) created a Her- 
metic Society, published a Corpus Hermeticum, and prosecuted the

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 393Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 393

“Higher Alchemy,” finding alchemical mysteries couched in the Old Tes- 
tament and equating alchemy with religion itself. 29 William Wynn West- 
cott (1848-1925), the “Supreme Magus of the Rosicrucian Society in 
England, and Master of the Quatuor Coronati Lodge,” summarized these 
esoteric formulations under the pseudonym Sapere Aude (“Dare to be 
wise”) in 1893. 30 Westcott saw a link between Eastern mysticism and 
Western alchemy, undoubtedly provoked by the garbled Hinduism of his 
associate Helena Petrovna Blavatsky (1831-91) and enshrined in the 
Theosophical Society she founded in 1875, of which Westcott was a mem- 
ber. In 1888, Westcott helped organize the “Hermetic Order of the Golden 
Dawn,” which flourished for fifteen years (before splintering into sects) 
and which had a seminal influence on W. B. Yeats. Its influence on late Vic- 
torian society is only beginning to be recognized. 31 Westcott also wrote a 
preface to a translation of Nicholas Flamel’s Hieroglyphics and edited and 
annotated a Collectanea Hermetica (published by the Theosophical Pub- 
lications Society) that included several alchemical and mystical tracts. 32Across the Channel in France, several occult alchemical societies were 
founded, including “L’Association Alchimique de France,” which under its 
leader F.Jollivet-Castelot (author of La synthese de /’or in 1909) published 
the monthly review L’Hyperchimie beginning in 1896. By the late nine- 
teenth century the incorporation of alchemy into esoteric and magical sub- 
jects and the mythic history of secret societies had become a matter of 
course. Hargrave Jennings’s popular work on the Rosicrucians presents al- 
chemical adepts as mysterious, unaging, semi-immortal wanderers en- 
dowed with a knowledge and being far above that of mere mortals. 
Likewise, Albert Pike recapitulates the esoteric interpretation of alchemy 
in a Masonic context. 33 The revival of alchemy under esoteric/occult guise 
grew so vigorous that a report on the various groups and their tenets was 
presented before the American Chemical Society in 1897 and printed in 
the annual report of the Smithsonian Institution, wherein the author com- 
plained of the “company of educated charlatans” then engineering the 
revival. 34

The most prolific of the esoterics was Arthur Edward Waite (1857- 
1942), 35 who published a multitude of books on occult topics ranging from 
Freemasonry and Rosicrucianism to devil worship and cabala. The major- 
ity of his publications, however, dealt with alchemy, and he exerted a signif- 
icant influence on the development of twentieth-century interpretations of

394 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman394 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

alchemy. His first book, Lives of the Alchemy stical Writers (1888), was a 
massively rewritten version of the book by the same title issued anony- 
mously seventy years earlier. Whereas the original Lives was merely a com- 
pilation of uncritical and largely fictitious biographies of about fifty 
alchemists, Waite’s expanded (but no more critical) version used these ac- 
counts to promote his own theosophical view of alchemy. His introductory 
essay finds fault with both Atwood’s “psychical” and Hitchcock’s “moral” 
interpretation because neither recognizes the real physical operations that 
the alchemists carried out in the laboratory, where they did (according to 
Waite) labor successfully to produce a physical philosophers’ stone able to 
transmute metals. 36 Waite asserts that the “attempt to enthrone [al- 
chemists] upon the loftiest pinnacles of achievement in the psychic world, 
however attractive and dazzling to a romantic imagination, and however 
spiritually attractive, must be regretfully abandoned.” 37 Nonetheless, he 
retains a largely spiritual view of alchemy, arguing that the true “Hermetic 
interpretation lies in a middle course”: The alchemists labored on actual 
physical processes, but these were only the corporeal manifestations of “a 
theory of Universal Development” that “had an equal application to the 
triune man” as to the triune metals. 38 Alchemy, or “psycho-chemistry is a 
grand and sublime scheme of absolute reconstruction . . . the divinisation, 
or deification in the narrower sense, of man the triune by an influx from 
above.” 39 The adepts’ success in physical processes is, by the “Hermetic 
doctrine of correspondences, . . . analogically a substantial guarantee of 
the successful issue of parallel methods when applied in the psychic world 
with the subject man.” 40Waite dealt with this esoteric “alchemical transformation of humanity” 
to provide “the perfect youth to come” at length in his Azoth, or the Star 
in the East, published in 1893. There he refers to alchemy as “physical 
mysticism” claiming that “all alchemists [were] Mystics, and alchemy . . . 
a mystic work.” While maintaining his view that the exclusively spiritual 
interpretations of Atwood and Hitchcock are “errors of enthusiasm,” 
Waite nevertheless asserts that “alchemical literature deals primarily at 
least with the conscious intelligence of man, and with the unevolved pos- 
sibilities of the body and mind of humanity.” 41 Thus alchemy presents the 
means of a “spiritual evolution” of mankind as a whole into a higher form 
of being. The (successful) transmutation of metals, according to Waite, is 
the lowest form of alchemical study. Waite urges experimental trials of

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 395

psychic alchemy and provides the reader with pithy (and often bizarre) 
rules for activity and advancement in the spiritual realm.Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 395

psychic alchemy and provides the reader with pithy (and often bizarre) 
rules for activity and advancement in the spiritual realm.

Waite is perhaps best known for the alchemical treatises he translated 
in the early 1890s. 42 But these editions have proven to be historically per- 
nicious, for although they appeared as translations, they are often noth- 
ing of the kind. They are almost invariably based upon corrupt editions 
and offer texts butchered to unrecognizability by the silent excision of 
large portions of material and adulterated by the addition of occultist el- 
ements and slants completely alien to the originals. The fact that there are 
in many cases no other modern translations with which to compare or re- 
place them has intensified their ill effects over time. Waite’s corrupt trans- 
lations were used regularly by historians of science until the middle of this 
century, as witnessed by their frequent citation in articles in Ambix and 
Isis, as well as in scholarly books; some authors still continue to refer to 
them. Nearly all have been reprinted and are currently available in inex- 
pensive editions.After his string of translations in the 1890s, Waite did not publish again 
on alchemy for almost thirty years. In 1926, however, he produced his last 
book, The Secret Tradition in Alchemy, whose contents mark a sharp de- 
parture from his earlier interpretations. Here Waite attacks Atwood and 
Hitchcock much more vigorously than before, proposing to “survey al- 
chemical literature and its history” in order to ascertain its real degree of 
esoteric or spiritual content. He then proceeds through biographies akin 
to his earlier Lives, but a remarkable metamorphosis is evident: a degree 
of skepticism and historical discretion appears, and Waite cites his “own 
hardened unbelief about things occult”! 43 He concludes that “between the 
age of Byzantine records and the age of Luther there is no vestige” of a 
spiritual alchemy in the historical record and actually refers to the history 
of alchemy as a record of experimental physics. 44 At no point does Waite 
explicitly repudiate his esoteric theosophical theories from the Lives, his 
doctrine of the “alchemical transformation of mankind” from Azoth, or 
any of his many other clear expressions of belief in occult matters. In one 
place he even criticizes a reviewer for maintaining the very same esoteric 
view of alchemy he himself had expounded at length in Azoth. The oc- 
cultist has marvelously transmuted himself into a positivist; whether his 
mind was changed by further studies or by a convenient abandonment of 
Victorian occultism for 1920s positivism is unclear.

396 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

Fate and Validity of the “Spiritual” Interpretation396 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

Fate and Validity of the “Spiritual” Interpretation

The esoteric school remains strong to this day and continues to have an 
extensive impact on both the general and the learned perceptions of his- 
torical alchemy. Writers such as Julius Evola (1898-1974) and Titus 
Burckhardt have extended the movement through the twentieth century. 45 
Outside of serious scholarship, a number of esoteric alchemical circles in 
the United States and Europe perpetuate the transcendental views of 
alchemy so popular in nineteenth-century occultism, sometimes amalga- 
mated with heterogeneous notions from more recent occultist/spiritualist 
movements such as the New Age movement or radical environmentalism. 
Many of these groups operate presses that regularly release books on 
“spiritual alchemy” as well as poor editions and translations of earlier 
texts. Over half of the books on alchemy published since 1970 either es- 
pouse an esoteric/occultist view or are reprints originating from esoteric 
organizations or presses. A 1976 reprint (by Shambhala Press in Berkeley, 
California) of Waite’s 1894 translation of Paracelsus bears a foreword by 
one Charles Ponce of the “Azoth Foundation,” who declares alchemy to be 
the “product of Soul Imagining” and the “archetypal language of the 
soul.” An even more extreme example may be found in Kenneth Rexroth’s 
preface to a reprint of Waite’s edition of the Works of Thomas Vaughan. 
Being completely ignorant of the Sendivogian alchemy that Vaughan es- 
poused, Rexroth is free to interpret it as a veiled expression of tantric yoga. 
Hence Vaughan’s sentimental references to his dead wife lead Rexroth to 
the sensational claim that “Thomas Vaughan and his wife, his soror mys- 
tica wrapped in entranced embrace at the Pinner of Wakefield were, it is 
true, blundering into a region of revelation which they little understood 
and which, it would seem, eventually destroyed both of them.” 46 
Many books embracing the esoteric interpretation continue to be taken 
quite seriously. The grip of occultism was, at least at one time, particularly 
strong in France, where esoteric/occultist volumes have been published 
regularly from the last century to the present day; a reviewer of one such 
book referred to its contents as the “typical French approach to the sub- 
ject of alchemy,” and Robert Halleux has briefly catalogued such writers. 47 
This unremitting flow of esoterica continues to seep into the field to the 
detriment of serious scholarship. Such volumes often appear on university 
library shelves alongside scholarly works (sometimes outnumbering them) 
and thus present a trap for the unwary. Within academe, scholars writingSome Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 397

on the relationship of alchemy to religion, art, and literature in particular 
have frequently embraced rather uncritically part or all of the spiritual in- 
terpretation of alchemy. Additionally, those who do not utilize primary 
sources are particularly liable to acquiesce to the esoteric view. One at- 
traction of this interpretation is that it allows writers with a generally sym- 
pathetic view of alchemists to attribute grand and cosmic designs to their 
subjects in opposition to the (equally unwarrantable) criticism that all their 
efforts toward the manufacture of gold were mercenary or fraudulent.The chief problem with the esoteric view is that even laying aside the 
more extreme positions, the historical record (as Waite, for whatever rea- 
son, finally concluded in 1926) simply does not countenance it. Although 
the works of many alchemical writers contain (often extensive) expres- 
sions of period piety, imprecations to God, exhortations to morality, and 
even the occasional appearance of an angelic or spiritual messenger, we 
find no indication that the vast majority of alchemists were working on 
anything other than material substances toward material goals. The dis- 
tinctions in tone and attitude toward spirituality that quite admittedly ex- 
ist between many “alchemical” texts and more modern “chemical” texts 
can be explicated without recourse to the spiritual interpretation’s dis- 
junction between “alchemy” and “chemistry” and its labeling of them as 
esoteric and exoteric traditions, respectively. First, it must be remembered 
that transmutatory alchemy fell out of wide popularity at around the time 
of the widespread secularization of intellectual culture that occurred in the 
eighteenth century. Most alchemical texts originated in a culture of greater 
religious sensibility than our own and thus naturally exhibit more spiri- 
tual and religious expressions than do later works of “chemistry.” Second, 
the secrecy and “initiatic style” ubiquitous in works on transmutation led 
quite naturally to a tone of mystery absent from the later, more “open” 
writings of eighteenth-century chemistry. This emphasis on secrecy led 
originally to the fairly common contemporaneous invocation of morality 
or divine agency as “gatekeepers” to secret knowledge, but in the nine- 
teenth century to a linkage of the arcana of alchemy to the secrets of “the 
occult” as a whole. 48 These culturally based differences of expression and 
tone do not countenance the spiritual interpretation, which fails to recog- 
nize the cultural context of alchemical texts.This is not to say that there was nothing whatsoever akin to a “spiritual 
alchemy” in the broad historical spectrum of alchemy. The relationship

398 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

between alchemy and religion, theology, and spirituality is complex, but 
still does not countenance the esoteric spiritual school of interpretation. It 
is true that a tradition of using alchemical terms and imagery in religious 
and spiritual literature did in fact develop in the early modern period; in- 
deed, such works sometimes use the term “spiritual alchemy.” St. Francis 
de Sales, for example, writes of Christian love as the “divine powder of 
projection” and labels the transforming power of that love as a “holy and 
sacred alchemy.” The alchemical emphasis on purification, transforma- 
tion, and the quest for the perfection of gold naturally provided an abun- 
dant supply of similitudes to religious writers. Secular writers and poets 
made a similar use of alchemy and its ideas, and the Scriptures themselves 
occasionally invoke metallurgical images of the refiner’s fire to express 
spiritual trials in a similar way . 49Alchemical theories and processes also provided theological and de- 
votional object lessons. Sir Thomas Browne remarked that his study of 
material relating to the philosophers’ stone “taught me a great deale of Di- 
vinity.” More dramatically, the alchemist Pierre-Jean Fabre wrote a book 
entitled Alchymista Christianus, in which “most of the mysteries of the 
Christian faith are explained by means of chymical analogies and fig- 
ures .” 50 Complementary to the use of alchemy to instantiate and illustrate 
religious truths, the same religious truths and revelations were also em- 
ployed to direct alchemical work. There exist numerous “alchemical read- 
ings” of the Bible, just as there are alchemical readings of pagan 
mythology . 51 It was this practice of some seekers after transmutation 
which Thomas Sprat criticized when he wrote dismissively that “they 
believe they see some footsteps of it, in every line of Moses, Solomon, 
and Virgil,” Interpretations of holy texts also contributed occasionally to 
the cause of alchemical secrecy, as in the case of a description of how to 
make the philosophers’ stone disguised under the forms and words of the 
Mass . 52 Of course, many fundamental terms and themes in alchemy — 
such as death and resurrection, exaltation and sublimation — derive from 
Christian theology.

But in all these interactions of alchemy with spirituality, it is clear that 
alchemy functions as a source of tropes and imagery for rhetorical embel- 
lishment or didactic exemplification rather than as an inherently spiritual 
exercise which elevates the practitioner by some esoteric illumination. It 
might be noted that the deployment of alchemical images to express spir-

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 399Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 399

itual themes metaphorically is in some sense related to Hitchcock’s expo- 
sition of alchemical themes as metaphorical descriptions of Christian prin- 
ciples and devotions, but it has nothing in common with the “spiritual 
alchemy” that stems from Atwood and her followers, with its links to 
Mesmerism and other nineteenth-century occultist movements. When al- 
chemical authors deploy sacred texts or spiritual terminology, this is a rel- 
atively unproblematic use of images, concepts, and terms drawn from the 
religious culture of the time, rather than evidence that alchemical practices 
were concerned primarily or essentially with the spiritual enlightment or 
development of the practitioner. These linkages were made by minds more 
attuned to the drawing of similitudes and the reading of “meanings” (and 
more convinced of the epistemological value of similitudes in general) than 
are those of our highly literal modern world.Perhaps the most pervasive use of alchemical language in spiritual writ- 
ings appears in Jakob Boehme’s mystical theology. The language of the 
Paracelsian tria prima, the divine Salitter (sal nitrum), and related con- 
cepts are used to express divine qualities, powers, and activities and to ex- 
pound the cobbler’s ecstatic visions. But Boehme’s use of alchemical 
language and imagery — as extensive as it is — remains clearly of a differ- 
ent order than, for example, the practical and theoretical antimonial ex- 
ercises of Basil Valentine, Alexander von Suchten, Eirenaeus Philalethes 
and others, or the rigorous Scholastic alchemy of “Geber,” Albert the 
Great, Petrus Bonus, or Gaston Duclo . 53 Even if Boehme’s work were 
taken as evidence of the “spiritual alchemy” promoted by esoterics and 
occultists, it would remain to be proven by historical argument that he falls 
into the mainstream of early modern alchemical thought, and that ex- 
trapolations about alchemy in general could be reliably or usefully made 
from him.

We should also mention the little-recognized school of “supernatural 
alchemy” which seems to have developed in seventeenth-century England. 
This school held that certain alchemical products had supernatural effects 
either upon the external world or upon the possessor. Robert Boyle, for 
example, thought that the philosophers’ stone might summon angels and 
facilitate communication with them, and Elias Ashmole and others men- 
tioned yet greater “supernatural stones” which gave the possessor spe- 
cial intellectual or spiritual powers . 54 But even these notions are only 
superficially similar to the spiritual interpretation of alchemy as it was

400 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman400 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

conceived in the nineteenth century. Now it is possible that this school 
may have initiated a certain tradition of alchemical interpretation which 
persisted at some low level through the eighteenth century, and then 
provided a nucleation point for nineteenth-century occultist writers, but 
there is presently no clear historical evidence for this conjecture. (The 
same conjecture might also be made regarding Behmenist thought.) 
The seventeenth-century supernatural school needs more study to define 
its origins, content, extent, and influence. Nonetheless, at present it is 
clear that this “school” was a small and perhaps fairly localized subset 
of alchemy, and so it would be wrong to extend its characteristics to 
“alchemy” as a whole.Thus it goes without question that alchemy and religion (or spirituality 
of various kinds) interpenetrated one another in the medieval and early 
modern periods, and that each borrowed terms and concepts from the 
other. This fact is not, however, remarkable in itself, nor is such interpen- 
etration with religion unique to alchemy. Recent work across the entire 
spectrum of the history of science displays clearly the ubiquity and the im- 
portance of religious and theological concerns and influences in early 
modern natural philosophy; alchemy should be neither an exception nor a 
special case. By rejecting the “spiritual interpretation” of alchemy we do 
not intend to imply that the discipline over the longue duree was uncon- 
cerned with religion any more than modern historians of science would 
wish to deny the religious and theological dimensions and motivations of 
the works of Kepler, Boyle, or Newton. We do argue that the view which 
sees alchemy as an essentially spiritual activity, and which maintains that 
the degree or character of alchemy’s religious or theological content ren- 
ders it distinct from other branches of contemporaneous natural philos- 
ophy (and particularly from “chemistry”) is an ahistorical formulation 
which postdates the early modern period and was fully developed only in 
the context of nineteenth-century occultism.

In addition to its direct effects on the historical understanding of 
alchemy, the prevalence of the esoteric interpretation in the late nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries seems to have had even greater indirect 
effects. The currency of the notion of an internal alchemy whose goal 
was the transformation of the soul cannot have failed to influence the 
construction formulated by Carl Gustav Jung, with which it shares an 
emphasis on psychic states and spiritual self-development. Indeed, the

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 401Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 401

Jungian view, as we shall see, seems little more than nineteenth-century oc- 
cultism translated into “scientific” terminology.

The Jungian Interpretation of Alchemy

Carl Jung has probably exercised a greater influence on the common per- 
ception of alchemy than any other modern author. His psychologizing 
view of alchemy has been propelled into the cultural mainstream by such 
writers as the historian of mythology Joseph Campbell, the literary critic 
Northrop Frye, the philosopher Gaston Bachelard, and the historian of re- 
ligion Mircea Eliade. 55 But Jung has had an even more pronounced effect 
on the historiography of alchemy itself. The Jungian approach to alchemy 
is a stock element of most popularizing texts on the subject, for example, 
Gareth Roberts’s 1994 The Mirror of Alchemy and Allison Coudert’s 
1980 Alchemy: The Philosopher’s Stone. Even such serious students of 
the subject as F. Sherwood Taylor and E. J. Holmyard felt obliged to con- 
sider the Jungian perspective in their own surveys. 56 Among recent serious 
historians of science, Betty Jo Teeter Dobbs promoted the Jungian ap- 
proach in her famous Foundations of Newton’s Alchemy and reaffirmed it 
unequivocally as recently as 1990. 57 Even the praiseworthy Norton His- 
tory of Chemistry pays homage to the Jungian analysis of alchemy, cit- 
ing it as a “traditionalist” view of the subject. This note of approbation is 
shared by the debunker of alchemical symbolism Marco Beretta. 58Jung was deeply interested in occultism from at least his adolescence. 
His doctoral dissertation, “On the Psychology and Pathology of So-Called 
Occult Phenomena,” was based on the spiritualist seances of his cousin 
Helly Preiswerk, in which he was an active participant. 59 As early as 1913, 
he had adopted a “spiritualist and redemptive interpretation of alchemy,” 
and one can be sure that this reflected his wide reading in the occult liter- 
ature of the nineteenth century. 60 In addition, Jung was aware of and prob- 
ably influenced by earlier work on alchemical symbolism by the Freudian 
psychologist Herbert Silberer. 61 But only in the 1920s did he begin writing 
on the subject, a pursuit that was to occupy the rest of his life. 62 By far 
the clearest specimen of Jung’s approach can be found in his “Die Erlo- 
sungsvorstellungen in der Alchemie,” published in the Eranos-Jahrbuch 
of 1936 and translated into English as “The Idea of Redemption in 
Alchemy.” 63 Here Jung put forth his soon-to-be-famous claim that in the

402 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

analysis of alchemy, “we are called upon to deal, not with chemical ex- 
perimentations as such, but with something resembling psychic processes 
expressed in pseudo-chemical language.” 64analysis of alchemy, “we are called upon to deal, not with chemical ex- 
perimentations as such, but with something resembling psychic processes 
expressed in pseudo-chemical language.” 64

According to Jung, alchemists were concerned less with chemical reac- 
tions than with psychic states taking place within the practitioner. The 
practice of alchemy involved the use of “active imagination” on the 
part of the would-be adept, which led to a hallucinatory state in which 
he “projected” the contents of his psyche onto the matter within his 
alembic. 65 The Jungian alchemist literally “saw” his own unconscious ex- 
pressing itself in the form of bizarre archetypal images, which were 
“irruptions” of the collective unconscious into his conscious mind. Be- 
cause he viewed the primary role of alchemy in the light of the uncon- 
scious, Jung pointedly devalued the chemical content of alchemical texts. 
The alchemist’s “experience had nothing to do with matter in itself,” and 
consequently, the attempt to decipher alchemical texts from a chemical 
point of view was quite “hopeless.” 66 In this claim one can see clear ves- 
tiges of Jung’s immersion in Victorian occultism. Like Atwood and Hitch- 
cock, Jung pointedly rejects the image of alchemy as protochemistry. 
Unlike the more radical upholders of spiritual alchemy, however, Jung did 
not altogether deny the role of the laboratory in alchemy. In this regard, 
Jung’s view of alchemy greatly resembles A. E. Waite’s notion of “alchem- 
ical transformation” expressed in Azoth, rather than those of inveterate 
spiritual alchemists such as Atwood and Hitchcock. Perhaps this should 
not be surprising, given that Waite’s works were circulating among mem- 
bers of Jung’s Zurich Psychological Club in the 1910s. 67 Like Waite, Jung 
did not completely reject the claim that alchemy involved laboratory ex- 
periment, but in effect he wrote it out of the picture, since alchemy’s real 
concern was the transformation of the psyche, which could project its con- 
tents onto any sort of matter. The actual substances employed in a process 
made no difference at all to the alchemist so long as they stimulated the 
psyche to its act of projection. In reference to the many operations in- 
tended to produce the philosophers’ stone, Jung explicitly stated that 
“[o]ne can make nothing of these from the standpoint of our modern 
chemical knowledge; if we turn to the texts and the hundreds and hun- 
dreds of processes and recipes which the Middle Ages and Antiquity have 
left behind, we find among them relatively few which contain any chemi- 
cal sense.” 68 According to Jung, therefore, the alchemical experience hadSome Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 403

more in common with the ecstasy of the illumine in a state of imio mystica 
than with that of the laboratory technician.

Beyond his confident view that alchemy represented a process of psychic 
transformation, Jung also had comments to make on the subject of al- 
chemical secrecy. Alchemists did not use obscure language to conceal 
chemical ingredients or to delude the uninitiated. Instead, they employed 
their bizarre terminology of dragons, dying kings, and copulating couples 
because these were the forms in which the unconscious projected itself 
onto matter . 69 Since the Latin Middle Ages were dominated by Christian- 
ity, the minds of medieval alchemists were especially filled with images of 
Christ, leading to the elaboration of a widespread “Lapis-Christus paral- 
lel,” in which the philosophers’ stone was symbolized by Christ . 70 The mul- 
tiplicity of names for the materia prima, the starting point of the 
alchemical work, was a necessary consequence of the fact that “projection 
derives from the individual, and is different for each individual .” 71

Because the unconscious, according to Jung, always reveals itself in the 
form of hints and images, ambiguity was therefore an essential element of 
“genuine” alchemy. From this it follows that any alchemical text that 
could be clearly decoded into chemical language would be a second-rate 
product, and indeed, Jung went so far as to say that “there are good and 
bad authors in alchemical literature as elsewhere. There are productions 
by charlatans, simpletons, and swindlers. Such inferior writings are easily 
recognizable by their endless recipes, their careless and uneducated com- 
position, their studied mystification, their excruciating dullness, and their 
shameless insistence on the making of gold. Good books can always be 
recognized by the industry, care, and visible mental struggles of the 
author .” 72This claim incorporates, of course, an important self-validating prin- 
ciple. If a historian, by successfully decoding a given allegorical recipe into 
chemical language, were to challenge Jung’s assertion that alchemical pro- 
cesses are expressions of the psyche, Jung (or a Jungian) could simply 
reply that the very fact that such a recipe could be translated into mod- 
ern chemistry means that it is not a specimen of “good” or “genuine” 
alchemy. Genuine alchemy, by definition, cannot be decoded.

Jung’s belief in a “good” and a “bad” alchemy led him to make numer- 
ous historiographical statements, and these have had a marked effect on 
subsequent historians. Jung believed that the history of alchemy could be

404 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

divided into two chronological periods. The first, which he called the 
“classical period,” fell between late antiquity and the end of the sixteenth 
century . 73 The second, which Jung called the period of alchemy’s “decay,” 
began with Paracelsus and Jakob Boehme, who split the field into two di- 
vergent realms. Paracelsus was responsible for putting alchemy on the 
path that would convert it into a “natural science” by emphasizing its 
medical aspect, whereas Boehme transformed it into a purely speculative 
mystical theology . 74 Jung put this metamorphosis of alchemy into typically 
graphic terms: “As we have seen, the Gnostic vision of the nous entangling 
itself in physical nature flashes out again from these late-comers to 
alchemy. But the philosopher who, in earlier days, descended like a Her- 
cules into the darkness of Acheron to fulfill a divine opus has now become 
a laboratory worker given to speculation .” 75In other words, the Paracelsians of the seventeenth century were no 
longer engaged in the “integration of the personality” by means of 
alchemy: They were mere technicians and scientists with a side interest in 
symbolism. The followers of Boehme, on the other hand, forsook the lab- 
oratory altogether and converted alchemy into a devotional literature. 
They too abandoned the path of ancient and medieval alchemy, which had 
relied on the integration of laboratory practice and visionary projection 
for its success as a path to “individuation” (the healing of the psyche). 
Jung believed, then, that alchemy began to divide into something like mod- 
ern chemistry on the one hand, and Hermetic theosophy on the other, 
around the beginning of the seventeenth century. He added that this “de- 
generation” of alchemy continued into the late eighteenth century and 
that the classical tradition received its coup de grace with the parallel oc- 
currence of the chemical revolution of Lavoisier and Goethe’s fully con- 
scious use of alchemical metaphor.

Criticism of the Jungian Interpretation

Despite the widespread acceptance of Jung’s approach to alchemy, a num- 
ber of his key suppositions have been challenged recently. First, Richard 
Noll’s fundamental study of Jung as a cult figure has cast considerable 
doubt on the validity of Jung’s “collective unconscious,” supposedly the 
deepest level of the mind, from which profound “archetypal images” can 
irrupt into the conscious . 76 Part of Jung’s fascination with alchemy lay in 
his observation that “alchemical” visions and dreams spontaneously oc-

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 405Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 405

curred in the minds of his own psychotic patients, along with other ar- 
chaic, esoteric images . 77 As Noll has argued, the showpiece in Jung’s the- 
ory was a patient known subsequently as “the Solar Phallus Man.” The 
patient had visions of the sun endowed with a swaying penis from which 
the winds issued. Jung was struck by the similarity of this image to a 
Mithraic liturgy stemming from late antiquity. On numerous subsequent 
occasions, Jung claimed that the patient could not have had any knowl- 
edge of the ancient mysteries and that the particular Mithraic text had not 
even been published at the time of his vision. Thus the Solar Phallus Man 
assumed an important role for Jung and his followers, providing evidence 
of the universal, transchronological character of archetypes drawn from a 
collective unconscious. As Noll has convincingly shown, however, Jung 
knew perfectly well that the Mithras liturgy had been translated and 
published both in German and English before the patient’s remarkable 
vision and that the symbol was available in other sources as well. Jung en- 
gaged in a deliberate pattern of deception to buttress the scientific validity 
of his collective unconscious, itself an outgrowth of nineteenth-century 
occultism . 78Although it is not our purpose here to engage in an ad hominem attack 
on Carl Jung, it is important to emphasize the weakness of his theory of 
the collective unconscious, for without it, his interpretation of alchemy 
cannot stand. Jung explicitly argued that in the “classical period” of 
alchemy, the collective unconscious provided the stock of alchemical im- 
agery: “The alchemistic process of the classical period (from antiquity to 
the end of the sixteenth century) was a chemical research into which there 
entered an admixture of unconscious psychic material by the way of pro- 
jection. For this reason the alchemistic texts frequently emphasize the 
psychological prerequisites of the work. The contents that come into 
consideration are those that suit themselves to projection upon the un- 
known chemical substance. Because of the impersonal nature of matter, it 
was the collective archetypes that were projected .” 79

Since Jung’s theory of the chronological development of alchemy de- 
pends on his belief in the complex mechanism of “projection,” according 
to which the contents of the collective unconscious acquire an external, 
hallucinatory reality, it follows that the fortune of his interpretation is 
yoked to the fate of the collective unconscious itself. The evidence of fraud 
that Noll uncovered therefore acquires a significance beyond the unsavory

406 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

light in which it places Jung, for by exposing the deeply problematic char- 
acter of the collective unconscious, it undercuts the foundation of his in- 
terpretation and “historiography” of alchemy.light in which it places Jung, for by exposing the deeply problematic char- 
acter of the collective unconscious, it undercuts the foundation of his in- 
terpretation and “historiography” of alchemy.

In addition to Noll’s probing analysis of Jung himself, the historians 
Barbara Obrist and Robert Halleux have presented detailed arguments 
against Jung’s interpretation based upon their extensive reading of late me- 
dieval and Renaissance alchemical texts, indeed, some of the very same fig- 
urative texts that Jung found most attractive. 80 Obrist in particular has 
shown that the Aurora consurgens, a highly emblematic alchemical text 
of the late Middle Ages ascribed to Thomas Aquinas, can be interpreted 
more simply and easily without the elaborate apparatus of analytical psy- 
chology. Nor do we need to invoke the gratuitous hypothesis made by its 
Jungian commentator Marie Luise von Franz that St. Thomas wrote the 
Aurora consurgens in a state of visionary ecstasy on his deathbed. The 
work is manifestly pseudonymous, having little relation either to the philo- 
sophical or theological work of Thomas Aquinas. 81Finally, we have elsewhere argued extensively against the validity and 
utility of the Jungian model. Briefly, if the images used in alchemical texts 
are in fact irruptions of the unconscious, then there would be no pos- 
sibility of “working backward” from them to decipher such images into 
actual, valid laboratory practice. Nonetheless, we have presented com- 
prehensive decodings of alchemical symbolism into modern, replicable 
chemical terminology. 82 Even some of the most allegorical writings — even 
when describing operations intimately linked with the making of the 
philosophers’ stone — can be sensitively “decoded” and the chemical ef- 
fects reproduced in a modern laboratory. Since these decoded authors 
include Eirenaeus Philalethes and Basilius Valentinus, who were among 
Jung’s favorite examples for use in his psychological interpretation, Jun- 
gians cannot dismiss them as “bad alchemists.”

Furthermore, we have shown clearly how extravagant alchemical im- 
agery was consciously constructed to hide actual laboratory operations 
and how the very same alchemists who penned bizarre allegorical de- 
scriptions in print were able routinely to express their knowledge in clear, 
unambiguous “chemical” terms in private communications. A clear ex- 
ample of this is the preparation of the “sophic mercury” darkly veiled in 
the allegorical writings of Eirenaeus Philalethes but lucidly expressed in 
operational terms in the private 1651 letter of George Starkey (the real au-

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 407

thor of the Philalethes tracts) to his friend Robert Boyle. Indeed, con- 
temporaneous alchemical readers were highly eager to “decode” allegor- 
ical texts such as Philalethes’ Introitus apertus ad occlusum regis palatium, 
and many were successful in doing so as well as in reproducing the results 
described . 83Additionally, some alchemists were quite specific in cogently describing 
and designing apparatus for particular operations. Were alchemy a psy- 
chic phenomenon involving the collective unconscious and an external, 
hallucinatory reality, there would be no requirement for intelligent appa- 
ratus design as a prerequisite for success. Finally, chemical replications of 
results described in alchemical texts under the guise of extravagant im- 
agery, including some of those that Jung himself used to argue for the non- 
chemical basis of alchemy, have demonstrated that the images that Jung 
claims originate in the collective unconscious actually have much more 
reasonable origins, namely, in the sometimes evocative physical appear- 
ances of chemicals reacting in flasks . 84 Clearly, then, alchemical texts, even 
highly emblematic and chrysopoetic ones, are not mere irruptions of the 
unconscious; they are descriptions of laboratory operations consciously 
and purposefully outfitted in sometimes outlandish guise. The alchemists’ 
images are not unconscious productions, but rather expressive metaphors 
developed under the guidance of actual observation of chemical reactions 
coupled with the need to maintain secrecy and the outlook fostered by the 
“emblematic world-view” characteristic of the premodern period . 85Despite the fact that Jung’s interpretation of alchemy is riddled with 
problems, many continue to accept his historiographical model. Sur- 
prisingly, few have challenged his claim that an alchemy previously unified 
by its single-minded projection of psychic contents onto matter began 
splitting into a natural science and a devotional art as a result of the early 
modern iatrochemical movement. To the contrary, Dobbs explicitly 
adopted this model in her Foundations of Newton’s Alchemy, and it 
has striking resonances with her later attempts to distinguish between 
seventeenth-century “chemistry” and “alchemy .” 86 According to her, the 
former was characterized by its straightforward practicality, whereas the lat- 
ter had such themes as the redemption of matter and the salvation of the 
soul . 87 We have argued elsewhere against similar anachronistic attempts to 
distinguish “alchemy” from “chemistry” in seventeenth-century contexts, 
such as those made by Dietlinde Goltz and Marco Beretta . 88 In fact, the

408 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

overarching discipline of late antique and medieval alchemy already con- 
tained a multitude of practical laboratory pursuits along with religious 
motifs; sometimes the two tendencies are combined in one text, but often 
they are not. The same is true of premodern alchemy’s successor, the 
“chymistry” of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. There is no com- 
pelling reason to adopt nor any clear evidence to support the Jungian the- 
ory that a previously homogeneous discipline disintegrated into the two 
realms of devotional and practical alchemy upon the advent of Paracel- 
sianism and that these immediately came to be identified as “alchemy” 
and “chemistry” respectively. 89Although Jung was an important contributor to the notion that an es- 
sential difference of philosophical or spiritual outlook divided alchemy 
from chemistry, the idea is not restricted to Jungians. Many scholars char- 
acterize alchemy as an essentially vitalistic, organic view of nature as well 
as a spiritual illumination granted to its adepts. Hence alchemy suppos- 
edly incorporates a “mentality” radically different from that of modern 
chemistry. Traces of nineteenth-century occultism are clearly evident in 
this viewpoint, though its twentieth-century proponents do not always 
perceive these vestiges. In the following section, we shall refer to this view 
of alchemy, in which illuminism and vitalism are viewed as atemporal, es- 
sential characteristics of the discipline, as the “panpsychic” model.

The Panpsychic Interpretation of Alchemy

The view that alchemy was a historical constant, suffused with ecstatic il- 
luminism and vitalism over its entire period, and that the loss of this out- 
look signified the death of the discipline had already been promoted as 
early as 1938 by the comparative religionist Mircea Eliade, whose essay 
“Metallurgy, Magic and Alchemy” formed the nucleus around which he 
built his immensely popular The Forge and the Crucible. 90 Eliade, like 
Jung, had early ties with the popular occultism of the late nineteenth and 
nascent twentieth centuries. In his student years, he was a devotee of 
Rudolph Steiner’s “Anthroposophy” and developed a keen interest in 
alchemy. 91 This juvenile interest bore fruit later in “Metallurgy, Magic, and 
Alchemy,” in which Eliade, like Jung, portrayed alchemy as a discipline 
concerned primarily with soteriology. Although the alchemist might work 
tangentially with chemicals and metals, his real quest concerned the soul:

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 409Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 409

“The alchemist, while pursuing the ‘perfecting’ of the metal, its ‘transfor- 
mation’ into gold, pursued in fact his own perfection .” 92

Eliade was not a psychoanalyst, and he therefore eschewed the language 
of analytical psychology, yet this part of his message is identical with 
Jung’s . 93 Like the Swiss psychologist, Eliade thought that alchemists expe- 
rienced an initiatic experience leading to “certain states of consciousness 
inaccessible to the uninitiated .” 94 And like Jung, Eliade stressed that the 
chemical side of alchemy became pronounced only when the discipline 
“decayed” or “degenerated” from its primeval simplicity . 95 As the “sa- 
cred” side of alchemy declined, the ecstatic experiences of the adept 
abated, making it possible for the newly “profane” science of chemistry to 
emerge and for precise laboratory observations to be made. This division 
of sacred alchemy from profane chemistry also recalls the spiritual inter- 
pretation of alchemy. Eliade differs from Jung, however, in his extreme em- 
phasis on the vitalism of alchemy, which he claimed to be a defining 
characteristic of the discipline. Drawing numerous parallels with African 
smith traditions, Eliade focused on alchemical texts that spoke of the 
growth of metals within the earth and of their “love” and “marriage” with 
one another . 96 Elis alchemists described the furnace as a surrogate for the 
“great tellurian matrix” of the earth, in which the philosophers’ stone as 
an “embryo” would be incubated . 97Eliade further claimed that alchemy represented a sort of “organic” 
worldview in contradistinction to the mechanism of modern science . 98 
Only with the birth of the scientific worldview during the early modern pe- 
riod did alchemy lose its cosmic vision: “After the mental revolution ac- 
complished by the Renaissance, the physico-chemical operations and 
cosmic events achieve their autonomy from the laws of universal life, en- 
closing themselves, though, into a system of ‘dead’ mechanical laws .” 99 
For Eliade, the development of mechanism killed alchemy and inaugu- 
rated modern science. Indeed, in a remarkably prescient turn of phrase, 
Eliade made it clear that for him, the death of alchemy was synonymous 
with the death of nature. It is only through the persistence of a few al- 
chemical topoi in Western civilization, he said, that “the Cosmos ‘dies’ 
very late in [the] European imagination .” 100

Eliade’s panpsychic view of alchemy has a surprising counterpart in the 
writings of a contemporaneous and influential historian of chemistry, 
Elelene Metzger. Although Metzger seems to have influenced Eliade little

410 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman410 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

if at all, she had already proposed important parts of his interpretation in 
a fundamental article of 1 922, which later resurfaced as an integral part 
of her well-known Les doctrines chimiques en France du debut du XVIIe 
a la fin du XVIIIe siecle of 1923. 101 Metzger maintained, like Eliade, that 
alchemists took a hylozoic approach to matter and that they believed that 
metals and minerals grew like vegetables or animals within the earth. 102 
This very vitalism, according to Metzger, made alchemy possible, for the 
“Hermetic philosophers” based their belief that base metals could be per- 
fected on an organic model: “Now in order to justify their research, the 
Hermetic philosophers said that gold is a metal that has attained the final 
limit of its perfection. The imperfect metals, like green fruits exposed to 
the sun, ripen spontaneously and transform themselves naturally into 
gold.” 103

Hence the very notion of metallic transmutation was based, according 
to Metzger, on a transference from the plant and animal realm to that of 
minerals and metals. Metzger went so far as to argue that such specious 
analogical reasoning was at the heart of alchemy. Just as alchemists made 
an invalid comparison between the inanimate mineral realm and that of 
the living, so they assumed that there were operative correspondences 
working between stars and metals or between minerals and the parts of the 
body. 104 She believed such “primitive,” “illogical” thought to be respon- 
sible for alchemy’s origin and longevity. 105 As Jan Golinski has argued, 
Metzger was probably influenced here by the famous philosopher- 
anthropologist Lucien Levy-Bruhl, who happened to be her uncle. 106 Levy- 
Bruhl too had spoken of a “primitive mentality” characterized by the 
reification of analogies, and Metzger explicitly used this concept to ex- 
plain alchemy in several of her later articles. 107Metzger shared with Eliade not only the belief that alchemy was by its 
very nature vitalistic, but also the conviction that the mechanical world- 
view of modern science killed it off. According to Metzger, the emergent 
corpuscular philosophy of the seventeenth century was fundamentally op- 
posed to alchemical transmutation, for the matter theory of the Cartesians 
left no room for “perfectability” in the mineral realm. Metzger was un- 
equivocal about this point, which resurfaces at various places in her oeu- 
vre: “What did manage to ruin [alchemy] was the Cartesian theory, which 
did not even attack it directly; indeed, to admit, as Descartes had done, 
that ‘all varieties which are found in matter depend on the movement of

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 411

its parts,’ was in effect to admit that matter is similar to itself everywhere; 
it is therefore to render absurd the idea of the perfection of chemical sub- 
stances or even of Nature, which remains always as created .” 108

According to Metzger, there was an inviolable schism between cor- 
puscular theory and alchemy. With the accession of the former, the latter 
had to fall. One result of this observation is that whenever Metzger found 
early modern writers on chemical subjects invoking the language of “cor- 
puscles” or “minimal parts,” they automatically became “chemists” 
rather than “alchemists.” This was one tool that she used in defining the 
emergent discipline of chemistry, as opposed to alchemy. “Alchemy” could 
not coexist with mechanism, whereas “chemistry,” as in the writing of the 
important iatrochemist Nicolas Lemery, could and did . 109Metzger and Eliade both asserted, then, that alchemy was fundamen- 
tally stamped by its insistence that matter was alive, indeed, ensouled, and 
when this view came into question during the Scientific Revolution, 
alchemy had to pass into oblivion. Hylozoism was therefore an essential 
characteristic of alchemy, according to these two writers. Jung too upheld 
that all alchemists viewed matter as alive and ensouled. Only this notion 
of the soul of matter allowed alchemists to develop their myth of redemp- 
tion, according to which the philosophers’ stone became an analogue of 
Christ. All three authors were therefore forced to see the development of 
early modern chemistry as a divorce from a radically different mental- 
ity represented by alchemy. In the case of Eliade and Jung this schism 
appeared in the nostalgic terminology of “decay” or “degeneration,” 
whereas Metzger, driven by other sentiments, employed a different lan- 
guage. But she too, no less than they, believed the seventeenth century to 
have witnessed the birth of our modern science of chemistry, to the imme- 
diate discomfiture of the alchemists.

This panpsychic view of alchemy has received a more modern expres- 
sion in some of the less overtly Jungian writings of Dobbs, and indeed, she 
employed both Eliade and Metzger directly . 110 It is interesting to note that 
Dobbs makes no reference at all to Jung in two of her last publications, Al- 
chemical Death and Resurrection and The Janus Faces of Genius, despite 
her simultaneous endorsement of his views elsewhere . 111 In these two 
works Dobbs stresses that alchemy has always been characterized by a de- 
sire to view nature in biological and vitalistic terms . 112 Not only is vitalism 
a fundamental trait of alchemy, however; so too is the quest for religious

412 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman412 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

illumination. 113 This fusion of vitalism and illuminism that characterizes 
alchemy over its entire history is in turn the product of a primitive under- 
standing of life, death, and resurrection that imposes these categories on 
the animal, vegetable, and mineral realms. 114 What is instructive about 
these comments is the ease with which Dobbs manages to pass from an 
overtly Jungian point of view to one that is bereft of the apparatus of ana- 
lytical psychology while maintaining Jung’s essential point that alchemy 
was above all a quest for religious revelation.A romantically colored rendition of the panpsychic view also forms a 
central thesis of Carolyn Merchant’s popular The Death of Nature (1980), 
whose very title could be a restatement of Eliade. Merchant uses Eliade 
and Jung to argue that the alchemists — again considered as a homoge- 
neous body — held a sacred view of nature in which the earth was revered 
as female. 115 She sees the (supposed) triumph of the mechanical philos- 
ophy over alchemy in the seventeenth century as a central example of “the 
transition from the organism to the machine.” 116 Evelyn Fox Keller has 
also expressed these themes from the panpsychic interpretation in her Re- 
flections on Gender and Science of 1985. 117 According to Keller, “the 
hermetic tradition” (here uncomplicatedly equated with alchemy) and 
“mechanism” provided the two poles available to natural scientists in mid- 
seventeenth-century Britain. 118 Unlike the upholders of a mechanical 
worldview, the alchemists employed a highly gendered language whose 
“basic images” were “the hermaphrodite and the marital couple.” 119 
Hence, although she asserts that the alchemists were not actually feminists 
themselves, Keller sees them as having championed the “view of nature 
and woman as Godly,” a position that she claims the mechanical philoso- 
phers defeated. 120 The traces of Eliade’s interpretation lie just below the 
surface of such claims, whether explicitly invoked or transmitted by au- 
thors such as Merchant and Dobbs. 121

Criticism of the Panpsychic Interpretation

One can see, then, how the panpsychic model of alchemy, based primarily 
on the work of Eliade and a diluted version of Jung’s conceptions, but also 
abetted by Metzger’s focus on vitalism, has colored the current view of 
alchemy. It seems to us that there are three fundamental problems with the 
panpsychic interpretation. From a historian’s point of view, one of its most 
obvious weaknesses lies in its failure to acknowledge the development ofSome Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 413

alchemical theory and practice over the longue duree as well as its internal 
diversity during a particular time. It is an essentialist picture of alchemy. 
Its goal has often been the segregation of the field from other scientific dis- 
ciplines for one or another polemic or historiographical purpose. As we 
and others have argued elsewhere, alchemy as a historical phenomenon is 
too diverse to permit such overly reductionistic views.

This diversity comes to the fore when we treat the second problem: vi- 
talism. The panpsychic notion that alchemy is inherently and necessarily 
vitalistic draws some support from alchemical sources, which often speak 
in a language that attaches images of vegetable and animal life to the min- 
eral realm. Images from agriculture and reproduction are particularly 
common. But here we encounter a problem analogous to that found in the 
spiritual interpretation, namely, how much of such imagery is to be un- 
derstood in a literal sense? We argue that among many alchemists these 
images are merely metaphorical or heuristic. Although we cannot declare 
that this is true for all alchemical writers, because of the inherent diversity 
of the subject, there are sufficient numbers of nonconforming alchemists 
to subvert any attempt to characterize alchemy on the basis of its vitalistic 
content. For example, the famous medieval Testamentum. ascribed falsely 
to Ramon Lull uses the term menstruum to describe a corrosive, drawing 
an elaborate parallel between the Galenic theory of human generation, 
with its male and female sperms and menstrual blood, and the mineral 
realm. But pseudo-Lull explicitly says that this analogy between the min- 
eral and the animal is only a metaphor: “the mineral genus is added only 
figuratively, for the sake of similarity.” 122 What may have appeared at first 
to be a naive case of hylozoism turns out to be a deliberate choice of 
metaphor.Unlike post-Enlightenment writers on alchemy, early modern scholars 
were sensitive to this distinction between analogy and identity in alchem- 
ical thought. When the polymath Daniel Georg Morhof wrote his 1672 
overview of alchemical thought, for example, he explicitly considered the 
question “an metalla vivant” (whether metals live). Morhof’s response is 
enlightening, for he excuses himself from answering the question at length 
and lists only Giordano Bruno and the little-known Berigardus as propo- 
nents of such vitalistic or hylozoic notions before he passes on to other 
topics. Clearly, the widely read Morhof did not see vitalism as ubiquitous 
or even widespread in alchemy as demanded by the panpsychic model. 123

414 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

Additionally, the popular late sixteenth-century chrysopoetic writer Gas- 
ton Duclo, or “Claveus,” explicitly discusses the use of vitalistic imagery. 
In his 1590 Apologia chrysopoeiae (written against the attack of Thomas 
Erastus on transmutation), Duclo states clearly that the laws governing the 
animate world of animals and vegetables are different from those govern- 
ing the inanimate world of minerals and metals. The anti-Paracelsian Eras- 
tus had in fact used cross-realm analogies in his attack on alchemy, and 
Duclo unequivocally asserts their faulty nature. Nevertheless, Duclo him- 
self uses terms like anima and semen and the image of the alchemist imi- 
tating the farmer growing crops, but he firmly denies any literal-minded 
interpretation of these expressions, stating that they are used only 
metapborice. 114 Such terminology is only superficially vitalistic: it does not 
imply the hylozoism claimed by the panpsychic interpretation.But there is a third flaw imbedded here as well. Adherents of the panpsy- 
chic model insist on a thoroughgoing break between alchemy and chem- 
istry, which they claim to have been implicit throughout much of the 
seventeenth century. This notion reflects Jung’s assertion that alchemy 
ceases to be alchemy when it becomes clear enough to be understood in 
chemical terms, and this seems also to be the case for Eliade, with the 
added criterion that such “degeneration” from the older tradition of 
alchemy marks a passage from the sacred to the profane. This break also 
appears in Metzger’s work, which contains a crucial erroneous element 
beyond the mere assertion that much of the seventeenth century saw 
alchemy and chemistry as widely divergent practices. As we have already 
stated, the definitive break between alchemy and chemistry occurs for 
Metzger when the iatrochemists of the seventeenth century adopt an ex- 
plicit corpuscular theory as in the case of Nicolas Lemery. This distinction 
displays the flip side of the supposed vitalist-mechanist dichotomy: al- 
chemists are vitalists, chemists are mechanists. But this distinction will not 
hold. It is now a demonstrated fact that an important corpuscularian tra- 
dition was associated with alchemy from the thirteenth century onward. 
Indeed, this alchemical corpuscular theory influenced the conceptions of 
no less a mechanical philosopher than Robert Boyle himself. 125 Thus not 
only is the assertion that alchemy was necessarily vitalistic flawed, so is the 
complementary assertion that it was nonmechanical and noncorpuscular- 
ian. In fact, the very notion of a clean distinction between vitalism and

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 415

mechanism in the seventeenth century, regardless of their putative attach- 
ment to “alchemy” and “chemistry” respectively, is open to question . 126mechanism in the seventeenth century, regardless of their putative attach- 
ment to “alchemy” and “chemistry” respectively, is open to question . 126

Metzger, Jung, and Eliade all employ a supposedly nonarbitrary, histor- 
ically founded criterion of demarcation for alchemy that they can then use 
to repel all countervailing criticisms. If one points out an alchemist who 
employed clear language, an expressly nonvitalist system, or the language 
of atomism, then these authors can simply reply that by virtue of their def- 
inition, he was not really an alchemist, or at least not a “good” one. But it 
does not require tremendous acumen to see that such a response is little 
more than a species of begging the question.

Positivist and Presentist Treatments

The reader will note that a common theme in all of the three foregoing in- 
terpretations of alchemy is the tendency to downplay or eliminate any nat- 
ural philosophical or “scientific” content in alchemy. Although we argue 
that the artificial segregation of alchemy from the scientific tradition is an 
error, we wish equally to steer away from a “positivist” position that there 
is no real distinction between alchemy and later science. It is pertinent 
then, briefly to mention the positivist view of alchemy, whose tutelage we 
must likewise decline.We are ill at ease with the label “positivist,” however, because of the dif- 
fuseness of its common use. The case of the nineteenth-century organic 
chemist Justus Liebig provides a good example of the problems inherent in 
the term. In the third letter of his Chemische Briefe, Liebig treats the his- 
tory of chemistry and states that “alchemy has never been anything other 
than chemistry .” 127 Although Liebig’s position here has often been charac- 
terized as positivist because he dwells upon the positive contributions of 
alchemy without due consideration of its historical context, at the end of 
the same letter Liebig explicitly refutes the threefold development thesis 
of Auguste Comte on which classical positivism is based . 128 The kind of 
“positivism” that is generally alluded to by historians of science and that 
we mean to critique in its application to alchemy shares much with “pres- 
entist” or “Whig” historiography, which assigns relative importance to 
historical ideas based upon their level of connection with or similarity to 
current scientific notions and shows insufficient interest in the historical

416 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

and cultural context of those ideas. For the sake of simplicity, then, we will 
henceforth refer to this type of historical writing as “presentist.”416 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

and cultural context of those ideas. For the sake of simplicity, then, we will 
henceforth refer to this type of historical writing as “presentist.”

This presentist historiography has had two quite opposite effects on the 
scholarly study of alchemy. Shortly before the appearance of Atwood’s 
Suggestive Inquiry, Hermann Kopp published the first of his several his- 
torical studies on the history of chemistry. 129 Kopp began by listing the 
specific contributions of alchemists to chemistry — for example, methods 
of separation and purification, apparatus, and various chemical prod- 
ucts — denominating alchemy as a developmental phase of chemistry. Yet 
he also dismissed as mere error whatever did not make a positive, experi- 
mental contribution to later chemistry. As one historian has remarked, 
Kopp “merely takes the seeds out of the fruit, which to him are the only 
things of value. He has no interest in the uniqueness of the fruit as a whole, 
its shape, color, and smell.” 130 But in spite of this criticism, it should be re- 
membered that before Kopp, alchemy was seen, following Enlightenment 
judgments, primarily as a fraud without redeeming qualities; thus Kopp’s 
reading offers not only a more accurate representation of the historical ac- 
count, but also a rehabilitation of alchemy. Kopp’s scholarship much 
exceeds that of his predecessors Johann Friedrich Gmelin and Karl 
Christoph Schmieder, and in his later contributions he develops a some- 
what broader view of alchemy. Yet the approach of picking and choosing 
nuggets of positive contributions to chemistry out of their alchemical con- 
text continued to characterize much of the serious historical literature of 
the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, particularly general histories 
of chemistry. 131 Such well-intentioned rehabilitation of alchemists and 
their art lies behind the early twentieth-century denomination of the real- 
ity of radioactive decay as a “vindication” of the alchemical belief in 
transmutation; this spurious connection is still encountered in popular 
texts on alchemy and serves as a point of confusion rather of clarification.At the same time, presentist attitudes have led certain historians to dis- 
miss alchemy from serious scholarly consideration. The spiritual and non- 
scientific interpretations outlined earlier in this chapter made the subject 
appear even more unpalatable to those with a positivist bent. For example, 
George Sarton expressed a notorious revulsion for alchemy, which led him 
to declare as late as 1950 that alchemists were all “fools or knaves, or more 
often a combination of both in various proportions.” His presentist out- 
look is fossilized in the Isis classification system he devised, which contin-

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 417

ues to this day to classify alchemy with witchcraft and divination under the 
opprobrious rubric of “pseudo-science .” 132 Alchemy seemed insufficiently 
“scientific” to merit serious consideration in the history of science. Such 
views stand behind the resistance to revelations that respected figures of 
early modern science, such as Newton and Boyle, were devotees of tradi- 
tional alchemy . 133 Similar sentiments undergird the continued casual use 
of alchemy as a convenient foil against which to set off modern science. 
On the flip side, the presen tist extractions of “scientific germs” from the 
totality of alchemy left the overall context of the field largely unexplored, 
allowing esoteric and psychological notions to fill that vacuum with little 
resistance, thus further removing from our reach an accurate understand- 
ing of the sum of the discipline. The unsatisfactory nature of a presentist 
approach need not be insisted upon to modern historians.

SummarySummary

The reader may already have noticed that of the three most influential 
interpretations of alchemy presented and critiqued here — spiritual, psy- 
chological, and panpsychic — none (excepting Metzger’s role in the pan- 
psychic model) were devised by historians. Jung and Eliade, moreover, 
were directly influenced by late nineteenth-century occultism, and Met- 
zger by the anthropological musings of her uncle Levy-Bruhl. Yet in spite 
of their origins outside of properly historical studies, a fact sufficiently 
manifested by their tendency to view alchemy as a chronological constant, 
these interpretations have all permeated the historiography of alchemy to 
such an extent that many historians have adopted them without being 
aware of either their origins or their unsuitability.

A factor common to these interpretations is their tendency to separate 
alchemy from “science” or natural philosophy; all insist upon psychologi- 
cal, ecstatic, or irrational elements as fundamental to alchemy. Much of this 
view arises from the often rather alien nature of alchemical writings, 
whether we consider the highly metaphorical style, the commonplace reli- 
gious sensibilities and sentiments, or the outlandish emblems and figures. 
Clearly these modes of expression are far removed from those encountered 
in the writings of more recent and more well-established scientific figures. 
But differences of expression need not translate directly into differences of 
intent or content. We have mentioned above the readings of even ostensibly

418 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman418 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

bizarre texts recently offered by us and others that “decode” alchemical 
language into a language of the laboratory and of natural philosophy. We 
do not deny that alchemical thought often embodied cultural and intellec- 
tual presuppositions and intents far different from those typical of the mod- 
ern age; we do, however, deny the validity of interpretations that artificially, 
unwarrantably, and most of all, ahistorically introduce a chasm between 
“alchemy” and “chemistry.” We argue that this putative divide is largely an 
artifact of the interpretations critiqued in this chapter.

We have shown moreover that not only the esoteric spiritual interpreta- 
tion but also, to varying degrees, both the Jungian and the panpsychic in- 
terpretations draw their inspiration from nineteenth-century occultism. 
The similarity of Jung’s psychologizing view to the “spiritual evolution” 
system of A. E. Waite’s Azoth is clear, and what we now know of Jung’s ju- 
venile interest in the occult and the currency of Victorian esoterica in 
Jung’s early circles supports this observable similarity. Likewise, the con- 
cept in Eliade and others that “genuine” alchemy had spiritual illumina- 
tion as its goal and that early modern alchemy was a product of a 
degeneration from a more “sacred,” purer, or more “organic” time are de- 
velopments of ideas that can be found in the work of Atwood and other 
occultists. Since Jung’s and Eliade’s views have been widely accepted by 
subsequent historians of alchemy, we therefore come to the rather surpris- 
ing conclusion that the residues of Victorian occultism have deeply colored 
the historical study of the discipline. It seems unlikely that many histori- 
ans would continue to engage in the blithe generalizations criticized in this 
chapter if they realized their dubious origins.

Future of Alchemical StudiesFuture of Alchemical Studies

Thus far we have devoted this chapter to a study of various influential in- 
terpretations and approaches to alchemy, all of which we find unsatisfac- 
tory. We hope that this exercise will succeed in clearing away these skewed 
historiographies and their claims and allow for more accurate and more 
penetrating future studies. Although it would be premature to sketch out 
in any detail what a fresh view of alchemy would look like, it is not amiss 
to conclude with suggested directions for the historical study of the sub- 
ject, some of which are currently being explored.

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 419Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 419

A fundamental difficulty in the study of alchemy has been the lack of re- 
liable historical data relating to both authors and their texts. This twin 
problem, which inhibits the accurate situation of authors and texts into 
their historical and cultural contexts, presents a major hurdle to be over- 
come before thorough and substantive advances in the understanding of 
alchemy can be made. Some notable advances have been effected in this 
arena, and further advances are to be expected from the work now in the 
hands of prominent scholars . 134 Nonetheless, rigorous historical attention 
to issues of textual purity and authorial biography should be one impor- 
tant focus for alchemical studies over the next decades. Critical editions of 
important individual works are needed and more comprehensively, edi- 
tions of the complete opera of important figures, containing careful dis- 
crimination between the strata of authentic, interpolated, and spurious 
works. Even the writings of so important a character as Paracelsus, in spite 
of the labors of Karl Sudhoff decades ago, are still quite problematic . 135 
The present corpora of many important figures are heterogeneous masses 
of texts; some are validly attributable to the real author, whereas others 
were composed by students or imitators who in some instances lived cen- 
turies later . 136 Clearly, the possession of emended texts localizable to a time 
and a place, coupled with information regarding the intellectual, tempo- 
ral, religious, social, and political situation of their authors, are prerequi- 
sites to solid and contextual historical inquiry.A common failing of the interpretations critiqued in this chapter is the 
depiction of alchemy as a uniform and constant monolith; consequently, 
future studies should pay attention to mapping out the development and 
fine structure of the discipline. One potentially fruitful method of ap- 
proaching this problem is by executing a variety of focused case studies of 
specific alchemists or their schools; broad surveys of alchemy in the style 
of Taylor and Holmyard are no longer of value for advancing the field. 
Such precise studies could then be drawn upon for making comparisons 
and contrasts between styles and contents among different schools and 
epochs . 137 For example, we already know a great deal about Paracelsians, 
and it would now be useful to contrast this group with non-Paracelsian al- 
chemical workers. Such a segregation of alchemical schools would sort out 
the conflicting works of rival alchemical practitioners, possibly showing, 
for example, that Paracelsus, somewhat too casually marked as a chief

420 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

doyen of alchemy, was as much an outsider and iconoclast to the alchem- 
ical tradition as he was to classical Galenism. Likewise, the bracketing of 
Van Helmont and the Helmontians would resolve some of the paradoxes 
presented by apparent self-contradictions in seventeenth-century alchemy.Since there is strong evidence that there is now a new interest in alchemy 
among historians of science, we hope that the kind of studies advocated 
here will be carried out with renewed vigor and liberated from the mis- 
conceived interpretations that this chapter has undertaken to criticize. 
Now that the importance of alchemy to the origins of early modern sci- 
ence is a more or less established fact, future studies will serve to define 
more rigorously what the precise lines of influence were. These future de- 
velopments should also serve to elucidate the spectrum of notions, atti- 
tudes, and pursuits generally grouped under the wide umbrella of 
“alchemy” and to portray it as a vastly more dynamic field than has hith- 
erto been presumed.

Acknowledgments

We wish to thank the National Science Foundation (SBR-9510135) and 
the National Endowment for the Humanities (RH-21301-95) for their 
support of our collaboration, part of the results of which are presented in 
this chapter.

Notes

1 . For nineteenth-century occultism and the Romantic movement, see the still in- 
dispensable August Viatte, Les sources occultes du romantisme, 2 vols. (Paris: 
Librairie ancienne Honore Champion, 1928). The Romantic rejection of New- 
tonianism is particularly strong in the works of William Blake. For his occult con- 
nections, see Kathleen Raine, Blake and Tradition, 2 vols. (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1968), esp. 1:99-125, and 2:189-213.

2. William R. Newman and Lawrence M. Principe, “Alchemy vs. Chemistry: The 
Etymological Origins of a Historiographic Mistake,” Early Science and Medicine, 
3 (1998): 32-65.2. William R. Newman and Lawrence M. Principe, “Alchemy vs. Chemistry: The 
Etymological Origins of a Historiographic Mistake,” Early Science and Medicine, 
3 (1998): 32-65.

3. W. Ganzenmiiller, “Wandlungen in der geschichtlichen Betrachtung der Al- 
chemie,” Cbymia, 3 (1950): 143-54; Dietlinde Goltz, “Alchemie und Aufklarung, 
Ein Beitrag zur Naturwissenschaftgeschichtsschreibung der Aufklarung,” Mediz- 
inhistorisches Journal, 7 (1972): 31-48. For examples of the late debate against 
gold making, see J. C. Wiegleb, Historich-kritische Untersuchung der Alchemie

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 421

(Weimar, 1777), and Siegmund Heinrich Giildenfalk, Sammlung von mehr als 
hundert wahrhaftigen Transmntationsgeschichten (Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1784).

4. Johann Friedrich Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 3 vols. (Gottingen, 1797- 
99); Thomas Thompson, History of Chemistry, 2 vols. (London, 1830). The ex- 
ception that proves the rule is Karl Christoph Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie 
(Halle, 1832). Schmieder not only provides a positive view of alchemy but seems 
actually to have been a believer in alchemical transmutation. An example of a con- 
temporary author who continues the eighteenth-century equation of alchemy with 
fraud (copious recently published evidence to the contrary notwithstanding) is 
Maurice Crosland; see, for example, his “Chemical Revolution of the Eighteenth 
Century and the Eclipse of Alchemy in the ‘Age of Enlightenment,’” in Z. R. W. M. 
von Martels, ed., Alchemy Revisited (Leiden, the Netherlands: E. J. Brill, 1990), 
67-77; compare his article with the balance of the volume.

5. Julius Sachse, The German Pietists of Provincial Pennsylvania, 1694-1708 
(Philadelphia: P. C. Stockhausen, 1895), passim.5. Julius Sachse, The German Pietists of Provincial Pennsylvania, 1694-1708 
(Philadelphia: P. C. Stockhausen, 1895), passim.

6. Christopher McIntosh, The Rose-Cross and the Age of Reason (Leiden, the 
Netherlands: Brill, 1992); Charles Porset, “Les enjeux ‘alchimiques’ du Convent 
des Philalethes,” in Didier Kahn and Sylvain Matton, eds., Alchimie: Art, histoire 
et mythes: Actes du ler colloque international de la Societe d’Etude de I’Histoire 
de l’ Alchimie (Paris: Societe d’Etude de l’Histoire de 1’ Alchimie, 1995), 757-800.

7. Johann Christoph Adelung, Geschichte der menschlichen Narrheit (Leipzig, 
1785).

8. Francis Barrett, The Magus, or Celestial Intelligencer (London, 1801); [Bar- 
rett?], Lives of the Alchemy sti cal Writers (London, 1815).

9. See the treatments of Mesmerism in Robert Darnton, Mesmerism and the End 
of the Enlightenment in France (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1968); 
Henri Ellenberger, The Discovery of the Unconscious (New York: Basic Books, 
1970); Alan Gauld, A History of Hypnotism (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1992); and George Bloch, Mesmerism (Los Altos: W. Kaufmann, 1980).10. If we restrict the meaning of esoteric to “accessible to only a small group or 
elite” and occult to “hidden,” then alchemy is both esoteric (its meaning being con- 
sciously restricted) and occult (hidden from the common reader) during much of 
its history; however, the meanings attached to these words in common parlance 
since the nineteenth century and by the school now under consideration do not fall 
within such narrow denotative limits. The modern construction “occultist” ap- 
pears to have been coined by Eliphas Levi in the nineteenth century and was used 
first in English in 1881, connoting something more than a mere believer in one or 
more of the occult sciences. It refers primarily to a fusion of Eastern and Western 
magical and mystical beliefs that reached its apotheosis in the works of Madame 
Blavatsky and has undergone a revival in the “New Age” movements. See Joscelyn 
Godwin, The Theosophical Enlightenment (Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 1994), esp. 49; Mircea Eliade, Occultism, Witchcraft, and Cultural Fash- 
ions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976), esp. 47-54; and Brian P. Copen- 
haver, “Natural Magic, Hermetism, and Occultism in Early Modern Science,” in

422 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

David C. Lindberg and Robert S. Westman, eds., Reappraisals of the Scientific 
Revolution (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 261-301, esp. 289.

11. Martin Luther, Colloquia Mensalia [Tischreden], trans. Henry Bell (London, 
1652), 480; here Luther praises alchemy “for the sake of the Allegorie and secret 
signification . . . touching the Resurrection of the dead.”

12. Herbert Butterfield, The Origins of Modern Science 1300-1800 (New York: 
Macmillan, 1952), 98.12. Herbert Butterfield, The Origins of Modern Science 1300-1800 (New York: 
Macmillan, 1952), 98.

13. A fragment of the Thomas South’s poem, entitled “Enigma of Alchemy,” was 
found in 1918 as proof sheets folded into a secondhand book in a London book- 
shop. This fragment was published by William Leslie Wilmshurst (the editor of the 
reprinted version of Suggestive Inquiry ) in The Quest, 10 (January 1919): 213-25 
(reprinted, Edmonds, WA: Alchemical Press, 1984).

14. Mary Anne Atwood, A Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic Mystery (Belfast: 
William Tait, 1918), from the introduction by Walter Leslie Wilmshurst, 6-9.

15. A revised edition appeared in 1920 and a reprint of it in 1960 (New York: Ju- 
lian Press); another reprint (1918 edition) is still in print (Yogi Publication 
Society).

16. Atwood, Inquiry, 52-53.

17. Ibid., 57; Philalethes on 61-62.

18. Ibid., 70-71.

19. Ibid., 26.

20. As an example: “chemical affinity, called Elective Attraction, is ruled by the 
same laws; and it is found that when two matters unite, one is attractive and the 
other repulsive; when either attraction or repulsion predominates in a matter, 
the circulation is in ellipse; but when they are in equilibrium, a circle is produced” 
(ibid., 155). A generous reader might compare this to Atwood’s adored Boehme ad- 
mixed with a sort of Newtonianism and Berzelian dualism; alternatively, more 
skeptical minds may see a resemblance to the superficial examination answers cob- 
bled together by ingenious but unlearned students.

21. Ibid., 78-85, 96-98, 162, 454-55.

22. Ibid., 162.

23. Ibid., 143.

24. Ibid., 543; 527-58: “Mesmerism, as it is mechanically practiced in the present 
day, is a first step indeed, and this only before the entrance of that glorious temple 
of Divine Wisdom which a more scientific Handicraft enabled the ancients exper- 
imentally to enter, and from its foundation build up, as it were, a crystalline edifice 
of Light and Truth.”25. Ethan Allen Hitchcock, Remarks upon Alchymists (Carlisle, Penn., 1855); 
Remarks upon Alchemy and the Alchemists (Boston, 1857). The review appeared 
in the Westminster Review, 66 (October 1856): 153-62. See I. B. Cohen, “Ethan 
Allen Hitchcock: Soldier-Humanitarian-Scholar, Discoverer of the ‘True Subject of 
the Hermetic Art,”’ Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society, 61 (1951): 
29-136.

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 423

26. Hitchcock, Remarks upon Alchemy, iv.

27. Ibid., viii and 30. The fact that he implicitly extends the medieval “midnight 
of darkness” into the eighteenth century can be passed over with only a smirk. Not 
surprisingly, there are glimpses of period anti-Catholicism even though Hitchcock 
seems to speak well of the Catholic Church at one juncture (64-65).

28. See, for example, Elbe Howe, ed., The Alchemist of the Golden Dawn: The 
Letters of the Reverend W. A. Ayton to F. L. Gardner and Others 1886-1905 
(Wellingborough, U.K.: Aquarian Press, 1985). Eliphas Levi, Dogme et rituel de la 
Haute Magie, 2 vols. (Paris, 1854-56). Levi’s volume was translated into all the im- 
portant Western European languages; the English-language version was by A. E. 
Waite, Transcendental Magic: Its Doctrine and Ritual (London, 1897). See also 
Thomas A. Williams, Eliphas Levi: Master of Occultism (University of Alabama 
Press, 1975), and Christopher McIntosh, Eliphas Levi and the French Occult Re- 
vival (New York: Samuel Weiser, 1975).29. See The Story of Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland, and of the New 
Gospel of Interpretation, 3rd ed. (Birmingham, Ala.: 1905); Godwin, Theosophi- 
cal Enlightenment, 333-37. Only two volumes of the Corpus appeared: a reissue 
of John Everard’s 1649 translation of Pymander (London, 1884), and The Virgin 
of the World of Hermes Trismegestus (London, 1885; reprinted, Madras, 1900). 
One of the characteristics of Kingsford and Maitland — reproduced in their fol- 
lowers to this day — is a predilection for ludicrous etymologies; e.g., the “Guard- 
in’’ of Eden, and Noah as a form of nous.

30. S. A. [Sapere Aude, alias William Wynn Westcott], The Science of Alchymy 
(London: Theosophical Publishing Society, 1893), 17-20. Westcott thought At- 
wood to be a clergyman of the Church of England, 17. Besides these esoteric 
notions, Westcott was known in a wholly different context as the coroner of north- 
east London and the coeditor of The Extra Pharmacopaeia of Unofficial Drugs 
(1883) and its fifteen supplements dating up to 1920; he is briefly mentioned (with 
a photograph) in The Chemist and Druggist for September 2, 1922, 339.

31. Elbe Howe, The Magicians of the Golden Dawn (New York: Samuel Weiser, 
1978); R. A. Gilbert, The Golden Dawn: Twilight of the Magicians (San Ber- 
nardino, Calif.: 1988); see also the issues of Cauda Pavonis dedicated to the 
Golden Dawn, new series 8 (Spring and Fall 1989).

32. The Flamel text was a modernized version of the 1624 English translation by 
“Irenaeus Orandus” and was published at London in 1870. Seven volumes were 
issued in the Collectanea Hermetica between 1893 and 1896: Jean d’Espagnet’s 
Hermetic Arcanum (Westcott’s translation of the 1623 Latin edition); Pymander; 
Lover of Philalethes, Hermetic Art (1714); Aesch Mezareph, collected from Ca- 
bala Denudata of Rosenroth; Somnium Scipionis; Chaldean Oracles of Zoroaster; 
and Eugenius Philalethes, Euphrates (1655 edition).33. Hargrave Jennings, The Rosicrucians (London, 1870); see esp. 20-39; Albert 
Pike, Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite (London, 
1871).

34. H. Carrington Bolton, “The Revival of Alchemy,” Science, 6 (1897): 853-63, 
and Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution 1897, 207-17.

424 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

35. See R. A. Gilbert, A. E. Waite: Magician of Many Parts (Wellingborough, 
U.K.: Crucible, 1987).

36. Arthur Edward Waite, Lines of the Alchemystical Philosophers (London, 
1888), 9-27. The work was reissued as Alchemists through the Ages (New York: 
Rudolf Steiner Publications, 1970).

37. Waite, Lives of the Alchemystical Philosophers, 273.

38. Meaning, of course, the spirit, soul, and body of man and the mercury, sulfur, 
and salt of metals.

39. Ibid., 30-36 and 273.

40. Ibid., 274.

41. A. E. Waite, Azoth, or the Star in the East, embracing the first matter of the 
Magnum Opus, the evolution of the Aprodite-Urania, the supernatural generation 
of the son of the sun, and the alchemical transfiguration of humanity (London, 
1893), 54, 58, and 60.

42. Waite was the editor and translator of each of the following: Alchemical Writ- 
ings of Edward Kelly (1893); Basil Valentine, Triumphal Chariot of Antimony 
(1893); Musaeum hermeticum, 2 vols. (1893); Benedictus Figulus, Golden Casket 
(1893); Hermetic and Alchemical Writings of Paracelsus, 2 vols. (1894); Petrus 
Bonus, Pearl of Great Price (1894); Turba Philosophorum (1896). On Waite’s 
translating activity, its context, and effects in terms of Paracelsus, see Andrew Cun- 
ningham, “Paracelsus Fat and Thin: Thoughts on Reputation and Realities,’’ in 
Ole Peter Grell, ed., Paracelsus: The Man and His Reputation, His Ideas, and 
Their Transformations (Leiden, the Netherlands: Brill, 1998), 64-68.

43. A. E. Waite, The Secret Tradition in Alchemy (New York: Alfred Knopf, 
1926), 165.

44. Ibid., 366.43. A. E. Waite, The Secret Tradition in Alchemy (New York: Alfred Knopf, 
1926), 165.

44. Ibid., 366.

45. Julius Evola, La tradizione ermetica (Bari: Guis, 1931); recently reprinted in 
English translation as The Hermetic Tradition (Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions In- 
ternational, 1995); Titus Burckhardt, Alchimie, Sinn und Weltbild (Olten: Walter 
Verlag, 1960), translated as Alchemy, Science of the Cosmos, Science of the Soul 
(London: Stuart and Watkins, 1967).

46. A. E. Waite, ed., The Works of Thomas Vaughan, foreword by Kenneth 
Rexroth (New York: University Books, 1968), 10.

47. G. Heym’s review of Rene Alleul, Aspects de I’alchimie traditionelle (Paris: 
1953), in Ambix, 5 (1956): 129-30; Robert Halleux, Les textes alchimiques 
(Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 1979), 56-58; “L’unique merite de leur travaux est 
de montrer qu’une approche erudite de l’alchimie est plus qu’une necessite scien- 
tifique: c’est une exigence de sante mentale,” p. 57.

48. For a consideration of the “initiatic style” and its sources, see William R. 
Newman, The Summa perfection is of pseudo-Geber (Leiden, the Netherlands: 
Brill, 1991), 85-99. On divine agency in alchemical laboratories see our forth- 
coming study on chymical laboratory practice.

49. Sylvain Matton, “Thematique alchimique et litterature religieuse dans la France 
du XVIIe siecle,” Chrysopoeia, 2 (1988): 129-208 (De Sales quotation on pp. 199- 
200); Sylvia Fabrizio-Costa, “De quelques emplois des themes alchimiques dans Part

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 425Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 425

oratoire italien du XVIIe siecle” Chrysopoeia, 3 (1989): 135-162; Stanton J. Lin- 
den, Darke Hierogliphicks: Alchemy in English Literature from Chaucer to the 
Restoration, (Lexington, KY: University of Kentucky Press, 1996). See also Daniel 
Merkur, “The Study of Spiritual Alchemy: Mysticism, Gold-Making, and Esoteric 
Hermeneutics,” Ambix 37 (1990): 35-45. Refining metaphors occur in the Bible at, 
for example, I Peter 1:7, Proverbs 17:3 and 27:21, Wisdom 3:6, Job 23:10.

50. Thomas Browne, Religio medici in Works of Sir Thomas Browne, ed. Geof- 
frey Keynes, 4 vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964) 1:50; on Fabre, 
see Bernard Joly, Rationalite de Valchimie an XVIIe siecle (Paris: Vrin, 1992), esp. 
pp. 42-45; Pierre Jean-Fabre, Alchymista Christianus, in quo Deus rerum author 
et quam plurima fdei christianae mysteria per analogias chymicas et figuras ex- 
plicantur, christianorumque orthodoxa doctrina, vita et probitas non oscitanter ex 
chymica arte demonstantur (Toulouse, 1632).

51. Sylvain Matton, “Une lecture alchimique de la Bible: les ‘Paradoxes chim- 
iques’ de Francois Thybourel,” Chrysopoeia, 2 (1988): 402-22. Although the best- 
known exposition of Classical mythology as alchemy is Antoine-Joseph Pernety, 
Les fables egyptiennes et grecques devoilees (Paris, 1758), the genre was well- 
established much earlier; see the fifteenth-century Vincenzo Percolla, Auriloquio, 
ed. Carlo Alberto Anzuini, in Textes et Travaux de Chrysopoeia 2, 1996, and for 
other examples, Michael Maier, Arcana arcanissima (s.l., s.d. [London, 1613 or 
1614]), and Pierre-Jean Fabre, Herctdes piochymicus (Toulouse, 1634).

52. Thomas Sprat, History of the Royal Society (London, 1667), p. 37; Nicholas 
Melchior, Processus sub forma missae, in Theatrum cbemicum, 6 vols. (Stras- 
bourg, 1659-61), 3:758-61.52. Thomas Sprat, History of the Royal Society (London, 1667), p. 37; Nicholas 
Melchior, Processus sub forma missae, in Theatrum cbemicum, 6 vols. (Stras- 
bourg, 1659-61), 3:758-61.

53. Yet even in the case of Boehme, it is not clear that practical alchemy was en- 
tirely excluded. See Will-Erich Peuckert, Das Leben Jakob Boehmes (Jena, Ger- 
many: Eugen Diederichs, 1924), 167.

54. Lawrence M. Principe, The Aspiring Adept: Robert Boyle and His Alchemical 
Quest (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998), 188-90, 197-201; Robert M. 
Schuler, “Some Spiritual Alchemies of Seventeenth-Century England,” Journal of 
the History of Ideas, 41 (1980): 293-318.

55. Joseph Campbell, The Plight of the Wild Gander: Explorations in the Mytho- 
logical Dimension (New York: Harper Perennial, 1990; first ed., 1951), 86-87, 
218-19. Idem, The Masks of God: Primitive Mythology (Harmondsworth, U.K.: 
Penguin, 1982; first ed., 1959), 72. Northrop Frye, Anatomy of Criticism (Prince- 
ton: Princeton University Press, 1957). For Bachelard, see Barbara Obrist, Les 
debuts de I’imagerie alchimique (XTVe-XVe siecles) (Paris: Le Sycomore, 1982), 
22-23. Mircea Eliade, The Forge and the Crucible (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1978; first ed., 1962; first French ed., 1956), 221-26.

56. Gareth Roberts, The Mirror of Alchemy (London: British Library, 1994), 7, 
66. Allison Coudert, Alchemy: The Philosopher’s Stone (London: Wildwood 
House, 1980), 148-60. F. Sherwood Taylor, The Alchemists: Founders of Modern 
Chemistry (New York: Henry Schuman, 1949), 159, 228. E. J. Holmyard, 
Alchemy (New York: Dover, 1990; first ed., 1957), 163-64, 176.

57. Betty Jo Teeter Dobbs, The Foundations of Newton’s Alchemy (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1975), 26-35; “From the Secrecy of Alchemy to the

426 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman426 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

Openness of Chemistry,” in Tore Frangsmyr, ed., Solomon’s House Revisited (Can- 
ton, Mass.: Science History Publications, 1990), 75-94, esp. 76. Dobbs’s endorse- 
ment of the Jungian historiographical model has served not only to further its 
acceptance among historians of science but to justify the model to other Jungians. 
Hence Nathan Schwartz-Salant’s Encountering ]ung on Alchemy (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1995), 10, explicitly cites Dobbs in support of the claim 
that historians of science “have recognized the value of Jung’s approach.”

58. William H. Brock, The Norton History of Chemistry (New York: Norton, 
1993), 17 and 678. Marco Beretta, The Enlightenment of Matter (Canton, Mass.: 
Science History Publications, 1993), 77, n. 6, and 331.

59. Richard Noll, The Jung Cult (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994), 
144. Idem, The Aryan Christ (New York: Random House, 1997), 25-30, 37-41.

60. Noll, Aryan Christ, 171.

6 1 . Luther H. Martin, “A History of the Psychological Interpretation of Alchemy,” 
Ambix, 22 (1975): 10-20, esp. 12-16.

62. Jung’s earliest writing on alchemy is found in The Secret of the Golden Flower, 
published with Richard Wilhelm in 1929: see Martin, “A History,” 16. Sustained 
treatments are found in The Collected Works of Carl Gustav Jung, 20 vols. (Lon- 
don: Routledge, 1953-79), vol. 9, pt. 2: Aion; vol. 12: Psychology and Alchemy; 
vol. 13: Alchemical Studies; vol. 14: Mysterium Conjunctionis.

63. Jung, “Die Erlosungsvorstellungen in der Alchemie,” in Eranos-Jahrbuch 
1936 (Zurich: Rhein-Verlag, 1937), 13-111; in English, “The Idea of Redemption 
in Alchemy,” in Stanley Dell, ed., The Integration of the Personality (New York: 
Farrar & Rinehart, 1939), 205-80. A retranslated and much expanded version of 
the original Eranos lecture appears in Jung, Works, vol. 12: Psychology and 
Alchemy, 227-471.

64. Jung, “Redemption in Alchemy,” 210.64. Jung, “Redemption in Alchemy,” 210.

65. Ibid., 215. The German text is quite unequivocal in its reference to “halluci- 
nations” (Jung, “Die Erlosungsvorstellungen,” 23-24): “Wie die beiden vorherge- 
henden Texts, so beweisen auch Hoghelande’s Ausfuhrungen, dass wahrend der 
praktischen Arbeit halluzinatorische oder visionare Wahrnehmungen erfolgten, 
die nichts anderes sein konnen als Projektionen unbewusster Inhalte.”

66. Jung, “Redemption in Alchemy,” 213, 206.

67. Noll, Aryan Christ, 229-30.

68. Jung, “Die Erlosungsvorstellungen,” 16: “Man kann sich vom Standpunkt 
unseres modernen chemischen Wissens darunter nichts vorstellen; und greifen 
wir zu den Texten und zu den Hunderten und Aberhunderten von Verfahren 
und Rezepten, die uns das Mittelalter und die Antike hinterlassen haben, so 
finden wir darunter relativ wenige, welche einen erkennbaren chemischen Sinn 
erhalten.”

69. Jung, “Idea of Redemption,” 239-47.

70. Ibid., 250-67.

71. Ibid., 239.

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 427

72. Jung, Works, vol. 12: Psychology and Alchemy, 316. Here the Collected 
Works version gives a better rendition of the German (“Die Erlosungsvorstellun- 
gen,” 59) than does Dell’s translation, “Redemption in Alchemy,” 239.

73. Jung, “Redemption in Alchemy,” 269-71.

74. Ibid., 268. For an elaboration of Jung’s view of Paracelsus as a reformer of 
alchemy, see his early “Paracelsus,” in Jung, Works, vol. 15: The Spirit in Man, Art, 
and Literature, 3-12. The essay is a translation of an address given in 1929.

75. Jung, “Redemption in Alchemy,” 267.

76. Noll, The Jung Cult, 181-84.

77. Jung, Works, vol. 13: Alchemical Studies, 253-349.

78. Noll, Aryan Christ, 22-52, 98-119.75. Jung, “Redemption in Alchemy,” 267.

76. Noll, The Jung Cult, 181-84.

77. Jung, Works, vol. 13: Alchemical Studies, 253-349.

78. Noll, Aryan Christ, 22-52, 98-119.

79. Jung, “Redemption in Alchemy,” 269-70. “Die Erlosungsvorstellungen,” 
103-4: “Die alchemische Prozess der klassischen Zeit (von der Antike bis zum 
Ende des 16. Jahrhunderts) war eine an sich chemische Untersuchung, in welche 
sich auf Wege der Projektion unbewusstes psychisches Material mischte. Die psy- 
chologische Bedingung des Werkes wird daher in den Texten vielfach betont. Die 
in Betracht kommenden Inhalte sind solche, welche sich zur Projektion in den un- 
bekannten chemischen Stoff eignen. Wegen der unpersonlichen, rein dinglichen 
Natur des Stoffes finden Projektionen von unpersonlichen, sogenannten kollek- 
tiven Archetypen statt.”

80. Obrist, Les debuts de I’imagerie alchimique, 15-21, 183-245; Halleux, Les 
textes alchimiques, 55-58.

81. Marie-Luise von Franz, Aurora consurgens: A document attributed to 
Thomas Aquinas (New York: Pantheon Books, 1966), 407-31.

82. William R. Newman, Gehennical Fire: The Lives of George Starkey, an Amer- 
ican Alchemist in the Scientific Revolution (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
1994), 125-33; Lawrence M. Principe, ‘“Chemical Translation’ and the Role of 
Impurities in Alchemy: Examples from Basil Valentine’s Triumph-Wagen,” Ambix, 
34 (1987): 21-30.

83. William R. Newman, “The Authorship of the ‘Introitus Apertus ad Occlusum 
Regis Palatium,”’ in von Martels, Alchemy Revisited, 139-44; ‘“Decknamen or 
pseudochemical language?’ Eirenaeus Philalethes and Carl Jung,” Revue d’histoire 
des sciences, 49 (1996): 159-88; and Gehennical Fire, 128, 132. In our forthcom- 
ing study of the alchemical collaboration of Starkey and Boyle we will detail the 
methods of analysis used by Starkey to “decode” the writings of earlier alchemical 
writers such as Bernard of Trier.84. Lawrence M. Principe, “Apparatus and Reproducibility in Alchemy,” in Trevor 
Levere and Frederick L. Holmes, eds., Instruments and Experimentation in the 
History of Chemistry (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000), 57-74.

85. On the emblematic worldview, see William B. Ashworth, “Natural History 
and the Emblematic World-View,” in Lindberg and Westman, Reappraisals of the 
Scientific Revolution, 303-31.

86. Dobbs, Foundations of Newton’s Alchemy, 26-29.

428 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

87. Betty Jo Teeter Dobbs, “Conceptual Problems in Newton’s Early Chemistry: 
A Preliminary Study,” in Margaret J. Osier and Paul Lawrence Farber, eds., Reli- 
gion, Science, and Worldview: Essays in Honor of Richard Westfall (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1985), 3-32, esp. 4. Dobbs claims to base this on a 
distinction made by Newton himself between “vulgar” and “vegetable” chemistry. 
See the critique of Dobbs’s position in William R. Newman’s review of The Janus 
Faces of Genius, Isis 84, no. 3 (1993): 578-79.

88. Newman and Principe, “Alchemy vs. Chemistry,” passim.

89. Ibid.

90. Mircea Eliade, “Metallurgy, Magic and Alchemy,” in Cahiers de Zalmoxis, 
publies par Mircea Eliade, vol. 1 (Paris: Librairie Orientaliste Paul Geuthner, 
[1938]).

91. Mac Linscott Ricketts, Mircea Eliade: The Romanian Roots, 1907-1945 
(Boulder, Colo.: East European Monographs, 1988), 141-53, 313-25, 804-8, 
835-42.

92. Eliade, “Metallurgy, Magic and Alchemy,” 44. See also his “Alchemy as a Spir- 
itual Technique” in Yoga: Immortality and Freedom, second ed., Bollingen Series 
55 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), 290-92.

93. Indeed, The Forge and the Crucible is heavily influenced by Jung; see 52, 158, 
161, 163, and 221-26.

94. Ibid., 162.

95. Eliade, “Metallurgy, Magic and Alchemy,” 44.

96. Ibid., 23-25.

97. Ibid., 27 and 38.

98. Ibid., 23.

99. Ibid.

100. Ibid., 38.94. Ibid., 162.

95. Eliade, “Metallurgy, Magic and Alchemy,” 44.

96. Ibid., 23-25.

97. Ibid., 27 and 38.

98. Ibid., 23.

99. Ibid.

100. Ibid., 38.

101. Helene Metzger, “Devolution du regne metallique d’apres les alchimistes du 
XVIIe siecle,” Isis, 4 (1922): 466-82; Les doctrines chimiques en France du debut 
du XVIIe a la fin du XVIIIe siecle (Paris: Les Presses Universitaires de France, 
1923), 99-142.

102. Metzger speaks of “la theorie alchimique” as a homogeneous whole. Ac- 
cording to “les philosophes hermetiques,” “les transmutations sont non seulement 
possibles, mais certaines, qu’elles se font dans un sens determinee toujours la 
meme, et qu’elles aboutissent forcement a donner aux metaux imparfaits l’ad- 
mirable forme de l’or.” See “Devolution du regne metallique,” 472.

103. Metzger, “Devolution du regne metallique,” 473.

104. Helene Metzger, Chemistry, trans. Colette V. Michael (West Cornwall, 
Conn.: Locust Hill Press, 1991; first French ed., 1930), 13-18.

105. Metzger, Les doctrines chimiques, 162-63.

106. Jan Golinski, “Helene Metzger and the Interpretation of Seventeenth Cen- 
tury Chemistry,” History of Science, 25 (1987): 85-97.

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 429

107. Helene Metzger, “L’a priori dans la doctrine scientifique et l’histoire des sci- 
ences” (1936) and “La philosophie de Lucien Levy-Bruhl et l’histoire des sciences” 
(1930), in Gad Freudenthal, ed., La methode philosophique en histoire des sci- 
ences: textes 1914-1939 (Paris: Fayard, 1987), 41-56, 113-28 (esp. 50-51, 119- 
20). Golinski has already drawn attention to these passages in “Metzger and 
Chemistry,” 96, n. 10.108. In order for alchemy to collapse, “il fallait tout d’abord qu’une autre notion 
de la perfection succedat au mysticisme des alchimistes: or, a l’epoque du triom- 
phe de la philosophie cartesienne, les savants, qu’ils donnent ou refusent leur ad- 
hesion a l’ensemble de la nouvelle doctrine, les savants refusaient d’admettre 
qu’une substance quelconque qui occupe de l’etendue soit theoretiquement plus 
parfaite que toutes les autres substances analogues. Les metaux ont ete crees par 
Dieu pour demeurer ce qu’ils sont; et le monde entier reste constamment semblable 
a lui-meme, semblable a ce qu’il etait au moment de la creation; si, comme le pre- 
tend Descartes, ‘toutes les varietes qui sont en la matiere dependent du mouvement 
de ses parties,’ si d’autre part ‘Dieu qui est la premiere cause du mouvement en con- 
serve toujours une egale quantite dans l’univers,’ la nature qui est parfaite n’a done 
aucune tendance au perfectionnement! L’idee meme du perfectionnement paraitra 
fantaisiste et inintelligible” (Metzger, Les doctrines chimiques, 138).

109. Metzger, Les doctrines chimiques, 27, 93, 133, 247, 289-91, 423-24. Dobbs 
has correctly criticized Metzger on this point: Foundations of Newton’s Alchemy, 
44-47. But Dobbs herself, though recognizing that corpuscularian views need not 
be at odds with transmutation, did not recognize that alchemical texts themselves 
often embody a corpuscular theory of matter having medieval roots.

110. Dobbs, Foundations of Newton’s Alchemy, 26, n. 2; 43, n. 46 (for Eliade); 
44-45, 45, n. 54 (for Metzger).

111. Betty Jo Teeter Dobbs, Alchemical Death and Resurrection (Washington, 
D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Libraries, 1990), and The Janus Faces of Genius 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991). For her 1990 endorsement of 
Jung, see “From the Secrecy of Alchemy to the Openness of Chemistry,” 76.

112. Dobbs, Alchemical Death, 4; Janus Faces, 46.

113. Dobbs, Alchemical Death, 13,25.

114. Ibid., 24.112. Dobbs, Alchemical Death, 4; Janus Faces, 46.

113. Dobbs, Alchemical Death, 13,25.

114. Ibid., 24.

115. Carolyn Merchant, The Death of Nature (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 
1983; first ed., 1980), 17-20, 25-27. Merchant’s use of Eliade is documented on 
296, n. 1, her use of Jung on 298, n. 21.

116. Ibid., xxii.

117. Evelyn Fox Keller, Reflections on Gender and Science (New Haven: Yale Uni- 
versity Press, 1985), 43-65. See the critique of Merchant and Keller in William 
Newman, “Alchemy, Domination, and Gender,” in Noretta Koertge, ed., A House 
Built on Sand (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), 216-26.

118. Keller, Reflections, 44.

119. Ibid., 48.

430 Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman

120. Ibid., 53-54.

121. Keller cites Merchant and Dobbs explicitly in Reflections. See 54-55, 
nn. 11-12.

122. See Newman, Gebennical Fire, 101-6, for a discussion of this issue. For the 
passage from pseudo-Lull, see II Testamentum alchemico attribuito a Raimondo 
Lnllo, ed. Michela Pereira and Barbara Spaggiari (Florence: Sismel, 1999), 
pp. 28-29.

123. Daniel Georg Morhof, Epistola de metallorum transmutatione ad Joelum 
Langelottum, in Manget, Bibliotheca chemica curiosa, 1:168-92, at 179; 
Lawrence M. Principe, “Daniel Georg Morhof’s Analysis and Defence of Trans- 
mutational Alchemy,” in Mapping the World of Learning: The Polybistor of 
Daniel Georg Morhof, ed. Frangoise Waquet (Wiesbaden: Harrassowtiz, 2000), 
139-153.

124. Lawrence M. Principe, “Diversity in Alchemy: The Case of Gaston ‘Claveus’ 
DuClo, a Scholastic Mercurialist Chrysopoeian,” in Allen G. Debus and Michael 
Walton, eds., Reading the Book of Nature: The Other Side of the Scientific Revo- 
lution (Kirksville, Mo.: Sixteenth Century Press, 1998), 181-200; Gaston DuClo, 
Apologia chrysopoeiae et argyropoeiae, in Lazarus Zetzner, ed., Theatrwn 
chemicum, 6 vols. (Torino: Bottega d’Erasmo, 1981; reprint of 1659-61 Strasburg 
ed.), 1:4-80, at 36-37, 39, 43-44, and 65.125. Newman, Gehennical Fire, 92-114; 141-69; “The Corpuscular Transmuta- 
tional Theory of Eirenaeus Philalethes,” in Piyo Rattansi and Antonio Clericuzio, 
eds., Alchemy and Chemistry in the XVI and XVII Centuries (Dordrecht, the 
Netherlands: Kluwer, 1994), 161-82; “The Corpuscular Theory of J. B. van Hel- 
mont and its Medieval Sources,” Vivarium, 31 (1993): 161-91; “Boyle’s Debt to 
Corpuscular Alchemy” in Michael Hunter, ed., Robert Boyle Reconsidered (Cam- 
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 107-18; and “The Alchemical Sources 
of Robert Boyle’s Corpuscular Philosophy,” Annals of Science, 53 (1996): 567-85.

126. Antonio Clericuzio, “A Redefinition of Boyle’s Chemistry and Corpuscular 
Philosophy,” Annals of Science, 47 (1990): 561-89; see 583-87, and John Henry, 
“Occult Qualities and the Experimental Philosophy: Active Principles in Pre- 
Newtonian Matter Theory,” History of Science, 24 (1986): 335-81.

127. Justus Liebig, Chemische Briefe (Heidelberg, 1851), 59.

128. For an instance where Liebig is used to exemplify the positivist view of 
alchemy, see Beretta, Enlightenment of Matter, 330. Liebig dissents from Comte in 
Briefe, 68-70.

129. Hermann Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie (Brunswick, 1843-47); Alchemie in 
Alterer und Neuerer Zeit (Heidelberg, 1886).

130. Ganzenmiiller, “Wandlungen,” 69.

131. Jost Weyer, “The Image of Alchemy and Chemistry in Nineteenth and Twen- 
tieth Century Histories of Chemistry,” Ambix, 23 (1976): 65-70. There are some 
notable exceptions, such as E. O. von Lippman, Die Entstehung und Ausbreitung 
der Alchemie (Berlin: Springer, 1919).

132. George Sarton, “Boyle and Bayle, the Sceptical Chemist and the Sceptical 
Historian,” Chymia, 3 (1950): 155-89, at 160.

Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 431

133. Dobbs, Foundations of Newton’s Alchemy, 6-12, 16-18; Principe, Aspiring 
Adept, 18-23.Some Problems ivith the Historiography of Alchemy 431

133. Dobbs, Foundations of Newton’s Alchemy, 6-12, 16-18; Principe, Aspiring 
Adept, 18-23.

134. Only a few examples of recent and ongoing work are Barbara Obrist’s trans- 
lation and edition of Constantine of Pisa’s The Book of the Secrets of Alchemy 
(Leiden: Brill, 1990); Robert Halleux, Les alchemistes grecs (Paris: Les Belles Let- 
tres, 1981); William Newman, The Summa perfectionis of the pseudo-Geber (Lei- 
den: E. J. Brill, 1991); the publications of Chrysopoeia under the direction of 
Sylvain Matton; Michela Pereira and Barbara Spaggiari, II Testamentum al- 
chemico attribuito a Raimondo Lullo, (Florence: Sismel, 1999); and Fabre’s Man- 
uscriptum in Bernard Joly, Rationalite de L’alchimie au XVIIe siecle, (Paris: Vrin, 
1992).

135. Andrew Weeks, Paracelsus: Specidative Theory and the Crisis of the Refor- 
mation (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1997), 36-44. Problems of 
disputed authenticity occur with the Paracelsian De natura rerum, among others.

136. One example of a work untangling knotty attributions is Michela Pereira, 
The Alchemical Corpus Attributed to Raymond Lull, Warburg Institute Surveys 
and Texts no. 18 (London: Warburg Institute, 1989).

137. For a few of many possible examples of such case studies, see the collections 
Rattansi and Clericuzio, Alchemy and Chemistry in the XVI and XVII Centuries ; 
Jean-Claude Margolin and Sylvain Matton, eds., Alchimie et Philosophic a la 
Renaissance (Paris: Vrin, 1993); and von Martels, Alchemy Revisited; as well as 
Karin Figala, “Zwei Londoner Alchemisten um 1700: Sir Isaac Newton und Clei- 
dophorus Mystagogus,” Pbysis, 18 (1976): 245-73; Principe, Aspiring Adept and 
“Diversity in Alchemy”; Newman, Gehennical Fire; and Robert M. Schuler, 
“William Blomfild, Elizabethan Alchemist,” Ambix, 20 (1973): 75-87.

This page intentionally left blank

ContributorsThis page intentionally left blank

Contributors

Nicholas H. Clulee is Professor of History at Frostburg State University in Mary- 
land. He received a B.A. from Hobart College and a Ph.D. from the University of 
Chicago. He published John Dee’s Natural Philosophy (Routledge, 1988) and is 
currently working on Roger Bacon and an edition of John Dee’s works.

Germana Ernst is professor of philosophy at the University of Rome, III. She is the 
author of Religione, ragione e natura (Franco Angeli, 1991) and the editor of many 
sixteenth- and seventeenth-century texts, notably Tommaso Campanella’s Articuli 
prophetales (1977) and Compendio di filosofia della natura (1999) and Ortensio 
Landi’s Paradossi (1999).

Anthony Grafton teaches European history and history of science at Princeton 
University. His publications include Joseph Scaliger (Oxford, 1983), Defenders of 
the Text (Harvard, 1991), and The Footnote: A Curious History (Harvard, 1997); 
he coedited, with Nancy Siraisi, Natural Particulars (MIT, 2000).

Didier Kahn currently occupies the position of “chercheur” at the CNRS. He 
is the author of a doctoral thesis, “Paracelsisme et alchimie en France a la fin 
de la Renaissance” (Universite de Paris IV, 1998, to be published by Droz). His 
work concerns the relationship between literature, science, and religion in the 
Europe of the alchemists (1567-1666), as well as the editing of Diderot’s 
correspondence.

Lauren Kassell is an assistant lecturer in history and philosophy of science at Cam- 
bridge University and a fellow of Pembroke College. She is completing a book on 
Simon Forman, medicine, and the occult in early modern England.

William R. Newman is a member of the Department of History and Philosophy of 
Science at Indiana University. He has published Gehennical Fire: The Lives of 
George Starkey, An American Alchemist in the Scientific Revolution (Harvard, 
1994) and The Summa perfections of pseudo-Geber (Brill, 1991).Lawrence M. Principe is an associate professor at Johns Hopkins University in the 
Departments of History of Science and of Chemistry. He is author of The Aspiring 
Adept: Robert Boyle and his Alchemical Quest (Princeton, 1998).

H. Darrel Rutkin is a doctoral candidate in the Department of History and Phi- 
losophy of Science at Indiana University. His dissertation will study Giovanni Pico 
della Mirandola’s Disputationes adversus astrologiam divinatricem, its context

434 Contributors

and influence. A Rome Prize winner, he is currently conducting dissertation re- 
search at the American Academy in Rome.

Nancy G. Siraisi is professor of history at Hunter College and the Graduate Cen- 
ter of the City University of New York. Her field of research is history of medieval 
and Renaissance medicine and life sciences in intellectual and social context. Her 
most recent book is The Clock and the Mirror: Girolamo Cardano and Renais- 
sance Medicine (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997).

Index

Adam, Charles, 296 
Adelung, Johann Christoph, 387 
Admiranda Methodus, 252 
Adorno, Theodor Wiesengrund, 2 
Advantages of Life in the Papal Curia, 
The, 7

Against the Astrologers, 45 
Agrippa, Henry Cornelius, 96, 357- 
358,369

Airs Waters Places, 80-82 
Alberti, Leon Battista, 5-9 
Alberti, Piero, 5-9 
Alchemical Death and Resurrection,

411

Alchemy

arguments against, 21-24 
and Aristotle, 214 
and Arthur Edward Waite, 393-395 
and astrology, 14-27 
books, 19, 198-199 
and Carl Gustav Jung, 401-408 
and Consideratio, 213-224 
eighteenth century view of, 385-388 
Ethan Allen Hitchcock on, 391-392 
future of, 418-420 
Johannes Trithemius on, 191-194, 
196

John Dee on, 174-178, 182-194,

195

and Lullists, 25 1-252 
and magic, 25-26, 367-373 
Mary Anne Atwood on, 389-391 
and metals, 16-17, 214-217

and Mircea Eliade, 408-415 
panpsychic interpretation of, 408- 
415195

and Lullists, 25 1-252 
and magic, 25-26, 367-373 
Mary Anne Atwood on, 389-391 
and metals, 16-17, 214-217

and Mircea Eliade, 408-415 
panpsychic interpretation of, 408- 
415

and Philipp a Gabella, 201 
and planets, 18-22, 184-185 
positivist view of, 415-417 
presentist view of, 415-417 
and psychology, 401-404 
and religion, 352-360 
and Rosicrucianism, 301-302, 309- 
310

and Simon Forman, 345-352, 367- 
373

spiritual interpretation of, 388-396 
supernatural, 399-400 
twentieth century view of, 396-401 
and vitalism, 411-412 
Alchemy: The Philosopher’s Stone, 
401

Alchymista Christianus, 398 
Alciato, Andrea, 45 
Al-Kindi, 209 
Aloysia Sigea, 245 
Alumbrados of Seville, the, 264-268 
Andreae, Johann Valentin, 238, 240, 
262

Aphorisms, 82-83, 86 
Archinto, Filippo, 43, 56 
Aristotle, 214 
Arnold, Paul, 295 
Ars alchemie, 19

Ashmole, Elias, 15-16, 19-21, 24-26, 
364,399

436 Index

Astrologers. See also Cardano, Giro- 
lamo; Dee, John; Galilei, Galileo; 
Kepler, Johann

accuracy of predictions made by, 4, 
82-84, 103-104 
dignity of, 46-49 
German, 9-14 
of Italy, 5-9

physicians as, 77-98, 107-110, 367- 
373

practices of Renaissance, 3-4, 12-13, 
106

and Ptolemy, 98-107 
Astrologicorum aphorismornm seg- 
menta septem, 45 
Astrology

and alchemy, 14-27 
arguments against, 21-24, 60, 88-89 
as art, 46-49, 57, 105-106 
and astronomy, 9, 18, 59-60, 154, 
177-178,203-21 3 
basis of, 59-62

books, 19, 39-40, 44-46, 74-76,

95- 96, 198-199

and Christianity, 50-56 
and the course of illness, 71-73 
and the critical days doctrine, 86-89 
critiques of, 74-76, 91-92 
dedicatory letters, 135-159 
genitures, 3-4, 10-12, 40-43, 56-62,

96- 98, 104-105 
and intellectuals, 7-8 
and language, 178-182 
medical, 77-92

and medical interrogations, 69-74 
and memory, 143 
and metals, 16-17, 184-185 
and numbers, 18296- 98, 104-105 
and intellectuals, 7-8 
and language, 178-182 
medical, 77-92

and medical interrogations, 69-74 
and memory, 143 
and metals, 16-17, 184-185 
and numbers, 182

and occult sciences, 17, 26, 45, 149- 
150, 391-392, 396-401 
and physicians, 77-92 
and plagues, 85 
and poetry, 139-140 
and Ptolemy, 98-107 
and the Pythagorean tetractys, 180 
and religion, 50-56, 61, 201, 237-

238, 263, 281-283, 287-289, 352- 
360

and the Roman Empire, 99-100 
and royalty, 3, 5-9, 40-43, 96, 142- 
155,255

and self-scrutiny, 11-12 
skepticism of, 4-5 
and social relations, 8-9 
and spirituality, 43-44 
and the stock market, 2 
textbooks, 9-10

Astronomiae Instauratae Mechanica, 
134, 142-143

Astronomia inferior, 173-174 
Astronomia Nova, 133-134, 147-159 
Astronomy and astrology, 9, 18-22, 
59-60, 154, 177-178, 184-185, 
190f, 203-213 
Atheism, 277

Atwood, Mary Anne, 14, 30, 389- 
391

Azoth, 394-395

Bachelard, Gaston, 401 
Bacon, Roger, 191, 209, 362 
Baduel, Claude, 96-97 
Baillet, Adrien, 245, 264, 295-300 
Baillif, Roch Le, 275 
Barbavara, Francesco, 6-9 
Beck, Hans-Georg, 10 
Belot, Jean, 251 
Benzi, Francesco, 89 
Beretta, Marco, 407 
Bernard of Trier, 23 
Besold, Christoph, 238 
Bethune, Philippe de, 254 
Biagioli, Mario, 133-134 
Bianchi, Forenzo, 245, 283 
Blavatsky, Helena Petrovna, 393 
Bodier, Thomas, 92 
Boehme, Jakob, 387, 390 
Boissat, Pierre de, 245-247 
Boivin de Villeneuve, Jean, 302 
Books on astrology, 19, 39-40, 44-46, 
74-76, 95-96, 198-199 
Bostocke, Richard, 345, 362-363

Index 437

Boucher, Jean, 277, 279, 293 
Boyle, Robert, 407, 414 
Brahe, Tycho, 134 
dedicatory letter to Astronomiae In- 
stauratae Mechanica of, 142-143 
Brasavola, Antonio Musa, 83 
Brind’ Amour, Pierre, 11 
Browne, Thomas, 398 
Bruno, Giordano, 413 
Burckhardt, Jacob, 3-4, 7-8 
Burckhardt, Titus, 396 
Burggraf, Johann Ernst, 277 
Butterfield, Herbert, 389Calvinists, 241-242 
Camerarius, Joachim, 9, 13 
Campanella, Tommaso, 5 
Campbell, Joseph, 401 
Campioni, Antonio de, 69-70 
Cardano, Battista, 70-71 
Cardano, Girolamo, 12-13, 27-28 
and astrology as art, 105-106 
books by, 39-40, 44-46, 95-96 
on Christianity, 50-56 
on the course of illness, 71-73 
on critical days, 86-89 
critiques by, 74-76, 91-92, 109 
early work of, 43-46 
genitures by, 40-43, 44, 56-62, 92, 
96-98, 104-105 
on God, 85

on large-scale events, 50-52 
and medical interrogations, 69-74 
medical work of, 92-98 
on plagues, 85 
on Ptolemy, 98-107 
use of astrology as a physician, 92- 
98, 107-110

on value of medical astrology, 77-92 
on weather, 84-85 
Casanate, Guglielmo, 42 
Casato, Pietro, 84 
Cellini, Benvenuto, 109 
Centiloquium, 102, 106 
Charpentier, Marc-Antoine, 308 
Charron, Pierre, 287-288

Chaume, Etienne, 29, 245-247, 255- 
256, 259, 264, 294 
Cheke, John, 41 
Chesne, Joseph Du, 275 
Chevallier, Pierre, 261 
Chorier, Nicolas, 245, 247-248, 258- 
259

Christianity and astrology, 50-56, 61, 
85,201

and alchemy, 396-401 
and Libertinism, 287-289 
and Life of Adam and Eve, 352-360 
and origin of disease, 360-367 
and the Rosicrucian movement, 237- 
238, 241, 263-268, 277-278, 281- 
283

Chymische Hochzeit, 238 
City of the Sun, 5 
Cohen, Gustave, 296, 300 
Colletet, Guillaume, 284-287 
Confessio Fraternitatis, 238, 240-241 
Conradus, Rodolphus, 249-250 
Consideratio, 199-201 
and alchemy, 213-224 
and astronomy, 202-204 
on creation, 204-207 
vs. Emerald Tablet, 201-213 
and Monas hieroglyphica, 222 
and Novum lumen chemicum, 223 
and Propaedeumata aphoristica, 
202-207

and Scholia, 218-220 
Constantine of Pisa, 19 
Continuation de I’histoire du regne de 
Louys le Juste, 267 
Coppie of a Letter ... by a Learned 
Physician, A, 345, 363, 365-366 
Corneille, Thomas, 307-308 
Corpus Hermeticum, 392 
Cosmology, 201. See also Christianity 
and astrology 
Coudert, Allison, 401 
Critical days doctrine, the, 86-89D’Abano, Pietro, 79, 88-89 
Da Castiglionchio, Lapo, 7

438 Index

Da Montegeltro, Federigo, 7 
De Angelis, Alessandro, 60-61 
Death of Nature, The, 412 
Dedicatory letters 
to Brahe’s Astronomiae Instauratae 
Mechanica, 142-143 
chronological considerations of, 155- 
159

features of, 135-136 
to Galileo’s Sidereus Nuncius, 136- 
142, 143-147

and historiography, 148-149 
to Kepler’s Astronomia Nova, 147- 
155

Dee, John, 14-15,28-29, 173-174, 
224-226

and alchemy, 174-178, 182-194,

195

and astronomy, 177-178, 186— 188f, 
190f, 204-213

and the Emerald Tablet, 182-194 
and Johannes Trithemius, 194-197 
on language, 178-182 
and Philipp a Gabella, 197-213 
and Propaedeumata aphoristica, 
202-207

and Rosicrucianism, 197-198, 236- 
237

De La Brosse, Guy, 306 
De Lavalle, Claude, 41 
Della Mirandola, Pico, 4, 80, 87-88 
Del Rio, Martin, 282 
De occulta philosophia, 109 
De Petri Boessatii vita, 247 
De Pizan, Christine, 23 
De Ranconnet, Aimar, 41, 96 
Descartes, Rene, 252, 295-300 
Des Freres de la Roze Croix, 302 
D’Espagnet, Jean, 254 
Des Reaux, Gedeon Tallemant, 248 
D’Este, Leonello, 7 
De Stella nova, 158 
De Vise, Donneau, 307-308 
Die Morgenland Fahrt, 235 
Difference Betivene the Auncient 
Phisicke, The, 345, 362-363 
Dillon, John, 15

Disease and astronomy 
and the critical days doctrine, 86-89 
and the food of angels, 360-367 
Girolamo Cardano on, 74-92 
and medical interrogations, 69-74 
and plagues, 85

and uses of medical astrology, 107- 
110

and weather, 84-85 
Divine Weeks and Works, 366 
Dobbs, Betty Jo Teeter, 401, 407, 411- 
412

Donville, Louise Goddard de, 268 
Dorn, Gerhard, 202-203 
Du Bartas, Guillaume Saluste, 366 
Duclo, Gaston, 414 
Dupebe, Jean, 11 
Dupleix, Scipion, 266-268 
Dupuy, Jacques, 274, 301

Economist, The, 2 
Edighoffer, Roland, 237 
Effroyables Pactions, 243, 248, 253, 
259, 261, 270-275 
Eglinus, Raphael, 197 
Eliade, Mircea, 401, 408-415 
Emblems, 45

Emerald Tablet, 25, 173-174, 179, 
182-194Emerald Tablet, 25, 173-174, 179, 
182-194

vs. Consideratio, 201-213 
England, 11, 40-41, 96, 237, 388- 
393

Epidemics, 80-83, 86, 103 
Epistola ad Thomam de Bononia, 23 
Epistolae medicinales, 89 
Erastus, Thomas, 281 
Esteve, Pedro Jaime, 82 
Evola, Julius, 396

Examen sur I’lnconnue et Nouvelle 
Caballe des Freres de la Croix 
Rosee, 261, 272-273

Fabre, Pierre-Jean, 398 
Fama Fraternitatis, 238-240, 258 
Farnese, Pier Luigi, 42, 58 
Ficino, Marsilio, 14, 24, 79, 109 
Figulus, Benedictus, 240, 278

Index 439

Fludd, Robert, 387

Forge and the Crucible, The, 408

Forman, Simon

and alchemy, 345-346, 367-373 
on Alexander von Suchten, 346-352 
and Of Cako, 346-352 
and the food of angels, 360-367 
medical practice of, 367-373 
on origins of disease, 360-367 
on Paracelsus, 357-360 
transcription of Life of Adam and 
Eve by, 352-360 
Foul, Robert Le, 251 
Foundations of Newton’s Alchemy, 
401,407

France. See Rosicrucian movement 
Frisius, Gemma, 47 
Frye, Northrop, 401 
Fubini, Riccardo, 9

Gabella, Philipp a, 174, 224-226 
and alchemy, 201, 213-224 
and astronomy, 203-213 
and Consideratio, 201-213 
and cosmology, 201 
on creation, 204-206 
vs. John Dee, 201-213 
and Propaedeumata aphoristica, 
202-207

and Secretions Philosophiae Consid- 
eratio Brevis, 197-201, 207f, 210- 
212f, 221-222f

and truth, 201 
Galen, 99-105 
Galilei, Galileo, 133-135 
chronological considerations and, 
155-159

dedicatory letter to Sidereus Nuncius 
of, 136-142, 143-147 
vs. Johann Kepler, 154-155, 156- 
159

and poetry, 139-140 
Ganay, Germanus de, 191-193 
Garasse, Francois, 268, 278, 280-283 
Gaspard, M., 273 
Gaulmin, Gilbert, 274 
Gaultier, Jacques, 263, 266, 278, 293

Gaurico, Luca, 57-58, 98, 105 
Gellius, Aulus, 99

Genitures, astrology, 3-4, 10-12, 40- 
43, 44, 56-62, 92, 96-98, 104-105 
of Jesus Christ, 52 
Germany, 236-242, 262-263 
Geschichte der menschlicben Narrheit, 
387Genitures, astrology, 3-4, 10-12, 40- 
43, 44, 56-62, 92, 96-98, 104-105 
of Jesus Christ, 52 
Germany, 236-242, 262-263 
Geschichte der menschlicben Narrheit, 
387

Gilly, Carlos, 198, 235, 237, 245 
Giordano Bruno, 237 
Gmelin, Johann Friedrich, 416 
Goclenius, Rudolph, 276 
Goclenius Heautontimorumenos, 
276-277

Gogava, Antonio, 39 
Gohory, Jacques, 218-221 
Goltz, Dietlinde, 407 
Gonzaga, Ludovico, 7 
Gonzago, Alvise, 84-85 
Goodage, John, 370 
Gouhier, Henri, 295, 296, 299 
Gras, Nicolas Le, 306 
Great Work, the, 218-219 
Grisogono, Federico, 88-89 
Grosseteste, Robert, 209 
Guarinoni, Hippolytus, 240 
Guicciardini, Francesco, 11 
Gutman, Aegidius, 239

Halleux, Robert, 406 
Hamilton, John, 39, 96 
Harris, John, 369 
Hartmann, Johann, 238 
Haslmayr, Adam, 238, 239-240, 242, 
262,278,293 
Henry II (England), 74 
Hess, Tobias, 238, 242 
Hesse, Hermann, 235 
Hillgarth, J. N.,251 
Histoire generale du progrez et deca- 
dence de I’Heresie moderne, 261 
Hitchcock, Ethan Allen, 30, 389, 391- 
392

Holland, 300

Holmyard, E. J., 401

Horky, Martin, 156

Horoscopes. See Genitures, astrology

440 Index

Ingegno, Alfonso, 58 
Instruction a la France sur la verite de 
I’histoire des Freres de la Roze- 
Croix, 261, 283-287, 291-294 
Intellectuals and astrology, 7-8 
Italy, astrology practice in, 5-9. See 
also Cardano, Girolamo

Janus Faces of Genius, The, 411 
Jesus Christ, 40 
Jollivet-Castelot, F., 393 
Jung, Carl Gustav 
criticism of, 404-408 
interpretation of alchemy by, 401- 
404

and occult sciences, 401-404

Keller, Evelyn Fox, 412 
Kepler, Johann, 28, 133-134 
and astronomy, 154 
chronological considerations and, 
155-159

dedicatory letter to Astronomia 
Nova, 147-155

vs. Galileo Galilei, 154-155, 156- 
159

and historiography, 148-149 
and nativity of Rudolf II, 152-154 
and occult sciences, 149-150 
Khunrath, Heinrich, 254, 387 
Kingsford, Anna, 3e2 
Kircher, Athanasius, 1-2 
Kirsop, Wallace, 261 
Kopp, Hermann, 416La Doctrine curieuse des beaux Es- 
prits de ce temps, 268-275, 284- 
287

L’Alemant, Adrien, 82, 91-92 
Lancre, Pierre de, 287-288 
Language and astrology, 178-182 
Lautensack, Paul, 239 
Lemery, Nicolas, 14, 411, 414 
Lenoble, Robert, 296, 299 
Leonello, Marquis, 3 
Leowitz, Cyprian, 12, 98 
Lerner, Michel-Pierre, 278

Les Enffans de la Croix Roze, 268 
Levi, Eliphas, 14, 392 
L’Hypercbimie, 393 
Liber de propria vita, 107 
Liber de providentia ex anni constitu- 
tione, 83

Liber secretorum alchimie, 19 
Libertinism, 287-289 
Liebig, Justus, 415 
Life of Adam and Eve, 352-360 
Lives of the Alchemy stical Writers, 
387

Locke, John, 248 
Los Angeles Times, 2 
Lull, Ramon, 251-252, 413 
Luther, Martin and Lutheranism, 4, 
290-291, 388

MacDonald, Michael, 12 
Magic and alchemy, 25-26, 367-373 
Magini, Giovanni Antonio, 69-74, 
156-157

Magnus, Albert, 53 
Maier, Michael, 263 
Mainardi, Giovanni, 89 
Maitland, Edward, 392 
Malingre, Claude, 261-262, 265-266, 
286

Matton, Sylvain, 295 
Mayerne, Theodore Turquet de, 254- 
259, 275

Medical astrology 
and alchemy, 214-215, 367-373 
and the critical days doctrine, 86- 
89

and Galen, 99-105 
Girolamo Cardano on, 74-92, 107- 
110

and medical interrogations, 69-74 
and origin of disease, 360-367 
Philipp a Gabella on, 214-215 
and plagues, 85 
and Ptolemy, 98-107 
and Rosicrucianism, 289-291, 303- 
304

uses of, 107-110 
and weather, 84

Index 441

Medical interrogations, 69-74 
Medici, Catherine de, 74 
Medici, Cosimo II de, 133-134, 136- 
142, 143-147uses of, 107-110 
and weather, 84

Index 441

Medical interrogations, 69-74 
Medici, Catherine de, 74 
Medici, Cosimo II de, 133-134, 136- 
142, 143-147

Medici, Giovan Giacomo, 41-42 
Meijer, Willem, 300 
Melanchthon, Philipp, 9, 13 
Memory and astrology, 143 
Merchant, Carolyn, 412 
Mercure Francois, 243-244, 266 
Mersenne, Marin, 277, 280-283 
Mesmer, Franz Anton, 388 
Metals and astrology, 16-17, 184- 
185,214-217 
Metzger, Helene, 409-411 
Mirror of Alchemy, The, 401 
Monas hieroglyphica, 14, 173-174, 
176-177f, 186— 188f 
and alchemy, 174-178, 182-194 
and astronomy, 202-204 
vs. Consideratio, 201-213 
on creation, 204-206 
and language, 178-182 
Moran, Bruce, 197-198 
Moreau, Rene, 289-291 
Morestel, Pierre, 251 
Morhof, Daniel Georg, 413 
Moritz, Landgraf, 197-198 
Mydorge, Claude, 296-297 
Mysterium Cosmographicum, 157

Napier, Richard, 369 
Naude, Gabriel, 243, 247, 254, 261 
on La Doctrine curieuse, 284-287 
on Libertinism, 287-289 
on Paracelsianism, 283, 289-291 
on Rosicrucianism, 291-294 
Neuhus, Heinrich, 260-261 
Newman, William, 191, 248 
Niccoli, Ottavia, 4-5 
Nifo, Agostino, 47 
Noll, Richard, 404-406 
Norton, Thomas, 19-20 
Norton History of Alchemy, 401 
Nostradamus, 11

Novum lumen chemicum, 200, 217, 
223

Numbers and astrology, 182 
Nutton, Vivian, 102

Obrist, Barbara, 406 
Occult sciences, 17, 26, 45, 391-392, 
396-401

and Carl Gustav Jung, 401-404 
and royalty, 149-150 
Offenbahrung Gottlicher Majestat, 
239

On Painting, 9

On the Art of Building, 9

On the Family, 5-9

On the Seven-Month Child, 80

Optica, 158

Ordinall of Alchemy, The, 19, 185 
Oresme, Nicole, 23 
Ottato, Cesare, 88

Pailleur, Jacques Le, 248-252 
Panpsychic interpretation of alchemy, 
408-415On the Seven-Month Child, 80

Optica, 158

Ordinall of Alchemy, The, 19, 185 
Oresme, Nicole, 23 
Ottato, Cesare, 88

Pailleur, Jacques Le, 248-252 
Panpsychic interpretation of alchemy, 
408-415

Paracelsus, 14, 218 
and France, 275 
and Francois Garasse, 280-283 
Gabriel Naude on, 283, 289-291 
and Rosicrucians, 275-294 
Simon Forman on, 357-360 
Pascal, Blaise, 248 
Pasquier, Etienne, 275 
Paterculus, Velleius, 100 
Penot, Bernard G., 291 
Pereyra, Benito, 6 1 
Peucer, Caspar, 13 
Philalethes, Eugenius, 390 
Philosophers’ Stone, The, 307 
Physicians and astrology. See Medical 
astrology

Pighius, Albertus, 47 
Pike, Albert, 393 
Plagues, 85

Poetry and astrology, 139-140 
Pomata, Gianna, 108 
Ponce, Charles, 396 
Pope Paul III, 42-43, 57-58 
Positivist view of alchemy, 415-417 
Presentist view of alchemy, 415-417

442 Index

Prognostic, 80-83 
Propaedenmata aphoristica, 175f, 
202-207

Propertius, 139-140 
Protestants and the Rosicrucian move- 
ment, 263, 278 
Prutenic Tables, 83 
Psychology and alchemy, 40 1-404 
Ptolemy, Claudius, 10, 15, 39, 46-47 
and Cardano, Girolamo, 98-107 
on large-scale events, 50-51 
Pythagorean tetractys, 180

Quadripartitum, 39, 47 
Quaestiones celeberrimae in Genesim, 
277

Quigley, Joan, 2

Raemond, Florimond de, 261

Reagan, Nancy, 2

Reagan, Ronald, 2

Recherches sur les Rose-Croix, 274

Reflections on Gender and Science, 412

Reiske, Jacob, 10

Religion and the Decline of Magic, 17 
Rhenanus, Johannes, 198 
Rheticus, Georg Joachim, 12, 57 
Roberti, Jean, 276-277 
Roberts, Gareth, 401 
Rodis-Lewis, Genevieve, 296 
Roman empire, 99-100 
Rosarium philosophorum, 199 
Rosicrucian Enlightenment, The, 236, 
237, 245, 262

Rosicrucian movement, the, 28-29, 
218,393-394

and alchemy, 301-302, 309-310 
and the Alumbrados of Seville, 264- 
268

authors of, 244-252 
books against, 278-279 
books on, 238-239 
and Claude Malingre, 261-262 
content of, 253-259 
denunciation of, 291-294 
and Father Mersenne, 280-283, 295- 
300authors of, 244-252 
books against, 278-279 
books on, 238-239 
and Claude Malingre, 261-262 
content of, 253-259 
denunciation of, 291-294 
and Father Mersenne, 280-283, 295- 
300

and Francois Garasse, 280-283 
and Gabriel Naude, 291-294 
and Heinrich Neuhus, 260-261 
influence of, 306-311 
and John Dee, 197-198 
and La Doctrine curieuse, 284-287 
and Libertinism, 287-289 
origins of, 236-242 
and Paracelsianism, 275-294, 289- 
291

placards of 1623, 235-236, 242-244 
and politics, 242 
and Protestants, 263, 278 
reaction to, 260-275 
and religion, 237-238, 241, 277-278 
and Rene Descartes, 295-300 
results of, 300-311 
and royalty, 239-240 
and Scipion Dupleix, 266-268 
and Theophile de Viau, 268-275 
versions of, 254-255, 259 
and Wallace Kirsop, 261 
Roslin, Helisaeus, 239 
Royalty and astrology, 3, 5-9, 40-43, 
96, 142-155, 255

and the Rosicrucian movement, 239- 
240

Rudolf II, Emperor, 142-143, 147- 
155

Sanches, Francisco, 52 
Sarton, George, 416 
Schmieder, Karl Christoph, 416 
Scholem, Gershom, 255 
Scholia, 218-220 
Schweighart, Theophilus, 301 
Scot, Michael, 19 
Scotland, 39-40 
Scribani, Charles, 250 
Secret, Francois, 235, 245 
Secretions philosophic consideratio 
brevis, 174, 197-201, 207f, 210- 
212f, 221-222f

Secret Tradition of Alchemy, The, 395 
Sendivogius, Michael, 200-201, 215- 
216

Sfondrato, Francesco, 42

Index 443

Sforza, Paolo, 94-95 
Sidereus Nuncius, 133-135, 143-147, 
156-159

dedicatory letter to, 136-142 
Silberer, Herbert, 401 
Skepticism of astrology, 4-5 
Smith, Thomas, 11-12 
Social relations and astrology, 8-9 
Solomon, Howard, 305 
Speculum Rbodostauroticum, 301 
Spirituality and astrology, 43-44 
Spon, Charles, 84 
Starkey, George, 406-407 
Steinmoel, Johann, 192 
Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic 
Mystery, A, 389 
Supernatural alchemy, 399-400

Table chronographique, 2 66 
Tabtda smaragdina. See Emerald 
TabletTable chronographique, 2 66 
Tabtda smaragdina. See Emerald 
Tablet

Taylor, F. Sherwood, 401 
Tetrabiblos, 10, 73, 101-107 
Theatrum chemicum britannicum, 15- 
16, 19, 25-26, 240, 364 
Theatrum Honoris, 249-250 
Themis aurea, 263 
Thomas, Keith, 12 
Thomas of Bologna, 23 
Thompson, E. P., 2 
Thoynard, Nicolas, 248 
Thresor de I’histoire generale de nostre 
temps, 273 
Toscanelli, Paolo, 9 
Trismegistus, Hermes, 192-193, 199— 
200, 345

Trithemius, Johannes, 25, 173-174, 
224-226

and alchemy, 191-194, 196 
and John Dee, 194-197 
Turnebe, Adrien, 52

Uffel, Bruno Carolus, 198

Valla, Giorgio, 99

Van Helmont, Jean Baptiste, 276, 278, 
295,300

Van Wassenaer, Nicolaes Janszoon, 
300

Vaughan, Thomas, 16-17, 390 
Viau, Theophile de, 268-275 
Vickers, Brian, 17

Vie de Monsieur Des-Cartes, 248, 264 
Visconti, Giangaleazzo, 5-9 
Vitalism, 411-412 
Voet, Gisbert, 251-252 
Von Anhalt, August, 238-239, 241 
Von Bezold, Friedrich, 3 
Von der Pfalz, Friedrich, 24 1 
Von Franz, Marie Fuise, 406 
Von Nettesheim, Agrippa, 14, 16-17, 
24

Von Suchten, Alexander, 346-352 
Von Uffel, Bruno Carlus, 197

Waard, Cornells de, 296 
Waite, Arthur Edward, 272, 393-395 
Warburg, Aby, 3-4 
Weather and disease, 84-85 
Wessel, Wilhelm, 197 
Westcott, William Wynn, 393 
Wilmshurst, Walter Feslie, 390 
Wolf, Hieronymus, 9-14 
Worm, Ole, 238

Yates, Frances, 17, 28, 236-241, 262 
Zetzner, Fazarus, 25 1