Advisory

Committee

on

Human

Radiation

Experiments


NATIONAL  IjVSTITi
NIHLIBR


JAN  2  2

BLDG  10,  10  CENTER  DR
BETHESDA,  MD  20892-1150


Advisory  Committee

on  Human  Radiation

Experiments

Final  Report


October  1995


Additional  copies  of  the  Final  Report  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Human
Radiation  Experiments  (stock  number  061-000-00-848-9)  as  well  as  copies  of  the
Executive  Summary  and  Guide  to  Final  Report  (stock  number  061-000-00849-7)
and  the  three  supplemental  volumes  (061-000-00850-1,  061-000-00851-9,  and
061-000-00852-7)  may  be  purchased  from  the  Superintendent  of  Documents,  U.S.
Government  Printing  Office.

All  telephone  orders  should  be  directed  to:

Superintendent  of  Documents

U.S.  Government  Printing  Office

Washington,  D.C.  20402

(202)  512-1800

FAX  (202)  512-2250

8  a.m.  to  4  p.m.,  Eastern  time,  M-F

All  mail  orders  should  be  directed  to:

U.S.  Government  Printing  Office
P.O.  Box  371954
Pittsburgh,  PA  15250-7954


An  Internet  site  containing  ACHRE  information  (replicating  the  Advisory
Committee's  original  gopher)  will  be  available  at  George  Washington  University.
The  site  contains  complete  records  of  Advisory  Committee  actions  as  approved;
complete  descriptions  of  the  primary  research  materials  discovered  and  analyzed;
complete  descriptions  of  the  print  and  non-print  secondary  resources  used  by  the
Advisory  Committee;  a  copy  of  the  Interim  Report  of  October  21,  1994,  and  a
copy  of  the  Final  Report;  and  other  information.  The  address  is
http://www.seas.gwu.edu/nsarchive/radiation.  The  site  will  be  maintained  by  the
National  Security  Archive  at  GWU.


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America


Contents

PREFACE  1

INTRODUCTION  The  Atomic  Century 19

PART  I Ethics  of  Human  Subjects  Research:  A  Historical  Perspective

Overview 81

1  Government  Standards  for  Human  Experiments:  The  1940s  and  1950s  83

2  Postwar  Professional  Standards  and  Practices  for  Human  Experiments ....  130

3  Government  Standards  for  Human  Experiments:  The  1960s  and  1970s  ....  171

4  Ethics  Standards  in  Retrospect 196

PART  II Case  Studies

Overview 227

5  Experiments  with  Plutonium,  Uranium,  and  Polonium  233

6  The  AEC  Program  of  Radioisotope  Distribution  283

7  Nontherapeutic  Research  on  Children 320

8  Total-Body  Irradiation:  Problems  When  Research  and  Treatment  Are
Intertwined 366

9  Prisoners:  A  Captive  Research  Population 42 1

10  Atomic  Veterans:  Human  Experimentation  in  Connection  with  Bomb

Tests 454

1 1  Intentional  Releases:  Lifting  the  Veil  of  Secrecy 506

12  Observational  Data  Gathering 563

13  Secrecy,  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  and  Intentional  Releases 619

PART  III Contemporary  Projects

Overview 669

14  Current  Federal  Policies  Governing  Human  Subjects  Research 675

1 5  Research  Proposal  Review  Project 694

16  Subject  Interview  Study 724

Discussion  of  Part  III 758

PART  IV Coming  to  Terms  with  the  Past,  Looking  Ahead  to  the  Future

Overview 769

1 7  Findings 777

18  Recommendations 801

Statement  By  Committee  Member  Jay  Katz 847

Official  Documents

Executive  Order 857

Charter | 862

Appendices

Acronyms  and  Abbreviations 869

Glossary 878

Selected  Bibliography 886

Public  Comment  Participants 892

A  Citizen's  Guide  to  the  Nation's  Archives:  Where  the  Records  Are

and  How  to  Find  Them  897

iii


advisory  committee  on  human  radiation  Experiments

1726  M  STREET,  N.W.,  SUITE  600

WASHINGTON,  D.C.  20036  _ . innc

October  1995

To  the  Members  of  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group:

Secretary  Hazel  O'Leaiy,  Department  of  Energy

Secretary  William  Perry,  Department  of  Defense

Attorney  General  Janet  Reno,  Department  of  Justice

Secretary  Donna  Shalala,  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Sen-ices

Secretary  Jesse  Brown.  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs

Director  Alice  Rivlin,  Office  of  Management  and  Budget

Director  John  Deutch,  Central  Intelligence  Agency

Administrator  Daniel  Goldin,  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration

On  behalf  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  it  is  my
privilege  to  transmit  to  you  our  Final  Report.

Since  the  Committee's  first  meeting  in  April  1994  we  have  been  able  to  conduct
an  intensive  inquiry  into  the  history  of  government-sponsored  human  radiation
experiments  and  intentional  environmental  releases  of  radiation  that  occurred  between
1944  and  1974.  We  have  studied  the  ethical  standards  of  that  time  and  of  today  and  have
developed  a  moral  framework  for  evaluating  these  experiments.  Finally,  we  have
examined  the  extent  to  which  current  policies  and  practices  appear  to  protect  the  rights
and  interests  of  today's  human  subjects.  This  report  documents  our  findings  and  makes
recommendations  for  your  consideration.

The  committee  listened  to  the  testimony  of  more  than  200  public  witnesses  who
appeared  before  us.  We  are  deeply  grateful  to  all  these  witnesses,  who  overcame  the
obstacles  of  geography  and  emotions  to  assist  us.

Our  work  and  this  report  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  extraordinary
effort  the  President  and  you  put  forward  to  open  the  government's  records  to  our  inquiry
and  thus  to  the  nation.  We  are  especially  pleased  that,  through  our  joint  efforts,  the
American  people  now  have  access  to  the  tens  of  thousands  of  documents  that  bear  on  this
important  history.

None  of  our  conclusions  came  easily.  We  endeavored,  both  as  individuals  and  as
a  committee,  to  live  up  to  the  responsibility  with  which  we  were  entrusted.  This  report
represents  the  consensus  of  fair-minded  people  who  gave  the  best  they  had  to  offer  to
their  fellow  citizens.

We  thank  President  Clinton  for  this  opportunity  and  for  his  courage  and
leadership  in  appointing  the  Advisory  Committee.


Ruth  R.  Faden

Chair,  Advisory  Committee

on  Human  Radiation  Experiments


®


Printed  with  soy  ink  on  recycled  paper


Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments

Ruth  R.  Faden.  Ph.D..  M.RH.-Chair

Philip  Franklin  Wagley  Professor  of  Biomedical  Ethics  and  Director

The  Bioethics  Institute

Johns  Hopkins  University

Baltimore,  Maryland

Senior  Research  Scholar

Kennedy  Institute  of  Ethics

Georgetown  University

Washington,  D.C.


Kenneth  R.  Feinberg,  J.D.

Kenneth  R.  Feinberg  &  Associates
Washington,  D.C.

Eli  Glatstein,  M.D.

Professor  and  Chair
Department  of  Radiation  Oncology
The  University  of  Texas
Southwestern  Medical  Center  at  Dallas
Dallas,  Texas

Jay  Katz,  M.D.

Elizabeth  K.  Dollard  Professor  Emeritus

of  Law,  Medicine  and  Psychiatry
Harvey  L.  Karp  Professorial  Lecturer  in  Law

and  Psychoanalysis
Yale  Law  School
New  Haven,  Connecticut

Patricia  A.  King,  J.D.

Professor  of  Law

Georgetown  University  Law  Center

Washington,  D.C.

Susan  E.  Lederer,  Ph.D.

Associate  Professor

Department  of  Humanities

The  Pennsylvania  State  University  College  of  Medicine

Hershey,  Pennsylvania

Ruth  Macklin,  Ph.D.

Professor  of  Bioethics

Department  of  Epidemiology  &  Social  Medicine

Albert  Einstein  College  of  Medicine

Bronx,  New  York


Nancy  L.  Oleinick,  Ph.D.

Professor  of  Radiation  Biochemistry

Division  of  Radiation  Biology

Case  Western  Reserve  University  School  of  Medicine

Cleveland,  Ohio

Henry  D.  Royal,  M.D.

Professor  of  Radiology

Associate  Director;  Division  of  Nuclear  Medicine

Mallinckrodt  Institute  of  Radiology

Washington  University  Medical  Center

St.  Louis,  Missouri

Philip  K.  Russell,  M.D.

Professor,  Department  of  International  Health
Johns  Hopkins  University
School  of  Hygiene  and  Public  Health
Baltimore,  Maryland

Mary  Ann  Stevenson,  M.D.,  Ph.D.

Assistant  Professor  of  Radiation  Oncology
Joint  Center  for  Radiation  Therapy
Harvard  Medical  School
Boston,  Massachusetts

Deputy  Chief

New  England  Deaconess  Hospital
Department  of  Radiation  Oncology
Boston,  Massachusetts

Duncan  C.  Thomas,  Ph.D.

Director,  Biostatistics  Division

Department  of  Preventive  Medicine

University  of  Southern  California  School  of  Medicine

Los  Angeles,  California


Lois  L.  Norris

Second  Vice  President  of  Omaha  National  Bank
and  Omaha  National  Corporation  (Retired)
Omaha,  Nebraska


Reed  V.  Tuckson,  M.D.

President

Charles  Drew  University  of  Medicine  and  Science

Los  Angeles,  California


Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments


Jeffrey  Kahn

Associate  Director


Dan  Guttman

Executive  Director


Anna  Mastroianni

Associate  Director


Stephen  Klaidman

Director  of  Communications
Counselor  to  the  Committee


Sarah  Flynn

Editor


Staff*


Senior  Policy  and  Research  Analysts

Barbara  Berney
James  David
John  Harbert
Gregg  Herken
Jonathan  Moreno
Ronald  Neumann
Gary  Stem
Jeremy  Sugarman
Donald  Weightman
Gilbert  Whittemore

Research  Analysts

Jonathan  Engel
Patrick  Fitzgerald
Mark  Goodman
Deborah  Holland
Denise  Holmes
Michael  Jasny
Gail  Javitt
Wilhelmine  Miller
Patricia  Perentesis
Kathy  Taylor
Sandra  Thomas
Faith  Weiss


Research  Associates

Miriam  Bowling
Praveen  Fernandes
Sara  Chandros  Hull
Valerie  Hurt
John  Kruger
Ellen  Lee

Shobita  Parthasarathy
Noel  Theodosiou

Information  Services

David  Saumweber,  Director
Robin  Cochran,  Librarian
Tom  Wisner,  Senior  Technology
Consultant

Communications  and  Outreach

Lanny  Keller
Kristin  Crotty

Committee  and  Staff  Affairs

Jerry  Garcia
Jeanne  Kepper


Consultants


Jeffrey  Botkin
Allen  Buchanan
Gwen  Davis
Gail  Geller
Steve  Goodman
Jon  Harkness
Rebecca  Lowen


Suzanne  White  Junod
Nancy  Kass
Charles  McCarthy
Monica  Schoch-Spana
Patricia  Stewart-Henney
John  Till
E.W.  Webster


*includes  both  full-time  and  part-time  staff


acknowledgments


Tt


he  Committee's  work  over  the  past  year  and  a  half  would  have  been
impossible  without  the  assistance  of  an  extraordinary  number  of  individuals  and
groups  from  all  corners  of  the  United  States,  and  beyond.  We  wish  to  express  the
depth  of  our  gratitude  to  the  many  people  who  assisted,  informed,  and  advised  us.

Some  of  these  people  are  identified  by  name  elsewhere  in  this  report  and
its  supplemental  volumes.  An  appendix  in  this  volume  lists  the  more  than  200
witnesses  who  appeared  before  the  Committee  at  our  public  meetings  in
Washington,  D.C.,  Cincinnati,  Knoxville,  San  Francisco,  Santa  Fe,  and  Spokane.
The  supplemental  volumes  identify  the  dozens  of  individuals  who  agreed  to
formal,  taped  interviews  in  connection  with  the  Committee's  oral  history  projects.
We  thank  all  these  people  and  many  more:

•  The  hundreds  of  people  who  contacted  the  Committee  with  information
about  their  own  experiences  or  the  experiences  of  their  family  members.
Many  of  these  people  shared  not  only  their  personal  stories  but  also  the
information  they  had  collected  in  the  course  of  conducting  their  own
research  into  government  archives.

•  The  representatives  of  many  groups  whose  interests  coincided  with  the
work  of  the  Committee.  These  include  organizations  of  former  subjects  of
biomedical  radiation  experiments  (and  their  families),  downwinders,
atomic  veterans,  uranium  miners,  and  workers  in  and  around  atomic
energy  communities.  These  groups,  as  well,  shared  the  accumulated
information  and  perspective  of  years  of  experience  and  research.

•  The  numerous  professionals  in  fields  related  to  our  research  who  gave  of
their  time  and  expertise  to  provide  information  or  comment  on  the  myriad
factual,  technical,  and  policy  questions  before  the  Committee.  These
experts  provided  help  in  understanding  areas  ranging  from  military  and
human  rights  law  to  the  laws  of  the  atom,  from  the  history  of  the
government's  use  of  secrecy  to  the  history  of  radiation  science.

•  The  dozens  of  universities  and  independent  hospitals,  located  in  all
regions  of  the  country,  that  willingly  provided  us  with  the  documents  we
needed  to  conduct  our  Research  Proposal  Review  Project.


vn


A  ckn  o  wledgm  en  (s


The  nearly  1,900  individuals  who  graciously  participated  in  our  Subject
Interview  Study,  and  the  university  hospitals,  veterans  hospitals,  and
community  hospitals  that  permitted  us  to  conduct  the  study.

The  numerous  chairs  of  institutional  review  boards  and  radiation  safety
committees  who  were  kind  enough  to  share  with  us  their  views  about  the
current  status  of  human  subject  protections.

Archivists  at  public  and  private  libraries,  universities,  and  research
institutions,  who  assisted  the  Committee  in  our  search  for  information.

The  many  journalists  and  scholars  who  have  previously  researched  and
written  about  the  subjects  covered  in  this  report,  for  sharing  the
knowledge  and  wisdom  embodied  in  their  own  many  years  of  inquiry  and
reflection.

A  variety  of  state  and  local  agencies  for  sharing  with  the  Committee  the
results  of  their  own  reviews  of  activities  that  we  explored.

Members  of  Congress  and  congressional  staff,  including  the  staffs  of  the
General  Accounting  Office  and  the  Office  of  Technology  Assessment,  for
sharing  the  product  of  their  own  prior  inquiries  into  many  of  the  areas
discussed  in  this  report.

The  members  of  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group,  who
provided  invaluable  assistance.  We  are  particularly  grateful  to  the  many
employees  at  the  Department  of  Energy,  the  Department  of  Defense,  the
Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  the  Department  of  Veterans
Affairs,  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  and  the
Central  Intelligence  Agency,  who  aided  us  in  the  search  and  retrieval  of
the  many  thousands  of  documents  that  provide  the  backbone  for  the
Committee's  review  of  human  radiation  experiments  that  took  place
between  1944  and  1974  and  the  history  of  government  requirements  for
the  conduct  of  that  research.  We  are  also  grateful  to  the  staffs  of  the
Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission  and  the  National  Archives  and  Records
Administration  for  their  invaluable  assistance.  Many  of  the  same  people,
as  well  as  others,  also  provided  advice  and  information  as  we  undertook
our  evaluation  of  the  conduct  of  research  involving  human  subjects  today.


We  wish  to  thank  both  the  professional  and  administrative  members  of  our
staff  who  worked  so  hard  and  showed  such  dedication  to  our  task.  Their  talent,
energy,  and  commitment  provided  the  foundation  for  our  work.  It  is  impossible
to  overstate  our  gratitude  and  appreciation  for  their  extraordinary  efforts.

Finally,  we  wish  to  acknowledge  our  indebtedness  to  President  Clinton  for
the  honor  he  bestowed  upon  us  when  he  selected  us  to  serve  on  the  Advisory
Committee.


Vlll


Documentary  Note


In  fulfilling  its  mandate,  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation
Experiments  (ACHRE)  relied  on  several  thousand  separate  sources:  primary  and
secondary  published  monographs,  journal  articles,  historical  records  and
manuscripts,  original  correspondence  and  surveys,  interviews,  specially
constructed  databases,  searches  of  public  and  commercial  databases,  and
documentary  films.  Only  a  fraction  of  these,  however,  is  represented  in  the  final
report.  More  extensive  information  may  be  found  in  the  supplemental  volume
Sources  and  Documentation,  which  contains  a  full  account  of  the  ACHRE
research  program,  a  finding  aid  to  the  complete  research  document  collection,  a
bibliography  of  published  sources  used,  an  index  to  significant  documents  and
identified  experiments,  and  other  auxiliary  materials.  Further  information  both
about  the  sources  used  by  the  Advisory  Committee  generally  and  about  the
particular  sources  cited  in  this  volume  should  be  sought  there.

The  unpublished  documents  referenced  in  this  report  are  identified  by
their  places  in  the  ACHRE  Research  Document  Collection.  These  identifiers,  or
ACHRE  document  numbers,  have  four  parts:  originating  institution,  date  of
receipt,  order  of  receipt,  and  document  number.  For  example,  DOE-05 1094-A-
123  is  the  123d  document  described  in  the  first  ("A")  Department  of  Energy
("DOE")  shipment  (or  accession)  received  on  May  10,  1994  ("051094").  One  of
the  appendices,  A  Citizen's  Guide  to  the  Nation's  Archives,  provides  instructions
for  using  references  to  the  ACHRE  collection  to  find  documents  there  and  in  the
collections  of  the  National  Archives  and  at  the  agencies.


IX


FINAL  REPORT


Preface


Un  January  15,  1994,  President  Clinton  created  the  Advisory  Committee
on  Human  Radiation  Experiments  in  response  to  his  concern  about  the  growing
number  of  reports  describing  possibly  unethical  conduct  of  the  U.S.  government,
and  institutions  funded  by  the  government,  in  the  use  of,  or  exposure  to,  ionizing
radiation  in  human  beings  at  the  height  of  the  Cold  War. He  directed  us  to
uncover  the  history  of  human  radiation  experiments  and  intentional  environmental
releases  of  radiation;  to  identify  the  ethical  and  scientific  standards  for  evaluating
these  events;  and  to  make  recommendations  to  ensure  that  whatever  wrongdoing
may  have  occurred  in  the  past  cannot  be  repeated.

The  Advisory  Committee  is  composed  of  fourteen  members:  a  citizen
representative  and  thirteen  experts  in  bioethics,  radiation  oncology  and  biology,
epidemiology  and  statistics,  public  health,  history  of  science  and  medicine,
nuclear  medicine,  and  law.  We  report  to  a  Cabinet-level  group  convened  by  the
President  (the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group),  whose  members
are  the  secretaries  of  defense,  energy,  health  and  human  services,  and  veterans
affairs;  the  attorney  general;  the  administrator  of  the  National  Aeronautics  and
Space  Administration;  the  director  of  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency;  and  the
director  of  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget.

On  April  21,  1994,  at  the  end  of  the  first  day  of  our  opening  meeting,
President  Clinton  invited  us  to  the  White  House  to  personally  communicate  his
commitment  to  the  process  we  were  about  to  undertake.  He  urged  us  to  be  fair,
thorough,  and  unafraid  to  shine  the  light  of  truth  on  this  hidden  and  poorly
understood  aspect  of  our  nation's  past.  Our  most  important  task,  he  said,  was  to
tell  the  full  story  to  the  American  public.  At  the  same  time,  we  were  also  to
examine  the  present,  to  determine  how  the  conduct  of  human  radiation  research
today  compares  with  that  of  the  past  and  to  assess  whether,  in  the  light  of  this
inquiry,  changes  need  to  be  made  in  the  policies  of  the  federal  government  to
better  protect  the  American  people.  This  report  and  the  accompanying

1


Preface

supplemental  volumes  constitute  the  Committee's  attempt  to  tell  the  story  of  the
past  and  to  report  on  our  inquiry  into  the  present.

WHY  THE  COMMITTEE  WAS  CREATED

Past  research  with  human  subjects,  including  human  radiation  research,
has  been  a  source  of  life-saving  knowledge.  Research  involving  human  subjects
continues  to  be  essential  to  the  progress  of  medical  science,  since  most  advances
in  medicine  must  at  some  point  in  their  development  be  tested  in  human  subjects.
Every  one  of  us  who  has  been  either  a  patient  or  a  loved  one  of  a  patient  has
benefited  from  knowledge  gained  through  research  with  human  subjects.  But
medical  science,  like  all  science,  does  not  proceed  or  progress  without  the  taking
of  risks.  In  medical  research,  these  risks  often  fall  on  the  human  subject,  who
sometimes  does  not  stand  to  benefit  personally  from  the  knowledge  gained.  This
is  the  source  of  the  moral  tension  at  the  core  of  the  enterprise  of  research
involving  human  subjects.  In  order  to  secure  important  collective  goods-
scientific  knowledge  and  advances  in  medicine-individuals  are  put  in  harm's
way.  The  moral  challenge  is  how  to  protect  the  rights  and  interests  of  these
individuals  while  enabling  and  encouraging  the  advancement  of  science.

The  Committee  had  its  origins  when  public  controversy  developed
surrounding  human  radiation  experiments  that  were  conducted  half  a  century
ago.  In  November  1993,  the  Albuquerque  Tribune  published  a  series  of  articles
that,  for  the  first  time,  publicly  revealed  the  names  of  Americans  who  had  been
injected  with  plutonium,  the  man-made  material  that  was  a  key  ingredient  of  the
atom  bomb.  Reporter  Eileen  Welsome  put  a  human  face  to  what  had  previously
been  anonymous  data  published  in  official  reports  and  technical  journals.  As
World  War  II  was  ending,  she  wrote,  doctors  in  the  United  States  injected  a
number  of  hospitalized  patients  with  plutonium,  very  likely  without  their
knowledge  or  consent.  The  injections  were  part  of  a  group  of  experiments  to
determine  how  plutonium  courses  through  the  human  body.  The  experiments,
and  the  very  existence  of  plutonium,  were  shrouded  in  secrecy.  They  were
conducted  at  the  direction  of  the  U.S.  government,  with  the  assistance  of
university  researchers  in  Berkeley,  Chicago,  and  Rochester  (New  York),  with  the
expectation  that  the  information  gained  could  be  used  to  limit  the  hazards  to  the
thousands  of  workers  laboring  to  build  the  bomb.

On  reading  the  articles,  Secretary  of  Energy  Hazel  O'Leary  expressed
shock,  first  to  her  staff,  and  then  in  response  to  a  question  posed  at  a  press
conference.  She  was  particularly  concerned  because  the  Department  of  Energy
had  its  earliest  origins  in  the  agencies  responsible  for  building  the  atomic  bomb
and  sponsoring  the  plutonium  experiments.  During  the  Cold  War,  these  agencies
had  continued  to  do  much  of  their  work  in  the  twilight  zone  between  openness
and  secrecy.  Now,  the  Cold  War  was  over.  The  time  had  come,  Secretary


Preface

O'Leary  determined,  to  make  public  anything  that  remained  to  be  told  about  the
plutonium  experiments.

Subsequent  press  reports  soon  noted  that  the  plutonium  injections  were
not  the  only  human  radiation  experiments  that  had  been  conducted  during  the  war
and  the  decades  that  followed.  In  Massachusetts,  the  press  reported  that  members
of  the  "science  club"  at  the  Fernald  School  for  the  Retarded  had  been  fed  oatmeal
containing  minute  amounts  of  radioactive  material.  In  Ohio,  news  articles  revived
an  old  controversy  about  University  of  Cincinnati  researchers  who  had  been
funded  by  the  Defense  Department  to  gather  data  on  the  effects  of  "total-body
irradiation"  on  cancer  patients.  In  the  Northwest,  the  papers  retold  the  story  of
Atomic  Energy  Commission  funding  of  researchers  to  irradiate  the  testicles  of
inmates  in  Oregon  and  Washington  prisons  in  order  to  gain  knowledge  for  use  in
government  programs.  The  virtually  forgotten  1986  report  prepared  by  a
subcommittee  headed  by  U.S.  Representative  Edward  Markey,  "American
Nuclear  Guinea  Pigs:  Three  Decades  of  Radiation  Experiments  on  U.S.
Citizens,"  was  also  recalled  to  public  attention.1

Coincidentally,  the  fact  that  the  environment  had  also  been  used  as  a
secret  laboratory  became  a  subject  of  controversy.  A  November  1993
congressional  report  uncovered  thirteen  cases  in  which  government  agencies  had
intentionally  released  radiation  into  the  environment  without  notifying  the
affected  populations.2  At  various  times,  tests  were  conducted  in  Tennessee,  Utah,
New  Mexico,  and  Washington  state.  This  report  had  been  prepared  at  the  request
of  Senator  John  Glenn  in  his  capacity  as  chair  of  a  committee  that  had  undertaken
a  comprehensive  oversight  investigation  of  the  nuclear  weapons  complex.  As  a
young  marine  in  1945,  the  senator  was  in  a  squadron  being  trained  for  possible
deployment  to  Japan  when  the  atomic  bomb  ended  the  war;  as  an  astronaut,  he
had  been  the  subject  of  constant  testing  and  medical  monitoring  by  space
administration  flight  surgeons;  as  a  senator  he  was  at  the  center  of  the  country's
efforts  to  understand  and  control  nuclear  weapons.  Senator  Glenn  understood  the
importance  of  national  security,  but  he  found  it  "inconceivable  . .  .  that,  even  at
the  height  of  the  communist  threat,  some  of  our  scientists  and  doctors  and  military
and  perhaps  political  leaders  approved  some  of  these  experiments  to  be  conducted
on  an  unknowing  and  unwitting  public."3

In  the  immediate  aftermath  of  Secretary  O'Leary's  press  conference  and
the  further  press  reports,  thousands  of  callers  flooded  the  Department  of  Energy's
phone  lines  to  recount  their  own  experiences  and  those  of  friends  and  family
members.

Underlying  the  outrage  and  concern  expressed  by  government  officials
and  members  of  the  public  were  many  unanswered  questions.  How  many  human
radiation  experiments  were  conducted?  No  one  knew  if  the  number  was  closer  to
100  or  1,000.  Were  all  the  human  radiation  experiments  done  in  secret,  and  were
any  of  them  still  secret?  Are  any  secret  or  controversial  studies  still  ongoing?


Preface

Scientists  and  science  journalists  pointed  out  that  some  of  the  highly  publicized
experiments  had  long  ago  been  the  subject  of  technical  journal  articles,  even  press
accounts,  and  were  old  news;  other  commentators  countered  that,  for  most  of  the
public,  articles  in  technical  journals  might  as  well  be  secret.

How,  why,  and  from  what  population  groups  were  subjects  selected  for
experiments?  Some  suspected  that  subjects  were  disproportionately  chosen  from
the  most  vulnerable  populations-children,  hospitalized  patients,  the  retarded,  the
poor—those  too  powerless  to  resist  the  government  and  its  researchers.

Did  the  experiments  benefit  the  American  people  through  the
advancement  of  science  and  the  enhancement  of  the  ability  to  treat  disease?

How  many  intentional  releases  took  place,  and  how  many  people  were
unknowingly  put  at  risk?  The  answer  here  was  sketchy;  the  releases  identified  in
the  November  1993  Glenn  report  had  all  been  performed  in  secret,  and  much
information  about  them  was  still  secret.

How  great  were  the  risks  to  which  people  were  exposed?  Many  pointed
out  that  radiation  is  not  only  present  in  our  natural  environment,  but  that,  as  a
result  of  biomedical  research,  most  people  routinely  rely  on  radiation  as  a  means
of  diagnosing  and  treating  disease.  Others  noted  that  while  this  is  so,  radiation
can  be  abused,  and  the  potential  dangers  of  low-level  exposure  are  still  not  well
understood.

What  did  our  government  and  the  medical  researchers  it  sponsored  do  to
ensure  that  the  subjects  were  informed  of  what  would  be  done  to  them  and  that
they  were  given  meaningful  opportunities  to  consent?  Today,  federal  government
rules  require  the  prior  review  of  proposed  experiments,  to  ensure  that  the  risks
and  potential  benefits  have  been  considered  and  that  subjects  will  be  adequately
informed  and  given  the  opportunity  to  consent.  But  the  standards  of  today,  many
historians  and  scholars  of  medical  ethics  noted,  are  not  those  of  yesterday.
Others,  however,  declared  that  it  was  self-evident  that  no  one  should  be
experimented  upon  without  his  or  her  voluntary  consent.  Indeed,  it  was  pointed
out  that  this  very  principle  was  proclaimed  aloud  to  the  world  in  1947,  as  the
plutonium  experiments  were  coming  to  a  close.  It  was  the  American  judges  at  the
international  war  crimes  trials  in  Nuremberg,  Germany,  who  invoked  the
principle  in  finding  doctors  guilty  of  war  crimes  for  their  vile  experiments  on
inmates  of  Nazi  concentration  camps.  How  could  yesterday's  standard  have  been
less  strict  than  that  of  today?  How,  moreover,  could  the  standard  not  have  been
known  by  the  government  that  sponsored  the  experiments  and  the  researchers
who  conducted  them?

Finally,  there  were  questions  about  how  human  experiments  are
conducted  today.  Insofar  as  wrong  things  happened  in  the  past,  how  confident
should  we  be  that  they  could  not  happen  again?  Have  practices  changed?  Do  we
have  the  right  rules,  and  are  they  implemented  and  enforced?


4


Preface
THE  PRESIDENT'S  CHARGE

The  Advisory  Committee  was  created  under  the  Federal  Advisory
Committee  Act  of  1972,  which  provides  that  committee  meetings  and  basic
decision  making  be  conducted  in  the  open.  The  Committee's  charter4  defined
human  radiation  experiments  to  include

(1)  experiments  on  individuals  involving  intentional  exposure  to
ionizing  radiation.  This  category  does  not  include  common  and
routine  clinical  practices. . . .

(2)  experiments  involving  intentional  environmental  releases  of
radiation  that  (A)  were  designed  to  test  human  health  effects  of
ionizing  radiation;  or  (B)  were  designed  to  test  the  extent  of  human
exposure  to  ionizing  radiation.

The  Committee  was  mandated  to  review  experiments  conducted  between
1944  and  1974,  the  latter  being  the  year  that  the  U.S.  Department  of  Health,
Education,  and  Welfare  issued  rules  for  the  protection  of  human  subjects  of
federally  sponsored  research.  The  Committee  was  asked  to  determine  the  ethical
and  scientific  standards  by  which  to  evaluate  the  pre- 1974  experiments  and  the
extent  to  which  these  experiments  were  consistent  with  such  standards.  We  were
also  to  "consider  whether  (A)  there  was  a  clear  medical  or  scientific  purpose  for
the  experiments;  (B)  appropriate  medical  follow-up  was  conducted;  and  (C)  the
experiments'  design  and  administration  adequately  met  the  ethical  and  scientific
criteria,  including  standards  of  informed  consent,  that  prevailed  at  the  time  of  the
experiments  and  that  exists  today."  The  charter  also  directed  that,  upon
completing  our  review,  the  Committee  may  recommend  that  subjects  (or  families)
be  notified  of  potential  health  risks  and  the  need  for  medical  follow-up  and  also
that  we  "may  recommend  further  policies,  as  needed,  to  ensure  compliance  with
recommended  ethical  and  scientific  standards  for  human  radiation  experiments."

In  order  to  inform  the  public  about  the  conduct  of  research  involving
human  subjects  taking  place  today,  we  were  authorized  to  sample  and  consider
examples  of  research  with  human  subjects  currently  under  way.

In  essence,  we  were  to  answer  several  fundamental  questions:  (1)  What
was  the  federal  government's  role  in  human  radiation  experiments  conducted  from
1944  to  1974?  (2)  By  what  standards  should  the  ethics  of  these  experiments  be
evaluated?  and  (3)  What  lessons  learned  from  studying  past  and  present  research
standards  and  practices  should  be  applied  to  the  future?

In  addition,  while  the  Committee  was  not  expressly  charged  with
considering  issues  relating  to  remedies,  including  financial  compensation,  we
have  felt  obliged  to  address  the  type  of  remedies  that  we  believe  the  government,


Preface

as  an  ethical  matter,  should  provide  to  subjects  of  experiments  where  the
circumstances  warranted  such  a  response.

THE  COMMITTEES  APPROACH

When  those  of  us  selected  by  President  Clinton  to  serve  on  the  Committee
read  about  human  radiation  experiments  in  our  hometown  newspapers  during  the
1993  holiday  season,  none  of  us  imagined  that  within  months  we  would  be
embarking  on  such  an  intense  and  challenging  investigation  of  an  important
aspect  of  our  nation's  past  and  present,  requiring  new  insights  and  difficult
judgments  about  enduring  ethical  questions.

On  April  2 1  and  22,  1 994,  the  Committee  held  its  first  meeting,  and  most
of  us  met  each  other  for  the  first  time.  As  we  listened  to  opening  statements  by
Cabinet  members  and  members  of  Congress,  as  well  as  the  first  witness  from  the
general  public,  it  became  clear  how  daunting  a  task  we  were  undertaking.  We
realized  that  our  ability  to  reconstruct  the  story  of  past  radiation  experiments
required  both  the  capacity  to  join  with  the  agencies  in  the  search  through
thousands  of  boxes  for  documents  and  the  intuition  to  recognize  which  documents
were  important.  We  knew  that  the  ability  to  tell  that  story  depended  on  our  ability
to  understand  the  full  range  of  technically  complex,  often  emotionally  charged
issues  related  to  human  radiation  experiments.  We  could  not  understand,  much
less  tell,  the  story  until  we  sought  out  all  who  could  enhance  our  understanding,  a
difficult  job  because  the  voices  to  which  we  had  to  listen  spoke  in  the  varied
languages  of  medicine,  a  multiplicity  of  scientific  disciplines,  the  military,
policymakers,  philosophers,  patients,  healthy  subjects,  family  members  of  former
subjects,  and  individuals  in  a  variety  of  other  roles.

Finally,  we  were  also  convinced  that  an  important  determinant  of  our
success  in  keeping  faith  with  the  American  people  would  be  to  understand  not
only  how  human  subject  research  was  conducted  in  the  past  but  also  how  it  is
being  conducted  in  the  present.

Reaching  In  and  Reaching  Out

As  we  began  our  work,  Committee  members  first  sought  to  educate  one
another.  Early  meetings  included  basic  presentations  on  such  topics  as  research
ethics,  radiation,  the  history  of  human  experimentation,  the  law  of  remedies,  and
the  debate  over  the  effects  of  low  levels  of  radiation.

Then  we  determined  to  search  broadly  for  those  who  could  contribute  to
our  understanding.  We  hired  a  staff  with  the  expertise  and  experience  need  for
the  Committee's  myriad  tasks.  Finally,  we  sought  to  make  ourselves  available  to
those  who  wanted  to  speak  to  us  directly,  especially  people  who  felt  they  or  their
loved  ones  were  harmed,  or  might  have  been  harmed,  by  human  radiation-related


Preface


research  or  exposure.  Each  of  the  Committee's  meetings  reserved  a  period  for
public  comment.  Since  April  1994,  the  full  Committee  held  sixteen  public
meetings,  each  of  two  to  three  days'  duration.  Fifteen  of  those  meetings  were  held
in  Washington,  D.C.,  and  one  was  in  San  Francisco.  In  addition,; subsets  of
Committee  members  presided  over  public  forums  in  Cincinnati,  Knoxville,  Santa
Fe  and  Spokane.  We  traveled  to  these  different  cities  in  order  to  hear  from
people  who  could  not  come  to  Washington,  D.C.,  and  lived  in  communities
where,  or  near  where,  experiments  or  intentional  releases  of  interest  to  the
Committee  had  taken  place.  We  further  sought  to  reach  out  to  those  who  could
not  attend  our  meetings.  By  phone,  mail,  and  personal  visit,  we  and  our  staff
communicated  with  members  of  the  public,  researchers,  attorneys,  investigative
reporters,  authors,  and  representatives  of  dozens  of  groups  of  interested  people
who  shared  some  aspect  of  the  Committee's  concern.

The  Records  of  Our  Past:  The  Search  for  Documents

One  of  the  most  difficult  tasks  before  the  Committee  was  determining  how
many  federally  sponsored  human  radiation  experiments  occurred  between  1944
and  1974  and  who  conducted  them.  When  President  Clinton  established  the
Committee,  he  also  directed  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group  to
provide  us  with  all  relevant  documentary  information  in  each  of  the  agencies
files  Teams  were  formed  to  identify  the  hundreds  of  government  sites  where
relevant  documents  might  be  located.  We  discovered  there  was  no  easy  way  to
identify  how  many  experiments  had  been  conducted,  where  they  took  place  and
which  government  agencies  had  sponsored  them.  The  location  and  retrieval  of
documents  thus  required  an  extraordinary  effort,  and  we  appreciate  the  assistance

of  all  our  collaborators.  . ,  ...

We  began  with  documents  that  were  assembled  during  the  1980s  and  that
provided  the  basis  for  the  Markey  report.  But  review  of  those  materials
confirmed  that,  even  for  this  relatively  well-known  group  of uexP^m^;  basic
information  was  lacking.  We  found  that  the  Department  of  Health ; an Humm
Services  (DHHS),  which  is  the  primary  government  sponsor  of  research  involving
human  subjects,  reported  that,  as  permitted  by  federal  records  laws  it  had  long
since  discarded  files  on  experiments  performed  decades  ago.  Furthermore,  the
capsule  descriptions  of  research  that  remained  sometimes  did  not  make  clear
whether  the  subjects  of  research  had  been  humans  or  animals To  complicate
matters  further,  the  DHHS  also  pointed  out  that  much  research  documentation  had
originated  and  been  retained  only  in  the  files  of  nonfederal  grantee  institutions
and  investigators.  Other  agencies  did  provide  some  lists  of  experiments,  in  many
cases  however,  there  was  no  information  on  basic  questions  of  concern  (tor
example,  who  the  subjects  were  and  what,  if  anything,  they  were  told).

What  rules  or  policies,  if  any,  existed  to  govern  federally  sponsored


Preface

experiments  in  the  pre- 1974  period?  The  prevailing  assumption  was  that,  with  a
few  notable  exceptions,  it  was  not  until  the  mid-1960s  that  federal  agencies  began
to  develop  such  policies  in  any  significant  way.  Most  scholarship  focused  on
divisions  of  the  (then)  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare.  Little  was
known  about  approaches  to  human  experimentation  at  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission  and  the  Department  of  Defense.  Yet  it  was  clear  from  the  outset  of
our  inquiry  that  these  agencies,  as  well  as  the  DHEW,  were  central  to  the  story  of
human  radiation  experiments  and  that  many  of  the  experiments  of  interest
predated  by  decades  the  mid-1960s'  interest  in  human  subject  protections.

As  we  began  our  search  into  the  past,  we  found  that  it  was  necessary  to
reconstruct  a  vanished  world.  The  Committee  and  the  agencies  had  to  collect
information  scattered  in  warehouses  throughout  the  country.  At  the  same  time,
we  had  to  create  and  test  the  framework  needed  to  ensure  that  there  would  be  a
"big  picture"  into  which  all  the  pieces  of  the  puzzle  would  fit.

After  a  few  months,  the  outlines  of  a  world  that  had  been  almost  lost
began  to  reemerge.  Working  with  the  Defense  Department,  we  discovered  that
long-forgotten  government  entities  had  played  central  roles  in  the  planning  of
midcentury  atomic  warfare-related  medical  research  and  experimentation.  These
groups,  the  piecing  together  of  long-lost  or  forgotten  records  would  show,
debated  the  ethics  of  human  experimentation  and  discussed  possible  human
radiation  experimentation:  Similarly,  working  with  the  Department  of  Energy,  we
pieced  together  the  minutes,  and  even  many  transcripts,  of  the  key  medical
advisory  committee  to  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission.  We  sought  to  mine
agency  histories,  when  th£y  existed:  for  example,  at  the  Committee's  request,  the
Defense  Nuclear  Agency  (the  heir  to  the  part  of  the  Manhattan  Project  that  was
transferred  to  the  Defense  Department)  made  public  portions  of  the  more  than  500
internal  histories  that  chronicle  its  story,  most  of  which  had  previously  been
available  only  to  those  with  security  clearances.

Despite  these  successes,  it  became  evident  that  the  records  of  much  of  our
nation's  recent  history  had  been  irretrievably  lost  or  simply  could  not  be  located.
The  Department  of  Energy  told  the  Committee  that  all  the  records  of  the
Intelligence  Division  of  its  predecessor,  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  had
been  destroyed— mainly  during  the  1970s,  but  in  some  cases  as  late  as  1989.  The
CIA  explained,  as  had  been  previously  reported,  that  records  of  the  program
known  as  MK.ULTRA,  in  which  unwitting  subjects  were  experimented  upon  with
a  variety  of  substances,  had  been  destroyed  during  the  1970s,  when  the  program
became  a  widely  publicized  scandal.  Though  documents  related  to  the  program
referred  to  radiation,  the  CIA  concluded  that  human  experiments  using  ionizing
radiation  never  took  place  under  that  program,  based  on  currently  available
evidence.

We  also  turned  to  nongovernmental  archives  throughout  the  country.
Cryptic  notes  and  fragments  of  correspondence  located  in  private  and  university

8


Preface

archives  were  fitted  into  our  growing  outline.  For  example,  a  copy  of  an
important  1954  Army  surgeon  general  research  policy  statement,  referenced  in
Defense  Department  documents,  was  found  at  Yale  University  among  the  papers

of  a  Nobel  laureate.  .  ,

Bv  the  end  of  our  term,  the  Committee  had  received,  organized,  and
reviewed  hundreds  of  thousands  of  pages  of  documents  from  public  and  private
archives This  collection  will  be  available  to  individuals  and  scholars  who  wish
to  pursue  the  great  many  stories  that  remain  to  be  told,  and  we  view  this  as  one  of
our  most  significant  contributions.

The  Records  of  Our  Past:  The  Memories  of  the  People

The  Committee  listened  to  the  testimony  of  more  than  200  public
witnesses  who  appeared  before  us.  We  heard  from  people  or  their  family
members  who  had  been  subjects  in  controversial  radiation  experiments,  including
the  plutonium  injections,  total-body  irradiation  experimen ts  and  ex Penments
involving  the  use  of  radioactive  tracers  with  institutionalized  children.  We  heard
from  "atomic  veterans":  soldiers  who  had  been  marched  to  ground  zero  at  atomic
bomb  tests,  sailors  who  had  walked  the  decks  of  ships  contaminated  by
radioactive  mist,  and  pilots  who  had  flown  through  radioactive  mushroom  clouds.
We  also  heard  from  their  widows.  We  heard  from  people  who  lived  "downwind
from  nuclear  weapons  tests  in  Nevada  and  intentional  releases  of  radioactive
material  in  Washington  state.  We  heard  from  Navajo  miners  who  had  served  the
Country  in  uranium  mines  filled  with  radioactive  dust,  from  native  Alaskans  who
had  been  experimented  upon  by  a  military  cold  weather  research  . lab,  and I  from
Marshall  Islanders,  whose  Pacific  homeland  had  been  contaminated  by  fallout
after  a  1954  hvdrogen  bomb  test.

We  heard  from  officials  and  researchers  responsible  for  human t  research
today  and  from  those  who  were  present  at  or  near  the  dawn  of  the  Cold  War.  We
heard  from  individuals  who,  on  their  own  time,  had  long  been  seeking  to  piece
together  the  story  of  human  radiation  experiments  and  offered  to  share  their
findings.  We  heard  from  scholars,  from  members  of  Congress,  and  from  people
who  wanted  to  bear  witness  for  those  who  could  no  longer  speak We  heard  from
a  woman  who,  as  a  high-school  student  intern  decades  ago,  attended  at  the
bedside  while  a  terminally  ill  patient  was  injected  with  uranium  and  from  a
powerfully  spoken  veteran  of  the  nuclear  weapons  work  force  who  told  of  the
"bodv  snatching"  of  dead  friends  in  the  name  of  science.

Most  important,  we  heard  from  many  people  who  believed  that  something
involving  the  government  and  radiation  happened  to  them  or  their  loved  ones
decades  ago;  most  had  been  unable  to  find  out  exactly  what  had  happened,  or
whv  and  now  they  wanted  to  know  the  truth.  These  witnesses  spoke  eloquent  y
of  their  pain,  their  frustration,  and  the  reasons  they  do  not  trust  the  government.


Preface

Their  very  appearance  before  the  Committee  testified  to  a  commitment  to  the
country  and  to  the  value  of  the  nation's  effort  to  understand  its  past.  We  are
deeply  grateful  to  all  of  these  witnesses,  who  overcame  the  obstacles  of
geography  and  emotions  to  participate  in  this  work.

We  combined  our  public  meetings  with  additional  efforts  to  interview,  and
record  for  the  nation's  archives,  those  who  could  shed  light  on  Cold  War  human
radiation  experiments  and  on  the  ethics  of  biomedical  experimentation.  Dozens
of  interviews  were  conducted  with  former  government  officials  responsible  for
programs  that  included  radiation  research,  as  well  as  with  radiation  researchers.

In  Mississippi  we  talked  with  a  retired  general  who  served  as  a  military
assistant  to  secretaries  of  defense  in  the  1940s  and  1950s;  in  Berkeley,  we  talked
with  the  chemist  who  was  one  of  the  discoverers  of  plutonium;  in  Rhode  Island
we  talked  with  the  physicist  who  served  as  the  link  between  the  civilian  health
and  safety  agencies  and  the  Cold  War  military  research  efforts;  in  Florida  we
talked  with  a  pioneer  in  health  physics,  a  discipline  created  to  provide  for  the
safety  of  nuclear  weapons  workers;  in  San  Francisco  and  Washington,  D.C.,  we
talked  to  the  lawyers  who  advised  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  at  its  postwar
creation;  in  New  York  we  talked  with  the  Navy  radiation  researcher  who  was
rousted  from  his  Maryland  laboratory  to  respond  to  the  emergency  created  by  the
exposure  of  the  Marshall  Islanders;  in  San  Diego  we  talked  with  a  researcher
whose  own  career  and  massive  history  of  radiation  research  had  covered  much  of
the  Committee's  territory.

We  also  launched  a  special  effort,  called  the  Ethics  Oral  History  Project,
to  learn  from  eminent  physicians  who  were  beginning  their  careers  in  academic
medicine  in  the  1940s  and  1950s  about  how  research  with  human  subjects  was
then  conducted.  The  Ethics  Oral  History  Project  also  included  interviews  with
two  people  who  had  been  administrators  of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health
during  the  1950s,  since  they  were  intimately  involved  with  ethical  and  legal
aspects  of  research  involving  human  subjects  at  the  time.

We  listened  to  all  these  people  and  more,  and  through  their  testimony,  this
report  is  informed.

Bounds  of  Our  Inquiry

In  the  course  of  listening  to  public  testimony,  it  became  clear  to  us  that
confusion  exists  about  what  an  experiment  is  and  whether  it  can  be  distinguished
from  other  activities  in  which  people  are  put  at  risk  and  information  is  gathered
about  them.  The  biomedical  community,  for  example,  struggles  with  the
distinction  between  scientific  research  and  related  activities.  In  a  medical  setting,
it  is  sometimes  hard  to  distinguish  a  formal  experiment  designed  to  test  the
effectiveness  of  a  treatment  from  ordinary  medical  care  in  which  the  same
treatment  is  being  administered  outside  of  a  research  project.  The  patient


10


Preface


receiving  the  treatment  may  discern  no  difference  between  the  two  but  the
Sn  is  relevant  to  questions  of  ethics.  The  physician-investigator  may  face
conflicts  between  the  obligation  to  do  what  is  best  for  each  individual  patient .and
the  requirements  of  scientific  research,  whereas  the  physician  involved  only  in
clinical  care  has  a  responsibility  solely  to  the  patient.

Similarly,  in  an  occupational  setting  in  which  employees  are  put  at  risk,  it
is  often  difficult  to  distinguish  formal  scientific  efforts  to  study  effects  on  the
health  of  employees  fromroutine  monitoring  of  employees  exposure  to  hazards
in  the  work  place  for  purposes  of  ensuring  worker  safety.  In  the  first  case,  the
r^les  of  research  ethics  apply;  in  the  second  they  do  not.  And  yet  here  too,  the
worker  may  discern  no  difference  between  the  two  activities.  A  further
complication  for  the  Committee  to  consider  was  the  fact  that  research  in
occupational  settings  rarely  takes  the  form  of  a  classic  experiment,  in  which  the
investigator  controls  the  variable  under  study  and  then  randomly  assigns  subjects
to  be  in  the  "treatment"  or  "control"  group.  Instead,  most  occupational  research
employs  observational  and  statistical  methods,  drawing  most  heavily  from  the
field  of  epidemiology.  These  distinctions  were  unimportant,  however  to Mhe
representatives  of  atomic  veterans,  uranium  miners,  and  residents  of  the  Marshall
Islands,  who  told  us  of  their  belief  that  they,  or  those  they  spoke  for,  were

subjects  of  research.  j-„*:„„

The  Committee  struggled  with  how  strictly  to  define  human  radiation
experiments  for  purposes  of  our  inquiry.  There  is  no  sin gle  clear  definition  of  an
experiment  that  is  widely  subscribed  to  by  every  member  of  the  biomedical
community.  Even  our  description  above  of  a  classic  experiment  is  open  to
contest Today,  as  well  as  in  the  past,  the  scientific  community  has  rarely
employed  the  term  experiment  in  discussions  of  biomedical  research;  other  terms,
not  necessarily  synonymous-such  as  clinical  study,  clinical  investigation,  quasi
Zeriment,  and  case  control  study--  all  used.  We  concluded  that  it  was  not
possible  to  interpret  our  charge  by  stipulating  an  artificial  definition  of  human
radiation  experiment.  Instead,  in  keeping  with  the  realities  of  bl0™e?ical
research,  we  decided  to  interpret  our  charge  broadly,  as  including  both  research
involving  human  subjects  in  which  the  research  design  called  for  exposing
subjects  to  ionizing  radiation  and  research  designed  to  study  the  effects  of
radiation  exposure  resulting  from  nonexpenmental  activities.

This  latter  category  includes  the  research  involving  uranium  miners  and
Marshall  Islanders.  In  these  cases  we  quickly  determined  that  it  was  in  some
respects  impossible  to  isolate  the  ethical  questions  raised  by  the  research  from  the
ethics  of  the  context  in  which  the  research  was  conducted.  A  centra  issue  was
the  exposure  of  people  to  risk,  regardless  of  whether  they  were  clearly  understood
to  be  subjects  of  research.  This  characterization  is  true,  as  well,  of  the  experience
of  atomic  veterans.  As  a  consequence,  we  considered  events  that  might  be  said  to
be  on  the  boundary  between  research  and  some  other  activity.  Our  inquiry

11


Preface

underscored  the  importance  for  social  policy  of  the  need  to  keep  focused  on
questions  of  risk  and  well-being  regardless  of  what  side  of  that  boundary  the
activity  producing  the  risk  falls.

Human  Experimentation  Today

In  tandem  with  the  reconstruction  of  the  past,  we  undertook  three  projects
to  examine  the  current  state  of  human  radiation  experiments.

First,  we  studied  how  each  agency  of  the  federal  government  that
currently  conducts  or  funds  research  involving  human  subjects  regulates  this
activity  and  oversees  it.  We  surveyed  what  the  operative  rules  are,  how  they  are
implemented,  and  how  they  are  enforced.

Second,  from  among  the  very  large  number  of  research  projects  involving
human  subjects  currently  supported  by  the  federal  government,  we  randomly
selected  125  research  projects  for  scrutiny  by  the  Committee.  For  each  of  these
projects,  we  reviewed  all  available  relevant  documentation  to  assess  how  well  it
appeared  the  rights  and  interests  of  the  subjects  participating  in  these  projects
were  being  protected.  The  success  of  this  review  required  the  cooperation  of
private  research  institutions  all  over  the  country,  on  whom  we  were  dependent  for
access  to  important  documents.  We  had  expected  that  perhaps  no  more  than  half
of  those  asked  to  cooperate  would  agree  to  do  so,  but  with  little  hesitation,  all  of
the  research  centers  that  we  approached  agreed  to  cooperate.

Third,  to  learn  from  the  subjects  themselves,  the  Committee  interviewed
almost  1,900  patients  receiving  medical  care  in  outpatient  facilities  of  private  and
federal  hospitals  throughout  the  country.  We  asked  patients  about  their  attitudes
toward  medical  research  with  human  subjects  and  about  the  meaning  they  attach
to  the  different  terms  used  to  explain  medical  research  to  potential  subjects.  We
ascertained,  and  attempted  to  verify,  how  many  of  these  patients  were  currently  or
ever  had  been  subjects  of  research.  Patient-subjects  were  asked  about  their
reasons  for  agreeing  to  join  research  projects;  patients  who  reported  having
refused  offers  to  enter  research  projects  were  asked  why  they  had  decided  against
participating.

In  all  three  of  these  projects,  we  focused  not  only  on  human  radiation
experiments  but  on  human  research  generally.  In  critical  (but  not  all)  respects,
the  government  regulations  that  apply  to  human  radiation  research  do  not  differ
from  those  that  govern  other  kinds  of  research  involving  human  subjects.
Moreover,  the  underlying  ethical  principles  that  should  guide  the  conduct  of
research  are  identical,  whether  one  is  considering  human  radiation  research  or  all
research  with  human  subjects.  Finally,  the  Committee  hoped  to  learn  whether,  in
practice,  there  are  any  differences  between  the  conduct  of  radiation  and
nonradiation  experiments.


12


Preface
LESSONS  FROM  HISTORY:  LOOKING  TO  THE  FUTURE

What  we  have  found  is  a  story  about  the  government's  attempt  to  serve
two  critical  purposes:  safeguarding  national  security  and  advancing  medical
knowledge.  One-half  century  ago,  the  U.S.  government  and  its  experts  in  the
fields  of  radiation  and  medicine  were  seeking  to  learn  more  about  radiation  in
order  to  protect  workers,  service  personnel,  and  the  general  public  against
potential  atomic  war  and  individuals  against  the  menace  of  disease.

Toward  these  laudable  ends,  the  government  used  patients,  workers,
soldiers,  and  others  as  experimental  subjects.  It  acted  through  the  experts  to
whom  we  regularly  entrust  the  well-being  of  our  country  and  our  selves:  elected
officials,  civil  servants,  generals,  physicians,  and  medical  researchers.

Moreover,  the  government  acted  with  full  knowledge  that  the  use  of
individuals  to  serve  the  ends  of  government  raises  basic  ethical  questions.  If,  as
we  look  back,  there  could  be  doubt  about  the  importance  of  the  matter  to  the
leaders  of  the  time,  we  need  only  look  to  the  appearance  before  the  U.S.  Senate  of
David  Lilienthal,  who  had  been  nominated  to  serve  as  the  first  chairman  of  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission,  the  civilian  successor  to  the  Manhattan  Project  and
the  predecessor  to  today's  Department  of  Energy.  In  his  testimony,  Lilienthal
forcefully  stated:

...  all  Government  and  private  institutions  must  be
designed  to  promote  and  protect  and  defend  the
integrity  and  the  dignity  of  the  individual.  .  . .  Any
forms  of  government . .  .  which  make  men  means
rather  than  ends  in  themselves  ...  are  contrary  to
this  conception;  and  therefore  I  am  deeply  opposed
to  them. . .  .  The  fundamental  tenet  of  communism
is  that  the  state  is  an  end  in  itself,  and  that  therefore
the  powers  which  the  state  exercises  over  the
individual  are  without  any  ethical  standards  to  limit
them.  This  I  deeply  disbelieve.6

What  did  happen  when  individuals  were  sometimes  used  as  means  to
achieve  national  goals?  How  well  were  the  national  goals  of  preserving  the  peace
and  advancing  medical  science  reconciled  with  the  equally  important  end  of
respect  for  individual  dignity  and  health?  What  rules  were  followed  to  protect
people,  and  how  well  did  they  work?  Was  the  public  let  in  on  the  balancing  of
collective  and  individual  interest?  In  what  sense  did  the  public,  in  general,  and
individuals,  in  particular,  know  what  was  happening  and  have  the  opportunity  to
provide  their  meaningful  consent?

In  this  report  we  try  to  convey  our  understanding  of  how,  when  only  good

13


Preface

was  sought,  when  its  pursuit  was  entrusted  to  the  experts  on  whom  we  most
relied,  and  when  missions  were  substantially  accomplished,  distrust,  as  well  as
accomplishment,  remains.

We  focus  on  the  ways  in  which  the  government  and  its  experts  recognized
the  interest  of  individual  dignity  and  sought  to  strike  a  balance  with  the  national
interests  being  pursued.  We  focus  equally  on  the  extent  to  which  the  public  was
privy  to  this  balancing.  In  particular,  we  try  to  show  how  individuals'
understanding  and  participation  were  limited  by  the  conjunction  of  government
secrecy  and  expert  knowledge.

All  Americans  should  experience  immense  satisfaction  in  the  strides  that
have  been  made  toward  accomplishing  both  our  national  security  and  our  medical
research  goals.  However,  as  attested  to  by  the  many  thousands  of  letters  and  calls
that  led  to  the  Committee's  creation,  and  the  eloquent  statements  of  the  witnesses
who  appeared  before  us,  this  pride  is  diluted  by  a  bitter  aftertaste-distrust  by
many  Americans  of  the  federal  government  and  those  who  served  it.

The  government  has  the  power  to  create  and  keep  secrets  of  immense
importance  to  us  all.  Secret  keeping  is  a  part  of  life.  Secret  keeping  by  the
government  may  be  in  the  national  interest.  However,  if  government  is  to  be
trusted,  it  is  important  to  know,  at  the  very  least,  the  basic  rules  of  secrecy  and  to
know  that  they  are  reasonable  and  that  they  are  being  followed.

Similarly,  experts,  by  training  and  experience,  have  knowledge  that
individual  people  must,  as  a  practical  matter,  rely  on.  However,  legitimate
questions  arise  when  experts  wear  multiple  hats  or  when  they  are  relied  on  in
areas  beyond  their  expertise.

Where  official  secrecy  is  coupled  with  expert  authority,  and  both  are
focused  on  a  public  that  is  not  privy  to  secrets  and  does  not  speak  the  languages
of  experts,  the  potential  for  distrust  is  substantial.

In  telling  the  story,  and  asking  the  questions,  we  have  kept  our  eyes  open
for  ways  in  which  lost  trust  can  be  restored.  It  might  be  presumed  that  the  past
we  report  on  here  is  so  different  from  the  present  that  it  will  be  of  little  use  in
understanding  research  involving  human  subjects  today.  In  fact,  as  we  shall  see,
basic  questions  posed  by  the  story  of  human  radiation  experiments  conducted
during  the  1944-1974  period  are  no  less  relevant  today.  Then,  as  now,  there  were
standards;  the  question  is  how  they  worked  to  protect  individuals  and  the  public.
Then,  as  now,  the  ethical  impulse  was  complexly  alloyed  with  concerns  for  legal
liability  and  public  image.  Then,  as  now,  the  most  difficult  questions  often
concerned  the  scope  and  practical  meaning  of  ethical  rules,  rather  than  their
necessity.  The  country  has  come  to  recognize,  from  its  experience  of  the  past  half
century,  that  tinkering  with  the  regulations  that  govern  publicly  supported
institutions,  imposing  ethical  codes  on  experts,  and  altering  the  balance  between
secrecy  and  openness  are  important  but  not  always  sufficient  means  of  reform.
The  most  important  element  is  a  citizenry  that  understands  the  limits  of  these


14


Preface

activities.  That  is  why  the  purpose  of  this  story  is  not  simply  to  leam  which
changes  to  make  in  rules  or  policies  that  apply  to  government  or  professionals,
but  to  begin  to  learn  something  more  about  how  the  Cold  War  world  worked,  as
the  most  important  means  to  making  the  world  of  tomorrow  work  better.

HOW  THIS  REPORT  IS  ORGANIZED

Though  this  report  is  addressed  largely  to  those  who  can  affect  future
policy  in  light  of  the  information  the  Advisory  Committee  has  gathered,
specifically  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group,  it  has  been  written
in  such  a  way  that  it  should  be  accessible  to  a  wide  range  of  interested  readers.

We  begin  with  an  introduction,  titled  "The  Atomic  Century,"  which
describes  the  intersection  of  several  developments:  the  birth  and  remarkable
growth  of  radiation  science;  the  parallel  changes  in  medicine  and  medical
research;  and  the  intersection  of  these  changes  with  government  programs  that
called  on  medical  researchers  to  play  important  new  roles  beyond  that  involved  in
the  traditional  doctor-patient  relationship.  The  introduction  concludes  with  a
section  titled  "The  Basics  of  Radiation  Science"  for  the  lay  reader.

The  remainder  of  the  text  is  divided  into  four  parts.  Each  part  is  preceded
by  an  overview.

Part  I,  "Ethics  of  Human  Subjects  Research:  A  Historical  Perspective,"
which  contains  four  chapters,  explores  how  both  federal  government  agencies  and
the  medical  profession  approached  human  experimentation  in  the  period  1944
through  1974.  We  begin  with  the  story  of  the  principles  stated  at  midcentury  at
the  highest  levels  of  the  Cold  War  medical  research  bureaucracies  and  what  we
have  ascertained  about  whether  these  principles  were  translated  into  federal  rules
or  requirements.  We  then  turn  to  the  norms  and  practices  engaged  in  at  the  time
by  medical  researchers  themselves.  It  is  in  this  chapter  that  we  report  the  results
of  our  Ethics  Oral  History  Project.  In  chapter  3,  we  review  the  development  of
formal  and  public  regulations  concerning  research  involving  human  subjects  in
the  1960s  and  1970s.  In  the  last  chapter  in  part  I  we  present  our  framework  for
evaluating  the  ethics  of  human  radiation  experiments,  grounded  in  both  history
and  philosophical  analysis.

Part  II,  "Case  Studies,"  approaches  particular  experiments  from  several
angles,  each  of  which  raises  overlapping  ethical  questions.  The  chapters  on  the
plutonium  injections  and  total-body  irradiation  consider  the  use  of  sick  patients  to
provide  data  needed  to  protect  the  health  of  workers  engaged  in  the  production  of
nuclear  weapons;  the  chapter  on  prisoners  considers  the  use  of  healthy  subjects
for  this  purpose;  the  chapter  on  children  considers  experimentation  with
particularly  vulnerable  people;  and  the  chapter  on  the  AEC  program  of
radioisotope  distribution  considers  the  institutional  safeguards  that  underlay  the
conduct  of  thousands  of  human  radiation  experiments.  The  chapters  on

15


Preface

intentional  releases,  atomic  veterans,  and  observational  studies  consider,  in
common,  situations  in  which  entire  groups  of  people  were  exposed  to  risk  as  a
consequence  of  government-sponsored  Cold  War  programs.  The  section
concludes  with  a  review  of  the  degree  to  which  secrecy  impaired,  and  may  still
impair,  our  ability  to  understand  human  radiation  experiments  and  intentional
releases  conducted  in  the  1944-1974  period.

Part  III,  "Contemporary  Projects,"  reports  the  findings  of  our  three
inquiries  into  the  present.  We  begin  by  describing  what  we  have  learned  about
how  the  different  federal  agencies  that  sponsor  human  research  regulate  and
oversee  this  activity.  Next,  we  report  the  results  of  our  Research  Proposal
Review  Project,  followed  by  the  results  of  our  Subject  Interview  Study.  Part  III
concludes  with  the  Committee's  synthesis  of  the  implications  of  the  results  of  all
three  of  these  projects  for  the  current  state  of  human  subject  research.

Part  IV,  "Coming  to  Terms  with  the  Past,  Looking  Ahead  to  the  Future,"
reports  the  Committee's  findings  and  recommendations.

A  FINAL  NOTE

The  Committee's  findings  and  recommendations  represent  our  best  efforts
to  distill  almost  eighteen  months  of  inquiry  into,  debate  about,  and  analysis  of
human  radiation  experiments.  But  what  they  cannot  fully  express  is  the
appreciation  we  developed  for  how  much  damage  was  done  to  individuals  and  to
the  American  people  during  the  period  we  investigated  and  how  this  damage
endures  today.  The  damage  we  speak  of  here  is  not  physical  injury,  although  this
too  did  occur  in  some  cases.  Rather,  the  damage  is  measured  in  the  pain  felt  by
people  who  believe  that  they  or  their  loved  ones  were  treated  with  disrespect  for
their  dignity  and  disregard  for  their  interests  by  a  government  and  a  profession  in
which  they  had  placed  their  trust.  It  is  measured  in  a  too-often  cynical  citizenry,
some  of  whom  have  lost  faith  in  their  government  to  be  honest  brokers  of
information  about  risks  to  the  public  and  the  purposes  of  government  actions.
And  it  is  measured  in  the  confusion  among  patients  that  remains  today  about  the
differences  between  medical  research  and  medical  care— differences  that  can
impede  the  ability  of  patients  to  determine  what  is  in  their  own  best  interest.

In  the  period  that  we  examined,  extraordinary  advances  in  biomedicine
were  achieved  and  a  foundation  was  laid  for  fifty  years  without  a  world  war.  At
the  same  time,  however,  it  was  a  time  of  arrogance  and  paternalism  on  the  part  of
government  officials  and  the  biomedical  community  that  we  would  not  under  any
circumstances  wish  to  see  repeated.

As  we  listened  to  the  heart-rending  testimony  of  many  public  witnesses,
we  came  to  feel  great  sorrow  about  the  suffering  they  described.  Our  most
difficult  task  was  determining  what  to  recommend  as  the  appropriate  national
response  to  these  emotions  and  the  events  that  stimulated  them.  What  can  best


16


Preface

precipitate  the  healing  of  wounds  and  the  restoration  of  trust?  Appropriate
remedies  for  those  who  were  wronged  or  harmed  were  of  critical  importance,  but
remedies  alone  speak  only  to  the  past,  not  the  future.  It  is  equally  important  that,
the  historical  record  having  been  spelled  out  and  appropriate  remedies  identified,
we  as  a  nation  move  forward  and  take  action  to  prevent  similar  occurrences  from
happening  in  the  future.  In  the  end,  if  trust  in  government  is  to  be  restored,  those
in  power  must  always  act  in  good  faith  in  their  dealings  with  the  citizenry.  At  the
same  time,  however,  we  must  recognize  that  unless  we  have  expectations  of
honesty  and  fairness  from  our  government  and  unless  we  are  vigilant  in  holding
the  government  to  those  expectations,  trust  will  never  be  restored.

Finally,  we  hope  that  this  report  conveys  the  sense  of  gratitude  and  honor
that  we  experienced  as  citizens  serving  on  the  Advisory  Committee.  We  were
provided  by  the  President  with  extraordinary  access  to  the  records  of  our  past  and
given  complete  liberty  to  deliberate  on  what  we  found.  Although  some  of  what
we  report  is  a  matter  for  national  regret,  our  freedom  of  inquiry,  and  the
cooperation  we  received  from  officials  and  fellow  citizens  of  all  perspectives,
confirms  that  our  nation's  highest  traditions  are  not  things  of  the  past  but  live  very
much  in  the  present.


17


ENDNOTES


1 .  U.S.  House  of  Representatives,  Committee  on  Energy  and  Commerce,
Subcommittee  on  Energy  Conservation  and  Power,  November  1986,  "American  Nuclear
Guinea  Pigs:  Three  Decades  of  Radiation  Experiments  on  U.S.  Citizens"  (ACHRE  No.
CON-050594-A-1).

2.  U.S.  Senate,  Committee  on  Governmental  Affairs,  1 1  November  1993,
"Nuclear  Health  and  Safety:  Examples  of  Post  World  War  II  Radiation  Releases  at  U.S.
Nuclear  Sites,"  GAO/RCED-94-51-FS  (ACHRE  No.  CON-042894-A-4).

3.  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  proceedings  of  21
April  1994,  transcript,  112-113.

4.  The  full  text  of  the  Committee's  charter  appears  at  the  end  of  this  report.  See
table  of  contents  for  page  number.

5.  For  further  information  on  access  to  this  collection,  see  "A  Citizen's  Guide  to
the  Nation's  Archives"  at  the  end  of  this  report.

6.  David  E.  Lilienthal,  The  Journals  of  David  E.  Lilienthal:  1945-1950,  2  vols.
(New  York:  Harper  and  Row,  1964),  as  quoted  in  David  McCullough,  Truman  (New
York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1992),  537-538.


18


INTRODUCTION

The  Atomic  Century


One  hundred  years  ago,  a  half  century  before  the  atomic  bombing  of
Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki,  the  discovery  of  x  rays  spotlighted  the  extraordinary
promise,  and  peril,  of  the  atom.  From  that  time  until  1942,  atomic  research  was  in
private  hands.  The  Second  World  War  and  the  Manhattan  Project,  which  planned
and  built  the  first  atomic  bombs,  transformed  a  cottage  industry  of  researchers
into  the  largest  and  one  of  the  most  secretive  research  projects  ever  undertaken.
Scientists  who  had  once  raced  to  publish  their  results  learned  to  speak  in  codes
accessible  only  to  those  with  a  "need  to  know."  Indeed,  during  the  war  the  very
existence  of  the  man-made  element  plutonium  was  a  national  secret.

After  the  war's  end,  the  network  of  radiation  researchers,  government  and
military  officials,  and  physicians  mobilized  for  the  Manhattan  Project  did  not
disband.  Rather,  they  began  working  on  government  programs  to  promote  both
peaceful  uses  of  atomic  energy  and  nuclear  weapons  development.

Having  harnessed  the  atom  in  secret  for  war,  the  federal  government
turned  enthusiastically  to  providing  governmental  and  nongovernmental
researchers,  corporations,  and  farmers  with  new  tools  for  peace-radioisotopes-
mass-produced  with  the  same  machinery  that  produced  essential  materials  for  the
nation's  nuclear  weapons.  Radioisotopes,  the  newly  established  Atomic  Energy
Commission  (AEC)  promised,  would  create  new  businesses,  improve  agricultural
production,  and  through  "human  uses"  in  medical  research,  save  lives.

From  its  1947  creation  to  the  1974  reorganization  of  atomic  energy
activities,  the  AEC  produced  radioisotopes  that  were  used  in  thousands  of  human
radiation  experiments  conducted  at  universities,  hospitals,  and  government
facilities.'  This  research  brought  major  advances  in  the  understanding  of  the


19


Introduction

workings  of  the  human  body  and  the  ability  of  doctors  to  diagnose,  prevent,  and
treat  disease.

The  growth  of  radiation  research  with  humans  after  World  War  II  was  part
of  the  enormous  expansion  of  the  entire  biomedical  research  enterprise  following
the  war.  Although  human  experiments  had  long  been  part  of  medicine,  there  had
been  relatively  few  subjects,  the  research  had  not  been  as  systematic,  and  there
were  far  fewer  promising  interventions  than  there  were  in  the  late  1940s.

With  so  many  more  human  beings  as  research  subjects,  and  with
potentially  dangerous  new  substances  involved,  certain  moral  questions  in  the
relationship  between  the  physician-researcher  and  the  human  subject—questions
that  were  raised  in  the  nineteenth  century-assumed  more  prominence  than  ever:
What  was  there  to  protect  people  if  a  researcher's  zeal  for  data  gathering
conflicted  with  his  or  her  commitment  to  the  subjects'  well-being?  Was  the  age-
old  ethical  tradition  of  the  doctor-patient  relationship,  in  which  the  patient  was  to
defer  to  the  doctor's  expertise  and  wisdom,  adequate  when  the  doctor  was  also  a
researcher  and  the  procedures  were  experimental?

While  these  questions  about  the  role  of  medical  researchers  were  fresh  in
the  air,  the  Manhattan  Project,  and  then  the  Cold  War,  presented  new  ethical
questions  of  a  different  order.

In  March  1946,  former  British  Prime  Minister  Winston  Churchill  told  an
audience  in  Fulton,  Missouri,  that  an  "iron  curtain"  had  descended  between
Eastern  and  Western  Europe—giving  a  name  to  the  hostile  division  of  the
continent  that  had  existed  since  the  end  of  World  War  II.  By  the  following  year.
Cold  War  was  the  term  used  to  describe  this  state  of  affairs  between  the  United
States  and  its  allies  on  the  one  hand  and  the  Soviet  bloc  on  the  other.  A  quick
succession  of  events  underscored  the  scope  of  this  conflict,  as  well  as  the  stakes
involved:  In  1948  a  Soviet  blockade  precipitated  a  crisis  over  Berlin;  in  1949,  the
American  nuclear  monopoly  ended  when  the  Soviet  Union  exploded  its  first
atomic  bomb;  in  1950,  the  Korean  War  began.

The  seeming  likelihood  that  atomic  bombs  would  be  used  again  in  war,
and  that  American  civilians  as  well  as  soldiers  would  be  targets,  meant  that  the
country  had  to  know  as  much  as  it  could,  as  quickly  as  it  could,  about  the  effects
of  radiation  and  the  treatment  of  radiation  injury.

This  need  for  knowledge  put  radiation  researchers,  including  physicians,
in  the  middle  of  new  questions  of  risk  and  benefit,  disclosure  and  consent.  The
focus  of  these  questions  was,  directly  and  indirectly,  an  unprecedented  public
health  hazard:  nuclear  war.  In  addressing  these  questions,  medical  researchers
had  to  define  the  new  roles  that  they  would  play.

As  advisers  to  the  government,  radiation  researchers  were  asked  to  assist
military  commanders,  who  called  for  human  experimentation  to  determine  the
effects  of  atomic  weapons  on  their  troops.  But  these  researchers  also  knew  that
human  experimentation  might  not  readily  provide  the  answers  the  military
needed.

20


The  Atomic  Century

As  physicians,  they  had  a  commitment  to  prevent  disease  and  heal.  At  the
same  time,  as  government  advisers,  they  were  called  upon  to  participate  in
making  decisions  to  proceed  with  weapons  development  and  testing  programs
that  they  knew  could  put  citizens,  soldiers,  and  workers  at  risk.  As  experts  they
were  asked  to  ensure  that  the  risks  would  not  be  excessive.  And  as  researchers
they  saw  these  programs  as  an  opportunity  for  gathering  data.

As  researchers,  they  were  often  among  the  first  to  volunteer  to  take  the
risks  that  were  unavoidable  in  such  research.  But  the  risks  could  not  always  be
disclosed  to  members  of  the  public  who  were  also  exposed.  In  keeping  with  the
tradition  of  scientific  inquiry,  these  researchers  understood  that  their  work  should
be  the  subject  of  vigorous  discussion,  at  least  among  other  scientists  in  their  field.
But,  as  government  officials  and  advisers,  they  understood  that  their  public
statements  had  to  be  constrained  by  Cold  War  national  security  requirements,  and
they  shared  in  official  concern  that  public  misunderstanding  could  compromise
government  programs  and  their  own  research.

Medical  researchers,  especially  those  expert  in  radiation,  were  not
oblivious  to  the  importance  of  the  special  roles  they  were  being  asked  to  play.
"Never  before  in  history,"  began  the  1949  medical  text  Atomic  Medicine,  "have
the  interests  of  the  weaponeers  and  those  who  practice  the  healing  arts  been  so
closely  related."2  This  volume,  edited  by  Captain  C.  F.  Behrens,  the  head  of  the
Navy's  new  atomic  medicine  division,  was  evidently  the  first  treatise  on  the  topic.
It  concluded  with  a  chapter  by  Dr.  Shields  Warren,  the  first  chief  of  the  AEC's
Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  who  would  become  a  major  figure  in  setting
policy  for  postwar  biomedical  radiation  research.  While  the  atomic  bomb  was  not
"of  medicine's  contriving,"  the  book  began,  it  was  to  physicians  "more  than  to  any
other  profession"  that  atomic  energy  had  brought  a  "bewildering  array  of  new
problems,  brilliant  prospects,  and  inescapable  responsibilities."  The  text,  a
prefatory  chapter  explained,  treats  "not  of  high  policy,  of  ethics,  of  strategy  or  of
international  control  [of  nuclear  materials],  as  physicians  these  matters  are  not  for
us."3  Yet  what  many  readers  of  Atomic  Medicine  could  not  know  in  1949  was
that  Behrens,  along  with  Warren  and  other  biomedical  experts,  was  already
engaged  in  vigorous  but  secret  discussions  of  the  ethics  underlying  human
radiation  experiments.  At  the  heart  of  these  discussions  lay  difficult  choices  at
the  intersection  of  geopolitics,  science,  and  medicine  that  would  have  a
fundamental  impact  on  the  federal  government's  relationship  with  the  American
people.

This  chapter  provides  a  brief  survey  of  the  development  of  radiation
research  and  the  changing  roles  of  the  biomedical  researcher,  from  the  discovery
of  x  rays  by  a  single  individual  to  the  complex  world  of  government-sponsored
human  radiation  experimentation.  Finally,  at  the  end  of  this  chapter,  an  aid  to  the
reader  titled  "The  Basics  of  Radiation  Science"  provides  information  needed  to
understand  technical  concepts  in  this  report.


21


Introduction


BEFORE  THE  ATOMIC  AGE:  "SHADOW  PICTURES,"
RADIOISOTOPES,  AND  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  HUMAN
RADIATION  EXPERIMENTATION

Radiation  has  existed  in  nature  from  the  origins  of  the  universe,  but  was
unknown  to  man  until  a  century  ago.  Its  discovery  came  by  accident.  On  a
Friday  evening,  November  8,  1895,  the  German  physicist  Wilhelm  Roentgen  was
studying  the  nature  of  electrical  currents  by  using  a  cathode  ray  tube,  a  common
piece  of  scientific  equipment.  When  he  turned  the  tube  on,  he  noticed  to  his
surprise  that  a  glowing  spot  appeared  on  a  black  paper  screen  coated  with
fluorescent  material  that  was  across  the  room.  Intrigued,  he  soon  determined  that
invisible  but  highly  penetrating  rays  were  being  produced  at  one  end  of  the
cathode  ray  tube.  The  rays  could  expose  photographic  plates,  leaving  shadows  of
dense  objects,  such  as  bone.

After  about  six  weeks  of  experimenting  with  his  discovery,  which  he
called  x  rays,  Roentgen  sent  a  summary  and  several  "shadow  pictures"  to  a  local
scientific  society.  The  society  published  the  report  in  its  regular  journal  and
wisely  printed  extra  copies.  News  spread  rapidly;  Roentgen  sent  copies  to
physicists  throughout  Europe.  One  Berlin  physicist  "could  not  help  thinking  that
I  was  reading  a  fairy  tale  . . .  only  the  actual  photograph  proved  to  everyone  that
this  was  a  fact."4

Physicians  immediately  recognized  these  rays  as  a  new  tool  for  diagnosis,
a  window  into  the  interior  of  the  body.  The  useless  left  arm  of  German  Emperor
Wilhelm  II  was  x-rayed  to  reveal  the  cause  of  his  disability,  while  Queen  Amelia
of  Portugal  used  x  rays  of  several  of  her  court  ladies  to  vividly  display  the
dangers  of  "tightlacing."5  Physicians  began  to  use  x  rays  routinely  for  examining
fractures  and  locating  foreign  objects,  such  as  needles  swallowed  by  children  or
bullets  shot  into  adults.6  During  World  War  I,  more  than  1.1  million  wounded
soldiers  were  treated  with  the  help  of  diagnostic  x  rays.7

In  1 896,  Roentgen's  insight  led  to  the  discovery  of  natural  radioactivity.
Henri  Becquerel,  who  had  been  studying  phosphorescence,  discovered  that
shadow  pictures  were  also  created  when  wrapped  photographic  plates  were
exposed  to  crystals  partly  composed  of  uranium.  Could  this  radioactive  property
be  concentrated  further  by  extracting  and  purifying  some  as-yet-unknown
component  of  the  uranium  crystals?  Marie  and  Pierre  Curie  began  laborious
chemical  analyses  that  led  to  the  isolation  of  the  element  polonium,  named  after
Marie's  native  Poland.8  Continuing  their  work,  they  isolated  the  element  radium.
To  describe  these  elements'  emission  of  energy,  they  coined  the  word  radio-
activity!'

As  with  x  rays,  popular  hopes  and  fears  for  natural  radioactivity  far
exceeded  the  actual  applications.  One  1905  headline  captures  it  all:  "Radium,  as
a  Substitute  for  Gas,  Electricity,  and  as  a  Positive  Cure  for  Every  Disease."10

22


The  Atomic  Century

Following  initial  enthusiasm  that  radiation  could,  by  destroying  tumors,  provide  a
miracle  cure  for  cancer,  the  reappearance  of  irradiated  tumors  led  to
discouragement.  Despite  distressing  setbacks,  research  into  the  medical  uses  of
radiation  persisted.  In  the  1920s  French  researchers,  performing  experiments  on
animals,  discovered  that  radiation  treatments  administered  in  a  series  of
fractionated  doses,  instead  of  a  single  massive  dose,  could  eliminate  tumors
without  causing  permanent  damage.  With  the  new  method  of  treatment,  doctors
began  to  report  impressive  survival  rates  for  patients  with  a  variety  of  cancers.^
Fractionation  became,  and  remains,  an  accepted  approach  to  cancer  treatment.

Along  with  better  understanding  of  radiation's  benefits  came  a  better
practical  appreciation  of  its  dangers.  Radiation  burns  were  quickly  apparent,  but
the  greater  danger  took  longer  to  manifest  itself.  Doctors  and  researchers  were
frequently  among  the  victims.  Radiation  researchers  were  also  slow  to  take  steps
to  protect  themselves  from  the  hidden  danger.  One  journal  opened  its  April  1914
issue  by  noting  that  "[w]e  have  to  deplore  once  more  the  sacrifice  of  a  radiologist,
the  victim  of  his  art."12

Clear  and  early  evidence  of  tragic  results  sharpened  both  expert  and  public
concern.  By  1924,  a  New  Jersey  dentist  noticed  an  unusual  rate  of  deterioration
of  the  jawbone  among  local  women.  On  further  investigation  he  learned  that  all
at  one  time  had  jobs  painting  a  radium  solution  onto  watch  dials.  Further  studies
revealed  that  as  they  painted,  they  licked  their  brushes  to  maintain  a  sharp  point.
Doing  so,  they  absorbed  radium  into  their  bodies.  The  radium  gradually  revealed
its  presence  in  jaw  deterioration,  blood  disease,  and  eventually,  a  painful,
disfiguring  deterioration  of  the  jaw.13  There  was  no  question  that  radium  was  the
culprit.  The  immediate  outcome  was  a  highly  publicized  crusade,  investigation,
lawsuits,  and  payments  to  the  victims.  Despite  the  publicity  surrounding  the  dial
painters,  response  to  the  danger  remained  agonizingly  slow.  Patent  medicines
containing  radium  and  radium  therapies  continued.14

The  tragedy  of  the  radium  dial  painters  and  similar  cases  of  patients  who
took  radium  nostrums  have  provided  basic  data  for  protection  standards  for
radioactive  substances  taken  into  the  body.  One  prominent  researcher  in  the  new
area  of  radiation  safety  was  Robley  Evans.  Evans  was  drawn  into  the  field  by  the
highly  publicized  death  in  1932  of  Eben  Byers,  following  routine  consumption  of
the  nostrum  Radiothor.  Byers's  death  spurred  Evans,  then  a  California  Institute  of
Technology  physics  graduate  student,  to  undertake  research  that  led  to  a  study  of
the  effects  on  the  body  of  ingesting  radium;  this  study  would  continue  for  more
than  half  a  century.15

Evans's  study  and  subsequent  studies  of  the  effects  of  radium  treatments
provided  the  anchor  in  human  data  for  our  understanding  of  the  effects  of
radiation  within  the  human  body.  As  the  dangers  of  the  imprudent  use  of  x  rays
and  internal  radiation  became  clear,  private  scientific  advisory  committees  sprang
up  to  develop  voluntary  guidelines  to  promote  safety  among  those  working  with
radiation.  When  the  government  did  enter  the  atomic  age,  it  often  referred  to  the

23


Introduction

guidelines  of  these  private  committees  as  it  developed  radiation  protection
standards."'

The  Miracle  of  Tracers

In  1913,  the  Hungarian  chemist  Georg  von  Hevesy  began  to  experiment
with  the  use  of  radioactive  forms  of  elements  (radioisotopes)  to  trace  the  behavior
of  the  normal,  nonradioactive  forms  of  a  variety  of  elements.  Ten  years  later
Hevesy  extended  his  chemical  experiments  to  biology,  using  a  radioisotope  of
lead  to  trace  the  movement  of  lead  from  soil  into  bean  plants.  In  1943,  Hevesy
won  the  Nobel  Prize  for  his  work  on  the  use  of  radioisotopes  as  tracers.

Previously,  those  seeking  to  understand  life  processes  of  an  organism  had
to  extract  molecules  and  structures  from  dead  cells  or  organisms,  and  then  study
those  molecules  by  arduous  chemical  procedures,  or  use  traceable  chemicals  that
were  foreign  to  the  organism  being  studied  but  that  mimicked  normal  body
chemicals  in  some  important  way.  Foreign  chemicals  could  alter  the  very
processes  being  measured  and,  in  any  case,  were  often  as  difficult  to  measure
precisely  as  were  normal  body  constituents.  The  radioactive  tracer— as  Our
Friend  the  Atom,  a  book  written  by  Dr.  Heinz  Haber  for  Walt  Disney  productions,
explained  in  1956  to  readers  of  all  ages—was  an  elegant  alternative:  "Making  a
sample  of  material  mildly  radioactive  is  like  putting  a  bell  on  a  sheep.  The
shepherd  traces  the  whole  flock  around  by  the  sound  of  the  bell.  In  the  same  way
it  is  possible  to  keep  tabs  on  tracer-atoms  with  a  Geiger  counter  or  any  other
radiation  detector."17

By  the  late  1920s  the  tracer  technique  was  being  applied  to  humans  in
Boston  by  researchers  using  an  injection  of  dissolved  radon  to  measure  the  rate  of
blood  circulation,  an  early  example  of  using  radioactivity  to  observe  life
processes.18  However,  research  opportunities  were  limited  by  the  fact  that  some
of  the  elements  that  are  most  important  in  living  creatures  do  not  possess
naturally  occurring  radioactive  isotopes.

The  answer  to  this  problem  came  simultaneously  at  faculty  clubs  and
seminars  in  Berkeley  and  Boston  in  the  early  1930s.  Medical  researchers  realized
that  the  famed  "atom  smasher,"  the  cyclotron  invented  by  University  of  California
physicist  Ernest  Lawrence,  could  be  used  as  a  factory  to  create  radioisotopes  for
medical  research  and  treatment.  "Take  an  ordinary  needle,"  Our  Friend  the  Atom
explained,  "put  it  into  an  atomic  reactor  for  a  short  while.  Some  of  the  ions
contained  in  the  steel  will  capture  a  neutron  and  be  transformed  into  a  radio-
isotope of  iron. . . .  Now  that  needle  could  be  found  in  the  proverbial  haystack
without  any  trouble."19

In  1936,  two  of  Lawrence's  Berkeley  colleagues,  Drs.  Joseph  Hamilton
and  Robert  Stone,  administered  radiosodium  to  treat  several  leukemia  patients.  In
1937,  Ernest  Lawrence's  brother,  physician  John  Lawrence,  became  the  first  to
use  radiophosphorus  for  the  treatment  of  leukemia.  This  application  was

24


The  Atomic  Century

extended  the  following  year  to  the  treatment  of  polycythemia  vera,  a  blood
disease.  This  method  soon  became  a  standard  treatment  for  that  disease.  In  1938,
Hamilton  and  Stone  also  began  pioneering  work  in  the  use  of  cyclotron-produced
neutrons  for  the  treatment  of  cancer.  The  following  year,  not  long  before  the  war
in  Europe  began,  Ernest  Lawrence  unveiled  a  larger  atom  smasher,  to  be  used  to
create  additional  radioisotopes  and  hence  dubbed  the  "medical  cyclotron."20  The
discovery  that  some  radioisotopes  deposited  selectively  in  different  parts  of  the
body—the  thyroid,  for  example-inspired  a  spirited  search  for  a  radioactive  "magic
bullet"  that  might  treat,  or  even  cure,  cancer  and  other  diseases.

In  Cambridge,  the  age  of  "nuclear  medicine"  is  said  to  have  begun  in
November  1936  with  a  lunchtime  seminar  at  Harvard,  at  which  MIT  President
Karl  Compton  talked  on  "What  Physics  Can  Do  for  Biology  and  Medicine."
Robley  Evans,  by  that  time  at  MIT,  is  reported  to  have  helped  prepare  the  portion
of  the  talk  from  which  medical  researchers  at  the  Massachusetts  General
Hospital's  thyroid  clinic  came  to  realize  that  MIT's  atom  smasher  could  produce  a
great  research  tool  for  their  work—radioisotopes.  Soon,  doctors  at  the  thyroid
clinic  began  a  series  of  experiments,  including  some  involving  humans,  that
would  lead  to  the  development  of  radioiodine  as  a  standard  tool  for  diagnosing
and  treating  thyroid  disease.21

In  late  1938,  the  discovery  of  atomic  fission  in  Germany  prompted
concern  among  physicists  in  England  and  the  United  States  that  Nazi  Germany
might  be  the  first  to  harness  the  power  of  the  atom— as  a  propulsion  method  for
submarines,  as  radioactive  poison,  or  most  worrisome  of  all,  as  a  bomb  capable  of
unimagined  destruction.  In  the  United  States,  a  world-famous  physicist,  Albert
Einstein,  and  a  recent  emigre  from  Hungary,  Leo  Szilard,  alerted  President
Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  to  the  military  implications  of  the  German  discovery  in  an
August  1939  letter.

Assigning  his  own  science  adviser,  Vannevar  Bush,  to  the  task  of
determining  the  feasibility  of  an  atomic  bomb,  Roosevelt's  simple  "O.K.,"
scrawled  on  a  piece  of  paper,  set  in  motion  the  chain  of  events  that  would  lead  to
the  largest  and  most  expensive  engineering  project  in  history.  Soon,  Ernest
Lawrence's  Radiation  Laboratory  and  its  medical  cyclotron  were  mobilized  to  aid
in  the  nationwide  effort  to  build  the  world's  first  atomic  bomb.  In  a  related  effort,
Drs.  Stone  and  Hamilton,  and  others,  would  turn  their  talents  to  the  medical
research  needed  to  ensure  the  safety  of  those  working  on  the  bomb.

THE  MANHATTAN  PROJECT:  A  NEW  AND  SECRET
WORLD  OF  HUMAN  EXPERIMENTATION

In  August  1942,  the  Manhattan  Engineer  District  was  created  by  the
government  to  meet  the  goal  of  producing  an  atomic  weapon  under  the  pressure
of  ongoing  global  war.  Its  central  mission  became  known  as  the  Manhattan
Project.  Under  the  direction  of  Brigadier  General  Leslie  Groves  of  the  Army

25


Introduction

Corps  of  Engineers,  who  recently  had  supervised  the  construction  of  the
Pentagon,  secret  atomic  energy  communities  were  created  almost  overnight  in
Oak  Ridge,  Tennessee,  at  Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico,  and  in  Hanford,
Washington,  to  house  the  workers  and  gigantic  new  machinery  needed  to  produce
the  bomb.  The  weapon  itself  would  be  built  at  the  Los  Alamos  laboratory,  under
the  direction  of  physicist  J.  Robert  Oppenheimer.

Plucked  from  campuses  around  the  country,  medical  researchers  came
face  to  face  with  the  need  to  understand  and  control  the  effect  upon  the  thousands
of  people,  doctors  included,  of  radioactive  materials  being  produced  in  previously
unimaginable  quantities.

In  November  1942  General  Groves,  through  the  intermediation  of  an
Eastman  Kodak  official,  paid  a  call  on  University  of  Rochester  radiologist
Stafford  Warren.  Rochester,  like  MIT  and  Berkeley,  was  another  locale  where
radiation  research  had  brought  together  physicists  and  physicians.  "They  wanted
to  know  what  I  was  doing  in  radiation.  So  I  discussed  the  cancer  work  and  some
of  the  other  things,"  Warren  told  an  interviewer  in  the  1960s.  Then  "[w]e  got
upstairs  and  they  looked  in  the  closet  and  they  closed  the  transom  and  they  looked
out  the  window.  . . .  Then  they  closed  and  locked  the  door  and  said,  'Sit  down.'"22

Soon  thereafter,  Dr.  Warren  was  made  a  colonel  in  the  U.S.  Army  and  the
medical  director  of  the  Manhattan  Project.  As  his  deputy,  Warren  called  on  Dr.
Hymer  Friedell,  a  radiologist  who  had  worked  with  Dr.  Stone  in  California.  Dr.
Stone  himself  had  meanwhile  moved  to  the  University  of  Chicago,  where  he
would  play  a  key  role  in  Manhattan  Project-related  medical  research.

Initially,  researchers  knew  little  or  nothing  about  the  health  effects  of  the
basic  bomb  components,  uranium,  plutonium,  and  polonium.23  But,  as  a  secret
history  written  in  1946  stated,  they  knew  the  tale  of  the  radium  dial  painters:

The  memory  of  this  tragedy  was  very  vivid  in  the
minds  of  people,  and  the  thoughts  of  potential
dangers  of  working  in  areas  where  radiation  hazards
existed  were  intensified  because  the  deleterious
effects  of  radiation  could  not  be  seen  or  felt  and  the
results  of  over-exposure  might  not  become  apparent
for  long  periods  after  such  exposure.24

The  need  for  secrecy,  Stafford  Warren  later  recalled,  compounded  the
urgency  of  understanding  and  controlling  risk.  Word  of  death  or  toxic  hazard
could  leak  out  to  the  surrounding  community  and  blow  the  project's  cover.25

The  need  to  protect  the  Manhattan  Project  workers  soon  gave  rise  to  a  new
discipline,  called  health  physics,  which  sought  to  understand  radiation  effects  and
monitor  and  protect  nuclear  worker  health  and  safety.  The  Project  was  soon
inundated  with  data  from  radiation-detection  instruments,  blood  and  urine
samples,  and  physical  exams.  The  "clinical  study  of  the  personnel,"  Robert  Stone

26


The  Atomic  Century

wrote  in  1943,  "is  one  vast  experiment.  Never  before  has  so  large  a  collection  of
individuals  been  exposed  to  so  much  radiation."26  Along  with  these  data-
gathering  efforts  came  ethical  issues.

Would  disclosure  of  potential  or  actual  harm  to  the  workers,  much  less  the
public,  impair  the  program?  For  example,  a  July  1945  Manhattan  Project  memo
discussed  whether  to  inform  a  worker  that  her  case  of  nephritis  (a  kidney  disease)
may  have  been  due  to  her  work  on  the  Project.  The  issue  was  of  special  import
because,  the  memo  indicated,  the  illness  might  well  be  a  precursor  of  more  cases.
The  worker,  the  memo  explained,  "is  unaware  of  her  condition  which  now  shows
up  on  routine  physical  check  and  urinalysis."27

As  this  memo  showed,  there  was  an  urgent  need  for  decisions  on  how  to
protect  the  workers,  while  at  the  same  time  safeguard  the  security  of  the  project:
"The  employees  must  necessarily  be  rotated  out,  and  not  permitted  to  resume
further  exposure.  In  frequent  instances  no  other  type  of  employment  is  available.
Claims  and  litigation  will  necessarily  flow  from  the  circumstances  outlined."
There  were  also,  the  memo  concluded,  "Ethical  considerations":

The  feelings  of  the  medical  officers  are  keenly
appreciated.  Are  they  in  accordance  with  their
canons  of  ethics  to  be  permitted  to  advise  the
patient  of  his  true  condition,  its  cause,  effect,  and
probable  prognosis?  If  not  on  ethical  grounds,  are
they  to  be  permitted  to  fulfill  their  moral  obligations
to  the  individual  employees  in  so  advising  him?  If
not  on  moral  grounds,  are  those  civilian  medical
doctors  employed  here  bound  to  make  full
disclosure  to  patients  under  penalty  of  liability  for
malpractice  or  proceeding  for  revocation  of  license
for  their  failure  to  do  so?28

It  is  not  clear  what  was  decided  in  this  case.  However,  the  potential
conflict  between  the  government  doctors'  duty  to  those  working  on  government
projects  and  the  same  doctors'  obligations  to  the  government  would  not  disappear.
Following  the  war,  as  we  see  in  chapter  12,  this  conflict  would  be  sharply  posed
as  medical  researchers  studied  miners  at  work  producing  uranium  for  the  nation's
nuclear  weapons.

Another  basic  question  was  the  extent  to  which  human  beings  could  or
should  be  studied  to  obtain  the  data  needed  to  protect  them.  The  radium  dial
painter  data  served  as  a  baseline  to  determine  how  the  effects  of  exposures  in  the
body  could  be  measured.  But  this  left  the  question  of  whether  plutonium,
uranium,  and  polonium  behaved  more  or  less  like  radium.  Research  was  needed
to  understand  how  these  elements  worked  in  the  body  and  to  establish  safety
levels.  A  large  number  of  animal  studies  were  conducted  at  laboratories  in

27


Introduction

Chicago,  Berkeley,  Rochester,  and  elsewhere;  but  the  relevance  of  the  data  to
humans  remained  in  doubt.

The  Manhattan  Project  contracted  with  the  University  of  Rochester  to
receive  the  data  on  physical  exams  and  other  tests  from  Project  sites  and  to
prepare  statistical  analyses.  While  boxes  of  these  raw  data  have  been  retrieved,  it
is  not  clear  what  use  was  made  of  them.29  Accidents,  while  remarkably  few  and
far  between,  became  a  key  source  of  the  data  used  in  constructing  an
understanding  of  radiation  risk.  But  accidents  were  not  predictable,  and  their
occurrence  only  enhanced  the  immediacy  of  the  need  to  gain  better  data.

In  1944,  the  Manhattan  Project  medical  team,  under  Stafford  Warren  and
with  the  evident  concurrence  of  Robert  Oppenheimer,  made  plans  to  inject
polonium,  plutonium,  uranium,  and  possibly  other  radioactive  elements  into
human  beings.  As  discussed  in  chapter  5,  the  researchers  turned  to  patients,  not
workers,  as  the  source  of  experimental  data  needed  to  protect  workers.  By  the
time  the  program  was  abandoned  by  the  government,  experimentation  with
plutonium  had  taken  place  in  hospitals  at  the  Universities  of  California,  Chicago,
and  Rochester,  and  at  the  Army  hospital  in  Oak  Ridge,  and  further
experimentation  with  polonium  and  uranium  had  taken  place  at  Rochester.

The  surviving  documentation  provides  little  indication  that  the  medical
officials  and  researchers  who  planned  this  program  considered  the  ethical
implications  of  using  patients  for  a  purpose  that  no  one  claimed  would  benefit
them,  under  circumstances  where  the  existence  of  the  substances  injected  was  a
wartime  secret.  Following  the  war,  however,  the  ethical  questions  raised  by  these
experiments  would  be  revisited  in  debates  that  themselves  were  long  kept  secret.

In  addition  to  experimentation  with  internally  administered  radioisotopes,
external  radiation  was  administered  in  human  experiments  directed  by  Dr.  Stone
at  Chicago  and  San  Francisco  and  by  others  at  Memorial  Hospital  in  New  York
City.  Once  again,  the  primary  subjects  were  patients,  although  some  healthy
subjects  were  also  involved.  In  these  cases,  the  researchers  may  have  felt  that  the
treatment  was  of  therapeutic  value  to  the  patients.  But,  in  addition  to  the  question
of  whether  the  patients  were  informed  of  the  government's  interest,  this  research
raised  the  question  of  whether  the  government's  interest  affected  the  patients'
treatment.  As  discussed  in  chapter  8,  these  questions  would  recur  when,
beginning  in  1 95 1 ,  and  for  two  decades  thereafter,  the  Defense  Department  would
fund  the  collection  of  data  from  irradiated  patients.

Ensuring  safety  required  more,  however,  than  simply  studying  how
radioactive  substances  moved  through  and  affected  the  human  body.  It  also
involved  studying  how  these  substances  moved  through  the  environment.  While
undetectable  to  the  human  senses,  radiation  in  the  environment  is  easily
measurable  by  instruments.  When  General  Groves  chose  Hanford,  on  the
Columbia  River  in  Washington  state,  as  a  site  for  the  plutonium  production
facility,  a  secret  research  program  was  mounted  to  understand  the  fate  of
radioactive  pollution  in  the  water,  the  air,  and  wildlife.30

28


The  Atomic  Century

Outdoor  research  was  at  times  improvisational.  Years  after  the  fact,
Stafford  Warren  would  recall  how  Manhattan  Project  researchers  had  deliberately
"contaminated  the  alfalfa  field"  next  to  the  University  of  Rochester  medical
school  with  radiosodium,  to  determine  the  shielding  requirements  for  radiation-
measuring  equipment.  Warren's  associate  Dr.  Harold  Hodge  recalled  that  a
shipment  of  radiosodium  was  received  by  plane  from  Robley  Evans  at  MIT,
mixed  with  water  in  a  barrel,  and  poured  into  garden  sprinklers:

We  walked  along  and  sprinkled  the  driveway.  This
was  after  dark.  .  . .  The  next  thing,  we  went  out  and
sprayed  a  considerable  part  of  the  field.  ...  It  was
sprayed  and  then  after  a  while  sprayed  again,  so
there  was  a  second  and  third  application.  We  were
all  in  rubber,  so  we  didn't  get  wet  with  the  stuff .  . .
then  Staff  [Warren]  said  that  one  of  the  things  we
needed  was  to  see  what  would  be  the  effect  on  the
inside  of  a  wooden  building.  So  we  took  the  end  of
the  parking  garage,  and  we  sprinkled  that  up  about
as  high  as  our  shoulders,  and  somebody  went  inside
and  made  measurements,  and  we  sprinkled  it  again.
Then  we  wanted  to  know  about  the  inside  of  a  brick
building,  and  so  we  sprinkled  the  side  of  the  animal
house. ...  I  had  no  idea  what  the  readings  were.  .  .  I
hadn't  the  foggiest  idea  of  what  we  were  doing,
except  that  obviously  it  was  something
radioactive.31

Outdoor  releases  would  put  at  risk  unsuspecting  citizens,  even
communities,  as  well  as  workers.  There  were  no  clear  policies  and  no  history  of
practice  to  guide  how  these  releases  should  be  conducted.  As  we  explore  in
chapter  1 1,  this  would  be  worked  out  by  experts  and  officials  in  secret,  on  behalf
of  the  workers  and  citizens  who  might  be  affected.

THE  ATOMIC  ENERGY  COMMISSION  AND  POSTWAR
BIOMEDICAL  RADIATION  RESEARCH

On  August  6,  1945,  when  the  atomic  bomb  was  dropped  on  Hiroshima,
the  most  sensitive  of  secrets  became  a  symbol  for  the  ages.  A  week  later,  the
bomb  was  the  subject  of  a  government  report  that  revealed  to  the  public  the  uses
of  plutonium  and  uranium.32  Immediately,  debate  began  over  the  future  of  atomic
energy.  Could  it  be  controlled  at  the  international  level?  Should  it  remain
entirely  under  control  of  the  military?  What  role  would  industry  have  in
developing  its  potential?  Although  American  policymakers  failed  to  establish

29


Introduction

international  control  of  the  bomb,  they  succeeded  in  creating  a  national  agency
with  responsibility  for  the  domestic  control  of  atomic  energy.

The  most  divisive  question  in  the  creation  of  the  new  agency  that  would
hold  sway  over  the  atom  was  the  role  of  the  military.  Following  congressional
hearings,  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  was  established  by  the  1946  McMahon
Act,  to  be  headed  by  five  civilian  commissioners.  President  Truman  appointed
David  Lilienthal,  former  head  of  the  Tennessee  Valley  Authority,  as  the  first
chairman  of  the  AEC,  which  took  over  responsibilities  of  the  Manhattan  Engineer
District  in  January  1947.

Also  in  1947,  under  the  National  Security  Act,  the  armed  services  were
put  under  the  authority  of  the  newly  created  National  Military  Establishment
(NME),  to  be  headed  by  the  secretary  of  defense.  In  1949  the  National  Security
Act  was  amended,  and  the  NME  was  transformed  into  an  executive  department—
the  Department  of  Defense.33  The  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project,  which
would  coordinate  the  Defense  Department's  responsibilities  in  the  area  of  nuclear
weapons,  became  the  military  heir  to  the  Manhattan  Engineer  District.  The
Military  Liaison  Committee  was  also  established  as  an  intermediary  between  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission  and  the  Defense  Department;  it  was  also  to  help  set
military  requirements  for  the  number  and  type  of  nuclear  weapons  needed  by  the
armed  services.

Even  before  the  AEC  officially  assumed  responsibility  for  the  bomb  from
the  Manhattan  Project,  the  Interim  Medical  Advisory  Committee,  chaired  by
former  Manhattan  Project  medical  director  Stafford  Warren,  began  meeting  to
map  out  an  ambitious  postwar  biomedical  research  program.  Former  Manhattan
Project  contractors  proposed  to  resume  the  research  that  had  been  interrupted  by
the  war  and  to  continue  wartime  radiation  effects  studies  upon  human  subjects.34

In  May  1947,  Lilienthal  commissioned  a  blue-ribbon  panel,  the  Medical
Board  of  Review,  that  reported  the  following  month  on  the  agency's  biomedical
program.  In  strongly  recommending  a  broad  research  and  training  program,  the
board  found  the  need  for  research  "both  urgent  and  extensive."  The  need  was
"urgent  because  of  the  extraordinary  danger  of  exposing  living  creatures  to
radioactivity.  It  is  urgent  because  effective  defensive  measures  (in  the  military
sense)  against  radiant  energy  are  not  yet  known."  The  board,  pointing  to  the
AEC's  "absolute  monopoly  of  new  and  important  tools  for  research  and  important
knowledge,"  noted  the  commensurate  responsibilities-both  to  employees  and
others  who  could  suffer  from  "its  negligence  or  ignorance"  and  to  the  scientific
world,  with  which  it  was  obliged  to  "share  its  acquisitions  . . .  whenever  security
considerations  permit."35  In  the  fall  of  1947,  as  recommended  by  the  Medical
Board  of  Review,  the  AEC  created  a  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  (DBM)  to
coordinate  biomedical  research  involving  atomic  energy  and  an  Advisory
Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine  (ACBM),  which  reported  directly  to  the
AEC's  chairman.36

Not  surprisingly,  the  DBM  and  ACBM  became  gathering  places  for  the

30


The  Atomic  Century

luminaries  of  radiation  science.  The  ACBM  was  headed  by  a  Rockefeller
Foundation  official,  Dr.  Alan  Gregg.  It  settled  on  Dr.  Shields  Warren,  a  Harvard-
trained  pathologist,  to  serve  as  the  first  chief  of  the  DBM.  Warren,  as  we  shall
see,  would  play  a  central  role  in  developments  related  to  radiation  research  and
human  experimentation.  In  the  1930s,  focusing  on  cancer  research,  and
influenced  by  the  work  of  Hevesy  and  the  pioneering  radioisotope  work  being
done  in  Berkeley  and  Boston,  Warren  turned  to  the  question  of  the  effects  of
radiation  on  animals  and  the  treatment  of  acute  leukemia,  the  "most  hopeless  . . .
of  tumors  at  that  time."  As  the  war  neared,  Warren  enlisted  in  the  Naval  Reserve.
He  continued  medical  work  for  the  Navy,  turning  down  an  invitation  to  join
Stafford  Warren  (no  relation)  on  "a  project . . .  that  he  couldn't  tell  me  anything
about  [the  Manhattan  Project].""

While  most  of  the  AEC's  budget  would  be  devoted  to  highly  secret
weapons  development  and  related  activities,  the  biomedical  research  program
represented  the  commission's  proud  public  face.  Even  before  the  AEC  opened  its
doors,  Manhattan  Project  officials  and  experts  had  laid  the  groundwork  for  a  bold
program  to  encourage  the  use  of  radioisotopes  for  scientific  research,  especially  in
medicine.  This  program  was  first  presented  to  the  broad  public  in  a  September
1946  article  in  the  New  York  Times  Magazine.  The  article  began  dramatically  by
describing  the  use  of  "radioactive  salt"  to  measure  circulation  in  a  crushed  leg,  so
that  a  decision  on  whether  to  amputate  below  or  above  the  knee  could  be  made.

By  November  1946,  the  isotope  distribution  program  was  well  under  way,
with  more  than  200  requests  approved,  about  half  of  which  were  designated  for
"human  uses."  From  the  beginning,  the  AEC's  Isotope  Division  at  Oak  Ridge  had
in  its  program  director,  Paul  Aebersold,  a  veritable  Johnny  Appleseed  for
radioelements.39  In  presentations  before  the  public  and  to  researchers,  Aebersold,
dubbed  "Mr.  Isotope,"  touted  the  simplicity  and  low  cost  with  which  scientists
would  be  provided  with  radioisotopes:  "The  materials  and  services  are  made
available  .  .  .  with  a  minimum  of  red  tape  and  under  conditions  which  encourage
their  use."40  At  an  international  cancer  conference  in  St.  Louis  in  1947,  the  AEC
announced  that  it  would  make  radioisotopes  available  without  cost  for  cancer
research  and  experimental  cancer  treatment.  This,  Shields  Warren  later  recalled,
had  a  "tremendous  effect"  and  "led  to  a  revolution  in  the  type  of  work  done  in  this

field."41  c . .__,

To  AEC  administrators,  Aebersold  emphasized  the  benefits  to  the  AhC  s
public  image:  "Much  of  the  Commission's  success  is  judged  by  the  public  and
scientists  ...  on  its  willingness  to  carry  out  a  wide  and  liberal  policy  on  the
distribution  of  materials,  information,  and  services,"  he  wrote  in  a  memo  to  the
AEC's  general  manager.42

The  AEC  biomedical  program  as  a  whole  also  provided  for  funding  ot
cancer  research  centers,  research  equipment,  and  numerous  other  research
projects.  Here,  too,  were  advances  that  would  save  many  lives.  Before  the  war,
radiotherapy  had  reached  a  plateau,  limited  by  the  cost  of  radium  and  the  inability

31


Introduction

of  the  machines  of  the  time  to  focus  radiation  precisely  on  tumors  to  the  exclusion
of  surrounding  healthy  tissue.  AEC  facilities  inherited  from  the  Manhattan
Project  could  produce  radioactive  cobalt,  a  cheaper  substitute  for  radium.  As
well,  the  AEC's  "teletherapy"  program  funded  the  development  of  new  equipment
capable  of  producing  precisely  focused  high-energy  beams.43

The  AEC's  highly  publicized  peacetime  medical  program  was  not  immune
to  the  pressures  of  the  Cold  War  political  climate.  Even  the  lives  of  young
researchers  in  the  AEC  Fellowship  Program  conducting  nonclassified  research
were  subject  to  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  review  despite  protests  from
commission  members.  Congressionally  mandated  Cold  War  requirements  such  as
loyalty  oaths  and  noncommunist  affidavits,  Chairman  Lilienthal  declared,  would
have  a  chilling  effect  on  scientific  discussion  and  could  damage  the  AEC's  ability
to  recruit  a  new  generation  of  scientists.44  The  reach  of  the  law,  the  Advisory
Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine  agreed,  was  like  a  "blighting  hand;  for
thoughtful  men  now  know  how  political  domination  can  distort  free  inquiry  into  a
malignant  servant  of  expediency  and  authoritarian  abstraction."45  Nonetheless,
the  AEC  accepted  the  congressional  conditions  for  its  fellowship  program  and
determined  to  seek  the  program's  expansion.46

The  AEC's  direct  promotional  efforts  were  multiplied  by  the  success  of
Aebersold  and  his  colleagues  in  carrying  the  message  to  other  government
agencies,  as  well  as  to  industry  and  private  researchers.  This  success  led,  in  turn,
to  new  programs.

In  August  1947,  General  Groves  urged  Major  General  Paul  Hawley,  the
director  of  the  medical  programs  of  the  Veterans  Administration,  to  address
medical  problems  related  to  the  military's  use  of  atomic  energy.  Soon  thereafter,
Hawley  appointed  an  advisory  committee,  manned  by  Stafford  Warren  and  other
medical  researchers.  The  advisers  recommended  that  the  VA  create  both  a
"publicized"  program  to  promote  the  use  of  radioisotopes  in  research  and  a
"confidential"  program  to  deal  with  potential  liability  claims  from  veterans
exposed  to  radiation  hazards.47  The  "publicized"  program  soon  mushroomed,
with  Stafford  Warren,  Shields  Warren,  and  Hymer  Friedell  among  the  key
advisers.  By  1974,  according  to  VA  reports,  more  than  2,000  human  radiation
experiments  would  be  performed  at  VA  facilities,48  many  of  which  would  work  in
tandem  with  neighboring  medical  schools,  such  as  the  relationship  between  the
UCLA  medical  school,  where  Stafford  Warren  was  now  dean,  and  the  Wadsworth
(West  Los  Angeles)  VA  Hospital.

While  the  AEC's  weapons-related  work  would  continue  to  be  cloaked  in
secrecy,  the  isotope  program  was  used  by  researchers  in  all  corners  of  the  land  to
achieve  new  scientific  understanding  and  help  create  new  diagnostic  and
therapeutic  tools.  It  was,  however,  only  a  small  part  of  an  enormous  institution.
By  1951  the  AEC  would  employ  60,000  people,  all  but  5,000  through  contractors.
Its  land  would  encompass  2,800  square  miles,  an  area  equal  to  Rhode  Island  and
Delaware  combined.  In  addition  to  research  centers  throughout  the  United  States,

32


The  Atomic  Century

its  operations  "extended]  from  the  ore  fields  of  the  Belgian  Congo  and  the  Arctic
region  of  Canada  to  the  weapons  proving  ground  at  Enewetak  Atoll  in  the  Pacific
and  the  medical  projects  studying  the  after-effects  of  atomic  bombing  in  . . .
Japan  "49  The  Isotope  Division,  however,  would  employ  only  about  fifty  people
and,  when  reactor  production  time  was  accounted  for,  occupy  only  a  fraction  of
its  budget  and  resources.50

THE  TRANSFORMATION  IN  GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED
RESEARCH

The  AEC's  decision  to  proceed  with  a  biomedical  research  program  was
part  of  an  even  greater  transformation,  in  which  government  continued  and
expanded  wartime  support  for  research  in  industry  and  at  universities.  Before
World  War  II,  biomedical  research  was  a  small  enterprise  in  which  the  federal
government  played  a  minor  role.  During  the  war,  however,  large  numbers  of
American  biomedical  researchers  were  mobilized  by  the  armed  forces.  These
researchers  played  an  important  role  in  advancing  military  medicine  in  a  wide
range  of  areas,  including  blood  substitutes,  antimalarial  drugs  and,  as  noted
above  in  nurturing  the  infant  science  of  nuclear  medicine.

'  As  the  war  was  drawing  to  a  close,  President  Roosevelt  asked  for  advice
from  his  Office  of  Scientific  Research  and  Development  (OSRD)  on  how  to
convert  the  nation's  military  research  effort  to  a  peacetime  footing,  and  whether
the  government  should  take  an  activist  role  in  promoting  research.  The  OSRD,
under  Vannevar  Bush,  responded  in  July  1945,  after  Roosevelt's  death,  with  a
report  called  "Science,  the  Endless  Frontier."  Bush  and  his  colleagues
recommended  among  other  things  the  establishment  of  a  National  Science
Foundation  (NSF)  to  support  basic  research  in  all  areas  including  the  biomedical
sciences.  While  the  principle  that  the  federal  government  should  fund  medical
research  came  to  seem  self-evident,  this  was  hardly  the  case  at  the  time.  In  a
personal  reminiscence  published  in  1970,  Bush  wrote:

To  persuade  the  Congress  of  these  pragmatically
inclined  United  States  to  establish  a  strong
organization  to  support  fundamental  research  would
seem  to  be  one  of  the  minor  miracles.  We  in  this
country  have  supported  well  those  pioneers  who
have  created  new  gadgetry  for  our  use  or  our
amusement.  But  we  have  not  had  during  our
formative  years  the  respect  for  scientific  endeavors,
for  scholarship  generally,  to  the  extent  it  had  been
present  in  Europe.51

Congress  worked  Bush's  small  miracle  and  passed  relevant  legislation,  but

33


Introduction

President  Harry  Truman  vetoed  the  bill.  When  the  bill  passed  again,  however,
Bush  persuaded  Truman  to  sign  it.52

At  the  new  AEC,  and  elsewhere,  a  key  element  of  the  support  for  science
was  the  determination  to  fund  extramural  research,  that  is,  research  outside  the
agency.  Prior  to  the  war,  federal  support  for  private  researchers  was  limited.  The
Manhattan  Project  was  only  one  of  several  wartime  efforts  that  drew  private
researchers  into  government  service  and  that  provided  federal  funds  for  those  who
remained  in  private  research  centers.  Following  the  war,  as  researchers  returned
to  universities,  laboratories,  and  hospitals,  the  continued  federal  support  of  their
efforts  transformed  the  relationship  between  government  and  science  and  the
dimensions  of  the  scientific  effort.53

During  the  war,  the  Committee  on  Medical  Research  (CMR)  of  the  OSRD
operated  entirely  by  funding  external  research.  In  1 944,  Congress  empowered  the
surgeon  general  of  the  Public  Health  Service  to  make  grants  to  universities,
hospitals,  laboratories,  and  individuals,  which  provided  the  legislative  basis  for
the  postwar  National  Institute  of  Health  (NIH)  extramural  program.54  In  1948,
Congress  authorized  the  National  Heart  Institute  to  join  the  decade-old  National
Cancer  Institute,  and  NIH  became  the  National  Institutes  of  Health.

By  the  late  1960s,  the  annual  appropriations  of  NIH  exceeded  $1  billion.55
Research  involving  medical  uses  of  radioisotopes  and  external  radiation  was
among  the  newer  fields  benefiting  from  the  increased  funding.  As  discussed  in
more  detail  in  chapter  6,  government-supported  radioisotope  research  has  proved
profoundly  important  in  the  development  of  techniques  for  medical  diagnosis  and
treatment.

Federal  research  funding  has  also  continued  to  be  essential  to  the
development  of  the  use  of  external  sources  of  radiation.  For  example,  the  crude
images  made  possible  by  Roentgen's  discovery  of  x  rays  have  been  replaced  by
higher  resolution,  three-dimensional  pictures,  such  as  those  produced  by
computerized  tomographic  (CT)  scanning  and  magnetic  resonance  imaging
(MRI).

Today,  the  benefits  of  federally  sponsored  medical  research  are  often
taken  for  granted.  To  many  of  those  in  the  midst  of  the  postwar  planning  and
advocacy,  however,  the  result  was  not  foreordained.  "Fortunately,"  Shields
Warren  recalled  years  later,  postwar  "momentum"  kept  AEC  research  budgets  on
track  until,  in  1957,  the  Soviet  launch  of  Sputnik  (the  first  space  satellite)  jolted
the  American  people  into  a  renewed  commitment  to  the  support  of  scientific
research.56


34


The  Atomic  Century

THE  AFTERMATH  OF  HIROSHIMA  AND  NAGASAKI:  THE
EMERGENCE  OF  THE  COLD  WAR  RADIATION  RESEARCH
BUREAUCRACY

While  promoting  the  beneficial  uses  of  radiation,  the  government  also
wished  to  continue  and  expand  research  on  its  harmful  effects.  Three  days  after
the  destruction  of  Hiroshima,  Robert  Stone  wrote  two  letters  to  Stafford  Warren's
deputy,  and  Stone's  former  student,  Hymer  Friedell.  The  first  expressed  hope  that
the  contribution  of  medical  researchers  could  now  be  made  public,  so  that  people
would  know  what  they  had  done  during  the  war.57  The  second  letter  described
Stone's  "mixed  feelings"  at  the  success  that  had  been  achieved  and  his  fear  that
the  lingering  effects  of  radiation  from  the  bomb  had  been  underestimated:  "I
could  hardly  believe  my  eyes,"  Stone  wrote,  "when  I  saw  a  series  of  news  releases
said  to  be  quoting  Oppenheimer,  and  giving  the  impression  that  there  is  no
radioactive  hazard.  Apparently  all  things  are  relative."58

Friedell  and  other  researchers,  including  Stafford  Warren  and  Shields
Warren,  soon  traveled  to  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  to  begin  what  became  an
extensive  research  program  on  survivors.  The  data  from  that  project  quickly
became  and  still  remain  the  essential  source  of  information  on  the  long-term
effects  of  radiation  on  populations  of  human  beings.  It  was  not  long,  however,
before  there  were  additional  real-life  data  on  the  bomb,  from  postwar  atomic  tests.
In  1946,  the  United  States  undertook  the  first  peacetime  nuclear  weapons  tests  at
Bikini  Atoll  in  the  Marshall  Islands.  Operation  Crossroads,  conducted  before
journalists  and  VIPs  from  around  the  world,  was  intended  to  test  the  ability  of  a
flotilla  of  unmanned  ships  to  withstand  the  blast.  Since  most  of  the  ships
remained  afloat,  the  Navy  declared  Crossroads  a  triumph.59

Behind  the  scenes,  however,  Crossroads  medical  director  Stafford  Warren
expressed  horror  at  the  level  of  contamination  on  the  ships  due  to  the  underwater
atomic  blast.60  When  the  ships  returned  to  the  West  Coast  from  the  Pacific,  they
were  extensively  studied  to  assess  the  damage  and  contamination  from  the  atomic
bombs.  The  government  created  the  Naval  Radiological  Defense  Laboratory
(NRDL)  to  study  the  effects  of  atomic  bombs  on  ships  and  to  design  ways  to
protect  them.  "Crossroads,"  according  to  an  NRDL  history,  "left  no  doubt  that
man  was  faced  with  the  necessity  for  coping  with  strange  and  unprecedented
problems  for  which  no  solutions  were  available."6'

Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki,  it  now  seemed,  were  only  the  beginning,  not  the
end,  of  human  exposure  to  bomb-produced  radiation.  As  Crossroads  confirmed
with  the  lingering  problem  of  contaminated  ships,  what  the  bomb  did  not
obliterate  it  might  still  damage  by  radiation  over  the  course  of  days  or  years.  It
was  no  longer  enough  to  know  about  the  effects  of  radioactive  materials  on
American  nuclear  weapons  workers;  now  there  was  the  urgent  need  to  understand
the  effects  on  American  soldiers,  sailors,  and  even  citizens  as  well.

Largely  invisible  to  the  public,  an  ad  hoc  bureaucracy  sprang  up  to

35


Introduction

address  the  medical  and  radiation  research  problems  of  atomic  warfare.  This
bureaucracy  brought  together  former  wartime  radiation  researchers,  who  were
joined  by  junior  colleagues,  to  advise,  and  participate  in,  the  government's
growing  radiation  research  program.  Other,  already  established  groups-such  as
the  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  and  its  advisory  committee-also
had  important  places  in  the  new  network.

Beyond  considering  fallout  from  the  testing  of  atomic  bombs,  these  groups
also  looked  at  how  radiation  itself  might  be  used  as  a  weapon.  During  the  war,
scientists  like  J.  Robert  Oppenheimer  had  speculated  on  the  possibility  that  fission
products  (radioactive  materials  produced  by  the  bomb  or  by  reactors)  could  be
dispersed  in  the  air  and  on  the  ground  to  kill  or  incapacitate  the  enemy.  In  1946,
the  widespread  contamination  of  ships  at  Crossroads  by  radioactive  mist  gave
dramatic  evidence  of  the  potential  of  so-called  radiological  warfare,  or  RW.  In
1947,  the  military  created  a  committee  of  experts  to  study  the  problem.  The
following  year,  a  blue-ribbon  panel  of  physicians  and  physicists  looked  at  the
prospects,  both  offensive  and  defensive,  of  what  the  Pentagon  termed  "Rad  War."
The  work  of  these  panels  would  lead  to  dozens  of  intentional  releases  of  radiation
into  the  environment  at  the  Army's  Dugway,  Utah,  testing  grounds  from  the  late
1940s  to  the  early  1950s.  The  very  fact  that  the  government  was  engaged  in  RW
tests  was  a  secret.  Indeed,  the  records  of  the  RW  program-including,  as  we  shall
see  in  chapter  1 1,  the  debate  on  what  the  public  should  be  told  about  the
program-would  remain  largely  secret  for  almost  fifty  years.

In  1 949,  a  military  program  to  build  a  nuclear-powered  airplane  led  to  a
set  of  proposed  human  radiation  experiments.  The  NEPA  (Nuclear  Energy  for  the
Propulsion  of  Aircraft)  program  had  its  origins  in  1946  as  a  venture  that  included
the  Manhattan  Project's  Oak  Ridge  site,  the  military,  and  private  aircraft
manufacturers.  Robert  Stone,  as  we  shall  see  in  chapter  8,  was  a  leading
proponent  of  experiments  involving  healthy  volunteers,  as  a  key  to  answering
questions  about  the  radiation  hazard  faced  by  the  crew  of  the  proposed  airplane.

The  NEPA  and  RW  groups  considered  important,  but  still  discrete,
projects.  Where  did  the  "big  picture"  discussions  take  place?  The  Advisory
Committee  has  pieced  together  the  records  of  the  Armed  Forces  Medical  Policy
Council,  the  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences,  and  the  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical
Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare."  These  three  Defense  Department  groups,  all
chaired  by  civilian  doctors,  guided  the  government  on  both  the  broad  subject  of
military-related  biomedical  research  and  the  new  and  special  problems  posed  by
atomic  warfare.

If  the  surviving  records  are  an  indication,  from  its  creation  in  1949  to  its
evident  demise  with  the  reorganization  of  the  Defense  Department  in  1953,  the
Joint  Panel  quickly  became  the  hub  of  atomic  warfare-related  biomedical
research.  The  Joint  Panel  gathered  information  about  relevant  research  from  all
corners  of  the  government,  provided  guidance  for  Defense  Department  programs,


36


The  Atomic  Century

and  reviewed  and  coordinated  policy  in  the  matter  of  human  experimentation
using  atomic  energy.

By  charter,  the  group  was  to  be  headed  by  a  civilian.  Harvard's  Dr.  Joseph
Aub,  a  long-standing  member  of  the  Boston-based  medical  research  community
who  had  worked  with  Robley  Evans  on  the  study  of  the  radium  dial  painters  and
had  also  studied  lead  toxicity,  served  as  chair.  Those  who  served  with  Aub
included  Evans,  Hymer  Friedell,  and  Louis  Hempelmann,  Oppenheimer's
Manhattan  Project  medical  aide.  Other  government  participants  came  from  the
AEC,  the  Public  Health  Service,  the  National  Institutes  of  Health,  the  Veterans
Administration,  and  the  CIA.  (The  charter  provided  that  the  Joint  Panel  should
collect  information  on  relevant  research  conducted  abroad,  which  the  CIA
evidently  provided.)63

This  bureaucracy  provided  the  venue  for  secret  discussions  that  linked  the
arts  of  healing  and  war  in  ways  that  had  little  precedent.  At  one  and  the  same
time,  for  example,  doctors  counseled  the  military  about  the  radiation  risk  to  troops
at  the  site  of  atomic  bomb  tests,  advised  on  the  need  for  research  on  the
"psychology  of  panic"  at  such  bomb  tests,  and  debated  the  need  for  rules  to
govern  atomic  warfare-related  experimentation.  (See  chapter  10.)

The  records  of  the  Joint  Panel  show  that,  during  the  height  of  the  Cold
War,  the  resources  of  civilian  agencies  were  part  of  the  mobilization  of  resources
to  serve  national  security  interests.  For  example,  Dr.  Howard  Andrews,  trained  as
a  physicist,  was  the  National  Institutes  of  Health's  representative  to  the  Joint
Panel,  and  in  the  1950s  he  worked  with  the  DOD  and  the  AEC  in  monitoring
safety  measures  and  measuring  fallout  from  nuclear  tests.64

In  1950  President  Truman  ordered  federal  agencies,  including  the  Public
Health  Service  and  NIH,  to  focus  their  resources  on  activities  that  would  benefit
national  security  needs.  On  paper,  at  least,  PHS  and  NIH  policymakers  sought  to
direct  resources  to  questions  of  radiation  injury,  civil  defense,  and  worker  health
and  safety.65  For  example,  a  1952  internal  planning  memo  explained  that  NIH
"will  not  wait  for  formal  requests  by  the  armed  forces  ...  to  undertake  research
which  NIH  staff  knows  to  be  of  urgent  military  and  civilian  defense  significance.
Limited  selective  conversion  of  research  to  work  directly  related  to  biological
warfare,  shock,  radiation  injury  and  thermal  burns  will  begin  immediately. . .  ."66
The  fragmentary  surviving  documentation,  however,  does  not  show  the  extent  to
which  PHS-  and  NIH-funded  researchers  actually  redirected  their  investigations
or  merely  recast  the  purpose  of  ongoing  work.

NEW  ETHICAL  QUESTIONS  FOR  MEDICAL
RESEARCHERS

As  medical  researchers  became  fixtures  in  the  Cold  War  research
bureaucracy,  they  assumed  roles  that,  if  not  entirely  new,  raised  ethical  questions
with  which  they  had  rarely  dealt  before.  The  surviving  records  of  the  period

37


Introduction

reveal  that  frank  and  remarkable  discussions  took  place  among  military  and
civilian  officials  and  researchers,  all  of  whom  had  to  balance  the  benefits  of
gaining  knowledge  needed  to  fight  and  survive  an  atomic  war  with  the  risks  that
had  to  be  taken  to  gain  this  knowledge.  They  had  to  consider,  and  even  debated,
whether  human  radiation  experimentation  was  justified,  what  kinds  of  risks  entire
populations  could  be  exposed  to,  and  what  the  public  could  and  should  be  told.

Whether  to  Experiment  with  Humans:  The  Debate  Is  Joined

Spurred  by  proposals  for  human  radiation  experiments  connected  with  the
nuclear-powered  airplane  (NEPA)  project,  AEC  and  DOD  medical  experts  in
1949  and  1950  engaged  in  debate  on  the  need  for  human  experimentation.  The
transcript  of  a  1950  meeting  among  AEC  biomedical  officials  and  advisers  and
military  representatives  provides  unique  insight  into  the  mix  of  moral  principles
and  practical  concerns.67

The  participants  in  the  debate  included  many  of  the  key  medical  figures  in
the  Manhattan  Project  and  the  postwar  radiation  research  bureaucracy.  For  the
Navy,  for  example,  Captain  Behrens,  the  editor  of  Atomic  Medicine,  made  the
point  that  an  atomic  bomb  might  contaminate,  but  not  sink,  ships.  The  Navy
would  need  to  know  the  risk  of  sending  rescue  or  salvage  parties  into  the
contaminated  area.  There  were  questions  of  "calculated  risk  which  all  of  the
services  are  interested  in,  and  not  only  the  services  but  probably  the  civilians  as
well."68  Brigadier  General  William  H.  Powell,  Jr.,  of  the  Office  of  the  Air  Force
Surgeon  General,  added  further  questions:  How  does  radiation  injure  tissue?  Can
equipment  protect  against  the  bomb's  effects?  Is  there  a  way  to  treat  radiation
injury?  How  should  mass  casualties  be  handled?69

These  questions  were  hardly  abstract.  Operation  Crossroads  had
demonstrated  that  postblast  contamination  of  Navy  ships  was  a  serious  hazard.
The  use  of  the  atomic  bomb  as  a  tactical  weapon,  declared  Brigadier  General
James  Cooney  of  the  AEC's  Division  of  Military  Applications,  "has  now  gone
beyond  the  realm  of  possibility  and  into  the  realm  of  probability."70  This  meant
that  "we  have  a  responsibility  that  is  tremendous,"  Cooney  added.  "If  this  weapon
is  used  tactically  on  a  corps  or  division,  and  we  have,  say,  5,000  troops  who  have
received  100  Roentgens]  radiation,  the  Commander  is  going  to  want  from  me,  'Is
it  all  right  for  me  to  reassemble  these  men  and  take  them  into  combat?'  I  don't
know  the  answer  to  that  question."71  Commanders  needed  to  know  "How  much
radiation  can  a  man  take?"72

Cooney  argued  that  human  experimentation  was  necessary.  He  invoked
the  military's  tradition  of  experimentation  with  healthy  volunteers,  dating  back  to
Walter  Reed's  famous  work  on  yellow  fever  at  the  turn  of  the  century.  Cooney
urged  that  the  military  seek  volunteers  within  its  ranks--"both  officer  and
enlisted"--to  be  exposed  to  as  much  as  150  R  of  whole-body  radiation.73

The  AEC's  Shields  Warren  took  the  other  side  in  this  debate.  Warren

38


The  Atomic  Century

raised  two  basic  points  in  response  to  Cooney.  First,  human  experimentation  was
not  essential  because  animal  research  would  be  adequate  to  find  the  answers.
Second,  data  from  human  experimentation  would  likely  be  scientifically  useless.
"We  have,"  Warren  declared,  "learned  enough  from  animals  and  from  humans  at
Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  to  be  quite  certain  that  there  are  extraordinary  variables
in  this  picture.  There  are  species  variables,  genetics  variables  within  species,
variations  in  condition  of  the  individual  within  that  species."  The  danger  of
failing  to  provide  data  had  to  be  weighed  against  the  danger  of  providing
misleading  data:  "It  might  be  almost  more  dangerous  or  misleading  to  give  an
artificial  accuracy  to  an  answer  that  is  of  necessity  an  answer  that  spreads  over  a
broad  range  in  light  of  these  variables."74

There  were,  moreover,  political  obstacles  to  the  program  Cooney  had
proposed.  Satisfactory  answers,  Warren  concluded,  would  require  "going  to  tens
of  thousands  of  individuals."  But  America  was  not  the  Soviet  Union:  "If  we  were
considering  things  in  the  Kremlin,  undoubtedly  it  would  be  practicable.  I  doubt
that  it  is  practicable  here."75

At  the  heart  of  Warren's  objections  to  Cooney's  proposal  was  a  concern
about  employing  "human  experimentation  when  it  isn't  for  the  good  of  the
individual  concerned  and  when  there  is  no  way  of  solving  the  problem."76  To
Cooney's  invocation  of  Walter  Reed,  Warren  responded  that,  in  the  case  of  yellow
fever,  humans  were  needed  as  subjects  because  there  was  no  nonhuman  host  to

Cooney  did  not  disagree  with  Warren  "that  statistically  we  will  prove

nothing."  But,  he  pointed  out,  "[G]enerals  are  hard  people  to  deal  with If  we

had  200  cases  whereby  we  could  say  that  these  men  did  or  did  not  get  sick  up  to
150  R,  it  would  certainly  be  a  great  help  to  us."77

Even  then,  Warren  rejoined,  the  data  might  not  be  of  great  use:  "I  can
think  in  terms  of  times  when  even  if  everybody  on  a  ship  was  sea-sick,  you  would
still  have  to  keep  the  ship  operating."78

The  1950  debate  over  NEPA  provides  clear  evidence  that  midcentury
medical  experts  gave  thought  before  engaging  in  human  experimentation  that
involved  significant  risk  and  was  not  intended  to  benefit  the  subject.  On  paper,
the  debate  was  decided  in  Shields  Warren's  favor.  Following  Warren's  and
DBM's  opposition,  Cooney  and  the  military  agreed  that  "human  experimentation"
on  healthy  volunteers  would  not  be  approved.  However,  even  as  this  policy  was
declared,  the  Defense  Department,  with  Warren's  apparent  acquiescence,
proceeded  to  contract  with  private  hospitals  to  gather  data  on  sick  patients  who
were  being  treated  with  radiation.  The  government's  use  of  sick  patients  for
research,  as  we  shall  see  in  chapter  8,  raised  difficult  ethical  questions  of  its  own.

Whether  to  Put  Populations  at  Risk:  The  Debate  Continues

As  the  medical  experts  debated  the  issue  of  whether  to  put  individual

39


Introduction

human  subjects  at  risk  in  radiation  experiments  on  behalf  of  NEPA,  they  were
also  engaged  in  secret  discussions  about  whether  to  proceed  with  the  testing  of
nuclear  weapons,  which  might  put  whole  populations  at  risk.

It  was  also  in  1950  that  the  decision  was  made  to  carry  out  atomic  bomb
testing  at  a  site  in  the  continental  United  States.  President  Truman  chose  the
Nevada  desert  as  the  location  for  the  test  site.  Shields  Warren's  Division  of
Biology  and  Medicine  was  assigned  the  job  of  considering  the  safety  of  early
tests.  Like  the  earlier  transcript,  an  account  of  a  May  1951  meeting  at  Los
Alamos,  convened  by  Warren,  provides  a  window  onto  the  balancing  of  risks  and
benefits  by  medical  researchers.

The  meeting  focused  on  the  radiological  hazards  to  populations  downwind
from  underground  testing  planned  at  the  Nevada  Test  Site.  Those  in  attendance
realized  that  the  testing  could  be  risky.  "I  would  almost  say  from  the  discussion
this  far,"  Warren  summarized,  "that  in  light  of  the  size  and  activity  of  some  of
these  particles,  their  unpredictability  of  fallout,  the  possibility  of  external  beta
burns  is  quite  real."79  Committee  members  considered  the  testing  a  "calculated
risk"  for  populations  downwind,  but  they  thought  that  the  information  they  could
gain  made  the  risk  worthwhile.  According  to  the  record  of  the  meeting,  Warren
summarized  the  view  of  Dr.  Gioacchino  Failla,  a  Columbia  University
radiological  physicist:  "[T]he  time  has  come  when  we  should  take  some  risk  and
get  some  information  ...  we  are  faced  with  a  war  in  which  atomic  weapons  will
undoubtedly  be  used,  and  we  have  to  have  some  information  about  these
things  ...  if  we  look  for  perfect  safety  we  will  never  make  these  tests."80  Worried
about  the  potential  consequences  of  miscalculation,  the  AEC's  Carrol  Tyler
observed,  "We  have  lost  a  continental  site  no  matter  where  we  put  it."  Still,  Tyler
argued,  "If  we  are  going  to  gamble  it  might  as  well  be  done  where  it  is
operationally  convenient."1"  A  proposed  deep  underground  test  did  not  take  place,
and  a  test  evidently  considered  less  risky  was  substituted.  Ultimately,  in  a
summary  prepared  at  the  end  of  the  1951  test  series,  the  Health  Division  leader  of
the  AEC's  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  recorded  that  perhaps  only  good  fortune  had
averted  significant  contamination:  "Thanks  to  the  kindness  of  the  winds,  no
significant  activity  was  deposited  in  any  populated  localities.  It  was  certainly
shown  however,"  he  wrote,  "that  significant  exposures  at  considerable  distances
could  be  acquired  by  individuals  who  actually  were  in  the  fallout  while  it  was  in
progress."82

The  NEPA  debate  and  the  advent  of  nuclear  testing  confronted  biomedical
experts  with  a  set  of  conflicting,  and  even  contradictory,  objectives.  First,  they
were  called  upon  to  offer  advice  on  decisions  that  might  inevitably  put  people  at
some  risk.  The  risk  had  to  be  balanced  against  the  benefit,  which  in  most
instances  was  defined  as  connected  with  the  nation's  security.  In  many  cases,  the
experts  agreed,  it  was  better  to  bear  the  lesser  risk  now,  in  order  to  avoid  a  greater
risk  later.  Second,  these  experts  were  also  called  upon,  as  in  the  1951  Nevada
test,  to  provide  advice  on  minimizing  risk.  Third,  as  in  the  Nevada  test,  these

40


The  Atomic  Century

same  experts  saw  the  tests  as  opportunities  to  gather  data  that  might  ultimately  be
used  to  reduce  risk  for  all.

Whether  and  What  the  Public  Should  Be  Told  About  Government-Created
Radiation  Risk

Scientific  research  had  a  long  and  celebrated  tradition  of  open  publication
in  the  scientific  literature.  But  several  factors  caused  Cold  War  researchers  to
limit  their  public  disclosures.  These  included,  preeminently,  concern  with
national  security,  which  necessarily  required  secrecy.  But  they  also  included  the
concern  that  the  release  of  research  information  would  undermine  needed
programs  because  the  public  could  not  understand  radiation  or  because  the
information  would  embarrass  the  government.

The  tension  between  the  publicizing  of  information  and  the  limits  on
disclosure  was  a  constant  theme  in  Cold  War  research.  When,  in  June  1 947,  the
Medical  Board  of  Review  appointed  by  David  Lilienthal  reported  on  the  AEC's
biomedical  program,  it  declared  that  secrecy  in  scientific  research  is  "distasteful
and  in  the  long  run  contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  scientific  progress."83  As
shown  by  its  organization  of  the  medical  isotope  program,  the  AEC  acted  quickly
to  make  sure  that  the  great  preponderance  of  biomedical  research  done  under  its
auspices  would  be  published  in  the  open  literature.

However,  recently  retrieved  documents  show  that  the  need  for  secrecy  was
also  invoked  where  national  security  was  not  endangered.  At  the  same  time  that
biomedical  officials,  such  as  those  on  the  Medical  Board  of  Review,  spoke  openly
of  the  need  to  limit  national  security  restrictions,  internally  they  sometimes  sided
with  those  who  would  restrict  information  from  the  public  even  where  release
admittedly  would  not  directly  endanger  national  security.  Thus,  as  we  shall  see  in
chapter  13,  Shields  Warren  and  other  AEC  medical  officials  agreed  to  withhold
data  on  human  experiments  from  the  public  on  the  grounds  that  disclosure  would
embarrass  the  government  or  could  be  a  source  of  legal  liability.

A  further  important  qualification  to  what  the  public  could  know  related  to
research  connected  with  the  atomic  bomb-including  the  creation  of  a  worldwide
network  to  gather  data  on  the  effects  of  fallout  from  nuclear  tests.  In  1949,  the
AEC  undertook  Project  Gabriel,  a  secret  effort  to  study  the  question  of  whether
the  tests  could  threaten  the  viability  of  life  on  earth.  In  1953,  Gabriel  led  to
Project  Sunshine,  a  loose  confederation  of  fallout  research  projects  whose  human
data-gathering  efforts,  as  we  see  in  chapter  13,  operated  in  the  twilight  between
openness  and  secrecy.

Finally,  while  documents  show  that  medical  experts  and  officials  shared
an  acute  awareness  of  the  importance  of  public  support  to  the  success  of  Cold
War  programs,  this  awareness  was  coupled  with  concern  about  the  American
public's  ability  to  understand  the  risks  that  had  to  be  borne  to  win  the  Cold  War.
The  concern  that  citizens  could  not  understand  radiation  risk  is  illustrated  by  a

41


Introduction

recently  recovered  NEPA  transcript.  In  July  1949,  the  nuclear  airplane  project
gathered  radiation  experts  and  psychologists  to  consider  psychological  problems
connected  to  radiation  hazard.  To  the  assembled  experts  the  greatest  unknown
was  not  radiation  itself,  but  the  basis  for  public  fear  and  misunderstanding  of
radiation.

"I  believe,"  General  Cooney  proposed,  "that  the  general  public  is  under
the  opinion  that  we  don't  know  very  much  about  this  condition  [radiation].  .  .  .  We
know,"  he  ventured,  "just  about  as  much  about  it  as  we  do  about  many  other
diseases  that  people  take  for  granted  .  .  .  even  tuberculosis."84

Yet,  said  the  Navy's  Captain  Behrens,  "there  are  some  peculiar  ideas
relative  to  radiation  that  are  related  to  primitive  concepts  of  hysteria  and  things  in
that  category. . . .  There  is  such  a  unique  element  in  it;  for  some  it  begins  to
border  on  the  mystical."85  A  good  deal  of  the  public's  fear  of  radiation,  declared
Berkeley's  Dr.  Karl  M.  Bowman,  a  NEPA  medical  adviser,  "is  essentially  the  fear
of  the  unknown.  The  dangers  have  been  enormously  magnified."  As  Dr.
Bowman  and  others  noted,  the  public's  perception  was  not  without  reason,  for  "we
have  emphasized  for  purposes  of  getting  funds  for  research  how  little  we  know."86

The  perspective  expressed  in  the  NEPA  transcript  would  lead,  as  shown  in
chapter  10,  to  the  use  of  atomic  bomb  tests  to  perform  human  research  on  the
psychology  of  panic  and,  as  shown  in  other  case  studies,  to  decisions  to  hold
information  closely  out  of  concern  that  its  release  could  create  public
misunderstanding  that  would  imperil  important  government  programs.

CONCLUSION

In  the  atomic  age,  Captain  Behrens's  Atomic  Medicine  pointed  out,
radiation  research  was  both  the  agent  and  the  beneficiary  of  dramatic
developments  at  the  intersection  of  government  and  medicine.  When  ethical
questions  were  raised  by  these  developments,  radiation  researchers  would  be  on
the  front  line  in  having  to  deal  with  them.  The  burgeoning  government- funded
biomedical  research,  including  human  radiation  research,  required  a
reexamination  of  the  traditional  doctor-patient  relationship.  At  the  same  time,  the
evolving  role  of  medical  researchers  as  government  officials  and  advisers  also
posed  questions  about  the  place  of  doctors,  and  more  generally  of  scientists,  in
service  to  government.


42


The  Atomic  Century

The  Basics  of  Radiation  Science

The  ethical  and  historical  issues  of  human  radiation  experiments  cannot  be
understood  without  a  basic  grasp  of  the  underlying  science.  This  requires  more
than  a  glossary  defining  technical  terms.  At  least  an  intuitive  understanding  of
the  natural  laws  and  scientific  techniques  of  radiation  science  is  necessary.
Obviously,  acquiring  a  professional  level  of  knowledge  would  require  far  more
time  than  most  readers  can  afford;  indeed,  entire  careers  are  devoted  to  studying
just  one  aspect  of  the  field.  To  serve  the  interests  of  democracy  in  a  technological
world,  however,  we  must  provide  sufficient  technical  background  for  all  citizens
to  become  active  participants  in  considering  the  ethical  and  political  dimensions
of  scientific  research.

What  follows  is  an  attempt  to  provide  such  a  background  for  the  events
and  issues  discussed  in  this  report,  directed  toward  those  readers  less  familiar
with  "the  basics"  of  radiation  science.  This  task  was  deemed  important  enough  to
deserve  a  distinct  section  of  this  Introduction.

What  Is  Ionizing  Radiation?

What  is  radiation!

Radiation  is  a  very  general  term,  used  to  describe  any  process  that
transmits  energy  through  space  or  a  material  away  from  a  source.  Light,  sound,
and  radio  waves  are  all  examples  of  radiation.  When  most  people  think  of
radiation,  however,  they  are  thinking  of  ionizing  ra<//arto«--radiation  that  can
disrupt  the  atoms  and  molecules  within  the  body.  While  scientists  think  of  these
emissions  in  highly  mathematical  terms,  they  can  be  visualized  either  as
subatomic  particles  or  as  rays.  Radiation's  effects  on  humans  can  best  be
understood  by  first  examining  the  effect  of  radiation  on  atoms,  the  basic  building
blocks  of  matter.

What  is  ionization!

Atoms  consist  of  comparatively  large  particles  (protons  and  neutrons)
sitting  in  a  central  nucleus,  orbited  by  smaller  particles  (electrons):  a  miniature
solar  system.  Normally,  the  number  of  protons  in  the  center  of  the  atom  equals
the  number  of  electrons  in  orbit.  An  ion  is  any  atom  or  molecule  that  does  not
have  the  normal  number  of  electrons.  Ionizing  radiation  is  any  form  of  radiation
that  has  enough  energy  to  knock  electrons  out  of  atoms  or  molecules,  creating
ions.

How  is  ionizing  radiation  measured?

Measurement  lies  at  the  heart  of  modern  science,  but  a  number  by  itself
conveys  no  information.  Useful  measurement  requires  both  an  instrument  for
measurement  (such  as  a  stick  to  mark  off  length)  and  an  agreement  on  the  units  to

43


Introduction

be  used  (such  as  inches,  meters,  or  miles).  The  units  chosen  will  vary  with  the
purpose  of  the  measurement.  For  example,  a  cook  will  measure  butter  in  terms  of
tablespoons  to  ensure  the  meal  tastes  good,  while  a  nutritionist  may  be  more
concerned  with  measuring  calories,  to  determine  the  effect  on  the  diner's  health.

The  variety  of  units  used  to  measure  radiation  and  radioactivity  at  times
confuses  even  scientists,  if  they  do  not  use  them  every  day.  It  may  be  helpful  to
keep  in  mind  the  purpose  of  various  units.  There  are  two  basic  reasons  to
measure  radiation:  the  study  of  physics  and  the  study  of  the  biological  effects  of
radiation.  What  creates  the  complexity  is  that  our  instruments  measure  physical
effects,  while  what  is  of  interest  to  some  are  biological  effects.  A  further
complication  is  that  units,  as  with  words  in  any  language,  may  fade  from  use  and
be  replaced  by  new  units.

Radiation  is  not  a  series  of  distinct  events,  like  radioactive  decays,  which
can  be  counted  individually.  Measuring  radiation  in  bulk  is  like  measuring  the
movement  of  sand  in  an  hourglass;  it  is  more  useful  to  think  of  it  as  a  continuous
flow,  rather  than  a  series  of  separate  events.  The  intensity  of  a  beam  of  ionizing
radiation  is  measured  by  counting  up  how  many  ions  (how  much  electrical
charge)  it  creates  in  air.  The  roentgen  (named  after  Wilhelm  Roentgen,  the
discoverer  of  x  rays)  is  the  unit  that  measures  the  ability  of  x  rays  to  ionize  air;  it
is  a  unit  of  exposure  that  can  be  measured  directly.  Shortly  after  World  War  II,  a
common  unit  of  measurement  was  the  roentgen  equivalent  physical  (rep),  which
denoted  an  ability  of  other  forms  of  radiation  to  create  as  many  ions  in  air  as  a
roentgen  of  x  rays.  It  is  no  longer  used,  but  appears  in  many  of  the  documents
examined  by  the  Advisory  Committee.

What  are  the  basic  types  of  ionizing  radiation?

There  are  many  types  of  ionizing  radiation,  but  the  most  familiar  are
alpha,  beta,  and  gamma/x-ray  radiation.  Neutrons,  when  expelled  from  atomic
nuclei  and  traveling  as  a  form  of  radiation,  can  also  be  a  significant  health
concern.

Alpha  particles  are  clusters  of  two  neutrons  and  two  protons  each.  They
are  identical  to  the  nuclei  of  atoms  of  helium,  the  second  lightest  and  second  most
common  element  in  the  universe,  after  hydrogen.  Compared  with  other  forms  of
radiation,  though,  these  are  very  heavy  particles—about  7,300  times  the  mass  of
an  electron.  As  they  travel  along,  these  large  and  heavy  particles  frequently
interact  with  the  electrons  of  atoms,  rapidly  losing  their  energy.  They  cannot  even
penetrate  a  piece  of  paper  or  the  layer  of  dead  cells  at  the  surface  of  our  skin.  But
if  released  within  the  body  from  a  radioactive  atom  inside  or  near  a  cell,  alpha
particles  can  do  great  damage  as  they  ionize  atoms,  disrupting  living  cells.
Radium  and  plutonium  are  two  examples  of  alpha  emitters.

Beta  particles  are  electrons  traveling  at  very  high  energies.  If  alpha
particles  can  be  thought  of  as  large  and  slow  bowling  balls,  beta  particles  can  be
visualized  as  golf  balls  on  the  driving  range.  They  travel  farther  than  alpha

44


The  Atomic  Century

particles  and,  depending  on  their  energy,  may  do  as  much  damage.  For  example,
beta  particles  in  fallout  can  cause  severe  burns  to  the  skin,  known  as  beta  burns.
Radiosotopes  that  emit  beta  particles  are  present  in  fission  products  produced  in
nuclear  reactors  and  nuclear  explosions.  Some  beta-emitting  radioisotopes,  such
as  iodine  131,  are  administered  internally  to  patients  to  diagnose  and  treat  disease.

Gamma  and  x-ray  radiation  consists  of  packets  of  energy  known  as
photons.  Photons  have  no  mass  or  charge,  and  they  travel  in  straight  lines.  The
visible  light  seen  by  our  eyes  is  also  made  up  of  photons,  but  at  lower  energies.
The  energy  of  a  gamma  ray  is  typically  greater  than  100  kiloelectron  volts  (keV—
"k"  is  the  abbreviation  for  kilo,  a  prefix  that  multiplies  a  basic  unit  by  1 ,000)  per
photon,  more  than  200,000  times  the  energy  of  visible  light  (0.5  eV).  If  alpha
particles  are  visualized  as  bowling  balls  and  beta  particles  as  golf  balls,  photons
of  gamma  and  x-radiation  are  like  weightless  bullets  moving  at  the  speed  of  light.
Photons  are  classified  according  to  their  origin.  Gamma  rays  originate  from
events  within  an  atomic  nucleus;  their  energy  and  rate  of  production  depend  on
the  radioactive  decay  process  of  the  radionuclide  that  is  their  source.  X  rays  are
photons  that  usually  originate  from  energy  transitions  of  the  electrons  of  an  atom.
These  can  be  artificially  generated  by  bombarding  appropriate  atoms  with  high-
energy  electrons,  as  in  the  classic  x-ray  tube.  Because  x  rays  are  produced
artificially  by  a  stream  of  electrons,  their  rate  of  output  and  energy  can  be
controlled  by  adjusting  the  energy  and  amount  of  the  electrons  themselves.  Both
x  rays  and  gamma  rays  can  penetrate  deeply  into  the  human  body.  How  deeply
they  penetrate  depends  on  their  energy;  higher  energy  results  in  deeper
penetration  into  the  body.  A  1  MeV  ("M"  is  the  abbreviation  for  mega,  a  prefix
that  multiplies  a  basic  unit  by  1,000,000)  gamma  ray,  with  an  energy  2,000,000
times  that  of  visible  light,  can  pass  completely  through  the  body,  creating  tens  of
thousands  of  ions  as  it  does.

A  final  form  of  radiation  of  concern  is  neutron  radiation.  Neutrons,  along
with  protons,  are  one  of  the  components  of  the  atomic  nucleus.  Like  protons,  they
have  a  large  mass;  unlike  protons,  they  have  no  electric  charge,  allowing  them  to
slip  more  easily  between  atoms.  Like  a  Stealth  fighter,  high-energy  neutrons  can
travel  farther  into  the  body,  past  the  protective  outer  layer  of  the  skin,  before
delivering  their  energy  and  causing  ionization.

Several  other  types  of  high-energy  particles  are  also  ionizing  radiation.
Cosmic  radiation  that  penetrates  the  Earth's  atmosphere  from  space  consists
mainly  of  protons,  alpha  particles,  and  heavier  atomic  nuclei.  Positrons,  mesons,
pions,  and  other  exotic  particles  can  also  be  ionizing  radiation.

What  Is  Radioactivity?

What  causes  radioactivity?

As  its  name  implies,  radioactivity  is  the  act  of  emitting  radiation
spontaneously.  This  is  done  by  an  atomic  nucleus  that,  for  some  reason,  is

45


Introduction

unstable;  it  "wants"  to  give  up  some  energy  in  order  to  shift  to  a  more  stable
configuration.  During  the  first  half  of  the  twentieth  century,  much  of  modern
physics  was  devoted  to  exploring  why  this  happens,  with  the  result  that  nuclear
decay  was  fairly  well  understood  by  1 960.  Too  many  neutrons  in  a  nucleus  lead
it  to  emit  a  negative  beta  particle,  which  changes  one  of  the  neutrons  into  a
proton.  Too  many  protons  in  a  nucleus  lead  it  to  emit  a  positron  (positively
charged  electron),  changing  a  proton  into  a  neutron.  Too  much  energy  leads  a
nucleus  to  emit  a  gamma  ray,  which  discards  great  energy  without  changing  any
of  the  particles  in  the  nucleus.  Too  much  mass  leads  a  nucleus  to  emit  an  alpha
particle,  discarding  four  heavy  particles  (two  protons  and  two  neutrons).

How  is  radioactivity  measured?

Radioactivity  is  a  physical,  not  a  biological,  phenomenon.  Simply  stated,
the  radioactivity  of  a  sample  can  be  measured  by  counting  how  many  atoms  are
spontaneously  decaying  each  second.  This  can  be  done  with  instruments
designed  to  detect  the  particular  type  of  radiation  emitted  with  each  "decay"  or
disintegration.  The  actual  number  of  disintegrations  per  second  may  be  quite
large.  Scientists  have  agreed  upon  common  units  to  use  as  a  form  of  shorthand.
Thus,  a  curie  (abbreviated  "Ci"  and  named  after  Pierre  and  Marie  Curie,  the
discoverers  of  radium87)  is  simply  a  shorthand  way  of  writing  "37,000,000,000
disintegrations  per  second,"  the  rate  of  disintegration  occurring  in  1  gram  of
radium.  The  more  modern  International  System  of  Measurements  (SI)  unit  for  the
same  type  of  measurement  is  the  becquerel  (  abbreviated  "Bq"  and  named  after
Henri  Becquerel,  the  discoverer  of  radioactivity),  which  is  simply  a  shorthand  for
"1  disintegration  per  second."

What  is  radioactive  half-life"!

Being  unstable  does  not  lead  an  atomic  nucleus  to  emit  radiation
immediately.  Instead,  the  probability  of  an  atom  disintegrating  is  constant,  as  if
unstable  nuclei  continuously  participate  in  a  sort  of  lottery,  with  random  drawings
to  decide  which  atom  will  next  emit  radiation  and  disintegrate  to  a  more  stable
state.  The  time  it  takes  for  half  of  the  atoms  in  a  given  mass  to  "win  the  lottery"--
that  is,  emit  radiation  and  change  to  a  more  stable  state—is  called  the  half-life.
Half-lives  vary  greatly  among  types  of  atoms,  from  less  than  a  second  to  billions
of  years.  For  example,  it  will  take  about  4.5  billion  years  for  half  of  the  atoms  in
a  mass  of  uranium  238  to  spontaneously  disintegrate,  but  only  24,000  years  for
half of  the  atoms  in  a  mass  of  plutonium  239  to  spontaneously  disintegrate.
Iodine  131,  commonly  used  in  medicine,  has  a  half-life  of  only  eight  days.

What  is  a  radioactive  decay  chain?

Stability  may  be  achieved  in  a  single  decay,  or  a  nucleus  may  decay
through  a  series  of  states  before  it  reaches  a  truly  stable  configuration,  a  bit  like  a
Slinky  toy  stepping  down  a  set  of  stairs.  Each  state  or  step  will  have  its  own

46


The  Atomic  Century

unique  characteristics  of  half-life  and  type  of  radiation  to  be  emitted  as  the  move
is  made  to  the  next  state.  Much  scientific  effort  has  been  devoted  to  unraveling
these  decay  chains,  not  only  to  achieve  a  basic  understanding  of  nature,  but  also
to  design  nuclear  weapons  and  nuclear  reactors.  The  unusually  complicated
decay  of  uranium  238,  for  example— the  primary  source  of  natural  radioactivity  on
earth— proceeds  as  follows:"8

U-238  emits  an  alpha

I

Thorium  234  emits  a  beta

I

Protactinium  234  emits  a  beta

I
Uranium  234  emits  an  alpha

1
Thorium  230  emits  an  alpha

1
Radium  226  emits  an  alpha

I

Radon  222  emits  an  alpha

!

Polonium  2 1 8  emits  an  alpha

1

Lead  214  emits  a  beta

1

Bismuth  214  emits  a  beta

I

Polonium  214  emits  an  alpha

I

Lead  210  emits  a  beta

1

Bismuth  210  emits  a  beta

1

Polonium  210  emits  an  alpha

I

Lead  206,  which  is  stable


How  can  radioactivity  be  caused  artificially?

Radioactivity  can  occur  both  naturally  and  through  human  intervention.
An  example  of  artificially  induced  radioactivity  is  neutron  activation.  A  neutron
fired  into  a  nucleus  can  cause  nuclear  fission  (the  splitting  of  atoms).  This  is  the
basic  concept  behind  the  atomic  bomb.  Neutron  activation  is  also  the  underlying

47


Introduction

principle  of  boron-neutron  capture  therapy  for  certain  brain  cancers.  A  solution
containing  boron  is  injected  into  a  patient  and  is  absorbed  more  by  the  cancer  than
by  other  cells.  Neutrons  fired  at  the  area  of  the  brain  cancer  are  readily  absorbed
(captured)  by  the  boron  nuclei.  These  nuclei  then  become  unstable  and  emit
radiation  that  attacks  the  cancer  cells.  Simple  in  its  basic  physics,  the  treatment
has  been  complex  and  controversial  in  practice  and  after  half  a  century  is  still
regarded  as  highly  experimental.

What  Are  Atomic  Number  and  Atomic  Weight?

What  is  an  element?

Chemical  behavior  is  what  originally  led  scientists  to  classify  matter  into
various  elements.  Chemical  behavior  is  the  ability  of  an  atom  to  combine  with
other  atoms.  In  more  technical  terms,  chemical  behavior  depends  upon  the  type
and  number  of  the  chemical  bonds  an  atom  can  form  with  other  atoms.  In
classroom  kits  for  building  models  of  molecules,  atoms  are  usually  represented  by
colored  spheres  with  small  holes  for  pegs  and  the  bonds  are  represented  by  the
small  pegs  that  can  connect  the  spheres.  The  number  of  peg  holes  signifies  the
maximum  number  of  bonds  an  atom  can  form;  different  types  of  bonds  may  be
represented  by  different  types  of  pegs.  Atoms  that  have  the  same  number  of  peg
holes  may  have  similar  chemical  behavior.  Thus,  atoms  that  have  identical
chemical  behavior  are  regarded  as  atoms  of  the  same  element.  For  example,  an
atom  is  labeled  a  "carbon  atom"  if  it  can  form  the  same  number,  types,  and
configurations  of  bonds  as  other  carbon  atoms.  Although  the  basics  are  simple  to
explain,  how  atoms  bind  to  each  other  becomes  very  complex  when  studied  in
detail;  new  discoveries  are  still  being  made  as  new  types  of  materials  are  formed.

What  is  atomic  number?

An  atom  may  be  visualized  as  a  miniature  solar  system,  with  a  large
central  nucleus  orbited  by  small  electrons.  The  bonding  capacity  of  an  atom  is
determined  by  the  electrons.  For  example,  atoms  that  in  their  normal  state  have
one  electron  are  hydrogen  atoms  and  will  readily  (and  sometimes  violently)  bond
with  oxygen.  This  bonding  capacity  of  hydrogen  was  the  cause  of  the  explosion
of  the  airship  Hindenburg  in  1937.  Atoms  that  in  their  normal  state  have  two
electrons  are  helium  atoms,  which  will  not  bond  with  oxygen  and  would  have
been  a  better  choice  for  filling  the  Hindenburg.

We  can  pursue  the  question  back  one  step  further:  What  determines  the
number  of  electrons?  The  number  of  protons  in  the  nucleus  of  the  atom.  Here,
the  analogy  between  an  atom  and  the  solar  system  breaks  down.  The  force  that
holds  the  planets  in  their  orbits  is  the  gravitational  attraction  between  the  planets
and  the  sun.  However,  in  an  atom  what  holds  the  electrons  in  their  orbit  is  the
electrical  attraction  between  the  electrons  and  the  protons  in  the  nucleus.  The

48


The  Atomic  Century

basic  rule  is  that  like  charges  repel  and  opposite  charges  attract.  Although  a
proton  has  more  mass  than  an  electron,  they  both  have  the  samf  amount  of
electrical  charge,  but  opposite  in  kind.  Scientists  have  designated  electrons  as
having  a  negative  charge  and  protons  as  having  a  positive  charge.  One  positive
proton  can  hold  one  negative  electron  in  orbit.  Thus,  an  atom  with  one  proton  in
its  nucleus  normally  will  have  one  electron  in  orbit  (and  be  labeled  a  hydrogen
atom);  an  atom  with  ninety-four  protons  in  its  nucleus  will  normally  have  ninety-
four  electrons  orbiting  it  (and  be  labeled  a  plutonium  atom).

The  number  of  protons  in  a  nucleus  is  called  the  atomic  number  and
always  equals  the  number  of  electrons  in  orbit  about  that  nucleus  (in  a  nonionized
atom).  Thus,  all  atoms  that  have  the  same  number  of  protons~the  atomic
number— are  atoms  of  the  same  element.

What  is  atomic  weight?

The  nuclei  of  atoms  also  contain  neutrons,  which  help  hold  the  nucleus
together.  A  neutron  has  no  electrical  charge  and  is  slightly  more  massive  than  a
proton.  Because  a  neutron  can  decay  into  a  proton  plus  an  electron  (the  essence
of  beta  decay),  it  is  sometimes  helpful  to  think  of  a  neutron  as  an  electron  and  a
proton  blended  together,  although  this  is  at  best  an  oversimplification.  Because  a
neutron  has  no  charge,  a  neutron  has  no  effect  on  the  number  of  electrons  orbiting
the  nucleus.  However,  because  it  is  even  more  massive  than  a  proton,  a  neutron
can  add  significantly  to  the  weight  of  an  atom.  The  total  weight  of  an  atom  is
called  the  atomic  weight.  It  is  approximately  equal  to  the  number  of  protons  and
neutrons,  with  a  little  extra  added  by  the  electrons.  The  stability  of  the  nucleus,
and  hence  the  atom's  radioactivity,  is  heavily  dependent  upon  the  number  of
neutrons  it  contains.

What  notations  are  used  to  represent  atomic  number  and  weight?

Each  atom,  therefore,  can  be  assigned  both  an  atomic  number  (the  number
of  protons  equals  the  number  of  electrons)  and  an  atomic  weight  (approximately
equaling  the  number  of  protons  plus  the  number  of  neutrons).  A  normal  helium
atom,  for  example,  has  two  protons  and  two  neutrons  in  its  nucleus,  with  two
electrons  in  orbit.  Its  chemical  behavior  is  determined  by  the  atomic  number  2
(the  number  of  protons),  which  equals  the  normal  number  of  electrons;  the
stability  of  its  nucleus  (that  is,  its  radioactivity)  varies  with  its  atomic  weight
(approximately  equal  to  the  number  of  protons  and  neutrons).  The  most  well-
known  form  of  plutonium,  for  example,  has  an  atomic  number  of  94,  since  it  has
94  protons,  and  with  the  145  neutrons  in  its  nucleus,  an  atomic  weight  of  239  (94
protons  plus  145  neutrons).  In  World  War  II,  its  very  existence  was  highly
classified.  A  code  number  was  developed:  the  last  digit  of  the  atomic  number
(94)  and  the  last  digit  of  the  atomic  weight  (239).  Thus,  in  some  of  the  early
documents  examined  by  the  Advisory  Committee,  the  term  49  refers  to
plutonium.

49


Introduction

Styles  of  notation  vary,  but  usually  isotopes  are  written  as:

atcic number  Chemical  abbreviation  at™8ht

or  as
atomic  weight  chemical  abbreviation

Thus,  the  isotope  of  plutonium  just  discussed  would  be  written  as:


94


Pu239  or  as  239Pu


Since  the  atomic  weight  is  what  is  often  the  only  item  of  interest,  it  might  also  be
written  simply  as  Pu-239,  plutonium  239,  or  Pu239.


Radioisotopes:  What  Are  They  and  How  Are  They  Made?

What  are  isotopes?

The  isotopes  of  an  element  are  all  the  atoms  that  have  in  their  nucleus  the
number  of  protons  (atomic  number)  corresponding  to  the  chemical  behavior  of
that  element.  However,  the  isotopes  of  a  single  element  vary  in  the  number  of
neutrons  in  their  nuclei.  Since  they  still  have  the  same  number  of  protons,  all
these  isotopes  of  an  element  have  identical  chemical  behavior.  But  since  they
have  different  numbers  of  neutrons,  these  isotopes  of  the  same  element  may  have
different  radioactivity.  An  isotope  that  is  radioactive  is  called  a  radioisotope  or
radionuclide.  Two  examples  may  help  clarify  this.

The  most  stable  isotope  of  uranium,  U-238,  has  an  atomic  number  of  92
(protons)  and  an  atomic  weight  of  238  (92  protons  plus  146  neutrons).  The
isotope  of  uranium  of  greatest  importance  in  atomic  bombs,  U-235,  though,  has
three  fewer  neutrons.  Thus,  it  also  has  an  atomic  number  of  92  (since  the  number
of  protons  has  not  changed)  but  an  atomic  weight  of  235  (92  protons  plus  only
143  neutrons).  The  chemical  behavior  of  U-235  is  identical  to  all  other  forms  of
uranium,  but  its  nucleus  is  less  stable,  giving  it  higher  radioactivity  and  greater
susceptibility  to  the  chain  reactions  that  power  both  atomic  bombs  and  nuclear
fission  reactors.

Another  example  is  iodine,  an  element  essential  for  health;  insufficient
iodine  in  one's  diet  can  lead  to  a  goiter.  Iodine  also  is  one  of  the  earliest  elements
whose  radioisotopes  were  used  in  what  is  now  called  nuclear  medicine.  The  most
common,  stable  form  of  iodine  has  an  atomic  number  of  53  (protons)  and  an
atomic  weight  of  127  (53  protons  plus  74  neutrons).  Because  its  nucleus  has  the
"correct"  number  of  neutrons,  it  is  stable  and  is  not  radioactive.  A  less  stable
form  of  iodine  also  has  53  protons  (this  is  what  makes  it  behave  chemically  as

50


The  Atomic  Century

iodine)  but  four  extra  neutrons,  for  a  total  atomic  weight  of  131  (53  protons  and
78  neutrons).  With  "too  many"  neutrons  in  its  nucleus,  it  is  unstable  and
radioactive,  with  a  half-life  of  eight  days.  Because  it  behaves  chemically  as
iodine,  it  travels  throughout  the  body  and  localizes  in  the  thyroid  gland  just  like
the  stable  form  of  iodine.  But,  because  it  is  radioactive,  its  presence  can  be
detected.  Iodine  131  thus  became  one  of  the  earliest  radioactive  tracers.

How  can  different  isotopes  of  an  element  be  produced?

How  can  isotopes  be  produced-especially  radioisotopes,  which  can  serve
many  useful  purposes?  There  are  two  basic  methods:  separation  and  synthesis.

Some  isotopes  occur  in  nature.  If  radioactive,  these  usually  are
radioisotopes  with  very  long  half-lives.  Uranium  235,  for  example,  makes  up
about  0.7  percent  of  the  naturally  occurring  uranium  on  the  earth.*9  The  challenge
is  to  separate  this  very  small  amount  from  the  much  larger  bulk  of  other  forms  of
uranium.  The  difficulty  is  that  all  these  forms  of  uranium,  because  they  all  have
the  same  number  of  electrons,  will  have  identical  chemical  behavior:  they  will
bind  in  identical  fashion  to  other  atoms.  Chemical  separation,  developing  a
chemical  reaction  that  will  bind  only  uranium  atoms,  will  separate  out  uranium
atoms,  but  not  distinguish  among  different  isotopes  of  uranium.  The  only
difference  among  the  uranium  isotopes  is  their  atomic  weight.  A  method  had  to
be  developed  that  would  sort  atoms  according  to  weight.

One  initial  proposal  was  to  use  a  centrifuge.  The  basic  idea  is  simple:
spin  the  uranium  atoms  as  if  they  were  on  a  very  fast  merry-go-round.  The
heavier  ones  will  drift  toward  the  outside  faster  and  can  be  drawn  off.  In  practice
the  technique  was  an  enormous  challenge:  the  goal  was  to  draw  off  that  very
small  portion  of  uranium  atoms  that  were  lighter  than  their  brethren.  The
difficulties  were  so  enormous  the  plan  was  abandoned  in  1942.90  Instead,  the
technique  of  gaseous  diffusion  was  developed.  Again,  the  basic  idea  was  very
simple:  the  rate  at  which  gas  passed  {diffused)  through  a  filter  depended  on  the
weight  of  the  gas  molecules:  lighter  molecules  diffused  more  quickly.  Gas
molecules  that  contained  U-235  would  diffuse  slightly  faster  than  gas  molecules
containing  the  more  common  but  also  heavier  U-238.  This  method  also  presented
formidable  technical  challenges,  but  was  eventually  implemented  in  the  gigantic
gas  diffusion  plant  at  Oak  Ridge,  Tennessee.  In  this  process,  the  uranium  was
chemically  combined  with  fluorine  to  form  a  hexafluoride  gas  prior  to  separation
by  diffusion.  This  is  not  a  practical  method  for  extracting  radioisotopes  for
scientific  and  medical  use.  It  was  extremely  expensive  and  could  only  supply
naturally  occurring  isotopes.

A  more  efficient  approach  is  to  artificially  manufacture  radioisotopes.
This  can  be  done  by  firing  high-speed  particles  into  the  nucleus  of  an  atom.
When  struck,  the  nucleus  may  absorb  the  particle  or  become  unstable  and  emit  a
particle.  In  either  case,  the  number  of  particles  in  the  nucleus  would  be  altered,
creating  an  isotope.  One  source  of  high-speed  particles  could  be  a  cyclotron.  A

51


Introduction

cyclotron  accelerates  particles  around  a  circular  race  track  with  periodic  pushes  of
an  electric  field.  The  particles  gather  speed  with  each  push,  just  as  a  child  swings
higher  with  each  push  on  a  swing.  When  traveling  fast  enough,  the  particles  are
directed  off  the  race  track  and  into  the  target.

A  cyclotron  works  only  with  charged  particles,  however.  Another  source
of  bullets  are  the  neutrons  already  shooting  about  inside  a  nuclear  reactor.  The
neutrons  normally  strike  the  nuclei  of  the  fuel,  making  them  unstable  and  causing
the  nuclei  to  split  (fission)  into  two  large  fragments  and  two  to  three  "free"
neutrons.  These  free  neutrons  in  turn  make  additional  nuclei  unstable,  causing
further  fission.  The  result  is  a  chain  reaction.  Too  many  neutrons  can  lead  to  an
uncontrolled  chain  reaction,  releasing  too  much  heat  and  perhaps  causing  a
"meltdown."  Therefore,  "surplus"  neutrons  are  usually  absorbed  by  "control
rods."  However,  these  surplus  neutrons  can  also  be  absorbed  by  targets  of
carefully  selected  material  placed  in  the  reactor.  In  this  way  the  surplus  neutrons
are  used  to  create  radioactive  isotopes  of  the  materials  placed  in  the  targets.

With  practice,  scientists  using  both  cyclotrons  and  reactors  have  learned
the  proper  mix  of  target  atoms  and  shooting  particles  to  "cook  up"  a  wide  variety
of  useful  radioisotopes.

How  Does  Radiation  Affect  Humans?

Radiation  may  come  from  either  an  external  source,  such  as  an  x-ray
machine,  or  an  internal  source,  such  as  an  injected  radioisotope.  The  impact  of
radiation  on  living  tissue  is  complicated  by  the  type  of  radiation  and  the  variety  of
tissues.  In  addition,  the  effects  of  radiation  are  not  always  easy  to  separate  from
other  factors,  making  it  a  challenge  at  times  for  scientists  to  isolate  them.  An
overview  may  help  explain  not  only  the  effects  of  radiation  but  also  the
motivation  for  studying  them,  which  led  to  much  of  the  research  examined  by  the
Advisory  Committee.

What  effect  can  ionizing  radiation  have  on  chemical  bonds?

The  functions  of  living  tissue  are  carried  out  by  molecules,  that  is,
combinations  of  different  types  of  atoms  united  by  chemical  bonds.  Some  of
these  molecules  can  be  quite  large.  The  proper  functioning  of  these  molecules
depends  upon  their  composition  and  also  their  structure  (shape).  Altering
chemical  bonds  may  change  composition  or  structure.  Ionizing  radiation  is
powerful  enough  to  do  this.  For  example,  a  typical  ionization  releases  six  to
seven  times  the  energy  needed  to  break  the  chemical  bond  between  two  carbon
atoms.91  This  ability  to  disrupt  chemical  bonds  means  that  ionizing  radiation
focuses  its  impact  in  a  very  small  but  crucial  area,  a  bit  like  a  karate  master
focusing  energy  to  break  a  brick.  The  same  amount  of  raw  energy,  distributed
more  broadly  in  nonionizing  form,  would  have  much  less  effect.  For  example,  the
amount  of  energy  in  a  lethal  dose  of  ionizing  radiation  is  roughly  equal  to  the

52


The  Atomic  Century

amount  of  thermal  energy  in  a  single  sip  of  hot  coffee.92  The  crucial  difference  is
that  the  coffee's  energy  is  broadly  distributed  in  the  form  of  nonionizing  heat,
while  the  radiation's  energy  is  concentrated  in  a  form  that  can  ionize.

What  is  DNA?

Of  all  the  molecules  in  the  body,  the  most  crucial  is  DNA  (deoxyribose
nucleic  acid),  the  fundamental  blueprint  for  all  of  the  body's  structures.  The  DNA
blueprint  is  encoded  in  each  cell  as  a  long  sequence  of  small  molecules,  linked
together  into  a  chain,  much  like  the  letters  in  a  telegram.  DNA  molecules  are
enormously  long  chains  of  atoms  wound  around  proteins  and  packed  into
structures  called  chromosomes  within  the  cell  nucleus.  When  unwound,  the  DNA
in  a  single  human  cell  would  be  more  than  2  meters  long.  It  normally  exists  as
twenty-three  pairs  of  chromosomes  packed  within  the  cell  nucleus,  which  itself
has  a  diameter  of  only  10  micrometers  (0.00001  meter).93  Only  a  small  part  of
this  DNA  needs  to  be  read  at  any  one  time  to  build  a  specific  molecule.  Each  cell
is  continually  reading  various  parts  of  its  own  DNA  as  it  constructs  fresh
molecules  to  perform  a  variety  of  tasks.  It  is  worth  remembering  that  the
structure  of  DNA  was  not  solved  until  1953,  nine  years  after  the  beginning  of  the
period  studied  by  the  Advisory  Committee.  We  now  have  a  much  clearer  picture
of  what  happens  within  a  cell  than  did  the  scientists  of  1944.

What  effect  can  ionizing  radiation  have  on  DNA?

Ionizing  radiation,  by  definition,  "ionizes,"  that  is,  it  pushes  an  electron
out  of  its  orbit  around  an  atomic  nucleus,  causing  the  formation  of  electrical
charges  on  atoms  or  molecules.  If  this  electron  comes  from  the  DNA  itself  or
from  a  neighboring  molecule  and  directly  strikes  and  disrupts  the  DNA  molecule,
the  effect  is  called  direct  action.  This  initial  ionization  takes  place  very  quickly,
in  about  0.000000000000001  of  a  second.  However,  today  it  is  estimated  that
about  two-thirds  of  the  damage  caused  by  x  rays  is  due  to  indirect  action.  This
occurs  when  the  liberated  electron  does  not  directly  strike  the  DNA,  but  instead
strikes  an  ordinary  water  molecule.  This  ionizes  the  water  molecule,  eventually
producing  what  is  known  as  zfree  radical.  A  free  radical  reacts  very  strongly
with  other  molecules  as  it  seeks  to  restore  a  stable  configuration  of  electrons.  A
free  radical  may  drift  about  up  to  10,000,000,000  times  longer  than  the  time
needed  for  the  initial  ionization  (this  is  still  a  very  short  time,  about  0.00001  of  a
second),  increasing  the  chance  of  it  disrupting  the  crucial  DNA  molecule.  This
also  increases  the  possibility  that  other  substances  could  be  introduced  that  would
neutralize  free  radicals  before  they  do  damage.94

Neutrons  act  quite  differently.  A  fast  neutron  will  bypass  orbiting
electrons  and  occasionally  crash  directly  into  an  atomic  nucleus,  knocking  out
large  particles  such  as  alpha  particles,  protons,  or  larger  fragments  of  the  nucleus.
The  most  common  collisions  are  with  carbon  or  oxygen  nuclei.  The  particles
created  will  themselves  then  set  about  ionizing  nearby  electrons.  A  slow  neutron

53


Introduction

will  not  have  the  energy  to  knock  out  large  particles  when  it  strikes  a  nucleus.
Instead,  the  neutron  and  the  nucleus  will  bounce  off  each  other,  like  billiard  balls.
In  so  doing,  the  neutron  will  slow  down,  and  the  nucleus  will  gain  speed.  The
most  common  collision  is  with  a  hydrogen  nucleus,  a  proton  that  can  excite  or
ionize  electrons  in  nearby  atoms.95

What  immediate  effects  can  ionizing  radiation  have  on  living  cells?

All  of  these  collisions  and  ionizations  take  place  very  quickly,  in  less  than
a  second.  It  takes  much  longer  for  the  biological  effects  to  become  apparent.  If
the  damage  is  sufficient  to  kill  the  cell,  the  effect  may  become  noticeable  in  hours
or  days.  Cell  "death"  can  be  of  two  types.  First,  the  cell  may  no  longer  perform
its  function  due  to  internal  ionization;  this  requires  a  dose  to  the  cell  of  about  100
gray  (10,000  rad).  (For  a  definition  of  gray  and  rad,  see  the  section  below  titled
"How  Do  We  Measure  the  Biological  Effects  of  Radiation?")  Second,
"reproductive  death"  (mitotic  inhibition)  may  occur  when  a  cell  can  no  longer
reproduce,  but  still  performs  its  other  functions.  This  requires  a  dose  of  2  gray
(200  rad),  which  will  cause  reproductive  death  in  half  the  cells  irradiated  (hence
such  a  quantity  is  called  a  "mean  lethal  dose.")96  Today  we  still  lack  enough
information  to  choose  among  the  various  models  proposed  to  explain  cell  death  in
terms  of  what  happens  at  the  level  of  atoms  and  molecules  inside  a  cell.97  If
enough  crucial  cells  within  the  body  totally  cease  to  function,  the  effect  is  fatal.
Death  may  also  result  if  cell  reproduction  ceases  in  parts  of  the  body  where  cells
are  continuously  being  replaced  at  a  high  rate  (such  as  the  blood  cell-forming
tissues  and  the  lining  of  the  intestinal  tract).  A  very  high  dose  of  100  gray
( 1 0,000  rad)  to  the  entire  body  causes  death  within  twenty-four  to  forty-eight
hours;  a  whole-body  dose  of  2.5  to  5  gray  (250  to  500  rad)  may  produce  death
within  several  weeks.98  At  lower  or  more  localized  doses,  the  effect  will  not  be
death,  but  specific  symptoms  due  to  the  loss  of  a  large  number  of  cells.  These
effects  were  once  called  nonstochastic;  they  are  now  called  deterministic.™  A
beta  burn  is  an  example  of  a  deterministic  effect.

What  long-term  effects  can  radiation  have?

The  effect  of  the  radiation  may  not  be  to  kill  the  cell,  but  to  alter  its  DNA
code  in  a  way  that  leaves  the  cell  alive  but  with  an  error  in  the  DNA  blueprint.
The  effect  of  this  mutation  will  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  error  and  when  it  is
read.  Since  this  is  a  random  process,  such  effects  are  now  called  stochastic.™0
Two  important  stochastic  effects  of  radiation  are  cancer,  which  results  from
mutations  in  nongerm  cells  (termed  somatic  cells),  and  heritable  changes,  which
result  from  mutations  in  germ  cells  (eggs  and  sperm).

How  can  ionizing  radiation  cause  cancer?

Cancer  is  produced  if  radiation  does  not  kill  the  cell  but  creates  an  error  in
the  DNA  blueprint  that  contributes  to  eventual  loss  of  control  of  cell  division,  and

54


The  Atomic  Century

the  cell  begins  dividing  uncontrollably.  This  effect  might  not  appear  for  many
years.  Cancers  induced  by  radiation  do  not  differ  from  cancers  due  to  other
causes,  so  there  is  no  simple  way  to  measure  the  rate  of  cancer  due  to  radiation.
During  the  period  studied  by  the  Advisory  Committee,  great  effort  was  devoted  to
studies  of  irradiated  animals  and  exposed  groups  of  people  to  develop  better
estimates  of  the  risk  of  cancer  due  to  radiation.  This  type  of  research  is
complicated  by  the  variety  of  cancers,  which  vary  in  radiosensitivity.  For
example,  bone  marrow  is  more  sensitive  than  skin  cells  to  radiation-induced
cancer.101

Large  doses  of  radiation  to  large  numbers  of  people  are  needed  in  order  to
cause  measurable  increases  in  the  number  of  cancers  and  thus  determine  the
differences  in  the  sensitivity  of  different  organs  to  radiation.  Because  the  cancers
can  occur  anytime  in  the  exposed  person's  lifetime,  these  studies  can  take  seventy
years  or  more  to  complete.  For  example,  the  largest  and  scientifically  most
valuable  epidemiologic  study  of  radiation  effects  has  been  the  ongoing  study  of
the  Japanese  atomic  bomb  survivors.  Other  important  studies  include  studies  of
large  groups  exposed  to  radiation  as  a  consequence  of  their  occupation  (such  as
uranium  miners)  or  as  a  consequence  of  medical  treatment.  These  types  of
studies  are  discussed  in  greater  detail  in  the  section  titled  "How  Do  Scientists
Determine  the  Long-Term  Risks  from  Radiation?"

How  can  ionizing  radiation  produce  genetic  mutations?

Radiation  may  alter  the  DNA  within  any  cell.  Cell  damage  and  death  that
result  from  mutations  in  somatic  cells  occur  only  in  the  organism  in  which  the
mutation  occurred  and  are  therefore  termed  somatic  or  nonheritable  effects.
Cancer  is  the  most  notable  long-term  somatic  effect.  In  contrast,  mutations  that
occur  in  germ  cells  (sperm  and  ova)  can  be  transmitted  to  future  generations  and
are  therefore  called  genetic  or  heritable  effects.  Genetic  effects  may  not  appear
until  many  generations  later.  The  genetic  effects  of  radiation  were  first
demonstrated  in  fruit  flies  in  the  1920s.  Genetic  mutation  due  to  radiation  does
not  produce  the  visible  monstrosities  of  science  fiction;  it  simply  produces  a
greater  frequency  of  the  same  mutations  that  occur  continuously  and
spontaneously  in  nature.

Like  cancers,  the  genetic  effects  of  radiation  are  impossible  to  distinguish
from  mutations  due  to  other  causes.  Today  at  least  1,300  diseases  are  known  to
be  caused  by  a  mutation.102  Some  mutations  may  be  beneficial;  random  mutation
is  the  driving  force  in  evolution.  During  the  period  studied  by  the  Advisory
Committee,  there  was  considerable  debate  among  the  scientific  community  over
both  the  extent  and  the  consequences  of  radiation-induced  mutations.  In  contrast
to  estimates  of  cancer  risk,  which  are  based  in  part  on  studies  of  human
populations,  estimates  of  heritable  risk  are  based  for  the  most  part  upon  animal
studies  plus  studies  of  Japanese  survivors  of  the  atomic  bombs.

The  risk  of  genetic  mutation  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  doubling  dose:

55


Introduction

the  amount  of  radiation  that  would  cause  additional  mutations  equal  in  number  to
those  that  already  occur  naturally  from  all  causes,  thereby  doubling  the  naturally
occurring  rate  of  mutation.

It  is  generally  believed  that  mutation  rates  depend  linearly  on  dose  and
that  there  is  no  threshold  below  which  mutation  rates  would  not  be  increased.
Spontaneous  mutation  (unrelated  to  radiation)  occurs  naturally  at  a  rate  of
approximately  1/10,000  to  1/1,000,000  cell  divisions  per  gene,  with  wide
variation  from  one  gene  to  another.

Attempts  have  been  made  to  estimate  the  contribution  of  ionizing
radiation  to  human  mutation  rates  by  studying  offspring  of  both  exposed  and
nonexposed  Japanese  atomic  bomb  survivors.  These  estimates  are  based  on
comparisons  of  the  rate  of  various  congenital  defects  and  cancer  between  exposed
and  nonexposed  survivors,  as  well  as  on  direct  counting  of  mutations  at  a  small
number  of  genes.  For  all  these  endpoints,  no  excess  has  been  observed  among
descendants  of  the  exposed  survivors.

Given  this  lack  of  direct  evidence  of  any  increase  in  human  heritable
(genetic)  effects  resulting  from  radiation  exposure,  the  estimates  of  genetic  risks
in  humans  have  been  compared  with  experimental  data  obtained  with  laboratory
animals.  However,  estimates  of  human  genetic  risks  vary  greatly  from  animal
data.  For  example,  fruit  flies  have  very  large  chromosomes  that  appear  to  be
uniquely  susceptible  to  radiation.  Humans  may  be  less  vulnerable  than  previously
thought.  Statistical  lower  limits  on  the  doubling  dose  have  been  calculated  that
are  compatible  with  the  observed  human  data.  Based  on  our  inability  to
demonstrate  an  effect  in  humans,  the  lower  limit  for  the  genetic  doubling  dose  is
thought  to  be  less  than  100  rem.103

How  Do  We  Measure  the  Biological  Effects  of  External  Radiation?

The  methods  of  measuring  radiation  and  radioactivity,  purely  physical
events,  were  discussed  earlier.  In  studying  the  effect  of  radiation  on  living
organisms,  a  biological  event,  the  crucial  data  are  the  amount  of  energy  absorbed
by  a  specific  amount  and  type  of  tissue.  This  requires  first  measuring  the  amount
of  energy  left  behind  by  the  radiation  in  the  tissue  and,  second,  the  amount  and
type  of  tissue.

What  is  an  absorbed  dose  of  radiation?

The  risk  posed  to  a  human  being  by  any  radiation  exposure  depends  partly
upon  the  absorbed  dose,  the  amount  of  energy  absorbed  per  gram  of  tissue.
Absorbed  dose  is  expressed  in  rad.  A  rad  is  equal  to  100  ergs  of  energy
absorbed  by  1  gram  of  tissue.  The  more  modern,  internationally  adopted  unit  is
the  gray  (named  for  the  English  medical  physicist  L.  H.  Gray);  one  gray  equals
100  rad.  Almost  all  the  documents  from  the  time  period  studied  by  the  Advisory
Committee  use  the  term  rad  rather  than  gray.  It  is  important  to  realize  that

56


The  Atomic  Centwy

absorbed  dose  refers  to  energy  per  gram  of  absorbing  tissue,  not  total  energy.
Someone  absorbing  1  gray  (100  rad)  in  a  small  amount  of  tissue,  such  as  a  thyroid
gland,  will  absorb  much  less  total  energy  than  someone  absorbing  1  gray  (100
rad)  throughout  his  or  her  entire  body.  Thus,  when  speaking  of  absorbed  dose,  it
is  crucial  to  know  the  amount  of  tissue  being  exposed,  not  simply  the  number  of
gray  or  rad.

What  is  an  equivalent  dose  of  radiation?

Even  the  rad  or  gray,  though,  are  still  units  that  measure  a  purely  physical
event:  the  amount  of  energy  left  behind  in  a  gram  of  tissue.  It  does  not  directly
measure  the  biological  effect  of  that  radiation.  The  biological  effect  of  the  same
amount  of  absorbed  energy  may  vary  according  to  the  type  of  radiation  involved.
This  biological  effect  can  be  computed  by  multiplying  the  absorbed  dose  (in  rad
or  gray)  by  a  number  indicating  the  quality  factor  of  the  particular  type  of
radiation.  For  photons  and  electrons  the  quality  factor  is  defined  to  be  1;  for
neutrons  it  ranges  from  5  to  20  depending  on  the  energy  of  the  neutron;  for  alpha
particles  it  is  20. m  Thus,  1  gray  (100  rad)  of  alpha  particles  is  currently  judged  to
have  an  effect  on  living  tissue  that  is  twenty  times  more  than  1  gray  ( 1 00  rad)  of  x
rays.  Multiplying  the  absorbed  dose  (in  rad  or  gray)  by  the  quality  factor  (also
known  as  the  radiation  weighting  factor)  produces  what  is  called  the  equivalent
dose.  For  the  period  studied  by  the  Advisory  Committee,  this  was  expressed  in
terms  of  a  unit  called  the  rem,  an  acronym  for  roentgen  equivalent  man.105  (The
term  equivalent  simply  meant  that  an  absorbed  dose  expressed  in  rem  would  have
equivalent  biological  effects,  regardless  of  the  type  of  radiation.  Thus,  10  rem  of
x  rays  should  have  the  same  biological  effect  as  10  rem  of  neutrons  absorbed  by
the  same  part  of  the  body.)  The  modern  unit  is  the  sievert  (abbreviated  Sv  and
named  for  the  prominent  Swedish  radiologist,  Rolf  Sievert),  which  is  equal  to  100
rem.  Thus,  an  equivalent  dose  of  200  rem  would  today  be  expressed  as  2  sievert.

What  is  an  effective  dose  of  radiation?

Finally,  the  biological  effect  of  radiation  depends  on  the  type  of  tissue
being  irradiated.  As  with  different  types  of  radiation,  a  weighting  or  quality
factor  is  introduced  depending  on  the  type  of  tissue.  The  more  sensitive  the  tissue
is  to  radiation,  the  higher  the  factor.  The  effective  dose  is  the  sum  of  the
equivalent  doses  of  the  various  types  of  irradiated  tissue,  each  properly  weighted
for  its  sensitivity  to  radiation.  Tissue  weighting  factors  are  determined  from  the
relative  incidence  of  cancers  in  different  tissues  in  the  Japanese  survivors  of  the
atomic  bombs.

Calculating  the  effective  dose  makes  it  possible  to  readily  compare
different  exposures,  as  illustrated  by  the  accompanying  graphs.


57


Experimental  and  Nonexperimental  Doses*


Thyroid  Studies  with  lodine-131

Effective  Dose  Equivalant  (millirems,  thyroid  excluded)
350


Study  1 Study  2 Study  3 Study  4 Background


Largest  Dose


Smallest  Dose


Thyroid  Studies  with  lodine-131

Dose  to  Thyroid  Gland  (rads)
600


Study  1 Study  2 Study  3
■  Largest  Thyroid  Dose H


Study  4 Medical  Scan
Smallest  Thyroid  Dose


*The  experiments  themselves  are  discussed  in  chapter  7.  These  graphs  are  reproduced  with  permission
from  Task  Force  on  Human  Subject  Research,  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts  Department  of  Mental
Retardation,  April  1994,  "A  Report  on  the  Use  of  Radioactive  Materials  in  Human  Subject  Research  that
Involved  Residents  of  State-Operated  Facilities  within  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts  from  1942-
1973"  (ACHRENo.  MASS-072194-A),  17,  and  the  Working  Group  on  Human  Subject  Research,
Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts  Department  of  Mental  Retardation,  June  1994,  "The  Thyriod  Studies:
A  Follow-up  Report  on  the  Use  of  Radioactive  Materials  in  Human  Subject  Research  that  Involved
Residents  of  State-Operated  Facilities  within  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts  from  1942-1973"
(ACHRENo.  MASS-072194-A),  14.


Fernald  School  Nutrition  Study:  Ca  Tracer

Effective  Dose  Equivalent  (millirems)
500


Smallest  Dose  Largest  Dose

|H  Annual  Natural  Background |


Denver  Resident
Study


Fernald  School  Nutrition  Study:  Fe  Tracer

Effective  Dose  Equivalent  (millirems)
500


Smallest  Dose  Largest  Dose  Denver  Resident

MB  Annual  Natural  Background H]  Study


Common  Medical  Procedures

Whole  Body  Effective  Dose  Equivalent  (millirems)
1000


Chest  X-Ray BackX-Ray Colon  X-Ray Brain  Scan
H|  Annual  Natural  Background HH  Procedure


Introduction

How  Do  We  Measure  the  Biological  Effects  of  Internal  Emitters?

The  general  principles  just  described  require  further  refinement  when
applied  to  doses  from  internal  emitters.

What  information  is  needed  to  calculate  absorbed  dose  of  a
radionuclide  inside  the  body?

Calculating  the  absorbed  dose  from  a  radionuclide  inside  the  body  is
complex  since  it  involves  both  the  physics  of  radioactive  decay  and  the  biology  of
the  body's  metabolism.  Six  important  factors  that  must  be  considered  are  these:

1.  The  amount  of  the  radionuclide  administered.

2.  The  type  of  radiation  emitted  during  the  decay  process.

3.  The  physical  half-life  of  the  radionuclide.

4.  The  chemical  form  of  the  radionuclide.

5.  The  fraction  of  the  radionuclide  that  accumulates  in  each  organ.

6.  The  length  of  time  that  the  radionuclide  remains  in  the  organ  (the
biological  half-life).

How  varied  are  the  types  of  radiation  that  different  radionuclides
emit?

Radionuclides  can  emit  several  types  of  radiation  (e.g.,  gamma  rays,  beta
or  alpha  particles).  Each  radionuclide  emits  its  own  unique  mixture  of  radiations;
indeed,  scientists  identify  radioactive  materials  by  using  these  unique  mixtures  as
if  they  were  fingerprints.  The  mix  of  radiations  for  a  specific  radionuclide  is
always  the  same,  regardless  of  whether  the  radionuclide  is  located  on  a  bench  in  a
physicist's  laboratory  or  inside  the  human  body.  This  means  that  the  type  of
radiation  of  each  radionuclide  can  be  measured  outside  the  body  with  great
precision  by  laboratory  instruments.  A  quality  factor,  discussed  earlier,  is  used  to
adjust  for  the  difference  in  the  biological  effects  of  different  types  of  radiation.

What  determines  how  long  a  radionuclide  will  irradiate  the  body?

The  combination  of  the  physical  and  biological  half-life  (the  effective
half-life)  determines  how  long  a  radionuclide  will  continue  to  pump  out  energy
into  surrounding  tissue.  If  the  physical  and  biological  half-lives  of  a  particular
chemical  form  of  a  radionuclide  are  very  long,  the  radionuclide  will  continue  to
expose  an  individual  to  radiation  over  his  or  her  lifetime.  The  total  lifetime
radiation  exposure,  expressed  in  rem,  is  called  the  committed  dose  equivalent.

The  physical  half-life  is  the  length  of  time  it  will  take  for  half  of  the  atoms
in  a  sample  to  decay  to  a  more  stable  form.  The  physical  half-life  of  each
radionuclide  can  be  measured  precisely  in  the  laboratory.  A  shorter  half-life
means  that  the  miniature  power  source  will  "run  down"  sooner.  Sometimes,
however,  a  radionuclide  will  not  decay  immediately  to  a  stable  form,  but  to  a

60


The  Atomic  Century

second,  still  unstable,  form.  A  full  calculation,  therefore,  must  also  include  the
types  of  radiation  and  physical  half-lives  of  any  decay  products.

The  biological  half-life  does  not  depend  on  the  radionuclide  but  rather  on
the  chemical  form  of  the  radionuclide.  One  chemical  form  of  the  radionuclide
might  be  rapidly  eliminated  from  the  body  whereas  other  chemical  forms  may  be
slowly  eliminated.

To  measure  the  biological  half-life  of  a  particular  chemical  form  of  a
radionuclide,  that  chemical  form  needs  to  be  studied  in  animals.  Since  the
biological  processes  of  different  animals  vary  considerably,  an  accurate
determination  of  the  biological  half-life  requires  that  each  chemical  form  of  the
radionuclide  be  studied  in  each  animal  of  interest.  Prior  to  studying  a  chemical
form  of  a  radionuclide  in  a  human  being,  animal  studies  are  performed  to  get
some  idea  of  what  to  expect.

Once  the  results  of  animal  studies  are  available,  scientists  are  able  to
predict  what  amount  of  that  chemical  form  of  the  radionuclide  can  be  safely
injected  into  humans.  An  accurate  determination  of  what  fraction  of  each
chemical  form  of  the  radionuclide  accumulates  in  each  organ  and  how  long  it
stays  in  each  organ  in  humans  can  only  be  determined  by  studying  humans.
These  type  of  studies  are  called  biodistribution  studies.

What  is  the  tissue  weighting  factor?

Some  chemical  forms  of  radionuclides  are  highly  concentrated  in  one
small  organ  (e.g.,  iodine  in  the  thyroid  gland).  When  this  happens,  that  organ  will
absorb  most  of  the  radiated  energy,  and  little  energy  will  be  deposited  in  the
remainder  of  the  body.  Thus,  for  each  chemical  form  of  a  radionuclide,  there  is
an  organ  that  will  receive  the  highest  dose  from  that  radionuclide.  Since  organs
also  vary  greatly  in  their  sensitivity  to  radiation,  the  biological  consequences  of
the  radiation  dose  differ  depending  on  the  organ.  This  difference  in  sensitivity  to
radiation  is  represented  by  what  is  called  a  tissue  weighting  factor.

What  is  the  difference  between  committed  equivalent  dose  and
committed  effective  dose?

An  estimate  of  the  risk  posed  by  a  radionuclide  in  the  body  depends  on  its
chemical  form,  its  biodistribution,  its  physical  properties  (how  it  decays),  and  the
sensitivity  of  the  organs  exposed.  When  all  these  factors  are  considered  in  the
calculation  of  risk  for  a  single  radionuclide,  the  total  lifetime  exposure  is  called
the  committed  equivalent  dose.  If  more  than  one  radioisotope  is  present,  the  sum
of  all  the  committed  equivalent  doses  is  called  the  committed  effective  dose.  Both
are  expressed  in  rem  or  the  more  modern  units  sieverts.m  These  calculations
provide  a  basis  for  comparing  the  risk  posed  by  different  isotopes.

How  do  radiation  risks  compare  with  chemical  risks?

It  should  be  noted  that  radiation  is  not  the  only  possible  hazard  resulting

61


Introduction

from  the  medical  use  of  radionuclides.  Few  radioisotopes,  whether  intentionally
or  accidentally  introduced  into  the  body,  enter  in  a  chemically  pure  form.  The
radioactive  atoms  are  usually  part  of  a  larger  chemical  compound.  The  chemical
form  of  the  radioisotope  may  pose  its  own  hazards  of  chemical  toxicity.  Chemical
toxicity  depends  upon  the  chemical  effect  of  the  compound  on  the  body,  quite
independent  of  any  effects  of  radiation.  Determining  chemical  toxicity  is  an
entire  field  of  science  on  its  own.

How  Do  Scientists  Determine  the  Long-Term  Risks  from  Radiation?

Where  did  the  risk  estimates  in  this  report  come  from?

Throughout  this  report,  the  reader  will  find  numerous  statements
estimating  the  risks  of  cancer  and  other  outcomes  to  individuals  exposed  to
various  types  of  radiation.  These  estimates  were  obtained  from  various  scientific
advisory  committees  that  have  considered  these  questions  in  depth.107  Their
estimates  in  turn  are  based  on  syntheses  of  the  scientific  data  on  observed  effects
in  humans  and  animals.

How  are  risk  estimates  expressed?

Epidemiologists  usually  express  the  risk  of  disease  in  terms  of  the  number
of  new  cases  {incidence  rate)  or  deaths  (mortality  rate)  in  a  population  in  some
period  of  time.  For  example,  an  incidence  rate  might  be  100  new  cases  per
100,000  people  per  year;  a  mortality  rate  might  be  15  deaths  per  100,000  people
per  year.  These  rates  vary  widely  by  age,  conditions  of  exposure,  and  various
other  factors.  To  summarize  this  complex  set  of  rates,  government  regulatory
bodies  often  consider  the  lifetime  risk  of  a  particular  outcome  like  cancer.  When
relating  a  disease,  such  as  cancer,  to  one  of  its  several  causes,  a  more  useful
concept  is  the  excess  lifetime  risk  expected  from  one  particular  pattern  of
exposure,  such  as  continuous  exposure  to  1  rad  per  year.

It  is  well  established  that  cancer  rates  begin  to  rise  above  the  normal
background  rate  only  some  time  after  exposure,  the  latent  period,  which  varies
with  the  type  of  cancer  and  other  factors  such  as  age. Even  after  the  latent  period
has  passed  and  radiation  effects  begin  to  appear,  not  all  effects  are  due  to
radiation.  The  excess  rate  may  still  vary  by  age,  latency,  or  other  factors,  but  for
many  cancers  it  tends  to  be  roughly  proportional  to  the  rate  in  the  general
population.  This  is  known  as  the  constant  relative  risk  model,  and  the  ratio  of
rates  at  any  given  age  between  exposed  and  unexposed  groups  is  called  the
relative  risk.  Many  advisory  committees  have  based  their  risk  estimates  on
models  for  the  relative  risk  as  a  function  of  dose  and  perhaps  other  factors.  Other
committees,  however,  have  based  their  estimates  on  the  difference  in  rates
between  exposed  and  unexposed  groups,  a  quantity  known  as  the  absolute  risk.
This  quantity  also  varies  with  dose  and  other  factors,  but  when  this  variation  is
appropriately  accounted  for,  either  approach  can  be  used  to  estimate  lifetime  risk.

62


The  Atomic  Century

What  are  the  types  of  data  on  which  such  estimates  are  based?

Human  data  are  one  important  source,  discussed  below.  Two  other
important  sources  of  scientific  data  are  experiments  on  animals  and  on  cell
cultures.  Because  both  types  of  research  are  done  in  laboratories,  scientists  can
carefully  control  the  conditions  and  many  of  the  variables.  For  the  same  reason,
the  experiment  can  be  repeated  to  confirm  the  results.  Such  research  has
contributed  in  important  ways  to  our  understanding  of  basic  radiobiological
principles.  It  also  has  provided  quantitative  estimates  of  such  parameters  as  the
relative  effectiveness  of  different  types  of  radiation  and  the  effects  of  dose  and
dose  rate.  In  some  circumstances,  where  human  data  are  limited  or  nonexistent,
such  laboratory  studies  may  provide  the  only  basis  on  which  risks  can  be
estimated.

Why  are  human  data  preferable  to  data  on  animals  or  tissue  cultures
for  most  purposes?

Most  scientists  prefer  to  base  risk  estimates  for  humans  on  human  data
wherever  possible.  This  is  because  in  order  to  apply  animal  or  tissue  culture  data
to  humans,  scientists  must  extrapolate  from  one  species  to  another  or  from  simple
cellular  systems  to  the  complexities  of  human  physiology.  This  requires  adjusting
the  data  for  differences  among  species  in  life  span,  body  size,  metabolic  rates,  and
other  characteristics.  Without  actual  human  data,  extrapolation  provides  no
guarantee  that  there  are  no  unknown  factors  also  at  work.  It  is  not  surprising  that
there  is  no  clear  consensus  as  to  how  to  extrapolate  risk  estimates  from  one
species  to  another.  This  problem  is  not  unique  to  radiation  effects;  there  are
countless  examples  of  chemicals  having  very  different  effects  in  different  species,
and  humans  can  differ  quite  significantly  from  animals  in  their  reaction  to  toxic
agents.

How  have  human  data  been  obtained?

There  are  serious  ethical  issues  with  conducting  experiments  on  humans,
as  discussed  elsewhere  in  the  report.  However,  most  of  the  human  data  that  are
used  to  estimate  risks,  not  just  risk  from  radiation,  come  from  epidemiologic
studies  on  populations  that  already  have  been  exposed  in  various  ways.  For
radiation  effects,  the  most  important  human  data  come  from  studies  of  the
Japanese  atomic  bomb  survivors  carried  out  by  the  Radiation  Effects  Research
Foundation  (formerly  the  Atomic  Bomb  Casualty  Commission)  in  Hiroshima.
Other  valuable  sources  of  data  include  various  groups  of  medically  exposed
patients  (such  as  radiotherapy  patients)  and  occupationally  exposed  workers  (such
as  the  uranium  miners,  discussed  in  chapter  12). I08


63


Introduction

Why  is  it  necessary  to  compare  exposed  populations  with  unexposed
populations?

Unlike  a  disease  caused  by  identifiable  bacteria,  no  "signature"  has  yet
been  found  in  cancerous  tissue  that  would  link  it  definitively  to  prior  radiation
exposure.  Radiogenic  cancers  are  identical  in  properties,  such  as  appearance
under  a  microscope,  growth  rate,  and  potential  to  metastasize,  to  cancers
occurring  in  the  general  population.  Finding  cancers  in  an  exposed  population  is
not  enough  to  prove  they  are  due  to  radiation;  the  same  number  of  cancers  might
have  occurred  due  to  the  natural  frequency  of  the  disease.  The  challenge  is  to
separate  out  the  effects  of  radiation  from  what  would  otherwise  have  occurred.  A
major  step  in  this  direction  is  to  develop  follow-up  (or  cohort)  studies,  in  which
an  exposed  group  is  followed  over  time  to  observe  their  disease  rates,  and  these
rates  are  then  compared  with  the  rates  for  the  general  population  or  an  unexposed
control  group.109

Why  is  the  analysis  of  epidemiologic  data  so  complicated?

Simply  collecting  data  on  disease  rates  in  exposed  and  control  populations
is  not  enough;  indeed,  casual  analysis  may  lead  to  serious  errors  in  understanding.
Sophisticated  data-collection  techniques  and  mathematical  models  are  needed  to
develop  useful  risk  estimates  for  several  reasons:

1 .  Random  variation  due  to  sample  size.

2.  Multiple  variables.

3.  Limited  time  span  of  most  studies.

4.  Problems  of  extrapolation.

In  addition,  individual  studies  may  also  be  biased  in  their  design  or
implementation.

What  is  random  variation?

The  observed  proportion  of  subjects  developing  disease  in  any  randomly
selected  subgroup  (sample)  of  individuals  with  similar  exposures  is  subject  to  the
vagaries  of  random  variation.

A  simple-minded  example  of  this  is  the  classic  puzzle  of  determining,  in  a
drawer  of  100  socks,  how  many  are  white  and  how  many  are  black,  by  pulling  out
one  sock  at  a  time.  Obviously,  if  we  pull  out  all  the  socks,  we  know  for  certain.
In  most  areas  of  study,  though,  "pulling  out  all  the  socks"  is  far  too  expensive  and
time-consuming.  But  if  we  pull  only  10,  with  what  degree  of  confidence  can  we
predict  the  color  of  the  others?  If  we  pull  20,  we  will  have  more  confidence.  In
other  words,  the  larger  the  sample,  the  greater  our  confidence.  Using  statistical
techniques,  our  degree  of  confidence  can  be  calculated  from  the  size  of  the  entire
population  (in  this  case  100  socks)  and  the  size  of  the  actual  sample.  The  result  is
popularly  called  the  margin  of  error.

64


The  Atomic  Century

The  most  common  examples  of  this  in  everyday  life  are  the  public  opinion
polls  continually  quoted  in  the  news  media.  As  can  be  seen  in  the  simple  example
of  the  drawer  of  socks,  the  highest  degree  of  confidence  can  be  achieved  simply
by  pulling  all  the  socks  out  of  the  drawer.  For  public  opinion  polls,  this  would  be
far  too  expensive;  instead,  a  small  sample  is  selected  at  random  from  the
population.  Nowadays  it  is  common  to  report  not  only  the  actual  results,  but  also
the  sample  size  and  the  margin  of  error.  The  margin  of  error  depends  not  only  on
the  sample  size,  but  also  on  how  high  a  degree  of  confidence  we  desire.  The
degree  of  confidence  is  the  probability  that  our  sample  has  provided  a  true  picture
of  the  entire  population.  For  example,  the  margin  of  error  will  be  smaller  for  80
percent  degree  of  confidence  than  for  95  percent.  Even  where  a  study  covers  an
entire  exposed  population,  such  as  the  atomic  bomb  survivors,  the  issue  of
random  variation  remains  when  we  wish  to  generalize  the  findings  to  other
populations.

What  are  multiple  variables'!

The  effects  of  radiation  will  depend  upon,  or  vary,  with  the  dose  of
radiation  received.  However,  these  effects  also  may  vary  with  other  factors-
other  variables-thai  are  not  dependent  upon  the  radiation  dose  itself.  Examples
of  such  variables  are  age,  gender,  latency  (time  since  exposure),  and  smoking.
Data  on  these  other  variables  must  be  collected  as  well  as  data  on  the  basic
elements  of  radiation  dose  and  disease.  The  challenge  is  to  then  distinguish
between  disease  rates  due  to  radiation  and  those  due  to  other  factors.  For
example,  if  the  population  studied  were  all  heavy  smokers,  this  might  explain  in
part  a  higher  rate  of  lung  cancer.  Much  of  the  science  of  epidemiology  is  devoted
to  choosing  what  factors  to  collect  data  on  and  then  developing  the  multivariate
mathematical  models  needed  to  separate  out  the  effect  of  each  variable.
Radiation  effects  vary  considerably  across  subgroups  and  over  time  or  age.
Because  of  this,  direct  estimates  of  risk  for  particular  subgroups  would  be  very
unstable.  Mathematical  models  must  be  used.  These  models  allow  all  the  data  to
be  used  to  develop  risk  estimates  that,  while  based  on  sufficiently  large  estimates
to  be  stable,  will  be  applicable  to  particular  subgroups.

A  more  subtle  problem  is  mis  specification  of  the  model  finally  chosen  to
calculate  risks.  The  model  may  weigh  selected  factors  in  a  manner  that  best  fits
the  data  from  a  statistical  viewpoint.  This  model,  while  fitting  the  data,  may  not
actually  be  a  "correct"  view  of  nature;  another  model  that  does  not  fit  the  data
quite  as  well  may  actually  better  describe  the  as-yet-unknown  underlying
mechanisms.

Why  does  a  limited  time  span  reduce  the  value  of  a  study?

The  most  pronounced  effects  of  large  exposures  to  radiation  manifest
themselves  quickly  in  symptoms  loosely  termed  radiation  sickness.

However,  another  concern  is  understanding  the  effects  of  much  lower

65


Introduction

levels  of  radiation.  Unlike  the  more  acute  effects  of  large  exposures,  these  may
not  appear  for  some  time.  Some  cancers,  for  example,  do  not  appear  until  many
years  after  the  initial  exposure.  These  latent  effects  may  continue  to  appear  in  a
population  throughout  their  entire  lifetimes.  Calculating  the  lifetime  risk  of  an
exposure  requires  following  the  entire  sample  until  all  its  members  have  died.
Thus  far,  none  of  the  exposed  populations  have  yet  been  followed  to  the  ends  of
their  lives,  although  the  radium  dial  painter  study  for  the  group  painting  before
1930  essentially  has  been  completed,  and  the  follow-up  has  been  closed  out."0

Why  does  extrapolation  among  human  populations  pose  problems?

As  discussed  earlier,  extrapolating  results  from  one  species  to  another  is
problematic  due  to  differences  in  how  species  respond  to  radiation.

Even  though  humans  are  all  members  of  the  same  species,  there  are
similar  problems  when  extrapolating  results  from  one  group  of  humans  to  another
group.  Within  the  human  species,  different  groups  can  have  different  rates  of
disease.  For  example,  stomach  cancer  is  much  more  common  and  breast  cancer
much  rarer  among  Japanese  than  among  U.S.  residents.

How  then  should  estimates  of  the  radiation-induced  excess  of  cancer
among  the  atomic  bomb  survivors  be  applied  to  the  U.S.  population?
Assumptions  are  needed  to  "transport"  risk  estimates  from  one  human  population
to  another  human  population  that  may  have  very  different  "normal"  risks.

Why  does  extrapolation  from  high  to  low  doses  pose  problems?

Acquiring  high-quality  human  data  on  low-dose  exposure  is  difficult.  Past
studies  indicate  that  the  effects  of  low  doses  are  small  enough  to  be  lost  in  the
"noise"  of  random  variation.  In  other  words,  the  random  variation  due  to  sample
size  may  be  greater  than  the  effects  of  the  radiation.  Thus,  to  estimate  the  risks  of
low  doses,  it  is  necessary  to  extrapolate  from  the  effects  of  high  doses  down  to
the  lower  range  of  interest.  As  with  extrapolation  among  species  or  among
human  populations,  assumptions  must  be  made.

The  basic  assumption  concerns  the  dose  effect.  Is  the  effect  of  a  dose
linear?  This  would  mean  that  half  the  dose  would  produce  half  the  effect;  one-
tenth  of  the  dose  would  produce  one-tenth  of  the  effect,  and  so  forth.  Nature  is
not  always  so  reasonable,  however.  There  are  many  instances  in  nature  of
nonlinear  relationships.  A  nonlinear  dose  effect,  for  example,  could  mean  that
half  the  dose  would  produce  75  percent  of  the  effects.  Or,  going  in  the  other
direction,  a  nonlinear  dose  effect  could  mean  that  half  the  dose  would  produce
only  10  percent  of  the  effect.  Reliable  data  are  too  sparse  to  settle  the  issue
empirically.  Much  of  the  ongoing  controversy  over  low-dose  effects  concerns
which  dose  effect  relationship  to  assume.  Concerning  dose  response,  most
radiation  advisory  committees  assume  that  radiation  risks  are  linear  in  doses  at
low  levels,  although  these  risks  may  involve  nonlinear  terms  at  higher  doses.

Another  assumption  concerns  the  effect  of  dose  rate.  It  is  generally

66


The  Atomic  Century

agreed  that  the  effect  of  high-dose  x  rays  is  reduced  if  the  radiation  is  received
over  a  period  of  time  instead  of  all  at  once.  (This  reduction  in  acute  effects,  due
to  the  cell's  ability  to  repair  itself  in  between  exposures,  is  one  of  the  reasons  that
modern  protocols  for  radiotherapy  use  several  fractionated  doses.)  The  degree  to
which  this  also  happens  at  low  doses  is  less  clear.  There  are  few  human  data  on
the  effect  of  dose  rate  on  cancer  induction.  Most  estimates  of  the  effect  come
from  animal  or  cell  culture  experiments.  There  is  also  evidence  of  quite  different
dose-rate  effects  for  alpha  radiation  and  neutrons.

How  can  a  specific  study  be  biased?

When  applied  to  an  epidemiologic  study,  the  term  bias  does  not  refer  to
the  personal  beliefs  of  the  investigators,  but  to  aspects  of  the  study  design  and
implementation.  There  are  several  possible  sources  of  bias  in  any  study.

What  is  called  a  confounding  bias  may  result  if  factors  other  than  radiation
have  affected  disease  rates.  Such  factors,  as  mentioned  earlier,  might  be  a  rate  of
smoking  higher  than  the  general  population.

A  selection  bias  may  result  if  the  sample  was  not  truly  a  random  selection
from  the  population  under  study.  For  example,  the  results  of  a  study  that  includes
only  employed  subjects  might  not  be  applicable  to  the  general  population,  since
employed  people  as  a  group  are  healthier  than  the  entire  population.

An  information  bias  may  result  from  unreliability  in  a  source  of  basic
data.  For  example,  basing  the  amount  of  exposure  on  the  memory  of  the  subjects
may  bias  the  study,  since  sick  people  may  recall  differently  than  healthy  people.
Dose,  in  particular,  can  be  difficult  to  determine  when  studies  are  conducted  on
populations  exposed  prior  to  the  study,  since  there  usually  was  no  accurate
measurement  at  the  time  of  exposure.  Sometimes  when  dose  measurements  were
taken,  as  in  the  case  of  the  atomic  veterans,  the  data  are  not  adequate  by  today's
standards."1

Finally,  any  study  is  subject  to  the  random  variation  discussed  earlier,
which  depends  on  how  large  the  sample  is.  This  is  more  important  for  low-dose
than  for  high-dose  studies,  since  the  low-dose  effects  themselves  are  small
enough  to  be  lost  amid  random  variations  if  the  sample  is  too  small.

To  summarize,  multiple  studies  may  produce  somewhat  different  results
because  there  is  an  actual  difference  in  the  response  between  populations  or
because  studies  contain  spurious  results  due  to  their  own  inadequacies.  In
addition,  it  must  be  recognized  that  the  entire  body  of  scientific  literature  is  itself
subject  to  a  form  of  bias  known  as  publication  bias,  meaning  an  overreporting  of
findings  of  excess  risk.  This  is  because  studies  that  demonstrate  an  excess  risk
may  be  more  likely  to  be  published  than  those  that  do  not.


67


Introduction

In  view  of  all  these  uncertainties,  what  risk  estimates  did  the
Committee  choose?

Despite  all  these  uncertainties,  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  more  is  known
about  the  effects  of  ionizing  radiation  than  any  other  carcinogen.

The  BEIR  V  Committee  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  estimated
in  1990  that  the  lifetime  risk  from  a  single  exposure  to  10  rem  of  whole-body
external  radiation  was  about  8  excess  cancers  (of  any  type)  per  1,000  people.
(This  number  is  actually  an  average  over  all  possible  ages  at  which  an  individual
might  be  exposed,  weighted  by  population  and  age  distribution.)  For  continuous
exposure  to  0.1  rem  per  year  throughout  a  lifetime,  the  corresponding  estimate
was  5.6  excess  cancers  (that  is,  over  and  above  the  rate  expected  in  a  similar,  but
nonexposed  population)  per  1 ,000  people.  It  is  widely  agreed  that  for  x  rays  and
gamma  rays,  this  latter  figure  should  be  reduced  by  some  factor  to  allow  for  a
cell's  ability  to  repair  DNA,  but  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  as  to  what  figure
to  use;  a  figure  of  about  2  or  3  is  often  suggested."2

The  estimates  of  lifetime  risk  from  the  BEIR  V  report  have  a  range  of
uncertainty  due  to  random  variation  of  about  1.4-fold.  The  additional
uncertainties,  due  to  the  factors  discussed  earlier,  are  likely  to  be  larger  than  the
random  variation.

In  comparison,  for  most  chemical  carcinogens,  the  uncertainties  are  often
a  factor  of  10  or  more.  This  agreement  among  studies  of  radiation  effects  is  quite
remarkable  and  reflects  the  enormous  amount  of  scientific  research  that  has  been
devoted  to  the  subject,  as  well  as  the  large  number  of  people  who  have  been
exposed  to  doses  large  enough  to  show  effects.


68


ENDNOTES


1 .  In  1974  the  AEC's  regulatory  activities  for  civilian  nuclear  power  and  the  use
(including  medical  research)  of  radioisotopes  produced  in  nuclear  reactors  were
transferred  to  the  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission  and  its  research  and  weapons-
development  activities  to  the  Energy  Research  and  Development  Administration
(ERDA) In  1 977  ERDA  was  incorporated  into  the  new  Department  of  Energy.

2.  Captain  C.  F.  Behrens,  ed.,  Atomic  Medicine  (New  York:  Thomas  Nelson  and
Sons,  1949),  3.

3.  Ibid.,  7.

4 Otto  Glasser,  William  Conrad  Roentgen  and  the  Early  History  oj  the
Roentgen  Rays  (Springfield,  111.,  and  Baltimore:  Charles  C.  Thomas,  1934),  29;  Glasser  is
quoting  O.  Lummer  of  Berlin.

5.  Ibid.,  271.

6.  Ibid.,  244-282.

7.  Robert  Reid,  Marie  Curie  (New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1974),  241.

8.  Ibid.,  86-87.

9.  P.  Curie  and  M.  S.  Curie,  "Radium:  A  New  Body,  Strongly  Radio-Active,
Contained  in  Pitchblende,"  Scientific  American  (28  January  1899):  60.  The  term
hyperphosphorescence  was  suggested  by  Silvanus  Thompson.  Reid,  Marie  Curie,  87.
See  also  Susan  Quinn,  Marie  Curie:  A  Life  (New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1995).

10.  New  York  Journal,  21  June  1905,  reproduced  in  David  J.  DiSantis,  M.D.,
and  Denise  M.  DiSantis,  "Radiologic  History  Exhibit:  Wrong  Turns  on  Radiology's  Road
of  Progress,"  Radiographics  (1991): 1 121-1 138,  figure  17.

11.  Henry  S.  Kaplan,  "Historic  Milestones  in  Radiobiology  and  Radiation
Therapy,"  Seminars  in  Oncology  6,  no.  4  (December  1979):  480.

12.  "Autopsy  of  a  Radiologist,"  Archives  of  the  Roentgen  Ray  18

(April  1914):  393.  .

13 Reid,  Marie  Curie,  274;  Barton  C.  Hacker,  The  Dragon's  Tail:  Radiation
Safety  in  the  Manhattan  Project,  1942-1946  (Berkeley,  Calif:  University  of  California

Press,  1987),  22-23.

14.  The  marketing  of  one  nostrum  containing  radium,  Radiothor,  was  not
officially  shut  down  by  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  until  1932.  "With  the  institution
of  regulations,  the  radioactive  patent  medicine  industry  collapsed  overnight."  Roger  M.
Macklis,  "The  Great  Radium  Scandal,"  Scientific  American  269 (March  1993):  94-99.
In  the  1920s,  the  use  of  capsules  containing  radium  inserted  into  the  nose  was  introduced
as  a  means  of  shrinking  lymphoid  tissue  in  children  to  treat  middle  ear  obstructions  and
infections.  During  World  War  II  this  procedure  was  used  on  submariners  and  Air  Force
personnel  as  treatment  and,  in  the  case  of  several  hundred  submariners,  on  an
experimental  basis  to  test  the  effectiveness  of  nasopharyngeal  irradiation  in  shrinking
lymphoid  tissue  and  equalizing  external  and  middle  ear  pressure.  In  the  late  1940s,  the
observation  that  no  controlled  study  had  ever  been  conducted  to  test  the  treatment's
effectiveness  in  preventing  deafness  in  children  led  Johns  Hopkins  researchers  to  begin
the  experimental  treatment  of  several  hundred  children.  As  the  Advisory  Committee
began  its  work  in  1994,  controversy  over  the  long-term  effects  of  this  treatment  still
swirled.  Samuel  Crane,  "Irradiation  of  Nasopharynx,"  Annals  of  Otology,  Rhinology,  and
Laryngology  55  (1946):  779-788;  H.  L.  Holmes  and  J.  D.  Harris,  "Aerotitis  Media  in

69


Submariners,"  Annals  of  Otology,  Rhinology,  and  Laryngology  55  (1946):  347-371.  See
chapter  7  and  ACHRE  Briefing  Book,  vol.  13,  tab  E,  April  1995,  for  fuller  discussion.

15.  Macklis,  "The  Great  Radium  Scandal,"  94-99.

16.  The  National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  began  as  the  American
Committee  on  X  Ray  and  Radium  Protection  in  1928,  under  the  aegis  of  the  International
Congress  of  Radiology.  A  private  organization,  its  members  were  physicians,  physicists,
and  representatives  of  the  equipment  manufacturers.  Prior  to  World  War  II  its  main
function  was  to  issue  recommendations  on  radiological  safety,  which  were  published  by
the  National  Bureau  of  Standards  (a  federal  agency).  At  times  this  arrangement  created
confusion,  leading  people  to  believe  the  publications  were  official  recommendations.
After  the  war,  the  private  group  was  revived  as  the  National  Committee  on  Radiation
Protection.  In  1956  it  was  renamed  the  National  Committee  on  Radiation  Protection  and
Measurements.  In  the  early  1 960s,  it  received  a  congressional  charter  and  was  renamed
the  National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and  Measurements.  Throughout  its  history
it  has  coordinated  its  activities  with  other  groups,  such  as  the  International  Commission
on  Radiological  Protection' and  committees  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  (known
as  the  BEAR  and  BEIR  Committees).  The  most  complete  record  of  the  NCRP's  activities
is  Lauriston  S.  Taylor,  Organization  for  Radiation  Protection:  The  Operations  of  the
ICRPandNCRP,  1928-1974  (Washington,  D.C.:  Office  of  Technical  Information,  U.S.
Department  of  Energy.)  Lauriston  Taylor,  a  physicist  at  the  National  Bureau  of
Standards,  served  as  the  executive  director  of  the  organization  from  its  founding  in  1 928
to  1974.  For  further  background  on  the  history  of  radiation  protection,  see  Daniel  P.
Serwer,  The  Rise  of  Radiation  Protection:  Science,  Medicine  and  Technology  in  Society,
1896-1935  (Ph.D.  diss,  in  the  History  of  Science,  Princeton  University,  1976)  (Ann
Arbor:  University  Microfilms  77-14242,  1977);  Gilbert  F.  Whittemore,  The  National
Committee  on  Radiation  Protection,  1928-1960:  From  Professional  Guidelines  to
Government  Regulation  (Ph.D.  diss,  in  the  History  of  Science,  Harvard  University,  1986)
(Ann  Arbor:  University  Microfilms  87-04465,  1987);  J.  Samuel  Walker,  "The
Controversy  Over  Radiation  Safety:  A  Historical  Overview,"  Journal  of  the  American
Medical  Association  262  (1989):  664-668;  D.  C.  Kocher,  "Perspective  on  the  Historical
Development  of  Radiation  Standards,"  Health  Physics  61,  no.  4  (October  1994).

17.  Heinz  Haber, The  Walt  Disney  Story  of  Our  Friend  the  Atom  (New  York:
Simon  and  Schuster,  1956),  152.  The  German-born  Dr.  Haber  had  come  to  the  United
States  in  1947  to  work  for  the  Air  Force  School  of  Aviation  Medicine  and  was  a
cofounder  of  the  field  of  space  medicine.  In  the  early  1950s  he  joined  the  faculty  of  the
University  of  California  at  Los  Angeles.  As  Spencer  Weart,  a  historian  of  the  images  of
the  atomic  age  has  recorded,  the  accompanying  Walt  Disney  movie  Our  Friend  the  Atom,
which  was  shown  on  television  and  in  schools  beginning  in  1957,  was  probably  the  most
effective  of  educational  films  on  the  perils  and  potential  of  atomic  energy.  "The  great
storyteller  introduced  the  subject  as  something  'like  a  fairy  tale,'  indeed  the  tale  of  a  genie
released  from  a  bottle.  The  cartoon  genie  began  as  a  menacing  giant.  .  .  .  But  scientists
turned  the  golem  into  an  obedient  servant,  who  wielded  the  'magic  power'  of
radioactivity.  .  .  ."  Spencer  R.  Weart,  Nuclear  Fear:  A  History  of  Images  (Cambridge,
Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1988),  169.

18.  Marshall  Brucer,  Chronology  of  Nuclear  Medicine  (St.  Louis:  Heritage
Publications,  1990),  199-200.  Radon  is  a  gas  at  room  temperature.  Doctors  developed
an  innovative  system  for  capturing  radon  from  used  cancer  therapy  vials  and  dissolving
it  in  a  saline  solution,  which  was  then  injected.


70


19.  Haber,  Our  Friend  the  Atom,  152.

20.  J.  L.  Heilbron  and  Robert  W.  Seidel,  Lawrence  and  His  Laboratory:  A
History  of  the  Lawrence  Berkeley  Laboratoiy,  vol.  1  (Los  Angeles:  University  of
California  Press,  1989).  The  birth  and  development  of  nuclear  medicine  at  the  University
of  California's  Berkeley  and  San  Francisco  branches  is  the  subject  of  a  case  study  in  a
supplemental  volume  to  this  report.

21.  John  Stanbury,  A  Constant  Ferment  (Ipswich,  N.Y.:  Ipswich  Press,  1991),
57-67.

22.  Stafford  Warren,  interview  by  Adelaide  Tusler  (Los  Angeles:  University  of
California),  23  June  1966  in  An  Exceptional  Man  for  Exceptional  Challenges,  Vol.  2
(Los  Angeles:  University  of  California,  1983)  (ACHRE  No.  UCLA-101794-A-1),  421-
422.

23.  Manhattan  Project  researchers  focused  on  polonium  in  the  development  of
the  initiator  for  the  bomb.  See  Richard  Rhodes,  The  Making  of  the  Atomic  Bomb  (New
York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1986),  578-580.

24.  Manhattan  District  Program,  31  December  1946  (book  1,  "General,"  volume
7,  "Medical  Program")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-052495-A-1),  2.2.

25.  Stafford  Warren  in  Radiology  in  World  War  II,  ed.  Arnold  Lorentz  Ahnfeldt
(Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1966),  847.

26.  Robert  Stone,  10  May  1943  ("Health  Radiation  and  Protection")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-011195-B-1).

27.  Philip  J.  Close,  Second  Lieutenant,  JAGD,  to  Major  C.  A.  Taney,  Jr.,  26
July  1945  ("Determination  of  Policy  on  Cases  of  Exposure  to  Occupational  Disease")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-E-96),  1.

28.  Ibid.,  3.

29.  Response  to  ACHRE  Request  No.  012795-B,  Oak  Ridge  Associated
Universities,  D.  M.  Robie  to  A.  ("Tony")  P.  Polendak,  15  June  1979  ("Storage  of  records-
-Shipment  1161").

30.  The  story  of  this  early  Hanford  research  is  told  in  Neal  D.  Hines,  Proving
Ground:  An  Account  of  the  Radiobiological  Studies  in  the  Pacific  1946-61  (Seattle:
University  of  Washington  Press,  1962).  As  Hines  explains,  the  initial  study  of  the  effect
of  radioactivity  on  aquatic  organisms  was  undertaken  by  a  University  of  Washington
researcher.  The  program  could  not  be  identified  with  the  Columbia  River,  and  the
research  was  to  be  conducted  in  a  normal  campus  setting.  The  project's  name  ("Applied
Fisheries  Laboratory")  was  selected  to  disguise  its  work.  The  primary  researcher  initially
did  not  know  the  true  purpose,  and  the  university  accepted  the  work  for  undisclosed
purpose  on  the  assurance  that  national  security  required  it.

3 1 .  Harold  Hodge,  interview  by  J.  Newell  Stannard,  transcript  of  audio
recording,  22  October  1980  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-061794-A-4),  21-22.  Stafford  Warren,
interview  by  J.  Newell  Stannard,  transcript  of  audio  recording,  7  February  1979  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-061794-A),  3.

32.  Henry  DeWolf  Smyth,  Atomic  Energy  for  Military  Purposes:  The  Official
Report  on  the  Development  of  the  Atomic  Bomb  under  the  Auspices  of  the  United  States
Government,  1940-45  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton  University  Press,  1945).

33.  The  organizational  history  of  the  Department  of  Defense  is  chronicled  in
The  Department  of  Defense:  Documents  on  Establishment  and  Organization  1944-1978,
eds.  Alice  C.  Cole,  Alfred  Goldberg,  Samuel  A.  Tucker,  Rudolf  A.  Winnacker
(Washington,  D.C.:  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  Historical  Office,  1978).


71


34.  The  program  expanded  from  the  base  of  Manhattan  Project  research  sites
such  as  Oak  Ridge,  Hanford,  Chicago,  and  the  Universities  of  California,  Chicago,  and
Rochester  to  take  in  a  growing  portion  of  the  university  research  establishment.  The
minutes  of  the  January  1947  meeting  record  an  ambitious  program  to  focus  on  the
physical  measurement  of  radiation,  the  biological  effects  of  radiation,  methods  for  the
detection  of  radiation  damage,  methods  for  the  prevention  of  radiation  injury,  and
protective  measures.  There  followed  an  itemized  list  of  the  work  to  be  done  at  Argonne
National  Laboratory,  Los  Alamos,  Monsanto,  Columbia  University,  and  the  Universities
of  Michigan,  Rochester,  Tennessee,  California,  and  Virginia.

The  University  of  Rochester  was  to  be  the  largest  university  contractor,  receiving
more  than  $1  million,  followed  by  the  University  of  California  (about  one-half  million
for  UCLA,  where  Stafford  Warren  was  dean  of  the  new  medical  school,  and  Berkeley,  to
which  Stone  had  returned  to  join  Hamilton),  Western  Reserve  (to  which  Warren's  deputy
Hymer  Friedell  was  headed),  and  Columbia  (more  than  $100,000).  Argonne  received  an
amount  comparable  to  Rochester;  other  labs,  including  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory
and  Clinton  Laboratories  (now  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory),  were  scheduled  for
$200,000  or  less.  Stafford  Warren,  Interim  Medical  Committee,  proceedings  of  23-24
January  1947  (ACHRE  No.  UCLA-1 1 1094-A-26).  See  also  ACHRE  Briefing  Book,  vol.
3,  tab  F,  document  H.

35.  "Report  of  the  Board  of  Review,"  20  June  1947,  attached  to  letter  from
David  Lilienthal,  Chairman,  AEC,  to  Dr.  Robert  F.  Loeb,  Chairman,  AEC  Medical  Board
of  Review,  27  June  1947  ("At  the  conclusion  of  the  deliberations  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-051094-A-191),  3-4.

36.  The  Advisory  Committee  has  assembled  the  minutes  of  the  meetings,  and
such  transcripts  as  have  been  retrieved.

37.  Shields  Warren,  interview  by  Dr.  Peter  Olch,  National  Library  of  Medicine,
transcript  of  audio  recording,  10-11  October  1972,  59.

38.  Harry  H.  Davis,  "The  Atom  Goes  to  Work  for  Medicine,"  New  York  Times
Magazine,  26  September  1946  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-408).

39.  Marshall  Brucer,  M.D.,  Chairman,  Medical  Division,  Oak  Ridge  Institute
for  Nuclear  Studies,  wrote:

Paul  Aebersold's  isotopes  division  was  the  only  safely  nonsecret  part  of
AEC.  Aebersold  had  unlimited  funds,  unlimited  radioisotopes,  and
seemingly  unlimited  energy  to  promote  the  unlimited  cures  that  had  been
held  back  from  the  American  public  for  too  long.  The  liberal
establishment  was  in  the  depths  of  shame  for  having  ended  the  war  by
killing  people.  Radioisotopes  didn't  kill  people;  they  cured  cancer.

Aebersold  spoke  at  every  meeting  of  one  person  or  more  that  had  one
minute  or  more  available  on  its  program.  No  matter  what  the  meeting's
subject,  Aebersold's  topic  was  always  the  same.  He  sold  isotopes.

Marshall  Brucer,  "Nuclear  Medicine  Begins  with  a  Boa  Constrictor,"  Journal  of  Nuclear

Medicine  19,  no.  6  (1978):  595.

40.  Isotopes  Division,  prepared  for  discussion  with  general  manager,  "Present
and  Future  Scope  of  Isotope  Distribution,"  4  March  1949  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-01 1895-B-
1).

41.  Interview  with  Shields  Warren,  10-11  October  1972,  76.


72


42.  Isotopes  Division,  4  March  1949,  2.

43.  See  Kaplan,  "Historic  Milestones,"  480.

44.  "Summary  of  Congressional  Hearings  on  Fellowship  Issue,"  16  May  1949
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-061395-D-1).

45.  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  proceedings  of  10
September  1949  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-A),  18.

46.  Ibid,  19.

47.  For  a  further  discussion  of  the  contemplated  secret  record  keeping  by  the
VA,  see  chapter  10.  As  noted  there,  a  VA  investigation  concluded  that  the  "confidential"
division  was  never  activated.

48.  The  VA  provided  the  Advisory  Committee  with  capsule  descriptions  of
experiments,  which  appeared  in  periodic  VA  reports  of  the  time.  In  fact,  the  number  of
descriptions  exceeded  3,000  for  the  portion  of  the  1944-74  period  the  reports  covered.
However,  further  information  on  the  vast  majority  of  the  experiments  was  typically
unavailable,  and  the  VA  noted  that  some  of  the  descriptions  may  be  redundant  (or  reflect
refunding  of  a  single  experiment),  and  some  may  not  have  involved  humans.  Therefore,
the  "more  than  2,000"  reflects  a  very  rough  estimate  adjusted  for  these  considerations.

49.  Paul  C.  Aebersold,  address  before  Rocky  Mountain  Radiological  Society,  9
August  1951  ("The  United  States  Atomic  Energy  Program:  Part  I-Overall  Progress")
(ACHRE  No.  TEX- 101294- A- 1),  6.

50.  By  1955  the  program  was  receiving  8,000  applications  a  year,  including
hundreds  from  abroad.  A  July  1955  Aebersold  summary  of  accomplishments  pronounced
that,  as  a  result  of  the  program,  there  were  now  1 00  companies  in  the  radiation  instrument
business,  two  dozen  suppliers  of  commercially  labeled  compounds,  pharmaceutical
companies,  hundreds  of  isotope  specialists,  a  half-dozen  waste  disposal  firms,  and  ten
safety  monitoring  companies.  Also,  2,693  U.S.  institutions  had  received  isotope
authorization,  including  1,126  industrial  firms,  1,019  hospitals  and  private  physicians,
220  colleges  and  universities,  244  federal  and  state  laboratories,  and  47  foundations.
"Capsule  Summary  of  Isotopes  Distribution  Program,"  July  1955  (ACHRE  No.  TEX-
101294-A-2).

5 1 .  Vannevar  Bush,  Pieces  of  the  Action  (New  York:  William  Morrow  and
Company,  1970),  65.

52.  Ibid.

53.  In  addition  to  direct  grants  to  private  institutions  the  AEC  pioneered  the
creation  of  research  consortia.  In  1946,  for  example,  the  University  of  Tennessee  and  a
consortium  of  southeastern  universities  urged  the  Manhattan  Project  to  establish  the  Oak
Ridge  Institute  of  Nuclear  Studies  (ORINS).  Following  the  creation  of  the  AEC,  ORINS
operated  under  AEC  contract  to  train  researchers  and  to  operate  a  clinical  research  facility
focused  on  cancer.  In  1966  ORINS  became  known  by  the  name  of  its  operating
contractor,  the  Oak  Ridge  Associated  Universities,  and  the  research  facility  is  now  known
as  the  Oak  Ridge  Institute  for  Science  and  Education  (ORISE).

54.  Donald  C.  Swain,  "The  Rise  of  a  Research  Empire:  NIH,  1930  to  1950,"
Science  138,  no.  3546  (14  December  1962):  1235.  The  National  Institutes  of  Health
began  as  the  Laboratory  of  Hygiene  in  1887.  It  was  renamed  the  National  Institutes  of
Health  in  1948.

55.  Assistant  Director,  Office  of  Extramural  Research,  National  Institutes  of
Health,  to  Anna  Mastroianni,  Advisory  Committee,  16  July  1995  ("Comments  on  Draft
Chapters  of  ACHRE  Final  Report").


73


56.  Interview  with  Shields  Warren,  10-1 1  October  1972,  78.

57.  Robert  S.  Stone,  M.D.,  to  Lieutenant  Colonel  H.  L.  Friedell,  U.S.  Engineer
Corps,  Manhattan  District,  9  August  1945  ("In  reading  through  the  releases  .  .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-121494-D-2).

58.  Robert  S.  Stone,  M.D.,  to  Lieutenant  Colonel  H.  L.  Friedell,  U.S.  Engineer
Corps,  Manhattan  District,  9  August  1945  ("As  you  and  many  others  are  aware,  a  great
many  of  the  people  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121494-D-1).

59.  Jonathan  M.  Weisgall,  Operation  Crossroads:  The  Atomic  Tests  at  Bikini
Atoll  (Annapolis,  Md.:  Naval  Institute  Press,  1994).  For  a  contemporary  account  by  a
doctor  who  served  as  a  radiation  monitor,  see  David  Bradley,  No  Place  to  Hide  (Boston:
Little,  Brown  and  Co.,  1948).

60.  Weisgall,  Operation  Crossroads,  266-270.

61.  "History  of  the  U.S.  Naval  Radiological  Defense  Laboratory,  1946-58"
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-071494-A-1),  1.

62.  The  Joint  Panel  was  the  child  of  the  Committee  on  Medical  Science  and
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  (hence  the  term  Joint),  both  of  which,  in  turn,  were
committees  of  the  Defense  Department's  Research  and  Development  Board.  That  board
served  as  the  secretary  of  defense-level  coordinator  of  departmentwide  R&D.

63.  The  Committee  has  assembled  the  charter,  agenda,  reports,  and  available
minutes  of  the  Joint  Panel.  ACHRE  Research  Collection  Series,  Library  File,
Compilation  of  the  Minutes  of  the  Joint  Panel  on  Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare,
1948-1953(1994).

64.  Howard  Andrews,  interview  by  Gilbert  Whittemore  (ACHRE  staff),
transcript  of  audio  recording,  3  December  1994  (ACHRE  Reseach  Project,  Interview
Series,  Targeted  Interview  Project).

65.  In  a  February  1950  paper,  the  Public  Health  Service  explained  its  role  in
national  defense:

During  and  since  WW  II,  science  and  technology  have
introduced  new  weapons  and  whole  new  industries
whose  effects  on  human  health  have  not  been  precisely
determined  and  effective  methods  against  these  hazards
have  not  yet  been  developed.

If,  for  example,  an  atomic  bomb  were  to  burst  over  a
large  city  in  this  country,  tens  of  thousands  of  burned  and
injured  people  could  not  be  given  effective  treatment
because  science  has  not  yet  found  the  practical  means. . . .
The  operation  of  atomic  piles  and  related  facilities  also
presents  a  variety  of  problems  as  to  human  tolerance  of
radiation  and  the  disposition  of  radioactive  substances.

"The  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  and  National  Defense,"  February  1950  (ACHRE  No.

HHS-071394-A-2),  1.

66.  National  Institutes  of  Health,  2  August  1952  ("Assumptions  Underlying
NIH  Defense  Planning")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-071394-A-1).

67.  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  transcript  (partial)  of
proceedings  of  10  November  1950  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-012795-C-1).  While  the
document  is  undated,  discussion  of  the  meeting  appears  in  the  November  1950  ACBM


74


minutes  (12);  a  letter  from  Alan  Gregg,  Chairman,  ACBM,  to  Gordon  Dean,  Chairman,
AEC,  30  November  1950  ("The  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine  held
their  twenty-fourth  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-A);  and  a  letter  from  Marion  W.
Boyer,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Honorable  Robert  LeBaron,  Chairman,  Military
Liaison  Committee,  10  January  1951  ("As  you  know,  one  of  the  important  problems  .  .
.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040395-A-1).

68.  Behrens,  transcript,  proceedings  of  10  November  1950,  2.

69.  Powell,  transcript,  proceedings  of  10  November  1950,  8-10.

70.  Cooney,  transcript,  proceedings  of  10  November  1950,  6.

71.  Ibid.,  7.

72.  Ibid.,  6.

73.  Ibid.,  7-8.

74.  Warren,  transcript,  proceedings  of  10  November  1950,  13.

75.  Ibid.,  14.

76.  Ibid.,  15.

77.  Cooney,  transcript,  proceedings  of  10  November  1950,  15.

78.  Ibid.,  16.

79.  "Notes  on  the  Meeting  of  a  Committee  to  Consider  the  Feasibility  and
Conditions  for  a  Preliminary  Radiological  Safety  Shot  for  Operation  'Windsquall,'"  2 1  -
22  May  1951  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-030195-A-1),  41.

80.  Ibid.,  40.

81.  Ibid.,  19.

82.  T.  L.  Shipman,  Health  Division  Leader,  to  Alvin  Graves,  J-Division  Leader,
27  December  1951  ("Summary  Report  Rad  Safe  and  Health  Activities  at  Buster- Jangle")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B-1).

83.  [AEC]  Board  of  Review  to  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  20  June  1947
("Report  of  the  Board  of  Review")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-071494-A-4),  10.

84.  NEPA  Medical  Advisory  Panel,  Subcommittee  No.  IX,  "An  Evaluation  of
Psychological  Problem  of  Crew  Selection  Relative  to  the  Special  Hazards  of  Irradiation
Exposure,"  22  July  1949  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-121494-A-2),  20.

85.  Ibid.,  27.

86.  Ibid.,  22.

87.  Definition  of  "curie,"  The  Compact  Edition  of  the  Oxford  English  Dictionaiy
(Oxford,  England:  Oxford  University  Press,  1971),  3937.

88.  J.  Newell  Stannard,  Radioactivity  and  Health:  A  History  (Oak  Ridge,  Tenn.:
Office  of  Scientific  and  Technical  Information,  1988),  9.

89.  Hanson  Blatz,  ed.,  Radiation  Hygiene  Handbook  (New  York:  McGraw-Hill
Book  Co.,  1959),  6-185.

90.  Richard  G.  Hewlett  and  Oscar  E.  Anderson,  The  New  World:  A  Histo>y  of
the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Vol.  I:  1939-1946  (Berkeley:  University  of  California
Press,  1990),  reprint  of  1962  edition,  107-108.

91.  Eric  Hall,  Radiobiology  for  the  Radiologist,  4th  ed.  (Philadelphia:  J.  B.
Lippincott,  1994),  3.

92.  Ibid.,  5.

93.  The  DNA  strand  would  be  about  5  centimeters  (cm)  long;  the  average  cell
diameter  is  about  20  microns  (0.002  cm).  Bruce  Alberts  et  al.,  eds.,  Molecular  Biology  of
the  Cell  (New  York:  Garland,  1983),  385-388.

94.  Hall,  Radiobiology  for  the  Radiologist,  4th  ed.,  9-10.


75


95.

Ibid.

96.

Ibid.,

30.

97.

Ibid.,

32-33.

98.

Ibid.,

312.

99.

Ibid.,

324.

100

.  Ibid

101.  International  Commission  on  Radiological  Protection,  Recommendations:
ICRP  Publication  No.  60  (New  York:  Pergamon  Press,  1991),  cited  in  Hall,
Radiobiology  for  the  Radiologist,  4th  ed.,  456.

102.  Hall,  Radiobiology  for  the  Radiobiologist,  4th  ed.,  355.

103.  Committee  on  the  Biological  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation,  National
Research  Council,  Health  Effects  of  Exposure  to  Low  Levels  of  Ionizing  Radiation:  BEIR
V  (Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy  Press,  1990),  2-4.

104.  International  Commission  on  Radiological  Protection,  Recommendations:
ICRP  Publication  No.  60,  quoted  in  Hall,  Radiobiology  for  the  Radiologist,  4th  ed.,  455.

105.  ".  .  .  roentgen  equivalent  man,  or  mammal  (rem).  The  dose  of  any  ionizing
radiation  that  will  produce  the  same  biological  effect  as  that  produced  by  one  roentgen  of
high-voltage  x-radiation."  Blatz,  ed.,  Radiation  Hygiene  Handbook,  2-19.

106.  Hall,  Radiobiology  for  the  Radiobiologist,  4th  ed.,  458.

107.  These  include  the  National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and
Measurement  (NCRP),  the  International  Commission  on  Radiation  Protection  (ICRP),  the
United  Nations  Scientific  Committee  on  the  Effects  of  Atomic  Radiation  (UNSCEAR),
the  Committee  on  the  Biological  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation  (BEIR)  of  the  National
Research  Council,  and  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA).

108.  In  addition,  there  have  been  a  number  of  studies  of  people  exposed  to  low
levels  of  radiation,  including  military  personnel  and  residents  subject  to  fallout  from
nuclear  weapons  testing,  workers  at  and  residents  near  nuclear  facilities,  patients  given
diagnostic  x  rays,  and  regions  with  high  natural  background  radiation.  Most  of  these
either  have  not  produced  convincing  positive  results  or  are  unsuitable  for  risk  assessment
because  of  the  statistical  instability  of  their  estimates.

109.  Some  indirect  estimates  have  been  based  on  "case  control"  studies,  in  which
diseased  cases  are  compared  with  unaffected  controls  to  look  for  differences  in  their  past
exposures  that  could  account  for  their  different  outcomes.

General  reference  works  include  D.  G.  Kleinbaum,  W.  Kupper,  and  H.
Morgenstern,  Epidemiologic  Research:  Principles  and  Quantitative  Methods  (Belmont,
Calif.:  Lifetime  Learning  Publications,  1982),  and  J.  D.  Boice,  Jr.,  and  J.  E.  Fraumeni,  Jr.,
Radiation  Carcinogenesis:  Epidemiology  and  Biological  Significance  (New  York:  Raven
Press,  1984).

110.  Dr.  Shirley  Fry  to  Bill  LeFurgy,  31  August  1995  ("HRE  Draft  Final
Report"),  8,  contained  in  Ellyn  Weiss,  Special  Counsel  and  Director,  Office  of  Human
Radiation  Experiments,  DOE,  to  Anna  Mastroianni,  ACHRE,  1 1  September  1995.

111.  "[T]he  NTPR  dose  data  are  not  suitable  for  dose-response  analysis."
Institute  of  Medicine,  "A  Review  of  the  Dosimetry  Data  Available  in  the  Nuclear  Test
Personnel  Review  (NTPR)  Program,  An  Interim  Letter  Report  of  the  Committee  to  Study
the  Mortality  of  Military  Personnel  Present  at  Atmospheric  Tests  of  Nuclear  Weapons  to
the  Defense  Nuclear  Agency"  (Washington,  D.C.:  Institute  of  Medicine,  May  15,  1995),
2.


76


1 12.  Committee  on  the  Biological  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation,  National
Research  Council,  Health  Effects  of  Exposure  to  Low  Levels  of  Ionizing  Radiation:  BEIR
V  (Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy  Press,  1990),  22,  162.


77


Part  I

ETHICS  OF  HUMAN  SUBJECTS

RESEARCH:  A  HISTORICAL

PERSPECTIVE


PartI
Overview


W  hen  the  Advisory  Committee  began  work  in  April  1994  we  were
charged  with  determining  whether  "the  [radiation]  experiments'  design  and
administration  adequately  met  the  ethical  and  scientific  standards,  including
standards  of  informed  consent,  that  prevailed  at  the  time  of  the  experiments  and
that  exist  today"  and  also  to  "determine  the  ethical  and  scientific  standards  and
criteria  by  which  it  shall  evaluate  human  radiation  experiments."

Although  this  charge  seems  straightforward,  it  is  in  fact  difficult  to
determine  what  the  appropriate  standards  should  be  for  evaluating  the  conduct
and  policies  of  thirty  or  fifty  years  ago.  First,  we  needed  to  determine  the  extent
to  which  the  standards  of  that  time  are  similar  to  the  standards  of  today.  To  the
extent  that  there  were  differences  we  needed  to  determine  the  relative  roles  of
each  in  making  moral  evaluations.

In  chapter  1  we  report  what  we  have  been  able  to  reconstruct  about
government  rules  and  policies  in  the  1940s  and  1950s  regarding  human
experiments.  We  focus  primarily  on  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  and  the
Department  of  Defense,  because  their  history  with  respect  to  human  subjects
research  policy  is  less  well  known  than  that  of  the  Department  of  Health,
Education,  and  Welfare  (now  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services).
Drawing  on  records  that  were  previously  obscure,  or  only  recently  declassified,
we  reveal  the  perhaps  surprising  finding  that  officials  and  experts  in  the  highest
reaches  of  the  AEC  and  DOD  discussed  requirements  for  human  experiments  in
the  first  years  of  the  Cold  War.  We  also  briefly  discuss  the  research  policies  of
DHEW  and  the  Veterans  Administration  during  these  years.

In  chapter  2  we  turn  from  a  consideration  of  government  standards  to  an
exploration  of  the  norms  and  practices  of  physicians  and  medical  scientists  who
conducted  research  with  human  subjects  during  this  period.  We  include  here  an


81


Part  I

analysis  of  the  significance  of  the  Nuremberg  Code,  which  arose  out  of  the
international  war  crimes  trial  of  German  physicians  in  1947.  Using  the  results  of
our  Ethics  Oral  History  Project,  and  other  sources,  we  also  examine  how
scientists  of  the  time  viewed  their  moral  responsibilities  to  human  subjects  as  well
as  how  this  translated  into  the  manner  in  which  they  conducted  their  research.  Of
particular  interest  are  the  differences  in  professional  norms  and  practices  between
research  in  which  patients  are  used  as  subjects  and  research  involving  so-called
healthy  volunteers.

In  chapter  3  we  return  to  the  question  of  government  standards,  focusing
now  on  the  1960s  and  1970s.  In  the  first  part  of  this  chapter,  we  review  the  well-
documented  developments  that  influenced  and  led  up  to  two  landmark  events  in
the  history  of  government  policy  on  research  involving  human  subjects:  the
promulgation  by  DHEW  of  comprehensive  regulations  for  oversight  of  human
subjects  research  and  passage  by  Congress  of  the  National  Research  Act.  In  the
latter  part  of  the  chapter  we, review  developments  and  policies  governing  human
research  in  agencies  other  than  DHEW,  a  history  that  has  received  comparatively
little  scholarly  attention.  We  also  discuss  scandals  in  human  research  conducted
by  the  DOD  and  the  CIA  that  came  to  light  in  the  1970s  and  that  influenced
subsequent  agency  policies.

With  the  historical  context  established  in  chapters  1  through  3,  we  turn  in
chapter  4  to  the  core  of  our  charge.  Here  we  put  forward  and  defend  three  kinds
of  ethical  standards  for  evaluating  human  radiation  experiments  conducted  from
1944  to  1974.  We  embed  these  standards  in  a  moral  framework  intended  to
clarify  and  facilitate  the  difficult  task  of  making  judgments  about  the  past.


82


Government  Standards  for

Human  Experiments:

The  1940s  and  1950s


W  hen  the  Advisory  Committee  began  its  work,  a  central  task  was  the
reconstruction  of  the  federal  government's  rules  and  policies  on  human
experiments  from  1944  through  1974.  The  history  of  research  rules  at  the
Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare  (DHEW)  was  well  known,  at  least
from  1953  on,  when  DHEW's  National  Institutes  of  Health  (NIH)  adopted  a
policy  on  human  subjects  research  for  its  newly  opened  research  hospital,  the
Clinical  Center.  In  the  1960s,  the  DHEW  and  some  other  executive  branch
agencies  undertook  regulation  of  research  involving  human  subjects.  These  were
early  steps  of  a  process  that  culminated,  in  1991,  in  the  comprehensive  federal
policy  known  as  the  "Common  Rule."'  The  historical  background  of  this  process,
including  a  well-publicized  series  of  incidents  and  scandals  that  motivated  it,  was
also  widely  known  and  much  discussed  (see  chapter  3).2

By  contrast  to  DHEW,  much  less  was  known  about  the  history  of  research
rules  for  other  agencies  also  involved  in  research  with  human  subjects  during  this
period,  including  the  Department  of  Defense  (DOD),  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission  (AEC),  and  the  Veterans  Administration  (VA).  From  the
perspective  of  the  charge  to  the  Advisory  Committee,  these  agencies  were  at  least
as  important  as  DHEW.  It  was  known  that  in  1953  the  secretary  of  defense
issued,  in  Top  Secret,  a  memorandum  on  human  subjects  based  on  the  Nuremberg
Code.3  In  1947  an  international  tribunal  had  declared  the  Nuremberg  Code  the
standard  by  which  a  group  of  doctors  in  Nazi  Germany  should  be  judged  for  their


83


Parti

horrific  wartime  experiments  on  concentration  camp  inmates.  However,  the
actual  impact  of  the  Nuremberg  Code  on  the  biomedical  community  in  the  United
States,  both  inside  and  outside  of  government,  is  a  matter  of  some  disagreement
(see  chapter  2).  The  general  view  was  that,  despite  some  developments  in  the
1940s  and  1950s,  there  was  little  activity  within  the  federal  government  on  issues
of  human  subjects  research  before  the  1960s.

But  while  scholars  have  known  of  the  1953  secretary  of  defense
memorandum,  which  was  declassified  in  1975,  other  relevant  Department  of
Defense  documents  remained  classified  or  had  lain  buried  in  archives.  Moreover,
relevant  records  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  were  largely  unexplored  and
in  some  cases  still  classified.  These  records  are  important  because,  from  its
creation  in  1947,  the  AEC  distributed  radioisotopes  that  would  be  used  in
thousands  of  human  radiation  experiments,  and  it  was  a  funding  source  for  many
other  experiments  (see  Introduction).  Along  with  the  DOD,  also  created  in  1 947,
the  AEC  was  searching  for  biomedical  information  needed  to  understand  the
effects  of  radiation  as  it  prepared  for  the  possibility  of  atomic  warfare.  Although
the  AEC  was  thus  the  catalyst  for  a  considerable  amount  of  human
experimentation  after  World  War  II,  there  has  been  literally  no  scholarship  on  the
AEC's  position  on  the  use  of  human  beings  in  radiation-related  research.

Now  that  previously  obscure,  even  classified,  records  are  being  made
public,  it  appears  that  in  the  first  years  of  the  Cold  War,  officials  and  experts  in
the  AEC  and  DOD  did  discuss  the  requirements  for  human  experiments.  In  this
chapter  we  tell  what  we  have  learned  about  those  discussions.

We  begin  by  telling  the  story  of  the  AEC  general  manager's  early
declarations  on  human  research,  which  included  a  requirement  that  consent  be
obtained  from  patient-subjects.  This  story  requires  a  careful  look  at  a  series  of
letters  and  memorandums  exchanged  in  the  late  1940s.  Together  these  documents
paint  a  clearly  important  but  nonetheless  confusing  picture  of  a  new  agency's
attempts  to  come  to  grips  with  the  complexities  of  human  experimentation.  We
consider  not  only  what  these  documents  say,  but  what  we  can  piece  together
about  what  they  meant  in  the  context  of  the  times.  Central  questions  include  the
precise  scope  of  the  activities  covered  by  the  requirements  and  whether  and  how
these  1 947  statements  were  communicated  and  put  into  effect  in  the  AEC's
burgeoning  contract  research  and  radioisotope  distribution  programs.

We  turn  next  to  the  Department  of  Defense,  where  we  trace  the  history  of
rules  on  the  use  of  healthy  "normal  volunteer"  subjects  in  military  research  from
the  time  of  Walter  Reed  through  the  secretary  of  defense's  1953  memorandum,
and  beyond.  This  memorandum  is  the  earliest  known  instance  in  which  a  federal
agency  that  sponsored  human  experiments  adopted  the  Nuremberg  Code.  What  is
known  about  how  the  memorandum  was  interpreted  and  implemented  by  the
military  establishment  takes  up  much  of  the  rest  of  this  chapter.  Here,  as  in  the
case  of  the  AEC,  key  questions  concern  the  scope  of  the  activities  covered  by
requirements  and  the  extent  to  which  they  were  put  into  effect.

84


Chapter  1

Finally,  we  briefly  discuss  how  research  involving  human  subjects  was
addressed  at  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  and  the  Veterans  Administration  in
the  1950s.  The  evolution  of  policies  governing  human  research  at  DHEW  has
been  well  documented  and  is  only  summarized  here.4  We  now  know  that  NIH's
1953  policy  was  not  the  earliest  federal  requirement  that  consent  be  obtained  from
patients  as  well  as  healthy  subjects.  However,  in  contrast  with  the  1940s
declarations  by  the  AEC,  it  was  a  far  more  visible  statement  issued  by  an  agency
that  was  emerging  as  the  leading  sponsor  of  human  subjects  research.  In  contrast
with  what  is  known  about  NIH,  the  extent  to  which  there  were  research  rules  at
the  VA  in  the  1940s  and  1950s  remains  unclear.

A  recurring  theme  in  this  chapter  is  the  uncertainty  about  the  significance
within  government  agencies  of  many  of  the  official  statements  that  are  discussed.
While  these  statements  emanated  from  high  and  responsible  officials  and
committees,  often  they  cannot  be  linked  to  fuller  expressions  of  commitment  by
the  agencies.  Some  of  these  statements  were  not  widely  disseminated,  and  there
were  no  implementing  guidelines  or  regulations  and  no  sanctions  for  failures  to
abide  by  them.  Thus,  it  is  sometimes  unclear  what  formal,  legal  significance
these  statements  had.  We  are  no  less  interested,  however,  in  what  these
statements  can  tell  us  about  how  government  officials  and  advisers  saw  human
research  at  the  time  and  how  they  understood  the  obligations  surrounding  it.

THE  ATOMIC  ENERGY  COMMISSION:  A  REQUIREMENT
FOR  "CONSENT"  IS  DECLARED  AT  THE  CREATION

Even  before  the  AEC  came  into  existence  on  January  1,  1947,  Manhattan
Project  researchers  and  officials  had  begun  to  lay  the  groundwork  for  the
expansion  of  the  government's  support  of  biomedical  radiation  research
conducted  under  federal  contract.  By  the  time  the  AEC  began  operations,  the
parallel  program  to  distribute  federally  produced  radioisotopes  to  research
institutions  throughout  the  country  was  already  well  under  way.

The  planning  for  these  undertakings  required  both  reflection  on  high-level
matters  of  policy  and  attention  to  matters  of  small  but  critical  legal  and
bureaucratic  detail.  Both  legal  rules  and  administrative  processes  were  uncharted.
For  example,  who  would  be  responsible  if  things  went  awry  and  subjects  were
injured?  When  could  the  government  tell  private  doctors  or  researchers  how  to
conduct  treatment  or  research?  The  need  for  rules  seemed  obvious,  but  the
particular  rules  that  would  be  arrived  at  were  not.

In  April  1947  and  again  in  November,  Carroll  Wilson,  the  general
manager  of  the  new  agency,  wrote  letters  first  to  Stafford  Warren  and  then  to
Robert  Stone,  both  of  whom  played  prominent  roles  in  Manhattan  Project  medical
research,  Warren  as  medical  director,  and  Stone  as  a  key  member  of  the  Chicago
branch  of  the  project.  In  these  letters,  Wilson  maintained  that  "clinical  testing"
with  patients  could  go  forward  only  where  there  was  a  prospect  that  the  patient

85


Part  I

could  benefit  medically  and  only  after  that  patient  had  been  informed  about  the
testing  and  there  was  documentation  that  the  patient  had  consented.  What  was  the
origin  of  this  position,  and  what  was  its  reach?  It  appears  that  these  letters  were
the  products  of  an  agency  that  was  not  only  seeking  to  devise  rules  for  new
programs  but  also  was  trying  to  glean  lessons  from  the  experience  with  the  secret
research  that  had  been  conducted  during  the  Manhattan  Project.  In  the  course  of
setting  rules  for  the  future,  the  AEC  and  its  research  community  had  to  confront
whether  and  how  to  proceed  with  human  experimentation  in  the  face  of  human
experiments,  including  plutonium  injections,  conducted  under  the  auspices  of  the
Manhattan  Project,  experiments  that  were  conducted  in  secret  and  that  had  the
potential  for  both  negative  public  reaction  and  litigation.

The  First  Wilson  Letter

General  Manager  Wilson's  first  1947  letter  on  human  research,  dated  April
30,  was,  at  least  in  part,  a  straightforward  effort  to  define  the  rules  according  to
which  the  AEC  would  provide  contractors  with  research  funding.  The  need  for
such  rules  had  been  discussed  by  the  AEC's  Interim  Medical  Advisory
Committee,  chaired  by  Stafford  Warren,  in  January  1 947  when  it  met  to  consider
whether  "clinical  testing"  should  be  part  of  the  AEC  contract  research  program.
The  report  of  the  meeting  records  projects  involving  human  subjects  at  the
University  of  Rochester  and  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley,  and  perhaps
others.5  In  a  January  30  letter  to  General  Manager  Wilson,  Stafford  Warren
reported  the  committee's  conclusion  that  in  the  study  of  health  hazards  and  the  use
of  fissionable  and  radioactive  materials,  "final  investigations  by  clinical  testing  of
these  materials"  would  be  needed.  Warren  therefore  requested  that  the  AEC  legal
department  determine  the  "financial  and  legal  responsibility"  of  the  AEC  when
such  "clinical  investigations"  are  carried  out  under  AEC-approved  and  -financed
programs.6  (The  term  experiment  was  not  used,  and  the  precise  meaning  of
clinical  testing  is  not  clear.)

A  month  later,  in  early  March,  Warren  met  with  Major  Birchard  M.
Brundage,  chief  of  the  AEC's  Medical  Division,  and  two  AEC  lawyers  to  consider
the  terms  for  the  resumption  of  "clinical  testing."  In  a  memorandum  for  the
record,  the  lawyers  summarized  the  meeting.  In  the  case  of  "clinical  testing"  the
lawyers

expressed  the  view  that  it  was  most  important  that  it
be  susceptible  of  proof  that  any  individual  patient,
prior  to  treatment,  was  in  an  understanding  state  of
mind  and  that  the  nature  of  the  treatment  and
possible  risk  involved  be  explained  very  clearly  and
that  the  patient  express  his  willingness  to  receive
the  treatment.7

86


Chapter  1

Initially,  the  lawyers  had  proposed  that  researchers  obtain  a  "written
release"  from  patients.  However,  "on  Dr.  Warren's  recommendation,"  the  lawyers
agreed  that  it  would  be  sufficient  if  "at  least  two  doctors  certify  in  writing  to  the
patient's  state  of  mind  to  the  explanation  furnished  him  and  to  the  acceptance  of

the  treatment.""

In  his  April  30  letter  to  Stafford  Warren,  Wilson  announced  that  the  AEC
had  approved  Warren's  committee's  recommendations  for  a  "program  for
obtaining  medical  data  of  interest  to  the  Commission  in  the  course  of  treatment  of
patients,  which  may  involve  clinical  testing."9  Wilson's  letter  spelled  out  ground
rules  that  were  agreed  upon.  The  commission  understood  that  "treatment  (which
may  involve  clinical  testing)  will  be  administered  to  a  patient  only  when  there  is
expectation  that  it  may  have  therapeutic  effect."  In  addition,  the  commission
adopted  the  requirement  for  documentation  of  consent  agreed  upon  in  Warren's
meeting  with  the  lawyers:

[I]t  should  be  susceptible  of  proof  from  official
records  that,  prior  to  treatment,  each  individual
patient,  being  in  an  understanding  state  of  mind,
was  clearly  informed  of  the  nature  of  the  treatment
and  its  possible  effects,  and  expressed  his
willingness  to  receive  the  treatment.10

The  commission  deferred  to  Warren's  request  that  written  releases  from
the  patient  not  be  required.  However,

it  does  request  that  in  every  case  at  least  two
doctors  should  certify  in  writing  (made  part  of  an
official  record)  to  the  patient's  understanding  state
of  mind,  to  the  explanation  furnished  him,  and  to
his  willingness  to  accept  the  treatment."

Carroll  Wilson's  April  letter  was  sent  to  Stafford  Warren  as  head  of  the
Interim  Medical  Advisory  Committee,  which  was  responsible  for  advising  the
AEC  on  its  contract  research  program,  and  forwarded  to  Major  Brundage  at  the
Oak  Ridge  office.12  Stafford  Warren  was  at  this  point  dean  of  the  medical  school
at  the  University  of  California  at  Los  Angeles,  one  of  the  dozen  research
institutions  involved  in  the  AEC  contract  research  program.  With  one  exception
the  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments  did  not  locate
documentation  that  the  letter  or  its  contents  were  communicated  to  any  other
research  institutions  involved  with  the  AEC's  contract  research  program.  The
exception  is  the  University  of  California  at  San  Francisco,  where  there  is  indirect
evidence  that  someone  at  that  institution  had  been  apprised  of  Wilson's  April
letter.  Of  the  eighteen  plutonium  injections,  only  the  last  one,  that  involving

87


Parti

Elmer  Allen,  or  "CAL-3,"  took  place  after  the  April  letter.  In  Mr.  Allen's
medical  chart,  there  is  a  notation  signed  by  two  physicians  indicating  that  the
"experimental  nature"  of  the  procedure  was  explained  and  that  the  patient
"agreed."13  Although  the  note  in  Mr.  Allen's  chart  suggests  an  effort  on  the  part
of  the  researchers  to  comply  with  Wilson's  April  letter,  the  researchers  did  not
comply  with  the  other  provision  of  the  Wilson  letter,  that  "treatment  (which  may
involve  clinical  testing)  will  be  administered  to  a  patient  only  when  there  is
expectation  that  it  may  have  therapeutic  effect."14  As  is  discussed  in  more  detail
in  chapter  5,  there  was  no  expectation  at  the  time  that  Mr.  Allen  would  benefit
medically  from  an  injection  of  plutonium.15

The  Second  Wilson  Letter

The  context  of  the  second  Wilson  letter,  as  well  as  its  precise  terms,  further
indicates  that  the  April  1947  letter  was  given  little  distribution  and  effect.  In  the
fall  of  1947,  the  AEC  laboratory  at  Oak  Ridge  requested  advice  from  Carroll
Wilson's  office  on  the  rules  for  experiments  involving  human  subjects.  Just  as  the
AEC's  Washington  headquarters  had  embarked  on  the  funding  of  a  new  research
program,  Oak  Ridge  was  also  in  the  midst  of  considering  the  rules  governing  the
expansion  of  its  own  medical  research  program  and  the  distribution  of  isotopes,
which  was  then  headquartered  at  Oak  Ridge.  In  September  1 947,  the  manager  of
Oak  Ridge  Operations  wrote  to  Wilson,  asking,  "What  responsibilities  does  the
AEC  bear  for  human  administration  of  isotopes  (a)  by  private  physicians  and
medical  institutions  outside  the  Project,  and  (b)  by  physicians  within  the  project.  .  .
What  are  the  criteria  for  future  human  use?"16

Two  weeks  later.  Oak  Ridge  sent  a  memorandum  to  the  Advisory
Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine  (ACBM).  The  ACBM  had  succeeded  both
Stafford  Warren's  Interim  Medical  Advisory  Committee  and  the  Medical  Board  of
Review,  a  group  appointed  by  AEC  Chairman  David  Lilienthal  to  review  the
AEC's  medical  program.  The  memorandum  emphasized  the  need  for  "medico-
legal criteria"  for  "future  human  tracer  research"  because  some  of  that  research
would  be  "of  no  immediate  therapeutic  value  to  the  patient."  The  memorandum
outlined  the  pros  and  cons  of  "tracer  studies":

Pro-

( 1 )  Tracer  research  is  fundamental  to  toxicity
studies.

(2)  The  adequacy  of  the  health  protection  which  we
afford  our  present  employees  may  in  a  large
measure  depend  upon  information  obtained  using
tracer  techniques.

(3)  New  and  improved  medical  applications  can

88


Chapter  1

only  be  developed  through  careful  experimentation
and  clinical  trial.

(4)  Tracer  techniques  are  inherent  in  the
radioisotope  distribution  program.

Con-

(1)  Moral,  ethical  and  medico-legal  objections  to
the  administration  of  radioactive  material  without
the  patient's  knowledge  or  consent.

(2)  There  is  perhaps  a  greater  responsibility  if  a
federal  agency  condones  human  guinea  pig
experimentation.

(3)  Publication  of  such  researches  in  some
instances  will  compromise  the  best  interests  of  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission.

(4)  Publication  of  experiments  done  by  Atomic
Energy  Commission  contractor's  personnel  may
frequently  be  the  source  of  litigation  and  be
prejudicial  to  the  proper  functioning  of  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission  Insurance  Branch.17

The  questions  raised  by  Oak  Ridge  were  discussed  by  the  ACBM  at  its
October  11,  1947,  meeting,  which  decided  to  give  the  "matter  more  study."18  The
minutes  of  the  October  1 1  meeting  record  that  "human  experimentation"  was  then
discussed  in  the  context  of  a  request  by  Dr.  Robert  Stone  to  release  "classified
papers  containing  certain  information  on  human  experimentation  with
radioisotopes  conducted  within  the  AEC  research  program."19  The  request  was
part  of  a  continuing  effort  by  Stone  and  other  scientists  to  obtain  permission  to
publish  the  research,  including  the  plutonium  experiments,  that  they  had
conducted  in  secret  during  the  Manhattan  Project.  Earlier  in  1947,  the  AEC  had
reversed  a  decision  to  declassify  a  report  on  the  plutonium  injections,  citing  the
potential  for  public  embarrassment  and  legal  liability  (see  chapter  5).  The
question  of  what  to  do  with  these  requests  continued  to  fester.

The  minutes  explain  that  the  "problem"  raised  by  Stone  had  been  dealt
with  by  Chairman  Lilienthal's  Medical  Board  of  Review  in  June.  In  a  cryptic
statement,  the  minutes  record  the  ACBM's  agreement  that  papers  on  human
experiments  "should  remain  classified  unless  the  stipulated  conditions  laid  down
by  the  Board  of  Review  were  complied  with."20

The  "stipulated  conditions"  referred  to  are  contained  in  General  Manager

89


Part  I

Wilson's  November  5,  1947,  letter  to  Stone.  According  to  Wilson's  letter,  at  a
June  meeting  the  Medical  Board  of  Review  concluded  that  "the  matter  of  human
experimentation"  would  remain  classified  where  certain  "conditions"  were  not
satisfied.  Wilson  then  quoted  from  the  "preliminary  unpublished  and  restricted
draft  of  the  [Medical  Board]  report  read  to  the  Commissioners"  as  follows:

The  atmosphere  of  secrecy  and  suppression  makes
one  aspect  of  the  medical  work  of  the  Commission
especially  vulnerable  to  criticism.  We  therefore
wish  to  record  our  approval  of  the  position  taken  by
the  medical  staff  of  the  AEC  in  point  of  their
studies  of  the  substances  dangerous  to  human  life.
We  [the  Medical  Board  of  Review]  believe  that  no
substances  known  to  be,  or  suspected  of  being,
poisonous  or  harmful  should  be  given  to  human
beings  unless  all  of  the  following  conditions  are
fully  met:  (a)  that  a  reasonable  hope  exists  that  the
administration  of  such  a  substance  will  improve  the
condition  of  the  patient,  (b)  that  the  patient  give  his
complete  and  informed  consent  in  writing,  and  (c)
that  the  responsible  next  of  kin  give  in  writing  a
similarly  complete  and  informed  consent,  revocable
at  any  time  during  the  course  of  such  treatment
[emphasis  added].21

In  other  words,  the  opinion  of  the  Medical  Board  of  Review  was  presented
by  Wilson  in  his  November  letter  as  both  a  prescription  for  the  future  conduct  of
human  experiments  and  a  presentation  of  the  criteria  that  must  be  met  for  the
declassification  of  past  research.  Wilson  again  referenced  these  conditions  in  a
letter  to  ACBM  Chairman  Alan  Gregg,  also  on  November  5.  "I  am  sure,"  Wilson
wrote  Gregg,  "that  this  information  will  assist  Dr.  Stone  in  evaluating  the  present
problem  and  inform  him  as  to  the  conditions  that  must  be  met  in  future
experiments."22  Thus,  as  discussed  in  more  detail  in  chapters  5  and  13,  the
requirement  that  research  proceed  only  with  consent  appears  to  have  been
coupled  with  the  decision  to  withhold  from  the  public  information  about
experiments  that  failed  to  meet  that  standard.

Two  points  should  be  made  about  the  term  informed  consent,  which
appears  in  the  November  letter  from  Wilson  to  Stone.  First,  it  is  not  clear  what
meaning  Wilson  and  the  members  of  the  Medical  Board  of  Review  attributed  to
the  term.  No  further  explanation  was  given.  Second,  it  is  nevertheless  a  matter  of
some  historical  interest  that  this  term  is  used  at  all.  Previous  scholarship  had
attributed  its  first  official  usage  to  a  landmark  legal  opinion  in  a  medical
malpractice  case  that  was  issued  a  decade  later.23-

90


Chapter  1

The  April  and  November  1947  Wilson  letters  have  some  common
elements,  in  spite  of  their  differences  in  detail.  They  both  provided  that  research
with  humans  proceed  (1)  only  where  there  is  reasonable  hope  of  therapeutic  effect;
and  (2)  with  documentary  proof  that  the  patient-subject  was  informed  of  the
treatment  and  its  possible  effects  and  had  consented  to  its  administration.

But  there  are  many  remaining  mysteries  about  the  AEC's  1947  statements.
In  interviews  with  Advisory  Committee  staff,  Joseph  Volpe,  who  served  as  an
AEC  attorney  in  its  early  days  and  became  general  counsel  in  1949,  explained
that  a  letter  authored  by  General  Manager  Wilson  could  state  AEC  policy  and
confidently  recollected  that  informed  consent  from  research  subjects  would  have
been  required  by  the  first  AEC  general  counsel.  This  requirement,  Volpe
maintained,  should  be  reflected  in  the  commission's  minutes.24  However,
Committee  and  DOE  review  of  the  commission's  minutes  did  not  reveal  evidence
that  the  "consent"  policy  was  expressly  addressed.

Even  more  troubling  is  that  both  Wilson  letters  precluded  research  that  did
not  offer  patient-subjects  a  prospect  of  direct  medical  benefit.  In  the  context  of
the  concern  about  the  plutonium  injections  and  the  other  "nontherapeutic"
research  conducted  during  the  Manhattan  Project  experiments,  this  provision
readily  makes  sense.  Yet,  as  Oak  Ridge's  inquiry  to  Washington  noted,
nontherapeutic  research  in  the  form  of  tracer  studies  had  been,  and  would
continue  to  be,  a  mainstay  of  AEC-sponsored  isotope  research.  How  could  it  be
that  the  Wilson  letters  were  intended  to  ban  exactly  the  kind  of  research  that  at  the
same  time  the  AEC  was  so  actively  promoting?  It  is  conceivable  that  the
requirement  of  the  isotope  distribution  program  for  risk  review  prior  to  the  human
use  of  radioisotopes  was  a  means  of  addressing  this  notion.  However,  if  the
equation  between  that  risk  review  procedure  and  the  provision  in  the  November
Wilson  letter  seems  implicit,  the  documentary  evidence  does  not  provide  an
express  link  between  the  requirement  stated  in  the  Wilson  letter  and  the  rules  of
the  isotope  distribution  program.

From  Statements  to  Policy:  A  Failure  of  Translation

Despite  the  fact  that  they  were  developed  in  response  to  a  need  for  clarity
in  the  way  that  human  research  should  be  conducted,  we  have  found  little
evidence  of  efforts  to  communicate  or  implement  the  rules  stated  by  Wilson  in
coordination  with  the  AEC's  biomedical  advisory  groups  and  other  AEC  officials.
In  some  cases  the  evidence  described  in  the  following  paragraphs  suggests  that
policies  for  consent  from  subjects  were  established  and  implemented,  while  in
other  cases  it  suggests  that,  if  there  were  any  such  policies,  they  were  unknown  or
lost.  Taken  together,  however,  this  evidence  further  supports  the  view  that  the
ideas  present  in  General  Manager  Wilson's  1947  statements  were  available  to
those  working  in  the  field  during  this  time,  albeit  perhaps  in  a  primitive  form.

Consider,  for  example,  a  1951  exchange  between  the  AEC's  Division  of

91


Parti

Biology  and  Medicine  (DBM),  which  directed  the  AEC's  medical  research
program,  and  the  commission's  Los  Alamos  Laboratory,  which  was  in  routine
contact  with  Washington.  An  information  officer  at  Los  Alamos,  Leslie  Redman,
who  was  charged  to  review  papers  that  involved  human  experimentation,  asked
the  DBM  for  a  "definite  AEC  policy"  on  "human  experimentation."  In  the  course
of  his  work,  Redman  wrote,  he  had  been  advised  by  "various  persons"  at  Los
Alamos  that  "regulations  or  policies  of  the  AEC"  on  human  experimentation  were
available,  but  he  had  been  unable  to  locate  more  than  general  information  about
these  regulations.  According  to  his  letter,  his  understanding  was  that

these  regulations  are  comparable  to  those  of  the
American  Medical  Association:  that  an  experiment
be  performed  under  the  supervision  of  an  M.D.,
with  the  permission  of  the  patient,  and  for  the
purpose  of  seeking  a  cure.25

Redman's  characterization  of  the  American  Medical  Association's  guidelines,  as
we  shall  see  in  chapter  2,  is  partly  incorrect.  The  requirement  of  a  therapeutic
intent  is  absent  from  the  AM  A  guidelines.  The  possibility  of  direct  therapeutic
benefit  for  the  patient  was,  however,  a  condition  of  research  according  to  both  of
General  Manager  Wilson's  1947  letters.

Shields  Warren,  the  DBM  chief,  responded  to  Redman  by  citing  Wilson's
November  5,  1947,  letter  to  Stone  and  by  excerpting  the  conditions  quoted
above.26  But  Warren  did  not  term  these  conditions  "standards"  or  "requirements."
Rather,  Warren's  response  to  Los  Alamos  "urges"  compliance  with  these  "guiding
principles."27

Though  Los  Alamos  was  provided  with  the  criteria  stated  by  Wilson  in
November  1947,  General  Manager  Wilson's  statements  were  not  routinely
communicated  in  response  to  requests  for  guidance  from  non-AEC  researchers.
In  an  April  1948  letter  to  the  DBM,  a  university  researcher  explained  that  the
Isotopes  Division  had  approved  his  request  to  use  phosphorus  32  for
"experimental  procedures  in  the  human  .  .  .  simply  for  investigational  purposes
and  not  for  treatment  of  disease."  What,  the  researcher  wanted  to  know,  should
be  done  about  "medical-legal  aspects"  and  "permission  forms"?28  The  request
could  have  been  answered  by  referring  to  Wilson's  1 947  statements  about
consent.  Instead,  the  DBM  simply  referred  the  researcher  to  the  Isotopes  Division
at  Oak  Ridge.29  In  its  response,  the  Isotopes  Division  did  not  indicate  that  consent
should  be  solicited,  as  Wilson  had  stipulated.  The  Isotopes  Division,  stating  it
could  be  "of  little  assistance,"  declined  to  provide  "legal  advice,"  save  to  note  that
"we  understand  that  most  hospitals  do  require  patients  to  sign  general  releases
before  entering  into  treatment."30

From  1947  onward,  the  AEC  had  ample  opportunity  to  disseminate  a
research  policy.  The  AEC  routinely  provided  educational  and  administrative

92


Chapter  1


materials  to  applicants  for  AEC  funding  and  to  the  far  greater  number  of
ZlTcan  s  foTAEC-produced  radioisotopes.  The  isotopes  distribution  program,
np  Sat  included  a  sophisticated  structure  of  regulation,  repkte  with ;  review
oSmttees,  training  courses,  and  informational  brochures  (see  chapter -t ) At  the
federal  level  this  included  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  of  the
Cotmi  ^ilitopc  Distribution,  whose  very  purpose  was  "to  review  all  initial
«  for  radioisotopes  to  be  used  experimentally  or  otherwise  in  human  beings
remohasis  added]."31  The  AEC  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  was
supplemented  by  similar  committees  at  the  research  institutions  where  the  work

WaS  C°fnUpCnnciple,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  reason  these  local  committees
could  not  have  been  instructed  by  the  Isotopes  Division  on  consent
eautemenL-  Some  evidence  suggests  that  in  March  1948  the  Subcommittee  on
Human  Applications  discussed  consent  requirements  for  healthy  subjects  and
"Sheets.  In  a  document  dated  March  29,  1948,  the  Subcommittee  on
Human  Applications  appeared  to  resolve  that

1 Radioactive  materials  should  be  used  in  experiments
involving  human  subjects  when  information  obtained  will
have  diagnostic  value,  therapeutic  significance,  or  will
contribute  to  knowledge  on  radiation  protection.

2.  Radioactive  materials  may  be  used  in  normal  human
subjects  provided

a.  The  subject  has  full  knowledge  of
the  act  and  has  given  his  consent  to
the  procedure.

b.  Animal  studies  have  established
the  assimilation,  distribution,
selective  localization  and  excretion
of  the  radioisotope  or  derivative  in
question.

3.  Radioactive  materials  may  be  used  in  patients
suffering  from  diseased  conditions  of  such  nature
that  there  is  no  reasonable  probability  of  the
radioactivity  employed  producing  manifest  injury
provided:

a.  Animal  studies  have  established  the
assimilation,  distribution,  selective

93


Part  I

localization  and  excretion  of  the
radioisotope  or  derivative  in
question.

b.  The  subject  is  of  sound  mind,  has
full  knowledge  of  the  act  and  has
given  his  consent  to  the  procedure.  . .  .

4.  Investigations  are  approved  ( 1 )  by  medical
director  or  his  equivalent  at  the  installation
responsible  for  the  investigation,  (2)  by  the
Director,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  and  (3)
full  written  descriptions  of  experimental  procedures
and  calculated  estimates  of  radiation  to  be  received
by  body  structure  and  organs  must  be  submitted.31

We  were  unable  to  locate  any  further  references  to  this  document  and  do  not
know  whether  it  represented  a  policy  that  was  adopted.  Perhaps  it  represents  the
consensus  of  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications,  as  it  had  met  shortly
before  that,  or  perhaps  it  is  simply  a  draft  document  prepared  by  staff.

Whatever  the  ultimate  disposition  of  this  document,  it  provides  some  idea
of  the  problems  that  were  under  consideration  at  the  time  and  indicates  that  views
on  human  use  were  unsettled.  The  first  numbered  item,  for  example,  appears  to
recommend  human  radiation  experiments  when  they  will  offer  diagnostic  value
and  therapeutic  significance  or  knowledge  about  radiation  protection.  If  the
document  had  in  fact  been  adopted,  the  recognition  that  isotope  experimentation
could  be  undertaken  to  "contribute  to  knowledge"  (item  1)  would  appear  to  revise
the  Wilson  letters'  prohibition  of  nontherapeutic  experimentation.  The  third  item
also  addresses  consent  and  risk  of  injury  to  patient-subjects  without  indicating
that  there  should  be  any  potential  benefit.  Another  peculiarity  is  found  in  the
second  item,  which  refers  to  consent  from  normal  human  subjects  but  does  not
rule  out  experiments  that  present  risk  to  the  subject.

In  any  event,  at  a  1948  meeting  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications
articulated  a  consent  requirement  as  part  of  a  decision  to  permit  patients  suffering
from  serious  diseases  to  receive  "larger  doses  for  investigative  purposes."34  This
requirement  was  disseminated  to  all  radioisotope  purchasers  in  1949.35  The
subcommittee  allowed  investigators  to  administer  "larger  doses"  to  seriously  ill
patients  but  only  with  the  patient's  consent.  While  it  is  possible  that  the  basis  for
permitting  larger  doses  was  an  assumption  that  smaller  ones  would  be  of  no
potential  benefit  to  subjects,  item  3  of  the  just-quoted  March  1948  document
suggests  the  assumption  was  rather  that  in  seriously  ill  patients  other  disease
processes  would  be  more  likely  to  take  their  course  before  radiation  injury  was
manifested.

94


Chapter  1

There  is  evidence  that  at  least  one  AEC-funded  entity  did  routinely
provide  some  form  of  disclosure  and  consent  in  the  early  1950s.  From  its  opening
in  1950  the  AEC-sponsored  Oak  Ridge  Institute  for  Nuclear  Studies  (ORINS),  a
research  hospital,  advised  incoming  patients  that  procedures  were  experimental.
Additionally,  patients  were  given  written  information  that  advised  them  that
"probable  benefit,  if  any,  cannot  always  be  predicted  in  advance."36  Patients  were
also  asked  to  sign  a  form  that  indicated  that  they  were  "fully  advised"  about  the
"character  and  kind  of  treatment  and  care,"  which  would  be  "for  the  most  part
experiments  with  no  definite  promise  of  improvement  in  my  physical
condition."37  Thus,  at  least  in  the  case  of  ORINS,  and  perhaps  at  other  AEC
facilities,  a  local  process  was  instituted  apart  from  any  known  communication  of
the  statements  by  AEC  officials.

Nonetheless,  there  is  other  evidence  that  the  AEC  did  not  communicate
the  requirements  detailed  in  General  Manager  Wilson's  1 947  letters  to  its  own
contract  research  organizations,  which,  as  in  the  cases  of  Argonne,  Los  Alamos,
Brookhaven,  and  Oak  Ridge,  ;had  significant  biomedical  programs  and  were
engaged  in  human  research.  When  the  Division  of  Biological  and  Medical
Research  at  Argonne  National  Laboratory  met  in  January  1951  to  discuss
beginning  a  program  of  human  experimentation  in  cancer  research,  one  of  its
members  asserted  that  the  ACBM  had  not  established  a  "general  policy
concerning  human  experimentation."  The  minutes  of  the  meeting  at  Argonne
record  that  the  ACBM  "has  been  approached  several  times  in  the  past  for  a
general  policy  and  has  refused  to  formulate  one."38

In  1956,  Los  Alamos  asked  the  DBM  to  "restate  its  position  on  the
experimental  use  of  human  volunteer  subjects"  for  tracer  experiments.39  The
DBM  responded  by  stating  that  tracer  doses  might  be  administered  under  certain
conditions,  which  included  the  provision  that  subjects  be  volunteers  who  were
fully  informed.  The  focus  of  this  position  seems  to  have  been  research  with
healthy  people  and  not  patients,  and  no  reference  was  made  to  the  provisions  of
the  Wilson  letters.40  The  DBM's  1956  formulation  was  given  "staff  distribution"
by  Los  Alamos  and  restated  in  1962.4'

Also  in  1956,  the  Isotopes  Division  did  state  a  requirement  for  healthy
subjects.  All  subjects  were  to  be  informed  volunteers.  As  part  of  its
"Recommendations  and  Requirements"  guidebook  for  the  medical  uses  of
radioisotopes,  which  was  distributed  to  all  medical  users  of  radioisotopes,  the
Isotopes  Division  stated:


Uses  of  radioisotopes  in  normal  subjects  for
experimental  purposes  shall  be  limited  to:

a.  Tracer  doses  which  do  not  exceed  the
permissible  total  body  burden  for  the  radioisotope


95


Part  I

in  question.  In  all  instances  the  dose  should  be  kept
as  low  as  possible.

b.  Volunteers  to  whom  the  intent  of  the  study  and
the  effects  of  radiation  have  been  outlined.

c.  Volunteers  who  are  unlikely  to  be  exposed  to
significant  additional  amounts  of  radiation.42

These  requirements  apparently  applied  to  all  uses  of  AEC  radioisotopes,  whether
government  or  private  researchers  were  involved.  The  "experimental  or
nonroutine"  use  of  radioisotopes  in  any  human  subjects  was  limited  to
institutional  programs  where  local  review  committees  existed  to  oversee  the  risk
to  which  subjects  were  exposed.  In  stating  these  requirements,  the  AEC  reiterated
that  "patients"  in  whom  "there  is  no  reasonable  probability  of  producing  manifest
injury"  may  be  used  in  some  experiments  not  normally  permitted,  but  did  not
reiterate  the  requirement  that  consent  should  be  obtained  from  these  patients,  as
was  stated  in  1948.

What,  then,  can  be  said  about  the  rules  and  policies  of  the  AEC  in  the
1940s  and  1950s?  General  Manager  Wilson's  1947  letters  clearly  stipulate  a
requirement  of  "informed  consent"  from  patient-subjects,  at  least  where
potentially  "poisonous  or  harmful"  substances  are  involved.  But  with  the
exception  of  ORINS  there  is  little  indication  that  this  requirement  was  imposed  as
binding  policy  on  any  AEC  facility,  contractor,  or  recipient  of  radioisotopes.  By
contrast,  later  requirements  that  healthy  subjects  be  informed  volunteers  and  that
seriously  ill  patients  be  permitted  to  receive  higher  doses  only  with  their  consent
appear  to  have  been  more  broadly  communicated  and  enforced.  The  only
evidence  of  general  attention  to  matters  of  consent  from  patient-subjects  comes
from  ORINS,  whose  policies  and  practices  show  a  striking  similarity  to  those  that,
as  we  shall  see,  were  being  contemporaneously  employed  at  another  facility
essentially  devoted  to  experimental  work,  the  NIH's  Clinical  Center.  At  the  same
time,  there  is  evidence  of  considerable  attention  in  both  policy  and  practice  to
issues  of  safety  and  acceptable  risk  (see  chapter  6).  Questions  of  subject
selection,  as  in  the  case  of  seriously  ill  patients,  emerge  only  in  this  context  of
safety;  there  is  no  evidence  that  issues  of  fairness  or  concerns  about  exploitation
in  the  selection  of  subjects  figured  in  AEC  policies  or  rules  of  the  period.

THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  DEFENSE:  CONSENT  IS
FORMALIZED

The  story  of  research  involving  human  subjects  in  the  U.S.  military  began
at  least  a  century  ago.  Well  before  1944,  the  beginning  of  the  period  of  special
interest  to  the  Advisory  Committee,  the  military  needed  healthy  subjects  to  test

96


Chapter  1

means  to  prevent  and  treat  infectious  diseases  to  which  military  personnel  might
be  exposed.  The  notion  that  consent  should  be  obtained  from  human  subjects  was
clearly  part  of  this  tradition;  less  clear  is  how  consistently  this  was  applied  and
what  consent  actually  meant  to  those  in  authority.

The  most  famous  example  of  the  early  use  of  subject  consent  in  the
military  took  place  at  the  turn  of  the  century.  Walter  Reed's  successful  research
on  yellow  fever,  the  mosquito-borne  disease  that  bedeviled  Panama  Canal
construction  efforts,  employed  healthy  subjects  who  signed  forms  indicating  their
agreement.  Whether  the  practice  was  required  by  the  Army  or  self-imposed  by
Reed  is  unknown.  In  1925  an  Army  regulation  to  promote  infectious  disease
research  noted  that  "volunteers"  should  be  used  in  "experimental"  research.43

The  Navy  also  provided  early  requirements  for  human  subject  research.
In  1932,  the  secretary  of  the  Navy  granted  permission  for  the  conduct  of  an
experiment  involving  divers  on  condition  that  the  subjects  were  "informed
volunteers."44  In  1943  the  secretary  of  the  Navy  also  required  that  all
investigators  seeking  to  conduct  research  with  service  personnel  obtain  prior
approval  from  the  secretary.45

As  we  have  noted  in  the  Introduction,  during  World  War  II,  federally
funded  biomedical  research  related  to  the  war  effort  (outside  the  Manhattan
Project)  was  coordinated  by  the  Committee  on  Medical  Research  (CMR)  of  the
Office  of  Scientific  Research  and  Development,  which  was  part  of  the  Executive
Office  of  the  President.  The  CMR  supported  a  program  of  human  research,
during  which  the  question  of  the  rules  for  the  conduct  of  human  research  was
addressed.  In  1942  a  University  of  Rochester  researcher,  seeking  to  "work  out  a
human  experiment  on  the  chemical  prophylaxis  of  gonorrhea,"  asked  the  CMR  for
"an  opinion  that  such  human  experimentation  is  desirable."46  In  an  October  9,
1942,  response,  the  CMR's  chairman  offered  the  following  general  statement,
which  was  endorsed  by  the  full  committee:

[HJuman  experimentation  is  not  only  desirable,  but
necessary  in  the  study  of  many  of  the  problems  of
war  medicine  which  confront  us.  When  any  risks
are  involved,  volunteers  only  should  be  utilized  as
subjects,  and  these  only  after  the  risks  have  been
fully  explained  and  after  signed  statements  have
been  obtained  which  shall  prove  that  the  volunteer
offered  his  services  with  full  knowledge  and  that
claims  for  damage  will  be  waived.  An  accurate
record  should  be  kept  of  the  terms  in  which  the
risks  involved  were  described.47

In  spite  of  the  CMR's  statement  in  response  to  this  researcher's  query,  it  supported
other  experiments  that  involved  subjects  whose  capacity  to  give  valid  consent  to

97


Part  I

participation  was  doubtful,  including  institutionalized  people  with  cognitive
disabilities.4*

During  the  war,  the  Navy  used  consent  forms  in  wartime  experiments
using  prisoners  and  conscientious  objectors,  as  a  proposal  for  research  on  an
influenza  vaccine  with  prisoners  at  San  Quentin  in  1943  shows.49  The  form  used
in  this  case  indicates  that  the  subject  is  "acting  freely  and  voluntarily  without  any
coercion  on  the  part  of  any  person  whomever."50  To  be  sure,  the  forms  located  by
the  Advisory  Committee  were  called  "waiver"  or  "release"  rather  than  "consent"
forms.  Thus,  the  attestation  to  voluntary  participation  was  punctuated  by  the
release  of  experimenters  from  liability.  However,  at  a  time  when  free  young  men
were  routinely  conscripted  into  the  military,  the  requirement  that  subjects,
including  prisoners  and  conscientious  objectors,  must  be  volunteers  seems
remarkable.

In  sharp  contrast  with  these  procedures,  the  Navy,  too,  sometimes
functioned  in  a  manner  inconsistent  with  a  voluntary  consent  policy  for  healthy
subjects.  Surviving  subjects  have  reported  that  harmful  mustard  gas  experiments
on  naval  personnel  at  the  Naval  Research  Laboratory  in  Washington,  D.C.,  during
World  War  II  failed  to  adequately  inform  subjects  and  seem  to  have  involved
manipulation  or  coercion  of  "volunteers."51  The  lack  of  medical  follow-up  on  the
subjects  of  these  experiments  was  sharply  criticized  in  a  1993  report  by  the
Institute  of  Medicine  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences.52

The  NEPA  Debate  on  the  Ethics  of  Prisoner  Experiments

Many  of  the  researchers  and  officials  who  had  been  involved  in  Manhattan
Project  human  experiments  during  the  war  and  then  in  the  1947  AEC
deliberations  about  human  research  policy  also  were  engaged  in  1949  and  1950  in
discussions  of  the  ground  rules  for  research  with  human  subjects  in  the
development  of  new  military  technology.  This  time  the  forum  was  the  joint  AEC-
DOD  project  on  Nuclear  Energy  for  the  Propulsion  of  Aircraft  (NEPA).  The
DOD  convened  an  advisory  panel  of  private  and  public  officials  to  determine  how
to  obtain  data  needed  to  answer  questions  such  as  whether  the  air  crew  would  be
put  at  undue  risk  by  the  nuclear-powered  engine.  The  participants  in  the
discussion  included  university  researchers  Hymer  Friedell,  Stafford  Warren,
Robert  Stone,  and  Joseph  Hamilton,  and  AEC  officials  Shields  Warren  and  Alan
Gregg.  Shields  Warren  argued  that  human  experimentation  was  not  appropriate
because  the  research  could  be  done  on  animals  and  human  data  was  not  likely  to
produce  scientifically  valid  results  (see  Introduction).

Robert  Stone,  the  recipient  of  the  November  1947  letter  in  which  AEC
General  Manager  Wilson  called  for  "informed  consent,"  emerged  as  the  primary
proponent  of  human  experiments.  In  a  January  1950  discussion  paper,  he  focused
on  the  "ethics  of  human  experimentation."53  After  a  recitation  of  a  tradition  that
included  Walter  Reed's  experience  and  the  historical  use  of  prisoners  and  medical

98


Chapter  1

students  as  research  subjects,  Stone  cited  requirements  that  had  been  publicized
by  the  American  Medical  Association  in  1946.  These  rules  provided  that  subjects
must  give  voluntary  consent,  that  animal  experimentation  must  precede  human
experimentation,  and  that  human  experiments  should  be  "performed  under  proper
medical  protection  and  management."54  (See  chapter  2.)  Stone  argued  that  it
would  be  possible  to  conduct  NEPA-related  experiments  with  prisoners  in
compliance  with  all  three  of  these  requirements.

Stone's  proposal  generated  considerable  discussion  among  DOD  and  AEC
experts  and  officials.  In  April  1950,  the  DOD's  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical
Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare  endorsed  the  use  of  prisoners  of  "true  volunteer
status"  as  meeting  "the  requirements  of  accepted  American  standards  for  the  use
of  human  subjects  for  research  purposes."55

However,  AEC  officials  were  less  than  enthusiastic.  "Doesn't  the  prisoner
proposal,"  ACBM  Chairman  Alan  Gregg  asked  a  military  official  in  the  course  of
one  discussion,  "fall  in  the  category  of  cruel  and  unusual  punishment?"5 "Not,"

the  official  replied,  "if  they  would  carry  out  the  work  as  they  proposed It

would  be  on  an  absolutely  voluntary  basis,  and  under  every  safety  precaution  that
could  be  built  up  around  it ...  it  didn't  strike  me  as  being  cruel  and  unusual."  To
which  Shields  Warren  retorted:  "It's  not  very  long  since  we  got  through  trying
Germans  for  doing  exactly  the  same  thing."57

In  December  1950  the  AEC  convened  a  panel  to  discuss  what  was  known
about  potential  radiation  effects  on  service  personnel  and  whether  human  research
was  needed.  Joseph  Hamilton,  Robert  Stone's  colleague  at  the  University  of
California,  was  unable  to  attend  the  meeting,  and  in  his  regrets  he  offered  his
thoughts  on  the  matter.  In  a  letter  to  Shields  Warren,  he  noted  that  the  proposal  to
use  prisoner  volunteers  "would  have  a  little  of  the  Buchenwald  touch"  and
reported  that  he  had  no  "very  constructive  ideas  as  to  where  one  would  turn  for
such  volunteers  should  this  plan  be  put  into  effect."58  He  suggested  using  large
primates,  even  though,  from  a  purely  scientific  viewpoint,  the  data  collected
would  not  be  as  useful  as  data  from  humans.59

Apparently  Stone  lost  the  debate.  A  decision  was  made  not  to  conduct
experiments  with  prisoners  or  other  healthy  subjects  in  connection  with  the  NEPA
project.  However,  as  will  be  discussed  in  more  detail  in  chapter  8,  the  military
contracted  with  a  private  hospital  to  study  patients  who  were  being  irradiated  for
cancer  treatment,  in  the  hopes  of  answering  the  same  kinds  of  questions  that
would  have  been  addressed  if  NEPA  research  with  prisoners  had  gone  forward.

Congress  Provides  for  DOD  Contractor  Indemnification  in  the  Case  of
Injury

In  the  aftermath  of  World  War  II,  the  military  continued  its  long-standing
program  of  infectious  disease  research  using  human  subjects.  During  the  late
1940s  and  early  1950s  the  Army  Epidemiological  Board  (AEB)  and  its  1949

99


Parti

successor,  the  Armed  Forces  Epidemiological  Board  (AFEB),  which  was
established  to  advise  on  medical  research  funded  by  the  DOD  and  to  direct  some
research  undertaken  with  Army  funds,  sponsored  studies  with  healthy  subjects
that  focused  on  hepatitis,  dengue  fever,  and  other  infectious  diseases.  Consistent
with  military  tradition,  at  least  some  AEB-sponsored  researchers  were  using
written  permission  forms.  The  forms,  frequently  referred  to  as  an  "Agreement
with  Volunteer,"  or  a  "release,"  outlined  the  study  and  the  risks  to  the  subject  and
protected  the  DOD  from  liability.60

In  the  late  1 940s,  some  university  researchers  expressed  concern  that  they
were  not  adequately  protected  from  liability  in  the  case  of  injury  or  death  of  their
prisoner-subjects.  The  ensuing  dialogue  provides  a  window  on  the  role  of  the
written  releases  and  the  understanding  of  the  rules  governing  human  subject
research.  In  response  to  a  researcher's  request  to  be  reimbursed  by  the  Army  for  a
disability  policy  for  the  subjects,  the  Army  lawyers  replied  that  the  Army  could
not  provide  indemnification  in  the  absence  of  clear  congressional  authority.
Army  legal  advisers  recommended  that  the  researcher  "protect  himself,  the  State
of  New  Jersey  [the  research  locale],  and  the  Government  by  means  of  the  usual
waiver."61

In  a  February  1948  letter,  the  AEB  director,  John  R.  Paul,  explained  that
the  "world  situation"  had  placed  the  rules  for  human  experimentation  up  for
grabs.62

At  this  stage  in  the  world  situation  one  should
proceed  cautiously,  until  standards  are  set  by  what
ever  body  is  in  'authority.'  I  am  not  sure  just  what
the  rules  are  but  I  understand  that .  . .  some  type  of
vigilance  committee  has  laid  down  certain
principles  about  volunteers  in  order  to  protect  this
country  from  the  criticisms  brought  up  in  Germany
during  the  Nuremberg  trials.  . . .  During  the  war  we
more  or  less  made  our  own  policies  on  this,  but  I
am  not  sure  that  this  is  possible  today.  .  .  ,63

The  allusion  to  a  "vigilance  committee"  is  unclear.  It  may  be  a  reference  to  a
committee  established  by  the  governor  of  Illinois  to  examine  the  use  of  prisoners
as  research  subjects  in  that  state  and  chaired  by  Andrew  Ivy,  the  principal  expert
witness  for  the  prosecution  at  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial  (see  chapter  2).
Given  the  date  of  the  letter,  February  18,  1948,  it  seems  likely  that  Paul  had  just
skimmed  through  his  new  copy  of  the  Journal  of  the  American  Medical
Association— the  report  of  Ivy's  committee  was  published  in  the  February  14,
1948,  issue.64

In  April  1948,  an  AEB  official  made  it  plain  to  the  researchers  that  the  fact
that  state  authorities  or  the  prison  warden  gave  permission  for  the  experiment

100


Chapter  1

should  be  of  little  comfort  to  them.  In  case  of  a  lawsuit,  responsibility  "would
devolve  entirely  upon  the  individual  experimenter."65  Only  Congress  could
provide  a  solution,  but  it  would  be  a  "dangerous  course"  to  raise  the  matter
publicly.  "I  have,"  the  AEB  official  wrote,

given  considerable  thought  to  the  matter  of  whether
it  would  be  advisable  to  approach  individuals  or
groups  in  Congress  with  the  idea  of  having  laws
passed  relating  to  payment  of  compensation  for
disability  or  release  of  the  experimenter  from
liability.  I  am  afraid  that  this  would  be  a  dangerous
course,  and  that  it  might  in  fact  injure  clinical
investigations  generally.  There  is  a  very  real
possibility  that  unfavorable  publicity  would  quickly
result.66

It  appears  that  the  relief  sought  by  researchers  was  provided  by  Congress
in  1952,  however,  under  the  umbrella  of  a  law  that  provided  indemnification  for
DOD  research  and  development  activities  as  a  whole.  In  October  1952,  following
the  death  of  a  prisoner-subject  in  an  AFEB-sponsored  hepatitis  study67  and
questions  raised  by  the  Army  Chemical  Corps  about  release  forms  for  "human
'guinea  pigs,'"68  the  AFEB  administrator  queried  the  DOD  Legal  Office  about  a
recently  passed  federal  law.  The  law  provided  authority  for  the  military  to
indemnify  contractors  for  risks  undertaken  in  "research  and  development
situations."  Did  the  new  law  "afford  relief  to  the  immediate  dependents  of

prison  volunteers  when  as  [a]  result  of  these  experiments  they  should  die[?]"6
The  answer  was  yes,  but  only  by  providing  relief  to  the  researchers  first.  "From
the  wording  of  the  law,  and  from  ...  the  legislative  history,"  the  Legal  Office
replied,  "it  is  a  direct  indemnification  to  the  contractor  and  not  to  the  individual

human  guinea  pig."70

Thus,  what  appears  to  have  been  the  first  Cold  War  congressional
enactment  to  deal  with  human  subjects  of  research  addressed  the  government's
obligation  to  its  contractors,  not  the  government's  and  its  researchers'  obligations
to  the  subjects.  Moreover,  the  record  indicates  that  a  more  direct  approach  was
not  sought  by  the  DOD  because  of  concerns  about  public  relations.  At  the  same
time  Congress  was  acting,  however,  the  DOD  itself  was  secretly  debating  a  new
policy  for  human  experiments.

The  Secretary  of  Defense  Issues  the  Nuremberg  Code  in  Top  Secret

As  the  Korean  War  began  in  mid- 1950,  the  military's  interest  in  human
experimentation-in  connection  with  chemical  and  biological  as  well  as  atomic
and  radiation  warfare-intensified.  The  need  for  a  DOD-wide  policy  on  the  use  of

101


Part  I

human  subjects  in  research  was  noted  by  Colonel  George  Underwood,  the
director  of  the  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  in  a  February  1953
memorandum  to  the  incoming  administration  of  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower:  "There
is  no  DOD  policy  on  the  books  which  permits  this  type  of  research  [human
experiments  in  the  field  of  atomic,  biological,  and  chemical  warfare]."71

From  1950  to  1953  discussions  about  human  research  and  human  research
policy  were  held  in  several  high-level  DOD  panels,  including  the  Armed  Forces
Medical  Policy  Council  (AFMPC),  the  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences  (CMS),
and  the  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare.  These  groups
were  headed  by  civilian  researchers,  and,  in  at  least  the  latter  two  cases,  included
representatives  of  the  AEC,  CIA,  NIH,  VA,  and  Public  Health  Service.

At  its  September  8,  1952,  meeting,  the  AFMPC  heard  a  presentation  from
the  chief  of  preventive  medicine  of  the  Army  Surgeon  General's  Office  on  the
topic  of  biological  warfare  research:

It  was  pointed  out  that  the  research  had  reached  a
point  beyond  which  essential  data  could  not  be
obtained  unless  human  volunteers  were  utilized  for
such  experimentation. . . .  Following  detailed
discussion,  it  was  unanimously  agreed  that  the  use
of  human  volunteers  in  this  type  of  research  be
approved.72

At  its  October  13,  1952,  meeting  the  AFMPC  again  took  up  the  question
of  human  experimentation.  "It  was  resolved,"  the  chairman  wrote  to  the  secretary
of  defense,  "that  the  ten  rules  promulgated  at  the  Nuremberg  trials  be  adopted  as
the  guiding  principles  to  be  followed.  An  eleventh  rule  [barring  experiments  with
prisoners  of  war]  was  added  by  the  legal  advisor  to  the  Council,  Mr.  Stephen  S.
Jackson."73

DOD  attorney  Jackson  evidently  was  responsible  for  the  inclusion  of  the
Nuremberg  Code  in  the  AFMPC's  proposed  policy.  In  an  October  13,  1952,
memo  to  the  chairman  of  the  AFMPC,  Jackson

recommended:  that  the  attached  principles  and
conditions  for  human  experimentation,  which  were
laid  down  by  the  Tribunal  in  the  Nuremberg  Trials,
be  adopted  instead  of  those  previously  submitted  by
me.74

As  an  addendum  to  the  Nuremberg  Code,  Jackson  proposed  a  requirement
that  "consent  be  expressed  in  writing  before  at  least  one  witness."  This
recommendation  followed  from  the  suggestion  of  Anna  Rosenberg,  assistant


102


Chapter  1


The  Nuremberg  Code

1.  The  voluntary  consent  of  the  human  subject  is  absolutely  essential.

This  means  that  the  person  involved  should  have  legal  capacity  to  give  consent;  should  be  so
situated  as  to  be  able  to  exercise  free  power  of  choice,  without  the  intervention  of  any  element  of
force,  fraud,  deceit,  duress,  overreaching,  or  other  ulterior  form  of  constraint  or  coercion;  and
should  have  sufficient  knowledge  and  comprehension  of  the  elements  of  the  subject  matter
involved  as  to  enable  him  to  make  an  understanding  and  enlightened  decision.  The  latter  element
requires  that  before  the  acceptance  of  an  affirmative  decision  by  the  experimental  subject  there
should  be  made  known  to  him  the  nature,  duration,  and  purpose  of  the  experiment;  the  method  and
means  by  which  it  is  to  be  conducted;  all  inconveniences  and  hazards  reasonably  to  be  expected;
and  the  effects  upon  his  health  or  person  which  may  possibly  come  from  his  participation  in  the
experiment.  The  duty  and  responsibility  for  ascertaining  the  quality  of  the  consent  rest  upon  each
individual  who  initiates,  directs  or  engages  in  the  experiment.  It  is  a  personal  duty  and
responsibility  which  may  not  be  delegated  to  another  with  impunity.

2.  The  experiment  should  be  such  as  to  yield  fruitful  results  for  the  good  of  society,
unprocurable  by  other  methods  or  means  of  study,  and  not  random  and  unnecessary  in  nature.

3.  The  experiment  should  be  so  designed  and  based  on  the  results  of  animal
experimentation  and  a  knowledge  of  the  natural  history  of  the  disease  or  other  problem  under
study  that  the  anticipated  results  will  justify  the  performance  of  the  experiment.

4.  The  experiment  should  be  so  conducted  as  to  avoid  all  unnecessary  physical  and
mental  suffering  and  injury.

5.  No  experiment  should  be  conducted  where  there  is  an  a  priori  reason  to  believe  that
death  or  disabling  injury  will  occur;  except,  perhaps,  in  those  experiments  where  the  experimental
physicians  also  serve  as  subjects.

6.  The  degree  of  risk  to  be  taken  should  never  exceed  that  determined  by  the
humanitarian  importance  of  the  problem  to  be  solved  by  the  experiment.

7.  Proper  preparations  should  be  made  and  adequate  facilities  provided  to  protect  the
experimental  subject  against  even  remote  possibilities  of  injury,  disability,  or  death.

8.  The  experiment  should  be  conducted  only  by  scientifically  qualified  persons.  The
highest  degree  of  skill  and  care  should  be  required  through  all  stages  of  the  experiment  of  those
who  conduct  or  engage  in  the  experiment.

9.  During  the  course  of  the  experiment  the  human  subject  should  be  at  liberty  to  bring  the
experiment  to  an  end  if  he  has  reached  the  physical  or  mental  state  where  continuation  of  the
experiment  seems  to  him  to  be  impossible.

10.  During  the  course  of  the  experiment  the  scientist  in  charge  must  be  prepared  to
terminate  the  experiment  at  any  stage,  if  he  has  probable  cause  to  believe,  in  the  exercise  of  the
good  faith,  superior  skill,  and  careful  judgment  required  of  him,  that  a  continuation  of  the
experiment  is  likely  to  result  in  injury,  disability,  or  death  to  the  experimental  subject.


103


Parti

secretary  of  defense  for  manpower  and  personnel,  who  was  an  expert  on  labor
relations.75

A  letter  written  by  the  administrator  of  the  Armed  Forces  Epidemiological
Board  documents  Mr.  Jackson's  role  and  motivation:

It  was  on  Mr.  Jackson's  insistence  that  the
'Nuremberg  Principles'  were  used  in  toto  in  the
document,  since  he  stated,  these  already  had
international  judicial  sanction,  and  to  modify  them
would  open  us  to  severe  criticism  along  the  line—
"see  they  use  only  that  which  suits  them."76

Thus,  the  DOD's  counsel  cited  the  1947  Nuremberg  military  tribunal
ruling  as  establishing  an  international  legal  precedent  to  which  American
researchers  should  be  held.

It  appears  that  in  succeeding  months  the  AFMPC  proposal  was  received
unenthusiastically  by  other  DOD  committees  that  reviewed  it.  In  a  November  12,
1952,  memorandum,  the  executive  director  of  the  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences
pointed  out  that  "human  experimentation  has  been  carried  on  for  many  years."  He
contended  that

to  issue  a  policy  statement  on  human
experimentation  at  this  time  would  probably  do  the
cause  more  harm  than  good;  for  such  a  statement
would  have  to  be  "watered  down"  to  suit  the
capabilities  of  the  average  investigator.77

"Human  experimentation,"  the  CMS  executive  director  asserted,  "has,  in
years  past,  and  is  at  present  governed  by  an  unwritten  code  of  ethics,"  which  is
"administered  informally  by  fellow  workers  in  the  field  [and]  is  considered  to  be
satisfactory.  ...  To  commit  to  writing  a  policy  on  human  experimentation  would
focus  unnecessary  attention  on  the  legal  aspects  of  the  subject."78

Notwithstanding  the  reservations  of  the  CMS  and  others,79  the  Nuremberg
Code  proposal  had  the  support  of  President  Truman's  secretary  of  defense,  Robert
A.  Lovett.80  However,  the  secretary's  aide,  George  V.  Underwood,  wrote  in
January  1953,  "Since  consequences  of  this  policy  will  fall  upon  Mr.  Wilson
[President  Eisenhower's  nominee  for  secretary  of  defense,  Charles  Wilson],  it
might  be  wise  to  pass  to  him  as  a  unanimous  recommendation  from  the
'alumni.'"81

In  a  January  13,  1953,  memorandum  for  the  new  secretary,  the  AFMPC
"strongly  recommended  that  a  policy  be  established  for  the  use  of  human
volunteers  (military  and  civilian  employees)  in  experimental  research  at  Armed


104


Chapter  1

Forces  facilities."  The  policy  would  render  the  research  "subject  to  the  principles
and  conditions  laid  down  as  a  result  of  the  Nuremberg  trials."82


The  Wilson  Memorandum

26  Feb  1953


Memorandum  for  the  Secretary  of  the  Army

Secretary  of  the  Navy
Secretary  of  the  Air  Force

Subject:  Use  of  Human  Volunteers  in  Experimental  Research

1.  Based  upon  a  recommendation  of  the  Armed  Forces  Medical  Policy  Council,  that
human  subjects  be  employed,  under  recognized  safeguards,  as  the  only  feasible  means  for  realistic
evaluation  and/or  development  of  effective  preventive  measures  of  defense  against  atomic,
biological  or  chemical  agents,  the  policy  set  forth  below  will  govern  the  use  of  human  volunteers
by  the  Department  of  Defense  in  experimental  research  in  the  fields  of  atomic,  biological  and/or
chemical  warfare.

2.  By  reason  of  the  basic  medical  responsibility  in  connection  with  the  development  of
defense  of  all  types  against  atomic,  biological  and/or  chemical  warfare  agents.  Armed  Services
personnel  and/or  civilians  on  duty  at  installations  engaged  in  such  research  shall  be  permitted  to
actively  participate  in  all  phases  of  the  program,  such  participation  shall  be  subject  to  the
following  conditions:

a.  The  voluntary  consent  of  the  human  subject  is  absolutely  essential.

( 1 )  This  means  that  the  person  involved  should  have  legal  capacity  to
give  consent;  should  be  so  situated  as  to  be  able  to  exercise  free  power  of  choice,
without  the  intervention  of  any  element  offeree,  fraud,  deceit,  duress,  over-
reaching, or  other  ulterior  form  of  constraint  or  coercion;  and  should  have
sufficient  knowledge  and  comprehension  of  the  elements  of  the  subject  matter
involved  as  to  enable  him  to  make  an  understanding  and  enlightened  decision.
This  latter  element  requires  that  before  the  acceptance  of  an  affirmative  decision
by  the  experimental  subject  there  should  be  made  known  to  him  the  nature,
duration,  and  purpose  of  the  experiment;  the  method  and  means  by  which  it  is  to
be  conducted;  all  inconveniences  and  hazards  reasonably  to  be  expected;  and  the
effects  upon  his  health  or  person  which  may  possibly  come  from  his
participation  in  the  experiment.

(2)  The  concept  [sic]  of  the  human  subject  shall  be  in  writing;  his
signature  shall  be  affixed  to  a  written  instrument  setting  forth  substantially  the
aforementioned  requirements  and  shall  be  signed  in  the  presence  of  at  least  one
witness  who  shall  attest  to  such  signature  in  writing.


105


Parti

(a)  In  experiments  where  personnel  from  more  than  one
Service  are  involved  the  Secretary  of  the  Service  which  is  exercising
primary  responsibility  for  conducting  the  experiment  is  designated  to
prepare  such  an  instrument  and  coordinate  it  for  use  by  all  the  Services
having  human  volunteers  involved  in  the  experiment.
(3)  The  duty  and  responsibility  for  ascertaining  the  quality  of  the
consent  rests  upon  each  individual  who  initiates,  directs  or  engages  in  the
experiment.  It  is  a  personal  duty  and  responsibility  which  may  not  be  delegated
to  another  with  impunity.

b.  The  experiment  should  be  such  as  to  yield  fruitful  results  for  the  good  of
society,  unprocurable  by  other  methods  or  means  of  study,  and  not  random  and
unnecessary  in  nature.

c.  The  number  of  volunteers  used  shall  be  kept  at  a  minimum  consistent  with
item  b.,  above.

d.  The  experiment  should  be  so  designed  and  based  on  the  results  of  animal
experimentation  and  a  knowledge  of  the  natural  history  of  the  disease  or  other  problem
under  study  that  the  anticipated  results  will  justify  the  performance  of  the  experiment.

e.  The  experiment  should  be  so  conducted  as  to  avoid  all  unnecessary  physical
and  mental  suffering  and  injury.

f.  No  experiment  should  be  conducted  where  there  is  an  a  priori  reason  to
believe  that  death  or  disabling  injury  will  occur.

g.  The  degree  of  risk  to  be  taken  should  never  exceed  that  determined  by  the
humanitarian  importance  of  the  problem  to  be  solved  by  the  experiment.

h.  Proper  preparation  should  be  made  and  adequate  facilities  provided  to  protect
the  experimental  subject  against  even  remote  possibilities  of  injury,  disability,  or  death.

i.  The  experiment  should  be  conducted  only  by  scientifically  qualified  persons.
The  highest  degree  of  skill  and  care  should  be  required  through  all  stages  of  the
experiment  of  those  who  conduct  or  engage  in  the  experiment.

j.  During  the  course  of  the  experiment  the  human  subject  should  be  at  liberty  to
bring  the  experiment  to  an  end  if  he  has  reached  the  physical  or  mental  state  where
continuation  of  the  experiment  seems  to  him  to  be  impossible.

k.  During  the  course  of  the  experiment  the  scientist  in  charge  must  be  prepared
to  terminate  the  experiment  at  any  stage,  if  he  has  probable  cause  to  believe,  in  the
exercise  of  the  good  faith,  superior  skill  and  careful  judgment  required  of  him  that  a
continuation  of  the  experiment  is  likely  to  result  in  injury,  disability,  or  death  to  the
experimental  subject.

1.  The  established  policy,  which  prohibits  the  use  of  prisoners  of  war  in  human
experimentation,  is  continued  and  they  will  not  be  used  under  any  circumstances.
3.  The  Secretaries  of  the  Army,  Navy  and  Air  Force  are  authorized  to  conduct
experiments  in  connection  with  the  development  of  defenses  of  all  types  against  atomic,  biological
and/or  chemical  warfare  agents  involving  the  use  of  human  subjects  within  the  limits  prescribed
above.


106


Chapter  1

4.  In  each  instance  in  which  an  experiment  is  proposed  pursuant  to  this  memorandum,
the  nature  and  purpose  of  the  proposed  experiment  and  the  name  of  the  person  who  will  be  in
charge  of  such  experiment  shall  be  submitted  for  approval  to  the  Secretary  of  the  military
department  in  which  the  proposed  experiment  is  to  be  conducted.  No  such  experiment  shall  be
undertaken  until  such  Secretary  has  approved  in  writing  the  experiment  proposed,  the  person  who
will  be  in  charge  of  conducting  it,  as  well  as  informing  the  Secretary  of  Defense.

5.  The  addresses  will  be  responsible  for  insuring  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  this
memorandum  within  their  respective  Services.

/signed/
C.  E.  Wilson
copies  furnished:

Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

Research  and  Development  Board

Downgraded  to
UNCLASSIFIED
22  Aug  75
TOP  SECRET


On  February  26,  1953,  Secretary  of  Defense  Wilson  signed  off  on  the
AFMPC  policy.  It  was  issued  in  a  Top  Secret  memorandum  to  the  secretaries  of
the  Army,  Navy,  and  Air  Force.  The  Wilson  memorandum  reiterates  the
principles  of  the  Nuremberg  Code,  requires  written  and  witnessed  informed
consent  of  research  subjects,  and  prohibits  the  use  of  prisoners  of  war.  The  policy
was  to  "govern  the  use  of  human  volunteers  by  the  Department  of  Defense  in
experimental  research  in  the  fields  of  atomic,  biological,  and/or  chemical  warfare
for  defensive  purposes."83

The  basis  for  the  classification  of  the  1953  memorandum  is  not  clear.
Since  the  memorandum  dealt  with  atomic  and  other  unconventional  forms  of
warfare,  its  classification  may  have  been  routine.  There  is  evidence  that  the  DOD
had  a  general  desire  to  keep  hidden  from  public  view  any  indication  that  it  was
involved  in  biological  and  chemical  warfare-related  research;  the  Wilson
memorandum,  of  course,  was  just  such  an  indication.  In  September  1952,  the
Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  advised  the  services  to  "[e]nsure,  insofar  as  practicable,  that
all  published  articles  stemming  from  BW  [biological  warfare]  and  CW  [chemical
warfare]  research  and  development  programs  are  disassociated  from  anything
which  might  connect  them  with  U.S.  military  endeavor."84

In  one  sense  the  memorandum  is  a  landmark  in  its  official  recognition  of
the  Nuremberg  Code,  but  in  another  sense  it  also  generates  important  questions.
Having  determined  to  recognize  international  principles  of  human  rights,  why,  or
how,  could  the  secretary  have  limited  their  application  to  some,  but  not  all,  human

107


Parti

experiments?  Why  was  the  policy  directed  exclusively  to  experiments  related  to
"atomic,  biological,  and  chemical  warfare"?  Moreover,  was  the  policy  intended
to  govern  such  research  wherever  it  was  conducted;  for  example,  when  it  was
performed  by  private  contractors,  as  well  as  by  intramural  researchers?  How  was
a  directive  issued  in  secret  implemented?

Communicating  the  1953  Wilson  Memorandum

That  there  were  problems  in  the  dissemination  of  Secretary  Wilson's  Top
Secret  memorandum  is  evidenced  in  a  memorandum  containing  queries  by
officials  of  the  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project  (AFSWP),  within  a  year
of  the  Wilson  memorandum's  issuance.  The  AFSWP,  now  the  Defense  Nuclear
Agency  (DNA),  was  at  the  hub  of  DOD  nuclear  weapons  research.  In  the  course
of  a  routine  review  of  research  reports,  an  AFSWP  official  learned  that
"volunteers  were  injured  as  a  consequence  of  taking  part  in  [a]  field  experiment"
of  flashblindness  conducted  at  an  atomic  bomb  test  before  the  Wilson
memorandum  was  issued  (see  chapter  10).  The  AFSWP  reviewer  immediately
concluded  that  a  "definite  need  exists  for  guidance  in  the  use  of  human  volunteers
as  experimental  subjects."85

On  further  inquiry,  the  AFSWP  reviewer  found  that  a  policy  already
existed,  but  had  not  been  disseminated  to  investigators.  A  follow-up
memorandum,  evidently  written  in  early  1954,  records:

In  November  53  it  was  learned  that  there  existed  a
T/S  [Top  Secret]  document  signed  by  the  Secretary
of  Defense  which  listed  various  requirements  and
criteria  which  had  to  be  met  by  individuals
contemplating  the  use  of  human  volunteers  in  Bio-
medical or  other  types  of  experimentation. ...  It
was  learned  that  although  this  document  details
very  definite  and  specific  steps  which  must  be  taken
before  volunteers  may  be  used  in  experimentation,
no  serious  attempt  has  been  made  to  disseminate  the
information  to  those  experimenters  who  have  a
definite  need-to-know.86

"The  lowest  level  at  which  it  had  been  circulated,"  the  AFSWP  reviewer
learned,  "was  that  of  the  three  Secretaries  of  the  Services."  Efforts  by  an  assistant
secretary  to  "downgrade"  the  document  had  "not  been  able  to  obtain
concurrence."  The  reviewer  hoped  that  "this  letter  shall  point  up  the  need  for
some  relaxation  of  the  grip  in  which  this  document  is  now  held,  at  least  on  a
definite  need-to-know  basis."87  (The  application  of  the  Wilson  memorandum  to
further  experiments  conducted  at  atomic  bomb  tests  is  discussed  in  chapter  10.)

108


Chapter  1
Implementation  in  the  Army

The  Army  did  take  substantial  steps  to  put  into  effect  the  Wilson
memorandum.  In  June  1953  the  Army  chief  of  staff,  John  C.  Oakes,  issued  a
memorandum  implementing  the  secretary  of  defense's  policy  in  toto.  Referred  to
in  the  Army  as  CS:385,  this  memorandum  was  initially  classified  Top  Secret,  but
was  declassified  the  following  year.  In  addition  to  the  provisions  of  the  Wilson
memorandum,  the  Army  document  required  the  prior  review  and  approval  of  both
the  surgeon  general  and  the  secretary  of  the  Army.  The  Army's  memorandum
also  contained  legal  analysis  that  explained  the  source  of  the  Army's  authority  to
perform  human  experiments  in  the  first  place  and  the  limits  that  this  authority  put
on  the  selection  of  subjects.81*  Even  in  the  midst  of  the  Korean  War,  the  Army
did  not  view  it  as  self-evident  that  the  DOD  could  engage  in  human  experiments
or  choose  any  subjects  it  wished.  The  memorandum  explained  that  the  authority
to  experiment  on  humans  came  from  congressional  enactments,  including
provisions  for  research  and  development.1*9

Interestingly,  choice  of  subjects  was  to  be  governed  by  the  Army's  ability
to  ensure  compensation  in  the  case  of  death  or  disability.90  This  could  be
provided,  the  lawyers  declared,  only  upon  express  congressional  action.  In  the
case  of  military  personnel  and  contractor  employees  there  was  such  provision.
But  there  was  no  such  authority  in  the  case  of  private  citizens  who  offered  their
services.  The  Army  lawyers  recommended,  and  the  CS:385  policy  provided,  that
private  citizens  not  employed  by  Army  contractors  could  not  serve  as  research
subjects.91

On  March  12,  1954,  the  Army  Office  of  the  Surgeon  General  (OSG)
issued  an  unclassified  statement  entitled  "Use  of  Human  Volunteers  in  Medical
Research: Principles,  Policies,  and  Rules."92  This  document  too  restated  the
Nuremberg  principles.  In  contrast  with  the  Wilson  and  Oakes  memorandums,  it
was  not  restricted  to  research  related  to  atomic,  biological,  or  chemical  warfare.
Instead,  the  OSG  statement  was  directed  to  "medical  research"  with  human
volunteers  generally.93

Moreover,  while  CS:385  did  not  state  directly  whether  it  applied  to
contract  researchers,  the  1954  OSG  statement  was  transmitted  to  at  least  some
university  researchers  with  the  prefatory  note,  "To  be  used  as  far  as  applicable  as
a  non-mandatory  guide  for  planning  and  conducting  contract  research."94  There  is
evidence  that  the  OSG's  requirements  were  sometimes  more  than  "non-mandatory
guides."  For  example,  in  a  June  27,  1956,  letter  to  the  the  Armed  Forces
Epidemiological  Board,  a  Tulane  University  public  health  researcher  agreed  that
his  vaccine  experiments  with  prisoner  subjects  would  be  conducted  only  after
written  consent  was  obtained  from  the  subjects.95  The  Tulane  researcher
indicated  that,  with  respect  to  his  application  for  funding,  "I  have  held  it  up  since
Dr.  Dingle  indicated  I  be  familiar  with  the  statement  of  the  Office  of  the  Surgeon
General  re  the  use  of  human  volunteers I  have  read  it  and  believe  that  our

109


Parti

past  and  future  work  have  [sic]  and  will  comply  with  the  rules  stipulated."96
Moreover,  this  researcher  provided  a  written  statement  to  supplement  his  original
proposal  that  explained  how  the  OSG  requirements  would  be  met.  In  another
case,  a  proposal  involving  measles  and  normal  children,  an  AFEB  official  advised
the  researcher  to  "take  [the  OSG  policy]  into  consideration  in  writing  the
proposal."97

As  discussed  earlier,  in  1952  the  Army  obtained  congressional  authority  to
indemnify  contract  researchers  in  the  event  that  an  experiment  caused  injury  or
death.  There  is  evidence  that  the  Army  sought  to  link  the  grant  of  an
indemnification  clause  (ASPR  7.203.22,  "Insurance-Liability  to  Third  Persons")
to  contractor  acceptance  of  the  principles  stated  by  the  Army  surgeon  general.  In
a  March  1957  letter  to  the  University  of  Pittsburgh,  which  was  proposing  to  use
medical  student-volunteers  in  a  (nonradiation)  experiment,  the  Army  told
Pittsburgh  that  the  provision  of  the  clause  was  "contingent  upon  your  adhering  to
the  following  [March  1954  Office  of  the  Surgeon  General]  principles,  policies,
and  rules  for  the  use  of  human  volunteers  in  performing  subject  medical  research
contracts."98

While  the  evidence  clearly  shows  that  Army  officials  sought  to  apply  the
Nuremberg  Code  policy  to  contractors,  it  did  not  meet  with  complete  success,  and
the  full  extent  of  its  efforts  remains  unclear.  As  we  see  in  chapter  2,  in  the  early
1960s  Harvard  successfully  resisted  the  inclusion  of  the  Nuremberg  Code
language  in  its  medical  research  contracts  with  the  Army.  As  we  see  in  chapter  8,
which  discusses  DOD  funding  of  research  on  the  effects  of  total-body  irradiation,
the  indemnification  language  was  included  in  at  least  some  contracts  in  which  the
surgeon  general's  policy  was  not  mentioned.  By  1969,  however,  the  policy  may
have  become  standard  in  Army  contracts  under  the  authority  of  the  Medical
Research  and  Development  Command.99

There  are  several  possible  explanations  for  the  seeming  absence  of
widespread  inclusion  of  the  surgeon  general's  memo  as  a  contractual  requirement,
at  least  where  indemnification  was  provided  for.  First,  as  discussed  below,  it  is
possible  that  the  1954  policy  was  meant  to  apply  to  research  with  healthy
subjects,  and  not  sick  patients.  (However,  even  if  that  were  generally  the  case,
the  provision  of  indemnification  might  be  expected  to  have  triggered  reflection  on
this  limitation.)  Second,  as  a  related  matter,  the  evidence  we  are  reviewing  shows
a  tension  between  the  government's  declaration  of  a  principle  and  its  readiness  to
actively  insist  that  the  principle  be  honored  within  the  privacy  of  the  doctor-
patient  relationship.

Finally,  Army  imposition  of  the  surgeon  general's  principles  may  also
have  depended  on  the  nature  of  its  interest  in  the  research  being  done.  An  April
3,  1957,  memo  distinguished  cases  where  the  institution  "because  of  its  primary
interest,  would  conduct  the  research  even  without  support  of  the  OSG,"  from
cases  where  "the  study  is  conducted  at  the  insistence  of  OSG."  In  the  former  case
the  strategy  would  be  to  seek  cost-sharing  contracts,  in  which  the  institution

110


Chapter  1

would  "assume  all  responsibility  for  any  possible  effects  resulting  from  the
experimentation."  In  the  latter  case,  the  indemnification  clause  would  be
provided,  but  the  March  1954  policy  would  also  be  required  and  included  in  the
contract  directly  or  by  reference. ino

It  is  not  clear  that  the  1954  OSG  policy  on  human  volunteers  was  intended
to  apply  to  research  with  patients.  The  term  volunteer  is  ambiguous  but  at  the
time  was  commonly  used  to  refer  to  healthy  subjects.  Nonetheless,  a  1 962  Army
memorandum  that  declared  that  since  World  War  II  "by  and  large  research  has
been  conducted  in  strict  accordance  with  the  Nuremberg  Code"  mentions
patients. I0'  The  memo  reported  that  a  recent  survey  of  contract  research  found
that  the  volunteers  treated  in  accord  with  the  Nuremberg  Code  included  "3,000
students,  250  patients,  and  300  prisoners."  It  is  not  known  what  kind  of  research
these  250  patients  were  involved  in,  nor  is  it  known  what  proportion  of  the
patients  who  had  been  subjects  of  research  supported  or  conducted  by  the  Army
since  World  War  II  were  represented  by  these  250.

Unfortunately,  the  1962  review's  confident  declaration  that  Army  research
complied  with  the  Nuremberg  Code  was  too  sanguine.  In  1975,  following  public
revelations  that  the  Army  and  the  CIA  had  conducted  LSD  experiments  on
unwitting  subjects,  the  Army  inspector  general  reviewed  the  application  of  the
June  1953  policy  to  drug  testing.  The  inspector  general's  review  led  to  the
declassification  of  the  1953  Wilson  memorandum.  The  inspector  general  found
that  the  Army  had,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  used  only  "volunteers"  for  its
drug-testing  program.  However,  the  "volunteers  were  not  fully  informed,  as
required,  prior  to  their  participation,  and  the  methods  of  procuring  their  services
in  many  cases  appeared  not  to  have  been  in  accord  with  the  intent  of  Department
of  the  Army  policies  governing  use  of  volunteers  in  research."102

Additional  DOD  Research  Requirements

While  the  Navy  is  not  known  to  have  taken  specific  action  in  response  to
the  1953  Wilson  memorandum,  we  have  already  noted  that  the  Navy  had  long
since  provided  for  prior  review  and  voluntary  participation  in  some  cases.  The
1951  Navy  "Manual  of  the  Medical  Department"  required  secretarial  approval  of
human  experimentation  and  the  use  of  volunteers.  These  requirements  applied  to
"experimental  studies  of  a  medical  nature"  involving  "personnel  of  the  Naval
Establishment  (military  and  civilian)."103  Participation  was  to  be  "on  a  voluntary
basis  only."104  The  manual  also  mandated  prior  review  for  research  with  patient-
subjects.  "Clinical  research,"  including  "research  projects  and  therapeutic  trials,"
was  to  be  "authorized  by"  the  Bureau  of  Medicine  and  Surgery.105

At  least  for  research  with  radioisotopes,  the  requirement  for  voluntary
participation  may  have  applied  to  patient-subjects  as  well  as  healthy  subjects.  In
1951  the  Navy  debated  adoption  of  a  permission  form  for  the  use  of  radioisotopes
for  patients  at  naval  hospitals.106  This  form,  to  be  signed  by  either  the  patient  or

111


Parti

the  responsible  next  of  kin,  authorized  the  use  of  "tracer-therapeutic"  doses
"obtained  from  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  for  research  purposes."107

Although  it  is  not  clear  that  the  Army  rules  implementing  the  1953  Wilson
memorandum  applied  to  patient-subjects,  there  is  some  evidence  that  consent
forms  that  were  usually  used  for  surgical  procedures  were  used  in  patient-related
experimental  settings  involving  radioisotopes.  In  1955  an  official  from  the
Letterman  Army  Hospital  in  San  Francisco  asked  the  Walter  Reed  Hospital  about
the  need  for  written  "permission"  forms  for  "test  doses"  of  radioisotopes.108  In
response,  the  Army  indicated  that  a  standard  form  used  for  operations  and
anesthesia  should  also  be  employed,  at  the  physician's  discretion,  when
"authorization  for  administration  of  radioisotope  therapy  is  desired."109

In  the  Air  Force,  a  1952  regulation  on  clinical  research  mandated  safety
and  administrative  procedures  for  the  use  of  humans  in  experiments  at  Air  Force
medical  facilities."0  This  regulation  required  prior  group  review  but  did  not
mention  consent  provisions  or  refer  to  the  subjects  as  volunteers.  In  1958  a  letter
from  the  Air  Force's  Air  Research  and  Development  Command  describes  the
policy  for  the  use  of  humans  in  "hazardous  research  and  development  tests."  This
policy  reiterated  the  requirement  for  prior  review  discussed  in  the  1952
regulation.  In  this  context,  however,  subjects  were  to  be  "volunteers]"  who
"understood]  the  degree  of  risk  involved  in  the  experiment.""1

What,  then,  were  the  operative  rules  in  the  Department  of  Defense  for
research  involving  human  subjects  in  the  1940s  and  1950s?  By  the  mid-1950s,
for  the  entire  DOD  for  research  related  to  atomic,  biological,  and  chemical
warfare,  and  for  all  research  involving  "human  volunteers"  in  the  Army,  the
formal  rules  were  the  ten  principles  of  the  Nuremberg  Code  and  the  additions
included  in  the  secretary  of  defense's  1953  policy.  According  to  the  1975
testimony  of  the  surgeon  general  of  the  Army  before  the  U.S.  Senate  and  the
internal  review  conducted  by  the  Army  inspector  general,  these  principles  were
Army  "policy.""2  At  the  same  time,  as  the  inspector  general  reported  in  1975  and
as  we  discuss  further  in  chapter  10,  these  requirements  were  not  always  known  or
followed.  While  there  were  attempts  to  implement  the  Army  surgeon  general's
1954  policy,  it  is  not  known  how  the  policy's  provisions,  including  the
requirement  to  obtain  voluntary  consent,  were  interpreted.  The  Navy's  1951
requirements  for  prior  review  and  voluntariness  applied  to  all  research  involving
Navy  personnel.

The  extent  to  which  research  rules  applied  to  patient-subjects  in  the
clinical  setting  is  less  clear.  There  is  some  indication  that  in  some  cases  standard
consent  forms,  akin  to  the  surgical  permits  in  use  at  the  time,  were  employed  with
patients  at  military  hospitals  who  were  administered  "test  doses"  of  radioisotopes.


112


Chapter  1

THE  NATIONAL  INSTITUTES  OF  HEALTH  AND  THE
VETERANS  ADMINISTRATION

During  the  late  1940s  and  1950s,  the  AEC  and  DOD  were  by  no  means
the  only  agencies  sponsoring  research  involving  human  subjects.  The  Department
of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare  (DHEW),  through  two  of  its  components,  the
Public  Health  Service  and  the  NIH,  was  emerging  during  this  period  as  the
dominant  government  agency  sponsoring  human  biomedical  research.  The
Veterans  Administration  (VA)  as  well  conducted  a  large  medical  research
program  that  involved  the  use  of  radioisotopes  in  numerous  human  experiments.

In  the  early  1950s  NIH  participated  in  some  of  the  discussions  preceding
the  issuance  of  the  1953  secretary  of  defense  memorandum.  At  the  request  of  a
DOD  official  for  information  on  NIH's  approach  to  the  use  of  human  subjects,
NIH  responded  with  an  April  1952  letter  that  included  a  draft  statement  on  the
"Ethical  Principles  Underlying  Investigations  Involving  Human  Beings."  Among
its  other  provisions,  the  April  28,  1952,  draft  states  that

[t]he  person  who  is  competent  to  give  consent  to  an
investigative  procedure  must  do  so.  He  must  have  legal
capacity  to  give  consent  and  be  able  to  exercise  free  choice,
without  the  intervention  of  any  element  of  force,  fraud,
deceit,  duress,  constraint  or  coercion.  He  must  have
sufficient  knowledge  and  comprehension  of  the  nature  of
the  investigation  to  enable  him  to  make  an  understanding
and  enlightened  decision.  He  must  therefore  be  told  the
nature,  duration,  and  purpose  of  the  experiment;  the
method  and  means  by  which  it  is  to  be  conducted;  the
inconveniences  and  hazards  reasonably  to  be  expected;  and
the  effects  upon  his  health  or  person  which  can  reasonably
be  expected  to  come  from  his  participation  in  the
investigation.  He  should  understand,  furthermore,  that  by
his  participation  he  becomes  a  co-investigator  with  the
physician."3

Although  it  is  not  known  what  became  of  this  draft  statement,  around  this
time  NIH  had  good  reason  to  develop  a  policy  on  the  use  of  human  subjects.  In
1953  NIH  opened  the  Clinical  Center,  a  state-of-the-science  research  hospital.
The  center  adopted  a  policy  requiring  "voluntary  agreement  based  on  informed
understanding"  from  all  research  subjects  and  written  consent  from  some  patient-
subjects  involved  in  research  that  the  physician  believed  to  be  unusually
hazardous."4  Written  consent  was  required  from  all  healthy,  "normal"  subjects  of
research  beginning  in  1954."5  Additionally,  NIH  began  a  system  of  group  review
of  proposed  research  that  became  a  model  for  today's  institutional  review  boards

113


Part  I

(IRBs)."6  Thus,  the  NIH  policy  appears  to  be  the  first  instance  of  a  single  policy
that  expressly  provides  for  consent  from  all  subjects,  be  they  healthy  or  sick.
Even  so,  the  policy  was  still  limited  to  research  at  the  Clinical  Center  and  did  not
apply  to  the  considerable  amount  of  NIH-funded  research  being  undertaken  by
grantees  (extramural  research).

The  question  of  whether  "patients,"  as  well  as  healthy,  "normal"
volunteers,  should  give  written  consent  arose  in  the  development  of  the  NIH
policy.  Legal  counsel  at  NIH  advised  that,  "from  a  legal  point  of  view,"  there
should  be  a  "written  statement . . .  indicating  the  patient's  awareness  of  the  nature
of  the  particular  investigation  in  which  he  was  to  participate  and  acceptance  of
any  particular  inconvenience  or  risk  inherent  in  his  participation.""7  A  signed
form  offered  the  best  proof  that  a  "policy"  of  "informed  consent"  was  followed  for
all  subjects  enrolled  in  studies  at  the  center.

The  NIH  attorney  wrote  that  while  the  Clinical  Center's  Medical  Advisory
Board  did  not  disagree  with  the  principle,  it  did  disagree  with  the  need  for  a
written  statement:

[0]f  the  members  that  expressed  their  views,  and
most  did  so,  all  rejected  such  a  proposal.  The
rejection  was  due,  as  I  understand  it,  not  to  any
particular  detail  but  rather  a  more  basic  objection  to
written,  as  opposed  to  oral,  statements.  There  was
apparently,  therefore,  no  objection  to  providing  the
patient  with  enough  information  to  permit  him  to
exercise  an  informed  choice  of  participation  or
refusal  as  long  as  not  reduced  to  writing  for  his
signature."8

Nonetheless,  the  principle  that  all  research  subjects,  including  healthy  subjects  in
the  "normal  volunteer"  program  and  patient-subjects,  should  make  an  informed
choice  seems  to  be  acknowledged  in  the  Medical  Advisory  Board's  position.

The  NIH  Clinical  Center  approach  adopted  by  the  mid-1950s-written
consent  from  healthy  subjects  and  from  only  certain  patient-subjects— persisted
through  the  early  1960s  and  was  paralleled  in  policies  of  the  DOD  and  the  AEC.
The  view  that  written  consent  from  patients  might  unnecessarily  interfere  with
doctor-patient  relationships  prevailed.

Within  the  NIH,  dialogue  continued  throughout  the  1950s,  setting  the
stage  for  the  leading  role  DHEW  was  to  take  in  formulating  human  research
regulations  in  the  1960s  (see  chapter  3)."9

Although  the  NIH  was  by  far  the  dominant  agency  in  research  involving
human  subjects,  a  significant  amount  of  radioisotope  research  occurred  at  the  VA.
The  VA  research  program  employing  radioisotopes  at  VA  medical  centers  began
in  1948.120  This  program  was  limited  to  VA  hospitals  affiliated  with  medical

114


Chapter  1

schools.  From  its  inception,  this  program  involved  a  system  of  prior  group  review
by  local  radioisotope  committees,  normally  composed  of  non-VA-affiliated
teaching  staff  of  the  affiliated  medical  school.121  These  committees  reviewed  all
research  proposals  and  approved  all  research  conducted  at  VA  radioisotope  units.

In  its  formative  years,  the  advisers  to  the  new  VA  program  included
Stafford  Warren,  Shields  Warren,  and  others  who  were  likely  to  be  familiar  with
the  consent  principles  articulated  by  the  AEC.  Nonetheless,  the  earliest  evidence
of  a  consent  policy  at  the  VA  comes  in  the  form  of  a  1958  general  counsel's
opinion  on  whether  the  VA  could  participate  in  certain  research.  The  general
counsel  asserted  that

persons  who  participate  [in  human  subject  research]
must  voluntarily  consent  to  the  experiment  on
themselves.  Such  consent  must  rest  upon  an
understanding  of  the  hazards  involved.  The
volunteer  may  withdraw  from  the  experiment  at  any
time.  Moreover,  before  the  experiment,  steps  to
reduce  the  hazard,  as  for  example,  indicated
research  on  animals,  must  be  made.122

This  opinion  was  written  in  response  to  two  proposed  research  projects,  and  it  is
not  known  if  it  was  implemented  in  the  projects  or  applied  to  others.

CONCLUSION

Records  now  available  show  that  at  the  highest  reaches  of  Cold  War
bureaucracies  officials  discussed  conditions  under  which  human  experimentation
could  take  place.  These  discussions  took  place  earlier  and  in  greater,  although  by
today's  standards  uncritical  and  less  searching,  detail  than  might  have  been
assumed.  Nonetheless,  the  stated  positions  that  resulted  were  often  developed  in
isolation  from  one  another,  were  neither  uniform  nor  comprehensive  in  their
coverage,  and  were  often  limited  in  their  effectuation.  Several  interrelated  factors
seem  to  have  been  prominent  in  causing  these  discussions  to  take  place  and  in
determining  the  scope  of  the  requirements  that  were  declared  and  the  efforts  that
were  undertaken  to  implement  them.  We  summarize  these  key  factors  below.

Administrative  and  Legal  Circumstance

The  creation  of  new  programs,  or  the  qualitative  expansion  of  old  ones,
impelled  officials,  lawyers,  and  researchers  to  reflect  on  the  rules  to  govern  them.
While  these  rules  were  sometimes  cast  as  "legal"  or  "financial"  requirements,  they
often  included  provisions,  such  as  a  requirement  for  written  consent,  that  appear
similar  to  statements  in  requirements  that  govern  the  conduct  of  research  today.

115


Parti

The  language  used  to  describe  these  rules  was  often  that  of  law  or  administration,
such  as  "waiver"  or  "release"  forms,  or  it  may  have  had  particular  meaning  to
researchers  at  the  time,  such  as  "clinical  testing."  As  a  result,  it  is  often  hard  to
compare  these  rules  to  current  requirements,  which  have  benefited  from
intervening  decades  of  linguistic  and  conceptual  refinement.

Professional  Cultures

Differing  professions  brought  their  own  tools  and  perspectives  to
discussions  of  conditions  under  which  human  subjects  research  could  proceed.
For  example,  lawyers  were  likely  to  insist  on  obtaining  documented  evidence  of
patient  consent,  while  medical  professionals  emphasized  the  importance  of  the
trust  that  underlay  the  relationship  between  doctor  and  patient;  they  sometimes
objected  to  the  use  and  implications  of  written  consent  forms.

If  consent  procedures  were  a  source  of  disagreement,  the  need  to  minimize
risk  to  subjects  was  not.  In  creating  and  administering  the  AEC's  radioisotope
distribution  program,  physician  investigators  and  other  researchers  placed  a
premium  on  controlling  and  minimizing  risk  in  the  "human  use"  of  radioisotopes.
This  emphasis  on  the  establishment  of  administrative  and  educational  procedures
to  control  risk,  the  details  of  which  are  discussed  in  chapter  6,  embodied  an
essential  principle  of  ethical  research.

The  requirement  for  prior  review  included  in  the  isotope  distribution
program  was,  as  we  have  seen,  also  present  elsewhere.  Even  before  1944,
approval  of  the  secretary  of  the  Navy  was  required  for  research  with  human
subjects.  The  secretary  of  the  Army  required  prior  approval  of  research  related  to
atomic,  biological,  and  chemical  warfare  in  1953.  In  the  Air  Force,  secretarial
approval  of  human  experiments  was  codified  in  1952.  At  NIH,  prior  group
review  was  employed  as  a  policy  from  1953  on.  The  VA,  whose  program
developed  under  the  eye  of  AEC  experts  and  advisers,  relied  on  local  isotope
committees.

The  Nature  of  the  Subjects

While  voluntary  consent  was  acknowledged  as  a  condition  of  human
research  by  some  government  agencies  well  before  1944,  it  was  not  as  broadly
applied  as  it  is  today.  Requirements  of  voluntary  consent  were  asserted  most
clearly  and  consistently  where  the  subjects  were  healthy.  As  a  practical  matter,
healthy  subjects  are  not  likely  to  participate  in  experiments  without  specific
request,  and  as  a  legal  matter  the  invasion  of  a  person's  body  in  the  absence  of  a
prior  relationship  that  might  justify  it  has  long  been  unacceptable.  Still  more
important,  the  arbitrary  use  of  people  in  experiments  is  incompatible  with  respect
for  human  dignity.


116


Chapter  1

The  use  of  patients  in  medical  research  appeared  in  a  different  historical
context  from  that  of  healthy  subjects,  and  the  agencies  appear  to  have  responded
accordingly.  From  the  perspective  of  the  medical  profession,  the  age-old  tradition
of  the  doctor-patient  relationship,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  next  chapter,  provided  a
justification  for  research  with  the  potential  to  benefit  patients,  but  not,  of  course,
for  healthy  subjects  who  were  not  under  medical  care.  There  is  little  evidence
that  the  agencies  questioned  whether  research  with  patients  that  did  not  offer  a
prospect  of  benefit  warranted  a  different  response.  An  exception  is  the  position
articulated  by  the  AEC's  general  manager  in  1947,  which  made  the  possibility  of
benefit  to  the  patient-subject  a  condition  of  permissible  research,  at  least  where
the  research  involved  "poisonous  or  harmful"  substances.  However,  there  is  little
indication  that  this  provision  was  ever  implemented.

The  period  we  reviewed  in  this  chapter  led  to  considerable  public  disquiet
about  the  use  of  healthy  subjects  and  about  the  use  of  ill  and  institutionalized
people  in  research  from  which  they  could  not  possibly  benefit.  It  was  this
disquiet,  in  the  wake  of  several  well-publicized  incidents,  that  formed  the  basis  of
the  mid-1960s  reforms  of  federal  policy  governing  research  with  human  subjects
(see  chapter  3).  The  focus  on  the  way  that  patient-subjects  were  used  in  clinical
research  that  offered  some  prospect  of  benefit,  and  particularly  on  consent  issues,
came  much  later.  The  latter  discussion  is  one  that  continues  today,  as  is  evident
from  the  Advisory  Committee's  work  on  current  research  regulation  that  is
described  in  part  III.

The  Degree  of  Risk

To  the  extent  that  there  was  discussion  in  the  1940s  and  the  1950s  of
consent  for  patient-subjects,  it  seemed  to  arise  mainly  in  circumstances  in  which
those  who  were  ill  would  be  put  at  unusual  risk  from  the  research.

As  we  have  seen,  the  AEC's  radioisotope  distribution  division  concluded
that  consent  was  required  where  patients  were  being  subjected  to  "larger  doses  for
investigative  purposes"  that  apparently  posed  unusually  hazardous  or  unknown
risks.  Similarly,  from  its  establishment  at  midcentury,  the  AEC's  hospital  at  Oak
Ridge,  which  focused  on  new  and  potentially  risky  experimental  cancer  treatment,
did  have  routine  requirements  for  consent.  Likewise,  from  its  1953  birth,  the
NIH's  Clinical  Center  established  a  policy  that  recognized  that  patient  choice  was
important  for  all  kinds  of  research  with  patients,  and  written  consent  was  required
when  an  experiment  involved' an  unusual  hazard.

Formal  Policies  and  Public  Morality

It  is  important  not  to  get  lost  in  the  details  of  the  various  documents  we
have  cited  in  this  chapter.  What  is  most  significant  about  the  discussions  that
took  place  in  federal  agencies  from  the  mid- 1940s  through  the  1950s  is  the  fact

117


Part  I

that  so  many  of  the  ideas  and  values  with  which  we  are  familiar  were  apparent
then.  That  does  not  mean  that  the  same  words  were  used  or  that  when  they  were
used  they  had  the  same  meaning  as  they  do  for  us  today.  But  it  does  mean  that
there  were  certainly  more  or  less  rough  ideas  about  voluntary  consent  and
minimization  of  risk.  As  we  have  seen  in  this  chapter,  these  ideas  were  very
much  in  play  in  the  culture  of  the  time.


118


ENDNOTES


1.  The  "Common  Rule"  applies  requirements  for  voluntary  consent,  prior
review,  and  risk  analysis  to  all  federally  sponsored  research.  This  rule  is  discussed  in
chapter  14.

2.  David  Rothman,  Strangers  at  the  Bedside:  A  History  of  How  Law  and
Bioethics  Transformed  Medical  Decision  Making  (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1991),  and
Ruth  Faden  and  Tom  Beauchamp,  A  History  and  Theoiy  of  Informed  Consent  (New
York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1986).

3.  George  J.  Annas  and  Michael  A.  Grodin,  eds..  The  Nazi  Doctors  and  the
Nuremberg  Code;  Human  Rights  in  Human  Experimentation  (New  York:  Oxford
University  Press,  1992).  343-345.

4.  See  Faden  and  Beauchamp,  A  Histoiy  and  Theory  of  Informed  Consent,  and
Mark  S.  Frankel,  "Public  Policymaking  for  Biomedical  Research:  The  Case  of  Human
Experimentation"  (Ph.D.  diss.,  George  Washington  University,  9  May  1976).

5.  Stafford  L.  Warren,  Chairman,  Interim  Medical  Advisory  Board  ("Report  of
the  23-24  January  1947  Meeting  of  the  Interim  Medical  Committee  of  the  United  States
Atomic  Energy  Commission")  (ACHRE  No.  UCLA-1 1 1094-A-26).  The  report
summarized  "specific  projects"  at  twelve  institutions.  The  projects  at  the  University  of
Rochester  included  "Study  of  the  Metabolism  of  Plutonium,  polonium,  radium,  etc.  in
human  subjects"  (p.  8).  In  the  case  of  Berkeley,  the  projects  identified  to  Dr.  Stone  were

(1 )  Studies  in  whole-body  radiation  of  human  subjects  by  external  and  internal
radiation.

(2)  Studies  on  the  metabolism  of  radioactive  iodine  in  animals  and  man.

(3)  Joint  studies  with  Dr.  Joseph  G.  Hamilton  to  evaluate  the  therapeutic
applications  '

of  the  fission  products  and  the  fissionable  elements.

(4)  Exploration  and  therapeutic  application  of  other  radioactive  elements  and
compounds  (p.  1 1).

A  14  March  1947  memorandum  from  Austin  Brues,  director  of  the  Biology  Division  of
the  Argonne  National  Laboratory,  records  that  "clinical  testing  programs"  had  only  been
authorized,  at  least  for  the  time  being,  at  Berkeley  and  Rochester.  However,  Brues  urged
that  Argonne  also  be  included.  On  behalf  of  this  request  he  cited  the  University  of
Chicago's  "work  using  human  subjects"  with  specific  reference  to  a  report  on  plutonium
injections.  He  further  noted  that  human  subject  work  also  included  the  Argonne  project
list  provided  at  the  January  meeting.  A.  M.  Brues,  Director,  Biology  Division,  to  N.
Hilberry,  Associate  Laboratory  Director,  14  March  1947  ("Clinical  Testing")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-050195-B).

6.  Stafford  Warren,  Chairman,  Interim  Medical  Advisory  Committee,  to  Carroll
Wilson,  General  Manager,  AEC,  30  January  1947  ("The  opinion  on  Clinical  Testing  .  .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-439),  1.


19


7.  John  L.  Burling,  Deputy  General  Counsel's  Office,  AEC,  to  Edwin
Huddleson,  Jr.,  Deputy  General  Counsel,  AEC,  7  March  1947  ("Clinical  Testing")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-468),  2-3.

8.  Ibid.,  3.

9.  Carroll  L.  Wilson,  General  Manager  of  the  AEC,  to  Stafford  Warren,  the
University  of  California  at  Los  Angeles,  30  April  1947  ("This  is  to  inform  you  that  the
Commission  is  going  ahead  with  its  plans  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-439),  2.

10.  Ibid.

11.  Ibid.

12.  Robert  J.  Buettner,  Assistant  to  Chairman,  Interim  Medical  Advisory
Committee,  AEC,  to  B.  M.  Brundage,  Chief,  Medical  Division,  AEC,  12  May  1947
("Transmitted  herewith  for  your  information  . .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-05 1 094-A-439),
1.

13.  Note  in  medical  chart  of  Cal-3,  dated  18  July  1947  ("Elmer  Allen  chart")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-05 1 094- A-6 1 5).  For  more  information  on  this  case,  see  chapter  5.

14.  Wilson  to  Warren,  30  April  1947.

15.  University  of  California  at  San  Francisco,  February  1995  ("Report  of  the
UCSF  Ad  Hoc  Fact  Finding  Committee  ")  (ACHRE  No.  UCSF-022495-A-6),  27.

16.  J.  C.  Franklin,  Manager,  Oak  Ridge  Operations,  to  Carroll  Wilson,  General
Manager,  AEC,  26  September  1947  ("Medical  Policy")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 13094-B-
3),  2.  Although  the  motivation  for  Oak  Ridge's  inquiry  is  not  entirely  clear,  it  seems  to
have  come  in  part  from  concerns  of  Albert  Holland,  M.D.,  who  became  the  acting
medical  adviser  at  Oak  Ridge  after  Major  Brundage  retired.  Holland  served  on  the
committee  that  oversaw  the  use  of  radioisotopes  in  human  research,  discussed  in  chapter
6.  In  November  1947  Holland  wrote,  in  regard  to  the  isotopes  distribution  program:
"How  far  does  the  AEC's  moral  responsibility  extend  in  this  program?"  Albert  Holland,
Jr.,  Medical  Adviser,  Oak  Ridge,  to  J.  C.  Franklin,  Manager  of  Oak  Ridge  Operations,  7
November  1947  ("Medical  and  Operational  Decisions")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 13095-B-
10),  2.

1 7.  Unknown  author  to  the  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  8
October  1947  ("It  is  the  desire  of  the  Medical  Advisor's  Office  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
05 1094-A-502).

18.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and
Medicine,  minutes  of  1 1  October  1947  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-A-1),  10.

19.  Ibid.

20.  Ibid.

21 .  Carroll  Wilson,  General  Manager,  AEC,  to  Robert  Stone,  University  of
California,  5  November  1947  ("Your  letter  of  September  18  regarding  the
declassification  of  biological  and  medical  papers  was  read  at  the  October  1 1  meeting  of
the  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-052295-A-1).

22.  Carroll  Wilson,  General  Manager,  AEC,  to  Alan  Gregg,  Chairman  of  the
AEC  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  5  November  1947  ("I  want  to
thank  you  for  your  letter  of  October  14  concerning  the  questions  raised  by  Dr.  Stone  in
his  letter  to  me  of  September  18  regarding  declassification  of  biological  and  medical
papers  containing  information  on  the  experimental  use  of  radioisotopes  in  human  beings
conducted  under  AEC  sponsorship.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-052295-A-I).

23.  Salgo  v.  Leland  Stanford  Jr.  University  Board  of  Trustees,  317  P. 2d  170
(1957).


120


24.  Joseph  Volpe,  interview  by  Gregg  Herken,  Dan  Guttman,  and  Debra  Holland
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  6  October  1994  (ACHRE  Research  Project
Series,  Interview  Program  Files,  Targeted  Interview  Project),  24-42.

In  a  May  1995  interview,  Volpe  agreed  that  a  letter  written  by  the  general
manager  constituted  a  "policy."  The  transcript  of  the  interview  records:

Interviewer: .  .  .  today  there  are  regular  procedures  for  getting

something  recognized  as  a  policy,  including  publication
and  so  forth.  In  1947,  when  the  general  manager  writes
a  letter,  is  that  a  policy?

Mr.  Volpe: Yes,  Yes.

Mr.  Volpe  noted  that  while  the  question  of  the  precise  authority  of  the  general  manager
was  not  without  controversy.  Chairman  Lilienthal  "believed  in  delegation  of  authority
and  so  always  took  measures  to  strengthen  the  general  manager's  hand  on  these  things."
Joseph  Volpe,  interview  by  Barbara  Berney,  Steve  Klaidman,  Dan  Guttman,  Lanny
Keller,  Jonathan  Moreno,  Patrick  Fitzgerald,  and  Gilbert  Whittemore  (ACHRE),
transcript  of  audio  recording,  18  May  1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview
Program  Files,  Targeted  Interview  Project),  37-38.

25.  Leslie  M.  Redman,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory,  to  Dr.  Alberto  F.  Thompson,
Chief,  Technical  Information  Service,  DBM,  22  January  1951  ("I  find  myself  concerned
in  the  course  of  duty  with  the  review  of  papers  relating  to  human  experimentation.")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-609).

26.  Warren  did  not  cite  the  context  for  Wilson's  discussion  of  these  conditions,
that  is,  the  need  for  criteria  for  declassification.

27.  Shields  Warren,  Director,  DBM,  to  Leslie  Redman,  "D"  Division,  Los
Alamos  National  Laboratory,  5  March  1951  (".  .  .  to  reply  to  your  letter  of  January  22,
1951,  concerning  policies  on  human  experimentation.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-
603).

28.  Everett  Idris  Evans,  M.D.,  Medical  College  of  Virginia,  to  John  Z.  Bowers,
M.D.,  Assistant  to  the  Director,  DBM,  AEC,  8  April  1948  ("We  have  recently  obtained
approval  from  the  Isotopes  Division  for  human  use  of  P32.  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
051094-A-64).

29.  John  Z.  Bowers,  Assistant  to  Director,  DBM,  AEC,  to  Everett  Idris  Evans,
M.D.,  Medical  College  of  Virginia,  27  April  1948  ("Thank  you  for  recent  letter
requesting  information  regarding  isotopes.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-050194-A-480).

30.  Nathan  H.  Woodruff,  Chief  Technical  Division,  Isotopes  Division,  to  Everett
I.  Evans,  M.D.,  Medical  College  of  Virginia,  14  May  1948  ("Your  letter  of  April  8  to  Dr.
Bowers  has  been  referred  to  me  for  answer.")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-10).

3 1 .  U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and
Medicine,  agenda  of  14  February  1948  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-A),  2.

32.  In  addition  to  the  document  discussed  above,  there  is  some  indication  that
the  AEC  Isotopes  Division  was  charged  with  ensuring  that  consent  was  obtained.  In  the
early  1970s,  when  the  AEC  conducted  an  investigation  into  the  plutonium  experiments.
Shields  Warren  told  the  investigators  that  his  recollection  was  that  ethical  issues  were
addressed  at  the  time  by  the  issuance  of  prospective  policies.  Warren  stated:

I  think  the  way  it  [concern  about  the  plutonium

121


injections]  was  handled  was  that  Alan  Gregg  and  1
agreed  the  best  way  to  do  [it]  was  to  see  that  the  rules
were  properly  drawn  up  by  the  .  .  .  Human  Applications
Isotope  Committee,  which  had  then  come  into  being,  so
that  use  without  full  safeguards  could  not  occur,  and  that
we  saw  no  point  in  bringing  this  up  after  the  fact  as  long
as  we  were  sure  that  nothing  of  this  sort  could  happen  in
the  future.

Shields  Warren,  interview  by  L.  A.  Miazga,  Sidney  Marks,  Walter  Weyzen  (AEC),
transcript  of  audio  recording,  9  April  1974,  10-11  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-14).

33.  Unknown  author,  unpublished  draft,  29  March  1948  ("The  Experimental
Use  of  Radioactive  Materials  in  Human  Subjects  at  AEC  Establishments")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-050194-A-267).

34.  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications,  minutes  of  22-23  March  1948,  as
discussed  in  the  minutes  of  the  13  March  1949  meeting.  S.  Allan  Lough,  Chief,
Radioisotopes  Branch,  to  H.  L.  Friedell,  G.  Failla,  J.  G.  Hamilton,  and  A.  H.  Holland,  19
July  1949  ("Revised  Tentative  Minutes  of  March  13,  1949  Meeting  of  the  Subcommittee
on  Human  Applications  of  Committee  of  U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  AEC
Building,  Washington,  DC")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-101 194-A-13),  5.

35.  The  subcommittee  was  not  definitive  about  when  larger  doses  were
permitted,  however.  The  policy  was  to  apply  in  "instances  in  which  the  disease  from
which  a  patient  is  suffering  permits  the  administration  of  larger  doses  for  investigative
purposes."  U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Isotopes  Division,  September  1949
("Supplement  No.  1  to  Catalogue  and  Price  List  No.  3,  July  1949")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
122794-A-l),  3-4.

36.  While  these  statements  were  perhaps  more  than  was  told  to  patient-subjects
in  other  institutions,  they  did  not  necessarily  provide  details  about  the  research.  In  the
application  for  admission,  the  applicant  agreed  to  "such  operations  and  biopsies  as  are
deemed  necessary  and  advisable  by  the  hospital."  Oak  Ridge  Institute  of  Nuclear
Studies,  1950  ("Application  for  Admission  to  the  Medical  Division  Hospital")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-121494-C-1),  1.

Upon  admission,  the  applicant  was  required  to  sign  a  "Waiver  and  Release"  that
did  not  describe  the  treatment,  but  included  a  lengthy  release  from  the  patient,  the
patient's  "heirs,  executors,  administrators,  and  assigns,"  for  any  "causes  of  action,  claims,
demands,  damages,  loss,  costs,  and  expenses,  whether  direct  or  consequential,"  associated
with  or  resulting  from  the  care  of  the  hospital. This  form  notes  that  the  hospital  has
described  the  "character  and  kind  of  treatment."  Oak  Ridge  Institute  of  Nuclear  Studies,
1950  ("Waiver  and  Release")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121494-C-3),  1.

37.  Oak  Ridge  Institute  for  Nuclear  Studies,  1950  ("Waiver  and  Release")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-121494-C-3).

38.  Program  Committee  of  the  Division  of  Biological  and  Medical  Research  of
the  Argonne  National  Laboratory,  minutes  of  22  January  1951  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
051095-B),  3.

39.  Thomas  Shipman,  M.D.,  Health  Division  Leader,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory,
AEC,  to  Dr.  Charles  Dunham,  Director,  DBM,  AEC,  18  June  1956  ("Two  questions  have
recently  arisen— one  of  them  specific,  the  other  general— wherein  we  need  an  opinion
from  you.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-091994-B-1).


122


40.  Charles  Dunham,  Director,  DBM,  AEC,  to  Thomas  Shipman,  Health
Division  Leader,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory,  5  July  1956  ("This  is  in  response  to  your  letter
of  June  18.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-091994-B-2).  In  addition  to  consent,  Dunham  indicated
that  the  research  should  proceed  so  long  as  (a)  the  doses  were  small,  "true  tracer  doses";
(b)  the  proposal  was  approved  by  a  senior  medical  officer;  and  (c)  the  work  was
supervised  by  a  licensed  physician.

41.  T.  L.  Shipman,  Health  Division  Leader,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory,  to  Staff
Distribution,  12  July  1956  ("Administration  of  Tracer  Doses  to  Humans")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-091994-B-3),  1.  Also,  T.  L.  Shipman,  Health  Division  Leader,  Los  Alamos
Laboratory,  to  "Distribution,"  3  September  1963  ("Administration  of  Tracer  Doses  to
Humans  For  Experimental  Purposes")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-091994-B-4),  1.

42.  Isotopes  Extension,  Division  of  Civilian  Application,  U.S.  AEC,  "The
Medical  Uses  of  Radioisotopes,  Recommendations  and  Requirements  of  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission"  (Oak  Ridge,  Tenn.:  AEC,  Februaiy  1956),  15.

43.  U.S.  Department  of  the  Army,  AR  40-210,  The  Prevention  of  Communicable
Diseases  of  Man— General  (21  April  1925).

44.  Charles  W.  Shilling,  Medical  Corps,  USN.  Retired,  undated  paper  ("History
of  the  Research  Division,  Bureau  of  Medicine  and  Surgery,  USN")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
080295-A),  74.

45.  The  Secretary  of  the  Navy  to  All  Ships  and  Stations,  7  April  1943
("Unauthorized  Medical  Experimentation  on  Service  Personnel")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
091494-A-2).

46.  J.  E.  Moore,  M.D.,  to  Dr.  A.  N.  Richards,  excerpt  of  letter  dated  6  October
1942  ("I  have  recently  received  an  inquiry  from  Dr.  Charles  M.  Carpenter  of  the
University  of  Rochester  School  of  Medicine  who  believes  that  he  may  be  able  to  work
out  a  human  experiment  on  the  chemical  prophylaxis  of  gonorrhea.")  (ACHRE  No.
NARA-060794-A-1).

47.  A.  N.  Richards  to  J.  E.  Moore,  31  October  1942  ("  Revision  of  Dr.  Richards'
letter  of  October  9,  1942")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-060794-A-1 ).  Stafford  Warren,  the
Manhattan  Project  medical  director,  also  came  from  the  University  of  Rochester.  It  is  not
clear  how,  if  at  all,  the  CMR's  views  on  human  experiments  were  accounted  for  in
Manhattan  Project  research.

48.  Rothman,  Strangers  at  the  Bedside,  30-50.

49.  The  Chief  of  the  Bureau  of  Medicine  and  Surgery  to  the  Officer-in-Charge,
Naval  Laboratory  Research  Unit  No.  1,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  California,  6
March  1943  ("Proposed  Clinical  Evaluation  of  Influenza  Antiserum,  and  Messages
concerning  Influenza  Virus  Specimens")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-062194-C-1).

50.  Ibid.,  2.

51.  Institute  of  Medicine,  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  Veterans  at  Risk:  The
Health  Effects  of  Mustard  Gas  and  Lewisite  (Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy
Press,  1993),  66-69.

52.  Ibid.,  214.

53.  Robert  S.  Stone,  unpublished  paper,  "Irradiation  of  Human  Subjects  as  a
Medical  Experiment,"  31  January  1950  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-070794-A).

54.  American  Medical  Association,  Judicial  Council,  "Supplementary  Report  of
the  Judicial  Council,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  132  (1946):  1090.

55.  The  Under  Secretary  of  the  Navy  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  24  April  1950
("Recommendation  that  the  Armed  Service  conduct  experiments  on  human  subjects  to


123


determine  effects  of  radiation  exposure")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-070794-A).

56.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and
Medicine,  transcript  (partial)  of  meeting,  10  November  1950  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-0 12795-
C-l),  28.

57.  Ibid.,  28-29.

58.  J.  G.  Hamilton,  University  of  California,  to  Shields  Warren,  DBM,  AEC,  28
November  1950  ("Unfortunately,  it  will  not  be  possible  for  me  to  be  at  the  meeting  on
December  8  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-45),  1.

59.  Ibid.

60.  Adam  J.  Rapalski,  Administrator,  the  Armed  Forces  Epidemiological  Board,
DOD,  to  Chief,  Legal  Office,  5  January  1952  ("Draft  of  'Agreement  with  Volunteer'")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-040895-A).

61.  Lieutenant  Colonel  Robert  J.  O'Connor,  Chief,  Legal  Officer,  JAGD,  to
Colonel  Frank  L.  Baier,  Army  Medical  Research  and  Development,  23  October  1947
("Protection  of  Research  Project  Volunteers")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-012395-A-4).

62.  John  R.  Paul,  Director,  AEB,  DOD,  to  Dr.  Joseph  Stokes,  Jr.,  Children's
Hospital,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania,  18  February  1948  ("This  is  in  reply  to  your  hand
written  request  for  a  comment  [from]  me  re  your  letter  to  Dr.  Macleod  dated  1 1  February
on  the  subject  of  funds  for  the  reimbursement  of  volunteer  prisoners  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
NARA-012395-A-1).

63.  Ibid.

64.  Committee  Appointed  by  Governor  Dwight  H.  Green  of  Illinois,  "Ethics
Governing  the  Service  of  Prisoners  As  Subjects  In  Medical  Experiments,"  Journal  of  the
American  Medical  Association  136,  no.  7  (1948):  457-458.

65.  C.  J.  Watson,  M.D.,  Commission  on  Liver  Disease,  Army  Epidemiological
Board,  to  Colin  MacLeod,  President  of  the  Board,  AEB,  5  April  1948  ("I  have  given
considerations  in  the  past  few  weeks  to  the  matter  of  using  volunteers  in  penal
institutions  for  experimentation  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-012395-A-2).

66.  Ibid.

67.  "Prisoner  Dies  After  Injection  in  Disease  Study,"  Washington  Post,  6  May
1952,3.

68.  L.  M.  Harff,  Contract  Insurance  Branch,  to  File,  25  April  1952  ("Research
and  Development  Contracts-Medical  Investigations)  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-012295-A).

69.  Adam  J.  Rapalski,  Administrator,  AEB,  to  Chief  Legal  Office,  14  October
1952  ("Applicability  of  Section  5,  Public  Law  557-82d  Congress")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-
012395-A).

70.  Adam  J.  Rapalski,  Administrator,  AEB,  to  Members  of  the  AEB,  undated
memorandum  ("Applicability  of  Section  5,  Public  Law  557-82nd  Congress")  (ACHRE
No.  NARA-012395-A).  In  congressional  hearings,  the  activities  used  to  illustrate  the
purpose  of  the  indemnification  provision  included  test  piloting,  damage  that  might  be
caused  by  cloud  modification  research,  and  cataracts  caused  by  the  operation  of  a
cyclotron.  In  addition,  however,  biomedical  human  experimentation  was  specifically
addressed  in  the  following  exchange  between  Representative  Edward  Hebert  and  Colonel
W.  S.  Triplet,  from  the  Army  Research  and  Development  Division:

Mr.  Hebert.  Colonel,  would  you  expand  on  the  proposal  to  make
the  Government  liable  for  losses  and  damages?  .  .  .


124


Colonel  Triplet.  There  have  been  some  experiments  or  types  of
research  in  the  past  which  would  have  come  under  section  5  [the
indemnification  provision].  There  are  more  coming  up  in  the
future.  One  of  the  early  cases,  long  before  the  time  of  the  bill,  I
would  cite  as  an  example  is  Dr.  Reed  in  Cuba  in  1900  utilized
the  services  of  21  volunteers  to  study  yellow  fever,  an  extremely
dangerous  experiment.  Two  of  these  volunteers  died.  Eighteen
of  the  others  became  seriously  ill.  As  a  result  a  special  medal
was  awarded  these  people  by  Congress.  That  is  an  example  of
the  type  of  experiment  that  at  the  present  time  is  going  on  in  the
medical  service.
Subcommittee  Hearings  on  H.  R.  1 1 80  to  Facilitate  the  Performance  of  Research  and
Development  Work  by  and  on  Behalf  of  the  Departments  of  the  Army,  the  Navy,  and  the
Air  Force,  and  for  Other  Purposes;  House  of  Representatives,  Committee  on  Armed
Services,  Subcommittee  no.  3,  6  June  1952,  621  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-10495-D).

71.  Colonel  George  V.  Underwood,  Director,  Executive  Office,  Office  of  the
Secretary  of  Defense,  to  Mr.  Kyes,  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense,  5  February  1953  ("Use
of  Human  Volunteers  in  Experimental  Research")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-062194-A).

72.  Melvin  Casberg,  Chairman,  AFMPC,  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  24
December  1952  ("Human  Volunteers  in  Experimental  Research")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-
101294-A-3).

73.  Ibid.

74.  Jackson  recommended  changes  to  the  Nuremberg  Code:  the  elimination  of
the  Nuremberg  Code  exception  for  self-experimentation  by  physicians  and  the  express
provision  that  prisoners,  but  not  prisoners  of  war,  could  be  used.  We  do  not  know  what
Jackson  had  "previously  submitted."  See  Stephen  Jackson,  Assistant  General  Counsel  in
the  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense  and  Counsel  for  the  AFMPC,  to  Melvin  Casberg,
undated  memorandum  ("The  standards  and  requirements  to  be  followed  in  human
experimentation")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-101294-A-3).

75.  Ms.  Rosenberg,  a  high-ranking  official  in  the  DOD,  was  an  expert  in  labor
relations  and  a  New  Dealer.  Her  role  was  recorded  in  Stephen  Jackson  to  Melvin
Casberg,  Chairman,  AFMPC,  22  October  1952  ("I  discussed  the  attached  with  Mrs.
Rosenberg  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-101294-A-3).

76.  Colonel  Adam  J.  Rapalski,  Administrator,  Armed  Forces  Epidemiological
Board,  DOD,  to  Colin  MacCleod,  President,  Armed  Forces  Epidemiological  Board,
DOD,  2  March  1953  ("The  attached  copy  of  letter  I  believe  is  self-explanatory.")
(ACHRE  No.  NARA-012395-A-5).

77.  F.  Lloyd  Mussells,  Executive  Director,  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences,
RDB,  DOD,  to  Floyd  L.  Miller,  Vice  Chairman,  Research  and  Development  Board,
DOD,  12  November  1952  ("Human  Experimentation")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-071 194-A-
2).

78.  Ibid.

79.  In  a  10  November  1952  meeting  the  Committee  on  Chemical  Warfare  was
read  a  draft  of  the  AFMPC  policy.  One  member  remarked  to  general  laughter:  "If  they
can  get  any  volunteers  after  that  I'm  all  in  favor  of  it."  Committee  on  Chemical  Warfare,
RDB,  DOD,  transcript  of  the  meeting  of  10  November  1952  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-
102594-A),  128.  H.  N.  Worthley,  Executive  Director,  Committee  on  Chemical  Warfare,
RDB,  DOD,  to  the  Director  of  Administration,  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  9


125


December  1952  ("Use  of  Volunteers  in  Experimental  Research")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-
101 294- A),  1.

80.  This,  at  least,  was  the  1994  recollection  of  Lovett's  military  assistant.
General  Carey  Randall,  who  served  in  the  same  role  for  Lovett's  predecessor  and
successor.  General  Carey  Randall,  interview  by  Lanny  Keller  (ACHRE),  transcript  of
audio  recording,  20  September  1994  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview
Program  File,  Targeted  Interview  Project),  17.

81 .  George  V.  Underwood,  Director  of  the  Executive  Office  of  the  Secretary  of
Defense,  to  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  Foster,  4  January  1953  ("I  believe  that  Mr.
Lovett  has  a  considerable  awareness  of  this  proposed  policy.")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-
101294-A-l),  1.

82.  Melvin  A.  Casberg,  Chairman,  Armed  Forces  Medical  Policy  Council,  DOD,
to  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  13  January  1953  ("Digest  'Use  of  Human  Volunteers  in
Experimental  Research"')  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042595-A),  1.

83.  Secretary  of  Defense  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Army,  Secretary  of  the  Navy,
Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  26  February  1953  ("Use  of  Human  Volunteers  in
Experimental  Research")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-082394-A).  The  second  paragraph  of  the
memorandum  stipulates  its  application  to  "Armed  Services  personnel  and/or  civilians  on
duty  at  installations  engaged  in  such  research.  .  .  ."  The  Advisory  Committee  takes  this
stipulation  to  be  in  recognition  of  the  separate  authority  of  the  medical  services,  as
distinct  from  research  and  development  commands.

84.  W.  G.  Lalor.  Secretary,  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff,  to  Chief  of  Staff,  U.S.  Army,
Chief  of  Naval  Operations,  Chief  of  Staff,  U.S.  Air  Force,  3  September  1952  ("Security
Measures  on  Chemical  Warfare  and  Biological  Warfare")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-0 12495-
A-l).

85.  Irving  L.  Branch,  Colonel,  USAF,  Acting  Chief  of  Staff,  to  the  Assistant
Secretary  of  Defense  (Health  and  Medicine),  3  March  1954  ("Status  of  Human
Volunteers  in  Bio-medical  Experimentation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-090994-C),  2.

86.  Ibid..  3.

87.  Ibid.

88.  Brigadier  General  John  C.  Oakes,  GS,  Secretary  of  the  General  Staff,
Department  of  the  Army,  to  the  Chief  Chemical  Officer  and  the  Surgeon  General,  30
June  1953  ("CS:385-Use  of  Volunteers  in  Research")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-022295-B-1)
(CS385).  This  document  was  originally  classified  as  Top  Secret  then  downgraded  to
Confidential  and  declassified  in  June  1954.  "Research  Report  Concerning  the  Use  of
Volunteers  in  Chemical  Agent  Research."  Inspector  General  and  Auditor  General,  1975
(Army  IG  report),  77.

89.  Oakes,  sec.  3(a).

90.  A  series  of  memorandums  from  the  Office  of  the  Judge  Advocate  General
preceded  and  shed  light  on  the  30  June  1953  memorandum:

Colonel  Robert  H.  McCaw,  JAGC,  Chief,  Military  Affairs  Division,  to  the  Chief,
Research  and  Development,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Staff,  6  April  1953  ("Volunteers  for
Biological  Warfare  Research")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-082294-B).

Colonel  Robert  H.  McCaw,  JAGC,  Chief,  Military  Affairs  Division,  to  the  Chief,
Research  and  Development,  Office  of  the  Chief  of  Staff,  10  April  1953  ("Volunteers  for
Biological  Warfare  Research")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-082294-B).


126


Colonel  A.  W.  Betts,  GS,  Executive  for  the  Chief  of  Research  and  Development,  to
Mr.  J.  N.  Davis,  Office  of  the  Under  Secretary  of  the  Army,  15  April  1953  ("Use  of
Volunteers  in  Experimental  Research")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-082294-B).

91.  CS:385,  sec.  3(d).

92.  Army  Office  of  the  Surgeon  General,  12  March  1954  ("Use  of  Volunteers  in
Medical  Research,  Principles,  Policies,  and  Rules  of  the  Office  of  the  Surgeon  General")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-1 20694- A-4).

93.  Ibid.,  1 .  A  copy  of  this  document  was  found  in  the  files  of  John  Enders,
Ph.D.,  Nobel  Laureate  in  Medicine  and  Physiology,  1954,  Yale  University.

94.  Ibid.

95.  John  Fox,  M.D.,  Professor  of  Epidemiology,  Tulane  University  School  of
Medicine,  to  Captain  R.  W.  Babione,  Executive  Secretary,  AFEB,  27  June  1956  ("Finally
I  am  able  to  complete  and  send  to  you  the  application  for  a  research  contract  to  study  .  .  .
")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-012395-A).

96.  Ibid.

97.  W.  McD.  Hammon,  M.D.,  Director,  Commission  on  Viral  Infections,  AFEB,
to  John  Enders,  Children's  Medical  Center,  20  November  1958  ("This  is  to  confirm  our
telephone  call  this  morning,  November  20th,  regarding  approval  of  the  AFEB  for  the
protocol  of  the  experiment  which  you  propose  to  carry  out .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-
032495-B),  1.

98.  Max  H.  Brown,  Contracting  Officer,  to  Vice  Chancellor,  Schools  of  the
Health  Professions,  University  of  Pittsburgh,  12  March  1957  ("This  is  in  reply  to  letter .  .
.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD  NARA-012395-A-6)  The  DOD  has  not  located  the  Pittsburgh
contract  itself,  which  may  have  been  long  since  routinely  destroyed;  therefore,  it  cannot
be  said  for  certain  that  the  1 954  surgeon  general  provisions  were  made  a  contract
requirement.

99.  Herbert  L.  Ley  to  Colonel  Howie,  8  January  1969  ("Review  of  Department
of  the  Army  Policy  on  Use  of  Human  Subjects  in  Research")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
063094-A).

100.  Max  H.  Brown  to  Contracting  Officer,  OTSG,  5  August  1957  ("The  Use  of
Human  Test  Subjects  in  Medical  Research  Supported  by  the  Office  of  the  Surgeon
General")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-012395-A).

101.  Donald  L.  Howie,  Assistant  Chief,  Medical  Research,  10  July  1962
("Memorandum  for  the  Record,  Use  of  Volunteers  for  Army  Medical  Research")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-1 20694- A-3).  It  is  worth  noting  that  prior  to  this  memorandum,  in
March  1 962,  the  Army  promulgated  its  first  regulation  specifically  directed  to  the
conduct  of  clinical  research.  This  regulation  (AR  70-25,  26  March  1962)  specifically
exempted  "clinical  research,"  which  apparently  included  research  conducted  on  patients.
See  chapter  3.

102.  Army  IG  report,  1975.

103.  Department  of  the  Navy,  Bureau  of  Medicine  and  Surgery,  "Manual  of  the
Medical  Department,"  sec.  IV,  research  article  1-17  (26  September  1951).

104.  On  the  question  of  written  documentation,  interestingly,  the  manual
stipulated:  "[Vjolunteers"  should  not  "execute  a  release  for  future  liability  for  negligence
attributable  to  the  Navy,"  but  the  manual  required  that  a  statement  be  "entered  into  the
Individual's  Health  Record"  indicating  the  project  number  and  the  physical  and
psychological  effects,  or  lack  of  same,  resulting  from  the  investigation.  "Manual  of  the
Medical  Department,"  sec.  IV,  art.  1-17.


127


105.  Ibid.

106.  Loren  B.  Poush,  Code  1 1,  USN,  to  Code  74,  USN  (Bureau  of  Medicine  and
Surgery),  18  October  1951 ("Legal  comments  relative  to  proposed  means  of  proper
authorization  and  safeguard  in  use  of  radioisotopes")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-070794-A-4).

107.  Code  74,  USN,  to  Code  1 1,  USN,  18  September  1951  ("Proposed  Means
of  Proper  Authorization  and  Use  of  Radioisotopes")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-070794-A-4)
2.

108.  Paul  O.  Wells,  Chief,  Radiological  Service,  Letterman  Army  Hospital,  to
Elmer  A.  Lodmell,  Chief,  Radiological  Service,  Walter  Reed  Army  Hospital,  14  January
1955  ("I  am  writing  this  letter  at  the  suggestion  of  General  Gillespie  after  having
discussed  with  him  the  matter  of  requiring  patients  to  sign  a  permit  for  radioisotope
therapy.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-012295-A).

109.  Standard  Form  522  (SF-522),  "Clinical  Record-Authorization  for
Administration  of  Anesthesia  and  Performance  of  Operations  and  Other  Procedures,"  was
proposed  for  use  "in  those  instances  when  authorization  for  administration  of
radioisotope  therapy  is  desired."  Eugene  L.  Hamilton,  Chief,  Medical  Statistics  Division,
to  the  Chiefs  of  the  Medical  Plans  and  Operations  Division  and  the  Legal  Office,  3
August  1955  ("Permit  for  Radioisotope  Therapy")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-012295-A).

In  response  to  an  inquiry  from  Walter  Reed  Army  Hospital  concerning  the  use  of
consent  forms  for  patients,  the  Medical  Statistics  Division,  recommending  the  use  of  SF-
522,  indicated  that  consent  should  be  obtained  when  a  procedure  "carries  an  unusual
risk."  Additionally,  the  Medical  Statistics  Division  recommended  that  patients  should  be
"counselled  as  to  the  nature,  expected  results  of,  and  risks  involved  in  procedures."
Eugene  L.  Hamilton,  Chief,  Medical  Statistics  Division,  to  the  Chiefs  of  the  Professional
Division,  Medical  Plans  and  Operations  Division,  and  the  Legal  Office,  undated
memorandum  (probably  November  1956)  ("Forms  for  Authorization  of  Radiation
Therapy")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-012295-A).

110.  U.S.  Air  Force,  Research  and  Development,  "Clinical  Research,"  AFR  80-
22(11  July  1952).

111.  The  Deputy  Commander  for  Research  and  Development  of  the  Air  Force
R&D  Command  to  RADC,  WADC,  APGC,  AFCRC,  AFSWC,  AFMTC,  AFMDC,
AFFTC,  AFBMD  (ARDC),  AFOSR,  12  September  1958  ("Conduct  of  Hazardous
Human  Experiments")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-090794-A).

112.  Richard  R.  Taylor,  Surgeon  General  of  the  Department  of  the  Army,
testimony  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Administrative  Practice  and  Procedure  of  the
Judiciary  Committee  and  the  Subcommittee  on  Health  of  the  Labor  and  Public  Welfare
Committee,  U.S.  Senate,  94th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  10  September  1975  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
063094-A),  1.

See  also,  U.S.  Army  Inspector  General,  Use  of  Volunteers  in  Chemical  Agent
Research  (Washington  D.C.:  GPO,  1975),  77.

1 13.  Charles  V.  Kidd,  Director,  Research  and  Planning  Division,  NIH,  to  Rear
Admiral  Winfred  Dana,  Medical  Corps,  USN,  30  April  1952  ("In  accordance  with  our
telephone  conversation  of  this  afternoon  I  am  enclosing  a  copy  of  draft  statement  which
we  have  developed.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-1 1 1594-A),  2-3.  The  context  of  this  statement
is  not  known.  Perhaps  it  was  formulated  in  response  to  an  inquiry  from  the  DOD  about
the  NIH's  research  requirements  during  the  discussions  that  led  to  the  drafting  of  the
Wilson  memorandum.


128


1 14.  National  Institutes  of  Health,  17  November  1953  ("Group  Consideration  of
Clinical  Research  Procedures  Deviating  from  Accepted  Medical  Practice  or  Involving
Unusual  Hazard")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-090794-A),  4.

115.  Director,  N1H,  to  Institute  Directors,  15  November  1954  ("Participation  by
NIH  Employees  as  Normal  Controls  in  Clinical  Research  Projects")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-
090794-A),  1.  Although  this  memorandum  referred  only  to  NIH  employees,  Advisory
Committee' staff  and  NIH  staff  have  concluded  it  applied  to  all  healthy  volunteer  subjects.

116.  National  Institutes  of  Health,  policy  statement  of  17  November  1953
("Group  Consideration  of  Clinical  Research  Procedures  Deviating  From  Accepted
Medical  Practice  Or  Involving  Unusual  Hazard")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-090794-A).

117.  Edward  J.  Rourke,  Legal  Adviser,  NIH,  to  Mr.  John  A.  Trautman,  Director,
Clinical  Center,  5  December  1952  ("At  your  invitation,  I  presented  to  the  Medical  Board
of  the  Clinical  Center  on  December  2  a  proposal  that,  in  view  of  several  factors  in  some
degree  peculiar  to  the  Clinical  Center,  it  would  be  advisable  from  the  legal  point  of  view
among  others  to  accept  certain  procedures  relating  to  patient  admission  that  are  more
formal  than  might  otherwise  be  considered  necessary")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-1 1 1 594- A),
1.

118.  Ibid.

119.  For  a  more  detailed  review  of  this  history  see  Faden  and  Beauchamp,  A
Histoiy  and  Theoiy  of  Informed  Consent,  and  Frankel,  "Public  Policymaking  for
Biomedical  Research:  The  Case  of  Human  Experimentation."

120.  George  M.  Lyon,  M.D.,  Assistant  Chief  Medical  Director  for  Research  and
Education,  presentation  to  the  Committee  on  Veterans  Medical  Problems,  National
Research  Council,  8  December  1952  ("Appendix  II,  Medical  Research  Programs  of  the
Veterans  Administration")  (ACHRE  No.  VA-052595-A).

121.  Ibid.,  558.

122.  Guy  H.  Birdsall,  General  Counsel,  Veterans  Administration,  to  Chief
Medical  Director,  25  June  1958,  ("Op.  G.C.  28-58,  Legal  Aspects  of  Medical  Research")
(ACHRE  No.  VA-052595-A).


129


Postwar  Professional

Standards  and  Practices  for

Human  Experiments


In  chapter  1,  we  explored  government  discussions  of  research  involving
human  subjects  in  the  1940s  and  1950s.  We  found  that,  at  several  junctures,
government  officials  exhibited  an  awareness  of  the  Nuremberg  Code,  the  product
of  an  international  war  crimes  tribunal  in  1947.  If  a  requirement  of  voluntary
consent  of  the  subject  was  endorsed  by  the  Nuremberg  judges  and  was  recognized
at  the  highest  reaches  of  the  new  Cold  War  bureaucracy,  then  how,  a  citizen
might  now  ask,  could  there  be  any  question  about  the  use  of  this  standard  to  judge
experiments  conducted  during  this  time  in  the  United  States?  And  yet  precisely
this  question  has  been  raised  in  connection  with  human  radiation  experiments.
Did  American  medical  scientists  routinely  obtain  consent  from  their  subjects  in
the  1940s  and  1950s,  including  those  who  were  patients,  and  if  not,  how  did  these
scientists  square  their  conduct  with  the  demands  of  the  Nuremberg  Code?

This  chapter  describes  the  Advisory  Committee's  efforts  to  answer  these
questions  and  what  we  learned.  We  begin  with  an  examination  of  what,  in  fact,
was  argued  at  Nuremberg.  We  focus  particularly  on  the  testimony  of  Andrew
Ivy,  the  American  Medical  Association's  (AMA)  official  consultant  to  the
Nuremberg  prosecutors,  and  on  the  AMA's  response  to  the  report  Dr.  Ivy
prepared  about  the  trial  for  the  organization.

We  turn  next  to  an  analysis  of  the  actual  practices  of  American  medical
scientists  during  this  period.  In  addition  to  reviewing  contemporary
documentation  and  present-day  scholarship,  the  Advisory  Committee  conducted


130


Chapter  2

interviews  with  leading  medical  scientists  and  physicians  who  were  engaged  in
research  with  human  subjects  in  the  1940s  and  1950s.  These  sources  suggest  a
different,  more  nuanced  picture  of  the  principles  and  practices  of  human  research
than  that  presented  at  Nuremberg.

Of  particular  importance  in  this  picture  are  the  practical  and  moral
distinctions  that  many  researchers  made  between  investigations  with  healthy
subjects  and  those  with  sick  patients.  Those  working  with  healthy  subjects  could
cite  a  tradition  of  consent  that  dated,  at  least,  to  Walter  Reed's  turn-of-the-century
experiments;  those  working  with  sick  patients  were  in  a  clinical  context  that  was
conditioned  by  a  tradition  of  faith  in  the  wisdom  and  beneficence  of  physicians,  a
tradition  that  was  dominant  until  at  least  the  1 970s.  Closely  related  to  these
distinctions  was  the  tension  between  being  a  scientist  and  being  a  physician.  This
tension  confronted  members  of  a  new,  and  rapidly  growing,  breed  of  medical
professionals  in  the  United  States  working  to  make  careers  in  clinical  research.
The  chapter  goes  on  to  explore  whether  these  distinctions  and  tensions  were
reflected  in  the  Nuremberg  Code  and  why  the  trial  may  not  have  had  much  impact
on  the  treatment  of  patient-subjects.

The  rest  of  the  chapter  explores  the  emerging  awareness  of  the  moral
complexities  of  research  at  the  bedside  and  the  limitations  of  the  Nuremberg  Code
to  address  them.  We  close  with  a  brief  discussion  of  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki,
the  international  medical  community's  attempt  to  produce  a  code  of  conduct
compatible  with  the  realities  of  medical  research.

THE  AMERICAN  EXPERT,  THE  AMERICAN  MEDICAL
ASSOCIATION,  AND  THE  NUREMBERG  MEDICAL  TRIAL

In  the  fall  of  1943,  the  United  States,  Great  Britain,  and  the  Soviet  Union
agreed  that,  once  victorious,  they  would  prosecute  individuals  among  the  enemy
who  might  have  violated  international  law  during  the  war.  On  August  8,  1945--
exactly  three  months  after  V.E.  Day  and  two  days  after  the  bombing  of
Hiroshima-representatives  of  the  American,  British,  French,  and  Soviet
governments  officially  established  the  International  Military  Tribunal  in
Nuremberg,  Germany.  An  assemblage  of  Allied  prosecutors  presented  cases
against  twenty-four  high-ranking  German  government  and  military  officials,
including  Hermann  Goering  and  Rudolph  Hess,  before  this  international  panel  of
judges.  Quite  early  in  the  course  of  these  initial  Nuremberg  trials,  which  ran  from
October  1945  to  October  1946,  "it  became  apparent,"  according  to  the  recent
recollections  of  American  prosecutor  Telford  Taylor,  "that  the  evidence  had
disclosed  numerous  important  Nazis,  military  leaders,  and  others"  who  should
also  be  tried.'  In  January  1946,  President  Harry  Truman  approved  a
supplementary  series  of  war  crimes  trials.  These  trials  were  to  take  place  in  the
same  Nuremberg  courtroom,  and  international  law  would  continue  to  be  the


131


Parti

standard  by  which  guilt  or  innocence  would  be  determined.  America's  wartime
allies  would  not,  however,  participate;  responsibility  for  prosecuting  and  judging
defendants  in  the  second  set  of  Nuremberg  trials  was  left  exclusively  to  the
United  States.

The  first  of  twelve  cases  that  would  eventually  make  up  this  second  series
of  trials  in  Nuremberg  is  technically  called  United  States  v.  Karl  Brandt  et  al.
More  popularly,  this  trial  is  known  by  a  variety  of  other  names  such  as  "The
Doctors'  Trial"  and  "The  Medical  Case."  For  the  sake  of  convenience  and
consistency  we  will  refer  to  the  trial  by  another  common  name:  the  Nuremberg
Medical  Trial.  This  case  began  on  December  9,  1946,  when  U.S.  Chief  of
Counsel  for  War  Crimes  Telford  Taylor  delivered  the  prosecution's  opening
statement  against  the  twenty-three  defendants  (twenty  of  whom  were  physicians).
To  one  degree  or  another,  Taylor  charged  the  defendants  with  "murders,  tortures,
and  other  atrocities  committed  in  the  name  of  medical  science."  The  trial  ended  in
late  August  1947  when  the  judges  handed  down  a  ruling  that  included  the  so-
called  Nuremberg  Code  and  seven  death  sentences.2

In  the  spring  of  1946,  the  American  prosecution  team  preparing  for  the
Medical  Trial,  which  was  made  up  of  lawyers  commissioned  in  the  Army,  cabled
Secretary  of  War  Robert  P.  Patterson  with  a  request  for  a  medical  expert.
Patterson  consulted  with  Army  Surgeon  General  Norman  T.  Kirk,  who  suggested
turning  to  the  American  Medical  Association.  Kirk  contacted  the  AMA,  and,
after  some  internal  consultation,  the  association's  Board  of  Trustees  voted  in  May
1946  to  appoint  Dr.  Andrew  C.  Ivy  as  the  AMA's  official  consultant  to  the
Nuremberg  prosecutors.3  Dr.  Ivy  was  one  of  America's  leading  medical
researchers  at  the  time.  Early  in  the  war,  Ivy  was  the  civilian  scientific  director  of
the  Naval  Medical  Research  Institute  in  Bethesda,  Maryland.4  During  the
summer  of  1946,  he  was  in  the  process  of  moving  from  a  position  as  head  of  the
Division  of  Physiology  and  Pharmacology  at  Northwestern  University  Medical
School  to  the  University  of  Illinois,  where  he  would  serve  as  a  vice  president  with
responsibility  for  the  university's  professional  schools  in  Chicago.

The  precise  rationale  behind  Ivy's  selection  as  the  AMA's  adviser  to  the
Nuremberg  prosecutors  remains  unclear,  but  it  is  likely  that  the  AMA  turned  to
Ivy  for  at  least  two  reasons.  First,  his  wartime  research  interests  corresponded  in
topic,  though  not  in  style,  to  some  of  the  most  shocking  experiments  that  had
taken  place  in  the  Nazi  concentration  camps.  Ivy  supervised  and  carried  out
experiments  in  seawater  desalination,  sometimes  using  human  subjects,  with  the
intent  of  developing  techniques  to  aid  Allied  pilots  and  sailors  lost  at  sea.  He  also
conducted  some  pioneering  human  experiments  in  aviation  medicine  dealing  with
the  physiological  challenges  posed  by  high  altitudes.  These  are  two  of  the  areas
in  which  Nazi  researchers  had  conducted  especially  gruesome  human
experiments.  Second,  Ivy  was  well  known  for  his  energetic  defense  of  animal
experimentation  against  American  antivivisectionists.  For  example,  he  served  for


132


Chapter  2

eight  years  as  the  founding  secretary-treasurer  of  the  National  Society  for  Medical
Research,  an  organization  formed  by  scientists  in  1946  to  ward  off  challenges  to
medical  research  posed  by  antivivisectionists.  It  seems  likely  that  the  AMA
Board  of  Trustees  would  have  recognized  Ivy  as  someone  who  possessed  an
unusual  combination  of  familiarity  with  the  scientific  aspects  of  experiments
carried  out  in  the  concentration  camps  and  broad  understanding  of  the  moral
issues  at  stake  in  medical  research,  whether  the  experimental  subjects  were
animals  or  humans.  Also,  Ivy  was  almost  certainly  perceived  as  someone  who
could  be  trusted  to  look  out  for  the  interests  of  the  American  medical  research
community  during  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial.  The  AMA  Board  of  Trustees
probably  realized  that  the  entire  enterprise  of  medical  research  would,  to  some
degree,  be  on  trial  in  Germany.

In  July  or  early  August  of  1946,  Ivy  went  to  Germany  to  meet  with  the
Nuremberg  prosecution  team.  Ivy  offered  technical  assistance  to  the  lawyers
struggling  with  the  scientific  details  of  the  experiments,  but  he  also  recognized,  as
he  put  it,  that  the  prosecutors  "appeared  somewhat  confused  regarding  the  ethical
and  legal  aspects"  of  human  experimentation.5

After  returning  from  his  initial  trip  to  Europe  in  aid  of  the  Nuremberg
prosecutors,  Ivy  offered  a  preliminary  oral  report  to  the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the
American  Medical  Association  at  the  board's  August  1946  meeting.  After  his
presentation,  the  trustees  asked  Ivy  to  provide  a  written  summary  of  his  findings,
so  that  the  AMA's  Judicial  Council  (a  committee  of  five  whose  duties  included
deliberating  on  matters  of  medical  ethics)  could  "make  a  report  as  to  the  manner
in  which  these  [Nazi]  experiments  [were]  infringements  of  medical  ethics."6

In  mid-September,  Ivy  submitted  a  written  report  to  the  AMA  as  he  had
been  directed.7  At  roughly  the  same  time,  he  also  turned  over  a  copy  of  the
twenty-two-page  typescript  to  the  Nuremberg  prosecution  team.  In  this  piece,  Ivy
laid  out  "the  rules"  of  human  experimentation.  He  stated  without  equivocation
that  these  standards  had  been  "well  established  by  custom,  social  usage  and  the
ethics  of  medical  conduct."  Ivy's  rules  read  as  follows:

1 .  Consent  of  the  human  subject  must  be  obtained.
All  subjects  must  have  been  volunteers  in  the
absence  of  coercion  in  any  form.  Before
volunteering  the  subjects  have  been  informed  of  the
hazards,  if  any.  (In  the  U.S.A.  during  War,  accident
insurance  against  the  remote  chance  of  injury,
disability  and  death  was  provided.  [This  was  not
true  in  all  cases.])

2.  The  experiment  to  be  performed  must  be  so
designed  and  based  on  the  results  of  animal


133


Parti

experimentation  and  a  knowledge  of  the  natural
history  of  the  disease  under  study  that  the
anticipated  results  will  justify  the  performance  of
the  experiment.  That  is,  the  experiment  must  be
such  as  to  yield  results  for  the  good  of  society
unprocurable  by  other  methods  of  study  and  must
not  be  random  and  unnecessary  in  nature.

3.  The  experiment  must  be  conducted

(a)  only  by  scientifically  qualified  persons,  and

(b)  so  as  to  avoid  all  unnecessary  physical  and  mental
suffering  and  injury,  and

(c)  so,  that,  on  the  basis  of  the  results  of  previous
adequate  animal  experimentation,  there  is  no  a  priori
reason  to  believe  that  death  or  disabling  injury  will  occur,
except  in  such  experiments  as  those  on  Yellow  Fever  where
the  experimenters  serve  as  subjects  along  with  non-
scientific  personnel.8

A  comparison  of  these  rules  with  the  Nuremberg  Code,  which  the
Nuremberg  Tribunal  issued  as  part  of  its  judgment  on  August  19,  1947,  reveals
that  the  three  judges  extracted  important  elements  of  clause  1  from  Ivy's  first  rule
and  clauses  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  8  almost  verbatim  from  the  rest  of  Ivy's  formulation.
Significantly,  the  judges  also  reiterated  Ivy's  assertion  that  these  rules  were
already  widely  understood  and  followed  by  medical  researchers.9

It  is  possible  that  the  Nuremberg  judges  never  read  Ivy's  report  directly.
During  his  testimony  at  the  trial,  Ivy  essentially  read  his  set  of  rules  into  the  court
record.10  Also,  the  judges  could  have  gained  exposure  to  Ivy's  thinking  through
two  additional  indirect  sources.  First,  another  medical  expert  who  aided  the
prosecution,  an  American  Army  psychiatrist  named  Leo  Alexander,  submitted  on
April  15,  1947,  a  memorandum  to  the  prosecutors  entitled  "Ethical  and  Non-
Ethical  Experimentation  on  Human  Beings."  In  this  memorandum,  which  would
have  been  passed  to  the  judges,  Alexander  repeated  in  very  similar  language
significant  portions  of  Ivy's  rules  as  outlined  in  the  September  1946  report."
Second,  American  prosecutor  James  McHaney  closely  followed  the  text  of  Ivy's
rules  when  setting  before  the  judges  the  "prerequisites  to  a  permissible  medical
experiment  on  human  beings"  during  the  prosecution's  closing  statement  on  July
14,  1947.12

But  Ivy's  standards  for  human  experimentation  served  as  even  more  than
the  primary  textual  foundation  for  the  Nuremberg  Code;  his  set  of  rules  also
undergirded  the  AMA's  first  formal  statement  on  human  experimentation.  As  the
Board  of  Trustees  had  directed  when  asking  Ivy  to  prepare  his  written  report,  the


134


Chapter  2

finished  document  was  immediately  forwarded  to  the  AMA  Judicial  Council.
The  board  gave  the  Judicial  Council  three  months  to  prepare  a  presentation  for  the
House  of  Delegates,  the  large  policy-making  body  of  the  AMA  that  was
scheduled  to  hold  an  annual  meeting  in  early  December  1946.13  Unfortunately,
records  of  the  Judicial  Council's  consideration  of  Ivy's  report  have  not  survived,
but  published  proceedings  of  the  House  of  Delegates  meeting  reveal  the  results  of
the  council's  deliberations.14  Dr.  E.  R.  Cunniffe,  chair  of  the  Judicial  Council,
summarized  his  panel's  response  to  Ivy's  report  at  an  executive  session  of  the
House  of  Delegates  on  December  10,  1946  (the  day  immediately  following  the
prosecution's  opening  statement  in  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial).  Cunniffe
condemned  the  Nazi  experiments  described  in  Ivy's  report  as  gross  violations  of
standards  that  were  already  inherent  in  the  existing  "Principles  of  Medical  Ethics
of  the  American  Medical  Association,"  which  had  undergone  only  minor  revision
since  the  AMA  adopted  them  in  1847,  the  first  year  of  the  association's  existence.
But  in  recognition  of  the  fact  that  guidelines  for  human  experimentation  were  not
explicitly  laid  out  in  these  "Principles,"  the  Judicial  Council  offered  the  following
distillation  of  Ivy's  rules:

In  order  to  conform  to  the  ethics  of  the  American
Medical  Association,  three  requirements  must  be
satisfied:  (1)  the  voluntary  consent  of  the  person  on
whom  the  experiment  is  to  be  performed  [must  be
obtained];  (2)  the  danger  of  each  experiment  must
be  previously  investigated  by  animal
experimentation,  and  (3)  the  experiment  must  be
performed  under  proper  medical  protection  and
management.15

These  three  rules  became  the  official  policy  of  the  AMA  when  the  House
of  Delegates  voted  its  approval  "section  by  section  and  as  a  whole"  on  the
morning  of  December  1 1,  1946.  The  AMA's  official  governing  body  also  added  a
general  admonition:  "This  House  of  Delegates  condemns  any  other  manner  of
experimentation  on  human  beings  than  that  mentioned  herein."16  It  is  worth
noting  that  in  1946  roughly  70  percent  of  American  physicians  belonged  to  the
AMA.  In  absolute  terms,  126,835  physicians  belonged  to  the  association,  but  it
must  be  acknowledged  that  membership  in  the  national  association  came
automatically  with  membership  in  county  and  state  medical  societies,  which  was
often  necessary  for  professional  privileges  at  local  hospitals.17  Each  member  of
the  AMA  would  have  received  a  regular  subscription  to  the  Journal  of  the
American  Medical  Association,  and  all  of  these  subscribers  would  have  had  an
opportunity  to  read  the  three  rules  for  human  experimentation  approved  by  the
House  of  Delegates.  At  the  same  time,  however,  these  rules  were  not  published


135


Parti

prominently;  they  were  set  in  small  type  along  with  a  variety  of  other
miscellaneous  business  items  in  the  lengthy  published  minutes  of  the  meeting.
Only  an  exceptionally  diligent  member,  or  one  with  a  special  interest  in  medical
ethics,  is  likely  to  have  located  this  item.

In  mid-June  1947,  Ivy  took  the  stand  late  in  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial
as  a  rebuttal  witness  for  the  prosecution  to  counter  the  claims  of  the  defense  that
standards  for  proper  conduct  in  human  experimentation  had  not  been  clearly
established  before  the  initiation  of  the  trial.  The  contents  of  Ivy's  September  1946
report,  and  the  AMA  standards  that  arose  from  it,  played  a  major  role  during  his
three  days  of  testimony.  At  one  point,  prosecution  associate  counsel  Alexander
G.  Hardy  carefully  walked  Ivy  through  a  verbatim  oral  recitation  of  the  rules  for
human  experimentation  contained  in  Ivy's  report  and  the  condensed  version  of  his
rules  as  approved  by  the  AMA.  After  a  reading  of  the  AMA  principles,  Hardy
and  Ivy  had  the  following  exchange:

Q. . . .  Now,  [do  these  rules]  purport  to  be  the  principles
upon  which  all  physicians  and  scientists  guide  themselves
before  they  resort  to  medical  experimentation  on  human
beings  in  the  United  States?

A.  Yes,  they  represent  the  basic  principles  approved  by  the
American  Medical  Association  for  the  use  of  human  beings
as  subjects  in  medical  experiments.18

Hearing  this  specific,  and  obviously  important,  claim  about  research  with
human  subjects  in  the  United  States,  Judge  Harold  E.  Sebring  interjected  with  a
broad  question  about  the  international  significance  of  Ivy's  assertion:  "How  do  the
principles  which  you  have  just  enunciated  comport  with  the  principles  of  the
medical  profession  over  the  civilized  world  generally?"  Ivy  responded:  "They
are  identical,  according  to  my  information."19

Later  in  his  testimony,  Ivy  faced  cross-examination  by  Fritz  Sauter,
counsel  for  two  of  the  German  medical  defendants.  Sauter  pushed  Ivy  to
acknowledge  that  the  AMA  guidelines  had  come  into  formal  existence  only  as  the
Nuremberg  Medical  Trial  was  getting  under  way.  In  response  to  this  attempt  to
diminish  the  legal  force  of  the  AMA  standards  with  the  obvious  suggestion  that
the  rules  had  been  made  up  too  recently  to  be  of  relevance,  Ivy  made  an  explicit
claim  in  court  that  the  ideas  inherent  in  the  AMA  standards  significantly  predated
their  official  formulation:

Q.  You  told  us  that ...  an  association  had  made  a
compilation  regarding  the  ethics  of  medical  experiments  on
human  beings. .  . .  Can  you  recall  what  I  am  referring  to?
A.  Yes.


136


Chapter  2

Q.  That  was  in  December  1946, 1  believe.

A.  Yes,  I  remember. . . .

Q.  Did  that  take  place  in  consideration  of  this  trial?

A.  Well,  that  took  place  as  a  result  of  my  relations

to  the  trial,  yes.

Q.  Before  December  of  1946  were  such  instructions

in  printed  form  in  existence  in  America?

A.  No.  They  were  understood  only  as  a  matter  of

common  practice.20

Thus,  if  Ivy  is  to  be  taken  literally,  the  standards  he  forcefully  articulated
during  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial,  which  were  affirmed  by  the  AMA  House  of
Delegates  as  the  trial  was  just  beginning  and  codified  by  three  American  judges
as  the  trial  came  to  an  end,  were  the  standards  of  practice  at  the  time.

THE  "REAL  WORLD"  OF  HUMAN  EXPERIMENTATION

It  would  be  historically  irresponsible,  however,  to  rely  solely  on  records
related  directly  to  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial  in  evaluating  the  postwar  scene  in
American  medical  research.  The  panorama  of  American  thought  and  practice  in
human  experimentation  was  considerably  more  complex  than  Ivy  acknowledged
on  the  witness  stand  in  Nuremberg.  In  general,  it  does  seem  that  most  American
medical  scientists  probably  sought  to  approximate  the  practices  suggested  in  the
Nuremberg  Code  and  the  AMA  principles  when  working  with  "healthy
volunteers."  Indeed,  a  subtle,  yet  pervasive,  indication  of  the  recognition  during
this  period  that  consent  should  be  obtained  from  healthy  subjects  was  the
widespread  use  of  the  term  volunteer  to  describe  such  research  participants.  Yet,
as  Advisory  Committee  member  Susan  Lederer  has  recently  pointed  out,  the  use
of  the  word  volunteer  cannot  always  be  taken  as  an  indication  that  researchers
intended  to  use  subjects  who  had  knowingly  and  freely  agreed  to  participate  in  an
experiment;  it  seems  that  researchers  sometimes  used  volunteer  as  a  synonym  for
research  subject,  with  no  special  meaning  intended  regarding  the  decision  of  the
participants  to  join  in  an  experiment.21

Even  with  this  ambiguity  it  is,  however,  quite  clear  that  a  strong  tradition
of  consent  has  existed  in  research  with  healthy  subjects,  research  that  generally
offered  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to  the  participant.  In  the  United  States
much  of  this  tradition  has  rested  on  the  well-known  example  of  Walter  Reed's
turn-of-the-century  experiments,  when  he  employed  informed  volunteers  to
establish  the  mosquito  as  the  vector  of  transmission  for  yellow  fever.22  Indeed,  it
seems  that  a  tradition  of  research  with  consenting  subjects  has  been  particularly
strong  among  Reed's  military  descendants  in  the  field  of  infectious  disease
research  (which  has  frequently  required  the  use  of  healthy  subjects).  For


137


Part  I

example,  Dr.  Theodore  Woodward,  a  physician-researcher  commissioned  in  the
Army,  conducted  vaccine  research  during  the  1950s  with  healthy  subjects  under
the  auspices  of  the  Armed  Forces  Epidemiological  Board.  In  a  recent  interview
conducted  by  the  Advisory  Committee,  Woodward  recalled  that  the  risks  of
exposure  to  diseases  such  as  typhus  were  always  fully  disclosed  to  potential
healthy  subjects  and  that  their  consent  was  obtained.  Since  some  of  these  studies
were  conducted  in  other  countries  with  non-English-speakers,  the  disclosure  was
given  in  the  volunteer's  language.23  Of  his  own  values  during  this  time,
Woodward  stated:  "If  I  gave  someone  something  that  could  make  them  sick  or  kill
them  and  hadn't  told  them,  I'm  a  murderer."24  Similarly,  Dr.  John  Arnold,  a
physician  who  conducted  Army-sponsored  malaria  research  on  prisoners  from  the
late  1940s  through  the  mid-1950s,  recalled  that  he  always  obtained  written
permission  from  his  subjects.25

Not  all  the  evidence  on  consent  and  healthy  subjects  comes  from  the
military  tradition.  A  particularly  compelling  general  characterization  of  research
with  "normal  volunteers"  during  this  period  comes  from  the  "Analytic  Summary"
of  a  conference  on  the  "Concept  of  Consent  in  Clinical  Research,"  which  the
Law-Medicine  Research  Institute  (LMRI)  of  Boston  University  convened  on
April  29,  1961.  At  this  conference,  twenty-one  researchers  from  universities,
hospitals,  and  pharmaceutical  companies  across  the  country  were  brought
together  "to  explore  problems  arising  from  the  legal  and  ethical  requirements  of
informed  consent  of  research  subjects."26  The  LMRI  project  was  what  one  might
now  call  a  fact-finding  mission;  the  LMRI  staff  was  attempting  "to  define  and  to
analyze  the  actual  patterns  of  administrative  practice  governing  the  conduct  of
clinical  research  in  the  United  States"  during  the  early  1960s.27  Anne  S.  Harris,
an  LMRI  staff  member  and  author  of  the  conference's  final  report,  offered  a
simple  but  significant  assessment  of  the  handling  of  healthy  participants  in
nontherapeutic  research  as  expressed  by  the  researchers  at  the  meeting,  whose
careers  included  the  decade  and  a  half  since  the  end  of  World  War  II:  "The
conferees  indicated  that  normal  subjects  are  usually  fully  informed."28

Even  so,  researchers  who  almost  certainly  knew  better  sometimes
employed  unconsenting  healthy  subjects  in  research  that  offered  them  no  medical
benefits.  For  example,  Dr.  Louis  Lasagna,  who  has  since  become  a  respected
authority  on  bioethics,  stated  in  an  interview  conducted  by  the  Advisory
Committee  that  between  1952  and  1954,  when  he  was  a  research  fellow  at
Harvard  Medical  School,  he  helped  carry  out  secret,  Army-sponsored  experiments
in  which  hallucinogens  were  administered  to  healthy  subjects  without  their  full
knowledge  or  consent:

The  idea  was  that  we  were  supposed  to  give
hallucinogens  or  possible  hallucinogens  to  healthy
volunteers  and  see  if  we  could  worm  out  of  them


138


Chapter  2

secret  information.  And  it  went  like  this:  a
volunteer  would  be  told,  'Now  we're  going  to  ask
you  a  lot  of  questions,  but  under  no  circumstances
tell  us  your  mother's  maiden  name  or  your  social
security  number,'  I  forget  what.  I  refused  to
participate  in  this  because  it  was  so  mindless  that  a
psychologist  did  the  interviewing  and  then  we'd
give  them  a  drug  and  ask  them  a  number  of
questions  and  sure  enough,  one  of  the  questions  was
'What  is  you  mother's  maiden  name?'  Well,  it  was
laughable  in  retrospect . .  .  [The  subjects]  weren  't
informed  about  anything  [emphasis  added].29

Lasagna,  reflecting  "not  with  pride"  on  the  episode,  offered  the  following
explanation:  "It  wasn't  that  we  were  Nazis  and  said,  'If  we  ask  for  consent  we  lose
our  subjects,'  it  was  just  that  we  were  so  ethically  insensitive  that  it  never
occurred  to  us  that  you  ought  to  level  with  people  that  they  were  in  an
experiment."30  This  might  have  been  true  for  Lasagna  the  young  research  fellow,
but  the  explanation  is  harder  to  understand  for  the  director  of  the  research  project,
Henry  Beecher.  Beecher  was  a  Harvard  anesthesiologist  who,  as  we  will  see  later
in  this  chapter  and  in  chapter  3,  would  emerge  as  an  important  figure  in
biomedical  research  and  ethics  during  the  mid-1960s.31

If  American  researchers  experimenting  on  healthy  subjects  sometimes  did
not  strive  to  follow  the  standards  enunciated  at  Nuremberg,  research  practices
with  sick  patients  seem  even  more  problematic  in  retrospect.  Advisory
Committee  member  Jay  Katz  has  recently  argued  that  this  type  of  research  still
gives  rise  to  ethical  difficulties  for  physicians  engaged  in  research  with  patients,
and  he  has  offered  an  explanation:  "In  conflating  clinical  trials  and  therapy,  as
well  as  patients  and  subjects,  as  if  both  were  one  and  the  same,  physician-
investigators  unwittingly  become  double  agents  with  conflicting  loyalties."

It  is  likely  that  such  confusion  and  conflict  would  have  been  as
troublesome  several  decades  ago,  if  not  more  troublesome,  than  it  is  today.  The
immediate  postwar  period  was  a  time  of  vast  expansion  and  change  in  American
medical  science  (see  Introduction).  Clinical  research  was  emerging  as  a  new  and
prestigious  career  possibility  for  a  growing  number  of  medical  school  graduates.
Most  of  these  young  clinical  researchers  almost  certainly  would  have  absorbed  in
their  early  training  a  paternalistic  approach  to  medical  practice  that  was  not
seriously  challenged  until  the  1970s.  This  approach  encouraged  physicians  to
take  the  responsibility  for  determining  what  was  in  the  best  interest  of  their
patients  and  to  act  accordingly.  The  general  public  allowed  physicians  to  act  with
great  authority  in  assuming  this  responsibility  because  of  an  implicit  trust  that
doctors  were  guided  in  their  actions  by  a  desire  to  help  their  patients.


139


Parti

This  paternalistic  approach  to  medical  practice  can  be  traced  to  the
Hippocratic  admonition:  "to  help,  or  at  least  do  no  harm."33  Another  long-
standing medical  tradition  that  can  be  found  in  Hippocratic  medicine  is  the  belief
that  each  patient  poses  a  unique  medical  problem  calling  for  creative  solution.
Creativity  in  the  treatment  of  individuals,  which  was  not  commonly  thought  of  as
requiring  consent,  could  be— and  often  was—called  experimentation.  This  tradition
of  medical  tinkering  without  explicit  and  informed  consent  from  a  patient  was
intended  to  achieve  proper  treatment  for  an  individual's  ailments;  but  it  seems  also
to  have  served  (often  unconsciously)  as  a  justification  for  some  researchers  who
engaged  in  large-scale  clinical  research  projects  without  particular  concern  for
consent  from  patients.

Members  of  the  medical  profession  and  the  American  public  have  today
come  to  better  understand  the  intellectual  and  institutional  distinctions  between
organized  medical  research  and  standard  medical  practice.  There  were  significant
differences  between  research  and  practice  in  the  1950s,  but  these  differences  were
harder  to  recognize  because  they  were  relatively  new.  For  example,  randomized,
controlled,  double-blind  trials  of  drugs,  which  have  brought  so  much  benefit  to
medical  practice  by  greatly  decreasing  bias  in  the  testing  of  new  medicines,  were
introduced  in  the  1950s.  The  postwar  period  also  brought  an  unprecedented
expansion  of  universities  and  research  institutes.  Many  more  physicians  than  ever
before  were  no  longer  solely  concerned,  or  even  primarily  concerned,  with  aiding
individual  patients.  These  medical  scientists  instead  set  their  sights  on  goals  they
deemed  more  important:  expanding  basic  knowledge  of  the  natural  world,  curing
a  dread  disease  (for  the  benefit  of  many,  not  one),  and  in  some  cases,  helping  to
defend  the  nation  against  foreign  aggressors.  At  the  same  time,  this  new  breed  of
clinical  researchers  was  motivated  by  more  pragmatic  concerns,  such  as  getting
published  and  moving  up  the  academic  career  ladder.  But  these  differences
between  medical  practice  and  medical  science,  which  seem  relatively  clear  in
retrospect,  were  not  necessarily  easy  to  recognize  at  the  time.  And  coming  to
terms  with  these  differences  was  not  especially  convenient  for  researchers;  using
readily  available  patients  as  "clinical  material"  was  an  expedient  solution  to  a
need  for  human  subjects.

As  difficult  and  inconvenient  as  it  might  have  been  for  researchers  in  the
boom  years  of  American  medical  science  following  World  War  II  to  confront  the
fundamental  differences  between  therapeutic  and  nontherapeutic  relationships
with  other  human  beings,  it  was  not  impossible.  Otto  E.  Guttentag,  a  physician  at
the  University  of  California  School  of  Medicine  in  San  Francisco,  directly
addressed  these  issues  in  a  1953  Science  magazine  article.  Guttentag's  article,  and
three  others  that  appeared  with  it,  originated  as  presentations  in  a  symposium  held
in  1951  on  "The  Problem  of  Experimentation  on  Human  Beings"  at  Guttentag's
home  institution.  Guttentag  constructed  his  paper  around  a  comparison  between
the  traditional  role  of  the  physician  as  healer  and  the  relatively  new  role  of


140


Chapter  2

physician  as  medical  researcher.  Guttentag  referred  to  the  former  as  "physician-
friend"  and  the  latter  as  "physician-experimenter."  He  explicitly  laid  out  the
manner  in  which  medical  research  could  conflict  with  the  traditional  doctor-
patient  relationship:

Historically, .  .  .  one  human  being  is  in  distress,  in
need,  crying  for  help;  and  another  fellow  human
being  is  concerned  and  wants  to  help  and  the  desire
for  it  precipitates  the  relationship.  Here  both  the
healthy  and  the  sick  persons  are  . . .  fellow-
companions,  partners  to  conquer  a  common  enemy
who  has  overwhelmed  one  of  them. . . .  Objective
experimentation  to  confirm  or  disprove  some
doubtful  or  suggested  biological  generalization  is
foreign  to  this  relationship  ...  for  it  would  involve
taking  advantage  of  the  patient's  cry  for  help,  and  of
his  insecurity.34

Guttentag  worried  that  a  "physician-experimenter"  could  not  resist  the
temptation  to  "tak[e]  advantage  of  the  patient's  cry  for  help."35  To  prevent  the
experimental  exploitation  of  the  sick  that  he  envisioned  (or  knew  about),
Guttentag  suggested  the  following  arrangement:

Research  and  care  would  not  be  pursued  by  the
same  doctor  for  the  same  person,  but  would  be  kept
distinct.  The  physician-friend  and  the  physician-
experimenter  would  be  two  different  persons  as  far
as  a  single  patient  is  concerned.  .  .  .  The
responsibility  for  the  patient  as  patient  would  rest,
during  the  experimental  period,  with  the  physician-
friend,  unless  the  patient  decided  differently.

Retaining  his  original  physician  as  personal  adviser,
the  patient  would  at  least  be  under  less  conflict  than
he  is  at  present  when  the  question  of
experimentation  arises.36

Among  physicians,  Guttentag  was  nearly  unique  in  medicine  in  those  days
in  raising  such  problems  in  print.  Another  example  of  concern  about  the  moral
issues  raised  by  research  at  the  bedside  comes  from  what  might  be  an  unexpected
source:  a  Catholic  theologian  writing  in  1945.  In  the  course  of  a  general  review
of  issues  in  moral  theology,  John  C.  Ford,  a  prominent  Jesuit  scholar,  devoted


141


Parti

several  pages  to  the  matter  of  experimentation  with  human  subjects.  Ford  was  not
a  physician,  but  his  thoughts  on  this  topic-published  a  year  before  the  beginning
of  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial-suggest  that  a  thoughtful  observer  could
recognize,  even  decades  ago,  serious  problems  with  conducting  medical  research
on  unconsenting  hospital  patients:

The  point  of  getting  the  patient's  consent  [before
conducting  an  experiment]  is  increasingly
important,  I  believe,  because  of  reports  which
occasionally  reach  me  of  grave  abuses  in  this
matter.  In  some  cases,  especially  charity  cases,
patients  are  not  provided  with  a  sure,  well-tried,  and
effective  remedy  that  is  at  hand,  but  instead  are
subjected  to  other  treatment.  The  purpose  of
delaying  the  well-tried  remedy  is,  not  to  cure  this
patient,  but  to  discover  experimentally  what  the
effects  of  the  new  treatment  will  be,  in  the  hope,  of
course,  that  a  new  discovery  will  benefit  later
generations,  and  that  the  delay  in  administering  the
well-tried  remedy  will  not  harm  the  patient  too
much. .  .  .  This  sort  of  thing  is  not  only  immoral,
but  unethical  from  the  physician's  own  standpoint,
and  is  illegal  as  well.37

The  transcripts  and  reports  produced  in  the  Law-Medicine  Research
Institute's  effort  during  the  early  1 960s  to  gather  information  on  ethical  and
administrative  practices  in  research  in  medical  settings  suggest  that  by  this  time
more  researchers  had  come  to  recognize  the  troubling  issues  associated  with  using
sick  patients  as  subjects  in  research  that  could  not  benefit  them.  The  body  of
evidence  from  the  LMRI  project  also  suggests  that  problems  with  this  type  of
human  experimentation  had  been  widespread  before  the  early  1960s  and  remained
common  at  that  time.  The  transcript  of  a  May  1,  1961,  closed-door  meeting  of
medical  researchers  organized  by  LMRI  to  explore  issues  in  pediatric  research
shows  a  medical  scientist  from  the  University  of  Iowa  offering  a  revealing
generalization  from  which  none  of  his  colleagues  dissented.  In  order  to
understand  this  transcript  excerpt  one  must  know  that  item  "Al"  on  the  meeting
agenda  related  to  research  "primarily  directed  toward  the  advancement  of  medical
science"  and  item  "A2"  referred  to  "clinical  investigation  .  .  .  primarily  directed
toward  diagnostic,  therapeutic  and/or  prophylactic  benefit  to  patients."

We  have  done  a  thousand  things  with  an  implied
feeling  [of  consent].  .  .  .  We  wear  two  hats.  Item


142


Chapter  2

A2  allows  us  to  do  A 1  but  we  feel  uncomfortable
about  it.  The  responsibility  of  the  physician
includes  responsibility  to  advance  in  knowledge.
Things  are  different  now  and  this  problem  of  a
secondary  role  [i.e.,  to  advance  knowledge]  is
increasingly  in  front  stage  [emphasis  added].38

This  researcher  acknowledged  that  many  physicians  during  the  period  let
themselves  slide  into  nontherapeutic  research  with  patients.  He  provided  the
additional,  and  significant,  assessment  that  he  and  his  colleagues  felt  guilty  about
this  behavior,  even  though  it  was  quite  common.

An  even  more  probing  analysis  of  these  issues  had  taken  place  two  days
earlier  at  the  April  29,  1961,  LMRI  conference  on  "The  Concept  of  Consent,"
referred  to  above  in  our  discussion  of  research  with  healthy  subjects.  The
participants  at  this  meeting  recognized  that  research  with  sick  patients  could  be
both  therapeutic  and  nontherapeutic.  Interestingly,  they  suggested  that  patients
employed  for  research  in  which  "there  was  the  possibility  of  therapeutic  benefit
with  minimal  or  moderate  risk"  were  "usually  informed"  of  the  proposed  study.
The  author  of  the  conference  report  offered  the  plausible  explanation  that
informing  subjects  in  potentially  beneficial  research  "is  psychologically  more
comfortable  for  investigators  [because]  the  [therapeutic]  expectations  of  potential
subjects  coincide  with  the  purpose  and  expected  results  of  the  experiment."39  The
conferees  identified  research  in  which  "patients  are  used  for  studies  unrelated  to
their  own  disease,  or  in  studies  in  which  therapeutic  benefits  are  unlikely"  as  the
most  problematic.  Those  at  the  meeting  "indicated  that  it  is  most  often  subjects  in
this  category  to  whom  disclosure  is  not  made."40  The  conference  report  outlined
an  approach  employed  by  many  researchers  (including  some  at  the  meeting),  in
which,  rather  than  seeking  consent  from  patients  for  research  that  offers  them  no
benefit,

[t]he  therapeutic  illusion  is  maintained,  and  the
patient  is  often  not  even  told  he  is  participating  in
research.  Instead,  he  is  told  he  is  "just  going  to
have  a  test."  If  the  experimental  procedure  involves
minimal  risk,  but  some  discomfort,  such  as  hourly
urine  collection,  "All  you  do  is  tell  the  patient:  'We
want  you  to  urinate  every  hour.'  We  merely  let  them
assume  that  it  is  part  of  the  hospital  work  that  is
being  done."41

Again,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  conference  participants  displayed
some  moral  discomfort  with  this  pattern  of  behavior,  as  can  be  seen  from  the


143


Part  I

following  exchange:

Dr.  X:  There  is  a  matter  here  of  whether  the  patient
is  not  informed  because  the  risk  is  too  trivial,  or
because  it's  too  serious.

Dr.  Y:  I  think  you're  getting  right  at  it.  There's  a
great  difference  in  not  telling  the  patient  because
you're  afraid  he  won't  participate  and  not  telling  him
because  you  don't  think  there  is  a  conceivable  risk,
and  it's  so  trivial  you  don't  bother  to  inform  him.
Dr.  Z:  On  the  question  of  whether  it's  [acceptable]
not  to  tell,  we  would  say  that  it  is  not  permissible  on
the  grounds  of  refusal  potential.42

It  is  also  important  to  draw  out  of  this  transcript  excerpt  the  general  point
that  most  researchers  in  this  period  appear  not  to  have  had  great  ethical  qualms
about  enrolling  an  uninformed  patient  in  a  research  project  if  the  risk  was  deemed
low  or  nonexistent.  Of  course,  the  varying  definitions  of  "low  risk"  could  lead  to
problems  with  this  approach.  Indeed,  the  participants  at  the  "Concept  of  Consent"
conference  grappled  at  length  with  this  very  issue  without  ever  reaching
consensus.  A  minority  steadfastly  asserted  that  participants  in  an  experiment
should  be  asked  for  consent  even  if  the  risk  would  be  extremely  low,  such  as  in
only  taking  a  small  clipping  of  hair.

The  Advisory  Committee's  Ethics  Oral  History  Project43  has  provided
extensive  additional  evidence  that  medical  researchers  sometimes  (perhaps  even
often)  took  liberties  with  sick  patients  during  the  decades  immediately  following
World  War  II.  The  element  of  opportunism  was  recounted  in  several  interviews.
Dr.  Lasagna,  who  was  involved  in  pain-management  studies  in  postoperative
patients  at  Harvard  in  the  1950s,  explained  rather  bluntly:

[Mjostly,  I'm  ashamed  to  say,  it  was  as  if,  and  I'm
putting  this  very  crudely  purposely,  as  if  you'd
ordered  a  bunch  of  rats  from  a  laboratory  and  you
had  experimental  subjects  available  to  you.  They
were  never  asked  by  anybody.  They  might  have
guessed  they  were  involved  in  something  because  a
young  woman  would  come  around  every  hour  and
ask  them  how  they  were  and  quantified  their  pain.
We  never  made  any  efforts  to  find  out  if  they
guessed  that  they  were  part  of  it.44

Other  researchers  told  similar  tales,  with  a  similar  mixture  of  matter-of-


144


Chapter  2

fact  reporting  and  regretful  recollection.  Dr.  Paul  Beeson  remembered  a  study  he
conducted  in  the  1940s,  while  a  professor  at  Emory  University,  on  patients  with
bacterial  endocarditis,  an  invariably  fatal  disease  at  the  time.  He  recalled  that  he
thought  it  would  be  interesting  to  use  the  new  technique  of  cardiac  catheterization
to  compare  the  number  of  bacteria  in  the  blood  at  different  points  in  circulation:

[This  is]  something  I  wouldn't  dare  do  now.  It
would  do  no  good  for  the  patient.  They  had  to
come  to  the  lab  and  lie  on  a  fluoroscopic  table  for  a
couple  of  hours,  a  catheter  was  put  into  the  heart,  a
femoral  needle  was  put  in  so  we  could  get  femoral
arterial  blood  and  so  on. .  .  .  All  I  could  say  at  the
end  was  that  these  poor  people  were  lying  there  and
we  had  nothing  to  offer  them  and  it  might  have
given  them  some  comfort  that  a  lot  of  people  were
paying  attention  to  them  for  this  one  study.  I  don't
remember  ever  asking  their  permission  to  do  it.  I
did  go  around  and  see  them,  of  course,  and  said,
"We  want  to  do  a  study  on  you  in  the  X-ray
department,  we'll  do  it  tomorrow  morning,"  and
they  said  yes.  There  was  never  any  question.  Such
a  thing  as  informed  consent,  that  term  didn't  even
exist  at  that  time. .  .  .  [I]f  I  were  ever  on  a  hospital
ethics  committee  today,  I  wouldn't  ever  pass  on  that
particular  study.45

Radiologist  Leonard  Sagan  recalled  an  experiment  in  which  he  assisted
during  his  training  on  a  metabolic  unit  at  Moffett  Hospital  in  San  Francisco  in
1956-1957.

At  the  time,  the  adrenal  gland  was  hot  stuff.  ACTH
[adrenocorticotropic  hormone]  had  just  become
available  and  it  was  an  important  tool  for  exploring  the
function  of  the  adrenal  gland. . . .  This  was  the  project
I  was  involved  in  during  that  year,  the  study  of  adrenal
function  in  patients  with  thyroid  disease,  both  hypo-
and  hyperthyroid  disease.  So  what  did  we  do?  I'd  find
some  patients  in  the  hospital  and  I'd  add  a  little  ACTH
to  their  infusion  and  collect  urines  and  measure  output
of  urinary  corticoids.  ...  I  didn't  consider  it  dangerous.
But  I  didn't  consider  it  necessary  to  inform  them
either.  So  far  as  they  were  concerned,  this  was  part  of


145


Parti

their  treatment.  They  didn't  know,  and  no  one  had
asked  me  to  tell  them.  As  far  as  I  know,  informed
consent  was  not  practiced  anyplace  in  that  hospital  at
the  time.46

Sagan  viewed  the  above  experiment  as  conforming  not  only  with  the
practices  of  the  particular  hospital  but  also  in  accord  with  the  high  degree  of
professional  autonomy  and  respect  that  was  granted  to  physicians  in  this  era:

In  1945,  '50,  the  doctor  . .  .  was  king  or  queen.  It
never  occurred  to  a  doctor  to  ask  for  consent  for
anything.  .  .  .  People  say,  oh,  injection  with
plutonium,  why  didn't  the  doctor  tell  the  patient?
Doctors  weren't  in  the  habit  of  telling  the  patients
anything.  They  were  in  charge  and  nobody
questioned  their  authority.  Now  that  seems
egregious.  But  at  the  time,  that's  the  way  the  world

47

was.

Another  investigator,  Dr.  Stuart  Finch,  who  was  a  professor  of  medicine  at
Yale  during  the  1950s  and  1960s,  recalled  instances  when  oncologists  there  were
overly  aggressive  in  pursuing  experimental  therapies  with  terminal  patients.

[I]t's  very  easy  to  talk  a  terminal  patient  into  taking
that  medication  or  to  try  that  compound  or  whatever
the  substance  is. .  . .  Sometimes  the  oncologists
[got]  way  overenthused  using  it.  It's  very  easy
when  you  have  a  dying  patient  to  say,  "Look,  you're
going

to  die.  Why  don't  you  let  me  try  this  substance  on
you?"  I  don't  think  if  they  have  informed  consent  or
not  it  makes  much  difference  at  that  point.48

Economically  disadvantaged  patients  seem  to  have  been  perceived  by
some  physicians  as  particularly  appropriate  subjects  for  medical  experimentation.
Dr.  Beeson  offered  a  frank  description  of  a  quid  pro  quo  rationale  that  was
probably  quite  common  in  justifying  the  use  of  poor  patients  in  medical  research:
"We  were  taking  care  of  them,  and  felt  we  had  a  right  to  get  some  return  from
them,  since  it  wouldn't  be  in  professional  fees  and  since  our  taxes  were  paying
their  hospital  bills."49

Another  investigator,  Dr.  Thomas  Chalmers,  who  began  his  career  in
medical  research  during  the  1940s,  identified  sick  patients  as  the  most  vulnerable


146


Chapter  2

type  of  experimental  subjects-more  vulnerable  even  than  prisoners:

One  of  the  real  ludicrous  aspects  of  talking  about  a
prisoner  being  a  captive,  and  therefore  needing
more  protection  than  others,  is,  there's  nobody  more
captive  than  a  sick  patient.  You've  got  pain.  You
feel  awful.  You've  got  this  one  person  who's  going
to  help  you.  You  do  anything  he  says.  You're  a
captive.  You  can't,  especially  if  you're  sick  and
dying,  discharge  the  doctor  and  get  another  one
without  a  great  deal  of  trauma  and  possible  loss  of
lifesaving  measures.50

Thus,  as  compared  with  prisoners,  who  are  now  generally  viewed  to  be
vulnerable  to  coercion,  those  who  are  sick  may  be  even  more  compromised  in
their  ability  to  withstand  subtle  pressure  to  be  research  subjects.  Appropriate
protection  for  the  sick  who  might  be  candidates  for  medical  research  has  proved
to  be  an  especially  troublesome  issue  in  the  era  following  Nuremberg.

NUREMBERG  AND  RESEARCH  WITH  PATIENTS

The  record  of  conducting  nontherapeutic  research  with  unconsenting  sick
patients  during  the  postwar  period  discussed  above  seems  to  stand  in  particularly
sharp  contrast  with  the  claims  about  the  conduct  of  research  involving  human
subjects  in  the  United  States  that  Andrew  Ivy  made  during  his  testimony  in
Nuremberg.  We  have  seen  how  some  observers,  even  before  Nuremberg,
recognized  that  employing  uninformed,  vulnerable  sick  patients  solely  as  a  means
to  a  scientific  end  was  simply  wrong.  We  must,  however,  also  acknowledge  that
the  particulars  of  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial  did  not  call  for  careful  attention  to
the  issues  surrounding  research  with  sick  patients.  None  of  the  German
physicians  at  Nuremberg  stood  accused  of  exploiting  patients  for  experimental
purposes.

Nonetheless,  it  is  likely  that  Andrew  Ivy  would  have  argued  that  consent
was  appropriate  in  virtually  all  instances  of  medical  research.  Dr.  Herman
Wigodsky,  who  worked  closely  under  Ivy  at  Northwestern  in  the  late  1930s  and
early  1940s,  explicitly  commented  during  an  Ethics  Oral  History  Project
interview  that  he  did  not  believe  that  his  mentor  drew  any  sort  of  ethical  line
between  various  types  of  clinical  research:  "I  don't  think  he  made  any  distinction
[between  research  with  sick  patients  and  research  with  healthy  subjects].
Research  was  research.  It  didn't  make  any  difference."51

Additional  evidence  that  Ivy  would  have  supported  standards  of  consent
for  research  with  ill  as  well  as  with  healthy  subjects  comes  from  his  response  to  a


147


Parti

set  of  rules  for  human  experimentation  put  forth  by  the  German  Ministry  of
Interior  in  1931,  presented  to  him  after  he  had  prepared  his  written  report  for  the
AM  A  in  the  fall  of  1946.  These  rules  appear  to  be  considerably  more
comprehensive  and  sophisticated  than  the  Nuremberg  Code  itself.52  Most
significantly,  the  1931  German  standards  cover  both  therapeutic  and
nontherapeutic  research,  calling  for  consent  in  both  types  of  medical
investigation.  For  reasons  that  are  not  clear,  the  prosecution  team  at  Nuremberg
did  not  choose  to  place  much  emphasis  on  these  German  standards  in  constructing
the  case.  Ivy  did,  however,  attempt  (without  much  help  from  the  prosecution)  to
initiate  a  discussion  of  the  1931  standards  during  his  testimony.  It  is  clear  from
the  trial  transcript  that  Ivy  saw  a  rough  equivalence  between  the  more  detailed  and
extensive  German  rules  and  those  formulated  by  the  AMA,  with  his  assistance.
Shortly  after  discussing  the  AMA  principles  on  the  witness  stand,  Ivy  had  the
following  exchange  with  prosecutor  Alexander  G.  Hardy:

Q.  Do  you  have  any  further  statements  to  make
concerning  rules  of  medical  ethics  concerning
experimentation  in  human  beings?
A.  Well,  I  find  that  since  making  [my]  report  to  the
American  Medical  Association  that  a  decree  of  the
Minister  of  Public  Welfare  [Ivy  should  have  said
"the  Minister  of  the  Interior"]  of  Germany  in  1931
on  the  subject  of  "Regulations  for  Modern  Therapy
for  the  Performance  of  Scientific  Experiments  on
Human  Beings"  contains  all  the  [AMA]  principles
which  I  have  read.53

Hardy  did  not  take  what  now  seems  an  obvious  opportunity  to  allow  Ivy  to
expand  further  on  these  rules.  However,  a  few  minutes  later,  Ivy  brought  up  the
German  standards  again  on  his  own  (and  again  Hardy  did  not  pursue  the  topic
further).  At  this  point,  Ivy  stated  his  general  agreement  with  the  German
standards  of  1931  even  more  firmly:

I  cited  the  principles  .  . .  from  the  Reich  Minister  of
the  Interior  dated  February  28,  193 1  to  indicate  that
the  ethical  principles  for  the  use  of  human  beings  as
subjects  in  medical  experiments  in  Germany  in
1931  were  similar  to  these  which  I  have  enunciated
and  which  have  been  approved  by  the  House  of
Delegates  of  the  American  Medical  Association.54

Ivy's  assertion  of  "similarity"  between  the  AMA  principles  and  those  in  the  1931


148


Chapter  2

German  document  may  not  meet  with  agreement  among  those  who  compare  the
two.  Though  they  may  be  viewed  as  similar  in  philosophy  and  intent,  the  German
interior  ministry  document  is, far  more  detailed  and  comprehensive  than  that  of

theAMA.

Contrary  to  Ivy's  claims  at  Nuremberg,  and  the  positioning  of  Ivy  by  the
prosecution,  he  cannot  in  any  full  sense  be  taken  as  the  embodiment  of  the  entire
American  medical  profession  in  the  years  immediately  following  World  War  II.
Again,  Dr.  Wigodsky  spoke  to  this  point  in  his  recent  interview:

Well,  I've  always  felt  that  that  stuff  that  Ivy  wrote
up  during  the  time  of  the  trials  was  pretty  much  an
expression  of  his  personal  philosophy  about
research.  And  ...  it  was  the  kind  of  understanding
that  we  had  in  working  with  him  about  how  he  felt.
Voluntariness  being  number  one--you  had  to
volunteer  and  had  to  be  in  a  situation  where  you
could  volunteer.  And  consent  in  the  sense  that  you
didn't  do  anything  to  anybody  that  they  didn't  know
what  you  were  doing.  That  you  explained  to  people
what  it  was  you  were  going  to  do  and  why  you  were
going  to  do  it  and  that  sort  of  thing  [emphasis
added].55

Even  if  it  is  true  that  Andrew  Ivy  would  have  wholeheartedly  endorsed  the
notion  of  obtaining  consent  from  any  research  subject- whether  an  experiment
held  the  possibility  of  personal  benefit  or  not;  whether  the  subjects  were  sick  or
healthy-it  seems  likely  that  the  AMA  House  of  Delegates  would  have  been
hesitant  to  endorse  a  condensation  of  Ivy's  principles  of  research  ethics  if  they  had
been  explicitly  extended  to  cover  all  categories  of  clinical  investigation.
Obtaining  consent  from  patients  within  the  normal  clinical  relationship  was  not  a
common  practice  in  late  1946.  At  that  time,  and  for  many  years  to  come,  patient
trust  and  medical  beneficence  were  viewed  as  the  unshakable  moral  foundations
on  which  meaningful  interactions  between  professional  healers  and  the  sick
should  be  built.  In  fact,  it  was  not  until  1981  that  the  AMA's  Judicial  Council
specifically  endorsed  "informed  consent"  as  an  appropriate  part  of  the  therapeutic
doctor-patient  relationship.56

But,  in  the  end,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  facts  of  the  Nuremberg
Medical  Trial  did  not  force  Andrew  Ivy,  the  AMA  House  of  Delegates,  the
Nuremberg  prosecutors,  or  the  judges  to  grapple  with  the  distinctions  between
research  with  sick  patients  and  research  with  healthy  subjects,  or  therapeutic  and
nontherapeutic  research.  The  Nuremberg  defendants  stood  accused  of  ghastly
experimental  acts  that  were  absolutely  without  therapeutic  intent,  and  their


149


Parti

unfortunate  subjects  were  never  under  any  illusion  that  they  were  receiving
medical  treatment.  To  rebut  the  claims  of  some  of  the  medical  defendants  that
obtaining  consent  from  research  subjects  was  not  a  clearly  established  principle,
Ivy  could,  and  did,  offer  a  variety  of  examples  on  the  witness  stand  from  a  long
tradition  of  human  experimentation  on  consenting  healthy  subjects.57  Ivy  and  the
members  of  the  prosecution  team  were  not  faced  with  what  might  have  been  a
more  troubling  process:  finding  examples  of  well-organized  nontherapeutic
experiments  on  sick  patients  in  which  the  subjects  had  clearly  offered  consent.
Simply  put,  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial  did  not  demand  it.

AMERICAN  MEDICAL  RESEARCHERS'  REACTIONS  TO
NEWS  OF  THE  NUREMBERG  MEDICAL  TRIAL

It  is  important  to  have  some  understanding  of  the  extent  to  which
American  medical  scientists  paid  attention  to  the  events  of  the  Nuremberg
Medical  Trial  and  made  connnections  with  the  messages  that  emanated  from  the
courtroom  in  Germany.  The  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial  received  coverage  in  the
American  popular  press,  but  it  would  almost  certainly  be  an  exaggeration  to  refer
to  this  attention  as  exhaustive.  Historian  David  Rothman  has  provided  the
following  summary  of  the  trial's  coverage  in  the  New  York  Times:

Over  1945  and  1946  fewer  than  a  dozen  articles
appeared  in  the  New  York  Times  on  the  Nazi
[medical]  research;  the  indictment  of  forty-two
doctors  in  the  fall  of  1946  was  a  page-five  story  and
the  opening  of  the  trial,  a  page-nine  story.  (The
announcement  of  the  guilty  verdict  in  August  1 947
was  a  front-page  story,  but  the  execution  of  seven
of  the  defendants  a  year  later  was  again  relegated  to
the  back  pages.)58

The  Advisory  Committee's  Ethics  Oral  History  Project  suggests  that
American  medical  researchers,  perhaps  like  the  American  public  generally,  were
not  carefully  following  the  daily  developments  in  Nuremberg.  For  example,  Dr.
John  Arnold,  a  researcher  who,  during  the  Medical  Trial,  was  involved  in  malaria
experiments  on  prisoners  at  Stateville  Prison  in  Illinois,  offered  a  particularly
vivid  (if  somewhat  anachronistic)  recollection  of  the  scant  attention  paid  to  the
Nuremberg  Medical  Trial  among  American  medical  scientists:  "We  were  dimly
aware  of  it.  And  as  you  ask  me  now,  I'm  astonished  that  we  [were  not]  hanging
on  the  TV  at  the  time,  watching  for  each  twist  and  turn  of  the  argument  to
develop.  But  we  weren't."59  It  might  have  been  expected  that  the  researchers  at
Stateville  would  have  been  particularly  concerned  with  the  events  at  Nuremberg


150


Chapter  2

because  some  of  the  medical  defendants  claimed  during  the  trial  that  the  wartime
malaria  experiments  at  the  Illinois  prison  were  analogous  to  the  experiments
carried  out  in  the  Nazi  concentration  camps.

The  strongest  statement  of  awareness  came  from  Dr.  Herbert  Abrams,  a
radiologist  who  was  in  his  residency  at  Montefiore  Hospital  in  the  Bronx
throughout  most  of  the  trial:

[The  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial]  was  part  of  the
history  of  the  day.  And  there  was  extensive
reportage  ...  so  that  the  manner  of  human
experimentation  as  it  had  been  done  by  the  Nazis
was  very  much  in  the  news.  We  were  all  aware  of
it.  I  think  that  people  experienced  this  kind  of
revulsion  about  it  that  you  might  anticipate.  ...  It
was  surely  something,  at  least  in  the  environment  I
was  in,  we  were  aware  of  and  that  affected  the
thinking  of  everyone  who  was  involved  in  clinical
investigation.60

It  seems  likely,  however,  that  the  "environment"  this  young  physician  was  in
would  have  caused  a  heightened  awareness  of  a  trial  dealing  with  Nazi  medical
professionals.  Montefiore  is  a  traditionally  Jewish  hospital  that  was  home  to
many  Jewish  refugee  physicians  who  had  fled  the  terror  and  oppression  of  the
Nazi  regime.61  A  trial  of  German  physicians  almost  certainly  would  have  been  of
particular  interest  in  this  setting.

Even  among  American  medical  researchers  who  might  have  been  aware  of
events  at  Nuremberg,  it  seems  that  many  did  not  perceive  specific  personal
implications  in  the  Medical  Trial.  Rothman  has  enunciated  this  historical  view
most  fully.  He  asserts  that  "the  prevailing  view  was  that  [the  Nuremberg  medical
defendants]  were  Nazis  first  and  last;  by  definition  nothing  they  did,  and  no  code
drawn  up  in  response  to  them,  was  relevant  to  the  United  States."62  Jay  Katz  has
offered  a  similar  summation  of  the  immediate  response  of  the  medical  community
to  the  Nuremberg  Code:  "It  was  a  good  code  for  barbarians  but  an  unnecessary
code  for  ordinary  physicians."63

Several  participants  in  the  Ethics  Oral  History  Project  affirmed  the
interpretations  of  Rothman  and  Katz,  using  similar  language.  Said  one  physician:
"There  was  a  disconnect  [between  the  Nuremberg  Code  and  its  application  to
American  researchers].  .  . .  The  interpretation  of  these  codes  [by  American
physicians]  was  that  they  were  necessary  for  barbarians,  but  [not  for]  fine
upstanding  people."64  This  same  physician  later  acknowledged  that,  in  a  sense,
some  American  researchers  did  not  pay  attention  to  the  lessons  of  the  Nuremberg
Medical  Trial  because  it  was  not  convenient  to  do  so:


151


Parti

The  connection  between  those  horrendous  acts
[carried  out  by  German  medical  scientists  in  the
concentration  camps]  and  our  everyday
investigations  was  not  made  [by  American  medical
researchers]  for  reasons  of  self-interest,  to  be
perfectly  frank.  As  I  see  it  now,  I'm  saddened  that
we  didn't  see  the  connection,  but  that's  what  was
done.  .  .  .  It's  hard  to  tell  you  now  .  . .  how  we
rationalized,  but  the  fact  is  we  did/'5

The  popular  press  mirrored  the  view  that  human  experimentation  as
practiced  in  the  United  States  was  not  a  morally  troubling  enterprise—it  was  as
American  as  apple  pie.  Between  1948  and  1960  magazines  such  as  the  Saturday
Evening  Post,  Reader's  Digest,  and  the  American  Mercury  ran  "human  interest"
stories  on  "human  guinea  pigs."  These  stories  generally  focused  on  specific
groups  of  healthy  subjects— prisoners,  conscientious  objectors,  medical  students,
soldiers— and  described  them  as  "volunteers."  The  articles  explained  the  ordeals
to  which  the  volunteers  had  submitted  themselves.  "Among  these  men  and
women,"  the  New  York  Times  informed  its  Sunday  readership  in  1958,  "you  will
find  those  who  will  take  shots  of  the  new  vaccines,  who  will  swallow  radioactive
drugs,  who  will  fly  higher  than  anyone  else,  who  will  watch  malaria  infected
mosquitos  feed  on  their  bare  arms."6'1  The  articles  assured  the  public  that  the
volunteers  had  plausible,  often  noble,  reasons  for  volunteering  for  such  seemingly
gruesome  treatment.  The  explanations  included  social  redemption  (especially  in
the  case  of  prisoners),  religious  or  other  beliefs  (particularly  for  conscientious
objectors),  the  advancement  of  science,  service  to  society,  and  thrill-seeking.67  In
sum,  most  articles  in  the  popular  press  were  uncritical  toward  experimentation  on
humans  and  assumed  that  those  involved  had  freely  volunteered  to  participate.

However,  a  smaller  number  of  press  reports  in  the  late  1940s  and  1950s
did  suggest  some  tension  between  the  words  at  Nuremberg  and  the  practices  in
America.  As  early  as  1948,  for  example,  Science  News  reported  the  Soviet  claim
that  Americans  were  using  "Nazi  methods"  in  the  conduct  of  prisoner
experiments.68  Concern  also  began  to  be  voiced  about  the  dangers  to  volunteer
"guinea  pigs."  In  October  1954,  for  another  example,  the  magazine  Christian
Century  called  on  the  Army  to  halt,  at  the  first  sign  of  danger,  experiments  at  the
Fitzsimmons  Hospital  in  Denver,  where  soldiers  were  called  upon  to  eat  foods
exposed  to  cobalt  radiation.69

It  is  also  possible  that  press  accounts  of  experiments  with  patients  rather
than  healthy  subjects  were  more  inclined  to  be  critical,  even  in  the  late  1940s.  A
Saturday  Evening  Post  article  from  the  January  15,  1949,  issue  describes  how  a
VA  physician  kept  quiet  about  streptomycin  trials  involving  the  medical
departments  of  the  Army,  Navy,  and  VA


152


Chapter  2

because  of  the  risk  of  congressional  chastisement
from  publicity-conscious  members  of  the  House  and
Senate  who  might  have  screamed:  'You  can't
experiment  on  our  heroes,'  if  it  had  been  known  that
Army  and  Navy  veterans  of  former  wars  were  being
used  in  the  medical  investigation.  This  was  a  real
worry  of  the  doctors  who  formulated  the  clinical
program.™

Evidence  suggests  that  some  American  researchers  were  genuinely  and
deeply  concerned  with  the  issues  surrounding  human  experimentation  during  the
years  immediately  following  World  War  II.  One  source  of  insight  into  the
thinking  of  American  physicians  engaged  in  clinical  research  during  the  1950s  is
found  in  the  ground-breaking  work  of  medical  sociologist  Renee  C.  Fox.  For  two
five-month  periods  between  September  1951  and  January  1953,  Fox  spent  long
days  "in  continuous,  direct,  and  intimate  contact  with  the  physicians  and  patients"
in  a  metabolic  research  ward  that  she  pseudonymously  called  "Ward  F-Second."
In  1959  Fox  reported  with  remarkable  sensitivity  and  eloquence  on  the  ethical
dilemmas  faced  by  the  physicians  conducting  research  on  this  ward.  She  did  not
suggest  that  the  scientists  under  her  observation  were  unaware  of  the  Nuremberg
Code;  instead  she  offered  a  point-by-point  paraphrasing  of  the  Code,  which  she
identified  as  "the  basic  principles  governing  research  on  human  subjects  which
the  physicians  of  the  Metabolic  Group  [her  collective  term  for  the  researchers
whom  she  studied]  were  required  to  observe."  Rather  than  being  unconscious  or
contemptuous  of  a  set  of  principles  intended  for  barbarians,  Fox  reported  that  the
researchers  on  "Ward  F-Second"  were  sometimes  troubled  by  their  inability  to
apply  the  high,  but  essentially  unquestioned,  standards  enunciated  at  the
Nuremberg  Medical  Trial:

The  physicians  of  the  Metabolic  Group  were  deeply
committed  to  these  principles  and  conscientiously
tried  to  live  up  to  them  in  the  research  they  carried
out  on  patients.  However  like  most  norms,  the
"basic  principles  of  human  experimentation"  are
formulated  on  such  an  abstract  level  that  they  only
provide  general  guides  to  actual  behavior.  Partly  as
a  consequence,  the  physicians  of  the  Metabolic
Group  often  found  it  difficult  to  judge  whether  or
not  a  particular  experiment  in  which  they  were
engaged  "kept  within  the  bounds"  delineated  by
these  principles.71


153


Parti

Sometimes  private  discussions  among  researchers  about  the  ethical
aspects  of  human  experimentation  led  to  public  events.  A  good  example  from  the
early  1950s  is  the  symposium  held  on  October  10,  1951,  at  the  University  of
California  School  of  Medicine  in  San  Francisco  at  which  Otto  Guttentag  made  the
presentation  discussed  earlier.  One  of  Guttentag's  colleagues,  Dr.  Michael  B.
Shimkin,  organized  the  symposium  in  response  to  some  confidential  criticism  that
he  had  received  for  research  carried  out  under  his  direction  with  patients  at  the
University  of  California's  Laboratory  of  Experimental  Oncology.  The  exact
nature  of  this  criticism  is  unclear  from  the  records  that  remain  of  the  episode,  but
Shimkin  reported  in  a  memoir  that  "remedial  steps"  were  taken,  including
"written  protocols  for  all  new  departures  in  clinical  research,  which  we  asked  the
cancer  board  of  the  medical  school  to  review."72  In  his  memoirs  Shimkin  also
recalls  that  patients  were  screened  carefully  before  they  were  admitted  to  the
Laboratory  of  Experimental  Oncology:

They  had  to  understand  the  experimental  nature  of
our  work,  and  every  procedure  was  again  explained
to  them;  the  initial  release  form  even  included
agreement  to  an  autopsy.  The  understanding  did
not  absolve  us  of  negligence,  nor  deprive  patients  of
recourse  to  legal  actions,  but  did  set  the  tone  and
nature  of  our  relationships.  In  all  our  5  years  of
operations,  not  a  single  threat  or  implied  threat  of
action  against  us  was  voiced.  Two  patients  did
instruct  us  to  terminate  our  attempts  at  therapy.73

The  criticism  Shimkin  experienced  also  demonstrated  to  him  that  a  more  open
discussion  of  clinical  research  might  be  of  benefit  to  his  colleagues.  According
to  his  recollection,  "There  was  an  almost  visible  thawing  of  attitude  by  the  airing
of  the  problem"  at  the  symposium.74

Less  than  a  year  after  Shimkin's  1 95 1  San  Francisco  symposium,  the
organizers  of  the  "First  International  Congress  of  the  Histopathology  of  the
Nervous  System,"  which  was  held  in  Rome,  were  sufficiently  concerned  with
ethical  issues  that  they  invited  Pope  Pius  XII  to  address  "The  Moral  Limits  of
Medical  Methods  of  Research  and  Treatment."  In  a  speech  before  427  medical
researchers  from  around  the  world  (including  62  Americans),  the  pope  firmly
endorsed  the  principle  of  obtaining  consent  from  research  subjects— whether  sick
or  healthy.  He  also  pointed  his  audience  to  the  relatively  recent  lessons  of  the
Nuremberg  Medical  Trial,  which  he  summed  up  as  teaching  that  "man  should  not
exist  for  the  use  of  society;  on  the  contrary,  the  community  exists  for  the  good  of
man."75  In  an  interview  in  1961,  Dr.  Thomas  Rivers,  a  prominent  American  virus
researcher,  recalled  that  the  pope's  words  had  been  influential  among  medical


154


Chapter  2

scientists  working  during  the  1950s:

[I]n  September  1952,  Pope  Pius  XII  had  given  a
speech  at  the  First  International  Congress  on  the
Histopathology  of  the  Nervous  System  in  which  he
outlined  the  Roman  Catholic  Church's  position  on
the  moral  limits  of  human  experimentation  for
purposes  of  medical  research.  That  speech  had  a
very  broad  impact  on  medical  scientists  both  here
and  abroad.76

The  growing  influence  of  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial  can  be  seen  by
looking  at  two  editions  of  the  best-known  textbook  of  American  medical
jurisprudence  in  the  midtwentieth  century.  In  the  1949  edition  of  Doctor  and
Patient  and  the  Law,  Louis  J.  Regan,  a  physician  and  lawyer,  offered  very  little
under  the  heading  "Experimentation,"  and  what  he  did  offer  made  no  reference  to
Nuremberg:

The  physician  must  keep  abreast  of  medical
progress,  but  he  is  responsible  if  he  goes  beyond
usual  and  standard  procedures  to  the  point  of
experimentation.  If  such  treatment  is  considered
indicated,  it  should  not  be  undertaken  until
consultation  has  been  had  and  until  the  patient  has
signed  a  paper  acknowledging  and  assuming  the
risk.77

However,  in  Regan's  next  edition  of  the  same  text,  published  in  1956,  his  few
lines  on  human  experimentation  had  been  expanded  to  three  pages.  He  presented
a  lengthy  paraphrasing  of  the  Nuremberg  Code,  and  he  repeated  verbatim
(without  quotation  marks)  the  judges'  preamble  to  the  Code,  stating  that  "all
agree"  about  these  principles.  Regan  characterized  the  standards  enunciated  by
the  judges  at  Nuremberg  as  "the  most  carefully  developed  set  of  precepts
specifically  drawn  to  meet  the  problem  of  human  experimentation."  Immediately
following  his  discussion  of  Nuremberg,  Regan  laid  out  the  1946  standards  of  the
American  Medical  Association,  which,  as  he  put  it,  researchers  needed  to  meet
"in  order  to  conform  with  the  ethics  of  the  American  Medical  Association."78

NEW  TIMES,  NEW  CODES

In  the  spring  of  1959  the  National  Society  for  Medical  Research  (NSMR),
an  organization  that  Andrew  Ivy  had  helped  to  found  in  1946,  sponsored  a


155


Parti

"National  Conference  on  the  Legal  Environment  of  Medicine"  at  the  University  of
Chicago.  Human  experimentation  was  one  of  the  major  topics  presented  for
discussion  by  the  148  conference  participants,  primarily  medical  researchers,
from  around  the  country.  The  published  report  of  this  conference  reveals  that  the
many  researchers  who  gathered  in  Chicago  understood  the  Nuremberg  Code  well
enough  to  use  it  as  a  point  of  departure  for  discussion.  As  a  group,  the  conferees
acknowledged  that  "[t]he  ten  principles  [of  the  Nuremberg  Code]  have  become
the  principal  guideposts  to  the  ethics  of  clinical  research  in  the  western  world."
Not  all  those  in  attendance,  however,  seemed  to  have  been  entirely  pleased  with
this  state  of  affairs.  A  "Committee  on  the  Re-Evaluation  of  the  Nuremberg
Experimental  Principles"  reported  general  agreement  with  "the  spirit  of  these
precautions"  but  discomfort  with  a  number  of  "particulars."  For  example,  they
suggested  that  the  absolute  requirement  for  consent  in  the  Code's  first  principle
might  be  softened  by  inserting  "either  explicit  or  reasonably  presumed"  before  the
word  "consent."  They  also  added  a  clause  that  would  allow  for  third-party
permission  for  "those  not  capable  of  personal  consent."79

The  1959  NSMR  conference  strongly  suggests  that  by  the  late  1950s  many
and  perhaps  even  most  American  medical  researchers  had  come  to  recognize  the
Nuremberg  Code  as  the  most  authoritative  single  answer  to  an  important  question:
What  are  the  rules  for  human  experimentation?  The  same  conference  also
provides  compelling  evidence  that  many  researchers  who  were  giving  the  ethical
issues  surrounding  human  experimentation  serious  attention  at  this  time  were  not
entirely  happy  with  the  prospect  of  living  by  the  letter  of  the  Code.  The  sources
of  discomfort  with  the  Nuremberg  Code  can  be  grouped,  retrospectively,  into
three  broad  categories.  First,  some  recognized  the  discrepancies  between  what
they  had  come  to  know  as  real  practices  in  research  on  patient-subjects  and  what
they  read  in  the  lofty,  idealized  language  of  the  Code.  Others  simply  disagreed
with  some  elements  of  the  Code.  Still  others  disliked  the  very  idea  of  a  single,
concrete  set  of  standards  to  guide  behavior  in  such  a  complex  matter  as  human
experimentation.

Henry  Beecher,  the  Harvard-based  medical  researcher  who  was  Louis
Lasagna's  mentor  in  the  early  1950s,  published  a  paper,  "Experimentation  in
Man,"  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  only  a  few  months
before  the  NSMR  conference  in  Chicago.  In  this  lengthy  piece,  Beecher
addressed  a  mixture  of  all  three  sources  of  discomfort  with  the  Nuremberg  Code.
Beecher  offered  the  assertion  that  "it  is  unethical  and  immoral  to  carry  out
potentially  dangerous  experiments  without  the  subject's  knowledge  and  consent"
as  the  "central  conclusion"  of  his  paper.80  But,  even  with  this  strong  statement,  he
was  not  entirely  happy  with  the  first  clause  of  the  Code;  he  viewed  the
Nuremberg  consent  clause  as  too  extreme  and  not  squaring  with  the  realities  of
clinical  research:


156


Chapter  2

It  is  easy  enough  to  say,  as  point  one  [of  the
Nuremberg  Code]  does,  that  the  subject  "should
have  sufficient  knowledge  and  comprehension  of
the  elements  of  the  subject  matter  involved  as  to
enable  him  to  make  an  understanding  and
enlightened  decision."  Practically,  this  is  often
quite  impossible  ...  for  the  complexities  of
essential  medical  research  have  reached  the  point
where  the  full  implications  and  possible  hazards
cannot  always  be  known  to  anyone  and  are  often
communicable  only  to  a  few  informed  investigators
and  sometimes  not  even  to  them.  Certainly  the  full
implications  of  work  to  be  done  are  often  not  really
communicable  to  lay  subjects. . .  .  [P]oint  one  states
a  requirement  very  often  impossible  of  fulfillment
[emphasis  added].81

Beecher's  second  form  of  difficulty  with  the  Code  can  be  found  in  his
opinion  of  another  Nuremberg  clause,  which  states,  in  part,  that  a  human
experiment  should  not  be  "random  and  unnecessary  in  nature."  Beecher  cited
"anesthesia,  x-rays,  radium,  and  penicillin"  as  important  medical  breakthroughs
that  had  resulted  from  "random"  experimentation.  He  further  stated  that  he
"would  not  know  how  to  define  experiments  'unnecessary  in  nature. ",82  Finally,
Beecher  expressed  skepticism  in  general  that  any  code  could  provide  effective
moral  guidance  for  researchers  working  with  human  subjects.  Near  the  beginning
of  his  paper  he  wrote  that  "the  problems  of  human  experimentation  do  not  lend
themselves  to  a  series  of  rigid  rules."83  Later  in  the  piece,  he  expanded  on  this
thought:

[I]t  is  not  my  view  that  many  rules  can  be  laid  down
to  govern  experimentation  in  man.  In  most  cases,
these  are  more  likely  to  do  harm  than  good.  Rules
are  not  going  to  curb  the  unscrupulous.  Such  abuses
as  have  occurred  are  usually  due  to  ignorance  and
inexperience.  The  most  effective  protection  for  all
concerned  depends  upon  a  recognition  and  an
understanding  of  the  various  aspects  of  the
problem.84

Another  episode  involving  Henry  Beecher  further  clarifies  the  medical
profession's  dissatisfaction  with  the  construction  of  the  Nuremberg  Code.  In  the
fall  of  1961,  Beecher  and  other  members  of  the  Harvard  Medical  School's


157


Parti

Administrative  Board,  the  school's  governing  body,  were  presented  with  a  set  of
"rigid  rules"  that  had  begun  to  appear  in  Army  medical  research  contracts.  The
members  of  the  board  quickly  recognized  the  "Principles,  Policies  and  Rules  of
the  Surgeon  General,  Department  of  the  Army,  Relating  to  the  Use  of  Human
Volunteers  in  Medical  Research"  awarded  by  the  Army  as  little  more  than  a
restatement  of  the  Nuremberg  Code.  The  Army  Office  of  the  Surgeon  General's
provisions,  as  we  discussed  in  chapter  1,  originally  appeared  in  1954.  Given  what
we  have  just  read  of  Beecher,  it  is  not  surprising  that  he  was  uncomfortable  with
the  prospect  of  working  in  strict  accordance  with  the  Nuremberg  Code  if  he  were
to  receive  funding  from  the  Army,  nor,  as  we  see  from  the  minutes  of  the
Administrative  Board  meetings  in  which  this  matter  came  up  for  discussion,  was
Beecher  alone  in  his  opposition.  At  the  October  6,  1961,  meeting  of  the  board,
when  the  Army  contract  insertion  was  first  mentioned,  "some  members  .  . .  felt
that  with  the  minor  changes  the  regulations  were  acceptable,  while  others
described  the  regulations  as  vague,  ambiguous  and,  in  many  instances,  impossible
to  fulfill.""5

One  of  Beecher's  fellow  board  members,  Assistant  Medical  School  Dean
Joseph  W.  Gardella,  M.D.,  produced  a  thoroughgoing  written  critique  of  the
"Principles,  Policies,  and  Rules  of  the  Surgeon  General"  (and,  thus,  of  the
Nuremberg  Code)  following  the  October  1961  meeting  for  the  consideration  of
the  other  board  members.  Gardella  opened  his  analysis  with  some  general
comments  on  the  intended  meaning  of  the  Nuremberg  Code:

The  Nuremberg  Code  was  conceived  in  reference  to
Nazi  atrocities  and  was  written  for  the  specific
purpose  of  preventing  brutal  excesses  from  being
committed  or  excused  in  the  name  of  science.  The
code,  however  admirable  in  its  intent,  and  however
suitable  for  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  conceived,
is  in  our  opinion  not  necessarily  pertinent  to  or
adequate  for  the  conduct  of  medical  research  in  the
United  States.86

After  questioning  the  pertinence  of  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial  to  American
medical  science,  Gardella  went  on  to  raise  a  general  question  about  the  scope  of
the  Nuremberg  Code;  he  strongly  suggested  that  the  code  was  not  meant  to  cover
what  he  perceived  as  the  morally  distinct  enterprise  of  conducting  potentially
therapeutic  research  with  sick  patients:

Does  it  refer  only  to  healthy  volunteers  who  have
nothing  to  gain  in  terms  of  their  health  by
participating  as  research  subjects?  Or  does  it


158


Chapter  2

include  the  sick,  whose  physicians  foresee  for  them
the  possibility  of  personal  benefit  through  their
participation?  The  distinction  is  important  in  that
we  believe  that  it  would  be  difficult  and  might
prove  to  be  impossible  to  devise  one  set  of  guiding
principles  that  would  apply  satisfactorily  to  both  of
these  two  different  categories.87

Gardella  offered  a  variety  of  specific  objections  to  the  Army  surgeon
general's  "Principles,"  but  several  of  these  points  related  directly  to  the  general
questions  raised  above.  The  first  rule  of  the  Army  "Principles"  stated  (in  a  clear
example  of  borrowing  from  the  Nuremberg  Code)  that  "the  voluntary  consent  of
the  human  subject  is  absolutely  essential."  Gardella,  like  Beecher,  did  not
question  the  general  spirit  of  this  stricture;  he  worried  about  the  practical
application  of  this  seemingly  simple  idea.  Some  of  Gardella's  worries  arose
specifically  in  the  context  of  research  with  sick  patients:

The  concept  of  "voluntary  consent"  is  of  central
importance  in  any  code  relating  to  experimentation
on  humans. .  .  .  And  yet  the  concept  of  "consent"  is
not  satisfactorily  defined  [in  the  Army
"Principles"].  .  .  .  The  quality  of  the  subject's
consent  depends  . . .  upon  an  interpretation  ...  of  a
factual  situation  which  will  frequently  be  complex.
Could  the  subject  comprehend  what  he  was  told?
Did  he  in  fact  comprehend?  How  far  was  his
consent  influenced  by  his  condition  or  by  his  trust
in  his  physician?  These  questions  may  be  easily
answered  in  the  case  of  the  [healthy]  volunteer.
They  may  be  more  difficult  for  the  sick  [emphasis
added].88

Perhaps  the  most  significant  addition  to  the  Nuremberg  Code  found  in  the
Army  "Principles"  was  the  requirement  for  written  consent  from  research
subjects.  Gardella  objected  to  this  requirement  in  research  on  patients  in  a  firm,
and  revealing,  fashion:

This  condition  is  . . .  inappropriate  except  in
connection  with  healthy  normal  volunteers.  The
legal  overtones  and  implications  attendant  to  such  a
requirement  have  no  place  in  [a]  patient-physician
relationship  based  on  trust.  Here  such  faith  and


159


Parti

trust  serve  as  the  primary  basis  of  the  subject's
consent.  Moreover  being  asked  to  sign  a  somewhat
formal  paper  is  likely  to  provoke  anxiety  in  the
subject  [i.e.,  patient]  who  can  but  wonder  at  the
need  for  so  much  protocol.89

Dr.  Gardella  presented  his  analysis  of  the  Army  "Principles"  to  the  other
members  of  the  Harvard  Medical  School  Administrative  Board  on  March  23,
1962.  The  minutes  of  that  meeting  document  that  Gardella's  views  were  not
extreme  or  exceptional  among  leading  medical  scientists  in  the  early  1960s,  at
least  at  Harvard  University:  "The  members  of  the  Board  were  in  general
agreement  with  the  objections  and  criticisms  expressed  in  [Gardella's]  critique."90
At  this  same  meeting,  Henry  Beecher  "agreed,  in  an  expansive  moment,  to
attempt  to  capture  in  a  paragraph  or  so  the  broad  philosophical  and  moral
principles  that  underlie  the  conduct  of  research  on  human  beings  at  the  Harvard
Medical  School."91  The  members  of  the  board  hoped  that  such  a  statement  might
satisfy  the  Army  and  that  it  would  allow  Harvard,  as  Gardella  put  it,  "to  avert  the
catastrophic  impact  of  the  Surgeon  General's  regulation."92

A  few  months  later,  Beecher  had  completed  a  two-and-a-half-page
"Statement  Outlining  the  Philosophy  and  Ethical  Principles  Governing  the
Conduct  of  Research  on  Human  Beings  at  Harvard  Medical  School."  At  the  June
8,  1962,  board  meeting,  Beecher's  colleagues  "commended"  and  "reaffirmed"  the
views  expressed  in  Beecher's  document.93  In  this  statement,  as  in  his  1959
published  paper,  Beecher  emphasized  the  significance  of  consent,  but  he  also
asserted  that  "it  is  folly  to  overlook  the  fact  that  valid,  informed  consent  may  be
difficult  to  the  point  of  impossible  to  obtain  in  some  cases."  More  than  consent,
Beecher  believed  in  the  significance  of  "a  special  relationship  of  trust  between
subject  or  patient  and  the  investigator."  In  the  end,  Beecher  concluded  that  the
only  reliable  foundation  for  this  relationship  was  a  virtuous  medical  researcher,
with  virtuous  peers:

It  is  this  writer's  point  of  view  that  the  best
approach  [to  research  with  human  subjects]
concerns  the  character,  wisdom,  experience,
honesty,  imaginativeness  and  sense  of  responsibility
of  the  investigator  who  in  all  cases  of  doubt  or
where  serious  consequences  might  remotely  occur,
will  call  in  his  peers  and  get  the  benefit  of  their
counsel.  Rigid  rules  will  jeopardize  the  research
establishments  of  this  country  where
experimentation  in  man  is  essential.94


160


Chapter  2

Available  evidence  suggests  that,  by  offering  Henry  Beecher's
replacement  for  the  Nuremberg  Code,  representatives  of  Harvard  Medical  School
were  able  to  extract  a  clarification  during  a  meeting  with  Army  Surgeon  General
Leonard  D.  Heaton,  on  July  12,  1962,  that  the  "Principles"  being  inserted  into
Harvard's  research  contracts  with  the  Army  were  "guidelines"  rather  than  "rigid
rules."95

While  the  Harvard  Medical  School  discussion  of  the  Army's  "Principles"
took  place  behind  closed  doors  and  involved  a  policy  of  limited  applicability,  the
leaders  of  the  international  medical  community  were  simultaneously  engaged  in  a
far  more  visible  and  global  attempt  to  bring  the  standards  enunciated  in  the
Nuremberg  Code  into  line  with  the  realities  of  medical  research.  The  1964
statement  by  the  World  Medical  Association  (WMA),  commonly  known  as  the
Declaration  of  Helsinki,  created  two  separate  categories  in  laying  out  rules  for
human  experimentation:  "Clinical  Research  Combined  with  Professional  Care"
and  "Non-therapeutic  Clinical  Research."96  In  the  former  category,  physicians
were  required  to  obtain  consent  from  patient-subjects  only  when  "consistent  with
patient  psychology."  In  the  latter  type  of  research,  the  consent  requirements  were
more  absolute:  "Clinical  research  on  a  human  being  cannot  be  undertaken
without  his  free  consent,  after  he  has  been  fully  informed."  Another  noteworthy
deviation  from  the  Nuremberg  Code  is  Helsinki's  allowance  (in  both  therapeutic
and  nontherapeutic  research)  for  third-party  permission  from  a  legal  guardian.97

As  one  might  predict  from  the  similarity  between  the  changes  introduced
by  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki  and  the  changes  to  the  Nuremberg  Code  suggested
by  the  American  participants  at  the  NSMR  conference  in  1959,  the  WMA
document  met  with  widespread  approval  among  researchers  in  this  country.
Organizations  including  the  American  Society  for  Clinical  Investigation,  the
American  Federation  for  Clinical  Research,  and  the  American  Medical
Association  offered  their  quick  and  enthusiastic  endorsements.98  Compared  with
the  lofty,  idealized  language  of  the  Nuremberg  Code,  the  Helsinki  Declaration
may  have  seemed  more  sensible  to  many  researchers  in  the  early  1 960s  because  it
offered  rules  that  more  closely  resembled  research  practice  in  the  clinical  setting.

CONCLUSION

In  the  late  1940s  American  medical  researchers  seldom  recognized  that
research  with  patient-subjects  ought  to  follow  the  same  principles  as  those  applied
to  healthy  subjects.  Yet,  as  we  have  seen  in  this  chapter,  some  of  those  few  who
asked  themselves  hard  questions  about  their  research  work  with  patients
concluded  that  people  who  are  ill  are  entitled  to  the  same  consideration  as  those
who  are  not.  That  some  did  in  fact  reach  this  conclusion  is  evidence  that  it  was
not  beyond  the  horizon  of  moral  insight  at  that  time.  Nevertheless,  they  were  a
minority  of  the  community  of  physician  researchers,  and  the  organized  medical


161


Parti

profession  did  not  exhibit  a  willingness  to  reconsider  its  responsibilities  to
patients  in  the  burgeoning  world  of  postwar  clinical  research.

While  a  slowly  increasing  number  of  investigators  reflected  on  the  ethical
treatment  of  human  subjects  during  the  1950s,  it  was  not  until  the  1960s  and  a
series  of  highly  publicized  events  with  names  like  "Thalidomide,"
"Willowbrook,"  and  "Tuskegee"  that  it  became  apparent  that  a  professional  code,
whether  it  originated  in  Nuremberg  or  Helsinki,  did  not  provide  sufficient
protection  against  exploitation  and  abuse  of  human  subjects  of  research.  In  the
next  chapter  we  examine  how  the  federal  government  became  intimately,
extensively,  and  visibly  involved  in  the  regulation  of  research  with  human
subjects.


162


ENDNOTES


1 .  A  detailed  recounting  of  the  first  series  of  Nuremberg  Trials  can  be  found  in
Telford  Taylor,  The  Anatomy  of  the  Nuremberg  Trials:  A  Personal  Memoir  (New  York:
Alfred  A.  Knopf,  1992).  Taylor  describes  the  motivation  for  the  second  series  of
Nuremberg  Trials  in  the  introduction  to  this  book  (p.  xii).  He  also  mentions  that  he
"hope[s]  later  to  write  a  description  of  these  subsequent  trials"  (p.  xii).  Taylor  served  as
an  assistant  to  chief  American  prosecutor  Robert  H.  Jackson  at  the  first  series  of  trials;  he
was  the  chief  prosecutor  for  the  second  series,  which  eventually  included  twelve  separate

trials.

2.  United  States  v.  Karl  Brandt  et  al,  "The  Medical  Case,  Trials  of  War
Criminals  before  the  Nuremberg  Military  Tribunals  under  Control  Council  Law  No.  10"
(Washington,  D.C.:  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office,  1949).  This  two-volume  set
contains  an  abridged  set  of  transcripts  from  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial.  A  general
timeline  for  the  trial  can  be  found  on  p.  3  of  volume  1 ;  the  quotation  of  Taylor's  charges
can  be  found  in  the  reproduction  of  his  opening  statement  in  volume  1,  p.  27.  The
published  trial  transcripts  provide  extensive  detail  on  the  experiments  carried  out  by
German  medical  scientists  on  inmates  at  Nazi  concentration  camps.  These  experiments
included  a  long  list  of  brutalities  carried  out  in  the  name  of  medical  science.  Some  of
these  were  specifically  related  to  the  Nazi  war  effort.  German  investigators  conducted
high-altitude  tolerance  tests  for  the  Luftwaffe  using  a  low-pressure  chamber.  Scientists
forced  prisoners  to  enter  the  chamber  and  subjected  them  to  extreme  pressure  changes
that  resulted  in  excruciating  pain  and,  sometimes,  death.  Among  these  experiments  were
human  twin  studies  related  to  genetics  and  germ  warfare.  For  example,  a  series  of
experiments  involved  injecting  one  twin  with  a  potential  germ  warfare  agent  to  test  the
effects  of  that  agent.  If  the  twin  injected  with  the  germ  died,  the  other  twin  was
immediately  killed  to  compare  the  the  organs  between  the  healthy  and  the  sick  twin.
Another  series  of  experiments  related  to  downed  airman  and  shipwrecked  sailors  who
were  faced  with  deprivation  of  potable  water.  In  these  tests,  prisoners  were  divided  into
four  groups:  the  first  received  no  water;  a  second  set  was  forced  to  drink  ordinary
seawater;  the  third  would  drink  seawater  processed  to  remove  the  salty  taste  (but  not  the
actual  salt);  and  fourth  group  could  drink  desalinated  seawater.  Many  of  the  subjects  in
the  first  three  groups  died.  German  researchers  also  compelled  prisoners  to  engage  in  a
variety  of  other  cruel  experiments,  many  of  which  were  concerned  with  infectious
diseases  such  as  malaria,  epidemic  jaundice,  and  typhus.  More  information  can  be
found  on  the  Nazi  prison  camp  experiments  in  several  sources  including  Robert  Jay
Lifton,  The  Nazi  Doctors:  Medical  Killing  and  the  Psychology  of  Genocide  (New  York:
Basic  Books,  1986);  Robert  N.  Proctor,  Racial  Hygiene:  Medicine  under  the  Nazis
(Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1988);  and  George  J.  Annas  and  Michael
A.  Grodin,  eds.,  The  Nazi  Doctors  and  the  Nuremberg  Code:  Human  Rights  in  Human
Experimentation  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1992).

Japanese  medical  scientists,  especially  those  associated  with  a  biological  warfare
(BW)  research  corps  known  as  Unit  731,  also  conducted  many  cruel  medical  experiments
during  the  war.  Until  recently,  these  experiments  were  virtually  unknown  because
American  military  and  medical  officials  struck  a  postwar  deal  with  leading  Japanese
scientists  associated  with  Unit  73 1 :  immunity  from  war  crimes  prosecution  in  exchange
for  exclusive  American  access  to  the  results  of  the  Japanese  BW  experiments.  The

163


Japanese  experiments  and  the  American  cover-up  have  recently  received  coverage  in
Sheldon  Harris's  Factories  of  Death:  Japanese  Biological  Warfare,  1932-1945,  and  the
American  Cover  Up  (London/New  York:  Routledge,  1994).  See  also  Peter  Williams  and
David  Wallace,  Unit  731:  The  Japanese  Army's  Secret  of  Secrets  (London:  Hodder  and
Stoughton,  1989);  and  John  W.  Powell,  Jr.,  "Japan's  Biological  Weapons,  1930-1945,"
Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists  37  (October  1981):  44-53.

3.  American  Medical  Association,  Board  of  Trustees,  minutes  of  the  May  1946
meeting,  AMA  Archive,  Chicago,  Illinois  (ACHRE  No.  IND-072595-A),  156-157.

4.  A  full-blown  biography  of  Ivy  remains  to  be  written,  but  some  biographical
information  can  be  found  in  the  following  brief  notices:  Carl  A.  Dragstedt,  "Andrew
Conway  Ivy,"  Quarterly  Bulletin  of  the  Northwestern  University  Medical  School  1 8
(Summer  1944):  139-140;  Morton  I.  Grossman,  "Andrew  Conway  Ivy  (1893-1978),"
Physiologist  21  (April  1978):  1 1-12;  D.  B.  Bill,  "A.  C.  Ivy-Reminiscences,"
Physiologist  22  (October  1979):  21-22.

5.  The  quotation  is  taken  from  Andrew  C.  Ivy,  "Nazi  War  Crimes  of  a  Medical
Nature,"  Federation  Bulletin  33  (May  1947):  133.  Ivy  first  publicly  offered  this  view  of
the  Nuremberg  prosecutors'  confusion  about  the  ethics  and  legality  of  human
experimentation  when  he  presented  this  paper  at  an  annual  meeting  of  the  Federation  of
State  Medical  Boards  of  the  United  States  on  10  February  1947-just  a  few  months  after
the  start  of  the  Medical  Trial. In  this  presentation  Ivy  said  that  he  traveled  to  Germany
in  August  1946.  In  a  similar  description  of  his  experiences  with  the  Nuremberg
prosecution  team  published  a  few  years  later  Ivy  reiterates  a  similar  story  except  that  the
date  of  his  initial  travel  is  given  as  July  1946:  A.  C.  Ivy,  "Nazi  War  Crimes  of  a  Medical
Nature,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  139(15  January  1 949):  131.  An
editorial  in  JAMA  confirms  some  of  the  essential  elements  of  Ivy's  early  work  with  the
Nuremberg  prosecutors  (his  selection  by  the  AMA  Board  of  Trustees  at  the  request  of  the
federal  government  and  his  travel  to  Germany  "a  few  months"  before  November  1946):
"The  Brutalities  of  Nazi  Physicians,"  JAMA  132  (23  November  1946):  714.  The  basic
narrative  of  Ivy's  selection  by  the  Board  of  Trustees  and  his  travel  to  Europe  can  also  be
found  in  R.  L.  Sensenich,  "Supplementary  Report  of  the  Board  of  Trustees,"  JAMA  132
(21  December  1946):  1006.

6.  American  Medical  Association,  Board  of  Trustees,  minutes  of  the  16  August
1946  meeting,  AMA  Archive,  Chicago,  Illinois  (ACHRE  No.  IND-072595-A),  8-9.

7.  American  Medical  Association,  Board  of  Trustees,  minutes  of  the  19
September  1946  meeting,  AMA  Archive,  Chicago,  Illinois  (ACHRE  No.  IND-072595-
A),  51-52.

8.  A.  C.  Ivy,  "Report  on  War  Crimes  of  a  Medical  Nature  Committed  in
Germany  and  Elsewhere  on  German  Nationals  and  the  Nationals  of  Occupied  Countries
by  the  Nazi  Regime  during  World  War  II,"  1946.  This  report  was  not  published,  but  it  is
available  at  the  National  Library  of  Medicine.  A  copy  also  exists  in  the  AMA  Archive
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-063094-A).

9.  United  States  v.  Karl  Brandt  et  ah,  "The  Medical  Case,  Trials  of  War
Criminals  before  the  Nuremberg  Military  Tribunals  under  Control  Council  Law  No.  10"
(Washington,  D.C.:  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office,  1949),  2:  181-182.  The  judges'
preamble  to  the  Code  states  that  "[a]ll  agree  .  .  .  that  certain  basic  principles  must  be
observed  in  order  to  satisfy  the  moral,  ethical  and  legal"  aspects  of  human
experimentation.


164


10.  Ivy's  recitation  of  his  own  set  of  rules  does  not  appear  in  the  published
abridged  transcripts  of  the  trial.  See  the  complete  transcripts  of  the  trial,  which  are
available  on  microfilm  at  the  National  Archives  (National  Archives  Microfilm,  M887,
reel  9,  13  June  1947,  pp.  9141-9142).  Throughout  this  chapter,  we  cite  the  abridged
transcripts  wherever  possible  and  the  full  transcripts  only  if  necessary.

11.  Leo  Alexander  later  reproduced  his  1 5  April  1 947  memo  in  two
publications:  "Limitations  in  Experimental  Research  on  Human  Beings,"  Lex  et  Scientia
3  (January-March  1966):  20-22,  and  "Ethics  of  Human  Experimentation,"  Psychiatric
Journal  of  the  University  of  Ottawa  1  (1976):  42-44.  In  the  1976  article,  Alexander  made
a  seemingly  exaggerated  claim  to  be  "the  original  author  of  the  Nuremberg  Code"  (p.  40).
Side-by-side  comparison  of  Ivy's  rules,  Alexander's  memo,  and  the  Nuremberg  Code
does,  however,  suggest  that  the  judges  drew  two  original  contributions  from  Alexander's
memo:  clauses  6  and  7  of  the  Nuremberg  Code  are  embedded  in  the  15  April  memo  (they
do  not  appear  in  Ivy's  rules).

12.  McHaney's  closing  statement  can  be  found  in  the  complete  microfilm
transcripts  of  the  trial  available  through  the  National  Archives.  McHaney's  closing
statement  and  Alexander's  memorandum  (and  Alexander's  claim  to  authorship  of  the
Code)  are  also  reproduced  in  Michael  A.  Grodin's  "Historical  Origins  of  the  Nuremberg
Code,"  in  The  Nazi  Doctors  and  the  Nuremberg  Code:  Human  Rights  in  Human
Experimentation,  134-137.

13.  American  Medical  Association,  Board  of  Trustees,  minutes  of  the  19
September  1946  meeting,  AM  A  Archive,  Chicago,  Illinois  (ACHRE  No.  IND-072595-

A).

14.  The  AM  A  reports  that  the  records  of  the  Judicial  Council  for  all  of  the  1940s
have  been  lost.  Personal  communication  between  Marilyn  Douros,  of  the  AM  A
Archives,  and  Jon  M.  Harkness  (ACHRE),  19  January  1995.

15.  "Supplementary  Report  of  the  Judicial  Council,"  proceedings  of  the  House
of  Delegates  Annual  Meeting,  9-1 1  December  1946,  JAMA  132  (28  December  1946):
1090.  The  bracketed  addition  to  rule  1  was  added  in  the  final  version  of  statement,  which
was  approved  by  the  House  of  Delegates  on  1 1  December  1946.

16.  William  A.  Coventry,  "Report  of  the  Reference  Committee  on
Miscellaneous  Business,"  proceedings  of  the  House  of  Delegates  Meeting,  9-1 1
December  1946,  JAMA  133  (4  January  1947):  35.

17.  Robert  Williamson,  an  AMA  archivist,  reports  that  in  1942,  65  percent  of
American  physicians  were  members  of  the  AMA,  and  in  1949,  75  percent  of  American
physicians  were  members;  he  did  not  have  percentage  figures  available  for  1946.
Williamson  also  provided  the  absolute  number  of  members  for  1946.  Personal
communication  between  Jon  M.  Harkness  (ACHRE)  and  Robert  Williamson,  4  January
1995.

1 8.  United  States  v.  Karl  Brandt  et  al. ,  "The  Medical  Case,  Trials  of  War
Criminals  before  the  Nuremberg  Military  Tribunal  under  Control  Council  Law  No.  10,"
voi.  2,  83.

19.  Ibid.

20.  Complete  transcripts  of  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial,  National  Archives
Microfilm,  M887,  reel  9,  13  June  1947,  pp.  9168-9170.

2 1 .  Susan  E.  Lederer,  Subjected  to  Science:  Experimentation  in  America  before
the  Second  World  War  (Baltimore:  Johns  Hopkins  University  Press,  1995),  105.

165


22.  Lederer  recounts  the  historical  details  of  the  yellow  fever  experiment  (pp.
19-23)  and  explores  Reed's  powerful  legacy  (pp.  132-134)  in  Subjected  to  Science.

23.  Theodore  Woodward,  interview  by  Gail  Javitt  and  Suzanne  White-Junod
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  14  December  1994  (ACHRE  Research  Project
Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Ethics  Oral  History  Project),  6.

24.  Interview  with  Woodward,  14  December  1994,  10.

25.  John  D.  Arnold,  interview  by  Jon  M.  Harkness  (ACHRE),  transcript  of
audio  recording,  6  December  1994  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program
File,  Ethics  Oral  History  Project),  18.

26.  The  list  of  participants  exists  in  the  extant  records  of  the  LMRI  project
available  at  the  Center  for  Law  and  Health  Sciences,  School  of  Law,  Boston  University.
The  quotation  explaining  the  goal  of  the  meeting  is  taken  from  the  first  page  of  a
summary  of  the  conference  prepared  for  the  project's  final  report,  which  was  not
published:  Anne  S.  Harris,  "The  Concept  of  Consent  in  Clinical  Research:  Analytic
Summary  of  a  Conference,"  chapter  6  in  A  Study  of  the  Legal,  Ethical,  and
Administrative  Aspects  of  Clinical  Research  Involving  Human  Subjects:  Final  Report  of
Administrative  Practices  in  Clinical  Research,  fNIHJ  Research  Grant  No.  7039  Law-
Medicine  Research  Institute,  Boston  University,  1963  (ACHRE  No.  BU-053194-A).

27.  The  National  Institutes  of  Health  awarded  LMRI  almost  $100,000  on  1
January  1960  to  begin  this  project,  which  concluded  31  March  1963.  The  general
statement  of  the  project's  purpose  appears  in  LMRI  final  report,  chapter  1  ("Focus  of  the
Inquiry"),  1.

28.  LMRI  final  report,  chapter  6,  48.

29.  Louis  Lasagna,  interview  by  Jon  M.  Harkness  and  Suzanne  White-Junod
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  13  December  1994  (ACHRE  Research  Project
Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Ethics  Oral  History  Project),  5.

30.  Ibid.,  11.

31.  Extensive  newspaper  clippings  related  to  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial  exist
in  Beecher's  personal  papers  in  the  Special  Collections  Department,  Countway  Library,
Harvard  University.  Beecher's  first  major  publication  on  research  ethics  appeared  in  early
1959:  Henry  K.  Beecher,  "Experimentation  in  Man,"  JAMA 169  (31  January  1959):  461-
478.  Of  course,  he  is  best  known  for  a  1966  article:  Henry  K.  Beecher,  "Ethics  and
Clinical  Research,"  New  England  Journal  of  Medicine  274  (16  June  1966):  1354-1360.
Significantly,  Beecher  acknowledged  in  a  manuscript  copy  of  the  original  version  of  the
NEJM  paper,  which  he  presented  at  a  conference  for  science  journalists  on  22  March
1965,  that  "in  years  gone  by  work  in  my  laboratory  could  have  been  criticized."  Beecher,
"Ethics  and  the  Explosion  of  Human  Experimentation,"  2a,  Beecher  Papers,  Countway
Library  (ACHRE  No.  IND-072595-A).

32.  Jay  Katz,  "Human  Experimentation  and  Human  Rights,"  St.  Louis  University
Law  Journal  38  (1993):  28.

33.  Stanley  Joel  Reiser,  Arthur  J.  Dyck,  and  William  J.  Curran,  eds.,  Ethics  in
Medicine:  Historical  Perspectives  and  Contemporarv  Concerns  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  The
MIT  Press,  1977),  7.

34.  Otto  E.  Guttentag,  "The  Physician's  Point  of  View,"  Science  1 17  (1953):
207-210;  the  quotation  is  from  208.  Guttentag's  article  appeared  in  Science  with  three
others  that  had  been  presented  at  the  1951  symposium:  Michael  B.  Shimkin,  "The
Researcher  Worker's  Point  of  View,"  205-207;  Alexander  M.  Kidd,  "Limits  of  the  Right


166


of  a  Person  to  Consent  to  Experimentation  on  Himself,"  211-212;  and  W.  H.  Johnson,
"Civil  Rights  of  Military  Personnel  Regarding  Medical  Care  and  Experimental
Procedures,"  212-215.

35.  Guttentag,  "The  Physician's  Point  of  View,"  208.

36.  Ibid.,  210.

37.  John  C.  Ford,  "Notes  on  Moral  Theology,"  Theological  Studies  6  (December
1945):  534-535.  Ford's  discussion  of  human  experimentation  arose  in  a  lengthy  and
discursive  review  of  issues  and  ideas  in  moral  theology.  For  several  years,  he  contributed
a  similar  review  to  each  volume  of  Theological  Studies.

38.  Transcripts  of  "Social  Responsibility  in  Pediatric  Research"  conference,  1
May  1961,  7.  LMRI  records,  Center  for  Law  and  Health  Sciences,  School  of  Law,  Boston
University  (ACHRE  No.  BU-053194-A).

39.  "LMRI  Final  Report,"  chapter  6,  43.

40.  Ibid.,  43-44.

41.  Ibid.,  44.

42.  Ibid.,  46-47.

43.  Committee  member  and  historian  Susan  Lederer  took  principal
responsibility  for  organizing  the  Ethics  Oral  History  Project,  with  assistance  from  several
members  of  the  staff  including  two  historians  experienced  in  the  techniques  of  oral
history.  The  Committee  also  drew  on  advice  from  several  outside  experts,  including
historians  and  ethicists,  to  create  a  list  of  potential  interviewees  and  to  refine  the  list  of
questions  that  we  wanted  to  explore  during  interviews.  In  total,  the  Committee
conducted  twenty-two  interviews  in  the  Ethics  Oral  History  Project.  Most  of  the  subjects
were  medical  researchers  whose  careers  began  in  the  late  1940s  or  early  1950s,  but  we
also  spoke  with  some  research  administrators.  In  general,  we  chose  to  interview
researchers  who  had  exhibited  some  particular  interest  in  research  ethics  during  their
careers.  But  this  does  not  mean  that  we  held  interviews  only  with  researchers  who
viewed  recent  developments  in  research  ethics  in  a  positive  fashion.  The  interviews  were
all  recorded  on  audio  tape  and  professionally  transcribed.  Interview  subjects  had  an
opportunity  to  review  the  transcripts.  Complete  sets  of  all  transcripts  can  be  found  in  the
archival  records  of  the  Advisory  Committee.

44.  Interview  with  Lasagna,  13  December  1994,  13.

45.  Paul  Beeson,  interview  by  Susan  E.  Lederer  (ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio
recording,  20  November  1994  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program
File,  Ethics  Oral  History  Project),  16-17.

46.  Leonard  Sagan,  interview  by  Gail  Javitt,  Suzanne  White-Junod,  Sandra
Thomas,  and  John  Kruger  (ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  17  November  1994
(ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Ethics  Oral  History  Project),
13-14.

47.  Ibid.,  19-20.

48.  Stuart  Finch,  interview  by  Gail  Javitt,  Suzanne  White-Junod,  and  Valerie
Hurt  (ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  6  December  1994  (ACHRE  Research
Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Ethics  Oral  History  Project),  52.

49.  Interview  with  Paul  Beeson,  20  November  1994,  39.

50.  Thomas  Chalmers,  interview  by  Jon  Harkness  (ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio
recording,  9  December  1994  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,
Ethics  Oral  History  Project),  75.

167


5 1 .  Herman  Wigodsky,  interview  by  Gail  Javitt  and  Suzanne  White-Junod
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  17  January  1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project
Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Ethics  Oral  History  Project),  14.

52.  For  an  analysis  and  translation  of  the  1931  German  rules  see  Hans-Martin
Sass,  "Reichsrundschreiben  1931:  Pre-Nuremberg  German  Regulations  Concerning  New
Therapy  and  Human  Experimentation,"  Journal  of  Medicine  and  Philosophy  8  ( 1 983):
99-1 1 1 .  A  similar  analysis  and  translation  of  the  same  set  of  rules  appears  in  Grodin,
"Historical  Origins  of  the  Nuremberg  Code,"  129-132.

53.  Full  trial  transcripts,  9142.

54.  Abridged  trial  transcripts,  83.

55.  Interview  with  Dr.  Herman  Wigodsky,  17  January  1995,  16-17.

56.  Ruth  Faden  and  Tom  Beauchamp,  A  History  and  Theory  of  Informed
Consent  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1986),  96.

57.  Ivy's  several  examples  ranged  from  Walter  Reed's  turn-of-the-century
experiments  with  yellow  fever  to  wartime  malaria  experiments  in  American  state  and
federal  prisons.  See  page  91 19  of  the  full  trial  transcripts  for  Ivy's  discussion  of  the
Reed  experiments  and  pages  9125-9129  for  his  description  of  the  malaria  experiments
that  had  taken  place  in  the  United  States  during  the  war.

58.  David  J.  Rothman,  Strangers  at  the  Bedside:  A  Histoiy  of  How  Law  and
Bioethics  Transformed  Medical  Decision  Making  (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1994),  62.

59.  Interview  with  John  Arnold,  6  December  1 994,  9- 1 0.

60.  Herbert  Abrams,  interview  by  Jon  Harkness  (ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio
recording,  12  January  1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,
Ethics  Oral  History  Project),  25.

61.  Dorothy  Levenson,  Montefwre:  The  Hospital  as  Social  Instrument,  1884-
1984  (New  York:  Farrar,  Straus  &  Giroux,  1984).  For  information  on  the  presence  of
Jewish  refugee  physicians  at  Montefiore,  see  pages  154-155.

62.  Rothman,  Strangers  at  the  Bedside,  62-63.

63.  Katz,  "The  Consent  Principle  of  the  Nuremberg  Code,"  228.

64.  William  Silverman,  interview  by  Gail  Javitt  (ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio
recording  14  February  1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,
Ethics  Oral  History  Project),  61-62.

65.  Ibid.,  87-88.

66.  "Why  Human  'Guinea  Pigs'  Volunteer,"  New  York  Times  Magazine,  13
April  1958,62.

67.  See,  for  example,  John  L.  O'Hara,  "The  Most  Unforgettable  Character  I've
Met,"  Reader's  Digest,  May  1948,  30-35;  Thomas  Koritz,  "I  Was  a  Human  Guinea  Pig,"
Saturday  Evening  Post,  25  July  1953,  27,  79-80,  82;  Don  Wharton,  "A  Treasure  in  the
Heart  of  Every  Man,'"  Reader's  Digest,  December  1954,  49-53  (condensed  from
"Prisoners  Who  Volunteer,  Blood,  Flesh-and  Their  Lives,"  American  Mercuiy,
December  1954,  51-55);  Howard  Simons,  "They  Volunteer  to  Suffer,"  Saturday  Evening
Post,  26  March  1960,  33,  87-88.

68.  "Experiments  on  Prisoners,"  Science  Newsletter  (also  Science  News),  2 1
February  1948,53,  117.

69.  "C.O.'s  Offer  Selves  for  Atomic  Experiments,"  Christian  Century,  20
October  1954,  1260.


168


70.  Robert  D.  Potter,  "Are  We  Winning  the  War  Against  TB?"  Saturday
Evening  Post,  15  January  1949.  Cited  in  Marcel  C.  LaFollette,  Making  Science  Our
Own:  Public  Images  of  Science  1910-1955  (Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1990),
138-140.

71 .  Renee  C.  Fox,  Experiment  Perilous:  Physicians  and  Patients  Facing  the
Unknown  (Philadelphia:  University  of  Pennsylvania  Press,  1974,  first  published  1959).
Fox  describes  her  long  days  of  observation  on  page  15;  she  discusses  the  Nuremberg
Code  at  46-47.

72.  Michael  B.  Shimkin,  As  Memory  Serves:  Six  Essays  on  a  Personal
Involvement  with  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  1938-1978  (Bethesda,  Md.:  U.S.
Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  1983),  127.

73.  Ibid.,  128.

74.  Ibid.,  127.

75.  The  quotation  is  a  translation  from  the  French  in  which  Pius  XII  delivered
the  address:  "II  faut  remarquer  que  l'homme  dans  son  etre  personnel  n'est  pas  ordonne  en
fin  de  compte  a  l'utilite  de  la  societe,  mais  au  contraire,  la  communaute  est  la  pour
rhomme."  The  French  text  can  be  found  in  the  Atti  del  Primo  Congresso  Internazionale
di  Istopatologia  del  Sistema  Nervosa/Proceedings  of  the  First  International  Congress  of
Neuropathology,  Rome,  8-13  September  1952.  English  translations  of  the  pope's  address
appear  in  a  variety  of  publications  including  The  Linacre  Quarterly:  Official  Journal  of
the  Federation  of  Catholic  Physicians'  Guilds  19  (November  1952):  98-107  and  The
Irish  Ecclesiastical  Record  86  (1954):  222-230.

76.  Saul  Benison,  Tom  Rivers:  Reflections  on  a  Life  in  Medicine  and  Science
(Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press,  1967),  498.

77.  Louis  J.  Regan,  Doctor  and  Patient  and  the  Law,  2d  ed.  (St.  Louis:  C.  V.
Mosby,  1949),  398.

78.  Louis  J.  Regan,  Doctor  and  Patient  and  the  Law,  3d  ed.  (St.  Louis:  C.  V.
Mosby,  1956),  370-372.

79.  Report  on  the  National  Conference  on  the  Legal  Environment  of
Medicine,27-28  May  1959  (Chicago:  National  Society  for  Medical  Research,  1959);  the
quotations  are  from  pages  91  and  88,  respectively.

80.  Henry  K.  Beecher,  "Experimentation  in  Man,"  Journal  of  the  American
Medical  Association  169(1959):  118/470.

81.  Ibid.,  121/473.

82.  Ibid.,  122/474.

83.  Ibid.,  109/461.

84.  Ibid.,  119/471.

85.  Harvard  Medical  School,  Harvard  Medical  School  Administrative  Board,
proceedings  of  the  6  October  1961  meeting  (ACHRE  No.  HAR-062394-A-3).

86.  Memorandum  to  "GPB"  [Harvard  Medical  School  Dean  Berry]  from  "JWG"
[Assistant  Dean  Gardella]  ("Criticisms  of 'Principles,  Policies  and  Rules  of  the  Surgeon
General,  Department  of  the  Army,  relating  to  the  use  of  Human  Volunteers  in  Medical
Research  Contracts  awarded  by  the  Army'")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-072595-A),  1.

87.  Ibid.,  2.

88.  Ibid.

89.  Ibid.,  3.


169


90.  Harvard  Medical  School,  Harvard  Medical  School  Administrative  Board,
proceedings  of  23  March  1962  (ACHRE  No.  HAR-062394-A-3).

91.  Joseph  W.  Gardella,  Assistant  Dean,  Harvard  Medical  School  to  Henry  K.
Beecher,  Massachusetts  General  Hospital,  27  March  1962  ("I  write  to  confirm  my
impression  . .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  HAR-062394-A-4).

92.  Ibid.

93.  Harvard  Medical  School,  Harvard  Medical  School  Administrative  Board,
proceedings  of  8  June  1962  (ACHRE  No.  HAR-062394-A-3).

94.  Henry  Beecher,  undated  ("Statement  Outlining  the  Philosophy  and  Ethical
Principles  Governing  the  Conduct  of  Research  on  Human  Beings  at  the  Harvard  Medical
School")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-072595-A).

95.  Henry  K.  Beecher  to  Lieutenant  General  Leonard  D.  Heaton,  12  July  1962
("I  have  just  returned  to  Boston  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  HAR-062394-A-2).

96.  World  Medical  Association,  "Declaration  of  Helsinki:  Recommendations
Guiding  Medical  Doctors  in  Biomedical  Research  Involving  Human  Subjects,"  adopted
by  the  Eighteenth  World  Medical  Assembly,  Helsinki,  Finland,  1964.

97.  "Draft  Code  of  Ethics  on  Human  Experimentation,"  British  Medical  Journal
2  (1962):  1119;  "Human  Experimentation:  Code  of  Ethics  of  the  World  Medical
Association,"  British  Medical  Journal  2  (1964):  177.

98.  Faden  and  Beauchamp,  A  History  and  Theory  of  Informed  Consent,  1 56- 1 57,
and  Paul  M.  McNeill,  The  Ethics  and  Politics  of  Human  Experimentation  (Cambridge,
U.K.:  Press  Syndicate  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,  1993),  44-47.  For  a  more  detailed
comparison  between  the  Nuremberg  Code  and  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki,  see  Jay  Katz,
"The  Consent  Principle  of  the  Nuremberg  Code,"  231-234.


170


Government  Standards  for

Human  Experiments:

The  1960s  and  1970s


1  he  year  1974  marks  the  upper  bound  for  the  period  of  the  Advisory
Committee's  historical  investigation.  That  year  two  landmark  events  in  the
history  of  government  policy  on  research  involving  human  subjects  took  place:
the  promulgation  by  the  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare  (DHEW)
of  comprehensive  regulations  for  oversight  of  human  subject  research  and
passage  by  Congress  of  the  National  Research  Act.  The  DHEW  regulations  set
rules  for  oversight  of  human  subject  research  supported  by  the  single  largest
funding  source  for  such  research,  and  the  National  Research  Act  authorized  the
establishment  of  the  National  Commission  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects
of  Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research  (also  known  as  the  National
Commission),  which  was  charged  with  examining  the  conduct  of  research
involving  human  subjects.  In  the  years  following  1974,  many  of  the  rules
promulgated  by  DHEW  were  subsequently  adopted  by  various  other  government
agencies,  culminating  in  governmentwide  regulations  under  the  Common  Rule  in
1991.'

In  the  first  part  of  this  chapter,  we  trace  the  developments  in  the  1960s  and
early  1970s  that  influenced  and  led  up  to  the  DHEW  regulations  and  the  National
Research  Act.  These  developments  included  congressional  hearings  on  the
practices  of  the  drug  industry  and  the  thalidomide  tragedy,  critical  scholarly
writings,  interim  policies  at  DHEW,  public  outcry  over  controversial  cases  of
medical  research,  and  the  congressional  hearings  these  cases  occasioned.  People


171


Parti

were  surprised  and  shocked  to  learn  about  practices  and  behaviors  they  knew  to
be  wrong.  While  the  ethical  principles  such  practices  violated  may  not  have  been
well  articulated  specific  to  the  enterprise  of  human  research,  they  were  part  of
individuals'  moral  consciousness.  The  history  of  these  events  has  been  well  told
before,  and  we  only  summarize  it  here,  drawing  heavily  on  the  previous  work  of
other  authors.2

The  1974  regulations  were  promulgated  by  DHEW  and  applied  only  to
that  agency.  Likewise,  the  National  Research  Act  authorized  the  establishment  of
the  National  Commission  and  directed  it  to  make  recommendations  to  the
secretary  of  DHEW.  In  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter,  we  review  developments  in
policies  governing  human  research  during  this  period  in  agencies  other  than
DHEW.  This  is  a  history  that  has  received  comparatively  little  scholarly
attention.

In  the  1970s,  just  as  DHEW  was  moving  ahead  with  broad  new
regulations,  scandal  rocked  the  Department  of  Defense  and  the  CIA.  It  was
revealed  that,  with  cooperation  from  university  researchers,  these  agencies  had
engaged  in  secret  experimentation  on  military  and  civilian  subjects  without  their
knowledge,  sometimes  with  tragic  results.3  The  discovery  of  the  existence  of
these  secret  programs  led  to  further  congressional  investigations  and  to  a  1975
Department  of  the  Army  review  of  the  effectiveness  of  the  1953  Secretary  of
Defense  Wilson  memorandum  adopting  the  Nuremberg  Code.  This  Army  review
led  to  the  eventual  declassification  of  the  Wilson  memorandum,  which  had  been
Top  Secret  upon  its  issuance  and  remained  classified  until  1975.  It  also  led,  much
later,  to  litigation  in  which  justices  of  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  for  the  first  time
commented  on  the  applicability  of  the  Nuremberg  Code  to  actions  undertaken  by
the  U.S.  government.4  The  chapter  concludes  with  a  discussion  of  these
important  events.

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  HUMAN  SUBJECT  RESEARCH
POLICY  AT  DHEW

As  the  largest  funding  source  in  the  federal  government  for  human  subject
research,  DHEW  led  the  way  in  developing  regulations  aimed  at  protecting  the
rights  and  welfare  of  subjects.  The  evolution  of  the  regulations,  which  would
eventually  be  adopted  on  a  government  wide  basis,  was  influenced  by  revelations
of  unethical  research,  congressional  reaction  to  the  revelations,  and  concern  over
public  perception  of  such  research.  That  regulations  were  eventually  adopted  at
all  by  DHEW  was  influenced  by  the  political  realities  of  the  time  and  the  lack  of
congressional  support  for  a  standing  regulatory  body  to  oversee  human  subject
research,  as  had  been  recommended  by  an  influential  federally  appointed  panel,
the  Tuskegee  Syphilis  Study  Ad  Hoc  Panel.  In  a  trade-off  that  would  have  major
influence  on  the  future  of  human  subject  research  oversight,  the  proposed  bill
creating  the  standing  regulatory  body  was  withdrawn  in  exchange  for  the  National

172


Chapter  3

Research  Act,  establishing  the  National  Commission,  and  an  understanding  that
DHEW  would  promulgate  the  aforementioned  regulations.  This  historical
backdrop  is  outlined  in  the  rerhainder  of  this  chapter.

The  Thalidomide  Tragedy  and  the  Congressional  Requirement  for  Patient
Consent

In  1959  a  Senate  subcommittee  chaired  by  Senator  Estes  Kefauver  of
Tennessee  began  hearings  into  the  conduct  of  pharmaceutical  companies.
Testimony  revealed  that  it  was  common  practice  for  drug  companies  to  provide
samples  of  experimental  drugs,  whose  safety  and  efficacy  had  not  been
established,  to  physicians,  who  were  then  paid  to  collect  data  on  their  patients
taking  these  drugs.  Physicians  throughout  the  country  prescribed  these  drugs  to
patients  without  their  knowledge  or  consent  as  part  of  this  loosely  controlled
research.  These  practices  and  others  prompted  calls  by  Kefauver  and  other
senators  for  an  amendment  to  the  Food,  Drug,  and  Cosmetic  Act  of  1938  to
address  the  injuriousness  and  ineffectiveness  of  certain  drugs.  In  1961  the
dangers  of  new  drug  uses  were  vividly  exemplified  by  the  thalidomide  disaster  in
Europe,  Canada,  and  to  a  lesser  degree,  the  United  States.5  Starting  in  late  1957,
the  sedative  thalidomide  was  given  to  countless  pregnant  women  and  caused
thousands  of  birth  defects  in  newborn  infants  (most  commonly,  missing  or
deformed  limbs).  The  thalidomide  disaster  was  widely  covered  by  the  television
networks,  and  the  visual  impact  of  these  babies  stunned  viewers  and  caused
Americans  to  question  the  protections  afforded  those  receiving  investigational
agents.

It  is  in  large  measure  because  of  the  thalidomide  episode  that  the  1962
Kefauver-Harris  amendments  to  the  Food,  Drug,  and  Cosmetic  Act  were  passed,6
requiring  that  informed  consent  be  obtained  in  the  testing  of  investigational
drugs.7  While  such  testing  occurred  mainly  with  patients,  Congress  carefully
avoided  interfering  in  the  doctor-patient  relationship  and  in  the  process  severely
reduced  the  effectiveness  of  the  requirement.  Consent  was  not  required  when  it
was  "not  feasible"  or  was  deemed  not  to  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  patient—
both  judgments  made  "according  to  the  best  judgment  of  the  doctors  involved."8
Despite  their  being  limited  in  scope,  the  Kefauver-Harris  amendments  were
influential  in  advancing  considerations  of  protections  of  research  subjects  first
within  the  DHEW  and  later  throughout  the  rest  of  the  government.

NIH  and  PHS  Develop  a  Uniform  Policy  to  Protect  Human  Subjects

In  late  1963,  concerns  were  raised  within  NIH  by  Director  James  Shannon
after  disturbing  revelations  about  two  research  projects  funded  in  part  by  the
Public  Health  Service  and  NIH.  One  was  the  unsuccessful  transplantation  of  a
chimpanzee  kidney  into  a  human  being  at  Tulane  University,  a  procedure  that

173


Parti

promised  neither  benefit  to  the  recipient  nor  new  scientific  information.  The
transplant  was  reportedly  done  with  the  consent  of  the  patient,  but  without
consultation  or  review  by  anyone  other  than  the  medical  team  involved."

The  second  was  research  undertaken  in  mid- 1963  at  the  Brooklyn  Jewish
Chronic  Disease  Hospital.  There,  investigators  (the  chief  investigator,  Dr.
Chester  M.  Southam  was  a  physician  at  the  Sloan-Kettering  Cancer  Research
Institute,  and  he  received  permission  to  proceed  with  the  work  from  the  hospital's
medical  director,  Dr.  Emmanuel  E.  Mandel)  had  undertaken  a  research  project  in
which  they  injected  live  cancer  cells  into  indigent  elderly  patients  without  their
consent.  The  research  went  forward  without  review  by  the  hospital's  research
committee  and  over  the  objections  of  three  physicians  consulted,  who  argued  that
the  proposed  subjects  were  incapable  of  giving  adequate  consent  to  participate.10
The  disclosure  of  the  experiment  served  to  make  both  PHS  officials  like  Shannon
and  the  Board  of  Regents  of  the  University  of  the  State  of  New  York,  which  had
jurisdiction  over  licensure  of  physicians,  aware  of  the  shortcomings  of  procedures
in  place  to  protect  human  subjects.  They  were  further  concerned  over  the  public's
reaction  to  disclosure  of  the  research  and  the  impact  it  would  have  on  research
generally  and  the  institutions  in  particular.  After  a  review,  the  Board  of  Regents
censured  the  researchers.  They  suspended  the  licenses  of  Drs.  Mandel  and
Southam,  but  subsequently  stayed  the  suspension  and  placed  the  physicians  on
probation  for  one  year."  There  were  no  immediate  repercussions  for  the  hospital,
Sloan-Kettering,  the  university,  or  PHS,  but  the  case  nonetheless  profoundly
affected  the  subsequent  development  of  federal  guidelines  to  protect  research
subjects.

To  add  to  the  ferment,  NIH  officials  had  closely  followed  the  work  of  the
Law-Medicine  Research  Institute  at  Boston  University,  which  issued  survey
findings  in  1 962  showing  that  few  institutions  had  procedural  guidelines  covering
clinical  research.12  And  in  the  year  after  both  the  above-mentioned  cases  came  to
light,  the  World  Medical  Association  issued  its  Declaration  of  Helsinki,  which  set
standards  for  clinical  research  and  required  that  subjects  give  informed  consent
prior  to  enrolling  in  an  experiment.13  Thus  national  and  world  opinion  on  matters
related  to  the  ethics  of  human  subject  research  created  a  climate  ripe  for  changes
in  policies  and  approaches  toward  research  ethics.

Concern  over  disturbing  cases  and  the  growing  attention  paid  to  research
ethics  prompted  NIH  director  James  Shannon  to  create  a  committee  in  late  1 963
under  the  direction  of  the  NIH  associate  chief  for  program  development,  Robert
B.  Livingston,  whose  office  supported  centers  at  which  NIH-funded  research  took
place.  The  internal  committee  was  charged  with  studying  problems  of  inadequate
consent  and  the  standards  of  self-scrutiny  involving  research  protocols  and
procedures.  The  committee  was  also  to  recommend  a  suitable  set  of  controls  for
the  protection  of  human  subjects  in  NIH-sponsored  research.  The  Livingston
Committee  recognized  that  ethically  questionable  research—exemplified  by  the
research  at  the  Jewish  Chronic  Disease  Hospitals-could  wreak  havoc  on  public

174


Chapter  3

perception,  increase  the  likelihood  of  liability,  and  inhibit  research.14  These
problems  made  it  worthwhile  to  reconsider  central  oversight~or  lack  thereof-for
research  contracted  out.  However,  the  committee  expressed  concern  over  NIH
taking  too  authoritarian  a  posture  toward  research  oversight  and  so  argued  that  it
would  be  difficult  for  the  agency  to  assume  responsibility  for  ethics  and  research
practices.  When  it  issued  its  report  in  late  1964,  the  committee  did  not
recommend  any  changes  in  the  current  NIH  policies  and,  moreover,  cautioned
that  "whatever  NIH  might  do  by  way  of  designating  a  code  or  stipulating
standards  for  acceptable  clinical  research  would  be  likely  to  inhibit,  delay,  or
distort  the  carrying  out  of  clinical  research. .  .  ."'5  In  deference  to  physician
autonomy  and  traditional  regard  for  the  sanctity  of  the  doctor-patient  relationship,
the  report  concluded  that  NIH  was  "not  in  a  position  to  shape  the  educational
foundations  of  medical  ethics. . .  ."16

Director  Shannon  did  not  think  the  conclusions  of  the  Livingston
Committee  went  far  enough,  feeling  as  he  did  that  NIH  should  take  a  position  of
increased  responsibility  for  research  ethics.17  Especially  in  light  of  the  Jewish
Chronic  Disease  Hospital  case  and  its  implications  for  the  NIH,  both  internally
and  in  terms  of  public  perception,  he  felt  that  a  stronger  reaction  was  needed.
Thus,  despite  the  committee's  limited  conclusions,  Shannon  and  Surgeon  General
Luther  Terry  together  decided  in  1965  to  propose  to  the  National  Advisory  Health
Council  (NAHC),  an  advisory  committee  to  the  surgeon  general  of  the  Public
Health  Service, 1S  that  in  light  of  recent  problems,  the  NIH  should  assume
responsibility  for  formal  controls  on  individual  investigators.19  At  the  NAHC
meeting,  Shannon  argued  for  impartial  prior  peer  review  of  the  risks  research
posed  to  subjects  and  questioned  the  adequacy  of  the  protections  of  the  rights  of
subjects.20

The  council's  members  mostly  agreed  with  Shannon's  concerns  and  three
months  later  issued  a  "resolution  concerning  research  on  humans"  following
Shannon's  broad  recommendations  and  endorsing  the  importance  of  obtaining
informed  consent  from  subjects:

Be  it  resolved  that  the  National  Advisory  Health
Council  believes  that  Public  Health  Service  support
of  clinical  research  and  investigation  involving
human  beings  should  be  provided  only  if  the
judgment  of  the  investigator  is  subject  to  prior
review  by  his  institutional  associates  to  assure  an
independent  determination  of  the  protection  of  the
rights  and  welfare  of  the  individual  or  individuals
involved,  of  the  appropriateness  of  the  methods
used  to  secure  informed  consent,  and  of  the  risks
and  potential  medical  benefits  of  the  investigation.21


175


Parti

What  this  statement  did  not  do,  however,  was  explain  what  would  count  as
informed  consent.  The  NAHC  recommendations  were  accepted  by  the  new
surgeon  general,  William  H.  Stewart,  and  in  February  1966  he  issued  a  policy
statement  requiring  PHS  grantee  institutions  to  address  three  topics  by  committee
prior  review  for  all  proposed  research  involving  human  subjects:

This  review  should  assure  an  independent
determination  (1)  of  the  rights  and  welfare  of  the
individual  or  individuals  involved,  (2)  of  the
appropriateness  of  the  methods  used  to  secure
informed  consent,  and  (3)  of  the  risks  and  potential
medical  benefits  of  the  investigation.22

The  1966  PHS  policy  required  that  institutions  give  the  funding  agency  a
written  "assurance"  of  compliance,  but  like  the  NAHC  recommendations,  the
policy  spoke  strictly  to  the  procedural  aspects  of  informed  consent  and  not  to  its
meaning  and  criteria.  Substantive  informed  consent  criteria  were  established  for
research  at  the  NIH  Clinical  Center  shortly  after  the  PHS  policy  was  issued,  but
this  new  policy  applied  only  to  intramural  research,  that  is,  to  research  undertaken
at  the  Clinical  Center.  The  Clinical  Center  policy  was  important  as  the  first
federal  research  policy  with  a  specific  definition  of  what  constituted  informed
consent  requirements  in  the  research  context.  The  inclusion  of  specific  consent
requirements  in  policies  applying  to  extramural  research  would  not  occur,
however,  until  the  mid-1970s.

The  1966  PHS  policy  is  significant  both  for  its  recognition  that  patient-
subjects,  like  healthy  subjects,  should  be  included  in  the  consent  provisions  for
federally  sponsored  human  experimentation  and  for  its  attempt  to  strike  a  balance
between  federal  regulation  and  local  control,  which  continues  to  this  day.  Such  a
balancing  continued  the  work  begun  by  the  AEC,  in  its  provision  for  local  human
use  committees  as  a  condition  for  the  use  of  AEC-supplied  isotopes,  and  the
DOD,  in  the  provision  for  high-level  review  of  proposed  experimentation.
Although  a  landmark  in  the  government  regulation  of  biomedical  research,  the
1966  policy  was  to  be  revised  and  changed  throughout  the  decade  as  biomedical
research  drew  greater  attention  and  informed  consent  grew  in  importance.

While,  from  the  outset,  the  PHS  policy  was  revised  periodically,23  site
visits  by  PHS  employees  to  randomly  selected  institutions  revealed  a  wide  range
of  compliance.24  These  site  visits  found  widespread  confusion  about  how  to
assess  risks  and  benefits,  refusal  by  some  researchers  to  cooperate  with  the  policy,
and  in  many  cases,  indifference  by  those  charged  with  administering  research  and
its  rules  at  local  institutions.  Complaints  of  overworked  review  committees  and
requests  for  clarification  and  guidance  came  from  research  institutions  all  over  the
country.25

In  response  to  continued  questions  about  the  scope  and  meaning  of  the

176


Chapter  3

policy,  DHEW  in  1971  produced  The  Institutional  Guide  to  DHEW Policy  on
Protection  of  Human  Subjects.2*  Better  known  as  the  "Yellow  Book"  because  of
its  cover's  color,  this  substantial  guide  contained  both  the  requirements  and
commentary  on  how  the  requirements  were  to  be  understood  and  implemented.
The  guide  provided  that  informed  consent  was  to  be  obtained  from  anyone  who
"may  be  at  risk  as  a  consequence  of  participation"  in  research-including  both
patients  and  healthy  volunteers.27

As  the  1960s  progressed,  increased  discussion  of  research  practices
appeared  in  both  professional  literature  and  the  popular  press.  One  person  who
advanced  the  debate  in  both  arenas  was  Henry  Beecher  of  Harvard  Medical
School.

Henry  Beecher:  The  Medical  Insider  Speaks  Out

Henry  Beecher,  as  noted  in  chapter  2,  was  an  active  participant  in
professional  discussions  of  ethics  in  research  during  the  late  1950s  and  early
1960s.  In  March  1965,  Beecher  focused  attention  on  the  issues  at  a  conference
for  science  journalists  sponsored  by  the  Upjohn  pharmaceutical  company.  There
Beecher  presented  a  paper  discussing  twenty-two  examples  of  potentially  serious
ethical  violations  in  experiments  that  he  had  found  in  recent  issues  of  medical
journals.28  (Among  them  was  the  Brooklyn  Jewish  Chronic  Disease  Hospital
study.)  He  explained  this  research  had  not  taken  place  "in  a  remote  corner,  but
[in]  .  .  .  leading  medical  schools,  university  hospitals,  top  governmental  military
departments,  governmental  institutes  and  industry."29  He  also  acknowledged  that
his  own  conscience  was  not  entirely  clear:  "Lest  I  seem  to  stand  aside  from  these
matters  I  am  obliged  to  say  that  in  years  gone  by  work  in  my  laboratory  could
have  been  criticized."30  Beecher  also  explained  the  consciousness-raising  purpose
of  these  revelations  with  stark  clarity:  "It  is  hoped  that  blunt  presentation  of  these
examples  will  attract  the  attention  of  the  uninformed  or  the  thoughtless  and
careless,  the  great  majority  of  offenders."31

In  making  this  presentation  to  a  group  of  journalists,  Beecher  was  clearly
breaking  with  a  professional  expectation  that  such  matters  should  be  addressed
within  the  biomedical  community.  After  some  reservations  on  the  part  of  medical
journals,  the  March  1965  paper  having  been  rejected  by  at  least  the  Journal  of  the
American  Medical  Association  (JAMA),  Beecher  published  a  revised  version  in
the  New  England  Journal  of  Medicine  in  June  1966.32  That  article,  like  his
presentation  at  the  conference,  indicted  the  entire  biomedical  research  community
and  the  journals  that  published  biomedical  research  results.

Beecher's  efforts  to  focus  professional,  press,  and  therefore  public
awareness  on  the  conduct  of  research  involving  human  subjects  met  with  some
success.  A  July  1965  article  in  the  New  York  Times  Magazine  was  headlined
"Doctors  Must  Experiment  on  Humans~But  What  Are  the  Patient's  Rights?"33  In
February  1966,  as  the  PHS  issued  its  first  uniform  policy  for  biomedical  research,

177


Parti

more  headlines,  this  time  in  the  Saturday  Review,  asked,  "Do  We  Need  New
Rules  for  Experimentation  on  People?"34  In  July  1966,  following  Beecher's
article  in  the  New  England  Journal  of  Medicine  and  an  editorial  in  JAMA,35
another  article  declared  "Experiments  on  People— The  Growing  Debate."36 Thus,
by  the  mid-  to  late  1960s,  professional,  governmental,  and  public  attention  was  all
being  drawn  to  issues  of  research  on  human  subjects.  Revelations  of  purportedly
unethical  treatment  of  research  subjects  would  not  be  over  by  this  time,  but
changes  in  policy  largely  driven  by  attention  from  so  many  corners  were
beginning  to  move  toward  a  more  comprehensive  approach  to  research  oversight.

Public  Attention  Is  Galvanized:  Willowbrook  and  Tuskegee

From  1956  to  1972  Dr.  Saul  Krugman  of  New  York  University  led  a  study
team  at  the  Willowbrook  State  School  for  the  Retarded,  on  Staten  Island,  New
York.  The  study  was  not  secret  or  hidden.  (It  was  one  of  the  twenty-two  projects
Beecher  discussed  as  ethically  troublesome  in  his  1966  article.)  The
Willowbrook  study  was  discovered  by  the  media  beginning  in  the  late  1 960s37  and
was  the  subject  of  further  discussion  of  the  case  in  separate  places  by  Beecher,38
theologian  Paul  Ramsey,39  and  physician  Stephen  Goldby.40  Noting  the  high
incidence  of  hepatitis  among  the  residents  of  the  school,  nearly  all  of  whom  were
profoundly  mentally  impaired  children  and  adolescents,  Krugman  and  his
colleagues  injected  some  of  them  with  a  mild  form  of  hepatitis  serum.  The
researchers  justified  their  work  on  the  grounds  that  the  subjects  probably  would
have  become  infected  anyway,  and  they  hoped  to  find  a  prophylaxis  for  the  virus
by  studying  it  from  the  earliest  stages  of  infection.  Before  beginning  the  work,
Krugman  discussed  it  with  many  physician  colleagues  and  sought  approval  from
the  Armed  Forces  Epidemiological  Board,  which  approved  and  funded  the
research,41  and  the  executive  faculty  of  the  New  York  University  School  of
Medicine,  who  approved  the  research.  A  review  committee  for  human
experimentation  did  not  exist  in  1955,42  but  later,  when  such  a  committee  was
formed,  it  too  approved  the  research.

According  to  Krugman,  the  parents  of  each  subject  signed  a  consent  form
after  receiving  a  detailed  explanation  of  the  research,  without  any  pressure  to
enroll  their  child.43  Some  critics  argued  that  the  content  of  the  consent  form  was
itself  deceiving,  since  it  seemed  to  say  that  children  were  to  receive  a  vaccine
against  the  virus.  Moreover,  charges  of  coercion  arose.  It  is  alleged  that  parents
who  enrolled  their  children  in  the  study  were  initially  offered  more  rapid
admission  to  the  school  through  the  hepatitis  unit  and  later  found,  due  to
overcrowding,  that  the  only  route  for  admission  of  new  patients  was  through  the
hepatitis  unit.44  Commentators  further  argued  that  the  fault  in  the  doctors'  study
lay  in  their  deliberate  attempt  to  infect  the  children,  with  or  without  parental
consent,  as  opposed  to  studying  the  course  of  disease  in  children  who  naturally
became  sick.

178


Chapter  3

Soon  after  Willowbrook,  another  research  project,  the  Tuskegee  syphilis
study,  provoked  widespread  public  outcry  when  it  was  revealed  the  study  had
exposed  people  to  unnecessary  and  serious  harm  with  no  prospect  of  direct
benefit  to  them.  Beginning  in  1 932,  PHS  physicians  sought  to  trace  the  natural
history  of  syphilis  by  observing  some  400  African- American  men  affected  by  the
disease  and  another  group  of  approximately  200  African- American  men  without
syphilis  serving  as  controls.  All  the  subjects  lived  in  or  around  Tuskegee,
Alabama.  Originally  designed  to  be  a  short-term  study  in  the  range  of  six  to  eight
months,  some  investigators  successfully  argued  that  the  potential  scientific  value
of  longer-term  study  was  so  great  that  the  research  ought  to  go  on  indefinitely.
The  subjects  were  enticed  into  the  study  with  offers  of  free  medical  examinations.
Many  of  those  who  came  from  around  the  area  to  be  tested  by  "government
doctors"  had  never  had  a  blood  test  before  and  had  no  idea  what  one  was.45  Once
selected  to  be  subjects  in  the  study,  the  men  were  not  informed  as  to  the  nature  of
their  disease  or  of  the  fact  that  the  research  held  no  therapeutic  benefit  for  them.
Subjects  were  asked  to  appear  for  "special  free  treatments,"  which  included
purely  diagnostic  procedures  such  as  lumbar  punctures.46

By  the  mid- 1940s  it  was  becoming  clear  that  the  death  rate  for  the  infected
men  in  the  study  was  twice  as  high  as  for  those  in  the  control  group.  This  was  the
period  in  which  penicillin  was  discovered  and  soon  after  began  to  be  used  to  treat
syphilis,  at  least  in  its  primary  stage.  The  study  was  reviewed  by  PHS  officials
and  medical  societies  and  reported  by  a  number  of  journals  from  the  early  1930s
to  1970.  In  the  1960s  a  growing  number  of  criticisms  began  to  appear,  although
the  study  was  not  stopped  until  1973.

Thus,  men  with  a  confirmed  disease  were  not  told  of  their  diagnosis  and
were  deceived  into  participating  in  the  study  under  the  guise  of  its  being
therapeutic  for  unspecified  maladies.  In  addition  to  exposing  the  subjects  to  the
additional  harms  of  participation  in  the  study,  the  false  belief  that  treatment  was
being  administered  prevented  subjects  from  otherwise  seeking  medical  care  for
their  disease.  As  at  Willowbrook,  a  justification  given  after  the  fact  for  the
research  was  that  the  disease  had  appeared  in  a  way  that  was  natural  and
inevitable  and  that  the  study  would  be  of  immense  benefit  to  future  patients.47
Over  this  forty-year  history,  at  least  28  participants  died  and  approximately  100
more  suffered  blindness  and  insanity  from  untreated  syphilis  before  the  study  was
stopped.

In  1972,  an  account  of  the  study  was  published  on  the  front  page  of  the
New  York  Times.4*  In  response,  DHEW  appointed  the  Tuskegee  Syphilis  Study
Ad  Hoc  Panel  to  review  the  Tuskegee  study  as  well  as  the  department's  policies
and  procedures  for  the  protection  of  human  subjects.  The  work  of  the  ad  hoc
panel-which  consisted  of  physicians,  a  university  president,  a  theologian,  an
attorney,  and  a  labor  representative-contributed  in  large  measure  to  the  passage
of  the  first  comprehensive  regulations  for  federally  sponsored  human  subjects
research.  One  member  of  the  ad  hoc  panel  who  is  also  a  member  of  the  Advisory

179


Parti

Committee,  Jay  Katz,  expressed  his  dismay  over  the  unwillingness  or  incapacity
of  society  to  mobilize  the  necessary  resources  for  "treatment"  at  the  beginning  of
the  study  and  the  deliberate  efforts  of  the  investigators  to  "obstruct  the
opportunity  for  treatment."49

Despite  the  fact  that  the  PHS  Policy  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects
had  been  in  place  for  six  years  by  the  time  the  Tuskegee  study  was  revealed,  it
was  exposed  by  a  journalist  rather  than  by  a  review  committee.  Although  an
institutional  committee  had  allegedly  reviewed  the  Tuskegee  study,  the  study  was
not  discontinued  until  after  the  recommendation  of  the  ad  hoc  panel.50  The  human
rights  abuses  of  the  Tuskegee  study  demonstrated  the  need  for  both  prior  and
ongoing  review,  in  that  the  study  was  undertaken  before  prior  review
requirements  were  in  place,  and  the  prevailing  review  policies  during  the  period
of  the  study  were  so  flawed  that  the  study  was  allowed  to  continue.

As  a  result  of  their  deliberations,  the  ad  hoc  panel  found  that  neither
DHEW  nor  any  other  agency  in  the  government  had  adequate  policies  for
oversight  of  human  subjects  research.  The  panel  recommended  that  the  Tuskegee
study  be  stopped  immediately  and  that  remaining  subjects  be  given  necessary
medical  care  resulting  from  their  participation.51  The  panel  also  recommended
that  Congress  establish  "a  permanent  body  with  the  authority  to  regulate  at  least
all  federally  supported  research  involving  human  subjects."52  In  summary,  the
panel  concluded  that  despite  the  lessons  of  Nuremberg,  the  Jewish  Chronic
Disease  Hospital  case,  and  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki,  human  subject  research
oversight  and  mechanisms  to  ensure  informed  consent  were  still  inadequate  and
new  approaches  were  needed  to  adequately  protect  the  rights  and  welfare  of
human  subjects.

Congressional  Response  to  Abuses  of  Human  Subjects:  The  National
Research  Act

Public  attention  to  abuses  such  as  those  inflicted  on  the  subjects  of  the
Tuskegee  study  increased  during  the  late  1960s  and  early  1970s.  Following  the
initial  revelations  about  the  Tuskegee  syphilis  study,  several  bills  were  introduced
in  Congress  to  regulate  the  conduct  of  human  experimentation.  In  February  1973
Senator  Edward  Kennedy  held  hearings  on  these  bills;53  the  Tuskegee  study;
experimentation  with  prisoners,  children,  and  poor  women;  and  a  variety  of  other
issues  related  to  biomedical  research  and  the  need  for  a  national  body  to  consider
the  ethics  of  research  and  advancing  medical  technology.54  After  the  hearings,
Senator  Kennedy  introduced  an  unsuccessful  bill  to  create  a  National  Human
Experimentation  Board,  as  recommended  by  the  Tuskegee  Syphilis  Study  Ad  Hoc
Panel.  When  it  became  clear,  however,  that  the  bill  would  not  be  successful,
Senator  Kennedy  introduced  the  bill  that  would  become  the  National  Research
Act,  endorsing  the  regulations  about  to  be  promulgated  by  DHEW  and
establishing  the  National  Commission  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects  of

180


Chapter  3

Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research,  in  return  for  DHEW's  issuance  of  human
subject  research  regulations.55  The  trade-off  was  clear:  no  national  regulatory
body  in  return  for  regulations  applying  to  the  research  funded  or  performed  by  the
government  agency  responsible  for  the  greatest  proportion  of  human  subject
research.  This  meant  that  the  goal  of  oversight  of  all  federally  funded  research
would  not  be  achieved  and  that  whatever  oversight  did  exist  was  left  to  the
funding  agencies  rather  than  an  independent  body.

On  May  30,  1974,  DHEW  published  regulations  for  the  use  of  human
subjects  in  the  Federal  Register.5"  These  regulations  required  that  each  grantee
institution  form  a  committee  (what  became  known  as  an  institutional  review
board,  or  IRB)  to  approve  all  research  proposals  before  they  were  passed  to
DHEW  for  funding  consideration.  These  committees  were  charged  with
reviewing  the  safety  of  the  proposals  brought  to  them  as  well  as  the  adequacy  of
the  informed  consent  obtained  from  each  subject  prior  to  participation  in  the
research.  Additionally,  the  regulations  defined  not  only  the  procedure  for
obtaining  informed  consent  but  substantive  criteria  for  it  as  well.  Shortly  after  the
announcement  of  the  DHEW  regulations,  in  July  1974,  the  National  Research  Act
was  passed,  and  with  it  came  the  establishment  of  the  National  Commission.57

The  National  Commission-charged  with  advising  the  secretary  of  DHEW
(though  the  National  Research  Act  did  not  require  the  secretary  to  follow  the
commission's  recommendations)--existed  over  the  next  four  years  and  published
seventeen  reports  and  appendix  volumes.  During  its  tenure,  the  commission  did
pioneering  work  as  it  addressed  issues  of  autonomy,  informed  consent,  and  third-
party  permission,  particularly  in  relation  to  research  involving  vulnerable  subjects
such  as  prisoners,  children,  and  people  with  cognitive  disabilities.  It  was  also
charged  with  examining  the  IRB  system  and  procedures  for  informed  consent,  as
background  for  proposing  guidelines  that  would  ensure  that  basic  ethical
principles  were  instituted  in  the  research  oversight  system  and  in  research
involving  vulnerable  populations.

In  the  course  of  its  deliberations,  the  commission  identified  three  general
moral  principles-respect  for  persons,  beneficence,  and  justice-as  the  appropriate
framework  for  guiding  the  ethics  of  research  involving  human  subjects.  These
three  are  known  as  the  Belmont  principles  because  they  appeared  in  The  Belmont
Report,  one  of  the  commission's  major  publications.58

The  National  Commission  was  required  to  examine  the  "nature  and
definition"  of  informed  consent  as  well  as  the  "adequacy"  of  current  practices.  In
its  reports,  the  commission  decisively  argued  that  the  basic  justification  for
obligations  to  obtain  informed  consent  is  the  moral  principle  of  respect  for
persons.  This  emphasis  on  respect  for  persons  meant  a  great  premium  was  put  on
autonomous  decision  making  by  the  research  subject,  an  emphasis  that  continues
to  the  current  day.

While  it  may  not  have  been  the  intent  of  those  who  sponsored  it,  the
National  Research  Act-because  it  was  limited  to  DHEW-funded  research-did

181


Parti

not  ensure  that  all  federally  sponsored  research  would  be  subject  to  requirements
for  informed  consent  and  prior  review.  Nonetheless,  by  this  time,  as  described
below,  published  policies  within  the  DOD,  the  AEC,  the  VA,  and  NASA  did  meet
these  requirements.

The  passage  of  the  National  Research  Act  and  the  promulgation  of
DHEW's  regulations  were  important  milestones  in  the  development  of  federal
standards  for  the  protection  of  human  subjects  of  research.  They  represented  the
first  national  recognition  of  the  need  to  protect  human  subjects.  Moreover,  they
attempted  to  provide  for  that  protection  through  the  IRB  requirement  and
establishment  of  the  National  Commission.  The  Advisory  Committee's  charter
requires  that  it  examine  the  standards  for  research  between  1944  and  1974.  These
two  landmark  events  in  1974  ushered  in  a  new  era  in  which  the  conduct  and
oversight  of  biomedical  experimentation  with  humans  remained  a  topic  of
national  scrutiny  and  debate.  Eventually,  the  approaches  required  by  the  1974
DHEW  regulations  would  be  applied  to  nearly  all  federally  sponsored  human
research,  as  described  in  chapter  14.

THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  REQUIREMENTS  FOR  HUMAN
SUBJECT  RESEARCH  IN  OTHER  FEDERAL  AGENCIES

The  history  and  evolution  of  human  subject  research  policy  in  the  federal
government  is  well  documented  for  DHEW.  However,  many  other  agencies,
most  notably  the  military  services,  have  important  but  less  well-documented  and
less  well-studied  histories.  Some  of  this  history  is  described  in  chapter  1  of  this
report.  Here  we  continue  with  a  brief  treatment  of  that  history  in  the  context  of
the  evolution  of  human  subject  research  policy.

Army  Policy

In  1962  the  Army,  for  the  first  time,  issued  as  a  formal  regulation,  Army
Regulation  (AR)  70-25,  the  1953  policy  embodied  in  the  Wilson  memorandum.
The  regulation  made  explicit,  as  the  1953  DOD  and  Army  policies  had  only  left
implicit,  basic  issues  about  the  scope  of  the  DOD's  rules.  Unlike  the  Wilson
memorandum,  the  new  regulation  applied  to  all  types  of  research,  not  simply  that
related  to  atomic,  biological,  and  chemical  warfare.  However,  the  regulation
specifically  excluded  clinical  research,  that  is,  the  research  likely  to  be  performed
with  patients  at  the  Army's  many  hospitals.  In  1963,  an  ad  hoc  committee  of
Army  and  civilian  personnel  concluded  that  the  rule  applied  where  research  was
done  by  contractors;  however,  tracer  research  (which  arguably  posed  minimal
risk)  was  excluded.59  Despite  the  committee's  recommendations,  no  immediate
changes  were  made  to  the  regulation.  In  1963,  however,  the  Army  issued  a
regulation  for  radioisotope  use  that  required  local  institutions  to  convene  review
committees  and  obtain  approval  from  the  secretary  of  the  Army  pursuant  to  AR

182


Chapter  3

70-25  when  radioisotopes  were  to  be  used  with  "volunteer"  experimental
subjects.60

The  regulatory  void  apparently  persisted  until  1973,  when  another  rule
(AR  40-38,  "Medical  Services-Clinical  Investigation  Program")  closed  the  gap.
That  rule  clearly  applied  to  "any  person  who  may  be  at  risk  because  of
participation  .  .  .  [in]  clinical  investigation,"  including  "patients"  and  "normal
individuals."61  It  required  that  subjects  of  research  be  given  an  explanation  of  the
proposal  in  understandable  language  and  sign  a  "volunteer  agreement."62
Moreover,  clinical  research  with  patients,  as  well  as  healthy  people,  was  to  be
reviewed  by  a  "Human  Use  Committee."63

Navy  Policy

As  we  saw  in  chapter  1 ,  the  Navy  had  required  oral  consent  from  research
volunteers  since  at  least  195 1.  Some  evidence  suggests  that  written  consent  was
required  in  the  mid-1960s;  in  a  1964  proposal  to  study  the  effects  of  hypoxia  on
service  personnel  it  is  indicated  that  a  "signed  Consent  to  Voluntarily  Participate
in  Research  Experiment  (NMRI  Form  3)"  would  be  used.64  In  1967  a  clear
requirement  for  written  consent  appeared  in  the  Navy's  Medical  Department
manual.65  It  is  unclear  whether  the  policy  drew  a  distinction  between  research  on
patients  and  research  on  healthy  subjects.  In  1969,  in  any  event,  the  secretary  of
the  Navy  issued  a  comprehensive  policy  requiring  written  informed  consent  of
research  subjects,  which  appeared  to  cover  both  groups.66

Air  Force  Policy

In  1965  the  Air  Force  promulgated  AFR  169-8,  "Medical  Education  and
Research— Use  of  Volunteers  in  Aerospace  Research,"  which  required  voluntary
and  written  informed  consent  from  all  subjects  in  any  "research,  development,
test,  and  evaluation"  that  may  involve  "distress,  pain,  damage  to  health,  physical
injury,  or  death."67 As  such,  it  seems  inclusive  of  both  healthy  and  patient-
subjects.68  Updating  the  language  of  the  Nuremberg  Code's  first  principle,  the
policy  was  based  on  the  idea  that  the  "voluntary  informed  consent  of  the  human
subject  is  absolutely  essential."69 Additionally,  the  regulation  provided  for  the
appointment  of  a  committee  to  review  all  human  research  proposals  at  each
originating  facility.

NASA  Policy

The  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  (NASA),  created  in
1958,  inherited  staff  and  research  expertise  from  the  DOD  and  other  federal
agencies.  Before  1968,  local  centers  at  which  research  using  radioisotopes  was
conducted-notably  the  Ames  Research  Center  and  the  Manned  Spacecraft  Center

183


Part  I

(MSC)-were  essentially  autonomous.  Each  center  established  medical  use
subcommittees,  as  required  by  AEC  rules.™  Reorganization  within  NASA  in
1 968  combined  the  medical  operations  functions  and  the  medical  research
functions  at  MSC  into  one  medical  research  and  operations  directorate  headed  by
Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry.

By  1968,  Ames  had  a  policy  requiring  informed  consent.71  By  definition,
of  course,  the  work  of  astronauts  is  frequently  risky  and  experimental.  The
question  of  the  proper  boundary  between  experimental  and  occupational  activities
was  one  that  could  not  be  drawn  easily.  Consequently,  the  policy  authorized  the
director  of  Ames  to  waive  the  consent  requirement  in  several  instances,  including
when  obtaining  consent  would  seriously  hamper  the  research  or  when  test  pilots
or  astronauts  were  involved.72

Between  1968  and  1970,  prior  review  for  risk  and  subject  consent  was
adopted  at  Ames  in  the  form  of  the  Human  Research  Experiments  Review  Board
and  indirectly  at  the  MSC  in  accordance  with  the  AEC  requirements  for  a  medical
use  committee.73  In  1972  the  prior  review  provisions  and  consent  requirements  of
Ames  and  the  MSC  were  reformulated  in  a  NASA-wide  policy.74  This  policy
required  voluntary  and  written  informed  consent  from  subjects  prior  to
participation.  The  policy  continued  to  provide  waivers  for  "exceptional  cases,"  as
in  the  Ames  policy,  and  did  not  apply  to  research  conducted  by  NASA  contractors
or  grantees.

The  development  of  NASA's  polices,  like  those  at  the  PHS,  NIH,  and  the
DOD,  appeared  at  a  time  when  the  public  was  becoming  increasingly  interested  in
biomedical  research.  In  contrast  with  the  1940s  and  1950s,  bureaucratic
developments  during  the  1960s  and  1970s  were  mirrored  by  growing  public
debate  about  the  adequacy  of  protections  for  human  subjects.

SUPREME  COURT  DISSENTS  INVOKE  THE  NUREMBERG
CODE:  CIA  AND  DOD  HUMAN  SUBJECTS  RESEARCH
SCANDALS

As  we  have  seen,  the  development  of  federal  legislation  for  government-
sponsored  research  with  human  subjects  arose  in  part  because  of  institutional  and
governmental  concern  and  public  reaction  to  perceived  abuses  and  failures  by  the
government.  Around  the  same  time  that  the  1974  National  Research  Act  was
enacted,  a  scandal  arose  surrounding  the  discovery  of  secret  Cold  War  chemical
experiments  conducted  by  the  CIA  and  DOD.  The  review  of  these  experiments
led  to  the  rediscovery  of  the  previously  secret  1953  Wilson  memorandum  and
later  to  the  first  Supreme  Court  decision  in  which  comment  was  made,  in  dissent,
on  the  application  of  the  Nuremberg  Code  to  the  conduct  of  the  U.S.  government.

In  December  1974,  the  New  York  Times  reported  that  the  CIA  had
conducted  illegal  domestic  activities,  including  experiments  on  U.S.  citizens,
during  the  1 960s.  That  report  prompted  investigations  by  both  Congress  (in  the

184


Chapter  3

form  of  the  Church  Committee)  and  a  presidential  commission  (known  as  the
Rockefeller  Commission)  into  the  domestic  activities  of  the  CIA,  the  FBI,  and
intelligence-related  agencies  of  the  military.  In  the  summer  of  1975,
congressional  hearings  and  the  Rockefeller  Commission  report  revealed  to  the
public  for  the  first  time  that  the  CIA  and  the  DOD  had  conducted  experiments  on
both  cognizant  and  unwitting  human  subjects  as  part  of  an  extensive  program  to
influence  and  control  human  behavior  through  the  use  of  psychoactive  drugs
(such  as  LSD  and  mescaline)  and  other  chemical,  biological,  and  psychological
means.  They  also  revealed  that  at  least  one  subject  had  died  after  administration
of  LSD.  Frank  Olson,  an  Army  scientist,  was  given  LSD  without  his  knowledge
or  consent  in  1953  as  part  of  a  CIA  experiment  and  apparently  committed  suicide
a  week  later.75  Subsequent  reports  would  show  that  another  person,  Harold
Blauer,  a  professional  tennis  player  in  New  York  City,  died  as  a  result  of  a  secret
Army  experiment  involving  mescaline.76

The  CIA  program,  known  principally  by  the  codename  MKULTRA,
began  in  1950  and  was  motivated  largely  in  response  to  alleged  Soviet,  Chinese,
and  North  Korean  uses  of  mind-control  techniques  on  U.S.  prisoners  of  war  in
Korea.  Because  most  of  the  MKULTRA  records  were  deliberately  destroyed  in
1973  by  order  of  then-Director  of  Central  Intelligence  Richard  Helms,  it  is
impossible  to  have  a  complete  understanding  of  the  more  than  150  individually
funded  research  projects  sponsored  by  MKULTRA  and  the  related  CIA
programs.77  Central  Intelligence  Agency  documents  suggest  that  radiation  was
part  of  the  MKULTRA  program  and  that  the  agency  considered  and  explored  uses
of  radiation  for  these  purposes.78  However,  the  documents  that  remain  from
MKULTRA,  at  least  as  currently  brought  to  light,  do  not  show  that  the  CIA  itself
carried  out  any  of  these  proposals  on  human  subjects.

The  congressional  committee  investigating  the  CIA  research,  chaired  by
Senator  Frank  Church,  concluded  that  "[p]rior  consent  was  obviously  not
obtained  from  any  of  the  subjects."7"  The  committee  noted  that  the  "experiments
sponsored  by  these  researchers  . .  .  call  into  question  the  decision  by  the  agencies
not  to  fix  guidelines  for  experiments."80  (Documents  show  that  the  CIA
participated  in  at  least  two  of  the  DOD  committees  whose  discussions,  in  1952,
led  up  to  the  issuance  of  the  Wilson  memorandum.)  Following  the
recommendations  of  the  Church  Committee,  President  Gerald  Ford  in  1976  issued
the  first  Executive  Order  on  Intelligence  Activities,  which,  among  other  things,
prohibited  "experimentation  with  drugs  on  human  subjects,  except  with  the
informed  consent,  in  writing  and  witnessed  by  a  disinterested  party,  of  each  such
human  subject"  and  in  accordance  with  the  guidelines  issued  by  the  National
Commission.81  Subsequent  orders  by  Presidents  Carter  and  Reagan  expanded  the
directive  to  apply  to  any  human  experimentation.82

Following  on  the  heels  of  the  revelations  about  CIA  experiments  were
similar  stories  about  the  Army.  In  response,  in  1975  the  secretary  of  the  Army
instructed  the  Army  inspector  general  to  conduct  an  investigation.83  Among  the

185


Part  I

findings  of  the  inspector  general  was  the  existence  of  the  then-still-classified  1953
Secretary  of  Defense  Wilson  memorandum.  In  response  to  the  inspector  general's
investigation,  the  Wilson  memorandum  was  declassified  in  August  1975.  The
inspector  general  also  found  that  the  requirements  of  the  1953  memorandum  had.
at  least  in  regard  to  Army  drug  testing,  been  essentially  followed  as  written.  The
Army  used  only  "volunteers"  for  its  drug-testing  program,  with  one  or  two
exceptions."4  However,  the  inspector  general  concluded  that  the  "volunteers  were
not  fully  informed,  as  required,  prior  to  their  participation;  and  the  methods  of
procuring  their  services,  in  many  cases,  appeared  not  to  have  been  in  accord  with
the  intent  of  Department  of  the  Army  policies  governing  use  of  volunteers  in
research."85  The  inspector  general  also  noted  that  "the  evidence  clearly  reflected
that  every  possible  medical  consideration  was  observed  by  the  professional
investigators  at  the  Medical  Research  Laboratories."86  This  conclusion,  if
accurate,  is  in  striking  contrast  to  what  took  place  at  the  CIA.

The  revelations  about  the  CIA  and  the  Army  prompted  a  number  of
subjects  or  their  survivors  to  file  lawsuits  against  the  federal  government  for
conducting  illegal  experiments.  Although  the  government  aggressively,  and
sometimes  successfully,  sought  to  avoid  legal  liability,  several  plaintiffs  did
receive  compensation  through  court  order,  out-of-court  settlement,  or  acts  of
Congress.  Previously,  the  CIA  and  the  Army  had  actively,  and  successfully,
sought  to  withhold  incriminating  information,  even  as  they  secretly  provided
compensation  to  the  families.87  One  subject  of  Army  drug  experimentation,
James  Stanley,  an  Army  sergeant,  brought  an  important,  albeit  unsuccessful,  suit.
The  government  argued  that  Stanley  was  barred  from  suing  it  under  a  legal
doctrine—known  as  the  Feres  doctrine,  after  a  1950  Supreme  Court  case,  Feres  v.
United  States—that  prohibits  members  of  the  Armed  Forces  from  suing  the
government  for  any  harms  that  were  inflicted  "incident  to  service."88

In  1987,  the  Supreme  Court  affirmed  this  defense  in  a  5-4  decision  that
dismissed  Stanley's  case.89  The  majority  argued  that  "a  test  for  liability  that
depends  on  the  extent  to  which  particular  suits  would  call  into  question  military
discipline  and  decision  making  would  itself  require  judicial  inquiry  into,  and
hence  intrusion  upon,  military  matters."90 In  dissent,  Justice  William  Brennan
argued  that  the  need  to  preserve  military  discipline  should  not  protect  the
government  from  liability  and  punishment  for  serious  violations  of  constitutional
rights:

The  medical  trials  at  Nuremberg  in  1947  deeply
impressed  upon  the  world  that  experimentation  with
unknowing  human  subjects  is  morally  and  legally
unacceptable.  The  United  States  Military  Tribunal
established  the  Nuremberg  Code  as  a  standard
against  which  to  judge  German  scientists  who
experimented  with  human  subjects.  .  .  .  [I]n

186


Chapter  3

defiance  of  this  principle,  military  intelligence
officials  .  . .  began  surreptitiously  testing  chemical
and  biological  materials,  including  LSD.91

Justice  Sandra  Day  O'Connor,  writing  a  separate  dissent,  stated:

No  judicially  crafted  rule  should  insulate  from
liability  the  involuntary  and  unknowing  human
experimentation  alleged  to  have  occurred  in  this
case.  Indeed,  as  Justice  Brennan  observes,  the
United  States  played  an  instrumental  role  in  the
criminal  prosecution  of  Nazi  officials  who
experimented  with  human  subjects  during  the
Second  World  War,  and  the  standards  that  the
Nuremberg  Military  Tribunals  developed  to  judge
the  behavior  of  the  defendants  stated  that  the
'voluntary  consent  of  the  human  subject  is
absolutely  essential ...  to  satisfy  moral,  ethical,  and
legal  concepts.'  If  this  principle  is  violated,  the  very
least  that  society  can  do  is  to  see  that  the  victims  are
compensated,  as  best  they  can  be,  by  the
perpetrators.92

This  is  the  only  Supreme  Court  case  to  address  the  application  of  the
Nuremberg  Code  to  experimentation  sponsored  by  the  U.S.  government.93  And
while  the  suit  was  unsuccessful,  dissenting  opinions  put  the  Army-and  by
association  the  entire  government-on  notice  that  use  of  individuals  without  their
consent  is  unacceptable.  The  limited  application  of  the  Nuremberg  Code  in  U.S.
courts  does  not  detract  from  the  power  of  the  principles  it  espouses,  especially  in
light  of  stories  of  failure  to  follow  these  principles  that  appeared  in  the  media  and
professional  literature  during  the  1960s  and  1970s  and  the  policies  eventually
adopted  in  the  mid-1970s.

CONCLUSION

The  1960s  and  early  1970s  witnessed  an  extraordinary  growth  in
government,  institutional,  and  public  awareness  of  issues  in  the  use  of  human
subjects,  fueled  by  scandals  and  an  increasing  emphasis  on  individual  expression.
The  branches  of  the  military  had  articulated  policies  during  this  period,  in  spite  of
numerous  problems  in  implementation.  By  1974  the  DHEW  had  established  a  set
of  regulations  and  a  system  of  local  review,  and  Congress  had  established  a
commission  to  issue  recommendations  for  further  change  to  the  DHEW.
Together,  these  advances  created  a  model  and  laid  the  groundwork  for  human

187


Parti

subjects  protections  for  all  federal  agencies.

Many  conditions  coalesced  into  the  framework  for  the  regulation  of  the
use  of  human  subjects  in  federally  funded  research  that  is  the  basis  for  today's
system.  Described  further  in  chapter  14,  this  framework  is  undergirded  by  the
three  Belmont  principles  that  were  identified  by  the  National  Commission  as
governing  the  ethics  of  research  with  human  subjects:  respect  for  persons,
beneficence,  and  justice.  The  federal  regulations  and  the  conceptual  framework
built  on  the  Belmont  principles  became  so  widely  adopted  and  cited  that  it  might
be  argued  that  their  establishment  marked  the  end  of  serious  shortcomings  in
federal  research  ethics  policies.  Whether  this  position  is  well  supported  is
evaluated  in  light  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  contemporary  studies  in  part  III.

By  1974,  DHEW  had  extensive  policies  to  protect  human  subjects  within
its  purview.  Policies  were  more  variable  among  other  government  agencies.  By
1975,  the  branches  of  the  military  set  about  developing  their  own  more
comprehensive  policies  for  human  subject  research,  and  the  CIA  was  required  by
executive  order  to  comply  with  consent  requirements  in  human  subject  research  in
light  of  scandalous  practices  in  the  past.  In  order  to  evaluate  the  adequacy  of  the
efforts  taken  to  protect  people  before  these  policies  were  established,  we  must
take  into  account  both  the  government's  policies  and  rules  and  the  norms  and
practices  of  medicine  reviewed  in  chapters  1  through  3.  The  Advisory
Committee's  framework  for  the  consideration  of  these  factors  is  presented  in  the
next  chapter.


188


ENDNOTES


1  For  a  discussion  of  the  development  of  the  Common  Rule,  see  chapter  1 4.

2  We  relied  particularly  on  Ruth  R.  Faden  and  Tom  L.  Beauchamp,  A  History
and  Theory  of  Informed  Consent  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1986).  Other
excellent  sources  include  Jay  Katz,  Experimentation  with  Human  Beings  (New  York:
Russell  Sage  Foundation,  1972),  and  Robert  Levine,  Ethics  and  Regulation  of  Clinical
Research  (Baltimore:  Urban  and  Schwarzenberg,  1981).

3  U  S.  Congress,  The  Select  Committee  to  Study  Governmental  Operations
with  Respect  to  Intelligence  Activities,  Foreign  and  Military  Intelligence  [Church
Committee  report],  report  no.  94-755,  94th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,
1976).  Also,  U.S.  Army  Inspector  General,  Use  of  Volunteers  in  Chemical  Agent
Research  [Army  IG  report]  (Washington,  D.C.:  1975).

4  In  dissenting  opinions,  four  justices  of  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court  (Brennan,
Marshall,  Stevens,  and  O'Connor)  cited  the  Nuremberg  Code.  United  States  et  al.  v.

Stanley,  483  U.S.  669, 687,  710  (1987).  u,,-^t t  tW

" 5. Thalidomide  was  only  available  in  clinical  trials  in  the  United  States  at  that
time  but  was  approved  for  use  in  a  number  of  other  countries.

6  Louis  Lasagna,  interview  by  Susan  White-Junod  and  Jon  Harkness
(ACHRE)  transcript  of  audio  recording,  13  December  1994  (ACHRE  Research  Project
Series  Interview  Program  Files,  Ethics  Oral  History  Project),  37-38.  See  also,  Louis
Lasagna  "1938-1968:  The  FDA,  the  Drug  Industry,  the  Medical  Profession,  and  the
Public,"  in  Safeguarding  the  Public:  Historical  Aspects  of  Medicinal  Drug  Control,  ed.
John  B.  Blake  (Baltimore:  The  Johns  Hopkins  Press,  1970),  173.

7  Food  Drug  and  Cosmetic  Act  amendments,  21  U.S.C.  §  355  (1962).

8* Congressional  Record,  87th  Cong,  2d  Sess.,  22042,  as  cited  in  an  attached
memorandum,  C.  Joseph  Stetler,  Pharmaceutical  Manufacturers  Association,  to  James  L.
Goddard  M.D.,  Commissioner  of  Food  and  Drugs,  DHEW,  1 1  October  1966
("Regarding  Statement  Appearing  in  August  30,  1966  Federal  Register  Concerning
Clinical  Investigation  of  Drugs")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-090794-A).

9  Keith  Reemtsma  et  al.,  "Reversal  of  Early  Graft  Rejection  after  Renal
Heterotransplantation  in  Man,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  1 87

(1964):  691-696.

1 0  This  research,  conducted  by  Dr.  Chester  Southam  of  Sloan-Kettenng
Institute  and  Dr.  Emmanuel  Mandel  of  the  Jewish  Chronic  Disease  Hospital  in  1963  and
funded  by  the  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  and  the  American  Cancer  Society,  raised
concern  within  PHS  and  brought  about  an  investigation  by  the  hospital.  Drs.  Mandel  and
Southam  were  subject  to  a  disciplinary  hearing  before  the  Board  of  Regents  of  the
University  of  the  State  of  New  York.  The  hospital's  internal  review  and  a  suit  against
the  hospital  prompted  concern  and  debate  at  the  NIH.  Edward  J.  Rourke,  Assistant
General  Counsel,  NIH,  to  Dr.  Luther  L.  Terry,  Surgeon  General,  16  September  1965
("Research  Grants-Clinical-PHS  responsibility-Fin*  v.  Jewish  Chronic  Disease
Hospital  [New  York  Supreme  Court,  Kings  County]")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-090794-A).

For  a  more  thorough  discussion  of  this  case,  see  Katz,  Experimentation  with

Human  Beings,  9-65.

11. In  1967  Dr.  Southam  was  elected  vice  president  of  the  American
Association  for  Cancer  Research  and  became  president  the  following  year.  Katz,

189


Experimentation  with  Human  Beings,  63  and  65.

12.  For  a  fuller  discussion  of  the  Law-Medicine  Research  Institute,  see  chapter
2.

13.  The  development  of  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki  is  discussed  briefly  in
chapter  2.

14.  Robert  B.  Livingston,  Associate  Chief  for  Program  Development,
Memorandum  to  the  Director,  NIH,  4  November  1964  ("Progress  Report  on  Survey  of
Moral  and  Ethical  Aspects  of  Clinical  Investigation"  [the  Livingston  report])  (ACHRE
No.  HHS-090795-A),  3.

15.  Ibid.,  7.

16.  Ibid.

17.  Mark  S.  Frankel,  "Public  Policymaking  for  Biomedical  Research:  The  Case
of  Human  Experimentation"  (Ph.D.  diss.,  George  Washington  University,  9  May  1976),
50-51.

1 8.  The  NAHC  discussed  the  "general  question  of  the  ethical,  moral,  and  legal
aspects  of  clinical  investigation"  at  its  meetings  of  September  and  December  1965.
Terry's  interest  in  this  was  motivated  in  part  by  the  concern  of  Senator  Jacob  K.  Javits
that  the  informed  consent  provisions  of  the  1962  Drug  Amendments  were  not  applicable
to  nondrug-related  research.  See  (a)  draft  letter  to  Senator  Javits  from  the  Surgeon
General,  15  October  1965;  (b)  Senator  Javits  to  Luther  L.  Terry,  Surgeon  General,  15
June  1965;  and  (c)  Edward  J.  Rourke,  Assistant  General  Counsel,  to  William  H.  Stewart,
Surgeon  General,  26  October  1965.  All  in  ACHRE  No.  HHS-090794-A.

19.  Transcript  of  the  NAHC  meeting,  Washington,  D.C.,  28  September  1965.
See  Faden  and  Beauchamp,  A  History  and  Theory  of  Informed  Consent,  208.

20.  Ibid.

21 .  Dr.  S.  John  Reisman,  the  Executive  Secretary,  NAHC,  to  Dr.  James  A.
Shannon,  6  December  1965  ("Resolution  of  Council")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-090794-A).

22.  Surgeon  General,  Public  Health  Service  to  the  Heads  of  the  Institutions
Conducting  Research  with  Public  Health  Service  Grants,  8  February  1966  ("Clinical
research  and  investigation  involving  human  beings")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-090794-A).
This  policy  was  distributed  through  Bureau  of  Medical  Services  Circular  no.  38,  23  June
1966  ("Clinical  Investigations  Using  Human  Beings  As  Subjects")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-
090794-A).

23.  In  December  1966  the  policy  was  expanded  to  include  behavioral  as  well
as  medical  research. William  H.  Stewart,  Surgeon  General,  Public  Health  Service,  to
Heads  of  Institutions  Receiving  Public  Health  Service  Grants,  12  December  1966
("Clarification  of  procedure  on  clinical  research  and  investigation  involving  human
subjects")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-072894-B),  2.

In  1967  the  Public  Health  Service  required  that  intramural  research,  including
that  conducted  at  NIH,  abide  by  similar  requirements.  William  H.  Stewart,  Surgeon
General  of  the  Public  Health  Service,  to  List,  30  October  1967  ("PHS  policy  for
intramural  programs  and  for  contracts  when  investigations  involving  human  subjects  are
included")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-072894-B),  2.

24.  Frankel,  "Public  Policymaking  for  Biomedical  Research:  The  Case  of
Human  Experimentation,"  161.

25.  Ibid.,  161-162.

26.  U.S.  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  The  Institutional
Guide  to  DHEW  Policy  on  Protection  of  Human  Subjects  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,


190


1971)  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-090794-A).

27.  Ibid.,  1-2.

28.  Beecher's  criticism  involved  many  aspects  of  the  research,  including  the
risk  assessment,  usefulness  of  the  research,  and  the  question  of  informed  consent.  On
this  last  point,  Beecher  argued  that  while  consent  was  important,  he  disputed  the  belief
that  it  was  easily  obtainable.  In  his  talk  at  Brook  Lodge,  Beecher  questioned  the  "naive
assumption  implicit  in  the  Nuremberg  Code,"  that  consent  was  readily  obtainable.
Beecher  indicated  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  truly  informed  consent  may  have  led  many
researchers  to  treat  the  provision  cavalierly  and  often  to  ignore  it.  Henry  K.  Beecher,
"Ethics  and  the  Explosion  of  Human  Experimentation,"  unpublished  manuscript  of  paper
presented  22  March  1965,  "a,"  Beecher  Papers,  Countway  Library  (ACHRE  No.  IND-
072595-A).

29.  lbid.,"a"  and  "b."

30.  Ibid.,  2a.

31.  Ibid.,  2.

32.  H.  K.  Beecher,  "Ethics  and  Clinical  Research,"  New  England  Journal  of
Medicine  274(1966):  3354-1360.

33.  W.  Goodman,  "Doctors  Must  Experiment  on  Humans~But  What  are
Patients  Rights?"  New  York  Times  Magazine,  2  July  1965,  12-13,  29-33,  as  cited  in
Faden  and  Beauchamp,  A  History  and  Theory  of  Informed  Consent,  1 88.

34.  J.  Lear,  "Do  We  Need  New  Rules  for  Experimentation  on  People?"
Saturday  Review,  5  February  1966,  61-70.

35.  Henry  K.  Beecher,  "Consent  in  Clinical  Experimentation:  Myth  and
Reality,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  1 95  ( 1 966):  34-35.

36.  J.  Lear,  "Experiments  on  People-The  Growing  Debate,"  Saturday  Review,
2  July  1966,41-43.

37.  Both  the  New  York  Times  and  the  Wall  Street  Journal  ran  stories  on  24
March  1971.  See  Medical  World  News,  15  October  1971,  "Was  Dr.  Krugman  Justified
in  Giving  Children  Hepatitis?"

38.  Beecher,  Research  and  the  Individual:  Human  Studies  (Boston:  Little,
Brown,  and  Company,  1970),  122-127.

39.  Paul  Ramsey,  The  Patient  as  Person:  Explorations  in  Medical  Ethics  (New
Haven:  Yale  University  Press,  1970),  51-55.

40.  In  a  letter  to  the  Lancet,  Dr.  Stephen  Goldby  called  the  work  "unjustifiable"
and  asked,  "Is  it  right  to  perform  an  experiment  on  a  normal  or  mentally  retarded  child
when  no  benefit  can  result  to  the  individual?"  (S.  Goldby,  "Letters  to  the  Editor,"  Lancet
7702  [1971]:  749).  The  Lancet  editors  agreed  with  Goldby.  On  this  side  of  the  Atlantic,
however,  the  editors  of  NEJM  and  JAMA,  among  others,  defended  Krugman's  work.

41.  Armed  Forces  Epidemiological  Board,  minutes  of  24  May  1957  (ACHRE
No.  NARA-032495-B).

42.  S.  Krugman,  "Ethical  Practices  in  Human  Experimentation,"  text  of  lecture
presented  at  the  Fifth  Annual  Midwest  Student  Medical  Research  Forum,  1  March  1974
(ACHRE  No.  IND-072895-A).

43.  Ibid.,  3-4.

44.  Louis  Goldman,  "The  Willowbrook  Debate,"  World  Medicine  (September
1971  and  November  1971):  23,  25.

45.  James  H.  Jones,  Bad  Blood  (New  York:  Free  Press,  1993  edition),  1 14.


191


46.  Jones,  Bad  Blood  (1981),  69-7 1 ;  Levine,  Ethics  and  Regulation  of  Clinical
Research,  70.

47.  Charles  J.  McDonald,  "The  Contribution  of  the  Tuskegee  Study  to  Medical
Knowledge,"  Journal  of  the  National  Medical  Association  (January  1 974):  1  - 1 1 ,  as  cited
in  Faden  and  Beauchamp,  A  History  and  Theory  of  Informed  Consent,  194-195.

48.  Jean  Heller,  "Syphilis  Victims  in  U.S.  Study  Went  Untreated  for  40
Years,"  New  York  Times  (26  July  1972)  1,  8,  as  cited  in  Faden  and  Beauchamp,  A
History  and  Theory  of  Informed  Consent,  195.

49.  U.S.  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  Final  Report  of  the
Tuskegee  Syphilis  Study  Ad  Hoc  Panel  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1 973),  Jay  Katz
Concurring  Opinion,  14.

50.  Ibid.

51.  Ibid.,  21-32.

52.  Ibid.,  23.

53.  Senator  Jacob  Javits  introduced  legislation  that  would  have  made  the
DHEW  policy  a  regulation  backed  by  federal  law.  S.  878  and  S.  974,  93d  Cong.,  1st
Sess.  (1973).

Senator  Hubert  Humphrey  introduced  a  bill  to  create  a  National  Human
Experimentation  Standards  Board~a  separate  federal  agency  with  authority  over  research
similar  to  the  Security  and  Exchange  Commission's  authority  over  securities  transactions.
S.  934,  93d  Cong.,  1  st  Sess.  ( 1 973).

Also,  Senator  Walter  Mondale  introduced  a  resolution  to  provide  for  a  "study
and  evaluation  of  the  ethical,  social,  and  legal"  aspects  of  biomedical  research.  S.J.  Res.
71,  93d  Cong.,  1st  Sess.  (1973).

54.  It  is  worth  noting  here  that  Senator  Kennedy  had  convened  similar  hearings
two  years  previously,  in  1971,  to  consider  the  establishment  of  a  national  commission  to
examine  "ethical,  social,  and  legal  implications  of  advances  in  biomedical  research."
Among  the  topics  mentioned  in  this  hearing  was  the  total-body  irradiation  research
sponsored  by  the  Department  of  Defense  at  the  University  of  Cincinnati,  which  we
discuss  in  chapter  8.

55.  Jay  Katz,  "Human  Experimentation:  A  Personal  Odyssey,"  IRB  9,  no.  1
(January/February  1987):  1-6.

56.  Protection  of  Human  Subjects,  39  Fed.  Reg.  105,  18914-1 8920  (1974)  (to
be  codified  at  45  C.F.R.  §46).

57.  National  Research  Act  of  1974.  P.L.  348,  93d  Cong.,  2d  Sess.  (12  July
1974).

58.  U.S.  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  Office  for  Protection
from  Research  Risks,  18  April  1979,  OPPR  Reports  [The  Belmont  Report]  (ACHRE  No.
HHS-011795-A-2),  4-20.

59.  Interestingly,  this  committee  included  Henry  Beecher,  who,  as  was
discussed  in  part  I,  chapter  3,  had  objected  to  the  imposition  of  these  requirements  to
contract  research  in  1961 .  Beecher's  presence  on  the  committee  testifies  to  the  common
relationship  between  military  and  private  research  during  this  time.  Like  many  of  the
AFEB  members  and  commissioners,  many  of  the  members  of  the  ad  hoc  panel  were
nonmilitary  consultants  to  the  DOD.

60.  Department  of  the  Army,  Army  Regulation  40-37,  12  August  1963
("Radioisotope  License  Program  [Human  Use]").


192


61.  Department  of  the  Army,  AR  40-38,  23  February  1973  ("Medical  Services-
Clinical  Investigation  Program").

62.  Ibid.

63.  Ibid.

64.  Commanding  Officer,  Naval  Medical  Research  Institute,  National  Naval
Medical  Center,  to  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  30  November  1964  ("Authorization  to  use
human  volunteers  as  subjects  for  study  of  effects  of  hypoxia  on  the  visual  field;  request
for")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-091494-A),  2.

65.  Department  of  the  Navy,  "Manual  of  the  Medical  Department,"  20-8,
Change  36,  7  March  1967  ("Use  of  Volunteers  in  Medical  or  Other  Hazardous
Experiments")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-091494-A).

66.  Department  of  the  Navy,  SecNav  Instruction  3900.39,  28  April  1969  ("Use
of  volunteers  as  subjects  of  research,  development,  tests,  and  evaluation").

67.  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  AFR  169-8,  8  October  1965  ("Medical
Education  and  Research—Use  of  Volunteers  in  Aerospace  Research").

68.  Ibid.

69.  Ibid.

70.  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  Manned  Spacecraft
Center,  MSCI  1860.2,  12  May  1966  ("Establishment  of  MSC  Radiological  Control
Manual  and  Radiological  Control  Committee")  (ACHRE  No.  NASA-022895-A),  3.

National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  "Ames  Management  Manual
7170-1,"  15  January  1968  ("Human  Research  Planning  and  Approval")  (ACHRE  No.
NASA- 120894- A),  3.

71 .  Ames  required  the  voluntary,  written  informed  consent  of  the  subject  and
stipulated  that  consent  be  informed  by  an

explanation  to  the  subject  in  language  understandable  to
him  .  .  .  [including]  the  nature,  duration,  and  purpose  of
the  human  research;  the  manner  in  which  it  will  be
conducted;  and  all  foreseeable  risks,  inconveniences  and
discomforts.
"Ames  Management  Manual  7170-1,"  15  January  1968,  3.

72.  The  Ames  director  was  authorized  to  waive  the  consent  requirements  (a)
when  the  requirements  would  "not  be  necessary  to  protect  the  subject";  (b)  when  the
research  uses  "classes  of  trained  persons  who  knowingly  follow  a  specialized  calling  or
occupation  which  is  generally  recognized  as  hazardous,"  including  "test  pilots  and
astronauts";  and  (c)  when  the  research  "would  be  seriously  hampered"  by  compliance.
"Ames  Management  Manual  7170-1,"  15  January  1968,  3.

73.  For  example,  one  review  from  this  group  recommended  changes  in  a
consent  form  to  include

[T]he  part  of  the  procedure  you  are  consenting  to  which
principally  benefits  the  research  program  and  is  not  part
of  your  treatment  is  known  as  arterial  puncture.  .  .  .
These  risks  will  be  explained  to  you  in  detail  if  you  so
desire.  The  entire  procedure,  including  the  diagnostic
radioscan,  takes  about  an  hour.


193


Although  this  proposed  consent  form  does  not  delineate  the  medical  risks  posed  by  the
procedure,  its  statement  that  the  patient's  participation  is  incidental  to  treatment  may
provide  a  greater  opportunity  for  the  patient  to  make  an  informed  decision  about
participation.  George  A.  Rathert,  Jr.,  Chairman,  Human  Research  Experiments  Review
Board,  ARC,  to  Director,  20  January  1969  ("Proposed  Investigation  entitled
'Measurement  of  Cerebral  Blood  Flow  in  Man  by  an  Isotopic  Technique  Employing
External  Counting,'  by  Dr.  Leo  Sapierstein,  Stanford  University")  (ACHRE  No.  NASA-
022895-A),  4.

At  MSC,  the  instruction  establishing  the  Medical  Uses  Subcommittee  was
rescinded  in  1968.  In  1969,  formal  combination  of  the  medical  operations  and  medical
research  functions  at  MSC  led  to  the  reestablishment  of  the  instruction  as  the  Medical
Isotopes  Subcommittee  at  MSC.  No  evidence  suggests  what  factors,  other  than  risk,
were  considered  in  this  form  of  prior  review  is  available  currently.  National  Aeronautics
and  Space  Administration,  Manned  Spacecraft  Center,  MSCI  1860.2,  12  May  1966
("Establishment  of  MSC  Radiological  Control  Manual  and  Radiological  Control
Committee");  and  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  NMI  1 156.19,  28
August  1969  ("Medical  Isotopes  Subcommittee  of  the  MSC  Radiation  Safety
Committee")  (ACHRE  No.  NASA-022895-A).

74.  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  NMI  71008.9,  2  February
1972  ("Human  Research  Policy  and  Procedures")  (ACHRE  No.  NASA-022895-A).  See
also,  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  NMI  7100.9  ("Power  and
Authority  -  To  Authorize  Human  Research  and  to  Grant  Certain  Related  Exceptions  and
Waivers")  (ACHRE  No.  NASA-022895-A).

75.  Commission  on  CIA  Activities  within  the  United  States,  Report  to  the
President,  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1975).

76.  U.S.  Congress,  The  Select  Committee  to  Study  Governmental  Operations
with  Respect  to  Intelligence  Activities,  Foreign  and  Military  Intelligence  [Church
Committee  report],  report  no.  94-755,  94th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,
1976),  394.

77.  For  general  information  on  the  CIA  program,  see  the  Church  Committee
report,  385-422,  and  J.  Marks,  The  Search  for  the  "Manchurian  Candidate":  The  CIA
and  Mind  Control  (New  York:  Times  Books,  1978).

78.  Church  Committee  report,  book  1,  389.

79.  Church  Committee  report,  book  1,  400,  402.  In  1963  the  CIA  inspector
general  (IG)  recommended  that  unwitting  testing  be  terminated,  but  Deputy  Director  for
Plans  Richard  Helms  (who  later  became  director  of  Central  Intelligence)  continued  to
advocate  covert  testing  on  the  ground  that  "positive  operational  capability  to  use  drugs  is
diminishing,  owing  to  a  lack  of  realistic  testing.  With  increasing  knowledge  of  the  state
of  the  art,  we  are  less  capable  of  staying  up  with  the  Soviet  advances  in  this  field."  The
Church  Committee  noted  that  "Helms  attributed  the  cessation  of  the  unwitting  testing  to
the  high  risk  of  embarrassment  to  the  Agency  as  well  as  the  'moral  problem.'  He  noted
that  no  better  covert  situation  had  been  devised  than  that  which  had  been  used,  and  that
'we  have  no  answer  to  the  moral  issue.'"

80.  Ibid.,  402.

8 1 .  Executive  Order  11905(19  February  1 976).

82.  Executive  Order  12036,  section  2-301  (26  January  1978)  and  Executive
Order  12333,  section  2.10  (4  December  1981).


194


83.  U.S.  Army  Inspector  General,  Use  of  Volunteers  in  Chemical  Agent
Research  [Army  IG  report] (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1975),  2.

84.  One  noted  exception  involved  using  LSD  as  an  interrogation  devise  on  ten
foreign  intelligence  agents,  and  one  U.S.  citizen  suspected  of  stealing  classified
documents.  Army  IG  report,  143.

85.  Army  IG  report,  87.

86.  Ibid.

87.  The  CIA  paid  death  benefits  to  the  Olson  family  after  Frank  Olson's  death,
and  the  Army  secretly  paid  half  of  an  $18,000  settlement  that  the  Blauer  family
negotiated  with  the  state  of  New  York  in  1955.  The  state  ran  the  psychiatric  institute
that  administered  the  drugs,  but  which  never  disclosed  the  Army's  involvement.  Both
agencies  feared  that  the  resulting  embarrassment  and  adverse  publicity  might  undermine
their  ability  to  continue  their  secret  research  programs.  Barrett  v.  United  States,  6660  F.
Supp.  1291  (E.  D.  N.Y.,  1987).

88.  Feres  v.  United  States,  340  U.S.  1 46  ( 1 950).

89.  United  States  v.  Stanley,  483  U.S.  669  ( 1 987).

90.  483  U.S.  669,  682.

91.  483  U.S.  669,  687-88.

92.  483  U.S.  669,  709-10.

93.  George  Annas,  a  scholar  of  human  experimentation  and  biomedical  ethics,
has  traced  the  history  of  the  Nuremberg  Code  in  the  U.S.  courts.  The  first  express
reference  in  a  majority  opinion,  Annas  found,  was  in  a  1973  decision  in  the  Circuit  Court
in  Wayne  County,  Michigan.  The  decisions  in  which  the  Code  has  since  been  cited,
Annas  concluded,  reflect  the  proposition  that  the  Nuremberg  Code  is  a  "document
fundamentally  about  nontherapeutic  experimentation."  Thus,  the  "types  of  experiments
that  U.S.  judges  have  found  the  Nuremberg  Code  useful  for  setting  standards  have
involved  nontherapeutic  experiments  often  conducted  without  consent.  .  .  .  Many  of
these  experiments  were  justified  by  national  security  considerations  and  the  cold  war."
George  J.  Annas,  "The  Nuremberg  Code  in  U.S.  Courts:  Ethics  versus  Expediency,"  in
George  J.  Annas  and  Michael  A.  Grodin,  eds..  The  Nazi  Doctors  and  the  Nuremberg
Code:  Human  Rights  in  Human  Experimentation  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,
1992),  218.


195


4

Ethics  Standards
in  Retrospect


/\ccording  to  the  mission  set  out  in  our  charter,  the  Advisory  Committee
is  in  essence  a  national  ethics  commission.  In  this  capacity  we  were  obliged  to
develop  an  ethical  framework  forjudging  the  human  radiation  experiments.  This
proved  to  be  one  of  our  most  difficult  tasks,  for  we  were  not  only  dealing  with
complex  events  that  occurred  decades  ago,  but  also  with  some  of  the  most
controversial  issues  in  moral  philosophy.  This  chapter  sets  out  the  standards  that
we  believe  are  appropriate  for  evaluating  human  radiation  experiments  and  offers
reasons  for  relying  on  them.  It  then  applies  these  standards  to  the  results  of  the
historical  research  we  have  conducted  and  draws  ethical  conclusions.*

Fulfilling  our  charge  to  "determine  the  ethical  and  scientific  standards  and
criteria"  to  evaluate  human  radiation  experiments  that  took  place  between  1 944
and  1974  requires  consideration  of  a  complex  question:  Is  it  correct  to  evaluate
the  events,  policies,  and  practices  of  the  past,  and  the  agents  responsible  for  them,
against  ethical  standards  and  values  that  we  accept  as  valid  today  but  that  may  not


"Some  of  the  features  of  the  moral  framework  presented  in  this  chapter  pertain  to
biomedical  experiments  only  and  not  to  intentional  releases.  A  moral  analysis  of
intentional  releases  involves  somewhat  different  elements  than  a  moral  analysis  of
biomedical  experiments,  because  they  engage  different  ethical  issues.  For  example,  a
requirement  of  individual  informed  consent  is  not  applicable  to  the  intentional  releases,
and  the  concepts  of  risk  and  benefit  and  national  security  have  different  implications  for
them. Ethical  and  policy  issues  specific  to  intentional  releases  are  discussed  in  chapter
11.

196


Chapter  4

have  been  widely  accepted  then?  Or  must  we  limit  our  ethical  evaluation  of  the
past  to  those  standards  and  values  that  were  widely  accepted  at  the  time?  This  is
the  problem  of  retrospective  moral  judgment.

Quite  apart  from  the  issue  of  the  validity  of  projecting  current  standards
onto  the  past,  there  is  another  question  that  this  chapter  must  address:  In  a
pluralistic  society  such  as  ours,  is  there  at  present  a  sufficiently  broad  consensus
on  ethical  standards  to  make  possible  a  public  evaluation  that  is  not  simply  the
arbitrary  imposition  of  one  particular  moral  point  of  view  among  several  or  even
many?  This  is  the  problem  of  value  pluralism.  The  ethical  framework  the
Advisory  Committee  employs  takes  both  these  issues  into  account.

This  chapter  is  divided  into  two  parts.  In  the  first  part  we  present  and
defend  the  ethical  framework  adopted  by  the  Committee  for  the  evaluation  of
human  radiation  experiments  conducted  from  1944  to  1974  and  the  agents
responsible  for  them.  We  begin  by  identifying  the  types  of  moral  judgments  with
which  the  Committee  is  concerned  and  the  different  kinds  of  ethical  standards
against  which  these  judgments  can  be  made.  We  next  address  two  challenges  to
the  position  that  the  Advisory  Committee  can  use  these,  or  any  other,  standards  to
make  valid  ethical  judgments.  These  challenges  are  (1)  that  the  diversity  of  views
about  ethics  in  American  society  invalidates  any  effort  by  a  public  body  such  as
the  Advisory  Committee  to  make  moral  judgments  and  (2)  that  the  diversity  of
views  about  ethics  across  time  similarly  invalidates  our  making  defensible  moral
judgments  about  the  past.  Although  the  Committee  does  not  accept  these
challenges  as  definitive,  we  discuss  these  as  well  as  other  factors  that  influence  or
limit  ethical  evaluation.  We  include  here  a  discussion  of  an  issue  of  particular
relevance  to  our  charge:  what  role,  if  any,  considerations  of  national  security
should  play  in  the  Committee's  ethical  framework.  We  also  consider  factors  that
can  mitigate  the  blame  we  would  otherwise  place  on  agents  (whether  individuals
or  collective  entities)  for  having  conducted  morally  wrong  actions.

In  the  second  part  of  the  chapter,  we  explore  how  the  Committee's  ethical
framework  can  be  used  to  evaluate  both  experiments  conducted  in  the  past  and  the
people  and  institutions  that  sponsored  and  conducted  them.  Drawing  on  the
history  presented  in  chapters  1  through  3,  we  illustrate  how,  when  applied,  the
framework  is  specified  by  context  and  detail.  This  specification  of  the  framework
continues  in  part  II  of  the  report,  when  the  framework  is  used  to  evaluate  specific
cases.

AN  ETHICAL  FRAMEWORK
Two  Types  of  Moral  Judgment

For  purposes  of  the  Committee's  charge,  there  are  two  main  types  of  moral
judgment:  judgments  about  the  moral  quality  of  actions,  policies,  practices,
institutions,  and  organizations;  and  judgments  about  the  praiseworthiness  or

197


Parti

blameworthiness  of  individual  agents  and  in  some  cases  entities  such  as
professions  and  governments  (insofar  as  these  can  be  viewed  as  collective  agents
with  powers  and  responsibilities).  The  first  type  contains  several  kinds  of
judgments.  Actions  may  be  judged  to  be  obligatory,  wrong,  or  permissible.
Institutions,  policies,  and  practices  can  be  characterized  as  just  or  unjust,
equitable  or  inequitable,  humane  or  inhumane.  Organizations  can  be  said  to  be
responsible  or  negligent,  fair-dealing  or  exploitative.

The  second  type  of  judgment  about  the  praiseworthiness  or
blameworthiness  of  agents  also  contains  a  diversity  of  determinations.  Agents,
whether  individual  or  collective,  can  be  judged  to  be  culpable  or  praiseworthy  for
this  or  that  action  or  policy,  to  be  generous  or  mean-spirited,  responsible  or
negligent,  to  respect  the  moral  equality  of  people  or  to  discriminate  against
certain  individuals  or  groups,  and  so  on.

Three  Kinds  of  Ethical  Standards

A  recognized  way  to  make  moral  judgments  is  to  evaluate  the  facts  of  a
case  in  the  context  of  ethical  standards.  The  Committee  identified  three  kinds  of
ethical  standards  as  relevant  to  the  evaluation  of  the  human  radiation
experiments:1

1 .  Basic  ethical  principles  that  are  widely  accepted  and  generally
regarded  as  so  fundamental  as  to  be  applicable  to  the  past  as
well  as  the  present;

2.  The  policies  of  government  departments  and  agencies  at  the
time;  and

3.  Rules  of  professional  ethics  that  were  widely  accepted  at  the
time.

Basic  Ethical  Principles

Basic  ethical  principles  are  general  standards  or  rules  that  all  morally
serious  individuals  accept.  The  Advisory  Committee  has  identified  six  basic
ethical  principles  as  particularly  relevant  to  our  work:  "One  ought  not  to  treat
people  as  mere  means  to  the  ends  of  others";  "One  ought  not  to  deceive  others";
"One  ought  not  to  inflict  harm  or  risk  of  harm";  "One  ought  to  promote  welfare
and  prevent  harm":  "One  ought  to  treat  people  fairly  and  with  equal  respect";  and
"One  ought  to  respect  the  self-determination  of  others."  These  principles  state
moral  requirements;  they  are  principles  of  obligation  telling  us  what  we  ought  to
do.2

Every  principle  on  this  list  has  exceptions,  because  all  moral  principles

198


Chapter  4

can  justifiably  be  overridden  by  other  basic  principles  in  circumstances  when  they
conflict.  To  give  priority  to  one  principle  over  another  is  not  a  moral  mistake;  it
is  a  reality  of  moral  judgment.  The  justifiability  of  such  judgments  depends  on
many  factors  in  the  circumstance;  it  is  not  possible  to  assign  priorities  to  these
principles  in  the  abstract.

Far  more  social  consensus  exists  about  the  acceptability  of  these  basic
principles  than  exists  about  any  philosophical,  religious,  or  political  theory  of
ethics.  This  is  not  surprising,  given  the  central  social  importance  of  morality  and
the  fact  that  its  precepts  are  embraced  in  some  form  by  virtually  all  major  ethical
theories  and  traditions.  These  principles  are  at  the  deepest  level  of  any  person's
commitment  to  a  moral  way  of  life.

It  is  important  to  emphasize  that  the  validity  of  these  basic  principles  is
not  typically  thought  of  as  limited  by  time:  we  commonly  judge  agents  in  the  past
by  these  standards.  For  example,  the  passing  of  fifty  years  in  no  way  changes  the
fact  that  Hitler's  extermination  of  millions  of  people  was  wrong,  nor  does  it  erase
or  even  diminish  his  culpability.  Nor  would  the  passing  of  a  hundred  years  or  a
thousand  do  so.

This  is  not  to  deny  that  it  might  be  inappropriate  to  apply  to  the  distant
past  some  ethical  principles  to  which  we  now  subscribe.  It  is  only  to  note  that
there  are  some  principles  so  basic  that  we  ordinarily  assume,  with  good  reason,
that  they  are  applicable  to  the  past  as  well  as  the  present  (and  will  be  applicable  in
the  future  as  well).  We  regard  these  principles  as  basic  because  any  minimally
acceptable  ethical  standpoint  must  include  them.

Policies  of  Government  Departments  and  Agencies

The  policies  of  departments  and  agencies  of  the  government  can  be
understood  as  statements  of  commitment  on  the  part  of  those  governmental
organizations,  and  hence  of  individuals  in  them,  to  conduct  their  affairs  according
to  the  rules  and  procedures  that  constitute  those  policies.  In  this  sense,  policies
create  ethical  obligations.  When  a  department  or  agency  adopts  a  particular
policy,  it  in  effect  promises  to  make  reasonable  efforts  to  abide  by  it.3

At  least  where  participation  in  the  organization  is  voluntary,  and  where  the
organization's  defining  purpose  is  morally  legitimate  (it  is  not,  for  example,  a
criminal  organization),  to  assume  a  role  in  the  organization  is  to  assume  the
obligations  that  attach  to  that  role.  Depending  upon  their  roles  in  the
organization,  particular  individuals  may  have  a  greater  or  lesser  responsibility  for
helping  to  ensure  that  the  policy  commitments  of  the  organization  are  honored.
For  example,  high-level  managers  who  formulate  organizational  policies  have  an
obligation  to  take  reasonable  steps  to  ensure  that  these  policies  are  effectively
implemented.  If  they  fail  to  discharge  these  obligations,  they  have  done  wrong
and  are  blameworthy,  unless  some  extenuating  circumstance  absolves  them  of
responsibility.  One  sort  of  extenuating  circumstance  is  that  the  policy  in  question

199


Parti

is  unethical.  In  that  case,  we  would  hold  an  individual  blameless  for  not
attempting  to  implement  it  (at  least  if  the  individual  did  so  because  of  a
recognition  that  the  policy  was  unethical).  Moreover,  we  might  praise  the
individual  for  attempting  an  institutional  reform  at  some  professional  or  personal
risk.

Different  types  of  organizations  have  different  defining  purposes,  and
these  differences  determine  the  character  of  the  department's  or  agency's  role-
derived  obligations.  All  government  organizations  have  special  responsibilities  to
act  impartially  and  to  fairly  protect  all  citizens,  including  the  most  vulnerable
ones.  These  special  obligations  constitute  a  standard  for  evaluating  the  conduct
of  government  officials.

Rules  of  Professional  Ethics

Professions  traditionally  assume  responsibilities  for  self-regulation,
including  the  promulgation  of  certain  standards  to  which  all  members  are
supposed  to  adhere.  These  standards  are  of  two  kinds:  technical  standards  that
establish  the  minimum  conditions  for  competent  practice,  and  ethical  principles
that  are  intended  to  govern  the  conduct  of  members  in  their  practice.  In  exchange
for  exercising  this  responsibility,  society  implicitly  grants  professions  a  degree  of
autonomy.  The  privilege  of  this  autonomy  in  turn  creates  certain  special
obligations  for  the  profession's  members.

These  obligations  function  as  constraints  on  professionals  to  reduce  the
risk  that  they  will  use  their  special  power  and  knowledge  to  the  detriment  of  those
whom  they  are  supposed  to  serve.  Thus,  physicians,  whose  special  knowledge
gives  them  opportunities  for  exploiting  patients  or  breaching  confidentiality,  are
obligated  to  act  in  the  patient's  best  interest  in  general  and  to  follow  various
prescriptions  for  minimizing  conflicts  of  interest.

Unlike  basic  ethical  principles  that  speak  to  the  whole  of  moral  life,  rules
of  professional  ethics  are  particularized  to  the  practices,  social  functions,  and
relationships  that  characterize  a  profession.  Rules  of  professional  ethics  are  often
justified  by  appeal  to  basic  ethical  principles.  For  example,  as  we  discuss  later  in
this  chapter,  the  obligation  to  obtain  informed  consent,  which  is  a  rule  of  research
and  medical  ethics,  is  grounded  in  principles  of  respect  for  self-determination,  the
promotion  of  others'  welfare,  and  the  noninfliction  of  harm.

In  one  respect,  rules  of  professional  ethics  are  like  the  policies  of
institutions  and  organizations:  they  express  commitments  to  which  their  members
may  be  rightly  held  by  others.  That  is,  rules  of  professional  ethics  express  the
obligations  that  collective  entities  impose  on  their  members  and  constitute  a
commitment  to  the  public  that  the  members  will  abide  by  them.  Absent  some
special  justification,  failure  to  honor  the  commitment  to  fulfill  these  obligations
constitutes  a  wrong.  To  the  extent  that  the  profession  as  a  collective  entity  has


200


Chapter  4

obligations  of  self-regulation,  failure  to  fulfill  these  obligations  can  lead  to
judgments  of  collective  blame.

Ethical  Pluralism  and  the  Convergence  of  Moral  Positions

Although  we  have  argued  that  there  is  broad  agreement  about  and
acceptance  of  basic  ethical  principles  in  the  United  States,  such  as  principles  that
enjoin  us  to  promote  the  welfare  of  others  and  to  respect  self-determination,
people  nevertheless  disagree  about  the  relative  priority  or  importance  of  these
principles  in  the  moral  life.  For  example,  although  any  minimally  acceptable
ethical  standpoint  must  include  both  these  principles,  some  approaches  to
morality  emphasize  the  importance  of  respecting  self-determination  while  others
place  a  higher  priority  on  duties  to  promote  welfare.  These  differences  in
approaches  to  morality  pose  a  problem  for  public  moral  discourse.  How  can  a
public  body,  such  as  the  Advisory  Committee,  purport  to  speak  on  behalf  of
society  as  a  whole  and  at  the  same  time  respect  this  diversity  of  views  about
ethics?  The  key  to  understanding  how  this  is  possible  is  to  appreciate  that
different  ethical  approaches  can  and  often  do  converge  on  the  same  ethical
conclusions.  People  can  agree  about  what  ought  to  be  done  without  necessarily
appealing  to  the  same  moral  arguments  to  defend  their  common  position.

This  phenomenon  of  convergence  has  been  observed  in  the  work  of  other
public  bodies  whose  charge  was  to  make  ethical  evaluations  on  research
involving  human  subjects,  including  the  National  Commission  for  the  Protection
of  Human  Subjects  of  Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research  and  the  President's
Commission  for  the  Study  of  Ethical  Problems  in  Medicine  and  Biomedical  and
Behavioral  Research.4  For  example,  both  those  who  take  the  viewpoint  that
emphasizes  obligations  to  promote  welfare  and  to  refrain  from  inflicting  harm  and
those  who  accord  priority  to  self-determination  can  agree  that  law  and  medical
and  research  practice  should  recognize  a  right  to  informed  consent  for  competent
individuals.  The  argument  for  a  requirement  of  informed  consent  based  on
promoting  welfare  and  refraining  from  inflicting  harm  assumes  that  individuals
are  generally  most  interested  in  and  knowledgeable  about  their  own  well-being.
Individuals  are  thus  in  the  best  position  to  discern  what  will  promote  their  welfare
when  deciding  about  participation  in  research  or  medical  care.  Allowing
physicians  or  others  to  decide  for  them  runs  too  great  a  risk  of  harm  or  loss  of
benefits.  By  contrast,  an  approach  based  on  self-determination  assumes  that,  at
least  for  competent  individuals,  being  able  to  make  important  decisions
concerning  one's  own  life  and  health  is  intrinsically  valuable,  independent  of  its
contribution  to  promoting  one's  well-being.  The  most  compelling  case  for
recognizing  a  right  of  informed  consent  for  competent  subjects  and  patients  draws
upon  both  lines  of  justification,  emphasizing  that  this  requirement  is  necessary
from  the  perspective  of  self-determination  considered  as  valuable  in  itself  and
from  the  standpoint  of  promoting  welfare  and  refraining  from  doing  harm.

201


Part  I

Therefore,  although  people  may  have  different  approaches  to  the  moral
life,  which  reflect  different  priorities  among  basic  moral  principles,  these
differences  need  not  result  in  a  lack  of  consensus  on  social  policy  or  even  on
particular  moral  rules  such  as  the  rule  that  competent  individuals  ought  to  be
allowed  to  accept  or  refuse  participation  in  experiments.  On  the  contrary,  the  fact
that  the  same  moral  rules  or  social  policies  can  be  grounded  in  different  basic
moral  principles  and  points  of  view  greatly  strengthens  the  case  for  their  public
endorsement  by  official  bodies  charged  to  speak  for  society  as  a  whole.

The  three  kinds  of  ethical  standards  upon  which  the  Committee  relies  for
our  ethical  evaluations-the  basic  moral  principles,  government  policies,  and  rules
of  professional  ethics—also  enjoy  a  broad  consensus.  They  are  not  idiosyncratic
to  a  particular  ethical  value  system.  Thus  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  think  that  in
order  to  fulfill  our  charge  of  ethical  evaluation,  the  Advisory  Committee  must
assume  that  there  is  only  one  uniquely  correct  ethical  standpoint.  A  broad  range
of  views  can  acknowledge  that  the  medical  profession  should  be  held  accountable
for  moral  rules  it  publicly  professes  and  that  individual  physicians  can  be  held
responsible  for  abiding  by  these  rules  of  professional  ethics.  Likewise,  regardless
of  whether  one  believes  that  the  ultimate  justification  for  government  policies  is
the  goal  of  promoting  welfare  and  minimizing  harms  or  respect  for  self-
determination,  one  can  agree  that  policies  represent  commitments  to  action  and
hence  generate  obligations.  Moreover,  any  plausible  ethical  viewpoint  will
recognize  that  when  individuals  assume  roles  in  organizations  they  thereby
undertake  role-derived  obligations.

We  have  already  argued  that  the  basic  ethical  principles  that  we  employ  in
evaluating  experiments  are  widely  accepted  and  command  significant  allegiance
not  only  from  our  contemporaries  but  also  from  reflective  and  morally  sensitive
individuals  and  ethical  traditions  in  the  past.  It  would  be  very  implausible  to
construe  any  of  them  as  parochial  or  controversial.

Retrospective  Moral  Judgment  and  the  Challenge  of  Relativism

Some  may  still  have  reservations  about  the  project  of  evaluating  the  ethics
of  decisions  and  actions  that  occurred  several  decades  ago.  The  worry  is  that  it  is
somehow  inappropriate,  if  not  muddled,  to  apply  currently  accepted  standards  to
earlier  periods  when  they  were  not  accepted,  recognized,  or  viewed  as  matters  of
obligation.  This  is  an  important  worry,  though  one  that  does  not  apply  to  our
framework.

The  position  that  the  values  and  principles  of  today  cannot  be  validly
applied  to  past  situations  in  which  they  may  not  have  been  accepted  is  called
historical  ethical  relativism.  This  is  the  thesis  that  moral  judgments  across  time
are  invalid  because  moral  judgments  can  be  justified  only  by  reference  to  a  set  of
shared  values,  and  the  values  of  a  society  change  over  time.  According  to  this
view,  one  historical  period  differs  from  another  by  virtue  of  lacking  the  relevant

202


Chapter  4

values  contained  in  the  other  historical  period,  namely,  those  that  support  or
justify  the  particular  moral  judgments  in  question.  Understood  in  this  way,
historical  ethical  relativism,  if  true,  would  explain  why  some  retrospective  moral
judgments  are  invalid,  namely,  where  the  past  society  about  which  the  judgments
are  made  lacked  the  values  that,  in  our  time,  support  our  judgments.  In  other
words,  the  claim  is  that  moral  judgments  made  about  actions  and  agents  in  one
period  of  history  cannot  be  made  from  the  perspective  of  the  values  of  another
historical  period.

The  question  of  whether  historical  ethical  relativism  limits  the  validity  of
retrospective  moral  judgment  is  not  a  mere  theoretical  puzzle  for  moral
philosophers.  It  is  an  eminently  practical  question,  since  how  we  answer  it  has
direct  and  profound  implications  for  what  we  ought  to  do  now.  Most  obviously,
the  position  we  adopt  on  the  validity  of  retrospective  moral  judgment  will
determine  whether  we  should  honor  claims  that  people  now  make  for  remedies  for
historical  injustices  allegedly  perpetrated  against  themselves  or  their  ancestors.
Similarly,  we  must  know  whether  there  is  any  special  circumstance  resulting  from
the  historical  context  in  which  the  responsible  parties  acted  that  mitigates
whatever  blame  would  be  appropriate.  We  return  to  this  question  later  in  the
chapter.

In  addition,  something  even  more  fundamental  is  at  stake  in  the  debate
over  retrospective  moral  judgment:  the  possibility  of  moral  progress.  The  idea  of
moral  progress  makes  sense  only  if  it  is  possible  to  make  moral  judgments  about
the  past  and  to  make  them  by  appealing  to  some  of  the  same  moral  standards  that
we  apply  to  the  present.  Unless  we  can  apply  the  same  moral  yardstick  to  the  past
and  the  present,  we  cannot  meaningfully  say  either  that  there  has  been  moral
progress  or  that  there  has  not.  For  example,  unless  some  retrospective  moral
judgments  are  valid,  we  cannot  say  that  the  abolition  of  slavery  is  a  case  of  moral
progress,  moral  regression,  or  either  one.  More  specifically,  unless  we  can  say
that  slavery  was  wrong,  we  cannot  say  that  the  abolition  of  slavery  was  a  moral
improvement.

For  these  and  other  reasons,  the  acceptance  of  historical  ethical  relativism
has  troubling  implications.  But  even  if  we  were  to  accept  historical  ethical
relativism  as  the  correct  position,  it  would  not  follow  from  this  alone  that  there  is
anything  improper  about  making  judgments  about  radiation  experiments
conducted  decades  ago  based  on  the  three  kinds  of  ethical  standards  the
Committee  has  identified.  Two  of  these  kinds  of  standards-government  policies
and  rules  of  professional  ethics-are  standards  used  at  the  time  the  experiments
were  conducted.  Neither  of  these  kinds  of  standards  involves  projecting  current
cultural  values  onto  a  different  cultural  milieu.

We  have  already  argued  that  basic  ethical  principles,  the  third  kind  of
standard  adopted  by  the  Committee,  are  not  temporally  limited.  Although  there
have  been  changes  in  ethical  values  in  the  United  States  between  the  mid- 1940s
and  the  present,  it  is  implausible  that  these  changes  involved  the  rejection  or

203


Part  I

affirmation  of  principles  so  basic  as  that  it  is  wrong  to  treat  people  as  mere  means,
wrong  to  inflict  harm,  or  wrong  to  deceive  people.  Thus,  the  Advisory
Committee's  evaluations  of  the  human  radiation  experiments  in  light  of  these
basic  principles  is  based  on  a  simple  and  we  think  reasonable  assumption  that,
even  fifty  years  ago,  these  principles  were  pervasive  features  of  moral  life  in  the
United  States  that  were  widely  recognized  and  accepted,  much  as  we  recognize
and  accept  them  today.5

Factors  That  Influence  or  Limit  Ethical  Evaluation

Several  considerations  influence  and  can  limit  the  ability  to  reach  ethical
conclusions  about  Tightness  and  wrongness  and  praise  and  blame.  Some  of  these
may  be  more  likely  to  be  present  in  efforts  to  evaluate  the  past,  but  all  can  arise
when  attempts  are  made  to  evaluate  contemporary  events  as  well.  The  most
important  such  limitations  relevant  to  the  Advisory  Committee's  evaluations  are
these:

( 1 )  Lack  of  evidence  as  to  whether  ethical
standards  were  followed  or  violated  and  if  so,
by  whom,  and

(2)  The  presence  of  conflicting  obligations.

The  three  kinds  of  ethical  standards  adopted  by  the  Committee  can  yield
the  conclusion  that  an  individual  or  collective  agent  had  or  has  a  particular
obligation.  But  this  conclusion  is  not  by  itself  sufficient  to  determine  in  any
particular  case  whether  anything  wrong  was  done  or  whether  any  individual  or
collective  agent  deserves  blame.

Lack  of  Evidence

Sound  evaluations  cannot  be  made  without  sufficient  evidence.
Sometimes  it  cannot  be  determined  if  anything  wrong  was  done  because  key  facts
about  a  case  are  missing  or  unclear.  Other  times  there  may  be  sufficient  evidence
that  a  wrong  was  done,  but  insufficient  evidence  to  determine  who  performed  the
action  that  was  wrong  or  who  authorized  the  policy  that  was  wrong  or  who  was
responsible  for  a  practice  that  was  wrong.  This  is  why  the  Advisory  Committee
strove  during  our  tenure  to  reconstruct  the  details  of  the  circumstances  under
which  the  human  radiation  experiments  themselves  took  place.  However,  these
records  are  incomplete,  and  even  the  copious  documentation  we  have  gathered
does  not  tell  as  complete  a  story  as  sometimes  was  needed  to  make  ethical
evaluations.


204


Chapter  4

Conflicting  Obligations

Because  we  all  have  more  than  one  obligation,  because  they  can  conflict
with  one  another,  and  because  some  obligations  are  weightier  than  others,  a
particular  obligation  that  is  otherwise  morally  binding  may  not  be  binding  in  a
particular  circumstance,  all  things  considered.  For  example,  a  government
official  might  be  obligated  to  follow  certain  routine  procedures,  but  in  a  time  of
dire  emergency  he  or  she  might  have  a  weightier  obligation  to  avert  great  harm  to
many  people  by  taking  direct  action  that  disregards  the  procedures.  Similarly,  a
physician  is  obligated  to  keep  his  patient's  condition  confidential,  but  in  some
cases  it  is  permissible  and  even  obligatory  to  breach  this  confidence  (for  example,
in  order  to  prevent  the  spread  of  deadly  infectious  diseases).  In  such  cases,  the
agent  has  done  nothing  wrong  in  failing  to  do  what  he  or  she  would  ordinarily  be
morally  obligated  to  do;  that  obligation  has  been  validly  overridden  by  what  is  in
the  particular  circumstances  a  weightier  obligation.

The  presence  of  conflicting  obligations  may  limit  our  ability  to  make
moral  judgments  when,  for  example,  it  is  difficult  to  determine,  in  a  particular
case,  which  obligation  should  take  precedence.  At  the  same  time,  however,  if  it
can  be  determined  which  obligation  is  weightier,  then  the  presence  of  this  factor
does  not  serve  as  an  impediment  to  evaluation;  rather,  it  can  lead  to  the
conclusion  that  nothing  morally  wrong  was  done  and  that  no  one  should  be
blamed.

An  example  of  a  potentially  overriding  obligation  that  is  especially
important  for  the  Advisory  Committee's  work  is  the  possibility  that,  during  the
period  of  the  radiation  experiments,  obligations  to  protect  national  security  were
sometimes  more  morally  weighty  than  obligations  to  comply  with  standards  for
human  subjects  research.  If  the  threat  were  great  enough,  considerations  of
national  security  grounded  in  the  basic  ethical  principle  that  one  ought  to  promote
welfare  and  prevent  harm  could  justifiably  override  the  basic  ethical  principle  of
not  using  people  as  mere  means  to  the  ends  of  others,  as  well  as  the  more  specific
rule  of  research  ethics  requiring  the  voluntary  consent  of  human  subjects.  Had
such  an  overriding  obligation  to  protect  national  security  existed  during  the  period
we  studied,  it  also  would  have  relieved  responsible  individuals  of  any  blame
otherwise  attributable  to  them  for  using  individuals  in  experiments  that  were
crucial  to  the  national  defense.

Especially  during  the  late  1940s  and  early  1950s,  and  then  again  in  the
first  years  of  the  early  1960s,  our  country  was  engaged  in  an  intense  competition
with  the  Soviet  Union.  A  high  premium  was  placed  upon  military  superiority,  not
only  in  "conventional"  warfare  but  also  in  atomic,  biological,  and  chemical
warfare.  The  DOD's  Wilson  memorandum,  when  originally  promulgated  in  1953,
declared  that  it  was  directed  toward  the  need  to  pursue  atomic,  biological,  and
chemical  warfare  experiments  "for  defensive  purposes"  in  these  fields.

It  would  not  be  surprising,  therefore,  to  discover  that,  in  the  government's

205


Parti

policies  and  rules  for  human  subject  research,  provisions  had  been  made  for  the
possibility  that  obligations  to  protect  national  security  might  conflict  with  and
take  priority  over  obligations  to  protect  human  subjects,  and  thus  that  such
policies  would  have  included  exceptions  for  national  security  needs.  The  moral
justification  would  also  not  be  surprising:  that,  in  order  to  preserve  the  American
way  of  life  with  its  precious  freedoms,  some  sacrifices  of  individual  rights  and
interests  would  have  to  be  made  for  the  greater  good.  The  very  phrase  Cold  War
expressed  the  conviction  that  we  already  were  engaged  in  a  life-or-death  struggle
and  that  in  war  actions  may  be  permissible  that  would  be  impermissible  in
peacetime.  Survival  in  the  treacherous  and  heavily  armed  post-World  War  II  era
might  demand  no  less,  repugnant  as  those  actions  otherwise  might  be  to  many
Americans.

The  Advisory  Committee  did  not  undertake  an  inquiry  to  determine
whether  during  either  World  War  II  or  the  Cold  War  there  were  ever
circumstances  in  which  considerations  of  national  security  might  have  justified
infringements  of  the  rights  and  protections  that  would  otherwise  be  enjoyed  by
American  citizens  in  the  context  of  human  experimentation.  Our  sources  for
answering  this  question  were  limited  to  materials  pertinent  to  specific  human
radiation  experiments  and  declassified  defense-related  memorandums  and
transcripts.  With  regard  to  the  experiments,  particular  cases  are  reviewed  in  part
II  of  this  report.  In  those  experiments  that  took  place  under  circumstances  most
closely  tied  to  national  security  considerations,  such  as  the  plutonium  injections
(see  chapter  5),  it  does  not  appear  that  such  considerations  would  have  barred
satisfying  the  basic  elements  of  voluntary  consent.  Thus,  for  instance,  although
the  word  plutonium  was  classified  until  the  end  of  World  War  II,  subjects  could
still  have  been  asked  their  permission  after  having  been  told  that  subjects  in  the
experiment  would  be  injected  with  a  radioactive  substance  with  which  medical
science  had  had  little  experience  and  which  might  be  dangerous  and  that  would
not  help  them  personally,  but  that  the  experiment  was  important  to  protecting  the
health  of  people  involved  in  the  war  effort  or  safeguarding  the  national  defense.

With  regard  to  defense-related  documents,  in  none  of  the  memorandums
or  transcripts  of  various  agencies  did  we  encounter  a.  formal  national  security
exception  to  conditions  under  which  human  subjects  may  be  used.  In  none  of
these  materials  does  any  official,  military  or  civilian,  argue  for  the  position  that
individual  rights  may  be  justifiably  overridden  owing  to  the  needs  of  the  nation  in
the  Cold  War.  In  none  of  them  is  an  official  position  expressed  that  the
Nuremberg  Code  or  other  conventions  concerning  human  subjects  could  be
overridden  because  of  national  security  needs.

Some  government  officials,  military  and  civilian,  may  have  personally
advocated  the  view  that  obligations  to  protect  national  security  were  more
important  than  obligations  to  protect  the  rights  and  interests  of  human  subjects.
It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  the  priority  placed  on  national  security  was  so  great
in  some  circles  of  government  that  the  ability  of  security  interests  to  override

206


Chapter  4

other  national  interests  was  implicitly  assumed,  rather  than  explicitly  articulated.
It  is  a  matter  of  historical  record  that  some  initiatives  undertaken  by  government
officials  at  some  agencies  during  this  period  adopted  the  view  that  greater
national  purposes  justified  the  exploitation  of  individuals.  Notorious  examples
are  the  CIA's  MKULTRA  project  and  the  Army's  psychochemical  experiments,
which  subjected  unsuspecting  people  to  experiments  with  LSD  and  other
substances  (see  chapter  3).A  However,  even  the  internal  investigation  of  the
Department  of  Defense  into  these  incidents  in  the  1970s  concluded  that  these
incidents  were  violations  of  government  policy,  not  recognized  legitimate
exceptions  to  it.7

During  the  era  of  the  Manhattan  Project,  the  United  States  and  its  allies
were  engaged  in  a  declared  and  just  war  against  the  Axis  powers.  Regarding  the
possibility  of  a  wartime  exception,  it  is  well  documented  that  during  World  War  II
the  Committee  on  Medical  Research  (CMR)  of  the  Executive  Office  of  the
President  funded  research  on  various  problems  confronting  U.S.  troops  in  the
field,  including  dysentery,  malaria,  and  influenza.  This  research  involved  the  use
of  many  subjects  whose  capacity  to  consent  to  be  a  volunteer  was  questionable  at
best,  including  children,  the  mentally  retarded,  and  prisoners. K  However,  when
the  CMR  considered  proposed  gonorrhea  experiments  that  would  have  involved
deliberately  exposing  prisoners  to  infection,  the  resulting  discussion  about  the
ethics  of  research  exhibited  a  cautious  attitude.  The  conclusion  was  that  only
"volunteers"  could  be  used  and  that  they  had  to  be  carefully  informed  about  the
risks  and  benefits  of  participation.  In  these  and  other  classified  conversations,  the
CMR  took  the  position  that  care  is  to  be  taken  with  human  subjects,  including
conscientious  objectors  and  military  personnel.9

It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  these  deliberations  with  the  fact  that  many
subjects  of  CMR-funded  research  were  not  true  volunteers.  Whether  the  CMR
believed  that  the  needs  of  a  country  at  war  justified  the  use  of  people  who  could
not  be  true  volunteers  as  research  subjects  is  not  known.

It  would,  however,  be  an  error  to  conclude  that,  even  in  contexts  where
important  national  security  interests  are  at  stake,  such  as  during  wartime,  a
conflict  between  obligations  to  protect  national  defense  and  obligations  to  protect
human  subjects  ought  always  to  be  resolved  in  favor  of  national  security.  The
question  of  whether  any  and  all  means  are  morally  acceptable  for  the  sake  of
national  security  and  the  national  defense  is  a  complex  one.  Even  in  the  case  of  a
representative  democracy  that  is  not  an  aggressor,  it  would  be  wrong  to  assume
that  there  are  no  moral  constraints  in  time  of  war.  All  of  the  major  religious  and
secular  traditions  concerning  the  morality  of  warfare  recognize  that  there  are
substantial  limitations  upon  the  manner  in  which  even  a  just  war  is  conducted.10
The  issue  of  the  morality  of  "total  warfare"  for  a  just  cause,  including  the  use  of
medical  science,  was  beyond  the  scope  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  charter,
deliberations,  and  expertise.


207


Part  I

Distinguishing  Between  the  Wrongness  of  Actions  and  Policies  and  the
Blameworthiness  of  Agents

Factors  That  Influence  or  Limit  Judgments  About  Blame

The  factors  we  have  just  discussed—lack  of  evidence  and  the  presence  of
conflicting  obligations-place  limits  on  our  ability  to  make  judgments  about  both
the  Tightness  and  wrongness  of  actions  and  the  blameworthiness  of  the  agents
responsible  for  them.  Some  factors,  however,  place  limits  only  on  our  ability  to
make  judgments  about  the  blameworthiness  of  agents.  Even  in  cases  where
actions  or  policies  are  clearly  morally  wrong,  it  may  be  uncertain  how
blameworthy  the  agents  who  conducted  or  promulgated  them  are,  or  in  fact,
whether  they  are  blameworthy  at  all.  Some  factors  make  it  difficult  to  affix
blame;  other  factors  can  mitigate  or  lessen  the  blame  actors  deserve.  Four  such
factors  are  of  particular  concern  to  the  Committee: ' '

(1)  Factual  ignorance;

(2)  Culturally  induced  ignorance  about  relevant  moral  considerations;

(3)  Evolution  in  the  interpretations  and  specification  of  moral  principles;
and

(4)  Indeterminacy  in  an  organization's  division  of  labor,  with  the  result
that  it  is  unclear  who  has  responsibility  for  implementing  the
commitments  of  the  organization.

Factual  Ignorance

Factual  ignorance  refers  to  circumstances  in  which  some  information
relevant  to  the  moral  assessment  of  a  situation  is  not  available  to  the  agent.  There
are  many  reasons  that  this  may  be  so,  including  that  the  information  in  question  is
beyond  the  scope  of  human  knowledge  at  the  time  or  that  there  was  no  good
reason  to  think  that  a  particular  item  of  information  was  relevant  or  significant.
However,  just  because  an  agent's  ignorance  of  morally  relevant  information  leads
him  or  her  to  commit  a  morally  wrong  act,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  person  is  not
blameworthy  for  that  act.  The  agent  is  blameworthy  if  a  reasonably  prudent
person  in  that  agent's  position  should  have  been  aware  that  some  information  was
required  prior  to  action,  and  the  information  could  have  been  obtained  without
undue  effort  or  cost  on  his  or  her  part.  Some  people  are  in  positions  that  obligate
them  to  make  special  efforts  to  acquire  knowledge,  such  as  those  who  are  directly
responsible  for  the  well-being  of  others.  Determinations  of  culpable  and
nonculpable  factual  ignorance  often  turn  on  whether  the  competent  person  in  the

208


Chapter  4

field  at  that  time  had  that  knowledge  or  had  the  means  to  acquire  it  without  undue
burdens.

Culturally  Induced  Moral  Ignorance

Sometimes  cultural  factors  can  prevent  individuals  from  discerning  what
they  are  morally  required  to  do  and  can  therefore  mitigate  the  blame  we  would
otherwise  place  on  individuals  for  failing  to  do  what  they  ought  to  do.  In  some
cases  these  factors  may  have  been  at  work  in  the  past  but  are  no  longer  operative
in  the  present,  because  of  changes  in  culture  over  time.

An  individual  may,  like  other  members  of  the  culture,  be  morally
ignorant.  Because  of  features  of  his  or  her  deeply  enculturated  beliefs,  the
individual  may  be  unable  to  recognize,  for  example,  that  certain  people  (such  as
members  of  another  race)  deserve  equal  respect  or  even  that  they  are  people  with
rights.  Moral  ignorance  can  impair  moral  judgment  and  hence  may  result  in  a
failure  to  act  morally.

In  extreme  cases,  a  culture  may  instill  a  moral  ignorance  so  profound  that
we  may  speak  of  cultural  moral  blindness.  In  some  societies  the  dominant  culture
may  recognize  that  it  is  wrong  to  exploit  people  but  fail  to  recognize  certain
classes  of  individuals  as  being  people.  Some  of  those  committed  to  the  ideology
of  slavery  may  have  been  morally  blind  in  just  this  way,  and  their  culture  may
have  induced  this  blindness.

Here  it  is  crucial  to  distinguish  between  culpable  and  nonculpable  moral
ignorance.  The  fact  that  one's  moral  ignorance  is  instilled  by  one's  culture  does
not  by  itself  mean  that  one  is  not  responsible  for  being  ignorant;  nor  does  it
necessarily  render  one  blameless  for  actions  or  omissions  that  result  from  that
ignorance.  What  matters  is  not  whether  the  erroneous  belief  that  constitutes  the
moral  ignorance  was  instilled  by  one's  culture.  What  matters  is  the  extent  to
which  the  individual  can  be  held  responsible  for  maintaining  this  belief,  as
opposed  to  correcting  it.  Where  opportunities  for  remedying  culturally  induced
moral  ignorance  are  available,  a  person  may  rightly  be  held  responsible  for
remaining  in  ignorance  and  for  the  wrongful  behavior  that  issues  from  his  or  her
mistaken  beliefs.

People  who  maintain  their  culturally  induced  moral  ignorance  in  the  face
of  repeated  opportunities  for  correction  typically  do  so  by  indulging  in
unjustifiable  rationalizations,  such  as  those  associated  with  racist  attitudes.  They
show  an  excessive  partiality  to  their  own  opinions  and  interests,  a  willful  rejection
of  facts  that  they  find  inconvenient  or  disturbing,  an  inflated  sense  of  their  own
self-worth  relative  to  others,  a  lack  of  sensitivity  to  the  predicament  of  others,  and
the  like.  These  moral  failings  are  widely  recognized  as  such  across  a  broad
spectrum  of  cultural  values  and  ethical  traditions,  both  religious  and  secular.

Only  if  an  agent  could  not  be  reasonably  expected  to  remedy  his  or  her
culturally  induced  moral  ignorance  would  such  ignorance  exculpate  his  conduct.

209


Parti

But  even  in  cases  in  which  the  individual  could  not  be  blamed  for  persisting  in
ignorance,  this  would  do  nothing  to  show  that  the  actions  or  omissions  resulting
from  his  or  her  ignorance  were  not  wrong.  Nonculpable  moral  ignorance  only
exculpates  the  agent;  it  does  not  make  wrong  acts  right.

Evolution  in  Interpretations  of  Ethical  Principles

There  is  another  respect  in  which  the  dependence  of  our  perceptions  of
right  and  wrong  on  our  cultural  context  has  a  bearing  on  the  Advisory
Committee's  evaluations.  While  basic  ethical  principles  do  not  change,
interpretations  and  applications  of  basic  ethical  principles  as  they  are  expressed  in
more  specific  rules  of  conduct  do  evolve  over  time  through  processes  of  cultural
change.

Recognizing  that  more  specific  moral  rules  do  change  has  implications  for
how  we  judge  the  past.  For  example,  the  current  requirement  of  informed  consent
is  the  result  of  evolution.  Acceptance  of  the  simple  idea  that  medical  treatment
requires  the  consent  of  the  patient  (at  least  in  the  case  of  competent  adults)  seems
to  have  preceded  by  a  considerable  interval  the  more  complex  notion  that
informed  consent  is  required.12  Furthermore,  the  notion  of  informed  consent  itself
has  undergone  refinement  and  development  through  common  law  rulings,  through
analyses  and  explanations  of  these  rulings  in  the  scholarly  legal  literature,  through
philosophical  treatments  of  the  key  concepts  emerging  from  legal  analyses,  and
through  guidelines  in  reports  by  government  and  professional  bodies.13  For
example,  as  early  as  1914,  the  duty  to  obtain  consent  to  medical  treatment  was
established  in  American  law:  "Every  human  being  of  adult  years  and  sound  mind
has  a  right  to  determine  what  shall  be  done  with  his  own  body;  and  a  surgeon  who
performs  an  operation  without  his  patient's  consent  commits  an  assault."14
However,  it  was  not  until  1957  that  the  courts  decreed  that  consent  must  be
informed,15  and  this  1957  ruling  was  only  the  beginning  of  a  long  debate  about
what  it  means  for  a  consent  to  be  informed.  Thus  it  is  probably  fair  to  say  that  the
current  understanding  of  informed  consent  is  more  sophisticated,  and  what  is
required  of  physicians  and  scientists  more  demanding,  than  both  the  preceding
requirement  of  consent  and  earlier  interpretations  of  what  counts  as  informed
consent.  As  the  content  of  the  concept  has  evolved,  so  has  the  scope  of  the
corresponding  obligation  on  the  part  of  these  professionals.  For  this  reason  it
would  be  inappropriate  to  blame  clinicians  or  researchers  of  the  1940s  and  1950s
for  not  adhering  to  the  details  of  a  standard  that  emerged  through  a  complex
process  of  cultural  change  that  was  to  span  decades.  At  the  same  time,  however,
it  remains  appropriate  to  hold  them  to  the  general  requirements  of  the  basic  moral
principles  that  underlie  informed  consent—not  treating  others  as  mere  means,
promoting  the  welfare  of  others,  and  respecting  self-determination.


210


Chapter  4

Inferring  Bureaucratic  Responsibilities

It  is  often  unclear  in  complex  organizations  such  as  government  agencies
who  has  responsibility  for  implementing  the  organization's  policies  and  rules.
This  is  particularly  common  in  new  and  changing  organizations,  where  it  is  more
likely  than  in  stable  organizations  that  there  will  be  interconnecting  lines  of
authority  among  employees  and  officials,  and  job  descriptions  that  are  not  explicit
with  respect  to  responsibility  for  implementation  of  policies  and  initiatives.  When
policies  are  not  properly  implemented  in  organizations  that  fit  this  description,  it
often  is  difficult  to  assign  blame  to  particular  individuals.  An  employee  or
official  of  an  agency  cannot  fairly  be  blamed  for  a  failed  or  poorly  executed
policy  unless  it  can  be  determined  with  confidence  that  the  person  had
responsibility  for  implementing  that  policy  and  should  have  known  that  he  or  she
had  this  responsibility.

The  Importance  of  Distinguishing  Wrongdoing  from
Blameworthiness

Judgments  of  wrongdoing  and  judgments  of  blameworthiness  have  very
different  implications.  Even  where  a  wrong  was  done,  it  does  not  follow  that
anyone  should  be  blamed  for  the  wrong.  This  is  because  there  are  factors,
including  the  four  we  have  just  described,  that  can  lessen  or  remove  blame  from
an  agent  for  a  morally  wrong  act  but  that  cannot  in  any  way  make  the  wrong  act
right.  If  experiments  violated  basic  ethical  principles,  institutional  or
organizational  policies,  or  rules  of  professional  ethics,  then  they  were  and  will
always  be  wrong.  Whether  and  how  much  anyone  should  be  blamed  for  these
wrongs  are  separate  questions.16

The  distinction  between  the  moral  status  of  experiments  and  that  of  the
individuals  who  were  involved  with  conducting,  funding,  or  sponsoring  them  also
has  important  implications  for  our  own  time.  For  a  society  to  make  moral
progress,  individuals  must  be  able  to  exercise  moral  judgment  about  their  actions.
It  is  important  for  social  actors  to  be  critical  about  their  activities,  even  those  in
which  they  have  been  engaged  for  some  time.  It  is  important  for  them  to  be  able
to  step  back  and  analyze  their  actions  as  right  or  wrong.  If  we  did  not  distinguish
between  actions  and  agents,  then  people  may  feel  that,  once  they  have  perceived
their  moral  error,  it  is  "too  late"  for  them  to  change  their  ways,  to  object  to  the
ongoing  activity,  and  to  try  to  rally  others  in  support  of  reform.

For  any  generation  to  initiate  morally  indicated  reforms,  it  must  be  able  to
take  this  critical  stance.  As  we  see  in  part  III  of  this  report,  even  now  there  are
aspects  of  our  society's  use  of  human  subjects  that  should  be  critically  examined.
The  actions  we  ourselves  have  performed  do  not  condemn  us  as  moral  agents
unless  we  refuse  to  open  ourselves  to  the  possibility  that  we  have  in  some  ways
been  in  error.  As  we  have  said,  even  if  we  are  exculpated  by  our  own  culturally

211


Parti

induced  moral  ignorance,  that  does  not  make  our  wrong  acts  right.  Even  if  we
must  accept  a  measure  of  blame  for  our  actions,  we  are  free  to  achieve  a  critical
assessment  and  to  initiate  and  participate  in  needed  change.

The  Significance  of  Judgments  About  Blameworthiness

The  Committee  believes  that  its  first  task  is  to  evaluate  the  Tightness  or
wrongness  of  the  actions,  practices,  and  policies  involved  in  the  human  radiation
experiments  that  occurred  from  1944  to  1974.  However,  it  is  also  important  to
consider  whether  judgments  ascribing  blame  to  individuals  or  groups  or
organizations  can  responsibly  be  made  and  whether  they  ought  to  be  made.

There  are  three  main  reasons  forjudging  culpability  as  well  as  wrongness..
First,  a  crucial  part  of  the  Committee's  task  is  to  make  recommendations  that  will
reduce  the  risk  of  errors  and  abuses  in  human  experimentation  in  the  future,  on
the  basis  of  its  diagnoses  of  what  went  wrong  in  the  past.  A  complete  and
accurate  diagnosis  requires  not  only  stating  what  wrongs  were  done,  but  also
explaining  who  was  responsible  for  the  wrongs  occurring.  To  do  this  is  likely  to
yield  the  judgment  that  some  individuals  were  morally  blameworthy.  Second,
unless  judgments  of  culpability  are  made  about  particular  individuals,  one
important  means  of  deterring  future  wrongs  will  be  precluded.  People
contemplating  unethical  behavior  will  presumably  be  more  likely  to  refrain  from
it,  other  things  being  equal,  if  they  believe  that  they,  as  individuals,  may  be  held
accountable  for  wrongdoing  than  if  they  can  assure  themselves  that  at  most  their
government  or  their  particular  government  agency  or  their  profession  may  be
subject  to  blame.  Third,  ethical  evaluation  generally  involves  both  evaluation  of
the  Tightness  or  wrongness  of  actions  and  the  praiseworthiness  or
blameworthiness  of  agents.  In  the  absence  of  any  explicit  exemption  of  the  latter
sorts  of  judgment  in  our  mandate,  the  Committee  believes  it  would  be  arbitrary  to
exclude  them.

Having  made  a  case  for  judgments  of  culpability  as  well  as  wrongness,  the
Committee  believes  it  is  very  important  to  distinguish  carefully  between  judging
that  an  individual  was  culpable  for  a  particular  action  and  judging  that  he  or  she  is
a  person  of  bad  moral  character.  Justifiable  judgments  of  character  must  be  based
on  accurate  information  about  long-standing  and  stable  patterns  of  action  in  a
number  of  areas  of  a  person's  life,  under  a  variety  of  different  situations.  Such
patterns  cannot  usually  be  inferred  from  information  about  a  few  isolated  actions
a  person  performs  in  one  particular  department  of  his  or  her  life,  unless  the
actions  are  so  extreme  as  to  be  on  the  order  of  heinous  crimes.

APPLYING  THE  ETHICAL  FRAMEWORK

The  three  kinds  of  standards  presented  in  this  chapter  provide  a  general
framework  for  evaluating  the  ethics  of  human  radiation  experiments.  In  this

212


Chapter  4

section  of  the  chapter,  we  revisit  those  standards  in  the  specific  context  of  human
radiation  experiments  conducted  between  1944  and  1974  and  what  we  have
learned  about  the  policies  and  practices  involving  human  subjects  during  that
period.

Basic  Ethical  Principles

Earlier  in  this  chapter  we  identified  six  basic  ethical  principles  as
particularly  relevant  to  our  work:  "One  ought  not  to  treat  people  as  mere  means  to
the  ends  of  others";  "One  ought  not  to  deceive  others";  "One  ought  not  to  inflict
harm  or  risk  of  harm";  "One  ought  to  promote  welfare  and  prevent  harm";  "One
ought  to  treat  people  fairly  and  with  equal  respect";  and  "One  ought  to  respect  the
self-determination  of  others."

These  principles  are  central  to  our  analysis  of  the  cases  we  present  in  part
II  of  the  report,  although  not  every  case  we  evaluate  engages  every  principle.
Two  of  the  principles,  however,  recur  repeatedly  as  we  consider  the  ethics  of  past
experiments.  These  are  "One  ought  not  to  treat  people  as  mere  means  to  the  ends
of  others"  and  "One  ought  not  to  inflict  harm  or  risk  of  harm."  Whether  an
experiment  involving  human  subjects  violates  the  principle  not  to  use  people  as
mere  means  generally  depends  on  two  factors-consent  and  therapeutic  intent.  An
individual  may  give  his  or  her  consent  to  being  treated  as  a  means  to  the  ends  of
others.  If  a  person  freely  consents,  then  he  or  she  is  no  longer  being  used  as  a
mere  means,  that  is,  as  a  means  only.  Thus,  if  a  person  is  used  as  a  subject  in  an
experiment  from  which  the  person  cannot  possibly  benefit  directly,  but  the
person's  consent  to  that  use  is  obtained,  the  person  is  not  being  used  as  a  mere
means  to  the  ends  of  others.  By  contrast,  if  a  person  is  used  as  a  subject  in  such
an  experiment  but  the  person's  consent  is  not  obtained  for  that  use,  the  person  is
being  used  as  a  mere  means  to  the  ends  of  the  investigator  conducting  the
experiment  and  the  institutions  funding  or  sponsoring  the  experiment.

If  an  action  that  involves  the  use  of  a  person  is  undertaken  in  whole  or  in
part  for  that  person's  benefit,  then  the  person  is  not  being  used  as  a  mere  means
toward  the  ends  of  others.  Thus,  if  a  person  is  used  as  a  subject  in  an  experiment
that  is  intended  to  offer  the  subject  a  prospect  of  direct  benefit,  then,  even  if  the
subject's  consent  has  not  been  obtained,  the  subject  is  not  being  used  as  a  mere
means  to  the  ends  of  others.  This  is  because  the  experiment  is  intended  to  serve
the  subject's  interests  as  well  as  the  interests  of  the  investigator  and  funding
agency.  It  may  be  wrong  not  to  obtain  the  subject's  consent  in  this  case,  but  the
wrong  does  not  stem  from  a  violation  of  the  principle  not  to  use  people  as  mere
means.  Instead,  the  wrong  reflects  the  violation  of  other  basic  principles  such  as
the  principles  enjoining  us  to  respect  self-determination  and  to  promote  welfare
and  prevent  harm.

These  two  factors-the  obtaining  of  consent  and  an  intention  to  benefit-
also  can  transform  the  moral  quality  of  an  act  that  involves  the  imposition  of  harm

213


Part  I

or  risk  of  harm.  One  important  way  to  make  the  imposition  of  a  risk  of  harm
justifiable  is  to  obtain  the  person's  permission  for  the  imposition.  The  imposition
of  risk  on  a  person  also  is  more  justifiable  when  the  risk  is  imposed  to  secure  a
benefit  for  that  person,  although  even  in  the  presence  of  a  prospect  of  offsetting
benefit,  the  imposition  of  risk  on  another  without  that  person's  consent  is  morally
questionable  because  it  appears  to  violate  the  principle  of  respect  for  self-
determination.17

Consider  the  following  example  of  how  the  factors  of  therapeutic  intent
and  consent  can  transform  a  morally  questionable  action  into  a  morally  acceptable
one.  Patients  are  enrolled  in  an  experiment  in  which  they  are  given  a  new  drug
that  is  unproven  in  humans,  induces  substantial  discomfort  or  even  suffering,  and
may  produce  irreversible  damage  to  vital  organs.  There  is,  however,  no  effective
treatment  for  the  condition  from  which  these  patient-subjects  suffer,  and  the
condition  is  life  threatening.  The  drug  is  theoretically  promising  compared  with
related  drugs  used  in  similar  diseases,  and  it  has  proven  effective  in  animals.
Further,  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  the  experiment  is  offered  to  patients
while  they  are  lucid,  comfortable,  and  at  ease.  Under  these  circumstances  the
imposition  of  harm  may  be  transformed  into  a  caring  and  respectful  act.

Policies  of  Government  Agencies

Where  agencies  of  the  government  had  policies  on  the  conduct  of  research
involving  human  subjects,  and  where  these  policies  included  requirements  or
rules  that  are  morally  sound,  these  policies  constitute  standards  against  which  the
conduct  of  the  agencies  and  the  people  who  worked  there,  as  well  as  the
experiments  the  agencies  sponsored  or  conducted,  can  be  evaluated.  Government
agencies  must  be  held  responsible  for  failures  to  implement  their  own  policies.
To  do  otherwise  is  to  break  faith  with  the  American  people,  who  have  a
reasonable  expectation  that  an  agency  will  conduct  its  affairs  in  accord  with  the
agency's  stated  policies.  As  we  noted  in  chapter  1 ,  it  is  not  always  clear,
however,  whether  statements  made  in  letters  or  memorandums  constitute  agency
policy.  When  there  is  little  evidence  that  a  statement  by  a  government  official
was  ever  implemented,  it  is  often  difficult  to  determine  whether  this  was  an
instance  of  an  agency  failing  to  implement  its  own  policies  or  an  instance  where  a
statement  by  a  government  official  was  not  perceived  as  agency  policy  in  the  first
place.

Among  the  general  conclusions  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  discussions
about  policies  during  the  late  1940s  and  early  1950s  is  that  the  AEC,  DOD,  and
NIH  required  investigators  to  obtain  the  consent  of  the  healthy  or  "normal"
subject,  and  prior  group  review  was  required  for  risk  in  research  using
radioisotopes  for  all  private  and  publicly  financed  research  (and,  in  the  NIH,  for
all  hazardous  procedures).  Also,  in  1953,  the  Department  of  Defense  adopted  the
Nuremberg  Code  as  the  policy  for  research  related  to  atomic,  biological,  and

214


Chapter  4

chemical  warfare,  and  the  NIH  Clinical  Center  articulated  a  consent  requirement
for  patient-subjects  in  intramural  research  (see  chapter  1).

Two  questions  that  arise  at  this  juncture  are  whether  an  experiment  was
wrong  if  it  violated  one  of  these  policies  but  took  place  at  another  government
agency,  and  whether  an  experiment  was  wrong  if  it  took  place  under  the  auspices
of  an  agency  before  it  promulgated  the  policy.  The  answer  to  both  questions  is
the  same:  Even  if  such  an  experiment  was  not  wrong  according  to  the  policy  of
the  agency  sponsoring  the  experiment  at  the  time,  the  experiment  may
nevertheless  have  been  unethical  based  on  one  or  more  basic  ethical  principles  or
rules  of  professional  ethics.

As  is  the  case  today,  decades  ago  government  officials  had  obligations  to
take  reasonable  steps  to  see  that  policies  were  adequately  implemented.18  Policies
constitute  organizational  commitments,  and  organizational  commitments  generate
obligations  on  the  part  of  the  organization  and  its  members.  In  some  cases,
however,  it  is  not  clear  that  conditions  stated  by  individual  officials  rise  to  a  level
that  all  would  be  comfortable  calling  "policies."  Accordingly,  it  is  not  clear
whether  corresponding  obligations  to  implement  can  be  inferred.  The  two  letters
signed  by  AEC  General  Manager  Carroll  Wilson  in  April  and  November  1947  are
the  best  examples  of  this  problem.  Nevertheless,  if  it  is  correct  to  say  that  high
officials  have  an  obligation  to  exert  due  efforts  to  implement  and  communicate
the  rules  they  are  empowered  to  establish,  then  they  may  reasonably  be  blamed
for  failures  in  this  regard.  Further,  if  they  do  not  even  attempt  to  articulate  rules
that  are  indicated  by  basic  ethical  principles  and  that  are  clearly  relevant  to
organizational  activities  that  fall  under  their  authority,  they  are  also  subject  to
moral  blame.

The  mitigating  condition  of  culturally  induced  moral  ignorance  does  not
apply  to  government  officials  who  failed  to  exercise  their  responsibilities  to
implement  or  communicate  requirements  that  clearly  fell  within  the  ambit  of  their
office  and  of  which  they  were  aware.  The  very  fact  that  these  requirements  were
articulated  by  the  agencies  in  which  they  worked  is  evidence  that  officials  could
not  have  been  morally  ignorant  of  them.

We  have  observed,  however,  that,  especially  with  regard  to  research
involving  patients,  policies  were  frequently  unclear.  When  this  research  offered
patient-subjects  a  chance  to  benefit  medically,  the  widespread  discretion  granted
physicians  to  make  decisions  on  behalf  of  their  patients  is  a  mitigating  factor  in
judging  the  blameworthiness  of  government  officials  for  failing  to  impose  consent
requirements  on  physician-investigators.  This  failure  could  be  attributed  to  a
cultural  moral  ignorance  concerning  the  proper  limits  to  the  authority  of
physicians  over  their  patients.

The  same  cannot  be  said  of  government  officials  for  failing  to  impose
consent  requirements  on  physician-investigators  who  used  patient-subjects  in
research  from  which  the  patients  could  not  benefit  medically.  This  use  of  human
subjects  took  place  outside  of  the  therapeutic  context  that  defines  the  doctor-

215


Parti

patient  relationship  and  therefore  also  was  outside  of  the  authority  then  ceded  to
physicians.  In  this  case  responsible  agency  officials  had  a  ready  analogy  to
healthy  subjects  for  whom  there  was  a  lengthy  tradition  of  policies  and  rules
requiring  the  use  of  "volunteers"  and  the  obtaining  of  consent.  Government
officials  could  and  should  have  perceived  the  morally  identical  nature  of  these
cases— that,  without  consent,  both  cases  involved  violation  of  the  principle  not  to
use  people  as  mere  means  to  the  ends  of  others.  Those  who  were  ill  should  have
been  granted  the  same  protections  as  those  who  were  well.

In  contrast  to  requirements  for  consent,  requirements  intended  to  ensure
that  risks  to  experimental  subjects  were  acceptable  were  far  more  clearly  stated.
Government  officials  are  blameworthy  if  they  permitted  research  to  continue  that
was  known  to  entail  unusual  risks  to  the  subjects,  in  direct  violation  of  agency
policy.

Finally,  some  lessons  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  experience  of  the  human
radiation  experiments  we  considered  speak  to  the  conduct  of  government  itself  as
a  collective  agent,  rather  than  simply  to  individual  government  officials.  In  too
many  instances,  as  we  saw  in  chapter  1,  we  found  a  lack  of  clarity  about  the  status
within  an  agency  of  specific  declarations  by  responsible  officials.  Particularly
when  agencies  are  engaged  in  activities  that  may  compromise  the  rights  or
interests  of  citizens,  it  is  critically  important  that  agencies  be  clear  about  their
commitments  and  policies  and  that  they  not  remain  passive  in  the  face  of
questionable  practices  for  which  they  may  bear  some  responsibility.  In  chapter  3
we  saw  an  effective  response  to  such  a  situation  in  the  1960s  by  the  PHS.  This
example  attests  to  the  fact  that  institutional  clarity  and  active  reform  measures  can
succeed  and  that  when  they  do  they  can  be  great  forward  strides.

Rules  of  Professional  Ethics

Even  if  the  federal  government  had  adopted  no  formal  human  research
ethics  policy  whatsoever,  the  medical  profession  and  its  members  would  still  have
moral  obligations  to  those  who  entrust  themselves  to  their  care.  The  successes  of
modern  medical  research,  regardless  of  its  funding  source,  are  ultimately  due  to
the  efforts  of  talented  and  dedicated  medical  scientists.  These  investigators  bear  a
profound  ethical  burden  in  their  work  with  human  subjects.  Society  entrusts  them
with  the  privilege  of  using  other  human  beings  to  advance  their  important  work.
Although  society  must  not  discourage  them  from  the  pursuit  of  new  information,
it  also  must  diligently  pursue  signs  that  medical  scientists  have  not  exercised  their
ethical  responsibility  with  the  care  and  sensitivity  that  society  has  good  reason  to
expect  from  them.

Without  reference  to  the  policies  adopted  by  federal  agencies,  what  rules
of  professional  ethics  were  seen  by  the  medical  profession  during  the  1944-1974
period  as  relevant  to  the  conduct  of  its  members  engaged  in  human  subjects
research?  The  answer  to  this  question  depends  upon  which  kind  of  experimental

216


Chapter  4

situation  is  under  discussion:  an  experiment  on  a  healthy  subject;  an  experiment
on  a  patient-subject  without  a  scientific  or  clinical  basis  for  an  expectation  of
benefit  to  the  patient-subject;  or  an  experiment  on  a  patient-subject  with  a
scientific  or  clinical  basis  for  an  expectation  of  benefit  to  the  patient-subject.

Experiments  on  Healthy  Subjects:  By  the  mid- 1 940s  it  was  common  to
obtain  the  voluntary  consent  of  healthy  subjects  who  were  to  participate  in
biomedical  experiments  that  offered  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to  them.
Sophisticated  philosophical  analysis  is  not  required  to  reach  the  conclusion  that
using  a  human  being  in  a  medical  experiment  that  offers  the  person  no  prospect  of
personal  benefits  without  that  person's  consent  is  wrong.  As  we  have  already
noted,  such  conduct  violates  the  basic  ethical  principle  that  one  ought  not  use
people  as  mere  means  to  the  ends  of  others.

Experiments  on  Patient-Subjects  Without  a  Scientific  or  Clinical  Basis  for
an  Expectation  of  Benefit  to  the  Patient-Subject:  The  Hippocratic  tradition  of
medical  ethics  inherited  by  physicians  in  the  1940s  holds  that,  unless  the
physician  is  reasonably  sure  that  his  or  her  treatment  is,  on  balance,  likely  to  do
the  patient  more  good  than  harm,  the  treatment  should  not  be  introduced.  The
heart  of  the  Hippocratic  ethic  is  the  physician's  commitment  to  putting  the
interests  of  the  patient  first.  Subjecting  one's  patient  to  experimentation  that
offers  no  prospect  of  benefit  to  the  patient  without  his  or  her  consent  is  a  direct
repudiation  of  this  commitment.  (If  the  patient  consents  to  this  use,  the  moral
warrant  for  proceeding  with  the  experiment  comes  from  the  patient's  permission,
not  from  the  Hippocratic  ethic.)

Experiments  on  Patient-Subjects  with  a  Scientific  or  Clinical  Basis  for  an
Expectation  of  Benefit  to  the  Patient-Subject:  Even  in  Hippocratic  medicine  it  is
recognized  that  physicians  should  attempt  to  use  unproven  or  experimental
methods  to  benefit  the  patient,  whether  through  efforts  at  cure  or  palliation,  but
only  so  long  as  there  is  no  efficacious  standard  therapy  available  and  innovative
measures  are  compatible  with  the  obligation  to  avoid  doing  harm  without  the
prospect  of  offsetting  benefit.  Interventions  in  this  category  should  be  based  on
scientific  reasoning  and  conservative  clinical  judgment.  Arguably,  so  long  as
these  conditions  prevailed,  it  was  not  thought  morally  necessary  within  the
medical  profession  to  obtain  the  patient's  consent  to  such  experimentation  prior  to
the  1960s.  But  the  physician  assumed  a  corresponding  obligation  to  base  his  or
her  deviation  from  standard  practice  on  the  reasonable  likelihood  of  patient
benefit,  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  risks  associated  with  being  in  the  experiment.
This  type  of  reasoning,  too,  has  been  available  to  and  accepted  by  physicians  for
many  years,  even  though  the  ability  to  assess  and  calculate  risks  has  developed
greatly.


217


Part  I

Although  the  professional  ethics  of  the  period  thus  had  relevant  moral
rules  for  each  of  these  three  experimental  situations,  compliance  with  these  rules
is  a  separate  matter.  There  may  be  many  reasons  for  specific  failures  by
physicians  to  adhere  to  the  requirements  of  their  ethical  tradition,  some  of  which
may  render  them  nonculpable,  and  there  are  various  limitations  on  our  ability  to
assign  blame  for  particular  cases  of  a  physician's  failure  to  adhere  to  professional
ethics.  However,  any  use  of  human  subjects  that  did  not  proceed  in  accordance
with  these  rules  of  professional  ethics  was  wrong  in  the  sense  that  it  was  a
violation  of  sound  professional  ethical  standards.  Moreover,  even  if  there  was
then  or  is  now  a  lack  of  clarity  about  the  rules  of  professional  ethics,  recognition
by  morally  serious  individuals  of  basic  ethical  principles  is  enough  to  identify
certain  sorts  of  human  experiments  as  morally  unacceptable.

The  special  moral  responsibilities  of  the  medical  profession  as  a  whole,
whether  decades  ago  or  in  our  own  time,  deserve  careful  consideration,  especially
insofar  as  previous  experience  can  help  formulate  lessons  for  the  future.  Like  the
government,  the  medical  profession  as  a  whole  must  be  held  to  a  higher  standard
than  individuals  in  society.  Confidence  in  the  medical  profession  is  important
because  individuals  put  their  very  lives,  and  the  lives  of  their  loved  ones,  in  the
hands  of  those  whom  the  profession  has  certified  as  competent  to  practice.
Unlike  government  officials,  members  of  the  medical  profession  are  explicitly
bound  to  a  moral  tradition  in  their  professional  relations,  based  on  which  society
grants  the  medical  profession  the  privilege  of  largely  policing  itself.  This
authority  is  part  of  what  constitutes  the  medical  profession  as  a  profession,  but  the
authority  is  granted  by  society  on  the  condition  that  the  profession  will  adhere  to
the  high  moral  rules  it  professes  and  that,  if  necessary,  the  medical  profession  will
reform  or  encourage  the  reform  of  relevant  institutions  to  ensure  that  those  rules
will  be  honored  in  practice.

Moreover,  many  of  the  privileges  that  devolve  on  the  medical  profession
are  granted  on  the  condition  that  it  is  sufficiently  well  organized  to  police  itself,
with  minimal  intervention  by  the  government  and  the  legal  system.  Therefore,
members  of  the  medical  profession  are  further  legitimately  expected  to  engage  in
organizational  conduct  that  constitutes  sound  moral  practices.  Implicit  in  this
arrangement  is  also  the  assumption  that  it  will  be  self-critical  even  about  its
relatively  well-entrenched  attitudes  and  beliefs,  so  that  it  will  be  prepared  to
undertake  reforms.  Without  this  commitment  to  self-criticism,  self-regulation
cannot  be  effective  and  the  public's  trust  in  the  professional's  ability  to  self-
regulate  would  be  unwarranted.

Today  we  regard  subjects  of  biomedical  research  whose  consent  was  not
obtained  to  have  been  wronged;  under  conditions  of  significant  risk,  the  wrong  is
greater,  and  in  the  absence  of  the  potential  for  offsetting  medical  benefit,  greater
still.  The  historical  silence  of  the  medical  profession  with  respect  to
nontherapeutic  experiments  was  perhaps  based  on  the  rationale  that  those  who  are
ill  and  perhaps  dying  may  be  used  in  experiments  because  they  will  not  be

218


Chapter  4

harmed  even  though  they  will  not  benefit.  But  this  rationale  overlooks  both  the
principle  that  people  should  never  be  used  as  mere  means  and  the  principle  of
respect  for  self-determination;  it  may  also  provide  insufficient  protection  against
harm,  given  the  position  of  conflict  of  interest  in  which  the  physician-researcher
may  find  him-or  herself.  Nevertheless,  until  the  mid-1960s  medical  conventions
were  silent  on  experiments  with  patient-subjects  that  offered  no  direct  benefit  but
which  physicians  believed  to  pose  acceptable  risk.  This  silence  was  a  failure  of
the  profession.

One  defense  of  the  profession  in  this  regard  is  that  it  was  as  subject  to  the
phenomenon  we  have  called  cultural  moral  ignorance  as  any  other  group  in
society  at  the  time,  including  the  arguably  excessive  deference  to  physician
authority  on  the  part  of  the  government  and  possibly  the  public  at  large.
However,  the  medical  profession  was  in  a  wholly  different  position  from  the
others,  in  several  respects.  First,  it  insisted  upon  and  was  given  the  privilege  of
policing  its  own  behavior.  Second,  the  profession  was  the  direct  beneficiary  of
the  deference  paid  to  it.  Third,  there  were  already  examples  of  experiments  that
had  involved  subject  consent  that  could  have  served  as  models  of  reform.  Under
these  conditions  the  profession  had  an  obligation  to  be  self-critical  concerning  the
norms  and  rules  it  thought  appropriate  to  govern  its  members'  conduct.

The  medical  profession  could  and  should  have  seen  that  healthy  subjects
and  patient-subjects  in  nontherapeutic  experiments  were  in  similar  moral
positions—neither  was  expected  to  benefit  medically.  Just  as  physicians  had  no
moral  license  to  determine  an  "acceptable  risk"  for  healthy  subjects  without  their
voluntary  consent,  they  had  no  moral  license  to  do  so  in  the  case  of  other  subjects
who  also  could  not  benefit  from  being  in  research,  even  if  they  were  patients.  The
prevailing  standards  for  healthy  subject  groups  could  easily  have  been  applied  to
patient-subjects  for  whom  there  was  no  expectation  of  medical  benefit.  The  moral
equivalence  of  the  use  of  healthy  people  and  ill  people  as  subjects  of  experiments
from  which  no  subject  could  possibly  benefit  directly  was  perceptible  at  the  time.

This  moral  equivalence  would  have  made  it  clear  that  no  one,  well  or  sick,
should  be  used  as  a  mere  means  to  advance  medical  science  without  voluntary
consent.  Thus,  this  moral  ignorance  could  have  and  should  have  been  remedied  at
the  time.  Indeed,  it  is  arguably  the  case  that  physicians  could  and  should  have
seen  that  using  patients  in  this  way  was  morally  worse  than  using  healthy  people,
for  in  so  doing  one  was  violating  not  only  the  basic  ethical  principle  not  to  use
people  as  a  mere  means  but  also  the  basic  ethical  principle  to  treat  people  fairly
and  with  equal  respect.

American  physicians  are  members  of  a  society  that  places  a  high  value  on
these  basic  moral  principles,  still  more  vital  than  the  advancement  of  medical
science.  These  principles  are  as  easily  known  to  physicians  as  to  anyone  else,  and
it  is  unacceptable  to  single  oneself  out  as  an  exception  to  these  principles  simply
because  one  is  a  member  of  an  esteemed  profession.  Someone  who  is  ill  deserves
to  be  treated  with  the  same  respect  as  someone  who  is  well.  Accordingly,  a

219


Parti

physician  who  failed  to  tell  a  patient  that  what  was  proposed  was  an  experiment
with  no  therapeutic  intent  was  and  is  blameworthy.  To  the  extent  that  the
experiment  entailed  significant  risk,  the  physician  is  more  blameworthy;  where  it
was  reasonable  to  assume  that  the  experiment  imposed  no  risk  or  minimal  risk  or
inconvenience,  the  blame  is  less.

We  argue  here  that  the  use  of  patients  in  nontherapeutic  experiments
without  their  consent  was  not  only  a  violation  of  these  basic  moral  principles  but
also  a  violation  of  the  Hippocratic  principle  that  was  the  cornerstone  of
professional  medical  ethics  at  that  time.  That  principle  enjoins  physicians  to  act
in  the  best  interests  of  their  patients  and  thus  would  seem  to  prohibit  subjecting
patients  to  experiments  from  which  they  could  not  benefit.  It  might  be  argued
that  a  widespread  practice  that  is  not  in  conformity  with  a  principle  of
professional  ethics  invalidates  the  principle,  since  the  practice  shows  that  the
profession  was  not  really  committed  to  the  principle  in  the  first  place.  This  is  a
misunderstanding,  however,  of  what  it  means  for  a  profession  to  adopt  and
espouse  a  moral  principle.  Even  if  many  or  most  physicians  sometimes  fail  or
even  often  fail  to  comply  with  the  principle,  it  is  still  coherent  to  say  that  the
principle  is  accepted  by  the  profession,  if  the  principle  has  been  publicly
pronounced  and  affirmed  by  the  profession,  as  was  clearly  the  case  with  respect  to
the  Hippocratic  ethic.

To  characterize  a  great  profession  as  having  engaged  over  many  years  in
unethical  conduct-years  in  which  massive  progress  was  being  made  in  curbing
some  of  mankind's  greatest  ills-may  strike  some  as  arrogant  and  unreasonable.
However,  fair  assessment  indicates  that  the  circumstance  was  one  of  those  times
in  history  in  which  wrongs  were  committed  by  very  decent  people  who  were  in  a
position  to  know  that  a  specific  aspect  of  their  interactions  with  others  should  be
improved.  Wrongs  are  not  less  egregious  because  they  were  committed  by  a
member  of  a  certain  profession  or  by  people  who  are  very  decent  in  their
relationships  with  other  parties.  It  is  common  for  us  to  look  back  at  such  conduct
in  amazement  that  so  many  otherwise  good  and  decent  people  could  have
engaged  in  it  without  a  high  level  of  self-awareness.  Moral  consistency  requires
the  Advisory  Committee  to  conclude  that,  if  the  use  of  healthy  subjects  without
consent  was  understood  to  be  wrong  at  the  time,  then  the  use  of  patients  without
consent  in  nontherapeutic  experiments  should  also  have  been  discerned  as  wrong
at  the  time,  no  matter  how  widespread  the  practice.

It  should  be  emphasized,  however,  that  often  these  nontherapeutic
experiments  on  unconsenting  patients  constituted  only  minor  wrongs.  Often  there
was  little  or  no  risk  to  patient-subjects  and  no  inconvenience.  Although  it  is
always  morally  offensive  to  use  a  person  as  a  means  only,  as  the  burden  on  the
patient-subject  decreased,  so  too  did  the  seriousness  of  the  wrong.

Much  the  same  can  be  said  of  experiments  that  were  conducted  on
patient-subjects  without  their  consent  but  that  offered  a  prospect  of  medical
benefit.  To  the  extent  that  such  experiments  were  conducted  within  the  moral

220


environment  of  the  doctor-patient  relationship,  that  is,  based  on  the  physician's
considered  and  informed  judgment  that  it  was  in  the  patient's  best  interests  to  be
enrolled  in  the  research,  then  the  less  blameworthy  the  physician  was  for  failing
to  obtain  consent.  However,  where  the  risks  were  great  or  where  there  were
viable  alternatives  to  participation  in  research,  then  the  physician  was  more
blameworthy  for  failing  to  obtain  consent.

It  is  often  difficult  to  establish  standards  and  make  judgments  about  right
and  wrong,  and  about  blame  and  exculpation.  Our  charge  was  all  the  more
difficult  because  the  context  of  the  actions  and  agents  we  were  asked  to  evaluate
differs  from  our  own.  In  arriving  at  this  moral  framework  for  evaluating  human
radiation  experiments,  we  have  tried  to  be  fair  to  history,  to  considerations  of
ethics,  and  above  all,  to  the  people  affected  by  our  analysis-former  subjects,
physician-investigators,  and  government  officials.


221


ENDNOTES


1 .  International  declarations  of  human  rights  that  would  otherwise  be  relevant
to  an  evaluation  of  human  experimentation,  such  as  the  Covenant  on  Civil  and  Political
Rights  (1966),  were  articulated  after  the  human  radiation  experiments  with  which  we  are
mainly  concerned,  with  the  significant  exception  of  the  Nuremberg  Code,  as  discussed  in
chapter  2.

2.  The  Advisory  Committee  is  aware  that  questions  such  as  precisely  what
ethical  principles  should  be  considered  "basic,"  how  they  are  related  to  those  less  basic,
and  how  the  basic  ethical  principles  are  known  are  among  the  most  controversial  and
difficult  in  moral  philosophy.  For  the  Advisory  Committee's  limited  purposes,  a
comprehensive  and  systematic  moral  theory  is  not  required  and  is,  in  any  case,  far
beyond  the  scope  of  this  report.  We  have  rather  settled  on  a  list  of  immediately
recognizable  and  widely  accepted  ethical  principles  that  are  not  usually  thought  to
require  justification  themselves  and  that  should  be  included  in  any  adequate  moral
theory.

3.  Some  view  promise  keeping  as  a  basic  ethical  principle  on  a  par  with  the
prohibition  against  deception.  It  may  also  be  seen  as  grounded  in  one  or  more  of  the
basic  ethical  principles  on  our  list  of  six,  such  as  those  concerning  deception  and  treating
people  as  mere  means.

4.  The  President's  Commission  functioned  from  1978  to  1983,  under  the  Carter
and  Reagan  administrations,  and  produced  a  number  of  influential  reports  and
recommendations  concerning  medical  ethics  and  health  care  policy.

5.  It  may  be  argued  that  historical  ethical  relativism  reduces  to  cultural  ethical
relativism.  On  this  position,  the  notion  that  even  basic  ethical  principles  vary  by  era  is
part  of  a  more  general  claim  that  what  is  really  at  stake  is  different  "world  views,"  and
these  different  world  views  may  exist  at  the  same  time  but  in  cultures  that  are  different
from  one  another  in  certain  crucial  respects.  On  this  analysis,  in  other  words,  the
temporal  factor  is  not  the  essential  one.  However,  some  find  it  easier  to  reject  historical
ethical  relativism  than  cultural  ethical  relativism,  for  they  find  it  plausible  that  essentially
the  same  values  operative  in,  say,  the  United  States  in  the  1990s  were  operative  in  the
1950s,  but  not  that  essentially  the  same  values  that  are  operative  in  the  United  States  in
the  1990s  are  also  operative  in  China  in  the  1990s.

6.  In  its  report  on  the  CIA  and  Army  psychochemical  experiments,  the  U.S.
Senate  found  that

[i]n  the  Army's  tests,  as  with  those  of  the  CIA,  individual

rights  were  .  .  .  subordinated  to  national  security

considerations;  informed  consent  and  follow-up

examinations  of  subjects  were  neglected  in  efforts  to

maintain  the  secrecy  of  the  tests.
U.S.  Congress,  The  Select  Committee  to  Study  Governmental  Operations  with  Respect
to  Intelligence  Activities,  Foreign  and  Military  Intelligence  [Church  Committee  report],
report  no.  94-755,  94th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1976),  book  1,4111.
However,  even  in  the  light  of  the  Army's  own  analysis  of  its  LSD  experiments,  presented
in  a  1959  staff  study  by  the  U.S.  Army  Intelligence  Corps  (USAINTC),  the  operative
legal  principles  should  not  have  permitted  the  resulting  practices  to  take  place:


222


It  was  always  a  tenet  of  Army  intelligence  that  the  basic
American  principle  of  dignity  and  welfare  of  the
individual  will  not  be  violated  ...  In  intelligence,  the
stakes  involved  and  the  interests  of  national  security
may  permit  a  more  tolerant  interpretation  of  moral-
ethical  values,  but  not  legal  limits,  through  necessity  .  .  .
[emphasis  added].
USAINTC  Staff  Study,  Material  Testing  Program  EA  1 729  ( 1 5  October,  1959),  26.  The
staff  study's  distinction  between  the  flexibility  of  "moral-ethical  values"  and  "legal

limits"  is  puzzling.

7.  U.S.  Army  Inspector  General,  Use  of  Volunteers  in  Chemical  Agent  Research

(Army  IG  report)  (Washington  D.C.:  GPO,  1975).

8.  David  J.  Rothman,  Strangers  at  the  Bedside:  A  History  of  How  Law  and
Bioethics  Transformed  Medical  Decision  Making  (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1991),  32-

9.  Rothman  writes  of  the  CMR's  deliberations  on  the  gonorrhea  proposal: It
[the  CMR]  conducted  a  remarkably  thorough  and  sensitive  discussion  of  the  ethics  of
research  and  adopted  procedures  that  satisfied  the  principles  of  voluntary  and  informed
consent.  Indeed,  the  gonorrhea  protocols  contradict  blanket  assertions  that  in  the  1940s
and  1950s  investigators  were  working  in  an  ethical  vacuum."  Ibid.,  42-43.

10.  Michael  Walzer,  Just  and  Unjust  Wars  (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1977).

11.  Another  factor  often  important  in  assessments  of  blame  is  duress.  All
systems  of  ethics  recognize  that  people  cannot  be  blamed  for  actions  that  violate  basic
ethical  principles  if  they  acted  under  duress.  Duress  includes  manipulation,  blackmail,
or  threats  of  physical  harm.  There  is  no  evidence  that  any  particular  individual  involved
in  the  human  radiation  experiments  functioned  under  conditions  of  duress.

12.  Ruth  Faden  and  Tom  Beauchamp,  A  History  and  Theory  of  Informed
Consent  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1986).

13.  For  example,  the  National  Commission  for  the  Protection  of  Human
Subjects  of  Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research  published  ten  reports.  Many  of  these
recommendations  were  enacted  into  federal  regulation.  U.S.  Congress,  Office  of
Technology  Assessment,  Biomedical  Ethics  in  U.S.  Public  Policy-Background  Paper,
OTA-BP-BBS-105  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  June  1993),  10.

14.  Scholendorffv.  Society  of  New  York  Hospital,  2 1 1  N.Y.  2d  ( 1 9 1 4).

1 5.  Salgo  v.  Leland  Stanford,  Jr.,  University  Board  of  Trustees.  3 1 7  P.2d  1 70

(1957).

1 6.  In  each  case  we  assume  that  the  principles  or  policies  in  question  were
morally  sound;  if  not,  anyone  who  refused  to  take  part  in  unethical  experiments
performed  in  accordance  with  them  acted,  in  retrospect,  in  a  praiseworthy  manner.

1 7.  Again,  with  regard  to  the  elements  of  an  ethical  framework  suited  to  the
intentional  releases,  we  note  that  different  justifications  are  used  to  evaluate  the  risks  to
collectives  or  communities  as  against  those  used  to  evaluate  risks  to  individuals.

18.  Note,  however,  that  the  intended  scope  of  the  policy  was  not  always  clear.
Also,  if  the  government  or  an  agency  had  no  policy  at  all  concerning  the  use  of  human
subjects  but  did  conduct  such  research,  then  the  absence  of  a  policy  would  itself  be
objectionable.


223


PART  II


CASE  STUDIES


Part  II
Overview


W  hen  we  began  our  work,  the  Advisory  Committee  was  aware  of
several  dozen  human  radiation  experiments  and  the  thirteen  intentional  releases  in
our  charter.  Soon,  however,  we  found  that  these  represented  a  fraction  of  the
several  thousand  government-sponsored  human  radiation  experiments  and
hundreds  of  intentional  releases  conducted  from  1944  to  1974.

It  was  clear  that  the  Committee  would  have  to  decide  how  to  proceed  in
examining  the  experiments.  Our  ability  to  review  all  of  the  experiments  and
releases  in  detail  was  limited  not  only  by  time  and  resources,  but  even  more  so  by
the  information  available.  For  the  majority  of  experiments  identified,  only  the
barest  descriptions  remained.  It  appeared  that  the  vast  majority  of  experiments
involved  trace  amounts  of  radioisotopes,  as  are  routinely  used  today  for  the  study
of  bodily  processes  and  the  diagnosis  of  disease.  However,  where  reports  or  other
data  were  available,  they  did  not  routinely  provide  information  needed  to  assess
the  precise  risks  to  which  subjects  were  exposed.  These  reports  were  even  less
likely  to  identify  what  kinds  of  people  were  chosen  as  subjects  and  why  and  how
they  were  selected.

Since  the  Committee  could  not  review  all  experiments,  we  decided  to
prepare  a  series  of  case  studies  focused  on  groups  of  experiments.  We  quickly
found  that  there  was  no  one  right  way  to  organize  the  experiments  for  purpose  of
case  study.  For  example,  the  case  studies  could  have  been  defined  by  the  type  of
radiation  to  which  subjects  were  exposed.  This  would  likely  have  yielded
groupings  of  experiments  with  differing  purposes,  differing  populations,  and
differing  risks  and  benefits.  Likewise,  grouping  all  experiments  according  to  the
characteristics  of  the  people  who  were  the  subjects  of  the  research  would  have
lumped  together  experiments  with  differing  purposes,  risks,  and  scientific
procedures.


227


Part  II


The  ACHRE  Experiments  Database

By  Cabinet  directive  on  January  19,  1994,  federal  agencies  were  ordered  to  "establish
forthwith  an  initial  procedure  for  locating  records  of  human  radiation  experiments  conducted  by
the  Agency  or  under  a  contract  or  grant  of  the  Agency."  The  agencies  most  closely  associated
with  these  activities-the  DOD,  DOE,  DHHS,  NASA,  CIA,  and  VA  (and  later  the  NRC)--in
cooperation  with  Advisory  Committee  staff,  identified  record  collections  of  importance  and
provided  ACHRE  with  copies  of  documents  potentially  containing  information  on  human  radiation
experiments.  The  documents  were  analyzed  to  identify  individual  experiments,  which  were  then
described  according  to  a  protocol  developed  by  ACHRE  members  and  staff,  given  unique
identifiers,  and  recorded  in  an  electronic  database.  Experiments  were  also  identified  by  Advisory
Committee  staff  in  the  published  literature,  discovered  through  a  search  of  the  National  Library  of
Medicine  databases  and  bibliographies,  and  documented  by  individuals  who  came  forward  with
information  for  the  Advisory  Committee.

The  database  contains  records  for  approximately  4,000  human  radiation  experiments.
Information  was  collected,  to  the  extent  it  was  available,  on  the  identity  of  the  experiment
(including  investigators,  location,  dates,  title,  and  documentation);  funding,  program  approval  and
classification;  the  type  and  dose  of  radiation  used;  various  characteristics  of  the  experimental
subjects;  and  the  nature  of  the  consent  obtained.  The  experiments  were  in  addition  categorized  by
various  themes  and  characteristics  developed  by  Advisory  Committee  members  and  staff  to  reflect
ACHRE  research  interests.

Documentation  for  individual  experiments  varies  widely,  sometimes  including  significant
primary  protocol  documentation,  often  including  only  a  journal  article  or  abstract  and,  for  the
greatest  number,  just  an  investigator's  name,  a  location,  a  date,  and  a  title.  As  a  result,  although
the  database  and  the  records  it  abstracts  constitute  an  impressive  and  unique  collection  of
information  on  human  radiation  experiments,  that  collection  is  not  a  comprehensive  information
resource  on  human  radiation  experiments  but  really  just  the  best  place  to  start  to  look  for
information.

The  supplemental  volume  titled  Sources  and  Documentation  contains  a  more  extensive
and  detailed  description  of  the  database  and  its  sources.


After  extensive  deliberation,  the  Committee  settled  on  eight  case  studies,
which  together  address  the  charges  to  and  priorities  of  the  Committee.  For
example,  we  were  charged  to  consider  both  intentional  releases  of  radiation  into
the  environment  and  the  question  of  whether  any  former  subjects  of  human
radiation  experiments  would  benefit  medically  from  notification  of  their
involvement.  In  addition,  the  Committee  saw  a  responsibility  to  address  those
experiments  that  had  received  significant  public  attention  at  the  time  of  the
Committee's  creation  as  well  as  those  brought  to  our  attention  by  members  of  the
public.  These  experiments  either  offered  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to
subjects  or  they  involved  interventions  alleged  to  be  controversial  at  the  time.  We

228


Overview

also,  however,  recognized  the  importance  of  considering  the  far  larger  group  of
experiments  that  received  no  such  attention  but  that  also  may  have  involved  no
prospect  of  benefit  to  subjects.  We  also  placed  a  priority  on  experiments  that
were  conducted  on  behalf  of  secret  programs  and  for  national  security  reasons;
experiments  that  posed  the  greatest  risk  of  harm;  and  experiments  in  which  the
subjects  selected  for  experimentation  were  particularly  powerless  to  resist  or
exercise  independent  judgment  about  participation.  Together,  these
considerations  formed  the  basis  for  the  selection  of  the  case  studies.

In  chapter  5,  we  look  at  the  Manhattan  Project  plutonium-injection
experiments  and  related  experimentation.  Sick  patients  were  used  in  sometimes
secret  experimentation  to  develop  data  needed  to  protect  the  health  and  safety  of
nuclear  weapons  workers.  The  experiments  raise  questions  of  the  use  of  sick
patients  for  purposes  that  are  not  of  benefit  to  them,  the  role  of  national  security
in  permitting  conduct  that  might  not  otherwise  be  justified,  and  the  use  of  secrecy
for  the  purpose  of  protecting  the  government  from  embarrassment  and  potential

liability.

In  contrast  to  the  plutonium  injections,  the  vast  majority  of  human
radiation  experiments  were  not  conducted  in  secret.  Indeed,  the  use  of
radioisotopes  in  biomedical  research  was  publicly  and  actively  promoted  by  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission.  Among  the  several  thousand  experiments  about
which  little  information  is  currently  available,  most  fall  into  this  category.  The
Committee  adopted  a  two-pronged  strategy  to  study  this  phenomenon.  In  chapter
6,  we  describe  the  system  the  AEC  developed  for  the  distribution  of  isotopes  to  be
used  in  human  research.  This  system  was  the  primary  provider  of  the  source
material  for  human  experimentation  in  the  postwar  period.  In  studying  the
operation  of  the  radioisotope  distribution  system,  and  the  related  "human  use"
committees  at  local  institutions,  we  sought  to  learn  the  ground  rules  that  governed
the  conduct  of  the  majority  of  human  radiation  experiments,  most  of  which  have
received  little  or  no  public  attention.  Also  in  this  chapter  we  review  how  research
with  radioisotopes  has  contributed  to  advances  in  medicine.

The  Committee  then  selected  for  particular  consideration,  in  chapter  7,
radioisotope  research  that  used  children  as  subjects.  We  determined  to  focus  on
children  for  several  reasons.  First,  at  low  levels  of  radiation  exposure,  children
are  at  greater  risk  of  harm  than  adults.  Second,  children  were  the  most
appropriate  group  in  which  to  pursue  the  Committee's  mandate  with  respect  to
notification  of  former  subjects  for  medical  reasons.  They  are  the  group  most
likely  to  have  been  harmed  by  their  participation  in  research,  and  they  are  more
likely  than  other  former  subjects  still  to  be  alive.  Third,  when  the  Committee
considered  how  best  to  study  subject  populations  that  were  most  likely  to  be
exploited  because  of  their  relative  dependency  or  powerlessness,  children  were
the  only  subjects  who  could  readily  be  identified  in  the  meager  documentation
available.  By  contrast,  characteristics  such  as  gender,  ethnicity,  and  social  class
were  rarely  noted  in  research  reports  of  the  day.

229


Part  II

Moving  from  case  studies  focused  on  the  injection  or  ingestion  of
radioisotopes,  chapter  8  shifts  to  experimentation  in  which  sick  patients  were
subjected  to  externally  administered  total-body  irradiation  (TBI).  The  Committee
discovered  that  the  highly  publicized  TBI  experiments  conducted  at  the
University  of  Cincinnati  were  only  the  last  of  a  series  in  which  the  government
sought  to  use  data  from  patients  undergoing  TBI  treatment  to  gain  information  for
nuclear  weapons  development  and  use.  This  experimentation  spanned  the  period
from  World  War  II  to  the  early  1970s,  during  which  the  ethics  of  experimentation
became  increasingly  subject  to  public  debate  and  government  regulation.  In
contrast  with  the  experiments  that  flowed  from  the  AEC's  radioisotope  program,
the  use  of  external  radiation  such  as  TBI  did  not  in  its  earlier  years  involve  a
government  requirement  of  prior  review  for  risk.  The  TBI  experimentation  raises
basic  questions  about  the  responsibility  of  the  government  when  it  seeks  to  gather
research  data  in  conjunction  with  medical  interventions  of  debatable  benefit  to
sick  patients.

In  chapter  9  we  examine  experimentation  on  healthy  subjects,  specifically
prisoners,  for  the  purpose  of  learning  the  effects  of  external  irradiation  on  the
testes,  such  as  might  be  experienced  by  astronauts  in  space.  The  prisoner
experiments  were  studied  because  they  received  significant  public  attention  and
because  a  literally  captive  population  was  chosen  to  bear  risks  to  which  no  other
group  of  experimental  subjects  had  been  exposed  or  has  been  exposed  since.  This
research  took  place  during  a  period  in  which  the  once-commonly  accepted
practice  of  nontherapeutic  experimentation  on  prisoners  was  increasingly  subject
to  public  criticism  and  moral  outrage.

Chapter  10  also  explores  research  involving  healthy  subjects:  human
experimentation  conducted  in  conjunction  with  atomic  bomb  tests.  More  than
200,000  service  personnel—now  known  as  atomic  veterans— participated  at  atomic
bomb  test  sites,  mostly  for  training  and  test-management  purposes.  A  small
number  also  were  used  as  subjects  of  experimentation.  The  Committee  heard
from  many  atomic  veterans  and  their  family  members  who  were  concerned  about
both  the  long-term  health  effects  of  these  exposures  and  the  government's
conduct.  This  case  study  provided  the  opportunity  to  examine  the  meaning  of
human  experimentation  in  an  occupational  setting  where  risk  is  the  norm.

In  chapter  1 1  we  address  the  thirteen  intentional  releases  of  radiation  into
the  environment  specified  in  the  Committee's  charter,  as  well  as  additional
releases  identified  during  the  life  of  the  Committee.  In  contrast  with  biomedical
experimentation,  individuals  and  communities  were  not  typically  the  subject  of
study  in  these  intentional  releases.  Rather,  the  releases  were  to  test  intelligence
equipment,  the  potential  of  radiological  warfare,  and  the  mechanism  of  the  atomic
bomb.  While  the  risk  posed  by  intentional  releases  was  relatively  small,  the
releases  often  took  place  in  secret  and  remained  secret  for  years.

The  final  case  study,  in  chapter  1 2,  looks  at  two  groups  that  were  put  at
risk  by  nuclear  weapons  development  and  testing  programs  and  as  a  consequence

230


Overview

became  the  subjects  of  observational  research:  workers  who  mined  uranium  for
the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  in  the  western  United  States  from  the  1 940s  to
1960s  and  residents  of  the  Marshall  Islands,  whose  Pacific  homeland  was
irradiated  as  a  consequence  of  a  hydrogen  bomb  test  in  1954. While  these
observational  studies  do  not  fit  the  classic  definition  of  an  experiment,  in  which
the  investigator  controls  the  variable  under  study  (in  this  case  radiation  exposure),
they  are  instances  of  research  involving  human  subjects.  The  Committee  elected
to  examine  the  experiences  of  the  uranium  miners  and  Marshallese  because  they
raise  important  issues  in  the  ethics  of  human  research  not  illustrated  in  the
previous  case  studies  and  because  numerous  public  witnesses  impressed  on  the
Committee  the  significance  of  the  lessons  to  be  learned  from  their  histories.

Part  II  concludes  with  an  exploration  of  an  important  theme  common  to
many  of  the  case  studies-openness  and  secrecy  in  the  government's  conduct
concerning  human  radiation  research  and  intentional  releases.  In  chapter  13  we
step  back  and  look  at  what  rules  governed  what  the  public  was  told  about  the
topics  under  the  Committee's  purview,  whether  these  rules  were  publicly  known,
and  whether  they  were  followed.


231


Experiments  with  Plutonium,
Uranium,  and  Polonium


In  August  1944,  at  the  secret  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  in  New  Mexico,  a
twenty-three-year-old  chemist  was  trying  to  learn  what  he  could  about  the
properties  of  a  radioactive  metal.  One  year  later,  the  new  "product"-one  of
several  code  words  for  this  three-year-old  element  with  a  classified  name-would
power  the  bomb  dropped  on  Nagasaki.  That  day  the  young  scientist,  Don
Mastick,  was  working  with  the  entire  Los  Alamos  supply  of  the  material,  10
milligrams.  It  was  sealed  in  a  glass  vial  several  inches  long  and  about  a  quarter
inch  in  diameter.  Unknown  to  Mastick,  a  chemical  reaction  was  causing  pressure
to  build  up  inside  the  vial.  Suddenly  it  burst,  firing  an  acidic  solution  against  the
wall  from  where  it  splattered  into  Mastick's  face,  some  of  it  entering  his  mouth.'

Realizing  the  importance  to  the  war  effort  of  the  plutonium  he  had  just
ingested,  Mastick  hurried  directly  to  the  office  of  Louis  Hempelmann,  the  health
director  at  Los  Alamos.  Hempelmann  pumped  Mastick's  stomach  and  instructed
the  young  scientist  to  retrieve  the  plutonium  from  the  expelled  contents.
Hempelmann  expressed  a  concern  related  to  worker  safety:  there  was  no  way
available  to  determine  how  much  plutonium  remained  in  Mastick's  body.  He
immediately  pressed  the  lab's  director,  J.  Robert  Oppenheimer,  for  authorization
to  conduct  studies  to  develop  ways  of  detecting  plutonium  in  the  lungs,  and  in
urine  and  feces,  and  of  estimating  the  level  of  plutonium  in  the  body  from  the
amount  found  in  excreta.2

Looming  over  Mastick's  accident  was  the  well-known  tragedy  of  the
radium  dial  workers  more  than  a  decade  earlier.  Like  Mastick,  they  had  ingested
radioactive  material  through  their  mouths,  as  they  licked  the  brushes  they  used  to


233


Part  II

apply  radium  paint  to  watch  dials.  As  time  passed,  many  suffered  from  a
gruesome  bone  disease  localized  in  the  jaw,  and  some  bone  cancers  developed.
Could  plutonium  cause  a  similar  tragedy?  If  so,  how  much  plutonium  needed  to
be  ingested  before  harmful  effects  might  arise?  How  could  one  tell  how  much
plutonium  a  person  had  already  ingested?  The  answers  to  these  questions  were
crucial,  not  only  in  the  case  of  accidents  such  as  Mastick's,  but  also,  in  the  long
run,  to  establish  occupational  health  standards  for  the  hundreds  of  workers  who
would  soon  be  mass-producing  plutonium  for  atomic  bombs.  Several  pounds  of
radium,  handled  without  recognition  of  the  dangers,  had  led  to  dozens  of  deaths;
what  might  plutonium  cause?

A  starting  point  was  to  examine  the  available  data  on  radium  poisoning,
compare  the  characteristics  of  the  radiation  emitted  by  radium  and  plutonium,  and
try  to  extrapolate  from  radium  to  plutonium.  However,  plutonium  had  already
revealed  unexpected  physical  properties,  which  were  posing  problems  for  the
bomb  designers.  Could  plutonium  also  have  unexpected  biochemical  properties?
Extrapolation  from  radium  was  a  good  starting  point,  but  could  never  be  as
reliable  as  data  on  plutonium  itself.

Oppenheimer  agreed  that  this  research  was  critical.  In  an  August  16,
1944,  memorandum  to  Hempelmann,  Oppenheimer  authorized  separate  programs
to  develop  methods  to  detect  plutonium  in  the  excreta  and  in  the  lung.  With
respect  to  biological  studies,  which  Oppenheimer  speculated  might  involve
human  experimentation,  he  wrote:  "I  feel  that  it  is  desirable  if  these  can  in  any
way  be  handled  elsewhere  not  to  undertake  them  here."3  The  reason
Oppenheimer  did  not  want  these  experiments  conducted  at  Los  Alamos  remains
obscure.  Nine  days  later,  Hempelmann  met  with  Colonel  Stafford  L.  Warren,
medical  director  of  the  Manhattan  Project,  and  others.  They  agreed  to  conduct  a
research  program  using  both  animal  and  human  subjects.4

Mastick,  who  reported  no  ill  effects  from  the  accident  when  Advisory
Committee  staff  interviewed  him  in  1995,5  was  not  the  first  alert  to  the  potential
hazards  of  plutonium.  Human  experiments  to  study  the  metabolism  and  retention
of  plutonium  in  the  body  had  been  contemplated  from  the  earliest  days  of  the
Manhattan  Project.  On  January  5,  1944,  Glenn  Seaborg,  who  in  1941  was  the
first  to  recognize  that  plutonium  had  been  created  in  the  cyclotron  at  the
University  of  California  at  Berkeley,  wrote  to  Dr.  Robert  Stone,  health  director  of
the  Metallurgical  Laboratory  in  Chicago  (a  Manhattan  Project  contractor)  and  a
central  figure  in  efforts  to  understand  the  health  effects  of  plutonium:

It  has  occurred  to  me  that  the  physiological  hazards
of  working  with  plutonium  and  its  compounds  may
be  very  great.  Due  to  its  alpha  radiation  and  long
life  it  may  be  that  the  permanent  location  in  the
body  of  even  very  small  amounts,  say  one
milligram  or  less,  may  be  very  harmful.  The

234


Chapter  5

ingestion  of  such  extraordinarily  small  amounts  as
some  few  tens  of  micrograms  might  be  unpleasant,
if  it  locates  itself  in  a  permanent  position.6

Seaborg  urged  that  a  safety  program  be  set  up. In  addition,  "I  would  like
to  suggest  that  a  program  to  trace  the  course  of  plutonium  in  the  body  be  initiated
as  soon  as  possible.  In  my  opinion  such  a  program  should  have  the  very  highest
priority."7  Stone  reassured  Seaborg  that  human  tracer  studies  "have  long  since
been  planned.  . .  .  although  never  mentioned  in  official  descriptions  of  the
program."8  The  work  began  at  Berkeley  with  studies  on  rats  conducted  by  Dr.
Joseph  Hamilton.9

Even  as  these  studies  on  the  biological  effects  of  plutonium  were
beginning,  the  amount  of  plutonium  being  produced  was  dramatically  increasing.
Most  of  the  effort  at  Oak  Ridge  was  devoted  to  the  separation  of  isotopes  of
uranium.  However,  the  X- 10  plant  at  Oak  Ridge  was  a  larger  version  of  the  very
small  plutonium-producing  reactor  developed  at  the  University  of  Chicago.  The
X-10  plant  began  operating  on  November  4,  1943,  and  by  the  summer  of  1944
was  sending  small  amounts  of  plutonium  to  Los  Alamos.10  By  December  1944
large-scale  production  of  plutonium  began  at  the  Hanford,  Washington,  reactor
complex. ' '

By  late  1944,  in  the  wake  of  the  Mastick  accident,  the  need  to  devise  a
means  of  estimating  the  amount  of  plutonium  in  the  body  became  acute.  It
seemed  that  the  only  way  to  estimate  how  much  plutonium  remained  in  a  worker's
body  would  be  to  measure  over  time  the  amount  excreted  after  a  known  dose  and,
from  this,  estimate  the  relationship  between  the  amount  excreted  and  the  amount
retained  in  the  body.12


Maximum  Permissible  Body  Burden  (MPBB)  for  Plutonium

The  plutonium  injections  were  part  of  a  larger  research  project  intended  to  provide  data
for  an  occupational  safety  program  riddled  with  uncertainty.  Not  only  was  there  a  need  for  ways  to
monitor  the  exposure  of  personnel-the  driving  force  behind  the  plutonium  injections-but  the
maximum  permissible  body  burden  (MPBB)  for  plutonium,  the  maximum  amount  of  plutonium
that  would  be  permitted  in  the  bodies  of  workers,  was  still  under  debate.

The  concept  of  "maximum  permissible  body  burden"  had  begun  to  develop  before  the
war  in  light  of  the  known  hazards  of  radium.  Just  prior  to  the  war,  primarily  at  the  request  of  the
Navy,  a  committee  of  experts  was  formed  to  establish  occupational  health  standards  for  the
factories  producing  dials  illuminated  by  radium  paint.  After  examining  the  data  on  radium  dial
painters,  this  committee  agreed  that  0. 1  microgram  fixed  in  the  body  should  be  the  "tolerance
level"  for  radium:  an  amount  that,  in  the  words  of  the  committee  chairman,  Robley  Evans,  would


235


Part  II

be  "at  such  a  level  that  we  would  feel  comfortable  if  our  own  wife  or  daughter  were  the  subject."8
After  the  war  the  term  maximum  permissible  body  burden  was  adopted  and  defined  more  precisely
as  the  amount  of  a  radioisotope  that,  when  continuously  present  inside  the  body,  would  produce  a
dose  equivalent  to  the  allowable  occupational  exposure  (the  maximum  permissible  dose).  For
radioisotopes  that,  like  radium,  primarily  reside  in  bone,  biological  data  and  mathematical  models
were  used  to  determine  how  much  of  another  bone  seeker  would  produce  the  same  dose  as  the
original  0. 1 -microgram  radium  standard.

Between  1943  and  the  spring  of  1945,  based  on  the  body  burden  for  radium  and
preliminary  results  of  animal  experiments,  a  tentative  MPBB  for  plutonium  of  5  micrograms  was
adopted  by  the  Manhattan  District.b  This  level  was  derived  by  direct  comparison  of  the  relative
energies  of  plutonium  and  radium.

By  the  spring  of  1945,  differences  between  the  deposition  of  radium  and  plutonium  in  the
body  were  becoming  clearer.  Animal  data  indicated  that  plutonium  deposited  in  what  was  called  at
the  time  the  "organic  matrix"  of  the  bone-the  part  of  the  bone  most  associated  with  bone  growth.
This  was  different  from  radium,  which  seemed  to  deposit  instead  in  the  mineralized  bone.  Wright
Langham  wrote  to  Hymer  Friedell  supporting  the  choice  of  1  microgram  as  an  operating  limit  in
lieu  of  a  more  formal  policy.  Langham  wrote  that  with  the  adoption  of  this  lower  limit  "the
medico-legal  aspect  will  have  been  taken  care  of  and  of  still  greater  importance,  we  will  have
taken  a  relatively  small  chance  of  poisoning  someone  in  case  the  material  proves  to  be  more  toxic
than  one  would  normally  expect.""  This  level  was  adopted  and  held  until  the  Tripartite  Permissible
Dose  Conference  at  Chalk  River,  Canada,  in  September  1 949.

At  this  conference,  representatives  from  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  and  Canada
agreed  on  tolerance  doses  for  many  radioactive  isotopes,  including  a  maximum  body  burden  of  0. 1
microgram  for  plutonium.  This  reduced  by  a  factor  of  10  the  value  under  which  Los  Alamos
production  had  been  operating.  This  reduction  was  based  on  the  results  of  acute  toxicological
experiments  with  animals,  which  indicated  that  plutonium  was  as  much  as  fifteen  times  more  toxic
than  radium.

On  January  20,  1950,  Wright  Langham  wrote  to  Shields  Warren,  then  the  director  of  the
AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  alerting  him  to  the  problems  caused  by  the  Chalk  River
Conference's  new  "extremely  conservative  tolerances  [which]  may  have  a  drastic  effect  on  the
efficiency  and  productivity  of  the  Los  Alamos  Laboratory.  Their  official  adoption  will
undoubtedly  force  major  alteration  in  both  present  and  future  laboratory  facilities  and  may  add
millions  of  dollars  to  the  cost  of  construction  of  the  permanent  building  program  now  in  the


a.  Robley  Evans,  "Inception  of  Standards  for  Internal  Emitters,  Radon  and  Radium,"  Health
Physics  41  (September  1981):  437-448.

b.  W.  H.  Langham  et  al.,  "The  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory's  Experience  with  Plutonium  in
Man,"  Health  Physics  8  (1962):  753.

C. Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory  Health  Division,  to  Hymer  Friedell,  21
May  1945  ("Since  the  Chicago  Meeting,  1  am  somewhat  lost  as  to  what  our  program  should  be  in  the
future  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 13094-B-7),  1.

236


Chapter  5

planning  phases.'"1  Langham  continued  with  reasons  for  regarding  the  Chalk  River  value  of  0.1
micrograms  of  plutonium  as  "unnecessarily  low."  He  cited,  among  other  things,  differences
between  acute  and  chronic  toxicity  and  new  analysis  of  data  from  the  radium  watch  dial  painters.

On  January  24,  1950,  Shields  Warren,  Austin  Brues  of  Argonne  National  Laboratory,
Robley  Evans,  Karl  Morgan,  and  Wright  Langham  met  in  Washington.  Langham  wrote  later:  "As
a  result  of  this  meeting,  Dr.  Shields  Warren  of  the  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  authorized
0.5  ug  (0.033  uc)  of  Pu2"  as  the  AEC's  official  operating  maximum  permissible  body  burden."0
There  were  no  minutes  or  transcripts  taken  of  this  meeting.  The  calculation  of  this  level  was  again
based  on  the  body  burden  for  radium,  this  time  modified  by  the  1/15  toxicity  factor  (since
experiments  had  indicated  that  plutonium  was  up  to  fifteen  times  more  toxic  than  radium),  by  the
relative  retention  of  plutonium  and  radium  in  rodents,  and  by  the  energy  ratios  modified  by  radon
retention.

Thus  far,  the  entire  debate  had  occurred  behind  the  closed  doors  of  the  AEC.
Consideration  of  all  the  complex  issues  applied  in  setting  a  permissible  body  burden  had  been
within  a  small  circle  of  scientists  and  administrators.  While  the  MPBB  for  plutonium  accepted  at
the  January  1950  meeting  has  held  until  today,  its  derivation  has  changed  over  the  years.


By  March  1945,  there  was  disturbing  news  that  urine  samples  from  Los
Alamos  workers  were  indicating,  based  on  models  developed  from  animal
experimentation,  that  some  might  be  approaching  or  had  exceeded  a  body  burden
of  1  microgram.13  A  March  25  meeting  led  to  Hempelmann's  recommendation
that  the  Project  "help  make  arrangements  for  a  human  tracer  experiment  to
determine  the  percentage  of  plutonium  excreted  daily  in  the  urine  and  feces.  It  is
suggested  that  a  hospital  patient  at  either  Rochester  or  Chicago  be  chosen  for
injection  of  from  one  to  ten  micrograms  of  material  and  that  the  excreta  be  sent  to
the  laboratory  for  analysis."14  The  overall  program,  as  it  was  envisioned  by  Dr.
Hymer  Friedell,  deputy  medical  director  of  the  Manhattan  Engineer  District,
Oppenheimer,  and  Hempelmann,  consisted  of  three  parts:  improvement  of
methods  to  protect  personnel  from  exposure  to  plutonium;  development  of
methods  for  diagnosing  overexposure  of  personnel;  and  study  of  methods  of
treatment  for  overexposed  personnel.  On  March  29,  Oppenheimer  forwarded  the
recommendation  to  Stafford  Warren,  with  his  "personal  endorsement."15


d.  The  letter  went  on  to  say  that  "operations  of  the  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  would  be  curtailed  or
stopped  if  such  action  were  necessary  to  the  reasonable  and  sensible  protection  of  the  personnel.  The
seriousness  of  this  action,  however,  seems  to  be  adequate  reason  for  requesting  that  official  adoption  of  the
tolerances  by  the  AEC  be  postponed  until  they  have  been  carefully  reviewed  in  order  to  make  certain  that  the
values  are  not  unnecessarily  conservative."  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division,  to
Shields  Warren,  Director  of  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  20  January  1950  ("Radiation
Tolerances  Proposed  by  the  Chalk  River  Permissible  Dose  Conference  of  September  29-30,  1949")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-020795-D-6),  1.

e.  W.  H.  Langham  et  al„  "The  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory's  Experience  with  Plutonium  in
Man,"  Health  Physics  8  (1962):  754.

237


Part  II

The  accident  at  Los  Alamos  was  part  of  the  prelude  to  experiments
conducted  between  1945  and  1947  in  which  eighteen  hospital  patients  were
injected  with  plutonium  to  determine  how  excreta  (urine  and  feces)  could  be  used
to  estimate  the  amount  of  plutonium  that  remained  in  an  exposed  worker's  body.
One  patient  was  injected  at  Oak  Ridge  Hospital  in  Oak  Ridge,  Tennessee;  eleven
were  injected  at  the  University  of  Rochester,  three  at  the  University  of  Chicago,
and  three  at  the  University  of  California.

The  results  of  these  experiments  contributed  to  the  development  of  a
monitoring  method  that,  with  small  changes,  is  still  used  today.  The  experimental
data  were  used  to  develop  a  model  relating  body  burden  to  short-term  excretion
rate.  Known  as  the  "Langham  model,"  it  was  based  on  short-term  excretion  data,
long-term  excretion  data  that  were  collected  in  1950  from  two  injection  subjects,
and  worker  excretion  data.  This  model  has  been  used  almost  universally  to
monitor  plutonium  workers  since  1950,  although  it  has  been  modified  over  the
years  as  longer-term  and  more  extensive  data  were  accumulated.  While  now,  fifty
years  later,  not  every  question  concerning  the  quality  of  the  science  or  the  basis
for  estimating  risk  can  be  answered  with  precision,  there  is  general  agreement
among  radiation  scientists  that  the  experiments  were  useful.

Although  this  would  be  the  first  time  that  plutonium  would  be  injected
into  human  beings,  the  plutonium  experiments  were  not  viewed  at  the  time  as
being  extremely  risky,  and  for  good  reason.  Based  on  experience  with  other
bone-seeking  radioisotopes  such  as  radium,  the  investigators  had  firm  basis  for
believing,  even  in  the  1940s,  that  the  amount  of  material  to  be  injected  was  likely
too  small  to  produce  any  immediate  side  effects  or  reactions.  No  one  was
expected  to  feel  ill  or  have  any  negative  reaction  to  the  injection,  and  apparently
no  one  did.  Because  acute  effects  were  not  expected,  the  plutonium  injections
were  viewed  as  posing  no  short-term  risks  to  human  subjects.  There  was  concern,
however,  about  long-term  risk.  A  draft  report,  written  by  one  of  the  primary
investigators  within  a  few  years  of  the  injections,  records  that  "acute  toxic  effects
from  the  small  dose  of  pu  [plutonium]  administered  were  neither  expected  nor
observed."  The  document  also  recognized  that  "with  regard  to  ultimate  effects,  it
is  too  early  to  predict  what  may  occur."16  Based  largely  on  the  experience  of  the
radium  dial  painters,  it  was  recognized  that  exposure  to  plutonium  could  result,
perhaps  ten  or  twenty  years  later,  in  the  development  of  cancer  in  a  human
subject.  This  was  viewed  as  a  significant  risk  but  also  as  a  risk  that  could  be
minimized  by  the  use  of  small  doses  and  wholly  avoided  if  the  subjects  were
expected  to  die  well  before  a  cancer  had  a  chance  to  materialize.

Even  if  the  plutonium  injections  had  been  entirely  risk  free,  an
impossibility  in  human  experimentation,  they  could  still  be  morally  problematic.
As  we  discussed  in  chapter  2,  it  was  not  uncommon  in  the  1940s  for  physicians
to  use  patients  as  subjects  in  experiments  without  their  knowledge  or  consent.
This  occurred  frequently  in  research  involving  potential  new  therapies,  where
there  was  at  least  a  chance  that  the  patient-subjects  might  benefit  medically  from

238


Chapter  5

being  in  an  experiment.  But  it  also  occurred  even  in  experiments-like  the
plutonium  injections- where  there  was  never  any  expectation  and  no  chance  that
the  experiment  might  be  of  benefit  to  the  subjects.

The  conduct  of  the  plutonium  experiments  raises  a  number  of  difficult
ethics  and  policy  questions:  Who  should  have  been  the  subjects  of  an  experiment
designed  to  protect  workers  vital  to  bomb  production  in  wartime?  What  should
the  subjects  have  been  told  about  the  risks  of  the  secret  substance  with  which  they
were  being  injected?  What  should  they  have  been  told  about  the  purpose  of  the
experiment?  What  were  the  subjects  told?  Did  they  know  they  were  part  of  an
experiment  in  which  there  was  no  expectation  that  they  would  benefit  medically?

An  inquiry  initiated  by  the  AEC  commissioners  in  1974  investigated  some
of  these  questions.  That  inquiry  focused  on  whether  consent  was  obtained  from
the  subjects,  either  at  the  time  of  the  plutonium  injections  or  during  1973  follow-
up  studies  funded  by  the  AEC's  Argonne  National  Laboratory  in  Chicago,
designed  to  determine  the  long-term  effects  of  the  injections.  Sixteen  patient
charts  were  examined  for  evidence  of  consent  at  the  time  of  injection;  the  other
two  charts  had  been  either  lost  or  destroyed.  Of  the  sixteen  charts  examined,  only
one  chart-that  of  the  only  subject  injected  after  the  April  1947  directive  of  AEC
General  Manager  Carroll  Wilson  (discussed  in  chapter  1)  that  required
documented  consent-contained  evidence  of  some  form  of  consent.  The  other
fifteen  contained  no  record  of  consent.17  According  to  AEC  investigators,  oral
testimony  pointed  to  failure  to  obtain  consent  in  the  case  of  the  Oak  Ridge
injection  and  to  some  form  of  disclosure  to  patients  for  the  California  and
Chicago  experiments.  The  AEC  concluded  that  testimony  was  inconclusive  for
the  Rochester  experiments.11*  With  regard  to  the  follow-up  studies  conducted  with
three  surviving  subjects  in  1973,  the  investigation  concluded  that  two  subjects  had
deliberately  not  been  informed  of  the  purpose  of  the  follow-up  and  that  one
subject  had  actually  been  misled  about  the  purpose.19

As  we  will  see  later  in  this  chapter,  the  AEC's  conclusion  that  consent  was
not  obtained  from  the  surviving  subjects  for  the  1973  follow-up  studies  was
correct.  Moreover,  additional  documentary  evidence  and  testimony  suggests  that
patient-subjects  at  the  Universities  of  Rochester  and  California  were  never  told
that  the  injections  were  part  of  a  medical  experiment  for  which  there  was  no
expectation  that  they  would  benefit,  and  they  never  consented  to  this  use  of  their
bodies.

The  rest  of  this  chapter  provides  a  chronological  account  of  the  plutonium
injection  experiments  and  follow-up  studies  conducted  over  the  course  of  many
years,  assesses  the  influence  of  secrecy  on  the  conduct  of  the  experiments,  and
examines  the  motivating  factors  behind  the  prolonged  secrecy  of  the  experiments
and  the  continued  deception  of  surviving  subjects.  We  also  consider  the  conduct
of  experimentation  with  uranium  and  polonium.  Finally,  we  render  judgments
where  we  can  about  the  ethical  conduct  of  these  experiments.


239


Part  II

THE  MANHATTAN  DISTRICT  EXPERIMENTS

The  First  Injection

A  few  days  after  Hempelmann's  March  26,  1945,  recommendation  that  a
hospital  patient  be  injected  with  plutonium,  Wright  Langham,  of  the  Los  Alamos
Laboratory's  Health  Division,  sent  5  micrograms  of  plutonium  to  Dr.  Friedell,
with  instructions  for  their  use  on  a  human  subject.20  The  subject,  as  it  turned  out,
was  already  in  the  Oak  Ridge  Army  hospital,  a  victim  of  an  auto  accident  that  had
occurred  on  March  24,  1945. 2I  He  was  a  fifty-three-year-old  "colored  male"22
named  Ebb  Cade,23  who  was  employed  by  an  Oak  Ridge  construction  company  as
a  cement  mixer.  The  subject  had  serious  fractures  in  his  arm  and  leg,  but  was
otherwise  "well  developed  [and]  well  nourished."24  The  patient  was  able  to  tell
his  doctors  that  he  had  always  been  in  good  health.25

Mr.  Cade  had  been  hospitalized  since  his  accident,  but  the  plutonium
injection  did  not  take  place  until  April  10.  On  this  date,  "HP- 12"  (the  code  name
HP— "human  product"26--was  later  assigned  to  this  patient  and  to  patients  at  the
University  of  Rochester)  was  reportedly  injected  with  4.7  micrograms  of
plutonium.  (It  is  important  here  to  distinguish  between  administered  dose  and
retained  dose;  not  all  of  the  injected  dose  would  remain  fixed  in  the  body.  It  was
not  known  with  certainty,  however,  how  much  of  the  4.7  micrograms  of
plutonium  would  remain  in  his  body.)

The  small  amount  of  material  injected  into  Mr.  Cade  would  not  be
expected  to  produce  any  acute  effects,  and  there  is  no  indication  that  any  were
experienced.  However,  except  for  his  fractures,  Mr.  Cade  was  apparently  in  good
health  and  at  age  fifty-three  could  reasonably  have  been  expected  to  live  for
another  ten  to  twenty  years.  Thus,  in  Mr.  Cade's  case,  the  risk  of  a  plutonium-
induced  cancer  could  not  be  ruled  out.

Dr.  Joseph  Howland,  an  Army  doctor  stationed  at  Oak  Ridge,  told  AEC
investigators  in  1974  that  he  had  administered  the  injection.  There  was,  he
recalled,  no  consent  from  the  patient.  He  acted,  he  testified,  only  after  his
objections  were  met  with  a  written  order  to  proceed  from  his  superior,  Dr.
Friedell.27  Dr.  Friedell  told  Advisory  Committee  staff  in  an  interview  that  he  did
not  order  the  injection  and  that  it  was  administered  by  a  physician  named  Dwight
Clark,  not  Dr.  Howland.28  The  Committee  has  not  been  able  to  resolve  this
contradiction.

Measurements  were  to  be  taken  from  samples  of  Mr.  Cade's  blood  after
four  hours,  his  bone  tissue  after  ninety-six  hours,  and  his  bodily  excretions  for
forty  to  sixty  days  thereafter.29  His  broken  bones  were  not  set  until  April  1 5— five
days  after  the  injection~when  bone  samples  were  taken  in  a  biopsy.30  Although
this  was  several  weeks  after  his  injury,  during  this  era  when  antibiotics  were  only
beginning  to  become  available,  it  was  common  practice  to  delay  surgery  if  there
was  any  sign  of  possible  infection.  One  document  records  that  Mr.  Cade  had

240


Chapter  5

"marked"  tooth  decay  and  gum  inflammation/1  and  fifteen  of  his  teeth  were
extracted  and  sampled  for  plutonium.  The  Committee  has  not  been  able  to
determine  whether  the  teeth  were  extracted  primarily  for  medical  reasons  or  for
the  purpose  of  sampling  for  plutonium.  In  a  September  1945  letter,  Captain
David  Goldring  at  Oak  Ridge  informed  Langham  that  "more  bone  specimens  and
extracted  teeth  will  be  shipped  to  you  very  soon  for  analysis."32  It  remains
unclear  whether  these  additional  bone  specimens  were  extracted  at  the  time  of  the
April  15  operation  or  later.

According  to  one  account,  Mr.  Cade  departed  suddenly  from  the  hospital
on  his  own  initiative;  one  morning  the  nurse  opened  his  door,  and  he  was  gone."
Later  it  was  learned  that  he  moved  out  of  state  and  died  of  heart  failure  on  April
13,  1953,  in  Greensboro,  North  Carolina.34

The  experiment  at  Oak  Ridge  did  not  proceed  as  planned.  "Before"  and
"after"  urine  samples  were  mistakenly  commingled,  so  no  baseline  data  on  kidney
function  was  available.35  Thus,  the  subject's  kidney  function  would  be  difficult  to
assess.  In  May  1945,36  Dr.  Stone  convened  a  "Conference  on  Plutonium"  in
Chicago  to  discuss  health  issues  related  to  plutonium,  including  the  relationship
between  dose  and  excretion  rate,  the  permissible  body  burden,  and  potential
therapy  and  protective  measures.37  Wright  Langham  spoke  about  the  Oak  Ridge
injection  at  the  conference,  carefully  qualifying  the  reliability  of  the  excretion
data  obtained  from  Mr.  Cade.  Langham  observed  that  "the  patient  might  not  have
been  an  ideal  subject  in  that  his  kidney  function  may  not  have  been  completely
normal  at  the  time  of  injection"38  as  indicated  by  protein  tests  of  his  urine.

The  Chicago  Experiments

On  April  1 1,  the  day  after  the  Oak  Ridge  injection,  Hymer  Friedell
transmitted  the  protocol  describing  the  experiment  on  Mr.  Cade  to  Louis
Hempelmann  at  Los  Alamos.  "Everything  went  very  smoothly,"  he  wrote,  "and  I
think  that  we  will  have  some  very  valuable  information  for  you."39  He  then  went
on  to  discuss  the  injection  of  more  patients:  "I  think  that  we  will  have  access  to
considerable  clinical  material  here,  and  we  hope  to  do  a  number  of  subjects.  At
such  time  as  we  line  up  several  patients  I  think  we  will  make  an  effort  to  have  Mr.
Langham  here  to  review  our  setup."40

Subsequently,  between  late  April  and  late  December  of  1945,  three  cancer
patients,  code-named  CHI-1,  2,  and  3,  were  injected  with  plutonium.  At  least  two
and  possibly  all  three  were  injected  at  the  Billings  Hospital  of  the  University  of
Chicago.  The  doses  to  subjects  CHI-2  and  CHI-3  were  the  highest  doses
administered  to  any  of  the  eighteen  injection  subjects-approximately  95
micrograms.41  However,  the  amount  of  material  injected  was  still  below  what
would  be  expected  to  produce  acute  effects.  Moreover,  unlike  Mr.  Cade,  all  three
of  these  patients  were  seriously  ill  and  at  least  two  of  them  died  within  ten  months
of  receiving  the  injection.  That  the  selection  of  seriously  ill  patients  was  an

241


Part  II

intentional  strategy  to  contain  risk  is  indicated  in  a  1946  report  on  CHI-1  and
CHI-2:  "Some  human  studies  were  needed  to  see  how  to  apply  the  animal  data  to
the  human  problems.  Hence,  two  people  were  selected  whose  life  expectancy
was  such  that  they  could  not  be  endangered  by  injections  of  plutonium."42  It
remains  a  mystery  why  CHI-3  was  not  included  in  this  report.

On  April  26,  1945,  CHI-1,  a  sixty-eight-year-old  man  who  had  been
admitted  to  Billings  Hospital  in  March,  was  injected  with  6.5  micrograms  of
plutonium.  At  the  time  of  injection  he  was  suffering  from  cancer  of  the  mouth
and  lung.  The  patient  reportedly  "remained  in  fair  condition  until  August  1945,
when  he  complained  of  pain  in  the  chest."4'1  His  lung  cancer  had  apparently
spread,  and  he  died  on  October  3,  1945.44

The  next  injection  took  place  eight  months  later.  CHI-2  was  a  fifty-five-
year-old  woman  with  breast  cancer  who  had  been  admitted  to  Billings  Hospital  in
December  1945  after  the  cancer  had  already  spread  throughout  her  body.  The
1 946  report  recorded  that  "the  patient's  general  condition  was  poor  at  the  time  of
admission  and  deteriorated  steadily  throughout  the  period  of  hospitalization."45
She  was  injected  with  95  micrograms  of  plutonium  on  December  27  and  died  on
January  13,  1946.46

There  is  little  known  about  the  condition  of  CHI-3,  the  other  subject  who
was  injected  with  approximately  95  micrograms.  He  was  a  young  man  suffering
from  Hodgkin's  disease,  reportedly  injected  on  the  same  date  as  CHI-2.47  His
condition  at  the  time  of  injection  remains  unknown,  as  does  his  date  of  death.
There  is  some  question  whether  he  was  injected  at  Billings  hospital  or  at  another
hospital  in  the  Chicago  area.4*

There  was  no  discussion  of  consent  in  the  original  reports  on  the  Chicago
experiments.  However,  a  draft  report  on  an  interview  conducted  with  E.  R.
Russell  for  the  1974  AEC  investigation  into  the  experiments  (Russell  was
coauthor  of  the  1946  report  on  the  Chicago  experiments)  summarized  Russell's
description  of  consent  as  follows:  "[H]e  prepared  the  plutonium  solutions  for
injection  and  acted  together  with  a  nurse  as  witness  to  the  fact  that  the  patient  was
or  had  been  informed  that  a  radioactive  substance  was  going  to  be  injected.  The
administration  of  this  substance,  according  to  what  was  said  in  obtaining  consent,
was  not  necessarily  for  the  benefit  of  the  patients  but  might  help  other  people."49
To  say  that  the  injection  was  "not  necessarily"  for  the  benefit  of  the  patient
implies  that  there  was  some  chance  these  patients  might  benefit;  in  fact,  there  was
no  expectation  that  this  would  occur.

Russell's  account  was  obtained  in  the  context  of  an  official  inquiry  into  his
conduct  and  the  conduct  of  the  other  investigators  and  officials  involved  in  the
plutonium  injections,  an  inquiry  that  focused  on  whether  consent  was  obtained
from  the  subjects.  We  have  no  way  of  corroborating  this  account  or  of  assessing
what  Dr.  Russell's  motivations  were  in  explaining  the  plutonium  injections  to  the
subjects  in  the  way  claimed.


242


Chapter  5
The  Rochester  Experiments

By  the  time  the  war  began,  the  University  of  Rochester,  which  had  a
cyclotron,  had  assembled  a  group  of  first-rate  physicists  and  medical  researchers
who  were  pioneering  the  new  radiation  research.  Following  the  selection  of  the
university's  Stafford  Warren  to  head  its  medical  division,  the  Manhattan  Project
turned  to  Rochester  for  an  increasing  share  of  its  biomedical  research-including,
in  particular,  research  needed  to  set  standards  for  worker  safety.50

The  university's  metabolism  ward,  at  what  is  now  the  Strong  Memorial
Hospital,  became  the  central  Manhattan  District  site  for  the  administration  of
isotopes  to  human  subjects.  The  two-bed  ward,  headed  by  Dr.  Samuel  Bassett,
was  part  of  the  Manhattan  District's  "Special  Problems  Division,"  which  worked
on  the  health  monitoring  of  production  plants,  the  development  of  monitoring
instruments,  and  research  on  the  metabolism  and  toxicology  of  long-lived
radioactive  elements.51  An  experimental  plan  called  for  fifty  subjects  altogether,
in  five  groups  often  subjects  each.  Each  group  would  receive  plutonium,  radium,
polonium,  uranium,  or  lead.52  Although  the  exact  number  of  subjects  remains
unknown,  at  least  twenty-two  patients  were  administered  long-lived  isotopes  in
experiments  with  plutonium  (eleven  subjects),  polonium  (five  subjects),  and
uranium  (six  subjects).

At  the  time  the  experiment  was  being  designed,  the  main  selection
criterion  for  the  subjects  chosen  at  Rochester  for  the  plutonium  experiment  was
that  they  have  a  metabolism  similar  to  healthy  Manhattan  Engineer  District
workers.  In  a  work  plan  for  the  plutonium  study  based  on  a  September  1 945
meeting  with  a  representative  of  Colonel  Warren's  office  and  the  Rochester
doctors,  Langham  wrote:

The  selection  of  subjects  is  entirely  up  to  the
Rochester  group.  At  the  meeting  it  seemed  to  be
more  or  less  agreed  that  the  subjects  might  be
chronic  arthritics  [patients  with  serious  collagen
vascular  diseases,  such  as  scleroderma]  or
carcinoma  patients  without  primary  involvement  of
bone,  liver,  blood  or  kidneys.

It  is  of  primary  importance  that  the  subjects  have
relatively  normal  kidney  and  liver  function,  as  it  is
desirable  to  obtain  a  metabolic  picture  comparable
to  that  of  an  active  worker.

Undoubtedly  the  selection  of  subjects  will  be
greatly  influenced  by  what  is  available.  The  above
points,  however,  should  be  kept  in  mind.53

243


Part  II

Although  this  protocol  specifies  cancer  patients  as  potential  subjects,
evidently  the  deliberate  choice  was  made  later  by  the  experimenters  to  select
patients  without  malignant  diseases  in  the  hope  of  ensuring  normal  metabolism.54
Thus  no  cancer  patients  were  included  among  the  plutonium  subjects  at
Rochester.  Preference  appears  to  have  been  given  to  patients  the  doctors  believed
would  benefit  from  additional  time  in  the  hospital.55

An  additional  perspective  on  the  selection  of  subjects  for  the  plutonium
experiments  is  provided  in  three  retrospective  reports  written  by  Wright
Langham.  In  a  1950  report  on  the  plutonium  project,  including  the  experiments
conducted  at  Rochester,  Langham  wrote  that  "as  a  rule,  the  subjects  chosen  were
past  forty- five  years  of  age  and  suffering  from  chronic  disorders  such  that
survival  for  ten  years  was  highly  improbable."56  In  subsequent  reports,  Langham
refers  to  the  plutonium  subjects  as  having  been  "hopelessly  sick"57  and
"terminal."58

Documents  retrieved  for  the  Advisory  Committee  show  that  all  but  one  of
the  plutonium  subjects  at  Rochester  suffered  from  chronic  disorders  such  as
severe  hemorrhaging  secondary  to  duodenal  ulcers,  heart  disease,  Addison's
disease,  cirrhosis,  and  scleroderma.59  One  subject,  Eda  Schultz  Charlton,  did  not
have  any  such  condition.  According  to  the  draft  of  the  1950  report,  she  was
misdiagnosed:  "a  woman  aged  49  years  may  have  a  greater  life  expectancy  than
originally  anticipated  due  to  an  error  in  the  provisional  diagnosis."60

Most  of  the  subjects  at  Rochester  were  not  terminally  ill,  and  at  least  some
of  them  had  the  potential  to  live  more  than  ten  years.  Three  of  the  Rochester
subjects  were  known  to  still  be  living  at  the  time  of  the  1974  AEC  investigation
into  the  plutonium  experiments.  Whether  the  inclusion  of  subjects  at  Rochester
with  the  potential  to  live  more  than  ten  years  is  an  indication  that  the  investigators
were  not  using  Langham's  criterion  to  select  subjects  or  that  they  erred  in  their
predictions  is  unclear.  Judgments  about  the  life  expectancy  of  the  chronically  ill
are  difficult  to  make  and  often  in  error,  even  today.

The  likelihood  that  long-term  risks  can  be  altogether  eliminated  does
exist,  however,  if  the  subject  is  in  the  terminal  stages  of  an  illness  and  death  is
imminent.  This  was  recognized  by  the  plutonium  investigators,  and  it  led  to  the
observation  that  the  use  of  a  terminal  patient  permitted  a  larger  dose,  which  would
make  analysis  easier.  The  first  terminal  patient  at  Rochester  was  injected  toward
the  end  of  that  series,  and  the  possibility  of  further  injections  into  terminal
patients  was  discussed  explicitly.  In  a  March  1946  letter,  Wright  Langham  wrote
to  Dr.  Bassett,  the  primary  physician-investigator  at  Rochester:

In  case  you  should  decide  to  do  another  terminal
case,  I  suggest  you  do  50  micrograms  instead  of  5.
This  would  permit  the  analysis  of  much  smaller
samples  and  would  make  my  work  considerably
easier. ...  I  feel  reasonably  certain  there  would  be

244


Chapter  5

no  harm  in  using  larger  amounts  of  material  if  you
are  sure  the  case  is  a  terminal  one  [as  was  done  in
two  of  the  three  Chicago  injections].61

As  was  the  case  at  Oak  Ridge  and  Chicago,  there  was  no  expectation  that
the  patient-subjects  at  Rochester  would  benefit  medically  from  the  plutonium
injections.  The  Advisory  Committee  found  no  documents  that  bear  directly  on
what,  if  anything,  the  subjects  were  told  about  the  injections  and  whether  they
consented.  The  recollections  of  at  least  some  of  those  intimately  involved  have
survived,  however,  and  these  recollections  all  suggest  that  the  patients  did  not
know  they  had  been  injected  with  radioactive  material  or  even  that  they  were
subjects  of  an  experiment.

Milton  Stadt,  the  son  of  a  Rochester  subject,  told  the  Advisory  Committee
the  following  at  a  meeting  in  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico,  on  January  30,  1995:

My  mother,  Jan  Stadt,  had  a  number,  HP-8.  She
was  injected  with  plutonium  on  March  9th,  1946.
She  was  forty-one  years  old,  and  I  was  eleven  years
old  at  the  time.  My  mother  and  father  were  never
told  or  asked  for  any  kind  of  consent  to  have  this
done  to  them.

My  mother  went  in  [to  the  hospital]  for  scleroderma
. . .  and  a  duodenal  ulcer,  and  somehow  she  got
pushed  over  into  this  lab  where  these  monsters
were.

Dr.  Hempelmann,  in  an  interview  for  the  1974  AEC  investigation,  said  he
believed  that  the  patients  injected  with  plutonium  were  deliberately  not  informed
about  the  contents  of  the  injections.62  Dr.  Patricia  Durbin,  a  University  of
California  researcher  who  in  1968  undertook  a  scientific  reanalysis  of  the
experiments,  reported  on  a  visit  with  Dr.  Christine  Waterhouse  in  1971 .  Dr.
Waterhouse  was  a  medical  resident  at  Rochester  at  the  time  of  the  plutonium
injections.  Durbin  wrote  the  following  regarding  the  Rochester  subjects  who
were  still  alive:

She  [Dr.  Waterhouse]  believes  that  all  three  persons
would  be  agreeable  to  providing  excretion  samples
and  perhaps  blood  samples,  but  they  are  all  quite
old~in  their  middle  or  late  70's  and  cannot  travel
far.  More  important,  they  do  not  know  that  they
received  any  radioactive  material.63


245


Part  II

In  notes  on  a  1971  telephone  conversation  with  Wright  Langham,  Dr.
Durbin  wrote:  "He  is,  I  believe,  distressed  by  .  .  .  the  fact  that  the  injected  people
in  the  HP  series  were  unaware  that  they  were  the  subjects  of  an  experiment."64
This  recollection  is  even  more  troubling  than  the  recollections  of  Drs.  Waterhouse
and  Hempelmann,  as  it  indicates  not  only  that  the  subjects  did  not  know  that  they
were  being  injected  with  plutonium  or  a  radioactive  substance,  but  also  that  they
did  not  know  even  that  they  were  subjects  of  an  experiment.

Even  the  doctors  in  charge  of  some  of  the  injections  at  Rochester  may  not
have  known  what  they  were  injecting  into  patients.  In  1974,  Dr.  Hempelmann
suggested  that  the  physician  who  actually  injected  the  solution  quite  possibly  did
not  know  of  its  contents.65

Further  evidence  suggesting  that  the  patient-subjects  were  never  told  what
was  done  to  them  comes  from  1 950  correspondence  between  Langham  and  the
physicians  at  Rochester.  These  physician-investigators  were  looking  for  signs  of
long-term  skeletal  effects  in  follow-up  studies  with  two  of  the  subjects  at
Rochester.  Langham  wrote  to  Rochester  that  he  was  "very  glad  to  hear  that  you
will  manage  to  get  follow-ups  on  the  two  subjects.  The  x-rays  seem  to  be  the  all-
important  thing,  but  please  get  them  in  a  completely  routine  manner.  Do  not
make  the  examination  look  unusual  in  any  way."66

Moreover,  a  letter  from  Langham  to  Dr.  Bassett  discussed  the
undesirability  of  recording  plutonium  data  in  the  Rochester  subjects'  hospital
records:

I  talked  to  Col.  [Stafford]  Warren  on  the  phone
yesterday  and  he  recommended  that  I  send  copies  of
all  my  data  to  Dr.  [Andrew]  Dowdy  where  it  would
be  available  to  you  and  Dr.  [Robert  M.]  Fink  to
observe.  He  thought  it  best  that  I  not  send  it  to  you
because  he  wanted  it  to  remain  in  the  Manhattan
Project  files,  instead  of  taking  a  chance  on  it  finding
its  way  into  the  hospital  records.  I  think  this  is
probably  a  sensible  suggestion.


67


Uranium  Injections  at  Rochester

Under  the  Manhattan  Engineer  District  program,  physicians  at  the
Rochester  metabolism  ward  also  injected  six  patients  with  uranium  (in  the  form  of
uranyl  nitrate  enriched  in  the  isotopes  uranium  234  and  uranium  235)  to  establish
the  minimum  dose  that  would  produce  detectable  kidney  damage  due  to  the
chemical  toxicity  of  uranium  metal,  and  to  measure  the  rate  at  which  uranium  was
excreted  from  the  body.  To  achieve  the  first  objective,  the  experimenters  used  a
higher  dose  with  each  new  subject  until  the  first  sign  of  minimal  kidney  damage
occurred.  Damage  occurred  in  the  sixth  and  last  subject  (at  a  calculated  amount

246


Chapter  5

of  radioactivity  of  0.03  microcuries),  indicated  by  protein  tests  of  his  urine.
Unlike  the  plutonium  injections,  this  was  an  experiment  that  evidently  was
designed  not  only  to  obtain  excretion  data  but  to  cause  actual  physical  harm,
however  minimal.  Thus,  although  the  investigators  could  reasonably  view  the
plutonium  injections  as  an  experiment  that  was  extremely  unlikely  to  produce
acute  effects,  this  was  not  true  of  the  uranium  experiment,  which  was  intended  to
produce  acute  effects.  As  with  the  plutonium  injections,  the  uranium  injections
also  posed  a  long-term  risk  of  the  development  of  cancer.  The  Committee  does
not  know  in  this  case  how  long  subjects  survived  after  injection;  there  is  no
documentation  of  follow-up  with  these  subjects  as  there  is  for  some  of  the
subjects  of  the  plutonium  injections.

The  subjects  of  this  experiment,  like  some  of  the  plutonium-injection
subjects,  were  not  at  risk  of  imminent  death,  but  did  suffer  from  chronic  medical
conditions  such  as  rheumatoid  arthritis,  alcoholism,  malnutrition,  cirrhosis,  and
tuberculosis.  According  to  Dr.  Bassett,  again  the  primary  investigator,  the
subjects  "were  chosen  from  a  large  group  of  hospital  patients.  Criteria  of
importance  in  making  the  selection  were  reasonably  good  kidney  function  with
urine  free  from  protein  and  with  a  normal  sediment  on  clinical  examination.  The
probability  that  the  patient  would  benefit  from  continued  hospitalization  and
medical  care  was  also  a  factor  in  the  choice."68

The  1948  report  on  the  experiment  did  not  discuss  the  question  of  consent.
We  were  not  able  to  locate  any  documents  that  bear  on  what,  if  anything,  the
subjects  were  told  about  the  uranium  injections,  nor  have  any  relevant
recollections  about  the  experiment  survived.  Two  1946  documents,  however,
discussing  whether  Dr.  Bassett  should  be  permitted  to  give  a  departmental
seminar  on  the  excretion  rate  of  uranium  in  humans,  illustrate  the  secrecy  that
surrounded  these  injections  and  suggest  that  the  subjects  were  not  informed  of  the
experiment.  By  the  time  of  this  correspondence,  the  uranium  research  with
animals  at  Rochester  had  been  declassified.  The  first  document,  a  letter  written  by
Andrew  Dowdy,  the  director  of  the  Manhattan  Department  at  the  University  of
Rochester,  to  a  Manhattan  District  Area  engineer  requesting  permission  for
Bassett  to  give  the  seminar,  included  the  following:  "I  feel  that  there  is  no  reason
why  he  should  not  discuss  this  matter,  and  I  believe  that  the  fact  that  this
information  was  actually  obtained  on  his  own  patients  is  of  more  concern  to
himself  than  to  the  District."69  In  the  second  document,  an  intraoffice
memorandum,  the  area  engineer  discussed  this  point,  and  more:

Dr.  Dowdy  states  that  the  patients  were  Dr.
Bassett's,  but  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  all  the
work  performed  by  Dr.  Bassett  was  performed  at
the  request  of  the  Manhattan  District  Medical
Section.  This  seminar  is  to  be  conducted  for  persons
who  are  all  Doctors  of  Medicine  and  it  is  doubtful  if

247


Part  II

this  information  would  get  out  to  any  of  the  families
of  the  patients  or  the  patients  on  whom  the
experiments  were  performed.  . .  .

At  the  time  these  experiments  were  started,  this
office  was  given  strict  orders  that  the  information
should  not  be  released  to  any  but  authorized
persons.  Almost  all  the  correspondence  and  result
of  experiments  were  exchanged  between  Dr.  Wright
Langham  at  Santa  Fe  and  Dr.  Bassett  of  the
University  of  Rochester.  This  rule  is  still  in  effect
on  some  of  the  material  that  Dr.  Bassett  is  using  and
knowledge  of  the  experiments  is  kept  from
personnel  at  the  Rochester  Area.70

Polonium  Injections  at  Rochester

In  addition  to  the  subjects  injected  with  plutonium  and  uranium  at
Rochester,  five  subjects  were  chosen  for  an  experiment  with  polonium.  The
purpose  of  the  experiment  was  to  determine  the  excretion  rate  of  polonium  after  a
known  dose,  as  well  as  to  analyze  the  uptake  of  polonium  in  various  tissues.  The
primary  investigator  for  these  experiments  was  Dr.  Robert  M.  Fink,  assistant
professor  of  radiology  and  biophysics  at  the  University  of  Rochester.  Four
patients  were  injected  with  the  element,  and  one  ingested  it.71  All  five  patients
selected  for  this  study  were  suffering  from  terminal  forms  of  cancer:
lymphosarcoma,  acute  lymphatic  leukemia,  or  chronic  myeloid  leukemia.  It  is
unclear  why  patients  with  malignant  diseases  were  chosen  as  subjects  in  this
experiment  but  excluded  from  the  subject  pools  for  the  plutonium  and  uranium
experiments.  There  is  no  discussion  in  the  1950  final  report  on  the  polonium
experiments  of  the  possibility  that  patients  with  malignant  diseases  might  have
abnormal  metabolism,  and  the  excretion  data  were  employed  right  away  in  the
establishment  of  occupational  safety  standards.72

The  final  report,  unlike  other  reports  on  the  Manhattan  District
metabolism  studies,  briefly  discusses  the  question  of  consent:  "the  general
problem  was  outlined  to  a  number  of  hospital  patients  with  no  previous  or
probable  future  contact  with  polonium.  Of  the  group  that  volunteered  as  subjects,
four  men  and  one  woman  were  selected  for  the  excretion  studies  outlined
below."73  This  statement  leaves  no  clear  impression  of  what  the  subjects  actually
were  told;  like  the  experiments  with  plutonium  and  uranium,  the  human  polonium
experiment  was  a  classified  component  of  the  metabolism  program.  Still,  this
report  provides  a  contrast  to  the  contemporaneous  reports  on  the  Manhattan
District  plutonium  and  uranium  experiments,  which  make  no  mention  of  consent
and  which  do  not  refer  to  the  patient-subjects  as  "volunteers."

248


Chapter  5
The  California  Experiments

While  the  University  of  Rochester  had  been  conducting  experiments  for
the  Manhattan  Engineer  District,  a  related  effort  was  under  way  at  the  University
of  California  at  Berkeley.74  Before  the  war,  Drs.  Joseph  Hamilton  and  Robert
Stone  had  been  exploring  medical  applications  of  radioisotopes  with  the  aid  of  the
University  of  California's  cyclotron.  Hamilton  and  his  colleagues  had  pioneered
in  using  radioisotopes  to  treat  cancer,  in  particular  iodine  131  in  the  1930s.  At  the
time  the  United  States  entered  the  war,  they  were  investigating  another  isotope  for
cancer  therapy,  strontium  89.  Indeed,  it  was  this  area  of  Hamilton's  expertise  that
attracted  the:  interest  of  the  Manhattan  Project.  While  Stone  moved  to  the  Chicago
Metallurgical  Laboratory  during  the  war,  Hamilton  remained  at  the  University  of
California's  Radiation  Laboratory,  or  "Rad  Lab,"  at  Berkeley.  A  colleague  of  both
men,  Dr.  Earl  Miller,  a  radiologist  at  the  University  of  California,  reported
regularly  to  Stone  on  the  progress  of  the  Berkeley  plutonium  project.

Under  the  Manhattan  District  contract,  Hamilton's  studies  originally  had
involved  exposing  rats  to  plutonium  in  an  effort  to  determine  its  metabolic  fate
and  thereby  project  the  risk  to  workers  at  atomic  plants.  Toward  the  end  of  the
war,  Hamilton  began  to  conduct  plutonium  studies  on  humans  for  the
government.75  Experiments  with  humans  could  be  handled  expeditiously,
Hamilton  wrote,  because  of  the  close  relationship  between  the  Rad  Lab  and  the
medical  school  at  the  University  of  California  at  San  Francisco.76  In  January
1945,  Hamilton  confirmed  to  the  Manhattan  District  that  he  planned  "to
undertake,  on  a  limited  scale,  a  series  of  metabolic  studies  with  [plutonium]  using
human  subjects."77  The  purpose  of  this  work,  Hamilton  wrote,  "was  to  evaluate
the  possible  hazards  ...  to  humans  who  might  be  exposed  to  them,  either  in  the
course  of  the  operation  of  the  [Chicago]  pile,  or  in  the  event  of  possible  enemy
action  against  the  military  and  civilian  population."78

Subsequently,  three  subjects,  two  adults  and  one  child  (known  as  CAL-1,
2,  and  3),  were  injected  with  plutonium.  In  addition,  in  April  1947  a  teenage  boy
(CAL-A)  was  injected  with  americium,  and  in  January  1948  a  fifty-five-year-old
female  cancer  patient  (CAL-Z)  was  injected  with  zirconium.79

On  May  10,  1945,  Hamilton  reported  he  was  awaiting  "a  suitable  patient"
for  the  plutonium  experiment.80  Four  days  later,  fifty-eight-year-old  Albert
Stevens,  designated  CAL-1,  was  injected  with  plutonium,  becoming  the  first
human  subject  in  the  California  portion  of  the  project.81  Albert  Stevens  was
chosen  in  the  belief  that  he  was  suffering  from  advanced  stomach  cancer.82
Shortly  after  the  injection,  however,  a  biopsy  revealed  a  benign  gastric  ulcer
instead  of  the  suspected  cancer.  The  researchers  collected  excreta  daily  for  almost
one  year,  analyzing  them  for  plutonium  content.83  Evidently,  by  two  months  after
the  injection,  Mr.  Stevens  was  considering  moving  out  of  the  Berkeley  area;  this
would  have  prevented  further  collection  of  excretion  specimens.  Dr.  Hamilton
proposed  to  Drs.  Stone  and  Stafford  Warren  that  he  be  permitted  to  "pay  the  man

249


Part  II

fifty  dollars  per  month"  in  order  to  keep  Mr.  Stevens  in  the  area.  Hamilton
recognized,  however,  that  there  were  "possible  legal  and  security  situations  which
may  present  insurmountable  obstacles."84  In  response  to  this  request,  Dr.  Joe
Howland  (who  was  reportedly  involved  with  the  Oak  Ridge  plutonium  injection)
wrote  the  following  to  the  California  area  engineer:

Possible  solutions  to  this  problem  could  be:

a.  Pay  for  his  care  in  a  hospital  or  nursing  home  as
a  service.

b.  Place  this  individual  on  Dr.  Hamilton's  payroll  in
some  minor  capacity  without  release  of  any
classified  information.

It  is  not  recommended  that  he  be  paid  as  an
experimental  subject  only."5

According  to  a  1979  oral  history  of  Kenneth  Scott,  an  investigator  at
Berkeley  who  evidently  was  responsible  for  the  analysis  of  Mr.  Stevens's
excretion  specimens,  the  patient  was  paid  some  amount  each  month  to  keep  him
in  the  area.  However,  Dr.  Scott  also  recalled  that  he  never  told  Mr.  Stevens  what
had  happened  to  him:  "His  sister  was  a  nurse  and  she  was  very  suspicious  of  me.
But  to  my  knowledge  he  never  found  out."86

In  addition,  an  April  1946  report  on  the  experiment  records  that  "several
highly  important  tissue  samples  were  secured  including  bone."87  It  appears  that
these  tissue  specimens,  which  included  specimens  of  rib  and  spleen,  were
removed  four  days  after  the  injection  in  an  operation  for  the  patient's  suspected
stomach  cancer.88

Four  months  after  Mr.  Stevens  was  injected,  Dr.  Hamilton  told  the
Manhattan  District  that  the  next  subject  would  be  injected  "along  with  Pu238
[plutonium],  small  quantities  of  radio-yttrium,  radio-strontium,  and  radio-
cerium."  The  purpose  of  this  experiment  was  to  "compare  in  man  the  behavior  of
these  three  representative  long-lived  Fission  Products  with  their  metabolic
properties  in  the  rat,  and  second,  a  comparison  can  be  made  of  the  differences  in
their  behavior  from  that  of  Plutonium."89  This  research  would  provide  data  to
improve  extrapolation  from  higher-dose  animal  experiments.

Despite  Hamilton's  hope  to  have  a  second  patient  by  the  fall,  CAL-2  was
not  selected  until  April  1946.  Simeon  Shaw  was  a  four-year-old  Australian  boy
suffering  from  osteogenic  sarcoma,  a  rare  form  of  bone  cancer,  who  was  flown
from  Australia  to  the  University  of  California  for  treatment.  According  to
newspaper  articles  at  the  time,  Simeon's  family  had  been  advised  by  an  Australian
physician  to  seek  treatment  at  the  University  of  California.90  Arrangements  then
were  made  by  the  Red  Cross  and  the  U.S.  Army  for  Simeon  and  his  mother  to  fly
by  Army  aircraft  to  San  Francisco.  Within  days,  he  had  been  injected  with  a

250


Chapter  5

solution  containing  plutonium,  yttrium,  and  cerium  by  physicians  at  the
university.91

Following  his  discharge  on  May  25,  about  a  month  after  his  injection,  the
boy  returned  to  Australia,  and  no  follow-up  was  conducted.  He  died  in  January
1947.  In  February  1995  an  ad  hoc  committee  at  the  University  of  California  at
San  Francisco  (UCSF)  concluded  that  probably  at  least  part  of  the  motivation  for
this  experiment  was  to  gather  scientific  data  on  the  disposition  of  bone-seeking
radionuclides  with  bone  cancers.92

One  piece  of  evidence  indicating  that  there  was  a  secondary  research
purpose  for  the  injection  of  CAL-2  was  a  handwritten  note  in  the  boy's  medical
record  saying  that  the  surgeons  removed  a  section  of  the  bone  tumor  for
pathology  and  for  "studies  to  determine  the  rate  of  uptake  of  radioactive  materials
that  had  been  injected  prior  to  surgery,  in  comparison  to  normal  tissues."93

It  is  likely  that  the  CAL-2  experiment  was  designed  both  to  acquire  data
for  the  Manhattan  District  and  also  to  further  the  physicians'  own  search  for
radioisotopes  that  might  treat  cancer  in  future  patients.  The  California  researchers
themselves  noted  the  dual  purpose  of  their  research  at  the  time.  Hamilton  wrote  in
a  report  to  the  Army  in  the  fall  of  1945  that  there  were  "military  considerations
which  can  be  significantly  aided  by  the  results  of  properly  planned  tracer
research."94

As  the  February  1995  UCSF  report  on  the  experiments  concluded,
however,  the  "injections  of  plutonium  were  not  expected  to  be,  nor  were  they,
therapeutic  or  of  medical  benefit  to  the  patients."95  This  corresponds  with  the
evidence  of  a  letter,  written  by  Hamilton  in  July  1946,  three  months  after  the
injection  of  CAL-2,  to  the  author  of  an  article  on  the  peacetime  implications  of
wartime  medical  discoveries:

To  date  no  fission  products,  aside  from  radioactive
iodine,  have  been  employed  for  any  therapeutic
purposes.  There  is  a  possibility  that  one  or  more  of
the  long  list  of  radioactive  elements  produced  by
uranium  fission  may  be  of  practical  therapeutic
value.  At  the  present  time,  however,  we  can  do  no
more  than  speculate.96

Documentary  evidence  suggests  that  consent  for  the  injections  likely  was
not  obtained  from  at  least  some  of  the  subjects  at  the  University  of  California.  A
1946  letter  from  T.  S.  Chapman,  with  the  Manhattan  District's  Research  Division,
said  the  following  regarding  preparations  for  injections:

. . .  preparations  were  being  made  for  injection  in
humans  by  Drs.  [Robert]  Stone  and  [Earl]  Miller.
These  doctors  state  that  the  injections  would

251


Part  II

probably  be  made  without  the  knowledge  of  the
patient  and  that  the  physicians  assumed  full
responsibility.  Such  injections  were  not  divergent
from  the  normal  experimental  method  in  the
hospital  and  the  patient  signed  no  release.  A  release
was  held  to  be  invalid.

The  Medical  Division  of  the  District  Office  has
referred  "P"  reports  for  project  48A  to  Colonel
Cooney  for  review  and  approval  is  withheld
pending  his  opinion.97

Chapman  does  not  specify  whether  the  "injections"  referred  to  in  this  letter
were  injections  of  plutonium  or  of  some  other  substance.  It  is  unclear  whether  "'P'
reports"  refers  to  Hamilton's  overall  progress  reports  on  his  tracer  research,  which
had  reported  mostly  on  research  with  plutonium  (but  also  on  research  with  cerium
and  yttrium),  or  whether  "P"  referred  specifically  to  reports  on  work  with
plutonium.  As  we  noted  at  the  outset  of  this  chapter,  Chapman's  claim  that  it  was
commonplace  at  the  time  to  use  patients  in  experiments  without  their  knowledge
and  without  asking  them  to  sign  a  "release"  is  correct.

In  the  case  of  Albert  Stevens  (CAL-1),  no  documentary  evidence  that
bears  on  disclosure  or  consent  has  been  found.  Simeon  Shaw's  (CAL-2's)  medical
file  contains  a  standard  form  "Consent  for  Operation  and/or  Administration  of
Anaesthetic."  This  form,  however,  was  signed  by  a  witness  attesting  to  consent  of
Simeon's  mother  one  week  after  the  injection  and  therefore  probably  applies  to  a
biopsy  done  a  week  after  the  injection,  not  to  the  injection  itself.98

On  December  24,  1946,  at  the  prompting  of  Major  Birchard  M.  Brundage,
who  was  chief  of  the  Manhattan  District's  Medical  Division,  Colonel  K.  D.
Nichols,  commander  of  the  Manhattan  District,  ordered  a  halt  to  injections  of
"certain  radioactive  substances''  into  human  subjects  at  the  University  of
California.99  "Such  work,"  Nichols  wrote,  "does  not  come  under  the  scope  of  the
Manhattan  District  Programs  and  should  not  be  made  a  part  of  its  research  plan.  It
is  therefore  deemed  advisable  by  this  office  not  only  to  recommend  against  work
on  human  subjects  but  also  to  deny  authority  for  such  work  under  the  terms  of  the
Manhattan  contract."  The  following  week,  the  civilian  AEC  took  over
responsibility  for  all  Manhattan  District  research  and  temporarily  reaffirmed  the
Manhattan  District's  suspension  of  human  experimentation  at  the  University  of
California.100  It  is  unclear  why  this  action  was  taken.

THE  AEC'S  REACTION:  PRESERVING  SECRECY  WHILE
REQUIRING  DISCLOSURE

When  the  civilian  Atomic  Energy  Commission  took  over  for  the

252


Chapter  5

Manhattan  District  on  January  1,  1947,  the  plutonium  injections  provoked  a
strong  reaction  at  the  highest  levels.  One  immediate  result  was  the  decision  to
keep  information  on  the  plutonium  injections  secret,  evidently  for  reasons  not
directly  related  to  national  security,  but  because  of  public  relations  and  legal
liability  concerns.  The  other  immediate  result,  as  we  saw  in  chapter  1,  was  the
issuing  of  requirements  for  future  human  subjects  research  as  articulated  in  letters
by  the  AEC's  general  manager,  Carroll  Wilson.

In  December  1946,  as  the  civilian  AEC  was  about  to  open  its  doors,
Hymer  Friedell,  who  had  been  deputy  medical  director  of  the  Manhattan  Engineer
District,  recommended  the  declassification  of  one  of  the  plutonium  reports,  "CH
[Chicago]-3607--The  Distribution  and  Excretion  of  Plutonium  in  Two  Human
Subjects."  The  report,  Friedell  argued,  "will  not  in  my  opinion  result  in  the  release
of  information  beyond  that  authorized  for  disclosure  by  the  current
Declassification  Guide."101

Friedell's  recommendation  was  soon  reversed.  Officials  with  the  new  AEC
had  learned  of  the  human  injection  experiments,  and  on  February  28,  1947,  an
AEC  declassification  officer  concluded  that  declassification  was  out  of  the
question.  The  reasons  are  revealed  in  a  previously  classified  document  recently
found  at  Oak  Ridge:

The  document  [CH-3607]  appears  to  be  the  most
dangerous  since  it  describes  experiments  performed
on  human  subjects,  including  the  actual  injection  of
the  metal  plutonium  into  the  body.  The  locations  of
these  experiments  are  given  and  the  results,  even  to
the  autopsy  findings  in  the  two  cases.  It  is  unlikely
that  these  tests  were  made  without  the  consent  of
the  subjects,  but  no  statement  is  made  to  that  effect
and  the  coldly  scientific  manner  in  which  the  results
are  tabulated  and  discussed  would  have  a  very  poor
effect  on  the  public.  Unless,  of  course,  the  legal
aspects  were  covered  by  the  necessary  documents,
the  experimenters  and  the  employing  agencies,
including  the  U.S.,  have  been  laid  open  to  a
devastating  lawsuit  which  would,  through  its
attendant  publicity,  have  far  reaching  results.102

It  is  not  clear  to  the  Advisory  Committee  on  what  basis  the
declassification  officer  who  wrote  this  comment  concluded  that  it  was  unlikely
that  consent  was  not  obtained  from  the  Chicago  subjects.  This  statement  could  be
read  as  careful  bureaucratic  language,  intended  to  leave  an  appropriate  paper  trail
in  the  event  of  subsequent  legal  problems.  On  the  other  hand,  the  statement  does


253


Part  II

support  the  claim,  noted  earlier,  made  by  one  of  the  Chicago  doctors  in  1974  that
some  form  of  oral  consent  for  the  injections  had  been  obtained  from  the  Chicago
subjects.  It  is  clear  that  there  was  no  documentation  of  disclosure  or  consent  on
which  the  AEC  could  rely.  As  a  consequence,  secrecy  was  to  be  maintained,  not
as  a  defense  against  foreign  powers,  but  to  avoid  a  "devastating  lawsuit"  and
"attendant  publicity."  Upon  further  review  the  report  was  "reclassified
'Restricted'  on  3/31/47."103  In  a  March  19,  1947,  memorandum,  Major  Brundage,
by  that  time  chief  of  the  AEC's  Medical  Division,  explained:

The  Medical  Division  also  agrees  with  Public
Relations  that  it  would  be  unwise  to  release  the
paper  'Distribution  and  Excretion  of  Plutonium'
primarily  because  of  medical  legal  aspects  in  the
use  of  plutonium  in  human  beings  and  secondly
because  of  the  objections  of  Dr.  Warren  and
Colonel  Cooney  that  plutonium  is  not  available  for
extra  Commission  experimental  work,  and  thus  this
paper's  distribution  is  not  essential  to  off  Project104
experimental  procedures.105

In  July  1947,  Argonne  National  Laboratory's  declassification  officer,
Hoylande  D.  Young,  inquired  about  possible  declassification  of  this  report  as  well
as  Hamilton's  report  on  the  CAL-1  injection.  She  stated  that  the  directors  of
Argonne's  Biology  and  Health  Divisions  (including  J.  J.  Nickson,  one  of  the
authors  of  the  Chicago  report  on  the  injections)  believed  that  declassification  of
these  reports  would  not  be  "prejudicial  to  the  national  interests."106  The  AEC
continued  to  withhold  declassification  of  these  reports,  however,  on  the  grounds
that  they  involved  "experimentation  on  human  subjects  where  the  material  was
not  given  for  therapeutic  reasons."107  Thus,  there  was  clearly  no  expectation  at
the  time  that  the  plutonium  injections  would  benefit  the  patient-subjects  but  some
expectation  that  the  general  public  might  be  disturbed  by  human  experimentation
in  the  absence  of  a  prospect  of  offsetting  benefit.

In  1950,  Wright  Langham  and  the  Rochester  doctors  undertook  to  prepare
a  "Plutonium  Report"101*  that  would  be  "the  last  word  on  the  plutonium
situation."109  It  would  be  the  "last  word"  to  only  a  select  few.  In  1947,  Rochester's
Andrew  Dowdy  had  urged  Los  Alamos  to  give  advance  notice  of  declassification
of  the  Rochester  part  of  the  experiment  "because  of  possible  unfavorable  public
relations  and  in  an  attempt  to  protect  Dr.  [Samuel]  Bassett  from  any  possible  legal
entanglements."110  This  is  likely  a  reference  to  the  same  concern  raised  in  the
discussion  of  Dr.  Bassett's  seminar  about  his  having  experimented  upon  his  own
patients,  except  in  this  case  the  context  is  the  plutonium  rather  than  the  uranium
injections.  "We  think,"  Langham  wrote  to  Stafford  Warren,  "the  classification  will
be  'Secret,'  and  the  circulation  limited,  depending  on  Dr.  Shields  Warren's  [the

254


Chapter  5

head  of  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine]  wishes.""1  In  August,  Shields
Warren  approved  the  report  for  "CONFIDENTIAL  classification  and  limited
circulation  as  [Dr.  Langham]  requested.""2

Even  though  its  data  and  analysis  were  the  basis  for  widespread  plutonium
safety  procedures,  the  report  remained  unavailable  to  the  public  until  1971  when,
at  the  urging  of  Dr.  Patricia  Durbin,  it  was  downgraded  to  "Official  Use  Only.""3
(This  categorization  means  that  while  the  document  was  not  likely  to  be  released
to  the  public  absent  specific  request,  it  could  be  disclosed.)

What  was  it  that  was  so  potentially  embarrassing  about  the  plutonium
experiments?  The  answer  appears  to  lie  in  the  1947  letters  from  General  Manager
Wilson,  discussed  in  detail  in  chapter  1 .  These  letters  state  rules  for  both  the
conduct  of  human  experiments  and  the  declassification  of  previously  conducted
secret  experiments."4

In  his  April  1947  letter,  Wilson  stated  the  requirements  that  there  be
expectation  that  research  "may  have  therapeutic  effect"  and  that  at  least  two
doctors  "certify  in  writing  (made  part  of  an  official  record)  to  the  patient's
understanding  state  of  mind,  to  the  explanation  furnished  him,  and  to  his
willingness  to  accept  the  treatment."""'  In  his  November  1947  letter,  Wilson
reiterated  these  terms  for  human  experiments,  again  calling  for  "reasonable
hope  . .  .  that  the  administration  of  such  a  substance  will  improve  the  condition  of
patient"  and  this  time  calling  for  "informed  consent  in  writing"  by  the  patient."6
All  of  the  seventeen  plutonium  injections  conducted  prior  to  the  letters  violated
both  these  terms.  As  a  consequence,  they  would  have  to  stay  secret.  The  only
secret  experiments  that  could  be  declassified  were  those  that  satisfied  these
requirements;  to  do  otherwise  was  to  risk  adverse  public  reaction.  Thus,  the
decision  to  keep  the  plutonium  reports  secret  was  itself  an  example  of  the  way  in
which  the  AEC's  assertion  of  conditions  for  human  experimentation  was  coupled
with  the  decision  to  keep  secret  those  experiments  that  evidently  did  not  adhere  to
these  conditions  (see  chapter  13).

HUMAN  EXPERIMENTATION  CONTINUES

In  March  1947,  just  as  he  was  declaring  that  "public  relations"  required
the  reclassification  of  plutonium  data.  Medical  Division  chief  Major  Brundage
approved  a  1947-48  "Research  Program  and  Budget"  for  Rochester  that  provided
for  metabolism  studies  with  polonium,  plutonium,  uranium,  thorium,  radiolead,
and  radium."7  The  program  was  put  on  hold  by  the  AEC  soon  after."8

The  future  of  the  metabolism  work  at  Rochester  apparently  was  decided
when  Shields  Warren  was  named  the  first  chief  of  the  AEC's  Division  of  Biology
and  Medicine  in  fall  1947.  In  his  private  diary  for  December  30,  1947,  Warren
tersely  noted:  "Ordered  abandonment  of  human  isotope  program  at  Rochester.""'
The  program  at  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley,  however,  continued.  On
December  4,  1947,  Shields  Warren  had  met  with  Hamilton  and  Stone;120  the

255


Part  II

decision  to  allow  the  program  to  continue  clearly  was  not  a  hasty  one.  A  1 974
recollection  of  Shields  Warren  indicates  that  his  decision  to  allow  the  program  to
continue  may  have  been  due  to  Hamilton's  assertion  in  December  1947  that  it  had
been  the  University  of  California's  practice  to  obtain  some  form  of
(undocumented)  consent.121

According  to  Warren,  Hamilton  had  said  that  subjects  were  told  "they
would  receive  an  injection  of  a  new  substance  that  was  too  new  to  say  what  it
might  do  but  that  it  had  some  properties  like  other  substances  that  had  been  used
to  control  growth  processes  in  patients,  or  something  of  that  general  sort."122
Warren  went  on  to  observe  that  "you  could  not  call  it  informed  consent  because
they  did  not  know  what  it  was,  but  they  knew  that  it  was  a  new  and  to  them
unknown  substance."123  Warren's  observation  does  not  go  far  enough,  however.  If
Warren's  secondhand  account  is  accurate  and  this  is  indeed  what  the  patient-
subjects  at  the  University  of  California  were  told,  then  they  were  more  misled
than  informed.  Analogizing  plutonium  to  substances  that  "control  growth
processes  in  patients,"  even  in  prospect,  might  reasonably  lead  patients  to  believe
that  they  would  be  receiving  a  substance  with  some  hope  of  treating  their  cancer.
Certainly  such  a  remark  would  not  communicate  to  patients  that  the  experiment  to
be  performed  was  not  for  their  own  benefit.  It  would  have  been  appropriate  that
these  patients  be  told  that  their  participation  might  benefit  future  patients  with  the
same  conditions.  It  would  have  been  crucial  to  distinguish,  however,  between
this  legitimate  explanation  of  potential  benefit  to  future  cancer  patients  and
misleading  the  patient  into  believing  the  experiment  might  benefit  him  or  her.

Human  Experimentation  Continues  at  the  University  of  California

By  the  summer  of  1947,  human  experimentation  had  resumed  at  the
University  of  California  under  AEC  contract.  In  June,  "CAL-A,"  a  teenage  Asian-
American  bone  cancer  patient  at  Chinese  Hospital  in  San  Francisco,  was  injected
with  americium.  An  instruction  in  the  patient's  file  by  one  of  Hamilton's  assistants
specifies  that  "we  will  use  the  same  procedure  as  with  Mr.  S,"'24  evidently  a
reference  to  Albert  Stevens.  Dr.  Durbin,  Hamilton's  associate,  believes  that  CAL-
A's  guardian  was  informed  of  the  procedure  followed  in  that  case.125  The
Advisory  Committee  received  incomplete  records  for  CAL-A  that  contained  no
evidence  of  disclosure  or  consent;  UCSF  has  told  the  Committee  that  records  at
Chinese  Hospital  from  the  1950s  and  earlier  have  been  destroyed. I2(1

A  thirty-six-year-old  African-American  railroad  porter  named  Elmer
Allen,  code-named  CAL-3,  was  believed  to  be  suffering  from  bone  cancer  and
was  injected  with  plutonium  at  the  University  of  California  in  July  1947.  His  left
leg  was  amputated  shortly  thereafter.  There  is  a  note  in  his  medical  chart  signed
by  two  physicians,  stating  that  the  experimental  nature  was  "explained  to  the
patient,  who  agreed  to  the  procedure"  and  that  "the  patient  was  in  fully  oriented
and  in  sane  mind."127  It  is  likely  that  this  note  was  intended  to  fulfill  one  of  the

256


Chapter  5

April  1947  conditions  for  human  experimentation,  which  allowed  for  such  a
procedure  as  documentation  of  having  obtained  the  patient-subject's  consent.  It  is
not  clear  from  the  note,  however,  whether  in  explaining  about  the  experimental
nature  of  the  procedure  the  physicians  told  the  patient  about  the  potential  effects
of  the  injection,  as  required  by  the  Wilson  letter,  or  that  the  injection  was  not
intended  to  be  of  medical  benefit  to  the  patient.  On  this  second  point,  the
injection  was  in  violation  of  the  Wilson  letter,  which  also  required  that  there  be  an
"expectation  that  it  may  have  therapeutic  effect."128  As  acknowledged  by  the
February  1995  UCSF  report,  there  was  never  any  expectation  on  the  part  of  the
experimenters  that  the  injection  would  be  of  therapeutic  benefit  to  Mr.  Allen.

Mr.  Allen  lived  until  1991.  According  to  UCSF's  1995  review  of  patient-
subjects'  medical  charts,  upon  biopsy  of  his  tumor  a  pathologic  diagnosis  was
made  of  chondrosarcoma,  a  type  of  malignant  bone  tumor.  UCSF  reported  that
patients  with  this  type  of  tumor  "frequently  surviv[e]  many  years  beyond
diagnosis  if  there  is  complete  excision  of  the  primary  tumor."'29  This  pathology
finding  suggests  that  Mr.  Allen  was  a  long-term  cancer  survivor.  A  note  in  his
patient  chart  recorded  that  the  tumor  was  "malignant  but  slow  growing  and  late  to
metastasize.  Prognosis  therefore  moderately  good."130

On  March  15,  1995,  Elmerine  Whitfield  Bell,  the  daughter  of  Elmer  Allen,
told  the  Advisory  Committee  in  Washington,  D.C.,  that  she

continue[s]  to  be  appalled  by  the  apparent  attempts
at  cover-ups,  the  inferences  that  the  nature  of  the
times,  the  1940s,  allowed  scientists  to  conduct
experiments  without  getting  a  patient's  consent  or
without  mentioning  risks.  We  contend  that  my
father  was  not  an  informed  participant  in  the
plutonium  experiment.

He  was  asked  to  sign  his  name  several  times  while  a
patient  at  the  University  of  California  hospital  in
San  Francisco.  Why  was  he  not  asked  to  sign  his
name  permitting  scientists  to  inject  him  with
plutonium?  Why  was  his  wife,  who  was  college
trained,  not  consulted  in  this  matter?

On  January  5,  1948,  a  fifty-five-year-old  woman  with  cancer  was  injected
with  zirconium  at  the  University  of  California.  '■"  The  patient  record  for  this  case
has  not  yet  been  located,  nor  have  any  other  documents  that  might  bear  on
whether  this  experiment  was  conducted  in  compliance  with  the  consent
requirements  of  the  Wilson  letters.  We  do  know  that  the  injection  of  zirconium
was  not  expected  to  benefit  the  subject  herself.132

A  secret  report  on  the  zirconium  injection  was  reviewed  by  the  AEC  in

257


Part  II

light  of  public  relations  and  liability  concerns.  In  August  of  that  year,  the  report
was  denied  declassification  with  the  approval  of  Shields  Warren,  who  wrote,
"This  document  should  not  be  declassified  for  general  medical  publication  [and]  it
would  be  very  difficult  to  rewrite  it  in  an  acceptable  manner."113  Warren  was
responding  to  a  memorandum  from  Albert  H.  Holland,  Jr.,  medical  adviser  at  Oak
Ridge,  which  specified  that  the  concern  about  rewriting  had  to  do  with  public
relations  and  the  fact  that  the  report  "specifically  involves  experimental  human
therapeutics."134

Follow-up  of  the  Patient-Subjects  at  Rochester

The  investigators  at  Rochester  and  the  AEC  were  interested  in  obtaining
long-term  data  from  surviving  subjects  on  excretion  levels  and  the  distribution  of
plutonium  in  various  tissues.  Follow-up  studies  at  Rochester  continued  at  least
through  1953  with  two  of  the  subjects  in  the  HP  series,  Eda  Charlton  and  John
Mousso.  We  have  already  noted  Wright  Langham's  1950  instruction  to  the
physicians  at  Rochester  suggesting  that  they  were  not  to  give  these  patients  any
indication  of  the  true  purpose  of  the  follow-up  studies.135  In  addition,  Langham
sought  help  in  early  1950  to  locate  Ebb  Cade  (the  man  injected  at  Oak  Ridge
Hospital)  for  follow-up  excretion  studies.  Langham  asked  Dr.  Albert  Holland  at
Oak  Ridge  to  try  to  locate  Mr.  Cade  and  to  keep  his  "eyes  open  for  a  possible
autopsy."136  It  is  unclear  to  the  Committee  whether  follow-up  of  any  kind  was
ever  done  with  Mr.  Cade.

On  June  8,  1953,  Eda  Charlton's  rib  was  removed  during  exploratory
surgery  for  cancer  and  analyzed  for  plutonium.  Louis  Hempelmann,  who  by  that
time  had  moved  from  Los  Alamos  to  Strong  Memorial  Hospital  at  Rochester,
wrote  to  Charles  Dunham  of  the  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  in
advance  of  the  procedure:

The  patient  in  question  was  brought  in  for  a  skeletal
survey,  and  turned  out  to  have  a  'coin-like'  lesion
inside  the  chest  wall.  ...  It  is  undoubtedly  an
incidental  finding,  but  she  must  be  explored  by  the
chest  surgeon  here  at  Strong.  In  the  course  of  the
operation,  he  will  remove  a  rib  which  we  can
analyze.  Her  films  show  the  same  type  of  minimal
indefinite  change  in  the  bone  that  the  others  have
had.137

It  was  standard  practice  at  the  time  to  remove  a  section  of  rib  incidental  to
lung  surgery.  It  is  clear  that  the  patient  was  still  being  followed  for  long-term
effects  of  plutonium  and  that  some  subclinical  bone  changes  of  unclear
significance  had  already  been  observed  by  this  time.  Therefore,  the  examination

258


Chapter  5

of  this  rib  segment  would  have  included  special  tests  to  determine  whether
plutonium  was  present.

On  August  31,  1950,  an  internal  DBM  memorandum  recorded  the
understanding  of  some  AEC  officials  that  Wright  Langham  and  Rochester  doctors
were  engaged  in  follow-up  studies.13"  In  a  1974  interview,  however,  Shields
Warren  recalled  that  he  had  no  knowledge  that  the  patients  were  the  subjects  of
follow-up  studies:  "I  did  not  learn  of  this  continuing  contact  while  I  was  in  office

at  AEC I  had  assumed  because  I  had  been  told  that  they  were  incurable

patients  that  they  all  had  died  by  the  time  we  talked."139

Additional  Follow-up  Studies  and  the  Argonne  Exhumation  Project

In  1968  Dr.  Patricia  Durbin  undertook  an  investigation  of  the  plutonium-
injection  subjects,  which  included  a  reevaluation  of  the  original  plutonium  data.
Her  goal  was  to  pursue  "some  elusive  information  on  Pu  in  man  and  the
information  or  assumptions  about  physiology  needed  to  create  a  believable  Pu
model  for  man."  She  "decided  to  look  at  all  the  old  Pu  patients  as  individuals

rather  than  in  a  lump "14°  Durbin  was  surprised  to  find  in  her  search  for  the

original  experimental  data  that  the  University  of  California  data  were  drawn  from
three  subjects  who  received  plutonium  and  one  who  received  americium;  the  data
from  only  one  plutonium  subject  from  California  had  previously  been  reported  in
the  open  scientific  literature.141  Durbin  asked  the  original  researchers  why  these
data  had  not  been  analyzed.  She  wrote:  "I  understand  from  Wright  Langham  that
this  problem  has  been  discussed  before  and  discarded  as  too  messy."14

In  1972,  after  the  classified  report  on  the  experiments  had  been
downgraded  to  "Official  Use  Only,"  she  went  on  to  publish  "Plutonium  in  Man:
A  New  Look  at  the  Old  Data,"  a  landmark  paper  in  the  plutonium  story.143  This
was  the  first  review  in  the  open  literature  to  analyze  Langham's  results  in  light  of
the  actual  medical  conditions  of  the  patient-subjects.  Because  of  the  prolonged
secrecy  surrounding  the  experiments,  it  was  generally  not  known  that  two  of  the
three  University  of  California  cases  had  been  omitted  from  the  1950  analysis.
The  report  also  revealed  in  retrospect  that  all  the  patients  were  not  hopelessly  or
terminally  ill,  as  had  been  suggested  in  Langham's  later  public  references,  that
some  were  still  alive,  and  that  some  had  been  misdiagnosed.

In  December  1972,  Argonne  National  Laboratory's  Center  for  Human
Radiobiology  (CHR),  to  whom  Durbin  had  provided  the  names  of  surviving
subjects,  began  a  review  of  the  data  from  all  eighteen  people  who  were  injected
with  plutonium  between  1945  and  1947.  CHR  was  the  national  center  designated
by  the  AEC  to  do  long-term  follow-up  of  individuals  with  internally  deposited
radionuclides,  primarily  the  radium  dial  painters.  Argonne's  follow-up  plan  for  the
plutonium  experiments  was  to  uncover  the  postinjection  medical  histories  of  all
the  subjects,  obtain  biological  material  from  those  still  living,  and  exhume  and
study  the  bodies  of  those  deceased  in  order  to  "provide  data  on  the  organ  contents

259


Part  II

at  long  times  after  acquisition  of  plutonium."144

In  1973,  three  patients--Eda  Charlton,  John  Mousso,  and  Elmer  Allen-
were  admitted  to  the  University  of  Rochester's  metabolic  ward  for  more  excretion
studies  paid  for  by  CHR.  Elmer  Allen  had  first  been  brought  to  Argonne,  where
an  unsuccessful  attempt  had  been  made  to  detect  plutonium  by  external  counting
techniques.  In  the  course  of  his  examination,  however,  CHR  found  subclinical
bone  "changes"  that  an  Argonne  radiologist  characterized  as  "suggestive  of
damage  due  to  radiation."145

Again  there  was  no  disclosure  to  the  subjects  that  they  were  now  being
followed  because  they  had  been  subjects  of  an  experiment  that  had  been  unrelated
to  their  medical  care,  an  experiment  in  which  there  was  continuing  scientific
interest.  The  1974  AEC  investigation  concluded  that,  in  the  case  of  the  surviving
Rochester  subjects,  Dr.  Waterhouse,  who  conducted  the  follow-up  studies  with
these  patients  for  Argonne,  had  not  told  them  the  purpose  of  the  studies  in  1973
because  she  believed  "that  disclosure  might  be  harmful  to  them  in  view  of  their
advanced  age  and  ill  health."146  This  suggests  that  Dr.  Waterhouse  had  well-
intentioned  motivations  for  not  being  straightforward  with  the  Rochester  subjects.
It  also  suggests  that  these  subjects  had  not  been  told  the  truth  about  the
experiments  at  the  time  the  injections  occurred,  or  that  they  had  forgotten.
According  to  Dr.  Waterhouse,  the  studies  were  feasible  without  the  subjects'
knowledge  of  the  true  purpose  of  the  research  since  these  two  patients  "were
accustomed  to  participating  in  clinical  studies,  unrelated  to  this  matter,  involving
the  collection  of  excretion  specimens."147  Elmer  Allen's  physician  was  told  by
CHR  that  the  purpose  of  bringing  Mr.  Allen  to  Argonne's  CHR  and  the  University
of  Rochester  for  follow-up  was  interest  in  the  treatment  he  received  at  the
University  of  California  in  1947  for  his  cancer.148  This  use  of  the  term  treatment
in  the  information  provided  Mr.  Allen's  physician,  which  he  presumably  relayed
to  Mr.  Allen  and  his  family,  was  deceptive  and  manipulative;  it  implied  that  the
injection  Mr.  Allen  received  had  been  given  as  therapy  for  his  benefit.

The  second  component  of  this  follow-up  study  was  research  on  the
exhumed  bodies  of  deceased  subjects.  The  1974  AEC  investigation  concluded
that  the  families  were  not  informed  that  plutonium  had  been  injected.  Instead,
they  were  told  that  "the  purpose  of  exhumation  was  to  examine  the  remains  in
order  to  determine  the  microscopic  distribution  of  residual  radioactivity  from  past
medical  treatment"  and  that  the  subjects  had  received  an  "unknown"  mixture  of
radioactive  isotopes.149  The  investigation  concluded  that  such  disclosure  "could  be
judged  misleading  in  that  the  radioactive  isotopes  were  represented  as  having
been  injected  as  an  experimental  treatment  for  the  patient's  disease."150  Thus,  the
families  of  the  deceased  subjects  as  well  as  those  subjects  still  surviving  were
deceived  by  officials  of  the  AEC.

A  December  1972  intralaboratory  memorandum,  written  by  an  Argonne
investigator,  instructs  that  "outside  of  CHR  we  will  never  use  the  word  plutonium
in  regard  to  these  cases.  'These  individuals  are  of  interest  to  us  because  they  may

260


Chapter  5

have  received  a  radioactive  material  at  some  time'  is  the  kind  of  statement  to  be
made,  if  we  need  to  say  anything  at  all."151  Robert  E.  Rowland,  the  author  of  this
memorandum,  told  Advisory  Committee  staff  in  1995  that  he  had  written  this
after  he  had  been  instructed  earlier  that  month  by  Dr.  James  Liverman,  director  of
the  AEC's  Division  of  Biomedical  and  Environmental  Research,  that  "I  could  not
tell  the  individuals  that  they  were  given  plutonium.  I  protested  that  they  must  be
given  a  reason  for  our  interest  in  them,  and  I  was  told  to  tell  them  that  they  had
received  an  unknown  mixture  of  radioisotopes  in  the  past,  and  that  we  wanted  to
determine  if  it  was  still  in  their  bodies.  Further,  we  were  not  to  divulge  the  names
of  the  institutions  where  they  received  this  unknown  mixture."152  Dr.  Rowland
said  he  had  received  these  instructions  during  a  trip  to  Washington,  D.C.,  to
obtain  approval  and  funding  for  the  study.153  Dr.  Liverman  told  Advisory
Committee  staff  that  he  has  "no  recollection  of  discussions  with  anyone  in  which
some  stricture  would  have  been  placed  on  what  could  be  discussed  with  the
patients.  That  is  a  medical  ethics  issue  which  would  have  been  left  to  the
physicians."154

This  study  was  not  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Argonne  Human  Use
Committee  until  November  1973,  even  though  it  had  been  established  in  January
1973.  (See  chapter  6  for  a  discussion  of  human  use  committees.)  In  a  briefing  for
the  1974  AEC  investigation,  Dr.  Liverman  attributed  this  failure  to  bring  the
study  before  the  Human  Use  Committee  to  the  following  factors:  "( 1 )  [Argonne's]
opinion  that  the  studies  came  under  the  scope  of  a  protocol  approved  by  that
Committee  in  1971.  (2)  The  nature  of  the  studies  was  to  be  suppressed  to  avoid
embarrassing  publicity  for  AEC."155

In  1974  the  AEC  informed  at  least  two  of  the  four  living  subjects— Eda
Charlton  and  John  Mousso— of  the  plutonium  injections  and  had  them  sign
documents  to  this  effect.  These  documents  did  not  provide  any  information  on
possible  effects  of  the  injections,  although  they  did  describe  the  purpose  as  having
been  "to  determine  how  plutonium,  a  man-made  radioactive  material,  is  deposited
and  excreted  in  the  human  body."156  One  living  patient,  Jan  Stadt,  was  not  told,
because  it  was  her  attending  physician's  opinion  that  her  condition  was  precarious
and  that  disclosure  in  this  case  would  be  "medically  indefensible."157  This
judgment,  like  that  of  Dr.  Waterhouse's,  exemplifies  how  physicians  of  the  time
commonly  managed  the  information  they  shared  with  their  patients.  Physicians
typically  told  patients  only  what  they  thought  it  was  helpful  for  them  to  know;  if
in  the  physician's  judgment  information  might  cause  the  patient  to  become  upset
or  distressed,  this  was  often  considered  reason  enough  to  withhold  it.15X  The
judgment  also  suggests  that  Ms.  Stadt,  like  Ms.  Charlton  and  Mr.  Mousso,  had  not
been  told  the  truth  about  the  experiments  at  the  time  the  injections  occurred  or
that  she  had  forgotten.

The  AEC  recommended  that  exhumations  continue,  but  only  with  full
disclosure  to  the  subjects'  next  of  kin.


261


Part  II

The  Boston  Project  Uranium  Injections

Human  experiments  conducted  to  measure  the  excretion  and  distribution
of  atomic  weapons  materials  did  not  stop  with  the  last  of  the  injections  at  the
University  of  California.  The  Boston  Project  human  uranium-injection
experiments  were  conducted  from  1953  to  1957  at  Massachusetts  General
Hospital  (MGH)  as  part  of  a  cooperative  project  between  the  hospital  and  the
Health  Physics  Division  of  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory.  Eleven  patients  with
terminal  conditions  were  injected  with  uranium,  although  data  obtained  from
three  of  these  subjects  were  never  published.159  The  ORNL  and  the  AEC
undertook  the  Boston  Project  to  obtain  better  data  for  the  development  of  worker
safety  standards.  One  of  the  investigators  wrote  that  the  Boston  Project  would
provide  "a  wonderful  opportunity  to  secure  'human  data'  for  the  analysis  and
interpretation  of  industrial  exposures."160  The  occupational  standards  for  uranium
at  the  time  were  based  on  animal  data  and  on  the  experiment  conducted  at
Rochester  in  the  1940s.  No  autopsy  data  were  obtained  from  this  earlier
experiment  at  Rochester,  however,  since  none  of  the  patients  had  terminal
diseases.  Thus,  wrote  a  Boston  Project  investigator,  "the  uncertainty,  in  so  far  as
the  distribution  of  uranium  was  concerned,  was  not  reduced  [by  the  Rochester
experiment]  or  could  not  even  be  determined."161

The  Boston  Project  involved  a  second  purpose—the  search  for  a
radioisotope  that  would  localize  in  a  certain  type  of  brain  tumor—called
glioblastomas— and  destroy  them  when  activated  by  a  beam  of  neutrons.  This  had
long  been  the  research  interest  of  Dr.  William  Sweet  at  MGH;  at  the  time,  these
tumors  were  clearly  diagnosable  and  100  percent  fatal,  and  there  was  no  effective
treatment.  This  research  involved  many  radioisotopes  over  the  years,  most
notably  isotopes  of  boron  and  phosphorus.  It  is  unclear  whether  Dr.  Sweet  would
have  tested  uranium  without  ORNL's  involvement— or  whether  it  would  have  been
made  available  to  him  by  the  AEC.  Dr.  Sweet  has  indicated  to  the  Committee  that
he  was  interested  in  the  potential  of  uranium  as  a  therapeutic  agent  prior  to  being
approached  by  the  AEC  about  the  possibility  of  conducting  a  joint  project.162

The  Boston  Project  produced  data  on  the  distribution  of  uranium  in  the
human  body  that  the  earlier  Manhattan  District  uranium  studies  had  not  provided.
The  data  obtained  indicated  that  uranium,  at  least  at  the  dose  levels  used  in  the
Boston  Project,  localized  in  the  human  kidney  at  higher  concentrations  than  small
animal  data  had  predicted  and  that  therefore  the  maximum  permissible  levels  for
uranium  in  water  and  air  might  be  unsafe.  Recommendations  made  by  the
investigators  of  the  Boston  Project  for  more  conservative  occupational  standards
were  apparently  not  heeded,  however.  The  accepted  occupational  levels  for
uranium  became  less  rather  than  more  conservative  over  the  years,  despite  the
findings  of  the  Boston  Project.163

Hopes  that  uranium  would  localize  sufficiently  in  brain  tumors  to  be  of
potential  therapeutic  use  were  unfulfilled.  In  a  1979  interview,  Robert  Bernard,

262


Chapter  5

one  of  the  health  physicists  at  ORNL  most  intimately  involved  with  the  study,
was  asked  if  during  the  experiment  uranium  was  showing  any  promise  as  a
treatment.  "No,  it  concentrated  in  the  kidney  just  like  Rochester  said  back  in  the
'40's. . .  .  They  got  brain  tumor  samples.  There  was  very  little  uranium  present,
but  Sweet  was  still  wondering:  maybe  [it  was]  not  a  high  enough  dose."164

In  a  1995  interview,  Karl  Morgan,  head  of  the  Health  Physics  Division  of
ORNL  at  the  time  of  the  Boston  Project,  indicated  that  the  project  was  ultimately
discontinued  in  1957165  because  of  the  concerns  of  an  ORNL  health  physicist:

He  felt  that  the  patients  were  given  very  large  doses
of  uranium  which  our  data  had  indicated— that  is,
the  data  we  collected  [at  ORNL]  in  setting
permissible  doses—would  be  very  harmful. ...  I
immediately  cancelled  our  participation  in  the
program.  Apparently,  they  were  given  doses  that
were  many  times  the  . .  .  permissible  body
burden.166

In  their  application  to  their  radioisotope  committee,  MGH  investigators  clearly
recorded  that  the  proposed  dose  of  2.12  rem  per  week  "exceeds  maximum
permissible  exposure  rate  of  0.3  rem/week  but  [patients]  are  terminal."16

At  least  one  of  the  subjects  was  selected  for  the  distribution  part  of  the
study  only.  Reports  describe  the  patients  as  "virtually  all"  having  malignant  brain
tumors;  newly  available  documents  indicate  that  at  least  one  patient  injected  with
uranium  did  not  have  a  brain  tumor  at  all.  An  unidentified  male,  identity  and  age
still  unknown  at  the  time  of  his  death,  became  Boston  Project  subject  VI  when  he
"was  brought  to  the  Emergency  Ward  after  being  found  unconscious.  ...  No  other
information  was  obtainable." I6X  According  to  his  autopsy  report,  this  patient  was
suffering  from  a  subdural  hematoma~a  severe  hemorrhage— on  his  brain.  There
was  clearly  no  benefit  intended  for  this  patient  from  the  injection  of  uranium,  but
there  is  evidence  of  harm  attributable  to  the  injection.  His  autopsy  report  records
clinical  evidence  of  mild  kidney  failure169  and  pathological  evidence  of  kidney
nephrosis  (damage  to  the  kidney  tubules)  from  the  chemical  toxicity  of  uranium
metal.170  The  report  also  records  that  "the  liver,  spleen,  kidneys  and  bone  marrow
showed  evidence  of  radiation."171

Even  for  the  patient-subjects  with  brain  cancer,  there  was  no  expectation
on  the  part  of  investigators  that  the  experiment  would  benefit  the  subjects
themselves.  The  object  of  the  experiment  was  to  test  whether  uranium  would
localize  sufficiently  in  brain  tumors  to  be  of  therapeutic  value  in  the  future.  In
order  for  uranium  to  have  had  therapeutic  potential  for  patient-subjects,  exposure
to  a  reactor's  neutron  beam  would  have  been  necessary  to  then  activate  the
uranium,  if  it  had  localized  sufficiently  in  the  tumors,  which  it  did  not.  There  was,
however,  no  plan  to  expose  these  particular  patient-subjects  to  a  neutron  beam;

263


Part  II

the  goal  was  to  see  whether  the  concentration  would  justify  further  research  that
would  involve  exposure  to  a  neutron  beam.  Most  of  the  subjects  were  already
comatose  and  "in  the  terminal  phase  of  severe  irreversible  central  nervous  system
disease."172

The  doses  used  in  the  Boston  Project  were  high;  the  lowest  dose  was
comparable  to  the  highest  used  in  the  earlier  Rochester  uranium  experiment— a
dose  that  had  caused  detectable  kidney  damage  in  one  of  the  Rochester  subjects.
One  document  records  that  at  least  two  Boston  Project  subjects,  in  addition  to
subject  VI,  had  kidney  damage  at  the  time  of  death,  although  this  document  does
not  directly  link  this  damage  to  the  uranium  injections.'73

There  is  no  discussion  of  consent  in  any  of  the  Boston  Project  reports.  It
appears  that  ORNL  left  such  considerations  to  Dr.  Sweet  and  MGH.  In  an  interim
report,  ORNL  discusses  the  division  of  responsibility  in  the  experiment:  "It  was
agreed  that  the  Y-12  Health  Physics  Department  [at  Oak  Ridge]  would  prepare
injection  solutions  and  perform  the  analytical  work  associated  with  this  joint
effort.  Massachusetts  General  Hospital  agreed  to  select  the  patients,  perform  the
injections,  and  care  for  the  patients  during  the  period  of  study."174

Dr.  Sweet  told  the  Advisory  Committee  in  1995  that  it  was  his  practice  to
obtain  consent  from  patients  or  from  their  families  and  "scrupulously  to  give  a
patient  all  the  information  we  had  ourselves."175  The  Committee  has  not  been
able  to  locate  any  documents  that  bear  on  questions  of  disclosure  or  consent  for
this  experiment. I7A  The  case  of  the  Boston  Project  subject  who  was  brought  into
the  hospital  after  being  found  unconscious,  and  who,  according  to  his  autopsy
report,  was  never  identified  and  never  regained  consciousness,  indicates  that  this
rule  was  not  applied  universally.

CONCLUSION

From  1945  through  1947  Manhattan  Project  researchers  injected  eighteen
human  subjects  with  plutonium,  five  human  subjects  with  polonium,  and  six
human  subjects  with  uranium  to  obtain  metabolic  data  related  to  the  safety  of
those  working  on  the  production  of  nuclear  weapons.  All  of  these  subjects  were
patients  hospitalized  at  facilities  affiliated  with  the  Universities  of  Rochester,
California,  and  Chicago  or  at  Oak  Ridge.  Another  set  of  experiments  took  place
between  1953  and  1957  at  Massachusetts  General  Hospital,  in  which  human
subjects  were  injected  with  uranium.  In  no  case  was  there  any  expectation  that
these  patient-subjects  would  benefit  medically  from  the  injections.

At  fifty  years'  remove,  it  is  in  some  respects  remarkable  that  so  much
information  has  survived  that  bears  on  the  question  of  what  the  patient-subjects
and  their  families  were  told.  Particularly  for  the  Manhattan  Project  plutonium
experiments  information  is  available,  in  large  part  because  of  the  1974  AEC
inquiry  in  which  interviews  with  principals  of  these  experiments  were  conducted
and  records  of  these  interviews  maintained.  At  the  same  time,  however,  there  are

264


Chapter  5

significant  gaps  in  the  record  for  all  the  experiments.  Particularly  where  the
evidence  is  skimpy,  it  is  possible  that  some  of  the  patient-subjects  agreed  to  be
used  in  nontherapeutic  experiments.,  But  the  picture  that  emerges  suggests
otherwise.  This  picture  is  bolstered  by  the  historical  context.  As  we  discussed  in
chapter  2,  it  was  not  uncommon  in  the  1940s  and  1950s  for  physician-
investigators  to  experiment  on  patients  without  their  knowledge  or  consent,  even
where  the  patients  could  not  benefit  medically  from  the  experimental  procedures.
This  context  is  referenced  in  a  1946  letter  about  the  University  of  California
injections:  "These  doctors  state  that  the  injections  would  probably  be  made

without  the  knowledge  of  the  patient Such  injections  were  not  divergent  from

the  normal  experimental  method  in  the  hospital.  .  .  ."'77

Here  we  present  our  conclusions  about  the  ethics  of  these  experiments,
first  for  the  set  of  experiments  conducted  between  1945  and  1947  and  then  for  the
experiment  conducted  from  1953  to  1957.  Because  the  facts  appear  to  be
different  in  the  different  institutions  at  which  these  experiments  took  place,  we
summarize  what  we  have  learned  about  risk,  disclosure,  and  consent  at  each
location.  We  also  analyze  the  ethical  issues  the  experiments  raise  in  common.  In
our  analysis,  we  focus  on  whether  the  subjects  consented  to  being  used  in
experiments  from  which  they  could  not  benefit  medically,  and  the  extent  to  which
the  subjects  were  exposed  to  risk  of  harm.  We  also  focus  on  the  particular  ethical
considerations  raised  when  research  is  conducted  on  patients  at  the  end  of  their
lives.  All  but  one  member  of  the  Advisory  Committee  believe  that  what  follows
is  the  most  plausible  interpretation  of  the  available  evidence  in  light  of  the
historical  context.

With  one  exception,  the  historical  record  suggests  that  these  patients-
subjects  were  not  told  that  they  were  to  be  used  in  experiments  for  which  there
was  no  expectation  they  would  benefit  medically,  and  as  a  consequence,  it  is
unlikely  they  consented  to  this  use  of  their  person.

In  the  case  of  the  plutonium  experiments,  there  was  no  reason  to  think  that
the  injections  would  cause  any  acute  effects  in  the  subjects.  This  was  not  true,
however,  in  the  case  of  the  Rochester  uranium  experiments.  Both  the  plutonium
and  the  Rochester  uranium  experiments  put  the  subjects  at  risk  of  developing
cancer  in  ten  or  twenty  years'  time.  In  some  cases,  this  risk  was  eliminated  by  the
selection  of  subjects  who  were  likely  to  die  in  the  near  future.  The  selection  of
subjects  with  chronic  illnesses  was  also  an  apparent  strategy  to  contain  this  long-
term  risk  of  cancer.  However,  some  of  these  subjects  lived  for  far  longer  than  ten
years,  and  some  were  misdiagnosed  altogether.  On  the  basis  of  available
evidence,  we  could  not  conclude  that  any  individual  was  or  was  not  physically
harmed  as  a  result  of  the  plutonium  injections.  There  is  some  evidence  that  there
were  observable,  subclinical  bone  changes  of  unclear  significance  in  at  least  two
surviving  subjects  who  were  followed  up  in  1953  and  1973  and  in  one  deceased
subject  who  was  exhumed  in  1973.  The  uranium  injections  at  Rochester  were
designed  to  produce  minimal  detectable  harm-that  was  the  endpoint  of  the

265


Part  II

experiment.  Such  minimal  damage  is  reported  to  have  occurred  in  the  sixth
patient  of  the  series.

In  the  case  of  Mr.  Cade  at  Oak  Ridge,  a  physician  claiming  to  have
injected  Mr.  Cade  reported  that  his  consent  was  not  obtained.  An  apparently
healthy  man  in  his  early  fifties,  Mr.  Cade  was  put  at  some  (probably  small)  risk  of
cancer  by  the  plutonium  injection.

At  the  University  of  Chicago,  the  only  evidence  that  bears  on  disclosure
and  consent  comes  from  an  interview  with  a  Chicago  investigator  conducted  as
part  of  the  AEC's  1974  inquiry.  The  investigator  was  recorded  as  saying  that  in
obtaining  consent  patients  were  told  that  the  radioactive  substance  to  be  injected
"was  not  necessarily  for  the  benefit  of  the  patients  but  might  help  other  people."178
This  statement  is  misleading.  It  suggests  that  there  was  some  chance  these
patient-subjects  might  benefit  when  there  was  no  such  expectation.  At  the  same
time,  however,  this  statement  suggests  that  the  subjects  at  Chicago  were  told
something.  These  subjects  also  were  all  apparently  terminally  ill  and  thus  at  no
risk  of  developing  plutonium-induced  cancer;  at  least  two  of  the  three  were
known  to  have  died  within  one  year  of  the  injection.

Misleading  language  was  purportedly  also  used  with  subjects  at  the
University  of  California,  where  a  secondhand  account  suggests  that  subjects  were
told  they  were  to  be  injected  with  a  new  substance  that  "had  some  properties  like
other  substances  that  had  been  used  to  control  growth  processes  in  patients."179
Language  in  a  1946  letter  suggests  that  at  least  some  of  the  injections  at  the
University  of  California  may  have  occurred  altogether  without  the  knowledge  of
the  patients.  In  the  case  of  Mr.  Allen,  one  of  the  California  subjects,  two
physicians  attested  that  the  experimental  nature  of  the  procedure  had  been
explained  to  Mr.  Allen  and  that  he  had  consented.  And  yet  Mr.  Allen's  physician
was  subsequently  informed  that  the  follow-up  studies  were  in  relation  to
treatment  Mr.  Allen  had  received  at  the  University  of  California.  This  suggests
that,  while  Mr.  Allen  may  have  been  told  the  procedure  was  experimental,  it  is
not  likely  that  he  was  told  that  the  procedure  was  part  of  an  experiment  in  which
there  was  no  expectation  that  he  would  benefit  medically.  Both  Mr.  Allen  and
Mr.  Stevens  survived  long  enough  after  injection  to  be  at  risk  of  plutonium-
induced  cancer.

All  the  available  evidence  suggests  that  none  of  the  subjects  injected  with
either  plutonium  or  uranium  at  Rochester  knew  or  consented  to  their  being  used
as  subjects  in  experiments  from  which  they  could  not  benefit.  This  evidence
comes  from  recollections  of  some  of  the  individuals  who  were  involved  with  the
plutonium  injections,  as  well  as  documents  about  seminars  and  follow-up  studies
in  the  early  1950s  suggesting  that  information  about  the  experiments  should  be
concealed  from  the  subjects.  Most  of  the  subjects  at  Rochester  had  serious
chronic  illnesses.  It  is  unclear  how  likely  it  was  at  the  time  that  these  patients
would  not  survive  more  than  ten  years.  A  few  of  these  subjects  were  still  alive
more  than  twenty  years  after  the  injections.  None  of  the  plutonium  subjects  but  all

266


Chapter  5

of  the  uranium  subjects  were  put  at  risk  of  acute  effects  from  the  experiment.

The  purpose  of  the  1973  follow-up  studies  was  withheld  from  two
surviving  subjects.  Also,  both  Elmer  Allen's  physician  and  family  members  of
deceased  subjects  were  misled  by  AEC  officials  about  the  purpose  of  the  follow-
up  studies.  They  were  told  that  the  follow-up  was  in  relation  to  past  medical
treatment,  which  was  not  true.

It  is  unlikely  that  AEC  officials  would  have  lied  about  or  otherwise
attempted  to  conceal  the  purpose  of  the  follow-up  studies  if  at  the  outset  the
subjects  had  known  and  agreed  to  their  being  used  as  subjects  in  nontherapeutic
experiments.  It  is  also  relevant  that  when  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission
succeeded  the  Manhattan  Project  on  January  1,  1947,  officials  decided  to  keep  the
plutonium  injections  secret.  It  appears  that  this  decision  was  based  on  concerns
about  legal  liability  and  adverse  public  reaction,  not  national  security.  The
documents  show  that  the  AEC  responded  to  the  possibility  that  consent  was  not
obtained  in  the  plutonium  experiments,  as  well  as  their  lack  of  therapeutic  benefit,
by  stating  requirements  for  informed  consent  and  therapeutic  benefit  for  future
research,  while  still  keeping  the  experiments  secret.  As  a  result  of  the  decision  to
keep  the  injections  secret,  the  subjects  and  their  families,  as  well  as  the  general
public,  were  denied  information  about  these  experiments  until  the  1970s.

The  one  likely  exception  to  this  picture  of  patients  not  knowing  that  they
were  used  as  subjects  in  experiments  that  would  not  benefit  them  is  the  polonium
experiment  conducted  at  Rochester.  This  is  the  one  instance  in  which  the  patient-
subjects  are  said  to  have  volunteered  after  being  told  about  "the  general  problem."
Although  there  is  no  direct  evidence  that  these  subjects  were  told  that  the
experiment  was  not  for  their  benefit,  the  language  of  volunteering  suggests  a  more
forthright  disclosure  was  made,  more  in  keeping  with  the  conventions  in
nontherapeutic  research  with  healthy  subjects  than  in  research  with  patients  (see
chapter  2).  We  cannot  reconcile  the  account  of  the  polonium  experiment  with  the
historical  record  on  the  other  injections.

The  Advisory  Committee  is  persuaded  that  these  experiments  were
motivated  by  a  concern  for  national  security  and  worker  safety  and  that,
particularly  in  the  case  of  the  plutonium  injections,  they  produced  results  that
continue  to  benefit  workers  in  the  nuclear  industry  today.180 However,  with  the
possible  exception  of  the  polonium  experiments,  we  believe  that  these
experiments  were  unethical.  In  the  conduct  of  these  experiments,  two  basic  moral
principles  were  violated-that  one  ought  not  to  use  people  as  a  mere  means  to  the
ends  of  others  and  that  one  ought  not  to  deceive  others-in  the  absence  of  any
morally  acceptable  justification  for  such  conduct.  National  security
considerations  may  have  required  keeping  secret  the  names  of  classified
substances,  but  they  would  not  have  required  using  people  as  subjects  in
experiments  without  their  knowledge  or  giving  people  the  false  impression  that
they  or  their  family  members  had  been  given  treatment  when  instead  they  had
been  given  a  substance  that  was  not  intended  to  be  of  benefit.

267


Part  II

The  egregiousness  of  the  disrespectful  way  in  which  the  subjects  of  the
injection  experiments  and  their  families  were  treated  is  heightened  by  the  fact  that
the  subjects  were  hospitalized  patients.  Their  being  ill  and  institutionalized  left
them  vulnerable  to  exploitation.  As  patients,  it  would  have  been  reasonable  for
them  to  assume  that  their  physicians  were  acting  in  their  best  interests,  even  if
they  were  being  given  "experimental"  interventions.  Instead,  the  physicians
violated  their  fiduciary  responsibilities  by  giving  the  patients  substances  from
which  there  was  no  expectation  they  would  benefit  and  whose  effects  were
uncertain.  This  is  clearest  at  Rochester  where  at  least  the  uranium  subjects,  and
perhaps  the  plutonium  subjects,  were  apparently  the  personal  patients  of  the
principal  investigator.

Concern  for  minimizing  risk  of  harm  to  subjects  is  evident  in  several  of
the  planning  documents  relating  to  the  experiments,  an  obligation  that  many  of
those  involved  apparently  took  seriously.  At  Chicago,  for  example,  where  the
highest  doses  of  plutonium  were  used,  care  was  taken  to  ensure  that  all  the
subjects  had  terminal  illnesses.  In  those  cases  where  this  concern  for  risk  was
less  evident  and  subjects  were  exposed  to  more  troubling  risks,  the  moral  wrong
done  in  the  experiments  was  greater.  Where  it  was  not  reasonable  to  assume  that
subjects  would  be  dead  before  a  cancer  risk  had  a  chance  to  materialize,  or  in  the
case  of  the  uranium  injections  at  Rochester  where  acute  effects  were  sought,  the
experiments  are  more  morally  offensive.

Consideration  for  the  basic  moral  principle  that  people  not  be  put  at  risk  of
harm  is  apparently  what  animated  the  decision  to  give  higher  doses  to  only
"terminal"  patients  who  could  not  survive  long  enough  for  harms  to  materialize.
A  person  who  is  dying  may  have  fewer  interests  in  the  future  than  a  person  who  is
not.  This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  a  dying  person  is  owed  less  respect  and
may  be  used,  like  an  object,  as  a  mere  means  to  the  ends  of  others.  There  are
many  moral  questions  about  research  on  patients  who  are  dying;  the  desperation
of  their  circumstances  leaves  them  vulnerable  to  exploitation.  At  a  minimum,
nontherapeutic  research  on  a  dying  patient  without  the  patient's  consent  or  the
authorization  of  an  appropriate  family  member  is  clearly  unethical.

Uranium  was  also  injected  in  eleven  patients  with  terminal  conditions  at
Massachusetts  General  Hospital  in  an  experiment  conducted  jointly  by  the
hospital  and  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory  from  1953  to  1957.  ORNL's  purpose
was  to  obtain  data  for  setting  nuclear  worker  safety  standards.  A  second  purpose
was  to  identify  a  radioisotope  that  would  localize  in  brain  tumors  and  destroy
them  when  activated  by  a  neutron  beam.  Although  all  but  one  of  the  patient-
subjects  had  brain  cancer,  the  limited  purpose  of  the  experiment— to  establish
whether  uranium  would  localize  sufficiently—meant  that  there  was  no  expectation
that  patient-subjects  might  benefit  medically  from  the  uranium  injections.

The  uranium  doses  in  the  Boston  experiment  were  comparable  to  or  higher
than  the  one  that  caused  measurable  physical  harm  in  the  Rochester  subject.
Boston  subjects  were  apparently  subjected  to  brain  biopsies,  presumably  solely

268


Chapter  5

for  scientific  purposes.  At  least  three  Boston  subjects  showed  kidney  damage  at
the  time  of  death.  In  one  of  these  cases,  a  trauma  victim  who  was  found
unconscious,  the  autopsy  report  recorded  clinical  evidence  of  some  amount  of
kidney  failure  and  pathological  evidence  of  kidney  damage  due  to  the  chemical
toxicity  of  uranium.

The  only  evidence  available  about  what  the  Boston  subjects  were  told
comes  from  1995  testimony  of  one  of  the  investigators,  Dr.  William  Sweet,  who
said  it  was  his  practice  to  "give  a  patient  all  the  information  we  had  ourselves."
Presumably  this  would  have  included  that  the  injections  had  no  prospect  of
benefiting  the  patient.  The  Boston  Project  was  an  instance  in  which  high  doses
were  given  to  dying  patients.  Some  of  these  patients  were  comatose  or  otherwise
suffering  from  severe,  irreversible  central  nervous  system  disease.  Unless  these
patients,  or  the  families  of  comatose  or  incompetent  patients,  understood  that  the
injections  were  not  for  their  benefit  and  still  agreed  to  the  injections,  this
experiment  also  was  unethical.  There  was  no  justification  for  using  dying
patients  as  mere  means  to  the  ends  of  the  investigators  and  the  AEC.  In  at  least
one  case,  this  disrespectful  treatment  clearly  occurred.  The  trauma  victim  who
arrived  at  the  hospital  unconscious  was  used  as  a  subject  despite  the  fact  that  his
identity  was  never  known.  Presumably  he  was  not  accompanied  by  any  family  or
friends  who  might  have  authorized  such  a  use  of  his  body.

Only  extraordinary  circumstances  can  justify  deception  and  the  use  of
people  as  mere  means  by  government  officials  and  physicians  in  the  conduct  of
research  involving  human  subjects.  In  the  case  of  the  injection  experiments,  we
see  no  reason  that  the  laudable  goals  of  the  research  could  not  have  been  pursued
in  a  morally  acceptable  fashion.  There  is  no  reason  to  think  that  people  would  not
have  been  willing  to  serve  as  subjects  of  radiation  research  for  altruistic  reasons,
and  indeed  there  is  evidence  of  people  writing  to  the  AEC  to  volunteer
themselves  for  just  such  efforts  (see  chapter  13).

That  people  are  not  likely  to  live  long  enough  to  be  harmed  does  not
justify  failing  to  respect  them  as  people.  Concerns  about  adverse  public  relations
and  legal  liability  do  not  justify  deceiving  subjects,  their  families,  and  the  public.
Insofar  as  basic  moral  principles  were  violated  in  the  conduct  of  the  injection
experiments,  the  Manhattan  Engineer  District,  the  AEC,  the  responsible  officials
of  these  agencies,  and  the  medical  professionals  responsible  for  the  injections  are
accountable  for  the  moral  wrongs  that  were  done.


269


ENDNOTES


1.  Don  Mastick,  telephone  interview  with  Steve  Klaidman  (ACHRE),  23  July  1995
(ACHRENo.  IND-072395-F),  1.

2.  L.  H.  Hempelmann,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  to  J.  R.
Oppenheimer,  Director,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory,  16  August  1944  ("Health  Hazards
Related  to  Plutonium")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-17),  1.

3.  J.  R.  Oppenheimer,  Director,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory,  to  L.  H.  Hempelmann,
Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  16  August  1944  ("Your  memorandum
of  August  16,  1944")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-17),  1.

4.  L.  H.  Hempelmann,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  to  J.  R.
Oppenheimer,  Director  of  the  Los  Alamos  Laboratory,  29  August  1944  ("Medical
Research  Program")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-17),  1.

5.  Interview  with  Mastick,  23  July  1995,  1.

6.  Glenn  Seaborg,  head  of  Chemistry  Section  C-l  of  the  Metallurgical
Laboratory,  to  Robert  Stone,  Health  Director  of  the  Metallurgical  Laboratory,  5  January
1944  ("Physiological  Hazards  of  Working  with  Plutonium")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-070194-
A-3),  1.

7.  Ibid.

8.  Robert  Stone,  Health  Director  of  the  Metallurgical  Laboratory,  to  Glenn
Seaborg,  Head  of  the  Chemistry  Section  C-l  of  the  Metallurgical  Laboratory,  8  January
1944  ("Hazards  of  Working  with  Plutonium")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-070194-A-4),  1.

9.  Seaborg  suggested  that  several  milligrams  of  the  first  shipment  of  plutonium
from  Oak  Ridge  be  sent  on  to  Dr.  Hamilton  at  Berkeley.  A  minute  amount  of  plutonium
was  sent  to  Hamilton,  who  began  his  studies  on  rats  in  February  1944.  Next  came  more
animal  work  at  Chicago,  focusing  on  the  toxic  effects  of  plutonium,  as  well  as  its
distribution  in  various  tissues.  These  studies  showed  that  plutonium,  like  radium,  was  a
"bone-seeking"  element,  the  potential  deadly  consequences  of  which  radium  had  already
demonstrated. Furthermore,  these  studies  demonstrated  that  in  rats,  plutonium  distributed
itself  in  bone  in  a  potentially  more  hazardous  way  than  radium.  J.  Newell  Stannard,
Radioactivity  and  Health:  A  History  (Oak  Ridge,  Tenn.:  Office  of  Scientific  and
Technical  Information,  1988),  1424.

10.  Richard  Rhodes,  The  Making  of  the  Atomic  Bomb  (New  York:  Simon  and
Schuster,  1986),  547-548.

11.  Ibid.,  560.

12.  The  most  likely  route  of  worker  exposure  to  plutonium  would  be  inhalation.
Hempelmann  and  others  wrote  to  Oppenheimer  in  March  1945  that  "the  very  important
and  difficult  problem  of  detection  of  alpha  active  material  in  the  lungs  has  been  studied
only  at  this  project  and  here  only  on  a  very  limited  scale.  This  problem  should  be  given
much  higher  priority  here  and  at  other  projects."  L.  H.  Hempelmann,  Los  Alamos
Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader  et  al.,  to  J.  R.  Oppenheimer,  Director  of  the  Los
Alamos  Laboratory,  15  March  1945  ("Medical  Research  of  Manhattan  District  concerned
with  Plutonium")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-17),  1.  Inhalation  experiments  with
rodents  were  undertaken,  starting  in  1944,  at  the  University  of  California's  Radiation
Laboratory  and  the  University  of  Chicago's  Metallurgical  Laboratory,  although  these
studies  did  not  result  in  extensive  analysis  of  data  until  the  latter  half  of  the  1940s.  W.  H.

270


Langham  and  J.  W.  Healy,  "Maximum  Permissible  Body  Burdens  and  Concentrations  of
Plutonium:  Biological  Basis  and  History  of  Development,"  in  Uranium  -  Plutonium  -
Transplutonic  Elements,  eds. H.  C.  Hodge  et  al.  (New  York:  Springer- Verlag,  1973),
576.  Wright  Langham  wrote  in  1945  that  "if  a  limited  amount  of  human  tracer  data  are  to
form  the  basis  of  a  method  of  diagnosing  internal  body  contamination,"  it  would  be
necessary  "to  assume  that  [plutonium]  is  metabolized  in  the  same  way  regardless  of  the
route  of  absorption  or  administration."  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health
Division,  28  July  1945  ("Report  of  Conference  on  Plutonium-May  14th  and  15th")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-05 1 094-A-427),  29.  Since  the  time  of  the  experiments,  it  has  become
clearer  that  the  deposition  of  plutonium  in  the  body  can  differ  in  cases  of  chronic
inhalation  exposure  versus  other  types  of  exposures.

13.  Langham  and  Healy,  "Maximum  Permissible  Body  Burdens  and
Concentrations  of  Plutonium,"  576.

14.  L.  H.  Hempelmann,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  to  J.
R.  Oppenheimer,  Director  of  the  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory,  26  March  1945
("Meeting  of  Chemistry  Division  and  Medical  Group")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-05 1094-A-
17),  1.

15.  J.  R.  Oppenheimer,  Director,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory,  to  Colonel  S.  L.
Warren,  29  March  1945  ("We  are  enclosing  a  record  of  discussions  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-05 1094-A- 17),  1.

16.  Samuel  Bassett  [attr.],  undated  ("Excretion  of  Plutonium  Administered
Intravenously  to  Man.  Rate  of  Excretion  in  Urine  and  Feces  with  Two  Observations  of
Distribution  in  Tissues")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-10),  29.

17.  Division  of  Biomedical  and  Environmental  Research  and  Division  of
Inspection,  AEC,  13  August  1974  ("Disclosure  to  Patients  Injected  with  Plutonium")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-05 1094-A-586),  11.

18.  Ibid.

19.  Ibid.,  10.

20.  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division,  to  Hymer
Friedell,  Executive  Officer  of  the  Manhattan  District's  Medical  Section,  6  April  1945
("Although  we  sent  you  directions  for  the  49  experiment  along  with  the  material  .  .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-E-1),  1.

2 1 .  Wilson  O.  Edmonds,  AEC  Resident  Investigator,  to  Jon  D.  Anderson,
Director,  Division  of  Inspection,  15  July  1974  ("Division  of  Biomedical  and
Environmental  Research,  Headquarters-Request  to  Locate  Mr.  Ebb  Cade")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-05 1 094- A-6 11),  2.

22.  Undated  document  ("Experiment  I  on  P.  49+4")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
113094-B-5),  1.

23.  The  Committee  uses  names  of  subjects  in  this  chapter  only  where  the  names
were  already  a  matter  of  public  record.

24.  "Experiment  I  on  P.  49+4,"  1.

25.  Ibid.

26.  Hannah  E.  Silberstein,  University  of  Rochester,  to  Wright  Langham,  Los
Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division,  25  October  1945  ("This  letter  is  to  report  the
injection  on  the  second  human  product  subject,  HP-2  .  . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-
D-19),  1.


271


27.  W.  H.  Weyzen,  25  April  1974  ("Visit  with  Dr.  Joe  Howland,  Chapel  Hill
Holiday  Inn,  April  24,  1974")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-18),  1.

28.  Hymer  Friedell,  interviewed  by  Steve  Klaidman  and  Ron  Neumann
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  23  August  1994  (ACHRE  Research  Project
Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Targeted  Interview  Project),  49-50.

29.  "Experiment  I  on  P.  49+4,"  3.

30.  Ibid.

31.  Ibid.,  2.

32.  Captain  David  Goldring,  Medical  Corps,  to  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos
Laboratory  Health  Division,  19  September  1945  ("Enclosed  is  a  brief  resume  of  E.  C.'s
medical  history  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-47),  1.

33.  Karl  Morgan,  interviewed  by  Gil  Whittemore  and  Miriam  Bowling
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  6  January  1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project
Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Targeted  Interview  Project),  147.

34.  Edmonds  to  Anderson,  15  July  1974,  3.

35.  "Experiment  I  on  p.  49+4,"  3.

36.  On  7  May  1945  Germany  had  surrendered  to  the  Allied  forces.  The
Manhattan  Engineer  District  continued  on  with  the  building  and  testing  of  the  first
atomic  bomb  (the  first  test  was  scheduled  for  July  of  that  year).

37.  Robert  Stone,  Health  Director  of  the  Metallurgical  Laboratory,  to  Stafford
Warren,  Hymer  Friedell  et  al.,  undated  ("On  Monday,  May  14th,  we  plan  to  have  an  all
day  meeting  dealing  with  plutonium  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  N ARA-082294-A-5 1 ),  1 .

38.  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division,  28  July  1945
("Report  of  Conference  on  Plutonium-May  14th  and  15th")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-
A-427),  29.

39.  Colonel  Hymer  Friedell,  Executive  Officer  of  the  Manhattan  District's
Medical  Section,  to  L.  H.  Hempelmann,  1 1  April  1945  ("Enclosed  is  a  protocol  of  the
clinical  experiment  as  we  intend  to  carry  it  out .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-1),  1.

40.  Ibid.

41.  J.  J.  Nickson  to  R.  S.  Stone,  23  January  1946  ("Abstract  of  Monthly  Report
for  January,  1946")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A),  1.

42.  E.  R.  Russell  and  J.  J.  Nickson,  2  October  1946  ("The  Distribution  and
Excretion  of  Plutonium  in  Two  Human  Subjects")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-370),
1.

43.  Ibid.

44.  Ibid.

45.  Ibid.,  2.

46.  Ibid.

47.  Nickson  to  Stone,  23  January  1946,  1.

48.  Sidney  Marks,  3  May  1974  ("Interview  with  Dr.  Leon  Jacobson  ...  by
Marks  and  Miazga  at  about  1:30  p.m.  on  4/16/74")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-15),  2.

49.  W.  H.  Weyzen,  25  April  1974  ("Visit  with  Edwin  R.  Russell,  Savannah
River  Plant,  April  23,  1974")  (ACHRE  No.  121294-D-17),  1.

50.  Andrew  H.  Dowdy,  Director  of  AEC  Rochester  Project  ("Proposed  Research
Program  and  Budget:  July  1,  1947  -  July  1,  1948")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-061794-B-16).


272


51.  William  F.  Bale,  Head  of  Special  Problems  Division,  undated
("Contributions  of  the  Division  of  Special  Problems  to  the  Manhattan  Project")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-113094-B),  1.

52.  L.  H.  Hempelmann  and  Wright  H.  Langham,  undated  ("Detailed  Plan  of
'Product'  Part  of  Rochester  Experiment")  (ACHRE  No.  121294-D-2),  5.

53.  W.  H.  Langham.  undated  ("Revised  Plan  of 'Product'  Part  of  Rochester
Experiment")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-3),  2.

54.  The  choice  not  to  use  subjects  suffering  from  malignant  conditions  is
discussed  retrospectively  in  a  partial  draft  version  of  the  1950  report  (probably  written
by  Dr.  Bassett).  This  discussion  was  not  included  in  the  final  version  of  the  report:

The  individuals  chosen  as  subjects  for  the  experiment
were  a  miscellaneous  group  of  male  and  female  hospital
patients  for  the  most  part  with  well  established
diagnoses.  Preference  was  given  to  those  who  might
reasonably  gain  from  continued  residence  in  the  hospital
for  a  month  or  more.  .  .  .  Patients  with  malignant  disease
were  also  omitted  from  the  group  on  the  grounds  that
their  metabolism  might  be  affected  in  an  unknown
manner.
Bassett,  "Excretion  of  Plutonium  Administered  Intravenously  to  Man,"  2.

55.  Ibid.

56.  Wright  Langham  et  al.,  20  September  1950  ("Distribution  and  Excretion  of
Plutonium  Administered  Intravenously  to  Man")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-070194-A-18).  10.

57.  Wright  Langham.  27  September  1957  ("Proceedings  of  the  Second  Annual
Meeting  on  Bio- Assay  and  Analytical  Chemistry:  October  1 1  and  12,  1956  ~  Panel
Discussion  of  Plutonium")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-C-1),  80.

58.  W.  H.  Langham  et  al..  "The  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory's  Experience
with  Plutonium  in  Man,"  Health  Physics  8  (1962):  755.

59.  Addison's  disease  is  an  endocrine  disease  produced  by  adrenal  gland  failure.
Today  this  disease  is  treated  with  steroid  therapy  that  was  developed  in  the  1940s  and
that  was  extremely  expensive  at  the  time  of  the  experiments.  HP-6,  diagnosed  with
Addison's,  was  given  steroid  treatment  as  part  of  his  care  at  the  University  of  Rochester;
he  lived  until  1984.

Scleroderma  is  a  collagen-vascular  disease  that  can  produce  extreme  pain,
especially  in  the  hands;  can  affect  eating  and  swallowing  if  the  esophagus  is  involved;
and  eventually  leads  to  organ  failure  and  death.  Steroids  are  the  treatment  of  choice
today,  but  if  this  disease  is  not  well  controlled  it  can  still  be  fatal.  HP-8,  who  was
diagnosed  with  scleroderma,  lived  until  1975.

60.  Bassett,  "Excretion  of  Plutonium  Administered  Intravenously  to  Man,"  2.
Her  provisional  diagnosis  according  to  this  report  was  mild  hepatitis  and  malnutrition.
Ibid,  18.  Her  medical  records  indicate,  however,  that  she  had  symptoms  related  to
nutritional  deficiencies,  which  appear  to  have  been  alleviated  with  proper  diet  and  rest.
Strong  Memorial  Hospital,  20  December  1945  ("Discharge  Summary  Form")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-051094-A-612),  1.

61 .  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division,  to  Samuel
Bassett,  Head  of  Metabolism  Ward  of  Strong  Memorial  Hospital,  13  March  1946  ("Your


273


letter  of  February  27  regarding  Hp  1 1  was  startling,  to  say  the  least .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-121294-D-4),  1.

62.  Document  dated  17  April  1974  ("Comments  on  Meeting  with  Dr.
Hempelmann  on  April  17,  1974")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-16),  1.

A  1955  letter  from  Dr.  Hempelmann  to  the  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and
Medicine  (discussed  in  more  detail  in  chapter  13)  indicates  Hempelmann's  belief  that,  in
general,  patients  could  be  easily  deceived  about  the  true  research  purpose  of  a  medical
intervention.  In  this  letter,  Hempelmann  (who  was  by  then  professor  of  experimental
radiology  at  Rochester)  is  proposing  that  researchers  present  themselves  as  life  insurance
agents  to  AEC  workers  as  a  ruse,  in  order  to  conceal  the  true  purpose  of  follow-up
medical  examinations.  He  observes  that  it  would  be  more  difficult  to  deceive  workers
than  it  would  be  to  mislead  patients  in  a  hospital:

If  you  feel  that  the  physical  examinations  are  vital  to  the
survey,  then,  perhaps,  you  could  offer  to  pay  the  people
to  compensate  them  for  the  time  and  effort  that  they  will
spend  on  the  part  of  your  alleged  survey  for  the
insurance  company.  They  would  think  they  were  getting
something  for  nothing  and  might  not  feel  that  you  were
worried  or  they  were  seriously  ill.  I  don't  know  if  these
ideas  are  helpful  at  all.  It  is  more  difficult  to  find  an
excuse  for  these  individual  workers  than  it  is  in  the  case
of  patients  who  were  treated  for  something  or  other  at  a
hospital.
Louis  Hempelmann,  University  of  Rochester,  to  Charles  Dunham,  Director,  AEC
Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  2  June  1955  ("I  did  not  have  an  opportunity  .  .  ."  )
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-092694-A),  1.

63.  Patricia  Durbin,  9  December  1971  ("Report  on  Visit  to  Rochester")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-I2),  1.

64.  Patricia  Durbin,  10  December  1971  ("Dr.  Wright  Langham,  of  the  Los
Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  was  the  biochemist  who  performed  the  Pu  analyses  .  .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-13),  1.

65.  "Comments  on  Meeting  with  Dr.  Hempelmann  on  April  17,  1974,"  1.

66.  Langham  further  instructed  Rochester  to  look  for  the  following  longer-term
"symptoms"  in  the  examination  of  the  patients:  "Judging  from  the  recent  observations
that  Robley  Evans  has  made,  a  generalized  osteitis  with  rarefaction  of  the  bones  of  the
feet,  the  jaw  and  the  heads  of  the  long  bones  with  coarsening  of  the  trabeculae  are  the
most  likely  symptoms."  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Health  Division,  to  Dr.  Joe
Howland,  Chief  of  University  of  Rochester's  Division  of  Medical  Services,  2  October
1950  ("I  am  very  glad  to  hear  that  you  will  manage  to  get  follow-ups  on  the  two  subjects
.  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE- 1 2 1 294-D- 1 1 ),  1 .

67.  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division,  to  Samuel
Bassett,  Head  of  Metabolism  Ward  of  Strong  Memorial  Hospital,  25  October  1946  ("I
just  received  a  shipment  of  samples  which  I  am  sure  are  the  ones  you  collected  on  HP-3  .
.  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-5),  1.

68.  Samuel  Bassett  et  al.,  19  July  1948  ("The  Excretion  of  Hexavalent  Uranium
Following  Intravenous  Administration  II.  Studies  on  Human  Subjects")  (ACHRE  No.
CON-030795-A-1),  8.

274


69.  Andrew  H.  Dowdy,  Director,  Manhattan  Department,  University  of
Rochester,  to  the  Area  Engineer,  Rochester  Area,  22  October  1946  ("Clearance  of
Material  for  Seminar")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120994-A-4),  1.

70.  Madison  Square  Area  Engineer,  24  October  1946  ("Uranium  Studies  in
Humans")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE  120994-A-4),  1.

71.  Robert  M.  Fink  ("Biological  Studies  with  Polonium,  Radium,  and
Plutonium")  (ACHRE  No.  CON-030795-A-2),  122.

72.  K.  Z.  Morgan,  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory  Health  Physics  Division,  to
R.  S.  Stone,  Health  Director  of  the  Metallurgical  Laboratory,  5  May  1945  ("Tolerance
Values  for  Polonium  Used  at  Clinton  Laboratories")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 13094-B-6),  2.

73.  Fink,  "Biological  Studies  with  Polonium,  Radium,  and  Plutonium,"  122.

74.  A  supplemental  volume  contains  a  chapter  on  the  development  of  human
subject  research  at  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley  and  San  Francisco.

75.  Hamilton's  work  with  plutonium  had  begun  in  1 942  with  support  from  the
Office  of  Scientific  Research  and  Development;  it  was  later  supported  by  the  Manhattan
Engineer  District.

76.  Joseph  Hamilton,  Radiation  Laboratory  of  University  of  California  at
Berkeley,  to  Colonel  E.  B.  Kelly,  28  August  1946  ("Summary  of  Research  Program  for
Contract  #W-7405-eng-48-A")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 13094-B-8),  2.

77.  Joseph  Hamilton,  1 1  January  1945  ("Proposed  Biochemical  Program  at
University  of  California")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-071395-A-14),  2.

78.  Ibid.

79.  At  least  eleven  patients  were  injected  with  columbium  (later  renamed
niobium)  or  zirconium  between  1 948  and  1 950.  These  experiments  appear  to  have  been
outside  the  federal  effort.

80.  Joseph  Hamilton,  10  May  1945  ("Progress  Report  for  Month  of  May  1945")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-65),  4.

81.  Joseph  Hamilton,  14  June  1945  ("Progress  Report  for  Month  of  June  1945")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-66),  4.

82.  Ibid.

83.  Joseph  G.  Hamilton,  Radiation  Laboratory,  University  of  California,
Berkeley,  to  Captain  Joe  W.  Howland,  23  April  1946  ("The  problems  of  the  research
program  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-E-40),  2.

84.  Joseph  G.  Hamilton,  Radiation  Laboratory,  University  of  California,
Berkeley,  to  Robert  Stone,  Metallurgical  Laboratory,  7  July  1945  ("I  am  writing
concerning  our  experimental  subject .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-071395-A),  1.

85.  Joe  W.  Howland,  First  Lieutenant.  Medical  Corps,  to  the  Area  Engineer,
California  Area,  12  July  1945  ("Status  of  Experimental  Subject")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-
071395-A),  1.

86.  Kenneth  Scott,  interviewed  by  Sally  Hughes  (University  of  California  Oral
History  Project),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  17  December  1979,  49-50.

87.  Ibid.

88.  Hamilton,  "Progress  Report  for  Month  of  June  1945,"  4.

89.  Joseph  Hamilton,  14  September  1945  ("Progress  Report  for  Month  of
September  1945")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-67),  5.


275


90.  "Mercy  Flight  Brings  Aussie  Boy  Here:  Suffering  From  Rare  Bone  Ailment,
He  Seeks  U.S.  Treatment,"  San  Francisco  Examiner,  16  April  1946,  1.

91.  In  addition  to  this  injection,  which  was  not  performed  for  his  benefit,  the
child  also  received  superficial  external  radiation  (five  doses  of  250  rad  over  five  days)
for  palliation  of  his  pain.  A  1995  report  written  by  an  ad  hoc  committee  at  the  University
of  California  at  San  Francisco  (UCSF)  described  the  child's  prognosis  as  having  been
"grave  with  palliation  the  only  option."  With  that  in  mind,  superficial  irradiation  was
performed  to  reduce  the  patient's  pain,  not  to  destroy  the  sarcoma  of  the  right  leg.
University  of  California  at  San  Francisco,  February  1995  ("Report  of  the  USCF  Ad  Hoc
Fact  Finding  Committee  on  World  War  II  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  February  1995,
Appendix  19:  Summary  of  the  medical  record  of  CAL-2")  (ACHRE  No.  UCSF-022495-
A-6),  3.

92.  UCSF,  "Report  of  the  USCF  Ad  Hoc  Fact  Finding  Committee,"  27.

93.  Loren  J.  Larson,  Assistant  in  Orthopedic  Surgery,  University  of  California
Hospital,  1 1  June  1946  ("To  Whom  It  May  Concern  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-05I094-A-
605),  2.

94.  Joseph  Hamilton,  Radiation  Laboratory  of  the  University  of  California  at
Berkeley,  to  Samuel  K.  Allison,  1 1  September  1945  ("Plans  for  Future  Biological
Research")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-071395-A-2),  3.

95.  UCSF,  "Report  of  the  USCF  Ad  Hoc  Fact  Finding  Committee,"  27.

96.  Joseph  Hamilton,  Radiation  Laboratory  of  the  University  of  California  at
Berkeley,  to  John  Fulton,  Historical  Library,  Yale  University  Medical  Center,  19  July
1946  ("Inasmuch  as  both  the  Lawrence  brothers  are  away  at  the  moment,  I  thought  it
best  that  I  answer  your  letter  of  July  16,  1946,  to  John  .  . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-122294-
A-3),  1.

97.  T.  S.  Chapman,  Chief  of  Operations  Branch,  Research  Division,  to  Area
Engineer,  Berkeley  Area,  30  December  1946  ("Human  Experiments")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-112194-D-3),  1.

98.  Form  dated  2  May  1946  ("Consent  for  Operation  and/or  Administration  of
Anaesthetic")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-604),  1.

99.  Colonel  K.  D.  Nichols,  Corps  of  Engineers,  to  the  Area  Engineer,  California
Area,  24  December  1946  ("Administration  of  Radioactive  Substances  to  Human
Subjects")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 I3094-B-2),  1.  This  order  followed  a  renewed  request  to
the  Army  by  Hamilton  for  additional  plutonium,  "to  be  used  for  certain  human  studies,"
and  a  further  progress  report  on  the  injection  of  Albert  Stevens.

100.  John  L.  Burling,  AEC  Legal  Division,  to  Edwin  E.  Huddleson,  AEC
Deputy  General  Counsel,  7  March  1947  ("Clinical  Testing.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
051094-A-468),  1.

101.  Undated  document  ("CH-3607  . . .  Excerpts  from  statements  of  reviewers")
(ACHRE  No.  113094-B-9),  I.

102.  Ibid.

103.  Ibid.  For  discussion  of  classification  levels,  see  chapter  13.

104.  "Off  Project"  probably  refers  to  work  not  sponsored  by  the  AEC.

105.  Major  B.  M.  Brundage,  Chief,  Medical  Division,  to  Declassification
Section,  19  March  1947  ("Clearance  of  Technical  Documents")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
113094-B-4),  1.


276


106.  Hoylande  D.  Young,  Argonne  National  Laboratory,  to  Charles  A.  Keller,
25  July  1947  ("Declassification  has  been  refused  for  the  following  reports  .  .  .")  (ACHRE
No.  NARA-050995-A-6),  1.

107.  Carroll  Wilson,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Robert  Stone,  University  of
California  Medical  Center,  12  August  1947  ("Declassification  of  Biological  and  Medical
Papers")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-061394-A-1 11),  1.

108.  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division,  to  Stafford
Warren,  University  of  California,  1  July  1950  ("Dr.  Bassett  has  been  here  and  helped  me
finish  the  semi-final  draft  of  the  Plutonium  Report .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-B-
72),  1.

109.  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division,  to  Joe  W.
Howland,  Chief,  Division  of  Medical  Services,  University  of  Rochester  School  of
Medicine  and  Dentistry,  15  April  1950  ("1  am  curious  to  hear  your  reaction  to  the  names
that  I  sent  you  . .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-B-73),  1 .

1 10.  Andrew  H.  Dowdy,  Director  of  the  Manhattan  Department,  University  of
Rochester,  to  Norris  E.  Bradbarry  [sic],  Director  of  the  Los  Alamos  Laboratory,  18
February  1947  ("Dr.  Wright  Langham  and  Dr.  Samuel  Bassett  were  discussing  with  me
today  the  technical  details  relative  to  writing  the  report .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-
D-6),  1.

111.  Langham  to  Warren,  1  July  1950,  1.

112.  Walter  D.  Claus,  Acting  Chief,  Biophysics  Branch,  AEC  Division  of
Biology  and  Medicine,  to  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division,  30
August  1950  ("You  will  be  pleased  to  learn  that  Dr.  Shields  Warren  has  approved  your
report  for  CONFIDENTIAL  classification  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-B-2),  1 .

113.  It  is  not  clear  when  CH-3607,  the  report  Dr.  Friedell  recommended  for
declassification  in  December  1946,  was  declassified.  The  copy  retrieved  by  the
Committee  bears  a  31  December  1946  declassification  date  and  no  indication  of
subsequent  reclassification.  Russell  and  Nickson,  "The  Distribution  and  Excretion  of
Plutonium  in  Two  Human  Subjects,"  1 .  In  1956  Dr.  Langham  made  a  brief  reference  to
fifteen  experimental  subjects  at  an  unclassified  technical  conference.  Langham,
"Proceedings  of  the  Second  Annual  Meeting  on  Bio-Assay  and  Analytical  Chemistry,"
80.  In  1951,  a  report,  based  on  Metallurgical  Laboratory  Memorandum  MUC-ERR-209
("Distribution  and  Excretion  of  Plutonium")  appeared  in  a  volume  of  the  public
Manhattan  District  research  history.

1 14.  While  the  Wilson  letters  do  not  expressly  reference  the  plutonium
experiments,  the  context  seems  to  leave  little  question  that  the  policies  stated  in  the
letters  were  arrived  at  with  the  plutonium  experiments  in  mind.  In  1974,  when  asked
what  steps  had  been  taken  when  the  plutonium  injections  had  been  brought  to  the
attention  of  the  AEC,  Shields  Warren,  who  became  director  of  the  AEC's  Division  of
Biology  and  Medicine  in  late  1947,  said  that  it  had  been  decided  "that  the  rules  [should
be]  properly  drawn  up  by  the ...  Human  Applications  Isotope  Committee  ...  so  that
use  without  full  safeguards  could  not  occur,  and  that  .  .  .  nothing  of  the  sort  could
happen  in  the  future."  Shields  Warren,  interviewed  by  L.  A.  Miazga,  Sidney  Marks,  and
Walter  Weyzen  (AEC),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  9  April  1974  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
121294-D-14),  10.

115.  Carroll  Wilson,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Stafford  Warren,  University  of
California,  30  April  1947  ("This  is  to  inform  you  that  the  Commission  is  going  ahead


277


with  its  plans  to  extend  the  medical  research  contracts  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-
A-439),  2.

1 16.  Carroll  Wilson,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Robert  Stone,  University  of
California  Medical  School,  5  November  1947  ("Your  letter  of  September  18  regarding
the  declassification  of  biological  and  medical  papers  was  read  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
061395-A-112),  1.

1 17.  Dowdy,  "Proposed  Research  Program  and  Budget:  July  1,  1947-July  1,
1948,"  25.

1 18.  A  December  1947  memorandum  from  Dr.  Bassett  recorded:

In  the  autumn  of  1 945  the  Section  on  Human
Metabolism  was  activated  under  your  direction  at  the
request  of  the  Manhattan  Engineer  District  to  carry  out
certain  tracer  studies  with  long-lived  isotopes.  As  you
know,  this  program  was  discontinued  in  the  spring  of
1 947  under  a  directive  from  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission  although  we  were  instructed  to  keep  the
personnel  of  the  section  intact.  When  this  directive  was
received,  it  was  anticipated  that  follow-up  studies  on  the
several  subjects  of  the  original  investigation  would
provide  occupation  for  the  employees  of  the  section.
Samuel  H.  Bassett,  Section  on  Human  Metabolism,  University  of  Rochester,  to  William
F.  Bale,  Head  of  Special  Problems  Division,  University  of  Rochester,  2  December  1947
("Proposal  of  Work  for  Metabolism  Section")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-7),  1.
Dr.  Bassett  proposed  an  interim  activity  for  the  employees  of  the  section— a
study  of  certain  aspects  of  radiation  injury.  This  was  approved  by  Bale  until  "the  project
research  program  of  the  Metabolism  Section  .  .  .  with  regard  to  tracer  studies  with  heavy
elements  is  clarified."  William  F.  Bale,  Head  of  Special  Problems  Division,  University
of  Rochester,  to  Andrew  H.  Dowdy,  Director  of  AEC's  Rochester  Project,  3  December
1947  ("Program  of  Work  for  Metabolism  Section")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-D-8),  1.

1 19.  Gilbert  Whittemore,  3  March  1995  ("Shields  Warren  Papers:  A  Cumulative
Update  of  Excerpts")  (ACHRE  No.  BU-030395-A-1),  3.

120.  Ibid.

121.  Interview  with  Warren,  9  April  1 974,  1 1 .

122.  Ibid.

123.  Ibid.  According  to  Dr.  Durbin,  it  is  likely  that  the  "other  substances"
referred  to  were  probably  phophorus  32  and  strontium  89,  which  were  used  at  the
University  of  California  between  1941  and  1944  as  experimental  tracers  or  for  palliation
of  pain.  Dr.  Patricia  Durbin,  telephone  interview  with  Miriam  Bowling  (ACHRE),  2
August  1995  (ACHRE  No.  ACHRE-081095-A),  1.

124.  Undated  note  in  medical  record  of  CAL-A  from  "K..G.S."  (Ken  G.  Scott
[attr.])  ("The  day  after  solution  is  injected  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  UCLA-1 1 1094-A-l),  1.

125.  Telephone  interview  with  Durbin,  2  August  1995,  1.

126.  Lori  Hefner;  telephone  interview  by  John  Kruger  (ACHRE),  6  July  1995
(ACHRE  No.  IND-070695-A),  1.

127.  Note  in  medical  record  of  CAL-3  dated  1 8  July  1 947  ("Elmer  Allen
Chart")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-615),  2.


278


128.  Wilson  to  Warren,  30  April  1947,  2.

129.  UCSF,  "Report  of  the  USCF  Ad  Hoc  Fact  Finding  Committee,  Appendix
20:  Summaries  of  the  medical  record  of  CAL-3,"  3-4.

130.  Ibid.,  4.  If  the  diagnosis  was  correct,  surgical  amputation  would  have  been
appropriate  treatment  at  the  time  to  completely  excise  the  tumor.

131.  B.  V.  Low  Beer  et  al.,  Radiation  Laboratory,  University  of  California,
Berkeley,  15  March  1948  ("Comparative  Deposition  of  Zr-95  in  a  Reticulo-Endothelial
Tumor  to  Normal  Tissues  in  a  Human  Patient")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE- 101 194-B-4),  4.

1 32.  Ibid.  The  test  dose  was  administered  to  the  patient  just  twenty-four  hours
prior  to  the  midthigh  amputation  of  her  leg  for  cancer.

133.  Shields  Warren,  Director  of  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  to
Albert  H.  Holland,  Jr.,  AEC  Medical  Adviser,  19  August  1948  ("Review  of  Document")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-101494-B),  1.

134.  Albert  H.  Holland,  Jr.,  AEC  Medical  Adviser,  to  Shields  Warren,  Director
of  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  9  August  1948  ("Review  of  Document")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A),  I.

135.  Langham  to  Howland,  2  October  1950,  1.

136.  Wright  Langham,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division,  to  Albert  H.
Holland,  AEC  Director  of  Research  and  Medicine,  20  March  1950  ("It  seems  that  I
really  fouled  up  regarding  my  promise  to  you  at  the  Washington  meeting  .  .  .")  (ACHRE
No.  NARA-082294-A-155),  1.

137.  L.  H.  Hempelmann.  University  of  Rochester,  to  Charles  Dunham,  AEC
Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  23  May  1953  ("There  are  several  things  on  my  mind
that  I  would  like  to  bring  to  your  attention  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-041495-A-1),  1.

138.  Walter  D.  Claus,  Acting  Chief  of  the  Biophysics  Branch,  AEC  Division  of
Biology  and  Medicine,  to  Charles  L.  Dunham,  Chief,  Medical  Branch,  31  August  1950
("Physical  Examinations  at  Rochester")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-471),  1.

139.  Interview  with  Warren,  9  April  1974,  8.

140.  Patricia  W.  Durbin,  University  of  California,  to  William  E.  Lotz,  AEC
Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  13  September  1968  ("You  will  never  guess  what  I
found  today  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-606),  1.

141.  Ibid.

142.  Ibid.

143.  Patricia  Durbin,  1 972  ("Plutonium  in  Man:  A  New  Look  at  the  Old  Data")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-160),  469.

144.  R.  E.  Rowland,  Argonne  National  Laboratory's  Center  for  Human
Radiobiology,  8  November  1973  ("Plutonium  Studies  at  the  Center  for  Human
Radiobiology  [CHR]")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-608),  4.

145.  I.  E.  Kirch,  Radiological  and  Environmental  Research  Division,  Argonne
National  Laboratory,  13  June  1973  ("Center  for  Human  Radiobiology:  Radiologist's
Report")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-616),  1.  The  report  records:  "In  the  proximal
portions  of  both  humeri  as  well  as  in  the  adjacent  acromions,  there  are  some  changes  in
the  trabeculae  which  are  consistent  with  findings  in  early  radium  deposition,  but  not  yet
completely  specific.  The  mandible  shows  abnormal  trabeculae,  suggestive  of  damage
due  to  radiation."

Subclinical  bone  changes  were  also  observed  in  a  deceased  subject  who  was
exhumed  for  the  Argonne  study.  The  same  radiologist  summarized  that  an  "abnormality

279


is  present,  namely,  that  there  are  very  many  very  small  very  dense  deposits  on  the
surfaces  of  a  number  of  the  bones,  and  other  such  deposits  in  the  soft  tissues  very  close
to  the  bone  surfaces.  This  abnormality  is  attributed  to  the  plutonium  which  has  been
administered  during  the  subject's  life.  The  radiographic  pattern  is  unique."  I.  E.  Kirch,
Radiological  and  Environmental  Research  Division,  Argonne  National  Laboratory,  15
November  1974  ("Center  for  Human  Radiobiology:  Radiologist's  Report")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-051094-A-618),  1.

146.  AEC  Division  of  Biomedical  and  Environmental  Research  and  Division  of
Inspection,  13  August  1974  ("Disclosure  to  Patients  Injected  With  Plutonium")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-051094-A-586),  10.

147.  Ibid.

148.  Ibid.

149.  Ibid.

150.  Ibid.

151.  Robert  E.  Rowland,  Argonne  National  Laboratory,  to  H.  A.  Schultz,  21.
December  1972  ("Plutonium  Cases")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-080795-A),  1.

152.  Robert  E.  Rowland  to  Miriam  Bowling  (ACHRE  Staff),  7  August  1995
("Attached  is  the  memo  of  December  2 1 ,  1972  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-080795-A),  1.

153.  Ibid.

154.  James  L.  Liverman  to  Miriam  Bowling  (ACHRE  Staff),  20  August  1995
("With  your  fax  of  August  9  was  included  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-082095-A),  1.

155.  James  L.  Liverman,  29  April  1974  ("Briefing  on  Plutonium  Project  by  Dr.
James  L.  Liverman  on  April  29,  1974")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-I96),  8.  The  1971
protocol  referred  to  in  this  briefing  had  covered  a  follow-up  project  involving  the  radium
dial  painters.  Although  the  procedures  for  the  two  follow-up  studies  were  similar,  the
original  conditions  of  exposure  were  quite  different.  The  radium  dial  painters,  unlike  the
plutonium-injection  subjects,  had  not  been  chosen  as  subjects  in  a  carefully  planned
medical  experiment  organized  by  the  government.  They  had  been  exposed  either
occupationally  as  dial  painters  or  therapeutically  as  patients  receiving  one  of  a  variety  of
prewar  radium  treatments.

156.  Signed  form  dated  28  August  1974  ("Acknowledgement  of  Disclosure")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-619),  1.

157.  Document  dated  24  May  1974  ("Patients  Injected  with  Plutonium  [Draft
Report  of  5-24-74]")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-607),  1.

158.  There  is  some  evidence  suggesting  that  at  least  one  subject  had  a  serious
emotional  reaction  to  the  news,  many  years  after  the  fact,  that  she  had  been  injected  with
plutonium.  This  suggests  that  physicians  involved  in  the  follow-up  had  cause  to  be
concerned  about  how  at  least  some  patients  might  respond  to  knowledge  of  the  injections.

159.  K.  F.  Eckerman  to  Barry  A.  Berven,  7  January  1994  ("The  Boston-Oak
Ridge  Uranium  Study")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-425),  1.

160.  John  C.  Gallimore,  Associate  Health  Physicist,  to  Dr.  W.  H.  Sweet,
Massachusetts  General  Hospital,  22  March  1954  ("First  Results  of  Uranium  Distribution
and  Excretion  Study")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-35),  1.

161.  S.  R.  Bernard,  "Maximum  Permissible  Amounts  of  Natural  Uranium  in  the
Body,  Air  and  Drinking  Water  Based  on  Human  Experimental  Data,"  Health  Physics  1
(1958):  288-305.


280


162.  According  to  the  1957  interim  report  on  the  study,  it  was  Harold  Hodge  of
the  University  of  Rochester's  Atomic  Energy  Project,  who  had  been  involved  with  the
MED  metabolism  work  at  Rochester,  who  ultimately  coordinated  the  beginning  of  the
joint  research.  S.  R.  Bernard  and  E.  G.  Struxness,  4  June  1957  ("A  Study  of  the
Distribution  and  Excretion  of  Uranium  in  Man:  An  Interim  Report")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
051094-A-369),  3.

163.  Bernard,  "Maximum  Permissible  Amounts  of  Natural  Uranium  in  the
Body,  Air  and  Drinking  Water  Based  on  Human  Experimental  Data,"  296-298;  Standards
for  Protection  Against  Radiation,  9  C.F.R.  20  (1958-1994).

1 64.  Robert  Bernard,  interviewed  by  J.  Newell  Stannard,  transcript  of  audio
recording,  17  April  1979  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-061794-A),  8.

1 65.  A  continuation  of  the  study  at  lower  doses  was  proposed  by  the  ORNL  in
1958;  it  is  unclear  whether  this  project  went  forward.  Karl  Morgan,  Director  of  ORNL's
Health  Physics  Division,  to  William  Sweet,  Massachusetts  General  Hospital,  16  July
1958  ("Your  help  in  our  cooperative  study  on  the  distribution  and  excretion  of  uranium
in  man  has  been  of  great  value  to  us  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-021695-A-1 ),  1.  A  study
similar  to  the  one  proposed  by  the  ORNL  in  1958  may  have  taken  place  during  the  mid-
1960s  at  Argonne  Cancer  Research  Hospital.  K.  Z.  Morgan  to  W.  H.  Jordan,  3
September  1963  ("Proposed  Study  of  Distribution  and  Excretion  of  Enriched  Uranium
Administered  to  Man")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-620),  1.

166.  Interview  with  Morgan,  6  January  1995,  118-119.

1 67.  Form  dated  3  November  1 953  ("Application  for  Approval  of  Radioactive
Isotopes:  Massachusetts  General  Hospital")  (ACHRE  No.  MGH-030395-A-1),  4.

1 68.  Leonard  Atkins,  M.D.,  26  June  1 954  ("Necropsy  No. :  June  26,  1 954  at

12:30  p.m.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-050895-D-1),  6.

169.  Ibid.,  1.

170.  Ibid.  The  "Anatomic  Diagnoses"  include  "Uranium  nephrosis,  acute."

171.  Ibid.,  5.

172.  Bernard  and  Struxness,  "A  Study  of  the  Distribution  and  Excretion  of
Uranium  in  Man:  An  Interim  Report,"  6.

173.  Undated  document  ("#l  Cloudy  swelling  of  the  epithelium  of  proximal
and  distal  convoluted  tubules  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-050895-D-2),  1.  The  document
records  a  diagnosis  for  the  two  additional  patients  as  "acute  nephrosis,"  and  for  subject
VI,  as  "severe  subacute  nephrosis."

174.  Bernard  and  Struxness,  "A  Study  of  the  Distribution  and  Excretion  of
Uranium  in  Man:  An  Interim  Report,"  4.

175.  William  Sweet,  interviewed  by  Gil  Whittemore  (ACHRE),  transcript  of
audio  recording,  8  April  1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,
Targeted  Interview  Project),  46.

176.  By  the  end  of  the  Committee's  deliberations,  MGH  had  not  yet  completed
its  search  for  the  patient  records  of  the  Boston  Project  subjects.

177.  Chapman  to  Area  Engineer,  Berkeley  Area,  30  December  1946,  1 .

178.  Weyzen,  "Visit  with  Edwin  R.  Russell,  Savannah  River  Plant,  April  23,
1974,"  1.

179.  Interview  with  Warren,  9  April  1974,  1 1 .

180.  The  relatively  small  population  that  has  been  exposed  to  substantial  levels
of  plutonium  precludes  definitive  conclusions  about  risks  to  humans,  but  the  available

281


evidence  clearly  suggests  that  an  epidemic  of  cancer  of  the  magnitude  that  afflicted  the
radium  dial  painters  from  an  earlier  era  has  not  occurred  in  plutonium  workers.  In  the
case  of  the  radium  dial  painters,  the  unprotected  handling  of  only  a  few  pounds  of
radium  led  to  hundreds  of  deaths;  in  contrast,  studies  of  plutonium  workers  suggest  that
to  date  there  is  no  definite  excess  mortality  in  this  population.  A  forty-two-year  follow-
up  of  twenty-six  Manhattan  Project  workers  who  worked  with  plutonium  found  a  total  of
seven  deaths,  including  three  cancers  (two  lung  and  one  osteogenic  sarcoma),  a
substantially  lower  mortality  rate  than  expected  based  on  the  U.S.  population.  The
authors  concluded  that  "the  diseases  and  physical  changes  noted  in  these  persons  are
characteristic  of  a  male  population  in  their  60s."  G.  L.  Voelz  and  J.  N.  Lawrence,  "A  42-
year  Medical  Follow-up  of  Manhattan  Project  Plutonium  Workers,"  Health  Physics  61
(1991):  181-190.  A  larger  study  of  15,727  LANL  workers  followed  through  1990,  some
of  whom  had  plutonium  exposures,  found  no  cause  of  death  significantly  elevated  among
the  plutonium-exposed  workers  compared  with  unexposed  workers,  although  there  was  a
nonsignificant  78  percent  elevation  in  lung  cancer  (a  site  that  is  directly  exposed)  and  a
single  osteogenic  sarcoma,  a  rare  cancer  that  has  been  associated  with  plutonium
exposure  in  animal  studies.  L.  D.  Wiggs,  E.  R.  Johnson,  C.  A.  Cox-DeVore  and  G.  L.
Voelz,  "Mortality  Through  1990  Among  White  Male  Workers  at  the  Los  Alamos
National  Laboratory:  Considering  Exposures  to  Plutonium  and  Ionizing  Radiation,"
Health  Physics  67  (1994):  577-588.  Another  study  of  5,413  workers  at  the  Rocky  Flats
Nuclear  Weapons  Plant  found  elevated  risks  for  various  cancers  comparing  workers  with
body  burdens  of  2  nanocuries  (nCi)  or  greater,  but  with  wide  uncertainties;  no  excesses
were  seen  for  bone  or  liver  cancers. .  The  authors  concluded  that  "these  findings  suggest
that  increased  risks  for  several  types  of  cancers  cannot  be  ruled  out  at  this  time  for
individuals  with  plutonium  body  burdens  of  >  2  nCi.  Plutonium-burdened  individuals
should  continue  to  be  studied  in  future  years."  G.  S.  Wilkinson  et  al.,  "Mortality  Among
Plutonium  and  Other  Radiation  Workers  at  a  Plutonium  Weapons  Facility,"  American
Journal  of  Epidemiology  125  (1987):  231-250.


282


6

The  AEC  Program  of
Radioisotope  Distribution


At  the  dawn  of  the  atomic  age,  many  people  hoped  for  dramatic
advances  in  medicine,  akin  to  the  new  miracle  drug  penicillin.  Many  of  these
hopes  have  been  fulfilled.  Radioisotopes  have  become  remarkable  tools  in  three
areas.  First,  as  their  travels  within  the  body  are  "traced,"  radioisotopes  provide  a
map  of  the  body's  normal  metabolic  functions.  Second,  building  on  tracer
research,  diagnostic  techniques  distinguish  between  normal  and  abnormal
functioning.  Finally,  radioisotopes,  carried  by  the  body's  own  processes  to
abnormal  or  cancerous  cells,  can  deliver  a  lethal  dose  of  radiation  to  those
undesirable  cells.  By  supplying  radioisotopes  and  supporting  their  use,  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission  (AEC)  actively  promoted  the  research  needed  to
achieve  this  progress.

The  growth  in  the  applications  of  radioisotopes  involved  thousands  of
experiments  using  radioisotopes.  No  feasible  method  was  found  to  review  in
detail  the  vast  number  of  individual  radioisotope  experiments  in  the  Advisory
Committee's  database.  This  was  due  not  only  to  the  large  number  of  experiments,
but  also  to  the  scarcity  of  information  about  many  of  the  individual  experiments.
Both  consent  and  exact  dose  levels  were  often  not  discussed  in  published  work;
no  federal  repository  was  found  that  had  collected  records  documenting  these
aspects  of  experiments.  Given  the  decentralized  structure  of  American  medicine,
it  is  not  surprising  that  the  Committee  found  that  records  on  consent  and  exact
dose,  if  they  exist,  would  still  be  held  at  the  local  institutions  conducting  research
or  perhaps  even  in  the  private  papers  of  physicians  and  scientists.  Even  when


283


Part  II

records  were  found  at  the  local  level,  there  was  little  documentation  about
consent.

Thus,  for  the  largest  group  of  human  radiation  experiments,  little
documentation  remains,  and  a  meaningful  examination  of  all  such  experiments
was  not  possible.  The  Committee  instead  chose  to  focus  its  energies  in  two
directions:  examining  the  overall  system  of  oversight  created  by  the  federal
government  and  examining  small  subsets  of  radioisotope  experiments  that  posed
significant  ethical  issues.  The  first  effort  led  to  this  chapter,  an  overview  of  the
system  created  by  the  federal  government  to  monitor  radioisotope  experiments.
The  second  effort  led  to  the  case  study  on  experiments  involving  children  (chapter
7)  since  those  raised  questions  of  both  additional  biological  risk  and  justification
for  doing  nontherapeutic  research  on  minors.

The  AEC's  isotope  distribution  program  was  faced  with  three  essential
ethical  questions.  The  most  immediate  question  concerned  the  allocation  of  a
scarce  resource.  Given  the  likelihood  that  demand  for  radioisotopes  would  exceed
supply,  how  should  priorities  be  set?  The  question  involved  not  simply  the  choice
among  competing  proposals  for  "human  uses"  (including  experimentation,
treatment  of  disease,  and  diagnosis),  but  between  human  uses  and  other  kinds  of
uses  (for  example,  basic  scientific  research  or  industrial  uses).

Another  immediate  question  was  the  safety  with  which  this  new  material
would  be  used.  Since  the  government  was  actively  promoting  the  use  of
radioactive  isotopes,  it  had  an  obligation  to  ensure  their  safe  use.  Harm  to
patients,  physicians,  and  others  involved  could  arise  from  inexperienced  and
untrained  users  of  radioisotopes.  When  properly  used  in  trace  amounts,
radioisotopes  posed  risks  well  below  those  deemed  acceptable  in  occupational
settings.  Balancing  risks  versus  benefits—and  seeking  means  to  decrease  risks  and
increase  benefits  as  the  field  developed— was  a  major  ethical  obligation.

Finally,  there  was  the  question  of  the  relationship  between  researcher  and
subject— more  precisely,  the  question  of  the  authorization  for  use  in  humans  and
the  process  of  disclosure  and  consent,  if  any,  to  be  followed.  These  uses  can  be
divided  into  (1)  therapeutic/diagnostic  uses,  (2)  therapeutic/diagnostic  research,
and  (3)  nontherapeutic  research.

As  we  shall  see,  great  attention  was  paid  initially  to  the  question  of
resource  allocation;  but  supply  soon  proved  far  greater  than  expected,  and  the
need  for  this  attention  evaporated.  The  control  of  the  risk  posed  by  the  use  of
AEC-provided  radioisotopes  was  also  a  source  of  intense  focus  from  the  outset
and  remained  so  as  the  program  grew.  By  contrast,  notwithstanding  the  1947
declarations  by  AEC  General  Manager  Carroll  Wilson  on  the  importance  of
consent,  the  matter  of  consent  received  only  limited  attention  in  the  early  years  of
the  program.


284


Chapter  6

ORIGINS  OF  THE  AEC  RADIOISOTOPE  DISTRIBUTION
PROGRAM  IN  THE  MANHATTAN  PROJECT

The  medical  importance  of  radioisotopes  was  recognized  before  World
War  II  but  distribution  was  unregulated  by  government.  The  postwar  program
for  distributing  radioisotopes  grew  out  of  the  part  of  the  Manhattan  Project  that
had  developed  the  greatest  technical  expertise  during  the  war:  the  Isotopes
Division  of  the  Research  Division  at  Oak  Ridge.1  Production  of  useful
radioisotopes  required  extensive  planning  for  both  their  physical  creation  and
their  chemical  separation  from  other  materials.  Plans  to  distribute  radioisotopes
to  medical  researchers  outside  the  Manhattan  Project  were  developed  in  the  final

year  of  the  Project.

In  June  1946,  the  Manhattan  Project  publicly  announced  its  program  tor
distributing  radioactive  isotopes.  The  new  world  of  radioisotope  research  was  to
be  shared  with  all.  Most  research  would  be  unclassified.2  An  enthusiastic  Science
magazine  reported:  "Production  of  tracer  and  therapeutic  radioisotopes  has  been
heralded  as  one  of  the  great  peacetime  contributions  of  the  uranium
chain-reacting  pile.  This  use  of  the  pile  will  unquestionably  be  rich  in  scientific,
medical,  and  technological  applications."3  An  article  in  the  New  York  Times
Magazine  told  readers  that  "properly  chosen  atoms  can  become  a  powerful  and
highly  selective  weapon  for  the  destruction  of  certain  types  of  cancer." Until
now  "the  doctors  and  biologists  have  had  to  plea  for  samples  of  isotope  material
from  their  brothers  in  the  cyclotron  laboratories.  ...  Now  the  picture  has  changed
in  a  revolutionary  way.  The  Government  has  adapted  one  of  the  Oak  Ridge
uranium  piles  to  the  mass  production  of  radioactive  'by-product  material."'

Extensive  planning  led  up  to  this  public  announcement.  Although  the
initial  expectations  were  that  basic  research  would  precede  extensive  medical
applications,  from  the  very  beginning  officials  planned  for  "clinical  investigation
with  humans.  In  doing  so,  they  recognized  that  the  "administration  to  humans
places  extreme  demands,  both  moral  and  legal,  upon  the  specifications  and  timing
of  the  radioisotope  material  supplied."6  The  recognition  of  special  moral  and
legal  aspects  of  human  experimentation  and  reliance  on  the  professional
competency  of  those  administering  radioisotopes  formed  the  cornerstones  of  the
radioisotope  distribution  system's  oversight  of  experiments.  Significantly,
however,  the  system  was  not  designed  to  oversee  consent  from  subjects  prior  to
the  administration  of  radioisotopes.

Radioisotopes  could  not  simply  be  ordered  from  the  Manhattan  Engineer
District;  each  purchase  had  to  be  reviewed  and  approved.  For  human  applications,
each  application  was  reviewed  by  a  special  group  of  experts:  the  Advisory
Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  of  the  Interim  Advisory  Committee  on
Isotope  Distribution  Policy  of  the  Manhattan  Project.  According  to  one  of  the
initial  planners,  "The  chief  reason  for  setting  this  group  up  as  a  separate  entity
from  the  Research  group  [another  subcommittee]  is  that  of  medico-legal

285


Part  II

responsibility  involved  in  the  use  or  treatment  of  humans,  experimentally  or
otherwise."7  (When  the  AEC  began  its  work,  this  subcommittee  continued  but
was  renamed  the  "Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  of  the  Committee  on
Isotope  Distribution  of  the  AEC."  In  1959  it  was  absorbed  into  the  "Advisory
Committee  on  Medical  Uses  of  Isotopes."8  In  1974,  the  AEC's  responsibilities
were  transferred  to  the  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission.)  Coupled  with  this
review  was  a  requirement  that  those  wishing  to  purchase  radioisotopes
demonstrate  the  special  competence  required  for  working  with  radioactive
materials.  This  mechanism  for  centralized,  nationwide  review  was  unusual  at  the
time  it  was  begun.

The  breadth  of  the  subcommittee's  purview  can  be  seen  in  the  range  of
proposals  examined.  Although  the  Advisory  Committee  is  concerned  primarily
with  medical  research,  the  AEC  subcommittee  review  extended  well  beyond  this
realm.  Apparently,  the  subcommittee  reviewed  all  proposed  uses  for
radioisotopes  that  might  result  in  the  exposure  of  humans  to  radiation.  These
included,  for  example,  using  cobalt  60  in  nails  in  wooden  survey  stakes  (probably
to  assist  in  later  locating  them),  sulfur  35  in  firing  underground  coal  mines,  and
yttrium  90  as  a  tracer  in  gasoline  in  simulated  airplane  crashes.9  (Its  jurisdiction
was  limited  to  by-product  material,  however,  and  did  not  extend  to  fissionable
materials  such  as  plutonium  and  uranium.)

Soon  after  the  Manhattan  Project's  public  announcement,  both  the
radioisotope  distribution  system  and  its  oversight  structure  began  operation.  On
June  28,  1946,  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  held  its  first  meeting.
Attending  as  members  were  Dr.  Andrew  Dowdy,  chairman,  and  biophysicist
Gioacchino  Failla.  Dowdy  was  director  of  the  University  of  Rochester's
Manhattan  Project  division,  while  Failla  was  a  professor  at  Columbia  University
and  consultant  to  the  Metallurgical  Laboratory  in  Chicago.  Not  attending  was  the
third  member  of  the  subcommittee,  Dr.  Hymer  Friedell,  executive  officer  of  the
Manhattan  Project's  Medical  Section.  Attending  as  nonvoting  secretary  was  Paul
Aebersold,  in  charge  of  the  production  of  radioisotopes  at  Oak  Ridge  (later  to
head  the  AEC's  Isotopes  Division).  His  efforts  to  promote  the  use  of
radioisotopes  later  earned  him  the  nickname  "Mr.  Isotope."  Also  attending  as
advisers  from  Oak  Ridge  were  W.  E.  Cohn,  the  author  of  the  original
memorandum  proposing  a  system  for  distributing  radioisotopes,  and  Karl
Morgan,  director  of  Health  Physics  at  Oak  Ridge,  who  would,  over  the  years,
become  a  leading  figure  in  the  establishment  of  occupational  exposure  limits  for
radioisotopes.10

Although  the  primary  task  of  the  subcommittee  was  to  oversee  safety,  at
the  time,  many  expected  a  shortage  of  radioisotopes.  Thus,  much  of  this  first
meeting  was  taken  up  with  a  discussion  of  priorities  for  allocation."  (As  it
happened,  supply  exceeded  demand  within  one  year.)  It  was  in  the  context  of  this
discussion  of  allocation,  not  a  discussion  of  safety  or  ethics,  that  a  system  of
local  committees  was  suggested.  Each  local  committee  (also  called  "local  isotope

286


Chapter  6

committee"  at  this  meeting)  would  include  "(a)  a  physician  well  versed  in  the
physiology  and  pathology  of  the  blood  forming  organs;  (b)  a  physician  well
versed  in  metabolism  and  metabolic  disorders;  (c)  a  competent  biophysicist,
radiologist,  or  radiation  physiologist  qualified  in  the  techniques  of
radioisotopes."'2  The  main  advantages  of  a  system  of  local  committees  were  ^
administrative  efficiency  and  delegation  of  prioritization  for  scarce  isotopes.
The  primary  functions  of  each  local  isotope  committee  were  coordination,
allocation,  and  safety.  Evidently  no  mention  was  made  of  overseeing  subject

consent.  .

At  this  first  meeting,  the  subcommittee  had  before  it  no  actual  requests  to
evaluate.  Even  so,  members  did  agree  on  the  general  principles  on  which  they
would  deny  a  request:

a.  The  requestors  are  not  sufficiently  qualified  to
guarantee  a  safe  and  trustworthy  investigation.

b.  Insufficient  knowledge  exists  to  permit  a  safe
application  of  the  material  in  the  proposed  human

14

cases.

There  was  no  elaboration  of  crucial  terms  such  as  qualified,  safe  and  trustworthy,
insufficient  knowledge,  and  safe  application.  Although  no  standards  of  adequate
consent  were  mentioned,  this  degree  of  oversight  was  unusual  in  medical  research
during  this  time  and  even  later.

Although  it  had  no  specific  requests  before  it,  the  subcommittee  did
consider  the  anticipated  uses  of  some  isotopes.  The  uses  of  some  isotopes  were
apparently  rejected,  not  only  because  of  the  hazards  of  radiation,  but  also  because
of  chemical  toxicity  and  the  availability  of  less-hazardous  alternatives. For
others,  specific  limits  were  set.  For  example,  the  subcommittee  was  especially
cautious  concerning  isotopes  of  strontium  because  it  concentrated  in  bone,  as  did
radium,  which  was  known  to  be  hazardous  from  the  prewar  experience  of  the  dial
painters.  The  subcommittee  set  a  specific  exposure  limit:  "the  Sr  90  (and  Y  90
daughter)  should  not  contribute  in  excess  of  1%  to  the  total  rate  of  beta

disintegration."16  .  •

Such  general  guidelines  have  little  effect  unless  a  procedure  is  established
for  their  implementation.  At  its  first  meeting,  the  subcommittee  set  out  in  detail
the  mechanism  for  its  own  future  operation.  What  the  subcommittee  would  be
reviewing  were  requests  to  purchase  isotopes  for  any  use  in  human  beings.  Only
after  the  subcommittee  approved  a  request  would  the  isotope  be  sold  and  shipped
to  the  researcher.  The  need  for  speed  in  responding  to  requests  for  human  uses

was  recognized.17

Details  of  the  procedure  for  purchasing  isotopes  were  disseminated  to
potential  users  through  a  brochure  issued  in  October  1946  by  the  Isotopes  Branch
at  Oak  Ridge.18  Most  of  the  brochure  concerned  the  paperwork,  which,  among


287


Part  II

other  things,  ensured  that  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  would
actually  be  notified  of  all  applications  for  human  use.

The  last  stage  of  the  purchase  procedure  indicates  the  underlying  concern
with  legal  liability.  Although  Manhattan  Project  approval  was  required,  the
actual  purchase  was  from  the  private  contractor-operator  of  the  Clinton
Laboratories  (later  designated  the  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory)  in  Oak  Ridge,
at  that  time  Monsanto  Chemical  Company.  The  final  purchase  agreement
contained  a  clause  relieving  both  the  government  and  the  private  contractor  from
any  responsibility  for  "injury  to  persons  or  other  living  material  or  for  any
damage  to  property  in  the  handling  or  application  of  this  material.  . .  ."'9  The
Manhattan  Project  also  required  the  purchaser  to  file  with  the  Isotopes  Office  a
statement  required  by  section  505(i)  of  the  Federal  Food,  Drug,  and  Cosmetic
Act.  However,  the  Advisory  Committee  found  no  evidence  of  direct  involvement
by  the  FDA  at  that  time  in  the  planning  or  operation  of  the  radioisotope
distribution  program.20

By  October  1 946,  the  distribution  program  was  well  under  way:  2 1 7
requests  had  been  received.  Of  these,  21 1  had  been  approved.  Human  use  requests
totaled  94,  of  which  90  had  been  approved.21

THE  AEC  ASSUMES  RESPONSIBILITY  FOR
RADIOISOTOPE  DISTRIBUTION

When  the  AEC  took  over  responsibility  for  the  program  on  January  1,
1947,  the  structure  of  the  radioisotopes  distribution  system  remained  intact.  The
Subcommittee  on  Allocation  and  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications
remained  as  standing  subcommittees  of  the  Interim  Committee  on  Isotopes
Distribution  Policy,  which  became  known  as  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Isotope
Distribution  Policy.  The  forms  developed  by  the  Manhattan  Project  were  reissued
as  AEC  forms  without  substantial  revision.  The  system  of  application  from
private  users,  review,  purchase,  and  distribution  continued  to  operate.

At  first,  there  appears  to  have  been  some  confusion  over  the  responsibility
of  the  AEC  for  its  own  research  program  and  for  its  program  to  distribute
radioisotopes  to  private  researchers.  As  discussed  in  chapter  1,  two  1947  letters
from  AEC  General  Manager  Carroll  Wilson  describe  strong  consent
requirements.  The  April  letter  to  Stafford  Warren  was  expressly  directed  to  the
terms  on  which  research  conducted  by  AEC  contractors  (including  universities)
would  be  approved.  The  November  letter  was  sent  to  Robert  Stone.  As  we  have
discussed,  those  clear  statements  to  contract  researchers  do  not  seem  to  have  been
made  to  those  applying  for  radioisotopes.  This  confusion  about  the  relationship
between  contract  research  and  isotope  distribution  is  discussed  in  a  September  26,
1947,  memorandum  from  J.  C.  Franklin,  manager  of  Oak  Ridge  Operations,  to
Carroll  Wilson.22  Other  correspondence  also  indicates  confusion  over  whether  the
AEC's  own  labs  (which  were  themselves  often  operated  by  contractors)  were  to

288


Chapter  6

follow  the  procedures  for  the  radioisotope  distribution  program,  which  would
have  placed  their  human  use  requests  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Human

Applications.

Initially,  requests  for  by-product  materials  from  within  the  AEC  used  a
form  that  did  not  specify  whether  the  radioisotope  was  to  be  used  on  humans.23
By  August  1949,  Shields  Warren,  director  of  the  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and
Medicine,  had  directed  that  human  use  by  AEC  laboratories  be  subject  to  review
by  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications.24  However,  when  regulations
governing  radioisotope  distribution  were  first  promulgated,  AEC-owned  facilities
were  specifically  exempted  from  all  such  regulations.25  Warren's  goal  was
achieved  instead  by  a  memorandum  from  Carroll  Wilson  in  July  1950.  This
memorandum  discontinued  use  of  the  earlier  form  and  directed  that  all  requests
use  the  same  form  used  by  outside  purchasers,  which  directed  human  use  requests
to  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications.26

The  AEC  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications

At  the  heart  of  overseeing  the  expansion  of  the  use  of  radioisotopes  was
the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  of  the  AEC's  Advisory  Committee  on
Isotope  Distribution.  Applications  had  to  have  been  approved  by  a  local  isotope
committee  before  even  being  considered  by  the  subcommittee.27  The
subcommittee  itself  conducted  most  of  its  reviews  by  mail.  Unfortunately,  only
fragmentary  records  of  this  correspondence  have  been  found.

The  subcommittee  formally  met  only  once  a  year  to  discuss  general  issues.
By  its  second  meeting,  in  March  1948,  membership  had  grown  to  four.  Dowdy
was  no  longer  on  the  subcommittee;  Joseph  Hamilton  and  A.  H.  Holland  had  been
added.  Hamilton  was,  as  described  in  chapter  5,  a  physician-investigator  with  the
University  of  California's  Radiation  Laboratory  in  Berkeley.  Holland  was  a
physician-investigator  who  became  medical  director  at  the  AEC's  Oak  Ridge
Operations  in  late  1947.  (As  we  shall  see  in  chapter  13,  he  played  a  central  role
in  the  question  of  the  declassification  of  secret  experiments.)  As  the
subcommittee  continued  to  "examine  each  case  on  its  own  merits"  it  began  to
generate  principles  for  "general  guidance."  In  doing  so,  it  began  to  categorize
experiments,  apparently  according  to  the  degree  of  hazard  posed.

One  category  was  tracer  studies  in  "normal  adult  humans"  using  beta  and
gamma  emitters  with  half-lives  of  twenty  days  or  fewer.  Applications  needed  to
include  information  on  biodistribution  and  biological  half-life  of  the  radioisotope,
based  on  either  animal  studies  or  references  to  the  literature.28

A  second  category  was  studies  in  "normal  children."  In  1948  the
subcommittee  did  not  issue  detailed  guidelines,  but  instead  simply  stated  that  such
applications  "would  be  given  special  scrutiny  by  the  Subcommittee  on  Human
Applications."29  In  1949  it  issued  more  detailed  guidelines,  which  indicate  that
the  concern  was  with  minimizing  risk,  not  requiring  or  overseeing  consent:

289


Part  II

In  general  the  use  of  radioisotopes  in  normal
children  should  be  discouraged.  However,  the
Subcommittee  will  consider  proposals  for  use  in
important  researches,  provided  the  problem  cannot
be  studied  properly  by  other  methods  and  provided
the  radiation  dosage  level  in  any  tissue  is  low
enough  to  be  considered  harmless.  It  should  be
noted  that  in  general  the  amount  of  radioactive
material  per  kilogram  of  body  weight  must  be
smaller  in  children  than  that  required  for  similar
studies  in  adults.30

Coupled  with  the  children's  category  in  1 949  were  studies  on  pregnant  women:
"The  use  of  radioactive  materials  in  all  normal  pregnancies  should  be  directly
discouraged  where  no  therapeutic  benefit  is  to  be  derived."31  Although  not
specifically  mentioned  in  the  minutes,  such  a  policy  may,  like  research  in  "normal
children,"  have  been  waived  for  "important  researches"  that  could  not  otherwise
be  undertaken.

One  recurring  difficulty  was  the  problem  of  deciding  when  an  application
could  be  considered  "safe."  There  was  no  simple,  mechanical  process  for  making
such  a  judgment.  This  can  be  seen  in  the  subcommittee's  detailed  consideration  of
an  application  for  phosphorus  32  to  be  used  in  a  blood  volume  study  of  children.
The  amount  of  radioactivity  proposed  ranged  from  1/4  to  1  microcurie  per
kilogram  of  body  weight.  Initially,  three  of  the  four  members  approved  the
application  and  the  allocation  was  made.  However,  the  fourth  member,  replying
late,  reopened  the  question.  Following  reconsideration  by  the  entire
subcommittee,  three  of  the  four  members  concluded  the  original  application  for
use  on  children  should  be  turned  down  and  the  investigator  asked  to  revise  the
application  to  "state  the  importance  of  making  the  study  in  children"  and  to  keep
the  amount  of  activity  less  than  1/2  microcurie  per  kilogram.32  The  reduction  in
allowable  amount  of  activity  illustrates  both  the  diligence  with  which  the
subcommittee  pursued  its  task  and  the  inherent  difficulties  in  making  judgments
about  what  constituted  "safe"  practices  in  a  rapidly  developing  field  of  research.

The  subcommittee's  task  was  made  a  bit  easier  when  considering
applications  with  adults,  where  it  could  draw  upon  occupational  guidelines.
Requests  for  "long-lived  radioisotopes"  were  placed  in  a  third  category,  defined
as  those  with  a  biological  half-life  greater  than  twenty  days.  In  contrast  with
experiments  on  children,  here  the  subcommittee  was  willing  to  set  a  general  dose
limit:  "The  dosage  in  the  critical  tissue  should  be  such  as  to  conform  to  the
limitations  stated  by  the  National  Committee  on  Radiation  Protection."33  (The
NCRP,  now  the  National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and  Measurements,  is
an  independent  organization  that  publishes  occupational  radiation  protection
guidelines  based  on  expert  reviews  of  contemporary  scientific  knowledge.)  As

290


Chapter  6

with  children,  such  applications  "must  be  reviewed  separately."  The
subcommittee  did  not  wish  this  limit  to  be  ironclad:  "In  special  cases,  however,
the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  may  permit  the  use  of  radioisotopes  in
higher  dosages."34  At  this  point  the  subcommittee  appears  to  have  been
establishing  general  principles;  no  specific  radioisotopes  or  particular  research
proposals  are  mentioned.

A  final  category  was  applications  using  radioisotopes  with  long  half-lives
in  patients  with  short  life  expectancies.  The  term  moribund  was  used  in
correspondence  by  Paul  Aebersold  prior  to  the  second  meeting  of  the
subcommittee  in  March  1948.  He  wrote  to  the  subcommittee  members  explaining
that  the  item  was  on  the  agenda  because  requests  for  such  work  had  been
received.  He  referred  to  a  written  request  from  a  physician  at  Massachusetts
General  Hospital  to  use  calcium  45  and  an  oral  request  from  a  staff  member  at
Presbyterian  Hospital  in  Chicago  to  use  testosterone  labeled  with  carbon  14.
Aebersold  did  not  provide  any  details  as  to  the  purposes  of  the  proposed  research.
The  issue  was  what  policy  to  adopt  when  the  patients  were  predicted  not  to  live
long  enough  for  long-term  hazards  to  develop.  Aebersold  told  the  subcommittee
that  "this  office  feels  that  such  requests  should  be  allowed  if  a  satisfactory
mechanism  for  determining  the  'moribundness'  of  the  patients  in  question  is
established.  We  believe  that  this  question  should  be  decided  by  a  group  of  doctors
and  written  evidence  signed  by  the  group  filed  with  the  Isotopes  Division  prior  to
use  of  the  material."35

The  subcommittee  had  no  objection  to  the  basic  principle  of  applying
larger  doses  to  patients  with  short  life  expectancies,  but  its  language  was  more
oblique  than  Aebersold's  letter:  "It  is  recognized  that  there  may  be  instances  in
which  the  disease  from  which  the  patient  is  suffering  permits  the  administration
of  larger  doses  for  investigative  purposes."36  Safeguards  were  to  be  provided  by
reliance  on  the  judgment  of  local  physicians,  not  a  precise  definition  of  moribund.
Indeed,  the  subcommittee  did  not  even  use  the  term.  Applications  would  be
approved  providing:

1.  Full  responsibility  for  conduct  of  the  work  is
assumed  by  a  special  committee  of  at  least  three
competent  physicians  in  the  institutions  in  which
the  work  is  to  be  done.  This  will  not  necessarily  be
the  local  Radioisotope  Committee.

2.  The  subject  has  given  his  consent  to  the
procedure.

3.  There  is  no  reasonable  likelihood  of  producing
manifest  injury  by  the  radioisotope  to  be
employed.37

No  further  explanation  was  given  of  how  the  second  requirement,  giving  consent,

291


Part  II

would  be  fulfilled  by  a  "moribund"  patient,  nor  was  additional  guidance  provided
to  clarify  the  third  criterion.

One  instance  in  which  this  policy  was  applied  took  place  at  the  Walter  E.
Fernald  State  School  in  Massachusetts  (see  chapter  7).  Correspondence  between
the  researchers  and  the  AEC  indicates  that  the  AEC  allowed  the  administration  of
50  microcuries  of  calcium  45  (fifty  times  the  amount  the  AEC  allowed  the
researchers  to  administer  to  other  subjects  in  the  study)  to  a  ten-year-old  patient
with  a  life  expectancy  of  a  few  months,  suffering  from  Hurler-Hunter  syndrome
(a  degenerative  disease  of  the  nervous  system).  In  applying  for  the  radioisotope,
Dr.  Clemens  Benda,  the  researcher,  noted  that  "permission  for  the  use  of  higher
doses  administered  to  moribund  patients  has  been  granted  by  you  to  other
investigators . . .  ."38  This  subject  was  part  of  a  study  of  calcium  metabolism
approved  by  the  superintendent  of  the  school.  Students  had  been  described  as
"voluntarily  participating"  in  a  letter  sent  earlier  to  the  parents  asking  if  they
objected,  but  that  did  not  mention  the  use  of  radioactive  tracers.  Lack  of  response
from  a  parent  was  presumed  to  be  approval.39  The  subject  with  Hurler-Hunter
syndrome  was  found  to  have  abnormal  calcium  metabolism,  but  died  before  the
study  could  be  completed.40

Even  as  it  developed  procedures  for  unusual  cases,  the  subcommittee
recognized  that  some  existing  uses  were  becoming  routine  and  did  not  need  to  be
continuously  reviewed  by  the  subcommittee  itself.  The  subcommittee  delegated
the  review  of  such  requests  to  the  Isotopes  Division,  setting  out  the  criteria  to  be
applied:

Such  applications  should  be  justified  by:

a)  A  commensurate  increase  in  patient  load.

b)  An  expanded  research  program.

c)  Provision  of  adequate  storage  and  handling  facilities.

d)  Assurance  that  personnel  protection  and  supervision  are
adequate  for  the  larger  amounts  requested.41

An  additional  simplification  occurred  with  the  introduction  in  1951  of  "general
authorizations,"  which  delegated  more  authority  to  the  local  radioisotope
committees  of  approved  institutions.42  These  authorizations  enabled  research
institutions  to  obtain  some  radioisotopes  for  approved  purposes  after  filing  a
single  application  each  year,  therefore  eliminating  the  need  to  file  a  separate
application  for  each  radioisotope  order.  As  such,  they  also  reduced  the  oversight
of  the  AEC's  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications,  as  each  order  was  no  longer
reviewed  individually.  However,  at  first  the  general  authorizations  did  not  apply
to  human  use,  and  when  they  were  expanded  to  human  use  in  1952,  they  were
limited  to  certain  radioisotopes  for  clinical  use  and  excluded  radioisotopes  in
cancer  research,  therapy,  and  diagnosis.43

Both  the  AEC  and  the  subcommittee  reacted  strongly  when  proper

292


Chapter  6

bureaucratic  procedures  were  not  followed.  One  example  was  a  private  industrial
lab  that  used  iodine  131  for  a  human  study  that  had  not  been  properly  reviewed.
Even  though  no  one  was  harmed,  the  AEC  threatened  to  suspend  shipments  of  all
radioisotopes,  not  just  iodine  131;  such  action  would  have  put  the  company  out  of
business.44  Aebersold,  at  the  direction  of  the  subcommittee,  notified  the  company
president  that  while  the  incident  "did  not  lead  to  any  unfortunate  results  from  the
standpoint  of  radiation  hazard  ...  a  recurrence  of  this  type  of  violation  should
result  in  cessation  of  all  shipment  of  radioactive  materials  to  Tracerlab,  Inc."45
For  his  part,  the  company  president  reacted  by  notifying  employees  that  such
action  would  be  grounds  for  automatic  dismissal.46

Thus,  as  it  proceeded  in  its  work  of  evaluating  individual  applications,  the
subcommittee  developed  more  general  principles  such  as  categories  of  human
uses  based  upon  risk  and  updating  of  criteria  based  upon  developing  knowledge.
The  goal,  as  the  AEC's  director  of  research,  K.  S.  Pitzer,  stated  in  1950,  was  "to
make  radioisotopes  as  nearly  as  possible  ordinary  items  of  commerce  in  the
technical  world."47  For  example,  cancer  researchers  initially  received
radioisotopes  at  no  charge.48  This  free  program  was  changed  to  an  80  percent
discount  program  in  195249  and  ended  in  July  1961.50

AEC  Regulations  and  Published  Guidelines

An  important  step  toward  making  the  use  of  radioisotopes  a  component  of
medical  practice  routine  was  formally  enacting  regulations  governing  the  use  of
isotopes.  The  first  regulations  were  enacted  in  1951.5'  These  early  regulations
essentially  promulgated  facility  and  personnel  requirements  without  establishing
dose  limits  or  mentioning  the  consent  requirement  established  in  1949  for
administering  larger  doses  to  very  sick  patients.  Throughout  the  1950s,  changes  in
the  regulations  dealt  with  administrative  procedures.  Other  concerns  about
radioisotope  use,  such  as  consent  requirements,  were  disseminated  through
circulars,  brochures,  and  guides  of  the  Isotopes  Division.  In  1948  the  circular
describing  medical  applications  was  only  three  pages  long;  by  1956  it  had  been
replaced  by  a  twenty-four-page  guide  that  provided  detailed  requirements  for
many  different  applications  of  isotopes.52

This  greater  precision  can  be  seen,  for  example,  in  the  guidelines  for
terminal  patients.  By  the  time  of  the  1956  guide,  the  use  of  radioisotopes  with
half-lives  greater  than  thirty  days  ordinarily  would  not  be  permitted  without  prior
animal  studies  establishing  metabolic  properties,  unless  patients  had  a  short  life
expectancy.  The  judgment  of  local  physicians  was  now  to  be  guided  by  a  more
exact  definition:  exceptions  would  be  "limited  to  patients  suffering  from  diseased
conditions  of  such  a  nature  (life  expectancy  of  one  year  or  less)  that  there  is  no
reasonable  probability  of  the  radioactivity  employed  producing  manifest  injury."53
However,  while  a  more  precise  definition  of  terminal  was  now  provided,  there
was  no  longer  explicit  mention  of  a  specific  requirement  for  consent  from  these

293


Part  II

patient  subjects,  as  had  been  made  earlier.

Consent  was  required,  though,  in  the  section  of  the  1956  guide  on  the  "use
of  radioisotopes  in  normal  subjects  for  experimental  purposes."  (Presumably,
"normal"  here  means  "healthy.")  This  section  included  the  earlier  provisions  that
the  tracer  dose  not  exceed  the  permissible  body  burden  and  that  such  experiments
not  normally  be  conducted  on  infants  or  pregnant  women.  It  also,  however,
included  a  new  provision  that  such  experiments  were  to  be  limited  to  "volunteers
to  whom  the  intent  of  the  study  and  the  effects  of  radiation  have  been  outlined."54
The  term  volunteer  would  seem  to  imply  a  requirement  that  consent  be  obtained
following  a  disclosure  of  information  to  potential  subjects.  The  disclosure
requirement  dops  not  include,  however,  all  of  the  elements  of  information  that
today  are  included  in  duties  to  obtain  informed  consent.

This  1956  consent  requirement  now  governed  all  radioisotope
experiments  in  normal  subjects,  a  substantial  expansion  of  the  earlier  requirement
of  consent  only  from  terminal  patients  receiving  larger-than-usual  doses.  It  also
explicitly  required  that  both  the  purpose  and  effects  of  radiation  be  explained.  It
is  unclear  whether  the  failure  to  mention  consent  in  the  section  on  terminal
patients  was  an  oversight  in  drafting  or  a  deliberate  distinction  between  patients
and  "normal"  subjects.  The  Advisory  Committee  has  not  found  documents
revealing  the  history  of  this  provision,  nor  any  explanation  of  the  choice  to  limit
the  broad  consent  requirement  to  "normal"  subjects.55

This  broad  requirement  continued  over  the  next  decade  as  part  of  AEC
policy.  In  1965,  the  AEC  published  the  "Guide  for  the  Preparation  of  Applications
for  the  Medical  Use  of  Radioisotopes."  The  guide  described  the  application
process  and  specific  policies  for  the  "Non-Routine  Medical  Uses  of  Byproduct
Material."  This  policy  statement  reiterated  the  exclusion  of  pregnant  women  and
required  that  subject  characteristics  and  selection  criteria  be  clearly  delineated  in
the  application.  Another  requirement  stated  that  applications  should  include
"confirmation  that  consent  of  human  subjects,  or  their  representatives,  will  be
obtained  to  participate  in  the  investigation  except  where  this  is  not  feasible  or  in
the  investigator's  professional  judgment,  is  contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  the
subjects."56

During  the  1960s,  the  entire  system  of  oversight  of  radioisotope  research
began  to  change  as  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  began  developing  a  more
active  role  in  supervising  the  development  of  radiopharmaceuticals.57  The
regulatory  history  of  this  shift  in  authority  is  complex  and  beyond  the  scope  of
this  report.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  by  the  mid-1960s  the  regulation  of  radioisotope
research  was  beginning  to  merge  with  the  regulation  of  pharmaceutical  research
in  general.


294


Chapter  6
LOCAL  OVERSIGHT:  RADIOISOTOPE  COMMITTEES

From  its  inception,  the  AEC  distribution  system  required  each  local
institution  to  establish  a  "local  radioisotope  committee,"  later  termed  a  "medical
isotopes  committee."  Initially,  the  primary  purpose  was  to  simplify  the  allocation
process  by  having  local  institutions  establish  their  own  priorities  before  applying
to  the  AEC.5X  Soon  after  the  program  began,  supply  increased  and  no  dramatic
new  uses  developed,  so  allocation  was  no  longer  a  major  issue.  These  local
committees  also  took  on  responsibilities  for  physical  safety,  usually  working
closely  with  radiation  safety  offices.  By  October  1949  this  requirement  also
applied  to  the  AEC's  national  labs.59  When  "general  authorizations"  were  issued
in  1951,  granting  broader  discretion  to  qualifying  local  institutions,  local  isotope
committees  assumed  greater  responsibility.60

By  1956,  the  functions  of  the  local  radioisotope  committees  included
reviewing  applications,  prescribing  any  special  precautions,  reviewing  reports
from  their  radiological  safety  officers,  recommending  remedial  action  when
safety  rules  were  not  observed,  and  keeping  records  of  their  own  activities.  The
basic  focus  on  radiological  safety  remained,  although  in  reviewing  applications  a
local  medical  isotopes  committee  could  also  consider  "other  factors  which  the
[local  medical  isotopes]  Committee  may  wish  to  establish  for  medical  use  of  these
materials."61  Exactly  what  these  "other  factors"  might  be  was  not  specified.

These  local  committees  together  reviewed  thousands  of  applications  over
the  next  decades.  Although  not  federal  agencies,  they  were  required  by  the  AEC,
and  their  proper  functioning  was  an  important  part  of  the  oversight  system
envisioned  by  the  AEC.  To  fully  assess  whether  this  system  fulfilled  its  goals
would  be  an  enormous  task,  requiring  the  retrieval  and  examination  of  thousands
of  local  records.  However,  to  make  a  preliminary  assessment  of  whether  the
system  as  a  whole  generally  appeared  to  function  as  planned,  the  Advisory
Committee  did  examine  the  records  of  several  public  and  private  institutions:  the
Veterans  Administration  (VA),  the  University  of  Chicago,  the  University  of
Michigan,  and  Massachusetts  General  Hospital  (MGH).62  Doing  so  provided  us
with  an  understanding  of  the  techniques  of  risk  management  used  at  the  local
level  on  a  day-to-day  basis.  We  specifically  examined  whether  local  radioisotope
committees  in  fact  were  established  as  directed  and  what  techniques  they
developed  to  monitor  consent  and  ensure  safety.

Establishment  of  Local  Isotope  Committees

Overall,  the  federal  requirement  seems  to  have  been  an  effective  means  of
instituting  a  reasonably  uniform  structure  across  the  nation  for  local  radioisotope
committees.  The  AEC's  requirements  for  local  committees  were  followed  in  all
the  institutions  studied,  and  there  is  no  reason  for  believing  they  were  exceptional.
One  local  radioisotope  committee,  that  of  Massachusetts  General  Hospital,  was

295


Part  II

established  in  May  1946,  prior  to  the  AEC  requirement.63  The  other  institutions
established  a  local  radioisotope  committee  when  required  to  do  so  by  the  AEC.

Local  committees  also  could  have  broader  tasks  than  those  required  by  the
AEC.  For  example,  the  Radiation  Policy  Committee  at  the  University  of  Michigan
regulated  all  radioactive  substances  used  on  campus,  not  just  those  purchased
from  the  AEC.  These  included  reactor  products,  transuranic  elements,  and
external  sources  of  radiation.64

The  Veterans  Administration  added  another  level  of  oversight  in  the  form
of  a  systemwide  Central  Advisory  Committee.65  In  1947  the  VA  embarked  on  a
radioisotope  research  program  that  would  take  place  within  newly  established
radiation  units  in  the  hospitals  that  would  be  the  recipients  of  AEC-supplied
isotopes.66  Among  early  research  projects  were  the  treatment  of  toxic  goiter  and
hyperthyroidism  with  iodine  131  and  treatment  of  polycythemia  rubra  vera
(overproduction  of  red  blood  cells)  with  phosphorus  32  at  Los  Angeles,
radioactive  iron  tracers  of  erythrocytes  at  Framingham,  and  sodium  24  circulatory
tracers  in  Minneapolis.67 By  the  end  of  1948,  radioisotope  units  had  been
established  in  eight  VA  hospitals.68  Each  of  the  eight  was  asked  to  establish  a
radioisotope  committee  (as  required  by  the  AEC)  to  be  appointed  by  the  Dean's
Committee  of  each  hospital,  while  representatives  from  affiliated  universities
agreed  to  serve  as  consultants  in  the  various  units.

Local  Monitoring  of  Consent

Generally,  although  local  institutions  created  clear  procedures  to  monitor
safety,  these  local  radioisotope  committees  did  not  establish  procedures  to
monitor  or  require  consent.69  (See  part  I  for  discussion  of  the  broader  historical
context  of  consent  in  medical  research.)  The  standard  application  form  to  the
Massachusetts  General  Hospital  committee,  as  of  1953,  had  no  place  to  describe
an  informed  consent  procedure.  This  does  not,  of  course,  resolve  the  question  of
whether  consent  was  given.  According  to  one  prominent  neurosurgeon
interviewed  by  the  Advisory  Committee  staff,  William  Sweet,  at  that  time,  in  the
case  of  brain  tumor  patients,  oral  consent  was  obtained  from  both  the  patient  and,
since  mental  competency  could  later  be  an  issue,  the  next  of  kin.70

Similarly,  no  mention  of  the  1947  AEC  requirements  stated  in  General
Manager  Wilson's  letters  is  contained  in  the  advice  Shields  Warren  gave  in  1948
to  the  VA,  even  though  Warren,  as  director  of  the  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and
Medicine,  must  have  known  of  discussions  about  consent  requirements.  An  issue
that  arose  before  the  VA  Central  Advisory  Committee  was  whether  patient-
subjects  should  sign  release  slips.  This  issue  posed  the  question  of  whether  the
radioisotope  units  in  the  VA  hospitals  were  treatment  wards  or  clinical  research
laboratories.  If  wards,  patients  need  not  sign  consent  forms,  for  they  were  simply
being  treated  in  the  normal  course  of  an  illness.  Shields  Warren  agreed  with  this
presumption  and  felt  that  there  was  no  need  for  the  patients  to  sign  release  slips:

296


Chapter  6

"The  proper  use  of  radioisotopes  in  medical  practice  is  encompassed  in  the
normal  responsibilities  of  the  individual  and  of  the  institution  or  hospital."71  In
addition,  he  felt  that  the  practice  would  draw  "undue  and  unwholesome  attention
to  the  use  of  radioisotopes."72

Movement  toward  more  formal  consent  requirements  gradually  arose  at
the  local  level.  In  1956  the  University  of  Michigan's  own  Human  Use
Subcommittee  directed  that  in  an  experiment  using  sodium  22  and  potassium  42,
each  "volunteer  would  be  required  to  sign  a  release  indicating  that  he  has  full
knowledge  of  his  being  subjected  to  a  radiation  exposure."  Since  the  local
committee  was  concerned  about  what  it  termed  "unnecessary"  radiation,  the
volunteers  presumably  were  healthy  subjects  not  otherwise  receiving  radiation  for
treatment  or  diagnosis.  The  committee  appended  a  recommended  "release"  form
to  its  minutes:

I,  the  undersigned,  hereby  assert  that  I  am

voluntarily  taking  an  injection  of at  a  dose

level  which  I  understand  to  be  considered  within
accepted  permissible  dose  limits  by  the  University
of  Michigan  Radio-isotope  Human  Use  Sub-
Committee.73

By  1967,  the  Michigan  subcommittee  also  required  that  the  subject
explain  the  experiment  to  the  researcher  to  clarify  any  doubts  or
misunderstandings.  The  following  statement  was  incorporated  into  all
applications  to  the  university's  Human  Use  Subcommittee:

The  opinion  of  the  Committee  is  that  INFORMED
CONSENT  is  the  legal  way  of  describing  a
"meeting  of  the  minds"  in  a  contract.  In  this
situation  it  means  that  the  subject  clearly
understands  what  the  experiment  is,  what  the
potential  risks  are,  and  has  agreed,  and  without
pressure  of  any  kind,  elected  to  participate.  The  best
way  to  ascertain  that  the  consent  is  informed,  is  to
have  the  subject  explain  back  fully  to  the
interviewer,  exactly  what  he  thinks  he  is  submitting
to  and  what  he  believes  the  risks  might  be.  This
facilitates  clarification  of  any  doubts,  spoken  or
unspoken.  The  content  of  this  discussion  will  be
recorded  in  detail  below.74

During  the  1960s,  as  explained  in  chapter  3,  concern  was  growing  over  the
adequacy  of  consent  from  subjects.  Although  not  intended  by  the  AEC  to

297


Part  II

monitor  the  obtaining  of  consent  from  subjects,  over  the  years  the  local
radioisotope  committees  may  have  come  to  take  on  this  task.  By  requiring  such
local  committees,  the  AEC  had,  probably  unwittingly,  provided  an  institutional
structure  that  allowed  later  concern  for  informed  consent  to  be  implemented  at  the
local  level.

Local  Monitoring  of  Risk

This  local  and  informal  approach  to  consent  is  in  sharp  contrast  to  the
detail  and  documentation  with  which  risk  was  assessed.  As  discussed  earlier,
monitoring  risk  was  the  major  task  of  the  AEC's  Subcommittee  on  Human
Applications.  The  local  committees  mirrored  this  task,  examining  in  detail  the
various  experiments  presented  to  them.  As  with  the  AEC  subcommittee,  local
committees  developed  a  variety  of  methods,  none  especially  surprising,  to  ensure
what  they  believed  was  adequate  safety.75

The  basic  dilemma  facing  local  committees  was  to  allow  exploration  of
new  territory  while  attempting  to  guard  against  hazards  that,  precisely  because
new  territory  was  being  explored,  were  not  totally  predictable.  This  dilemma  was
apparent  at  the  local  level,  as  well  as  at  the  level  of  the  AEC's  Subcommittee  on
Human  Applications.  For  example,  in  the  minutes  of  the  Massachusetts  General
Hospital  local  radioisotope  committee  in  1955,  during  a  discussion  of  new  and
experimental  radiotherapies  for  patients,  one  member  of  the  committee  declared
that  the  safety  of  the  patient  was  of  "paramount  importance."76  Yet,  other
members  suggested  that  a  risk-benefit  analysis  needed  to  be  an  integral
component  of  such  a  policy  decision.  The  committee  as  a  whole  concluded
merely  that  it  was  a  complicated  issue  and  that  "it  is  not  wise  in  any  way  to  inhibit
investigators  with  ideas,  and  yet  the  safety  of  the  patient  must  come  first."77

Requiring  prior  animal  studies  was  a  basic  method  of  assessing  risk.  For
example,  the  twenty-two  studies  reviewed  by  the  University  of  Chicago's  local
committee  in  1953  included  multiple  therapeutic  and  tracer  studies  involving
brain  tumors,  the  thyroid  gland,  metastatic  masses,  and  tissue  differentiation.
Those  the  Chicago  committee  viewed  as  involving  any  risk  to  the  patient  were
preceded  by  extensive  animal  studies.78

Animal  studies  were  usually  tailored  to  each  project  and  also  raised  the
question  of  the  differences  between  how  humans  and  animals  might  respond  to  a
particular  radioisotope.  A  more  uniform  standard  directly  applicable  to  humans
was  the  system  of  dose  limits  established  by  the  National  Committee  on  Radiation
Protection  for  occupational  purposes:  the  maximum  permissible  dose  for  each
isotope.  In  addition,  although  no  national  system  existed  for  reporting  their
decisions,  local  committees  drew  upon  their  knowledge  of  what  had  been
approved  at  other  institutions.79  At  least  one  local  committee  issued  its  own  dose
limits.  The  Massachusetts  General  Hospital  local  committee  in  1949  issued  a
seven-point  policy  on  human  use  of  beta-  and  gamma-emitting  radioisotopes.80

298


Chapter  6

By  1956,  the  Michigan  committee  provided  explicit  limits  for  exposure  of
volunteers/1

At  other  times,  the  condition  of  subjects  who  were  patients  was  accepted
as  justification  for  higher  doses.  For  example,  in  1953  the  Chicago  committee
approved  a  tracer  study  using  mercury  203  "to  study  uptake  by  malignant  renal
tissue."  Although  admitted  to  be  unusual,  it  was  approved  as  potentially
efficacious  in  patients  suffering  hypernephroma  (a  kidney  cancer).  Total  dose
would  not  exceed  10  milligrams  of  ionic  mercury,  a  high  dose  for  most  tracer
studies,  which  was  approved  as  reasonable  given  the  illness  of  the  patients.82
Similarly,  the  Harvard  Medical  School  committee  in  1956  stipulated  that  "the  risk
of  incurring  any  type  of  deleterious  effect  due  to  the  radiation  received  should  be
comparable  to  the  normal  everyday  risks  of  accidental  injury."  For  seriously  ill
patients  receiving  experimental  treatment,  however,  the  committee  stated,  "the
estimated  deleterious  effect  from  radiation  should  be  offset  by  the  expected
beneficial  effects  of  the  procedure."83

In  addition  to  setting  limits,  local  committees  encouraged  the  use  of
technical  methods  to  reduce  risk.  Use  of  different  detection  techniques  could
reduce  the  dose  required.  In  1955,  for  example,  the  Michigan  committee
considered  an  application  to  administer  to  normal  volunteers  up  to  30  microcuries
of  sodium  22  and  up  to  350  microcuries  of  potassium  42,  resulting  in  internal
radiation  doses  of  up  to  300  millirem  per  week.  (The  purpose  was  to  study
sodium-potassium  exchanges.)  The  committee  asked  itself:  "Is  it  justifiable  to
subject  the  volunteers  to  an  exposure  in  excess  of  the  maximum  permissible?
This  Committee  did  not  resolve  this  question  but  came  forward  with  the
suggestion  that  more-sensitive  counting  techniques  might  permit  this
investigation  at  lower  dose  levels."84

Another  method  of  reducing  risk  was  to  restrict  the  type  of  subjects  to
those  whose  life  expectancy  was  too  short  for  long-term  effects  to  appear.  This
has  already  been  seen  regarding  terminal  patients.  Another  variation  of  the  same
technique  was  to  restrict  the  use  of  volunteers  to  those  over  a  certain  age.  At
Michigan,  age  restrictions  on  who  would  be  acceptable  as  a  volunteer  began
appearing  in  the  1960s.85

When  a  worthwhile  experiment  also  involved  novel  risks,  another  method
to  control  risk  was  to  require  additional  monitoring  by  the  local  committee  as  the
experiment  proceeded. At  times,  the  Michigan  committee  required  preliminary
reports  before  allowing  experiments  to  proceed  further.86  In  another  instance,  the
Michigan  committee  required  the  researcher  to  obtain  long-term  excretion  data
because  of  concern  that  "the  usual  biologic  half-life  data  might  not  be
sufficient."87  Similar  additional  oversight  was  required  at  the  University  of
Chicago  in  1953.  A  proposal  was  made  to  use  tritium-labeled  cholesterol  to  study
steroid-estrogen  metabolism  in  women.  The  question  of  the  distribution  of
estrogenic  hormones  in  humans  was  unexplored  at  the  time  and  deemed  worthy  of
research.  While  the  risk  appeared  low,  the  committee  ultimately  approved  the

299


Part  II

study  for  the  first  round  of  the  experiment  only  for  nonpregnant  women  who  were
sterile  or  pregnant  women  who  planned  to  be  sterilized  postabortion.  If  data  from
the  first  round  suggested  minimal  risk  to  the  women  and  the  fetuses,  the  program
could  be  expanded.88

Thus,  in  establishing  a  system  of  local  radioisotope  committees,  the  AEC
effectively  increased  the  detail  with  which  each  proposed  experiment  was
reviewed.  Often,  it  appears,  experimental  protocols  were  revised  at  the  local  level
before  being  approved  and  sent  on  to  the  AEC.  Thus,  the  system  created  by  the
AEC  did  some  of  its  most  effective  risk  management  out  of  sight  of  direct  federal
oversight.

GENERAL  BENEFITS  OF  RADIOISOTOPE  RESEARCH

The  system  for  distribution  of  radioisotopes  worked  well  and  encouraged
researchers  to  explore  new  applications.  There  are  two  striking  aspects  of  the
application  of  radioisotopes  to  medicine  since  World  War  II:  rapid  expansion  and
complexity.  Practices  that  at  the  end  of  the  war  were  limited  to  fewer  than  four
dozen  practitioners  have  now  become  mainstays  of  modern  medicine.89  The
second  major  aspect  of  the  field  is  its  complexity.  Just  as  nature  at  times  is  best
regarded  as  a  seamless  web,  not  unconnected  scientific  fields,  knowledge
nurtured  in  one  field  often  provides  unexpected  benefits  in  another. A  few
examples  can  illustrate  how  some  of  the  hopes  at  the  dawn  of  the  atomic  age  have
actually  been  realized.90

Improved  Instrumentation  to  Detect  Radiation

Improved  instruments,  the  basic  tools  for  all  biological  research  using
radioisotopes,  were  developed  through  the  interaction  of  biology  and  medicine
with  physics  and  engineering.  Improvements  not  only  provide  greater  precision,
they  also  allow  the  same  amount  of  information  to  be  gathered  with  lower  doses
of  radiation,  thereby  reducing  the  risk.

Perhaps  the  best-known  example  is  the  application  of  the  "whole-body
counter"  to  biological  problems.  The  device  was  originally  developed  as  a  tool
for  physics,  enabling  measurements  of  minute  amounts  of  radiation  by  combining
sensitive  detectors  with  extensive  shielding  to  eliminate  extraneous  radiation.
The  result  was  similar  to  placing  a  sensitive  microphone  in  a  sound-proofed  room,
allowing  lower  levels  of  radioactivity  to  be  detected  than  was  previously  possible.
For  some  research,  no  radioisotope  at  all  was  administered;  the  counters  could
measure  naturally  occurring  radioisotopes.  Whole-body  counters  also  greatly
simplified  metabolic  studies.  In  some  studies,  subjects  who  previously  would
have  had  to  reside  continuously  in  a  metabolic  ward  could  now  schedule  visits  to
the  whole-body  counter  for  their  natural  radioactivity  to  be  measured  on  an
outpatient  basis.91  This  device  was  later  adapted  for  whole-body  counting  after

300


Chapter  6

administration  of  tracer  amounts  of  radioisotopes  and  is  the  basis  for  a  number  of
fundamental  nuclear  medicine  tests.

In  the  early  1 970s,  computerized  tomographic  scanning  (CT)  was
introduced.  This  technique  was  first  applied  to  x-ray  imaging  by  taking  multiple
x-ray  "slices"  through  a  region  of  the  body,  then  programming  a  computer  to
construct  a  three-dimensional  image  from  the  information.  Thus,  internal
structures  of  the  body  may  be  imaged  noninvasively.  Newer  types  of
tomographic  scanning  include  positron  emission  tomography  (PET),  in  which
various  metabolites  or  drugs  are  labeled  with  a  very  short  half-life  positron-
emitting  radioisotope,  such  as  fluorine  18,  and  the  passage  of  the  labeled  material
is  tracked  throughout  the  body  by  taking  multiple  images  over  several  minutes  or
hours.

Diagnostic  Procedures

The  first  medical  application  of  any  radiation  was  the  use  of  x  rays  for
diagnostic  purposes,  such  as  locating  broken  bones  inside  the  patient.
Radioisotopes  later  opened  another  window  into  the  body.  The  natural  tendency
of  certain  organs  to  preferentially  absorb  specific  radioisotopes,  coupled  with
ever-improving  detection  techniques,  allowed  radioisotopes  to  be  used  to  increase
the  contrast  between  different  parts  of  the  body.  X  rays  could  distinguish
between  hard  and  soft  tissues  because  of  their  different  densities.  Radioisotopes
could  go  one  step  further  and  distinguish  different  kinds  of  tissues  from  one
another  based  upon  their  metabolic  function,  not  merely  their  physical  density.

Radioisotopes  also  could  go  beyond  detecting  different  types  of  tissues.
Since  they  were  distributed  throughout  the  body  by  the  body's  own  metabolism,
their  location  provided  a  picture  not  only  of  structure,  but  also  of  processes.
Tracing  radioisotopes  was  a  means  of  observing  the  body  in  action.  The  earliest
success  was  using  radioiodine  to  measure  the  activity  of  the  thyroid.  The  gland
cannot  distinguish  between  radioactive  and  nonradioactive  forms  of  iodine  and
therefore  preferentially  absorbs  all  isotopes  of  iodine.  Thus,  the  activity  of  the
gland  can  be  assessed  by  observing  its  absorption  of  radioiodine.  Largely  as  a
result  of  these  advances,  the  thyroid  gland  is  arguably  the  best  understood  of  all
human  endocrine  organs,  and  its  hormones  the  best  understood  of  all  endocrine
secretions.  Since  the  incidence  of  thyroid  disease  is  second  only  to  diabetes
mellitus  among  human  endocrine  diseases,  this  understanding  is  basic  to  therapy
in  large  numbers  of  patients.92

Because  the  brain  is  a  crucial  and  delicate  organ,  techniques  for
diagnosing  brain  tumors  without  surgery  were  vital.  In  1948  radioactive  isotopes
were  applied  to  this  task.  Using  radiotagged  substances  that  were  preferentially
absorbed  by  brain  tumors,  physicians  could  more  accurately  detect  and  locate
brain  tumors,  allowing  better  diagnosis  and  more  precise  surgery.  Similar
"scanning"  techniques  were  later  developed  for  the  liver,  spleen,  gastrointestinal

301


Part  II

system,  gall  bladder,  lymphomas,  and  bone.

As  mentioned,  a  recently  developed  technique  is  PET  scanning,  which  is
especially  helpful  in  studying  the  human  brain  in  action.  Glucose  is  the  primary
food  for  the  brain;  by  tagging  a  glucose  analog  with  fluorine  18,  investigators  can
identify  the  actively  metabolizing  portions  of  the  brain  and  relate  that  to  function.
This  technique,  has  opened  a  new  era  of  studies  of  the  brain.  Outwardly
observable  functions,  such  as  language,  object  recognition,  and  fine  motor
coordination  can  now  be  linked  with  increased  activities  in  specific  areas  of  the
brain.

Radioisotopes  allow  investigators  to  increase  the  sensitivity  for  analyzing
biological  samples,  such  as  tissue  and  blood  components,  especially  when
separating  out  the  material  of  interest  using  chemical  processes  would  be  difficult.
Because  instruments  to  measure  radioactivity  are  so  sensitive,  radioisotopes  are
frequently  used  in  tests  to  detect  particular  hormones,  drugs,  vitamins,  enzymes,
proteins,  or  viruses.

Therapeutic  Techniques

Radioisotopes  are  energy  sources  that  emit  one  or  more  types  of  radiation
as  they  decay.  If  radioisotopes  are  deposited  in  body  tissues,  the  radiation  they
emit  can  kill  cells  within  their  range.  This  may  be  harmful  to  the  individual  if  the
exposed  cells  are  healthy.  However,  this  same  process  may  be  beneficial  if  the
exposed  cells  are  abnormal  (cancer  cells,  for  example).

The  potential  for  radiation  to  treat  cancer  had  been  recognized  in  the  early
days  of  work  with  radiation,  but  after  World  War  II  the  effort  to  develop  radiation
therapy  for  cancer  increased.  Iodine  1 3 1  treatment  for  thyroid  cancer  was
recognized  as  an  effective  alternative  to  surgery,  both  at  the  primary  and
metastatic  sites.  Cancer  is  not  the  only  malady  susceptible  to  therapy  using
radioisotopes.  The  use  of  radioiodine  to  treat  hyperthyroidism  is  perhaps  the
most  widespread  example.  It  illustrates  the  progression  from  using  a  radioisotope
to  measure  a  process  (thyroid  activity)  to  actually  correcting  an  abnormal  process
(hyperthyroidism).93

Not  all  experimental  applications  of  radioisotopes  are  successful.  Some
experiments  end  in  blind  alleys,  an  important  result  because  this  prevents
widespread  application  of  useless  or  even  harmful  treatments.  Negative  results
also  help  researchers  to  redirect  their  efforts  to  more  promising  areas.  The
importance  of  negative  results  is  sometimes  not  appreciated  because  they  do  not
lead  to  effective  treatments.  Negative  results  may  range  from  simply  not
obtaining  an  anticipated  beneficial  effect  to  the  development  of  severe  side
effects.  Such  side  effects  may  or  may  not  have  been  anticipated;  they  may  occur
simultaneously  with  beneficial  effects,  such  as  the  killing  of  cancer  cells.
Occasionally  negative  results  include  earlier-than-anticipated  deaths  of  severely
ill  subjects.  An  example  is  the  experimental  use  of  gallium  72  in  the  early  1950s

302


Chapter  6

on  patients  diagnosed  with  malignant  bone  tumors.94

Another  radioisotope,  cobalt  60,  has  been  used  successfully  to  irradiate
malignant  tumors,  but  in  this  case  the  radioisotope  is  not  administered  internally
to  the  patient;  rather,  the  cobalt  60  forms  the  core  of  an  external  irradiator,  and  the
gamma  radiation  emanating  from  the  radioisotope  source  is  focused  on  the
patient's  tumor.  Although  cobalt  60  irradiators  have  been  largely  replaced  by
linear  accelerators,  they  were  developed  under  AEC  sponsorship  and  were
responsible  for  many  advances  in  radiation  therapy.

Recent  efforts  to  utilize  radioisotopes  in  cancer  diagnosis  and  treatment
are  based  on  the  ability  of  antibodies  to  recognize  and  bind  to  specific  molecules
on  the  surface  of  cancer  cells  and  the  ability  of  biomedical  scientists  to  custom-
design  and  manufacture  antibodies,  thus  improving  their  specificity.  These  fields
are  now  contributing  to  a  hybrid  technique:  cloning  antibodies  and  tagging  them
with  radioactive  isotopes.  As  the  antibody  selectively  binds  to  its  target  on  the
surface  of  the  cancer  cell,  the  radioactive  isotopes  attached  to  the  antibody  can
either  tag  the  cell  for  detection  and  diagnosis  or  deliver  a  fatal  dose  of  radiation  to
the  cancer  cell.  The  Food  and  Drug  Administration  recently  approved  the  first
radiolabeled  antibody,  to  be  used  to  diagnose  colorectal  and  ovarian  cancers.95

Even  in  the  case  of  widespread  metastases  where  cure  is  no  longer
possible,  radiation  treatments  will  often  produce  tumor  regression  and  ease  the
pain  caused  by  cancer.  Phosphorus  32  has  been  used  to  ease  (palliate)  the  bone
pain  caused  by  metastatic  prostate  and  breast  cancers.  Recently,  the  FDA
approved  the  use  of  strontium  89  for  similar  uses.9''

Metabolic  Studies

Studies  of  the  basic  processes  within  the  body  may  not  have  any
immediate  application  in  diagnosis  or  therapy,  but  they  can  indirectly  lead  to
practical  applications.  One  example  is  in  the  study  of  the  metabolism  of  iron  in
the  body.  Iron  is  an  important  part  of  hemoglobin,  which  carries  oxygen  from  the
lungs  to  all  cells  in  the  body.  Studies  using  radioactive  iron  established  the
pathway  iron  takes,  from  its  ingestion  in  food  to  its  use  in  the  blood's  hemoglobin
and  its  eventual  elimination  from  the  body;  these  studies  had  practical
applications  in  blood  disease,  nutrition,  and  the  importance  of  iron  metabolism
during  pregnancy.

Radioisotopes  have  also  been  used  to  study  how  the  weightlessness  of
space  travel  affects  the  human  body.  Radioisotopes  have  allowed  more  precise
observation  of  effects  of  space  travel  on  blood  plasma  volume,  total  body  water,
extracellular  fluid,  red  cell  mass,  red  cell  half-life,  and  bone  and  muscle  tissue
turnover  rates.

Other  uses  of  radioisotopes  are  in  studies  of  the  transport  and  metabolism
of  drugs  through  the  body.  New  drugs  for  any  clinical  application,  whether
diagnostic  or  therapeutic,  must  be  understood  in  detail  before  the  FDA  will

303


Part  II

approve  them  for  general  use.  One  method  for  readily  determining  how  a  drug
moves  through  the  blood  to  various  tissues,  and  is  metabolically  changed  in
structure,  is  to  incorporate  a  radioactive  isotope  into  the  structure  of  the  drug.

Unexpected  results  from  an  experiment  can  at  times  have  widespread
consequences.  An  example  is  how  the  work  of  Rosalyn  Yalow  and  Solomon
Berson  of  the  Bronx  VA  Medical  Center  opened  up  the  field  of
radioimmunoassay.  In  the  early  1950s,  it  was  discovered  that  adult  diabetics  had
both  pancreatic  and  circulating  insulin.  This  appeared  odd;  previously,  it  had
been  believed  that  all  diabetics  lacked  insulin.  To  explain  the  presence  of
diabetes  in  people  with  pancreatic  insulin,  Yalow  and  Berson  decided  to  study
how  rapidly  insulin  disappeared  from  the  blood  of  diabetics.  To  do  this,  they
synthesized  radioiodine-labeled  insulin.  This  would  act  as  a  radioactive  tag,
making  it  much  easier  to  measure  the  presence  of  insulin  in  blood.  To  their
surprise,  they  found  that  insulin  disappeared  more  slowly  from  diabetic  patients
than  from  nondiabetic  people.97

Their  work  had  an  impact  beyond  the  study  of  diabetes,  however.  In  the
process  of  studying  the  plasma  of  patients  who  had  been  injected  with  insulin,
they  discovered  that  the  radioactively  tagged  insulin  was  bound  to  an  antibody,  a
defensive  molecule  that  had  been  produced  by  the  patient's  body  and  custom-
designed  to  attach  itself  to  the  foreign  insulin  molecule.  This  was  a  surprise,  since
prevalent  doctrine  held  that  the  body  did  not  produce  antibodies  to  attack  small
molecules  such  as  insulin.  To  study  the  maximum  binding  capacity  of  the
antibodies,  they  did  saturation  tests,  using  fixed  amounts  of  radiolabeled  insulin
and  of  antibody  to  measure  graded  concentrations  of  insulin.  With  this  technique
Yalow  and  Berson  realized  they  could  measure  with  great  precision  the  quantities
of  insulin  in  unknown  samples. They  thus  developed  the  first
radioimmunoassay.  This  technique,  for  which  Rosalyn  Yalow  was  awarded  the
Nobel  Prize  in  Medicine  in  1977,  has  become  a  basic  tool  in  many  areas  of
research.  Radioimmunoassay  revolutionized  the  ability  of  scientists  to  detect  and
quantify  minute  levels  of  tissue  components,  such  as  hormones,  enzymes,  or
serum  proteins,  by  measuring  the  component's  ability  to  bind  to  an  antibody  or
other  protein  in  competition  with  a  standard  amount  of  the  same  component  that
had  been  radioactively  tagged  in  the  laboratory.  This  technique  has  permitted  the
diagnosis  of  many  human  conditions  without  directly  exposing  patients  to
radioactivity.

No  discussion  of  the  impact  of  radioisotopes  on  biomedical  science  would
be  complete  without  a  recognition  of  their  fundamental  importance  in  basic
biological  investigations.  The  ability  of  radioisotopically  labeled  metabolites  to
act  like,  and  therefore  trace,  their  nonradioactive  counterparts  has  allowed
scientists  to  follow  virtually  every  aspect  of  metabolism  in  cells  of  bacteria,
yeasts,  insects,  plants,  and  animals,  including  human  cells.  Among  the  benefits  of
such  studies  are  (a)  an  understanding  of  the  similarities  in  metabolism  of
organisms  throughout  the  evolutionary  scale,  (b)  identification  of  sometimes

304


Chapter  6

subtle  differences  in  cell  structure  and  function  between  organisms  and  thus  the
ability  of  drugs  to  kill  bacteria,  fungi,  or  insects  without  harming  humans,  and  (c)
elucidation  of  the  fundamental  properties  of  genetic  material  (DNA),  The  last  of
these  examples  has  important  implications  today,  as  the  human  genes  controlling
many  important  bodily  functions  are  being  identified  and  cloned  and  gene  therapy
is  just  beginning  to  find  its  way  into  clinical  application.  Many  benefits  of
understanding  the  human  genetic  code  have  already  been  realized,  and  others  will
likely  accrue  in  the  next  few  years.  These  benefits  are  the  result  of  fundamental
advances  in  genetics  and  molecular  biology  of  the  past  half  century,  which  in  turn
depended  heavily  on  studies  with  lower  organisms  and  with  radioisotopically
labeled  materials.  Thus,  human  health  is  benefiting  from  both  human  and
nonhuman  research  with  radioisotopes.

The  grandest  dream  of  the  early  pioneers—a  simple  and  complete  cure  for
cancer-remains  unfulfilled.  Promising  paths  at  times  proved  to  be  dead  ends.
However,  the  AEC's  widespread  provision  of  radioisotopes,  coupled  with  support
for  new  techniques  to  apply  them,  laid  the  foundation  stones  for  much  of  modern
medicine  and  biology.  This  section  has  only  skimmed  the  field  of  nuclear
medicine,  with  its  vast  array  of  diagnostic  and  therapeutic  techniques,  and  the  use
of  radioisotopes  in  many  areas  of  basic  research.


An  Example  of  Hopes  Unfulfilled:  The  Gallium  72  Experiments

Human  experiments  with  gallium  72,  as  discussed  in  the  section  titled  "General  Benefits
of  Radioisotope  Research,"  were  conducted  at  the  Oak  Ridge  Institute  of  Nuclear  Studies  in  the
early  1950s.  The  experiments  used  gallium  72  because  of  its  short  half-life  (14.3  hours)  and
because  an  earlier  animal  study  indicated  it  concentrated  in  new  bone,  making  it  useful  as  a  tumor
marker  and  possibly  for  therapy."  The  1953  published  report  stated  that  the  purpose  of  the  study
was  "to  investigate  the  therapeutic  possibilities  in  human  tumors  involving  the  skeletal  system. "b
In  1995  one  of  the  original  researchers  stated  to  Advisory  Committee  staff  a  somewhat  broader
purpose:  "to  exploit  to  the  fullest  possible  extent  any  possible  use  of  this  isotope  as  a  bone  seeking
element  rather  than  to  seek  a  cure  for  a  specific  malignant  bone  tumor,  such  as  osteogenic
sarcoma.  .  .  .  While  the  GalIium-72  studies  did  include  osteogenic  sarcomas,  they  only  represented


a.  Herbert  D.  Herman.  M.D.,  FACR,  to  Dan  Guttman,  Executive  Director,  Advisory  Committee
on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  19  May  1995  ("It  has  come  to  my  attention  .  .  ."),  2.  Dr.  Kerman  cites  as
the  preceding  study:  H.  C.  Dudley  and  G.  E.  Maddox,  "Deposition  of  radiogallium  (Ga-72)  in  skeletal
tissues,"  Journal  of  Pharmacology,'  and  Experimental  Therapeutics  96  (July  1949):  224-227.

b.  Gould  A.  Andrews,  M.D.,  Samuel  W.  Root,  M.D..  and  Herbert  D.  Kerman,  M.D..  "Clinical
Studies  with  Gallium-72,"  570,  in  Marshall  Brucer,  M.D.  (ed.),  Gould  Andrews,  M.D.,  and  H.  D.  Bruner,
M.D.,  "Clinical  Studies  with  Gallium-72,"  Radiology  66  (1953):  534-613.

305


Part  II

less  than  half  (9/21 ),  43%,  of  all  the  other  primary  and  metastatic  skeletal  malignancies  studied.'"

Patients  were  chosen  who  had  been  diagnosed  with  "ultimately  fatal  neoplasms  not
amenable  to  curative  surgery  or  radiotherapy.'"1  The  diagnosis  later  proved  to  be  accurate  in  all  but
one  of  the  fifty-five  subjects.0  In  one  part  of  the  study,  thirty-four  patients  were  given  trace
amounts  of  gallium.  Both  external  radiation  measurements  and  a  variety  of  excreta,  blood,  and
tissue  samples  were  analyzed  to  determine  the  localization  of  gallium.  In  another  part  of  the  study,
twenty-one  other  patients  were  given  doses  that  the  researchers  hoped  would  be  in  the  therapeutic
range.  Total  doses  ranged  from  50  to  777  microcuries.1  The  gallium  was  administered  in
fractionated  doses  biweekly.  According  to  the  medical  investigators,  these  patients  "were,  in
general,  in  a  more  advanced  stage  of  disease  and  were  completely  beyond  even  palliation  from
conventional  forms  of  therapy."6  For  these  patients,  "doses  which  were  believed  to  be  moderate
were  given  and  gradually  increased  to  toxic  level. "h  The  conclusion  of  the  report  notes  that  "most
of  the  patients  in  whom  gallium  therapy  was  attempted  were  given  maximum  amounts  of  the
isotope.  Only  the  hopelessness  of  their  prognoses  justified  a  trial  of  doses  so  damaging  to  the
hematopoietic  tissues.'"

A  major  difficulty  was  lack  of  knowledge  about  both  the  chemical  toxicity  of  stable  (that
is,  nonradioactive)  gallium  and  the  radiation  toxicity  of  gallium  72.  Calculations  and  small  animal
studies  indicated  that  dosimetry  techniques  used  for  other  radioisotopes  would  "be  of  little  value."1
During  the  study,  close  monitoring  was  done  of  many  bodily  functions  to  observe  toxic  effects  as
soon  as  they  began  to  appear.  Blood  tests  revealed  changes  that  "were  prominent  and  were  usually
of  primary  importance  in  determining  when  the  treatments  should  be  discontinued. "k  Other  effects
included  drowsiness,  then  anorexia,  nausea,  vomiting,  and  skin  rash.

One  problem  was  determining  whether  these  effects  were  due  to  chemical  toxicity,
radiation  toxicity,  or  a  combination.  Due  to  technical  difficulties  in  separating  out  pure  gallium


c.  Kerman  to  Guttman,  19  May  1995,  2.  Dr.  Kennan  presumably  was  referring  to  the  twenty-one
subjects  who  received  doses  in  the  therapeutic  range,  not  the  thirty-four  who  received  trace  doses.

d.  Andrews,  Root,  and  Kerman,  "Clinical  Studies  with  Gallium-72,"  570.

e.  A  patient  was  diagnosed  with  osteogenic  sarcoma  in  his  leg,  which  was  amputated.  X  rays  also
revealed  dense  nodules  in  his  lung,  which  were  diagnosed  as  inoperable  but  typical  pulmonary  metastases.
He  was  discharged  after  the  gallium  study.  When  he  later  returned  to  the  hospital,  an  operation  revealed  that
the  nodules  were  not  typical  metastases,  but  unidentifiable  lesions  "not  characteristic  of  any  specific  lesion."
This  could  not  have  been  known  prior  to  the  study,  when  only  x  rays  were  available  for  diagnosis.  Ibid.,  585.

f.  The  researchers  reported  that  these  doses  were  equivalent  to  8.5-89.2  mg/kg  of  body  weight.
Ibid.,  574-577.

g.  Ibid.,  570.
h.  Ibid.,  571.
i. Ibid.,  587.

j. The  investigators  wrote  that  "[njormal  tissue  and  whole-body  tolerances  for  amounts  of
radiogallium  necessary  to  produce  a  significant  effect  upon  malignant  tissues  were  unknown.  Preliminary
calculations  and  small  animal  experiments  had  indicated  that  accepted  radiation  dosimetry  as  applied  to  other
isotopes  would  be  of  little  value  in  calculating  radiation  dosage  to  tissues.  It  was  therefore  necessary  to
utilize  the  hematologic  picture  to  assess  the  damaging  effects  of  whole-body  irradiation,  and  clinical  and
roentgenographic  experience  in  evaluating  a  therapeutic  response."  Ibid.,  571.

k. Ibid.,  573.

306


Chapter  6

72.  the  radioactive  gallium  was  injected  with  larger  amounts  of  stable  gallium,  so  both  chemical
and  radiation  effects  could  be  present.  To  distinguish  them,  one  patient  was  administered  an
amount  of  stable  gallium  equal  to  a  therapeutic  dose,  but  with  only  an  insignificant  amount  of
radioactive  tracer  (to  determine  localization).  Observed  toxic  effects  in  this  patient  did  not  include
bone  marrow  depression.  The  researchers  concluded,  therefore,  that  the  "profound  bone  marrow
depression  is  characteristic  of  radiation  damage  and  is  probably  chiefly  caused  by  radiation,
though  an  element  of  stable  metal  toxicity  may  also  be  contributory."1

Bone  marrow  depression  gradually  ended  after  gallium  injections  were  stopped.  While  it
lasted,  bone  marrow  depression  led  to  greater  susceptibility  to  infection  and  bleeding.  Two
subjects  died  sooner  than  anticipated,  one  from  infection  and  bleeding  and  the  other  from
infection,  while  their  bone  marrow  was  still  depressed.  "These  two  patients  died  in  spite  of
antibiotics,  blood  transfusions,  and  toluidine-blue  therapy.'""  The  researchers  reported  that  "in  two
patients  our  estimates  of  safe  dosage  limits  were  in  error  and  radiogallium  is  believed  to  have
hastened  death.""  One  researcher,  writing  in  1995,  stated  that  "since  'safe  dosage'  levels  were  only
estimates  and  seven  other  patients  had  survived  with  even  higher  dosages,  our  choice  of  language
[citing  the  preceding  quotation]  was  unfortunate.  It  must  be  emphasized  that  this  portion  of  the
study  must  be  likened  to  a  current  clinical  Phase  I  trial  where  in  a  limited  fashion  [a]  broad  range
of  toxicity  levels  may  at  best  be  only  estimated."0

The  major  conclusion  of  the  experiment  was  that  hopes  for  gallium  therapy  were
unfulfilled.  Even  though  the  maximum  tolerated  doses  had  been  administered,  the  researchers
reported  that  "we  were  impressed  with  the  almost  complete  lack  of  any  clinical  improvement
following  gallium  treatment,  even  in  patients  who  showed  evidence  of  striking  differential
localization  of  gallium  in  tumor  tissue."0

Concerning  patient  consent,  the  published  study  says  nothing,  which  was  normal  for
scientific  articles  at  that  time.  Near  the  end  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  deliberations,  ORINS
reportedly  found  consent  forms  signed  by  subjects  in  the  gallium  study.4  One  of  the  researchers  in
1995  did  offer  his  recollections  regarding  consent  to  the  Committee:

Forty-five  years  ago  all  of  our  patients  and  their  families  were
given  a  booklet  of  information  explaining  how  radioisotopes
were  used  in  medicine  and  more  specific  information  about


I. Ibid.,  575.

m. Ibid.,  573.  Neither  had  suffered  from  osteogenic  sarcoma;  one  had  suffered  from
adenocarcinoma  of  the  kidney  with  lytic  bone  metastases  and  another  from  cancer  of  the  prostate  with
metastatic  skeletal  involvement,  Kerman  to  Guttman,  19  May  1995,  3.

n. Andrews,  Root,  and  Kerman,  "Clinical  Studies  with  Gallium-72,"  571.

o. Ibid.

p. Ibid.,  587.  Researchers  reported  evidence  of  concentration  in  tumors  as  being  one  of  the
following:  "no  data,"  "none."  "little,"  "moderate,"  or  "pronounced."  Ibid.,  574.

q. Dr.  Shirley  Fry,  telephone  interview  with  Dan  Guttman  (ACHRE),  30  August  1995,  I.  The
Advisory  Committee  did  not  have  enough  time  to  review  the  forms  and  related  file  materials  once  they  were
identified,  which,  because  ORINS  deemed  them  privacy-protected  material,  would  have  required  review  at
Oak  Ridge.

307


Part  II


their  own  involvement  including  the  possible  known  risks.
Signed  applications  for  admission  and  waiver  and  release
forms  were  demanded  for  all  patients.  When,  as  in  the  ongoing
gallium  studies,  toxicity  or  enhanced  risks  were  encountered,
these  were  immediately  made  clear  to  the  patients  and  their
families  if  they  were  known  in  that  time  frame.  Very  often
toxicity  is  only  apparent  after  review  of  the  clinical  data.  In  the
gallium  studies,  when  on  review  of  the  data  it  was  determined
that  no  therapeutic  benefit  had  occurred,  the  study  was
immediately  terminated/


CONCLUSION

At  the  end  of  World  War  II,  radioisotopes  were  regarded  as  the  most
promising  peacetime  application  of  our  new  knowledge  of  the  atom.  Venturing
into  new  fields  carried  with  it  substantial  risks:  risks  due  to  our  ignorance  of  what
lay  ahead,  and  risks  due  to  the  lack  of  training  of  many  would-be  explorers.  The
AEC  consistently  accepted  and  acted  upon  its  responsibility  to  manage  this  risk.
An  extensive  administrative  system  was  created  to  oversee  the  safety  of  human
radiation  experiments  that  used  radioisotopes  supplied  by  the  AEC.  At  the  heart
of  the  system  was  the  AEC's  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  of  the
Advisory  Committee  on  Isotopes  Distribution  Policy.  This  system  regulated  the
types  of  uses  allowed  according  to  their  hazard  and  the  extent  of  our  knowledge
of  the  risks.  It  required  and  provided  training  of  those  who  would  use
radioisotopes.  It  required  the  establishment  of  local  radioisotope  committees,
which  not  only  reviewed  proposals  but  suggested  changes  at  the  local  level  in
experimental  design  to  reduce  risk.

While  extensive  measures  were  taken  to  minimize  risk,  few  measures
were  taken  to  ensure  that  all  the  explorers,  subjects  as  well  as  researchers,  were
fully  informed  and  willing  members  of  the  expedition.  No  evidence  has  yet  been
found  that  the  standards  for  documented  consent,  articulated  by  AEC  General
Manager  Carroll  Wilson  in  1947,  were  applied  by  the  AEC  Isotopes  Distribution
Division.  A  limited  consent  requirement  was  instituted  only  for  the  administration
of  larger-than-usual  doses  to  very  sick  patients.  Only  in  the  late  1950s  did  a
consent  requirement  for  normal  volunteers  appear  in  the  AEC  guidelines.

Based  on  the  records  examined  by  the  Advisory  Committee,  the  adjunct


r. Kerman  to  Guttman,  19  May  1995,  3.  The  booklet,  "ORINS  Patient  Information  Booklet"
(circa  May  1950).  is  discussed  in  chapter  1 .  ORINS  hospital  was  known  to  be  dedicated  to  experimental
work  with  radiation  and  radioisotopes.  Patients  were  admitted  to  the  hospital  only  if  they  were  willing  to  be
experimental  subjects.  It  is  not  as  clear,  however,  whether  the  details  of  any  particular  experiment  were
always  explained  adequately  to  patients.

308


Chapter  6

system  of  local  radioisotope  committees  appears  to  have  functioned  as  planned.
The  records  of  local  institutions  indicate  that  they  established  their  own  local
radioisotope  committees,  as  required  by  the  AEC,  and  that  these  local  committees
closely  assessed  the  risks  of  experiments.  At  times,  this  system  went  beyond
what  the  AEC  had  planned.  Some  local  committees  had  jurisdictions  that
extended  to  all  radiation-related  work,  not  merely  to  radioisotopes  supplied  by  the
AEC.  The  local  committees  also  provided,  probably  unintentionally,  a  ready-
made  vehicle  for  administering  greater  oversight  of  consent  practices,  as  concern
developed  in  the  1960s.  Requirements  for  consent  on  a  federal  level  changed  only
in  the  late  1960s,  as  part  of  a  governmentwide  concern.


309


ENDNOTES


1.  The  first  complete  proposal  for  radioisotope  distribution  is  contained  in  a
memo  dated  3  January  1946.  Radioisotope  Committee  of  Clinton  Laboratories  (Oak
Ridge,  Tennessee)  to  Colonel  S.  L.  Warren,  Medical  Director  of  the  Manhattan  Project,
3  January  1946  ("Specific  Proposals  for  the  National  Distribution  of  Radioisotopes
Produced  by  the  Manhattan  Engineer  District")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-31).
This  memo,  in  turn,  was  derived  from  a  more  extensive  document  prepared  by  Waldo
Cohn,  a  member  of  the  lab  staff.  W.  E.  Cohn,  3  January  1946  ("The  National
Distribution  of  Radioisotopes  from  the  Manhattan  Engineer  District")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-051094-A-317).

2.  The  press  release  announcing  the  program  noted  that,  in  addition  to  technical
qualifications  of  researchers,  "An  additional  qualification  will  require  all  groups  using
the  isotopes  for  fundamental  research  or  applied  science  to  publish  or  otherwise  make
available  their  findings,  thereby  promoting  further  applications  and  scientific  advances."
Headquarters,  Manhattan  District  (Oak  Ridge,  Tennessee),  14  June  1946  ("For  Release
in  Newspapers  Dated  June  14,  1946")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-31),  1.

3.  "Availability  of  Radioactive  Isotopes:  Announcement  from  Headquarters,
Manhattan  Project,  Washington,  D.C.,"  Science  103  (14  June  1946):  697-705.

4.  Harry  H.  Davis,  New  York  Times  Magazine  (typescript),  22  September  1946
("The  Atom  Goes  to  Work  for  Medicine")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-408),  2.

5.  Ibid.,  6.

6.  Cohn,  3  January  1946,  10.

7.  Ibid.,  14.

8.  R.  E.  Cunningham,  20  February  1971  ("Historical  Summary  of  the
Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications")  (ACHRE  No.  NRC-012695-A),  6.

9.  AEC  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  of  the  Committee  on  Isotope
Distribution,  13  March  1949  ("Revised  Tentative  Minutes  of  March  13,  1949,  Meeting
of  Subcommittee  on  Human  Application  of  the  Committee  on  Isotope  Distribution  of
U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission:  AEC  Building,  Washington,  D.C.")  (ACHRE  No.
NARA-082294-A-62),  7.

10.  Advisory  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  of  the  Interim  Advisory
Committee  on  Isotope  Distribution  Policy,  1 1  July  1946  ("Minutes  of  Initial  Meeting-
Held  June  28,  1946;  Oak  Ridge,  Tennessee")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-84),  1.

11.  Ibid.,  2-8.

12.  Ibid.,  5.

13.  Ibid.,  6.

14.  Ibid.,  10.

15.  For  example,  proposals  to  study  possible  therapeutic  uses  of  UX1/  UX2,  a
"naturally  radioactive  pair  [that]  behaves  chemically  as  UX1,  a  thorium  isotope

(Th  234). .  .  .  Aside  from  the  danger  of  bone  damage,  the  material  would  have  to  be  used
with  much  caution  because  of  likely  kidney  damage.  No  advantage  could  be  seen  in  the
use  of  radiothorium  over  the  use  of  certain  other  beta  ray  emitting  radioisotopes  which
deposit  in  bone."  Ibid.,  9.

16.  Ibid.

17.  "In  general,  there  is  more  of  a  need  for  speed  in  handling  requests  for  human
applications  than  for  others  because:  (1)  therapeutic  action  may  be  needed  urgently,  (2)


310


the  case  may  be  an  exceptionally  good  one  for  some  purpose  and  may  only  be  available
for  study  immediately  (for  example,  the  chance  to  obtain  tracer  samples  resulting  from  a
special  operation)."  Ibid.,  10.

18.  Isotopes  Branch,  Research  Division,  Manhattan  District,  Oak  Ridge,
Tennessee,  3  October  1946  ("Details  of  Isotope  Procurement")  (ACHRE  No.
NARA-082294-A-31).

19.  Isotopes  Branch,  Research  Division,  Manhattan  District,  Oak  Ridge,
Tennessee,  3  October  1946  ("Agreement  and  Conditions  for  Order  and  Receipt  of
Radioactive  Materials")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-31),  2.

20.  The  statement  read:

This  is  to  certify  that  the  undersigned  has  adequate  facilities  for  the
investigation  to  be  conducted  by  him  as  proposed  in  the  'Interim

Period  Request  for  Radioelement,  Form  313,'  Serial  Number ,

and  that  such  drug  will  be  used  solely  by  him  or  under  his  direction
for  the  investigation,  unless  and  until  an  application  becomes
effective  with  respect  to  such  drug  under  section  505  of  the  Federal
Food,  Drug  and  Cosmetic  Act,  Isotopes  Branch,  Research  Division,
Manhattan  District,  Oak  Ridge,  Tenn.
Isotopes  Branch,  Research  Division,  Manhattan  District,  Oak  Ridge,  Tennessee,  3
October  1946  ("Certificate  .  .  .  EIDM  Form  465")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-31),
1.

21.  Isotopes  Branch,  Research  Division,  Manhattan  District  ("Report  of
Requests  Received  to  July  31,1 946,"  "2nd  Report  of  Request  Received  August  1  to  3 1 ,
1946,"  "3rd  Report  of  Request  Received  September  1  to  30,  1946,"  "4th  Report  of
Requests  Received  October  1  to  31,  1946")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-31).

22.  Franklin  asked:

What  is  the  relationship  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  Medical
Division  to  the  Isotopes  Branch  and  the  medical  and  biological  aspects
of  the  isotope  distribution  program?

(1)  Will  allocations  for  human  administration  be  subject  to  medical
review  and  what  control  will  be  exercised?

(2)  What  responsibilities  does  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  bear
for  the  human  administration  of  isotopes  (a)  by  private  physicians  and
medical  institutions  outside  of  the  Project,  and  (b)  by  physicians  within
the  Project?  This  latter  category  includes  contractor  personnel
employing  Atomic  Energy  Commission  funds  (indirectly)  to  perform
tracer  research,  some  of  which  is  of  no  immediate  therapeutic  value  to
the  patient.  What  are  the  criteria  for  future  human  tracer  research?

(3)  What  responsibilities  does  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  bear
for  the  safe  handling  by  the  recipient  of  the  more  hazardous
radioisotopes?

(4)  What  responsibilities  does  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  bear
for  radioactive  waste  disposal  outside  the  Project?

J.  C.  Franklin,  Manager,  Oak  Ridge  Operations,  to  Carroll  Wilson,  AEC  General
Manager,  26  September  1947  ("Medical  Policy")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 13094-B-3),  2.


311


23.  Research  Division,  Manhattan  District,  3  October  1946  ("Isotope  Request,
For  Manhattan  Project  Use  Only  .  .  .  EIDM  Form  558")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-
31),  1.

24.  In  a  5  October  1949  memorandum  to  Carroll  Tyler,  Manager  of  Los  Alamos,
Paul  Aebersold,  Chief  of  the  Isotopes  Division,  noted  that  "Dr.  [Shields]  Warren
instructed  that  such  allocations  would  be  made  by  the  Isotopes  Division  only  after
review  and  approval  by  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  of  the  Commission's
Committee  on  Isotope  Distribution.  It  should  be  emphasized  that  the  instruction  applies
even  though  the  radiomaterial  is  produced  in  the  laboratory  where  it  is  to  be  used.

"Since  this  procedure  has  not  been  uniformly  followed  in  the  past,  we  are
writing  to  acquaint  you  with  the  appropriate  details."  Paul  Aebersold,  Chief,  Isotopes
Division,  to  Carroll  Tyler,  Manager,  Los  Alamos,  5  October  1949  ("Use  of  Radioisotopes
in  Human  Subjects")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-021095-B-4),  1 .  An  identical  memo  was  also
sent  to  the  manager  of  the  AEC's  New  York  office  regarding  requirements  for
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory.  Paul  Aebersold,  Chief,  Isotopes  Division,  to  W.  E.
Kelley,  Manager,  New  York,  5  October  1949  ("Use  of  Radioisotopes  in  Human
Subjects")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-012795B).

25.  Presumably  codifying  existing  practice,  10  C.F.R.  30.10  (1951  supplement
to  1949  edition)  states:

The  regulations  in  this  part  do  not  apply  to  persons  to
the  extent  that  such  persons  operate  Commission-owned
facilities  in  carrying  out  programs  on  behalf  of  the
Commission.  In  such  cases,  the  acquisition,  transfer,
use,  and  disposal  of  radioisotopes  are  governed  by  the
contracts  between  such  persons  and  the  Commission,
and  internal  bulletins,  instructions  and  directives  issued
by  the  Commission.

26.  Carroll  L.  Wilson,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Principal  Staff,  Washington,
and  Managers  of  Operations,  7  June  1950  ("Bulletin  GM-161,  Procedure  for  Securing
Isotopic  Materials  and  Irradiation  Services")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-122994-B),  1.

27.  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications,  13  March  1949,  1.

28.  Ibid.,  3.

29.  Ibid.  These  minutes  include  a  review  of  the  minutes  of  the  22-23  March
1948,  meeting.

30.  Ibid.,  10-11.

31.  Ibid.,  10.

32.  Ibid.,  12-13.

33.  Ibid.,  4.

34.  Ibid.

35.  Paul  Aebersold,  Chief,  Isotopes  Division,  Oak  Ridge  Operations,  to  Hymer
Friedell,  G.  Failla,  Joseph  G.  Hamilton,  and  A.  H.  Holland,  Jr.,  9  March  1948  ("Meeting
of  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  in  Washington,  March  22  and  23")  (ACHRE
No.  NARA-082294-A-17),  2.

36.  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications,  13  March  1949,  5-6.

37.  Ibid.

38.  Clemens  Benda,  Director  of  Research  and  Clinical  Psychiatry,  to  AEC
Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications,  29  September  1953  ("This  letter  is  written  in


312


order  to  elicit  your  permission  to  administer  a  dose  of  50  uc  Ca45  to  a  moribund  gargoyle
patient  now  hospitalized  in  our  institution  .  .  ."),  1 .  Reproduced  at  appendix  B-27,  Task
Force  on  Human  Subject  Research,  to  Philip  Campbell,  Commissioner,  Commonwealth
of  Massachusetts  Executive  Office  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  Department  of  Mental
Retardation,  April  1994  ("A  Report  on  the  Use  of  Radioactive  Materials  in  Human
Subject  Research  that  Involved  Residents  of  State-Operated  Facilities  within  the
Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts  from  1943  to  1973")  (ACHRE  No.  MASS-072194-A).

39.  Clemens  Benda,  Clinical  Director,  to  "Parent,"  28  May  1953  ("In  previous
years  we  have  done  some  examinations  in  connection  with  the  nutritional  department  of
the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  .  .  ."),  1.  Reproduced  at  appendix  B-23,  Task
Force  on  Human  Subject  Research,  to  Philip  Campbell,  April  1994.

40.  Task  Force  on  Human  Subject  Research,  to  Philip  Campbell,  April  1994,  16.

41.  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications,  13  March  1949,  8.

42.  AEC  Isotopes  Division,  "General  Authorizations  for  Procurement  of
Radioisotopes,"  Isotopics:  Announcements  of  the  Isotopes  Division  1  (April  1951):  1-3.

43.  AEC  Isotopes  Division.  "General  Authorizations  for  Clinical  Use  of
Radioisotopes,"  Isotopics:  Announcements  of  the  Isotopes  Division  2  (April  1952):  1-2.

44.  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications,  13  March  1949,  1 1.

45.  Paul  C.  Aebersold,  Chief,  AEC  Isotopes  Division,  to  William  E.  Barbour,
Jr.,  President,  Tracerlab,  Inc.,  1 1  April  1949  ("Violation  of 'Acceptance  of  Terms  and
Conditions  for  Order  and  Receipt  of  Byproduct  Materials  [Radioisotopes]'")  (ACHRE
No.  NARA-082294-A-4),  1.

46.  William  Barbour,  President,  Tracerlab,  Inc.,  to  Employees,  April  1949
("Violation  of  AEC  Regulations")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-4),  1 .  Barbour  stated
that  a  recurrence  would

mean  cessation  of  all  radiochemical  operations  of  the
Company.  In  turn  this  would  jeopardize  the  investments
of  several  thousand  new  stockholders  who  have  placed
great  faith  in  the  integrity  and  ability  of  the  management.
A  violation  of  a  specific  agreement  with  the  AEC  would
be  a  breach  of  that  faith  and  could  only  result  in  the
automatic  dismissal  of  anyone  contributing  to  such  a
violation.

47.  AEC  Isotopes  Division,  23  March  1950  ("Meeting  of  the  Advisory
Committee  on  Isotope  Distribution,  March  23  and  24,  1950,  Washington,  D.C.,
Minutes")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA- 1 22994-B- 1 ),  4.

48.  AEC  Isotopes  Division,  September  1949  ("Supplement  No.  1  to  Catalogue
and  Price  List  No.  3")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-122794-A-1),  1.

49.  Paul  C.  Aebersold,  Director,  Isotopes  Division,  to  T.  H.  Johnson,  Director,
Division  of  Research,  2  November  1954  ("Providing  Radioisotopes  at  Reduced  Prices
for  Medical,  Biological,  or  Other  Research  Uses")  (ACHRE  No.  TEX-101294-A-4),  1 .

50.  10  C.F.R.  37(1961).

51.  A  conscious  decision  was  made  not  to  include  detailed  standards  in  the
regulations.  The  discussion  is  summarized  in  Advisory  Committee  on  Isotope
Distribution,  23  March  1950,  7-8.  The  regulations  were  first  promulgated  in  10  C.F.R.
30.50(1951  supplement  to  1949  edition).


313


52.  AEC  Isotopes  Division,  6  December  1948  ("Isotopes  Division  Circular  D-4:
Radioisotopes  for  Use  in  Medicine")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-101 194-A-5);  Isotopes
Division,  "Supplement  No.  1,"  September  1949;  Isotopes  Extension,  Division  of  Civilian
Application,  U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  "The  Medical  Use  of  Radioisotopes:
Recommendations  and  Requirements  by  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,"  RC- 1 2
(February  1956).

53.  Isotopes  Extension,  February  1956,  14.

54.  Ibid.,  15.

55.  R.  E.  Cunningham,  "Historical  Summary,"  5.

56.  AEC  Division  of  Materials  Licensing,  "Non-Routine  Medical  Uses  of
Byproduct  Material,"  A  Guide  for  the  Preparation  of  Applications  for  the  Medical  Use  of
Radioisotopes  (November  1965),  47-48.

57.  See,  for  example,  Bryant  L.  Jones,  Division  of  Oncology  and
Radiopharmaceuticals,  Bureau  of  Medicine,  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  1 8  May
1967  ("FDA  Responsibility  in  Radiopharmaceutical  Research")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
051094-A-236).

58.  Advisory  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications,  1 1  July  1946,  6.

59.  This  requirement  is  stated  in  Aebersold's  memo  of  5  October  1949,  quoted
earlier  in  endnote  24,  which  notified  AEC  labs  that  their  applications  for  human  use
would  now  be  reviewed  by  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  of  the  AEC's
Committee  on  Isotope  Distribution.  Concerning  local  isotope  committees,  the  memo
states:  "It  should  be  emphasized  that  each  application  should  be  accompanied  by  a
formal,  written  endorsement,  signed  by  the  Chairman  of  the  local  "Isotopes  Committee,"
the  recommended  membership  of  which  is  outlined  on  pages  30  and  31  of  the  catalog."
Paul  Aebersold,  Chief,  Isotopes  Division,  to  Carroll  Tyler,  Manager,  Los  Alamos,  5
October  1949  ("Use  of  Radioisotopes  in  Human  Subjects")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-021095-
B-4);  Paul  Aebersold,  Chief,  Isotopes  Division,  to  W.  E.  Kelley,  Manager,  New  York,  5
October  1949  ("Use  of  Radioisotopes  in  Human  Subjects")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-0 12795-

B).

60.  AEC  Isotopes  Division,  Isotopics  1,1.

61.  Isotopes  Extension,  February  1956,  7.  The  full  description  of  the  functions
of  the  Medical  Isotope  Committee  is:

1.  Formation  of  a  Medical  Isotopes  Committee.  The
Medical  Isotope  Committee  shall  include  at  least  three
members.  Membership  should  include  physicians  expert
in  internal  medicine  (or  hematology),  pathology,  or
therapeutic  radiology  and  a  person  experienced  in  assay
of  radioisotopes  and  protection  against  ionizing
radiations.  It  is  often  appropriate  that  a  qualified
physicist  be  available  to  the  Committee,  at  least  in
consulting  capacity.  It  is  recognized  that  the
composition  of  local  isotope  committees  may  vary  from
institution  to  institution  depending  upon  the  individual
interests  of  a  particular  medical  facility.

2.  Duties  of  the  Medical  Isotopes  Committee


314


Generally,  the  Committee  should  have  the  following
responsibilities:

a.  Review  and  grant  permission  for,  or  disapprove,  the
use  of  radioisotopes  within  the  institution  from  the
standpoint  of  radiological  health  safety  and  other  factors
which  the  Committee  may  wish  to  establish  for  medical
use  of  these  materials.

b.  Prescribe  special  conditions  which  may  be  necessary,
such  as  physical  examinations,  additional  training,
designation  of  limited  area  or  location  of  use,  disposal
methods,  etc.

c.  Review  records  and  receive  reports  from  its
radiological  safety  officer  or  other  individual  responsible
for  health-safety  practices.

d.  Recommend  remedial  action  when  a  person  fails  to
observe  safety  recommendations  and  rules.

e.  Keep  a  record  of  actions  taken  by  the  Committee.

62.  The  Advisory  Committee  also  reviewed  materials  from  the  AEC's  Oak
Ridge,  Los  Alamos,  Argonne,  and  Brookhaven  laboratories,  the  Air  Force  School  of
Aviation  Medicine,  and  the  University  of  California.  The  development  of  research  at  the
University  of  California  at  Berkeley  and  San  Francisco  is  the  subject  of  a  case  study
appearing  in  a  companion  volume  to  this  report.

63.  N.  W.  Faxon,  Director,  Massachusetts  General  Hospital,  to  Drs.  Aub,
Moore,  Shulz,  and  Rawson,  3  May  1946  ("At  the  meeting  of  the  General  Executive
Committee  held  on  May  1,  1946,  consideration  of  the  use  of  radioactive  isotopes  was
discussed  .  . .")  (ACHRE  No.  H AR- 100394- A- 1),  1.

64.  "It  should  be  emphasized  that  the  University  Radiation  Policy  Committee
was  established  to  deal  with  all  types  of  radiation  problems  at  the  University  and  was  not
limited  to  the  scope  of 'radioisotope  committees'  suggested  by  the  AEC  for  radioisotope
procurement.  In  fact  this  Committee  predated  the  earliest  suggestions  of  the  AEC  by
almost  a  year."  W.  W.  Meinke,  Chairman,  University  of  Michigan  Radiation  Policy
Committee,  to  I.  Lampe,  27  February  1956  ("On  October  13,  1950,  the  President  of  the
University  of  Michigan  established  the  Radiation  Policy  Committee  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
MIC-010495-A-2),  1.

65.  Consisting  of  Hugh  Morgan  (Vanderbilt  University),  Stafford  Warren
(University  of  California  at  Los  Angeles),  Hymer  Friedell  (Case  Western  Reserve
University  ),  Shields  Warren  (AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine),  and  Perrin  Long
(Johns  Hopkins  University).

66.  There  was  some  debate  at  the  beginning  as  to  the  name  of  the  units.  With
"radioactive"  still  a  charged  word  for  much  of  the  population,  an  early  memo  suggested
that  "it  could  to  advantage  be  called  a  Metabolism  Ward."  Veterans  Administration,  15
September  1948  ("Minutes  of  the  Meeting,  Central  Advisory  Committee  on
Radioisotopes,  U.S.  Veterans  Administration")  (ACHRE  No.  UCLA- 100794- A),  23.

67.  The  chairman  listed  the  already-achieved  benefits  to  thyroid  gland  research
and  blood  volume  diagnosis,  and  claimed,  "It  is  not  an  overstatement  to  say  that  progress
can  be  expected  to  be  rapid  and  on  a  wide  front  as  greater  use  is  made  in  medical  and
biological  research  when  this  new  tool  is  applied  in  attempts  to  solve  such  problems."


315


Ibid.,  3.

68.  Framingham,  Massachusetts;  Bronx,  New  York;  Cleveland,  Ohio;  Hines,
Illinois;  Minneapolis,  Minnesota;  Van  Nuys,  California;  Los  Angeles,  California;  and
Dallas,  Texas.

69.  Joseph  C.  Aub  et.  a!.,  to  the  Executive  Committee,  Massachusetts  General
Hospital,  17  June  1946  ("The  Radioactive  Isotope  Committee  had  its  first  meeting  on
June  15th  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  HAR-100394-A-2),  1-2.

70.  William  Sweet,  interviewed  by  Gilbert  Whittemore  (ACHRE),  transcript  of
audio  recording,  8  April  1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,
Targeted  Interview  Project),  20.

7 1 .  VA  Central  Advisory  Committee  on  Radioisotopes,  1 5  September  1 948,  26.

72.  Ibid.

73.  University  of  Michigan  Subcommittee  on  Human  Use  of  Isotopes,  10
December  1956  ("Minutes,  Meeting  of  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Use  of  Isotopes")
(ACHRE  No.  MIC-010495-A-3),  1.

74.  William  H.  Beierwaltes  to  Edward  A.  Carr,  Chairman,  University  of
Michigan  Subcommittee  on  Human  Use  of  Radioisotopes,  20  May  1968  ("Enclosed  are
our  calculations  to  date  on  our  first  two  patients  studied  in  the  Clinical  Research  Unit .  .
.")  (ACHRE  No.  MIC-010495-A-6),  3.  The  form  includes  space  for  a  signature  by  a
witness  as  well  as  the  patient.

75.  In  an  effort  to  develop  an  overall  assessment  of  the  possible  harm  from
radioisotope  experiments  conducted  in  the  past,  the  Advisory  Committee  extracted  dose
data  from  our  Experiment  Database,  whenever  available,  in  order  to  perform  risk
analyses  using  contemporary  standards.  Unfortunately,  most  of  the  data  recovered  by  the
Committee  was  fragmentary  and  did  not  provide  a  sufficient  basis  for  an  analysis  of
possible  harm  in  most  cases.

76.  Massachusetts  General  Hospital  Radioactive  Isotope  Committee,  15  March
1955  ("Meeting  of  the  Massachusetts  General  Hospital  Radioactive  Isotope  Committee")
(ACHRE  No.  HAR-100394-A-4),  1.

77.  Ibid.

78.  One  proposal,  for  example,  involved  saturating  gelfoam  with  silver  1 1 1  or
yttrium  90,  and  then  implanting  the  gelfoam  into  the  tumor.  Preliminary  work  had  been
done  on  animals  in  the  previous  year  on  normal  brain  tissue.  After  extensive  animal
testing,  the  procedure  was  to  be  attempted  on  those  humans  who  already  suffered  brain
cancer  and  had  undergone  surgery.  Theodore  Rasmussen,  29  May  1952  ("Local
Application  of  Beta  Ray  Isotopes  to  Brain  Tumors")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-122194-A).

79.  For  example,  in  1 953  the  Chicago  committee  approved  a  proposal  to  use
tritium  and  C-14-labeled  acetate  to  trace  the  development  of  adrenal  cholesterol  in
advanced  cancer  patients  as  well  as  a  control  group.  The  committee  noted  that  the  doses
"are  smaller  than  have  been  used  in  human  studies  at  other  institutions  and  in  no  case
involve  amounts  which  will  produce  internal  radiation  in  excess  of  maximum  permissible
dose."  George  V.  LeRoy,  Chairman,  Radioisotope  Committee,  24  February  1953
("Minutes  of  the  Radioisotope  Committee  Meeting")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE- 122 1 94- A),  1.

80.  This  included  recommendations  for  using  the  minimum  amounts  of  isotopes
possible,  a  limitation  of  1  rep  [roentgen  equivalent  physical]  for  tracers,  mandatory  blood
tests  before  administration  and  forty-eight  hours  after,  and  a  listing  of  dose
recommendations.  The  policy  on  patients  and  children  was  specific:  "Adult  humans  who
are  ill  and  who  are  expected  to  receive  benefit  from  the  procedure,  shall  not  receive  tracer


316


doses  of  radioactive  material  giving  off  radiation  in  excess  of  a  total  of  4  rep.  Children
(all  patients  below  15  years  of  age)  shall  not  receive  more  than  a  total  of  0.8  rep."  J.  C.
Aub,  A.  K.  Solomon,  and  Shields  Warren,  Harvard  Medical  School,  7  May  1949  ("Tracer
Doses  of  Radioactive  Isotopes  in  Man")  (ACHRE  No.  HAR-100394-A-3),  1.

81 .  The  committee  stated  that  all  volunteers  receiving  Na-22  and  K-42  should
be  subjected  to  doses  no  more  than  100  millirads  for  the  whole  body,  nor  more  than  one-
third  the  maximum  permissible  values  to  a  specific  organ.  University  of  Michigan
Subcommittee  on  Human  Use  of  Isotopes,  10  December  1956,  1.

82.  W.  F.  to  University  of  Chicago  Radioisotope  Committee,  28  September
1953  ("Permission  is  requested  to  administer  intravenously  500  microcuries,  or  less,  of
radio-mercury  to  a  patient . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-122194-A-2),  1 .

83.  Harvard  Medical  School  Committee  on  Medical  Research  in  Biophysics,
August  1957  ("Tracer  Doses  of  Radioactive  Isotopes  in  Man")  (ACHRE  No.  HAR-
100394-A-5),  2.

84.  University  of  Michigan  Subcommittee  on  Human  Use  of  Isotopes,  27
September  1955  ("Minutes  of  Human  Use  Committee  Meeting")  (ACHRE  No.  MIC-
010495-A),  2.

85.  A  1963  memorandum  indicates  the  committee's  unwillingness  to  allow  a
procedure  involving  selenium  75-labeled  methionine  for  parathyroid  scanning  limited  to
use  in  patients  over  forty  years  old,  while  in  a  1 966  letter  Carr  stated  that  he  was
"strongly  inclined  to  refuse  to  permit  the  use  of  radioisotopes  in  all  volunteers  below  the
age  of  21,  unless  there  are  special  mitigating  circumstances  approved  by  the  whole
subcommittee."  Ronald  C.  Bishop,  Acting  Chairman,  Subcommittee  on  Human  Use,  13
August  1963  ("Dr.  E.  A.  Carr  has  asked  me  to  act  as  chairman  of  the  Subcommittee  on
Human  Use  in  his  absence  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  MIC-010495-A-4),  1;  Edward  A.  Carr  to
Dr.  Bishop,  3  September  1966  ("To  Members  of  the  Subcommittee  on  Human  Use  of
Radioisotopes")  (ACHRE  No.  MIC-010495-A-5),  1.

86.  In  1 968  the  committee  approved  a  proposal  for  an  experiment  that  involved
doses  of  NM-125  labeled  with  1-131  or  1-125  for  patients  with  melanomas  or  a  reasonable
clinical  suspicion  of  melanoma  for  thirty  patients,  and  then  wished  to  see  results  before
approving  of  further  administration.  Likewise,  the  committee  gave  approval  to  a  closely
related  experiment  involving  use  of  the  same  substances  in  patients  with  lung  cancer.  For
that  regime,  the  committee  demanded  feedback  after  fifteen  patients.  For  a  further
related  matter  involving  the  same  substances  in  patients  with  pulmonary  carcinoma,  the
committee  limited  the  work  to  five  patients.  In  each  case  the  dose  was  to  exceed  2
millicuries  per  patient.  Edward  A.  Carr,  Chairman,  Subcommittee  on  Human  Use,  to
William  H.  Beierwaltes,  Director,  Nuclear  Medicine,  27  September  1968  ("This  is  to
inform  you  that  the  Sub-committee  on  Human  Use  of  Radioisotopes,  at  its  meeting  of
September  26,  1968,  approved  the  use  of  a  single  dose  of  NM-1 13  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
M1C-010495-A-6),  1.

87.  A  researcher  had  applied  to  use  sodium  22  in  a  tracer  procedure  with  several
patients.  The  committee  was  concerned  that  "a  small  but  significant  fraction  of  one  of
the  radioisotopes  might  remain  localized  in  the  body  for  a  long  period  of  time  .  .  ."
Edward  A.  Carr,  3  June  1968  ("Sub-committee  on  Human  Use  of  Radioisotopes,  Minutes
of  the  Meeting  of  June  3,  1968")  (ACHRE  No.  MIC-010495-A-7),  1 .

88.  George  V.  LeRoy,  3  November  1953  ("Minutes  of  the  Radioisotope
Committee  Meeting")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-122194-A-3),  1.


317


89.  Paul  C.  Aebersold,  Chief,  Isotopes  Division,  to  John  Z.  Bowers,  Assistant  to
Director,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  18  March  1948  ("Investigation  of  Patients
Who  Have  Received  Radioactive  Isotopes")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-061395-E-1),  1.

90.  A  comprehensive  history  of  the  application  of  radioisotopes  is  well  beyond
the  scope  of  this  chapter  and  would  needlessly  duplicate  substantial  histories  already
written.  See,  for  example,  J.  Newell  Stannard,  Radioactivity  and  Health:  A  History
(Springfield,  Va.:  Office  of  Scientific  and  Technical  Information,  1988).

91.  An  example  is  Konstantin  N.  Pavlou,  William  P.  Steffee,  Robert  H.  Lerman,
and  Belton  A.  Burrows,  "Effects  of  Dieting  and  Exercise  on  Lean  Body  Mass,  Oxygen
Uptake,  and  Strength,"  Medicine  and  Science  in  Sports  and  Exercise  17(1 985):  466-47 1 .
The  study  was  conducted  at  the  Boston  University  Medical  School  and  the  Boston  VA
Medical  Center.

92.  There  is  a  vast  literature  on  radioiodine  and  the  thyroid.  Government  studies
specifically  noted  by  the  Veterans  Administration  as  significant  are  the  following:  H.  C.
Allen,  R.  A.  Libby,  and  B.  Cassen,  "The  Scintillation  Counter  in  Clinical  Studies  of
Human  Thyroid  Physiology  Using  1-131,"  Journal  of  Clinical  Endocrinology  and
Metabolism  1 1  (1951):  492-51 1;  B.  A.  Burrows  and  J.  A.  Ross,  "The  Thyroid  Uptake  of
Stable  Iodine  Compared  with  the  Serum  Concentration  of  Protein-Bound  Iodine  in
Normal  Patients  and  in  Patients  with  Thyroid  Disease,"  Journal  of  Clinical
Endocrinology  and  Metabolism  13  (1953):  1358-1368;  S.  A.  Berson  and  R.  S.  Yalow,
"Quantitative  Aspects  of  Iodine  Metabolism:  The  Exchangeable  Organic  Iodine  Pool,
and  the  Rates  of  Thyroidal  Secretion,  Peripheral  Degradation  and  Fecal  Excretion  of
Endogenously  Synthesized  Organically  Bound  Iodine,"  Journal  of  Clinical  Investigation
33  (1954):  1533-1552;  M.  A.  Greer  and  L.  J.  DeGroot,  "The  Effect  of  Stable  Iodide  on
Thyroidal  Secretion  in  Man,"  Metabolism  5  (1956):  682-696;  K.  Sterling,  J.  C.  Lashof,
and  E.  B.  Man,  "Disappearance  from  Serum  of  1-131  Labeled  I-Thyroxine  and  1-
Triiodothyronine  in  Euthyroid  Subjects,"  Journal  of  Clinical  Investigation  33  (1954):
1031;  K.  Sterling  and  R.  B.  Chodos,  "Radiothyroxine  Turnover  Studies  in  Myxosema,
Thyrotoxicosis,  and  Hypermetabolism  Without  Endocrine  Disease,"  Journal  of  Clinical
Investigation  35  (1956):  806-813.

93.  See,  for  example,  J.  F.  Ross,  "Cooperative  Study  of  Radioiodine  Therapy  for
Hyperthyroidism,"  Bulletin  of  the  Committee  on  Veterans  Medical  Problems  (National
Academy  of  Sciences)  (1952):  576-578.

94.  Gould  A.  Andrews,  M.D.,  Samuel  W.  Root,  M.D.,  and  Herbert  D.  Kerman,
M.D.,  "Clinical  Studies  with  Gallium-72,"  570-588  in  Marshall  Brucer,  M.D.  (ed.),
Gould  Andrews,  M.D.,  and  H.D.  Bruner,  M.D.,  "Clinical  Studies  with  Gallium-72,"
Radiology  66  (1953):  534-613.

95.  OncoScint,  developed  by  Cytogen,  was  approved  by  the  FDA  for  diagnosis
of  colorectal  and  ovarian  cancers  on  29  December  1992,  Product  License  Application  no.
89-0601,  with  Amendment  no.  90-0278.  The  use  of  monoclonal  antibodies  to  treat  cancer
is  discussed  in  Oliver  W.  Press,  M.D.,  Ph.D.,  et  al.,  "Radiolabeled-Antibody  Therapy  of
B-Cell  Lymphoma  with  Autologous  Bone  Marrow  Support,"  New  England  Journal  of
Medicine  329  (21  October  1993):  1219-1224.  Progress  in  the  field  is  reviewed  in  an
accompanying  editorial,  Robert  C.  Bast,  Jr.,  M.D.,  "Progress  in  Radioimmunotherapy,"
New  England  Journal  of  Medicine  329(21  October  1993):  1266-1268.

96.  Strontium  89,  commercially  available  as  Metastron  from  Amersham-
Mediphysics,  was  approved  on  18  June  1993,  New  Drug  Application  no.  20134.  One  of
its  therapeutic  uses  is  described  in  an  article  by  Arthur  T.  Porter.  M.D.,  and  Lawrence  P.


318


Davis,  M.D.,  "Systemic  Radionuclide  Therapy  of  Bone  Metastases  with  Strontium-89,"
Oncology  8  (February  1994):  93-96.

97.  R.  S.  Yalow  and  S.  A.  Berson,  "Assay  of  Plasma  Insulin  in  Human  Subjects
by  Immunological  Methods,"  Nature  184  (1959):  1648.


319


nontherapeutic  research  on

Children


In  the  late  1940s  and  again  in  the  early  1950s,  Massachusetts  Institute  of
Technology  scientists  conducting  research  fed  breakfast  food  containing  minute
amounts  of  radioactive  iron  and  calcium  to  a  number  of  students  at  the  Walter  E.
Fernald  School,  a  Massachusetts  institution  for  "mentally  retarded"  children.1
The  National  Institutes  of  Health,  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  and  the
Quaker  Oats  Company  funded  the  research,  which  was  designed  to  determine
how  the  body  absorbed  iron,  calcium,  and  other  minerals  from  dietary  sources  and
to  explore  the  effect  of  various  compounds  in  cereal  on  mineral  absorption.

In  1961,  researchers  from  Harvard  Medical  School,  Massachusetts
General  Hospital,  and  Boston  University  School  of  Medicine  administered  small
amounts  of  radioactive  iodine  to  seventy  children  at  the  Wrentham  State  School,
another  Massachusetts  facility  for  mentally  retarded  children.  With  funding  from
the  Division  of  Radiologic  Health  of  the  U.S.  Public  Health  Service,  the  scientists
conducting  this  experiment  used  Wrentham  students  to  test  a  proposed
countermeasure  to  nuclear  fallout.  Specifically,  the  study  was  meant  to  determine
the  amount  of  nonradioactive  iodine  that  would  effectively  block  the  uptake  of
radioactive  iodine  that  would  be  released  in  a  nuclear  explosion.

Recently,  these  two  studies  have  received  considerable  media  attention,
and  an  official  Massachusetts  state  task  force  has  reported  on  both  episodes  in
some  detail.2  Although  they  represent  special  cases  because  they  involve
institutionalized  children,  the  Fernald  and  Wrentham  experiments  nonetheless  are
the  most  widely  known  examples  of  a  category  of  research  that  raises  particular
concerns  for  the  Committee:  nontherapeutic  experimentation  on  children.


320


Chapter  7

Experiments  involving  children  are  important  to  the  Committee  for  two
reasons.  First,  children  are  more  susceptible  than  adults  to  harm  from  low  levels
of  radiation,  and  thus  as  a  group  they  are  more  likely  than  adults  to  have  been
harmed  as  a  consequence  of  their  having  been  subjects  of  human  radiation
experiments.  Second,  an  evaluation  of  research  with  children  is  critical  to
determining  whether  any  former  subjects  of  radiation  experiments  should  be
notified  in  order  to  protect  their  health,  one  of  our  specific  charges.3  Subjects
who  were  children  at  the  time  of  their  exposure  are  more  likely  than  adults  to  be
candidates  for  such  notification,  both  because  of  their  increased  biological
sensitivity  and  because  they  are  more  likely  to  still  be  alive.  (See  chapter  18  for
the  Committee's  recommendations  with  respect  to  notification  and  follow-up.)

We  elected  to  focus  on  pediatric  research  that  offered  subjects  no  prospect
of  medical  benefit,  so-called  nontherapeutic  research,  because  it  is  this  kind  of
research  that  has  generated  the  most  public  concern  and  is  the  most  ethically
problematic.  This  is  not  to  say,  however,  that  experiments  on  children  in  which
the  children  stand  to  benefit  medically  never  raise  ethical  issues;  such  research
certainly  can  and  does.  But  in  deciding  how  to  allocate  our  limited  resources,  we
chose  to  concentrate  where  the  issues  are  mostly  sharply  drawn.  Also,  because
most  nontherapeutic  research  with  children  involved  tracer  doses  of  radioisotopes,
focusing  on  this  work  allowed  us  a  window  into  radioisotope  research  generally.

We  begin  the  chapter  by  setting  the  context  for  nontherapeutic  radiation
experiments  on  children.  We  review  those  factors  that  make  nontherapeutic
research  on  children  ethically  problematic  and  how  such  research  has  been
viewed  historically.  We  next  consider  what  the  practices  and  standards  were  for
research  on  children  in  the  1940s,  1950s,  and  1960s.  This  is  a  continuation  of  the
discussion  in  chapter  2,  which  focused  on  professional  standards  and  practices  for
human  research.

The  next  three  sections  address  human  radiation  experiments  in  terms  of
the  central  ethical  issues  raised  by  nontherapeutic  research  involving  children-
level  of  risk,  authorization  for  the  involvement  of  children,  and  selection  of
subjects.  To  address  the  question  of  risk,  we  analyzed  twenty-one  nontherapeutic
radiation  experiments  with  children  conducted  during  the  1944-1974  period.  The
focus  of  this  analysis  is  whether  it  is  likely  that  any  of  the  subjects  of  these
experiments  was  harmed  or  remains  at  risk  of  harm  attributable  to  research
exposures.  A  table  summarizing  these  experiments  and  our  risk  estimates  can  be
found  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.  The  twenty-one  experiments  were  selected  from
eighty-one  pediatric  radiation  research  projects  identified  by  the  Committee  from
government  documents  and  the  medical  literature.  Although  these  eighty-one  by
no  means  constitute  all  the  pediatric  radiation  research  conducted  during  this
time,  they  include  what  are  likely  fairly  typical  examples  of  such  research.  Of  the
eighty-one,  thirty-seven  studies  were  judged  to  be  nontherapeutic,  and  twenty-one
of  these  were  conducted  or  funded  by  the  federal  government  and  thus  fell  under
the  charge  of  the  Committee.  Included  within  these  twenty-one  studies  were  the

321


Part  II

two  nutrition  experiments  conducted  at  the  Fernald  School  and  one  fallout-related
study  conducted  at  the  Wrentham  School  discussed  in  the  introduction  to  this
chapter.  All  twenty-one  studies  employed  radioisotopes  to  explore  human
physiology  and  pathology.

We  turn  next  to  a  consideration  of  how  authorization  for  the  inclusion  of
the  children  in  these  experiments  was  obtained  and  who  these  children  were.
Unfortunately,  for  most  of  these  experiments,  little  is  known  about  either  of  these
issues.  The  last  section  of  the  chapter  focuses  specifically  on  the  experiments  at
the  Fernald  School  where,  thanks  to  the  work  of  the  Massachusetts  Task  Force  on
Human  Subject  Research,  relevant  information  is  available.  Throughout  the
chapter,  we  focus  only  on  research  in  which  children  could  not  have  benefited
medically.  The  Committee  did  not  have  the  resources  to  pursue  two  related  areas
of  research—nontherapeutic  research  on  pregnant  women  and  therapeutic  research
on  children.  We  include  two  capsule  descriptions  of  examples  of  these  types  of
research  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.

THE  CONTEXT  FOR  NONTHERAPEUTIC  RESEARCH  WITH
CHILDREN

Children  as  Mere  Means

In  both  law  and  medical  ethics,  it  has  long  been  recognized  that  children
may  not  authorize  medical  treatment  for  themselves,  except  in  special
circumstances.4  Instead,  authorization  must  be  sought  from  the  parent.
Historically,  the  source  of  this  respect  for  parental  authority  rested  upon  the  view
that  children  were  the  property  of  their  parents,  and  thus  parents  had  the  right  to
determine  how  their  "property"  Was  to  be  treated.  Today,  we  still  speak  of
parental  rights,  although  the  justification  for  these  rights  no  longer  rests  on  an
analysis  of  children  as  property.  Instead,  respect  for  the  rights  of  parents  is
viewed  as  a  mechanism  for  valuing  and  fostering  the  institution  of  the  family  and
the  freedom  of  adults  to  perpetuate  family  traditions  and  commitments.  Another
important  line  of  justification  for  respecting  the  authority  of  parents  relies  not  on
a  recognition  of  parental  rights  but  on  the  view  that  the  interests  of  the  child  are
generally  best  served  by  ceding  decisional  authority  to  the  parent.  The  parent  is
thought  not  only  to  be  in  the  best  position  to  determine  what  is  in  the  interests  of
the  child  but  is  also  thought  to  be  generally  motivated  to  act  in  the  child's  best
interests.5

When  research  involving  children  offers  a  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to
the  child-subject,  the  application  of  the  above  analysis  is  straightforward.  Parents
are  generally  thought  to  have  the  authority  to  determine  whether  their  children
should  be  made  subjects  of  such  research.  Certainly  today,  any  use  of  a  child  in
research  would  not  be  ethically  acceptable  or  legally  permissible  without  the
parent's  permission/'  Where  the  research  does  not  offer  any  prospect  of  benefit  to

322


Chapter  7

the  child,  however,  the  legitimacy  of  the  parent  as  authorizer  is  less  clear.

Respect  for  the  authority  of  parents  to  make  decisions  for  their  children
and  otherwise  control  their  children's  lives  is  not  without  bounds.  The  law
recognizes  several  exceptions,  designed  primarily  to  protect  the  child  from  what
society  at  large  considers  to  be  unacceptable  or  unjustifiable  harm  or  risk  of
harm.7  Laws  against  the  physical  abuse  of  children  are  perhaps  the  most  obvious
example  of  such  limitations  on  parental  authority.  In  the  context  of  research,  the
question  arises  of  whether  a  parent  has  the  authority  to  permit  a  child  to  be  put  at
risk  of  harm  in  an  experiment  from  which  the  child  could  not  possibly  benefit
medically.  In  this  case,  the  child  is  to  be  used  as  a  means  to  the  ends  of  others.
Children  are  not  in  a  position  to  determine  for  themselves  whether  they  wish  to
agree  to  such  a  use  and  thus  cannot  themselves  render  the  use  morally  acceptable.
Should  parents  have  such  authority?  Should  anyone?

This  question  was  resolved  as  a  matter  of  public  policy  in  the  1970s
through  the  work  of  the  National  Commission  for  the  Protection  of  Human
Subjects  of  Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research  and  the  subsequent  adoption,  in
1983,  of  federal  regulations  governing  research  involving  children  that  were
guided  by  the  recommendations  of  the  National  Commission.8  These  regulations
state  that  children  can  participate  in  federally  funded  research  that  poses  greater
than  minimal  risks  to  the  subject  if  a  local  review  committee  (an  institutional
review  board,  or  IRB)  finds  that  the  potential  risk  is  "justified  by  the  anticipated
benefit  to  the  subjects";  "the  relation  of  the  anticipated  benefit  to  the  risk  is  at
least  as  favorable  to  the  subjects  as  that  presented  by  available  alternative
approaches";  and  "adequate  provisions  are  made  for  soliciting  the  assent  of  the
children  and  permission  of  their  parents  or  guardians."9  The  word  consent  is
purposely  avoided  in  these  regulations  to  distinguish  parental  permission  and
minor  assent  from  the  autonomous,  legally  valid  consent  of  a  competent  adult.

Federal  regulations  do  allow  nontherapeutic  research  on  children  if  an  IRB
determines  that  the  research  presents  "no  greater  than  minimal  risk"  to  the
children  who  would  serve  as  subjects,  although  no  clear  definition  of  what
constitutes  minimal  risk  is  provided.10  As  with  therapeutic  pediatric  research,
parents  or  guardians  must  grant  "permission"  and  children  who  are  deemed
capable  must  offer  "assent."

The  regulations  also  allow  for  nontherapeutic  research  with  children  that
does  present  more  than  minimal  risk,  again  with  parental  permission  and  assent  of
the  child  (as  appropriate),  but  only  if 'the  risk  represents  a  minor  increase  over
minimal  risk,  the  procedures  involved  are  commensurate  with  the  general  life
experiences  of  subjects,  and  the  research  is  likely  to  yield  knowledge  of  "vital
importance"  about  the  subjects'  disorder  or  condition."  Research  with  children
that  is  not  otherwise  approvable  may  be  permitted,  but  only  under  special,  and
presumably  rare,  circumstances.  In  addition  to  local  IRB  review,  such  research
must  withstand  the  special  scrutiny  of  the  secretary  of  the  agency  sponsoring  the
research,  who  is  to  be  advised  by  a  special  IRB.12  The  secretary  must  also  allow

323


Part  II

the  opportunity  for  "public  review  and  comment"  on  a  proposed  nontherapeutic
research  project  that  is  not  otherwise  approvable.

The  regulations  thus  draw  a  sharp  distinction  between  therapeutic  and
nontherapeutic  research.  Nontherapeutic  research,  while  severely  restricted,  is
not  banned.  The  decision  to  permit  parents  to  authorize  the  use  of  their  children  in
nontherapeutic  research  reflects  both  the  recognition  that  some  important
advances  in  pediatrics  could  come  only  from  research  with  children  that  was  of  no
benefit  to  them  and  the  recognition  that  we  all—as  parents,  as  potential  future
parents,  and  as  members  of  society— share  in  the  interest  of  advancing  the  health
of  the  young.  At  the  same  time,  however,  parental  authority  to  permit  such  use  of
a  child  is  generally  restricted  to  research  judged  to  pose  little  risk;  as  important  as
it  is  to  promote  the  welfare  of  children  (as  a  class),  this  interest  justifies  only
minor  infringements  of  the  principle  not  to  use  people  as  mere  means  to  the  ends
of  others.

These  1983  regulations,  and  the  reasoning  behind  them,  were  the
culmination  of  considerable  public  debate  and  scholarly  analysis,  much  of  which
occurred  in  the  1970s.  To  situate  properly  the  experiments  of  interest  to  the
Committee,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the  social  and  professional  roots  of  the
issues  and  arguments  that  ultimately  led  to  the  federal  regulations.

Public  Attitudes,  Professional  Practices

Attitudes  and  Practices  Prior  to  1944

There  was  significant  research  interest  in  infants  and  children  as  early  as
the  eighteenth  century,  as  scientists  began  to  experiment  with  vaccines  and
immunization.  Children  were  particularly  valuable  subjects  for  this  type  of
research  because  in  general,  they  were  less  likely  than  adults  to  have  been
exposed  to  the  disease  being  studied.13  A  child's  response  to  immunizations  was
also  of  great  interest  because  most  immunizations  are  performed  during
childhood.

During  the  nineteenth  century,  the  Industrial  Revolution  greatly  increased
the  number  of  child  laborers,  and  the  public  began  to  acknowledge  the  need  for
laws  to  protect  children  from  abuse.14  Physicians  started  to  specialize  in
pediatrics,  studying  specifically  the  health  problems  and  diseases  that  afflicted
children. Simultaneously,  as  social  reformers  were  creating  a  wide  range  of
institutions  for  children,  such  as  orphanages,  schools,  foundling  homes,  and
hospitals,  scientists  recognized  the  value  of  research  conducted  in  these  types  of
institutions.  In  the  late  nineteenth  and  early  twentieth  centuries,  Alfred  F.  Hess,
the  medical  director  of  the  Hebrew  Infant  Asylum  in  New  York  City,  conducted
pertussis  vaccine  trials  and  undertook  extensive  studies  of  the  anatomy  and
physiology  of  digestion  in  infants  at  the  asylum.  According  to  Advisory
Committee  member  and  historian  Susan  Lederer,  Hess  sought  to  take  advantage

324


Chapter  7

of  the  conditions  in  the  asylum  as  they  approximated  those  "conditions  which  are
insisted  on  in  considering  the  course  of  experimental  infection  among  laboratory
animals,  but  which  can  rarely  be  controlled  in  a  study  of  infestation  in  man."15

Although  many  shared  Hess's  laudable  goal  of  improving  the  health  of
asylum  children,  many  people  drew  the  line  at  the  pediatrician's  investigations  of
scurvy  and  rickets.  In  order  to  study  the  disease,  Hess  and  his  colleagues
withheld  orange  juice  from  infants  at  the  asylum  until  they  developed  lesions
characteristic  of  scurvy.  Responding  to  the  public  discussion  of  the  ethics  of
using  children  in  such  nontherapeutic  experiments,  the  editors  of  one  American
medical  journal  insisted  that  such  investigations  gave  the  children  an  opportunity
to  repay  their  debt  to  society,  even  as  they  conceded  that  experimentation  on
human  beings  should  be  limited  to  "children  as  may  be  utilized  with  parental
consent."16

Hess's  work  was  not  the  only  case  in  which  experiments  involving
children  attracted  negative  public  opinion.  In  1896,  for  example,  American
antivivisectionists  attacked  a  Boston  pediatrician,  Arthur  Wentworth,  who
performed  lumbar  punctures  on  infants  and  children  in  order  to  establish  the
safety  and  utility  of  the  procedure.  The  antivivisectionists  were  particularly
alarmed  because  this  procedure,  which  caused  pain  and  discomfort,  did  not  confer
any  benefits  to  the  subjects.  John  B.  Roberts,  a  physician  from  Philadelphia,
labeled  Wentworth's  procedures  "human  vivisection,"  saying  that  "using  the
children  in  the  hospital  without  explaining  his  plan  to  their  mothers  or  gaining
their  permission  intensified  public  fear  of  hospitals."17

The  twentieth  century  brought  new  drugs  and  advanced  technologies,
which  allowed  for  increased  research  on  children.  The  conduct  of  this
experimentation,  however,  was  largely  left  to  the  individual  investigator.  When
his  experimental  gelatin  injections  provoked  "alarming  symptoms  of  prostration
and  collapse  in  three  normal  children  (including  a  'feeble-minded'  four-year-old
girl),  the  physician  Isaac  Abt  stopped  his  pediatric  experiments  and  began
experimenting  on  rabbits."18  Meanwhile,  legislation  was  being  proposed
throughout  the  country  to  protect  children  and  pregnant  women  from
experimenting  physicians.  Two  proposals  were  introduced  in  the  U.S.  Senate  in
1900  and  1902;  proposals  '"to  prohibit  such  terrible  experiments  on  children,
insane  persons  and  pregnant  women  .  .  . ,'  and  to  ensure  'that  no  experiment
should  be  performed  on  any  other  human  being  without  his  intelligent  written
consent'  were  introduced  in  the  Illinois  legislature"  in  1905  and  1907;  in  1914  and
1923,  the  New  York  legislature  considered  bills  that  prohibited  exoerimentation
with  children.19  Although  these  bills  did  not  become  law,  it  is  clear  that  some
unease  concerning  nontherapeutic  research  on  children  existed  among  the  public
and  elected  officials.

Reaction  to  the  polio  vaccine  trials  conducted  during  the  1930s  further
demonstrated  the  growing  discomfort  over  pediatric  experimentation  as  thousands
of  American  children  were  involved  in  what  some  considered  at  the  time  to  be

325


Part  II

premature  human  trials  of  the  polio  vaccine.  Although  it  appears  that  parental
consent  was  obtained  for  a  number  of  these  studies,  the  controversy  over  these
trials  stalled  polio  vaccine  research  for  almost  two  decades  and  generally  made
investigators  ambivalent  about  the  use  of  human  subjects.20

Although  there  are  no  legal  cases  that  bear  directly  on  nontherapeutic
research  with  children  during  this  period,  an  appellate  court  ruling  in  1941,
Bonner  v.  Moran,  involving  the  performance  of  a  nontherapeutic  medical
procedure  on  a  child  without  parental  consent,  suggests  how  such  a  case  might
have  been  decided.21  John  Bonner,  a  fifteen-year-old  African-American  boy  from
Washington,  D.C.,  had  undergone  an  experimental  skin  graft  for  the  benefit  of
Clara  Howard,  a  cousin  suffering  from  severe  burns.  When  he  discovered  that
John  Bonner  had  the  same  blood  type  as  the  burn  victim,  Howard's  plastic
surgeon,  Robert  Moran,  persuaded  Bonner  to  allow  him  to  fashion  "a  tube  of
flesh"  by  cutting  from  the  boy's  "arm  pit  to  his  waist  line."22  This  procedure,
however,  was  conducted  without  the  consent  of  a  parent,  as  "his  mother,  with
whom  he  lived,  was  ill  at  the  time  and  knew  nothing  about  the  arrangement."23
Moran  then  attached  the  free  end  of  Bonner's  flesh  tube  to  Clara  Howard,  hoping
that  the  flesh-and-blood  link  would  bring  benefit  to  the  burned  girl.  Due  to  poor
circulation  in  the  tube,  the  procedure  did  not  help  the  burn  patient  and  put  the
healthy  boy,  who  was  required  to  stay  in  the  hospital  for  two  months,  at
significant  risk  (and  left  him  with  permanent  scars).  Bonner's  mother  brought  suit
against  Moran  for  assault  and  battery.

The  appellate  court  based  its  ruling  against  Moran  on  what  it  perceived  as
a  disturbing  combination  of  a  lack  of  direct  benefit  for  John  Bonner  and  a  lack  of
permission  from  the  boy's  mother:

[H]ere  we  have  a  case  of  a  surgical  operation  not
for  the  benefit  of  the  person  operated  on  but  for
another. .  .  .  We  are  constrained,  therefore,  to  feel
.  . .  that  the  consent  of  the  parent  was  necessary.24

The  court  did  not  refer  to  the  episode  as  an  instance  of  experimentation,  but  the
parallels  between  this  novel  procedure  performed  for  the  benefit  of  another  and  a
nontherapeutic  medical  experiment  are  quite  powerful.25

Attitudes  and  Practices  1944-1974

As  best  the  Committee  can  establish,  there  were  no  written  rules  of
professional  ethics  for  the  conduct  of  research  on  children  prior  to  1964.  Taken
literally,  the  Nuremberg  Code,  which  requires  that  all  subjects  of  research  "have
legal  capacity  to  give  consent,"  precludes  all  research  with  children.26  There  is  no
reason  to  believe,  however,  that  the  judges  at  Nuremberg  meant  to  impose  such  a
prohibition,  and  the  Nuremberg  Code  did  not  result  in  a  ban  on  research  with

326


Chapter  7

children.

Pediatric  research  flourished  after  World  War  II,  as  did  biomedical
research  in  general.  What  is  less  clear  is  how  this  research  was  conducted,  and  on
whom.  One  source  of  evidence  about  legal  thinking  on  pediatric  research,  if  not
actual  practice,  is  the  writings  of  Irving  Ladimer,  a  lawyer  who,  in  1958,  was
completing  a  doctoral  degree  in  juridical  science  at  the  same  time  he  was
employed  as  an  administrator  at  the  National  Institutes  of  Health.  Ladimer
concluded  his  doctoral  dissertation,  "Legal  and  Ethical  Implications  of  Medical
Research  on  Human  Beings,"  with  an  appendix  devoted  to  the  issues  surrounding
"Experimentation  on  Persons  Not  Competent  to  Provide  Personal  Consent,"
whom  he  defined  broadly  as  minors  and  mental  incompetents.27  Ladimer  argued
that  it  was  "permissible  to  employ  minors  and  incompetents  as  subjects  of
medical  investigations  . . .  where  there  is  informed  consent  by  a  parent  or
guardian  (including  the  state)  for  procedures  which  also  significantly  benefit  or
may  be  expected  to  benefit  the  individual. "2X  Ladimer  was  less  sanguine,
however,  about  nontherapeutic  research  with  these  populations.  He  expressed
particular  concern  about  the  use  of  institutionalized  children— even  with  proxy
permission—in  research  that  did  not  hold  the  possibility  of  personal  benefit:
"Permission  given  by  parents  or  the  state  to  utilize  institutionalized  children,
without  any  suggestion  of  benefit  to  the  children,  may  well  be  beyond  the  ambit
of  parental  or  guardianship  rights."29

Ladimer  did,  however,  leave  open  a  window  for  the  use  of  legally
incompetent  subjects  in  nontherapeutic  research,  but  he  clearly  harbored  great
discomfort  with  his  own  suggestion:

[T]he  availability  of  certain  persons,  not  able  to
consent  personally,  may  constitute  a  strategic
resource  in  terms  of  time  or  location  not  otherwise
obtainable.  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that
the  Nazis  hid  behind  this  rationalization  in
explaining  certain  highly  questionable  or
clandestine  medical  experiments.  Such  justification
should  not  even  be  considered  except  in  dire
circumstances.  If  ever  employed,  it  should  not  be
assimilated  into  the  concept  of  personal  benefit,  else
there  may  be  no  legal  or  ethical  control  for  the
protection  of  both  prospective  subject  and
investigator  and  their  individual  integrity.30

As  part  of  the  Committee's  Ethics  Oral  History  Project,  we  interviewed
two  pediatricians  who  were  beginning  their  careers  in  academic  medicine  in  the
late  1940s.  One  of  these  respondents,  Dr.  Henry  Seidel,  had  some  research
experience  with  institutionalized  children.  He  noted  that  "we  got  access  [to  the

327


Part  II

children]  very  easily,"  and  although  his  research  was  merely  observational,  it  was
"not  hard  to  imagine"  that  experimental  research  with  these  children  could  have
been  conducted.31  When  asked  about  the  studies  conducted  by  Dr.  Saul  Krugman
on  institutionalized  children  at  the  Willowbrook  State  School  (discussed  later  in
this  chapter),  Seidel  observed,  "I  didn't  have  any  problem  imagining  that
possibility.  In  retrospect,  I'm  sure  it  could  happen,  you  know.  There  was
something  about  those  reports  that  rang  true.  .  .  ."32  William  Silverman,  the  other
pediatrician  interviewed,  had  clear  recollections  of  how  research  was  conducted
in  pediatrics  at  that  time.  He  recalled  that,  in  the  1950s,  many  pediatricians,
including  himself,  believed  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  obtain  the  permission  of
parents  before  using  a  pediatric  patient  as  a  subject  in  research-even  if  the
research  was  nontherapeutic  (he  has  since  become  a  strong  proponent  of  the
parental  permission  requirement  in  pediatric  research).33  He  also  asserted  that
performing  nontherapeutic  experiments  on  children  without  authorization  from
parents  was  part  of  a  broader  "ethos  of  the  time"  in  which  "everyone  was  a
draftee"  in  a  national  war  on  disease.34  Dr.  Silverman's  account  squares  with  the
picture  that  emerged  in  chapter  2  of  practices  in  research  with  adults,  in  which  it
was  not  uncommon  to  use  adult  patients  as  subjects  of  research  without  their
knowledge  or  consent.

Silverman  was  among  the  researchers  invited  by  Boston  University's  Law-
Medicine  Research  Institute  (LMRI)  to  participate  in  a  conference  on  "Social
Responsibility  in  Pediatric  Research"  held  in  May  1961.35  This  meeting  was  one
in  a  series  of  closed-door  conferences  organized  by  LMRI  to  investigate  actual
practices  among  clinical  researchers.  The  transcripts  of  the  conference  provide  an
important  window  onto  practices  and  attitudes  of  the  time;  in  large  measure,  they
confirm  Silverman's  recollection  of  his  own  position  some  thirty-five  years  ago.
Early  in  the  meeting,  Silverman  asserted  that  "there  is  an  unwritten  consent  by
being  a  living  person  at  this  time  to  participate  in  this  kind  of  advancement  of
knowledge  [that  is,  nontherapeutic  pediatric  research]."3'1  Some  of  the  other
participants  employed  the  same  analogy  to  the  military  draft  that  Silverman
recently  used  to  relate  his  recollections.

However,  there  was  by  no  means  unanimity  about  the  appropriateness  of
this  view:

Dr.  A:  [Dr.  B]  says  that  this  [research  without

consent]  is  like  military  conscription.

Dr.  C:  Not  comparable.  We  voted  to  do  military

conscription.37

The  proceedings  of  the  conference  suggest  that  while  it  may  not  have  been
uncommon  for  pediatric  patients  to  be  used  as  subjects  of  nontherapeutic  research
without  the  permission  of  their  parents,  at  least  some  physician-investigators,
including  investigators  who  followed  this  practice,  thought  it  was  morally  wrong

328


Chapter  7

to  do  so.  Consider,  for  example,  a  story  relayed  by  one  pediatrician-investigator
at  the  conference  who  seemed  to  embrace  with  particular  earnestness  the  desire  of
the  conference  organizers  to  learn  the  unvarnished  reality  of  clinical  research.  In
the  opening  minutes  of  the  meeting,  this  researcher  reminded  his  colleagues  that
"the  question  for  us  to  discuss  here  today  is  how  we  operate  on  a  daily  basis."38
He  offered  for  discussion  a  provocative  case  from  his  personal  experience  in
which  he  and  his  associates  "wanted  [to  do]  lumbar  punctures  on  newborns. "39
He  explicitly  noted  that  "this  study  [was]  not  of  benefit  to  the  individual;  it  was  an
attempt  to  learn  about  normal  physiology."40  One  of  the  other  conferees  asked,
"Did  you  ask  [parental]  permission?"  The  researcher  responded,  "No.  We  were
afraid  we  would  not  get  volunteers."41  The  case  prompted  a  great  deal  of
discussion  at  the  conference,  but  perhaps  most  tellingly  this  researcher  frankly
acknowledged  toward  the  end  of  the  discussion— in  a  meeting  that  had  begun  with
an  assurance  of  confidentiality  from  the  organizers—that  he  had  "sinned"  in
carrying  out  these  lumbar  punctures  in  "normal  infants"  without  parental
permission.42

The  proceedings  of  the  conference  also  suggest  that  at  least  some
pediatrician  investigators  routinely  obtained  the  permission  of  parents  before
embarking  on  research  with  their  children.  It  is  perhaps  significant  that  the
pediatric  researcher  who  articulated  this  position  at  the  conference  was  from
Canada— and  the  conference  transcript  seems  to  suggest  that  he  was  providing  a
general  characterization  of  practices  in  his  country:

Dr.  A:  Let's  ask  [Dr.  B]  from  Canada.
Dr.  B:  We  have  been  quite  sticky  on  consent.  If  we
want  a  biopsy  or  a  radioactive  exposure  and  the
parent  says  "no"  then  we  don't  do  it.  . .  .  The
question  of  morals  is  too  valuable.43

If  this  statement  represents  the  sensitivity  of  Canadian  pediatrician-investigators
to  issues  of  parental  permission  (which  this  single  quotation  does  not  prove),
there  is  no  obvious  explanation  as  to  why  many  of  their  colleagues  in  the  United
States  behaved  differently.

The  LMRI  conference  is  noteworthy  not  only  for  what  it  reveals  about  the
range  of  views  and  practices  concerning  parental  permission  for  nontherapeutic
research,  but  also  for  the  unanimity  expressed  about  the  importance  of  obligations
to  prevent  or  minimize  harm  to  pediatric  subjects  of  research.  Minimizing  risk
was  recognized  by  those  at  the  conference  as  the  most  important  (and,  for  some
participants,  the  only)  moral  duty  of  pediatric  investigators.44

Three  years  after  the  LMRI  conference,  in  the  summer  of  1964,  the  World
Medical  Association  ratified  a  code  of  ethics  for  human  experimentation  at  a
meeting  in  Helsinki.  Unlike  the  Nuremberg  Code,  this  statement,  known  as  the
Declaration  of  Helsinki,  recognizes  that  research  may  be  conducted  on  people

329


Part  II

with  "legal  incapacity  to  consent."45  The  Declaration  distinguishes  between  two
kinds  of  research:  "Clinical  Research  Combined  with  Professional  Care"  and
"Non-therapeutic  Clinical  Research."46  It  permits  the  use  of  people  with  legal
incapacity  to  consent  as  subjects  in  both  kinds  of  research,  provided  that  the
consent  of  the  subject's  legal  guardian  is  procured.

Subjects  of  the  first  kind  of  research  are  referred  to  as  patients;  disclosure
to  and  consent  from  patient-subjects  are  required  by  the  Declaration,  "consistent
with  patient  psychology."47  The  Declaration  does  not  specify  whether
considerations  of  "patient  psychology"  also  could  justify  not  obtaining  the
consent  of  the  guardian  where  the  subject  does  not  have  the  legal  capacity  to
consent.

The  subjects  of  "non-therapeutic  clinical  research"  are  not  referred  to  as
patients  but  as  human  beings  who  must  be  "fully  informed"  and  whose  "free
consent"  must  be  obtained.48  The  Declaration  also  requires  that  nontherapeutic
research  be  discontinued  if  in  the  judgment  of  the  investigators  to  proceed  would
"be  harmful  to  the  individual."49  Thus,  although  the  Declaration  permits  parents
to  authorize  the  use  of  their  children  as  subjects  in  nontherapeutic  research,  such
research  is  not  intended  to  be  "harmful"  to  the  subjects.

The  language  and  reasoning  of  the  Declaration  was  unclear  and  confusing
with  regard  to  clinical  research,  both  therapeutic  and  nontherapeutic,  on  legally
incapacitated  individuals.  It  was  revised  in  1 975,  at  a  time  when  the  ethics  of
research  with  human  subjects  was  receiving  considerable  public  attention  in  the
United  States  (see  chapter  3).

Both  in  the  1960s  and  early  1970s,  public  controversies  erupted  about
several  cases  of  research  involving  human  subjects,  controversies  that  led  to  the
establishment  of  the  National  Commission  and  publication  of  the  federal
regulations  (see  chapter  3).  One  of  the  most  well  known  of  these  cases  involved
research  on  institutionalized  children.  During  the  1950s  and  1960s,  Dr.  Saul
Krugman  of  New  York  University  conducted  studies  of  hepatitis  at  the
Willowbrook  State  School,  an  institution  for  the  severely  mentally  retarded.50  To
study  the  natural  history,  effects,  and  progression  of  the  disease,  Krugman  and  his
staff  systematically  infected  newly  arrived  children  with  strains  of  the  virus.
Although  the  investigators  did  obtain  the  permission  of  the  parents  to  involve
their  children  in  the  research,  critics  of  the  Willowbrook  experiments  maintained
that  the  parents  were  manipulated  into  consenting  because,  at  least  in  the  later
years  of  the  research,  the  institution  was  overcrowded  and  the  long  waits  for
admittance  were  allegedly  shorter  for  children  who  were  entering  the  research
unit.  Henry  Beecher,  a  Harvard  anesthesiologist  whose  impact  on  the  history  of
research  ethics  is  detailed  in  chapter  3,  condemned  Krugman  and  his  staff  for  not
properly  informing  the  parents  about  the  risks  involved  in  the  experiment.51
Beecher  also  challenged  the  legal  status  of  parental  consent  when  no  therapeutic
benefit  for  the  child  was  anticipated.  A  New  York  state  senator,  Seymour  R.
Thaler,  criticized  the  Willowbrook  research  on  the  pages  of  the  New  York  Times

330


Chapter  7

in  1967,  only  to  come  to  its  defense  later  in  1971.  Also  in  the  early  1970s
Willowbrook  became  the  subject  of  a  heated  debate  in  the  medical  literature.52

Interestingly,  Dr.  Krugman  was  one  of  the  participants  at  the  LMRI
"Social  Responsibility  in  Pediatric  Research"  conference  where  he  expressed
pride  that  he  routinely  obtained  permission  from  the  parents  of  the  children  in  his
studies.  In  that  group  in  1961,  Krugman  was  thus  among  those  pediatric
investigators  most  sympathetic  to  the  position  that  children  could  not  be  used  as
mere  means  to  the  ends  of  the  researcher  without  the  authorization  of  the  parent.

AEC  Requirements  for  Radiation  Research  With  Children

Although  in  the  1940s  and  1950s  there  were  apparently  no  written  rules  of
professional  ethics  for  pediatric  research  in  general,  there  were  guidelines  for  the
investigational  use  of  radioisotopes  in  children.  In  1949,  the  Subcommittee  on
Human  Applications  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission's  Isotope  Division
established  a  set  of  rules  to  judge  proposals  submitted  by  researchers  for  the  use
of  radioisotopes  in  medical  experiments  with  human  subjects,  including  "normal
children.""  These  standards  appeared  in  the  fall  1949  supplement  to  the  AEC's
isotope  catalogue  and  price  list.  Under  the  heading  "Normal  Children"  the
isotope  catalogue  offered  the  following  statement:

In  general  the  use  of  radioisotopes  in  normal
children  is  discouraged.  However,  the
Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  will
consider  proposals  for  such  use  in  important
researches,  provided  the  problem  cannot  be  studied
properly  by  other  methods  and  provided  the
radiation  dosage  level  in  any  tissue  is  low  enough  to
be  considered  harmless.  It  should  be  noted  that  in
general  the  amount  of  radioactive  material  per
kilogram  of  body  weight  must  be  smaller  in
children  than  that  required  for  similar  studies  in  the
adult.54

These  guidelines  did  not  mention  consent--of  parents,  guardians,  or
children.55  Instead,  this  statement  simply  discouraged  nontherapeutic  experiments
with  children.  The  guidelines  did  not,  however,  suggest  that  the  practice  was
completely  inappropriate;  the  subcommittee  asserted  that  "important"  research
using  "harmless"  levels  of  radiation  dosage  with  children  was  acceptable.  The
crucial  terms  important  and  harmless  were  left  undefined.

It  seems  reasonable  to  expect  that  "important"  pediatric  research  would
address  a  significant  medical  problem  affecting  children  or  would  explore  key
aspects  of  normal  human  physiology-relevant  to  health  promotion  or  disease

331


Part  II

prevention— for  which  research  on  children  is  indispensable.  By  these  standards,
the  twenty-one  nontherapeutic  radiation  experiments  with  children  whose  risks
we  review  in  the  next  section  of  this  chapter  could  all  be  said  to  address  important
questions  relevant  to  pediatric  health  care.  This  judgment  is  not  based  on  a
determination  of  whether  a  given  study  proved  important  in  the  subsequent
development  of  a  particular  field.  Such  retrospective  analysis  would  place  an
unreasonable  burden  on  investigators  of  the  past,  as  research  is  an  inherently
speculative  enterprise.  Many  experiments  that  prove  to  be  of  little  value  in  the
advance  of  medical  knowledge  are,  at  the  time  they  are  implemented,  well
designed  and  appropriate  attempts  to  address  important  research  questions.

It  is  easier  to  infer  what  the  members  of  the  AEC  Subcommittee  on
Human  Applications  would  have  considered  "important"  research  than  what  the
subcommittee  would  have  considered  "harmless"  radioisotope  research.  Acute
toxicity  is  not  seen  following  administration  of  nontherapeutic  (tracer)  doses  of
radioisotopes.  Thus,  the  principal  potential  harm  from  radiation  exposure  at
lower  doses  is  the  subsequent  development  of  cancer.  In  the  1940s  and  1950s,
some  in  the  field  apparently  discounted  the  risk,  while  others  were  wary  of  a
prevailing  uncertainty.  Dr.  John  Lawrence,  an  early  radioisotope  researcher  at  the
University  of  California,  described  how  some  researchers  conducted  public
demonstrations  of  tracers,  using  an  "unsuspecting  physician  out  of  the  audience  to
act  as  the  guinea  pig,"  presumably  to  reassure  the  audience  that  tracers  were
innocuous.56  By  contrast,  other  investigators  focused  on  the  tragedy  of  the  radium
dial  painters,  concerned  that  this  might  be  repeated  with  man-made  radionuclides.

Evidence  of  how  well  the  AEC  enforced  its  1949  guidelines  with  respect
to  research  on  children  is  elusive  (see  chapter  6).  AEC  correspondence  with
researchers  at  the  Fernald  School  suggests  that  in  at  least  one  case  there  was
oversight  of  research  in  which  children  were  administered  radioisotopes.57

RISK  OF  HARM  AND  NONTHERAPEUTIC  RESEARCH
WITH  CHILDREN

The  Twenty-One  Case  Examples

During  the  1944-1974  period,  there  was  an  explosion  of  interest  in  the  use
of  radioisotopes  in  clinical  medicine  and  medical  research,  including  pediatrics.
The  twenty-one  research  projects  we  review  here  include  only  a  small  number  of
all  those  that  were  likely  conducted.  These  twenty-one  do  include,  however,
every  nontherapeutic  study  that  was  funded  by  the  federal  government  and  fell
into  our  original  group  of  eighty-one  pediatric  radiation  experiments.  The  table
that  appears  at  the  end  of  the  chapter  provides  information  about  the  number  of
children  involved  in  each  of  the  experiments,  the  radioisotopes  used,  and  risk
estimates  for  cancer  incidence.  These  twenty-one  represent  a  subset  of  eighty-one
studies  identified  in  documents  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  and  a  review

332


Chapter  7

of  the  medical  literature  that  met  the  criteria  described  above."

All  twenty-one  projects  analyzed  in  detail  involve  the  administration  of
radioisotopes  to  children  in  order  to  better  understand  child  physiology  or  to
develop  better  diagnostic  tools  for  pediatric  disease.  In  this  respect,  the  studies
supported  by  the  federal  government  do  not  differ  from  those  reviewed  that  had
other  funding  sources.  With  the  exception  of  the  study  at  the  Wrentham  school  to
evaluate  protective  measures  for  fallout,  none  of  the  twenty-one  experiments
reviewed  was  related  to  national  defense  concerns.  Seventeen  of  the  twenty-one
experiments  involved  the  use  of  iodine  131  for  the  evaluation  of  thyroid  function.
Three  examples  of  research  reviewed  by  the  Committee  will  help  illustrate
the  nature  of  the  experiments  and  the  risks  posed  to  children.  In  the  first  example
investigators  at  Johns  Hopkins  in  1953  injected  iodine  131  into  thirty-four
children  from  ages  two  months  to  fifteen  years  with  hypothyroidism  and  an
unknown  number  of  healthy  "control"  children  in  order  to  better  understand  the
cause  of  this  disease.59  Iodine  is  normally  taken  up  and  used  by  the  thyroid  gland
for  hormone  production.  In  this  experiment,  a  radiation  detector  was  placed  over
the  thyroid  to  detect  the  amount  of  iodine  1 3 1  taken  up.  Most  children  with
hypothyroidism  have  an  underdeveloped  thyroid  gland,  in  which  case  only  very
low  levels  of  iodine  131  uptake  will  occur.  Indeed,  this  is  what  the  investigators
found  in  this  experiment,  which  was  one  of  the  first  projects  to  use  iodine  131
uptake  as  a  measure  of  thyroid  function  in  children.  Hypothyroidism  is  a
relatively  common  condition  (1  per  4,000  births)  that  can  cause  profound  mental
retardation  if  untreated.  Today,  better  diagnostic  tests  for  thyroid  function
including  radioimmunoassay  and  effective  thyroid  hormone  replacement  have
virtually  eliminated  hypothyroidism  as  a  cause  of  mental  retardation  in  the
developed  world.

A  second  example  of  research  reviewed  by  the  Committee  is  an
experiment  by  investigators  at  the  University  of  Minnesota  in  1951  in  which  four
children  with  nephrotic  syndrome  were  injected  with  an  amino  acid  labeled  with
sulfur  35,  along  with  two  "control"  children  hospitalized  for  other  conditions.60
Nephrotic  syndrome  is  a  serious  pediatric  condition  in  which  protein  is  excreted
by  the  kidneys  in  large  quantities.  There  was  controversy  at  the  time  over
whether  children  with  nephrotic  syndrome  have  low  blood  protein  levels  solely
because  of  renal  losses  or  whether  they  also  have  impaired  protein  production
This  experiment  looked  at  the  incorporation  of  the  radioisotope-labeled  amino
acid  into  protein,  and  the  results  suggested  that  the  protein  production  in  children
with  nephrotic  syndrome  is  normal.

A  third  example  of  research  reviewed  by  the  Committee  is  a  study  of
iodine  125  and  iodine  131  uptake  by  eight  healthy  children  performed  at  the  Los
Alamos  Laboratory  in  1963.61  The  purpose  of  the  study  was  to  evaluate  the  use  of
radioisotopes  in  very  small  doses  (nanocurie  levels)  as  a  measure  of  thyroid
function.  The  study  demonstrated  that  the  technique  was  scientifically  valid  and
exposed  the  children  to  smaller  radiation  doses  than  earlier  methods


333


Part  II
Estimating  Risk

How  can  the  risks  posed  to  children  in  these  types  of  experiments  be
estimated?  The  primary  risk  posed  by  the  administration  of  radioisotopes  is  the
potential  development  of  cancer  years,  even  decades,  after  the  exposure.  As  will
be  discussed  further,  the  risk  of  cancer  following  external  radiation  exposure  was
not  well  documented  until  the  late  1950s  and  the  early  1960s.  Thus,  the  published
reports  of  research  projects  prior  to  that  time  rarely  discuss  the  issue  of  long-term
risks.

The  principles  of  risk  assessment  for  radioisotopes  are  laid  out  in  "The
Basics  of  Radiation  Science"  at  the  end  of  "Introduction:  The  Atomic  Century."62
To  review:  the  increased  risk  of  cancer  is  generally  assumed  to  be  proportional  to
the  dose  of  radiation  delivered  to  the  various  organs  of  the  body.  This  dose
depends  upon  a  number  of  factors,  including  the  amount  of  radioactivity
administered,  its  chemical  form  (which  determines  which  organs  will  be
exposed),  and  how  long  it  stays  in  the  body,  which  in  turn  depends  upon  the
radioactive  decay  rate  and  the  body's  normal  excretion  rate  for  that  substance.
For  many  radioisotopes,  the  overall  personal  dose  can  be  derived  by  the
"effective-dose  method,"  in  which  the  doses  to  the  ten  most  sensitive  organs  are
computed  and  added  together,  weighting  the  various  organs  in  proportion  to  their
radiosensitivity.  Thus,  this  effective  dose  can  be  thought  of  as  producing  the
same  excess  risk  of  cancer  (all  sites  combined)  as  if  the  whole  body  had  received
that  amount  as  a  uniform  dose.  This  risk  is  then  computed  by  multiplying  the
effective  dose  by  established  risk  estimates  per  unit  dose  for  various  ages.  For
this  chapter,  the  Advisory  Committee  has  adopted  the  effective  doses  and  risk
estimates  tabulated  by  the  International  Commission  on  Radiation  Protection  and
the  National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection.63  The  lifetime-risk  estimate  used  in
this  chapter  is  1/1,000  excess  cancers  per  rem  of  effective  dose  for  children  and
fetuses  exposed  to  slowly  delivered  radiation  doses,  like  those  from  radioactive
tracers.

The  risks  of  thyroid  cancer  following  exposure  to  radioactive  iodine
(generally  1-131)  represent  a  special  case  for  three  reasons.  First,  use  of  the
effective-dose  method  is  inappropriate  because  the  dose  is  much  greater  to  the
thyroid  than  for  other  organs,  and  the  lifetime  risk  is  therefore  dominated  by  the
thyroid  cancer  risk.  Therefore,  risk  is  best  calculated  using  only  the  thyroid  dose
and  its  associated  risk.  Second,  the  thyroid  cancer  risk  varies  even  more  by  age
than  for  other  cancers.  Third,  the  risk  for  iodine  1 3 1  has  not  been  measured
directly,  but  several  lines  of  evidence  suggest  that  it  may  be  substantially  lower
than  for  external  radiation.  For  this  chapter,  the  Advisory  Committee  has  adopted
estimates  provided  by  three  follow-up  studies  of  external  irradiation  of  the  thyroid
by  x  rays  or  gamma  rays  in  childhood:  2,600  children  who  received  x-ray
treatment  for  enlarged  thymus  glands  in  the  first  year  of  life;64  1 1,000  children
who  were  treated  by  x  rays  in  Israel  for  ringworm  under  age  ten;65  and  Japanese

334


Chapter  7

atomic  bomb  survivors  under  age  twenty.66  The  risk  estimates  from  these  studies
were  divided  by  three  to  convert  them  to  internal  iodine  131  exposures.67  The
estimates  from  these  studies  are  for  cancer  incidence;  for  mortality  we  have
divided  them  by  10,  since  90  percent  of  thyroid  cancers  are  curable.  The  resulting
estimates  are  summarized  in  table  1 .  These  are  the  same  estimates  used  by  the
Massachusetts  Task  Force,  which  investigated  the  Fernald  and  Wrentham
experiments.68

We  can  use  data  from  the  previously  described  Johns  Hopkins  iodine  1 3 1
study  as  an  example.  In  this  study,  the  amount  of  radioactivity  administered  was
1.75  microcuries  per  kilogram  body  weight;  equivalent  to  44  microcuries  in  a
seven-year-old  child  weighing  25  kilograms.  Based  on  interpolation  of  the  tables
in  ICRP  53,  and  assuming  a  13  percent  thyroid  uptake,  this  would  produce  a
thyroid  dose  of  1 15  rem  to  a  child  aged  seven.  In  this  age  range  (5-9),  the  lifetime
risk  of  developing  thyroid  cancer  would  be  calculated  by  multiplying  this  dose  by
20  per  million  person  rems  to  produce  an  estimate  of  2.3  cases  per  1,000  exposed
individuals,  or  0.23  percent  for  a  particular  child.  The  risk  of  dying  of  thyroid
cancer  would  be  one-tenth  of  this,  or  0.023  percent.

The  twenty-one  experiments  subjected  to  the  Committee's  detailed  risk
analysis  included  approximately  800  children.  Eleven  of  the  studies  produced
estimates  of  average  risk  of  cancer  incidence  within  the  range  of  1  and  0.1
percent;  eight  studies  ranged  within  0.09  and  0.01  percent,  and  the  remaining  two
studies  produced  average  risk  estimates  of  0.001  percent.  The  maximum  potential
risk  estimate  was  2.3  percent  in  a  few  children  aged  one  to  two  years  at  the  time
of  exposure.  The  average  risk  of  cancer  incidence  for  the  Fernald  radioiron  and
radiocalcium  studies  were  0.03  percent  and  0.001  percent  respectively,  and  for  the
Wrentham  fallout  (iodine  131)  study,  0. 10  percent.  All  of  the  highest-risk
experiments  involved  iodine  131,  and  hence  the  risks  of  dying  of  cancer  would  be
about  ten  times  smaller.  (See  table  2  at  the  end  of  this  chapter  for  further  details.)

Based  on  the  average  risk  estimate  for  each  of  the  twenty-one
experiments,  we  would  estimate  an  excess  cancer  incidence  of  1 .4  cases  for  the
entire  group  of  792  subjects.  However,  given  the  uncertainties  built  into  the  risk
analysis,  it  is  also  possible  that  no  excess  cases  resulted.  Furthermore,  since  most
of  that  excess  would  have  been  thyroid  cancer,  it  is  particularly  unlikely  that  any
cancer  deaths  would  have  been  caused.  Finally,  as  thyroid  cancer  does  occur  in
the  general  population,  it  would  be  difficult  to  attribute  these  cases  to  an
individual's  involvement  in  research.  In  addition,  any  cases  of  thyroid  cancer
among  former  subjects  attributable  to  their  participation  in  research  conducted  in
the  1940s  and  1950s  are  likely  to  have  occurred  already,  although  there  is  little
long-term  follow-up  data  to  know  for  certain  what  the  ultimate  lifetime  risk  might
be.


335


Part  II


Table  1.  Summary  of  Risk  Estimates  for  Thyroid  Cancer

from  Iodine  131


EXPOSURE  AT  VARIOUS  AGES

Age

0-4*

5-9+

10-14*

15-19§

Lifetime  risk"  of  cancer  incidence  per  million  exposed  per  rem

Males

27

13

6.7

1.9

Females

53

27

13

3.7

Both

40

20

10

2.8

Lifetime  risk  of  cancer  mortality  per  million  exposed  per  rem

Males

2.7

1.3

0.7

0.2

Females

5.3

2.7

1.3

0.4

Both

4.0

2.0

1.0

0.3

* From  R.  E.  Shore  et  al.,  "Thyroid  Tumors  Following  Thymus  Irradiation,"
Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute  74  ( 1 985): 1 1 77- 1 1 84,  based  on  2.9  cases  per
million  person-year-rem.

t From  E.  Ron  and  B.  Modon,  "Thyroid  and  Other  Neoplasms  Following
Childhood  Scalp  Irradiation,"  in  J.  D.  Boice,  Jr.,  and  J.  F.  Fraumeni,  Jr.,  eds.,  Radiation
Carcinogenesis:  Epidemiology  and  Biological  Significance  (New  York:  Raven,  1984),
139-151,  based  on  the  risk  in  this  age  group  being  half  that  in  the  0-4  age  group.

\ From  R.  L.  Prentice  et  al.,  "Radiation  Exposure  and  Thyroid  Cancer  Incidence
Among  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  Residents,"  National  Cancer  Institute  Monographs  62
(1982):  207-212,  based  on  the  risk  in  this  age  group  being  one-third  of  that  in  the  0-9  age
group.

§ Ibid.,  based  on  0.21  per  million  person-year-rem.

I Based  on  an  assumed  forty-year  period  at  risk  from  five  to  forty-five  years
after  exposure  and  assuming  females  have  twice  the  excess  risk  of  males.


336


Chapter  7

How  do  these  risk  figures  compare  with  what  is  acceptable  in
nontherapeutic  research  today?  As  noted  earlier  in  this  chapter,  the  contemporary
regulatory  standard  permits  children  to  be  involved  in  nontherapeutic  research  if
the  research  poses  no  more  than  "minimal  risk"  to  the  subjects.  "Minimal  risk"  is
defined  by  analogy  only:  "A  risk  is  minimal  where  the  probability  and  magnitude
of  harm  or  discomfort  anticipated  in  the  proposed  research  are  not  greater,  in  and
of  themselves,  than  those  ordinarily  encountered  in  daily  life  or  during  the
performance  of  routine  physical  or  psychological  tests. "^  The  regulations  also
allow  for  nontherapeutic  research  with  children  that  does  present  more  than
minimal  risk,  but  only  //"the  risk  represents  a  minor  increase  over  minimal  risk,
the  procedures  involved  are  commensurate  with  the  general  life  experiences  of
subjects,  and  the  research  is  likely  to  yield  knowledge  of  "vital  importance"  about
the  subjects'  disorder  or  condition.70  The  regulations  do  not  specify  what  would
count  as  a  minor  increase  over  minimal  risk.  With  this  general  guidance,  it  is  the
obligation  of  individual  institutional  review  boards  (IRBs)  to  determine  whether  a
nontherapeutic  study  involving  children  is  acceptable.71 It  is  likely  that  a  cancer
risk  of  greater  than  1  per  1 ,000  subjects  would  be  considered  by  most,  if  not  all
IRBs  to  be  unacceptable  by  a  minimal-risk  standard,  even  for  nonfatal  cancers.  It
is  less  clear  whether  this  risk  would  be  considered  unacceptable  by  the  "minor
increase  over  minimal  risk"  standard  (assuming  the  research  satisfied  the  "vital
importance"  condition).  The  difficulty  of  establishing  an  acceptable  level  of  risk
in  nontherapeutic  radiation  research  with  children  is  currently  being  debated  in
the  medical  literature,72  a  debate  that  will  likely  continue  at  least  until  federal
guidelines  become  more  specific.

What  Was  Known  at  the  Time  About  Risk  in  Children

Assuming  that  any  study  that  posed  risks  of  greater  than  1  excess  case  of
cancer  per  1,000  subjects  would  be  judged  to  be  more  than  minimal  risk,  eleven
of  the  twenty-one  research  projects  reviewed  by  the  Committee  exposed  children
to  higher  risk  than  is  acceptable  today  for  nontherapeutic  experiments.  From  a
moral  perspective,  a  crucial  question  is  whether  investigators  at  the  time  could  or
should  have  known  that  they  were  putting  their  pediatric  subjects  at  greater  than
minimal  risk.  If  they  could  have  known,  then,  arguably,  these  investigators  were
not  conforming  to  the  AEC's  requirement  permitting  nontherapeutic  research  in
children  provided  that  "the  radiation  dosage  level  in  any  tissue  is  low  enough  to
be  considered  harmless."

It  is  clear  that  the  medical  community's  understanding  of  the  nature  and
magnitude  of  risks  posed  to  children  by  radiation  exposure  is  not  what  it  is  today.
Researchers  did  not  positively  associate  prior  exposure  to  external  radiation  with
an  increased  risk  of  cancer  until  the  mid  to  late  1950s.  In  1950,  Duffy  and
Fitzgerald  raised  the  question  as  to  whether  there  might  be  cause  to  investigate  a
possible  association  between  therapeutic  thymic  irradiation  during  childhood  and

337


Part  II

subsequent  development  of  thyroid  or  thymic  cancers:

To  pose  a  cause  and  effect  relationship  between
thymic  irradiation  and  the  development  of  cancer
would  be  quite  unjustified  on  the  basis  of  data  at
hand  when  one  considers  the  large  number  of
children  who  have  had  irradiation  of  an  "enlarged
thymus."  However,  the  potential  carcinogenic
effects  of  irradiation  are  becoming  increasingly
apparent,  and  such  relationships  as  those  of  thymic
irradiation  in  early  life  and  the  subsequent
development  of  thyroid  or  thymic  tumors  might  be
profitably  explored.73

By  1959,  several  studies  had  reported  an  association  between  radiation
exposure  and  the  subsequent  development  of  leukemia.74  Saenger  et  al.
performed  an  epidemiologic  study  of  several  thousand  children  in  1960  to
evaluate  the  association  between  radiation  exposure  and  cancer.75  They  stated:

The  question  of  whether  or  not  radiation  can  be
indicted  as  the  principal  causative  factor  in  the
induction  of  neoplasia  following  radiation  exposure
for  either  diagnostic  or  therapeutic  purposes  has
been  of  increased  interest  over  the  past  several
years.76

In  completing  their  analysis,  they  concluded:  "It  remains  a  fact,  indisputable  in
all  respects,  that  the  rate  of  thyroid  cancers  in  the  irradiated  group  is
disproportionately  high."77

In  196U  Beach  and  Dolphin  prepared  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  literature
on  the  relationship  between  radiation  and  thyroid  cancer  in  children.78  They
reported:

The  thyroid  has  always  been  considered  to  be  an
organ  comparatively  radio-resistant  to  alteration
and  subsequent  tumor  development.  Although  no
definite  development  of  radiogenic  tumor  has  been
reported  in  adults  after  therapeutic  administration  of
iodine-131,  Jelliffe  and  Jones  (1960)  discuss  a  total
of  10  cases  of  thyroid  cancer  reported  in  the
literature  in  persons  treated  early  in  life  by  x-ray
irradiation  in  the  neck  region.  [T]he  total  of
malignant  thyroid  tumors  which  develop  in  children

338


Chapter  7

given  a  dose  of  x-radiation  to  the  thyroid  that  is  of
the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  incidence
estimated  for  other  tumors  if  a  linear  dose-response
relationship  is  assumed.  No  biologic  significance  is
attached  to  this  point,  apart  from  noting  the  fact  that
the  child's  thyroid  appears  to  be  more  radio-
sensitive than  an  adult's  but  not  more  sensitive  than
some  adult  tissues.79

This  lack  of  appreciation  for  the  potential  long-term  effects  of  radiation  in
children  is  further  reflected  in  institutional  policy  development  for  use  of
radioisotopes  at  the  time.  The  Massachusetts  General  Hospital  developed
standards  for  tracer  doses  of  radioisotopes  in  May  1949.  Dr.  Shields  Warren
director  of  the  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  assisted  in  the
development  of  the  MGH  standard:

Tracer  doses  in  humans  will  always  be  kept  to  the
absolute  minimum  required  to  make  the
observation.

Adult  humans  who  are  ill  and  who  are  expected  to
benefit  from  the  procedure,  shall  not  receive  tracer
doses  of  radioactive  material  giving  off  radiation  in
excess  of  a  total  of  4  rep.  Children  (all  patients
below  15  years  of  age)  shall  not  receive  more  than  a
total  of  0.8  rep.sn

In  any  other  cases,  tracer  doses  will  be  limited  to
radioactive  material  giving  off  radiation  in  an
amount  less  than  a  total  of  1  rep.

In  the  case  of  iodine,  the  thyroid,  which  retains
most  of  the  radioactivity,  is  radioresistant.  In  this
case,  the  permitted  dosage  may  be  increased  by  a
factor  of  100.81

Despite  the  cautious  tone  of  this  document,  the  policy  illustrates  the
complete  lack  of  understanding  of  the  true  radiosensitivity  of  the  thyroid  gland
especially  in  the  pediatric  population.  Further  allowances  must  be  made  with  '
regard  to  what  was  known  about  the  distribution  of  radioisotopes  in  children  at
the  time.  It  is  evident  that  investigators  using  radioisotopes  in  children  were  not
employing  available  information  on  organ  weights  in  children  to  calculate  tissue
exposures  at  least  until  the  mid-1960s.  When  "standard  man"  assumptions  were

339


Part  II

used  to  calculate  pediatric  exposures  before  pediatric  standards  were  developed,
investigators  may  have  significantly  and  systematically  underestimated  effective
tissue  dosages  in  children.  It  is  notable  that  the  highest  levels  of  risk  posed  in  the
experiments  reviewed  were  to  infants  administered  iodine  131.

Iodine  131  was  routinely  used  for  diagnostic  procedures  in  the  pediatric
population  until  the  1980s,  when  it  was  replaced  by  1-123,  a  newly  available
radioisotope  with  a  significantly  shorter  half-life,  which  reduced  the  thyroid  dose
markedly.  The  Wrentham  fallout  study,  performed  in  1 96 1 ,  employed  doses  of
iodine  131  that  resulted  in  an  average  dose  of  44  rad  to  the  gland,  slightly  less
than  the  dose  that  would  have  been  received  for  a  diagnostic  thyroid  scan  during
this  time.  ,

Although  the  doses  of  radioisotopes  subsequently  declined  during  these
years  for  both  therapeutic  medicine  and  nontherapeutic  research,  these  guidelines
were  not  based  on  long-term  outcome  studies  of  exposed  individuals  but  rather
on  conservative  extrapolations  from  high-dose  studies  and  on  the  dosages
necessary  to  enable  detection  with  the  available  equipment.

The  debate  over  the  potential  risks  of  low-dose  exposure  continues  today,
as  epidemiological  studies  of  thyroid  cancer  incidence  subsequent  to  iodine  131
administration  in  both  the  diagnostic  as  well  as  therapeutic  dose  range  have  been
largely  negative.  Risks  as  a  result  of  iodine  131  exposure  are  still  unclear,  and
risk  analyses  for  exposure  to  radioisotopes  are  thus  based  on  extrapolations  from
studies  involving  external  irradiation.

In  summary,  during  the  period  in  which  children  were  exposed  to  the
highest  levels  of  risk  from  nontherapeutic  research  involving  radioisotopes,
investigators  had  a  limited  understanding  of  the  potential  long-term  risks  of  low-
dose  radiation  and  of  methods  to  accurately  calculate  the  tissue  doses  in  children.
Today,  we  cautiously  assume  that  any  exposure  to  radiation  likely  produces  some
small  increase  in  cancer  risk,  so  that  no  exposure  is  absolutely  harmless.  Instead,
the  concept  of  minimal  or  acceptable  risk  is  commonly  used,  as  discussed  earlier.
Some  of  the  studies  during  this  period  involved  risks  that  would  be  judged  as
minimal  even  today,  whereas  others  would  be  clearly  viewed  as  unacceptable
today.  Should  the  investigators  then  have  viewed  any  of  these  studies  as
harmless?  Though  an  understanding  of  the  association  between  exposure  to
external  radiation  and  subsequent  development  of  cancer  was  emerging  during
this  time,  a  similar  association  had  not  been  made  for  exposure  to  low  dose  levels
of  radioisotopes.  In  addition,  the  relative  radiosensitivity  of  many  pediatric
tissues,  including  thyroid,  had  not  been  established,  and  most  researchers  during
this  period  subscribed  to  the  "threshold"  theory  of  risk,  which  assumed  that
sufficiently  low  doses  were  probably  harmless.  In  the  face  of  such  widespread
factual  ignorance,  it  is  difficult  to  hold  these  investigators  culpable  for  imposing
risks  on  their  subjects  that  were  not  appreciated  at  the  time.


340


Chapter  7

BEYOND  RISK:  OTHER  DIMENSIONS  OF  THE  ETHICS  OF
NONTHERAPEUTIC  RESEARCH  ON  CHILDREN

The  level  of  risk  to  which  children  are  exposed  is  critical  in  evaluating  the
ethics  of  nontherapeutic  research  on  children.  Also  important,  however,  is
whether  and  how  the  authorization  of  parents  was  solicited,  and  also  which
children  were  selected  to  be  so  used.  For  nineteen  of  the  twenty-one  studies
reviewed  by  the  Committee,  we  know  almost  nothing  about  whether  the
permission  of  parents  was  sought  or  what  the  parents  were  told  about  their
children's  involvement.  Two  of  the  studies  conducted  at  the  Fernald  School  were
the  exceptions,  as  a  result  of  extensive  historical  and  archival  research  by  the
Massachusetts  Task  Force  on  Human  Subjects  Research.

There  is  a  reference  to  parents  in  the  published  literature  on  only  one  of
the  remaining  nineteen  studies,  a  1954  iodine  uptake  experiment  at  the  University
of  Tennessee.  This  paper  included  the  following  line:  "The  procedure  was
described  to  the  mothers  of  the  infants  studied,  and  the  mothers  gave  consent  for
the  study  before  the  tests  were  made."*2  (The  inclusion  of  this  line  is  noteworthy
for  it  suggests  that  at  least  some  investigators  thought  parental  permission  was
worth  mentioning  in  published  reports  of  their  research.)

If  the  Committee  had  devoted  extensive  investigatory  resources  to  these
nineteen  studies,  it  is  likely  we  would  have  learned  more  about  whether  or  how
parental  authorization  was  obtained  in  at  least  some  cases.  It  is  also  almost
certain  that  even  the  deepest  archival  digging  would  have  produced  no  useful
information  about  parental  authorization  for  some  of  these  experiments.  The
recent  experience  of  the  Massachusetts  Task  Force  demonstrates  the  possibility  of
both  outcomes:  for  some  of  the  experiments  conducted  at  the  Fernald  School,  the
task  force's  diligent  historical  research  uncovered  a  variety  of  documents  that
shed  important  light  on  what  both  parents  and  children  were  told;  for  the
experiments  at  Wrentham,  similar  efforts  did  not  produce  any  significant
information  on  questions  of  parental  authorization.

Again  with  the  exception  of  the  experiments  conducted  at  Fernald  and
Wrentham,  we  know  almost  nothing  about  who  the  children  were  who  served  as
subjects  in  these  experiments.  The  journal  articles  on  these  remaining  studies  do
not  describe  the  sociodemographic  characteristics  of  the  subjects.  They  do
sometimes  mention  whether  the  subjects  had  relevant  medical  conditions  and
usually  that  the  children,  including  the  "control"  subjects,  were  hospitalized
patients.  In  some  of  the  experiments  reviewed  by  the  Committee,  the  scientific
research  questions  of  interest  could  have  been  pursued  only  in  children  who  were
ill  and  hospitalized.  In  other  instances,  however,  the  hospitalized  children  were
likely  samples  of  convenience.  This  is  particularly  plausible  in  the  case  of  control
subjects,  when  a  sample  of  healthy,  nonhospitalized  children  might  have  made  a
better  control  group  from  a  scientific  perspective.  As  we  saw  in  chapter  2,
hospitalized  patients  were  often  viewed  by  physician-investigators  as  a

341


Part  II

convenient  source  of  research  subjects.

Because  so  little  is  known,  the  Committee  cannot  draw  conclusions  about
the  ethics  of  most  of  the  nontherapeutic  studies  involving  children  we  reviewed,
apart  from  the  important  issue  of  risk  of  harm  to  the  children  involved.  We  turn
now  to  an  analysis  of  the  studies  where  relevant  information  about  parental
authorization,  disclosure,  and  subject  selection  is  available:  the  studies  conducted
at  the  Fernald  School.

THE  STUDIES  AT  THE  FERNALD  SCHOOL

Researchers  from  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  working  in
cooperation  with  senior  members  of  the  Fernald  staff,  carried  out  nontherapeutic
nutritional  studies  with  radioisotopes  at  the  state  school  in  the  late  1940s  and
early  1950s.  The  subjects  of  these  nutritional  research  studies  were  young  male
residents  of  Fernald,  who  were  members  of  the  school's  "science  club."  In  1946,
one  study  exposed  seventeen  subjects  to  radioactive  iron.  The  second  study,
which  involved  a  series  of  seventeen  related  subexperiments,  exposed  fifty-seven
subjects  to  radioactive  calcium  between  1950  and  1953.  It  is  clear  that  the  doses
involved  were  low  and  that  it  is  extremely  unlikely  that  any  of  the  children  who
were  used  as  subjects  were  harmed  as  a  consequence.  These  studies  remain
morally  troubling,  however,  for  several  reasons.  First,  although  parents  or
guardians  were  asked  for  their  permission  to  have  their  children  involved  in  the
research,  the  available  evidence  suggests  that  the  information  provided  was,  at
best,  incomplete.  Second,  there  is  the  question  of  the  fairness  of  selecting
institutionalized  children  at  all,  children  whose  life  circumstances  were  by  any
standard  already  heavily  burdened.

Parental  Authorization

The  Massachusetts  Task  Force  found  two  letters  sent  to  parents  describing
the  nutrition  studies  and  seeking  their  permission.  The  first  letter,  a  form  letter
signed  by  the  superintendent  of  the  school,  is  dated  November  1949."  The  letter
refers  to  a  project  in  which  children  at  the  school  will  receive  a  special  diet  "rich"
in  various  cereals,  iron,  and  vitamins  and  for  which  "it  will  be  necessary  to  make
some  blood  tests  at  stated  intervals,  similar  to  those  to  which  our  patients  are
already  accustomed,  and  which  will  cause  no  discomfort  or  change  in  their
physical  condition  other  than  possibly  improvement."  The  letter  makes  no
mention  of  any  risks  or  the  use  of  a  radioisotope.  Parents  or  guardians  are  asked
to  indicate  that  they  have  no  objection  to  their  son's  participation  in  the  project  by
signing  an  enclosed  form.84


342


Chapter  7
The  second  letter,  dated  May  1953,  we  quote  in  its  entirety:
Dear  Parent:

In  previous  years  we  have  done  some
examinations  in  connection  with  the  nutritional
department  of  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of
Technology,  with  the  purposes  of  helping  to
improve  the  nutrition  of  our  children  and  to  help
them  in  general  more  efficiently  than  before.

For  the  checking  up  of  the  children,  we
occasionally  need  to  take  some  blood  samples,
which  are  then  analyzed.  The  blood  samples  are
taken  after  one  test  meal  which  consists  of  a  special
breakfast  meal  containing  a  certain  amount  of
calcium.  We  have  asked  for  volunteers  to  give  a
sample  of  blood  once  a  month  for  three  months,  and
your  son  has  agreed  to  volunteer  because  the  boys
who  belong  to  the  Science  Club  have  many
additional  privileges.  They  get  a  quart  of  milk  daily
during  that  time,  and  are  taken  to  a  baseball  game,
to  the  beach  and  to  some  outside  dinners  and  they
enjoy  it  greatly.

I  hope  that  you  have  no  objection  that  your
son  is  voluntarily  participating  in  this  study.  The
first  study  will  start  on  Monday,  June  8th,  and  if
you  have  not  expressed  any  objections  we  will
assume  that  your  son  may  participate.

Sincerely  yours,

Clemens  E.  Benda,  M.D.
[Fernald]  Clinical  Director

Approved:.


Malcom  J.  Farrell,  M.D.
[Fernald]  Superintendent85


Again,  there  is  no  mention  of  any  risks  or  the  use  of  a  radioisotope.  It  was
believed  then  that  the  risks  were  minimal,  as  indeed  they  appear  to  have  been,  and
as  a  consequence,  school  administrators  and  the  investigators  may  have  thought  it
unnecessary  to  raise  the  issue  of  risks  with  the  parents.  There  was  no  basis,
however,  for  the  implication  in  both  letters  that  the  project  was  intended  for  the

343


Part  II

children's  benefit  or  improvement.  This  was  simply  not  true.*6

The  conclusion  of  the  Massachusetts  Task  Force  was  that  these
experiments  were  conducted  in  violation  of  the  fundamental  human  rights  of  the
subjects.  This  conclusion  is  based  in  part  on  the  task  force's  assessment  of  these
letters.  Specifically,  the  task  force  found  that

1  [t]he  researchers  failed  to  satisfactorily  inform  the
subjects  and  their  families  that  the  nutritional
research  studies  were  non-therapeutic;  that  is,  that
the  research  studies  were  never  intended  to  benefit
the  human  subjects  as  individuals  but  were  intended
to  enhance  the  body  of  scientific  knowledge
concerning  nutrition.

The  letter  in  which  consent  from  family  members
was  requested,  which  was  drafted  by  the  former
Fernald  superintendent,  failed  to  provide
information  that  was  reasonably  necessary  for  an
informed  decision  to  be  made.87

Fairness  and  the  Use  of  Institutionalized  Children

The  Fernald  experiments  also  raise  quite  starkly  the  particular  ethical
difficulties  associated  with  conducting  research  on  members  of  institutionalized
populations-especially  where  some  of  the  residents  have  mental  impairments.
Living  conditions  in  most  of  these  institutions  (including  Fernald  and  Wrentham)
have  improved  considerably  in  recent  years,  and  sensitivity  toward  people  with
cognitive  impairments  has  likewise  increased.  As  Fred  Boyce,  a  subject  in  one  of
these  experiments  has  put  it,  "Fernald  is  a  much  better  place  today,  and  in  no  way
does  it  operate  like  it  did  then.  That's  very  important  to  know  that."ss

The  Massachusetts  Task  Force  describes  conditions  in  state-operated
facilities  like  Fernald,  particularly  as  they  bear  on  human  experimentation,  as
follows:

Until  the  1970s,  the  buildings  were  dirty  and  in
disrepair,  staff  shortages  were  constant,  brutality
was  often  accepted,  and  programs  were  inadequate
or  nonexistent.  There  were  no  human  rights
committees  or  institutional  review  boards.  If  the
Superintendent  (in  those  days  required  to  be  a
medical  doctor)  "cooperated"  in  an  experiment  and
allowed  residents  to  be  subjects,  few  knew  and  no
one  protested.  If  nothing  concerning  the

344


Chapter  7

experiments  appeared  in  the  residents'  medical
records,  if  "request  for  consent"  letters  were  less
than  forthright,  or  if  no  consent  was  obtained  there
was  no  one  in  a  position  of  authority  to  halt  or
challenge  such  procedures.89

Although  public  attitudes  toward  people  who  are  institutionalized  are
admittedly  different  today  than  they  were  fifty  years  ago,  it  is  likely  that  this  state
of  affairs  would  have  been  troubling  to  most  Americans  even  then.  Historian
Susan  Lederer  has  revealed  several  episodes  of  experimentation  with
institutionalized  children  in  America  that  caused  considerable  public  outcry  even
before  1940,  presaging  the  concern  generated  by  Willowbrook  when  this  research
became  a  public  issue  in  the  1960s.90

The  LMRI  staff  reported  in  the  early  1960s  that  the  pediatric  researchers
whom  they  had  gathered  agreed  in  principle  that  the  convenience  of  conducting
research  on  institutionalized  children  did  not  outweigh  the  moral  problems
associated  with  this  practice:

Several  investigators  spoke  about  the  practical
advantages  of  using  institutionalized  children  who
are  already  assembled  in  one  location  and  living
within  a  standard,  controlled  environment.  But  the
conferees  agreed  that  there  should  be  no  differential
recruitment  of  ward  patients  rather  than  private
patients,  of  institutionalized  children  rather  than
children  living  in  private  homes,  or  of  handicapped
rather  than  healthy  children.91

A  particularly  poignant  dimension  of  the  unfairness  of  using
institutionalized  children  as  subjects  of  research  is  that  it  permits  investigators  to
secure  cooperation  by  offering  as  special  treats  what  other,  noninstitutionalized
children  would  find  far  less  exceptional.  The  extra  attention  of  a  "science  club,"  a
quart  of  milk,  and  an  occasional  outing  were  for  the  boys  at  Fernald  extraordinary
opportunities.  As  Mr.  Boyce  put  it:

I  won't  tell  you  now  about  the  severe  physical  and
mental  abuse,  but  I  can  assure  you,  it  was  no  Boys'
Town.  The  idea  of  getting  consent  for  experiments
under  these  conditions  was  not  only  cruel  but
hypocritical.  They  bribed  us  by  offering  us  special
privileges,  knowing  that  we  had  so  little  that  we
would  do  practically  anything  for  attention;  and  to
say,  I  quote,  "This  is  their  debt  to  society,"  end

345


Part  II

quote,  as  if  we  were  worth  no  more  than  laboratory
mice,  is  unforgivable.92

Even  when  a  child  was  able  to  resist  the  offers  of  special  attention  and
refused  to  participate  in  the  experiment,  the  investigators  seem  to  have  been
unwilling  to  respect  the  child's  decision.  One  MIT  researcher,  Robert  S.  Harris,
explicitly  noted  that  "it  seemed  to  [him]  that  the  three  subjects  who  objected  to
being  included  in  the  study  [could]  be  induced  to  change  their  minds."93  Harris
believed  that  the  recalcitrant  children  could  be  "induced"  to  join  in  the  study  by
emphasizing  "the  Fernald  Science  Club  angle  of  our  work."94

From  the  perspective  of  the  science,  it  was  considered  important  to
conduct  the  research  in  an  environment  in  which  the  diet  of  the  children-subjects
could  be  easily  controlled.  From  this  standpoint,  the  institutional  setting  of
Fernald  was  ideal.  The  institutional  settings  of  the  boarding  schools  in  the
Boston  area,  however,  would  have  offered  much  the  same  opportunity.  Although
the  risks  were  small,  the  "children  of  the  elite"  were  rarely  if  ever  selected  for
such  research.  It  is  not  likely  that  these  children  would  have  been  willing  to
submit  to  blood  tests  for  extra  milk  or  the  chance  to  go  to  the  beach.

The  question  of  what  is  ethical  in  the  context  of  unfair  background
conditions  is  always  difficult.  Perhaps  the  investigators,  who  were  not
responsible  for  the  poor  conditions  at  Fernald,  believed  that  the  opportunities
provided  to  the  members  of  the  Science  Club  brightened  the  lives  of  these
children,  if  only  briefly.  Reasoning  of  this  sort,  however,  can  all  too  easily  lead  to
unjustifiable  disregard  of  the  equal  worth  of  all  people  and  to  unfair  treatment.

Today,  fifty  years  after  the  Fernald  experiments,  there  are  still  no  federal
regulations  protecting  institutionalized  children  from  unfair  treatment  in  research
involving  human  subjects.95  The  Committee  strongly  urges  the  federal
government  to  fill  this  policy  void  by  providing  additional  protections  for
institutionalized  children.96

CONCLUSION

If  an  ethical  evaluation  of  human  experiments  depended  solely  upon  an
assessment  of  the  risks  to  subjects  as  they  could  reasonably  be  anticipated  at  the
time,  the  radiation  experiments  conducted  on  children  reviewed  in  this  chapter
would  be  relatively  unproblematic.97  During  this  time,  the  association  between
radiation  exposure  and  the  subsequent  development  of  cancer  was  not  well
understood,  and  in  particular,  little  was  known  about  iodine  131  and  the  risk  of
thyroid  cancer.  Both  researchers  and  policymakers  appear  to  have  been  alert  to
considerations  of  harm  and  concerned  about  exposing  children  to  an  unacceptable
level  of  risk.

At  the  same  time,  however,  the  scientific  community's  experience  with
radionuclides  in  humans  was  limited,  and  this  approach  to  medical  investigation

346


Chapter  7

was  new.  Although  the  available  data  about  human  risk  were  encouraging  and
the  biological  susceptibility  of  children  to  the  effects  of  radiation  was  not
appreciated,  we  are  left  with  the  lingering  question  of  whether  investigators  and
agency  officials  were  sufficiently  cautious  as  they  began  their  work  with  children.
This  is  a  difficult  judgment  to  make  at  any  point  in  the  development  of  a  field  of
human  research;  it  is  particularly  difficult  to  make  at  forty  or  fifty  years'  remove.
Investigators  and  officials  had  to  make  decisions  under  conditions  of  considerable
uncertainty;  this  is  commonplace  in  science  and  in  medicine.  Although  the
biological  susceptibility  of  children  was  not  then  known,  investigators  and
officials  held  the  view  that  children  should  be  accorded  extra  protection  in  the
conduct  of  human  research,  and  they  made  what  they  thought  were  appropriate
adjustments  when  using  children  as  subjects.  If  human  research  never  proceeded
in  the  face  of  uncertainty,  there  would  be  no  such  experiments.  How  little
uncertainty  is  acceptable  in  research  involving  children  is  a  question  that  remains
unresolved.  Today,  we  continue  to  debate  what  constitutes  minimal  risk  to
children,  in  radiation  and  in  other  areas  of  research.  The  regulations  governing
research  on  children  offer  little  in  the  way  of  guidance,  either  with  respect  to
conditions  of  uncertainty  about  risk  or  when  risks  are  known.

As  best  as  we  can  determine,  in  eleven  of  the  twenty-one  experiments  we
reviewed,  the  risks  were  in  a  range  that  would  today  likely  be  considered  as  more
than  minimal,  and  thus  as  unacceptable  in  nontherapeutic  research  with  children
according  to  current  federal  regulations.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  four  of  the
eleven  might  be  considered  acceptable  by  the  "minor  increase  over  minimal  risk"
standard.98  In  these  four  experiments,  the  average  risk  estimates  were  between
one  and  two  per  thousand,  the  studies  were  directed  at  the  subjects'  medical
conditions,  and  they  may  well  have  had  the  potential  to  obtain  information  of
"vital  importance."

Physical  risk  to  subjects  is  not  the  only  ethically  relevant  consideration  in
evaluating  human  experiments.  With  the  exception  of  the  studies  at  Fernald,  we
know  almost  nothing  about  whether  or  how  parental  authorization  for  the
remaining  nineteen  experiments  we  reviewed  was  obtained.  And  with  the
exception  of  the  Fernald  studies  and  the  experiment  at  Wrentham,  we  know  very
little  about  the  children  who  were  selected  to  be  the  subjects  of  this  research.
Therefore,  we  cannot  comment  on  the  general  ethics  of  these  other  experiments.

The  experiments  at  Fernald  and  at  the  Wrentham  School  unfairly  burdened
children  who  were  already  disadvantaged,  children  whose  interests  were  less  well
protected  than  those  children  living  with  their  parents  or  children  who  were
socially  privileged.  At  the  Fernald  School,  where  more  is  known,  there  was  some
attempt  to  solicit  the  permission  of  parents,  but  the  information  provided  was
incomplete  and  misleading.  The  investigators  successfully  secured  the
cooperation  of  the  children  with  offers  of  extra  milk  and  an  occasional  outing-
incentives  that  would  not  likely  have  induced  children  who  were  less  starved  for
attention  to  willingly  submit  to  repeated  blood  tests.

347


Part  II

One  researcher  speaking  almost  thirty-five  years  ago  set  out  the
fundamental  moral  issue  with  particular  frankness  and  clarity:

...  we  are  talking  here  about  first  and  second  class
citizens.  This  is  a  concept  none  of  our  consciences
will  allow  us  to  live  with. . . .  The  thing  we  must  all
avoid  is  two  types  of  citizenry."

It  might  have  been  common  for  researchers  to  take  advantage  of  the  convenience
of  experimenting  on  institutionalized  children,  but  the  Committee  does  not
believe  that  convenience  offsets  the  moral  problems  associated  with  employing
these  vulnerable  children  as  research  subjects~now  or  decades  ago.


The  Vanderbilt  Study

In  an  exceptionally  large  study"  at  Vanderbilt  University  in  the  1940s,  approximately  820
poor,  pregnant  Caucasian  women  were  administered  tracer  doses  of  radioactive  iron.  Vanderbilt
worked  with  the  Tennessee  State  Department  of  Health,  and  the  research  was  partly  funded  by  the
Public  Health  Service.11  Today,  most  women  take  iron  supplements  during  pregnancy.  This
experiment  provided  the  scientific  data  needed  to  determine  the  nutritional  requirements  for  iron
during  pregnancy.

The  radioiron  portion  of  the  nutrition  study,  directed  by  Dr.  Paul  Hahn,  was  designed  to
study  iron  absorption  during  pregnancy.'  The  women,  who  were  anywhere  from  less  than  ten
weeks  to  more  than  thirty-five  weeks  pregnant,  were  administered  a  single  oral  dose  of  radioactive


a.  Most  of  the  other  tracer  studies  involving  pregnant  women  and  offering  no  prospect  of  benefit
that  were  reviewed  by  the  Committee  involved  fewer  than  twenty  women  as  subjects.

b.  William  J.  Darby,  Director  of  the  Tennessee-Vanderbilt  Project  et  al.,  Summary  Report.  Section
B.  Tennessee-Vanderbilt  Nutrition  Project.  July  1.  1946  to  December  31.  1946  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-020395-
A),  97-1 10.  This  nutrition  study  summary  report  notes,  "Considerable  expansion  of  the  program  of  study  of
maternal  and  infant  nutrition  has  been  made  possible  by  a  grant  of  $9,000  per  year  which  was  made  by  the
U.S.  Public  Health  Service.  These  funds  were  available  beginning  November  1,  1946."  Ibid.,  99.  The
summary  observes  that  the  grant  was  to  be  used  for  additional  personnel,  including  the  appointment  of  Dr.
Richard  Cannon,  an  obstetrics  resident,  to  the  staff  of  the  Division  of  Nutrition  beginning  1  January  1947.
Dr.  Cannon's  name  subsequently  appears  as  an  investigator  in  the  medical  report  discussing  the  radioiron
portion  of  the  study,  along  with  Dr.  Paul  Hahn's  and  others.

c.  P.  Hahn  et  al.,  "Iron  Metabolism  in  Human  Pregnancy  as  Studied  with  the  Radioactive  Isotope,
Fe-59,"  American  Journal  of  Obstetrics  and  Gynecology  61  (March  1951):  477-486.  The  exact  years  of  the
radioiron  portion  of  the  nutrition  study  are  uncertain.  Minutes  from  a  meeting  of  the  nutrition  study
investigators  indicate  the  study  was  to  begin  in  September  1945.  Tennessee-Vanderbilt  Nutrition  Project,
Nutrition  in  Pregnancy  Study,  "Minutes  of  Meeting  for  Discussion  of  Nutrition  in  Pregnancy  Study,  August
17,  1945"  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-020395-A).  17A-C.  The  radioiron  study  probably  began  at  approximately
that  time  and  appears  to  have  continued  until  sometime  in  1947,  based  on  a  review  of  periodic  study
summaries.

348


Chapter  7

iron,  Fe-59,  during  their  second  prenatal  visit,  before  receiving  their  routine  dose  of  therapeutic
iron.'1  On  their  third  prenatal  visit,  blood  was  drawn  and  tests  performed  to  determine  the
percentage  of  iron  absorbed  by  the  mother.  The  infants'  blood  was  then  examined  at  birth  to
determine  the  percentage  of  radioiron  absorbed  by  the  fetus.  The  doses  to  the  women  were
estimated  in  the  study  article,  using  crude  dose-estimation  methods  available  at  the  time,  to  be
from  200,000  to  1,000,000  countable  counts  per  minute."  Although  the  investigators  did  not
estimate  doses  to  the  fetuses  in  the  original  study.  Dr.  Hahn  later  estimated  fetal  doses  to  be
between  5  and  15  rad.  This  estimate,  however,  has  been  questioned.1

There  is  at  least  some  indication  that  the  women  neither  gave  their  consent  nor  were
aware  they  were  participating  in  an  experiment.  Vanderbilt  study  subjects,  expressing  bitterness  at
the  way  they  believed  they  had  been  treated,  testified  at  an  Advisory  Committee  meeting  that  the
proffered  drink,  called  a  "cocktail"  by  the  investigators,  was  offered  with  no  mention  of  its
contents.  "1  remember  taking  a  cocktail,"  one  woman  said  simply.  "I  don't  remember  what  it  was,
and  I  was  not  told  what  it  was."B  Although  it  is  not  clear  what,  if  anything,  the  subjects  were  told,
information  about  the  Vanderbilt  experiment  was  available  to  the  general  public.  In  late  1946
news  reports  appeared  in  the  Nashville  press.1'

The  actual  risk  to  the  fetuses  in  the  Vanderbilt  experiment  has  long  been  a  matter  of
study.  In  1963-1964,  a  group  of  researchers  at  Vanderbilt  found  no  significant  differences  in
malignancy  rates  between  the  exposed  and  nonexposed  mothers.1  However,  they  did  identify  a
higher  number  of  malignancies  among  the  exposed  offspring  (four  cases  in  the  exposed  group:
acute  lymphatic  leukemia,  synovial  sarcoma,  lymphosarcoma,  and  primary  liver  carcinoma,  which
was  discounted  as  a  rare,  familial  form  of  cancer).  No  cases  were  found  in  a  control  group  of
similar  size,  and  approximately  0.65  cases  would  have  been  expected  on  Tennessee  state  rates,
compared  to  which  the  three  observed  cases  is  a  marginally  significant  excess.  This  led  the
researchers  to  conclude  that  the  data  suggested  a  causal  relationship  between  the  prenatal  exposure
to  Fe-59  and  the  cancer.  The  investigators  also  concluded  that  Dr.  Hahn's  estimate  of  fetal


d.  The  Advisory  Committee  has  not  been  able  to  determine  whether  Dr.  Hahn  got  the  radioactive
iron  used  in  the  study  from  a  private  or  government  source,  or  both.

e.  Counts  per  minute  is  a  measure  of  the  radioactivity  detected  by  a  specific  counting  instrument.
The  sensitivities  of  counting  instruments  vary;  a  specific  instrument  may  not  "see"  and  count  all  the  radiation
coming  from  a  particular  substance.  Thus,  the  total  amount  of  radiation  emitted  by  a  substance  may  be
calculated  by  considering  the  sensitivity  of  the  counter.

f.  Contemporary  estimates  of  the  fetal  doses  by  the  Committee  and  others  suggest  that  the  fetal
effective  dose  was  a  few  hundred  millirems.

g.  Wilton  McClure,  transcript  of  audio  testimony  before  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Human
Radiation  Experiments,  Small  Panel  Meeting,  Knoxville,  Tennessee,  2  March  1995,  182.

h. "Iron  Doses  with  Radioactive  Isotopes  Aid  to  Pregnancy,  Experiment  Shows,"  Nashville
Banner,  13  December  1946;  "VU  to  Report  on  Isotopes,"  The  Nashville  Tennessean,  14  December  1946
(ACHRE  No.  CORP-020395-A).

i. The  investigators  identified  the  hospital  records  of  751  exposed  mothers  and  771  unexposed
controls,  as  well  as  719  exposed  offspring  and  734  unexposed  offspring,  and  mailed  them  questionnaires.  Of
the  exposed  mothers,  90.4  percent  responded,  as  did  91.45  percent  of  the  unexposed  mothers,  88.2  percent
of  the  exposed  offspring,  and  89.2  percent  of  the  unexposed.  Ruth  M.  Hagstrom  et  al.,"Long  Term  Effects
of  Radioactive  Iron  Administered  During  Human  Pregnancy,"  American  Journal  of  Epidemiology  90  ( 1 969):
1-8.

349


Part  II

exposure  was  an  underestimation  of  the  fetal-absorbed  dose.

A  1969  study,  funded  by  the  AEC  and  conducted  by  one  of  the  investigators  from  the
1963-1964  study,  attempted  to  reconstruct  the  doses  of  Fe-59  to  the  fetuses  in  the  original
Vanderbilt  study .J  The  investigators  observed  that  the  one  case  of  leukemia  might  have  been  due
to  radiation  damage,  but  that  the  doses  in  the  other  two  cases  were  low;  therefore,  the  relationship
between  the  radiation  exposure  and  the  cancer  in  those  cases  might  not  have  been  causal.
However,  the  researchers  also  noted  that  due  to  incomplete  data,  they  could  not  estimate  the  dose
absorbed  by  the  fetus  with  confidence  and  that  no  definitive  conclusions  could  be  drawn  from  this
study  as  to  whether  these  exposures  resulted  in  damage  to  the  fetus. k

The  Vanderbilt  study  raises  many  of  the  same  ethical  issues  as  the  experiments  reviewed
in  this  chapter.  Like  these  experiments,  the  Vanderbilt  study  offered  no  prospect  of  medical
benefit  to  the  pregnant  women  or  their  offspring,  raising  the  question  of  the  conditions  under
which  it  is  acceptable  to  put  children  at  risk  for  the  benefit  of  others,  whether  before  or  after  birth.
What  could  the  investigators  reasonably  have  been  expected  to  know  about  the  risks  to  which  they
put  their  subjects?  Did  they  exercise  appropriate  caution  in  exposing  fetuses  to  radiation?  What
were  the  pregnant  women  told,  if  anything,  and  was  their  permission  sought?  Who  were  these
women,  and  how  were  they  positioned  relative  to  pregnant  women,  generally?

The  Committee  did  not  have  the  resources  to  pursue  these  questions  in  both  research  in
which  children  were  the  subjects  and  research  in  which  children  were  exposed  as  fetuses.  We  did
establish  that  the  Vanderbilt  study  was  not  the  only  experiment  during  this  period  to  expose
fetuses  in  research  that  offered  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to  them  or  their  mothers.  While  the
Committee  did  not  conduct  an  exhaustive  review  of  the  scientific  literature,  we  did  find  twenty-
seven  human  radiation  studies  that  included  pregnant  or  nursing  women  as  subjects  between  1944
and  1974.'  Of  these  studies,  eight  were  considered  therapeutic,  and  nineteen  offered  no  prospect  of
benefit  to  the  subject.  Most  of  the  nineteen  were  tracer  experiments.

These  studies  were  performed  in  order  to  examine  human  physiology  during  pregnancy
or  to  study  the  uptake  of  radioactive  substances  by  fetuses  or  nursing  infants."1  They  generally


j. Norman  C.  Dyer  and  A.  Bertrand  Brill,  "Fetal  Radiation  Dose  from  Maternally  Administered
Fe-59  and  1-131,"  in  Radiation  Biology  of  the  Fetal  and  Juvenile  Mammal:  Proceedings  of  the  Ninth  Annual
Hanford  Biology  Symposium  at  Richland.  Washington.  May  5-8.  1969,  eds.  Melvin  R.  Sikov  and  D.  Dennis
Mahlum  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  December  1969),  78-88.  This  study  was  reviewed  in  detail  by  the
Committee.  The  study  also  investigated  fetal  absorption  of  radioiodine  because  that  isotope  was  and  is
commonly  used  in  diagnosis  and  therapy,  including  in  pregnant  women.

k. Ibid.,  85.

1. All  of  the  nineteen  studies  reviewed  in  detail  by  the  Committee  were  conducted  or  at  least
partially  funded  by  the  federal  government  or  were  supplied  with  radioisotopes  by  the  AEC.  For  the  earlier
years,  the  Committee  relied  on  the  ACHRE  experiments  database,  AEC  isotope  distribution  lists  provided  by
DOE,  and  relevant  biographies.  The  Committee  also  consulted  relevant  medical  indexes  and  computer
databases;  the  isotope  distribution  lists  provided  by  DOE  did  not  cover  these  years.  While  the  computer
search  would  have  located  nontherapeutic  tracer  experiments  for  this  period  as  well,  very  few  were
identified.

m. Of  the  nineteen  tracer  experiments  (funded  by  the  government)  involving  pregnant  or  nursing
women  identified  by  the  Committee,  only  three  administered  tracer  doses  to  nursing  women  that  offered  no
prospect  of  benefit;  in  at  least  one  of  the  studies  the  infants  were  exposed.  In  one  case,  six  nursing  women
were  given  radioiodine  to  determine  excretion  in  breast  milk,  the  infants  were  not  given  the  exposed  milk.  In

350


Chapter  7

addressed  valid  scientific  questions  that  could  not  be  investigated  in  other  populations.
Knowledge  of  fetal  exposure  to  radioiodine.  for  example,  was  relevant  to  issues  such  as  potential
harm  to  the  fetus  from  maternal  uptake  of  radioiodine  in  diagnostic  tests  or  to  estimate  the
potential  effects  of  environmental  exposure  to  radioiodine  on  the  human  fetus.  In  other  studies,
radioactive  iron  was  administered  to  better  understand  the  physiology  of  maternal  and  fetal  intake
of  iron  during  pregnancy.


another  case,  two  infants  were  intentionally  exposed  to  the  breast  milk  of  their  mothers,  who  were  given  I-
131.  An  I- 1 3 1  tracer  study  on  the  general  population,  incidentally  included  two  nursing  women.  The  report
indicates  that  both  had  been  nursing  their  children,  and  since  there  is  no  indication  that  the  mothers  were
warned  to  avoid  breastfeeding  after  the  exposure,  it  is  quite  probable  that  the  infants  were  exposed.

351


Part  II


Nasopharyngeal  Irradiation

Nasopharyngeal  irradiation,"  introduced  by  S.  J.  Crowe  and  J.  W.  Baylor  of  the
Otological  Research  Laboratory  at  the  Johns  Hopkins  University,  was  employed  from  1924  on  as
a  means  of  shrinking  lymphoid  tissue  at  the  entrance  to  the  eustachian  tubes  to  treat  middle  ear
obstructions,  infections,  and  deafness.  For  this  treatment,  intranasal  radium  applicators  (sealed
ampules  containing  radium  salt)  were  inserted  (at  least  three  insertions  per  treatment  cycle)  into
the  nasopharyngeal  area  for  twelve-minute  periods.11  The  therapeutic  effect  of  the  treatments
resulted  from  the  penetrating  radiation  emitted  from  the  radium  source  (gamma  and  beta  rays),  not


a.  Nasopharyngeal  irradiation  was  studied  in  adults  as  well  as  children.  In  the  early  1940s,  732
submariners  were  subjects  of  a  controlled  experiment  designed  to  test  whether  nasopharyngeal  radium
treatments  could  be  used  to  shrink  lymphoid  tissue  surrounding  the  eustachian  tubes,  thereby  preventing  and
treating  aerotitis  media  in  submariners  by  equalizing  external  and  middle  ear  pressure.  This  treatment  was
successful  in  90  percent  of  the  cases.  H.  L.  Haines  and  J.  D.  Harris,  "Aerotitis  Media  in  Submariners,"
Annals  of  Otology.  Rlrinology.  and  Laryngology  55  ( 1 946):  347-37 1 .  In  a  1 945  journal  article,  it  was  noted
that  a  controlled  study  was  considered  by  the  Army  Air  Forces,  but  rejected  because  of  the  urgent  need  to
treat  fliers  immediately  and  keep  them  flying.  However,  the  published  report  describes  differences  between
various  dose  groups,  implying  an  uncontrolled  experimental  comparison  was  made.  Captain  John  E.
Hendricks  et  al.,  "The  Use  of  Radium  in  the  Aerotitis  Control  Program  of  the  Army  Air  Forces:  A  Combined
Report  by  the  Officers  Participating,"  Annals  of  Otology,  Rlrinology.  and  Laryngology'  54  ( 1 945 ):  650-724.
Tens  of  thousands  of  servicemen  were  subsequently  given  this  nasopharyngeal  radium  treatment.

Relying  on  the  risk  estimate  developed  in  the  Sandler  study,  Stewart  Farber,  a  radiation-monitoring
specialist  with  a  background  in  public  health,  has  projected  5 1 .4  excess  brain  cancers  over  a  fifty-year
period  in  the  7,613  servicemen  irradiated  in  the  Navy  and  Army  Air  Forces  studies  noted  above.  Stewart
Farber,  Consulting  Scientist  of  the  Public  Health  Sciences,  to  Stephen  Klaidman,  ACHRE  Staff.  8  March
1995  ("Nasopharyngeal  Radium  Irradiation-Initial  Radiation  Experiments  Performed  by  DODon  7,613
Navy  and  Army  Air  Force  Military  Personnel  during  1944-45").  Alan  Ducatman,  M.D..  of  the  University  of
West  Virginia  School  of  Medicine,  who  coauthored  a  letter  with  Farber  to  the  New  England  Journal  of
Medicine  regarding  the  radium  exposure  of  military  personnel,  wrote  that  he  found  "no  convincing  evidence
of  excess  cancer  in  the  exposed  population."  He  added,  however,  "there  is  also  no  good  evidence  for  the  null
hypothesis."  Alan  Ducatman,  West  Virginia  University  School  of  Medicine,  to  Duncan  Thomas,  Member  of
the  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  22  February  1995  ("I'm  sorry  I  could  not
respond  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  WVU-02 1 795-A).

Han  K.  Rang,  with  the  Environmental  Epidemiology  Service  of  the  Veterans  Health
Administration,  is  currently  conducting  a  study  to  assess  the  feasibility  of  an  epidemiologic  study  of  Navy
veterans  who  received  radium  treatments. Han  K.  Rang.  Environmental Epidemiology  Service,  Veterans
Health  Administration,  "Feasibility  of  an  Epidemiologic  Study  of  a  Cohort  of  Submariners  Who  Received
Radium  Irradiation  Treatment,"  23  August  1994.  It  is  not  clear,  however,  that  sufficient  numbers  of
treatment-documented  personnel  can  be  identified,  as  a  group  representing  submariners  has  apparently  been
able  to  identify  only  six  former  Navy  personnel  from  of  a  pool  of  twenty-seven  whose  records  indicate  they
received  radium  treatment.  (It  is  not  clear  whether  the  data  being  collected  by  the  VFW  with  the  support  of
Senator  Joesph  Lieberman  of  Connecticut  will  be  from  a  representative  sample  of  respondents.  If,  in  fact,
these  data  are  from  a  highly  nonrepresentative  sample,  the  study  may  not  be  considered  scientifically  valid.)
However,  the  Veterans  of  Foreign  Wars  organization  apparently  is  now  processing  hundreds  of  surveys  filled
out  by  veterans  who  say  they  underwent  nasopharyngeal  radium  treatment.  Once  this  task  is  completed.
Senator  Lieberman  plans  to  present  the  data  to  the  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs  with  a  recommendation
that  an  epidemiologic  study  be  conducted.

b.  Samuel  J.  Crowe,  "Irradiation  of  the  Nasopharynx,"  Annals  of  Otology,  Rhinology  and
Laryngology  55  (\9Ad):  31.

352


Chapter  7

from  the  internal  deposition  of  radium  itself.  Crowe  and  his  colleagues  reported  that  "under  this
treatment,  the  lymphoid  tissue  around  the  tubal  orifices  gradually  disappeared,  marked
improvement  or  complete  return  of  the  hearing  followed,  and  in  many  the  bluish  discoloration  of
the  tympanic  membrane  also  disappeared.""  This  method  was  used  for  more  than  a  quarter  century
as  a  prophylaxis  against  deafness,  for  relieving  children  with  recurrent  adenoid  tissue  following
tonsillectomy  and  adenoidectomy,  and  for  children  with  chronic  ear  infections.  Asthmatic
children  with  frequent  upper  respiratory  infections  were  also  often  considered  for  this  type  of
irradiation.

An  average  of  1 50  patients  a  month,  mostly  children,  were  given  the  treatment  at  the
Johns  Hopkins  clinic  over  a  period  of  several  years.'1  Many  children  received  the  treatment  more
than  once  as  recurrent  lymphoid  tissue  Was  considered  an  indication  for  treatment.

Crowe  and  his  colleagues  reported  that  the  results  following  irradiation  of  the
nasopharynx  alone  were  not  only  as  good  as,  but  often  better  than,  those  following  removal  of
tonsils  and  adenoids."  In  review  articles,  they  noted  that  approximately  85  percent  of  treated
patients  responded  with  decreased  numbers  of  infections  and/or  improved  hearing  when  treated  at
young  ages.  They  also  concluded  that  "it  is  effective,  safe,  painless,  inexpensive  and  has  proved
particularly  valuable  for  prevention  of  certain  ear,  sinus  and  bronchial  condition  in  children."1
Although  early  articles  by  Crowe  and  colleagues  indicate  that  nasopharyngeal  radium  treatments
were  accepted  as  standard  procedure  for  the  prevention  of  childhood  deafness,  these  treatments,
like  most  standard  interventions  in  medicine,  had  not  been  subjected  to  formal  scientific
evaluation.  A  controlled  study  was  conducted  from  1948  to  1953  by  Crowe  and  his  colleagues  to
determine  "the  feasibility  of  irradiation  of  the  nasopharynx  as  a  method  for  controlling  hearing
impairment  in  large  groups  of  children  associated  with  lymphoid  hyperplasia  in  the  nasopharynx;
to  draw  conclusions  concerning  the  per  capita  cost  of  such  an  undertaking  as  a  public  health
measure."6  Crowe  et  al.  wrote  in  an  NIH  "Notice  of  Research"  that  "the  procedure  of  treatment  is
not  new,  as  an  individual  measure;  this  is  the  first  adequately  controlled  experiment  of  sufficient
size  for  accurate  statistical  analysis."'1

This  work  was  funded  by  NIH  for  the  entire  period  of  study.  As  recorded  in  an  NIH  grant
application,  the  study  involved  approximately  7,000  children  screened  for  hearing  impairment.'  Of
those  screened,  approximately  50  percent  were  selected  for  further  study  based  on  the  chosen
criteria  for  hearing  loss.  Half  of  this  study  group  was  irradiated  with  radium,  while  the  other  half
served  as  a  control  group.  Crowe  and  colleagues  reportedly  concluded  from  this  study  (published
in  1955)  that  the  radium  treatments  did  shrink  swelling  of  lymphoid  tissue  and  improve  hearing.1
This  type  of  therapy  was  ultimately  discontinued  because  of  newly  available  antibiotics  and  the


c.  Ibid..  30.

d.  Ibid.,  33.;  Dale  P.  Sandler  et  al.,  "Neoplasms  Following  Childhood  Radium  Irradiation  of  the
Nasopharynx,"  Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute  68  ( 1982):  3-8.

e.  Ibid.,  33.

f.  Ibid.

g.  S.  J.  Crowe  et  al..  The  Johns  Hopkins  University  School  of  Medicine  and  School  of  Hygiene
and  Public  Health,  to  Federal  Security  Agency,  Public  Health  Service,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  July
1948  ("The  Efficiency  of  Nasopharyngeal  Irradiation  In  the  Prevention  Of  Deafness  in  Children,  Notice  of
Research  Project,  Grant  No.  B-19")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS  No.  092694-A).

h.  Ibid,
i.  Ibid.
j. Ibid.

353


Part  II

use  of  transtympanic  drainage  tubes,  as  well  as  awareness  of  the  potential  risks  of  radiation
treatment.

In  addition  to  the  targeted  lymphoid  tissue,  the  brain  and  other  tissues  in  the  head  and
neck  region,  including  the  paranasal  sinuses,  salivary  glands,  thyroid,  and  parathyroid  glands  are
also  exposed  to  significant  doses  of  radiation  during  the  radium  treatments,  prompting  concern  that
these  treated  individuals  might  have  been  placed  at  increased  risk  for  radiation-induced  cancers  at
these  sites.  Dale  P.  Sandler  et  al.,  in  their  1982  study  of  the  effects  of  nasopharyngeal  irradiation
on  excess  cancer  risk  for  children  treated  at  the  Johns  Hopkins  clinic,  found  "a  statistically
significant  overall  excess  of  malignant  neoplasms  of  the  head  and  neck  among  exposed  subjects,"
based  however  on  only  four  cases  in  comparison  with  0.57  expected.1  This  excess  was  accounted
for  mainly  by  three  brain  tumors  that  occurred  in  the  irradiation  subjects.  One  other  malignant
tumor,  a  cancer  of  the  soft  palate,  was  also  reported.  The  Department  of  Epidemiology  at  the
Johns  Hopkins  University  has  undertaken  a  further  follow-up  study  of  the  Crowe  et  al.  cohort  of
children  irradiated  there,  previously  studied  by  Sandler  et  al.1  Verduijn  et  al.,  in  their  1989  study
of  cancer  mortality  risk  for  those  individuals  (mostly  children)  treated  by  nasopharyngeal
irradiation  with  radium  226  in  the  Netherlands,  reported  that  "the  present  study  has  found  no
excess  of  cancer  mortality  at  any  site  associated  with  radium  exposure  by  the  Crowe  and  Baylor
therapy.  Specifically,

the  finding  of  Sandler  et  al.  of  an  excess  of  head  and  neck  cancer  was  not  found  in  this  study
group.""'

Among  the  Japanese  atomic  bomb  survivors,  no  excess  of  brain  tumors  was  found.
However,  several  studies  have  noted  an  increased  risk  of  both  benign  and  malignant  brain  tumors
following  therapeutic  doses  of  radiation  to  the  head  and  neck  region  during  childhood."  From  the
Committee's  own  limited  risk  analysis  of  these  experiments,  we  concluded  that  the  brain  and
surrounding  head  and  neck  tissues  would  be  put  at  highest  risk  and  estimated  the  lifetime  risk  at
approximately  4.35  per  1,000  and  an  increased  relative  risk  of  62  percent."


k.  For  the  combination  of  benign  and  malignant  neoplasms,  there  were  23  cases,  for  a  relative  risk
of  2.08  with  a  95  percent  confidence  interval  of  1.12  to  3.91.  Sandler,  "Neoplasms  Following  Childhood
Radium  Irradiation,"  5.

I.  Jessica  Yeh  and  Genevieve  Matanowski,  fax  to  Anna  Mastroianni  (ACHRE),  7  July  1995
("Nasopharyngeal  Power  Analysis"),  1-3.

in.  Verduijn  et  al.,  "Mortality  after  Nasopharyngeal  Irradiation,"  Annals  of  Otology.  Rhinology,
and  Laiyngolog}-  98  ( 1 989):  843.

n. S.  Jablon  and  H.  Kato,  "Childhood  Cancer  in  Relation  to  Prenatal  Exposure  to  Atomic-Bomb
Radiation,"  The  Lancet,  ii  (1970):  1000-1003.;  M.  Colman,  M.  Kirsch,  and  M.  Creditor,  "Radiation  Induced
Tumors,"  in  Late  Biological  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation.  Vol.  I  (Vienna:  International  Atomic  Energy
Agency,  1978),  167-180;  R.  E.  Shore,  R.  E.  Albert,  and  B.  S.  Pasternak,  "Follow-up  Study  of  Patients
Treated  by  X  ray  Epilation  for  Tinea  Capitis:  Resurvey  of  Post-Treatment  Illness  and  Mortality  Experience,"
Archives  of  Environmental  Health  31(1 976):  1 7-24;  and  C.  E.  Land.Xarcinogenic  Effects  of  Radiation  on
the  Human  Digestive  Tract  and  Other  Organs."  in  Radiation  Carcinogenesis,  eds.  A.  C.  Upton  et  al.  (New
York:  Elsevier,  1986),  347-378.

o. The  radiation  dose  estimate  to  the  head  and  neck  region  was  calculated  according  to  the
following  assumptions:  ( I )  Source  description:  50  ing  of  radium,  active  length  1 .5  cm,  filtered  by  0.3  mm  of
Monel  metal.  (2)  Average  treatment:  60  mg/hrs;  based  on  three  12-minute  treatments  (radium  applicators
inserted  through  both  nostrils)=  ( 12x3x50x2 )/60  mins  per  hour=  60  mg-hrs.  (3)  Dose  rate  at  points  in  a
central  orthogonal  plane  surrounding  the  source:  for  distances  up  to  5  centimeters  dose  estimated  using
published  data  (Quimby  Tables,  Otto  Glasser  et  al..  Physical  Foundations  of  Radiology,  3d  ed.  [New  York:
Paul  Hoeber,  Inc.,  1961])  for  linear  radium  sources  with  dose  increased  by  50%  to  allow  for  the  reduced

354


Chapter  7

The  Hopkins  nasopharyngeal  study  raises  different  ethical  issues  than  those  posed  by  the
other  experiments  reviewed  in  this  chapter,  all  of  which  offered  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to
the  children  who  served  as  subjects.  By  contrast,  the  nasopharyngeal  irradiation  experiment  was
designed  to  determine  whether  children  at  risk  for  hearing  loss  would  be  better  off  receiving
radiation  treatments  or  not  receiving  such  treatments.  A  central  issue  here  was  whether  it  was
permissible  to  withhold  this  intervention  from  "at  risk"  children.  The  application  of  radium  was  at
this  point  a  common,  but  scientifically  unproven,  treatment  for  children  at  risk  of  hearing  loss;  the
risks  of  the  treatment  were  not  well  characterized.  If  it  was  really  unknown  which  was  better  for
children-receiving  radium  or  no  intervention-then  the  medical  interests  of  the  children  were  best
served  by  being  subjects  in  the  research  because,  as  a  consequence,  they  would  have  a  50  percent
chance  of  receiving  the  better  approach.  The  nasopharyngeal  experiment  thus  belongs  to  a  class  of
research  the  Committee  did  not  investigate-therapeutic  research  with  children.


filtration  provided  by  the  applicator  wall  and  converting  roentgen  to  rad  by  a  multiplication  factor  of  0.93.
For  distances  greater  than  5  centimeters,  the  dose  rate  is  reduced  in  accordance  with  the  inverse  square  law,
with  a  proportionality  constant  of  690  rad-cnr.  There  was  no  dose  correction  for  attenuation  of  the  gamma
rays  by  tissue  absorbtion,  which  has  been  calculated  to  be  about  2%/cm  (yielding  a  dose  reduction  of  about
20%  at  10  cm).

The  local  gamma  dose  to  the  head  and  neck  region  was  assumed  to  be  distributed  according  to  an
inverse  square  law  d(r)  =  690/r  rad.  The  Committee  approximated  the  exposed  region  of  the  body  by  a
sphere  with  radius  10  centimeters.  This  was  felt  to  be  a  conservative  assumption,  because  although  the  dose
does  not  go  to  zero  at  the  base  of  the  neck,  a  10-centimeter  sphere  would  also  extend  outside  the  skull.
Averaging  this  dose  distribution  over  the  exposed  sphere,  the  average  dose  to  the  head  was  found  to  be  20.7
rad.  The  exposed  volume  is  about  4189  cm',  or  29  percent  of  the  total  body,  so  the  average  whole  body  dose
is  about  6.0  rad.  Multiplying  this  by  the  BEIR  V  risk  coefficient  for  children  exposed  at  age  five.  1.4/1,000
person-rad,  produces  a  lifetime  risk  of  about  8.4/1,000.  This  calculation  assumes  that  the  brain  and  other
head  tissues  have  average  radiosensitivity.  BEIR  V  also  gives  absolute-risk  coefficients  for  brain  cancer
ranging  from  1  to  9  per  million  person-year-rad,  with  3  being  a  reasonable  average.  Applying  this  figure  to
an  average  head  dose  of  20.7  rad,  the  Committee  estimates  a  lifetime  risk  of  about  4.35/1,000.  The
corresponding  relative  risk  coefficients  average  about  3  percent  per  rad,  so  this  dose  would  correspond  to  an
excess  relative  risk  of  62  percent.


355


5 *«

•■^ .2 0s — £

/^^

,^^,

y-"V

^^,

^^^v

CN

— *

<N

00

o

rn

00

d

d

""J

_'

(N

d

m

NO

©

VI

o

^f

IT)

TT

d  a,

o

tN

tN

o
©

o
©

o
d

d

d

Ss

d

d

o
d

d

o

d

73

T3

T3

-a

TD

"O

"O

•a

rs

12

2

<u

O

O

O

o

o

o

o

'3

'3

"5

'o

H

H

u

u

t-

H

>-

u

c

"o3

4-*

c

id

0>

>n

>>

>.

>,

>^

^

>.

>,

>!

>>

>,

E

£

X

X

J3

J3

J3

X

X

X

X

o

X

X

H

H

H

H

H

H

H

P

H

H

H

H

i- a

4) cy

c

o

X t-

w  2

e

3 IS

z u

o

in

m

00

•>*■  X

r^

o

r-~

ON

"~i

On

oo

<N

'O

(N

(N CD

00

t~-

IT)

NO

i>

4)

o.

TS

o

• — i

dd

dd

r-H

p-H

^>H

^-l

, — 1

^H

v^

<*

1

^d

^d

«<

o

<■<->

C">

m

m

r<">

m

f^l

c-i

m

m

rn

^d

^d

^d

^^

»— «

^—

»— i

^^

~—

03

dd

^d

o>

i

i

i

i

i

i

l

i

i

u

1

1

i>>

CD

£}

CO

"3

M

-a

S

E

o

CD

•a

C4-H

a
a,

"3

s

•3

JO
Cm

o

X

x1

O

D

s

CO

a
cd

CD

3
CO

X

H

'o

03

u

OS

J

CO
CD

O
CD

03

2

Ct-

O

"2

'o

"o

K 00

H

>>

X
H

IT)
•<*

c

03

'■3

s

■M

t/5

1/3

"o
o

co

s

>

00

c  _
'co  c">

CO 1>

CO

e

D

co

CO

CD
i—

&

CO

T3
C
c«

o

."2

00

c
o

1> —

03 O
^ CD
— 00

c  <

CD
X

>,

X

o

CO

CD

■4— »

03

■*-^

X

E

CO

"o

CD
X

a.

o

Id
■*-»
CO

is  g

a

&

'o

s

fc <U

m

PL,

00

Q

la

>3

o

-3  ^
^^

g <N

id > — i

2  £

3  .S
U-o

3 i— :

•" C+-I

6  ^

C^ CO

•— <u

II

C3 P

■*— »

s-S

3  3

o o

5- C
>^ cd

•^ IZ

^^

3

1-

O XI

i—i

h ti

c

EM

S

■a

3

co

<*■
o

at

H

E

CO

"o

-o

c

03

£

O

C
O

E
o
x>

(U

2

c

CO

o
-a

CD

i-i

'3

a*

CD

X

H

_c

n
_o

c

-4—*

tU CD

I— (

T3 03
O ^

?  I

g  §■

u 3
"O co

x  1

■

CD

•3
o

CD
C

o

° c5

CD ^

,0) 03

W  CQ
E |

"o  5

o

X

'1

a

CD

Id

2

03

'3

O

o

a

1/9

e

►>>

s
s

3

in

00

c
o

_c

a
_o

-4— »

o

c

3

"2
'S

In
>>

X

H

f

o

CO

X

<

CO

fc

<+d
O

c
_o

CO

J

CO

w

a

en
<u

03

a.
D

<u
c

"3

_o

'o

03

CD

g

•3  "^
^  '3

O XI
CD H
00  —

03 «
co C

o E
Q o

■a*

,§^

§2

c

CD
CD

C

o
U

CD

a

•3

_o

i

CD

_>
■*— >

CD

c3 co

.2  |

O o
-a ca

3  £

CD X

§•0

co  .~

S "

1  5

"3  j

3  CQ

CO Dh

c  -a

o c

•^3 03

S  M
P 03

2  D

o  _

!h ' — '

>>fN

[S2

o

CD
-^
03

CU co

2  c2

•S c

o g

5  I

CO cD

<  a.

Q 03

«  u

O CD

1-3

.3 o

.S o

co E^
CD >n

X °
^  CQ

CO  .S

X

u

CD

03

a.
D

CD
C

■3

_o

'o
•3

03

06

_o

'■*d

CD

c

3
Pd

"2
'o

id

X

H

(4-1

o

CO

1)

-3
3

00

2

4> — •

15  "-  -C
« © 3

Q a,

in

^

r*l

m

<N

o

r~~

r-

MD

M3

in

"*

vo

no

VO

VO

>0

NO

IT)

>o

<o

in

in

in

93

H

On

ON

ON

On

ON

On

ON

On

C3N

ON

On

ON

iS

C

1—

CD

E

t:

03

il

1  3

CS

c
u
X
03
CO

"3

00

o

i5

c

03

>

O

CO

O

03
C
CD
X
03
CO

E

o

X
00

O

'"O

c

3

CD
C

Id

CD

C

c

C
03

£

•a

.2

03

-o

3
CD

CQ

S

Q
o

<

H

s

W

CO

o

w

o

CQ

u

M

S

s

CBJ

M

cd

d

J

w

u-

<

u'

fN

3"

m

fN

O

O

o

fN

o

C)

m

00

m

«*

fN

^,  ©

NO

o

o

©

o

O

(N

O

O

o

o

o

o

©

O w

d

T3

■a

T3

-o

T3

O

o

_

O

__

2

O

<-

>>

H

X
H

2
o

B

O

H

c3
O

H

X

H

ca

o
H

X

H

X

H

^

*

r-

in

o

fN

t—

VO

■*

NO

(N

in

>

K

53

ITl OS

^

"«

m

ro

m

fN

m  in
i i

f>

m
i

m

m

i

1

i

ft.

u.  u.

00

^^

-H

a

T3

s

cn

<u

O

X

H

o u

ao  o

3
O
CD

c
ca

s
_2

ca
c

X

r )

c

en
C

tS

3

e

o

X

2

"ca

o
2

<*-
o

1)

Q,
>>

H

S3

u

S
c+-

o

Dtein  in  the  Study  of  Protein  Di
ith  and  without  Cystic  Fibrosis

Blood  Volume  in  Congenital  Cyanotic  Heart  Disease:  Simull
Measurements  with  Evans  Blue  and  Radioactive  Phosphorus

o

1/3

X)

<

c

o

c

o

en

o

o

ca

-a

o
o

PL,

1—

u
X!

ne-13 1  Thyroid  Uptake  and  Ur
othyroid  Children

s
_o

ca

o

u-

e

-—

o

u
C_

o
o

ea

CJ

CD
X

U

g

en
CD

•3

3
oo

en

C

ca

i

X

T3

CD
u.

CD

■a

o

en

5

-a

c
ca

la

o
2

CD
X

X

5
a
g

'1
S

c
5

1

<*-
o

<u

J^

ea
■*— •
a.

D

g

■a

o

Uptake  in  the  Stu
ism  in  Childhood

s-131  Labeled  Pr
on  in  Children  w

O

-o

c
ca

C/3
CD
■4— »

ca
■«-j

>.

X!

Cu

(+-

Radioactive  lodi
Normal  and  Hyp

T3
CJ

c
ca

CA

ca

u

g

'8
o

X

en
'en

O

—
X

D,

CD

2

_g
CD

£

3
U
CD

ca
D

CD
g

'•3

CD
_>

■4—*

0 i-i
« S

.2 2

-Q T3

ca  ~

-s:
u
a

>

_>

■*— »

o

ca

o
■3

ca

Pi

<d  12

S o
.2 o

-73 O.

Use  of  lodin
and  Absorpti
Pancreas

O

W
u

X

H

£.5

£  S

i o

t- ■«

<D «J

C u

ca x

U  W

13

"33

X

ca
-J

'o

g,
X

<D

g

•o
2
'o

-3

ca

Pi

(V X

O 3
<D """
^ T3

ca s
S.i2
D  O

ca

en

"a
53

■^j-

m

(N

o

o

o

ON

r~-

o

i/~>

>/~>

»/■>

>T)

IT)

in

■^r

"*■

SI

ON

on

ON

ON

ON

O

On

ON

ON

s

en

43

o

5

CS

>^

>.

a

CD
>

+-i

o

CD

e-

ca

X

'5

Pi

<

4)

CD

O

X

s

3

•1

en
ca

C/3
U

> T3

OO

ca

00

00

00

2

U

a

X

5

JS

00

Cu

S

J

£

>

a

ui

*

ENDNOTES


1 .  As  noted  in  the  report  of  the  Massachusetts  Task  Force,  "many  of  the  people
who  became  residents  of  the  Walter  E.  Fernald  School  .  .  .  were  not  admitted  with  a
diagnosis  of  mental  retardation.  Societal  and  cultural  norms  of  the  day  permitted  persons
to  be  admitted  to  state-operated  institutions  for  a  number  of  reasons.  All  were  labeled
mentally  retarded  just  by  virtue  of  having  lived  within  the  facility."  Task  Force  on
Human  Subject  Research,  to  Philip  Campbell,  Commissioner,  Commonwealth  of
Massachusetts  Executive  Office  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  Department  of  Mental
Retardation,  April  1994,  "A  Report  on  the  Use  of  Radioactive  Materials  in  Human
Subject  Research  that  Involved  Residents  of  State-Operated  Facilities  within  the
Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts  from  1943  to  1973"  (ACHRE  No.  MASS-072194-A),
1.

2.  Task  Force  on  Human  Subject  Research,  April  1994  ("A  Report  on  the  Use
of  Radioactive  Materials  in  Human  Subject  Research  that  Involved  Residents  of  State-
Operated  Facilities  within  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts  from  1943  to  1973");
and  the  Working  Group  on  Human  Subject  Research  to  Philip  Campbell,  June  1994
("The  Thyroid  Studies:  A  Follow-up  Report  on  the  Use  of  Radioactive  Materials  in
Human  Subject  Research  that  Involved  Residents  of  State-Operated  Facilities  within  the
Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts  from  1943  through  1973")  (ACHRE  No.  MASS-
072194-B).

3.  Unfortunately,  the  published  reports  of  the  twenty-one  research  projects  we
review  in  this  chapter  often  provide  little  or  no  information  that  could  be  used  to  identify
the  individual  children.  Many  published  reports  provide  information  only  about  the
child's  age,  weight,  and  diagnosis.  Other  reports  provide  only  the  child's  initials  and
diagnosis.  In  either  case,  it  would  be  difficult  or  impossible  to  identify  specific
individuals  from  this  limited  information.  An  existing  chart  may  or  may  not  confirm  a
child's  involvement  in  a  research  project.  If  the  investigators  maintained  records,  those
could  serve  as  a  key  to  identify  the  individuals.  Even  if  the  hospital  records  do  exist,
however,  records  for  a  period  of  several  years  prior  to  publication  of  the  research  would
have  to  be  reviewed  in  order  to  match  a  set  of  initials  with  a  diagnosis.  However,  it  is
unlikely  that  research  records  have  been  maintained  for  many  of  these  projects  for  the
past  three  to  five  decades.  Finally,  the  identification  of  an  individual  would  be  only  the
first  step  in  tracking  him  to  his  current  location.

Many  of  the  children  at  the  Wrentham  and  Fernald  Schools  have  been  located
through  extensive  local  efforts.  The  existence  of  the  research  records,  as  well  as  the
records  of  these  long-term  residential  institutions,  have  made  these  identifications
possible.

4.  There  are  a  few  exceptions  to  the  usual  involvement  of  parents  in  decisions
concerning  their  minor  children.  Children  who  are  considered  either  "emancipated
minors"  or  "mature  minors"  are  generally  able  to  receive  routine  medical  care  without
any  need  for  parental  involvement.  Emancipated  minors  are  minor  children  who  have
taken  on  adult  responsibilities,  such  as  maintaining  financial  independence  and/or  living
away  from  the  parents'  home.  A  mature  minor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  considered  to  be
decisionally  capable  under  special  circumstances  because  he  or  she  has  demonstrated  the
maturity  and  ability  to  decide  treatment  decisions  for  himself  or  herself.  Adolescents  can
be  considered  emancipated  or  mature  minors  and  are  thereby  exempted  from  parental
consent.  In  addition,  if  a  minor  is  close  to  the  age  of  majority  (at  least  fifteen),  the
treatment  clearly  benefits  the  minor  and  is  medically  necessary,  there  is  good  justification
for  not  obtaining  parental  consent,  and  if  the  procedure  is  not  extraordinary  or  one

358


involving  substantial  risk  to  the  child,  then  practitioners  are  usually  able  to  deliver
medical  care  without  parental  permission.  A  number  of  states  permit  minors  to  give
consent  to  the  diagnosis  or  treatment  of  venereal  disease,  drug  addiction,  alcoholism,
pregnancy,  or  for  purposes  of  giving  blood.  For  more  information  on  this  subject,  please
see:  A.  R.  Holder,  Legal  Issues  in  Pediatrics  and  Adolescent  Medicine  (New  Haven,  Yale
University  Press,  1985),  123;  and  Robert  H.  Mnookin  and  D.  Kelly  Weisberg,  Child,
Family,  and  State:  Problems  and  Materials  on  Children  and  the  Law  (Little  Brown  and
Company,  New  York,  1995).

5.  Mnookin  and  Weisburg,  Child,  Family,  and  State,  536.  In  addition,  parents
are  considered  to  be  "legally  responsible  for  the  care  and  support  of  their  children,"  and
"the  parental  consent  requirement  protects  parents  from  having  to  pay  for  unwanted  or
unnecessary  medical  care  and  from  the  possible  financial  consequences  of  supporting  the
child  if  unwanted  treatment  is  unsuccessful."

6.  In  addition  to  the  exceptions  given  in  endnote  4,  there  are  other  standard
common  law  and  statutory  limitations  and  exceptions  to  the  general  parental  consent
requirement.  "These  relate  to  mandatory  immunizations  and  screening  procedures
(applicable  to  all  children),  the  neglect  limitation  (where  a  court  may  override  a  parental
decision  for  an  individual  child),  the  emergency  treatment  of  children  (where  no  parental
consent  is  required  if  the  parent  is  unavailable)."  Ibid.

7.  "Some  medical  procedures  are  required  of  all  children  and  in  this  sense
represent  generally  applicable  limitations  on  parental  prerogatives.  The  Supreme  Court
has  held,  for  example,  that  a  state  could  impose  a  compulsory  smallpox  vaccination  law
as  a  'reasonable  and  proper  exercise  of  police  power.'  Jacobsen  v.  Massachusetts,  197
U.S.  1 1,  35  (1905)  quoting  Viemeister  v.  White,  72  N.E.  97  (1904).  A  vaccination
requirement  may  act  to  protect  society  from  various  public  health  hazards  created  by
communicable  diseases  where  a  parental  decision  may  endanger  not  only  a  particular
child  but  society  at  large."  Mnookin  and  Weisburg,  Child,  Family,  and  State,  55 1 .

8.  The  National  Commission  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects  of
Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research,  Research  Involving  Children:  Report  and
Recommendations  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1977),  and  Protection  of  Human  Subjects,
45  C.F.R.  §  46,  subpart  D.

9.  Protection  of  Human  Subjects,  45  C.F.R.  §  46.408.

10.  Ibid.,  §  46.404.

11.  Ibid.,  §  46.406.

12.  Ibid.,  §  46.407.

13.  Susan  E.  Lederer  and  Michael  A.  Grodin.  "Historical  Overview:  Pediatric
Experimentation,"  in  Children  as  Research  Subjects:  Science,  Ethics,  and  Law,  eds.
Michael  A.  Grodin  and  Leonard  H.  Glantz  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1994),
4.

14.  Ibid.,  5.

15.  Ibid.,  6.

16.  "Orphans  and  Dietetics,"  American  Medicine  27  (1921):  394-396.

1 7.  Lederer  and  Grodin,  Children  as  Research  Subjects,  11-12.

18.  Ibid.,  14.

19.  Ibid.,  12.

20.  Ibid.,  15.

2 1 .  This  ruling  is  summarized  in  Jay  Katz,  Experimentation  with  Human
Beings,  the  Authority  of  the  Investigator,  Subject,  Professions,  and  State  in  the  Human
Experimentation  Process  (New  York:  Russell  Sage  Foundation,  1972),  972-974.

22.  Ibid.

23.  Ibid.


359


24.  Ibid.

25.  This  case  is  also  discussed  in  "Use  of  Fifteen  Year  Old  Boy  as  Skin  Donor
Without  Consent  of  Parents  as  Constituting  Assault  and  Battery:  Bureau  of  Legal
Medicine  and  Legislation  Society  Proceedings,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical
Association  1 20  ( 1 7  October  1942):  562-563.

26.  For  more  information  on  the  Nuremberg  Code,  please  see  United  States  v.
Karl  Brandt,  et  ai,  "The  Medical  Case,"  Trials  of  War  Criminals  before  the  Nuremberg
Military  Tribunals  under  Control  Council  Law  No.  10  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1949),
2;  Jay  Katz,  "Human  Experimentation  and  Human  Rights,"  St.  Louis  University  Law-
Journal  38  (1993);  and  George  J.  Annas  and  Michael  A.  Grodin,  eds.,  The  Nazi  Doctors
and  the  Nuremberg  Code:  Human  Rights  in  Human  Experimentation  (New  York:
Oxford  University  Press,  1992).

27.  Irving  Ladimer,  "Legal  and  Ethical  Implications  of  Medical  Research  on
Human  Beings,"  (S.J.D.  diss.,  George  Washington  University,  1958),  appendix  II,  202-
208.

28.  Ibid.,  207.

29.  Ibid.,  206.

30.  Ibid.,  208.

3 1 .  Henry  Seidel,  interview  by  Gail  Javitt  ( ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio
recording,  20  March  1995  (Research  Project  Series,  Oral  History  Project),  67-68.

32.  Ibid.

33.  William  Silverman,  interview  by  Gail  Javitt  (ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio
recording,  14  February  1995  (Research  Project  Series,  Oral  History  Project),  26.

34.  Ibid.

35.  Boston  University,  Law-Medicine  Research  Institute,  1  May  1961
("Conference  on  Social  Responsibility  in  Pediatric  Research")(ACHRE  No.  BU-062394-
A).  This  was  part  of  a  larger  LMRI  project  (which  was  funded  by  NIH)  to  investigate
actual  practices  in  clinical  research.  The  project  began  in  early  1960  and  continued  until
1963,  resulting  in  a  lengthy  final  report,  which  was  never  published.

36.  Ibid.,  5. In  this  document,  speakers  are  identified  by  initials.  A  list  of
participants  found  in  these  same  records  generally  makes  identifying  particular  speakers
in  the  transcripts  quite  straightforward. In  this  case,  however,  a  complexity  arises
because  the  speaker  is  identified  as  "WF."  The  list  of  participants  reveals  no  one  with
these  initials,  and  "WF"  appears  only  once  in  the  transcripts. It  is  almost  certain  that
"WF"  is  a  typographical  error,  and  given  the  flow  of  the  transcripts,  it  is  also  almost
certain  that  "WF"  should  have  been  "WS"--William  Silverman.

37.  Ibid.,  7.

38.  Ibid,,  3.

39.  Ibid.

40.  Ibid.,  2.

41.  Ibid.,  6.

42.  Ibid.,  17.

43.  Ibid.,  15.

44.  Ibid.

45.  The  Declaration  of  Helsinki  can  be  found  in  many  sources,  but  its  earliest
published  appearance  was  perhaps  "Human  Experimentation:  Code  of  Ethics  of  the
World  Medical  Association,"  British  Medical  Journal  2  (1964):  177.

46.  Ibid.

47.  Ibid.

48.  Ibid.

49.  Ibid.


360


50.  Much  has  been  written  on  the  Willowbrook  studies;  for  a  short  summary  of
this  episode  see  Ruth  R.  Faden  and  Tom  L.  Beauchamp,  A  Histoiy  and  Theoiy  of
Informed  Consent  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1986),  5,  163-164.

5 1 .  Henry  Beecher,  Research  and  the  Individual:  Human  Studies  (Boston:
Little,  Brown,  and  Company,  1970),  122-127.

52.  There  were  many  exchanges  in  the  medical  literature  over  the  hepatitis
studies  conducted  by  Saul  Krugman  at  the  Willowbrook  State  School.  Stephen  Goldby
wrote  an  editorial  to  The  Lancet,  expressing  his  outrage  over  The  Lancet's  position  on
Krugman's  research,  saying  that  the  research  was  "quite  unjustifiable,  whatever  the  aims,
and  however  academically  or  therapeutically  important  are  the  results.  ...  Is  it  right  to
perform  an  experiment  on  a  normal  or  mentally  retarded  child  when  no  benefit  can  result
to  that  individual?"  The  editors  of  The  Lancet  responded  to  Goldby's  letter,  expressing
agreement  with  his  position,  stating,  "The  Willowbrook  experiments  have  always  carried
a  hope  that  hepatitis  might  one  day  be  prevented  there  and  in  other  situations  where
infection  seems  almost  inevitable;  but  that  could  not  justify  the  giving  of  infected
material  to  children  who  would  not  directly  benefit."  Krugman  responded  to  these
editorials  by  arguing,

Our  proposal  to  expose  a  small  number  of  newly
admitted  children  to  the  Willowbrook  strains  of  hepatitis
virus  was  justified  in  our  opinion  for  the  following
reasons:  1 )  they  were  bound  to  be  exposed  to  the  same
strains  under  the  natural  conditions  existing  in  the
institution,  2)  they  would  be  admitted  to  a  special,  well-
staffed  unit  where  they  would  be  isolated  from  exposure
to  other  infectious  diseases  which  were  prevalent  in  the
institution.  .  .  .  Thus,  their  exposure  in  the  hepatitis  unit
would  be  associated  with  less  risk  than  the  type  of
institutional  exposure  where  multiple  infections  could
occur;  3)  they  were  likely  to  have  a  subclinical  infection
followed  by  immunity  to  the  particular  hepatitis  virus;
and  4)  only  children  with  parents  who  gave  informed
consent  would  be  included.

The  debate  over  these  experiments  continued,  as  evidenced  by  editorials  by  Geoffrey
Edsall,  Edward  Willey,  and  Benjamin  Pasamanick  in  The  Lancet  and  through  an  editorial
in  JAMA  as  well.  Jay  Katz,  Experimentation  with  Human  Beings,  1007-1010;  Geoffrey
Edsall,  "Experiments  at  Willowbrook,"  The  Lancet  ( 1 0  July  1971):  95;  Edward  N.  Willey
and  Benjamin  Pasamanick,  "Experiments  at  Willowbrook,"  The  Lancet  (22  May  1971):
1 078- 1 079;  and  "A  Shedding  of  Light,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association
212(11  May  1970):  1057-1058.

53.  S.  Allan  Lough,  Chief  of  the  Radioisotopes  Branch,  AEC  Isotopes  Division,
to  Drs.  Hymer  L.  Friedell,  G.  Failla,  Joesph  G.  Hamilton,  A.  H.  Holland,  Members  of
AEC  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications,  19  July  1949  ("Revised  Tentative  Minutes
of  March  13,  1949  Meeting  of  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  of  Committee  on
Isotope  Distribution  of  U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  AEC  Building,  Washington,
D.C.")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-24).  For  price  list  and  isotope  catalogue,  see
AEC  Isotopes  Division,  Supplement  No.  1  to  Catalogue  and  Price  List  No.  3,  September
1949  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-122794-A),  3-4.

54.  S.  Allan  Lough,  19  July  1949  ("Revised  Tentative  Minutes  of  March  13,
1949  Meeting..."),  10.


361


55.  AEC  General  Manager  Carroll  Wilson's  two  1947  letters  that  address  the
consent  issue  (see  chapter  1)  did  not  specifically  mention  children.  The  second  letter,
dated  November  1947,  required  that  "the  patient  give  his  complete  and  informed  consent
in  writing,  and  (c)  that  the  responsible  nearest  of  kin  give  in  writing  a  similarly  complete
and  informed  consent.  .  .  ."  It  is  not  clear,  however,  that  Wilson's  phrase,  "responsible
nearest  of  kin,"  was  written  out  of  concern  for  children  and  other  patients  not  capable  of
giving  "complete  and  informed  consent,"  as  opposed,  for  example,  to  adult  patients  who
were  too  sick  to  give  such  consent.  Moreover,  it  is  not  even  clear  whether  the  letter  was
intended  to  apply  to  experiments  with  healthy  subjects,  as  opposed  to  sick  patients,  or  to
experiments  using  tracer  amounts  of  radioactive  substances.  The  second  letter  is
specifically  focused  on  "substances  known  to  be,  or  suspected  of  being,  poisonous  or
harmful."  It  is  plausible,  for  example,  that  tracer  amounts  of  radionuclides  were
considered  "harmless,"  especially  since  the  Wilson  letter  expressly  prohibited  the
administration  of  "harmful"  substances  unless  there  was  a  reasonable  hope  that  "such  a
substance  will  improve  the  condition  of  the  patient."  Carroll  L.  Wilson,  General  Manager
of  the  AEC,  to  Stafford  Warren,  the  University  of  California,  Los  Angeles,  30  April  1947
("This  is  to  inform  you  that  the  Commission  is  going  ahead  with  its  plans  .  .  .")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-051094-A-439),  1.  Also  C.  Wilson,  General  Manager,  AEC,  to  Robert  Stone,
University  of  California,  5  November  1947  ("Your  letter  of  September  1 8  regarding  the
declassification  of  biological  and  medical  papers  was  read  at  the  October  1 1  meeting  of
the  Advisory  Committee  on  Biology  and  Medicine.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-052295-A).

56.  J.  H.  Lawrence,  "Early  Experiences  in  Nuclear  Medicine,"  The  Journal  of
Nuclear  Medicine  20  (1979):  561 .  (Publication  of  speech  given  in  1955).  Dr.  Lawrence
concludes,  however,  that  "as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the  20  years  since  we  first  used
artificially  produced  radioisotopes  in  humans,  we  have  not  run  into  delayed  effects  or
complications  as  some  of  the  skeptics  predicted  we  would."  Ibid.,  562.

57.  This  correspondence  can  be  found  in  Task  Force  on  Human  Subject
Research,  A  Report  on  the  Use  of  Radioactive  Materials,  appendix  B,  documents  16-18.

58.  Citations  for  the  studies  for  which  the  Committee  performed  detailed  risk
analysis  can  be  found  in  the  supplemental  volumes.

59.  S.  H.  Silverman  and  L.  Wilkins,  "Radioiodine  Uptake  in  the  Study  of
Different  Types  of  Hypothyroidism  in  Childhood,"  Pediatrics  12  (1953):  288-299.

60.  V.  C.  Kelley  et  al.,  "Labeled  Methionine  as  an  Indicator  of  Protein
Formation  in  Children  with  Lipoid  Nephrosis,"  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for
Experimental  Biology  and  Medicine  76  ( 1 950):  1 53- 1 55.

61 .  M.  A.  Van  Dilla  and  M.  J.  Fulwyler,  "Thyroid  Metabolism  in  Children  and
Adults  Using  Very  Small  (Nanocurie)  Doses  of  Iodine- 125  and  Iodine- 131,"  Health
Physics  9  (\963):  1325-1331.

62.  For  more  information,  please  see  the  "Introduction:  The  Atomic  Century,"
sections  entitled  "How  Do  We  Measure  the  Biological  Effects  of  Internal  Emitters?"  and
"How  Do  Scientists  Determine  the  Long-Term  Risks  From  Radiation?"

63.  International  Commission  on  Radiological  Protection,  Publication  53:  Data
for  Protection  Against  Ionizing  Radiation  from  External  Sources  (New  York:  Pergamon
Press,  1973);  see  also  National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and  Measurements,
Report  80:  Induction  of  Thyroid  Cancer  by  Ionizing  Radiation— Recommendations  of  the
National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and  Measurements  (New  York:  The  Council,
1985).

64.  R.  E.  Shore  et  al.,  "Thyroid  Tumors  Following  Thymus  Irradiation,"  Journal
of  the  National  Cancer  Institute  74  ( 1 985):  1 1 77- 1 1 84.

65.  E.  Ron  and  B.  Modan,  "Thyroid  and  Other  Neoplasms  Following  Childhood
Scalp  Irradiation,"  in  J.  D.  Boice,  Jr.,  and  J.  F.  Fraumeni,  Jr.,  eds.,  Radiation


362


Carcinogenesis:  Epidemiology  and  Biological  Significance  (New  York:  Raven,  1 984),
139-151.

66.  R.  L.  Prentice  et  al.,  "Radiation  Exposure  and  Thyroid  Cancer  Incidence
among  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  Residents,"  National  Cancer  Institute  Monographs  62
(1982):  207-212.

67.  National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and  Measurements,  Report  80:
Induction  of  Thyroid  Cancer  by  Ionizing  Radiation.  The  BIER  V  report  recommends  a
figure  of  0.66  but  with  a  broad  confidence  interval  of  (0.14-3.15).  National  Research
Council,  Board  on  Radiation  Effects  Research,  Committee  on  the  Biological  Effects  of
Ionizing  Radiation,  Health  Effects  of  Exposure  to  Low  Levels  of  Ionizing  Radiation:
BIER  V{ Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy  Press,  1990),  5,  298.

68.  Task  Force  on  Human  Subject  Research,  "A  Report  on  the  Use  of
Radioactive  Materials  in  Human  Subject  Research  that  Involved  Residents  of  State-
Operated  Facilities  within  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts  from  1943  to  1973."

69.  Protection  of  Human  Subjects,  45  C.F.R.  §  46. 1 02.

70.  Ibid.,  §  46.406.

71 .  F.  P.  Castronovo,  "An  Attempt  to  Standardize  the  Radiodiagnostic  Risk
Statement  in  an  Institutional  Review  Board  Consent  Form,"  Investigative  Radiology  28
(1993):  533-538.

72.  W.  L.  Freeman,  "Research  with  Radiation  and  Healthy  Children:  Greater
than  Minimal  Risk,"  IRB:  A  Review  of  Human  Subjects  Research  5,  no.  16  (1994):  1-5.

73.  B.  J.  Duffy  and  P.  J.  Fitzgerald,  "Thyroid  Cancer  in  Childhood  and
Adolescence:  A  Report  of  Twenty-eight  Cases,"  Cancer  3  (November  1950):  1018-1032.

74.  R.  Murray,  P.  Heckel,  and  L.  H.  Hempelmann,  "Leukemia  in  Children
Exposed  to  Ionizing  Radiation,"  New  England  Journal  of  Medicine  261(1 959):  585-597.

75.  Eugene  L.  Saenger  et  al.,  "  Neoplasia  Following  Therapeutic  Irradiation  for
Benign  Conditions  in  Childhood,"  Radiology  74  (1960):  889-904.  For  more  information
on  the  work  of  Eugene  Saenger,  please  see  chapter  8,  "Total-Body  Irradiation:  Problems
When  Research  and  Treatment  Are  Intertwined."

76.  Ibid.,  889.

77.  Ibid.,  901.

78.  S.  A.  Beach  and  G.  W.  Dolphin,  "A  Study  of  the  Relationship  Between  X-
Ray  Dose  Delivered  to  the  Thyroids  of  Children  and  the  Subsequent  Development  of
Malignant  Tumors,"  Physics  in  Medicine  and  Biology  6  ( 1 962):  583-598.

79.  Ibid.,  583.'

80.  One  rep  (roentgen  equivalent  physical),  a  unit  that  is  no  longer  used,  is
approximately  equivalent  to  one  rem  (roentgen  equivalent  man).

81.  J.  C.  Aub,  A.  K.  Solomon,  and  Shields  Warren,  Harvard  Medical  School,  7
May  1949  ("Tracer  Doses  of  Radioactive  Isotopes  in  Man")  (ACHRE  No.  HAR- 100395-
A).  It  appears  that  at  least  one  physician-researcher  of  the  time  determined  to  avoid  an
unknown  risk  by  not  administering  radioisotopes  in  studies  with  pregnant  women  and
children.  In  his  recent  autobiography,  Dr.  Francis  Moore,  an  eminent  Boston-based
surgeon,  recalled  that  "in  pregnancy,  even  very  small  doses  of  radiation  are  dangerous  to
the  unborn  child,  so  we  did  not  use  radioactive  isotopes  in  studying  the  body  composition
in  pregnant  women  or  in  young  children."  Presumably  Dr.  Moore  is  referring  to  the
1940s  when  he  began  his  pioneering  research  employing  radioisotopes  to  determine  the
composition  of  the  body,  although  this  is  not  clear.  Whether  Dr.  Moore's  view  was
informed  by  dialogue  with  the  relevant  pediatric  perspectives  reviewed  here  also  is
unclear.  Francis  D.  Moore,  M.D.,  A  Miracle  and  a  Privilege:  Recounting  a  Half  Century
of  Surgical  Advance  (Washington,  D.C.:  Joseph  Henry  Press,  1995),  109,  111.


363


82.  L.  Van  Middlesworth,  "Radioactive  Iodide  Uptake  of  Normal  Newborn
Infants,"  American  Journal  of  Diseases  of  Children  88(1 954):  44 1 .

83.  Malcom  J.  Farrell,  Superintendent,  Walter  E.  Fernald  State  School,  to
Parent,  2  November  1949  ("The  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  and  this
institution  are  very  much  interested  .  .  ."),  as  cited  in  the  Task  Force  for  Human  Subject
Research,  "A  Report  on  the  Use  of  Radioactive  Materials,"  appendix  B,  document  19.

84.  This  form  states,

To  the  Superintendent  of  the  Walter  E.  Fernald  State
School:

This  is  to  state  that  I  give  my  permission  for  the

participation  of in  the  project  mentioned  in  your

letter  of

Witnessed  by:


Signature
Date:


Relationship

Permission  form  from  Parent  to  the  Superintendent  of  the  Walter  E.  Fernald  State  School,
2  November  1949  ("This  is  to  state  that  I  give  my  permission  .  .  ."),  as  cited  by  the  Task
Force  on  Human  Subject  Research,  in  "A  Report  on  the  Use  of  Radioactive  Materials,"
appendix  B,  document  19.

85.  Clemens  E.  Benda,  Director  of  Research,  the  Walter  E.  Fernald  State
School,  to  Parent,  28  May  1953,  as  cited  by  the  Task  Force  on  Human  Subject  Research,
in  "A  Report  on  the  Use  of  Radioactive  Materials,"  appendix  B,  document  23.

86.  As  stated  in  the  Massachusetts  Task  Force  report,  the  purpose  of  the
nutritional  research  studies  was  to  "understand  how  the  body  obtained  the  minerals  iron
and  calcium  from  dietary  sources  and  to  find  out  whether  compounds  in  cereals  affected
their  absorption  ...  the  immediate  goal  of  the  research  was  to  understand  if  either  of
these  cereals  was  preferable  from  a  nutritional  point  of  view."  Ibid.,  16.

87.  Ibid.,  43.

88.  Fred  Boyce,  transcript  of  audio  testimony  before  the  Advisory  Committee
on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  16  December  1994,  38.

89.  Task  Force  on  Human  Subject  Research,  in  "A  Report  on  the  Use  of
Radioactive  Materials,"  33.

90.  Susan  E.  Lederer  and  Michael  A.  Grodin,  "Historical  Overview:  Pediatric
Experimentation,"  12-13.

91.  Boston  University,  Law-Medicine  Research  Institute,  1  January  1960  to  31
March,  1963, /J  Study  of  the  Legal,  Ethical,  and  Administrative  Aspects  of  Clinical
Research  Involving  Human  Subjects:  Final  Report  of  Administrative  Practices  in  Clinical
Research,  Research  Grant  No.  7039  (ACHRE  No.  BU-053194-A),  34.

92.  Fred  Boyce,  16  December  1994,  38.

93.  Robert  S.  Harris,  Professor  of  Biochemistry  and  Nutrition,  Massachusetts
Institute  of  Technology,  to  Clemens  E.  Benda,  1  May  1953,  as  cited  by  the  Task  Force
on  Human  Subject  Research,  in  "A  Report  on  the  Use  of  Radioactive  Materials,"
appendix  B,  document  21,1.


364


94.  Ibid.

95.  Children  who  are  considered  "wards  of  the  State  or  any  other  agency,
institution,  or  entity"  can  become  subjects  of  research  if  the  research  is  related  to  their
status  as  wards  and  conducted  in  a  setting  in  which  the  majority  of  children  involved  in
the  research  are  not  wards.  If  the  research  meets  these  conditions,  the  IRB  must  then
appoint  a  special  advocate  not  associated  in  any  way  with  the  research,  who  will  act  in
the  best  interests  of  the  child.  Protection  of  Human  Subjects,  45  C.F.R.  §  46.409.

96.  There  are  also  no  special  regulations  protecting  institutionalized  adults.  The
Committee  believes  that  the  federal  government  should  inplement  public  policies  to  fill
this  regulatory  gap.

97.  This  conclusion  does  not  hold  for  people  who  believe  that  it  is  never
acceptable  to  use  children  as  subjects  in  nontherapeutic  research,  even  if  the  research  is
risk-free.

98.  G.  S.  Kurland  et  al.,  "Radioisotope  Study  of  Thyroid  Function  in  21
Mongoloid  Subjects,  including  Observations  in  7  Parents,"  Journal  of  Clinical
Endocrinology  and  Metabolism  17  (1957):  552-60;  A.  Friedman,  "Radioactive  Uptake  in
Children  with  Mongolism,"  Pediatrics  16  (1955):  55;  S.  H.  Silverman  and  L.  Wilkins,
"Radioiodine  Uptake  in  the  Study  of  Different  Types  of  Hypothyroidism  in  Childhood,"
288-299;  and E.  H.  Quimby  and  D.  J.  McCune,  "Uptake  of  Radioactive  Iodine  by  the
Normal  and  Disordered  Thyroid  Gland  in  Children,"  Radiology  49  (1947):  201-205.

99.  Boston  University  Law-Medicine  Research  Institute,  Final  Report  of
Administrative  Practices  in  Clinical  Research,  34.


365


8

Total-Body  Irradiation:

Problems  when  Treatment  and

Research  Are  Intertwined


In  the  fall  of  1971,  a  public  controversy  erupted  about  the  ethics  of  a
research  project  at  the  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  funded  for
more  than  a  decade  by  the  Department  of  Defense  (DOD).  In  this  research,  the
subjects  were  cancer  patients  who  underwent  external  total-body  irradiation  (TBI);
the  DOD  was  funding  postirradiation  research  on  the  biological  effects  of  this  type
of  exposure  to  radiation.  Critics  of  the  research  charged  that  the  physician-
investigators  were  exposing  unknowing  patients  to  potentially  lethal  doses  of  TBI-
-not  to  treat  their  cancer,  but  to  collect  data  on  the  effects  of  nuclear  war  for  the
military—and  that  numerous  patients  had  died  or  seriously  suffered  from  the
radiation.  Defenders  asserted  that  the  TBI  was  reasonable  medical  treatment  for
people  with  incurable  cancer  and  that  this  treatment  was  performed  in  accordance
with  contemporary  professional  ethics.  Over  the  next  four  months,  the  research
was  reviewed  favorably  by  ad  hoc  committees  of  physicians  appointed  by  the
American  College  of  Radiology  (ACR),  the  preeminent  professional  organization
of  radiologists,  and  by  University  of  Cincinnati  officials,  but  critically  by  an  ad
hoc  committee  of  junior  nonmedical  faculty  members  at  the  university.  Following
these  reports,  the  university  president  rejected  further  Defense  Department  funding
for  the  posttreatment  data-collection  program,  and  the  use  of  TBI  was  suspended.

When  news  reports  about  human  radiation  experiments  appeared  in  late
1993,  journalists  and  investigators  again  focused  on  this  Cincinnati  project.
Critics  charged  that  the  reviews  commissioned  by  the  university  and  the  ACR


366


Chapter  8

were  biased  and  had  been  "whitewashes";  supporters  countered  that  the
Cincinnati  research  had  been  conducted  in  the  open,  had  been  thoroughly  and
favorably  reviewed  by  the  medical  community,  and  was  old  news.  In  addition,
patients  were  identified  publicly  for  the  first  time,  leading  a  number  of  their
family  members  to  file  a  lawsuit  against  the  university,  the  physicians,  and  other
parties  in  federal  court.'  The  family  members  also  formed  an  advocacy  group
called  the  Cincinnati  Families  of  Radiation  Victims  Organization.

The  University  of  Cincinnati  was  only  the  last  in  a  line  of  institutions  that
received  funds  to  provide  data  to  the  government  on  the  effects  of  total-body
irradiation  on  humans.  In  this  chapter  we  review  thirty  years  of  research
supported  by  the  Manhattan  Project,  the  Department  of  Defense,  and  the  AEC
aimed  at  gathering  data  on  the  effects  of  radiation  on  hospitalized  patients  who
were  medically  exposed  to  total-body  irradiation.  Much  of  the  record  is
incomplete,  and  some  of  it  is  contradictory.  We  cannot  and  do  not  resolve  all  the
inconsistencies  and  uncertainties  in  the  record.  We  do,  however,  focus  on  the
ethical  issues  that  emerged  in  this  research,  some  of  which  are  still  with  us  today.

The  history  of  TBI  research  is  important  to  the  Committee  for  several
reasons.  First,  in  the  other  case  studies  conducted  by  the  Committee,  there  was
never  any  expectation  or  any  claim  that  subjects,  even  if  they  were  patients,
would  benefit  medically  from  their  being  involved  in  experiments.  By  contrast,
in  the  TBI  research,  the  TBI  itself  was  recommended  as  treatment  for  incurable
cancer,  for  which  the  expectation  of  benefit  was  low,  although  possible;
chemotherapy,  which  would  be  considered  "standard"  today,  was  not  well
established  until  the  mid-  to  late  1960s.  (The  postradiation  effects  studies
sponsored  by  the  DOD,  however,  were  not  intended  to  benefit  the  patients.)  As
we  noted  in  chapter  4,  the  presence  of  an  intent  to  benefit,  if  that  intent  is  both
genuine  and  reasonable,  alters  the  ethics  of  the  situation.  An  intent  to  benefit  the
patient-subject  does  not,  however,  ensure  that  an  experiment  is  ethically
acceptable.  Many  perplexing  questions  about  the  ethics  of  research  involving
human  subjects  that  we  face  today  occur  at  the  bedside  with  patient-subjects  who
may  or  may  not  benefit  medically  by  their  participation.  The  TBI  story  thus
foreshadows  important  issues  we  discuss  in  part  III  of  this  report  when  we  focus
on  contemporary  research  involving  human  subjects,  much  of  which  involves
patient-subjects  and  the  prospect  of  medical  benefit.  The  core  of  the  ethical
problem  is  straightforward.  Whenever  the  treatment  of  a  patient  is  intertwined
with  the  conduct  of  research,  the  potential  emerges  for  conflict  between  the
interests  of  science  and  the  interests  of  the  patient.  The  patient  may,  for  example,
be  exposed  to  additional  risk  or  discomfort  as  a  consequence.  At  the  same  time,
for  some  patients,  participation  in  research  may  offer  the  only  chance,  or  the  best
chance,  of  improving  their  medical  condition.

The  second  reason  the  history  of  TBI  research  is  important  to  the
Committee  is  that  although  the  research  was  conducted  on  cancer  patients,  the
government's  interest  in  the  research  was  not  to  advance  the  treatment  of  cancer

367


Part  II

but  to  find  answers  to  problems  facing  the  military  in  the  development  and  use  of
atomic  weapons  and  nuclear-powered  aircraft.  It  is  this  disparity  that  raised
questions,  both  in  1971  and  today,  about  the  motivations  behind  treatment  of
these  patient-subjects  with  TBI.  Whether  it  matters  morally  that  the  government
pursued  its  interests  in  the  effects  of  TBI  on  patient-subjects  depends  in  large
measure  on  whether  the  government's  objectives  in  supporting  this  research
inappropriately  compromised  the  medical  care  the  patient-subjects  received.  We
have  just  noted  that  the  conjoining  of  research  with  medical  care  necessarily
creates  a  potential  for  conflict  between  the  interests  of  the  research  and  the
interests  of  the  patient.  This  is  true  even  where  the  objective  of  the  research  is  to
find  a  treatment  for  the  condition  from  which  the  patient  suffers.  A  central  issue
in  the  case  of  the  TBI  research  is  whether  this  conflict  was  exacerbated  by  the
nature  of  the  gap  between  the  interests  of  the  patient  and  the  objectives  of  the
research.  A  complicating  feature  of  the  TBI  story  is  that  the  DOD  did  not  pay
directly  for  the  patients  to  be  administered  TBI;  the  funding  by  these  agencies
was  restricted  to  the  costs  associated  with  the  physiological  and  psychological
measurements  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  TBI,  rather  than  the  costs  of  the  TBI
itself.

The  Committee  was  also  struck  with  how  well  the  history  of  TBI  research
illustrates  two  very  contemporary  problems—how  to  draw  boundaries  between
medical  care  and  medical  research,  and  how  to  draw  boundaries  between  research
with  patient-subjects  that  is  "therapeutic"  and  research  that  is  "nontherapeutic."
Was  the  administration  of  TBI  always  an  instance  of  medical  research,  was  it  ever
standard  care,  or  was  it  sometimes  administered  as  a  departure  from  standard  care
outside  of  research?  When  TBI  was  administered  in  the  context  of  research,  was
there  a  basis  for  believing  that  there  was  a  reasonable  prospect  that  patients  could
benefit,  or  was  it  the  kind  of  research  from  which  patients  could  not  benefit
medically?  Because  of  conflicting  and  incomplete  evidence,  these  were  questions
that  we  could  not  always  answer  but  that  guided  our  inquiry.

The  Committee  began  our  review  by  seeking  to  track  down  TBI  research
identified  in  a  "Retrospective  Study"  of  TBI  exposures  conducted  in  the  mid-
1960s  by  the  Oak  Ridge  Associated  Universities  on  behalf  of  the  National
Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  (NASA),  which  collected  records  on  more
than  2,000  TBI  exposures  on  both  radiosensitive  and  radioresistant  cancers  from
forty-five  U.S.  and  Canadian  institutions.2  The  Committee  then  focused  on
approximately  twenty  research  studies  that  were  published  between  1940  and
1974  on  the  use  of  TBI  in  the  United  States.  Nine  of  these  twenty  studies
involved  at  least  some  patients  with  "radioresistant"  cancers.  Eight  of  the  nine
institutions  that  conducted  the  studies  received  funding  from  either  the  Manhattan
Project  or  the  DOD;3  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  sponsored  one  of  the
studies  involving  "radiosensitive"  cancers  at  the  Oak  Ridge  Institute  of  Nuclear
Studies  (ORINS).4  In  addition,  the  Committee  found  only  one  instance  in  which


368


Chapter  8


nongovernment-funded  TBI  research  involved  patients  with  radioresistant


cancers.5


In  this  chapter,  we  begin  with  a  definition  of  TBI,  including  a  discussion
of  the  then-contemporary  distinction  between  the  use  of  TBI  to  treat
radiosensitive  and  radioresistant  tumors.  The  distinction  is  important  to  what
follows,  because  patients  with  radiosensitive  cancers  (for  which  TBI  was
considered  most  promising  medically)  were  less  useful  subjects  for  obtaining  the
type  of  information  that  the  military  sought— information  on  the  acute  effects  of
radiation  on  healthy  soldiers  or  citizens  during  the  course  of  atomic  warfare-
related  activities.  In  these  patients,  it  would  be  less  clear  whether  signs  such  as
nausea,  vomiting,  or  other  acute  effects  were  due  to  rapid  destruction  of  cancer
cells  by  the  radiation  or  due  to  the  radiation  acting  on  normal  tissue,  such  as
normal  blood  cells.  Similarly,  patients  with  radiosensitive  cancers  were  less
useful  for  research  intended  to  find  biological  measures  of  radiation  doses
("biological  dosimeters"),  because  this  research  depended  on  measuring  various
cell  products  in  the  blood  or  urine  that  could  also  be  released  by  tumor  cells  that
were  destroyed.  Patients  with  radioresistant  tumors  were  more  desirable  because
it  was  more  likely  that  the  effects  seen  were  related  to  radiation  effects  on  normal
tissue  rather  than  rapid  destruction  of  their  tumor  cells.

Following  a  discussion  of  TBI  itself,  we  turn  to  a  chronological  history  of
government  sponsorship  of  research  related  to  the  effects  of  TBI  with
radioresistant  tumors.  This  research  began  during  the  Manhattan  Project.  In  1949
and  1950,  as  we  next  discuss,  DOD  and  AEC  experts  and  officials  met  to  consider
the  need  for  further  TBI  human  experiments  in  order  to  gain  information  needed
in  the  development  of  the  nuclear-powered  airplane.  When  the  decision  was  made
not  to  proceed  with  human  experiments  involving  healthy  subjects,  the  military
began  to  fund  research  on  the  effects  of  TBI  on  patients  undergoing  treatment  for
cancer.  As  we  discuss,  this  program  began  in  1950  at  the  M.  D.  Anderson
Hospital  for  Cancer  Research  in  Houston  and  continued  through  the  end  of  the
Cincinnati  research,  in  the  early  1970s.  We  conclude  our  review  with  a  discussion
of  the  AEC-funded  TBI  research  conducted  at  Oak  Ridge  between  1957  and
1974,  which  focused  on  patients  with  radiosensitive  cancers.

WHAT  IS  TBI?

Medically  administered  total-body  irradiation,  also  known  as  whole-body
radiation,  involves  the  use  of  external  radiation  sources  that  produce  penetrating
rays  of  energy  to  deliver  a  relatively  uniform  amount  of  radiation  to  the  entire
body.  Total-body  irradiation  was  used  as  a  medical  treatment  long  before  the
1944-1974  experiments,  and  it  continues  to  be  used  today.  Soon  after  doctors
began  to  experiment  with  radiation,  they  recognized  that  radiation  had  different
effects  on  different  types  of  cancers.  They  thus  began  to  distinguish  between
radiosensitive  cancers,  which  generally  responded  to  the  radiation  treatment,  and

369


Part  II

radioresistant  cancers,  which  most  often  did  not  respond.  By  the  1940s,  TBI  was
recognized  as  an  acceptable  treatment  for  certain  radiosensitive  cancers  that  are
widely  disseminated  throughout  the  body,  such  as  leukemia  and  lymphoma  (a
cancer  whose  origin  is  in  the  lymphoid  tissue).  By  the  late  1950s,  TBI  was  also
being  used  to  assist  in  conjunction  with  research  on  bone  marrow  transplantations
for  radiosensitive  cancers.  During  this  period,  TBI  was  also  explored  as  a
possible  palliative  treatment  (providing  relief,  but  not  cure)  for  disseminated
radioresistant  cancers,  such  as  carcinomas  of  the  breast,  lung,  colon,  and  other
organs  (carcinoma  is  a  cancer  that  originates  from  the  cells  lining  these  organs).6
However,  TBI  alone  did  not  prove  to  be  of  value  in  treating  these  cancers
because,  without  support  measures  to  maintain  bone  marrow  function,  the  doses
needed  to  significantly  shrink  the  tumors  were  potentially  lethal  to  the  patient.

In  the  1950s,  there  were  few  effective  methods  for  treating  radioresistant
cancers.  Chemotherapy  was  just  being  developed;  it  was  risky  to  use  and  only
marginally  effective.  With  no  better  alternatives,  interest  in  TBI  continued.  In
addition,  the  development  in  the  1950s  of  high-energy  sources  of  radiation-
cobalt  60,  cesium  137,  and  megavolt  x-ray  sources— represented  a  significant
advance  in  technology.  These  new  teletherapy  units  allowed  high-energy
radiation  to  penetrate  deeper  into  the  body  without  damaging  the  overlying  skin
and  soft  tissues;  thus  higher  absorbed  marrow  doses  (in  rad)  could  be  delivered
than  with  previous  equipment.  The  advent  of  this  new  teletherapy  encouraged
researchers  to  retest  TBI  on  patients  with  radioresistant  cancers  even  though  prior
TBI  techniques  with  older  x-ray  therapy  machines  had  failed.  By  the  late  1960s,
however,  chemotherapy  began  to  be  recognized  as  more  effective,  and  interest  in
TBI  waned.  During  the  1 970s,  researchers  explored  the  effectiveness  of
administering  TBI  without  bone  marrow  transplant  through  multiple  exposures  at
lower  doses  (e.g.,  10  to  30  rad),  known  as  "fractionated  radiation,"  to  achieve
cumulative  total  body  doses  of  150  to  300  rad,  rather  than  single  exposures  of  an
equivalent  total  body  dose.7  They  also  focused  much  more  extensively  on  partial-
body  irradiation,  because  the  risk  of  patient  bone  marrow  failure  was  lower.
Since  the  1980s,  TBI  has  again  been  used  to  treat  certain  widely  disseminated,
radioresistant  carcinomas  at  doses  as  high  as  1,575  rad  in  conjunction  with
effective  bone  marrow  transplantation,  which  became  routinely  available  in  the
late  1970s.8

TBI  can  cause  acute  health  effects  during  the  first  six  weeks  following  an
acute  (single)  exposure.  The  type  and  severity  of  the  effects  depend,  among  other
things,  on  the  dose,  the  dose  rate,  and  the  individual's  sensitivity  to  radiation.9
The  most  serious  side  effects  seen  during  this  period  are  related  to  radiation-
induced  depression  of  the  bone  marrow,  which  can  cause  a  decrease  in  the
number  of  circulating  platelets  and  white  blood  cells,  which  in  turn  can  result  in
small  hemorrhages  and  infections,  possibly  leading  to  death.  Moderate  bone
marrow  depression  results  with  doses  of  about  125  rad.  The  following  table
describes  the  general  acute  effects  that  are  likely  to  occur  to  healthy  persons  from

370


Chapter  8

a  single  exposure;10  these  effects  can  be  exaggerated  and  prolonged  for  people
who  are  ill  or  have  had  prior  radiation  treatments.  As  with  an  ordinary  diagnostic
x  ray,  the  patient  feels  nothing  during  the  radiation  exposure  itself.  In  addition,
TBI,  like  most  other  forms  of  radiation  exposure,  can  potentially  have  long-term
effects  such  as  cancer  induction;  however,  most  patients  who  receive  TBI  do  not
live  long  enough  to  experience  most  long-term  effects.


Midline  Tissue
Dose

Symptoms

Percentage

Time
Postexposure

50-100  rad

nausea

5-30

3-20  hours

1 00-200  rad

nausea

vomiting

death"

30-70
20-50
<5

4-30  hours
6-24  hours
5-6  weeks

200-350  rad

nausea

vomiting

death

70-90
50-80
5-50

1-48  hours
3-24  hours
4-6  weeks

350-500  rad

nausea

vomiting

death

90-100
80-100
50-99

1-72  hours
3-24  hours
4-6  weeks

550-750  rad

death

100

2-3  weeks

EARLY  USE  OF  TBI  FOR  RADIORESISTANT  TUMORS:
THE  MANHATTAN  PROJECT  EXPERIMENTS  ON
PATIENTS  AND  THE  SUBSEQUENT  AEC  REVIEW

In  the  early  1930s,  researchers  at  Memorial  Hospital  in  New  York,  a
major  cancer  research  center  (now  known  as  the  Memorial  Sloan-Kettering
Cancer  Research  Institute)  engaged  in  an  extensive  study  on  the  medical  effects
of  total-body  irradiation.  As  part  of  this  study,  the  researchers  attempted  to  treat  a
few  radioresistant  carcinomas.  When  they  published  their  results  in  1942,  they
noted  that  "[e]xcept  for  transient  relief  of  pain  in  a  few  cases,  the  results  in
generalized  carcinoma  cases  were  discouraging.  The  reason  for  this  is  quickly
apparent.  Carcinomas  are  much  more  radioresistant  than  the  lymphomatoid
tumors,  and  by  total  body  irradiation  the  dose  cannot  be  nearly  large  enough  to
alter  these  tumors  appreciably."  They  cautioned  that  a  cancer-killing  dose  "will
produce  deleterious  reactions  in  the  bone  marrow  and  general  metabolism  which
may  prove  lethal  to  the  patient."12  The  equipment  used  to  deliver  the  TBI  during
this  time  was  suboptimal  because  most  of  the  radiation  was  deposited  in


371


Part  II

superficial  structures  such  as  the  skin  and  other  soft  tissues.

During  World  War  II,  Memorial  Hospital  was  one  of  three  medical
institutions  chosen  by  the  Health  Division  of  the  Manhattan  Project's
"Metallurgical  Project"  to  conduct  TBI  experiments  in  order  to  help  understand
the  effects  of  radiation;  the  other  two  were  the  Chicago  Tumor  Institute13  and  the
University  of  California  Hospital.14  All  three  studies  focused  on  individuals  with
radioresistant  diseases.  From  the  limited  records  that  are  currently  available,  it
appears  that  these  three  studies  achieved  little,  if  any,  medical  benefit  to  subjects.
In  addition,  the  interest  of  the  military  in  these  studies  was  classified  and  kept
secret  from  the  patients  in  order  not  to  reveal  the  ongoing  atomic  bomb  project.

The  first  experiment  was  carried  out  from  1942  to  1946  at  the  University
of  California  Hospital  in  San  Francisco  to  "study  the  effects  of  total-body
irradiation  with  x-rays  of  varying  energy  on  hematologically  normal
individuals."15  Twenty-nine  patients  were  treated  with  total  dosages  ranging  from
100  to  300  R  (using  a  250-KV  machine).  The  investigators  noted  that  the
"treatments  were  administered  as  part  of  the  normal  therapy  of  these  patients"  and
reported  that  "advantage  was  taken  of  the  fact  that  patients  were  receiving  such
treatment  by  making  numerous  blood  studies  for  the  Manhattan  Project.""'  Little
is  known,  for  this  and  the  other  two  studies,  about  the  treatment  of  the  patients  or
the  issue  of  patient  consent.  A  number  of  the  patients  in  the  University  of
California  study  had  rheumatoid  arthritis,  and  the  use  of  TBI  for  that  disease  was
severely  criticized  after  the  war  by  the  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and
Medicine  of  the  newly  formed  Atomic  Energy  Commission  (see  below).17  In
1948  Dr.  Robert  Stone,  chief  of  the  Manhattan  Project's  Metallurgical  Laboratory
Health  Division,  noted  that  although  "no  signed  consent  was  received  from  the
patient ...  the  treatment  was  explained  to  them  by  the  physicians  and  they,  in  full
knowledge  of  the  facts,  accepted  the  treatments."  At  the  same  time,  however,  it
was  admitted  that  "the  fact  that  Manhattan  District  was  interested  in  the  effects  of
total  body  irradiation  was  kept  a  secret."18

A  second  Manhattan  Project  experiment  was  performed  from  December
1942  to  August  1944  at  Memorial  Hospital  in  New  York  by  one  of  the  researchers
who  had  previously  written  that  they  were  "discouraged"  by  the  use  of  TBI  for
radioresistant  cancers~Dr.  L.  F.  Craver.19  Despite  his  earlier  negative  results,
eight  patients  were  given  a  total  of  300  R  (using  a  250-KV  machine),  at  various
dose  rates,  in  order  "to  yield  some  detectable  effects  on  the  blood  count  and  to
serve  as  a  guide  to  the  clinical  tolerance  for  whole-body  irradiation."20  The
patients  had  to  have

metastatic  cancer  of  such  an  extent  and  distribution
as  to  render  their  cases  totally  unsuitable  for  any
accepted  method  of  surgical  or  radiological
treatment,  yet . . .  be  in  good  enough  general
condition  so  that  they  might  be  expected  not  only  to

372


Chapter  8

tolerate  the  exposure  to  300  R  of  total-body
irradiation  in  a  period  often  to  thirty  days,  but  also
to  survive  the  combined  effects  of  their  disease  and
the  irradiation  for  at  least  six  months  in  order  that
some  conclusions  might  be  drawn  as  to  the  later
effects  of  the  irradiation.21

The  report  on  this  experiment  makes  clear  that  the  primary  purpose  of  this  TBI
was  to  obtain  data  for  the  military.  Dr.  Craver  essentially  acknowledged  that
there  was  little  prospect  of  actual  medical  benefit  to  the  patients  in  light  of  the
previous  failure  using  the  same  procedure.22

A  third  TBI  study  involving  fourteen  people  was  performed  at  the  Chicago
Tumor  Clinic  from  March  1943  to  November  1944;  doses  up  to  120  R  were  given
with  a  250-KV  machine.23  None  of  these  individuals  had  radiosensitive  cancers.
The  use  of  TBI  was  justified  by  the  investigators  because  there  were  no  known
treatments  for  their  illnesses,  and  therefore,  "x-ray  exposures  that  were  given  were
as  likely  to  benefit  the  patient  as  any  other  known  type  of  treatment,  or  perhaps
even  more  likely  than  any  other."24  This  study  appears  to  be  the  only  TBI  study
that  included  healthy  subjects:  three  "normals"  were  each  given  three  doses  of  7  R.

After  the  war,  Dr.  Stone  took  on  the  task  of  editing  an  official  history  of
the  experiments  done  for  the  plutonium  project.  At  one  point,  he  complained  to
Dr.  Shields  Warren,  chief  of  the  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine
(DBM),  that  declassifies  were  withholding  the  report  of  the  Chicago  TBI
experiment  on  grounds  that  its  release  would  cause  "adverse  publicity  and  even
encourage  litigation."25  Stone  proposed  to  solve  the  problems  by  carefully
rewording  the  report.  The  report  would  make  clear  that  the  patients  were
suffering  from  incurable  illnesses  for  which  radiation  was  as  good,  if  not  better
than,  any  other  known  treatment.  Stone  then  proposed  to  deflect  the  likelihood  of
adverse  publicity  or  litigation  by  deleting  identifying  information  so  that  the
patients  could  never  "connect  themselves  up  with  the  report."26  The  study  was
declassified  and  published  in  the  form  that  Stone  proposed.27

At  about  the  same  time  in  the  fall  of  1948,  Dr.  Alan  Gregg,  chairman  of
the  AEC's  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine  (ACBM),  engaged
Stone  in  an  exchange  regarding  the  Manhattan  Project  TBI  experiment  on  the
arthritic  patients  at  the  University  of  California  Hospital.  Stone,  who  by  this  time
had  returned  to  the  staff  of  the  UC  Hospital,  had  requested  funding  to  monitor
these  arthritic  patients.  Gregg  told  Stone  that  "I  think  that  I  do  not  misrepresent
the  opinion  of  the  Advisory  Committee  [for  Biology  and  Medicine]  in  saying  that
we  agree  with  those  who  believe  the  x-ray  treatment  of  arthritic  patients  you  have
been  giving  patients  is  not  justified."28  (Despite  Dr.  Gregg's  concerns,  the  role  of
TBI  in  the  treatment  of  benign  autoimmune  diseases  such  as  rheumatoid  arthritis
continues  to  be  explored  today.29)  Gregg  stated  that  the  AEC  had  an  obligation  to
provide  a  check  on  overly  enthusiastic  researchers.  While  admitting  that  a

373


Part  II

conservative  consensus  against  certain  treatments  is  not  always  correct,  Gregg
cautioned  that  "there  is  plenty  of  experience  that  shows  that  some  forms  of
therapy  attract  enthusiastic  supporters  only  to  be  discarded  later  as  unsafe  or
unjustified."30

In  response,  Stone  acknowledged  that  the  military's  need  for  worker  safety
information  during  the  war  was  a  primary  motivation  for  choosing  patients  with
nonradiosensitive  carcinomas  and  some  benign  disorders  such  as  arthritis.  "At
that  time  I  was  confronted  with  the  problem  of  building  up  the  morale  of  the
workers  on  the  new  atomic  bomb  project,  many  of  whom  were  seriously  worried
about  the  effects  of  prolonged  whole  body  irradiation."  But  he  countered  that  he
and  the  other  researchers  did  believe  that  the  total-body  irradiation  would  be
therapeutic.  Moreover,  Stone  retorted,  Gregg's  statements  threatened  researcher
and  doctor  freedom:  "Wittingly  or  otherwise  you  have  dictated  how  I  should  treat
patients  even  outside  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission's  supported  activities."31
Stone's  declaration  marked  a  boundary  that  government  officials  (including
Stone's  fellow  medical  researchers)  would  not  be  eager  to  cross.

RENEWED  INTEREST  IN  TOTAL-BODY  IRRADIATION

In  1949  AEC  and  Defense  Department  planners  were  seeking  information
on  the  human  effects  of  a  nuclear  reactor-powered  airplane.  The  proponents  of
the  so-called  NEPA  project,32  which  at  the  time  was  managed  out  of  Oak  Ridge
by  the  Fairchild  Engine  and  Airplane  Corporation  on  behalf  of  the  Air  Force  and
the  AEC,  needed  to  know  how  much  external  radiation  air  crews  could  tolerate.
This  question  was  critical  because,  depending  upon  the  answer,  the  shielding
needed  to  separate  the  crew  from  the  aircraft's  nuclear  reactor  might  render  the
project  impractical.

Those  involved  with  the  NEPA  project  were  primarily  interested  in  the
acute  effects  of  total-body  exposure  over  a  relatively  short  time  (although  they
were  also  concerned  about  long-term  effects  of  radiation  on  longevity  and
reproduction).  It  was  anticipated  that  NEPA  pilots  would  be  exposed  to  as  much
as  25  roentgens  in  the  course  of  a  twenty-four-hour  flight.  How  would  this
amount  of  radiation  affect  the  crew's  abilities  to  fly  the  plane  and  perform  their
tactical  military  function?  How  many  such  missions  could  a  crew  endure  before
being  incapacitated  for  flight  duty,  as  well  as  facing  a  significant  risk  of
developing  a  life-shortening  disease?

In  early  1949,  the  NEPA  Medical  Advisory  Committee  was  created  to
research  the  questions  noted  above  and  to  advise  on  the  project.  Dr.  Andrew
Dowdy  of  UCLA  was  the  chairman.33  Dr.  Robert  Stone  was  chosen  to  head  a
human  experiment  subcommittee.  At  an  April  3,  1949,  meeting,  Stone  proposed
to  the  full  committee  a  program  of  experimentation  using  total-body  irradiation  on
healthy  subjects.  In  defense  of  this  proposal.  Stone  noted  that  experimentation
with  normal  human  subjects  had  been  done  in  the  past  when  there  was  no  other

374


Chapter  8

way  to  obtain  necessary  data.  At  the  same  time,  however,  Stone  discounted  the
value  of  the  TBI  research  that  had  been  performed  on  sick  patients.34  As
Brigadier  General  James  P.  Cooney,  representing  the  AEC's  Division  of  Military
Applications,  put  it,  "We  have  lots  of  cases  of  whole  body  radiation  treatments,
but  all  of  them  in  patients  and  we  have  no  controls  and  we  don't  have  anything  we
can  put  our  finger  on. .  .  .  Most  of  this  work  was  unsatisfactory  because  the  data
was  poor."35  However,  Shields  Warren  was  not  persuaded  that  experiments  on
healthy  men  would  provide  any  more  useful  information  and  was  concerned  about
the  long-term  health  consequences.  Warren  noted  that  "[i]t  was  not  very  long
since  we  got  through  trying  Germans  for  doing  exactly  the  same  thing."36
Nonetheless,  General  Cooney  argued  that  even  if  the  data  would  not  be
statistically  valid,  "psychologically  it  would  make  a  lot  of  difference  to  the  soldier
if  we  were  able  to  tell  him  that  various  doses  of  total-body  irradiation  were  given
to  a  group  of  people  and  here  are  the  effects  that  were  discerned."37

As  we  have  seen  in  earlier  chapters,  the  question  of  medical  ethics  was
considered  by  the  NEPA  discussants.  Stone  urged  that  the  committee  approve
TBI  human  experimentation  in  accordance  with  three  basic  principles  of  the  1946
American  Medical  Association  Judicial  Council:  (1)  "the  voluntary  consent  of
the  person  on  whom  the  experiment  is  to  be  performed  must  be  obtained";  (2)  "the
danger  of  each  experiment  must  have  been  previously  investigated  by  animal
experimentation";  and  (3)  "the  experiment  must  be  performed  under  proper
medical  protection  and  management."38  Shields  Warren  added  that  the
experiments  should  be  unclassified,  so  that  there  would  be  "no  suspicion  that
anything  is  being  hidden  or  covered  up,  that  it  is  all  being  done  openly  and
straightforwardly."39  MIT's  Robley  Evans  responded  that  "we  don't  have  to
advertise  it,  but  at  the  same  time  it  doesn't  have  to  be  concealed,  as  Dr.  Shields
Warren  has  said."40  Dr.  Hymer  Friedell  raised  the  question  of  whether  decisions
on  these  issues  could  be  made  by  doctors  alone:  "I  am  just  wondering  whether
someone  else  ought  not  to  hold  the  bag  along  with  us  with  regard  to  making  such
a  recommendation.  Previously  in  medical  experiments  the  physicians  and  doctors
have  made  such  recommendations  because  the  problem  was  primarily  a  medical
one.  I  think  this  is  something  larger  than  that.  It  is  really  not  a  medical  problem
alone.  It  has  to  do  with  how  critical  this  is  with  regard  to  the  safety  of  the
nation."41

In  January  1 950,  the  NEPA  Medical  Advisory  Board  recommended,  with
the  exception  of  one  member  (not  named),  that  human  experimentation  be
conducted.42  Dr.  Stone  then  prepared  a  January  1950  paper  on  "Irradiation  of
Human  Subjects  as  a  Medical  Experiment"  to  be  presented  to  the  DOD's
Research  and  Development  Board  (RDB).  The  paper  explained  that  as  long  as
they  kept  doses  below  1 50  R,  the  chances  of  long-term  effects  such  as  "leukemia
could  be  entirely  ruled  out."43  (This  assertion  would  prove  to  be  inaccurate;
subsequent  epidemiological  research  has  shown  that  radiation  doses  at  such  levels
will  produce  approximately  a  sevenfold  increase  in  leukemia  risk  and  a  doubling

375


Part  II

in  the  risk  of  many  other  cancers.)44  Accordingly,  the  experiments  were  designed
only  to  analyze  the  acute  effects  of  radiation.  Stone  extolled  the  "inestimable
value"  that  would  come  from  being  able  to  tell  pilots  that  "normal  human  beings
had  been  voluntarily  exposed  without  untoward  effects  to  larger  doses  than  they
would  receive  while  carrying  out  a  particular  mission."  Stone  then  described  a
"plan  of  attack,"  in  which  he  would  start  with  25  R  total-body  irradiation  and  then
gradually  increase  the  dose  to  50  R,  100  R,  and  150  R  if  no  immediate  effects
were  seen.45

The  RDB's  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare  met  in
March  1950  and  endorsed  the  NEPA  recommendations  in  Stone's  paper.46  From
there,  the  issue  was  debated  by  the  RDB's  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences  (CMS)
in  May  1950.  When  one  committee  member  asked  whether  "you  can  get  answers
from  people  subjected  to  radiation  therapy  usually  by  reason  of  neoplastic
disorders"  as  an  alternative  to  experiments  on  healthy  persons,  Dr.  Stone
responded  that  it  might  be  possible,  but  only  if  the  patients  had  radioresistant
cancers:  "you  can't  pick  lymphomas,  but  [rather]  carcinomas  [sic]  types  of
metastases"47~the  death  of  lymphoma  cells  would  release  quantities  of  unknown
biologic  chemicals  and  complicate  the  data  collection.

The  Defense  Department  shied  away  from  making  a  final  decision  and
instead  deferred  the  matter  to  the  AEC  on  the  grounds  that  NEPA  involved
"civilian"  as  well  as  military  problems.  Accordingly,  the  AEC  appointed  another
panel  of  experts,  who  met  in  Washington,  D.C.,  on  December  8,  1950.4S  This  ad
hoc  "biological  and  medical  committee,"  which  included  a  number  of  participants
in  the  DOD's  NEPA  advisory  committee,  addressed  four  questions:

•  Assume  that  troops  are  acutely  exposed  to  penetrating  ionizing
radiation  (gamma  rays).  At  what  dosage  level  will  they  become
ineffective  as  troops?

•  What  dosage  will  render  an  air  crew  .  .  .  unable  to  complete  a
mission  during  a  flight  of  one  to  three,  four  to  twelve,  and  twelve
to  forty-eight  hours?

•  How  often  may  an  aircraft  crew  accept  an  exposure  of  25  R  per
mission  and  still  be  a  reasonable  risk  for  subsequent  missions?

•  A  submarine  crew  are  receiving  25  R  per  mission.  How  many
missions  should  they  be  allowed  to  make?49

This  group  of  experts  concluded,  somewhat  in  contrast  to  Stone,  that  the
acute  effects  of  doses  of  150  R  or  more  would  pose  "grave  risks"  of  rapidly
making  troops  "ineffective  as  fighting  units,"  but  that  doses  held  below  75
roentgens  should  be  "unimportant  in  determining  the  success  of  a  mission

376


Chapter  8

provided  the  crew  members  had  not  previously  received  an  appreciable  amount  of
radiation."  (Current  reports  suggest  that  tolerance  levels  for  acute  effects  may  be
a  little  higher,  and  that  a  dose  of  125  rad  (approximately  200  roentgens)  would
cause  vomiting  in  approximately  30  percent  of  those  exposed  within  twenty-four
hours,  and  200  rad  would  cause  vomiting  in  50  percent.)50  They  also  said  that  air
and  submarine  crews  could  withstand  eight  missions  of  25  roentgens,  but  that
cumulative  doses  of  more  than  200  roentgens  could  "substantially  reduce  the  life
expectancy  of  the  irradiated  individual."  The  ad  hoc  committee  based  these
conclusions  on  "the  results  of  extensive  animal  experiments,  the  response  of
patients  treated  for  disease  by  X-ray  and  radium,  observations  on  the  effect  of
radiations  from  the  atomic  bombs  detonated  over  the  Japanese  cities  of  Hiroshima
and  Nagasaki,  and  accidental  exposures  within  the  Manhattan  Project  and  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission."51  Accordingly,  this  committee  found  that
additional  human  experimentation  was  not  needed  to  come  up  with  reasonable
answers.

Dr.  Joseph  Hamilton,  a  Manhattan  Project  physician  involved  with  the
plutonium  injections,  was  unable  to  attend  the  December  8  meeting  and  sent  a
note  to  Shields  Warren  explaining  his  views:

For  both  politic  and  scientific  reasons,  I  think  it
would  be  advantageous  to  secure  what  data  can  be
obtained  by  using  large  monkeys  such  as
chimpanzees  which  are  somewhat  more  responsive
than  the  lower  animals.  Scientifically,  the  use  of
such  animals  bears  the  disadvantage  of  the  fact  that
they  are  considerably  smaller  than  most  adult
humans  and  a  critical  evaluation  of  their  subjective
symptoms  is  infinitely  more  difficult.  If  this  is  to  be
done  in  humans,  I  feel  that  those  concerned  in  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission  would  be  subject  to
considerable  criticism,  as  admittedly  this  would
have  a  little  of  the  Buchenwald  touch.  The
volunteers  should  be  on  a  freer  basis  than  inmates
of  a  prison.  At  this  point,  I  haven't  any  very
constructive  ideas  as  to  where  one  would  turn  for
such  volunteers  should  this  plan  be  put  into
execution.52

Following  the  ad  hoc  committee's  conclusion,  the  AEC's  Division  of
Biology  and  Medicine,  headed  by  Shields  Warren,  declared  "that  human
experimentation  at  the  present  time  is  not  indicated."  Moreover,  the  AEC  also
stated  that  such  experiments  "would  have  serious  repercussions  from  a  public
relations  standpoint,  particularly  if  undertaken  by  an  agency  that  has  to  do  a

377


Part  II

portion  of  its  work  in  secret."  If  data  were  needed,  the  DBM  concluded,  they
could  be  obtained  from  the  sources  cited  by  the  ad  hoc  committee.53  The  AEC
position  spelled  the  end  of  the  DOD's  request  to  do  radiation  exposure
experiments  on  healthy  people,  and  roughly  coincident  with  the  rejection  of  this
proposal,  the  DOD  contracted  to  gather  data  from  cancer  patients  receiving  TBI
treatments.

POSTWAR  TBI-EFFECTS  EXPERIMENTATION:
CONTINUED  RELIANCE  ON  SICK  PATIENTS  IN  PLACE  OF
HEALTHY  "NORMALS"

In  October  1950,  the  Air  Force  entered  into  a  contract  with  the  M.  D.
Anderson  Hospital  for  Cancer  Research  in  Houston,  Texas,  to  provide  the  DOD
with  data  obtained  from  TBI  studies  on  cancer  patients.  Dr.  Shields  Warren,  who
seemed  to  oppose  human  experimentation  on  healthy  persons  during  the  NEPA
debates,  did  not  appear  to  have  any  misgivings  about  this  project.54  By  the  end  of
that  decade,  the  DOD  would  have  several  contracts  with  TBI  researchers.  When,
in  1959,  a  DOD  newsletter  announced  the  renewal  of  a  TBI  contract  between  the
Army  and  the  Sloan-Kettering  Institute  in  New  York,  readers  were  told:  "It  is
hoped  to  make  this  work  [by  Sloan-Kettering]  as  well  as  the  work  of  Baylor
University  College  of  Medicine  and  University  of  Cincinnati  a  complete  program
to  provide  us  with  answers  on  the  human  whole  body  radiation  effects."55  The
Navy  also  conducted  TBI-related  research  in  conjunction  with  patient  treatments
at  the  Naval  Hospital  in  Bethesda,  Maryland.  All  five  of  these  studies  used  TBI
on  many  patients  with  radioresistant  cancers. 5('  In  contrast,  physicians  at  the
AEC's  hospital  in  Oak  Ridge  operated  by  the  Oak  Ridge  Institute  of  Nuclear
Studies  (ORINS),  a  university-based  consortium,  chose  to  perform  TBI  only  on
patients  with  radiosensitive  diseases.  In  each  project,  the  research  institutions
accepted  the  dual  purposes  of  treating  the  patients'  illnesses  and  collecting  and
analyzing  postexposure  information  for  the  military.

The  DOD-funded  experiments  would  seek  to  address  the  three  main
questions  the  military  wanted  answered:  How  do  different  doses  of  radiation
correlate  with  the  acute  effects?  How  do  different  doses  of  radiation  influence
psychological  effects?  And  most  important,  is  there  a  way  to  find  a  biological
dosimeter  to  measure  how  much  radiation  someone  has  received?  The  military
was  also  interested  in  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  radiation  injuries.  One
reviewer  of  the  initial  Cincinnati  proposal  described  the  interest  in  finding  a
biological  dosimeter:  if  "accurate  knowledge  of  the  total  dose  of  radiation
received  could  be  determined  it  would  be  of  inestimable  value  in  case  of  atomic
disaster  or  nuclear  warfare."57

When  the  DOD  contracted  with  medical  professionals  to  perform
additional  research  on  their  patients  receiving  TBI,  it  is  not  clear  whether
department  officials  believed  that  the  TBI  itself  should  be  covered  by  the  ethical

378


Chapter  8

standards  being  established  for  "human  experimentation"  following  the
Nuremberg  trials.  For  example,  in  the  NEPA  debates,  Dr.  Robert  Stone
distinguished  experiments,  which  involved  healthy  persons  such  as  the  prisoners,
from  studies,  which  involved  sick  patients. 5*  Did  Stone  mean  by  this  that  patients
receiving  treatment  did  not  need  to  give  informed  consent,  while  healthy  subjects
should?  The  AEC,  for  example,  took  the  view  that  the  consent  standards  should
apply  to  patients.  Indeed,  as  we  saw  in  chapter  1,  AEC  General  Manager  Carroll
Wilson  wrote  in  a  1 947  letter  to  Robert  Stone  that  "the  patient  [must]  give  his
complete  and  informed  consent  in  writing."59

In  1953,  Secretary  of  Defense  Charles  Wilson  issued  a  memo  establishing
the  Nuremberg  Code  as  DOD  policy.  The  Wilson  memo  required  that  all
experimental  subjects  sign  a  statement  that  explained  "the  nature,  duration,  and
purpose  of  the  experiment;  the  method  and  means  by  which  it  is  to  be  conducted;
all  inconveniences  and  hazards  reasonably  to  be  expected;  and  effects  upon  his
health  or  person  which  may  possibly  come  from  his  participation  in  the
experiment."  Unlike  the  AEC's  1947  pronouncements,  the  1953  Wilson  memo
did  not  explicitly  refer  to  patients.  In  addition,  if  DOD  officials  believed  that  the
experiments  they  were  sponsoring  did  not  include  the  administration  of  the
radiation,  but  only  the  collection  of  postradiation  biochemical  and  psychological
data,  then  they  might  have  interpreted  the  Wilson  memo  as  applying  only  to  the
postexposure  testing,  not  to  the  radiation  treatments.

Although  the  Wilson  memo  was  classified,  its  requirements  were
reiterated  by  the  surgeon  general  of  the  Army  in  a  1 954  document  that  was
transmitted  to  at  least  some  university  contract  researchers.  The  Committee  found
no  evidence  that  this  memo  was  transmitted  to  the  TBI  contractors  in  particular.
As  discussed  in  chapter  1,  in  1952  Congress  had  passed  legislation  that  provided
for  Defense  Department  indemnification  of  private  contract  researchers  in  cases
where  human  experiments  resulted  in  injury  to  subjects.60  As  we  have  seen,  the
DOD  appears  to  have  linked  the  requirements  of  this  statute  to  contractor
adherence  to  the  principles  stated  by  the  1 954  Army  surgeon  general  memo,
including  written  consent  of  the  subject.  For  example,  in  a  March  1957  letter  to
the  University  of  Pittsburgh,  which  was  proposing  to  use  medical  student-
volunteers  in  a  (nonradiation)  experiment,  the  Army  stated  that  the
indemnification  provision  in  the  contract  was  "contingent  upon  your  adhering  to
the  following  [March  1954  Office  of  the  Surgeon  General]  principles,  policies,
and  rules  for  the  use  of  human  volunteers  in  performing  subject  medical  research
contracts."61  Although  this  indemnification  provision  was  in  the  contract  of  at
least  one  of  the  five  institutions  that  conducted  DOD-sponsored  TBI-effects
research,62  no  available  information  indicates  that  its  inclusion  demanded
adherence  to  the  principles  set  forth  by  the  surgeon  general.  Nonetheless,  at  least
three  of  the  institutions  had  written  forms  authorizing  the  radiation  treatment
procedure,  although  the  forms  did  not  explicitly  spell  out  all  of  the  risks  and


379


Part  II

benefits  of  the  additional  experiments.  This  chapter  will  now  review  what  is
known  about  the  five  DOD-sponsored  experiments.

M.  D.  Anderson  Hospital  (Houston,  Texas)

The  Air  Force's  School  of  Aviation  Medicine  (SAM)  contract  with  M.  D.
Anderson  Hospital  for  Cancer  Research,  in  association  with  the  University  of
Texas  Medical  School,  declared  that  the  Air  Force  was  willing  to  use  sick  patients
for  the  needed  data  because  "human  experimentation"  had  been  prohibited  by  the
military:

The  most  direct  approach  to  this  information  would
be  by  human  experiment  in  specifically  designed
radiation  studies;  however,  for  several  important
reasons,  this  has  been  forbidden  by  top  military
authority.  Since  the  need  is  pressing,  it  would
appear  mandatory  to  take  advantage  of  investigation
opportunities  that  exist  in  certain  radiology  centers
by  conducting  special  examinations  and  measures
of  patients  who  are  undergoing  radiation  treatment
for  disease.  While  the  flexibility  of  experimental
design  in  a  radiological  clinic  will  necessarily  be
limited,  the  information  that  may  be  gained  from
the  studies  of  patients  is  considered  potentially
invaluable;  furthermore,  this  is  currently  the  sole
source  of  human  data.63

The  M.  D.  Anderson  TBI-effects  study  extended  from  1951  to  1956  and
involved  263  cancer  patients.64  M.  D.  Anderson  had  a  well-established  and
ongoing  radiation  treatment  program.  The  project  began  at  the  same  time  that  M.
D.  Anderson  received  the  first  cobalt  60  teletherapy  unit  developed  by  the  AEC's
Oak  Ridge  Institute  of  Nuclear  Studies  (ORINS).  The  M.  D.  Anderson  study
involved  three  phases  beginning  with  low  doses— 15  to  75  R— and  gradually
increasing  to  a  maximum  of  200  R.  The  patients  in  the  first  group  were  "in  such  a
state  that  cure  or  at  least  definite  palliation  could  still  be  expected  from  established
methods  of  treatment  [in  addition  to  the  TBI]."65  Based  on  these  results,  the
researchers  then  moved  to  the  second  phase,  which  involved  doses  ranging  from
1 00  to  200  R.  The  researchers  noted  that  this  greater  possible  risk  necessitated
"the  selection  of  patients  whose  disease  had  advanced  to  such  a  state  that,  in
general,  significant  benefit  could  not  be  expected  from  conventional  procedures
other  than  systemic  ones."66

The  final  phase  involved  thirty  patients,  all  of  whom  had  radioresistant
carcinomas  for  which  "cure  by  conventional  means  was  regarded  as  completely

380


Chapter  8

hopeless."67  These  thirty  received  the  highest  doses,  200  R,  and  reportedly  "knew
about  the  advanced  state  of  their  disease  and  the  experimental  nature  and  possible
risks  of  the  proposed  radiotherapy."68  The  Advisory  Committee  has  found  no
written  documentation  on  what  types  of  risks  were  described  to  and  understood
by  these  patients.  Beginning  in  1953,  patients  signed  a  release  form  authorizing
the  physicians  to  administer  "x-ray  therapy,  radium  and  radioactive  isotopes, .  . .
which  in  their  judgment  they  deem  necessary  or  advisable,  in  the  diagnosis  and
treatment  of  this  patient."69  This  form  was  designed  apparently  to  waive  legal
liability,  but  did  not  inform  the  patient  of  the  risks  and  benefits  of  treatment  and
thus  did  not  meet  the  other  requirements  established  by  the  1953  Wilson  memo.

With  respect  to  the  biomedical  findings,  a  1954  Air  Force  review  noted
that  M.  D.  Anderson  had  obtained  positive  preliminary  results  by  finding  a
biological  dosimeter  in  the  blood.  However,  one  of  the  reviewers  commented  that
because  "the  patients  were  not  normal  people  the  changes  could  very  well  be  the
effect  of  the  radiation  on  the  abnormal  tissue."70  The  review  noted  that  an  effort
earlier  in  the  study  to  find  a  marker  in  patients  who  received  repetitive  small
doses  of  radiation,  similar  to  what  might  occur  on  repeated  NEPA  flights,  was  not
successful;  accordingly,  the  researchers  looked  for  it  in  patients  who  received
larger  doses  in  single  exposures.7'

An  additional  aspect  of  the  M.  D.  Anderson  study  was  the  mental  and
psychomotor  tests  that  most  of  the  patients  were  subjected  to  before  and  after
receiving  TBI.  (The  patients  reportedly  participated  "by  their  own  consent  and
judgment  of  the  hospital  staff."72)  They  performed  three  tests  related  to  the  skills
required  for  piloting  aircraft.  But  the  value  of  testing  the  abilities  of  extremely  ill
patients  as  a  measure  for  the  performance  of  highly  fit  pilots  was  doubtful  to  the
Air  Force.73  In  an  attempt  to  lessen  this  problem,  the  investigators  sought
outpatients  who  were  in  reasonably  good  physical  and  mental  condition.74
Nonetheless,  because  patients  received  TBI  radiation  doses  according  to  the
severity  of  their  disease  rather  than  from  an  arbitrary  experimental  protocol,  there
was  difficulty  in  determining  whether  the  performance  changes  noted  resulted
from  the  underlying  disease  or  the  radiation.75

The  M.  D.  Anderson  researchers  found  medical  benefit  in  three  of  thirty
patients  who  received  200  R:76  "200  [roentgens]  whole-body  x-irradiation
produced  a  definite  transitory  amelioration  of  the  disease  in  3  cases,  and  a
questionable  improvement  in  several  additional  patients."77  The  study  concluded
that  "the  threshold  dose,  beyond  which  in  a  small  percentage  of  patients  severe
complications  begin  to  appear,  lies  somewhere  between  150  and  200  r."7S  This
conclusion  seems  to  have  moved  the  threshold  tolerance  level  for  acute  effects
slightly  higher  than  the  1950  level;  at  that  time  the  AEC's  ad  hoc  NEPA
committee  had  decided  that  doses  above  150  R  would  pose  "grave  risks"  to
troops.

There  is  very  little  information  concerning  subject  selection.  It  appears
that  many  of  the  patients  were  indigent  members  of  minorities,  although  no

381


Part  II

information  is  available  to  determine  whether  the  ratio  of  minorities  differed  in
relation  to  the  general  hospital  population.  In  the  context  of  an  Air  Force
discussion  about  the  costs  of  the  study,  one  report  noted  that  "there  is  some  racial
problems  [sic]  involved  with  colored  patients  and  the  colored  out-patient
maintenance  facilities  were  located  in  another  part  of  the  city  and,  therefore,  it
would  be  difficult  to  have  them  transported  back  and  forth  to  the  hospital  for
testing. . . .  Colonel  McGraw  stated  that  if  we  are  paying  for  the  maintenance  of
indigents  of  the  State  of  Texas  with  research  funds,  and  the  State  is  also  paying
for  the  maintenance  of  those  patients,  there  could  be  some  difficulty. . .  ,"79
Another  report  stated  that  "language  barriers,  both  of  degree  and  kind,"  caused
problems  in  the  testing  of  cognitive  functions  as  part  of  the  psychomotor  study.80

Several  years  later,  researchers  at  the  School  of  Aviation  Medicine  and  the
University  of  Texas  issued  a  report  comparing  the  effects  of  radiation  based  on
TBI  treatment  of  eleven  patients  (most  of  whom  had  radiosensitive  diseases)  with
the  M.  D.  Anderson  group.  The  researchers  used  the  data  to  report  on  the  civil
defense  implications  that  would  result  from  mass  exposures  to  doses  between  150
and  200  R.  They  concluded  that  60  percent  of  the  people  would  experience
varying  degrees  of  disability  from  acute  radiation  sickness  that  would  cause
fatigue,  nausea,  and  vomiting  for  the  first  twenty-four  hours.8 '

TBI-Effects  Studies  at  Baylor  University  College  of  Medicine,  Memorial
Sloan-Kettering  Institute  for  Cancer  Research,  and  the  U.S.  Naval  Hospital
in  Bethesda

Within  a  few  years  after  the  Air  Force's  M.  D.  Anderson  program  began,
the  Army  funded  two  TBI-effects  programs  with  leading  cancer  centers,  both  of
which  appear  to  have  been  using  TBI  to  treat  radioresistant  cancers  even  before
receiving  the  Army  contract.  The  studies  began  before  M.  D.  Anderson  had
published  any  of  its  findings.

From  1954  to  1963,  Baylor  University  College  of  Medicine  in  Houston,
Texas,  performed  TBI  on  1 12  patients  (54  of  whom  had  radioresistant  cancers)
during  the  military  study;  doses  ranged  from  25  to  250  R,  and  a  2-megavolt  (MV)
machine  was  used  in  place  of  a  250-KV  machine  after  the  first  two  years.82  The
principal  researchers,  Drs.  Vincent  Collins  and  Kenneth  Loeffler,  again  sought  a
biological  dosimeter  and  data  on  the  acute  effects  of  radiation.83  The  researchers
noted  that  even  though  a  significant  amount  of  data  had  been  amassed  on
radiation  effects,  no  one  had  been  able  "to  establish  clear  and  dependable
relationships  with  precise  physical  data."84  There  is  no  discussion  of  consent  or
peer  review  in  any  of  the  twelve  available  reports  or  published  papers  currently
available.

The  Baylor  researchers  recognized  the  same  problem  that  confronted  M.  D.
Anderson:  that  seeking  data  from  sick  patients  who  require  therapeutic  TBI
treatments  may  be  in  conflict  with  an  optimal  experimental  design.85  They  also

382


Chapter  8
noted  the  problems  with  giving  "last-resort"  treatment  of  this  kind:

When  patients  are  referred  as  a  "last  resort,"  the
radiotherapist  does  not  wish  to  withhold  treatment
that  may  offer  possible  benefit  but  he  cannot  be
certain  that  the  benefit  will  outweigh  the  risk.  The
risk  is  not  that  the  patient  will  die  but  that  the
undesirable  effects  of  radiation  [i.e.,  bone  marrow
suppression]  will  appear  more  severe  in  the  terminal
cancer  patient  and  that  the  time  of  death  may  be
destined  to  coincide  with  the  undesirable  effects  of
radiation.86

They  concluded  that  for  patients,  radiation  sickness  may  be  avoided  for  doses  up
to  200  R  by  administering  proper  care  (the  researchers  suggested  that  nausea  and
vomiting  for  some  patients  may  have  been  caused  by  the  power  of  suggestion).87
They  then  hypothesized  that  "with  correct  information  and  proper  preparation,
normal  healthy  individuals  could  tolerate  even  higher  exposures  without  undue
incapacitation."88  Efforts  to  find  a  biological  dosimeter  were  said  to  be
unsuccessful  because  the  pool  of  patients  was  too  small  and  many  either  died  or
were  unable  to  tolerate  the  necessary  tests.89

From  1954  to  1961,  Dr.  James  J.  Nickson  of  the  Memorial  Sloan-
Kettering  Institute  for  Cancer  Research  in  New  York  City  performed  TBI  on
more  than  twenty  patients  with  doses  ranging  from  20  to  150  R  and  participated
in  a  DOD  study  on  the  acute  effects  of  radiation  on  humans.c)0  Again,  the  military
aims  were  to  find  a  biological  dosimeter  and  better  understand  the  effects  of
radiation.91  Sloan-Kettering  was  a  leading  U.S.  cancer  research  center  and  had  a
long  history  of  using  and  experimenting  with  TBI.  The  patients  selected  at  Sloan-
Kettering  had  a  variety  of  radioresistant  and  radiosensitive  cancers  and  were  in
"relatively  good  condition."92  However,  patients  with  kidney,  liver,  or  bone
marrow  impairment  were  deliberately  excluded  from  the  study  because  their
conditions  would  "contaminate"  biological  dosimeter  data  (the  record  does  not
indicate  whether  these  patients  who  were  excluded  still  received  TBI).  There  is
no  mention  in  the  currently  available  records  regarding  consent  of  the  patients  or
any  form  of  peer  review  of  the  protocol  or  the  experiments.

Between  1959  and  1960,  the  Navy  treated  seventeen  patients  using  TBI
for  a  variety  of  radioresistant  and  radiosensitive  disorders  at  the  Naval  Hospital  in
Bethesda,  Maryland,  with  a  cobalt  60  teletherapy  unit.93  The  report  on  these
treatments  concluded  that  "total-body  radiation  therapy  in  a  dose  range  of  100-
400  [roentgens]  [air  dose]  appears  to  offer  relatively  safe  and  reasonably  effective
palliative  therapy  for  advanced  radiosensitive  disease."94  There  was  no  equivalent
success  on  the  radioresistant  tumors.  Urine  from  some  of  the  patients  was
collected  and  retained  for  analysis  to  see  if  there  was  any  amino  acid  change  that

383


Part  II

corresponded  to  the  radiation  exposure  received  by  patients,  as  part  of  another
attempt  to  identify  a  biological  dosimeter  in  the  urine.  The  investigators  of  the
urine  study  could  not  find  any  direct  correlation  between  the  dose  of  radiation  and
biochemicals  in  the  urine,  and  they  acknowledged  that  the  poor  state  of  health  of
the  patients,  as  well  as  age,  nutritional  state,  and  renal  function  changes,  may
have  contributed  to  this  problem.95

Surviving  patient  records  indicate  that  the  Naval  Hospital  used  an
authorization  form,  which  states  that  the  patient  "hereby  consents]  to  the
performance  . . .  of  total  body  radiation  therapy.  This  procedure  has  been  fully
explained  to  me  by  a  staff  physician  of  the  Department  of  Radiology."96  There  is
no  information  available  to  determine  if  patient  permission  was  or  was  not  given
for  the  collection  of  urine  for  evaluation  as  a  biological  dosimeter  or  if  the
biological  dosimeter  project  had  any  effect  on  the  patients'  treatment.  Neither  is
any  information  currently  available  on  whether  the  patients  were  informed  about
the  additional  military  research  interest  in  the  project,  or  whether  there  was  any
form  of  review  of  the  project  as  required  by  Navy  procedures.

The  early  postwar  TBI  researchers,  such  as  those  at  M.  D.  Anderson,  may
have  been  enthusiastic  to  test  the  new  cobalt  60  teletherapy  TBI  technology  on
cancers  that  resisted  older  TBI  techniques,  but  by  the  end  of  the  1950s  the  new
technology  did  not  appear  to  be  producing  any  more  favorable  results  on
radioresistant  cancers.  Dr.  Shields  Warren  seemed  to  confirm  this  view  in  a  1959
article  in  Scientific  American;  he  noted  that  "radioresistant  tumors  are  generally
not  treated  with  radiation  because  the  damage  to  surrounding  tissue  is  too  great."97

However,  in  March  1960  the  Defense  Atomic  Support  Agency  (DASA)
sponsored  a  conference  on  the  effects  of  whole-body  radiation  on  humans.  A
DASA  summary  of  the  meeting  reported:  "First,  experience  at  the  dosage  levels
up  to  200  r  indicates  that  man  is  able  to  tolerate  far  greater  radiation  dosages  than
was  predicted  in  the  NEPA  report  of  1949;  second,  there  is  a  need  for
continuation  of  this  work  and,  more  important,  investigation  and  analysis  of  the
radiation  syndrome  in  man  up  to  the  300  r  level,  is  the  next  logical  area  of
study."98  Indeed,  DASA  had  just  signed  a  contract  with  the  University  of
Cincinnati  to  provide  information  on  the  effects  from  these  higher  doses  of  TBI.


384


Chapter  8

The  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine--the  Last  DOD-Sponsored
TBI-Effects  Study

The  University  of  Cincinnati  (Cincinnati)  was  the  last  institution  that  the
Department  of  Defense  contracted  with  to  collect  information  on  radiation  effects
from  patients  exposed  to  total-body  irradiation.  From  1960  to  1971,  Dr.  Eugene
L.  Saenger  and  a  team  of  medical  researchers  from  the  university's  College  of
Medicine  (referred  to  in  this  chapter  as  the  "Cincinnati  doctors")99  conducted  TBI
and  partial-body  irradiation  (PBI)  on  approximately  eighty-eight  cancer  patients.
Cincinnati  was  the  only  nonmilitary  research  institution  in  the  DOD  program  that
did  not  have  preexisting  clinical  experience  with  TBI  therapy.100  It  was  also  the
only  institution  using  TBI  to  focus  almost  exclusively  on  patients  with
radioresistant  cancers  (except  for  three  children  with  Ewing's  sarcoma,  a
childhood  bone  cancer  for  which  widespread  irradiation  is  still  considered  an
accepted  form  of  treatment.)101  The  military  contract  was,  as  before,  to  obtain
more  information  on  the  acute  effects  of  radiation  and  to  find  a  biological
dosimeter.

The  University  of  Cincinnati  experiments  came  to  public  attention  in
1971,  a  time  in  the  national  debate  over  the  Vietnam  War  when  university
associations  with  the  military  were  being  questioned  by  students,  the  press,  and
the  public.  Research  by  Roger  Rapoport,  who  subsequently  wrote  a  book  entitled
The  Great  American  Bomb  Machine,  led  to  a  story  in  the  Washington  Post  on
October  8,  1971,  that  described  the  Department  of  Defense  contract  with  the
University  of  Cincinnati  to  measure  radiation  effects  in  humans.

It  appears  that  by  1971  the  University  of  Cincinnati  was  the  only
remaining  institution  doing  post  TBI-effects  studies  for  the  Department  of
Defense.  The  publicity  prompted  the  University  of  Cincinnati  to  hold  a  news
conference  on  October  11,  1971,  to  explain  its  TBI  program.  The  public  attention
resulted  in  three  investigations  of  the  Cincinnati  experiments,  all  of  which
reported  their  findings  in  January  1972:  (  1)  a  January  3,  1972,  American  College
of  Radiology  report  in  response  to  a  request  by  Senator  Mike  Gravel  (the  ACR
report),102  which  was  generally  supportive  of  the  program;  (2)  a  January  1972  Ad
Hoc  Review  Committee  of  the  University  of  Cincinnati  Report  to  the  Dean  of  the
College  of  Medicine  on  "The  Whole  Body  Radiation  Study  at  the  University  of
Cincinnati"  (the  Suskind  report),103  which  probed  the  facts  and  supported  the
overall  objectives  of  the  study;  and  (3)  a  January  25,  1972,  "Report  to  the  Campus
Community"  of  the  Junior  Faculty  Association  of  the  University  of  Cincinnati
(the  JFA  report),104  which  severely  criticized  the  TBI  program.  Following  these
reviews,  the  president  of  the  University  of  Cincinnati  decided  not  to  renew  the
DOD  contract  in  the  spring  of  1972.  The  use  of  TBI  was  suspended  after  that
time,  and  the  effects  study  was  ended.  As  recently  as  April  1994  in  a
congressional  hearing,  an  ACR  representative  reiterated  its  belief  that  the
Cincinnati  project  was  reasonably  conducted  based  on  the  standards  of  the  time,

385


Part  II

even  if  "one  might  judge  them  harshly  from  a  perspective  20  years  later."105
Because  of  this  public  attention,  a  substantial  number  of  documents
concerning  the  University  of  Cincinnati  experiments  were  preserved,  including
the  original  application  and  subsequent  progress  reports  by  the  researchers  for  the
Department  of  Defense,  records  of  the  Faculty  Committee  on  Research  (the
Cincinnati  IRB)  review  of  a  midcourse  research  protocol,  relevant  medical
literature,  and  certain  patient  medical  records.  In  addition  to  reviewing  these
documents,  the  Advisory  Committee  staff  also  interviewed  Dr.  Eugene  Saenger,
the  principal  investigator  of  the  study;  and  the  Committee  and  staff  met  with  and
heard  from  numerous  patient  family  members  and  other  critics  of  the  Cincinnati
experiments.  The  Advisory  Committee  also  held  a  public  hearing  in  Cincinnati
on  October  21,  1994,  where  more  than  thirty  family  members  and  other  interested
parties  related  their  concerns  about  what  they  believed  was  wrong  with  the
Cincinnati  TBI  experiments,  chiefly  that  informed  consent  was  inadequate.  Other
family  members  have  appeared  before  the  Advisory  Committee  at  another  public
hearing  in  Knoxville,  Tennessee,  and  at  the  Advisory  Committee's  meetings  in
Washington,  D.C.  The  Committee  also  heard  public  testimony  from  Dr.  Bernard
Aron,  a  coresearcher  of  Dr.  Saenger,  and  heard  from  counsel  for  Dr.  Saenger  and
others  involved  in  pending  litigation.

What  Was  the  Purpose  of  the  University  of  Cincinnati  TBI  Program?

The  experimenters  were  supported  by  the  military  to  find  a  biological
dosimeter  and  provide  additional  human  performance  data  of  military  interest.
There  is  no  question  that  the  patients  were  seriously  ill  with  terminal  cancers;
indeed,  many  received  other  forms  of  treatment  in  addition  to  TBI,  including
surgery,  chemotherapy,  and  localized  radiation.  Although  there  is  no  indication
that  the  Defense  Department  had  any  direct  role  in  patient  selection  or  treatment,
there  have  been  questions  raised  publicly  as  to  whether  the  military  interest
influenced  or  at  all  compromised  the  physicians'  willingness  to  objectively
present  reasonable  treatment  options  (including  no  treatment  at  all)  to  these
cancer  patients.  Thus,  the  Advisory  Committee  has  sought  to  determine  what
effect,  if  any,  the  DOD  contract  requirements  had  on  the  actual  treatment  of
patients.

In  1958  Dr.  Saenger  applied  to  the  Department  of  the  Army  for  funding  of
a  research  proposal  entitled  "Metabolic  Changes  in  Humans  Following  Total
Body  Radiation."106  (Dr.  Saenger  had  joined  the  radiology  department  of  the
University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  in  1949  and  became  the  director  of
its  Radioisotope  Laboratory  in  1950,  serving  until  1987.  Before  and  after  starting
the  TBI  program,  he  was  a  consultant  in  radiology  to  the  Army,  the  Air  Force,  the
AEC,  DASA,  and  the  PHS.)107  The  primary  purpose  of  his  proposal  was  to
determine  whether  amino  acids  or  other  biochemicals  in  the  urine  could  "serve  as
an  indicator  of  the  biological  response  of  humans  to  irradiation."108

386


Chapter  8

Later,  the  first  of  approximately  ten  progress  reports  to  DASA  described
the  purpose  of  the  research  program  it  was  funding  as  "to  obtain  new  information
about  the  metabolic  effects  of  total  body  and  partial  body  irradiation  so  as  to  have
a  better  understanding  of  the  acute  and  subacute  effects  of  irradiation  in  the
human."109  The  second  progress  report  added  that  "this  information  is  necessary
to  provide  knowledge  of  combat  effectiveness  of  troops  and  to  develop  additional
methods  of  diagnosis,  prognosis,  prophylaxis  and  treatment  of  these  injuries.""0
The  study  would  focus  generally  on  post-TBI  effects  in  patients  with
radioresistant  carcinomas;  those  with  radiosensitive  lymphomas  and  other
hematological  diseases  were  for  the  most  part  not  included,  with  the  exception  of
the  children  with  Ewing's  sarcoma.1"  Dr.  Saenger  reported  to  DASA  in  1962  that
the  further  studies  would  be  conducted  "so  long  as  the  following  criteria  are
fulfilled:  1.  There  is  a  reasonable  chance  of  therapeutic  benefit  to  the  patient.  2.
The  likelihood  of  damage  to  the  patient  is  no  greater  than  that  encountered  from
comparable  therapy  of  another  type.  3.  The  facilities  for  support  of  the  patient
and  complication  of  treatment  offer  all  possible  medical  services  for  successful
maintenance  of  the  patient's  well  being.""2

Midway  into  the  study,  the  post-TBI-effects  researchers  added  a  program
of  psychological  and  psychiatric  testing,  to  determine  "whether  single  doses  of
whole  or  partial  radiation  produce  any  decrement  in  cognitive  or  other  functions
mediated  through  the  central  nervous  system.""3  They  also  recorded  data  on  the
incidence  of  nausea  and  vomiting  from  radiation.  Within  the  first  three  years,  the
Cincinnati  doctors  reported  to  the  DOD  the  information  that  the  March  1960
DASA  conference  had  sought,  that  "[h]uman  beings  can  tolerate  doses  of  200  rad
(300  r)  relatively  well  as  far  as  combat  effectiveness  is  concerned.""4

In  1973,  two  years  after  their  work  terminated,  the  Cincinnati  doctors
published  a  journal  article  describing  the  purpose  of  their  irradiation  study  as  "to
improve  the  treatment  and  general  clinical  management  and  if  possible  the  length
of  survival  of  patients  with  advanced  cancer.""5  Unfortunately,  no  written
research  protocol  now  exists  for  this  treatment  study,  nor  did  Dr.  Saenger  state
that  they  had  a  written  protocol  while  carrying  out  the  TBI  palliation  treatment
study.  This  lack  of  a  written  protocol  is  consistent  with  the  confusion  doctors  had
at  this  time  (and  to  a  lesser  extent  today)  distinguishing  what  constituted  research
from  what  constituted  innovative  treatments  (see  chapter  2).

The  clinical  objective  of  the  Cincinnati  TBI  treatments  remains  difficult  to
categorize  precisely  even  now.  Dr.  Saenger  stated  in  a  1994  interview  with
Advisory  Committee  staff  that  there  was  no  need  for  an  experimental  treatment
protocol  because  the  TBI  treatments  were  given  as  a  palliative  cancer  therapy  for
people  for  whom  there  was  no  better  alternative."6  In  contrast,  the  Suskind  and
ACR  reports  seem  to  have  assumed  that  the  TBI  treatments  were  experimental;
they  both  describe  them  as  being  in  "Phase  II"  of  a  standard  three-phase
experimental  process."7

Because  the  Cincinnati  doctors  recognized  that  higher  doses  of  TBI  (150

387


Part  II

rad  and  above)  were  causing  severe  bone  marrow  suppression  in  some  of  the
patients,  beginning  in  1963  they  sought  to  develop  countermeasures  through  the
use  of  bone  marrow  transplants.  Over  a  six-year  period,  they  instituted  a  program
to  remove  bone  marrow  from  the  patient  prior  to  the  radiation  and  to  reinfuse  it
afterward  so  as  to  counter  any  deleterious  effect.  In  1 966,  they  submitted  a
protocol  on  bone  marrow  transplantation  to  the  College  of  Medicine's
institutional  review  board,  which  provisionally  approved  it  in  1967.  However,  the
use  of  high-dose  TBI  continued  during  this  time,  with  the  first  successful
transplant  being  administered  in  1 969.

Critics  have  suggested  that  the  irradiation  of  the  patients  who  were
subjects  of  the  Cincinnati  experiments  may  not  have  taken  place  at  all  in  the
absence  of  DOD  funding.  The  TBI  regimen  did  not  begin  until  after  the  DOD
funds  were  secured  in  1960.  The  DOD  provided  a  total  of  $651,482  for  the  TBI-
effects  study.  In  addition  to  the  DOD  funds,  Dr.  Saenger  has  estimated  that  the
hospital  spent  $483,222  on  patient  care."8  Dr.  Saenger  has  stated  that  he  was
very  careful  to  separate  the  DOD  work  from  the  patient  care  and  to  make  sure  that
the  DOD  funding  was  in  no  way  used  for  the  patient  therapy."9  For  this  reason,
he  states  that  he  was  never  personally  involved  in  patient  selection  or  treatment,
in  order  not  to  influence  the  judgment  of  the  attending  physicians.'20

When  asked  if  TBI  treatment  could  have  begun  before  the  DOD  money
arrived,  Dr.  Saenger  said:  "No,  we  had  to,  we  hired  some  people.  We  had
laboratory  equipment  to  set  up It  proceeded  as  one,  as  really  a  sort  of  a  two-
pronged  investigation."121  Dr.  Saenger  stated  that  the  work  for  the  DOD  "started
when  we  started  [administering  TBI]~this  [DOD]  protocol  permitted  us  to  get  a
technique  going  in  trying  to  look  at  whole  body  radiation  in  comparison  with
other  forms  of  palliation."122  Dr.  Saenger  also  said  that  "if  we  had  found  in  the
first  ten  or  twelve  patients  a  clear  biochemical  indicator,  we  possibly  would  have
done  something  else.  We  kept  being  on  the  edge  of  finding  what  we  were  looking
for  so  we  kept  on  treating  the  patients."123

In  the  1 969  proposal  to  renew  the  DOD  contract,  Dr.  Saenger  wrote  that,
in  light  of  "world  tensions  from  the  possibility  of  nuclear  warfare  on  any  scale  .  . .
it  is  necessary  to  pursue  with  increased  diligence  the  scientific  investigations  of
acute  radiation  effects  and  the  attendant  treatment  possibilities  in  the  human
being."  In  outlining  a  plan  to  compare  total-body,  partial-body,  and  trunk  and
thorax  irradiation,  the  proposal  noted  that  in  most  cases  bidirectional  radiation
would  be  used  for  each  of  these  treatments,  but  that  "whenever  possible
unidirectional  radiation  will  be  attempted  since  this  type  of  exposure  is  of  military
interest."124  There  is  no  available  evidence  to  show  that  the  Cincinnati  doctors
ever  actually  used  unidirectional'  radiation.

The  military's  interest  in  the  onset  level  for  the  acute  effects  of  radiation,
such  as  nausea  and  vomiting,  led  the  Cincinnati  doctors  to  intentionally  withhold
from  the  patients,  as  discussed  later  in  the  chapter,  any  premedication  or
information  about  these  effects  for  the  first  three  days  after  irradiation  in  order  not

388


Chapter  8

to  induce  them  via  psychological  suggestions.  No  mention  was  made  of  nausea
or  vomiting  in  any  of  the  consent  forms.

To  the  extent  that  palliation  of  cancer  symptoms  was  the  goal  of  the
Cincinnati  doctors,  TBI  presumably  would  have  been  given  either  as  part  of  a
planned  experimental  protocol  or  as  conventional  clinical  therapy.  If  the  former,
then  the  currently  available  evidence  indicates  rather  poor  scientific  design,  even
by  contemporary  standards;  if  the  latter,  then  the  TBI  treatment  administered  for
the  vast  majority  of  patients  was  nonstandard  therapeutic  practice  for  patients
with  radioresistant  carcinomas  at  that  time.

Institutional  Review

Department  of  Defense

The  Army  Research  and  Development  Command  review  of  Dr.  Saenger's
proposal  in  1958  was  limited  to  an  evaluation  of  the  usefulness  of  the  proposed
work  to  the  military.  One  Army  medical  officer  wrote  that  there  are  "so  few
radiobiologists  in  the  country  willing  to  do  total  body  radiation  that  those  that  are
should  be  encouraged."  The  proposal  should  be  approved  even  though  there  was
"very  little  hope  that  [this  study]  will  result  in  practical  data.  As  is  pointed  out  in
the  proposal,  a  number  of  people  have  looked  at  the  problem  and  the  levels  vary
widely  and  there  appears  to  be  no  consistency.  A  great  deal  of  work  has  been
done  in  animals,  again  without  consistent  findings."  The  reviewer  hoped  that  the
researchers  "will  soon  decide  that  some  other  phase  of  the  radiation  program
should  be  investigated  and  switch  to  this."125

Another  reviewer  noted  that  Saenger's  study  would  "augment  work  being
done  by  Dr.  Collins  at  Baylor  and  the  Sloan-Kettering  Institute  who  are  working
with  humans."126  This  point  was  reiterated  when  the  contract  was  approved,  at
which  point  the  approving  officer  declared  that  "diversification  is  required  to
achieve  adequate  results  in  a  field  of  whole  body  radiations  [sic]  in  humans."127  A
third  reviewer  noted  that  correlating  tumor  response  to  total  dose  of  irradiation
"would  be  of  great  value  in  the  field  of  cancer  . . .  [and]  in  case  of  atomic  disaster
or  nuclear  accident."128

There  is  no  indication  that  the  Army  reviewers  considered  whether  any
therapeutic  benefits  to  the  patients  outweighed  the  risks  that  the  TBI  treatments
might  pose.  These  reviewers  seemed  to  have  based  their  support  for  funding  this
proposal  on  the  military's  need  for  collaborative  researchers  and  the  reputation  of
the  applicant,  rather  than  on  the  substance  of  the  science  within  the  application  or
their  knowledge  of  radiation  therapy  practice  at  that  time.

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  DOD  reviewed  the  treatment  of  the  patients
as  the  study  progressed,  even  though  the  University  of  Cincinnati  appears  to  have
been  the  only  federally  funded  institution  in  the  country  that  was  treating
radioresistant  carcinomas  with  total-body  irradiation  at  that  time.  The  Cincinnati

389


Part  II

doctors  administered  doses  up  to  250  rad,  and  had  indicated  in  their  first  DASA
progress  report  that  they  planned  to  go  up  to  600  rad,129  without  seeming  to  raise
any  concerns  within  the  DOD  contract  office.

University  of  Cincinnati

As  was  customary  at  the  time,  there  was  no  formal  review  of  the  TBI
proposal  within  the  University  of  Cincinnati  when  it  was  initially  submitted  to  the
DOD  in  1958.  The  University  of  Cincinnati  established  an  institutional  review
board,  known  as  the  University  of  Cincinnati  Faculty  Committee  on  Research
(FCR),  in  1964.  (IRBs  were  just  beginning  to  be  formed  at  this  time  and  did  not
become  formalized  in  most  institutions  until  several  years  later,  nor  were  they
required  as  a  condition  of  government  funding  until  1974.)

Subsequent  internal  reviews  by  Cincinnati  committees  raised  several
concerns.  In  March  1966,  Dr.  Saenger  and  a  colleague  submitted  a  protocol
entitled  "Protection  of  Humans  with  Stored  Autologous  Marrow"  to  the
University  of  Cincinnati  FCR.  This  proposal  was  considered  an  adjunct  to  the
TBI  treatments,  which  Saenger  said  he  did  not  consider  an  experiment,  and  was
therefore  not  subject  to  review.130  Some  members  of  the  FCR,  however,  raised
concerns  that  attended  to  the  underlying  TBI  treatments.  These  questions
included  whether  each  patient  was  advised  that  "no  specific  benefit  will  derive  to
him,"  the  need  for  a  more  detailed  description  of  the  potential  hazards,  and
whether  the  irradiation  would  "influence  the  morbidity  or  the  mortality  in  these
patients."131

The  proposal  was  revised  and  resubmitted  on  March  1 967  under  the  title
"The  Therapeutic  Effect  of  Total  Body  Irradiation  Followed  by  Infusion  of  Stored
Autologous  Marrow  in  Humans."  A  five-person  FCR  subcommittee  reviewed
the  proposal.  One  member,  Dr.  George  Shields,  recommended  that  the  study  be
disapproved  because  "the  radiation  proposed  has  been  documented  in  the  author's

own  series  to  cause  a  25%  mortality I  believe  a  25%  mortality  is  too  high,

(25%  of  36  patients  is  9  deaths)  but  this  is  of  course  merely  an  opinion."  Shields
added  that  if  the  study  were  to  be  approved,  then  his  concern  could  be  addressed
by  improving  the  consent  process-that  is,  by  ensuring  that  "all  patients  are
informed  that  a  1  in  4  chance  of  death  within  a  few  weeks  due  to  treatment  exists,
etc."'32  Another  member,  Dr.  Thomas  E.  Gaffney,  initially  recommended
disapproval  for  several  reasons,  including  the  "considerable  morbidity  associated
with  this  high  dose  radiation,"133  but  he  subsequently  recommended  approval
along  with  Dr.  Harvey  Knowles,  Dr.  Edward  Radford,  and  R.  L.  Witt.  The
proposal  was  then  given  "provisional  approval"  on  May  23,  1967.  The
requirements  did  not  include  Shields's  recommendation  on  mortality,  but  did
stipulate  that  "the  protocol  should  be  modified  to  indicate  that  the  exclusive
purpose  of  the  study  is  to  determine  the  therapeutic  efficacy  of  whole  body
irradiation."134  There  is  no  written  evidence  as  to  whether  the  FCR  ever  re-

390


Chapter  8

reviewed  and  approved  the  revised  protocol  or  the  new  consent  forms  that  the
investigators  produced  in  response  to  this  review.

In  1 970,  the  FCR  reexamined  the  bone  marrow  protocol  because  it  had  not
been  reviewed  since  it  received  provisional  approval  in  1967.  Following  two
protocol  revisions  intended  to  meet  the  committee's  concerns,  the  FCR  noted  that
it  still  could  "not  find  adequate  methods  of  evaluation  in  this  study  protocol. .  .  .
The  real  problem  seems  to  be  how  are  we  going  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of
marrow  transplants  in  protecting  against  the  side  effects  of  total  body  irradiation.
Secondly,  how  are  we  going  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  total  body
irradiation."135  Nonetheless,  after  yet  another  revision,  the  protocol  was  approved
on  August  9,  1971.

In  April  1972,  Dr.  Edward  Silberstein,  a  colleague  of  Dr.  Saenger,
submitted  a  protocol  to  the  FCR  entitled  "Evaluation  of  the  therapeutic
effectiveness  of  total  and  partial  body  irradiation  as  compared  to  chemotherapy  in
humans  with  carcinoma  of  the  lung  and  colon."136  This  presumably  was  to  be  the
next  experimental  phase  of  the  ongoing  TBI  work,  for  which  an  NIH  grant  was
also  contemplated.  But  that  same  month,  the  president  of  the  University  of
Cincinnati  refused  to  allow  continued  DOD  funding  for  the  post-TBI  treatment
data  collection  and  analysis  following  the  negative  public  attention  brought  to  the
study.  TBI  was  suspended  pending  FCR  review.  Dr.  Silberstein's  protocol  was
approved  by  the  university's  FCR  in  August  1972  as  a  grant  application  to  the
NIH's  National  Cancer  Institute.137  However,  in  February  1973  the  NIH  elected
not  to  fund  the  proposal.

National  Institutes  of  Health

The  TBI  research  was  incorporated  into  a  general  research  grant  that  the
NIH  funded  beginning  in  1966.  According  to  Dr.  Evelyn  Hess,  chair  of  the  FCR,
writing  in  1971:

Background  to  Grant  Approvals:  This  research  had,
of  course,  been  submitted  to  the  DOD  initially  with
yearly  reports  since  the  initiation  of  the  project.
The  entire  total  body  irradiation  protocol,  including
all  the  therapeutic,  metabolic,  chemical,
hematologic,  immunologic,  and  psychologic  studies
was  incorporated  as  one  of  the  components  for  the
General  Clinical  Research  Center  (GCRC)  grant
submitted  to  the  NIH  in  1966.  There  was  a  site  visit
and  counsel  visit  on  this  grant  application  and  many
aspects  of  the  radiation  project  were  presented  to
the  scientific  review  committees.  This  NIH  grant
was  given  full  approval  and  was  funded.  It  came  up

391


Part  II

for  renewal  in  1970,  and  again  all  aspects  of  the
radiation  study  were  incorporated.  This  grant  also
had  full  approval  by  the  NIH.I3X

However,  a  1 969  internal  FCR  memorandum  from  the  then-chairman  of
the  Cincinnati  FCR,  Dr.  Thomas  Gaffney,  noted  that  the  NIH  had  rejected  a
University  of  Cincinnati  grant  application  for  TBI  research  "on  ethical  grounds,"
even  though  it  had  been  approved  by  the  FCR:  "We  learned  that  two  applications
received  by  NIH  from  this  institution  have  been  rejected  on  ethical  grounds.  Both
had  been  through  this  committee.  As  far  as  I  know,  neither  of  the  principal
investigators  involved  were  notified  of  the  reason  of  the  rejection  by  the  NIH.
One  of  these  grants  was  the  total  body  radiation  study  in  patients  with
malignancy.  . .  ."139

In  1974,  D.  T.  Chalkley,  then  chief  of  the  NIH's  Office  for  Protection  of
Research  Risks,  vigorously  responded  to  a  magazine  article  criticizing  the
Cincinnati  experiments.  Chalkley  stated  that  "none  of  the  patients  involved  died
from  radiation  sickness. ...  In  all  instances,  death  was  clearly  attributable  to  the
advance  of  cancer,  or  to  intercurrent  disease  associated  with  advanced  cancer."'40

Risk  of  TBI  on  Mortality  and  Morbidity

The  risks  associated  with  total-body  irradiation  were  reported  by  all  of  the
previous  DOD-sponsored  TBI  research  institutions  and  were  known  to  the
Cincinnati  doctors.  Midway  into  the  program,  the  Cincinnati  doctors
acknowledged  that  the  TBI  treatments  posed  a  risk  of  death:  "bone  marrow
suppression  was  the  most  life  threatening  radiation  effect  at  the  doses  used."141  In
their  1966  report  to  the  DOD,  they  noted  that  the  general  response  of  the  first  fifty
patients  was  that  their  "total  white  count  falls  to  a  low  point  25  to  40  days  after
irradiation.  There  was  lymphopenia  [low  white  blood  cell  count]  which  persisted
for  40  to  60  days."142  The  same  report  stated  that  "severe  hematologic  depression
was  found  in  most  patients  who  expired."143  Although  the  efforts  by  the
Cincinnati  doctors  to  employ  bone  marrow  transplantation  in  response  to  this
problem  did  not  succeed  until  1969,  they  continued  to  administer  TBI  without
bone  marrow  transplantation  throughout  the  six-year  interim  period:  thirteen
patients  received  doses  of  150  or  200  rad  TBI  (including  five  on  whom
autologous  marrow  infusion  was  attempted  but  did  not  succeed);  nine  of  these
patients  died  between  twenty-five  and  seventy-four  days  after  being  irradiated,
and  the  other  four  survived  longer.144

Some  relatives  of  deceased  TBI  patients  contend  that  their  relatives  may
not  have  been  as  seriously  ill  as  the  reports  claim.  While  all  patients  had
advanced  cancer  (indicated  either  by  the  presence  of  metastatic  or  locally
advanced  tumors)  and  thus  could  be  considered  "end  stage"  in  terms  of  unlikely
curability,  they  were  clearly  not  all  "near  death,"  in  that  family  members  reported

392


Chapter  8

some  of  the  patients  feeling  well  enough  to  carry  on  normal  activities  of  daily  life
(e.g.,  holding  down  jobs,  caring  for  children)  until  the  day  they  received  the  TBI.
Patient  status  reports  written  by  the  Cincinnati  doctors  seem  to  bear  out  this  view.
For  example,  the  first  seventeen  patients  were  described  as  all  having  "incurable
and/or  metastatic  cancer  .  .  .  although  in  reasonably  good  clinical  condition
[emphasis  added]."145  Similarly,  the  1969  DASA  report  states  that  the  patients
"have  inoperable,  metastatic  carcinoma  but  are  in  relatively  good  health
[emphasis  added]."146  The  1970  DASA  report  states  that  the  studies  conducted
during  the  prior  year  "were  all  performed  on  ambulatory  human  subjects  . . .
[who]  were  all  clinically  stable,  many  of  them  working  daily  [emphasis
added]."'47  This  report  also  noted  the  "comparatively  better  physical  condition  of
these  new  subjects"  and  went  on  to  state  that  "only  three  of  our  1 1  new  patients
died  in  less  than  100  days  following  irradiation.  This  was  in  sharp  contrast  to  the
almost  50  percent  low  survival  rate  for  earlier  years  in  this  study,"148  when  lower
radiation  doses  had  been  administered.

Although  the  Advisory  Committee  has  received  some  partial  patient
hospital  records,  it  has  not  analyzed  the  records  of  every  patient,  which  would  be
required  to  determine  if  any  deaths  could  be  attributed  to  the  TBI  alone,  or  if  such
conclusions  could  be  reached  at  all  from  the  data  currently  available.  (The
Committee  did  not  have  the  time  or  resources  to  review  the  individual  files  of
every  patient  from  this  and  the  numerous  other  experiments  that  it  has
investigated.)  Contemporaneous  reports,  however,  state  that  TBI  treatments  may
have  contributed  to  the  deaths  of  at  least  eight  and  as  many  as  twenty  patients.
The  Suskind  report,  for  example,  said  that  "19  died  within  20-60  days  and
possibly  could  have  died  from  radiation  alone,"  but  noted  that  bone  marrow
failure  was  found  in  only  eight  at  the  time  of  death.149  (An  additional  death
occurred  six  days  after  irradiation  to  a  patient  under  anesthesia  in  the  course  of  a
bone  marrow  transfusion  to  support  the  TBI,  bringing  the  number  to  twenty.)  The
Suskind  report  also  stated  that  "there  is  absolutely  no  evidence  that  whole  body
radiation  shortened  the  period  of  survival  of  the  treated  patients,"  referring,
apparently,  to  the  statistical  "survival  rate"  of  the  entire  group  of  patients.150
Similarly,  the  1972  ACR  report  associated  the  death  of  eight  patients  to  the  fact
that  "the  bone  marrow  function  was  subnormal  and  thus  relatable  to  radiation
syndrome."  The  ACR  report  also  noted  that  "it  is  not  possible  to  determine
positively  that  those  patients  who  died  within  60  days  of  the  treatment  would  not
have  succumbed  to  their  disease  within  that  period,  even  though  the  clinical
assessment  had  been  that  their  disease  was  stable  enough  to  justify  their  inclusion
in  the  study. "'51

Similarly,  following  the  completion  of  their  study,  the  Cincinnati  doctors
wrote  that  "if  one  assumes  that  all  severe  drops  in  blood  cell  count  and  all
instances  of  hypocellular  or  acellular  marrow  at  death  were  due  only  to  radiation
and  not  influenced  by  the  type  or  extent  of  cancer  and  effects  of  previous  therapy,
then  one  can  identify  8  cases  in  which  there  is  a  possibility  of  the  therapy

393


Part  II

contributing  to  mortality."152  In  1994  Dr.  Saenger  wrote:

It  is  important  to  realize  that  in  any  given  patient  it
is  not  possible  to  determine  objectively  whether
death  occurred  too  soon  or  was  prolonged  as  a
consequence  of  treatment.  The  only  way  that  an
estimate  can  be  made  is  to  compare  the  length  of
survival  of  a  group  of  patients  with  the  same  tumor
and  extent  of  tumor  treated  by  radiation  to  a  group
of  patients  with  the  same  tumor  and  extent  of  tumor
treated  by  different  methods.153

The  attempt  by  the  Cincinnati  doctors  in  their  1 973  article  to  compare
survival  rates  for  their  TBI  patients  with  the  statistics  from  other  published
reports'54  is  problematic  for  a  number  of  reasons:  first,  the  comparisons  were  not
controlled  for  known  prognostic  factors,  such  as  age,  tumor  subtype,  and  stage;
second,  comparisons  with  external  and  historical  comparison  groups  are  easily
confounded  by  unmeasured  characteristics,  such  as  differences  in  patient
populations  and  trends  in  prognosis  over  time;  and  third,  survival  from  time  of
irradiation  (some  considerable  time  after  diagnosis)  in  the  TBI  series  is  compared
to  survival  from  diagnosis  in  the  published  series,  without  using  appropriate
survival  analysis  methods.  A  more  meaningful  comparison  would  have  been
between  subgroups  of  the  patients  receiving  different  doses  of  radiation,
preferably  including  a  concurrent  unexposed  chemotherapy  group,  adjusting  for
the  interval  from  diagnosis  to  the  time  of  death  and  other  relevant  prognostic
factors.  Although  limited  statistical  data  were  made  available  to  the  Advisory
Committee,  they  were  not  adequate  to  allow  meaningful  statistical  analysis,  and  it
was  not  feasible  for  us  to  abstract  the  necessary  data  from  the  charts.  The
Suskind  report  stated  that  "before  1966  the  design  of  the  study  to  measure
palliation  was  unstructured  and  not  uniformly  applied,  particularly  as  regards
uniform  definitions  and  methods  of  reporting."155  The  report  also  noted  that  "it  is
uncertain  whether  this  study  and  similar  studies  reported  in  the  medical  literature
are  truly  comparable  in  all  major  factors  that  influence  survival,  such  as  selection
of  patients  and  ancillary  medical  management.  Therefore,  the  significance  of
comparisons  of  survival  rates  is  doubtful,  unless  marked  differences  are  found."156

The  nature  of  the  DOD-sponsored  research  raises  additional  concerns  as  to
whether  patients  were  subjected  to  unnecessary  discomfort  without  full  disclosure
of  experimental  purpose  or  prior  consent.  In  order  to  collect  data  on  certain  side
effects  of  radiation  for  the  military,  the  patients  were  not  premedicated  or
informed  of  potential  acute  side  effects  of  TBI  such  as  nausea  and  vomiting  so  as
not  to  induce  these  effects  psychologically.157  Patients  were  to  be  treated  to
relieve  their  symptoms  if  they  affirmatively  requested  medication.  In  contrast,
researchers  at  the  City  of  Hope  Medical  Center  conducting  a  purely  clinical  TBI

394


Chapter  8

study  (from  1 960  to  1 964)  gave  antinauseant  medication  to  all  patients  who
received  40  or  more  rad  within  one  hour  prior  to  being  irradiated  to  alleviate
possible  side  effects. I5S

Informed  Consent

There  is  no  indication  that  the  DOD  ever  informed  the  Cincinnati  doctors
about  the  secretary  of  defense's  1953  Nuremberg  Code  directive  or  any
subsequent  Army  implementation  of  the  directive.  It  is  not  clear  what  patients  (or
family  members)  were  told  about  the  TBI  program  in  the  early  years  of  the
experiments,  because  written  consent  forms  were  not  standard  practice  at  that
time.  During  the  later  years  of  the  program,  written  consent  forms  were
employed,  but  they  have  been  criticized  for  not  clearly  stating  all  of  the  risks
involved.159

Written  consent  forms  were  first  produced  and  used  in  the  experiments  in
1965,  two  years  before  they  were  required  by  the  University  of  Cincinnati  review
committee  and  NIH;160  the  form  was  revised  twice  thereafter.  According  to  the
Cincinnati  doctors'  1973  article  summarizing  the  study,  all  patients  gave
informed  consent  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  Cincinnati  Faculty
Committee  on  Research  and  the  National  Institutes  of  Health.  Although  by  the
end  of  the  study  the  consent  forms  did  describe  the  TBI  procedure  and  its  effects,
information  about  risks  associated  with  TBI--nausea  and  possible  death  from
bone  marrow  suppression-was  not  included  in  these  forms.

The  first  Cincinnati  form,  dated  May  1,  1965,  is  entitled  "Consent  for
Special  Study  and  Treatment."  It  states  that  the  "nature  and  purpose  of  this
therapy,  possible  alternative  methods  of  treatment,  the  risks  involved,  the
possibility  of  complications,  and  prognosis  have  been  fully  explained  to  me.  The
special  study  and  research  nature  of  this  treatment  has  been  discussed  with  me
and  understood  by  me."161  There  was  no  mention  in  the  form  about  the  possible
risk  of  death  from  bone  marrow  suppression  or  of  the  possible  side  effects  of
nausea  and  vomiting,  which  the  doctors  were  studying  and  did  not  want  to  induce
by  suggestion.  There  is  no  available  documentation  on  what  the  patients  were
told  orally  about  the  "risks  involved."  Because  Dr.  Saenger  was  not  responsible
for  recruiting  or  treating  patients,  he  could  not  speak  to  what  was  actually  said  to
the  patients.

In  1981,  Dr.  Robert  Heyssel,  director  of  Johns  Hopkins  Hospital,
discussed  the  ethical  climate  before  the  mid-1960s:

I  should  say  that  in  the  climate  of  those  times  . . .
that  many  things  were  done  with  human  subjects,
including  the  investigator  himself,  which  would  no
longer  be  condoned. . . .  None  of  these  activities
had  to  be  reviewed  by  anyone  else  in  any  formal

395


Part  II

sense  within  the  institutions.  I  think  this  was  the
situation  probably  up  to  and  around  1966  in  most
institutions.  I  am  not  suggesting  that  that  was  the
proper  thing;  I  am  simply  saying  that  was  the  case.
In  terms  of  experimental  therapeutics,  I  think  an
honest  effort  was  made  by  most  investigators  to
explain  to  families,  to  patients,  that  what  was  being
done  was  in  the  range  of  the  untried  or
experimental,  but  there  were  certainly  no  informed-
consent  rules  that  anyone  was  operating  under
during  that  period  of  time  up  to  the  midsixties.162

A  second  consent  form  went  into  effect  in  1967,  following  the  1967  FCR
review  of  the  bone  marrow  protocol  discussed  above.  This  form  listed  the  risks  as
these:  "The  chance  of  infection  or  mild  bleeding  to  be  treated  with  marrow
transplant,  drugs,  or  transfusion  as  needed."  It  also  said  that  consent  was  for  "a
scientific  investigation  which  is  not  directed  specifically  to  my  own  benefit,  but  in
consideration  for  the  expected  advancement  of  medical  knowledge,  which  may
result  for  the  benefit  of  mankind."163  One  member  of  the  University  of  Cincinnati
FCR  had  suggested  in  1967  that  the  consent  form  should  inform  the  patient  of  a
one-in-four  risk  of  death.  The  1967  FCR  review  of  the  protocol  required  only  that
the  form  make  clear  "the  danger  inherent  in  the  method  and  the  steps  intended  to
protect  the  patient."

In  1971,  a  third  form  came  into  use,  following  the  second  Faculty
Committee  review  of  the  bone  marrow  protocol.  This  form  expanded  on  the
previous  form  by  explaining  that  "the  bone  marrow's  ability  to  make  [white]  cells
will  be  decreased  for  four  or  five  weeks  after  you  receive  your  radiation.  If  you
receive  a  dose  of  radiation  of  200  rads  or  more,  which  your  doctor  will  tell  you,
your  blood  counts  will  fall  to  levels  where  infection  or  bleeding  could  be  a
problem."  It  also  refined  the  previous  form  by  describing  the  research  as  "a
scientific  investigation  which  is  not  only  directed  specifically  to  my  own  benefit,
but  also  in  consideration  for  the  expected  advancement  of  medical  knowledge,
which  may  result  for  the  benefit  of  mankind."'64  There  was  no  mention  of  any
risk  of  death.

Beginning  in  1968,  patient  consent  was  solicited  over  a  two-day  period.
Dr.  Saenger  described  this  process:  "Dr.  Silberstein  was  the  person  who  did  all
this,  in  that  phase.  He  would  explain  to  somebody  the  first  day  what  the  problems
were,  what  was  going  to  happen,  what  the  risks  were,  etc.  or  what  the  benefits
were.  Then  he  had  the  patient  and  a  representative  come  back  the  next  day,  the
representative  could  have  been  the  patient's  mother  or  cousin,  or  some  family
person,  or  it  could  have  been  the  patient's  minister.  And  you  go  through  the
whole  thing  with  the  minister,  and  the  patient  and  family  were  all  happy  with  this
desperate  situation,  and  the  signature  was  affixed."165  To  the  extent  it  was

396


Chapter  8

employed,  this  procedure  appears  to  have  been  innovative  and  above  the  standard
practice  of  the  time.

Family  members  of  some  patients  testified  to  the  Advisory  Committee  that
neither  the  patients  nor  their  families  were  adequately  informed  about  the  nature
and  risks  of  the  radiation  treatments.  They  claim  that  this  occurred  despite
multiple  and  persistent  requests  by  family  members  to  meet  and  discuss  their
concerns  with  the  doctors  involved  in  administering  these  treatments.  Family
members  also  told  the  Advisory  Committee  that  patients  were  not  informed  about
the  source  of  the  program  funding  (although  it  should  be  noted  that  such
disclosures  are  still  not  mandatory  in  most  institutions). 16ft  The  Suskind  report
noted  that  "this  information  was  not  withheld  if  the  patient  asked  about  this
matter.  The  procedure  follows  the  custom  of  every  other  research  project  in  this
University."'67  The  ACR  report  stated  that  "in  the  last  few  years  they  were  told
that  the  information  might  have  military  as  well  as  clinical  significance."168

Subject  Selection

All  but  five  of  the  patients  were  referred  into  the  study  from  either  the
wards  of  the  Cincinnati  General  Hospital  or  its  Out-Patient  Tumor  Clinic.  The
remaining  five  were  private  patients,  three  of  whom  were  children  treated  for
Ewing's  sarcoma.  The  Suskind  report  noted  that  fifty-one  of  eighty-two  patients
were  black  (62  percent)  and  most  were  indigent;  the  report  commented  that  "this
distribution  reflects  the  patient  population  of  the  Cincinnati  General  Hospital."169
Psychological  data  from  the  TBI  study  suggest  that  some  of  the  subjects  may  have
been  of  questionable  competence  or  may  have  been  temporarily  incapacitated.
However,  the  meaning  and  importance  of  these  data  have  been  criticized  and  are
in  dispute.'70

AEC-SPONSORED  TBI  AT  OAK  RIDGE

At  the  same  time  that  the  University  of  Cincinnati  was  conducting  TBI
experiments  for  the  DOD,  the  Medical  Division  of  the  AEC's  Oak  Ridge  Institute
of  Nuclear  Studies  (ORINS)'7'  was  also  treating  patients  with  selected  rumors
with  TBI;  retrospective  and  prospective  analyses  of  these  data  were  supported  by
the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration.172  ORINS  was  established  in
the  late  1940s  as  a  research  institution  to  help  advance  the  field  of  nuclear
medicine  through  research,  training,  and  technology  development.'73  From  1957
to  1974,  the  ORINS/ORAU  hospital  treated  194  patients  with  TBI.  In  contrast
with  the  DOD-sponsored  experiments  at  Cincinnati  and  the  other  institutions,
ORINS/ORAU  used  TBI  only  to  treat  patients  with  radiosensitive  cancers.

Indeed,  in  1 972,  the  ORAU  Medical  Program  Review  Committee  issued  a
report  on  the  ORAU  TBI  activities  in  light  of  the  recent  revelations  about  the
University  of  Cincinnati  TBI  program,  noting  that  the  studies  were  ethically

397


Part  II

conducted  and  that  survival  rates  were  as  good  as  with  other  methods  of
treatment.174

Nonetheless,  similar  questions  have  been  raised  about  the  dual-purpose
nature  of  the  Oak  Ridge  program.  As  happened  at  Cincinnati,  the  Oak  Ridge  TBI
experiments,  although  known  in  the  national  and  international  medical  and
scientific  communities  through  presentations  and  publications,  first  came  to  the
attention  of  the  general  public  through  the  news  media.  In  September  1981,
Mother  Jones  magazine  published  an  article  charging  that  ORINS/ORAU  treated
its  patients  with  total-body  irradiation  in  order  to  collect  data  for  NASA.'75  The
article  focused  on  one  patient  in  particular—Dwayne  Sexton,  who  suffered  from
acute  lymphocytic  leukemia  and  was  treated  with  TBI  and  chemotherapy  over  the
course  of  three  years  until  he  died  in  1968.  That  article  prompted  an  investigation
and  public  hearing  by  the  Investigations  and  Oversight  Subcommittee  of  the
House  Science  and  Technology  Committee,  which  was  chaired  by  Representative
Albert  Gore.176  Testifying  before  the  subcommittee  were  patients  and  patient
relatives;  administrative  officials  from  Oak  Ridge,  the  AEC,  and  NASA;  the
medical  staff  of  ORAU;  and  two  cancer  experts:  Dr.  Peter  Wiernik,  director  of
the  Baltimore  Cancer  Research  Center,  and  Dr.  Eli  Glatstein,  who  was  then  chief
of  radiation  oncology  at  the  National  Cancer  Institute  and  is  now  a  member  of  the
Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments.

ORINS  began  treating  patients  with  TBI  in  1957.  Following  a  1958
accident  at  the  Oak  Ridge  Y-12  production  plant,  in  which  eight  workers  were
irradiated  and  treated  by  the  ORINS  hospital,  ORINS  took  a  heightened  interest
in  the  use  and  effects  of  TBI.  As  William  R.  Bibb,  then  director  of  the
Department  of  Energy's  Research  Division  at  Oak  Ridge,  testified  at  the  Gore
Hearing:  "In  order  to  provide  the  best  possible  care  in  case  of  an  accident  the
AEC  expected  that  hematologic  data  from  patients  being  treated  with  total  body
irradiation  in  addition  to  being  used  to  benefit  other  patients  would  also  be  used  to
benefit  any  radiation  accident  victim."177  In  1960,  the  ORINS  hospital  completed
a  newly  designed  irradiation  facility  that  could  deliver  a  uniform  dose  to  all
portions  of  the  body  without  having  to  move  the  patient,  known  as  the  Medium
Exposure  Total  Body  Irradiator  (METBI).  The  METBI  facility  delivered
approximately  1.5  rad  per  minute.  Several  years  later,  ORINS  sought  to  test  the
hypothesis  that  exposure  to  low  doses  of  radiation  over  an  extended  period  of
time  would  be  more  effective  than  a  single  administration  of  a  similar  total
radiation  dose  to  the  whole  body  in  treating  certain  types  of  diffuse  tumors  known
to  be  responsive  to  radiation.  Accordingly,  it  developed  the  Low  Exposure  Total
Body  Irradiator  (LETBI)  as  a  "one  of  a  kind"  system  to  test  this  hypothesis.
LETBI,  which  could  deliver  a  whole-body  radiation  dose  of  1 .5  rad  per  hour,
went  into  operation  in  1967  and  patients  could  spend  several  days  or  weeks  in  this
facility.  AEC  sponsored  all  activities  concerned  with  the  construction  and
operation  of  the  LETBI  and  its  use  in  patient  treatment.  The  results  of  this
treatment  approach,  however,  were  found  to  be  no  better  than  others  then

398


Chapter  8

available,  and  the  use  of  the  LETBI  was  discontinued  in  the  early  1970s.

The  LETBI  project  was  conceived  at  approximately  the  same  time  that
NASA  had  commissioned  ORINS  to  study  the  effects  of  total-body  irradiation.
NASA  was  particularly  interested  in  the  effects  of  low  dose-rate  radiation  that  the
LETBI  would  produce  because  astronauts  would  most  likely  be  exposed  to  low-
dose  cosmic  radiation.  Accordingly,  NASA  provided  approximately  $65,000  to
the  AEC  for  monitoring  equipment  and  the  radiation  sources  used  for  the
LETBI.178  At  the  Gore  Hearing,  officials  from  the  AEC  and  NASA  testified  that
the  LETBI  program  was  conceived  purely  for  therapeutic  purposes  and  that
NASA's  interest  in  the  data  from  LETBI  exposures  in  no  way  influenced  the
decision  to  construct  the  facility  or  its  use  for  patients.  Dr.  Clarence  Lushbaugh,
who  ran  the  LETBI  facility  under  Dr.  Gould  Andrews,  and  succeeded  Andrews  as
director  of  the  ORAU  medical  division,  testified:  "First,  neither  NASA  nor  AEC
program  monitors,  to  my  knowledge,  ever  attempted  to  become  involved  directly
or  indirectly  with  the  treatment  of  patients  at  the  ORINS/ORAU  Medical
Division.  Second,  the  ORINS/ORAU  NASA  study  group  never  influenced  the
clinicians  in  their  selection  of  patients  or  the  prescription  of  the  exposure  dose
and  dose  rates."179

There  was  little  dispute  with  the  view  of  the  1972  Medical  Program
Review  Committee,  expressed  above,  that,  at  least  in  the  early  years,  TBI  was  a
legitimate  form  of  treatment  worth  exploring  for  the  radiosensitive  cancers  that
ORINS/ORAU  was  treating.  The  Review  Committee's  concern  was  whether  the
Oak  Ridge  medical  staff  conducted  their  investigations  in  an  effective  manner  and
whether  the  AEC's  or  NASA's  interest  in  the  data  compelled  the  continuation  of
this  modality  at  a  time  when  other  forms  of  treatment  were  considered  more
effective.  Dr.  Peter  H.  Wiernik,  one  of  the  two  expert  witnesses,  acknowledged,
for  example,  that  in  the  early  years  it  was  legitimate  to  experiment  with  TBI  at  the
high  doses  being  used  to  try  to  improve  treatment,  because  "clearly  treatment
needed  to  be  advanced  in  those  days."IS0

The  record  of  the  1972  review  suggests  that  the  ORINS/ORAU  staff  did
not  engage  in  the  type  of  rigorous,  systematic  research  that  would  be  necessary  to
evaluate  the  usefulness  of  that  type  of  therapy.  The  Oak  Ridge  doctors
acknowledged  that  they  were  not  evaluating  the  long-term  effectiveness  of  single-
exposure,  high-dose  TBI  and  that  fractionated  exposures  (in  which  numerous
smaller  doses  are  given  over  a  period  of  several  weeks  or  months)  "probably
offers  a  preferable  approach  for  total-body  irradiation  therapy."181  Dr.  Lushbaugh
explained  that,  because  the  doctors  would  administer  whatever  treatment  they
thought  was  "best  for  each  patient,"  they  did  not  adhere  to  an  established  research
protocol  based  exclusively  on  TBI.182

In  commenting  on  the  1972  report  before  the  Gore  Committee,  Dr.
Glatstein  questioned  the  "manner  of  administration  and  the  uncontrolled  nature  of
the  studies."  Oncology  research,  he  said,  requires  "an  obsession  with  time"~the
effect  that  a  given  treatment  has  over  months  or  years.  Glatstein  noted  that  the

399


Part  II

reports  he  reviewed  "are  interesting  in  terms  of  acute  radiation  effects  but  really
don't  have  any  substance  in  terms  of  oncologic  practice."183  Glatstein  summarized
his  view  of  the  ORINS/ORAU  TBI  research  program:  "If  you  are  talking  about
the  early  60's  I  think  this  is  probably  fairly  representative  of  protocols  that  were
going  on  at  that  time. . . .  [B]y  the  end  of  that  decade  I  believe  this  was  probably
not  acceptable."184

Both  Wiernik  and  Glatstein  criticized  Dwayne  Sexton's  medical
(nonradiation)  treatment,  in  particular  the  decision  to  withhold  maintenance
chemotherapy,  which  was  recognized  as  an  effective  treatment  at  that  time,  in
order  to  attempt  a  never-before-used  experimental  procedure.185  Even  if  the  new
treatment  was  worth  pursuing,  they  argued,  it  should  have  been  done  only  as  part
of  a  larger  protocol  and  only  when  the  patient  was  in  secondary  remission
following  the  failure  of  more-effective  treatments.

All  patients  accepted  into  the  ORINS/ORAU  hospital  program  signed  a
"Patient  Admittance  Agreement"  that  explained  that  the  hospital  operated  for  the
purpose  of  conducting  radiation-related  research.  The  form  stated  that  the  patient
is  being  admitted  because  his  physical  condition  "makes  me  a  suitable  patient  for
a  currently  active  clinical  research  project,"  that  experimental  examinations,
treatments,  and  tests  may  be  prescribed  for  which  the  patient  hereby  gives  his  or
her  consent,  and  that  the  patient  "can  remain  in  the  research  hospital  only  so  long
as  I  am  needed  for  research  purposes."  Additional  forms  were  used  to  establish
"Consent  for  Experimental  Treatment,"  which  stated  that  "the  nature  and  purpose
of  the  treatment,  possible  alternative  methods  of  treatment,  the  risks  involved,  and
the  possibilities  of  complications  have  been  explained  to  me.  I  understand  that
this  treatment  is  not  the  usual  treatment  for  my  disorder  and  is  therefore
experimental  and  remains  unproven  by  medical  experience  so  that  the
consequences  may  be  unpredictable."186  The  form  made  no  mention  of  the
possible  risk  of  death  from  bone  marrow  suppression  or  specific  side  effects  such
as  nausea  or  vomiting.

In  1974,  the  AEC  conducted  a  program  review  of  the  Medical  Division  of
ORAU.  It  recommended  that  the  clinical  TBI  programs  be  closed,  having  found
that  the  METBI  and  LETBI  programs  had  "evolved  without  adequate  planning,
criticism  or  objectives,  and  have  achieved  less  in  substantial  productivity  than
merits  continued  support."187

At  the  end  of  his  hearing,  Gore  noted  that  the  subcommittee  would  issue  a
report  with  conclusions  and  recommendations.  Although  no  formal  report  was
ever  completed,  the  full  committee  issued  the  following  statement  in  January
1983:  "The  Subcommittee  testimony  revealed  that  while  many  of  the  conditions
at  [ORAU]  were  not  satisfactory,  particularly  when  judged  by  the  routine
institutional  safeguards  and  medical  knowledge  of  today,  the  more  scandalous
allegations  could  not  be  substantiated.  Given  the  standards  of  informed  consent
at  the  time,  and  the  state  of  nuclear  medicine,  the  experiments  were  satisfactory,
but  not  perfect."188

400


Chapter  8

Perhaps  the  most  striking  contrast  between  philosophies  of  the  Oak  Ridge
and  the  University  of  Cincinnati  TBI  programs  can  be  gleaned  from  an  exchange
that  occurred  in  1966.  That  year,  the  AEC's  Medical  Program  Review
Committee  suggested  that  ORAU  consider  using  TBI  for  treatment  of
radioresistant  cancers  (similar  to  what  was  being  done  at  Cincinnati).189  The
ORAU  physicians  responded  that  they  had  carefully  considered  treating  such
diseases,  but  had  declined  to  do  so:

[W]e  are  very  hesitant  to  treat  them  because  we
believe  there  is  so  little  chance  of  benefit  to  make  it
questionable  ethically  to  treat  them.  Lesions  that
require  moderate  or  high  doses  of  local  therapy  for
benefit,  or  that  are  actually  resistant  (gastroenteric
tract)  are  not  helped  enough  by  total  body  radiation
to  justify  the  bone  marrow  depression  that  is
induced.  Of  course,  in  one  way  these  patients
would  make  good  subjects  for  research  because
their  hematologic  responses  are  more  nearly  like
those  of  normals  than  are  the  responses  of  patients
with  hematologic  disorders.190

CONCLUSION

When  we  began  our  work,  the  controversy  surrounding  the  Cincinnati  TBI
research  had  been  rekindled.  There  was,  however,  little  public  awareness  that
Cincinnati  was  the  last  in  the  line  of  many  years  of  sponsorship  of  similar  TBI-
related  research  by  the  Defense  Department  and  other  federal  agencies.  The
ethical  issues  raised  by  the  Cincinnati  case  are  made  more  acute  by  the  fact  that
both  the  government  and  the  medical  community  already  had  had  decades  of
experience  with  TBI,  although  comparatively  less  experience  with  cobalt  60  as  a
means  to  deliver  higher  doses  than  had  been  delivered  in  the  earlier  era.

This  history  provides  compelling  evidence  of  the  importance  of  the  rules
that  regulate  human  subject  research  today—prior  review  of  risks  and  potential
benefits,  requirements  of  disclosure  and  consent,  and  procedures  for  ensuring
equity  in  the  selection  of  subjects.  The  history  also  highlights  four  issues  in  the
ethics  of  research  with  human  subjects  that  are  as  important  today  as  they  were
then,  issues  that  are  not  easily  resolved  or  even  addressed  by  present-day  rules.
As  discussed  below,  these  issues  are  (1)  how  to  protect  the  interests  of  patients
when  physicians  use  medical  interventions  that  are  not  standard  care;  (2)  the
effects  and  attendant  obligations  of  the  government  when  it  funds  research
involving  patient-subjects;  (3)  the  impact  on  patients  when  research  is  combined


401


Part  II

with  medical  care;  and  (4)  what  constitutes  fairness  in  the  selection  of  subjects  for
research.

The  first  issue  is  how  best  to  protect  the  interests  of  patients  when
physicians  propose  to  use  medical  interventions  that  are  not  standard  care.
Today,  when  nonstandard  interventions  are  part  of  a  formal  research  project,  the
interests  of  the  patient  are  protected  in  theory  by  the  institutional  review  board,
which  is  charged  with  determining  that  the  risks  of  the  nonstandard  intervention
are  acceptable  in  light  of  the  available  alternatives  and  the  prospect  for  benefit.
Patients  are  also  protected  by  the  requirement  of  informed  consent,  which  is
intended  to  allow  the  potential  patient-subject  to  assess  whether  the  balance  of
risks  to  potential  benefits  is  acceptable.  There  is  no  federally  mandated  parallel
IRB  mechanism  of  review,  however,  when  a  medical  intervention  that  is
experimental  or  innovative  or  even  controversial  is  to  be  used  outside  the  confines
of  a  research  project,  although  some  institutions  voluntarily  have  adopted
mechanisms  of  peer  review.  The  requirement  of  informed  consent  remains;  the
physician  is  obligated  to  inform  the  patient  that  the  proposed  intervention  is  not
standard  practice,  whether  it  is  controversial  within  the  field,  and  how  it  compares
with  alternative  approaches,  but  this  requirement  provides  the  patient  less
protection  than  would  a  professional  peer  review.

At  the  time  of  the  TBI  studies,  none  of  these  mechanisms  were  well
developed.  During  the  Cincinnati  project,  IRBs  were  in  their  infancy  and  the
convention  of  obtaining  informed  consent  from  patient-subjects  was  just
emerging.  The  record  is  confused  and  confusing  as  to  whether  or  when  TBI  at
Cincinnati  was  viewed  as  part  of  a  cancer  research  project  and  thus  properly  the
subject  of  IRB  review.  It  is  not  clear  whether  the  treatment  of  the  Cincinnati
patients  with  TBI  was  initially  intended  to  be  research.  In  the  practice  of
medicine  there  has  always  been  a  fine  boundary  between  practices  or  treatments
that  are  accepted  as  standard,  those  that  are  "innovative,"  and  those  that  are
experimental  or  the  subject  of  research.  The  use  of  TBI  at  Cincinnati  is
emblematic  of  the  difficulties  inherent  in  sorting  through  these  categories.

By  the  mid- 1 960s,  TBI  without  bone  marrow  protection  was  a  treatment
that  had  been  tried  and  had  not  been  proven  effective  for  patients  with
radioresistant  cancers.  By  this  time,  total-body  irradiation  was  not  standard
treatment  for  such  cases,  nor  could  it  be  called  innovative  treatment;  some  at  the
time  considered  its  continued  use  in  patients  with  radioresistant  cancers  to  be
controversial.  The  history  of  medicine,  however,  is  replete  with  instances  in
which  failure  is  followed  by  success.  The  continued  use  of  TBI  in  patients  with
radioresistant  cancers  would  not  have  been  unethical  if  the  physicians  had
established  clear  benchmarks  for  determining  how  much  additional  use  was
warranted,  and  if  patients  had  been  informed  of  the  speculative  nature  of  the
treatment  and  the  gravity  of  the  risks  involved.  It  is  not  clear  that  either  of  these
things  occurred.


402


Chapter  8

What  is  clear  is  that  neither  the  university's  IRB  nor  the  funding  agency
reviewed  the  appropriateness  of  continuing  to  treat  patients  with  radioresistant
cancers  using  TBI  without  bone  marrow  protection,  despite  mounting  evidence
casting  doubt  on  the  utility  of  TBI  treatment  for  radioresistant  tumors  in  the
absence  of  bone  marrow  protection.  It  is  also  clear  that  the  consent  forms  did  not
disclose  that  it  was  by  this  time  at  best  unconventional  to  treat  patients  with
radioresistant  cancers  with  TBI  and  that  no  other  medical  centers  were  engaged  in
this  practice  at  the  time;  whether  physicians  told  this  to  their  patients  is  not
known.  The  system  of  checks  and  balances  that  is  usually  in  place  today  to
protect  patients'  interests  was  in  its  early  phase  at  the  University  of  Cincinnati
and  the  system  did  not  work  well  at  the  time.  The  responsibility  for  failure  rests
at  all  levels,  but  it  is  reasonably  clear  that  patient  protection  was  compromised.

Today,  as  in  the  past,  there  are  occasions  when  nonstandard  medical
interventions  are  not  subject  to  human  research  regulations.  In  such  situations
neither  IRB  review  nor  the  rigors  of  scientific  design  are  in  place  to  help
determine  whether  an  experimental  intervention  should  continue  to  be  used
Today,  for  example,  many  innovations  in  reproductive  technologies  and  surgery
proceed  with  little  oversight  and  few  constraints  on  the  practices  of  physicians A
physician  wishing  to  use  an  intervention  that  other  colleagues  in  the  field  believe
to  be  ineffective  or  inferior-as  was  arguably  the  case  with  TBI  and  radioresistant
tumors  after  several  years  in  the  Cincinnati  program-will  find  little  standing  in
his  or  her  way  to  do  so  save  the  fear  of  malpractice  claims  and,  increasingly  the
likelihood  that  such  interventions  will  not  be  reimbursed,  particularly  in
managed-care  settings.  The  Cincinnati  experience  underscores  the  importance  of
( 1 )  establishing  benchmarks  forjudging  the  propriety  of  continued  use  and  (2)
providing  for  special  disclosures  to  patients  in  all  cases  where  interventions  are
not  standard-without  regard  for  whether  the  intervention  is  deemed  "human
subject  research"  or  is  governed  by  the  Common  Rule  (see  chapter  3).

The  question  of  what  role  the  Department  of  Defense  should  have  played
in  reviewing  the  appropriateness  of  TBI  as  medical  care  for  the  patient-subjects  in
its  bio  ogical  dosimetry  and  radiation-effects  research  points  to  the  second  major
issue  illustrated  by  our  review  of  the  TBI  history.  Arguably,  the  ultimate
responsibility  for  determining  that  TBI  was  acceptable  medical  practice  rested
with  the  physicians  at  Cincinnati  and  with  the  university  and  associated  hospitals
At  the  same  time,  however,  thirty  years  of  government  interest  in  the  effects  of
I  HI  also  arguably  had  a  significant  influence  on  medical  practice

From  one  vantage,  the  DOD  had  little  or  no  obligation  to  consider  the
value  of  TBI  to  the  patients  who  provided  the  data  it  was  seeking.  The  DOD  was
not  paying  for  the  irradiation  of  the  patients.  It  had  reason  to  assume  that  the
decision  about  the  propriety  of  the  treatment  would  be  made  by  doctors  whose
judgment  in  the  matter  could  be  trusted.  Yet  the  TBI  experience  illustrates  that
when  the  government  funds  research,  particularly  over  a  long  period,  its  funding
may  well  have  effects  beyond  the  simple  conduct  of  the  science  and  well  beyond

403


Part  II

the  confines  of  the  strict  terms  stated  in  the  contracts  or  grants  authorizing  the
research.

Over  the  course  of  three  decades,  there  was  a  substantial  coincidence
between  the  use  of  TBI  on  patients  with  radioresistant  cancers  and  funding  from
the  Department  of  Defense  and  its  predecessor.  With  the  exception  of  work
conducted  at  the  City  of  Hope  Hospital,  every  journal  article  in  the  professional
literature  on  the  use  of  TBI  with  radioresistant  tumors  during  this  period  was
reporting  on  work  supported  by  the  government  for  military  purposes.

In  the  case  of  Cincinnati,  Dr.  Saenger  told  the  Advisory  Committee  in
1994  that  the  irradiation  of  patients  might  not  have  been  initiated  were  it  not  for
funding  by  the  DOD  and,  once  initiated,  might  not  have  been  continued  if  the
objective  sought  by  the  DOD  (a  biological  dosimeter)  had  been  realized  early  on.
As  Dr.  Saenger  explained,  while  the  DOD  did  not  directly  pay  for  irradiation,  its
funding  provided  for  other  items — including  laboratory  equipment  and
specialists— that  facilitated  the  initiation  and  maintenance  of  the  TBI  program.

Even  where  the  medical  care  of  patients  is  peripheral  to  the  interests  of  a
funding  agency,  so  long  as  the  research  supported  by  the  agency  is  to  be
conducted  on  patient-subjects,  it  is  likely  that  the  research  will  affect  the  care
patients  receive.  This  is  particularly  true  when  agencies  support  research
programs  extending  over  many  years,  as  was  the  case  with  the  Department  of
Defense  and  TBI.  Such  programs  can  motivate  physician-investigators  to  alter
their  practice  and  can  stimulate  the  adoption  of  different  approaches  to  the  care
of  patients.  Although  there  is  today  a  greater  appreciation  of  the  impact  on
medical  practice  of  funding  patterns  in  research,  it  is  not  clear  even  now  that
funding  agencies  regularly  think  through  the  implications  for  medical  care  of  the
research  programs  they  support  or  that  they  monitor  the  impact  on  patients  of
their  programs  over  time.

That  the  joining  of  research  with  medical  care  can  alter  what  happens  to  a
patient  is  the  third  issue  in  research  ethics  illustrated  by  the  TBI  experience.  Each
purpose  introduced  into  the  clinical  setting  in  addition  to  the  treatment  of  the
patient  increases  the  likelihood  that  the  patient  will  receive  more,  fewer,  or
different  medical  interventions  than  he  or  she  would  otherwise  receive.  It  is  naive
to  think  that,  either  today  or  thirty  years  ago,  research  can  be  grafted  on  to  the
clinical  setting  without  changing  the  experience  for  the  patient,  now  turned
subject.  When  the  demands  of  science  alter  the  standard  medical  practice  by
increasing  the  monitoring  of  physiological  indicators,  the  additional  blood  tests  or
bone  scans  or  biopsies  are  frequently  presented  as  in  the  interest  of  patient-
subjects.  Sometimes  this  claim  is  defensible,  and  the  patient-subjects  are  indeed
advantaged  by  more  careful  monitoring  of  their  medical  condition;  at  other  times,
however,  this  claim  is  an  insupportable  rationalization,  and  there  are  no  offsetting
benefits  to  patients  for  the  risks  and  discomforts  associated  with  additional
monitoring.


404


Chapter  8

In  the  case  of  the  Cincinnati  experiments,  the  impact  of  the  research
protocol  on  the  care  of  the  patient-subjects  cannot  be  construed  as  beneficial  to
the  patients;  in  addition,  there  is  evidence  of  the  subordination  of  the  ends  of
medicine  to  the  ends  of  research.  The  decisions  to  withhold  information  about
possible  acute  side  effects  of  TBI  as  well  as  to  forgo  pretreatment  with
antiemetics  were  irrefutably  linked  to  advancing  the  research  interests  of  the
DOD.  To  the  extent  that  this  deviated  from  standard  care,  and  caused
unnecessary  suffering  and  discomfort,  it  was  morally  unconscionable;  to  the
extent  that  the  standard  of  care  in  this  area  is  uncertain,  it  is  morally  questionable.
As  troubling  as  this  is,  far  more  troubling  is  the  evidence,  including  the  testimony
of  the  principal  investigator,  that  TBI  might  not  have  been  employed  as  treatment
for  the  patients,  or  once  employed  continued,  in  the  absence  of  the  government's
funding  and  research  requirements.

Whether  the  ends  of  research  (understood  as  discovering  new  knowledge)
and  the  ends  of  medicine  (understood  as  serving  the  interests  of  the  patient)
necessarily  conflict  and  how  the  conflict  should  be  resolved  when  it  occurs  are
still  today  open  and  vexing  issues.  Increasingly,  advocates  for  patients  with
serious,  chronic  diseases  such  as  AIDS  and  breast  cancer  maintain  that  it  is  often
in  the  interests  of  patients  to  participate  as  subjects  in  clinical  research.  These
advocates  are  particularly  concerned  to  ensure  fair  access  to  participation  in
research  for  people  who  are  politically  less  powerful,  such  as  the  poor,  minorities,
and  women.  This  contemporary  perspective  upends  the  traditional  way  of  viewing
the  fourth  issue  in  research  ethics  raised  by  the  TBI  experiments— fairness  in  the
selection  of  subjects.

At  both  M.  D.  Anderson  Hospital  and  the  University  of  Cincinnati,  almost
all  the  patients  were  drawn  from  public  hospitals,  and  many  were  African-
Americans.  It  was  common  during  this  period  for  medical  research  to  be
conducted  on  the  poor  and  the  powerless.  In  part,  this  practice  reflected  a  general
societal  insensitivity  to  questions  of  justice  and  equal  treatment.  In  this  case,
people  who  were  poor  disproportionately  bore  the  burdens  of  questionable
research  to  which  their  interests  as  ill  people  were  subordinated.  The  practice
also  reflected  the  view,  however,  that  poor  people  were  better  off  being  patients
at  hospitals  affiliated  with  research-oriented  medical  schools  where  they  were
likely  to  become  subjects  of  research  (as  well  as  subject  matter  for  clinical
teaching).  Such  institutions,  it  was  thought,  offered  poor  people  their  best,  and
perhaps  their  only,  chance  to  secure  quality  medical  care.  Recently,  this  kind  of
reasoning  has  emerged  again,  as  constraints  on  access  to  medical  care—from  the
narrowing  of  entitlement  programs  to  the  narrowing  of  coverage  in  managed-care
medical plans— have  made  participation  in  research,  as  a  route  to  medical  care,
more  attractive.  The  question  of  whether  the  "side  benefits"  of  being  a  subject
should  be  weighted  in  the  review  of  the  risks  and  potential  benefits  of  research
remains  unresolved  today.


405


Part  II

These  findings  highlight  the  contemporary  resonance  of  the  TBI  story.
The  issues  discussed  above  are  either  not  now  addressed  or  not  addressed
adequately  by  regulation;  neither  are  they  covered  by  clear  conventions  or  rules  of
professional  ethics.  Thus,  the  history  of  TBI  research  sponsored  by  the
government  is  important  not  only  for  what  it  tells  us  about  our  past  but  also  for
how  it  illuminates  the  present.


406


ENDNOTES


1 .  As  of  September  1995,  the  lawsuit  was  still  ongoing.  In  January  1995,  the
court  issued  an  opinion  rejecting  the  defendants'  request  to  dismiss  the  case,  thus
allowing  the  plaintiffs  to  proceed  with  discovery  and  a  possible  trial.  In  re  Cincinnati
Litigation,  874  F.  Supp.  796  (S.D.  Ohio,  1995).  That  decision  is  now  on  appeal  in  the
U.S.  Court  of  Appeals.

2.  A  list  was  published  in  the  1967  National  Academy  of  Sciences  report  on
"Radiobiological  Effects  of  Manned  Space  Flight"  and  is  reprinted  in  Hearing  on  the
Human  Total  Body  Irradiation  (TBI)  Program  at  Oak  Ridge  before  the  Subcommittee  on
Investigations  and  Oversight  of  the  House  Science  and  Technology  Committee  [Gore
Hearing],  97th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.  (23  September  1981),  355.  The  Advisory  Committee
requested  information  from  most  of  these  institutions  (except  for  those  performing  five  or
fewer  procedures)  on  their  use  of  TBI.  Virtually  all  of  them  informed  the  Advisory
Committee  that  they  no  longer  have  any  records  describing  these  activities,  besides  what
has  been  published  in  the  literature;  some  of  the  institutions  have  informed  the  staff
orally  that  they  did  "nonexperimental"  TBI  treatments  on  patients  with  leukemia  during
the  1950s  and  therefore  would  have  no  protocols  or  review  documents  of  that  work.

3.  Three  were  conducted  during  the  Manhattan  Project  years,  and  five  between
1951  and  1971.  ;

4.  Renamed  the  Oak  Ridge  Associated  Universities  (ORAU)  in  1966.

5.  City  of  Hope  Hospital  in  Duarte,  California.  Melville  L.  Jacobs  and  Fred  J.
Marasso,  "A  Four-Year  Experience  with  Total-Body  Irradiation,"  Radiology  84  (1965):
452-456  (using  a  cobalt  60  teletherapy  unit).

6.  The  terms  radiosensitive  and  radioresistant  are  relative  terms  that  appear  to
have  little  meaning  in  current  medical  parlance,  but  were  widely  used  at  least  into  the
1970s.

7.  J.  T.  Chaffey  et  al.,  "Total  Body  Irradiation  in  the  Treatment  of  Lymphocytic
Lymphoma,"  Cancer  Treatment  Report  61  (1977):  1 149-1 152;  M.  H.  Lynch  et  al.,  "Phase
II  Study  of  Busulfan,  Cyclophosphamide,  and  Fractionated  Total  Body  Irradiation  as  a
Preparatory  Regimen  for  Allogeneic  Bone  Marrow  Transplantation  in  Patients  with
Advanced  Myeloid  Malignancies,"  Bone  Marrow  Transplant  15,  no.  1  (January  1995):
59-64  (This  study  combines  chemotherapy  with  doses  of  1,200  rad  of  TBI).

8.  R.  A.  Clift,  C.  D.  Buckner,  and  F.  R.  Appelbaum,  "Allogeneic  Marrow
Transplantation  in  Patients  with  Chronic  Myeloid  Leukemia  in  the  Chronic  Phase:  A
Randomized  Trial  of  Two  Irradiation  Regimes,"  Blood  77  (1991):  1660.

9.  The  methods  of  reporting  radiation  doses  have  changed  over  the  years.
Throughout  the  1950s,  researchers  tended  to  report  the  dose  in  roentgens  ("R"  or  "r"),
which  represented  the  amount  of  radiation  emanating  from  the  source;  from  the  1960s
through  the  present,  researchers  reported  the  dose  in  rad  (also  known  as  centigrays),
which  represent  the  amount  of  radiation  absorbed  by  the  body.  For  x  rays,  the  rem-- for
roentgen  equivalent  man— is  equivalent  to  a  rad.  A  given  air  dose  (roentgen)  of  radiation
is  generally  equivalent  to  a  lesser  body  dose  (rad).  For  example,  325  R  (air  dose)  was
reported  in  one  experiment  as  approximately  equivalent  to  200  rad  (body  dose).

10.  Fred  A.  Mettler,  Jr.,  and  Arthur  C.  Upton,  Medical  Effects  of  Ionizing
Radiation,  2d  ed.  (Philadelphia:  W.  B.  Saunders  Co.,  1995),  41,  278  (table  adapted  from


407


J.  T.  Conklin).

1 1 .  One  of  the  difficulties  in  reporting  the  chance  of  death  at  a  given  dose  is  a
confusion  between  the  use  of  air  (or  skin)  dose  as  opposed  to  body  (or  midline  tissue)
dose  (the  former  is  generally  significantly  higher  than  the  latter),  and  whether  or  not
medical  care  is  provided.  Many  investigators  fail  to  indicate  clearly  what  type  of  dose
they  are  using.  Mettler  and  Upton  report  that  "[i]t  is  probable  that  with  appropriate
medical  treatment,  the  LD50  [lethal  dose  for  50  percent  of  recipients]  skin  dose  may  be  in
the  range  of  6  Gy  (600  rad)  or  an  MTD  [midline  tissue  dose]  of  3.96  Gy  (396  rad)."
Mettler  and  Upton,  Medical  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation,  278.

12.  Fred  G.  Medinger  and  Lloyd  F.  Craver,  "Total  Body  Irradiation,  with  review
of  cases,  "American  Journal  of  Roentgenology  48  (1942):  651,  668.  The  investigators
used  a  250-kilovolt  (K.V)  machine  and  doses  up  to  450  R. The  dose  that  would  cause
severe  bone  marrow  damage  and  be  potentially  lethal  was  considered  to  be  between  200
and  400  roentgens.  This  figure  can  vary  depending  on  the  length,  frequency,  and
intensity  of  the  dose;  for  example,  a  single  dose  of  200  R  will  generally  cause  more
severe  reactions  than  five  doses  of  40  R  spaced  over  one  or  two  weeks.

13.  J.  J.  Nickson,  "Blood  Changes  in  Human  Beings  Following  Total-Body
Irradiation,"  in  Industrial  Medicine  on  the  Plutonium  Project:  Survey  and  Collected
Papers,  ed.  Robert  S.  Stone  (New  York:  McGraw-Hill  Book  Co.,  1951),  337.

14.  B.  V.  A.  Low-Beer  and  Robert  S.  Stone,  "Hematological  Studies  on  Patients
Treated  by  Total-Body  Exposure  to  X-ray,"  in  Stone,  Industrial  Medicine,  338.

15.  Ibid.

16.  Ibid.,  338-39.

17.  Alan  Gregg,  M.D.,  Chairman  of  the  AEC  Advisory  Committee  on  Biology
and  Medicine,  to  Dr.  Stone,  20  October  1948  ("The  secrecy  with  which  some  of  the
work  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  UCLA-1 1 1094-A-24),  1.

18.  Robert  Stone,  M.D.,  to  Allen  Gregg,  M.D.,  Chairman  of  the  AEC  Advisory
Committee  on  Biology  and  Medicine,  4  November  1948  ("The  candor  of  your  letter  of
October  20th  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  UCLA-1 1 1094-A-25),  3.

19.  Medinger  and  Craver,  "Total  Body  Irradiation,"  668.

20.  L.  F.  Craver,  "Tolerance  to  Whole-Body  Irradiation  of  Patients  with
Advanced  Cancer,"  in  Stone,  Industrial  Medicine,  485.

21.  Ibid.,  486.

22.  Ibid.

23.  See  Nickson,  "Blood  Changes  in  Human  Beings  Following  Total-Body
Irradiation,"  in  Stone,  Industrial  Medicine.  After  World  War  II,  Dr.  Nickson  continued
to  engage  in  TBI  research  at  Sloan-Kettering.

24.  Ibid.,  309.  "The  persons  who  were  subjected  to  radiation  during  this  study
were  divided  into  three  general  groups.  The  first  group  consisted  of  eight  persons  who
had  neoplasms  that  could  not  be  cured  but  still  were  not  extensive  enough  to  influence
general  health. . . .  The  second  group  consisted  of  three  persons  who  had  illnesses  that
were  generalized  and  chronic  in  nature  [two  had  arthritis]. . .  .  The  third  group  consisted
of  three  normal  volunteers  from  among  the  personnel  of  the  Metallurgical  Laboratory."
Ibid.

25.  Robert  Stone,  M.D.,  to  Shields  Warren,  M.D.,  6  October  1948  ("I  have
recently  been  shown  a  letter  from  Mr.  Keller  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120994-A-27),  1.


408


26.  Ibid.

27.  The  chief  of  the  AEC's  Insurance  Branch  supported  declassification:  "It  is
conceivable  that  if  it  became  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  that  experiments  on  human
beings  such  as  those  described  in  this  document  were  being  carried  on  by  the
Commission  it  might  result  in  some  adverse  publicity  and  perhaps  encourage  litigation.
However,  we  feel  that  this  objection  is  outweighed  by  the  advantages  to  be  gained  by
making  this  information  available  to  technically  trained  personnel."  Clyde  E.  Wilson,
Chief  of  the  AEC  Insurance  Branch,  to  Anthony  Vallado,  Deputy  Declassification
Officer,  AEC  Declassification  Branch,  10  September  1948  ("Review  of  Document")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-E-42).

28.  Gregg  to  Stone,  20  October  1948,  1 .

29.  For  example,  M.  Soden  et  al.,  "Lymphoid  Irradiation  in  Intractable
Rheumatoid  Arthritis:  Long-term  Follow-up  of  Patients  Treated  with  750  rad  or  2,000
rad, .  .  ."  Arthritis  and  Rheumatism  15,  no.  3  (May  1989):  577-582.

30.  Ibid.

3 1 .  Stone  to  Gregg,  4  November  1 948,  2.

32.  NEPA  stood  for  Nuclear  Energy  for  the  Propulsion  of  Aircraft.

33.  Other  participants  included  Robley  Evans,  Hymer  Friedell,  Robert  Stone,
Shields  Warren,  and  Stafford  Warren,  all  of  whom  were  often  called  on  for  other
radiation  research  advice  in  the  late  1 940s  and  1 950s  by  the  AEC,  the  DOD,  and  other
agencies.  NEPA  Advisory  Committee  on  Radiation  Tolerance  of  Military  Personnel,
proceedings  of  3  April  1949  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120994-B-1).

34.  In  a  subsequent  paper,  Stone  cited  Jenner's  experiments  with  smallpox,
Walter  Reed's  experiments  with  yellow  fever,  and  World  War  II  experiments  with
malaria  on  prisoners  as  examples.  Robert  S.  Stone,  paper  of  3 1  January  1 950  for  the
NEPA  project  ("Irradiation  of  Human  Subjects  as  a  Medical  Experiment")  (ACHRE  No.
NARA-070794-A-9).  Stone  also  sought  to  justify  the  use  of  normal  humans  on  national
security  grounds:  "The  information  desired  is  sufficiently  important  to  the  safety  of  the
U.S.,"  and  the  doses  would  be  "relatively  low  in  relation  to  the  lethal  doses."  The  "safety
of  the  U.S."  language  was  later  dropped  by  the  full  committee.  NEPA  Advisory
Committee,  3  April  1949,  43-48.

35.  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  transcript  (partial)  of
proceedings  of  10  November  1950  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-012795-C-1),  6.

36.  Ibid.,  29.

37.  ACBM,  transcript  of  proceedings  of  3  April  1949.

38.  Ibid.,  39-40.  Stone  noted  that  "volunteering  exists  when  a  person  is  able  to
say  Yes  or  No  without  fear  of  being  punished  or  of  being  deprived  of  privileges  due  him
in  the  ordinary  course  of  events."  Ibid.,  39.

39.  Ibid.,  40.

40.  Ibid.,  42.

41.  Ibid.,  41.

42.  NEPA  Medical  Advisory  Committee,  5  January  1950  ("Radiation  Biology
Relative  to  Nuclear  Energy  Powered  Aircraft")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-060295-C-1),  4.

43.  Robert  S.  Stone,  3 1  January  1950,  3.  "The  extremely  small  hazard  of
undetectable  genetic  effect,  undetectable  effect  on  the  life  span  and  possibly  slight  effect
on  the  blood  picture  are  the  extremely  small  hazards  that  must  be  weighed  against  the
value  of  having  actual  experience  with  exposure  of  humans."  Ibid.,  4.

409


44.  See  Committee  on  the  Biological  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation,  National
Research  Council,  Health  Effects  of  Exposure  to  Low  Levels  of  Ionizing  Radiation:  BEIR
V  (Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy  Press,  1990),  168-169,  171-175,242-253.  See
also  Donald  A.  Pierce  and  Michael  Vaeth,  "Cancer  Risk  Estimation  from  the  A-Bomb
Survivors:  Extrapolation  to  Low  Doses,  Use  of  Relative  Risk  Models  and  Other
Uncertainties,"  in  Low  Dose  Radiation:  Biological  Bases  of  Risk  Assessment,  eds.  K.  F.
Baverstock  and  J.  W.  Stather  (London:  Taylor  &  Francis,  1989),  54,  58-59.  The  BEIR  V
leukemia  model  includes  both  a  linear  and  quadratic  term  in  dose,  the  latter  dominating
the  risk  above  90  rad.  For  a  single  exposure  to  10  rad,  the  BEIR  report  gives  an
estimated  excess  relative  risk  of  15  percent  (lifetime,  averaging  over  ages  at  exposure).
Extrapolating  this  figure  linearly  to  1 50  rad  would  produce  an  excess  relative  risk  of
2.25,  but  when  the  quadratic  term  is  included,  the  total  relative  risk  becomes  7.  This
estimate  is  in  perfect  agreement  with  the  observed  and  fitted  risks  among  the  atomic
bomb  survivors  at  150  rad,  as  plotted  by  Pierce  and  Vaeth.  For  exposures  at  particular
ages  and  expressed  at  particular  follow-up  times,  the  relative  increase  can  be  either  larger
or  smaller  than  this  figure.

45.  Ibid.,  3-4.

46.  W.  A.  Selle,  Secretary,  NEPA  Medical  Advisory  Committee,  to  Dr.  Richard
Meiling,  Director,  Medical  Services  Division,  22  March  1950  ("As  indicated  to  you  in
person  on  March  8  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-070794-A-9).

47.  DOD  Research  and  Development  Board,  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences,
proceedings  of  23  May  1950  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-15),  10.

48.  Marion  W.  Boyer,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Robert  LeBaron,  Chairman,
Military  Liaison  Committee,  10  January  1951  ("As  you  know,  one  of  the  important
problems  that  would  confront  us  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040395-B-1),  3-4.

49.  Participants  were  Alan  Gregg  (ACBM  chairman).  Dr.  Austin  Brues  of  the
Argonne  National  Laboratory  (operated  by  the  University  of  Chicago),  Dr.  Simon
Cantril  of  Swedish  Hospital  in  Seattle,  Dr.  Andrew  Dowdy  (who  had  chaired  the  NEPA
Medical  Advisory  Committee),  Dr.  Louis  Hempelmann  of  Rochester,  Dr.  Robert  Loeb  of
Columbia,  Dr.  Curt  Stern  of  the  ACBM,  and  Dr.  Shields  Warren  of  the  DBM.  Ibid.

50.  Mettler  and  Upton,  Medical  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation,  278.

5 1 .  Marion  W.  Boyer,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Robert  LeBaron,  Chairman,
Military  Liaison  Committee,  10  January  1951  ("As  you  know,  one  of  the  important
problems  that  would  confront  us  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040395-B-1),  3-4.

52.  Joseph  Hamilton  to  Shields  Warren,  28  November  1950  ("Unfortunately,  it
will  not  be  possible  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-071395-A-9).

53.  Armed  Forces  Medical  Policy  Council  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  30  June
1951  ("Annual  Report")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-091694-A-1),  158.

54.  Interview  of  Colonel  John  Pickering  by  Dr.  John  Harbert  and  Gilbert
Whittemore  (ACHRE  staff),  transcription  of  audio  recording,  2  November  1994
(ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Targeted  Interview  Project),
14ff.

55.  Wilson  F.  Humphreys,  Colonel,  USMC,  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,  to
Commanding  Officers,  16  November  1959  ("DAS A  Base  Commanders'  Weekly
Bulletin")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-082694-A-1),  2.

56.  At  least  four  of  the  five  DOD  institutions  used  the  new,  high-energy
radiation  sources-cobalt  60  or  megavoltage  x  rays.  (The  available  data  did  not  make

410


clear  what  type  of  unit  Sloan-Kettering  used.)

57.  John  A.  Isherwood,  Chief,  Army  Radiological  Service,  to  Assistant  Chief,
U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Development  Command,  22  October  1958  ("1.
Recommend  approval  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-16).

58.  Executive  Panel  of  the  NEPA  Medical  Advisory  Committee,  proceedings  of
8  July  1949  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A- 17),  77  (emphasis  added).

59.  Carroll  Wilson,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Robert  Stone,  5  November  1947
("Your  Letter  of  September  18  .  .  .  ")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-052295-A-1).

60.  P.L.  82-557,  sec.  5,  66  Stat.  725  (16  July  1952).

61.  Max  Brown  to  Vice  Chancellor,  University  of  Pittsburgh,  12  March  1957
("This  in  reply  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-012395-A-6).

62.  Department  of  Defense,  Defense  Atomic  Support  Agency,  Contract  DA-49-
146-XZ-029  (contract  with  the  University  of  Cincinnati),  Modification  no.  1,  ASPR.  no.
7-203.22,  28  February  1961  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-23).

63.  Lieutenant  Lando  Haddock,  USAF,  19  October  1950  ("Negotiation  of  Cost-
Reimbursement")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-062 1 94-B-3 ).

64.  The  results  were  published  in  Lowell  S.  Miller,  Gilbert  H.  Fletcher,  and
Herbert  B.  Gerstner,  to  the  School  of  Aviation  Medicine,  report  of  May  1957  ("Systemic
and  Clinical  Effects  Induced  in  263  Cancer  Patients  by  Whole  Body  X-Irradiation  with
Nominal  Air  Doses  of  15  to  200  R")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-102594-A-1);  and  Lowell  S.
Miller,  Gilbert  H.  Fletcher,  and  Herbert  Gerstner,  "Radiobiologic  Observations  on  Cancer
Patients  Treated  with  Whole-Body  X-Irradiation,"  Radiation  Research  4  ( 1 958): 1 50-
165.

65.  Miller,  Fletcher,  and  Gerstner,  "Systemic  and  Clinical  Effects,"  1.  "Colonel
McGraw  stated  that  he  thought  that  the  cases  studied  were  terminal  cases.  He  was
answered  in  the  negative."  Air  Force  Research  Council,  proceedings  of  14  January  1954
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-092894-A-1),  7.

66.  Miller,  Fletcher,  and  Gerstner,  "Systemic  and  Clinical  Effects,"  2.

67.  Ibid.  The  report  also  states  that  "[a]t  the  time  of  irradiation,  these  patients
were  still  able  to  walk  and  perform  light  physical  tasks."

68.  Ibid.

69.  Attachment,  Lester  J.  Peters,  Division  of  Radiotherapy,  M.  D.  Anderson
Cancer  Center,  to  Steve  Klaidman  (ACHRE),  22  December  1994  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-
010995-A-l).

70.  School  of  Aviation  Medicine  (SAM)  Research  Council,  proceedings  of  14
January  1954  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-092894-A-1),  6-7.

71.  Ibid.

72.  Robert  B.  Payne  to  the  School  of  Aviation  Medicine,  report  of  February
1963  ("Effects  of  Acute  Radiation  Exposure  on  Human  Performance")  (ACHRE  No.
DOD-121994-C-1),  10.

73.  One  Air  Force  reviewer  stressed  that  "the  patients  cannot  be  considered  as
normal  people."  SAM  Research  Council,  proceedings  of  14  January  1954,  6.  Even  the
study  investigator  warned  that  "the  application  of  these  results  to  operational  problems
should  be  made  with  cautious  regard  for  the  medical  status  of  the  subjects  and  the
limited  relevance  of  experimental  criteria."  Payne,  "Effects  of  Acute  Radiation,"  12.

74.  SAM  Research  Council,  proceedings  of  14  January  1954,  7.


411


75.  SAM  Research  Council,  proceedings  of  29  August  1955  (ACHRE  No.
DOD-092894-A-2),  6.

76.  Miller,  Fletcher,  and  Gerstner,  "Systemic  and  Clinical  Effects,"  20.  The
researchers  noted  that  their  paper  deals  only  with  "those  aspects  of  the  problem  which  are
of  general  radiobiological  interest;  a  strictly  clinicotherapeutic  evaluation  will  be  given
elsewhere."  Ibid.,  1 .  It  is  not  known  if  such  a  therapeutic  evaluation  was  ever  completed,
and  none  has  been  located  to  date.

77.  Ibid.,  7.  The  report  states  that  30  percent  claimed  subjective  improvement,
but  that  this  was  possibly  due  to  psychological  rather  than  clinical  factors.  Ibid.

78.  Ibid.,  20.  They  cautioned,  however,  that  the  condition  of  terminally  ill
patients  may  increase  their  sensitivity  to  both  acute  and  longer-term  radiation  symptoms.
Ibid.

79.  SAM  Research  Council,  proceedings  of  14  January  1954,  7.

80.  Colonel  Robert  B.  Payne,  "Effects  of  Acute  Radiation  Exposure  on  Human
Performance,"  Review  3-63,  USAF  School  of  Aerospace  Medicine,  Aerospace  Medical
Division,  February  1963,  3.

81.  William  C.  Levin,  Martin  Schneider,  and  Herbert  B.  Gerstner,  paper  of
1960  for  Air  University,  School  of  Aviation  Medicine  ("Initial  Clinical  Reaction  to
Therapeutic  Whole-Body  X-Irradiation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-072794-B-18).

82.  The  original  contract  was  for  a  "Study  of  the  Effects  of  Total  and  Partial
Body  Radiation  on  Iron  Metabolism  and  Hematopoiesis";  it  was  later  known  as  "The
Effect  of  Total  Body  Irradiation  on  Immunologic  Tolerance  of  Bone  Marrow  and
Homografts  of  Other  Living  Tissue."  (The  Advisory  Committee  has  eight  progress
reports.)  At  least  three  of  the  patients  had  arthritis.  Baylor  University  College  of
Medicine  to  the  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project  (AFSWP),  report  of  1  January
1954  (ACHRE  No.  BAY-101794-A-1).  This  condition  was  not  among  the  diseases  listed
as  having  been  treated  in  the  Baylor  University  College  of  Medicine  to  Defense  Atomic
Support  Agency  (DASA),  report  of  1  February  1963-31  January  1964  (ACHRE  No.
BAY-101794-A-2),  6.

83.  The  "fundamental  problem  has  been  to  define  effect  of  irradiation  and
quantitate  effect  with  amount  of  radiation  exposure."  Baylor  University  College  of
Medicine  to  DASA,  report  of  1  February 1963-31  January  1964,  I.  Collins  and  Loeffler
published  preliminary  findings  in  1956.  Vincent  P.  Collins  and  R.  Kenneth  Loeffler,
"The  Therapeutic  Use  of  Single  Doses  of  Total  Body  Radiation,"  American  Journal  of
Roentgenology  75  (1956):  546.  Collins  appears  to  have  first  conducted  DOD-sponsored
TBI  research  in  1953  while  at  Columbia  University.  See  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical
Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare,  proceedings  of  7  January  1953  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-072294-
B-l),  item  10.

84.  Baylor  University  College  of  Medicine  to  AFSWP,  report  of  1  September
1955-31  January 1956  ("A  Study  of  the  Effects  of  Total  and  Partial  Radiation  on  Iron
Metabolism  and  Hematopoiesis")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-090994-D-2),  6.

85.  Baylor  University  College  of  Medicine  to  DASA,  report  of  1  February
1963-31  January  1964,  1;  Baylor  University  College  of  Medicine  to  Defense  Atomic
Support  Agency,  report  of  1  February  1961-31  January  1962  (ACHRE  No.  BAY-
101794-A-3),2.

86.  Baylor  University  College  of  Medicine  to  DASA,  report  of  1  February
1963-31  January  1964,7-8.


412


87.  Ibid.,  5-6.

88.  Ibid.,  6.

89.  Ibid.,  12.

90.  Because  the  Advisory  Committee  did  not  receive  all  of  the  progress  reports
on  this  study,  the  total  number  of  patients  cannot  be  determined.  Nor  could  the  Advisory
Committee  determine  what  type  of  teletherapy  unit  the  investigators  used.  Memorial
Hospital  was  the  site  of  the  second  Manhattan  Project  experiment  under  Dr.  Craver.  Dr.
Nickson  was  the  author  of  the  report  on  the  third  Manhattan  Project  experiment  at
Chicago;  he  came  to  Sloan-Kettering  after  World  War  II.

91.  Sloan-Kettering  Institute  for  Cancer  Research  to  AFSWP,  report  of  1  March
1958  ("Quarterly  Report-Study  of  the  Post- Irradiation  Syndrome  in  Humans")  (ACHRE
No.  DOD-062194-A-9).

92.  Sloan-Kettering  Institute  for  Cancer  Research  to  AFSWP,  report  of  1  May
1956  ("Annual  Report")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-060794-A-1 ),  abstract  page.

93.  Captain  E.  Richard  King,  "Use  of  Total-Body  Radiation  in  the  Treatment  of
Far  Advanced  Malignancies,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  1 77  (2
September,  1961):  86-89.

94.  Ibid.,  613.

95.  Ralph  R.  Cavalieri,  Milton  Van  Metre,  F.  W.  Chambers,  and  R.  Richard
King,  "Taurine  Excretion  in  Humans  Treated  by  Total-Body  Radiation,"  Journal  of
Nuclear  Medicine  1  (1960):  186,  187,  190.  Taurine  is  an  amino  acid  that  is  excreted  in
the  urine.  A  1962  request  for  funding  document  from  the  Navy  Bureau  of  Medicine  and
Surgery  proposed  to  continue  the  biological  dosimeter  project  through  1 967  by  collecting
"daily  urine  specimens  from  patients  exposed  to  total  body  irradiation  for  therapeutic
purposes."  U.S.  Navy,  Bureau  of  Medicine  and  Surgery,  1  June  1962  ("Biological
Dosimeter  of  Radiation  Injury")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-090994-C-3),  1-4.  The  Navy
informed  the  Advisory  Committee  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  this  project  was  ever
funded.

96.  Standard  Form  522,  revised  August  1954  ("Authorization  for  Administration
of  Anesthesia  and  for  Performance  of  Operations  and  other  Procedures")  (ACHRE  No.
DOD-020695-B- 1 ). Standard  Form  522  was  modified  for  TBI  procedures.  A  second
form  was  sometimes  used  for  "consent  to  drastic  radiation/chemical  therapy,"  which
states  that  "[t]he  possibility  that  drastic  radiation  therapy  may  be  useful  .  .  .  ,  the  results
expected,  and  the  consequences  likely  to  ensue,  have  been  explained  to  me  and  I  hereby

give  my consent "  NHBETH  Form  27B,  August  1959  ("Consent  to  Drastic

[Radiation]  Therapy")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-020695-B-2).

97.  Shields  Warren,  "Ionizing  Radiation  and  Medicine,"  Scientific  American,
September  1959,  165.

98.  AG  Central  Files,  January-May  1962  ("Conference,  Meetings,  Military,
Naval  and  All  Divisions")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-081994-A-1),  2.

99.  Over  the  course  of  the  eleven-year  DOD  study,  ten  researchers  participated
in  the  project  and  contributed  to  the  DASA  reports:  Eugene  L.  Saenger,  M.D.;  Edward
B.  Silberstein,  M.D.;  Ben  L.  Friedman,  M.D.;  James  G.  Kereiakes,  Ph.D.;  Harold  Perry,
M.D.;  Harry  Horwitz,  M.D.;  Bernard  S.  Aron,  M.D.;  I-Wen  Chen,  Ph.D.;  Carolyn
Winget,  M.A.;  and  Goldine  C.  Gleser,  Ph.D.  Dr.  Saenger  was  the  principal  investigator  of
the  study,  but  not  the  attending  physician  or  the  administering  radiologist  for  any  of  the
patients.

413


100.  Dr.  Saenger  had  developed  an  interest  in  studying  the  "effect  of  whole
body  radiation  on  the  patient  suffering  from  cancer"  while  serving  in  the  military  as  chief
of  the  radioisotope  laboratory  at  Brooke  General  Hospital,  Fort  Sam  Houston,  Texas.
Raymond  Suskind  et  al.  to  Dean  of  the  College  of  Medicine,  University  of  Cincinnati,
January  1972  ("The  Whole  Body  Radiation  Study  at  the  University  of  Cincinnati")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-2)  (hereafter  "Suskind  Report"),  40.  He  also  "had  treated
occasional  private  patients  with  leukemia  and  lymphoma  in  my  office  using  whole  body
radiation  and  had  been  impressed  with  its  potentiality."  Saenger's  response  to  "Questions
from  the  [Suskind]  Committee"  (undated)  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-24),  2.

101.  Philip  A.  Pizzo  et  al.,  "Solid  Tumors  of  Childhood,"  in  Cancer:  Principles
and  Practice  of  Oncology,  4th  ed.,  eds.  Vincent  T.  Devita,  Samuel  Hellman,  and  Steven
A.  Rosenberg  (Philadelphia:  J.  B.  Lippincott,  Co.,  1993),  1782-1783.

102.  Robert  W.  McConnell,  President  of  the  American  College  of  Radiology,  to
U.S.  Senator  Mike  Gravel,  3  January  1972  ("This  letter  represents  our  response  .  .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-7).  The  ACR  is  the  principal  organization  serving
radiologists,  with  programs  that  focus  on  the  practice  of  radiology  and  the  delivery  of
comprehensive  radiological  health  services.  The  stated  purposes  of  the  ACR  are  to
advance  the  science  of  radiology,  improve  radiologic  service  to  the  patient,  study  the
economic  aspects  of  the  practice  of  radiology,  and  encourage  improved  and  continuing
education  for  radiologists  and  allied  professional  fields.  The  ACR  committee  consisted
of  Drs.  Henry  Kaplan  (Stanford),  Frank  Hendrickson  (Chicago  Presbyterian-St.  Lukes),
and  Samuel  Taylor  (also  Presbyterian-St.  Lukes).

103.  Suskind  report  (released  in  February  1972).  The  Suskind  Committee  was
appointed  by  the  dean  of  the  medical  school  at  the  University  of  Cincinnati.  It  was
constituted  of  eleven  physicians  from  the  University  of  Cincinnati;  one  of  the  members,
Dr.  Bernard  S.  Aron,  had  worked  on  the  TBI  program.

104.  Junior  Faculty  Association,  25  January  1972  ("A  Report  to  the  Campus
Community")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-8).  The  JFA  was  a  group  of  untenured  arts
and  sciences  faculty  who  organized  at  the  University  of  Cincinnati  in  the  late  1960s  to
protect  each  other's  rights  to  speak  out  on  social  issues  and  to  work  for  fair  tenure
procedures.  In  the  fall  of  1971,  a  committee  of  this  association,  chaired  by  Martha
Stephens,  currently  professor  of  English  at  the  university,  obtained  the  reports  submitted
to  the  DOD  by  the  Cincinnati  doctors  and  studied  the  TBI  project's  history  of  consent,  as
well  as  the  blood  counts  and  survival  times  of  the  subjects.  The  JFA  then  held  a  press
conference  on  25  January  1972,  charging  that  "many  patients  in  the  project  paid  severely
for  their  participation  and  often  without  even  knowing  they  were  part  of  an  experiment"
and  asking  that  the  study  be  terminated  by  the  president  of  the  university  (which  did  in
fact  take  place  the  following  March).  The  JFA  report  was  covered  widely  in  the  press
and  in  a  number  of  subsequent  studies.

105.  James  M.  Cox,  past  Chairman  of  the  ACR  Commission  on  Radiation
Oncology,  statement  at  Hearing  on  Radiation  Experiments  Conducted  by  the  University
of  Cincinnati  Medical  School  with  Department  of  Defense  Funds  before  the
Subcommittee  on  Administrative  Law  and  Governmental  Relations  of  the  House
Judiciary  Committee,  103d  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  1 1  April  1994  (ACHRE  No.  IND-091594-A-

1).

106.  Dr.  Eugene  Saenger,  University  of  Cincinnati,  to  Department  of  the  Army,
Office  of  Surgeon  General,  25  September  1958  ("Application  for  Research  Project:
Metabolic  Changes  in  Humans  Following  Total  Body  Irradiation")  (ACHRE  No.  UCIN-

414


103194-A-l).

107.  Dr.  Saenger  is  also  a  long-standing  member  of  the  American  College  of
Radiology  and  has  served  on  the  National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and
Measurements  (NCRP)  and  the  BEIR  (Biological  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation)
Committee  in  1972.  In  1963,  he  wrote  the  AEC's  handbook  on  Medical  Aspects  of
Radiation  Accidents  and  regularly  consulted  for  the  AEC  on  radiation  accidents  and
workers'  claims  of  radiation  exposure.  Saenger  has  written  almost  200  articles  in  the
medical  literature  on  radiology  and  other  topics.  Eugene  L.  Saenger,  statement  at
Hearing  on  Radiation  Experiments  Conducted  by  the  University  of  Cincinnati  Medical
School  with  Department  of  Defense  Funds  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Administrative
Law  and  Governmental  Relations  of  the  House  Judiciary  Committee,  103d  Cong.,  2d
Sess.,  1 1  April  1994  (ACHRE  No.  IND-091594-A-1).

108.  Saenger  to  the  Department  of  the  Army,  25  September  1958,  3.  Dr.
Saenger's  proposal  to  the  DOD  was  restricted  to  a  description  of  the  post-TBI  metabolic
studies  for  which  he  was  requesting  funding,  and  it  made  no  mention  of  a  primary
clinical  purpose  for  the  TBI  such  as  a  medical  therapy  or  therapeutic  research.

109.  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  to  the  Defense  Atomic
Support  Agency,  report  of  February  1960-October  1961  ("Metabolic  Changes  in
Humans  Following  Total  Body  Irradiation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-1),  1.

1 10.  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  to  the  Defense  Atomic
Support  Agency,  report  of  1  November  1961-30  April  1963  ("Metabolic  Changes  in
Humans  Following  Total  Body  Irradiation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-1),  3.

111.  See,  for  example,  ibid.,  3  ("Patients  with  solid  neoplasms  which  are  not
radiosensitive  are  sought.").  Three  children  with  Ewing's  sarcoma  were  also  treated  and
included  in  the  study.  In  addition,  the  original  grant  proposal  stated  that  they  would
compare  one  group  of  patients  "with  relatively  radio-resistant  lesions  (e.g.,  stomach,
bowel,  brain)"  with  a  second  group  "with  highly  radio-sensitive  tumors  (lymphomas)."
Saenger  to  the  Department  of  the  Army,  25  September  1958,  4-5.  The  records  indicate
that  the  latter  group  was  never  used.

1 12.  Eugene  Saenger  and  Ben  Friedman,  14  November  1962  ("An  appraisal  of
Human  Studies  in  Radiobiological  Aspects  of  Weapons  Effects")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
09 1 894- A- 1).

113.  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  to  the  Defense  Atomic
Support  Agency,  report  of  February  1960-30  April  1966  ("Metabolic  Changes  in
Humans  Following  Total-Body  Irradiation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-1),  2.

1 14.  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  to  DAS  A,  report  of  1
November  1960-30  April  1963,  19.

1 15.  Eugene  L.  Saenger  et  al.,  "Whole  Body  and  Partial  Body  Radiotherapy  of
Advanced  Cancer,"  American  Journal  of  Roentgenology  117(1973):  670-685.  The
article  makes  no  mention  of  the  Defense  Department-related  funding  or  studies  that  were
performed  as  part  of  this  program.

1 16.  Eugene  Saenger,  M.D.,  interview  by  Ron  Neumann,  M.D.,  Gary  Stern,  and
Gilbert  Whittemore  (ACHRE  staff),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  15  September  1994
(ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Targeted  Interview  Project),
50-51.

1 17.  Suskind  report,  12;  ACR  report,  10.


415


1 1 8.  Calculated  from  3,804  patient  days  at  approximately  $114  per  day.  Eugene
L.  Saenger,  statement  at  Hearing  on  Radiation  Experiments  Conducted  by  the  University
of  Cincinnati  Medical  School  with  Department  of  Defense  Funds  before  the
Subcommittee  on  Administrative  Law  and  Governmental  Relations  of  the  House
Judiciary  Committee,  103d  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  1 1  April  1994  (ACHRE  No.  IND-091594-A-
D.7.

1 19.  Interview  with  Saenger,  15  September  1994,  50;  Saenger  testimony,  1 1
April  1994,7.

120.  Interview  with  Saenger,  15  September  1994,  54.

121.  Interview  with  Saenger,  20  October  1994,  22-23.

122.  Interview  with  Saenger,  15  September  1994,  64.

123.  Ibid.,  94.

124.  Eugene  L.  Saenger  to  Dr.  Steven  Kessler,  DASA  Project  Officer,  19
February  1969  ("Enclosed  are  eight  copies  . . ."),  item  9  ("Dosimetry").

125.  Lieutenant  Colonel  James  B.  Hartgering,  Director  of  the  Army  Division  of
Nuclear  Medicine  and  Chemistry,  to  Lieutenant  Colonel  Arthur  D.  Sullivan,  Assistant
Chief  of  the  Army  Medical  Research  and  Development  Command,  7  November  1958
("Application  for  Research  Contract")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-18)  (reviewing
application  submitted  by  Dr.  Eugene  Saenger).

126.  Lieutenant  Colonel  Arthur  D.  Sullivan,  Assistant  Chief  of  the  Army
Biophysics  and  Astronautics  Research  Branch,  to  Colonel  Hullinghorst,  12  November
1958  ("Application  for  Research  Contract")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-19).

127.  Captain  David  Lambert,  Deputy  Chief  of  DASA  Weapons  Effects  and
Tests,  to  DASA  Director  of  Logistics,  29  October  1959  ("Negotiation  of  Contract")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-20).

128.  Colonel  John  A.  Isherwood  to  Assistant  Chief  of  the  Army  Biophysics
and  Astronautics  Research  Branch,  22  October  1958.  Isherwood  also  described  Dr.
Saenger  as  "well  qualified  to  conduct  such  research."

129.  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  to  DASA,  report  of  February
1960-October  1961,  1.

1 30.  Dr.  Saenger  informed  the  Advisory  Committee  that  he  did  not  believe  that
he  was  required  to  submit  the  marrow  proposal  to  the  FCR,  but  elected  to  do  so  on  his
own.  Interview  with  Saenger,  20  October  1994,  6.

131.  Dr.  Edward  A.  Gall,  FCR  Chairman,  to  Dr.  Clifford  G.  Grulee,  Dean  of  the
University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine,  6  May  1966  ("This  relates  to  a  request .  .
.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-1 1).

132.  Dr.  George  Shields  to  Dr.  Edward  A.  Gall,  FCR  Chairman,  13  March  1967
("Protection  of  Humans  with  Stored  Autologous  Marrow")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-
A-l  1).  Shields  also  indicated  that  he  was  withdrawing  from  the  FCR  subcommittee  "for
reasons  of  close  professional  and  personal  contact  with  the  investigators  and  with  some
of  the  laboratory  phases  of  this  project."  Ibid.

133.  Thomas  E.  Gaffney  to  Dr.  Edward  A.  Gall,  FCR  Chairman,  17  April  1967
("I  cannot  recommend  approval .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-1 1).  In  a
subsequent  letter,  dated  18  May  1967,  Gaffney  indicated  to  Gall  his  approval  subject  to  a
proviso  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-1 1).

134.  Dr.  Clifford  G.  Grulee,  Dean  of  the  College  of  Medicine,  to  Dr.  Ben  I.
Friedman,  23  May  1967  ("The  Research  Committee  has  reported  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.

416


DOD-042994-A-11).

135.  Dr.  Evelyn  V.  Hess,  FCR  Chairman,  to  Drs.  Edward  B.  Silberstein  and
Eugene  L.  Saenger,  22  July  1971  ("The  Therapeutic  Effect  of  Total  Body  Irradiation
Followed  by  Infusion  of  Autologous  Marrow  in  Humans")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-
A-l  1),  2.

136.  Dr.  Edward  B.  Silberstein  to  Dr.  Evelyn  Hess,  4  April  1972  ("Enclosed
is  the  protocol  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-1 1[5]>.

137.  Dr.  Evelyn  Hess,  FCR  Chairman,  to  Clifford  G.  Grulee,  Jr.,  Dean,  College
of  Medicine,  28  August  1972  ("Evaluation  of  the  Therapeutic  Effectiveness  of  Wide-
Field  Radiotherapy  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  042994- A- 1 1  [25]).

138.  Evelyn  Hess,  20  December  1971  ("Historical  Review  of  the  Total  Body
Irradiation  and  the  Faculty  Research  Committee  Reviews")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-080195-
A-l).

139.  FCR  Chairman  to  the  Members  of  the  Faculty  Committee  on  Research,
18  April  1969  ("NIH  Review  .  . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-2 1 ),  1  (describing
meeting  with  Dr.  Mark  Connor,  NIH  representative  from  the  Institutional  Relations
Division).

140.  D.  T.  Chalkley,  Ph.D.,  Chief  of  the  NIH  Office  for  Protection  of  Research
Risks,  to  U.S.  Senator  Sam  Nunn,  9  December  1974  ("Thank  you  for  your  notes  .  .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-12[5]),l-2.  In  his  letter  to  Senator  Nunn,  Chalkley  states
that  "[w]hole-body  radiation  at  levels  of  a  few  hundred  rads  is  lethal  only  when  it
destroys  the  blood  building  cells  of  the  bone  marrow.  In  the  treatment  of  these  patients
who  had  widespread  metastatic  cancer,  a  large  part  of  the  marrow  was  first  removed,  the
patient  was  then  treated  and  the  marrow  returned.  None  of  the  patients  involved  died
from  radiation  sickness."  However,  the  marrow  transplants  that  Chalkley  refers  to  were
not  successfully  performed  until  1969  and  were  done  on  only  eight  of  the  eighty-eight
patients.  See  Saenger  et  al.,  "Radiotherapy  of  Advanced  Cancer,"  682.

141.  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  to  the  Defense  Atomic
Support  Agency,  report  of  1  May  1966-30  April  1967  ("Metabolic  Changes  in  Humans
Following  Total-Body  Irradiation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-1).

142.  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  to  DASA,  report  of  February
1960-30  April  1966,31.

143.  Ibid.,  17.

144.  Saenger,  et  al.,  "Radiotherapy  of  Advanced  Cancer,"  682.

145.  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  to  DASA,  report  of  February
1960-October  1961,  20  (emphasis  added).  Note  that  the  Sloan-Kettering  study  sought
patients  in  similar  condition.

146.  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  to  the  Defense  Atomic
Support  Agency,  report  of  1  May  1968-30  April  1969  ("Radiation  Effects  on  Man:
Manifestations  and  Therapeutic  Effects")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-1),  1  (emphasis
added).

147.  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  to  the  Defense  Atomic
Support  Agency,  report  of  1  May  1969-30  April  1970  ("Radiation  Effects  on  Man:
Manifestations  and  Therapeutic  Effects")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-1),  1  (emphasis
added).

148.  Ibid.,  34.  Over  the  course  of  the  study,  twenty-eight  patients  lived  more
than  one  year  after  being  irradiated;  seventeen  survived  for  more  than  two  years,  at  least

417


three  people  lived  more  than  five  years.

149.  Suskind  report,  65.

150.  Ibid.,  63.

151.  McConnell  to  Gravel,  3  January  1 972,  8.  Autopsies  were  performed  on
only  eight  patients,  so  bone  marrow  biopsies  were  used  for  this  evaluation.

152.  Eugene  L.  Saenger  et  al.,  "Radiotherapy  of  Advanced  Cancer,"  677.

153.  Eugene  L.  Saenger,  20  October  1994  ("How  Can  the  Quality  and  Length  of
Life  of  a  Cancer  Patient  Be  Determined?")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-021095-B-2).

1 54.  The  article  reported  that  the  median  survival  time  for  the  three  cancers  for
which  there  was  a  statistically  large-enough  group-colon,  cancer,  breast-was  longer
than  comparable  groups  receiving  no  treatment,  and  almost  as  long  as  for  patient  groups
receiving  chemotherapy.  Saenger  et  al.,  "Radiotherapy  of  Advanced  Cancer,"  672-676.

155.  Suskind  report,  59.

156.  Ibid.

157.  University  of  Cincinnati  College  of  Medicine  to  the  Defense  Atomic
Support  Agency,  report  of  February  1 960-October  1961  ("Metabolic  Changes  in
Humans  Following  Total  Body  Irradiation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-A-1),  3-4.
When  asked  by  ACHRE  staff  whether  information  on  these  side  effects  would  have  been
withheld  in  the  absence  of  the  DOD  funding,  Dr.  Saenger  replied  in  the  first  interview
that  "we  would  not  have  [had  that  period  of  silence]."  Interview  with  Saenger,  15
September  1994,  74.  In  the  second  interview  he  said  that  he  probably  would  still  have
withheld  the  information.  Interview  with  Saenger,  20  October  1994,  12.  A  number  of
contemporary  articles  discuss  the  use  of  compazine  in  the  treatment  of  radiation  sickness.
See,  for  example,  Joseph  H.  Marks,  "Use  of  Chlorpromazine  in  Radiation  Sickness  and
Nausea  from  Other  Causes,"  New  England  Journal  of  Medicine  (June  1 954):  999- 1 00 1 ;
M.  J.  Solan,  "Prochlorperazine  and  Irradiation  Sickness,"  British  Medical  Journal  (21
November  1959): 1068-1069;  G.  H.  Berry,  W.  Duncan,  and  Carol  M.  Bowman,  "The
Prevention  of  Radiation  Sickness:  Report  of  a  Double  Blind  Random  Clinical  Trial
Using  Prochlorperazine  and  Metopimazine,"  Clinical  Radiology  22  (1971):  534-537.

158.  Melville  L.  Jacobs  and  Fred  J.  Marasso,  "A  Four-Year  Experience  with
Total-Body  Irradiation,"  Radiology  84  (1965):  452-456  (twelve  of  fifty-two  patients  still
experienced  some  degree  of  nausea  and  vomiting).  This  was  the  only  known  U.S.  TBI-
effects  study  that  performed  TBI  on  patients  with  radioresistant  cancers  that  does  not
appear  to  have  been  funded  by  the  DOD.  Sixteen  of  the  fifty-two  patients  had
radioresistant  carcinomas  and  were  chosen  because  they  had  life  expectancies  of  less  than
one  month.  Ibid.

159.  Three  main  consent  forms  were  used:  the  first  beginning  in  1965;  the
second  beginning  in  1967;  and  the  third  beginning  in  1971  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042994-
A-22).

160.  Dr.  Saenger  stated  that  he  was  prompted  to  begin  the  use  of  written  consent
when  he  received  a  letter  in  1964  from  the  DASA  requiring  all  DOD  components  and
contractors  to  obtain  written  consent  for  the  use  of  "investigational  drugs  in  any  manner,
including  research  programs."  Saenger  said  he  reasoned  that  there  was  little  difference
between  drugs  and  radiation  in  this  context  and  therefore  applied  the  same  standard.
Interview  with  Saenger,  15  September  1994,  77.

161.  A  second  form  went  into  effect  at  the  same  time  for  bone  marrow
aspiration  and  storage  and  is  basically  the  same  as  the  above.

418


162.  Gore  Hearing,  35-36.

163.  University  of  Cincinnati  Medical  Center,  Faculty  Committee  on  Research,
1967,  "Voluntary  Consent  Statement."

164.  University  of  Cincinnati,  "Consent  Form,"  1971.

165.  Interview  with  Saenger,  20  October  1 994,  7-8.  This  procedure  is  also
described  by  Dr.  Silberstein  in  "Extension  of  Two-part  Consent  Form,"  New  England
Journal  of  Medicine  29 1  ( 1 974):  155-1 56.

166.  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  transcript  of
Cincinnati  Small  Panel  Meeting,  21  October  1994,  136.

167.  Suskind  report,  50.

168.  ACR  report,  7.

169.  Suskind  report,  28-29.  It  also  notes  approximately  2  percent  of  all  patients
(both  in-  and  outpatient)  at  the  hospital  were  private  patients.  Ibid.,  29.

170.  In  1969,  several  of  the  University  of  Cincinnati  researchers  reported  on  the
effects  of  TBI  and  PBI  on  cognitive  and  emotional  processes  based  on  a  study  involving
sixteen  of  the  patients.  The  published  article  notes  that  the  "relevant  intellectual
characteristics  of  the  patient  sample  were  as  follows:  a  low-educational  level  (ranging
from  0  to  eight  years  of  education  with  a  mean  of  4.2  years),  a  low-functioning
intelligence  quotient  (ranging  from  63  to  1 12  on  the  full-scale  Wechsler-Bellevue  with  a
mean  of  84.5),  and  a  strong  evidence  of  cerebral  organic  deficit  in  the  baseline
(preradiation)  measure  of  most  of  the  patients."  Louis  A.  Gottschalk,  Eugene  L.  Saenger
et  al.,  "Total  and  Half  Body  Irradiation:  Effect  on  Cognitive  and  Emotional  Processes,"
Archives  of  General  Psychiatry  21  (November  1969):  574,575.  Although  these
findings  suggest  that  there  may  have  been  serious  issues  about  competence  among  the
Cincinnati  subjects,  questions  have  been  raised  about  this  interpretation.  For  example,
Martha  Stephens,  former  chair  of  the  JFA,  has  argued  as  follows:  "These  citizens  were
not  necessarily  dumb  or  defective,  and  nothing  whatever,  in  my  view,  can  be  judged  from
the  batteries  of  tests  of  the  psychologists;  in  the  very  face  of  them,  they  are  unconvincing
and  contradictory.  .  .  .  These  individuals  were  in  a  bad  place  in  life— cancer  was  more
frightening  then  than  it  is  now,  and  so  were  public  hospitals.  To  find  people  coming  to
tumor  wards  (or  in  the  hospital  for  evaluation  of  their  cancers)  to  be  depressed  and  upset
and  somewhat  disoriented,  and  not  particularly  interested  in  answering  irrelevant
questions  .  .  .  would  be  quite  normal,  I  would  guess.  ...  It  seems  to  be  best  not  to  lead
the  public  to  believe  that  what  happened  in  Cincinnati  could  only  have  happened  to
people  who  weren't  smart  enough  to  protect  themselves,  were  virtually  retarded."  Martha
Stephens  to  Gary  Stern,  Advisory  Committee  staff,  3  June  1995  ("I  want  to  thank  you  for
the  documents  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-060595-A),  10-11.

171.  ORINS  was  renamed  the  Oak  Ridge  Associated  Universities  (ORAU)  in
1966.  In  1991,  ORAU  became  the  contractor  of  the  Oak  Ridge  Institute  for  Science  and
Education  (ORISE).

172.  Following  standard  retention  schedules,  NASA  destroyed  funding  and
procurement  records  on  the  Oak  Ridge  project  in  1980.  Additional  administrative,
technical  monitoring,  and  contractor  reports  still  exist.  Medical  records  associated  with
this  project  were  never  in  the  possession  of  NASA  and  always  resided  with
ORINS/ORAU.

173.  ORINS  had  training  courses  in  the  handling  and  use  of  radioisotopes;  it
also  helped  develop  the  supervoltage  cobalt  60  teletherapy  machine.

419


174.  Gore  Hearing,  110.

175.  Howard  L.  Rosenberg,  "Informed  Consent:  How  the  Space  Program
Experimented  with  Dwayne  Sexton's  Life,"  Mother  Jones,  September/October  1981, 31-
44.  On  13  March  1994,  60  Minutes  aired  a  story  based  on  the  Mother  Jones  article.

176.  Gore  Hearing,  1 10.

177.  Gore  Hearing,  144.

178.  Gore  Hearing,  161  (statement  of  Andrew  J.  Stofan,  Acting  Associate
Administrator  for  NASA  Office  of  Space  Sciences).

179.  Ibid.,  200.  See  also  page  151  (testimony  of  William  R.  Bibb,  Director  of
the  Research  Division,  Oak  Ridge  Operations  Office)  and  159-63  (testimony  of  Stofan).

180.  Ibid.,  290.

181.  G.  A.  Andrews  et  al.,  paper  of  December  1 970  for  Oak  Ridge  Associated
Universities  ("Hematologic  and  Therapeutic  Effects  of  Total-Body  Irradiation  (50  R-100
R)  in  Patients  with  Malignant  Lymphoma,  Chronic  Lymphocytic  and  Granulocytic
Leukemias,  and  Polycythemia  Vera"),  2,  reprinted  in  Gore  Hearing,  49.

182.  Gore  Hearing,  264.

183.  Ibid.,  291.

184.  Ibid.,  293.

185.  Ibid.,  294-295.  Following  the  Gore  Hearing,  Dr.  Helen  Vodopick,  one  of
the  ORAU  physicians  who  testified,  wrote  a  memo  to  the  file  stating  that  "the  therapy
given  was  different  from  other  therapy  given  that  had  been  tried  at  that  time.  However,
the  other  therapies  that  were  being  investigated  were  also  radically  different.  ...  All  of
these  various  approaches  were  tried  since  nothing  had  worked  before  and  certainly
something  new  and  innovative  had  to  be  tried  to  try  to  improve  the  survival  rate  of  acute
leukemia  in  children."  Comments  to  the  file  prepared  by  Helen  Vodopick,  M.D.,
following  the  Gore  Hearing,  6.

186.  Reprinted  in  Gore  Hearing,  32-33.

187.  U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  report  of  16  April  1974  ("ORAU
Review"),  reprinted  in  Gore  Hearing,  186.  William  Bibb  testified  that  this  report  was
written  for  the  purpose  of  shutting  down  the  hospital,  which  had  outlived  its  purposes
and  could  no  longer  be  justified  as  a  necessary  AEC  program.  Accordingly,  he  stated,
some  of  the  statements  in  the  report  were  "overstatements  in  order  to  accomplish  what
we  felt  should  be  accomplished,  knowing  full  well  that  closing  down  any  Government
hospital  is  hard,  closing  down  that  hospital  was  extraordinarily  hard."  Gore  Hearing,
182.

188.  H.  R.  Resolution  1010,  97th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.  186(1983).  The  Committee
noted  that  a  later  hearing  was  held  on  the  state  of  radiation  epidemiology  within  DOE  on
19  May  1982.  Ibid.

189.  It  had  recommended  that  ORAU  compare  the  effect  of  TBI  with
chemotherapy  "for  a  variety  of  other  solid  tumors  such  as  carcinoma  of  the  breast,
carcinoma  of  the  gastroenteric  tract,  the  urogenital  tract,  etc.,  as  well  as  for  lymphomas."
U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  report  of  16  April  1974,  reprinted  in  Gore  Hearing,
247.

190.  Ibid.,  reprinted  in  Gore  Hearing,  252.


420


PRISONERS:  A  CAPTIVE  RESEARCH

POPULATION


In  July  1949  a  medical  advisory  panel  met  in  Washington,  D.C.,  to
discuss  psychological  problems  posed  by  radiation  to  crews  of  a  then-planned
nuclear-powered  airplane.  During  the  meeting  an  Air  Force  colonel  noted  that
crewmen  were  concerned  about  anything  physically  harmful,  but  especially
anything  seen  as  a  threat  to  what  he  delicately  called,  using  a  euphemism  of  that
gentler  era,  the  "family  jewels."',  The  nuclear-powered  airplane  was  never  built,
but  concern  about  radiation  hazards  to  testicular  function  in  space  flight,  weapons
plants,  nuclear  power  plants,  and  on  an  atomic  battlefield  remained.

This  concern  provides  some  of  the  context  for  a  brace  of  almost  identical
experiments  carried  out  between  1963  and  1973  in  which  131  prisoners  in  Oregon
and  Washington  submitted  to  experimental  testicular  irradiations  with  national
security  and  other  societal  goals,  but  no  potential  for  therapeutic  benefit  for  the
subjects.  The  studies  were  directed  by  Carl  G.  Heller,  M.D.,  a  leading
endocrinologist  of  his  day,  and  by  Dr.  Heller's  protege,  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  M.D.
Perhaps  because  they  involved  irradiation  of  the  testicles,  they  have  caused  great
public  concern.  They  were  also  noted  briefly  among  the  thirty-one  experiments
Representative  Edward  J.  Markey  of  Massachusetts  publicized  in  his  1986  report
on  radiation  research  on  human  subjects.2  Both  studies  were  funded  solely  by  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission.  Drs.  Heller  and  Paulsen  were  interested  in  the
effects  of  radiation  on  the  male  reproductive  system,  especially  the  production  of
sperm  cells.  The  government  was  interested  in  the  effects  of  ionizing  radiation  on
workers,  astronauts,  and  other  Americans  who  might  be  exposed,  in  a  nuclear
attack  for  example.


421


Part  II

Both  doctors  viewed  prisoners  as  ideal  subjects.  They  were  healthy,  adult
males  who  were  not  going  anywhere  soon.  In  1963  few  if  any  researchers  had
moral  qualms  about  using  them  as  subjects,  although  there  seems  to  have  been  a
consensus  in  the  research  community  on  the  rules  that  should  govern  such
experimentation.  By  1973,  however,  some  ethicists,  researchers,  and  others,  such
as  the  investigative  journalist  Jessica  Mitford,  pointed  out  that  incarcerated  people
were  not  well  placed  to  make  voluntary  decisions.  In  1976,  the  National
Commission  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects  of  Biomedical  and  Behavioral
Research  recommended  the  banning  of  almost  all  research  on  prisoners.  Prison
experimentation  effectively  came  to  an  end  in  this  country  a  few  years  after  the
commission  offered  its  recommendations.

The  Heller  and  Paulsen  experiments  were  groundbreaking  scientifically,
and  they  were  conceived  as  having  an  important  government  purpose-protecting
Americans  engaged  in  building  the  nation's  high-priority  nuclear  and  space
programs.  But  looking  back  through  the  lens  of  history,  there  appears  to  be  an
inconsistency  between  the  way  human  subjects  were  treated  in  this  research  and
the  standards  intended  to  govern  their  treatment.  Although  both  Dr.  Heller  and
Dr.  Paulsen  showed  sensitivity  to  some  ethical  issues,  in  both  cases  the
researchers  themselves  and  some  of  those  charged  with  oversight  at  both  the
federal  and  state  levels  did  not  completely  live  up  to  what  appear  to  have  been
well-understood  standards  applicable  to  their  research.  In  this  failure  they  were
no  different  from  many  if  not  most  of  their  contemporaries.  Times  were
changing,  however,  and  in  the  end,  state  officials  shut  down  both  sets  of
experiments,  bringing  practice  more  into  line  with  the  standards  already  on  the
books  of  some  government  agencies  and  private  research  organizations.

Among  researchers  who  used  prisoners  as  subjects,  as  early  as  1958  the
Nuremberg  Code  was  recognized  as  a  model  set  of  rules  for  conducting  human
subject  research.3  It  is  equally  clear  that  the  work  in  the  Oregon  and  Washington
prisons  did  not  carefully  follow  all  these  rules.  Moreover,  the  funding  agency,
the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  had  its  own  rules  for  the  conduct  of  research
with  human  volunteers,  which  were  not  fully  observed  in  these  experiments.  As
discussed  in  chapter  1,  in  1956  the  AEC's  Isotope  Division  program  provided  that
where  healthy  subjects  were  used  for  research,  they  needed  to  be  volunteers  "to
whom  the  intent  of  the  study  and  the  effects  of  radiation  have  been  outlined."  A
1966  memorandum  from  the  AEC's  office  of  general  counsel  to  the  director  of  the
Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  sheds  some  light  on  the  agency's  standards  at
that  time,  and  why  it  had  them.  The  specific  experiments  referred  to  in  the
memo-plutonium  and  promethium  injections  or  ingestion— appear  not  to  have
been  carried  out,  but  the  "use  of  human  volunteers  in  experiments"  is  addressed  in
general  terms.  The  memo  calls  for  "volunteers]"  to  sign  a  written,  witnessed
agreement  attesting  to  their  sound  mental  state  and  free  will,  to  their
understanding  of  the  purposes  and  risks  of  the  planned  experimentation,  and  that
the  experiment  was  not  being  done  for  their  benefit.  The  relevant  paragraph

422


Chapter  9

concludes:  "Assuming  complete  understanding  and  no  unequal  bargaining  factors
(e.g.  pressure  on  prisoners  to  submit),  such  an  agreement  would  protect  against
liability  for  unauthorized  invasion  of  the  person."4

Finally,  those  attending  a  1962  conference  on  research  using  prisoners  as
subjects  reached  a  consensus  on  a  higher  standard  for  subject  selection  and
informed  consent  than  was  typically  observed  in  Oregon  and  Washington.  For
example,  the  conferees  argued  that  potential  prisoner  subjects  should  have  enough
information  to  avoid  their  being  deceived  and  that  inducements  to  prisoners
should  not  be  so  high  as  to  invalidate  consent.

The  surviving  researchers  disagree  somewhat  about  the  genesis  of  the
testicular  irradiation  experiments,  which  the  available  documentary  evidence  does
not  completely  resolve.  What  follows  is  a  version  based  on  and  consistent  with
both  the  Heller  and  Paulsen  accounts.

Early  in  1963  the  AEC  held  a  conference  in  Fort  Collins,  Colorado,  for
investigators  who  were  using  radiation  in  studies  of  reproduction  in  animals.  Dr.
Heller  was  invited.  In  a  bedside  deposition  taken  after  he  suffered  a  stroke  in
1976,  he  recounted  what  happened:

The  whole  conference  finally  focused  on  man.  A
given  group  at  Fort  Collins  was  working  on  mice
and  another  group  was  working  on  bulls,  and  then
they  concluded,  what  would  happen  to  man[?]
They  extrapolated  the  data  from  bulls  or  mice  to
man.  I  commented  one  day  to  Dr.  [Paul]  Henshaw,
who  was  then  . . .  with  the  AEC,  that  if  they  were  so
interested  in  whether  it  was  happening  to  man,  why
were  they  fussing  around  with  mice  and  beagle
dogs  and  canaries  and  so  on?  If  they  wanted  to
know  about  man,  why  not  work  on  man[?]5

According  to  Dr.  Heller,  that  remark  stimulated  the  AEC  to  solicit  a
research  proposal  from  him  to  study  the  effects  of  radiation  on  the  male
reproductive  system.

Dr.  Paulsen,  however,  recalled  a  different  scenario  in  a  1994  interview  by
Committee  staff  at  his  office  in  Seattle.6  He  said  he  was  invited  to  the  AEC's
Hanford,  Washington,  facility  in  1962  to  act  as  a  consultant  after  three  workers
were  accidentally  exposed  to  radiation.  Like  Dr.  Heller,  Dr.  Paulsen  had  no
previous  experience  with  radiation  exposure.  He  said  he  was  brought  in  because
of  a  chapter  he  had  written  on  the  testes  in  an  endocrinology  text.  As  a  result  of
that  experience,  Dr.  Paulsen  said,  he  became  interested  in  doing  work  on  the
effects  of  radiation  on  testicular  function,  discussed  his  idea  with  colleagues,  and
contacted  the  AEC  to  see  if  the  agency  would  be  interested  in  funding  his  work.

Whether  or  not  Drs.  Heller  and  Paulsen  initiated  their  projects  separately,

423


Part  II

the  practical  result  was  that  both  received  AEC  funding  and  carried  out  their
research  projects  during  the  1960s  and  early  1970s  in  the  Oregon  and  Washington
state  prisons,  respectively.  Although  the  two  studies  were  very  much  alike  in
their  methods  and  objectives,  there  were  small  differences.  They  used  different
consent  forms,  different  levels  and  means  of  irradiation,  and  different  subject-
selection  procedures.

This  chapter  provides  accounts  of  the  Washington  and  Oregon
experiments  that  focus  on  the  failure  of  these  two  research  projects  to  live  up  fully
to  ethical  standards  of  their  time;  the  Committee's  analysis  of  the  risk  to  subjects
in  the  two  experiments;  capsule  descriptions  of  a  number  of  other  radiation
experiments  using  prisoners  as  subjects;  and  a  general  ethical  analysis  of  radiation
experiments  using  prisoners  as  subjects.

THE  OREGON  AND  WASHINGTON  EXPERIMENTS

Oregon

In  1963  Carl  Heller  was  an  internationally  renowned  medical  scientist,  a
winner  of  the  important  Ciba  Prize.  In  the  field  of  endocrinology,  he  was  a
preeminent  researcher,  so  it  is  not  surprising  that  when  the  AEC  decided  to  fund
work  on  how  radiation  affects  male  reproductive  function,  they  would  turn  to
him.  He  designed  a  study  to  test  the  effects  of  radiation  on  the  somatic  and
germinal  cells  of  the  testes,  the  doses  of  radiation  that  would  produce  changes  or
induce  damage  in  spermatogenic  cells,  the  amount  of  time  it  would  take  for  cell
production  to  recover,  and  the  effects  of  radiation  on  hormone  excretion.7  To
accomplish  this  he  had  a  machine  designed  and  built  that  would  give  a  carefully
calibrated,  uniform  dose  of  radiation  from  two  sides.  The  subject  lay  face  down
with  his  scrotum  in  a  small  plastic  box  filled  with  warm  water  to  encourage  the
testes  to  descend.  On  either  side  of  the  box  were  a  matched  set  of  x-ray  tubes.
The  alignment  of  the  x-ray  beams  could  be  checked  through  a  system  of
peepholes  and  mirrors.  Subjects  were  required  to  agree  to  be  vasectomized
because  of  a  perceived  small  risk  of  chromosomal  damage  that  could  lead  to  their
fathering  genetically  damaged  children.  To  carry  out  this  work  Dr.  Heller  was  to
receive  grants  totaling  $1.12  million  over  ten  years.

Mavis  Rowley,  Dr.  Heller's  former  laboratory  assistant,  who  was
interviewed  by  Advisory  Committee  staff  in  1 994,  said  that  the  AEC  "was  looking
for  a  mechanism  to  measure  the  effect  of  ionizing  radiation  on  the  human
body.  .  .  ."  She  said  testicular  irradiation  was  promising  because  the  testes  have  "a
cell  cycle  and  physiology  which  allows  you  to  make  objective  measurements  of
dosimetry  and  effect  without  having  to  expose  the  whole  body  to  radiation."8

Although  official  documentation  is  fragmentary,  it  is  clear  from  other
evidence  such  as  interviews  and  contemporary  newspaper  articles  that  the
concerns  cited  above—worker  exposures,  potential  exposures  of  the  general

424


Chapter  9

population  as  a  result  of  accidents  or  bomb  blasts,  and  exposures  of  astronauts  in
space-- were  of  interest  to  the  AEC.

In  the  case  of  the  astronauts,  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space
Administration  has  been  able  to  find  no  evidence  of  direct  involvement  in  Dr.
Heller's  project.  Yet  Ms.  Rowley  remembers  with  clarity  that  NASA
representatives,  even  astronauts  themselves,  attended  meetings  with  their  research

team.  In  her  1994  interview,  she  said,  "NASA  was  also  very  interested  in  this

There  was  a  section  of  activity  which  was  devoted  to  what  effect  would  the  sun
flares  and  so  forth,  which  give  out  significant  radiation  have  on  the  astronauts.
And  so  there  were  meetings  that  went  on  which  actually  included  some  of  the

astronauts  attending  them "  Rowley  explained  that  the  astronauts  were

concerned  that  reduced  testosterone  production  might  make  them  lose  muscle
function,  which  could  compromise  their  mission,  but,  belying  the  comment  of  the
colonel  in  the  1 949  nuclear-powered  airplane  meeting  who  said  that  crewmen
were  concerned  about  anything  physically  harmful,  she  said  they  seemed
altogether  unconcerned  "about  their  own  health."9  During  his  1976  deposition.
Dr.  Heller  remarked:  "What  we  would  like  to  supply  the  medical  community  with
is  what  happens  when  you  give  continual  very  small  doses  such  as  might  be  given
to  an  astronaut."10  Moreover,  in  1965,  Dr.  Heller  served  as  a  consultant  to  a
Space  Radiation  Panel  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences-National  Research
Council.  And  finally,  Harold  Bibeau,  an  Oregon  subject,  recalls  that  Dr.  Heller
told  him  when  he  signed  up  for  the  program  that  NASA  was  interested  in  the
results."

At  the  time  the  Oregon  experiment  got  under  way,  using  prisoners  as
research  subjects  was  an  accepted  practice  in  the  United  States.  And  in  this
particular  study  Oregon  law  was  interpreted  by  state  officials  as  permitting  an
inmate  to  give  his  consent  to  a  vasectomy,  which  they  appear  to  have  seen  as
analogous  to  consenting  to  becoming  an  experimental  subject.  However,
important  ethical  concerns  of  today  such  as  balancing  risks  and  benefits,  the
quality  of  informed  consent,  and  subject-selection  criteria  appear,  on  the  whole,
not  to  have  been  carefully  addressed  or  not  addressed  at  all  by  the  investigators
or  those  responsible  for  oversight.

With  respect  to  the  health  risks  associated  with  the  testicular  irradiations,
there  was  very  little  reliable  "human"  information  at  the  time  about  the  long-term
effects  of  organ-specific  testicular  exposure  to  radiation.  Hiroshima  and
Nagasaki  bomb  data,  however,  which  of  course  were  not  organ  specific,
suggested  that  the  likelihood  of  inducing  cancers  with  the  amount  of  radiation  Dr.
Heller  planned  to  use  was  small.  By  way  of  comparison,  today's  standard
radiotherapy  of  the  pelvis,  for  prostate  cancer  for  example,  often  results  in  doses
to  the  testicles  in  the  ranges  encountered  in  these  experiments.

So  what  did  Dr.  Heller  tell  subjects  about  the  chronic  risk?  The  answer
appears  to  have  been  nothing  in  the  early  years  and,  later  on,  perhaps  a  vague
reference  to  the  possibility  of  "tumors"  but  not  cancer.  In  a  deposition  taken  in

425


Part  II

1 976  a  subject  named  John  Henry  Atkinson  said  he  was  never  told  there  was  a
possibility  of  getting  cancer  or  any  kind  of  tumors  as  a  result  of  the  testicular
irradiation  experiments.  Other  subjects  deposed  in  1 976  also  said  they  had  not
been  warned  of  cancer  risk,  and  when  asked  by  one  subject  about  the  potential  for
"bad  effects,"  Dr.  Heller  was  reported  to  have  said,  "one  chance  in  a  million."12
When  asked  in  his  own  deposition  what  the  potential  risks  were,  Dr.  Heller  said,
"The  possibility  of  tumors  of  the  testes."  In  response  to  the  question  "Are  you
talking  about  cancer?"  Dr.  Heller  responded,  "I  didn't  want  to  frighten  them  so  I
said  tumor;  I  may  have  on  occasion  said  cancer."13

The  acute  risks  of  the  exposures  included  skin  burns,  pain  from  the
biopsies,  orchitis  (testicular  inflammation)  induced  by  repeated  biopsies,  and
bleeding  into  the  scrotum  from  the  biopsies.  Using  consent  forms  and  depositions
as  a  basis  for  determining  what  the  subjects  were  told,  it  appears  that  they  were
adequately  informed  about  the  possibility  of  skin  burns;  sometimes  informed,  but
perhaps  inadequately,  about  the  possibility  of  pain;  informed  about  the  possibility
of  bleeding  only  from  1970  on;  and  never  informed  of  the  possibility  of  orchitis.

As  far  as  the  quality  of  consent  is  concerned,  the  evidence  suggests  that
many  if  not  most  of  the  subjects  might  not  have  appreciated  that  some  small  risk
of  testicular  cancer  was  involved.  It  is  also  not  clear  that  all  subjects  understood
that  there  could  be  significant  pain  associated  with  the  biopsies  and  possible  long-
term  effects.

In  selecting  subjects,  Dr.  Heller  appears  to  have  relied  on  the  prison
grapevine  to  get  out  the  word  about  a  project  he  apparently  believed  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission  did  not  want  publicized.  In  a  1964  memorandum  he  was
paraphrased  as  saying  "at  Oregon  State  Penitentiary,  the  existence  of  the  project  is
practically  unknown."14  In  a  1966  letter  to  the  National  Institutes  of  Health
describing  the  review  process  at  the  Pacific  Northwest  Research  Foundation,  a
respected,  free-standing  research  center,  Dr.  Heller  and  two  colleagues  wrote  that
"the  inmates  are  well  informed  by  fellow  inmates  regarding  the  general
procedures  concerned  (i.e.,  collecting  seminal  samples,  collecting  urines  for
hormone  studies,  submitting  to  testicular  biopsies,  receiving  medication  orally  or
by  injection,  and  having  vasectomies  . . .  )."15  If  the  volunteers  were  healthy  and
normal  they  were  accepted  for  a  trial  period  during  which  they  donated  semen
samples.  If  all  went  well,  in  a  matter  of  weeks  they  were  accepted  into  the
radiation  program,  as  long  as  the  prison's  Roman  Catholic  chaplain  certified  that
they  were  not  Roman  Catholics—because  of  the  church's  objection  to  their
providing  masturbated  semen  samples—and  they  could  pass  what  appears  to  have
been  a  cursory  psychological  screening  designed  to  ensure  they  had  no  underlying
objections  to  the  required  vasectomy.  A  copy  of  a  form  titled  "Psychiatric
Examination"  provided  by  Harold  Bibeau  and  signed  with  the  initials  of  the
examining  psychiatrist,  WHC  for  William  Harold  Cloyd,  says  in  full:


426


Chapter  9

1 1-4-64  Seen  for  Dr.  Heller  — -  Never  married,
quite  vague  about  future.  Feels  he  doesn't  want
children  — -  shouldn't  have  any.  I  agree.  No
contraindication  to  sterilization.

As  far  as  potential  health  benefits  to  the  subjects  are  concerned,  there  were
none,  and  the  inmates  who  volunteered  for  the  research  were  told  so.  The
benefits  were  in  the  form  of  financial  incentives.  A  review  of  applications  for  Dr.
Heller's  program,  and  depositions  of  prisoners  who  sued  Dr.  Heller,  various  other
individuals,  and  the  state  and  federal  governments  for  violation  of  their  rights,
clearly  indicates  that  money  was  in  most  cases  the  most  important  consideration
in  deciding  to  volunteer.  In  prison  industry  inmates  were  typically  paid  25  cents  a
day.  For  participating  in  the  Heller  program  they  received  $25  for  each  testicular
biopsy,  of  which  most  inmates  had  five  or  more,  plus  a  bonus  when  they  were
vasectomized  at  the  end  of  the  program,  which  appears  to  have  been  an  additional
$25.  Some  inmates  indicated  that  they  were  grateful  for  an  opportunity  to
perform  a  service  to  society.  An  obvious  ethical  question  is  whether  the  money
constituted  a  coercive  offer  to  prisoners.16

During  the  course  of  his  study  between  1963  and  1973  Dr.  Heller
irradiated  sixty-seven  inmates  of  the  Oregon  State  Prison.  Nominally,  three
institutions  had  some  oversight  responsibility  for  Dr.  Heller's  work~the  Oregon
Department  of  Corrections,  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  and  the  Pacific
Northwest  Research  Foundation,  where  Dr.  Heller  was  employed.  Practically
speaking,  however,  it  appears  that  Dr.  Heller  conducted  his  research
independently.  As  an  example  of  his  independence,  as  recounted  by  Ms.  Rowley,
the  AEC  requested  that  Dr.  Heller  begin  irradiating  subjects  at  600  rad  and  work
upward,  but  he  refused  and  in  the  end  set  600  rad  as  an  upper  limit.17  (It  is  not
clear  whether  Dr.  Heller  was  concerned  about  risk  to  the  subjects'  health  or  other
research  criteria.)  Dr.  Heller  also  was  a  member  of  the  committee  at  Pacific
Northwest  Research  Foundation  that  had  responsibility  for  overseeing  his
research,  giving  him  a  voice  in  the  oversight  process.  This  committee  was
authorized  under  a  foundation  regulation  titled  "Policy  and  Procedures  of  the
Pacific  Northwest  Research  Foundation  With  Regard  to  Investigations  Involving
Human  Subjects."  In  a  section  on  ethical  policy,  the  document  says:  "Since  1958
the  investigators  of  this  Foundation  have  conducted  all  research  under  the  ethical
provisions  of  the  Nuremburg  [sic]  Code,  modified  to  permit  consent  by  parents  or
legal  guardians.""*

In  January  1973,  in  a  rapidly  changing  research  ethics  environment,  the
Oregon  irradiations  were  terminated  when  Amos  Reed,  administrator  of  the
Corrections  Division,  ordered  all  medical  experimentation  programs  shut  down
essentially  because  he  concluded  that  prisoners  could  not  consent  freely  to
participate  as  subjects.  It  is  not  known  exactly  what  was  behind  the  timing  of
Reed's  decision,  but  according  to  Oregon  Times  Magazine,  he  had  recently  read

427


Part  II

Jessica  Mitford's  article  in  the  Atlantic  Monthly  titled  "Experiments  Behind  Bars"
and  an  article  in  The  (Portland)  Oregonian  headlined  "Medical  Research  Provides
Source  of  Income  for  Prisoners."19

In  1976,  a  number  of  subjects  filed  lawsuits  effectively  alleging  poorly
supervised  research  and  lack  of  informed  consent.  In  their  depositions  they
alleged  among  other  things  that  prisoners  had  sometimes  controlled  the  radiation
dose  to  which  they  were  exposed,  that  an  inmate  with  a  grudge  against  a  subject
filled  a  syringe  with  water  instead  of  Novocain,  resulting  in  a  vasectomy
performed  without  anesthetic,  and  that  the  experimental  procedures  resulted  in
considerable  pain  and  discomfort  for  which  they  were  not  prepared.20  These  suits
were  settled  out  of  court  in  1979.  Nine  plaintiffs  shared  $2,215  in  damages.21

For  the  last  twenty  years  all  efforts  to  put  in  place  a  medical  follow-up
program  for  the  Oregon  subjects  have  been  unsuccessful.  Dr.  Heller  and  Ms.
Rowley  explicitly  favored  regular  medical  follow-up.  During  the  period  between
1976  and  1979,  the  pending  lawsuits  might  have  been  the  reason  for  the  state's
reluctance  to  initiate  a  follow-up  program,  but  it  is  less  clear  why  during  other
periods  such  efforts  have  also  failed.  Two  possible  reasons  suggested  by  state
officials  are  the  cost  of  such  a  program  and  the  difficulty  of  finding  released
convicts.  Other  possible  reasons  are  that  a  follow-up  program  would  not  provide
a  significant  health  benefit  to  former  subjects  and  that  it  would  not  provide
significant  new  scientific  knowledge.  According  to  Tom  Toombs,  administrator
of  the  Corrections  Division  of  the  State  of  Oregon  at  the  time  of  the  lawsuits,  the
Corrections  Division  wrote  to  the  AEC's  successor  (the  Energy  Research  and
Development  Administration)  in  early  1976  recommending  medical  follow-up  for
the  subjects.  Mr.  Toombs  said  there  was  no  record  of  a  response  to  this  request.22
In  1990,  James  Ruttenber,  an  epidemiologist  at  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control,
designed  a  follow-up  program  for  Oregon,  but  it  has  not  been  implemented.  In  an
interview  with  Advisory  Committee  staff,  Dr.  Ruttenber  said  state  officials  told
him  that  Oregon  does  not  have  sufficient  funds  to  carry  out  his  plan.23

Washington

C.  Alvin  Paulsen  was  a  student  of  Carl  Heller  at  the  University  of  Oregon
in  the  late  1940s,  and  in  the  early  1950s  he  was  a  fellow  in  Heller's  lab.  But  by
1963  he  was  ready  to  direct  a  substantial  research  program  on  his  own.  His
chance  came  when  he  was  called  to  Hanford  to  consult  on  an  accidental  radiation
exposure  of  three  workers.  The  upshot  of  this  experience  was  a  $505,000  grant
from  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  to  study  the  effects  of  ionizing  radiation  on
testicular  function.  Dr.  Paulsen  remarked  in  the  1994  interview  with  Advisory
Committee  staff  that  the  main  research  questions  he  was  trying  to  answer  were
what  would  constitute  "a  reasonably  safe  dose"  of  ionizing  radiation  to  the  testes
as  well  as  what  dose  "would  cause  some  change  in  sperm  production  and
secondly,  to  determine  the  scenario  of  recovery."24  He  recalled  a  1962  letter  to

428


Chapter  9

the  Washington  State  Department  of  Institutions  in  which  he  wrote  that  he  would
like  to  find  out  "the  maximum  dose  of  radiation  that  would  not  alter
spermatogenesis"  and  "the  maximum  dose  of  radiation  that  affects
spermatogenesis,  but  only  temporarily."25 Dr.  Paulsen  said  in  a  1995  telephone
interview,  however,  that  for  reasons  he  can  no  longer  remember,  he  limited
dosage  to  400  rad,  not  enough  to  test  a  maximum-dose  thesis.26
In  the  1994  interview,  Dr.  Paulsen  said:

When  I  recognized  a  tremendous  void  of
information  relative  to  human  exposure,  and  space
travel  had  started  and  there  was  the  question  of
solar  explosions  and  ionizing  radiation  exposure  in
space,  the  nuclear  power  plants  were  going  in  then,
a  few  men  throughout  the  world  were  exposed  ...  I
then  contacted  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  to
determine  .  .  .  whether  they  would  entertain
receiving  an  application.27

Obviously,  Dr.  Paulsen  too  was  interested  in  the  space  applications  of  his
research.  In  1972  he  and  a  colleague  published  their  work  titled  "Effects  of  X-
Ray  Irradiation  on  Human  Spermatogenesis"  in  the  proceedings  of  the  National
Symposium  on  Natural  and  Manmade  Radiation,  a  NASA-sponsored  symposium.
And  Dr.  Paulsen  said  that  when  he  explained  his  research  to  potential  subjects,
one  of  the  things  he  referred  to  was  concern  about  exposures  in  space.28 An
August  1,  1963,  article  in  the  Oregonian  about  the  Washington  experiments  said,
"Although  one  of  the  primary  benefits  of  the  research  will  be  in  space  exploration,
the  findings  are  also  expected  to  be  of  value  to  an  atomic  industry  where  an
occupational  hazard  might  exist."29

One  major  difference  between  the  Heller  and  Paulsen  projects  was  that
from  the  outset  Dr.  Paulsen  planned  to  eventually  move  from  x  rays  to  neutron
irradiation,  which,  among  other  things,  is  more  analogous  than  x  rays  with  the
radiation  encountered  in  space.30  A  neutron  generator  was  purchased,  calibrated,
and  shielding  was  developed.  However,  the  work  took  years  to  complete,  and  this
part  of  the  research  was  never  carried  out.  Dr.  Paulsen  has  expressed  the  belief
on  a  number  of  occasions  that  one  reason  his  project  was  terminated  by  the  state
of  Washington  in  1970  was  concern  about  the  possibly  greater  risks  of  exposing
subjects  to  neutrons.  Another  difference  was  that  Dr.  Paulsen  used  a  standard
General  Electric  x-ray  machine,  which  he  says  he  believed  would  deliver  as
precise  and  well-targeted  a  dose  of  radiation  as  Dr.  Heller's  specially  designed
machine.31

Still  another  difference  was  that  at  a  certain  stage  of  the  Washington
study,  Dr.  Paulsen  used  the  prison  bulletin  board  to  advertise  for  volunteers.


429


Part  II

Under  the  headline  "Subject:  Additional  Volunteers  for  Radiation  Research
Project,"  a  notice  said  in  part:

The  project  concerns  effects  of  radiation  on  human
testicular  function  and  the  results  of  the  project  will
be  utilized  in  the  safety  of  personnel  working
around  atomic  steam  plants,  etc. ...  It  is  possible
that  those  men  receiving  the  higher  dosages  may  be
temporarily,  or  even  permanently,  sterilized.  It
should  be  understood  that  when  sterilized  in  this
manner,  a  man  still  has  the  same  desires  and  can
still  perform  as  he  always  has. . . .  Submit  to
surgical  biopsy.  (This  is  a  simple  procedure
performed  under  local  anesthesia.  It  is  not  a  very
painful  procedure.)32

According  to  a  March  9,  1976,  report  prepared  for  then-Governor  Daniel
J.  Evans  by  Harold  B.  Bradley,  director  of  Washington  state's  Adult  Corrections
Division,  neither  Dr.  Paulsen's  1963  outline  of  his  research  project  nor  the
November  1 964  announcement  to  inmates  mentioned  a  requirement  to  undergo  a
vasectomy  at  the  end  of  the  experiment  to  ensure  that  subjects  would  not  father
genetically  damaged  children.33  Dr.  Paulsen  said  he  did  not  recall  precisely  when
in  the  recruitment  process  the  vasectomy  requirement  was  conveyed  to  subjects,
but  he  pointed  out  that  once  it  was  they  had  the  option  of  dropping  out  of  the
project  without  penalty.34

Dr.  Paulsen's  review  process  and  consent  procedures  are  less  well
documented  than  Dr.  Heller's,  but  he  says  his  research  application,  including
provisions  for  subject  selection  and  consent,  was  approved  by  what  he  described
as  a  "human  experimentation  committee"  at  the  University  of  Washington.  He
said  the  process  was  "very  informal,"  noting  that  it  was  done  over  the  phone.
Paulsen  added  that  "somewhat  later"  his  work  was  also  reviewed  by  a  "radiation
safety  committee."35  His  recollection  of  both  processes  is  vague.  The  minutes  of
a  December  10,  1969,  meeting  of  a  University  of  Washington  Research  and
Clinical  Investigations  Committee  at  the  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  Hospital  in
Seattle  includes  a  recommendation  that  Dr.  Paulsen's  consent  form  be  modified  to
indicate  that  "a  risk  of  carcinoma  of  the  testes  exists  although  it  is  extremely
small."36  According  to  Mr.  Bradley's  report,  his  department's  records  show  that
Dr.  Paulsen's  project  was  reviewed  and  approved  on  two  occasions—March  1963
and  June  1966--by  the  University  Hospital  Clinical  Investigation  Committee.  The
report  shows  no  state  Department  of  Institutions  review  until  mid- 1 969. 37

The  Bradley  report  and  related  correspondence  from  1970  show  that  at
that  time  some  state  officials  had  a  sharp  concern  for  research  ethics.  In  mid-
1969  a  review  of  all  experimentation  in  the  prison  system  was  undertaken  by  Dr.

430


Chapter  9

Audrey  R.  Holliday,  chief  of  research  for  the  Department  of  Institutions At  this
time  Dr.  Holliday  took  steps  to  temporarily  halt  the  irradiation  phase  of  the
project.  After  investigating  the  origins  of  Dr.  Paulsen's  research,  Dr  Holliday
asked  the  University  of  Washington  to  conduct  a  new  review  of  the  study
emphasizing  her  concern  about  the  state's  responsibility  to  safeguard  human
rights.  The  university  stood  by  its  initial  findings  allowing  the  research  to
continue,  although  at  about  the  same  time  it  turned  down  Dr.  Paulsen's  request  to
move  into  the  neutron-irradiation  phase  of  his  project.31*

Dr.  Holliday  then  debated  the  issue  with  Dr.  William  Conte,  director  of
the  Department  of  Institutions,  who  was  disposed  to  allow  the  project  to  continue
On  March  18,  1970,  she  wrote  a  letter  to  Dr.  Conte  noting,

. .  .There  is  no  question  but  what  the  Federal
Government  has  made  considerable  investment  in
this  project.  The  Federal  Government,  however,  as
a  reading  of  any  newspaper  will  show,  has
supported  a  number  of  projects  over  which  there
have  been  many  moral-ethical  questions  (both  large
and  small)  raised,  e.g.,  nerve  gasses,  toxins,  etc.  I
remind  you  that  the  Federal  Government  is  not
responsible  for  the  care,  safety  and  safeguarding  of
human  rights  of  populations  under  the  purview  of
the  Department  of  Institutions.  This  is  a
responsibility  we  must  discharge,  regardless  of  the
amount  of  money  that  the  Federal  Government  is
willing  to  invest  in  a  project.  .  .  .

There  is  no  doubt  but  what  the  prison  setting  is  an
ideal  setting  for  this  type  of  research. ...  I  suppose
concentration  camps  provided  ideal  settings  for  the
research  conducted  in  them If ,  in  fact,  non-
inmates  were  to  volunteer  in  the  substantial
numbers  of  persons  Dr.  Paulsen  needs,  then  I  would
have  less  qualms  about  offering  up  a  captive
population  for  this  research,  i.e.,  I  would  have  some
evidence,  assuming  the  volunteers  were,  in  fact,
normal,  that  non-captive  populations  might  make
the  same  decision  as  a  captive  population

I  am  not  against  high  risk  research.  I  have  engaged
in  some  myself.  I  am  not  against  federally
sponsored  research.  I  have  engaged  in  some
myself.  However,  the  risk  should  be  commensurate

431


Part  II

with  the  probable  benefits  to  be  received  by  the
population  or  others  like  it  to  follow.  I  don't  think
we  can  argue  that  in  this  case.

Neither  am  I  opposed  to  use  of  a  prison  population
on  a  volunteer  basis  for  research  projects  that  may
not  be  of  direct  benefit  to  the  population,  but  which
are  of  clear  benefit  to  society  or  mankind.  I  don't
think  we  can  argue  that  in  this  case  either.39

Dr.  Holliday  also  argued  that  the  study  should  have  been  done  on  "lower
order  primates"  and  that  if  the  state  allowed  Dr.  Paulsen's  study  to  continue  it
would  forfeit  its  right  to  speak  out  on  behalf  of  human  rights  relating  to  future
research  proposals.40

While  favoring  continuation  of  Dr.  Paulsen's  research,  Dr.  Conte
authorized  a  review  by  the  Department  of  Institutions's  Human  Rights  Review
Committee. The  committee  recommended  that  the  study  be  shut  down,  noting
that  the  Paulsen  project  "seems  clearly  inconsistent  with  the  standards  laid  down
by  the  Nuremberg  Code"  for  the  protection  of  human  subjects  with  respect  to
freedom  of  choice  and  consent.  The  recommendation  went  on  to  say  that  "within
the  context  of  Dr.  Paulsen's  project,  it  is  largely  irrelevant  whether  or  not  a
volunteer  declares  his  'desire  to  undergo  vasectomy'  since  there  is  no  assurance
that  his  real  reasons  would  be  ethically-morally  acceptable  or  that  his  reasons
(whatever  they  may  be)  will  stand  the  test  of  reality  after  release."  It  specified
that  the  money  paid  for  participation  and  the  expectation  of  privileges,  "real  or
imagined,"  could  constitute  undue  inducements.41

This  review,  according  to  the  report,  "recommended  that  Dr.  Paulsen's
request  for  continuation  of  his  study  be  rejected  as  it  was  found  to  be  inconsistent
with  standards  for  the  protection  of  the  individual  as  a  research  subject.  The
essential  issue  raised  by  departmental  personnel  was  that  of  informed  consent."
On  March  23,  1970,  Dr.  Holliday  wrote  to  Dr.  Paulsen  to  inform  him  that  his
project  was  over.42  The  Bradley  report  added  that  "so  far  as  is  known  to
departmental  personnel,  no  ill  effects  have  been  reported  by  subjects  of  the
experiments."43  In  1994,  however,  a  former  Washington  state  inmate  named
Martin  Smith  told  Karen  Dora  Steele  of  the  Spokane  Spokesman-Review  that  ever
since  participating  in  the  experiment  he  has  suffered  testicular  pain.44  Dr.  Paulsen
notes,  however,  that  Smith  was  a  control  and  therefore  not  actually  irradiated,
although  he  did  have  one  testicular  biopsy.45

There  has  been  less  debate  than  in  Oregon  on  the  subject  of  medical
follow-up.  This  may  be  in  part  because  Dr.  Paulsen  has  taken  the  position,  based
on  his  conversations  with  inmates,  that  the  subjects  of  the  Washington
experiments  want  their  privacy  protected,  and  he  has  refused  to  disclose  their
names.  A  December  1 975  AEC  memorandum  from  Nell  W.  Fraser,  a  government

432


Chapter  9

contract  administrator,  to  Oscar  J.  Bennett,  director  of  the  Contracts  and
Procurement  Division,  paraphrases  Dr.  Paulsen  as  saying  that  a  follow-up
program  was  not  medically  indicated  and  "a  follow-up  program  would  be  harmful
because  most  of  the  prisoners  wish  to  disassociate  themselves  with  the  prison
experience."46  According  to  the  memorandum,  Dr.  Paulsen  also  noted  that  his
medical  malpractice  insurance  would  apply  in  the  event  that  litigation  resulted
from  his  radiation  study.47  In  recent  years,  however,  a  handful  of  former  subjects
have  told  reporters  such  as  Karen  Dorn  Steele  that  they  would  like  to  be  followed
up.48  In  late  1 994  state  officials  said  they  would  seek  federal  funds  to  carry  out  a
follow-up  program  or  ask  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  to
mount  such  a  program.

The  Advisory  Committee  conducted  its  own  analysis  of  the  risks  incurred
by  the  Oregon  and  Washington  testicular  irradiation  subjects  based  on  a  600-rem
dose,  which  was  the  maximum  testicular  exposure  of  any  subject  in  either  state.
For  purposes  of  this  analysis  we  assumed  that  the  testicles  have  average  radiation
sensitivity;  that  there  is  a  linear  relationship  between  cancer  incidence  and  dose,
and  that  there  is  a  linear  relationship  between  the  risk  of  cancer  and  the  amount  of
tissue  exposed.  Using  these  assumptions,  we  calculated  that  it  would  take  more
than  double  the  dose  received  by  any  prisoner-subject  to  yield  an  effective  dose  of
1  rem.  This  means  that  the  predicted  increase  over  the  expected  cancer  rate  for
the  individuals  who  received  the  greatest  exposure  would  be  less  that  four-
hundreths  of  1  percent.  For  those  who  received  smaller  doses  of  radiation,  the
risk  would,  of  course,  be  smaller,  too.49

OTHER  RADIATION  EXPERIMENTS

There  is  no  comprehensive  list  of  radiation  experiments  with  prisoners  as
subjects,  but  in  the  course  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  historical  research  a
handful  of  such  experiments  other  than  those  in  Oregon  and  Washington  has  been
identified.  In  many  cases  there  is  only  fragmentary  information  available,  which
the  Committee  has  not  always  been  able  to  verify.  To  provide  a  sense  of  what  else
might  have  been  going  on  at  the  time  (which  may  or  may  not  have  been
representative),  consider  the  following:

•  A  former  prison  administrator  in  Utah  has  confirmed  that  experiments

were  conducted  on  prisoner  subjects  in  the  late  1950s  or  early  1960s  in
which  blood  appears  to  have  been  removed,  irradiated,  and  returned  to  the
body.  Prisoners  at  the  time  who  were  interviewed  by  the  Deseret  News,  a
Salt  Lake  City  newspaper,  said  they  believed  that  about  ten  prisoner-
volunteers  were  studied  ih  this  way.  One  subject  said,  "They  told  us
nothing  about  the  tests.  They  just  said  it  wouldn't  bother  us."50  In  a  1959
confidential  report  to  the  president  of  the  University  of  Utah,  Lowell  A.
Woodbury,  the  radiological  safety  officer  said:  "One  group  of  medical

433


Part  II


experimenters  with  authorization  for  human  experimentation  was
administering  isotopes  to  volunteers  at  the  state  prison.  This  was  in  direct
violation  of  the  terms  of  their  license  and  while  not  an  extremely  serious
violation  was  apt  to  result  in  a  citation  [from  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission]."51

Experiments  were  conducted  at  the  Medical  College  of  Virginia  in  the
early  1950s  under  the  sponsorship  of  the  Army  and  possibly  the  Public
Health  Service  using  radioactive  tracers.  The  goal  was  to  study  the  life
cycle  of  red  blood  cells.  As  discussed  in  more  detail  in  chapter  13,  Dr.
Everett  I.  Evans,  in  a  letter  to  the  superintendent  of  the  state  penitentiary,
quoted  from  a  letter  from  Colonel  John  R.  Wood  of  the  Army  surgeon
general's  office,  which  provided  that  no  information  related  to  research
being  conducted  for  the  Army  surgeon  general  be  released  without  review
by  the  Public  Information  Office  of  the  Defense  Department.  Dr.  Evans
said  the  reason  for  this  was  that  "the  problem  of  the  use  of  prisoner
volunteers  is  not  yet  clarified."52

During  the  1960s  "prison  volunteers"  in  the  Colorado  State  Penitentiary
were  used  as  subjects  in  an  experiment  designed  to  determine  the  survival
time  and  characteristics  of  red  blood  cells  during  periods  of  rapid  red  cell
formation  and  during  periods  of  severe  iron  deficiency.  Red  cells
transfused  into  normal  recipients  were  tagged  with  either  radioactive  iron
or  radioactive  phosphorus.53  In  a  1976  report  on  the  study,  which  used
five  subjects,  the  investigators  wrote:

The  rights  of  the  prisoners  were  respected  in
conformance  with  the  Helsinki  Declaration  of  the
World  Health  Organization  and  the  Nuremberg
Code.  Approval  was  obtained  from  the  Governor,
Attorney  General,  and  Director  of  Institutions  of  the
State  of  Colorado,  the  warden  and  psychiatrist  of
the  Colorado  State  Penitentiary,  and  the  nearest  of
kin  of  each  volunteer.54

It  is  not  clear  from  this  publication  or  other  documents  available  to  the
Committee  precisely  what  use  was  made  of  the  principles  stated  in  the
Nuremberg  Code  and  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki  in  obtaining  the  consent
of  the  prisoner-subjects  in  this  experiment.  However,  if  the  investigators
did  accept  Nuremberg  and  Helsinki  as  standards  for  consent  in  the  1 960s
it  adds  weight  to  other  evidence  (for  example,  the  citation  of  Nuremberg
by  the  Human  Rights  Review  Committee  of  the  Department  of  Institutions


434


Chapter  9

in  the  Washington  testicular  irradiation  experiment)  that  these
standards  were  considered  relevant  to  research  on  prisoners  in  the
1960s.

•  Other  federally  sponsored  experiments  on  prisoner  volunteers  appear  to

have  been  conducted  in  Pennsylvania  (Holmesburg  State  Prison,  the
effects  of  radiation  on  human  skin),  Oklahoma  (Oklahoma  State
Penitentiary,  routine  metabolic  studies  of  experimental  drugs  using  tracer
amounts  of  radionuclides),  Illinois  (Stateville  Prison,  measurements  of
radium  burden  received  from  drinking  water),  and  California  (San
Quentin,  tracking  movement  of  iron  from  plasma  to  red  blood  cells  using  a
radioactive  marker).55

HISTORY  OF  PRISON  RESEARCH  REGULATION

Dr.  Paulsen  reported  in  a  recent  interview  that  he  had  "asked  a  lot  of
people"  in  1963  about  the  use  of  prisoners  as  research  subjects.  He  went  on  to
say  that  at  that  time  "no  one  said  no"  to  the  use  of  such  subjects  in  his  research.
However,  Dr.  Paulsen  explained  in  the  same  interview  that  he  had  started  to  sense
a  shift  in  public  opinion  around  1970.  In  particular,  he  pointed  to  comments
critical  of  prison  experimentation  that  he  had  heard  at  a  New  York  Academy  of
Sciences  conference,  "New  Dimensions  in  Legal  and  Ethical  Concepts  for  Human
Research,"  which  he  attended  in  the  spring  of  1969.56  Of  course,  we  cannot  rely
solely  on  Dr.  Paulsen's  recollections  to  provide  historical  context  for  experiments
in  which  he  was  so  intimately  involved— and  which  have  now  become
controversial.  But  ample  evidence  suggests  that  Dr.  Paulsen  was  essentially
correct  in  his  impression  that  testicular  irradiation  experiments  in  Washington  and
Oregon  bridged  a  transitional  period  in  the  history  of  human  experimentation
generally  and  particularly  in  the  history  of  experimentation  in  American  prisons.

Isolated  incidents  of  prison-based  research  before  World  War  II  formed
the  foundation  for  a  practice  that  would  become  firmly  embedded  in  the  structure
of  American  clinical  research  during  World  War  II.  Perhaps  the  most  significant
wartime  medical  research  project  in  which  American  scientists  employed
prisoners  as  research  subjects  was  centered  in  Illinois's  Stateville  Prison.
Beginning  in  1944,  hundreds  of  Illinois  prisoners  submitted  to  experimental  cases
of  malaria  as  researchers  attempted  to  find  more  effective  means  to  prevent  and
cure  tropical  diseases  that  ravaged  Allied  forces  in  the  Pacific  Theater.57  In  1947,
a  committee  was  established  by  the  governor  of  Illinois  to  examine  the  ethics  of
using  state  prisoners  as  research  subjects.  The  committee  was  chaired  by  Andrew
Ivy,  a  prominent  University  of  Illinois  physiologist  and  the  chief  expert  witness
on  medical  ethics  for  the  prosecutors  at  the  Nuremberg  Medical  Trial,  where
prison  research  was  a  salient  topic  (see  chapter  2).  The  committee  pronounced
the  wartime  experiments  at  Stateville  Prison  "ideal"  in  their  conformity  with  the

435


Part  II

newly  adopted  rules  of  the  American  Medical  Association  concerning  human
experimentation.  The  AMA  rules,  which  Ivy  had  played  a  key  role  in  developing,
included  provisions  stipulating  voluntary  consent  from  subjects,  prior  animal
experimentation,  and  carefully  managed  research  under  the  authority  of  properly
qualified  clinical  researchers.51*  Perhaps  most  significantly,  the  findings  of  Ivy's
committee  were  announced  to  the  American  medical  community  when  the  group's
final  report  was  reproduced  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association.^
The  appearance  of  this  report  in  the  nation's  leading  medical  journal  both
represented  and  reinforced  the  sentiment  that  prison  research  was  ethically
acceptable.

Publicly  aired  assertions  that  experimentation  on  prisoners  relied  on
exploitation  or  coercion  were  extremely  rare  in  the  United  States  before  the  late
1960s.  One  criticism  of  medical  research  behind  bars  did,  however,  emerge  with
some  frequency:  prisoners  who  participated  in  research  were  somehow  escaping
from  their  just  measures  of  punishment.  Inmates  were  usually  offered  rewards  in
exchange  for  their  scientific  services,  ranging  from  more  comfortable
surroundings,  to  cash,  to  early  release.  Perhaps  the  most  powerful  statement  of
the  concern  that  convicts  should  not  receive  special  treatment  because  they  had
participated  in  an  experiment  came  from  the  AMA.  In  1952,  this  organization
formally  approved  a  resolution  stating  its  "disapproval  of  the  participation  in
scientific  experiments  of  persons  convicted  of  murder,  rape,  arson,  kidnapping,
treason,  or  other  heinous  crimes."  The  AMA  was  alarmed  that  some  such
criminals  "have  not  only  received  citations,  but  have  in  some  instances  been
granted  parole  much  sooner  than  would  otherwise  have  occurred."60  (In  the
Oregon  testicular  irradiation  experiments  it  appears  that  this  recommendation
against  using  inmates  accused  of  "heinous  crimes"  was  not  always  observed.)

It  should  be  noted  that  the  use  of  prisoners  as  research  subjects  seems  to
have  been  a  uniquely  American  practice  in  the  years  following  World  War  II.
The  large-scale  successes  of  prison  experimentation  during  World  War  II~and  the
authoritative  pronouncement  of  the  Ivy  Committee  that  prison  research  could  be
conducted  in  an  ethical  fashion—seem  to  have  given  the  practice  a  kind  of
momentum  in  this  country  that  it  did  not  have  elsewhere.  In  other  countries  it
seems  that  the  first  clause  of  the  Nuremberg  Code  was  interpreted  to  preclude  the
use  of  prisoners  in  experimentation.61  This  clause  begins  with  the  assertion  that
the  only  acceptable  experimental  subjects  are  those  who  are  "so  situated  as  to  be
able  to  exercise  free  power  of  choice."

It  is  difficult  to  overemphasize  just  how  common  the  practice  became  in
the  United  States  during  the  postwar  years.  Researchers  employed  prisoners  as
subjects  in  a  multitude  of  experiments  that  ranged  in  purpose  from  a  desire  to
understand  the  cause  of  cancer  to  a  need  to  test  the  effects  of  a  new  cosmetic.
After  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration's  restructuring  of  drug-testing
regulations  in  1962,  prisoners  became  almost  the  exclusive  subjects  in
nonfederally  funded  Phase  I  pharmaceutical  trials  designed  to  test  the  toxicity  of

436


Chapter  9

new  drugs.  By  1972,  FDA  officials  estimated  that  more  than  90  percent  of  all
investigational  drugs  were  first  tested  on  prisoners.62

It  appears  that  throughout  the  history  of  medical  experimentation  on
American  prisoners  many  inmates  have  valued  the  opportunity  to  participate  in
medical  research.  One  must  quickly  add  that  such  an  observation  points  to  the
paucity  of  opportunities  open  to  most  prisoners.  The  common  perception  among
inmates  that  participating  in  a  medical  experiment  was  a  good  opportunity  has
had  an  important  impact  on  the  racial  aspects  of  prison  experimentation.  Because
of  the  large  numbers  of  African- Americans  in  prison  (and  the  overt  racial
exploitation  of  the  notorious  Tuskegee  syphilis  study,  in  which  black  men  with
syphilis  were  observed  but  not  treated),  it  might  be  assumed  that  minorities
predominated  as  research  subjects  in  prisons.  The  opposite  has  generally  been
true;  white  prisoners  have  usually  been  overrepresented  in  the  "privileged"  role  of
research  subject.  In  most  prison  studies  before  and  during  World  War  II,  it  seems
that  all  of  the  research  subjects  were  white.63  In  1975,  the  National  Commission
for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects  of  Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research
carefully  examined  the  racial  composition  of  the  research  subjects  at  a  prison  with
a  major  drug-testing  program.  The  commission  found  that  African-Americans
made  up  only  31  percent  of  the  subject  population,  while  this  racial  "minority"
formed  68  percent  of  the  general  prison  population.64

The  shift  in  public  opinion  against  the  use  of  prisoners  as  research
subjects,  which  began  in  the  late  1960s,  was  no  doubt  tied  to  many  other  social
and  political  changes  sweeping  the  country:  the  civil  rights  movement,  the
women's  movement,  the  patients'  rights  movement,  the  prisoners'  rights
movement,  and  the  general  questioning  of  authority  associated  with  the  anti-
Vietnam  War  protests.  But,  as  has  been  common  in  the  history  of  human
experimentation,  scandal  galvanized  public  attention,  brought  official  inquiry,  and
resulted  in  significant  change.  A  major  scandal  in  prison  experimentation  came
when  the  New  York  Times  published  a  front-page  article  on  July  29,  1969,
detailing  an  ethically  and  scientifically  sloppy  drug-testing  program  that  a
physician  had  established  in  the  state  prisons  of  Alabama.65  Even  more
sensational  was  Jessica  Mitford's  January  1973  Atlantic  Monthly  article.  In  this
article,  Mitford  portrayed  experimentation  on  prisoners  as  a  practice  built  on
exploitation  and  coercion  of  an  extremely  disadvantaged  class.66  When  the  article
reappeared  later  in  1973  as  a  chapter  in  her  widely  read  book  critiquing  American
prisons,  she  had  come  up  with  an  especially  provocative  and  suggestive  title  for
this  section  of  the  book:  "Cheaper  than  Chimpanzees."67  Mitford,  and  most  of  the
growing  number  who  condemned  experimentation  on  prisoners  during  the  1 970s
(and  after),  offered  two  arguments  against  the  practice.  First,  prisoners  were
identified  as  incapable  of  offering  voluntary  consent  because  of  a  belief  that  most
(some  argued,  all)  prisons  are  inherently  coercive  environments.  Another  line  of
argument  was  based  on  a  principle  of  justice  that  stipulated  that  one  class-
especially  a  disadvantaged  class  such  as  prisoners—should  not  be  expected  to

437


Part  II

carry  an  undue  burden  of  service  in  the  realm  of  medical  research.

A  few  months  after  the  publication  of  Mitford's  article,  Senator  Edward  M.
Kennedy  of  Massachusetts  held  hearings  to  investigate  human  experimentation.
Kennedy  was  primarily  fired  into  action  by  the  revelations  of  the  Tuskegee
syphilis  study,  which  made  headlines  in  1972,  but  he  devoted  one  full  day  of  his
hearings  to  the  issue  of  prison  experimentation.68  The  chief  outcome  of  Kennedy's
hearings  was  the  formation  of  the  National  Commission  for  the  Protection  of
Human  Subjects  of  Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research,  which,  among  other
topics,  was  specifically  charged  with  investigating  experimentation  on  prisoners
(see  chapter  3).

The  eleven  commissioners,  including  Adviory  Committee  member
Patricia  King-with  the  assistance  of  twenty  staff  members-gathered  a  wealth  of
data  on  prison  medical  research,  made  site  visits  to  prisons,  held  extensive  public
hearings,  and  engaged  in  long  debates  among  themselves.69  After  their
deliberations,  the  commission  concluded  that  it  was  "inclined  toward  protection
as  the  most  appropriate  expression  of  respect  for  prisoners  as  persons."70  But  the
commission  did  not  call  for  an  absolute  ban  on  the  use  of  prisoners  in  medical
research.  A  steadfast  minority  on  the  commission  held  to  a  belief  that  prisoners
should  not  arbitrarily  be  denied  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  medical  research.
An  excursion  to  the  State  Prison  of  Southern  Michigan,  where  Upjohn  and  Parke-
Davis  pharmaceutical  companies  had  cooperatively  built  and  maintained  a  large
Phase  I  drug-testing  facility,  served  to  reinforce  the  opinions  of  this  contingent.
In  candid  conversations  with  the  visiting  commissioners,  randomly  selected
inmates  spoke  in  convincing  terms  about  their  support  for  the  drug-testing
program  in  the  Michigan  prison.71

The  commission's  final  report  reflected  this  hesitancy  to  call  for  a
complete  halt  to  the  use  of  prisoners  in  nontherapeutic  experimentation.  The
commission  recommended  that  prisoners  could  be  considered  ethically  acceptable
experimental  subjects  if  three  requirements  were  satisfied:  (1)  "the  reasons  for
involving  prisoners  in  .  .  .  research  [were]  compelling,"  (2)  "the  involvement  of
[the]  prisoners  . .  .  satisfie[d]  conditions  of  equity,"  and  (3)  subjects  lived  in  a
prison  characterized  by  a  great  deal  of  "openness"  in  which  a  prisoner  could
exercise  a  "high  degree  of  voluntariness."  The  final  requirement  involved  a
detailed  prison  accreditation  scheme  intended  to  ensure  the  possibility  of
voluntary  consent.72

The  National  Commission  derived  its  primary  power  from  the  fact  that  the
secretary  of  the  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare  (DHEW)  was
legally  compelled  to  respond  to  the  commission's  findings  and  to  justify  the
rejection  of  any  commission  recommendations.73  Joseph  Califano,  DHEW
secretary  in  the  Carter  administration,  spent  nearly  a  year  formulating  his
response  regarding  the  use  of  prisoners  in  medical  research.  Califano  explored
the  possibility  of  an  accreditation  scheme  as  suggested  by  the  commission.
However,  in  a  letter  to  the  commission,  Califano  reported  that  the  American

438


Chapter  9

Correctional  Association,  "the  one  currently  qualified  [prison]  accrediting
organization,"  had  no  interest  in  "accrediting  correctional  institutions  as
performance  sites  for  medical  research."  "On  the  contrary,"  Califano  went  on  to
explain,  the  ACA  had  recently  decided  it  "would  not  fully  accredit  any  institution
which  permitted  research  on  prisoners."74  After  his  interchange  with  the  ACA,
Califano  ultimately  decided  to  issue  regulations  that,  for  almost  all  intents  and
purposes,  brought  an  end  to  federally  funded  nontherapeutic  medical  research  in
American  prisons.75

In  the  interest  of  uniform  federal  regulations,  Secretary  Califano  also
"directed"  the  FDA  to  issue  similar  rules  governing  the  use  of  prisoners  in
"research  that  the  FDA  accepted]  to  satisfy  its  regulatory  requirements."76  The
FDA  published  final  rules  in  the  spring  of  1980  that  were  intended,  on  the
planned  effective  date  of  June  1,  1981,  to  eliminate  prisons  as  acceptable  sites  for
nontherapeutic  pharmaceutical  testing.77  However,  in  July  of  1980,  almost  a  year
before  the  FDA's  regulations  were  scheduled  to  take  effect,  a  group  of  prisoners  at
the  State  Prison  of  Southern  Michigan  filed  suit  against  the  federal  government.
These  inmates  claimed  that  the  impending  FDA  regulations  threatened  to  violate
their  "right"  to  choose  participation  in  medical  research.  The  case  was  settled  out
of  court  when  FDA  attorneys  decided  to  reclassify  the  agency's  prison  drug-
testing  regulations  as  "indefinitely"  stayed.  The  FDA's  regulations  still  exist  in
this  bureaucratic  limbo.78

But  even  before  the  FDA  issued  its  proposed  regulations  on  the  use  of
prisoners  in  drug  testing,  pharmaceutical  companies  had  already  largely
abandoned  a  practice  that  had  been  so  widespread  only  a  few  years  earlier.  Most
significantly,  pharmaceutical  researchers,  along  with  other  medical  scientists,  had
discovered  that  sufficient  numbers  of  experimental  subjects  could  be  found
beyond  prison  walls.  Students  and  poor  people  proved  to  be  especially  viable
alternative  populations  from  which  to  draw  participants  for  nontherapeutic
experiments—if  the  cash  rewards  were  sufficient.  The  growing  controversy
surrounding  the  use  of  prisoners  as  research  subjects,  combined  with  the
realization  that  they  could  find  enough  alternate  subjects  for  their  needs,  led  drug
companies  to  make  decisions  that  were  based  not  so  much  on  ethics  as
expediency.  The  comments  of  an  administrator  associated  with  an  Eli  Lilly
testing  operation  at  an  Indiana  prison  are  revealing  and  provide  a  fitting
conclusion  to  this  brief  historical  analysis:  "The  reason  we  closed  the  doggone
thing  down  was  that  we  were  getting  too  much  hassle  and  heat  from  the  press.  It
just  didn't  seem  worth  it."79

ETHICAL  CONSIDERATIONS

It  is  quite  clear  that  all  of  the  radiation  experiments  that  have  come  to  the
Advisory  Committee's  attention  in  which  prisoners  were  employed  as  research
subjects  would  have  been  in  violation  of  federal  standards  as  they  exist  today.

439


Part  II

Federal  regulation  stipulates  an  extremely  limited  range  of  permissible  medical
research  in  prison  populations.  Only  four  types  of  investigations  can  currently
receive  approval:  (1)  low-risk  studies  of  "the  possible  causes,  effects,  and
processes  of  incarceration,  and  of  criminal  behavior";  (2)  low-risk  studies  of
"prisons  as  institutional  structures  or  of  prisoners  as  incarcerated  persons";  (3)
"research  on  conditions  particularly  affecting  prisoners  as  a  class  (for  example,
vaccine  trials  and  other  research  on  hepatitis  which  is  much  more  prevalent  in
prisons  than  elsewhere  .  . .)";  and  (4)  research  that  has  "the  intent  and  reasonable
probability  of  improving  the  health  or  well-being  of  the  subject."  Almost
certainly,  none  of  the  various  episodes  of  radiation  research  on  prisoners  treated
in  this  chapter  would  have  fallen  into  any  one  of  these  categories.

But  as  noted  above,  widespread  concern  about  coercion  and  exploitation
of  prisoner-subjects-which  brought  about  these  restrictive  federal  regulations-
arose  relatively  recently  in  this  country.  For  the  period  before  roughly  1970,  it  is
almost  certainly  unfair  to  condemn,  in  retrospect,  a  research  project  as  unethical
solely  because  researchers  employed  prisoners  as  subjects;  historical  sensitivity
demands  some  appreciation  for  what  seems  to  have  been  a  genuine  lack  of
widespread  professional  or  public  concern  for  the  ethical  problems  of  prison
research  that  came  to  the  fore  during  the  1970s.  Only  in  the  case  of  the
Washington  and  Oregon  testicular  irradiation  experiments  do  we  know  enough  to
make  any  legitimate  claims  about  the  extent  to  which  researchers  conformed  with
reasonable  contemporary  standards  for  the  ethical  conduct  of  prison
experimentation.  And,  even  for  these  relatively  well-known  studies,  the
individual  complexities  of  each  series  of  experiments  have  grown  hazier  with
time.

One  of  the  first  known  efforts  to  examine  the  ethics  of  using  prisoners  as
research  subjects  was  organized  by  the  Law-Medicine  Research  Institute  (LMRI)
of  Boston  University.  The  conference  was  called  "The  Participation  of  Prisoners
in  Clinical  Research,"  and  it  opened  on  February  12,  1962.  The  conference  was
part  of  a  larger  LMRI  project  to  study  and  report  on  "the  actual  practices,
attitudes,  and  philosophies  currently  being  applied  in  the  legal  and  ethical  aspects
of  clinical  investigation"  (see  chapter  2).  LMRI's  conference  on  prison  research
was  one  of  several  "invitational  work  conferences"  organized  to  gather
information  on  several  important  topics  in  human  experimentation  (other
conferences  were  devoted  to  "the  concept  of  consent,"  pediatric  research,  and
pharmaceutical  testing).  The  participants  at  each  conference  received  an  agenda
and  briefing  book  in  advance  of  the  meetings,  but  discussions  tended  to  be  free-
ranging.  Those  who  attended  the  conferences  understood  that  their  words  were
being  recorded,  but  they  tended  to  speak  in  a  frank  and  revealing  fashion  because
LMRI  pledged  to  preserve  their  anonymity  when  reporting  on  the  meetings.80

A  copy  of  the  list  of  participants  at  the  conference  on  "The  Participation  of
Prisoners  in  Clinical  Research,"  which  survives  at  Boston  University,  confirms
the  following  characterization  of  those  who  attended:

440


Chapter  9

[T]he  thirty-six  invited  participants  comprised  two
main  categories.  The  first  was  composed  of  clinical
research  administrators  and  clinical  investigators
with  a  variety  of  academic,  commercial,  and
governmental  affiliations,  who  have  had  experience
in  conducting  medical  studies  with  prisoners  as
subjects.  The  second  category  consisted  of  prison
administrators  and  prison  medical  officers  with
various  federal,  state,  and  municipal  correctional
programs.  Also  participating  in  the  conference
were  representatives  of  various  related  fields  such
as  behavioral  science,  criminal  law,  organized
medicine,  pharmaceutical  manufacturing,  and  the
military  services."'

Unfortunately,  a  copy  of  the  actual  meeting  transcript  has  not  survived.  However,
the  lengthy  unpublished  "Analytic  Summary,"  which  contains  many  (anonymous)
transcript  excerpts,  seems  to  be  a  fair  representation  of  the  daylong  meeting.*2  It
is  relatively  easy  to  extract  several  important  points  of  agreement  about  the  proper
conduct  of  experimentation  in  prisons  from  this  report.  And,  given  the  broad
cross  section  of  those  involved  in  prison  experimentation  who  attended  this  1962
conference,  it  seems  reasonable  to  employ  the  standards  enunciated  at  this
conference  as  evidence  of  prevailing  interpretation  of  ethical  standards  for
prisoner  experiments  that  began  in  1963.

First,  the  "conferees  generally  agreed  that  experimental  risks  must  be
balanced  against  benefits."  In  the  case  of  research  that  was  not  intended  to  be  of
potential  direct  benefit  to  the  subject,  which  was  generally  the  case  in  prison
experiments,  most  meeting  participants  believed  that  the  social  or  scientific  value
of  new  knowledge  that  might  result  from  an  experiment  should  be  weighed  as  a
benefit."  However,  when  "confronted  with  the  direct  question  of  whether  or  not
a  relatively  high  degree  of  risk  can  ever  constitute  a  legitimate  reason  for  the  use
of  prisoner  subjects,  the  conferees  were  almost  unanimous  in  rejecting  this
position."84  Interestingly,  those  at  the  conference  believed  that  the  general  public
was  less  inclined  to  worry  about  subjecting  prisoners  to  high  levels  of
experimental  risk.  Two  brief  transcript  excerpts  are  revealing:

When  the  public  hears  that  inmates  are
[participating  in  a  seemingly  very  hazardous  study],
they  rationalize,  "Well,  I  wouldn't  do  it,  but  it's  all
right  with  prisoners."85

[T]he  public  will  allow  the  investigator  to  go  a  lot
further,  with  regard  to  risks  taken  with  prisoners,

441


Part  II

than  the  investigator  would  go  himself.86

The  conferees  spent  a  large  portion  of  their  day  together  discussing  the  matter  of
consent.  They  reached  agreement  that  meaningful  consent  should  be  both
voluntary  and  informed,  provided  the  reach  of  these  terms  is  carefully
circumscribed.  The  report  stated,

[T]he  legal  prerequisites  of  consent  are,  first,  not
absolute  free  will,  but  sufficient  free  choice  to  avoid
coercion  or  duress;  and,  second,  not  absolutely
perfect  knowledge,  but  enough  information  to  avoid
fraud  or  deceit."

The  conference  participants  "unanimously  agreed  that  rewards  offered  to
prisoner  volunteers  should  not  be  so  high  as  to  invalidate  their  consent  to
participate  as  research  subjects."™  There  seems  to  have  been  considerable
disagreement  about  exactly  where  to  draw  the  line  between  ethically  acceptable
and  unacceptable  rewards  to  prisoners  for  service  as  experimental  subjects,  but
there  was  a  general  desire  to  "minimize  rewards"  because  it  was  "consistent  with
the  penological  desirability  of  maximizing  prisoners'  'opportunity  for  altruism.'"89
As  for  sentence  reductions,  some  thought  that  small  amounts  of  "good  time"
credits  were  appropriate,  but  all  agreed  that  "maximum  rewards  of  this  type,  i.e.,
definite  promises  of  pardon  or  parole,  should  not  be  given."90  There  seems  to
have  been  little  discussion  of  the  possibility  that  the  authoritarian  structure  of
prison  life  was  in  itself  coercive  and  therefore  limited  a  prisoner's  ability  to  make
an  autonomous  decision.

The  disclosure  component  of  consent  received  extensive  attention  at  the
conference.  The  following  was  offered  as  a  summation  of  what  the  conferees
perceived  as  the  "essential  content  and  emphasis"  of  the  information  that  should
be  conveyed  to  "prospective  prisoner-subjects":

The  explanation  of  a  clinical  research  project .  .  .
should  describe  completely  the  procedures  entailed
and  should  stress  the  possible  consequences  of  these
procedures.  Even  though  it  may  be  necessary  to
"stop  somewhere  short  of  full  revelation  when  you
reach  intricacies  a  layman  would  never
comprehend,"  there  should  be  no  omission  of  any
adverse  consequences,  detriments,  or  risks.91

To  strive  toward  this  level  of  communication,  the  conference  participants  cited
procedures  that  were  "usually"  followed  in  most  prison  experiments:  a  general
announcement  of  the  research  project  to  the  inmates  (usually  by  notices  posted  on

442


Chapter  9

bulletin  boards  or  printed  in  prison  newsletters);  a  general  explanation  of  the
project  (often  in  an  auditorium)  to  groups  of  prisoners  who  expressed  initial
interest  in  an  experiment;  and,  finally,  one-on-one  meetings  between  prospective
participants  and  research  personnel.92  Conferees  who  had  administered  or
conducted  prison  experiments  also  reported  that  prisoner-subjects  "usually
sign[ed]  some  type  of  'consent  agreement.'"93  (Generally  speaking  the  provisions
specified  above  were  followed  in  the  Washington  and  Oregon  experiments,  but
the  information  provided  was  often  inadequate.)

Even  with  all  of  these  measures,  some  meeting  participants  asserted  that
the  "ideals  of  comprehension,  evaluation,  and  decision  on  the  part  of  prisoners
were  seldom  attained  in  practice."  They  pointed  to  two  general  difficulties  in
achieving  these  ideals.  First,  "the  lack  of  intelligence,  education,  or  'medical
sophistication'  among  many  prisoners."  Second,  they  cited  "various  'motives  or
pressures  which  so  often  stand  in  the  way  of  objective  understanding.'"94  The
participants  in  the  conference  also  recognized  that  the  consent  forms  used  in
prison  experiments  were  often  less  than  perfect.  They  understood  that  the
"waiver  or  release"  components  of  many  forms  were  probably  inappropriate.
They  also  recognized  that  reasonably  predictable  risks  of  an  experiment  were  not
always  carefully  listed  on  consent  forms,  but  at  the  same  time  they  "agreed  that
'no  serious'  risk  should  ever  be  disguised  or  concealed"  on  these  forms.95

In  sum,  the  records  from  this  conference  suggest  that  even  apart  from
formal,  federal  rules  for  experimentation  on  prisoners,  ethical  conditions  for  the
conduct  of  prison  research  were  articulated  in  the  early  1960s.  Now,  with  these
conditions  in  mind,  let  us  turn  to  a  more  detailed  analysis  of  the  Washington  and
Oregon  testicular  irradiation  experiments.

As  we  have  noted,  the  Committee's  ability  to  assess  the  quality  of  consent
obtained  from  a  research  subject  thirty  or  forty  years  earlier  can  be  confounded  in
a  thousand  ways.  To  begin  with,  the  records  are  invariably  incomplete;  then,  the
investigators  are  either  no  longer  alive  or  their  memories  have  grown  hazy  or
selective  with  time;  the  same  is  true  of  subjects;  and,  of  course,  there  are
confidentiality  considerations,  which  limit  the  availability  of  records,  the  concern
of  researchers  for  their  reputations,  and  so  on.  All  of  these  considerations,  to
greater  or  lesser  degrees,  apply  to  the  Oregon  and  Washington  experiments.

With  respect  to  these  experiments,  however,  we  believe  we  have  a  clear-
enough  picture  of  the  standards  and  practices  of  the  time  to  evaluate  the  conduct
of  the  research  against  them  without  reference  to  the  standards  and  practices  of
today.

In  both  Oregon  and  Washington,  some  subjects  were  not  warned,  warned
only  after  enrolling  in  the  experimental  program,  or  inadequately  warned  that
there  was  potential  risk,  albeit  small,  of  testicular  cancer.  While  it  might  not  have
been  uncommon  at  the  time  for  physicians  to  avoid  using  the  word  cancer  with
sick  or  even  terminally  ill  patients  for  paternalistic  reasons,  such  avoidance  is
harder  to  justify,  even  by  the  standards  of  the  time,  in  the  case  of  healthy  subjects

443


Part  II

who  are  participating  in  research  that  offers  them  no  direct  benefit.96

As  far  as  acute  effects  are  concerned,  the  pain  of  testicular  biopsy  may
have  been  understated  in  both  programs,  and  the  risk  of  orchitis  from  repeated
biopsies  seems  to  have  been  ignored.  Some  former  subjects  have  complained  of
long-term  pain,  sexual  dysfunction,  and  skin  rashes.  It  is  not  clear  whether  these
conditions  were  caused  by  the  experiments,  nor  is  it  certain  that  long-term
medical  follow-up  can  answer  this  question.

Subjects  in  both  sets  of  experiments  were  required  to  have  a  vasectomy  at
the  end  of  the  program  because  of  concerns  about  possible  chromosomal  damage.
In  both  cases  the  vasectomy  consent  forms  signed  by  the  subjects,  and  their  wives
if  they  were  married,  adequately  described  the  procedure,  its  consequences,  and
the  small  possibility  it  could  be  reversed.  However,  appropriate  questions  have
been  raised  about  the  reasons  inmates  might  agree  to  vasectomy  in  the
circumstances  of  prison  research,  and  the  possibility,  as  actually  occurred  in  a
number  of  cases,  that  in  the  end  the  subject  would  refuse  to  undergo  the
procedure.

Finally,  there  appears  to  be  little  doubt  that  the  financial  incentives  offered
for  participation  were  the  main  reason  most  inmates  volunteered.  Payments
totaling  more  than  $100  could  be  seen  as  unduly  influencing  the  judgment  of
potential  volunteers.  While  money  also  is  a  powerful  incentive  for  research
participation  outside  prison  walls,  we  believe  that  the  conditions  of  confinement
can  magnify  the  perceived  value  of  the  reward.  Whether  the  payments  offered  to
participants  in  these  programs  constitute  an  unfair  inducement  to  participate  in
research  may  vary  from  inmate  to  inmate.

While  the  prison  experiments  were  unethical  with  respect  to  current
requirements  for  disclosure  of  risk  and  noncoercion,  the  researchers  functioned
during  a  period  of  rapid  evolution  of  the  interpretation  of  ethical  principles  in  the
prison  context.  Their  actions,  however,  were  less  than  fully  consistent  with  the
existing  AEC  requirements,  especially  concerning  the  information  the  prisoner-
subjects  were  provided.


444


ENDNOTES


1 Colonel  Don  Flickinger,  NEPA  Medical  Advisory  Panel,  Subcommittee  IX,
Washington,  D.C.,  22  July  1949  (ACHRE  No.  DOE- 12 1494- A-2),  17.

2.  Subcommittee  on  Energy  Conservation  and  Power,  Committee  on  Energy  and
Commerce,  House  of  Representatives,  American  Nuclear  Guinea  Pigs:  Three  Decades
of  Radiation  Experiments  on  U.S.  Citizens,  99th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  3.

3.  Pacific  Northwest  Research  Foundation,  undated  ("Policy  and  Procedures  of
the  Pacific  Northwest  Research  Foundation  with  Regard  to  Investigations  Involving
Human  Subjects")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-01 1 195-A-l).

4 Bertram  H  Schur  to  Dr.  Charles  L.  Dunham,  13  May  1966  (  Use  of  Human
Volunteers  in  Biomedical  Research")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-138).

5.  Deposition  of  Mavis  Rowley  and  Carl  G.  Heller,  19  July  1976,  Poulsbo,
Washington  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-0 13095- A-2),  18.

6  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  interview  by  Steve  Klaidman  (ACHRE),  8  September
1994,  Seattle,  Washington,  transcript  of  recording  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,
Interview  Program  File,  Targeted  Interview  Project),  10-11.

7  Pacific  Northwest  Research  Foundation,  proposal  for  Atomic  Energy
Commission,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  February  1963  ("Effects  of  Ionizing
Radiation  on  the  Testicular  Function  of  Man")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE- 122994- A-2);  Carl
Heller  Pacific  Northwest  Research  Foundation,  27  April  1967  ("Fifth  Yearly  Proposal.
June  l'  1967-May  31,  1968")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-122994-A-2);  Carl  Heller,  Pacific
Northwest  Research  Foundation,  May  1 972  ("Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation  on  the
Testicular  Function  of  Man:  9  Year  Progress  Report")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE- 122994- A-2);
Mavis  Rowley,  Division  of  Nuclear  Medicine,  Tumor  Clinic,  Swedish  Research  Hospital,
undated  ("The  Effect  of  Graded  Doses  of  Ionizing  Radiation  on  the  Human  Testis:
Progress  Report,  October  1,  1975-September  30,  1976")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-01 1895-B-
3).  The  following  is  a  staff-prepared  abstract  of  Dr.  Heller's  research  based  on  annual
reports,  the  final  report,  and  his  research  proposal:

I.  OBJECTIVES  .

To  determine  the  nature  of  the  cytological  changes,  both  somatic  (Sertoli  cell)  and
germinal  (spermatogonia)  induced  by  acute  irradiation.

-  To  determine  the  dosage  required  to  produce  these  changes,  as  well  as  the  dose
to  induce  permanent  damage  to  spermatogenic  cells.

-  To  determine  recovery  time.

-  To  determine  radiation-produced  alteration  of  testicular  parameters,  such  as  total
gonadotropin,  interstitial-cell  hormone  excretion,  estrogen  excretion,  and
androgen  excretion.

II.  METHODOLOGY

Subjects  received  varying  doses  of  X-irradiation  to  both  testes  from  8-  to  600-rad
single  dose.  Testicular  effects  were  determined  by  histological  (light  microscopy)
examination  of  pre-  and  serial  postirradiation  biopsy  specimens.  Sperm  counts,  motility,
morphology,  and  seminal  fluid  volume  were  monitored  in  serial  postirradiation
ejaculates.  Hormonal  excretion  was  to  be  monitored  by  serial  urine  and  plasma  analyses.

-  Radiation  exposure  was  controlled  by  a  specially  constructed  device  that  assured

445


uniform  (plus  or  minus  5%)  irradiation  at  a  dose  rate  of  100  r/min,  approximately
140  kVp  with  5  mA  tube  current,  and  2  mm  Al  filter.

-  Some  subjects  received  10  uCi  -'H-thymidine  injected  intratesticularly  to  assess
(via  autoradiography)  effects  of  radiation  on  incorporation  into  spermatogonia!
DNA  as  a  measure  of  chromosome  replication.

III.  RATIONALE  FOR  THE  USE  OF  HUMAN  SUBJECTS

-  To  determine  radiosensitivity  of  germinal  elements  in  man.  According  to  Dr.
Heller,  man  is  unique  among  commonly  studied  species  in  being  able  to  submit
to  serial  testicular  biopsy  without  damage  and  biopsy-induced  testicular  artifacts.
(Mavis  Rowley  has  pointed  out  that  improved  techniques  have  made  it  more
practical  to  do  biopsies  on  large  animals.)

-  To  determine  germinal  cell  recovery,  thereby  allowing  prognosis  in  cases  of
accidental  irradiation.

IV.  FINDINGS

-  Sperm  count  reduction  and  recovery  of  sperm  count  are  both  dose  related.  At
400-600  rad,  sperm  count  was  zero  at  1 56  weeks.

-  By  autoradiographic  studies  of  3H-thymidine  uptake  into  spermatocytes  in
nonirradiated  subjects,  it  was  shown  that  there  are  approximately  four  cycles  of
spermatogenesis  of  approximately  sixteen  days  each,  so  that  the  complete
evolution  of  spermatogonia  to  mature  sperm  is  approximately  sixty-four  days.
This  is  approximately  the  same  as  other  mammalian  species.

-  Urinary  and  plasma  gonadotropins  rose  in  proportion  to  testicular  dose  and  fell
with  germinal  recovery.  Plasma  FSH  and  LH  also  rose.  Urinary  estrogen
remained  unchanged.  Urinary  testosterone  fell  slightly  after  irradiation.

-  Histologically,  spermatogonia  were  the  most  radiosensitive.  Spermatocytes
were  damaged  above  200-300  rads.  Spermatids  showed  no  overt  damage.

-  Germinal  cell  recovery  time  increased  as  radiation  dose  increased.  Complete
recovery  occurred  within  nine  to  eighteen  months  for  doses  of  1 00  rad  and
below.  Complete  recovery  required  five  or  more  years  for  doses  of  400-600
rad.  Germinal  tissue  appears  to  be  somewhat  more  radiosensitive  in  humans
than  other  studied  species.

V.  FINANCIAL  SUPPORT

Contract  AST  (45-1)  1780,  U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission.

8.  Mavis  Rowley,  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  8  September  1994  (ACHRE  No.
ACHRE-051795-B)6.

9.  Ibid.,  12-13.

10.  Deposition  of  Mavis  Rowley  and  Carl  Heller,  19  July  1976,  32.

11.  Harold  Bibeau,  telephone  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  1 1  August  1994
(ACHRE  No.  IND-081 194-A).

12.  Depositions  of  John  Henry  Atkinson,  54;  Ivan  Dale  Herland,  22,  68;  Donald
Eugene  Mathena,  94;  taken  14  October  1976  in  Donald  Mathena  et  al.  v.  Amos  Reed  et
al.  Civil  nos.  73-326,  U.S.  District  Court,  Dist.  Oregon  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-013095-A).

13.  Deposition  of  Carl  Heller,  19  July  1976.


446


14.  L.  C.  Wertz  to  Warden  C.  T.  Gladden,  10  July  1964  ("Dr.  Heller  stopped  in
the  office  . .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-061594-A-1).

1 5.  William  B.  Hutchison,  M.D.,  Joseph  E.  Primeau,  and  Carl  G.  Heller,  M.D.,
Ph.D.,  to  Dr.  John  C.  McDougall,  Assistant  Director  for  Operations,  National  Institute  of
Child  Health  and  Human  Development,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  12  May  1966
("This  letter  is  in  response  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-B-70).

16.  C.  T.  Gladden,  Warden,  to  Mark  Hatfield,  Governor,  8  May  1963  ("I  am
glad  to  provide  . .  .  ")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-061594-A),  2;  C.T.  Gladden,  Warden,  to  Hon.
Robert  Thornton,  Attorney  General,  9  September  1963  ("Carl  Heller,  Medical  Research
Programs")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-061595-A);  undated  ("Consent  and  Release")  (ACHRE
No.  IND- 11 0994- A).

17.  Mavis  Rowley,  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  8  September  1994,  36.

18.  Pacific  Northwest  Research  Foundation,  undated  ("Policy  and  Procedures  of
the  Pacific  Northwest  Research  Foundation  with  Regard  to  Investigations  Involving

Human  Subjects").

19.  William  Boly,  "The  Heller  Experiments,"  Oregon  Times  Magazine,

November  1977,45.

20.  Robert  Case  v.  State  of  Oregon  et  ai,  Civil  no.  76-500;  Paul  Tyrell  v.  State
of  Oregon  et  ah,  Civil  no.  76-499.

21 .  Tom  Toombs,  Administrator  of  Corrections  Division,  undated  testimony
before  Oregon  legislature  (ACHRE  No.  IND-101294-D-1),  7.

22.  Ibid.,  11.

23.  James  Ruttenber,  telephone  interview  with  Steve  Klaidman  (ACHRE  staff),
20  July  1995  (ACHRE  No.  IND-072095-E).

24.  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  proposal  to  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  undated  ("Study
of  Irradiation  Effects  on  the  Human  Testis:  Including  Histologic,  Chromosomal  and
Hormonal  Aspects")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-1 10994-A-2).  The  following  has  been  abstracted
by  staff  from  Dr.  Paulsen's  research  proposal  and  annual  progress  reports:

I.  OBJECTIVE

-  To  determine  the  dose-dependent  relationship  between  external  irradiation  and
cell  kiil  and  inhibition  of  mitosis  in  spermatogenic  cells.  The  cells  in  question
are  spermatagonial  stem  cells,  and  the  dose  response  would  be  expected  to  differ
from  other  kinds  of  cells.

II.  METHODOLOGY

-  Subjects  with  normal  ejaculates  received  7.5-400  rad  to  both  testes.  The  details
of  irradiation  are  not  specified.

-  Weekly  seminal  fluid  was  examined  for  the  end-point  response  of  azoospermia.
Duration  was  not  specified.

-  Subjects  and  some  controls  received  periodic  unilateral  testicular  biopsies.
Number  not  specified.

-  Irradiated  subjects  agreed  to  be  vasectomized  at  the  completion  of  the
experiment.

III.  RATIONALE  FOR  THE  USE  OF  HUMAN  SUBJECTS

447


One  cannot  directly  relate  animal  data  to  the  human  male  with  security.  Among
other  things,  the  rate  of  spermatogenesis  in  man  is  different  from  that  in  various  animal
species.

IV.  FINDINGS

-  The  average  presterile  period  was  142  days.

-  The  maximum  sterile  period  was  501  days.

-  Spermatogenesis  in  man  is  more  radiosensitive  than  in  rodents  and  recovery  time
is  longer.  Man  is  more  radiosensitive  to  complete  sterility  than  rodents.

-  Testicular  biopsy  by  itself  can  reduce  seminal  fluid  sperm  concentration.

V.  FINANCIAL  SUPPORT

AEC  contracts  AT  (45-1)  1781  and  AT  (45-1)  2225.

25.  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  telephone  interview  with  Steve  Klaidman  (ACHRE),  20
July  1995  (ACHRE  No.  IND-072095-D).

26.  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  telephone  interview  with  Steve  Klaidman  (ACHRE),  7
March  1995  (ACHRE  No.  ACHRE-030995-A).

27.  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  8  September  1994,  9.

28.  T.  W.  Thorslund  and  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  "Effects  of  X-Ray  Irradiation  on
Human  Spermatogenesis,"  Proceedings  of  the  National  Symposium  on  Natural  and
Manmade  Radiation  in  Space,  ed.  E.  A.  Warman  (NASA  Document  TM  X-2440,  1 972),
229-232.

29.  "Prison  Inmates  Sought  in  Prison  Experiment,"  The  (Portland)  Oregonian,
August  1963.

30.  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  proposal  to  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  undated  ("Study
of  Irradiation  Effects  on  the  Human  Testis:  Including  Histologic,  Chromosomal  and
Hormonal  Aspects").

31.  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  8  September  1994,  56-57.

32.  C.  E.  Heffron,  M.D.,  Prison  Physician,  to  All  Inmates  Interested,  2
November  1964  (ACHRE  No.  WASH-1 12294-A-l).

33.  Harold  Bradley,  Director,  Adult  Corrections  Division,  to  Hon.  Daniel  J.
Evans,  Governor,  Washington  State,  9  March  1976  ("Secretary  Morris  has  asked  .  .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  WASH- 1 12294-A-2).

34.  Paulsen,  telephone  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  20  July  1995.

35.  Ibid.

36.  University  of  Washington,  Research  and  Clinical  Investigations  Committee,
proceedings  of  10  December  1969  (ACHRE  No.  WASH- 1 12294-A-3),  4.

37.  Bradley  to  Evans,  2. .

38.  George  Farwell,  Vice  President  for  Research,  University  of  Washington,  to
John  Totter,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  16  July  1969  ("Thank  you  very  much  for
your  prompt  response")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-B-7I).

39.  Audrey  Holliday,  Research  Administrator,  Department  of  Institutions,  to
William  Conte,  Director,  Department  of  Institutions,  18  March  1970  ("I  received  the
review  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  WASH-1 12294-A-4),  2.

40.  Ibid.


448


41 .  Research  Review  Committee,  Department  of  Institutions,  to  Audrey
Holliday,  Research  Administrator,  Department  of  Institutions,  13  March  1970
("Disposition  of  Division  Review  Committee  in  Regard  to  Irradiation  Project  of  Dr.  C.
Alvin  Paulsen  at  the  State  Penitentiary")  (ACHRE  No.  WASH-1 12294-A-5),  2.

41 .  Audrey  Holliday  to  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  23  March  1970  ("The  Department  of
Institutions  received  copies  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  WASH-1 12294-A-6).

43.  Bradley  to  Evans,  9  March  1976,  2.

44.  Karen  Dorn  Steele,  "Experiments  A  Life  Sentence,"  Spokane  Spokesman-
Review,  19  June  1994,  1.

45.  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  telephone  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  7  March  1995
(ACHRE  No.  ACHRE-030795-A).

46.  Nell  Fraser  to  Oscar  Bennett,  23  December  1975  ("Contracts  AT[45-1]-
1780-1781,  Irradiation  of  Prison  Volunteers")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-B).

47.  Ibid.

48.  Karen  Dorn  Steele,  "State  Agrees  to  Find  Victims  of  Experiments,"  Spokane
Spokesman-Review,  16  December  1994,  1.

49.  The  Advisory  Committee  calculated  the  risk  from  the  testicular  irradiation
study  as  follows:

The  radiation  dose  to  the  testicles  ranged  from  7.5  to  600  rem.  The  Committee's
risk  analysis  was  based  on  a  600-rem  dose  and  the  following  three  assumptions:

1 .  The  testicles  have  average  radiation  sensitivity.

2.  The  risk  of  cancer  is  linearly  related  to  dose.

3.  The  risk  of  cancer  is  linearly  related  to  the  amount  of  tissue  exposed.

Based  on  these  assumptions,  the  Committee  calculated  the  maximum  risk
expected  to  any  of  the  prisoner  subjects  using  the  following  two  steps:

1 .  Calculate  effective  dose  by  multiplying  a  600-rem  testicular  dose  by  the  proportion  of
the  body  exposed:  (2  x  25  grams/70  kilograms),  or  (50/70,000)  x  600  rem  =  429  mrem.

2.  Calculate  the  risk  (assuming  average  radiosensitivity)  by  multiplying  this  effective
dose  by  the  age-specific  risk  for  males  age  25:  (0.429  x  921/1,000,000  person  rem),  or  a
risk  of  about  0.4/1,000  for  males  age  25.

50.  Lee  Davidson,  "Did  Secret  Radiation  Tests  on  Inmates  Doom  Offspring?"
Deseret  News,  10  November  1994,  Al .

51.  Lowell  A.  Woodbury,  Radiological  Safety  Officer,  to  Dr.  A.  Ray  Olpin,
President  of  the  University  of  Utah,  9  July  1959  ("Resume  of  Activities  While  Acting  as
Health  Physicist  and  Radiological  Safety  Officer  to  the  University  of  Utah  Isotope
Committee")  (ACHRE  No.  UTAH-1 1 1394-A-2).  A  1964  article  titled  "The  Kinetics  of
Granulopoiesis  in  Normal  Man"  appears  to  describe  the  experiment.  The  article
compares  methods  of  labeling  white  blood  cells  with  various  radioisotopes  and
formulates  a  concept  of  forming  white  cells  in  normal  man  based  on  information  obtained
using  a  DFP32(diisopropyIfluorophosphate)  label.  G.  E.  Cartwright,  J.  W.  Athens,  and
M.  M.  Wintrobe,  "The  Kinetics  of  Granulopoiesis  in  Normal  Man,"  Blood  24,  no.  6
(December  1964).

52.  Everett  Evans,  Professor  of  Surgery,  Medical  College  of  Virginia,  to  W.  F.
Smyth,  State  Penitentiary,  13  December  1951  ("We  continue  to  enjoy  and appreciate


449


.  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  VCU-012595-A-17).

53.  Matthew  Block  to  John  Lawrence,  10  April  1969  ("I  have  met  a  very
serious  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-B-7).

54.  Matthew  Block,  Text-Atlas  of  Hematology  (Philadelphia:  Lea  &  Febiger,
1966),  503.

55.  Henry  De  Bernardo,  "University  of  Pennsylvania  and  the  Holmesburg
Connection,"  Philadelphia  News  Observer,  1 2  October  1 994,  1 2;  Shelby  Thompson,
Director  (Acting),  Division  of  Information  Services,  AEC,  to  H.  C.  Baldwin,  Information
Officer,  Chicago  Operations  Office,  21  August  1953  ("Information  Guidance  on  Any
Experimentation  Involving  Human  Beings")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-473);  "10
San  Quentin  Felons  Used  for  Atom  Tests,"  source  unknown,  12  April  1949;  Oak  Ridge
National  Laboratory  Human  Studies  Review  Taskforce,  University  of  Oklahoma  Human
Studies  Reviews,  undated  ("Findings  for  License  35-03176-01")  (ACHRE  No.  NRC-
012695-A).

56.  C.  Alvin  Paulsen,  M.D.,  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  8  September  1994.
The  meeting  Paulsen  referred  to  took  place  on  19-21  May  1969.  The  proceedings  of  the
conference  are  reported  in  the  Annals  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Sciences  169  (21
January  1970):  293-593.  Paulsen  is  not  listed  among  those  who  offered  formal
presentations.

57.  Published  accounts  of  this  research  include  Alf  S.  Alving  et  al.,  "Procedures
Used  at  Stateville  Penitentiary  for  the  Testing  of  Potential  Antimalarial  Agents,"  Journal
of  Clinical  Investigation  27,  no.  3  (part  2)  (1948):  2-5;  Joseph  E.  Ragen  and  Charles
Finston,  Inside  the  World's  Toughest  Prison  (Springfield,  111.:  Charles  C.  Thomas,  1962),
391-395;  Nathan  F.  Leopold,  Jr.,  Life  Plus  99  Years  (Garden  City,  N.Y.:  Doubleday,
1958),  305-355.  David  J.  Rothman,  in  Strangers  at  the  Bedside:  A  History  of  How  Law
and  Bioethics  Transformed  Medical  Decision  Making  (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1 99 1 ),
gives  some  considerable  attention  to  this  tropical  disease  research  in  Illinois  in  a  chapter
entitled  "Research  at  War,"  30-50.

58.  These  rules,  as  approved  by  the  AMA  House  of  Delegates  on  1 1  December
1946,  read  as  follows:

I.  The  voluntary  consent  of  the  individual  on  whom  the  experiment  is  to
be  performed  must  be  obtained;  2.  The  danger  of  each  experiment  must
be  previously  investigated  by  animal  experimentation,  and  3.  The
experiment  must  be  performed  under  proper  medical  protection  and
management.
From  "Minutes  of  the  Supplemental  Session  of  the  House  of  Delegates  of  the  American
Medical  Association,  Held  in  Chicago,  December  9-11,  1946,"  Journal  of  the  American
Medical  Association  133  (4  January  1947):  35.  For  more  background  on  the
development  of  the  AMA  standards  for  human  experimentation,  see  chapter  2  of  this
report.

59.  "Ethics  Governing  the  Service  of  Prisoners  as  Subjects  in  Medical
Experiments:  Report  of  a  Committee  Appointed  by  Governor  Dwight  H.  Green  of
Illinois,"  Journal  oj  the  American  Medical  Association  136  (14  February  1948):  457-
458.

60.  "Abstract  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  House  of  Delegates  Meeting,  Denver,
2-5  December  1952,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  150  (27  December
1952): 1699.  The  Illinois  delegation  to  this  meeting  introduced  the  resolution.  It  is


450


likely  that  the  Illinois  group  was  motivated  by  the  possibility  that  Nathan  Leopold,  who
had  participated  in  a  highly  publicized  kidnapping  and  murder  that  had  been  dubbed  by
the  press  as  "the  crime  of  the  century,"  might  be  paroled  as  a  result  of  his  participation
as  a  subject  in  the  wartime  tropical  disease  research  at  Stateville  Prison.

61 .  Martin  Jaffe  and  C.  Stewart  Snoddy,  "An  International  Survey  of  Clinical
Research  in  Volunteers,"  in  Appendix  to  Report  and  Recommendations:  Research
Involving  Prisoners,  National  Commission  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects  of
Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research  (Washington,  D.C.:  DHEW,  1976).

62.  Aileen  Adams  and  Geoffrey  Cowan,  "The  Human  Guinea  Pig:  How  We
Test  New  Drugs,"  World  (5  December  1971):  20.

63.  Jon  M.  Harkness,  "Vivisectors  and  Vivishooters:  Medical  Experiments  on
American  Prisoners  before  1950,"  paper  presented  at  "Regulating  Human
Experimentation  in  the  United  States:  The  Lessons  of  History,"  Columbia  College  of
Physicians  and  Surgeons,  New  York,  23  February  1995.

64.  National  Commission  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects  of  Biomedical
and  Behavioral  Research,  Report  and  Recommendations:  Research  Involving  Prisoners
(Washington,  D.C.:  DHEW,  1976),  36.

65.  Walter  Rugaber,  "Prison  Drug  and  Plasma  Projects  Leave  Fatal  Trail,"  New
York  Times,  29  July  1 969,  1 ,  20-2 1 .

66.  Jessica  Mitford,  "Experiments  Behind  Bars:  Doctors,  Drug  Companies,  and
Prisoners,"  Atlantic  Monthly  23,  January  1973,  64-73.

67.  Jessica  Mitford,  Kind  and  Usual  Punishment:  The  Prison  Business  (New
York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf,  1973),  138-168.

68.  For  an  analysis  of  the  chain  of  events  leading  up  to  Senator  Kennedy's
hearings,  see  Mark  S.  Frankel,  "Public  Policymaking  for  Biomedical  Research:  The  Case
of  Human  Experimentation"  (Ph.D.  diss.,  George  Washington  University,  1976),  190-
192.  For  the  transcripts  of  the  actual  hearings,  see  U.S.  Congress,  Senate,  Committee  on
Labor  and  Public  Welfare,  Subcommittee  on  Health,  Hearings  on  Quality  of  Health
Care-Human  Experimentation,  on  S.  974,  S.  878,  and  S.  J.  Res.  71,  93d  Cong.,  1st
Sess.,  part  3,  7  March  1973  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1973).

69.  A  record  of  the  National  Commission's  work  can  be  found  in  a  complete  set
of  the  commission's  papers  in  the  archives  of  the  National  Reference  Center  for  Bioethics
Literature,  Kennedy  Institute  of  Ethics,  Georgetown  University.  For  a  useful  (and
critical)  overview  of  the  commission's  work  with  regard  to  prisoners  see  Roy  Branson,
"Prison  Research:  National  Commission  Says  'No,  Unless  .  . .,'"  Hastings  Center  Report,
February  1977,  15-21.

70.  The  National  Commission  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects  of
Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research,  Report  and  Recommendations:  Research  Involving
Prisoners,  8.

71.  Branson,  "Prison  Research,"  17;  National  Commission,  Staff  Paper,
"Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research  Involving  Prisoners,"  5  March  1976,  12-13,
Archives,  National  Reference  Center  for  Bioethics  Literature,  Kennedy  Institute  of
Ethics,  Georgetown  University,  National  Commission  Papers,  Box  6;  form  letter  sent  to
randomly  selected  prisoners  for  permission  to  conduct  an  interview,  3  November  1975,
Archives,  National  Reference  Center  for  Bioethics  Literature,  Kennedy  Institute  of
Ethics,  Georgetown  University,  National  Commission  Papers,  Box  22.

72.  National  Commission,  Report  and  Recommendations:  Research  Involving
Prisoners,  16-19.


451


73. Frankel,  402;  see  also  the  enabling  legislation  for  the  commission,  the
National  Research  Act,  P.L.  93-348.

73.  Joseph  Califano  to  Kenneth  J.  Ryan,  Chairman  of  the  National  Commission  for  the
Protection  of  Human  Subjects  of  Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research,  2  May  1978;  see  also  a
memorandum  from  Julius  P.  Richmond,  Assistant  Secretary  for  Health,  to  Califano,  26  July
1977.  Both  documents  can  be  found  in  the  Office  of  the  Director  (OD)  Files,  National  Institutes
of  Health,  Central  Files,  "Human  Subjects"  folders.

75.  For  the  proposed  DHEW  regulations  see  the  Federal  Register  43  (5
January  1978),  1050-1053;  the  final  regulations  can  be  found  in  the  Federal  Register  43
(16  November  1978),  53652-53656.  These  regulations  remain  essentially  unchanged
today  and  can  be  found  at  45  C.F.R.  part  46,  subpart  C.  These  regulations  have  also
been  adopted  by  other  federal  agencies  that  have  any  concern  with  human
experimentation  as  part  of  the  so-called  Common  Rule,  with  the  exception  of  the  FDA
(see  below).

76.  Federal  Register  43  (5  January  1 978),  1 05 1 .

77.  Federal  Register  45  (30  May  1 980),  36386-36392.

78.  Henry  Fante  et  al.  v.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  et  al.,  U.S.
District  Court,  Eastern  District  of  Michigan,  Southern  Division,  Civil  Action  No.  80-
72778.  The  records  from  this  case  are  now  kept  at  the  National  Archives,  Great  Lakes
Regional  Archives,  Chicago,  Accession  No.  21-88-0016,  Location  No.  331792-332283,
Box  No.  269.  FDA  officials  announced  the  decision  to  stay  indefinitely  the  regulations
in  the  Federal  Register  46  (7  July  1981),  35085.  The  current  "stayed"  status  of  the  FDA
prison  research  regulations  can  be  found  at  21  C.F.R.  part  50,  subpart  C.

79.  Charles  Miller,  as  quoted  in  Stephen  Gettinger  and  Kevin  Krajick,  "The
Demise  of  Prison  Medical  Research,"  Corrections  Magazine  5  (December  1979):  12.

80.  On  1  January  1960,  NIH  awarded  $97,256.00  to  the  LMRI  of  Boston
University  to  carry  out  this  study.  Irving  Ladimer,  who  had  completed  a  doctor  of  law
dissertation  at  George  Washington  University  in  1958  on  the  legal  and  ethical  aspects  of
human  experimentation,  served  as  the  project's  principal  investigator  through  June  1 962,
when  he  left  Boston  University.  Ladimer  was  replaced  as  principal  investigator  by  his
chief  assistant,  Donald  A.  Kennedy,  an  anthropologist  by  training,  who  saw  the  project
through  to  completion.  The  first  characterization  of  the  purpose  of  the  project  is  taken
from  page  1  of  Kennedy's  preface  to  the  final  report:  "A  Study  of  the  Legal,  Ethical,  and
Administrative  Aspects  of  Clinical  Research  Involving  Human  Subjects:  Final  Report  of
Administrative  Practices  in  Clinical  Research,  Research  Grant  No.  7039,"  Law-Medicine
Research  Institute,  Boston  University  (1963)  (hereafter  cited  as  LMRI  final  report);  both
chapter  and  page  numbers  will  be  provided  because  pages  within  chapters  are  numbered
separately.  The  second,  and  lengthier  puipose  statement  is  taken  from  page  1  of  chapter

1  of  the  LMRI  final  report,  "Focus  of  the  Inquiry."  This  unpublished  report  is  in  the
collections  of  the  Mugar  Memorial  Library,  Boston  University  (ACHRE  No.  BU-
053194-A).  This  report,  which  is  more  than  360  typewritten  pages,  is  a  wealth  of
information  that  has  remained  largely  untapped  by  recent  scholars  interested  in  the
development  of  research  ethics  in  this  country.  The  few  citations  of  the  project  that  do
appear  in  the  published  literature  almost  all  refer  to  a  threummary  that  appears  in
William  J.  Curran,  "Governmental  Regulation  of  the  Use  of  Human  Subjects  in  Medical
Research:  The  Approach  of  Two  Agencies,"  Daedalus  98  (spring  1969):  546-548.  In
this  very  brief  reference  to  the  project,  Curran  makes  no  mention  of  the  "invitational
work  conferences,"  which  the  project  staff  identified  as  the  investigational  technique  that


452


"yielded  the  most  valuable  information."  This  characterization  appears  on  page  8  of
chapter  2,  which  is  devoted  to  research  method;  pages  3-5  of  the  same  chapter  provide
more  details  on  the  specific  methodology  employed  in  these  conferences.

81.  LMRI  final  report,  chapter  8,  Roger  W.  Newman,  LL.B.  [of  the  project
staff],  "The  Participation  of  Prisoners  in  Clinical  Research:  Analytic  Summary  of  a
Conference,"  1-2.  A  collection  of  documents  related  to  the  project  is  located  in  the  files
of  the  Center  for  Law  and  Health  Sciences,  School  of  Law,  Boston  University.  This
entity  is  the  successor  to  the  Law-Medicine  Research  Institute  (ACHRE  No.  BU-062394-
A).

82.  Newman's  "Analytic  Summary"  is  more  than  100  pages  of  typescript  and
seems  to  cover  the  conference  in  considerable  detail.  Also,  comparisons  between  the
transcripts  of  other  LMRI  "invitational  work  conferences"  that  have  survived  with  the
related  summaries  produced  for  the  final  report  reveal  a  skillful  and  fair  rendering  of  the
meetings.

83.  LMRI  final  report,  chapter  8,  27.

84.  Ibid.,  18.

85.  Ibid.,  31.

86.  Ibid.

87.  Ibid.,  85.

88.  Ibid.,  71.

89.  Ibid.,  72.

90.  Ibid.,  74.

91.  Ibid.,  88-89.

92.  Ibid.,  85-86.

93.  Ibid.,  93.

94.  Ibid.,  89-90.

95.  Ibid.,  96.

96.  Deposition  of  Carl  Heller,  19  July  1976,  32.  Heller  said  he  avoided  the
word  cancer  because  "I  didn't  want  to  frighten  them  [the  prisoners]."  Dr.  Paulsen  said  in
a  telephone  interview  on  12  September  1995  that  he  explained  to  the  inmates  that  data
from  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  "showed  no  additional  incidence  of  testicular  cancer."
Undated  consent  forms  from  the  Washington  experiment  differ.  Some  specify  an
"extremely  small"  risk  of  testicular  cancer,  and  others  do  not  specifically  mention
cancer.  C.  A.  Paulsen,  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  12  September  1995  (ACHRE  No.
ACHRE-091295-A).


453


10

Atomic  Veterans:  Human

Experimentation  in  Connection

with  Atomic  Bomb  Tests


In  1 946,  the  United  States  conducted  Operation  Crossroads,  the  first
peacetime  nuclear  weapons  tests,  before  an  audience  of  worldwide  press  and
visiting  dignitaries  at  the  Bikini  Atoll  in  the  Pacific  Marshall  Islands.  In  1949  the
Soviet  Union  exploded  its  first  atomic  bomb,  and  in  December  1950,  shortly  after
the  United  States  entered  the  Korean  War,  President  Truman  chose  Nevada  as  the
site  for  "continental  testing"  of  nuclear  weapons.  Testing  of  atomic  bombs  in
Nevada  began  in  January  1951  and  continued  throughout  the  decade.  Further
testing  of  atomic,  then  hydrogen,  bombs  took  place  in  the  Pacific.  By  the  time
atmospheric  testing  was  halted  by  the  1963  test  ban  treaty,  the  United  States  had
conducted  more  than  200  atmospheric  tests  and  dozens  of  underground  tests.1

The  rules  governing  nuclear  weapons  tests  were  not  spelled  out  by  law  or
handed  down  by  tradition.  They  had  to  be  created  in  ongoing  interplay  between
the  new  Atomic  Energy  Commission  and  the  new  Department  of  Defense.

The  tests  were  important  to  many  governmental  agencies  but,  of  course,
critical  to  the  AEC  and  the  DOD.  The  AEC,  as  the  source  of  weapons  design
expertise,  was  interested  in  the  performance  of  new  bomb  designs  and,  along  with
DOD,  in  the  effects  of  the  weapons.  The  DOD,  and  each  of  the  armed  services,
had  particular  interests  in  the  use  of  the  tests  to  learn  how  atomic  wars  could  be
fought  and  won,  if,  as  seemed  quite  possible  at  midcentury,  they  had  to  be.  Along
with  "civilian  agencies,"  such  as  the  Public  Health  Service,  the  Veterans
Administration,  and  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  they  shared  an  interest  in  civil


454


Chapter  10

defense  against  the  use  of  the  bomb  in  wartime  and  the  impact  of  the  bomb's  use-
in  peacetime  tests  as  well  as  war--on  the  public  health  and  welfare.  The  bomb
tests  inevitably  involved  risk  and  uncertainty;  safety  was  a  basic  and  continued
concern,  and  the  development  of  radiation  safety  practices  and  understanding  was
therefore  an  essential  part  of  the  test  program.

At  its  core,  the  test  program  was  established  to  determine  how  well  newly
designed  nuclear  weapons  worked;  but  officials  and  researchers  quickly  saw  the
need  and  opportunity  to  use  the  tests  for  other  purposes  as  well.  More  than
200,000  people,  including  soldiers,  sailors,  air  crews,  and  civilian  test  personnel,
were  engaged  to  staff  the  tests,  to  participate  as  trainees  or  observers,  and  to
gather  data  on  the  effects  of  the  weapons.

The  Committee  was  not  chartered  to  review  the  atomic  bomb  tests  or  the
experience  of  the  troops  present  at  the  detonations.  However,  early  in  our  tenure
we  heard  from  veterans  who  participated  in  the  tests,  and  their  family  members,
who  urged  that  we  include  their  experiences  in  our  review.  In  testimony  before
the  Advisory  Committee,  "atomic  vets"  and  their  widows  stated  forcefully  that  all
those  who  participated  in  the  bomb  tests  were  in  a  real  sense  participants  in  an
experiment.  It  also  was  argued  that  biomedical  experiments  involving  military
personnel  as  human  subjects  took  place  in  connection  with  the  tests.  The  interest
among  atomic  veterans  and  their  families  in  the  activities  of  the  Advisory
Committee  and  the  government's  commitment  to  investigating  human  radiation
experiments  was  intense.  When  the  Department  of  Energy  established  its
Helpline  for  citizens  concerned  about  human  radiation  experiments,  for  example,
bomb-test  participants  and  their  family  members  were  the  single  largest  group  of
callers  among  the  approximately  20,000  calls  received.

That  the  bomb  tests  were  in  some  sense  experiments  is,  of  course,  correct.
The  tests  of  new  and  untried  atomic  weapons  were,  wrote  the  chief  health  officer
of  the  AEC's  Los  Alamos  lab,  "fundamentally  large  scale  laboratory
experiments."2  At  the  same  time,  although  there  was  a  real  possibility  that  human
subject  research  had  been  conducted  in  conjunction  with  the  bomb  tests,  the  tests
were  not  themselves  experiments  involving  human  subjects.

The  Committee  reviewed  the  historical  record  to  determine  if  human
experiments  had  taken  place  in  connection  with  the  tests.  We  found  that
somewhere  in  the  range  of  2,000  to  3,000  military  personnel  at  the  tests  did  serve
as  the  subjects  of  research  in  connection  with  the  tests.  In  most  cases,  these
research  subjects  were  engaged  in  activities  similar  to  those  engaged  in  by  many
other  service  personnel  who  were  not  research  subjects.  For  example,  some  air
crew  flew  through  atomic  clouds  in  experiments  to  measure  radiation  absorbed  by
their  bodies,  but  many  others  flew  in  or  around  atomic  clouds  to  gather  data  on
radiation  in  the  clouds.  The  Defense  Department  generally  did  not  distinguish
such  research  from  otherwise  similar  activities,  treating  both  as  part  of  the  duties
of  military  personnel.  The  experience  of  the  atomic  veterans  illustrates  well  the
difficulty  in  locating  the  boundary  between  research  involving  human  subjects

455


Part  II

and  other  activities  conducted  in  occupational  settings  that  routinely  involve
exposure  to  hazards.

The  more  the  Committee  investigated  the  human  research  projects
conducted  in  conjunction  with  the  bomb  tests,  the  more  we  found  ourselves
discussing  issues  that  affected  all  the  service  personnel  who  had  been  present  at
the  tests,  and  not  just  those  who  also  had  been  involved  as  subjects  of  research.
This  occurred  both  because  of  the  boundary  problem  just  described  and  because
critical  decisions  about  initial  exposure  levels  and  follow-up  of  veterans  were
generally  not  made  separately  for  research  subjects  and  other  personnel  present  at
the  tests.  Legislation  passed  in  1984  and  1988  that  provides  the  basis  for
compensation  to  some  atomic  veterans  similarly  does  not  distinguish  between
those  veterans  who  were  research  subjects  and  the  vast  majority  who  were  not.

In  this  chapter  we  present  what  we  have  learned  about  human
experimentation  conducted  in  conjunction  with  atomic  bomb  testing  as  well  as
some  observations  about  the  experience  of  the  atomic  veterans  generally.  In  the
first  section  of  the  chapter  we  focus  on  research  involving  human  subjects.  We
begin  by  a  review  of  the  1951-1952  discussions  in  which  DOD  biomedical
advisers  considered  the  role  of  troops  at  the  bomb  tests  and  the  need  for
biomedical  research  to  be  conducted  in  conjunction  with  them.  We  then  look  at  a
research  activity  that  was  given  the  highest  priority  by  these  advisers,  the
psychological  and  physiological  testing  of  troops  involved  in  training  maneuvers
at  bomb  tests  and  of  officers  who  volunteered  to  occupy  foxholes  in  the  range  of
one  mile  from  ground  zero.  We  next  turn  to  the  so-called  flashblindness
experiments  conducted  to  measure  the  effect  on  vision  of  the  detonation  of  an
atomic  bomb.  Finally,  we  look  at  research  in  which  men  were  used  to  help
measure  the  radiation  absorbed  by  protective  clothing,  by  equipment  that  humans
operated,  and  by  the  human  body.  We  note  at  the  outset  that  while  the  studies  all
took  place  in  the  context  of  the  atomic  bomb,  and  therefore  involved  some
potential  exposure  to  radiation,  none  of  them  were  designed  to  measure  the
biological  effects  of  radiation  itself  (as  opposed  to  the  levels  of  exposure).  A
basic  reason  this  was  so  was  the  determination  of  the  DOD  and  the  AEC  to  keep
exposure  levels  of  test  participants  below  those  at  which  acute  radiation  effects
were  likely  to  be  experienced  (and  therefore  measurable).

In  the  second  section  of  the  chapter  we  discuss  issues  of  concern  to  the
Committee  that  affected  all  the  atomic  veterans.  We  review  how  risk  was
considered  by  AEC  and  DOD  officials  at  the  time  the  tests  were  being  planned,
the  creation  and  maintenance  of  records  related  to  bomb-test  exposure,  and  what
is  now  known  about  the  longer-term  risks  of  participation  in  the  tests.  We  also
discuss  the  legacy  of  distrust  among  atomic  veterans  and  their  families  that  stems,
in  part,  from  the  failure  to  create  and  maintain  adequate  records.  Finally,  we
conclude  with  a  discussion  of  what  the  atomic  bomb-test  experience  tells  us  about
the  boundary  between  experimental  and  occupational  exposures  to  risk  and  some
lessons  that  remain  to  be  learned  from  the  experience  of  the  atomic  veterans.

456


Chapter  10

HUMAN  RESEARCH  AT  THE  BOMB  TESTS

The  Defense  Department's  Medical  Experts:  Advocates  of  Troop  Maneuvers
and  Human  Experimentation

As  we  saw  in  the  introduction,  in  1 949,  when  AEC  and  DOD  experts  met
to  consider  the  psychological  problems  connected  to  construction  of  the  proposed
nuclear-powered  airplane,  the  NEPA  project,  there  was  a  consensus  that
America's  atomic  war-fighting  capability  would  be  crippled  unless  servicemen
were  cured  of  the  "mystical"  fear  of  radiation.3  When  routine  testing  of  nuclear
weapons  began  at  the  test  site  in  Nevada  in  1951,  the  opportunity  to  take  action  to
deal  with  this  problem  presented  itself.  DOD  officials  urged  that  troop  maneuvers
and  training  exercises  be  conducted  in  connection  with  the  tests.  Whole  military
units  would  be  employed  in  these  exercises,  and  participation,  as  part  of  the  duty
of  the  soldier,  would  not  be  voluntary.  DOD's  medical  experts  simultaneously
urged  that  the  tests  be  used  for  training  and  "indoctrination"  about  atomic  warfare
and  as  an  opportunity  for  research.  The  psychological  and  physiological  testing
of  troops  to  address  the  fear  of  radiation  was  the  first  of  the  research  to  take  place;
this  testing  was  largely  conducted  as  an  occupational  rather  than  an  experimental
activity.

In  a  June  27,  1951,  memorandum  to  high  DOD  officials,  Dr.  Richard
Meiling,  the  chair  of  the  secretary  of  defense's  top  medical  advisory  group,  the
Armed  Forces  Medical  Policy  Council,  addressed  the  question  of  "Military
Medical  Problems"  associated  with  bomb  tests.4  The  memorandum  made  clear
that  troops  should  be  placed  at  bomb  tests  not  so  much  to  examine  risk  as  to
demonstrate  relative  safety.

"Fear  of  radiation,"  Dr.  Meiling's  memorandum  began,  "is  almost
universal  among  the  uninitiated  and  unless  it  is  overcome  in  the  military  forces  it
could  present  a  most  serious  problem  if  atomic  weapons  are  used."  In  fact,  "[i]t
has  been  proven  repeatedly  that  persistent  ionizing  radiation  following  air  bursts
does  not  occur,  hence  the  fear  that  it  presents  a  dangerous  hazard  to  personnel  is
groundless."  Dr.  Meiling  urged  that  "positive  action  be  taken  at  the  earliest
opportunity  to  demonstrate  this  fact  in  a  practical  manner."5

He  continued,  a  "Regimental  Combat  Team  should  be  deployed
approximately  twelve  miles  from  the  designated  ground  zero  of  an  air  blast  and
immediately  following  the  explosion  . . .  they  should  move  into  the  burst  area  in
fulfillment  of  a  tactical  problem."  The  exercise  "would  clearly  demonstrate  that
persistent  ionizing  radiation  following  an  air  burst  atomic  explosion  presents  no
hazards  to  personnel  and  would  effectively  dispel  a  fear  that  is  dangerous  and
demoralizing  but  entirely  groundless."6

Dr.  Meiling's  proposal  to  put  troops  at  the  bomb  tests  in  order  to  allay
their  fears  may  well  have  been  an  echo  of  what  the  military  already  had  in  mind.
The  Army's  1 950  "Atomic  Energy  Indoctrination"  pamphlet,  a  primer  for  soldiers,

457


Part  II

showed  that  the  military  was  concerned  that  misperception  of  the  effect  of  an  air
burst  could  be  damaging  in  combat.  "[Lingering  radioactivity  will  be  virtually
nonexistent  in  the  case  of  the  normal  air  burst,"7  it  reassured  the  soldiers.  The
greater  danger,  it  told  them,  was  the  probability  that  "an  unreasoning  fear  of
lingering  radioactivity"  would  take  "an  unnecessary  toll  in  American  lives."8

While  the  tests  provided  an  opportunity  to  allay  fears,  they  simultaneously
provided  the  opportunity  to  gather  data.  In  this  regard,  Dr.  Meiling  appeared  to
be  ahead  of  his  military  colleagues  in  expressing  concern  that  the  military  was  not
taking  adequate  advantage  of  the  bomb  tests  as  an  opportunity  for  "biomedical
participation."  In  February  1951,  in  fact,  following  tests  in  Nevada,  he  had  urged
the  DOD  to  incorporate  "biomedical  tests"  into  plans  for  future  bomb  tests.9

Meiling's  suggestion  that  planning  for  biomedical  tests  be  undertaken
wound  its  way  through  the  secretary  of  defense's  research  and  development
bureaucracy  and  fell  into  the  lap  of  the  civilian-chaired  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical
Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare.10  Under  the  chairmanship  of  Harvard's  Dr.  Joseph
Aub,  the  Joint  Panel  was  the  gathering  place  for  the  small  world  of  government
radiation  researchers  and  their  private  consultants.  Its  periodic  "Program
Guidance  Reports"  laid  out  the  atomic  warfare  medical  research  agenda,
summarizing  work  that  was  ongoing  and  that  which  remained.  At  its  meetings,
participants  heard  from  the  CIA  on  foreign  medical  intelligence,  debated  the  need
for  human  experimentation,  and  learned  of  the  latest  developments  in  radiation
injury  research,  of  the  blast  and  heat  effects  of  the  bomb,  and  of  instruments
needed  to  measure  radiation  effects.

In  September  1951  the  Joint  Panel  considered  a  draft  report  on
"biomedical  participation"  in  bomb  tests."  "It  is,  of  course  obvious,"  the  report
noted,  "that  a  test  of  a  new  and  untried  atomic  weapon  is  not  a  place  to  have  an
unlimited  number  of  people  milling  about  and  operating  independently."
Planning  was  therefore  in  order.  There  were,  the  document  explained,  basic
criteria  for  "experimentation"  at  bomb  tests.  For  example,  "Does  the  experiment
have  to  be  done  at  a  bomb  detonation;  is  it  impossible  or  impractical  in  a
laboratory?"12

The  document  turned  to  "specific  problems  for  future  tests."  The  list  of
twenty-nine  problems  was  not  intended  to  be  all-inclusive,  but  was  "designed  to
show  the  types  of  problems  which  should  be  considered  as  a  legitimate  basis  for
biomedical  participation  in  future  weapons  tests."  The  term  human
experimentation  was  not  used,  and  most  of  the  items  could  be  performed  without
humans.13  However,  the  list  included  several  examples  of  research  involving
human  subjects:

1 1 .  Effects  of  exposure  of  the  eye  to  the  atomic  flash  . . .

24.  Measurements  of  radioactive  isotopes  in  the
body  fluids  of  atomic  weapons  test  personnel . . .

458


areas.15


Chapter  10

27.  The  efficiency  and  suitability  of  various
protective  devices  and  equipment  for  atomic
weapons  war . . .

28.  Psychophysiological  changes  after  exposure  to
nuclear  explosions.

29.  Orientation  flights  in  the  vicinity  of  nuclear
explosions  for  certain  combat  air  crews.14

By  the  end  of  the  decade,  human  research  would  be  conducted  in  all  these


At  the  same  September  meeting,  the  Joint  Panel  also  considered  a
"Program  Guidance  Report"  on  the  kinds  of  atomic  warfare-related  research  that
needed  to  be  conducted,  in  the  laboratory  as  well  as  in  the  field.  The  areas
singled  out  for  immediate  and  critical  attention  included  the  initiation  of  "troop
indoctrination  at  atomic  detonations"  and  "psychological  observations  on  troops
at  atom  bomb  tests."16

A  section  on  "Biomedical  Participation  in  Future  Atomic  Weapons  Tests"
concluded  that  the  next  step  should  be

4. 1  To  complete  present  program  and  plan  for
participation  in  future  tests  in  light  of  results  from
Operation  GREENHOUSE  [a  prior  atomic  test
series].  These  plans  should  include  studies  on  the
effect  of  atomic  weapons  detonations  on  a  troop
unit  in  normal  tactical  support  [emphasis  added].17

Thus,  while  it  was  well  known  at  the  time  that  troops  participated  at  the
bomb  tests  and  were  subjected  to  psychological  testing,  it  now  is  evident  that  the
DOD's  medical  advisers  advocated  the  presence  of  the  troops  at  the  tests  for  both
training  and  research  purposes.  The  doctors  were  not  alone  in  attaching  high
priority  to  such  research.  The  Joint  Panel's  September  guidance  punctuated,
perhaps  echoed,  the  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Projects's  midsummer  195 1
call  for  a  "systematic  research  study  .  .  .  [to]  provide  a  sound  basis  for  estimating
troop  reaction  to  the  bomb  experience  and  ...  the  indoctrination  value  of  the
maneuver."18

The  HumRRO  Experiments

Just  two  months  later,  in  November  1951,  at  a  bomb  test  in  the  Nevada
desert,  the  Army  conducted  the  first  in  a  series  of  "atomic  exercises."19  This
exercise  was  designed  primarily  to  train  and  indoctrinate  troops  in  the  fighting  of

459


Part  II

atomic  wars.  The  exercise  also  provided  an  opportunity  for  psychological  and
physiological  testing  of  the  effects  of  the  experience  on  the  troops.

Desert  Rock  was  an  Army  encampment  in  Nevada  adjacent  to  the  nuclear
test  site.  At  the  exercise  named  Desert  Rock  I,  more  than  600  of  the  5,000  men
present  would  be  studied  by  psychologists  from  a  newly  created  Army  contractor,
the  Human  Resources  Research  Organization  (HumRRO).  HumRRO's  research
was  directed  by  Dr.  Meredith  Crawford,  who  was  recruited  by  the  Army  from  a
deanship  at  Vanderbilt  University.20  The  identity  of  all  the  participants  involved
in  the  "HumRRO  experiments,"  and  the  further  DOD  research  discussed  later  in
this  chapter,  is  not  known.  The  numbers  of  those  who  participated  must  be
reconstructed  from  available  reports.21

The  highly  publicized  bomb  test  was  well  attended  by  military  and
civilian  officials.  "Las  Vegas,  Nevada,"  Time  magazine  reported,  "had  not  seen
so  many  soldiers  since  World  War  II. . . .  The  hotels  were  jammed  with  high
brass. . .  .  [o]ut  on  the  desert,  65  miles  away  5,000  hand-picked  troops  were
getting  their  final  briefing  before  Exercise  Desert  Rock  I~the  G.I.'s  introduction
to  atomic  warfare."22  The  detonation,  Representative  Albert  Gore  (father  of  the
current  Vice  President),  told  the  New  York  Times,  was  "the  most  spectacular  event
I  have  ever  witnessed. ...  As  I  witnessed  the  accuracy  and  cataclysmic  effect  of
the  explosion,  I  felt  the  conviction  that  it  might  be  used  in  Korea  if  the  cease-fire
negotiations  broke  down."23

To  render  the  experience  more  realistic,  the  observers  and  participants
were  told  to  imagine  that  aggressor  armies  had  invaded  the  United  States  and
were  now  at  the  California-Nevada  border.  An  atomic  bomb  would  be  dropped,
with  the  troops  occupying  a  position  seven  miles  from  ground  zero.  After  the
detonations  they  would  "attack  into  the  bombed  area."24

At  their  home  base,  two  groups  of  troops-a  control  group  that  would  stay
at  home  base  and  an  experimental  group  that  would  go  to  Nevada—had  listened  to
lectures  and  seen  films  intended  to  "indoctrinate"  them  about  the  effects  of  the
bomb  and  radiation  safety.  Both  groups  were  administered  a  questionnaire  to
determine  how  well  they  had  understood  the  information  provided.  Dr.  Crawford
explained  in  a  1994  interview  that  "indoctrination,"  which  today  has  a  negative
connotation,  was  not  intended  to  suggest  misrepresentation  of  fact,  but  "had  more
to  do  with  attitude,  feeling  and  motivation."25  At  Desert  Rock,  the  experimental
group  was  given  a  further  "non-technical  briefing."  They  were  "reminded  that  no
danger  of  immediate  radiation  remains  90  seconds  after  an  air  burst;  that  they
would  be  sufficiently  far  from  ground  zero  to  be  perfectly  safe  without  shelter;
and  that  with  simple  protection  they  could  even  be  placed  quite  close  to  the  center
of  the  detonation,  with  no  harm  to  them."26

After  the  blast,  a  questionnaire  was  again  administered  to  most  of  the
experimental  subjects,  and  physiological  measurements  including  blood  pressure
and  heart  rates  were  taken.  The  questionnaire  was  designed  to  test  the  success  of
the  "indoctrination."27  For  example,  questions  included  (answers  in  parentheses

460


Chapter  10

were  those  the  HumRRO  report  stated  were  correct):

1.  Suppose  the  A-bomb  were  used  against  enemy
troops  by  exploding  it  2000  feet  from  the  ground
and  suppose  all  enemy  troops  were  killed.  How
dangerous  do  you  think  it  would  be  for  our  troops  to
enter  the  area  directly  below  the  explosion  within  a
day?  (Not  dangerous  at  all). .  . .

6.  If  an  A-bomb  were  exploded  at  2000  feet,  under
what  conditions  would  it  be  safe  to  move  into  the
spot  directly  below,  right  after  the  explosion?  (Safe
if  you  wore  regular  field  clothing.)28

These  answers  were  not  correct.  Answers  to  questions  like  the  above
depend  on  weather  conditions,  the  yield  of  the  weapon,  and  the  assumptions  about
the  degree  of  risk  from  low  levels  of  exposure.  For  example,  while  an  airburst
(where  the  fireball  does  not  touch  the  ground)  may  result  in  little  fallout  in  the
immediate  area  of  the  blast,  it  does  not  result  in  none;  if  rain  is  present,  a
substantial  amount  of  fallout  may  be  localized.

Similarly,  whereas  the  1 946  Bikini  bomb  tests  at  Operation  Crossroads  in
the  Pacific  had  caused  contamination  so  severe  that  many  of  the  surviving  ships
were  scrapped,  the  question  and  answer  provided  said:

Some  of  the  ships  in  the  Bikini  tests  had  to  be  sunk
because  they  were  too  radioactive  to  be  used  again.
(False).29

In  a  1 995  review  of  the  1 95 1  questionnaire,  the  Defense  Department
found  that  "changes/corrections/clarifications"  would  be  in  order  for  nine  of  the
thirty  questions.30

In  January  1952,  the  Army  surgeon  general  expressed  "continuing  interest
in  the  conduct  of  psychiatric  observations,"  offering  funds  for  "Psychiatric
Research  in  Connection  with  Atomic  Weapons  Tests  Involving  Troop
Participation."31  In  March  1952,  however,  the  Army  and  the  Armed  Forces
Special  Weapons  Project  (AFSWP),  which  coordinated  nuclear  weapons  activities
for  the  DOD,  provided  critical  reflections  on  Desert  Rock  I.  "[0]ne  is  inevitably
drawn  to  the  conclusion,"  the  Army  reported,  "that  the  results,  though  measurable,
were  highly  indeterminate  and  unconvincing.  The  limitations  of  evaluation  were
inherent  in  the  problem.  Handicapped  by  a  preconceived  notion  that  there  would
be  no  reaction,  it  took  on  the  form  of  a  gigantic  experiment  whose  results  were
already  known.  No  well  controlled  studies  could  be  undertaken  which  could
presume  even  superficial  validity "32  In  a  letter  to  the  AEC,  the  AFSWP  went

461


Part  II

further.  Owing  to  the  "tactically  unrealistic  distance  of  seven  miles  to  which  all
participating  troops  were  required  to  withdraw  for  the  detonation,"33  troops  might
get  the  wrong  impression  about  nuclear  warfare.

In  1994,  Dr.  Crawford  reflected  on  the  logic  of  testing  for  panic  in  an
environment  that  was  thought  to  be  too  safe.  "No  troops,"  Dr.  Crawford  recalled,
"were  exposed  anywhere  where  anybody  thought  there  was  any  danger,  so  you
might  ask  the  question,  so  what?  I've  asked  that  question  myself  and  I've  thought
about  it.  It  was  the  first  HumRRO  project.  It  was  really  pretty  well  agreed  upon
before  I  got  up  here  from  Tennessee  ...  so  we  did  what  we  could."34

Despite  the  reservations  about  the  1951  study,  on  May  25,  1952,  the  Army
conducted  its  second  HumRRO  experiment  at  the  exercise  called  Desert  Rock  IV.
It  was  similar  in  methodology  to  the  first  experiment  and  involved  about  700
soldiers  who  witnessed  the  shot  and  900  who  served  in  the  control  group  as
nonparticipants.35  This  time,  to  add  more  realism,  the  troops  witnessed  the  blast,
an  1 1-kiloton  weapon  that  was  set  off  from  the  top  of  a  tower,  from  four  miles
from  ground  zero.  By  the  end  of  the  second  research  effort,  there  was  even  more
reason  to  question  the  utility  of  the  experiments.  HumRRO's  report  on  Desert
Rock  IV  stated  that  while  knowledge  increased  as  a  result  of  the  indoctrination,
the  actual  maneuver  experience  did  not  produce  significant  improvement  in  test
scores  and  decreases  were  actually  reported  on  some  questions.36

In  both  Desert  Rock  I  and  Desert  Rock  IV,  the  Army  hoped  that  the  troops
who  witnessed  the  blasts  would  disseminate  information  to  the  troops  who  stayed
at  home  base.  However,  the  troops  who  participated  in  the  exercises  were  warned
that  discussion  of  their  experiences  could  bring  severe  punishment,  and  the
researchers  found  that  communication  was  at  a  minimum.37  Moreover,  those  who
stayed  home,  HumRRO  found,  "showed  no  evidence  of  great  interest,  of
extensive  discussion,  or  of  any  important  benefit  from  dissemination  as  a  result  of
the  atomic  maneuver."38  Meanwhile,  the  experience  that  the  participants  had  been
warned  not  to  discuss  and  that  was  of  little  interest  to  their  comrades  was  front-
page news  throughout  the  country.  "When  they  returned  to  camp,"  Time  reported
of  the  first  Desert  Rock  exercise,  "the  men  were  quickly  herded  into  showers.
Some  were  given  test  forms  to  fill  out.  Did  you  sweat?  Did  your  heart  beat  fast
at  any  time?  Did  you  lose  bladder  control?  Most  of  the  answers  were  no."39

Without  any  direct  comment  on  the  results  of  the  Desert  Rock  I  and  IV
experiments,  in  September  1952,  the  Joint  Panel  urged  that  the  psychological
research  continue:

It  is  possible  that  inclination  to  panic  in  the  face  of
AW  [atomic  warfare]  and  RW  [radiological
warfare]  may  prove  high.  It  seems  advisable,
therefore,  to  increase  research  efforts  in  the
scientific  study  of  panic  and  its  results,  and  to  seek
means  for  prophylaxis. . .  .  The  panel  supports  the

462


Chapter  10


point  of  view  that  troop  participation  in  tests  of
atomic  weapons  is  valuable.  As  many  men  as
possible  ought  to  be  exposed  to  this  experience
under  safe  conditions.  Psychological  evaluation  is
difficult  and  results  can  be  expected  to  appear
superficially  trivial,  but  the  matter  is  of  such
extreme  importance  that  the  research  should  be
persisted  in,  utilizing  every  opportunity.


.  40


Indeed,  a  third  set  of  experiments  was  carried  out  in  April  1953,  at  Desert
Rock  V;  this  time,  the  number  of  participants  is  unknown.41

The  final  HumRRO  bomb  test  study  was  conducted  in  1957  at  Operation
Plumbbob.42  No  formal  report  was  prepared,  but  the  experience  was  recorded  in  a
personalized  recollection  by  a  HumRRO  staffer.43  Weather-related  delays,  the
departure  of  HumRRO  staff,  the  continued  redesign  of  the  exercises,  and  the
failure  of  a  fifth  of  the  troops  to  return  from  a  weekend  pass  in  time  for  the  events
took  their  toll.  The  researchers  were  not  given  the  script  used  in  the
indoctrination  lectures  to  the  troops.  Thus,  it  was  impossible  for  the  researchers
to  know  whether  incorrect  responses  were  due  to  "lack  of  inclusion  of  the  topic  in
the  orientation  or  to  ineffective  instruction."44  The  research  was  to  include
exercises  such  as  crawling  over  contaminated  ground.45  But,  yet  again,  the
researchers  found  that  the  safety  rules  in  force  precluded  important  study:  "shock
. . .  and  panic  . .  .  would  not  be  observed."46

There  is  no  question  that  HumRRO  activities  were  research  involving
human  subjects;  the  projects  involved  an  experimental  design  in  which  soldier-
subjects  were  assigned  either  to  an  experimental  or  a  control  condition.  Available
evidence  suggests,  however,  that  the  Army  did  not  treat  HumRRO  as  a
discretionary  research  activity  but  as  an  element  of  the  training  exercise  in  which
soldiers  were  participating  in  the  course  of  normal  duty.  The  HumRRO  subjects
were  apparently  not  volunteers.  Dr.  Crawford  in  1994  said  of  the  HumRRO
subjects,  "Whether  they  were  requested  to  formally  give  their  consent  is  pretty
unknowable  because  in  the  Army  or  any  other  military  service  people  generally
do  what  they're  asked  to  do,  told  to  do."47  Indeed,  as  HumRRO's  initial  report
stated,  the  primary  purpose  of  the  atomic  exercise  was  training;  "research  was
necessarily  of  secondary  importance."48  However,  Dr.  Crawford  felt  confident
that  the  risks  were  disclosed.  Because  of  the  "number  and  intensity  of  briefings
.  [n]o  soldier,  to  our  knowledge,  went  into  the  test  situation  with  no  idea  about
what  to  expect.  They  were  adequately  informed."49

We  now  know  that  in  1952  the  Defense  Department's  medical  experts
were  simultaneously  locked  in  discussion  of  the  need  for  psychological  studies
and  other  human  research  at  bomb  tests  and,  as  we  saw  in  chapter  1,  the  need  for
a  policy  to  govern  human  experimentation  related  to  atomic,  biological,  and
chemical  warfare.  In  October  of  that  year,  the  Armed  Forces  Medical  Policy

463


Part  II

Council  recommended  that  the  Nuremberg  Code  be  adopted,  as  it  was  by
Secretary  Charles  Wilson  in  1953.  What  is  still  missing  is  information  that  might
show  how,  as  seems  to  be  the  case,  the  same  experts  could  have  been  having  these
discussions  without  communicating  the  essence  of  them  to  those  responsible  for
conducting  the  human  research  at  the  tests.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the
investigators  responsible  for  HumRRO  were  informed  about  the  Wilson  memo.
Dr.  Crawford,  for  example,  when  queried  in  1994,  reported  that  he  did  not  know
of  the  1953  Wilson  memorandum.  It  is  possible  that  HumRRO  was  not  viewed  as
being  subject  to  the  requirements  stated  in  the  Wilson  memo  despite  the  fact  that
it  was  human  research  relating  to  atomic  warfare.  Although  the  experimental
variable  was  participation  at  a  bomb  test,  arguably,  the  troops  would  have  been
present  at  the  test  in  any  event,  along  with  many  thousands  of  other  soldiers  who
were  not  subjects  in  the  HumRRO  research.

Atomic  Effects  Experiments

At  the  same  time  that  the  third  set  of  HumRRO  experiments  was  being
conducted,  in  April  1953  at  Desert  Rock  V,  the  Army  called  on  several  dozen
"volunteers  for  Atomic  Effects  Experiments."50  According  to  the  Army,  all  were
officers  familiar  with  the  "experimental  explosion  involved"  and  were  able  to
personally  judge  "the  probability  of  significant  variations  in  [weapon]  yield."
They  were  instructed  to  choose  the  distance  from  ground  zero  they  would  like  to
occupy  in  a  foxhole  at  the  time  of  detonation,  as  long  as  it  was  no  closer  than
1 ,500  yards.  If  the  surviving  documentation  is  the  measure,  these  officers,  and
perhaps  officer  volunteers  in  the  subsequent  Desert  Rock  series,  were  the  only
subjects  of  bomb-test  research  who  signed  forms  saying  that  they  were  voluntarily
undertaking  risk.51  The  exposures  were  meant  to  set  a  standard  for  developing
"troop  exposure  programs  and  for  confirming  safety  doctrine  for  tactical  use  of
atomic  weapons."52

An  Army  report  on  the  volunteers  at  Desert  Rock  V  concluded  that  there
would  be  "little  more  to  be  gained  by  placing  volunteer  groups  in  forward
positions  on  future  shots."53  An  April  24,  1953,  Army  memorandum
recommended  termination  of  the  program  "as  little  will  be  gained  in  repeatedly
placing  volunteers  in  trenches  2000  yards  from  ground  zero."54  However,  officer
volunteers  were  called  on  again  at  the  next  Desert  Rock  exercises  at  the  1955
nuclear  test  series  called  Operation  Teapot.  Following  Teapot,  the  Army
recommended  that  further  experiments  be  conducted  in  which  the  volunteers
would  be  moved  closer  to  ground  zero,  "until  thresholds  of  intolerability  are
ascertained."55  This  "use  of  human  volunteers  under  conditions  of  calculated
risk,"  the  Army  told  the  AFSWP,  "is  essential  in  the  final  phase  of  both  the
physiological  and  psychological  aspects  of  the  overall  program."56

In  response,  the  AFSWP  pointed  out  that  the  injury  threshold  could  not  be
determined  "without  eventually  exceeding  it."57  The  Army  was  essentially

464


Chapter  10

proposing  human  beings  be  exposed  to  the  detonation's  blast  effects  to  the  point
of  injury.  The  proposal,  an  AFSWP  memo  explained,  would  not  pass  muster
under  the  rules  of  the  Nevada  Test  Site  and  was  otherwise  unacceptable:

In  particular,  it  is  significant  that  the  long  range
effect  on  the  human  system  of  sub-lethal  doses  of
nuclear  radiation  is  an  unknown  field.  Exposure  of
volunteers  to  doses  higher  than  those  now  thought
safe  may  not  produce  immediate  deleterious  effects;
but  may  result  in  numerous  complaints  from
relatives,  claims  against  the  Government,  and
unfavorable  public  opinion,  in  the  event  that  deaths
and  incapacitation  occur  with  the  passage  of  time.58

If  the  Army  wanted  more  data  on  blast  effects,  AFSWP  declared,  it  should
proceed  with  laboratory  experiments,  for  which  money  would  be  made  available.
The  AFSWP  was  not  opposed  to  the  kinds  of  activities  that  had  previously  taken
place  at  Desert  Rock.  But  those  activities,  AFSWP's  memo  observed  in  passing,
"cannot  be  expected  to  produce  data  of  scientific  value."59

The  Desert  Rock  experience  was  apparently  repeated,  again  with  officer
volunteers,  in  the  next  Nevada  test  series,  the  1957  Operation  Plumbbob.
Although  the  total  number  of  officers  involved  in  all  of  the  "officer  volunteer"
experiments  is  not  known,  it  is  probably  fewer  than  one  hundred.

The  Flashblindness  Experiments

Beginning  with  the  1946  Bikini  tests,  experiments  with  living  things
became  a  staple  of  bomb  tests.  At  Operation  Crossroads,  animals  were  penned  on
the  decks  of  target  ships  to  study  the  effects  of  radiation.  In  the  1948  Sandstone
series  at  the  Marshall  Islands  Enewetak  Atoll,  seeds,  grains,  and  fungi  were
added.  In  1949,  the  AEC  and  the  DOD  began  to  coordinate  the  planning  of  the
biomedical  experiments  at  tests  and  set  up  a  Biomedical  Test  Planning  and
Screening  Committee  to  review  proposals.60  Presumably,  the  human  experiments
at  bomb  tests  should  have  been  filtered  through  this  or  some  other  review  process
designated  to  consider  experiments.  Yet,  in  only  one  case-flashblindness
experiments-did  this  happen.

With  Dr.  Meiling's  1951  call  for  renewed  DOD  effort  at  biomedical
experimentation  came  a  revival  of  the  DOD-AEC  joint  biomedical  planning.
From  the  start,  the  AEC  doubted  DOD's  willingness  to  cooperate.61  In  a  January
1952  letter  to  Shields  Warren,  Los  Alamos's  Thomas  Shipman  complained  that
the  committee  was  limited  to  reviewing  proposals  from  civilian  groups,  and  not
the  military:  "[I]f,"  he  wrote,  the  "AEC  can  not  exercise  a  measure  of  control  in
this  matter,  they  might  better  withdraw  from  the  picture  completely  and  permit

465


Part  II

the  military  to  continue  on  its  own  sweet  way  without  the  somewhat  ludicrous
spectacle  of  an  impotent  committee's  snapping  its  heels  like  a  puppy  dog."62  In
retrospect,  Shipman  wrote  to  Warren's  successor  in  June  1956,  the  military's
refusal  to  participate  "reduced  that  committee  to  impotence."63

Whatever  its  effectiveness,  in  1952  the  biomedical  research  screening
group  did  consider  at  least  one  of  the  military's  flashblindness  experiments.64
Flashblindness— the  temporary  loss  of  vision  from  exposure  to  the  flash— was  a
serious  problem  for  all  the  armed  services,  but  particularly  for  the  Air  Force.
Pilots  flying  hundreds  of  miles  an  hour  in  combat  could  not  afford  to  lose
concentration  and  vision  even  temporarily.65

The  flashblindness  experiments  began  at  the  1951  Operation  Buster-
Jangle,  the  series  that  included  Desert  Rock  I,  with  the  testing  of  subjects  who
"orbit[ed]  at  an  altitude  of  15,000  feet  in  an  Air  Force  C-54  approximately  9  miles
from  the  atomic  detonation. .  .  ,"66  The  test  subjects  were  exposed  to  three
detonations  during  the  operation,  after  which  changes  in  their  visual  acuity  were
measured.67  Although  these  experiments  were  conducted  at  bomb  tests  that
potentially  exposed  the  subjects  to  ionizing  radiation,  the  purpose  of  the
experiment  was  to  measure  the  thermal  effects  of  the  visible  light  flash,  not  the
effects  of  ionizing  radiation.

When  another  experiment  was  proposed  for  Operation  Tumbler-Snapper,
the  1952  Nevada  tests,  the  AEC  sought  a  "release  of  AEC  responsibility"  on
grounds  that  "there  is  a  possibility  that  permanent  eye  damage  may  result."68  It  is
not  clear  how  the  military  responded,  but  the  experiment  proceeded.  Twelve
subjects  witnessed  the  detonation  from  a  darkened  trailer  about  sixteen  kilometers
from  the  point  of  detonation.69  Each  of  the  human  "observers"  placed  his  face  in  a
hood;  half  wore  protective  goggles,  while  the  other  half  had  both  eyes  exposed.70
A  fraction  of  a  second  before  the  explosion,  a  shutter  opened,  exposing  the  left
eye  to  the  flash.71  Two  subjects  incurred  retinal  burns,  at  which  point  the  project
for  that  test  series  was  terminated.72  The  final  report  recorded  that  both  subjects
had  "completely  recovered."73

At  the  1953  tests,  the  Department  of  Defense  engaged  in  further
flashblindness  study.74  During  this  experiment,  "twelve  subjects  [dark-adapted]
in  a  light-tight  trailer  were  exposed  to  five  nuclear  detonation  flashes  at  distances
offrom7to  14  miles."75

The  flashblindness  experiments  were  the  only  human  experiments
conducted  under  the  biomedical  part  of  the  bomb-test  program  and  the  only
human  experiments  where  immediate  injury  was  recorded.  They  were  also  the
only  experiments  where  there  is  evidence  of  any  connection  to  the  1953  Wilson
memorandum  applying  the  Nuremberg  Code  to  human  experimentation.

Recently  recovered  documents  show  that  upon  a  1954  review  of  a  report
showing  the  injuries  at  the  1952  experiment,  AFSWP  medical  staff  immediately
declared  that  "a  definite  need  exists  for  guidance  in  the  use  of  human  volunteers
as  experimental  subjects."76  Further  inquiry  revealed  that  a  Top  Secret  policy  on

466


Chapter  10

the  subject  existed.  That  policy  detailed  "very  definite  and  specific  steps"  that
had  to  be  taken  before  volunteers  could  be  used  in  human  experimentation.  But,
the  AFSVVP  wrote,  "No  serious  attempt  has  been  made  to  disseminate  the
information  to  those  experimenters  who  had  a  definite  need-to-know."77

Nonetheless,  some  form  of  consent  was  obtained  from  at  least  some  of  the
flashblindness  subjects.  In  a  1994  interview,  Colonel  John  Pickering,  who  in  the
1950s  was  an  Air  Force  researcher  with  the  School  of  Aviation  Medicine,  recalled
participating  as  a  subject  in  one  of  the  first  tests  where  the  bomb  was  observed
from  a  trailer,  and  his  written  consent  was  required.  "When  the  time  came  for
ophthalmologists  to  describe  what  they  thought  could  or  could  not  happen,  and
we  were  asked  to  sign  a  consent  form,  just  as  you  do  now  in  the  hospital  for
surgery,  I  signed  one."78  There  is  no  documentation  showing  whether  subsequent
flashblindness  experiments,  which  followed  upon  the  issuance  of  the  secretary  of
defense's  1953  memorandum,  required  informed  and  written  consent.  However,
given  the  recollection  of  Colonel  Pickering  and  the  military  tradition  of  providing
for  voluntary  participation  in  biomedical  experimentation,  this  may  well  have
been  the  case.  (A  report  on  a  flashblindness  experiment  at  the  1957  Plumbbob
test  uses  the  term  volunteers'™  a  report  on  1962  "studies"  at  Dominic  I  provides
no  further  information.)80

In  early  1954  the  Air  Force's  School  of  Aviation  Medicine  reported  that
animal  studies  and  injuries  at  bomb  tests  (to  nonexperimental  participants)  had
shown  that  potential  for  eye  damage  was  substantially  worse  than  had  been
understood.81  Studies  of  flashblindness  with  humans  continued  in  both  field  and
laboratory  tests  through  the  1960s  and  into  the  1970s.  These  experiments  tested
prototype  versions  of  eye  protection  equipment,  and  the  results  were  used  to
recommend  requirements  for  eye  protection  for  those  exposed  to  atomic
explosions.82

Research  on  Protective  Clothing

In  late  1951,  following  the  first  Desert  Rock  exercise,  the  government
conducted  Operation  Jangle,  a  nuclear  test  series  that  detonated  two  nuclear
weapons,  one  on  the  surface  and  one  buried  seventeen  feet  underground.  The  two
Jangle  shots  were  tests  where  the  weapon's  fireball  touched  the  ground.  When  a
nuclear  weapon's  fireball  touches  the  ground  it  creates  much  more  local  fallout
than  an  explosion  that  bursts  in  the  air.  Consequently,  these  tests  posed  some
potential  hazard  to  civilians  who  lived  near  the  test  site  and  to  test  observers  and
participants.

Two  weeks  before  Jangle  the  DOD  requested  an  additional  500  observers
at  each  of  the  Jangle  shots,  to  acclimate  the  troops  to  nuclear  weapons.  The  AEC
advised  against  the  additional  participants,  declaring  that  "[t]his  [the  first
detonation]  was  an  experiment  which  had  never  been  performed  before  and  the
radiological  hazards  were  unpredictable."  In  the  AEC's  view,  no  one  should

467


Part  II

approach  ground  zero  for  three  or  four  days  after  the  surface  shot.83

The  AEC  seems  to  have  been  successful  in  persuading  the  Department  of
Defense  not  to  include  the  extra  observers,  but  the  DOD  did  not  agree  to  the
AEC's  suggestion  on  approaching  ground  zero.  Four  hours  after  the  first  shot,  the
DOD  conducted  research  involving  troops  who  were  accompanied  by  radiation
safety  monitors.84  Eight  teams  of  men  walked  over  contaminated  ground  for  one
hour  to  determine  the  effectiveness  of  protective  clothing  against  nuclear
contamination.85  Similar  tests  were  conducted  after  the  second  shot  at  Jangle,  but
this  time  after  a  longer  period.  Five  days  after  the  shallow  underground  shot,  men
crawled  over  contaminated  ground,  again  to  determine  the  effectiveness  of
protective  clothing.86  Other  men  rode  armored  vehicles  through  contaminated
areas  to  check  the  shielding  effects  of  tanks  and  to  check  the  effectiveness  of  air-
filtering  devices.87  According  to  the  final  report,  the  protective  clothing  was
"adequate  to  prevent  contact  between  radioactive  dust  and  the  skin  of  the
wearer."88

The  information  on  this  research  is  limited.  The  only  mention  of  the
subjects  in  the  report  reads,  "The  volunteer  enlisted  men,  too  numerous  to
mention  by  name,  who  participated  in  the  evaluation  of  protective  clothing  were
of  great  assistance  which  is  gratefully  acknowledged."89  It  is  likely  that  at  the
time  these  men  were  not  viewed  as  subjects  of  scientific  research  but  rather  as
men  who  had  volunteered  for  a  hazardous  or  risky  assignment.  We  know  nothing
about  what  these  men  were  told  about  the  risks  or  whether  they  felt  they  could
have  refused  the  assignment  if  they  had  an  interest  in  doing  so.

The  Jangle  activities  are  a  good  illustration  of  difficulties  in  drawing
boundaries  in  the  military  between  activities  that  are  research  involving  human
subjects  and  activities  that  are  not.  Although  the  Jangle  evaluation  was  likely  not
considered  an  instance  of  human  research  at  the  time,  it  has  many  similarities  to
ground-crawling  activity  conducted  several  years  later,  not  in  conjunction  with  a
nuclear  test,  that  was  treated  as  research  involving  human  subjects.  In  1958
ninety  soldiers  at  Camp  Stoneman,  in  Pittsburg,  California,  were  asked  to  perform
"typical  army  tactical  maneuvers"  on  soil  that  had  been  contaminated  with
radioactive  lanthanum.90  The  soldiers  were  then  monitored  for  their  exposure  to
study  beta  contamination  from  this  nonpenetrating  form  of  radiation.  In  1963
soldiers  were  again  asked  to  maneuver  on  ground  contaminated  with  artificial
fallout,  this  time  at  Camp  McCoy  in  Wisconsin.91

The  plans  for  the  1958  maneuvers,  which  were  administered  by  the  Navy's
Radiological  Defense  Laboratory,  had  been  submitted  for  secretarial  approval,  as
was  required  for  biomedical  experiments  involving  Navy  personnel.92  In
accordance  with  the  Navy  rules,  the  soldiers  signed  "written  statements  of
voluntary  participation."93  During  the  1963  experiments  the  Army  processed  the
activity  under  its  1962  regulation  on  human  experimentation  (AR  70-25  ).94  This
rule,  a  public  codification  of  the  secretary  of  defense's  1953  Nuremberg  Code
rule,  also  required  secretarial  review  and  written  consent.95

468


Chapter  10
Cloud-Penetration  Experiments

What  are  the  dangers  to  be  encountered  by  the
personnel  who  fly  through  the  cloud?~How  much
radiation  can  they  stand?~How  much  heat  can  the
aircraft  take?~Can  the  ground  crews  immediately
service  the  aircraft  for  another  flight?— If  so,  what
precautions  are  necessary  to  insure  their  safety?96

The  Air  Force  felt  that  it  was  essential  to  answer  these  questions.  To  do
so,  it  carried  out  experiments,  including  some  with  animals  and  a  few  with
humans.

At  the  first  atomic  tests  the  military  used  remote-controlled  aircraft,  called
"drones,"  to  enter  and  gather  samples  from  atomic  clouds  in  order  to  estimate  the
yield  and  learn  the  characteristics  of  the  weapon  being  tested.  Military  pilots  did,
however,  "track"  mushroom  clouds,  gathering  information  and  plotting  the  cloud's
path  in  order  to  warn  civilian  aircraft.  During  a  1948  test,  a  cloud  tracker  piloted
by  Colonel  Paul  Fackler  inadvertently  got  too  close  to  a  cloud.  But  after  the
accident,  Colonel  Fackler  commented,  '"No  one  keeled  over  dead  and  no  one  got
sick.'"97  Colonel  Fackler's  experience,  an  Air  Force  history  later  recorded,
showed  that  manned  flight  through  an  atomic  cloud  "would  not  necessarily  result
in  a  lingering  and  horrible  death."98

Some  of  the  trackers  had  "sniffers"  on  their  aircraft  to  collect  small
samples.  The  Air  Force  conducted  experimental  sampling  missions  at  1951  tests
and  later  permanently  replaced  the  drones  with  manned  aircraft  because  drones
were  difficult  to  use,  and  they  often  did  not  get  the  quality  samples  of  the  atomic
cloud  that  Atomic  Energy  Commission  scientists  desired.  By  Operation  Teapot
(1955),  the  AEC  considered  the  testing  of  a  nuclear  device  "largely  useless"
unless  sampler  aircraft  were  used  to  obtain  fission  debris  that  would  be  used  to
estimate  the  nuclear  weapon's  performance.99

As  the  sampling  mission  became  routine,  a  new  mission  in  the  clouds
began.  At  Teapot  the  Air  Force  performed  the  first  manned  "early  cloud
penetration."  The  phrase  was  used  by  the  Air  Force  to  refer  to  missions
conducted  as  soon  as  minutes  after  detonation  of  the  test  weapon.  The  main
purpose  was  to  discover  the  radiation  and  turbulence  levels  within  the  cloud  at
early  times  after  detonation.

Like  the  first  sampling  missions,  the  first  early  cloud-penetration  missions
were  conducted  by  unmanned  drone  aircraft.  In  1951  Colonel  (now  General)  E.
A.  Pinson,  an  Air  Force  scientist  who  had  earlier  conducted  tracer  experiments  on
himself  and  other  scientists,  placed  mice  aboard  a  drone  aircraft;  in  1953  he  flew
mice,  monkeys,  and  instrumentation  in  drone  aircraft  through  atomic  clouds.
Pinson  concluded  that  the  radiation  risk  from  flying  manned  aircraft  through
atomic  clouds  could  be  controlled  by  monitoring  the  external  gamma  dose.'00  But

469


Part  II

the  Air  Force  was  not  convinced  and  asked  Pinson  to  follow  up  the  animal
experiments  with  studies  with  humans  during  Operation  Teapot  (1955)  and
Operation  Redwing  (1956)  to  confirm  the  results.  This  research  appears  to  have
involved  a  small  number  of  subjects,  perhaps  in  the  range  of  a  dozen  or  so.

Pinson  designed  the  human  experiments  to  "learn  exactly  how  much
radiation  penetrates  into  the  human  system"10'  when  humans  flew  through  a
mushroom  cloud.  The  Air  Force  had  pilots  swallow  film  contained  in  small
watertight  capsules.  The  film  was  attached  to  a  string  held  in  their  mouths,  so
that  it  could  be  retrieved  at  the  end  of  the  mission.102  When  the  film  was
retrieved,  the  researchers  compared  the  exposures  measured  inside  the  human
body  with  those  measured  on  the  outside.  They  found  that  the  doses  measured
outside  the  body  were  essentially  identical  to  the  doses  inside  the  body;  this  was  a
critical  finding,  because  it  meant  that  surface  measurements  would  be
"representative  of  the  whole-body  dose."103

For  the  experiment,  the  AEC  test  manager  for  Teapot  waived  the  AEC's
test-exposure  limit  of  3.9  roentgens  and  permitted  four  Air  Force  officers  to
receive  up  to  15  roentgens  whole-body  radiation.104  The  exemption  was  "based
on  the  importance  of  [the  project]  to  the  Military  Effects  Test  program  and  the
fact  that  radiation  up  to  1 5  R  may  be  necessary  for  its  successful
accomplishment."105 When  the  air  crews  entered  the  atomic  clouds,  they
measured  dose  rates  of  radiation  as  high  as  1,800  rad  per  hour.  Since  the  crews
were  in  the  cloud  for  such  a  short  period  of  time,  however,  the  actual  doses  were
much  lower  than  1,800  R.106  The  maximum  reported  dose  received  on  a  single
mission  was  17  R,'07  higher  than  the  15  R  authorized  for  the  project.  Since  the  air
crews  flew  on  several  missions,  two  of  the  crew  members  received  more  than  17
R.108

A  year  later,  at  Operation  Redwing,  where  the  atomic  and  hydrogen
bombs  were  tested,  the  Air  Force  conducted  another  series  of  experimental  cloud
penetrations.  Part  of  the  Redwing  experiment  was  to  measure  the  hazard  from
inhaling  or  ingesting  radioactive  particles  while  flying  through  a  mushroom
cloud.  When  mice  and  monkeys  were  flown  through  clouds  during  earlier  tests
they  were  placed  in  ventilated  cages  to  determine  the  hazard  from  inhaling
radioactive  particles.  The  studies  found  that  the  hazard  from  inhalation  was  less
than  1  percent  of  the  external  radiation  hazard.  As  General  Pinson  put  it,  "In
other  words,  if  the  internal  hazard  were  to  become  significant,  the  external  hazard
would  be  overwhelming."109  To  confirm  this  finding,  Pinson  undertook  a  similar
experiment  with  humans,  and  again,  as  with  the  Teapot  experiment,  Pinson  was  a
subject  as  well  as  a  researcher.  To  perform  the  experiment,  no  filters  were
installed  in  the  penetration  aircraft.110  Again,  it  is  estimated  that  about  a  dozen
subjects  were  involved.

The  military  this  time  set  the  authorized  dosage  (the  maximum  dosage  to
which  Pinson  could  plan  to  have  people  exposed)  at  25  R  and  a  limiting  dosage
(in  which  case  a  report  had  to  be  filed)  at  50  R."1  During  the  experiment

470


Chapter  10

"maximum  radiation  dose  rates  as  high  as  800  r/hr  were  encountered,  and  several
flights  yielded  total  radiation  doses  to  the  crew  of  15  r.""2  (To  measure  the
internal  dose  of  radiation  the  scientists  analyzed  urine  samples  and  used  whole-
body  counters.)

The  project,  as  Pinson's  final  report  noted,  marked  the  transition  from
animal  experimentation  to  human  measurement:

Although  a  considerable  amount  of  experimentation
had  been  done  with  small  animals  which  were
flown  through  nuclear  clouds,  the  early  cloud-
penetration  project  of  Operation  Redwing  was  the
first  instance  in  which  humans  were  studied  in  a
similar  situation."3

The  results  confirmed  those  of  the  animal  experiments.  The  internal
hazard  of  radiation  was  insignificant  relative  to  the  external  hazard.
Consequently,  the  researchers  recommended  "that  no  action  be  taken  to  develop
filters  for  aircraft  pressurization  systems  nor  to  develop  devices  to  protect  flight
crews  from  the  inhalation  of  fission  products.""4

Experimental  Purpose:  Military  Tactics,  Money,  and  Morale

Why  was  the  Air  Force  interested  in  showing  that  atomic  clouds  could  be
penetrated  soon  after  a  detonation?

Most  important,  the  military  wanted  to  assure  itself  that  it  was  safe  for
combat  pilots  to  fly  through  atomic  clouds,  if  need  arose  during  atomic  war.  But
the  research  did  not  make  much  of  a  scientific  contribution.  Researchers  had
already  established  the  levels  of  radiation  in  atomic  clouds  by  flying  drone
aircraft  through  them,  and  there  was  nothing  pathbreaking  about  humans  being
exposed  to  levels  of  radiation  under  25  R.  General  Pinson  later  noted,  "there  are
no  research  people  that  I  know  of  that  gave  a  damn  [about  manned  early  cloud-
penetration  experiments],  because  this  is  ...  a  negligible  contribution  to  research
and  scien[ce]~scientifically,  you  know,  this  contributes  less  than  I  suspect
anything  I've  ever  done  ...  its  only  virtue  is  the  practical  use  of  it.""5

From  the  scientific  perspective  the  data  would  not  likely  be  of  great  use;
from  an  immediate  practical  perspective  human  data  were  felt  to  be  essential  for
reassurance.  Should  the  Air  Force  have  been  satisfied  with  the  wealth  of  data  it
had  from  the  drone  experiments?  In  retrospect  Pinson  found  the  question
difficult.  "There's  reason  to  say,  'Well,  you  should  have  been  satisfied  with  the
data  that  had  been  gathered  with  the  drones.'  But,  you  know,  these  are  hard-
nosed,  practical  people  that—that  put  their  life  on  the  line  and  in  military  combat .
. .  where  the  hazards  are  far  greater  than  in  this  modest  exposure  to  radiation.""6

The  budget  also  played  a  key  role  in  cloud-penetration  research,  as  well  as

471


Part  II

the  related  decontamination  experiments,  which  will  be  discussed  shortly.  The
Defense  Department  declared  that  the  knowledge  gained  through  its  cloud-
penetration  experiments  would  save  "the  taxpayers  thousands  upon  thousands  of
dollars"  because  there  would  be  no  need  to  develop  special  protective  clothing  or
equipment,  which  had  been  thought  to  be  necessary."7

As  in  the  case  of  the  HumRRO  experiments  and  the  troop  maneuvers,
indoctrination  and  morale  were  important  forces  behind  the  experimentation.
"Perhaps  the  most  important  problem  of  all,"  a  popular  men's  magazine  of  the  day
wrote  about  the  Teapot  experience,  "might  be  a  psychological  resistance  of
combat  pilots  and  crews  flying  into  the  unknown  dangers  of  hot,  radio-active
areas.""8  The  press,  therefore,  depicted  the  Teapot  experiment  as  a  message  to
the  world— pilots  can  fly  through  atomic  clouds  safely.

Research,  Consent,  and  Volunteerism

Like  the  HumRRO  experiments,  the  cloud  flythrough  experiments  were
treated  as  occupational,  rather  than  experimental,  activities.  None  of  the
participants  signed  consent  forms,  and  waivers  to  dose  limits  were  sought,  and
approved,  under  the  process  followed  for  the  nonexperimental  flythrough
activities.  In  1995  General  Pinson  said  that  he  had  not  been  aware  of  the  ethical
standards  declared  in  the  1953  secretary  of  defense  memorandum.  If  he  had  been,
he  "would  have  gotten  written  consent  from  the  people  that  were  involved  in
this.""9

A  1963  Air  Force  history  of  the  cloud-sampling  program  does  not  describe
the  process  of  crew  and  pilot  selection,  but  does  provide  a  perspective:

The  Strategic  Air  Command  pilots  picked  to  fly  the
F-84G  sampler  aircraft  were  pleased  to  learn  that
they  were  doing  something  useful, .  . .  not  serving
as  guinea  pigs  as  they  seriously  believed  when  first
called  upon  to  do  the  sampling.120

Did  the  personnel  understand  the  risks?  Some  of  them  surely  did.  The
aircraft  carried  airmen  and  scientific  observers.  Because  the  scientific  observers
were  the  very  scientists  who  designed  the  experiments,  they  certainly  understood
the  radiation  risks  as  well  as  anyone  could  be  expected  to.  In  this  way,  the  cloud
flythrough  experiments  exemplified  the  ethic  of  researcher  self-experimentation.
As  Pinson  recalled  in  1995,  "If  you  are  going  to  do  something  like  this  and  you
think  it's  safe  to  do  it,  then  you  shouldn't  ask  somebody  else  to  do  it.  The  way
you  convince  other  people  that  at  least  you  think  it's  all  right,  is  do  it  yourself."121

The  nonscientists  were  briefed  and  informed  that  the  risks  from  their
radiation  exposure  would  be  minimal.122  A  pilot  in  the  cloud-tracking  activities
recalled  one  of  the  briefings:  "The  scientists  line  up  at  a  briefing  session  and  tell

472


Chapter  10

you  there's  no  danger  if  you  will  follow  their  instructions  carefully.  In  fact,  they
almost  guarantee  it."123

But  many  of  the  pilots  seemed  to  have  been  neither  worried  at  the  prospect
of  risk  nor  excited  at  the  prospect  of  glory.  Pinson,  for  example,  described  the
attitude  of  the  pilot  who  flew  his  aircraft  as  "matter  of  fact."124  And  at  Operation
Teapot,  Captain  Paul  M.  Crumley,  project  officer  for  the  early  cloud  penetrations,
stated,  "We  consider  these  flights  routine.  Neither  the  pilots  nor  observers  are
unduly  concerned  over  the  fact  that  no  one  else  has  flown  into  an  atomic  cloud  so
soon  after  detonation."125

Decontamination  Experiments

In  conjunction  with  the  Teapot  cloud  flythrough  experiment,  the  military
also  conducted  an  experiment  on  ground  crews  "to  determine  how  soon  these
same  aircraft  could  be  reserviced  and  made  ready  to  fly  again."126  The  Air  Force
used  the  contaminated  aircraft  from  the  early  cloud-penetration  experiment.127
The  research  sparked  a  debate  between  the  Air  Force  and  the  AEC  over  the  costs
and  benefits  of  safety  measures,  a  debate  that  was  itself  resolved  by  further
experimentation.

In  one  part  of  the  "experimental  procedure,"  personnel  (the  number
involved  is  not  reported)  rubbed  their  gloved  hands  over  a  contaminated  fuselage,
and  in  another  part  "the  bare, hand  was  also  rubbed  over  a  surface  whose  detailed
contamination  was  known  and  a  radioautograph  of  the  hand  surfaces  [was]
made."128  None  of  the  "survey  team"  exceeded  the  AEC's  gamma  exposure  limit
of  3.9  R.'29  Concluding  that  aircraft  did  not  need  to  be  "washed  down"  or
decontaminated  after  they  flew  through  the  atomic  clouds,  Colonel  William
Kieffer,  deputy  commander  of  the  Air  Force  Special  Weapons  Center,  proposed
that  decontamination  procedures  be  eliminated  except  in  extreme  circumstances.
This  change  in  procedures  might  cause  overexposures,  Kieffer  wrote,  but  they
would  be  acceptable  as  long  as  "dangerous"  dosages  would  be  avoided.130

The  proposal  was  not  warmly  received  by  the  AEC.  Los  Alamos's
Thomas  Shipman  complained  that  the  goal  should  be  to  reduce  exposures  to
zero.131  Harold  Plank,  a  Los  Alamos  scientist  who  was  in  charge  of  the  cloud-
sampling  project  and  who  rode  along  on  many  of  the  cloud-sampling  missions,
said,  "Kieffer  simply  could  not  understand  the  philosophy  which  regards  every
radiation  exposure  as  injurious  but  accepts  minimum  exposures  for  critical
jobs."132

Kieffer  suggested  a  compromise;  test  the  proposal  with  only  one  or  two
sampler  aircraft.133  Plank  objected,  but  the  AEC  test  manager  promised  to  "do
everything  possible  to  obtain  a  waiver  of  AEC  operating  radiological  safety
requirements."134  The  Air  Force  carried  out  the  study  during  the  1957  Operation
Plumbbob.  An  additional  plane  was  flown  through  the  atomic  clouds  created  by
five  "events"  to  determine  the  hazard  from  the  Air  Force's  proposed  procedures.135

473


Part  II

The  study  showed  that  decontamination  would  be  necessary  to  prevent
overexposures  at  test  sites.136  In  the  end,  the  Air  Force  was  unsuccessful  in  its
attempt  to  change  the  decontamination  procedures  for  sampler  aircraft.

We  do  not  know  how  the  Air  Force  viewed  this  activity.  Given  that  it  did
not  treat  the  cloud  flythroughs  as  an  experiment,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  Air  Force
considered  the  ground  personnel  activity  to  be  an  experiment.  There  is  no  record
of  what  the  ground  personnel  were  told  or  whether  they  were  volunteers.

THE  BOMB  TESTS:  QUESTIONS  OF  RISK,  RECORDS,  AND
TRUST

In  this  chapter,  the  Advisory  Committee  reviewed  six  different  activities
that  were  conducted  in  conjunction  with  bomb  tests  that  today  we  would  consider
research  involving  human  subjects.137  Only  two  of  the  six—the  "atomic  effects
experiments"  conducted  on  officer  volunteers  and  the  flashblindness  experiments-
-were  clearly  treated  as  instances  of  human  research  at  the  time.  The  six  human
research  projects  likely  included  no  more  than  3,000  of  the  more  than  200,000
people  who  were  present  during  the  bomb  tests.138  Some  of  the  research  subjects,
perhaps  as  many  as  several  hundred,  were  placed  at  greater  risk  of  harm  than  the
other  bomb-test  participants  who  were  not  also  research  subjects.  However,  most
of  the  research  subjects  were  not.  At  this  point,  we  turn  to  a  consideration  of
several  issues  that  affect  all  atomic  veterans,  regardless  of  whether  they  were  also
research  subjects.  These  include  how  at  the  time  the  DOD  and  the  AEC
determined  what  exposures  would  be  permitted,  issues  of  record  keeping,  and
what  is  known  today  about  long-term  risks  and  participation  in  the  bomb  tests.

AEC  and  DOD  Risk  Analysis  for  Exposure  at  Bomb  Tests

In  counseling  human  subject  research  at  bomb  tests,  the  Joint  Panel  on  the
Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare  stated  that  the  research  had  to  be  performed
under  "safe  conditions."  What  "safe"  meant  for  all  those  exposed,  both
experimental  subjects  and  other  military  participants  at  the  bomb  tests,  was
subject  to  arrangements  between  the  AEC  and  the  DOD.139  While  the  military,  of
course,  is  responsible  for  the  safety  of  its  troops,  the  AEC  had  responsibility  for
the  safe  operation  of  the  Nevada  and  Pacific  sites  at  which  the  weapons  were
tested.  "Secrecy,"  summarized  Barton  Hacker,  a  DOE-sponsored  historian  of  the
bomb  tests,  "so  shrouded  the  test  program  . .  .  that  such  matters  as  worker  safety
could  not  then  emerge  as  subjects  of  public  debate."140

As  we  have  seen  in  the  case  of  the  cloud  flythrough  research,  by  the  mid-
1950s  the  AEC  and  the  Defense  Department  had  arrived  at  a  method  of  operation
through  which  waivers  to  the  basic  radiation  safety  standards  for  the  tests  would
be  granted  for  particular  activities.  In  the  early  1950s,  in  the  context  of  the  Desert
Rock  exercises,  the  AEC  and  the  DOD  established  the  precedent  for  departure

474


Chapter  10

from  the  standards  that  the  AEC  relied  on  for  its  own  bomb-test  work  force.

At  this  time  the  AEC  was  the  main  source  of  expertise  on  radiation
effects.  Its  guidepost  for  its  own  workers  (at  the  Nevada  Test  Site  and  elsewhere)
was  the  3  R  per  thirteen-week  standard  established  for  occupational  risk  by  a
private  organization  (the  National  Committee  on  Radiation  Protection).  This
level,  it  may  be  recalled  from  the  debates  on  nuclear  airplane  experimentation
(discussed  in  chapter  8),  was  well  below  that  at  which  the  experts  assumed  acute
radiation  effects,  such  as  would  limit  combat  effectiveness,  could  occur.141

In  1951,  the  Los  Alamos  Laboratory,  the  AEC's  right  hand  in  weapons  test
management,  called  on  the  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine's  director,  Shields
Warren,  for  "official  but  unpublicized  authority  to  permit  exposures  up  to  3.9r"
for  AEC  test  personnel.142  Warren  granted  the  request,  counseling  that  "this
Division  does  not  look  lightly  upon  radiation  excesses."143

As  we  have  seen,  the  DOD  shortly  thereafter  determined  to  use  the  tests
for  troop  maneuvers  and  did  so  at  Desert  Rock  I,  keeping  the  troops  at  seven
miles  distance  during  the  detonation.  In  early  1 952  the  DOD  asked  the  AEC  to
endorse  its  request  to  station  troops  at  Desert  Rock  IV  as  close  as  7,000  yards
from  ground  zero  (approximately  four  miles),  far  closer  than  the  seven-mile  limit
the  AEC  permitted  its  own  test-site  personnel.  The  AEC's  Division  of  Military
Applications  was  willing  to  concur.  Shields  Warren,  however,  dissented  on
grounds  of  safety.144  The  dispute  was  settled  when  AEC  Chairman  Gordon  Dean
advised  DOD  that  "the  Commission  would  enter  no  objection  to  stationing  troops
at  not  less  than  7000  yards  from  ground  zero,"  provided  that  proper  precautions
were  taken.145

Even  so,  an  internal  review  of  the  Desert  Rock  IV  exercise  by  the  Division
of  Military  Applications,  generally  supportive  of  DOD's  request  for  troop
maneuvers,  raised  questions  about  the  wisdom  of  deviation  from  the  AEC
standard—and  the  potential  for  "delayed"  casualties.'46

Determined  to  proceed,  DOD  called  for  "a  study  to  be  made  to  determine
the  minimum  distance  from  ground  zero  that  should  be  permitted  in  a  peacetime
maneuver."147  A  December  1952  report  recommended  that  dosages  for  Army
personnel  be  above  the  limit  set  by  the  AEC  for  its  personnel.  The  soldiers,  by
comparison  with  the  AEC  personnel,  would  be  exposed  "very  infrequently."  The
report  summarized  the  state  of  knowledge:

There  is  no  known  tolerance  for  nuclear  radiation,
that  is,  there  is  no  definite  proof  that  even  small
doses  of  nuclear  radiations  [sic]  may  not,  in  some
way,  be  harmful  to  the  human  body.  On  the  other
hand,  there  is  no  evidence  to  indicate  that,  within
certain  limits,  nuclear  radiation  has  injured
personnel  who  have  been  exposed  to  it.148


475


Part  II

In  response  to  the  DOD's  proposal  to  assume  full  responsibility  for
physical  and  radiological  safety  of  troops  and  troop  observers  within  the  Nevada
Test  Site,  the  AEC  stated  that  general  safety  practice  and  criteria  at  the  Nevada
Proving  Grounds  was,  and  must  continue  to  be,  the  responsibility  of  the  AEC.
The  AEC  did,  however,  "accept  the  proposal  that  the  DOD  assume  full
responsibility  for  physical  and  radiological  safety  of  troops  and  all  observers
accompanying  troops  within  the  maneuver  areas  assigned  to  Exercise  Desert
Rock  V,  including  establishment  of  a  suitable  safety  criteria."  The  AEC  further
explained  that

The  Atomic  Energy  Commission  adopts  this
position  in  recognition  that  doctrine  on  the  tactical
use  of  atomic  weapons,  as  well  as  the  hazards
which  military  personnel  are  required  to  undergo
during  their  training,  must  be  evaluated  and
determined  by  the  Department  of  Defense.

The  Atomic  Energy  Commission  has,  however,
established  safety  limits. .  .  .  We  consider  these
limits  to  be  realistic,  and  further,  are  of  the  opinion
that  when  they  are  exceeded  in  any  Operation,  that
Operation  may  become  a  hazardous  one.  So  that  we
may  know  in  which  particulars  and  by  how  much
these  safety  standards  are  being  exceeded,  we  desire
that  the  Exercise  Director  transmit  to  the  Test
Manager  a  copy  of  his  Safety  Plan.  . .  ,'49

For  the  spring  1953  Desert  Rock  V  exercises,  the  DOD  deemed  the
permissible  limit  for  the  troops  (for  a  test  series)  to  be  6  R.'50  In  the  case  of  the
officer  volunteers,  a  10  R  test  limit  was  agreed  to,  with  the  proviso  that  "it  is  not
intended  that  these  exposures  result  in  any  injury  to  the  selected  individuals."151
The  Army's  limit  at  Desert  Rock  was  well  below  the  level  understood  to
potentially  cause  acute  effects  and  far  below  the  recommendation  of  Brigadier
General  James  Cooney  that  the  military  depart  from  the  "infinitesimal"  industrial
and  laboratory  limits  and  accept  100  roentgens  for  a  single-exposure  limit.152  But
the  level  was  not  only  higher  than  the  AEC  level  but  also  above  the  0.9  R  per
week  being  urged  by  the  British  and  Canadians,  partners  in  U.S.  testing.153  (The
AEC  itself  objected  that  a  0.9  R-per-week  limit  would  make  testing  at  Nevada
impractical.)'54

Interestingly,  in  1952  the  Navy,  also  faced  with  the  need  for  more-realistic
training  exercises,  considered  spraying  radioactive  materials  on  ships  during
training  exercises.  The  Navy's  Bureau  of  Medicine  (BuMed)  rejected  the
proposal.  BuMed  told  the  chief  of  naval  operations  that  while  it  "fully

476


Chapter  10

appreciates"  the  need  for  more  "realistic  radiological  defense  training,"  it  could
not  approve  the  use  of  radioisotopes  in  a  form  other  than  "sealed  sources
commonly  used  in  basic  training  .  .  .  since  such  use  might  produce  an  internal
radiation  hazard  serious  enough  to  outweigh  the  advantages  of  area  contamination
for  training  purposes."155

By  the  mid-1950s,  AEC  test  health  and  safety  staff  were  continually
concerned  about  radiation  safety  at  the  tests  and  the  failure  to  reduce  them  to  a
predictable  and  assuredly  safe  routine.  "There  are,"  Los  Alamos  Health  Division
leader  Thomas  Shipman  wrote  to  the  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine's
Gordon  Dunning  in  1956,  "two  basic  facts  . . .  which  must  never  be  lost  sight  of.
The  first  of  these  is  that  the  only  good  exposure  is  zero. . . .  The  second  fact  is
that  once  the  button  for  a  bomb  detonation  is  pushed  you  have  to  live  with  the
results  no  matter  what  they  are. .  .  ."'56  In  fact,  while  the  AEC  had  set  a  limit  of
50  kilotons  (more  than  twice  the  power  of  the  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  bombs)
for  Nevada  tests,  this  limit  had  already  been  exceeded  by  10  kilotons  in  1953.'57
"It  is  all  very  nice,"  Shipman  wrote  in  another  1956  memorandum,  "to  have  a
well-meaning  Task  Force  commander  who  by  a  stroke  of  the  pen  can  absolve  our
radiologic  sins,  but  somehow  I  do  not  believe  that  overexposures  are  washed
away  by  edict."158  Shipman's  comments  illustrate  an  acute  awareness  among
experts  at  the  center  of  the  testing  program  of  the  real  and  continuing  element  of
risk  and  uncertainty  in  the  attempt  to  define  and  control  exposures  at  the  bomb
tests.

The  Aftermath  of  Crossroads:  Confidential  Record  Keeping  to  Evaluate
Potential  Liability  Claims

In  the  midst  of  the  Korean  and  Cold  Wars,  researchers  and  generals  were
focused  on  the  short-term  effects  of  radiation,  not  effects  that  might  take  place
years  later.  Thus,  the  benefits  from  knowledge  about  the  bomb,  or  training  of
troops  in  its  use,  loomed  large,  and  the  risks  from  long-term  exposure  likely
seemed  distant  and  small.  Government  officials  undertook  to  guard  against  acute
radiation  effects;  the  surviving  documentation  indicates  that  they  were
remarkably  successful.  Of  the  more  than  200,000  service  participants  in  the  tests,
available  records  indicate  that  only  about  1 ,200  received  more  than  today's
occupational  exposure  limit  of  5  rem,  and  the  average  exposure  was  below  1
rem.159  But  there  was  no  certainty  that  lower  exposures  were  risk  free.

During  the  summer  of  1946,  the  contamination  of  ships  at  the  Crossroads
tests  put  officials  and  medical  experts  on  alert  to  the  radiation  risk  posed  to
participants  at  atomic  bomb  detonations.  "[Difficult  and  expensive  medico  legal
problems,"  Crossroads  medical  director  Stafford  Warren  feared,  "will  probably
occur  if  previously  contaminated  target  ships  are  'cleared'  for  constant  occupancy
or  disposal  as  scrap."160  A  "Medico-Legal  Advisory  Board"  sought  to  deal  with
these  questions,161  and  the  Navy  created  a  research  organization  dedicated  to  the

477


Part  II

study  of  decontamination  and  damage  to  ships.162

Concern  for  long-term  liability  stimulated  by  Crossroads  led  to  more  steps
to  guard  against  the  legal  and  public  relations  implications  if  service  personnel
exposed  to  radiation  filed  disability  claims.

In  the  fall  of  1946,  General  Paul  Hawley,  administrator  of  the  Veterans
Administration,  "became  deeply  concerned  about  the  problems  that  atomic  energy
might  create  for  the  Veterans  Administration  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Armed
Services  were  so  actively  engaged  in  matters  of  atomic  energy."163  In  August
1947  Hawley  met  with  representatives  of  the  surgeon  general's  offices  of  the
military  services  and  the  Public  Health  Service.164  The  meeting  was  also  attended
by  former  Manhattan  Project  chief  General  Leslie  Groves,165  (Groves  reportedly
was  "very  much  afraid  of  claims  being  instituted  by  men  who  participated  in  the
Bikini  tests.")'66  An  advisory  committee  was  created,  which  included  Stafford
Warren  and  Hymer  Friedell,  Warren's  deputy  on  the  Manhattan  Project  medical
team.  The  committee  was  given  the  name  "Central  Advisory  Committee,"  as  "it
was  not  desired  to  publicize  the  fact  that  the  Veterans  Administration  might  have
any  problems  in  connection  with  atomic  medicine,  especially  the  fact  that  there
might  be  problems  in  connection  with  alleged  service-connected  disability
claims."167

The  committee  recommended  the  creation  of  an  "Atomic  Medicine
Division"  of  the  VA  to  handle  "atomic  medicine  matters"  and  a  radioisotope
section  to  "implement  a  Radioisotope  Program."168  The  committee  further
recommended  that  "for  the  time  being,  the  existence  of  the  Atomic  Medicine
Division  be  classified  as  'confidential'  and  that  publicity  be  given  instead  to  the
existence  of  a  Radioisotope  Program."'69

This  history  is  contained  in  a  1952  report  presented  by  Dr.  George  Lyon  to
the  National  Research  Council.170  The  1952  report  records  that  "General  Hawley
took  affirmative  actions  on  these  recommendations  and  it  was  in  the  manner
described  that  the  Radioisotope  Program  was  initiated  in  the  Fall  of  1947."'7'
Lyon,  who  had  worked  with  Stafford  Warren  at  Crossroads,  was  appointed
special  assistant  to  the  VA's  chief  medical  director  for  atomic  medicine,  and
through  1959  served  in  a  variety  of  roles  relating  to  the  VA's  atomic  medicine
activities.  Dr.  Lyon's  1952  report  recounts  that  he  was  present  at  the  August  1947
meeting  and  involved  in  the  deliberations  of  the  Central  Advisory  Committee,  as
well  as  subsequent  developments.172

Working  with  the  VA  and  the  Defense  Department,  we  sought  to  retrieve
what  information  could  be  located  regarding  the  Atomic  Medicine  Division  and
any  secret  record  keeping  in  anticipation  of  potential  veterans'  claims  from
radiation  overexposures.  Among  the  documents  found  was  a  Confidential  August
1952  letter  to  the  attention  of  Dr.  Lyon,  in  which  the  Defense  Department  called
for  comment  on  the  Army's  proposal  to  "eliminate  the  requirement  for
maintaining  detailed  statistical  records  of  radiological  exposures  received  by  the
Army  personnel."173  The  requirement,  the  letter  recorded,  "was  originally

478


Chapter  10


conceived  as  being  necessary  to  protect  the  government's  interest  in  case  any
large  number  of  veterans  should  attempt  to  bring  suit  against  the  government
based  on  a  real  or  imagined  exposure  to  nuclear  radiations  during  an  atomic


war."174


In  1959  Dr.  Lyon  was  recommended  for  a  VA  "Exceptional  Service
Award."175  In  a  memo  from  the  VA  chief  medical  director  to  the  VA
administrator,  Dr.  Lyon's  work  on  both  the  publicized  and  confidential  programs
was  the  first  of  many  items  for  which  Dr.  Lyon  was  commended.  Following  a
recitation  of  the  1947  developments  similar  to  those  stated  by  Dr.  Lyon  in  his
1 952  report,  the  memo  explained:

It  was  felt  unwise  to  publicize  unduly  the  probable
adverse  effects  of  exposure  to  radioactive  materials.
The  use  of  nuclear  energy  at  this  time  was  so
sensitive  that  unfavorable  reaction  might  have
jeopardized  future  developments  in  the  field  . . .
[Dr.  Lyon]  maintained  records  of  classified  nature
emanating  from  the  AEC  and  the  Armed  Forces
Special  Weapons  Project  which  were  essential  to
proper  evaluation  of  claims  of  radiation  injury
brought  against  VA  by  former  members  of  the
Armed  Forces  engaged  in  the  Manhattan  project.176

The  Advisory  Committee  has  been  unable  to  recover  or  identify  the
precise  records  that  were  referred  to  in  the  documents  that  have  now  come  to
light.  An  investigation  by  the  VA  inspector  general  concluded  that  the  feared
claims  from  Crossroads  did  not  materialize  and  that  the  confidential  Atomic
Medicine  Division  was  not  activated.177  However,  the  investigation  did  not  shed
light  on  the  specific  identity  of  the  records  that  were  kept  by  Dr.  Lyon,  as  cited  in
the  1959  memo  on  behalf  of  his  commendation.178  While  mystery  still  remains,
the  documentation  that  has  been  retrieved  indicates  that  prior  to  the  atomic  testing
conducted  in  the  1950's,  the  government  and  its  radiation  experts  had  strong
concern  for  the  possibility  that  radiation  risk  borne  by  servicemen  might  bear
longer-term  consequences.

Looking  Back:  Accounting  for  the  Long-Term  Risks

Civilians,  a  UCLA  psychologist  observed  during  a  1949  NEPA  meeting
convened  to  consider  the  psychology  of  radiation  effects,  question  "whether  the
medical  group  have  actually  discovered  thus  far  all  the  effects  of  radiation  on
human  beings  . . .  that  is  going  to  be  one  of  the  most  insidious  things  to
combat. . .  ."'79  "[W]hen  you  talk  about  probable  delayed  effects  possible,
unknown,  and  so  forth,"  Dr.  Sells,  of  the  Air  Force,  asked,  "what  is  the  proper

479


Part  II

evaluation  of  the  ethical  question  as  to  how  to  treat  the  possible  or  probable
unknown  effects?"180  While  not  answering  the  question,  he  observed  that
"certainly  we  can  create  more  anxiety  by  being  scientifically  scrupulous  than  if
we  simply  treated  these  matters  as  we  are  inclined  to  treat  other  matters  in  our
every-daylife."181

This  may  have  been  the  case  following  Crossroads.  "Now  we  are  very
much  interested  in  long-term  effects,"  a  military  participant  in  a  1950  meeting  of
the  DOD  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences  stated,  "but  when  you  start  thinking
militarily  of  this,  if  men  are  going  out  on  these  missions  anyway,  a  high
percentage  is  not  coming  back,  the  fact  that  you  may  get  cancer  20  years  later  is
just  of  no  significance  to  us."182

Decades  following  the  1946  Crossroads  tests,  researchers  began  to  study
the  longer-term  effects  of  the  bomb  on  test  participants.

In  1980  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  (CDC)  reported  a  cluster  of  9
leukemias  among  the  3,224  (then  identified)  participants  of  shot  Smoky  at  the
Nevada  Test  Site  in  1957. I83  A  later  report184  increased  the  count  of  leukemias  to
10  compared  with  4.0  expected  on  the  basis  of  U.S.  rates,  but  found  no  excess
cancers  at  other  anatomical  sites  (the  total  observed  was  1 12,  compared  with
1 17.5  expected).  The  Smoky  test  was  the  highest-yield  tower  shot  ever  conducted
at  the  Nevada  Test  Site;  however,  the  measured  doses  for  the  Smoky  participants
as  a  group  were  too  low  to  explain  the  excess.  Whether  this  cluster  represents  a
random  event,  an  underestimation  of  the  doses  for  the  few  participants  who  got
leukemia,  or  some  other  explanation  remains  unclear.

In  light  of  the  CDC  research,  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  (NAS)
thereafter  undertook  an  enlarged  study  of  five  series  of  nuclear  tests  totaling
46,186  (then  identified)  participants.185  The  1985  NAS  report  confirmed  the
excess  of  leukemia  at  the  Smoky  test  but  found  no  such  excess  at  any  of  the  test
series  (as  opposed  to  individual  tests)  and  no  consistent  pattern  of  excesses  at
other  cancer  sites.  Later,  however,  the  NAS  study  was  found  to  be  flawed  by  the
inclusion  of  4,500  individuals  who  had  never  participated  and  the  exclusion  of
15,000  individuals  who  had  participated  in  one  or  more  of  the  five  series,  as  well
as  incompleteness  of  dosimetry. ' 86

The  belated  discovery  that  thousands  of  test  participants  had  been
misidentified  punctuated  the  deficiencies  in  record  creation  and  record  keeping
faced  by  those  who  seek  to  reconstruct,  at  many  years'  remove,  the  exposures  of
participants  at  the  tests.

Documents  long  available,  and  those  newly  retrieved  by  the  Committee,
provide  further  basis  for  concern  about  the  data  gathering  at  test  series  in  which
human  subject  research  took  place.  At  the  1953  Upshot  Knothole  series,  which
included  the  Desert  Rock  V  HumRRO  research,  1994  DOD  data  show  that  only
2,282  of  the  17,062  participants  are  known  to  have  been  issued  film  badges  to
serve  as  personal  dosimeters.187  At  Desert  Rock.  V,  the  Army  surgeon  general's
policy  that  one-time  exposure  need  not  be  reported  led  to  a  determination  that

480


Chapter  10

maneuver  troop  units  would  be  issued  one  film  badge  per  platoon,  and  observers
would  be  issued  one  per  bus.'88  An  AFSWP  memo  recorded  that  the  Radiological
Safety  Organization  did  not  have  enough  pocket  dosimeters  for  efficient
operation.189  A  recently  declassified  DOD  memo  records  that  "[although  film
badges  on  the  officer  volunteers  [at  Desert  Rock  V]  indicated  an  average  gamma
dose  of  14  roentgens,  best  information  available  suggests  that  the  true  dose  was
probably  24  rem  initial  gamma  plus  neutron  radiation."190

In  a  1995  report,  the  Institute  of  Medicine  found  that  the  dose  estimates
that  were  proposed  for  use  in  the  NAS  follow-up  study  were  unsuitable  for
epidemiologic  purposes,  but  concluded  that  it  would  be  feasible  to  develop  a
dose-reconstruction  system  that  could  be  used  for  this  purpose.  Nonetheless,
there  are  some  further  studies  that  are  of  direct  relevance.191

Recently,  Watanabe  et  al.192  studied  mortality  among  8,554  Navy  veterans
who  had  participated  in  Operation  Hardtack  1  at  the  Pacific  Proving  Grounds  in
1958.  This  is,  to  date,  the  only  study  of  U.S.  veterans  to  include  a  control  group
of  unexposed  military  veterans.  Overall,  the  participant  group  had  a  10  percent
higher  mortality  rate,  but  the  cancer  excess  was  significant  only  for  the  combined
category  of  digestive  organs  (66  deaths  compared  with  44.9  expected,  a  47
percent  increase).  On  average,  the  radiation  doses  were  low  (mean  388  mrem),
but  among  the  1,094  men  with  doses  greater  than  1  rem,  there  was  a  42  percent
excess  of  all  cancers.  No  categories  of  cancer  sites  showed  a  significant  excess  or
clear  dose-response  relationship,  but  the  number  of  deaths  in  any  category  was
small.

Two  sets  of  foreign  atomic  veterans  have  been  studied.  In  a  study  of  954
Canadian  participants,193  no  differences  with  matched  controls  were  found,  but
only  very  large  effects  would  have  been  detectable  in  such  a  small  study.  In
contrast,  a  large  study  of  British  participants  of  test  programs  in  Australia  found
higher  rates  of  leukemia  and  multiple  myeloma  than  in  a  matched  control  group
(28  vs.  6).194  However,  the  cancer  rates  among  the  exposed  veterans  were  only
slightly  higher  than  expected  based  on  national  rates,  whereas  those  in  the  control
group  were  much  lower  than  expected,  and  there  was  no  dose-response
relationship.  No  excess  was  found  at  any  other  cancer  site.  Although  the
difference  between  the  exposed  and  unexposed  groups  was  quite  significant,  the
interpretation  of  this  result  is  unclear.  Does  it  mean  that  for  some  unknown
reason,  soldiers  are  less  likely  than  the  general  population  to  get  cancer  (the
"healthy  soldier  effect,"  which  is  usually  not  thought  to  be  so  large  for  cancer),  or
is  it  an  indication  of  some  unexplained  methodological  bias?  This  point  has  never
been  resolved.

These  observed  effects  need  to  be  put  in  the  context  of  what  might
reasonably  be  expected  based  on  current  understanding  of  low-dose  radiation
risks  and  the  doses  the  atomic  veterans  are  thought  to  have  received.
Approximately  220,000  military  personnel  participated  in  at  least  one  nuclear  test.
The  film  badges  for  those  monitored  (thought  to  be  roughly  representative  of  all

481


Part  II

participants)  average  600  mrem.195  As  summarized  in  "The  Basics  of  Radiation
Science"  section  of  the  Introduction,  the  consensus  among  scientific  experts  is
that  the  lifetime  risk  of  fatal  cancer  due  to  radiation  is  approximately  8  per  10,000
person-rem.  On  this  basis,  one  might  anticipate  approximately  106  excess  cancer
deaths  attributable  to  participation  in  the  nuclear  tests.  Not  only  is  this  a  number
with  considerable  uncertainty,  it  is  small  in  comparison  with  the  total  of  about
48,000  cancer  deaths  that  are  eventually  anticipated  in  this  population.

Such  a  small  overall  excess  would  be  virtually  impossible  to  detect  by
epidemiologic  methods.  In  some  subgroups,  however,  the  relative  increase  above
normal  cancer  rates  could  be  large  enough  to  be  detectable.  Leukemia,  for
example,  is  proportionally  much  more  radiosensitive  than  other  cancers  and  the
largest  excess  occurs  fairly  soon  after  exposure,  when  natural  rates  are  low.
Focusing  on  those  with  highest  exposure  would  also  enhance  the  relative  increase,
albeit  with  many  fewer  people  at  risk.  The  Defense  Nuclear  Agency  estimates
that  about  1,200  veterans  received  more  than  5  rem  (mean  8.1  rem).196  On  this
basis,  about  eight  excess  cancer  deaths  would  be  anticipated.  These  factors  may
have  contributed  to  the  observed  leukemia  excess  among  participants  of  shot
Smoky,  for  example.

Although  these  numbers  represent  the  best  estimate  currently  available  of
the  expected  cancer  excess,  there  are  uncertainties  in  both  the  real  exposures
received  by  the  participants  and  the  magnitude  of  the  low-dose  risk.  As  described
in  "The  Basics  of  Radiation  Science"  section,  there  is  roughly  a  1.4  uncertainty  in
the  low-dose  radiation  risk  coefficient  simply  due  to  random  variation  in  the
available  epidemiologic  data,  with  additional  uncertainties  of  unknown  magnitude
about  model  specification,  variation  among  studies,  extrapolation  across  time  and
between  populations,  unmeasured  confounders,  and  so  on.  These  uncertainties
are  hotly  contested,  although  the  majority  of  radiation  scientists  believe  the
figures  quoted  above  are  unlikely  to  be  seriously  in  error.  If  low-dose  radiation
risks  were  indeed  substantially  higher  than  this,  then  there  would  be  a  serious
discrepancy  to  explain  with  the  effects  actually  observed  at  higher  doses.  The
uncertainties  in  the  doses  received  by  participants  are  perhaps  more  substantial,
but  given  the  limitations  in  the  dosimetry  and  record  keeping,  it  may  be  difficult
ever  to  resolve  them.

As  is  clear  from  the  epidemiologic  data  available  today,  there  is  no
consistent  pattern  in  increased  cancer  risk  among  atomic  veterans,  although  there
are  a  number  of  suggestive  findings,  most  notably  the  excesses  of  leukemia
among  shot  Smoky  and  British  test  participants,  the  causes  of  which  are  still
unclear.  The  low  recorded  doses,  the  small  size  of  the  expected  excesses,  and
problems  in  record  keeping  and  dosimetry  make  it  very  difficult  to  resolve
whether  atomic  veterans  as  a  group  are  at  substantially  elevated  cancer  risk  and
whether  any  such  excess  can  be  attributed  to  their  radiation  exposures.  The
Advisory  Committee  debated  at  some  length  the  merits  of  further  epidemiologic


482


Chapter  10

studies  and  concluded  that  the  decisions  to  conduct  such  studies  should  be  made
by  other  appropriately  constituted  bodies  of  experts.

Looking  Back:  The  Legacy  of  Distrust

The  chain  of  events  set  in  motion  by  the  CDC  research,  and  renewed
interest  in  the  fate  of  the  "atomic  vets,"  led  to  congressional  enactment  of
legislation  that  provides  veterans  exposed  at  atmospheric  tests  with  the
opportunity  to  obtain  compensation  for  injury  related  to  radiation  exposure.

The  Veterans  Dioxin  and  Radiation  Exposure  Compensation  Standards
Act  of  1984  provides  for  claims  for  compensation  for  radiation-related  disabilities
for  veterans  exposed  at  atmospheric  tests.  The  Radiation  Exposed  Veterans
Compensation  Act  of  1988  provides  that  a  veteran  who  was  exposed  to  radiation
at  a  designated  event  and  develops  a  designated  disease  may  be  entitled  to
benefits  without  having  to  prove  causation.197

Notwithstanding  the  passage  of  this  legislation,  the  Committee  heard  from
many  atomic  veterans,  and  their  widows,  who  complained  that  the  records  that
were  created  and  maintained  by  the  government-records  on  which  veterans'
claims  may  stand  or  fall-were  inadequate,  missing,  or  wrong.198  Atomic  veterans
also  stated  that  the  laws  and  rules  do  not  adequately  reflect  the  kinds  of  illnesses
that  may  be  caused  by  radiation,  that  they  do  not  provide  for  veterans  who  were
exposed  to  radiation  in  settings  other  than  atmospheric  tests,  and  that  the  practical
difficulties~in  time  and  resources~of  pursuing  their  rights  under  the  laws  are
often  excessive.  The  Committee  heard  from  many  who  told  of  the  time,  expense,
and  difficulty  of  getting  information  on  the  full  circumstances  of  bomb-test
exposures.  They  told  of  their  continued  efforts,  over  the  course  of  the  years,  to
reconcile  what  they  have  learned  from  government  sources  with  that  which  they
have  been  told  by  other  test  participants,  that  which  they  recovered  from  the
private  letters  of  test  participants  to  family  members,  and  their  own  further
research.

For  numerous  atomic  veterans,  the  testimony  was  not  simply  that  the
bomb  tests  themselves  had  been  large  experiments,  but  that  they  had  been  put  at
risk  in  the  absence  of  planning  to  gather  the  data  and  perform  the  follow-up
studies  needed  to  ensure  that  the  risks  of  the  unknown,  however  small,  would  be
measured  and  adequately  accounted  for.

CONCLUSION

The  story  of  human  research  conducted  in  connection  with  nuclear
weapons  tests  illustrates  the  difficult  questions  that  are  raised  when  human
research  is  conducted  in  an  occupational  setting,  especially  a  setting,  such  as  the
military,  where  exposure  to  risk  is  often  part  of  the  job.  The  story  illustrates  that
it  may  often  be  difficult  to  discern  whether  or  not  an  activity  is  a  human

483


Part  II

experiment.  By  the  same  token,  it  also  illustrates  the  importance  of  guarding
participants  against  unnecessary  risks,  whether  or  not  the  activity  is  a  human
experiment.

Human  experiments  at  atomic  bomb  tests  were  undertaken  by  the  military,
which  had  a  long  tradition  of  requiring  voluntary  consent  from  participants  in
biomedical  experiments.  The  need  for  written  consent  in  experiments  related  to
atomic,  biological,  and  chemical  warfare  was  clearly  stated  in  the  secretary  of
defense's  1953  memorandum.  That  memorandum  also  required  the  approval  in
writing  of  the  appropriate  service  secretary  and  precluded  experiments  that  did
not  adhere  to  its  further  requirements.  The  1953  memorandum,  however,  does
not  appear  to  have  been  transmitted  to  those  involved  in  human  research  at  bomb
tests,  although  the  tenet  of  voluntary  consent  was  followed  in  some  cases.  In
addition  to  consent,  the  1953  memorandum  contained  other  significant  ethical
requirements,  including  that  research  be  reasonably  likely  to  produce  useful
scientific  results  and  that  proper  precautions  be  taken  to  minimize  risk.

The  bomb-test  research  illustrates  the  significance  of  the  position  that  bad
science  is  bad  ethics.  Unless  a  research  project  is  scientifically  defensible,  there
is  no  justification  for  imposing  on  human  subjects  even  minimal  risk  or
inconvenience.  For  example,  the  DOD's  biomedical  advisers  advocated  the
conduct  of  psychological  and  physiological  research  on  troops  participating  in
bomb  tests  with  an  awareness  that  the  likelihood  of  scientifically  useful  results
was  small  and  that  the  effort  would  be  part  of  a  larger  exercise  in  indoctrination
and  training.  Having  done  so,  they  had  an  obligation  to  at  least  review  continued
research  efforts  to  determine  if  the  research  design  was  developing  useful
information.  In  the  case  of  the  psychological  and  physiological  testing,  the
evidence  indicates  that  early  results  showed  that  the  research  design  was  not
likely  to  produce  useful  scientific  information,  if  only  because  the  military,  the
researchers,  and  perhaps  even  the  subjects  did  not  view  the  setting  as  sufficiently
realistic.

At  the  same  time,  this  question  of  ethics  and  science  is  irrelevant  if  the
HumRRO  activities  did  not  entail  research  involving  human  subjects.  An  activity
that  has  a  poor  research  design  would  not  be  an  ethical  human  experiment.
However,  the  same  activity  might  be  ethical  if  conducted  as  a  training  activity
whose  essential  purpose  is  to  provide  reassurance.  Similarly,  to  the  extent  that
research  was  intended  solely  to  provide  reassurance,  ethical  questions  arise  that
might  not  be  present  if  the  activity  were  not  experimental.

Just  what  makes  something  an  instance  of  research  involving  human
subjects?  The  answer  to  this  question  is  not  discoverable;  instead,  it  is  fashioned
by  people  in  particular  contexts  for  particular  purposes.  Today,  we  would  likely
consider  all  the  activities  reviewed  in  the  first  part  of  this  chapter —the  HumRRO
testing,  the  "atomic  effects  experiment,"  the  flashblindness  experiments,  the  cloud
flythroughs,  and  the  protective  clothing  and  decontamination  tests— to  be  cases  of
research  involving  human  subjects  to  which  the  current  federal  regulations  and

484


Chapter  10

the  current  rules  of  research  ethics  would  apply.  Some  of  these  activities  are,
nevertheless,  more  paradigmatically  instances  of  human  research  than  others.
Depending  on  the  context,  for  example,  the  protective  clothing  and
decontamination  tests  might  be  considered  within  the  normal  course  of  duty  for
military  personnel.

One  of  the  reasons  it  is  important  to  be  able  to  distinguish  research
involving  human  subjects  from  other  activities  is  that  military  policy  clearly  states
that  service  personnel  may  not  be  ordered  to  be  human  subjects.  In  contrast  to
much  else  in  military  service,  participation  in  research  is  a  discretionary  activity
that  service  personnel  are  permitted  under  military  policy  and  federal  regulation
to  refuse.  Thus,  in  the  military  as  elsewhere,  human  subjects  are  supposed  to  be
volunteers  whose  valid  consent  has  been  obtained.

Human  subject  research  is  not  the  only  activity  in  the  military,  however,
for  which  consent  is  a  requirement.  The  military  also  often  asks  for  volunteers  in
settings  where  the  risk  is  unusually  great.  For  example,  the  testing  of  equipment
may  often  be  hazardous,  may  involve  the  use  of  volunteers,  but  may  not  be
considered  human  research.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  test  pilots,  there  may  be
significant  risk,  volunteers  may  be  called  for,  but  the  activity  might  not  be
considered  research  with  human  subjects  and  thus  would  not  be  thought  subject  to
human  use  research  regulations.

Conversely,  a  requirement  of  consent  may  not  necessarily  mean  that
subjects  have  some  measure  of  control  over  the  risks  to  which  they  are  to  be
exposed.  Even  under  today's  rules,  informed  consent  in  the  HumRRO  tests  would
be  limited  to  the  psychological  and  physiological  testing,  and  not  required  for
participation  in  the  bomb  test  itself.

Whether  the  activity  is  research  involving  human  subjects  or  an  unusually
risky  assignment  that  is  not  considered  human  subject  research,  how  free  are
military  personnel  to  accept  or  refuse  offers  (as  opposed  to  orders)  put  to  them?
Dr.  Crawford,  when  asked  to  comment  in  1994  on  consent  in  his  HumRRO
research,  responded  by  observing  that  "military  service  people  generally  do  what
they're  asked  to  do,  told  to  do."  He  was  speaking  of  an  army  that  included  many
conscripts;  today's  all-volunteer  military  is  doubtless  different  in  many  respects
that  bear  on  questions  of  voluntariness.  Nevertheless,  the  culture  of  the  military,
with  its  emphasis  not  only  on  following  orders  but  on  the  willingness  to  take  risks
in  the  interests  of  the  nation,  surely  influences  and  in  some  circumstances  may
restrict  how  service  personnel  respond  to  such  offers.

Because  in  the  military  volunteering  is  often  seen  as  a  matter  of  duty  and
honor,  and  the  boundaries  between  experimental  and  occupational  activities  may
not  be  clear,  the  importance  of  minimizing  risk  emerges  as  a  central  concern.
Above  all,  the  activities  discussed  in  this  chapter  confirm  that  the  ethical
requirement  that  risks  to  service  personnel  be  minimized  should  not  depend  on
whether  an  activity  is  characterized  as  an  experiment  or  occupational.  In  the  case
of  the  atomic  veterans,  the  risks  run  were  usually  no  different  for  those  who  were

485


Part  II

subjects  of  research  and  those  who  were  not.

The  military  took  precautions,  with  great  success,  to  preclude  exposure  to
radiation  at  levels  that  might  produce  acute  effects.  However,  bomb-test
participants  were  exposed  to  lesser,  long-term  risks  without  adequate  provision
for  (1)  the  creation  and  maintenance  of  records  that  might  be  needed,  in
retrospect,  to  determine  the  precise  measure  of  risks  to  which  military  personnel
were  exposed;  (2)  the  tracking  of  those  exposed  to  risk,  so  that  follow-up  and
assurance,  as  needed,  could  be  efficiently  undertaken.

It  might  be  argued  that,  at  the  time,  there  was  no  awareness  of  a  potential
for  long-term  risk,  or  that  the  potential  was  understood  to  be  nonexistent.  But,
while  the  possibility  of  long-term  risk  from  low  exposures  was  seen  as  low,  it  was
not  seen  as  nonexistent.  Following  the  1946  Crossroads  tests,  officials  and
experts  connected  with  the  DOD,  AEC,  and  VA  thought  action  was  needed  to
collect  data  in  secret  to  evaluate  potential  disability  claims.

Since  the  bomb  tests,  the  Defense  Department  has  come  to  recognize  the
importance  of  providing  for  an  independent  risk  assessment  when  service
personnel  may  be  exposed  to  new  weapons-regardless  of  whether  the  exposure  is
classed  as  experimental  or  occupational.199

However,  for  the  numerous  atomic  veterans  (and  their  family  members)
who  spoke  to  the  Committee,  a  continuing  source  of  distress  is  not  simply  that  the
government  put  service  personnel  at  risk  but  that,  having  undertaken  to  do  so,  the
government  did  not  undertake  to  collect  the  data  and  perform  the  follow-up  that
might  provide  them  knowledge  and  comfort  in  later  years.  The  Advisory
Committee  agrees.  When  the  nation  exposes  servicemen  and  women  to
hazardous  substances,  there  is  an  obligation  to  keep  appropriate  records  of  both
the  exposures  and  the  long-term  medical  outcomes.

From  listening  to  those  who  appeared  before  us,  and  from  reflection  on  the
laws  that  are  already  in  effect,  the  Committee  came  to  appreciate  that  there  are
several  reasons  record  keeping  is  important.  First,  those  who  served,  and  their
widows  and  surviving  family  members,  have  a  great  interest  in  knowing  the  facts
of  service-related  exposures.  We  repeatedly  heard  from  veterans  and  family
members  whose  inquiries  into  the  circumstances  and  details  of  exposures  has
spanned  many  years.  Second,  information  may  provide  basis  for  scientific
analysis  that  may  shed  light  on  the  relation  between  exposure  to  risk  and
subsequent  disability  or  disease.  Third,  where  disability  or  disease  appears  to  be
a  possible  result  of  exposure,  data  are  needed  to  provide  the  basis  for  a  fair  and
efficient  system  of  remedies.

The  experience  of  the  bomb-test  participants  indicates  that  several
different  kinds  of  records  or  data  should  be  of  use.  First,  of  course,  there  are  data
about  the  exposure  of  individual  service  personnel  to  particular  potential  hazards.
In  the  case  of  the  atomic  bomb  tests,  the  potential  that  radiation  would  be  a  hazard
was,  of  course,  obvidus.  In  addition,  radiation  is  a  phenomenon  that  is  almost
uniquely  susceptible  to  measurement.  In  other  settings  faced  by  service

486


Chapter  10

personnel,  the  precise  nature  of  the  hazard  may  not  be  easily  anticipated  or,  even
if  anticipated,  readily  measurable.  Second,  there  are  data  concerning  the  location
of  service  personnel.  In  the  case  of  the  bomb  tests,  as  we  have  seen,  data  on  the
identity  and  location  of  all  test  participants  (so  that  their  position  in  relation  to  the
putative  hazard  can  be  retrospectively  reconstructed,  if  need  be)  were  not  readily
available.  Even  if  the  hazard  cannot  be  anticipated,  such  data  can  be  useful  in
later  efforts  to  reconstruct  the  nature  of  the  hazard  and  its  effect.  Third,  the
maintenance  of  complete  medical  records,  including  linkages  where  multiple  sets
of  records  exist,  is  essential.  Records  suitable  for  use  in  epidemiologic  studies  of
long-term  medical  consequences  of  military  actions  would  be  valuable  for  both
medical  science  and  service  members.

But  having  heard  from  many  atomic  vets  and  their  family  members,  the
Advisory  Committee  does  not  believe  that,  but  for  the  inadequate  record  keeping
and  lack  of  follow-up,  there  would  be  no  anger  or  disappointment  among  atomic
veterans  and  their  families.  The  real  offense  to  many  is  the  belief  that  the  risk
was  unacceptable  and  that  they  or  their  loved  ones  may  suffer  illness
unnecessarily  as  a  consequence.  Proper  attention  to  record  keeping  should
provide  some  basis  for  gaining  and  assuring  the  trust  of  those  who  are  exposed  to
risk  in  the  future  and,  perhaps,  scientific  results  that  may  be  of  real  value  to  them,
but  it  is  hardly  a  guarantee  against  perceptions  of  abuse  or  unfairness.

If  nothing  else,  our  experience  makes  us  appreciate  the  difference  between
technical,  analytic  data  and  the  reality  of  the  human  experience.  The  available
data,  as  we  have  discussed,  indicate  that  the  average  amount  of  radiation  to  which
bomb-test  participants  were  exposed  was  low.  But  those  who  believe  they  have
suffered  as  a  consequence  of  these  exposures  do  not  believe  these  risks  to  have
been  as  slight  as  the  data  indicate.  When  we  review  this  decades  later,  we  rely  on
numbers;  the  atomic  veterans  and  their  family  members  who  have  appeared
before  the  Committee  associate,  in  a  "cause  and  effect"  way,  the  exposure  with
some  kind  of  result  that  they  have  personally  experienced  or  witnessed.  The
emotions  and  concerns  expressed  to  the  Committee  by  these  citizens  (and  those
downwind  from  atomic  tests  and  intentional  releases)  were  very,  very  real.  Both
the  public  and  the  scientific  community  must  understand  that,  when  data  indicate
that  risks  are  low,  the  risks  are  not  necessarily  zero;  and  it  is  possible  for  a  rare
event  to  occur.  The  risk  analysis  may  only  indicate  that  it  is  unlikely  that  such
events  will  occur  with  significant  frequency  or  probability.


487


ENDNOTES


1 .  See  Department  of  Energy,  Announced  United  States  Nuclear  Tests:  July
1945  Through  December  1992  (Springfield,  Va.:  National  Technical  Information
Service,  May  1993);  Department  of  Energy,  Expanded  Test  Information  for  Nuclear
Tests  With  Unannounced  Simultaneous  Detonation  (Springfield,  Va.:  National  Technical
Information  Service,  20  June  1994).

2.  Thomas  L.  Shipman,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  to  Dr.
Harry  G.  Ehrmentraut,  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences,  Research  and  Development
Board,  Department  of  Defense,  25  July  1951  ("Dr.  Robert  Grier  has  passed  on  to

me  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B),  2.

3.  See  the  July  1949  transcript  of  a  meeting  convened  by  the  NEPA  [Nuclear
Energy  for  the  Propulsion  of  Aircraft]  Medical  Advisory  Panel  to  discuss  the
"Psychological  Problem  of  Crew  Selection  Relative  to  the  Special  Hazards  of  Irradiation
Exposure,"  27.  NEPA  Medical  Advisory  Panel,  Subcommittee  IX,  proceedings  of  22
July  1949  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-121494-A-2).

4.  Richard  L.  Meiling,  Chairman,  Armed  Forces  Medical  Policy  Council,  to  the
Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense  et  al.,  27  June  1951  ("Military  Medical  Problems
Associated  with  Military  Participation  in  Atomic  Energy  Commission  Tests")  (ACHRE
No.  DOD-122794-B),  1.

5.  Ibid.

6.  Ibid.

7.  Department  of  the  Army,  September  1950  ("Atomic  Energy  Indoctrination")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-020395-D),  73.

8.  Ibid.

9.  Richard  L.  Meiling,  Chairman,  Armed  Forces  Medical  Policy  Council,  to  the
Chairman,  Research  and  Development  Board,  23  February  1951  ("Department  of
Defense  Biomedical  Participation  in  Atomic  Weapons  Tests")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-
071194-A),  1.

10.  The  Joint  Panel  was  created  in  1949  by  the  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences
and  the  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  which  were  committees  of  the  Research  and
Development  Board.  (See  the  Introduction  and  chapter  1  for  further  discussions  of  the
Joint  Panel.)

1 1 .  The  agenda  noted  that  while  civilians  were  polled  in  the  preparation  of  the
draft,  "very  few"  responded.  The  draft  was  therefore  "  offered  not  as  a  proposed
statement,  to  be  accepted  after  only  minor  revisions,  but  as  a  general  guide  to  the  type  of
paper  which  is  expected  of  the  Joint  Panel."  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical  Aspects  of
Atomic  Warfare,  20  September  1951  ("Agenda,  8th  Meeting,  Item  3  -  Preparation  of
Statement  on  Biomedical  Participation  in  Future  Weapons  Tests")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
072294-B),  1-2.

12.  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare,  20  September  195 1
("Biomedical  Participation  in  Future  Atomic  Weapons  Tests  [Attachment  to  Agenda,  8th
Meeting]")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-072294-B),  2.  The  quoted  language  appears  to  have
come  from  Dr.  Thomas  Shipman  of  Los  Alamos.  See  Thomas  Shipman,  Los  Alamos
Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  to  Shields  Warren,  Director,  AEC  Division  of
Biology  and  Medicine,  15  September  1951  ("Permissible  Exposures,  Test  Operations")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-C).


488


13.  The  draft  stated  a  concern  that  "actual  animal  exposures  should  be  limited
as  much  as  possible,"  but  did  not  expressly  address  human  experimentation.  Joint  Panel
on  the  Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare,  20  September  1951,  ("Biomedical
Participation  in  Future  Atomic  Weapons  Tests"),  3.

14.  Ibid.,  5-7.

15.  We  discuss  the  data  gathering  on  radioisotopes  in  the  body  fluids  in  chapter
13,  in  the  context  of  a  discussion  of  secret  human  data  gathering  on  fallout.

16.  Joint  Panel  on  Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare,  20  September  1951
("Program  Guidance  Report")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-072294-B),  23.

17.  Ibid.,  20. A  further  section  on  "Psychological  Studies"  recommended  the
following:

4.1.3  Continue  studies  in  psychology  of  panic.

4.1 .4  Seek  technics  [sic]  for  reducing  apprehension  and
for  producing  psychologic  resistance  to  fear  and  panic,
especially  in  presence  of  radiation  hazard  (emotional
vaccination).

4.1.5  Spread  knowledge  of  radiation  tolerance,  technics
[sic]  of  avoidance,  and  possibility  of  therapy  through
military  and  civilian  populations  and  measure  their
acceptance.

4. 1 .6  Prepare  to  make  psychologic  observations  at  and
after  bomb  tests.

Ibid.,  14.

18.  Colonel  Michael  Buckley,  Acting  Deputy  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,  Research
and  Development,  to  Chief  of  Army  Field  Forces,  Fort  Monroe,  Virginia,  20  August
1951  ("Proposed  Study  of  Behavior  of  Troops  Exposed  to  A-Bomb")  (ACHRE  No.
NARA-013195-A),  1.

19.  Peter  A.  Bordes  et  al.,  February  1953  ("DESERT  ROCK  I:  A  Psychological
Study  of  Troop  Reactions  to  an  Atomic  Explosion  [HumRRO-TR-1]")  (ACHRE  No.
CORP-111694-A),3.

20.  Dr.  Meredith  Crawford,  interview  by  Dan  Guttman  and  Patrick  Fitzgerald
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  1  December  1994  (ACHRE  Research  Project
Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Targeted  Interview  Project),  6-7.  Dr.  Crawford  was
recruited  to  head  the  new  HumRRO  by  psychologist  Harry  Harlow,  an  Army  adviser
who  was  famed  for  his  work  with  monkeys.  HumRRO  was  a  private  contractor  created
at  the  Army's  behest  and  initially  affiliated  with  George  Washington  University.  In  the
1951  experiments,  HumRRO  worked  with  the  Operations  Research  Organization  (ORO),
which  was  affiliated  with  Johns  Hopkins  University.

21.  In  1 994,  Dr.  Crawford  prepared  a  retrospective  memorandum  titled
"HumRRO  Research  During  Four  Army  Training  Exercises."  Based  on  the  1953  report,
"A  Psychological  Study  of  Troop  Reactions  to  an  Atomic  Explosion,"  Dr.  Crawford
estimated  that  633  service  personnel  were  involved  in  the  maneuvers  at  Desert  Rock  I.
Meredith  P.  Crawford  to  William  C.  Osbom,  27  January  1994  ("HumRRO  Research
During  Four  Army  Training  Exercises  Involving  Atomic  Weapons— 1951-1957")
(ACHRE  No.  CORP-1 12294-B),  8.  In  addition,  hundreds  of  additional  troops  were
involved  as  the  "nonparticipant"  group  (which  did  not  attend  the  test  maneuvers,  but  was
given  psychological  tests).  The  "experimental  paradigm"  for  the  HumRRO  tests  is


489


described  in  this  1994  memorandum.  Ibid.,  4.

22.  "Armed  Forces:  Exercise  Desert  Rock,"  Time,  12  November  1951,  21-22.

23.  New  York  Times,  1  November  1951,  4.

24.  Bordes  et  al.,  "DESERT  ROCK  I:  A  Psychological  Study  of  Troop
Reactions  to  an  Atomic  Explosion,"  6.

25.  Interview  with  Crawford,  1  December  1994,  57.

26.  Bordes  et  al.,  "DESERT  ROCK  I:  A  Psychological  Study  of  Troop
Reactions  to  an  Atomic  Explosion,"  5.

27.  Ibid.,  103.

28.  Ibid.,  107-108.

29.  Interestingly,  the  troops  evidently  did  not  buy  the  "correct"  answer;  only
about  40  percent  of  the  troops  at  the  maneuver  were  reported  to  have  been  correctly
indoctrinated.  Bordes  et  al.,  "DESERT  ROCK  I:  A  Psychological  Study  of  Troop
Reactions  to  an  Atomic  Explosion,"  130.

30.  The  Committee  asked  the  DOD  to  review  the  1951  questionnaire  and
comment  on  whether  the  information  presented  regarding  the  effect  of  an  airburst  is,
based  on  DOD's  current  expert  understanding,  still  correct.  DOD  provided
"changes/corrections/clarifications"  on  nine  items.  In  the  case  of  items  1  and  6,  quoted
in  the  text,  DOD  commented:

1)  As  stated,  the  answer  is  wrong.  The  ground  zero
hazard  1  day  after  an  atomic  explosion  depends  on  the
yield.  At  20  kt,  there  would  be  no  fallout  for  a  burst  at
2000  feet,  but  there  would  be  induced  activity. .  . .

6)  There  is  thp  same  problem  with  this  answer  as  with  1 ,  above.

In  one  case  the  DOD  reported  that  the  1951  questionnaire  erred  on  what  might
be  called  the  side  of  caution;  where  a  1951  answer  stated  that  a  posited  detonation  would
not  kill  anybody  beyond  the  range  of  three  miles,  the  answer  today  would  be  one  mile.
Department  of  Defense,  Radiation  Experiments  Command  Center,  26  April  1995
("ACHRE  Request  032795-A,  HumRRO  Questionnaire  and  Air  Burst  Material")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-042695-A),  1.

3 1 .  Colonel  R.  G.  Prentiss,  Executive  Officer,  Office  of  the  Army  Surgeon
General,  to  Chief,  Army  Field  Forces,  Fort  Monroe,  Virginia,  9  January  1952
("Psychiatric  Research  in  Connection  with  Atomic  Weapon  Tests  Involving  Troop
Participation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-080594-A),  1.  The  memo  recorded:

1.  For  your  information  in  connection  with  planning  for
future  exercises  and  operations  in  which  atomic
weapons  tests  will  be  used  and  troops  will  participate,
this  office  has  a  continuing  interest  in  the  conduct  of
psychiatric  observations  regarding  the  effects  of  the
weapons  on  the  participating  troops.

2.  Funds  for  the  conduct  of  psychiatric  observations
which  may  be  approved  for  future  atomic  weapons  tests
will  be  made  available  through  the  Surgeon  General.


490


The  memorandum  bears  concurrences  from  the  "Medical  Research  and
Development  Board,"  "Medical  Plans  and  Operations,"  "Fiscal  Division,"  and  "Chief,
Psychiatry  and  Neurology  Consultants  Division."  It  is  not  clear  what  role  Army
psychiatrists  (i.e.,  medical  doctors)  played  in  the  implementation  of
the  "psychological"  experiments.

32.  Major  P.  C.  Casperson,  for  the  Chief  of  Army  Field  Forces,  to  First  Army
et.  al.,  7  March  1952  ("Extracts,  Final  Report  Exercise  DESERT  ROCK  I")  (ACHRE
No.  NARA-013195-A),  122.  In  an  age  of  "polls  and  questionnaires,"  the  report
suggested,  the  overpsychologized  troops  may  have  been  putting  the  psychologists  on:

The  psychological  evaluators,  of  whom  there  were  many
and  various,  were  perhaps  too  obvious  and  eager.  This
is  an  era  of  polls  and  questionnaires  and  here  was  a  new
and  untried  field  with  unlimited  possibilities.  The
ultimate  response,  finally,  was  a  humorous  and
deliberate  program  in  the  troops  to  confuse  the
psychological  people  with  fictitious  reactions.
Ibid.

33.  Brigadier  General  A.  R.  Luedecke,  AFSWP,  to  Director,  AEC  Division  of
Military  Application,  7  March  1952  ("Reference  is  made  to  your  letter  of  28  December
1951  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-010495-A),  2.

34.  Interview  with  Crawford,  1  December  1994,  12-13.

35.  Dr.  Crawford's  1994  reconstruction  of  events  estimated  that  672  soldiers
witnessed  the  shot,  and  914  served  in  the  control  group  as  nonparticipants.  Crawford  to
Osborn,  27  January  1994,  10.

36.  Motivation,  Morale,  and  Leadership  Division,  Department  of  the  Army,
August  1953  ("Desert  Rock  IV:  Reactions  of  an  Armored  Infantry  Battalion  to  an  Atomic
Bomb  Maneuver  [HumRRO-TR-2]")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP- 1 1 1 694- A),  ix,  17.

37.  Benjamin  W.  White,  1  August  1953  ("Desert  Rock  V:  Reactions  of  Troop
Participants  and  Forward  Volunteer  Officer  Groups  to  Atomic  Exercises")  (ACHRE  No.
CORP-111694-A),  10.

38.  Department  of  the  Army,  "Desert  Rock  IV:  Reactions  of  an  Armored
Infantry  Battalion  to  an  Atomic  Bomb  Maneuver  [HumRRO-TR-2],"  72.

39.  "Armed  Forces:  Exercise  Desert  Rock,"  Time,  12  November  1951,  22.  At
Desert  Rock  I,  physiological  testing,  including  the  use  of  a  polygraph,  sought  to  measure
anxiety  before  and  after  D-Day.  Bordes  et  al.,  "DESERT  ROCK  I,"  chapter  6.  At  Desert
Rock  IV,  before  and  after  "sweat  tests"  measured  troops'  hand  sweating  as  a  possible
index  of  fear.  Department  of  the  Army,  "Desert  Rock  IV:  Reactions  of  an  Armored
Infantry  Battalion  to  an  Atomic  Bomb  Maneuver  [HumRRO-TR-2],"  10.

40.  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare,  9  September  1 952
("Minutes:  9,  10,  1 1  and  12  September  1952,  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-072294-B),  3-4.  The  panel's  statement  was  in  the  form  of  a  motion
to  be  transmitted  to  the  DOD  Research  and  Development  Board's  Committee  on  Human
Resources,  to  which  the  advisory  role  on  the  HumRRO  effort  was  being  turned  over.

4 1 .  The  available  research  reports  do  not  indicate  the  numbers  of  participants  in
the  research.

42.  Defense  Nuclear  Agency,  8  August  1995  ("Atmospheric  Test
Series/Activities  Matrix")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-081 195-A).


491


43.  Robert  D.  Baldwin,  March  1958  ("Staff  Memorandum:  Experiences  at
Desert  Rock  VIM")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-1 1 1694-A).  Also  at  Plumbbob  was  an
experiment  to  test  the  efficiency  of  fallout  shelters.  Sixteen  men  were  confined  in  four
shelters  to  collect  fallout  samples,  so  that  their  ability  to  collect  samples  could  be  studied
and  so  that  they  could  be  studied  for  the  psychological  effect  of  confinement.  The  study
concluded  that  the  shelters  were  well  suited  for  both  manned  stations  at  nuclear  weapons
tests  and  for  single-family  fallout  shelters.  J.  D.  Sartor  et  al.,  23  April  1963  ("The  Design
and  Performance  of  a  Fallout-Tested  Manned  Shelter  Station  and  Its  Suitability  as  a
Single-Family  Shelter  [USNRDL-TR-647]")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-032395-A).  See  also
Nevada  Test  Organization,  Office  of  Test  Information,  24  July  1957  ("For  Immediate
Release")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B);  Nevada  Test  Organization,  Office  of  Test
Information,  15  July  1957  ("For  Immediate  Release")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-030895-F).

44.  Baldwin,  "Experiences  at  Desert  Rock  VIII,"  39.

45.  Ibid.,  12.  The  troops  were  not  to  be  told  the  amount  of  contamination
present,  which  would  depend  upon  actual  fallout  amounts.  The  course  was  marked  by
radiation  hazard  markers,  which  might  or  might  not  reflect  the  actual  fallout.  Ibid.,  23.

46.  Ibid.,  7.

47.  Interview  with  Crawford,  1  December  1994,  52.

48.  Bordes  et  al.,  "DESERT  ROCK  I:  A  Psychological  Study  of  Troop
Reactions  to  an  Atomic  Explosion,"  20.

49.  Crawford  to  Osborn,  27  January  1994,  1 5.

50.  CG  Cp  Desert  Rock  to  CG  Sixth  Army,  28  March  1953  ("Reference
message  G3,  OCAFF  No.  423")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-013195-A),  1.  The  office
volunteers  participated  in  three  detonations  in  the  1953  "Upshot-Knothole"  series— shots
Nancy,  Badger,  and  Simon.  "DNA  Fact  Sheet  Operation  Upshot-Knothole,"  January
1992.

51.  Captain  Robert  A.  Hinners,  USN,  Headquarters,  Armed  Forces  Special
Weapons  Project,  25  April  1953  ("Report  of  Participation  in  Selected  Volunteer  Program
of  Desert  Rock  V-7")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B),  2.

In  an  1 1  February  1953  letter,  the  Army  informed  the  Congressional  Joint
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  of  the  "steps  being  taken  by  the  Army  in  connection  with
exposure  of  troops  at  tests  of  atomic  weapons."  Lieutenant  General  L.  L.  Lemnitzer,
Deputy  Chief  of  Staff  for  Plans  and  Research,  to  Honorable  Carl  T.  Durham,  House  of
Representatives,  1 1  February  1953  ("The  Secretary  of  the  Army  has  asked  that  the  Joint
Committee  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-1 12594-A),  1.  The  Army  explained  that
deployment  in  foxholes  at  as  close  to  1 ,500  yards  was  needed  to  confirm  that
commanders  could  risk  troops  at  this  distance.  The  Army  assured  the  committee  that
experts  deemed  it  "highly  improbable  that  troops  will  suffer  any  injury  under  these
conditions."  Ibid.,  2.

Assurance  was  given  to  Congress  that  no  more  than  twelve  volunteers  would  be
used  at  one  shot.  G3  DEPTAR,  to  CG  Cp  Desert  Rock,  15  April  1953  ("Reference  your
msg  AMCDR-DPCO  0498")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-013194-A),  1.

52.  Brigadier  General  Carl  H.  Jark,  for  the  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,
Organization  and  Training  Division,  to  Distribution,  20  February  1953  ("Instructions  for
Positioning  DA  [Department  of  Army]  Personnel  at  Continental  Atomic  Tests
[Attachment  to  20  February  1953  memo]")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-1 20694-A),  2.

53.  White,  "Desert  Rock  V:  Reactions  of  Troop  Participants  and  Forward
Volunteer  Officer  Groups  to  Atomic  Exercises,"  iii.


492


54.  CG  Sixth  Army  Presidio  of  SFran  Calif,  to  OCAFF  Ft  Monroe  Va,  24  April
1953  ("Reference  Desert  Rock  msg  AMCDR-CG-04237")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-013195-
A),  1.

55.  Major  R.  C.  Morris,  for  the  Commanding  General,  to  Chief  of  Research  and
Development,  15  November  1955  ("Amendment  to  Proposed  Project  Regarding  Blast
Injury  Evaluation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-030895-F),  1.

56.  Major  Benjamin  I.  Hill,  for  the  Director,  Terminal  Ballistics  Laboratory,  to
Chief,  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project,  13  December  1955  ("Amendment  to
Proposed  CONARC  Project  Regarding  Blast  Injury  Evaluation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
030895-F),  1.

57.  Colonel  Irving  L.  Branch,  for  the  Chief,  AFSWP,  to  Chief  of  Research  and
Development,  Department  of  the  Army,  20  January  1956  ("Annex  'A'  to  2nd
Endorsement:  Detailed  Explanation  of  AFSWP  Comments  on  Feasibility  of  Human
Volunteer  Program")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-030895-F),  1.

58.  Ibid.

59.  Colonel  Irving  L.  Branch,  for  the  Chief,  AFSWP,  to  Chief  of  Research  and
Development,  Department  of  the  Army,  20  January  1956  ("Amendment  to  Proposed
Project  Regarding  Blast  Injury  Evaluation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-030895-F),  1-2.

60.  National  Military  Establishment,  Military  Liaison  Committee,  to  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission,  24  March  1949  ("Planning  for  1951  Atomic  Bomb  Tests")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-C).

61 .  Howard  Brown  to  Shields  Warren,  20  August  195 1  ("Larry  Tuttle  advised
that  he  had  learned  from  his  agents  in  AFSWP  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040395-A),  1.

62.  Thomas  L.  Shipman,  Los  Alamos  Health  Division  Leader,  to  Shields
Warren,  Director,  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  20  January  1952  ("Since
Wright's  return  from  the  meeting  in  Washington  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-C),  2.

63.  Thomas  Shipman,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  to
Charles  Dunham,  Director,  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  9  June  1956  ("This
is  a  rather  belated  reply  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-C),  1.  In  response  to  the
suggestion  that  Los  Alamos  participate  in  another  effort,  Shipman  urged  that  the
committee  should

either  be  given  some  real  responsibility  or  will  at  least  be
able  to  speak  in  a  loud,  strong  voice  against  any  proposed
program  which  appears  to  be  poorly  or  inadequately
planned  ...  or  which  appears  to  be  an  out  and  out  waste  of
the  taxpayers'  money.
Ibid.

64.  T.  L.  Shipman  to  Alvin  Graves,  9  August  1952  ("Meeting  of  Biomedical
Test  Planning  and  Screening  Committee")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-C),  1.  DOD
records  show  flashblindness  research  at  Buster- Jangle  (1951),  Tumbler-Snapper  (1952),
Upshot-Knothole  (1953),  Plumbbob  (1953),  Hardtrack  II  (1958),  and  Dominic  I  (1962),
in  Defense  Nuclear  Agency,  8  August  1995,  "Atmospheric  Test  Series/Activities  Matrix."

65.  The  topic  of  the  bomb's  effect  on  vision  merited  instruction.  The  1951
HumRRO  questionnaire  included:  "Watching  an  A-bomb  explode  five  miles  away  can
cause  permanent  blindness.  (False)."  Bordes  et  al.,  "DESERT  ROCK  I:  A  Psychological
Study  of  Troop  Reactions  to  an  Atomic  Explosion"),  109.  In  a  1995  comment  on  this
question,  DOD  noted  that  "[i]n  the  strictest  sense  the  correct  answer  is  'true'.  Some


493


permanent  retinal  damage  will  occur,  but  complete  vision  loss  will  not."  Department  of
Defense,  Radiation  Experiments  Command  Center  ("ACHRE  Request  032795-A,
HumRRO  Questionnaire  and  Air  Burst  Material"),  1.

66.  Colonel  Victor  A.  Byrnes,  USAF  (MC),  15  March  1952  ("Operation
BUSTER:  Project  4.3,  Flash  Blindness")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-121594-C-4),  2.

67.  The  objectives  were

(a)  To  evaluate  the  visual  handicap  which  might  be
expected  in  military  personnel  exposed,  during
daylight  operations,  to  the  flash  of  an  atomic
detonation.

(b)  To  evaluate  devices  developed  for  the  purpose  of
protecting  the  eye  against  visual  impairment  resulting
from  excessive  exposure  to  light.

Ibid.,  1.

68.  J.  C.  Clark,  Deputy  Test  Director,  to  Colonel  Kenner  Hertford,  Director,
Office  of  Test  Operations,  5  March  1952  ("Attached  is  an  outline  of  approved  Project  4.5
. . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-020795-C),  1.  The  letter  noted  that  at  Buster- Jangle  the  AEC
had  sought  and  received  "release  of  AEC  responsibility"  in  the  event  of  such  damage  and
requested  the  same  release  for  Tumbler-Snapper.

69.  Defense  Nuclear  Agency,  1952  ("Operation  Tumbler-Snapper")  (ACHRE
No.  DOD- 102 194-C),92.

70.  Ibid.

71.  Colonel  Victor  A.  Byrnes,  March  1953  ("Operation  Snapper,  Project  4.5:
Flash  Blindness,  Report  to  the  Test  Director")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-121994-C),  12.

72.  Ibid.,  15.

73.  Ibid.  The  DOD  reported  that  it  does  not  have  the  ability  to  retrieve  the
names  of  experimental  subjects.  Thus,  the  long-term  outcome  of  those  involved  in
flashblindness  tests  (estimated  by  DOD  to  approximate  100)  is  not  known  to  the
Committee.

74.  Colonel  Victor  A.  Byrnes,  USAF  (MC),  et  al.,  30  November  1955
("Operation  Upshot-Knothole,  Project  4.5:  Ocular  Effects  of  Thermal  Radiation  from
Atomic  Detonation-Flashblindness  and  Chorioretinal  Burns")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
121994-C),3.

75.  Ibid.

76.  Colonel  Irving  L.  Branch,  USAF,  Acting  Chief  of  Staff,  to  Assistant
Secretary  of  Defense  (Health  and  Medicine),  5  March  1954  ("Status  of  Human
Volunteers  in  Bio-medical  Experimentation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-042595-A),  2.

77.  Ibid,  3.

78.  Colonel  John  Pickering;  interview  by  John  Harbert  and  Gil  Whittemore
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  2  November  1994  (ACHRE  Research  Project
Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Targeted  Interview  Project),  55.  DOD  did  not  locate  any
documents  showing  written  consent.

79.  Defense  Atomic  Support  Agency,  15  August  1962  ("Operation  Plumbbob:
Technical  Summary  of  Military  Effects,  Programs  1-9")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-100794-A),
137.

80.  Defense  Nuclear  Agency,  1962  ("Operation  Dominic  I:  Report  of  DOD
Participation")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-A).


494


81 .  John  R.  McGraw,  Deputy  Commandant,  USAF,  to  Director.  AEC,  20  March
1954  ("Examination  of  the  Retina  of  Individuals  Exposed  to  Recent  Atomic  Detonation")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-090994-C).  The  memorandum  stated  that  it  "can  be  assumed  that  all
persons  who  viewed  the  actual  fireball"  of  a  recent  hydrogen  bomb  test  "without  eye
protection  have  received  permanent  chorio-retinal  damage."  The  memorandum  went  on
to  recommend  that  "[papulations  and  observers  within  an  approximate  radius  of  100
miles  from  ground  zero  should  be  surveyed."

82.  See,  for  example,  Byrnes,  "Operation  Snapper,  Project  4.5,"  16-17.

83.  Roy  B.  Snapp,  Secretary,  AEC,  minutes  of  meeting  no.  623,  6  November
1951  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B),  526.

84.  Defense  Nuclear  Agency,  23  June  1982  ("Shots  Sugar  and  Jangle:  The
Final  Tests  of  the  Buster-Jangle  Series")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-C),  46.

85.  John  R.  Hendrickson,  July  1952  ("Operation  Jangle,  Project  6.3-1 :
Evaluation  of  Military  Individual  and  Collective  Protection  Devices  and  Clothing")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-121594-C-14),  5.

86.  Ibid.

87.  Ibid.,  5,  20.

88.  Ibid.,  19.

89.  Ibid.,v.

90.  U.S.  Naval  Radiological  Defense  Laboratory,  26  May  1958  ("Supplement
[l]toAEC-313  [2-57]  USNRDL")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-091494-A),  1.

91.  Lieutenant  Colonel  Gordon  L.  Jacks,  CmlC  Commanding,  to  TSG,  DA,  12
April  1963  ("Beta  Hazard  Experiment  Using  Volunteer  Military  Personnel")  (ACHRE
No.  DOD-122294-B),  1.

92.  Commanding  Officer  and  Director,  U.S.  Naval  Radiological  Defense
Laboratory,  to  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  26  May  1958  ("Authorization  for  use  of
radioisotopes  on  human  volunteers,  request  for")  (ACHRE  No  DOD-091494-A) 1

93.  Ibid.

94.  Jacks  to  TSG,  12  April  1963,  I.

95.  "Research  and  Development:  Use  of  Volunteers  as  Subjects  of  Research  "
AR  70-25  (1962).

96.  Office  of  Information  Services,  Air  Force  Special  Weapons  Center,  to
Headquarters,  Air  Research  Development  Command,  27  January  1956  ("Early  Cloud
Penetration")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-122894-B),  1.

97.  Air  Force  Systems  Command,  January  1 963  ("History  of  Air  Force  Atomic
Cloud  Sampling  [AFSC  Historical  Publication  Series  61-142-11")  (ACHRE  No  DOD-
082294-A),  23.

98.  Ibid.,  229.

99.  Air  Force  Systems  Command,  "History  of  Air  Force  Atomic  Cloud
Sampling,"  121.

100.  E.  A.  Pinson  [attr.],  1956  [attr.]  ("Gentlemen:  this  morning  I  will  discuss
the  following  topics  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B),  3.

101 .  Harold  Clark,  "I  Flew  Through  an  Atomic  Hell,"  Argosy,  December  1955
63.

102.  J.  E.  Banks  et  al.,  30  April  1958  ("Operation  Teapot:  Manned  Penetrations
of  Atomic  Clouds,  Project  2.8b")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 1 1694-A),  18.

103.  The  researchers  found:  "There  appears  to  be  no  significant  difference
between  the  dose  received  inside  and  outside  of  the  body.  This  indicates  that  the


495


radiation  which  reaches  the  body  surface  is  of  sufficiently  high  energy  that  it  is  not
greatly  attenuated  by  the  body.  If  this  is  the  case,  then  measurements  made  on  the
surface  of  the  body  are  representative  of  the  whole-body  dose."  Ibid.

104.  James  Reeves,  Test  Manager,  to  Colonel  H.  E.  Parsons,  Deputy  for
Military  Operations,  1 1  April  1955  ("Radiation  Dosage-Project  2.8,  Operation  Teapot")
(ACHRENo.  DOE- 122894- A),  1.

105.  Ibid.

106.  Banks  et  al.,  "Operation  Teapot,  Manned  Penetrations  of  Atomic  Clouds
Project  2.8b,"  5.

107.  Ibid.

108.  One  received  21.8  R  and  another  received  21.7  R.  Undated  document
("On-Site  Personnel  Overexposure")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-091394-A),  6.

109.  Pinson  [attr.],  1956  [attr.],  "Gentlemen:  this  morning  I  will  discuss  the
following  topics  .  .  . ,"  3.

1 10.  "The  aircraft  were  B-57Bs.  No  special  filters  were  installed  in  the  cockpit
pressurization  system.  The  pilots  and  technical  observers  were  given  free  choice  of  the
setting  of  their  oxygen  controls."  Colonel  E.  A.  Pinson  et  al.,  24  February  1960
("Operation  Redwing-Project  2.66a:  Early  Cloud  Penetrations")  (ACHRE  DOE- 122894-
B),41.

111.  William  Ogle,  Headquarters,  Task  Group  7. 1 ,  to  Commander  Joint  Task
Force  Seven,  8  November  1955  ("Maximum  Permissible  Radiation  Exposure  for
Personnel  Participating  in  Projects  2.66  and  1 1.2,  Operation  Redwing")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-013195-A),2.

1 12.  Pinson  et  al.,  "Operation  Redwing— Project  2.66a:  Early  Cloud
Penetrations,"  5.

113.  Ibid.,  41.

114.  Ibid.,  51.

115.  E.  A.  Pinson,  interviewed  by  Patrick  Fitzgerald  (ACHRE),  transcript  of
audio  recording,  21  March  1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program
File,  Targeted  Interview  Project),  106.

116.  Ibid.,  121.

1 17.  Office  of  Information  Services  to  Headquarters,  Air  Research
Development  Command,  27  January  1956,  3.

1 18.  Clarke,  "I  Flew  Through  an  Atomic  Hell,"  62.

1 19.  Interview  with  Pinson,  21  March  1995,  94.

120.  Air  Force  Systems  Command,  "History  of  Air  Force  Atomic  Cloud
Sampling,"  66.

121.  Interview  with  Pinson,  21  March  1995,  15.

122.  Pinson  [attr.],  1956  [attr.],  "Gentlemen:  this  morning  I  will  discuss  the
following  topics  .  .  . ,"  8.

123.  Raymond  Thompson,  "A  Select  Group  of  ARDC  Men  Collects  Samples
from  the  Mushrooms,"  Baltimore  Sun—Magazine  Section,  1  May  1955,  17.

124.  Interview  with  Pinson,  21  March  1995,  38.

125.  "Center  Scientists  Fly  Through  Atom  Clouds,"  Atomic  Flyer,  29  April
1955  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-122894-B),  1.

1 26.  Office  of  Information  Services  to  Headquarters,  Air  Research
Development  Command,  27  January  1956,  2.


496


127.  Captain  Paul  M.  Crumley  et  al.,  1 1  October  1957  ("Operation  Teapot-
Project  2.8a:  Contact  Radiation  Hazard  Associated  with  Contaminated  Aircraft  [WT-
1 122]")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 1 1694-A),  9.

128.  Ibid.,  20.

129.  Ibid.,  21.

130.  Colonel  W.  B.  Kieffer,  Deputy  Commander,  Air  Force  Special  Weapons
Center,  to  K.  F.  Hertford,  Manager,  AEC  Albuquerque  Operations  Office,  2 1  March
1957  ("Recent  discussion  within  the  Air  Force  Special  Weapons  Center .  .  .")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-033195-B),2.

131.  Thomas  Shipman,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  to  Al
Graves,  J-Division  Leader,  29  March  1957  ("Decontamination  of  Aircraft  at  Tests")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-040595-A),  1.  Thomas  Shipman  also  argued  that  the  new  procedures
could  compromise  the  scientific  projects.

Without  decontamination  there  will  be  inevitable  migration
of  contamination  carrying  activity  to  other  areas  where  it
may  be  very  undesirable.  This  letter  has  completely
overlooked  the  fact  that  people  working  at  tests  invariably
have  neighbors  with  special  requirements.
Ibid.,  2.

132.  Harold  F.  Plank,  to  Alvin  C.  Graves,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  J-Division
Leader,  24  April  1957  ("Col.  Kieffer's  Proposal  for  the  Decontamination  of  Sampling
Aircraft")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040595-A),  2.

133.  Colonel  W.  B.  Kieffer,  Deputy  Commander,  Air  Force  Special  Weapons
Center,  to  Colonel  Wignall,  22  April  1957  ("Decontamination  of  Sampler  Aircraft  at
Plumbbob")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040595-A),  1.

1 34.  James  Reeves,  Test  Manager,  Nevada  Test  Organization,  to  Commander,
Air  Force  Special  Weapons  Center,  Attention:  Colonel  W.  B.  Kieffer,  Deputy
Commander,  14  May  1957  ("Reference  is  made  to  your  letter  of  March  21,  1957  .  .  .  ")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-032895-A),  2.

135.  First  Lieutenant  William  J.  Jameson,  7  October  1957  ("Aircraft
Decontamination  Study")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-022395-B),  1.

136.  The  decontamination  experiment  had  several  further  components.  Lead
vests  were  tested  and  found  to  provide  a  6.0  percent  reduction  in  exposure  levels  for  air
crews.  In  addition,  the  experiment  tested  the  consequences  of  using  a  fork  lift  to  remove
air  crews  from  contaminated  planes  versus  the  consequences  of  letting  them  climb  out
with  a  standard  ladder.  It  concluded  that  the  fork  lift  was  unnecessary.  Ibid.,  5-6.

Also  at  Plumbbob  a  project  was  undertaken  "to  measure  the  radiation  dose,  both
from  neutrons  and  gamma  rays,  received  by  an  air  crew  delivering  an  MB-1  rocket."
The  report  on  the  research  states:  "The  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  approved  the  conduct  of  a
test  as  a  part  of  Operation  Plumbbob  in  order  to  obtain  the  necessary  experimental
measurements."  The  report  indicates  that  six  studies  were  involved.  Captain  Kermit  C.
Kaericher  and  First  Lieutenant  James  E.  Banks,  1 1  October  1957  ("Operation
PLUMBBOB-Project  2.9:  Nuclear  Radiation  Received  by  Aircrews  Firing  the  MB-1
Rocket")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-082294-A),  9.

137.  The  Advisory  Committee  is  also  aware  of  three  more  research  activities
involving  atomic  veterans.  As  noted,  the  body  fluid  sampling  research  is  discussed  in
chapter  13.  In  addition,  as  mentioned  in  endnotes  in  this  chapter,  the  Advisory


497


Committee  notes  experiments  involving  fallout  shelters  and  the  measurement  of  radiation
exposure  to  air  crews  delivering  the  MB-1  rocket.  The  inclusion  of  the  subjects  of  these
three  types  of  experiments,  however,  does  not  change  our  estimate  that  human  research  in
connection  with  bomb  tests  involved  no  more  than  3,000  subjects.

138.  DOD  records  did  not  permit  the  identification  of  individuals  who
participated  in  particular  research  projects,  and  remaining  reports  do  not  always  indicate
the  number  of  subjects.  The  basis  for  the  very  rough  estimate  of  2,000  to  3,000  research
subjects  in  the  activities  reviewed  by  the  Committee  including  those  noted  in  endnote  137
is  (1)  1,500  to  2,200  test-site  subjects  in  the  psychological  and  physiological  testing,
based  on  reports,  as  cited  in  this  chapter,  for  three  experiments  and  an  estimated
maximum  of  800  for  the  fourth;  (2)  a  dozen  test-site  subjects  in  the  1955  body-fluid-
sampling  research,  as  cited  in  the  report  on  this  research  referenced  in  chapter  13,  and  an
assumed  comparable  number  for  the  1956  research,  for  which  no  similar  figures  appear
available;  (3)  about  100  participants  in  the  flashblindness  research,  an  estimate  DOD
provided  to  the  Committee;  (4)  in  the  range  of  perhaps  one  dozen  or  two  dozen
participants  in  aircrew  experiments,  and  perhaps  a  dozen  to  several  dozen  participants  in
decontamination  experiments;  (5)  perhaps  several  dozen  participants  in  the  protective
equipment  research;  (6)  sixteen  participants  in  shelter  research;  and  (7)  several  dozen
participants  in  the  officer  volunteer  program.  See  further  endnotes  for  citations  related  to
particular  research.

139.  The  permissible  level  of  risk  to  which  humans  could  be  exposed  in
connection  with  bomb  tests  lay  at  the  balance  point  of  several  factors.  Radiation  was  not
the  only  risk  at  issue;  harm  from  blast  and  thermal  burn  were  also  possible.

140.  Barton  C.  Hacker,  Elements  of  Controversy  (Berkeley:  University  of
California  Press,  1994),  118.

141.  Marion  W.  Boyer,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Honorable  Robert  LeBaron,
Chairman,  Military  Liaison  Committee,  10  January  1951  ("As  you  know,  one  of  the
important  problems  .  . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040395-B-1).

142.  Shipman  to  Warren,  15  September  1951,  1.

143.  Shields  Warren,  Director,  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  to
Carroll  Tyler,  Manager,  Sante  Fe  Operations  Office,  1 1  October  1951  ("Permissible
Levels  of  Radiation  Exposure  for  Test  Personnel")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-013195-A),  1.

144.  Warren's  concern  was  not  radiation  risk,  but  injury  from  the  blast.  Shields
Warren,  Director,  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  to  Brigadier  General  K.  E.
Fields,  Director,  Division  of  Military  Application,  25  March  1952  ("Draft  Staff  Paper  on
Troop  Participation  in  Operation  Tumbler-Snapper")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040395-A),  1.

145.  Gordon  Dean,  Chairman,  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  to  Brigadier
General  H.  B.  Loper,  Chief,  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project,  2  April  1952
("Reference  is  made  to  letter  of  March  7,  1952  .  .  . ")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD- 100694- A),  2.

146.  Captain  Harry  H.  Haight  to  General  Fields,  21  August  1952  ("Exercise-
Desert  Rock  IV")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-013195-A),  1.  According  to  this  review  of  Desert
Rock  activities,  "The  military  importance  of  permitting  major  personnel  exposures  or
decreases  in  drifting  distances  is  not  evident  from  the  report.  For  the  Commission  to
prescribe  one  limitation  for  the  test  personnel  and  allow  greater  latitude  for  the  DOD
would  seem  to  be  unwise  and  unnecessary.  The  Commission  should  strongly  object  to
any  special  dispensation  to  the  DOD  which  could  possibly  result  in  personnel  casualties
whether  immediate  or  delayed.",  Ibid.


498


147.  Colonel  John  C.  Oakes,  by  direction  of  the  Chief  of  Staff,  to  Assistant
Chief  of  Staff,  G-3,  5  June  1952  ("Indoctrination  of  Personnel  in  Atomic  Warfare
Operations")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-1 12594-A),  1.

148.  C.  D.  Eddleman,  Assistant  Chief  of  Staff,  G-3,  15  December  1952
("Complete  Discussion"  [attachment  to  "Positioning  of  Troops  at  Atomic  Weapons
Tests"]),  1 .  In  a  1953  memorandum  to  an  AEC  committee  created  to  study  the  Nevada
Test  Site,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  Director  John  Bugher  similarly  wrote:

While  it  may  be  stated  with  considerable  certainty  that  no
significant  injury  is  going  to  result  to  any  individual
participating  in  test  operations  at  the  levels  mentioned  [3.9  R],
and  while  it  is  true  that  the  same  thing  would  probably  have  to
be  said  were  the  limits  to  be  set  two  or  three  times  as  high,  it
nevertheless  is  true  that  there  is  no  threshold  to  significant
injury  in  this  field,  and  the  legal  position  of  the  Commission  at
once  deteriorates  if  there  is  deliberate  departure  from  ...  the
accepted  permissible  limit.
John  C.  Bugher,  Director,  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  to  Members  of  the
Committee  to  Study  NPG,  8  September  1953  ("Interpretation  of  the  Standards  of
Radiological  Exposure")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040395-A),  3-4.

149.  M.  W.  Boyer,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Major  General  H.  B.  Loper,
Chief,  AFSWP,  8  January  1953  ("Reference  is  made  to  letter  from  Chief. . .")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-121594-C-8),2.

150.  Jark  to  Distribution,  20  February  1953,  "Instructions  for  Positioning  DA
[Department  of  Army]  Personnel  at  Continental  Atomic  Tests,"  1.

151.  Ibid.,  2-3.

152.  General  Cooney  presented  this  view  at  a  July  1951  conference  on  Past  and
Future  Atomic  Tests.  Major  Sven  A.  Bach,  Development  Branch,  Research  and
Development  Division,  12  July  1951  ("Conference  at  OCAFF,  Fort  Monroe,  Virginia,  re
Past  and  Future  Atomic  Weapons  Tests")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-042295-C),  1.

153.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  minutes  of  meeting  no.  862,  13  May  1953
(ACHRE  DOE-013195-A),  2.

154.  Ibid.

155.  Chief,  Bureau  of  Medicine  and  Surgery,  to  Chief  of  Naval  Operations,  14
February  1952  ("Radiological  Defense  Training,  comments  and  recommendations  on")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-080295-B),  1.  The  proposal  would  have  limited  "the  dosage  of  all
personnel  to  0.3  roentgens  per  week."  Chief  of  Naval  Operations  to  Chief,  Bureau  of
Medicine,  23  January  1952  ("Atomic  Defense  Training")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-080295-B),
1.  The  proposal  originated  with  the  Pacific  Fleet.  See  Commander,  Mine  Force,  U.S.
Pacific  Fleet,  to  Commander  in  Chief,  U.S.  Pacific  Fleet,  17  December  1951
("Radiological  Defense  Training")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-080295-B),  1.  In  counseling
against  the  use  of  "area  contamination,"  BuMed  solicited  advice  from  the  AEC  on  an
isotope  that  "would  have  such  characteristics  that  the  internal  hazard  involved  would  be
minimized  even  though  amounts  to  be  used  would  produce  as  much  as  10  mr/hr,  gamma
radiation,  three  feet  from  the  surface  of  the  contaminated  area."  Chief,  Bureau  of
Medicine  and  Surgery,  to  Director,  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  February
1952  ("Radiological  Defense  Training,  use  of  radioisotopes  in")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
080295-B),  1.


499


1 56.  Shipman's  comments  were  specifically  directed  at  the  establishment  of
standards  for  exposure  to  the  general  public.  Thomas  L.  Shipman,  Los  Alamos
Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  to  Gordon  Dunning,  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and
Medicine,  14  August  1956  ("Thanks  for  sending  the  draft  concerning  exposure  .  .  .")
(ACHRENo.  DOE-022195-C),  1.

1 57.  Department  of  Energy,  Announced  United  States  Nuclear  Tests:  July  1945
Through  December  1992  (Springfield,  Va.:  National  Technical  Information  Service,  May
1993),  65  (shot  Climax  in  1953).  In  the  early  days,  when  entirely  new  types  of
experimental  weapons  were  being  rapidly  developed  and  tested,  it  was  not  uncommon  for
a  particular  yield  to  exceed  estimates  by  50  percent  or  more.  In  an  October  1957
memorandum  to  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  director  Charles  Dunham,
Shipman  explained  that  the  unpredictability  of  weapons  effects  was  making  biomedical
experimentation  increasingly  difficult.  "All  too  often  preshot  estimates  of  yields  etc.  are
just  enough  in  error  to  make  the  results  of  effects  tests  useless."  Thomas  L.  Shipman,  Los
Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  to  Charles  Dunham,  AEC  Division  of
Biology  and  Medicine,  7  October  1957  ("Payne  Harris  is  planning  to  attend  the
meeting  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-C),  2.

158.  T.  L.  Shipman,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  to  Alvin
C.  Graves,  J-Division  Leader,  6  August  1956  ("Permissible  Exposures")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-021095-B),  1.

1 59.  Summary  information  provided  by  DOD  in  August  1 995  provides  a  total  of
216,507  participants  in  atmospheric  tests,  beginning  with  Trinity  in  1945  and  concluding
with  Dominic  II  in  1962.  This  tabulation  shows  about  1,200  instances  of  exposure  in
excess  of  5  rem.  The  "total  dose  may  have  been  measured  by  one  or  more  film  badges,
may  have  been  reconstructed,  or  may  be  the  sum  of  both  film  badge  data  and
reconstruction."  Some  individuals  participated  in  more  than  one  test.  Defense  Nuclear
Agency,  8  August  1995  ("Summary  of  External  Doses  for  DOD  Atmospheric  Nuclear
Test  Participants  as  of  24  February  1994")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-081 195-A).  See  also
testimony  of  Major  General  Ken  Hagemann:  Senate  Committee  on  Governmental
Affairs,  Human  Radiation  and  Other  Scientific  Experiments:  The  Federal  Government's
Role,  103d  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  25  January  1994,  49-50.

Coincident  with  the  beginning  of  epidemiological  studies  discussed  in  the  text
above,  and  growing  congressional  and  public  interest  in  the  atomic  vets,  the  Defense
Department  undertook  an  information-gathering  effort  called  the  "NTPR"  (Nuclear  Test
Personnel  Review).  The  NTPR  includes  a  database,  which  seeks  to  include  those  who
participated  at  tests  in  an  effort  to  reconstruct  the  doses  they  received  at  tests,  and  a
multivolume  history  of  the  bomb  tests,  which  is  available  in  many  libraries.

160.  Stafford  L.  Warren,  Radiological  Safety  Consultant,  Joint  Task  Force  One,
to  Admiral  Parsons,  6  January  1 947  ("Hazards  from  Residual  Radioactivity  on  the
Crossroads  Target  Vessels")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B),  2.

161 .  Jonathan  M.  Weisgall,  Operation  Crossroads:  The  Atomic  Tests  at  Bikini
Atoll  (Annapolis,  Md.:  Naval  Institute  Press,  1994),  210-214,  270-271.  Only
fragmentary  records  of  the  Medico-Legal  Board  remain.

162.  The  Naval  Radiological  Defense  Laboratory,  the  new  research  laboratory,
was  established  at  the  Hunter's  Point  Naval  Shipyard  in  San  Francisco,  the  port  to  which
some  ships  contaminated  in  the  1946  Crossroads  tests  were  sent.

1 63.  George  M.  Lyon,  Assistant  Chief  Medical  Director  for  Research  and
Education,  to  Committee  on  Veterans  Medical  Problems,  National  Research  Council,  8


500


December  1952  ("Medical  Research  Programs  of  the  Veterans  Administration")  (ACHRE
No.  VA-052594-A),  553.

164.  Ibid.

165.  Ibid.

166.  J.  J.  Fee,  Commander,  USN,  as  quoted  in  Weisgall,  Operation  Crossroads,
273-274.

167.  Lyon  to  Committee  on  Veterans  Medical  Problems,  8  December  1952,
554.

168.  Ibid.

169.  Ibid.

1 70.  Ibid.  The  report  was  retrieved  by  the  VA  at  the  time  of  the  Advisory
Committee's  formation  in  1994.  In  an  April  1994  statement  to  the  Committee,  VA
Secretary  Jesse  Brown  stated  his  determination  to  find  the  facts  related  to  the
Confidential  Division.  To  this  end  the  VA  reviewed  significant  amounts  of  documentary
information  and  called  on  its  inspector  general  to  conduct  a  further  review.

171.  Ibid.,  554.

172.  Ibid.,  553-554.

1 73.  Major  General  Herbert  B.  Loper,  Chief,  AFSWP,  to  the  Administrator,
Veterans  Administration,  Attention:  George  M.  Lyon,  8  August  1952  ("This  activity  has
received  information  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD- 100694- A),  1.

1 74.  Ibid.  The  specific  rule  or  policy  that  provided  for  the  record  keeping
referred  to  in  this  letter  was  not  located.  Thus,  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  record  keeping
referred  only  to  nuclear  war-related  exposures  or  more  generally  to  exposures  at  bomb
tests  or  other  nuclear  weapons-related  activities  as  well.

1 75.  William  Middleton,  VA  Chief  Medical  Director,  to  the  VA  Administrator,
13  May  1959  ("Recommendation  for  Administrator's  Exceptional  Service  Award")
(ACHRE  No.  VA-102594-A),  1.

176.  Ibid.

177.  "12  January  1995  Review  of  Effort  to  Identify  Involvement  with  Radiation
Exposure  of  Human  Subjects,"  Inspector  General,  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs.  The
inspector  general  (IG)  found  that  "an  'Atomic  Medicine  Division'  was  discussed  as  a
means  to  deal  with  potential  claims  from  veterans  as  a  result  of  exposure  to  radiation
from  atomic  bomb  testing  and  to  be  the  focal  point  for  VA  civil  defense  planning  and
support  in  case  of  nuclear  war.  However,  claims  did  not  materialize  at  that  time  and
evidence  indicates  that  the  Division  was  not  activated."  Stephen  A.  Trodden,  VA
Inspector  General,  to  VA  Chief  of  Staff,  12  January  1995  ("Review  of  Effort  to  Identify
Involvement  with  Radiation  Exposure  of  Human  Subjects")  (ACHRE  No.  VA-01 1795-

A),  1.

With  regard  to  the  1952  history  prepared  by  Dr.  Lyon  for  the  National  Research
Council,  which  has  been  previously  quoted  in  the  text,  the  IG  stated  that  "the  reference
to  the  Atomic  Medicine  Division  should  not  be  taken  literally  as  documentation  that  a
Division  was  ever  established."  Ibid.,  4.

178.  In  communications  with  Defense  Department  officials  two  alternatives
were  offered:  (1)  that  the  records  may  have  been  confidential  medical  examination  data
taken  from  participants  in  Crossroads,  pursuant  to  a  regulation  providing  for  such  exams;
(2)  that  the  records  may  have  related  to  exposures  of  military  scientists  or  technicians
who  worked  at  the  Manhattan  Project  and  were  confidential  because  they  contained
weapons  design  or  production-related  data.


501


Navy  regulations  in  1 947  provided  that

All  personnel,  both  military  and  civilian,  who  may  be
exposed  to  radiation  or  radioactive  hazard,  will  be
required  to  have  a  complete  physical  examination  prior
to  commencing  such  duty.  Special  medical  records
separate  from  the  normal  individuals'  health  records  will
be  set  up  and  they  will  be  classified  as  confidential,  until
declassification  is  permitted.
Bureau  of  Medicine  and  Surgery,  3 1  January  1 947  ("Appendix  B--Current  Directives;
Subject:  Safety  Regulations  for  Work  in  Target  Vessels  formerly  JTF-1")  (ACHRE  No.
DOD-020795-A),  B-22.  The  Navy  was  not  able  to  locate  the  records  referred  to.

The  VA  told  the  Committee  that  "the  volume  of  classified  records  that  are
unaccounted  for  by  the  VA  is  too  small  to  have  constituted  a  defense  against  liability
claims."  Susan  H.  Mather,  M.D.,  M.P.H.,  letter  to  Dan  Guttman  (ACHRE),  17  July
1995.  Based  on  discussions  with  the  VA,  the  basis  for  this  statement  appears  to  be  the
fact  that  there  were  more  than  200,000  test  participants,  and  the  safe  maintained  by  Dr.
Lyon  (in  which  secret  documents  would  presumably  have  been  kept)  was  relatively
small.  In  the  absence  of  the  documents  themselves,  the  VA's  statement  appears  to  be
only  one  of  several  possible  speculative  alternatives.  For  example,  the  VA  also  explained
that  few  claims  eventuated  in  the  period  of  Dr.  Lyon's  service;  thus,  the  magnitude  of
necessary  filekeeping  may  not  have  been  great.  Alternatively,  documents  kept  by  Dr.
Lyon  could  have  been  summary  documents,  which  referred  to  materials  in  other  files.
Finally,  the  VA's  statement  is  also  consistent  with  the  possibility  that  files  were  kept  but
that  their  contents  were  deemed  inadequate  to  constitute  a  defense  against  potential
claims.

179.  NEPA  Medical  Advisory  Panel,  Subcommittee  IX,  proceedings  of  22  July
1949  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-121494-A-2),  17-18.  The  meeting  is  further  discussed  in  the
Introduction.

180.  Ibid.,  18.

181.  Ibid.

182.  Department  of  Defense,  Research  and  Development  Board,  Committee  on
Medical  Sciences,  proceedings  of  23  May  1950  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-080694-A),  10.

183.  Caldwell  et  al.,  "Leukemia  Among  Participants  in  Military  Maneuvers  at
Nuclear  Bomb  Tests,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  244,  no.  14  (1980).

1 84.  Caldwell  et  al.,  "Mortality  and  Cancer  Frequency  Among  Military  Nuclear
Test  Participants,  1957  through  1959,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association
250,  no.  5(1983).

185.  CD.  Robinette  et  al.,  Studies  of  Participants  in  Nuclear  Weapons  Test:
Final  Report  (Washington,  D.C.:  National  Research  Council,  May  1985).

1 86.  See  U.S.  General  Accounting  Office,  Nuclear  Health  and  Safety:  Mortality
Study  of  Atmospheric  Nuclear  Test  Participants  Is  Flawed  (Gaithersburg,  Md.:  GAO,
1992),  4.  Helen  Gelband,  Health  Program,  Office  of  Technology  Assessment,  Mortality
of  Nuclear  Weapons  Tests  Participants  (Washington,  D.C.:  Office  of  Technology
Assessment,  August  1992),  4.

1 87.  The  data  appear  in  table  1  of  Clark  W.  Heath,  Chairman,  Institute  of
Medicine  (IOM)  Committee  on  the  Mortality  of  Military  Personnel  Present  at
Atmospheric  Tests  of  Nuclear  Weapons,  and  John  E,  Till,  Chairman,  IOM  Dosimetry


502


Working  Group,  to  D.  Michael  Schaeffer,  Program  Manager,  DNA  Nuclear  Test
Personnel  Review,  15  May  1995  ("A  Review  of  the  Dosimetry  Data  Available  in  the
Nuclear  Test  Personnel  Review  [NTPR]  Program:  An  Interim  Letter  Report  of  the
Committee  to  Study  the  Mortality  of  Military  Personnel  Present  at  Atmospheric  Tests  of
Nuclear  Weapons")  (ACHRE  No.  NAS-051595-A),  9.

188.  Hacker,  Elements  of  Controversy,  96.

1 89.  The  memo  explained  that  the  need  had  been  foreseen,  but  the  request  for
dosimeters  had  only  been  partially  filled.  The  memo  recorded  that  175  "0-5  R
dosimeters"  were  on  hand  at  the  Nevada  Test  Site,  but  a  minimum  of  325  were  needed
for  an  operation  the  size  of  Upshot- Knothole.  Colonel  Leonard  F.  Dow,  Acting  Director,
Weapons  Effects  Tests,  to  Manager,  AEC  Santa  Fe  Operations,  19  February  1954  ("Rad-
Safe  Equipment  for  Nevada  Proving  Grounds")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-020795-D),  1.

1 90.  Irving  L.  Branch,  Chief  of  Staff,  AFSWP,  to  Chief  of  Research  and
Development,  OCS,  Department  of  the  Army,  20  January  1956  ("Annex  'A'  to  2nd
Indorsement:  Detailed  Explanation  of  AFSWP  Comments  on  Feasibility  of  Human
Volunteer  Program")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-030895-F),  2.

191 .  Clark  W.  Heath  and  John  E.  Till,  IOM,  to  D.  Michael  Schaeffer,  DNA,  "An
Interim  Letter  Report  of  the  Committee  to  Study  the  Mortality  of  Military  Personnel
Present  at  Atmospheric  Tests  of  Nuclear  Weapons,"  15  May  1995.

1 92.  K.  K.  Watanabe,  H.  K.  Kang,  and  N.  A.  Dalager,  "Cancer  Mortality  Risk
Among  Military  Participants  of  a  1955  Atmospheric  Nuclear  Weapons  Test,"  American
Journal  of  Public  Health  85  (April  1995).

193.  S.  Raman,  G.  S.  Dulberg,  R.  A.  Spasoff,  and  T.  Scott,  "Mortality  Among
Canadian  Military  Personnel  Exposed  to  Low  Dose  Radiation,"  Canadian  Medical
Association  Journal  136(1 987):  1 05 1  - 1 056.

194.  S.  C.  Darby,  G.  M.  Kendall,  T.  P.  Fell  et  al.,  "A  Summary  of  Mortality
and  Incidence  of  Cancer  in  Men  from  the  United  Kingdom  Who  Participated  in  the
United  Kingdom's  Atmospheric  Nuclear  Weapon  Tests  and  Experimental  Programs,"
British  Medical  Journal  296  (1988):  332-338.

195.  Human  Radiation  Experiments: The  Federal  Government's  Role,
Hearings  before  the  Committee  on  Governmental  Affairs,  United  States  Senate,  103d
Cong.,  2d  Sess.,  25  January  1994,  160.

196.  DNA,  "Summary  of  External  Doses  for  DOD  Atmospheric  Nuclear  Test
Participants  as  of  24  February  1994."

197.  These  laws  are  further  discussed  in  the  Committee's  recommendations.  In
enacting  the  1984  Veterans'  Dioxin  and  Radiation  Exposure  Compensation  Standards
Act,  Congress,  among  other  items,  found

(8)  The  'film  badges'  which  were  originally  issued  to  members  of  the
Armed  Forces  in  connection  with  the  atmospheric  nuclear  test  program
have  previously  constituted  a  primary  source  of  dose  information  for  .  . .
veterans  filing  claims  ....

(9)  These  film  badges  often  provide  an  incomplete  measure  of  radiation
exposure,  since  they  were  not  capable  of  recording  inhaled,  ingested,  or
neutron  doses  (although  the  DNA  currently  has  the  capability  to
reconstruct  individual  estimates  of  such  doses),  were  not  issued  to  most
of  the  participants  in  nuclear  tests,  often  provided  questionable  readings


503


because  they  were  shielded  during  the  detonation,  and  were  worn  for
only  limited  periods  during  and  after  each  nuclear  detonation.

(10)  Standards  governing  the  reporting  of  dose  estimates  in  connection

with  radiation-related  disability  claims  .  .  .  vary  among  the  several

branches  of  the  Armed  Services,  and  no  uniform  minimum  standards

exist.

1 98. For  example,  Frances  Brown,  of  Southwick,  Massachusetts,  told  the
Committee  of  her  late  husband's  experience  as  a  navigator  who  flew  through  clouds  at
weapons  tests.  Colonel  Brown  was  assigned  the  duty  and  was  given  no  protective
clothing;  he  died  of  cancer  in  1983.  Ms.  Brown  shared  with  the  Committee  the  story  of
years  of  inquiry,  and  her  continuing  inability  to  obtain  all  documents  that  might  shed
light  on  the  duty  he  undertook  in  the  service  of  his  country.

Nancy  Lynch,  of  Santa  Barbara,  California,  told  the  Committee  of  her  late
husband's  involvement  in  the  Desert  Rock  exercises  at  Operation  Teapot  in  1955  and
her  questions  regarding  the  dose  reconstruction  that  was  ultimately  provided  by  the
government.

Vernon  Sousa,  a  San  Francisco  veteran,  told  of  years  of  government
"stonewalling"  of  his  information  requests.  He  explained  that  the  oath  of  secrecy  he  had
taken  limited  his  own  ability  to  discuss  the  tests  for  decades  after  his  time  in  the  service
ended.

Charles  McKay  of  Severna  Park,  Maryland,  a  Navy  diver  at  Operation
Crossroads,  recalled  that  he  received  no  briefing  on  radiation  risks  before  his
participation.  Mr.  McKay  said  that  he  received  a  very  low  dose  reconstruction  report
from  the  government,  which  he  believed  to  be  highly  inaccurate  because  it  did  not  take
into  account  diving  experiences  on  Crossroads  wrecks.

Rebecca  Harrod  Stringer  of  St.  Augustine,  Florida,  wrote  to  the  Committee
about  the  Navy  service  of  her  late  father  in  Operation  Dominic  I,  a  nuclear  weapons  test
in  the  Pacific,  and  the  fifteen  years  it  took  to  obtain  copies  of  his  military  and  medical
records.

Linda  Terry  of  California  talked  of  obtaining  information  about  her  late  father's
experiences  at  the  Buster-Jangle  tests  in  1951-52.  She  called  for  full  disclosure  of
information  about  the  weapons  tests  "so  that  families  do  not  have  to  live  in  the  darkness"
of  not  knowing.

Harry  Lester  of  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico,  testified  that  he  was  responsible  for
cleanup  at  Operation  Castle  and  that  he  experienced  radiation  sickness  as  a  result  of  his
exposure.  After  his  involvement  in  Castle,  he  was  shipped  to  an  Albuquerque  hospital
every  six  months  for  examinations.  He  told  the  Committee  that  his  full  records  remain  to
be  found.

Langdon  Harrison  of  Albuquerque  told  the  Committee  about  his  experiences  in
cloud  flying  activities  at  Operations  Redwing  and  Plumbbob.  He  recalled  routine
carelessness  in  the  handling  of  the  film  badges  of  the  pilots  of  cloud  flythroughs  and
occasions  when  significantly  different  dose  readings  were  recorded  on  film  badges  and
personal  dosimeters.

Representatives  of  "atomic  veterans"  organizations  also  shared  with  the
Committee  information  collected  in  years  of  research  on  behalf  of  themselves  and  others.
These  included  Pat  Broudy  of  California,  whose  late  husband  died  of  lymphoma  and  had
served  at  the  occupation  of  Nagasaki,  Bikini,  and  in  three  Nevada  tests;  Dr.  Oscar  Rosen


504


of  Massachusetts,  who  participated  in  Crossroads;  and  Fred  Allingham  of  California,
whose  father  served  in  the  occupation  of  Nagasaki  and  died  several  years  later  of
leukemia.

199. The  new  rules  stemmed  from  the  development  of  a  new  howitzer.  Late  in
the  development  cycle  a  medical  hazards  review  found  that  alteration  to  the  firing  routine
was  needed  if  the  weapon  was  to  be  employed  without  injuring  U.S.  soldiers.  The
discovery  caused  a  long  and  expensive  delay  while  biomedical  studies  of  blast
overpressure  effects  were  done  in  animals  and  man  and  engineering  solutions  were
sought  to  reduce  the  hazard.  After  this  experience,  the  Army  determined  to  conduct
health  hazard  assessments  (HHAs)  early  in  the  development  of  weapons  and  equipment,
so  that  new  material  is  not  brought  on  line  with  unnecessarily  great  health  and  safety  risk
to  the  troops  using  it.

Relevant  DOD  directives  (DODD)  and  Army  regulations  are  the  following:
DODD  5000.1,  "Defense  Acquisition";  DODD  5000.2,"  "Defense  Acquisition
Management  Policies  and  Procedures";  AR  70-1;  "Army  Acquisition  Policy";  AR  602-1,
"Human  Factors  Engineering  Program";  AR  602-2,  "Manpower  and  Personnel
Integration  (MANPRINT)  in  the  System  Acquisition  Process";  AR  385-16,  "System
Safety  Engineering  and  Management";  AR  40-10,  "Health  Hazard  Assessment  Program
in  Support  of  the  Army  Material  Acquisition  Decision  Process";  and  AR  70-75,
"Survivability  of  Army  Personnel  and  Material."


505


11

Intentional  Releases:  Lifting
the  Veil  of  Secrecy


in  February  1986,  officials  at  the  Department  of  Energy  responded  to
requests  from  activists  by  releasing  19,000  pages  of  documents  on  the  early
operations  of  the  world's  first  plutonium  factory,  at  Hanford,  Washington.
Combing  through  these  documents,  reporters  and  citizens  found  references  to  an
event  cryptically  named  the  "Green  Run,"  in  which  radioactive  material  was
deliberately  released  into  the  air  at  Hanford  in  December  1949.'

In  the  aftermath  of  the  public  discovery  of  the  Green  Run,  Senator  John
Glenn  asked  the  General  Accounting  Office,  the  investigative  arm  of  Congress,  to
find  out  if  there  were  other  instances  in  which  radioactivity  had  been  intentionally
released  into  the  environment  without  informing  the  surrounding  community.  In
1993,  the  GAO  reported  twelve  more  instances  of  such  secret  intentional
releases.2

Following  additonal  research  by  the  DOD  and  DOE,  the  number  of  secret
intentional  releases  has  expanded  to  several  hundred,  conducted  between  1944
and  the  1960s.  At  the  Army's  Dugway  Proving  Ground  in  Utah,  dozens  of
intentional  releases  were  conducted  in  an  effort  to  develop  radiological  weapons,
some  in  tests  of  prototype  cluster  bombs,  others  using  different  means  of
dispersal;  at  Bayo  Canyon  in  New  Mexico,  on  the  AEC's  Los  Alamos  site,
researchers  detonated  nearly  250  devices,  which  contained  radiolanthanum
(RaLa)  as  a  source  of  radiation  to  measure  the  degree  of  compression  and
symmetry  of  the  implosion  used  to  trigger  the  atomic  bomb.  Other  intentional
releases  were  not  classified,  although  not  all  were  made  known  to  the  public  in
advance.  At  AEC  sites  in  Nevada  and  Idaho,  radioactive  materials  were  released


506


Chapter  1 1

in  tests  of  the  safety  of  bombs,  nuclear  reactors,  and  proposed  nuclear  rockets  and
airplanes;  in  still  other  cases,  small  quantities  of  radioactive  material  were
released  in  and  around  AEC  facilities  and  in  the  Alaskan  wilderness  to  determine
the  pathways  such  material  follows  in  the  environment.3  Public  witnesses  from
several  of  these  communities  told  the  Committee  that  they  remain  deeply
disturbed  by  these  releases,  wondering  whether  there  is  still  more  information
about  the  secret  releases  in  their  communities  that  they  do  not  know  and  how
much  will,  at  this  late  date,  be  impossible  to  reconstruct.


Intentional  Releases  and  the  Charter  Thirteen

The  Advisory  Committee  is  authorized  by  its  charter  to  examine  "experiments  involving
intentional  environmental  releases  of  radiation  that  (A)  were  designed  to  test  human  health  effects
of  ionizing  radiation;  or  (B)  were  designed  to  test  the  extent  of  human  exposure  to  ionizing
radiation."  The  charter  also  called  for  the  Committee  to  "provide  advice,  information,  and
recommendations"  on  the  following  thirteen  experiments  and  similar  experiments  identified  by  the
Interagency  Working  Group:

(1)  the  experiment  into  the  atmospheric  diffusion  of  radioactive  gases  and  test
of  detectability,  commonly  referred  to  as  "the  Green  Run  test,"  by  the  former
Atomic  Energy  Commission  (AEC)  and  the  Air  Force  at  the  Hanford
Reservation  in  Richland,  Washington;

(2)  two  radiation  warfare  field  experiments  conducted  at  the  AEC's  Oak  Ridge
office  in  1 948  involving  gamma  radiation  released  from  non-bomb  point  sources
or  at  near  ground  level;

(3)  six  tests  conducted  during  1949-1952  of  radiation  warfare  ballistic  dispersal
devices  containing  radioactive  agents  at  the  U.S.  Army's  Dugway,  Utah,  site;
[and]

(4)  four  atmospheric  radiation-tracking  tests  in  1950  at  Los  Alamos,  New
Mexico. . . .

Tests  of  nuclear  weapons,  intentional  environmental  releases  of  radiation  in  amounts
greatly  in  excess  of  any  of  the  releases  identified  above,  were  not  included  in  the  charter.  As
discussed  in  chapter  10,  the  Committee  did  seek  to  investigate  human  subject  research  conducted
in  connection  with  these  tests.


This  chapter  reports  on  what  we  found  as  we  sought  to  retrieve  what  we
could  about  the  releases  identified  in  our  charter,  determine  the  nature  and
number  of  further  intentional  releases,  identify  the  ethical  standards  by  which
these  activities  can  be  evaluated,  and  determine  what  lessons  can  be  learned  from
the  past.

507


Part  II

Because  of  the  secrecy  surrounding  these  releases— as  opposed  to
atmospheric  nuclear  weapons  tests,  which  were  impossible  to  hide-many  of  them
took  place  with  no  public  awareness  or  understanding.  The  intentional  releases
were  conducted  primarily  at  sites  such  as  Hanford,  Los  Alamos,  and  Oak  Ridge,
in  which  defense  and  atomic  energy  facilities  were  located,  but  they  were  largely
unknown  to  those  who  lived  in  surrounding  areas.

There  is  no  evidence  in  any  of  these  cases  that  radioactive  material  was
released  for  the  purpose  of  studying  its  effects  on  human  communities.  As  we
discuss  later  in  the  chapter,  the  public  often  was  exposed  to  far  greater  risk  from
the  routine  course  of  operations  of  the  facilities  than  from  the  intentional  releases
themselves.

That  the  possible  health  effects  from  the  Green  Run  and  other  intentional
releases  are  so  slight  that  they  cannot  be  distinguished  from  other  sources  of
disease  is  small  comfort  to  "downwinders"  who  were  put  at  risk  without  their
knowledge.  The  Committee  heard  from  many  of  them  and  learned  that  the  longer-
term  costs  of  secrecy  extend  well  beyond  any  physical  injury  that  may  have  been
incurred.  These  costs  include,  first,  the  anxiety  and  sense  of  personal  violation
experienced  by  those  who  have  discovered  that  they  have  intentionally  and
secretly  been  put  at  risk,  however  small,  by  a  government  they  trusted.  But  they
also  include  the  consequences  for  that  government,  and  its  people,  of  the
attendant  distrust  of  government  that  has  been  created.  And  finally,  they  also  now
include  the  citizen  and  taxpayer  resources  that  must  be  expended  in  efforts  to
reconstruct  long-buried  experiences,  and  determine,  as  best  as  can  currently  be
done,  the  precise  measures  of  the  risks  involved.

The  chapter  is  divided  into  two  parts.  The  first  and  lengthier  section
reconstructs  the  history  of  the  three  kinds  of  releases  that  were  in  our  charter— the
Green  Run,  radiological  warfare  tests,  and  the  RaLa  tests— and  includes  a
discussion  of  some  types  of  intentional  releases  that  were  not  expressly  identified
in  the  charter.  This  section  concludes  with  a  review  of  what  is  known  today  about
the  likely  risks  of  all  the  releases  we  consider,  as  well  as  a  review  of  the  science
of  dose  reconstruction  by  which  this  knowledge  is  obtained.  In  the  second  part  of
the  chapter,  we  focus  on  the  ethical  and  policy  issues  raised  by  intentional
releases.  We  examine  the  rules  that  currently  govern  intentional  releases  in  an
effort  to  learn  whether  secret  environmental  releases  like  the  Green  Run  could
take  place  today  and,  if  so,  whether,  in  light  of  lessons  learned  from  the  past,
current  procedures  and  protections  are  adequate.

WHAT  WE  NOW  KNOW

The  Green  Run

While  the  other  intentional  releases  addressed  in  the  Committee's  charter
were  part  of  the  effort  to  develop  the  U.S.  nuclear  arsenal,  the  Green  Run  was

508


Chapter  1 1

conducted  to  develop  intelligence  techniques  to  understand  the  threat  posed  by
the  Soviet  Union.  In  1947  General  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower  assigned  the  Air  Force
the  mission  of  long-range  detection  of  Soviet  nuclear  tests.4  Based  on
observations  from  Operation  Fitzwilliam,  the  intelligence  component  of  the  1948
Sandstone  nuclear  test  series,  the  Air  Force  determined  aerial  sampling  of
radioactive  debris  to  be  the  best  method  of  detecting  atomic  releases.5  An  interim
aerial  sampling  network  was  in  place  in  early  September  1949  that  detected
radioactive  debris  from  the  first  Soviet  nuclear  test.6

Around  the  same  time,  Jack  Healy  of  Hanford's  Health  Instrument  (HI)
Divisions  noticed  anomalous  radioactivity  readings  from  an  air  filter  on  nearby
Rattlesnake  Mountain.  The  HI  Divisions  were  responsible  for  radiological  safety,
and  Healy  had  set  up  this  filter  to  test  how  radioactive  contamination  varied  with
altitude.  The  rapid  decay  of  his  radioactive  samples  led  Healy  to  conclude  that
they  had  come  from  a  recent  nuclear  test.7  Soon  after  news  of  Healy's  observation
reached  Washington,  D.C.,  Air  Force  specialists  arrived  and  took  Healy's  samples
and  data  for  analysis.  It  is  not  clear  whether  Healy's  observation  came  in  time  to
support  President  Harry  Truman's  announcement  on  September  23  that  the  Soviet
Union  had  exploded  its  first  atomic  bomb,8  but  it  did  confirm  that  radioactivity
from  a  nuclear  test  could  be  detected  on  the  other  side  of  the  globe.

Now  that  the  Soviet  Union  knew  how  to  make  atomic  weapons,  the  United
States  needed  to  know  how  many  weapons  and  how  much  of  the  critical  raw
material  plutonium  the  Soviets  possessed.  Like  nuclear  testing,  plutonium
production  released  radioactive  gases  that  sensitive  instruments  could  detect,
though  not  at  such  great  distances.9  To  identify  Soviet  production  facilities  and
estimate  their  rate  of  plutonium  production,  the  Air  Force  now  needed  to  test
ways  to  monitor  these  gases.10


Hanford:  The  World's  First  Plutonium  Factory

In  1942  General  Leslie  Groves  selected  the  Hanford  site  overlooking  the  Columbia  River
in  southeast  Washington  state  for  the  Manhattan  Project's  plutonium  factory.  The  river  would
provide  a  large,  reliable  supply  of  fresh  water  for  cooling  the  plutonium-production  reactors,  and
Hanford's  relative  isolation  from  major  population  centers  would  make  it  easier  to  construct  and
operate  the  facility  without  attracting  unwanted  attention.  The  nearby  towns  of  Richland,
Kennewick,  and  Pasco  soon  became  boom  towns  whose  economies  depended  on  Hanford.

At  Hanford,  neutrons  converted  uranium  238  in  the  production  reactor's  nuclear  fuel  into
plutonium  239.  Chemical  separation  plants  then  separated  this  plutonium  from  the  fission
products  and  residual  uranium  in  the  irradiated  fuel  elements.  The  first  separation  plants,  the  T
and  P  plants,  used  acid  to  dissolve  these  fuel  elements,  but  this  was  superseded  by  the  more
efficient  Redox  and  Purex  processes  in  the  1 950s.


509


Part  II

In  late  1948  and  early  1949,  Air  Force  and  Oak  Ridge  personnel
conducted  a  series  of  twenty  air-sampling  flights  at  Oak  Ridge  and  three  at
Hanford."  The  results  were  disappointing:  instruments  detected  airborne  releases
of  radioactive  material  at  ranges  of  up  to  fifteen  miles  in  the  hills  and  valleys  near
Oak  Ridge,  but  no  farther  than  two  miles  from  Hanford,  because  of  measures
taken  to  reduce  radioactive  emissions  there.  At  an  October  25,  1949,  meeting  at
Hanford,  representatives  of  the  Air  Force,  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  and
General  Electric  (the  postwar  contractor  for  the  Hanford  site)  agreed  to  a  plan  to
release  enough  radioactive  material  from  Hanford12  to  provide  a  larger  radioactive
source  for  intelligence-related  experiments.13

This  intentional  release  took  place  in  the  early  morning  of  December  3,
1 949,  but  information  about  it  remained  classified  until  1 986.  Two  periodic
reports  of  the  HI  Divisions  described  a  plutonium  production  run  using  "green"
fuel  elements.14  The  story  of  this  "Green  Run"  has  emerged  piecemeal  since  then.
The  most  complete  account  comes  in  a  1950  report  co-authored  by  Jack  Healy
(referred  to  as  the  Green  Run  report),  which  was  declassified  in  stages  in  response
to  requests  from  the  public  under  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act  and  inquiries
by  the  Advisory  Committee.15

Although  cooling  times  of  90  to  100  days  were  common  by  1949,  the  fuel
elements  used  in  the  Green  Run  were  dissolved  after  being  cooled  for  only  16
days.  This  short  cooling  time  meant  that  much  more  radioactive  iodine  1 3 1  and
xenon  133  were  released  directly  into  the  atmosphere,  rather  than  decaying  while
the  fuel  elements  cooled.  Furthermore,  pollution  control  devices  called  scrubbers
normally  used  to  remove  an  estimated  90  percent  of  the  radioiodine16  from  the
effluent  gas  were  not  operated.17

When  these  "green"  fuel  elements  were  processed,  roughly  8,000  curies  of
iodine  1 3 1 l8  flowed  from  the  tall  smokestack  at  Hanford's  T  plant.  This  stack  was
built  in  the  early  years  of  Hanford's  operation  when  large  quantities  of  radioactive
gases  were  routinely  released  in  the  rush  to  produce  plutonium.  Although  the
Green  Run  represents  roughly  1  percent  of  the  total  radioiodine  release  from
Hanford  during  the  peak  release  years  1945-1947,  it  was  almost  certainly  larger
than  any  other  one-day  release,  even  during  World  War  II.19

One  clear  purpose  of  the  Green  Run  was  to  test  a  variety  of  techniques  for
monitoring  environmental  contamination  caused  by  an  operating  plutonium-
production  plant.  A  small  army  of  workers,  including  many  from  Hanford's  HI
Divisions,  took  readings  of  radioactivity  on  vegetation,  in  animals,  and  in  water
and  tested  techniques  for  sampling  radioactive  iodine  and  xenon  in  the  air.20  The
Air  Force  operated  an  airplane  carrying  a  variety  of  monitoring  devices— the  same
aircraft  used  in  earlier  aerial  surveys  at  Oak  Ridge  and  Hanford-and  set  up  a
special  air  sampling  station  in  Spokane,  Washington.21

Those  operating  the  equipment  encountered  numerous  technical  problems,
including  a  lost  weather  balloon  and  failed  air  pumps.  The  greatest  problem,
however,  was  the  general  contamination  of  monitoring  and  laboratory  equipment.

510


Chapter  11

The  contamination  created  a  high  background  signal  that  made  it  difficult  to
distinguish  radioactivity  on  the  equipment  from  radioactivity  in  the  environment.
The  main  cause  of  this  contamination  was  the  weather  at  the  time,  which  led  to
much  higher  ground  contamination  near  the  stack  than  expected.22

The  plans  for  the  Green  Run  included  very  specific  meteorological
requirements.  These  requirements  were  designed  to  facilitate  monitoring  of  the
radioactive  plume  by  aircraft,  but  they  were  similar  to  the  normal  operational
requirements,  which  were  designed  to  limit  local  contamination:

A  temperature  inversion,23  to  keep  the  effluents  aloft,  but  at  a  low
altitude;

No  rain,  fog,  or  low  clouds  to  impede  aircraft  operations;
Light  to  moderate  wind  speeds  (less  than  fifteen  miles  an  hour);

Wind  from  the  west  or  southwest,  so  the  plane  would  not  have  to
fly  over  rough  terrain;24  and

Strong  dilution  of  the  plume  before  any  possible  contact  with  the
ground.25

Jack  Healy  reports  that  he  made  the  decision  to  go  ahead  with  the  Green
Run  on  the  evening  of  December  2,  1949,  even  though  the  weather  did  not  turn
out  as  expected.  Some  have  suggested  that  the  Air  Force  pressed  to  go  ahead
with  the  release  in  spite  of  marginal  weather  conditions,  but  Healy  recalls  no  such
pressure.26  The  plume  from  the  release  stagnated  in  the  local  area  for  several  days
before  a  storm  front  dispersed  it  toward  the  north-northeast.  As  a  consequence,
local  deposition  of  radioactive  contaminants  was  much  higher  than  anticipated.27
The  Green  Run  report  concludes:

Under  the  worst  possible  meteorological  conditions
for  such  a  test,  the  airborne  instruments  detected  the
radioactive  gases  at  a  distance  better  than  100  miles
from  the  stack.  Under  favorable  conditions,  it  was
estimated  that  with  the  same  concentrations  this
distance  could  have  been  increased  by  up  to  a  factor
often.28

Despite  the  contamination  of  equipment,  the  monitoring  provided  a  record
of  the  extensive  short-term  environmental  contamination  that  resulted  from  the
Green  Run.  Measurements  of  radioactivity  on  vegetation  produced  readings  that,
while  temporary,  were  as  much  as  400  times  the  then-"permissible  permanent
concentration"  on  vegetation  thought  to  cause  injury  to  livestock.29  The  current

511


Part  II

level  at  which  Washington  state  officials  intervene  to  prevent  possible  injury  to
people  through  the  food  supply  is  not  much  higher  than  the  then-permissible
permanent  concentration.30  Animal  thyroid  specimens  showed  contamination
levels  up  to  "about  80  times  the  maximum  permissible  limit  of  permanently
maintained  radioiodine  concentration."31

In  spite  of  this  contamination,  the  public  health  effects  of  the  Green  Run,
discussed  later  in  this  chapter,  were  quite  limited.  However,  in  1949,  at  the  time
the  Green  Run  was  conducted,  the  most  important  environmental  pathways  for
human  exposure  to  radioiodine  were  unknown.  (Understanding  developed  shortly
thereafter  that  environmental  radioiodine  enters  the  human  body  from  eating  meat
and  drinking  milk  from  animals  that  grazed  on  contaminated  pastures.)32  Thus,
the  effects  of  exposure  through  these  pathways  could  not  have  been  planned  for,
and  it  is  fortunate  that  the  risks  were  not  higher.

The  Control  of  Risks  to  the  Public  from  Plutonium  Production  at
Hanford

From  the  first  years  of  Hanford's  operation,  its  health  physicists  were
aware  of  the  problems  of  contamination  of  the  site  by  radioactive  wastes,  and  it
quickly  became  clear  that  radioiodine  posed  the  greatest  immediate  hazard.33
Most  fission  products  would  remain  in  the  dissolved  fuel,  but  iodine  gas  would
bubble  out  of  the  solution,  up  through  Hanford's  tall  stacks  into  the  atmosphere
and  down  onto  the  surrounding  countryside.  Other  radioactive  wastes  could  be
stored  and  dealt  with  later,  and  other  radioactive  gases  were  chemically  inert  and
would  quickly  dissipate.

Over  the  years,  Hanford  health  physicists  adopted  three  main  approaches
to  the  iodine  problem:

•  Choosing  meteorological  conditions  for  releases  that  would
prevent  air  with  high  iodine  concentrations  from  contaminating  the
ground  near  Hanford;

•  Letting  the  irradiated  fuel  elements  cool  for  extended  periods
before  separating  the  plutonium,  so  that  most  of  the  iodine  131,
which  has  an  eight-day  half-life,  could  decay;  and

•  Beginning  in  1948,  using  scrubbers  or  filters  to  remove  iodine
from  the  exhaust  emissions.

During  World  War  II,  producing  plutonium  for  bombs  was  an  urgent
priority  and  knowledge  of  both  the  environmental  hazards  from  iodine  and  the
ways  to  prevent  it  were  limited.  Over  the  period  1944-1947,  Hanford  released
nearly  685,000  curies  of  radioiodine  into  the  atmosphere,  about  eighty  times  what

512


Chapter  1 1

was  released  in  the  Green  Run.34  After  the  war,  an  improving  understanding  of
how  iodine  could  contaminate  the  food  supply,35  evolving  techniques  to  remove
iodine  from  the  plants'  emissions,  and  policy  decisions  to  limit  the  risks  to  the
nearby  population  led  to  a  marked  reduction  in  iodine  emissions.

When  the  AEC  began  operation  in  1947,  it  promptly  moved  to  review
safety  practices  at  Hanford  and  other  operating  facilities,  which  had  operated
largely  autonomously  until  then.  The  advisory  panel  established  for  this  purpose
concluded  that  "the  degree  of  risk  justified  in  wartime  is  no  longer  appropriate."36
To  address  the  radioiodine  problem  at  Hanford  and  related  problems,  the  AEC
established  a  Stack  Gas  Working  Group,  which  met  for  the  first  time  in  mid- 1948
to  study  air  pollution  from  AEC  production  facilities.  The  chair  of  this  group
noted  that  the  AEC  "desires  the  removal  from  gaseous  effluents  of  all
[radioactive]  material  insofar  as  is  humanly  and  economically  feasible"  and  that
because  of  uncertainties  in  risk  estimates  "no  limit  short  of  zero  should  be
considered  satisfactory  for  the  present."37  By  1949,  daily  emissions  of
radioiodine  had  fallen  by  a  factor  of  1,000  from  their  wartime  highs.

The  Green  Run  clearly  did  not  conform  to  the  practices  designed  to  ensure
public  safety  at  Hanford  in  1949  or  even  during  the  rush  to  produce  plutonium  for
the  first  atomic  bombs. In  his  monthly  report  for  December  1949,  Herbert
Parker,  Hanford's  manager,  concluded  that  the  Green  Run  had  posed  a
"negligible"  risk  to  personnel,  but  "[t]he  resultant  activity  came  close  enough  to
significant  levels,  and  its  distribution  differed  enough  from  simple  meteorological
predictions  that  the  H.I.  Divisions  would  resist  a  proposed  repetition  of  the
tests."38  This  suggests  that  Parker,  at  least,  considered  the  risks  of  such  releases
potentially  excessive  even  for  a  one-time  event,  particularly  given  the  degree  of
uncertainty.

Parker's  recognition  of  the  uncertainties  surrounding  environmental  risks
from  Hanford's  radioiodine  emissions  was  appropriate.  At  the  time,  it  was  not
known  that  drinking  milk  from  cows  that  graze  on  contaminated  pastures  is  the
main  source  of  exposure,  especially  for  children.  Jack  Healy  recently  suggested
that  if  Parker  had  known  of  the  milk  pathway,  he  would  have  objected  strongly  to
the  Green  Run.39  The  question  remains  as  to  the  consideration  that  was  given  by
the  Green  Run's  planners  to  the  possibility  that  they  might  not  fully  understand
the  risks  that  might  be  imposed  on  nearby  communities.

Benefits  of  the  Green  Run

The  Advisory  Committee  attempted  to  assess  of  the  national  security
benefits  that  were  expected  and  actually  resulted  from  the  Green  Run.  A  planning
memorandum  before  the  Green  Run  notes,  "the  possibility  of  the  detection  of
stack  effluents  is  of  great  importance  to  the  intelligence  requirements  of  the
country."40  How  important  the  detection  of  stack  effluents  was  to  the  security  of
the  nation  in  1949  is  not  something  the  Advisory  Committee  was  in  a  position  to

513


Part  II

judge.  We  did  attempt  to  ascertain,  however,  the  purpose  of  the  Green  Run  and
the  extent  to  which  this  purpose  was  served.

The  Green  Run  report  focuses  primarily  on  ground-based  monitoring  of
radioactive  contamination  in  the  environment,  which  provided  a  test  for
techniques  that  could  be  used  on  the  ground  in  the  Soviet  Union.  The  report  also
describes  efforts  to  track  the  radioactive  plume  by  aircraft,  but  their  significance
is  unclear.  Aerial  monitoring  turned  out  to  be  the  most  effective  method  for
detecting  atmospheric  nuclear  tests,  and  perhaps  it  was  expected  to  be  equally
effective  for  monitoring  Soviet  plutonium  production.  Plutonium  production
releases  relatively  little  radioactivity  into  the  atmosphere,  however— too  little  to
detect  outside  Soviet  air  space,  and  flying  inside  Soviet  air  space  would  have  been
risky.  Alternatively,  aerial  radiation  tracking  may  have  been  designed  to  test
techniques  for  use  in  monitoring  nuclear  weapons  tests.  Finally,  the  Green  Run
report  compares  the  pattern  of  the  plume's  dispersion  with  theoretical  models,  but
this  appears  to  be  an  attempt  to  estimate  the  pattern  of  contamination  rather  than
to  test  the  already  well-established  theory  regarding  atmospheric  diffusion  of
gases  developed  in  the  1930s.

It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  how  useful  the  Green  Run  actually  was.  The
classified  histories  of  the  Air  Force's  atomic  intelligence  activities  contain  no
references  to  the  Green  Run.  These  histories  jump  from  events  that  directly
preceded  the  Green  Run—the  Oak  Ridge  and  Hanford  aerial  monitoring  tests— to
later  ones,  without  any  mention  of  the  Green  Run.41  Perhaps  most  telling,  a  1952
AEC  report  entitled  "Technical  Methods  in  Atomic  Energy  Intelligence"  does
mention  the  Green  Run  in  the  text,  but  only  in  a  list  of  occasions  on  which  a
particular  type  of  instrument  was  used.  In  describing  ways  of  detecting
plutonium-production  facilities,  the  report  relies  on  routine  reports  of
environmental  surveys  from  Hanford's  routine  operations.42

Secrecy  and  Public  Risk

The  Advisory  Committee  accepts  that  there  may  be  conditions  under
which  national  security  can  justify  secrecy  in  intentional  releases  like  the  Green
Run,  even  as  we  recognize  that  secrecy  can  increase  the  risk  to  the  exposed
population.

In  discussing  this  question  it  is  important  to  explain  that  when  we  use  the
term  secret  we  can  be  referring  to  secrecy  regarding  the  very  fact  that  a  risk  has
been  posed,  secrecy  regarding  the  purpose  behind  the  risk,  or  secrecy  regarding
the  means  (for  example,  the  science  of  technology)  by  which  the  risk  was
imposed.  These  distinctions  are  important  because  even  if  we  agree  that  the
undertaking  of  an  activity  is  required  for  national  security  reasons,  it  does  not
follow  that  secrecy  should  govern  all  aspects  of  the  activity.  Thus,  as  an  obvious
example,  atomic  bomb  tests  were  quintessential  national  security  activities;
information  on  the  design  of  the  bomb  was  secret,  as  was  information  on  many  of

514


Chapter  1 1

the  specific  purposes  of  the  tests;  however,  in  many  (but  not  all)  cases  the  public
was  given  notice  that  a  hazardous  activity  was  being  undertaken.  Similarly,  in  the
cases  of  other  environmental  releases,  it  may  be  that  national  security  requires
secrecy  for  some  aspects  of  the  release  but  does  not  necessarily  preclude  public
disclosure  sufficient  to  give  basic  notification  of  the  existence  of  potential  risk.
The  Committee  is  not  equipped  to  say  whether  this  was  so  in  the  case  of  the
Green  Run.  However,  in  the  case  of  radiological  warfare,  as  we  will  discuss  later,
there  was  contemporary  argument  that  some  public  disclosure  was  not
inconsistent  with  national  security.

If  a  release  is  conducted  publicly,  affected  communities  have  an
opportunity  to  comment  and  perhaps  influence  the  conduct  of  the  release  in  ways
that  serve  their  interests.  Downwinders  can  be  warned,  giving  them  the  options
of  staying  indoors  with  their  windows  closed,  wearing  protective  clothing,
altering  their  eating  habits,  or  evacuating  the  area.  If  the  release  is  conducted  in
secret,  foreign  adversaries  are  less  likely  to  be  alerted,  but  downwinders  will  be
deprived  of  their  options.  Of  course,  evacuation  may  not  be  warranted,  and  other
precautions  may  not  be  needed,  or  they  may  be  of  limited  value.  But,  as  we  have
learned  during  the  course  of  our  work,  secrecy,  even  where  initially  merited,  has

its  long-term  price.

At  Hanford,  as  we  have  noted,  the  Green  Run  represented  only  a  fraction
of  the  risks  (including  nonradiation  as  well  as  radiation  hazard)  to  which  local
communities  may  have  been  exposed  in  secret.  The  delayed  legacy  of  these  risks,
in  uncertainty  and  distrust,  as  witnesses  from  the  Hanford  community  told  the
Committee,  is  only  becoming  apparent  as  the  secret  history  of  early  Hanford
operations  has  been  made  public.

During  World  War  II,  officials  at  Du  Pont,  the  contractor  for  Hanford  at
that  time,  proposed  a  practice  evacuation  to  prepare  for  a  possible  emergency.
General  Groves  turned  them  down,  saying  that  "any  practice  evacuation  of  the
Hanford  Camp  would  cause  a  complete  breakdown  in  the  security  of  the
project."43  As  noted  in  the  Introduction,  at  the  onset  of  the  Manhattan  Project
concern  for  the  effects  of  Hanford  operations  on  the  surrounding  environment,
including  the  salmon  in  the  Columbia  River,  led  to  a  secret  program  of  research
on  the  environmental  effects  of  Hanford's  operations.44

Secrecy  remained  the  rule  at  Hanford  after  the  war.  In  1946,  as  recalled
years  later  by  an  early  biologist  at  Hanford  who  wrote  to  radiation  researcher  and
historian  Newell  Stannard,  Hanford  researchers  resorted  to  deception  simply  to
collect  information  about  possible  iodine  contamination  in  livestock,  by  having
employees  pretend  to  be  agricultural  inspectors  while  surreptitiously  monitoring
iodine  levels  in  animal  thyroids.  The  biologist  wrote:  "Though  the
Environmental  Study  Group  at  Hanford  had  been  sampling  air,  soil,  water,  and
vegetation  in  a  wide  area  surrounding  the  Hanford  site  for  several  years  previous
to  1946,  it  was  agreed  that  sampling  from  farm  animals  for  uptake  of  fission
product  plant  wastes  would  be  a  much  more  sensitive  problem.  At  the  time,  the

515


Part  II

revelation  of  a  regional  1-131  problem  would  have  had  a  tremendous  public
relations  impact  and  furthermore  the  presence  of  other  radionuclides  . . .  was  of
possible  National  Defense  significance."

He  explained  that  he  was  called  at  home  and  told  to  report  to  work  at  the
director's  office  in  downtown  Richland.  There:

I  was  introduced  to  two  security  agents  of  the
Manhattan  Engineer  District .  .  .  who  were  to  be  my
escorts  and  contact  men  during  the  day.  They
proved  to  be  the  best  straight  faced  "liars"  I  had
ever  known.  I  was  no  longer  "Karl  Herde  of
DuPont"  but  through  the  day  would  be  known  and
introduced  as  Dr.  George  Herd  of  the  Department  of
Agriculture.  I  was  to  simulate  an  animal  husbandry
specialist  who  had  the  responsibility  of  testing  a
new  portable  instrument  based  on  an  unproven
theory  that  by  external  readings  on  the  surface  of
the  farm,  the  "health  and  vigor"  of  animals  could  be
evaluated.  I  was  advised  not  to  be  alarmed  if  at
times  during  the  conversations  with  farmers  that
they  appeared  critical  or  skeptical.  I  was  to  be  very
reserved  and  answer  questions  as  briefly  and
vaguely  as  seemed  acceptable.  They  agreed  to  carry
a  clipboard  ...  I  was  to  concentrate  on  the  high
readings  (thyroids,  of  course)  and  furnish  those  for
recording  when  not  being  observed.

That  day  we  visited  several  diversified  farms  under
irrigation  from  the  Yakima  River  between
Toppenish  and  Benton  City.  .  .Smooth  talk  and
flattery  enabled  us  to  gain  one  hundred  percent
cooperation. .  . .

I  was  successful  in  placing  the  probe  of  the
instrument  over  the  thyroid  at  times  when  the
owner's  attention  was  focused  on  the  next  animal  or
some  concocted  distraction.45

In  1948,  the  AEC  prepared  a  public  relations  pamphlet  entitled  Handling
Radioactive  Wastes  in  the  Atomic  Energy  Program.  The  Department  of  Defense
objected  to  the  description  of  Hanford's  operations,  arguing  that  any  description
of  the  methods  used  to  reduce  contamination  might  be  used  by  the  Soviet  Union
to  avoid  detection  of  its  plants.46  The  AEC  decided  at  its  October  7,  1949,

516


Chapter  1 1

meeting  to  release  the  pamphlet,  which  contained  no  specific  numbers,  in  order  to
"dispel  and  allay  possible  latent  hysteria."47

With  a  major  expansion  of  Hanford's  operations  under  way  in  1954,
questions  arose  over  whether  to  publish  information  about  contamination  of  the
Columbia  River.  Parker  warned  that  it  might  be  necessary  to  close  portions  of  the
river  to  public  fishing,  but  he  and  others  noted  that  this  could  have  a  substantial
public  relations  impact.48  At  the  same  time,  there  was  concern  that  information
on  river  contamination  could  make  it  possible  to  ascertain  Hanford's  plutonium
output.49  For  this  combination  of  public  relations  and  security  reasons,  Hanford
did  not  release  any  quantitative  information  or  public  warning  on  contamination
of  fish  in  the  Columbia  River  until  many  years  later.

It  is  difficult  to  argue  with  the  need  for  secrecy  about  the  purposes  of  the
Green  Run.  Making  information  on  U.S.  atomic  intelligence  methods  openly
available  could  have  led  the  Soviet  Union  to  develop  countermeasures  to  these
methods.  The  issue  remains  important  today  in  responding  to  the  potential
proliferation  of  nuclear  weapons  capabilities  around  the  world.

But  the  results  of  the  long  delay  in  informing  the  public  about  the
activities  of  which  the  Green  Run  was  only  a  part  are  now  evident  in  public  anger
and  distrust  toward  the  government.  At  the  Advisory  Committee's  public  meeting
in  Spokane  on  November  21,  1994,  Lynne  Stembridge,  executive  director  of  the
Hanford  Education  Action  League,  argued  that

Information  regarding  that  radiation  release  was
kept  secret  for  almost  40  years.  There  was  no
warning.  There  was  no  informed  consent.  Citizens
down  wind  were  never  advised  of  measures  that
could  have  been  taken  to  safeguard  the  health  of
themselves  or  their  children.

Although  the  Green  Run  was  not  as  direct  as
handing  a  patient  orange  juice  laced  with
radioactivity,  or  giving  someone  an  injection,  the
Green  Run  was  every  bit  as  intentional,  every  bit  as
experimental,  every  bit  as  unethical  and  immoral  as
the  medical  experiments  which  have  made
headlines  over  the  last  year.50

Among  the  most  damaging  dimensions  of  the  legacy  of  distrust  created
by  the  secrecy  that  surrounded  the  routine  and  intentional  releases  at  Hanford  is
the  government's  loss  of  crediblity  as  a  source  of  information  about  risk.  Now,
when  the  government  is  attempting  to  find  out  what  damage  these  releases
actually  did  and  share  that  information  with  the  people  affected,  these  people
question  why  they  should  believe  what  the  government  says.51  Federally  funded

517


Part  II

scientists  at  the  Fred  Hutchinson  Cancer  Research  Center  in  Seattle,  Washington,
are  now  studying  those  exposed  as  children  to  all  of  Hanford's  iodine  emissions-
the  many  routine  emissions  as  well  as  the  Green  Run-to  see  whether  any  health
effects  are  detectable.52  Whatever  this  study  concludes,  many  residents  are
convinced  that  they  have  already  seen  the  effects.  Tom  Bailie,  who  grew  up  and
still  lives  on  a  farm  near  Hanford,  spoke  to  the  Advisory  Committee's  meeting  in
Spokane  in  November  1994.  He  pointed  on  a  large  map  to  what  he  called  a
"death  mile,"  where  "100  percent  of  those  families  that  drank  the  water,  drank  the
milk,  ate  the  food,  have  one  common  denominator  that  binds  us  together,  and  that
is  thyroid  problems,  handicapped  children  or  cancer."53  It  is  doubtful  that  the
results  of  any  study  supported  with  federal  funds,  no  matter  how  impeccably
conducted,  would  be  believable  to  people  like  Mr.  Bailie.  Assuming  that  the
Hutchinson  Cancer  Research  Center  study  is  so  conducted,  and  assuming  the
study  finds  that  at  least  some  outcomes  of  concern  to  the  community  are  not
attributable  to  the  Hanford  emissions,  government  secrecy  will  have  deprived  Mr.
Bailie  and  people  like  him  of  an  important  source  of  reassurance  and  peace  of
mind.

The  Green  Run,  and  the  far  greater  number  of  environmental  releases
resulting  from  Hanford's  routine  operations,  raises  challenging  questions  about
the  balance  between  openness  and  secrecy  in  settings  where  citizens  may  be
exposed  to  environmental  hazards.  Citizens  may  reasonably  ask  whether  releases
have  been  determined  to  be  necessary  in  light  of  alternatives,  whether  actions
have  been  taken  to  minimize  risk  and  provide  for  any  harm  that  might  occur,
whether  disclosure  will  be  made  at  the  earliest  possible  date,  and  whether  records
will  be  created  and  preserved  so  that  citizens  can  account  for  any  health  and
safety  consequences  at  the  time  of  disclosure.  As  we  will  see,  these  questions
were  posed  with  regard  to  other  environmental  releases,  and  they  remain  with  us
today.

Radiological  Warfare

The  first  proposed  military  application  of  atomic  energy  was  not  nuclear
weaponry  but  radiological  warfare  (RW)--the  use  of  radioactive  materials  to
cause  radiological  injury.  A  May  1941  report  by  the  National  Academy  of
Sciences  listed  the  first  option  as  the  "production  of  violently  radioactive
materials  . . .  carried  by  airplanes  to  be  scattered  as  bombs  over  enemy
territory."54  It  was  not  until  later  that  year  that  a  calculation  by  British  physicists
demonstrated  the  feasibility  of  nuclear  weapons,  and  attention  quickly  turned  to
their  development.

Military  interest  in  both  offensive  and  defensive  aspects  of  radiological
warfare  continued  throughout  World  War  II.  In  the  spring  of  1943,  when  it  was
still  unclear  whether  the  atomic  bomb  could  be  built  in  time,  radiological
weapons  became  a  possible  fallback.  Manhattan  Project  scientific  director

518


Chapter  1 1

J.  Robert  Oppenheimer  discussed  with  physicist  Enrico  Fermi  the  possibility  of
using  fission  products,  particularly  strontium,  to  poison  the  German  food  supply.
Oppenheimer  later  wrote  to  Fermi  that  he  thought  it  impractical  unless  "we  can
poison  food  sufficient  to  kill  a  half  a  million  men."  This  proposal  for  offensive
use  of  radiological  weapons  appears  to  have  been  dropped  because  of  its
impracticality.55  At  the  same  time,  military  officials  developed  contingency  plans
for  responding  to  the  possible  use  of  radiological  weapons  by  Germany  against
invading  Allied  troops.

The  peacetime  experience  of  Operation  Crossroads  in  1946,  particularly
the  contamination  of  the  Navy  flotilla  from  the  underwater  nuclear  test  shot
labeled  Baker,  revived  interest  in  radiological  warfare.  Some,  including
Berkeley's  Dr.  Joseph  Hamilton,  concluded  that  radiological  poisons  could  be
used  as  strategic  weapons  against  cities  and  their  food  supplies.56  Once  absorbed
into  the  body,  radioactive  materials  would  cause  slow,  progressive  injuries.
Others  proposed  that  RW  could  be  a  more  humane  form  of  warfare.  Using
radioactive  material  to  contaminate  the  ground  would  render  it  temporarily
unhabitable,  but  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  kill  or  injure  people.57

Although  many  discussions  of  radiological  warfare  took  place  in  classified
military  circles,58  the  basic  notion  of  radiological  warfare  was  not  secret  and  was
a  subject  of  public  speculation.  But  the  government's  program  in  radiological
warfare  remained  largely  secret,  except  in  its  broadest  outlines.  The  postwar
interest  in  radiological  warfare  spawned  competing  programs  on  radiological
warfare  both  in  the  AEC  and  in  various  parts  of  the  Department  of  Defense.59  To
meld  these  into  a  coherent  program,  the  AEC  and  DOD  established  a  joint  study
panel  in  May  1948,  chaired  by  the  chemist  W.  A.  Noyes  from  the  University  of
Rochester  and  including  civilian  experts  and  DOD  and  AEC  officials.

At  its  first  meeting  that  month,  the  Noyes  panel  recommended  work  in
three  areas:  (1)  biological  research  on  the  effects  of  radiation  and  radioactive
materials,  to  be  carried  out  mainly  at  the  Army  Chemical  Corps's  Toxicity
Laboratory,  located  at  the  University  of  Chicago;60  (2)  studies  on  the  production
of  radioactive  materials  for  use  in  radiological  warfare,  carried  out  mainly  by  the
AEC;  and  (3)  military  studies  of  possible  RW  munitions,  also  carried  out  mainly
by  the  Chemical  Corps.

The  latter  program  was  the  focus  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  attention
because  it  involved  the  intentional  release  of  radioactive  materials  during  several
dozen  tests  of  prototype  radiological  weapons  at  the  Chemical  Corps's  Dugway
Proving  Ground  in  the  Utah  desert.  The  offensive  radiological  warfare  program
field- testing  program  coincided  with  the  Korean  War  years.  The  Noyes  panel
issued  its  final  report  after  its  sixth  meeting,  in  November  1950,61  and  was  revived
briefly  in  1952  to  assess  the  status  of  the  RW  research  program.62

The  first  two  field  tests  were  conducted  at  Oak  Ridge.  These  involved
sealed  sources  of  radioactive  material  that  were  placed  in  a  field  in  order  to
measure  the  resulting  radiation  levels.  These  measurements  may  have  helped

519


Part  II

predict  the  effectiveness  of  radiological  weapons.  The  sources  were  then  returned
to  the  laboratory  and  left  no  residual  contamination  in  the  environment.63

Most  of  the  radiological  warfare  field  tests  were  carried  out  by  the
Chemical  Corps  at  the  Dugway  Proving  Ground,  using  radioactive  tantalum
produced  at  Oak  Ridge.64  From  1949  to  1952,  the  Chemical  Corps  conducted
sixty-five  field  tests  at  Dugway,  intentionally  releasing  onto  the  ground  roughly
13,000  curies  of  tantalum  in  the  form  of  dust,  small  particles,  and  pellets.  These
were  prototype  tests,  releasing  much  smaller  quantities  of  radioactive  material
than  the  millions  of  curies  per  square  mile  that  an  operational  radiological  weapon
would  need  to  render  territory  temporarily  uninhabitable.65  Furthermore,  the
field-test  programs  used  tantalum  primarily  because  it  could  be  produced  at
existing  facilities.  An  operational  radiological  warfare  program  required
materials  that  could  be  produced  in  greater  quantities  than  tantalum,  but  this
would  have  meant  constructing  special  production  facilities.66

In  May  1949,  the  Chemical  Corps  established  a  panel  of  outside  experts  to
provide  advice  on  the  safety  of  its  field-testing  program.  Chaired  by  Dr.  Joseph
Hamilton,  a  strong  advocate  of  the  RW  research  program,67  the  panel  was
chartered  to  consider  radiological  hazards  to  the  civilian  population,  including
hazards  to  "the  water  supply,  food,  crops,  animal  population,  etc."  Occupational
safety  was  left  to  the  Chemical  Corps.68

Under  Hamilton's  leadership,  this  panel  raised  a  number  of  safety  concerns
but  in  the  end  appears  to  have  been  satisfied  with  the  safety  of  the  test  program.
Several  months  before  the  first  panel  meeting,  Hamilton  himself  had  objected  to
the  use  of  the  relatively  long-lived  isotope  tantalum  182  (half-life,  1 17  days)  as
the  radiological  warfare  agent  in  these  field  tests.  He  proposed  using  gold  198
instead  (half-life,  2.7  days)  to  eliminate  any  lingering  radiation  hazard  to  the
general  population.69

At  its  first  meeting,  on  August  2,  1949,  the  RW  test  safety  panel
provisionally  accepted  the  proposed  testing  program  of  the  Chemical  Corps,
subject  to  a  radiological  safety  review  of  the  results  of  the  first  two  tests.
Hamilton's  potential  opposition  clearly  was  of  consequence,  and  his  agreement  to
proceed  was  cause  for  relief.70

Other  members  of  the  test  safety  panel,  including  Karl  Morgan,  head  of
health  physics  at  Oak  Ridge,  raised  concerns  about  the  possible  hazard  posed  by
radioactive  dust  at  an  arid  site  like  Dugway,71  both  on-  and  off-site.  Morgan
proposed  the  use  of  airborne  monitoring  equipment  developed  at  Oak  Ridge  in
tests  that  preceded  the  Green  Run.72  The  use  of  such  aircraft  and  other  monitoring
equipment  evolved  and  expanded  as  the  Dugway  field  tests  continued  over  the
next  few  years.  Panel  members  approved  the  continuation  of  the  program  based
in  part  on  the  results  of  these  radiological  surveys,  which  showed  that
contamination  of  the  area  was  limited  in  size.73

In  1952  the  Chemical  Corps  proposed  a  significant  expansion  of  the
radiological  warfare  program,  with  a  large  test  of  100,000  curies  planned  for  1953

520


Chapter  11

and  still  larger  tests  proposed  for  later.  The  test  safety  panel  once  again  raised
concerns  over  the  radioactive  dust  hazard.  Hamilton  noted  that  there  were  several
"hot  spots'—areas  of  unusually  high  radiation-at  Dugway  and  that  trucks  at  one
of  the  target  areas  were  kicking  up  significant  quantities  of  radioactive  dust.74  A
Chemical  Corps  study  in  early  1953  concluded  that  the  hazard  was  relatively
slight.75

Hamilton  favored  going  ahead  with  the  1953  tests  and  was  greatly
disappointed  when  they  were  canceled,  and  with  them  the  entire  radiological
warfare  test  program.76  The  reasons  for  this  cancellation  are  not  entirely  clear,
but  two  factors  are  evident.  The  next  phase  of  the  program  would  have  required
the  construction  of  expensive  new  production  facilities,  which  collided  with
military  budget  cuts  at  the  end  of  the  Korean  War.  Furthermore,  by  1953,  only
the  Chemical  Corps  maintained  a  strong  interest  in  the  radiological  warfare
program,  making  it  vulnerable  to  questions  about  whether  it  satisfied  any  unique
military  need.77  The  radiological  warfare  program  did  not  end  completely,  but  its
focus  narrowed  to  defensive  measures,  including  shielding  and  decontamination,78
with  atmospheric  nuclear  tests  providing  the  main  opportunity  for  study.79

The  radiological  warfare  test  safety  panel  was  an  early  example  of  the  use
of  an  expert  panel  to  evaluate  possible  risks  of  planned  government  activities.
Ideally,  such  a  panel  should  not  be  chaired  by  a  proponent  of  the  program  in
question,  although  those  with  such  knowledge  of,  and  interest  in,  the  program  are
of  obvious  value  to  a  safety  effort.  Hamilton's  evident  enthusiasm  for  radiological
warfare  research  raises  questions  about  his  impartiality  as  head  of  the  panel,80  but
the  panel  as  a  whole  appears  to  have  dealt  with  serious  public  health  issues  in  a
responsible  manner.

Secrecy  in  the  Radiological  Warfare  Program

The  U.S.  radiological  weapons-testing  program  appears  to  have  remained
formally  secret  until  1974  and  remained  largely  unknown  to  the  public  until  the
GAO's  report  in  1993.81  There  was  a  recurring  tension  at  the  time  between  those
who  wanted  to  release  information  to  allay  unwarranted  public  fears  about
radiation  hazards  and  those  who  thought  that  publicity  would  create  unwarranted
attention  and  public  apprehension  that  could  interfere  with  the  successful
prosecution  of  the  program.  If  there  was  a  concern  that  public  knowledge  of  the
general  outlines  of  the  program  would  undermine  national  security,  none  of  the
available  documents  state  this  argument  explicitly,  except  through  their
classification  markings.

In  May  1948,  at  its  first  meeting,  the  Noyes  panel  recommended  that  the
entire  program  be  classified  Secret,  Restricted  Data;82  the  Chemical  Corps's  RW
program  was  classified  at  this  level.83  At  its  second  meeting,  in  August,  the
Noyes  panel  revised  this  recommendation  to  conclude  that  "[t]he  existence  of  an
RW  Program  should  be  considered  as  unclassified  information."84  The  Noyes

521


Part  II

panel  was  responding  to  the  recommendation  by  the  AEC's  ACBM  "that  the
Advisory  Committee  on  Biology  and  Medicine  urge  that  the  broad  subject  of
Radiological  Warfare  be  declassified"  on  the  grounds  that  "the  subject  appears  in
nearly  every  Sunday  supplement  in  a  distorted  manner"  and  that  "better  work
could  be  done  from  the  scientific  and  medical  standpoint"  if  the  program  were
declassified.85

In  February  1949,  Defense  Secretary  James  Forrestal,  responding  to
requests  for  greater  public  disclosure  of  U.S.  nuclear  activities,  appointed  Harvard
University  President  James  Conant  to  chair  a  confidential  ad  hoc  committee  to
make  recommendations  on  "the  information  which  should  be  released  to  the
public  concerning  the  capabilities  of,  and  defense  against,  the  atomic  bomb  and
weapons  of  biological,  chemical,  and  radiological  warfare."86  This  high-level
committee's  work  ended  in  October  1949  in  deadlock,  without  making  any  strong
recommendations.  Its  report  to  President  Truman  was  quickly  forgotten  and,  if
anything,  provided  the  basis  for  continuing  the  existing  pattern  of  secrecy.87

Among  the  listed  rationales  provided  by  the  majority  of  committee
members  who  opposed  the  release  of  further  information  on  the  capabilities  of
atomic  weapons  was  the  absence  of  "public  demand"  for  the  information.  (The
positions  taken  "by  certain  well-known  and  probably  well  meaning  pressure
groups,"  they  suggested,  "do  not  spring  from  any  general  public  sentiment  in  this
regard  and  should,  therefore  be  ignored.")  James  Hershberg,  in  his  biography  of
Harvard  University  President  James  Conant,  who  chaired  "The  Fishing  Party"  (as
the  committee  was  code-named),  has  observed:

Notably  missing  from  this  list  is  any  indication  that
they  were  worried  that  the  Soviet  Union  might
derive  military  benefit  from  the  release  of  data
under  consideration.  . . .  The  observation  [of  the
majority]  that  the  "public  would  seem  to  be  more
concerned  lest  their  officials  release  too  much
classified  information,  rather  than  too  little"  may
have  been  accurate,  but  would  the  attitude  have
been  the  same  if  it  were  known  the  government  was
hiding  the  information  not  from  Moscow  but  from
its  own  people  because  it  did  not  trust  them?  How
else  to  explain  the  fear  that  "even  a  carefully
reasoned  statement . . .  might  have  a  very  disturbing
effect  on  the  general  public  and  could  be
misinterpreted  by  pressure  groups  in  support  of  any
extreme  position  they  were  currently  advocating"?88

In  May  1949,  while  Conant's  panel  deliberated  and  the  Chemical  Corps
was  preparing  for  the  initial  Dugway  field  tests,  the  Defense  Department's

522


Chapter  1 1

Research  and  Development  Board  (RDB)  addressed  the  question  of  releasing
information  on  radiological  warfare.  The  RDB's  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy
recommended  against  a  public  release  of  information.  Soon  after,  a  joint  meeting
of  the  Military  Liaison  Committee  and  the  General  Advisory  Council  considered,
but  rejected  a  drafted  letter  to  the  President,  also  recommending  a  press  release  on
the  RW  program.  Later  that  year,  on  advice  from  Joseph  Hamilton,  the  Chemical
Corps  prepared  a  release  regarding  munitions  tests  at  Dugway.  The  Chemical
Corps's  proposal  for  a  release  was  discussed  with  AEC  and  DOD  officials,  who
rejected  it,  saying  such  a  release  was  "not  desirable."89

At  roughly  the  same  time,  Defense  Secretary  Louis  Johnson  briefed
President  Truman  on  the  radiological  warfare  program.  The  briefing
memorandum  prepared  for  Truman  said  that  the  planned  tests  posed  a  "negligible
risk,"  but  argued  that  "should  the  general  public  learn  prematurely  of  the  tests,  it
is  conceivable  that  an  adverse  public  reaction  might  result  because  of  the  lack  of  a
true  understanding  of  radiological  hazards."  It  also  noted  that  "a  group  of  highly
competent  and  nationally  recognized  authorities  is  being  assembled  to  review  all
radiological  aspects  of  the  tests  before  operations  are  initiated  at  the  test  site."90

The  reference  in  the  briefing  memorandum  was  to  the  radiological  warfare
test  safety  panel,  which  was  being  selected  at  that  time.  In  August,  at  the  first
meeting  of  this  panel,  Albert  R.  Olpin,  president  of  the  University  of  Utah,  noted
the  risk  that  uranium  prospectors  might  stumble  onto  the  site.91  Citing  Olpin's
concern,  Joseph  Hamilton  noted,

While  the  hazards  to  health  for  both  man  and
animals  can  be  considered  relatively  slight,  the
adverse  effects  of  having  public  attention  drawn  to
such  a  situation  would  be  most  deleterious  to  the
program.  In  particular,  Dr.  Olpin  brought  up  the
interesting  point  that  most  of  Utah  is  being  very
carefully  combed  by  a  large  number  of  prospectors
armed  with  geiger  counters.  Needless  to  say,  it  is
imperative  that  such  individuals  be  denied  the
opportunity  to  survey  any  region  containing  a
perceptible  amount  of  radioactivity  arising  from  the
various  radioactive  munitions  that  are  to  be
employed.92

Soon  after  this  meeting,  Hamilton  also  proposed  a  public  release  of
information,  perhaps  reasoning  that  a  program  that  was  announced,  but  played
down,93  would  attract  less  attention  than  one  that  was  discovered  accidentally.
Hamilton's  proposal  was  refused.94  Echoing  Hamilton's  concerns,  the  Chemical
Corps  proposed  once  more  that  the  tests  be  made  public,  again  citing  the  risk  of
discovery  by  uranium  prospectors.95  Robert  LeBaron,  chairman  of  the  DOD's

523


Part  II

Military  Liaison  Committee  to  the  AEC,  turned  down  this  request,  claiming  the
need  for  review  by  the  Armed  Forces  Policy  Council.96

The  official  silence  about  the  prospects  for  radiological  warfare  prompted
some  public  speculation  about  the  government's  activities,  including  a  report
appearing  in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists,  a  journal  created  following  the
war  to  give  a  policy  voice  in  print  to  many  of  the  physicists  who  had  worked  on
the  bomb.  The  journal  had  some  following  in  the  general  public  as  well  as  the
scientific  community.  The  report  mirrored  much  of  the  analysis  of  the  Noyes
panel  and  concluded  that  RW  had  significant  military  potential.97

In  September  1949,  the  AEC's  Declassification  Branch  recommended  that
certain  general  information,  civil  defense  problems,  and  medical  aspects  of  RW
be  declassified.  Details  regarding  specific  agents  and  methods  of  delivery,
however,  should  remain  secret.98  These  suggestions  appear  to  have  been  adopted
shortly  thereafter,  as  AEC  and  DOD  reports  at  the  end  of  1949  and  into  the  early
1950s  discuss  some  aspects  of  the  RW  program  in  very  broad  terms.99  The
closest  thing  to  an  official  announcement  of  the  field-test  program  appears  to  have
come  in  a  report  for  the  first  half  of  1 95 1 . ' 00  This  report  briefly  noted  that
"research  and  development  activities  in  chemical,  biological,  and  radiological
warfare  were  accelerated,"  and  that  "Dugway  Proving  Ground  . . .  was
reactivated,  and  major  field-test  programs  in  offensive  and  defensive
toxicological  warfare  were  started,"  but  provided  no  details.  The  1994  summary
of  declassification  policy  by  the  Department  of  Energy  notes  that  offensive
radiological  warfare  was  declassified  in  1951  by  the  AEC,  although  the  Defense
Department  appears  to  have  kept  this  aspect  of  the  program  classified  until  much
later.101

The  secrecy  that  surrounded  the  radiological  warfare  field-test  program
raises  two  related  questions.  The  first  question  is  whether  concerns  over  public
reaction  are  a  legitimate  basis  for  security  classification.  Officials  at  various
levels  cited  fears  of  "public  anxiety,"  "undue  public  apprehension,"  and  even
"public  hysteria"  to  justify  keeping  even  the  most  general  information  secret.

The  documents  reviewed  by  the  Advisory  Committee  do  not  record  the
actual  decisions  at  various  stages  to  keep  the  field-testing  program  secret;  they
refer  only  to  such  decisions  being  made  by  others.  It  may  be  that  those  decisions
reflected  other  reasons  for  secrecy.  Or  it  may  be  that  public  reaction  was
considered  a  national  security  issue.  This  can  be  a  legitimate  argument,  when  the
program  in  question  is  considered  vital  to  the  nation's  security.  However,  the
nation  has  a  vital  interest  in  open  public  participation  in  representative
government,  and  making  exceptions  to  the  rule  of  openness  requires  a  high
standard  of  national  need.

The  second  question  is  the  same  as  the  one  raised  for  the  Green  Run:  Can
potentially  important  public  health  information  about  secret  activities  be  made
available  to  the  public  without  compromising  secrecy  about  the  details  and


524


Chapter  1 1

purposes  of  the  activity?  As  described  later  in  this  chapter,  this  remains  a  live
issue  today.

The  RaLa  Tests:  Two  Decades  of  Experimentation

From  1944  to  1961,  the  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory  used  lanthanum
140  (also  known  as  radiolanthanum  or  RaLa)  in  244  identified  tests  of  atomic
bomb  components.102  These  tests  were  critical  to  the  development  of  the
plutonium  bomb,  which  required  a  highly  symmetrical  inward  detonation  of  high
explosive—known  as  implosion—to  compress  the  plutonium  fuel  and  allow  a
critical  chain  reaction.  The  RaLa  method  (see  "What  Were  the  RaLa  Tests?")  was
the  only  technique  available  for  measuring  whether  the  implosion  was
symmetrical  enough  and  continued  to  be  used  for  testing  bomb  designs  until  the
early  1960s,  when  technical  advances  allowed  the  use  of  alternative  techniques


103


What  Were  the  RaLa  Tests?

Implosion  devices  use  carefully  timed  detonations  of  carefully  shaped  high-explosive
charges  to  generate  a  spherically  symmetrical  inward-directed  shock  wave.  This  shock  wave  in
turn  compresses  the  nuclear  fuel  of  an  atomic  bomb— usually  plutonium— causing  it  to  "go  critical"
and  undergo  a  nuclear  chain  reaction."

In  the  RaLa  tests,  the  plutonium  core  was  replaced  by  a  surrogate  heavy  metal  with  an
inner  core  of  lanthanum.  Lanthanum  140  has  a  half-life  of  forty  hours,  emitting  a  high-energy
gamma  ray  in  its  decay.  Some  of  these  gamma  rays  were  absorbed  as  they  passed  through  the
outer  components  of  the  implosion  device,  the  degree  of  absorption  depending  on  how  compressed
those  components  were.  Radiation  measurement  devices  placed  in  various  directions  outside  the
device  would  indicate  the  overall  compression  and  whether  that  compression  was  symmetrical  or
instead  varied  with  direction.  The  lanthanum  sources  typically  ranged  from  a  few  hundred  to  a
few  thousand  curies,  the  average  being  slightly  more  than  1,000  curies,  and  were  dispersed  in  the
cloud  resulting  from  the  detonation.


In  1950  the  Air  Force  flew  a  B-17  aircraft  carrying  an  atmospheric
conductivity  apparatus  in  four  radiation-tracking  experiments  at  Los  Alamos.
These  four  experiments  were  identified  subsequently  by  the  General  Accounting
Office104  and  appear  in  the  Advisory  Committee's  charter.105  A  historical  analysis
undertaken  by  the  Los  Alamos  Human  Studies  Project  Team  in  1994  identified


a.  Lillian  Hoddenson  et  al.,  Critical  Assembly:  A  Techincal  History  of  Los
Alamos  during  the  Oppenheimer  Years,  1943-1945  (New  York:  Cambridge  University
Press,  1993),  268-271.

525


Part  II

three  of  these  experiments,  in  which  the  environmental  release  of  radiation  was
incidental  to  the  experiment,  as  part  of  the  series  of  244  intentional  releases
mentioned  above;  the  presence  of  the  tracking  aircraft  is  all  that  distinguishes  the
three  in  the  Advisory  Committee's  charter  from  the  other  24 1.106

The  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory  was  established  in  1 943  as  the
atomic  bomb  design  center  for  the  Manhattan  Project  on  a  mesa  overlooking  the
Rio  Grande  valley,  about  forty  miles  northwest  of  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico.  The
RaLa  tests  were  conducted  in  Bayo  Canyon,  roughly  three  miles  east  of  the  town
of  Los  Alamos,  which  grew  up  next  to  the  lab.  Although  radioactive  clouds  from
the  RaLa  tests  occasionally  blew  back  toward  the  town,  the  prevailing  winds
usually  blew  those  clouds  over  sparsely  populated  regions  to  the  north  and  east.
Aside  from  a  small  construction  trailer  park  and  a  pumice  quarry  within  three
miles,  the  next  nearest  population  center  was  the  San  Ildefonso  pueblo,  roughly
eight  miles  downwind  of  the  test  site  in  the  Rio  Grande  valley.  Several  Pueblo
Indian  and  Spanish-speaking  communities  lie  within  twelve  miles  of  Los  Alamos.

Risks  to  the  Public

Concerns  over  risks  to  the  public  arose  at  the  beginning  of  the  RaLa
program.  In  the  early  years,  Los  Alamos  planners  and  health  physicists  worried
that  the  detonations  could  cause  some  contamination  in  areas  outside  the  test  site,
such  as  the  construction  trailer  park  and  nearby  hiking  trails.107

As  the  RaLa  program  continued,  several  patterns  of  public  safety  practices
developed.  Initially,  the  principal  way  to  protect  people  was  to  keep  them  out  of
the  immediate  test  areas,  but  in  later  years  it  became  the  practice  to  test  only  when
the  weather  was  favorable,  and  later  still  to  survey  surrounding  roads  to  detect
whether  contamination  had  reached  hazardous  levels.

Perhaps  because  early  atmospheric  monitoring  had  produced  only
negative  results  and  because  surveys  in  Los  Alamos  had  indicated  only  minimal
levels  of  contamination,108  ground  contamination  was  not  believed  to  be  a
significant  problem  at  first.  Environmental  surveys  after  RaLa  tests  indicated
significant  contamination  at  some  locations  within  three  miles  of  the  release,  but
not  at  greater  distances.

This  observation,  and  the  opening  of  a  pumice  quarry  within  three  miles  of
Bayo  Canyon,  led  to  intensive  studies  of  fallout  from  the  RaLa  tests  in  1949  and
1950.  These  studies  led  Los  Alamos  to  conclude  that  "any  area  which  is  two
miles  or  more  from  the  firing  point  may  be  regarded  as  a  non-hazardous  area."109
As  a  result  of  these  studies,  Los  Alamos  restricted  RaLa  testing  to  take  place  only
when  the  winds  were  blowing  away  from  the  town  and  laboratory  of  Los
Alamos."0  Systematic  weather  forecasting,  therefore,  began  only  in  1949,  after
more  than  120  tests  had  been  carried  out,  and  maintaining  the  capability  to
forecast  wind  conditions  for  these  tests  remained  an  important  requirement  over
the  years. ' ' '

526


Chapter  1 1

The  meteorological  constraints  presumably  reduced  the  radiation
exposures  in  Los  Alamos  itself;  exposures  in  more  distant  communities,  while
probably  more  frequent,  remained  lower  than  Los  Alamos.  At  the  Advisory
Committee's  public  meeting  in  Santa  Fe  on  January  20,  1995,  however,  Los
Alamos  activist  Tyler  Mercier  commented  that  most  of  the  "shots  were  fired  when
the  wind  was  blowing  to  the  northeast.  At  this  point  in  time,  that's  where  most  of
the  population  of  this  region  lived.  I  mean,  half  of  it  is  Spanish  and  half  of  it
Native  American."  Mercier  concluded  that  there  "appears  to  be  a  callous
disregard  for  the  well-being  and  lives  of  the  Spanish  and  Native  Americans  in  our
community.""2

The  RaLa  tests  were  suspended  from  July  1950  to  March  1952.  Routine
radiological  survey  procedures  were  put  into  place  when  testing  resumed.
Surveyors  would  drive  along  roads  in  three  sectors  monitoring  radiation  hazards.
Readings  were  typically  below  1  mrad  per  hour  (1  mR/hr),  but  reached  levels  of
up  to  15  mR/hr  at  nearby  locations  and  up  to  3  mR/hr  at  distances  of  several
miles.  Readings  in  excess  of  6  mR/hr  required  further  action,  including  possible
road  closure.  If  the  surveyors  detected  significant  levels,  they  would  continue
monitoring  in  the  next  canyon  downwind.  On  at  least  one  occasion,  ground
contamination  at  relatively  large  distances  from  Los  Alamos  led  monitors  to
extend  their  survey  to  a  nearby  town  (Espanola),  where  they  detected  no
radioactivity."3

The  RaLa  tests  were  understood  from  the  beginning  to  be  hazardous,  but
they  were  also  critical  to  the  design  of  nuclear  weapons.  Los  Alamos  officials
took  significant  steps  to  understand  and  limit  those  risks.  On  at  least  two
occasions-in  late  1946  and  from  1950  to  1952-they  suspended  testing  amid
questions  about  the  continuing  need  and  decided  to  continue  testing."4  When  the
RaLa  tests  finally  ended  in  1961,  an  alternative  means  of  obtaining  needed
information  had  become  available.

Risks  to  Workers

From  the  beginning,  the  RaLa  tests  also  raised  concerns  over  hazards  to
workers,  particularly  the  chemists,  in  spite  of  elaborate  measures  adopted  to  limit
these  chemists'  radiation  exposures."5  Lanthanum  140,  with  a  half-life  of  forty
hours,  is  itself  the  decay  product  of  barium  140,  which  was  separated  from  spent
reactor  fuel  at  Oak  Ridge  or  Idaho  National  Engineering  Laboratory  in  later
years'  '"and  transported  in  heavily  shielded  containers  to  Los  Alamos.  There,
chemists  would  periodically  separate  out  the  highly  radiaoactive  lanthanum  for
use  in  the  implosion  tests.

Soon  after  testing  began  on  September  21,  1944,  the  RaLa  program  posed
a  puzzle  for  radiation  safety.  On  October  16,  Louis  Hempelmann,  director  of  the
Health  Division  at  Los  Alamos,  wrote  to  Manhattan  Project  medical  director


527


Part  II

Stafford  Warren  about  blood  changes  observed  in  the  chemists  working  on  the
most  recent  RaLa  test:"7

[I]t  looks  now  as  though  I  was  too  excited  about  the
blood  changes,  but  at  that  time  it  seemed  to  me  to
be  such  a  clear  cut  case  of  cause  and  effect  that  I
thought  the  measurements  of  dosage  must  have
been  incorrect.  Now  I  feel  reasonably  certain  of  the
dosage. ...  It  was  a  case  where  risk  was  taken
knowingly  and  willingly  because  it  seemed
necessary  for  the  project. ...  It  is  my  feeling  that  it
should  be  the  decision  of  the  Director  whether  or
not  risks  of  this  type  should  be  taken. .  .  ."8

In  August  1946  Hempelmann  termed  the  exposures  of  personnel  in  the
Chemical  Group  "excessive"  and  recommended  that  no  more  "RaLa  shots"  be
attempted  until  "replacements  are  obtained  for  each  member  in  this  team.""9  The
tests  were  suspended  temporarily  "because  of  over-exposure  of  personnel  to
radiation."120  Los  Alamos  was  faced  with  the  alternative  of  increasing  its  staff  (so
that  individual  exposures  could  be  reduced)  or  shutting  work  down  until  safety
measures  were  installed.

RaLa  testing  resumed  in  December  1 946,  after  a  review  to  determine
whether  it  was  still  necessary,121  but  no  documents  are  available  to  determine
whether  safety  procedures  or  staffing  were  changed.  What  did  change  was  that
researchers  began  a  formal  study  of  the  relationship  between  the  radiation
exposures  and  blood  counts  of  the  Bayo  Canyon  chemists.  The  chemists'
depressed  white  blood  counts  (lymphopenia),  presumably  the  same  changes  noted
two  years  earlier,  posed  a  puzzle  that  continued  for  at  least  a  decade,  resulting  in
three  scientific  reports.122  In  1954,  Thomas  Shipman,  who  had  replaced
Hempelmann  as  Health  Division  director,  wrote  to  the  AEC  that

The  blood  counts  were  done  with  extreme  care  . . .
and  we  are  satisfied  that  the  changes  in  counts  are
actual  and  not  imaginary.  It  is  our  belief,  however,
that  they  don't  mean  anything;  if  they  do  mean
anything,  we  don't  know  what  it  is.123

The  cause  of  these  blood  effects  remains  uncertain.  The  reported  doses  of
roughly  10  rad  per  year  are  well  below  levels  expected  to  produce  any  detectable
blood  changes,  a  fact  that  was  known  by  1950.124  While  it  is  possible  the  effect
could  have  been  due  to  undetected  internal  contamination,125  a  more  likely
explanation  may  be  that  the  chemists  were  exposed  to  chemical  compounds  that
produced  the  observed  blood  changes.126

528


Chapter  1 1

It  appears  that  in  the  latter  part  of  the  1940s  some  Los  Alamos  officials
worried  about  the  possible  consequences  of  publicly  releasing  data  on  health
effects,  including  those  related  to  the  chemists.  A  1946  internal  Los  Alamos
memo  records  that  Dr.  Oppenheimer  asked  that  "all  reports  on  health  problems  be
separately  classified  and  issued  at  his  request."  The  author  of  the  memo  indicated
his  belief  that  the  purpose  was  to  "safeguard  the  project  against  being  sued  by
people  claiming  to  have  been  damaged."127  Two  years  later,  Norman  Knowlton,  a
Los  Alamos  hematologist,  reported  on  the  blood  changes  in  ten  workers  at  the  lab.
A  1948  memo  from  the  AEC's  insurance  branch  argued  that  releasing  this  report
on  blood  counts  could  have  "a  shattering  effect  on  the  morale  of  the  employees  if
they  became  aware  that  there  was  substantial  reason  to  question  the  standards  of
safety  under  which  they  are  working"  and  concluded  that  "the  question  of  making
this  document  public  should  be  given  very  careful  study."128  The  report  was  not
classified,  however,  although  later  reports  were  stamped  "Official  Use  Only."

While  the  remaining  information  on  the  Los  Alamos  chemists  is
fragmentary,  the  experience  raises  an  enduring  question:  What  are  the  obligations
of  the  government  and  its  contractors  to  notify  and  protect  employees  whose  work
may  expose  them  to  continuing  hazards,  even  when  the  risk  is  known  to  be  small
or  is  uncertain?  As  is  discussed  in  chapter  12,  during  the  same  period,  issues  of
worker  protection  and  notification  were  raised  much  more  starkly  in  the  case  of
the  uranium  miners,  who  were  placed  at  significant  risk,  a  risk  they  had  not
"knowingly  and  willingly"  taken.

Informing  the  Public

Although  many  in  Los  Alamos-those  who  worked  on  bomb  design-knew
of  the  RaLa  program  and  its  potential  hazards,  there  is  no  indication  of  any
discussion  with  other  workers  or  local  communities.  For  example,  from  the  mid-
1940s  to  the  mid-1950s  many  Pueblo  people  who  may  not  have  been  informed
worked  at  the  lab  as  day  laborers,  domestics,  and  manufacturers  of  detonators.129
The  first  public  mention  appears  to  have  come  in  1963,  when  the  Los  Alamos
laboratory  newsletter  printed  an  article  describing  the  cleanup  of  Bayo  Canyon.130
Los  Alamos  reports  that  its  first  concerted  efforts  to  tell  the  Pueblo  people  about
the  RaLa  program  did  not  occur  until  1994,  when  Los  Alamos  began  its  review  of
the  RaLa  program.131

Representatives  of  the  pueblos  near  Los  Alamos  most  likely  to  be  affected
by  the  RaLa  tests  have  complained  about  past  and  continuing  failures  of
laboratory  officials  to  communicate  with  Pueblo  workers  or  communities.  Recent
efforts  at  Los  Alamos  to  undo  this  legacy  of  secrecy  have  created  a  continuing
sense  of  frustration;  Pueblo  representatives  state  that  information  and  other
relations  with  the  lab  are  still  too  tightly  controlled  to  be  trusted  completely.132

It  is  difficult  for  any  outsider  to  appreciate  fully  the  unique  cultural  and
religious  viewpoint  from  which  the  Pueblo  Indians  perceive  the  effects  of

529


Part  II

environmental  releases.  In  addition  to  having  several  holy  sites  located  near  Los
Alamos,  the  Pueblo  have  a  deep  respect  for  the  land,  which  appears  to  have  been
violated  by  many  of  the  activities  at  Los  Alamos.133  The  Pueblo  continue  to  rely
to  some  degree  for  the  basic  necessities  of  food,  heat,  and  shelter  on  plants,
animals,  and  the  earth,  and  they  suspect  that  they  may  be  at  added  risk  of
exposure  to  radioactivity  in  the  environment.'34

George  Voelz,  a  Los  Alamos  physician  who  was  at  the  lab  during  some  of
the  RaLa  tests,  told  the  Advisory  Committee,  "As  far  as  I  know  there  was  not
much  communication  going  on  with  the  people  in  the  area.  And  that,  in
retrospect  was  a  mistake."135  As  a  result  of  these  failures  of  communication,  Los
Alamos  now  faces  a  difficult  challenge,  five  decades  later,  of  attempting  to
establish  trust  with  neighboring  communities  that  have  become  more  suspicious
because  of  what  they  have  learned.  Here,  as  in  Hanford,  credibility  is  the  casualty
of  silence  and  secrecy.

Studies  of  Environmental  Risks  and  Safety

The  Green  Run  and  the  radiological  warfare  and  RaLa  programs  were  by
no  means  the  only  government-sponsored  experiments  in  which  radioactive
materials  were  intentionally  released  into  the  environment.  Scientists  undertook  a
wide  variety  of  studies  designed  to  understand  the  risks  of  environmental
exposure  to  radioactive  materials.  For  example,  tests  of  experimental  nuclear
reactors  at  the  National  Reactor  Testing  Station  in  Idaho  and  the  National  Reactor
Development  Station  in  Nevada  were  designed  to  simulate  possible  accident
scenarios  under  carefully  controlled  and  isolated  conditions.  Similarly,  tests  at
the  Nevada  Test  Site  were  designed  to  understand  the  possible  effects  of  an
accidental  (nonnuclear)  explosion  of  a  nuclear  weapon.136

In  addition  to  intentional  releases  designed  to  test  the  safety  of  nuclear
machinery,  safety  was  also  a  concern  in  studies  designed  to  understand  the  fate  of
radioactive  materials  in  the  environment.  Many  of  these  studies  simply  took
advantage  of  releases  that  occurred  accidentally  or  were  incidental  to  other
projects.  In  1943,  studies  of  the  exposure  of  salmon  in  the  Columbia  River  to  the
radioactive  effluent  from  Hanford's  reactors  set  in  motion  the  growing  and  largely
public  science  of  radioecology.  The  environmental  analogue  of  radioisotope
tracer  studies  designed  to  better  understand  the  workings  of  the  human  body,
these  studies  were  intended  both  to  follow  the  course  of  radionuclides  released
into  the  environment  during  nuclear  weapons  production  and  testing,  and  use
radionuclides  to  trace  the  basic  workings  of  the  environment.  The  deliberate
release  of  very  small  quantities  of  radioactive  material  provided  the  opportunity
for  more-controlled  environmental  study  than  those  studies  that  simply  observed
radionuclides  already  released  into  the  environment.137  The  Advisory  Committee
did  not  attempt  to  survey  the  entire  field  of  radioecology,  but  we  have  reviewed
the  following  examples  in  some  detail.

530


Chapter  11
Project  Chariot

Project  Chariot  was  a  component  of  Project  Plowshare,  the  brainchild  of
physicist  Edward  Teller,  who  helped  develop  the  first  hydrogen  bomb.  Plowshare
arose  in  the  late  1950s  in  response  to  public  protests  against  atmospheric  nuclear
testing  and  was  intended  to  demonstrate  that  "clean"  nuclear  explosives  would
provide  safe,  peaceful  uses  of  atomic  energy.138

In  1958,  Teller  selected  a  site  in  northern  Alaska  for  Project  Chariot,  the
proposed  excavation  of  an  Arctic  seaport  using  a  series  of  nuclear  explosions.
The  site  chosen  was  near  Cape  Thompson,  roughly  thirty  miles  from  the  Inupiat
Eskimo  village  of  Point  Hope.  This  proposal,  which  was  the  subject  of  public
debate,  died  in  1962  in  the  face  of  popular  opposition.139  However,  extensive
observations  of  the  Alaskan  ecosystem  were  undertaken  between  1958  and  1962
to  provide  a  baseline  for  comparison  with  results  of  the  planned  nuclear
explosions.  These  observations  led  to  the  first  awareness  of  the  environmental
hazards  of  cesium  137  from  distant  (primarily  Soviet)140  atmospheric  nuclear  tests
and  led  to  a  series  of  studies  on  cesium  in  the  food  chain  and  in  humans.141

Most  of  the  environmental  studies  in  Project  Chariot  were  purely
observational,  but  one  series  of  studies  involved  the  intentional  release  of  small
quantities  of  radioactive  materials--a  total  of  26  millicuries  of  iodine  131,
strontium  85,  cesium  137,  and  mixed  fission  products.142  In  several  studies,
researchers  from  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey  spread  radioactive  materials  on  the
surface  of  small  plots  of  land  and  observed  their  spread  across  the  surface  when
sprayed  with  water  to  simulate  rainfall.  In  another,  researchers  placed  mixed
fission  products  in  a  small  pit  and  measured  their  transport  through  the  subsurface
clay,  and  in  yet  another,  researchers  studied  the  spread  of  radioactivity  in  a  creek
contaminated  with  radioactive  soil  from  Nevada.  After  these  studies,  the
contaminated  soil  was  removed  and  buried  in  above-ground  mounds.  Although
this  was  a  technical  violation  of  regulatory  requirements,  an  AEC  memo
expressed  general  satisfaction  with  the  cleanup,  noting  that  burial  in  the
permafrost  would  have  been  too  difficult.143

After  the  initial  cleanup,  the  site  remained  dormant  for  thirty  years  until
1992,  when  a  researcher  discovered  correspondence  between  the  AEC  and  USGS
about  the  tracer  studies.  In  response  to  public  concerns,  the  Department  of
Energy  undertook  to  clean  up  the  mounds'  potentially  contaminated  soil.  A
survey  indicated  no  externally  observable  radioactivity,  and  very  little,  if  any
measurable,  radioactive  material  was  believed  to  remain.  In  1993,  the  mounds  of
soil  were  removed  for  disposal  at  the  Nevada  Test  Site.144  Caroline  Cannon,  an
Inupiat  Indian  resident  of  Point  Hope,  told  the  Advisory  Committee  at  its  public
meeting  in  Santa  Fe,

I  have  lived  in  Point  Hope  all  my  life  and  eaten  the
food  from  the  sea  and  the  land  and  drank  the  water

531


Part  II

of  Cape  Thompson,  along  with  the  others.  I  have  to
wonder  about  my  health,  what  impact  the  poison  on
the  earth  will  have  all  through  my  lifetime,
emotionally,  physically,  and  most  of  all  for  my
children  and  my  grandchildren.145

Although  the  risk  to  the  population  was  minimal,  residents  still  wonder
whether  other  experiments  might  have  occurred  and  remain  secret.146  Here  again,
government  secrecy  in  the  past  is  undermining  government  credibility  in  the
present.  How  much  comfort  are  Ms.  Cannon  and  others  like  her  able  to  take  in
reassurances  from  the  government  about  risks  to  future  generations,  a  government
that  they  perceive  unjustifiably  kept  them  in  the  dark?

Controlled  Radioiodine  Releases

A  small  number  of  intentional  releases  involved  the  deliberate  exposure  of
human  subjects  to  trace  quantities  of  radioisotopes  in  the  environment.  The  most
systematic  of  these  were  five  of  the  roughly  thirty  Controlled  Environmental
Radioiodine  Tests  (CERT),  carried  out  at  Idaho  National  Engineering  Laboratory
(INEL)  between  1963  and  1968.  Small  quantities  of  1-131  were  released  into  the
atmosphere  under  carefully  monitored  meteorological  conditions.147

In  one  study,  seven  volunteers  drank  milk  from  cows  that  grazed  on  the
contaminated  pasture.  The  quantity  of  iodine  was  measured  carefully  in  the  air,
on  the  grass,  in  the  milk,  and  later  in  the  volunteers'  thyroids,  allowing  a
quantitative  reconstruction  of  the  full  environmental  pathway.148  The  maximum
exposure  among  these  volunteers  was  reported  as  0.63  rad  to  the  thyroid,  nearly  a
factor  of  50  below  the  contemporary  annual  occupational  exposure  limits.149  In
four  other  studies,  a  total  of  about  twenty  volunteers  stood  downwind  at  the  time
of  the  release;  their  exposures,  from  inhaling  1-131  in  the  air,  were  much  lower.'50
Apparently,  all  these  volunteers  were  members  of  the  INEL  staff.151
Measurements  of  the  radioactivity  in  their  thyroids  provided  a  quantitative
reconstruction  of  the  inhalation  pathway.

Studies  similar  to  the  CERT  took  place  at  Hanford  in  1962,  1963,  and
possibly  in  1965.  The  1963  Hanford  test  involved  human  volunteers  from
Hanford's  health  physics  staff,  as  did  studies  of  iodine  uptake  from  milk.152

The  subjects  in  all  these  studies  are  referred  to  as  volunteers  in  the
relevant  documents.  No  evidence  is  available  bearing  on  what  these  subjects
knew  or  were  told  about  the  experiments  or  the  conditions  under  which  they
agreed  to  participate.  The  subjects  were  all  staff  members  of  the  agency  (or  its
contractors)  conducting  the  research.  The  documents  suggest  that  these  staff
members  included  knowledgeable  individuals  who  participated  in  these
experiments  in  the  spirit  of  self-experimentation.


532


Chapter  11
Reconstructing,  Comparing,  and  Understanding  Risks

Thus  far,  we  have  only  briefly  characterized  the  risks  associated  with  the
intentional  releases  reviewed  in  this  chapter.  Just  how  risky  were  those
intentional  releases  and  how  much  of  this  risk  materialized?  Although  these
questions  cannot  be  answered  with  certainty,  the  answers  can  be  approximated.
Actual  and  suspected  failures  to  respect  public  health  in  the  environmental
practices  of  the  past  have  often  led  to  efforts  to  reconstruct  the  basic  facts  and
estimate  the  likely  harm  from  environmental  releases  of  radioactive  materials.
This  process  of  environmental  dose  reconstruction  has  become  an  essential  part  of
informing  the  public.

The  task  of  estimating  past  environmental  exposures  to  radioactive
materials  is  a  complex,  multistep  process.  The  first  step  is  to  collect  data  from
historical  records  on  the  amount  of  material  released.  The  second  is  to  use
records  on  weather,  actual  measurements  of  radioactivity  in  the  environment,  and
computer  models  to  reconstruct  where  this  material  went.  The  third  step  is  to
estimate  how  this  distribution  of  material  might  result  in  radiation  exposures  to
humans.  Finally,  these  exposure  estimates  can  be  combined  with  mathematical
models  of  radiation  risks  to  estimate  the  resulting  harm  to  people  who  were
exposed.

Radioactive  materials  released  into  the  environment  can  affect  humans  in
two  ways.  First,  they  can  be  a  source  of  radiation  external  to  the  body:  beta
radiation,  which  affects  the  skin,  or  more  penetrating  gamma  radiation.  Second,
they  can  enter  the  body  from  contaminated  air,  food,  or  water  and  provide  an
internal  source  of  radiation.  Of  these  environmental  pathways  to  radiation
exposure,  the  food  pathway  is  by  far  the  most  complicated.  Radionuclides  can
enter  the  food  chain  at  many  points,  through  contaminated  air,  water,  and  soil,
resulting  in  contaminated  fruits,  vegetables,  meat,  and  dairy  products.

The  hazards  from  environmental  exposures  to  radionuclides  differ  in
important  quantitative  ways  from  those  due  to  medical  procedures  or  participation
in  biomedical  research.  The  natural  dilution  of  materials  in  the  environment
means  that  individual  exposures  even  from  massive  releases  are  often  quite  small,
although  the  chemical  and  biological  processes  involved  in  exposures  through  the
food  chain  can  lead  to  effects  that  counteract  this  dilution.  Finally,  many  more
people  may  be  exposed,  with  exposures  that  vary  widely  from  person  to  person.

Because  individual  exposures  are  generally  too  low  to  produce  any  acute
effects,  the  main  form  of  injury  possible  from  environmental  radiation  exposure  is
cancer,  which  may  occur  many  years  after  the  exposure,  and  the  number  of  cases
attributable  to  such  exposures  can  be  expected  to  be  relatively  small.  Evidence  of
cancer  from  exposure  to  radiation  is  difficult  to  separate  out  from  other  possible
causes  of  those  injuries;  for  the  intentional  releases  discussed  in  this  chapter,  it  is
essentially  impossible.  Instead,  we  must  rely  on  models  of  risk  based  on  studies
of  other  human  radiation  exposures.

533


Table  1.

Magnitude  of  Radioactive  Releases

Event

Location

Year(s)

Curies  Released

Isotopes

Risk  (fatal  cancers)'

(number)

(Total)

Chernobyl

Ukraine,

1986

950,000

Cs-134;

17,400  expected/2.9

Soviet  Union

1,900,000
17,000,000

Cs-137;
1-131";

billion  exposed'

Household

United  States

Lifetime

N/A

Ra-222

14,000  per  year

radon

expected/  240  milliond

Atomic

Worldwide

1945-

-26  million  (Cs-

Cs-137;

12,000  expected/ 5

weapons  testing

1980

137); -18  million

Sr-90;

billion  '

(atmospheric)

(Sr-90);

-19  billion  (1-131);
-6.5  billion  (H-3);
-6  million  (C- 14)

1-131;

H-3;

C-14

First  A-bombs

Hiroshima  &

1945

-250,000,000

Short-

300 estimated\76,000

Nagasaki,

lived

tracked8

Japan

fission
products'

Early  Hanford

Hanford,

1945-

700,000

1-131  "

-1.6  cases  of  thyroid

operations

Washington

1947

cancer  expected/
3,200 '

Three  Mile

Harrisburg,

1979

15

1-131;

0.7/  2  million  exposed

Island

Penn-
sylvania

10,000,000

noble
gasesJ

k

RaLa  tests

Los  Alamos,

1944-

250,000

La- 140

0.4  cases/  10,000

(254)

New  Mexico

1962

exposed1

Green  Run

Hanford,

1949

8,000

1-131;

0.04  expected/30,000

Washington

20,000

Xe-133

exposed"1

R W  field  tests

Dugway,

1949-

13,000

Ta-182n

Unknown"

(65)

Utah

1952

a.  For  every  event  but  one,  this  column  displays  the  risk  of  excess  cancer  fatalities.  For  I  -131
released  during  "Hanford  early  operations,"  it  displays  the  risk  of  excess  cases  of  thyroid  cancer.

b.  United  Nations  Scientific  Committee  on  the  Effects  of  Atomic  Radiation  (UNSCEAR),  Sources
and  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiations  (New  York:  United  Nations,  1993),  1 14,  basing  findings  on  L.  A.  Ilyin  et
al.,  "Recontamination  Patterns  and  Possible  Health  Consequences  of  the  Accident  at  the  Chernobyl  Nuclear
Power  Station,"  Journal  of  Radiological  Protection  10  (1990):  3-29.  The  radioactivity  released  in  the
Chernobyl  accident  would  include  other  fission  products,  particularly  long-lived  ones,  but  isotopes  of  cesium


534


Chapter  11

and  iodine  posed  the  greatest  health  hazard.

c.  Lynn  R.  Anspaugh,  Robert  J.  Catlin,  and  Marvin  Goldman,  "The  Global  Impact  of  the
Chernobyl  Reactor  Accident,"  Science  242  (1988): 1516.

d.  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Public  Health  Service,  A  Citizen's  Guide  to  Radon,
(Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  May  1992),  2.

e.  United  Nations  Scientific  Committee  on  the  Effects  of  Atomic  Radiation,  Ionizing  Radiation:
Sources  and  Biological  Effects  (New  York:  United  Nations,  1 982),  2 1 2-226.  While  the  list  of  fission
products  released  is  incomplete,  other  products  do  not  contribute  much  in  the  way  of  effective  doses.

f.  This  is  the  rough  level  of  radioactivity  remaining  one  day  after  each  of  the  explosions,  including
biologically  active  and  relatively  active  isotopes.  Samuel  Glasstone,  ed..  The  Effects  of  Atomic  Weapons
(Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1950),  220.  The  level  of  radioactivity  diminished  rapidly  thereafter.  Prompt
neutron  and  gamma  radiation  from  the  nuclear  explosion,  rather  than  fallout,  was  responsible  for  most  of  the
radiation  exposures.

g.  "Life  Span  Study,"  in  Hiroshima  Radiation  Effects  Research  Foundation  [electronic  bulletin
board]  (cited  31  May  1995);  available  from  www.rerf.or.jp;  World  Wide  Web.  This  is  the  number  of  excess
cancer  fatalities  between  1950  and  1985  among  the  76,000  for  whom  doses  have  been  calculated.

h.  Sara  Cate,  A.  James  Ruttenber,  and  Allen  W.  Conklin,  "Feasibility  of  an  Epidemiologic  Study
of  Thyroid  Neoplasia  in  Persons  Exposed  to  Radionuclides  from  the  Hanford  Nuclear  Facility  between  1944
and  1956."  Health  Physics  59  (1990): 169.

i.  Kenneth  Kopecky  et  al.,  "Clarification  of  Hanford  Thyroid  Disease  Study,"  HPS  Newsletter,
July  1995,24-25.

j.  UNSCEAR,  Sources  and  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation,  1 1 4.

k.  Report  of  the  President's  Commission  on  the  Accident  at  Three  Mile  Island:  The  Need  for
Change: The  Legacy  of '  TMl  (New  York:  Pergamon  Press.  1979),  12.

1.  This  is  an  upper  estimate  based  upon  a  preliminary  dose  reconstruction  by  staff  of  the  Los
Alamos  National  Laboratory  of  1 . 1  mSV  (1.1  rem).  "Assuming  an  individual  had  been  at  the  Los  Alamos
site  continuously  throughout  the  experiments,  the  total  dose  from  the  1 8  year  RaLa  series  was  estimated  to
have  been  approximately  1.1  mSv."  Using  the  average  dose  of  0.6  mSv  (0.6  rem),  the  excess  cancer  risk  falls
to  0.24.  Los  Alamos  notes,  "A  somewhat  abbreviated  approach  could  be  used  wherein  a  static  population  of
10,000  is  assumed  to  be  uniformly  distributed  across  the  Los  Alamos  of  the  1950s.  The  dose  as  a  function  of
distance  could  be  used  to  estimate  approximate  population  doses."  D.  H.  Kraig,  Human  Studies  Project
Team,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory,  fax  to  Gilbert  Whittemore  (ACHRE  staff),  14  September  1995
("Dose  Reconstruction  for  Experiments  Involving  Lal40  at  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory,  1944-1962")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-091495-A).

m.  Maurice  Robkin,  "Experimental  Release  of  1-131:  The  Green  Run,"  Health  Physics  62,  no.  6
(July  1992):  487-495.

n.  See,  for  example  Chemical  Corps,  1952  ("Explosive  Munitions  for  RW  Agents")  (ACHRE  No.
NARA-1 12294-A-10);  Chemical  Corps,  1952  ("Testing  of  RW  Agents")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-1 12294-A-7);
George  Milly,  Chemical  Corps,  27  June  1952  ("Report  of  Field  Tests  623  and  624  Airburst  Test  of  Two
1,000  Lb.  Radiological  Bombs")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-062494-A-16);  E.  Campagna,  Chemical  Corps,  18
September  1953  ("Static  Test  of  Full  Diameter  Sectional  Munitions,  E83")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-062494-A-
15).

o.  The  Advisory  Committee  knows  of  no  dose  reconstructions  for  these  releases.

535


Part  II

Increased  cancer  rates  among  Japanese  survivors  of  the  atomic  bombings
provide  the  basis  for  most  current  radiation  exposure  risk  estimates.153  Health
effects  from  the  massive  accident  at  Chernobyl  and  from  other  sites  in  the  former
Soviet  Union  should  also  be  detectable  and  eventually  may  improve  our
understanding  of  the  risks  of  chronic,  low-level  radiation  exposure.  The
uncertainties  in  these  scientific  analyses  are  a  major  component  of  the  uncertainty
in  risk  estimation  from  environmental  exposures.

In  addition  to  individual  exposures,  it  is  important  to  know  how  many
people  were  exposed.  The  population  dose-obtained  by  adding  up  the  individual
exposures-provides  a  measure  of  the  overall  risk  to  the  exposed  population.
According  to  models  used  by  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA),  we
can  expect  about  one  induced  fatal  cancer  for  every  1 ,940  person-rem  of  radiation
exposure.154  While  the  risk  to  any  one  person  may  be  small,  the  exposure  of  a
large  population  can  lead  to  a  statistically  significant  increase  in  the  number  of
fatal  cancers,  but  it  will  be  impossible  to  attribute  any  particular  cancer  to
radiation  exposure.

The  Committee  was  not  equipped  to  reconstruct  historical  doses  from
intentional  releases,  but  can  make  some  rough  judgments  based  on  more  formal
analyses  performed  by  others.

The  Green  Run

The  Green  Run  took  place  after  years  of  routine  emissions  of  radioiodine
from  the  wartime  and  early  postwar  operations  of  the  Hanford  plant,  and  it  added
a  relatively  small  amount  to  the  overall  risk  (see  the  accompanying  table  1,
"Magnitude  of  Radioactive  Releases").  In  1987  the  Department  of  Energy
established  the  Hanford  Environmental  Dose  Reconstruction  (HEDR)  project  to
provide  an  estimate  of  all  the  exposures  that  might  have  resulted  and  continues  to
refine  its  estimates  of  the  resulting  radiation  doses  to  people.155  These  exposures,
primarily  through  the  food  chain,  may  have  produced  a  measurable  excess  in
thyroid  disease.  A  follow-up  study  of  the  exposed  population  is  attempting  to
ascertain  whether  excess  thyroid  disease  can  indeed  be  seen.

The  Green  Run  represents  only  about  1  percent  of  all  the  radioiodine
releases  from  Hanford.  Fortunately  for  most  nearby  residents,  it  occurred  at  a  time
of  year  when  people  were  not  eating  fresh  garden  vegetables  or  drinking  milk
from  cattle  grazing  in  open  pastures.  The  estimated  radiation  dose  to  members  of
the  public  from  Hanford's  operations  for  all  of  1949  probably  did  not  exceed  600
mrad  to  the  thyroid,  and  doses  ten  times  lower  were  more  typical  of  the  most
highly  exposed  population.  The  Committee  estimates  that  the  Green  Run  may
have  increased  the  expected  number  of  fatal  thyroid  cancers  in  the  exposed
population  by  0.04,  within  broad  error  margins.156  This  means  it  is  highly
unlikely  that  even  one  person  died  as  a  result  of  the  Green  Run.  A  larger
incidence  of  benign  thyroid  conditions  is  likely,  but  there  is  no  evidence  to

536


Chapter  11

support  a  connection  between  the  intentional  releases  and  any  other  possible
medical  conditions.

Radiological  Warfare

No  formal  dose  reconstruction  has  been  done  for  the  radiological  warfare
field  tests  at  Dugway.  Although  the  radioactive  tantalum  used  in  these  tests  does
not  concentrate  in  the  food  chain,  because  of  its  long  half-life  there  may  have
been  many  opportunities  for  people  to  be  exposed.  Weather  and  vehicle  traffic
could  have  spread  some  of  the  contamination  outside  the  Proving  Ground,  and
even  repeated  low-level  exposures  to  uranium  prospectors  or  hikers  who  regularly
wandered  onto  the  site  may  have  been  possible.

Whatever  public  health  hazard  the  RW  tests  at  Dugway  may  have  posed  at
the  time,  the  radioactive  decay  of  the  tantalum  caused  the  risks  to  dissipate  over
time.  By  1960,  no  more  than  a  few  millicuries  of  tantalum  remained,  dispersed  so
widely  that  by  this  time  it  posed  no  conceivable  human  or  environmental  hazard.

RaLa  Tests

Los  Alamos's  1995  report  on  the  history  of  the  RaLa  test  program  contains
basic  information  necessary  for  an  environmental  dose  reconstruction,  including
the  amount  of  radioactivity  released,  a  rough  indication  of  the  amount  of  high
explosive  used  in  each  test,  and  meteorological  and  fallout  data  where
available.157  Advisory  Committee  staff  reviewed  the  process  by  which  this
information  was  assembled  and  reported  that  the  historical  reconstruction  appears
to  be  a  reasonably  accurate  representation  of  what  actually  occurred.

Los  Alamos  is  using  this  historical  information  to  produce  an
environmental  dose  assessment,  which  it  is  providing  to  the  state  of  New  Mexico
and  plans  to  submit  for  publication  in  a  peer-reviewed  journal.  The  Committee
was  not  in  a  position  to  judge  the  adequacy  of  the  dose  reconstruction,  but  the
sources,  methodology,  and  results  will  be  available  for  review  by  outside  experts.

Individual  exposures  from  the  full  series  of  RaLa  tests  were  somewhat
higher  than  for  the  single  release  of  the  Green  Run,  and  the  exposed  population
was  somewhat  smaller.  According  to  a  preliminary  dose  reconstruction  by  the
Human  Studies  Project  Team  at  Los  Alamos,  the  total  dose  for  someone  living
continuously  in  Los  Alamos  for  all  eighteen  years  of  the  program  was  roughly
1 10  mrem.  With  a  population  of  approximately  10,000  in  Los  Alamos  County,  0.4
excess  cancer  deaths  might  be  expected.  The  average  dose  would  have  been  60
mrem  for  someone  living  in  Los  Alamos.158

The  General  Accounting  Office  noted  an  Air  Force  report  that  a  B- 1 7
airplane  detected  radioactive  debris  from  one  of  the  tests  as  far  as  seventy  miles
away,  over  the  town  of  Watrous,  New  Mexico,  but  it  is  unlikely  that  any
significant  risks  extended  to  this  distance.  The  Human  Studies  Project  Team

537


Part  II

concluded,  however,  that  the  cloud  could  not  have  gone  as  far  as  claimed  at  the
time  of  the  observation  and  suggests  that  the  atmospheric  conductivity  apparatus
used  by  the  Air  Force  was  sensitive  to  effects  other  than  radioactivity.159

Los  Alamos  has  not  attempted  to  reconstruct  the  doses  to  the  Bayo
Canyon  chemists.  Using  data  from  one  of  the  reports,  however,  it  would  appear
that  the  total  exposure  for  these  chemists  was  high  enough  to  place  these
individuals  at  some  increased  risk  for  developing  a  radiation-induced  cancer.160

Other  Intentional  Releases

No  risk  estimates  are  available  for  the  other  releases  the  Committee  has
studied,  and  aside  from  DOE's  Idaho  National  Engineering  Laboratory,  no  dose
reconstructions  have  been  undertaken.  It  does  appear,  however,  that  the  human
health  risks  were  small  even  compared  with  the  minimal  risks  of  the  intentional
releases  discussed  above  and  with  other,  more  familiar  exposures  to  radioactivity
in  the  environment  (see  the  accompanying  table,  "Magnitude  of  Radioactive
Releases").

POLICIES  AND  PRINCIPLES  GOVERNING  SECRET
INTENTIONAL  RELEASES:  THE  EFFECTIVENESS  OF
CURRENT  REGULATIONS

Policies  and  Practices  in  the  Early  Years

When  the  federal  government  set  out  to  apply  atomic  energy  to  national
needs,  there  were  no  specific  rules  or  policies  to  govern  the  deliberate  release  of
radionuclides  into  the  environment.  Nonetheless,  the  declassified  record  of  the
releases  just  reviewed  shows  that  those  responsible  considered  the  basic  issues
that  concern  us  today  and  that  are  today  the  subject  of  federal  regulation.  These
include  the  need  to  limit  risks,  the  question  of  who  should  bear  those  risks,  and
the  extent  of  the  obligation  to  inform  affected  citizens.

This  record  indicates  that,  for  intentional  releases  as  for  biomedical
experimentation,  the  government  was  most  concerned  with,  and  placed  the
highest  priority  on,  limiting  human  health  risks.  At  Hanford,  for  example,  this
was  done  by  establishing  limits  for  the  permitted  level  of  radioactive
contamination.  Some  of  these  guidelines  were  exceeded,  if  only  temporarily,  by
the  Green  Run.  For  the  radiological  warfare  program,  the  Department  of  Defense
established  a  panel  of  outside  experts  to  safeguard  against  excessive  risks  to  the
general  public.

The  federal  government  struggled  throughout  these  early  years  to  clarify
its  obligations  to  protect  the  general  public  from  the  risks  of  radioactive
contamination  in  the  environment,  particularly  from  atmospheric  nuclear  weapons
testing  (see  chapter  10).  The  1953  Nevada  test  series  raised  serious  concerns

538


Chapter  1 1

about  whether  and  how  radioactive  fallout  from  the  expanding  testing  program
was  exposing  nearby  people  and  livestock  to  risk.161  In  an  analysis  that  seems
equally  apt  for  intentional  releases,  Richard  Elliott,  information  director  of  the
AEC's  Santa  Fe  Operations  Office,  argued  at  the  time  that  the  AEC  had  the
obligation  to  show  that  the  testing  program  was  "vital  to  the  nation  and  that  it  was
conducted  as  safely  as  possible."  He  also  asserted,  however,  that  the  agency  had
duties  in  addition  to  limiting  risk,  including

(1)  To  inform  concerned  publics  of  the  hazards
created  and  of  preventive  action  which  may  be
undertaken;  (2)  To  warn  people  in  advance  of
potentially  hazardous  situations,  or  of  situations
which  may  alarm  them;  (3)  To  report  after  the  fact
not  only  with  reassurances  but  also  with  details  and
interpretations;  (4)  And,  to  the  extent  of  the
agency's  responsibility,  to  reimburse  the  public  for
its  losses.162

For  most  of  the  intentional  releases  described  in  this  chapter,  information
was  withheld  entirely,  even  when  that  information  might  have  enabled  the  public
to  reduce  its  risk,  however  small,  of  exposure  to  ionizing  radiation.163  This
secrecy  appears  to  have  been  motivated  by  legitimate  national  security  needs  in
the  cases  of  the  Green  Run  and  the  RaLa  program.  The  radiological  warfare
field-testing  program  was  kept  secret  primarily  to  avoid  public  awareness  and
controversy  that  might  jeopardize  the  program.  The  extent  of  secrecy  abated  in
later  years,  and  many  of  the  intentional  releases  that  occurred  from  about  1960
onward  involved  relatively  low  risks  and  were  made  known  to  the  public.

Obligations  to  limit  risk,  to  consider  who  should  bear  the  risk,  and  to
inform  the  public,  while  recognized,  were  often  subordinated  to  concerns  for
national  security,  which  were  sometimes  joined  or  melded  with  concerns  for
public  relations.  The  information  that  is  available  indicates  that  the  physical  harm
from  the  radiation  is  probably  less  than  the  damage— to  individuals,  communities,
and  the  government— caused  by  the  initial  secrecy,  however  well  motivated,  and
by  subsequent  failures  to  deal  honestly  with  the  public  thereafter.  The  legacy  of
distrust,  as  described  in  the  histories  presented  above,  is  probably  more
significant  than  the  legacy  of  physical  harm.

Regulating  the  Levels  of  Risk  the  Government  May  Impose

The  past  fifty  years  has  seen  the  development  of  a  body  of  laws  and
regulations  governing  releases  into  the  environment,  including  releases  of
radioactive  materials.  These  laws  and  regulations  give  legal  standing  to  moral
considerations  about  limiting  risk,  fairness  in  the  imposition  of  risk,  and

539


Part  II

disclosure  to  and  involvement  of  the  public.  When  environmental  releases  take
place  today-for  example,  in  the  cleanup  of  the  nuclear  weapons  complex-they
are  subject  to  rules  that  provide  procedures  for  public  review  and  comment  on
proposed  federal  actions  and  to  rules  that  limit  the  amounts  of  radiation  that  can
be  released  into  the  environment.

Environmental  law  contains  a  variety  of  quantitative  standards  designed  to
limit  the  risk  to  human  health  from  exposure  to  environmental  hazards.  These
limits  apply  both  to  private  companies  and  to  the  federal  government.

The  Atomic  Energy  Act  of  1954  and  the  Clean  Air  Act  of  1970  impose  the
most  important  constraints  on  intentional  releases  of  radioactivity  into  the
environment.164  Regulations  under  both  of  these  laws  limit  the  maximum
exposure  to  any  one  person.  These  limits  are  often  supplemented  by  secondary
standards  (for  example,  on  concentrations  in  air  and  water)  designed  to  prevent
exposures  from  exceeding  this  limit.  This  basic  form  of  regulation  remains
largely  unchanged  from  the  early  days  of  radiation  protection,  although  the
quantitative  limits  have  been  greatly  reduced  over  the  years.165

The  actual  limits  on  radiation  exposures  to  members  of  the  public  have
dropped  dramatically  over  time.  The  initial  postwar  standard  was  for
occupational  exposures:  0.1  R  per  day.166  If  a  person  were  exposed  at  such  levels
for  his  or  her  entire  working  lifetime,  about  fifty  years,  a  rough  extrapolation  of
current  risk  models  would  predict  that  he  or  she  would  be  more  likely  than  not  to
die  of  radiation-induced  cancer.  In  practice,  however,  it  is  extremely  unlikely  that
any  worker  came  close  to  that  level  of  lifetime  exposure.  Once  it  was  recognized
that  standards  for  the  general  public  should  be  stricter  than  those  for  a  potentially
hazardous  workplace,  the  exposure  standard  for  members  of  the  public  was  set  a
factor  often  below  the  occupational  standard.  In  1960,  when  the  occupational
standard  was  reduced  to  5  rem  per  year,  the  standard  for  exposures  to  members  of
the  general  public  was  reduced  to  500  mrem  per  year  from  all  artificial
environmental  sources.167

Since  that  time,  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  and  the  Nuclear
Regulatory  Commission  (NRC)  were  established  as  separate  regulatory
agencies,168  and  radiation  protection  standards  have  been  tightened  further.  The
DOE  and  NRC  have  adopted  the  stricter  limit  of  100  mrem  per  year  for  general
population  exposure,  and  the  EPA  has  proposed  adopting  a  similar  standard.  The
EPA's  standard  for  atmospheric  emissions  under  the  Clean  Air  Act  is  a  factor  of
ten  lower:  10  mrem  per  year.  A  lifetime  of  exposure  at  this  level  would  produce
an  expected  excess  in  cancer  deaths  of  a  few  in  1 0,000. 169

By  way  of  comparison,  the  average  human  exposure  to  background
radiation  from  naturally  occurring  cosmic  rays  and  radioactive  materials  is
roughly  300  mrem  per  year.  Exposure  limits  that  were  initially  much  higher  than
natural  backgrounds  have  since  fallen  substantially  below  those  levels.  Actual
public  exposures  are  much  lower  still,  with  average  medical  exposures  of  roughly
50  mrem  per  year  and  exposures  from  nuclear  power  at  roughly  1  mrem  per  year

540


Chapter  1 1

for  people  living  closest  to  nuclear  power  plants.170  Although  the  risk  associated
with  the  maximum-allowed  exposure  from  human-controlled  sources  has  fallen
over  the  years,  so  that  it  is  now  below  that  from  natural  background  levels,  it
remains  higher  than  that  for  exposure  to  chemical  carcinogens,  which  range  from
linl0,000tolinl,000,000.171

However,  standards  based  solely  on  limiting  individual  exposures  would
not  address  the  possibility  that-as  in  the  case  of  intentional  releases-large
numbers  of  people  might  be  exposed  to  risk,  though  likely  at  low  levels.  As
described  above,  the  population  dose,  obtained  by  adding  up  all  the  individual
doses  provides  a  measure  of  the  overall  risk  to  a  large  exposed  population.  A
more  universal  application  of  the  population  dose  in  the  regulatory  process  would
give  greater  weight  to  this  overall  risk.17"

Under  some  circumstances,  however,  the  federal  government  may  invoke
exceptions  to  these  baseline  standards-imposing  greater  risks  on  its  citizens
where  national  need  dictates.  Under  the  Clean  Air  Act,  only  the  President  may
invoke  such  exceptions,  and  only  on  the  basis  of  "national  security  interest."  The
President  must  report  to  Congress  on  any  such  exceptions  at  the  end  of  the
calendar  year.173  Under  the  Atomic  Energy  Act,  however,  the  Department  of
Energy  is  largely  exempt  from  external  regulation.  When  its  predecessor,  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission,  developed  regulations  for  the  civilian  nuclear  power
industry,  it  also  committed  to  operate  its  own  nuclear  facilities  according  to
certain  safety  provisions,  but  allowed  itself  an  exemption  "when  over-riding
national  security  considerations  dictate."174  Such  an  exception  under  the  Atomic
Energy  Act  could  still  be  invoked  today.  These  exemptions  clearly  allow  national
security  interests  to  take  precedence  over  public  health  concerns.  The  Advisory
Committee  is  concerned  that  this  could  occur  without  adequate  consideration  or
oversight,  and  without  adequate  protection  of  the  public's  interest  in  a  safe
environment  and  public  notice.  Once  the  exemption  is  invoked,  there  is  no  formal
limit  on  the  risks  to  which  members  of  the  public  may  be  exposed,  although  the
requirement  to  report  to  Congress  could  deter  some  actions.

Public  Disclosure  and  Formal  Review

Today's  environmental  laws  require  public  disclosures  of  the  likely
environmental  impacts  of  federal  government  actions,  subject  to  public  and  EPA
review,  and  EPA  oversight  of  federal  compliance  with  environmental  regulations.
As  we  will  discuss  below,  the  classification  of  information  for  national  security
purposes  requires  certain  exceptions  to  the  general  rules  described  here.

The  National  Environmental  Policy  Act  (NEPA)  of  1969  requires  that  the
federal  government  take  into  account  and  publicize  the  environmental  impact  of
its  actions.176  NEPA's  requirements  serve  the  dual  purposes  of  informing  the
public  and  forcing  agencies  of  the  federal  government  to  inform  themselves  of  the
environmental  impact  of  their  actions.  NEPA  requires  an  agency  to  prepare  an

541


Part  II

environmental  impact  statement  (EIS)  for  any  proposed  "major  federal  action"
having  a  significant  impact  on  the  human  environment.177

As  long  as  an  agency  has  followed  the  requisite  procedures  (and  rationally
explained  its  choices  in  the  EIS)  it  may  choose  whatever  course  of  action  it  likes,
even  the  alternative  that  poses  greater  environmental  risks.  Nonetheless,  the
public  process  can  have  dramatic  effects  on  the  way  agencies  make  decisions.
Assessments  that  are  subject  to  public  comment  and  decisions  that  are  open  to
public  scrutiny  force  agencies  to  consider  public  reaction  when  they  choose
policy  alternatives.  The  adequacy  of  the  process  is  subject  to  review  by  EPA  and,
if  members  of  the  public  sue,  by  the  courts.  However,  environmental  impact
statement  may  be  classified  in  whole  or  in  part.  The  EPA  is  obliged  to  review  and
comment  on  the  classified  portions.178

The  EPA  is  also  charged  with  making  sure  the  federal  government
complies  with  the  substantive  requirements  of  the  Clean  Air  Act  (and  other
environmental  statutes),  and  shares  oversight  responsibilities  under  the  Atomic
Energy  Act  with  DOE  and  the  NRC.  For  example,  EPA  must  approve  the
construction  or  expansion  of  a  facility,  certifying  that  such  action  would  not
exceed  the  limits  of  the  Clean  Air  Act.  Furthermore,  agencies  are  required  to
report  on  their  emissions  to  EPA  and  are  subject  to  fines  if  they  violate  the
emissions  limits.  Under  the  Federal  Facility  Compliance  Act,  EPA  must  list  and
review  environmental  compliance  at  all  federal  facilities.

Selection  of  Sites  and  Affected  Communities

The  sites  selected  for  intentional  releases,  and  thus  the  populations
affected,  do  not  appear  to  have  been  chosen  arbitrarily,  but  rather  for  reasons  that
are  arguably  defensible,  albeit  open  to  a  charge  of  unfairness.  Most  of  the  releases
took  place  in  and  around  "atomic  energy  communities"  and  military  sites,  a
choice  that  had  several  obvious  advantages.  First,  the  sites  offered  the  expertise
and  facilities,  both  indoors  and  out,  for  the  evaluation  of  releases  involving
radioactivity.  Second,  the  locations  of  most  of  these  facilities  were  originally
chosen  because  of  their  relative,  if  not  complete,  isolation  from  major  "civilian"
population  centers.  Residents  near  these  sites  were  generally  accustomed  to
secret  government  activities  in  their  midst.  The  selection  of  these  sites  for
repeated  exposure  to  releases  of  radioactivity—whether  experimental,  accidental,
or  routine-probably  resulted  in  fewer  people  being  exposed,  but  it  also  meant  that
the  same  groups  were  repeatedly  exposed  to  higher  than  normal  risks.

While  there  is  no  formal  analogue  to  the  research  rules  regarding  fairness
in  the  selection  of  subjects  in  the  context  of  environmental  releases,  the
environmental  impact  process  does  provide  for  public  review  of,  and  comment
on,  the  rationale  for  the  choice  of  taking  an  action  in  one  locale,  as  opposed  to
another.  In' addition,  by  a  1994  executive  order,  President  Clinton  called  on
decision  makers  to  consider  whether  actions  affecting  the  environment  may  have

542


Chapter  1 1


179


disproportionate  impact  on  the  environment  of  poor  or  minority  populations.
When  the  environmental  review  and  decisions  are  made  in  secret,  however,
opportunities  for  any  group  of  citizens  to  make  their  concerns  known  are  limited.

The  Effects  of  Secrecy  on  Current  Policies  and  Protections

As  we  have  seen,  current  law  permits  the  conduct  of  intentional  releases
in  secret.  Secret  intentional  releases  pose  two  kinds  of  problems  for  the  interests
of  the  public-loss  of  assurance  that  secret  releases  comply  with  laws  regulating
risk  exposure  and  loss  of  the  protections  afforded  by  public  disclosure  and

comment.

Formally,  at  least,  the  regulations  limiting  radiation  exposures  to  the
public  and  requiring  official  environmental  review  and  oversight  of  government
programs  apply  equally  to  classified  programs  as  to  public  ones.  In  practice,
however,  classification  creates  complications  that  have  yet  to  be  resolved.  Efforts
are  now  under  way  to  put  procedures  into  place  to  better  address  proper
environmental  compliance  in  classified  programs.

For  example,  security  classification  can  interfere  with  official  oversight  of
environmental  compliance.  Even  in  recent  times,  environmental  oversight  of
classified  programs  has  not  been  the  rule  in  practice.  Until  1994,  the  Federal
Facilities  Enforcement  Office  at  EPA,  which  is  charged  with  environmental
oversight  of  all  federal  facilities,  had  no  personnel  with  suitable  clearances  to
oversee  "black"  programs-programs  so  highly  classified  that  their  existence  is
not  acknowledged.180

Lack  of  oversight  creates  opportunities  for  violations  of  environmental
law  to  go  undetected  and  unpunished.  Some  have  charged  that  the  Department  of
Defense,  as  recently  as  1993,  used  secrecy  as  a  cover  for  violations  of
environmental  law.  Recent  lawsuits  against  the  Department  of  Defense  and  the
Environmental  Protection  Agency  allege  that  (1)  illegal  open-air  burning  of  toxic
wastes  took  place  at  a  secret  Air  Force  facility  near  Groom  Lake,  Nevada,  and
that  (2)  EPA  has  not  exercised  its  required  environmental  oversight
responsibilities  for  this  facility.181  Responding  to  the  second  of  these  lawsuits,
EPA  reported  that  in  early  1995  it  had  seven  regulators  on  staff  with  Special
Access  clearance  who  inspected  the  Groom  Lake  facility.'8

The  Committee  believes  that  the  federal  government  has  a  particular
obligation  to  provide  environmental  oversight  of  classified  programs  and  that
there  is  no  fundamental  barrier  to  environmental  oversight  in  classified  programs.
Regulators  can  be  granted  the  appropriate  clearances.  For  example,  before  its
existence  was  openly  recognized,  the  F-117  Stealth  fighter  base  in  Nevada  was
subject  to  oversight  by  Nevada  state  regulators  who  had  received  the  necessary
clearances.183  Such  oversight  is  not  automatic;  it  requires  active  cooperation
between  the  regulatory  agencies  and  the  agencies  subject  to  regulation.  The
Department  of  Defense  has  undertaken  a  review  of  environmental  compliance  in

543


Part  II

its  "black"  programs  and  is  working  with  EPA  to  establish  mechanisms  to  provide
continuing  environmental  oversight  of  those  programs.184

Even  when  regulators  have  the  appropriate  clearances,  however,  other
aspects  of  secrecy  can  create  barriers  to  oversight.  Providing  clearances  often
entails  lengthy  background  investigations,  which  can  result  in  delays.
Furthermore,  it  remains  unclear  what  EPA  can  do  if  it  detects  a  violation  that
results  in  a  dispute  with  the  agency  in  charge  of  the  program.  This  is  a  basis  for
concern  about  the  credibility  of  environmental  oversight  that  occurs  in  secret.

The  limits  on  outside  oversight  are  ameliorated  by  the  fact  that  both  DOE
and  DOD  have  established  environmental  and  health  offices  that  are  largely
independent  of  their  respective  agencies'  operational  programs.  Under  most
circumstances  these  offices  can  probably  provide  adequate  oversight  over  their
agencies'  classified  programs.  Because  of  the  potential  institutional  conflict  of
interest,  however,  it  would  be  preferable  to  have  further  oversight  by  an
independent  entity.

The  conduct  of  intentional  releases  in  secret  necessarily  deprives  the
public  of  information  to  which  it  would  otherwise  be  entitled.  Security
classification  modifies  or  eliminates  the  various  requirements  for  providing  public
disclosures.  The  agency  states  that  its  normal  practice  is  to  send  an  EPA
employee  with  appropriate  clearances  to  the  agency  in  question  to  review  the
classified  information;  EPA,  however,  does  not  keep  copies  of  the  reviewed
document  or  any  other  records  of  such  reviews.185  Moreover,  review  by  an  EPA
employee  is  no  substitute  for  a  process  open  to  public  comment  and  scrutiny.

Secrecy,  especially  to  the  degree  of  "black"  programs,  severely  limits  or
eliminates  the  ability  of  the  public  to  influence  decisions  about  environmental
health,  either  through  political  action  or  through  the  courts,186  and  undermines
public  confidence  that  officials  are  carrying  out  their  responsibilities  to  safeguard
public  health.  As  in  the  secret  releases  of  the  past,  there  are  also  concerns  about
whether  and  what  kind  of  information  can  be  given  to  the  public  about
environmental  and  public  health  effects  when  releases  are  classified  and  if
restrictions  on  information  compromise  the  ability  of  members  of  the  public  to
take  protective  actions.

CONCLUSION

While  the  intentional  releases  described  in  this  chapter  put  people  at  risk
from  radiation  exposures,  with  limited  exception,  they  were  not  undertaken  for
the  purpose  of  gathering  research  data  on  humans.  Thus,  in  contrast  with  the
biomedical  experiments  studied  by  the  Advisory  Committee,  they  were  not
intended  as  human  experiments.

Fifty  years  ago,  unlike  today,  there  was  no  formal  and  published  body  of
laws  that  defined  and  limited  the  ability  of  the  government  to  release  potentially
hazardous  substances  into  the  environment.  Nonetheless,  the  duty  to  limit  risk

544


Chapter  1 1

and,  by  implication,  the  duty  to  balance  risks  against  potential  benefits  was
understood  by  those  who  engaged  in  intentional  releases.  In  the  case  of  the  Green
Run,  risk  from  the  intentional  release  could  be  gauged  against  preexisting
guidelines  for  operational  releases;  in  the  case  of  radiological  warfare  tests,  a
separate  safety  panel  was  established  to  consider  releases.

The  intentional  releases  studied  by  the  Committee  often  engaged  national
security  interests  and  were  conducted  in  secret.  However  legitimate  and  well-
motivated  the  releases  were,  security  classification  prevented  any  public  notice  or
discussion  of  the  Green  Run--an  experiment  conducted  for  intelligence  purposes-
the  radiological  weapons  field  tests,  or  the  RaLa  experiments  testing  atomic  bomb
components.  The  essentially  complete  secrecy  surrounding  these  tests  prevented
any  warnings  that  might  have  allowed  members  of  the  public  to  protect
themselves  from  whatever  risks  might  have  been  inherent  in  the  tests.

In  retrospect,  and  with  limited  information,  it  is  difficult  to  know  whether
and  how  national  security  interests  affected  the  decisions  to  conduct  these
intentional  releases.  In  the  case  of  the  Green  Run,  for  example,  how  did  decision
makers  seek  to  balance  the  national  security  interests  in  learning  about  Soviet
bomb  testing  (and  the  risks  of  not  performing  the  Green  Run  and  thus  not  gaining
relevant  information)  against  the  potential  risks  to  the  local  population  of  the

release?

The  health  and  safety  risks  posed  by  the  intentional  releases  appear  in
retrospect  to  have  been  negligible  (the  Green  Run,  for  example,  in  comparison
with  other  exposures  at  Hanford).  But  this  does  not  mean  that  the  intentional
releases  were  without  negative  consequences.  The  secrecy  that  surrounded  the
conduct  of  these  releases  and  the  failure  to  deal  forthrightly  with  citizens  after  the
fact  has  taken  a  substantial  toll.  People  living  in  the  affected  communities  have
been  robbed  of  peace  of  mind,  and  the  government  has  lost  the  trust  of  some  of  its

citizens.

Could  this  happen  again?  Could  there  be  another  Green  Run?  The  answer

is  a  qualified  yes.

In  fact,  an  intentional  release  like  the  Green  Run  probably  would  not  be
contemplated  (because  the  scientific  and  strategic  value  would  seem  minimal),
but  actions  that  raise  similar  concerns  if  undertaken  in  secrecy  could  still  happen.
Environmental  regulations  apply  to  secret  programs,  but  the  oversight  procedures
are  not  fully  in  place  to  ensure  adherence  to  these  regulations.  The  public  review
process  that  is  at  the  heart  of  current  environmental  protections  could  be  limited
or  rendered  nonexistent  if  the  government  were  to  invoke  exceptions  for  "national
security  interest"  to  avoid  these  constraints.

Any  government  action  that  is  conducted  in  secret  is  likely  to  cause
suspicion  and  distrust,  even  if  the  risks  to  members  of  the  public  are  minimal  or
nonexistent.  Public  policy  should  operate  with  a  strong  presumption  favoring
public  disclosure  and  openness.  There  doubtless  are  limited  circumstances  under
which  it  is  justifiable  to  conduct  an  intentional  release  in  secret.  The  lesson  of  the

545


Part  II

Green  Run  and  the  other  intentional  releases  is,  however,  that  unless  great  care  is
taken  to  preserve  and  honor  the  public's  trust,  the  cost  to  the  body  politic  of  such
an  action  is  likely  to  be  substantial.  The  Committee  believes  that  the  current
regulatory  structure  does  not  go  far  enough  in  this  regard.  Provisions  must  be
made  for  timely  public  disclosure,  and  records  must  be  created  and  maintained
capable  of  satisfying  the  affected  populations  that  their  interests  have  been
protected.  And  mechanisms  need  to  be  developed  to  approximate  the  scrutiny  of
the  public  when  security  interests  require  the  classification  of  environmental
impact  statements  or  otherwise  limit  disclosure  of  information  to  the  public.
Without  such  protections,  the  greatest  casualty  of  the  Green  Run— the  distrust  it
engendered—cannot  be  prevented  in  the  future;  where  this  happens,  official
concern  that  the  public  cannot  be  trusted  to  appreciate  sometimes-complex
information  about  health  and  safety  will  become  an  ever-more-corrosive  self-
fulfilling  prophecy.


546


ENDNOTES


1 .  The  story  of  the  public  discovery  of  the  Green  Run  is  recounted  in  Michael
D'Antonio's  Atomic  Harvest:  Hanford  and  the  Lethal  Toll  of  America's  Nuclear  Arsenal
(New  York:  Crown,  1993),  116-145.

2.  U.S.  Congress,  General  Accounting  Office,  Examples  of  Post  World  War  II
Radiation  Releases  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1993)  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-042894-B-1).

3.  The  Committee  did  not  undertake  to  review  in  detail  the  general  development
of  radioecology,  which  began  during  the  Manhattan  Project  with  research  on  the
radiosensitivity  of  aquatic  life  around  the  Hanford  Reservation  and  extended  to  research
on  flora  and  fauna  in  and  around  other  AEC  sites.  For  an  introductory  overview,  see
"Survey  of  Radioecology:  Environmental  Studies  Around  Production  Sites,"  in  J.  Newell
Stannard,  Radioactivity  and  Health:  A  History  (Springfield,  Va.:  Office  of  Science  and
Technical  Information,  1988).

4.  General  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower,  to  Commanding  General,  Army  Air  Forces,
16  September  1947  ("Long  Range  Detection  of  Atomic  Explosions")  (ACHRE  No.
DOD-0U595-A).

5.  Charles  A.  Ziegler  and  David  Jacobson,  Spying  Without  Spies:  Origins  of
America's  Secret  Nuclear  Surveillance  System  (Westport,  Conn.:  Praeger,  1995),  133.

6.  Ibid.,  203-204.  R.  H.  Hillenkoetter,  Rear  Admiral,  USN,  Central  Intelligence
Agency,  9  September  1949  memorandum  ("Samples  of  air  masses  recently  collected  over
the  North  Pacific  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  CIA-01 1895-A).

7.  Jack  W.  Healy,  interview  by  Marisa  Caputo  (Department  of  Energy,  Office
of  Human  Radiation  Experiments),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  28  November  1994
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-D),  7.  Nuclear  explosions  release  larger  quantities  of  short-
lived fission  products  than  do  nuclear  reactors,  so  the  radioactive  fallout  from  a  nuclear
test  decays  much  more  rapidly  than  emissions  from  a  reactor.

8.  "Statement  by  the  President  on  Announcing  the  First  Atomic  Explosion  in
the  USSR,  23  September  1949,"  reprinted  in  Robert  C.  Williams  and  Philip  L.  Cantelon,
eds.,  The  American  Atom:  A  Documentary  History  of  Nuclear  Policies  from  the
Discovery  of  Fission  to  the  Present,  1939-1984  (Philadelphia:  University  of
Pennsylvania  Press,  1984),  116-117.

9.  For  example,  krypton  85  in  the  atmosphere  comes  entirely  from  atmospheric
testing  and  nuclear  fuel  reprocessing.  Chemically  unreactive,  with  a  half-life  of  roughly
eleven  years,  it  is  well  mixed  in  the  atmosphere,  so  the  concentration  of  Kr-85  measured
at  random  sites  on  the  globe  will  provide  a  rough  measure  of  the  total  production  of
plutonium  production  over  time.  See  Frank  von  Hippel,  Barbara  G.  Levi,  and  David  H.
Albright,  "Stopping  the  Production  of  Fissile  Materials  for  the  Weapons,"  Scientific
American  253,  no.  3  (September  1985):  43,  45.

1 0.  Charles  A.  Ziegler  and  David  Jacobson,  Spying  Without  Spies,  181.

11.  F.  J.  Davis  et  al.,  Department  of  Energy,  13  April  1949,  ORNL-341,
declassified  with  deletions  as  ORNL-6728,  2  September  1992  ("An  Aerial  Survey  of
Radioactivity  Associated  with  Atomic  Energy  Plant?")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-122194-B),
7,  13,  156-157.  Pages  136  and  148  refer  to  the  possibility  of  tracking  a  "really  strong
source"  from  the  Hanford  stacks.


547


12.  [Deleted]  to  Commander,  Military  Air  Transport  Service,  10  November
1949  ("In  furtherance  of  the  research  and  development  program  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
DOD-032395-A);  [deleted]  to  Dr.  S.  C.  Schlemmer,  Manager,  Hanford  Operations
Officer,  10  November  1949  ("This  letter  will  confirm  the  arrangements  made  . .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-032395-A).  The  name  of  the  author  of  these  memorandums  remains
classified.

1 3.  GAO,  Examples  of  Post  World  War  II  Radiation  Releases,  9.

14.  H.  M.  Parker,  Department  of  Energy,  6  January  1950,  HW-15550-E  DEL
("Health  Instruments  Divisions  Report  for  the  Month  of  December  1949")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-050394-A-4);  H.  J.  Paas  and  W.  Singlevich,  Department  of  Energy,  2  March  1950,
HW- 17003  ("Radioactive  Contamination  in  the  Environs  of  the  Hanford  Works  for  the
Period  October,  November,  December,  1949")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-050394-A-6).  These
two  reports  were  among  more  than  1 9,000  pages  of  documents  on  Hanford's  early
operations  released  by  the  Department  of  Energy  in  1986.

15.  Lieutenant  W.  E.  Harlan,  D.  E.  Jenne,  and  Jack  W.  Healy,  Hanford  Works,
Atomic  Energy  Commission,  1  May  1950,  HW-17381  ("Dissolving  of  Twenty  Day  Metal
at  Hanford")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-121494-C).  This  document  was  originally  classified
Secret,  Restricted  Data,  but  has  been  declassified  in  several  stages;  this  citation  is  to  the
version  that  was  declassified  most  recently  and  completely,  on  13  December  1994.  The
GAO  report  Examples  of  Post  World  War  II  Radiation  Releases  also  relies  on  interviews
with  several  people  connected  with  the  Green  Run,  including  one  who  was  involved
directly  in  the  intelligence  aspects  of  the  Green  Run,  but  who  has  since  died.

16.  Harlan,  Jenne,  and  Healy,  "Dissolving  of  Twenty  Day  Metal,"  26.

17.  Ibid.,  7.

1 8.  Hanford  workers  managing  the  Green  Run  estimated  the  release  at  7,780
curies.  Ibid.,  28.  Subsequent  estimates  have  ranged  from  7,000  curies  to  1 1,000  curies.
Maurice  Robkin,  "Experimental  Release  of  1311:  The  Green  Run,"  Health  Physics  62
(June  1992):  487-495.  Roughly  20,000  curies  of  xenon  133  were  also  released,  but
because  this  gas  does  not  concentrate  in  the  food  supply  or  in  the  thyroid,  it  posed
relatively  little  danger.  The  section  "Reconstructing,  Comparing,  and  Understanding
Risks"  discusses  the  significance  of  these  numbers.

19.  M.  S.  Gerber,  Department  of  Energy,  May  1994,  WHC-MR-0452  ("A  Brief
History  of  the  T  Plant  Facility  at  the  Hanford  Site")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 12294-A),  25-
32.

20.  Harlan,  Jenne,  and  Healy,  ""Dissolving  of  Twenty  Day  Metal,"  10-11.

21.  Ibid.,  12-14.  See  also  8,  32.

22.  Healy,  interview  with  Caputo  (Office  of  Human  Radiation  Experiments),
28  November  1994,  12;  Jack  Healy,  interview  with  Mark  Goodman  (ACHRE  staff),  8
March  1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Targeted
Interview  Project),  26-27.  Healy  has  compared  the  contamination  with  that  resulting  from
the  1957  Windscale  nuclear  reactor  accident  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Although
Windscale  released  a  greater  quantity  of  radioiodine,  the  Green  Run  contaminated  an  area
five  to  ten  times  as  large.  Healy  attributed  the  high  levels  of  contamination  to  the
weather.

23.  Normally  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  falls  with  increasing  altitude.
An  inversion  occurs  when  the  temperature  near  the  ground  rises  before  falling  at  higher
altitudes.  This  traps  contamination  in  the  lower  levels  of  the  atmosphere.


548


24.  F.  J.  Davis  et  al.,  "An  Aerial  Survey  of  Radioactivity  Associated  with
Atomic  Energy  Plants,"  112-116. The  Air  Force  had  found  it  difficult  to  track
radioactivity  from  Oak  Ridge's  operations  in  the  hills  and  valleys  of  Tennessee.

25.  Harlan,  Jenne,  and  Healy,  "Dissolving  of  Twenty  Day  Metal,  5-6.

26.  Healy,  interview  with  Caputo  (Office  of  Human  Radiation  Experiments),
28  November  1994,  13.

27.  Harlan,  Jenne,  and  Healy,  "Dissolving  of  Twenty  Day  Metal,"  20-25;  Bruce
Napier,  Battelle  Pacific  Northwest  Laboratory,  to  John  Kruger  (ACHRE  staff),  1 8  August
1995.

28.  Harlan,  Jenne,  and  Healy,  "Dissolving  of  Twenty  Day  Metal,"  70. Also,
W.  E.  Harlan,  interview  by  Mark  Goodman  (ACHRE  staff),  transcript  of  audio  interview,
10  April  1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Targeted
Interview  Project).  Harlan  recalls  no  plans  to  track  the  plume  to  greater  distances.

29.  The  "permanent  tolerance  value"  at  the  time  was  0.009  microcuries  per
kilogram  OuCi/Kg)  of  vegatation.  Harlan,  Jenne,  and  Healy,  "Dissolving  of  Twenty  Day
Metal,"  3.  Readings  from  the  Green  Run  were  as  high  as  4.3  fid/kg.  The  current
intervention  level  is  .013  //Ci/kg.  Al  Conklin,  Washington  Department  of  Health,  7
November  1994,  personal  communication  with  Mark  Goodman  (ACHRE  staff).

30.  In  mid- 1949,  the  standard  was  lowered  from  0.2  /^Ci/kg  to  0.1  ^Ci/kg.
Manager,  Health  Instruments  Division,  Hanford,  to  AEC,  Hanford  Operations  Office,  8
November  1950  ("Radiation  Exposure  Data"),  which  is  still  ten  times  higher  than
described  in  Harlan,  Jenne,  and  Healy,  "Dissolving  of  Twenty  Day  Metal,"  3.  A  footnote
in  the  November  1950  report  suggests  that  the  lower  level  (0.01/^Ci/kg)  was  still
controversial  and  considered  by  the  author  to  be  overly  cautious.

31.  H.  M.  Parker,  "Health  Instruments  Divisions  Report  for  December  1 949,"
2;  Harlan,  Jenne,  and  Healy,  "Dissolving  of  Twenty  Day  Metal,"  3,  65.

32.  Healy,  interview  with  Caputo,  28  November  1 994,  8-9.  The  largest  hazard
is  now  known  to  come  from  drinking  milk  from  cows  that  graze  on  pastures
contaminated  with  radioiodine.  The  earliest  reference  from  Hanford  to  the  milk  pathway
is  H.  M.  Parker,  "Radiation  Exposure  from  Environmental  Hazards,"  presented  at  the
United  Nations  International  Conference  on  the  Peaceful  Uses  of  Atomic  Energy,  August
1955,  reprinted  in  Ronald  L.  Kathren,  Raymond  W.  Baalman,  and  William  J.  Bair,  eds.,
Herbert  M.  Parker:  Publications  and  Other  Contributions  to  Radiological  and  Health
Physics  (Richland,  Wash.:  Battelle  Press,  1986),  494-499.  A  reference  to  concern  over
milk  contamination  in  Utah  from  a  19  May  1953  atmospheric  test  appears  in  "Transcript
of  Meeting  on  Statistical  Considerations  on  Field  Studies  on  Thyroid  Diseases  in  School
Children  in  Utah-Arizona,  December  3,  1965,  Rockville,  MD"  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-
022395-A),  4.

33.  Herbert  Parker,  Chief  Supervisor,  to  S.  T.  Cantril,  Assistant  Supervisor,  1 1
December  1945  ("Xenon  And  Iodine  Concentration  in  the  Environs  of  the  T  and  P
Plant")  (ACHRE  No.  IND- 120294- A- 1);  Herbert  Parker  to  File,  17  December  1945
("Proposed  Revision  of  Tolerances  for  1131")  (ACHRE  No.  IND- 1 20294- A-2);  Herbert
M.  Parker,  Department  of  Energy,  14  January  1946  ("Tolerance  Concentration  of  Radio-
Iodine  on  Edible  Plants")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-120294-A-3).  This  was  confirmed  by  later
dose  reconstructions.  The  estimated  doses  range  up  to  several  hundred  rad  (a  few  tens  of
rem)  to  the  thyroid.  Technical  Steering  Panel,  Department  of  Energy,  10  February  1990
("Hanford  Environmental  Dose  Reconstruction  Project:  Finding  the  facts  about  people  at


549


risk.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-050694-B-3).

34.  Estimates  from  ARH-3026,  by  J.  D.  Anderson  as  cited  in  the  Technical
Steering  Panel  of  the  Hanford  Environmental  Dose  Reconstruction  Project,  Department
of  Energy,  March  1992  ("The  Green  Run")  (ACHRE  No.  ORE-1 10794- A).

35.  Parker,  "Tolerance  Concentration  of  Radio-Iodine  on  Edible  Plants,"
Kathren,  Baalman,  and  Bair,  Herbert  M.  Parker:  Publications  and  Other  Contributions
to  Radiological  and  Health  Physics,  art.  IV-7.

36.  "Report  of  Safety  and  Industrial  Heath  Advisory  Board,"  as  cited  in  Daniel
Grossman,  A  Policy  History  of  Hanford's  Atmospheric  Releases  (Ph.D.  diss.,
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  1994),  169.

37.  F.  A.  R.  Stainkan  to  R.  S.  Ball,  "Stack  Gas  Conference- Washington,  D.C.,"
8  September  1948,  HW- 10956.  Michele  S.  Gerber,  On  the  Home  Front:  The  Cold  War
Legacy  of  the  Hanford  Nuclear  Site  (Lincoln:  University  of  Nebraska  Press,  1 994),  89.

38.  Parker,  "Health  Instrument  Divisions  Report  for  Month  of  December,
1949,"  3.

39.  Healy,  interview  with  Caputo,  28  November  1994,  8.

40.  [Deleted]  to  Dr.  Schlemmer,  10  November  1949,  2.

41.  "Green  Run,"  an  Air  Force  official  noted  in  a  1995  comment  on  this
omission,  "was  beset  by  numerous  technical  and  meteorological  problems  that
significantly  compromised  the  value  of  the  results  obtained.  In  our  view,  then,  this
omission  implies  the  Green  Run  was  not  useful,  rather  than  unnecessary."  Major  Meade
Pimsler,  USAF,  to  ACHRE  Staff,  19  June  1995  ("Comments  on  5th  Set  of  Review
Chapters").

42.  ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Mark  Goodman  Files,  6-21 .  The  device  in
question  was  the  atmospheric  Conductivity  Apparatus;  it  was  used  in  Operation
Fitzwilliam,  at  the  radiation  survey  flights  at  Oak  Ridge  and  Hanford,  at  the  Green  Run,
and  in  radiation  survey  flights  at  the  Los  Alamos  radiolanthanum  tests  described  in  this
chapter.

43.  Grossman,  A  Policy  History  of  Hanford's  Atmospheric  Releases,  230-232
(references  24  and  35).

44.  Neal  D.  Hines,  Proving  Ground:  An  Account  of  the  Radiobiological  Studies
in  the  Pacific  1946-61  (Seattle:  University  of  Washington  Press,  1962).

45.  Stannard,  Radiactivity  and  Health:  A  History,  76 1  -762.

46.  Decision  on  AEC  1 80/1  and  1 80/2,  as  cited  in  Grossman,  A  Policy  History
of  Hanford's  Atmospheric  Releases,  244-245.

47.  AEC  180/1;  Ibid.,  245.

48.  Herbert  Parker,  19  August  1954  ("Columbia  River  Situation--A  Semi-
Technical  Review")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-053095-A),  5.

49.  William  Bale,  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  transcript  of
proceedings  of  13-14  January  1950  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-A).  The  ACBM  decided
at  this  meeting  that  it  might  be  possible  to  publish  a  sanitized  version  of  the  report  to  aid
scientists  studying  the  contamination  problem.  It  is  unclear  whether  the  report  was
published.

50.  Lynne  Stembridge,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,
transcript  of  proceedings  of  21  November  1994  (Spokane,  Wash.).

5 1 .  For  the  perspective  of  a  government-sponsored  expert  involved  in  the
reconstruction  of  the  risk  at  Hanford  and  other  nuclear  weapons  sites  on  the  necessity  of

550


public  participation  in  dose  reconstruction  activities,  see  John  Till,  "Building  Credibility
in  Public  Studies,"  American  Scientist  83,  no.  5  (September-October  1995).

52.  Scott  Davis,  Ph.D.,  et  al.,  Fred  Hutchinson  Research  Center,  24  January
1995  ("Hanford  Thyroid  Disease  Study:  Final  Report")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-061295-A).

53.  Tom  Bailie,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,
transcript  of  proceedings,  21  November  1994  (Spokane,  Wash.),  121-122.

54.  Quoted  in  Richard  Rhodes,  The  Making  of  the  Atomic  Bomb  (New  York:
Simon  and  Schuster,  1986),  365.  See  also  Henry  De  Wolf  Smyth,  Atomic  Energy  for
Military  Purposes  (Stanford,  Calif.:  Stanford  University  Press,  September  1,  1945),  71.
Princeton  physicists  Henry  De  Wolf  Smyth  and  Eugene  Wigner  reported  later  that  year
that  the  fission  products  produced  in  one  day's  operation  of  a  1 00-megawatt  reactor  could
render  a  large  area  uninhabitable.  Eugene  Wigner  and  Henry  D.  Smyth,  National
Academy  Project,  10  December  1941  ("Radioactive  Poisons")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-
033195-A).

55.  J.  Robert  Oppenheimer  to  Enrico  Fermi,  25  May  1943,  reproduced  in
Barton  Bernstein,  "Oppenheimer  and  the  Radioactive  Poison  Plan,"  Technology  Review
88,  no.  14  (May  1985).

56.  These  included  Dr.  Joseph  Hamilton  of  Berkeley,  who  had  performed
pioneering  studies  of  the  fate  of  radioactive  materials  in  the  bodies  of  animals  and
humans  (see  chapter  5).  Joseph  Hamilton,  M.D.,  to  K.  D.  Nichols,  31  December  1946
("Radioactive  Warfare")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-010395-C-1);  Lee  Bowen,  U.S.  Air  Force
("A  History  of  the  Air  Force  Atomic  Energy  Program,  1943-1953,  volume  IV:  The
Development  of  Weapons")  (ACHRE  No.  SMITH- 120994- A- 1),  323.

57.  Joseph  Hamilton  to  D.  T.  Griggs,  Project  Rand,  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.,  7
April  1948  ("1  wish  to  thank  you  . .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-34).

58.  For  example,  General  Douglas  MacArthur  proposed  in  1950  to  lay  down  a
line  of  highly  radioactive  cobalt  60  to  block  a  Chinese  return  to  the  Korean  Peninsula.
Bruce  Cummings,  The  Origins  of  the  Korean  War,  volume  IT.  The  Roaring  of  the
Cataract,  1947-1950  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton  University  Press,  1981),  750.

59.  The  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project,  the  Air  Force,  and  the  Army's
Chemical  Corps  were  interested  in  both  offensive  and  defensive  radiological  warfare,
while  the  Naval  Radiological  Defense  Laboratory  focused  on  defense.

60.  This  research  program,  led  by  Dr.  Franklin  McLean,  used  animals  to  test
the  toxicity  of  various  candidate  radiological  warfare  agents.  The  Advisory  Committee's
research  has  uncovered  no  evidence  that  human  subjects  were  used  in  any  of  these
studies.  The  Toxicity  Laboratory  also  performed  studies  using  human  subjects  on  the
inhalation  of  aerosols,  but  available  documents  do  not  indicate  any  use  of  radioactive
material  as  tracers  or  otherwise.  These  studies  may  have  been  related  to  the  Chemical
Corps's  programs  in  chemical  and  biological  warefare.  Frank  C.  McLean  to  Shields
Warren,  Director,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  5  October  1948  ("Program  of
Chicago  Toxicity  Laboratory")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-B-18);  Walter  J.  Williams,
Acting  General  Manager,  to  Major  General  A.  H.  Waitt,  Chief,  Chemical  Corps,  12  April
1948  ("For  some  time  we  have  been  considering  ways  and  means  of  enlarging  programs  .
.  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-012595-B-2);  Shields  Warren  to  Frank  C.  McLean,  4  May  1950
("In  light  of  our  conversations  of  January  25,  1950  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-012595-B-
1).


551


6 1 .  Joint  AEC-NME  Panel  on  Radiological  Warfare,  20  November  1 950
("Radiological  Warfare  Program  Status  Report:  Sixth  Meeting  of  the  Joint  AEC-NME
Panel  on  Radiological  Warfare")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-010395-A-2).  See  also,  Atomic
Energy  Commission,  Division  of  Military  Application,  26  December  1950  ("Conclusions
and  Recommendations  of  the  Sixth  Meeting  of  the  RW  Panel")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
092694-B-3).

62.  Major  Thomas  A.  Gibson,  Chemical  Corps,  Radiological  Branch,  to  Chief
of  Staff,  AFSWP,  23  April  1952  ("A  Technical  Study  Group  to  Review  the  Technical
Aspects  of  Radiological  Warfare")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-033195-A).

63.  These  two  tests  appear  in  the  Advisory  Committee's  charter.  One  test
involved  three  sources  of  roughly  1,280,  100,  and  20  curies  of  radioactive  lanthanum;
Karl  Z.  Morgan  and  C.  N.  Rucker,  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory,  23  July  1948  ("Single
Source  Lanthanum  Test-AHRUU  Program")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-122).  The
other  used  156  tantalum  sources  of  roughly  100  millicuries  each  distributed  in  an  uniform
grid;  Karl  Z.  Morgan,  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory,  1 1  August  1948  ("Uniformly
Distributed  Source,  AHRUU  Program")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-1 18).

64.  R.  W.  Cook  to  Brigadier  General  James  McCormack,  Division  of  Military
Applications,  4  May  1949  ("Irradiation  of  Tantalum  for  RW  Tests")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
120994-A-24).

65.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Division  of  Military  Application,  26
December  1950  ("Conclusions  and  Recommendations  of  the  Sixth  Meeting  of  the  RW
Panel"),  3.

66.  AFSWP  to  Chief,  Chemical  Officer,  Department  of  the  Army,  3 1  December
1952  ("Re-evaluation  of  the  Research  and  Development  Program  on  Offensive
Radiological  Warfare")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-010395-A-5);  this  memo  makes  reference  to
the  proposed  production  of  zirconium  and  niobium  radioisotopes.

67.  Joseph  Hamilton  had  written  in  1948:  "In  concluding,  I  would  like  to
emphasize  that  all  of  the  potentialities,  including  the  rather  repellent  concepts  of  the  use
of  fission  products  and  other  radioactive  materials  as  internal  poisons,  should  be  explored
up  to  and  including  a  level  of  pilot  experiments  on  a  fairly  large  scale.  I  feel  very  strongly
on  the  point  that  unless  we  ourselves  learn  all  we  can  about  the  use  and  possible  methods
of  protection  against  these  agents  and  a  wide  variety  of  their  potential  applications  as
military  weapons,  we  shall  have  failed  to  explore  the  necessary  measures  which  may  be
desperately  needed  for  the  protection  of  our  own  people."  Joseph  Hamilton  to  D.  T.
Griggs,  Project  Rand,  Douglas  Aircraft  Co.,  7  April  1948  ("I  wish  to  thank  you  very
much  for  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-34),  3.

68.  C.  B.  Marquand,  Secretary,  Test  Safety  Panel,  to  Joseph  Hamilton,  Director,
Crocker  Laboratory,  24  August  1949  ("Meeting  of  the  Test  Safety  Panel  at  Dugway
Proving  Ground  on  August  2,  1949")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-29),  3.

69.  Joseph  Hamilton  to  C.  B.  Marquand,  Office  of  the  Chief,  Chemical  Corps
Advisory  Board,  6  July  1949  ("I  am  sorry  not  to  have  had  some  more  definitive
information  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-3).

70.  C.  B.  Marquand,  Secretary,  Test  Safety  Panel,  and  S.  C.  Hardwick,
Assistant  Secretary,  Test  Safety  Panel,  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  5  August  1949
("Preliminary  Report  of  the  Test  Safety  Panel  Meeting  at  Dugway  Probing  Ground-
August  2,  1949")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-010395-A-1).


552


71.  G.  Failla,  Columbia  University,  to  Joseph  Hamilton,  13  May  1950  ("In
answer  to  your  letter  of  May  10th,  I . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-4).

72.  Karl  Z.  Morgan  to  Joseph  Hamilton,  9  September  1949  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-072694-B-5).

73.  Joseph  Hamilton  to  Albert  Olpin,  President,  University  of  Utah,  10  May
1950  ("Please  find  enclosed  my  report  and  recommendations  for  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-072694-B-7);  Failla  to  Hamilton,  13  May  1950;  Albert  Olpin  to  Joseph  Hamilton,
17  May  1950  ("It  was  good  to  hear  from  you  again  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-
55);  Joseph  Hamilton  to  C.  B.  Marquand,  1  June  1950  ("At  long  last  I  have  received
agreement  from  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-21);  Joseph  Hamilton  to  C.  B.
Marquand,  4  August  1949  ("This  letter  is  to  confirm")  (ACHRE  No.CORP-010395-A-l).

74.  Joseph  Hamilton  to  C.  B.  Marquand,  18  November  1952  ("Last  week,  I
spent  a  profitable  two  days  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-23).  See  also,  Joseph
Hamilton  to  John  Bugher,  Director,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  25  February  1953
("In  my  opinion  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-49).

75.  Department  of  Defense,  1 1  May  1953  ("An  Evaluation  of  the  Airborne
Hazard  Associated  with  Radiological  Warfare  Tests")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-50),
iii.

76.  Brigadier  General  William  M.  Creasy  to  Chief  Chemical  Officer,
Department  of  the  Army,  24  June  1953  ("Minimum  Fund  Requirement")  (ACHRE  No.
DOD-030895-F-3);  U.S.  Army  Chemical  Corps,  31  December  31  1953  ("RDB  Project
Card:  Progress  Report,  Project  No.  4-12-30-002")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-1 12294-A-l);
Joseph  Hamilton  to  C.  B.  Marquand,  23  July  1953  ("I  regret  to  hear  that  the  RW
Program  has  been  so  drastically  reduced  . .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-51).

77.  Lee  Bowen,  United  States  Air  Force  Historical  Division,  "A  History  of  the
Air  Force  Atomic  Energy  Program,  1943-1953,  vol.  4:  The  Development  of  Weapons"
(ACHRE  No.  SMITH- 120994-A-l),  331-332.

78.  Merril  Evans,  3  June  1953  ("RW  Decontamination  and  Land  Reclamation
Studies")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-062494-A-1 1);  also  Chemical  Corps,  1952  ("Testing  of
RW  Material  for  Detection,  Protection  and  Decontamination")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-
112294-A-5).

79.  Lee  Bowen,  "The  Development  of  Weapons,"  333-337.

80.  The  Chemical  Corps  recognized  Hamilton's  support  for  the  radiological
warfare  program.  A  1952  Chemical  Corps  memorandum,  Lieutenant  Colonel  Truman
Cook  to  Secretariat,  Chemical  Corps  Advisory  Council,  7  April  1952  ("Radiological
Warfare  Test  Saftey  Panel")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-46),  noting  the  greater  risk
associated  with  planned  large-scale  tests,  including  possible  plutonium  contamination
from  the  use  of  fission  products,  recommended  that  the  test  safety  panel  should  be
dissolved  and  Hamilton  and  someone  chosen  by  him  be  retained  as  a  consultant.

8 1 .  Joseph  Hamilton's  papers,  including  those  dealing  with  the  radiological
warfare  test  safety  panel,  were  declassified  in  1974,  but  the  GAO  report  provided  the
first  opportunity  for  most  people  to  learn  about  it.

82.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Ad  Hoc  Panel  on  Radiological  Warfare,
proceedings  of  23  May  1948  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-051894-A-1).  Restricted  Data  are
atomic  energy  secrets  as  classified  by  statute  under  the  Atomic  Energy  Act.  Information
may  also  be  classified  Confidential,  Secret,  or  Top  Secret,  depending  on  its  importance
to  national  security,  under  the  authority  of  an  executive  order  by  the  President.  See


553


chapter  1 3  on  secrecy  for  details.

83.  Chemical  Corps,  1  January  1948  ("Quarterly  Technical  Progress  Reports")
(ACHRE  No.  NARA- 1 2 1 594-B).

84.  Joint  NME-AEC  Panel  on  Radiological  Warfare,  29  August  1948
("Radiological  Warfare  Report-Second  Meeting")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-041295-A),  72.

85.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and
Medicine,  proceedings  of  1 1-12  June  1948  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-A).  The  ACBM
reiterated  this  recommendation  at  its  next  meeting  on  1 1  September  1948.  Atomic  Energy
Commission,  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  proceedings  of  1 1
September  1948  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-B-15),  15.

86.  The  eight  members  included  future  President  Dwight  D.  Eisenhower,  who
was  president  of  Columbia  University  at  the  time,  and  New  York  lawyer  John  Foster
Dulles,  who  would  serve  as  secretary  of  state  in  the  Eisenhower  administration.  See
James  Hershberg,  James  B.  Conant:  Harvard  to  Hiroshima  and  the  Making  of  the
Nuclear  Age  (New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf,  1993),  378-383.  The  story  of  the  Conant
Committee  is  told  in  chapter  20  of  Hershberg's  book.

87.  Ibid.,  390.

88.  Ibid.,  383.  The  members  of  the  majority  opposed  to  further  release  included
Eisenhower  and  Dulles.

89.  Marshall  Stubbs  to  Joseph  Hamilton,  30  August  1949  ("Following  your
suggestion  that  we  prepare  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-B-1).  Stubbs  concluded  by
reporting,  "Both  Colonel  Cooney  and  Captain  Winant  reiterated  that  regardless  of  the
actions  noted  above,  such  a  release  is  not  desirable."

90.  William  Webster  to  Secretary  Johnson,  Department  of  Defense,  1 1  May
1949  ("Memorandum  for  the  President:  This  memorandum  is  to  inform  you  of  planned
activities  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-071 194-A-4).

91.  Joseph  Hamilton  to  C.  B.  Marquand,  Secretary,  Test  Safety  Panel,  4  August
1949  ("This  letter  is  to  confirm  the  decisions  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-010395-A-3).

92.  Ibid.,  3.

93.  The  proposed  press  release  falsely  described  the  program  as  intended  only
"to  determine  a  proper  defense,"  involving  "the  distribution  of  small  amounts  of
radioactive  materials  on  various  types  of  simulated  targets  in  the  field."  Marshall  Stubbs
to  Joseph  Hamilton,  30  August  1949  ("Following  your  suggestion  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-072694-B-1),2.

94.  Ibid.

95.  Colonel  William  M.  Creasy,  Chief,  Research  and  Engineering  Division,
U.S.  Army  Chemical  Corps,  to  Director  of  Logistics,  U.S.  Army  General  Staff,  3  October
1949  ("Public  Release  On  Rfadiological]  W[arfare]  Tests  at  Dugway  Proving  Ground")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-071 194-A-l).  The  letter  notes  the  draft  press  release  contains  "no
reference  to  the  general  RW  program  or  to  the  use  of  radioactive  materials  as  agents  of
warfare.  It  does  indicate  the  use  of  radioactive  materials  in  the  Dugway  area  for  the
purpose  of  formulating  defensive  doctrine."

96.  C.  G.  Helmick,  Deputy  Director  for  Research  and  Development,  to  Robert
LeBaron,  Chairman,  Military  Liaison  Committee,  3  January  1950  ("Public  Release  on
RW  Tests  at  Dugway  Proving  Ground")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-071 194-A-l);  Robert
LeBaron  to  C.  G.  Helmick,  19  January  1950  ("Public  Release  on  RW  Tests  at  Dugway
Proving  Ground")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-071 194-A-l).

554


97.  Louis  N.  Ridenour,  "How  Effective  Are  Radioactive  Poisons  in  Warfare?"
Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists  6  (1950):  199-202.  On  the  birth  of  Bulletin  of  the  Atomic
Scientists  and,  more  generally,  the  history  of  the  physics  community  that  worked  on  the
bomb,  see  Daniel  J.  Kevles,  The  Physicists:  The  History  of  the  Scientific  Community  in
Modern  America  (New  York:  Vintage,  1979),  351.

98.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Declassification  Branch,  30  September  1949
("Classification  Guide  for  Radiological  Warfare")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-070695-C).

99.  U.S.  Department  of  Defense,  Semiannual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense
and  the  Semiannual  Reports  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Army,  Secretary  of  the  Navy,
Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  July  1  to  December  31,  1949  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1950),
65-69;  Samuel  Glasstone,  executive  editor,  The  Effects  of  Atomic  Weapons  (Washington,
D.C.:  GPO,  1950),  287-290.

100.  U.S.  Department  of  Defense,  Semiannual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of
Defense  and  the  Semiannual  Reports  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Army,  Secretary  of  the  Navy,
Secretary  of  the  Air  Force,  January  1  to  June  30,  1951  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1951)
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-052695-A),  36.  In  an  August  1951  letter  to  AEC  Chairman  Dean,
Acting  Secretary  of  Defense  Rovert  Lovett  noted:  "The  Director  of  Public  Information,
Department  of  Defense,  has  been  directed  to  undertake  a  program  of  public  information
in  this  field  as  recommended  by  the  [Noyes]  Panel."

A  further  memo  to  the  Director,  Office  of  Public  Information,  the  author  of
which  is  unclear,  cited  the  Noyes  panel's  recommendation  that  civil  defense  agencies  and
the  public  be  apprised  "concerning  the  nature  and  possibilities  of  radiological  warfare  as
well  as  possible  countermeasures  so  as  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  panic  should  an  enemy
carry  out  an  attack  . .  .  and  that  studies  be  made  of  the  psychological  effects  to  be
expected."  Robert  Lovett  to  Gordon  Dean,  6  August  1951  ("The  Final  Report  of  the  Joint
AEC-NME  Panel  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-081695-A);  memorandum  to  Director,
Office  of  Public  Information,  undated  ("Public  Information  Program  on  Radiological
Warfare")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-021095-A).

101.  U.S.  Department  of  Energy,  Office  of  Declassification,  Drawing  Back  the
Curtain  of  Secrecy:  Restricted  Data  Declassification  Policy,  1946  to  the  Present  (RDD-
1)(1  June  1994),  82.

1 02.  Human  Studies  Project  Team,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory,  March
1995  ("The  Bayo  Canyon  Radioactive  Lanthanum  [RaLa]  Program  [draft]")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-031095-B-1).  This  report  lists  254  RaLa  tests,  but  1  planned  test  was  never
fired,  and  the  last  9,  conducted  for  different  purposes,  did  not  release  radiolanthanum
into  the  environment.

103.  D.  P.  MacDougall  to  N.  E.  Bradbury,  22  June  1961  ("RaLa  Shots  in
Bayo")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040695-A-13),  concludes  that  the  RaLa  program  should  not
be  dismantled  until  the  replacement  procedure,  Phermex,  was  operating.  Jane  H.  Hall  to
Distribution,  8  February  1963  ("Subject:  Rala")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040695-A-8),
reports  that  "RaLa  may  no  longer  be  released  into  the  Bayo  Canyon  atmosphere."

1 04.  GAO,  Examples  of  Post  World  War  11  Radiation  Releases,  1 6.

105.  The  fourth  experiment  was  not  an  intentional  release;  like  the  Oak  Ridge
radiological  warfare  experiments,  it  involved  a  sealed  source  of  radiation  that  was  later
returned  to  the  laboratory.  Samuel  Coroniti,  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  1 9  July
1950  ("Radiation  Test  Conducted  at  Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico  on  19  July  1950")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-051095-B).


555


106.  Human  Studies  Project  Team,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory,  March
1995  ("The  Bayo  Canyon/Radioactive  Lanthanum  RaLa  Program  [draft]"),  6.  The  GAO
report  states  that  the  Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Laboratories  and  Los  Alamos  jointly
performed  the  explosions;  Samuel  C.  Coroniti,  Air  Force  Cambridge  Research
Laboratories,  26  May  1950  ("Report  on  the  Atmospheric  Electrical  Conductivity  Tests
Conducted  in  the  Vicinity  of  Los  Alamos,  Scientific  Laboratories,  New  Mexico")
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-120294-A-1). S.  V.  Burriss,  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  to
Colonel  Benjamin  G.  Holzman,  Research  and  Development,  Pentagon,  1 1  October  1949
("Cloud  Studies  at  Los  Alamos")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-060295-B),  indicates  that  the  Air
Force  simply  took  advantage  of  releases  that  occurred  for  other  purposes.

107.  L.  H.  Hempelmann  to  David  Dow,  29  June  1944  ("Safety  of
Radiolanthanum  Experiment  in  Bayo  Canyon")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-15);  Los
Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  Safety  Committee,  proceedings  of  7  March  1945  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-052395-B-1).

108.  Ralph  G.  Steinhardt,  Jr.,  to  Joseph  Hoffman,  19  June  1945  ("Summary
Report  on  Health  Conditions  in  RaLa  Program")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-052395-B-2).

109.  T.  L.  Shipman  to  R.  E.  Cole,  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Office  of
Engineering  and  Construction,  through  N.  E.  Bradbury,  4  April  1950  ("Health  Hazards-
Guaje  Canyon  and  Vicinity")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-052395-B),  1.

1 1 0.  If  the  wind  was  blowing  toward  the  main  access  road  to  the  Los  Alamos
mesa,  tests  could  not  be  conducted  in  the  late  afternoon.  T.  L.  Shipman  to  Donald
Mueller  through  N.  E.  Bradbury  and  Duncan  MacDougall,  28  April  1949  ("Precaution
for  Bayo  Canyon  Shots")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-042495-C).

111.  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  8  March  1952  ("H-l  Program  for
Bayo  Canyon  Shots")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-042495-C);  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,
23  July  1952  ("H-l  Program  for  Bayo  Canyon  Shots")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-042495-C);
Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  1  April  1958  ("H-l  Program  for  Bayo  Canyon  Shots")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-042495-C);  and  C.  D.  Montgomery,  D.  W.  Mueller,  R.  O.
Niethammer,  30  June  1954,  revised  15  January  1960  ("Clearance,  Firing,  and  Monitoring
Procedures  for  Bayo  Canyon  Site")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040695-A-14),  8,  all  describe  the
continuing  requirements  for  weather  forecasting.  N.  E.  Bradbury  to  Distribution,  8
March  1956  ("Meteorological  Forecasting  Service")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040695-A-12),
notes  the  continuing  need  for  weather  forecasting  in  the  context  of  an  Air  Force  threat  to
withdraw  two  meteorologists.

1 12.  Tyler  Mercier,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,
transcript  of  proceedings  of  30  January  1995,  Santa  Fe,  N.M.,  35.

113.  Glenn  Vogt,  General  Monitoring  Section,  Los  Alamos,  to  Dean  Meyer,
Group  Leader,  20  April  1956  ("Bayo  Canyon  Activities,  April  12,  16,  18,  1956")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-041295-C).

1 14.  D.  W.  Mueller  to  RaLa  Committee,  22  September  1952  ("RALA  Shots")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-071095-B).

115.  Steinhardt  to  Hoffman,  19  June  1945.

1 1 6.  The  National  Reactor  Testing  Station  was  established  near  Idaho  Falls  in
1950,  and  plans  to  process  Ba-140  for  Los  Alamos  at  Idaho  Chemical  Processing  Plant
were  made  on  5  November  1952.  Dick  Duffey,  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  to  W.  B.
Allred,  Chief,  Reactor  Division,  Oak  Ridge  Operations  Office,  and  H.  Leppich,  Idaho
Operations  Office,  5  November  1952  ("This  will  confirm  our  telephone


556


conversation  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040695-A).

1 17.  The  third  test  had  taken  place  two  days  earlier,  on  14  October  1944.
Human  Studies  Project  Team  ("The  Bayo  Canyon  [RaLa]  Program"),  appendix  A-l .

1 18.  Louis  Hempelmann,  M.D.,  to  Colonel  Stafford  Warren,  16  October  1944
("Enclosed  is  an  excerpt  of  my  report  about  the  health  hazards  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
07 1494- A- 10).

1 19.  Louis  Hempelmann  to  Norris  E.  Bradbury,  30  August  1946  ("Excessive
Exposures  at  Bayo  Canyon")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-062295-A-1).

120.  E.  R.  Jette,  Acting  Director,  to  Technical  Board  Members,  3  September
1946  ("The  main  topic  for  discussion  at  the  Technical  Board  meeting  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-062295-A-2) .

121.  Ibid.

122.  Norman  Knowlton,  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  "Changes  in  the
Blood  of  Humans  Chronically  Exposed  to  Low  Level  Gamma  Radiation,"  LA-587,  1948
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-033095-A-2);  Robert  Carter  and  Norman  Knowlton,  "Hematological
Changes  in  Humans  Chronically  Exposed  to  Low-Level  Gamma  Radiation,"  LA- 1092,
1950  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-030695-A);  Robert  E.  Carter  et  al.,  Los  Alamos  Scientific
Laboratory,  July  1952,  LA- 1440  "Further  Study  of  the  Hematological  Changes  in
Humans  Chronically  Exposed  to  Low-Level  Gamma  Radiation"  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
033095-A).

123.  Thomas  Shipman,  Health  Division  Leader,  Los  Alamos  Scientific
Laboratory,  to  Gordon  Dunning,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  21  July  1954
("When  we  finally  decided  to  issue  LA- 1440  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-020795-D-4).

124.  Samuel  J.  Glasstone,  ed.,  The  Effects  of  Atomic  Weapons  (Washington,
D.C.:  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  1957),  342.

125.  This  dosimetry  appears  to  have  been  a  subject  of  some  care.  See  Louis
Hempelmann  to  Stafford  Warren,  16  October  1944  ("Enclosed  is  an  excerpt .  .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-071494-A-10),  and  William  C.  Inkret,  Human  Studies  Project  Team,
Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory,  to  Michael  Yuffee,  Office  of  Human  Radiation
Experiments,  Department  of  Energy,  16  May  1995  ("This  letter  is  a  follow-up  to  the
other  materials  we  have  sent .  .  .")  (ACHRE  Request  No.  032995-C).

126.  For  example,  organic  solvents  such  as  benzene  and  toluene  can  cause
depressed  white  blood  cell  counts.  The  first  of  the  Los  Alamos  reports  (Knowlton,  LA-
587,  1948)  notes  that  the  control  group  was  not  exposed  to  organic  solvents,  suggesting
that  the  researchers  were  aware  of  this  fact,  but  does  not  consider  this  as  a  factor  in  the
chemists'  blood  counts.

127.  J.  F.  Mullaney  to  N.  E.  Bradbury,  3  January  1946  ("Biological  Effects  of
July  16th  Explosion"),  1.  See  also  Bradbury  to  Mullaney,  7  January  1946.

128.  Clyde  Wilson,  Chief,  Insurance  Branch,  to  Anthony  C.  Vallado,  Deputy
Declassification  Officer,  20  December  1948  ("Review  of  Document  by  Knowlton")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-E-32).

129.  Leon  Tafoya,  interview  with  Mark  Goodman  (ACHRE  staff),  10  March
1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Targeted  Interview
Project).

130.  "Bye  Bye  Bayo  Site,"  LASL  News,  23  May  1963  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
051094-A-622),  7.


557


131.  William  C.  Inkret,  Los  Alamos  Human  Studies  Project  Leader,  to  Mark
Goodman  and  Dan  Guttman  (ACHRE  staff),  17  April  1995  ("Attached  are  the  answers  to
questions  6  and  7  of .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-042495-C),  4-5.

132.  Leon  Tafoya,  interview  with  Mark  Goodman  (ACHRE  staff),  10  March
1995;  and  Gilbert  Sanchez,  interview  with  Mark  Goodman  (ACHRE  staff),  9  March
1995  (ACHRE  Research  Project  Series,  Interview  Program  File,  Targeted  Interview
Project).

133.  Leon  H.  Tafoya,  "Biocultural  Dimension  of  Health  and  Environment,"
Hazardous  Waste  and  Public  Health  (1994):  245-252.

134.  Sanchez,  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  9  March  1995.

135.  Dr.  George  Voelz,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation
Experiments,  transcript  of  proceedings  of  30  January  1995,  Santa  Fe,  N.M.,  43.

136.  Department  of  Energy,  Human  Radiation  Experiments:  The  Department
of  Energy  Roadmap  to  the  Story  and  the  Records  (Springfield,  Va.:  National  Technical
Information  Service,  February  1995),  214-222.

137.  The  story  of  this  early  Hanford  research  is  told  in  Hines,  Proving  Ground.
See  also,  Stannard,  Radioactivity  and  Health,  745-1368.

138.  Daniel  O'Neill,  The  Firecracker  Boys  (New  York:  St.  Martin's  Press,
1 994),  28,31  -46.  Some  tests  were  designed  to  see  whether  nuclear  explosions  could
stimulate  the  release  of  deep  deposits  of  natural  gas.  Others  were  conducted  in  Nevada
to  test  the  ability  to  conduct  massive  civil  engineering  projects  using  nuclear  explosions.
The  possibility  of  using  nuclear  explosions  to  excavate  a  second  Panama  Canal  received
serious  theoretical  attention.

139.  Ibid.,  239-257.

140.  The  Soviet  test  site  at  Novaya  Zemla  lies  north  of  the  Arctic  Circle  and
was  responsible  for  most  of  the  fallout  in  Alaska  and  other  Arctic  locations.

141 .  Wayne  Hanson,  interview  by  Daniel  O'Neill,  4  May  1988,  transcribed  by
ACHRE  staff,  9  March  1995  (ACHRE  No.  ACHRE-031395-A),  56.

142.  Nevada  Environment  Restoration  Project,  Department  of  Energy,  Project
Chariot  Site  Assessment  and  Remedial  Action  Final  Report  (Springfield,  Va.:  National
Technical  Information  Service,  1994),  1-5.  See  also  Arthur  Piper  and  Donald  Eberlein
to  John  Phelps,  Director,  Special  Projects  Division,  9  October  1962  ("Your  letter  of
September  27,  1962,  to  . . . ")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-050295-E),  3-4.

143.  Ray  Emens,  Director,  Support  Division,  to  John  Phillip,  Director,  Special
Projects  Division,  10  April  1963  ("Radioactive  Waste  Mound  At  Project  Chariot  Site")
(ACHRE  No.  CORP-013095-A-1),  1.

144.  Nevada  Environmental  Restoration  Project,  Project  Chariot  Site
Assessment  and  Remedial  Action  Final  Report,  1  -2.

145.  Caroline  Cannon,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,
transcript  of  proceedings  of  30  January  1995,  Santa  Fe,  N.M.,  136.

146.  North  Slope  Borough  Science  Advisory  Committee,  April  1994,  "A
Preliminary  Review  of  the  Project  Chariot  Site  Assessment  and  Remedial  Action  Final
Report"  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121494-E-2).

147.  C.  A.  Hawley  et  al.,  Health  and  Safety  Division,  AEC,  Idaho  Operations
Office,  "Controlled  Environmental  Radioiodine  Tests  at  the  National  Reactor  Testing
Station,"  IDO- 12035,  June  1964  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-060794-B-37),  6.  After  1968,  a
variety  of  radioisotopes  were  used,  and  the  name  of  the  series  was  changed  to  the

558


Controlled  Environmental  Release  Tests.

148.  Ibid.,  iii.

149.  Ibid.,  3 1 .  The  exposure  limits  at  the  time  were  30  rem  to  the  thyroid  per
year.  Richard  Dickson,  Idaho  National  Engineering  Laboratory,  to  Bill  LeFurgy,  Office
of  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  16  May  1995  ("Comments  on  Draft  Advisory
Committee  Report").

150.  Data  on  tests  2,  7,  10,  and  1 1  are  contained  in  C.  A.  Hawley,  Jr.,  ed.,  Idaho
Operations  Office,  AEC,  "Controlled  Environmental  Radioiodine  Test  at  the  Nuclear
Rector  Testing  Station:  1965  Progress  Report,"  IDO-129457,  February  1966,  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-060794-B-37);  D.  F.  Bunch,  ed.,  Idaho  Operations  Office,  AEC,  "Controlled
Environmental  Radioiodine  Tests:  Progress  Report  Number  Two,"  IDO- 12053,  August
1966,  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-060794-B-39),  26-30;  D.  F.  Bunch,  ed.,  Idaho  Operations
Office,  AEC,  "Controlled  Environmental  Radioiodine  Tests:  Progress  Report  Number
Three,"  IDO- 12063,  January  1968  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-101 194-B-3),  14.

151.  Dr.  George  Voelz,  interview  with  Marisa  Caputo  (DOE  Office  of  Human
Radiation  Experiments),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  29  November  1994  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-061495-A),  16-18.  Members  of  the  INEL's  Human  Radiation  Experiments  Team
state  that  the  identities  of  these  subjects  could  be  determined  from  records.

152.  [Deleted]  Senior  Engineer  to  R.  F.  Foster  (PNL-9370),  1  August  1963
("Monthly  Report:  July  1963  [handwritten  draft]")  and  PNL-9369-DEL,  23  August  1963
("Monthly  Report:  August  1963").  A  proposal  for  a  second  Hanford  iodine  131  field
release  test  was  never  implemented.  E.  C.  Watson,  BWWL-CC-167,  22  July  1965
("Proposal  for  a  Second  Iodine-131  Field  Release  Test")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033095-A-
1 ).  A  handwritten  notation  on  the  cover  sheet  reads:  "This  test  was  not  run.  D  Gydesen.
3/24/86."  The  DOE  interview  with  Jack  Healy  includes  descriptions  of  his  role  in  a  study
involving  iodine  uptake  through  milk.  Jack  Healy,  interview  with  Mark  Goodman
(ACHRE  staff),  8  March  1995,  transcript  of  audio  recording  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-050295-
A),  32.

153.  The  exposures  at  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  came  primarily  from  acute
exposure  to  gamma  and  neutron  radiation,  rather  than  from  radioactive  fallout.

1 54.  U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Estimating  Radiogenic  Cancer
Risks,  EPA,  402-R-93-076,  June  1994  (DOE-061 195-A).  One  person-rem  corresponds
to  an  aggregate  dose  of  1  rem  spread  over  any  number  of  people.  The  result  from  BEIR
V  is  roughly  one  cancer  fatality  for  every  1,120  person-rem  (see  chapter  4,  "BEIR  V"),
but  this  is  from  a  single  exposure  to  gamma  radiation.

1 55.  This  project  has  since  been  transferred  to  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control
and  Prevention.

1 56.  The  Committee  has  not  attempted  to  estimate  the  range  of  uncertainty  in
this  estimate.  Some  of  the  relevant  figures  are  the  estimated  maximum  600-mrad  thyroid
dose  from  Hanford  emissions  in  1949,  the  more  typical  1 80-mrad  dose  for  residents  of
Richland  and  the  roughly  30,000  population  of  the  Richland  area  at  the  time,  suggesting  a
total  population  exposure  of  roughly  5,400  person-rad  to  the  thyroid.  See  W.  T.  Farris  et
al.,  Hanford  Environmental  Dose  Reconstruction  Project,  PWWD-2228  HEDR,  April
1994,  ("Atmospheric  Pathway  Dosimetry  Report,  1944-1992  [draft]"),  C.  6.  Using
NCRP  risk  estimates  of  7.5  excess  cancer  deaths  per  million  person-rad  to  the  thyroid,
this  leads  to  an  estimate  of  0.04  excess  thyroid  cancer  deaths.  The  corresponding
estimate  for  nonfatal  thyroid  cancer  is  a  factor  of  10  higher.  There  are  many  uncertainties
in  this  estimate,  but  they  do  not  consistently  overstate  or  understate  the  risk.  For

559


example,  we  have  ignored  the  smaller  exposures  to  other  population  centers  and  the
relatively  high  doses  and  risks  to  children,  as  well  as  the  offsetting  facts  that  the  Green
Run  represented  only  about  80  percent  of  Hanford's  1-131  emissions  in  1949  and
occurred  in  December  when  the  food  pathway  was  suppressed.

157.  Meteorological  and  fallout  data  are  more  or  less  complete  after  1950.  A
total  of  roughly  250,000  curies  of  radiolanthanum  were  released  (remarkably,  less  than
half  a  gram)  from  1944  to  1960,  with  releases  peaking  in  1955  and  1956  at  roughly
40,000  curies  a  year.  Strontium  90  was  a  minor  contaminant,  with  total  releases  of  about
200  millicuries.  Los  Alamos  Human  Studies  Project  Team  (draft,  9  March  1995)  ("Bayo
Canyon/[RaLa]  Program"),  1 5,  appendix  A.

158.  D.  H.  Kraig,  Human  Studies  Project  Team,  Los  Alamos  National
Laboratory,  1995  ("Dose  Reconstruction  for  Experiments  Involving  La  140  at  Los
Alamos  National  Laboratory,  1944-1962")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-091495-A).

1 59.  General  Accounting  Office,  Examples  of  Post  World  War  II  Radiation
Releases,  16.  Los  Alamos  Human  Studies  Project  Team,  "Bayo  Canyon/RaLa  Program,"
9-10.  In  tandem  with  its  historical  reconstruction,  the  Human  Studies  Project  Team  at
Los  Alamos  is  preparing  a  report  estimating  radiation  exposures  to  the  general
population.

160.  According  to  LA- 1440,  ten  workers  were  exposed  to  an  average  exposure
of  at  least  34  R,  and  the  total  exposure  was  at  least  340  person-R,  corresponding  to
roughly  0.2  fatal  cancers.  Knowlton  reports  that  ten  men  received  an  average  of  1 6.2 1  R
over  a  77-week  period.  Knowlton,  LA-587,  2.

161.  Barton  C.  Hacker,  Elements  of  Controversy:  The  Atomic  Energy
Commission  and  Radiation  Safety  in  Nuclear  Weapons  Testing,  1947-1974  (Berkeley:
University  of  California  Press,'  1 994),  chapters  4  and  5.

162.  Richard  Elliott,  Director,  Public  Information  Division,  San  Francisco
Office,  AEC,  to  Public  Information  Officers,  Division  Offices,  AEC,  2  December  1953
("The  Public  Relations  of  Atmospheric  Nuclear  Tests")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-030195-C),
2.  Hacker,  in  Elements  of  Controversy,  provides  some  of  the  background  for  the
discussion  of  Elliott's  paper,  including  high  levels  of  fallout  observed  in  communities  in
southern  Utah  and  injuries  and  death  to  livestock  that  had  grazed  in  the  fallout  area.

1 63.  We  should  emphasize  that  public  notification  does  not  mean  that  members
of  the  public  would  need  to  or  could  take  precautionary  actions  that  would  not  otherwise
be  taken.  Given  the  relatively  low  risk  posed  by  the  intentional  releases,  evacuation
could  have  had  costs  greater  than  the  possible  benefits.  In  the  case  of  the  Green  Run,  a
warning  not  to  eat  certain  foods  might  have  been  useful;  however,  the  food  pathways
were  not  known  at  the  time.  On  the  other  hand,  the  prospectors  around  the  Dugway  site
and  the  Pueblo  Indians  around  Los  Alamos  could  have  been  warned  not  to  wander  into
certain  areas  that  may  have  posed  some  hazard,  however  small.

1 64.  Both  statutes  have  since  been  amended  by  subsequent  legislation.  The
relevant  provisions  of  the  Clean  Air  Act  are  the  National  Emission  Standards  for
Hazardous  Air  Pollutants  (42.  U.S.C.  7412),  and  those  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Act  are  42
U.S.C.  21 14,  2133.  Other  environmental  statutes  either  explicitly  exempt  most
radioactive  materials  (the  Clean  Water  Act)  or  are  less  directly  relevant  to  intentional
releases  (the  Safe  Drinking  Water  Act,  the  Resource  Conservation  and  Recovery  Act,  and
the  Comprehensive  Environmental  Compensation,  Response,  and  Liability  Act).

165.  As  noted  in  the  Introduction,  radiation  standards  were  initially  established
as  recommendations  by  two  private  advisory  bodies:  the  International  Commission  on

560


Radiological  Protection  (ICRP)  and  the  U.S.  National  Committee  on  Radiation
Protection,  now  the  National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and  Measurements
(NCRP).  Over  time  federal  and  state  agencies  have  based  regulatory  standards  on  these
recommendations.

1 66.  As  noted  above,  this  standard  was  a  recommendation  by  the  NCRP,  later
adopted  as  policy  by  the  AEC.  Carroll  Wilson  to  Lauriston  Taylor,  10  October  1947,  as
cited  in  Gilbert  Whittemore,  "The  National  Committee  on  Radiation  Protection,  1928-
1960:  From  Professional  Guidelines  to  Government  Regulation"  (Ph.D.  diss.,  Harvard
University,  1986),  326-327.

167.  This  standard  took  the  form  of  guidance  issued  by  the  Federal  Radiation
Council  in  1960,  "Radiation  Protection  Guidance  for  Federal  Agencies,"  in  Fed.  Reg.  25,
4402-4403  (1960);  and  Fed.  Reg.  26,  9057-9058  (1961).  See  also,  D.  C.  Kocher,
"Perspective  on  the  Historical  Development  of  Radiation  Standards,"  Health  Physics  61
no.  4  (October  1991).

168.  The  EPA  was  established  by  President  Nixon.  The  NRC  was  formed  in
1 974  under  the  Energy  Reorganization  Act  to  take  over  the  regulatory  functions  of  the
AEC.  See  42  U.S.C.  5801  et  seq.

1 69.  U.S.  General  Accounting  Office,  Consensus  on  Acceptable  Radiation  Risk
to  the  Public  is  Lacking,  GAO/RCED-94-190,  summarizes  the  existing  radiation
protection  standards  in  the  federal  government  (see  especially  table  1,  p.  5).

1 70.  Committee  on  the  Biological  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation,  BEIR  V,  1 8.
Table  1-3  provides  a  comparison  on  typical  exposure  to  natural  and  artificial  sources  of
ionizing  radiation.

171.  54  Fed.  Reg.  5 1 657;  54  Fed.  Reg.  5 1 655;  56  Fed.  Reg.  33080,  as  cited  in
David  O'Very  and  Allan  Richardson,  unpublished,  "Regulation  of  Radiological  and
Chemical  Carcinogens:  Current  Steps  Toward  Risk  Harmonization,"  1995.

1 72.  Some  regulations  already  take  the  population  dose  into  account.  The
DOE  and  NRC  use  the  population  dose  in  implementing  the  principle  that  radiation
exposures  be  made  as  low  as  reasonably  achievable  (a  principle  that  goes  by  the  acronym
ALARA),  applying  cost-benefit  analysis  to  reduce  population  doses  from  the  operation  of
a  given  facility.  As  another  example,  releases  of  Kr-85  from  nuclear  power  plants  are
limited  on  the  basis  of  population  doses.  40  C.F.R.  190.10(b).

173.  The  national  security  interest  exemption  to  the  Clean  Air  Act  is  provided
in  42  U.S.C.  7412(i)(4):  "The  President  may  exempt  any  stationary  source  from
compliance  with  any  standard  or  limitation  under  this  section  for  a  period  of  not  more
than  two  years  if  the  President  determines  that  the  technology  to  implement  such  standard
is  not  available  and  is  in  the  national  security  interest  of  the  United  States  to  do  so."
Other  environmental  statutes  have  similar  exemptions.

174.  AEC  132/64,  7  January  1964,  cited  in  J.  Samuel  Walker,  Containing  the
Atom  (Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press,  1992),  11-12.  Except  for  such
circumstances,  the  AEC  declared  its  intention  to  ensure  that  "reactor  facilities  are
designed,  constructed,  operated,  and  maintained  in  a  manner  that  protects  the  general
public,  government  and  contractor  personnel,  and  public  and  private  property  against
exposure  to  radiation  from  reactor  operations  and  other  potential  health  and  safety
hazards."

1 75.  The  ability  to  delay  any  report  to  Congress  by  as  much  as  a  year  greatly
limits  the  effectiveness  of  this  reporting  requirement.  There  also  remains  the  possibility


561


that  the  information  provided  to  Congress  would  be  classified,  and  so  the  report  would
not  be  made  public.

176.  See42U.S.C4321  etseq.

1 77.  The  basic  requirements  for  environmental  impact  analyses  appear  at  40
C.F.R.  part  1500  et  seq.  As  a  preliminary  step,  an  environmental  assessment  may  be
done  to  determine  whether  the  "significant  impact"  threshold  is  met  and  a  full  EIS  is
necessary.  This  EIS  must  include  an  analysis  of  the  environmental  impact  alternatives  to
the  proposed  action.  Normally,  a  draft  EIS  must  be  made  available  for  public
information  and  comment,  and  the  agency  must  respond  to  any  comments  of  the  public.

178.  The  regulations  implementing  NEPA  provide  that  "environmental
assessments  and  environmental  impact  statements  which  address  classified  proposals
may  be  safeguarded  and  restricted  from  public  dissemination  in  accordance  with
agencies'  own  regulations  applicable  to  classified  information."  40  C.F.R.  1507.3(c).
This  provision  for  secret  procedures  does  not  relieve  an  agency  of  the  obligation  to
inform  itself  of  the  environmental  impacts  of  its  actions,  nor  does  it  relieve  EPA  of  the
requirement  to  review  those  impacts.

179.  On  1 1  February  1994,  President  Clinton  signed  Executive  Order  12898,
"Federal  Actions  to  Address  Environmental  Justice  in  Minority  Populations  and  Low-
Income  Populations,"  which  requires  each  federal  agency  to  address  disproportionate
human  health  or  environmental  effects  of  its  policies.  This  includes  requirements  to
assess  those  impacts  and  to  seek  greater  public  participation  in  environmental  planning
and  policymaking.  Executive  Order  12898,  59  Fed.  Reg.  7629  (16  February  1994).

180.  Richard  Sanderson,  Director,  Office  of  Federal  Activities,  EPA,  to  Donald
Weightman  (ACHRE  Staff),  22  March  1995  ("NEPA  Oversight  of  Classified
Documents").  Such  programs  are  offically  referred  to  as  Special  Access  programs.

181.  See  Helen  Frost  et  al.  v.  William  Perry,  Secretary  of  the  United  States
Department  of  Defense  et  al,  Civil  Action  no.  CV-S-94-795-PMP  (RLH),  filed  August
1 5,  1 994  (ACHRE  No.  5 VVU-04 1 495- A),  and  John  Doe  et  al.  v.  Carol  M.  Browner,
Administrator,  United  States  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Civil  Action  no.  CV-S-
94-795-DWH  (LRL),  both  of  which  were  filed  in  the  U.S.  District  Court  for  the  District
of  Nevada.

182.  Craig  Hooks,  Associate  Director,  Federal  Facilities  Enforcement  Office,
EPA,  to  Donald  Weightman  (ACHRE  staff),  1 1  April  1995  ("Please  find  enclosed  . .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  EPA-041395-A).

183.  Gary  Vest,  Deputy  to  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense  for
Environmental  Security,  interview  with  Mark  Goodman  (ACHRE  staff),  13  December
1994,  staff  notes  (ACHRE  Contact  Database).

184.  Mark  Hamilton,  USAF,  telephone  interview  with  Mark  Goodman
(ACHRE  staff),  4  January  1995,  staff  notes  (ACHRE  Contact  Database).

185.  Richard  Sanderson,  Director,  Office  of  Federal  Activities,  EPA,  to  Donald
Weightman  (ACHRE  Staff),  22  March  1995  ("NEPA  Oversight  of  Classified
Documents").

186.  The  Supreme  Court  has  ruled  that  the  question  of  an  agency's  compliance
with  NEPA  is  "beyond  judicial  scrutiny"  when  a  trial  of  the  case  would  "inevitably  lead
to  the  disclosure  of  matters  which  the  law  itself  regards  as  confidential,  and  respecting
which  it  will  not  allow  the  confidence  to  be  violated."  Weinberger  v.  Catholic  Action  of
Hawaii/Peace  Education  Project,  454  U.S.  139,  146  (1981).


562


12

Observational  Data  Gathering


Oupplies  of  uranium  to  build  atomic  bombs;  a  remote,  sparsely  inhabited
site  to  test  the  bombs;  information  about  the  health  effects  of  both  the  raw
material  and  the  bomb:  these  were  the  Cold  War  needs  that  led  directly  to  the
events  with  which  this  chapter  is  concerned.

This  chapter  examines  whether  the  U.S.  government  wronged  or  harmed
uranium  miners  in  the  American  West  and  Marshall  Islanders  in  the  mid-Pacific,
in  both  cases  by  exposing  them  to  radiation  hazards:  in  the  case  of  the  miners  by
failing  to  inform  them  about  the  risk  and  failing  to  mitigate  it;  and  in  both  cases,
perhaps  to  different  degrees,  by  studying  them  without  having  obtained  adequate
consent.  Although  the  mines  of  the  Colorado  Plateau  and  the  seas  surrounding
the  atolls  of  the  Marshall  Islands  were  seen  by  U.S.  policy  planners  as  ideal  sites
for  the  government's  primary  missions-mining  uranium  and  detonating  atomic
and  hydrogen  bombs--they  became  laboratories  for  studying  radiation  damage  to
humans.  We  also  touch  briefly  on  a  radiation  experiment  conducted  with  a  view
to  the  natural  laboratory  in  which  the  subjects  were  set:  in  1956  and  1957  the  Air
Force  administered  iodine  131  to  Alaskan  residents  to  determine  the  role  of  the
thyroid  gland  in  adapting  to  extreme  cold.

The  uranium  mines,  the  Marshall  Islands,  and  Alaska  were  not,  of  course,
the  first  such  occasions  for  studying  the  effects  of  radiation  on  people.  As  has
been  reported  in  earlier  chapters,  radium  dial  painters  were  studied,  and  in  the
largest  epidemiological  study  of  radiation  effects  ever,  the  survivors  of  the
Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  bombs  continue  to  be  followed.  The  Atomic  Bomb
Casualty  Commission  (now  the  Radiation  Effects  Research  Foundation)  began  its
work  soon  after  World  War  II.  The  organization's  projects  include  a  mortality
study,  a  periodic  health  examination  study,  a  study  of  people  exposed  in  utero,


563


Part  II

and  a  genetic  effects  study.  Some  of  the  most  important  data  available  on  long-
term  radiation  risks  have  come  from  these  studies.  These  data  have  also  provided
the  basis  for  most  current  radiation  exposure  standards.  The  Hiroshima-Nagasaki
studies  are  different  from  the  cases  of  the  uranium  miners  and  the  Marshallese,
however,  because  the  exposure  ended  before  the  epidemiologic  study  got  under
way.

While  the  miners,  and  the  Marshallese  after  their  high  initial  exposure,
were  subjected  to  continuous  exposure  to  radiation—relatively  high  for  the  miners,
relatively  low  for  the  Marshallese— they  were  not  exposed  for  the  purpose  of
studying  the  effects  of  radiation  on  their  health.  But  the  exposures  resulting  from
the  mining  and  bomb  tests  provided  the  government  an  opportunity,  and  some
would  say  a  duty,  to  collect  needed  information  on  radiation  effects  on  human
beings.  In  both  cases  researchers  were  interested  in  determining  the  health
consequences  of  exposure  to  specific  and  quantified  forms  and  levels  of  ionizing
radiation  over  a  long  term.  For  the  miners  it  was  radon  gas  and  its  radioactive
decay  products.  For  the  Marshallese  it  was  the  fallout  products  of  nuclear
explosions  such  as  iodine  131,  strontium  90,  and  cesium  137.  Also,  in  both  cases,
the  United  States  has  provided,  and  in  the  case  of  the  miners,  continues  to
provide,  financial  compensation.  In  addition,  a  class-action  lawsuit,  Begay  v.
United  States,  was  brought  on  behalf  of  a  group  of  Navajo  miners.

There  were,  however,  major  differences  between  the  situation  of  the
miners  and  that  of  the  Marshallese.  In  the  case  of  the  miners,  the  research  was
conducted  even  though  there  were  data  from  European  studies  clearly  indicating
that  uranium  miners  were  at  high  risk  for  lung  cancer,  which  could  have  been
substantially  mitigated  by  ventilating  the  mines.  The  study  of  the  miners,
conducted  by  the  Public  Health  Service,  was  epidemiological  in  nature  and
unrelated  to  their  clinical  care.  The  Marshallese  were  the  first  population  exposed
to  amounts  of  fallout  perceived  as  acutely  dangerous.'  The  long-term  effects  of
exposure  to  fallout  were  unknown;  therefore  it  was  important  to  gather  data  while
treating  the  exposed  population.  It  appears  that  the  medical  monitoring  of  the
exposed  population  was  directly  integrated  with  the  management  of  their  health
care.

To  gather  information  on  the  health  effects  of  radiation,  federal
government  agencies  mounted  observational  studies,  a  term  indicating  that  the
conditions  of  exposure  are  not  under  the  control  of  the  investigator  who  is
studying  the  health  effects.

For  a  long  time,  while  they  were  being  studied,  it  seems  evident  that  no
one  explained  to  the  miners  the  extent  to  which  their  exposure  to  radiation  might
be  hazardous  and,  in  many  cases,  lethal.  Nor,  it  appears,  were  they  told  that
ventilation  of  the  mines  could  significantly  reduce  the  hazard.  And,  evidently  no
one  seems  to  have  told  the  miners  the  true  purposes  of  the  research.  With  respect
to  the  Marshallese,  efforts  to  explain  to  them  the  purpose  of  the  studies  and  the
hazards  of  their  contaminated  environment  were  inadequate  well  into  the  1960s,

564


Chapter  12

and  the  difference  between  medical  care  and  treatment-related  research  was  not
clearly  explained.  The  Advisory  Committee  reports  here  on  both  studies  and
concludes  with  a  discussion  of  the  cold-weather  experiment  in  Alaska  in  which
servicemen,  Eskimos,  and  Indians  were  given  tracer  amounts  of  iodine  131.  We
begin  with  the  uranium  miners.

THE  URANIUM  MINERS

The  competition  with  the  Soviet  Union  to  build  atomic  arsenals  spurred  a
uranium  boom.  In  the  late  1940s,  there  was  a  perceived  need  for  a  large  and
reliable  domestic  source  of  uranium  to  replace  supplies  predominantly  from  the
Belgian  Congo  and,  to  a  lesser  degree,  Canada.  The  AEC's  announcement  in
1 948  that  it  would  purchase  at  a  guaranteed  price  all  the  ore  that  was  mined  set
off  a  stampede  on  the  Colorado  Plateau.2  Hundreds  of  mines,  ranging  from  mines
run  by  the  prospectors  themselves  to  larger  corporate  operations,  were  opened  in
the  Four  Corners  area  of  Arizona,  New  Mexico,  Utah,  and  Colorado,  and  several
thousand  miners,  many  of  them  Navajo,  went  to  work.3

Some  of  the  mines  were  large  open  pits,  but  most  were  underground
networks  of  shafts,  caverns,  and  tunnels,  shored  up  by  timbers.  Because  uranium
milling  and  open-pit  mining  is  conducted  above  ground,  radon  levels  tend  to  be
quite  low,  as  radon  is  readily  dispersed  into  the  atmosphere.  However,  millers  are
exposed  to  uranium  dust  and  thorium  230,  both  of  which  may  have  chemical  or
radiological  toxicity,  as  well  as  additional  chemicals  used  in  the  extraction
process.  In  the  remainder  of  this  chapter,  we  focus  on  the  underground  miners
who  were  exposed  to  much  higher  levels  of  the  hazards  that  are  the  principal
cause  of  lung  cancer  in  the  miners.4

The  American  boom  followed  centuries  of  experience  with  uranium
mining  in  Europe,  where  a  mysterious  malady  had  been  killing  silver  and  uranium
miners  at  an  early  age  in  the  Erzgebirge  (ore  mountains)  on  the  border  between
what  is  now  the  Czech  Republic  and  Germany.  In  1879,  two  researchers
identified  the  disease  as  intrathoracic  malignancy.  They  reported  that  a  miners'
life  expectancy  was  twenty  years  after  entering  the  mine,  and  about  75  percent  of
the  miners  died  of  lung  cancer.5  By  1932,  both  Germany  and  Czechoslovakia  had
deemed  the  miners'  cancers  a  compensable  occupational  disease.

In  1942,  Wilhelm  C.  Hueper,  a  German  emigre  who  was  founding  director
of  the  environmental  cancer  section  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute  (NCI),  one  of
the  National  Institutes  of  Health,  published  a  review  in  English  of  the  literature  on
the  European  miners  suggesting  that  radon  gas  was  implicated  in  causing  lung
cancer.6  He  eliminated  nonoccupational  factors  because  excess  lung  cancer
showed  up  only  among  miners.  He  also  eliminated  occupational  factors  other
than  radon  .because  these  other  factors  had  not  caused  lung  cancer  in  other
occupational  settings.7  Among  Hueper's  peers,  dissenters,  such  as  Egon  Lorenz,
also  of  the  NCI,  focused  on  contaminants  other  than  radon  in  the  mine,  the

565


Part  II

possible  genetic  susceptibility  of  the  population,  and  the  calculated  doses  to  the
lung,  which  seemed  too  low  to  cause  cancer  because  the  role  of  radon  daughters—
which  the  radioactive  polonium,  bismuth,  and  lead  decay  products  of  radon  gas
are  known  as—was  not  yet  understood.8

At  the  time  its  own  program  began,  the  AEC  had  many  reasons  for
concern  that  the  experience  of  the  Czech  and  German  miners  portended  excess
lung  cancer  deaths  for  uranium  miners  in  the  United  States.  The  factors  included
the  following:  (1)  No  respected  scientist  challenged  the  finding  that  the  Czech
and  German  miners  had  an  elevated  rate  of  lung  cancer;  (2)  these  findings  were
well  known  to  the  American  decision  makers;  (3)  as  Hueper  points  out,  genetic
and  nonoccupational  factors  could  be  rejected;  and  (4)  radon  standards  existed  for
other  industries,  and  there  was  no  reason  to  think  that  conditions  in  mines  ruled
out  the  need  for  such  standards.  Moreover,  as  soon  as  the  government  began  to
measure  airborne  radon  levels  in  Western  U.S.  uranium  mines,  they  found  higher
levels  than  those  reported  in  the  European  mines  where  excess  cancers  had  been
observed.9  As  Public  Health  Service  (PHS)  sanitary  engineer  Duncan  Holaday,
who  spent  many  years  studying  the  miners,  recalled  in  1959  congressional
testimony,  there  was  early  recognition  that  while  there  were  substantial
differences  between  European  and  American  settings,  the  exposure  levels  in  U.S.
mines  were  high:

In  1 946  our  American  mines  were  not  as  deep  as  those  in
Europe.  The  men  did  not  work  long  hours.  Furthermore,  a
great  many  of  them  were  more  or  less  transient  miners,  in
and  out  of  the  industry.

However,  our  early  environmental  studies  in  these
early  American  mines  indicated  that  we  had
concentrations  of  radioactive  gases  considerably  in
excess  of  those  that  had  been  reported  in  the
literature.10

One  important  hole  in  Hueper's  argument  was  that  the  calculated  dose  of
radiation  from  the  radon  in  European  mines  did  not  seem  high  enough  to  cause
cancer."  But  when  William  Bale  of  the  University  of  Rochester  and  John  Harley,
a  scientist  at  the  AEC's  New  York  Operations  Office  (NYOO)  who  was  working
toward  his  doctorate  at  Renssaelear  Polytechnic  Institute,  were  able  to  show  and
explain  in  1951  the  importance  of  radioactive  particles  that  attached  to  bits  of  dust
and  remained  in  the  lung,  the  discovery  had  a  tremendous  impact.12  When  doses
to  the  lung  were  recalculated  using  Bale  and  Harley's  models,  they  increased  76
times,13  making  them  high  enough  to  explain  the  observed  cancer  rates.14
Recognizing  the  importance  of  radon  daughters  also  explained  why  animal
experiments  using  pure  radon  gas  had  not  caused  cancer.15

566


Chapter  12

In  the  absence  of  Atomic  Energy  Commission  willingness  to  press  for
relatively  safe  tolerance  levels  for  radon  in  U.S.  mines  and  to  institute  an  effective
program  of  mine  ventilation  to  reduce  the  hazard,  and  a  mixed,  but  mainly
unsatisfactory  response  from  the  states,  the  stage  was  set  for  intergovernmental
buck  passing  and  decades  of  study,  a  course  that  resulted  in  the  premature  deaths
of  hundreds  of  miners.  An  analysis  of  eleven  underground  miners'  studies
published  in  1994  by  the  National  Cancer  Institute  supports  the  view  that  radon
daughters  are  responsible  for  an  even  greater  number  of  lung  cancers  than
previously  believed.16

The  Advisory  Committee  heard  from  many  miners  and  their  families
about  the  devastation  wrought  by  the  experience  in  the  mines  and  the
government's  ability  to  prevent  it.  Dorothy  Ann  Purley,  from  the  pueblo  of
Laguna  in  New  Mexico,  told  Advisory  Committee  members  at  a  public  meeting
in  Santa  Fe,  "Nowadays  people  come  out  and  say,  'Did  you  know  so  and  so  died
of  cancer?'  'I  have  a  brother  in  law  who  has  got  cancer.  He  worked  at  the
mine.""7

Philip  Harrison,  a  spokesman  for  Navajo  miners  and  their  families,  told
the  Advisory  Committee  that  in  New  Mexico  mines  "the  working  conditions  were
sometimes  unbearable. . .  .  The  government  knew  all  along  what  the  outcome
would  be  and  .  .  .  initiated  studies  on  the  miners  . . .  without  their  knowledge  and
consent."18

A  Standard  for  Beryllium,  But  Not  for  Uranium

In  1948,  Merril  Eisenbud,  an  industrial  hygienist,  was  recruited  by  the
AEC's  New  York  Operations  Office  to  help  set  up  a  health  and  safety  laboratory.
The  NYOO  was  responsible  for  all  raw  materials  procurement  for  the  AEC.19  At
the  request  of  the  AEC's  Raw  Materials  Division,  Dr.  Eisenbud  and  Dr.  Bernard
Wolf,  a  radiologist,  reported  on  potential  health  hazards  in  the  mines  to  the
NYOO  field  office  in  Colorado  and  to  AEC  headquarters  staff.20  Dr.  Eisenbud
and  the  New  York  Operations  Office  recommended  that  the  AEC  write
requirements  for  health  protection  into  its  contracts  with  the  mine  operators.21

The  AEC  had  used  contract  provisions  in  the  case  of  beryllium,  another
key  (but  not  radioactive)  element  in  bomb  production.  One  month  before  Dr.
Eisenbud  filed  his  report  on  the  uranium  mines,  the  Cleveland  News  reported  on  a
conference  convened  to  discuss  cases  of  beryllium  poisoning  at  plants  in
Massachusetts  and  Lorain,  Ohio.22  Among  the  fatalities  in  Lorain  were  five
residents  living  near  the  Beryllium  Corporation  plant.23  The  plant  owner,  Dr.
Eisenbud  recalled  in  1995,  was  eager  to  have  conditions  studied  "because  he
wanted  to  know  what  his  liability  was."24

That  same  month,  June  1948,  responding  to  the  "considerable  publicity  .  .
.  given  by  the  press  to  cases  of  berylliosis  among  plant  workers  and  residents,"
the  AEC  set  a  tentative  standard  for  the  permissible  levels  of  exposure  to

567


Part  II

beryllium.  The  NYOO,  "with  the  approval  of  the  Division  of  Biology  and
Medicine,  has  insisted  that  the  AEC-recommended  tolerance  levels  be  met  in  all
plants  processing  beryllium  or  beryllium  compounds  for  the  Commission."25
Despite  the  fact  that  by  September  1 949  there  had  been  at  least  twenty-seven
deaths  attributed  to  beryllium  in  plants  where  the  AEC  had  contracts  (no  one
became  sick  with  berylliosis  after  the  tolerance  limits  had  been  set  in  place),  the
DBM  objected  to  AEC  "establishment  and  enforcement  of  standards  or
regulations  pertaining  to  health  and  safety  conditions"  and  wanted  to  turn  the
matter  over  to  the  states.26  Nevertheless,  the  NYOO  enforced  standards  for
beryllium.27

The  uranium  and  beryllium  situations  had  much  in  common.  In  both  cases
the  AEC  was  the  sole  or  primary  purchaser!  In  both  cases  the  AEC's  New  York
Operations  Office  sought  to  control  the  hazard.  And  in  both  cases  there  were
arguments  to  be  made  for  inaction:  The  causation  mechanism  for  the  disease  was
poorly  understood,  and  the  legal  authority  of  the  AEC  to  regulate  private
production  was  questionable. The  essential  difference  between  the  two  cases
was  that  the  illness  caused  by  beryllium  appeared  shortly  after  exposure  and
aroused  publicity  and  associated  public  concern.  By  contrast,  it  would  take  more
than  a  decade  before  uranium  miners  would  begin  to  die  of  lung  cancer,  and
causality  would  be  harder  to  infer.

The  DBM  and  the  AEC  Raw  Materials  Division  rejected  Dr.  Eisenbud's
recommendation  for  health  protection,  arguing  that  the  Atomic  Energy  Act  did
not  give  the  AEC  authority  over  uranium  mine  health  and  safety.28  The  New
York  Operations  Office  took  the  same  position  that  it  had  taken  on  beryllium:  if
it  was  going  to  procure  uranium,  it  was  going  to  control  radon  in  the  mines.29  The
AEC  responded  by  transferring  uranium  procurement  to  a  newly  created  section
of  the  Raw  Materials  Division  in  Washington.30  According  to  Dr.  Eisenbud,  the
director  of  the  New  York  Operations  Office  and  many  of  its  employees  quit  over
this  move,  at  least  some  of  them  because  the  shift  was  intended  to  keep  the  AEC
out  of  health-related  matters  in  the  uranium  mining  industry.31

Eisenbud's  perspective  was  echoed  in  at  least  part  of  the  AEC's
Washington  office.  In  May  1949,  A.  E.  Gorman,  a  sanitary  engineer  at  the  AEC,
wrote  a  memo  for  the  files  in  which  he  reported  on  a  meeting  with  Lewis  A.
Young,  director  of  the  Colorado  Department  of  Health's  division  of  sanitation,
and  Dr.  John  Z.  Bowers,  deputy  director  of  the  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine.
Bowers  "indicated  that  health  conditions  [on  the  Colorado  Plateau]  were  not
satisfactory,"  and  Mr.  Young  reported  that  "conditions  under  which  uranium  ore
was  being  mined  and  processed  were  not  good."32  Bowers,  the  memo  recorded,
said  his  office  did  not  want  to  recommend  "drastic  steps"  to  require  correction  of
deficiencies,  but  preferred  to  gather  facts  about  the  hazard  and  cooperate  with
mine  operators  and  state  agencies  to  correct  unsatisfactory  conditions.  Gorman,
however,  recorded:


568


Chapter  12

I  expressed  the  opinion  that  if  the  State  of  Colorado
had  only  two  inspectors  to  cover  industrial  hygienic
conditions  in  all  mines  in  the  state,  it  would  not  be
realistic  to  expect  very  extensive  follow  up  of  the
hazards  problems  [sic]  involving  silicosis  and
radioactivity;  also  that  since  AEC  was  purchasing  a
very  large  percentage  of  the  uranium  produced,  we
had  a  moral  responsibility  at  least  to  improve  any
unsatisfactory  condition  which  was  known  to  exist
involving  the  health  of  workers.  I  suggested  that
this  might  be  taken  care  of  by  a  clause  in  our
contracts  even  though  it  might  result  in  a  higher
cost  of  production.  I  questioned  the  point  that  such
action  might  seriously  affect  the  production  of
uranium.33

Gorman's  perspective  did  not  win  out.  By  the  1950s  occupational
standards  or  guidelines  existed  not  only  for  radium34  (a  maximum  permissible
body  burden)  but  also  for  radon.  By  1 94 1  the  data  from  the  European  mines  had
been  used  to  establish  a  radon  standard  for  "air  in  plant,  laboratory,  or  office  [of]
10  picocuries  per  liter."35  But  when  it  came  to  the  mines  the  federal  government
took  nearly  two  decades  to  issue  enforceable  standards  and  actions  to  protect  all
those  miners  known  to  be  exposed  to  significant  risk.  Instead,  it  debated
responsibility  for  action  while  it  pursued  a  long  course  of  epidemiological  study.
The  episode,  the  judge  would  declare  in  the  Begay  case  decision  in  1984,  was  a
"tragedy  of  the  nuclear  age."36

The  PHS  Study

On  August  25,  1949,  the  state  of  Colorado  and  U.S.  Public  Health  Service
officials  met  to  explore  radiation  safety  in  the  uranium  mines  and  mills.37
Colorado  was  home  to  about  half  of  the  U.S.  uranium  mines.  Because  many  of
them  were  small  mines,  they  employed  less  than  10  percent  of  the  country's
uranium  miners.  (New  Mexico,  with  much  larger  mines  on  average,  had  a  fraction
of  the  mines,  but  nearly  half  of  the  miners.)38  The  Colorado  Department  of  Health
established  an  advisory  panel  of  federal,  state,  and  uranium  industry  officials  to
oversee  a  comprehensive  study.  The  panel  advised  the  health  department  that
more  information  was  needed  on  the  medical  hazards  of  the  uranium  mines.  In
August  1949,  the  health  department,  along  with  the  Colorado  Bureau  of  Mines
and  the  U.S.  Vanadium  Company,  formally  requested  a  study  of  the  mines  and
mills,  which  the  PHS  agreed  to  do.39  The  PHS  initiated  both  environmental
studies  of  the  mines40  and  epidemiologic  studies  of  the  miners.41  The
environmental  study  ended  in  1956,  but  the  epidemiologic  study  is  ongoing.

569


Part  II

In  1949,  Henry  Doyle,  a  sanitary  engineer  who  was  the  chief  PHS
representative  in  Colorado,  began  environmental  sampling  in  the  mines.42  Doyle
recruited  Holaday  to  direct  the  study.43  The  health  departments  of  Utah,  New
Mexico,  and  Arizona  also  participated.44  The  environmental  part  of  the  study
began  first,  in  1950.  Between  1950  and  1954  medical  examinations  of  uranium
miners  and  millers  were  done  on  a  "hit-or-miss  basis,"45  but  in  1954  a  systematic
epidemiological  study  of  the  miners  was  begun.

Between  1949  and  1951,  PHS  investigators  took  environmental
measurements  of  radon  levels  in  the  mines.  Like  Dr.  Eisenbud,  they  detected
high  levels  of  radon.46  In  a  February  1950  memo  to  the  PHS  Salt  Lake  City
office,  Holaday  reported  on  a  survey  of  four  mines  on  the  Navajo  reservation.  He
declared  that  while  he  "anticipated  that  the  samples  would  show  high  radon
concentrations,  the  final  results  were  beyond  all  expectations."  The  samples
disclosed  a  "rather  serious  picture,"  leading  Holaday  to  conclude  "that  a  control
program  must  be  instituted  as  soon  as  possible  in  order  to  prevent  injury  to  the
workers."47

On  January  25,  1951,  representatives  from  the  AEC,  the  PHS  Division  of
Industrial  Hygiene,  and  other  branches  of  PHS  convened  to  discuss  in  detail  the
radon  concentrations  discovered  by  the  PHS  study  and  what  could  be  done  about
them.48  The  PHS  staff  explained  that  the  uranium  study  demonstrated  "radon
concentrations  ...  in  the  mines  high  enough  to  probably  cause  injury  to  the
miners. .  .  ,"49  They  also  said  the  hazard  could  be  abated  by  proper  ventilation.
The  group  concluded  that  the  radon  concentrations  should  be  reduced  to  the
lowest  level  possible  consistent  with  good  mine  ventilation  practices,  but  found  it
"unrealistic"  to  set  a  definite  level  that  mine  operators  should  meet.50  They
recommended  further  research,  especially  on  ventilation  techniques.51  By  this
route,  "the  radon  concentrations  in  the  mines  would  be  materially  reduced  in  all
cases,  and  valuable  information  would  be  yielded  as  to  the  effectiveness  of
standard  ventilation  practice  in  the  control  of  radon."52  It  also  was  noted  at  this
meeting  that  the  acceptable  level  of  radon  in  manufacturing  was  only  10
picocuries  per  liter,  one  to  three  orders  of  magnitude  lower  than  the  observed
levels  in  the  mines.53

The  PHS  Progress  Report  for  the  second  half  of  1951  explained  that
because  of  the  "acuteness  of  the  radon  problem  it  was  felt  that  it  was  necessary  to
temporarily  put  aside  our  full-scale  environmental  investigation  of  this  industry
and  concentrate  on  the  control  of  this  contaminant."54  The  PHS  met  with  the
mining  companies  to  discuss  the  hazards  and  urged  them  to  undertake  ventilation
measures.55  In  1979,  Duncan  Holaday  testified  to  Congress  that  "by  1940  I  do  not
believe  there  was  any  prominent  scientist  or  industrial  hygienist  in  the  United
States,  except  one  [presumably  Lorenz],  who  was  not  thoroughly  convinced  of  the
dangers,  and  it  had  been  demonstrated  that  the  radioactive  elements  could  be
removed  from  a  closed  area  and  be  completely  avoided."56  However,  it  appears
the  mining  industry  lacked  the  commitment  to  improve  worker  conditions.57

570


Chapter  12

The  PHS  distributed  its  interim  report  on  a  "restricted"  basis  to  state  and
federal  government  officials  and  mining  companies  in  May  1952.58  A  June  26,
1952,  press  release  announcing  the  completion  of  the  interim  report  began  with
the  statement  that  "no  evidence  of  health  damage  from  radioactivity  had  been
found."59  Mining  had  been  going  on  for  only  a  few  years,  and  lung  cancer  has  a
ten-  to  twenty-year  latency  period.  The  introduction  to  the  report  itself  noted,
however,  that  "certain  acute  conditions  are  present  in  the  industry  which,  if  not
rectified,  may  seriously  affect  the  health  of  the  worker."60

Meanwhile,  as  evidence  of  hazard  mounted,  Dr.  Hueper,  now  at  the
National  Cancer  Institute,  reported  continued  efforts  to  limit  his  speech  on  the
risks  involved.  Dr.  Hueper  reported  that  in  1952  he  was  invited  to  speak  to  the
Colorado  Medical  Society,  but  declined  to  attend  when  ordered  by  the  director  of
the  NCI,  at  the  request  of  the  AEC's  Shields  Warren,  to  delete  references  "to  the
observation  of  lung  cancer  in  from  40  to  75  percent  of  the  radioactive  ore  miners
in  .  .  .  [Europe]  although  these  occupational  cancers  had  been  reported  repeatedly
since  1879."6'  In  a  1952  memo  to  the  head  of  the  Cancer  Control  Branch  of  NIH,
Hueper  reported  that  an  AEC  representative  had  objected  that  references  to
occupational  cancer  hazards  in  the  mines  were  "not  in  the  public  interest"  and
"represented  mere  conjectures."62  After  the  Colorado  episode,  according  to
Hueper,  Warren  wrote  to  the  director  of  the  NCI,  asking  for  Dr.  Hueper's
dismissal  for  "bad  judgment."  Dr.  Hueper  kept  his  job,  but  was,  according  to
Victor  Archer,  one  of  the  physicians  who  ran  the  uranium  miner  study,  forbidden
to  travel  west  of  the  Mississippi  for  research  purposes.63

U.S.  officials,  including  those  from  the  PHS,  had  no  independent  authority
to  enter  the  privately  owned  mines-as  opposed  to  those  owned  by  the  AEC  and
leased  to  private  operators-without  permission  of  the  mine  owners.64  Duncan
Holaday  testified  in  court  proceedings  that  in  order  to  gain  access  to  the  mines,  an
oral  agreement  was  made  with  mine  owners  not  to  directly  inform  those  most
affected  by  their  findings,  the  miners.65  According  to  Holaday,  "this  was  routine
procedure  that  was  followed  in  every  industrial  survey  I  was  aware  of . . .  this
went  back  for  many  decades."  To  gain  entry  to  the  mines  the  researchers  agreed
that  the  PHS  would  not  "alarm  the  miners"  by  warning  them  of  hazardous
conditions.66  In  1983  Holaday  testified  in  Begay  that  "you  had  to  get  the  survey
done  and  you  knew  perfectly  well  you  were  not  doing  the  correct  thing  ...  by  not
informing  the  workers."67  A  medical  consent  form  from  the  PHS  study  dated  May
1960  says  nothing  about  the  risk  of  lung  cancer  or  any  other  health  risk  associated
with  working  in  uranium  mines.68  "[T]here  would  be  no  overt  publicity,"  Holaday
recalled  in  a  1985  deposition,  "and  when  we  reported  the  information  that  we
found,  it  would  be  done  in  such  a  way  that  the  facilities  where  a  particular  set  of
samples  were  taken  would  not  be  identified  and  that  we  would  not  inform  the
individual  workers  of  what  data  we  found."69

Holaday  told  Stewart  Udall,  a  former  secretary  of  the  interior  who
represented  the  miners  in  the  Begay  case,  that  he  did  not  try  to  go  public  because

571


Part  II

he  didn't  think  that  Washington  would  notice  a  "little  Utah  tweet"  from  him.70
Eisenbud  has  suggested  that  perhaps  this  was  because  in  the  Cold  War
environment,  with  nuclear  weapons  testing  under  way,  no  one  would  pay  much
attention  to  the  long-term  health  risks  of  a  small  group  of  miners.71

Although  the  PHS  and  the  AEC  already  knew  the  danger  of  radon  in  the
mines  in  1951,  and  had  pressed  the  states  to  take  action  with  mixed  results,  PHS
doctors  nonetheless  began  to  conduct  basic  health  examinations  to  collect
baseline  data  against  which  long-term  health  effects  of  radon  could  be  gauged.72
These  medical  examinations  did  not  initially  find  evidence  of  harm  caused  from
working  in  the  mines.  However,  one  would  not  have  expected  to  find  such  effects
because  few  miners  had  been  on  the  job  for  more  than  five  years  and  lung  cancer
takes  ten  to  fifteen  years  to  appear.

By  1953,  the  PHS  had  completed  a  series  of  ventilation  studies.  As  early
as  1951,  federal  and  state  officials  meeting  with  mine  owners  in  Colorado  had
told  them  that  "ventilation  had  been  tried  in  other  mines  and  found  to  be
satisfactory."73  But  while  some  large  mines  were  ventilated  during  the  1950s  and
1960s,  most  of  the  small  mines  were  not  ventilated  until  the  1960s  or  later,  and  in
those  mines  that  had  ventilating  systems  earlier,  they  were  not  always  properly
used.74

The  uranium  miners  were  discussed  at  a  January  1956  meeting  of  the
AEC's  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine.  The  formally  secret
transcript  records  that  in  a  "status  report  on  the  Colorado  plateau,"  the  Division  of
Biology  and  Medicine's  Dr.  Roy  Albert  stated:

There  are  no  pressing—particularly  pressing—problems
associated  with  it  now,  but  there  has  always  been  a
rumbling  of  discontent  with  the  status  of  the  health
conditions  in  the  uranium  mines  of  the  Colorado  Plateau
because  this  is  a  mining  industry  which  is  essentially
controlled  by  the  Federal  Government  and  by  the  AEC  in
terms  of  how  much  it  can  produce  and  how  much  it  paid  for
its  product.

Albert  explained  that  the  tentative  decision  was  to  "sit  tight"  because  it
would  be  "an  unusual  step"  for  the  federal  government  to  enter  the  mining
industry  and  the  AEC  could  take  a  "wait  and  see"  approach  as  the  states  "took  up
the  cudgel."75

Merril  Eisenbud  responded,  to  no  evident  effect,  that  the  federal
government  should  pay  to  ventilate  the  mines:  "I  think  here  is  where  our
responsibility  lies,  because  I  think  this  industry  would  not  exist  except  for  the  fact
that  we  need  uranium.  If  the  cost  of  operating  these  mines  as  determined  by  us
does  not  permit  adequate  ventilation  of  those  mines,  we  will  have  to  change  the
price.  It  is  as  simple  as  that."76

572


Chapter  12

In  October  1958,  LeRoy  Burney,  the  surgeon  general  of  the  Public  Health
Service,  wrote  to  Charles  Dunham,  director  of  the  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and
Medicine,  that  the  "numbers  are  too  small  to  permit  conclusions  to  be  drawn  at
this  time"  about  whether  there  were  excess  lung  cancer  deaths  among  the  uranium
miners.  However,  he  added,  "if  this  proportion  of  mortality  .  . .  should  increase  or
even  continue  in  the  future,  then  it  might  be  appropriate  to  conclude  that  our
American  experience  is  not  inconsistent"  with  that  in  the  Czech  and  German
mines.  Dr.  Burney  added:

Although  we  do  not  have  complete  environmental
measurements  in  all  mines,  it  appears  that  about
1,500  men  in  some  300  mines  are  working  in
uncontrolled  or  poorly  controlled  environments.
The  median  level  of  alpha  emitters  in  the  mines  of
one  state  is  five  times  the  recommended  working
level,  and  in  some  mines  the  level  is  exceeded  by
more  than  50  times. ...  It  is  usually  the  older,
smaller  mines  in  which  the  workers  are  still
exposed  to  these  high  levels.77

Burney  concluded  by  suggesting  that  as  the  "sole  purchaser  of  ores
produced  in  the  mines,"  the  federal  government  could  require  mine  owners  to
conform  to  federal  safety  standards.

Several  months  later,  Dunham  wrote  a  memo  to  AEC  General  Manager  A.
R.  Luedecke,  reporting  "it  is  doubtful  if  the  Commission's  regulatory  Authority
could  be  extended  to  cover  the  mines."78  The  same  day,  March  1 1,  1959,  AEC
General  Counsel  L.  K.  Olson  wrote  to  Dunham  reporting  that  "there  is  nothing  in
the  legislative  history  of  the  1954  [Atomic  Energy]  Act,  or  the  1946  [Atomic
Energy]  Act,  which  indicates  that  Congress  may  have  intended  to  permit  AEC  to
regulate  uranium  mining  practices."79

Later  in  1959,  the  AEC  asked  the  Bureau  of  Mines  to  inspect  mines  it
leased  and  then  made  follow-up  inspections  to  see  that  the  bureau's
recommendations  were  followed,  closing  sections  of  mines  temporarily  until
corrective  measures  were  completed.  In  the  ten  months  between  July  1959  when
the  inspections  began  and  May  1960,  levels  of  radon  in  these  mines  improved
dramatically.80

As  the  judge  in  the  Begay  decision  found,  "the  AEC  concluded  that  it
could  enforce  health  and  safety  measures  in  leased  mines  [as  distinct  from
privately  owned  mines]  pursuant  to  the  leasing  provisions  of  the  Atomic  Energy
Act"  and  amended  its  mines'  leases  "to  contain  explicit  enforcement  language
and  procedures."81  The  states  began  to  enact  standards  in  1955,82  but  inspection
and  enforcement  came  later  and  varied  greatly.  New  Mexico  began  enforcement
in  1958.83  Colorado  and  Utah  did  not  begin  serious  enforcement  until  the  1960s,84

573


Part  II

and  Arizona,  according  to  Duncan  Holaday,  did  "nothing  outside  of  take  air
samples."85

In  late  1959,  the  miners  were  provided  with  the  PHS  pamphlet  that  warned
them  about  the  hazards  of  radon  exposure.  The  pamphlet  mentioned  the
possibility  of  radon  causing  lung  cancer,  but  said  nothing  of  the  experience  of
U.S.  or  European  miners  or  the  level  of  risk. It  said  that  "scientists  are  working
hard  to  get  the  final  answer  on  how  much  radon  and  its  breakdown  products,
known  as  daughters,  you  can  be  exposed  to  safely."86  It  did  not  tell  the  miner  the
"suggested  figures,"  but  suggested  bringing  "enough  clean,  fresh  air  to  the  face  to
sweep  out  the  radon  gas  and  dust,"  as  well  as  several  other  measures  to  reduce

07

exposures.

All  mining  is  dangerous,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  any  miners
went  into  the  uranium  mines  unaware  of  this.  Whether  the  uranium  miners  had  an
appreciation  of  the  added  cancer  risk  from  radon  is  another  matter.  The  1959
pamphlet  is  the  first  document  we  could  find  that  indicated  that  the  federal
government  tried  to  warn  the  miners  of  the  radiation  hazards.  While  the  pamphlet
mentioned  the  possibility  of  radon  causing  lung  cancer,  it  gave  no  indication  of
the  level  of  risk.88  Duncan  Holaday  told  a  congressional  hearing  in  1979,  "We,  in
the  Public  Health  Service,  made  every  effort  to  communicate  with  the  men  the
situation  that  they  were  in.  We  put  out  pamphlets  .  .  .  conducted  medical
examinations  ...  we  told  them  what  the  story  was."89  This  statement  is  hard  to
reconcile  with  Holaday's  other  statements,  as  quoted  earlier,  that  the  researchers
had  agreed  not  to  warn  the  miners  as  the  condition  for  access  to  the  mines.  When
Senator  Orrin  Hatch  of  Utah  suggested  to  Mr.  Holaday  that  some  of  the  miners
"just  were  not  capable  of  understanding  or  knowing  the  dangers  to  which  they
were  subjected,"  Mr.  Holaday  responded,  "I  understand  this  perfectly  well."90

In  1960,  the  PHS  presented  to  the  governors  of  the  mining  states  what  it
believed  to  be  conclusive  evidence  from  the  PHS  study  of  a  correlation  between
uranium  mining  and  lung  cancer.  The  evidence  showed  that  at  least  four  and  a
half  times  more  lung  cancers  were  observed  than  would  normally  be  expected
among  white  miners-for  whom  comparison  data  were  available-and  that  there
was  less  than  a  5  percent  chance  that  such  a  difference  had  appeared  by  chance.
The  results  of  a  study  of  371  mines  (the  number  of  miners  surveyed  was  not
stated)  in  1959  showed  that  the  number  of  mines  with  unacceptable  levels  of
radon  had  increased  from  1958.91  Yet  the  federal  government  continued  to  defer
to  the  states  on  rule  setting  and  enforcement  in  the  case  of  the  mines  that  were  not
AEC  property,  and  the  AEC,  the  PHS,  and  the  states  continued  studies  and
discussions.

Finally,  in  1967,  Secretary  of  Labor  Willard  Wirtz  announced  the  first
federally  enforceable  standard  for  radon  and  its  daughters  in  uranium  mines  that
supplied  the  federal  government.  "After  seventeen  years  of  debate  and
discussions  regarding  the  respective  private,  state,  and  federal  responsibilities  for
conditions  in  the  uranium  mines,"  Wirtz  told  Congress,  "there  are  today  (or  were

574


Chapter  12

when  the  hearings  were  called)  no  adequate  health  and  safety  standards  or
inspection  procedures  for  uranium  mining."92  The  standard  was  set  at  0.3
Working  Level  (WL).93  Wirtz  established  this  criterion  under  the  1936
Walsh-Healy  Act,  which  provided  for  the  regulation  of  health  and  safety
conditions  under  government  contracts.94  It  is  not  clear  why  the  authority  granted
the  secretary  of  labor  under  this  1936  law  was  not  used  earlier  to  control  radon  in
the  mines,  but  it  might  have  been  because  most  of  the  mines  were  privately
owned  and  did  not  operate  under  federal  contacts,  which  made  the  applicability  of
the  act  questionable.95

The  Begay  Decision

Begay  v.  United  States  was  filed  on  behalf  of  a  group  of  miners  in  federal
district  court  in  Arizona  in  1979;  the  case  came  to  trial  in  1983.  During  the
1950s,  according  to  the  court,  the  PHS  found  radiation  exposures  in  some  mines
higher  than  the  level  it  recommended,  and  "even  higher  than  the  doses  received  as
a  result  of  the  atomic  bomb  explosion  in  Japan."96  But  on  July  10,  1984,  the  court
decided  that  the  United  States  was  immune  from  suit,97  although  the  judge  wrote
that  the  miners'  situation  "cries  for  redress."98

The  decision  in  the  Begay  case  poses  basic  questions  regarding  the
responsibility  of  the  government  and  its  researchers.  The  court  found  that  the
government's  actions  were  motivated  by  strong  national  security  interests:

The  government,  in  making  its  decision  in  this  area,
was  faced  with  the  immediate  need  of  a  constant,
uninterrupted  and  reliable  flow  of  great  quantities  of
uranium  ...  for  urgent  national  security  purposes
and  as  an  energy  source  in  the  future  for  the
growing  peacetime  nuclear  energy  industry. . . .
[T]he  decision  makers  had  to  be  concerned  that
there  was  adequate  data  available  to  justify  the
standards  to  be  set  and  that  labor  and  management
would  have  the  tools  to  know  when  they  were  in
violation. . . ."

The  court  is  not  clear,  however,  on  why  or  how  a  standard  for  radon  in  the
mines  would  have  interrupted  the  flow  of  uranium,  damaged  national  security
interests,  or  interfered  with  the  development  of  peaceful  uses  of  nuclear  energy.
Ventilating  the  mines  would  have  been  relatively  inexpensive,  and  it  would  have
improved  working  conditions-this  was  demonstrated  in  PHS  ventilation  studies
in  1951  l00-making  it  more  rather  than  less  attractive  to  a  potential  work  force.  In
1960  the  deputy  commissioner  of  mines  of  Colorado  is  reported  as  having  said
that  98  percent  of  the  mines  would  have  to  suspend  work  if  forced  to  abide  by  a

575


Part  II

working  level  standard  proposed  in  1955: 100  picocuries  of  radon  in  equilibrium
with  300  picocuries  of  radon  daughters.101  In  any  event,  the  federal  government
did  not  invoke  national  security  as  a  basis  for  its  inaction.  For  example,  in  1986
Duncan  Holaday  responded  in  the  negative  when  asked  in  a  deposition,  "in  all
[your]  years  from  1949  until  your  retirement,  did  you  ever  receive  directly  or
receive  indirectly,  any  document  [from  the]  Public  Health  Service,  from  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission,  or  from  any  other  source,  indicating  you  or  directing
you  that  you  are  to  pull  punches  or  nothing  was  to  be  done  because  of  national
security  considerations?"102  As  for  the  federal  government's  policy  of  not
regulating  the  mines,  this  appears  to  have  involved  questions  of  the  AEC's
understanding  of  its  authority  and  political  questions  relating  to  the  traditional
relationship  between  the  states  and  the  federal  government.

Was  the  failure  to  apply  the  same  approach  to  the  uranium  miners  as  to  the
beryllium  workers  a  matter  of  the  absence  of  legal  authority,  as  claimed  by  the
AEC,  or  of  reasoned  deference  to  state  regulators,  as  the  court  suggested? The
court's  decision  did  not  address  the  AEC's  action  to  require  its  beryllium
contractors  to  comply  with  hazard  standards,  nor  did  it  address  the  fact  that
radiation  standards  were  enforced  in  industrial  settings.  Fragmentation  of
responsibility— both  at  the  federal  level  and  between  the  states  and  the  federal
government— appears  to  have  provided  a  convenient  opportunity  for  the  federal
government  to  pass  the  buck  among  agencies  and  avoid  decisive  action  until  long
after  such  action  should  have  been  taken.

Under  what  conditions  should  researchers  enter  into  a  long-term  study
where  there  is  reason  to  suspect  at  the  outset  that  the  subjects  are,  each  day,  at
continuing  and  largely  avoidable  and  unnecessary  risk?

The  Begay  decision  states  clearly  the  bargain  entered  into  by  the
government  and  its  researchers,  on  behalf  of  the  epidemiological  study:

...  it  was  necessary  to  obtain  the  consent  and
voluntary  cooperation  of  all  mine  operators.  To  do
this,  it  was  decided  by  PHS  under  the  surgeon
general  that  the  individual  miners  would  not  be  told
of  possible  potential  hazards  from  radiation  ...  for
fear  that  many  miners  would  quit  and  others  would
be  difficult  to  secure  because  of  fear  of  cancer.
This  would  seriously  interrupt  badly  needed
production  of  uranium.  . . .  [N]o  individual  mine,  or
mines,  would  be  publicly  identified  in  connection
with  that  data.  Consequently,  the  voluntary  consent
of  mine  operators  was  secured  to  conduct  the  PHS
study.103

The  Begay  decision  does  not  address  questions  such  as  whether  the

576


Chapter  12

researchers  could  have  worked  more  effectively  with  state  agencies  that  had
authority  to  enter  the  mines,  or  whether  they  could  have  conducted  the  study  in
mines  on  federal  or  Navajo  land,  to  which  they  had  access. In  any  case,  there  is
no  obvious  national  security  or  other  ground  on  which  to  justify  the  continued
exposure  of  miners  to  the  radon  hazard.104

As  to  medical  examinations  of  the  miners,  the  court  found  that  the
physicians  who  had  conducted  them  "had  the  responsibility  for  dealing  only  with
the  examination  and  the  results  of  that  examination."105  Thus,  the  court
concluded,  "it  was  neither  necessary  nor  proper  for  those  physicians  to  advise  the
miners  voluntarily  appearing  for  examinations  of  potential  hazards  in  uranium
mines."'06  In  the  case  of  the  epidemiological  study,  the  court  explained:

An  epidemiological  study  deals  with  group  statistics
and  the  conclusions  of  such  a  study  appropriately
cannot  be  applied  to  specific  participants  of  a
group.  .  .  .  The  government  did  not  seek  volunteers
to  work  in  the  mines  so  that  they  could  become  part
of  the  study  group.  . .  ,107

On  this  point,  the  Advisory  Committee  disagrees  with  the  court.  In
epidemiological  studies  such  as  the  one  under  discussion,  group  conclusions  are
applicable  to  the  members  of  the  population  of  which  the  group  is  intended  to  be  a
representative  sample.  That  is,  each  individual  can  be  told  the  probability  of
developing  disease  based  on  his  level  and  conditions  of  exposure.  If  the  study
was  poorly  designed,  then  such  applicability  may  not  hold,  but  to  the  Committee's
knowledge,  no  one  has  argued  this  about  the  PHS  study.  Moreover,  the  PHS
researchers  had  opportunities  to  warn  the  miners  face  to  face  because  they
examined  them  periodically  over  more  than  twenty  years.  There  is  some
disagreement  about  whether  any  miners  were  warned  of  the  risk  of  lung  cancer,
but  even  Duncan  Holaday,  who  in  one  instance  indicated  that  some  miners
received  warnings,  acknowledged  that  very  likely  these  warnings  were
ineffective.

Radiation  Exposure  Compensation  Act

The  Begay  decision  concluded  that  the  plight  of  the  uranium  miners  "cries
for  redress."  Because  of  the  doctrine  of  sovereign  immunity,  however,  the  court
declared  that  it  could  not  provide  the  appropriate  remedy.  By  1990,  410  lung
cancer  deaths  had  occurred  among  the  4, 1 00  miners  in  the  Colorado  Plateau  study
group;  about  75  lung  cancer  deaths  would  normally  have  been  expected  in  a
group  of  miners  such  as  this.108  In  the  same  year,  Congress  responded  with
legislation,  the  Radiation  Exposure  Compensation  Act  (RECA),  which  provided
$100,000  compensation  for  miners  with  lung  cancer  or  nonmalignant  respiratory

577


Part  II

disease,  subject  to  certain  conditions.  In  the  case  of  lung  cancer,  the  act  requires
that  the  claimant  demonstrate  an  occupational  exposure  to  radon  daughters  from
200  WLM  (working  level  months)  to  500  WLM,  depending  upon  his  age  and
smoking  history,  the  higher  figure  applying  to  smokers  and  older  miners.  In  the
case  of  nonmalignant  respiratory  disease,  the  act  also  requires  documentation  of
disease  by  a  panel  of  radiologists  certified  in  assessing  x-ray  evidence  of  lung
disease.  In  both  cases,  records  of  occupational  histories  and  civil  records  for
next-of-kin  claimants  (such  as  marriage  certificates)  are  also  required— records
that  are  often  nonexistent  or  difficult  to  obtain,  particularly  for  Navajo  miners.
The  most  recent  and  authoritative  analysis  of  risks  of  lung  cancer  from
radon  in  uranium  mining  comes  from  a  1994  NIH  publication109  that  reanalyzed
all  eleven  of  the  major  occupational  radon  studies  worldwide.  This  analysis
considerably  extends  that  undertaken  by  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  BEIR
IV  Committee,"0  which  was  available  in  1986  prior  to  the  enactment  of  RECA.
This  report  used  similar  methods  of  analysis  but  more  recent  and  more  detailed
data  on  a  larger  set  of  studies.  The  most  important  conclusions  of  this  report  are

•  that  the  risk  rises  approximately  linearly  with  level  of  exposure,  with  an
average  slope  that  is  similar  to  that  estimated  by  earlier  committees,
including  BEIR  IV;1"

•  that  the  risk  per  WLM  varies  strongly  by  age,  latency,  mining  cohort,  and
especially  by  dose  rate  or  duration,  the  latter  being  a  relatively  recent
observation,  but  one  that  is  now  widely  accepted;"2

•  that  there  is  little  evidence  that  the  proportional  increase  in  lung  cancer
risks  is  substantially  different  for  smokers  and  nonsmokers~as  a
consequence,  the  probability  that  a  particular  lung  cancer  was  caused  or
contributed  to  by  radon  is  not  materially  altered  by  smoking  history;"3

•  that  on  average  more  than  half  of  the  lung  cancers  among  white  miners  in
the  Colorado  plateau  cohort  and  the  Navajo  New  Mexico  cohort  were
caused  by  radon  exposures;"4  and

•  that  there  were  substantial  uncertainties  in  the  actual  doses  received  by
miners  in  different  mines."5

Thus,  the  200  WLM  figure  that  is  used  in  RECA  as  the  criterion  for
awarding  compensation  is  not  unreasonable  as  a  "balance  of  probabilities"  for  the
miners  as  an  entire  group,  but  (1)  is  a  much  higher  risk  threshold  than  is  required
for  either  the  downwinders  of  the  Nevada  Test  Site  or  the  atomic  veterans  covered
in  the  same  act  and  (2)  ignores  substantial  variation  in  age,  latency,  and  other
factors  and  substantial  uncertainties  in  dose  estimates  for  individuals  within  the

578


Chapter  12

group  of  all  miners,  so  that  many  miners  whose  cancers  are  likely  to  have  been
caused  by  radon  would  not  have  attained  this  criterion.  Furthermore,  the
distinction  between  smokers  and  nonsmokers  established  in  the  act  is  not  well
supported  by  currently  available  scientific  evidence  and  tends  to  deny
compensation  to  many  miners,  most  of  whom  are  smokers  but  suffered  substantial
increases  in  risk  due  to  the  synergistic  effect  of  the  two  carcinogens.

Clearly  some  miners  have  a  stronger  case  for  compensation  than  others,
and  RECA  makes  an  attempt  to  make  such  distinctions.  In  principle,  it  would  be
possible  to  construct  a  formula  for  determining  the  probability  of  causation  that
would  better  reflect  the  current  state  of  scientific  knowledge  and  a  threshold  on
this  scale  of  probabilities  that  would  treat  the  miners  more  equitably  vis-a-vis  the
other  groups  covered  by  the  act.  However,  the  case  of  the  uranium  miners
presents  insurmountable  obstacles  in  this  regard,  including  the  loss  of  records
pertaining  to  occupational  histories  and  exposures  and  variations  in  cultural
practices  that  have  made  record-keeping  burdens  on  claimants  especially  onerous.
When  the  difficulty  of  meeting  such  bureaucratic  requirements  is  coupled  with  the
strong  link  between  lung  cancer  and  uranium  mining,  the  scheme  unjustly  places
too  great  a  burden  on  the  individual.  The  Committee  is  strongly  persuaded  to
propose  an  adjustment  in  the  criteria  so  that  the  evidence  of  a  minimum  duration
of  employment  underground  would  be  sufficient  to  qualify  for  compensation.
Any  compensation  scheme  is  necessarily  imperfect,  but  given  the  strength  of
causal  connection,  and  the  severity  of  the  injury,  the  time  spent  in  the  mines  is  a
rational  and  equitable  basis  for  determining  exposure  levels.

Conclusions  About  the  Uranium  Miners

The  Advisory  Committee  concludes  that  an  insufficient  effort  was  made
by  the  federal  government  to  mitigate  the  hazard  to  uranium  miners  through  early
ventilation  of  the  mines,  and  that  as  a  result  miners  died.  The  Committee  further
concludes  that  there  were  no  credible  barriers  to  federal  action.  While  national
security  clearly  provided  the  context  for  uranium  mining,  our  review  of  available
records  reveals  no  evidence  that  national  security  or  related  economic
considerations  were  relied  on  by  officials  as  a  basis  for  not  taking  action  to
ventilate  the  mines.  Since  most  of  the  mines  were  not  ventilated,  the  federal
government  should  at  least  have  warned  the  miners  of  the  risk  of  lung  cancer  they
faced  by  working  underground.  We  recognize  that  the  miners  had  limited
employment  options  and  might  have  felt  compelled  to  continue  working  in  the
mines,  but  the  information  should  have  been  available  to  them.  Had  they  been
better  informed,  they  could  have  sought  help  in  publicizing  the  fact  that  working
conditions  in  the  mines  were  extremely  hazardous,  which  might  have  resulted  in
some  mines  being  ventilated  earlier  than  they  were.

The  court  in  the  Begay  decision  did  not  exaggerate  when  it  called  the
abuse  of  these  miners  "a  tragedy  of  the  nuclear  age."

579


Part  II

The  Committee  believes  that  after  1951,  when  William  Bale  and  John
Harley's  findings  on  radon  daughters  established  that  miners  were  getting  a  much
larger  dose  to  the  lungs  than  previously  suspected,  the  mine  owners,  the  state
governments,  and  the  federal  government  each  had  a  responsibility  to  take  action
leading  to  ventilation  of  all  mines.  There  are  basic  ethical  principles  to  not  inflict
harm  and  to  promote  the  welfare  of  others  (as  described  in  chapter  4)  under  which
all  the  relevant  parties  ought  to  have  acted  to  prevent  harm  to  the  miners.

The  Advisory  Committee  has  found  no  plausible  justification  for  the
failure  of  the  federal  government,  which  is  the  focus  of  our  inquiry,  to  adhere  to
these  principles.  It  is  clear  that  officials  of  the  federal  government  were  convinced
by  the  early  1950s  that  radon  and  radon-daughter  concentrations  in  the  mines
were  high  enough  to  cause  lung  cancer.  The  federal  government's  obligation
flows  from  this  knowledge  and  its  causal  link  to  the  mining  activity.  Without  the
federal  government  to  buy  uranium,  there  would  have  been  no  uranium  mining
industry.  Since  the  miners  were  put  at  risk  by  the  federal  government,  a  minimal
moral  requirement  would  be  that  the  government  ensure  that  the  risk  was  reduced
to  an  acceptable  level.  Because  the  federal  government  did  not  take  the  necessary
action,  the  product  it  purchased  was  at  the  price  of  hundreds  of  deaths.

The  historical  record  is  tangled  and  incomplete,  but  legal  responsibility  for
the  health  and  safety  of  the  miners  appears  to  have  rested  largely,  but  not
exclusively,  with  the  states.  At  the  same  time,  the  resources  to  implement
remedial  measures  existed  mainly  within  the  federal  government.

The  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  which  was  the  contracting  agency  of  the
federal  government  in  its  role  as  sole  purchaser  of  uranium,  interpreted  the
Atomic  Energy  Act  as  not  providing  it  with  authority  over  health  and  safety  in  the
mines.  It  is  not  clear  to  the  Committee  why  the  AEC,  as  in  the  case  of  beryllium,
could  not  have  made  ventilation  a  requirement  of  any  contract  to  mine  uranium,
or,  in  any  event,  why  the  AEC  could  not  have  sought  clarification  of  its  authority
from  Congress.  The  Labor  Department  appears  to  have  had  authority  under  the
1936  Walsh-Healy  Act  to  ensure  safe  working  conditions  in  the  mines,  but  for
reasons  that  are  again  unclear  to  the  Committee,  it  was  not  until  1967  that  the
Department  of  Labor  applied  the  act.

According  to  the  Begay  decision,  the  United  States  did  not  recruit  miners
to  work  in  the  mines,  nor  did  it  cause  the  miners  to  be  exposed  to  hazard  or
withhold  treatment  from  any  individual.  None  of  the  considerations,  however,
detracts  from  what  was  for  the  Advisory  Committee  an  overarching  determinative
consideration:  without  the  federal  government's  initiative  and  its  role  as  sole
purchaser,  there  would  not  have  been  an  American  uranium  industry.  Because
the  government  played  a  pivotal  role  in  putting  the  miners  in  harm's  way,  it
follows  that  the  government  had  a  moral  obligation  to  ensure  that  the  harm  be
controlled,  at  least  to  a  level  of  risk  that  was  not  in  excess  of  those  risks  normally
associated  with  underground  mining,  an  argument  the  government  used  to  act  in
the  case  of  beryllium.

580


Chapter  12

The  uranium  mines  were  not  ventilated,  however,  adding  particular
significance  to  a  second  moral  issue  raised  by  this  case:  Why  were  the  miners  not
warned  about  the  risk  to  which  they  were  being  exposed,  particularly  as  the  likely
magnitude  of  the  hazard  became  clear?  Although  this  question  can  be  properly
put  to  all  the  relevant  parties,  including  the  mine  owners,  the  state  governments,
and  the  various  federal  agencies,  most  attention  has  focused  on  the  Public  Health
Service.  Investigators  of  the  PHS  were  the  only  federal  officials  in  direct  contact
with  miners  as  they  recruited  and  then  followed  the  miners  in  the  course  of  their
epidemiological  studies.  Also,  it  was  in  the  course  of  these  studies  that  important
evidence  about  the  severity  of  the  risk  was  accumulated.

When  the  data  collected  by  the  PHS  indicated  the  miners  were  working  in
an  environment  where  the  threat  of  lung  cancer  was  significant,  which  was  clearly
the  case  after  the  Bale-Harley  findings,  and  when  the  PHS  observed  in  the  early
1950s  that  the  states  and  owners  were  not  ventilating  the  mines  to  mitigate  the
hazard,  the  PHS  was  obligated  to  warn  the  miners  about  the  implications  of  its
research.  This  research  appears  to  have  been  conducted,  however,  under  oral
understandings  with  the  mine  owners  that  the  PHS  researchers  would  not  directly
warn  the  miners  of  the  level  of  hazard."6

The  question  arises,  of  course,  of  whether  the  PHS  should  have  entered
into  an  agreement  to  study  the  miners  conditioned  on  not  warning  them  of  the
hazard  to  which  they  were  being  exposed.  The  argument  for  accepting  this
condition  is  that  it  was  the  only  way  the  PHS  researchers  could  gain  entry  to  the
mines  and  that  ultimately  the  study  results  would  be  valuable  and  likely  save
some  lives.  But  acceptance  of  the  condition  precluded  the  PHS  from  dealing  in  a
straightforward  manner  with  the  people  they  were  proposing  to  study  and  from
providing  a  warning  that  had  the  potential,  in  this  case,  for  saving  at  least  some
lives.  The  Committee  is  divided  on  this  issue.  Some  members  concluded  that  the
condition  was  morally  objectionable  and  should  have  been  rejected,  even  if  this
meant  that  the  research  could  not  go  forward  or  could  go  forward  only  in  a  limited
way."7  Others  argued  that  a  morally  acceptable  course  would  have  been  to  accept
the  condition  and,  as  the  results  emerged,  warn  the  miners  anyway,  because  in
this  case  the  duty  of  promise  keeping  was  justifiably  overridden  by  the  duty  to
prevent  harm.

The  PHS's  decision  to  abide  by  the  agreement  not  to  warn  the  miners  is
particularly  troubling  in  light  of  a  regulation,  as  noted  by  the  court  in  the  Begay
decision,  in  force  from  1951  to  1978,  that  governed  the  disclosure  of  information
obtained  and  conclusions  reached  for  PHS  surveys,  research  projects,  and
investigations.  The  regulation  said,  in  part,  that  information  "obtained  by  the
Service  under  an  assurance  of  confidentiality  .  .  .  may  be  disclosed  .  .  .  whenever
the  Surgeon  General  specifically  determines  disclosure  to  be  necessary  (1)  to
prevent  an  epidemic  or  other  grave  danger  to  the  public  health.  .  .  .""8  Certainly
at  some  point  the  potential  and  eventually  realized  lung  cancer  epidemic  qualified
under  this  regulation.  The  PHS's  1952  interim  report  is  clear  that  "certain  acute

581


Part  II

conditions  are  present  in  the  industry  which,  if  not  rectified,  may  seriously  affect
the  health  of  the  worker.""9  So,  while  the  PHS  had  legal  as  well  as  moral
standing  to  breach  its  confidentiality  agreement,  it  did  not  do  so,  although  it
appears  to  have  made  efforts  to  communicate  its  findings,  their  implications,  and
abatement  recommendations  to  health  authorities,  the  AEC,  mine  operators  and
owners,  and  state  agencies.120

The  agreement  between  the  PHS  and  the  mine  owners  no  doubt  also
affected  what  PHS  investigators  were  willing  to  tell  the  miners  about  the  purpose
of  their  investigations  at  the  time  the  miners  were  recruited  to  participate.  The
PHS  told  the  miners  little  more  than  that  they  were  studying  "miners'  health."121
In  fact  they  were  studying  (1)  the  relationship  between  exposure  to  radon  and
other  conditions  in  the  mines  and  miners'  health  and  (2)  engineering  methods
(specifically,  ventilation  techniques)  for  controlling  radiation  hazards.122  Had
miners  been  told  the  true  purpose  of  the  study  then,  even  in  advance  of  any
warnings  connected  with  the  progress  of  the  research,  it  is  possible  the  miners
could  have  used  this  information  to  advocate  for  their  interests.  Even  if  the
miners  were  not  well  positioned  to  seek  employment  elsewhere  or  to  advocate  for
improved  working  conditions,  the  principle  of  respect  for  the  self-determination
of  others  would  have  required  a  more  straightforward  disclosure.

Current  guidelines  for  the  ethics  of  epidemiological  research,  as  well  as
current  practices,  would  not  counsel  the  original  bargain  with  the  mine  owners,
the  minimal  disclosure  made  to  workers  about  the  purpose  of  the  research,  or  the
failure  to  warn  the  workers  as  the  hazard  became  clear.  For  example,  the  current
Council  for  International  Organizations  of  Medical  Sciences  (CIOMS)  guidelines
explain:  "Part  of  the  benefit  that  communities,  groups  and  individuals  may
reasonably  expect  from  participating  in  studies  is  that  they  will  be  told  of  findings
that  pertain  to  their  health."123  The  CIOMS  guidelines  also  specify  a  duty  not  to
withhold,  misrepresent,  or  manipulate  data.124  Today,  it  is  widely  recognized
among  epidemiologic  researchers  that  they  have  an  obligation  to  report  findings
indicating  potential  or  actual  harm,  along  with  the  uncertainties  of  those  findings,
to  the  people  being  studied  and  to  the  public  at  large.

Although  the  Committee  believes  that  the  federal  government  should  have
acted  to  ensure  that  the  mines  were  ventilated  and  that  the  PHS  should  have
informed  the  miners  about  the  severity  of  the  risk  it  was  investigating,  the
Committee  did  not  have  enough  information  to  assess  the  moral  responsibility  of
individual  AEC  and  PHS  employees  and  officials  for  these  failures. Some  effort
was  made  by  some  investigators  to  get  the  states  and  mine  owners  to  ventilate  the
mines,  and  some  warnings  may  have  been  given  to  individual  miners.  But  the
ventilation  effort  was  inadequate  and  the  warnings  ineffectual.  We  lack  the
information  to  evaluate  whether  officials  such  as  Duncan  Holaday,  Henry  Doyle,
and  Merril  Eisenbud  should  have  done  more  than  they  did  to  protect  the  miners,
granting  that  their  superiors  had  ultimate  responsibility  for  decisions  not  to  press
for  ventilation  and  warnings.  Whistleblowing  to  avert  serious  harm  is  an

582


Chapter  12

important  moral  responsibility,  but  there  are  personal  prudential  considerations
unknown  to  us  that  must  be  weighed  before  judging  whether  these  people  failed
in  their  duty.'25

While  federal  and  state  agencies  may  debate  internally  and  with  one
another  the  limits  of  their  authority,  from  the  vantage  of  those  exposed  to  risk  by
the  government,  the  government  should  be  reasonably  expected  to  do  what  is
needed  to  sort  out  responsibility  and  to  ensure  that  action  is  taken  to  address  risk.
This  did  not  happen.  Perhaps  the  most  remarkable  aspect  of  the  uranium  miners
tragedy  is  that,  notwithstanding  the  national  security  context,  so  much  of  it  took
place  in  the  open;  so  many  federal  and  state  agencies  were  participants,  often  with
some  formal  degree  of  responsibility  or  authority  in  an  unfolding  disaster  that
appears  to  have  been  preventable  from  the  outset.

THE  MARSHALLESE

Following  World  War  II,  the  United  States  selected  the  Marshall  Islands
as  the  site  of  the  Pacific  Proving  Grounds  for  testing  nuclear  weapons.  The
Marshall  Islands  are  a  widely  scattered  cluster  of  atolls  located  just  above  the
equator  north  of  New  Zealand.  They  were  designated  a  trust  territory  of  the
United  States  by  the  United  Nations  in  1947.  The  Marshallese  were  granted
independence  under  a  Treaty  of  Free  Association  that  went  into  effect  in  1986.
The  U.S.  Department  of  the  Interior  oversees  relations  with  the  Marshall  Islands,
with  responsibility  to  ensure  that  the  terms  of  the  Trusteeship  Agreement  are
carried  out.  According  to  the  1947  Agreement,  the  United  States  as  trustee  "shall
. . .  protect  the  health  of  the  inhabitants."126

Testing  of  nuclear  weapons  began  on  July  1,  1946,  with  Operation
Crossroads,  two  tests  at  Bikini  Atoll.  In  preparation  for  this  operation,  the
Bikinians  were  evacuated  in  March  of  that  year.  Crossroads  did  not  lead  to  any
immediate  exposure  of  the  native  population.  However,  the  second  shot  in  the
series,  Baker,  was  a  21-kiloton  underwater  blast  that  contaminated  the  surviving
test  ships,  posing  major  decontamination  problems  for  the  military  participants.  It
also  contaminated  the  atoll  itself,  which,  along  with  further  testing,  delayed  the
return  of  the  Bikinians,  who  began  returning  to  the  island  in  1 969.  Although
some  radioactive  contamination  was  still  known  to  linger,  it  was  believed  at  the
time  that  restrictions  on  the  consumption  of  certain  native  foods  and  provision  of
imported  foods  would  make  Bikini  habitable.  Unfortunately,  these  assumptions
proved  wrong.  After  the  resettlement,  the  AEC  and  its  successors  monitored  the
internal  contamination  levels  of  the  Bikinians  and  observed  increases  in
plutonium,  leading  to  their  reevacuation  in  1978.127  Today,  the  Bikinians  remain
scattered  around  the  Marshall  Islands,  while  a  new  radiological  cleanup  of  their
atoll  is  in  progress.

In  1954,  the  Bravo  shot  of  the  Operation  Castle  series  was  detonated  at
Bikini  Atoll.  Bravo  was  the  second  test  of  a  thermonuclear  (hydrogen)  bomb,

583


Part  II

with  a  yield  of  15  megatons,  a  thousand  times  the  strength  of  the  Hiroshima
bomb.  A  change  in  wind  direction  carried  fallout  from  the  test  toward  Rongelap
and  other  inhabited  atolls  downwind  of  it.  The  populations  of  the  Rongelap  and
Utirik  Atolls  were  evacuated,  but  not  until  after  they  had  received  serious
radiation  exposure  (about  200  roentgens  on  Rongelap  and  about  20  on  Utirik).
What  followed  was  a  program  by  the  U.S.  government— initially  the  Navy  and
then  the  AEC  and  its  successor  agencies— to  provide  medical  care  for  the  exposed
population,  while  at  the  same  time  trying  to  learn  as  much  as  possible  about  the
long-term  biological  effects  of  radiation  exposure.  The  dual  purpose  of  what  is
now  a  DOE  medical  program  has  led  to  a  view  by  the  Marshallese  that  they  were
being  used  as  "guinea  pigs"  in  a  "radiation  experiment."

As  happened  at  Bikini,  the  Rongelapese  were  resettled  onto  their  atoll,  but
after  an  interval  of  only  three  years.  Again,  it  was  recognized  at  the  time  that
some  radioactivity  remained,  but  U.S.  officials  concluded  that  appropriate  dietary
restrictions  would  minimize  the  danger.128  Unlike  the  case  of  the  Bikinians,
however,  the  medical  follow-up  program  has  continued  to  the  present,  reflecting
the  seriousness  of  the  initial  exposure  and  the  added  risk  of  continuing  exposure
at  low  levels.  Five  years  after  the  Bravo  shot,  Dr.  Robert  A.  Conard,  then  the
director  of  the  AEC's  Brookhaven  National  Laboratory  (BNL)  medical  team,
wrote,

The  people  of  Rongelap  received  a  high  sub-lethal
dose  of  gamma  radiation,  extensive  beta  burns  of
the  skin,  and  significant  internal  absorption  of
fission  products.  .  .  .  Very  little  is  known  of  the  late
effects  of  radiation  in  human  beings. .  .  .  The
seriousness  of  their  exposure  cannot  be  minimized.

Low  levels  of  radioactive  contamination  persist  on
Rongelap  Atoll.  The  levels  are  considered  safe  for
habitation.  However,  the  extent  of  contamination  is
greater  than  found  elsewhere  in  the  world  and,  since
there  has  been  no  previous  experience  with
populations  exposed  to  such  levels,  continued
careful  checks  of  the  body  burdens  of  radionuclides
in  these  people  is  indicated  to  insure  no  unexpected
increase.

From  these  considerations  it  is  apparent  that  we  are
obligated  to  carry  out  future  examinations  on  the
exposed  people  to  the  extent  that  they  are  deemed
necessary  as  time  goes  on  so  that  any  untoward
effects  that  may  develop  may  be  diagnosed  as  soon

584


Chapter  12

as  possible  and  the  best  medical  therapy  instituted.
Any  action  short  of  this  would  compromise  our
responsibility  and  lay  us  open  to  criticism.129

These  and  similar  documents  discussed  below  lay  out  clearly  the  purposes
of  the  medical  program.  However,  at  the  fourth  meeting  of  the  Advisory
Committee,  representatives  of  the  Republic  of  the  Marshall  Islands  presented
documents  to  support  their  contention  that  by  ignoring  forecasts  about  the
weather  patterns  at  the  time  of  the  Bravo  shot,130  and  by  resettling  the
Rongelapese  on  their  atoll  despite  knowledge  of  residual  contamination,  the  U.S.
government  was  using  the  Marshallese  as  guinea  pigs  in  a  deliberate  human
radiation  experiment.

The  Committee  heard  extensive  testimony  about  the  difficulties  the
Marshallese  have  had  in  obtaining  information  relevant  to  their  health.  Their  own
medical  records  are  only  now  being  made  readily  available  to  them.  Many  other
documents  describing  U.S.  government  activities  conducted  on  their  soil  have  for
too  long  been  shrouded  in  secrecy  or  made  inaccessible  to  the  Marshallese  by
bureaucratic  obstacles.  This  inaccessibility  of  records,  combined  with  a  history  of
inadequate  disclosure  of  hazards  known  to  U.S.  researchers,  has  contributed  to  a
climate  of  distrust.

In  our  review  of  materials  that  are  now  becoming  available,  we  found  no
evidence  to  support  the  claim  that  the  exposures  of  the  Marshallese,  either
initially  or  after  resettlement,  were  motivated  by  research  purposes.  On  the
contrary,  while  there  is  ample  evidence  that  research  was  done  on  the
Marshallese,  we  find  that  most  of  it  offered  at  least  a  plausible  therapeutic
rationale  for  the  potential  benefit  of  the  subjects  themselves.  We  have  found  only
two  examples  of  research  in  the  Rongelap  and  Utirik  populations  that  appear  to
have  been  nontherapeutic:  this  research  was  intended  to  learn  about  radiation
effects  in  this  population  and  offered  little  or  no  prospect  of  benefit  to  the
individual  subjects.

There  is,  of  necessity,  some  tension  between  data  gathering  and  patient
care  when  the  same  physician  is  responsible  for  both.  The  Advisory  Committee
has  found  no  clear-cut  instance  in  which  this  tension  was  likely  to  have  caused
harm  to  patients,  but  some  may  have  been  subjected  to  biomedical  tests  for  the
primary  purpose  of  learning  more  about  radiation  effects.  This  inherent  tension,
coupled  with  the  additional  strains  of  language  and  cultural  differences  between
the  Marshall  Islanders  and  the  physicians,  appears  to  have  compromised  the
process  of  informing  the  subjects  of  the  purpose  of  the  tests  and  of  obtaining  their
consent,  which  has  doubtless  contributed  to  their  sense  of  being  treated  as  guinea
pigs.  Insensitivity  to  cultural  differences,  failure  to  involve  the  Marshallese  in  the
planning  and  implementation  of  the  research  and  medical  care  program,  divided
responsibilities  for  general  medical  care,  and  failure  to  be  fully  open  about
hazardous  conditions  have  all  contributed  to  unfortunate  and  probably  avoidable

585


Part  II

distrust  of  the  American  medical  program  by  the  Marshallese.

It  is  of  concern  to  the  Advisory  Committee  that  problems  arose  in
explaining  to  the  Marshallese  the  nature  and  purpose  of  the  research  activities  that
accompanied  their  treatment  and  in  obtaining  their  consent  for  both  research-
related  interventions  (such  as  bone  marrow,  blood,  dnd  Urine  tests)  and  treatment.
Both  Brookhaven  researchers  and  the  Marshallese  agree  that  general  medical  care
provided  by  the  Trust  Territory  government  was  inadequate,131  but  this  question
was  outside  the  scope  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  investigation.  What  follows,
as  best  we  can  piece  it  together,  is  the  story  of  how  the  United  States  handled  its
responsibility  to  provide  medical  care  to  citizens  of  a  U.S.  trust  territory  exposed
to  hazard  by  a  U.S.  nuclear  bomb  test  that  went  awry.

The  Bravo  Shot

The  Bravo  shot  was  detonated  on  Bikini  at  6:45  a.m.  on  March  1,  1954.
Its  yield  was  substantially  greater  than  expected.  The  radioactive  cloud  rose  to  an
altitude  of  about  100,000  feet  before  blowing  east  toward  the  inhabited  atolls  of
Rongelap,  Ailinginae,  and  Rongerik,  and  still  farther  east,  toward  Utirik,  Ailuk,
and  Likiep,  instead  of  north  into  the  Pacific  as  planned.  It  was  soon  clear  to  the
task  force  command  in  charge  of  the  shot  that  evacuations  would  be  necessary
and  by  the  evening  of  March  2  a  ship  was  steaming  toward  Rongelap  to  remove
the  population.  Over  the  next  three  days,  236  Marshallese  were  transported  by  sea
and  28  U.S.  servicemen  were  airlifted  from  a  weather  station  on  Rongerik  to
Kwajelain  Atoll,  south  of  the  fallout  pattern,  and  then  to  a  U.S.  naval  base  with
medical  facilities.132

Merril  Eisenbud  has  observed:

There  are  many  unanswered  questions  about  the
circumstances  of  the  1954  fallout.  It  is  strange  that
no  formal  investigation  was  ever  conducted.  There
have  been  reports  that  the  device  was  exploded
despite  an  adverse  meteorological  forecast.  It  has
not  been  explained  why  an  evacuation  capability
was  not  standing  by,  as  had  been  recommended,  or
why  there  was  not  immediate  action  to  evaluate  the
matter  when  the  task  force  learned  (seven  hours
after  the  explosion)  that  the  AEC  Health  &  Safety
Laboratory  recording  instrument  on  Rongerik  was
off  scale.  There  was  also  an  unexplained  interval  of
many  days  before  the  fallout  was  announced  to  the
public.133


586


Chapter  12

The  Marshallese  and  Americans  were  not  the  only  ones  exposed  to  fallout
from  Bravo.  A  100-ton  Japanese  fishing  vessel  with  a  crew  of  twenty-three  called
the  Fukuryu  Maru  (Lucky  Dragon)  was  sailing  some  eighty  miles  from  Bikini
when  the  bomb  exploded.  Within  days,  crew  members  suffered  from  acute
radiation  sickness.  Seven  months  after  the  test,  one  of  the  crew  members  died.134
The  others  were  hospitalized  for  more  than  a  year,  until  May  1955.  The  event
received  international  attention  and  contributed  to  a  worldwide  protest  of
atmospheric  testing  of  nuclear  weapons.

Dr.  Victor  Bond,  a  member  of  the  medical  team  sent  from  the  United
States  to  treat  the  exposed  population  immediately  after  the  accident,  said  in  an
interview  with  Advisory  Committee  staff  that  "initial  statements  by  Washington
officials  underplayed  the  severity  of  the  effects  of  the  exposure."135  Dr.  Eugene
Cronkite,  who  headed  the  medical  team,  said  he  told  Lewis  Strauss,  chairman  of
the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  in  1954,  of  his  concern  that  the  New  York  Times
and  others  had  reported  a  "downright  lie"  in  reporting  that  the  fallout  hazard  was
minimal.136  Dr.  Cronkite  recalled  Strauss's  response:  "Young  man,  you  have  to
remember  that  nobody  reads  yesterday's  newspapers."137

On  March  6,  the  task  force  command  approved  a  request  by  the  Armed
Forces  Special  Weapons  Project  to  establish  a  joint  study  of  the  "response  of
human  beings  exposed  to  significant  gamma  and  beta  radiation  due  to  high  yield
weapons."138  Thus,  it  appears  to  have  been  almost  immediately  apparent  to  the
AEC  and  the  Joint  Task  Force  running  the  Castle  series  that  research  on  radiation
effects  could  be  done  in  conjunction  with  the  medical  treatment  of  the  exposed
populations.

Medical  Follow-up

On  March  8,  Dr.  Cronkite's  mission  was  formally  established  in  a  letter  to
him  that  was  classified  Secret  and  Restricted  Data  and  said,  "The  objective  of  this
project  is  to  study  the  response  of  human  beings  in  the  Marshall  Islands  who  have
received  significant  doses  due  to  the  fall-out  from  first  detonation  of  Operation
Castle."139  The  project  was  given  the  designation  4. 1  and  titled,  "Study  of
Response  of  Human  Beings  Exposed  to  Significant  Beta  and  Gamma  Radiation
Due  to  Fallout  from  High  Yield  Weapons."140  The  letter  continued:  "Due  to
possible  adverse  public  reaction,  you  will  specifically  instruct  all  personnel  in  this
project  to  be  particularly  careful  not  to  discuss  the  purpose  of  this  project  and  its
background  or  its  findings  with  any  except  those  who  have  a  specific  'need  to
know.""41

As  Dr.  Cronkite  understood  it,  his  mission  was  to  "examine  and  treat  the
Marshallese  and  the  American  servicemen  that  were  exposed."142  Initial  exposure
estimates  ranged  from  1 5  rad  for  people  on  Utirik  to  1 50  rad  for  those  on
Rongelap.143  Dr.  Bond,  who  accompanied  Dr.  Cronkite  on  the  mission,  told
Advisory  Committee  staff  that  "we  were  given  estimates  of  dose.  But  they  were

587


Part  II

poor,  and  we  still  don't  know  very  well  the  effects."144  The  Marshallese  were
exposed  to  highly  penetrating  gamma  radiation,  which  resulted  in  whole-body
exposure,  external  radiation  from  deposition  of  fission  products  on  the  skin,
internal  radiation  from  consumption  of  contaminated  food  and  water  and,  to  a
lesser  extent,  from  inhalation  of  fallout  particles.  During  the  first  few  days  after
Bravo,  several  of  the  people  from  Rongelap  were  suffering  from  nausea  and
vomiting  (the  first  signs  of  radiation  sickness),  depressed  white  blood  cell  counts,
and  slight  hair  loss.  Only  one  of  the  Marshallese  exposed  on  Ailinginae  Atoll  had
these  symptoms,  and  none  from  Utirik  had  them.  The  American  servicemen  on
Rongerik  were  asymptomatic,  as  well.145

Although  the  medical  program  for  the  exposed  Marshallese  was
designated  a  "study,"  both  Dr.  Cronkite  and  his  successor,  Dr.  Robert  A.  Conard,
maintain  the  project  never  included  nontherapeutic  research.146  Both  men  assert
that  the  primary  goal  has  always  been  the  treatment  of  the  exposed  population  and
that  the  data  that  were  collected  were  always  intended  first  and  foremost  to
benefit  the  Marshallese.  There  is  no  conclusive  evidence  available  to  the
Advisory  Committee  to  contradict  their  statements.  In  examining  various  studies
of  the  Marshallese  that  could  have  been  driven  by  pure  research  goals,  the
Advisory  Committee  has  found  treatment-related  goals  that  are  at  least  plausible.
It  appears  that  in  the  medical  follow-up  to  the  Bravo  shot,  treatment  and  research
objectives  were  essentially  congruent.

Dr.  Cronkite  and  his  team  arrived  on  Kwajalein  the  same  day  he  received
the  memorandum  establishing  their  mission. They  set  up  examination  and  lab
facilities  in  a  building  adjacent  to  the  living  quarters  of  the  Marshallese  and  began
their  work.  Team  members  took  medical  histories  with  the  help  of  translators,
inspected  skin  to  monitor  for  radiation  burns,  took  body  temperatures,  drew  blood
regularly  to  check  white  cell  counts,  platelet  levels,  leukocytes,  and  red  cells,  took
urine  samples,  checked  for  eye  injuries,  and  monitored  pregnancies.  I47

In  the  Rongelap  population,  platelet  levels  fell  to  about  30  percent  of
normal  by  the  fourth  week,  white  blood  cell  counts  fell  to  half  of  normal  by  the
sixth  week,  but  at  the  six-week  point,  when  the  initial  examinations  were
completed,  these  blood  elements  began  moving  back  up  toward  normal  levels.148
There  was  substantially  less  depression  of  platelet  and  white  cell  counts  in  the
other  groups,  which  received  significantly  lower  doses  of  radiation.  Despite  the
low  platelet  and  white  cell  counts,  there  appears  to  have  been  little  unusual
bleeding  or  increased  susceptibility  to  infection.  Dr.  Bond,  said  "There  was
some  . . .  excessive  menstruation  and  blood  in  the  urine  ...  but  nothing  that
merited  strenuous  therapy."149  About  ten  to  fourteen  days  after  exposure,  radiation
burns  began  appearing.150  These  burns  were  much  more  pronounced  among  the
Rongelap  people  than  those  from  Ailinginae  or  the  U.S.  servicemen  on  Rongerik,
and  there  were  no  burns  noted  in  the  Utirik  group.  Often  the  burns  were
accompanied  by  itching  and  some  of  the  lesions  on  the  top  of  the  feet  were
described  as  painful.  In  two  to  three  weeks  the  burns  began  healing.151  There  was

588


Chapter  12

some  weight  loss  in  the  exposed  population,  and  about  90  percent  of  the  children
and  30  percent  of  the  adults  lost  hair.152

Dr.  Bond  told  Advisory  Committee  staff  that  the  exposed  Marshallese
"seemed  to  be  perfectly  healthy  people  [but]  we  were  well  aware  of  the  latent
period,  and  that  they  might  well  become  ill  later."  He  went  on  to  say:

And  quite  frankly.  I'm  still  a  little  embarrassed
about  the  thyroid.  [T]he  dogma  at  the  time  was  that
the  thyroid  was  a  radio-resistant  organ.  .  .  .  [I]t
turned  out  they  had  .  .  .  very  large  doses  of  iodine  .  .
.  to  the  thyroid.153

Dr.  Cronkite  noted  that  "there  was  nothing  in  the  medical  literature  ...  to
predict  that  one  would  have  a  relatively  high  incidence  of  thyroid  disorders."134

In  May  1954  the  AEC  told  the  DOD  that  the  "Utirik  people"  could  return
home  following  the  completion  of  the  current  tests,  "provided  that  specimens
reveal  absence  of  radioactive  materials  in  quantity  injurious  to  health."155  On
Rongelap.  however,  radiation  levels  were  considered  to  be  too  high.  The
Rongelapese  were  moved  to  Eijit.  a  small  island  in  Majuro  Atoll.1"6  The  United
States  continues  regularly  to  followup  the  exposed  Rongelapese  and  Utirikese.
The  U.S.  servicemen  were  sent  to  Honolulu  for  further  examination  by  Army
physicians.'5 But  according  to  Dr.  Cronkite,  "Somebody  at  a  higher  level  within
DOD  decided  that  they  did  not  want  to  study  the  American  servicemen  and  cast
them  to  the  wind.  Sort  of  forget  them.  I  think  that's  a  terrible  thing  to  do,  but  it
was  done.  Medically,  it  was  unacceptable."1-8  Dr.  Cronkite  went  on  to  explain
that  if  an  induced  cancer  had  been  identified,  early  diagnosis  and  treatment  might
have  benefited  the  exposed  serviceman.1-9  The  DOD  reported  to  the  Advisory
Committee  that  twelve  of  the  twenty-eight  servicemen  were  examined  in  1979  by
the  Veterans  Administration  as  part  of  a  notification  and  medical  examination
program  for  military  personnel  exposed  to  radiation.  We  have  not  been  able  to
determine  whether  any  of  the  twenty-eight  had  any  other  medical  follow-up.160

The  Ailuk  Exposure

According  to  a  report  by  Lieutenant  Colonel  R.  A.  House,  based  on  an
aerial  survey  done  within  forty-eight  hours  of  the  Bravo  blast.  "The  only  other
atoll  which  received  fallout  of  any  consequence  at  all  was  Ailuk  [it  is  not  clear  to
which  atolls  the  word  "other"  applies].  .  .  .  [I]t  was  calculated  that  a  [lifetime]
dose  would  reach  approximately  20  roentgens."  about  the  same  as  or  slightly
higher  than  the  exposure  of  the  Utirik  population.161  Unlike  the  people  of  Utirik
and  Rongelap,  however,  the  401  people  of  Ailuk,  south  of  Utirik  in  the  eastern
Marshalls,  were  not  evacuated  at  all.  The  January  18.  1955.  final  off-site
monitoring  report  of  Operation  Castle,  however,  gave  the  Ailuk  exposure,  based

589


Part  II

on  several  aerial  and  ground  readings,  as  6.14  roentgens.  Readings  from  this
report  for  other  exposed  atolls  were  as  follows:  Rongerik,  206;  Rongelap,  202;
Utirik,  24;  Ailinginae,  6.7;  Likiep,  2.19;  and  Wotje,  2.54. I62  People  living  on
these  atolls  would  be  exposed  to  additional  radiation  as  a  result  of  consuming
contaminated  food.  Based  on  the  initial  reading  of  20  roentgens,  the  U.S.  task
force  should  have  evacuated  the  people  of  Ailuk.  A  1987  epidemiological  study
reported  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association,  however,  shows
higher  rates  of  thyroid  abnormalities  on  other  atolls  to  the  south  and  east  of  the
blast  site,  including  Jaluit  and  Ebon.163

By  the  afternoon  of  March  4,  two  ships,  both  destroyer  escorts,  seem  to
have  been  available  to  evacuate  the  400  or  so  people  on  Ailuk.164  But  according  to
Colonel  House,  "the  effort  required  to  move  the  400  inhabitants,"  when  weighed
against  potential  health  risks  to  the  people  of  Ailuk,  seemed  too  great,  so  "it  was
decided  not  to  evacuate  the  atoll."165  However,  evacuation  would  have  reduced
the  lifetime  exposures  of  the  Ailuk  population  by  a  factor  of  three,  according  to  an
estimate  provided  by  Thomas  Kunkle  of  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory.166  In
testimony  before  the  Advisory  Committee,  Ambassador  Wilfred  Kendall  of  the
Republic  of  the  Marshall  Islands  noted  that  "the  United  States  Government
studied  with  interest  the  unexpected  and  dramatic  incidence  of  thyroid  disease  on
Utirik  Atoll  [but]  no  effort  was  made  to  reassess  the  health  of  the  population  on
Ailuk,  or  Likiep,  or  other  mid-range  atolls."167

Resettlement  of  Rongelap

Between  March  1954  and  mid-1956,  the  Rongelap  population  on  Eijit  was
followed  medically,  with  visits  from  a  U.S.  medical  team  at  six  months,  one  year,
and  every  year  thereafter.168  According  to  a  preliminary  report  on  the  two-year
medical  resurvey,  "There  has  been  little  illness  among  the  people  [and]  none  of
the  clinical  entities  noted  in  the  Rongelap  people  appear  to  be  related  in  any  way
to  radiation  effect."169

By  late  1956,  about  a  dozen  radiological  surveys  of  Rongelap  and
neighboring  atolls  had  been  conducted  to  determine  contamination  levels.170  On
February  27,  1957,  the  AEC  informed  the  commander  of  the  Pacific  Fleet  that
resettlement  was  approved'71  despite  lingering  residual  radiation,  most
pertinently,  in  the  food  supply.172  This  decision,  which  was  consistent  with
international  pressure  for  resettlement,  was  made  even  though  in  1954  U.S.
medical  officers  had  recommended  that  the  exposed  Rongelapese  "should  be
exposed  to  no  further  radiation,  external  or  internal  with  the  exception  of  essential
diagnostic  and  therapeutic  x-rays  for  at  least  12  years.  If  allowance  is  made  for
unknown  effects  of  surface  dose  and  internal  deposition  there  probably  should  be
no  exposure  for  rest  of  natural  lives."173  However,  the  displaced  Rongelapese
were  eager  to  return  to  their  home  island.  In  March  1956,  Dr.  Conard  wrote  to
Dr.  Charles  L.  Dunham,  director  of  the  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,

590


Chapter  12

that  "we  are  committed  to  return  the  people  to  their  homes  and  that  is  their
express  wish."174

In  June  1957,  a  final  resettlement  radiosurvey  was  made  from  the  air.
Gordon  Dunning,  an  AEC  health  physicist,wrote  he  would  have  preferred  a  full
survey,  but  that  "it  appears  we  will  have  to  settle  for  the  external  readings
only."175  The  exposed  Rongelap  people  and  200  other  Rongelapese,  who  were  not
on  the  atoll  at  the  time  of  the  Bravo  shot,  were  returned  to  their  home  islands  at
the  end  of  June.  The  Advisory  Committee  has  not  been  able  to  learn  why
Dunning's  advice  to  carry  out  a  more  thorough,  land-based  survey  was  not
heeded.  A  1957  project  report  notes  that  while  "the  radioactive  contamination  of
Rongelap  Island  is  considered  perfectly  safe  for  human  habitation.  .  .  .  The
habitation  of  these  people  on  this  island  will  afford  most  valuable  ecological
radiation  data  on  human  beings."176  Nevertheless,  the  Advisory  Committee  does
not  conclude  that  the  resettlement  decision  was  motivated  by  AEC  research  goals.
From  1954  on,  the  U.S.  researchers  recognized  the  importance  of  the  opportunity
that  had  been  presented  to  gather  data  on  radiation  effects.  However,  we  have
seen  no  evidence,  including  this  report,  that  convincingly  demonstrates  that
research  goals  took  priority  over  treatment  in  a  way  that  would  expose  the
populations  to  greater  than  minimal  risk.

Apart  from  the  radiation  deposited  by  the  Bravo  shot,  there  is  evidence
that  later  bomb  tests  also  contributed  to  the  overall  radiation  level  on  Rongelap.
For  example,  a  January  1957  letter  from  Dr.  Edward  Held,  the  director  of  a
University  of  Washington  group  conducting  ecological  studies  for  the  Joint  Task
Force,  said  that  "activity  levels  in  the  water  at  Rongelap  were  higher  in  July  1956
than  the  levels  . . .  obtained  at  earlier  visits  [and]  the  best  evidence  seems  to
indicate  that  the  increase  ...  is  due  to  the  recontamination  of  Rongelap  from  the
1956  series  of  weapons  tests."177  The  letter  goes  on  to  say,  "The  decay  of  the
newly  added  radioactivity  is  such  that  it  will  soon  be  insignificant  when  compared
with  that  from  the  1954  series."178

Atmospheric  testing  of  nuclear  weapons  was  ended  in  1963  by
international  agreement.

Post-Resettlement  Medical  Follow-up

After  the  population  returned  to  Rongelap  in  1957,  Dr.  Conard  visited
annually  with  a  medical  team  from  Brookhaven  National  Laboratory.179  The
team's  primary  mission,  according  to  Dr.  Conard,  "was  to  treat  the  people.  I  don't
think  at  any  time  the  motivation  .  .  .  was  anything  other  than  treatment  of  the
effects  of  radiation."  He  added,  however,  that  "we  [also]  were  trying  to  get  as
much  information  as  we  could  into  the  medical  literature.  We  knew  that  we  were
dealing  with  an  area  that  was  unexplored  in  human  beings  and  we  wanted  to  find
out  as  much  as  we  could  about"  the  effects  of  radiation  exposure  resulting  from
fallout  from  a  nuclear  explosion.180

591


Part  II

After  their  return  to  their  native  island  in  1957,  the  Rongelapese  continued
to  be  monitored  annually  by  the  Brookhaven  teams.  On  Utirik,  exams  were
carried  out  every  three  years,  then  annually  with  the  appearance  of  thyroid
abnormalities."*1  The  examinations  included  complete  physicals;  blood  tests;
examinations  of  reproductive  effects  including  fertility,  miscarriages,  stillbirths,
observable  birth  defects/2  and  genetic  studies;  growth  and  development  studies
of  children;  thyroid  function  tests  and  palpation;  and  studies  of  absorption,
metabolism,  and  excretion  of  radioisotopes.11*3  In  addition  to  the  annual  exams
conducted  in  the  Marshalls,  in  1957  some  Marshallese  were  flown  from  their
islands  to  Argonne  National  Laboratory  in  Chicago,  where  a  whole-body  counter
and  other  advanced  equipment  was  available."*4  When  Marshallese  developed
medical  problems  that  required  treatment  in  the  United  States,  such  as  thyroid
nodules  requiring  surgery,  they  were  sent  to  Metropolitan  General  Hospital  in
Cleveland  or  to  other  hospitals.185  One  eighteen-year-old  male  was  treated  in
1972  at  NIH  and  at  a  Western  Reserve  University  teaching  hospital  for  leukemia,
which  proved  fatal.'6

In  our  search  of  documents  related  to  the  Brookhaven  medical  program,
the  Advisory  Committee  has  found  only  two  examples  of  studies  that  were  not
primarily  intended  to  benefit  the  individual  participants.  In  one,  a  "chelating"
agent  (EDTA),  normally  administered  shortly  after  internal  radiation
contamination  to  remove  radioactive  material,  was  administered  seven  weeks
after  exposure.  The  stated  rationale  was  that  the  agent  would  "mobilize  and  make
detection  of  isotopes  easier,  even  though  it  was  realized  that  the  procedure  would
have  limited  value  at  this  time."187  Because  there  was  virtually  no  therapeutic
benefit  envisioned,  it  appears  the  primary  goal  of  the  study  was  to  measure
radiation  exposures  for  research  purposes,  although  the  knowledge  may  have  been
helpful  in  the  clinical  care  of  the  patient.  In  the  second  experiment,  a  radioactive
tracer  (chromium  5 1 )  was  used  to  tag  red  blood  cells  in  ten  unexposed
Rongelapese  to  measure  their  red  blood  cell  mass.  The  purpose  was  to  determine
whether  the  anemia  that  had  been  observed  among  Marshallese  was  an  ethnic
characteristic  or  due  to  their  radiation  exposures.188  The  tracer  dose  used  would
have  posed  a  very  minimal  risk,  but  it  was  clearly  not  for  the  benefit  of  the  ten
subjects  themselves.  The  data  could,  however,  have  benefited  Marshallese
exposed  as  a  result  of  the  Bravo  explosion.  No  documentation  addressing
whether  consent  was  sought  is  available  for  either  experiment.

The  AEC  was  responsible  only  for  continuing  studies  of  the  Marshallese
to  detect  radiation  effects  and  for  medical  care  required  for  radiation-related
effects,  while  the  Trust  Territory  government  under  the  Department  of  Interior
was  responsible  for  general  medical  care,  but  this  appears  to  have  been  a
meaningless  distinction  to  the  Marshallese.  "All  they  knew,"  Dr.  Cronkite  told
Advisory  Committee  staff,  "is  that  something  had  happened  to  them  and  they
wanted  to  be  taken  care  of,  very  logically."189  Often,  Dr.  Cronkite  noted,  the
members  of  the  Brookhaven  team  did  take  care  of  nonradiation-related  health

592


Chapter  12

problems.  "Physicians  being  what  they  are,"  he  said,  "you  see  disease  and  there's
something  you  can  do  about,  you  like  to  take  care  and  help  people."190  The
Brookhaven  team  sometimes  included  a  dentist  because  severe  dental  problems
had  been  observed.  The  dentist  mostly  did  extractions  and  "a  little  restoration."'91
According  to  Dr.  Cronkite,  the  Marshallese  appreciated  getting  dental  care
because  "they  were  getting  something  they  had  never  had  before  in  their  lives  and
they  liked  it."192  Although  the  extractions  appear  to  have  been  done  for
therapeutic  or  prophylactic  purposes,  the  extracted  teeth  were  analyzed  for
radioactive  content.

Primary  care,  however,  remained  inadequate.  There  were  serious
epidemics  of  poliomyelitis,  influenza,  chicken  pox,  and  pertussis,  all  of  which,
according  to  Dr.  Conard,  were  imported  into  the  Marshalls  by  the  U.S.  medical
teams.193  The  epidemics  were  severe,  with  high  mortality  rates,  and  could  have
been  prevented  by  the  use  of  available  vaccines.  The  AEC  insisted  that  primary
care  be  left  to  the  Trust  Territory,  which  had  neither  the  personnel  nor  the
equipment  to  provide  adequate  services.  Dr.  Hugh  Pratt,  who  succeeded  Dr.
Conard  in  1977,  wrote  as  late  as  December  1978,  "The  Marshall  Islands  medical
'system'  under  the  Trust  Territory  is  underfinanced.  The  professional  staff  is
undertrained  and  overworked.  Critical  supplies  are  usually  not  available."194

By  1958,  Dr.  Conard  was  aware  of  Marshallese  dissatisfaction  with  the
annual  exams  and  wrote  to  Dr.  Dunham:

I  found  that  there  was  a  certain  feeling  among  the
Rongelap  people  that  we  were  doing  too  many
examinations,  blood  tests,  etc.  which  they  do  not
feel  necessary,  particularly  since  we  did  not  treat
[emphasis  in  the  original]  many  of  them.  Dr.
Hicking  and  I  got  the  people  together  and  explained
that  we  had  to  carry  out  all  the  examinations  to  be
certain  they  were  healthy  and  only  treated  those  we
found  something  wrong  with.  I  told  them  they
should  be  happy  so  little  treatment  was  necessary
since  so  few  needed  it . . .  etc.,  etc.  Perhaps  next  trip
we  should  consider  giving  more  treatment  or  even
placebos.195

Also  in  1958,  Edward  Held,  the  University  of  Washington  professor
involved  in  environmental  surveys  of  the  islands,  wrote  to  Dr.  Conard  about  a
meeting  he  had  with  Amata,  son  of  a  paramount  chief  of  the  Marshalls,  in  which
Amata  said  the  Marshallese  were  "apprehensive  about  being  stuck  with
needles."196  Amata,  who  is  now  president  of  the  Republic  of  the  Marshall  Islands,
asked  about  the  need  for  continued  medical  examinations,  and  Dr.  Held  told  him
that  he  should  talk  to  Dr.  Conard,  but  Held  also  wrote  that  "there  have  been

593


Part  II

medical  benefits  not  connected  with  radiation  which  have  resulted  from  the
medical  surveys."  Held  added  that  Amata  agreed  this  was  true.197

The  annual  exams  given  to  the  people  of  Rongelap  were  described  by
Konrad  Kotrady,  a  Brookhaven  physician  resident  in  the  islands  from  1975  to
1976,  from  the  Marshallese  point  of  view:

[E]ach  March  a  large  white  ship  arrives  at  your
island.  Doctors  step  ashore,  lists  in  hand  of  things
to  do,  and  people  to  see.  Each  day  a  jeep  goes  out
to  collect  people  for  examinations,  totally
interrupting  the  normal  daily  activities.  Each
person  is  given  a  routing  slip  which  is  checked  off
when  things  are  done.  They  are  interviewed  by  a
Marshallese,  then  examined  by  a  white  doctor  who
does  not  speak  their  language  and  usually  without
the  benefit  of  a  Marshallese  man  or  woman
interpreter.  Their  blood  is  taken,  they  are  measured,
and  at  times,  subjected  to  body  scans.198

Eventually,  Dr.  Conard  tentatively  arranged  for  the  AEC  to  pay  the  Utirik
participants  $100  each  for  their  inconvenience.199

A  Marshallese  who  acted  as  a  translator  for  the  Brookhaven  team  said  that
people  didn't  believe  Dr.  Conard.  According  to  this  man,  they  began  to  say,  "You
people  coming  back  every  2  years  to  .  . .  just  do  the  experiments  on  us  like  guinea
pigs."200  According  to  Dr.  Pratt,  some  of  the  distrust  of  Dr.  Conard,  at  least
among  the  people  of  Utirik,  was  the  fact  that  he  predicted  that  there  would  be  no
cases  of  thyroid  carcinoma  in  this  population  and  one  occurred.201  Dr.  Kotrady
wrote  that  "for  22  years,  the  people  have  heard  Dr.  Conard  and  other  doctors  tell
them  not  to  worry,  that  the  dose  of  radiation  received  at  the  island  was  too  low  to
cause  any  harmful  effects. . .  .  However  .  .  .  [i]t  has  been  found  that  there  is  as
much  thyroid  cancer  at  Utirik  as  at  Rongelap— 3  cases  each.  .  .  .  The  official
explanation  for  the  high  incidence  of  thyroid  cancer  at  Utirik  is  unknown  at
present.  Yet  in  the  people's  mind  the  explanation  is  that  it  is  a  radiation  effect
despite  what  the  doctors  have  said  for  20  years."202

In  1961,  Dr.  Dunham  wrote  an  open  letter  to  the  exposed  people  of
Rongelap  in  which  he  explained  the  need  for  medical  follow-up.203  Dr.  Dunham
specified  that  one  reason  was  the  health  care  of  the  exposed  population,  but  that
the  other  was  "of  no  direct  value  to  you  (the  Rongelap  population)."  This  is  the
only  instance  we  found  in  which  a  U.S.  official  explicitly  says  research  is  being
conducted  that  has  no  direct  benefit  to  the  Marshallese  population  under  the  care
of  the  Brookhaven  doctors.  The  letter  continued:  "The  [health  studies]  help  us  to
understand  better  the  kinds  of  sickness  caused  by  radiation.  The  United  Nations
has  a  special  scientific  committee  to  study  these  things  and  the  information  we  get

594


Chapter  12

from  our  work  here  is  made  available  to  that  committee  and  to  the  whole
world."204  This  letter  was  rescinded  before  it  was  sent,  however.  Although  it  was
read  once  over  the  radio,  the  "broadcast  probably  did  not  reach  the  Rongelap
people  since  there  are  only  three  radios  on  the  island."205  Courts  Oulahan,  the
AEC's  deputy  general  counsel,  apparently  requested  the  letter  be  rescinded,
although  the  reason  for  the  request  is  unclear.  The  district  administrator  of  the
Marshall  Islands,  William  Finale,  complied  with  the  request,  and  the  letter  was
never  published.206

Many  complaints  resulted  from  the  fact  that  the  U.S.  researchers  had
difficulty  communicating  with  the  Marshallese,  most  of  whom  did  not  speak
English.  Information  about  risk,  countermeasures,  and  radiation  was  not  easily
explained  to  the  Marshallese,207  and  cultural  differences  made  it  difficult  for  the
researchers  to  appreciate  relevant  Marshallese  practices  and  customs.  According
to  Dr.  Bond,  an  early  member  of  the  medical  team,  the  Brookhaven  doctors  did
not  believe  that  they  needed  to  obtain  consent  for  treatment  or  to  conduct  studies
related  to  treatment.208  The  Brookhaven  team  offered  needed  medical  care;
therefore,  despite  complaints,  the  Marshallese  requested  extension  of  the  medical
program  provided  to  the  Rongelap  and  Utirik  people  to  include  more  general
medical  care  and  to  include  other  islands  and  atolls.209

Thyroid  abnormalities,  in  addition  to  the  one  fatal  case  of  leukemia,  have
been  the  most  significant  late  effect  of  radiation  among  the  Marshallese.  These
endpoints  appear  to  have  received  both  extensive  study  and  appropriate  treatment.
As  thyroid  abnormalities  began  to  appear  in  the  Utirik  population,  the
Brookhaven  team  felt  a  need  to  establish  a  baseline  in  an  unexposed  Marshallese
population.210  Over  the  years,  members  of  the  Ailuk  "control"  population-at  best
an  imperfect  control  population  because  of  their  exposure-had  emigrated  or  died
and  had  been  lost  to  follow-up.  This  population  was  too  small  to  provide  an
adequate  baseline,  so  the  Brookhaven  team  conducted  surveys  of  354  people  at
Likiep  and  Wotje  Atolls  in  1973  and  1976.  They  also  examined  more  than  900
Rongelap  and  Utirik  people  who  were  not  on  their  home  islands  during  Bravo.2"
It  is  likely  that  many  if  not  most  of  the  controls  selected  had  some  radiation
exposure  resulting  from  the  bomb  tests.

During  the  early  1 970s  there  were  increasing  complaints  about  and
resistance  to  participation  in  the  medical  surveys  coupled  with  the  continuing
appearance  of  thyroid  abnormalities,  including  their  development  in  the  less-
exposed  Utirik  population.2'2  There  were  also  growing  numbers  of  people  from
Rongelap  and  Utirik  who,  as  a  result  of  thyroid  surgery  or  reduced  thyroid
function,  needed  thyroid  medication  and  indications  that  those  on  medication
were  not  adequately  complying  with  their  therapeutic  regimen.213

As  a  consequence  of  all  these  events,  Brookhaven  expanded  its  staff  and
medical  care  programs  in  the  Marshalls  in  the  mid-1970s,  including  for  the  first
time  primary  care  for  a  number  of  conditions  not  thought  to  be  radiation  related.
Full-time  resident  staff  was  increased.  In  1973,  Brookhaven  stationed  a  full-time

595


Part  II

physician  in  the  Marshalls.  "His  principal  responsibilities  included  (a)  monitoring
the  thyroid  treatment  program,  (b)  visiting  Rongelap,  Utirik,  and  Bikini  Atolls  for
health  care  purposes  every  3  to  4  months,  and  (c)  assisting  the  TT  [Trust
Territory]  medical  services  with  the  care  of  Rongelap  and  Utirik  patients  at  the
hospitals  at  Ebeye  and  Majuro."214

In  1 974,  the  researchers  conducted  extensive  screening  for  diabetes,  a
nonradiation-related  condition,  in  order  to  determine  the  impact  of  diabetes  on  the
population  and  form  the  basis  for  development  of  a  program  for  treatment  and
management  of  this  significant  problem,  which  affects  17  percent  of  the
population.215  In  1976,  a  new  agreement  provided  for  Brookhaven  to  provide
examinations  and  health  care  for  all  Marshallese  living  on  Rongelap  and  Utirik
when  they  made  their  visits  and  for  the  resident  Brookhaven  physician  to  assist  in
the  care  of  Rongelap  and  Utirik  patients  at  the  hospitals  at  Ebeye  Island  in
Kwajelein  Atoll  and  Majuro,  the  capital  of  the  Marshall  Islands  in  the  Majuro
Atoll.216  In  1977,  an  extensive  program  to  diagnose  and  treat  intestinal  parasites
was  carried  out.217

By  1 978,  administrative  responsibility  in  the  Trust  Territory  government
shifted  to  the  individual  island  groups.  The  Marshallese  at  this  point  took
responsibility  for  general  health  care.218  While  the  1947  Trusteeship  Agreement
provided  for  health  care  for  the  Marshall  Islanders,  the  Department  of  the  Interior
carried  out  this  responsibility  mainly  in  an  oversight  capacity.  The  Department  of
Energy  carried  on  the  programs  of  its  predecessor  agencies  for  treating  radiation-
related  illnesses  in  the  people  of  Rongelap  and  Utirik.  During  this  period  the
Brookhaven  medical  team  often  treated  nonradiogenic  as  well  as  radiogenic
medical  conditions.219

In  1985,  expressing  concern  that  radioactivity  in  the  food  chain
represented  a  significant  health  hazard,  the  people  of  Rongelap  rejected  the
Department  of  Energy's  advice  that  they  stay  on  their  island.  At  their  own  request
they  were  evacuated  on  the  Greenpeace  ship  Rainbow  Warrior  to  Majetto  Island
in  Kwajelein  Atoll,  where  they  remain  today.  In  1994  the  National  Research
Council  published  a  report  that,  among  other  things,  reviewed  food-chain  data
collected  and  analyzed  by  Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory.  According
to  this  report,

On  the  basis  of  current  radiation  dose  estimates,
there  is  no  expectation  that  any  medical  illness  due
to  exposure  to  ionizing  radiation  will  occur  in  any
members  of  the  resettlement  population  of  the
island  of  Rongelap  from  either  intake  of  native
foods  or  environmental  contact.220

However,  the  report  recommended  that  no  categorical  assurances  be  given
the  people  of  Rongelap  that  their  annual  exposure  upon  returning  would  be  less

596


Chapter  12

than  the  100-mrem  limit  agreed  to  in  a  1992  memorandum  of  understanding
between  the  Republic  of  the  Marshall  Islands  and  the  United  States.  Moreover,
the  report  recommended  an  initial  diet  in  which  half  the  food  consumed  would  be
from  nonnative  sources  and  that  no  food  be  gathered  from  the  northern  islands  of
Rongelap  and  Rongerik  Atolls.22'

In  1986  a  Compact  of  Free  Association  went  into  effect  between  the
United  States  and  the  Republic  of  the  Marshall  Islands.222  The  compact
established  a  $150  million  fund  to  compensate  the  Marshallese  for  damage  done
by  the  U.S.  nuclear  testing  program.223  The  United  States  accepted  "responsibility
for  compensation  owing  to  citizens  of  the  Marshall  Islands  ...  for  loss  or  damage
to  property  and  person  of  the  citizens  of  the  Marshall  Islands "224

At  present  there  are  three  separate  health  care  programs  for  citizens  of  the
Republic  of  the  Marshall  Islands.  There  is  a  program  of  general  health  care  for  all
citizens  for  which  the  Marshallese  government  is  solely  responsible;  there  is  a
Four  Atoll  Program,  which  is  run  by  the  Marshallese,  but  funded  by  the  United
States  at  about  $2  million  a  year225  (the  atolls  that  benefit  from  this  program  are
Bikini,  Enewetak,  Rongelap,  and  Utirik),  and  there  is  the  continuation  of  the
Brookhaven  program,  which  is  responsible  for  medical  monitoring  and  care
related  to  radiation  exposure.  The  Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory
conducts  environmental  surveys  as  part  of  the  Brookhaven  program,  whose  total
cost  is  about  $6  million  a  year.226  The  funding  for  this  entire  program  is
discretionary  and  can  be  reduced  or  eliminated  by  Congress.

Conclusions  About  the  Marshallese

The  United  States  has  a  special  responsibility  to  care  for  the  radiation-
related  illnesses  of  the  exposed  Marshallese  because  of  its  role  as  trustee  and
because  it  caused  the  exposures.  As  best  the  Advisory  Committee  can  determine,
it  is  carrying  out  this  responsibility  well.  Treatment  has  been  provided  as  needed
for  acute  effects,  monitoring  continues  to  this  day,  and  latent  radiation  effects
have  been  identified  early  and  treated.  The  research  conducted  between  1954  and
today  consisted  mainly  of  blood  and  urine  tests  and  procedures  to  measure
radiation  with  little  or  no  additional  risk  to  the  subjects.  Overall,  these  tests  seem
to  have  been  related  to  patient  care,  although  two  instances  of  minimal-risk
nontherapeutic  research  have  been  identified.  The  Committee  found  no  evidence
that  the  initial  exposure  of  the  Rongelapese  or  their  later  relocation  constituted  a
deliberate  human  experiment.  On  the  contrary,  the  Committee  believes  that  the
AEC  had  an  ethical  imperative  to  take  advantage  of  the  unique  opportunity  posed
by  the  fallout  from  Bravo  to  learn  as  much  as  possible  about  radiation  effects  in
humans.

Nevertheless,  the  inherent  conflicts  posed  by  combining  research  with
patient  care  could  perhaps  have  been  reduced  by  clearer  separation  of  the  two
activities  and  clearer  disclosure  to  the  subjects.  For  the  most  part,  consent  for

597


Part  II

tests  and  treatment  appears  to  have  been  neither  sought  nor  obtained.  Although
lack  of  consent  for  minimal-risk  procedures  performed  on  a  patient  population
was  not  atypical  for  the  time  (see  chapter  2),  the  Committee  believes  efforts
should  have  been  made  to  ensure  that  the  people  being  monitored  and  treated
understood  what  was  being  done  to  them  and  why,  and  their  permission  should
have  been  sought.

While  cultural  and  linguistic  differences  made  communication  with  the
Marshallese  difficult  at  first,  the  Advisory  Committee  believes  the  situation
continued  for  much  too  long.  As  a  consequence,  dietary  differences  and  other
eating  habits  were  not  recognized  and  may  have  led  to  higher  exposures  among
some  members  of  the  population.  Cultural  differences  may  also  have  resulted  in
an  inadequate  accounting  of  adverse  reproductive  outcomes.  Certainly,
differences  in  pace  and  lifestyle  contributed  to  a  perception  by  the  Marshallese
that  they  were  being  told  what  to  do  rather  than  asked.  The  Advisory  Committee
was  unable  to  determine  whether  the  early  medical  teams  should  have  been  more
aware  of  such  cultural  differences,  but  they  do  appear  to  have  been  slow  to  learn.

The  BNL  medical  team  was  constrained  by  instructions  from  the  U.S.
government  to  restrict  its  activities  to  treatment  and  research  related  to  radiation-
related  illnesses.  General  medical  care  was  held  to  be  the  responsibility  of  the
Trust  Territory  government.  However,  there  was  no  adequate  medical  service
available  to  refer  other  complaints  to,  so  the  BNL  physicians  were  put  in  an
awkward  situation  where,  as  doctors,  they  felt  obliged  to  treat  conditions  that
were  presented  to  them.  The  lack  of  clear  lines  for  general  medical  care  in  the
early  years  of  the  program  seriously  compromised  relations  with  the  Marshallese.
Since  the  Marshall  Islands  were  a  trust  territory,  both  general  medical  care  and
care  for  radiation  injuries  were  ultimately  the  responsibility  of  the  United  States,
and  the  care  of  individuals  should  not  have  suffered  as  a  result  of  bureaucratic
confusion.  Thus  the  Committee  commends  the  expansion  of  the  BNL  program  in
the  1970s  to  include  general  health  care,  and  the  U.S.-supported  Four  Atoll
Program  that  went  into  effect  after  the  Compact  of  Free  Association  was
approved  in  1986.  It  may  be,  depending  on  factors  such  as  food-chain  and  other
environmental  exposure  levels,  that  certain  midrange  atolls  such  as  Ailuk  and
Likiep  also  merit  inclusion.

THE  IODINE  131  EXPERIMENT  IN  ALASKA

In  1956  and  1957  the  U.S.  Air  Force's  Arctic  Aeromedical  Laboratory
conducted  a  study  of  the  role  of  the  thyroid  gland  in  acclimatizating  humans  to
cold,  using  iodine  131.  Like  the  case  of  the  Marshallese,  this  study  is  another
instance  in  which  research  conducted  on  populations  that  were  unfamiliar  at  the
time  with  modern  American  medicine  posed  special  ethical  problems  and  was
therefore  of  interest  to  the  Advisory  Committee.  The  study  involved  200
administrations  of  1-131  to  120  subjects:  19  Caucasians,  84  Eskimos,  and  17

598


Chapter  12

Indians,227  with  some  subjects  participating  more  than  once.  Animal  studies  had
suggested  the  thyroid  gland  might  play  a  crucial  role  in  adaptation  to  extreme
cold.  This  experiment  was  part  of  the  laboratory's  larger  research  mission  to
examine  ways  of  improving  the  operational  capability  of  Air  Force  personnel  in
arctic  regions.  The  results  of  the  study  were  published  in  1957  as  an  Air  Force
technical  report  by  the  principal  investigator,  Dr.  Kaare  Rodahl,  M.D.,  a
Norwegian  scientist  hired  by  the  U.S.  Air  Force  for  his  expertise-rare  at  the  time-
-in  arctic  medicine.228  Many  observational  studies  of  Alaska  Natives  were  carried
out  by  a  variety  of  researchers  in  the  1950s  and  1960s;  most  of  these  did  not
administer  radiation  to  the  natives,  but  only  measured  what  had  already
accumulated  in  their  bodies  from  fallout.229  The  thyroid  study  discussed  here,
however,  differed  in  that  it  actively  administered  radionuclides  to  natives,  raising
more  direct  questions  of  consent,  risk,  and  subject  selection.  The  Alaskan  1-131
experiment  also  offered  subjects  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit.

This  study  is  the  subject  of  a  review  by  a  committee  of  the  Institute  of
Medicine  and  the  National  Research  Council.  The  IOM/NRC  committee  was
mandated  by  legislation  passed  by  Congress  in  1993  and  began  operation  in  June
1994,  including  an  on-site  investigation  of  the  experiments.230

To  the  extent  possible,  the  IOM/NRC  committee  has  provided  the
Advisory  Committee  with  information  but,  in  accordance  with  its  own
procedures,  has  kept  its  own  deliberations  confidential.  The  IOM/NRC  report  was
not  available  to  the  Advisory  Committee,  as  it  had  not  been  completed  by  the  time
the  Committee  had  concluded  its  deliberations.  We  did  not  conduct  our  own  on-
site  investigation  of  the  Alaskan  experiments.  Instead,  we  have  relied  on
published  materials  (primarily  Rodahl's  1957  report  on  the  study,  "Thyroid
Activity  in  Man  Exposed  to  Cold")  and  those  observations  presented  to  the
Committee  in  testimony  by  representatives  of  the  IOM/NRC  committee,  as  well
as  by  representatives  of  the  Inupiat  villages  of  the  North  Slope  of  Alaska  where
the  research  was  conducted.  More  detailed  study  may  always,  of  course,  lead  to
different  factual  conclusions.  The  Advisory  Committee  was  concerned  with
understanding  the  experiments  well  enough  to  develop  general  remedial
principles  to  be  applied  to  more  detailed  factual  findings  completed  by  others.

According  to  Dr.  Chester  Pierce  of  Harvard  Medical  School,  chair  of  the
IOM/NRC  committee,  in  1994  Dr.  Rodahl  recalled  that  the  base  commander  at
the  Artie  Aero-medical  Laboratory  approved  the  study,  and  headquarters  in
Washington  knew  of  the  experiment.231  Participants  in  the  study  were  asked  to
swallow  a  capsule  containing  a  tracer  dose  of  radioiodine.  Measurements  were
then  made  of  thyroid  activity,  using  a  scintillation  counter,  and  samples  taken  of
blood,  urine,  and  saliva.232  The  study's  overall  conclusion  was  that  "the  thyroid
does  not  play  any  significant  role  in  human  acclimatization  to  the  arctic
environment  when  the  cold  stress  is  no  greater  than  what  is  normally  encountered
by  soldiers  engaged  in  usual  arctic  service  or  by  Alaskan  Eskimos  or  Indians  in
the  course  of  their  normal  life  or  activities."233  One  minor  consequence  of  the

599


Part  II

experiment  was  to  have  the  noniodized  salt  in  the  local  stores  replaced  with
iodized  salt.  Follow-up,  Dr.  Rodahl  told  the  IOM/NRC  Committee,  was  left  to  the
Alaska  Native  Service,  which  was  already  aware  of  a  goiter  problem  in  these
communities.234  Alaska  natives  testifying  in  1994  before  the  IOM/NRC
committee  could  not  recall  any  follow-up  visits  by  physicians,  according  to  Dr.
Pierce.235

Risk

The  Advisory  Committee  did  not  undertake  a  detailed  dose  reconstruction
or  assessment  of  the  scientific  quality  of  the  research,  since  these  tasks  were
already  being  undertaken  by  the  IOM/NRC  committee.  The  actual  capsules  of
iodine  131  were  prepared  in  continental  U.S.  laboratories.  As  was  common  at  the
time,  the  principal  investigator,  Dr.  Rodahl,  took  a  one-week  course  on  the  proper
handling  and  administration  to  humans  of  iodine  131.236  He  then  instructed  the
other  physicians  who  would  be  working  in  the  field.  Doses  were  officially
reported  to  range  from  9  to  65  microcuries  of  iodine  131,  with  most  being
approximately  50  microcuries.  The  doses  below  50  microcuries  were  due  to  the
natural  reduction  in  the  radioactivity  of  the  ready-made  capsules  during  the  long
trip  to  remote  regions.237  (To  compensate  for  the  low  doses,  longer  scanning
times  were  used  in  the  field,  but  in  the  1957  report  these  results  were  judged  to  be
unreliable.)238  According  to  Dr.  Pierce,  Dr.  Rodahl  stated  in  1994  that  the  dosage
was  standard  at  the  time  for  tracer  studies.  This  was  the  dose  he  had  been  taught
in  his  training  course;  the  dosage  was  approved  by  the  AEC.239

In  terms  of  dosage  and  risk,  the  experiment  was  not  significantly  different
from  tracer  studies  conducted  in  the  continental  United  States  with  two
exceptions.  First,  some  subjects  were  used  more  than  once;  several  Alaska  Native
subjects  reported  they  received  as  many  as  three  doses.240  Second,  the  subjects
included  women  who  were  pregnant  or  lactating.  Dr.  Pierce  reported  that
testimony  at  the  IOM/NRC  hearings  in  Alaska  indicated  that  at  least  one  subject
may  have  been  pregnant  at  the  time;  technical  reports,  he  said,  state  that  two
female  subjects  may  have  been  lactating  at  the  time.241  Although  the  AEC
discouraged  the  nontherapeutic  use  of  radioisotopes  in  pregnant  women,  such
research  was  sometimes  conducted.  What  sets  the  Alaska  experiment  apart  from
other  studies  conducted  on  pregnant  and  lactating  women  is  that  this  experiment
was  not  investigating  a  research  question  about  an  aspect  of  pregnancy  or
lactation.

As  discussed  in  detail  in  chapter  6,  from  its  mid- 1940s  inception  the
AEC's  radioisotope  distribution  program  required  prior  review  of  "human  uses"  of
radioisotopes  to  ensure  that  risks  were  minimized  and  safety  precautions  were
followed.  (In  1952  the  Air  Force  issued  a  rule  that  required  prior  review  for
experiments,  but  the  rule  was  limited  to  research  conducted  at  Air  Force  medical
facilities.242)  As  discussed  in  chapter  6,  in  1949  the  AEC's  Human  Use

600


Chapter  12

Subcommittee  expressly  discouraged  the  use  of  radioisotopes  for  research  with
children  or  pregnant  women.

Disclosure  and  Consent

This  experiment  offered  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to  subjects.  If  the
subjects  in  this  experiment  did  not  understand  and  agree  to  this  instrumental  use
of  their  bodies,  then  they  were  used  as  mere  means  to  the  ends  of  the
investigators  and  the  Air  Force.  It  was  at  this  time  conventional  for  investigators
to  obtain  the  consent  of  "normal"  (healthy)  subjects  or  "volunteers"  in
nontherapeutic  research.  This  tradition  was  particularly  strong  in  the  military
services  (see  part  I).  It  was  also  recognized  by  the  AEC  at  least  by  February  1956
when  the  AEC's  radioisotopes  distribution  program  explicitly  stated  that  where
normal  subjects  are  to  be  used  they  must  be  "volunteers  to  whom  the  intent  of  the
study  and  the  effects  of  radiation  have  been  outlined."243

The  Committee  is  not  aware  of  any  documents  from  the  time  of  the
experiment  that  bear  on  what,  if  anything,  the  subjects  were  told  and  whether
consent  was  obtained.  There  are  also  no  documents  bearing  on  whether  the  Air
Force  provided  the  researchers  with  guidelines  on  the  use  of  human  subjects  or
requirements  for  obtaining  consent.  However,  documents  available  to  the
Committee  indicate  that  the  radioisotopes  used  by  the  Arctic  Aeromedical
Laboratory  and  Dr.  Rodahl  were  obtained  by  the  Air  Force  under  license  from  the
AEC.244  The  AEC's  provision  for  healthy  volunteers,  as  just  quoted,  was  included
in  the  AEC's  publicly  available  materials  and  presumably  should  have  been
known  to-and  abided  by--those  conducting  government  research  programs
involving  AEC  provided  radioisotopes.245

The  only  available  evidence  comes  from  personal  recollections  of  the
principal  investigator  and  a  few  of  the  former  subjects.  Dr.  Rodahl  recalled  in
1994  that  he  obtained  white  volunteers  through  their  military  commanders  and
Indian  and  Eskimo  volunteers  through  the  village  elders.246  When  a  military
volunteer  came  before  him,  he  explained,  in  the  subject's  native  tongue  (English),
the  purpose  of  the  study  and  what  a  subject  would  do  and  gave  the  person  the
opportunity  to  decline  to  participate.247  When  visiting  the  villages,  the  physicians
could  not  communicate  directly  in  the  native  language.  They  would  find  an
English-speaking  village  elder  and  explain  the  purpose  of  the  study.  The  elder
would  then  find  people  to  serve  as  subjects.  What  communication  occurred
between  the  village  elder  and  the  prospective  subjects  is  not  known.  According  to
members  of  the  IOM/NRC  committee,  Dr.  Rodahl  recalled  that,  although  all
potential  subjects  were  given  the  opportunity  not  to  participate,  all  of  the  Indians
and  Eskimos  who  reported  did  participate  in  the  experiment.248

Dr.  Rodahl  also  reported  that  he  did  not  use  the  term  radiation  in  his
explanation  to  the  English-speaking  village  elders  who  then  communicated  with
others  in  the  villages.  Interviews  in  1994  by  the  IOM/NRC  committee  indicated

601


Part  II

that  there  is  no  word  for  radiation  in  the  native  languages.  One  Alaska  Native
subject,  interviewed  by  the  IOM/NRC  committee  in  1994,  recalled  that  at  the  time
he  worked  in  a  hospital,  spoke  English,  and  did  know  about  "radiation."  He  could
not  recall  any  use  of  the  term  in  the  study.249  In  at  least  one  village— Arctic
Village— there  were  no  English  speakers.  Subjects  from  this  village  testified  in
1 994  to  the  IOM/NRC  that  they  thought  they  were  taking  a  substance  that  would
improve  their  own  health  and  that  they  would  not  have  participated  in  the  study  if
they  had  known  it  required  them  to  take  a  radioactive  tracer.250

These  accounts  raise  difficult  ethical  questions  about  authorization  and
consent,  questions  made  the  more  difficult  by  an  incomplete  historical  record.  It
is,  for  example,  unclear  whether  the  village  elders  were  employed  solely  as
translators  who  were  asked  to  transmit  individual  requests  for  permission  to
potential  subjects,  or  whether  Dr.  Rodahl  was  responding  to  the  perceived
authority  of  the  village  elder  who  then  "volunteered"  members  of  his  community.
Thus  we  do  not  know  what  the  individual  subjects  were  told  or  whether  their
individual  permission  was  sought.  Today  we  continue  to  debate  whether,  when
human  research  is  conducted  in  cultures  where  tribal  or  family  leaders  have
considerable  authority  over  members  of  their  communities,  it  is  ever  appropriate
to  substitute  the  permission  of  these  leaders  for  first-person  consent.251

Even  if  the  procedure  used  for  securing  authorization  through  the  tribal
leaders  was  appropriate,  the  available  evidence  suggests  that  the  leaders  may  not
have  understood,  and  thus  were  not  in  a  position  to  communicate  to  the  subjects,
that  the  experiment  was  nontherapeutic,  that  it  had  a  military  purpose,  or  that  it
involved  exposure  to  low  doses  of  radiation.  The  ethical  difficulties  posed  by  the
language  barrier  were  exacerbated  by  a  significant  cultural  barrier.  The  Indian
and  Eskimo  villages  had  little  exposure  to  modern  medicine.  One  village— Point
Lay-is  described  in  Rodahl's  1957  report  as  "relatively  little  affected"  by  the
modern  world.252  There  is  a  strong  likelihood  that  there  was  no  appreciation  for
the  difference  between  treatment  of  a  patient  and  research  unrelated  to  any  illness
of  the  subject.

The  danger  of  exploitation  was  further  heightened  by  the  trusting
relationship  that  developed  between  the  native  Alaskans  and  the  field  researchers.
In  part,  this  trust  was  the  customary  welcome  given  to  visitors;  in  part  it  was  due
to  the  desire  for  medical  care.  In  at  least  one  village,  harsh  conditions  may  have
increased  the  need  for  outside  assistance.  Rodahl's  report  states  that  Point  Lay
had  suffered  from  semistarvation  the  previous  year.253  Dr.  Pierce  testified  to  the
Advisory  Committee  that  "in  the  mid-1950s,  doctor  visits  to  native  villages  were
quite  scarce."  Dr.  Rodahl  said  when  his  plane  landed,  the  villagers  would  come
running  to  meet  him  and  the  other  physicians  who  came  with  him,  and  the
villagers  would  immediately  want  their  ailments  treated.  He  said  the  physicians
treated  them  because  they  were  medical  men.  He  also  said  "the  natives  trusted
them,  and  they  trusted  the  natives."254  Testimony  before  the  IOM/NRC
committee  included  the  recollection  of  one  participant  that  he  had  been  paid  $10

602


Chapter  12

for  the  study;  in  other  testimony  it  appears  some  subjects  may  have  believed  there
was  an  implicit  quid  pro  quo,  trading  medical  treatment  for  participation/55  The
testimony  suggests  that  at  least  some  subjects  understood  that  part  of  what  was
being  done  to  them  was  not  medical  care.

Subject  Selection

The  selection  of  Alaskan  Indians  and  Eskimos  as  subjects  for  this  research
was  not  arbitrary.  In  order  to  better  understand  acclimatization  and  human
performance  under  conditions  of  extreme  cold,  it  was  reasonable  and  potentially
important  to  study  people  who  lived  under  such  conditions.  At  the  same  time,
however,  the  population  chosen  was  not  one  familiar  with  modern  medicine,  but
rather  a  population  for  whom  the  treatments  of  modern  physicians  were  a  strange
but  valued  innovation,  and  the  research  activities  of  modern  medicine  were  totally
unknown.  As  a  consequence,  the  potential  for  misunderstanding  and  exploitation
was  significant.  The  Committee  does  not  know  whether  there  were  at  the  time
other  populations  also  acclimated  to  cold  weather  who  were  better  positioned  than
Alaskan  Indians  or  Eskimos  to  be  genuine  volunteers  for  this  nontherapeutic
experiment.  There  has  been  no  evidence  that  any  attempt  was  made  to  explain  the
military  purpose  of  the  study  to  the  Indians  or  Eskimos.  Thus,  in  general,  there
was  no  oversight-or  even  knowledge--of  how  the  village  elders  recruited
participants  and  explained  the  nature  of  the  experiment.

CONCLUSION

The  three  cases  discussed  in  this  chapter  all  raise  troubling  questions  that
will  stay  with  us  into  the  future,  but  they  do  so  in  different  ways,  and  with
different  consequences.

The  iodine  1 3 1  experiment  conducted  in  Alaska  was  conventional
biomedical  research,  although,  as  discussed  in  chapter  1 1,  the  subject  population
and  its  environment  were  also  the  object  of  observational  study  related  to  the
effects  of  fallout  from  nuclear  weapons.  This  experiment  took  place  at  a  time  (the
mid-1950s)  when  the  government's  rules  requiring  disclosure  and  consent  in  the
use  of  radioisotopes  with  healthy  subjects  were  established  and  public;  the
available  documented  evidence  suggests  that  these  rules  were  not  followed.  The
evidence  also  suggests  that,  like  the  Marshallese,  the  Eskimos  and  Indians  in
Alaska  were,  in  the  1950s,  unacquainted  with  modern  medical  science  and
therefore  unlikely  to  understand  the  nature  and  purpose  of  the  research.

As  a  result  of  the  1954  Bravo  shot,  the  Marshallese  (and  those  exposed
American  servicemen  and  Japanese  fishermen)  experienced  the  largest  peacetime
exposures  from  fallout  from  detonation  of  nuclear  weapons,  and  as  a  consequence
of  subsequent  detonations,  they  were  subjected  to  further  exposures.  The
biomedical  research  that  was  conducted  by  the  United  States  in  the  aftermath  of

603


Bravo  raises  basic  questions  about  the  obligations  of  researchers  when  long-term
study  is  coupled  with  treatment,  particularly  in  a  setting  where  communication  is
difficult  and  the  subjects  otherwise  have  inadequate  medical  care.

Of  all  those  covered  in  this  report,  the  uranium  miners  were  the  single
group  that  was  put  most  seriously  at  risk  of  harm,  with  inadequate  disclosure  and
with  often-fatal  consequences.  The  failure  of  the  government  and  its  researchers
to  adequately  warn  uranium  miners  who  were  continually  being  studied  is
difficult  to  comprehend;  but  the  greater  question  is  why,  with  the  knowledge  that
they  had,  government  agencies  did  not  act  to  reduce  risk  in  the  mines  in  the  first
place.


604


ENDNOTES


1 .  Downwinders  at  the  Nevada  Test  Site  were  exposed  to  lower  levels  of  fallout
during  the  same  period  as  the  Marshallese.  The  residents  of  Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki
were  exposed  mainly  to  neutron  and  gamma  radiation  from  the  bomb's  explosion.

2.  Peter  H.  Eichstaedt,  If  You  Poison  Us:  Uranium  and  Native  Americans  (Santa
Fe,  N.M.:  Red  Crane  Books,  1994),  35-36.

3.  Undated  document  ("Radiation  Exposure  in  the  United  States-Uranium
Mining  Industry")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-092694-A),  1.

4.  The  Advisory  Committee  also  heard  extensive  testimony  from  uranium
millers  and  open-pit  uranium  miners  who  expressed  dissatisfaction  that  their  health
problems  were  not  covered  by  RECA,  as  were  those  of  the  underground  miners.  The
health  problems  of  the  uranium  millers  appear  to  have  been  overshadowed  by  the  clearly
established  problems  of  the  underground  miners  and  have  received  little  attention  in  the
scientific  literature:  only  three  articles  have  been  located  by  the  Advisory  Committee.
These  papers  show  modest  increases  in  certain  cancers  (notably  lung  and  lymphatic)  and
nonmalignant  respiratory  disease  and  contain  recommendations  that  these  problems  merit
further  study.  No  excess  bone  cancer,  leukemia,  or  chronic  renal  disease  has  been
reported,  however.  The  most  recent  publication  found  by  the  Advisory  Committee  is
dated  1983,  and  we  are  not  aware  of  any  further  studies  currently  under  way.
Nevertheless,  the  millers  and  open-pit  miners  attest  to  numerous  health  problems  they
associate  with  their  occupational  exposures.  See  V.  E.  Archer,  S.  D.  Wagoner,  F.  E.
Lundin,  "Cancer  Mortality  Among  Uranium  Mill  Workers,"  Journal  of  Occupational
Medicine  15(1973): 1 1-14;  A.  P.  Polednak  and  E.  L.  Frome,  "Mortality  Among  Men
Employed  Between  1 943  and  1 947  at  a  Uranium-Processing  Plant,"  Journal  of
Occupational  Medicine  23  (1981):  169-178;  R.  J.  Waxweiler  et  al.,  "Mortality  Patterns
Among  a  Retrospective  Cohort  of  Uranium  Mill  Workers"  in  Epidemiology  Applied  to
Health  Physics,  Proceedings  of  the  16th  Midyear  Topical  Meeting  of  Health  Physics
Society,  Albuquerque,  N.M.,  9-13  January  1983,  428-435.

5.  Robert  N.  Proctor,  Cancer  Wars:  How  Politics  Shapes  What  We  Know  and
What  We  Don 't  Know  About  Cancer  (New  York:  Basic  Books,  1 995),  1 86.

6.  William  C.  Hueper,  Occupational  Tumors  and  Allied  Diseases  (Springfield,
111.:  C.C.Thomas,  1942).

7.  Ibid.,  438.

8.  Egon  Lorenz,  "Radioactivity  and  Lung  Cancer,"  Journal  of  the  National
Cancer  Institute  5  (August  1944):  13.

9.  Duncan  Holaday  to  Chief,  Industrial  Hygiene,  20  November  1950  ("Radon
and  External  Radiation  Studies  in  Uranium  Mines")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-091394-B).

10.  Duncan  Holaday,  Chief,  Occupational  Health  Field  Station,  Public  Health
Service,  "Employee  Radiation  Hazards  and  Workmen's  Compensation,"  Joint  Committee
on  Atomic  Energy,  86th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.  (1959),  190.

1 1 .  See  Lorenz,  "Radioactivity  and  Lung  Cancer."

12.  William  F.  Bale  to  Files,  14  March  1951  ("Hazards  Associated  with  Radon
and  Thoron")  (ACHRE  No.  DOJ-05 1 795-A),  3-8.

13.  Ibid.,  6.

14.  J.  Newell  Stannard,  Radioactivity  and  Health:  A  History  (Oak  Ridge,  Tenn.:
Office  of  Scientific  and  Technical  Information,  1988),  138.


605


15.  See  Lorenz,  "Radioactivity  and  Lung  Cancer,"  for  a  review  of  animal
experimentation,  7-10.

1 6.  National  Cancer  Institute,  Radon  and  Lung  Cancer  Risk:  A  Joint  Analysis  of
II  Underground  Miners  Studies,  January  1994.

1 7.  Dorothy  Ann  Purley,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation
Experiments,  small  panel  meeting,  Santa  Fe,  N.M.,  proceedings  of  30  January  1995
(morning  session),  82-83.

18.  Philip  Harrison,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,
proceedings  of  21  June  1995.

19.  Merril  Eisenbud,  An  Environmental  Odyssey  (Seattle:  University  of
Washington  Press,  1990),  43.

20.  B.  S.  Wolf,  Medical  Director,  NYOO,  to  P.  C.  Loshy,  Manager,  Colorado
Area  Office,  19  July  1948  ("Medical  Survey  of  Colorado  Raw  Materials  Area")  (ACHRE
No.  IND-091394-B),2.

2 1 .  Health  Impact  of  Low-Level  Radiation:  Joint  Hearing  before  the
Subcommittee  on  Health  and  Scientific  Research  of  the  Senate  Committee  on  Labor  and
Human  Resources  and  the  Senate  Committee  on  the  Judiciary,  96th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.
(1979),  40-41.

22.  "A-Bomb  Metal  Affects  Lungs,  Doctor  Reveals,"  Cleveland  News,  22
September  1948.

23.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Manager  of  the  New  York  Operations  Office,
15  September  1949  ("Policy  Regarding  Special  Beryllium  Hazards")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
01295-B),  11.

24.  Merril  Eisenbud,  telephone  interview  by  Steve  Klaidman  (ACHRE  staff),  7
July  1995  (ACHRE  No.  IND-070795-B),  1.

25.  George  Hardie  to  John  Bowers,  29  December  1949  ("Statement  of  Policy  on
Be.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-012595-B),  1.

26.  Ibid.,  2.

27.  Shields  Warren,  Director,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  to  W.  E.
Kelley,  Manager,  New  York  Operations  Office,  17  January  1950  ("Proposed  AEC  Staff
Paper  on  Beryllium  Policy")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-012595-B),  1-2.

28.  Eisenbud,  Environmental  Odyssey,  61.  The  DBM's  position  was  apparently
based  on  the  view  that  the  Atomic  Energy  Act  did  not  give  authority  to  the  AEC  until
after  the  ore  was  mined.  "The  position  of  the  New  York  Operations  Office,"  Eisenbud
wrote,  "was  that  while  the  act  did  not  require  that  the  AEC  be  responsible  for  uranium
mine  safety,  neither  did  it  prevent  the  agency  from  doing  so."

While  the  Committee  did  not  locate  the  early  AEC  legal  opinions  on  this
question,  as  discussed  in  the  text,  we  did  find  documentation  of  AEC  lawyer  reassertion
of  this  position  in  the  late  1950s.

29.  Ibid.,  62.

30.  Ibid.

31.  Interview  with  Eisenbud,  7  July  1995,  1.

32.  A.  E.  Gorman,  AEC  Sanitary  Engineer,  to  Files,  26  May  1949  ("Visit  of
Lewis  A.  Young,  Director,  Division  of  Sanitation,  Colorado  Department  of  Health")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-051 195-A),  1.

33.  Ibid.

34.  The  radium  standard  was  set  in  1941  when  the  Navy  came  to  Robley  Evans,
a  leading  radiation  researcher.  A  committee  was  established  and  came  up  with  a  standard


606


based  on  data  on  twenty-seven  human  beings  who  had  been  exposed  to  radium,  twenty  of
whom  had  been  injured. Evans  went  around  the  room  and  asked  each  of  the  men  for  a
standard  they  would  feel  comfortable  having  their  wives  or  daughters  work  with  and  they
agreed  on  0.1  /<Ci.  Robley  D.  Evans,  "Inception  of  Standards  for  Internal  Emitters,
Radon  and  Radium,"  Health  Physics  14  (September  1981):  441-443.

35.  Stannard,  Radioactivity  and  Health,  1 3 1  - 1 32. Stannard  adds  in  a  footnote
on  page  131:

This  standard  was  not  intended  to  be  applied  to  the
mines.  The  Europeans  were  totally  involved  with  the
war.  In  the  Western  Hemisphere,  there  were  not  yet
enough  uranium  mines  per  se  to  worry  about  exposure
standards.  Uranium  mining  in  the  United  States  had
hardly  begun. In  1967,  NCRP  representative  Lauriston
Taylor  testified  at  the  congressional  hearings  on
Secretary  of  Labor  Williard  Wirtz's  proposed  uranium
mine  standard  that  the  1941  standard  was  meant  for
"indoor"  environments  "where  it  is  quite  feasible  to
accomplish  any  degree  of  ventilation  .  . .  that  might
seem  indicated."

According  to  Taylor,  the  PHS  was  handling  the  situation  in  the  mines,  so  the  NCRP
stayed  out  of  it.  Radiation  Exposure  of  Uranium  Miners,  Part  One:  Hearings  before  the
Subcommittee  on  Research.  Development,  and  Radiation  of  the  Joint  Committee  on
Atomic  Energy,  90th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.  (1967).

36.  Begay  v.  United  States,  591  Supp.  991  (D.  AZ,  1984),  1013.

37.  Duncan  A.  Holaday,  August  1994  ("Origin,  History  and  Development  of  the
Uranium  Study")  (ACHRE  No.  DOJ-051795-A),  2.

38.  Begay  v.  United  States,  994.

39.  Undated  document  ("Progress  Report  [July  1950  -  December  1951]  on  the
Health  Study  in  the  Uranium  Mines  and  Mills")  (ACHRE  No.  DOJ-051795-A),  3.

40.  Duncan  Holaday,  Radiation  Exposure  of  Uranium  Miners,  Part  One,  JCAE
(1967),  601.

41.  Federal  Radiation  Council,  Preliminary  Staff  Report,  No.  8,  Radiation
Exposure  of  Miners,  Part  One,  JCAE  (1967),  1038.

42.  Henry  N.  Doyle,  Senior  Sanitary  Engineer,  USPHS,  undated  ("Survey  of
Uranium  Mines  on  Navajo  Reservations,  November  14-17,  1949  and  January  11-12,
1950")  (ACHRE  No.  DOJ-051795-A),  1.

43.  Duncan  A.  Holaday,  "Origin,  History  and  Development  of  the  Uranium
Study,"  5.

44.  Ibid.,  12.

45.  Deposition  of  Duncan  A.  Holaday,  Bamson  v.  Foote  Mineral  Co.,  9  October
1985,25.

46.  "Progress  Report  (July  1950-December  1951)  on  the  Health  Study  in  the
Uranium  Mines  and  Mills,"  4-5,  8.

47.  Duncan  A.  Holaday,  Senior  Sanitary  Engineer,  Radiation  Unit,  Division  of
Industrial  Hygiene,  to  Chief,  Industrial  Hygiene  Field  Station,  21  February  1950  ("Radon
Samples  in  Uranium  Mines")  (ACHRE  No.  DOJ-051795-A),  1.


607


48.  Public  Health  Service,  Division  of  Industrial  Hygiene,  proceedings  of  25
January  1951  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-092794-A),  1.

49.  Ibid.

50.  Ibid.,  2.

51.  Ibid.

52.  Ibid.

53.  Duncan  Holaday  to  J.  W.  Hill,  General  Superintendent,  U.S.  Vanadium
Company,  26  March  1951  ("I'm  sorry  that  Dr.  Cralley  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-091394-
B).

54.  "Progress  Report  (July  1950-December  1951)  on  the  Health  Study  in  the
Uranium  Mines  and  Mills,"  1 1.

55.  Ibid.

56.  Duncan  Holaday,  "Radiation  Exposure  of  Uranium  Miners,"  Subcommittee
on  Research,  Development,  and  Radiation,  1967,  23.

57.  A  1975  report  written  for  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and
Health  (NIOSH)  and  released  by  the  National  Technical  Information  Service  provides
the  following  analysis  of  the  behavior  of  both  the  industry  and  the  states:  "The  early
uranium  mining  industry,  was  unstable,  extremely  transient  and  highly  speculative.  It
was  both  ill-equipped  to  remedy  the  mine  radiation  hazard  and  resistant  to  encroachments
by  the  government.  ..."  The  report  also  says  that  in  the  absence  of  actual  cases  of  lung
cancer  "companies,  official  agencies  and  miners  alike  remained  unconvinced  of  the  need
for  preventative  measures  to  control  mine  radiation."  Jessica  S.  Pearson,  "A  Sociological
Analysis  of  the  Reduction  of  Hazardous  Radiation  in  Uranium  Mines,"  National
Technical  Information  Service,  PB-267  503  (April  1975),  12.

58.  Henry  N.  Doyle,  Senior  Sanitary  Engineer,  Division  of  Occupational  Health,
to  Chief,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  AEC,  26  May  1952  ("I  am  pleased  to
transmit .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-061395-E),  1.  Doyle  wrote:  "This  is  a  restricted  report
[An  Interim  Report  of  a  Health  Study  of  the  Uranium  Mines  and  Mills]  and  is  only  being
circulated  to  companies  engaged  in  the  production  of  uranium  ores,  certain  federal
agencies  concerned  with  the  problem,  and  the  Universities  of  Rochester,  Colorado  and
Utah."

59.  Associated  Press,  "Survey  Shows  Miners  Unhurt  by  Radiation,"  26  June
1952.  The  lead  paragraph  reads:  "Examinations  of  more  than  1,100  workers  in  uranium
mines  and  mills  have  revealed  no  evidence  of  health  damage  from  radioactivity."  The
existence  of  the  press  release  suggests  the  report  was  generally  available;  however,  the
May  1 952  letter  discussing  it,  as  cited  immediately  above,  indicated  that  it  would  be
available  on  a  "restricted"  basis.

60.  Federal  Security  Agency  and  Colorado  State  Department  of  Public  Health,
May  1952  ("Interim  Report  of  a  Health  Study  of  the  Uranium  Mines  and  Mills")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-061395-E),  i.

61 .  Wilhelm  C.  Hueper,  undated,  "Organized  Labor  and  Occupational  Cancer
Hazards"  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-042495-A),  9-10.  Wilhelm  C.  Hueper,  "Adventures  of  a
Physician  in  Occupational  Cancer:  A  Medical  Cassandra's  Tale"  (1976).  Unpublished
autobiography,  Hueper  Papers,  National  Library  of  Medicine  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-
042495-A),  177-178.

62.  W.  C.  Hueper,  M.D.,  to  Dr.  R.  F.  Kaiser,  Chief,  Cancer  Control  Branch,
NIH,  3  April  1952  ("Re.:  Cancer  Control  Grant")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-083094-A),  4.

63.  Proctor,  Cancer  Wars,  44.


608


64.  Duncan  Holaday  testified  in  1983  that  "the  Division  of  Industrial  Hygiene
[PHS]  had  no  right  of  entry  to  any  facility.  We  had  to  have  the  permission  of  the  owner
of  the  facility  in  order  to  get  on  the  property."  Begay  v.  United  States,  Civ.  80-982  Pet.
WPC,  transcript  of  trial  proceedings,  3  August  1983  (ACHRE  No.  DOJ-051795-A),  1 14.
With  respect  to  AEC-owned  mines,  E.  C.  Van  Blarcom  of  the  AEC  noted  that  "the
Commission  ha[d]  carried  out  independent  observations  in  mines  under  its  control."  In
addition,  the  AEC  requested  that  the  Bureau  of  Mines  conduct  its  own  independent
investigation  because  of  "its  statutory  responsibility  to  assist,  on  request,  other  Federal
and  State  agencies  in  matters  concerning  mine  safety  and  health."  Department  of  Health,
Education,  and  Welfare,  PHS,  16  December  1960  ("Proceedings  of  the  Governors'
Conference  on  Health  Hazards  in  Uranium  Mines")  (ACHRE  No.  DOJ-051795-A),  29.

65.  Barnson  v.  Foote  Mineral  Co.,  Consolidated  Action  Nos.  C-80-01 19A,  C-
81-0719W,  C-81-0045W  &  C-81-0715J,  deposition  taken  upon  oral  examination  of
Duncan  Holaday,  9  October  1985  (ACHRE  No.  DOJ-051795-A),  12.  Begay  v.  United
States,  Civ.  80-982  Pet.  WPC,  transcript  of  trial  proceedings,  3  August  1983,  116-119.

66.  Begay  v.  United  States,  116-119.

67.  Ibid.,  119.

68.  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  Public  Health  Service,  Rev.
5-60  ("Uranium  Miner  Study  Record,  PHS  2766,  Rev.  5-60")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-0 12395-

A),  1.

69.  Deposition  of  Duncan  Holaday,  Barnson  v.  Foote  Mineral  Co.,  12.

70.  Stewart  Udall,  The  Myths  of  August  (New  York:  Pantheon  Books,  1994),

199.

71.  Merril  Eisenbud,  interview  by  Steve  Klaidman  (ACHRE)  7  July  1995,  1.

72.  Federal  Security  Agency  and  Colorado  State  Department  of  Public  Health
("An  Interim  Report  of  a  Health  Study  of  the  Uranium  Mines  and  Mills")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-032195-B),  3-5,  6.

73.  P.  W.  Jacoe  to  Lester  Cleere,  28  March  1951  ("Regarding  a  Discussion  with
Uranium  Producers  on  Radon  Gas  Problems  in  Mines")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-083094-A),

1.

74.  Duncan  Holaday,  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  Subcommittee  on
Research,  Development  and  Radiation,  26  July  1967,  90th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  1213.

75.  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  transcript  of  proceedings  of
13-14  January  1956  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-A),  22,  23-24.

76.  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  transcript  of  January  13-14.
1956  (ACHRE  No.  DOE  072694- A),  7.  Some  state  regulators  and  mine  owners  took  the
position  that  the  imposition  of  a  strict  safety  standard  would  have  resulted  in  the  closing
of  large  numbers  of  small  mines.  While  conceivably  the  cost  to  the  federal  government
of  ventilating  hundreds  of  small  mines  could  have  been  prohibitive,  the  federal
government  does  not  appear  to  have  invoked  this  claim  as  a  basis  for  inaction.
According  to  Duncan  Holaday,  the  cost  of  ventilating  these  mines  would  have  translated
to  an  increase  of  50  cents  to  $1  a  pound  in  the  price  of  uranium,  and  the  average  price  of
fully  processed  uranium  was  in  the  range  of  $20  a  pound.  Richard  Hewlett,  Francis
Duncan,  and  Oscar  Anderson,  Jr.,  Atomic  Shield  (Berkeley:  University  of  California
Press,  1990),  173.  The  second  volume  of  a  history  of  the  AEC  cites  a  1948  estimate  of
about  $20  for  uranium  mined  and  processed  in  the  United  States.

77.  L.  E.  Burney,  Surgeon  General,  to  C.  L.  Dunham,  27  October  1958  ("Since
1950,  as  you  know  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-083094-A).


609


78.  C.  L.  Dunham  to  A.  R.  Luedecke,  1 1  March  1959  ("Letter  from  Surgeon
General  to  C.  L.  Dunham  Concerning  Radiation  Exposure  to  Miners  in  Certain  Mines")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-040395-A),  2.

79.  L.  K.  Olson,  AEC,  General  Counsel,  to  C.  L.  Dunham,  1 1  March  1959
("Health  Hazards  in  Uranium  Mines")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040395-A).

80.  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  "Proceedings  of  the
Governors'  Conference  on  Health  Hazards  in  Uranium  Mines,"  29-33.

81.  Begay  v.  United  States,  591  F.  Supp.  991  (D.  AZ.,  1984),  1002.

82.  Duncan  A.  Holaday,  "Origin,  History  and  Development  of  the  Uranium
Study,"  12.

83.  Ibid.,  14.

84.  Ibid.,  16.

85.  Begay  v.  United  States,  Civ.  80-982  Pet.  WPC,  transcript  of  trial  proceedings
(3  August  1983),  152.

86.  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  Public  Health  Service  and
U.S.  Department  of  the  Interior,  Bureau  of  Mines  ("Uranium  Miners:  Your  Ounce  of
Prevention")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-083094-A).

87.  Ibid.,  8.

88.  Ibid.,  4.

89.  Health  Impact  of  Low-Level  Radiation,  24.

90.  Ibid.,  25.

91 .  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  "Proceedings  of  the
Governors'  Conference  on  Health  Hazards  in  Uranium  Mines,"  17-23.

92.  Holaday,  "Radiation  Exposure  of  Uranium  Miners,"  88.

93.  A  working  level  is  any  combination  of  short-lived  radon  daughter  products
per  liter  of  air  that  releases  an  amount  of  energy  equal  to  the  energy  that  would  be
released  by  the  short-lived  daughter  products  in  equilibrium  with  100  picocuries  of  radon
per  liter  of  air.

94.  Holaday,  "Radiation  Exposure  of  Uranium  Miners,"  89.  Wirtz  explained:
"Since  so  much  of  the  uranium  ore  mined  in  this  country  is  used  by  mills  which  have
contracts  with  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  the  Public  Contracts  Act  [Walsh-Healey]
authority  has  clear  applicability  to  the  uranium  miners  situation.  This  has  not  been
questioned,  except  with  respect  to  certain  details  regarding  the  coverage  of 'independent'
mines  (those  not  owned  or  operated  by  the  milling  companies).  The  AEC  contracts  with
the  mills  contain  broadly  phrased  'health  and  safety'  stipulations  in  accordance  with  the
Public  Contract  Act  Requirements."

95.  George  T.  Mazuzan  and  J.  Samuel  Walker,  Controlling  the  Atom  (Berkeley:
University  of  California  Press,  1984),  308.

96.  Begay  v.  United  States,  591  F.  Supp.  991,  1007.

97.  Under  U.S.  law,  the  federal  government  may  be  sued  only  in  circumstances
in  which  it  waives  its  sovereign  immunity.  The  Federal  Torts  Claims  Act  spells  out  these
circumstances.  Under  that  law,  the  federal  government  cannot  be  sued  when  the  actions
complained  of  are  "discretionary  functions"  of  government.  Ibid.,  1007-1013.  The
general  theory  behind  this  limitation  is  that  the  ability  of  officials  to  govern  would  be
seriously  compromised  if  their  basic  decision  making  were  routinely  subject  to  court
challenge.  The  judge  in  the  Begay  case  concluded  that  because  "conscious  policy
decisions  based  on  political  and  national  security  feasibility  factors"  were  involved,  he
had  no  authority  provide  a  remedy.  Ibid.,  1012.


610


98.  Ibid.,  1013.

99.  Ibid.,  1011-1012.

100.  Federal  Security  Agency  and  Colorado  State  Department  of  Public  Health
("An  Interim  Report  of  a  Health  Study  of  the  Uranium  Mines  and  Mills"),  9.

101.  Mazuzan  and  Walker,  Controlling  the  Atom,  3 1 7.

102.  Duncan  Holaday,  deposition,  19  March  1986,  Begay  v.  United  States,  Civ.
80-982,  and  Anderson  v.  United  States,  Civ.  81-1057  (ACHRE  No.  IND-091494-A),
102.

103.  Begay  v.  United  States,  591  F.  Supp.  991,  995.

104.  On  the  question  of  the  economic  impact  of  ventilation  costs  on  the  price  of
uranium  from  U.S.  mines  (which  was  already  significantly  higher  than  that  from  the
Belgian  Congo,  but  was,  of  course,  a  more  secure  source),  Eisenbud  noted  in  1956:
"While  it  has  a  big  effect  on  the  price  of  ore,  by  the  time  you  get  it  into  a  reactor  or  into  a
bomb  that  differential  is  insignificant."  ACBM,  transcript  of  proceedings  of  13-14
January  1956  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-012795-C),  35.  See  also,  Victor  Archer,  interview  by
Ken  Verdoia  (KUED-TV,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  July  1993
(ACHRE  No.  CORP- 122794- A),  14.

105.  Begay  v.  United  States,  591  F.  Supp.  991,  997.

106.  Ibid.

107.  Ibid.

108.  Richard  Lemen,  Assistant  Surgeon,  to  D.  A.  Henderson,  Deputy  Director,
National  Institute  of  Occupational  Safety  and  Health,  12  May  1995  ("Populations  at
Risk:  The  Ethics  of  Observational  Data  Gathering").  This  was  a  response  to  a  draft
ACHRE  chapter  sent  to  the  agency  for  review.

109.  National  Cancer  Institute,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  Radon  and  Lung
Cancer  Risk:  A  Joint  Analysis  of  11  Undergound  Miner  Studies,  Publication  No.  94-3644
(Washington,  D.C.:  National  Institutes  of  Health,  January  1994).

1 10.  Committee  on  the  Biological  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation,  Health  Risks  of
Radon  and  Other  Internally  Deposited  Alpha- Emittters,  BEIR  IV  (Washington,  D.C.:
National  Academy  Press,  1986).

111.  The  average  risk  estimate  for  all  eleven  mining  cohorts  is  0.49  percent  per
WLM,  which  translates  to  a  "doubling  dose"-the  dose  at  which  the  probability  of
causation  equals  50  percent~of  204  WLM.

1 12.  For  example,  the  doubling  dose  for  the  Colorado  cohort  is  238  WLM,
whereas  for  the  New  Mexico  cohort  it  is  only  58  WLM.  The  doubling  dose  is  as  low  as
84  WLM  under  age  fifty,  and  exposures  at  different  latency  periods  should  be
accumulated  with  different  weights.  A  consistent  "inverse  dose  rate  effect"  was  found,
such  that  a  long  low-dose-rate  exposure  is  much  more  hazardous  than  a  short,  intense  one
(this  is  the  reverse  of  the  usual  pattern  for  x  rays  and  gamma  rays).  Thus,  exposures  at  a
dose  rate  of  greater  than  15  WL  have  1/10  the  effect  of  those  at  a  rate  of  less  than  0.5
WL,  or  equivalently  a  35+  year  exposure  is  13.6  times  more  hazardous  than  one  of  less
than  5  years.

1 13.  The  studies  differ  considerably  in  the  quality  of  data  available  on  smoking
and  on  the  pattern  of  interactions  between  smoking  and  radon  found.  Because  of  these
limitations,  a  joint  analysis  of  smoking  and  the  above  temporal  modifiers  was  not
attempted  for  all  studies.  One  analysis  gives  an  estimated  doubling  dose  of  97  WLM  for
nonsmokers  and  294  WLM  for  smokers  in  all  cohorts  combined.  The  latter  figure  is
close  to  the  300  WLM  figure  specified  for  smokers  in  RECA.  However,  for  specific


611


cohorts,  the  results  are  quite  different.  Neither  the  Colorado  nor  the  New  Mexico  cohorts
show  any  significant  differences  in  slope  between  smokers  and  nonsmokers,  although  the
estimated  slopes  appear  to  vary  in  opposite  directions.  In  the  Colorado  cohort,  the
doubling  doses  are  higher  for  smokers,  whereas  in  the  Naw  Mexico  cohort  the  doubling
doses  are  lower  for  smokers.

1 14.  The  report  estimates  that  59  percent  of  the  lung  cancer  deaths  in  the
Colorado  cohort  and  66  percent  of  the  New  Mexico  deaths  are  attributable  to  radon
exposure  (87  percent  and  47  percent,  respectively,  among  nonsmokers,  59  percent  and  74
percent  among  smokers).

115.  These  uncertainties  (95  percent  confidence  limits)  are  typically  of  the  order
of  sevenfold,  with  about  90  percent  of  the  estimates  being  based  on  extrapolations  from
other  mines  or  other  years  in  the  absence  of  any  actual  measurements.

1 16.  The  court  in  the  Begay  decision  concluded  that  the  epidemiological  study
and  the  conduct  of  the  researchers  were  consistent  with  the  "medical,  ethical  and  legal
standards  of  the  1940s  and  1950s."  The  researchers  "were  not  experimenting  on  human
beings.  They  were  gathering  data  to  be  used  for  the  establishment  of  enforceable
maximum  standards  of  radiation.  ..."  Begav  v.  United  States,  591  F.  Supp.  991,  997-
998.

1 1 7.  The  PHS  could  have  conducted  its  research  on  only  the  small  number  of
mines  that  were  not  privately  owned.

118.  42  C.F.R.  §  1.103  quoted  in  Begay  v.  United  States,  591  F.  Supp.  991,
1011.

119.  Federal  Security  Agency  and  the  Colorado  State  Department  of  Public
Health  ("An  Interim  Report  of  a  Health  Study  of  the  Uranium  Mines  and  Mills"),  i.

120.  For  example,  see  the  May  1952  "Interim  Report  of  a  Health  Study  of  the
Uranium  Mines  and  Mills"  compiled  by  PHS  and  the  Colorado  State  Department  of
Public  Health;  "Proceedings  of  the  Governors'  Conference"  held  in  1960;  and
correspondence  between  the  Industrial  Hygiene  Field  Station  and  mining  concerns.
Duncan  A.  Holaday,  Senior  Sanitary  Engineer,  to  J.  W.  Hill,  General  Superintendent,
U.S.  Vanadium  Company,  26  March  1951  ("I'm  sorry  that  Dr.  Cralley  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
IND-091394-B).

121.  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  undated  ("Uranium  Miner
Study  Record,  PHS  2766,  Rev.  5-60")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-012395-C),  1.

122.  Uranium  Study  Advisory  Committee,  proceedings  of  3  December  1953
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-012595-B),  1.

1 23.  International  Guidelines  for  Ethical  Review  of  Epidemiological  Studv
(Geneva:  CIOMS,  1991),  13.

124.  Ibid.,  18.

125.  Judith  Sweazey  and  Stephen  Scher,  "The  Whistleblower  as  a  Deviant
Professional:  Professional  Norms  and  Responses  to  Fraud  in  Clinical  Research,"
Whistleblowing  in  Biomedical  Research,  proceedings  of  a  workshop,  21-22  September
1981,  180-2.  President's  Commission  for  the  Study  of  Ethical  Problems  in  Medicine  and
Biomedical  Research,  1981.

126.  U.S.  Department  of  State,  "Trusteeship  Agreement,"  reprinted  in  Trust
Territories  of  the  Pacific  Islands,  1993,  appendix  B.

127.  According  to  a  1976  Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory  Study:
"Bikini  Atoll  may  be  the  only  global  source  of  data  on  humans  where  intake  via  ingestion
is  thought  to  contribute  the  major  fraction  of  plutonium  body  burden.  ...  It  is  possibly


612


the  best  available  source  of  data  for  evaluating  the  transfer  of  plutonium  across  the  gut
wall  after  being  incorporated  into  biological  systems."  W.  L.  Robison  and  V.  E.
Noshkin,  27  September  1976  ("Plutonium  Concentration  in  Dietary  and  Inhalation
Pathways  at  Bikini  and  New  York")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-021795-A),  15.

128.  Due  to  cultural  differences  and  the  language  barriers,  however,  Marshallese
dietary  customs  were  unknown  or  ignored.  For  example,  differences  in  the  eating  habits
between  men  and  women  may  have  led  to  higher  exposure  in  women.  The  differences  of
retention  of  radionuclides  by  coconut  and  land  crabs  also  were  not  recognized  by  the
American  doctors.  Ambassador  Wilfred  Kendall,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human
Radiation  Experiments,  proceedings  of  15  February  1995;  Gordon  Dunning  to  A.  H.
Seymour,  13  February  1958  ("Operational  Responsibilities").

129.  Robert  Conard  to  L.  H.  Farr,  2  June  1959  ("Future  Marshallese  Surveys").

130.  See  for  example,  Joint  Task  Force-7,  spring  1954  ("Operation  Castle-
Radiological  Safety,  Final  Report")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-063095-A),  K-3;  and  R.  A.
House,  1  March  1954  ("Memo  for  the  Record").

131.  Robert  Conard,  Fallout:  The  Experiences  of  a  Medical  Team  in  the  Care  of
a  Marshallese  Population  Accidentally  Exposed  to  Fallout  Radiation  (Upton,  N.Y.:
Associated  Universities,  Inc.,  September  1992)  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082494-A),  15.

132.  Jonathan  Weisgall,  Operation  Crossroads  (Annapolis,  Md.:  Naval  Institute
Press,  1994),  303.

133.  Merril  Eisenbud,  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  12  September  1995
(ACHRE  No.  ACHRE-091895-A).

134.  There  has  been  a  diffference  of  opinion  regarding  whether  the  death,  caused
by  liver  disease,  was  due  to  radiation  exposure  or  a  blood  transfusion  received  after  the
incident.  Stannard,  Radioactivity  and  Health,  914.

135.  Victor  Bond,  interview  by  Gil  Whittemore  and  Faith  Weiss  (ACHRE  staff),
1  December  1994,  transcript  of  audio  recording  (ACHRE  Research  Project,  Interview
Program  Series,  Targeted  Interview  Project),  57.

1 36.  Eugene  Cronkite,  interview  by  Gil  Whittemore  and  Faith  Weiss  (ACHRE
staff),  1  December  1994,  transcript  of  audio  recording  (ACHRE  Research  Project,
Interview  Program  Series,  Targeted  Interview  Project),  42.

137.  Ibid.

138.  Commander,  Joint  Task  Force-7,  to  Chief,  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons
Project,  6  March  1954  ("Project  4.1  Study.  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B).

139.  E.  K.  Gilbert,  Commander  Task  Unit  13,  USAF,  to  Commander  Eugene  P.
Cronkite,  8  March  1954  (Letter  of  Instruction  to  Cmdr.  Eugene  P.  Cronkite,  USN")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B).

140.  Ibid.

141.  Ibid.

142.  Interview  with  Cronkite,  1  December  1994,  37.

143.  Gordon  Dunning,  Biophysics,  to  John  Bugher,  Division  of  Biology  and
Medicine,  8  June  1954  ("Basis  for  Estimation  of  Whole  Body  Gamma  Dose  to  Exposed
Personnel  in  the  Pacific")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B).

144.  Interview  with  Bond,  1  December  1994,36.

145.  Naval  Station  Kwajalein  to  AEC,  16  March  1954  ("Pastore,  Hollifield,  and
staff.  . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B).

146.  Robert  A.  Conard,  telephone  interview  with  Steve  Klaidman  (ACHRE
staff),  29  June  1995;  Interview  with  Cronkite,  1  December  1994,  60.


613


147.  Project  Officers  for  Follow-up  Studies  on  Marshallese  to  John  Bugher,
DBM,  20  July  1954  ("Plans  for  the  first  follow-up  study  on  the  Marshallese")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-051095-B),  3.

148.  Cronkite  et  al.,  "Response  of  Human  Beings  Accidentally  Exposed  to
Significant  Fallout  Radiation,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  ( 1  October
1955):  427-434.

149.  Interview  with  Bond,  1  December  1994,  38.

150.  Ibid.

151.  Cronkite  et  al.,  "Response  of  Human  Beings  Accidentally  Exposed,"  433.

152.  Ibid.

153.  Interview  with  Bond,  1  December  1994,  42.

154.  Interview  with  Cronkite,  1  December  1994,67.

155.  Francis  Midkiff,  High  Commissioner,  Trust  Territories  of  the  Pacific
Islands,  to  Major  General  P.  W.  Clarkson,  Joint  Task  Force-7,  6  May  1954  ("Dr.  John
Bugher  . .  .  conferred  with  my  staff. . . ")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B).

156.  Ibid.

157.  Director,  Project  l-M-54,  to  Surgeon  General,  5  July  1954  ("Report  of  1-
M-54  on  30  Servicemen  Exposed  to  Residual  Radiation  at  Operation  Castle")  (ACHRE
No.  DOD-092394-C),  2.

158.  Interview  with  Cronkite,  1  December  1994,  46.

159.  Ibid.

160.  Colonel  Claud  Bailey,  Department  of  Defense,  Radiation  Experiments
Command  Center,  to  David  Saumweber,  ACHRE  staff,  14  July  1995  ("DNA  response  to
ACHRE  Request  070695-B").

161.  Lieutenant  Colonel  R.A  House,  undated,  "Discussion  of  Off-Site  Fallout,"
in  Operation  Castle,  Radiological  Safety,  Final  Report,"  vol.  1,  spring  1954  (ACHRE
No.  CORP-063095-A),  K-59.

162.  Alfred  J.  Breslin  and  Melvin  E.  Cassidy,  18  January  1955  ("Radioactive
Debris  From  Operation  Castle  Islands  of  the  Mid-Pacific")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-
B).

163.  Thomas  Hamilton  et  al.,  "Thyroid  Neoplasia  in  Marshall  Islanders  Exposed
to  Nuclear  Fallout,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  (7  August  1987):  630.

164.  House,  "Discussion  of  Off-Site  Fallout,"  K-59.

165.  Ibid.

166.  Thomas  Kunkle,  Los  Alamos,  to  Ellyn  Weiss,  Office  of  Human  Radiation
Experiments,  17  April  1995  ("More  Comments  on  the  Draft  ACHRE  Chapter"),  19.

1 67.  Ambassador  Wilfred  Kendall,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation
Experiments,  proceedings  of  15  February  1994.

168.  Conard,  F allout,  15.

169.  Robert  A.  Conard,  undated,  "Preliminary  Report  on  the  Two- Year  Medical
Resurvey  of  the  Rongelap  People"  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B).

170.  Gordon  Dunning,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  November  1956
("Review  of  Data:  Radioactive  Contamination  of  Pacific  Areas  from  Nuclear  Tests")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-051095-B).

171.  Holmes  &  Narver,  Inc.,  November  1957,  "Report  of  Repatriation  of  the
Rongelap  People,"  prepared  for  the  Albuquerque  Operations  Office  of  the  AEC  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-033195-B),  1.18.


614


172.  K.  E.  Fields  to  Anthony  Lausi,  Department  of  the  Interior,  4  March  1957
("The  Atomic  Energy  Commission  .  . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B).

173.  Eugene  Cronkite  to  Commander,  Joint  Task  Force-7,  21  April  1954  ("Care
and  Disposition  of  Rongelap  Natives")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051995-B).

174.  Robert  A.  Conard  to  Charles  L.  Dunham,  28  March  1956  ("The  medical
team  .  . .")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-062295-B).

175.  Gordon  M.  Dunning,  Health  Physicist,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,
to  C.  L.  Dunham,  Director,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  13  June  1957  ("Resurvey
of  Rongelap  Atoll")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-072195-B).  In  a  13  February  1958
memorandum  to  Dr.  A.  H.  Seymour  of  the  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  Dunning
characterized  the  radiological  survey  as  "a  poor  second  alternative"  that  provided  "only  a
small  part  of  the  data  we  should  have  obtained."  Gordon  M.  Dunning  to  A.  H.  Seymour,
13  February  1958  ("Operational  Responsibilities")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-072195-B).

176.  Robert  Conard  etal.,  March  1957  ("Medical  Survey  of  Rongelap  and  Utirik
People  Three  Years  After  Exposure  to  Radioactive  Fallout")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-

B),  22.

177.  Lauren  R.  Donaldson,  University  of  Washington,  to  Allyn  H.  Seymour,
Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  AEC,  1 1  January  1957  ("During  a  conversation  .  .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  CORP-072195-B).

178.  Ibid.

179.  Robert  Conard,  Review  of  Medical  Findings  in  a  Marshallese  Population
Twenty-Six  Years  After  Accidental  Exposure  to  Radioactive  Fallout  (Upton,  N.Y.:
Associated  Universities,  January  1980),  8.

180.  Dr.  Robert  A.  Conard,  interview  by  Steve  Klaidman,  30  June  1995.

181.  Conard,  Fallout,  15.

1 82.  According  to  an  interview  with  Marshallese  senator  Tony  deBrum,  taboos
would  have  kept  Marshallese  women  from  reporting  births  of  severely  deformed  children
to  the  BNL  medical  team.  Senator  Tony  deBrum,  interview  with  Steve  Klaidman
(ACHRE  staff),  16  July  1994.

183.  Robert  Conard,  Three  Year  Report,  22-23.

184.  Ibid.,  6.

1 85.  Robert  Conard,  Fallout,  26.

186.  Ibid.,  24.

187.  E.  L.  Cronkite,  V.  P.  Bond,  and  C.  L.  Dunham,  Some  Effects  of  Ionizing
Radiation  on  Human  Beings  (Washington,  D.C.:  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  July
1956)  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-062295-A),  75  .

188.  Undated,  "Evaluation  of  Total  Body  Water  and  Blood  Volume  Using
Marshallese  Individuals"  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-062295-B).

189.  Interview  with  Cronkite,  1  December  1994,  59.

190.  Ibid.

191.  Ibid.,  60.

192.  Ibid.

193.  For  example,  Conard  noted,  "Polio  was  introduced  into  the  Islands  by  an
infected  sailor  from  a  visiting  ship.  A  widespread  epidemic  occurred,  with  nearly  200
cases  of  paralysis."  Conard,  Fallout,  14.

1 94.  Hugh  Pratt,  "Position  Paper  for  the  Marshall  Islands  Study  from
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,"  1  December  1978  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A).


615


195.  Robert  Conard  to  Charles  Dunham,  5  June  1958  ("I  sent  you  a  letter  .  .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  CORP-012395-A),  2.

196.  Edward  E.  Held  to  Robert  A.  Conard,  16  September  1958  ("We  have  been
back  in  Seattle  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-062295-B).

197.  Ibid.

198.  Konrad  Kotrady,  "The  Brookhaven  Medical  Program  to  Detect  Radiation
in  the  Marshallese  People,"  1  January  1977  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-062295-B),  5.

199.  Robert  A.  Conard  to  John  R.  Totter,  4  November  1970  ("I  have  just
returned  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-052695-A).

200.  Ezra  Riklon,  interview  by  Holly  Barker,  transcript  of  audio  recording,  18
August  1994,  provided  by  Marshallese  Embassy  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-092694-A).

201.  Dr.  Hugh  Pratt,  telephone  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  29  July  1995
(ACHRE  No.  ACHRE-091895-A).

202.  Kotrady,  "Brookhaven  Medical  Program,"  8.

203.  Charles  L.  Dunham  to  the  People  of  Rongelap,  2  February  1961.

204.  Ibid.

205.  Robert  Conard  to  Courts  Oulahan,  Deputy  General  Counsel,  AEC,  17  April
1961  ("In  regard  to  our  telephone  conversation  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-062295-B).

206.  Ibid.

207.  Conard,  Twenty-Six  Year  Report,  vi.

208.  Bond,  interview  with  ACHRE  staff,  1  December  1994,  80-81.

209.  Kotrady,  "Brookhaven  Medical  Program,"  13.

2 1 0.  Conard,  Twenty-Six  Year  Report,  vi.

211.  Ibid.

212.  Martin  Biles,  AEC,  Division  of  Operational  Safety,  to  Julius  Rubin
Assistant  General  Manager  for  Environment  and  Safety,  13  March  1972  ("Summary  of
Activities  Related  to  Several  Pacific  Atolls")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-B),  2.

213.  Conard,  Twenty-Six  Year  Report,  v.

214.  Conard,  Twenty-Six  Year  Report,  v.

215.  Ibid.,  44.

216.  Ibid.,  v-vi.

217.  Ibid.,  vi.

218.  Jim  Beirne,  Senate  Energy  Committee,  interview  with  Steve  Klaidman
(ACHRE  staff),  3  July  1995  (ACHRE  No.  ACHRE-091895-A).

219.  Conard,  Fallout,  14;  Conard,  Twenty-Six  Year  Report,  vi.

220.  National  Research  Council,  Radiological  Assessments  for  Resettlement  of
Rongelap  in  the  Republic  of  the  Marshall  Islands  (Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy
Press,  1994),  86.

221.  Ibid.,  6-7.

222.  Compact  of  Free  Association,  48  U.S. C,  sec.  177(c).

223.  Ibid.

224.  Ibid.,  sec.  177(a).

225.  Interview  with  Beirne,  3  July  1995.

226.  Ibid.

227'.  Kaare  Rodahl,  M.D.,  and  Gisle  Bang,  D.D.S.,  "Thyroid  Activity  in  Men
Exposed  to  Cold,"  Technical  Report  57-36  (Alaskan  Air  Command,  Arctic  Aeromedical
Laboratory,  Ladd  Air  Force  Base:  October  1957)  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-071294-A),  81.
Charts  appearing  in  the  report  indicate  slightly  different  subject  numbers.


616


228.  Loren  Setlow,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,
transcript  of  proceedings  of  16  March  1995,  440.

229.  For  an  extensive  bibliography  see  Robert  Fortuine,  M.D.,  et  al.,  "The
Health  of  the  Inuit  of  North  America,"  Arctic  Medical  Research  52,  supplement  8  (1953):
86-91.  All  fifty-one  studies  listed  under  "Radiobiology  and  Radioactive  Substances"  are
either  reports  on  monitoring  fallout  or  survey  articles.

230.  The  IOM/NRC  Committee's  members  are  Professor  Chester  M.  Pierce,
Harvard  Medical  School;  Dr.  David  Baines,  native  Alaskan  physician;  Professor  Inda
Chopra,  UCLA  School  of  Medicine;  Associate  Professor  Nancy  M.  P.  King,  University
of  North  Carolina  School  of  Medicine;  Professor  Kenneth  Mossman,  Arizona  State
University.  Administering  the  committee  is  Loren  Setlow,  director  of  the  NRC's  Polar
Research  Board.  The  committee  is  examining  the  1-131  study  to  determine  compliance
with  contemporaneous  guidelines  for  human  subject  research;  compliance  with
contemporaneous  and  modern  radiation  exposure  standards;  notification  of  participants
of  possible  risk;  and  whether  follow-up  studies  should  have  been  conducted.  The
IOM/NRC  committee  will  make  recommendations  to  the  Department  of  Defense,  which
must  then  report  to  Congress.

23 1 .  Chester  Pierce,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,
transcript  of  proceedings  of  16  March  1995,  429.

232.  Rodahl  and  Bang,  "Thyroid  Activity  in  Men  Exposed  to  Cold,"  75-77.

233.  Ibid.,  83.

234.  Pierce,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  transcript
of  proceedings  of  16  March  1995,  433.

235.  Ibid.,  433-434.

236.  Ibid.,  429.

237.  Rodahl  and  Bang,  "Thyroid  Activity  in  Men  Exposed  to  Cold,"  3.

238.  See  Loren  Setlow,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,
transcript  of  proceedings  of  16  March  1995,  442.  Concerning  longer  scanning  times,  see
Rodahl  and  Bang,  "Thyroid  Activity  in  Men  Exposed  to  Cold,"  32.

239.  Pierce,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  transcript
of  proceedings  of  16  March  1995,  430-431.

240.  Ibid.,  430-431.

241.  Ibid.,  432.

242.  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  "Research  and  Development,  Clinical
Research,"  AFAR  80-22  (28  July  1952).

243.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Division  of  Civilian  Application,  "The
Medical  Use  of  Radioisotopes:  Recommendations  and  Requirements  by  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission, "  February  1956  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-082294-A-96),  15.

244.  See  15  March  1957  letter  from  Kaare  Rodahl,  M.D.,  to  Colonel  D.  M.
Alderson,  USAF,  Deputy  Chief,  Preventive  Medicine  Division,  Office  of  the  Surgeon
General  ("In  accordance  with  your  letter  of  June  21,  1956  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  NAS-
072195-A),  and  26  April  1957  letter  from  Cecil  R.  Buchanan,  Assistant  Chief,  Byproduct
Licensing  Branch,  Isotopes  Extension,  Division  of  Civilian  Application,  to  Colonel  Jay  F.
Gamel,  Headquarters,  Air  Material  Command,  United  States  Air  Force  ("License  no.  46-
50-1")  (ACHRE  No.  NAS-072195-A).

245.  Ibid.,  1-2.

246.  Pierce,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  transcript
of  proceedings  of  16  March  1995,  429.


617


247.  Ibid.,  434.

248.  Ibid.,  436.

249.  Ibid.

250.  Ibid.,  437.

25 1 .  C.  C.  Ijsselmuiden  and  R.  R.  Faden,  "Research  and  Informed  Consent  in
Africa:  Another  Look,"  New  England  Journal  of  Medicine  326,  no.  12  (1992):  830-834.

252.  Rodahl  and  Bang,  "Thyroid  Activity  in  Men  Exposed  to  Cold,"  15.

253.  Ibid.,  16.

254.  Pierce,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  transcript
of  proceedings  of  16  March  1995,  435.

255.  Chester  Pierce  and  Loren  Setlow,  Advisory  Committee  on  Human
Radiation  Experiments,  transcript  of  proceedings  of  16  March  1995,  454.


618


13

Secrecy,  Human  Radiation
Experiments,  and  Intentional

Releases


W  hen  news  reports  of  human  radiation  experiments  sponsored  by  the
government  appeared  in  late  1993,  most  citizens  were  startled  to  learn  about  such
seemingly  secret  activities.  However,  some  said  that  there  was  nothing  new  or
secret;  not  only  had  such  experiments  been  the  subject  of  government  inquiry  in
prior  years,  but  they  also  had  been  openly  published  in  the  medical  literature,  and
even  the  popular  press,  at  the  time  they  were  performed.  Not  unlike  the  atomic
bomb  itself,  human  radiation  experiments  were  said  to  be  the  darkest  of  secrets
and  yet  no  secret  at  all.  What  was  secret  about  human  experiments  and  what  was
not?  This  chapter,  drawing  on  what  we  have  reported  and  adding  some  new
material,  summarizes  what  we  have  learned  about  both  the  rules  governing
secrecy  in  human  subject  research  and  data  gathering  and  the  actual  practices
employed.

To  most  citizens  it  is  axiomatic  that  openness  in  government  is  a
cornerstone  of  our  society.  We  believe  this  is  so  for  many  reasons.  In  a
democracy,  the  free  flow  of  information  is  essential  if  we  are  to  choose  our
governmental  leaders,  understand  their  policy  choices,  and  hold  them
accountable.  In  our  society,  when  the  government  puts  citizens  at  risk,  those
citizens  reasonably  expect  to  be  informed-both  in  advance  about  the  potential
risks  and  in  retrospect  about  the  consequences.  In  the  tradition  of  science,  as  well


619


Part  II

as  that  of  democracy,  secrecy  has  often  been  said  to  be  anathema.  Good  science
requires  the  testing  of  theories  and  findings,  and  the  open  flow  of  information  is
essential  to  this  end.

Yet  we  also  know  that  the  government  must  keep  some  secrets  for  reasons
of  national  security.  But  national  security  may  not  be  the  only  reason  the  public
cannot  obtain  information  about  government  activities.  In  the  absence  of  an
affirmative  requirement  that  the  government  must  provide  the  public  with  access
to  information-such  as  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act  (FOIA),  enacted  in
1966-much  information  that  is  not  classified  under  secrecy  laws  is,  for  practical
purposes,  out  of  the  citizen's  reach.  Even  under  FOIA,  access  can  be  denied  for
reasons  other  than  national  security.1  Finally,  the  government  can  make
information  public  in  a  form--such  as  technical  research  reports-that  is  too
obscure  or  costly  to  be  within  the  practical  reach  of  many  citizens.  In  short,  our
discussion  of  secrecy  must  begin,  but  not  end,  with  information  intentionally
concealed  through  the  formal  system  of  classification.2  It  must  also  cover
information  that  is  intentionally  concealed  through  other  means  and  information
that  may  not  have  been  intentionally  concealed  but  remains  inaccessible  to  the
public.

The  government's  use  of  secrecy  is  a  measure  of  its  citizens'  ability  to
understand,  participate  in,  and  trust  government.  Because  the  government  must
keep  some  secrets,  the  measure  of  public  trust,  therefore,  is  not  simply  whether
secrets  are  kept  but  the  integrity  of  the  rules  used  to  keep  them.  The  question,
then,  is  not  simply  whether  secrets  were  kept.  Were  the  rules  governing  secrecy
clear  and  known  to  all?  Were  they  reasonable?  Were  they  honored  in  practice?

To  answer  these  questions,  we  begin  by  describing  the  rules  of  secrecy
that  governed  the  the  AEC  and  the  Defense  Department  at  the  beginning  of  the
Cold  War.  We  found  that  in  addition  to  national  security,  classification
guidelines  instructed  officials  to  keep  secrets  for  other  reasons,  including  the
protection  of  the  "prestige"  of  the  government.

We  begin  reviewing  the  practices  of  secrecy  with  the  story  of  a  debate
within  the  early  AEC  over  declassification  of  Manhattan  Project  human  radiation
experiments.  While  publicly  professing  the  need  to  limit  secrecy  in  science  to
matters  of  national  security,  the  AEC  kept  information  on  experiments  secret  for
reasons  of  public  relations  and  liability.  We  next  turn  to  the  practice  of  secrecy
that  began  roughly  in  1950.  We  have  learned  that  since  that  time,  human  subject
research  (including  those  that  served  military  purposes)  have  typically  not  been
classified.  Nonetheless,  some  important  information  on  human  radiation
experiments  was  still  concealed  from  the  public.  After  these  two  sections  on  the
practices  of  secrecy  in  clinical  research,  we  turn  to  the  issue  of  secrecy  in
environmental  releases  of  radiation.  When  radiation  was  released  into  the
environment,  the  government  concealed  information  for  reasons  that  included  but
were  not  limited  to  national  security.  Finally,  we  look  at  the  government's
practice  of  record  keeping.  The  government  records  that  the  Advisory  Committee

620


Chapter  13

and  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group  have  retrieved  are
invaluable,  and  the  history  described  in  this  report  could  not  have  been  told
without  them.  At  the  same  time  there  are  important  gaps  in  the  records  that  limit
the  public's  ability  to  know  about  the  rules  and  practices  of  secrecy,  and  most
important,  the  activities  that  were  conducted-in  whole  or  in  part-in  secret.

While  the  Cold  War  is  over,  the  choices  faced  by  biomedical  officials  and
researchers  from  the  onset  of  the  period,  and  the  decisions  they  made,  have
substantial  relevance  today.  Early  AEC  leaders  and  biomedical  advisers  came
from  traditions  of  science  and  democracy  that  recognized  that  while  some  secrets
must  be  kept,  secrecy  is  corrosive,  and  over  the  longer  term  secrecy  itself  can
endanger  national  security.  At  the  same  time,  these  individuals  were  confronted
with  continued  temptation  to  keep  secrets  out  of  concern  that  public  opinion  about
sensitive  matters  would  itself  imperil  programs  they  believed  to  be  important.
The  boundary  between  legitimate  concern  for  national  security  requirements  and
concern  for  the  consequences  of  public  opinion  was  continually  tested.  The
problem  of  defining  this  boundary,  and  ensuring  its  integrity,  remains  with  us
today.  So,  too,  does  the  no  less  important  question  of  the  means  of  ensuring
public  trust  in  cases  where  secrecy  is  merited.  In  what  follows  we  seek  to
determine  what  can  be  learned  from  the  experience  of  those  for  whom  the
question  of  defining  the  rules  of  secrecy  and  putting  them  into  practice  was
routine  and  essential.

NATIONAL  SECURITY  AND  GOVERNMENTAL  PRESTIGE:
THE  LEGAL  TRADITION  INHERITED  BY  COLD  WAR
AGENCIES

To  many  citizens,  the  idea  of  secrecy  in  government  is  linked  to  the  idea
of  "national  security  secrets"  or  "classified  information."  As  we  have  noted,  the
government  also  keeps  secrets  that  fit  in  neither  of  these  categories.  The  system
of  classification,  nonetheless,  occupies  a  special  place  in  governmental  secrecy.
Classified  information  is  accessible  only  to  those  who  have  been  "cleared"
following  investigation  and  who  agree  to  abide  by  the  rules  regarding  access  to
this  information;  the  violation  of  these  rules  can  result  in  severe  criminal
penalties.3

Today,  classification  is  limited  to  matters  of  national  security.  At  the  start
of  the  Cold  War,  however,  the  legitimate  reasons  for  classification  were  not  so
limited.  The  legal  tradition  that  information  can  only  be  classified  for  reasons  of
national  security  was  just  beginning  to  displace  a  tradition  that  allowed
classification  for  other  interests  of  state.

The  authority  to  classify  information  derives  from  legislation  and  from
presidential  executive  order.  In  1917,  Congress  passed  the  Espionage  Act  to
address  wartime  spying,4  and  further  legislation  providing  for  military  secrets  was
enacted  in  1938.5  In  1940  President  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  issued  the  first

621


Part  II

executive  order  on  classification,  which  was  based  on  the  authorization  of  the
1938  law  enacted  to  protect  military  installations  and  equipment.6

The  regulations  that  interpreted  the  World  War  I  law  declared  that  secrets
could  be  kept  not  only  for  national  security  reasons  but  also  for  other  reasons.  In
1936,  for  example,  the  Army  issued  rules  that  provided  for  Secret,  Confidential,
and  Restricted  information.  The  definition  of  Confidential  provided  that

A  document  will  be  classified  and  marked
"Confidential"  when  the  information  it  contains  is
of  such  nature  that  its  disclosure,  although  not
endangering  our  national  security,  might  be
prejudicial  to  the  interests  or  prestige  of  the  Nation,
an  individual,  or  any  governmental  activity,  or  be  of
advantage  to  a  foreign  nation  [emphasis  added].7

Similarly,  data  could  be  classified  Secret  where  it  might  endanger  national
security  "or  cause  serious  injury  to  the  interests  or  prestige  of  the  Nation,  an
individual,  or  any  government  activity  [emphasis  added]."8

The  Manhattan  Project's  "Security  Manual"  followed  the  Army  rules,
requiring  classification  of  information  as  Confidential,  and  even  at  the  higher
level  of  Secret,  in  the  absence  of  likely  harm  to  national  security.9  Before  the  end
of  World  War  II,  therefore,  there  was  precedent  for  using  the  classification  system
to  do  more  than  protect  national  security.

The  era  of  atomic  energy  presented  the  government  with  unique  questions
of  secrecy.  The  government  built  the  atomic  bomb  behind  an  extraordinary  shield
of  wartime  secrecy.  The  very  existence  of  the  newly  created  communities
surounding  AEC  laboratories  in  Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico;  Hanford,
Washington;  and  Oak  Ridge,  Tennessee;  was  a  secret.  Children  at  Oak  Ridge
schools  did  not  use  their  full  names,  and  houseguests  were  introduced  as  "Mr.
Smith."10  Following  the  Hiroshima  bombing,  the  government  faced  the  somewhat
paradoxical  task  of  protecting  its  single  most  important  military  secret  while
having  to  inform  the  public,  if  not  the  world,  about  both  the  hazards  and
peacetime  spinoffs  that  the  creation  of  the  bomb  had  engendered-from  radiation
fallout  and  waste  to  nuclear  power  and  radioisotopes  for  medical  research  and
treatment.

At  the  war's  end,  a  committee  (known  after  its  chair  as  the  Tolman
Committee)"  convened  to  determine  what  information  from  the  Manhattan
Project  should  be  declassified.  In  its  report,  the  Tolman  Committee  concluded
that  "in  the  interest  of  national  welfare  it  might  seem  that  nearly  all  information
should  be  released  at  once."12  But  national  welfare  had  to  be  considered  in  light
of  national  security.  Still,  "it  is  not  the  conviction  of  the  [Tolman]  Committee
that  the  concealment  of  scientific  information  can  in  any  long  term  contribute  to
the  national  security  of  the  United  States."13  The  progress  of  science,  the

622


Chapter  13

committee  reasoned,  depends  on  the  free  flow  of  information,  and  long-term
national  security  depends  on  the  progress  of  science.  In  the  short  term,  however,
the  security  of  the  nation  required  some  secrecy.  Thus,  the  Tolman  Committee
concluded  that  secrecy  could  be  justified  for  reasons  of  national  security  and  then
only  if  "there  is  a  likelihood  of  war  within  the  next  five  or  ten  years."14  Applying
this  general  philosophy  to  the  question  of  secrecy  in  medical  research,  it
recommended  that  "all  reports  on  medical  research  and  all  health  studies"  be
immediately  declassified  except  for  those  reports  that  contained  information
independently  classified  in  the  interest  of  short-term  national  security.15

While  the  Tolman  Committee  report  generally  advocated  openness,  it  also
set  the  precedent  for  keeping  declassification  guides  secret.  The  report
recommended  that  "the  whole  of  the  Declassification  Guide  should  not,  however,
be  generally  distributed  since  it  gives  an  overall  picture  of  the  whole  project  and
makes  mention  in  certain  instances  of  extremely  secret  matters.  The  portions  of
the  Declassification  Guide  needed  for  the  work  of  anyone  concerned  with
declassification  should  be  made  available."16  By  following  this  recommendation,
the  AEC,  and  later  the  Department  of  Energy,  would  keep  from  the  public  the
ever-accumulating  rules  governing  weapons-related  information.  Indeed,  the  first
three  declassification  guides  covering  information  on  nuclear  weapons,  published
in  1946,  1948,  and  1950,  were  declassified  only  in  1995. I7

In  1946  Congress  enacted  the  Atomic  Energy  Act,  which,  in  creating  the
AEC,  expressly  addressed  the  protection  of  atomic  energy  information.  The  act
provided  that  all  information  related  to  atomic  energy  was  to  be  considered  as
Restricted  Data  (RD)  until  the  AEC  reviewed  it  and  decided  that  it  should  be
unprotected  (RD  was,  therefore,  said  to  be  "born  secret").18  The  act  prohibited  the
unauthorized  disclosure  of  RD  (making  it  a  capital  crime  to  do  so  in  the  course  of
espionage)  and  prohibited  anyone  from  receiving  access  to  it  without  first
receiving  a  security  clearance.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the  act  instructed  the
AEC  not  to  protect  information  if  the  AEC  did  not  consider  its  disclosure  harmful
to  the  national  security.  Thus,  the  statute  defined  RD  to  mean  "all  data
concerning  the  manufacture  or  utilization  of  atomic  weapons,  the  production  of
fissionable  material,  or  the  use  of  fissionable  material  in  the  production  of  power,
but  shall  not  include  any  data  which  the  Commission  from  time  to  time
determines  may  be  published  without  adversely  affecting  the  common  defense  and
security  [emphasis  added]."'9

As  we  look  back  on  a  Cold  War  that  spanned  four  decades,  the  Tolman
Committee's  view  that  secrecy  could  be  justified  for  reasons  of  national  security
only  if  there  is  a  "likelihood  of  war  within  the  next  five  or  ten  years"  may  seem
quaint.  In  the  decades  following  the  Tolman  Committee's  work,  the  possibility  of
nuclear  war  would  loom  as  a  reality,  and  information  on  nuclear  weapons  design
and  development  would  be,  and  remains  today,  most  closely  guarded.  But,  in  the
immediate  postwar  period  in  which  the  Tolman  Committee  worked  and  the
Atomic  Energy  Act  was  passed,  the  question  of  whether  information  on  atomic

623


Part  II

energy  could,  as  a  practical  matter,  long  be  kept  secret  by  one  nation,  or  whether
international  control  of  atomic  energy  and  atomic  energy  information  was  the  best
course  to  national  security,  was  itself  a  subject  of  highest-level  policy  discussion.
Most  notably,  this  question  was  addressed  in  1946  by  a  committee  appointed  by
Secretary  of  State  James  F.  Byrnes,  and  chaired  by  future  Secretary  of  State  Dean
Acheson.  Acheson  selected  David  Lilienthal  (soon  to  be  the  first  chairman  of  the
new  AEC)  to  chair  a  board  of  consultants,  which  included  J.  Robert
Oppenheimer,  the  Manhattan  Project's  senior  scientist.  In  early  1946  the
"Acheson-Lilienthal  Report"  proposed  international  control  of  atomic  energy
under  an  "Atomic  Development  Authority."  The  story  of  how  this  proposal  was
overtaken  by  the  dawning  of  the  Cold  War  is  beyond  this  report's  purview.20
Nonetheless,  as  we  turn  to  the  new  AEC's  treatment  of  information  on  biomedical
research,  it  is  important  to  recall  that  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  Hiroshima
and  Nagasaki,  there  was  a  window  in  our  history  in  which  the  most  basic
questions  of  the  role  of  secrecy  in  nuclear  weapons  development  were  an  open
subject  of  high-level  and  public  debate.

THE  PRACTICE  OF  SECRECY

The  AEC  Addresses  Secret  Manhattan  Project  Experiments

When  it  began  operation  in  1947,  the  AEC  was  heir  to  two  traditions:  one
in  which  official  secrets  could  extend  beyond  national  security  to  matters  of
prestige  and  another  in  which  the  interest  in  promoting  openness  and  limiting
secrecy  to  matters  of  national  security  was  recognized.  In  public,  AEC
biomedical  officials  and  advisers  advocated  the  latter  policy.  In  secret  they
embraced  the  former  and  even  expanded  it  to  encompass  "embarrassment."
Through  as  late  as  1949,  the  declassification  of  reports  on  human  experiments
involved  their  review  for  public  relations  and  legal  liability  implications.
Documents  revealing  the  dual  tracks  of  public  policy  making  and  the  secret
review  process  did  not  become  public  until  1994.  Important  pieces  of  the  story
remain  unclear,  including  the  way  in  which  AEC  officials  and  advisers  reconciled
seemingly  contrary  principles.

As  described  in  chapter  5,  when  Manhattan  Project  medical  official
Hymer  Friedell  recommended  in  late  1946  that  one  of  the  reports  on  the
plutonium  injection  experiments  be  declassified,  officials  inside  the  new  AEC
reacted  strongly.  On  March  19,  1947,  AEC  Medical  Division  chief  Major  B.  M.
Brundage  countermanded  the  declassification  decision,  on  grounds  of  "public
relations."  The  plutonium  report  produced  the  strongest  reaction,  but  it  was  not
the  only  report  on  human  data  at  issue.  Brundage's  March  19  memo  also  stated
that  further  reports  ("Studies  of  Human  Exposure  to  Uranium  Compounds"  and
"Uranium  Excretion  Studies")  should  remain  classified.  On  March  2 1 ,  an  AEC
declassification  officer  confirmed  the  reclassification  on  the  ground  that  "these

624


Chapter  13

documents  may  involve  matters  prejudicial  to  the  best  interests  of  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission  in  that  experiments  with  humans  are  involved."  The  memo
expressed  hope  that  "a  definite  policy  in  this  matter  will  be  announced  or
explained  in  the  near  future."21

In  April  1947  that  hope  was  partly  fulfilled  when  Colonel  O.  G.  Haywood
of  the  Corps  of  Engineers  wrote  to  H.  A.  Fidler,  an  AEC  information  officer,  that
"it  is  desired  that  no  document  be  released  which  refers  to  experiments  with
humans  and  might  have  adverse  effects  on  public  opinion  or  result  in  legal  suits.
Documents  covering  such  work  should  be  classified  as  secret."22

Shortly  thereafter  the  AEC  seemingly  embraced  both  of  the  contradictory
traditions  to  which  it  was  heir.  In  June  1947,  the  AEC  approved  the  basic  policy
of  the  1945  Tolman  report  as  an  "interim  policy."23  In  August  1947  General
Manager  Carroll  Wilson  publicized  that  approval  in  a  letter  appearing  in  the
Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists.  The  letter  indicated  that  the  AEC  endorsed  the
Tolman  report,  quoting  sections  that  advocated  declassification  of  nuclear
weapons  information  that  posed  no  "danger  to  our  military  security."24

Also  in  June  1947,  Chairman  David  Lilienthal's  blue-ribbon  Medical
Board  of  Review  issued  its  recommendations  on  the  biomedical  program.
"Secrecy  in  scientific  research,"  the  board  declared,  "is  distasteful  and  in  the  long
run  is  contrary  to  the  best  interests  of  scientific  progress."  The  board
recommended  that  "in  so  far  as  it  is  compatible  with  national  security,  secrecy  in
the  field  of  biological  and  medical  research  be  avoided."25  The  endorsement  of
the  Tolman  report  and  the  broad  statement  of  the  Medical  Board  would  seem  to
indicate  that  high-level  AEC  officials  and  biomedical  advisers  were  opposed  to
secrecy  not  required  by  national  security.

But  these  broad  statements  left  unaddressed  the  specific  response  to
continued  requests  to  declassify  Manhattan  Project  human  experiments.  In  a  June
5  response  to  researcher  Robert  Stone,  General  Manager  Wilson  suggested  that
any  experiments  involving  "unwitting  subjects"  should  remain  classified  as  they
"might  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the  position  of  the  Commission"  in  "the  eyes  of
the  American  people  and  the  medical  profession  in  general."26  In  an  August  12
letter  to  Stone,  Wilson  indicated  that  the  Medical  Board  of  Review  had
considered  the  question  of  secrecy  and  human  experiments  in  mid- June,  but  the
matter  had  been  deferred.27

On  August  9,  John  Deny,  serving  as  acting  general  manager,  evidently  in
Wilson's  absence,  proposed  a  set  of  guidelines  that  restated  the  proposition  that
secrecy  could  be  based  on  reasons  other  than  national  security.  The  definition  of
Confidential  that  he  proposed  went  beyond  the  Army  and  Manhattan  Project
rules:

CONFIDENTIAL:  Documents,  information  or
material,  the  unauthorized  disclosure  of  which,
while  not  endangering  the  National  security,  would

625


Part  II

be  prejudicial  to  the  interests  or  prestige  of  the
Nation  or  any  Governmental  activity,  or  individual,
or  would  cause  administrative  embarrassment,  or  be
of  advantage  to  a  foreign  nation  shall  be  classified
CONFIDENTIAL  [emphasis  added].28

The  Deny  memo  called  for  review  by  a  classification  board  assembled
from  the  AEC's  regional  sites.  In  September,  this  board  assembled  in  Oak  Ridge.
The  available  documentation  does  not  show  that  Derry's  proposed  rules  went  into
effect,  but  does  show  that  the  Classification  Board  blessed  the  illustrations  of
matter  that  "should  be  graded"  Secret  or  Confidential.  The  former  category
included  "certain  selected  human  administration  experiments  performed  under
MED  [Manhattan  Engineer  District]."29  The  latter  category  contained  a  broad
catch-all:

All  documents  and  correspondence  relating  to
matters  of  policy  planning  and  procedures,  the
given  knowledge  of  which  might  compromise  or
cause  embarrassment  to  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission  and/or  its  contractors  [emphasis
added].30

Following  the  Classification  Board's  meeting,  Oak  Ridge  officials  wrote  to
Washington  headquarters  in  search  of  policy  guidance  on  human  subject  research.
Oak  Ridge  explained  that  researchers  were  eager  to  have  their  work  declassified.
"However,  there  are  a  large  number  of  papers  which  do  not  violate  security,  but
do  cause  considerable  concern  to  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  Insurance
Branch  and  may  well  compromise  the  public  prestige  and  best  interests  of  the
Commission."  A  problem  arose,  for  example,  "in  the  declassification  of  medical
papers  on  human  administration  experiments  done  to  date.  Again  many  of  these
radioactive  agents  have  been  of  no  immediate  value  to  the  patient  but  rather  a
much  needed  opportunity  for  tracer  research."31

The  problem,  Oak  Ridge  pointed  out,  was  not  limited  to  data  from  human
experiments,  but  also  included  health  risks  that  radiation  posed  for  workers  and
for  the  public:

Papers  referring  to  levels  of  soil  and  water
contamination  surrounding  Atomic  Energy
Commission  installations,  idle  speculation  on  future
genetic  effects  of  radiation  and  papers  dealing  with
potential  process  hazards  to  employees  are
definitely  prejudicial  to  the  best  interests  of  the
government.  Every  such  release  is  reflected  in  an

626


Chapter  13


increase  in  insurance  claims,  increased  difficulty  in
labor  relations  and  adverse  public  sentiment.32


Indeed,  the  Insurance  Branch  had  already  reviewed  some  papers  that  were
slated  for  declassification.  It  had  advised  against  publishing  papers  that  suggested
health  hazards  to  the  public.  In  the  case  of  one  paper,  for  example,  the  Insurance
Branch  wrote  in  June  1947:

We  question  the  advisability  of  publishing  this
document  unless  the  contractor  involved  is  able  to
establish  that  the  amounts  of  fissionable  material
leaving  the  area  is  in  no  way  a  health  hazard  to  the
people  living  down  stream.33

In  an  October  memo  to  Washington,  Oak  Ridge  suggested  that  the  Insurance
Branch  should  routinely  review  declassification  decisions  for  liability  concerns:

Following  consultation  with  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission  Insurance  Branch,  the  following
declassification  criteria  appears  desirable.  If
specific  locations  or  activities  of  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission  and/or  its  contractors  are  closely
associated  with  statements  and  information  which
would  invite  or  tend  to  encourage  claims  against  the
Atomic  Energy  Commission  or  its  contractors  such
portions  of  articles  to  be  published  should  be
reworded  or  deleted.  The  effective  establishment  of
this  policy  necessitates  review  by  the  Insurance
Branch,  as  well  as  the  Medical  Division,  prior  to
declassification.34

Oak  Ridge  explained  that  its  acting  medical  adviser,  Dr.  Albert  Holland,
Jr.  (whose  contribution  had  been  praised  in  the  June  1947  report  of  the  Medical
Board  of  Review),  would  be  in  Washington  on  October  1 1  to  discuss  the  matter
further.35  On  that  date  the  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine  met
and  concluded  that  the  "important"  policy  questions  raised  by  Oak  Ridge  would
require  "more  study."36

While  the  discussion  of  Oak  Ridge's  inquiry  did  not  resolve  the  question
of  classification,  the  matter  was  otherwise  addressed  at  the  October  1 1  meeting.
The  draft  of  the  secret  minutes  of  the  meeting  record  the  discussion  of  yet  another
letter  from  Dr.  Robert  Stone,  regarding  the  release  of  "classified  papers
containing  information  on  human  experiments  with  radioisotopes  conducted
within  the  AEC  program."37  The  ACBM  concluded  that  the  "problem"  was

627


Part  II

addressed  by  "the  recommendations  of  the  Medical  Board  of  Review  and  that
papers  on  this  subject  should  remain  classified  unless  the  stipulated  conditions
laid  down  by  the  Board  of  Review  are  complied  with.""

What  were  the  recommendations  of  the  Medical  Board  of  Review  that  the
ACBM  referred  to?  Recall  that  its  public  report  did  not  address  human
experiments  but  briefly  declared  the  importance  of  limiting  secrecy.  The  matter  is
cleared  up  by  two  letters  written  by  General  Manager  Wilson  on  November  5~the
first  to  Stone  (this  is  the  "second  Wilson  letter"  discussed  in  chapter  1 )  and  the
second  to  ACBM  Chair  Alan  Gregg.39  Consistent  with  the  October  1 1  ACBM
minutes,  the  letter  to  Stone  explained  that  all  classified  research  not  in  compliance
with  certain  conditions  laid  down  by  the  Medical  Board  would  remain  classified.
These  conditions,  as  we  discussed  in  chapter  1  included  written  "informed
consent"  from  the  patient  and  the  next  of  kin.  This  requirement,  Wilson  further
explained,  was  contained  in  an  "unpublished  and  restricted"  draft  report  of  the
Medical  Board  of  Review,  which  had  been  read  to  the  Commission  in  June.  The
letter  to  Gregg,  who  had  served  on  the  Medical  Board  of  Review,  indicated  that
the  ACBM  need  not  consider  the  matter  further  because  the  Medical  Board  of
Review's  statement  was  sufficient.

Thereafter,  documents  show  that  the  AEC  continued  to  review  reports  for
possible  public  relations  and  liability  consequences  and,  as  Oak  Ridge  had
recommended,  called  on  the  AEC  Insurance  Branch  to  vet  reports  for  public
relations  and  liability  implications.

In  1948  former  Manhattan  Project  researchers  pressed  the  AEC  to
declassify  data  from  human  experiments  for  inclusion  in  a  history  of  Manhattan
Project  medical  research  as  part  of  a  group  of  publications  called  the  National
Nuclear  Energy  Series,  or  "NNES."  In  February  1948,  the  University  of
Rochester's  Harold  Hodge  complained  about  classification  officers  gutting  his
chapter  on  uranium  toxicology.  "I  would  like,"  Hodge  wrote,  "to  advance  the
argument  that  Chapter  XVI  does  not  report  experiments  with  humans,  and  should
never  have  been  classified  on  this  basis  in  the  first  place."40

The  researchers  sought  a  "final  policy"  decision  on  reports  regarding
plutonium  and  uranium  from  the  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  and  its
advisory  committee.  In  a  March  15  letter  to  a  participant  in  the  NNES  project,
Oak  Ridge's  Holland  reported  that  it  was  "the  feeling"  of  these  groups  that  the
reports  should  not  be  declassified.  "While  I  am  sure  we  both  fully  appreciate  the
desirability  of  declassification,  I  feel  certain  that  the  various  individuals
concerned  will  also  understand  and  appreciate  the  reasons  for  this  decision."41
(The  minutes  of  the  March  10,  1948,  ACBM  meeting,  themselves  declassified  in
1994,  do  not  refer  to  the  policy  decision.)

The  policy  of  classifying  reports  for  reasons  of  public  relations  and
liability  was  not  limited  to  human  experiments  conducted  under  the  Manhattan
Project;  it  extended  to  at  least  one  human  experiment  conducted  under  the  AEC.
In  late  1948,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  chief  Shields  Warren  stated  his

628


Chapter  13

"complete  agreement"  with  Oak  Ridge's  Holland  that  a  report  on  a  1948
University  of  California  experiment  with  zirconium  (the  research  has  since
become  known  as  the  "CAL-Z"  experiment;  see  chapter  5)  had  to  be  kept  under
wraps.42  The  report  had  to  remain  secret  because  "it  specifically  involves
experimental  human  therapeutics"  and  could  not  be  rewritten  in  a  way  that
"would  not  jeopardize  our  public  relations."43

In  addition,  data  on  workers,  as  well  as  sick  patients,  was  vetted  for  labor
relations  and  legal  concerns.  In  chapter  1 1  we  discussed  the  exposure  of  Los
Alamos  workers  involved  in  the  "RaLa"  intentional  releases.  In  late  1948  the
AEC  Declassification  Branch  reviewed  a  study  entitled  "The  Changes  in  Blood  of
Humans  Chronically  Exposed  to  Low  Level  Gamma  Radiation."  The  document,
a  memo  from  the  Declassification  Branch  recorded,  "has  been  issued  as  an
unclassified  report  by  Los  Alamos,  since  it  clearly  falls  within  the  open  fields  of
research."  While  agreeing  with  Los  Alamos,  the  Declassification  Branch  sent  the
document  to  the  Insurance  Branch,  at  the  suggestion  of  the  medical  adviser.44

In  a  December  20,  1 948,  memo  to  the  Declassification  Branch,  the
Insurance  Branch  recorded  its  alarm  over  the  study's  finding  that  accepted  gamma
radiation  safety  levels  "may  be  too  high."  In  calling  for  "very  careful  study"
before  making  the  report  public  the  Insurance  Branch  declared:

We  can  see  the  possibility  of  a  shattering  effect  on
the  morale  of  the  employees  if  they  become  aware
that  there  was  substantial  reason  to  question  the
standards  of  safety  under  which  they  are  working.
In  the  hands  of  labor  unions  the  results  of  this  study
would  add  substance  to  demands  for  extra-
hazardous pay  .  .  .  knowledge  of  the  results  of  this
study  might  increase  the  number  of  claims  of
occupational  injury  due  to  radiation  and  place  a
powerful  weapon  in  the  hands  of  a  plaintiffs
attorney.45

While  the  Insurance  Branch  reviewed  declassification  decisions  it  did  not
automatically  veto  the  release  of  all  human  experimental  data.  In  an  October
1947  memo,  Holland  approved  a  report  ("The  Effect  of  Folic  Acid  on  Radiation
Induced  Anemia  and  Leucopenia")  for  publication  "since  purportedly  the  human
work  was  done  in  the  Department  of  Medicine  of  the  University  of  Chicago,"  and
not,  presumably,  an  AEC  or  Manhattan  Project  facility.46  Even  when  publication
might  result  in  bad  public  relations  or  might  encourage  litigation,  information  was
sometimes  released.47

Thus,  while  the  evidence  of  formal  policy-making  that  can  be  recovered  is
fragmentary,  it  appears  that  even  though  the  AEC  biomedical  officials  and
advisers  publicly  advocated  limiting  secrecy  to  matters  of  national  security,  they

629


Part  II

secretly  endorsed  a  different  policy  and  followed  the  secret  one.  The  AEC
employed  the  concepts  of  "prejudicial  to  the  best  interests  of  the  government"  and
"administrative  embarrassment"  in  determining  what  information  to  withhold  on
human  experiments.  This  course  was  crafted  and  administered  in  secret  and
remained  a  secret  for  decades.  Its  full  reach  remains  unknown.

While  our  discussion  thus  far  has  focused  on  the  AEC,  it  was  not  alone  in
its  concerns  that  data  on  human  radiation  exposure  could  cause  public  relations  or
legal  liability  problems.  As  we  saw  in  chapter  10,  in  1947,  former  Manhattan
Project  head  General  Groves,  and  the  chair  of  the  new  AEC's  Interim  Medical
Advisory  Committee,  Stafford  Warren,  were  evidently  among  those  who
counseled  the  Veterans  Administration  to  keep  secret  records  in  anticipation  of
potential  claims  from  servicemen.  In  both  cases,  the  impulse  to  keep  such
information  secret  was  accompanied  by  the  decision  to  create  a  highly  publicized
program  of  radioisotope  research,  which  resulted  in  numerous  human  radiation
experiments  that  were  not  secret.

The  practice  (and  any  policy)  of  keeping  information  secret  on  grounds  of
embarrassment  or  potential  legal  liability  should  have  ended  no  later  than  1951,
and  perhaps  as  early  as  1949.4S  In  its  1949  "Policy  on  the  Control  of
Information,"  the  AEC  recognized  that  secrecy  must  be  balanced  against  not  only
the  value  of  the  progress  of  science  but  also  the  value  of  a  well-run  democracy.
Limiting  secrecy,  the  AEC  said,  ensures  "that  people  may  be  able  to  judge  the
action  of  their  representatives  and  officials  and  to  participate  in  public  policy
decisions.  Information  about  a  public  enterprise  of  such  consequence  as  the
atomic  energy  program  should  be  concealed  only  for  reasons  soundly  based  upon
the  common  defense  and  security."49  In  1951  President  Harry  Truman  issued  a
new  executive  order  on  classification.50  While  the  order  expanded  government
secrecy  by  giving  every  department  and  agency  the  authority  to  classify
information,  it  limited  the  reasons  for  classification  to  national  security.  Today,
the  governing  executive  order  expressly  prohibits  classification  of  information  "in
order  to:  (1)  conceal  violations  of  the  law,  inefficiency,  or  administrative  error;
(2)  prevent  embarrassment  to  a  person,  organization,  or  agency;  (3)  restrain
competition;  or  (4)  prevent  or  delay  the  release  of  information  that  does  not
require  protection  in  the  interest  of  national  security."  The  order  also  prohibits
classification  of  "basic  scientific  research  information  not  clearly  related  to
national  security."51  As  we  shall  see  later  in  this  chapter,  while  the  law  has  long
since  begun  to  draw  a  line  against  the  keeping  of  classified  secrets  for  reasons
other  than  national  security,  the  boundary  between  national  security  and  public
relations  rationales  remains  murky.

Human  Radiation  Experiments  In  the  1950s:  Experiments  Are  Not
Classified,  but  Some  Secrets  Remain

The  1947-1948  AEC  declassification  controversy  may  have  taught  Shields

630


Chapter  13

Warren  and  other  AEC  biomedical  officials  that  secrecy  and  human  radiation
experimentation  were  a  troubling  mix,  to  be  avoided  if  possible.  The  search
efforts  of  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group  and  the  Committee
located  very  few  human  radiation  experiments  in  the  post-Manhattan  Project
period  that  were  classified  secrets.  Nonetheless,  important  information  relating  to
many  experiments  was  still  intentionally  concealed  from  the  public.

When  the  AEC  and  DOD  debated  the  need  for  human  experiments  for  the
proposed  nuclear-powered  airplane  (NEPA)  in  1950,  Warren  and  the  Advisory
Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine  counseled  the  Defense  Department  that
there  would  be  "serious  repercussions  from  a  public  relations  standpoint"  if
human  experiments  were  conducted  by  an  agency  that  did  some  of  its  work  in
secret.52  As  we  saw  in  chapter  1,  in  March  1951,  Los  Alamos  asked  Warren  to
state  the  policy  on  human  experimentation.  In  transmitting  to  Los  Alamos
excerpts  from  General  Manager  Wilson's  November  1947  letter  to  Stone,  which
cited  the  requirement  for  "informed  consent,"  Warren  added  further  counsel
against  secrecy.  Warren  cited  the  Medical  Board  of  Review's  public  declaration
that  secrecy  should  only  be  countenanced  when  required  by  national  security.  He
then  quoted  ACBM  chairman  Alan  Gregg:  "The  secrecy  with  which  some  of  the
work  of  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  has  to  be  conducted  creates  special
conditions  for  the  clinical  aspects  of  its  work  in  that  the  public  is  aware  of  this
necessity  for  secrecy  and  of  the  subsequent  difficulty  of  probing  into  it."53  When
in  1952  the  DOD's  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare  called
for  renewed  discussion  of  human  experiments,  Warren  reportedly  advised  "that
studies  of  this  type  under  the  Joint  Panel's  purview  should  be  conducted  by  the
Public  Health  Service  or  some  agency  where  security  restrictions  would  not  lead
to  misunderstanding."54

Thus,  Warren  and  Gregg's  statements  convey  a  profound  concern  for  the
public's  perception  of  human  experiments,  particularly  where  human  experiments
are  conducted  by  agencies  that  also  conduct  activities  in  secret.

Under  Paul  Aebersold,  the  AEC  isotope  distribution  program~the
provider  of  the  source  material  for  many  hundreds  of  human  experiments-
became  a  showcase  for  public  research  (see  chapter  6).  At  the  Defense
Department  as  well,  biomedical  human  radiation  experiments—even  when  there
was  clear  military  purpose—were  typically  not  classified.  For  example,  post-
Manhattan  Project  total-body  irradiation  research  sponsored  in  part  by  the
military,  in  the  wake  of  the  controversy  that  raged  when  similar  human
experiments  were  proposed  for  the  NEPA  project,  was  not  conducted  in  secret
(see  chapter  8).

But  if  the  experiments  themselves  were  not  secret,  important  decision-
making context  for  them  was  sometimes  secret,  and  hidden  rules  or  practices  may
have  also  limited  what  the  public  was  told  about  particular  experiments.  The
ability  of  the  public  and  the  press  to  probe  experiments  connected  to  secret
programs  was  limited,  making  it  difficult  for  the  public  to  critically  assess  the

631


Part  II

practices  of  its  government.

For  example,  the  1950-1952  meetings  in  which  DOD  biomedical  officials
discussed  the  need  for  an  ethical  code  to  govern  human  experiments  were
classified.55  So  were  the  meetings  of  the  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical  Aspects  of
Atomic  Warfare.  Similarly,  meetings  of  the  ACBM  were  often  conducted  in  part
or  whole  in  secret.  These  meetings,  as  we  have  seen  from  the  review  of  the  1947-
1948  secret  keeping,  included  seminal  discussions  of  the  ethics  of  human
experimentation  and  the  rules  governing  declassification  of  experimental  data.56

To  some  degree  experiments  sponsored  by  civilian  agencies  such  as  the
National  Institutes  of  Health  were  also  rooted  in  this  secret  context.  The  1952
letter  that  reported  Warren's  belief  that  human  experiments  should  be  separated
from  secret  programs  communicated  the  willingness  of  NIH  and  PHS  to
cooperate  in  conducting  research  needed  for  military  purposes.  These  civilian
agencies  were  themselves  participants  in  DOD  biomedical  planning  for  atomic
warfare,  and  their  research  was  also  listed  in  the  secret  digests  (which  included
classified  and  nonclassified  research)  of  atomic  warfare-related  research  that  the
DOD's  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences  provided  to  the  Joint  Panel  on  the
Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare.57  Also  in  1952,  an  internal  report  on
"Defense  Activity  of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  (1950-52)"  noted  that  "a
second  major  activity  of  the  NIH  relating  to  radiation  research  has  been
participation  in  the  medical  and  biological  aspects  of  atomic  bomb  tests.  A  large
share  of  this  activity  has  been  borne  by  the  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons
Project.  The  substance  of  this  work  is  classified."58

The  country's  research  resources  should  have  been  available  to  serve
national  security  needs.  But,  as  Warren  and  Gregg  suggested,  when  human
research  and  national  security  are  intertwined,  care  must  be  taken  to  ensure  that
the  public  has  means  to  separate  out  secret  and  nonsecret  purposes  with
confidence.  At  this  time  it  is  not  clear  what,  if  any,  classified  human  radiation
experiments  were  conducted  by  DHHS's  predecessors  and  what  was  said  in
secret  about  otherwise  public  human  radiation  experiments.59

Similarly,  while  most  AEC  biomedical  radiation  research  was  not
classified,  some  was.  From  available  records,  it  appears  unlikely  that  much  of  the
secret  research  involved  humans.  But,  given  the  secrecy  and  the  absence  of  clear
records,  certainty  is  impossible.60

Moreover,  even  if  little  human  subject  radiation  research  itself  was
classified,  information  about  the  research  could  be  concealed  by  less  formal
means.  As  we  discussed  in  the  Introduction  and  chapter  10,  in  July  1949,  the
NEPA  advisory  group  met  with  a  group  of  psychologists  and  psychiatrists  to
discuss  the  psychology  of  radiation  risk.  The  participants  were  told:

This  is  not  a  closed  meeting.  Some  of  our ,
advisers  .  .  .  have  not  been  cleared.  Ordinarily,
medical  and  biological  discussions  are  not,  of

632


Chapter  13

course  classified.  We  shall  ask  you,  however,  to
refrain  from  discussing  these  matters  on  the  outside,
since  of  course  we  do  not  want  newspapers  to  know
of  these  discussions  at  this  time.61

Moreover,  the  determination  to  render  information  formally  secret  could
be  applied  in  a  manner  that  was  invisible  and  arbitrary,  as  illustrated  by  the
following  case.  At  midcentury,  the  Medical  College  of  Virginia  (MCV)
performed  research  on  the  effect  of  thermal  burns  for  the  Defense  Department.
MCV's  research,  conducted  with  animals,  prisoners,  and  medical  students,
initially  appears  to  have  been  a  matter  of  public  record.  In  January  195 1,
following  inquiry  by  a  reporter  from  the  Richmond  Times-Dispatch,  MCV
investigator  Dr.  Everett  I.  Evans  grew  alarmed  that  press  reports  decrying  the  use
of  dogs  would  "greatly  harm  the  work  we  are  doing  on  the  experimental  burn  in
relation  to  atomic  bomb  injuries."62  Evans  called  on  the  chairman  of  the  Army's
Medical  Research  and  Development  Board  to  classify  the  work  so  that  "I  would
have  legal  means  of  preventing  a  public  newspaper  discussion  of  these
experiments. .  .  .""

The  Army  immediately  provided  a  declaration  that  all  work  under  the
MCV  contract  "will  be  classified  RESTRICTED."64  The  Army  decreed  that  a
bureaucratic  obstacle  course  would  have  to  be  overcome  before  information  was
released,  including  "coordination"  with  the  experimenters,  and  evaluation  by  "the
other  branches  of  the  Armed  Forces,  the  Federal  Civil  Defense  Administration,
the  National  Security  Resources  Board,  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  and  the
National  Research  Council."65  This  rigor  was  essential  because  "individual
releases  may  be  mistaken  for  official  advice  to  civil  defense  groups  and  result  in
confusion  of  training  and  procedure,  the  stockpiling  of  unnecessary  or
inappropriate  materials,  etc."66  Finally,  perhaps  on  the  possibility  that  the  local
reporter  might  be  uniquely  dogged,  the  Army  added  that  it  "is  also  the  policy  of
the  Department  of  Defense  that  public  releases  to  the  press  are  made
simultaneously  to  all  national  news  services,  and  that  the  releases  are  not  made  to
individual  reporters  or  newspapers."67  While  the  secrecy  was  prompted  by
revelations  on  animal  experiments,  in  late  1 95 1  Dr.  Evans  invoked  it  to  close  the
curtain  on  the  use  of  prisoner  volunteers  at  the  state  penitentiary.68  The  prison
assured  Evans  that  inmates  and  staff  were  informed  that  "no  publicity  should  be
given  to  the  experiment  being  carried  on  at  the  Medical  College."69

In  the  case  of  research  related  to  chemical  and  biological  warfare,  the
military  issued  a  secret  edict  that  published  articles  be  cleansed  of  any  reference
to  military  purpose.™  In  many  cases  the  opportunity  to  obscure  the  full  purpose
of  research  by  careful  wording  was  obvious.  As  a  DOD  document  put  it,  "the
term  'radiobiology'  is  so  flexible  semantically  that,  depending  upon  the
investigator's  point  of  view,  any  project  could  be  classified  as  'clinical'  or  'basic'
or  'nuclear  weapons  effects.'"71  In  1961,  the  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture

633


Part  II

issued  an  extensive  bibliography  of  research  on  strontium  and  calcium.  The
preface  made  clear  the  publication  was  relevant  to  those  researching  fallout
(radioactive  strontium  being  a  major  fallout  concern).72  However,  Advisory
Committee  staff  review  of  many  of  the  articles  on  human  experiments  included  in
the  bibliography  revealed  few  indications  of  fallout  as  a  purpose  for  the
research.73

The  difficulty  of  determining  what  was  secret  is  compounded  because  the
government  sometimes  actively  deceived  or  lied.  Most  remarkably,  the  AEC
continually  told  inquiring  members  of  the  public  that  it  did  not  perform  human
experiments— even  when  its  isotope  division  very  publicly  supported  them.  In
1948,  for  example,  the  AEC  wrote  to  a  member  of  the  public  that  "there  is  no
possibility,  at  present  or  projected,  of  human  experimentation  with  atomic
energy."74  In  1951,  when  the  press  pursued  a  rumor  that  the  AEC  was  sponsoring
an  experiment  with  prisoners,  the  AEC's  chief  public  information  official  assured
the  Associated  Press  that  the  AEC  "has  never  sponsored  a  medical  research
project  where  human  beings  were  being  used  for  experimental  purposes."75  In
1953  the  AEC  wrote  to  members  of  the  public  that  it  "does  not  deliberately
expose  any  human  being  to  nuclear  radiation  for  research  purposes  unless  there  is
a  reasonable  chance  that  the  person  will  be  benefited  by  such  exposure."76  At  the
same  time  an  internal  AEC  memo  from  the  public  information  office  noted  that
"any  experimentation  on  humans  has  obvious  and  delicate  public  relations
aspects.  Any  project  involving  such  experimentation  must  have  careful  prior
consideration  by  both  the  field  and  Washington,  particularly  as  to  content  of  any
public  statements."77

As  we  saw  in  chapter  1 2,  uranium  miners  were  not  adequately  informed
about  the  purpose  of  research  regarding  their  exposure  to  radon  in  the  mines.
Above  and  beyond  lack  of  disclosure,  there  is  evidence  that  deception  was  not
unusual  in  data  gathering  on  AEC  workers,  as  illustrated  by  a  1955  exchange
between  the  University  of  Rochester's  Dr.  Louis  Hempelmann  and  the  AEC
Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  regarding  a  proposed  study  evidently  designed
to  measure  the  occurrence  of  lung  cancer  among  a  group  of  former  workers.
"You  will  have  to  find  a  good  excuse  so  as  not  to  worry  the  person  you  are
contacting,"  Hempelmann  wrote  to  DBM  chief  Charles  Dunham.  "This  isn't  very
clever  but,  perhaps,  you  could  say  in  some  convincing  way  that  you,  or  rather  the
person  conducting  the  study,  represents  a  life  insurance  company  studying  the
health  of  people  employed  by  the  Harshaw  Company  during  a  certain  period."78
Dr.  Hempelmann  apologized  for  his  lack  of  imagination:

I  don't  know  whether  these  ideas  are  helpful  at  all.
It  is  more  difficult  to  find  an  excuse  for  these
individual  workers  than  it  is  in  the  case  of  patients
who  were  treated  for  something  or  other  at  a
hospital.  I  think  that  someone  with  imagination

634


Chapter  13


might  come  up  with  a  better  idea  than  I  have  had  to
date.79


This  last  comment  implies  that  it  was  not  only  workers,  but  also  patients,
who  were  deceived  about  their  participation  in  research,  and  more  easily  at  that.
The  statement  is  particulary  striking  when  it  is  recalled  that  Dr.  Hempelmann
was,  as  an  adviser  to  Robert  Oppenheimer,  a  proponent  of  the  plutonium  injection
experiments,  and,  following  the  war,  became  professor  of  experimental  radiology
at  the  University  of  Rochester,  a  major  AEC  biomedical  contractor.  Thus,  if  the
statement  is  a  reflection  of  the  readiness  to  deceive  patients,  it  is  one  mady  by  a
doctor  at  the  center  of  the  AEC  biomedical  community  and,  indeed,  was  made
directly  to  the  head  of  the  AEC's  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine.

Dunham's  assistant  evidently  agreed  that  workers  should  be  deceived,  but
"we  have  racked  our  brains  for  any  useful  subterfuge  in  carrying  out  the  study  but
none  came  to  mind  which  could  possibly  hold  water  for  any  length  of  time."80
The  AEC  opted  for  subtle  deception:

The  attack  with  which  we  are  going  to  start  the
study  will  be  to  inform  the  old  Harshaw  employees
that  our  interest  in  them  is  only  part  of  an  over-all
program  to  make  sure  that  the  safety  controls  in  the
atomic  energy  business  are  absolutely  perfect.  To
be  sure,  such  an  approach  might  cause  some  alarm
but  this  should  not  be  too  great,  I  hope,  because  it  is
essentially  a  negative  one;  namely,  the  Commission
is  sure  that  there  will  be  no  injury  to  its  workers  but
it  needs  to  document  this  fact  for  the  record.81

The  AEC  official  agreed  that  "routine  physical  examination  would  be
relatively  fruitless  since  the  ultimate  objective  is  to  determine  the  incidence  of
lung  cancer,  which  can  be  obtained  best  with  a  post-mortem  examination.  On  the
other  hand,"  the  official  noted,  "the  attitude  of  the  Western  Reserve  group  [with
whom  the  AEC  was  proposing  to  contract  for  the  study]  is  that  physicial
examinations  are  a  useful  means  for  maintaining  close  contact  with  people  and
will  improve  the  chances  of  getting  post-mortem  information."82

In  sum,  after  the  Manhattan  Project  the  governing  presumption,  to  which
the  Advisory  Committee  found  little  exception,  has  been  that  biomedical  human
radiation  experiments  should  not  be  classified.  But  the  presumption  included
important  qualifications,  some  of  which  were  hidden  at  the  time,  and  others  of
which  may  be  beyond  our  ability  to  retrieve  and  reconstruct.  These  qualifications
are  shortcomings  and  legitimate  cause  for  public  concern,  especially  when  held
up  to  the  ideals  publically  espoused  by  the  AEC's  initial  leaders.


635


Part  II

Human  Data  Gathering  Connected  with  Bomb  Tests  and  Intentional
Releases:  National  Security,  Secrecy,  and  Public  Opinion

The  view  that  a  line  needed  to  be  drawn  to  ensure  that  human  radiation
experiments  were  not  too  closely  associated  with  secret  keeping  was  not  easily
translated  to  settings  where  entire  groups  of  people  were  placed  at  risk  by
environmental  releases  of  radiation.  In  March  1951,  as  we  have  just  noted,
Shields  Warren  advised  Los  Alamos  to  avoid  secrecy  in  human  experimentation.
Warren  and  other  AEC  officials  also  told  the  military  of  their  concern  for  public
repercussions  if  human  experiments  were  conducted  in  close  proximity  to
government  secret  keeping.  At  the  same  time,  however,  Warren  and  other  AEC
biomedical  experts  were  called  on  to  advise  on  nuclear  weapons  activities  that
might  place  entire  populations  at  risk.  Here,  the  question  of  public  disclosure  was
more  difficult  to  resolve.  In  May  1951  for  example,  as  discussed  in  the
Introduction,  Warren  chaired  a  secret  meeting  in  Los  Alamos  to  consider  the
safety  concerns  of  the  first  underground  test  of  a  nuclear  weapon.  The  record  of
the  meeting  shows  that  Warren  and  other  experts  worried  that  fallout  from  the
tests  could  endanger  citizens  around  the  Nevada  Test  Site.  The  public  was  not
given  access  to  the  discussion  of  testing  that  the  participants  were  concerned
might  endanger  surrounding  communities.83  Press  information  stressed  the
absence  of  public  danger.84

As  we  saw  in  the  discussion  of  intentional  releases  (chapter  11),  little  or
no  information  was  contemporaneously  made  public  about  the  radiological
warfare  tests  at  Dugway,  the  RaLa  tests  at  Los  Alamos,  or  the  Green  Run  at
Hanford.  National  security  required  some  degree  of  secrecy;  but  whether  more
could  or  should  have  been  disclosed  is  unclear  in  retrospect.  In  the  case  of  at
least  the  Dugway  tests,  secrecy  was  fueled  by  concern  that  the  public  might  not
understand  the  tests  and  might  question  the  program.

Atmospheric  nuclear  weapons  tests  were,  in  contrast  to  the  intentional
releases  and  underground  nuclear  weapons  tests,  much  more  difficult  to  keep
secret.  In  chapter  10  we  saw  that  activities  could  simultaneously  have  elements
of  deep  secrecy  and  appear  as  front-page  news.  A  then-secret  report  on  the
Desert  Rock  exercises  observed,  "It  was  a  constant  source  of  amusement  at  the
camp  that  the  newspapers  carried  accounts  of  the  atomic  tests  which  included
information,  usually  accurate,  which  the  men  had  been  expressly  forbidden  to
reveal."85  At  the  same  time  that  the  bomb  tests  were  highly  publicized,  basic
information  on  the  risks  to  participants  was  not  public.  "Secrecy,"  summarized
Barton  Hacker,  author  of  a  DOE-sponsored  history  of  the  bomb  test  program,  "so
shrouded  the  test  program  . .  .  that  such  matters  as  worker  safety  could  not  then
emerge  as  subjects  of  public  debate."86

Once  bomb  tests  became  routine,  fallout  presented  a  further  opportunity
and  obligation  for  the  government  to  sponsor  data  gathering,  including  human
subject  data  gathering.  It  did  so  on  a  global  scale.  As  discussed  in  chapter  12,  the

636


Chapter  13

research  on  the  Marshall  Islanders  to  measure  fallout  effects  began  in  secret.
"Due  to  possible  adverse  public  reaction,  "the  director  of  the  research  project  was
counseled,  those  involved  should  limit  discussions  of  the  research  to  those  with  a
"need  to  know."87  The  Marshall  Islands  research  was  only  one  component  of  a
worldwide  data-gathering  program  that  was  constructed  and  operated  in
substantial  secrecy  until  the  latter  part  of  the  1950s.  The  Advisory  Committee
was  not  created  to  study  atomic  bomb  testing  or  the  related  debate  about  the
effects  of  fallout.  However,  the  human  subject  research  related  to  bomb-test
fallout  also  presents  questions  about  openness  and  secrecy  in  human  research  and
the  ethics  of  human  data  gathering.

The  Fallout  Data  Network:  Projects  Gabriel  and  Sunshine

The  study  of  fallout  began  with  the  effects  of  the  first  atomic  bomb  test  in
New  Mexico  in  1945.88  In  1949  the  AEC  commissioned  Project  Gabriel,  a  study
to  determine  how  many  atomic  weapons  could  be  detonated  before  radioactive
contamination  of  air,  water,  and  soil  would  have  a  long-range  effect  upon  crops,
animals,  and  humans.89  The  AEC  soon  created  a  worldwide  network  for  the
collection  and  measurement  of  fallout  (typically  by  permitting  it  to  fall  on  a
horizontal  gummed  paper  or  plastic  sheet).90  By  1954  Gabriel  included  about
seventy  investigations  supported  by  the  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,
involving  325  person  years  of  labor  per  year  and  costing  $3,325  million

annually.91

In  the  early  1950s  the  Defense  Department  created  its  own  fallout  research
program,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project.  The
Public  Health  Service  joined  with  the  AEC  and  the  DOD  in  monitoring  fallout
around  the  Nevada  Test  Site.92

In  1953,  under  contract  to  the  AEC  and  the  Air  Force,  the  Rand
Corporation  convened  a  review  of  Gabriel.93  The  study  was  directed  by  Dr.
Willard  Libby,  a  University  of  Chicago  radiochemist  who  would  receive  the
Nobel  Prize  in  1960  for  the  development  of  the  radioactive  carbon  dating  method.
The  resulting  report  concluded  that  strontium  90  (Sr-90)  was  the  most  dangerous
long-term,  global  radioactive  product  of  bomb  testing  and  that  a  global  study  of
strontium  90  fallout  was  needed.94

The  report  noted  how  atmospheric  testing  had,  as  an  unintended  side
effect,  introduced  tracers  into  the  world's  ecosystem:  "Until  comparatively
recently  it  would  have  been  extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  obtain  a
measure  of  a  number  of  the  parameters.  Today  we  are  afforded  the  opportunity  of
doing  a  radioactive-tracer  chemistry  experiment  on  a  world-wide  scale." The
group  recommended  that  "studies  then  current  be  supplemented  by  a  world-wide
assay  of  the  distribution  of  strontium  90  from  the  nuclear  detonations  which  have
occurred.  This  assay  has  been  designated  Project  Sunshine."  The  name  for  the
project  would  be  variously  attributed  to  the  project's  gestation  in  Santa  Monica,

637


Part  II

California,  (where  Rand  was  headquartered)  and  to  the  determination  to  measure
the  presence  of  strontium  in  "sunshine  units."  Three  laboratories  were  engaged  to
analyze  samples  of  strontium  90:  one  at  Libby's  research  center  at  the  University
of  Chicago,  another  at  the  Lamont  Geological  Observatory  of  Columbia
University,  and  a  third  at  the  New  York  office  of  the  AEC.

The  long-term  goals  of  the  full-scale  study  would  be  to  (1)  determine  if  a
hazard  had  already  been  created  by  fallout;  (2)  determine  the  number  of  bombs
that  could  be  exploded  without  creating  a  hazard,  and  (3)  determine  the
mechanisms  by  which  radioactive  materials  might  become  concentrated.96

Secrecy  and  Deception  in  Fallout  Studies:  Project  Sunshine's  Collection  of
Human  Bones

Project  Sunshine  was  born  in  secrecy.97  The  decision  to  keep  the
existence  of  the  worldwide  assay  Secret  "limited  the  freedom  with  which  suitable
combinations  of  samples  might  be  obtained  from  foreign  countries."98  For  the
pilot  program,  the  report  suggested  that  twelve  human  samples  (bone  and  teeth)
be  drawn  from  each  of  six  regions  around  the  world.  In  addition,  samples  would
be  drawn  from  livestock,  foodstuffs,  water,  and  soil.99  The  discussion  of
collecting  individual  samples  was  limited  to  means  of  ensuring  uniformity  in
practice,  without  mention  of  the  ethical  relationship  between  investigators  and
human  subjects.  An  early  effort  concerned  the  collection  of  baby  bones.

In  an  October  1953  letter  to  Dr.  Libby,  Robert  A.  Dudley  of  the  DBM
explained  that  the  collection  process  would  proceed  "through  personal  contacts
with  foreign  doctors"  and  groups  like  the  Rockefeller  Foundation,  which  had
many  overseas  contacts.  Because  the  chief  of  the  DBM,  Dr.  John  Bugher,
advised  that  "security  specifications"  needed  to  be  maintained,  a  cover  story
would  be  employed.100

The  stated  purpose  of  the  collection  is  to  be  for  a
survey  of  the  natural  Ra  [Radium]  burden  of  human
bones  . . .  there  are  still  enough  uncertainties
regarding  threshold  dose  for  injury  ...  to  provide  a
plausible  explanation  for  further  surveys. ...  As  for
the  emphasis  on  infants,  we  can  say  that  such
samples  are  easy  to  obtain  here,  and  that  we  would
like  to  keep  our  foreign  collections  comparable.101

Dudley  explained  that  the  AEC  wanted  to  be  kept  "out  of  the  picture
where  possible,"  but  to  be  helpful  "I  would  still  be  prepared  to  do  all  the  work
except  for  providing  the  signature."102

One  week  later  Dudley  wrote  to  Shields  Warren  in  Boston.  Dudley,
noting  that  the  effort  was  proceeding  "pretty  much  on  the  lines  you  suggested,"

638


Chapter  13

sought  Warren's  assistance  in  contacting  another  Boston  doctor  who  might  not  be
in  on  the  full  story.  Dudley  offered  that  "while  the  real  purpose  will  of  course
remain  secret ...  we  do  expect  to  make  radium  analyses  on  at  least  some  of  the
samples,  so  our  story  is  merely  incomplete,  not  false."10

On  the  same  day,  Dudley  wrote  to  his  father,  the  director  of  a  missionary
organization,  also  in  Boston.  The  letter  explained  the  public  purpose  of  the  data
gathering  and  solicited  assistance.104  On  November  10,  evidently  from  a  referral
from  his  father,  the  AEC  official  wrote  to  the  Christian  Medical  Association  in
Nadya  Pradesh,  India,  also  soliciting  assistance.  Finally,  the  DBM  sought
assistance  from  civilian  organizations  that  already  had  well-developed  contacts  at
the  local  level  in  foreign  countries.105

What  was  the  "real  purpose"  that  had  to  be  kept  so  carefully  concealed,
even  from  those  who  were  actually  assisting  the  project?  On  December  9,  Dudley
sent  a  letter  to  a  doctor  at  the  AEC's  project  at  the  University  of  Rochester  that
explained  "for  you  alone"  the  AEC's  real  interest:

This  letter  will  explain  in  a  little  more  detail  than  I
was  able  to  do  over  the  phone  our  interest  in
obtaining  infant  skeletons  from  Japan.

The  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  is  engaged
in  a  project  to  evaluate  the  long  range  radiological
hazard  which  might  result  from  the  large  scale  use

of  atomic  weapons In  order  to  help  in  the

evaluation  of  the  hazard,  we  are  providing  for  the
direct  measurement  of  the  world-wide  Sr-90
distribution  which  has  resulted  from  the  40  or  50
nuclear  detonations  in  the  last  few  years.  One  type
of  sample  on  which  we  are  concentrating  is  the
bones  of  infants,  either  stillborn  or  up  to  a  year  or
two  of  age.  We  have  found  that  stillborn  bones  are
easy  to  obtain  in  the  United  States,  and  are  trying  to
extend  our  collection  to  foreign  countries.  It
appears  that  the  ABCC  [Atomic  Bomb  Casualty
Commission]  would  be  a  logical  contact  in  Japan.
We  could  use  perhaps  6  or  8  skeletons  from  that
area.

It  has  been  decided,  for  various  reasons  including
public  and  international  relations,  to  classify  this
project  SECRET  for  the  present.  Hence,  the
unclassified  description  of  our  purpose  in  obtaining
these  bones  is  for  Ra  analyses.

639


106


Part  II

The  July  1954  Gabriel  report  summarized  the  "human,  animal  and  animal
product  samples"  that  had  been  analyzed.107  The  list  included  stillborns  from
Chicago  (fifty-five),  Utah  (one),  Vellore,  southern  India  (three),  and  human  legs
from  Massachusetts  (three).108

Soon,  the  DOD  was  also  engaged  in  fallout  data  gathering.  In  the  fall  of
1954,  the  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project  established  a  "Fall-out  Study
Group"  following  a  request  for  information  from  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.'09  In
1 954  DOD  planned  a  secret  project  to  collect  human  urine  and  animal  milk  and
tissue  samples  following  the  1955  Operation  Teapot  tests  in  Nevada.  The  work
was  coordinated  by  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  for  Research,  with  review
from  researchers  at  the  Harvard  Medical  School  and  the  National  Institutes  of
Health.  The  purpose  of  the  effort  was  to  establish  a  baseline  for  forthcoming
Pacific  tests."0  The  military  data  gathering  also  involved  a  cover  story.  A
December  16,  1954,  memorandum  from  the  chief  of  the  Armed  Forces  Special
Weapons  Project  stated,  at  least  in  regard  to  the  animal  sampling:

The  actual  data  obtained  are  SECRET  and  the
sample  collection  should  be  discreetly  handled.  It
is  suggested  that  a  statement  be  included  in  the
instructions  to  the  effect  that  these  samples  are
being  collected  for  nutritional  studies.'"

In  January  1955  the  Gabriel-Sunshine  program  was  the  subject  of  a
classified  "Biophysics  Conference"  convened  by  the  Division  of  Biology  and
Medicine.  The  spring  1954  Marshall  Islands  disaster  had,  the  attendees  were  told,
added  new  urgency  to  their  task.  "I  keep  reading,"  noted  one  participant,  "the
articles  by  the  Alsops  and  others  [journalists]  of  the  high  level  groups  which  are
frantically  trying  to  find  the  answer  to  how  many  bombs  we  can  detonate  without
producing  a  race  of  monsters.""2

The  Secret  transcript  of  the  conference,  declassified  from  Restricted  Data
status  only  in  1995,  shows  that  the  AEC  and  its  researchers  assigned  a  high
priority  to  what  was  referred  to  as  "body  snatching."  No  AEC  program,  explained
Dr.  Libby,  who  had  become  an  AEC  commissioner,  was  more  important  than
Sunshine.  There  were  great  gaps  in  knowledge  and  human  samples  were  essential
to  fill  them.  "[HJuman  samples  are  of  prime  importance  and  if  anybody  knows
how  to  do  a  good  job  of  body  snatching,  they  will  really  be  serving  their
country.""3  In  the  1953  Rand  Sunshine  study,  Libby  recalled,  an  "expensive  law
firm"  was  hired  to  study  the  "law  of  body  snatching."  The  lawyers'  analysis
showed  "how  very  difficult  it  is  going  to  be  to  do  it  legally.""4

Nonetheless,  "excellent  sources"  were  available  from  several  places,
including  New  York,  Vancouver,  and  Houston.  In  Houston,  said  Columbia
University's  Laurence  Kulp,  "they  intend  to  get  virtually  every  death  in  the  age
range  we  are  interested  in  that  occurs  in  the  City  of  Houston.  They  have  a  lot  of

640


Chapter  13

poverty  cases  and  so  on.""5

Where  good  personal  relationships  with  medical  sources  existed,  Dr.  Kulp
offered,  "the  men  did  not  require  you  to  tell  them  anything  except  that  they
realized  it  was  something  confidential.  They  could  guess,  and  they  probably
didn't  guess  very  wrong,  but  they  were  willing  to  cooperate  just  on  the  basis  that
this  was  an  important  thing.""6  With  a  connection  "through  one  of  the  top
medical  people  who  is  internationally  known,  it  will  not  be  hard  at  all  to  be  able
to  establish  the  sites  that  we  should  establish."  The  DBM's  Dr.  Bugher  explained
that  the  AEC  was  exploring  the  possibility  of  a  special  clearance  ("L")  so  that
medical  professionals  who  did  not  want  to  "fill  out  any  forms"  could  be  briefed  on
a  limited  basis.  "You  are,"  he  stated,  "dealing  with  directors  of  hospitals  and
pathologists  and  persons  in  general  who  have  an  understanding  of  the  seriousness
of  the  project  in  which  we  are  engaged.""7

Libby  hoped  to  declassify  at  least  the  existence  of  the  Sunshine  program.
"Whether  this  is  going  to  help  in  the  body  snatching  problem,  I  don't  know,  I
think  it  will.  It  is,"  he  said,  "a  delicate  problem  of  public  relations,  obviously."1"*

The  efforts  bore  fruit.  A  report  on  Sunshine's  1955-1956  operations
recorded  that  during  that  period  hundreds  of  human  bone  samples  were  collected
by  dozens  of  stations  abroad  and  by  researchers  in  Boston,  Denver,  Houston,  and
New  York."9

In  addition  to  the  Sunshine-related  research,  the  AEC  sponsored  further
efforts  to  gather  human  tissue  in  order  to  study  the  effects  of  radiation  on
weapons  complex  workers,  as  well  as  fallout  on  citizens.  In  a  June  1995  report,
the  General  Accounting  Office  summarized  fifty-nine  studies,  most  of  which  were
conducted  and  terminated  in  the  1950s  and  1960s.  While  many,  probably  the
great  majority,  were  not  secret  programs,  the  GAO  found  that  typically  no
information  can  now  be  located  about  the  consent  practices  that  were  followed.
Today,  the  Department  of  Energy  sponsors  a  program  under  which  those  with
documented  exposures  to  certain  radioactive  elements  may  donate  their  tissues  for
research.  The  operations  of  the  transuranium  and  uranium  registries  are  subject  to
review  by  an  institutional  review  board,  and  donors  must  sign  a  consent  form.120

In  sum,  during  the  1950s  the  AEC  promoted  human  tissue  sampling  for
studies  on  fallout  and  other  research,  and  its  efforts  involved  secrecy  and
deception.  The  AEC  evidently  considered  the  legal  aspects  of  "body  snatching,"
but  there  is  no  evidence  that  it  sought  to  consider  any  independent  ethical
requirements  for  disclosure  to  the  families  of  the  subjects  (or  the  subjects
themselves,  where  alive)  whose  tissue  was  sampled.  While  further  rationale  for
keeping  the  data  gathering  secret  may  have  existed,  in  surviving  documents
concern  for  public  relations  emerges  as  the  dominant  motivation.  At  the  same
time,  the  AEC  recognized  that  secrecy  hampered  the  conduct  of  research  that  it
believed  central  to  the  public  interest.


641


Part  II

Secrecy,  Public  Opinion,  and  Credibility

On  reviewing  the  transcript  of  the  1955  Biophysics  Conference  in  1995,
Dr.  Merril  Eisenbud,  a  former  AEC  official  who  participated  in  the  session,
expressed  surprise  that  the  document  had  been  classified  in  the  first  place.121
There  was,  he  observed,  nothing  that  merited  national  security  classification;  if
anything,  perhaps  it  merited  the  category  of  Official  Use  Only,  which  instructs
officials  not  to  publicize  the  document  but  is  not  a  category  in  the  formal
classification  system.122  As  in  the  case  of  the  AEC's  1947-1948  decision  to  keep
experimental  data  secret,  however,  information  on  fallout  data  gathering  appears
to  have  been  classified  out  of  concern  that  public  opinion  (in  the  United  States,
but  also  elsewhere)  might  imperil  U.S.  weapons  development  programs.

In  November  1954  AEC  officials  met  for  lunch  with  Secretary  of  Defense
Charles  Wilson,  the  signator  of  the  1953  memorandum  discussed  in  chapter  1,  to
discuss  civilian  evacuation  in  case  of  atomic  warfare  and  the  related  question  of
what  the  public  should  be  told  about  fallout.  "Secretary  Wilson,"  an  AEC  record
of  the  meeting  summarizes,

stressed  the  importance  of  not  arousing  public
anxiety  in  this  country  or  abroad  by  public  official
discussions  of  the  dangers  of  atomic  warfare,
particularly  with  reference  to  fall-out.  He  expressed
the  view  that  much  too  much  had  already  been  said
publicly  about  fallout,  and  he  urged  that  before  the
Government  reveals  the  full  extent  of  the  dangers  to
be  expected  the  Government  work  out  the  answers
to  a  lot  of  questions  as  to  what  our  citizens  could  do
in  the  event  of  an  atomic  blitz.123

"Obviously,"  records  a  history  of  the  AEC  by  AEC  and  DOE  historians,
"estimates  of  the  biological  effects  of  fallout  on  large  human  populations  were
more  likely  to  arouse  fear  and  controversy  than  were  small-scale  experiments  on
laboratory  animals.  Thus,  it  was  not  surprising  that  initial  studies  of  large-scale
effects  were  highly  classified  and  unknown  to  the  public."124

Within  a  very  short  period,  however,  much  of  the  secret  research  was
disclosed,  but  under  circumstances  where,  as  the  AEC  itself  came  to  recognize,  its
credibility  as  an  information  source  was  seriously  impaired.

The  Marshall  Islands  disaster,  and  the  attendant  controversy  related  to  the
irradiation  of  the  crew  of  a  Japanese  fishing  boat  in  the  area,  marked  the
beginning  of  a  worldwide  debate  on  fallout  that  would  end  with  a  ban  on
atmospheric  testing.125  Following  this  event,  ban-the-bomb  protests  began  in
Britain.126  Two  years  later,  in  1956,  presidential  candidate  Adlai  Stevenson  called
for  an  end  to  nuclear  testing.  Soon  thereafter,  the  closely  held  fallout  research

642


Chapter  13

began  to  become  public.  In  October,  Libby,  addressing  the  American  Association
for  the  Advancement  of  Science  at  the  dedication  of  its  new  headquarters  in
Washington,  reported  that  the  amounts  of  strontium  90  entering  the  bodies  of
children  were  well  below  the  maximum  permissible  concentration.127  In  February
1957  Dr.  Kulp  and  his  associates  presented  the  results  of  their  study  of  1,500
human  bones  from  around  the  world.  The  report  made  the  front  page  of  the  New
York  Times.m  In  June,  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  issued  a  report  noting
that  strontium  90  and  genetic  effects  were  two  potentially  long-term  hazards  from
nuclear  testing.

The  public  fallout  debate  was  on,  pitting  scientists  against  one  another.
"Test  ban  advocates,"  a  historian  of  the  fallout  controversy  recounted,  "always
stressed  the  great  potential  hazard  from  fallout  over  a  long  period  of  time;  their
opponents  minimized  the  danger  by  pointing  to  similar  or  greater  risks  that  people
routinely  accepted,  such  as  luminous  wristwatches  and  medical  X-rays."129

In  May  and  June  1957,  Congress's  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy
held  its  first  public  hearings  on  the  dangers  of  fallout.  The  initial  1953  Sunshine
report,  "Worldwide  Effects  of  Atomic  Weapons-Project  Sunshine,"  was
apparently  declassifed  on  May  25,  two  days  before  the  hearings  began.130  Most  of
the  debate  focused  on  the  dangers  of  strontium  90.  In  June,  Commissioner  Libby
responded  to  a  proposal  from  an  NIH  official  for  the  use  of  children's  milk  teeth
to  measure  strontium  90.  The  idea  was  good,  but  he  advised  (in  the  immediate
aftermath  of  the  first  highly  publicized  hearings  on  fallout),  "I  would  not
encourage  publicity  in  connection  with  the  program.  We  have  found  that  in
collecting  human  samples  publicity  is  not  particularly  helpful."131

In  October  1958,  a  moratorium  on  nuclear  testing  began,  and  in  May  1959
the  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  held  a  second  series  of  hearings  on
fallout.  The  hearings  concluded  that  the  risk  was  worth  the  returns  to  national
security;  but  the  public  debate  continued.132

As  AEC  documents  on  the  fallout  debate  have  become  available  in  the
intervening  years,  it  has  become  clear  that  the  government's  effort  to  manage
public  opinion  was  rooted  in  a  sensitivity  to  its  importance.  For  example,  in
1953,  following  the  spring  Nevada  test  series,  ranchers  in  Utah  began  to  report
the  deaths  of  their  sheep  from  what,  it  appeared,  might  be  radiation  burns  from
the  tests.133  The  AEC  convened  a  panel  to  consider  the  continuation  of  testing  at
the  Nevada  Test  Site.  The  panel  concluded  that  continued  testing  was  justified  by
the  national  interest,  although  risks  were  inevitable.134  The  tests  to  date  were
relatively  safe,  but  there  were  serious  problems  with  "public  reaction."135  The
panel  found  that  "a  sufficient  degree  of . . .  public  acceptance  has  not  been
achieved."136  Radiation  remained  a  "mysterious  threat."137  But  the  government
had  surrounded  the  program  with  an  aura  of  secrecy,  its  own  statements  were  not
clear,  and  statements  by  former  AEC  experts  or  officials  had  caused  "near-panic
concern."138  The  public,  "which  is  expected  to  accept  a  certain  degree  of  hazard,
has  not  been  adequately  informed  of  the  extent  and  nature  of  the  hazard."139  An

643


Part  II

extensive  program  of  public  education  was  called  for.140

The  AEC  study  found  the  problem  was  not  only  with  the  public;  there  was
a  "lack  of  agreement  and  acceptance,  first,  within  AEC  and  test  management,  and
second,  among  health,  medical,  and  other  scientific  individuals  and  groups."  The
problem  was  exacerbated  by  "lack  of  knowledge  of  this  new  subject,  by  lack  of
definition,  by  the  extreme  sensitivity  of  the  subject,  and  by  the  resulting
nervousness  of  the  various  levels  of  management."14'  As  shown  by  the  secrecy
surrounding  the  ongoing  Project  Sunshine,  however,  the  public  was  not  let  in  on
the  uncertainty  of  knowledge  or  on  the  steps  being  taken  to  answer  questions  of
admitted  import  to  all  citizens.

AEC  insiders  recognized  that  credibility  was  a  problem.  In  a  December
1954  letter  to  DBM's  director,  Charles  Dunham,  Los  Alamos  Health  Division
Leader  Thomas  Shipman  touted  the  importance  of  Sunshine  and  suggested  a
possible  role  for  Los  Alamos.  At  the  same  time  he  lamented  the  lack  of
credibility  possessed  by  those  too  closely  associated  with  the  AEC:

There  is  also  the  fact  that  Los  Alamos  may  be
regarded  as  a  rather  biased  institution.  Some  people
may  feel  that  we  are  interested  parties.  I  certainly
am  only  too  well  aware  of  a  resistance,  particularly
in  the  Press,  to  accept  pronouncements  and
conclusions  coming  out  of  the  AEC  itself.
Strangely  enough,  they  were  quite  willing  to  accept
the  conclusions  of  the  National  Academy  of
Sciences,  completely  forgetting  that  the
subcommittees  were  in  very  large  measure
composed  of  AEC  or  AEC  contractor
representatives.  They  were  the  same  guys  wearing
different  hats.142

In  the  late  1950s  the  AEC  itself  came  to  question  whether  its  data-
gathering  efforts  were  serving  the  purposes  of  scientific  knowledge  and  public
understanding,  as  had  been  hoped.  Sunshine,  internal  memos  recorded,  lacked
coordination  and  clear  goals,  and  the  confusion  of  roles  cost  credibility.  "[T]he
primary  reason,"  wrote  Hal  Hollister,  an  AEC  fallout  expert,  "the  AEC  is  now  in
the  soup  with  respect  to  Congress,  the  public,  and  the  fallout  problem  is  that  all
three  of  these  relationships  with  the  public  (reporting  data  scientifically,  getting  it
across  to  the  public,  and  telling  official  interpretations  of  it)  have  been
inextricably  mixed  up.  This  has  continued  to  be  true  after  the  hearings,  and  the
future  promises  more  of  the  same."143

In  1959  President  Dwight  Eisenhower  acted  to  take  responsibility  for
radiation  safety  away  from  the  AEC,  placing  it  in  the  hands  of  a  new  Federal
Radiation  Council,  chaired  by  the  secretary  of  the  Department  of  Health,

644


Chapter  13

Education,  and  Welfare.

By  the  mid-1960s  the  possibility  that  data  gathering  could  only  get  the
AEC  into  more  trouble  became  an  incentive  to  "not  study  at  all."  In  1965  Dwight
Ink,  general  manager  of  the  AEC,  advised  against  conducting  proposed  studies  on
the  detrimental  effects  of  nuclear  testing  partly  because  of  liability  concerns:
"[Performance  of  the  above  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  studies  will  pose
potential  problems  to  the  Commission.  The  problems  are:  (a)  adverse  public
reaction;  (b)  law  suits;  and  (c)  jeopardizing  the  programs  at  the  Nevada  Test
Site."144

In  his  DOE-sponsored  history  of  the  AEC  and  nuclear  testing  safety,
Barton  Hacker,  laboratory  historian  at  DOE's  Lawrence  Livermore  Laboratory,
concludes  that  while  AEC  officials  did  not  doubt  that  testing  could  be  done  safely
if  precautions  were  taken,  there  was  divergence  about  what  to  tell  the  public,  and
reassurance  won  out  over  information:

[T]he  people  in  the  field,  those  involved  in  the  test
program  directly,  tended  to  favor  telling  the  public
just  what  the  risk  was  and  stressing  that  whatever
risk  testing  might  impose  was  far  outweighed  by  the
national  importance  of  the  test  program.  Openness,
they  argued,  would  retain  public  trust  and  ensure
continued  testing.145


However:


AEC  officials  in  general,  headquarters  staff
members  in  particular,  mostly  preferred  to  reassure
rather  than  inform.  Convinced  that  trying  to  explain
risks  so  small  would  simply  confuse  people  and
might  cause  panic,  they  feared  jeapordizing  the
testing  vital  to  American  security.  Their  policy
prevailed.  A  formal  public  relations  plan  became  as
much  a  part  of  every  test  as  the  technical  operations
plan.  Carefully  crafted  press  releases  never  to  my
knowledge  lied,  though  they  sometimes  erred.  Yet,
by  the  same  token,  they  rarely  if  ever  revealed  all.
Choices  about  which  truths  to  tell,  which  to  omit,
could  routinely  veil  the  larger  implications  of  a
situation 146

"Reluctance  to  acknowledge  any  risk,  the  policy  that  mainly  prevailed  in
the  1950s,"  Hacker  concluded,  "undercut  the  AEC's  credibility  when  the  public
learned  from  other  sources  that  fallout  might  be  hazardous."147

645


Part  II

THE  RECORDS  OF  OUR  PAST

The  story  that  we  have  told  in  this  report  could  not  have  been  told  if  the
government  did  not  keep  records  that  could  be  retrieved.  By  the  same  token,  the
story  is  often  disturbingly  fragmentary;  seemingly  contradictory  statements  of
principle  or  policy  abound,  and  the  trail  from  policy  to  practice  is  often  hard  to
discern.  The  story  is  complex,  but  it  is  also  hard  to  reconstruct  because,
notwithstanding  considerable  search  efforts  of  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency
Working  Group,  many  documents  appear  to  have  been  long  since  lost  or
destroyed.  In  each  case,  we  emphasize,  any  loss  or  destruction  took  place
prior-most  often  many  years  prior-to  the  Advisory  Committee's  creation.
Federal  records  management  law  provides  for  the  routine  destruction  of  older
records,  and  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  it  should  be  assumed  that  loss  or
destruction  was  a  function  of  normal  record-keeping  practices.  At  the  same  time,
however,  the  records  that  recorded  the  destruction  of  documents,  including  secret
documents,  have  themselves  often  been  lost  or  destroyed.  Thus,  the
circumstances  of  destruction  (and  indeed,  whether  documents  were  destroyed  or
simply  lost)  is  often  hard  to  ascertain.

As  Shields  Warren  and  Alan  Gregg  suggested,  where  human  research  is
connected  to  secret  programs,  the  public  has  a  special  interest  in  the  adequacy  of
record  keeping  needed  to  ensure  the  integrity  of  experimental  activity.
Regardless  of  whether  documents  that  cannot  now  be  retrieved  contained  further
secrets,  they  would  have  provided  more  confidence  in  our  understanding  of  the
rules  and  practices  that  governed  the  boundary  between  openness  and  secrecy.  In
too  many  cases,  however,  documents  are  no  longer  available.148  A  number  of
such  examples  follow.149

The  CIA,  virtually  all  of  whose  records  are  classified,  reported  that  it  was
unable  to  retrieve  any  records  of  its  participation  in  the  midcentury  DOD  panels
that  met  in  secret  to  discuss,  among  other  things,  human  experiments.  In  addition,
the  CIA's  classified  records  of  its  secret  MKULTRA  human  experimentation
program  were,  as  reported  when  the  program  became  a  public  scandal  in  the
1970s,  substantially  destroyed  at  the  direction  of  then-Director  of  Central
Intelligence  Richard  Helms  in  1973.  In  1995  the  CIA  concluded,  following  a
search  for  remaining  records  and  interviews  of  those  involved,  that  it  did  not
likely  conduct  or  sponsor  human  radiation  experiments  as  part  of  MKULTRA.
The  Advisory  Committee,  which  was  necessarily  limited  in  its  abilities  to  directly
review  CIA  files,  did  not  find  evidence  to  the  contrary.  As  a  CIA  report  on  its
own  inquiry  (which  was  declassified  at  the  Advisory  Committee's  request)
concluded,  the  circumstances  of  the  CIA's  MKULTRA  record  keeping  will  likely
leave  questions  in  the  public's  mind.150

The  DOD  provided  many  documents  that  shed  light  on  the  rules  of
secrecy.  However,  some  important  collections  are  incomplete,  and  other
important  collections  (such  as  the  records  of  the  Naval  Radiological  Defense

646


Chapter  13

Laboratory,  the  Medical  Division  of  the  Defense  Nuclear  Agency,  classified
records  of  the  Navy  Bureau  of  Medicine  relating  to  Operations  Crossroads
physical  exams,  and  entire  sections  of  records  of  the  Army  surgeon  general)
appear  to  have  been  substantially  lost  or  destroyed.

The  DOE  could  locate  only  fragments  of  the  records  of  the  Insurance  and
Declassification  Branches,  which  reviewed  human  subject  research  for
declassification.  The  entirety  of  the  files  of  the  AEC  Intelligence  Division,  which
likely  contained  information  on  intentional  releases,  research  performed  by  the
AEC  for  other  agencies,  and  secrecy  policy  and  practices,  was  subject  to  "purge"
in  the  1970s,  and  as  late  as  1989.15'  Many  other  significant  collections  were
retrieved.  However,  there  were  often  gaps,  including,  for  example,  multiyear
gaps  in  the  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  fallout  collection,  gaps  in  the
transcripts  from  the  meetings  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Biology  and
Medicine,  and  limited  collections  related  to  the  work  of  the  Isotope  Distribution
Division's  Human  Use  Subcommittee.

The  DHHS  was  able  to  locate  sufficient  information  to  confirm  that  it
conducted  classified  research  on  behalf  of  the  military  mission,  but  could  not
locate  information  needed  to  determine  the  nature  and  extent  of  this  research.15'
The  classified  information  it  once  maintained  has  been  substantially  destroyed  (or

lost).

The  VA,  similarly,  was  able  to  provide  fragments  of  information  that
show  that  "confidential"  files  were  kept  in  anticipation  of  potential  radiation
liability  claims.  However,  neither  the  VA,  nor  the  DOE  and  DOD  (who  evidently
were  parties  to  this  secret  record  keeping),  have  been  able  to  determine  exactly
what  secret  records  were  kept  and  what  rules  governed  their  collection  and
availability.153  VA  publications  did  contain  lists  of  several  thousand
(nonclassified)  human  experiments  conducted  at  VA  facilities;  however,  the
information  was  quite  fragmentary,  and  further  information  could  not  be  readily
retrieved  (if  it  still  exists)  on  the  vast  majority  of  these  experiments.

Thus,  in  looking  for  answers  to  questions  about  the  secrecy  of  data  on
human  experiments  and  intentional  releases,  we  find  record-keeping  practices  that
leave  questions  about  both  what  secrets  were  kept  and  what  rules  governed  the
keeping  of  secrets.

CONCLUSION

Openness-the  public  sharing  of  all  information  necessary  to  govern-has
long  been  an  ideal  in  American  democracy  and  politics.  Scientists,  also,  have
traditionally  embraced  openness  as  the  surest  guarantee  of  continued  progress.
However,  the  ideal  of  openness  has  often  competed  of  necessity  with  some
measure  of  government-imposed  secrecy.  This  has  been  particularly  the  case  in  a
time  of  national  emergency,  such  as  war.  But  secrecy  existed  even  at  the  roots  of
our  democracy:  the  Constitutional  Convention  itself  was  conducted  out  of  the

647


Part  II

public  eye.

In  the  early  part  of  this  century,  President  Woodrow  Wilson  called  for
"open  covenants  openly  arrived  at,"seeking  to  shed  light  upon  an  area-
international  diplomacy-traditionally  shrouded  in  secrecy.  In  the  half  century
since  the  end  of  World  War  II,  with  the  growing  importance  of  science  and
technology  in  our  lives,  the  proper  place  of  secrecy  at  the  intersection  of
government,  private  enterprise,  and  research  has  emerged  as  a  question  of  central
and  continuing  importance  to  society.

We  have  focused  upon  only  one  of  many  Cold  War  settings  where
secrecy  was  often  a  routine  consideration.  But  human  radiation  experiments  and
intentional  releases  of  radiation  were  often  closely  related  to,  if  not  directly  a  part
of,  some  of  the  most  closely  held  of  secrets;  including,  most  notably,  nuclear
weapons  design  and  testing.  The  episodes  we  reviewed  reveal  the  tensions
underlying  the  necessarily  delicate  balance  between  openness  and  secrecy.

We  found  that  from  the  onset,  leading  government  biomedical  officials
and  advisers  were  aware  of  the  costs  of  secrecy  and  proclaimed  the  need  to  limit
its  reach.  In  one  important  respect,  these  officials  and  researchers  lived  up  to
their  publicly  stated  ideals.  Since  about  midcentury,  there  have  been  very  few
instances  in  which  the  very  existence  of  human  subject  radiation  research  has
been  officially  classified.  Nonetheless,  we  also  found  that  practices  often  fell
short  of  the  ideals  that  were  publicly  expressed.

We  found  that  decision  making  related  to  the  secrecy  of  human  subject
research  considered  not  only  national  security,  but  also  other  criteria.  At  its  birth
in  1947,  the  AEC  determined  to  keep  Manhattan  Project  experiments  secret  on  the
basis  of  concern  for  "adverse  effects  on  public  opinion"  and  possible  "legal  suits,"
even  where  national  security  itself  was  not  expressly  invoked.  More  generally,
we  also  found  that  decisions  to  keep  information  secret  were  often  accompanied
by  a  concern  that  the  public  might  not  understand  the  information  and  thus
overreact  or  that  the  public  would  understand  the  information  but  that  its
immediate  reaction  could  undermine  support  for  programs  deemed  essential  by
policymakers.

Significantly,  we  found  that  AEC  and  DOD  discussions  of  Cold  War
human  research  policy  were  themselves  conducted  outside  the  realm  of  public
debate.  For  example,  the  1947  AEC  declarations  of  requirements  for  human
research  involving  patients  were  evidently  given  minimal  distribution  within  the
AEC  research  community  itself.  Recently  retrieved  documents  now  show  that  in
1947  the  requirement  of  "informed  consent"  was  itself  invoked  in  secret  by  the
AEC's  Medical  Board  of  Review,  in  response  to  the  request  for  criteria  that  had  to
be  met  when  secret  experiments  could  be  declassified,  and  evidently  thereafter
relied  on  to  keep  some  experiments  secret.  Similarly,  the  discussions  underlying
the  1953  memorandum  by  Secretary  of  Defense  Charles  Wilson,  concerning
human  experiments  done  under  DOD  auspices,  were  themselves  secret,  as,  of
course,  was  the  Wilson  memorandum  itself.

648


Chapter  13

Even  if  there  is  clear  and  public  consensus  on  what  constitutes  "national
security,"  its  application  to  the  classification  of  particular  information  may  be  a
matter  of  disagreement.  In  addition,  in  some  cases  the  boundary  between
protecting  the  nation's  security  and  simply  avoiding  the  potential  of  adverse
public  reaction  may  not  be  so  clear.  For  example,  in  an  intense  national  crisis,  the
release  of  information  that  might  jeopardize  successful  resolution  of  the  crisis
should  properly  be  proscribed.  But  it  is  also  clear  that  the  assertion  that  programs
will  be  jeopardized  because  of  embarrassment  or  potential  legal  liability  (or,
worse,  because  of  a  lack  of  confidence  in  the  American  public's  ability  to
understand)  can  be  used  to  limit  disclosure  of  precisely  those  matters  that  most
affect  us  all  and  that  would  most  benefit  from  informed  public  discussion.

If  the  boundary  between  openness  and  secrecy  is  inherently  ambiguous,
the  public  trust  in  those  who  define  it  on  a  daily  basis  requires  a  clear  explanation
of  the  principles  that  they  will  follow.  However,  we  found  that  some  of  the  basic
principles  and  rules  by  which  this  boundary  was  defined  were  themselves  kept
secret  from  the  public.  AEC  officials,  in  consultation  with  biomedical  advisers
internally  invoked  public  relations  and  legal  liability  as  bases  for  keeping  secrets,
while  publicly  declaring  that  secrecy  should  be  limited  to  national  security
requirements.  As  a  corollary,  we  found  that  where  formal  criteria  for
classification  were  not  established,  secrecy  was  nonetheless  achieved  by  other,
informal  means.  Thus,  at  midcentury,  participants  in  discussions  of  defense-
related  biomedical  research  were  told  that  while  the  information  in  question  was
not  itself  classified,  it  should  nonetheless  be  kept  from  the  press  and  public.

Since  1951,  presidential  executive  orders  have  limited  the  use  of
classification  stamps  to  matters  of  national  security.  Nonetheless,  the  keeping  of
secrets  with  reference  to  ill-defined  reasons  such  as  public  relations,  continued.
Indeed,  as  recently  as  the  early  1 970s,  adverse  public  relations  was  reportedly
invoked  as  a  reason  for  keeping  secret  details  of  the  plutonium  injections  of  the
1940s.  In  some  cases,  as  we  look  back,  the  public  relations  rationale  for  secrecy
appears  to  be  more  clearly  documented  than  any  national  security  rationale.  For
example,  we  found  that  in  the  early  1950s  public  relations  was  an  express
consideration  in  keeping  secrets  related  to  fallout-related  human  tissue  sampling;
but  we  found  it  more  difficult  to  locate  contemporaneous  documentation  of
national  security  rationales,  and  in  1995,  surviving  participants  found  it  hard  to
reconstruct  one  as  well.

We  also  found  instances  where  the  keeping  of  secrets  was  accompanied  by
deception.  The  shades  of  deception  ranged  from  outright  denials  by  the  AEC  that
it  engaged  in  human  experimentation,  to  the  use  of  cover  stories  in  the  collection
of  human  tissue,  to  incomplete  information  deliberately  given  participants  in
government-sponsored  biomedical  research.  In  some  such  cases,  such  as  the  use
of  a  cover  story  in  collecting  the  bones  of  stillborn  infants,  those  involved
rationalized  that  since  partial  truths  were  being  told,  active  deceit  was  not
involved.  In  others,  a  rationalization  for  deception  was  a  desire  not  to  alarm

649


Part  II

exposed  workers  or  the  public.  In  yet  others,  such  as  the  AEC's  denial  that  it
sponsored  human  experiments  (when  its  Isotopes  Division  publicly  advertised  the
success  of  human  subject  research)  the  rationale  is  hard  to  discern  in  retrospect.

In  many  cases,  of  course,  some  degree  of  secrecy  was  merited.154  We
found  that  where  secrecy  was  initially  justified  by  reasons  relating  to  national
security,  the  classifying  authority  often  gave  too  little  attention  to  the  likelihood
that  there  would  come  a  time  when  such  information  was  no  longer  sensitive.
Immediately  prior  to  the  AEC's  creation,  the  Tolman  Committee  pointed  out  that
in  the  long  run  (which  that  Committee  identified  in  terms  of  years,  not  decades)
the  nation's  interest  lies  in  the  disclosure  of  information  that  needs  to  be  kept
secret  over  the  shorter  term.  Yet,  the  practical  reality  was  that  once  information
was  "born  secret"  it  often  simply  remained  that  way.

Similarly,  we  found  that  where  a  national  security  rationale  for  secrecy  did
exist,  adequate  attention  was  often  not  paid  to  ensuring  that  sufficient  records
would  be  created  and  maintained  so  that  all  affected  individuals  (and  the  public  at
large)  could  later  know  the  possible  health  and  safety  consequences.  As  a  result,
"downwinders,"  as  well  as  knowing  participants  in  nuclear  tests,  today  wonder
whether  the  information  given  them  represents  the  full  story  of  these  events.
(Indeed,  as  we  reported  in  chapter  1 1 ,  the  number  of  once-secret  intentional
releases  that  are  publicly  known  burgeoned  from  the  thirteen  reported  by  the
General  Accounting  Office  in  late  1 993  to  the  far  greater  number  reported  by  the
DOD  and  DOE  following  their  more  recent  search.)  When,  as  we  reported  in
chapter  10,  there  is  evidence  that  government  officials  contemplated,  and  may
have  kept,  secret  records  to  evaluate  potential  claims  from  service  personnel
exposed  to  government-sponsored  radiation  risk,  the  public  has  a  right  to  expect
that  the  government  can  readily  and  unambiguously  account  for  any  record
keeping  that  may  have  taken  place.  Its  inability  to  do  so  is  very  troubling.

Finally,  we  found  that  confusion,  misunderstanding,  and  controversy  still
characterize  public  understanding  of  issues  at  the  core  of  the  Committee's  work;
for  example,  what  is  the  nature  of  the  risk  from  radiation?  And  to  what  extent  can
government  statements  about  human  radiation  experiments  and  intentional
releases  be  trusted?  It  is  important  to  reflect  on  the  ways  in  which  this  state  of
affairs  may,  in  part,  be  a  consequence  of  past  secret  keeping.

In  testimony  before  the  Advisory  Committee,  numerous  witnesses
expressed  a  common  feeling—that  the  government  did  not  give  adequate  weight  to
the  interests  of  an  informed  public.  Secrets,  some  said,  were  kept  from  the
American  public,  not  the  enemy.  Even  where  information  may  have  been  rightly
classified  in  the  first  instance,  many  pointed  out  that  there  is  no  longer  any  reason
for  the  absence  of  documents  that  provide  a  clear  and  full  accounting  to  all  those
who  were  put  at  risk.  There  are  too  many  cases  where  we  can  give  no  comforting
answer  to  these  angry  voices.

However,  by  paying  heed  to  these  voices  and  by  trying  to  understand  the
past  they  point  to,  we  may  more  readily  find  our  path  into  the  future.  Perhaps  the

650


Chapter  13

first  step  in  this  direction  is  a  simple  recognition  that  the  proper  boundary
between  openness  and  secrecy  will  not  be  immediately  obvious  in  all  cases;  many
cases  will  not  only  require  judgment,  but  also  the  will  to  avoid  the  temptation  to
keep  secrets  because  the  benefits  of  secrecy  may  be  immediate,  while  the  costs
are  longer  term.

A  second  step  is  to  understand  that  where  secrecy  is  truly  merited,  and
citizens  are  put  at  risk,  there  must  also  be  precautions  to  ensure  that  a  timely
public  accounting  will  be  possible  when  the  information  need  no  longer  be  kept
secret.

As  the  Cold  War  recedes  further  into  history,  the  issues  of  secrecy  and
openness  it  posed  will  undoubtedly  continue  to  present  themselves,  although
often  in  new  settings.  Our  review  of  the  past  provides  the  basis  for  some  specific
recommendations  about  the  future,  but  it  also  points  to  a  more  fundamental
understanding  of  the  wisdom  of  those  leaders  of  the  day  who  identified  the  long-
term  costs  of  secrecy  and  called  for  policies  to  minimize  them.  The  shortcomings
of  past  policies  and  actions  confirm  that  even  when  principles  are  articulated  by
well-intentioned  officials,  the  translation  of  principles  into  practice  is  not
automatic  and  warrants  careful  attention  by  the  public.  At  the  same  time,  the
present-day  legacy  of  distrust  confirms  that  too  much  secrecy  in  the  short  term
will,  in  the  long  run,  erode  the  public's  trust  in  government  and  the  government's
ability  to  keep  the  secrets  that  must  be  kept.


651


ENDNOTES


1 .  For  example,  FOIA  exempts  from  disclosure  draft  documents  and  other
records  reflecting  deliberations  made  before  a  decision.

2.  For  a  discussion  of  the  definition  of  secrecy  see  Sissela  Bok,  Secrets:  On  the
Ethics  of  Concealment  and  Revelation  (New  York:  Vintage  Books,  1989),  5-9.

3.  As  discussed  in  the  text  that  follows,  the  executive  orders  on  national  security
information  are  perhaps  the  most  basic  source  on  the  definition  of  national  security
requirements  in  the  context  of  security  classification.  The  currently  effective  order,
Executive  Order  12958,  provides  that  '"national  security'  means  the  national  defense  or
foreign  relations  of  the  United  States."  The  precise  contours  of  this  definition  are,  as
discussed  in  what  follows,  a  perennial  subject  of  attention.  Executive  Order  12958  further
provides  that  "a  person  may  have  access  to  classified  information  provided  that:  (1)  a
favorable  determination  of  eligibility  for  access  has  been  made  by  an  agency  head  or  the
agency  head's  designee  [i.e.,  a  security  clearance];  (2)  the  person  has  signed  an  approved
nondisclosure  agreement;  and  (3)  the  person  has  a  need-to-know  the  information."
Executive  Order  12958,  sec.  4.2(a),  60  Fed.  Reg.  19836  (April  20  1995).  The
nondisclosure  agreement  referred  to  will  typically  refer,  in  turn,  to  various  statutes  that
make  it  a  crime  to  disclose  classified  information  without  authorization-for  example,  the
Espionage  Act  and  the  Atomic  Energy  Act,  as  also  discussed  in  the  text.

4.  Espionage  Act,  18  U.S.C.  793-794.

5.  Military  Installation  and  Equipment  Protection  Act,  1 8  U.S.C.  795-797.

6.  President,  executive  order,  "Defining  Certain  Vital  Military  and  Naval
Installations  and  Equipment,  Executive  Order  8381,"  Federal  Register  5,  no.  59  (26
March  1940).

7.  Army  Classification  Guide,  AR  320-5  ( 1 936).

8.  Ibid.

9.  Manhattan  Engineer  District,  26  November  1945  ("Security  Manual")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-050595-B),  21.

1 0.  Noted  by  Stafford  Warren,  who  came  from  the  University  of  Rochester  to
be  the  medical  director  of  the  Manhattan  Project.  Stafford  L.  Warren,  interviewed  by
Adelaide  Tusler  (UCLA  Oral  History  Program),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  21  July
1966  (ACHRE  No.  UCLA-101794-A),  574-575.

1 1 .  Committee  on  Declassification  to  Major  General  L.  R.  Groves,  1 7
November  1945  ("Report  of  Committee  on  Declassification  [Tolman  Committee  report]")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-120594-D).  The  committee  was  chaired  by  Dr.  H.  C.  Tolman,  a
professor  of  physical  chemistry  and  mathematical  physics  at  the  California  Institute  of
Technology.  Tolman  had  advised  the  government  on  the  creation  of  the  wartime  Office
of  Scientific  Research  and  Development,  advised  Manhattan  Project  director  General
Groves,  and  served  on  the  Target  Committee  that  made  decisions  on  the  dropping  of  the
atomic  bombs  on  Japan.  Ronald  L.  Kathren  et  al.,  eds.,  The  Plutonium  Story:  The
Journals  of  Professor  Glenn  T.  Seaborg:  1939-1946  (Columbus:  Battelle  Press,  1994),
818-819.

12.  Committee  on  Declassification  to  Groves,  1 7  November  1945,  2.

13.  Ibid.,  3.

14.  Ibid.

15.  Ibid.,  4-5.


652


16.  Ibid.,  13-14.

17.  Manhattan  Engineer  District,  30  March  1946  ("Declassification  Guide  for
Responsible  Reviewers")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-050495-B);  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  1
January  1948  ("Declassification  Guide")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-050495-B);  Atomic  Energy
Commission,  15  November  1950  ("Declassification  Guide  For  Responsible  Reviewers")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-052595-B).

18.  Defense  Department  entities  can  also  create  and  use  RD.  However,
presidential  order  has  been  the  primary  source  of  DOD  classification  authority.

1 9.  Atomic  Energy  Act  §  1 0(b)(  1 )  ( 1 946)  (emphasis  added).  In  1 954  the  Atomic
Energy  Act  was  amended,  and  the  requirement  to  declassify  RD  was  strengthened:  "The
Commission  shall  from  time  to  time  determine  the  data  . . .  which  can  be  published
without  undue  risk  of  the  common  defense  and  security  .  .  .  "42  U.S.C.  §  2162.  In
addition,  a  new  category  of  classified  information,  later  termed  Formerly  Restricted
Data,  was  created  to  apply  to  information  concerning  the  military  use  of  atomic  weapons
that  was  no  longer  RD.  42  U.S.C. §  2164.

20.  For  treatments  of  this  complex  story,  see  Gregg  Herken,  The  Winning
Weapon:  The  Atomic  Bomb  in  the  Cold  War  1945-1950  (New  York:  Knopf,  1980);  James
Hershberg,  James  B.  Conant:  Harvard  to  Hiroshima  and  the  Making  of  the  Nuclear  Age
(New  York:  Knopf,  1993);  Richard  G.  Hewlett  and  Oscar  E.  Anderson,  Jr.,  The  New
World:  A  History  of  the  United  States  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Volume  1 1939-1946
(Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press,  1990);  George  T.  Mazuzan  and  J.  Samuel
Walker,  Controlling  the  Atom:  The  Beginnings  of  Nuclear  Regulation,  1946-1962
(Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press,  1984);  and  Richard  Rhodes,  Dark  Sun:  The
Making  of  the  Hydrogen  Bomb  (New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1995).

21 .  Major  Richard  T.  Batson,  Declassification  Officer,  Research  Division,  to
Dr.  A.  H.  Dowdy,  21  March  1947  ("Reclassification  of  Documents")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
101394-A),  1.  The  two  reports  were  chapters  in  the  volume  Pharmacology  and
Toxicology  of  Uranium  Compounds,  which  was  to  be  part  of  the  public  history  of
Manhattan  Project  research.

22.  Colonel  O.  G.  Haywood  to  H.  A.  Fidler,  17  April 1947  ("Medical
Experiments  on  Humans")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-62),  1.  In  May,  Fidler  noted
that  for  purposes  of  classification,  "the  Declassification  Section  was  giving  a  very  strict
interpretation  to  the  above  term  [human  experiment]  and  included  routine  checks
performed  on  plants'  personnel  who  may  or  may  not  have  been  exposed  to  excess
radiation  as  well  as  known  accidental  exposures  where  plutonium,  for  instance,  was
introduced  into  the  body."  Fidler  noted,  however,  that  "Colonel  Cooney  stated  that  only
those  experiments  where  actual  materials  were  intentionally  introduced  into  the  human
system  need  to  be  regarded  as  secret."  H.  A.  Fidler,  14  May  1947  ("Memo  to  the  Files  on
Policy  on  Medical  Reports")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-071395-A),  1.

23.  H.  A.  Fidler  to  Carroll  L.  Wilson,  AEC  General  Manager,  26  May  1 947
("Declassification  Policy")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-C),  7;  Carroll  L.  Wilson  to  H.  A.
Fidler,  23  June  1947  ("Declassification  Policy")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-121294-C),  1.

24.  Carroll  Wilson,  "Security  Regulations  in  the  Field  of  Nuclear  Research,"
Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists  3  (1947):  322.  Wilson's  27  August  1947  letter  also,
however,  stated  that  information  policies  were  under  review  and  that  "since  the
Commission  took  over  the  facilities  and  operations  of  the  Manhattan  District  on  January
1,  1947,  the  information  program  has  followed  the  policies  inaugurated  by  the  War
Department."


653


25.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  20  June  1947  ("Report  of  the  Board  of
Review")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-191),  11.

26.  Carroll  Wilson,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Dr.  Robert  Stone,  5  June  1947
("Your  letter  of  May  7,  1947  ... )  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-061395-A),  1.

27.  Carroll  Wilson,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Dr.  Robert  Stone,  12  August
1947  ("Declassification  of  Biological  and  Medical  Papers")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-061395-
A),  1.

28.  John  A.  Derry,  AEC  Acting  General  Manager,  to  Walter  J.  Williams,
Manager,  Field  Operations  at  Oak  Ridge,  9  August  1947  ("Establishing  Criteria  for
Proper  Classification  of  Information")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-020795-B).

29.  Further  items  included  the  following:

(1)  All  medical  records,  reports  and  correspondence
which  embodies  or  refers  to  other  technical  information
classified  secret  or  higher. . . .

(3)  All  medico-legal  and  insurance  statistics  which  refer
directly  to  process  hazards.

(4)  Claims,  allegations  or  reports  of  injury  on
'investigation  prohibited'  cases  where  the  material  or
process  involved  is  considered  to  be  classified  secret.

(5)  All  medical  reports,  references  and  correspondence
dealing  with  certain  special  hazard  problems,  as  for
example,  the  medical  aspects  of  criticality  accidents.

Albert  H.  Holland,  AEC  Acting  Medical  Adviser,  to  the  Chairman,  Classification  Board,
12  September  1947  ("Proposed  Classification  for  Unique  Operational  and  Production
Hazards,  Including  Medical  Classification")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-101394-A),  1.

30.  Ibid.,  2.  Other  examples  of  "information  or  matter  which  should  be  graded
confidential"  included  these:

(1)  All  documents,  claims,  allegations  and  medical
reports  on  injury  on  'investigation  prohibited'  cases,
including  reports  of  the  Advisory  Board  on  Occupational
Disease  Claims.

(2)  All  'programmatic'  medical  research.

(3)  All  records  of  exposure  to  classified  substances.

(4)  All  documents  and  correspondence  which  state,  refer
to  or  give  information  of  known  medical  or  public  health
hazards.

Ibid.,  1.

31.  J.  C.  Franklin,  Manager,  Oak  Ridge  Operations,  to  Carroll  L.  Wilson,  AEC
General  Manager,  26  September  1947  ("Medical  Policy")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 13094-B-
3),  2-3.  We  note  that  the  documentation  available  does  not  permit  a  definitive
understanding  of  the  relationship  between  the  rationale  employed  for  keeping  data  on
human  radiation  experimentation  (and  other  human  radiation  data  gathering)  secret  and
the  particular  level  of  security  classification  to  which  the  data  were  assigned.  As  quoted
in  the  text,  documents  talk  in  terms  of  the  need  to  keep  secret  information  that,  while  not
endangering  national  security,  could  nonetheless  be  damaging  to  the  government.  As
also  quoted  in  the  text,  the  category  of  Confidential  provided  for  classification  on  this


654


basis.  However,  as  indicated  in  the  text,  documents  invoking  the  "adverse  effect  on
public  opinion"  language  also  call  for  the  classification  of  human  radiation
experimentation  data  as  Secret,  a  higher  level  of  classification.  Thus,  while  it  is  clear  that
the  rules  provided  for  classification  on  bases  other  than  national  security,  and  it  also
seems  clear  that  those  calling  for  continued  keeping  of  radiation  experiments  secret  saw  a
need  for  secret  keeping  independent  of  national  security  impact,  there  also  may  have
coexisted  the  view  that  an  "adverse  effect  on  public  opinion"  could  equate  to
endangering  national  security.

32.  Ibid.,  3.

33.  L.  F.  Spalding,  Chief,  Insurance  Claims  Section,  to  C.  L.  Marshall,  Deputy
Declassification  Officer,  Technical  Information  Branch,  1 1  June  1947  ("Document  by
Cheka  and  Morgan")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-070795-C),  1.  See  also  L.  F.  Spalding,  Chief,
Insurance  Claims  Section,  to  C.  L.  Marshall,  Deputy  Declassification  Officer,  Technical
Information  Branch,  1 1  June  1947  ("Document  by  Cheka")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-070795-
C),  1.

34.  Memorandum  to  Advisory  Board  on  Medicine  and  Biology,  8  October  1947
("Medical  Policy")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-419),  8.

35.  Holland  had  proposed  that  the  definition  of  Unclassified  include

All  medical  and  biological  documents,  reports  and
research  not  directly  relating  to  experimental  human
administration,  process  hazards,  contamination  hazards
or  public  health  hazards,  and  which  will  not  result  in
mass  hysteria  on  the  part  of  employees  or  the  public,  or
in  idle  speculation  or  [illegible]  adverse  claims  against
the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  or  its  contractors.
Holland  to  the  Chairman,  Classification  Board,  12  September  1947,  2.

36.  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  1 1  October  1947  ("Draft
Minutes,  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine:  Second  Meeting")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-072694-A),  10.  The  agenda  for  the  1 1  October  1947,  meeting  of  the  Advisory
Committee  on  Biology  and  Medicine  also  contained  "publication  of  scientific  papers"
and  "secrecy  of  work  in  the  field  of  biological  and  medical  research."  Carroll  L.  Wilson,
AEC  General  Manager,  to  Commissioners  and  Division  Heads,  9  October  1947
("Meeting  of  the  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
072694-A),  2.  The  minutes  show  the  topics  were  discussed;  however,  there  is  no  specific
reference  to  human  experiments  data  in  these  discussions.

Regarding  restrictions  on  the  publication  of  scientific
papers  [General  Manager  Wilson]  expressed  the  hope
that  these  restrictions  [which  were  not  identified]  would
diminish  in  time.  He  pointed  out  that  information  on  the
physical  science  mentioned  in  medical  and  biological
papers  frequently  delays  classification.

"Draft  Minutes,"  1 1  October  1947,  5-6.  In  addition.  Chairman  Gregg

read  a  memorandum  on  the  publication  of  scientific
papers  prepared  jointly  by  Dr.  A.  F.  Thompson,  Chief


655


Technical  Information  Branch,  and  H.  A.  Fidler,  Chief,
Declassification  Branch.  The  memorandum  explained
the  present  status  of  declassification  . . .  and  stated  that
papers  are  not  declassified  when  they  include
information  on  nuclear  constraints  for  the  heavy
elements  or  reference  to  classified  technological  papers.
Ibid.,  6-7.

37.  "Draft  Minutes,"  1 1  October  1947,  1 1 .

38.  Ibid.,  11.

39.  Carroll  L.  Wilson,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Robert  S.  Stone,  University  of
California  Medical  School,  5  November  1947  ("Your  letter  of  September  18  regarding
the  declassification  of  biological  and  medical  papers  was  read  at  the  October  1 1  meeting
of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Biology  and  Medicine  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-061395-
A),  1 .  Carroll  L.  Wilson,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Alan  Gregg,  Director  for  Medical
Sciences,  Rockefeller  Foundation,  5  November  1947  ("I  want  to  thank  you  for  your  letter
of  October  14  concerning  the  questions  raised  by  Dr.  Stone  in  his  letter  to  me  of  October
18  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-061395-A),  1.

40.  Dr.  Harold  Hodge,  Chief  Pharmacologist,  University  of  Rochester,  to
Brewer  F.  Boardman,  Chief,  Technical  Information  Division,  AEC  Field  Operations,  12
February  1948  ("Thank  you  for  your  letter  of  February  4th  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-

1 13094-B-4),  1.  Following  a  section-by-section  review  of  the  chapter  Hodge  declared,  "I
wish  to  submit  the  argument  that  none  of  this  material  is  human  experimentation  unless
you  would  class  measuring  a  man's  height  or  recording  his  weight  as  human
experimentation."

41.  Albert  H.  Holland,  Medical  Adviser,  to  Dr.  Hoylande  D.  Young,  Director,
Information  Division,  Argonne  National  Laboratory,  15  March  1948  ("In  accordance
with  your  recent  request,  the  following  documents  were  reviewed  for  reconsideration  of
their  classification  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-E-4),  1.

42.  Shields  Warren,  Director,  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  to  Albert
H.  Holland,  AEC  Medical  Adviser,  19  August  1948  ("Review  of  Document")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-101494-B),  1.

43.  Albert  H.  Holland,  AEC  Medical  Adviser,  to  Shields  Warren,  Director,
AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  9  August  1948  ("Review  of  Document")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A),  1.

44.  Anthony  C.  Vallado,  Deputy  Declassification  Officer,  Declassification
Branch,  to  Clyde  Wilson,  Insurance  Branch,  8  December  1948  ("Review  of  Document
by  Knowlton")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-E-32),  1.

45.  Clyde  E.  Wilson,  Chief,  Insurance  Branch,  to  Anthony  C.  Vallado,  Deputy
Declassification  Officer,  Declassification  Branch,  20  December  1948  ("Review  of
Document  by  Knowlton")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-120894-E-32),  1.

46.  Albert  H.  Holland,  AEC  Acting  Medical  Adviser,  to  C.  L.  Marshall,  Deputy
Declassification  Officer,  Technical  Information  Branch,  23  October  1947
("Declassification  of  Document")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 13094-B-4),  1.

47.  In  February  1948  the  Insurance  Branch  opined  that  although  a  report
("Biochemical  Studies  Relating  to  the  Effects  of  Radiation  and  Metals")  "might  arouse
some  claim  consciousness  on  the  part  of  former  employees  we  are  unable  to  predict  that
the  Commission's  interests  would  be  unjustifiably  prejudiced  by  its  publication."
Nonetheless,  if  latent  disabilities  resulted  from  the  exposures  reported,  the  public


656


relations  section  would  be  involved.  The  Insurance  Department,  noting  that  it  was
conferring  with  Dr.  Holland  on  "claims  similar  in  nature  to  some  of  the  exposures"
discussed  in  the  report,  urged  that  he  be  called  in.  L.  F.  Spalding,  Insurance  Branch,  to
Charles  A.  Keller,  Declassification  Officer,  Declassification  Branch,  5  February  1948
("Review  of  Document")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-1 13094-B),  1.

48.  Documents  available  to  the  Committee  show  that  medical  research  reports
were  reviewed  by  Public  Relations  and  Insurance  Branch  officials  prior  to
declassification  at  least  as  late  as  April  1949.  See  27  April  1949  letter  from  Anthony  C.
Vallado,  Deputy  Declassification  Officer,  Declassification  Branch,  to  Warren  C.  Johnson,
University  of  Chicago  ("Transmittal  of  Fink  Survey  Volume  ['Biological  Studies  with
Polonium,  Plutonium,  and  Radium']  for  Final  Declassification  Review")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-032995-A).

49.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  2  May  1949  ("Policy  on  Control  of
Information")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-071395-B),  3.

50.  President,  executive  order,  "Prescribing  Regulations  Establishing  Minimum
Standards  for  the  Classification,  Transmission,  and  Handling,  by  Departments  and
Agencies  of  the  Executive  Branch,  of  Official  Information  Which  Requires  Safeguarding
in  the  Interest  of  the  Security  of  the  United  States,  Executive  Order  10290,"  3  C.F.R.

( 1 949- 1 953  Compilation).  The  executive  order  provided  that:

[information  . .  .  shall  not  be  classified  under  these
regulations  unless  it  requires  protective  safeguarding  in  the
interest  of  the  security  of  the  United  States.  The  use  of  any
of  the  four  security  classification  prescribed  herein  .  .  .  shall
be  strictly  limited  to  classified  security  info.

"Classified  security  information"  was  defined  as  "official  information  the
safeguarding  of  which  is  necessary  in  the  interest  of  national  security."  The  order  did,
however,  provide  that  it  should  not  be  construed  "to  replace,  change,  or  otherwise  be
applicable  with  respect  to  any  material  or  info  protected  against  disclosure  by  statute."  It
would  not  have  required  the  alteration  of  embarrassment-  or  public  relations-based
criteria  if  they  were  supported  by  an  independent  statutory  basis.  Thus,  if  statutes  like  the
Espionage  Act  previously  provided  adequate  basis  for  classification  in  the  absence  of
national  security  endangerment,  they  would  continue  to  do  so.

5 1 .  President,  executive  order,  "Classified  National  Security  Information,
Executive  Order  1 2958,  sec.  1 .8  (a)-(b),"  Federal  Register  60,  no.  76  (20  April  1 995).

52.  AEC  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  minutes  of  the
twenty-third  meeting,  8-9  September  1950  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-072694-A),  28.

53.  Shields  Warren,  Director,  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  to  Leslie
M.  Redman,  "D"  Division,  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  5  March  1951  ("Dr.
Alberto  F.  Thompson,  Chief,  Technical  Information  Service,  has  asked  me  to  reply  to
your  letter  .  .  .  ")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A-603),  2.  Warren's  letter  attributes  Gregg's
statement  to  a  September  1948  meeting  of  the  ACBM.  While  the  statement  is  not
reflected  in  the  minutes,  a  statement  by  Gregg  in  a  similar  vein  was  contained  in  an
October  letter,  as  discussed  in  chapter  8.  Alan  Gregg,  Chairman,  AEC  Advisory
Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  to  Robert  Stone,  University  of  California  Medical
School,  20  October  1948  ("The  secrecy  with  which  some  of  the  work  of  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission  has  to  be  conducted  creates  special  conditions  for  the  clinical


657


aspects  of  its  work  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  UCLA-1 1 1094-A-24),  1.

54.  Warren's  view  is  reported  in  a  1952  letter  from  a  PHS  official.  James  G.
Terrill,  Acting  Chief,  Radiological  Health  Branch,  Division  of  Engineering  Resources,  to
Charles  V.  Kidd,  Chief,  Research  Planning  Branch,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  25
September  1952  ("At  the  September  8-12  meeting  of  the  Panel  at  Los  Alamos,  several
subjects  were  discussed  that  are  of  general  interest  to  the  Public  Health  Service  . . .")
(ACHRE  No.  HHS-092794-A),  1.

55.  See  Department  of  Defense,  Research  and  Development  Board,  Committee
on  Medical  Sciences,  23  May  1950  ("Transcript  of  Meeting  Held  on  23  May  1950  .  .  .
The  Pentagon,  Washington,  D.C.")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-080694-A).  (The  Advisory
Committee's  copy  of  this  transcript  was  classified  Confidential  and  bears  a  1994
declassification  stamp.)  See  also  Department  of  Defense,  Research  and  Development
Board,  Committee  on  Chemical  Warfare,  10  November  1952  ("Transcript  of  the
Fourteenth  Meeting  Held  10  November  1952  ..  .  The  Pentagon")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
080694-A).  (The  Advisory  Committee's  copy  of  this  transcript  was  classified  Secret  and
bears  a  1994  declassification  stamp.)

56.  The  Committee's  copies  of  the  minutes  of  the  first  year  of  meetings  of  the
ACBM  bear  a  1994  declassification  stamp.

57.  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences  to  Chairman  and  Members,  Joint  Panel  on
the  Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare,  15  December  1952  ("Department  of  Defense
Research  Program  Under  the  Technical  Objective  of  AW-6")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-
062094-A).  The  NIH  and  PHS  had  representatives  who  were  associate  members  on  the
Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical  Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare.  See  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical
Aspects  of  Atomic  Warfare,  Minutes  of  the  Sixth  Meeting  held  on  31  October--l
November  1950  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-072294-B),  and  Joint  Panel  on  the  Medical  Aspects
of  Atomic  Warfare,  Minutes  of  the  Seventh  Meeting  held  on  25-26  January  1951
(ACHRE  No.  DOD-072294-B).

58.  National  Institutes  of  Health,  13  May  1952  ("Defense  Activities  of  the
National  Institutes  of  Health  [1950-1952]")  (ACHRE  No.  HHS-071394-A),  30.

59.  Since  DOD  and  AEC  biomedical  human  subject  radiation  research  was
rarely  classified,  it  would  seem  most  likely  that  the  classified  HHS  research  (except  in
cases,  such  as  the  Marshallese,  where  there  was  a  direct  connection  to  weapons  tests)  did
not  involve  humans.

60.  In  a  7  May  1955  letter  to  AEC  chairman  Lewis  Strauss,  Gioacchino  Failla,
chairman  of  the  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine,  wrote  that  the  AEC  had
reviewed  the  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine's  research  program  "and  is  pleased  to
find  that  less  than  5%  of  the  medical  program  has  security  classification."  Failla  to
Strauss,  7  May  1955  ("The  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine  has  reviewed
again  the  program  of  research  in  the  Division  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-B),  1.  In
a  May  1955  letter  to  AEC  Chairman  Strauss,  the  ACBM  recommended  that  the  AEC
"continue  to  sponsor  all  research  relative  to  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  radiation
injury  in  a  wholly  unclassified  way  except  those  experiments  directly  related  to  weapons
testing  or  development."  Ibid.  However,  in  Senate  testimony  two  months  earlier,  the
University  of  Chicago's  George  Leroy  (who  played  a  key  role  as  an  AEC  adviser  on
bomb  test  research  and  who,  as  medical  school  dean,  oversaw  AEC-funded  research)  told
Senator  Hubert  Humphrey  that  "there  is  a  considerable  amount  of  information  which  for
one  reason  or  another  has  not  been  disseminated  to  the  medical  profession  and  scientific
profession."  Subcommittee  on  Reorganization  of  the  Committee  on  Government


658


Operations,  Hearing  Held  Before  Subcommittee  on  Reorganization  of  the  Committee  on
Government  Operations,  S.  J.  Res.  21,  Joint  Resolution  to  Establish  a  Commission  on
Government  Security,  Statement  of  Dr.  George  V.  LeRoy,  M.D.,  84th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  14
March  1955,851.

61.  NEPA  Medical  Advisory  Panel,  22  July  1949  ("NEPA  Medical  Advisory
Panel  Subcommittee  No.  IX,  Report  No.  NEPA  1 1 10-IER-20")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
121494-A-2),  5.  A  subgroup  was  convened  to  assess  what  was  known  about  the  effects
of  whole-body  exposure  to  radiation.  In  a  1951  letter  to  the  Air  Force's  School  of
Aviation  Medicine  transmitting  the  conclusions,  the  Air  Force's  surgeon  general
explained  that  "[w]hile  this  information  is  not  classified,  it  should  not  be  given  general
publicity."  Major  General  Harry  G.  Armstrong,  Air  Force  Surgeon  General,  to
Commandant,  USAF  School  of  Aviation  Medicine,  24  January  1951  ("Data  Relative  to
External  Radiation  from  Radioactive  Material")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-062194-B-14),  3.

62.  Everett  Evans,  Director  of  the  Laboratory  for  Surgical  Research  at  Medical
College  of  Virginia,  to  Doctors  W.  T.  Sanger  et  al.,  23  January  1951  ("I  think  each  of
you  should  be  informed  of  a  problem  .  . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-020995-A),  1.  Evans
added:

There  is  much  about  this  experiment  I  do  not  like  but  we
are  doing  it  in  a  manner  as  humane  as  possible  ...  we
have  simply  had  to  make  the  choice  between  this  type  of
study  which  I  hope  will  bring  relief  to  atomic  bombing
victims  or  simply  wait  for  an  atomic  bomb  attack.  .  .  .
This  issue  here  is  one  of  national  security.
Ibid.,  2.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  focus  of  the  MCV  atomic  bomb-related  research
appears  to  have  been  thermal  burns,  and  not  the  effects  of  ionizing  radiation.

63.  Everett  Idris  Evans,  Director,  Laboratory  for  Surgical  Research,  Medical
College  of  Virginia,  to  Colonel  John  R.  Wood,  Chairman,  Army  Medical  Research  and
Development  Board,  23  January  1951  ("You  will  find  from  the  attached  letter  I  am
having  my  problems  with  the  local  press  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-020995-A),  1.

64.  John  Wood,  Chairman,  Medical  Research  and  Development  Board,  to
Everett  I.  Evans,  Director,  Laboratory  for  Surgical  Research,  Medical  College  of
Virginia,  25  January  1951  ("Reference  your  letter  of  23  January  1951  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
DOD-020995-A),  1.

65.  Ibid.

66.  Ibid.

67.  Ibid.

68.  Everett  Evans,  Director,  Laboratory  for  Surgical  Research,  Medical  College
of  Virginia,  to  Major  W.  F.  Smyth,  Superintendent,  Virginia  State  Penitentiary,  13
December  1951  ("We  continue  to  enjoy  all  the  help  you  and  your  staff  are  giving  us  .  .  .")
(ACHRENO.VCU-012595-A-17),  1.

69.  Major  W.  F.  Smyth,  Superintendent,  Virginia  State  Penitentiary,  to  Everett
Evans,  Director,  Laboratory  for  Surgical  Research,  Medical  College  of  Virginia,  19
December  1951  ("I  wish  to  thank  you  for  your  letter  of  December  13  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
VCU-012595-A-17),  1.

70.  W.  G.  Lalor,  Rear  Admiral,  U.S.  Navy  (Ret.),  Secretary,  Joint  Chiefs  of
Staff,  to  Chief  of  Staff,  U.S.  Army  et  al.,  3  September  1952  ("Security  Measures  on
Chemical  Warfare  and  Biological  Warfare")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-012495-A),  2.  In  the


659


memo  to  the  service  chiefs  of  staff,  the  Joint  Chiefs  decreed  that  "responsible  agencies"
should  "[e]nsure,  insofar  as  practicable,  that  all  published  articles  stemming  from  the
B W  [biological  warfare]  or  CW  [chemical  warfare]  research  and  development  programs
are  disassociated  from  anything  which  might  connect  them  with  U.S.  military  endeavor."

71 .  Office  of  the  Director  of  Defense  Research  and  Engineering,  Thirtieth  Joint
Medical  Research  Conference,  minutes  of  8  January  1964  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-062994-
A),3.

72.  R.  Wasserman  and  C.  Comar,  Annotated  Bibliography  of  Strontium  and
Calcium  Metabolism  in  Man  and  Animals  (Washington,  D.C.:  Agricultural  Research
Service,  1961),  Publication  no.  821,  1.  The  preface  states:

Within  recent  years  it  has  become  necessary  to  understand
the  metabolism  and  movement  of  radioactive  strontium  in
the  biosphere.  The  behavior  of  strontium  in  man  and
animals  is  closely  linked  with  that  of  calcium,  and  it  is
therefore  necessary  to  consider  the  factors  that  govern  the
behavior  of  both  elements.  This  annotated  bibliography  .  .
.  should  be  useful  to  national  defense  workers  who  are
doing  research  on  the  strontium-calcium  relationship.

73.  In  some  cases,  however,  the  fallout-related  purpose  of  research  was  publicly
stated.  See,  for  example,  Robert  P.  Chandler  and  Samuel  Wider,  "Radionuclides  in  the
Northwestern  Alaska  Food  Chain,  1959-1961— A  Review,"  Radiological  Health  Data
(June  1963):  317-324.

74.  John  Bowers,  Assistant  to  Director,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  to
A.  H.  Gill,  18  February  1948  ("Your  letter  to  David  E.  Lilienthal .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-040395),  1.

75.  Shelby  Thompson,  Chief,  AEC  Public  Information  Service,  to  Frank
Starzel,  Associated  Press  General  Manager,  7  December  1950  ("We  have  noted  in  the
November  29  Baltimore  Sun... ")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-051094-A),  1.

76.  John  C.  Bugher,  Director,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  to  Jesse  Paul
Malone,  2  April  1953  ("This  is  in  reply  to  your  letter  of  March  23rd  . .  .  ")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-040395-A),  1.  See  also  another  April  1953  letter  in  which  the  AEC's  Argonne
Laboratory  told  a  citizen,  "We  do  not  conduct  experiments  on  human  beings."  Harvey
M.  Patt,  Division  of  Biological  and  Medical  Research,  to  Mr.  Joseph  Vodraska,  New
York  City,  14  April  1953  ("Thank  you  kindly  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-050195-B).

77.  Shelby  Thompson,  Acting  Director,  Division  of  Information  Services,  to  H.
C.  Baldwin,  Information  Officer,  Chicago  Operations  Office,  21  August  1953
("Information  Guidance  on  Any  Experimentation  Involving  Human  Beings")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-040395-A),  1.

78.  Louis  Hempelmann,  University  of  Rochester  School  of  Medicine  and
Dentistry,  to  Charles  Dunham,  Director,  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  2  June
1955  ("I  did  not  have  an  opportunity  to  speak  to  Roy  Albert  in  New  York  .  .  ." )  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-092694-A),  1.

79.  Ibid.

80.  Roy  Albert,  Assistant  Chief  of  the  Medical  Branch  of  the  Division  of
Biology  and  Medicine,  to  Louis  Hempelmann,  University  of  Rochester  School  of
Medicine  and  Dentistry,  23  June  1955  ("Chuck  Dunham  passed  along  to  me  your  letter
containing  suggestion  for  the  Harshaw  study  . . ." )  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-092694-A),  1.


660


81.  Ibid.

82.  Ibid.

83.  Committee  to  Consider  the  Feasibility  and  Conditions  for  a  Preliminary
Radiological  Safety  Shot  for  Operation  "Windsquall"  [later  named  Jangle],  2 1  May  1 95 1
("Notes  on  the  Meeting  ...  21  and  22  May  1951")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-030195-A).

84.  Barton  C.  Hacker,  Elements  of  Controversy;  The  Atomic  Energy
Commission  and  Radiation  Safety  in  Nuclear  Weapons  Tests  1947-74  (Berkeley:
University  of  California  Press,  1994),  69.

85.  Benjamin  W.  White,  1  August  1953  ("Desert  Rock  V:  Reactions  of  Troop
Participants  and  Forward  Volunteer  Officer  Groups  to  Atomic  Exercises")  (ACHRE  No.
CORP-111694-A),  10.

86.  Hacker,  Elements  of  Controversy,  1 1 8.  The  pattern  applied  to  animal
experiments,  as  well  as  human  data  gathering.  A  recently  declassified  1952  DOD  history
records  that  "because  of  anti-vivisection  sentiment,  release  of  such  information  would  be
detrimental  to  the  testing  program.  Decision  was  made  that  such  information  fell  into  a
sensitive,  though  non-classified,  category  and  should  not,  therefore,  be  released  to  the
public."  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project,  undated  document  ("First  History  of
AFSWP  1947-1954,  Volume  5-1952,  Chapter  3-Headquarters")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-
120794-A),  3.12.9.  Other  evidence  indicates,  however,  that  animal  experiments  were
publicized.

87.  H.  K.  Gilbert,  Commander,  USAF,  to  Commander  Eugene  Cronkite,  USN,
8  March  1954  ("Letter  of  Instruction  to  CMR  Eugene  P.  Cronkite,  USN")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-013195-A),  1.

88.  In  Rochester,  New  York,  an  Eastman  Kodak  researcher,  observing  the
fogging  of  a  batch  of  Kodak  film,  traced  the  film  materials  to  Iowa  and  deduced  that
radiation  had  been  transported  by  air  following  an  explosion.  J.  Newell  Stannard,
Radioactivity  and  Health:  A  History  (Springfield,  Va.:  Office  of  Scientific  and  Technical
Information,  1988),  884-886.

89.  Roy  B.  Snapp,  14  February  1952  ("Project  Gabriel:  Note  By  the  Secretary")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-A),  1;  Shields  Warren,  Director,  AEC  Division  of  Biology
and  Medicine,  to  General  Advisory  Committee,  13  February  1952  ("Project  Gabriel")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-A),  1.

90.  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  July  1954  ("Report  on  Project
Gabriel")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040395-A),  8.

91 .  AEC,  19  January  1954  ("Supplementary  Information  on  Gabriel:  Report  by
the  Director  of  Biology  and  Medicine")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-013195-A),  1.

92.  Stannard,  Radioactivity  and  Health,  934-936,  1 064- 1 080.

93.  Rand,  the  quintessential  "think  tank,"  was  created  to  advise  the  Air  Force
on  emerging  issues  of  policy  and  strategy.

94.  Rand  Corporation,  Worldwide  Effects  of  Atomic  Weapons:  Project
Sunshine:  AECU-3488  (Oak  Ridge,  Tenn.:  U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Technical
Information  Service  Extension,  1953),  v-vii.

95.  The  report  continues  to  explain  in  more  detail:  "The  release  in  the  world  of
several  kilograms  (kg)  of  strontium  90  within  less  than  a  decade  has  probably
disseminated  enough  of  the  contaminant  to  provide  amounts  that  are  probably  now
detectable  in  samples  of  inert  and  biological  materials  throughout  the  world."  Ibid.,  7.

96.  Ibid.,  47.


661


97.  Even  the  initial  conference  was  kept  secret.  The  attendees  had  been  told:
"The  letter  of  invitation  [to  the  conference]  .  .  .  should  be  classified  ...  or  returned  to  this
office  by  registered  mail."  Ernest  H.  Plesset,  Nuclear  Energy  Division,  Rand  Corporation,
to  Forrest  Western,  Biophysics  Branch,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  31  July  1953
("We  wish  to  thank  you  very  much  for  your  participation  in  the  conference  .  .  .")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-013195-A),  1.

98.  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  "Report  on  Project  Gabriel."  2.

99.  The  six  locales  were  ( 1 )  northern  Utah  or  southwestern  Idaho,  (2)  Kansas  or
Iowa,  (3)  New  England  (Boston),  (4)  South  America,  (5)  England,  and  (6)  Japan.  From
each  would  be  drawn  twelve  human  tissue  samples,  four  from  each  age  group:  0-10
years,  10-20  years,  over  20  years.  Within  each  age  group,  two  samples  would  be
epiphysial  end  or  rib  and  two  would  be  teeth.  Rand  Corporation,  Worldwide  Effects,  5 1 .

100.  Robert  A.  Dudley,  Biophysics  Branch,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,
to  Gertrude  Steel  c/o  Willard  Libby,  Professor  of  Chemistry,  University  of  Chicago,  16
October  1953  ("There  are  several  matters  which  I  would  like  to  bring  to  the  attention  of
you  and  Dr.  Libby  . . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-013195-A),  1.

101.  Ibid.

102.  Ibid.,  2.

103.  Robert  A.  Dudley,  Biophysics  Branch,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,
to  Shields  Warren,  Director,  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  26  October  1953
("We  are  now  starting  to  make  provision  for  a  collection  of  foreign  bones  . .  .")  (ACHRE
No.  DOE-013195-A),  1.

104.  Robert  A.  Dudley,  Biophysics  Branch,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,
to  Raymond  A.  Dudley,  ABCRM,  10  November  1953  ("Thanks  for  the  information  in
your  letter  of  November  4.  . .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-013195-A),  1.

105.  DBM  Director  Bugher  wrote  to  the  Rockefeller  Foundation,  providing  the
cover  story  and  asking  for  help  in  obtaining  specimens  "from  Brazil,  Colombia,  Peru,  and
Chile  or  Bolivia."  John  C.  Bugher,  Director,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  to
Andrew  J.  Warren,  Director,  Division  of  Medicine  and  Public  Health,  Rockefeller
Foundation,  30  December  1953  ("Herewith  I  am  enclosing  a  letter  to  you  which  might  be
used  to  explain  the  program  of  bone  collections  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-013195-A),  1.

106.  Robert  A.  Dudley,  Biophysics  Branch,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,
to  James  K.  Scott,  Atomic  Energy  Project,  University  of  Rochester,  9  December  1 953
("This  letter  will  explain  in  a  little  more  detail . .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-013195-A),  1.

1 07.  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  "Report  on  Project  Gabriel,"  July
1954, 13.

108.  Ibid.,  38.

109.  Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project,  undated  document  ("AFSWP
History,  Latter  Period:  1955-58")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-072594-B),  37.

1 10.  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  November  1955  ("Recovery  of
Radioactive  Iodine  and  Strontium  from  Human  Urine-Operation  Teapot  [WRAIR-IS-55
{AFSWP-893}]")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-092394-C),  1.  The  substance  of  the  work  was
declassified  in  the  late  1950s.

Research  continued  through  the  early  1960s,  with  use  of  the  new  body  counter
technologies  (that  permitted  measurement  of  body  radiation).  U.S.  Army  Medical
Research  and  Development  Command  to  the  Chief  of  DAS  A,  25  April  1963
("Metabolism  of  Fission  Products  from  Fallout")  (ACHRE  No.  DOD-020195-A);  U.S.
Army  Medical  Research  and  Development  Command  to  the  Chief  of  DASA,  26  April


662


1963  ("Ionizing  Radiation  Combined  with  Trauma")  (ACHRE  DOD-020195-A).

111.  Major  General  A.  R.  Luedecke,  Chief,  AFSWP,  to  the  Surgeon  General,
Department  of  the  Air  Force,  16  December  1954  ("Fall-Out  Studies")  (ACHRE  No.
DOD-090994-C),  2.

Another  contemporary  instance  of  selective  disclosure  of  fallout-related  research,
although  not  directly  involving  human  beings,  is  discussed  in  a  February  1955  letter
written  in  the  aftermath  of  the  March  1954  Bravo  bomb  test.  In  this  letter,  Willard  Libby,
acting  AEC  chairman,  writes  to  the  chairman  of  the  Congressional  Joint  Committee  on
Atomic  Energy  to  report  on  a  proposed  marine  radiobiological  survey  in  the  Pacific.
Libby  explained  that  it  had  been  determined  that  the  survey  itself  did  not  involve
Restricted  Data,  although  the  results  would  involve  Restricted  Data  since  they  could
reveal  weapons  information.  Libby  further  explained:

The  classification  "Secret"  Defense  Information  has  been  assigned  to  the
survey  in  order  to  avoid,  if  possible,  an  unwarranted  recrudescence  of
fears  in  Japan  of  radioactive  contamination  offish;  and  because
knowledge  by  unfriendly  interests  of  bomb-originated  debris  in  the
vicinity  of  Formosa  might  be  used  effectively  to  embarrass  the  United
States.  The  fact  of  an  oceanographic  survey  in  the  Pacific,  however,  is
regarded  as  unclassified  so  long  as  purpose,  content,  and  results  are  not
revealed.
W.  F.  Libby,  Acting  Chairman,  AEC,  to  Honorable  Clinton  P.  Anderson,  Chairman,  Joint
Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  U.S.  Congress,  16  February  1955  ("We  would  like  to
inform  the  Committee  of  plans  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-070595-A),  1-2.

1 12.  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  18  January  1955  ("Biophysics
Conference")  (ACHRE  No.  NARA-061395-B),  60.

113.  Ibid..  8.

1 14.  The  researchers  had  come  to  recognize  the  difficult  sampling  problems;
not  only  was  the  stati'stical  representativeness  of  individual  subjects  a  question,  but  the
representativeness  of  particular  body  parts.  Ibid.,  12.

1 15.  Ibid.,  81.  In  1995,  Dr.  Kulp  recalled  that  the  Columbia  researchers
followed  legal  processes  to  obtain  cadavers.  Some  states  required  a  special  permit  to
dispose  of  human  remains  outside  the  state;  others  required  specific  approval  from
relatives  for  use  of  certain  organs.  At  the  time  there  were  no  restrictions  in  Houston  on
the  use  of  unclaimed  bodies  for  any  scientific  purpose.  As  a  result  of  these  policies,  Dr.
Kulp  recalled,  "The  group  supporting  our  project  said  they  could  obtain  samples  from
virtually  every  body  that  came  under  their  jurisdiction  (not  all  of  Houston!)  that  met  the
legal  criteria."  The  reference  to  "poverty  cases"  was  "meant  to  convey  the  fact  that
among  the  lower  economic  group  in  the  city  there  are  many  unclaimed  bodies."  Dr.  Kulp
recalled:  To  the  best  of  my  recollection  all  human  bone  samples  collected  for  the
Columbia  University  studies  were  done  legally.  They  came  from  medical  school
cadavers,  morgues  or  amputation  material.  In  all  cases  the  sources  were  either  bodies
that  had  been  donated  for  medical  use,  unclaimed,  or  residue  from  necessary
amputations.  In  all  cases  the  material  (with  or  without  Project  Sunshine)  would  have
been  ashed  after  examination  or  research  use  and  then  the  ash  discarded.  Taking  a
portion  of  this  ash  for  the  determination  of  its  calcium  and  strontium-90  concentration
(or  for  any  other  trace  element  such  as  radium,  selenium,  arsenic  etc.)  can  hardly  be  a
moral,  ethical  or  legal  issue  under  these  circumstances."  Dr.  J.  Laurence  Kulp,  letter  to


663


Dan  Guttman  (ACHRE),  21  July  1995.

1 16.  DBM,  "Biophysics  Conference,"  185-187.

117.  Ibid.,  187.

118.  Ibid.,  12.

1 19.  Geochemistry  Laboratory,  Lamont  Observatory,  Columbia  University,  15
April  1956  ("Project  Sunshine:  Annual  Report,  Period  March  31,  1955-April  1,  1956")
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-082294-B),  68-70.

120.  U.S.  General  Accounting  Office,  Fact  Sheet  for  Congressional  Requestors:
Information  on  DOE's  #  Human  Tissue  Analysis  Work,  GAO/RCED-95-109FS
(Gaithersburg,  Md.:  GAO,  1995),  3.

121.  Dr.  Merril  Eisenbud  to  Dan  Guttman  (ACHRE),  25  June  1995  ("I
appreciate  the  opportunity  you  have  given  me  .  .  .  ")  (ACHRE  No.  IND-070395-A).

122.  Ibid.  From  1948  to  1950  "Official  Use  Only"  was  a  category  in  the  formal
classification  system,  but  since  then  it  has  been  used  as  an  informal  way  of  connoting
that  information  should  be  protected  even  if  it  is  not  classified.  While  much  information
labeled  Official  Use  Only  never  makes  it  to  the  public,  the  information  does  not  have  to
be  protected  with  formal  security  measures,  readers  do  not  have  to  be  cleared  in  order  to
see  it,  and  officials  cannot  be  criminally  prosecuted  for  disclosing  it  to  members  of  the
public.

123.  Paul  F.  Foster,  Special  Assistant  to  the  General  Manager  for  Liaison,  to
the  AEC  General  Manager,  9  November  1954  ("Discussion  in  Office  of  Secretary  of
Defense  on  'Change  in  National  Dispersion  Policy'")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-A),  2.
This  memo  was  circulated  within  the  AEC;  see  W.  B.  McCool,  Secretary,  to  Distribution,
16  November  1954  ("Atomic  Energy  Commission  National  Dispersion  Policy:  Note  by
the  Secretary")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-033195-A),  1.

124.  Richard  Hewlett  and  Jack  Holl,  Atoms  for  Peace  and  War:  1953-1961
(Berkeley  and  Los  Angeles:  University  of  California  Press,  1989),  264.

125.  On  the  scientific  debate,  see  Carolyn  Kopp,  "The  Origins  of  the  American
Scientific  Debate  over  Fallout  Hazards,"  Social  Studies  of  Science  9  (1979):  403-422.
For  a  public  AEC  presentation  of  fallout  at  the  time,  see  Gordon  M.  Dunning,  "The
Effects  of  Nuclear  Weapons  Testing,"  Scientific  Monthly  81,  no.  6  (December  1955):
265-270.  (Dunning  was  a  health  physicist  with  the  AEC  Division  of  Biology  and
Medicine.)

1 26.  Robert  A.  Divine,  Blowing  on  the  Wind:  The  Nuclear  Test  Ban  Debate
1954-1960  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1978),  21 .

1 27.  Stannard,  Radioactivity  and  Health,  982.

128.  Harold  M.  Schmeck,  Jr.,  "Study  Discounts  Risk  In  Nuclear  Fall-Out,"  New
York  Times,  8  February  1957,  1.  See  J.  Laurence  Kulp,  Walter  R.  Eckelmann,  and  Arthur
R.  Schulert,  "Strontium-90  in  Man,"  Science  125  (8  February  1957):  219-225.  Following
the  initial  declassification  of  Sunshine  in  the  mid-1950s,  the  details  of  the  Columbia
work,  including  the  identity  of  medical  professionals  who  had  provided  assistance,
became  part  of  the  public  research  report  record.

129.  Divine,  Blowing  on  the  Wind,  106.

130.  For  a  contemporary  reaction  to  the  declassification  see,  Ralph  E.  Lapp,
"Sunshine  and  Darkness,"  Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists  15  (January  1959):  27-29.

131.  W.  F.  Libby,  AEC  Commissioner,  to  Herman  M.  Kalcker,  National
Institutes  of  Health,  10  June  1957  ("I  think  your  idea  of  using  children's  milk  teeth  for
strontium-90  measurement  is  a  good  one  .  .  .")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-041295-D),  1.


664


132.  The  1957  and  1959  hearings  appear  as  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,
Special  Subcommittee  on  Radiation,  The  Nature  of  Radioactive  Fallout  and  its  Effect  on
Man,  85th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  1957;  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy,  Special
Subcommittee  on  Radiation,  Fallout  from  Nuclear  Weapons  Tests,  86th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,
5  May  1959.

1 33.  The  AEC  concluded  that  radiation  did  not  cause  any  sheep  deaths  and
consequently  did  not  compensate  the  Nevada  ranchers.  Some  of  the  ranchers  remained
unconvinced  by  the  AEC's  explanation  and  sued  the  government.  While  the  court  ruled
in  favor  of  the  government,  controversy  over  the  case  continues  to  this  day.  Congress
held  hearings  on  the  subject  in  1979  and  concluded  that  the  AEC  had  suppressed
evidence  during  the  trial.  House  Committee  on  Interstate  and  Foreign  Commerce,
Subcommittee  on  Oversight  and  Investigations,  The  Forgotten  Guinea  Pigs':  A  Report
on  Health  Effects  of  Low-Level  Radiation  Sustained  as  a  Result  of  the  Nuclear  Weapons
Testing  Program  Conducted  by  the  United  States  Government,  98th  Cong.,  2d  Sess.,
1980,  Committee  Print  96-IFC  53,  15.  In  1981,  the  judge  who  heard  the  first  case  ruled
that  the  AEC  fraudulently  suppressed  evidence  in  the  trial.  On  appeal,  however,  this
ruling  was  overturned.  For  further  discussion  of  the  sheep  controversy  see  Philip  L.
Fradkin,  Fallout:  An  American  Nuclear  Tragedy  (Tucson:  The  University  of  Arizona
Press,  1989),  147-165;  Hacker,  Elements  of  Controversy,  106-130.

134.  Committee  to  Study  Nevada  Proving  Grounds,  1  February  1954  ("Abstract
of  Report,  Committee  to  Study  Nevada  Proving  Grounds")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-040395-
B),  1-2.

135.  Ibid.,  2.

136.  Ibid.,  46.

137.  Ibid.

138.  Ibid.,  47.

139.  Ibid.

140.  Ibid.,  50.

141.  Ibid.,  46.

142.  Thomas  L.  Shipman,  Los  Alamos  Laboratory  Health  Division  Leader,  to
Charles  Dunham,  Director,  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine,  5  December  1956
(ACHRE  No.  DOE-020795-D-2),  3.  On  Sunshine,  Shipman  also  wrote,  "such  a  program
obviously  cannot  be  carried  out  with  the  complete  lack  of  administration  which  has
characterized  past  efforts."  Ibid,  2.

143.  Hal  Hollister,  Environmental  Sciences  Branch,  Division  of  Biology  and
Medicine,  to  Dunham  et  al.,  27  February  1958  ("Reporting  Sunshine")  (ACHRE  No.
DOE-012595-B),  2.  Other  participants  in  AEC-sponsored  biomedical  research  had  a
different  perspective  on  the  fallout  research.

In  1995,  Dr.  Kulp  recalled  that,  from  the  perspective  of  the  researchers  at
Columbia,  the  goals  were  clear~"defining  the  amount  of  SR90  in  the  stratosphere  to  its
mechanism  of  descent  in  the  ground  to  the  movement  through  the  food  chain  to  man."

The  work  of  Sunshine,  he  recalled,  "provided  the  scientific  basis  for  the
International  Treaty  banning  atmospheric  tests."  J.  Laurence  Kulp,  letter  to  Dan  Guttman
(ACHRE),  21  July  1995.

Another  perspective  is  contained  in  a  1973  letter  to  Dixie  Lee  Ray,  the  last
AEC  chairman  before  its  separation  into  agencies  responsible  for  regulating  (the  Nuclear
Regulatory  Commission)  and  promoting  (the  Energy  Research  and  Development
Administration)  nuclear  energy.  Dr.  William  F.  Neuman,  director  of  the  Atomic  Energy


665


Project  at  the  University  of  Rochester,  suggested  that  the  difficulties  leading  to  the
agency's  breakup  were  not  limited  to  the  conflict  between  its  responsibilities  to  promote
and  regulate  atomic  energy.  In  addition,  "the  AEC  (its  Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine
in  particular)  has  been  put  in  the  position  of  providing  a  biological  justification  for  some
other  agency's  political  decision."  He  explained  to  Chairman  Ray:

Some  years  back,  before  the  Test  Ban,  the  military
wished  to  test  various  weapon  designs.  The  Eisenhower
Administration  concurred.  Admiral  Strauss  was
instructed  to  have  the  AEC  provide  the  basis  for  public
acceptance.  This  meant  of  course  that  the  Division  of
Biology  and  Medicine  was  supposed  to  convince  the
public  that  fallout  was  good  for  them  and  environmental
Sr-90  contamination  was  accordingly  expressed  in
'Sunshine  Units'  if  you  recall.  This  very  nearly  tore  the
Division  apart  and  we  were  rescued  from  potential
disaster  only  by  the  timely  signing  of  the  big  power  Test
Ban  Treaty.

Neuman  had  been  a  participant  in  the  fallout  debate  and  was  the  spokesperson
for  a  panel  that  included  Libby,  Eisenbud,  Dunham,  Langham,  and  other  AEC-connected
experts  at  the  1959  congressional  hearings.  William  F.  Neuman,  Wilson  Professor  and
Director,  Atomic  Energy  Project,  University  of  Rochester,  to  Dixie  Lee  Ray,  Chairman,
Atomic  Energy  Commission,  12  November  1973  ("When  you  visited  the  Rochester
Biomedical  Research  Project .  .  .")  (ACHRE  DOE-01 1895-B),  1.

144.  Dwight  Ink,  AEC  General  Manager,  to  Seaborg,  Chairman  of  the  AEC,  9
September  1965,  as  quoted  in  House  Committee  on  Interstate  and  Foreign  Commerce,
Subcommittee  on  Oversight  and  Investigations,  The  'Forgotten  Guinea  Pigs,'  15.

145.  Hacker,  Elements  of  Controversy,  277.

146.  Ibid.,  278.

147.  Ibid.

148.  "The  worst  thing  in  the  world,"  Harry  Truman  reportedly  once  said,  "is
when  records  are  destroyed."  Merle  Miller,  Plain  Speaking:  An  Oral  Biography  of  Harry
Truman  (New  York:  Berkley,  1974),  27.

149.  The  supplemental  volumes  to  this  report  contain  a  detailed  description  of
the  record  collections  reviewed  by  the  Advisory  Committee.

1 50.  As  a  14  February  1995  CIA  report  concluded:

CIA  has  found  no  evidence  that  Agency  offices
sponsored  human  radiation  experiments  or  deliberately
exposed  anyone  to  ionizing  radiation  for  operational  or
experimental  purposes.  As  noted  above,  at  least  two
Agency-affiliated  contractors  [deletion]  and  [Dr.]
Geschickter  [a  Georgetown  University  researcher])  may
have  conducted  human  radiation  experiments  while
working  on  other  matters  for  the  CIA.  Some  CIA
officers  probably  knew  of  human  radiation  tests  by  other
U.S.  government  agencies,  but  apparently  did  not


666


consider  these  tests  particularly  relevant  to  the  Agency's
mission.

Circumstantial  evidence,  however,  may  not  suffice  to
overcome  suspicions  fueled  by  CIA's  contacts  with
persons  and  programs  involved  in  radiation  experiments
sponsored  by  other  agencies.  The  fact  that  MKULTRA
held  the  authority  to  conduct  radiological  experiments,
combined  with  the  Agency's  destruction  of  the  main
MKULTRA  files  in  1973,  has  already  prompted
speculation  about  the  Agency's  "real"  role.  These
heightened  suspicions  will  not  fade  any  time  soon.
Michael  Warner,  CIA  History  Staff,  14  February  1995  ("The  Central  Intelligence  Agency
and  Human  Radiation  Experiments:  An  Analysis  of  the  Findings")  (ACHRE  No.  CIA-
061295-A),  14.

151.  This  conclusion  was  arrived  at  by  DOE  following  an  investigation
conducted  in  response  to  the  Committee's  request  for  the  documents.  DOE  Office  of
Human  Radiation  Experiments,  26  August  1994  ("Destruction  of  the  U.S.  Atomic  Energy
Commission  Division  of  Intelligence  Files")  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-082994-A).  The  DOE
interviewed  DOE  employees  who  stated  that  they  destroyed  documents  under  direction
from  supervisors  during  this  period.  DOE  reported  that,  shortly  after  the  AEC  Division
of  Intelligence  was  abolished  in  1971,  destruction  of  older  file  materials  began.  "This
first  file  'purge'  continued  until  at  least  May  1 974.  Destruction  was  probably  confined  to
documents  dated  prior  to  1964."  Following  the  DOE's  creation  in  1977,  a  second  "purge"
began,  reportedly  based  on  limited  storage  space,  "destroying  most  surviving  files."  In
1988,  DOE  implemented  rules  requiring  that  documents  classified  at  the  Secret  level  be
inventoried.  "Many  offices,  however,  destroyed  Secret  documents  rather  than  having  the
burden  of  inventorying  them.  Surviving  fragments  of  the  AEC  Division  of  Intelligence
files  may  also  have  been  destroyed  during  this  third  'purge.'"  Ibid.,  2-3.  The
investigation  reported  that  records  that  were  kept  of  the  documents  that  were  destroyed
had  themselves  been  subsequently  destroyed  in  the  routine  course  of  business.

1 52.  There  was  no  central  location,  within  agencies,  or  among  them,  that
routinely  kept  anything  but  the  most  fragmentary  records  of  human  experiments
sponsored  by  the  agencies.  During  the  1950s,  a  central  "Bio-Science"  information
exchange  was  maintained.  Government  and  nonfederal  agencies  (such  as  foundations)
formerly  registered  descriptions  of  research  projects  performed  or  sponsored  by  the
federal  government  with  an  office  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution  variously  called  the
Scientific  Information  Exchange  or  the  Bio-Sciences  Information  Exchange.  This  group,
established  at  the  recommendation  of  and  advised  by  the  National  Research  Council,
collected  abstracts  of  research  in  progress  reports  for  the  period  1949-1979.  The
Department  of  Commerce's  National  Technical  Information  Service  began  a  similar
program  two  years  later.

The  abstracts  submitted  to  the  Exchange  were  collected  in  annual  reports  and  are
available  on  microfiche  in  the  Smithsonian  Institution  Archives.  Unfortunately,  the
indices  to  the  reports  are  available  only  on  magnetic  tape  in  a  1970s  mainframe  format
that  Smithsonian  technologists  are  currently  unable  to  read.  For  that  reason,  Advisory
Committee  staff  did  not  review  the  Exchange's  records.


667


153.  As  noted  in  chapter  10,  the  VA  concluded  that  a  "confidential"  division
contemplated  in  relation  to  secret  record  keeping  was  not  activated.

154.  Although,  as  discussed  in  chapter  1 1,  we  must  be  careful  to  distinguish  the
need  to  keep  secret  information,  for  example,  weapons  design  or  a  weapon's  purpose,
from  the  need  to  keep  secret  a  weapons  test  that  may  put  surrounding  populations  at  risk.


668


PART  III


CONTEMPORARY  PROJECTS


Part  III
Overview


In  parts  I  and  II  of  this  report,  the  Advisory  Committee  attempted  to
come  to  terms  with  the  past.  We  told  the  history  of  standards  for  conducting
human  subject  research  in  part  I,  and  the  history  of  human  radiation  experiments
through  representative  case  studies  in  part  II.  Here  in  part  III  of  our  final  report,
we  attempt  to  assess  whether  the  current  protections  for  human  subjects  are
better  than  the  prevailing  standards  and  practices  during  the  1944  to  1974  period
to  help  recommend  what  changes,  if  any,  ought  to  be  instituted  in  current  policies
governing  human  subject  research.

The  Advisory  Committee's  study  of  contemporary  research  ethics  is  three-
pronged.  It  comprises  a  review  of  agency  policies  and  oversight  practices,  a
review  of  documents  from  recently  funded  research  proposals  (the  Research
Proposal  Review  Project,  or  RPRP)  to  examine  the  extent  to  which  the  rights  and
interests  of  the  subjects  of  federally  sponsored  research  appear  to  be  protected,
and  the  Subject  Interview  Study  (SIS)  in  which  the  attitudes  and  beliefs  of
patients  about  medical  research  and  their  decisions  and  experiences  regarding
participation  in  research  are  examined.  These  projects  together  form  the  basis  of
the  Advisory  Committee's  picture  of  the  protections  now  afforded  the  subjects  of
biomedical  research  and,  along  with  findings  regarding  radiation  experiments
during  the  1944-1974  period,  inform  the  forward-looking  recommendations  of  the
Advisory  Committee,  found  in  part  IV.

Chapter  14  reviews  the  current  regulatory  structure  for  human  subjects
research  conducted  or  supported  by  federal  departments  and  agencies,  a  structure
that  has  been  in  place  since  1991.  This  "Common  Rule"  has  its  roots  in  the
human  subject  protection  regulations  promulgated  by  the  then-Department  of
Health,  Education,  and  Welfare  (DHEW)  in  1974.  The  historical  developments
behind  these  regulations  are  described  in  chapter  3.  Following  a  summary  of  the


671


Part  111

essential  features  of  the  Common  Rule,  chapter  14  discusses  several  subjects  of
particular  relevance  to  the  Advisory  Committee's  work,  such  as  special  review
processes  for  ionizing  radiation  research,  protection  for  human  subjects  in
classified  research,  and  audit  procedures  of  institutions  performing  human  subject
research.

Chapter  15  describes  the  Research  Proposal  Review  Project  (RPRP),  the
Advisory  Committee's  examination  of  documents  from  research  projects
conducted  at  institutions  throughout  the  country,  including  both  radiation  and
nonradiation  proposals.  Documents  utilized  in  the  RPRP  were  those  available  to
the  local  institutional  review  boards  (IRBs)  at  the  institutions  where  the  research
was  conducted.  The  goals  of  the  RPRP  were  to  gain  an  understanding  of  the
ethics  of  radiation  research  as  compared  with  nonradiation  research;  how  well
research  proposals  address  central  ethical  considerations  such  as  risk,
voluntariness,  and  subject  selection;  and  whether  informed  consent  procedures
seem  to  be  appropriate.

The  RPRP  reviewed  documents  prepared  by  investigators  and  institutions
and  submitted  in  IRB  applications.  This  study  was  complemented  by  a
nationwide  effort  to  learn  about  research  from  the  perspective  of  patients
themselves,  including  those  who  were  and  were  not  research  subjects.  The
Subject  Interview  Study  (SIS),  described  in  chapter  16,  was  conducted  through
interviews  with  nearly  1,900  patients  throughout  the  country.  The  SIS  aimed  to
learn  the  perspectives  of  former,  current,  and  prospective  research  subjects  by
asking  about  their  attitudes  and  beliefs  regarding  the  endeavor  of  human  subject
research  generally  and  their  participation  specifically.

The  RPRP  tried  to  understand  the  experience  of  human  subjects  research
from  the  standpoint  of  the  local  oversight  process,  while  the  SIS  tried  to
understand  it  from  the  standpoint  of  the  participant.  Although  the  two  studies
related  to  different  research  projects  and  different  groups  of  patients  and  subjects,
some  common  tensions  in  the  human  research  experience  emerge  in  both  projects,
and  they  are  described  in  the  "Discussion"  section  of  part  III.  For  example,  it  has
long  been  recognized  that  the  physician  who  engages  in  research  with  patient-
subjects  assumes  two  roles  that  could  conflict:  that  of  the  caregiver  and  that  of  the
researcher.  The  goals  inherent  in  each  role  are  different:  direct  benefit  of  the
individual  patient  in  the  first  case  and  the  acquisition  of  general  medical
knowledge  in  the  second  case.  The  interviews  with  SIS  participants  suggest  that
at  least  some  patient-subjects  are  not  aware  of  this  distinction  or  of  the  potential
for  conflict.  In  our  review  of  documents  in  the  RPRP  we  found  that  the  written
information  provided  to  potential  patient-subjects  sometimes  obscured,  rather
than  highlighted,  the  differences  between  research  and  medical  care  and  thus
likely  contributed  to  the  potential  for  patients  to  confuse  the  two.

To  help  complete  the  picture  of  current  human  subject  research  and  its
regulation  and  oversight,  the  Committee  also  gathered  limited  information  in  two
areas:  (1)  the  federal  system  of  human  subject  protection  as  viewed  by  those

672


Overview

charged  with  implementing  it  at  the  local  level,  the  chairs  of  IRBs;  and  (2)  the
particular  review  process  applied  to  human  subject  research  involving  radiation  as
viewed  by  those  charged  with  implementing  it  at  the  local  level,  the  chairs  of
radiation  safety  committees.*

A  letter  was  written  to  forty-one  chairs  of  IRBs  and  forty  chairs  of
radiation  safety  committees  at  institutions  throughout  the  country,  attempting  to
gain  their  perspectives  on  the  current  regulatory  systems  their  committees  seek  to
apply.  Many  of  these  letters  are  reproduced  in  a  supplemental  volume  to  this
report.  Most  of  the  replies  from  IRB  chairs  indicated  a  general  approval  of  the
current  system,  but  many  also  had  useful  observations  and  suggestions  for
improvement.  For  example,  several  expressed  concern  about  what  they  believed
to  be  a  disparity  in  the  procedures  of  IRBs  from  one  institution  to  another.  The
chairs  of  radiation  safety  committees,  on  the  other  hand,  reported  a  nearly
universal  confidence  in,  and  approval  of,  the  review  process  for  human  subject
research  involving  the  use  of  radiation.  The  Committee's  recommendations,  in
part  IV  of  this  report,  address  some  of  the  concerns  outlined  in  response  to  our
queries.

As  the  Committee's  work  in  part  III  shows,  in  the  discussion  section,
contemporary  human  subject  research  does  not  suffer  from  the  same  shortcomings
witnessed  in  the  1940s  and  1950s,  but  poses  different  issues  that  need  to  be
addressed.  With  a  system  of  human  subjects  protections  comes  issues  related  to
implementation  and  interpretation  of  rules  and  regulations.  And  with  a  change  in
the  culture  of  medicine  comes  a  change  in  the  relationship  between  researchers
and  subjects.  In  the  historical  period  of  the  Committee's  review,  we  found  that
subjects  needed  protections  to  ensure  their  basic  rights  to  consent  to  or  to  refuse
participation  in  research.  While  this  need  to  protect  the  right  of  consent
continues,  in  the  current  period  we  found  that  subjects  also  need  protections  to
ensure  their  interests  are  served  in  understanding  the  distinctions  between
research  and  therapy  and  the  limits  of  the  benefits  research  may  offer.  These
findings  and  conclusions  suggest  the  need  for  changes  in  an  oversight  system
designed  to  address  the  concerns  of  an  earlier  time,  and  the  Committee  makes
recommendations  for  such  change  in  part  IV  of  this  report.


"The  Committee  also  contacted  a  sample  of  institutions  at  which  therapeutic
human  radiation  research  involving  higher  doses  of  radiation,  and  therefore  imposing
substantial  risk,  had  recently  been  conducted  according  to  reports  in  the  medical
literature.  The  Committee  was  interested  in  learning  whether  the  research  projects
reported  in  these  journal  articles  had  been  reviewed  by  an  IRB,  and  if  IRB  review  had
depended  upon  whether  the  research  was  supported  by  federal  funds.  Information  was
received  from  only  nine  of  the  sixteen  institutions  requested.  Although  the  projects  about
which  we  were  inquiring  were  sometimes  described  as  clinical  investigations  in  the
journal  reports,  these  institutions  did  not  always  view  them  as  satisfying  the  definition  of
human  subject  research  and  thus  did  not  appear  to  require  IRB  review  for  these  projects.

673


14

Current  Federal  policies

Governing  Human  Subjects

Research


Each  year  many  thousands  of  people  participate  in  biomedical  and
behavioral  research  projects  conducted,  sponsored,  or  regulated  by  federal
agencies.  The  federal  government  invests  roughly  $3.5  billion  annually  in
research  that  involves  human  subjects.1  The  Committee  wanted  to  establish  what
the  federal  government  currently  does  to  protect  the  rights  and  interests  of  these
subjects.  The  answers  to  this  question  all  emanate  from  a  seminal  event  in  the
history  of  human  subjects  research,  the  adoption  of  what  is  widely  known  as  the

"Common  Rule."

A  single,  general  set  of  regulatory  provisions  governing  human  subjects
protections  was  adopted  by  sixteen  federal  departments  and  agencies2  in  1991;  the
Common  Rule  specifies  how  research  that  involves  human  subjects  is  to  be
conducted  and  reviewed,  including  specific  rules  for  obtaining  informed  consent.3
The  Common  Rule  was  developed  in  response  to  recommendations  made  by  the
President's  Commission  for  the  Study  of  Ethical  Problems  in  Medicine  and
Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research  in  1981  calling  for  the  adoption  by  all
federal  agencies  of  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  regulations  then  in
effect  for  the  protection  of  human  subjects  of  research.4  In  mid- 1982  the
President's  science  adviser,  the  head  of  the  Office  of  Science  and  Technology
Policy  (OSTP),  appointed  an  ad  hoc  committee  that  included  the  federal
departments  and  agencies  engaged  in  research  involving  human  subjects  to
address  these  recommendations.5  Nine  years  later,  the  Common  Rule  was  the
result  of  this  committee's  efforts.


675


Part  III


History  of  the  Common  Rule  Since  1974a

1 974  Title  II  of  the  National  Research  Act  (P.L.  93-348)

Required  codification  of  DHEW policy  in  regulations,  imposed  a
moratorium  on  federally  funded  fetal  research,  and  established
requirements  for  IRB  review  of  all  human  subjects  research  at  any
institution  receiving  DHEW  funding.
DHEW  regulations  for  the  protection  of  human  research  subjects,  45  C.F.R.  46
Established  JRB  review  procedures  in  accordance  with  Title  II.  Later
in  the  same  year  DHEW  published  regulations  providing  additional
protections  for  pregnant  women  and  fetuses.

1974-1978  National  Commission  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects  of  Biomedical  and

Behavioral  Research

Issued  reports  and  recommendations  on  fetal  research;  on  research
involving  prisoners,  psychosurgery,  children,  and  the  mentally  infirm;
on  IRBs  and  informed  consent;  and,  in  The  Belmont  Report,  discussed
criteria  for  distinguishing  research  from  the  practice  of  medicine  and
ethical  principles  underlying  the  protection  of  subjects.

1978  Revised  DHEW  regulations  governing  protections  for  pregnant  women,  fetuses,

in  vitro  fertilization  (subpart  B  of  45  C.F.R.  46),  and  prisoners  (subpart  C)
published

1 980- 1 983  President's  Commission  for  the  Study  of  Ethical  Problems  in  Medicine  and

Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research

Charged  with,  among  other  responsibilities,  reviewing  federal  policies
governing  human  subjects  research  and  determining  how  well  those
policies  were  being  carried  out.  Recommended  that  all  federal
agencies  adopt  the  DHHS  (a  successor  agency  to  DHEW)  regulations
for  the  protection  of  human  subjects  (1981).

1981  DHHS  published  a  revision  of  45  C.F.R.  46,  responding  to  recommendations  of

the  National  Commission

The  revision  set  out  in  greater  specificity  IRB  responsibilities  and  the
procedures  IRBs  were  to  follow.
FDA  regulations  at  21  C.F.R.  50,  governing  informed  consent  procedures,  and  at
21  C.F.R.  56,  governing  IRBs,  revised  to  correspond  to  DHHS  regulations  to  the
extent  allowed  by  FDA's  statute


Tor  a  brief  history  of  federal  protections  for  human  subjects  prior  to  1974,  see  chapter  3.

676


Chapter  14

1982  President's  Science  Adviser,  Office  of  Science  and  Technology  Policy  (OSTP),
appointed  an  interagency  committee  to  develop  a  common  federal  policy  for  the
protection  of  human  research  subjects

1983  DHHS  regulation  governing  protections  afforded  children  in  research  (subpart  D
of45C.F.R.  46)  published

1986  Proposed  common  federal  policy  for  the  protection  of  human  research  subjects

published

1991  Final  common  federal  policy  published  on  June  18,  codified  in  the  regulations  of

fifteen  federal  agencies  and  adopted  by  the  CIA  under  executive  order.

This  common  policy,  known  as  "the  Common  Rule, "  is  identical  to  the
basic  DHHS  policy  for  the  protection  of  research  subjects,  45  C.F.R.
46,  subpart  A.  Other  sections  of  the  DHHS  regulation  provide
additional  protections  for  pregnant  women,  fetuses,  in  vitro  fertilization
(subpart  B),  prisoners  (subpart  C),  and  children  (subpart  D).  Several
agencies  have  adopted  these  additional  provisions  as  administrative
guidelines. The  FDA  made  conforming  changes  in  its  informed  consent
and  IRB  regulations.


The  promulgation  of  the  Common  Rule  was  a  significant  achievement.
The  ability  of  the  Common  Rule  to  protect  the  rights  and  interests  of  human
subjects  is,  however,  at  least  partially  dependent  on  how  the  departments  and
agencies  to  which  the  Common  Rule  applies  implement  and  oversee  its
provisions.  As  a  foundation  for  the  Advisory  Committee's  recommendations
concerning  contemporary  policies  and  practices  regarding  human  subjects,  we
asked  the  sixteen  federal  agencies  and  departments  that  conduct  human  subjects
research  to  provide  us  with  information  on  the  relevant  policies  and  practices
currently  in  place.  In  this  brief  descriptive  overview,  we  focus  on  six  agencies
within  the  scope  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  charter:  the  Department  of  Defense
(DOD),  Department  of  Energy  (DOE),  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services
(DHHS),  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs  (VA),  National  Aeronautics  and  Space
Administration  (NASA),  and  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency  (CIA).
(Information  on  the  ten  other  agencies  covered  by  the  Common  Rule  is  provided
in  a  supplemental  volume  to  this  report.)

The  following  sections  briefly  describe  the  institutional  structures,  review
mechanisms,  and  policies  prescribed  by  the  Common  Rule  and  the  variety  of
ways  in  which  federal  agencies  attempt  to  ensure  that  human  subjects  are
adequately  protected  in  the  conduct  of  research.  The  chapter  closes  with  a  review
of  an  issue  of  particular  importance  to  the  Advisory  Committee-the  status  of
protections  for  human  subjects  of  classified  research.6


677


Part  III

THE  FEDERAL  POLICY  FOR  HUMAN  SUBJECTS
PROTECTIONS  (THE  COMMON  RULE)

The  Common  Rule  applies  to  all  federally  funded  research  conducted  both
intra-  and  extramurally.  The  rule  directs  a  research  institution  to  assure  the
federal  government  that  it  will  provide  and  enforce  protections  for  human  subjects
of  research  conducted  under  its  auspices.  These  institutional  assurances
constitute  the  basic  framework  within  which  federal  protections  are  effected.
Local  research  institutions  remain  largely  responsible  for  carrying  out  the  specific
directives  of  the  Common  Rule.  They  must  assess  research  proposals  in  terms  of
their  risks  to  subjects  and  their  potential  benefits,  and  they  must  see  that  the
Common  Rule's  requirements  for  selecting  subjects  and  obtaining  informed
consent  are  met.

As  discussed  below,  central  to  the  process  of  ensuring  that  the  rights  and
well-being  of  human  subjects  are  protected  are  institutional  review  boards  (IRBs).
The  Common  Rule  requires  that  a  research  institution,  as  a  condition  for  receiving
federal  research  support,  establish  and  delegate  to  an  IRB  the  authority  to  review,
stipulate  changes  in,  approve  or  disapprove,  and  oversee  human  subjects
protections  for  all  research  conducted  at  the  institution.  IRBs  are  generally
composed  of  some  combination  of  physicians,  scientists,  administrators,  and
community  representatives,  usually  at  the  local  research  institution,  but
sometimes  at  an  agency  that  conducts  intramural  research.7  IRBs  have  the
authority  to  suspend  the  conduct  of  any  research  found  to  entail  unexpected  or
undue  risk  to  subjects  or  research  that  does  not  conform  to  the  Common  Rule  or
the  institution's  additional  protections.

A  prominent  feature  of  the  Common  Rule  is  the  informed  consent
requirement.  The  informed  consent  of  a  competent  subject,  along  with  adequate
safeguards  to  protect  the  interests  of  a  subject  who  is  unable  to  give  consent,  is  a
cornerstone  of  modern  research  ethics,  reflecting  respect  for  the  subject's
autonomy  and  for  his  or  her  capacity  for  choice.  Informed  consent  is  an  ongoing
process  of  communication  between  researchers  and  the  subjects  of  their  research.
It  is  not  simply  a  signed  consent  form  and  does  not  end  at  the  moment  a
prospective  subject  agrees  to  participate  in  a  research  project.

The  required  elements  of  informed  consent  stipulated  by  the  Common
Rule  are  summarized  as  follows:

•  A  statement  that  the  study  involves  research,  an  explanation  of  the
purposes  of  the  research,  and  a  description  of  the  procedures  to  be
followed;

•  A  description  of  any  reasonably  foreseeable  risks  or  discomforts  to  the
subject;

•  A  description  of  any  benefits  to  the  subjects  or  to  others  that  might
reasonably  be  expected;


678


Chapter  14

•  A  disclosure  of  alternative  procedures  or  courses  of  treatment;

•  A  statement  describing  the  extent  to  which  confidentiality  of  records
identifying  the  subject  will  be  maintained;

•  For  research  involving  more  than  minimal  risk,  an  explanation  of  the
availability  and  nature  of  any  compensation  or  medical  treatment  if  injury
occurs;

•  Identification  of  whom  to  contact  for  further  information  about  the
research  and  about  subjects'  rights,  and  whom  to  contact  in  the  event  of  a
research-related  injury;  and

A  statement  that  participation  is  voluntary,  that  refusal  to  participate  will
involve  no  penalty  or  loss  of  benefits  to  which  the  subject  is  otherwise
entitled,  and  that  the  subject  may  discontinue  participation  at  any  time.8

The  Common  Rule  includes  several  additional  elements  of  consent  that
may  be  appropriate  under  particular  circumstances9  and  describes  the  conditions
under  which  an  IRB  may  modify  or  waive  the  informed  consent  requirement  in
particular  research  projects.10

When  an  IRB  reviews  and  approves  a  research  project,  it  must  pay
particular  attention  to  the  project's  plan  for  obtaining  subjects'  informed  consent
and  to  the  documentation  of  informed  consent.  The  IRB  may  require  changes  in
the  investigator's  procedure  for  obtaining  informed  consent  and  in  the  consent
documents.  The  board  also  must  be  allowed  to  observe  the  informed  consent
process  if  the  IRB  considers  such  oversight  important  in  ascertaining  that  subjects
are  being  adequately  protected  by  that  process."

RESEARCH  INVOLVING  IONIZING  RADIATION

Beyond  the  strictures  of  the  Common  Rule,  research  involving  either
external  radiation  or  radioactive  drugs  usually  undergoes  additional  reviews  for
safety  and  risk  (including  a  review  of  radiation  dose)  prior  to  IRB  review  at  the
local  research  institution.  Most  medical  institutions  have  a  radiation  safety
committee  (RSC)  responsible  for  evaluating  the  risks  of  medical  activities
involving  radiation,  whether  for  diagnostic,  treatment,  or  research  purposes,  and
limiting  the  exposure  of  both  employees  and  subjects  to  radiation.  In  addition,
research  and  medical  institutions  that  perform  basic  research  involving  human
subjects  and  radioactive  drugs  must  have  such  studies  reviewed  and  approved  by
a  radioactive  drug  research  committee  (RDRC)-a  local  institutional  committee
approved  by  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  to  ensure  that  safeguards,
including  limitations  on  radiation  dose,  in  the  use  of  such  drugs  are  met.12
Notwithstanding  the  prior  review  and  approval  of  either  or  both  of  these  radiation
committees,  the  IRB  must  also  assess  the  risks  and  potential  benefits  of  the
proposed  research  before  approving  it.13


679


Part  III

SCOPE  OF  PROGRAMS  OF  RESEARCH  INVOLVING
HUMAN  SUBJECTS

The  six  federal  departments  and  agencies  (DHHS,  DOD,  DOE,  NASA,
VA,  and  CIA)  all  conduct  or  support  research  involving  human  subjects.  Each
agency's  program  is  distinctive  in  terms  of  its  scope,  organization,  and  focus,  all
of  which  reflect  the  primary  mission  of  the  agency.

DHHS  is  the  largest  federal  sponsor  of  research  involving  human  subjects,
with  approximately  $367  million  in  intramural  funding  and  $2.4  billion  in
extramural  support  for  clinical  research  in  fiscal  year  1992,  the  latest  year  for
which  an  estimate  of  extramural  research  funding  is  available.14  Intramural
research  is  usually  conducted  by  agency  staff  members  at  various  field  sites,
while  extramural  research  is  conducted  outside  the  agency  by  contractors  or
grantees  such  as  universities.  Most  of  this  research  is  biomedical,  and  some
involves  the  use  of  radiation  in  experimental  diagnostic  and  therapeutic
procedures  or  as  tracers  in  basic  biomedical  research.'5  The  U.S.  Public  Health
Service  (PHS)  is  the  operating  division  of  DHHS  and  the  principal  health  agency
of  the  federal  government.16

The  DOD  conducts  biomedical  and  behavioral  research  involving  human
subjects  within  each  of  the  military  services  and  through  several  additional
defense  agencies,  primarily  in  areas  that  support  the  mission  of  the  department.
In  fiscal  year  1994  DOD  spent  an  estimated  $77  million  on  intramural  and  $107
million  on  extramural  human  subjects  research.17

The  VA  operates  1 7 1  inpatient  medical  centers,  including  short-term
hospitals,  psychiatric  and  rehabilitation  facilities,  and  nursing  homes.  The  VA's
largely  intramural  biomedical  research  program  focuses  on  the  health  care  needs
of  veterans.  The  VA  spends  approximately  $114  million  annually  in  appropriated
research  money  on  human  subjects  research,  along  with  another  $110  million  in
staff  clinicians'  time.  Other  federal  agencies  and  private  entities  also  support
research  in  VA  facilities.18

The  DOE  conducts  and  supports  research,  both  intramurally  and
extramurally,  involving  human  subjects  that  ranges  from  diagnostic  and
therapeutic  applications  in  nuclear  medicine  to  epidemiological  and  occupational
health  studies.  DOE  laboratories  also  receive  funding  from  other  federal  agencies
such  as  the  NIH  and  from  private  sponsors  of  research.  DOE  spends  $46  million
annually  on  human  subjects  research,  more  than  $20  million  of  which  is  devoted
to  the  Radiation  Effects  Research  Foundation  (RERF)  in  Japan,  which  is  charged
with  studying  the  health  effects  of  exposure  to  radiation  from  atomic  weapons.19

Both  intramurally  and  extramurally,  NASA  conducts  ground-based  and  in-
flight biomedical  research  involving  human  subjects  related  to  space  life. In
fiscal  year  1994  NASA  spent  approximately  $25  million  on  ground-based  human
subjects  research.20

The  CIA  supports  or  conducts  a  small  number  of  intramurally  and


680


Chapter  14

extramurally  conducted  studies  involving  human  subjects  each  year.21  No  figure
for  the  annual  dollar  amount  spent  by  the  CIA  was  made  available  to  the
Advisory  Committee.

ADMINISTRATIVE  STRUCTURES  AND  PROCEDURES  FOR
RESEARCH  OVERSIGHT

The  following  is  an  overview  of  the  administrative  structures  and
procedures  used  by  the  six  departments  and  agencies  to  ensure  compliance  with
human  subjects  ethics  rules,  particularly  as  they  relate  to  the  Common  Rule.  The
Advisory  Committee  asked  each  of  these  agencies  to  provide  the  following
information  on  its  program  of  protections  for  human  subjects  involved  in
research:

•  The  scope  of  its  human  subjects  research  programs;

•  The  organizational  structure  of  its  human  subjects  protection  efforts  and
the  resources  devoted  to  such  activities;

The  policy  issuances  and  guidances  pursuant  to  the  Common  Rule  that  the
department  or  agency  has  prepared  and  provides  to  subsidiary  agencies
and  research  institutions  engaged  in  human  subjects  research;
Monitoring  and  enforcement  activities  for  ensuring  that  the  provisions  of
the  Common  Rule  are  met;

•  Sanctions  available  for  noncompliance  with  human  subjects  protections;

•  The  rules  governing  classified  research  involving  human  subjects;  and
The  use  or  potential  use  of  waivers  of  any  of  the  requirements  of  the
Common  Rule  or  the  agency's  human  subjects  regulations.

In  a  supplemental  volume  to  this  report  we  provide  greater  detail  on  the
departments'  and  agencies'  responses.

Each  federal  department  structures  its  program  of  administrative  oversight
of  human  subjects  research  somewhat  differently,  despite  the  fact  that  all  operate
under  the  requirements  of  the  Common  Rule.22  Some  departments  conduct
reviews  of  research  documentation  out  of  one  central  departmental  office,  while
others  rely  on  local  review;  some  provide  detailed  interpretive  guidance  on
human  subjects  protections  to  subsidiary  intramural  research  offices,  contractors,
and  grantees,  while  others  simply  reference  the  Common  Rule;  and  some
departments  audit  or  review  IRB  performance  routinely,  while  others  conduct
investigations  only  when  problems  emerge.

The  Office  for  Protection  from  Research  Risks  (OPRR)  at  the  National
Institutes  of  Health  (within  DHHS)  serves  not  only  as  the  locus  for  that
department's  policies  for  the  protection  of  research  subjects  but  also  as  the
principal  federal  agent  approving  the  assurances  of  research  institutions  to
conduct  human  subjects  research  sponsored  by  any  of  a  number  of  departments


681


23


Part  III

Scientific  peer  review  of  federally  sponsored  research  is  one  layer  of
protection  for  research  subjects.  Most  federal  research  programs  require  that
committees  of  scientists,  expert  in  the  particular  subject  under  consideration  and
often  from  outside  the  agency  (generally  known  as  "study  sections"),  review  both
intramural  and  extramural  research  proposals  for  scientific  merit  and  make
recommendations  regarding  funding.  When  these  committees  of  subject-matter
experts  review  research  proposals,  they  also  consider  the  risks  that  may  be
involved  for  subjects.  They  may  recommend  that  the  sponsoring  agency  more
closely  consider  the  potential  risks  or  that  the  principal  investigator  make  specific
changes  in  the  research  protocol  prior  to  any  funding.

Local  review  is  a  key  component  of  the  oversight  system.  The  Common
Rule  requires  IRB  review  and  approval  prior  to  the  granting  of  federal  funding  for
research  on  human  subjects.  Almost  all  federal  agencies  that  conduct  human
subjects  research  within  their  own  facilities  have  intramural  IRBs,  whose
members  include  agency  staff  and  at  least  one  member  who  is  not  affiliated  with
the  facility.24  Likewise,  extramural  research  projects  must  undergo  IRB  review
prior  to  agency  funding,  usually  by  an  IRB  at  the  site  of  the  research  activity-for
example,  a  university,  medical  school,  or  hospital.  The  IRB  is  an  administrative
unit  that  must  itself  comply  with  certain  requirements  of  the  Common  Rule  in
terms  of  its  composition,  review  procedures,  and  substantive  review  criteria;  it
must  also  direct  researchers  to  comply  with  other  requirements  of  the  rule,  such  as
adequate  informed  consent  and  fair  subject  selection  procedures.

A  research  institution  that  has  assured  either  OPRR  or  the  federal  agency
sponsoring  the  research  that  it  conducts  human  subjects  research  in  compliance
with  the  Common  Rule  must  delegate  to  its  IRB  the  authority  to  preclude  or  halt
the  conduct  of  any  federally  funded  research  project  that  does  not  conform  with
federal  human  subjects  protections.25  This  delegation  of  authority  applies  to  IRBs
within  federal  research  institutions  for  intramural  research  and  to  those  at
nonfederal  research  institutions  as  well.  This  authority  extends  even  to  research
performed  by  military  organizations,  where  unit  commanders  cannot  overrule
safeguards  adopted  by  military  IRBs.26  Thus  the  IRB  is  the  enforcing  agent  of
federal  protections  that  is  situated  closest  to  the  conduct  of  research.  Much  of  the
success  or  failure  of  the  federal  regulations  governing  human  subjects  research
depends  on  the  effectiveness  of  IRBs  in  carrying  out  their  responsibilities:
assessing  research  proposals  prior  to  their  funding;  stipulating  any  changes  in  the
research  protocol  or  informed  consent  procedure  that  strengthen  the  protections
afforded  the  subjects;  disapproving  inadequate  or  excessively  risky  research
proposals;  minimizing  risks  to  subjects;  reviewing  ongoing  research  at  least  every
twelve  months  to  ascertain  that  the  research  poses  no  undue  risks  to  subjects;  and
taking  action  quickly  to  correct  any  failings  in  safeguarding  subjects'  rights  and
welfare.27

In  overseeing  human  subjects  research  conducted  in-house  or  supported
extramurally,  federal  agencies  acquire  the  following  responsibilities:  (1)


682


Chapter  14

communication  of  practice  guidelines  to  research  institutions  and  IRBs  based  on
the  policies  of  the  Common  Rule,  (2)  establishment  of  a  structure  whereby
research  proposals  involving  human  subjects  are  peer  reviewed  for  scientific
merit  as  well  as  for  IRB  approval  and  the  adequacy  of  subject  protections,  (3)
negotiation  of  assurances  with  research  institutions  that  ensure  that  adequate
protections  will  be  in  place  for  research  subjects,  (4)  verification  that  institutions,
their  IRBs,  and  researchers  are  complying  with  the  federal  human  subjects
regulations,  and  (5)  investigation  of  complaints  of  noncompliance  and  adverse
outcomes  for  subjects  of  research.

Table  1,  "Human  Subjects  Research  &  Protections  in  Seven  Departments
and  Agencies"  (at  the  end  of  this  chapter),  summarizes  information  received  by
the  Advisory  Committee  about  human  subjects  research  programs  in  DHHS,
DOD,  DOE,  VA,  NASA,  CIA,  and  FDA  (a  subagency  of  DHHS).  This  chart
shows  each  department's  or  agency's  staffing  levels  for  human  subjects  protection
activities.  Both  the  size  of  the  departments'  research  programs  and  their
investment  of  staff  resources  in  oversight  activities  vary  widely.  A  particularly
important  distinction  in  oversight  programs  is  the  extent  to  which  they  investigate
the  performance  of  research  institutions  and  IRBs  in  carrying  out  their
responsibilities  under  the  Common  Rule.  Some  departments  rely  heavily  on  the
prospective  assurances  that  research  institutions  make  to  the  funding  agency  or  to
OPRR,  while  others  audit  research  institutions  and  IRB  records  periodically.

The  method,  intensity,  and  frequency  of  research  oversight  and  inspection
activities  depend  entirely  on  how  much  staff  and  budget  an  agency  allots  them.
OPRR  negotiates  multiple  project  assurances  (MPAs)  with  large  research
institutions  that  perform  a  significant  amount  of  research  funded  by  DHHS.  If  an
institution  is  awarded  an  MPA  by  OPRR,  the  federal  agency  funding  the  research
must  accept  that  institution's  assurance  of  compliance  with  federal  requirements
and  may  not  impose  additional  assurance  requirements  on  the  institution.  This
provision  is  intended  to  avoid  duplicative  and  potentially  contradictory
enforcement  of  the  federal  protections.28

OPRR,  in  overseeing  human  subjects  protections  for  DHHS-funded
research  and  for  all  institutions  to  which  it  has  issued  an  assurance,  generally
investigates  the  conduct  of  research  only  in  cases  where  a  complaint  has  been
filed;  where  an  institution,  IRB,  or  researcher  has  reported  a  problem  or  adverse
outcome;  or  where  a  problematic  audit  finding  has  been  referred  to  it  by  the
FDA.29  Principal  investigators  are  required  to  report  to  the  IRB  any  adverse
outcomes  to  subjects  in  the  course  of  their  research,  and  the  IRB  must  have
procedures  to  ensure  that  the  appropriate  institutional  officials  and  the  funding
agency  are  informed  as  well.  The  FDA,  in  its  role  regulating  new  drugs,
biologies,  and  devices  for  marketing,  enforces  the  somewhat  different
requirements  for  human  subjects  protections  of  the  Food,  Drug,  and  Cosmetic  Act
through  periodic  on-site  investigations  of  research  institutions  (e.g.,
pharmaceutical  firms,  university-based  research  facilities  funded  by


683


Part  III

pharmaceutical  firms,  independent  testing  laboratories)  and  their  IRBs.30  The
DOD  conducts  on-site  audits  of  its  intramural  research  programs  in  addition  to
negotiating  assurances.  The  DOD  also  reports  that  it  is  common  practice  in
DOD-funded  research  to  appoint  independent  medical  monitors— health  care
providers  qualified  by  training,  experience,  or  both  to  monitor  human  subjects
during  the  conduct  of  research  as  advocates  for  safety  of  the  subjects.31  The  DOE
is  now  planning  to  institute  periodic  audits  of  the  research  programs  that  it  funds
in  addition  to  relying  on  assurances.32

Special  Issues  Arising  in  DOD  Research

Human  subjects  research  conducted  by  military  agencies  and  within
military  settings  entails  considerations  for  subject  protections  and  research
oversight  that  are  unique  to  the  military  context.  The  activities  of  military
research  programs  may  be  difficult  to  distinguish  from  innovative  training
programs  and  medical  interventions  undertaken  for  the  protection  of  the  troops.
In  addition  to  enforcing  policies  derived  from  the  requirements  of  the  Common
Rule,  DOD  has  in  place  a  parallel  set  of  regulations  for  managing  the  risks  to
which  military  personnel  are  exposed  in  the  course  of  these  routine  duties.33
Military  leaders  are  responsible  for  determining  whether  human  experimentation
protections,  in  addition  to  the  more  general  risk-assessment  requirements,  apply
to  particular  practices.  A  further  distinction  of  the  military  context  is  the
hierarchical  and  comprehensive  nature  of  its  authority  structure,  which  poses
special  issues  with  respect  to  voluntariness  in  the  recruitment  of  experimental
subjects.  In  some  cases,  military  researchers  have  excluded  unit  officers  and
senior  noncommissioned  officers  from  subject  recruitment  sessions  (e.g.,  in
vaccine  trials  conducted  by  Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center).34  DOD  has
regulations  that  require  most  more-than-minimal-risk  research  proposals  to  be
subjected  to  a  second  level  of  review  by  each  military  medical  service  at  a  central
oversight  office.35  The  Army,  for  example,  requires  greater-than-minimal-risk
research  protocols  to  undergo  a  second  level  of  review  at  the  Human  Use  Review
and  Regulatory  Affairs  Division  (HURRAD)  and  the  Human  Subjects  Research
Review  Board  or  the  Clinical  Investigation  Regulatory  Office  (CIRO).36

FEDERAL  RESPONSES  TO  VIOLATIONS  OF  HUMAN
SUBJECTS  PROTECTIONS

In  the  event  that  the  Common  Rule  is  violated  in  the  conduct  of  federally
sponsored  research  involving  human  subjects,  there  are  various  responses  that  can
affect  both  investigators  and  grantee  institutions,  such  as  withdrawal  or  restriction
of  an  institution's  or  project's  assurance  and,  with  that  action,  of  research  funding
and  suspension  or  termination  of  IRB  approval  of  the  research.  In  addition,  an
IRB  is  authorized  by  the  Common  Rule  to  suspend  or  terminate  its  approval  of


684


Chapter  14

research  that  fails  to  comply  with  the  IRB's  requirements  or  when  a  research
subject  suffers  an  adverse  event.37  No  federal  department  or  agency  may  continue
to  fund  a  project  from  which  IRB  approval  has  been  withdrawn  or  at  an  institution
whose  assurance  has  been  withdrawn.38

An  institution's  or  investigator's  prior  performance  with  respect  to  human
subjects  protections  may  affect  future  federal  funding  as  well.  If  human  subjects
protection  regulations  are  willfully  violated,  the  department  secretary  or  agency
head  may  bar  the  organization  or  individual  from  receiving  funding  from  any
federal  source.39  Such  debarment  must  be  for  a  specified  length  of  time  and,  in
some  extreme  cases,  may  be  permanent.

Federal  agencies  may  also  take  disciplinary  action  against  employees
involved  in  human  subjects  research  for  failure  to  follow  human  subjects
protection  rules.  For  example,  DOD  sanctions  for  noncompliance  by  intramural
researchers  include  loss  of  investigator  privileges.  For  military  personnel,
potential  sanctions  are  letters  of  reprimand,  nonjudicial  punishment,  and  sanctions
under  the  Military  Code  of  Justice;  for  civilian  DOD  personnel,  sanctions  include
reprimands,  suspension,  or  termination  of  employment.

No  requirement  of  the  Common  Rule  can  preempt  state  and  local  laws
governing  the  conduct  of  human  subjects  research  that  are  stricter  or  provide
additional  protections  for  subjects.  Of  those  states  with  any  laws  governing
research  involving  human  subjects,  only  California  authorizes  sanctions  for
failure  to  obtain  a  subject's  informed  consent.40  The  California  statute  authorizes
monetary  awards  for  negligent  failure  to  obtain  a  subject's  informed  consent  (up
to  $1,000),  for  willful  failure  to  obtain  such  consent  (up  to  $5,000)  and,  if  a
subject  is  thereby  exposed  to  "a  known  substantial  risk  of  serious  injury  either
bodily  harm  or  psychological  harm,"  jail  terms  of  up  to  one  year  and/or  fines  of
up  to  $10,000.

PROTECTIONS  FOR  HUMAN  SUBJECTS  IN  CLASSIFIED
RESEARCH

We  were  advised  that  the  only  classified  studies  involving  human  subjects
currently  conducted  by  the  six  federal  agencies  are  a  small  number  of  projects
sponsored  by  the  DOD  and  the  CIA.41  The  Common  Rule  does  not  distinguish
between  classified  and  unclassified  research  in  terms  of  the  requirements  or
procedures  it  imposes  to  protect  human  subjects.

The  Department  of  Defense  reported  that  it  currently  sponsors  a  small
number  of  classified  research  studies  involving  human  subjects.42  When  such
research  is  proposed,  IRBs  review  classified  protocols  in  one  of  two  ways.  The
chair  of  the  IRB  may  remove  the  classified  portions  of  the  protocol  if  he  or  she
judges  that  those  classified  portions  have  no  effect  on  the  risks  imposed  on  human
subjects.  Alternatively,  the  IRB  may  be  composed  of  people  with  appropriate
security  clearances  who  then  review  the  protocol  in  its  entirety.  A  person  not


685


Part  III

affiliated  with  the  institution  but  with  appropriate  security  clearance  is  included  as
a  voting  member  of  such  IRBs.

The  CIA  indicated  that  it  is  currently  performing  classified  human
research  projects.43  The  agency  informed  the  Advisory  Committee  that  all  human
subjects  are  informed  of  the  CIA's  sponsorship  and  of  the  specific  nature  of  the
study  in  which  they  are  participating,  even  if  the  general  purposes  of  the  research
are  classified.44

Although  DOE  has  the  authority  to  conduct  or  support  classified  human
subjects  research  projects,  it  reports  that  it  is  not  currently  conducting  such
research.45  According  to  DOE  guidelines,  IRB  review  of  classified  research  may
take  one  of  two  forms.46  If  the  chair  of  the  IRB  determines  that  none  of  the
classified  information  in  a  proposal  is  relevant  to  the  protection  of  human  subjects
and  that  the  research  can  be  accurately  and  fully  described  to  the  IRB,  the
proposed  research  will  be  reviewed  at  a  regular  IRB  meeting  without  disclosure
of  any  classified  information.  If  the  proposed  research  cannot  be  reviewed  in  the
foregoing  manner,  however,  the  IRB  must  meet  in  a  secure  environment.  (The
Advisory  Committee  was  advised  that  to  date  this  has  not  occurred.)  To  review
classified  research,  each  member  of  the  IRB  must  have  the  appropriate  security
clearance.  The  member  of  the  IRB  who  is  not  affiliated  with  the  institution
conducting  the  research  must  also  have  security  clearance  to  participate  in  the
review  of  classified  research.  DOE  guidelines  recommend  that  IRBs  expecting  to
review  classified  research  obtain  clearance  for  their  nonaffiliated  members  so  that
they  are  not  excluded  from  such  reviews.

DHHS  neither  conducts  nor  sponsors  any  classified  research.  Some  FDA
personnel  hold  security  clearances  so  that  they  may  review  classified
investigational  new  drug  or  device  applications  submitted  by  the  DOD,  if  the
need  to  study  or  use  these  items  in  secret  arises.47  The  VA  does  not  now  conduct
any  classified  research  and  does  not  have  original  classification  authority.48
NASA  currently  conducts  no  classified  research  that  involves  human  subjects  and
has  not  in  the  past.  NASA  does  have  classification  authority,  however,  and
conducts  some  classified  research  that  does  not  involve  human  subjects.49

Research  that  involves  human  subjects  and  is  classified  for  reasons  of
national  security  raises  special  issues  for  IRB  review  and  for  the  process  of
obtaining  informed  consent,  particularly  with  respect  to  the  level  of  disclosure
and  waivers  of  informed  consent.  Specifically,  the  IRB  must  consider  whether
the  prospective  research  subject  will  be  adequately  informed  about  the  nature  of
classified  research  if  some  aspects  of  the  research  will  not  be  disclosed  in  the
informed  consent  process,  whether  security  clearances  are  needed  for  IRB
members,  and  whether  information  about  classified  studies  must  be  partitioned
from  other  IRB  study  reviews.  Institutional  review  boards  can  determine  that
some  aspect  of  a  classified  research  project,  if  only  the  identity  of  the  research
sponsor,  is  irrelevant  to  the  process  of  obtaining  a  subject's  informed  consent  to
participate.  IRB  members  can  decide  that  sponsorship  information  or  complete


686


Chapter  14

disclosure  of  the  purpose  of  the  research  need  not  be  provided  to  potential
subjects  (in  contrast  to  information  about  physical  risk).

The  Common  Rule  grants  IRBs  the  authority  to  approve  modifications  in,
or  to  waive  entirely,  informed  consent  requirements,  but  only  for  research
involving  no  more  than  minimal  risk.50  A  separate  provision  grants  an  agency
head  the  authority  to  waive  any  requirement  of  the  Common  Rule  for  any  kind  of
human  subject  research  as  long  as  advance  notice  is  given  to  OPRR  and  the  action
is  announced  in  the  Federal  Register.^  As  indicated  above,  the  rule  makes  no
distinction  between  classified  and  unclassified  research,  so  this  latter  route  to  an
informed  consent  exception  would  appear  to  pose  a  tension  between  duties  to
disclose  and  the  need  to  keep  information  secret.

CONCLUSION

The  Common  Rule,  adopted  by  the  sixteen  federal  agencies  and
departments  that  conduct  human  subjects  research,  is  another  step  in  the  evolution
of  human  subject  research  protections  policies  begun  in  the  1940s.  While  those
protections  are  crucial,  gaps  still  remain.

With  respect  to  classified  research,  the  current  requirement  of  informed
consent  is  not  absolute;  if  consent  is  waived,  the  research  may  proceed  in  ways
that  do  not  adequately  protect  the  research  subject.  Also,  military  research
involves  special  considerations  because  of  the  nature  of  the  subject  population,
whose  voluntary  participation  must  be  especially  guarded.  In  addition,
nonfederally  funded  research  is  not  subject  to  the  Common  Rule,  except  under  the
umbrella  of  an  institution's  multiple  project  assurance.

Further,  oversight  mechanisms  generally  are  limited  to  audits  for  cause
and  review  of  paperwork  requirements.  These  offer  little  in  the  way  of  assurances
that  the  prospective  review  process  is  working  and  do  not  give  an  indication  of
the  quality  or  consistency  of  IRB  review,  either  among  IRBs  or  within  a  single
board.  An  effective  system  of  oversight  relies  on  the  detection  of  violations  of
policies  and  the  imposition  of  appropriate  sanctions.

The  Committee's  recommendations  for  remedying  these  and  other
shortcomings  are  discussed  in  chapter  18  of  the  final  report.  The  remaining  two
chapters  of  part  III  report  what  documents  used  by  IRBs  suggest  about  the
protection  of  human  subjects  and  what  patients  think  about  the  enterprise  of
human  subject  research.


687


Part  HI

Table  1.  Human  Subjects  Research  &  Protections  in  Seven  Departments  and
Agencies


Specific  Statutory

Annual  Spending

Locus  of  Human

Staff  Resources

Nature  of

Original

Additional

Authority  for

on  Human

Subjects

Devoted  to

Research

Classification

Provisions

Human  Subjects

Subjects

Research

Human  Subjects

Oversight  and

Authority/

for  Special

Protection

Research  t

Sponsored  by

Protection

Compliance

Conduct  of  Classified

Populations

Agencyf

Activities*t

Activitiesf

Research  t

DHHS

P.L.  93-348(1974)

$367  million

Intramural  and

19  full-time  staff

Negotiates

Is  not  conducting

Pregnant

P.L.  99-158(1985)

intramural,  $2.4

extramural

&  38.3  FTEs

institutional

classified  research

women.

P.L.  103-43(1993)

billion  extramural

(excludes  FDA)

assurances;

with  human  subjects

fetuses  and  in

fiscal  year  1992

Some  overseas
research

reviews  IRB
performance  on
an  exceptions
basis  only

vitro

fertilization  at
subpart  B,  45
C.F.R.  46;
prisoners  at
subpart  C;
children  at
subpart  D

FDA

Food.  Drug,  and

(included  in

Intramural  and

6  full-time  staff  &

Conducts

No  classified  research.

Intramural

Cosmetic  Act,  sec.

DHHS  total)

extramural

26.7  FTEs

compliance

Maintains  security

research

505(i).  507(d)

inspections  on

clearances  for

governed  by

(1963).  and  520(g)

Drug  and  device

a  three-year

coordination  with

45  C.F.R.  46

(1976)

research
regulated  by
FDA;  domestic
and  foreign

cycle,  annually
if  problematic

DOD

subparts  B,
C, and  D

DOD

I0U.S.C.  980

$77  million  for

Intramural  and

80  FTEs

Negotiates

Has  original

Subparts  B.

(1988).  Requires

intramural

extramural .

assurances,

classification

C,  and  D  of

informed  consent

programs;  $  1 07

relies  on  OPRR

authority.

45  C.F.R.  46

million  for

Some  overseas

MPAs;  Also

Conducted  one

adopted  as

extramural

research

conducts  on-

classified  human

DOD

programs,  fiscal

site  audits  of

subject  study  in  FY

directives

-

year  1994

research
programs

1994.  May  conduct
other  minimal-risk
classified  studies

*This  estimate  includes  staff  resources  devoted  to  policy  development  and  guidance,  negotiating  assurances,  oversight,  and
auditing.  It  excludes  the  time  of  agency  staff  spent  on  IRB  members  or  staff  and  the  minimal  efforts  of  grant  and  contracts
personnel  who  track  IRB-approval  status  on  research  applications. Full-time  equivalent  (FTE)  effort  represents  the  cumulative
efforts  of  several  people,  who  spend  part  of  their  time  on  oversight  of  human  subjects  experiments.

/■Information  on  current  human  subjects  research  programs  and  practices  provided  by  agencies  to  Advisory  Committee  staff.


688


Chapter  14


Specific  Statutory

Authority  for

Human  Subjects

Protection

Annual  Spending

on  Human

Subjects

Research  f

Locus  of  Human

Subjects

Research

Sponsored  by

Agencyf

Staff  Resources
Devoted  to

Human  Subjects
Protection
Activities  *f

Nature  of

Research

Oversight  and

Compliance

Activitiesf

Original

Classification

Authority/

Conduct  of  Classified

Research f

Additional
Provisions
for  Special
Populations

DOE

None.  Policy
derives  from

$46  million  in
fiscal  year  1 994

Intramural  and
extramural

1  -  10.4  FTEs

Negotiates
institutional

Has  original
classification

Subparts  B.
C.  and  D  of

Common  Rule

(S20.4  million  of

Program  director

assurances.

authority.  Is  not

45  C.F.R.  46

which  is  for

Some  overseas

devotes  85

relies  on

conducting  any

adopted  as

epidemiological
studies  in  Japan);

research

percent  of  time  to
human  subjects

OPRR  MPAs,
reviews  IRB

classified  research
with  humans

agency
guidelines

$10  million  from
other  federal

protection

performance  on
an  exceptions

agencies

basis;  plans  to
conduct
periodic  audits

VA

38U.S.C.  7331.

$1 14  million  in

Intramural  only

0.5  FTE,  central

Central  office

Does  not  have

No  distinct

7334.  Requires

research  funds;

office  staff

review  of  IRB

original  classification

requirements

informed  consent

$1 10  million  in

minutes  and  of

authority. No

and  references

clinicians'  time;

51.6  FTEs,  field

research

classified  human

Common  Rule

$100  million  in
privately
supported
research;  $170
million  funded  by
other  federal
agencies

staff

protocols

subject  research

NASA

None.  Policy

$25  million

Intramural  and

0.5  FTE

In-house  IRB

Has  original

No  distinct

derives  from

FY  1994  for

extramural

provides  a

classification

requirements

Common  Rule

ground-based
research

Some  overseas
research

second-level
review  for  all
air/space
human
research;
ground-based
research  may
be  reviewed  by
one  or  more
IRBs

authority.  Conducts
no  classified  human
subject  research

None.  DHHS

Funding  is  a

Intramural  and

One  senior  staff

Director,  CIA,

Has  original

Subparts  B,

regulations
applicable  under
Executive  Order
12333(1981)

small  portion  of
research
components  of
general  budget

extramural

physician  (four
hours  per  month)

approves  all
human  subjects
research. In-
house  IRB  also

classification
authority.  Conducted
small  number  of
classified  human

C,  and  Dof
45  C.F.R.  46
adopted  as
agency  policy

CIA

-

reviews
extramural
projects.
Inspector
general  reviews
Human  Subject
Research  Panel

subject  studies  FY
1992-1993

689


ENDNOTES


1 .  Agency  data  reported  to  the  Advisory  Committee.  See  table  1  at  end  of  this
chapter  and  supplemental  volume  for  the  individual  agency  spending  estimates  that
make  up  this  total  figure.

2.  The  sixteen  departments  and  agencies  that  adopted  a  common  policy  for
human  subjects  protection  are  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  Department  of  Energy,
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  Department  of  Commerce,  Consumer
Product  Safety  Commission,  Agency  for  International  Development,  Department  of
Housing  and  Urban  Development,  Department  of  Justice,  Department  of  Defense,
Department  of  Education,  Veterans  Administration  (now  Department  of  Veterans
Affairs),  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,
National  Science  Foundation,  Department  of  Transportation,  and  pursuant  to  an
executive  order,  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency.  The  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  a
subagency  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  has  somewhat  different  regulations  governing
human  subjects  research,  based  on  its  distinct  statutory  authority  to  regulate  research  for
the  licensing  of  new  drugs,  devices,  and  biologies  (e.g.,  vaccines).

3.  Federal  Policy  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects;  Notices  and  Rules,  56
Fed.  Reg.  28002  -  28032  (June  18,  1991).  Each  department  and  agency  subject  to  the
Common  Rule  incorporated  its  provisions  within  the  agency's  own  regulations  (e.g.,
DHHS  regulations  are  reflected  in  45  Code  of  Federal  Regulations  [C.F.R.]  pt.  46,  while
DOD  regulations  are  reflected  in  32  C.F.R.  pt.  219).  The  June  1991  Federal  Register
announcement  is  the  only  publication  of  the  Common  Rule  as  such.  The  Common  Rule
is  not  applicable  to  nonfederally  funded  research  unless  the  research  is  performed  at  an
institution  whose  research  is  subject  to  a  multiple  project  assurance  (MPA),  described
later  in  this  chapter.

4.  President's  Commission  for  the  Study  of  Ethical  Problems  in  Medicine  and
Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research,  Protecting  Human  Subjects: The  Adequacy  and
Uniformity  of  Federal  Rules  and  Their  Implementation  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1981).

5.' Ibid.,  140.

6.  DHHS  regulations  specify  additional  protections  for  research  on  certain
subject  populations:  pregnant  women,  fetuses,  and  subjects  of  in  vitro  fertilization
research;  prisoners;  and  children.  The  DHHS  regulation  is  codified  at  45  C.F.R.  pt.  46
(1991).  Subpart  A  of  this  regulation  is  the  Common  Rule.  Subpart  B  provides  additional
protections  for  research  involving  pregnant  women,  fetuses,  and  in  vitro  fertilization,
subpart  C  for  research  involving  prisoners,  and  subpart  D  for  research  involving  children.
At  their  discretion,  some  of  the  other  federal  agencies  whose  research  programs  involve
subjects  in  one  of  these  categories  have  adopted  these  regulations  as  agency  guidelines.
See  table  1  at  the  end  of  this  chapter  for  information  on  the  applicability  of  special
protections  by  agency.  Some  agencies,  such  as  DOD,  impose  other  safeguards  in
addition  to  those  of  the  Common  Rule.  Information  on  individual  agency  policies  and
oversight  practices  at  the  other  ten  agencies,  and  greater  detail  on  the  policies  of  the  six
agencies  above,  are  reported  in  a  supplemental  volume  to  this  report.

7.  The  Common  Rule  directs  that  IRBs  must  include  at  least  one  member
whose  primary  concerns  are  in  scientific  areas  and  at  least  one  member  whose  primary
concerns  are  in  nonscientific  areas.  They  must  also  include  at  least  one  member  who  is

not  otherwise  affiliated  with  the  institution  (§ .107).  (The  provisions  of  the  Common

Rule  are  designated  as  "§ .000."  The  " "  indicates  that  these  sections  are

reproduced  within  the  regulations  of  various  departments.  Thus  § .107  of  the

690


Common  Rule  is  codified  for  DHHS  at  45  C.F.R.  §  46.107.)

8.  Federal  Policy  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects,  § .  1 1 6(a).

9.  Ibid.,  § .116(b).

1 0.  Common  Rule, .  1 1 6(d).  Under  the  Common  Rule,  four  requirements

must  be  met  in  order  for  an  IRB  to  waive  the  rule's  informed  consent  requirements:  "(1)
the  research  involves  no  more  than  minimal  risk;  (2)  the  waiver  or  alteration  will  not
adversely  affect  the  rights  and  welfare  of  the  subjects;  (3)  the  research  could  not
practicably  be  carried  out  without  the  waiver  or  alteration;  and  (4)  whenever  appropriate,
the  subjects  will  be  provided  with  additional  pertinent  information  after  participation."

11.  Ibid.,  § .109.

12.  Radioactive  Drugs  for  Certain  Uses,  21  C.F.R.  §  361.1

13.  National  Institutes  of  Health,  Office  for  Protection  from  Research  Risks,
Protecting  Human  Research  Subjects  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1993),  5-23  -  5-28.

14.  These  figures  represent  the  total  amount  of  funds  obligated  for  projects  in
which  any  human  subjects  were  involved  regardless  of  how  minimal  such  involvement
may  be.  Since  it  is  virtually  impossible  to  determine,  within  any  given  grant,  the  exact
dollar  amount  that  goes  to  human  subject  research,  only  the  funding  for  the  entire  project
could  be  calculated.

15.  Lily  O.  Engstrom,  Office  of  Extramural  Research,  NIH,  to  Wilhelmine
Miller,  ACHRE,  21  February  1995  ("Response  to  ACHRE  Request  No.  013095-E")  and
4  April  1995  ("Additional  Information  in  Response  to  ACHRE  Request  No.  013095-E").

16.  The  PHS  comprises  a  number  of  agencies,  including  the  National  Institutes
of  Health  (NIH),  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC),  and  the  Food
and  Drug  Administration  (FDA).  The  NIH  is  the  world's  largest  medical  research  center
and  conducts  biomedical  research  (both  basic  science  and  clinical)  dedicated  to  the
improvement  of  the  public's  health.  The  CDC  focus  is  primarily  on  health  promotion
and  disease-prevention,  in  addition  to  basic  research  in  epidemiology,  disease
surveillance,  laboratory  science,  and  training  of  disease-prevention  officials.  The  FDA
is  responsible  for  regulating  and  overseeing  the  safety  and  effectiveness  of  food,
cosmetic,  medical  device,  and  human  and  veterinary  drug  industries,  in  addition  to
studying  and  monitoring  consumer  products  and  the  industries  that  produce  them.
Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  Public  Health  Service,  Office  of  the  Assistant
Secretary  for  Health,  January  1993  ("The  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  Today")  (ACHRE
No.  HHS-091395-A).

17.  Joseph  V.  Osterman,  Environmental  and  Life  Sciences,  Office  of  the
Director  of  Defense  Research  and  Engineering,  DOD,  to  Principal  Deputy  Assistant  to
the  Secretary  of  Defense  (Atomic  Energy),  27  February  1995  ("White  House  Advisory
Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments").

18.  Richard  Pell,  Jr.,  Deputy  Chief  of  Staff,  VA,  to  Jeffrey  Kahn,  ACHRE,  10
February  1995  ("We  have  prepared  the  enclosed  fact  sheet"),  and  Richard  Pell,  Jr.,  to
Wilhelmine  Miller,  ACHRE,  19  January  1995  ("In  response  to  your  request"),  enclosure
pages  9-10.

19.  DOE  Database,  Fiscal  Year  1994,  reported  by  David  Saumweber,  ACHRE,
to  Advisory  Staff,  ACHRE,  17  October  1994  ("DOE  Current  Research"),  and  oral
communication  by  Susan  Rose,  Office  of  Health  and  Environmental  Research,  Office  of
Energy  Research,  DOE,  to  Wilhelmine  Miller,  ACHRE,  13  January  1995.  There  is
ongoing  discussion  as  to  how  large  the  commitment  to  RERF  will  be  and  how  it  will  be
administered.


691


20.  J.  Stoklosa,  NASA  Office  of  Aerospace  Medicine,  to  Wilhelmine  Miller,
ACHRE,  14  February 1995  ("Enclosed  is  the  response  to"),  2.  Figures  for  in-flight
biomedical  research  were  not  provided.

21.  Notes  of  Gary  Stern,  ACHRE,  regarding  7  March  1994  meeting  with  CIA
inspector  general's  staff,  8  March  1994.  John  F.  Pereira,  CIA,  to  Gary  Stern,  Anna
Mastroianni,  and  Sara  Chandros,  ACHRE,  7  August  1995  ("Information  for  Committee's
Final  Report").  No  additional  information  on  this  issue  was  made  available  by  the  CIA
in  response  to  Advisory  Committee  queries.

22.  In  addition,  several  federal  agencies  have  adopted  as  policy  guidelines  the
additional  provisions  of  the  DHHS  regulation,  45  C.F.R.  pt.  46,  for  pregnant  women,
fetuses,  and  in  vitro  fertilization;  prisoners;  and  children  (subparts  B,  C,  and  D,
respectively).  See  table  1  at  the  end  of  this  chapter  for  references  to  such  agency  policies.

23.  Federal  Policy  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects,  § .  1 03(a).

24.  Occasionally,  a  federal  agency  may  rely  on  an  IRB  at  an  adjacent  academic
institution  to  review  research  projects  conducted  at  the  federal  facility.  This  sometimes
occurs  at  VA  hospitals  that  are  affiliated  with  teaching  hospitals  and  is  the  case  for  the
Environmental  Protection  Agency,  whose  own  research  facility  is  located  at  the
University  of  North  Carolina.

25.  Federal  Policy  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects,  § .103  and

§ -113.

26.  James  M.  Lamiel,  Chief,  Clinical  Investigation  Regulatory  Office,
Consultant  to  the  Army  Surgeon  General  for  Clinical  Investigation,  to  Director,  Radiation
Experiments  Command  Center,  28  July  1995  ("Revised  Chapter  Drafts  of  the  Advisory
Committee").

27.  Ibid.,  § .109  and  § .113.

28.  Federal  Policy  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects,  § _.  1 03(a).

29.  Gary  Ellis,  Director,  OPRR,  to  OPRR  Staff,  7  December  1993  ("Compliance
Oversight  Procedures"),  1-4.

30.  FDA  Protection  of  Human  Subjects,  21  C.F.R.  pt.  50  and  Institutional
Review  Board  Requirements,  21  C.F.R.  pt.  56  (1995),  §  56.1 15  and  §  56.120.  See
supplemental  volume  for  further  discussion  of  the  FDA's  distinctive  policies  and
oversight  practices.

3 1 .  Medical  monitors  are  not  permitted  to  be  investigators  involved  in  the
protocol.  Medical  monitors  have  the  authority  to  terminate  an  individual  volunteer's
participation  in  the  study  or  suspend  the  study  for  review  by  the  IRB.  Lamiel,  "Revised
Chapter  Drafts  of  the  Advisory  Committee."

32.  DOE,  Office  of  Health  and  Environmental  Research,  Progress  Report:
Protecting  Human  Research  Subjects  (Washington,  D.C.:  DOE,  November  1994),  A2.

33.  See  for  example,  Department  of  Defense  Instruction  5000.2:  "Defense
Acquisition  Management  Policies  and  Procedures,"  23  February  1991  (Administration);
Army  Regulation  40-10,  "Medical  Service  Health  Hazard  Assessment  Program  In
Support  of  the  Army  Materiel  Acquisition  Decision  Process,"  15  September  1983
(Administration  and  Safety  Issues);  Army  Regulation  70-8:  "Research,  Development,
and  Acquisition,  Personnel  Performance  and  Training  Program  (PPTP),  (Research
Guidelines  and  Procedures;  Training  and  Indoctrination)";  Army  Regulation  70-8:
"Research,  Development,  and  Acquisition,  Soldier-Oriented  Research  and  Development
in  Personnel  and  Training,"  31  July  1990  (Research  Guidelines  and  Procedures  Training
and  Indoctrination);  Donald  J.  Atwood,  Deputy  Secretary  of  Defense,  Department  of
Defense  Directive  Number  5000.1:  "Defense  Acquisition,"  23  February  1991.


692


34.  Oral  communication  by  Colonel  John  Boslego,  Deputy  Director,  WRAIR,  to
Shobita  Parthasarathy  (ACHRE  Staff),  13  September  1995.

35.  Lamiel,  "Revised  Chapter  Drafts  of  the  Advisory  Committee."

36.  Major  Dale  Vander  Hamm,  Chief,  Human  Use  Review  and  Regulatory
Affairs  Division,  Headquarters,  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command,  to
Shobita  Parthasarathy,  ACHRE,  27  July  1995  ("Human  Volunteers  in  U.S.  Army
Research  in  1995").

37.  Ibid.,  § .113.

38.  Ibid.,  § .  103(b)  and  (f),  § .122- .123.

39.  Each  agency  has  its  own  regulations  regarding  the  oversight  of  compliance.
For  example,  debarment  procedures  are  specified  for  DHHS  at  45  C.F.R.  §  76.  These
procedures  are  summarized  in  a  memorandum  from  Gary  Ellis  to  OPRR  staff,  5  February
1993  ("Compliance  Oversight  Procedures"),  3.

40.  California  Health  and  Safety  Code,  vol.  40B,  §  24176  (1995).

41 .  Joseph  V.  Osterman,  Environmental  and  Life  Sciences,  Office  of  the
Director  of  Defense  Research  and  Engineering,  to  Principal  Deputy,  Assistant  to  the
Secretary  of  Defense  (Atomic  Energy),  27  February  1995  ("White  House  Advisory
Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments").  Larry  Magnuson,  M.D.,  CIA,  in  oral
communication  to  Gary  Stern,  ACHRE.

42.  Osterman  to  Assistant  to  the  Secretary  of  Defense  (Atomic  Energy),  27
February  1995.

43.  Notes  of  Gary  Stern  (ACHRE  staff),  regarding  meeting  with  inspector
general's  staff,  CIA,  7  March  1994  (8  March  1994).

44.  Ibid.

45.  Ellyn  R.  Weiss,  Office  of  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  DOE,  to  Daniel
Guttman,  ACHRE,  13  February  1995  ("This  letter  is  in  response  to  .  .  .").

46.  Described  in  the  DOE  guidance.  Protecting  Human  Subjects  at  the
Department  of  Energy,  Human  Subjects  Handbook,  Office  of  Health  and  Environmental
Research,  1992,  "Review  of  Classified  Research,"  unpaginated  (ACHRE  No.  DOE-
050694-A).

47.  The  FDA  and  DOD,  memorandum  of  understanding  of  May  1987
("Concerning  Investigational  Use  of  Drugs,  Antibiotics,  Biologies,  and  Medical  Devices
by  the  Department  of  Defense"),  4.

48.  Veterans  Administration,  "Policy  Manual  MP-1"  (21  November  1979),  part
5,  chapter  1,  5-8.

49.  Janis  Stoklosa,  Office  of  Aerospace  Medicine,  NASA,  in  oral
communication  to  Wilhelmine  Miller,  ACHRE,  February  1995.

50.  Federal  Policy  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects,  §  .  1 1 6  (d).

5 1 .  Ibid.,  § .  1 0 1  (i).  This  provision  also  allows  for  a  statute  or  executive

order  to  override  the  notification  and  publication  requirements.


693


15

RESEARCH  PROPOSAL  REVIEW

PROJECT


T\


wo  of  the  biggest  differences  between  research  involving  human
subjects  today  and  research  involving  human  subjects  as  it  was  conducted  in  the
1940s,  1950s  and  1960s,  are  the  presence  of  applicable  federal  regulations  and
the  articulation  of  rules  of  professional  and  research  ethics.  There  is  little
question  that  these  developments  have  had  a  significant  effect  on  the  protection  of
the  rights  and  interests  of  human  subjects.  At  the  same  time,  however,  there  has
been  little  systematic  investigation  of  how  much  protection  these  developments
have  provided.  As  an  Advisory  Committee  charged  both  with  looking  at  the  past
and  making  recommendations  about  the  future,  we  hoped  to  learn  as  much  as  we
could  about  the  state  of  contemporary  human  subjects  research.  We  were
particularly  interested  in  exploring  the  extent  to  which  the  rights  and  interests  of
people  currently  involved  as  subjects  of  radiation  research  conducted  or  supported
by  the  federal  government  appear  to  be  adequately  protected  and  whether  the
level  of  protection  afforded  these  subjects  was  the  same  as  that  afforded  the
subjects  of  nonradiation  research.  The  Advisory  Committee's  Research  Proposal
Review  Project  (RPRP)  was  designed  to  address  these  questions.  By  examining
documents  from  a  wide  variety  of  research  projects  funded  by  many  agencies  of
the  federal  government,  we  hoped  to  offer  insight  into  the  general  state  of  the
protection  of  the  rights  and  interests  of  human  subjects.

During  the  course  of  the  RPRP,  the  Committee  reviewed  documents  from
a  random  sample  of  research  proposals  involving  human  subjects  and  ionizing
radiation  that  were  approved  and  funded  in  fiscal  years  1990  through  1993  by  the

694


Chapter  15

Departments  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (DHHS),  Defense  (DOD),  Energy
(DOE),  Veterans  Affairs  (VA),  and  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space
Administration  (NASA);  these  are  the  only  federal  agencies  that  currently
conduct  human  subjects  research  involving  ionizing  radiation.1  We  also  reviewed
a  comparison  sample  of  studies  that  did  not  involve  ionizing  radiation  funded  by
the  same  agencies  during  the  same  period.

In  this  chapter,  we  first  present  the  methodology  and  findings  of  the
Research  Proposal  Review  Project.  We  then  report  the  results  of  an  independent
review  of  research  proposals  and  documents  conducted  by  one  member  of  the
Committee  who  also  acted  as  a  reviewer  in  the  RPRP.  The  chapter  closes  with  a
discussion  of  our  results  in  the  context  of  current  policies  and  practices  in
research  involving  human  subjects.

METHODOLOGY  OF  THE  RPRP

Obtaining  Research  Proposal  Abstracts  to  Identify  Studies  of  Interest

The  RPRP  involved  the  collection  and  review  of  documents  related  to
recently  funded,  federally  supported  human  radiation  research.  This  included
research  supported  or  performed  by  the  DOD,  DOE,  DHHS,  NASA,  and  VA.
Each  agency  funds  intramural  research  conducted  by  agency  staff  members  at
various  field  sites  and  extramural  research  conducted  outside  the  agency  by
contractors  or  grantees.  The  Advisory  Committee  requested  and  received
abstracts  or  similar  descriptions  from  these  agencies  for  all  intramural  and
extramural  studies  newly  approved  and  funded  between  fiscal  years  1 990  and
1993  (that  is,  "new  starts"  in  those  fiscal  years)  that  fell  within  two  general
categories:  (1)  studies  involving  the  exposure  of  human  subjects  to  research
applications  of  ionizing  radiation  (or  follow-up  studies  of  such  exposures);  and
(2)  nonradiation  research  involving  human  subjects.  These  abstracts  represented
the  "universe"  of  federally  funded  contemporary  human  research  from  which
studies  were  then  selected  for  review.

Selection  of  Studies  Involving  Ionizing  Radiation

For  purposes  of  the  RPRP,  a  radiation  experiment  was  defined  as  any
federally  funded  or  performed  investigation  where  the  exposure  of  human
subjects  to  ionizing  radiation  is  an  element  of  the  research  design.  In  addition,
we  included  follow-up  or  epidemiological  studies  of  exposures  of  humans  to
ionizing  radiation.2  Any  procedures  involving  radiation  incidental  to  a  subject's
enrollment  in  a  study  (for  example,  a  diagnostic  x  ray  in  research  involving
chemotherapy)  were  not  considered  experimental  for  purposes  of  the  review.

To  select  studies  to  review  from  the  many  abstracts  we  received,  nuclear
medicine  experts  on  the  Advisory  Committee  staff  first  reviewed  and  stratified  the

695


Part  III


Definitions  of  Biomedical  Categories

Tracer/biodistribution  studies:  Studies  involving  the  measurement  of  administered  radioactive
chemicals  within  the  body  (in  vivo)  using  radiation  detectors  directed  at  the  body  from  the  outside,
or  in  body  fluids  such  as  blood  and  urine  in  the  test  tube  (in  vitro).

Biodistribution  studies  are  distinct  from  tracer  studies  in  that  their  object  of  study  is
radioactive  contaminants  themselves,  in  order  to  understand  their  distribution  and  metabolism
within  the  body.  By  contrast,  tracer  studies  employ  radio-labeled  variants  of  ordinary  biological
chemicals  to  provide  information  on  natural  metabolic  processes  involving  those  chemicals.
Tracer/biodistribution  studies  differ  from  research  involving  external  sources  of  radiation  (such  as
x  rays),  because  tracer/biodistribution  studies  involve  the  administration  of  radioactive  chemicals
into  a  subject's  body."

Studies  involving  potential  therapeutics:  Studies  that  involve  novel  or  nonvalidated  uses  of
radiation  for  therapeutic  purposes  on  sick  individuals.

Studies  involving  potential  diagnostics:  Studies  that  involve  experimental  uses  of  radiological  or
nuclear  medicine  diagnostics  (for  imaging)  that  are  experimental  in  that  their  efficacy  has  not  been
established.  This  includes  research  involving  different  types  of  radiation  exposure  as  well  as
applications  of  established  radiation  imaging  techniques  (such  as  diagnostic  x-rays  or  CAT  scans),
for  new  diagnostic  purposes.

Epidemiological/observational:  Studies  of  health  effects  in  people  who  have  experienced
exposures  to  ionizing  radiation.  This  research  does  not  employ  radiation,  but  attempts  to
understand  health  effects  on  humans  exposed  to  ionizing  radiation  using  follow-up  studies,
medical  monitoring,  and  retrospective  records  reviews.


study  abstracts  obtained  according  to  the  biomedical  categories  that  the  Advisory
Committee  established  for  radiation  research:  tracer/biodistribution  studies,
studies  involving  potential  therapeutics,  studies  involving  potential  diagnostics,
and  epidemiological/observational  studies.  These  categories  were  intended  to
parallel  roughly  the  various  types  of  past  radiation  experiments  identified  by  the
Advisory  Committee.  We  recognized  that  placing  radiation  experiments  into
discrete  categories  was  a  difficult  task.  The  purpose  of  the  categorization,
however,  was  to  sample  proposals  across  the  range  of  radiation  research
conducted  on  human  subjects  rather  than  to  identify  specific  research  as  falling
into  strict  categories.3  Definitions  of  the  biomedical  categories  used  in  the


aHenry  N.  Wagner,  Jr.  and  Linda  E.  Ketchum,  Living  with  Radiation— The  Risk,  The  Promise
(Baltimore:  The  Johns  Hopkins  University  Press,  1989),  77-78.

696


Chapter  15

Research  Proposal  Review  Project  are  listed  in  the  accompanying  box.

We  then  selected  studies4  to  ensure  that  each  funding  agency  and  each
biomedical  category  of  human  radiation  research  (tracer/biodistribution,
therapeutic,  diagnostic,  and  epidemiological/observational)  was  adequately
represented  in  the  random  sample5  of  studies  to  be  reviewed.  Eighty-four
radiation  studies  were  selected  from  proposal  abstracts  provided  by  the  agencies.
These  included  3 1  extramural  proposals  representing  nonfederal  research
institutions,6  primarily  universities,  and  53  intramural  proposals7  from  the  DHHS,
DOE,  DOD,  NASA,  and  VA.

Selection  of  a  Comparison  Group  of  Nonradiation  Studies

For  purposes  of  selecting  a  comparison  sample  of  nonradiation  studies,  the
84  radiation  studies  were  reclassified  according  to  the  following  categories:  ( 1 )
federal  funding  agency,  (2)  extramural/intramural,  and  (3)
cardiology /cancer/neither  cardiology  nor  cancer.8  Approximately  half  as  many
studies  (41)  were  selected  for  the  comparison  sample  and  distributed  in  each  of
the  three  categories  in  comparable  proportion  to  the  distribution  of  radiation
studies.  We  drew  our  sample  of  nonradiation  studies  from  the  same  grantee
institutions  that  were  included  in  the  radiation  sample.

Data  Sources

In  total,  the  Advisory  Committee  identified  for  review  125  research
proposals  involving  human  subjects  (84  involving  ionizing  radiation,  and  41  not
involving  radiation)  that  were  approved  and  funded  by  DHHS,  DOE,  DOD,
NASA,  or  VA  between  fiscal  year  1990  and  fiscal  year  1993.9  Long-term
epidemiological  studies  that  were  initiated  before  fiscal  year  1990  and  continued
through  this  period  were  included  in  the  review  in  cases  where  the  methodology
and/or  consent  procedures  for  such  studies  were  found  to  have  been  updated  in
recent  proposal  renewals.

The  Advisory  Committee  requested  the  following  documents10  for  each  of
the  125  studies  it  identified  for  review:

1 .  Grant  proposal  submitted  by  investigator  to
federal  agency;"

2.  Institutional  review  board  (IRB)  application;12

3.  Original  consent  form  submitted  to  the  IRB;

4.  Consent  form,  as  approved  by  the  IRB;'3

5.  The  IRB's  final  disposition  letter;14

6.  Documentation  concerning  any  changes  to  the
research  design,  methods,  or  consent  form  approved


697


Part  III

by  the  IRB  after  the  IRB's  initial  approval  of  the
study;15

7.  If  relevant,  the  application  submitted  to  and  the
official  letter  of  approval  from  the  radioactive  drug
research  committee  (RDRC);'6

8.  If  relevant,  the  application  submitted  to  and  the
official  letter  of  approval  from  any  institutional
human  use  committee  other  than  the  IRB  or  RDRC.

All  of  the  relevant  federal  agencies  and  the  47  extramural  grantee
institutions  to  which  the  Advisory  Committee  submitted  a  request  complied  with
this  request.  The  willingness  of  institutions  to  voluntarily  make  available
documents  for  review  indicates  their  commitment  to  research  ethics,  which  the
Committee  very  much  appreciates.  The  openness  shown  by  the  biomedical
research  community  is  important  evidence  of  improvement  in  the  ethics  of  human
subject  research  over  the  fifty-year  history  reviewed  by  the  Committee.

Review  Process

Three  basic  elements  were  considered  in  developing  a  system  to  review
the  research  materials  supplied  to  the  Advisory  Committee:  the  procedures  for
obtaining  informed  consent,  the  balance  of  risks  to  potential  benefits  for  the
subject,  and  the  selection  and  recruitment  of  subjects.  An  evaluation  form  was
developed  by  a  subcommittee  of  Committee  members  and  staff  to  assist  reviewers
in  organizing  their  assessments  of  the  research  documents  (grant  proposal,  IRB
application,  RDRC  application)  and  the  consent  form(s).

The  documents  for  each  proposal  were  reviewed  by  a  team  of  two
individuals,  with  at  least  one  member  of  the  Advisory  Committee  placed  on  each
team,  so  that  documents  from  every  proposal  were  reviewed  by  at  least  one
member  of  the  Committee.  Review  teams  consisted  of  either  two  Advisory
Committee  members  or  one  Committee  member  and  one  staff  member.  One
member  of  each  team  had  expertise  in  research  ethics,  while  the  other  had
expertise  in  radiation  science,  radiation  medicine,  another  branch  of  medicine,  or
epidemiology.  Reviewers  were  never  assigned  documents  from  their  own
institution;  they  were  also  required  to  recuse  themselves  if  they  were  well
acquainted  with  the  principal  investigator  of  a  proposal.

Documents  were  first  reviewed  independently  by  each  reviewer  and  then
by  the  reviewers  together  as  a  team.  At  the  end  of  this  process,  each  team
completed  a  single  evaluation  form  representing  a  joint  assessment.

Limitations

The  Research  Proposal  Review  Project  was  designed  to  provide  insight  on

698


Chapter  15

an  exploratory  basis  into  the  current  practice  of  human  subjects  research
conducted  or  supported  by  the  U.S.  government.  The  project  was  not  undertaken
with  the  expectation  that  our  results  would  be  generalizable  to  all  research
involving  human  subjects  or  to  research  sponsored  by  nongovernmental  agencies.
Of  necessity,  we  reviewed  documents  from  only  a  small  sample  of  proposals  for
human  subjects  research  funded  in  fiscal  years  1990  through  1993.  In  a  given
year,  DHHS  supported  16,972  projects  and  subprojects  involving  human  subjects
research.17  At  the  same  time,  however,  our  sample  includes  examples  of  both
radiation  and  nonradiation  research  funded  or  sponsored  by  five  different  federal
agencies  across  a  variety  of  biomedical  categories  and  medical  specialties.
Moreover,  the  proposals  whose  documents  we  received  and  reviewed  were
selected  at  random;  there  was  no  attempt  to  identify  proposals  that  appeared  from
the  outset  to  pose  human  subjects  problems  or  high  levels  of  risk  and  therefore  no
reason  to  suspect  that  the  sample  chosen  was  biased  in  favor  of  more  problematic
or  higher-risk  studies.

Within  the  Committee,  reviewers  rarely  disagreed  in  their  reviews.
Although  these  reviews  are  based  on  interpretation  and  opinion  in  the  context  of
Committee  deliberation,  it  should  be  noted  that  so,  too,  are  the  evaluations  of
IRBs,  on  which  the  protection  of  human  subjects  now  rests.

Perhaps  the  most  significant  limitation  of  this  project  is  that  the  evaluation
of  each  proposal  was  based  only  on  the  documents  that  were  provided  by  the
federal  funding  agency  and  grantee  institution.  The  documentation  we  received
was  not  always  complete.  Moreover,  IRBs  may  have  had  access  to  sources  of
information  not  available  to  the  Committee.  Some  IRBs  invite  principal
investigators  to  make  presentations  at  IRB  meetings;  others  encourage  reviewers
to  discuss  proposals  with  principal  investigators  before  IRB  meetings.  Thus,  in
some  cases,  IRBs  may  have  reviewed  the  proposals  evaluated  by  the  Committee
with  a  fuller  and  more  accurate  understanding  of  the  project  than  was  available  to
the  Committee.  It  is  therefore  possible  that  some  of  the  research  projects  that
raised  concerns  for  us  based  on  the  documents  we  reviewed,  would,  with  the
provision  of  additional  information,  be  deemed  unproblematic  from  a  human
subjects  perspective.  Conversely,  it  is  possible  that  some  of  the  research  projects
whose  documents  raised  no  concerns  may  nevertheless  have  inadequacies
affecting  the  rights  and  interests  of  human  subjects  that  we  could  not  detect.

From  the  outset,  the  Committee  neither  desired  nor  thought  it  possible
(because  of  our  limited  tenure  and  resources)  to  make  judgments  about  the  extent
to  which  these  125  research  projects  were  in  fact  being  conducted  in  an  ethically
acceptable  manner.  This  would  have  required  a  careful  evaluation  of  far  more
than  the  documents  that  we  received.

Neither  IRB  interactions  with  principal  investigators  nor  documents  speak
to  what  actually  happens  between  investigators,  their  assistants,  and  potential
subjects.  What  investigators  in  fact  say  to  potential  subjects,  the  tone  with  which
they  say  it,  and  the  conditions  under  which  the  interaction  takes  place  are  pieces

699


Part  III

of  information  that  were  unavailable  to  the  Advisory  Committee  in  its  review  of
the  documents  from  contemporary  human  research  proposals,  just  as  they  are
generally  unavailable  to  IRBs.

The  Advisory  Committee's  review  of  research  proposal  documents  thus
was  not  intended  to  evaluate  the  performance  of  particular  IRBs  or  the  ethics  of
the  conduct  of  particular  investigators  or  specific  insitutions.  Rather,  by
examining  documents  from  a  wide  variety  of  research  projects  funded  by  many
agencies  of  the  federal  government,  we  hoped  to  offer  insight  into  the  general
state  of  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  interests  of  human  subjects.


FINDINGS  OF  THE  RPRP


IK


In  this  section,  we  present  the  results  of  the  RPRP.  We  begin  with  a
general  characterization  of  our  overall  assessment  of  the  research  documents.  We
also  provide  additional  analysis  of  the  impact  of  the  level  of  risk  and  kind  of
experiment  (nonradiation  vs.  radiation)  on  our  evaluations.  Next,  we  turn  to  a
discussion  of  what  the  Committee  found  most  troubling  in  these  documents,
organized  around  issues  of  understanding,  voluntariness,  and  decisional  capacity.
Finally,  we  look  at  problems  that  were  common  in  the  sample  as  a  whole,
including  the  readability  of  consent  forms  and  deficiencies  in  documentation.

Overall  Assessment

Reviewer  teams  registered  their  overall  assessment  of  each  set  of
documents  using  a  scale  from  1  to  5,  where  1  was  taken  to  indicate  no  ethical
concerns  and  5  was  taken  to  indicate  serious  ethical  concerns.  This  scoring  scale
was  used  to  assist  reviewers  in  organizing  their  overall  evaluations  of  the  set  of
documents  for  each  research  proposal.  These  ratings  were  made  in  concert  by  the
two  reviewers  after  each  had  completed  his  or  her  own  independent  review.
Ratings  of  4  and  5  are  grouped  together  in  the  discussion  that  follows  because
reviewers  generally  did  not  differentiate  between  the  two;  both  ratings  were  used
when  documents  raised  serious  ethical  concerns  for  reviewers.19

For  the  total  sample  of  documents  from  1 25  radiation  and  nonradiation
research  proposals,  two-thirds  received  ratings  of  either  1  (34%)  or  2  (34%),
while  18  percent  received  a  rating  of  3  and  14  percent  received  a  rating  of  4  or  5.

Level  of  Risk

Reviewers  identified  whether  the  research  proposals  as  described  in  the
documents  involved  minimal  risk  or  greater  than  minimal  risk  of  harm  to
subjects;  78  proposals  were  considered  to  involve  greater  than  minimal  risk
(including  24  proposals  that  were  evaluated  as  "maybe"  greater  than  minimal
risk20),  while  47  proposals  were  considered  to  involve  minimal  risk.

700


Chapter  15

There  was  a  marked  difference  in  the  distribution  of  ratings  between
minimal-risk  and  greater-than-minimal-risk  studies  (Figure  1 ).  Although  a
substantial  number  of  greater-than-minimal-risk  studies  received  ratings  of  1  or  2,
all  of  the  studies  that  received  4s  and  5s  were  considered  greater  than  minimal
risk.

Radiation  versus  Nonradiation  Research

While  about  70  percent  of  both  radiation  and  nonradiation  proposals
received  ratings  of  1  or  2,  a  somewhat  higher  proportion  of  nonradiation  studies
than  radiation  studies  received  overall  ratings  of  4  or  5  (Figure  2).  This
difference  could  not  be  explained  by  differences  in  level  of  risk;  the  proportion  of
studies  in  the  nonradiation  subsample  and  the  radiation  subsample  that  involved
greater  than  minimal  risk  was  essentially  the  same.  Perhaps  the  lower  proportion
of  proposals  in  the  radiation  sample  whose  documents  were  rated  as  ethically
problematic  can  be  attributed  to  the  second  layer  of  scrutiny  that  is  often  afforded
radiation  studies  during  the  initial  review  process.  It  must  be  noted,  however,
that  because  there  were  few  studies  that  received  ratings  of  4  or  5,  differences
between  radiation  and  nonradiation  studies  may  not  be  significant.

Issues  Contributing  to  the  Overall  Ratings

In  this  section  we  examine  the  kinds  of  problems  that  troubled  reviewers
in  the  documents  from  the  40  proposals  that  received  ratings  of  3,  4,  or  5.  These
problems  fell  in  to  three  categories:  (1)  factors  likely  to  affect  the  adequacy  of
potential  subjects'  understanding  of  the  research  (other  than  questions  of
competence);  (2)  factors  likely  to  affect  the  voluntariness  of  potential  subjects'
decisions  about  participation;  and  (3)  approaches  to  the  inclusion  of  subjects  with
limited  or  questionable  decision-making  capacity.

Factors  Likely  to  Affect  Understanding

Reviewers  were  likely  to  give  a  3,  4,  or  5  to  proposals  whose  consent
forms  did  a  poor  job  of  describing  either  what  potential  subjects  stand  to  gain  or
what  they  stand  to  lose  by  participating  in  research.  We  looked  carefully  at  how
the  consent  forms  presented  the  purpose  of  the  study,  its  potential  for  direct
benefits  to  the  subject,  the  distinction  between  direct  benefits  and  benefits  to
medical  science,  and  alternatives  to  participation.  How  well  consent  forms
communicated  the  realities  of  what  it  would  be  like  to  participate  in  the  proposed
research,  including  the  likely  impact  on  quality  of  life,  also  came  under  scrutiny.
We  were  troubled,  for  example,  by  consent  forms  that,  when  compared  with  the
information  provided  in  the  grant  proposal  or  other  research  documents,  appeared
to  overstate  the  therapeutic  potential  of  research,  either  explicitly  or  indirectly.

701


Part  III


Figure  1


Overall  Ratings

Greater  than  Minimal  Risk  vs.  Minimal  Risk


60


50


o
0.


40


30


ffi  20


10


Legend

~]  Greater  than  Minimal  Risk  (n=78)
| Minimal  Risk  (n=47)


Overall  Rating


23


4/5


Figure  2


Overall  Ratings

Radiation  vs.  Non-Radiation


40


35


30


Cfl

1

o

2 25
a.

° 20

0)

I 15


I 10


Legend


Radiation  (n=84)
Non-Radiation  (n=41)


19


Overall  Rating


702


Chapter  15

This  issue  was  of  particular  concern  to  the  Committee  when  the  subjects  being
recruited  were  patients  with  poor  prognoses.  For  example,  one  study,  which  was
presented  as  primarily  a  toxicity  study  in  the  accompanying  research  documents,
was  cast  differently  in  the  consent  form:  "One  objective  is  to  find  out  how  well

patients  respond  to  treatment If  treatment  works  in  your  case,  it  may  shrink

your  tumor  or  cause  it  to  temporarily  disappear,  and/or  prolong  your  life  and/or

improve  the  quality  of  your  life Another  objective  of  this  study  is  to  find  out

what  kind  of  side  effects  this  treatment  causes  and  how  often  they  occur."2

There  also  was  significant  concern  about  the  use  of  the  word  treatment  in
consent  forms  for  pharmacological  studies.  Phase  I  studies  are  designed  to
establish  the  maximum  tolerated  dose  (MTD)  for  new  chemotherapeutic  agents
and  radiation  regimens,  which  are  then  subjected  to  limited  (Phase  II)  and  then
more  extensive  (Phase  III)  clinical  trials  to  determine  therapeutic  effectiveness.22
Although  some  Phase  I  studies  contain  elements  of  Phase  II  research  and  can
appropriately  be  characterized  as  holding  out  at  least  a  remote  prospect  of  benefit
to  the  subject,  for  some  Phase  I  studies  even  the  suggestion  that  subjects  might
benefit  is  inappropriate.

Reviewers  were  influenced  in  their  overall  assessments  by  inadequate
descriptions  of  the  physical  risks  of  participating  in  the  research.  Reviewers  were
concerned,  for  example,  when  consent  forms  did  not  discuss  the  risks  potential
subjects  faced  in  being  removed  from  their  standard  treatments  to  be  placed  on  an
experimental  protocol.  In  one  study,  patient-subjects  were  taken  off  cardiac
medication  in  order  to  participate  in  a  diagnostic  study  that  offered  no  direct
benefit  to  them.  Any  risks  involved  in  the  removal  from  this  cardiac  medication
were  not  addressed  in  the  consent  form.  The  Advisory  Committee  also  identified
consent  forms  in  which  the  possible  lethality  of  drug  treatments  and  radiation
exposures  was  not  adequately  discussed.  This  occurred  in  contexts  where  patient-
subjects  generally  faced  far  greater  risks  from  their  underlying  illnesses,  but,
nevertheless,  we  felt  that  the  consent  forms  should  have  been  more  forthcoming.
A  number  of  projects  that  involved  combination  drug  treatments,  for  example,  did
not  provide  the  potential  subject  with  an  estimate  of  the  possibilities  of  death  or
major  toxicities  from  a  combination  of  drugs.  One  study  involved  a  combination
chemotherapy  consisting  of  twelve  different  drugs  but  did  not  address  the
uncertainty  of  risk  resulting  from  this  new  and  investigational  combination.
Although  the  hazards  and  side  effects  for  each  drug  were  described  individually,
there  was  no  discussion  of  overall  risks  and  harms.

Even  where  consent  forms  described  the  risks  of  the  research,  there  was
often  little  mention  of  how  participation  would  affect  the  subject's  ability  to
function  in  daily  life  or  how  ill  subjects  might  be  made  to  feel  during  the  course
of  the  research.  This  omission  was  of  particular  concern  to  us  when  the
implications  for  quality  of  life  were  markedly  different  depending  upon  whether  a
person  decided  to  participate  in  the  research  or  accept  standard  medical
management,  such  as  when  standard  management  included  only  palliative  care  or

703


Part  III

watchful  waiting.  In  one  end-stage  cancer  study,  for  example,  the  consent  form
stated  only  that  there  may  be  "[o]ther  general  complications  which  may  occur
from  combinations  of  chemotherapy  drugs,  including  weight  loss  and  loss  of
energy."  The  Advisory  Committee  was  troubled  that  in  such  studies  patient-
subjects  may  not  understand  that  although  the  research  protocol  might  offer  a
chance  to  extend  life,  the  time  gained  might  be  compromised  by  additional
limitations  in  the  quality  of  life  resulting  from  participation  in  the  study.

Reviewers  also  noted  a  number  of  problems  in  some  consent  forms  for
randomized  clinical  trials.  For  example,  when  some  patient-subjects  were
randomized  to  receive  the  standard  treatment  while  others  would  undergo  an
experimental  procedure,  reviewers  commented  that  physical  risks  associated  with
the  standard  treatment  or  procedure  were  sometimes  not  adequately  addressed  in
the  consent  forms.  In  one  study  of  the  effectiveness  of  a  new  compound  for  the
decontamination  of  people  who  had  ingested  a  radioisotope,  although  the  grant
proposal  indicated  that  subjects  would  be  randomized  to  receive  a  placebo,  this
information  was  not  included  in  the  consent  form.  In  fact,  the  consent  form  only
vaguely  discussed  the  experimental  procedures.  "I  [subject  name]  authorize
[physician  name].  .  .  to  administer  decorporation  therapy  utilizing  the  drug  [name
of  drug]."

The  Committee  recognizes  the  difficulties  facing  investigators  in
communicating  to  potential  research  subjects  a  complex  set  of  experimental
procedures,  side  effects,  long-term  risks,  trade-offs  relative  to  alternatives,  and
other  relevant  information.  This  task  is  not  impossible,  however.  We  reviewed
documents  from  several  complex  research  proposals  that  at  the  same  time  had
excellent  consent  forms.

For  example,  we  reviewed  documents  from  a  proposal  for  a  Phase  I  study
of  experimental  antibody  therapy  that  involved  a  number  of  possible  risks;
imposed  a  number  of  inconveniences  including  restrictions  on  sexual  activities
and  a  weeklong  time  commitment;  and,  as  a  Phase  I  study,  offered  little  prospect
of  direct  benefit  to  subjects.  The  consent  form  for  this  study  addressed  each  of
these  issues  in  understandable  language,  briefly  described  how  the  monoclonal
antibodies  used  in  this  research  were  derived,  and  explained  that  the  U.S.  Food
and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  permits  experimental,  new  forms  of  therapy  to  be
tested  in  a  limited  number  of  patient-subjects  in  Phase  I  studies.  This  consent
form  presented  enough  useful  information  to  enable  potential  subjects  to  make  an
informed  decision  about  whether  to  participate  in  the  research,  and  it  was  not
overly  optimistic  about  the  prospect  of  direct  benefit  to  the  patient-subject.

Another  complex,  greater-than-minimal-risk  study  with  a  good  consent
form  involved  an  investigational  radiation  treatment,  radiosurgery,  for  patient-
subjects  who  had  vascular  disorders  of  the  brain.  The  consent  form  for  this  study
described  the  experimental  procedures  step-by-step  with  a  very  realistic  picture  of
what  participation  would  entail.  Potential  risks,  possible  benefits,  and  alternatives
to  participation  for  this  experimental  therapy  were  clearly  presented.

704


Chapter  15

Furthermore,  information  that  was  likely  to  discourage  some  patients  from
enrolling--the  possibility  that  participation  in  this  study  might  limit  the
effectiveness  of  similar  types  of  radiotherapy  for  the  patient  in  the  future—was
disclosed  in  the  consent  form.

Factors  Likely  to  Affect  Voluntariness

As  is  discussed  later  in  this  chapter,  the  documents  we  reviewed  often
provided  no  basis  on  which  to  judge  whether  the  participation  of  potential
subjects  was  likely  to  be  voluntary  or  not.  In  some  cases,  however,  the
information  provided  was  sufficient  to  raise  concerns.  One  was  a  neuroscience
study  that  offered  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to  potential  subjects.  Subjects
were  being  recruited  from  among  former  cocaine  addicts  who  were  living  in  a
residential  treatment  facility.  Although  compensation  was  not  needed  to
reimburse  subjects  for  travel  expenses  or  loss  of  income,  subjects  were  being
offered  $100  to  participate.  Reviewers  were  concerned  that  this  cash  payment
might  make  it  easier  for  those  people  struggling  to  break  an  addiction  to  get
cocaine.  Moreover,  as  part  of  the  study,  cocaine  was  injected  into  the  body  in
order  to  measure  brain  uptake.  Even  if  this  procedure  was  not  likely  to  have  a
physiologic  effect  upon  the  subjects,  we  were  concerned  that  subjects  may  have
been  encouraged  to  participate  because  the  research  involved  the  injection  of
cocaine.  We  were  also  concerned  about  how  their  receiving  cocaine  as  part  of  the
research  might  affect  the  subjects'  perceptions  of  themselves  during  the  recovery
process.

By  contrast,  the  following  text  from  a  consent  form  for  employee-subjects
(colleagues  of  the  investigators)  who  are  smokers  illustrates  exemplary  handling
of  the  voluntariness  issue  in  a  minimal-risk  study.  The  study,  which  involved  no
risk  of  physical  harm  to  the  subjects,  was  designed  to  measure  environmental
tobacco  smoke.

Your  participation  in  the  experiments  is  entirely  voluntary
and  you  are  free  to  refuse  to  take  part.  You  may  also  stop
taking  part  at  any  time.  Because  you  are  a  colleague  here
at  [research  institution],  we  want  to  be  especially  clear  on
this  point.  We  have  approached  you  about  the  possibility
of  your  volunteering  for  these  experiments.  Your  refusal  to
participate  or  to  continue  will  not  be  questioned  by  us,  nor
will  it  (or  should  it)  be  discussed  further  with  anyone  else.

Inclusion  of  Subjects  With  Limited  Decisional  Capacity

Several  issues  revolve  around  how  certain  factors  that  influence  a  subject's
decisional  capacity  may  affect  his  or  her  ability  to  understand  the  implications  of

705


Part  III

participating  in  research.  There  is,  for  example,  considerable  controversy  over
how  to  conduct  research  ethically  in  emergency  medicine  when,  because  of  the
acute  nature  of  the  medical  problem,  the  patient  is  temporarily  incapacitated  and
no  family  members  are  available  for  consultation.  The  documents  of  one  proposal
raised  some  of  these  issues.  In  this  example,  5  minutes  were  allotted  to  obtain
consent  from  subjects  who  were  recruited  in  the  emergency  room  while  their
chest  x-ray  films  were  being  processed.  Under  the  stressful  conditions  of  an
emergency  room  and  while  experiencing  chest  pain,  the  decisional  capacity  of
potential  subjects  was  likely  to  be  severely  compromised.  Reviewers  expressed
concern  about  the  subjects'  ability,  in  such  a  context,  to  comprehend  the  study
adequately  and  then  make  a  voluntary  decision  about  whether  or  not  to
participate.  In  another  study,  women  in  preterm  labor  were  recruited  to  participate
in  a  study  that  involved  collecting  data  about  the  infants  born  to  these  women.
Although  the  proposal  stipulates  that  "[n]o  mother  will  be  approached  while
under  undo[s/c]  stress  or  in  excessive  pain,"  reviewers  were  nonetheless
concerned  about  consent  having  been  solicited  during  preterm  labor.

The  Advisory  Committee  also  reviewed  the  documents  of  studies
involving  children  and  adults  with  questionable  decision-making  capacity,  several
of  which  raised  serious  ethical  concerns.

Sixteen  of  the  studies  included  in  the  Advisory  Committee's  review
involved  children  as  research  subjects;  1 1  of  these  16  studies,  according  to  federal
regulations,  should  have  had  assent  forms  as  well  as  parental  permission  forms.23
The  documents  we  received  on  each  of  these  proposals  all  included  parental
permission  forms.  We  received  assent  forms  for  8  of  these  1 1  proposals.  The  3
studies  for  which  we  did  not  receive  assent  forms  all  involved  greater  than
minimal  risk,  1  of  which  may  not  have  offered  any  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to
the  children-subjects.

This  last  study  illustrates  a  major  issue  in  the  ethics  of  research  involving
children.  Current  regulations  permit  the  use  of  children  as  subjects  in  research
that  offers  no  prospect  of  direct  medical  benefit  to  them  when  the  research  poses
no  more  than  minimal  risk.  Nontherapeutic  research  on  children  posing  more
than  minimal  risk  is  permitted  under  special  circumstances.  A  central,  unresolved
question  is  whether  the  administration  of  tracer  amounts  of  radioactive  materials
to  children  can  properly  be  classified  as  a  minimal-risk  intervention.

Eight  studies  in  the  project  sample  sought  to  recruit  adult  subjects  with
questionable  decision-making  capacity.  6  of  the  8  appeared  not  to  offer  potential
medical  benefits  to  the  subjects;  two  of  the  6  were  epidemiologic  studies.

The  Committee's  concerns  focused  primarily  on  the  remaining  four
studies,  all  of  which  involved  diagnostic  imaging  with  cognitively  impaired
persons,  such  as  those  with  Alzheimer's  disease.  The  imaging  processes  required
that  the  subjects'  movements  be  restricted,  yet  there  was  no  discussion  in  the
documents  or  consent  form  of  the  implications  for  the  subjects  of  these  potentially
anxiety-provoking  conditions.  Nor  was  there  discussion  of  the  subjects'  capacity

706


Chapter  15

to  consent  or  evidence  that  appropriate  surrogate  decision  makers  had  given
permission  for  their  participation.  We  were  particularly  troubled  that  two  of  these
studies  exposed  subjects  to  greater  than  minimal  risks.  The  question  of  whether
or  under  what  conditions  adults  with  questionable  decision-making  capacity  can
be  used  as  subjects  of  research  that  offers  no  prospect  of  benefit  to  them  is
unresolved  in  both  research  ethics  and  regulation.  When  such  research  puts
potentially  incompetent  people  at  greater  than  minimal  risk  of  harm,  it  is  even
more  ethically  problematic.

Common  Problems  With  the  Documents

We  turn  now  to  a  discussion  of  issues  that  emerged  often  in  the  documents
we  reviewed,  including  documents  that  raised  only  minor  concerns.

Consent  Form  Language

Although  inappropriate  reading  level  in  a  consent  form  was  generally  not
sufficient  in  and  of  itself  to  result  in  ratings  of  3,  4,  or  5,  it  was  sufficient  for  a
rating  of  2.  A  significant  majority  (nearly  80%)  of  the  proposals  receiving  a  1
included  consent  forms  that  used  a  reading  level  appropriate  for  the  study
population.  By  contrast,  the  reading  level  was  judged  to  be  appropriate  in  no
more  than  half  of  the  remaining  consent  forms.

Reviewers  raised  a  number  of  issues  that  they  felt  may  have  contributed  to
problematic  reading  levels  in  the  consent  forms.  One  such  issue  pertains  to  the
complexity  of  the  research  being  proposed.  We  were  disturbed  to  find  that  in
their  attempts  to  convey  complexities  to  the  subject,  investigators  often  drafted
consent  forms  that  were  too  lengthy,  highly  technical,  and  generally
unintelligible.  Consider  the  following,  for  example:  "The  purpose  of  this  study  is

to  obtain  a  'map'  of  brain  cholinergic  receptors This  is  done  by  administering,

intravenously,  small  amounts  of  a  radioactive  substance  that  attaches  to  brain
acetylcholine  receptors  and  then  producing  a  map  of  these  receptors  using  Single
Photon  Emission  Computed  Tomography  (SPECT)."

Still  another  consent  form  included  language  such  as  "[y]ou  will  then  be
positioned  in  a  recumbent  position,"  and  "[a]nother  possibility  is  poor  regional
function  because  of  ongoing  or  intermittent  ischemia  at  rest,  resulting  in  anginal
symptoms  and  global  function  that  is  worse  than  it  can  or  should  be."

A  number  of  the  consent  forms  included  standard  ("boilerplate")  language
that  was  often  in  a  smaller  type  and  distinct  from  the  rest  of  the  document.  The
presentation  of  information  in  this  manner  may  have  given  subjects  the
impression  that  the  information  was  less  important  and  easily  skipped.
Sometimes  these  sections  contained  the  only  discussion  of  such  critical  topics  as
alternatives  to  participation,  costs  to  the  subject,  confidentiality,  potential  benefits
of  participation,  and  voluntariness  of  participation.

707


Part  III

The  Advisory  Committee  found  that  intramural  institutions  often  used  a
standard  consent  form  that  contained  boilerplate  language  provided  by  their
respective  agencies.  The  following  passage  is  an  example  of  such  language.  It
appeared  in  smaller  type  at  the  top  of  consent  documents,  clearly  separated  from
the  rest  of  the  text:

We  invite  you  (or  your  child)  to  take  part  in  a
research  study  at  the  [named  institution].  It  is
important  that  you  read  and  understand  several
general  principles  that  apply  to  all  who  take  part  in
our  studies:  (a)  taking  part  in  the  study  is  entirely
voluntary;  (b)  personal  benefit  may  not  result  from
taking  part  in  the  study,  but  knowledge  may  be
gained  that  will  benefit  others;  (c)  you  may
withdraw  from  the  study  at  any  time  without
penalty  or  loss  of  any  benefits  to  which  you  are
otherwise  entitled.  The  nature  of  the  study,  the
risks,  inconveniences,  discomforts,  and  other
pertinent  information  about  the  study  are  discussed
below.  You  are  urged  to  discuss  any  questions  you
have  about  this  study  with  the  staff  members  who
explain  it  to  you.

Reliance  on  Disclosures  Not  Subject  to  IRB  Review

When  patients  are  being  approached  to  participate  in  research  that  has
implications  for  the  medical  management  of  their  illness,  it  is  understandable  and
indeed  desirable  that  patient-subjects  discuss  the  proposed  research  with  their
treating  physician.  The  Committee  was  disturbed,  however,  when  consent  forms
indicated  that  the  only  presentation  to  potential  subjects  of  key  information  about
the  research  was  to  take  place  in  such  undocumented  discussions.  This  suggests
that  it  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  for  IRBs  to  judge  whether  potential  subjects
were  being  provided  an  adequate  base  of  information  on  which  to  make  an
informed  decision.  There  is  no  documentary  record,  either  in  the  consent  form  or
in  other  materials  submitted  to  the  IRB,  of  what  potential  subjects  have  or  will  be
told  about  key  aspects  of  research  participation.

In  some  cases,  consent  forms  indicated  that  subjects  themselves  were
responsible  for  approaching  physician-investigators  for  explanations  of  the
choices  available  and  guidance  on  how  to  compare  the  experimental  protocol  to
standard  treatment.  Consider  the  following  example:

Your  (child's)  doctor  can  provide  detailed
information  about  your  (child's)  disease  and  the

708


Chapter  15

benefits  and  risks  of  the  various  options  available.
You  are  (your  child  is)  encouraged  to  discuss  this
with  your  (child's)  doctor.

In  this  instance,  it  is  unclear  whether  the  phrase  your  doctor  refers  to  the
patient-subject's  personal  physician,  a  physician  who  is  a  member  of  the  research
team,  or  a  physician  who  is  both.  This  passage,  as  well  as  passages  in  several
other  consent  forms,  suggests  that  conversations  between  subjects  and  the  doctors
occurred  after  consent  was  given.  Examples  of  this  follow:  "Severe  and
sometimes  deadly  side  effects  have  occured  when  high  doses  of  this  drug  have
been  given  .  .  .  You  and  your  doctor  will  determine  whether  the  benefits  of  such
treatment  outweigh  the  risk";  and  "You  will  discuss  the  options  with  your
physician  and  decide  between  . .  .  [surgical  alternative] ...  or  [medical
alternative] . . ."  Subjects  in  these  studies  may  have  received  information  critical
to  their  decision  making  process  only  after  giving  their  consent  to  participate  in
the  research  and  without  the  IRB  knowing  the  content  of  that  information.  This  is
particularly  troublesome  because  these  statements  comprise  the  only  discussions
of  side  effects  and  alternatives,  respectively,  in  these  consent  forms.

Other  consent  forms  seemed  to  rely  on  disclosures  that  had  already  taken
place  by  the  time  potential  subjects  were  approached  to  give  their  consent,  and  so
could  not  be  afforded  IRB  review.  One  such  consent  form  began,  "The  following
is  a  summary  of  the  information  your  doctors  gave  you  when  discussing  this
treatment  with  you.  Please  read  it  and  ask  any  questions  you  may  have."  The
summary  that  followed  provided  little  specific  detail.  The  Committee  was  left
wondering  whether  the  IRB  was  in  a  position  to  make  a  judgment  about  the
adequacy  of  this  prior  disclosure.

Voluntariness

If  an  informed  consent  is  to  be  a  meaningful  act  of  decisional  autonomy,  it
is  essential  not  only  that  the  consent  be  based  on  adequate  understanding  but  also
that  it  be  substantially  free  from  coercive  or  manipulative  influences.  We  found,
however,  that  many  proposal  documents,  including  applications  to  IRBs,  did  not
contain  enough  information  to  make  a  judgment  about  the  likely  voluntariness  of
subjects'  consent  decisions.  For  example,  there  was  often  insufficient  or  no
information  about  who  was  soliciting  a  potential  subject's  consent  and  under  what
conditions.24

Often  the  only  information  in  the  documents  reviewed  that  bore  on  issues
of  voluntariness  was  the  inclusion  in  consent  forms  of  boilerplate  language  to  the
effect  that  participation  was  voluntary.  In  most  cases,  the  issue  of  voluntariness
was  simply  ignored  in  proposal  documents  submitted  to  the  IRBs  and  funding
agencies,  precluding  us  (and,  presumably,  IRBs)  from  making  any  judgments
about  the  procedures  employed  to  ensure  voluntary  decision  making.

709


Part  III

Scientific  Merit

A  controversy  has  long  existed  over  whether  the  role  of  IRBs  includes
evaluation  of  the  scientific  merit  of  proposed  research.  Some  argue  that
evaluation  of  scientific  merit  lies  outside  the  scope  of  IRB  review,  while  their
opponents  contend  that  it  is  impossible  to  do  a  proper  assessment  of  the  benefit-
risk  ratio  without  evaluating  the  potential  contribution  to  science.  Based  on  the
documents  we  received,  it  was  sometimes  difficult  to  make  judgments  about
scientific  merit.  In  some  cases,  reviewers  felt  that  they  could  not  establish  from
the  documents  available  to  them  whether  there  was  sufficient  scientific  merit  to
warrant  the  exposure  of  human  subjects  to  risk  or  inconvenience.

Psychosocial  and  Financial  Risks

In  research  where  psychosocial  risks  were  clearly  an  issue,  these  risks
were  often  inadequately  addressed  in  proposal  documents.  A  number  of
proposals  that  included  neuropsychological  batteries,  for  example,  failed  to
discuss  the  potential  anxieties  that  may  result  from  participation  in  the  study.  The
objective  of  one  research  project  involved  the  inducement  of  sadness  in  the
subject.  Neither  the  consent  form  nor  the  research  documents  addressed  the
possibility  that  the  sadness  would  not  resolve  itself  quickly  and  that  psychological
counseling  or  other  therapy  might  be  necessary.

Four  studies  reviewed  by  the  Advisory  Committee  involved  DNA
screening  to  determine  the  subjects'  carrier  status  for  a  particular  gene.  None  of
the  proposals  for  these  studies  addressed  the  potential  psychosocial  impact  of
learning  about  one's  carrier  status,  including  possible  implications  for  other
members  of  the  subject's  family  or  the  potential  for  insurance  discrimination.  The
availability  of  genetic  counseling  for  these  subjects  was  not  mentioned  in  consent
forms.  Reviewers  also  were  concerned  that  some  proposals  did  not  clearly
explicate  the  types  of  tests  that  were  included  in  what  was  referred  to  as  "chronic
disease  screening"  in  the  consent  forms.  This  lack  of  specificity  was  particularly
troubling  for  "chronic  disease  screens"  that  included  human  immunodeficiency
virus  (HIV)  testing.  Although  the  anxieties  and  social  risks  of  HIV  testing  were
likely  to  be  addressed  on  a  separate  HIV-specific  consent  form,  any  study  that
requires  HIV  screening  as  part  of  its  eligibility  criteria  should  make  that  clear  to
subjects  so  that  those  who  do  not  wish  to  undergo  HIV  testing  can  decline
participation.

Another  area  that  was  sometimes  inadequately  described  in  both  consent
forms  and  research  documents  was  the  financial  cost  to  the  subject  of
participating  in  the  research.  Costs  were  often  briefly  addressed  in  the  boilerplate
section  of  the  consent  form,  but  usually  no  project-specific  information  about
actual  expenses  was  offered  to  the  subject.  Reviewers  were  concerned  that
subjects  might  not  appreciate  the  real  costs  and  the  possibility  that  insurance

710


Chapter  15

companies  would  be  very  reluctant  to  cover  them.  This  omission  was  particularly
troubling  in  studies  involving  seriously  ill  patient-subjects  who  may  be  at  risk  of
spending  much  of  their  assets  on  research  interventions  at  the  end  of  life.

Justice  in  the  Selection  of  Subjects

Most  research  documents  did  not  include  specific  information  about  the
subject  populations  that  would  be  involved  in  the  protocol.  Unless  IRBs  are
receiving  more  information  on  this  topic  than  that  provided  in  the  documents
reviewed  by  the  Advisory  Committee,  they  are  clearly  ill-equipped  to  address  the
social  policy  goal25  of  including  women,  minorities,  and  other  groups  in  research.
The  racial  and  ethnic  composition  of  the  subject  sample,  for  example,  was
specified  in  only  one-quarter  of  the  proposals  whose  documents  were  reviewed  by
the  Committee.

The  only  frequently  mentioned  reason  for  excluding  a  person  from
participation  in  research  was  pregnancy.  Pregnant  women  were  explicitly
excluded  in  58  percent  of  the  studies  (73  of  125)  and  were  explicitly  included  in
only  5  percent  (6  of  125)  of  the  proposals.  Pregnancy  tests  were  often  included  in
the  eligibility  screening  procedures  for  women  who  were  willing  to  participate  in
research.  The  RPRP  sample  also  included  13  studies  in  which  women  who  were
not  pregnant  were  expressly  excluded  from  participation.  There  was  no  scientific
reason  to  exclude  women  as  subjects  of  research  in  any  of  these  proposals.  In  two
of  these  instances,  women  were  excluded  expressly  because  of  the  possibility  that
they  might  become  pregnant.

The  Committee's  interpretation  of  the  implications  of  these  findings  can  be
found  in  the  "Discussion"  section  at  the  end  of  the  chapter.

INDEPENDENT  REVIEW  OF  PROPOSALS

One  member  of  the  Advisory  Committee,  Jay  Katz,  served  both  as  a
reviewer  for  the  RPRP  and  independently  reviewed  93  proposals.26  Katz's
independent  sample  was  drawn  from  the  same  pool  of  proposals  from  which  the
RPRP  sample  was  drawn,  included  examples  of  both  radiation  and  nonradiation
research,  and  was  based  on  the  same  sets  of  documents  as  the  RPRP.27  Although
there  is  considerable  overlap  between  the  proposals  included  in  Katz's  review  and
those  in  the  RPRP,  the  samples  are  not  identical.  Katz  reviewed  the  first  93
proposals  for  which  the  Committee  received  documents,  while  the  RPRP  sample
was  drawn  from  the  entire  pool  of  proposals  for  which  documents  were  received
in  order  to  achieve  adequate  representation  by  funding  agency  and  type  of
research.  In  addition,  a  few  of  the  studies  reviewed  by  Katz  were  eliminated  from
eligibility  in  the  RPRP  because  they  did  not  fall  within  the  biomedical  categories
established  by  the  Committee.

Katz's  review  complements  and  strengthens  the  findings  of  the  Research

711


Part  III

Proposal  Review  Project.  Whereas  the  RPRP  sought  to  investigate  several  basic
issues  regarding  the  conduct  of  human  subjects  research,  including  balance  of  risk
to  potential  benefit,  justice  in  the  selection  of  subjects,  the  involvement  of  people
with  diminished  decisional  capacity,  and  the  consent  process,  Katz  focused
exclusively  on  informed  consent.  In  doing  so,  he  asked  himself  two  interrelated
questions:  (1)  What  can  be  learned  about  the  contemporary  informed  consent
process?  and  (2)  How  adequately  does  the  process  protect  the  rights  and  interests
of  research  subjects?  Although  Katz  appreciated  that  there  was  more  to  the  IRB
process  than  could  be  ascertained  from  the  protocols  and  consent  forms  submitted
to  the  IRB,  he  felt  that  consent  forms  constituted  written  documentation  not  only
of  what  subjects  ultimately  agreed  to  but  also  what  IRBs  considered  to  be
adequate  written  disclosure  for  purposes  of  consent.  With  respect  to  these  signed
informed  consent  forms,  he  echoed  a  fellow  Committee  member's  observation
that,  if  such  forms  are  not  clearly  written  or  are  otherwise  flawed  in  significant
ways,  it  is  likely  that  the  oral  interactions  are  similarly  flawed.

Of  the  93  proposals  Katz  reviewed,  he  identified  41  that  posed  greater
than  minimal  risks  to  subjects  and  therefore  that  also  raised  significant  and
complex  informed  consent  issues.28  Of  these  41  proposals,  Katz  found  that  1 1
(26%)  raised  no  or  only  minor  ethical  concerns  and  were  analogous  to  those
warranting  a  Committee  rating  of  1  or  2.  Thirty  protocols,  however,  raised  ethical
concerns  about  the  informed  consent  process  (analogous  to  a  Committee  rating  of
3,  4,  or  5).  Of  the  30  (74%)  protocols  that  raised  serious  problems,  Katz  felt  that
10  were  "borderline"  (analogous  to  a  Committee  rating  of  3),  and  20  raised
serious  ethical  concerns  of  the  sort  analogous  to  those  warranting  a  rating  of  4  or
5  in  the  RPRP.  Katz  detailed  the  results  of  his  review  of  these  20  problematic
proposals  for  the  Committee,  and  a  summary  of  his  findings  specific  to  those
proposals  is  presented  here.

Physician-Investigators

In  his  review,  Katz  was  struck  by  evidence  of  the  dedication  physician-
investigators  brought  to  their  task.  They  were  concerned,  and  so  informed  IRBs,
about  current  treatments  that  were  inadequate  in  eradicating  disease  or,  at  least,  in
prolonging  life.  Moreover,  physician-investigators  emphasized  the  importance  of
finding  cures  and  not  merely  temporary  or  prolonged  remissions.

Katz  also  noted  that  a  number  of  the  troublesome  research  proposals
appeared  to  be  part  of  an  underlying  "grand  scientific  design"  to  gain  basic
knowledge  in  such  areas  as  cellular  immunology  or  molecular  biology,  which
might  eventually  lead  to  more  clinical  research  about  therapeutic  effectiveness.
The  primary  purpose  of  these  studies  was  to  advance  knowledge  for  the  sake  of
future  patients,  not  to  benefit  present  patients.

As  investigators  declared  war  on  cancer  and  other  ills,  they  often
employed  highly  toxic  agents  to  treat  patients  whose  prognosis  was  grave.  In

712


Chapter  15

their  scientific  protocols,  the  use  of  such  agents  was  justified  by  arguing  that  only
such  aggressive  approaches  would  ultimately  lead  to  cure,  although  often  only  for
future  patients  rather  than  present  patient-subjects.

Katz,  like  the  full  Committee,  was  concerned  that,  at  the  same  time,
documents  from  these  proposals  were  devoid  of  any  discussion  of  the  impact  of
the  research  on  patient-subjects'  quality  of  life,  particularly  in  situations  of
terminal  illness.  He  speculated  that  in  their  ultimate  quest  for  finding  cures,
physician-investigators  often  paid  more  attention  to  increased  longevity  for
present  patient-subjects  than  to  the  quality  of  remaining  life.

Patient-Subjects

To  Katz,  the  ancient  but  questionable  proposition  that  physicians  and
patients  share  an  identity  of  interest  in  medical  decision  making  becomes  even
more  questionable  in  research  settings  where  physician-investigators  have  dual
allegiances:  to  their  subject-patients  and  to  their  research  objectives.  As  did
those  in  the  RPRP,  Katz  noted  that  consent  forms  for  the  troublesome  proposals
were  often  written  in  ways  that  made  it  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  for  patient-
subjects  to  come  to  a  meaningful  decision  as  to  whether  they  wished  to  participate
in  research.  Thus,  patient-subjects  seemed  obliged  to  fall  back  on  uninformed
trust,  based  on  a  belief  that  physician-investigators  will  act  only  to  ensure  a
patient-subject's  therapeutic  benefit.

Katz  identified  five  specific  problems  with  the  informed  consent  process:
(1)  unclear  purpose,  (2)  incomplete  information  regarding  the  consequences  of
participation  in  randomized  studies,  (3)  confusing  or  incomplete  discussion  of
risks,  (4)  exaggerated  benefits,  and  (5)  insufficiency  of  information  in  consent
forms  provided  to  IRBs.  His  concerns  are  elucidated  below.

Specific  Problems  With  the  Informed  Consent  Process

Unclarity  About  Purpose

Katz  found  that  the  most  striking  element  of  the  troublesome  consent
forms  was  the  lack  of  a  forthright  and  repeated  acknowledgment  that  patient-
subjects  were  invited  to  participate  in  human  experimentation.  All  too  quickly  the
language  shifted  to  treatment  and  therapy  when  the  latter  was  not  the  purpose  and
was  only,  at  best,  a  by-product  of  the  research.  Like  the  other  reviewers  in  the
RPRP,  Katz  was  particularly  concerned  with  Phase  I  trials.  As  documented  in
some  of  the  protocols  in  his  examination,  patient-subjects  may  suffer  life-
threatening  toxicities  that  may,  though  rarely,  kill  them.  Nevertheless,  such
studies  are  important  for  subsequent  clinical  trials  and  more  widespread  use  in  an
attempt  to  save  lives  in  the  future.  Katz's  examination  of  consent  forms  revealed
that  investigators  often  did  not  take  sufficient  care  to  apprise  patient-subjects  of

713


Part  III

the  purpose  of  Phase  I  studies.  Although  the  dangers  of  the  research  are  often
mentioned,  this  information  was  often  compromised  when  the  "treatment"
dimension  of  the  research  was  emphasized.  Katz  concurred  with  a  fellow
Committee  member  who  observed,  through  his  participation  in  the  RPRP,
"Perhaps  the  consent  form  should  not  repeatedly  emphasize  that  it  is  treatment,
but  I  believe  that  it  is  the  way  it  is  perceived  by  the  researchers  themselves."  Katz
pointed  out  that  the  controversy  over  when,  if  ever,  Phase  I  trials  are  to  be
regarded  as  potentially  therapeutic  has  not  been  satisfactorily  resolved  with
respect  to  the  question:  What  must  patient-subjects  know?  The  President's
Commission  for  the  Study  of  Ethical  Problems  in  Medicine  and  Biomedical  and
Behavioral  Research,29  when  addressing  Phase  I  trials,  recommended  that
"patients  not  be  misled  about  the  likelihood  (or  remoteness)  of  any  therapeutic
benefit  they  might  derive  from  such  participation."30  Katz's  review  of  consent
forms  revealed  that  the  Phase  I  purpose  is  often  dismissed  and  the  therapeutic
benefits  are  highlighted.  Thus,  he  was  concerned  that  patient-subjects  are  likely
to  be  confused  about  what  is  being  asked  of  them.

The  Consequences  of  Participation  in  Randomized  Studies

A  number  of  the  troublesome  proposals  identified  by  Katz  involved
randomized  clinical  studies  in  which  patient-subjects  were  assigned  to  two
different  experimental  regimens  to  assess  their  comparative  merits.  These  two
procedures  were  generally  described  adequately  in  the  consent  forms.  Patient-
subjects,  however,  were  generally  not  apprised  of  the  already  accumulated
knowledge  about  possible  therapeutic  benefits  to  be  derived  from  each  regimen.
Although  protocols  submitted  to  the  IRB  contained  some,  but  often  incomplete,
information  about  the  greater  promise  of  one  procedure  over  the  other,  patient-
subjects  rarely  received  such  information.

In  one  protocol,  for  example,  investigators  clearly  indicated  that  clinical
experiences  with  the  combined  administration  of  chemotherapy  and  radiation  had
demonstrated  its  effectiveness  against  cancer.  But  since  no  scientific  randomized
clinical  study  had  as  yet  been  conducted,  the  investigators  intended  to  submit  half
of  the  subjects  to  radiation  alone.  Consent  forms  provided  no  clues  about  what
had  already  been  learned  from  clinical  experience  and  nonrandomized  trials.

In  another  randomized  trial,  the  research  objective  required  that  half  of
the  patient-subjects  submit  to  a  mild  treatment  regimen,  and  the  other  half  to  a
more  intensive  one.  Katz  noted  that  quality-of-life  impairments  imposed  by
random  assignment  to  one  research  arm  over  another  were  not  addressed  in  the
consent  forms.  The  consent  forms  also  failed  to  address  the  fact  that  more
intensive  treatment  regimens  went  counter  to  customary  clinical  practice  of
"watching  and  waiting,"  as  the  often  slowly  progressive  nature  of  the  cancers
under  investigation  had  led  practitioners  to  recommend,  in  most  cases,  doing
nothing  or  administering  chemotherapy  or  radiation  therapy  only  in  low  doses.

714


Chapter  15

Moreover,  the  risks  inherent  in  both  the  mild  and  aggressive  regimens  were
lumped  together  in  the  consent  forms  as  if  they  were  one  and  the  same.  The
history  of  clinical  experience  with  these  particular  cancers  also  was  not  discussed
in  the  consent  forms.

Discussion  of  Risks

The  troublesome  consent  forms  identified  by  Katz  customarily  listed  an
extremely  detailed  and  separate  discussion  of  all  risks  of  the  drugs,  surgery,
and/or  radiation  to  be  administered.  Although  he  felt  that  federal  regulations  can
be  interpreted  to  require  such  detail,  Katz,  like  the  Advisory  Committee  as  a
whole,  was  concerned  that  such  exhaustive  treatment  may  serve  only  to
overwhelm  and  numb  patient-subjects.  Only  rarely  were  risks  summarized  or
were  risks  of  particular  relevance  to  the  research  project  highlighted.  In  almost
none  of  the  troublesome  consent  forms  was  there  any  comparative  discussion  of
the  impact  on  quality  of  life  and  toxic  consequences  of  what  investigators
sometimes  term  total  therapy  (or  of  the  physical  and  financial  hardships  imposed
by  countless  research  tests)  on  the  one  hand  and  of  less  toxic  therapeutic
alternatives  that  promise  less  but  at  least  provide  greater  comfort  for  remaining
life  on  the  other.

For  example,  one  study  sought  to  explore  the  toxicity /efficacy  of  a  new
drug  that  may  cause  irreversible  brain  damage.  That  crucial  piece  of  information,
however,  was  not  highlighted  as  a  specific  risk  of  the  particular  drug  under
investigation.

Another  research  project  was  designed  to  treat  a  cancer  with  a  highly  toxic
drug,  which  had  an  expected  mortality  of  up  to  10  percent  when  used  in  a  dosage
greater  than  customary,  as  was  contemplated  in  this  "total  therapy"  research
project.  This  fact,  however,  was  not  mentioned  in  the  consent  form.  Although  the
patient-subjects  had  limited  life  expectancies,  they  probably  would  live  longer
than  when  a  lethal  drug  toxicity  would  occur.  Katz  noted  that  another
investigator  simultaneously  submitted  the  identical  study  to  the  same  IRB
(utilizing  the  same  drug  to  combat  the  same  disease),  but  with  an  exemplary
protocol  and  consent  form  that  discussed  the  expected  10  percent  mortality  rate
without  equivocation.

Presentation  of  Benefits

Like  the  RPRP  reviewers,  Katz  found  that  benefits  were  often  exaggerated
in  the  troublesome  consent  forms.  One  consent  form,  for  example,  stated,  "It  is
possible  that  the  treatment  [emphasis  added]  will  cause  the  tumor  to  shrink  or
disappear  or  eliminate  any  symptoms  and  thus  increas[e]  life  expectancy."
Although  this  statement  conveys  a  promise  of  benefit  to  the  patient-subject,  the
protocol  clearly  indicates  that  any  benefits  would  be  fortuitous  since  they  were

715


Part  III

•.  '^neither  an  aspect  of  the  research  objective  nor  supported  by  evidence  so  far
accumulated.

One  consent  form  for  a  research  project  that  was  designed  solely  to
establish  the  maximum  tolerated  dose  of  an  intensive  chemotherapy  schedule
stated,  "It  is  not  possible  to  predict  whether  or  not  any  personal  benefit  will  result
from  the  use  of  the  treatment  program.  A  possible  benefit  could  be  the
achievement  of  a  remission."  There  was,  however,  no  therapeutic  intent  in  this
proposal;  physician-investigators  were  interested  only  in  learning  if  it  could  be
used  safely  in  a  subsequent  randomized  clinical  trial.  The  subjects,  however,
could  easily  be  led  to  believe  that  there  was  probable  therapeutic  benefit.  Katz
was  particularly  alarmed  about  the  overstatement  of  benefits  because  patient-
subjects  so  desperately  long  for  such  benefits.

Insufficiency  of  Information  Provided  to  IRBs

,!  In  many  cases,  Katz  found  discrepancies  between  information  provided  in

/the  protocol  and  that  provided  in  the  consent  forms.  This  finding  was  not  unlike
that  of  the  full  Advisory  Committee.  Thus,  an  important  question  must  be  posed
and  eventually  answered:  Why  was  information  that  was  available  to  IRBs  not
disclosed  to  patient-subjects?
'%  According  to  the  documents  received,  it  seemed  that  even  IRBs  were  often

inadequately  apprised  of  crucial  information.  In  some  cases,  Katz  noted  that

.'•proposals  were  deficient  in  explicating  the  available  knowledge  about  standard

'treatments,  therapeutic  effectiveness,  and  the  impact  of  experimental  procedures
on  quality  of  life.  Although  research  is  often  a  voyage  into  the  unknown,
investigators  do  possess  preliminary  guiding  data  that  must  be  transmitted  to
IRBs.  Only  then  can  IRBs  accurately  evaluate  consent  forms  and  make  certain

.  ithat  patient-subjects  are  provided  with  necessary  information  in  order  to  make

'•decisions  about  participation.

In  one  research  project,  for  example,  IRBs  and,  in  turn,  parents  were
insufficiently  informed  that  the  combination  of  radiation  treatment  and  highly
toxic  chemotherapeutic  agents  used  in  the  project  exposed  children  to
considerable  risks  that  deserved  careful  scrutiny.  The  parents  or  guardians  had
two  choices:  to  enroll  their  children  in  the  study  or  to  opt  for  standard  treatments
of  either  radiation  or  chemotherapy  alone  (depending  also  on  the  location  of  the
cancer),  with  or  without  one  of  the  chemotherapeutic  agents  that  had  considerable
carcinogenic  potential  within  five  years.  This  example  highlighted  another,  more
general  concern:  that  some  patient-subjects  may  become  part  of  inflexible
research  protocols  when  considerable  clinical  experience  suggests  that  a  patient-
subject's  medical  condition  may  deserve  an  individualized  treatment  approach.


716


'*Kf


Chapter  15

DISCUSSION

We  turn  now  to  a  consideration  of  the  implications  of  the  results  of  the
RPRP,  as  bolstered  by  Katz's  review,  for  our  understanding  of  the  current  status
of  human  subjects  protections.  It  should  be  reemphasized  that  these  results  were
based  solely  on  an  evaluation  of  the  documents  available  to  the  Committee.  It  is
therefore  possible  that  some  of  the  research  projects  that  raised  concerns  for  us
based  on  the  documents  we  reviewed  would,  with  the  provision  of  additional
information,  be  deemed  unproblematic  from  a  human  subjects  perspective.  It  is ^
also  possible  that  some  of  the  research  projects  whose  documents  raised  no
concerns  may  nevertheless  have  inadequacies  affecting  the  rights  and  interests  of
human  subjects  that  we  could  not  detect.

There  is  no  evidence  in  this  review  that  research  in  which  human  subjects
are  exposed  to  radiation  is  any  more  ethically  problematic  than  other  kinds  of
research  involving  human  subjects;  in  fact,  our  results  suggest  that  human  subject
protections  may  be  more  effective  in  radiation  research  then  elsewhere,  perhaps
because  some  radiation  research  is  reviewed  by  a  radiation  safety  committee  as
well  as  an  IRB.  Because  we  failed  to  find  any  systematic  differences  between
radiation  research  and  nonradiation  research  in  our  review,  our  observations
based  on  the  RPRP  results  are  directed  at  human  subjects  research  generally,  not
solely  at  radiation  research.

About  40  percent  of  the  research  whose  documents  we  reviewed  appeared
to  pose  no  greater  than  minimal  risk  to  participants.  Most  of  these  studies  raised
no  concerns  about  ethics,  or  only  minor  ones.  Many  studies  that  involved  greater
than  minimal  risks  to  subjects  were  similarly  ethically  unproblematic.
Specifically,  more  than  half  of  the  greater-than-minimal-risk  studies  reviewed
raised  no  or  only  minor  concerns  about  ethics.  There  are  important  lessons  to  be  > :
learned  from  these  studies.  It  is  possible  to  conduct  complex  research  that  puts >
subjects  at  greater  than  minimal  risk  of  harm  in  an  ethically  acceptable  fashion.  It£
is  possible  to  develop  good  consent  forms  for  this  kind  of  research.  Not  only  is  it  •
possible,  but  it  appears  that  this  happens  frequently.

At  the  same  time,  our  review  suggests  that  there  are  significant
deficiencies  in  some  aspects  of  the  current  system  for  the  protection  of  human
subjects.  We  have  evidence  that  the  documents  provided  to  IRBs  often  do  not
contain  enough  information  about  topics  that  are  central  to  the  ethics  of  research
involving  human  subjects  such  as  voluntariness  of  participation,  fairness  in  the
selection  of  subjects,  and  scientific  merit.  Although  we  have  already  noted  that
IRBs  do  not  necessarily  rely  solely  on  documents  in  making  their  evaluations,
clear,  complete  written  documents  are  important.  These  documents  form  the  core
of  the  information  upon  which  IRBs  rely  in  protecting  the  rights  and  interests  of
human  subjects;  in  some  cases,  they  are  the  only  source  of  information  available.
These  documents  also  provide  a  written  record  of  the  research  subject  protection
process  for  both  administrative  and  historical  purposes.

717


Part  III

In  some  cases,  the  Committee  found  that  it  was  difficult  to  assess  the
scientific  merit  of  a  protocol  based  on  the  documentation  provided.  This  is
particularly  problematic  for  proposals  in  which  the  IRB  provides  the  only
opportunity  for  peer  review,  as  is  sometimes  the  case  for  research  that  is  not
funded  by  the  federal  government.

The  Committee  also  found  evidence  suggesting  that  in  some  studies
women  are  being  excluded  from  participation  in  research,  explicitly  or
presumably  because  of  the  possibility  that  they  might  become  pregnant  during  the
course  of  the  study.  This  finding  is  disturbing  in  light  of  the  fact  that  much  of  this
research  was  undertaken  after  a  national  policy  had  been  instituted,  advocating
the  inclusion  of  women  in  research,  and  a  general  rejection  of  the  mere  possibility
of  pregnancy  as  a  justifiable  reason  for  not  permitting  women  to  become  research
subjects.31  The  conditions  under  which  pregnant  women  ought  to  be  included  as
research  subjects  remain  controversial.  That  pregnant  women  are  frequently
excluded  from  research  was  clearly  evidenced  in  the  RPRP;  this  occurred  in  more
than  half  the  studies  in  our  review.

Some  of  the  Committee's  most  serious  concerns  focus  on  informed
consent.  The  results  of  the  RPRP,  as  well  as  of  Katz's  review,  suggest  that  some
consent  forms  currently  in  use  are  flawed  in  morally  significant  respects,  not
merely  because  they  are  difficult  to  read  but  because  they  are  uninformative  or
even  misleading.  These  are  consent  forms  that  have  been  approved  by  an  IRB,
and  still  they  are  problematic,  to  the  point  where  Committee  reviewers  viewed
them  as  raising  serious  ethical  issues.  Most  of  these  concerns  centered  on
research  involving  patient-subjects  with  poor  prognoses,  people  who  are
particularly  vulnerable  to  confusion  about  the  relationship  of  research  to
treatment.  The  consent  forms  to  be  used  with  such  patient-subjects  sometimes
appeared  to  suggest  a  greater  prospect  of  benefit  than  the  research  as  described  in
the  documents  we  reviewed  warranted.  In  a  few  Phase  I  studies,  any  intimation
that  subjects  would  benefit  appeared  questionable.  At  the  same  time,  the
disadvantages  of  participation,  particularly  as  they  would  affect  quality  of  life,
were  sometimes  inadequately  described  or  not  presented  at  all.  The  Committee
recognizes  that  the  consent  form  is  only  a  document  and  is  never  to  be  confused
with  the  entire  process  of  soliciting  informed  consent,  which  includes  far  more
than  the  form  itself.  It  is  possible  that  in  some  of  these  cases  potential  patient-
subjects  were  provided  more  balanced  and  straightforward  information  in
discussions  with  investigators  or  their  own  physicians.  At  the  same  time,
however,  the  consent  form  as  approved  by  the  IRB  is  a  powerful  symbol  of  what
the  system  considers  an  adequate  disclosure.  Moreover,  this  may  convey  to
investigators  that  meeting  ethical  obligations  to  potential  subjects  requires  the
investigators  to  say  nothing  different  and  nothing  more  than  what  is  approved  on
the  consent  form.

-  Our  review  also  raises  serious  concerns  about  some  research  involving
children  and  adults  with  questionable  decision-making  capacity.  Although  we

718


Chapter  15

looked  at  documents  from  only  125  proposals,  we  found  examples  of  three
controversial,  unresolved  issues  in  the  ethics  of  research:  research  with  patients  in
the  midst  of  a  potential  medical  emergency;  research  involving  children  that  may
offer  them  no  prospect  of  direct  benefit  but  that  may  put  them  at  greater  than
minimal  risk,  depending  on  how  minimal  risk  is  understood;  and  research  on
adults  with  questionable  decision-making  capacity  that  offers  them  no  benefit  but
that  involves  unpleasant  procedures  and  exposes  them  to  greater  than  minimal
risk  of  harm.

All  told,  the  documents  of  almost  half  the  studies  reviewed  by  the
Committee  that  involved  greater  than  minimal  risk  raised  serious  or  moderate
concerns.  Katz,  who  focused  exclusively  on  the  informed  consent  process,  had
serious  concerns  about  50  percent  of  the  greater-than-minimal-risk  proposals  he
evaluated.  These  are  findings  that  cannot  be  ignored.  At  the  same  time,  our
review  provides  evidence  that  research  involving  human  subjects,  even  complex
research,  can  and  often  is  being  conducted  in  an  ethically  responsible  manner.
The  challenge  is  to  identify  what  needs  to  be  changed  to  ensure  that  all  research
involving  human  subjects  is  conducted  in  accord  with  the  highest  ethical
standards.


719


ENDNOTES


1.  From  1988  to  1993,  the  CIA  approved  twelve  proposals  for  human  subjects
research.  However,  none  of  these  proposals  involved  ionizing  radiation  as  an  element  of
the  research  design.

2.  Studies  performed  upon  human  tissue  were  included  in  this  definition  of
radiation  experiments  only  if  a  subject's  exposure  to  ionizing  radiation  occurred  prior  to
the  collection  of  the  tissue.

3.  The  matrix,  shown  in  the  chapter  on  the  Research  Proposal  Review  Project  in
a  supplemental  volume  to  this  report,  went  through  several  adjustments  to  account  for
classification  errors  in  which  research  abstracts  were  assigned  to  the  incorrect  biomedical
category  (owing  largely  to  inadequate  information  in  the  abstracts).

4.  The  approach  we  used  can  be  described  as  a  modified  quota  sampling
methodology.  Quota  sampling  methodology  is  described  briefly  in  Earl  R.  Babble,
Swvey  Research  Methods  (Belmont,  Calif:  Wadsworth  Publishing  Company,  Inc.,
1973),  107-108.

5.  The  final  radiation  study  sample  matrix  can  be  found  in  the  chapter  on  the
Research  Proposal  Review  Project  in  a  supplemental  volume  to  this  report.  A  matrix  of
these  categories  was  constructed  and  a  criterion  was  established  that  every  cell  of  the
matrix  be  filled  with  no  fewer  than  3  and  no  more  than  5  studies  from  the  contemporary
period  of  research  (fiscal  years  1990  through  1993).  Where  there  were  more  than  5
eligible  studies  per  cell,  a  sample  of  5  was  randomly  selected.  The  original  target
number  of  studies  per  cell  was  set  at  between  3  and  10;  studies  were  identified  for
review  according  to  this  initial  criterion.  However,  as  the  Advisory  Committee
approached  the  end  of  its  tenure,  the  sampling  of  radiation  studies  was  modified  slightly.
The  Committee  agreed  that  reviewing  only  5  would  enable  the  Research  Proposal
Review  Project  to  be  completed  in  enough  time  for  the  results  to  be  included  in  this
report  without  compromising  the  meaning  of  its  findings.  Accordingly,  where  5  studies
had  not  yet  been  reviewed  in  any  given  cell,  the  number  of  studies  needed  to  reach  5  was
randomly  selected  from  those  remaining.

6.  Of  the  225  research  proposals  originally  chosen  by  the  Advisory  Committee,
91  were  funded  at  43  extramural  institutions.  As  a  number  of  these  proposals  were
deleted  during  the  review  process,  however,  only  32  extramural  institutions  were
represented  in  the  final  total  sample.  Although  31  extramural  institutions  were
represented  in  the  radiation  sample,  one  institution  was  represented  only  in  the
nonradiation  sample.

7.  We  originally  believed  that  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  extramural  to  intramural
studies  would  be  much  closer  to  1:1;  however,  this  was  not  the  case  with  our  radiation
sample.  The  discrepancy  can  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  VA  studies  are  all  intramural
and  that  few  extramural  studies  are  funded  by  DOD.

8.  The  final  nonradiation  (and  radiation)  study  sample  matrix,  broken  down  by
funding  agency,  funding  type,  and  disease,  can  be  found  in  a  supplemental  volume.

9.  The  Advisory  Committee  received  a  total  of  225  proposals.  A  number  of
these  proposals  were  eliminated  from  the  sample  because  they  did  not  fall  within  the
definitions  (for  radiation/nonradiation,  biomedical  category)  established  by  the  Advisor}'
Committee.  Additionally,  approximately  40  proposals  were  deleted  according  to  the
modified  sampling  scheme  that  was  conceived  in  order  to  pare  down  the  number  of

720


studies  reviewed  to  125.

10.  Grant  proposals  were  requested  directly  from  the  funding  agencies.  All
other  materials  for  intramural  studies  were  also  requested  from  the  respective  agencies,
while  other  materials  for  extramural  studies  were  requested  from  the  grantee  institution
performing  the  research.

1 1 .  Contains  a  detailed  scientific  research  proposal  including  references  to
related  work  and  relevant  animal  models.  Descriptions  of  the  informed  consent  process
and  subject  selection  are  not  usually  well  developed  in  this  document.  When  the
proposal  was  not  available,  a  detailed  protocol  and  summary  of  research  were  used  in
lieu  of  the  proposal.  Intramural  studies  often  did  not  include  a  full  research  proposal,  but
only  the  IRB  application,  consent  form,  and  other  supporting  documents.

12.  May  sometimes  include  the  grant  proposal,  but  usually  contains  a  more
concise  version  of  the  research  protocol  with  greater  explanation  of  and  specific  attention
to  the  use  of  human  subjects.

13.  The  consent  form  provides  a  written  record  of  what  information  is  provided
by  the  investigators  to  research  subjects.  The  original  and  approved  versions  of  the
consent  form  reviewed  together  give  some  insight  into  the  IRB  review  process  for  the
particular  research,  the  extent  to  which  investigators  understand  the  requirements  for
informed  consent  prior  to  submitting  their  study  proposal  for  review  by  the  IRB,  and  the
IRB's  required  changes  lo  the  consent  form  and/or  process  prior  to  the  approval.  In  some
cases,  only  the  consent  form  approved  by  the  IRB  was  available.

14.  Specific  changes  required  for  final  approval  of  the  proposal  are  often
indicated  in  this  document.  When  the  disposition  letter  could  not  be  obtained,  a  record
of  the  IRB  minutes  for  the  meeting  in  which  the  project  was  approved  served  as  a
substitute.

15.  Such  documentation,  which  generally  takes  the  form  of  correspondence  or
annual  renewal  forms,  enabled  the  Committee  to  determine  if,  over  time,  there  were
improvements  or  further  problems  with  the  consent  procedures,  risks  and  benefits,  and
selection  of  subjects.

16.  The  RDRC  application  provides  additional  justification  regarding  the
dosages  of  radioactive  drugs  administered  to  subjects,  which  helped  the  Committee
assess  risks  to  which  subjects  were  exposed.  The  Advisory  Committee  sometimes
received  a  radiation  safety  committee  (RSC)  application  in  lieu  of  or  in  addition  to  the
RDRC  application.

17.  D.  A.  Henderson,  University  Distinguished  Service  Professor,  The  Johns
Hopkins  University  School  of  Hygiene  and  Public  Health,  to  Ruth  Faden,  Chair,
ACHRE,  31  July  1995  ("Who  would  have  believed  .  .  .").

18.  A  more  exhaustive  report  of  the  quantitative  findings  can  be  found  in  the
Research  Proposal  Review  Project  chapter  of  a  supplemental  volume  of  this  report.
These  findings  include  additional  graphs  of  overall  rating  distributions  according  to
federal  agency,  biomedical  category,  disease,  and  funding  type.

19.  All  proposals  receiving  an  overall  rating  of  4  or  5  were  reviewed  a  second
time  by  Advisory  Committee  and  staff  reviewers  to  identify  the  core  ethical  concerns
involved  in  each  such  proposal.

20.  In  light  of  the  analysis  that  showed  that  inclusion/exclusion  of  "maybe
greater  than  minimal  risk"  studies  with  those  studies  that  involved  "greater  than  minimal
risk"  did  not  significantly  affect  the  proportion  of  studies  that  received  each  overall
rating,  the  Advisory  Committee  decided  to  evaluate  these  two  groups  of  studies  together.


721


2 1 .  In  correspondence  with  RPRP  extramural  institutions,  the  Advisory
Committee  promised  not  to  link  findings  in  this  report  to  any  institution,  investigator,  or
research  proposal.  Where  individual  RPRP  proposals  are  discussed  in  the  final  report,
no  identifying  information  is  provided.

22.  The  FDA  approval  process  for  the  sale  and  use  of  drugs  and  medical  devices
proceeds  through  four  phases  of  testing  on  humans,  after  being  tested  in  animal  models.
In  Phase  I  the  goal  is  to  establish  the  dose  of  a  drug  or  treatment  at  which  toxicity  in
humans  results,  in  an  effort  to  establish  safe  levels  for  human  use.  In  Phase  II  the  goal  is
to  establish  a  therapeutically  effective  dose  of  a  drug  or  treatment  whose  toxicity  has
been  established.  Phase  III  is  testing  of  a  drug  or  treatment  whose  therapeutic
effectiveness  has  been  shown,  to  determine  its  effectiveness  as  compared  with  existing
drugs  or  treatments,  in  preparation  for  approval  and  marketing.  Phase  IV  testing  is
postmarketing  data  collection  to  determine  the  longer  term  effects  of  the  drug  or
treatment  in  a  large  group  of  patients,  over  time.

23.  Of  the  5  studies  involving  children  that  did  not  require  assent  forms,  3
involved  sixteen-  to  eighteen-year-olds,  and  2  were  follow-up  studies  in  which  children
were  not  actively  recruited  and  were  not  likely  to  be  subjects  in  the  study.

24.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  degree  of  professional  expertise  of  the  person
soliciting  consent  is  often  considered  important  to  the  quality  of  the  consent  process. In
some  cases,  consent  is  solicited  by  researchers  or  nurses  working  on  the  project,  not  by
the  principal  investigators  themselves.  Although  there  is  controversy  over  whether  the
influence  of  the  investigator  in  the  consent  process  is  potentially  coercive,  many  argue
that  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  principal  investigator  to  make  sure  that  the  subject's
consent  is  informed  and  voluntary.

25.  Institute  of  Medicine,  Committee  on  the  Ethical  and  Legal  Issues  Relating  to
the  Inclusion  of  Women  in  Clinical  Studies,  Women  and  Health  Research:  Ethical  and
Legal  Issues  of  Including  Women  in  Clinical  Studies  (Washington,  D.C.:  National
Academy  Press,  1994).

26.  Committee  member  Katz  initiated  this  independent  review  of  research
proposals.  Dr.  Katz  has  been  a  scholar  of  the  ethics  of  human  experimentation  for  more
than  thirty  years.

27.  Most  of  these  100  studies  reviewed  by  Professor  Katz  also  appeared  in  the
sample  of  studies  "formally"  evaluated  by  the  review  teams;  however,  several  were  cut
from  the  sample  over  the  course  of  the  review  process  in  the  interests  of  managing  the
sample  size.  The  studies  included  in  Professor  Katz's  independent  review  sample  that
were  eliminated  from  the  "formal"  reviews  were  otherwise  relevant  to  the  Research
Proposal  Review  Project  and  provide  additional  depth  to  the  scope  of  the  Committee's
review  of  research  proposals.

28.  Because  Katz  reviewed  a  convenient  sample  of  proposals  in  the  order
received  and  did  not  apply  the  Committee's  selection  criteria,  his  sample  included  a
number  of  minimal-risk  studies  that  had  been  eliminated  from  the  Committee's  scope  of
review.  It  is,  therefore,  not  surprising  that  there  is  a  discrepancy  between  the  proportion
of  minimal-risk  studies  assessed  by  Katz  and  those  assessed  by  the  full  Committee.

29.  The  President's  Commission  for  the  Study  of  Ethical  Problems  in  Medicine
and  Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research  was  chartered  in  1979  to  report  biennially  on
the  adequacy  and  uniformity  of  the  federal  rules  and  policies  for  the  protection  of  human
subjects  in  biomedical  and  behavioral  research,  as  well  as  the  adequacy  and  uniformity
of  their  implementation.


722


30.  President's  Commission  for  the  Study  of  Ethical  Problems  in  Medicine  and
Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research,  Implementing  Human  Research  Regulations:  The
Adequacy  and  Uniformity'  of  Federal  Rules  and  Their  Implementation,  for  the  Protection
of  Human  Subjects  Biennial  Report  No.  2  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1983),  2,  43.

31.  The  National  Institutes  of  Health  (NIH)  Revitalization  Act  of  June  1993
introduced  new  requirements  to  "ensure  that  women  be  included  as  subjects  in  each
project  of  [clinical]  research"  and  "conduct  or  support  outreach  programs  for  the
recruitment  of  women  and  members  of  minority  groups  as  subjects  in  projects  of  clinical
research."  A  copy  of  this  act  can  be  found  in  Institute  of  Medicine,  Committee  on  the
Ethical  and  Legal  Issues  Relating  to  the  Inclusion  of  Women  in  Clinical  Studies  Women
and  Health  Research,  appendix  B.  This  report  also  stresses  the  need  for  the  inclusion  of
pregnant,  women  in  clinical  research  and  recommends  "that  NIH  strongly  encourage  and
facilitate  clinical  research  to  advance  the  medical  management  of  pre-existing  medical
conditions  in  women  who  become  pregnant  (e.g.,  lupus),  medical  conditions  of
pregnancy  (e.g.,  gestational  diabetes)  and,  conditions  that  threaten  the  successful  course
of  pregnancy  (e.g.,  pre-term  labor)."  Ibid.,  16.


723


16

Subject  Interview  Study


I,


Ln  reporting  to  the  American  people  what  we  have  learned  about  the
current  status  of  human  subjects  research,  the  Committee  wanted  to  incorporate
the  voices  and  experiences  of  subjects  themselves.  What  is  it  like  to  be  a  subject
in  biomedical  research  today?  Why  do  people  become  research  subjects,  and
what  does  participating  in  research  mean  to  them?

To  provide  answers  to  these  questions,  the  Advisory  Committee
conducted  the  Subject  Interview  Study  (SIS),  a  descriptive  study  in  which  both
patients  who  were  research  subjects  and  patients  who  were  not  research  subjects
were  interviewed  to  determine  whether  they  believed  that  they  were  participants
in  medical  research,  their  general  attitudes  and  beliefs  about  medical  research,
and  if  applicable,  why  they  did  or  did  not  decide  to  participate  in  research.  The
Committee  would  have  liked  to  have  heard  not  only  from  patient-subjects  but  also
from  the  many  "healthy  volunteers"  who  are  critical  to  the  success  of  much
biomedical  research.  Unfortunately,  time  constraints  made  this  impossible.
Clinical  research—research  involving  patients— does  account  for  a  large  proportion
of  contemporary  medical  research  involving  human  subjects,  however,  and  it  was
toward  this  enterprise  that  the  SIS  was  directed.

In  this  chapter,  we  report  what  patients  and  patient-subjects  told  us  about
research  and  what  we  learned  about  their  experiences.  We  begin  by  describing
the  methodology  of  the  SIS:  how  the  patients  were  selected  and  how  they  were
interviewed.  Next,  we  report  the  results  of  these  interviews,  as  well  as  the  results
of  our  review  of  the  records  of  the  patients  to  whom  we  talked.  We  close  with  a
discussion  of  the  limitations  and  implications  of  the  SIS.


724


Chapter  16
METHODOLOGY

The  SIS  included  almost  1,900  patients  at  medical  institutions  across  the
country.  To  determine  whether  the  experiences  people  had  with  radiation
research  were  any  different  from  those  people  had  with  nonradiation  research,  we
interviewed  patients  in  medical  oncology,  radiation  oncology,  and  cardiology
clinics.  All  of  these  patients  participated  in  a  Brief  Survey  (five  to  ten  minutes).
One  hundred  three  of  these  patients,  all  of  whom  reported  in  the  Brief  Survey  that
they  were  research  participants,  also  completed  longer  (roughly  forty-five
minutes)  In-Depth  Interviews,  designed  to  give  patients  an  opportunity  to
elaborate  on  their  perceptions  of  research  and  their  personal  research  experiences.
Advisory  Committee  staff  and  consultants  took  primary  responsibility  for
designing  the  SIS,  recruiting  institutions  to  participate  in  the  study,  conducting
some  of  the  interviews,  and  analyzing  the  data.  Research  Triangle  Institute,  a
nonprofit  organization,  was  hired  to  perform  several  tasks  including  conducting
focus  groups,  piloting  the  interview  instruments,  conducting  the  majority  of
interviews,  and  performing  most  of  the  data  entry.

Selection  of  Institutions

Five  areas  of  the  country  were  selected  as  sites  for  the  SIS:  Ann  Arbor,
Baltimore/Washington,  Dallas/San  Antonio,  Raleigh/Durham,  and
Seattle/Tacoma.  These  sites  were  selected  because  they  include  institutions  that
receive  some  of  the  highest  amounts  of  federal  dollars  for  human  subjects
research  and  because  we  were  trying  to  balance  our  sample  with  respect  to
geographic  region,  rural/urban  settings,  and  expected  ethnic  mix.  At  each  of
these  five  sites,  a  university  hospital,  a  VA  hospital,  and  a  community  hospital
were  selected.  If  other  federal  government  or  military  hospitals  were  present  at  a
site,  the  most  highly  funded  of  these  institutions  were  included.  A  total  of
nineteen  institutions  were  selected,  as  presented  in  table  1 .  Interviews  were
conducted  at  sixteen  of  the  nineteen  institutions  selected.  At  the  University  of
Washington  Health  Services  Center  and  the  Seattle  Veterans  Affairs  Medical
Center,  the  institutional  review  board  (IRB)  process  could  not  be  completed
within  the  time  constraints  of  the  SIS.  Baylor  University  Medical  Center  declined
to  participate  in  the  study.


725


Part  III

Table  1.  Institutions  Selected  for  the  Subject  Interview  Study

Ann  Arbor

Ann  Arbor  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center
1  St.  Joseph's  Hospital
University  of  Michigan  Medical  Center


Baltimore/Washington

Baltimore  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center
Clinical  Center  of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health
Greater  Baltimore  Medical  Center
The  Johns  Hopkins  Hospital
Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center


Dallas/San  Antonio

Baylor  University  Medical  Center  *

Dallas  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center

Parkland  Memorial  Hospital  and  the

University  of  Texas  Southwestern  Medical  Center  at  Dallas

Wilford  Hall  Air  Force  Medical  Center


Durham/Raleigh

Duke  University  Medical  Center
Durham  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center
Rex  Hospital


Seattle/  Tacoma

Madigan  Army  Medical  Center

Seattle  Veterans  Affairs  Medical  Center  *

Swedish  Hospital

University  of  Washington  Health  Services  Center  *

*  Interviews  were  not  conducted  at  these  institutions.


726


Chapter  16
Recruitment  of  Patients

At  each  of  the  participating  institutions,  patients  were  recruited  from  the
waiting  rooms  of  three  outpatient  departments:  medical  oncology,  radiation
oncology,  and  cardiology.  On  the  days  that  patients  were  seen  in  each  of  the
departments,  a  clinic  staff  member  informed  patients  arriving  at  the  clinic  that  a
study  was  being  conducted  to  examine  attitudes  and  beliefs  about  participation  in
medical  research.  The  staff  member  also  asked  patients  if  they  were  willing  to
have  a  study  interviewer  approach  them  in  the  waiting  room  to  see  if  they  were
willing  to  be  interviewed.  Interviewers  approached  a  systematic  sample  of  these
patients  and,  following  a  brief  description  of  the  SIS,  asked  individuals  to
participate.

Each  patient  who  agreed  to  participate  in  the  Brief  Survey  completed  a
written  consent  form  that  authorized  the  SIS  staff  to  consult  one  or  more  of  the
following  sources  to  ascertain  whether  the  patient  was  or  had  been  a  participant  in
a  research  project:  doctors,  investigators,  research  nurses,  a  research  office,  a
research  database,  and  their  medical/research  records.  The  survey,  composed
mostly  of  multiple-choice  questions,  was  designed  to  take  roughly  five  to  ten
minutes  to  administer.  Patients  completing  the  Brief  Survey  received  $5.00  for
their  time  and  effort  devoted  to  the  study.  All  patients  who  indicated  in  the  Brief
Survey  that  they  believed  they  were  medical  research  participants  were  asked  if
they  were  willing  to  participate  in  an  In-Depth  Interview  (roughly  forty-five
minutes).  These  interviews  raised  many  of  the  topics  from  the  Brief  Survey.  A
sample  of  those  who  agreed  to  this  further  participation  were  contacted  to  arrange
for  an  interview  at  a  time  and  place  convenient  for  them.  Patients  completing  the
In-Depth  Interview  received  $25.00  to  compensate  them  for  their  time  and  effort
devoted  to  the  study  as  well  as  to  pay  for  any  expenses  related  to  participation  in
the  study,  such  as  transportation  and  parking.

A  target  of  150  Brief  Surveys  (50  each  in  medical  oncology,  radiation
oncology,  and  cardiology)  was  set  for  each  institution.  A  target  of  100  total
In-Depth  Interviews  was  set  for  patients  selected  from  all  institutions.  Both  the
Brief  Survey  instrument  and  the  In-Depth  Interview  guide  appear  in  a
supplemental  volume  to  this  report.  Electronic  files  containing  the  final  data  from
the  Brief  Survey  and  transcripts  from  the  In-Depth  Survey  are  maintained  along
with  other  records  of  the  Advisory  Committee.

Data  Collection  and  Analysis

Brief  Survey

The  Brief  Survey  instrument  was  refined  based  upon  focus  groups  of
patients  conducted  at  two  institutions  not  participating  in  the  SIS:  the  University
of  North  Carolina  at  Chapel  Hill  and  Georgetown  University.  The  instrument  was

727


Part  III

then  further  refined  based  upon  pilot  testing  at  these  same  institutions.  The
instrument  consisted  predominantly  of  questions  with  multiple-choice  answers
addressing:

1 .  General  attitudes  toward  medical  research.

2.  Any  perceived  differences  in  understanding  among  the
following  terms:  medical  research,  medical  study,  clinical
trial,  clinical  investigation,  and  medical  experiment.

3.  Beliefs  about  research  participation.

4.  Reasons  for  either  participating  in  research  or  not
participating  in  research  (when  applicable).

5.  Demographic  and  other  background  information  (such  as
race,  sex,  age,  and  employment/insurance  status).

All  survey  forms  were  labeled  with  an  identification  number  for  each
patient,  rather  than  with  patients'  names.  Data  were  entered  into  a  computerized
database  and  analyzed  using  standard  statistical  methods.

In-Depth  Interview

An  In-Depth  Interview  guide  was  developed  based  on  the  focus  groups
and  pilot  testing  at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  at  Chapel  Hill  and
Georgetown  University.  The  In-Depth  Interview  contained  open-ended  questions
that  allowed  participants  to  speak  more  extensively  about  the  issues  addressed  in
the  Brief  Survey.  For  example,  patients  were  asked  to  describe  their  attitudes
about  research  generally,  their  own  experience  as  research  participants,  how  they
arrived  at  their  decision  to  participate,  and  the  informed  consent  process  for  their
particular  project.  All  of  the  interviews  were  audiotaped  and  transcribed.  All
cassette  tapes  and  transcripts  were  labeled  with  an  identification  number  for  each
patient  and  never  with  patients'  names.  All  transcripts  were  read  in  their  entirety
by  Advisory  Committee  staff  members,  and  then  data  were  coded  and  analyzed
using  text  analysis  software.

Determination  of  Research  Participation

To  assess  how  well  patients'  reports  of  their  participation  in  research
matched  their  documented  enrollment  in  research  projects  at  the  participating
institutions,  a  mechanism  for  determining  research  participation  was  developed
for  each  institution.  In  each  instance,  we  sought  documentation  of  participation  in
research  from  sources  such  as  patients'  medical  or  research  records.  This
information  was  supplemented  by  information  from  investigators  and  research
nurses.


728


Chapter  16

A  second  level  of  review  was  conducted  in  those  cases  in  which  there  was
an  apparent  discrepancy  between  a  patient's  own  description  of  having  been,  or
not  having  been,  a  research  subject  and  the  documents  or  other  sources  of  this
information.  A  physician  or  a  research  nurse  on  the  Advisory  Committee  staff
reviewed  the  patient's  interview,  the  patient's  medical  and  research  records,
institutional  databases,  and  other  sources  of  information  at  the  local  institution
for  evidence  that  could  either  resolve  or  verify  the  discrepancy.

Expert  Panel  Assessments  of  the  Research  Projects

To  identify  some  of  the  basic  characteristics  of  the  research  projects  in
which  the  patients  we  interviewed  were  or  had  been  participating,  we  convened
an  expert  panel  and  asked  this  panel  to  make  some  preliminary  judgments  based
on  the  information  provided  in  the  consent  forms  of  these  research  projects.  The
panel  consisted  of  eight  physicians:  specialists  in  oncology,  radiation  oncology,
cardiology,  nuclear  medicine,  and  radiology,  as  well  as  general  internists.

We  attempted  to  secure  a  copy  of  an  unsigned  consent  form  for  every
research  project  in  which  a  respondent  in  the  SIS  was  a  documented  participant
and  that  had  been  conducted  at  one  of  the  study  institutions.  Although  336
consent  forms  were  requested,  only  236  were  received  in  time  to  be  reviewed  by
the  expert  panel.

Each  consent  form  received  was  reviewed  by  the  expert  panel,  which  met
for  one  day.  After  agreeing  how  the  forms  would  be  evaluated,  the  panel  broke
into  four  teams,  each  consisting  of  two  physicians,  one  who  had  content  area
expertise  in  the  project  being  reviewed  and  another  who  did  not.  If  a  team  could
not  reach  consensus  on  the  evaluation  of  a  particular  consent  form,  it  was  brought
to  the  larger  group  for  review.  If  a  consent  form  was  received  after  this  meeting
of  the  panel  it  was  sent  to  the  panelists  for  review.  The  expert  panel  characterized
the  research  projects  on  three  dimensions:  (1)  type  of  research  (therapeutic,
diagnostic,  or  other);  (2)  degree  of  sickness  of  the  population  (expressed  as  a
high  burden  for  those  with  diseases  such  as  AIDS,  a  medium  burden  for  those
with  conditions  such  as  hypertension,  or  a  low  burden  for  those  who  generally
were  healthy),  and  (3)  incremental  risk  assumed  by  those  who  participated  in  the
project  compared  with  those  who  were  not  participating  in  the  research  project
(measured  as  minimal  or  more  than  minimal  incremental  risk).


729


Part  III
RESULTS

In  this  section,  we  present  the  results  of  the  SIS.  We  begin  with  a
description  of  the  demographic  characteristics  of  the  patients  we  interviewed,  as
well  as  the  basic  characteristics  of  the  research  projects  in  which  some  of  these
patients  were  or  had  been  participating.  We  then  review  what  we  learned  about
patients'  general  attitudes  toward,  and  beliefs  about,  research  and  their
understanding  of  some  of  the  terms  commonly  used  to  describe  research  to
potential  subjects.  This  is  followed  by  our  results  concerning  patients'
perceptions  of  whether  they  are,  or  are  not,  participants  in  research  and  the  extent
to  which  we  were  able  to  compare  these  perceptions  with  documents  and  other
sources.  We  then  discuss  what  patients  said  about  the  distinctions  between
research  and  treatment,  and  their  reasons  for  deciding  to  participate.  We  also
describe  the  characteristics  of  patients  who  reported  that  they  declined  to  be
research  participants.  Our  discussion  of  results  closes  with  what  we  learned  from
the  SIS  about  the  consent  process  and  issues  of  voluntariness  of  participating  in
research.

Demographic  Information

Brief  Survey

A  total  of  1,882  patients  completed  the  Brief  Survey.  The  overall
response  rate  was  95  percent.  Patients  predominantly  were  Caucasian  (80%),
more  than  sixty  years  old  (53%),  and  male  (59%).  Other  relevant  demographic
features  are  found  in  table  2.

In-Depth  Interview

A  total  of  103  patients,  representing  fourteen  of  the  sixteen  institutions
included  in  the  overall  study  sample,  were  interviewed.1  This  sample  also  was
predominantly  Caucasian  (74%)  and  male  (54%)  (see  table  2).  Due  to  technical
or  administrative  difficulties  with  four  interviews,  only  ninety-nine  transcripts
were  available  for  analysis.2

Characteristics  of  the  Research  Projects

The  characteristics  of  the  projects  in  which  patients  participated  are
described  in  table  3.  The  expert  panel  categorized  the  disease  burden  associated
with  the  projects  reviewed  as  low  (1 1%),  medium  (38%),  and  high  (51%).
Approximately  half  (48%)  involved  minimal  incremental  risk  from  research.


730


Table  2.  Demographic  Characteristics  of  SIS  Patients


Brief  Survey

(N  =  1882)

Percent

Sex

Male

58.7

Female

41.3

Age  Category

Under  30

3.6

30  to  59

43.3

Over  59

53.1

Race/Ethnicity

African-American

16.3

Caucasian

79.7

Latino

3.9

Other

2.9

Education

Less  than  high  school

21.5

High  school  graduate  plus  those

with  additional  schooling

53.7

College  graduate  plus  those  with

additional  schooling

24.9

Annual  Household  Income

Greater  than  $75,000

10.9

$50,000  -  $74,999

14.4

$25,000  -  $49,999

28.7

Less  than  $25,000

41.0

Not  reported

5.1

Insurance*

Private

87.2

Public

46.4

Veterans  Administration

26.6

Not  reported

1.4

Type  of  Institution

Community

37.7

VA  Medical

19.7

University

28.5

Government/Military

24.1

In-Depth
Interview
(N  =  103)
Percent

54.0
46.0

5.0

53.0

42.0

23.0
74.0
2.0
1.0

9.0

52.0

39.0

21.0
15.0
25.0
34.0
5.0

65.0
36.0
20.0
12.0

34.0
17.0
17.0
32.0


A  detailed  breakdown,  in  schematic  format,  of  the  procedures  and  results
reported  in  this  section  are  found  in  a  supplemental  volume  to  this  report.


73]


Type  of  Research

Patients'  Re]

Report

N=,

Therapeutic

65%

Diagnostic

16%

Other

14%

Did  not  know

3%

Missing/Unreported

2%

Part  III

Table  3.  Characteristics  of  Research  Projects

*  Expert  Panel

N  =  236+

69%
18%
12%

N/A
1%

*  Patients'  Report  refers  to  the  patient's  understanding  of  the  type  of  research  in
which  they  were  participating.  Expert  Panel  Report  refers  to  the  expert  panel's
assessment  of  the  type  of  research  in  which  the  patient  was  participating.

t  Because  of  time  constraints,  the  remaining  consent  forms  were  not  reviewed.


General  Attitudes  Toward  and  Beliefs  About  Biomedical  Research
Brief  Survey

In  the  Brief  Survey,  patients  were  asked  a  series  of  questions  concerning
their  attitudes  toward,  and  beliefs  about,  "medical  research."  Almost  all  the
patients  had  positive  impressions  of  medical  research.  Specifically,  52  percent
reported  a  "very  favorable"  attitude  toward  research  and  37  percent  a  "somewhat
favorable"  attitude.  Only  5  percent  of  patients  described  themselves  as  having  an
unfavorable  attitude.  Controlling  for  multiple  factors,  the  characteristics
associated  with  more  favorable  general  attitudes  toward  research  included  being
older  (age  greater  than  sixty),  being  male,  being  a  patient  in  radiation  oncology
rather  than  cardiology,  and  having  reported  currently  being  or  having  been  a
participant  in  research.3

More  than  two-thirds  of  the  patients  reported  that  they  believed  medical
research  usually  or  always  advances  science.  More  than  80  percent  of  the  patients
agreed  that  medical  research  does  not  involve  unreasonable  risks  (86%).
Nevertheless,  some  patients  (9%)  believed  that  research  usually  or  always  poses
unreasonable  risks  to  people. Controlling  for  multiple  factors,  the  characteristics
associated  with  holding  this  belief  included  being  younger,  being  African-
American,  not  having  a  college  education,  being  in  fair  or  poor  general  health,
and  not  having  any  experience  as  a  research  participant.4 Seven  percent  of
patients  believed  that  participants  in  medical  research  are  usually  or  always
pressured  into  participating.  Patients  more  likely  to  believe  that  people  are

732


Chapter  16

pressured  into  research  were  African-American  and  had  an  annual  income  of  less
than  $25,000.5

Thirty-seven  percent  of  patients  believed  that  patients  who  participate  in
medical  research  are  usually  or  always  better  off,  medically,  than  similar  patients
who  are  not  in  medical  research.  Patients  with  a  more  positive  view  about
research  tended  to  be  older,  have  incomes  of  less  than  $50,000  a  year,  and  have
had  some  experience  as  a  research  participant.6

In-Depth  Interview

In  the  In-Depth  Interviews,  patients'  general  attitudes  about  research  often
seemed  to  be  shaped  by  what  their  own  research  experiences  had  been,  and
patients  generally  had  very  positive  things  to  say  about  their  own  experiences.
Typically,  they  believed  that  the  projects  in  which  they  were  or  had  been
participants  had  been  explained  thoroughly,  that  they  had  been  treated  kindly,  and
that  they  had  received  at  least  as  much  benefit  as  could  have  been  expected.
Moreover,  the  more  experience  people  had  with  research,  the  more  positive  was
their  attitude.  In  addition,  a  few  patients  admitted  that  they  had  held  a  rather
negative  impression  of  research  until  they  themselves  had  participated,  at  which
time  their  impression  changed.  One  respondent  said,  "I  didn't  know  what  to
expect.  In  the  beginning  I  was  worried,  you  know.  I  was  a  little  upset,  a  little
frighten[ed]  and  everything.  Once  I  got  here,  I  found  that  the  people  were  very
nice,  very  professional,  and  they  care  about  their  patients  . .  .  [Y]ou  think  that  you
are  going  to  be  a  number,  that  they  just  may  be  cold  and  calculating,  they['ll]  just
be  thinking  about  just  the  data  itself  and  you  are  just  a  number  or  something.  But
once  I  got  here  I  found  that . . .  the  doctors  and  nurses  and  everybody  are  very
concerned  about  the  individual  and  you  find  that  out  because  they  take  the  time  to
know  your  name."7  These  findings  are  consistent  with  those  from  the  Brief
Survey,  in  which  patients  who  currently  were,  or  once  had  been,  research
participants  had  significantly  more  positive  attitudes  about  research  than  those
who  had  never  participated.

When  asked  for  their  attitudes  and  beliefs  about  medical  research
generally  (rather  than  about  their  own  experiences),  patients,  again,  had  very
positive  things  to  say.  Research  was  thought  of  as  a  promising  endeavor,
something  that  would  advance  knowledge  and  help  other  people:  "[Research  is]
the  only  way  advancement  is  made  in  the  medical  field  particularly.  .  .  [I]t's  gotta
be  done  at  some  point  in  time  on  human  beings  .  .  .  and  there  are  people  who  are
alive  today  because  of  the  people  [who]  did  research  projects."8  Another
respondent  strongly  endorsed  research  activities:  "Overall  I  have  to  say  clinical
trials,  medical  experiments  are  the  only  way  we're  going  to  find  any  type  of
results  . . .  because  you  can  .  .  .  practice  on  guinea  pigs,  monkeys,  or  whatever,
but  the  only  way  you're  going  to  find  out  if  any  of  these  drugs  are  going  to  work
is  you're  going  to  have  to  do  it  on  a  human  being."9  While  patients  articulated  the
necessity  of  conducting  research,  a  few  reiterated  the  importance  of  looking  out
for  the  interests  of  the  human  participants:  "I  think  that .  .  .  research  is  awfully

733


Part  III

important  in  all  fields  and  ...  the  more  it  involves  human  life  the  more  guarded
one  has  to  be  about  it."10

Terminology

Brief  Survey

In  the  Brief  Survey,  patients  were  asked  to  compare  the  term  medical
research  with  one  of  four  alternative  terms:  clinical  trial,  clinical  investigation,
medical  study,  or  medical  experiment.  The  term  medical  experiment  evoked  the
most  striking  and  negative  associations.  It  was  the  only  term  to  be  evaluated  as
worse  than  the  term  medical  research  on  all  of  the  dimensions  considered.
Specifically,  patients  who  were  asked  to  compare  medical  experiments  with
medical  research  reported  that  patients  in  "medical  experiments"  were  more  likely
to  get  unproven  treatments  and  be  at  greater  risk  than  patients  in  "medical
research"  and  also  that  they  were  less  likely  to  do  better  medically.  By
comparison,  patients  thought  those  in  "medical  research"  were  more  likely  than
those  in  either  "clinical  investigations"  or  "clinical  trials"  to  get  unproven
treatments  and  to  be  at  greater  risk,  but  they  were  more  likely  to  do  better
medically.  The  term  medical  study  got  better  ratings  than  the  term  medical
research  in  every  respect;  medical  studies  were  viewed  as  less  risky,  as  less  likely
to  involve  unproven  treatments,  and  as  offering  a  greater  chance  at  medical
benefit.

In-Depth  Interview

Distinctions  in  meaning  among  different  terms  for  biomedical  research
also  emerged  from  the  In-Depth  Interview.  Elaborating  on  the  findings  of  the
Brief  Survey,  the  terms  experiment  and  experimental,  for  the  vast  majority  of
participants,  meant  that  something  was  unproven,  untested,  or  in  the  first  stage  of
testing  and  was  thereby  riskier  and  perhaps  scary.  Some  patients  said  they  would
become  a  participant  in  an  "experiment"  only  if  they  were  terminally  ill.  A  few
participants  described  quite  explicit  images  of  what  experiments  involved:  "I
envision  all  kinds  of  weird  things  done  to  the  body  and  I  assume  that's  not  true,
but  also  I  envision  a  medical  experiment  maybe  .  .  .  done  in  a  laboratory  sealed  up
somewhere  where  no  one  even  knows  what  [is]  going  on.""  Another  respondent
said,  "Medical  experiment—almost  sounds  like  Frankenstein  to  me."12  When
asked  to  explain  the  term  experiment,  patients  often  invoked  the  term  guinea  pig
to  convey  the  sentiment  of  being  the  "victim"  of  an  experiment.  For  example,  one
respondent,  when  asked  to  define  the  term  medical  experiment,  said,  "That's
where  you  get  down  to  the  human  guinea  pig  .  .  .  where  they  may  be  injecting
medication  or  whatever  they  want  to  inject  in  someone  and  watching  them  for  a
reaction."13

In  comparison  with  the  term  experiment,  clinical  trial  and  clinical
investigation  were  not  such  evocative  terms.  Some  patients  gave  hesitant  or

734


Chapter  16

stumbling  definitions  or  said  they  were  not  familiar  with  these  terms.  On  the
other  hand,  some  patients  did  attach  meaning  to  these  terms,  defining  them  as
endeavors  that  were  at  an  intermediate  stage  of  inquiry,  where  researchers  already
know  something  about  the  topic  and  they  are  now  trying  the  next  step.

Patients  were  most  likely  to  consider  "study"  a  benign  endeavor,  akin  to
studying  something  in  school:  "Study  brings  to  my  mind  more  of  using
documentation  for  analysis.  . . .  With  a  study  . .  .  you're  looking  at  records.  You
look  at  past  histories  and  so  forth.  ...  It  is  mostly  paperwork,  documents,  or  the
books  and  things."14

Of  the  four  terms  offered,  patients  usually  said  they  would  prefer  to  be  in  a
study.  It  was  reported  to  be  the  least  harmful  because  it  was  believed  to  be  the
least  invasive.  In  comparison  to  experiments,  which  many  patients  believed
involved  "trying  things  out"  on  animals  and/or  humans,  "studies,"  they  felt,
usually  entailed  gathering  information  and  reviewing  paperwork.

Personal  Experience  With  Research

Brief  Survey

Thirty  percent  (570)  of  the  1,882  patients  interviewed  reported  that  they
were  or  had  been  participants  in  research  (see  table  4).15  We  were  able  to  review
records  or  consult  other  sources  for  541  of  these  570  cases.  By  these  reviews,  we
were  able  to  confirm  research  participation  in  302  of  541  cases  (56%).  In  another
203  of  the  541  cases  (38%),  we  were  unable  to  find  documentation  to  suggest
whether  or  not  the  patient  was  participating  or  had  participated  in  research.  In  the
remaining  36  cases,  the  review  by  health  professionals  on  the  Advisory
Committee  staff  concluded  that  these  patients  were  probably  in  error  and  that  they
were  not,  indeed,  research  participants.16  In  summary,  16  percent  (302  of  1,882)
of  the  total  sample,  consistent  with  their  reports,  were  former  or  current  research
participants.  Also,  assuming  that  most  of  the  patients  for  whom  research
participation  could  not  be  verified  but,  consistent  with  their  own  reports  were
probably  truly  former  or  current  participants  (1 1%,  or  203  of  1,882),  then  a  total
of  27  percent  of  the  Brief  Survey  respondents  were  former  or  current  research
participants.  By  contrast,  2  percent  of  the  total  sample  (36  of  1,882),  were  likely
incorrect  in  their  perception  of  themselves  as  being  participants  in
research.


735


Part  III


Table  4.  Personal  Experience  With  Participation  in  Research:  Results  of  the
Record  Review*


Result  of  Subjects  who  reported  Subjects  who  said  they

record  review  they  were  in  research  were  not  in  research

N  =  570  N  =  1,223

In  research  53%  (302)  5%  (69)

Couldn't  tell  36%  (203)  2%  (23)

Probably  not  in  research  6%  (36)  88%  ( 1 ,080)

No  record  review  5%  (29)  4%  (5 1 )


*The  numbers  in  this  table  should  be  interpreted  in  the  context  of  the
explanation  and  limitations  presented  in  the  text  (pages  10-12  and  21-24).


Sixty-five  percent  (1,223  of  1,882)  of  the  patients  interviewed  reported
that  they  were  not  and  never  had  been  participants  in  research.  We  were  able  to
review  records  or  consult  other  sources  for  1,1 72  of  these  cases.  In  23  of  the
cases,  relevant  records  were  unavailable  to  confirm  participation.  In  our  review
of  records  and  other  sources,  we  did  not  find  evidence  of  research  participation
for  1,080  of  1,149  patients.  In  69  of  these  1,149  cases,  however,  Advisory
Committee  health  professional  staff  was  able  to  confirm  patients'  participation  in
research.  In  61  of  these  69  cases,  the  preliminary  evidence  for  participation  had
included  an  informed  consent  form  signed  by  the  patient  for  enrollment  in  the
research  project.  In  summary,  then,  60  percent  of  the  total  sample  (1,080  of  a
total  of  1,882)  appear  never  to  have  been  research  participants— in  the  sense  that
there  is  no  evidence  to  the  contrary—and  in  another  1  percent  of  the  sample  (23
out  of  1,882)  it  is  unclear.  By  contrast,  4  percent  (69  of  1,882)  of  the  total  sample
were  apparently  incorrect  in  believing  they  never  had  been  participants  in
research.

Although  the  Committee  could  not  return  to  the  69  subjects  to  determine
whether  the  apparent  discrepancy  was  due  to  true  lack  of  awareness  or  perhaps  to
other  factors  like  confusion,  misunderstanding  of  the  question,  or  poor  memory,
we  did  attempt  to  take  a  closer  look  at  these  cases.  These  69  patients  came  from
all  five  geographic  sites  sampled  in  the  SIS  and  were  receiving  care  at  every  type
of  institution  participating  in  the  study  (that  is,  university  hospitals,  government
or  military  hospitals,  Veterans  Affairs  medical  centers,  and  community  hospitals).
These  patients  were  interviewed  in  radiation  oncology,  medical  oncology,  and


736


Chapter  16

cardiology  clinics.  Their  ages  ranged  from  twenty-one  to  eighty-nine  years  of
age;  30  were  women  and  39  were  men;  and  the  majority  (53)  were  white  (12  were
African-American  and  4  were  of  other  ethnicities).  Their  educational  background
ranged  from  less  than  eighth  grade  to  those  with  graduate  or  professional  degrees.

The  records  of  these  69  patients,  who  reported  that  they  were  not  in
research  but  for  whom  evidence  of  research  participation  was  found,  were
subjected  to  extensive  review  and  analysis  by  Advisory  Committee  health
professional  staff.  According  to  this  review,  about  half  of  these  patients  had  been
enrolled  in  research  during  the  previous  year.17  The  consent  forms  of  42  of  the
studies  in  which  these  patients  were  enrolled  had  been  included  in  the  sample  of
consent  forms  reviewed  by  our  expert  panel.  According  to  the  panel,  the  disease
burden  for  those  recruited  for  these  42  studies  ranged  from  low  (5  studies)  to  high
(18  studies),  with  the  remainder  being  medium  (19  studies).  Most  of  these  studies
involved  the  evaluation  of  treatment  (23  studies),  while  some  were  diagnostic
(13)  or  other  types  of  studies  (5). '8  Finally,  of  these  42  studies,  25  were
determined  by  our  experts  as  posing  minimal  incremental  risk  to  subjects  and  17
as  posing  more  than  minimal  incremental  risk.

In-Depth  Interview

Patients  completing  the  Brief  Survey  were  recruited  for  the  In-Depth
Interview  if  they  reported  that  they  currently  were  or  once  had  been  participants
in  research.  Through  the  review  process  described  above,  however,  research
participation  could  not  be  verified  for  9  of  the  99  In-Depth  Interview  patients,  nor
did  the  transcripts  of  these  9  patients  suggest  that  they  were  research  participants.
Two  of  these  9  patients  told  stories  about  research  participation  that  were
confusing  or  unclear.  Another  7  of  the  9  seemed  to  believe  that  anything  new  or
unknown,  or,  in  a  few  instances,  any  tests,  were  research.  One  such  respondent,
with  a  rare  medical  condition  without  a  known  efficacious  treatment,  described
the  interventions  she  received  and  said,  "Everything  is  experimental,  they  don't
know  how  to  cure  it."|g  These  9  transcripts  were  excluded  from  further  analysis.

Distinctions  Between  Research  and  Medical  Care

While  the  Brief  Survey  did  not  address  distinctions  between  medical
treatment  and  research,  this  issue  arose  during  the  In-Depth  Interview.  Here,
patients'  descriptions  of  their  research  experiences  often  included  descriptions  of
their  physical  conditions,  their  own  health  care  providers,  or  the  hospitals  at
which  their  research  projects  were  conducted.  Research  experiences,  particularly
for  those  patients  who  reported  being  in  research  evaluating  potential  treatments,
were  inextricably  interwoven  with  their  medical  care  experiences.  One
respondent  described  her  research  experience  "as  a  means  of  treating  what  I
have."20  Another  respondent,  when  asked  what  she  disliked  about  the  project  in
which  she  was  a  participant,  replied:  "Nothing  other  than  the  fact  that  nobody
likes  to  be  sick  and  nobody  likes  to  go  to  doctors."21

737


Part  HI

While  patients,  if  asked,  were  quite  able  to  identify  which  procedures,
tests,  and  staff  were  associated  with  their  research,  they  did  not  themselves
readily  make  distinctions  between  research  and  medical  treatment.  Particularly
for  patients  with  serious  medical  diagnoses,  research  often  was  viewed  as  one  of
the  treatment  options  for  their  medical  conditions.  Not  surprisingly,  then,  some
participants  evaluated  their  research  experience  in  terms  of  whether  they  believed
it  would  provide  them  with  clinical  benefit.  One  respondent  noted,  "I  see  results
that  indicate  that  the  chemotherapy  that  I'm  taking  is  working,  and  therefore,  that
is  adequate  enough  to  satisfy  me."22

Despite  the  tendency  for  some  patients  to  fuse  discussions  of  research  and
treatment,  some  clearly  differentiated  the  two.23  This  was  especially  true  for
those  who  reported  that  they  were  in  diagnostic,  epidemiologic,  or  survey
research.24

Deciding  to  Participate

Brief  Survey

When  asked  whether  specific  factors  contributed  a  lot,  contributed  a  little,
or  did  not  contribute  to  their  decision  to  participate  in  particular  research  projects,
patients  typically  identified  multiple  motivations.  Most  patients  reported  that
they  had  joined  a  research  project  to  get  better  treatment  (contributed  a  lot,  67%;
a  little,  1 1%)  and  because  being  in  research  gave  them  hope  (contributed  a  lot,
61%;  a  little,  18%).  Patients  who  cited  the  desire  for  better  treatment  as  a  reason
for  agreeing  to  be  in  research  were  more  likely  than  other  patients  to  be  in  a  study
that  they  viewed  as  "therapeutic,"  that  related  to  the  patient's  medical  condition,
and  that  involved  radiation.25

In  addition  to  this  emphasis  on  the  possibility  of  better  treatment  and  the
bolstering  of  hope,  135  patients  agreed  with  the  statement  that  they  "had  little
choice"  but  to  participate  and  that  this  belief  contributed  a  lot  to  their  decision.
While  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  precisely  what  these  patients  understood  this
statement  to  mean,  patients  elaborated  on  this  motivation  in  the  In-Depth
interviews,  often  saying  that  because  of  the  serious  nature  of  their  medical
condition  and/or  because  other  interventions  had  not  been  successful,  they
believed  they  had  "little  choice"  but  to  try  research.  Patients  reporting  that  they
had  little  choice  tended  to  categorize  the  projects  in  which  they  were  subjects  as
treatment  projects  (compared  with  diagnostic  or  epidemiological),  tended  to
report  that  the  projects  involved  radiation,  that  they  did  not  feel  they  had  enough
information,  and  that  the  research  was  related  to  their  medical  condition.26

Altruistic  reasons  also  played  a  part  in  many  patients'  decisions  to
participate  in  research.  Specifically,  most  patients  reported  that  they  looked  at
participation  as  a  way  to  help  others  (contributed  a  lot,  76%;  a  little,  18%)  and  as
a  way  to  advance  science  (contributed  a  lot,  72%;  a  little,  21%). Patients  also
frequently  said  that  they  had  joined  research  projects  because  it  seemed  like  a
good  idea  (contributed  a  lot,  48%;  a  little,  17%),  the  project  sounded  interesting

738


Chapter  16

(contributed  a  lot,  53%;  a  little,  24%),  and  they  had  no  reason  not  to  participate  in
medical  research  (contributed  a  lot,  56%;  a  little,  15%).

In-Depth  Interview

In  reporting  how  they  had  decided  to  participate  in  research,  In-Depth
Interview  patients  described  many  different  processes,  ranging  from  the  very
deliberate  weighing  of  risks  and  benefits  to  the  quicker  decision  of  just  taking
action.  Doctors  (e.g.,  "my  doctor,"  "the  doctor,"  a  particular  doctor,  or  referring
physician)  were  frequently  identified  as  the  key  agent  in  the  respondent's  decision
to  participate  in  research.

Patients  expressed  a  broad  range  of  reasons  they  decided  to  participate  in
biomedical  research.  As  in  the  Brief  Survey,  for  people  in  therapeutic  research,
the  primary  reason  for  participating  in  research  was  to  obtain  benefits  either
through  an  experimental  treatment  they  hoped  would  be  better  than  standard
treatment  or  through  the  closer  medical  attention  they  believed  they  would
receive  through  research.  One  woman  reported  that  she  was  participating  in  a
treatment  trial  specifically  to  obtain  an  experimental  drug  that  she  believed
looked  promising.  Furthermore,  she  wanted  to  receive  it  in  a  controlled
environment  where  she  could  receive  good  follow-up  and  where  researchers
would  document  the  drug's  effects.27  Another  respondent  commented  that  since
doctors  at  the  military  hospital  where  he  received  his  care  were  very  busy,  he
could  receive  closer  attention  and  obtain  appointments  more  easily  by  enrolling  in
research.2*  Some  patients  who  reported  being  in  therapeutic  research  hoped  that
the  research  would  give  them  more  "time":  "[A]ll  I  wanted  at  that  point  was  five
years  to  get  my  boys  through  high  school";29  "I  want  longevity  ...  I  don't  see
myself  wanting  to  just  pass  away."30  Some  patients  decided  to  be  in  research
because  they  believed  that  newer  therapies  might  inherently  be  better:  "If  there's
something  new  on  the  market  that  might  be  better  than  the  traditional  program
they've  been  using,  why  not  try  it?"31

Mirroring  the  Brief  Survey  finding  that  31  percent  of  patients  felt  they  had
little  choice  in  joining  a  research  project,  many  In-Depth  Interview  patients  who
participated  in  therapeutic  research  remarked  that  they  had  joined  because  they
believed  they  had  "no  choice,"  meaning  they  had  no  medical  alternatives:  "My
doctor  told  me  if  I  do  not  take  the  drug,  in  a  couple  of  months  I . . .  [will] . .  .  die.
So,  I  had  no  choice.  Who  wants  to  die?  Nobody."32  Another  respondent  said,  "I
had  one  more  option  as  he  [the  doctor]  put  it."33  Hope  and  desperation  pervaded
the  remarks  of  many  terminally  ill  patients.  Patients  said  they  wanted  to  "try
anything"  or  that  this  was  their  "last  resort."  One  man  explained,  "Well,  what  was
driving  me  to  say  'yes'  was  the  hope  that  this  drug  would  work.  .  .  .  When  you
reach  that  stage  .  . .  and  somebody  offered  that  something  that  could  probably
save  you,  you  sort  of  make  a  grab  of  it,  and  that's  what  I  did."34  This  same  patient
noted  that  he  had  first  declined  what  he  had  considered  a  very  aggressive  therapy,
"because  at  that  point  everything  was  pretty  okay  and  there  was  no  need  for  me  to


739


Part  III

do  any  wild  things."35  Later,  when  his  condition  worsened,  he  decided  to
participate  in  the  research.

One  of  the  most  influential  forces  in  patients'  decisions  to  enroll  was
doctors'  recommendations.  One  patient  described  the  process  of  her  enrollment:
"He  [the  doctor]  asked  me  if  I  wanted  to  go  on  it,  and  I  said,  'If  it's  what  you
think  I  should  do,  yes,  because  you  know  more  about  it  than  I  do.' . . .  [H]e  said,  'I
think  it  would  be  a  good  idea  to  try  it.'"36

Along  these  lines,  a  theme  of  trust  overwhelmingly  emerged.  Patients
trusted  specific  physicians,  medical  professionals  more  generally,  or  the  overall
research  enterprise.  Trust  in  specific  physicians  was  straightforward:  "Basically,
y[ou]  know,  we  trust  Dr.  [So-and-so]  . .  .  [There]  was  no  reason  to, .  .  .  get  a
second  opinion  from  another  doctor."37  Another  respondent  exclaimed  "Oh,  I
love  that  man.  He  has  kept  me  alive  and  I  obey  him  and  I  do  what  he  tells  me

to  do. .  .  ."38 Some  patients  also  communicated  trust  in  the  medical  profession
more  generally:  "I  have  this  attitude.  They  know  what  they're  doing.  They
wouldn't  have  you  to  do  this  if  they  didn't  know  what  they  were  doing  and  .  .  .
that's  my  attitude.  .  .  ."3<)  Finally,  there  were  a  few  patients  who  expressed  trust  in
the  overall  enterprise  of  medical  research  as  well  as  its  oversight.  One  respondent
stated:  "I  do  not  feel  like  the  drug  would  be  on  the  market  if  it  were  going  to  harm
me,  and  if  it  would  help  in  any  way  .  .  .  I'm  very  willing  to  participate  in  this  and
perhaps  other  studies."40  Related  were  patients  who  said  they  decided  to
participate  because  of  their  trust  in  the  institution  where  the  research  was  being
conducted.  "I  think  I've  got  the  best  treatment  down  there  [named  hospital].  I
don't  think  I  could  get  any  better."41  Rare  were  the  patients  who  had  less  "blind
trust"  and  considered  themselves  to  be  more  of  a  consumer:  "I  sort  of  take  my
own  treatment  in  my  head  and  tell  them  that  I'm  his  client.  It's  not  the  other  way
around. .  .  ,"42

Elaborating  on  responses  to  the  Brief  Survey,  the  majority  of  patients
mentioned  altruism  as  a  reason  to  participate.  This  desire  to  help  others  took
many  forms,  including  helping  others  who  had  the  same  medical  condition,
advancing  medical  science  more  broadly,  and  contributing  to  society.  Most
frequently,  those  in  therapeutic  research  seemed  to  voice  a  combined  motivation
of  seeking  benefit  for  themselves  and  hoping  to  achieve  benefit  for  others.  Very
representative  was  the  comment,  "I  was  hoping,  if  not  for  me,  at  least  for  the  next
people  coming  along. . .  ,"43

For  some  patients  who  faced  a  life-threatening  illness,  participating  in
research  seemed  to  offer  them  a  greater  sense  of  personal  worth,  a  chance  to
contribute  something  of  value  to  society.  One  woman  said,  "[I]f  I  can  help  find  a
cure  for  what  seems  to  be  so  common  [that  is,  cancer]  these  days,  I  would  love  to
think  I  was  part  of  finding  that  cure."44  For  a  small  number  of  patients,  this  notion
of  helping  others  went  further,  to  be  a  duty  or  obligation:  "[I  thought],  well,  I
don't  have  to  do  this,  and  then  I  thought,  well,  here  I  am  benefiting  from  literally
thousands  and  thousands  of  experiments  that  have  gone  before  and  that  are
helping  to  save  my  life  and  this  one  sounded  [very]  reasonable  to  me  and  I  was
happy  to  participate."45  Similarly,  one  respondent  replied,  "I  feel  like  that

740


Chapter  16

[participating  in  research  and  giving  blood]  is  a  moral  obligation  as  a  citizen.

You  put  back  into  your  community [Opportunities  to  not  only  help  yourself

but  other  people  are  real  important  to  me "46  ^

Only  three  patients  cited  monetary  reasons  for  participating  in  research.

Deciding  Not  to  Participate

It  is  also  clear  from  the  Brief  Survey  that  not  all  patients  approached  to
participate  in  a  research  project  agree  to  do  so.  In  fact,  191  (10%)  of  the  1,882
patients  we  spoke  with  told  us  that  at  some  point  they  had  made  a  decision  not  to
participate  in  research.  While  112  (59%)  of  these  191  patients  had  never  decided
to  be  in  research,  the  remainder  reported  that  at  some  time  or  other  they  had  (39
were  current  research  participants,  and  40  were  former  research  participants),
suggesting  that  some  patients  discriminate  between  projects  they  are  willing  to
participate  in  and  those  they  are  not.  Patients  who  declined  to  participate  in
research  ranged  in  age  from  twenty-one  to  eighty-three,  with  a  median  age  of
fifty-six.  The  patients  were  of  both  genders  (53%  male,  47%  female),
predominantly  white  (69%,  with  27%  African-American  and  the  remainder  being
of  other  ethnicities),  with  wide  educational  backgrounds  ranging  from  less  than
eighth  grade  to  those  with  professional  degrees.

We  asked  the  1 12  patients  who  had  never  been  in  research  why,  when
they  had  been  offered  the  chance,  they  had  decided  not  to  participate.  The
reasons  that  "contributed  a  lot"  to  their  decision  were  that  they  wanted  to  know
what  treatment  they  were  getting  (64%);  they  wanted  their  medical  decisions  to
be  made  by  their  doctors  and  themselves,  not  by  researchers  (56%);  they  believed
that  being  in  the  medical  research  project  was  not  the  best  way  for  them  to  get
better  (45%);  and  taking  part  in  the  medical  research  project  would  have  been
inconvenient  (43%).

Consent  and  Voluntariness

Brief  Survey

Overall,  83  percent  of  patients  who  told  us  they  were  current  or  former
research  participants  remembered  signing  a  consent  form  agreeing  to  take  part  in
research.  This  was  true  for  88  percent  of  current  research  participants  and  80
percent  of  former  research  participants.  Most  (90%)  of  the  patients  who  believed
that  they  were  current  or  former  participants  in  research  reported  that  they  felt
they  had  enough  information  to  make  a  good  decision  about  whether  to
participate.  This  was  the  case  for  95  percent  of  current  research  participants  and
87  percent  of  former  research  participants.

Fewer  than  2  percent  of  current  or  former  research  participants  felt
pressured  by  others  in  making  a  decision  to  participate.  Six  patients  specifically
said  that  they  had  been  pressured  by  someone  in  the  medical  field  (e.g.,  "my


741


Part  III

doctor";  "the  hospital");  four  patients  reported  having  been  pressured  by  someone
in  the  military  (e.g.,  "the  military";  "Admiral  on  ship").

When  patient-subjects  were  asked  what  they  thought  the  policy  was  for
dropping  out  of  the  study  in  which  they  were  participating,  78  percent  thought,
correctly  according  to  current  research  standards,  that  they  could  drop  out  at  any
time.  A  variety  of  other  responses  were  also  offered,  ranging  from  not  knowing
the  policy,  to  expressing  that  it  was  irrelevant  (e.g.,  the  entire  project  consisted  of
a  single  survey  or  blood  test),  to  believing  they  had  to  stay  in  the  research  project.

In-Depth  Interview

On  the  whole,  patients  who  granted  In-Depth  Interviews  recounted  that
the  staff  involved  in  conducting  research  explained  research  projects,  gave
participants  time  to  read  over  the  consent  forms  and  confer  with  family  and
friends,  and  responded  to  participants'  questions.  One  patient  said  explicitly,  "It
seemed  to  me  that  they  were  well  prepared  to  answer  any  questions  I  would  ask
them."48  Asked  if  research  staff  had  provided  her  with  as  much  information  as
she  needed,  one  patient  replied  that  they  used  "terminology  . . .  that  I  could  relate
to.  They  spoke  in  my  language.  That  was  a  plus."49

The  consent  process,  in  general,  and  the  consent  form,  in  particular,  held
varying  degrees  of  importance  for  patients.  Most  patients  enrolled  in  survey  or
noninvasive  projects  did  not  attach  a  great  deal  of  meaning  to  the  consent  form.
One  respondent,  whose  experimental  procedure  consisted  of  "just  drawing  some
blood,"  thought,  in  fact,  that  his  consent  form  went  overboard.50  For  those
patients  who  reported  being  in  research  evaluating  potential  treatments,  the  value
of  the  consent  form  varied.  For  many,  the  decision  to  participate  seemed  to  have
been  made  before  the  consent  form  was  given  to  them,  and  they  signed  it  almost
as  a  formality.  For  a  few,  signing  a  consent  form  symbolized  the  first  step  on  the
path  to  getting  better.  Others,  however,  relied  heavily  upon  the  content  of  the
form  when  deliberating  about  whether  to  participate.  In  addition,  several  patients
noted  that  they  held  on  to  their  consent  forms,  a  few  even  offering  them  up  for  the
interviewers'  review.

The  notion  of  trust  also  accompanied  accounts  of  the  consent  process.  For
some  participants,  the  consent  form  was  the  means  by  which  patients  could
authorize  trusted  health  professionals  to  do  what  they  think  is  best.  One
respondent  remarked,  "[W]hatever  the  doctor  was  doing,  well,  that  was  all  right.  I
consented  to  this  and  let  the  experts  take  over  then."51  This  authorization  for
treatment  meant  abdicating  attention  to  detail  for  some  patients:  "I'm  the  type  of
person,  I  don't  read  all  this  fine  print  and  all  this  stuff  and  so  forth.  The  lady  said
that  we  would  like  to  experiment  on  your  body  to  see  what  can  be  done  . .  .  and
it's  to  help  me  and  so  far,  so  good.  .  .  .  "52

While  patients  attached  different  levels  of  personal  interest  to  the  consent
process,  they  were  clear  that  the  type  of  information  typically  conveyed  in  a
consent  process  is  exactly  what  they  would  need  in  order  to  decide  about
participating  in  research  jn  the  future.  Patients  overwhelmingly  said  that  they

742


Chapter  16

would  participate  in  a  research  project  again  if  they  had  enough  information  and
if  the  project  were  explained  in  sufficient  detail  by  research  staff:  "I'd  have  to
know  the  what  fors,  ifs,  whys,  what  they're  gonna  do.  . .  ."53  Or,  "if  somebody
can't  explain  what  they're  going  to  do  to  me  good  enough,  I  wouldn't  [do]  it."54
Furthermore,  several  patients  stated  that  they  would  like  to  know  why  a  particular
study  was  being  conducted  and  why  certain  procedures  or  techniques  were
necessary.  "Communication,"  "information,"  and  "honesty"  were  frequently
identified  by  participants  as  essential  in  considering  participation  in  any  future
research  project.

For  patients  who  described  their  own  consent  process,  experiences
generally  were  positive.  A  few  patients  reported  problems,  however.  Three
general  problems  were  identified:  ( 1 )  too  much  technical  information  that  was
difficult  to  read  and  understand,55  (2)  an  overwhelming  amount  of  information,56
and  (3)  discussions  occurring  at  stressful  or  inappropriate  moments.57  A  few
patients  reported  that  during  discussions  with  physicians  or  investigators  they
relied  upon  family  members  to  help  process  the  information  conveyed.58

A  few  patients  remarked  upon  the  importance  of  contact  among
participants  in  research  projects  evaluating  treatments.  One  respondent  contrasted
the  type  of  information  one  research  participant  can  provide  to  another  versus  that
which  a  doctor  can  provide:  "[It's]  always  nice  to  be  able  to  .  . .  see  somebody  in
the  same  boat  or  talk  to  [that  person]. . . .  because  even  though  a  doctor  is  very
good  in  explaining  thing[s].  .  . .  there  are  certain  things  that .  .  .  only  somebody
who's  going  through  the  thing  can  really  know  what  you're  talking  about."59

Consistent  with  findings  from  the  Brief  Survey  in  which  98  percent  of
patients  reported  that  they  were  not  pressured  into  participating  in  research,  almost
all  the  patients  who  gave  In-Depth  Interviews  believed  that  the  decision  about
whether  to  participate  in  research  had  been  theirs  to  make  and  that  they  had  not
felt  pressured  into  that  decision.  Indeed,  many  patients  mentioned  that  they
participated  "voluntarily."  One  respondent  said,  "They  wanted  to  know  if  I  would
be  interested  in  this.  Nobody  was  pushy.  Nobody,  they  just  said,  'Here  it  is,
would  you  like  to  be  involved  in  this  program[?]"'60  No  one  interviewed  identified
pressure  from  family  members.  More  often,  patients  remarked  that  while  they
conferred  with  families  and  friends,  the  choice  was  ultimately  their  own:  "My
family.  The  people  I  work  with  .  .  .  [E]verybody  tells  you  you  have  to  make  up
your  own  mind.  .  .  .  [Njobody's  going  to  tell  you  what  to  do  because  it  wouldn't
work  anyway.  So  nobody  tried  to  influence  me  one  way  or  the  other.  .  .  ."6I

There  were  only  a  few  patients  who  suggested  that  doctors  tried  to  exert
what  was  viewed  as  unwelcome  or  inappropriate  influence.  One  respondent,  who
remarked  in  one  portion  of  the  transcript  that  she  did  not  feel  pressured,  later
reported,  "[The  doctor]  sorta  made  a  plug.  He  said,  'you  know,  if  people  like  you
refuse  to  get  into  this  . .  .  we're  never  going  to  get  anywhere.'"62  Another
respondent  indicated  that  he  felt  pushed  by  one  doctor  to  sign  a  consent  form  for  a
particular  type  of  infusion  treatment.  "[T]hey  say,  well ...  go  ahead  and  sign
it ...  so  we  can  .  .  .  start  you  on  the  process,  and  I  said,  well,  I  want  to  read


743


Part  III

it. . . .  And  he  said,  have  you  signed  it  yet?  And  I  said,  'I  haven't  read  it  yet.  Oh,
okay,  well ...  we  need  you  to  sign  it  and  then  . .  .  make  a  copy  and  we'll  just  let
you  read  it  afterwards  and  I  thought,  what  is  going  on?  I  mean,  they  had  never
ever  kind  of  pushed  it  like  that."63

Almost  all  patients  reported  that  they  had  been  told  they  could  leave  the
research  project  at  any  time  and  that  they  believed  that  they  could  leave  at  any
time.  One  respondent  said,  "[T]hey  always  told  us  all  the  way  along,  anytime  you
don't  feel  happy  with  this,  we  can  quit .  .  .  they  said  if  you  don't  feel  like  you  want
to  continue,  you  can  quit  anytime.  There  was  no  pressure  on  or  nothing.  . .  ."64
Similarly,  "[I]t  was  made  very  clear  up  front[,]  and  then  in  the  original  package  of
material  that  they  had,  at  any  point  in  time  for  any  reason  in  time  any  reason  I
wanted,  you  know,  I  didn't  even  have  to  have  a  reason,  I  could  withdraw  with  no
problem."65  For  some  participants,  the  question  of  withdrawing  seemed  almost
foreign  because  there  was  such  trust  in  the  research  process. One  respondent
said,  "[The  thought  of  withdrawing]  never  entered  my  mind.  I  was  going  to  let
them  make  the  decision  because  they  were  the  ones  that  were  watching  the
cancer.  ...  I  wasn't  the  expert.  If  they  thought  it  was  working,  that  was  fine."66
One  respondent  who  was  in  the  military  believed  that  continued  participation  was
required.67  Another  respondent,  about  to  undergo  a  bone  marrow  transplant,
reported  being  pressured  both  to  enroll  and  to  continue  participation  in  a  clinical
trial.  "They  were  really  pushing  this  procedure  [a  drug  to  help  raise  white  blood
cell  counts]. ...  It  was  very  obvious  to  me  that  they  wanted  people  to  sign  up  for
this  bad,  and  I  did  not  want  to  upset  my  doctor. . . .  Y'know  I'm  totally  helpless.
I'm  in  his  hands  and,  so  part  of  it  was,  I  wanted  to  keep  him  happy  and,  uh,  there
was  some  pressure."61*

As  described  earlier,  several  patients  in  therapeutic  research  identified  an
intense  desire  to  have  some  type  of  treatment.  This  not  only  influenced  their
decision  to  enroll,  but  also  to  remain  in  a  research  project.  One  respondent  stated
that  participating  in  research  "was  through  necessity.  .  .  .  [T]he  thought  never
entered  my  mind  that  I  would  withdraw  from  this  program."69 Such  sentiments
also  seemed  to  influence  patients'  desires  to  find  research  projects  for  which  they
might  be  eligible.  "I  said  if  something  comes  up  that  you  think  will  benefit  me,
let  me  know  ...  I  wanted  to  be  on  that  trial  bad  enough  to  where  I  gave  [in  to]  the
pressure."70

DISCUSSION

Limitations

Although  we  were  able  to  involve  different  types  of  hospitals  from  five
different  areas  across  the  country  in  this  study,  only  sixteen  hospitals  were
included  in  our  sample.  We  have  no  way  of  knowing  whether  our  findings  would
have  been  different  if  we  had  interviewed  individuals  at  other  hospitals.
Similarly,  we  interviewed  only  medical  oncology,  radiation  oncology,  and


744


Chapter  16

cardiology  patients  who  were  not  hospitalized  but  were  receiving  their  care  at
outpatient  clinics.  Most  of  them  were  white,  and  many  were  more  than  sixty
years  of  age.  It  is  quite  possible  that  other  types  of  patients  would  have  answered
some  questions  differently  from  our  patients  and  that  healthy  research  subjects
might  have  had  different  attitudes,  beliefs,  or  motivations  for  participation  than
patients  likely  to  have  serious  illnesses  did.  In  the  In-Depth  Interview  component
of  the  study,  only  people  who  believed  they  were  or  had  been  research
participants  were  included.  The  responses  of  people  who  had  chosen  not  to
participate  in  research,  presumably,  would  be  quite  different.  It  should  not  be
assumed,  therefore,  that  our  findings  necessarily  apply  to  the  entire  research
enterprise.

An  important  research  question  in  this  project  was  the  degree  to  which
present-day  patients  know  whether  or  not  they  are  research  participants.  To
answer  this  question,  we  interviewed  patients  and  asked  them  whether  they
believed  they  were,  or  had  been,  participants  in  research,  and  then,  with  their
permission,  we  checked  their  records  for  evidence  of  research  participation.
Although  this  approach  provides  an  estimate  of  the  degree  to  which  present-day
patients  know  or  remember  if  they  are  research  subjects,  this  estimate  is  likely  to
be  very  rough  for  two  sets  of  reasons.  First,  interviewing  patients  in  the  way  we
did  may  not  be  the  most  accurate  way  of  gauging  their  own  understanding  of
participation  in  research.  This  is  because  they  were  often  approached  in  a  busy
clinic  setting  by  an  interviewer  they  did  not  know.  It  is  also  likely  that  these
patients  were  under  stress  at  the  time  of  the  interview,  either  because  of  their
upcoming  appointment  with  their  doctors  or  because  of  the  very  illnesses  that
brought  them  to  the  clinic.  In  addition,  because  of  necessity  the  Brief  Survey  was
designed  to  take  only  five  to  ten  minutes  to  complete;  we  asked  patients  only
about  current  or  former  research  participation  with  single  questions,  rather  than  a
series  of  questions  designed  to  more  completely  capture  those  patients  who  had
experience  with  research.  Moreover,  following  our  review  of  the  medical  and
research  records  we  did  not  go  back  to  patients  and  ask  them  questions  about
research  once  we  had  an  understanding  of  their  medical  history  and  documented
research  experience.

Second,  despite  significant  attempts  to  gather  information  from  multiple
sources,  the  method  of  abstracting  medical  and  research  records  we  used  may  not
have  been  comprehensive  enough  to  locate  all  relevant  evidence  of  research
participation  (e.g.,  records  of  research  may  not  be  retained  at  the  same  institution
in  which  the  Brief  Survey  was  conducted,  or  research  participation  may  have  been
in  the  distant  past  and  records  may  no  longer  be  available).  A  related  problem  is
that  some  patients  may  have  been  enrolled  in  studies  that  purposely  do  not  keep
records  of  participation  (e.g.,  studies  where  confidentiality  is  paramount).
Finally,  while  trained  abstractors  examined  records  for  all  patients,  health
professionals  on  the  Advisory  Committee  staff  only  reviewed  records  where
patients'  responses  differed  from  the  results  of  the  initial  records  review
conducted  by  the  trained  abstractors.  Health  professionals  had  only  a  one-  to  two-
day  window  to  perform  this  confirmatory  search  of  documentation  at  each

745


Part  III

institution  and  thus  were  not  always  able  to  review  relevant  records  because  they
were  unavailable  on  short  notice.  Because  of  these  reasons,  we  do  not  know  the
degree  to  which  our  estimates  are  accurate  regarding  the  proportion  of  patients
whose  responses  about  research  participation  differed  from  what  we  found  in
records.

Implications

A  striking  finding  from  this  study  is  the  frequency  with  which  people  with
cancer  and  heart  disease  appear  to  come  in  contact  with  biomedical  research  in
the  course  of  their  medical  care.  Notably,  nearly  40  percent  of  the  patients  we
talked  with  either  believed  they  were  or  had  been  subjects  in  research,  had  records
that  showed  that  they  were,  or  had  reported  that  they  had  been  offered  the
opportunity  to  be  in  research  but  had  declined.  Moreover,  most  patients  thought
that  medical  research  was  a  good  thing.  They  had  favorable  attitudes  toward
medical  research  generally,  they  believed  that  research  did  not  involve
unreasonable  risks,  and  they  believed  that  medical  research  usually  or  always
advances  science.  Patients  who  are  or  had  been  participants  in  research  had  even
more  positive  attitudes  about  research  than  those  who  had  not.

There  was  evidence  in  this  study  that  many  patients  feel  free  to  refuse
when  physicians  and  researchers  ask  them  to  become  research  subjects.  Nearly
200  patients  told  us  that  they  had  been  offered  an  opportunity  to  participate,  but
had  declined.  Moreover,  40  percent  of  these  patients  had  chosen  at  some  other
time  to  participate  in  research,  indicating  that  at  least  some  patients  are
discriminating  in  terms  of  the  circumstances  under  which  they  are  willing  to
participate  in  research.  There  also  was  little  evidence  that  patients  felt  coerced  or
manipulated  by  health  care  providers  or  scientific  investigators  to  participate  in
research.  When  we  asked  patients  who  were  subjects  if  they  had  felt  pressured  by
others  into  becoming  research  participants,  these  patient-subjects  overwhelmingly
said  no.  Not  only  did  they  give  the  impression  that  the  initial  decision  to  enter  a
research  project  was  theirs,  but  many  also  informed  us  that  they  had  been  told
frequently  by  the  investigators  that  they  could  drop  out  of  the  study  at  any  point,
and  the  patients  believed  that  this  was  so.

Although  the  vast  majority  of  both  African-American  and  white  patients
held  favorable  beliefs  about  research,  such  beliefs  were  held  less  often  by  patients
who  are  African-American.  Specifically,  as  compared  with  white  patients,
African-American  patients  were  more  likely  to  believe  that  people  are  pressured
into  research  and  more  likely  to  believe  that  research  poses  unreasonable  risks.
These  findings  together  suggest  that  for  a  small  number  of  patients,  distrust  as  a
result  of  the  troubled  historical  experience  of  African- Americans  in  research,  as
exemplified  by  the  Tuskegee  syphilis  study,  may  persist.

We  learned  a  great  deal  from  this  project  about  why  patients  choose  to  be
in  research.  The  overwhelming  majority  of  the  patients  we  interviewed  who  were
participants  in  research  were  subjects  in  studies  investigating  medical  treatments.
Almost  all  of  these  patients  said  that  they  had  enrolled  in  research  because  they

746


Chapter  16

thought  it  offered  them  their  best  chance  of  personal  medical  benefit.  Moreover,
for  many  of  them,  their  doctors  had  recommended  it.  Often  these  patients  had
very  serious  illnesses  and  had  tried  many  treatments  unsuccessfully;  the
opportunity  to  be  in  research  offered  them  hope  that  improvement  might  still  be
possible.  Many  of  these  patients  specifically  said  that  they  had  "no  choice"  but  to
participate.  They  had  tried  everything  else  to  improve  their  condition,  and
nothing  else  had  worked.  These  patients  felt  constrained  to  participate  because  of
their  medical  situation,  not  by  their  providers  or  the  research  investigators.

Not  surprisingly,  then,  when  asked  to  describe  the  research  project  they
were  in,  most  of  the  patient-subjects  we  talked  with  described  the  project  as  part
of  their  therapy.  Although,  when  asked,  these  patients  appeared  to  clearly
understand  which  interventions  were  associated  specifically  with  the  research,
they  also  conceived  of  the  research  as  their  medical  treatment.  And  despite  the
recognition  by  most  of  these  patients  that  the  goal  of  the  enterprise  of  medical
research  generally  was  to  advance  science,  when  asked  about  their  own  specific
project,  they  often  believed  that  the  project  would  benefit  them.

It  is  likely  that  in  some,  and  perhaps  in  many,  of  these  cases,  it  was  indeed
in  the  patient's  medical  best  interest  to  be  enrolled  in  a  research  project.  As
demonstrated  by  the  recent  push  for  access  to  investigational  drugs  on  the  part  of
people  with  HIV  infection  and  other  serious  illnesses  where  there  may  seem  to  be
no  truly  efficacious  standard  therapies,  many  patients  believe  that  their  best
chance  of  extending  life  is  to  take  treatments  that  are  still  experimental.  In  some
cases,  patient-subjects  were  participating  in  treatment  studies  involving  agents
available  only  through  research  because  their  illnesses  may  have  had  no  known
efficacious  treatments.  From  the  perspective  that  holds  extending  life  to  be  the
primary  concern,  it  would  be  in  the  patients'  best  interests  to  be  in  the  research.

It  is  a  separate  issue  whether  participation  in  research  is  in  a  patient's
overall  best  interests.  Investigational  interventions  for  devastating,  life-
threatening  illnesses  may  be  a  patient's  best  chance— however  small—of  extending
life.  However,  this  chance  may  be  at  the  expense  of  the  person's  ability  to
function  and  enjoy  life  for  the  time  affected  by  participation  in  the  research.
Furthermore,  the  history  of  experimentation  demonstrates  that  such  therapies
might  also  shorten  life  rather  than  extend  it.  Unfortunately,  we  did  not  pursue
whether  these  sorts  of  trade-offs  were  clearly  understood  by  the  patient-subjects
we  interviewed.  In  chapter  15,  we  report  some  data  from  the  RPRP  that  bear  on
this  question.

That  patients  viewed  their  participation  as  being  in  their  best  interests  is
consistent  with  patients'  profound  trust  in  their  physicians,  on  whom  they  depend
as  their  lifelines,  and  who  they  could  not  imagine  offering  something  not  in  their
best  interests.  We  heard  from  several  patients  the  belief  that  their  doctors  are  the
experts  and  that  they  know  best  what  would  be  helpful.  If  a  doctor  recommended
or  even  offered  research,  patients  were  certainly  more  inclined  to  decide  to
participate.  The  trust  that  patients  placed  in  their  physicians  often  was
generalized  to  the  medical  and  research  community  as  a  whole.  Patient-subjects
frequently  expressed  the  belief  that  an  intervention  would  not  even  be  offered  if  it

747


Part  III

did  not  carry  some  promise  of  benefit;  many  certainly  assumed  that  the
intervention  would  not  be  offered  if  it  posed  significant  risks.

It  was  largely  because  of  this  trust  that  most  patient-subjects  considered
the  consent  process  somewhat  incidental  to  their  decision  to  participate  in
research.  When  asked,  almost  all  patients  reported  that  they  had  been  provided
with  information,  their  questions  had  been  answered,  and  they  had  been  satisfied
with  the  consent  process.  Nevertheless,  doctors'  recommendations  and  patients'
own  beliefs  that  the  research  was  their  best  chance  or  even  their  only  hope  made
the  research  an  obvious  decision  for  many  patients,  and  the  consent  process  and
consent  form  were  viewed  as  somewhat  of  a  formality.

This  framing  of  research  as  therapy  is  consistent  with  the  very  language
used  to  describe  research  projects.  We  learned  that  patients  attach  very  different
meanings  to  the  different  terms  associated  with  medical  research.  Experiments
are  considered  by  patients  to  involve  unproven  treatments  of  greater  risk,  often
invoking  the  image  of  human  beings  as  "guinea  pigs,"  while  terms  such  as
clinical  investigation  or  study  convey  less  uncertainty  to  patients  and  a  greater
chance  of  personal  benefit.

The  design  of  this  study  does  not  allow  us  to  assess  whether  patients'
expectations  of  benefit  from  their  therapeutic  trials  were  appropriate  for  the
particular  studies  in  which  they  were  enrolled,  or  whether  their  expectations  were
exaggerated  or  unrealistic.  Moreover,  if  patients'  expectations  were  exaggerated
in  some  way,  we  have  no  evidence  to  discern  whether  patients  overestimated  the
expected  benefit  themselves  or  whether  it  was  investigators  who  suggested  that
the  research  held  more  promise  than  was  warranted.  It  is  understandable  that
patients  with  poor  prognoses  may  read  hope  into  even  the  slimmest  possibility  of
benefit.  It  also  is  understandable  that  some  physicians,  uncomfortable  with
having  little  to  offer  their  seriously  ill  patients,  might  at  such  times  inadvertently
impart  more  hope  than  the  clinical  facts,  strictly  speaking,  warrant.

Hope  is  a  delicate  and  precious  commodity  for  those  with  life-threatening
illnesses.  For  clinicians,  the  balance  between  support  of  that  hope  and  honesty  is
often  difficult.  At  the  same  time,  however,  there  is  a  world  of  moral  difference
between  a  physician  emphasizing— even  inappropriately—slim  chances,  in  order  to
bolster  waning  hope,  and  a  physician  emphasizing  slim  chances  in  order  to  meet  a
recruitment  goal  for  a  clinical  investigation.  Feeding  hope  at  the  expense  of
candor  is  one  thing;  exploiting  the  desperation  of  those  whose  lives  hang  in  the
balance  is  another.  Here  again,  our  data  are  silent.  We  cannot  know,  insofar  as
physicians  contributed  to  unrealistic  expectations  among  these  patient-subjects,
how  often  this  was  the  result  of  well-meaning  reassurances  or  self-interested
misrepresentations.

It  seems  very  much  related  that  we  found  that  a  small  proportion  of
patients  believed  they  were  subjects  in  research  when  it  appeared  they  were  not,
and  other  patients  believed  they  were  not  research  subjects  when  records
suggested  that  they  were.  These  confusions  about  whether  a  patient  was  in
research  occurred  almost  exclusively  when  patients  were  in  (or  thought  they  were
in)  research  investigating  potential  therapeutic  interventions.  However,  we  found

748


Chapter  16

that  these  patients  covered  the  full  range  in  terms  of  education,  income,  sex,  and
race;  they  came  from  all  three  medical  specialties  studied  and  all  types  of
hospitals.

At  least  three-quarters  of  the  patients  who  apparently  were  mistaken  when
they  reported  they  were  not  research  subjects  had  actually  signed  consent  forms
authorizing  participation  in  research.  In  addition  to  the  limitations  of  our  methods
described  earlier  in  the  chapter,  we  can  only  speculate  as  to  why  the  discrepancy
exists  between  patients'  perceptions  and  their  records.  Some  patients  may  not
have  understood  our  question  and  may  in  fact  have  known  they  were  research
subjects  all  along.  Other  patients  may  not  have  understood  what  they  were  doing
when  they  signed  the  consent  form,  perhaps  believing  that  it  was  a  consent  for
treatment.  Still  other  patients  may  have  had  an  adequate  understanding  that  they
were  consenting  to  participate  in  research  at  the  time  they  signed  the  form  and
then  later  forgot.  This  last  explanation  is  not  as  troubling  as  the  second,  in  that  it
suggests  the  possibility  that  in  at  least  some  cases  valid  consents  were  initially
obtained,  but  it  does  raise  questions  about  the  meaningfulness  of  these  patients'
rights  to  withdraw  from  research.  Such  questions  are  obviously  more  meaningful
in  ongoing  projects  that  involve  continuing  exposure  to  potential  risk,  in  contrast
to  those  studies  where  research  participation  is  less  burdensome,  such  as  studies
involving  routine  follow-up  or  only  a  minor  change  in  a  regular  therapeutic
regimen.

It  is  often  the  case  in  clinical  research  that  the  participation  of  ill  people  in
research  and  the  medical  treatment  they  receive  for  their  illnesses  are  identical.
When  this  occurs,  it  is  not  surprising  that  some  patients  conflate  their  being  in
research  with  therapy  to  the  point  that  they  no  longer  understand  or  remember
that  they  actually  are  in  a  research  project.  Ironically,  it  may  be  especially  when
patient-subjects  feel  well  cared  for  that  they  are  most  likely  to  feel  like  a  patient
only,  and  not  like  a  research  subject.  At  the  same  time,  many  patient-subjects
told  us  of  being  reminded  by  research  staff  that  they  could  leave  the  project  at  any
time  for  any  reason.  It  seems  doubtful  that  the  patients  we  interviewed  whose
self-report  of  participation  was  not  consistent  with  research  records  had  such  an
experience.

Although  most  of  the  patients  we  interviewed  listed  a  chance  at  medical
benefit  as  a  reason  for  participating  in  research,  many  patients  also  said  that  they
had  participated  in  research  to  help  others.  Some  patients  described  the
willingness  to  participate  in  research  as  a  civic  duty;  others  wanted  to  help
members  of  their  own  families  at  risk  for  the  same  conditions,  and  still  others  saw
being  in  research  as  a  means  of  making  a  shortened  life  expectancy  more
meaningful.  Participants  in  survey  research  and  similar  research  projects  were
especially  likely  to  say  that  they  had  joined  in  part  because  there  was  no  reason
not  to  do  so,  but  also  because  they  hoped  they  could  help  others  or  advance
science  by  doing  so.  Several  patients  in  therapeutic  research  who  appreciated  that
there  was  only  a  slim  chance  that  the  research  would  provide  them  with  personal
benefit,  offered  that,  as  a  result  of  their  participation,  they  hoped  at  least  that
someone  down  the  road  would  be  better  off,  if  not  themselves.  This  willingness

749


Part  III

of  patients  to  be  altruistic  should  be  tapped  explicitly  when  recruiting  participants
for  research,  since  it  might  help  to  underscore  for  patients  that  the  primary
objective  of  research  is  to  create  generalizable  scientific  knowledge  rather  than
simply  to  offer  them  a  chance  for  some  medical  benefit.  In  the  end,  it  is  only  the
benefit  of  furthering  knowledge  that  can  be  honestly  guaranteed  to  a  potential
research  subject.


750


ENDNOTES


1 .  Because  of  time  constraints,  no  In-Depth  Interviews  were  conducted  with
patients  from  the  University  of  Michigan  or  the  Baltimore  VA  Medical  Center.

2.  One  audiotape  of  poor  quality  was  never  transcribed.  Transcripts  for  three
patients  who  stated  clearly  during  the  In-Depth  Interview  that  they  had  never  participated
in  research  and  who  were  inappropriately  selected  were  also  excluded.

3.  All  models  were  developed  using  multiple  logistic  regression,  and  the  results
are  reported  here  as  the  baseline  probability  of  a  given  response  along  with  the
approximate  absolute  difference  due  to  a  given  factor.  Each  factor  either  adds  to  or
subtracts  from  this  baseline  probability.  Note  that  the  baseline  probability  used  in  the
models  is  not  equal  to  the  overall  probability  of  corresponding  response  reported  in  the
text.  It  is  only  a  "baseline"  within  the  context  of  these  models.

4.  Baseline  probability  of  saying  that  medical  research  usually  or  always
involves  unreasonable  risks  was  19%;  Age  >  60,  -6%;  African-American.  +1 1%;  College
degree, -6%;  Good  health,  -8%;  Research  participant,  -6%.

5.  Baseline  probability  of  feeling  that  potential  subjects  are  usually  or  always
pressured  was  5%;  African-American,  +9%;  Income=$25,000-$50,000,  -2%;  and  Income
>  $50,000,  -3%.

6.  Baseline  probability  or  saying  those  in  research  usually  or  always  do  better
was  31%;  Age  >  60,  +7%;  Income  >  $50,000, -8%;  Research  experience, +9%.

7.  Subject  No.  335216-8,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  (ACHRE),
transcript  of  audio  recording,  27  March  1995,  lines  40-43,  170-175  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

8.  Subject  No.  551334-6,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  (ACHRE),
transcript  of  audio  recording,  14  March  1995,  lines  706-714  (Research  Project  Series,
Subject  Interview  Study).

9.  Subject  No.  335213-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  (ACHRE),
transcript  of  audio  recording,  28  March  1995,  lines  1663-1668  (Research  Project  Series,
Subject  Interview  Study).

1 0.  Subject  No.  442 1 07-9,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  29  March  1995,  lines  458-460  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

1 1 .  Subject  No.  552106-7,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  14  March  1995,  lines  311-315  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

12.  Subject  No.  442107-9,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  29  March  1995,  line  432  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

13.  Subject  No.  333208-7,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  6  March  1995,  lines  745-748  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

14.  Subject  No.  333256-6,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  16  March  1995,  lines  361-366  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

15.  A  detailed  breakdown,  in  schematic  format,  of  the  procedures  and  results
reported  in  this  section  is  found  in  a  supplemental  volume  to  this  report.

1 6.  A  variety  of  reasons  suggested  that  although  patients  reported  that  they
were  research  participants,  review  of  their  medical  records  suggested  that  they  were  not.


751


For  instance,  in  comparing  patients'  self-reports  with  their  records,  what  they  had  called
"research"  actually  was  standard  clinical  care  that  they  were  receiving.

1 7.  Data  for  this  analysis  were  available  for  54  of  69  individuals  with  discordant
responses:  54%  had  enrolled  after  1  January  1994;  65%  after  1  January  1993;  and  72%
after  1  January  1 99 1 .

1 8.  Data  regarding  type  classification  are  missing  for  one  study  in  this  group.

19.  Subject  No.  552212-3,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  13  March  1995,  lines  34-35  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

20.  Subject  No.  335227-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  24  March  1995,  lines  226-227  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

2 1 .  Subject  No.  552 1 26-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  13  March  1995,  lines  186-187  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

22.  Subject  No.  221202-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  14  March  1995,  lines  403-405  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

23.  One  respondent  remarked,  "Wouldn't  it  be  great"  if  this  particular  protocol
"that  treats  you  for  [a]  shorter  period  of  time  [with]  high  doses  of  chemotherapy"  proved
as  beneficial  as  treatment  over  "years  and  years"  (Subject  No.  335215-0,  interview  by
Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  24  March  1995,
lines  536-539  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).  It  was  clear  that  this
respondent  conceptualized  research  as  an  endeavor  aimed  at  increasing  knowledge  about
unproven  interventions,  rather  than  understanding  research  as  a  form  of  medical  care.

24.  Research  experience  for  these  patients  tended  to  be  described  more
dispassionately  as  a  one-time  event  that  stood  apart  from  their  therapeutic  needs.  Indeed,
the  patients  tended  to  minimize  the  effect  that  the  research  experience  had  for  them
personally:  deciding  to  join  required  little  deliberation,  and  participating  required  little
effort.  One  respondent  made  it  clear  repeatedly  that  her  research  experience  was  "just"
an  interview  (Subject  No.  334148-4,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
[ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  3  March  1995,  lines  73,  105,  143-144  [Research
Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).  A  respondent  who  participated  in  survey
research  agreed  out  of  a  willingness  to  help:  "If  I  can  help  on  anything,  I  want  to  be  able
to  do  it ...  .  'course  my  wife  thinks  if  we  can  help  in  any  research,  we're  both  willing  to
do  it"  (Subject  No.  443321-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],
transcript  of  audio  recording,  lines  108-109,  125-126  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject
Interview  Study]).  Finally,  in  notes  kept  by  interviewers  and  in  debriefing  sessions  with
interviewers,  interviewers  reported  that  most  patients  who  had  participated  in  survey
research  simply  did  not  have  a  lot  to  say  compared  with  other  patients.

25.  Groups  for  which  there  was  marginal  statistical  evidence  for  increased
frequency  for  this  belief  were  African- Americans  (versus  Caucasians)  and  those  who
were  retired  or  unemployed.  In  this  model,  the  baseline  probability  of  contributing  a  lot
to  the  decision  was  13%;  Treatment  study  +27%;  Involved  radiation  13%;  African-
American  +8%,  Employed  -5%;  and  Research  related  to  condition  +20%.

26.  Baseline  probability  of  contributing  a  lot  to  their  decision  was  1 1%;
Treatment  study  +10%;  Radiation  +6%;  Had  enough  information  7%;  Research  related  to
condition  +25%.

27.  Subject  No.  33521 5-0,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  24  March  1995,  lines  1 1-72  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

752


28.  Subject  No.  553 1 09-0,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  10  March  1995,  lines  252-269  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

29.  Subject  No.  441227-6,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  10  March  1995,  lines  542-544  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

30.  Subject  No.  22 1 202-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  14  March  1995,  lines  350-352  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

3 1 .  Subject  No.  333208-7,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  6  March  1995,  lines  30-32  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

32.  Subject  No.  3332 1 5-2,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  3  March  1995,  lines  194-195  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

33.  Subject  No.  1 14229-8,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  14  March  1995,  line  1 19  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

34.  Subject  No.  332250-0,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  28  March  1995,  lines  105-109  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

35.  Subject  No.  332250-0,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  28  March  1995,  lines  208-210,  188-193
(Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

36.  Subject  No.  552264-4,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  March  1995,  lines  432-434  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

37.  Subject  No.  1 14229-8,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  14  March  1995,  lines  194-198  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

38.  Subject  No.  1 14217-3,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  10  March  1995,  lines  50-51  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).  A  powerful  instance  of  the  finding  of  trust  in
physicians'  recommendations  and  requests  was  the  participant  who  said,  "He  [a
physician]  asked  me  would  I  do  it  and  I  told  him,  'Yeah.'  I  didn't  think  that  he  would
harm  me  [in]  any  kind  of  way,  hurt  me  in  any  kind  of  way,  so  I  told  him,  'Yeah.'  He
couldn't  get  I  don't  believe  . .  .  anybody  else  to  do  it"  (Subject  No.  44 1 3 1 1  -8,  interview
by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  28  March
1995,  lines  155-158  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).

39.  Subject  No.  332324-3,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  24  March  1995,  lines  309-31 1  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).  Another  reported,  "There's  not  a  lot  that  you  can
control  when  you're  sick  so  you  have  to  rely  on  your  doctor  ...  if  he  suggests  that  you
should  go  into  a  research  project,  I  think  you  should  really  take  his  advice  or  her  advice,
whatever  it  may be  .  .  .[B]ecause  if  you  take  the  time  to  get  yourself  a  good  doctor  and
they're  involved  in  research,  they  would  never  steer  you  wrong"  (Subject  No.  552244-6,
interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  5
March  1995,  lines  617-675  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).

40.  Subject  No.  44324 1  -5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  2  March  1995,  lines  67-70  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

753


41.  Subject  No.  333208-7,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  6  March  1995,  lines  381-383  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

42.  Subject  No.  552143-0,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  15  March  1995,  lines  327-329  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

43.  Subject  No.  223212-2,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  16  March  1995,  lines  233-234  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).  A  few  patients  had  very  specific  others  in  mind.  One
respondent,  for  instance,  enrolled  in  a  genetic  study  of  colon  cancer,  said,  "Because  if  it's
hereditary  and  it  sure  seems  [so]  in  my  situation  ...  I'm  concerned  about  my  daughter.
I'm  concerned  about  her  kids,  and  [it]  goes  on  and  on  and  on  ...  "  (Subject  No.  221240-
5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  15
March  1995,  lines  334-337  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).  As
patients  became  sicker,  altruism  played  a  larger  note  for  some.  For  example,  one
respondent  explained  that  over  the  course  of  his  disease  and  enrollment  in  numerous
research  projects,  his  reasons  for  participating  in  research  had  become  more  altruistic:
"[I]t  will  never  cure  me  .  .  .  I'll  be  dead  in  the  next  couple  of  years  .  .  .  but  if  they  can  find
something  that  can  save  someone  else  [I'll  be  happy]  .  .  .  [W]hen  you  first  go  in  .  .  .  you're
kind  of  dealing  with  whatever .  .  .  disease  you're  dealing  with.  .  .  .  There's  this  hope  factor
that's  there,  that  you  think,  'Well,  maybe  this  is  going  to  work.  Maybe  I'm  going  to—it's
going  to  help  me.  .  .  .'  [But  now]  I  don't  have  the  expectations  that ...  I  did  .  .  .  seven  or
eight  years  ago  ...  I'm  realistic.  It  might  help.  It  might  not.  But,  you  know,  they're
going  to  find  out  something  that's  going  ...  to  help  somebody  else  and  you  have  to  think
of  it  that  way"  (Subject  No.  335213-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
[ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  28  March  1995,  lines  598-600,  1234-1238,
1294-1299  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).

44.  Subject  No.  443252-2,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  1  March  1995,  lines  198-200  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

45.  Subject  No.  442107-9,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  29  March  1995,  lines  120-124  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

46.  Subject  No.  443218-3,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  24  February  1995,  lines  545-553  (Research
Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

47.  Only  one  respondent  noted  that  he  participated  simply  because  he  wanted
the  money  that  was  being  paid  to  participants  in  his  research  project  (Subject  No.

551 145-6,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio
recording,  1 1  March  1995,  line  60  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).
Another  respondent  with  breast  cancer  stated  plainly  that  she,  as  someone  without  health
insurance,  had  enrolled  in  research  to  get  treatment  and  "didn't  have  to  worry  about  trying
to  pay  something  back  later  on"  (Subject  No.  335216-8,  interview  by  Subject  Interview
Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  27  March  1995,  lines  30-33
[Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).

48.  Subject  No.  335227-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  24  March  1995,  lines  47-48  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

49.  Subject  No.  333256-6,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  16  March  1995,  lines  332-333  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

754


50.  Subject  No.  221240-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  15  March  1995,  lines  359-370  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

5 1 .  Subject  No.  333208-7,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  6  March  1995,  lines  407-409  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).  Another  respondent  had  a  similar  response:  "[T]o  me
they  are  the  doctors  and  once  I  had  gotten  those  doctors  and  I  trusted  them.  It  was  pretty
much  up  them.  I  wanted  to  know  what  I  was  going  to  be  going  through  as  far  as  what  to
expect .  .  .  physically  . .  .  [b]ut  a  lot  of  the  little  nitty-gritty  detail,  I  did  not  even  want  to
know"  (Subject  No.  1 14250-4,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],
transcript  of  audio  recording,  10  March  1995,  lines  274-283  [Research  Project  Series,
Subject  Interview  Study]).

52.  Subject  No.  332324-3,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  24  March  1995,  lines  156-161  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

53.  Subject  No.  441204-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  8  March  1995,  lines  171-172  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

54.  Subject  No.  552365-9,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  14  March  1995,  lines  399-401  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

55.  There  were  a  number  of  people  who  said  that  the  written  material  was
difficult  to  read:  "I  read  some  of  the  literature  and  it  didn't  mean  a  hill  of  beans  to  me
because  I  didn't  know  anything  about  medical  science  .  .  .  but .  .  .  like  I  say,  if  it's  to  help
me,  I'll  go  in  .  . ."  (Subject  No.  332324-3,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
[ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  24  March  1995,  lines  189-192  [Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).  One  respondent  drew  attention  to  the  overly  technical
language  used  in  forms:  "You  kind  of  think,  'Hmmmm.  What  do  these  things  really
mean?'.  . .  [You  hear  that]  your  follicles  might  fall.  .  .  .  you're  thinking,  'follicles  fall?'
My  hair  .  . .  [T]hey're  slick  at . . .  [how]  they  present  stuff. . .  "  (Subject  No.  335213-5,
interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  28
March  1995,  lines  742-748  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).  A  few
patients  said  the  forms  were  unnerving:  "[I]t'd  be  more  reassuring  for  the  person  .  .  .
that's  going  to  be  involved  in  the  research  to  receive  some  positive,  more  positive
language  in  the  protocol  itself. . .  .  [C]ertainly  in  a  way  it's  good  that  they  let  you  know
these  things.  ...  on  the  other  hand,  it  just  scares  people  sometimes"  (Subject  No.  335227-
5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  24
March  1995,  lines  89-92,  114-116  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).

56.  One  respondent  noted  that  cancer  patients  such  as  herself  receive  a  deluge  of
technical  information  to  digest:  "We  were  sorta  bombarded  with  information  and  I  just
made  my  mind  up  at  that  one  appointment  to  go  with  the  study"  (Subject  No.  4433 1 1-6,
interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  28
February  1995,  lines  212-214  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).
Another  replied,  "[T]hey  do  give  you  all  the  available  information,  almost  too  much,
because  you  can't  absorb  it  all  at  once,  and  I  brought  home  all  these  little  books  and  the
books  are  good  and  you  just  get  sick  of  it . . ."  (Subject  No.  333250-9,  interview  by
Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  8  March  1995,
lines  84-87  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).

57.  One  respondent,  approached  in  his  hospital  room  the  night  before  scheduled
brain  surgery  to  consider  enrolling  in  a  clinical  trial  for  anesthesia,  felt  that  the  timing  of
consent  was  poor: "...  I  felt  the  timing  could  have  been  a  little  better,  because  I  was

755


concerned  about  sleeping  and  being  rested.  .  .  .  [I]t  might  have  been  better  a  day  earl[ier]
. .  ."  (Subject  No.  442107-9,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],
transcript  of  audio  recording,  29  March  1995,  lines  155-157,  174-175  [Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).

58.  One  respondent  who  spoke  only  broken  English  reported  that  she  relied
upon  her  husband  to  gather  and  make  sense  of  information  that  staff  relayed  about  her
therapeutic  research  project.

59.  Subject  No.  1 14229-8,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  14  March  1995,  lines  481-486.  Similarly,
another  respondent  argued  that  "it's  important  that  the  people  who  are  on  the  protocol
talk,"  particularly  since  in  this  forum  participants  can  more  quickly  exchange  information
about  what  "is  going  to  happen.  ..."  Talking  can  convey  the  information  "quicker  than
if  it's  on  a  piece  [of paper]  . .  ."  (Subject  No.  335213-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview
Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  28  March  1995,  lines  1403-1404,
1417-1420  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).

60.  Subject  No.  333208-7,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  6  March  1995,  lines  27-29.  Even  when  some
patients  noted  that  a  doctor's  recommendation  had  influenced  them,  they  did  not  construe
this  as  "pressure":  "[D]on't  misunderstand  me,  [my  doctor]  didn't  influence  me  in  [any]
way  .  .  .  [but]  he  thought  it  would  be  a  good  program  for  my  type  of  cancer"  (Subject  No.
552126-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio
recording,  13  March  1995,  lines  125-127  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview
Study]).  Another  respondent  noted  that  she  thought  that  the  staff  wanted  her  to  enroll,
"but  they  [were]  not  pushing  anything"  (Subject  No.  1 13122-6,  interview  by  Subject
Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  1 1  March  1995,  line  462
[Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).

6 1 .  Subject  No.  552 1 26-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  13  March  1995,  lines  102-105  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

62.  Subject  No.  223201-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  13  March  1995,  lines  136-138  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

63.  Subject  No.  335213-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  28  March  1995,  lines  687-700  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).  Another  respondent,  who  did  not  remember  signing  a
consent  form  reported,  the  doctor  "just  recommended  me  to  go  [on  the  drug]"  (Subject
No.  44131 1-8,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio
recording,  28  March  1995,  lines  63  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).
Another  respondent  reported  that  although  she  did  not  recall  signing  a  consent  form,  she
later  discovered  that  she  had.  One  procedure  to  which  she  had  consented  in  written  form
was  not  something  she  wanted  to  go  through,  however.  This  respondent  explained  the
confusion  in  part  to  the  fact  that  she  .  .  .  "never  thought  about  the  study" .  .  .  because  she
was  worried  about .  .  .  "[having]  to  be  cut  again  .  .  ."  (Subject  No.  443226-6,  interview  by
Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  16  March  1995,
lines  246-255,  348-361,  446-448  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).

64.  Subject  No.  2232 12-2,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  16  March  1995,  lines  195-200  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

65.  Subject  No.  552143-0,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  15  March  1995,  lines  205-208  (Research  Project
Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

756


66.  Subject  No.  333208-7,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  6  March  1995,  lines  250-252,  256-257,  260-261
(Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).

67.  This  respondent  described  that  others  in  the  study  had  been  "on  orders  to
leave  here"  (i.e.,  to  go  to  another  military  base), ...  and  were  "not  allowed  to  [leave].
The  doctor  told  them  that  they  could  not .  .  .  [and]  ...  had  the  orders  changed  because
they  were  enrolled  in  an  intense  medical  program  research  program"  (Subject  No.
333301-0,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio
recording,  9  March  1995,  lines  779-783  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview
Study]).

68.  The  respondent  went  on  to  identify  sources  of  overt  and  covert  pressure  for
him  to  remain  in  the  trial:  "[T]he  response  was  kind  of  like  trying  to  convince  me  to  just
finish  it  up  and  that  was  always  the  response,  anytime  I  had  reservations  there  was
somebody  there  to  .  .  .  talk  about  those  reservations,  but  in  the  course  of  doing  it  really

trying  to  convince  me  that  it's  ok[ay] "  The  respondent  also  said,  "When  they  asked

for  a  bone  marrow  biopsy  I  said  I'm  not  gonna  do  it,  so  I  just  dropped  out  at  that  point,
and  she  says,  you  know  if  we  don't  do  that  then  I  mean,  it's  not  valid  ...  it  defeats  all
those  days  .  .  ."  (Subject  No.  551334-6,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
[ACHRE],  transcript  of  audio  recording,  14  March  1995,  lines  303-305,  326-328,  330-
332,  562-566,  652-656,  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study]).

69.  Subject  No.  5532 1 5-5,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  10  March  1995,  lines  96-99,  205-206.  Another
respondent  explained, "...  I  knew  that  I  could  stop  at  any  point  and  time.  I  was  aware  of
that ...  I  knew  that  I  could,  but  I  didn't  have  anything  else  ...  1  didn't  know  what
stopping  was  going  to  do  either .  .  .  then  I  thought  well,  if  I  stop,  what  do  I  do[?]"
(Subject  No.  3341 10-4,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff  [ACHRE],  transcript
of  audio  recording,  28  March  1995,  lines  483-488  [Research  Project  Series,  Subject
Interview  Study]).

70.  Subject  No.  552143-0,  interview  by  Subject  Interview  Study  staff
(ACHRE),  transcript  of  audio  recording,  15  March  1995,  lines  37-38,  217-218  (Research
Project  Series,  Subject  Interview  Study).


757


Discussion  of  Part  III


1  he  Committee  undertook  the  efforts  described  in  part  III  of  this  report
in  order  to  gain  insight  into  the  current  status  of  protections  in  human  radiation
research  and  research  with  human  subjects  generally.  An  important  finding  of
part  III  is  that  with  respect  to  the  rights  and  interests  of  human  subjects  there
appear  to  be  no  differences  between  radiation  research  and  other  research.

Compared  with  what  we  have  learned  about  the  1940s,  1950s,  and  1960s,
there  have  been  many  changes  in  the  climate  and  conduct  of  human  subject
research.  The  most  obvious  change  is  the  regulatory  apparatus  described  in
chapter  14,  which  was  not  in  place  in  that  earlier  time.  The  rules  of  research
ethics  are  also  more  articulated  today  than  they  were  then,  as  exemplified  by  the
evolution  of  the  concept  of  informed  consent.  Although  the  basic  moral
principles  that  serve  as  the  underpinning  for  research  ethics  are  the  same  now  as
they  were  then,  some  of  the  issues  of  greatest  concern  to  us  today  are  different,  or
have  taken  on  a  different  cast,  from  those  of  earlier  decades.

In  our  historical  inquiry,  for  example,  we  concentrated  on  cases  that
offered  subjects  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit;  they  were  instances  of
"nontherapeutic  research"  in  the  strictest  sense.  That  is,  these  were  experiments
in  which  there  was  never  any  basis  or  expectation  that  subjects  could  benefit
medically-both  the  design  and  the  objectives  precluded  such  a  possibility.  Most
of  the  human  radiation  experiments  that  were  public  controversies  when  the
Advisory  Committee  was  appointed  were  of  this  type.  The  basic  moral  concern
they  raised  was  whether  people  had  been  used  as  mere  means  to  the  ends  of
scientists  and  the  government;  this  would  have  occurred  if  the  subjects  could  not
possibly  have  benefited  medically  from  being  in  the  research  and  they  had  not
consented  to  this  use  of  their  person.

As  we  noted  in  chapter  4,  the  ethical  issues  raised  by  research  that  is
nontherapeutic  in  this  strict  sense  are  stark  and  straightforward.  Because  risks  to
subjects  cannot  be  offset  by  the  possibility  that  they  might  benefit  medically,
there  is  rarely  justification  for  nontherapeutic  research  that  puts  subjects  at


758


significant  risk.  Participation  in  such  research  is  always  a  burden  and  never  a
benefit  to  the  individual  subject,  making  questions  of  justice  straightforward  as
well.  And,  at  least  theoretically,  there  are  no  subtleties  involved  in  disclosing  to
potential  subjects  that  they  cannot  possibly  benefit  medically  from  participating  in
the  research,  although  problems  do  emerge  concerning  what  incentives  are
appropriate  to  induce  people  to  become  research  subjects  when,  considerations  of
altruism  aside,  it  is  otherwise  not  in  their  interests  to  do  so.

Today,  we  still  conduct  nontherapeutic  medical  research  on  human
subjects.  Much  research  in  physiology  offers  subjects  no  prospect  of  medical
benefit,  as  does  every  protocol  that  calls  for  "normal  controls."  Although
nontherapeutic  research  frequently  involves  subjects  who  are  healthy,  it  also  often
involves  patient-subjects  as  well.  It  is,  of  course,  still  appropriate  to  be  concerned
about  the  ethics  of  such  research,  as  it  is  with  all  research.  For  example,  we  were
particularly  troubled  in  our  Research  Proposal  Review  Project  by  documents  that
suggested  that  adults  of  questionable  competence  were  being  used  as  subjects  of
research  from  which  it  appeared  they  could  not  benefit  medically  and  where  the
authorization  for  this  use  was  unclear.

Much  research  involving  human  subjects  does  not,  however,  fit  this
nontherapeutic  paradigm.  Many  of  our  most  pressing  ethical  questions  concern
research  that  raises  at  least  the  specter  of  potential  medical  benefit  to  the  patient-
subject.  For  example,  unlike  the  plutonium  experiments  with  hospitalized  adults
or  the  iodine  131  experiments  with  hospitalized  children,  in  which  there  was  no
possibility  that  the  patient-subjects  could  have  benefited  medically,  in  the  modern
Phase  I  trial,  which  is  conducted  to  establish  toxicity,  there  is  at  least  the
possibility  of  therapeutic  benefit,  however  slim.  Thus,  although  Phase  I  trials
often  impose  significant  burden  and  risk  on  subjects,  they  are  not  nontherapeutic
in  the  strict  sense.  And,  in  contrast  with  Phase  I  trials,  in  much  research  involving
patient-subjects  there  is  a  real  prospect  that  subjects  will  benefit  medically  from
their  participation.  In  many  of  these  cases,  being  a  research  subject  is  clearly  in
the  medical  best  interests  of  the  patient.

As  Otto  Guttentag  observed  in  the  1950s  (see  chapter  1),  it  is  the
possibility  of  medical  benefit  that  creates  much  of  the  moral  tension  in  human
subject  research.  Physician  researchers  are  often  torn  between  the  demands  of  a
research  project  and  the  needs  of  particular  patients.  Today  this  tension  has  taken
on  special  significance,  with  the  immense  growth  of  research  at  the  bedside  and
the  frequency  with  which  the  medical  care  of  seriously  ill  patients  is  intertwined
with  clinical  research.  In  our  Subject  Interview  Study,  for  example,  at  least  a
third  of  the  patients  interviewed  had  some  contact  with  medical  research.

It  is  these  considerations  that  led  us  to  focus  the  efforts  reported  on  in  part
III,  and  particularly  the  SIS,  on  research  involving  patient-subjects.  The
Committee  regrets  that  we  did  not  have  the  resources  to  conduct  a  similar  study
with  subjects  who  are  not  also  patients.  It  would  have  been  particularly  useful  to
have  conducted  such  a  study  with  subjects  who  are  military  personnel  not
currently  in  medical  care.  This  would  have  allowed  us  to  investigate  other
important  sources  of  tension  in  the  ethics  of  research,  including  the  tension

759


Part  III

between  giving  orders  and  soliciting  consent  and  between  occupational
monitoring  and  research.

Although  the  SIS  and  the  RPRP  employed  radically  different
methodologies  and  were  directed  toward  different  research  questions,  both
projects  speak  to  the  ethical  issues  raised  by  the  conduct  of  human  research  in  a
medical  context,  a  context  dominated  by  the  human  needs  to  be  healed  and  to
heal.

The  findings  of  the  SIS  underscore  what  other,  smaller  studies  also  have
identified— that  patient-subjects  generally  decide  to  participate  in  medical  research
because  they  believe  that  being  in  research  is  the  best  way  to  improve  their
medical  condition.1  In  the  SIS,  we  could  not  determine  whether  the  patients  had
unrealistic  expectations  about  how  likely  it  was  that  they  might  benefit  from
being  in  research,  or  in  what  form  that  benefit  might  take.  Other  empirical  studies
suggest  that  some  subjects  do  have  an  inadequate,  sometimes  exaggerated
understanding  of  the  potential  benefits  of  the  research  in  which  they  are
participating.2  In  the  RPRP,  we  reviewed  consent  forms  that  appeared  to
overpromise  what  research  could  likely  offer  the  ill  patient  and  underplay  the
effect  of  the  research  on  the  patient's  quality  of  life.  These  were  the  kinds  of
disclosures  that  could  easily  be  interpreted  by  a  patient  desperate  for  hope  as
offering  much  more  than  realistically  could  be  expected.  Not  surprisingly,  this
problem  was  the  most  acute  in  certain  Phase  I  trials  that,  while  not  being
nontherapeutic  in  the  strict  sense,  appeared  to  offer  only  a  remote  possibility  of
benefit  to  the  patient-subject.  In  oncology,  for  example,  it  is  estimated  that  in
only  about  5  percent  of  subjects  enrolled  in  Phase  I  chemotherapy  studies  does
the  tumor  respond  to  the  drug,3  and  it  is  often  unclear  even  then  what  the  tumor
response  means  from  a  patient's  point  of  view.4  To  say  that  there  is  no  prospect
that  the  patients  might  benefit  medically  is  questionable;  there  are  enough  cases
of  patients  being  helped  in  Phase  I  trials  to  make  such  a  stark  claim  problematic.
Beneficial  effects  of  Phase  I  trials  have  a  very  low  probability,  but  do  occur.5  At
the  same  time,  however,  any  suggestion  of  the  possibility  of  benefit  has  the
potential  to  be  magnified  many  times  over  by  patients  with  no  good  medical
alternatives.  It  is  understandable  that  physicians,  faced  with  the  prospect  of  little
or  nothing  to  offer  seriously  ill  patients,  may  sometimes  impart  more  hope  than
the  clinical  facts  warrant.  At  the  same  time,  however,  desperate  hopes  are  easily
manipulated.

Consider,  for  example,  a  recent  report  of  a  small  study  of  patient-subjects
participating  in  Phase  I  clinical  oncology  trials.6  Despite  the  predictably  low
likelihood  of  medical  benefit  for  subjects  in  Phase  I  trials,  all  of  the  patient-
subjects  surveyed  about  their  reasons  for  participating  said  their  decision  was
motivated  in  large  part  by  the  possibility  of  therapeutic  benefit,  and  nearly  three-
quarters  cited  trust  in  their  physician  as  motivating  their  decision  to  participate.
Only  one-third  listed  altruism  as  a  major  motivating  factor.  These  results  support
what  we  found  in  the  SIS-that  patient-subjects  view  research  participation  as  a

760


Discussion  of  Part  III

way  of  obtaining  the  best  medical  care,  even  when  participating  in  research  holds
out  very  little  prospect  of  direct  benefit.  This  phenomenon,  which  is  especially
relevant  when  some  subjects  receive  a  placebo  as  a  part  of  the  research,  has  been
dubbed  the  therapeutic  misconception.7  This  phenomenon  is  not  confined  to
patient-subjects'  perceptions  of  benefit  from  research;  at  least  one  study  has
shown  that  physician-investigators  also  overestimate  the  potential  benefits  to
subjects  participating  in  Phase  I  oncology  trials.8

One  of  the  most  powerful  themes  to  emerge  from  the  SIS  is  the  role  of
trust  in  patients'  decisions  to  participate  in  research,  a  finding  that  has  been
observed  in  other  studies  as  well.9  It  was  common  for  patients  in  the  SIS  to  say
that  they  had  joined  a  research  project  at  the  suggestion  of  their  physician  and  that
they  trusted  that  their  physician  would  never  endorse  an  option  that  was  not  in
their  best  interest.  This  trust  underscores  the  much-discussed  tension  in  the  role  of
physician-investigator,10  whose  duties  as  a  healer  and  as  a  scientist  inherently
conflict.  This  trust  that  patients  place  in  their  physicians  often  is  generalized  to
the  medical  and  research  community  as  a  whole.  Some  patients  expressed  faith
not  only  in  their  doctors  but  also  in  the  institutions  where  they  were  receiving
medical  care.  These  patients  believed  that  hospitals  would  never  permit  research
to  be  conducted  that  was  not  good  for  the  patient-subjects.  The  trust  that  patients
have  in  physicians  and  hospitals  underscores  the  importance  of  the  Committee's
concern,  based  on  our  review  of  the  documents  in  the  RPRP,  that  IRBs  may  not
always  be  properly  structured  to  ensure  that  the  medical  interests  of  ill  patients
are  adequately  protected.  In  some  cases,  the  scientific  information  to  make  such
judgments  was  not  included  in  the  documents  we  received.  Even  with  adequate
information,  IRBs  may  lack  sufficient  expertise  to  evaluate  the  science  or
implications  for  medical  care  of  particular  proposals.  As  we  heard  from  some
IRB  chairs,  they  may  also  lack  the  staff  or  the  respect  and  authority  within  their
institutions  to  function  adequately  to  protect  subjects.

The  theme  of  trust  discerned  in  the  SIS  also  has  implications  for  how
properly  to  view  the  role  of  informed  consent  in  protecting  the  rights  and  interests
of  human  subjects.  For  many  of  the  patients  who  based  their  decision  to  be  in
research  on  their  trust  in  their  physicians,  the  informed  consent  process  and  the
informed  consent  form  were  of  little  importance.  IRBs  can  serve  the  interests  of
these  patients  best  by  being  vigilant  in  their  review  of  risks  and  benefits  and
attending  to  questions  of  fairness  in  the  selection  of  subjects.  On  the  other  hand,
we  also  found  in  the  SIS  that  sizable  numbers  of  patients  had  refused  offers  to
participate  in  research  and  that  some  patients  who  had  consented  to  be  research
subjects  had  made  efforts  to  learn  what  they  could  about  the  research  opportunity.
For  these  patients,  the  informed  consent  process  likely  served  an  important  moral
function.

From  these  seemingly  conflicting  results  we  can  conclude  both  that  the
informed  consent  requirement  is  crucial  to  protect  the  autonomy  rights  of  those
potential  subjects  who  choose  to  exercise  them,  but  that  it  is  naive  to  think  that

761


Part  III

informed  consent  can  be  relied  upon  as  the  major  mechanism  to  protect  the  rights
and  interests  of  patient-subjects.  Taken  together,  the  results  of  our  two  projects
suggest  that  it  is  important  to  correct  the  deficiencies  identified  in  the  RPRP  with
respect  to  informed  consent.  Our  results  also  underscore,  however,  the
importance  of  an  IRB  review  that  focuses  on  whether  the  proposed  research  is  a
reasonable,  ethically  acceptable  option  to  offer  the  patient,  in  light  of  available
alternatives  and  the  risks  and  potential  benefits  of  the  proposed  research  for  the
subject,  including  impact  on  quality  of  life.  An  alternative,  the  practice  of  adding
detail  to  consent  forms  as  a  way  of  further  informing  potential  subjects  who  often
have  a  difficult  time  understanding  risks,  benefits,  and  purposes  of  research,"  is
unacceptable;  by  confusing  subjects,  it  offers  less,  rather  than  greater  protection.
For  the  many  patients  who  continue  to  rely  on  the  expertise  and  good  will  of
physicians  and  hospitals  in  deciding  whether  to  participate  in  research,  rigorous
review  on  the  part  of  IRBs  and  rigorous  commitment  on  the  part  of  physicians  to
honor  the  faith  entrusted  to  them  are  the  important  protections.

The  SIS  and  the  RPRP  also  both  speak  to  the  current  confusion  between
research  and  "standard  care"  in  medical  practice.12  The  same  therapy  that  is  part
of  a  research  protocol,  and  therefore  must  receive  IRB  approval,  can  proceed
outside  of  the  research  setting  and  not  be  subject  to  IRB  oversight.  This  leads  to
understandable  confusion  on  the  part  of  subjects  as  to  whether  they  are
participating  in  research,  receiving  standard  care,  or  some  combination.  It  is  thus
perhaps  not  surprising  that  research  subjects  occasionally  seem  unaware  of  their
participation  in  research,  even  when  there  is  evidence  they  have  signed  consent
forms.'3  This  finding  was  observed  in  the  SIS,  though  the  methodology  of  the
study  did  not  allow  us  to  probe  the  reasons  some  subjects  appeared  unaware  of
their  participation.

The  confusion  between  research  and  alternative  medical  interventions  is
mirrored  in  the  language  used  to  communicate  to  patients  in  the  informed  consent
process  and  in  the  language  of  patients  themselves.  In  the  SIS,  the  patients
surveyed  viewed  experiments  as  involving  unproven  treatment  of  greater  risk,
while  clinical  investigation  or  study  conveyed  less  uncertainty  and  were  perceived
as  offering  a  greater  chance  of  personal  benefit.  None  of  the  consent  forms  we
reviewed  in  the  RPRP  used  the  term  experiment.

CONCLUSION

In  addition  to  the  role  they  played  in  helping  the  Advisory  Committee
come  to  our  conclusions,  the  RPRP  and  SIS  should  be  understood  as  adding  to  the
body  of  research  undertaken  to  try  to  understand  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of
the  system  to  protect  the  rights  and  interests  of  human  subjects.

In  the  end,  patients'  reasons  for  participating  in  research  must  more
accurately  reflect  the  benefits  they  may  reasonably  expect.  Altruistic  motivation
can  be  more  fruitfully  tapped,  both  for  the  benefit  it  provides  to  the  advancement

762


Discussion  of  Part  III

of  science  and  to  underscore  for  patients  that  the  primary  objective  of  some
research  is  to  create  generalizable  scientific  knowledge  rather  than  to  offer
personal  benefit  to  them.  Subjects  are  much  more  likely  to  have  a  positive  view
of  biomedical  research  if  they  feel  they  understand  what  prospects  research  holds
for  them.  The  good  news  in  the  endeavor  of  human  subject  research  is  that
subjects  are  willing  to  participate,  and  in  the  process  entrust  their  care  to
researchers;  however,  that  trust  cannot  be  taken  for  granted  as  it  sometimes  has
been  in  our  history.

Increasingly  it  is  being  argued  that  it  is  generally  advantageous  for
patients  to  participate  in  research;  the  distinction  between  standard  care  and
research,  if  it  was  ever  clear,  is  viewed  as  growing  dimmer  all  the  time.14  As  a
consequence,  the  debate  over  subject  selection  has  changed  entirely.  As  we
discussed  in  parts  I  and  II,  in  the  past  a  central  concern  was  that  certain
populations,  considered  vulnerable  to  exploitation  because  of  their  relative
powerlessness,  were  inequitably  bearing  the  burdens  of  the  risks  of  research.
Today,  the  concern  is  that  the  same  populations  may  have  inequitable  access  to
research  and  therefore  individuals  and  the  communities  of  which  they  are  a  part
may  be  denied  a  fair  share  of  the  benefits  of  research  participation.  While  this  is  a
valid  moral  concern,  the  results  of  the  SIS  and  the  RPRP  suggest  that  it  remains
important  to  be  attuned  to  issues  of  vulnerability.  While  patients  with  serious
illnesses  may  stand  to  gain  the  most  from  participating  in  medical  research,  they
also  are  among  the  most  vulnerable  to  its  risks.

It  also  is  important  to  underscore  the  finding  in  the  RPRP  that  in  both
studies  involving  minimal  risk  and  those  involving  greater  risk,  research  with  ill
patient-subjects  can  proceed  ethically  and  consent  can  be  properly  obtained.  The
research  enterprise  is  too  important  to  jeopardize  by  inadequate  protections  for
subjects.  Tensions  and  potential  conflicts  exist  throughout  the  research  process,
and  so  we  must  be  sure  to  acknowledge  and  address  them  squarely.  This  is  the
goal  of  the  next  and  final  part  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  report.


763


ENDNOTES


1.  Barrie  R.  Cassileth,  Edward  J.  Lusk,  David  S.  Miller,  and  Shelley  Hurwitz,
"Attitudes  Toward  Clinical  Trials  Among  Patients  and  the  Public,"  Journal  of  the
American  Medical  Association  248,  no.  8  (1982):  968-970;  and  Christopher  Daugherty,
Mark  J.  Ratain,  Eugene  Grocowski  et  al.,  "Perceptions  of  Cancer  Patients  and  Their
Physicians  Involved  in  Phase  I  Trials,"  Journal  of  Clinical  Oncology  13,  no.  5  (1995):
1062-1072.

2.  Ira  S.  Ockene  et  al.,  "The  Consent  Process  in  the  Thrombolysis  in  Myocardial
Infarction  (TIMI-Phase  I)  Trial,"  Clinical  Research  39  no.  1  (1991):  13-17;  Roberta  M.
Tanakanow,  Burgunda  V.  Sweet,  and  Jill  A.  Weiskopf,  "Patients'  Perceived
Understanding  of  Informed  Consent  in  Investigational  Drug  Studies,"  American  Journal
of  Hospital  Pharmacy  49  (1992):  633-635;  Doris  T.  Penman  et  al.,  "Informed  Consent
for  Investigational  Chemotherapy:  Patients'  and  Physicians'  Perceptions,"  Journal  of
Clinical  Oncology  2  no.7  (1984):  849-855;  Henry  W.  Riecken  and  Ruth  Ravich,
"Informed  Consent  to  Biomedical  Research  in  Veterans  Administration  Hospitals,"
Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  248  no.  3  ( 1 982):  344-348;  Gail  A.
Bujorian,  "Clinical  Trials:  Patient  Issues  in  the  Decision-Making  Process,"  Oncology
Nursing  Forum  15,  no.  6  (1988):  779-783;  Niels  Lynoe  et  al.,  "Informed  Consent:  Study
of  Quality  of  Information  Given  to  Participants  in  a  Clinical  Study,"  British  Medical
Journal  303  (1991):  610-613;  and  Daugherty  et  al.,  "Perceptions  of  Cancer  Patients  and
Their  Physicians  Involved  in  Phase  I  Trials."

3.  D.  D.  Von  Hoff  and  J.  Turner,  "Response  Rates,  Duration  of  Response,  and
Dose  Response  Effects  in  Phase  I  Studies  of  Antineoplastics,"  Investigational  New
Drugs  9  (1991):  1 15-122;  E.  Estey  et  al.,  "Therapeutic  Response  in  Phase  I  Trials  of
Antineoplastic  Agents,"  Cancer  Treatment  Report  70  (1986):  1 105-1 155;  and  G.
Decoster,  G.  Stein,  and  E.  E.  Holdener,  "Responses  and  Toxic  Deaths  in  Phase  I  Clinical
Trials,"  Annals  of  Oncology  2  ( 1 990):  1 75- 1 8 1 .

4.  Decoster,  Stein,  and  Holdener,  "Responses  and  Toxic  Deaths  in  Phase  I
Clinical  Trials,"  175-181.

5.  There  have  been  very  few  occasions  reported  in  the  literature  of  Phase  I  trials
having  medical  benefit  for  patient-subjects.  While  very  rare,  that  such  benefit  occurs  at
all  further  complicates  the  difficulty  over  what  to  say  to  patients  at  the  end  of  the  medical
road  who  are  considering  enrolling  in  a  Phase  I  trial.  See,  for  example,  M.  Kaminski,
"Radioimmunotherapy  of  Bcell  Lymphoma  with  1-131  Anti-Bl,"  New  England  Journal
of  Medicine  329,  no.  7  (1993):  459-465.

6.  Daugherty  et  al.,  "Perceptions  of  Cancer  Patients  and  Their  Physicians
Involved  in  Phase  I  Trials."

7.  Paul  S.  Appelbaum,  Loren  H.  Roth,  and  Charles  Lidz,  "The  Therapeutic
Misconception:  Informed  Consent  in  Psychiatric  Research,"  International  Journal  of
Law  and  Psychiatry  5  (1982):  319-329;  Paul  S.  Appelbaum  et  al.,  "False  Hopes  and  Best
Data:  Consent  to  Research  and  the  Therapeutic  Misconception,"  Hastings  Center  Report,
April  1987,20-24.

8.  Decoster,  Stein,  and  Holdener,  "Responses  and  Toxic  Deaths  in  Phase  I
Clinical  Trials."

9.  Cassileth  et  al.,  "Attitudes  toward  Clinical  Trials  among  Patients  and  the
Public";  Susan  M.  Newburg,  Anne  E.  Holland,  and  Lesly  A.  Pearce,  "Motivation  of


764


Subjects  to  Participate  in  a  Research  Trial,"  Applied  Nursing  Research  5,  no.  2  (1992):
89-104;  Penman  et  al.,  "Informed  Consent  for  Investigational  Chemotherapy:  Patients'
and  Physicians'  Perceptions";  and  Daugherty  et  al.,  "Perceptions  of  Cancer  Patients  and
their  Physicians  Involved  in  Phase  I  Trials."

10 Nancy  M.  P.  King,  "Experimental  Treatment:  Oxymoron  or  Aspiration?"
Hastings  Center  Report  25,  no.  4  (1995):  6-15;  Jay  Katz,  "The  Regulation  of  Human
Experimentation  in  the  United  States-A  Personal  Odyssey,"  IRB  9,  no.  1  (1987):  1,  5-6;
and  J.  R.  Maltby,  and  C.  J.  Eagle,  "Patient  Recruitment  for  Clinical  Research  [letter,
comment],"  Canadian  Journal  of  Anaesthesia  40,  no.  9  (1993):  897-898.

11.  Ockene  et  al.,  "The  Consent  Process  in  the  Thrombolysis  in  Myocardial
Infarction  (TIMI-Phase  I)  Trial";  Tanakanow  et  al.,  "Patients'  Perceived  Understanding
of  Informed  Consent  in  Investigational  Drug  Studies";  Penman  et  al.,  "Informed  Consent
for  Investigational  Chemotherapy:  Patients'  and  Physicians'  Perceptions";  Riecken  et  al.,
"Informed  Consent  to  Biomedical  Research  in  Veterans  Administration  Hospitals";
Bujorian  et  al.,  "Clinical  Trials:  Patient  Issues  in  the  Decision-Making  Process";  Lynoe
et  al.,  "Informed  Consent:  Study  of  Quality  of  Information  Given  to  Participants  in  a
Clinical  Study";  and  Daugherty  et  al.,  "Perceptions  of  Cancer  Patients  and  their
Physicians  Involved  in  Phase  I  Trials."

12.  King,  "Experimental  Treatment:  Oxymoron  or  Aspiration?"

13.  Riecken  et  al.,  "Informed  Consent  to  Biomedical  Research  in  Veterans
Administration  Hospitals."

14.  King,  "Experimental  Treatment:  Oxymoron  or  Aspiration?"


765


PART  IV

COMING  TO  TERMS  WITH
THE  PAST,  LOOKING  AHEAD  TO  THE

FUTURE


Part  IV
Overview


In  part  IV  we  present  the  overall  findings  of  the  Advisory  Committee's
inquiry  and  deliberations  and  the  recommendations  that  follow  from  these
findings.

In  chapter  17,  findings  are  presented  in  two  parts,  first  for  the  period  1944
through  1974  and  then  for  the  contemporary  period.  These  parts,  in  turn,  are
divided  into  findings  regarding  biomedical  experiments  and  those  regarding
population  exposures.

We  begin  our  presentation  of  findings  for  the  period  1944  through  1974
with  a  summation  of  what  we  have  learned  about  human  radiation  experiments:
their  number  and  purpose,  the  likelihood  that  they  produced  harm,  and  how
human  radiation  experimentation  contributed  to  advances  in  medicine.  We  then
summarize  what  we  have  found  concerning  the  nature  of  federal  rules  and
policies  governing  research  involving  human  subjects  during  this  period,  and  the
implementation  of  these  rules  in  the  conduct  of  human  radiation  experiments.
Findings  about  the  nature  and  implementation  of  federal  rules  cover  issues  of
consent,  risk,  the  selection  of  subjects,  and  the  role  of  national  security
considerations.

Our  findings  about  government  rules  are  followed  by  a  finding  on  the
norms  and  practices  of  physicians  and  other  biomedical  scientists  for  the  use  of
human  subjects.  We  then  turn  to  the  Committee's  finding  on  the  evaluation  of
past  experiments,  in  which  we  summarize  the  moral  framework  adopted  by  the
Committee  for  this  purpose.  Next,  we  present  our  findings  for  experiments
conducted  in  conjunction  with  atmospheric  atomic  testing,  intentional  releases,
and  other  population  exposures.  The  remaining  findings  for  the  historical  period
address  issues  of  government  secrecy  and  record  keeping.

There  is  an  asymmetry  in  our  findings  on  human  radiation  experiments
and  intentional  releases.  In  both  cases,  we  discuss  their  number  and  purpose,  the

769


Part  IV

likelihood  that  they  produced  harm,  and  what  is  known  about  applicable
government  rules  and  policies.  In  the  case  of  human  radiation  experiments,  we
also  have  a  finding  on  the  benefits  to  medicine-and  thus  to  all  of  us— that  human
radiation  research  during  this  period  produced.  We  do  not,  however,  have  a
corresponding  finding  on  the  benefits  of  the  intentional  releases  of  the  period,
benefits  that  would  presumably  have  been  to  the  national  defense  and,  thus  again,
to  all  of  us.  Although  the  members  of  the  Committee  are  positioned  to  comment
on  contributions  to  medicine  and  medical  science,  we  do  not  have  the  expertise  to
evaluate  contributions  to  the  national  defense  and  thus  could  not  speak  to  this
issue.

Our  findings  for  the  contemporary  period  summarize  what  we  have
learned  about  the  rules  and  practices  that  currently  govern  the  conduct  of
radiation  research  involving  human  subjects,  as  well  as  human  research  generally,
and  about  the  status  of  government  regulations  regarding  intentional  releases.

Chapter  1 8  presents  the  Committee's  recommendations  to  the  Human
Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group  and  to  the  American  people.  The
Committee's  inquiry  focused  on  research  conducted  by  the  government  to  serve
the  public  good— the  promotion  and  protection  of  national  security  and  the
advancement  of  science  and  medicine.  The  pursuit  of  these  ends— today,  as  well
as  yesterday— inevitably  means  that  some  individuals  are  put  at  risk  for  the  benefit
of  the  greater  good.  The  past  shows  us  that  research  can  bear  fruits  of
incalculable  value.  Unfortunately,  however,  the  government's  conduct  with
respect  to  some  research  performed  in  the  past  has  left  a  legacy  of  distrust.
Actions  must  be  taken  to  ensure  that,  in  the  future,  the  ends  of  national  security
and  the  advancement  of  medicine  will  proceed  only  through  means  that  safeguard
the  dignity,  health,  and  safety  of  the  individuals  and  groups  who  may  be  put  at
risk  in  the  process.

The  needed  actions  are  in  four  dimensions:

First,  the  nation  must  provide  for  appropriate  remedies  as  it  comes  to  grips
with  the  past.

Second,  the  nation  must  provide  improved  means  to  better  ensure  that
those  who  conduct  research  involving  human  subjects  act  in  a  manner  consistent
with  the  interests  and  rights  of  those  who  may  be  put  at  risk  and  consistent  with
the  highest  ethical  standards  of  the  practice  of  medicine  and  the  conduct  of
science.

Third,  the  nation  must  ensure  that  special  care  is  taken  to  prevent  abuses
in  the  conduct  of  human  subject  research  and  environmental  releases  in  a  context
where  these  activities  must  occur  in  secret.

Fourth,  the  nation  must  ensure  that  records  are  kept  so  that  a  proper
accounting  can  be  made  to  those  who  are  asked  to  bear  risks,  particularly  when
any  or  all  of  the  risk  taking  involves  secrecy.  Moreover,  these  records  should  be
made  available  to  the  public  at  large  on  a  timely  basis  consistent  with  legitimate


770


Overview

national  security  requirements.

The  Committee's  recommendations  address  these  four  areas— remedies  for
the  past,  practices  to  govern  the  future  of  biomedical  experimentation,  practices  to
govern  the  future  exposure  of  citizens  to  biomedical  research  or  environmental
releases  from  secret  activities,  and  provisions  for  record  keeping  and  public
access  to  records.

We  wish  to  note  here  the  limits  of  our  framework  for  remedies  for  past
harms  or  wrongs  for  subjects  of  human  radiation  experiments.*  First,  we  are
addressing  questions  of  remedies  from  the  perspective  of  what,  ethically,  ought
to  be  done.  We  recognize  that  some  of  the  remedies  we  propose,  including
financial  compensation,  may  not  be  available  under  current  federal  law.  To  the
extent  that  such  remedies  are  not  available  under  current  law,  we  encourage  the
administration  to  work  with  Congress  to  develop  such  remedies  through
legislation  or  other  appropriate  means.

Second,  the  Committee  has  focused  on  past  experiments  in  which  there
was  no  possibility  that  subjects  could  derive  medical  benefit  from  being  in  the
research  or  in  which  the  potential  for  this  benefit  is  in  dispute.  These  were  the
experiments  that  raised  the  greatest  public  concern.  They  were  also  the
experiments  that  raised  the  greatest  concern  for  most  members  of  the  Committee
when  we  considered  the  1944-1974  period.  This  was  a  time,  as  noted  throughout
this  report,  when  it  was  common  for  physicians  to  use  patients  as  research
subjects  without  the  patients'  knowledge  or  consent.  It  was  also  a  time,  however,
when  physicians  were  ceded  considerable  moral  authority  both  by  patients  and  by
society  to  decide  for  patients  what  medical  treatments  they  should  receive.  This
authority  extended,  as  well,  to  deciding  whether  a  patient  should  be  a  subject  in
therapeutic  medical  research,  provided  that  this  decision  was  based  on  a  good
faith  judgment  by  the  physician  that  it  was  in  the  patient's  medical  best  interest  to
be  a  subject  in  the  research  and  thus  that  any  risks  of  the  research  were  acceptable
in  light  of  the  possibilities  for  medical  benefit.  Even  at  the  time,  however,
physicians  did  not  have  the  moral  authority  to  use  patients,  without  their
knowledge  or  consent,  as  subjects  in  research  in  which  there  was  no  expectation
that  they  could  benefit  medically.


*  In  accordance  with  our  charter,  these  recommendations  apply  to  human
radiation  experiments  conducted  from  1944  to  1974  that  were  supported  by  the
government,  whether  the  support  was  in  the  form  of  funding  (including  funding  for  data
gathering  in  conjunction  with  exposure  of  patient-subjects  to  radiation)  or  other  means,
such  as  the  provision  of  equipment  or  radioisotopes,  and  regardless  of  whether  the
research  was  performed  by  federal  employees  or  nonfederal  investigators.  Although  we
focus  here  on  human  research  involving  exposure  to  ionizing  radiation,  the  moral
justification  for  these  recommendations  is  not  specific  only  to  experiments  involving
radiation.

771


Part  IV

The  Committee  appreciates  that  simply  because  the  moral  context  of  the
doctor-patient  relationship  during  the  1944-1974  period  was  different  from
today's,  this  does  not  mean  that  all  therapeutic  research  was  always  or  even  often
conducted  in  an  ethical  fashion.  We  also  appreciate  that  the  risks  of  therapeutic
research  were  often  considerable  and  that  it  is  likely  that  some  patient-subjects
were  harmed  unnecessarily  as  a  consequence.  However,  the  moral  problems
presented  when  people  in  the  1944-1974  period  were  used  as  subjects  of  research
from  which  they  could  not  benefit  medically  are  both  more  straightforward  and
more  compelling.  We  therefore  felt  obligated  to  expend  our  limited  resources  on
historical  and  moral  analysis  of  these  kinds  of  experiments.  We  do  not  address
whether  or  under  what  conditions  remedies  should  be  provided  for  injuries  or
offenses  related  to  research  that  offered  a  plausible  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to
subjects  and  we  leave  that  work  to  others.

Third,  even  in  those  experiments  where  there  was  no  prospect  of  medical
benefit,  limited  Committee  resources,  and  the  overall  Committee  mandate,
precluded  the  type  of  fact-intensive  individual  investigation  that  would  give  rise
to  a  recommendation  of  compensation  in  individual  cases.  The  Committee  did
not  have  the  ability  to  locate  and  evaluate  the  research  and  medical  records  of
countless  individual  subjects.  As  a  consequence,  for  example,  we  were  not  able
to  make  judgments  about  whether,  in  individual  cases,  subjects  had  suffered
physical  harm  attributable  to  their  involvement  in  research.

Fourth,  we  note  that  the  Committee  was  not  unanimous  in  its  decision  to
make  a  recommendation  for  remedies  for  people  who  were  subjects  in
experiments  that  offered  them  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  but  who  were  not
physically  harmed  as  a  consequence  (recommendation  3).  Three  Committee
members  elected  not  to  support  this  recommendation.

The  entire  Committee  believes  that  people  who  were  used  as  research
subjects  without  their  consent  were  wronged  even  if  they  were  not  harmed.
Although  it  is  surely  worse,  from  an  ethical  standpoint,  to  have  been  both  harmed
and  wronged  than  to  have  been  used  as  an  unwitting  subject  of  experiments  and
suffered  no  harm,  it  is  still  a  moral  wrong  to  use  people  as  a  mere  means.
Although  what  we  know  about  the  practices  of  the  time  suggests  it  is  likely  that
many  people  who  were  subjects  in  nontherapeutic  research  were  used  without
their  consent  or  with  what  today  we  would  consider  inadequate  consent,  in  most
of  these  cases,  we  have  almost  no  information  about  whether  or  how  consent  was
obtained.  Moreover,  in  most  of  these  cases,  the  identities  of  the  subjects  are  not
currently  known;  even  if  considerable  resources  were  expended,  it  is  likely  that
most  of  their  identities  would  remain  unknown.  The  Committee  is  not  persuaded
that,  even  where  the  facts  are  clear  and  the  identities  of  subjects  known,  financial
compensation  is  necessarily  a  fitting  remedy  when  people  have  been  used  as
subjects  without  their  knowledge  or  consent  but  suffered  no  material  harm  as  a
consequence;  the  remedy  that  emerged  as  most  fitting  was  an  apology  from  the


772


"


Overview

government.

The  Committee  struggled  with  and  ultimately  was  divided  on  the  issue  of
whether  to  recommend  that  the  government  extend  an  apology  under  the
circumstances  just  described.  While  all  members  agreed  that  a  goal  of  all  the
Committee's  recommendations  is,  in  the  words  of  one  member,  to  "bind  the
nation's  wounds,"  we  disagreed  about  how  best  to  accomplish  that  end  when
debating  whether  we  should  recommend  such  an  apology.  Our  deliberations  were
complicated  by  what  we  all  agreed  was  a  murky  historical  record.  In  the  case  of
some  experiments,  there  was  evidence  of  some  disclosure  or  some  attempt  to
obtain  consent,  and  the  issue  emerged  as  to  how  poor  these  attempts  must  be  for
an  apology  still  to  be  in  order.  In  other  cases,  there  was  simply  too  little
documentary  evidence  to  draw  any  conclusions  about  disclosure  or  consent.  In
most  cases,  as  noted  above,  the  identities  of  subjects  are  unknown  and  are
unlikely  to  be  uncovered  even  with  an  enormous  expenditure  of  resources.

The  Committee  members  who  concluded  that  it  was  not  appropriate  to
recommend  that  a  government  apology  be  extended  did  not  all  reach  this
conclusion  for  the  same  reasons.  Among  the  reasons  put  forward  were  that  it
would  be  impossible  to  craft  a  recommendation  for  an  apology  in  such  a  way  as  to
avoid  the  divisiveness  that  could  result  from  apologizing  to  some  but  not  all  of
those  who  view  themselves  as  victims  of  this  kind  of  human  radiation  experiment.
There  was  concern  that  if  the  criteria  for  who  should  receive  an  apology  were  too
narrow,  some  people  would  resent  not  qualifying  for  an  apology;  conversely,  if
the  criteria  were  too  broad  and  included  large  numbers  of  people,  the  generality  of
the  apology  would  diminish  its  meaningfulness.  It  was  also  argued  that  a
recommendation  for  an  apology  should  not  be  made  because  of  the  difficulties  in
crafting  the  criteria  for  eligibility  in  the  face  of  an  incomplete  historical  record.
Another  reason  for  not  recommending  an  apology  was  that  during  the  1944-1974
period  many  people  were  used  as  subjects  of  research  that  did  not  involve
radiation,  for  which  there  was  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  and  consent  was  not
obtained  from  them,  and  these  people  would  not  be  included  in  a  recommendation
from  us  for  an  apology.

The  Committee  members  who  favored  an  apology  took  the  position  that
justice  requires  that  an  apology  from  the  government  is  due  in  research  that  it
sponsored,  where  it  can  be  determined  that  an  apology  is  deserved  and  the
identities  of  subjects  who  were  wronged  can  be  known.  They  do  not  believe  that
the  recommendation  to  apologize  rests  on  the  likelihood  that  it  will  lead  to  more
healing  than  divisiveness.  Rather,  these  Committee  members  hold  that  an  apology
is  a  just  remedy  for  those  who  were  wronged  and  that  it  should  not  be  withheld
only  because  there  are  other  cases  that  are  likely  to  have  been  morally  similar  but
for  which  a  recommendation  of  an  apology  could  not  be  made  because  the
evidence  was  unclear  or  unavailable.  Making  a  specific  apology  in  those  cases
where  the  facts  are  clear  today  would  not  for  these  Committee  members  preclude

773


Part  IV

apologies  being  extended  to  other  subjects  in  the  future,  should  new  information
come  to  light.

All  Committee  members  agreed  that  it  was  appropriate  that  the  subjects  of
the  experiments  at  the  Fernald  State  School  in  Massachusetts  receive  an  apology,
but  divisions  within  the  Committee  arose  when  we  tried  to  determine  how  to
differentiate  them  from  the  subjects  of  studies  similar  to  those  conducted  at
Fernald  about  which  less  is  known  in  relation  to  disclosure  and  consent.

Fifth,  the  Committee  notes  that  our  recommendations  for  remedies  are
directed  solely  to  the  executive  and  legislative  branches  of  the  federal
government;  they  are  not  recommendations  for  exclusive  remedies  intended  to  bar
the  opportunity  to  seek  redress  from  other  parties  or  the  courts.  Those  who
believe  they  or  their  family  members  have  been  wronged  or  injured  should  be  free
also  to  seek  relief  from  appropriate  institutions  or  from  individuals;  the
Committee  does  not  intend  to  suggest  the  limiting  of  any  rights  to  do  so.

Finally,  the  framework  for  remedies  for  former  subjects  of  human
radiation  experiments  that  the  Committee  proposes  in  our  recommendations  limits
the  availability  of  compensation  from  the  federal  government  to  what  is  likely  to
be  a  small  number  of  people.  In  developing  the  framework  we  were  concerned
about  the  impact  of  recommending  criteria  that  would  result  in  compensation  in
some  cases  but  not  in  others.  The  Committee  sought  and  heard  testimony  from
hundreds  of  witnesses,  over  months  of  deliberation,  many  of  whom  were
emotional  and  heart-rending  in  sharing  their  experiences.  Often  these  witnesses
expressed  considerable  anguish  over  the  pain  that  they  and  their  families  suffer
because  of  their  belief  that  they  have  been  or  might  yet  be  harmed,  and  some
advanced  the  view  that  compensation  is  appropriate.  It  was  very  painful  for  the
Committee  to  recognize  that  often  we  had  neither  the  resources  nor  the  mandate
to  investigate  all  these  compelling  stories.  The  Committee  concluded  that  an
appropriate  service  we  could  render  was  to  shed  light  on  this  dark  period  in  our
history  by  articulating  the  historical  record  to  the  best  of  our  ability.  But  it  is
equally  important  that,  the  historical  record  having  been  spelled  out,  we  as  a
nation  move  forward.  The  most  fitting  way  to  acknowledge  the  wrongs  and
harms  that  were  done  to  others  in  the  past,  and  to  honor  their  contributions  to  the
nation,  is  for  the  government  to  take  steps  to  ensure  that  what  they  experienced
will  not  happen  again.

Thus,  many  of  our  recommendations  are  directed  not  to  the  past  but
toward  the  future.  The  Committee  calls  for  changes  in  the  current  federal  system
for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  interests  of  human  subjects.  These  include
changes  in  institutional  review  boards;  in  the  interpretation  of  ethics  rules  and
policies;  in  the  conduct  of  research  involving  military  personnel  as  subjects;  in
oversight,  accountability,  and  sanctions  for  ethics  violations;  and  in
compensation  for  research  injuries.  Unlike  the  1944-1974  period,  in  which  the
Committee  focused  primarily  on  research  that  offered  subjects  no  prospect  of


774


Overview

medical  benefit,  our  recommendations  for  the  future  emphasize  protections  for
patients  who  are  subjects  of  therapeutic  research,  as  many  of  the  contemporary
issues  involving  research  with  human  subjects  occur  in  this  setting.  We  also  call
for  the  adoption  of  special  protections  for  the  conduct  of  human  research  or
environmental  releases  in  secret,  protections  that  are  not  currently  in  place.

We  realize,  however,  that  regulations  and  policies  are  no  guarantee  of
ethical  conduct.  If  the  events  of  the  past  are  not  to  be  repeated,  it  is  essential  that
the  research  community  come  to  increasingly  value  the  ethics  of  research
involving  human  subjects  as  central  to  the  scientific  enterprise.  We  harbor  no
illusions  about  the  Pollyanna-ish  quality  of  a  recommendation  for  professional
education  in  research  ethics;  we  call  for  much  more.  We  ask  that  the  biomedical
research  community,  together  with  the  government,  cause  a  transformation  in
commitment  to  the  ethics  of  human  research.  We  recognize  and  celebrate  the
progress  that  has  occurred  in  the  past  fifty  years.  We  recognize  and  honor  the
commitment  to  research  ethics  that  currently  exists  among  many  biomedical
scientists  and  many  institutional  review  boards.  But  more  needs  to  be  done.  The
scientists  of  the  future  must  have  a  clear  understanding  of  their  duties  to  human
subjects  and  a  clear  expectation  that  the  leaders  of  their  fields  value  good  ethics  as
much  as  they  do  good  science.  At  stake  is  not  only  the  well-being  of  future
subjects,  but  also,  at  least  in  part,  the  future  of  biomedical  science.  To  the  extent
that  that  future  depends  on  public  support,  it  requires  the  public's  trust.  There  can
be  no  better  guarantor  of  that  trust  than  the  ethics  of  the  research  community.

Finally,  our  examination  of  the  history  of  the  past  half  century  has  helped
us  understand  that  the  revision  of  regulations  that  govern  human  research,  the
creation  of  new  oversight  mechanisms,  and  even  a  scrupulous  professional  ethics
are  necessary,  but  are  not  sufficient,  means  to  needed  reform.  Of  at  least  equal
import  is  the  development  of  a  more  common  understanding  among  the  public  of
research  involving  human  subjects,  its  purposes,  and  its  limitations.  Furthermore,
if  the  conduct  of  the  government  and  of  the  professional  community  is  to  be
improved,  that  conduct  must  be  available  for  scrutiny  by  the  American  people  so
that  they  can  make  more  informed  decisions  about  the  protection  and  promotion
of  their  own  health  and  that  of  the  members  of  their  family.  It  is  toward  that  end
that  we  close  our  report  with  recommendations  for  continued  openness  in
government  and  in  biomedical  research.  It  is  also  toward  that  end  that  this  report
is  dedicated.  Some  of  what  is  regrettable  about  the  past  happened,  at  least  in  part,
because  we  as  citizens  let  it  happen.  Let  the  lessons  of  history  remind  us  all  that
the  best  safeguard  for  the  future  is  an  informed  and  active  citizenry.


775


17

Findings


Findings  for  the  Period  1944-1974

Biomedical  Experiments
Finding  1

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  from  1944  through  1974  the
government  sponsored  (by  providing  funding,  equipment,  or  radioisotopes)
several  thousand  human  radiation  experiments.  In  the  great  majority  of
cases,  the  experiments  were  conducted  to  advance  biomedical  science;  some
experiments  were  conducted  to  advance  national  interests  in  defense  or  space
exploration;  and  some  experiments  served  both  biomedical  and  defense  or
space  exploration  purposes.

These  experiments  were  conducted  by  researchers  affiliated  with
government  agencies,  universities,  hospitals,  and  other  research  institutions.  Only
fragmentary  information  survives  about  most  experiments.

Finding  2

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  the  majority  of  human  radiation
experiments  in  our  database  involved  radioactive  tracers  administered  in
amounts  that  are  likely  to  be  similar  to  those  used  in  research  today.  Most  of
these  tracer  studies  involved  adult  subjects  and  are  unlikely  to  have  caused


777


Part  IV

physical  harm.  However,  in  some  nontherapeutic  tracer  studies  involving
children,  radioisotope  exposures  were  associated  with  increases  in  the
potential  lifetime  risk  for  developing  cancer  that  would  be  considered
unacceptable  today.  The  Advisory  Committee  also  identified  several  studies
in  which  patients  died  soon  after  receiving  external  radiation  or  radioisotope
doses  in  the  therapeutic  range  that  were  associated  with  acute  radiation
effects.

Review  of  available  information  indicates  that  the  majority  of  the
approximately  4,000  human  radiation  experiments  in  the  Advisory  Committee
database  involved  the  use  of  radioisotopes  as  tracers  in  research  designed  to
measure  physiological  processes  in  either  normal  or  diseased  states.  These
experiments  were  not  typically  aimed  at  measuring  the  biological  effects  of
radiation  itself.  However,  information  on  the  majority  of  experiments  in  our
database  was  fragmentary  and  thus  did  not  allow  for  detailed  estimates  of
dosimetry  or  examination  of  issues  of  experimental  design  and  subject  selection.

To  supplement  the  information  in  our  database  and  provide  context  to  our
analysis,  we  independently  reviewed  archival  documents  from  AEC-mandated
institutional  local  isotope  committees.  These  local  use  committees  were  part  of  a
larger  AEC  program  that  facilitated  the  distribution  of  radioisotopes  for  use  in
government-sponsored  human  subjects  research  in  the  1947-1974  period  and
involved  the  review  of  experimental  risk  on  an  individual  basis  to  ensure  that
human  uses  of  isotopes  were  within  accepted  risk  standards  of  the  day.  We  thus
used  these  materials  as  an  indicator  of  isotope  use  and  regulatory  practices  at  that
time.

While  we  recognize  the  limitations  of  the  data  available  to  us,  our
evaluation  suggests  that  most  tracer  studies  conducted  during  the  period  1944-
1974  likely  involved  low  doses  that  did  not  cause  any  acute  or  long-term  effects.
The  Advisory  Committee  cannot  rule  out,  however,  the  possibility  that  some
people  were  or  will  be  harmed  as  a  consequence  of  their  involvement  in  these
experiments.

The  Committee  did  identify  some  nontherapeutic  tracer  experiments
involving  the  administration  of  iodine  131  to  children,  which  may  have  raised  the
subsequent  risk  of  developing  thyroid  cancer  to  levels  that  would  be  considered
unacceptable  today.  Based  on  the  average  risk  estimate  for  each  experiment,
approximatedly  500  individuals  were  exposed  to  greater  than  minimal  risk.  (The
Committee  used  a  threshold  of  greater  than  or  equal  to  one  excess  case  of  cancer
per  1,000  subjects  for  categorizing  experiments  as  greater  than  minimal  risk.)
Combining  the  average  risk  estimates  for  each  experiment,  this  translates  into  an
expected  excess  of  1.3  incident  cases  of  thyroid  cancer  for  the  entire  group.
Fortunately,  unlike  many  other  cancers,  thyroid  cancer  is  curable  in  more  than  90
percent  of  cases;  therefore,  it  is  unlikely  that,  even  if  cancers  developed,  these

778


Chapter  1 7

exposures  caused  any  premature  deaths.  Furthermore,  although  there  is  strong
scientific  evidence  that  radiation  doses  delivered  over  a  short  period  of  time  from
external  sources  can  result  in  increases  in  cancer  incidence  at  specific  sites,
comparable  data  suggest  that  the  carcinogenic  effects  of  isotope  exposures  are
less  than  those  of  external  irradiation.  The  difference  in  carcinogenic  effect  is
thought  to  be  due  to  the  relatively  low  dose  rate  of  the  isotope  exposure,  which
allows  for  effective  repair  of  radiation  damage.

One  additional  isotope  study  involving  the  administration  of  radioiron  to
pregnant  women  has  been  linked  to  a  possible  increase  in  cancers  in  children  who
were  exposed  in  utero.  However,  the  small  number  of  observed  cancers  as  well
as  considerable  uncertainties  in  the  amount  of  radioisotope  administered  have
made  the  determination  of  causality  difficult.  Finally,  the  Committee  found  some
experiments  where  radioisotope  exposures  were  associated  with  either  acute  or
chronic  physiologic  changes  of  uncertain  clinical  significance,  pathologic
evidence  of  kidney  damage  secondary  to  chemical  and  radiation  toxicity  in  some
patients  injected  with  uranium,  and  radiographic  evidence  of  minimal  bone
changes  in  some  long-term  survivors  of  plutonium  injections.

Studies  that  involved  radiation  doses  in  the  therapeutic  range  were  for  the
most  part  performed  on  patient-subjects  where  there  was,  at  least  arguably,  a
prospect  that  the  subjects  might  benefit  medically  from  the  exposure.  However,
the  TBI  and  experimental  gallium  treatments,  in  which  patients  suffered
symptoms  of  acute  radiation  sickness  and  died  soon  after  treatment,  raise  the
question  of  whether  their  deaths  were  hastened  by  the  radiation  treatments.
Resolution  of  this  issue  requires  review  of  individual  medical  histories,  which  the
Advisory  Committee  could  not  undertake.

Finding  3

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  human  radiation  experimentation
during  the  period  1944  through  1974  contributed  significantly  to  advances  in
medicine  and  thus  to  the  health  of  the  public.

Human  radiation  research  was  essential  to  the  development  of  new
therapies  such  as  the  use  of  radioactive  iodine  to  treat  thyroid  cancer;  the  use  of
phosphorus  to  treat  blood  diseases  such  as  polycythemia  vera;  and  the  use  of
radioactive  strontium  as  a  palliative  in  prostate  and  other  cancers  metastasized  to
the  bone.  Diagnostic  uses  of  radionuclides  developed  during  this  period  include
scanning  techniques  to  identify  tumors  and  radiolabeling  techniques  that  help
evaluate  a  variety  of  cardiac  diseases.  The  quality  of  images  produced  by
external  sources  of  radiation  also  improved  dramatically  between  1944  and  1974,
making  possible,  for  example,  techniques  such  as  balloon  angioplasty  to  open
occluded  arteries.


779


PartIV

Finding  4

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  some  government  agencies
required  the  consent  of  some  research  subjects  well  before  1944.  These
requirements  generally  did  not  stipulate  what  was  meant  by  consent,
however,  nor  did  they  generally  indicate  whether  investigators  were
obligated  to  disclose  specific  information  to  potential  subjects.  The
government  did  not  have  comprehensive  policies  requiring  the  consent  of  all
subjects  of  research,  including  both  healthy  subjects  and  patient-subjects,
until  1974.

4a.  Research  Involving  Healthy  Subjects:  In  the  1920s,  the  Army
promulgated  a  regulation  concerning  the  use  of  "volunteers"  for  medical  research.
In  1932,  the  secretary  of  the  Navy  required  that  subjects  of  a  proposed  experiment
be  "informed  volunteers."  In  1942  the  requirement  that  healthy  subjects  be
informed  volunteers  was  also  articulated  by  the  Committee  on  Medical  Research,
which  oversaw  war-related  research  for  the  Executive  Office  of  the  President.  In

1953,  the  principle  of  consent  articulated  in  the  Nuremberg  Code  was  adopted  by
the  Department  of  Defense  in  a  Top  Secret  memorandum  from  Secretary  of
Defense  Charles  Wilson  regarding  human  research  related  to  atomic,  biological,
and  chemical  warfare  (this  document  is  known  as  the  Wilson  memorandum);  in

1954,  this  application  of  the  Nuremberg  Code  was  expanded  by  the  Army  Office
of  the  Surgeon  General  as  an  unclassified  policy  for  all  research  with  "human
volunteers."  A  policy  of  requiring  researchers  to  obtain  consent  was  adopted  by
the  Clinical  Center,  the  research  hospital  of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health,  in
1953;  by  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  in  1956;  and  by  the  Air  Force  in  1958.
In  the  1960s,  all  branches  of  the  Department  of  Defense  promulgated  regulations
requiring  the  consent  of  healthy  subjects,  and  the  Isotopes  Distribution  Division
of  the  AEC  included  in  its  guide  for  researchers  a  requirement  of  consent  from  all
subjects.  In  1966,  the  surgeon  general  of  the  Public  Health  Service  issued  a
policy  requiring  the  consent  of  all  subjects  of  research  conducted  or  funded  by
PHS;  also  in  the  late  1960s,  the  Veterans  Administration  codified  in  its  operating
manual  a  requirement  of  consent  from  all  research  subjects.  In  1972,  the  National
Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  adopted  similar  consent  requirements,
although  exceptions  were  made  for  certain  subject  populations,  such  as
astronauts.  In  1 974,  the  Public  Health  Service  policy  was  promulgated  as  a
regulation  for  all  contracts  and  grants  of  the  Department  of  Health,  Education,
and  Welfare.  The  CIA  did  not  formally  adopt  consent  requirements  until  1976,
when  an  executive  order  mandated  that  it  follow  the  1974  regulations  of  DHEW
concerning  research  involving  human  subjects.

4b.  Research  Involving  Patient-Subjects:  In  an  April  1947  letter,  the  AEC
general  manager  stated  the  AEC's  understanding  that  AEC  contract  researchers

780


Chapter  1 7

would  inform  patient-subjects  of  the  risks  associated  with  a  research  intervention
and  that  patient-subjects  express  a  willingness  to  receive  the  intervention.  In  a
second  letter,  written  in  November  1947,  the  general  manager  specifically
stipulated  that  the  AEC  require  researchers  to  obtain  "informed  consent  in
writing"  from  patient-subjects  where  "substances  known  to  be  or  suspected  of
being  poisonous  or  harmful"  were  given  to  human  beings.  In  1948,  the  AEC
permitted  the  administration  of  "larger  doses  [of  radioisotopes]  for  investigative
purposes,"  but  only  with  the  patient-subject's  consent.  In  1953,  the  NIH  Clinical
Center  required  consent  from  all  patient-subjects  and  specified  that  written
consent  was  to  be  obtained  from  patient-subjects  involved  in  high-  or  uncertain-
risk  experiments.  In  the  early  1 960s,  several  government  agencies  adopted
consent  provisions  for  investigational  drugs;  these  requirements  applied  to  some
radioisotope  experiments  with  patients.  In  1965,  the  AEC  required  that  consent
be  obtained  from  all  subjects,  including  patient-subjects,  who  were  administered
radioisotopes  for  experimental  purposes,  except  when  it  appeared  "not  feasible"
or  not  in  the  patient's  "best  interest."  By  1967,  the  VA  required  the  consent  of  all
patient-subjects.  As  noted  in  Finding  4a  above,  in  1965  the  AEC  required  that
consent  be  obtained  from  all  subjects  administered  radioisotopes  for  experimental
or  nonroutine  uses.  In  1966  the  surgeon  general  of  the  Public  Health  Service
issued  a  policy  requiring  the  consent  of  all  subjects  of  research  conducted  or
funded  by  PHS,  including  patient-subjects.  Exceptions  to  this  requirement  were
permitted  for  only  certain  kinds  of  social  science  research  posing  minimal  risk.  A
1972  NASA  policy  applied  to  all  subjects  of  research,  presumably  including
patient-subjects.  By  1973,  all  the  branches  of  the  military  had  promulgated
regulations  requiring  the  consent  of  patient-subjects.  In  1974,  the  PHS  policy  was
promulgated  as  a  regulation  for  all  contracts  and  grants  of  DHEW.

Finding  5

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  government  agencies  did  not
generally  take  effective  measures  to  implement  their  requirements  and
policies  on  consent  to  human  radiation  research.

Evidence  of  the  implementation  of  the  AEC's  consent  requirements  stated
in  April  and  November  1947  letters  from  the  general  manager  is  slim.  A
document  suggests  that  the  April  1947  requirement  for  a  signed  statement  from
two  physicians  testifying  to  consent  was  satisfied  in  at  least  one  case.  However,
the  Advisory  Committee  did  not  find  evidence  that  this  or  other  requirements
stated  in  the  1947  letters  were  embodied  as  a  provision  of  AEC  contracts
involving  human  subject  research  or  otherwise  routinely  communicated  to
contract  researchers.  Further,  there  was  no  reference  to  the  requirements  stated  in
these  letters  or  to  the  letters  themselves  in  the  written  material  disseminated  to


781


PartIV

researchers  by  the  AEC's  program  for  distributing  radioisotopes  for  "human  uses."
Moreover,  requests  for  guidance  concerning  human  use  policies  from
investigators  at  AEC-operated  research  facilities  suggest  that  the  1947
requirements  were  not  routinely  disseminated.  Subsequent  requirements  that
healthy  subjects  be  informed  volunteers  and  that  consent  be  obtained  from
seriously  ill  patients  receiving  higher  doses  of  radioisotopes  were  more  widely
communicated;  we  have  not  been  able  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  they  were
actually  implemented.

Secretary  of  Defense  Wilson's  February  1953  Top  Secret  memorandum
detailing  requirements  for  research  with  human  subjects  was  rewritten  as  an
unclassified  June  1953  directive  from  the  secretary  of  the  Army.  It  is  difficult  to
determine  why  these  requirements  were  applied  to  some  activities  and  not  to
others.  For  example,  elements  of  some  of  these  requirements  appear  to  have  been
implemented  in  some  experiments  conducted  in  conjunction  with  atomic  bomb
tests  and  not  in  others.  In  1954,  these  requirements  were  adopted  by  the  Army
surgeon  general  as  applicable  to  all  research  involving  "human  volunteers."  This
1954  statement  was  transmitted  to  contractors  as  a  "nonmandatory  guide."
However,  there  is  some  evidence  that  the  Army  sought  to  include  this  statement
as  a  condition  in  at  least  some  contracts.

Evidence  of  implementation  of  the  NIH  Clinical  Center's  1953  policy
requiring  that  information  be  provided  to  and  consent  obtained  from  all  subjects  is
difficult  to  find;  in  most  cases  involving  patient-subjects,  documentation  would
not  have  been  required  in  writing.  By  contrast,  the  use  of  healthy  subjects  in  the
Clinical  Center  required  written  consent  and  the  "normal  volunteer  program"
appears  to  have  involved  greater  supervision  to  ensure  that  consent  was  obtained
from  these  subjects.

Finding  6

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  from  at  least  1946  some
government  agencies  had  in  place  procedural  mechanisms  for  reviewing  the
acceptability  of  risks  to  human  subjects  from  exposure  to  radioisotopes.  By
1974,  the  government  had  policies  requiring  review  of  the  acceptability  of
risks  to  human  subjects  in  other  forms  of  research,  including  research
involving  exposure  to  external  radiation.

Beginning  in  1946  the  Manhattan  Project,  and  from  1947  onward  the
AEC,  required  some  investigators  seeking  to  conduct  experiments  using
radioisotopes  supplied  by  the  government  to  have  the  risks  to  subjects  reviewed
by  a  committee  at  the  irtstitution  where  the  work  was  to  be  conducted  and  in  some
cases  by  the  AEC's  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  as  well.  The  AEC
required  that  local  committees  be  composed  of  at  least  three  physicians  or

782


Chapter  1 7

researchers  with  relevant  expertise  regarding  radiation  safety  and  medical
applications.  By  1949,  it  was  clear  that  this  policy  applied  to  all  investigators
using  radioisotopes  supplied  by  the  AEC.

In  1953  prior  group  review  for  risk  was  also  begun  at  the  NIH  Clinical
Center  for  proposed  human  research  that  involved  unusual  hazard.  No  such
requirement  applied  to  research  funded  by  NIH  but  conducted  at  universities  and
other  nongovernmental  research  facilities  until  1966,  when  the  PHS  required  that
all  institutions  establish  a  local  peer  review  committee  to  evaluate  the  adequacy  of
the  protection  provided  to  human  subjects  in  each  proposal.  This  requirement
was  promulgated  as  an  institutional  policy  by  the  DHEW  in  1971.

In  1953,  by  adopting  the  Nuremberg  Code,  the  secretary  of  defense  and
the  Department  of  the  Army  endorsed  several  principles  intended  to  minimize  risk
in  research  with  human  subjects,  at  least  in  regard  to  the  atomic,  biological,  and
chemical  warfare  experiments  that  were  subject  to  this  policy.  In  the  DOD,  both
the  purpose  of  proposed  research  and  the  level  of  risk  were  subjected  to  prior
review  through  the  military  chain  of  command.  This  was  previously  required  by
the  Navy  at  least  from  1943,  and  the  Air  Force  from  1952.  However,  the  extent  to
which  these  requirements  covered  particular  research  activities  (such  as  healthy
subjects  vs.  patients;  radioisotopes  vs.  external  radiation)  and  particular
institutions  (such  as  contractors  vs.  in-house  research)  differs  and  is  difficult  to
reconstruct.  Also  difficult  to  reconstruct  is  the  extent  to  which  the  risk  protection
principles  of  the  Nuremberg  Code  were  implemented.  In  the  mid-1960s,
concurrent  with  the  adoption  of  regulations  related  to  investigational  drug  testing,
the  DOD  and  each  military  service  adopted  provisions  requiring  the  establishment
of  a  "review  board"  or  committee  to  oversee  proposed  research  projects  involving
new  drugs.  In  some  cases,  such  as  with  the  Air  Force  beginning  in  1965,  this
committee  also  served  to  evaluate  all  other  proposals  involving  human  subjects.
During  this  period,  the  VA  also  established  a  review  board  mechanism  for
research  involving  new  drugs  and  investigational  procedures.

Finding  7

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  the  government  program  of
distributing  radioisotopes  for  use  in  human  subject  research  included
procedures  for  the  review  of  risk.  These  were  widely  implemented  by
researchers  and  institutions  that  used  isotopes  obtained  from  the  AEC  for
human  experimentation.  However,  there  is  no  evidence  that  a  parallel
mechanism  for  reviewing  the  risks  of  research  involving  external  radiation
was  in  place.

From  its  1947  birth,  the  AEC,  as  part  of  its  policy  to  promote  the  peaceful
use  of  radioisotopes,  required  private  institutions  that  wished  to  obtain

783


Part  IV

radioisotopes  for  "human  uses"  (including  human  experimentation  as  well  as
patient  treatment)  to  establish  local  review  committees.  These  committees
reviewed  proposed  human  uses  under  guidelines  provided  by  the  AEC's  own
Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications  of  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Isotope
Distribution  Policy.  This  AEC  subcommittee  reviewed  these  applications,
providing  a  second  level  of  oversight  of  risk.  By  1949,  the  AEC's  own  labs  were
required  to  establish  local  committees  and  to  have  human  use  applications,
reviewed  by  the  same  AEC  Subcommittee  on  Human  Applications.  The  control
of  risk,  and  the  assurance  of  safety  to  all  those  involved  (including  doctors  and
other  health  care  workers),  was  a  primary  purpose  of  the  reviews.  The  Advisory
Committee  lacked  sufficient  evidence  to  determine  whether  the  system  was
implemented  in  all  of  the  many  institutions  that  used  government-supplied
radioisotopes  for  human  subjects  research  or  whether  the  system  was  always
adhered  to  in  any  particular  institution.

In  addition  to  providing  for  the  review  of  research  proposals,  the  AEC
dramatically  increased  the  number  of  qualified  personnel  by  offering  training
courses  in  the  safe  handling  and  use  of  radioisotopes.  As  individual  procedures
became  routine,  the  degree  of  review  was  lessened;  as  specific  institutions
became  more  experienced,  more  reviewing  authority  was  delegated  to  them.

The  primary  function  of  the  system  was  to  reduce  the  physical  hazards  of
using  radioisotopes,  not  to  enforce  any  policies  regarding  consent  of  subjects.
(See  chapter  6.)

Finding  8

The  Committee  finds  that  for  the  period  1944  to  1974  there  is  no
evidence  that  any  government  statement  or  policy  on  research  involving
human  subjects  contained  a  provision  permitting  a  waiver  of  consent
requirements  for  national  security  reasons.

Neither  the  AEC  nor  the  DOD  included  national  security  exceptions  in
their  written  rules  on  human  subjects  research.  For  example,  the  1953  Wilson
memorandum  adopting  the  Nuremberg  Code  was  expressly  applicable  to  human
experimentation  related  to  atomic,  biological,  and  chemical  warfare  and  did  not
provide  for  any  "national  security"  exception.

The  Committee  notes  that  much  documentation  related  to  the  CIA's
program  of  secret  experimentation,  including  MKULTRA,  has  long  since  been
destroyed,  and,  therefore,  we  cannot  state  with  certainty  what  policy(ies)  underlay
human  experiments  in  these  programs  or  whether  such  policies  included  national
security  exceptions.


784


Chapter  1 7

Finding  9

9a.  The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  government  agencies  had  no
requirements  or  policies  to  ensure  equity  in  the  selection  of  subjects  for
research  conducted  or  funded  by  the  federal  government  during  the  period
1944  through  1974.

The  only  reference  during  this  period  to  issues  of  equity  in  the  selection  of
subjects  in  agency  documents  reviewed  by  the  Advisory  Committee  is  in  an
influential  DHEW  guide  to  recipients  of  federal  research  funds  published  in  1971,
popularly  known  as  the  Yellow  Book.  The  Yellow  Book  notes  a  "particular
concern"  about  research  involving  "groups  with  limited  civil  freedom."

9b.  Because  of  the  limited  data  available  on  the  universe  of
experiments  identified  by  the  Committee,  the  Committee  was  unable  to
determine  whether  during  the  period  1944  through  1974  people  who  were
socially  disadvantaged  were  more  likely  than  more  socially  advantaged
people  to  be  used  as  subjects  in  human  radiation  experiments  generally  or  in
those  experiments  that  offered  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  or  posed
greater  risks.  The  Advisory  Committee  finds,  however,  that  some  of  the
biomedical  experiments  reviewed  by  the  Committee  that  were  ethically
troubling  were  conducted  on  institutionalized  children,  seriously  ill  and
sometimes  comatose  patients,  African-Americans,  and  prisoners.

The  Committee  was  troubled  by  the  selection  of  subjects  in  many  of  the
experiments  we  reviewed.  These  subjects  often  were  drawn  from  relatively
powerless,  easily  exploited  groups,  and  many  of  them  were  hospitalized  patients.
As  noted  in  Finding  9a,  there  were  during  this  period  no  federal  rules  or  policies
directed  at  fairness  in  the  selection  of  research  subjects,  and  no  norms  or  practices
within  the  biomedical  research  community  specifically  addressing  considerations
of  fairness.  This  silence  on  questions  of  justice  in  the  conduct  of  human  research
was  characteristic  not  only  of  radiation  research  but  also  of  the  entire  research
enterprise.  While  we  note  here  cases  that  provoked  concern,  we  were  unable  to
determine  the  extent  to  which  there  were  systemic  injustices  in  the  selection  of
research  subjects  in  human  radiation  research  because  in  most  cases  we  were
unable  to  determine  any  of  the  characteristics  of  the  subjects  involved  in  the
experiments  we  catalogued.

Finding  10

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  even  as  early  as  1944  it  was
conventional  for  physicians  and  other  biomedical  scientists  to  obtain  consent

785


Part  IV

from  healthy  subjects  of  research.  By  contrast,  during  the  1944-1974  period
but  especially  through  the  early  1960s,  physicians  engaged  in  clinical
research  generally  did  not  obtain  consent  from  patient-subjects  for  whom  the
research  was  intended  to  offer  a  prospect  of  medical  benefit.  Even  where
there  was  no  such  prospect,  it  was  common  for  physicians  to  conduct
research  on  patients  without  their  consent.  It  also  was  common,  however,  for
physicians  to  be  concerned  about  risk  in  conducting  research  on  patient-
subjects  and,  in  the  absence  of  a  prospect  of  offsetting  medical  benefit,  to
restrict  research  uses  of  patients  to  what  were  considered  low-  or  minimal-
risk  interventions.

Perhaps  the  best-known  example  of  the  use  of  informed  volunteers  in
research  conducted  at  the  turn  of  the  century  is  the  yellow  fever  research  by
military  scientist  Walter  Reed.  In  the  Advisory  Committee's  Ethics  Oral  History
Project,  several  of  Reed's  military  successors  who  were  active  in  the  1940s  and
1950s  gave  similar  examples  of  voluntary  consent  from  healthy  subjects  in  the
context  of  work  on  typhus  and  malaria.  In  1946,  the  American  Medical
Association  (AMA)  articulated  the  principle  that  human  subjects  must  give
"voluntary  consent."  In  1947,  the  prosecution's  expert  witness  at  the  Nuremberg
Medical  Trial,  Dr.  Andrew  Ivy,  who  had  helped  shape  the  AMA  principle  in
conjunction  with  his  role  at  Nuremberg,  asserted  that  this  was  a  standard  by
which  physicians  were  guided  in  the  use  of  human  beings  in  medical  experiments
and  that  this  standard  was  in  "common  practice"  prior  to  its  articulation  by  the
AMA  in  1946.  Precisely  what  Ivy  meant  by  this  claim  is  unclear.  Although  there
are  doubtless  instances  in  which  this  standard  of  voluntary  consent  was  not
followed,  it  does  seem  to  have  been  widely  recognized  and  adhered  to  among
investigators  whose  research  involved  healthy  subjects.

By  contrast,  various  sources  confirm  that  it  was  not  conventional  to  obtain
consent  from  patient-subjects.  These  sources  include  documents  from  the  period
in  which  the  conduct  of  clinical  research  was  discussed  as  well  as  the
Committee's  Ethics  Oral  History  Project,  in  which  physicians  active  in  research  in
the  1940s  and  1950s  agreed  that  consent  played  little  or  no  role  in  research  with
patient-subjects,  even  where  there  was  no  expectation  that  the  patient  would
benefit  medically  from  the  research.  At  the  same  time,  however,  there  was  also
agreement  that,  where  patients  were  used  as  subjects  in  nontherapeutic  research,
the  research  usually  posed  little  or  no  risk  to  the  patients.

Finding  11

11a.  The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  the  government  and
government  officials  are  morally  responsible  in  cases  in  which  they  did  not
take  effective  measures  to  implement  the  government's  policies  and

786


Chapter  1 7

requirements,  and  the  medical  profession  and  biomedical  scientists  are
morally  responsible  for  instances  in  which  they  failed  to  adhere  to  the
professional  norms  and  practices  of  the  time.

The  Advisory  Committee  was  concerned  that  our  conclusions  about
actions  taken  in  the  past  be  rendered  fairly.  Clearly,  if  government  agencies  had
rules  or  requirements  for  the  use  of  human  subjects  at  the  time,  and  if  these
requirements  were  sound  from  our  point  of  view  and  consistent  with  basic  moral
principles,  then  agencies  and  agency  officials  had  just  as  much  moral
responsibility  to  implement  those  requirements  as  those  in  analogous  positions
would  have  today,  or  in  any  day,  with  respect  to  current  sound  government
requirements.'  We  have  found  that  some  government  agencies  did  in  fact  have
such  requirements  (see  Findings  4  and  6).

Similarly,  if  the  medical  profession  and  the  research  community  generally
had  recognized  norms  and  practices  for  the  conduct  of  research  with  human
subjects,  and  if  these  norms  and  practices  were  sound,  then  physician-
investigators  and  other  scientists  operating  in  the  past  had  just  as  much
responsibility  to  adhere  to  those  norms  and  practices  as  those  in  analogous
positions  would  have  today  with  respect  to  current  norms  and  practices  that  are
morally  sound.  The  Committee  found  evidence  that  the  medical  profession  had
such  norms  with  respect  to  obtaining  consent  from  healthy  subjects,  although
physicians  engaged  in  clinical  research  did  not  generally  seek  consent  from
patient-subjects.  The  Committee  also  found  evidence  of  professional  norms
concerning  acceptability  of  risk  to  subjects  (see  Finding  10).

lib.  The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  by  today's  standards  we
consider  it  wrong  that  our  government  did  not  take  effective  measures  to
adequately  protect  the  rights  and  interests  of  all  human  subjects  of  research.
We  also  find  that  by  today's  standards  we  consider  it  wrong  that  medical  and
other  professions  engaged  in  human  research  did  not  have  norms  and
practices  of  consent  for  all  subjects  of  research.

There  is  today  a  well-established  consensus  about  the  basic  principles  that
should  govern  the  use  of  human  subjects  of  research.  There  is  also  wide
agreement  that  the  government  has  an  obligation  to  protect  the  rights  and  interests
of  all  human  research  subjects  and  that  the  medical  and  other  professions  engaged
in  research  are  obligated  to  have  norms  and  practices  of  consent  for  all  human
subjects  of  research.  The  failure  to  have  such  conditions  in  place  would  today  be
considered  wrong.

lie.  The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  government  officials  and
investigators  are  blameworthy  for  not  having  had  policies  and  practices  in

787


Part  IV

place  to  protect  the  rights  and  interests  of  human  subjects  who  were  used  in
research  from  which  the  subjects  could  not  possibly  derive  medical  benefits
(nontherapeutic  research  in  the  strict  sense).  By  contrast,  to  the  extent  that
there  was  reason  to  believe  that  research  might  provide  a  direct  medical
benefit  to  subjects,  government  officials  and  biomedical  professionals  are
less  blameworthy  for  not  having  had  such  protections  and  practices.

We  also  find  that,  to  the  extent  that  research  was  thought  to  pose
significant  risk,  government  officials  and  investigators  are  more
blameworthy  for  not  having  had  such  protections  and  practices  in  place.  By
contrast,  to  the  extent  that  research  was  thought  to  pose  little  or  no  risk,
government  officials  and  biomedical  professionals  are  less  blameworthy  for
not  having  had  such  protections  and  practices.

Today  we  consider  policies  and  practices  to  protect  the  rights  and  interests
of  human  subjects  to  be  as  important  in  research  that  offers  participants  a
prospect  of  medical  benefit  as  in  research  that  does  not.  Government  regulations
and  the  rules  of  professional  and  research  ethics  apply  equally  to  both  kinds  of
research.  In  the  1940s,  1950s,  and  1960s,  however,  patients  and  society  generally
accorded  doctors  more  authority  to  make  decisions  for  their  patients  than  they  do
today.  It  was  both  commonplace  and  considered  appropriate  for  a  physician  to
determine  what  treatments  a  patient  should  receive  without  necessarily  consulting
the  patient,  provided  that  the  decision  was  based  on  the  physician's  judgment
about  what  would  be  in  the  patient's  best  interest.  This  authority  generally
extended  to  decisions  about  whether  a  patient's  interest  would  be  served  by  being
a  subject  in  medical  research.  Judgments  about  the  blameworthiness  of  officials
and  physician-investigators  for  not  having  had  policies  and  practices  to  protect
the  rights  of  human  subjects  in  research  that  offered  a  prospect  of  medical  benefit,
such  as  requirements  of  consent,  are  mitigated  by  this  historical  context.

However,  even  at  the  time,  government  officials  and  biomedical
professionals  should  have  recognized  that  when  research  offers  no  prospect  of
medical  benefit,  whether  subjects  are  healthy  or  sick,  research  should  not  proceed
without  the  person's  consent.  It  should  have  been  recognized  that  despite  the
significant  decision-making  authority  ceded  to  the  physician  within  the  doctor-
patient  relationship,  this  authority  did  not  extend  to  procedures  conducted  solely
to  advance  science  without  a  prospect  of  offsetting  benefit  to  the  person.  This
finding  is  supported  by  the  moral  principle,  deeply  embedded  in  the  American
experience,  that  individuals  may  not  be  used  as  mere  means  toward  the  ends  of
others.  We  also  note  that  at  its  1947  beginning,  officials  of  and  biomedical
advisers  to  the  AEC  were  clearly  aware  of  the  issues  raised  when  patients,  as  well
as  healthy  people,  were  used  as  subjects  in  nontherapeutic  research  without  their
consent.


788


Chapter  1 7

The  Advisory  Committee  has  also  determined  that  government  officials
and  scientific  investigators  at  the  time  recognized  that  research  could  put  subjects
at  risk  of  harm,  that  they  had  an  obligation  to  determine  that  the  risks  imposed
were  reasonable,  and  that  research  that  posed  greater  or  more  uncertain  risks  was
more  problematic  than  research  whose  risks  were  lower.  Sometimes  government
officials  and  investigators  took  steps  to  protect  subjects  from  unnecessary  or
unacceptable  risks.  These  steps  included  in  some  cases  a  requirement  of  group
review  of  research  proposals  and  the  obtaining  of  consent  of  the  subjects,
particularly  where  risks  were  considered  worrisome.  But  these  steps  were  not
consistently  or  uniformly  taken.

Population  Exposures

Finding  12

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  some  service  personnel  were  used
in  human  experiments  in  connection  with  tests  of  atomic  bombs.  The
Committee  finds  that  such  personnel  were  typically  exposed  to  no  greater
risks  than  the  far  greater  number  of  service  personnel  engaged  in  similar
activities  for  training  or  other  purposes.  The  Committee  further  finds  that
there  is  little  evidence  that  the  1953  secretary  of  defense  Nuremberg  Code
memorandum  was  transmitted  to  those  involved  with  human  experiments
conducted  in  conjunction  with  atomic  testing.  However,  some  of  the
requirements  contained  in  the  memorandum  were  implemented  in  the  case
of  a  few  experiments,  apparently  independently  of  the  memorandum.  The
Committee  also  finds  that  the  government  did  not  create  or  maintain
adequate  records  for  both  experimental  and  nonexperimental  participants.

More  than  200,000  service  personnel  participated  in  nuclear  weapons  tests
from  1946  to  the  early  1960s.  The  vast  majority  of  those  who  participated  were
engaged  in  management  of  the  tests,  training  maneuvers,  or  data-gathering
activities.  In  the  range  of  2,000  to  3,000  of  these  participants  were  research
subjects.  In  many  cases  these  research  subjects  engaged  in  activities,  and  were
subjected  to  risks,  essentially  identical  to  those  engaged  in  by  many  more  people
who  were  not  research  subjects.  The  purpose  of  this  human  subject  research  was
not  to  measure  the  biological  effects  of  radiation.  Rather,  for  example,
researchers  sought  to  measure  the  psychological  and  physiological  effects  of
participation  in  bomb  tests,  the  levels  of  radiation  to  which  individuals  who  flew
in  and  around  atomic  clouds  were  exposed,  and  the  effects  of  intense  light  from
the  bomb  blast  on  the  eyes.

The  Advisory  Committee  found  little  evidence  that  the  1953  Wilson
memorandum  on  human  experimentation  in  connection  with  atomic,  biological,

789


Part  IV

and  chemical  warfare  (or  an  Army  implementing  document)  was  transmitted  to
those  involved  in  bomb-test-related  experimentation.  In  interviews  with
Committee  staff,  some  of  those  involved  in  the  experimentation  stated  that  they
were  unaware  of  the  memorandum.  However,  there  is  evidence  that  in  some  of
the  experiments  consent  was  provided  for,  but  this  was  likely  independent  of  the
1953  policy.

The  military  took  successful  precautions  against  exposure  to  radiation
levels  that  were  likely  to  produce  acute  effects.  However,  bomb-test  participants
were  exposed  to  lower  levels  of  radiation,  which  might  conceivably  have  effects
on  some  participants  over  the  longer  term.  The  evidence  shows  that  those  who
managed  the  tests  were  aware  of  the  potential,  however  small,  that  injury  might
result  years  later  from  such  exposures.  In  recent  years,  as  the  government  and
veterans  have  sought  to  reconstruct  the  extent  of  exposure  and  resulting  injury,  it
has  become  apparent  that  the  government  did  not  uniformly  create  records  that
would  permit  all  individuals  to  efficiently  and  confidently  know  the  extent  of
their  exposure,  did  not  create  records  that  would  permit  reconstruction  of  the
identity  and  location  of  all  those  who  participated  at  the  tests,  did  not  adequately
undertake  to  link  medical  and  exposure  records,  and  did  not  adequately  maintain
those  records  that  were  initially  created.

Finding  13

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  during  the  1944-1974  period  the
government  intentionally  released  radiation  into  the  environment  for
research  purposes  on  several  hundred  occasions.  In  only  a  very  few  of  these
cases  was  radiation  released  for  the  purpose  of  studying  its  effect  on  humans.

The  Advisory  Committee's  charter  identified  thirteen  releases:  one  related
to  the  testing  of  intelligence  equipment  (the  "Green  Run"),  eight  radiological
warfare  tests,  and  four  releases  of  radioactive  lanthanum  ("RaLa")  to  test  the
mechanism  of  the  atomic  bomb.  The  Advisory  Committee  received  information
on  more  than  sixty  radiological  warfare  releases  that  took  place  in  the  period
1949-1952  and  on  the  nearly  250  RaLa  releases  that  took  place  in  the  period
1 944- 1961.  We  identified  further  intentional  releases  of  a  kind  that  were  not
described  in  the  charter.  These  included  the  release  of  radiation  to  study  its
environmental  pathways  and  the  release  of  radiation  in  connection  with  outdoor
safety  tests  and  tests  related  to  the  development  of  nuclear  reactors,  as  well  as  to
the  development  of  nuclear-powered  rockets  and  airplanes.

Most  releases  took  place  in  and  around  the  sites  that  constitute  the  nation's
nuclear  weapons  complex,  notably  Oak  Ridge,  Tennessee;  Hanford,  Washington;
Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico;  the  Nevada  nuclear  weapons  test  site;  and  the  Idaho
National  Engineering  Laboratory.  Releases  related  to  radiological  warfare  tests

790


Chapter  1 7

took  place  primarily  at  the  Dugway  Proving  Ground  in  Utah.  Radioactive  material
was  also  released  into  the  environment  for  research  purposes  at  other  locations;
for  example,  fallout  from  the  Nevada  Test  Site  was  inserted  into  the  tundra  of
Alaska.

Finding  14

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  for  both  the  Green  Run  (at
Hanford)  and  the  RaLa  tests  (at  Los  Alamos),  where  dose  reconstructions
have  been  undertaken,  it  is  unlikely  that  members  of  the  public  were
directly  harmed  solely  as  a  consequence  of  these  tests.

It  is  impossible  to  distinguish  any  harm  due  to  these  releases  from  other
sources  of  exposure,  particularly  at  Hanford,  where  the  amount  of  radioactivity
intentionally  released  by  the  Green  Run  was  1  percent  of  the  amounts  released  by
routine  operations  of  the  Hanford  facility  in  the  1945-1947  period.  The  risks  of
thyroid  disease  from  all  past  operations  of  the  Hanford  plant  are  currently  under
study;  however,  the  Advisory  Committee  estimates  that  the  contribution  of  the
Green  Run  to  any  such  risks  amounts  to  substantially  less  than  one  case.  No  dose
reconstruction  has  been  undertaken  for  the  radiological  warfare  field  tests  at  the
Dugway  Proving  Grounds.  Most  of  the  intentional  releases  the  Advisory
Committee  has  studied,  including  all  those  identified  in  our  charter,  involved
radioactive  materials  with  short-enough  half-lives  that  they  quickly  decayed  and
therefore  pose  no  risk  to  health  from  continuing  exposure.

Finding  15

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  during  the  period  from  1944  to
about  1970  there  was  no  system  of  environmental  laws  and  regulations
governing  the  conduct  of  intentional  releases  analogous  to  that  currently  in
place.  However,  those  responsible  for  intentional  releases  during  this  period
recognized  the  possible  health  risks  from  environmental  releases  and  that
risks  had  to  be  considered  in  making  policy  decisions  about  such  releases.

In  the  case  of  the  Green  Run,  guidelines  existed  for  routine  (or  normal
operating)  environmental  releases  of  radioactive  iodine  but  were  exceeded;  in  the
case  of  radiological  warfare  tests,  a  safety  panel  was  created.  These  and  other
releases  specified  in  the  Advisory  Committee's  charter  were  conducted  in  secret
because  of  a  combination  of  concerns  about  national  security  and  public  reaction.
The  Atomic  Energy  Act  of  1954  began  the  formal  public  system  of  safety
regulation  of  environmental  releases  of  radiation.  It  was  not  until  the  National


791


Part  IV

Environmental  Policy  Act  of  1969  that  public  review  of  federal  actions  likely  to
have  a  significant  impact  on  the  environment  was  institutionalized.

Finding  16

The  Committee  finds  that,  as  a  consequence  of  exposure  to  radon  and
its  daughter  products  in  underground  uranium  mines,  at  least  several
hundred  miners  died  of  lung  cancer  and  surviving  miners  remain  at  elevated
risk.  As  a  consequence  of  a  U.S.  hydrogen  bomb  test  conducted  in  1954,
several  hundred  residents  of  the  Marshall  Islands  and  the  crew  of  a  Japanese
fishing  boat  developed  acute  radiation  effects.  Some  of  the  Marshall
Islanders  subsequently  developed  benign  thyroid  disorders  and  thyroid
cancer  as  a  result  of  the  radiation  exposure.  Surviving  Marshallese  also  may
remain  at  elevated  risk  of  thyroid  abnormalities.

The  miners,  who  were  the  subject  of  government  study  as  they  mined
uranium  for  use  in  weapons  manufacturing,  were  subject  to  radon  exposures  well
in  excess  of  levels  known  to  be  hazardous.  The  government  failed  to  act  to
require  the  reduction  of  the  hazard  by  ventilating  the  mines,  and  it  failed  to
adequately  warn  the  miners  of  the  hazard  to  which  they  were  being  exposed,  even
though  such  actions  would  likely  have  posed  no  threat  to  the  national  security.

Some  Marshallese  exposed  during  the  1954  bomb  test  received  radiation
doses  substantially  in  excess  of  those  considered  safe,  both  at  the  time  and  today.
One  Marshallese  exposed  as  a  baby  died  of  leukemia  in  1972,  which  may  have
been  as  a  consequence  of  exposure  during  the  test.  In  1954,  twenty-eight  U.S.
servicemen  manning  a  weather  station  on  Rongerik  Atoll  also  received  doses  of
radiation  substantially  in  excess  of  those  considered  safe  at  the  time  and  today.
The  Advisory  Committee  does  not  know  whether  any  of  the  servicemen  suffered
long-term  harm  as  a  result  of  their  exposure.  Twenty-three  Japanese  fishermen
were  irradiated  as  a  result  of  the  fallout  from  the  1954  bomb  test.  The  exposed
Marshallese  population  received  additional  doses  of  radiation  from  later  bomb
tests  and  residual  radiation  in  the  food  chain,  which  continues  to  this  day.  The
U.S.  government— initially  the  Navy  and  then  the  AEC  and  its  successor  agencies-
has  provided  care  to  the  Marshallese  ever  since  for  radiation-related  illnesses
while  conducting  research  on  this  population  to  determine  radiation  effects.  For
many  years  the  distinction  between  research  and  clinical  care  was  not  adequately
explained  to  the  Marshallese.

Finding  17

The  Committee  finds  that  since  the  end  of  the  Manhattan  Project  in
1946  human  radiation  experiments  (even  where  expressly  conducted  for

792


Chapter  1 7

military  purposes)  have  typically  not  been  classified  as  secret  by  the
government.  Nonetheless,  important  discussions  of  human  experimentation
took  place  in  secret,  and  information  was  kept  secret  out  of  concern  for
embarrassment  to  the  government,  potential  legal  liability,  and  concern  that
public  misunderstanding  would  jeopardize  government  programs.  In  some
cases,  deception  was  employed.  In  the  case  of  the  plutonium  injection
experiments,  government  officials  and  government-sponsored  researchers
continued  to  keep  information  secret  from  the  subjects  of  several  human
radiation  experiments  and  their  families,  including  the  fact  that  they  had
been  used  as  subjects  of  such  research.  Some  information  about  the
plutonium  injections,  including  documentation  showing  that  data  on  these
and  related  human  experiments  were  kept  secret  out  of  concern  for
embarrassment  and  legal  liability,  was  declassified  and  made  public  only
during  the  life  of  the  Advisory  Committee.

Human  experimentation  conducted  during  the  Manhattan  Project  was
carried  out  in  secret.  Since  1947  (when  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  began
operations  and  the  military  services  were  unified  under  a  secretary  of  defense)
human  radiation  experiments  have  rarely  been  protected  as  classified  secrets.
However:

In  1947  AEC  biomedical  advisers  publicly  urged  that  biomedical  research
be  kept  secret  only  where  required  by  national  security.  At  the  same  time,  AEC
officials  and  advisers  secretly  determined  that  reports  on  human  radiation
experiments  should  not  be  declassified  where  they  contained  information  that  was
potentially  embarrassing  or  a  cause  of  legal  liability.  Upon  requests  for
declassification,  research  reports  involving  human  radiation  experiments  and
other  human  radiation  exposures  were  reviewed  for  their  effects  on  public
relations,  labor  relations,  and  potential  legal  claims.

In  1947  AEC  officials  and  advisers  conducted  discussions  about  human
subject  research  policy;  some  of  these  discussions  were  conducted  in  secret
meetings,  and  the  statements  of  requirements  that  were  articulated,  while  not
secret,  evidently  were  little  disseminated.  Similarly,  1949-1950  AEC/DOD
discussions  of  the  terms  on  which  human  radiation  experiments  could  be
conducted  were  either  secret  or  the  substance  of  the  discussions  was  given  limited
public  distribution.  In  1952,  Department  of  Defense  biomedical  advisory  groups
also  engaged  in  secret  or  restricted  discussions  of  policy,  which  led  to  the  1953
issuance  of  the  Wilson  memorandum,  which  was  itself  issued  in  Top  Secret.

Government  officials  and  experts  did  not  squarely  and  publicly  address
the  existence  and  scope  of  government-supported  human  radiation
experimentation.  For  example,  in  the  late  1940s  and  early  1950s  the  AEC  denied
to  the  press  and  citizens  that  it  engaged  in  human  experimentation,  even  though


793


PartIV

the  AEC's  highly  visible  radioisotope  distribution  program  had  been  created  to
provide  the  means  for,  among  other  things,  human  experimentation.

Project  Sunshine,  a  worldwide  program  of  data  gathering,  including
human  data  gathering  to  measure  the  effects  of  fallout,  was  kept  secret  from  its
1953  inception  until  1956,  and  AEC  officials  and  researchers  employed  deception
in  the  solicitation  of  bones  of  deceased  babies  from  intermediaries  with  access  to
human  remains.  It  appears  that  concern  for  public  relations  played  a  key  role  in
keeping  the  human  data  gathering,  and  the  very  existence  of  Project  Sunshine,
secret.

Finding  18

All  the  intentional  releases  identified  in  the  Advisory  Committee's
charter,  as  well  as  the  several  hundred  other  releases  that  were  essentially  of
the  same  types,  were  conducted  in  secret  and  remained  secret  for  many  years
thereafter.  All  involved  some  stated  national  security  purpose,  which  may
have  justified  some  degree  of  secrecy.  Despite  continued  requests  from  the
public  that  stretch  back  well  over  a  decade,  however,  some  information
about  intentional  releases  was  declassified  and  made  publicly  available  only
during  the  life  of  the  Advisory  Committee.

The  Committee's  review  indicates  that  internal  proposals  that  the  public  be
informed  about  the  existence  of  the  radiological  warfare  program  were  rebuffed
on  grounds  that  public  misunderstanding  might  jeopardize  the  program.

Citizens  learned  of  the  1949  Green  Run  in  1986,  and  then  only  following
close  review  of  documents  requested  from  the  government  by  members  of  the
public.  Portions  of  a  key  surviving  report  on  the  Green  Run  were  not  declassified
until  1994.  Similarly,  although  250  intentional  releases  near  the  land  of  the
Pueblo  Indians  in  New  Mexico  took  place  between  1944  and  1961,  the  Pueblo  do
not  appear  to  have  been  informed  of  the  full  scope  of  the  program  until  1994.
Documentation  on  these  midcentury  tests  is  only  now  being  declassified.

Finding  19

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  the  government  did  not  routinely
undertake  to  create  records  needed  to  ensure  that  secret  programs  could  be
understood  and  accounted  for  in  later  years  and  that  it  did  not  adequately
maintain  such  records  where  they  were  created.  The  Committee  further
finds  that  many  important  record  collections  (including  records  that  were
not  initially  classified)  have  been  maintained  in  a  manner  that  renders  them
practically  inaccessible  to  those  who  need  them,  thereby  limiting  the  utility  of


794


Chapter  1 7

the  records  to  the  government  itself,  as  well  as  the  public's  rights  under  the
Freedom  of  Information  Act.

Where  citizens  are  exposed  to  potential  hazards  for  collective  benefit,  the
government  bears  a  burden  of  collecting  data  needed  to  measure  risk,  of
maintaining  records,  and  of  providing  the  information  to  affected  citizens  and  the
public  on  a  timely  basis.  The  need  to  provide  for  ultimate  public  accounting,  as
was  recognized  by  early  AEC  leadership,  is  particularly  great  where  risk  taking
occurs  in  agencies  that  do  much  of  their  work  in  secret.  The  government  did  not
routinely  or  adequately  create  and  maintain  such  records  for  relevant  human
radiation  experiments,  intentional  releases,  and  service  personnel  exposed  in
conjunction  with  atomic  bomb  tests.

Where  records  were  initially  created,  important  collections  have  been  lost
or  destroyed  over  the  years.  These  include  the  classified  records  of  the  Atomic
Energy  Commission's  Intelligence  Division;  secret  records  that  were  kept  in
anticipation  of  potential  liability  claims  from  service  personnel  exposed  to
radiation;2  records  relating  to  the  secret  program  of  experimentation  conducted  by
the  CIA  (MKULTRA);  nonclassified  records  of  VA  hospitals  regarding  the
thousands  of  experiments  that,  the  VA  told  the  Advisory  Committee,  were
conducted  there;  and  nonclassified  files  of  the  AEC's  Isotope  Distribution
Program  relating  to  the  many  licenses  for  "human  use"  it  granted  in  the  period
1947  to  1955.  The  Committee  notes  that  laws  governing  government  records
provide  for  routine  destruction  of  older  records;  however,  we  also  found  that
some  records  documenting  the  destruction  of  records  had  been  lost  or  destroyed.

Public  witnesses  and  others  repeatedly  expressed  doubt  to  the  Advisory
Committee  about  the  credibility  of  the  government's  efforts  to  respond  to  requests
for  documents.  The  Advisory  Committee's  experience  indicates  that
shortcomings  in  government  response  to  Freedom  of  Information  Act  requests,
which  may  be  interpreted  by  citizens  as  deliberate  nondisclosure,  may  often  occur
because  the  agencies  themselves  lack  adequate  road  maps  to  the  records  that  still
exist  and  lack  records  needed  to  determine  whether  collections  of  importance  to
the  public  have  been  lost  or  destroyed.  In  the  absence  of  the  efforts  put  forth  by
the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group,  thousands  of  documents  that
have  now  been  made  public  would  not  have  been  located.


795


Part  IV

Findings  for  the  Contemporary  Period

Biomedical  Experiments

Finding  20

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  human  research  involving
radioisotopes  is  currently  subjected  to  more  safeguards  and  levels  of  review
than  most  other  areas  of  research  involving  human  subjects.  The  Advisory
Committee  further  finds  that  there  are  no  apparent  differences  between  the
treatment  of  human  subjects  of  radiation  research  and  human  subjects  of
other  biomedical  research.

Today,  research  involving  either  external  radiation  or  radioactive  drugs
usually  undergoes  an  additional  layer  of  review  for  safety  and  risk.  Most  medical
institutions  have  a  radiation  safety  committee  (RSC)  responsible  for  evaluating
the  risk  of  radiation  research  and  other  medical  activities  and  limitation  of
radiation  exposure  of  both  employees  and  subjects.  Research  and  medical
institutions  that  perform  basic  research  involving  human  subjects  and  radioactive
drugs  must  also  have  studies  reviewed  and  approved  by  a  radioactive  drug
research  committee  (RDRC),  a  local  institutional  committee  approved  by  the
Food  and  Drug  Administration,  to  ensure  that  safeguards  in  the  use  of  such  drugs
are  met.  These  steps  are  in  addition  to  the  review  of  risks  and  benefits  undertaken
for  all  research,  whether  radiation  or  nonradiation,  by  local  institutional  review
boards.

In  the  Advisory  Committee's  two  empirical  projects  examining  current
practices  in  human  subject  research,  we  found  no  meaningful  differences  between
radiation  research  and  human  research  in  other  fields.

Finding  21

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  today  research  involving  human
subjects  sponsored  by  the  government  may  be  classified  and  conducted  in
secret,  but  it  must  comply  with  the  provisions  of  the  Common  Rule.

It  is  permissible  today  to  perform  classified  research  on  human  subjects,
although  it  is  our  understanding  that  classified  research  occurs  relatively  rarely.
Like  unclassified  research,  such  research  is  covered  by  the  protections  enunciated
in  the  Common  Rule.  There  may  be  significant  problems  in  the  application  of  the
Common  Rule  to  classified  research,  however.  One  problem  concerns  the
possible  need  for  security  clearances  if  institutional  review  boards  are  to
appropriately  protect  the  interests  of  human  subjects.  Written  guidance  on  this

796


Chapter  1 7

question  differs  among  the  agencies.  Of  particular  concern  is  whether  only  those
members  of  the  IRB  who  are  employees  of  the  agency  will  possess  security
clearances  and  thus  be  able  to  participate  in  reviewing  classified  projects.

Another  issue  of  concern  is  that  for  classified  research  involving  no  more
than  minimal  risk,  as  with  any  such  research,  the  Common  Rule  allows  IRBs  to
waive  any  or  all  elements  of  informed  consent  if,  among  other  things,  it  is  not
practicable  for  the  research  to  be  carried  out  without  such  a  waiver.*  The
Committee  believes,  however,  that  research  conducted  in  secret  should  never  be
permitted  on  human  subjects  without  the  subjects'  informed  consent.  The  question
of  what  must  be  disclosed  to  potential  subjects  in  order  for  them  to  make  an
informed  decision  about  participating  in  classified  research,  including  whether  an
adequate  disclosure  can  be  made  to  people  who  do  not  have  security  clearances,  is
an  important  issue  not  addressed  in  the  Common  Rule.

Finding  22

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that,  in  comparison  with  the  practices
and  policies  of  the  1940s  and  1950s,  there  have  been  significant  advances  in
the  protection  of  the  rights  and  interests  of  human  subjects  of  biomedical
research.  However,  we  also  find  that  there  is  evidence  of  serious  deficiencies
in  some  parts  of  the  current  system  for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and
interests  of  human  subjects.

Based  on  the  Advisory  Committee's  review,  it  appears  that  about  40  to  50
percent  of  human  subjects  research  poses  no  more  than  minimal  risk  of  harm  to
subjects.  In  our  review  of  research  documents  that  bear  on  human  subjects  issues,
we  found  no  problems  or  only  minor  problems  in  most  of  the  minimal-risk  studies
we  examined.  In  our  review  of  documents  we  also  found  examples  of
complicated,  higher-risk  studies  in  which  human  subjects  issues  were  carefully
and  adequately  addressed  and  that  included  excellent  consent  forms.  In  our
interview  project,  there  was  little  evidence  that  patient-subjects  felt  coerced  or
pressured  by  investigators  to  participate  in  research.  We  interviewed  patients
who  had  declined  offers  to  become  research  subjects,  reinforcing  the  impression
that  there  are  often  contexts  in  which  potential  research  subjects  have  a  genuine
choice.


'Common  Rule, .  1 1 6(d). Under  the  Common  Rule,  four  requirements  must

be  met  for  an  IRB  to  waive  the  rule's  informed  consent  requirements:  "(1)  the  research
involves  no  more  than  minimal  risk;  (2)  the  waiver  or  alteration  will  not  adversely  affect
the  rights  and  welfare  of  the  subjects;  (3)  the  research  could  not  practicably  be  carried
out  without  the  waiver  or  alteration;  and  (4)  whenever  appropriate,  the  subjects  will  be
provided  with  additional  pertinent  information  after  participation."


797


PartIV

At  the  same  time,  however,  we  also  found  in  our  review  of  documents
examples  in  which  human  subjects  issues  were  carelessly  and  inadequately
addressed.  These  disparities  suggest  that  there  is  substantial  variation  in  the
performance  of  institutional  review  boards.

We  found  serious  deficiencies  in  our  review  of  research  proposal
documents  in  several  areas  central  to  the  ethics  of  research  involving  human
subjects.  Specifically,  these  documents  often  failed  to  provide  sufficient
information  with  which  judgments  could  be  made  about  the  likely  voluntariness
of  participation  and  about  the  characteristics  of  and  justification  for  the  subjects
selected  for  study.  It  also  was  often  difficult  to  assess,  again  because  of
insufficient  information,  whether  the  likely  merits  of  the  research  warranted  the
imposition  of  risk  or  inconvenience  on  human  subjects.  We  also  found  serious
deficiencies  in  many  of  the  consent  forms  we  reviewed,  including  the  consent
forms  of  some  minimal-risk  studies.

Most  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  concerns  focus,  however,  on  research
that  exposes  subjects  to  greater  than  minimal  risk.  We  found  evidence  of
confusion  over  the  distinction  between  research  and  therapy  in  interviews  with
patients,  in  the  research  documents  reviewed,  and  in  public  testimony.  This
confusion  appears  to  be  borne  out  of  a  combination  of  trust  in  physicians  and  an
inadequate  understanding  of  the  differences  among  innovative  practice,
therapeutic  research,  and  accepted  modes  of  therapy.  The  Advisory  Committee's
empirical  studies  suggest  that  there  is  reason  to  worry  that  patient-subjects  who
have  serious  illnesses  may  have  unrealistic  expectations  both  about  the  possibility
that  they  will  personally  benefit  by  being  a  research  subject  and  about  the
discomforts  and  hardships  that  sometimes  accompany  research.

The  Advisory  Committee  is  also  concerned  about  research  we  reviewed
involving  adult  subjects  of  questionable  capacity.  In  the  documents  made
available  to  the  Advisory  Committee,  there  was  little  discussion  of  the
implications  of  diminished  capacity  for  the  process  of  consent  and  authorization
to  participate  in  research,  even  in  studies  that  appeared  to  offer  no  prospect  of
medical  benefit  to  subjects.  In  addition,  the  Advisory  Committee  is  concerned
about  the  failure  of  federal  regulations  to  address  the  conduct  of  research
involving  institutionalized  children.


Population  Exposures

Finding  23

The  Advisory  Committee  finds  that  events  that  raise  the  same
concerns  as  the  intentional  releases  in  the  Advisory  Committee's  charter


798


Chapter  1 7

could  still  take  place  in  secret  under  current  environmental  laws  and
regulations.

Today  the  law  provides  that  environmental  reviews  may  be  conducted  in
part  or  even  in  whole  in  secret,  thereby  eliminating  provision  for  public  notice
and  comment.  In  classified  programs,  the  government  must  still  comply  with
environmental  standards,  and  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  must  oversee
and  review  environmental  compliance.  However,  the  EPA  has  not  maintained
records  of  environmental  releases  where  the  reviews  were  conducted  in  whole  or
in  part  in  secret.  Environmental  laws  and  regulations  that  limit  quality  or  quantity
of  a  release  also  contain  provisions  allowing  exemptions  for  national  security.  In
principle,  the  President  or  the  secretary  of  energy  (in  the  case  of  the  Atomic
Energy  Act)  could  invoke  these  exemptions  to  permit  releases  that  would
otherwise  exceed  risk  standards.


799


ENDNOTES


1.  The  qualification  of  agency  officials'  responsibility  to  implement  "sound"
requirements  refers  to  the  moral  quality  of  the  requirements.  There  may  be  other  reasons
for  a  society  to  hold  its  government  officials  responsible  for  implementing  duly
authorized  rules,  such  as  prudential  needs  for  orderliness  and  predictability.  But  we
would  not  hold  an  official  morally  blameworthy  for  failing  to  implement  a  requirement
that  is  morally  unsound.  In  that  case  his  or  her  role-related  responsibilities  are
superseded  by  basic  ethical  principles.

2.  As  discussed  in  chapter  10,  the  precise  nature  of  all  the  records  that  were  kept
remains  to  be  determined.


800


18

RECOMMENDATIONS


Recommendations  for  Remedies  Pertaining  to  Experiments  and
Exposures  During  the  Period  1944-1974*

Biomedical  Experiments

Recommendation  1

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  the  government  deliver  a  personal,
individualized  apology  and  provide  financial  compensation  to  the  subjects
(or  their  next  of  kin)  of  human  radiation  experiments  in  which  efforts  were
made  by  the  government  to  keep  information  secret  from  these  individuals
or  their  families,  or  from  the  public,  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding
embarrassment  or  potential  legal  liability,  or  both,  and  where  this  secrecy
had  the  effect  of  denying  individuals  the  opportunity  to  pursue  potential
grievances.

The  Advisory  Committee  has  found  three  cases  to  which  the  above
applies.  These  are  the  surviving  family  members  of:


*In  preparing  these  recommendations,  the  Advisory  Committee  addressed  only
the  question  of  whether  the  federal  government  owes  remedies  to  subjects  or  their
surviving  immediate  family  members.  The  remedies  identified  below  are  not  intended  to
preclude  any  remedies  that  subjects  or  their  family  members  may  otherwise  be  entitled  to
from  nonfederal  institutions  or  from  individuals.

801


Part  IV

1 .  The  eighteen  subjects  of  the  plutonium  injection  experiments;

2.  The  subject  of  a  zirconium  injection  experiment,  known  only  as
Cal-Z;  and

3.  Several  subjects  of  total-body  irradiation  experiments  conducted
during  World  War  II.1

Deliberate  attempts  by  public  officials  in  trusted  and  often  sensitive
government  positions  to  conceal  the  fact  of  participation  from  subjects  or  their
families,  particularly  in  the  absence  of  sufficient  national  security  justification
and  for  the  declared  purpose  of  avoiding  potential  liability  and  public
embarrassment,  are  assaults  upon  the  foundations  of  individual  privacy  and  self-
determination.  Such  actions  violate  an  individual's  right  to  information  about
him-  or  herself  and  must  be  taken  with  the  utmost  seriousness.

In  the  cases  listed  above,  this  secrecy  served  to  prevent  people  who  may
have  been  wronged  from  seeking  redress  within  their  lifetimes.  Secrecy
regarding  the  participation  of  particular  subjects  was  maintained  until  as  late  as
1974.  Documents  showing  that  the  government  kept  information  secret  about
particular  1940s  experiments  on  grounds  of  potential  liability  and  embarrassment
remained  secret  until  retrieved  by  the  committee  in  1994.  Even  though  at  the  time
justice  might  not  have  required  financial  compensation  for  the  failure  to  disclose
information  in  the  absence  of  direct  physical  harm,  the  fact  that  the  government's
actions  limited  the  opportunity  of  these  subjects  to  seek  justice  is  undeniable.
Because  of  the  offensiveness  of  the  government's  actions,  justice  today  warrants  a
remedy  of  financial  compensation.

Moreover,  efforts  to  cover  up  governmental  wrongdoing  are  assaults  upon
the  polity  itself,  and  not  just  upon  the  directly  affected  individual,  because  such
efforts  undermine  the  ability  of  a  civil  society  to  ensure  that  the  government  and
its  agents  act  within  the  rule  of  law.  Such  a  situation  warrants  the  extension  of
compensation  to  the  next  generation.

Implementation:

Congress  may  need  to  consider  legislation  to  provide  compensation  for  the
immediate  families  of  the  subjects  in  the  plutonium  injection  experiments  whose
identities  are  known.  The  identities  of  the  subject  known  as  Cal-Z,  as  well  as  the
subjects  in  the  wartime  total-body  irradiation  experiments,  are  not  now  known.
Should  their  identities  come  to  light,  they  or  their  families  also  should  be
compensated.  In  addition,  should  additional  cases  be  identified  that  satisfy  the
criteria  outlined  above,  further  legislation  should  be  enacted  or  other  steps  taken
to  provide  those  individuals  or  their  family  members  with  similar  compensation.


802


Chapter  18

Recommendation  2

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  for  subjects  of  human  radiation
experiments  that  did  not  involve  a  prospect  of  direct  medical  benefit  to  the
subjects,  or  in  which  interventions  considered  to  be  controversial  at  the  time
were  presented  as  conventional  or  standard  practice,  and  physical  injury
attributable  to  the  experiment  resulted,  the  government  should  deliver  a
personal,  individualized  apology  and  provide  financial  compensation  to  cover
relevant  medical  expenses  and  associated  harms  (pain,  suffering,  loss  of
income,  disability)  to  the  subjects  or  their  surviving  immediate  family
members.*

The  Advisory  Committee  has  identified  several  experiments  that  are
candidates  for  remedies  to  former  subjects  under  this  recommendation;  these  are
described  below  in  the  section  on  implementation.

When  the  government  puts  an  individual  at  risk  in  order  to  serve  some
collective  national  interest,  it  must  take  steps  to  ensure  that  the  rights  and  interests
of  the  individual  are  adequately  protected.  The  Advisory  Committee  presumes,
however,  based  on  our  understanding  of  the  historical  context,  that  such  steps
were  not  uniformly  undertaken.  As  a  consequence,  it  is  possible  that  a  citizen
who  was  harmed  as  a  result  of  participation  in  nontherapeutic  research  did  not
adequately  consent  to  this  use  of  his  or  her  person.  That  the  government  did  not
have  a  system  in  place  to  ensure  that  individuals  were  not  wronged  by  their  use  as
research  subjects  in  nontherapeutic  research  without  their  adequate  consent,  when
that  use  resulted  in  harm,  warrants  a  personal,  individualized  apology  and
financial  compensation  to  subjects  or  to  their  surviving  immediate  family
members.

Analogous  cases  exist  to  support  this  recommendation.  In  awarding
substantial  compensation  to  victims  (or  their  families)  of  the  CIA's  MKULTRA
experiments  who  were  killed  or  suffered  other  serious  harm,  Congress  and  the


*  The  Advisory  Committee  was  convened  in  response  to  concerns  about  human
radiation  experiments  that  offered  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to  human  subjects.  In
our  historical  analysis,  the  experiments  we  investigated  either  offered  no  prospect  of
medical  benefit  or  they  involved  interventions  alleged  to  be  controversial  at  the  time  (see
Overview  to  Part  II).  As  a  consequence,  the  Advisory  Committee  focused  its
consideration  of  remedies  for  subjects  of  human  radiation  experiments  only  on  those
experiments  that  fit  these  descriptions.  The  Committee  makes  no  recommendations
about  whether,  or  under  what  conditions,  remedies  are  appropriate  for  subjects  of  human
radiation  experiments  that  were  considered  at  the  time  to  offer  a  plausible  prospect  of
medical  benefit  to  subjects.

803


Part  IV

courts  recognized  that  individuals  used  for  government  purpose  without  direct
benefit  to  the  experimental  subject  and  without  their  consent  deserved  substantial
awards.2

Nothing  in  this  recommendation  should  be  taken  as  having  implications
for  how  future  policies  governing  compensation  for  research  injuries  should  be
constructed.

Implementation:

Of  the  experiments  that  the  Advisory  Committee  studied  in  detail,  we
have  identified  several  that  are  candidates  for  remedies  under  this
recommendation.  These  are  as  follows:  the  total-body  irradiation  (TBI)
experiments  (should  it  be  determined  that  TBI  was  considered  at  the  time  to  be  a
controversial  treatment  for  patients  with  "radioresistant"  tumors,  and  it  was  not
presented  as  such  to  potential  subjects,  and  should  a  determination  of  harm
attributable  to  the  experiments  be  made);  the  testicular  irradiation  experiments
using  prisoners  as  subjects  (should  a  determination  of  harm  attributable  to  the
experiments  be  made);  the  uranium  injection  experiments  at  Rochester  and
Boston  (should  a  determination  of  harm  attributable  to  the  experiments  be  made);
and  some  of  the  iodine  131  experiments  involving  children  (should  a
determination  of  harm  attributable  to  the  experiments  be  made).  Because  of  the
scope  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  charge  and  our  limited  tenure,  we  were  not  in
a  position  to  undertake  the  individualized  and  detailed  fact-finding  required  to
resolve  the  uncertainties  in  each  of  these  cases,  including  the  evaluation  of
medical  and  research  records  of  all  the  patients  or  subjects  involved.

In  addition,  two  experiments  that  the  Committee  did  not  study  in  detail,
the  iodine  131  experiment  in  Alaska  and  the  Vanderbilt  radioiron  nutrition
experiments,  are  currently  in  legal  proceedings  in  which  claims  of  harm  have
been  made.

If  an  appropriate  forum  such  as  the  courts  or  a  properly  constituted  review
committee  determines  that  subjects  were  harmed  as  a  consequence  of
nontherapeutic  research,  or  as  a  consequence  of  research  in  which  controversial
treatments  were  presented  to  patients  as  conventional  or  standard  therapy,  it  is  the
Advisory  Committee's  view  that  the  government  should  take  steps  to  ensure  that
the  remedies  of  apology  and  financial  compensation  are  awarded.

The  question  of  causation  is  key  to  any  such  determination.  The  Advisory
Committee  has  heard  from  many  public  witnesses  regarding  the  standards  of
proof  and  presumptions  involved  in  the  administration  of  existing  radiation
compensation  statutes,  which  cover  atomic  bomb  testing  and  uranium  mining.  In
those  cases  the  nature  of  the  exposure  for  all  applicants  is  relatively  uniform  and
well  defined,  and  the  exposures  have  been  the  subject  of  a  relatively  large  amount
of  study;  by  contrast,  in  the  case  of  human  radiation  experiments,  each
experiment  may  present  a  different  set  of  circumstances.  In  some  cases,  as  in  the

804


Chapter  18


administration  of  iodine  131,  there  is  considerable  knowledge  of  the  relation
between  exposure  and  subsequent  injury.  In  many  other  situations,  less  is  known.

A  decision  should  be  made  about  how  strict  a  causal  association  ought  to
be  required,  with  a  more  strict  standard  making  financial  compensation  available
to  fewer  individuals.  Whether  the  standard  for  presuming  "causation"  should  be
strict  or  loose  is  a  policy  decision  that  depends  on  values,  not  science.  The
standards/values  problem  speaks  both  to  what  should  be  done  about  whether  the
illness  should  be  treated  as  experiment-related  for  purposes  of  compensation  if  (1)
it  is  impossible  to  determine  the  likely  range  of  association  between  the  exposure
and  the  illness  (because  the  facts  about  dose  or  method  of  exposure  are  not
available);  and  (2)  the  likely  range  of  association  is  broad  or  the  probability  of
association  between  the  exposure  and  the  illness  is  low.

To  determine  reasonable  medical  expenses,  a  schedule  of  projected
medical  costs  appropriate  for  reimbursement  could  be  created  for  specific
diagnoses,  rather  than  compensating  for  actual  costs  incurred.  This  approach
would  relieve  the  burden  on  the  subject  or  immediate  family  members  to  prove
actual  costs,  streamline  the  process  for  determining  level  of  compensation,  and
allow  for  compensation  for  costs  not  yet  incurred.

Recommendation  3

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  for  subjects  who  were  used  in  experiments
for  which  there  was  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to  them  and  there  is
evidence  specific  to  the  experiment  in  which  the  subjects  were  involved  that
(1)  no  consent,  or  inadequate  consent,  was  obtained,  or  (2)  their  selection  as
subjects  constituted  an  injustice,  or  both,  the  government  should  offer  a
personal,  individualized  apology  to  each  subject.*

The  Committee  believes  that  people  who  were  used  as  research  subjects
without  their  consent  were  wronged  even  if  they  were  not  harmed.  Although  it  is
surely  worse,  from  an  ethical  standpoint,  to  have  been  both  harmed  and  wronged
than  to  have  been  used  as  an  unwitting  subject  of  experiments  and  suffered  no
harm,  it  is  still  a  moral  wrong  to  use  people  as  a  mere  means  without  their
consent.  Although  what  we  know  about  the  practices  of  the  time  suggests  it  is
likely  that  many  people  who  were  subjects  in  nontherapeutic  research  were  used
without  their  consent  or  with  what  today  we  would  consider  inadequate  consent,
in  most  of  these  cases  we  have  almost  no  information  about  whether  or  how


*For  a  discussion  of  the  Committee's  deliberations  about  this  recommendation,
see  "Overview  to  Part  IV."

805


PartIV

consent  was  obtained.  Moreover,  in  most  of  these  cases,  the  identities  of  the
subjects  are  not  currently  known;  even  if  considerable  resources  were  expended,
it  is  likely  that  most  of  their  identities  would  remain  unknown.

The  Committee  is  not  persuaded  that,  even  where  the  facts  are  clear  and
the  identities  of  subjects  known,  financial  compensation  is  necessarily  a  fitting
remedy  when  people  have  been  used  as  subjects  without  their  knowledge  or
consent  but  suffered  no  material  harm  as  a  consequence;  the  remedy  that  emerged
as  most  fitting  was  an  apology  from  the  government.

The  Committee  struggled  with  the  issue  of  whether  to  recommend  that  the
government  extend  such  an  apology.  Our  deliberations  were  complicated  by  what
we  all  agreed  was  a  murky  historical  record.  In  the  case  of  some  experiments,
there  was  evidence  of  some  disclosure  or  some  attempt  to  obtain  consent,  and  the
issue  emerged  as  to  how  poor  these  attempts  must  be  for  an  apology  still  to  be  in
order.  In  the  great  majority  of  cases,  there  was  simply  too  little  documentary
evidence  to  draw  any  conclusions  about  disclosure  or  consent.  In  most  cases,  as
noted  above,  the  identities  of  subjects  are  unknown  and  are  unlikely  to  be
uncovered  even  with  a  substantial  expenditure  of  resources.

What  kind  of  evidence  is  necessary  to  determine  that  an  apology  is
warranted?  In  the  preceding  recommendation,  the  remedy  is  linked  to  evidence  of
harm  to  particular  individuals.  While  requiring  evidence  of  harm  specific  to
individuals,  we  did  not  require  such  specific  evidence  of  lack  of  consent.  Rather,
in  that  recommendation,  we  presumed  that  the  government  did  not  uniformly
undertake  steps  to  ensure  that  the  rights  and  interests  of  individual  subjects  were
adequately  protected,  and  thus  that  it  is  possible  that  people  who  were  harmed  as
a  result  of  participation  in  research  did  not  adequately  consent  to  this  use  of  their
person.  In  this  recommendation,  by  contrast,  a  remedy  is  linked  to  a  showing  that
people  were  wronged,  not  harmed.  Thus  the  Committee  believes  that  an  apology
should  be  offered  only  where  there  is  evidence  specific  to  an  experiment  or
subject  that  no  consent,  or  inadequate  consent,  was  obtained,  or  the  subject's
selection  constituted  an  injustice,  or  both.

The  Committee  believes  that,  among  those  experiments  we  have  had  the
opportunity  to  review  in  depth,  there  is  sufficient  evidence  that  wrongs  were
committed  against  the  children  who  participated  in  the  experiments  at  the  Fernald
School.  This  case  is  discussed  in  detail  in  chapter  7.*

In  recommending  an  apology  to  individuals  who  were  subjects  of  these
experiments,  the  Committee  wishes  to  emphasize  that  there  are  likely  many  other


*  Several  other  experiments  studied  by  the  Committee  are  candidates  for
remedies  under  Recommendation  2.  Where  it  is  determined  that  subjects  in  these
experiments  were  not  harmed,  they  may  be  due  an  apology  under  this  recommendation  if
it  is  determined  that  they  were  wronged.

806


Chapter  18


instances  in  which  an  apology  is  warranted  but  for  which  experiment-specific
factual  support  is  not  currently  available.3

Recommendation  4

In  the  research  that  we  reviewed  for  this  recommendation,  the
Advisory  Committee  has  found  no  subjects  of  biomedical  experiments  for
whom  there  is  a  need  to  provide  notification  and  medical  follow-up  for  the
purpose  of  protecting  their  health.  In  the  event  that  other  experiments  of
concern  come  to  light  in  the  future,  we  recommend  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  subsequent  decisions  for  notification  be
based  on  evaluation  of  both  the  level  of  risk  from  radiation  exposure  and  the
potential  medical  benefit  from  medical  follow-up  in  exposed  individuals.

Additionally,  the  Advisory  Committee  has  found  no  evidence  to
indicate  that  the  subjects  of  human  radiation  experiments  we  reviewed
would  have  had  greater  likelihood  of  incurring  heritable  (genetic)  effects
than  the  general  population  and  thus  does  not  recommend  notification  or
medical  follow-up  for  descendants  of  subjects  of  human  radiation
experiments.

In  formulating  this  recommendation,  the  Advisory  Committee  considered
those  subjects  for  whom  there  is  a  significant  risk  of  developing  a  radiation-
related  disease  that  has  not  yet  occurred,  or  has  occurred  but  may  still  be
undetected  or  untreated,  and  in  whom  there  might  be  an  opportunity  to  prevent  or
minimize  potential  health  risks  through  detection  and  treatment.  In  considering
notification,  we  focused  only  on  biomedical  experiments,  as  stated  in  our  charter.

The  Advisory  Committee  based  its  present  recommendation  on  the
specific  guidelines  stated  below  and  recommends  that  future  decisions  for
medical  notification  and  follow-up  of  subjects  of  government-sponsored  human
radiation  experiments  not  examined  by  the  Committee,  or  that  have  not  yet  come
to  light,  be  based  on  these  same  guidelines,  as  follows:

1 .  The  subject  was  placed  at  increased  lifetime  risk  for  development

of  a  fatal  radiation-induced  malignancy.  The  level  of  increased
risk  was  set  by  the  Advisory  Committee  at  1/1,000  remaining
lifetime  risk  and  an  excess  relative  risk  of  greater  than  10  percent
(organ  specific).  This  level  of  risk  was  arbitrarily  chosen  by  the
Advisory  Committee.  When  compared  with  the  normal  risk  of
dying  of  cancer  (220  out  of  1,000),  this  level  of  risk  is  small.  The
Advisory  Committee  chose  this  small  remaining  lifetime  risk  as  a
reasonable  initial  criterion  to  decide  if  an  analysis  of  the  utility  of
screening  and  intervention  (criterion  2  below)  was  needed.

807


PartIV

2. There  is  a  recognized  medical  benefit  from  early  detection  and
treatment  of  the  cancer,  which  outweighs  whatever  medical  risks
are  associated  with  detection  and  treatment  interventions.  In
addition,  the  government  should  consider  the  public  health  and
financial  costs  as  well  as  the  potential  benefits  before  making  a
decision  to  offer  such  a  notification  and  screening  program.

Eligible  subjects  for  whom  medical  follow-up  to  protect  health  is
recommended  should  be  notified  of  their  participation  in  a  human  radiation
experiment,  and  voluntary  screening  programs  offered  to  them.  Such  a  program
should  include  adequate  disclosure  of  both  the  nature  of  the  potential  benefits  as
well  as  the  potential  risks  of  medical  follow-up,  which  might  include  some  of  the
following  aspects:

•  medical  harm,  discomfort,  inconvenience,  or  anxiety  from  the  screening
test  itself  or  subsequent  follow-up  exams;

•  the  possibility  of  incorrect  test  results,  either  false  positive  or  false
negative;

•  the  possibility  of  stigmatization  by  friends,  family,  employers,  or
life/health  insurance  carriers;

•  the  costs  to  themselves  of  the  screening  program  (if  any)  and  subsequent
medical  tests  and  treatments.

Thus  the  Advisory  Committee's  recommendations  for  notification  and
medical  follow-up  of  individuals  who  were  subjects  of  a  human  radiation
experiment  depend  equally  on  risk  estimates  and  the  medical  utility  of  early
detection  and  treatment  for  changing  the  course  of  disease  or  the  quality  or  length
of  life  in  such  an  exposed  individual,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying  table.

The  Advisory  Committee  database  includes  articles  and  other  documents
describing  approximately  4,000  government-sponsored  human  radiation
experiments.  Because  of  the  limited  data  available  on  most  of  these,  and  the
Advisory  Committee's  limited  resources,  it  has  not  been  feasible  for  the  Advisory
Committee  to  systematically  apply  the  two  criteria  described  above  to  the
majority  of  experiments  identified  within  its  database.  The  Advisory  Committee
therefore  selected  for  review  types  of  experiments  that  seemed  most  likely  to
include  subjects  who  might  still  be  alive  and  meet  the  risk  criteria  chosen  by  the
Committee  and  who  might  medically  benefit  from  notification  and  medical
follow-up.


808


Chapter  18


DETERMINATION  OF  THE  NEED  FOR  NOTIFICATION
AND  MEDICAL  FOLLOW-UP


Risk  Analysis
(For  Development  of  Fatal  Cancer)

Remaining  Lifetime  Risk
*  1/1,000  AND  RRa  10%

Remaining  Lifetime  Risk
<  1/1,000  OR  RR<  10%

Medical  Benefit  from
Early  Detection  and
Treatment

Yes

RECOMMEND
NOTIFICATION  AND
MEDICAL  FOLLOW-UP

NO  NOTIFICATION

No

NO  NOTIFICATION

NO  NOTIFICATION

Specifically,  the  Advisory  Committee  has  reviewed  twenty  one  studies
involving  three  types  of  experiments:

1 .  Children  who  received  iodine  131;

2.  Prisoners  subjected  to  testicular  irradiation;  and

3.  Children  and  military  personnel  exposed  to  nasopharyngeal  radium
treatments.

Following  this  detailed  analysis,  the  Advisory  Committee  concluded  that
none  of  the  experiments  examined  satisfied  both  of  the  guidelines  identified  in
this  recommendation.  If  in  the  future  new  methods  of  screening  are  developed  or
new  information  about  increased  risk  is  discovered,  then  these  experiments
should  be  reevaluated  to  assess  whether  they  meet  the  criteria.  (For  a  full
discussion,  see  the  addendum  on  medical  notification  and  follow-up  at  the  end  of
this  chapter.)

Though  it  was  beyond  the  scope  of  the  Advisory  Committee  to  evaluate
individually  all  the  experiments  in  our  database,  the  results  of  our  review  of  these
carefully  selected  studies  suggest  that  the  remaining  experiments  would  be
unlikely  to  meet  the  proposed  criteria  for  notification  and  medical  follow-up.
However,  another  important  group  of  studies  not  considered  in  detail  by  the
Advisory  Committee  were  tracer  studies  in  pregnant  and  nursing  women.

It  is  possible  that  experiments  that  would  satisfy  the  Committee's  criteria
for  notification  and  medical  follow-up  will  be  identified.  Implementation  of  a
notification  and  medical  follow-up  program  would  have  to  be  done  carefully  if  a
follow-up  program  is  to  provide  former  research  subjects  with  greater  health
benefit  than  harm.  Considerable  effort  would  be  needed  to  educate  both  subjects
and  physicians  about  the  realistic  benefits  and  the  possible  harms  of  medical


809


PartIV

follow-up,  as  well  as  the  specific  screening  modalities  and  follow-up  care  that
would  be  indicated.  It  is  particularly  important  to  distinguish  follow-up  that  is
intended  to  benefit  medical  science  from  follow-up  that  is  intended  to  medically
benefit  patients.  An  additional  concern  is  that,  for  most  experiments,  no  list  of
subjects  exists.  Performing  screening  tests  in  people  who  are  incorrectly
identified  as  having  an  increased  risk  is  unlikely  to  result  in  any  benefit  and  may
result  in  harm.

The  Advisory  Committee  also  recognizes  that  individuals  who  have
received  therapeutic  radiation  treatments,  either  in  a  purely  clinical  setting  or
research  setting,  may  have  been  exposed  to  substantially  higher  doses  of  radiation
and  should  seek  medical  follow-up  pursuant  to  the  advice  of  their  treating
physician.

With  regard  to  the  need  to  notify  descendants  of  subjects  of  human
radiation  experiments  of  potential  genetic  effects,  it  is  likely  that  the  risk  of
radiation-induced  mutations  is  small  in  relation  to  natural  rates.  Thus  it  would  be
impossible  to  distinguish  whether  the  condition  was  caused  by  the  parent's
radiation  exposure  or  by  other  factors.  Based  on  these  considerations,  the
Advisory  Committee  does  not  recommend  notification  and  medical  follow-up  for
descendants  of  subjects  of  radiation  experiments.

In  the  event  that  specific  genetic  effects  attributable  to  radiation  exposure
could  be  identified  in  a  particular  population  of  descendants  at  some  future  time,
the  guidelines  would  be  the  same  as  those  previously  outlined  for  subject
populations— there  would  need  to  be  evidence  to  indicate  that  early  intervention
would  change  the  course  of  a  particular  disease  before  notification  and  follow-up
would  be  recommended.

Population  Exposures

In  recent  years  Congress  has  enacted  a  body  of  laws  to  provide  relief  to
service  personnel  exposed  to  radiation  in  connection  with  atmospheric  nuclear
tests,  citizens  who  lived  downwind  from  the  tests,  and  workers  who  mined
uranium  to  be  used  by  the  government  in  nuclear  weapons  production.  These
include  the  Veterans  Dioxin  and  Radiation  Exposure  Compensation  Standards
Act  of  1984,  the  Radiation-Exposed  Veterans  Compensation  Act  of  1988,  and  the
Radiation  Exposure  Compensation  Act  of  1990.

In  the  Committee's  view,  these  existing  laws  provide  the  framework  on
which  to  base  continued  provision  for  relief. In  the  interim  since  these  laws  were
passed,  experience  with  the  laws  and  more  current  scientific  knowledge  strongly
suggest  the  need  for  revisiting  the  laws  and  their  administration  and  for  extending
their  coverage  to  similarly  situated  groups—such  as  those  exposed  to  intentional
releases— who  are  not  now  covered.


810


Chapter  18


The  following  recommendations  address  the  circumstances  of  groups
exposed  to  intentional  releases,  service  personnel  who  were  exposed  in
connection  with  nuclear  weapons  tests,  and  workers  who  mined  uranium  for  use
in  government  programs.  We  also  address  the  circumstance  of  the  citizens  of  the
Republic  of  the  Marshall  Islands,  for  whom  a  different  framework  of  remedies
has  been  fashioned.

Recommendation  5

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  it,  together  with  Congress,  give  serious
consideration  to  amending  the  provisions  of  the  Radiation  Exposure
Compensation  Act  of  1990  to  encompass  other  populations  environmentally
exposed  to  radiation  from  government  operations  in  support  of  the  nuclear
weapons  program,  should  information  become  available  that  shows  that
areas  not  covered  by  the  legislation  were  sufficiently  exposed  that  a  cancer
burden  comparable  to  that  found  in  populations  currently  covered  by  the
law  may  have  resulted.

The  Advisory  Committee  did  not  have  the  time  or  resources  to  undertake
our  own  epidemiologic  studies  of  the  cancer  burden  surrounding  the  Hanford
facility  in  Washington  state,  where  the  Green  Run  took  place.  The  preliminary
radioiodine  dose  estimates  now  available  raise  the  issue  of  whether  the  releases
from  Hanford  may  have  caused  cancers.  The  Advisory  Committee  found  that  the
Green  Run  itself  contributed  only  a  very  small  portion  of  that  cancer  burden,  so
small  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  attribute  any  cancers  to  the  Green  Run  as
opposed  to  other  sources  (including  routine  Hanford  releases).  The  Advisory
Committee  believes  that  in  addressing  the  Green  Run  intentional  release,  the
appropriate  response  is  to  redress  injury  without  regard  to  whether  exposures
were  in  the  course  of  routine  or  research  activities.  There  would  be  no  practical
way  to  make  this  distinction,  if  it  were  desired.  We  also  note  that  the  Radiation
Exposure  Compensation  Act  provides  relief  for  downwinders  and  uranium  miners
without  regard  for  whether  they  were  subjects  of  research  (and  in  many  cases  they
were  not).

Recommendation  6

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  it,  together  with  Congress,  give  serious
consideration  to  reviewing  and  updating  epidemiological  tables  that  are
relied  upon  to  determine  whether  relief  is  appropriate  for  veterans  who
participated  in  atomic  testing  so  that  all  cancers  or  other  diseases  for  which

811


PartIV

there  is  a  reasonable  probability  of  causation  by  radiation  exposure  during
active  military  service  are  clearly  and  unequivocally  covered  by  the  statutes.

Congress  has  provided  for  compensation  for  veterans  who  participated  in
atmospheric  atomic  tests  or  the  American  occupation  of  Hiroshima  or  Nagasaki,
Japan.  The  provision  of  compensation  depends  on  evidence  that  the  veteran  has
sustained  disability  from  a  disease  that  may  be  related  to  radiation  exposure.

The  Veterans  Dioxin  and  Radiation  Exposure  Compensation  Standards
Act  of  1984  required  the  Veterans  Administration  to  write  a  rule  governing
entitlement  to  compensation  for  radiation-related  disabilities.  The  resulting
regulation  contains  criteria  for  adjudicating  radiation  claims,  including
consideration  of  a  radiation-dose  estimate  and  a  determination  as  to  whether  it  is
at  least  as  likely  as  not  that  the  claimed  disease  resulted  from  radiation  exposure.
The  Radiation-Exposed  Veterans  Compensation  Act  of  1988  provides  that  a
veteran  who  was  present  at  a  designated  event  and  subsequently  develops  a
designated  radiogenic  disease  may  be  entitled  to  benefits  without  having  to  prove
causation.4

The  Committee  recommends  that  the  radioepidemiological  tables  prepared
by  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  in  1985,  which  identify  diseases  that  may  be
causally  connected  to  radiation  exposures,  be  updated.  The  Committee
understands  that  the  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs  agrees  with  this
recommendation.

The  Advisory  Committee  further  recommends  to  the  Human
Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group  that  it  review  whether  existing  laws
governing  the  compensation  of  atomic  veterans  are  now  administered  in
ways  that  best  balance  allocation  of  resources  between  financial
compensation  to  eligible  atomic  veterans  and  administrative  costs,  including
the  costs  and  scientific  credibility  of  dose  reconstruction.

While  the  Committee's  inquiry  focused  on  participants  at  atmospheric
testing  who  were  subjects  of  experimentation,  the  Committee  found  that  the  risks
to  which  experimental  subjects  were  exposed  were  typically  similar  to  those  to
which  many  other  test  participants  were  subjected.  Those  service  members  who
were  participants  in  the  experiments  reviewed  by  the  Advisory  Committee  would,
as  veterans  of  atmospheric  atomic  tests,  be  eligible  for  relief  under  the  laws
enacted  in  1984  and  1988,  as  amended,  concerning  radiation-exposed  veterans.

The  Committee  found  that  the  government  did  not  create  or  maintain
adequate  records  regarding  the  exposures  of  all  participants,  the  identity  and  test
locale  of  all  participants,  and  the  follow-up,  to  the  extent  it  took  place,  of  test
participants.  Witnesses  before  the  Advisory  Committee,  and  others  who
communicated  with  us  by  mail,  telephone,  and  personal  visit,  expressed  strong

812


Chapter  18


concerns  about  the  adequacy  and  operation  of  the  current  laws,  including,
specifically,  record-keeping  practices.  Although  the  Committee  did  not  have  the
time  or  resources  to  pursue  these  concerns  to  the  degree  they  merit,  we  believe
that  the  concerns  expressed  by  veterans  and  their  family  members  deserve
attention,  and  we  urge  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group  in
conjunction  with  Congress  to  address  these  concerns  promptly.  The  concerns
reported  to  us  include  the  following:

1 .  The  listing  of  diseases  for  which  relief  is  automatically  provided-
the  "presumptive"  diseases  provided  for  in  the  1988  law— is
incomplete  and  inadequate.

2.  The  standard  of  proof  for  those  without  a  presumptive  disease  is
impossible  to  meet  and,  given  the  questionable  condition  of  the
exposure  records  retained  by  the  government,  inappropriate.

3.  The  statutes  are  limited  and  inequitable  in  their  coverage;  for
example,  the  inclusion  of  those  exposed  at  atmospheric  tests  does
not  protect  those  who  were  exposed  to  equal  amounts  of  radiation
in  activities  such  as  cleanup  at  Enewetak  atoll.

4.  The  time  and  expense  needed  to  prosecute  a  claim  is  too  great.  For
example,  veterans  whose  claims  are  initially  denied  at  the  VA
regional  offices  and  are  seeking  appeal  of  the  initial  decision
receive  a  form  letter  stating  that  it  will  take  at  least  twenty-four
months  to  process  their  appeal.

5.  Time  and  money  spent  on  contractors  and  consultants  in
administering  the  program  would  be  better  spent  on  directly  aiding
veterans  and  their  survivors.

Recommendation  7

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  it,  together  with  Congress,  give  serious
consideration  to  amending  the  provisions  of  the  Radiation  Exposure
Compensation  Act  of  1990  relating  to  uranium  miners  in  order  to  provide
compensation  to  all  miners  who  develop  lung  cancer  after  some  minimal
duration  of  employment  underground  (such  as  one  year),  without  requiring  a
specific  level  of  exposure.  The  act  should  also  be  reviewed  to  determine
whether  the  documentation  standards  for  compensation  should  be
liberalized.

The  uranium  miners  were  exposed  to  extremely  high  levels  of  radon
daughters,  which  were  recognized  at  the  time  to  be  hazardous  yet  were  not
controlled  by  the  government,  despite  the  availability  of  feasible  means  to

813


PartIV

ventilate  the  mines.  Furthermore,  the  government  studied  the  miners  without
disclosing  the  purposes  of  the  examinations  or  warning  them  of  the  hazards  to
which  they  were  exposed.  As  a  result  of  their  continued  exposure,  hundreds  of
miners  developed  lung  cancer  or  nonmalignant  respiratory  diseases  that  could
have  been  prevented,  and  many  of  them  have  died.

In  recognition  of  this  tragedy,  Congress  included  provisions  for
compensating  certain  uranium  miners  in  the  Radiation  Exposure  Compensation
Act  of  1990  (RECA).  However,  the  criteria  for  compensation  set  in  this  act  were
far  more  stringent  than  for  the  two  other  groups  (atomic  veterans  and
downwinders  of  the  Nevada  Test  Site)  for  which  compensation  was  provided,
despite  the  fact  that  the  risks  were  far  higher  for  the  uranium  miners.

Since  1990,  additional  scientific  information  has  become  available  to
support  the  view  that  radon  exposure  is  responsible  for  a  much  higher  proportion
of  the  lung  cancer  cases  among  the  miners  than  had  been  previously  thought.  In
particular,  the  act's  current  requirement  of  a  minimum  of  200  WLM  (working
level  months)  exposure  for  nonsmokers  or  300  to  500  WLM  (depending  on  age)
for  smokers  translates  to  quite  large  probabilities  of  causation,  according  to  a
recent  report  by  the  National  Cancer  Institute.5  That  analysis  finds  little  evidence
to  support  a  distinction  between  smokers  and  nonsmokers  and  suggests  that  a
majority  of  lung  cancer  deaths  among  Colorado  white  miners  and  New  Mexico
Navajo  miners  are  attributable  to  radon  exposure.  Furthermore,  it  finds  that  the
lung  cancer  risk  is  strongly  modified  by  a  number  of  factors  and  uncertainties  that
are  not  accounted  for  in  the  total  dose;  thus,  for  many  miners,  the  level  of
exposure  that  would  merit  compensation  on  the  basis  of  the  principle  of  "balance
of  probabilities"  might  be  far  lower  than  the  present  criteria.  In  particular,  no
exposure  measurements  are  available  for  90  percent  of  the  years  in  most  mines,  so
that  any  requirement  to  reconstruct  exposure  histories  is  likely  to  require  some
degree  of  extrapolation  or  estimation  and  be  quite  uncertain.  Furthermore,  many
mines  have  since  gone  out  of  business,  so  that  records  needed  to  establish  an
exposure  history  are  simply  unavailable.

Also  since  1990,  there  has  been  considerable  experience  with  the
administration  of  the  act,  and  apparently  much  of  it  has  been  negative.  The
Advisory  Committee  took  extensive  testimony  regarding  the  difficulties  faced  by
miners  in  meeting  the  documentation  requirements,  particularly  those  related  to
the  requirement  to  provide  a  reconstruction  of  their  radon  dose.  For  these
practical  reasons,  and  in  light  of  the  additional  information,  we  suggest  that  the
requirement  that  a  miner  demonstrate  that  he  had  been  exposed  to  a  certain
minimum  cumulative  dose  be  replaced  by  a  simple  requirement  that  he  worked
underground  for  a  certain  minimum  length  of  time.  Since  more  than  half  the  lung
cancer  deaths  in  the  cohort  who  worked  at  least  one  month  underground  appear  to
be  attributable  to  radon,  we  suggest  that  minimum  length  of  service  be  set  quite
low,  preferably  not  more  than  a  year.  At  most  this  should  then  lead  to

814


Chapter  18


compensation  being  awarded  to  twice  as  many  miners  as  would  be  entitled  to  it
under  the  balance  of  probabilities  principle,  while  not  denying  it  to  any  who  are
entitled  to  it.

The  grave  injustice  that  the  government  did  to  the  uranium  miners,  by
failing  to  take  action  to  control  the  hazard  and  by  failing  to  warn  the  miners  of  the
hazard,  should  not  be  compounded  by  unreasonable  barriers  to  receiving  the
compensation  the  miners  deserve  for  the  wrongs  and  harms  inflicted  upon  them  as
they  served  their  country.

Recommendation  8

The  Advisory  Committee  supports  the  Department  of  Energy's
program  of  medical  monitoring  and  treatment  for  the  exposed  inhabitants  of
the  Marshall  Islands  atolls  of  Rongelap  and  Utirik  and  recommends  that  this
program  be  continued  as  long  as  any  member  of  the  exposed  population
remains  alive.  Furthermore,  the  Advisory  Committee  recommends  that  the
program  be  reviewed  to  determine  if  it  is  appropriate  to  add  to  the  program
the  populations  of  other  atolls  to  the  south  and  east  of  the  blast  whose
inhabitants  may  have  received  exposures  sufficient  to  cause  excess  thyroid
abnormalities.  The  Advisory  Committee  also  recommends  that
consideration  be  given  to  the  involvement  of  the  Marshall  Islanders  in  the
design  of  any  further  medical  research  to  be  conducted  upon  them  and  the
Advisory  Committee  recommends  that  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency
Working  Group  consider  establishing  an  independent  panel  to  review  the
status  and  adequacy  of  the  current  program  of  medical  monitoring  and
medical  care  provided  by  the  United  States  to  the  exposed  population  of  the
Marshall  Islands.

The  1 954  Bravo  hydrogen  bomb  test  caused  the  populations  of  several
Marshall  Islands  atolls  to  be  exposed  to  hazardous  levels  of  radiation.  The  United
States  has  provided  a  medical  follow-up  program  that  combines  research  on
radiation  effects  with  treatment  for  radiation-related  illnesses. It  is  noteworthy
that  as  a  result  of  the  ongoing  program  to  study  radiation  effects,  many  cases  of
thyroid  disease  were  detected  and  treated,  but  not  all  exposed  Marshallese
received  the  benefits  of  the  program.  The  people  of  Ailuk,  for  example,  who
according  to  early  reports  received  about  the  same  exposure  as  the  people  of
Utirik,  were  never  evacuated  from  their  atoll  and  were  not  followed  up  medically,
even  though  they  received  a  radiation  dose  of  more  than  six  roentgens.
Moreover,  an  epidemiological  study  reported  in  the  Journal  of  the  American
Medical  Association  in  1987  demonstrated  that  inhabitants  of  several  atolls  to  the
east  and  south  of  Bikini  had  elevated  levels  of  thyroid  disease  and  that  there  was  a
"strong  inverse  linear  relationship"  between  incidence  of  thyroid  nodules  and

815


Part  IV

distance  from  the  blast.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  exposed  populations
received  additional  doses  of  radiation  over  the  years  from  later  bomb  tests  and
residual  radiation  on  the  atolls.  The  medical  program  is  ongoing,  but  Congress
has  the  authority  to  reduce  or  eliminate  funding.

Available  evidence  indicates  that  many  Marshallese~it  is  impossible  to
identify  specific  individuals—were  not  adequately  informed  about  the  purposes  of
the  medical  tests  to  which  they  were  subjected.  There  is  also  evidence  in  the
documentary  record  that  the  Marshallese  often  did  not  understand  the  relationship
between  the  research  and  medical  care  components  of  the  medical  follow-up
program.  For  example,  Dr.  Robert  A.  Conard  headed  the  program,  and  according
to  his  report  on  twenty  years  of  medical  treatment  and  monitoring,  "the  people  did
not  always  understand  the  need  for  the  examinations,  or  their  results."  Although
this  situation  has  improved  in  recent  years,  it  would  nevertheless  be  appropriate  to
consult  with  the  Marshallese  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  further  medical
research  so  as  to  minimize  any  possibility  of  misunderstanding  and  to  ensure  that
the  priorities  of  the  Marshallese  are  a  consideration  in  the  planning  of  such
research.

The  Advisory  Committee  supports  the  continuation  of  the  Department  of
Energy's  program  of  medical  monitoring  and  medical  care  for  the  exposed
inhabitants  of  the  Marshall  Islands.  Questions  have  been  raised  during  the  course
of  our  deliberations  as  to  whether  this  program  is  running  as  well  as  it  should,
both  with  respect  to  the  research  and  monitoring  activities  conducted  by
Brookhaven  National  Laboratory  (BNL)  and  with  respect  to  the  medical  care
provided.  In  particular,  the  issue  has  emerged  whether  the  medical  care  ought  to
be  expanded  to  include  treatment  for  conditions  that  are  not  radiogenic  as  a
further  remedy  to  Marshallese  people  who  were  exposed,  however  inadvertently,
as  a  result  of  weapons  tests.  The  Advisory  Committee  did  not  have  the  resources
to  pursue  these  issues,  but  we  believe  that  they  deserve  serious  consideration.
One  mechanism  through  which  this  could  be  accomplished  is  the  establishment  of
an  independent  panel  to  review  the  program  with  input  from  the  Marshallese  as  to
the  panel's  composition.

Recommendations  for  the  Protection  of  the
Rights  and  Interests  of  Human  Subjects  in  the  Future

While  we  were  constituted  to  consider  issues  related  to  human  radiation
experiments,  in  critical  (but  not  all)  respects,  the  government  regulations  that
apply  to  human  radiation  research  do  not  differ  from  those  that  govern  other  kinds
of  research.  In  comparison  with  the  practices  and  policies  of  the  1940s  and
1950s,  there  have  been  significant  advances  in  the  protection  of  the  rights  and
interests  of  human  subjects.  These  advances,  initiated  primarily  in  the  1970s  and
1980s,  culminated  in  the  adoption  of  the  Common  Rule  throughout  the  federal

816


Chapter  18


government  in  1991 .  Although  the  Common  Rule  now  affords  all  human  subjects
of  research  funded  or  conducted  by  the  federal  government  the  same  basic
regulatory  protections,  the  work  of  the  Advisory  Committee  suggests  that  there
are  serious  deficiencies  in  some  parts  of  the  current  system.  These  deficiencies
are  of  a  magnitude  warranting  immediate  attention.

The  Committee  was  not  able  to  address  the  extent  to  which  these
deficiencies  are  a  function  of  inadequacies  in  the  Common  Rule,  inadequacies  in
the  implementation  and  oversight  of  the  Common  Rule,  or  inadequacies  in  the
awareness  of  and  commitment  to  the  ethics  of  human  subject  research  on  the  part
of  physician-investigators  and  other  scientists. We  urge  that  in  formulating
responses  to  the  recommendations  that  follow,  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency
Working  Group  consider  each  of  these  factors  and  subject  them  to  careful  review.

Recommendation  9

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  efforts  be  undertaken  on  a  national  scale  to
ensure  the  centrality  of  ethics  in  the  conduct  of  scientists  whose  research
involves  human  subjects.

A  national  understanding  of  the  ethical  principles  underlying  research  and
agreement  about  their  importance  is  essential  to  the  research  enterprise  and  the
advancement  of  the  health  of  the  nation.  The  historical  record  makes  clear  that  the
rights  and  interests  of  research  subjects  cannot  be  protected  if  researchers  fail  to
appreciate  sufficiently  the  moral  aspects  of  human  subject  research  and  the  value
of  institutional  oversight.

It  is  not  clear  to  the  Advisory  Committee  that  scientists  whose  research
involves  human  subjects  are  any  more  familiar  with  the  Belmont  Report6  today
than  their  colleagues  were  with  the  Nuremberg  Code  forty  years  ago.  The
historical  record  and  the  results  of  our  contemporary  projects  indicate  that  the
distinction  between  the  ethics  of  research  and  the  ethics  of  clinical  medicine  was,
and  is,  unclear.  It  is  possible  that  many  of  the  problems  of  the  past  and  some  of
the  issues  identified  in  the  present  stem  from  this  failure  to  distinguish  between
the  two.

The  necessary  changes  are  unlikely  to  occur  solely  through  the
strengthening  of  federal  rules  and  regulations  or  the  development  of  harsher
penalties.  The  experience  of  the  Advisory  Committee  illustrates  that  rules  and
regulations  are  no  guarantee  of  ethical  conduct.  The  Advisory  Committee  has
also  learned,  in  responses  to  our  query  of  institutional  review  board  (IRB)  chairs,
that  many  of  them  perceive  researchers  and  administrators  as  having  an
insufficient  appreciation  for  the  ethical  dimensions  of  research  involving  human
subjects  and  the  importance  of  the  work  of  IRBs.  The  federal  government  must

817


Part  IV

work  in  concert  with  the  biomedical  research  community  to  exert  leadership  that
alters  the  way  in  which  research  with  human  subjects  is  conceived  and  conducted
so  that  no  one  in  the  scientific  community  should  be  able  to  say  "I  didn't  know"  or
"nobody  told  me"  about  the  substance  or  importance  of  research  ethics.

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  that  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  institute,  in  conjunction  with  the  biomedical
community,  a  commitment  to  the  centrality  of  ethics  in  the  conduct  of  research
involving  human  subjects.  We  urge  that  careful  consideration  be  given  to  the
development  of  effective  strategies  for  achieving  this  change  in  the  culture  of
human  subjects  research,  including,  specifically,  how  best  to  balance  policies  that
mandate  the  teaching  of  research  ethics  with  policies  that  encourage  and  support
private  sector  initiatives.  It  may  be  useful  to  commission  a  study  or  convene  an
advisory  panel  charged  with  developing  and  perhaps  implementing
recommendations  on  how  best  to  approach  this  challenge  for  the  research
community.7

The  Committee  suggests  that  such  an  examination  include  consideration
of  the  following:

•  Extending  to  all  federal  grant  recipient  institutions  and  all  students  and
trainees  involved  or  likely  to  be  involved  in  human  subject  research  the
current  federal  requirement  that  institutions  receiving  NIH  National
Research  Service  Award  training  grants  offer  programs  in  the  responsible
conduct  of  research.

•  The  role  of  accrediting  bodies  such  as  the  Joint  Commission  on
Accreditation  of  Healthcare  Organizations  (JCAHO).

•  Establishing  competency  in  research  ethics  as  a  condition  of  receipt  of
federal  research  grants,  both  for  institutions  and  individual  investigators.

•  Incorporating  of  research  ethics,  and  the  differences  between  the  ethics  of
research  involving  human  subjects  and  the  ethics  of  clinical  medical  care,
into  curricula  for  medical  students,  house  staff,  and  fellows.

•  Encouraging  the  nation's  leaders  in  biomedical  research  to  spearhead
efforts  to  elevate  the  importance  of  research  ethics  in  science.

Recommendation  10

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  the  IRB  component  of  the  federal  system
for  the  protection  of  human  subjects  be  changed  in  at  least  the  five  critical
areas  described  below.

1.  Mechanisms  for  ensuring  that  IRBs  appropriately  allocate  their
time  so  they  can  adequately  review  studies  that  pose  more  than  minimal  risk

818


Chapter  18


to  human  subjects.  This  may  include  the  creation  of  alternative  mechanisms
for  review  and  approval  of  minimal-risk  studies.

The  majority  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  concerns  in  its  Research
Proposal  Review  Project  centered  on  research  that  exposed  subjects  to  greater
than  minimal  risk  of  harm.  If  human  subjects  are  to  be  adequately  protected,  such
research  must  be  carefully  scrutinized.  However,  higher  risk  research  is  often
complex,  and  careful  review  is  time-consuming  and  difficult.  The  Advisory
Committee  heard  from  several  chairs  of  IRBs  who  underscored  the  difficulties
their  committees  experience  in  finding  the  time  to  adequately  review  such
research.  Members  of  IRBs  have  only  so  many  hours  they  can  devote  to  review
of  proposals.  This  problem  of  inadequate  time  appears  to  have  worsened  in
recent  years.  Institutional  review  boards  are  required  to  review  research
proposals  prior  to  their  review  for  funding  by  the  National  Institutes  of  Health.
As  the  probability  that  a  proposal  will  be  approved  for  funding  has  decreased  over
time,  due  to  increasing  competition  for  limited  research  monies,  the  number  of
proposals  being  submitted  to  NIH  from  many  institutions  has  significantly
increased.  This  has  resulted  in  a  substantial  increase  in  the  workload  of  some
IRBs,  whose  members  are  spending  considerable  time  reviewing  proposals  that
are  never  implemented.  Without  guidance  from  the  federal  government,  and
perhaps  regulatory  relief,  IRBs  may  not  have  the  flexibility  necessary  to
concentrate  their  efforts  where  subjects  are  in  greatest  need  of  protection— on  the
proposals  that  pose  the  greatest  risks  to  subjects  and  that  are  actually
implemented.

2.  Mechanisms  for  ensuring  that  the  information  provided  to  potential
subjects  (1)  clearly  distinguishes  research  from  treatment,  (2)  realistically
portrays  the  likelihood  that  subjects  may  benefit  medically  from  their
participation  and  the  nature  of  the  potential  benefit,  and  (3)  clearly  explains
the  potential  for  discomfort  and  pain  that  may  accompany  participation  in
the  research.

The  Advisory  Committee's  empirical  studies  and  public  testimony
suggests  that  there  may  be  considerable  confusion  in  the  minds  of  many  members
of  the  public  concerning  what  is  "research"  or  "experimentation,"  and  what  is
simply  an  application  of  a  new  technology  or  even  standard  medical  care.  There
is  reason  to  worry  that  participants  in  research  may  have  unrealistic  expectations
both  about  the  possibility  that  they  will  personally  benefit  from  participation  and
about  the  discomfort,  pain,  and  suffering  that  sometimes  accompany  some
research.  This  seemed  particularly  to  be  the  case  in  Phase  I  and  Phase  II  drug
trials.  It  is  important  that  in  the  informed  consent  process  it  is  clearly
communicated  to  the  potential  subject,  particularly  the  potential  patient-subject,

819


Part  IV

that  the  primary  intent  of  "research"  is  to  advance  medical  knowledge  and  not  to
advance  the  welfare  of  particular  subjects.  Inadequate  and  potentially  misleading
information  about  potential  benefits  and  harms,  and  about  the  trade-offs  between
enrollment  in  research  and  standard  or  conventional  treatment,  was  one  of  the
major  problems  identified  by  the  Advisory  Committee  in  our  Research  Proposal
Review  Project.

3.  Mechanisms  for  ensuring  that  the  information  provided  to  potential
subjects  clearly  identifies  the  federal  agency  or  agencies  sponsoring  or
supporting  the  research  project  in  whole  or  in  part  and  all  purposes  for
which  the  research  is  being  conducted  or  supported.

A  morally  complicating  factor  in  several  of  the  human  radiation
experiments  the  Advisory  Committee  has  studied  is  the  tendency  to  disclose  to
subjects  only  the  medical  purpose  of  the  research  (if  that)  and  not  those  purposes
of  the  research  that  advance  interests  other  than  medical  science  or  the
sponsorship  of  agencies  other  than  DHEW/DHHS.  For  example,  in  the  case  of
the  total-body  irradiation  experiments,  the  data  gathered  from  the  research  had  a
military  purpose  quite  distinct  from  questions  of  cancer  therapy.  The  purpose  and
funding  source  may  be  relevant  to  a  person's  decision  to  participate  in  human
subject  research  and  should  be  disclosed.

4.  Mechanisms  for  ensuring  that  the  information  provided  to  potential
subjects  clearly  identifies  the  financial  implications  of  deciding  to  consent  to
or  refuse  participation  in  research.

Many  of  the  consent  forms  that  the  Committee  reviewed  as  part  of  the
Research  Proposal  Review  Project  were  silent  on  the  subject  of  financial  costs.
However,  knowing  whether  being  in  research  costs  or  saves  them  money  may  be
necessary  for  potential  subjects  to  make  an  informed  decision  about  whether  to
participate.  Potential  subjects  need  to  know  whether  the  interventions  that  are  part
of  the  research  are  free  or  must  be  paid  for  and~if  there  are  any  financial  costs-
what  they  are,  the  likelihood  that  third-party  payers  will  pay  for  these  research-
related  medical  services,  and  the  extent  to  which  the  research  institution  will
assist  patient-subjects  in  securing  third-party  payment  or  reimbursement.

5.  Recognition  that  if  IRBs  are  to  adequately  protect  the  interests  of
human  subjects,  they  must  have  the  responsibility  to  determine  that  the
science  is  of  a  quality  to  warrant  the  imposition  of  risk  or  inconvenience  on
human  subjects  and,  in  the  case  of  research  that  purports  to  offer  a  prospect
of  medical  benefit  to  subjects,  to  determine  that  participating  in  the  research
affords  patient-subjects  at  least  as  good  an  opportunity  of  securing  this

820


Chapter  18


medical  benefit  as  would  be  available  to  them  without  participating  in
research.

In  research  involving  human  subjects,  good  ethics  begins  with  good
science.  In  our  Research  Proposal  Review  Project,  the  Advisory  Committee  was
unable  to  evaluate  the  scientific  merit  of  a  significant  number  of  proposals  based
on  the  documents  provided  by  institutions.  We  suspect  that  this  occurred  in  part
because  there  is  ambiguity  about  the  role  that  IRBs  should  play  with  respect  to
evaluation  of  scientific  merit  and,  thus,  that  documents  submitted  to  IRBs  may  be
inadequate  in  this  area.  The  Advisory  Committee  also  heard  dissatisfaction  with
this  ambiguity  in  our  interviews  and  oral  histories  of  researchers  and  from  chairs
of  IRBs.  If  the  science  is  poor,  it  is  unethical  to  impose  even  minimal  risk  or
inconvenience  on  human  subjects.  Although  the  fine  points  of  the  relative  merit
of  research  proposals  are  best  left  to  study  sections  and  other  review  mechanisms
specially  constituted  to  make  such  judgments,  IRBs  must  be  situated  to  assure
themselves  that  the  science  they  approve  to  go  forward  with  human  subjects
satisfies  some  minimal  threshold  of  scientific  merit.  In  some  cases,  the  IRB  may
be  the  only  opportunity  for  this  kind  of  scientific  review.

In  our  Subject  Interview  Study  interviews  with  patient-subjects,  we
confirmed  that  patient-subjects  often  base  their  decisions  to  participate  in  research
on  the  belief  that  physicians,  and  research  institutions  generally,  would  not  ask
them  to  enter  research  projects  if  becoming  a  research  subject  was  not  in  their
medical  best  interests.  For  these  patients,  even  the  most  candid,  clearly  written
consent  form  affords  little  protection,  for  both  the  consent  form  and  the  consent
process  are  of  little  interest  to  them.  For  patient-subjects  whose  decisions  to
participate  in  research  are  based  on  trust,  and  not  on  an  assessment  of  disclosed
information,  the  IRB  review  is  of  special  importance.  It  is  the  only  source  of
protection  in  the  federal  system  for  regulating  human  research  positioned  to
ensure  that  their  participation  in  research  does  not  compromise  their  medical
interests.  Such  a  determination,  however,  often  requires  more  specialized  clinical
expertise  than  any  one  IRB  can  possess.  Federal  policy  must  make  it  clear  that
IRBs  have  the  responsibility  to  make  this  determination,  but  it  must  also  allow
mechanisms  to  be  devised  at  the  local  level  that  permit  this  responsibility  to  be
satisfied  in  an  efficient  and  effective  manner.

Recommendation  11

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  a  mechanism  be  established  to  provide  for
the  continuing  interpretation  and  application  of  ethics  rules  and  principles
for  the  conduct  of  human  subject  research  in  an  open  and  public  forum.
This  mechanism  is  not  provided  for  in  the  Common  Rule.

821


Part  IV

Issues  in  research  ethics  are  no  more  static  than  issues  in  science.
Advances  in  biomedical  research  bring  new  twists  to  old  questions  in  ethics  and
sometimes  raise  new  questions  altogether.  No  structure  is  currently  in  place  for
interpreting  and  elaborating  the  rules  of  research  ethics,  a  process  that  is  essential
if  research  involving  human  subjects  is  to  have  an  ethical  framework  responsive
to  changing  times.  Also,  for  this  framework  to  be  effective,  any  changes  or
refinements  to  it  must  be  debated  and  adopted  in  public;  otherwise,  the  framework
will  fail  to  have  the  respect  and  support  of  the  scientific  community  and  the
American  people,  so  necessary  to  its  success.

Three  examples  of  outstanding  policy  issues  in  need  of  public  resolution
that  the  Advisory  Committee  confronted  in  our  work  are  presented  below:

1.  Clarification  of  the  meaning  of  minimal  risk  in  research  with  healthy
children,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  exposure  to  radiation.

2.  Regulations  to  cover  the  conduct  of  research  with  institutionalized
children.

3.  Guidelines  for  research  with  adults  of  questionable  competence.  Of
particular  concern  is  more-than-minimal-risk  research  that  offers  adults  of
questionable  competence  no  prospect  of  offsetting  medical  benefit.

Current  regulations  permit  the  involvement  of  children  as  subjects  in
research  that  offers  no  prospect  of  medical  benefit  to  participants  when  the
research  poses  no  more  than  minimal  risk.  An  important  question  that  has  come
to  the  Advisory  Committee's  attention,  both  in  the  literature  and  in  our  Research
Proposal  Review  Project,  is  whether  research  proposing  to  expose  healthy
children  to  tracer  doses  of  radiation  constitutes  minimal  risk.  The  uncertainty
surrounding  this  issue  calls  into  question  the  adequacy  of  the  federal  regulations,
as  currently  formulated,  in  providing  guidance  for  this  category  of  research.  This
is  a  policy  question  that  ought  to  be  discussed  and  resolved  in  a  public  forum  at
the  national  level,  not  left  to  the  deliberations  of  individual  IRBs.

Current  regulations  do  not  provide  any  special  protections  for  children
who  are  institutionalized  unless  they  are  also  wards  of  the  state.  Thus,
researchers  and  IRBs  have  no  more  guidance  from  the  federal  government  on  the
ethics  of  conducting  such  research  than  was  available  at  the  time  of  the  Fernald
and  Wrentham  experiments,  decades  ago.

The  Advisory  Committee  also  confronted  in  its  Research  Proposal  Review
Project  another  issue  of  research  policy  deserving  public  debate  and  resolution  in
a  public  forum.  This  is  the  issue  of  whether  and  under  what  conditions  adults  of
questionable  capacity  can  be  used  as  subjects  in  research  that  puts  them  at  more
than  minimal  risk  of  harm  and  from  which  they  cannot  realize  direct  medical
benefit.  It  is  important  that  the  nation  decide  together  whether  or  under  what
conditions  it  is  ever  permissible  to  use  a  person  toward  a  valued  social  end  in  an
activity  that  puts  him  or  her  at  risk  but  from  which  the  person  cannot  possibly
benefit  medically.

822


Chapter  18
Recommendation  12

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  at  least  the  following  four  steps  be  taken  to
improve  existing  protections  of  the  rights  and  interests  of  military  personnel
with  respect  to  human  subject  research.

1.  Review  of  policies  and  procedures:  Policies  and  procedures
governing  research  involving  human  subjects  should  be  reviewed  to  ensure
that  they  (1)  clearly  state  that  participation  as  research  subjects  by  members
of  the  armed  services  is  voluntary  and  without  repercussions  for  those  who
choose  not  to  participate;  and  (2)  clearly  distinguish  those  activities  that  are
research  and  therefore  discretionary  on  the  part  of  members  of  the  armed
services  from  other  activities  that  are  obligatory,  such  as  training  maneuvers
and  medical  interventions  intended  to  protect  the  troops.

2.  Appreciation  of  regulations:  Education  in  applicable  human
subjects  regulations  should  be  a  component  of  the  training  of  all  officers  and
investigators  who  may  be  involved  in  decisions  regarding  research  on  human
subjects.  Mechanisms  are  needed  to  ensure  that  officers  expected  to  have
command  responsibilities  and  all  officers  engaged  in  research,  development,
testing,  and  evaluation  have  an  adequate  appreciation  of  the  regulations
(including  DOD  regulations  and  directives,  and  service  regulations)  that  bear
on  the  conduct  of  research  involving  human  subjects,  including  an
appreciation  of  the  conditions  under  which  such  regulations  apply,  the  role
of  officers  in  interpreting  such  regulations,  and  how  such  regulations  are  to
be  implemented.

3.  Maximizing  voluntariness:  The  service  secretaries  should  consider
the  situations  under  which  it  would  be  appropriate  to  make  obligatory  two
practices  for  maximizing  voluntariness  that  have  been  employed  on  an  ad
hoc  basis  in  some  military  research:  first,  that  unit  officers  and  senior
noncommissioned  officers  (NCOs)  who  are  not  essential  as  volunteers  in  the
research  be  excluded  from  recruitment  sessions  in  which  members  of  units
are  informed  of  the  opportunity  and  asked  to  participate  in  research  by
investigators;  and  second,  that  an  ombudsman  not  connected  in  any  way
with  the  proposed  research  be  present  at  all  such  recruitment  sessions  to
monitor  that  the  voluntariness  of  participation  is  adequately  stressed  and
that  the  information  provided  about  the  research  is  adequate  and  accurate.

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  consideration  of  steps  1  through  3
above  in  light  of  our  examination  of  history  that  makes  plain  how  difficult  it  often
is  in  a  military  context  to  distinguish  an  order  from  a  request  for  voluntary
participation  and  to  distinguish  research  from  training.  (These  tensions  are
similar  in  many  respects  to  tensions  in  the  clinical  context  between  research  and

823


PartIV

treatment.)  Although  the  military  has  a  long  tradition  of  commitment  to  the  use
of  volunteers  in  research  and  has  introduced  significant  advances  in  the  military's
system  of  protection  for  human  subjects  since  the  1940s  and  1950s,  without
constant  attention  to  these  inherent  tensions,  the  potential  for  confusion  and
inappropriate  practice  continues.

The  military  setting,  with  its  strict  hierarchical  authority  structure  and
pervasive  presence  in  the  lives  of  its  members,  poses  special  problems  for
ensuring  the  voluntariness  of  participation  in  research  activities.  Thus,  although
the  DOD  has  adopted  and  implemented  the  consent  requirements  of  the  Common
Rule,  additional  procedural  safeguards  and  educational  activities  for  officers  may
be  warranted  to  counteract  the  generalized  deference  to  authority  inherent  in
military  culture.  Also,  because  the  opportunity  to  serve  the  nation  as  subjects  in
defense-oriented  research  projects  is  closely  akin  to  the  demands  placed  on
members  of  the  military  in  their  routine  duties,  it  is  desirable  to  emphasize  the
distinction  between  research  and  course-of-duty  risks  both  in  consent  procedures
and  in  officer  training  programs.

The  Advisory  Committee  recognizes  that  additional  procedural
requirements  in  soliciting  research  volunteers  and  augmenting  already  demanding
training  curricula  would  have  administrative  costs  and,  to  a  limited  extent,  would
shift  organizational  priorities.  It  is  the  Advisory  Committee's  understanding  that
the  DOD  is  preparing  to  revise  its  directive  implementing  the  Common  Rule  and
that  the  Advisory  Committee's  recommendations  with  respect  to  steps  1  through  3
above  are  a  timely  contribution  to  the  department's  deliberations.

Military  personnel  are  exposed  to  both  short-  and  long-term  risks  in  the
course  of  training  and  regular  duty  activities  as  well  as  when  they  participate  in
biomedical  or  behavioral  experiments.  The  demarcation  of  those  activities  that
are  research  in  contrast  with  those  that  constitute  routine  duty  assignments  and
medical  care  in  the  military  context  is  not  always  easy  to  discern  from  the
standpoint  of  the  potential  subject-member  of  the  military.  Indeed,  except  in
medical  settings  where  research  studies  are  regularly  performed  and  military
testing  sites  that  conduct  weapons,  materiel,  and  performance  trials  routinely,
officers  as  well  as  their  troops  may  be  uncertain  as  to  whether  the  status  of
particular  exercises  is  research  or  training.  Greater  clarity  in  communications  to
potential  subjects  about  the  genuinely  voluntary  nature  of  participation  in
research  projects  and  procedural  safeguards  in  recruiting  volunteers  could
improve  their  understanding  of  what  they  are  being  asked  (rather  than  required)  to
do.  Likewise,  educating  officers  throughout  the  military  services  who  may  be  in  a
position  to  solicit  volunteers  for  research  studies  as  to  the  distinctive  rights  of
research  subjects  and  the  particular  duties  to  protect  subjects  of  research  from
both  harm  and  violations  of  rights  would  make  the  Common  Rule  protections  of
subjects  more  effective.


824


Chapter  18


4.  Maintenance  of  a  registry:  The  secretaries  of  the  Navy  and  the  Air
Force  should  be  directed  to  adopt  the  policy  of  the  Army,  as  detailed  in  Army
Regulation  70-25,  to  maintain  a  registry  of  all  volunteers  in  human  studies
and  experiments  conducted  under  research  and  development  programs.
Such  registries  make  it  easier  to  confirm  participation  in  research  by
subjects  and  facilitates  their  long-term  follow-up.

In  analyzing  the  record  of  atomic  bomb  testing,  the  Advisory  Committee
has  found  that  military  personnel  were  exposed  to  radiation  and  nonradiation  risks
as  participants  in  experiments  that  were  conducted  in  conjunction  with  the  tests,
and  as  participants  in  other  activities  connected  to  the  testing.  While  these
activities  were  not  intended  to  measure  biological  effects  of  ionizing  radiation,  the
exposure  to  radiation  risk  was  incurred  without  adequate  provision  for  the
maintenance  of  records  to  document  exposures  or  in  order  to  allow  for  monitoring
and  follow-up  of  those  who  were  exposed.  Army  regulations  now  provide  for  a
registry  of  participants  in  experiments  conducted  under  the  authority  of  the
Army's  research  and  development  program.  This  tool  for  long-term  monitoring
and  follow-up  in  the  case  of  exposures  to  risks  unknown  at  the  time  of
participation  should  be  employed  by  the  other  services  as  well.

Recommendation  13

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  that  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  take  steps  to  improve  three  elements  of  the
current  federal  system  for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  interests  of  human
subjects-oversight,  sanctions,  and  scope.

1.  Oversight  mechanisms  to  examine  outcomes  and  performance.  In

most  federal  agencies,  current  mechanisms  of  oversight  of  research  involving
human  subjects  are  limited  to  audits  for  cause  and  a  review  of  paperwork
requirements.  These  strategies  do  not  provide  a  sufficient  basis  for  ensuring  that
the  current  system  is  working  properly.  The  adequate  protection  of  human
subjects  requires  that  the  system  be  subjected  to  regular,  periodic  evaluations  that
are  based  on  an  examination  of  outcomes  and  performance  and  that  include  the
perspective  and  experiences  of  subjects  of  research  as  well  as  the  research
community.  The  Committee  recommends  that  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency
Working  Group  consider  new  methods  of  oversight  that  focus  on  outcomes  and
performance  of  the  system  of  protection  of  human  subjects.  The  Committee's
Subject  Interview  Study  and  Research  Proposal  Review  Project,  for  example,
yielded  important  and  heretofore  unavailable  information  about  the  current  status
of  human  subjects  protections  that  could  never  be  obtained  from  either  an
oversight  policy  that  audits  only  "for  cause"  or  a  review  that  determines  only

825


Part  IV

whether  paperwork  requirements  have  been  satisfied.

We  realize  that  resources  available  for  oversight  are  limited  and  that  there
may  be  real  constraints  on  what,  practically,  can  be  achieved.  At  the  very  least,
we  urge  that  in  the  setting  of  priorities  for  limited  oversight  dollars,  a  premium  be
placed  on  methods  that  permit  an  examination  of  what  the  system  is  actually
producing  with  respect  to  the  outcome  of  human  subjects  protections,  in  contrast
to  methods  that  focus  on  process.

2.  Appropriateness  of  sanctions  for  violations  of  human  subjects
protections.  The  Committee  recommends  that  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency
Working  Group  review  and  evaluate  the  options  available  to  the  government
when  it  is  determined  that  there  has  been  a  violation  of  the  Common  Rule  in  the
conduct  of  federally  sponsored  research  involving  human  subjects.  The  object  of
this  review  is  to  determine  whether  the  current  structure  of  sanctions  that  can  be
imposed  on  investigators  and  grantee  institutions  is  appropriate  to  the  seriousness
with  which  the  nation  takes  violations  of  the  rights  and  interests  of  human
subjects.  This  structure  includes  mechanisms  for  detecting  violations  (including
issues  of  oversight  discussed  above),  severity  of  sanctions,  and  dissemination  of
policies  on  sanctions  to  investigators  and  institutions.  We  are  particularly
concerned  that,  even  in  the  absence  of  research-related  injury,  there  be  clear  and
severe  penalties  for  investigators  who  use  human  subjects  without  their  consent.
Although  at  least  one  state  authorizes  civil  and  criminal  penalties  for  failure  to
obtain  a  subject's  consent,8  in  most  jurisdictions  civil  litigation  is  unlikely  to
result  in  penalties  to  investigators  for  failing  to  obtain  consent  from  subjects  if  the
subjects  have  not  been  physically  injured.  The  Committee  is  aware  that  the
Common  Rule  provides  for  sanctions  of  violations  of  its  provisions,  including  the
withdrawal  of  multiple  project  assurances  and,  with  that  action,  research  funding.
It  is  not  clear,  however,  that  this  system  of  sanctions  functions  well;  nor  is  it  clear
that  it  adequately  addresses  the  public's  concerns  that  those  who  abuse  the  trust  of
research  subjects  be  dealt  with  accordingly.

3.  Extension  of  human  subjects  protections  to  nonfederally  funded
research.  While  some  nonfederally  funded  research  is  performed  voluntarily  in
accordance  with  the  Common  Rule,  there  is  a  need  to  assess  the  level  of  research
performed  outside  its  requirements  and  to  consider  action  to  ensure  that  all
subjects  are  afforded  the  protections  it  offers.  The  Committee  was  charged  with
reviewing  only  federally  funded  research,  and  we  limited  our  inquiries
accordingly.  However,  we  are  aware  that  important  areas  of  research  are
conducted  largely  independently  of  federal  funding— for  example,  some  research
on  reproductive  technologies.  We  recommend  that  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  take  steps  to  ensure  that  all  human  subjects  are
adequately  protected.

826


Chapter  18

Recommendation  14

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  that  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  review  the  area  of  compensation  for  research
injuries  of  future  subjects  of  federally  funded  research,  particularly
reimbursement  for  medical  costs  incurred  as  a  result  of  injuries  attributable
to  a  subject's  participation  in  such  research,  and  create  a  mechanism  for  the
satisfactory  resolution  of  this  long-standing  social  issue.

A  system  of  compensation  for  research  injuries  has  been  contemplated
since  at  least  the  late  1940s,  when  the  Army  debated,  but  ultimately  rejected,
suggestions  to  establish  a  "uniform"  program  for  compensating  prisoner
volunteers  who  were  injured  during  experiments  involving  malaria  and  hepatitis.
Beginning  in  the  1970s,  a  number  of  government-sponsored  ethics  panels
endorsed  the  provision  of  compensation  for  research  injuries,  culminating  with
the  President's  Commission  for  the  Study  of  Ethical  Problems  in  Medicine  and
Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research  (President's  Commission)  in  1982.  Since
then,  experts  and  commentators  have  continued  to  support  this  position.9

In  our  deliberations  concerning  retrospective  remedies  for  injured  research
subjects,  the  Advisory  Committee  was  unable  to  reference  a  federal  policy  or
guide  for  a  fair  system  of  compensation  of  research  subjects,  as  no  policy  exists
even  today.  So  that  years  from  now  others  do  not  have  to  revisit  and  struggle
with  this  issue,  the  federal  government  must  take  steps  now  to  address  the  issue  of
compensation  for  injured  research  subjects.  These  steps  should  include
consideration  of  the  approach  recommended  by  the  President's  Commission  in  its
report,  Compensating  for  Research  Injuries:  The  Ethical  and  Legal  Implications
of  Programs  to  Redress  Injured  Subjects. w

The  President's  Commission  summarized  the  basic  argument  for
compensation  as  follows:

Medical  and  scientific  experimentation,  even  if
carefully  and  cautiously  conducted,  carries  certain
inherent  dangers.  Experimentation  has  its  victims,
people  who  would  not  have  suffered  injury  and
disability  were  it  not  for  society's  desire  for  the
fruits  of  research.  Society  does  not  have  the
privilege  of  asking  whether  this  price  should  be
paid;  it  is  being  paid.  In  the  absence  of  a  program
of  compensation  of  subjects,  those  who  are  injured
bear  both  the  physical  burdens  and  the  associated
financial  costs.  The  question  of  justice  is  why  it
should  be  these  persons,  rather  than  others,  who  are

827


Part  IV

to  be  expected  to  absorb  the  financial,  as  well  as  the
unavoidable  human  costs  of  the  societal  research
enterprise  which  benefits  everyone."

The  Advisory  Committee  urges  not  only  consideration  of  a  compensation
policy  for  physical  injuries  attributable  to  research  but  also  that  consideration  be
given  to  appropriate  remedies  for  subjects  who  have  suffered  dignitary  harms,
even  in  the  absence  of  physical  injury.  Subjects  so  wronged  have  little  recourse  in
the  current  system;  litigation  in  the  absence  of  physical  injury  is  unlikely  to
provide  relief  to  people  who  have  been  used  as  subjects  without  their  adequate
consent.  If  it  is  determined  that  financial  compensation  is  not  generally  an
appropriate  remedy  in  the  absence  of  physical  injury,  consideration  should  be
given  to  other  remedies  that  would  be  fitting.

Recommendations  for  Balancing  National  Security  Interests  and

the  Rights  of  the  Public

Recommendation  15

15a:  The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  the  adoption  of  a  federal  policy  requiring  the
informed  consent  of  all  human  subjects  of  classified  research  and  that  this
requirement  not  be  subject  to  exemption  or  waiver.  In  all  cases,  potential
subjects  should  be  informed  of  the  identity  of  the  sponsoring  federal  agency
and  that  the  project  involves  classified  information.

15b:  The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  the  adoption  of  a  federal  policy  requiring  that
classified  research  involving  human  subjects  be  permitted  only  after  the
review  and  approval  of  an  independent  panel  of  appropriate
nongovernmental  experts  and  citizen  representatives,  all  with  the  necessary
security  clearances.  This  panel  should  be  charged  with  determining  (1)  that
the  proposed  experiment  has  scientific  merit;  (2)  that  risks  to  subjects  are
acceptable  and  that  the  balance  of  risk  and  potential  benefit  is  appropriate;
(3)  that  the  disclosure  to  prospective  subjects  is  sufficiently  informational
and  that  the  consent  solicited  from  subjects  is  sufficiently  voluntary;  and  (4)
whether  potential  subjects  must  have  security  clearances  in  order  to  be
sufficiently  informed  to  make  a  valid  consent  decision,  and  if  so,  how  this  can
be  achieved  without  compromising  the  privacy  and  voluntariness  of  potential
subjects.  Complete  documentation  of  the  panel's  deliberations  and  of  the
informed  consent  documents  and  process  should  be  maintained  permanently.
These  records  should  be  made  public  as  soon  as  the  national  security  concern
justifying  secrecy  no  longer  applies.

828


Chapter  18


Although  the  Advisory  Committee  believes  that  the  interests  of  both
science  and  potential  subjects  are  best  served  when  research  involving  human
subjects  is  conducted  in  the  open,  a  public  policy  prohibiting  the  conduct  of
human  subject  research  in  secret  is  unwise.  Important  national  security  goals  may
suffer  if  human  subjects  research  projects  making  unique  and  irreplaceable
contributions  were  foreclosed.  More  citizens  may  suffer  harms  for  lack  of  such
information  than  would  be  harmed  if  adequately  safeguarded  human  subjects
research  was  conducted  in  secret.

It  also  is  possible  that  a  prohibition  on  classified  human  subjects  research
would  be  circumvented  through  redefinition  of  activities  or  disregarded  outright.
If  this  were  to  occur,  the  participants  in  such  activities  could  end  up  less  well
protected  than  if  they  were  bona  fide  research  subjects.

The  Advisory  Committee  believes,  however,  that  the  classification  of
human  subject  research  ought  properly  to  be  a  rare  event  and  that  the  subjects  of
such  research,  as  well  as  the  interests  of  the  public  in  openness  in  science  and  in
government,  deserve  special  protections.  The  Advisory  Committee  does  not
believe  that  continuing  with  the  current  federal  policy  governing  the  protection  of
human  subjects,  which  does  not  provide  any  special  safeguards  or  procedures  for
classified  research,  is  adequate.

In  the  current  political  context,  classified  human  subjects  research  occurs
relatively  rarely.  Existing  policy  may  prove  an  inadequate  safeguard  of
individual  rights  and  welfare,  however,  if  in  the  future  national  security  crises
occur  that  generate  a  perceived  need  for  classified  research.  The  history  of
human  experimentation  conducted  in  the  interests  of  strengthening  and  protecting
national  security  that  the  Advisory  Committee  has  examined  demonstrates  how
the  rights  and  interests  of  citizens  can  be  violated  in  secret  research.  The
convergence  of  elements  of  secrecy,  urgent  national  purposes,  and  the  essential
vulnerability  of  research  subjects,  owing  to  differentials  in  information  and  power
between  those  conducting  research  and  those  serving  as  subjects,  could  again  lead
to  abuses  of  individual  rights  and,  upon  subsequent  revelation,  the  erosion  of
public  distrust  in  government.

The  Advisory  Committee  is  particularly  concerned  about  two  aspects  of
current  policy— exceptions  to  informed  consent  requirements  and  the  absence  of
any  special  review  and  approval  process  for  human  research  that  is  to  be
classified.  The  current  requirement  for  the  informed  consent  of  research
participants  is  not  absolute,  leaving  open  the  possibility  that  subjects  may  serve  as
mere  tools  of  the  state  in  the  interests  of  national  security  if  consent  is  waived.  A
strengthened  requirement  for  the  informed  consent  of  research  subjects  in
classified  research  should  safeguard  against  the  merely  instrumental  use  of
individual  people  to  serve  national  purposes.

Institutional  review  boards  of  government  agencies  are  not  sufficiently
independent  of  the  interests  of  the  organizations  of  which  they  are  a  part  to  set

829


8


PartIV

aside  considerations  of  organizational  mission  when  considering  research
construed  as  having  the  greatest  national  priority.  Thus,  determination  by  an
agency  IRB  that  a  waiver  of  informed  consent  is  warranted,  or  that  sufficient
information  about  a  study  remains  in  a  censored  protocol  description  for  a
potential  subject's  review,  inadequately  protects  subjects'  interests  and  rights  and
does  not  adequately  safeguard  the  public's  trust.  By  contrast,  an  independent
panel  should  be  less  subject  to  unintended  bias  than  that  of  an  IRB  of  a  federal
agency  whose  mission  is  to  protect  and  promote  national  security.

Although  the  Advisory  Committee  acknowledges  that  both  the  formation
of  an  independent  review  panel  and  an  absolute  informed  consent  requirement
create  opportunities  for  information  leaks  or  security  breaches  and  delays  in  the
progress  of  urgent  research,  these  disadvantages  are  surmountable  and  are  more
than  balanced  by  the  increased  vigilance  afforded  the  rights  and  interests  of
citizens  and  the  safeguarding  of  the  public's  trust  in  government.


Recommendation  16

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  improvements  be  made  in  the  protections
of  the  public's  rights  and  interests  with  respect  to  intentional  releases.

16a.  The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  an  independent  review  panel  review  any
planned  or  intended  environmental  releases  of  substances  in  cases  where  the
release  is  proposed  to  take  place  in  secret  or  in  circumstances  where  any
aspect  of  the  environmental  review  process  required  by  law  is  conducted  in
secret.

In  conducting  its  review,  the  independent  panel  should  ensure  that  (1)
secrecy  is  limited  to  that  required  for  reasons  of  national  security;  (2)  records  will
be  kept  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  the  release,  the  rationale  for  not  informing
the  public  (including  workers  and  service  personnel,  as  well  as  affected  citizens),
and  alternative  means  of  gathering  data  that  were  considered;  (3)  actions  to
mitigate  risk  were  considered  and  will  be  taken;  and  (4)  actions  will  be  taken  to
measure  the  actual  effect  of  the  release  on  the  environment  and  human  health  and
safety,  to  the  extent  that  measurements  are  deemed  needed  and  feasible.  The
panel  should  also  review  the  conditions  on  which  any  information  kept  secret
should  be  made  public,  with  a  view  toward  ensuring  the  release  of  information  as
soon  as  practicable,  consistent  with  any  legitimate  national  security  restrictions.
The  panel  should  report  to  Congress  periodically  on  the  number  and  nature  of
releases  it  has  reviewed.


830


Chapter  18


The  Advisory  Committee  does  not  conclude  that  intentional  releases  can
never  be  conducted  in  secret.  It  does  conclude  that,  to  the  extent  that  the
government  proposes  to  conduct  an  intentional  release  that  involves  elements  of
secrecy  there  must  be  independent  review  to  ensure  that  the  action  is  needed,  that
risk  is  minimized,  and  that  records  will  be  kept  to  make  sure  a  proper  accounting
is  made  to  the  public  at  the  earliest  date  consistent  with  legitimate  national

security  concerns.

The  Advisory  Committee  found  that  the  government  has  sponsored
numerous  intentional  environmental  releases  of  radiation  for  research  purposes.
In  many  cases  these  releases  were  conducted  in  secret,  without  warning  to  the
surrounding  populations.  While  the  risks  posed  by  these  releases  appear  to  have
been  relatively  small,  in  many  cases  little  data  remain  on  the  precise  measure  ot
these  risks  or  on  actions  taken  to  minimize  risk  and  to  ensure  that  unknowing
citizens  did  not  inadvertently  expose  themselves  to  greater  risks  than  necessary.
In  addition  the  Committee  found  that  the  risks  and  concerns  posed  by  intentional
releases  for  research  purposes-in  terms  of  both  the  magnitude  of  radiation
exposure  and  the  consequences  of  secret  keeping-sometimes  did  not  differ
qualitatively  from  those  posed  by  "routine"  operational  releases  of  radiation.  Most
notably  the  radiation  risk  posed  by  the  Green  Run,  a  relatively  large  intentional
release,  was  a  fraction  of  that  posed  by  radiation  released  in  the  normal  course  of
operation  of  Hanford  in  the  mid- 1 940s.

This  recommendation  is  intended  to  apply  to  all  secret  releases  ot
substances  into  the  environment,  not  merely  to  substances  determined  to  be
hazardous The  Committee  believes  that  the  operative  concern  is  secrecy;  even  it
the  substance  released  is  entirely  harmless,  the  backdrop  of  secrecy  is  sufficient  to
create  a  climate  of  distrust.  The  Committee  did  not  have  the  expertise,  however,
to  determine  whether  so  broad  a  sweep  was  feasible.  At  minimum,  the
Committee  recommends  that  any  secret  release  of  a  substance  that  would
necessitate  an  environmental  impact  statement  be  required  to  have  a  review  by  an

independent  panel.

Today,  federal  environmental  laws  and  rules  provide  for  environmental
impact  statements,  which  are  subject  to  review,  in  instances  in  which  the  federal
government  proposes  actions  with  a  substantial  effect  on  the  environment.
However,  the  rules  also  provide  that  part-or  even  all-of  such  reviews  may  be
conducted  in  secret.  In  fact,  reviews  that  are  secret  in  whole  or  part  do  take  place.

The  Environmental  Protection  Agency  has  the  authority  and  responsibility
to  oversee  all  environmental  impact  reviews,  including  those  conducted  in  secret.
However  the  Advisory  Committee's  inquiries  indicate  that  EPA's  role  in  the
review  of  secret  impact  statements  has  been  limited.  Moreover,  the  decades  of
secret  keeping  regarding  intentional  releases  have  created  a  basis  for  distrust,
particularly  among  those  living  in  potentially  affected  communities.  Even  today,
there  is  little  practical  means  by  which  the  public  can  know  the  full  extent

831


PartIV

(whether  or  not  great)  of  environmental  decision  making  and  action  that  is  being
kept  secret.  The  location  of  responsibility  for  review  of  these  activities  in  a  single
panel  that  is  itself  accountable  and  that  is  independent  of  agencies  that  conduct
releases  should  be  a  means  to  restoring  lost  trust.

16b.  The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  an  appropriate  government  agency,
currently  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  maintain  a  program
directed  at  the  oversight  of  classified  programs,  with  suitably  cleared
personnel.  This  program  should  maintain  critical  records,  such  as
environmental  impact  statements  and  environmental  permits,  permanently.
The  agencies  subject  to  regulation  should  ensure  the  timely  consideration  of
environmental  impacts  and  oversight  and  the  timely  provision  of  all
necessary  clearances.  EPA  should  provide  regular  unclassified  reports  to
Congress  describing  the  extent  of  its  activities  as  well  as  any  significant
problems.

The  requirements  of  environmental  law  apply  to  activities  of  the  federal
government,  regardless  of  whether  those  activities  are  classified.  However,
classification  complicates  the  process  of  regulatory  oversight  by  the  EPA  or  any
other  regulatory  agency  and  limits  the  ability  to  report  to  the  public  and  for  the
public  to  express  its  own  concerns.  Furthermore,  secrecy  has  been  used  to  shield
activities  that  raise  public  health  concerns.

For  these  reasons,  the  responsibility  for  environmental  oversight  is
magnified  for  secret  programs.  There  is  no  fundamental  barrier  to  effective
oversight— at  least  some  regulators  can  be  given  the  necessary  clearances.
However,  ensuring  timely  and  effective  oversight  requires  cooperation  between
the  regulated  agency  and  the  regulatory  agency  to  establish  the  necessary
oversight  procedures.  These  mechanisms  are  not  fully  in  place.  For  example,  the
EPA  office  with  the  statutory  responsibility  to  review  environmental  impact
statements  maintains  no  records  of  classified  environmental  impact  statements
and  has  not  historically  had  individuals  cleared  to  review  the  most  highly
classified  defense  programs.  The  EPA  office  responsible  for  overseeing  federal
compliance  with  environmental  regulations  has  just  begun  to  establish
mechanisms  for  overseeing  secret  programs.

Recommendations  on  Openness

Recommendation  17

The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  that  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  take  steps  to  ensure  the  continued  application
of  the  lessons  learned  from  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working

832


Chapter  18


Group's  efforts  to  organize  and  make  accessible  to  the  public,  and  the
government  itself,  the  nation's  historical  records.

The  Committee's  experience  confirms  that  with  presidential  directive  and
the  strong  and  continued  support  of  a  multiagency  records  search  team,
substantial  amounts  of  the  nation's  documentary  heritage  can  be  located  and
retrieved.  Through  the  research  process,  important  lessons  were  learned  about
ways  in  which  to  improve  the  accessibility  and  usefulness  of  this  documentary
record  to  both  the  public  and  the  government.

We  are  aware  that  government  resources  are  stretched  thin  and  may  well
be  diminishing.  However,  the  nation's  records  are  a  precious  asset  that  the
government  created,  and  holds  in  trust,  for  its  citizens.  This  asset,  and  the
commitment  made  to  the  public  through  the  enactment  of  the  Freedom  of
Information  Act,  is  of  limited  value  if  the  government  itself  cannot  access  its
records  as  citizens  rightfully  expect  it  should.  The  Committee's  experience
confirms  that  there  is  an  intense  public  interest  in  using  these  records,  a  public
willingness  to  volunteer  time  and  intelligence  needed  to  help  organize  and
research  them,  and  great  opportunity  to  make  them  available  in  ways  that  will

permit  citizens  to  do  so.

The  Committee  recommends  that  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency
Working  Group  effect  the  following  five  steps  to  increase  both  government  and
citizen  access  to  information  about  the  past.  The  implementation  of  these  steps
might  best  be  accomplished  by  the  designation  of  an  individual  or  entity  with
responsibility  and  appropriate  authority  for  their  effectuation.12

1.  The  most  important  historical  collections  should  be  entrusted  to
the  National  Archives.  The  agencies  and  the  National  Archives  should
review  the  extent  to  which  this  is  now  being  done  and  develop  policies  to
hasten  the  transfer  of  agency  records  to  the  National  Archives.

Federal  law  basically  requires  that  permanent  records  be  transferred  to  the
National  Archives  when  (1)  they  are  more  than  thirty  years  old;  or  (2)  earlier  if
the  originating  agency  no  longer  needs  to  use  the  records  for  the  purpose  for
which  they  were  created  or  in  its  regular  current  business,  or  if  agency  needs  will
be  satisfied  by  use  of  the  records  at  the  National  Archives.

Nonetheless,  many  portions  of  older  collections  have  been  appraised  as
permanently  valuable  but  are  not  at  the  National  Archives.  For  example,  the
Committee  found  that  a  great  number  of  AEC  headquarters  records  of  substantial
interest  to  the  Committee  and  the  public  are  still  held  by  DOE  either  at  its
headquarters  or  at  the  Washington  National  Records  Center  (these  include  the
only  collection  of  general  manager  files,  the  post- 1958  Executive  Secretariat  files,
virtually  all  the  Division  of  Military  Application  files,  and  most  of  the  files  of  the
Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine).  In  the  case  of  the  Department  of  Defense,  the

833


Part  IV

records  of  the  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense  largely  remain  at  the
Washington  National  Records  Center  or  with  the  Office  of  the  Secretary  of
Defense.13

The  public's  ability  to  access  records  held  by  agencies  is  limited  because
(1)  most  agencies  do  not  know  in  detail  what  records  they  still  hold,  and  even  if
folder  listings  exist,  they  are  not  publicly  available  for  the  most  part;  (2)  there  has
generally  been  little  declassification  review  of  these  records;  (3)  there  is  no
requirement  that  agencies  permit  access  to  even  completely  unclassified  or
declassified  collections;  and  (4)  most  agencies  have  very  limited  facilities  to
accommodate  researchers.  The  public's  ability  to  gain  access  to  documents  in
federal  records  centers  is  also  limited  because  (1)  the  task  of  examining  the  basic
inventory  forms  (SF-135s)14  to  determine  what  is  in  a  record  group  is  time-
consuming,  and  in  many  cases,  the  SF-135s  do  not  adequately  describe  the
records;  (2)  there  has  generally  been  very  little  declassification  review  of  these
records;  and  (3)  permission  must  be  obtained  from  the  appropriate  agencies  to
review  even  completely  unclassified  or  declassified  collections;  this  permission
process  can  be  time-consuming  and  agencies  can  impose  restrictions,  such  as
permitting  review  but  not  copying.

Locating  records  at  the  National  Archives  has  the  following  advantages:
(1)  there  is  generally  at  least  some  type  of  finding  aid  and,  in  some  cases,  folder
listings  prepared  by  the  National  Archives  or  the  agencies  when  the  records  were
sent;  (2)  archivists  are  available  to  assist  researchers;  (3)  there  is  complete  access
to  unclassified  and  declassified  collections  (unless  Privacy  Act  or  similar
restrictions  apply);  and  (4)  many  classified  records  at  the  National  Archives
(among  the  exceptions  are  Restricted  Data  records  and  records  dealing  with
intelligence)  are  properly  the  subject  of  an  informal  and  usually  very  quick  in-
house  declassification  review  process  called  Special  Declassification  Review.
Under  Special  Declassification  Review,  records  are  often  reviewed  within
months,  versus  the  years  it  takes  under  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act  or
Mandatory  Declassification  Review.

2.  Agencies  should  make  readily  available  all  existing  inventories,
indices,  folder  listings,  and  other  finding  aids  to  record  collections  now  under
agency  control.  Classified  finding  aids  should  undergo  declassification
review,  and  declassified  versions  of  these  finding  aids  should  also  be  made
available.

Finding  aids  or  indices  to  federal  government  records  holdings  are  an
invaluable  tool,  without  which  it  would  be  practically  impossible  to  locate
documents  of  interest  from  among  the  hundreds  of  thousands  of  boxes  of  records
maintained  by  the  government.

Many  collections  of  records  still  held  by  agencies  have  finding  aids  or
indices  that  have  been  inaccessible  to  the  public,  either  because  they  simply  have

834


Chapter  18


never  been  made  available  or  because  they  are  classified.  Finding  aids  should  be
made  available  to  the  public  in  a  headquarters  office,  regional  offices  (including
all  field  site  reading  rooms),  and  ultimately,  on  the  Internet.  (This
recommendation  does  not  call  for  the  creation  of  indices  where  they  do  not
currently  exist.)

For  example,  folder  listings  (which  provide  the  titles  of  records  files)  exist
for  many  of  the  AEC  headquarters  record  collections  that  are  still  at  DOE  or  at
the  Washington  National  Records  Center.  These  include,  among  others,  the  only
known  collection  of  general  manager's  files  from  1947  through  1974,  all  of  the
Division  of  Military  Applications  files  from  1947  through  1974,  all  of  the
Executive  Secretariat  files  from  1959  through  1974,  and  most  of  the  Division  of
Biology  and  Medicine  files  from  1947  through  1974.  Without  the  folder  listings
it  would  have  been  difficult  for  the  Advisory  Committee  to  locate  particular
collections  of  interest  and,  even  if  located,  to  determine  the  documents  to  be
reviewed.  The  folder  listings,  however,  have  not  been  generally  available  to  the
public.

Similarly,  the  DOE's  Oak  Ridge  Operations  Office  vault  contains  more
than  7,000  cubic  feet  of  classified  records.  The  Committee  found  that  the
Records  Holding  Task  Group  (RHTG)  collection  in  this  vault  (about  300  cubic
feet)  contained  many  documents  of  interest  to  the  Committee,  which  were
typically  readily  declassifiable.  This  collection  has  an  index;  however,  the  index
is  classified.

In  the  case  of  the  National  Archives,  finding  aids  are  generally  available.
However,  there  are  fifteen  National  Archives  facilities  around  the  country.
Currently,  the  only  means  of  determining  exactly  what  records  are  at  a  particular
branch  is  to  contact  that  branch  directly.  This  is  a  time-consuming  process,  and
there  are  understandable  limits  on  the  number  of  pages  of  finding  aids  archivists
can  copy  and  send  to  any  person  (a  single  finding  aid  can  total  hundreds  of
pages).  It  would  be  much  simpler  and  easier  for  the  public  to  be  able  to  review
the  finding  aids  from  all  fifteen  branches  at  any  one  of  them.

3.  The  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group  should  ensure
the  development  of  policies  to  improve  public  access  to  records  held  by
agencies  or  deposited  in  federal  records  centers.

In  the  case  of  a  vast  amount  of  records,  particularly  those  not  yet
transferred  to  the  National  Archives,  the  available  descriptions  are  often  too  broad
or  incomplete  to  provide  meaningful  clues  to  the  contents  of  boxes.  Thus,  a
Freedom  of  Information  Act  request  that  seeks  all  information  on  a  given  topic
may  well  receive  a  response  that  ignores  information  located  in  boxes  or  files  that
are  not  clearly  labeled  or  indexed.  Under  these  circumstances,  searches  may  be
more  fruitfully  conducted  by  citizens  with  an  interest  in,  and  understanding  of,  the
subject  of  the  search.  However,  because  so  many  of  the  nation's  records

835


Part  IV

collections  are  off-limits  to  the  public,  even  citizens  who  are  willing  to  help  are
often  precluded  from  lending  a  hand.

Many  collections  of  interest  to  citizens  contain  no  classified  documents
and  can  be  made  directly  accessible  to  them.  However,  the  Committee  reviewed
collections,  particularly  those  containing  decades-old  records,  where  the  entire
collection  was  classified  because  it  housed  a  small  number  of  classified
documents.  For  example,  Record  Group  326  at  the  College  Park  National
Archives  has  approximately  160  feet  of  Metallurgical  Laboratory /Argonne
National  Laboratory  documentation  that  should  be  of  significant  historical
interest.  The  collection  itself  is  classified  and  currently  inaccessible  to  citizens.
The  Committee's  examination  of  large  portions  of  the  collection  found  very  few
classified  documents,  and  when  found,  these  documents  were  immediately
declassified.

Executive  Order  12958,  issued  by  President  Clinton  on  April  17,  1995
("Classified  National  Security  Information"),  provides  broadly  for  the  automatic
declassification  (with  specific  exceptions)  of  all  records  that  are  more  than
twenty-five  years  old.  In  implementing  the  order,  agencies  should  target
collections  that  can  be  relatively  quickly  reviewed  and  made  available  to  the
public  in  their  entirety.

4.  Agencies  should  maintain  complete  records,  available  to  the  public,
of  document  destruction.

Government  records  management  rules  provide  for  the  destruction  at
varying  dates  in  the  future  of  all  records  that  are  appraised  as  temporary  (that  is,
nonpermanent).  They  also  provide  that  records  be  kept  where  certain  collections,
including  classified  records,  are  destroyed.  But  the  Committee  found  that  records
of  destruction  are  themselves  routinely  destroyed.

For  example,  upon  Committee  inquiry,  DOE  investigation  revealed  that
the  files  of  the  AEC's  Intelligence  Division  had  been  substantially  destroyed
during  the  1970s  and  as  late  as  1989.  (These  files  may  have  contained  data  on
intentional  releases,  experimentation  performed  by  the  AEC  for  other  agencies,
and  on  the  rules  and  practices  of  secret  keeping  regarding  human  data  gathering).
The  DOE's  inquiry  found  individuals  who  stated  that  they  destroyed  substantial
records  and  that  records  of  destruction  were  made.  However,  in  accordance  with
DOE  rules,  the  "certificates  of  destruction"  were  themselves  later  destroyed.15  As
another  example,  documents  provided  by  the  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs  and
the  Department  of  Defense  indicate  that,  in  1 947,  the  government  contemplated
the  keeping  of  secret  records  in  anticipation  of  potential  liability  claims  from
service  personnel  exposed  to  radiation  and  that  some  such  records  were  kept.
However,  despite  substantial  search  efforts  by  the  DOD  and  the  VA,  the  specific
identity  of  the  records  referred  to  has  not  yet  been  determined.16


836


Chapter  18


The  Committee  presumes  that  the  vast  majority  of  these  records  were
destroyed  in  the  routine  course  of  business.  Nonetheless,  where  records  recording
the  destruction  of  important  collections  of  records  are  themselves  destroyed,  the
public  cannot  know  whether  important  records  have  been  destroyed  (or  merely
are  lost)  and  cannot  be  easily  assured  that  destruction  was  in  the  routine  course  of
business.

5.  The  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group  should  review
and  develop  policies  concerning  public  access  to  records  generated  or  held  by
private  contractors  and  institutions  receiving  federal  funding.

Since  World  War  II,  the  government  has  relied  on  contractors  and  grantees
to  perform  an  increasing  number  of  governmental  activities,  including
government-sponsored  biomedical  research.  When  the  Advisory  Committee
undertook  to  locate  information  on  particular  government-sponsored  radiation
experiments,  it  was  often  told  by  federal  agencies  that,  if  such  information  was
created,  it  would  have  been  maintained  only  by  nonfederal  entities  or
investigators  and  not  the  government  itself.

Where  an  activity  is  conducted  by  government  employees  (for  example,
researchers  working  in  the  facilities  of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health's  Clinical
Center),  citizens  have  a  right  to  seek  access  to  information  relating  to  that  activity
under  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act.  A  similar  right  of  access  often  does  not
apply,  however,  where  a  similar  or  even  identical  activity  is  conducted,  also  on
federal  funds,  at  nonfederal  facilities.17

From  the  citizen's  vantage  point,  the  right  to  know  about  a  government-
funded  activity  should  not  depend  on  whether  that  activity  is  conducted  directly
by  the  government  or  by  a  government-funded  private  institution.  At  the  same
time,  nonfederal  institutions  are  not  governmental  agencies,  and  there  may  be
good  reasons  they  should  not  be  burdened  with  identical  obligations  to  retain
records  and  to  provide  information  to  the  public.

Rules  are  needed  that  accommodate  both  the  citizen's  right  to  know  about
the  conduct  of  the  government  and  the  relevant  differences  between  nonfederal
and  federal  institutions  with  respect  to  duties  to  create  and  maintain  publicly
accessible  records.18  To  ensure  consistent  and  informed  governmentwide
treatment  of  the  question,  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group  may
wish  to  call  on  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (OMB)  and  the  Office  of
Federal  Procurement  Policy  (OFPP)  to  review  the  current  right  of  members  of  the
public  to  gain  access  to  the  records  of  government  grantees  and  contractors.

Recommendation  18

18a:  The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  to  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  that  the  CIA's  record-keeping  system  be

837


Part  IV

reviewed  to  ensure  that  records  maintained  by  that  agency  are  accessible
upon  legitimate  request  from  the  public  or  governmental  sources.  This
review  could  be  performed  by  the  CIA  inspector  general  or  an  oversight
panel.

18b:  The  Advisory  Committee  recommends  that  all  records  of  the
CIA  bearing  on  programs  of  secret  human  research,  such  as  MKULTRA
and  the  related  CIA  human  behavior  projects  from  the  late  1940s  through
the  early  1970s,  including  Bluebird,  Artichoke,  MKSEARCH,  MKDELTA,
Naomi,  Chance,  Often,  and  Chickwit,  become  a  top  priority  for
declassification  review  with  the  expectation  that  most,  if  not  all,  of  these
documents  can  be  declassified  and  made  available  to  the  public.

These  recommendations  are  intended  to  ensure  that  the  public  and  the
government  have  practical  access  to  historical  records  of  the  CIA  (where  access  is
otherwise  appropriate)  and  to  address  long-standing  public  interest  and  concerns
regarding  secret  human  experiments  conducted  or  sponsored  by  the  CIA.

The  framework  of  the  records  collections  of  all  the  Human  Radiation
Interagency  Working  Group  agencies,  save  the  CIA,  is  visible  to  the  public.  This
is  the  case  even  in  agencies,  such  as  the  Defense  Nuclear  Agency,  where
historical  research  records  are  largely  classified.

While  documents  showing  CIA  participation  in  midcentury  DOD-
sponsored  discussions  of  human  experimentation  were  obtained  from  DOD,  DOE,
and  the  public  National  Archives,  the  CIA  was  not  able  to  locate  such  documents
in  its  own  files  and  states  that  the  CIA's  role  in  these  discussions  was  sufficiently
minor  that  such  records  would  not  have  been  kept.  The  Advisory  Committee  also
notes  the  recent  report  to  the  attorney  general  of  the  BNL  Task  Force,  which  was
investigating  a  bank-related  scandal:  "While  we  benefited  from  extensive
cooperation  and  assistance  from  the  CIA's  Office  of  General  Counsel,  the  CIA's
ability  to  retrieve  information  is  limited.  Records  are  'compartmentalized'  to
prevent  unauthorized  disclosure;  only  some  of  those  records  are  retrievable
through  computer  databases;  no  database  encompasses  all  records;  and  not  all
information  is  recorded.  In  the  course  of  our  work,  we  learned  of 'sensitive'
components  of  information  not  normally  retrievable  and  of  specialized  offices
that  previously  were  unknown  to  the  CIA  personnel  assisting  us."19

In  addition,  while  the  Advisory  Committee  has  found  no  evidence  to  show
that  the  CIA  conducted  or  sponsored  human  radiation  experiments,  numerous
documents,  some  of  which  remain  partially  classified,  make  reference  to  possible
CIA  interest  in  this  area.  Although  Advisory  Committee  staff  has  reviewed  all  of
the  available  classified  information  concerning  human  radiation  experiments  and
requested  that  it  be  declassified,  the  public  does  not  as  yet  have  the  benefit  of
such  access.

Twenty  years  after  they  were  first  revealed  to  the  public,  there  continues
to  be  a  strong  public  interest  in  the  CIA's  "mind  control"  programs.  The  Advisory

838


Chapter  18


Committee  received  numerous  queries  about  MKULTRA  and  the  other  related
programs  from  scholars,  journalists,  and  citizens  who  have  been  unable  to  review
the  complete  record.  Although  these  CIA  projects  were  the  subject  of  significant
governmental  inquiry  in  the  mid  to  late  1970s~by  the  Senate  and  House
committees  and  by  the  presidentially  appointed  Rockefeller  Commission-and  a
substantial  portion  of  the  records  have  been  declassified  and  released  to  the
public,  a  number  of  documents  remain  classified,  and  many  of  the  documents  that
have  been  released  contain  numerous  redactions.  This  has  made  it  extremely
difficult  to  understand  the  full  context  of  the  activities  or  to  clarify  discrepancies
or  uncertainties  in  the  record.

A  number  of  the  declassified  documents  make  reference  to  radiation
experiments.  However,  because  of  the  redactions,  it  is  impossible  for  the  public
to  determine  from  these  documents  whether  there  is  additional,  secret  information
about  radiation  activities.  (Advisory  Committee  staff  have  reviewed  the  full  text
of  these  documents.)  For  example,  the  1963  CIA  inspector  general  report  on  the
inspection  of  MKULTRA,  which  was  declassified  in  redacted  form  in  1975,
stated  that  "radiation"  was  one  of  the  avenues  explored  under  MKULTRA.  But
because  so  much  of  that  document  was  redacted,  the  public  reader  might
reasonably  suspect  that  there  is  more  information  about  radiation  in  the  report.  At
the  request  of  the  Advisory  Committee,  the  CIA  re-released  this  document,  and  a
handful  of  others,  with  minimal  redactions.

However,  few  other  such  documents  have  been  re-reviewed  for
declassification  in  almost  twenty  years.  Since  most  of  the  classified  CIA
documents  concerning  MKULTRA  and  related  programs  that  Advisory
Committee  staff  reviewed  were  declassified  upon  request,  the  Advisory
Committee  believes  that  if  the  rest  of  these  records  were  reviewed  for  historical
declassification,  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  records  could  be  declassified  without
harming  the  national  security.

So  long  as  documents  about  secret  human  experiments  are  withheld  from
the  public,  it  will  be  impossible  to  put  to  rest  distrust  with  the  conduct  of
government.  The  rapid,  public  release  of  the  remaining  documents  about
MKULTRA  and  other  secret  programs  would  be  a  fitting  close  to  an  unhappy
chapter  in  the  nation's  history.


839


Part  IV

ADDENDUM  TO  RECOMMENDATION  4:  MEDICAL
NOTIFICATION  AND  FOLLOW-UP

The  Advisory  Committee's  charter  requires  that  we  consider  the  issue  of
notice  to  experimental  subjects  of  potential  health  risk  and  the  need  for  medical
follow-up:

If  required  to  protect  the  health  of  individuals  who
were  subjects  of  a  human  radiation  experiment,  or
their  descendants,  the  Advisory  Committee  may
recommend  to  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency
Working  Group  that  an  agency  notify  particular
subjects  of  an  experiment,  or  their  descendants,  of
any  potential  health  risk  or  the  need  for  medical
follow-up  [Sec.  4.c.].

The  basic  intent  of  this  provision  is  not  directed  at  subjects  who  have
already  died,  or  at  subjects  who  have  already  become  ill  and  been  treated.  It  is
primarily  aimed  at  asymptomatic  subjects  who  remain  at  significant  risk  for  the
development  of  radiation-induced  cancers.  Because  at  least  two  and  as  many  as
five  decades  have  passed  since  the  experiments  took  place,  most  of  those  who
may  eventually  develop  cancer  as  a  result  of  the  experiment  will  already  have
developed  symptoms  and  sought  treatment.  However,  some  subjects  may  still  be
at  risk  and  thus  arguably  might  benefit  from  medical  follow-up.

The  initial  consideration  in  deciding  whether  to  implement  a  program  of
active  notification  and  medical  follow-up  is  the  identification  of  populations  of
subjects  who  have  been  put  at  significant  risk  for  the  development  of  radiogenic
cancers.  The  magnitude  and  focus  of  these  risk  estimates  are  driven  by  the
specific  organs  placed  at  highest  risk  from  the  particular  radiation  exposure  (for
example,  thyroid  being  the  organ  at  greatest  risk  in  the  iodine  1 3 1  experiments,
testes  in  the  Oregon  and  Washington  prisoner  experiments,  and  the  brain  for  the
nasopharyngeal  radium  experiments).  Risk  estimates  are  calculated  for  each
target  organ  according  to  a  number  of  assumptions  that  may  include  adjustments
for  variables  such  as  age  at  exposure,  sex,  or  type  of  radiation  (isotope  vs.
external  beam)  and  are  generally  expressed  in  terms  of  excess  cancer
incidence/mortality  for  a  given  population  over  a  specified  period  at  a  specified
dose.

The  Advisory  Committee  adopted  an  excess  site-specific  cancer  mortality
(death)  greater  than  1  case  in  1,000  (lifetime)  as  a  criterion  for  determining  that  a
subject  had  been  placed  at  increased  risk.  However,  because  of  the  substantial
passage  of  time  since  the  initial  exposure,  the  criteria  for  consideration  of  active
notification  were  set  at  1/1,000  future  or  remaining  lifetime  risk  and  an  excess


840


Chapter  18


relative  risk  of  greater  than  10  percent  (organ  specific).  This  level  of  risk  was
arbitrarily  chosen  by  the  Advisory  Committee.  When  compared  with  the  normal
risk  of  developing  cancer  (220  out  of  1,000),  this  level  of  risk  is  small.  The
Advisory  Committee  chose  this  small  remaining  lifetime  risk  as  a  reasonable
initial  criterion  to  decide  if  a  more  in-depth  analysis  of  the  effectiveness  of
screening  and  intervention  was  needed.

Once  a  population  has  been  determined  to  have  an  increased  remaining
lifetime  risk  for  radiogenic  cancer  mortality,  a  second  criterion  must  be  satisfied
before  a  government- funded  medical  follow-up  program  is  recommended,  namely
whether  the  exposed  individuals  would  likely  benefit  from  a  program  of  early
detection  or  early  treatment  of  the  malignancy.  Effective  screening  procedures
for  the  detection  of  an  early-stage  cancer  exist  only  for  a  limited  number  of  cancer
sites.  Moreover,  the  lack  of  specificity  of  all  diagnostic  screening  tests  results  in
a  significant  number  of  "false  positives"  (a  positive  test  result  in  an  individual
who  in  truth  is  not  affected),  resulting  in  unnecessary  and  potentially  hazardous
medical  procedures  that  may  cause  health  problems  in  and  of  themselves.  On  the
other  hand,  most  diagnostic  tests  are  also  imperfectly  sensitive,  meaning  that
some  individuals  who  actually  have  the  disease  will  be  falsely  reassured  that  they
are  cancer  free  and  may  thereby  delay  seeking  attention  when  it  becomes
symptomatic.  To  this  end  the  Advisory  Committee  has  adopted  the  following
criteria  for  assessing  the  value  of  screening,  preventive,  or  therapeutic  measures
for  exposed  subjects  of  biomedical  experiments:20

1 .  The  condition  must  have  a  significant  effect  on
the  quality  or  length  of  life.

2.  The  condition  must  have  an  asymptomatic
period  during  which  it  can  be  detected  by  available
screening  methods.

3.  These  screening  methods  must  have  high
sensitivity  and  specificity.

4.  Treatment  in  the  asymptomatic  phase  must  yield
a  therapeutic  result  superior  to  that  obtained  by
delaying  treatment  until  symptoms  appear.

5.  The  medical  benefits  of  screening  and  early
treatment  must  outweigh  any  detrimental  medical
effects  or  risks.

These  criteria  were  applied  to  each  exposed  population  at  significant  risk
for  development  of  a  malignancy  and  evaluated  according  to  the  organ(s)  at  risk

841


PartIV

from  radiation  exposure.  In  each  case,  the  conditions  enumerated  above  must  be
satisfied  before  specific  medical  follow-up  would  be  recommended.

Details  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  risk  calculations  can  be  found  in
chapters  7  and  9.  To  summarize,  the  Advisory  Committee  found  no  experiments
involving  iodine  131  administration  to  children  that  met  our  1/1,000  criterion  for
remaining  lifetime  risk  of  dying  of  cancer;  even  in  the  most  highly  exposed
individuals,  risks  were  estimated  to  be  1/2,000  (remaining  lifetime  risk).  In
addition,  the  U.S.  Preventive  Services  (USPS)  Task  Force  concluded  that  "routine
screening  for  thyroid  disorders  is  otherwise  not  warranted  in  asymptomatic  adults
or  children."  Although  it  has  been  suggested  that  people  placed  at  risk  for
development  of  thyroid  carcinoma  following  high-dose  external  irradiation  to  the
upper  body  may  benefit  from  regular  physical  examination  of  the  thyroid,  there
are  no  data  to  support  a  similar  risk  or  benefit  for  those  who  have  been  exposed  to
diagnostic  or  therapeutic  doses  of  iodine  13 1.21

The  Advisory  Committee  recognizes  that  in  addition  to  the  very  small  risk
of  a  fatal  thyroid  cancer,  individuals  exposed  as  children  to  iodine  131  also  have  a
larger  risk  of  a  nonfatal  thyroid  cancer  or  benign  tumor,  a  lifetime  risk  that  in
many  of  the  experiments  we  considered  exceeded  1/1,000  and  in  a  few
individuals  exceeded  1/100.  We  recognize  that  such  conditions  may  require
medical  treatment  and  may  be  associated  with  considerable  anxiety  and
discomfort.  After  considerable  discussion,  however,  the  Committee  concluded
that  notification  was  not  warranted  for  the  purpose  of  detecting  such  conditions
early,  on  several  grounds.  First,  the  prognosis  for  such  conditions  under  standard
clinical  care  is  excellent,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  early  detection  improves
the  outcome.  Second,  even  among  the  subgroup  of  about  200  children  exposed  to
this  level  of  risk,  the  number  of  excess  cancers  expected  is  less  than  one,  whereas
the  normal  prevalence  in  an  unexposed  population  is  about  20  to  30  percent.
Third,  many  thyroid  cancers  that  are  detectable  by  screening  may  have  no  clinical
significance.  Finally,  the  most  effective  means  of  screening  for  thyroid  cancer
remains  palpation,  which  has  low  sensitivity  and  low  specificity.

For  the  prisoners  subjected  to  testicular  irradiation,  the  Advisory
Committee  estimates  that  even  the  most  heavily  exposed  individual  (600  rad  to
the  testicles)  would  have  a  risk  of  only  0.4/l,00022  of  developing  a  fatal  cancer,
which  does  not  attain  our  stated  criterion.  Furthermore,  the  USPS  Task  Force  has
concluded  that  "there  is  insufficient  evidence  of  clinical  benefit  or  harm  to
recommend  for  or  against  routine  screening  of  asymptomatic  men  [other  than
those  with  a  history  of  cryptorchidism,  orchiopexy,  or  testicular  atrophy]  for
testicular  cancer."23  These  considerations  lead  the  Advisory  Committee  to
recommend  against  any  program  of  active  notification  of  these  subjects.
However,  subjects  who  voluntarily  request  medical  check-up  or  counseling
should  have  such  provided  in  a  standard  clinical  setting.

For  the  children  who  received  nasopharyngeal  radium  treatments,  the
Advisory  Committee  has  estimated  that  the  lifetime  risk  of  tumors  to  the  central

842


Chapter  18

nervous  system  (brain),  head,  and  neck  regions  is  approximately  4.35/1,000  and
the  excess  relative  risk  is  about  62  percent,  both  with  considerable  uncertainties.24
Although  these  experiments  were  conducted  in  the  1940s  and  much  of  the  risk  has
probably  already  been  expressed,  it  is  still  possible  that  the  future  risk  is  greater
than  or  equal  to  our  arbitrary  1/1,000  risk  criterion.  However,  at  greatest  risk  are
the  brain,  and  head  and  neck  tissues,  for  which  there  is  neither  an  accepted  nor
recommended  screening  procedure.25  Thus,  while  the  subjects  in  these
experiments  meet  the  Advisory  Committee's  arbitrary  1/1,000  criterion  for
consideration  for  notification  and  medical  follow-up  (criterion  1  in
Recommendation  4,  above),  the  utility  of  such  a  program  has  not  been
demonstrated,  so  criterion  2  of  Recommendation  4  is  not  satisfied.  Adult  military
personnel  who  participated  in  trials  of  this  procedure  received  significantly  lower
radiation  exposures,  did  not  attain  our  arbitrary  1/1,000  criterion  for  risk,  and
would  similarly  fail  to  meet  the  criteria  in  guideline  2.  Therefore,  the  Advisory
Committee  does  not  recommend  notification  and  medical  follow-up  of  children  or
adults  in  this  group  of  experiments.

The  Advisory  Committee's  charter  also  requires  that  we  consider  the  need
for  notification  of  descendants  of  experimental  subjects  for  purposes  of  health
protection.  The  rationale  for  considering  notification  in  this  instance  derived
from  the  assumption  that  the  offspring  of  former  subjects  might  be  at  risk  for
disease  or  disability  as  a  consequence  of  inherited  mutations  resulting  from  their
parent's  previous  radiation  exposure.  The  weight  of  evidence  suggests  that  the
risk  of  heritable  genetic  effects  from  the  radiation  exposures  in  the  experiments
we  reviewed  is  very  small,  although  it  is  possible  that  some  offspring  of  exposed
individuals  might  carry  mutations  that  were  caused  by  radiation.26  Moreover,  in
most  medical  experiments  involving  external  sources  of  radiation,  efforts  are
made  to  shield  the  gonads  (ovaries/testes)  as  much  as  possible.  With  the
exception  of  the  testicular  irradiation  experiments,  where  subjects  agreed  to
undergo  vasectomy  to  prevent  transmission  of  any  mutations  that  might  have
occurred,  experiments  involving  external  irradiation  are  likely  to  have  produced
relatively  small  gonadal  doses,  as  would  those  experiments  involving  tracers.
Even  therapeutic  studies  involving  internal  radionuclides  would  generally  involve
only  modest  gonadal  doses.  Thus,  in  the  vast  majority  of  experiments,  it  is  likely
that  the  risk  of  radiation-induced  mutations  is  small  in  relation  to  natural  rates.

In  addition  to  cancer  and  genetic  effects,  there  are  only  a  small  number  of
well-established  effects  of  radiation,  including  severe  mental  retardation  among
those  exposed  in  utero  (particularly  between  eight  and  fifteen  weeks  of  gestation),
sterility,  cataracts,  and  hypothyroidism.  Unlike  cancer  and  genetic  effects,
however,  these  other  endpoints  appear  to  be  "deterministic"  effects  that  appear
only  after  high  doses  that  are  unlikely  to  have  been  received  by  subjects  in  the
experiments  under  consideration  for  notification.  The  Advisory  Committee  heard
extensive  public  testimony  about  a  range  of  other  conditions  that  those  testifying
thought  might  be  related  to  radiation  exposures.  However,  the  Advisory

843


Part  IV

Committee  believes  that  a  program  of  active  notification  must  be  grounded  on
currently  accepted  scientific  evidence  concerning  the  conditions  that  are  likely  to
be  caused  by  radiation.


844


ENDNOTES


1 .  AEC  documents  reveal  that  in  order  for  one  researcher  to  publish  a  report  on
his  TBI  research,  he  had  to  respond  to  the  AEC's  concerns  about  potential  public  relations
and  legal  liability  consequences  and  did  so  by  deleting  information  that  might  permit
identification  of  patients.  See  chapter  8.

2.  These  awards  included  $750,000  in  1976  by  Congress  to  the  Olson  family,
$703,000  in  1987  by  court  order  to  the  Blauer  family,  and  $750,000  in  1988  by  court
order  to  nine  Canadians  for  nonfatal  brainwashing  experiments.  See  chapter  3.

3.  For  example,  based  on  facts  available  to  the  Committee,  those  Alaskans  who
were  subjects  of  Air  Force-sponsored  radioisotope  research  (see  chapter  12)  and  the
pregnant  women  who  were  subjects  of  radioisotope  research  at  Vanderbilt  University
(see  chapter  7)  may  also  be  owed  an  apology.  However,  the  Committee  conducted  only
limited  inquiry  into  these  cases.  The  Advisory  Committee  did  not  attempt  a  full  factual
inquiry  into  the  Alaskan  research,  which  is  the  subject  of  an  inquiry  by  a  committee  of
the  Institute  of  Medicine  and  the  National  Research  Council,  whose  report  is  pending.
The  Vanderbilt  research  is  currently  the  subject  of  litigation  that  may  provide  for  fuller
development  of  the  facts.

4.  Veterans  who  participated  in  weapons  tests  are  also  eligible  for  relief  under
the  Radiation  Exposure  Compensation  Act  of  1990,  which,  however,  requires  claimants
to  elect  the  monetary  remedy  to  the  exclusion  of  other  benefits  to  which  a  veteran  may  be
eligible.  We  also  note  the  Veterans  Exposure  Amendments  of  1992.

5.  National  Cancer  Institute,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  Radon  and  Lung
Cancer  Risk:  A  Joint  Analysis  of  1 1  Underground  Miner  Studies  (Washington,  D.C.:
National  Institutes  of  Health  Publication  No.  94-3644,  January  1994).

6.  The  Belmont  Report:  Ethical  Principles  and  Guidelines  for  the  Protection  of
Human  Subjects  of  Research,  Report  of  the  National  Commission  for  the  Protection  of
Human  Subjects  of  Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,
1979).

7.  The  convening  of  a  national  panel  could  assist  as  well  with  the
implementation  of  Recommendations  10  and  1 1 .

8.  California  Health  and  Safety  Code,  vol.  40B,  sec.  24 1 76  ( 1 995).

9.  For  example,  in  1994,  the  Institute  of  Medicine's  Committee  on  the  Ethical
and  Legal  Issues  Relating  to  the  Inclusion  of  Women  in  Clinical  Studies  recommended
that  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  review  the  area  of  compensation  for  research  injury.
See  Women  and  Health  Research  (Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy  Press,  1994),
169  and  appendix  D  to  that  volume  titled  "Compensation  for  Research  Injuries."

10.  President's  Commission  for  the  Study  of  Ethical  Problems  in  Medicine  and
Biomedical  and  Behavioral  Research,  Compensating  for  Research  Injuries:  The  Ethical
and  Legal  Implications  of  Programs  to  Redress  Injured  Subjects,  Vol.  I,  Report
(Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  June  1982).

11.  Ibid.,  50.

12.  While  lessons  such  as  those  identified  above  have  been  learned,  by  the  same
token,  it  seems  unlikely  that  they  will  be  fully  taken  advantage  of  unless  some  individual
or  entity  is  designated  with  responsibility  to  ensure  that  this  takes  place.

13.  The  post- World  War  II  records  of  the  Army  Office  of  the  Surgeon  General
are  also  located  primarily  either  at  the  Washington  National  Records  Center  or  with  the
Office  of  the  Surgeon  General.  Similarly,  very  few  of  the  post-World  II  records  of  the

845


Chemical  Corps  and  its  successors  are  located  at  the  National  Archives  but  are  mostly
found  at  the  Washington  National  Records  Center  or  the  successors.

14.  Standard  Form  135  (SF-135)  is  the  transmittal  form  agencies  use  when
shipping  records  to  a  federal  records  center.  A  folder  listing  is  supposed  to  accompany
all  shipments  of  records,  with  the  exception  of  the  relatively  rare  classified  SF-135,  the
forms  are  available  for  examination  by  the  public.

15.  "Destruction  of  the  U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission  Division  of
Intelligence  Files,"  report  by  the  Office  of  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  26  August
1994.

16.  As  noted  in  chapter  10,  an  investigation  by  the  VA  concluded  that  the
"confidential  Atomic  Medicine  Division"  evidently  contemplated  was  not  activated;
nonetheless,  remaining  documents  indicate  that  certain  records  were  kept  in  anticipation
of  potential  liability  claims.  As  noted  further  in  chapter  10,  the  precise  nature  of  all
records  at  issue  cannot  be  conclusively  determined.

,17.  Government  contractor  records  have  been  found  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of
the  Freedom  of  Information  Act  because  contractors  are  not  "agencies"  who  maintain
"agency  records,"  a  condition  required  by  the  act.  However,  regulations  that  govern
contractors  may  bring  records  that  contractors  maintain  under  the  act.  For  example,  a
recent  Department  of  Energy  regulation  (10  C.F.R.  §  1004.3[e],  59  Fed.  Reg.  63883  [12
December  1994]),  provides  that  even  if  a  contractor-held  document  fails  to  qualify  as  an
"agency  record"  it  may  be  subject  to  the  act  if  the  contract  provides  that  the  document  in
question  is  the  property  of  DOE.  For  a  discussion  of  the  application  of  this  rule,  see
Cowles  Publishing  Company,  Decision  and  Order  of  the  Department  of  Energy,  Case  No.
VFA-0018,  28  February  1995.

1 8.  In  making  this  recommendation,  the  Advisory  Committee  emphasizes  that
we  do  not  intend  to  alter  privacy  restrictions  that  currently  limit  access  to  records  related
to  biomedical  research  (such  as  personal  medical  records).

19.  21  October  1994  Addendum  to  the  BNL  Task  Force-Final  Report  from  John
Hogan,  Acting  Assistant  U.S.  Attorney,  Northern  District  of  Georgia  and  Counselor  to
the  Attorney  General  to  the  Attorney  General  (ACHRE  No.  CORP-060595-A),  2-3.

20.  Adapted  from  U.S.  Preventive  Services  Task  Force,  Guide  to  Clinical
Preventive  Services:  An  Assessment  of  the  Effectiveness  of  169  Interventions  (Baltimore:
Williams  &  Wilkins,  1989),  xxix-xxxii;  and  P.  S.  Frame,  "A  Critical  Review  of  Adult
Health  Maintenance,"  Journal  of  Family  Practice  22  (1986):  341,  417,  51 1.

21.  National  Research  Council,  Board  on  Radiation  Effects  Research,
Committee  on  the  Biological  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiations,  Health  Effects  of  Exposure
to  Low  Levels  of  Ionizing  Radiation:  BEIR  V  (Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy
Press,  1990),  5,  287-294.

22.  See  footnote  on  testicular  risk  analysis  in  chapter  9.

23.  U.S.  Preventive  Services  Task  Force,  Guide  to  Clinical  Preventive  Sei-vices,


77.


24.  See  footnote  on  children's  risk  analysis  in  chapter  7.

25.  U.S.  Preventive  Services  Task  Force,  Guide  to  Clinical  Preventive  Services.

26.  See  "The  Basics  of  Radiation  Science"  section  of  the  Introduction.


846


Statement  by  Individual
Committee  Member


STATEMENT  BY
COMMITTEE  MEMBER  JAY  KATZ


We  were  assigned  two  tasks:  to  examine  the  past  and  to  examine  the
present.  Telling  the  full  story  of  government  sponsored  Cold  War  human
radiation  experiments  serves  many  important  purposes—remembrance,  warning,
healing.  Ultimately,  however,  the  value  of  knowing  the  past  resides  in  the  lessons
it  can  teach  us  for  the  present  and  future.  Thus,  the  central  question  is  this:  Do
current  regulations  of  human  experimentation  adequately  protect  patient-subjects?
Here  I  have  the  most  serious  reservations  about  our  Report.

In  summary,  my  conclusions  are  these:  (1)  In  the  quest  to  advance
medical  science,  too  many  citizen-patients  continue  to  serve,  as  they  did  during
the  Cold  War  period,  as  means  for  the  sake  of  others.  (2)  The  length  to  which
physician-investigators  must  go  to  seek  "informed  consent"  remains  sufficiently
ambiguous  so  that  patient-subjects'  understanding  of  the  consequences  of  their
participation  in  research  is  all  too  often  compromised.  (3)  The  resolution  of  the
tensions  inherent  in  the  conduct  of  research--/. e.,  respect  for  citizen-patients'
rights  to,  and  interest  in,  self-determination  on  the  one  hand  and  the  imperative  to
advance  medical  science,  on  the  other— confronts  government  officials  with  policy
choices  that  they  were  unwilling  to  address  in  any  depth  during  the  Cold  War  or
for  that  matter  in  today's  world.  (4)  Our  Recommendations  only  touch  on  these
problems  and  at  times  make  too  much  of  the  safeguards  that  have  been  introduced
since  1974.  The  present  regulatory  process  is  flawed.  It  invites  in  subtle,  but
real,  ways  repetitions  of  the  dignitary  insults  which  unconsenting  citizen-patients
suffered  during  the  Cold  War.

Medical  research  is  a  vital  part  of  American  life.  The  Federal  government
allocates  billions  of  dollars  to  human  research,  and  the  pharmaceutical  industry
spends  many  more  billions  to  develop  new  drugs  and  medical  devices.  And
research  is  by  and  large  conducted  with  patients.  Since  all  of  us  at  one  time  or
another  will  be  patients,  we  are  readily  available  subjects  for  research.  Thus,  the
protection  of  the  rights  and  interests  of  citizen-research  subjects  in  a  democratic
society  is  a  major  societal  concern.

Let  me  introduce  my  Reservations  by  offering  some  preliminary  remarks
about  the  current  regulatory  scheme  and  the  history  of  consent.  The
contemporary  regulatory  scheme  provides  insufficient  guidance  for  addressing
one  basic  question:  When,  if  ever,  should  conflicts  between  advancing  medical
knowledge  for  our  benefit  and  protecting  the  inviolability  of  citizen-subjects  of
research  be  resolved  in  favor  of  the  former?  Inviolability,  unless  patient-subjects
agree  to  invasions  of  mind  and  body,  requires  punctilious  attention  to  disclosure
and  consent  and,  in  turn,  imposes  considerable  burdens  on  physician-
investigators-be  it  taking  the  necessary  time  to  converse  with  patient-subjects  or,


849


Statement

if  necessary,  making  discomforting  disclosures.  Moreover,  taking  informed
consent  seriously  may  slow  the  rate  of  medical  progress  with  painful
consequences  to  investigators'  work  and  to  society.  These  dilemmas  must  be
resolved  forthrightly,  instead  of  allowing  them  to  be  "resolved"  by  discretionary
subterfuge.

Neither  the  drafters  of  the  1974  Federal  Regulations  nor  the  members  of
the  research  community  were  willing  to  respond  to  the  reality  that  taking
informed  consent  seriously  in  this  new  age  of  informed  consent  confronted  them
with  problems  that  required  sustained  and  thoughtful  exploration.
Implementation  would  also  turn  out  to  be  a  most  formidable  task  because  of
physicians'  low  regard  for  patient  consent  throughout  medical  history.  The
Committee's  analysis  of  the  informed  consent  requirements  in  existence  during
the  Cold  War  and  earlier  in  the  20th  century  acknowledges,  but  not  sufficiently
so,  that  the  millennia-long  history  of  medical  custom  casts  a  dark  shadow  over
what  transpired  during  the  Cold  War.

Patient  consent,  until  most  recently,  has  not  been  enshrined  in  the  ethos  of
Hippocratic  medicine.  As  I  once  put  it,  the  idea  of  patient  autonomy  is  not  to  be
found  in  the  lexicon  of  medicine.  It  is  important  to  be  aware  of  this  history;  for  it
explains  why  our  Findings  on  contemporary  research  practices,  which  time
constraints  prevented  us  from  probing  in  sufficient  depth,  revealed  deficiencies  in
the  informed  consent  process,  both  at  the  levels  of  physician-investigator
interactions  with  their  patient-subjects  and  of  IRB  review.  This  is  not  surprising;
for  not  only  does  it  take  time  to  change  historical  practices,  it  also  requires  more
thoughtful  rules  and  procedures  than  currently  exist.

My  reading  of  the  Cold  War  record  suggests  that  governmental  officials  in
concert  with  their  medical  advisers  at  best  paid  lip  service  to  consent.  Whenever
they  considered  it,  they  worried  mostly  about  legal  liability  and  embarrassment.
They  were  not  worried  or  embarrassed  about  their  willingness  to  conscript
unconsenting  patient-subjects  to  serve  as  means  in  plutonium  and  whole  body
radiation  experiments.  All  this  is  a  frightening  example  of  how  thoughtlessly
human  beings,  including  physicians,  can  treat  human  beings  for  "noble"  purposes.
Most  references  to  consent  (with  rare  exceptions)  that  we  uncovered  in
governmental  documents  or  in  exchanges  between  officials  and  their  medical
consultants  were  meaningless  words,  which  conveyed  no  appreciation  of  the
nature  and  quality  of  disclosure  that  must  be  provided  if  patient-subjects  were
truly  to  be  given  a  choice  to  accept  or  decline  participation  in  research.  Form,  not
substance,  punctuated  most  of  the  policies  on  consent  during  the  Cold  War
period.  The  drafters  of  the  Federal  Regulations  would  eventually  build  their  rules
on  this  shaky  historical  foundation,  disregarding  in  the  process  that  the
imprecision  of  their  policies  invited  physician-investigators  not  to  alter  decisively
customary  Hippocratic  practices.

The  long  established  tradition  of  obtaining  consent  from  healthy  subjects

850


Statement

is  a  separate  story;  for  this  tradition  did  not  extend  to  patients  or  patient-subjects.
Put  another  way,  the  latter  were  quarantined  from  disclosure  and  consent.  In  our
Finding  10,  this  was  clearly  stated:  "[DJuring  the  1944-1974  period  .  . .
physicians  engaged  in  clinical  research  generally  did  not  obtain  consent  from
patient-subjects  for  whom  the  research  was  intended  to  offer  a  prospect  of
medical  benefit."  Therefore,  it  should  come  as  no  surprise,  as  noted  in  our
Report,  that  when  a  decision  was  reached  in  1951  not  to  pursue  radiation  research
with  prisoners  or  healthy  subjects  in  connection  with  an  important  defense
project,  "the  military  immediately  contracted  with  a  private  hospital  to  study
patients  being  irradiated  for  cancer  treatment."  Patients  have  always  been  the
most  vulnerable  group  for  purposes  of  research.

From  the  perspective  of  history  no  significant  conclusions  can  be  drawn
about  ethical  consent  standards  that  "should"  have  existed  for  research  with
patients  by  drawing  attention  to  consent  requirements  that  existed  for  healthy
volunteers.  When  persons  became  patients,  the  rules  of  consent  changed.  This
observation  also  has  relevance  for  the  impact  of  the  Nuremberg  Code  on  the
conduct  of  research.  The  Code  emerged  from  contexts  not  only  of  research  with
non-patients  but  also  of  sadistic  and  brutal  disregard  for  the  sanctity  of  human
life,  unparalleled  in  the  annals  of  Western  research.  American  physician-
investigators,  therefore,  found  it  doubly  easy  to  consider  the  pronouncements  of
the  Allied  Military  Tribunal  irrelevant  to  their  practices.

Let  me  interject  here  a  few  brief  remarks  about  risks:  Taking  risks  is
inevitable  in  research.  After  all,  research  is  by  its  nature  a  voyage  into  the
unknown.  To  pierce  uncertainty,  to  gain  scientific  knowledge  requires  risk
taking.  And,  as  our  Report  makes  clear,  physician-investigators  and  government
officials  as  well  have  generally  been  attentive,  whenever  physical  risks  needed  to
be  taken,  to  minimize  them.  But  such  care  notwithstanding,  research  requires
taking  risks;  for  example,  research  with  highly  toxic  agents  affects  the  quality  and
extent  of  remaining  life.  In  our  review  of  contemporary  research  we  identified
many  instances  where  patient-subjects  were  unknowingly  exposed  to  such  risks,
which  have  both  physical  and  emotional  dimensions.

Scientific  studies  in  today's  world  often  involve  patient-subjects  whose
prognosis  is  dire-the  most  vulnerable  of  all  disadvantaged  groups-and  for  whom
no  effective  or  curative  treatments  exist.  In  these  situations  hope  can  readily  be
exploited  by  intimating  that  research  interventions  may  also  benefit  patient-
subjects,  even  though  the  experiment's  objectives  are  in  the  service  of  gaining
scientific  knowledge.  Embarking  on  this  slippery  slope  begins  with  investigators'
rationalizations  which  justify  experimental  interventions  on  grounds  of  "possible"
therapeutic  benefits;  it  continues  with  apprising  patient-subjects  insufficiently  of
the  slings  and  arrows  of  the  experimental  component;  and  it  ends  with  feeding
into  patient-subjects'  own  dispositions  to  deny  the  truth.  In  sum,  by  obliterating
vital  distinctions  between  therapy  and  research,  investigators  invite  subjects  to

851


Statement

collude  with  them  in  the  hazy  promise  of  therapeutic  benefits.  Put  another  way,
the  "therapeutic  illusion,"  as  one  commentator  felicitously  called  it,  can  lead
physician-investigators  to  emphasize  the  possible  (though  unproven)  therapeutic
benefits  of  the  intervention  and,  in  turn,  to  minimize  its  risks,  particularly  to  the
quality  of  (remaining)  life.  Such  considerations  played  a  role  in  the  total  body
radiation  experiments  discussed  in  our  Report.

In  my  Reservations  I  want  to  emphasize,  however,  the  centrality  of
dignitary,  not  physical,  injuries  in  any  appraisal  of  the  ethics  of  research.  This  is
the  uncompromising  message  of  the  Nuremberg  Code's  first  principle  on
voluntary  consent,  a  message  which  during  the  Cold  War  period  physician-
investigators  found  impossible  to  accept.  But  the  problem  goes  deeper  than  that.
The  Code,  without  extensive  exegesis,  could  not  serve  as  a  viable  guide  for  the
conduct  of  medical  research.  This  made  its  disregard  easy  and  in  the  process,  the
central  message  which  the  judges  tried  to  convey  in  their  majestic  first  principle
was  also  lost.  Thus  too  much  can  be  made,  as  our  Report  does,  of  Secretary  of
Defense  Wilson's  memorandum  endorsing  the  Nuremberg  Code.  To  hold  him
culpable  for  not  implementing  the  Code  makes  little  sense.  If  he  is  culpable  of
anything,  it  is  for  promulgating  it  without  first  having  sought  thoughtful  advice
about  what  needed  to  be  explicated  to  make  it  a  viable  statement  for  research
practices.  Merely  embracing  the  Code  invited,  indeed  guaranteed,  neglect.

Finally,  from  the  perspective  of  history  I  want  to  note  that  only  since  the
early  1960's  was  the  importance  of  consent  given  greater  attention.  Among  the
social  forces  that  contributed  to  this  development  two  stand  out:  Judges'
promulgation  of  a  new  legal  doctrine  of  informed  consent,  based  on  the  Anglo-
American  premise  of  "thoroughgoing  self-determination."  And  the  explorations
by  a  new  breed  of  bioethicists,  recruited  from  philosophy  and  theology,  of  the
relevance  of  such  principles  as  autonomy,  self-determination,  beneficence,  and
justice  to  medical  decision-making.  Their  novel  and  powerful  arguments,  so  alien
to  the  medical  mind,  disturbed  the  sleep  of  the  medical  community.  Physicians
had  a  particularly  hard  time  in  coming  to  terms  with  the  idea  of  patient  autonomy.
To  this  day,  I  believe,  this  principle  has  only  gained  a  foothold  in  the  ethos  of
medical  practice  and  research.

In  our  Report  we  emphasize  the  primacy  of  patient-subject  autonomy  in
research.  It  led  us  to  conclude  in  our  Interim  Report  that  "[a]  cornerstone  of
modern  research  ethics  [is]  informed  consent."  I  agree  with  this  statement  of
principle.  From  the  1963  beginnings  of  my  work  in  human  experimentation,  I
have  championed  the  idea  of  respect  for  autonomy  and  self-determination  in  all
interactions  between  physician-investigators  and  patient-subjects.  But  I
introduced  one  major  qualification  when  I  wrote  that  only  when  the  Nuremberg
Code's  first  principle  on  voluntary  consent


852


Statement

is  firmly  put  into  practice  can  one  address  the  claims  of  science
and  society  to  benefit  from  science.  Only  then  can  one  avoid  the
dangers  that  accompany  a  balancing  of  one  principle  against  the
other  that  assigns  equal  weight  to  both;  for  only  if  one  gives
primacy  to  consent  can  one  exercise  the  requisite  caution  in
situations  where  one  may  wish  to  make  an  exception  to  this
principle  for  clear  and  sufficient  reasons.

I  mention  this  here  because  the  final  and  most  far-reaching
recommendation  for  change  that  I  shall  soon  propose  is  based  on  two  premises:
(1)  that  any  exception  to  the  principle  of  individual  autonomy,  since  it  tampers
with  fundamental  democratic  values,  must  be  rigorously  justified  by  clear  and
sufficient  reasons;  and  (2)  that  such  exception  cannot  be  made  by  investigators  or
IRBs  but  only  by  an  authoritative  and  highly  visible  body.

I  now  turn  to  our  Research  Proposal  Review  Project.  The  Committee's
review  of  contemporary  research  reveals  that  of  the  greater-than-minimal-risk
studies  (which  are  the  ones  that  raise  complex  informed  consent  issues)  23%  were
ethically  unacceptable  and  23%  raise  ethical  concerns.  My  own  independent
review  tells  a  grimmer  story:  50%  raise  serious  ethical  concerns  and  an
additional  24%  raise  ethical  concerns  that  cannot  be  taken  lightly.  Since  I
focused  exclusively  on  the  informed  consent  process,  the  differences  in  our
Findings  can  perhaps  in  part  be  explained  on  that  basis.  My  data,  like  the
Committee's,  were  the  protocols  submitted  to  IRBs  and  the  informed  consent
forms  signed  by  patient-subjects.  I  appreciate  that  the  evidence  available  to  us
does  not  reflect  what  patient-subjects  might  have  been  told  during  oral
communications.  But  if  the  protocols  and  patient-subject  consent  forms  are
flawed  in  significant  ways,  it  is  likely  that  the  oral  interactions  are  similarly
flawed.  Moreover,  since  IRBs  are  charged  to  pay  particular  attention  to  the
informed  consent  process,  I  contend  that  IRBs  should  not  have  approved  the
problematic  consent  forms  in  the  form  they  were  submitted.  The  forms  often
seem  to  "sell"  research  rather  than  to  convey  a  sense  of  caution  that  invites
reflective  thought.

I  had  expected  to  discover  problems,  but  I  was  stunned  by  their  extent.
Consider  what  we  observed  in  Chapter  15  and  what  is  described  there  in  greater
detail:  The  obfuscation  of  treatment  and  research,  illustrated  most  strikingly  in
Phase  I  studies,  but  by  no  means  limited  to  them;  the  lack  of  disclosure  in
randomized  clinical  trials  about  the  different  consequences  to  patient-subjects'
well  being  if  assigned  to  one  research  arm  or  the  other;  the  administration  of
highly  toxic  agents,  in  the  "scientific"  belief  that  only  the  knowledge  gained  from
"total  therapy"  will  eventually  lead  to  cures,  but  without  disclosure  of  the  impact
of  such  radical  interventions  on  quality  of  life  or  longevity.  I  do  not  wish  to
minimize  the  impact  of  making  total  disclosure  on  patient-subjects'  and  physician-

853


Statement

investigators'  hopes  and  fears.  Yet,  nagging  questions  remain:  What  are  "clear
and  sufficient  reasons"  which  permit  tampering  with  disclosure  and  consent;  and,
if  permissible,  who  decides?

Our  Recommendations  do  not  go  far  enough  in  remedying  the  flawed
nature  of  our  current  regulations  which  appear  to  rely  so  heavily  on  informed
consent,  but  which  in  practice  I  contend,  bypass  true  informed  consent.  Here  I
can  only  make  a  few  comments  about  the  changes  required  if  we  wish  to  protect
adequately  the  rights  and  interests  of  subjects  of  research:

( 1 )  Informed  consent  is  central  to  such  protections.  The  drafters  of  the
Federal  regulations  have  acknowledged  that  fact.  They  have  failed,  however,  to
take  responsibility  for  making  these  requirements  meaningful  ones.  Thus,
patient-subjects  now  all  too  often  give  a  spurious  consent;  a  "consent"  that  can
readily  mislead  physician-investigators  into  believing  that  they  have  received  the
authority  to  proceed  when  in  fact  they  have  not.

(a)  The  Federal  regulations  imply  that  the  principle  of  respect  for  patient-
subjects'  autonomy  is  central  to  the  regulatory  scheme.  Leaving  it  at  that  is  not
enough;  for  the  principle  requires  commentary  so  that  physician-investigators  will
have  a  more  thoroughgoing  appreciation  of  the  moral  issues  at  stake  whenever
they  ask  human  beings  to  serve  as  means  for  the  ends  of  others.  Only  then  will
they  learn,  for  example,  that  to  take  informed  consent  seriously  requires  them  to
spend  considerable  time  with  prospective  patient-subjects  and  to  engage  them  in
searching  conversations.  In  these  conversations  they  must  disclose  (a)  that  their
subjects  are  not  patients  or,  to  the  extent  they  are  patients,  that  their  therapeutic
interests  will  be  subordinated  in  specified  ways  to  scientific  interests;  (b)  that  it  is
problematic  (and  in  what  ways)  whether  their  welfare  will  be  better  served  by
placing  their  medical  fate  in  the  hands  of  a  practitioner  rather  than  a  physician-
investigator;  (c)  that  in  opting  for  the  care  of  a  physician  they  may  be  better  or
worse  off  and  for  such  and  such  reasons;  (d)  that  research  is  governed  by  a
research  protocol  and  a  research  question  and  therefore  patient-subjects'  interests
and  needs  have  to  yield  (and  to  what  extent)  to  the  claims  of  science;  etc.

Such  disclosure  obligations  are  formidable  ones.  They  need  to  be  fulfilled
in  a  manner  that  will  give  patient-subjects  a  clear  appreciation  of  the  difference
between  research  and  therapy,  and  in  the  spirit  that  disabuses  them  of  the  belief,
so  widely  held-as  our  Subject  Interview  Study  demonstrates-  that  everything  the
investigator  proposes  serves  their  best  therapeutic  interests.

The  Cold  War  experiments  teach  us  that  misplaced  trust  can  deceive;  that
trust  must  be  earned  by  prior  disclosures  of  what  research  participation  entails.  I
agree,  as  our  Recommendation  9  proposes,  that  scientists  should  be  educated  "to
ensure  the  centrality  of  ethics  in  [their]  conduct."  To  accomplish  that  educational
task,  however,  requires  policies  that  more  clearly  delineate  the  ambit  of  discretion
which  investigators  can  exercise  in  the  conduct  of  research.

(b)  Current  criteria  for  informed  consent  encourage,  perhaps  even

854


Statement

mandate,  overwhelming  patient-subjects  with  information  on  every  conceivable
risk  and  benefit  as  well  as  on  the  scientific  purpose  of  the  study.  Adherence  to
these  mandates  has  led,  and  justifiably  so,  to  concerns  about  the
incomprehensibility  of  the  informed  consent  forms  that  patient-subjects  must
sign.  Much  thought,  and  then  guidance,  has  to  be  given  to  IRBs  and  investigators
as  to  the  essential  information  they  most  provide;  e.g.,  alternatives,  uncertainties,
essential  risks,  realistic  benefits  as  well  as  the  impact  of  participation—known  and
conjectured—on  the  quality  of  future  (or  remaining)  lives.  Many  of  the  informed
consent  forms  I  have  examined  fail  to  emphasize  the  risks  germane  to  the  research
protocol;  instead  they  go  into  numbing  detail  on  risks  that  can  be  summarized.  To
put  it  bluntly:  Informed  consent  criteria  in  today's  world,  at  least  in  the  ways  they
are  communicated  to  patient-subjects,  often  serve  purposes  of  obscuring  rather
than  clarifying  what  participation  in  research  entails.

(2)  Though  IRBs  serve  important  functions,  they  do  not  have  the  capacity,
if  only  by  virtue  of  composition  and  lack  of  time,  either  to  modify  consent
standards  (including  the  ones  I  have  just  proposed)  or,  more  generally,  to  make
any  other  decisions  that  could  affect  the  fundamental  constitutional  rights  and
personal  interests  of  subjects  of  research.  IRBs  should  not  have  the  authority  to
decide  how  to  balance  competing  principles  in  situations  where  the  competence  of
subjects'  consent  is  in  question,  or  where  consent  cannot  be  obtained  because
patient-subjects  suffer  from  a  life-threatening  condition,  or  where  other  complex
issues  need  to  be  resolved,  as  illustrated  in  our  Chapter  on  the  total  body  radiation
experiments.  Such  fateful  decisions  are  beyond  their  competence.

Moreover,  IRBs  work  in  a  climate  of  low  visibility,  another  species  of
secrecy  about  which  we  expressed  so  much  concern  in  Chapter  13.  These  and
other  complex  ethical  problems  should  only  be  resolved  by  an  accountable  and
highly  visible  national  Body.  That  Body  then  can  provide  IRBs  with  guidelines
that  will  better  inform  their  deliberations.  I  would  like  to  note  here,  but  only  in
passing,  that  the  Body  I  envision  will  lighten  IRBs'  tasks;  for  example,  by
fashioning  policies  for  cursory  review  of  the  many  minimal/no  risk  studies,  or  by
being  available  for  advisory  opinions  whenever  IRBs  are  confronted  with  new
ethical  problems.  (IRBs  now  spend  an  inordinate  amount  of  time  on  such
problems  which  they  should  not  resolve  in  the  first  place.)  The  national  Body
should  not  review  individual  research  projects  except  when  investigators  and
IRBs  disagree.  Finally,  a  national  Body  is  needed  for  another  reason  as  well:  The
considerable  pressure  for  approval  of  protocols  to  which  IRBs  are  subjected  by
the  scientists  at  their  institutions.

(3)  Already  in  1973,  when  I  served  on  HEW's  Tuskeegee  Syphilis  Study
Ad  Hoc  Advisory  Panel,  we  proposed  in  our  Final  Report  that  Congress  establish
a  permanent  body— we  called  it  the  National  Human  Investigation  Board—with
the  authority  to  regulate  at  least  all  Federally  supported  research  involving  human
subjects.  We  recommended  that  this  Board  should  not  only  promulgate  research

855


Statement

policies  but  also  administer  and  review  the  human  experimentation  process.
Constant  interpretation  and  review  by  a  Body  whose  decisions  count  by  virtue  of
the  authority  invested  in  them  can  protect  both  the  claims  of  science  and  society's
commitment  to  the  inviolability  of  subjects  of  research.

A  most  important  task  which  such  a  Board  would  face  in  formulating
research  policies  is  to  delineate  exceptions  to  the  informed  consent  requirement
when  competing  principles  require  it.  For  example,  when  might  it  be  permissible
for  IRBs  to  "defer  consent"  (or  more  correctly,  to  allow  physician-investigators  to
proceed  without  consent)  with  patient-subjects  suffering  from  acute  head  trauma?
Conscripting  citizen-patients  to  anything  they  have  not  consented  to  is  deeply
offensive  to  democratic  values  and,  if  necessary,  requires  public  approval.
Greater  public  participation  in  the  formulation  of  research  policies  is  vital,  and  the
Board  must  therefore  establish  procedures  for  the  publication  of  all  its  major
policy  and  advisory  decisions,  particularly  those  where  compromises  seem
warranted  between  the  advancement  of  science  and  the  protection  of  subjects  of
research.  Publication  of  such  decisions  would  not  only  permit  their  intensive
study  both  inside  and  outside  the  medical  profession  but  would  also  be  an
important  step  toward  the  case-by-case  development  of  policies  governing  human
experimentation.  If  we  are  truly  concerned  about  the  baneful  effects  of  secrecy
on  public  trust,  what  I  propose  here  could  restore  trust.

There  is,  of  course,  much  more  to  consider,  and  I  have  written  about  it
elsewhere.  I  hope,  however,  that  I  have  said  enough  to  suggest  that  the  problems
inherent  in  research  with  human  subjects—advancing  science  and  protecting
subjects  of  research-are  complex.  Society  can  no  longer  afford  to  leave  the
balancing  of  individual  rights  against  scientific  progress  to  the  low-visibility
decision-making  of  IRBs  with  regulations  that  are  porous  and  invite  abuse.  The
important  work  that  our  Committee  has  done  in  its  evaluation  of  the  radiation
experiments  conducted  by  governmental  agencies  and  the  medical  profession
during  the  Cold  War  once  again  confronts  us  with  the  human  and  societal  costs  of
too  relentless  a  pursuit  of  knowledge.  If  this  is  a  price  worth  paying,  society
should  be  forced  to  make  these  difficult  moral  choices  in  bright  sunlight  and
through  a  regulatory  process  that  constantly  strives  to  articulate,  confront,  and
delimit  those  costs.

We  have  judged  the  past  and  judgments  of  the  past  become  most  relevant
when  they  teach  us  lessons  for  the  present  and  future.  Yet,  we  did  not  judge  the
present  with  sufficient  care.  If  the  problem  was  time,  I  wanted  to  take  the  time  to
offer  my  judgments.  I  also  took  the  time  and  "took  [the  road]  less  traveled  by"
because  much  is  at  stake  in  the  quest  for  advancing  medical  science  that  speaks
not  only  to  progress  in  the  conquest  of  disease  but  to  other  moral  values  as  well.


856


Official  documents


Federal  Register  /  Vol  59.  No.  13  /  Thursday.  January  20,  1994  /  Presidential  Documents 2935

Presidential  Documents


Executive  Order  12891  of  January  IS,  1994

Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments


By  the  authority  vested  in  me  as  President  by  the  Constitution  and  the
laws  of  the  United  States  of  America,  it  is  hereby  ordered  as  follows:

Section  1.  Establishment,  (a)  There  shall  be  established  an  Advisory  Commit-
tee on  Human  Radiation  Experiments  (the  "Advisory  Committee"  or  "Com-
mittee"). The  Advisory  Committee  shall  be  composed  of  not  more  than
15  members  to  be  appointed  or  designated  by  the  President.  The  Advisory
Committee  shall  comply  with  the  Federal  Advisory  Committee  Act,  as  amend-
ed. 5  U.S.C.  App.  2.

(b)  The  President  shall  designate  a  Chairperson  from  among  the  members
of  the  Advisory  Committee.

See.  2.  Functions,  (a)  There  has  been  established  a  Human  Radiation  Inter-
agency Working  Group,  the  members  of  which  include  the  •  Secretary  of
Energy,  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  the  Secretary  of  Health  and  Human  Services,
the  Secretary  of  Veterans  Affairs,  the  Attorney  General,  the  Administrator
of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  the  Director  of  Central
Intelligence,  and  the  Director  of  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget.
As  set  forth  in  paragraph  (b)  of  this  section,  the  Advisory  Committee  shall
provide  to  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group  advice  and
recommendations  on  the  ethical  and  scientific  standards  applicable  to  human
radiation  experiments  carried  out  or  sponsored  by  the  United  States  Govern-
ment. As  used  herein,  "human  radiation  experiments"  means:

(1)  experiments  on  individuals  involving  intentional  exposure  to
ionizing  radiation.  This  category  does  not  include  common  and
routine  clinical  practices,  such  as  established  diagnosis  and  treat-
ment methods,  involving  incidental  exposures  to  ionizing  radiation;

(2)  experiments  involving  intentional  environmental  releases  of  radi-
ation that  (A)  were  designed  to  test  human  health  effects  of  ionizing
radiation;  or  (B)  were  designed  to  test  the  extent  of  human  exposure
to  ionizing  radiation.

Consistent  with  the  provisions  set  forth  in  paragraph  (b)  of  this  section,
the  Advisory  Committee  shall  also  provide  advice,  information,  and  rec-
ommendations on  the  following  experiments:

(1)  the  experiment  into  the  atmospheric  diffusion  of  radioactive
gases  and  test  of  detectability,  commonly  referred  to  as  "the  Green
Run  test,"  by  the  former  Atomic  Energy  Commission  (AEC)  and
the  Air  Force  in  December  1949  at  the  Hanford  Reservation  in
Richland,  Washington;

(2)  two  radiation  warfare  field  experiments  conducted  at  the  AEC's
Oak  Ridge  office  hi  1948  involving  gamma  radiation  released  from
non-bomb  point  sources  at  or  near  ground  level;

(3)  six  tests  conducted  during  1949-1952  of  radiation  warfare  ballis-
tic dispersal  devices  containing  radioactive  agents  at  the  U.S.  Army's
Dugway.  Utah,  site;.

(4)  four  atmospheric  radiation-tracking  tests  in  1950  at  Los  Alamos,
New  Mexico;  and

(5)  any  other  similar  experiment  that  may  later  be  identified  by
the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group.


2936  Federal  Register  /  Vol.  59,  No.  13  /  Thursday,  January  20,  1994  /  Presidential  Documents

The  Advisory  Committee  shall  review  experiments  conducted  from  1944
to  May  30,  1974.  Human  radiation  experiments  undertaken  after  May  30
1974  the  date  of  issuance  of  the  Department  of  Health,  Education,  and
Welfare  ("DHEW")  Regulations  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects  (45
C.F.R.  46),  may  be  sampled  to  determine  whether  further  inquiry  into  experi-
ments is  warranted.  Further  inquiry  into  experiments  conducted  after  May
30,  1974,  may  be  pursued  if  the  Advisory  Committee  determines,  with
the  concurrence  of  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group,  that
such  inquiry  is  warranted.

(b)(1)  The  Advisory  Committee  shall  determine  the  ethical  and  scientific
standards  and  criteria  by  which  it  shall  evaluate  human  radiation  experi-
ments, as  set  forth  in  paragraph  (a)  of  this  section.  The  Advisory  Committee
shall  consider  whether  (A)  there  was  a  clear  medical  or  scientific  purpose
for  the  experiments;  (B)  appropriate  medical  follow-up  was  conducted;  and
(C)  the  experiments'  design  and  administration  adequately  met  the  ethical
and  scientific  standards,  including  standards  of  informed  consent,  that  pre-
vailed at  the  time  of  the  experiments  and  that  exist  today.

(2)  The  Advisory  Committee  shall  evaluate  the  extent  to  which  human
radiation  experiments  were  consistent  with  applicable  ethical  and  scientific
standards  as  determined  by  the  Committee  pursuant  to  paragraph  (b)(1)
of  this  section.  If  deemed  necessary  for  such  an  assessment,  the  Committee
may  carry  out  a  detailed  review  of  experiments  and  associated  records
to  the  extent  permitted  by  law.

(3)  If  required  to  protect  the  health  of  individuals  who  were  subjects
of  a  human  radiation  experiment,  or  their  descendants,  the  Advisory  Commit-
tee may  recommend  to  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group
that  an  agency  notify  particular  subjects  of  an  experiment,  or  their  descend-
ants, of  any  potential  health  risk  or  the  need  for  medical  follow-up.

(4)  The  Advisory  Committee  may  recommend  further  policies,  as  needed,
to  ensure  compliance  with  recommended  ethical  and  scientific  standards
for  human  radiation  experiments.

(5)  The  Advisory  Committee  may  carry  out  such  additional  functions
as  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group  may  from  time  to
time  request.

Sex:.  3.  Administration,  (a)  The  heads  of  executive  departments  and  agencies
shall,  to  the  extent  permitted  by  law,  provide  the  Advisory  Committee
with  such  information  as  it  may  require  for  purposes  of  carrying  out  its
functions.

(b)  Members  of  the  Advisory  Committee  shall  be  compensated  in  accord-
ance with  Federal  law.  Committee  members  may  be  allowed  travel  expenses,
including  per  diem  in  lieu  of  subsistence,  to  the  extent  permitted  by  law
for  persons  serving  intermittently  in  the  government  service  (5  U.S.C.  5701-
5707).

(c)  To  the  extent  permitted  by  law,  and  subject  to  the  availability  of
appropriations,  the  Department  of  Energy  shall  provide  the  Advisory  Commit-
tee with  such  funds  as  may  be  necessary  for  the  performance  of  its  functions.

Sec.  4.  General  Provisions,  (a)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  any  other
Executive  order,  the  functions  of  the  President  under  the  Federal  Advisory
Committee  Act  that  are  applicable  to  the  Advisory  Committee,  except  that
of  reporting  annually  to  the  Congress,  shall  be  performed  by  the  Human
Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group,  in  accordance  with  the  guidelines
and  procedures  established  by  the  Administrator  of  General  Services.

(b)  The  Advisory  Committee  shall  terminate  30  days  after  submitting  its
final  report  to  the  Human  Radiation  Interagency  Working  Group.


Federal  Register  /  Vol.  59,  No.  13  /  Thursday,  January  20,  1994  /  Presidential  Documents  2937

(c)  This  order  is  intended  only  to  improve  the  internal  management  of
the  executive  branch  and  it  is  not  intended  to  create  any  right,  benefit,
trust,  or  responsibility,  substantive  or  procedural,  enforceable  at  law  or
equity  by  a  party  against  the  United  States,  its  agencies,  its  officers,  or
any  person.


ll'R  Doc.  94-1531
Filed  1-18-94:  4:37  pml
Billing  code  3195-01-P


0^nAJ^AAA<T^MAd^^


THE  WHITE  HOUSE,
January  15,  1994.


CHARTER
ADVISORY  COMMITTEE  ON  HUMAN  RADIATION  EXPERIMENTS

1.  Committee' s Official  Designation

Advisory  Committee  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments  (the
"Advisory  Committee"  or  "Committee").

2.  Authority

Executive  Order  No.  12891.


Objectives  and  Scope  of  Activities

There  has  been  established  a  Human  Radiation  Interagency
Working  Group  (the  "Interagency  Working  Group") ,  the  members
of  which  include  the  Secretary  of  Energy,  the  Secretary  of
Defense,  the  Secretary  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  the
Secretary  of  Veterans  Affairs,  the  Attorney  General,  the
Administrator  of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space
Administration,  the  Director  of  Central  Intelligence,  and
the  Director  of  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget. As  set
forth  in  section  4  of  this  Charter,  the  Advisory  Committee
shall  provide  to  the  Interagency  Working  Group  advice  and
recommendations  on  the  ethical  and  scientific  standards
applicable  to  human  radiation  experiments  carried  out  or
sponsored  by  the  United  States  Government. As  used  herein,
"human  radiation  experiments"  means:

(1)  Experiments  on  individuals  involving  intentional
exposure  to  ionizing  radiation. This  category  does  not
include  common  and  routine  clinical  practices,  such  as
established  diagnosis  and  treatment  methods,  involving
incidental  exposures  to  ionizing  radiation.

(2)  Experiments  involving  intentional  environmental
releases  of  radiation  that  (A)  were  designed  to  test
human  health  effects  of  ionizing  radiation;  or  (B)  were
designed  to  test  the  extent  of  human  exposure  to
ionizing  radiation.

Consistent  with  the  provisions  set  forth  in  section  4  of
this  Charter,  the  Advisory  Committee  also  shall  provide
advice,  information  and  recommendations  on  the  following
experiments:


(1)  The  experiment  into  the  atmospheric  diffusion  of
radioactive  gases  and  test  of  detectability ,  commonly
referred  to  as  "the  Green  Run  test,"  by  the  former
Atomic  Energy  Commission  (AEC)  and  the  Air  Force  in
December  1949  in  Hanford,  Washington;

(2)  Two  radiation  warfare  field  experiments  conducted  at
the  AEC's  Oak  Ridge  office  in  1948  involving  gamma
radiation  released  from  non-bomb  point  sources  at  or
near  ground  level;

(3)  Six  tests  conducted  during  1949-1952  of  radiation
warfare  ballistic  dispersal  devices  containing
radioactive  agents  at  the  U.S.  Army's  Dugvay,  Utah
site;

(4)  Four  atmospheric  radiation-tracking  tests  in  19  50  at
Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico;  and

(5)  Any  other  similar  experiments  which  may  later  be
identified  by  the  Interagency  Working  Group.

The  Advisory  Committee  shall  review  experiments  conducted
from  1944  to  May  30,  1974. Human  radiation  experiments
undertaken  after  May  30,  1974,  the  date  of  issuance  of  the
Department  of  Health,  Education  and  Welfare  Regulations  for
the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects  (45  C.F.R.  46),  may  be
sampled  to  determine  whether  further  inquiry  into
experiments  is  warranted. Further  inquiry  into  experiments
conducted  after  May  30,  1974,  may  be  pursued  if  the  Advisory
Committee  determines,  with  the  concurrence  of  the
Interagency  Working  Group,  that  such  inquiry  is  warranted.

4. Description  of  Duties  for  Which
Committee  is  Responsible

The  duties  of  the  Advisory  Committee  are  solely  advisory  and
shall  be:

a. The  Advisory  Committee  shall  determine  the  ethical  and
scientific  standards  and  criteria  by  which  it  shall _
evaluate  human  radiation  experiments,  as  set  forth  in
section  3  of  this  Charter. The  Advisory  Committee
shall  consider  whether  (A)  there  was  a  clear  medical  or
scientific  purpose  for  the  experiments;  (B)  appropriate
medical  follow-up  was  conducted;  and  (C)  the
experiments'  design  and  administration  adequately  met
the  ethical  and  scientific  standards,  including
standards  of  informed  consent,  that  prevailed  at  the
time  of  the  experiments  and  that  exist  today.


b.  The  Advisory  Committee  shall  evaluate  the  extent  to
which  human  radiation  experiments  were  consistent  with
applicable  ethical  and  scientific  standards  as
determined  by  the  Committee  pursuant  to  paragraph  (a)
of  this  section. If  deemed  necessary  for  such  an
assessment,  the  Advisory  Committee  may  carry  out  a
detailed  review  of  experiments  and  associated  records
to  the  extent  permitted  by  law.

c.  If  required  to  protect  the  health  of  individuals  who
were  subjects  of  a  human  radiation  experiment,  or  their
descendants,  the  Advisory  Committee  may  recommend  to
the  Interagency  Working  Group  that  an  agency  notify
particular  subjects  of  an  experiment,  or  their
descendants,  of  any  potential  health  risk  or  the  need
for  medical  follow-up.

d.  The  Advisory  Committee  may  recommend  further  policies,
as  needed,  to  ensure  compliance  with  recommended
ethical  and  scientific  standards  for  human  radiation
experiments.

e.  The  Advisory  Committee  may  carry  out  such  additional
functions  as  the  Interagency  Working  Group  may  from
time  to  time  request.

5.  To  Whom  the  Advisory  Committee  Reports

The  Advisory  Committee  shall  report  to  the  Interagency
Working  Group.

The  Advisory  Committee  shall  submit  its  final  report  to  the
Interagency  Working  Group  within  one  year  of  the  date  of  the
first  meeting  of  the  Advisory  Committee,  unless  such  period
is  extended  by  the  Interagency  Working  Group. The  Advisory
Committee  shall  issue  an  interim  report  not  more  than  six
months  after  the  date  of  the  first  meeting  of  the  Advisory
Committee. That  interim  report  shall  advise  the  Interagency
Working  Group  on  the  status  of  the  Advisory  Committee's
proceedings  and  the  likelihood  that  the  Committee  will  be
able  to  complete  its  duties  within  one  year  of  the  date  of
the  first  meeting  of  the' Advisory  Committee.

6.  Duration  and  Termination  Date

The  Advisory  Committee  shall  terminate  thirty  days  after
submission  of  its  final  report  to  the  Interagency  Working
Group. This  Charter  shall  expire  one  year  plus  thirty  days
after  the  first  meeting  of  the  Advisory  Committee,  subject
to  renewal  and  extension  by  the  President.


7.  Agency  responsible  for  providing  financial  and
administrative  support  to  the  Advisory  Committee

Financial  and  administrative  support  shall  be  provided  by
the  Department  of  Energy.

8.  Estimated  Annual  Operating  Costs
$3  million.

9.  Estimated  Number  and  Frequency  of  Meetings

The  Advisory  Committee  shall  meet  as  it  deems  necessary  to
complete  its  functions.

10.  Subcommittee ( s )

To  facilitate  functioning  of  the  Advisory  Committee,
subcommittee (s)  may  be  formed. The  objectives  of  the
subcommittee (s)  are  to  make  recommendations  to  the  Advisory
Committee  with  respect  to  matters  related  to  the
responsibilities  of  the  Advisory  Committee. Subcommittees
shall  meet  as  the  Advisory  Committee  deems  appropriate.

11.  Members

Up  to  a  maximum  of  fifteen  Advisory  Committee  members  shall
be  appointed  by  the  President  for  a  term  of  one  year,  which
may  be  extended  by  the  President. Committee  members  shall
be  compensated  in  accordance  with  federal  law. Committee
members  may  be  allowed  travel  expenses,  including  per  diem
in  lieu  of  subsistence,  to  the  extent  permitted  by  law  for
persons  serving  intermittently  in  the  government  service  (5
U.S.C.  §§  5701-5707) .

12 .  Chairperson

The  President  shall  designate  a  Chairperson  from  among  the
members  of  the  Advisory  Committee.


Appendices


Acronyms  and  Abbreviations


ACBM  Advisory  Committee  for  Biology  and  Medicine  (a  civilian

advisory  panel  established  in  late  1947  to  advise  AEC's  DBM  on
various  aspects  of  biomedical  research;  dissolved  in  1974)

ACR  American  College  of  Radiology  (professional  society)

AEB  Army  Epidemiological  Board  (established  in  1942;  through  a

series  of  various  commissions,  whose  members  were  civilian
health  professionals,  sponsored  studies  of  infectious  diseases  of
interest  to  military;  succeeded  by  Armed  Forces  Epidemiological
Board  in  1949)

AEC  Atomic  Energy  Commission  (established  by  the  Atomic  Energy

Act  of  1946  and  inherited  most  functions  of  the  MED;  succeeded
in  1974  by  ERDA  and  NRC)

AFEB  Armed  Forces  Epidemiological  Board  ( 1 949  successor  to  AEB)

AFMPC  Armed  Forces  Medical  Policy  Council  (established  by  the

secretary  of  defense  in  January  195 1;  formerly  the  Office  of
Medical  Services  [OMS];  members  included  a  civilian  physician
as  chairman,  other  civilians  from  medicine  or  related  fields,  and
the  surgeons  general  of  the  three  services;  developed  basic  medical
and  health  policies  for  DOD  and  reviewed  the  medical  and  health
aspects  of  the  policies,  plans,  and  programs  of  other  DOD
agencies;  succeeded  by  the  ASD  [H&M]  in  late  1953)

AFPC  Armed  Forces  Policy  Council  (established  under  National  Security

Act  of  1947,  this  panel  advised  the  secretary  of  defense  on  broad
policy  matters  and  specific  issues  as  requested;  its  initial  members


869


Appendices


AFSWP


AMA
ANL


AR

ASD  (H&M)


ASD  (R&D)


ASD  (R&E)


BNL


included  the  secretary  and  deputy  secretary  of  defense;  the
secretaries  of  the  Air  Force,  Army,  and  Navy;  the  chairman  of  the
JCS;  chiefs  of  staff  of  the  Air  Force  and  the  Army;  and  chief  of
naval  operations)

Armed  Forces  Special  Weapons  Project  (established  by  the
secretaries  of  war  and  the  Navy  in  January  of  1947;  inherited
certain  functions  of  the  MED  in  the  areas  of  nuclear  weapons
development,  testing,  storage,  and  training  of  personnel;  succeeded
byDASAin  1958)

American  Medical  Association  (professional  society)

Argonne  National  Laboratory  (established  in  1946  and  operated  by
the  University  of  Chicago;  inherited  many  of  the  facilities  and
functions  of  Met  Lab;  one  of  the  three  original  national
laboratories,  the  others  are  BNL  and  ORNL,  established  in  1946
and  1947,  respectively)

Army  regulation  (policy  directive)

assistant  secretary  of  defense  (health  and  medicine)  (succeeded  the
AFMPC  in  1953;  provided  advice  and  assistance  on  health  and
medical  aspects  of  DOD  policies,  plans,  and  programs  and
collaborated  with  ASD  [R&D]  in  the  development  of  policies  and
the  review  of  requirements  for  biomedical  research  by  DOD)

assistant  secretary  of  defense  (research  and  development)
(replaced  the  RDB  in  1953;  provided  advice  and  assistance  to  the
secretary  of  defense  on  R&D  policies,  plans,  and  programs,
developed  an  integrated  DOD  R&D  program,  assigned  specific
responsibilities  for  R&D  programs  where  unnecessary  duplication
would  be  eliminated  by  such  action,  examined  the  interaction  of
R&D  and  strategy  and  advised  the  JCS,  and  reviewed  proposed
R&D  budgets  and  made  recommendations  thereon;  succeeded  by
ASD  [R&E]  in  1957)

assistant  secretary  of  defense  (research  and  engineering)
(combined  the  offices  of  ASD  [R&D]  and  the  assistant  secretary  of
defense  [engineering];  succeeded  by  the  director  of  defense
research  and  engineering  [DDR&E]  in  1958)

Brookhaven  National  Laboratory  (established  by  the  MED  in  1946


870


Acronyms  and  Abbreviations

and  operated  by  the  Associated  Universities;  created  to  facilitate
cooperation  between  universities  and  the  federal  government  in
performing  research  in  physics  and  nuclear  science)

BuMed  Bureau  of  Medicine  and  Surgery  (operates  Navy's  hospitals  and

medical  research  centers,  as  well  as  sponsoring  most  of  its  outside
biomedical  research)

CDC  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention

CEQ  Council  on  Environmental  Quality  (three-member  panel  within

EOP,  established  by  National  Environmental  Policy  Act;  has
environmental  oversight  responsibilities)

C.F.R.  Code  of  Federal  Regulations  (compilation  of  federal  regulations

available  from  the  Government  Printing  Office  and  in  many  public
and  private  libraries)

CHR  Center  for  Human  Radiobiology  (created  within  Argonne  National

Laboratory  in  the  late  1 960s)

CMR  Committee  on  Medical  Research  (established  in  1942  under  OSRD

to  sponsor  nonradiation-related  biomedical  research  of  interest  to
the  military;  disestablished  in  late  1946)

CMS  Committee  on  Medical  Sciences  (RDB  committee  in  existence

from  1948  to  late  1953  that  reviewed,  evaluated,  and  made
recommendations  on  all  biomedical  research  conducted  by  or  for
DOD  entities;  members  included  both  civilian  and  military  health
professionals;  from  late  1953  to  1957,  an  advisory  group  to  ASD
[R&D]  and  ASD  [R&E],  functions  transferred  to  the  Committee  on
Science  in  1957)


DASA
DBM


Defense  Atomic  Support  Agency  (1958  AFSWP  successor)

Division  of  Biology  and  Medicine  (established  in  early  1948  to
direct  and  coordinate  all  AEC  biomedical  research  activities;
became  the  Biological  and  Environmental  Research  Division  with
the  creation  of  ERDA  in  1974)


DDR&E  director  of  defense  research  and  engineering  (succeeded  ASD

[R&E]  in  1958,  reviewing,  evaluating,  and  directing  all  R&D
conducted  by  or  for  DOD)


871


Appendices
DHEW

DHHS

DNA
DOD


DOE
EOP
EPA

ERDA


FDA


HEDR


HEW
HHS


Department  of  Health,  Education,  and  Welfare  (DHHS
predecessor,  established  in  1953)

Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (1980  DHEW
successor;  the  principal  federal  agency  charged  with  advancing  the
health  of  Americans  and  providing  essential  human  services)

Defense  Nuclear  Agency  (1971  successor  to  DAS  A)

Department  of  Defense  (new  name  established  in  1949  for  the
National  Military  Establishment,  which  had  been  created  under  the
National  Security  Act  of  1947  to  replace  the  War  and  Navy
Departments)

Department  of  Energy  (1977  successor  to  ERDA)

Executive  Office  of  the  President

Environmental  Protection  Agency  (federal  agency  charged  with
monitoring  the  quality  of  the  environment)

Energy  Research  and  Development  Administration  (succeeded
AEC  in  1974,  with  responsibilities  for  civilian  nuclear  power  and
isotope  licensing  and  distribution  transferred  to  the  newly  created
Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission;  succeeded  by  DOE  in  1977)

Food  and  Drug  Administration  (established  as  part  of  the
Department  of  Agriculture  in  1862;  became  a  regulatory  agency  in
1906;  transferred  to  Federal  Security  Agency  in  1940,  which
became  HEW  in  1953;  became  part  of  PHS  in  1968;  enforces  laws
to  ensure  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  foods,  food  additives,  drugs,
biologies,  cosmetics,  and  medical  devices)

Hanford  Environmental  Dose  Reconstruction  (established  by  DOE,
later  transferred  to  Centers  for  Disease  Control,  this  project
assesses  human  exposures  to  ionizing  radiation  due  to  radioactive
emissions  from  the  Hanford,  Washington,  plutonium-production
plant)

See  DHEW

See  DHHS


872


Acronyms  and  Abbreviations


HURB


ICRP


IG


INEL


IRB
JCAE


Human  Use  Review  Board  (within  Army  surgeon  general's  office,
reviews  proposed  research  involving  greater  than  minimal  risk)

International  Commission  on  Radiological  Protection
(international  body  of  scientific  experts,  created  in  1928,  which
functions  on  an  international  basis  as  the  NCRP  does  within  the
United  States)

inspector  general  (office  in  federal  departments  and  agencies  that
conducts  and  supervises  audits,  investigations,  and  inspections  of
department  and  agency  operations)

Idaho  National  Engineering  Laboratory  (originally  named  the
National  Reactor  Testing  Station,  INEL  was  established  in  1 949  as
a  remote  site  to  work  with  experimental  civilian  and  military
reactors)

institutional  review  board  (See  Glossary)

Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  (congressional  committee
established  under  the  Atomic  Energy  Act  of  1946  to  oversee  AEC;
disestablished  in  1974).


JCS  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff

LANL  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  (established  as  Los  Alamos

Scientific  Laboratory  by  the  MED  in  1943;  operated  by  the
University  of  California  since  it  was  established;  originally  created
to  design  and  build  a  fission  bomb;  designated  a  national
laboratory  in  1977)

LBL  Lawrence  Berkeley  Laboratory  (1971  successor  to  UCRL)

LLNL  Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory  (successor  to  the

Livermore  weapons  lab  which  had  been  established  in  1952  as  the
second  weapons  lab  and  had  been  operated  by  UCRL)

MED  Manhattan  Engineer  District,  also  popularly  known  as  the

Manhattan  Project  (established  in  1942  within  the  U.S.  Army  to
build  the  atomic  bomb;  functions  transferred  to  AEC  and  AFSWP
in  1947)

MetLab  Metallurgical  Laboratory  (University  of  Chicago-based  MED


873


Appendices

laboratory  established  in  1 942;  most  functions  transferred  to  ANL
in  1946)

MKULTRA A  domestic  CIA  program  in  the  1950s  and  1960s  involving  human
experimentation  to  investigate  control  of  human  behavior  through
the  use  of  chemical,  biological,  and  other  means  (including
psychoactive  drugs,  psychology,  and  possibly  radiation)

MLC  Military  Liaison  Committee  (established  under  the  Atomic  Energy

Act  of  1946;  chaired  by  a  civilian,  its  other  members  included  two
senior  officers  from  each  of  the  three  services;  advised  the
secretary  of  defense  and  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff  on  priorities  for  DOD
atomic  energy  R&D,  which  component  should  conduct  it,  and
liaisoned  with  the  AEC  on  DOD  activities)

MPA  multiple-project  assurance  (research  institution's  assurance,

covering  a  number  of  different  research  projects,  to  OPRR  or  the
funding  agency  that  the  institution  will  comply  with  federal  human
subjects  protection  policy)

MPBB  maximum  permissible  body  burden  (amount  of  radioactivity  that,

if  deposited  in  the  body,  is  estimated  to  deliver  the  highest
allowable  dose  rate  to  the  most  critical  organ  over  a  defined  period
of  time)

NASA  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  (established  in

1958;  agency  responsible  for  the  development  of  space  aviation,
technology,  and  exploration)

NCI  National  Cancer  Institute  (established  in  1937,  part  of  NIH)

NCRH  National  Center  for  Radiological  Health  (1967  successor  to  PHS's

radiological  health  and  safety  program;  conducted  biological  and
epidemiological  research  on  radiation  effects)

NCRP  National  Committee  on  Radiological  Protection  and  Measurements

( 1 946  successor  to  Advisory  Committee  on  X-ray  and  Radium
Protection,  known  after  1964  as  National  Council  on  Radiation
Protection  and  Measurements;  an  independent  body  of  scientific
experts,  it  recommends  limits  for  occupational  exposure  that  are
widely  followed  and  periodically  issues  reports  on  special  topics)

NEPA  ( 1 )  Nuclear  Energy  for  the  Propulsion  of  Airplanes  ( 1 946- 1 96 1  Air


874


Acronyms  and  Abbreviations


NIH


NIOSH


Force  program  for  developing  nuclear-powered  bomber)
(2)  National  Environmental  Policy  Act  of  1969  (Federal  statute
requiring  that  the  U.S.  government  consider  and  publicize  the
environmental  impact  of  its  actions)

National  Institutes  of  Health  (part  of  PHS;  begun  as  a  one-room
Laboratory  of  Hygiene  in  1887,  now  the  world's  largest  biomedical
research  facility;  based  in  Bethesda,  Maryland;  conducts  and
sponsors  research  dedicated  to  health  promotion  and  the  discovery
of  causes,  prevention,  and  cure  of  diseases)

National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (part  of
CDC)


NRC  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission  (established  in  1974  as  a

successor  to  AEC  to  run  civilian  nuclear  power  program  and
radioisotope  licensing  and  distribution  program)

NTPR  Nuclear  Test  Personnel  Review  (DNA  program  established  in

1978  to,  among  other  things,  compile  unclassified  histories  of
atmospheric  nuclear  weapons  tests,  determine  which  DOD  civilian
and  military  personnel  were  present  at  these  tests,  and  establish
their  exposure  levels  at  the  tests)

NYOO  New  York  Operations  Office  (AEC  regional  office)

OPRR  Office  for  Protection  from  Research  Risks  (established  within  NIH

in  1966  to  educate  investigators  and  others  about  research  ethics
and  to  implement  regulations  for  the  protection  of  human  and
animal  subjects)

ORAU  Oak  Ridge  Associated  Universities  (1966  successor  to  ORINS)

ORINS  Oak  Ridge  Institute  of  Nuclear  Studies  (established  in  1946,  and

operated  initially  by  a  consortium  of  fourteen  Southeastern
universities  under  AEC  contract  beginning  in  1947;  a  research  and
training  site  for  users  of  radioisotopes  in  medicine  and  site  of
biomedical  research)

ORISE  Oak  Ridge  Institute  for  Science  and  Education  ( 199 1  successor  to

ORAU)

ORO  Oak  Ridge  Operations  Office  (AEC/ERD A/DOE  regional  office)


875


Appendices
ORNL

OSG

OSRD


PBI
PHS


R&D
RDB

RDRC
RSC

RW

SAM

TBI
UCRL


Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory  (established  in  1947,  succeeding
Clinton  Labs;  has  conducted  a  wide  range  of  research  for  AEC,
ERDA,  and  DOE)

Army  Office  of  the  Surgeon  General  (operates  Army's  hospitals
and  medical  research  centers,  as  well  as  sponsoring  most  of  its
outside  biomedical  research)

Office  of  Scientific  Research  and  Development  (through  numerous
committees,  coordinated  and  directed  all  nonatomic  energy  R&D
of  the  War  and  Navy  Departments  from  1942  to  1946;  succeeded
by  the  Joint  Research  and  Development  Board)

partial-body  irradiation

Public  Health  Service  (the  federal  government's  principal  health
agency,  restructured  three  times  since  World  War  II,  now  one  of
five  operating  divisions  of  DHHS;  functions  to  improve  public
health  through  the  promotion  of  physical  and  mental  health  and  the
prevention  of  disease,  injury,  and  disability)

research  and  development

Research  and  Development  Board  (reviewed,  evaluated,  and
directed  all  research  and  development  conducted  by  or  for  DOD;
functions  transferred  to  ASD  [R&D]  and  ASD  [R&E]  in  late  1953)

radioactive  drug  research  committee  (reviews  proposed  use  of
radioactive  drugs  within  an  institution)

radiation  safety  committee  (monitors  radiation  safety  within  an
institution)

radiological  warfare

School  of  Aviation  Medicine  (Air  Force  component;  conducted
radiobiology  research  beginning  in  the  late  1940s;  coordinated
efforts  with  other  government  agencies)

total-body  irradiation

University  of  California  Radiation  Laboratory  (lab  established  in
1936  by  Ernest  Lawrence  on  the  Berkeley  campus;  conducted  a


876


Acronyms  and  Abbreviations

wide  range  of  research  for  the  MED  and  AEC;  operated  the
Livermore  weapons  lab  from  its  establishment  in  1952;
redesignated  the  Lawrence  Berkeley  Laboratory  in  1 97 1 )

UCSF  University  of  California  at  San  Francisco  (biomedical  research

site)

U.S.C.  United  States  Code  (compilation  of  congressionally  enacted  laws

available  in  many  public  and  private  libraries)

VA  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs  (successor  to  1 930- 1 989  Veterans

Administration)

WMA  World  Medical  Association  (professional  organization;  issued

Helsinki  Declaration  in  1964)


877


Glossary

Terms  in  italics  appear  in  the  Glossary  as  separate  entries.


Alpha  radiation See  Ionizing  radiation.

Association In  statistics,  the  correlation  or  relationship  between  one  factor  and
one  or  more  other  pertinent  factors  as  demonstrated  by  experimental  data.

Atomic  bomb An  explosive  device  in  which  a  large  amount  of  energy  is
released  through  the  nuclear  fission  of  uranium  or  plutonium.  The  first  atomic
bomb  test,  known  as  the  Trinity  Shot,  took  place  in  the  desert  north  of
Alamogordo,  New  Mexico,  on  July  16,  1945.  Several  weeks  later,  an  atomic
bomb  was  used  for  the  first  time  as  an  instrument  of  war,  detonating  over  the
Japanese  cities  of  Hiroshima  (August  6)  and  Nagasaki  (August  9).

Atomic  pile See  Nuclear  reactor.

Becquerel See  Units  of  radioactivity.

Beta  radiation See  Ionizing  radiation.

Biodistribution The  pattern  and  process  of  a  chemical  substance's  distribution
through  the  body.

Biological  dosimeter See  Dosimeter.

Biopsy The  removal  and/or  examination  of  tissues,  cells,  or  fluids  from  a  living
body  for  the  purposes  of  diagnosis  or  experimental  tests.

878


Glossary

Biophysics The  application  of  physical  principles  and  methods  to  the  study  of
the  structures  of  living  organisms  and  the  mechanics  of  life  processes.

Body  burden The  amount  of  a  radioactive  material  present  in  a  body  over  a
long  time  period.  It  is  calculated  by  considering  the  amount  of  material  initially
present  and  the  reduction  in  that  amount  due  to  elimination  and  radioactive  decay.
It  is  commonly  used  in  reference  to  radionuclides  having  a  long  biological  half-
life.  A  body  burden  that  subjects  the  body's  most  sensitive  organs  to  the  highest
dose  of  a  particular  radionuclide  that  regulators  allow  is  known  as  a  maximum
permissible  body  burden  (MPBB).

Bone  marrow  infusion The  injection  of  bone  marrow  (an  essential  tissue
producing  red  and  white  blood  cells  and  platelets)  into  the  body,  used  primarily  to
replace  bone  marrow  destroyed  by  disease  or  in  the  course  of  radiation  and  other
therapies  for  certain  types  of  cancer.

Carcinogen A  material  that  can  initiate  or  promote  the  development  of  cancer.
Well-known  carcinogens  include  saccharine,  nitrosamines  found  in  cured  meat,
certain  pesticides,  and  ionizing  radiation.

Chain  reaction The  process  by  which  the  fission  of  a  nucleus  releases  neutrons,
causing  other  nuclei  to  undergo  fission  in  turn.  Both  the  atomic  bomb  and  the
nuclear  reactor  use  a  chain  reaction  to  generate  energy.

Clinical  trial A  research  study  involving  human  subjects,  designed  to  evaluate
the  safety  and  effectiveness  of  new  therapeutic  and  diagnostic  treatments.

Common  Rule  The  1991  federal  regulation  that  provides  the  basic  procedures
and  principles  that  are  to  be  followed  in  the  conduct  of  human  subject  research
sponsored  by  federal  agencies.

Critical  mass  The  amount  of  fissionable  material  (uranium  235  or  plutonium
239)  sufficient  to  sustain  a  nuclear  chain  reaction.

Curie See  Units  of  radioactivity.

Cyclotron A  device  that  uses  alternating  electric  fields  to  accelerate  subatomic
particles  (a  particle  smaller  than  an  atom,  such  as  an  alpha  particle  or  a  proton).
When  these  particles  strike  ordinary  nuclei,  radioisotopes  are  formed.  For  his
work  in  developing  the  cyclotron  in  the  early  1930s,  Ernest  Lawrence  of  the
University  of  California  received  the  1939  Nobel  Prize  in  Physics.

Deterministic  effect An  effect,  such  as  kidney  damage,  whose  severity

879


Appendices

increases  with  increasing  dose  of  radiation  or  other  agent.

Diagnostic  procedure A  method  used  to  identify  a  disease  in  a  living  person.

Dosage The  prescribed  amount  of  medicine  or  other  therapeutic  agent
administered  to  treat  a  given  illness.

Dose In  radiology,  a  measure  of  energy  absorbed  in  the  body  from  ionizing
radiation,  measured  in  rad.

Dose  reconstruction The  process  of  using  information  about  an  individual's  past
exposures  to  ionizing  radiation  as  well  as  general  knowledge  about  the  behavior
of  radioactive  materials  in  the  human  body  and  in  the  environment  to  estimate  the
dose  of  radiation  that  someone  has  received.

Dosimeter An  instrument  that  measures  the  dose  of  ionizing  radiation.  A
biological  dosimeter  is  a  biological  or  biochemical  indicator  of  the  effects  of
exposure,  such  as  a  change  in  blood  chemistry  or  in  blood  count.  A  highly
accurate  biological  dosimeter  has  yet  to  be  found.

Dosimetry The  measurement  and  calculation  of  radiation  doses.

Endocrinology  The  study  of  the  body's  hormone-producing  glands,  such  as  the
thyroid,  pituitary,  and  adrenal  glands,  and  the  functions  of  the  hormones  they
synthesize  and  secrete.

Epidemiology The  study  of  the  determinants  (risk  factors)  and  distribution  of
disease  among  populations.

Fallout Radioactive  debris  that  falls  to  earth  after  a  nuclear  explosion.

Fission The  division  of  an  atomic  nucleus  into  parts  of  comparable  mass.
Generally  speaking,  fission  may  occur  only  in  heavier  nuclei,  such  as  isotopes  of
uranium  and  plutonium.  Atomic  bombs  derive  energy  from  the  fission  of  uranium
or  plutonium.

Fission  product An  atom  or  nucleus  that  results  from  the  fission  of  a  larger
nucleus.

Fusion The  combining  of  two  light  atomic  nuclei  to  form  a  single  heavier
nucleus,  releasing  energy.  Hydrogen  bombs  derive  a  large  portion  of  their  energy
from  the  fusion  of  hydrogen  isotopes.


880


Glossary
Gamma  radiation See  Ionizing  radiation.

Genetic  effects Changes  in  a  person's  germ  calls  (sperm  or  ova)  that  are
transmissible  to  future  generations.  Such  changes  result  from  mutations  in  genes
within  the  germ  cells.

Gray see  Units  of  radioactivity.

Half-life The  average  time  required  for  one-half  of  the  amount  of  radioactivity
of  a  radionuclide  to  undergo  radioactive  decay.  For  material  with  a  half-life  of
one  week,  half  of  the  original  amount  of  activity  will  remain  after  one  week;  half
of  that  (one-quarter  of  the  original  amount)  will  remain  after  two  weeks;  and  so
on.

Health  physics  A  branch  of  physics  specializing  in  accurate  measurement  of
agents,  such  as  ionizing  radiation,  which  can  have  effects  on  human  health.

Hydrogen  bomb  (also  known  as  a  thermonuclear  weapon) An  explosive
weapon  that  uses  nuclear  fusion  to  release  energy  stored  in  the  nuclei  of  hydrogen
isotopes.  The  high  temperatures  essential  to  fusion  are  attained  by  detonating  an
atomic  bomb  placed  at  the  H-bomb's  structural  center.  The  United  States  tested
the  first  hydrogen  bomb  in  1954  at  the  Pacific  Test  Site.

Institutional  review  board  (IRB) Under  the  Common  Rule,  a  local  review
board  convened  by  any  institution  conducting  federally  sponsored  human  subject
research,  vested  with  the  responsibility  to  review  research  proposals  to  ensure
compliance  with  federal  research  regulations.

Internal  emitter A  radioisotope  incorporated  into  a  tissue  in  the  body  that
decays  in  place  and  continuously  exposes  that  tissue  to  ionizing  radiation.

Ionization The  process  by  which  a  neutral  atom  or  molecule  loses  or  gains
electrons,  thereby  acquiring  a  net  electrical  charge.  When  charged,  it  is  known  as
an  ion.

Ionizing  radiation Any  of  the  various  forms  of  radiant  energy  that  causes
ionization  when  it  interacts  with  matter.  The  most  common  types  are  alpha
radiation,  made  up  of  helium  nuclei;  beta  radiation,  made  up  of  electrons;  and
gamma  and  x  radiation,  consisting  of  high-energy  particles  of  light  (photons).

Irradiation Exposure  to  radiation  of  any  kind,  especially  ionizing  radiation.

Isotope A  species  of  nucleus  with  a  fixed  number  of  protons  and  neutrons.  The

881


Appendices

term  isotope  is  usually  used  to  distinguish  nuclear  species  of  the  same  chemical
element  (i.e.,  those  having  the  same  number  of  protons,  but  different  numbers  of
neutrons),  such  as  iodine  127  and  iodine  131.

Latency  period The  time  between  when  an  exposure  occurs  and  when  its  effects
are  detectable  as  an  injury  or  illness.

Maximum  Permissible  Body  Burden  (MPBB) see  Body  burden

Metabolism The  manner  in  which  a  substance  is  acted  upon  (taken  up,
converted  to  other  substances,  and  excreted)  by  various  organs  of  the  body.

Natural  background  radiation Ionizing  radiation  that  occurs  naturally.  Its
principal  sources  are  cosmic  rays  from  outer  space,  radionuclides  in  the  human
body,  and  radon  gas  (a  decay  product  of  natural  uranium  in  the  earth's  crust).

Nuclear  medicine A  branch  of  medicine  specializing  in  the  use  of  radionuclides
for  diagnostic  and  therapeutic  purposes.

Nuclear  reactor A  device  containing  fissionable  material  in  sufficient  quantity
and  suitable  arrangement  to  maintain  a  controlled,  self-sustaining  nuclear  chain
reaction.

Nuclide A  type  of  nucleus  with  a  fixed  number  of  protons  and  neutrons.  The
term  nuclide  is  usually  used  to  distinguish  nuclear  species  of  different  chemical
elements  (i.e.,  those  having  different  numbers  of  protons  and  neutrons),  such  as
iodine  127  and  uranium  235.

Partial-Body  Irradiation  (PBI) Exposure  of  part  of  the  body  to  external
radiation.

Permissible  dose In  the  judgment  of  a  regulatory  or  advisory  body,  such  as  the
National  Committee  on  Radiation  Protection,  the  amount  of  radiation  that  may  be
received  by  an  individual  within  a  specified  period.

Principal  investigator The  scientist  or  scholar  with  primary  responsibility  for
the  design  and  conduct  of  a  research  project.

Protocol The  formal  design  or  plan  of  an  experiment  or  research  activity;
specifically,  the  plan  submitted  to  an  institutional  review  board  for  review  and  to
a  government  agency  for  research  support.  Protocols  include  a  description  of  the
research  design  or  methodology  to  be  employed,  the  eligibility  requirements  for
prospective  subjects  and

882


Glossary

controls,  the  treatment  regimen(s),  and  the  methods  of  analysis  to  be  performed
on  the  collected  data.

Rad See  Units  of  radiation

Radiation The  emission  of  waves  transmitting  energy  through  space  or  a
material  medium,  such  as  water.  Light,  radio  waves,  and  x  rays  are  all  forms  of
radiation.

Radiation  biology See  radiobiology.

Radiation  oncology A  branch  of  medicine  specializing  in  the  treatment  of
cancer  with  radiation.  Radiation  therapy  and  radiotherapy  are  equivalent  terms.

Radiation  sickness Acute  physical  illness  caused  by  exposure  to  doses  of
ionizing  radiation  large  enough  to  cause  toxic  reactions.  This  can  include
symptoms  such  as  nausea,  diarrhea,  headache,  lethargy,  and  fever.

Radioactive  decay  The  process  by  which  the  nucleus  of  a  radioactive  isotope
decomposes  and  releases  radioactivity.  For  example,  carbon  14  (a  radioisotope
of  carbon)  decays  by  losing  a  beta  particle,  thereby  becoming  nitrogen  14,  which
is  unstable.

Radioactivity The  decay  of  unstable  nuclei  through  the  emission  of  ionizing
radiation.  The  resulting  nucleus  may  itself  be  unstable  and  undergo  radioactive
decay.  The  process  stops  only  when  the  decay  product  is  stable.

Radiobiology Branch  of  biology  specializing  in  the  study  of  the  effects  of
radiation  on  biological  molecules,  cells,  tissues,  and  whole  organisms,  including
humans.  Radiobiology  seeks  to  discover  the  molecular  changes  responsible  for
radiation  effects  such  as  cancer  induction,  genetic  changes,  and  cell  death.

Radiogenic  A  term  used  to  identify  conditions  observed  to  be  caused  by
exposure  to  ionizing  radiation,  such  as  certain  kinds  of  cancer.

Radioisotope A  radioactive  isotope.  Radioisotopes  are  used  in  medical  research
as  tracers.  See  also  isotope,  nuclide,  and  radionuclide.

Radiological  weapons Weapons  that  use  radioactive  materials  to  cause
radiation  injury.

Radionuclide A  radioactive  nuclide.  Often  used  to  distinguish  radioisotopes  of
different  chemical  elements,  such  as  iodine  131  and  uranium  239.

883


Appendices

Radiopharmaceuticals Drugs  (compounds  or  materials)  that  may  be  labeled  or
tagged  with  a  radioisotope.  In  many  cases,  these  materials  function  much  like
materials  found  in  the  body  and  do  not  produce  special  pharmacological  effects.
The  principal  risk  associated  with  these  materials  is  the  consequent  exposure  of
the  body  or  certain  tissues  to  radiation.

Radioresistance The  degree  of  resistance  of  organisms  or  tissues  to  the  harmful
effects  of  ionizing  radiation.

Radiosensitivity The  degree  of  sensitivity  of  organisms  or  tissues  to  the  harmful
effects  of  ionizing  radiation.

Radiotherapy  See  radiation  oncology.

Rem See  Units  of  radiation.

Rep See  Units  of  radiation.

Roentgen See  Units  of  radiation.

Tolerance  dose See  Permissible  dose.

Total-Body  Irradiation  (TBI) Exposure  of  the  entire  body  to  external
radiation.

Tracer A  distinguishable  substance,  usually  radioactive,  administered  to
determine  the  distribution  and/or  metabolism  of  materials  in  the  body.  In  1923,
George  Hevesy  was  the  first  investigator  to  use  an  isotope  (radioactive  thorium)
in  metabolic  studies,  exploring  lead  transport  in  the  bean  plant.  Metabolic  studies
proliferated  after  World  War  II,  when  with  the  development  of  the  cyclotron,
radioisotopes  of  various  atoms  became  more  widely  available.  Isotopes
commonly  used  as  tracers  today  include  carbon  14,  iodine  131  and  phosphorus
32.

Transuranic  elements Radioactive  elements  with  atomic  numbers  (i.e.,  the
number  of  protons  in  the  nucleus)  greater  than  92.  Only  two  of  these  elements
(plutonium  in  minute  amounts  and  neptunium)  occur  in  nature;  the  others  are
produced  in  minute  amounts  through  the  radioactive  decay  of  uranium.  The  first
transuranic  elements  were  discovered  as  synthetic  radioisotopes  at  the  University
of  California  at  Berkeley  and  the  Argonne  National  Laboratory  in  the  1930s  and
1940s.


884


Glossaiy

Units  of  radiation The  basic  unit  of  radiation  exposure  is  the  roentgen,  named
after  Wilhelm  Roentgen  (discoverer  of  x  rays).  It  is  a  measure  of  ionization  in  air,
technically  equal  to  one  ESU  (electrostatic  unit)  per  cubic  centimeter,  due  to
radiation.  A  rep  (roentgen  equivalent  physical)  is  an  archaic  measure  of  skin
exposure  to  a  dose  of  beta  radiation  having  an  effect  equivalent  to  1  roentgen  of
x  rays.  The  basic  unit  of  radiation  absorbed  by  the  body  is  the  rad,  technically
equal  to  100  ergs  (energy  unit)  per  gram  of  exposed  tissue.  One  roentgen
corresponds  to  roughly  0.95  rad.  The  rem  (roentgen  equivalent  in  man)  is  a  unit
of  effective  dose,  a  dose  corrected  for  the  varying  biological  effectiveness  of
various  types  of  ionizing  radiation.  The  currently  accepted  unit  of  radiation  is  the
gray  (Gy),  the  International  System  unit  of  absorbed  dose,  equal  to  the  energy
imparted  by  ionizing  radiation  to  a  mass  of  matter  corresponding  to  one  joule  per
kilogram.

Units  of  Radioactivity The  becquerel  (Bq),  named  after  the  physicist  Henri
Becquerel  (the  discoverer  of  radioactivity),  is  a  measure  of  radioactivity  equal  to
one  atomic  disintegration  per  second.  The  curie  (Ci),  whose  name  honors  the
French  scientists  Marie  and  Pierre  Curie  (the  discoverers  of  radium),  is  a  standard
based  on  the  radioactivity  of  1  gram  of  radium.  It  is  equal  to  3.7  x  1010
becquerels.

X  rays Invisible,  highly  penetrating  electromagnetic  radiation  of  a  much  shorter
wavelength  than  visible  light,  discovered  in  1895  by  Wilhelm  C.  Roentgen.  Most
applications  of  X  rays  are  based  on  their  ability  to  pass  through  matter.  They  are
dangerous  in  that  they  can  destroy  living  tissue,  causing  severe  skin  burns  on
human  flesh  exposed  for  too  long  a  time.  This  property  is  applied  in  x-ray
therapy  to  destroy  diseased  cells.  See  Ionizing  radiation.


885


Selected  Bibliography

The  books  and  articles  listed  below  provide  additional  reading  in  scientific,
ethical,  and  historical  literature.  A  comprehensive  bibliography  of  primary  and
secondary  sources  used  in  this  report  appears  in  the  supplemental  volume  Sources
and  Documentation.

RESEARCH  ETHICS

Annas,  George  J.,  and  Michael  A.  Grodin,  eds.,  The  Nazi  Doctors  and  the
Nuremberg  Code:  Human  Rights  in  Human  Experimentation.  New  York:
Oxford  University  Press,  1992.

Beecher,  Henry  K.  "Ethics  and  Clinical  Research."  New  England  Journal  of
Medicine  214  (1966):  1354-1360.

Bok,  Sissela.  Secrets:  On  the  Ethics  of  Concealment  and  Revelation.  New  York:
Vintage  Books,  1989.

Couglin,  Steven  S.,  and  Tom  L.  Beauchamp.  Ethics  in  Epidemiology.  New  York:
Oxford  University  Press,  forthcoming.

Faden,  Ruth,  and  Tom  L.  Beauchamp.  A  History  and  Theory  of  Informed
Consent.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1986.

Gray,  Bradford  H.  Human  Subjects  in  Medical  Experimentation:  A  Sociological
Study  of  the  Conduct  and  Regulation  of  Clinical  Research.  New  York:  John
Wiley  and  Sons,  1975.

Grodin,  Michael  A.,  and  Leonard  H.  Glantz,  eds.,  Children  as  Research  Subjects:
Science,  Ethics,  and  Law.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1994.


886


Selected  Bibliography

Institute  of  Medicine,  Committee  on  the  Ethical  and  Legal  Issues  Relating  to  the
Inclusion  of  Women  in  Clinical  Studies. Women  and  Health  Research:  Ethical
and  Legal  Issues  of  Including  Women  in  Clinical  Studies.  Vol.  1.  Washington,
D.C.:  National  Academy  Press,  1994.

Katz,  Jay.  Experimentation  with  Human  Beings:  The  Authority  of  the

Investigator,  Subject,  Professions,  and  State  in  the  Human  Experimentation
Process.  New  York:  Russell  Sage  Foundation,  1972.

Katz,  Jay.  The  Silent  World  of  Doctor  and  Patient.  New  York:  Free  Press,  1984.

Lederer,  Susan.  Subjected  to  Science:  Human  Experimentation  in  America  after
the  Second  World  War.  Baltimore:  Johns  Hopkins  University  Press,  1995.

Levine,  Robert  J.  Ethics  and  Regulation  of  Clinical  Research.  2d  ed.  Baltimore:
Urban  and  Schwarzenberg,  1986.

Lifton,  Robert  Jay.  Nazi  Doctors:  Medical  Killing  and  the  Psychology  of
Genocide.  New  York:  Basic  Books,  1986.

Orlans,  F.  Barbara.  In  the  Name  of  Science:  Issues  in  Responsible  Animal
Experimentation.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1993.

Rothman,  David  J.  Strangers  at  the  Bedside:  A  History  of  How  Law  and
Bioethics  Transformed  Medical  Decision  Making.  New  York:  Basic  Books,
1991.

Veatch,  Robert  M. The  Patient  as  Partner:  A  Theory  of  Human-Experimentation
Ethics.  Bloomington:  Indiana  University  Press,  1987.

RADIATION-RELATED  SCIENCE

Brucer,  Marshall.  A  Chronology  of  Nuclear  Medicine.  St.  Louis,  Mo.:  Heritage
Publications,  1990.

Committee  on  the  Biological  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation.  Board  on  Radiation
Effects  Research.  Commission  on  Life  Sciences.  National  Research  Council.
Health  Risks  of  Radon  and  other  Internally  Deposited  Alpha-Emitters:  BEIR
IV.  Washington,  D.C.:  National  Academy  Press,  1988.

Committee  on  Biological  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation,  Board  on  Radiation
Effects  Research,  National  Research  Council.  Health  Effects  of  Exposure  to

887


Appendices

Low  Levels  of  Ionizing  Radiation:  BEIR  V.  Washington,  D.C.:  National
Academy  Press,  1990.

Conklin,  James  J.,  and  Richard  I.  Walker,  eds.,  Military  Radiobiology.  Orlando,
Fla.:  Academic  Press,  1987.

Eisenberg,  Ronald  L.  Radiology:  An  Illustrated  History.  St.  Louis:  Mosby-Year
Book,  1992.

Gofman,  John  W.  Radiation  and  Human  Health.  San  Francisco:  Sierra  Club
Books,  1981.

Hennekens,  Charles  H.,  and  Julie  E.  Buring.  Epidemiology  in  Medicine.  Edited
by  Sherry  L.  Mayrent.  Boston:  Little,  Brown  and  Company,  1987.

Martin,  Alan,  and  Samuel  A.  Harbison,  eds.,  An  Introduction  to  Radiation
Protection.  3d  ed.  New  York:  Chapman  and  Hall,  1986.

McAfee,  J.  G.,  R.  T.  Kopecky,  and  P.  A.  Frymoyer.  "Nuclear  Medicine  Comes  of
Age:  Its  Present  and  Future  Roles  in  Diagnosis."  Radiology  (1990):  609-620.

Mettler,  Fred  A.,  Jr.,  and  Arthur  C.  Upton.  Medical  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation.
2d  ed.  Philadelphia:  W.  B.  Saunders,  1995.

Schapiro,  Jacob.  Radiation  Protection:  A  Guide  for  Scientists  and  Physicians.  3d
ed.;  Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1990.

United  Nations  Scientific  Committee  on  the  Effects  of  Atomic  Radiation.
"Sources  and  Effects  of  Ionizing  Radiation."  UNSCEAR  1993  Report  to  the
General  Assembly,  with  Scientific  Annexes.  New  York:  United  Nations,  1993.

Upton,  Arthur  C.  "The  Biological  Effects  of  Low-Level  Ionizing  Radiation."

Scientific  American  (February  1982):  41-49.

HISTORY  AND  BIOGRAPHY

Bradley,  David.  No  Place  to  Hide.  Boston:  Little,  Brown  and  Company,  1948.

Bush,  Vannevar.  Pieces  of  the  Action.  New  York:  William  Morrow,  1970.

Conard,  Robert  A.  Fallout:  The  Experiences  of  a  Medical  Team  in  the  Care  of  a
Marshallese  Population  Accidently  Exposed  to  Fallout  Radiation.  New  York:

888


Selected  Bibliography

Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,  1992.  Available  from  National  Technical
Information  Service,  U.S.  Department  of  Commerce,  5285  Port  Royal  Road,
Springfield,  VA  22161.

D' Antonio,  Michael.  Atomic  Harvest:  Hanford  and  the  Lethal  Toll  of  America's
Nuclear  Arsenal.  New  York:  Crown  Publishing,  1993.

Divine,  Robert  A.  Blowing  on  the  Wind:  The  Nuclear  Test  Ban  Debate  1954-
1960.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1978.

Eichstaedt,  Peter  H.  If  You  Poison  Us:  Uranium  and  Native  Americans.  Santa
Fe,  N.M.:  Red  Crane  Books,  1994.

Eisenbud,  Merril.  An  Environmental  Odyssey:  People,  Pollution  and  Politics  in
the  Life  of  a  Practical  Scientist.  Seattle:  University  of  Washington  Press,
1990.

Fradkin,  Phillip  L.  Fallout:  An  American  Nuclear  Tragedy.  Tucson:  University
of  Arizona  Press,  1989.

Gallagher,  Carole.  American  Ground  Zero:  The  Secret  Nuclear  War.  Boston:
MIT,  1993.

Gerber,  Michele  Stenehjem.  On  the  Home  Front:  The  Cold  War  Legacy  of  the
Hanford  Nuclear  Site.  Lincoln:  University  of  Nebraska  Press,  1992.

Glasser,  Otto. Wilhelm  Conrad  Roentgen  and  the  Early  History  of  the  Roentgen
Rays.  San  Francisco:  Norman  Publishing,  1993.

Hacker,  Barton  C.  The  Dragon  s  Tail:  Radiation  Safety  in  the  Manhattan  Project,
1942-1946. Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press,  1987.  A  history  of
radiation  safety  in  the  Manhattan  Project,  1942-1946.


.  Elements  of  Controversy:  The  Atomic  Energy  Commission  and  Radiation

Safety  in  Atomic  Weapons  Testing,  1947-1974.  Berkeley:  University  of
California  Press,  1994.

Hershberg,  James.  Harvard  to  Hiroshima  and  the  Making  of  the  Nuclear  Age.
New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf  Publications,  1993.

Hewlett,  Richard  G.,  and  Oscar  E.  Anderson,  Jr. The  New  World:  A  History  of
the  United  States  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  Volume  1:  1939-1946.

889


Appendices

University  Park:  Pennsylvania  State  University  Press,  1962.


■ —  and  Francis  Duncan.  Atomic  Shield:  A  History  of  the  Unites  States  Atomic
Energy  Commission,  Volume  II:  1947-1952.  University  Park:  Pennsylvania
State  University  Press,  1969.


and  Jack  M.  Moll.  Atoms  for  Peace  and  War:  Eisenhower  and  the  Atomic

Energy  Commission:  1953-1961.  Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press,
1989.

Johnson,  Charles  W.,  and  Charles  O.  Johnson.  City  Behind  a  Fence:  Oak  Ridge,
Tennessee,  1942-1946.  Knoxville:  University  of  Tennessee  Press,  1981.

Kathren,  Ronald  L.,  Jerry  B.  Gough,  and  Gary  T.  Benefiel,  eds.  The  Plutonium
Story:  The  Journals  of  Professor  Glenn  T.  Seaborg,  1939-1946.  Columbus,
Ohio:  Battelle  Press,  1994.

Kevles,  Daniel  J.  The  Physicists:  The  History  of  a  Scientific  Community  in
Modern  America.  New  York:  Vintage  Books,  1979.

Lindee,  Susan.  Suffering  Made  Real:  American  Science  and  the  Survivors  of
Hiroshima.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1994.

Mazuzan,  George  T.,  and  J.  Samuel  Walker.  Controlling  the  Atom:  The
Beginnings  of  Nuclear  Regulation,  1946-1962.  Berkeley:  University  of
California  Press,  1992.

Price,  Don  K.  The  Scientific  Estate.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1965.

Quinn,  Susan.  Marie  Curie:  A  Life.  New  York:  Simon  &  Schuster,  1995.

Rhodes,  Richard.  The  Making  of  the  Atomic  Bomb.  New  York:  Simon  &
Schuster,  1986.


.  Dark  Sun:  The  Making  of  the  Hydrogen  Bomb.  New  York:  Simon  &

Schuster,  1995.

Rosenberg,  Howard  L.  Atomic  Soldiers:  American  Victims  of  Nuclear
Experiments.  Boston:  Beacon  Press,  1980.

Smyth,  Henry  DeWolf.  Atomic  Energy  for  Military  Purposes:  The  Official
Report  on  the  Development  of  the  Atomic  Bomb  under  the  Auspices  of  the

890


Selected  Bibliography

United  States  Government:  1940-1945.  Stanford,  Calif.:  Stanford  University
Press,  1989.

Stannard,  J.  Newell.  Radioactivity  and  Health:  A  History.  Oak  Ridge,  Tenn.:
Office  of  Scientific  and  Technical  Information,  1988.

Starr,  Paul.  The  Transformation  of  American  Medicine.  New  York:  Basic  Books,
1982.

Taylor,  Telford.  The  Anatomy  of  the  Nuremberg  Trials:  A  Personal  Memoir.
New  York:  Alfred  A.  Knopf,  1992.

Udall,  Stewart  L.  The  Myths  of  August:  A  Personal  Exploration  of  Our  Tragic
Cold  War  Affair  with  the  Atom.  New  York:  Pantheon  Books,  1994.

Walker,  J.  Samuel.  Containing  the  Atom:  Nuclear  Regulation  in  a  Changing
Environment,  1962-1971.  Berkeley:  University  of  Califonia  Press,  1992.

Weart,  Spencer  R.  Nuclear  Fear:  A  History  of  Images.  Cambridge,  Mass.:
Harvard  University  Press,  1988.

Weisgall,  Jonathan.  Operation  Crossroads.  Annapolis,  Md.:  Naval  Institute
Press,  1994.


891


Public  Comment  Participants


Unless  otherwise  noted,  full  committee  meetings,  with  opportunity  for  public
comment,  took  place  in  Washington,  D.C.  There  was  also  one  full  committee
meeting  in  San  Francisco.  In  addition,  the  Committee  convened  panels  of  its
members  to  take  testimony  in  Cincinnati,  Spokane,  Sante  Fe,  and  Knoxville  on
the  dates  listed.  Where  known,  cities  and  affiliations  are  noted.


April  21-22,  1994

Gwendon  Plair,  Concerned  Relatives  of
Cancer  Study  Patients

May  18-19, 1994

E.  Cooper  Brown,  Executive
Commission,  Task  Force  on  Radiation

and  Human  Rights
H.  W.  Cummins,  Human  Radiation

Experiments  Litigation  Project
Fred  Allingham,  National  Association  of

Radiation  Survivors
Daryl  Kimball,  Physicians  for  Social

Responsibility

June  13-14, 1994

Tod  Ensign,  Citizen  Soldier,  NY
John  McCarthy,  Sacramento  Radiation

Survivors  Group
Thomas  Smith,  National  Association  of

Radiation  Survivors
Pat  Broudy,  National  Association  of

Atomic  Veterans

July  5-6, 1994

Wilfred  Kendall,  Representative  of  the

Embassy  of  the  Republic  of  the

Marshall  Islands
Tony  deBrum,  Representative  of  the

Embassy  of  the  Republic  of  the

Marshall  Islands
Jonathan  Weisgall,  Attorney  representing

Bikini  Islands
E.  Cooper  Brown,  Executive

Commission,  Task  Force  on  Radiation

and  Human  Rights*


July  25-26,  1994

Stewart  Udall,  former  U.S.  Secretary  of

the  Interior
Eugene  Trani,  Virginia  Commonwealth

University
Hermes  Kontos,  Virginia  Commonwealth

University
John  Jones,  Virginia  Commonwealth

University
Chris  Zucker,  Disability  Advocates  of

New  York,  Inc.,  Albany,  NY
Pat  Broudy,  National  Association  of

Atomic  Veterans*
Dr.  Oscar  Rosen,  National  Association  of

Atomic  Veterans
Catherine  Variano,  South  Bend,  ID
Janet  Gordon,  Citizen's  Call,  UT

September  12-13, 1994

Ruth  Blaz,  Hollywood,  FL

Cliff  Honicker,  Environmental  Health

Studies  Project,  Knoxville,  TN
Francis  Brown,  Southwick,  MA
Tod  Ensign,  Citizen  Soldier,  NY*
Pat  Broudy,  National  Association  of

Atomic  Veterans*

San  Francisco,  October  11-13,  1994

Nancy  Lynch,  Santa  Barbara,  CA
Jackie  Maxwell,  Menlo  Park,  CA
Vernon  Sousa,  San  Francisco,  CA
Gwynne  Borroughs,  Chico,  CA
Israel  Torres,  Niporno,  CA
Audrey  Hack,  Union  City,  CA
Richard  Harley,  Bakersfield,  CA


*  indicates  that  the  participant  spoke  at  a  previous  meeting

892


San  Francisco,  October  11-13, 1994
(cont.)

Donald  Arbitlit,  San  Francisco,  CA
Geoffrey  Sea,  International  Radiation

Survivors,  Oakland,  CA
Harold  Bibeau,  Portland,  OR
Cheri  Anderson,  Placerville,  CA
Tom  Wilson,  Placerville,  CA
Michael  Yesley,  Los  Alamos  National

Laboratory
Lynn  Stembridge,  Hanford  Education

Action  League,  Spokane,  WA
Trisha  Pritikin,  Berkeley,  CA
Lois  Camp,  Hanford  Downwinder  Health

Effects  Group
Darcy  Thrall,  Richland,  WA
Dr.  Bernard  Lo,  San  Francisco,  CA
Jackie  Cabasso,  Oakland,  CA
Marylia  Kelley,  Livermore,  CA

Cincinnati,  October  21,1994

U.S.  Representative  Rob  Portman  (OH)
Gwendon  Plair,  Concerned  Relatives

of  Cancer  Study  Patients*
Doris  Baker,  Cincinnati,  OH
Gloria  Nelson
Richard  Casey
Lisa  Crawford,  Fernald  Residents  for

Environmental  Safety  and  Health
Herbert  Varin
Leslie  Lynch
Professor  Martha  Stephens,  University  of

Cincinnati
Bob  Phillips
Lillian  Pagano
Sherry  Brabant
Otisteen  Goodwin
Clifford  Tidwell
Owen  Thompson
Dr.  Joseph  Steger,  President,  University

of  Cincinnati
Stan  Chesley,  Former  Chairman  of  the

Board,  University  of  Cincinnati
David  Thompson,  Attorney,  Cincinnati

lawsuits
Kenneth  Kendall


Cincinnati,  October  21, 1994  (cont.)

Tom  Wilkenson

Tom  Row,  Oak  Ridge  National

Laboratory
Joe  Larkins
Monica  Ray
Gene  Branham
Dorothy  Sweety
Pat  Wheeler
Katherine  Hager
Robert  Hager
H.  W.  Cummins,  Radiation  Health

Effects  Public  Law  Group*
Ruth  Blaz,  Hollywood,  FL*
Manuel  Blaz,  Hollywood,  FL
Jackie  Kitrell,  American  Environmental

Health  Studies  Project
Ann  Hopkins
Mary  Mueller
Daryl  Kimball,  Physicians  for  Social

Responsibility*
Vina  Colley,  Portsmouth/Piketon

Residents  or  Environmental  Safety

and  Security
Diana  Salisbury,  Portsmouth/Piketon

Residents  for  Environmental  Safety

and  Security
Geoffrey  Sea,  International  Radiation

Survivors,  Oakland,  CA*

November  14-15, 1994

Marcia  Haggard,  Silver  Spring,  MD
Dr.  Kathy  Platoni,  Beaver  Creek,  OH
Dr.  Dennis  Nelson,  Kensington,  MD
Mayor  George  Ahmaogak,  North  Slope

Borough  Assembly,  AK
Rossman  Peetok,  North  Slope  Borrough

Assembly,  AK

Spokane,  November  21, 1994

Leonard  Schroeter,  Seattle,  WA

Gertie  Hanson,  Citizens  Against  Nuclear

Weapons  and  Exterminations
Al  Conklin,  Department  of  Health,  WA
Harold  Bibeau,  Portland,  OR*


*  indicates  that  the  participant  spoke  at  a  previous  meeting

893


Spokane,  November  21,  1994  (cont.)

Catherine  Knox,  Department  of

Corrections,  OR
Jim  Thomas,  Seattle,  WA
Trisha  Pritikin,  Berkeley,  CA*
Fred  Larson,  Ocean  Park,  WA
Brenda  Weaver,  Spokane,  WA
Tom  Bailie,  Mesa,  WA
Lynn  Grover,  Mesa,  WA
Michelle  Grover,  Mesa,  WA
Geoffrey  Sea,  International  Radiation

Survivors,  Oakland,  WA*
Kathy  Jacobovitch,  Vashon  Island,  WA
JoAnne  Watts,  Grants  Pass,  OR
Theresa  Potts,  Couer  d'Alene,  ID
Tom  Cooper,  Couer  d'Alene,  ID
Kay  Sutherland,  Walla  Walla,  WA
Beverly  Aleck,  Anchorage,  AK
Sherri  Lozon,  Nez  Pierce  Tribe
Jeanne  Haycraft,  Enterprise,  OR
Darcy  Thrall,  Benton  City,  WA*
Lynne  Stembridge,  Hanford  Education

Action  League*
Lois  Camp,  LaCrosse,  WA*
Lynn  Horn,  Spokane,  WA
Charlie  Miller,  Spokane,  WA
Charles  Lombard,  Spokane,  WA
Curt  Leslie,  Wallua,  WA
Rex  Harter,  Mesa,  WA
David  Vanderbilt,  lone,  WA
Wendell  Ogg,  Knoxville,  TN
Iris  Hedman  Othello,  WA

December  15-16, 1994

Doris  Baker,  Cincinnati,  OH*
Vina  Colley,  Portsmouth/Piketon

Residents  for  Environmental  Safety

and  Security*
Diana  Salisbury,  Sardinia,  OH*
Lenore  Fenn,  Lexington,  MA
Peter  Lewis,  Uniontown,  PA


December  15-16, 1994  (cont.)

Professor  Robert  Proctor,  Pennsylvania

State  University
William  Jackling,  Honeye  Falls,  NY
Fred  Boyce,  Norwell,  MA
Pat  Broudy,  National  Association  of

Atomic  Veterans*

Santa  Fe,  January  30, 1995

Stewart  Udall,  Former  U.S.  Secretary  of

the  Interior*
Ray  Michael,  Truth  or  Consequences,

NM
Darcy  Thrall,  Benton  City,  WA*
Tyler  Mercier,  Santa  Fe,  NM
DH  Bob  Hofmann,  Mountain  Home,  AR
Theodore  Garcia,  Las  Cruces,  NM
Bill  Holmes,  Fulsom,  CA
Manuel  Pino,  Mesa,  AZ
Alvino  Wacanda,  Laguna-Acoma

Delegation,  Paguato,  NM
Curtis  Francisco,  Laguna-Acoma

Delegation,  Pueblo,  NM
Dorothy  Purley,  Laguna-Acoma

Delegation,  Paguato,  NM
Harry  Lester,  Albuquerque,  NM
Milton  Stadt,  Victor,  NY
Clyde  Gardner,  Edgewood,  NM
Stanley  Paytioma,  Pueblo  of  Acoma,

Acoma,  NM
John  Taschner,  Los  Alamos  National

Laboratory
Don  Petersen,  Los  Alamos  National

Laboratory
George  Voelz,  Los  Alamos  National

Laboratory
Joe  Nardella

Timothy  Benally,  Shiprock,  NM
Carlos  Pacheco,  Santa  Fe,  NM
Rosalie  Jones,  West  Jordan,  UT
Bernice  Brogan,  West  Valley  City,  UT
Barney  Bailey,  Lovington,  NM
Robert  Stapleton,  Ventura,  CA
Linda  Terry,  Albuquerque,  NM
Sue  Dayton,  Tijares,  NM


*  indicates  that  the  participant  spoke  at  a  previous  meeting

894


Santa  Fe,  January  30,  1995  (cont.)

Ernest  Garcia,  Chair,  National
Contaminated  Veterans  of  America,

Albuquerque,  NM
Dale  Howard,  Las  Lunas,  NM
Coy  Overstreet,  Dickens,  TX
Denise  Nichols,  USAF  Major,  Retired
Langdon  Harrison,  Albuquerque,  NM
Ray  Koonuk,  Mayor,  Point  Hope,  AK
Jack  Schaefer,  Point  Hope,  AK
Caroline  Cannon,  Point  Hope,  AK
Dr.  Chellis  Glendinning,  Chimayo,  NM
John  Sheahan,  Albuquerque,  NM
Damacio  Lopez,  Bernalillo,  NM
Phil  Harrison,  Uranium  Radiation

Victims  Committee,  Shiprock,  NM
John  Fowler
Renda  Fowler
Bill  Tsosie

Glenn  Stuckey,  Albuquerque,  NM
Robert  McConaghy

January  19-20, 1995

Joan  McCarthy

Charles  McKay,  Severna  Park,  MD
Pat  Broudy,  National  Association  of
Atomic  Veterans*

February  15-16,  1995

Alex  Reinhart,  Braintree,  MA
Wilfred  Kendall,  Embassy  of  the

Republic  of  the  Marshall  Islands*
Senator  Henchi  Balos,  Republic  of  the

Marshall  Islands
Holly  Barker,  Embassy  of  the  Republic  of

the  Marshall  Islands
E.  Cooper  Brown,  Executive  Commission

Task  Force  on  Radiation  and  Human

Rights*
Cliff  Honicker,  Environmental  Safety

Studies  Project,  Knoxville,  TN*
Pat  Broudy,  National  Association  of

Atomic  Veterans*
Jonathan  Weisgall,  Attorney  representing

the  Bikini  Islands*


Knoxville,  March  2, 1995

Paul  White,  Oak  Ridge,  TN

Dorothea  Gay  Brown,  Knoxville,  TN

Betty  Freels,  Clinton,  TN

Mary  Bunch,  Clinton,  TN

Margaret  Jacobs,  Harriman,  TN

Dorothy  McRight,  Nashville,  TN

David  Lee,  Knoxville,  TN

Gary  Litton,  Oak  Ridge,  TN

Dr.  Karl  Morgan,  Oak  Ridge,  TN

Dr.  Gary  Madsen,  Utah  State  University

Richard  Sheldon,  Knoxville,  TN

Janice  Stokes,  Clinton,  TN

Shirley  Rippletoe,  Old  Hickory,  TN

Bill  Clark,  Knoxville,  TN

Dr.  Helen  Vodopick,  Oak  Ridge,  TN

Claudia  Soulyarette,  Oak  Ridge,  TN

Dick  Smyser,  The  Oak  Ridger

Gertrude  Copeland,  Brentwood,  TN

Dr.  William  Burr,  Oak  Ridge,  TN

Dr.  Bill  Bibb,  Oak  Ridge,  TN

Dr.  Shirley  Fry,  Oak  Ridge,  TN

Acie  Byrd,  Washington,  D.C.

Reba  Neal,  Coalfield,  TN

Emma  Craft,  White  Bluff,  TN

Mary  Hamm,  Goodletsville,  TN

Ron  Hamm,  Goodletsville,  TN

Venia  Lazenby,  Mt.  Juliet,  TN

Dot  McLeod,  Lake  Park,  GA

Mary  Lynn  Stanley,  Wrightsville,  GA

Richard  Vaughn,  Franklin,  TN

Dr.  Frank  Comas,  Knoxville,  TN

Ann  Sipe,  Oak  Ridge,  TN

Freda  Jo  Burchfield,  Morristown,  TN

Barbara  Humphreys,  Louisville,  TN

Wilton  McClure,  Tony,  AL

Earl  McClure,  Nashville,  TN

Irene  Sartain,  Nashville,  TN

Bruce  Lawson,  Oak  Ridge,  TN

Jeff  Hill,  Oak  Ridge,  TN

Patricia  Jedlica,  Spring  City,  TN

Carolyn  Szetela,  Nashville,  TN

Doris  Baker,  Cincinnati,  OH*

Gloria  Nelson,  Cincinnati,  OH

Ann  Marie  Harrod,  Nashville,  TN


*  indicates  that  the  participant  spoke  at  a  previous  meeting

895


March  15-17, 1995

U.  S.  Senator  Paul  Wellstone  (MN)
Ernest  Sternglass,  University  of

Pittsburgh
Elmerine  Whitfield  Bell,  Dallas,  TX
E.  Cooper  Brown,  Executive

Commission,  Task  Force  on  Radiation

and  Human  Rights*
Dr.  Oscar  Rosen,  National  Association

for  Atomic  Veterans*
Glenn  Alcalay,  New  York,  NY
Denise  Nelson,  Bethesda,  MD
Chris  DeNicola,  New  Orleans,  LA
Valerie  Wolfe,  New  Orleans,  LA
Claudia  Mullen,  New  Orleans,  LA
Suzanne  Starr,  Chimayo,  NM
Steven  Schwartz,  Washington,  D.C.

April  10-12, 1995

Gwendon  Plair,  Concerned  Relatives  of

Cancer  Study  Patients,  Cincinnati,

OH*
James  Tidwell,  Cincinnati,  OH
Barbara  Tatterson,  Cincinnati,  OH
Joseph  Peterson,  Carson  City,  NV
Banny  deBrum,  Acting  Ambassador,

Embassy  of  the  Republic  of  the

Marshall  Islands
Rebecca  Harrod  Stringer,  St.  Augustine,

FL


Phil  Harrison,  Uranium  Radiation
Victims  Committee,  Albuquerque,
NM*

Rachel  Greene,  Hyattsville,  MD

Zina  Greene,  Washington,  DC

Julie  Boddy,  Tacoma  Park,  MD

July  17-19

Senator  Tony  deBrum,  (w/ Ambassador

Wilfred  Kendall,  Phillip  Muller),

Marshall  Islands*
Dr.  Bernard  Aron,  Cincinnati,  OH
Dr.  David  Egilman,  Braintree,  MA*
Dr.  Oscar  Rosen,  National  Association  of

Atomic  Veterans*
Dr.  Dennis  Nelson,  Bethesda,  MD
Ms.  Mary  Mueller,  Task  Force  on

Radiation  and  Human  Rights
Mr.  Acie  Byrd,  Task  Force  on  Radiation

and  Human  Rights*


May  8-10, 1995

Doris  Baker,  Cincinnati,  OH*
Barbara  Tatterson,  Cincinnati,  OH*
Herbert  Varin,  Cincinnati,  OH*
Clifford  Tidwell,  Cincinnati,  OH*
Beatrice  Tidwell,  Cincinnati,  OH
Zettie  Smith,  Cincinnati,  OH
Pat  Broudy,  National  Association  of
Atomic  Veterans*

June  21-23,  1995

Anthony  Roisman,  National  Committee
of  Radiation  Victims,  Washington,  DC

Geoffrey  Sea,  Task  Force  on  Radiation
and  Human  Rights,  Oakland,  CA*


*  indicates  that  the  participant  spoke  at  a  previous  meeting

896


A  Citizen's  Guide  to  the  Nation's

Archives

where  the  records  are  and
how  to  find  them


SOME  INITIAL  QUESTIONS  AND  ANSWERS

How  can  I  find  out  if  I  or  my  relative  was  in  a  radiation  experiment?

This  was  one  of  the  most  commonly  asked  questions  from  the  hundreds  of  individuals  who
contacted  the  Committee.  There  is  no  simple  answer. Medical  records  are  the  place  to  start.
They  should  provide  information  on  what  condition  you  or  your  relative  was  treated  for,  what
treatment  was  actually  given,  and  who  administered  this  treatment.  See  part  III.  A  for  further
details.

How  can  I  obtain  medical  records?  What  should  I  do  with  them  once  I  have  them?

You  have  a  legal  right  to  your  own  medical  records  and,  with  the  proper  authorization,  to  a
relative's  medical  records.  By  contacting  the  facility  where  the  treatment  occurred,  you  should
be  able  to  request  and  obtain  the  records.  The  next  step  is  to  have  a  qualified  medical
professional  review  the  records  to  ascertain  whether  the  treatment  administered  was  acceptable
for  the  patient's  condition.  See  part  III.B  for  further  details.

What  A  CHRE  materials  are  available  to  the  public?  Where  are  they  stored  and  who  can  look  at
them?

All  documents  obtained  by  and  produced  by  the  Advisory  Committee  are  public  information,
available  to  anyone.  A  large  portion  of  Committee  materials  is  available  through  the  Internet.
Hard  copies  of  all  materials  will  be  stored  at  the  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration
in  Washington,  D.C.  See  part  IV. A  for  further  details.

Whom  should  an  individual  call  to  request  an  investigation  into  his  or  her  particular  case?

This  was  another  very  common  question.  No  office  currently  exists  that  is  specifically
chartered  to  investigate  individual  cases  with  respect  to  human  radiation  experiments.  That  is  one
reason  for  this  guide:  to  provide  individual  citizens  with  enough  guidance  to  begin  their  own
investigations.  See  part  II  for  details.

Where  should  an  individual  researcher  turn  to  learn  more  about  radiation  experiments  with
government  involvement?

Researchers  can  use  a  number  of  resources,  including  the  ACHRE  collection.  If  more
information  is  desired,  the  federal  agencies  have  reported  to  the  Advisory  Committee  that  the
public  may  contact  their  designated  offices.  See  part  II  for  details.

Whom  should  the  public  work  through  after  the  Advisory  Committee  is  disbanded?

No  extant  government  body  is  chartered  to  provide  such  guidance.  It  is  the  purpose  of  this
appendix  to  provide  individuals  with  enough  direction  to  begin  their  own  investigations.


CONTENTS

Introduction

Part  I:  Finding  Federal  Records

Types  and  Sources  of  Federal  Information

Aids  for  Focusing  Research

Where  Federal  Records  Are

Access  to  Information:  Rights  and  Restrictions

Part  II:  Agency  Information  and  Services
Department  of  Energy
Department  of  Defense
Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services
Department  of  Veterans  Affairs
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration
Central  Intelligence  Agency
Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission

Part  III:  Personal  Medical  Records
A  Basic  Distinction

Personal  Medical  Records  Created  by  Physicians  and  Hospitals
Where  Else  Could  the  Information  Be?

Part  IV:  Using  the  ACHRE  Collection  as  a  Place  to  Start
What's  in  the  Collection  and  What  Is  Not
Experiments
Finding  Aids
How  to  Go  From  the  ACHRE  Collection  to  Agency  Records


...  I  have  been  to  Oak  Ridge,  Tennessee,  and  Washington,
D.C.  I  have  seen  a  lot  of  documents.  I  have  learned  some  of
the  codes,  so  please  don't  try  to  shaft  me.  I  know  a  lot.  The
records  are  not  here  in  Cincinnati,  all  of  them  on  my
grandmother.  And  I  have  been  trying  to  find  them.  And  I  just
would  like  to  know  where  the  rest  of  them  are.  So  please,  will
you  help  me  find  them?

--Citizen  at  the  ACHRE  public  forum  in  Cincinnati
21  October  1994


As  the  Advisory  Committee  traveled  across  the  country  taking  public  testimony,  it
heard  citizens  describe  many  of  the  same  experiences  over  and  over.  One  common
thread  that  struck  a  particularly  responsive  chord  with  the  Committee  was  the  sheer
frustration  felt  by  many,  even  experienced  researchers,  who  had  tried  to  find  their  own
records  or  to  find  out  the  details  of  government  programs.  The  difficulty  we  have  all
faced  in  doing  this  research  yields  an  important  lesson:  The  government  must  be  honest
about  the  nature  and  purposes  of  the  studies  it  sponsors  and  conducts;  in  sponsoring
human  experimentation,  it  has  an  even  higher  obligation  to  keep  a  fair  record  and  provide
those  involved  with  meaningful  access.  The  Advisory  Committee  has  done  what  it  can  to
open  the  door  to  our  nation's  archives.  We  all  must  see  that  it  remains  open.

This  appendix  is  intended  to  help.  For  those  who  want  to  know  whether  a  relative  was
involved  in  an  experiment,  and  for  historians,  journalists,  and  others  with  a  more  general
interest  in  human  radiation  experiments  (HREs)  and  the  general  topic  of  government-
sponsored  research,  the  following  pages  discuss  what  to  ask  for,  whom  to  write  to,  and
where  to  go.

The  Advisory  Committee's  records  are  one  important  place  to  turn  (see  part  IV).  It
should  be  understood,  though,  that  the  Advisory  Committee  did  not  find  everything  there
is  to  find  about  human  radiation  experiments,  nor  could  we  review  what  we  did  find  in
the  detail  we  would  have  preferred.  Moreover,  neither  the  Advisory  Committee  nor  the
agencies,  generally  speaking,  sought  the  medical  records  of  individuals.  But  there  is
much  information  that  we  did  recover,  and  the  efforts  of  the  Advisory  Committee  and  the
agencies  have  increased  the  likelihood  that  citizens  will  be  able  to  find  the  personal
documents  they  need.

This  Guide  has  four  parts:  part  I  is  an  introduction  to  finding  and  using  federal
records;  part  II  covers  agency  facilities  and  services,  including  what  information  is
available  at  which  agencies,  and  where  to  go  and  how  to  get  it;  part  III  focuses  on  finding
medical  records. And  part  IV  is  an  introduction  to  the  records  collected  and  created  by
the  Advisory  Committee.


901


Appendices

PART  I:  FINDING  FEDERAL  RECORDS

Finding  the  most  general  information  about  the  activities  of  the  federal  government
can  be  as  easy  as  picking  up  the  telephone  or  looking  in  a  reference  book,  but  those
approaches  do  not  provide  the  detail  necessary  to  understanding  how  a  program  operates
or  why  it  does  what  it  does.  Finding  information  like  this  requires  research,  and  research
in  government  documents  may  require  time  and  effort.  The  government's  records  are
stored  in  a  sprawling,  decentralized,  and  sometimes  haphazard  system,  and  particular
records  are  often  hard  to  locate.  It  may  be  difficult  simply  to  determine  whether  the
records  still  exist.  Federal  records  laws  and  rules  provide  for  the  periodic  review  and
destruction  of  certain  categories  of  records.  However,  the  Committee  found  that  the
documents  that  recorded  the  destructions  of  other  documents  were  themselves  often  later
destroyed.  Thus,  it  is  often  difficult  to  know  for  certain  whether  particular  documents
have  been  destroyed  or  are  simply  hard  to  locate.

This  part  of  the  Citizen's  Guide  provides  information  that  will  allow  the  researcher  to
focus  more  quickly  on  where  the  desired  information  may  be  or,  that  being  determined,
how  to  go  about  retrieving  it.

Types  and  Sources  of  Federal  Information

Although  there  are  many  ways  to  categorize  the  types  of  information  citizens  seek,  the
one  that  will  have  the  most  profound  effect  on  what  to  look  for  and  where  to  look  for  it  is
whether  the  citizen  is  interested  in  records  of  individual  experience  or  in  program
records.  Records  of  individual  experience  are  those  that  document  the  history  of  a
particular  person— medical  records,  personnel  records,  tax  returns,  memberships,  and  so
forth—and  are  usually  kept  for  the  private  use  of  that  person  and  the  institution  whose
relationship  they  record.  Such  records  will  only  rarely  include  information  about  a
program  in  which  the  individual  participates.  For  example,  an  individual's  medical
records  will  not  likely  contain  information  on  the  government  program  that  funded  the
medical  research  or  the  ethical  guidelines  applicable  to  the  use  of  human  subjects  in  the
program.

Program  records,  on  the  other  hand,  document  the  purposes,  organization,  staffing,
and  funding  of  an  activity-minutes,  proceedings,  memorandums,  proposals,  contracts,
and  so  forth— and  are  likely  to  be  available  to  the  public  in  some  form.  Such  records  will
only  rarely  contain  information  about  individuals.  For  example,  agency  records  on  a
biomedical  research  program  will  not  contain  the  names  of  the  patients  involved  in  it  or
their  medical  histories.

As  is  obvious  from  these  descriptions,  records  of  individual  experiences  and  program
records  hold  very  different  types  of  information.1  The  significance  for  the  researcher  is
that  the  two  types  of  records  are  kept  in  different  places,  and  his  or  her  approach  to
finding  the  information  must  reflect  this  fact.  For  example,  if  information  about  the
physical  condition  and  treatment  of  an  individual  is  what  is  wanted— that  is,  medical
facts— a  search  for  medical  records  is  likely  to  be  more  useful  than  a  search  for  records  of
experiments.  Medical  information  about  the  condition  and  treatment  of  experimental
subjects  is  generally  contained  in  medical  records  and  not  in  the  scientific  records  of
experiments.2  On  the  other  hand,  information  about  a  study  in  which  citizens  participated

902


A  Citizen's  Guide

is  unlikely  to  be  found  in  their  medical  records,  but  in  the  investigator's  records  and  those
of  his  institution  and  the  study's  sponsors.

Further  information  on  finding  program  records,  which  are  generally  publicly
available  in  large  repositories,  may  be  found  in  the  remainder  of  part  I  and  in  parts  II  and
IV.  Those  sections  also  provide  information  on  government-held  records  of  personal
experience.  For  information  on  finding  medical  records,  see  part  III.

Aids  for  Focusing  Research

Because  the  federal  government  is  vast,  it  is  vitally  important  to  identify  as  quickly  as
possible  the  government  components  whose  records  may  contain  the  needed  information;
as  will  be  discussed  in  the  section  below  on  the  National  Archives,  that  understanding  is
also  important  to  using  the  records  once  they  are  found.  Unfortunately,  one  of  the  things
that  the  Advisory  Committee  learned  in  our  research  is  that  many  government  agencies
do  not  have  complete  information  on  all  the  programs  they  sponsored  through  the  years
or  on  the  records  that  were  created  or  preserved  or  where  they  are  located.  And,
furthermore,  there  is  no  central,  comprehensive  source  of  information  for  the  history  of
the  federal  government:  Even  the  collections  of  the  National  Archives  do  not  reflect  the
full  and  complete  history  of  the  government  and  its  programs.  In  some  cases  extensive
research  was  required  to  discover  or  to  understand  the  histories  of  certain  parts  of  the
agencies  in  order  to  identify  the  organizational  components  whose  work  was  potentially
relevant  to  the  Advisory  Committee's  research.  Only  then  could  the  search  for  records
begin.

Fortunately,  however,  much  unearthing  of  the  histories  of  government  organizations
and  locating  of  pertinent  records  has  been  done  by  agency  personnel  and  Advisory
Committee  staff.  The  fruits  of  these  efforts  are  available  in  three  resources  that  may
assist  the  citizen  researcher  in  finding  agency  information.  First,  the  relevant
organizational  components;  the  location,  classification,  and  review  of  their  records;  and
what  records  were  never  located  are  all  described  in  great  detail  on  an  agency-by-agency
basis  in  the  supplemental  volume,  Sources  and  Documentation.  This  volume  serves  as  an
excellent  guide  for  those  doing  their  own  research.3  The  second  is  the  ACHRE  collection
itself;  as  explained  in  more  detail  in  part  IV  below,  most  records  in  the  ACHRE
collection  can  be  traced  to  the  agency  collection  and  repository  from  which  they  came.
The  third  is  the  February  1995  Department  of  Energy  publication,  Human  Radiation
Experiments:  The  Department  of  Energy  Roadmap  to  the  Story  and  the  Records  and  its
July  1995  supplements  (see  part  II,  below).4  This  work  describes  in  considerable  detail
many  relevant  DOE  record  collections  that  are  located  at  various  repositories  in  the
Washington,  D.C.,  area  and  the  national  laboratories  around  the  nation  (see  part  II,
below,  for  further  information  about  the  laboratories).  We  note  that,  in  addition  to
resources  created  during  the  life  of  the  Committee,  agencies  may  have  created  other
guides  to  agency  history  and  records  collections.  See,  for  example,  "A  Guide  To
Resources  on  the  History  of  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration,"  Food  and  Drug
Administration,  History  Office.


903


Appendices

Where  Federal  Records  Are

Unless  they  have  been  lost  or  destroyed,  almost  all  federal  records5  created  since  the
founding  of  the  Republic  are  in  agency  files,  stored  at  a  federal  records  center,  or
preserved  in  the  National  Archives.6  Generally,  agencies  are  required  to  transfer  to  the
National  Archives  records  that  are  of  sufficient  historical  or  other  value  to  warrant
preservation.  Documents  are  transferred  when  they  are  thirty  years  old  or,  regardless  of
age,  when  the  originating  agency  no  longer  needs  them  for  its  regular  business  and  will
be  satisfied  accessing  them  through  the  National  Archives.

In  actual  practice,  few,  if  any,  agencies  have  fully  complied  with  these  requirements.
Most  records  are  still  under  the  control  of  the  agencies  that  created  them,  though  some
are  stored  with  the  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration  (NARA).  Even  for
quite  old  records,  therefore,  the  citizen  will  often  find  it  necessary  to  look  beyond  the
National  Archives  into  the  federal  record  centers  and  the  agencies.  The  use  of  these  three
repositories  is  described  below;  further  information  on  the  agencies  is  contained  in  part
II.

National  Archives

Collections

NARA  does  not  refile  the  records  it  receives  according  to  some  grand  theoretical
scheme  but,  rather,  preserves  them  in  as  close  to  their  original  order  as  is  practical,
arranging  them  according  to  provenance  J  This  means  that  the  structure  and  organization
of  records  in  the  National  Archives  reflects  the  structure  and  organization  of  the  office
that  created  them,  using  the  same  divisions  and  titles  that  were  used  by  the  office
originally.  For  this  reason,  all  records  of  an  individual  agency— or  in  the  cases  of  very
large  agencies  such  as  the  military  services,  the  records  of  various  commands,
headquarters,  and  other  major  organizational  units—are  placed  by  the  National  Archives
in  a  separate  record  group  with  a  distinctive  title  and  number.  The  approximately  475
record  groups  at  the  National  Archives  vary  in  size  from  less  than  100  cubic  feet  to  tens
of  thousands  of  feet.  Record  groups  are  divided  into  subdivisions  called  entries  that  often
hold  the  records  of  a  single  division,  department,  bureau,  or  office.  The  access  tool
generally  used  to  find  basic  information  in  a  record  group  (e.g.,  brief  descriptions  of
individual  entries)  is  the  finding  aid  created  by  the  National  Archives.  Not  all  record
groups  have  finding  aids,  however,  and  some  older  ones  have  not  been  kept  up  to  date.
The  archivists  who  work  with  the  record  groups  are  often  an  invaluable  source  of
information  as  well.

Services

The  National  Archives  is  the  one  repository  holding  agency  records  specifically
charged  with  accommodating  the  public.  In  addition  to  a  staff  of  professional  archivists,
the  Archives  provide  large  research  rooms,  copiers,  and  complete  access  to  unclassified
and  declassified  collections.

The  National  Archives  has  two  major  public  facilities  in  the  Washington  area:  the

904


A  Citizen's  Guide

National  Archives,  Pennsylvania  Avenue  between  7th  and  8th  Streets,  N.W.,
Washington,  D.C.,  and  the  National  Archives  at  College  Park  ("Archives  II"),  8601
Adelphi  Road,  College  Park,  Maryland  20740-6001.  (Telephone  202-501-5400  to
request  reference  help,  or  write  Reference  Services  Branch,  National  Archives  and
Records  Administration,  Washington,  D.C.  20408.)  Research  hours  at  both  the
downtown  Washington  and  College  Park  facilities  are  8:45  a.m.  to  9:00  p.m.,  Tuesday,
Thursday,  and  Friday;  8:45  a.m.  to  5:00  p.m.,  Monday  and  Wednesday;  and  8:45  a.m.  to
4:45  p.m.  on  Saturday,  except  federal  holidays.

Records  that  are  generated  by  regional  offices  are  maintained  in  regional  archives:

Anchorage,  Alaska:  654  W.  3rd  Avenue,  99501;  907-271-2441

Chicago,  Illinois:  7358  S.  Pulaski  Road,  60629;  312-581-7816

Denver,  Colorado:  Building  48,  Denver  Federal  Center,  80225;

303-236-0817

East  Point,  Georgia: 1557  St.  Joseph  Avenue,  30344;  404-763-7477

Fort  Worth,  Texas:  501  W.  Felix  Street,  761 15;  817-334-5525

Kansas  City,  Missouri:  2312  E.  Bannister  Road,  64131;  816-926-6272

Laguna  Niguel,  California:  24000  Avila  Road,  92677;  714-643-4241

New  York,  New  York:  201  Varick  Street,  10014;  212-337-1300

Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania:  9th  and  Market  Streets,  19107;

215-597-3000

San  Bruno,  California: 1 000  Commodore  Drive,  94066;  4 1 5-876-90 1 8

Seattle,  Washington:  6125  Sand  Point  Way  N.E.,  981 15;  206-526-6507

Waltham,  Massachusetts:  380  Trapelo  Road,  02 1 54;  6 1 7-647-8 1 00

For  Freedom  of  Information  Act  (FOIA)  and  Privacy  Act  requests,  speak  with  the
archivists  who  work  with  the  record  group  concerned,  or  write:  Office  of  the  National
Archives,  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration,  Washington,  D.C.  20408;
telephone  202-501-5300.  For  further  information  see  the  section  on  Rights  and
Restrictions  on  Access  to  Information,  below.

Federal  Records  Centers

When  an  agency  determines  that  it  no  longer  needs  to  house  a  group  of  records  it  can
transfer  them  to  a  federal  records  center  in  its  geographical  area.  Federal  records  centers
have  been  established  solely  to  assist  the  agencies  in  the  storage  and  processing  of  their
records.  There  is  no  requirement  that  any  agency  transfer  its  records  to  a  records  center.
Although  the  records  centers  are  managed  by  NARA,  the  agencies  retain  legal  custody
and  control  of  the  records.

Collections

Records  held  in  federal  records  centers  are  also  organized  into  record  groups  (using
the  same  titles  and  numbers  as  at  the  National  Archives),  but  are  not  further  broken  down
into  entries.  Instead,  a  record  group  at  a  records  center  consists  simply  of  a  series  of
accessions,  the  shipments  of  records  added  to  it.  Record  groups  may  contain  from  a  few


905


Appendices

to  thousands  of  accessions,  and  an  individual  accession  may  hold  one  to  many  hundreds
of  boxes  of  records.  Unfortunately,  there  are  no  archivists  or  finding  aids  at  federal
records  centers  to  assist  the  public.  The  only  means  of  determining  what  is  in  a  record
group  is  by  examining  the  Standard  Form  135  (SF-I35)  prepared  by  the  agency  for  each
individual  shipment.  These  forms  contain  a  great  deal  of  information,  including  the
accession  number,  name  and  address  of  the  office  shipping  the  records,  point  of  contact,
security  classification  of  the  records,  quantity  of  records  in  cubic  feet,  and  a  description
of  the  records  that  often  includes  a  folder  listing.8  The  examination  of  SF-135s  can  be  a
very  tedious  process,  for  they  may  total  many  thousands  of  pages.

Services

The  public  does  not  have  free  access  to  records  at  a  federal  records  center,  not  even  to
completely  unclassified  or  declassified  accessions.  Permission  first  must  be  obtained
from  the  agency  that  owns  the  records,  and  this  can  be  a  time-consuming  process.
Personnel  at  the  federal  records  centers  will  provide  information  on  who  should  be
contacted  at  an  agency  about  obtaining  such  permission.

The  one  federal  records  center  in  the  Washington,  D.C.,  area  is  the  Washington
National  Records  Center,  4205  Suitland  Road,  Suitland,  Maryland  20409;  telephone  301-
763-7000.  The  hours  are  8:00  a.m.  to  4:30  p.m.,  Monday  through  Friday  except  federal
holidays.  There  are  thirteen  regional  federal  records  centers,  which  hold  records
generated  by  federal  offices  in  that  particular  geographical  region  of  the  nation.  Many,
but  not  all,  are  located  in  the  same  place  as  the  regional  National  Archives:

Bayonne,  New  Jersey:  Building  22,  Military  Ocean  Terminal,  07002;

201-823-7161

Chicago,  Illinois:  7358  S.  Pulaski  Road,  60629;  312-352-0164

Dayton,  Ohio:  3 1 50  Springboro  Road,  45439;  5 1 3-225-2878

Denver,  Colorado:  Building  48,  Denver  Federal  Center,  80225;  303-236-0804

East  Point,  Georgia: 1 557  St.  Joseph  Avenue,  30344;  404-763-7476

Fort  Worth,  Texas:  Building  1,  Fort  Worth  Federal  Center,  761 15;  817-334-5515

Kansas  City,  Missouri:  2312  E.  Bannister  Road,  64131;  816-926-7271

Laguna  Niguel,  California:  24000  Avila  Road,  92677;  714-643-4420

Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania:  5000  Wissahickon  Avenue,  19144;  215-951-5588

San  Bruno,  California: 1 000  Commodore  Drive,  94600;  4 1 5-876-90 1 5

Seattle,  Washington:  6125  Sand  Point  Way  N.E.,  981 15;  206-526-6501

St.  Louis,  Missouri:  National  Personnel  Records  Center,  9700  Page  Boulevard,

63132;  314-263-7201

Waltham,  Massachusetts:  380  Trapelo  Road,  02154;  617-647-8745

FOIA  requests  for  records  in  the  custody  of  the  federal  records  centers  must  be
submitted  to  the  federal  agency  that  transferred  the  records  to  the  federal  records  center.
Records  center  personnel  will  provide  addresses  and  contacts.  For  further  information,
see  the  section  "Access  to  Information:  Rights  and  Restrictions,"  below.


906


A  Citizen's  Guide


Records  Still  Held  by  Agencies


Several  agencies  retain  great  volumes  of  records  that  have  never  been  sent  to  the
National  Archives  or  a  federal  records  center.  Such  records  may  be  stored  at  any  number
of  places,  including  internal  record  storage  facilities  and  history  offices.  With  a  few
exceptions,  these  collections  are  generally  less  well  organized  and  described  than  those  at
the  National  Archives  or  federal  records  centers.  Furthermore,  most  agencies  have  only  a
limited  ability  to  accommodate  researchers.  The  names,  addresses,  and  telephone
numbers  of  the  locations  where  the  agencies  store  records  are  available  in  part  II,  below.

Access  to  Information:  Rights  and  Restrictions

This  section  addresses  some  government  policies  that  control  access  to  information—
on  privacy,  freedom  of  information,  and  national  security  classification-and  some  of  a
citizen's  rights  to  information  and  how  to  exercise  them.

Privacy  and  Freedom  of  Information

The  Privacy  Act  and  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act  (FOI A)9  are  the  most  critical
components  of  the  legal  framework  that  supports  public  access  to  federal  records.  The
Privacy  Act  defines  certain  types  of  information  as  privileged  to  the  individual,  and
during  his  or  her  lifetime  it  prevents  their  public  dissemination  or  their  use  for  purposes
other  than  those  originally  authorizing  their  collection.  This  means,  for  example,  that  one
agency  may  not  share  personal  information  about  citizens  with  another  government
agency,  and  it  means  that  one  person  may  not  have  access  to  such  information  about  any
other  person  without  authorization.  This  protection  of  privacy  extends  to  records  in  the
National  Archives  as  well.  The  Freedom  of  Information  Act  guarantees,  with  some
categories  of  exceptions,  that  all  records  created  by  the  executive  branch  of  the  federal
government  are  available  to  citizens.  Among  those  exemptions  are  a  privacy  clause  that
broadens  the  scope  of  the  Privacy  Act  by  extending  protection  to  personnel  and  medical
files  by  category  rather  than  limiting  protection  to  the  lifetime  of  individuals,  and  a
national  defense  and  foreign  policy  clause  that  precludes  one  from  obtaining  certain
classified  information  under  FOIA.

The  next  two  sections  discuss  the  effect  of  these  laws  on  obtaining  information  based
on  the  names  of  individuals,  and  the  procedures  and  requirements  for  making  Freedom  of
Information  Act  Requests.

Name  Searches

Access  by  citizens  to  federal  records  that  are  retrievable  by  the  names  of  individuals  or
other  personal  information  are  controlled  by  the  Privacy  Act  and  by  the  privacy  clause  of
the  Freedom  of  Information  Act.  The  Privacy  Act  restricts  access  to  information
contained  in  what  are  called  Privacy  Act  systems  of  records,  records  arranged  by  the
names  of  individuals  or  other  personal  information.  In  general,  during  an  individual's
lifetime,  records  retrieved  by  the  use  of  personal  information  are  available  only  to  that
person  or  with  his  or  her  authority,10  although  redacted  copies  of  such  documents— that  is,

907


Appendices

copies  from  which  private  information  has  been  removed-may  be  available  if  the  records
are  retrievable  in  some  other  way."  If,  therefore,  a  citizen  is  interested  in  obtaining
records  that  concern  him  or  her  or,  with  the  appropriate  authority,  those  that  concern  a
close  relative,  there  should  be  no  legal  restrictions  on  access;  to  the  extent,  however,  that
a  citizen  wishes  more  information  about  other  individuals  who  are  mentioned  in  those
records,  there  may  be  considerable  difficulty.  In  such  cases  one  would  probably  have
greater  success  identifying  the  program  in  which  he  or  she  participated,  determining
where  the  records  of  that  program  are  housed,  and  extracting  information  from  those
records.

FOIA  Requests

In  general,  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act  requires  that  the  individual12  make  inquiry
in  writing13  directly  to  the  appropriate  agency,  in  conformity  with  the  established
procedures  of  the  agency,  and  that  agreement  on  the  payment  or  inapplicability  of  fees  is
reached  between  the  requester  and  the  agency.  The  first  requirement  usually  is
understood  to  include  identification  of  the  records  in  which  the  information  is  to  be
found.  Agencies  are  not  required  to  do  research  for  the  citizen  but  only  to  conduct
"reasonable  searches"  of  their  records  in  an  attempt  to  meet  the  request.14  The  second
requirement  recognizes  that  different  agencies  may  have  different  procedures  for
handling  public  inquiry.15  The  third  requirement  permits  the  agency  to  determine  before
accepting  the  request  that  the  requestor  will  pay  all  the  applicable  fees  or,  in  the
alternative,  that  there  are  valid  grounds  for  waiving  the  fees.16

Once  an  agency  has  accepted  a  FOIA  request,  the  law  establishes  very  short  periods  of
time  for  the  agency  to  respond.  If  the  request  is  accepted,  the  agency  is  obligated  to
decide  within  ten  working  days  of  acceptance  whether  or  not  it  will  provide  the
information  within  a  reasonable  length  of  time,17  and  if  the  request  is  denied  and  an
appeal  is  made,  it  must  provide  a  response  within  twenty  working  days.  In  actual
practice,  however,  agencies  rarely  meet  these  time  limits.  Depending  on  the  backlog  of
requests,  the  number  of  other  agencies  that  must  be  contacted,  and  other  factors,  a  FOIA
can  take  one  to  five  years  to  process.

Agencies  are  most  likely  to  reproduce  and  mail  copies  of  records  to  requesters,  but
they  are  not  required  to  do  so  and  are  permitted  to  provide  access  to  the  records  at  a
central  location  (see  also  the  information  on  the  FOIA  reading  rooms  and  offices  at  the
agencies  in  Part  II).

If  an  agency  denies  a  request  in  whole  or  in  part,  the  requester  then  has  the  right  to
make  one  administrative  appeal.  If  after  these  the  requester  is  still  not  satisfied,  the  only
recourse  is  federal  court.

Classified  Records

There  is  a  vast  number  of  records  at  the  National  Archives,  in  the  federal  records
centers,  and  at  the  agencies  that  are  still  classified  and  therefore  unavailable  to  the  public.
The  government  is  obliged  by  executive  order  to  review  its  records  periodically  for
declassification,  but  citizens  may  request  a  review  on  their  own  initiative.  Submitting  a
request,  of  course,  does  not  guarantee  that  the  records  will  be  declassified  either  in  whole


908


A  Citizen's  Guide

or  in  part.  The  government  authorities  conducting  the  review  may  conclude  that  the
documents  should  remain  classified.

There  are  three  methods  under  which  the  public  can  request  that  documents  at  the
National  Archives  be  reviewed  for  declassification.  The  first  is  under  FOIA,  and  the
second  is  under  the  Mandatory  Declassification  Review  (MDR)  provisions  of  Executive
Order  12958  of  April  17,  1995. I8  Under  both  methods,  a  request  is  submitted  to  the
National  Archives  (rather  than  to  the  agency  that  generated  the  records),  whose  archivists
will  provide  information  on  how  the  request  should  be  handled  further.  The  third  method
for  requesting  declassification  is  under  the  Special  Declassification  Review  procedure.
This  informal  procedure,  which  is  only  applicable  to  records  at  the  National  Archives,  is
much  quicker  than  either  FOIA  or  MDR,  but  there  are  some  records-intelligence  records,
for  example-that  cannot  be  reviewed  in  this  way.  The  archivists  working  with  the
records  should  be  consulted  to  determine  whether  a  Special  Declassification  Review  may
be  used.

To  access  classified  collections  at  federal  records  centers  or  agencies,  either  a  FOIA  or
an  MDR  request  must  be  submitted  to  the  agency.  Classified  records  that  turn  up  in  the
course  of  a  document  search  are  sent  through  declassification  review.  There  is  no  Special
Declassification  Review  procedure  at  federal  records  centers  or  agencies.

PART  II:  AGENCY  INFORMATION  AND  SERVICES

As  part  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  effort  to  improve  citizen  access  to  information,
we  asked  the  agencies  providing  information  to  the  Committee-chiefly  the  members  of
the  Interagency  Working  Group  and  the  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission-to  respond  to  a
series  of  questions  concerning  the  handling  of  private  information  requests.  We  asked
how  citizens  should  make  requests,  what  services  the  agencies  would  provide,  what
information  resources  were  available,  and  how  agencies  would  handle  requests  for
information  held  by  agency  contractors  and  grantees.  Each  agency's  response  is
summarized  in  its  section,  below.  Those  sections  also  include  general  information
obtained  from  the  U.S.  Government  Manual,19  including  the  location  of  FOIA  reading
rooms  and  offices.20

Department  of  Energy

General

DOE  maintains  a  Freedom  of  Information  Act  Reading  Room  at  its  headquarters  in
Washington.  The  address  is  FOIA  Reading  Room,  Forrestal  Building,  Room  IE- 190,
Department  of  Energy,  1000  Independence  Avenue,  S.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20585;
telephone  202-586-6020.  The  reading  room  is  open  9:00  a.m.  to  4:00  p.m.,  Monday
through  Friday,  except  federal  holidays.  General  information  on  filing  FOIA  requests
may  be  obtained  from  the  FOIA  office,  202-586-5955.

As  described  both  in  Sources  and  Documentation  and  in  Human  Radiation
Experiments: The  Department  of  Energy  Roadmap  to  the  Story  and  the  Records,  the
History  Division  at  DOE  headquarters  has  custody  of  many  collections  of  records.  The
relatively  few  unclassified  and  declassified  collections  that  the  division  maintains  can  be

909


Appendices

examined  at  its  office  in  DOE's  Germantown  facility:  U.S.  Department  of  Energy,
History  Division,  HR-76,  Room  F031,  19901  Germantown  Road,  Germantown,
Maryland  20874-1290;  telephone  301-903-5431.  The  hours  are  from  8:00  a.m.  to  4:00
p.m.,  Monday  through  Friday,  except  federal  holidays.  An  appointment  must  be  made,  as
there  is  limited  space  to  accommodate  the  public.

In  addition,  the  national  laboratories  around  the  nation  hold  a  huge  volume  of  records.
Information  at  those  locations  is  available  as  follows:

Argonne  National  Laboratory:  There  is  no  reading  room  at  Argonne,  but  citizens  may
write:  Argonne  National  Laboratory,  Office  of  Public  Affairs,  9700  South  Cass
Avenue,  Argonne,  Illinois  60439;  708-252-5575.

Brookhaven  National  Laboratory:  There  is  no  reading  room  at  Brookhaven,  but  citizens
may  write:  Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,  Office  of  Public  Affairs,  Building  134,
P.O.  Box  5000,  Upton,  New  York  22973;  516-282-2345.

Hanford:  DOE  Public  Reading  Room,  P.  O.  Box  999  -  Mail  Stop  H2-53,  Richland,
Washington  99352;  509-376-8583.  This  facility  is  in  the  library  at  Washington  State
University  -  Tri-Cities  Campus,  100  Sprout  Road,  Richland,  Washington.  The  hours
are  8:00  a.m. -noon  and  1:00-4:30  p.m.,  Monday  through  Friday.

Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory:  Public  Reading  Room,  1350  Central  Avenue  -  Suite
101,  Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico  87544;  505-665-2127  or  800-343-2342.  The  reading
room  is  open  9:00  a.m.  -  5:00  p.m..  Monday  through  Friday,  except  federal  holidays.

Idaho  National  Engineering  Laboratory:  DOE  Idaho  Operations  Public  Reading  Room,
1776  Science  Center  Drive,  Idaho  Falls,  Idaho  83415-2300;  208-526-9162.  The  hours
are  8:00  a.m.  -  5:00  p.m.,  Monday  through  Friday,  except  federal  holidays.

Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory:  There  is  no  reading  room  at  Lawrence
Livermore,  but  citizens  may  write:  Area  Relations  -  Mail  Stop  L404,  Lawrence
Livermore  National  Laboratory,  P.O.  Box  808,  Livermore,  California  94550.

Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory:  Oak  Ridge  Operations  (ORO)  Public  Reading  Room,
55  Jefferson  Circle,  Oak  Ridge,  Tennessee  37831;  615-241-4780.  The  hours  are
8:00  -  1 1:30  a.m.  and  12:30  -  5:00  p.m.,  Monday  through  Friday,  except  federal
holidays.  In  addition  to  the  laboratory  itself  (ORNL),  the  Oak  Ridge  complex  also
encompasses  the  regional  DOE  office  (ORO)  and  an  independent  research  institute
(ORISE)  operated  by  a  consortium  of  universities.  The  regional  office  may  be
contacted  by  writing:  Oak  Ridge  Operations  Office  (ORO),  P.O.  Box  2001,  Oak
Ridge,  Tennessee  3783 1 .  The  research  institute  may  be  contacted  by  writing:  Oak
Ridge  Institute  for  Science  and  Education  (ORISE),  P.O.  Box  117,  Oak  Ridge,
Tennessee  37831-01 17.


910


A  Citizen's  Guide

Information  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments

In  response  to  the  Advisory  Committee's  request,  the  Department  of  Energy  has
provided  the  following  information  about  its  resources  and  services  for  citizens  inquiring
about  human  radiation  experiments.

General  Department  of  Energy  information  about  human  radiation  experiments
sponsored  by  DOE  and  its  predecessors,  and  referrals,  may  be  requested  through  the
Radiation  Research  Helpline  (1-800-493-2998)  or  by  writing  to  the  Department  of
Energy,  Office  of  Human  Radiation  Experiments  (OHRE),  EH-8,  1 000  Independence
Avenue,  S.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20585.

The  largest  body  of  pertinent  records  is  maintained  by  the  Coordination  and
Information  Center  (CIC).21  All  CIC  material  is  declassified,  screened,  and  redacted  for
public  dissemination.  The  CIC  may  be  contacted  by  writing  to  the  Coordination  and
Information  Center,  3084  South  Highland  Street,  Las  Vegas,  Nevada  89109,  or  by  calling
702-295-073 1 .  Although  generally  equivalent  for  DOE-related  human  radiation
experiment  records,  the  ACHRE  and  CIC  collections  are  not  identical:  The  ACHRE
collection  contains  most  but  not  all  of  CIC's  Human  Radiation  Experiments  records  series
and  has  some  DOE  records  not  represented  in  CIC  collections.  For  further  information
on  CIC  documentation,  see  "How  to  Go  From  the  ACHRE  Collection  to  Agency
Records"  in  part  IV,  below.

Medical  records  should  be  requested  from  the  facility  where  the  medical  services  were
performed.  Current  or  former  DOE  employees  may  obtain  their  medical  records  from  the
site  where  they  worked  or  from  the  National  Personnel  Record  Center  in  St.  Louis,
Missouri,  which  may  be  contacted  directly  (314-538-3882).22  Dosimetry  records
documenting  occupational  radiation  exposures  are  maintained  for  both  government  and
contractor  personnel;  they  should  be  requested  from  the  DOE  manager  at  the  site  where
exposure  may  have  occurred.  DOE  also  maintains  a  consolidated  collection  of  dosimetry
records  related  to  weapons  testing,  including  both  civilian  and  military  information.
Information  may  be  requested  by  writing  to  the  Dosimetry  Research  Program  (DRP),
P.O.  Box  98521,  Las  Vegas,  Nevada  89193-8521,  or  by  calling  702-295-0731.  DOE  will
also  help  to  identify  and  locate  records  that  are  not  in  the  custody  of  the  department,
although  citizens  must  contact  those  institutions  or  individuals  themselves.

Several  DOE  departments  have  created  finding  aids  that  may  be  useful  in  finding  HRE
records:  (1)  As  mentioned  above,  the  report  Human  Radiation  Experiments:  The
Department  of  Energy  Roadmap  to  the  Story  and  the  Records,  prepared  by  the  Office  on
Human  Radiation  Experiments,  provides  summaries  of  that  office's  findings  and
descriptions  of  some  relevant  record  collections.  (2)  An  electronic  index  to  pertinent  CIC
holdings  is  available  at  the  CIC  and  OHRE  offices  and  at  DOE's  reading  rooms.  Citizens
may  request  searches  or  do  their  own  at  those  locations.  (3)  For  those  with  Internet
access,  recently  declassified  documents  are  available  from  DOE's  Office  of  Scientific  and
Technical  Information  through  its  World  Wide  Web"  presence,  Opennet
(http://www.doe.gov/html/osti/opennet/opennetl.html).  And  another  group  of  databases
on  the  Internet,  created  by  OHRE,  provide  full  access  to  the  documents  in  the  CIC
collection.  (Further  information  about  OHRE  and  this  complex  of  databases  [called
HREX]  may  be  obtained  from  its  World  Wide  Web  site,  http://www.ohre.doe.gov.)
Finally,  OHRE  issued  a  supplement  to  its  February  1995  report  in  July  1995  entitled


911


Appendices

Human  Radiation  Experiments  Associated  with  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy  and  Its
Predecessors.24  This  volume  adds  to  the  information  reported  in  the  February  1995
volume,  and  also  includes  summaries  of  the  nearly  150  HREs  reported  by  DOE.

Department  of  Defense

General

The  Department  of  Defense's  Freedom  of  Information  Act  offices  may  be  contacted  as
follows:  DOD,  703-697-1 180;  Army,  703-607-3452;  Navy,  703-697-1459;  Air  Force,
703-697-3467.

Information  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments

In  response  to  the  Advisory  Committee's  request,  the  Department  of  Defense  has
provided  the  following  information  about  its  resources  and  services  for  citizens  inquiring
about  human  radiation  experiments.

Information  concerning  human  radiation  experiments  sponsored  or  conducted  by  the
Department  of  Defense  is  available  chiefly  through  the  Radiation  Experiments  Command
Center  (RECC),  the  DOD  equivalent  of  DOE's  Office  of  Human  Radiation  Experiments.
RECC  is  operated  under  contract  by  Science  Applications  International  Corporation
(SAIC).  The  primary  method  of  contacting  RECC  is  by  referral  from  the  DOE  Radiation
Research  Helpline  (l-800-493-2998)--RECC  does  not  provide  direct  telephone
assistance.  Citizens  may  also  write  directly  to  RECC:  Radiation  Experiments  Command
Center,  6801  Telegraph  Road,  Alexandria,  Virginia  22310-3398.  Individuals  contacting
RECC  will  be  requested  to  fill  out  a  survey  form  to  facilitate  the  search  for  records
responsive  to  their  requests.  The  RECC  collection  and  the  ACHRE  collection  of  DOD
materials  are  generally  equivalent.  For  further  information  on  RECC  documentation,  see
"How  to  Go  From  the  ACHRE  Collection  to  Agency  Records"  in  part  IV,  below.

RECC  does  not  keep  medical  records  but  will  assist  those  who  request  them  by
contacting  the  appropriate  facility  and  referring  the  individual  there.  Active  duty  military
personnel  will  find  their  complete  medical  records  at  their  current  duty  stations;  upon
retirement  or  discharge,  their  files  are  transferred  to  the  National  Personnel  Records
Center  in  St.  Louis.  Former  military  personnel  may  contact  the  center  directly  (3 14-538-
3882).25

RECC  maintains  a  database  of  information  on  human  radiation  experiment  documents
identified  during  DOD's  search  and  a  database  of  secondary  information  concerning  the
history  and  policy  behind  the  activities.  Case  files  on  individuals  exposed  to  radiation  are
being  created  and  categorized  by  exposure.  RECC  will  also  help  citizens  contact  private
institutions  involved  in  DOD-sponsored  programs,  within  the  limits  of  the  Privacy  Act.

Another  DOD  resource  is  the  Nuclear  Test  Personnel  Review  Program  (NTPRP)
operated  by  the  Defense  Nuclear  Agency  (DNA),  which  has  obtained  a  considerable
volume  of  records  and  information  related  to  military  and  civilian  participants  in
atmospheric  nuclear  tests  between  1 945  and  1 962.  Unclassified  and  declassified  records
that  do  not  contain  privacy  information  can  be  reviewed  by  the  public  at  a  special  library
at  DNA  headquarters.  The  program  also  provides  certain  informational  and  referral


912


A  Citizen's  Guide

services  to  participants.  The  address  is  Defense  Nuclear  Agency,  Nuclear  Test  Personnel
Review  Program,  6801  Telegraph  Road,  Alexandria,  Virginia  22310;  telephone
1-800-462-3683.  Additional  services  may  be  available  through  the  VA's  Ionizing
Radiation  Registry  Examination  Program  (see  VA  section,  below).

Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services

General

There  is  no  general  reading  room  for  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,
nor  for  its  research  divisions,  the  Public  Health  Service  and  the  National  Institutes  of
Health.26  Each  institute  of  NIH27  maintains  its  own  information  facilities,  including  its
own  office  of  public  affairs.  For  help  in  identifying  the  sort  of  information  needed  and
how  to  obtain  it,  a  good  place  to  start  is  the  National  Library  of  Medicine,  8600  Rockville
Pike,  Bethesda,  Maryland.  The  general  information  line  for  NIH  is  301-496-4000.

Information  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments

In  response  to  the  Advisory  Committee's  request,  the  Department  of  Health  and
Human  Services  has  provided  the  following  information  about  its  resources  and  services
for  citizens  inquiring  about  human  radiation  experiments.

DHHS  sponsors  two  types  of  research— intramural  ("within  the  walls"),  research
conducted  by  DHHS  staff  members,  and  extramural  ("outside  the  walls"),  research
conducted  outside  DHHS  by  contractors  or  grantees.  DHHS  keeps  medical  records  only
for  individuals  who  participated  in  intramural  research.  Inquiries  concerning  such
records  should  be  directed  in  writing  to  the  Deputy  Assistant  Secretary  for
Health/Communications,  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  Hubert  Humphrey
Building  -  Room  70 1H,  200  Independence  Avenue,  S.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20201 .

There  are  four  DHHS  databases  that  may  help  identify  potential  human  radiation
experiments.  The  first  is  the  Clinical  Center  intramural  protocol  database  (also  called  the
Protocols  by  Institute  database),  which  was  created  at  the  Advisory  Committee's  request
to  index  information  about  NIH  intramural  research.  This  database  was  completed  in
February  1995  and  contains  more  than  5,000  entries  for  the  period  1953  through
November  1994.  More  recent  information  on  extramural  research  is  included  in  the
CRISP  (Computer  Retrieval  of  Information  on  Scientific  Projects)  database,  which
contains  records  for  all  PHS  extramural  projects  and  for  NIH  and  Food  and  Drug
Administration  (FDA)  intramural  projects.  The  most  comprehensive  database  is  called
IMPAC  and  includes  information  on  awards  as  far  back  as  1944,  although  not  all
programs  are  included  for  their  entire  tenure  and  the  information  on  early  awards  is
limited.  Finally,  the  National  Library  of  Medicine  (NLM)  is  creating  a  database  with
entries  for  all  articles  written  by  investigators  whose  human  radiation  experiments  were
supported  by  NIH.  (Thus  the  database  will  contain  citations  for  both  radiation  and
nonradiation  research.)  NLM  expects  the  database  will  eventually  contain  approximately
100,000  entries.

DHHS  has  a  contractual  relationship  with  its  contractors  and  grantees  that  limits  its
access  to  the  records  they  create  to  those  occasions  required  by  agency  functions.


913


Appendices

Consequently,  although  DHHS  will  help  citizens  identify  the  independent  researchers  and
institutions  that  hold  their  medical  records,  it  asks  that  the  initial  contact  be  made  by  the
citizen.  If  that  approach  is  unsuccessful,  DHHS  will  attempt  to  obtain  the  records.
Citizens  are  encouraged  to  contact  DHHS  to  make  a  precise  determination  of  whom  to
contact  and  what  information  to  include  in  their  inquiries.

Department  of  Veterans  Affairs

General

The  VA  maintains  a  reading  room  at  its  central  office  in  Washington,  D.C.,  where
citizens  may  inspect  or  copy  VA  records  available  to  the  public.  The  address  is  Room
170,  810  Vermont  Avenue,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20420;  telephone  202-233-2356.
For  further  information,  contact  the  Office  of  Public  Affairs,  Department  of  Veterans
Affairs,  810  Vermont  Avenue,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20420;  telephone  202-273-5700.

Information  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments

In  response  to  the  Advisory  Committee's  request,  the  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs
has  provided  the  following  information  about  its  resources  and  services  for  citizens
inquiring  about  human  radiation  experiments.

The  VA  is  continuing  to  look  for  information  on  human  radiation  experiments  in  its
own  records  and  will  assist  citizens  in  identifying  nongovernment  records  related  to  their
case  histories.  It  has  also  published  a  fact  sheet,  "Information  for  Veterans  Exposed  to
Radiation"  (November  1994).  Requests  for  information  about  participation  in
experiments  may  be  made  directly  to  the  director  of  the  appropriate  VA  medical  center  or
to  the  director  of  the  regional  VA  office  (toll-free  1-800-827-1000).  The  VA  maintains
an  Ionizing  Radiation  Registry  Examination  Program  for  veterans  who  may  have  been
exposed  to  the  ionizing  radiation  while  on  active  duty  in  the  period  1945-1962.
Information  about  the  program  may  be  requested  in  writing  from:  Director,
Environmental  Epidemiology  Service  (103E),  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs,  1 120  20th
Street,  Suite  950,  Washington,  D.C.  20036-3406,  telephone  202-606-5420.  Additional
information  may  be  requested  from  DOD's  Nuclear  Test  Personnel  Review  Program  (see
DOD  section,  above).

National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration

General

The  NASA  Headquarters  Information  Center  is  in  Room  1H23,  300  E  Street,  S.W.,
Washington,  D.C.  20546,  and  is  open  8:00  a.m.  to  4:30  p.m.,  Monday  through  Friday,
except  federal  holidays.  For  information  about  holdings,  telephone  202-358-1000.

Information  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments

In  response  to  the  Advisory  Committee's  request,  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space

914


A  Citizen 's  Guide

Administration  has  provided  the  following  information  about  its  resources  and  services
for  citizens  inquiring  about  human  radiation  experiments.

NASA's  records  concerning  human  radiation  experiments  are  generally  limited  to
summary  reports  from  principal  investigators  and  do  not  contain  medical  information  on
individuals,  apart  from  the  records  of  astronauts.  Information  about  individual
participation  may  be  requested  in  writing  under  the  Privacy  Act  using  FOIA  procedures
and  NASA's  standard  Human  Radiation  Exposure  Log  form.  Inquiries  should  be  directed
to:  NASA  Johnson  Space  Center,  Freedom  of  Information  Coordinator,  Public  Affairs
Office,  Mail  Code  AP2,  Houston,  Texas  77058,  Attn.:  Director,  Space  and  Life  Sciences
Directorate.  NASA's  information  retrieval  systems  in  this  area  are  limited,  and  success
will  largely  depend  on  the  quality  and  detail  of  the  information  provided  to  NASA.
NASA  will  refer  requests  for  information  requiring  access  to  non-NASA  records  to  the
appropriate  individual  or  institution.

Central  Intelligence  Agency

General

The  CIA  does  not  maintain  a  public  reading  room  but  does  issue  several  publications
that  may  be  of  interest.  For  information,  write:  Central  Intelligence  Agency,  Public
Affairs  Office,  Washington,  D.C.  20505,  or  telephone  703-351-2053.

Information  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments

In  response  to  the  Advisory  Committee's  request,  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency  has
provided  the  following  information  about  its  resources  and  services  for  citizens  inquiring
about  human  radiation  experiments.

The  CIA  has  no  special  facilities  for  handling  requests  concerning  human  radiation
experiments  nor  any  information  resources  specifically  concerned  with  them.  Privacy
Act  and  Freedom  of  Information  Act  requests  should  be  filed  in  the  usual  ways.  The  CIA
is  not  prepared  to  facilitate  the  identification  or  the  retrieval  of  nongovernment  records
that  may  be  associated  with  government  activities.  Requests  should  be  addressed  in
writing  to:  Information  and  Privacy  Coordinator,  CIA,  Washington,  D.C.  20505.

Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission

General

The  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission  (NRC)  Headquarters  Public  Document  Room
maintains  an  extensive  collection  of  documents  related  to  NRC  licensing  proceedings  and
other  significant  decisions  and  actions,  and  documents  from  the  regulatory  activities  of
the  former  Atomic  Energy  Commission.  The  reading  room  is  located  at  2120  L  Street,
N.W.,  Washington,  D.C;  telephone  202-634-3273,  toll-free  800-397-4209  or  fax  202-
634-3343.  The  Public  Document  Room  is  open  Monday  through  Friday  from  7:45  a.m.
to  4: 1 5  p.m.,  except  on  federal  holidays. Reference  librarians  are  available  to  assist
users  with  information  requests.  A  bibliographic  database  is  available  for  on-line

915


Appendices

searching  twenty-four  hours  a  day.  For  additional  information  call  the  above  telephone
number  or  write:  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission,  Public  Document  Room,
Washington,  D.C.  20555.

The  commission  also  maintains  eighty-eight  local  public  document  rooms  in  libraries
in  cities  and  towns  near  commercially  operated  nuclear  power  reactors  and  certain
nonpower  reactor  facilities.  A  list  of  local  public  document  rooms  is  available  from  the
Director,  Division  of  Freedom  of  Information  and  Publications  Services,  Nuclear
Regulatory  Commission,  Washington,  D.C.  20555-0001.  To  obtain  specific  information
about  the  availability  of  documents  at  the  local  public  document  rooms,  NRC's  Local
Public  Document  Room  Program  staff  may  be  contacted  directly  by  calling,  toll-free,
800-638-8081.  Citizens  may  also  request  the  publication  Users'  Guide  for  the  NRC
Public  Document  Room  (NUREG/BR-0004,  Rev.  2).

Freedom  of  Information  Act  inquiries  should  be  directed  in  writing  to  the  Director,
Division  of  Freedom  of  Information  and  Publications  Services,  Nuclear  Regulatory
Commission,  Washington,  D.C.  20555-0001.  For  further  information,  call  301-415-
7175.

For  general  information,  contact  the  Office  of  Public  Affairs,  Nuclear  Regulatory
Commission,  Washington,  D.C.  20555-0001;  telephone  301-415-8200.  Citizens  may
request  the  publication  Citizen's  Guide  to  U.S.  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission
Information  (NUREG/BR-0100,  Rev.  2).

Information  on  Human  Radiation  Experiments

In  response  to  the  Advisory  Committee's  request,  the  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission
has  provided  the  following  information  about  its  resources  and  services  for  citizens
inquiring  about  human  radiation  experiments.

Although  the  NRC  and  its  predecessor,  the  regulatory  division  of  the  Atomic  Energy
Commission  (AEC),  have  not  conducted  or  sponsored  human  radiation  experiments,  their
license  files  do  contain  some  relevant  information  about  the  radioactive  materials  that
were  distributed  and  the  purposes  to  which  they  were  put,  human  radiation  experiments
among  them.  AEC  and  NRC  records  do  not  contain  names  or  other  identifying
information  about  the  subjects  of  such  experiments  and  only  rarely  contain  detailed
information  about  the  experiments  themselves.  The  NRC  also  collects  information  about
occupational  exposures,  medical  misadministrations,  and  other  cases  of  overexposure.
This  information  is  available  to  the  public,  subject  to  the  restrictions  of  the  Privacy  Act
and  FOIA.  Citizens  may  request  agency  documents  under  the  Freedom  of  Information
Act  and/or  the  Privacy  Act  by  writing  to:  Director,  Division  of  Freedom  of  Information
and  Publication  Services,  Office  of  Administration,  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission,
Washington,  D.C.  20555-0001.

The  agency  will  search  all  agency  records,  if  requested  to  do  so,  and  can  search
license  files  by  institution.

PART  III:  PERSONAL  MEDICAL  RECORDS

Citizens  who  participated  in  experiments  have  medical  records  of  the  same  type  as
those  created  by  their  personal  physicians,  whether  the  experiments  were  conducted  in

916


A  Citizen's  Guide

doctors'  offices,  research  laboratories,  or  medical  facilities  such  as  hospitals  and
sanatoria.  As  discussed  in  part  I,  these  records  are  distinct  from  the  scientific  records  of
the  experiments  and  must  be  sought  in  different  places.  Medical  records,  unlike  scientific
records,  will  contain  most  of  the  information  necessary  to  finding  out  what  medical
actions  were  taken  and  why  specific  procedures  were  followed.

Citizens  share  ownership  of  their  medical  records  with  their  physicians  and  the
medical  facilities  where  they  were  treated  and  have  the  right  to  copies  of  these  records.
The  records  should  be  available  to  the  individual  or  an  authorized  relative  for  the  asking
(though  there  may  be  a  copying  charge).  In  this  part,  we  discuss  how  to  find  personal
medical  records  and  where  those  records  may  be  located.

A  Basic  Distinction

Many  individuals  who  contacted  the  Advisory  Committee  were  understandably
confused  by  the  difference  between  the  broad  array  of  medical  interventions  involving
radiation  and  the  "human  radiation  experiments"  that  the  Committee  was  chartered  to
review.  The  difference  is  this:  While  medical  interventions  are  not  expressly  intended  to
accomplish  anything  more  than  therapy,  "experiments"  are  designed  to  yield
generalizable  scientific  knowledge.  This  is  not  to  imply  that  experiments  offer  no
therapeutic  benefit  (many  do),  only  that  they  are  organized  in  a  different  way,  taking
place  in  a  controlled  setting  and  potentially  involving  thousands  of  subjects.

It  is  not  always  easy  for  a  patient  to  tell  from  circumstances  whether  he  or  she  is
involved  in  a  larger  study.  One  reason  for  the  difficulty  is  semantic.  Some  ad  hoc
medical  interventions  are  loosely  called  "experimental,"  meaning  that  they  have  not  been
proven  effective  or  generally  accepted  as  safe  by  the  medical  community.  Experiments,
meanwhile,  are  commonly  known  by  another  name:  "human  subject  research."2*  Matters
are  complicated  by  the  dual  role  many  doctors  play,  rapidly  switching  hats  between
physician  and  investigator.  Given  all  this  potential  for  misunderstanding,  those  who
conduct  human  research  are  under  an  acute  ethical  responsibility  to  clearly  explain  the
purposes  of  a  procedure  in  obtaining  the  subject's  consent.

A  citizen  who  believes  that  he  or  she  or  a  relative  may  have  been  a  subject  in
government-sponsored  human  research  should  begin  the  search  for  facts  in  the  medical
records,  which  provide  the  details  of  the  patient's  condition  and  the  treatment
administered  for  it.  A  medical  professional  should  be  asked  to  review  these  records  and
check  for  signs  of  a  research  purpose.  In  many  cases,  having  the  records  reviewed  by  a
professional  will  answer  most  questions  and  concerns.  The  next  two  sections  give  advice
on  finding  one's  records.

Personal  Medical  Records  Created  by  Physicians  and  Hospitals

Physicians  and  medical  facilities  should  be  approached  directly  by  the  individual  or  by
an  authorized  relative.  As  with  any  request  for  private  information,  a  request  for  medical
records  should  be  formal,  direct,  and  clear,  and  it  should  include  significant  personal
details  to  assure  the  identity  of  the  correspondent  and,  thus,  the  legitimacy  of  the  request.
These  details  are  similar  to  those  needed  to  request  a  birth  certificate-date  and  place  of
birth,  parent's  names,  and  so  forth.  The  letter  should  also  include  as  many  details  as

917


Appendices

possible  about  the  circumstances  of  interest,  such  as  the  dates  of  treatment,  the  names  of
the  physicians,  and  any  other  information  that  will  help  locate  the  records.  Institutions
may  have  standard  forms  that  need  to  be  used;  if  the  request  occurs  at  some  distance  in
time  or  geography,  the  identity  of  the  correspondent  may  have  to  be  certified  in  some
way.  These  are  common  procedures,  designed  to  protect  an  individual's  privacy  by
preventing  the  unauthorized  release  of  information.

If  the  name  of  the  physician  or  medical  facility  that  conducted  the  procedure  in
question  is  known  but  the  address  is  unknown,  one  of  the  indexes  of  physicians  and
facilities  available  at  a  public  library  should  be  useful.29  If  the  names  are  unknown,  one
place  to  start  is  with  the  individual's  current  physician  and  local  hospital.  They  may  have
copies  of  older  medical  records  because  they  were  authorized  to  obtain  medical  histories.
They  are  also  likely  to  have  (or  to  be  able  to  get)  information  about  how  to  contact
physicians  or  medical  facilities  in  other  locations.

If  the  names  of  the  physician  and  facility  are  not  readily  found,  more  extensive
research  in  family  papers  and  a  broader  correspondence  with  individuals  who  may  have
information  will  be  necessary.  Former  friends,  neighbors  and  co-workers,  extended
family  members,  clergy,  and  any  other  associates  are  all  potential  sources  of  information,
as  is  the  patient's  health  insurance  company.  Without  the  names  of  the  medical  personnel
and  facilities  involved  it  will  be  very  difficult  to  find  records  at  nongovernmental
facilities.  If  the  treatment  received  occurred  in  a  government  facility,  see  part  II  of  this
appendix,  which  describes  how  to  find  those  records.  Outside  the  military  services  and
large  government  research  and  social  benefit  programs,  however,  there  are  no  large  lists
of  individual  citizens  matched  to  their  medical  experiences  that  would  provide  the  needed
information.

Where  Else  Could  the  Information  Be?

In  general,  unless  there  are  regulations  or  legal  obligations  that  require  other
arrangements,  records  stay  where  they  are  created.  For  example,  if  a  patient  was  treated
at  Hospital  X,  Hospital  X  is  likely  to  be  where  those  records  are  kept.  It  is  possible  that
Hospital  X  destroys  all  records  that  are,  say,  thirty  years  old;  it  is  also  possible  that
Hospital  X  stores  those  records  with  a  firm  that  specializes  in  document  storage.  In  either
case,  the  disposition  and  location  of  the  records  will  be  known  to  Hospital  X  and  possibly
to  no  one  else.

Physicians  and  institutions,  however,  create  records  other  than  patient  medical  records
that  may  also  contain  important  medical  information.  When  asked  for  medical  records,
Hospital  X  may  not  think  of  all  the  records  that  an  individual  might  find  valuable  in
reconstructing  his  or  her  medical  history,  other  records  that  reflect  activities  under  its
sponsorship.

These  records  may  not  be  coordinated  or  housed  with  any  of  the  others.  Departmental
records  at  a  hospital  may  be  retired  with  those  of  the  hospital  generally  or  they  may  not.
Departmental  records  at  a  university  are  typically  retired  to  the  university  archives,
usually  housed  in  the  university  library;  a  hospital  department's  records  at  a  university
with  a  medical  school  may  be  retired  to  the  medical  school  library.  The  academic  records
of  faculty  members  are  treated  similarly.  Records  of  private  research  and  personal
papers,  however,  are  often  given  to  the  faculty  member's  alma  mater  rather  than  to  the


918


A  Citizen 's  Guide

university  where  the  research  was  done,  so  that  both  locations  need  to  be  searched.  If  the
faculty  member  was  a  physician,  it  is  also  possible  that  such  records  were  given  to  the
institution  where  he  or  she  attended  medical  school  rather  than  to  an  undergraduate
school  (and  then  to  the  medical  school,  rather  than  to  the  university  itself).  In  either  case,
it  is  unlikely  that  actual  patient  records  would  be  included  in  an  institution's  archives.
Many  retiring  physicians  offer  former  patients  (or  their  successor  physicians)  their  files
or  may  destroy  these  records  if  the  patients  cannot  be  reached.

As  reported  to  the  Advisory  Committee,  in  some  cases  (see  part  II  of  this  appendix)
federal  agencies  will  help  citizens  locate  or  retrieve  records  that  were  created  or  are  held
by  nongovernment  organizations  or  individuals.

PART  IV:  USING  THE  ACHRE  COLLECTION  AS  A  PLACE
TO  START

What  Is  in  the  Collection  and  What  Is  Not

The  ACHRE  research  collection,  which  will  be  deposited  in  its  entirety  at  the  National
Archives  as  part  of  Record  Group  220,  Presidential  Committees,  Commissions,  and
Boards,30  is  composed  primarily  of  documents  identified  through  agency  search  processes
or  selected  by  the  Advisory  Committee  through  requests  or  site  visits  to  forty-five
nonfederal  as  well  as  federal  institutions.  These  efforts  have  not  exhausted  all  research
possibilities,  but  the  volume  of  materials  now  identified  and  available  to  the  public  is
very  large.  The  Advisory  Committee  has  not  attempted  to  collect  everything  that  might
be  pertinent,  but  has  emphasized  primary  materials  of  wide  importance.  The  resulting
collection  is  rich  in  its  breadth  and  variety,  but  frequently  limited  in  the  depth  to  which
individual  events  or  people  are  documented.  Most  records  in  the  collection  do  not
contain  information  about  the  individual  subjects  of  human  radiation  experiments.

ACHRE  records  can  make  two  significant  contributions  to  the  efforts  of  the  individual
researcher.  First,  there  is  no  other  collection  in  which  pertinent  materials  from  so  many
different  sources  are  available  in  a  scholarly  arrangement  with  a  substantial  finding  aid.
Second,  the  collection  deposited  with  the  National  Archives  also  includes  the  Advisory
Committee's  own  research  documents,  including  substantial  unpublished  notes,  histories,
analyses,  and  findings.  The  comprehensiveness  of  the  collection  and  the  added  value  of'
the  Advisory  Committee's  scholarship  make  the  ACHRE  records  a  good  starting  point  for
citizens  researching  the  public  and  private  histories  of  human  radiation  experiments.

Experiments

The  Advisory  Committee's  general  charge  was  to  provide  advice  on  the  character  of
historical  and  present-day  policies  and  practices  in  human  radiation  research.  The  scope
of  such  activities  and  the  difficulty  in  identifying  and  retrieving  relevant  records  were
initially  underestimated,  but  agency  and  Advisory  Committee  staff  sought  out  and
documented  as  many  experiments  as  resources  permitted.  Two  points  should  be
emphasized  here.  First,  the  agencies  and  the  Advisory  Committee  collected  and  recorded
information  about  every  experiment  that  could  be  documented.  The  inclusion  of  an


919


Appendices

experiment  should  not  be  taken  as  an  indication  that  the  experiment  was  ethically
improper  or  likely  to  have  caused  harm  to  those  involved.

Second,  there  was  never  an  expectation  that  this  effort  would  succeed  in  assembling  a
complete  list  of  experiments  or  that  full  documentation  for  any  large  proportion  of  those
identified  could  be  discovered  and  retrieved  within  the  time  permitted.  The  Advisory
Committee's  research  interest  was  focused  on  understanding  the  scope  of  activity  (for
example,  the  number  and  types  of  subjects  typical  for  experiments  of  a  certain  character)
and  the  policy  context  (for  example,  institutional  procedures  for  the  review  of  informed
consent  practices),  than  on  accumulating  the  details  of  particular  cases.  As  a  result,
although  the  Advisory  Committee's  log  of  such  experiments  is  the  most  comprehensive
and  detailed  assembled  to  date,  the  records  of  particular  experiments  are  incomplete.
Many  experiments  are  documented  entirely  through  a  publication  of  results  and  many
others  are  documented  by  references  to  even  briefer  descriptions  of  experiments  in
records  reviewed  by  the  Interagency  Working  Group  or  ACHRE.

The  chief  value  of  the  Advisory  Committee's  experiment  record  series  is  in  providing
identifying  information  such  as  location,  dates,  and  researchers'  names— a  good  place  to
start.  The  experiment  records  are  indexed  by  location,  financial  sponsorship,  principal
investigator  (and  his  or  her  home  institution),  and  other  key  pieces  of  information  that
could  support  extended  research.  Such  information  may  be  used  to  find  additional
information  either  in  the  ACHRE  collection  or  elsewhere.

Finding  Aids

There  are  two  sets  of  finding  aids  for  the  Advisory  Committee's  records.  The  first  is
entitled  Sources  and  Documentation,  a  supplement  to  this  final  report.  The  two-volume
supplement  features  accounts  of  the  agency  and  ACHRE  research  processes,  descriptions
of  the  record  collections  assembled  by  the  Advisory  Committee  and  of  individual
documents  identified  as  significant,  a  complete  bibliography  of  the  published  sources
used  in  the  Advisory  Committee's  research,  brief  descriptions  of  individual  experiments,
lists  of  testifiers  and  interviewees,  indexes,  collections  of  documents,  and  other  research
aids.

The  second  aid  is  the  electronic  record  upon  which  much  of  the  supplemental  volume
is  based.  Unfortunately,  the  National  Archives  is  unable  to  make  this  information
available  in  its  original  format,  although  it  will  be  available  there  in  simplified  electronic
formats  with  explanatory  documentation.  Copies  of  the  original  databases,
documentation,  and  operating  instructions  will  be  available  at  the  National  Security
Archive,  an  independent  research  institute  whose  offices  are  in  the  Gelman  Library  at
George  Washington  University.31  In  addition  to  these  facilities,  both  the  National
Archives  and  the  National  Security  Archive  provide  access  to  the  electronic  records
contained  in  the  Advisory  Committee's  original  gopher.32  The  gopher  materials  include
electronic  copies  of  the  Advisory  Committee  meeting  documents  (briefing  books,
minutes,  and  transcripts),  condensed  descriptions  of  record  collections  and  experiments,
and  other  information.


920


A  Citizen 's  Guide


How  to  Go  From  the  ACHRE  Collection  to  Agency  Records


There  are  two  sources  of  information  that  connect  records  contained  in  the  ACHRE
collection  with  those  of  the  agencies  and  the  National  Archives.  The  first  are  document
identifiers  provided  by  the  agencies;  the  second  are  transmittal  records  that  identify  the
origins  of  the  records.

Agency  Document  Identifiers

Most  Department  of  Energy  and  a  large  proportion  of  Department  of  Defense
documents  are  marked  with  unique  identifiers  that  will  allow  location  of  those  documents
in  DOE  and  DOD  retrieval  systems.  Those  retrieval  systems  include  provenance
information,33  that  is,  information  that  identifies  the  record's  office  of  origin  and  other
information  about  its  creation  and  current  location.

DOE  documents  are  stamped  with  a  CIC  number,34  a  six-digit  accession  number  that
uniquely  identifies  a  document  or  document  set  (that  is,  documents  described  as  a  group
rather  than  individually)  that  can  be  used  to  retrieve  CIC  records  with  their  attendant
provenance  and  other  information  management  information.  DOE's  Internet  facility  can
be  used  to  identify  these  documents.  Information  is  also  available  directly  from  the  CIC,
which  also  provides  its  index  on  CD-ROM  using  Folio  Views  text  retrieval  software.

Beginning  in  the  fall  of  1994,  DOD  documents  supplied  to  the  Advisory  Committee
were  assigned  accession  numbers  by  the  Radiation  Experiments  Command  Center
(RECC).  These  numbers  denote  a  document's  origin  and  the  date  it  was  sent  to  ACHRE.
For  example,  records  bearing  numbers  beginning  "ARM"  originated  with  the  U.S.  Army.
Later  in  1994  the  RECC  began  to  assign  accession  numbers  retroactively  to  documents
transmitted  earlier.  These  accession  numbers  are  available  in  the  RECC  library  catalog,
which  was  converted  by  ACHRE  staff  and  is  available  among  the  Advisory  Committee's
records  in  both  hard  copy  and  electronic  formats.35

Records  of  Agency  Transmittal

Most  records  accessioned  into  the  ACHRE  collection  were  transmitted  or  deposited
with  documents  indicating  their  origins.  For  example,  materials  obtained  from  the
National  Archives  usually  have  notations  indicating  record  group,  series,  and  box
numbers;  agency  records  have  accompanying  documents  indicating  where  materials  were
obtained;  and  donations  from  individuals  include  such  information  as  the  address  of  the
donor.  This  information  is  collected  in  a  ACHRE  Records  Management  Series,  Records
Accession  and  Disposition  File.  Summaries  of  this  information  are  included  in  the
electronic  records  kept  in  the  Document  Collection  database.  Additional  information
concerning  specially  requested  information  is  contained  in  the  Agency  Data  Requests
records  file,  which  includes  the  Agency  Data  Requests  Tracking  database.


921


ENDNOTES


1 .  There  are  intersections,  naturally,  as  in  contracts  and  grants,  applications  and
responses,  and  so  forth,  but  program  history  is  not  constituted  of  cumulative  accounts  of
individual  program  experiences  but,  rather,  summary  accounts  of  overall  program
performance.

2.  The  scientific  records  of  an  experiment  contain  various  medical  facts  about
an  individual  subject,  but  generally  only  information  pertinent  to  the  conduct  of  the
experiment  and  not  the  subject's  medical  history.  The  complete  records  of  an  experiment
may  include  the  medical  records,  but  they  will  be  handled  separately  from  the  scientific
records.  This  may  or  may  not  mean  that  the  medical  records  and  the  scientific  records  are
the  responsibility  of  different  individuals  and  are  stored  in  different  places;  it  will
certainly  mean  that  they  are  created,  controlled,  and  preserved  under  different  guidelines.

3.  For  example,  Sources  and  Documentation  describes  the  contents  and
classifications  of  the  record  groups  and  entries  examined  at  the  various  National  Archives
facilities,  the  record  groups  and  accessions  reviewed  at  the  various  federal  records
centers,  and  the  record  collections  examined  at  various  agency  record  storage  facilities,
history  offices,  and  other  locations.

4.  Department  of  Energy,  Office  of  Human  Radiation  Experiments,  Human
Radiation  Experiments:  The  Department  of  Energy  Roadmap  to  the  Story  and  the
Records  (Washington,  D.C.:  Department  of  Energy,  February  1995).  For  ordering
information,  write:  U.S.  Department  of  Commerce,  Technology  Administration,
National  Technical  Information  Service,  Springfield,  Virginia  22161;  or  telephone:  703-
487-4650.

5.  Although  the  National  Archives  and  Records  Administration  (NARA)  system
includes  records  of  the  judicial  and  legislative  branches  of  the  federal  government,  most
citizen  researchers  are  looking  for  records  created  by  agencies  of  the  executive  branch,
and  so  the  following  information  is  generally  limited  to  those  records.  A  brief  discussion
of  judicial  and  legislative  records  is  included  in  Sources  and  Documentation.

6.  Because  the  National  Archives  was  not  established  until  1934  and  the  records
centers  only  came  into  existence  in  1950,  there  are  some  instances  where  the  records  of
federal  officials  and  agencies  are  outside  the  "physical  control"  of  the  government.  Also,
unfortunately,  no  general  rule  can  be  applied  to  contractor  records.  The  handling  of  the
records  of  contract  work  is  controlled  by  the  terms  of  the  contract,  which  may  require
anything  from  deposit  of  complete  records  with  the  contracting  agency  to  complete
retention  of  all  records  by  the  contractor.  The  citizen  will  need  to  research  such
situations  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  Agency  records  should  include  copies  of  the  contract
or  grant  instruments,  however,  and  research  should  begin  with  those.

7.  Provenance  refers  to  the  origin,  creation,  and  ownership  (or  chain  of  custody)
of  records  or  other  items.

8.  A  folder  listing  is  a  list  of  the  titles  of  the  file  folders  (that  is,  what  is  on  their
labels)  that  are  contained  in  the  shipment.  Because  it  reproduces  the  file  labels  more  or
less  exactly,  such  a  listing,  while  invaluable,  is  only  as  informative  as  the  labels.  SF-135s
are  unlikely  to  contain  information  on  individual  documents.

9.  The  most  practical  resource  is  A  Citizen's  Guide  on  Using  the  Freedom  of
Information  Act  and  the  Privacy  Act  of  1974  to  Request  Government  Records,  House
Report  104-156  (Washington,  D.C.:  GPO,  1995),  prepared  by  the  Committee  on


922


Government  Management,  Information,  and  Technology  of  the  House  of
Representatives.  Another  important  resource  (for  those  interested  in  the  administrative
and  legal  details)  is  the  annual  Department  of  Justice  publication  Freedom  of  Information
Act  Guide  &  Privacy  Act  Overview.  Both  volumes  are  available  from  the  U.S.
Government  Printing  Office,  Superintendent  of  Documents,  Mail  Stop:  SSOP,
Washington,  D.C.  20401-9328.  The  American  Civil  Liberties  Union  (ACLU)  also
publishes  an  annual  guide  to  FOIA  and  the  Privacy  Act;  for  information  call  (202)  544-
1681.

1 0.  These  sorts  of  records  are  subject  to  Privacy  Act  controls  whether  they  are
in  the  keeping  of  the  originating  agency  or  the  National  Archives.

1 1 .  This  is  an  area  in  which  there  is  not  agreement  among  the  agencies.  For
example,  the  Advisory  Committee  was  assured  by  one  agency  that  records  retrievable  by
the  names  of  principal  investigators  were  not  subject  to  the  Privacy  Act-after  all,
officials  said,  these  individuals  were  government  contractors  and  grantees  who  had  a
practical  relationship  with  the  federal  government  that  had  to  be  substantiated  by  reports
under  the  law.  Under  similar  circumstances,  however,  another  agency  provided  the
Advisory  Committee  with  information  that  it  said  could  not  be  made  public  because  it
had  been  retrieved  by  the  name  of  a  principal  investigator.

12.  The  act  uses  the  phrase  "any  person,"  so  that  inquiry  is  not  restricted  to  U.S.
citizens.

13.  "There  are  three  basic  elements  to  a  FOIA  request  letter.  First,  the  letter
should  state  that  the  request  is  being  made  under  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act.
Second,  the  request  should  identify  the  records  that  are  being  sought  as  specifically  as
possible.  Third,  the  name  and  address  of  the  requester  must  be  included."  A  Citizen's
Guide  on  Using  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act,  8.

14.  The  Department  of  Justice's  Overview,  32  fn.  103,  cites  a  Federal  District
Court  decision:  "FOIA  creates  only  a  right  of  access  to  records,  not  a  right  to  personal
services."  Hudgins  v.  IRS,  620  F.Supp.  19,  21  (D.D.C.  1985),  affd,  808  F.2d  137  (D.C.
Cir.),  cert,  denied,  484  U.S.  803  (1987).

15.  The  agencies  concerned  with  human  radiation  experiments  have  provided
information  on  their  procedures  for  filing  FOIA  requests,  and  these  are  included  in  part  II
of  this  appendix.

1 6.  A  Citizen 's  Guide  on  Using  the  Freedom  of  Information  Act,  1 0,  should  be
consulted  on  how  fees  may  be  waived.

1 7.  The  effect  of  this  provision  is  potentially  highly  elastic  because,  under  the
act,  the  agency  may  lengthen  the  time  it  takes  to  provide  records  in  order  to  look  for  the
records,  search  through  the  records,  or  consult  with  another  agency  or  office.

18.  The  requirements  for  MDRs  under  Executive  Order  12958  are  very  similar
to  those  of  the  FOIA  described  in  the  previous  section,  and  accordingly,  there  is  no
separate  discussion  of  this  alternative  procedure.  Among  the  few  differences  are  that
only  U.S.  citizens  may  file  MDRs,  and  that  if  there  is  a  denial  of  an  MDR  in  whole  or  in
part  there  is  a  right  to  an  administrative  appeal,  but  no  right  of  judicial  redress.

1 9.  The  U.S.  Government  Manual,  published  annually  as  a  special  edition  of  the
Federal  Register,  is  available  by  writing:  Superintendent  of  Public  Documents,  P.O.  Box
317954,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania  15250-7954;  telephone  (202)  783-3238.

20.  A  FOIA  reading  room  is  a  publicly  accessible  facility  that  houses
information  that  has  been  released  to  the  public  by  the  agency,  either  voluntarily  or  as  a
result  of  a  citizen's  FOIA  request.  Almost  without  exception,  however,  these  repositories


923


contain  only  a  small  fraction  of  the  records  that  have  been  released  over  the  years.  FOIA
reading  rooms  are  generally  managed  and  staffed  by  the  agency  library.  But  access  to
agency  libraries  varies,  and  many  agencies  do  not  have  FOIA  reading  rooms.  Most
agencies,  however,  have  an  office  of  public  affairs  that  may  be  contacted  for  general
information  about  the  agency  and  its  programs.  An  agency's  FOIA  office  handles  all
FOIA  requests  and  is  the  primary  source  of  information  about  the  agency's  FOIA
procedures.

2 1 .  CIC  is  a  records  center  operated  by  the  Reynolds  Electrical  &  Engineering
Co.,  under  contract  with  DOE.  Reynolds's  address  is  P.O.  Box  98521,  Las  Vegas,
Nevada  89 1 93-852 1 .  The  CIC  is  the  major  source  of  the  documents  made  available  by
DOE  through  the  Internet  and  provides  reference  services  and  copies  of  documents  to
help  the  public.

22.  Some  records  transferred  to  the  St.  Louis  facility  were  destroyed  in  a  fire  in
1973.

23.  The  World  Wide  Web  is  a  network  of  Internet  sites  using  graphical  and
hypertext  formats  permitting  access  to  images  and  linking  distant  and  diverse  information
sources.

24.  Department  of  Energy,  Assistant  Secretary  for  Environment,  Safety  and
Health,  Human  Radiation  Experiments  Associated  with  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy
and  Its  Predecessors  (Washington,  D.C.:  U.S.  Department  of  Energy,  July  1995).

25.  Some  records  transferred  to  the  St.  Louis  facility  were  destroyed  in  a  fire  in
1973.

26.  The  operations  of  the  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services  (DHHS)
are  diverse  and  decentralized  and  include  several  large  components,  such  as  the  Food  and
Drug  Administration  (FDA),  the  Public  Health  Service  (PHS),  and  the  National  Institutes
of  Health  (NIH),  which  are  so  well  known  that  they  sometimes  may  appear  to  be
independent.  PHS  is  one  of  the  major  subdivisions  of  the  department;  FDA  and  NIH  are
components  of  PHS.

27.  The  "institutes"  that  make  up  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  are  organized
around  medical  specialties  such  as  cancer  and  mental  health,  and  physiological  topics
such  as  the  heart  and  the  kidneys.  They  are  based  in  Bethesda,  Maryland.

28.  The  Common  Rule  governing  human  experimentation  in  most  federal
government  agencies  uses  this  phrase.  See  56  Fed.  Reg.  28,012  (1991)  (§  101  [a]).

29.  Some  reference  books  that  might  be  useful:  (1)  Directory  of  Physicians  in
the  United  States,  issued  by  the  American  Medical  Association;  (2)  Official  ABCS
Director}'  of  Board  Certified  Medical  Specialists,  issued  by  the  American  Board  of
Medical  Specialties;  (3)  The  World  of  Learning,  which  contains  entries  for  major
universities  that  include  medical  center  faculty  lists  and  addresses;  and  (4)  Directory  of
U.S.  Hospitals,  published  by  Health  Care  Investment  Analysts,  Inc.

30.  These  records  will  be  available  at  the  National  Archives  in  late  1995.

31.  The  National  Security  Archive,  Gelman  Library,  Suite  70 1 ,  2 1 30  H  Street,
N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.  20037;  telephone,  202-994-7000;  fax,  202-994-7005;  e-mail,
archive@cap.gwu.edu.

32.  A  gopher  is  a  software  application  that  provides  menu-driven  access  to
electronic  files,  frequently  over  the  Internet.  The  Advisory  Committee  maintained  both
a  gopher  and  a  World  Wide  Web  home  page.

33.  For  additional  information  on  provenance,  see  the  section  on  the  National
Archives  in  part  I.


924


34.  CIC  numbers  are  assigned  by  the  Coordination  and  Information  Center.
The  CIC  document  number  identifies  the  records  series  in  which  a  document  is  indexed.
The  records  of  concern  to  the  Advisory  Committee  are  primarily  from  the  human
radiation  series,  which  uses  numbers  700,000-799,999.  Other  series  cover  such  related
topics  as  Enewetak  Atoll,  fallout,  and  Glenn  T.  Seaborg.

35.  Hard  copy  format  is  available  in  the  transmittal  documents  (see  next
section).


925


N


• LIBRARY

1H

JJr Amazing  Research.
Amazing  Help.


http://nihlibrary.nih.gov


10  Center  Drive

Bethesda,  MD  20892-1150

301-496-1080


3  1496  00681  6410
