INTRODUCTION


TO   THE


SCIENCE


INTRODUCTION


TO   THE


SCIENCE    OF    RELIG

FOUR,  LECTURES

DELIVERED   AT   THE  ROYAL  INSTITUI
IN   FEBRUARY   AND  MAY,  1870.

"BY

P,    MAX     MtTLLEB,    M.J*

Fortfffn  Member  &  the  French  Institute,  ttc.
ISTew  'Edition.

SSMPBft,    QU^^B    OMN2St||C


LONGMAN^    GBEEN,    AND    <3t>

1882.


OXFORD:

BY  X,  HOKABD  BALL,  M.A.,  AND  J.  H.  STACT,
FBINKEBS  TO  THE  U^lVJUtSITY.


CONTENTS.

ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RELIGION: —

Lecture  I

Lecture  II *

Lecture  HI 52

Lecture  IV 83

145

AND  ILLUSTBATIONS  : —

The  Emperor  AH>ar

The  Languages  of  Africa       .        .  2°9

Tedic  Literature    ....  236

Polynesian  Mytholog7     .        .        .  z^

The  Chinese  name  for  God      .       *  24§

Mythology  of  the  Hottentots  ,        ,

The  Sacred  Books  of  the  East      .  2>?6

Index 2^8


PREFACE,

THESE  Lectur&,  intended  as  an  introduction  to  a
comparative  study  of  the  principal  religions  of  the
worid4  were  delivered  at  the  Boyal  Institution  in
London,  in  February  tod  March  1870,  and  printed
in  Fraser's  Magazine  of  February,  March,  April,  and
May  of  the  same  year.  I  declined  at  that  time  to
publish  them  in  a  s'Sparate  form,  hoping  that  I  might
find  leisure  n  to  wOrk  up  more  fully  the  materials
whicify  I  had  collected  for  many  years.  I  thought
that  I  should  thus  be  enabled  to  make  these  lectures
more  instructive  and  more  complete,  and  at  the  same
time  meet  several  objections  that  had  been  raised  by
some  critics  against  the  very  possibility  of  a  scientific
study  of  religions,  and  against  the  "views  which  I
ventured  to  put  forward  on  the  origin,  the  growth,
and  the  real  yalue  of  the  ancient  systems  ol  faith,
elaborated  by  different  branches  of  the  human  mee.
A  small  edition  only  of  these  'lectures  wad  printed
privately,  and  sent  to  some  of  my  frienda,  whose
remarks  4iave  proved  in  man$  cases  most  valuable
and  instructive.

If  now  I  have  decKled  oa.  republishing  these  Lec-
tures, I  have  done  so  because  I  fear  that  as  during
the  three  years  that  have  elapsed  since  their  delivery,


VOX  PREFACE.

so  again  during  the  years  to  come  I  shall  find "  little
lefeure  fo*  thesu  researches*  *  I  have  just  finished  a
new -edition  of  the  test  of  the  Kig-veda,  ami  I  now
feef^ bound  to  print* the  lasi*  vdlurae  of  iffy  large
edition  of  the  Big-v«da  witB  the  commentary  of
S&yarza,  When  tha*  is  done,  Ihe  translation  of  the
hymrta  of  the  Big-veda,  of  wlfich  \he  first  volume
was  published  in  1869,  mil  h&ve  te  be  continued,
and  I  see  but  little  chance  tnat,  with  these  .tasks
before  me,  I  shall  be  able  to  devote  much  time  to  my
favourite  study-  of  ancient  language,  mythology,  and
religion.

I  should  gladly  have  left  these  Lectures  to  their
ephemeral  fate;  but  as  they  hav8  beeiurepublished
in  America,  and  translated  in  France  and  Italy  /they
have  become  the  subject  of  friendly  and  unfriendly
remarks  in  several  works  on  Comparative  Theology.
A  German  translation  also  being  on  the  eve  of  pub-  j
lication,  I  at  last  determined  to  publish  them  in  their
original  form,  find  to  rendej  them  at  least  as  perfect
as  I  could  at  the  present  moment.  The  Lectures
as  now  printed,  contain  considerable  portions  which
were  written  in  1870,  but  had  to  be  left  out  in  the
course  of  delivery,  and  therefore  also  in  Fraser's
Magazine.  I  have  inserted  such  corrections  and  sup-
plementary notes  as  I  had  made  from  timfc  to  time
in  the  course  of  my  reading,  and  a  few  remarks  were
added  at  the  last  moment,  whifet  seeing  these  sheets
through  the  Press.
For  more  complete  information  on  many


PREFACE.  IX

touched  upon  in  these  L»etjires,  I  must  refar  my
reader?  to  my  Essays  w^  tfc$  Scieitfg  of»"Religi<mJ
and  the  Essays  on  Mythology *  Traditions  and  .Cus-
toms, published  in  9863  «nder  tfie  title  of»'Chiptf  ^x>m
a  Girma|i  Workshop^,

The  literature  -of  Cdfcaparative  .-Theology  is  growing
rapidly,  particularly  Jh  Aratajea.  The  works  of  JSames
F.  Clarke,  Sanwiel  Johnson,  O.  B.  Frothingham,  the
lectures  of  T.  W.  Higgbison,  W.  C.  Gannett,  and  J.  W.
Chadwick,  the  philosophical  pa$>ers  by  F.  E.  Abbota
all  show  tiiat  the  New  World,  in*  spite  of  all  its  pre-
occupations, has  not  ceased  to  feel  at  one  with  the
Old  World;  all  tofer  witness  to  a  deep  conviction
that  the  st^dy  of*  the  ancient  religions  of  mankind
will  ^Lot  remain  without  momentous  practical  results.
'That  study,  I  feel  convinced,  if  carried  on  in  a  bold,
but  scholar-like,  careful,  and  reverent  spirit,  will
remove  many  doubts  and  difficulties  which  are  due
entirely  to  the  narrowness  of  our  religious  horizon;
it  will  enlarge  our  sympathies,  it  ^rill  raise  our
thoughts  above  the  small  controversies  of  the  day,
and  at  no  dis^nt  future  evoke  in  the  very  heart  of
Christianity  a  fresh  spirit,  and  a  new  life.

F.MLM.
OXPOED,  May  is,  1873*

1  Since  reputti&ed  with  ad&tona  in  'Selected  Essays,*  a  vols.
1881.


DEDICATED

TO    RALPH  WALDO    EMERSON

IN  MEMORY  OF  HIS  VISIT  TO  OXFORD

IN  MAY,  MDCCCLXXIII,
AftD  IN  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  OF  CONSTANT  REFRESHME1

OF  HEAD  AND  HEART

DERIVED  FROM  HIS  WRITINGS

DURING  THE  LAST  TWENTY-FIVE  YEARS,


LECTUEE.


DELIVERED  AT  JTHE  ROYAL  INSTITUTION",
Ip,  1870.


WHEN  I  Undertook  for  the  first  time  to  deliver
a  course  of  lectures  in  this  Institution,  I  chose
for  my  subject  the  Sciefice  of  Language.  What  I  then
had  at  heart  was  to  show  to  you,  and  to  the  woi'ld  at
large,  that  the  comparative  study  of  the  principal
languages  of  mankind  was  based  on  sound  and  truly
scientific  principles^  and  that  it  had  brought  to  light
results  whict  deserved  a  larger  share  of  public  interest
than*they  had  as  yet  received.  I  tried  to  convince
not  only  scholars  by  profession,  but  historians,  theo-
logians, and  philosophers,  nay  everybody  who  had
once  felt  the  charm  of  gazing  inwardly  upon  the
secret  workings  of  his  own  mind,  veiled  and  revealed
as  they  are  in  the  flowing  folds  of  language,  that  the
discoveries  made  by  comparative  philologists  could  no
longer  be  ignored  with  impunity;  and  I  submitted
that  after  the  progress  achieved  in  a  scientific  study
of  the  principal  branches  of  the  vast  realm  of  human
speech,  our  new  science,  the  Science  of  Language,
might  claim  by  right  its  seat  at  the  Bound-table  of
the  intellectual  chivalry  of  our  ftge,

Such  was  the  goodness  01  the  cause  I  haft  then  to
defend  that,  however  imperfect  my  own  pleading,  the
verdict  of  the  public  has  been  immediate  and  almost
unanimous.  During  the  yeara  that  have  elapsed  since

B


2  LECTURES  ON  THE   SCIENCE  »0:F  BELIGIOtf,

the  deliv^ujr  of  my  first  course  of  lectures,  the  Science
of  Language  has  Lad  its  Ml  share  of  public  recog-
nition Whether  we»  look  at  the  number  *of  books
that  have  been  published  for  tha  a$vaneen*3nt  and
elucidation  of  our  scienee3  or.at  the  excellent  arti-
cles in  the  daily,  weekly,  forfcaightly,  monthly,  and
quarterly  reviews,  or  at  the  fi^que^t  notices  of  its
results*  scattered  about  in  works  on  philosophy,
theology,  and  ancient  history,  we  "may  well  rest
satisfied.  The  example  set  by  France  and  Gej'rcmny
in  founding  chairs  of  Sanskrit  and  Comparative  Phi*
lology,  has  been  followed  of  late  in  nearly  all  tho
universities  of  England,  Ireland,  and  Scotland.  We
need  not  fear  for  the  future  of  the  Science  of  Language*
A  career  so  auspiciously  begun,  Jta  spite  of  strong
prejudices  that  had  to  be  encountered,  Vill  lead  on
from  year  to  year  to  greater  triumphs.  Out  best
public  schools,  if  they  have  not  done  so  already,  will
soon  have  to  follow  the  example  set  by  tho  uni-
versities* It  is  but  fair  that  nchoolboyB  who  arc  made
to  devote  so  many  hours  every  day  to  the  laborious
acquisition  of*  languages,  should  now  and  thon  IKS
taken  by  a  safe  guide  to  efijoy  from  a  higher  point  of
view  that  living  panorama  of  human  speech  which
has  been  surveyed  and  carefully  napped  out  by
patient  explorers  and  bold  discoverers :  nor  is  there
any  longer  an  excuse  why,  even  in  tho  most  ele-
mentary lessons,  nay  I  should  aay,  why  more  par-
ticularly in  theae  elelnentary  lessons,  the*dark  and
dreary  passages  of  Greek  and  Latin,  of  French  and
Gorman,  grammar,  should  not  Jbe  brightened  by  the
electric  light  of  Comparative  Philology.
When  last  year  I  travelled  in  Germany  I  found


LECTURE  I.  SL

that  lectures  on  Comparative  Philology  Wc«o  attended
in  the  universities  by  nearly  all  who  Btftdy  fireek  and
Latin.  At  Leipzig  there  were  Jmndreds  of  ntti/lents
who  crrftoded  the  Tecticre  room  of  the  Profi!Ms<#»  of
Comparajiive  Philolog/,  and  tfce  classes  of  the  Pro-
fessor of  Sanskrit  conn&ted  of  more  than  fifty  uitdi?r-
graduates,  most*x>f  them  wishing  to  acquire  *thafc
amount  of  knowledge  *of  Sanskrit  which  is  absolutely
necessary  before  entering  upon  a  study  of  Com-
paratire  Grammar.

The  introduction  of  Greek  into  the  imiverHiUcs  of
Europe  in  the  fifteenth  century  could  hardly  have
caused  a  greater  revolution  than  the  discovery  of
Sanskrit  and  the  study  of  Comparative)  Philology  in
the  nineteenth.  Very  few  indeed  now  take  their
degree  of  Master  of  Arts  in  Germany  or  would  bo
allowed  to  teach  at  a  public  nchciol,  without  having
been  examined  in  the  principle**  of  Comparative
Philology,  nay  in  the  elements  of  Sanskrit  grammar,
Why  should  it  be  different  in  England?  Th0  in-
tellectual fibre,  I  know,  is  not  different  in  the  youth
of  England  and  in  the  youth  of  Germany,  and  if  there
is  but  a  fair  field  and  no  favour,  Comparative*  Philology,
I  feel  convince^  will  noon  hold  in  Kngland  too,  that
place  which  it  ought  to  hold  at  overy  public  school,  in
every  university,  and  in  every  classical  examination  *«

In  beginning  to-day  a  courae  of  lectures  on  the

*  Sinoe  thi8*wuB  written,  CompitrMivo  Ailology  hftft  beta  admitted
to  its  rightful  place  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  In  th«  fiiwi  Pobtto
Examination  candidate*  for  Honour*  in  Gr«k  or  L*tia  LiWhitaiw  wtt4
be  oxfttnined  in  th*  elenientu  <ff  Comparative  Philology  M  iliu*far*tlag
the  Greek  and  Latin  Ungu*g«,  In  th»  flnul  Pnbllo


Comp*rative  Philology  will  form  *  sp«l*l  subject,  by  tfaa  tide  rtf  th«

hittory  of  Ancient  Literature.

B  a


4  LECTUEE3   OK  THE  SCIENCE  JF  KELIGION.


e  crflteliffion,  —  or  I  should  rather  say  on  some
preliminary  points  that  have  to  he  settled  before  we
can  enter  upon  a  truly  scientific  study  of  the*  religions
of  tfio  world,  —  I  feel  as  I  felt*  whfcn  «first  pleading  in
this  very  place  for  th«>Bcience*of  Language.

I  know  that  I  shall  have  to  meet  determined  an-
tagonists who  will  deny  the  Tory*  possibility  of  a
Hcientitic  treatment  of  religions,  as  formerly  they
denied  the  possibility  of  a  ^cientifTe  treatment  of
languages.  I  fores*  to  even  far  more  serious  conflicts
with  familiar  prejudices  and  <loi»p-rooted  convictions;
but  1  feel  at  the  same  time  that  i  am  prepared  to
moot  my  antagonists,  and  I  have  such  faith  in  their
honesty  and  love  of  truth,  that  I  doubt  not  of  a
patii-rifc  nml  impartial  hearing  out  their  part,  and  of
a  vonlicfc  itittminctul  by  nothing  but  by*  the  evidence
that  I  shall  have  to  place  before  them,

In  these  our  days  it  i«  almost  impossible  to  speak
of  ruligioa  at  all,  without  giving  offunoo  either  on  the
right  or  on  tin1,  loft,  With  nowu,  religion  mutinM  too
Haeruil  a  subject  for  scientific  tri*atitiunt;  with  others
it  stands  on  fi  lovoi  with  §lchotny  and  astrology,  as  a
mere  tissue  of  errors  or  haluci  nations,  far  beneath  tho
notice  of  the  man  of  science,

In  a  certain  sonso,  I  accept  both  tnese  views,  R$*
ligion  is  a  sacred  subject,  and  whether  in  its  most
perfect  or  in  its  most  imperfect  fonn(  it  has  a  right  to
our  highest  reverence.  In  this  respect  we  might  learn
something  from  those  whpm  we  are  so  ready  to  teach.
I  quote  .from  tho  *  Declaration  of  Principles'  by  which
the  church  founded  by  Keshufe  Chuader  Sen  professes
to  be  guided,  After  stating  that  no  created  object
ahali  ever  be  worshipped,  nor  any  man  or  inferior  being


LECTURE  I.  5

or  material  object  be  treated  as  identical  ^ijb  God,  or
like  unto  God,  or  as  an  'incarnation  o£  God*  and  tltat
no  prayer  or  hymn  shall  be  sai$  unto  or  In  the  <name
of  any  one  except  Ood^the  declaration  continues :«

'No  created  being  $r  object  that  has  been  or^ay
hereafte?  be  worshipp^i  liy  any  sect  shall  be  ridiculed
or  contemned  injhe  Bourse  of  the"  divine  service  to  be
conducted  here.

'No  book  shall  be  acknowledged  or  received  as  the
infallible  Word  of  Go3 ;  yet  no  book  which  has  been
or  may  hereafter  be  acknowledged  by  any  sect  to  be
infallible  shall  be  ridiculed  or  contemned.'

*  No  sect  shall  be  vilified,  ridiculed,  or  hated.*

It  might  bo  thought,  perhaps,  that  these  broad
sentiments  of  religious  toleration  were  borrowed  by
Keshub  Chflnder  Sen,  or  rather  by  the  founder  of
the  Brahma-Sam&j,  Eammohun  Boy,  from  Christian
writers.  That  may  bo  so.  But  they  need  not  have
gono  to  Europe  for  these  truly  Christian  principles.
They  might  have  found  them  inscribed  on  the  very
rocks  of  India,  placed  there  more  than  2000  ye(ars
ago  by  Aaoka,  who  ruled  from  259  to  sm  B,c.
Aaoka,  who  had  left  thfc  old  Vedic  religion,  and
had  embraced  the  essential  principles  of  Buddha's
teaching,  says"in  ono  of  bin  Edicts:  'Tho  King  Pi-
yadaei  wishes  that  all  sects  should  dwell  everywhere
(unmolested);  for  all  of  them  approve  of  restraint  (of
the  sonsos)  and  purification  of  the  soul,'  And  again,
6  The  Kinjf  Piyadasi  honours  all  sects,  monks  and:  house-
holders; he  honours  them*  by  liberality  and  various
kinds  of  favours. .  *  *  But  there  is  a  fundamental  law
for  every  sect,  namely  moderation  in  speech,  that  one
should  not  exalt  one's  own  sect  in  decrying  others,


6  LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE. OF  BELIGIGN,

and  not  depreciate  them  lightly,  but  that  one  ought  on
tbe  contrary  to^how  always^to  other  sects  the  honour
due  £o  them.  In  th$  manner  one  exalts  one's  own
se<$,  and  benefits  others,  while  in  Acting  otherwise  ono
injiftes  one's  own  sect,  and  cfges  not  benefit  others,
He  who  exalts  his  own  sect  agd  decries  otfeers,  cloes
It  from  devotion  toliis  own  sect  in  order  to  make  it
illustrious,  but  really  in  acting  thus  he  only  damages
his  own  sect.  Therefore  peace  'alone  cs  good,  so  that
all  should  hear  and  listen  glailly  to  the  opinion  of
others  V

The  Students  of  the  Science  of  Religion  snouui
at  all  events  endeavour  not  to  be  outdone  in  impar-
tiality by  this  ancient  king.  Apd,  as  for  myself,  I
can  promise  that  no  ono  who  attends  these  lectures,
be  he  Chrintian  or  Jew,  Hindu  or  iWohanmiGdan,  shall
hear  his  own  way  of  serving  God  spoken  of  irreve-
rently'•*„  But  true  reverence  does  not  consist  in  de-
claring a  subject,  because  it  is  dear  to  us,  to  bo  unfit
for  free  and  honest  inquiry:  far  from  itt  Truo  reve-
rence IH  shown  in  treating  ovrry  subject,  howewr
sacred,  however  dear  to  u»,  with  jwrfnct  confidence;
without  fear  and  without  favour;  with  tenderness  and
love>  by  all  moans,  kit,  before  all,  with  an  unflinching
and  uncompromising  loyalty  to  truth,  •

On  the  other  hand,  I  fully  admit  that  roligion  ban

1  *Le«  TfutcriptionB  <fo  rfyatburi,'  par  K,  Hetmrt,  1881,  p,  174$
8epttt<me  Kdit;  p.  349,  DoussJl»m«  Kclit.

9  My  fttttmtinn  haw  \mm  direc-teil  to  &  cunoun  ln^»7io«  of  reni
AtaviMin,  My  great  grand •fnibm*,  BA«e<low,  tlie  founder  of  the  PMtttn-
thr(ij>innm,B,t  DeHSfin,  wrote  Rlnifmt  { of  idem  rertn»  '  that  in  the  gen«rftl
divine  wervico  at  hin  achmil  nothing  Hh^ihl  happen  by  wont  or  Awd,
oouU  iwi  be  approval  i»f  by  every  wnrfthipptr  of  Ood,  be  h*
J«w,  Moliamfnodan,  w  PeiHt/  H«e  '  Aroliiv  fur  Leben*bo-
/  p.  63;  Kftuiuer, '  Gusolm-hto  der  Padagogik/  ii.  p.  374.


LECTUEE  I.  7

stood"  in  former  ages,  and  stands  also  in  ojir  own  age,
if  we  look  abroad,  and«if  we  look  iafco  some  of  the
highest  and  some  of  the  lowest  places  af  home,  on  a
level  with  alchepiy^nd  astrology.  There  exist  supeKati*
tions,  little  short  of  fet^hism ;  and,  what  is  worse,  %ere
exists  hypocrisy,  as  ba/jl  as  tha£of  the  Roman  augurs*

In  practical  Jife  it  would  bo  wrong  to  assume  a
neutral  position  between  such  conflicting^  views.
Where  wo  see*  that  the  reverence  due  to  religion  5s
violated,  we  are  bound  to  protest;  where  we  see  that
superstition  saps  the  roots  of  faith,  and  hypocrisy
poisons  the  springs  of  morality,  we  must  take  sides.
But  as  students  of  the  Science  of  Religion  we  move
in  a  higher  and  mere  serene  atmosphere.  We  study
error,  as  the  physiologist  studios  a  disease,  looking  for
its  causes,  tracing  its  influence,  speculating  on  possible
remedies  of  this  l«/wte  i/o5<ro?,  but  leaving  the  applica-
tion of  such  remedies  to  a  different  class  of  men,  to
the  surgeon  and  the  practical  physician.  Dwer&oa
diver&a  jtwant  applies  here  as  everywhere  else,  and  a
division  of  labour,  according  to  the  peculiar  abilities
and  tastes  of  different  individuals,  will  always  yield
tho  best  results.  The  stftdont  of  the  history  of  the
physical  sciencoB  is  not  angry  with  tho  alchemists,
nor  docs  ho  arguo  with  tho  astrologies :  ho  rather
tries  to  enter  into  their  view  of  things,  and  to  dis-
cover in  the  errors  of  alchemy  the  seeds  of  chemistry,
and  in  the  halucinations  of  astrology  a  yearning  and
groping  after  a  true  knowledge  of  the  heavenly  bodies.
It  is  the  same  with  the  "student  of  the  Science  of
Religion.  He  wantg,  to  find  out  what  Religion  is,
what  foundation  it  has  in  the  soul  of  man,  and  what
laws  it  follows  in  its  historical  growth,  For  that


8  LEtfTTOES  Off  THE  SCIENCE  »0ff  BELIQION.

purpose  th§  study  of  errors  is  to  him  more  instructive
than  the  ^tudy.  of  that  religion  which  he  considers
the  ijrue  on£,  and  the^smiling  augur  as  interesting  a
subjject  as  the  Boman  suppliant  wl^o*veiled  his,  face  in
pray%r,-that  he  might  be  alone*with  his  God.

The  very  title  of  the*  Science^of  Keligion  w*ll  jar,  I
know,  on  the  ears  of  many  persons,  and  a  comparison
of  alF  the  religions  of  the  world,  in  which  none  can
claim  a  privileged  position,  will  no  doubt  seem  to
many  dangerous  and  reprehensible1,  because  ignoring
that  peculiar  reverence  which  everybody,  down  to  the
mere  fetish  worshipper,  feels  for  his  (nun  religion  and
for  his  own  God.  Let  me  say  then  at  once  that  I
myself  have  shared  these  misgivings,  but  that  I  have
tried  to  overcome  them,  because  I  would  not  and
could  not  allow  myself  to  surrender*eitherwhat  I  hold
to  be  the  truth,  or  what  I  hold  still  dearer  tha»*  the
truth,  the  right  of  testing  truth.  Nor  do  I  regret  it.
I  do  not  say  that  the  Science  of  Religion  is  all  gain.
No,  it  entails  losses,  and  losses  of  many  things  which
we  hold  dear.  But  this  I  will  say,  that,  as  far  as  my
humble  judgment  goes,  it  does  not  entail  the  loss  of
anything  that  is  essential  to  true  religion,  and  that
if  we  strike  the  balance  honestly,  the  gain  'is  im-
measurably greater  than  the  loss.

One  of  the  first  questions  that  was  asked  by  classical
scholars  when  invited  to  consider  the  value  of  the
Science  of  Language,  was,  'What  shall  we  gain  by  a
comparative  study  of  languages  V  Language*,  it  was
said,  are  wanted  for  practidal  purposes,  for  speaking

1  <Tbe  so-called  "Science of  Religion"  Sf  the  present  day,  with  its
attempts  to  put  into  competition  the  sacred  books  of  India  and  the
Holy  Scnptrcures,  is  deeply  to  be  deprecated.'  Bishop  of  Gloucester*


LECTURE  I.


and  ifeading ;  and  by  studying  too  many  languages  au
once,  we  run  the  risk  of  losing  the  firm  g^asp  which
we  ought  to  have  on  the  few  th%t  are  really  important.
Our  kfcowledge^  *ljy  becoming  wider,  must  needg,  it
was  thought,  become  $iallower,  and  the  gain,  if  $here
is  any,*in  knowing  £he  structure  of  dialects  which
havfe  never  pr$duce,d  any  literature  at  all,  would
certainly  be  outweighed  by  the  loss  in  accurate  and
practical  scholarship.*

if  jbhis  could  be  said  of  a  comparative  study  of
languages,  with  how  much  greater  force  will  it  be
urged  against  a  comparative  study  of  religions!
Though  I  do  not  expect  that  those  who  study « the
religious  books  of  *Brahmans  and  Buddhists,  of  Con-
fucius and  Laotse,jpf  Mohammed  and  Nanak,  will  be
accused  of  Cherishing  in  their  secret  heart  the  doc*
trinen  of  those  ancient  masters,  or  of  having  lost  the
firm  hold  on  their  own  religious  convictions,  yet  I
doubt  whether  the  practical  utility  of  wider  studies
in  the  vast  field  of  the  religions  of  the  world  will  be
admitted  with  greater  readiness  by  professed  theo-
logians than  the  value  of  a  knowledge  of  Sanskrit,
Zend,  Gothic,  or  Celtic  "for  a  thorough  mastery  of
Greek  and  Latin,  and  for  a  rettl  appreciation  of  the
nature,  the  purpose,  the  laws,  the  growth  and  decay  of
language  was  admitted,  or  is  even  now  admitted,  by
some  of  our  most  eminent  professors  and  teachers.

People  ask,  What  is  gained  by  comparison? — Why,
all  higher  knowledge  is  acquired  by  comparison^  «n,d
rests  on  comparison.  If  ?t  is  said  that  the  kharact&r
of  scientific  research  jn  our  age  is  pre-e»mfeatly  com-
parative, this  really  means  that  our  researches  are
now  based  on  the  widest  evidence  that  can  be  ob*


10        LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  rOF  BELIQION.

tained,  on  t]ie  broadest  inductions  that  can  be  gifcsped
by  the  hujnan  jaind.

Wfcat  caiS  be  gainqfl  by  comparison  ?— Why,  look
at  Jhe  study  of  languages.    If  ypflftgo  bacfc  but  a
hundred  years  and  examine  ijjae  folios  of  the  most
learned  writers  on  questions  connected  with  language,
and  then  open  a  bofck  written  Igr  the  merest  tiro  in
Comparative  Philology,  you  will  see  what  can  be
gained,  what  has  been  gained,' by  the  comparative
method.     A  few  hundred  yeafs  ago,  the  idea^  that
Hebrew  was  the  original  language  of  mankind  was
accepted  as  a  matter  of  course,  even  as  a  matter  of
iaith,  the  only  problem  being  to  find  out  by  what
process  Greek,  or  Latin,  or  any  oiier  language  could
have  been  developed  out  of  Hebrew.     The  idea,  too,
that  language  was  revealed,  in  the  *schola»tic  sense  of
the  word,  was  generally  accepted,  although,  as  «arly
as  the  fourtih  century,  St.  Gregory,  the  learned  bishop
of  Nyssa,  had  strongly  protested  against  it1.     The
grammatical  framework  of  a  language  was  either
considered  as  the  result  of  a  conventional  agreement,
or  the  terminations  of  nouns  and  verbs  were  supposed
to  have  sprouted  forth  like  *huds  from  the  roots  and
stems  of  language;  and  the  vaguest  similarity  in  the
sound  and  meaning  of  words  was  taken  to  be  a  suf-
ficient criterion  for  testing  their  origin   and  their
relationship.    Of  all  this  philological  somnambulism
we  hardly  find  a  trace  in  works  published  since  the
days  of  Humboldt,  Bopp,  and  Grimm.

Has  there  been  any  loss*here  ?  Has  it  not  been
pure  gain"?  Does  language  exjite  our  imagination
less,  because  we  know  that,  though  the  faculty  of

1  '  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language,'  vol.  i.  p.  32.


LECTUBE  I.  11

speafting  is  the  work  of  Him  who  "W$ijJ$:s  nNS2
things,  the  invention  <*>f  words  for,  naming  each
object  was  left  to  man,  and  j^as  achieved  through
the  working  of  %fre  human  mind?  Is  Hebrew  Jess
carefully  studied,  because  it  is  no  longer  believed  to
be  a  repealed  language,  sent  down  from  heaven,  but  a
language  doseljr  allied  to  Arabic,  Syriac  and  ancient
Babylonian,  and  receiving  light  from  these  Cognate,
and  in  some  respects  more  primitive,  languagesj  for
tha  explanation  of  ifiany  of  its  grammatical  forms,
and  for  the  exact  interpretation  of  many  of  its
obscure  and  difficult  words?  Is  the  grammatical
articulation  of  Greek  and  Latin  less  instructive,
because  instead  of  seeing  in  the  terminations  of  nouns
and  verbs  merely  arbitrary  signs  to  distinguish  the
plural  from  the  singular,  or  the  future  from  the
present,  we  can  now  perceive  an  intelligible  principle
in  the  gradual  production  of  formal  out  of  the
material  elements  of  language?  And  are  our  ety-
mologies less  important,  because,  instead  of  being
suggested  by  superficial  similarities,  they  are  now
based  on  honest  historical  and  physiological  research?
Lastly,  has  our  own  language  ceased  to  hold  its  own
peculiar  place?  Is  our  lover  for  our  own  native
tongue  at  alb  impaired  ?  Do  men  speak  less  boldly
or  pray  less  fervently  in  their  own  mother  tongue,
because  they  know  its  true  origin  and  its  unadorned
history;  because  they  know  that  everything  in
language  that  goes  beyond  the  objects  of  sense,  is  and-
must  be  pure  metaphor?  Or  does  any  one  deplore
the  fact  that  there  j.a  in  all  languages,  ^ven  in  the
jargons  of  the  lowest  savages,  order  and  wisdom;
nay,  something  that  makes  the  world  akin?


12        LEOTUBKS  ON  THE  SCIENCE  dOF  RELIGION.

Why,  iji$n,  should  we  hesitate  to  apply  the*  com-
parative method,  which  has  produced  such  great  results
in  otfcer  spheres  of  knpwledge,  to  a  study  of  religion?
Th%t  it  will  change  many  of  the  *vjews  commonly
held*about  the  origin,  the  character,  the  growth,  and
decay  of  the  religions  "of  the  -yorld,  I  do  n<ft  deny;
but  unless  we  hold  Tihat  fearless,  progression  in  new
inquiries,  which  is  our  bounden  duty  and  our  honest
pride  in  all  other  branches  of  knowledge,  is  dangerous
in  the  study  of  religions,  unless  Ve  allow  ourselves  to
be  frightened  by  the  once  famous  dictum,  that  what-
ever is  new  in  theology  is  false,  this  ought  to  be  the
very  reason  why  a  comparative  study  of  religions
should  no  longer  be  neglected  or  delayed.

When  the  students  of  Comparative  Philology  boldly
adapted  Goethe's  paradox, '  He  who  &nows  one  language
knows  none^  people  were  startled  at  first;  but«they
soon  began  to  feel  the  truth  which  was  hidden  beneath
the  paradox.  Could  Goethe  have  meant  that  Homer
did  not  know  Greek,  or  that  Shakespeare  did  not
know  English,  because  neither  of  them  knew  more
bhan  his  own  mother  tongue  ?  No  I  what  was  meant
was  that  neither  Homer  nor  Shakespeare  knew  what
that  language  really  ^ras  which  he  handled  with  so
much  power  and  cunning.  Unfortunately  the  old
rerb  fto  can/  from  which  'canny'  and  'cunning,'  is
ost  in  English,  otherwise  we  should  be  able  in  two
tfords  to  express  our  meaning,  and  to  keep  apart  the
•wo  kinds  of  knowledge  of  which  we  are  here  speaking.
Is  we  say  in  German  konndh  is  not  bennen,  we  might
ay  in  English,  to  can,  that  is  to  Jbe  cunning,  is  not  to
m9  that  is  to  know ;  and  it  would  then  become  clear
.t  once,  that  the  most  eloquent  speaker  and  the  most


LECTURE  I.  19

gifted  poet,  with  all  their  cunning  of  wordg  ^nd  skilful
mastery  of  expression,  ^rould  have  toot  litfte  to  say  if
asked,  -vfhat  really  is  language,?  The  same  applies  to
religion.  He  tyfto^knows  one,  knows  none.  There,  are
thousands  of  people  -^hose  faith  is  such  that'it'fcould
move  mountains,  ang  who  yet,  if  they  were  asked
what  religion  ^ally  is,  would  remain  silent,  or  would
speak  of  outward  tokens  rather  than  of  th^  inward
nature,  or  of  the  faculty  of  faith.

3trtwill  be  easily  perceived  that  religion  means  at
least  two  very  different  things.  When  we  speak  of
the  Jewish,  or  the  Christian,  or  the  Hindu  religion,
we  mean  a  body  of  doctrines  handed  down  by
tradition,  or  in  canonical  books,  and  containing  all
that  constitutes  the  faith  of  Jew,  Christian,  or  Hindu.
Using  religion  in  that  sense,  we  may  say  that  a  man
has  Changed  his  religion,  that  is,  that  he  has  adopted
the  Christian  instead  of  the  Brahmanical  body  of
religious  doctrines,  just  as  a  man  may  learn  to  speak
English  instead  of  Hindustani.

But  religion  is  also  used  in  a  different  sense.  As
there  is  a  faculty  of  speech,  independent  of  all  the
historical  forms  of  language,  there  is  a  faculty  of
faith  in  man,  independent  of  <all  historical  religions.
If  we  say  that  it  is  religion  which  distinguishes  man
from  the  animal,  we  do  not  mean  the  Christian  or
Jewish  religion;  we  do  not  mean  any  special  religion;
but  we  mean  a  mental  faculty  or  disposition,  which,
independent  of,  nay  in  spite  of  sense  and  fc jreaac»v
enables  man  to  apprehend  the  Infinite  under  different
names,  and  under  pwrying  disguises.  ,"Wtoout  that
faculty,  no  religion,  not  even  the  lowest  worship  of
idols  and  fetishes,  would  be  possible ;  and  if  we  will


14        LEOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

but  listen  attentively,  we  can  hear  in  all  religions  a
groaning  o/ the,j9pirit,  a  struggle  to  conceive  the  in-
conceivable,rto  utter  $ie  unutterable,  a  longing  after
the  ^Infinite,  a  love  of*God.  Whetjbfir  the  etymology
whic£  the  ancients  gave  of  therGreek  word  fodptoiros,
man,  be  true  or  not  (thfy  derivejj.  it  from  6  &v&  &6p&v,
he  who  looks  upward),  certain  itris  tljat  what  makes
man  man,  is  that  he  alone  can  turn  his  face  to
heaven  f  certain  it  is  that  he  alone  yearns  for  some-
thing that  neither  sense  nor  reftson  can  supply,,  nay
for  something  which  both  sense  and  reason  by  them-
selves are  bound  to  deny.

I£  then  there  is  a  philosophical  discipline  which
examines  into  the  conditions  of  sensuous  or  intuitional
knowledge,  and  if  there  is  another  philosophical  dis-
cipline which  examines  into  the  conaitions*of  rational
or  conceptual  knowledge,  there  is  clearly  a  place  for  a
third  philosophical  discipline  that  has  to  examine  into
the  existence  and  the  conditions  of  that  third  faculty
of  man,  co-ordinate  with,  yet  independent  of,  sense  and
reason,  the  faculty  of  the  Infinite1,  which  is  at  the
root  of  all  religions.  In  German  we  can  distinguish
that  third  faculty  by  the  name  of  Vernunft,  as  opposed
to  V&rstand,  reason,  and  Sinn,  sense.  In  English  I
know  no  better  name  for  it,  than  the  faculty  of  faith,
though  it  will  have  to  be  guarded  by  careful  definition,
in  order  to  confine  it  to  those  objects  only,  which  can-
not be  supplied  either  by  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  or
,by  the  evidence  of  reason,  and  the  existence  «f  which
is  nevertheless  postulated  }fy  something  without  us

1  I  use  the  word  Infinite,  because  it  is  lescf  liable  to  be  misunderstood
than  the  Absolute,  or  the  Unconditioned,  or  the  Unknowable.  On  the
distinction  between  the  Infinite  and  the  Indefinite,  see  Kant,  *  Critique
of  Pure  Reason,7  translated  by  M.  M.,  vol.  ii,  p.  443.


LECTTOE  I.  15

which  we  cannot  resist.  No  simply  historical  fact
can  e^er  fall  under  the>  cognisance  of  faijji,  in  our
sense  of  *the  word.

If  w$  look  at*t]ie  history  of  modern  thought,,  we
find  that  the  dominan£  school  of  philosophy,  pretious
to  Kanf,  had  reducec^all  intellectual  activity  to  one
faculty,  that  of  _the  Censes,  *  NiMl  in  intellects  quod
non  ante  fuerit  in  sensu' — '  Nothing  exists  in  the
intellect  but  what  has  before  existed  in  the  senses/
wa§  their  watchword  ;*and  Leibniz  answered  epigram-
matically,  but  most  profoundly,  'Nihil — nisi  intel-
lectual *  Yes,  nothing  but  the  intellect.'  Then  followed
Kant,  who,  in  his  'Criticism  of  Pure  Eeason/  written
ninety  years  ago,  but  not  yet  antiquated,  proved  that
our  knowledge  requires,  besides  the  data  of  sensation,
the  admission  of  Ihe  intuitions  of  space  and  time,
and  the  categories,  or,  as  we  might  call  them,  the
laws  and  necessities  of  the  understanding.  Satisfied
with  having  established  the  a  priori  character  of  the
categories  and  the  intuitions  of  space  and  time,  or,  to
use  his  own  technical  language,  satisfied  with,  having
proved  the  possibility  of  synthetic  judgments  a  priori,
Kant  declined  to  go  further,  and  he  most  energetically
denied  to  the  human  intellect  tbe  power  of  transcend-
ing the  finite,*  or  the  faculty  of  approaching  the  In-
finite. He  closed  the  ancient  gates  through  which
man  had  gazed  into  Infinity ;  but,  in  spite  of  himself,
he  was  driven  in  his  *  Criticism  of  Practical  Reason,'  to
open  a  side-door  through  which  to  admit  the  sense  of
duty,  and  with  it  the  sen«&  of  the  Divine.  Tbis  has
always  seemed  to  me  the  vulnerable  point  *in  Kant's
philosophy,  for  if  philosophy  has  to  explain  what  is,
not  what  ought  to  be,  there  will  be  and  can  be  no


16        LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENOE.OF  RELIGION.

rest  till  wefr  admit  that  there  is  in  man  a  third  faculty,
TOhich  I  ^all  si$nply  the  faculty  of  apprehending  the
Inflate,  ndb  only  in0  religion,  but  in  all  things;  a
poorer  independent  o£  sense  and  refispn,  a  poorer  in  a
certfiur  sense  contradicted  by^sense  and  reason,  but
yet  a  very  real  powefj  which  £as  held  its  cTwn  from
the  beginning  of  th%  world,  neither  jiense  nor  reason
being  able  to  overcome  it,  while  it  alone  is  able  to
overcome  in  many  cases  both  reason  and  sense1.

According  to  the  two  meanings  of  the  word*  re-
ligion, then,  the  science  of  religion  is  divided  into  two
parts;  the  former,  which  has  to  deal  with  the  his-
torical forms  of  religion,  is  called  Comparative  Theo-

1  As  this  passage  lias  given  rise  to  strange  misunderstandings,  I
quote  a  passage  from  another  lecture  of  mine,mnot  yet  published  '  It  is
difficult  at  present  to  speak  of  the  human  mind  &n  any  technical
language  whatsoever,  without  being  called  to  order  by  some  philosopher
or  other.  According  to  some,  the  mind  is  one  and  indivisible,  and  it  is
the  subject-matter  only  of  our  consciousness  which  gives  to  the  acts  of
the  mind  the  different  appearances  of  feeling,  remembering,  imagining,
knowing,  willing  or  believing.  According  to  others,  mind,  as  a  subject,
has  no  existence  whatever,  and  nothing  ought  to  be  spoken  of  except
states  of  consciousness,  some  passive,  some  active,  some  mixed.  I
myself  have  been  sharply  taken  to  task  for  venturing  to  speak,  in  this
enlightened  igih  century  of  ours,  of  different  faculties  of  the  mind,—
faculties  being  purely  imaginary  creations,  the  illegitimate  offspring  of
mediaeval  scholasticism*  STow  I  confess  I  am  amused  rather  than
frightened  by  such  pedantry*  Faculty,  facultas,  seems  to  me  BO  good  a
word  that,  if  it  did  not  exist,  it  ought  to  be  invented  in  order  to  express
the  different  modes  of  action  of  what  we  may  still  be  allowed  to  call
our  mind.  It  does  not  commit  us  to  more  than  if  we  were  to  speak  of
-&.Q  facilities  or  agihfaes  of  the  mind,  and  those  only  who  change  the
forces  of  nature  into  gods  or  demons,  would  be  frightened  by  the
faculties  as  green-eyed  monsters  seated  in  the  dark  recessfs  of  our  Self.
I  shall  therefore  retain  the  name  of  faculty/  &c.

On  the  necessity  of  admitting  a  faculty  of  perceiving  the  Infinite  I
have  treated  more  folly  in  my  '  Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language/
voL  ii  pp.  635-632.  The  subject  is  ably  discussed  by  Niootra  Sangia-
wmo,  in  IS  In/into  di  Masc-Mitiler,  Oatama,  i8Sa,


LECJTTOE  I.  IT

i®  latter,  which  has  to  explain  the«<»nditions
under  which  religion,  whether  in  its'higjiest  or  its
lowest  form,  is  possible,  is  callecfr  Theoretic  Theoltyy.

We  skall  at  present  Jiave  to*deal  with  the  Jfopner
only;  nay  it  will  be  •my  object  to  show  that  the
problems  which  chieiy  occupy  .theoretic  theology,
ought  not  to  be*taken  up  till  all  the  evidence,  that
can  possibly  be  gained  from  a  comparative  sfoidy  of
the  religions  of  the  world  has  been  fully  collected,
classified,  and  analysed.  I  feel  certain  that  the  time
will  come  when  all  that  is  now  written  on  theology,
whether  from  an  ecclesiastical  or  philosophical  point
of  view,  will  seem  as  antiquated,  as  strange,  as  un-
accountable as  the"  works  of  Vossius,  Hemsterhuys,
Valckenaer,  and  Lqpnep,  by  the  side  of  Bopp's  Com-
parative  Grfftnmar.

It  fhay  seem  strange  that  while  theoretical  theology,
or  the  analysis  of  the  inward  and  outward  conditions
under  which  faith  is  possible,  has  occupied  so  many
thinkers,  the  study  of  comparative  theology  has  never
as  yet  been  seriously  taken  in  hand,  But  the  expla-
nation is  very  simple.  The  materials  en  which  alone
a  comparative  study  of  the  religions  of  mankind  could
have  been  founded  were  not  acceSsible  in  former  days,
while  in  our  own  days  they  have  come  to  light  in
such  profusion  that  it  is  almost  impossible  for  any
individual  to  master  them  all.

It  is  well  known  that  the  Emperor  Akbar  (1543-*
1605)*  had  a  passion  for  the  study  of  religions,  a&cl
that  he  invited  to  his  court  Jews,  Christians.  Moham-
medans, Brahmans,  and  Zoroastrians,  and  had  as  many
of  their  sacred  books  as  he  could  get  access  to,  trans-

*SeeNoteA,QnAkbar,
0


18        LEOTUBT3S  ON  THE  SarEJSTOE'OF  RELIGION.

lated  for  fcfe  own  study  *.    Yet,  how  small  was  $e  col-
lection offered  books  that  even  an  Emperor  of  India
could  command  not  more  than  300  years  sigo,  com-
parejfl  to  what  may  now  be  {ound  in  the  library  of
any  poor  scholar !    We  have  the  original  text  of  the
Veda,  which  neithgr  the  bribes  nor  the  threats  of
Akb^r  could  extort  from  the  Brnhmnns.    The  trans-
lation «f  the  Veda  which  he  is  said  to  have  obtained,
was  a  translation  of  the  so-called  AtHarva-veda,  and
comprised  most  likely  the  Upanishads  only,  ai^tic
and  philosophical  treatises,  very  interesting,  very  im-
portant in  themselves,  but  as  far  removed  from  the
ancient  poetry  of  the  Veda  as  the  Talmud  is  from  the
Old  Testament,  as  Sufiism  is  frofh.  the  Koran.    We
have  the  Zendavesta,  the  sacred  jmtings  of  the  so-
called  fire-worshippers,  and  we  possess  translations  of
it,  far  more  complete  and  far  more  correct  thafl  any
that  the  Emperor  Akbar  obtained  from  Ardsher,  a
wise  Zoroastrian  whom  he  invited  from  Kirman  to
India2.     The  religion  of  Buddha,  certainly  in  many
respects  more  important  than  either  Brahmanism,  or
Zoroastrianisnr,  or  Mohammedanism,  is  never  men-
tioned in  the  religious  discussions  that  took  place  every
Thursday  evening3  at  the  imperial  court  of  Delhi.
Abulfazl,  it  is  said,  the  minister  of  AJ&ar,  could  find<
no  one  to  assist  him  in  his  inquiries  respecting  Buddh-
ism.    We  possess  the  whole  sacred  canon  of  the
Buddhists  in  various  languages,  in  Pali,  Burmese,  and
Siamese,  in  Sanskrit,  Tibetan,  Mongolian,  and  Chinese,

1  mpiinstone's  •  History  of  India,'  e<£  CWell,  book  ix.  cap.  3.
a  See  'Journal  of  tiie  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal/  1868,  p.  14.
8  See  'Ami  Atbari/  transl.  by  Blochnmam,  p.  i/j,  note  3.


LEOTUBE  I.  19

and  i£  is  our  fault  entirely,  if  as  yet  tbfere  is  no
complete  translation  in  any  European1  tojigue  of  this
important  collection  of  sacred"  books.  The  arfeient
religion*  of  China  again,  that  of  Confucius  and^fhat
of  Laotse,  may  now  be  studie£  in  excellent  transla-
tions of  their  sacred  feooks  by  anybody  interested  in
the  ancient  faitl»  of  ^mankind.

But  this  is  not  all.  We  owe  to  missionaries  par-
ticularly, care&l  accounts  of  the  religious  belief  and
wofship  among  tribes  far  lower  in  the  scale  of  civilisa-
tion than  the  poets  of  the  Vedic  hymns,  or  the  fol-
lowers of  Confucius.  Though  the  belief  of  African
and  Melanesian  savages  is  more  recent  in  point  of
time,  it  may  or  may  not  represent  an  earlier  and  far
more  primitive  phase  in  point  of  growth,  and  is  there-
fore as  instructive  to  the  student  of  religion  as  the
study*  of  uncultivated  dialects  hae  proved  to  the
student  of  language1.

Lastly,  and  this,  I  believe,  is  the  most  important
advantage  which  we  enjoy  as  students  of  the  history
of  religion,  we  have  been  taught  the  rules  of  critical
scholarship.  No  one  would  venture,  flow-a-days,  to
quote  from  any  book,  whether  sacred  or  profane,
without  having  asked  these  simple  and  yet  moment-
ous questions :  w  hen  was  it  written  ?  "Where  ?  and  by
whom?  Was  the  author  an  eye-witness,  or  does  he
only  relate  what  he  has  heard  from  others?  And  if
the  latter,  were  his  authorities  at  least  contemporane-
ous with  fiie  events  which  Jbhey  relate,  and  were


1  See  Tiele,  '  De  Plaats  van  de  Godsdienflten  der  Nairarvolken  in  de
GodsdienstgesoluedeniB/  Aixurterdam,  1873.
Keview,'  *866,  p.  71.

o  a


£0        LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  'OS1  BELIGUON.

under  the*  sway  of  party  feeling  or  any  other  disturb-
ing  influence?  °Was  the  whole  book  written  at  once,
or  ddes  it  contain  portions  of  an  earlier  date ;  and  if
so,  2^  it  possible  for  us  to  separate  tiisse  earlier  docu-
ments from  the  body  of  the  bock  ?

A  study  of  the  original  documents  on  wfiich  the
principal  religions  of  the  world  profeis  to  be  founded,
carried«on  in  this  spirit,  has  enabled  some  of  our  best
living  scholars  to  distinguish  in  each  religion  between
what  is  really  ancient  and  what  is  comparatively  fiao-
dern;  between  what  was  the  doctrine  of  the  founders
and  their  immediate  disciples,  and  what  were  the
afterthoughts  and,  generally,  the  corruptions  of  later
ages.  A  study  of  these  later  developments,  of  these
later  corruptions,  or,  it  may  be,  improvements,  is  not
without  its  own  peculiar  charm,  and  is  full  of  practical
lessons ;  yet,  as  it  is  essential  that  we  should  'know
the  most  ancient  forms  of  every  language,  before  we
proceed  to  any  comparisons,  it  is  indispensable  also
that  we  should  have  a  clear  conception  of  the  most
primitive  form  of  every  religion,  before  we  proceed  to
determine  its1*  own  value,  and  to  compare  it  with
other  forms  of  religious  faith.  Many  an  orthodox  Mo-
hammedan, for  instance,  will  relate  miracles  wrought
by  Mohammed;  but  in  the  Koran  MTohammed  say%
distinctly,  that  he  is  a  man  like  other  men.  He  dis-
dains to  work  miracles,  and  appeals  to  the  great
works  of  Allah,  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun,  the
rain  that  fructifies  the  eyth,  the  plants  that  grow,
and  the  Jiving  souls  that  are  born  into  the  world —
who  can  tell  whence? — as  the  leal  signs  and  wonders
in  the  eyes  of  a  true  believer.  *  I  am  only  a  warner,1
ne  says;  <I  cannot  show  you  a  sign— a  miracle—


LECTURE  I.  21

except  what  ye  see  every  day  and  night,,  Signs  are
withtk>dV

The  Buddhist  legends  teem  with  miserable  miracles
attributed  to  Buddha  and  his  disciples — miracles  w^ieh
in  wonderfulness  certainly  surpass  the  miracles  8£  any
other  religion :  yet  in^their  own  sacred  canon  a  saying
of  Buddha's  is  jecoi;ded,  prohibiting  his  disciples  from
working  miracles,  though  challenged  to  do  so  foy  the
multitudes,  wtio  required  a  sign  that  they  might  be-
lieve. And  what  is 'the  miracle  that  Buddha  com-
mands his  disciples  to  perform?  'Hide  your  good
deeds/  he  says, '  and  confess  before  the  world  the  sins
you  have  committed/  That  is  the  true  miracle  of
Buddha.

Modern  Hinduism  rests  on  the  system  of  caste  as
on  a  rock  which  no  arguments  can  shake :  but  in  the
Veda,  the  highest  authority  of  the  religious  belief  of
the  Hindus,  no  mention  occurs  of  the  complicated
system  of  castes,  such  as  we  find  it  in  Manu:  nay,  in
one  place,  where  the  ordinary  classes  of  the  Indian,
or  any  other  society,  are  alluded  to,  viz.  the  priests,
the  warriors,  the  citizens,  and  the  slaves,  all  are  re-
presented as  sprung  alike  from  Brahman,  the  source
of  all  being.

It  would  b»  too  much  to  say  that  the  critical  sifting
of  the  authorities  for  a  study  of  each  religion  has  been
already  fully  carried  out.  There  is  work  enough  still
to  be  done.  But  a  beginning,  and  a  very  successful
beginning,  has  been  made,  and  the  results  thus  brought
to  light  will  serve  as  a  wholesome  caution,  to  every*
body  who  is  engagejjL  in  religious  researcSes.  Thus,

1  'The  Speeches  and  Table-talk  of  the  Prophet  Mohammad/  by
Stanley  Lane-Poole,  1882,  InirocL  p,  juuvi  and  xtt.


82        LEOTUBES  ON  THE  SpIENCE  Otf  RELIGION.

if  we  stu£j  the  primitive  religion  of  the  Veda,  we
ha?e  to  d^tingijish  most  carefully,  not  only  be£ween
the  h^rnms  'of  the  KSg-veda  on  one  side,  and  the
hyinns  collected  in  th«  S&ma-veda,  «Ya#ur-ve$a,  and
Athafv#-veda  on  the  other,  bu^  critical  scholars  dis-
tinguish with  equal  cate  betwqpn  the  more*ancient
and  the  more  modefn  hymns  of  Jthe  Jlig-veda  itself,
so  far  "as  even  the  faintest  indications  of  language,  of
grammar,  or  metre  enable  them  to  do  sot

In  order  to  gain  a  clear  insight  into  the  motives
and  impulses  of  the  founder  of  the  worship  of  Ahu-
ramazda,  we  must  chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  depend  on
thos-e  portions  of  the  Zendavesta  which  are  written  in
the  GatM  dialect,  a  more  primitive  dialect  than  that
of  the  rest  of  the  sacred  code  of  the  Zoroastrians,

In  order  to  do  justice  to  Buddha,"we  must  not  mix
the  practical  portions  of  the  Tripifaka,  the  Dharma,
with  the  metaphysical  portions,  the  Abhidharma.
Both,  it  is  true,  belong  to  the  sacred  canon  of  the
Buddhists ;  but  their  original  sources  He  in  very  dif-
ferent latitudes  of  religious  thought.

We  have  in  Jhe  history  of  Buddhism  an  excellent
opportunity  for  watching  the  process  by  which  a
canon  of  saored  books  is  called  into  existence.  We
see  here,  as  elsewhere,  that  during  the  Hetime  of  the
teacher,  no  record  of  events,  no  sacred  code  containing
the  sayings  of  the  master  was  wanted.  His  presence
was  ^  enough,  and  thoughts  of  the  future,  and  more
particularly,  of  future  greatness,  seldom  entered  the
minds  of  those  who  followed  him.  It  was  only  after


— — —  —»»••«•    wuw    it  vrxavL,   ujjfuv  -MUjKt  VLJLBuJLUlGQ    CbUUVjill  UuUU

to  recall  the  sayings  and  doings  of  their  departed  Mend
and  master.    At  that  time  everything  that  seemed  to


,LECTTIRB  I.  23

redound  to  the  glory  of  Buddha,  however  extraordi-
nary afcd  incredible,  -was  eagerly  ^elcojned 'while  -wit-
nesses who  would  have  ventured  to  criticise0  or  reject
unsupported  statements,  or  to  .detract  in  any  Vay
from  the  holy  cfiaractef  of  Buddha,  had  no  chanoe"  of
even  bei»g  listened  to1.  And»when,  in  spite  of  all
this,  differences  of  opinion  arose,  they  were  not  brought
to  the  test  by  a  careful  weighing  of  evidence,  birt  the
names  of  'unbeliever '  and  'heretic'  (n&stika,  p&fihamfo)
werp  quickly  invented  in  Injdia  as  elsewhere,  and
bandied  backwards  and  forwards  between  contending
parties,  till  at  last,  when  the  doctors  disagreed,  the
help  of  the  secular  power  had  to  be  invoked,  $nd
kings  and  emperor^  assembled  councils  for  the  sup-
pression of  schism,  for  the  settlement  of  an  orthodox
creed,  and  f<jr  the  completion  of  a  sacred  canon.  We
kno-v^  of  King  Asoka,  the  contemporary  of  Seleucus,
sending  his  royal  missive  to  the  assembled  elders,  and
telling  them  what  to  do,  and  what  to  avoid,  warning
them  also  in  his  own  name  of  the  apocryphal  or  he-
retical character  of  certain  books  which,  as  he  thinks,
ought  not  to  be  admitted  into  the  sacred  canon2.

1  'Mahavansa,'  p.  12,  TX&nnebi  tatha  vatftabbam  ita,  'it  cannot  be
allowed  to  other  priests  to  be  present.'

3  The  following  is  Professor  Kern's  translation  of  the  Second  Bairat
Book  Inscription,  Containing  the  rescript  which  Ajoka  addressed  to
the  Council  of  Magadha;  'King  Priyadarsin  of  Magadha  greets  the
Assembly  (of  denes)  and  wishes  them  welfare  and  happiness.  Ye
know,  Sirs,  now  great  is  our  reverence  and  affection  for  the  Triad  which
is  called  JBuddha  (the  Master),  Fmth,  and  Ass&nlly.  All  that  oar
Lord  BudcUp  has  spoken,  my  Lords,  is  well  spoken.  "Wfcerefor*,  Sirs,
it  must  indeed  be  regarded  as  hiring  indisputable  authority,  se  the
true  faith  shall  last  long.  Thus,  my  Lords,  I  honour  in  Jhft  first  place
these  religious  works :— Summary  of  the  Discipline,  T&e  Supernatural
Powers  of  the  Master  (or  of  the  Masters),  The  Terrors  of  the  Future,
The  Song  of  the  Hermit,  The  Sutra  on  Asceticism,  The  Question  of
Upatishya,  and  the  Admonition  of  Mania  concerning  Falsehood,


24        LECTTJBES  ON  THE  SOIENC^  OF  BELIQ-ION.

We  here  learn  a  lesson,  which  is  confirmed  .by  the
Study  of  *other  jeligions,  that  canonical  books,  though
they  furmsti  in  most  cases  the  most  ancientoand  most
authentic  information  within  the  reach  of  the.  student
of  religion,  are  not  to  be  trusfted  implicitly,  nay,  that
they  must  be  submitted  to  a  more  searchingr>criticism
and  to  more  stringent  tests  than  any  other  historical
books.  For  that  purpose  the  Science  of  Language
has  proved  in  many  cases  a  most  valuable  auxiliary.
It  is  not  easy  to  imitate  ancient  language  so  9$  to
deceive  the  practised  eye  of  the  grammarian,  even  if
it  were  possible  to  imitate  ancient  thought  that  should
not  betray  to  the  historian  its  modern  origin.  A
forged  book,  like  the  Ezour-ve^,  which  deceived
even  Voltaire,  and  was  published  by  him  as  'the
most  precious  gift  for  which  the  West  wag  indebted  to
the  East,'  could  hardly  impose  again  on  any  Sanskrit
scholar  of  the  present  day.  This  most  precious  gift
from  the  East  to  the  West,  is  about  the  silliest  book
that  can  be  read  by  the  student  of  religion,  and  all
one  can  say  in  its  defence  is  that  the  original  writer
never  meant  it  as  a  forgery,  never  intended  it  for  the
purpose  for  wfiich  it  was  used  by  Voltaire.

I  may  add  that  a  J3ook  which  has  lately  attracted
considerable  attention,  La  Bible  dan**  FInde,  by  M,
Jacolliot,  belongs  to  the  same  class  of  books.  Though
the  passages  from  the  sacred  'books  of  the  Brahmans

uttered  by  our  Lord  Buddha.  These  religions  works,  Sirs,  I  wish  that
the  monks  and  nuns,  for  the  advancement  of  their  good  name,  should
uninterruptedly  study  and  remember,  as  also  the  laics  of  the  male  and
female  sex.  'For  this  end,  my  Lords,  I  cause  this  to  be  written,  and
have  made  my  -wish  evident,'  See  Indiai  Antiquary,  vol.  v,  p.  257 ;
Cunningham,  'Corpus  lasoript.  India,'  p.  133;  Oldenberg.  'Yinaynr
pitaka,*  voL  L,  Xntrod.p,xL


'  LECTUBB  I.  85

are  ndt  given  in  the  original,  but  only  in  a  vBeigr  poetical
French  translation,  no  Sanskrit  scholar  woujd  hesitate
for  one  tnoment  to  say  that  they  are  forgeries^  and
that  MdTacollio&Ihe  President  ef  the  Court  of  Justice
at  Chandernagore,  hag  been  deceived  by  his*  ri&tive
teacher.  *  We  find  man.y  childish  and  foolish  things  in
the  Veda,  but  •vtfien  .we  read  the  following  line,  as  an
extract  from  the  Veda :

'La  famine  c'egt  TAme  de  1'htunajait^,— -

it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  this  is  the  folly  of  the
nineteenth  century,  and  not  of  the  childhood  of  the
human  race.  M.  Jacolliot's  conclusions  and  theories
are  such  as  might  be  expected  from  his  materials1.

With  all  the  genuine  documents  for  studying  the
history  of  the  religions  of  mankind  that  have  lately
been  "brought  to  light,  and  with  the  great  facilities
which  a  more  extensive  study  of  Oriental  languages
has  afforded  to  scholars  at  large  for  investigating  the
deepest  springs  of  religious  thought  all  over  the
world,  a  comparative  study  of  religions  has  become
a  necessity.  If  we  were  to  shrink  *irom  it,  other
nations  and  other  creeds  would  take  up  the  work.  A
lecture  was  lately  delivered  at  Calcutta,  by  the
> minister  of  tttfc  Adi-Samaj  (i.e.  the  Old  Church),  *0n
the  Superiority  of  Hinduism  to  every  other  existing
Religion.'  The  lecturer  held  that  Hinduism  was
superior  to  all  other  religions,  'because  it  owed  its
name  to^io  man;  because  it  acknowledged  no  Bae-
diator  between  God  and* man;  because  the  Hindu
worships  God,  in  tha  intensely  devotiomf  sense,  as
the  soul  of  the  soul ;  because  the  Hindu  alone  caa

1  See  Selected  Essays,  roL  Si.,  p.  468  sq.


26        LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE. OF  RELIGION.

worship  God  at  all  times,  in  business  and  pleasure,
and  everything;  because,  -while  other  Scriptures  in-
culca^te  the  practice  oi;piety  and  virtue  for  the  sake  of
eternal  happiness,  th»  Hindu  Scriptures  alon#  main-
tain*that  God  should  be  worshipped  for  the  sake  of
God  alone,  and  virtue  J>ractised^for  the  sake*bf  virtue
alone ;  because  HMduism  inculqates  ijniversal  bene-
volerfce.  while  other  faiths  merely  refer  to  man;
because  Hinduism  is  non-sectarian  (believing  that  all
faiths  are  good  if  the  men  whfl  hold  them  are  good),
non-proselytizing,  pre-eminently  tolerant,  devotional
to  an  entire  abstraction  of  the  mind  from  time  and
sense,  and  the  concentration  of  it  on  the  Divine ;  of
an  antiquity  running  back  to  tiie  infancy  of  the
human  race,  and  from  that  time  till  now  influencing
in  all  particulars  the  greatest  affairs  of  the  State  and
the  most  minute  affairs  of  domestic  life1.*

A  Science  of  Religion,  based  on  an  impartial  and
truly  scientific  comparison  of  all,  or  at  all  events,  of
the  most  important,  religions  of  mankind,  is  now  only
a  question  of  time.  It  is  demanded  by  those  whose
voice  cannot  be  disregarded.  Its  title,  though  imply-
ing as  yet  a  promise  rather  than  a  fulfilment,  has
become  more  or  lese  familiar  in  Germany,  France,
and  America ;  its  great  problems  hava  attracted  the
eyes  of  many  inquirers,  and  its  results  have  been
anticipated  either  with  fear  or  with  delight,  It  be-
comes therefore  the  duty  of  those  who  have  devoted
their  life  to  the  study  of  the  principal  religions  of  the
world  in  their  original  documents,  and  who  value
religion  atd  reverence  it  in  whatever  form  it  may  pre-
sent itself,  to  take  possession  of  this  new  territory  in

1  See  'limes,1  Oct.  27,  1872.


LECTURE  I.  £7

the  name  of  true  science,  and  thus  to  jmjtect-  its
sacred  precincts  from  the  inroads  of  those  who  think
that  they  have  a  right  to  speak  on*  the  ancieitt  religions
of  mankind,  whejbter  those  of  the  Brahmans,  the  Zp-
roastrians,  or  Buddhist^,  or  those  of  the  Jews  ftnd
Christian^  -without  ev^r  having'taken.  the  trouble  of
learning  the  languages  in  which  their  sacred  books
are  written.  What  should  we  think  of  philosophers
writing  on  the  religion  of  Homer,  without  knowing
Greek,  or  on  the  religion  of  Mpses,  without  knowing
Hebrew '<

I  do  not  wonder  at  Mr.  Matthew  Arnold1  speaking
scornfully  of  La  Science  des  Religions,  and  I  fully
agree  with  him  that  such  statements  as  he  quotes
would  take  away  the  breath  of  a  mere  man  of  letters.
But  are  these  statements  supported  by  the  authority
of  any* scholars?  Has  anybody  who  can  read  either
the  Vedas  or  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  in  the
original  ever  maintained  that  c  the  sacred  theory  of
the  Aryas  passed  into  Palestine  from  Persia  and  India,
and  got  possession  of  the  founder  of  Christianity  and
of  his  greatest  apostles,  St.  Paul  and  St.  John ;  be-
coming more  perfect,  and  returning  more  and  more  to
its  true  character  of  a  "  transcenAent  metaphysic,"  as
the  doctors  of*  the  Christian  Church  developed  it$'
lias  Colebrooke,  or  Lassen,  or  Bournouf,  ever  sug-
gested '  that  we  Christians,  who  are  Aryas,  may  have
the  satisfaction  of  thinking  that  the  religion  of  Christ
has  not  came  to  us  from  the  Semites,  and  that  it  is
in  the  hymns  of  the  Veda^ind  not  in  the  Bible  thafc
we  are  to  look  for  the  primordial  source  of  any  re-
ligion ;  that  the  theory  of  Christ  is  the  theory  of  the

i  '  literature  and  Dogma,' p.  117.


28        LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OP  RELIGUON,

Vedic  Agni,  or  fire\  that  the  Incarnation  represents
%he  Ved^c  solemnity  of  the*production  of  fire,  symbol
of  £re  of  every  ksnd,  of  all  movement,*  life,  and
thought;  that  the  Trinity  o£  Fatfier,  Son,  and  Spirit
is  the*  Vedic  Trinity  of  Sur^  Fire,  and  Wind;  and
God  finally  a  cosmic  unity*'  Mr.  Arnold  quotes
indeed  the  name  of  Burnouf,  but  ke  ought  to  have
knowp.  that  Eugene  Burnouf  has  left  no  son  and  no
successor.

Those  who  would  use  a  comparative  study  Sf  re-
ligions as  a  means  for  lowering  Christianity  by  exalt-
ing the  other  religions  of  mankind,  are  to  my  mind  as
dangerous  allies  as  those  who  think  it  necessary  to
lower  all  other  religions  in  order  to  exalt  Christianity.
Science  wants  no  partisans.  I  make  no  secret  that  true
Christianity,  I  mean  the  religion  of  Christ,  seems  to  me
to  become  more  and  more  exalted  the  more  w8  know
and  the  more  we  appreciate  the  treasures  of  truth
hidden  in  the  despised  religions  of  the  world.  But
no  one  can  honestly  arrive  at  that  conviction,  unless
he  uses  honestly  the  same  measure  for  all  religions.
It  would  be  fetal  for  any  religion  to  claim  an  excep-
tional treatment,  most  of  all  for  Christianity.  Chris-
tianity enjoyed  no  privileges  and  claimed  no  immuni-
ties when  it  boldly  confronted  and  Confounded  thj
most  ancient  and  the  most  powerful  religions  of  the
world.  Even  at  present  it  craves  no  mercy,  and  it
receives  no  mercy  from  those  whom  our  missionaries
have  to  meet  face  to  face  in  every  part  of  »the  world.
Unless  Christianity  has  ceased  to  be  what  it  was,  its
defenders  should  not  shrink  from  this  new  trial  of
•strength,  but  should  encourage  rather  than  depreciate
the  study  of  comparative  theology.


I.  29

And -let  me  remark  this,  in  the  very  beginning,  that
no  other  religion,  with  th»  exception,  pojchaps.  of  early
Buddhism*,  would  have  favoured  the  idea*of  an^ im-
partial qpmparisotf  of  the  principal  religions  of  the
world — would  ever  hav^  tolerated  our  science.  Ne&rly
every  reHgion  seems  Jp  adopt  *the  language  of  the
Pharisee  rather  ijian  that  of  the  Publican.  It  is  Chris-
tianity alone  which,  as  the  religion  of  humanity,  as
the  religion  of*  no  caste,  of  no  chosen  people,  has
taught  us  to  study  tife  history  of  mankind,  as  our
own,  to  discover  the  traces  of  a  divine  wisdom  and
love  in  the  development  of  all  the  races  of  the  world,
and  to  recognise,  if  possible,  even  in  the  lowest  and
crudest  forms  of  religious  belief,  not  the  work  of  the
devil,  but  something  that  indicates  a  divine  guidance,
something  that  makes  us  perceive,  with  St.  Peter,
'  that  God.  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  but  that  in  every
nation  he  that  feareth  him  and  worketh  righteousness
is  accepted  with  him/

In  no  religion  was  there  a  soil  so  well  prepared  for
the  cultivation  of  Comparative  Theology  as  in  our
own.  The  position  which  Christianity Jfrim  the  very
beginning  took  up  with  regard  to  Judaism,  served  as
the  first  lesson  in  comparative  tieology,  and  directed
Jhe  attention  wen  of  the  unlearned  to  a  comparison  of
two  religions,  differing  in  their  conception  of  the  Deity,
in  their  estimate  of  humanity,  in  their  motives  of
morality,  and  in  their  hope  of  immortality,  yet  shar-*
ing  so  much  in  common  that  there  are  but  few  of  the
psalms  and  prayers  in  th€P01d  Testament  in  which  a
Christian  cannot  heartily  join  even  now,  anil  but  few
rules  of  morality  wliiich  he  ought  not  even  now  to
obey.  If  we  have  once  learnt  to  see  in  the  exclusive


80       LTECTTJSES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

religion  *of  the  Jews  a  preparation  of  what  was  "to  be
ifoe  all-embracing  religion  df  humanity,  we  shall  feel
muck  less*difficulty  «in  recognising  in  the  mazes  of
other  religions  a  hidden  purpose;  «£  wanderiag  in  the
desert?  it  may  be,  but  a  preparation  also  for  the  land
of  promise.

A  study  of  these  two  religions,  th%  Jewish  and  the
Chrfstjp,  such  as  it  has  long  been  carried  on  by  some
of  our  moat  learned  divines,  simultaneously  with  the
study  of  Greek  and  Boman  mythology,  has,  in  «fact,
served  as  a  most  useful  preparation  for  wider  in-
quiries* Even  the  mistakes  that  have  been  committed
by  earlier  scholars  have  proved  useful  to  those  who
followed  after;  and,  once  corrected? they  are  not  likely
to  be  committed  again.  The  opinion,  for  instance,  that
the  pagan  religions  were  mere  corruption*  of  the  reli-
gion of  the  Old  Testament,  once  supported  by  men  of
high  authority  and  great  learning,  is  now  as  com-
pletely surrendered  as  the  attempts  of  explaining
Greek  and  Latin  as  corruptions  of  Hebrew l.

The  theory  again,  that  there  was  a  primeval  pre-
ternatural revelation  granted  to  the  fathers  of  the
human  race,  and  that  the  grains  of  truth  which  catch
our  eye  when  exploring  the  temples  of  heathen  idols,
are  the  scattered  fragments  of  that  sacred  heirloom, —
the  seeds  that  fell  by  the  wayside  or  upon  stony
places — would  find  but  few  supporters  at  present ;  no
more,  in  fact,  than  the  theory  that  there  was  in  the
beginning  one  complete  and  perfect  primevaWanguagej

1  Tertolliqp,  'Apolog.*  xtoii:  'Undo  liaeo,  oro  voa,  philosophis  aut
poetistam  oonflimilia*  Nonnisi  de  aostri|  sacrameutis :  si  do  nostris
sacramentie,  nt  de  prioribus,  ergo  fideliora  aunt  nostra  magisque  cre-
deada,  quomm  imagines  quoqne  fidem inveninnV  See  Hardwiok,  'Christ
and  other  Masters/  vol.  i.  p.  17.


LECTUBE  I.  31

broker*  up  in  later  times  into  the  numberless^nguages
of  the  world.

Some  dther  principles,  too,  hg,ve  been  Established
within  tiis  limit^d'sphere  by  a  comparison  of  Judaism
and  Christianity  with  'the  religions  of  Grfceca  %nd
Borne,  wffich  will  provf  extremely  useful  in  guiding
us  in  our  own  researches.  It  haS  been  proved,  for
instance,  that  the  language  of  antiquity  is  not  like
the  language  of  our  own  times ;  that  the  language  of
the  East  is  not  like  th%  language  of  the  West;  and
that,  unless  we  make  allowance  for  this,  we  cannot
but  misinterpret  the  utterances  of  the  most  ancient
teachers  and  poets  of  the  human  race.  The  same
words  do  not  meaa  the  same  thing  in  Anglo-Saxon
and  English,  in  Latin  and  French:  much  less  can  we
expect  that  tke  words  of  any  modern  language  should
be  th^  exact  equivalents  of  words  belonging  to  an
ancient  Semitic  language,  such  as  the  Hebrew  of  the
Old  Testament.

Ancient  words  and  ancient  thoughts,  for  both  go
together,  have  in  the  Old  Testament  not  yet  arrived
at  that  stage  of  abstraction  in  which,,  for  instance,
active  powers,  whether  natural  or  supernatural,  can
be  represented  in  any  but  a  personal  and  more  or
teas  human  form.  When  we  speak  of  a  temptation
from  within  or  from  without,  it  was  more  natural  for
the  ancients  to  speak  of  a  tempter,  whether  in  a
human  or  in  an  animal  form ;  when  we  speak  <>f  the
ever-presemt  help  of  God,  they  call  the  Lord  fteir
rock,  and  their  fortress,  their  buckler,  and  their  sbig&
tower.  They  even  sp^ak  of  'the  Rock  tfc|&  begat
them*  (Deut.  yinrii.  18),  though  in  a  very  different
sense  from  that  in  which  Homer  speaks  of  the  rock


32        LECTUBES  ON  TEE  SCIENOm  OF  RELIGION.

from  whence  man  has  sprung.  What  with  us'  is  a
heavenly  message,  or  a  godsend,  was  to  them  a  winged
messenger?  what  we«call  divine  guidance,  they  speak
of.as  a  pillar  of  a  cloud,  to  lead  thsm  the  w$y,  and  a
pill&r  -of  light  to  give  them  %ht ;  a  refuge  from  the
storm,  and  a  shadow'from  the.  heat.  Whafr  is  really
meant  is  no  doubt  the  same,  and  the  ^ault  is  ours,  not
their*  s,  if  we  wilfully  misinterpret  the  language  of  ancient
prophets,  if  we  persist  in  understanding  their  words  in
their  outward  and  material  asjfect  only,  and  forgetathat
before  language  had  sanctioned  a  distinction  between
the  concrete  and  the  abstract,  between  the  purely  spi-
rikial  as  opposed  to  the  coarsely  material,  the  inten-
tion of  the  speakers  comprehended  both  the  concrete
and  tiie  abstract,  both  the  material  and  the  spiritual
in  a  manner  which  has  become  "quite  sirange  to  uss
though  it  lives  on  in  the  language  of  every  trua  poet.
Unless  we  make  allowance  for  this  mental  parallax,
all  our  readings  in  the  ancient  skies  will  be,  and  must
be,  erroneous.  Nay,  I  believe  it  can  be  proved  that
more  than  half  of  the  difficulties  in  the  history  of
religion  owe  £heir  origin  to  this  constant  misinterpre-
tation of  ancient  language  by  modern  language,  of
ancient  thought  by  modern  thought,  particularly  when-
ever the  word  has  become  more  sacrednthan  the  spirit.
That  much  of  what  seems  to  us,  and  seemed  to  the
best  among  the  ancients,  irrational  and  irreverent  in
the  mythologies  of  India,  Greece,  and  Italy  can  thus
be  removed,  and  that  many  of  their  childish  fables
can  thus  be  read  again  9x  their  original  child-like
sense,  h&s  been  proved  by  the  researches  of  Compa-
rative Mythologists.  The  phase  of  language  which
gives  rise,  inevitably,  we  may  say,  to  these  misunder-


LEOTUEE  L  33

standings,  is  earlier  than  the  earliest  literacy  docu-
ments.' Its  work  in  'that  Aryan  languages  was  dona
before  the  time  of  the  Veda,  befqre  the  time  of  Homer,
though  Jts  influence  continues  io  be  felt  to  a  much
later  period.

Is  it  Mkely  that  the  Semitic*  languages,  .and,  more
particularly,  Hejbrew,  should,  as  *by  a  miracle,  have
escaped  altogether  the  influence  of  a  process  which  is-
inherent  in  the  very  nature  and  growth  of  lafiguage,
and*  which,  in  fact,  may  rightly  be  called  an  infantine
disease,  against  which  no  precautions  can  be  of  any
avail?

I  hold  indeed  that  the  Semitic  languages,  for  reasons
which  I  explained  on  a  former  occasion,  have  suffered
less  from  mythology  than  the  Aryan  languages ;  yet
we  have  only  to  read  the  first  chapters  of  Genesis  in
order*to  convince  ourselves,  that  we  shall  never  un-
derstand its  ancient  language  rightly,  unless  we  make
allowance  for  the  influence  of  ancient  language  on
ancient  thought*  If  we  read,  for  instance,  that  after
the  first  man  was  created,  one  of  his  ribs  was  taken
out,  and  that  rib  made  into  a  woman,  every  student  of
ancient  language  sees  at  once  that  this"  account  must
not  be  taken  in  its  bare,  literal  #ense.  We  need  not
dwell  on  the  &ct  that  in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis
'a  far  less  startling  account  of  the  creation  of  man  and
woman  had  been  given.  What  could  be  simpler,  and
therefore  truer,  than;  'So  God  created  man  in  his  ow$
image,  injihe  image  of  God  created  he  him ;  male  an4
female  created  he  them.  And  God  blessed  them,  *&£}
God  eaid  unto  them,  Be  fruitful,  and  muH%>Iy,  and
replenish  th$  earth,  and  subdue  it?'  The  question
then  is,  bow,  after  this  account  of  the  creation  of


34        IECTXJBES  OK  THE  SCIENCE*  Off  BELIQION.


man  an4  woman,  could  there  be  a  second
of  the  creation  *)f  man,  of  his»lone  estate  in  the  garden
of  Egen,  aifll  of  the  rgmoval  of  one  of  his  ribs,  which
wqp  to  be  made  into  a  help  meet  foshim?

TQose  who  are  familiar  witSi  the  genius  of  ancient
Hebrew,  can  hardly  hesitate  as  to  the  original  in-
tention of  such  traditions.  Let  us  remember  that
whefi  we,  in  our  modern  languages,  speak  of  the  self-
same thing,  the  Hebrews  speak  of  the  bone  (DSEP),  the
Arabs  of  the  eye  of  a*thing.  "This  is  a  well  knt>wn
Semitic  idiom,  and  it  is  not  without  analogies  in  other
languages.  'Bone'  seemed  a  telling  expression  for
whfot  we  should  call  the  innermost  essence;  'eye*  for
what  we  should  call  the  soul  or  Self  of  a  thing.  In
the  ancient  hymns  of  the  Vedav  too,  a  poet  asks  :
(  Who  has  seen  the  first-born,  when  he  •who  had  no
bones,  i.  e.  no  form,  bore  him  that  had  bones  ?  '  i  e.*when
that  which  was  formless  assumed  form,  or,  it  may  be,
when  that  which  had  no  essence,  received  an  essence?
And  he  goes  on  to  ask:  *  Where  was  the  life,  the
blood,  the  soul  of  the  world?  Who  sent  to  ask  this
from  any  thaihknew  it?'  In  the  ancient  language  of
the  Veda,  bone,  blood,  breath,  are  all  meant  to  convey
more  than  what  we  sRould  call  their  material  meaning  ;
but  in  course  of  time,  the  Sanskrit  dtman,  meaning
originally  breath,  dwindled  away  into  a  mere  pro-
noun, and  came  to  mean  self.  The  same  applies  to
the  Hebrew  'etzem.  Originally  meaning  bone,  it  came
to  be  used  at  last  as  a  mere  pronominal  adjective,  in
the  senseA  of  self  or  same.

After  these  preliminary  catenations,  we  can  well
tmderstand  that,  while  if  speaking  and  JvhiTiTdng  ^  a
modern  language  Adam  might  have  been  made  to  say


%EOTURB  I.  85

to  Eve,;' Thou  art  the  same  as  I  am,'  such  a  thought
would  in  ancient  Hebrew  be  expressed  by:  'Thou  art*
bone  of  m^  bone,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh.'  Let  sucb  an
expression  be  rep&ted  Jfor  a  feV  generations  only,
and  a  literal,  that  is  to  flay,  a  material  and  deceptive
interpretation,  would  so$n  spring'uj^  and  people  would
at  last  bring  themselves  to  believe  that  the  first  woman
was  formed  from  the  bone  of  the  first  man,  or  %om  a
rib,  for  the  simple  reason,  it  may  be,  because  it  could
better  be  spared  than  any  other  bone.  Such  a  mis-
understanding, once  established,  retained  its  place  on
account  of  its  very  strangeness,  for  a  taste  for  the
unintelligible  springs  up  at  a  very  early  time,  arid
threatens  to  destroy  among  ancient  nations  the  power
of  appreciating  whatever  is  simple,  natural,  and  whole-
some. Thus  o&ly  can  it  be  explained  that  the  account
pf  the  creation  of  the  woman  obtained  its  place  in
the  second  chapter,  though  in  dear  opposition  to  what
had  been  said  in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis  \

It  is  not  always  possible  to  solve  these  ancient
riddles,  nor  are  the  interpretations  which  have  been
attempted  by  various  scholars  always  Bright.  The
only  principle  I  stand  up  for  is  this,  that  mis-
understandings of  this  kind  are  iaevitable  in  ancient
languages,  and  tkat  we  must  be  prepared  to  meet  with
tfiem  in  the  religions  of  the  Semitic  as  well  as  of  the
Aryan  nations.

Let  us  take  another  Semitic  religion,  the  ancient
religion  of  JBabylon,  as  described  to  us  in  the  frag-
ments of  Berosus.  The  similarities  between  thai  re-
ligion and  the  religion^  of  the  Jews  are  noJ  to  be
mistaken,  but  such  is  the  contrast  between  the  sim-

i  See  'Selected  Essaya,'  vol.  ii.  p.  45<*.


36        LECTURES  ON  THli  BOIESOa  OF  RELIQIOtf.


plicdty  <rf  the  Bible  language  sad  the  wild;  estra-
iragance«0f  tha  Babylonian  fheogonies,  that  it  requires
soxoe  courage  to  guess  at  the  original  outlines  behind
tbe  distorted  featured  of  a  hideous  caricature*.

We*  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  accuracy  of
Berosus  in  describing  the  religion  of  the  Babylonians,
at  least  for  the  time  in  which  he  lived.  He'  was  a
Baby^nian  by  birih,  a  priest  of  the  temple  of  Belus,
a  contemporary  of  Alexander  the  Great.  He  wrote
the  History  of  the  Ghaldseans,  in  Greek,  evidently
intending  it  to  be  read  by  the  Greek  conquerors,
and  he  states  in  his  first  book  that  he  composed  it
frta  the  registers,  astronomical  and  chronological,
which  wete  preserved  at  Babylon,  and  which  com-
prised a  period  of  200,000  yearj  (150,000,  according
to  the  Syncellus).  The  history  of  Beroeus  is  lost.
Extacte  from  it  had  been  made  by  Alexand*  Poly-
histor,  in  the  first  eeatury  before  our  era-,  but  his
work  too  is  lost,  Ife  still  existed,  however,  at  the
&ne  when  Eusebius  {1*70-340)  wrote  his  Chrtmicon,
Mid  wa&  used  by  him  in  describiBg  the  ancient  history
of  Babylon,  *  But  the  Chronicle  of  Eusebius,  too,  is
lo»tj  at  least  ia  Greek,  and  it  is  only  in  an  Armenian
trat&h&oii  of  Eus%bittg  that  many  of  the  passages
have  beea  preserved  to  us>  which  reffir  to  the  bisto^
of  Babylon,  a&  originally  described  by  Berosns.  This
Armenian  translation  was  published  in  1818,  and  its
importance  was  first  pointed  out  by  Niebuhr2,  As
we  possess  large  extraejs  from  £usebitt$  preserved


1BnnSOT,-EgypViT.>364.

8  Eusebii  Pwaphili  OaesMitt»e  Eptacopi  Ghronfoott  Bto^tekXL.
jxtmo  ynsam  ex  Armemaoo  textu  in  Latinum  conversmn,  opera  P.  Jo.
BAwjfcer  Vena


LEOTUKE  I.  87

by  Geergius  the  Syneellus,  i.  e,  the  coneellanens,  or
cell-companion,  the  Vice^patriarch  of  Constantinople,
who  wrdte  a  Chronography  about  800  "A.  p.,  it  is
possible*  in  several  places  to  compare  the  original
Greek  text  "with  the  Armenian,  and  thus  to  establish
the  trustworthiness  of  $ie  Arm&dan  translation.

Ber&sus  thus  describes  the  Babylonian  traditions  of
the  creation  *  :

*  There  was  a  time  in  which  all  was  darkness  and
water,  and  in  these  were  generated  monstrous  orear
tures,  having  mixed  forms  ;  men  were  born  with  two
and  some  with  four  wings,  with  two  faces,  having  one
body,  but  two  heads,  a  man's  and  a  woman's,  and
bearing  the  marks*  of  male  and  female  nature;  and
other  men  with  the  legs  and  horns  of  goats,  or  with
horses'  feet,  *and  having  the  hind  quarters  of  horses,
but  ttie  fore  part  of  men,  being  in  fact  like  Hip-
pocentaurs.  Bulls  also  were  produced  having  human
heads,  and  dogs  with  four  bodies,  having  fishes'  tails
springing  from  their  hinder  parts;  and  horses  with
dogs1  heads,  and  men  and  other  creatures,  having
heads  and  bodies  of  horses,  but  tails  ,,of  fishes  ;  and
other  creatures  having  the  shape  of  all  sorts  of  beasts.
Besides  these,  fishes,  and  reptHes,  and  snakes  and
^many  other  wonderful  and  strange  beings,  one  having
the  appearance  of  the  other,  the  images  of  which  are
to  be  seen  in  the  temple  of  Belus.  At  the  head  of  all
was  a  woman,  called  Qmorka*  (Armen,  Mwca$a)>  -which


*  Eusebii  duonioan,  voL  1.  p,  29*  'Pwgmentft  mtia&#wa*?  Vt*.  *t

P-  497-  ,    V

•  According  to  Lenaraaitf  ('  Deluge,*  p,  30)  BotH  TTn*TTwtk    In
moeEerm  Armenian,  Ana-iurg*  is  said  to  mean  teoto«r.e*rthP    Prof.
!Dietrf<&e^ii^ttewOT4w^  See
Bnnaen's  *  Egypt,'  fr.  p.  150.


38        LEOTUBES  ON  THE  SOIENCJB  OF  BELIGTOff.

is  said  to  be  Thalatih1  in  Chaldean,  and  translated
in  Greelj;,  Thalassa  (or  serf).  When  all  these  were
thus  togetBer,  Belus  eame  and  cut  the  wonufn  in  two :
and  one  half  of  her  he  made  the  e&ih,  and  the  other
half  the  sky;  and  he  destroyed  all  the  creatures  that
were  in  her.  But  thiS  account*  of  nature  i&Tx)  be  un-
derstood aUegoricafty.  For  when  allr  was  stilt  moist,
and  "creatures  were  born  in  it,  then  the  god  (Belus)
cut  off  his  own  head,  and  the  gods  mixed  the  blood
that  flowed  from  it  with  the  earth,  and  formed  men ;
wherefore  men  are  rational,  and  participate  in  the
divine  intelligence/

*And  Belus,  whom  they  explain  as  Zeus  (and  the
Armenians  as  Aramazd),  cut  the  darkness  in  two,  and
separated  earth  and  heaven  from  each  other,  and
ordered  the  world.  And  animals  which  could  not
bear  the  power  of  the  light,  perished.  And  <33elus,
when  he  saw  the  desert  and  fertile  land,  commanded
one  of  the  gods  to  cut  off  his  head,  to  mix  the  earth
with  the  blood  flowing  from  it,  and  to  form  men  and
beasts  that  could  bear  the  air.  And  Belus  established
also  the  stars^and  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the  five
planets.'

1  Mr.  Sayce  writes  to  mtf:  'Perhaps  Lenonnant  is  right  in  correcting
(when  compared  with  the  Toi>0*  or  Tavftjaof  Damascins)  into
that  is,  the  Assyrian  T&amtu  or  Tamtu,  the  sea,  ihe  Hetf
In  this  case  the  correspondence  of  ihe  Babylonian  account
with  Genesis  i.  2  will  be  even  greater '  Bunsen  explained  Tal&deth
from  the  Hebrew  yalad,  as  meaning  'laying  eggs.'  Bunsen's  'Egypt,'
vol.  iv  p.  150,  Dr,  Haupt  ('Die  SumeriBohe^kkadis^he  Spraohe,'
p.  276)  points  out  ifcat  m  in  Sumei^Accadian  dwindled  down  to  v,  and
that  the  same  change  may  be  observed  in  Assyrian  also.  Thus  the
Assyria^  Tdmdu,  sea  (-  tahmatu,  or  ti  'amdu,  ti'tontu,  stat.  oonstr.
t'  ftmat;  cf  Hebrew  tehom)  is  represented  as  Tavfll  by  Damascius,
'Qsestaones  de  primis  principiis/  ed.  Eopp.  p.  384),  and  Damkina,  the


LECTTOE  I.  89

Nothing  can  be  at  first  sight  more  senseless  and
confused  than  this  Babylonian  version*  of  ttye  genesis
of  the  earth  and  of  man ;  yet,  ifr  we  examine  it  more
carefully,  we  can  stjjl  distinguish  the  following
elements :

i.  In  file  beginning tthere  waS  darkness  and  water.

In  Hebrew:  •Darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the
deep,

a.  The  heaven  was  divided  from  the  earth.

Ift  Hebrew :  Let  there  be  a«ftrmament  in  the  midst
of  the  waters,  and  let  it  divide  the  waters  from  the

waters And  God  called  the  firmament  Heaven ;

and  God  called  the  dry  land  Earth.

3.  The  stars  were  made,  and  the  sun  and  the  moon,
and  the  five  planets.

In  Hebrew :  And  God  made  two  great  lights ;  the
greater  light  to  rule  the  day,  and  the  lesser  light  to
rule  the  night ;  he  made  the  stars  also.

4.  Animals  of  various  kinds  were  created.

5.  Men  were  created.

It  is  in  the  creation  of  animals  in  particular  that
the  extravagant  imagination  of  the  Babylonians  finds
its  widest  scope.  It  is  said  that  the  images  of  these
creatures  are  to  be  seen  in  the  temple  of  Belus,  and  as
their  description  certainly  agrees  with  some  of  the
figures  of  gods  and  heroes  that  may  now  be  seen  in
the  British  Museum,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  the  Baby-
lonian story  of  the  creation  of  these  monsters  may
have  arisen  from  the  contemplation  of  the  a&efc&t
idols  in  the  temples  of  BaBylon.  But  this  waM  still
leave  the  original  conception  of  such  moj&$ere  unex-
plained.

The  most  important  point,  however,  is  this,  that


40        LEOTUBES  OK  THE  SOIENOEf  OF  RELIGION.

•  *      •

the  Babylonians  represented  man  as  participating  in
divine  intelligence.  The  syntbolical  language  in  which
they*  express  this  id«a  is  no  doubt  horrible*  and  dis-
gusting, but  let  us  recollect  tfeat  tlie  JIebrew«symbol,
too,*'  that  God  breathed  into  n>an's  nostrils  the  breath
of  life/  is  after  all  but  another  weak  attempt  at  ex-
pressing the  same  idea, — an  idea  so  exalted  tnat  no
language  can  ever  express  it  without  loss  or  injury,

In  order  to  guess  with  some  hope  of  success  at  the
original  meaning  of  ancient  traditions,  it  is  absolutely
necessary  that  we  should  be  familiar  with  the  genius
of  the  language  in  which  such  traditions  took  their
origin.  Languages,  for  instance,  which  do  not  denote
grammatical  gender,  will  be  free  from  many  mytho-
logical stories  which  in  Sanskrifc,  Greek,  and  Latin
are  inevitable.  Dr.  Bleek,  the  indefatigable  student
of  African  languages,  has  frequently  dwelt  oft  this
fact.  In  the  Preface  to  his  Comparative  Grammar
of  the  South- African  Languages,  published  in  1863,
he  says :

'  The  forms  of  a  language  may  be  said  to  constitute
in  some  degree  the  skeleton  frame  of  the  human  mind
whose  thoughts  they  express  ....  How  dependent,
for  example,  the  higl&st  products  of  the  human  mind,
the  religious  ideas  and  conceptions  d?  even  highly
civilized  nations,  may  be  upon  this  manner  of  speak-
ing has  been  shown  by  Max-Muller,  in  his  essay  on
Comparative  Mythology  (Oxford  Essays,  I855)1.
This  will  become  still  more  evident  from  otfr  African
researches.  The  primary  cause  of  the  ancestor  wor-
ship of  the  one  race  (Kafirs,  Degrees,  and  Polyne-
sians), and  of  the  sidereal  worship,  or  of  those  forms
1  'Chips  from  a  German  Workshop,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  1-146.


LEOTUBE  I*  4rl

of  religion  which  have  sprung  from  the  veneration  of
heavenly  bodies,  of  th<J  other  (Hottentots,  North-
African,  Semitic,  and  Aryan  nations),  is  Supplied  "by
the  ve^p-  forms,  W  their  languages.  The  nations
speaking  Sex-denoting  languages  are  distinguished
by  a  higher  poetical^  conception,  by  which  human
agencj-  is  transferred  to  other  beirfgs,  and  even  to  in-
animate things,  in  consequence  of  which  iheir*  per-
sonification takes  place,  forming  the  origin  of*almost
all  mythological  legends.  This  faculty  is  not  de-
veloped in  the  Kafir  mind,  because  not  suggested  by
the  form  of  their  language,  in  which  the  nouns  of
persons  are  not  (as  in  the  Sex-denoting  languages)
thrown  together  with  those  of  inanimate  beings  into
the  same  classes  or  genders,  but  are  in  separate  classes,
without  anj*  grammatical  distinction  of  sex1/

If  ttierefore,  without*  possessing  a  knowledge  of  the
Zulu  language,  I  venture  on  an  interpretation  of  an
account  of  creation  that  has  sprung  up  in  the  thought
and  language  of  the  Zulus,  I  do  so  with  great  hesita-
tion, and  only  in  order  to  show,  by  one  instance  at
least,  that  the  religions  of  savages,  too,  will  have  to

1  See  also  his  Preface  to  the  second  volume  of  the  Comparative
Grammar,  published  1869.  Mr.  E.  B.*  Tylor  has  some  valuable
yremarka  on  the  satne  subject,  in  his  article  on  the  Beligion  of  Savages,
in  the  Fortnightly  Review,  1866,  p.  80.  Looked  at  from  a  higher  poiftt
of  view,  it  la,  of  couse,  not  language,  as  such,  which  dominate*  &*
mjnd,  but  thought  and  language  are  only  two  manifestations  of  the  same
energy,  mutually  determining  each  other.  Failing  to  jtewarw  ifc&  *&
haa  to  take  «efnge,  like  ^ylor,  with  the  oM  ao-aOU*  «atf  '"  '

as  the  apparent  source  of  all  mythology.  Bat  •
tautological,  not  a  genetic  explanation  of  my$i
important  difference  betwee^the  inevitable  «nd  4fe*«
of  the  genius  of  language.  The  deepest  ecruroe  of  mjCfce&gy  lies  in  tho
former,  and  must  be  carefully  dm$pgraBhed  from  the  later  sporadic
diseases  of  language.


42        LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  EELIGION.

submit  hereafter  to  the  same  treatment  whidi  we
apply  to  the  sacred  traditions  of  the  Semite  and
Axypn  nations.  I  should  not  be  at  all  surprised  if
tile  tentative  interpretation  whidf  J  venturgi  to  pro-
pos$,  -were  proved  to  be  untenable  by  those  who
have  studied  the  ZuJu  dialec^p,  but  I  shalFbe  much
more  ready  to  surrender  my  interpretation,  fehan  to
lose*the  conviction  that  there  is  no  solid  foundation
for  the  study  of  the  religions  of  savages  except  the
study  of  their  languages.

How  impossible  it  is  to  arrive  at  anything  like  a
correct  understanding  of  the  religious  sentiments  of
savage  tribes  without  an  accurate  and  scholarlike
knowledge  of  their  dialects,  is  best  shown  by  the  old
controversy  whether  there  are  any  tribes  of  human
beings  entirely  devoid  of  religious  sentiments  or  no.
Those  who,  for  some  reason  or  other,  hold  that  re-
ligious sentiments  are  not  essential  to  human  nature,
find  little  difficulty  in  collectijjg  statements  of  tra-
vellers and  missionaries  in  support  of  their  theory.
Those  who  hold  the  opposite  opinion  find  no  more
difficulty  in  rebutting  such  statements1.  Now  the
real  point  to  settle  before  we  adopt  the  one  or  the
other  view  is,  what  feind  of  authority  can  be  claimed
by  those  whose  opinions  we  quote;  did  they  really
know  the  language,  and  did  they  know  it,  not  onljT
sufficiently  well  to  converse  on  ordinary  subjects,  but
to  enter  into  a  friendly  and  unreserved  conversation
on  topics  on  which  even  highly  educated  people  are
so  apt  to  misunderstand  %ach  other?  We  want  in-
formant^, in  fact,  like  Dr.  Callaway,  Dr.  Bleek,  men

1  See  Schelling,  Werke,  vol.  i  p  72 ;  and  Mr.  B.  B.  Tyler's  reply  to
Sir  John  Lubbock,  'Primitive  Culture,'  vol.  i  p.  381.


LEOTUBE  I.  43

who  are  both  scholars  and  philosophers.  Savages
are  shy  and  silent  in  th3  presence  of  white  ^itien,  and
they  have  a  superstitious  reluctance  against  mention-
ing evott  the  naifies  of  their  gods  and  heroes.  Not
many  years  ago  it  wae^supposed,  on  what  would  'seem
to  be  gold  authority,  Jthat  the  Zulus  had  no  religious
ideas  tit  all ;  at*  present  our  very*  Bishops  have  been
silenced  by  their  theological  inquiries.

Captain  Gardiner,  in  his  Narrative  of  a  Journey  to
the«Zoolu  Country  undertaken  in  1835,  gives  the
following  dialogue:

'Have  you  any  knowledge  of  the  power  by  whom
the  world  was  made?  When  you  see  the  sun  rising
and  setting,  and  tbe  trees  growing,  do  you  know  who
made  them  and  who  governs  them 2'

TPAI,  a  Z«lu  (af^er  a  little  pause,  apparently  deep
in  thought),— 'No ;  we  see  them,  but  cannot  tell  how
they  come;  we  suppose  that  they  come  of  them-
selves/

A.  '  To  whom  then  do  you  attribute  your  success
or  failure  in  war  ? '

TPAI.  'When  we  are  not  suceessfu],  and  do  not
take  cattle,  we  think  our  father  (Itango)  has  not
looked  upon  us.'

A.  'Do  yoa  think  your  father's  spirits  (Amatongo)
'made  the  world  ? '

TPAI.    'No.'

A.  'Where  do  you  suppose  the  spirit  of  man  goes
after  it  leaves  the  body1?*

TPAI,    'We  cannot  tell/

A.    'Do  you  think  it  lives  for  ever?'

TPAI.  'That  we  cannot  tell;  we  believe  that  the
spirit  of  our  forefathers  looks  upon  us  when  we  go


44        LECTURES  ON  THE  SOIEKOB  OF  BELIQION.

to  war ;  but  we  do  not  think  about  it  at  any  "other
time.3

A*  *T?oft  admit  that  you  cannot  control  &e  suu  or
th£  moon,  or  even  make  a  hair  of  J^ur  head  J/o  grow.
Eafe»you  no  idea  of  any  fiower  capable  of  doing
this?'

TPAJ  *No;  we*know  of  none:  ^  know  tbat  we
camfot  do  these  things,  and  we  suppose  that  they
come  of  themselves.'

It  may  seem  difficult  to  find  a  deeper  shade  of
religious  darkness  than  is  pictured  in  this  dialogue.
But  now  let  us  hear  the  account  which  the  Eev,  Dr.
Callaway1  gives  of  the  fundamental  religious  notions
which  he,  after  a  long  residence  among  the  various  clans
of  the  Zulus,  after  acquiring  an  intimate  knowledge  of
their  language,  and,  what  is  still  luvu-e  jB^portant,  after
gaining  their  confidence,  was  able  to  extract  from  their
old  men  and  women.  They  all  believe,  first  of  all,
in  an  ancestor  of  each  particular  family  and  clan,  and
also  in  a  common  ancestor  of  the  whole  race  of  man.
That  ancestor  is  generally  called  the  Unkulunkulu,
which  means^  the  great-great-grand&ther2  When

1  Dr.  Callaway,  'TTnfculimkulu,'  p.  54

9  Ibid,  p.  48.  UAfalufi&ufa,  the  word  by  which  God  is  rendered  fn
Zulu,  is  derived,  according  to  Bleek,  by  reduplicatton  of  a  (nasalised^
form  of  the  9th  class  from  the  adjective  stem  -kulu  (great,  large,  oldf
n-ku-kula,  to  grow,  etc.),  and  seems  to  mean  originally  a  great-great-
grandfather, or  the  first  ancestor  of  a  family  or  tribe,  though  perhaps
the  unnaBalised  form  v-kuluJcuTto  is  at  present  more  usual  in  this  signi-
fication. Then  it  was  applied  by  metapnor  to  that  being  from  whom
everything  was  derived,  who  ae*>rding  to  the  Zulu  tradition  has
created  airmen,  animals,  and  other  things  to  whom  life  and  death
are  due,  &c.  In  Inhambane  the  word  for  God,  derived  from  the  same
root  is  Mvfa&ffufa;  in  Ki-hiztu,  Ki-kamba,  and  Kinika  it  is  JKW^^w;
in  Ej-suiJheli,  Mhagu;  in  Makua,  Muhngo  or  MuMo;  in  Sofala,
m  Tette,  Murwiffo  or  Mornngo ;  in  the  Ku-suaTieli  dialect


LECTURE  I.  45

pressejL  as  to  the  father  of  this  great-great-grandfather,
the  general  answer  of  tfie  Zulus  seems  to  1$&  that  he
'branched  off  fronj  a  reed/  or  ihat  he  'c&me  from  a
bed  of  *eeds.'

Here,  I  cannot  help*  suspecting  that  languag£  has
been  at  Vork  spinning  mytholbgy.  In  Sanskrit  the
word  ^parvan)  which  means  originally  a  knot  or  joint
in  a  cane,  comes  to  mean  a  link,  a  member;*  and,
transferred  to  a  family,  it  expresses  the  different  shoots
and*  scions  that  spring  from  the  original  stem.  The
name  for  stem  or  race  and  lineage  in  Sanskrit  is
vajrc&a,  which  originally  means  a  reed,  a  bamboo-cane.
In  the  Zulu  language  a  reed  is  called  uthlanga,  strktly
speaking  a  reed  which  is  capable  of  throwing  out  off*
shoots1.  It  comes  thus  metaphorically  to  mean  a
source  of  besng.  &  father  is  the  uthlanga  of  his  chil-
dren* who  are  supposed  to  have  branched  off  from
him.  Whatever  notions  at  the  present  day  the  ignor-
ant among  the  natives  may  have  of  the  meaning
of  this  tradition,  so  much  seems  to  be  generally
admitted,  even  among  Zulus,  that  originally  Ifc
could  not  have  been  intended  to  t$aeh  that  men
sprang  from  a  real  reed2.  clt  cannot  be  doubted/
T)r.  Callaway  writes,  'that  the*word  alone  has  come
down  to  the  people,  whilst  the  meaning  has  been

108k*


of  Mombas,  Mtingu;  in  the  Ki-pofeomo,  JfvA^o;  in  Otyi-Hererd,
Afiubcn*  ;  see  Bleek,  '  Comparative  Grammar,'  §§  389-394,
taU  Jftftett  IB  our  fatter  Muter*  ;  eee  Eolbe^
Dictionary,'  s.  T.God.  O

1  Dr.  Callaway,  '  TTnknlunbalu,'  p.  a,  note,

1  In  Herero,  '  tna  memnjsi  Mtzkurtt9  meaas,  ^  ^fe'l^wa  oreftted,
i.e.  broken  trat  of  the  omiinoboromtKjng*  (<a**fck»-kde)  1n  Herero
fashion  by  Hukuru  ;  see  Kolbs'e  '  English-Heraro  rfiatianary,*  s  v.
God.


46        LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  •  OF  BELIGUOff.

The  interpretation  which  I  venture  to  progose  of
this  Zulu  myth  is  this: — The  Zulus  may  have  said
originally  that  they  T*ere  all  offshoots  of  a  re6d,  using
reed  in  the  same  sense  in  which  vawfeq,  is  used«In  San-
skrit? and  meaning  therefore  no  jnore  than  that  they  all
were  children  of  one  father,  members  of  one  ft,ce.  As
the  word  uthlanga,  Much  came  to  meaji  race,  retained
also  its  original  meaning,  viz.  reed,  people,  unaccus-
tomed 6>  metaphorical  language  and  thought,  would
soon  say  that  men  camja  from  A  reed,  or  were  fetched
from  a  bed  of  reeds,  while  others  would  take  Uthlanga
for  a  proper  name  and  make  him  the  ancestor  of  the
human  race.  Among  some  Zulu  tribes  we  actually
find  that  while  TJnkulunkulu  is  the  first  man,  Uth-
langa is  represented  as  the  first  woman1.  Among
other  tribes  where  Unkulunkulu  was  the  first  man,
Uthlanga  became  the  first  woman  (p.  58).

Every  nation,  every  clan,  every  family  requires
sooner  or  later  an  ancestor.  Even  in  comparatively
modern  times  the  Britons,  or  the  inhabitants  of  Great
Britain,  were  persuaded  that  it  was  not  good  to  be
without  an  ancestor,  and  they  were  assured  by  Geof-
frey of  Monmouth  that  they  might  claim  descent  from
Brutus.  In  the  same  manner  the  Hellenes,  or  the
ancient  inhabitants  of  Hellas,  claimed  descent  from
Hellen.  The  name  of  Hellenes,  originally  restricted
to  a  tribe  living  in  Thessaly2,  became  in  time  the
name  of  the  whole  nation8,  and  hence  it  was  but
natural  that  ^Jolos,  the  ancestor  of  the  «Eolians,

1  Dr.  Galloway,  'Unkulunknln,'  p.  58.  According  to  tlie  Popol  Voh
the  first  woman  was  created  from  the  xnarrW  of  a  reed  see  'Selected
Essays/  ii.  p.  394-

*  Horn.  E.  a.  684.  i  Hmcyd,  i.  3.


LECTURE  I,  47

ijhe  ancestor  of  the  Dorians,  and  Xuthos,  the
father  of  Achseos  and  lorQ  should  all  be  represented
as  the  sons  of  Hellen.  So  far  aft  is  intelligible,  if,we
will  onlyrxemembQr*that  this  is  the  technical  language
of  the  heraldic  office  of  ancient  Greece.

But  very  soon  the  question  "arose,  who  was  the
father  o£  Hellen^the  ancestor  of  the  Greeks,  or,  ac-
cording to  the  intellectual  horizon  of  the  ancient
Greeks,  of  the  whole  human  race?  If  he  was  the
ancestor  of  the  whole  Human  race,  or  the  first  man,
he  could  only  be  the  son  of  Zeus,  the  supreme  god,
and  thus  we  find  that  Hellen  is  by  some  authorities
actually  called  the  son  of  Zeus.  Others,  however,
give  a  different  account.  There  was  in  Greece,  as  in
many  countries,  the  tradition  of  a  general  deluge  by
which  every  living  being  had  been  destroyed,  except
a  few  ^ho  escaped  in  a  boat,  and  who,  after  the  flood
had  subsided,  repeopled  the  earth,  The  person  thus
saved,  according  to  Greek  traditions,  was  called  Deu-
kahon,  the  ruler  of  Thessaly,  the  son  *of  Prome-
theus. Prometheus  had  told  him  to  build  a  ship  and
furnish  it  with  provisions,  and  when  ths  flood  came,
he  and  his  wife  Pyrrha  were  the  only  people  who
escaped.

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  the  Greeks  had  really  two
ancestors  of  the  human  race,  Hellen  and  Deukalion,
and  in  order  to  remove  this  difficulty,  nothing  re-
mained but  to  make  Hellen  the  son  of  Deukalion.
All  this  is  perfectly  natural  and  intelligible*  if
only  we  will  learn  to  s|>eak,  and  not  otofy  $o
speak,  but  also  to  think  the  language  of  tte*aii@&Lt
world.

The  story  then  goes  on  to  explain  how  Deukalion


48        LECTUBES  ON  THE  SOIENOS  OF  RELIG-IOff.

became  the  father  of  all  the  people  on  earth;  .that  he
and  his^ffife  Pyrrha  were  t6ld  to  throw  stones  (or  the
bones  of  &e  earth)  backward  behind  thenf,  and  that
tfeese  stones  became  men  and  woin^n.  No^  here  we
have  "clearly  a  myth  or  a  joiracle, — a  miracle,  too,
without  any  justification,  for  jf  Pyrrha  was  the  wife
of  Deukalion,  wh£  should  not  Eellen  be  thear  son?
Alll)e.jsomes  clear,  if  we  look  at  the  language  in  which
the  story  is  told.  Pyrrha  means  the  Red,  and  was
originally  a  name  for  the  red  Dearth.  As  the  Hellenes
claimed  to  be  indigenous  or  autochthonic,  born  of  the
earth  where  they  lived,  Pyrrha,  the  red  Earth,  was
naturally  called  their  mother,  and  being  the  mother
of  the  Hellenes,  she  must  needs  be  made  the  wife  of
Deukalion,  the  father  of  the  Hellenes.  Originally,
however,  Deukalion,  like  Manu  In  India,  was  repre-
sented as  haying  alone  escaped  from  the  deluge,  and
hence  the  new  problem  how,  without  a  wife,  he  could
have  become  the  father  of  the  people  ?  It  was  in  this  per-
plexity, no  doubt,  that  the  myth  arose  of  his  throwing
stones  behind  him,  and  these  stones  becoming  the  new
population  o|  the  earth.  The  Greek  word  for  people
W»B  Xiwfe,  that  for  stones  A£« ; — hence  what  could  be
more  natural,  whei*  children  asked,  whence  the  Acwfe
or  the  people  of  Deukalion  camea  tban  to  say  that
they  came  from  XSes  or  stones l  ?

I  might  give  many  more  instances  of  the  same
kind,  all  showing  that  there  was  a  meaning  in  the


1  The  IJortii  American  Indians  told  Roger  Williams,  that  'they  hud
it  from  their  fathers,  that  Kautantowwtf  made  one  man  and  woman
of  a  stone,  •which  disliking,  he  broke  thfim  in  pieoes,  and  made  Another
man  and  woman  of  a  tree,  which  were  the  fountain  of  all  mankind.'
*  Publications  of  Narraganaett  Club/  voL  i.  p.  158.


LEOTUBE  I.  49

most  t&aaningless  traditions  of  antiquity,  all  show-
ing, what  is  still  more  important,  that  these  tradi-
tions, many  of  them  in  their  present  sttffee*  absurd
and  repqjlsive,  regaftn  a  simple,  intelligible,  and  even
beautiful  character  if  ^e  divest  them  of  the  -cflist
•which  language  in  its  inevitable  decay  has  formed
around  "them.

We  never  lose,  we  always  gain,  when  we  discover
the  most  ancient  intention  of  sacred  traditions,  instead
of  beong  satisfied  with 'their  l$ter  aspect,  and  their
modern  misinterpretations.  Have  we  lost  anything
if,  while  reading  the  story  of  Hephsestos  splitting  open
with  his  axe  the  head  of  Zeus,  and  Athene  springing
from  it,  full  armed**  we  perceive  behind  this  savage
imagery,  Zeus  as  the  bright  Sky,  his  forehead  as
the  East,  Hephsestos"as  the  young,  not  yet  risen  Sun,
and  Athene  as  the  Dawn,  the  daughter  of  the  Sky,
stepping  forth  from  the  fountain-head  of  light —

r\av/c«7rw,  with  eyes  like  an  owl  (and  beautiful  they
are);

UapO&os,  pure  as  a  virgin;

Xptf  tr€o»  the  golden ;

'Ajcpfa,  lighting  up  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  and
her  own  glorious  Parthenon  in  he$own  favourite  town
of  Athens ;

JIoXAeiy,  whirling  the  shafts  of  light;

'AX^o,  the  genial  warmth  of  the  morning;

Uptpaxos,  the  foremost  champion  in  the  battle
between  night  and  day;

H(iz;o7rXos,  in  full  armour*  in  her  panoply,  of  Bgit,
driving  away  the  darlpiess  of  night,  and  r &a$ng  men
to  a  bright  life,  to  bright  thoughts,  to  bright  endea-
vours?


60      LEorraEs  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGHON.

Would  the  Greek  gods  lose  in  our  eyes  i£  instead
of  believing  that  Apollon  €tnd  Artemis  murcfered  the
twelve  children  of.Niobe,  we  perceived  feat  Niobe
was,  in  a  former  period  of  language,  a  nam^  of  snow
and  innter,  and  that  no  nft>re  was  intended  by  the
ancient  poet  than  tfeat  Apolfon  and  Artemis,  the  ver-
nal deities,  must  ftlay  every  year  wi|h  their  darts  the
briHiant  and  beautiful,  but  doomed  children  of  the
Sno\^?  Is  it  not  something  worth  knowing,  worth
knowing  even  to  us^  after  the  lapse  of  four  qr  five
thousand  years,  that  before  the  separation  of  the
Aryan  race,  before  the  existence  of  Sanskrit,  Greek,
or,  Latin,  before  the  gods  of  the  Veda  had  been  wor-
shipped, and  before  there  was  %  sanctuary  of  Zeus
among  the  sacred  oaks  of  Dodona,  one  supreme  Deity
had  been  found,  had  been  namdfl,  had  .been  invoked
by  the  ancestors  of  our  race,  and  had  been  mvofced
by  a  name  which  has  never  been  excelled  by  any
other  name,  Dyaus,  Zeus,  Jupiter,  Tyr, — all  meaning
originally  light  and  brightness,  a  concept  which  on
one  side  became  materialized  as  sky,  morning,  and
day,  while  on  the  other  it  developed  into  a  name  of
the  bright  and  heavenly  beings,  the  Devas,  as  one  of
the  first  expression^ of  the  Divine?

No,  if  a  critical  examination  of  the  ancient  language
of  our  own  religion  leads  to  no  worse  results  thaJh
those  which  have  followed  from  a  careful  interpreta-
tion of  the  petrified  language  of  ancient  India  and
Greece,  we  need  not  fear;  we  shall  be  gjiineors,  not
losers.  Like  an  old  previous  metal,  the  ancient  reli-
gion, after  the  rust  of  ages  has  been  removed,  will
come  out  in  all  its  purity  an*d  brightness:  and  the
image  which  it  discloses  will  be  the  image  of  the


LECTURE  I.  51

Father,'  the  Father  of  all  the  nations  upon  earth ;
and  the  "superscription,  when  we  can  read  it  again,
will  be,  not  in  Judaea  only,  but  i$  the  languages  flof
all  the  rjces  of  thfc  world,  the  Word  of  God,  re;
vealedj  where  alone  it  cafi.  be  revealed, — revealed  £n
the  heart  06  man.


SECOND  LECTURE.

DELIVEBEp  AT  THE  ROYAL  INSTITUTION^
FEBBUABY  36,  1870.

flpHERE  is  no  lack  of  materials  for  the  student  of
JL  the  Science  of  "Religion.  It  is  true  tha£,  com-
pared with  the  number  of  languages  which  the  com-
parative philologist  has  to  deal  with,  the  number  of
religions  is  small.  In  a  comparative  study  of  lan-
guages, however,  we  find  most  of  our  materials  ready
for  use ;  we  possess  grammars  and  dictionaries,  while
it  is  difficult  to 'say,  where  we  are  fc>  look  for  the
grammars  and  dictionaries  of  the  principal  religions
of  the  world.  Not  in  the  catechisms,  or  the  articles,
not  even  in  the  so-called  creeds1  or  confessions  of  faith
which,  if  they  do  not  give  us  an  actual  misrepresen-
tation of  the  doctrines  which  they  profess  to  epitomise,
give  us  always  the  shadow  only,  and  never  the  soul
and  substance  of  a  religion.  But  how  seldom  do  we
find  even  such  helJ>sJ

Among  Eastern  nations  it  is  not  unusual  to  distin-
guish between  religions  that  are  founded  on  a  book,
and  others  that  have  no  such  vouchers  to  produce.

1  'What  are  creeds?  Skeletons,  freezing  abstractly  metaphysical
expressions  of  unintelligible  dogmas;  and  these  I  am  to  regard  as  the
expositions  of  the  fresh,  living,  infinite  truth  which  came  from  Jesus !
I  aught  with  equal  propriety  be  required  to  hear  and  receive  the
lispings  of  infancy  as  the  expressions  of  wisdom,  Creeds  are  to  the
Scriptures,  what  rushlights  are  to  the  sun.*— Dr.  Charming,  'On
Creeds/


LECTURE  II.  53

The  former  are  considered  more  respectable,  and,
though  they  may  contain*  false  doctrine,  th#y  are
looked  upon  as  a  kind  of  aristocracy  among  the
vulgar  and  nondescript  crjpwd  of  bookless  or  illiterate
reKgions1.

To  the  student  of  religion  canonical  books  are,  no
doubt,  of  the  utmost  importance,  but  he  ought  never
to  forget  that  canonical  books  too  give  the  reflgofed
image  only  of  the  real  doctrines  of  the  founder  of  a
new  religion,  an  image  always  Wurred  and  distorted
by  the  medium  through  which  it  had  to  pass.  And
how  few  are  the  religions  which  possess  a  sacred  canon!
how  small  is  the  aristocracy  of  real  book-religions  in
the  history  of  the  world  1

Let  us  look  at  the.  two  races  that  have  been  the
principal  actors  in  that  great  drama  which  we  call
the  history  of  the  world,  the  Aryan  and  the  Semitic^
and  we  shall  find  that  two  members  only  of  each  race
can  claim  the  possession  of  a  sacred  code.  Among
the  Aryans,  the  Hindus  and  the  Persians;  among  the
Shemites,  the  Hebrews  and  the  Arabs.  In  the  Aryan
family  the  Hindus,  in  the  Semitic  family  the  Hebrews,
have  each  produced  two  book-religions;  the  Hindus
have  given  rise  to  Brahmanism  aad  Buddhism;  the
I^pbrews  to  Mtf&aism  and  Christianity,  Nay,  it  is
important  to  observe  that  in  each  family  the  third
book-religion  can  hardly  lay  daim  to  an  independent.
origin,  but  is  only  a  weaker  repetition  of  ike  firsi,
Zoroastrianism  has  its  sources  in  the  aams


1  Even  before  Mohammed,  %»  people  in  posaeo&mrf  »  fc»£{
ktt&Owerein  Ajabio  distiiigiiififad  from  the  mnsaiynn,  ttofeatihea.
The  aama  ahl  i  klttfb  W9*>  howler,  property  restricted  to
t  868  Jfate  A*


54         LECTTOES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OP  BELIGUON,


which  fed  the  deeper  and  broader  stream  X>f  Vedie
religion  ^Mohammedanism  springs,  as  far^fts  its  most
vital  doctrines  are"  concerned,  frgm  the  ancient  foun-
tain-head of  the  religion  o£  Abraham,  the  Worshipper
andlhe  friend  of  the  one  tnre  God.

If  you  keep  befofe  your  mind  the  following  simple
outline,  you  can  see  at  one  glance  tile  river-system  in
which  the  religious  thought  of  the  Aryan  and  the
Semitic  nations  has  been  running  for  centuries — of
those,  at  least,  who  "are  in  possession  of  sacrdd  and
canonical  books.


ARYAN  FAMILY.
Veda


SEMITIC  FAMILY,
Old  Testament


Zend-Avesta
ZoroastaanJBm


Ttjpirfaka
Buddhism


New  Testament


Christianity


AKYAN-


Koran


While  Buddhism  is  the  direct  offspring,  and,  at  the
same  time,  the  antagonist  of  Erahmanism,  Z/oroas-
trianism  is  rather  a  deviation  from  the  straight  course
of  ancient  Vedic  fedth,  though  it  likewise  contains  a
protest  against  some  of  the  doctrines  of  the  earliest
worshippers  of  the  Vedic  gods.  The  same,  or  nearly
the  same  relationship  holds  together  the  three  prin-


LEOTUBE  II.  55

cipal  religions  of  the  Semitic  stock,  only  that,  chrono-
logically, ]£ohanimedanism0is  later  than  Christianity,
while  Zoroastrianism  is  earlier  than.  Buddhisin.

Observe  also  another,  and,  as  we  shall  see,  by  no
means  accidental  coincidence  in  the  parallel  ramifica-
tions of  these  two  religious  stems?

BuddMsm,  which  is  the  offspring  of,  but  at  the
same  time  marks  a  reaction  against,  the  ancient  frah-
manism  of  Eadia,  withered  away  after  a  time  on  the
soil  from  which  it  had  sprung,  And  assumed  its  real
importance  only  after  it  had  been  transplanted  from
India,  and  struck  root  among  Turanian  nations  in  the
very  centre  of  the  Asiatic  continent.  Buddhism,
being  at  its  birth  an* Aryan  religion,  ended  by  becom-
ing the  principal  religion  of  the  Turanian  world.

The  same  transference  took  place  in  the  second
stem.  *  Christianity,  being  the  offspring  of  Mosaism,
was  rejected  by  the  Jews  as  Buddhism  was  by  the
Brahmans.  It  failed  to  fulfil  its  purpose  as  a  mere
reform  of  the  ancient  Jewish  faith,  and  not  till  it
had  been  transferred  from  Semitic  to  Aryan  ground,
from  the  Jews  to  the  Gentiles,  did  it  devjelope  its  real
nature  and  assume  its  world-wide  importance.  Having
been  at  its  birth  a  Semitic  religion,  it  became  the
jrincipal  religion  of  the  Aryan  world.

There  is  one  other  nation  only,  outside  the  pale  of
the  Aryan  and  Semitic  families,  which  can  claim  one,
or  even  two  book-religions  as  its  own.  China  is  the
mother  ofr  two  religions,  each  founded  on  a  &&3R&
code— the  religion  of  Conrucius,  (Kung  Fu-tee,  i  e.
Rung,  the  Master,)  and  the  religion  of  Lacntee,  the
former  resting  on  the  ^Tive  King  and  the  Four  Shu,
the  latter  on  the  Tao-te-king.


56         LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGUON.

With  these  eight  religions  the  library  of  th^  Sacred
Books  of  the  whole  humarf  race  is  complete,  and  an
acqirate  Study  of  these  eight  codes,  written  in  San-
s^rit,  P&li,  and  Zend,  in  Eebrew^Cfcreek,  and  Arabic,
lastly  in  Chineses  might  in  itself  not  seem  too  formid-
able an  undertaking  d or  a  single  scholar.  Yet,  let  us
begin  at  home,  atfd  look  at  the  enormous  literature
devoted  to  the  interpretation  of  the  Old  Testament,
and  the  number  of  books  published  every  year  on
controverted  points  i^  the  dtfctrine  or  the  history  of
the  Gospels,  and  you  may  then  form  an  idea  of  what
a  theological  library  would  be  that  should  contain
tbe  necessary  materials  for  an  accurate  and  scholar-
like  interpretation  of  the  eight  «sacred  codes.  The
Tao-te-king,  the  canonical  book  of  the  followers  of
Lao-tse,  contains  only  about  5,320  woids,  the  com-
mentaries written  to  explain  its  meaning  are  endless1.
Even  in  so  modern,  and,  in  the  beginning,  at  least,  so
illiterate  a  religion  as  that  of  Mohammed,  the  sources
that  have  to  be  consulted  for  the  history  of  the  faith
during  the  early  centuries  of  its  growth  are  so  abund-
ant, that  few  critical  scholars  could  master  them  in
their  completeness2.

If  we  turn  our  eyes  to  the  Aryan  religions,  the

1  Julian,  '  Tao-te-king,*  p.  xrsv;  see  infra,  p.  62.

1  Sprengsr, '  Das  Leben  des  Mohammed,1  vol.  i.  p.  9 :— 'Bie  Quellen,
die  ich  benutzt  babe,  sind  90  zallreich,  trad  der  Zustand  der  Gelehr-
samkeit  war  unter  den  Moalimen  in  ihrer  Urzeit  von  dera  unHrigen  so
verscMeden,  dasa  die  Materialien,  die  ioh  fiber  die  Quelfen  geaammelt
tabe,  ein  ziemlich  beleibtes  Banchhen  bilden  werden,  Es  1st  in  der
Th%t  nothwesdig,  die  Literatnigesohiohte  dee  Islam  der  ersten  zwei
Jabrhunderte  am.  schreiben,  mn  den  Les^f  in.  den  Stand  m  setzen,  den
tier  gesammelten  kritisohen  Apparat  zn  bemitzen.  Ioh  gedenke  die
Eesoltate  meiner  Foreohungen  ala  eins  separates  Werkohen  iwwh  der
PtopheteoibiograpMe  horauszngeben.^


LEOTtTBB  II.  67

sacred  ^writings  of  the  Brahmans,  in  the  narrowest
acceptation  of  the  word?,  might  seem  within  easy
grasp.  The  hymns  of  the  Big-*reda,  whiBh  are  „  the
real  bible  of  the-ancient  faith  of  the  Vedic  Bishis,  $re
only  1,028  in  number  consisting  of  about  scQjSo
verses1.  ^The  commentary,  however,  on  these  hymns,
of  which  I  ha?we  published  six  *  good-sized  quarto
volumes,  is  estimated  at  100,000  lines  consisting  of
32  syllables  each,  that  is  at  3,200,000  syllables2.
There  are,  besides,  the  three  minor  Vedas,  the  Ya#ur-
veda,  the  S&ma-veda,  the  Afcharva-veda,  which,  though
of  less  importance  for  religious  doctrines,  are  indis-
pensable for  a  right  appreciation  of  the  sacrifioial
and  ceremonial  system  of  the  worshippers  of  the
ancient  Vedic  gods.

To  each  ef  these"  four  Vedas  belong  collections  of
so-called  Br&hmanas,  scholastic  treatises  of  a  later
time,  it  is  true,  but  nevertheless  written  in  archaic
Sanskrit,  and  reckoned  by  every  orthodox  Hindu  as
part  of  his  revealed  literature.  Their  bulk  is  much
larger  than  that  of  the  ancient  Vedic  hymn-books.

And  all  this  constitutes  the  text  only  for  number-
less treatises,  essays,  manuals,  glosses,  &c.,  forming  an
uninterrupted  chain  of  theological  literature,  extend-
ing  over  mor^than  three  thousand  years,  and  receiv-
ing new  links  even  at  the  present  time.  There  are,
besides,  the  inevitable  parasites  of  theological  litera-
ture, the  controversial  writings  of  different  scboofe  of
thought  and  faith,  all  claiming  to  be  orthodox,  yefe
differing  from  each  other *Hke  day  and  uigfetj  «od
lastly,  the  compositions  of  writers,  pcofefeedly  at

1  Max  Muller,  'History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,'  p.  aao.
•SeeffoteB.


58        LEOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

variance  with  the  opinions  of  the  majority,  declared
enemies  ef  the  Brahmanic  taith  and  the  B^ahmanic
priesthood,  wnose  accusations  and  insinuations,  whose
sledge-hammer  arguments,  and  whose*poisone<f  arrows


of  theological  warfare  In  any  other  country.

Nor  can  we  exclude  the  sacred  latf-books,  nor  the
ancieni^  epic  poems,  the  Mah&bh&rata  and  K&m&yana,
nor  the  more  modern,  yet  sacred  literature  of  India,
the  Pur&was  and  Tantras,  if  we'wish  to  gain  an  insight
into  the  religious  belief  of  millions  of  human  beings,
who,  though  they  all  acknowledge  the  Veda  as  their
supreme  authority  in  matters  of  faith,  are  yet  unable
to  understand  one  single  line  of  it,"  and  in  their  daily
life  depend  entirely  for  spiritual  food  on  the  teaching
conveyed  to  them  by  these  more  receiffc  and  more
popular  books.

And  even  then  our  eye  would  not  have  reached
many  of  the  sacred  recesses  in  which  the  Hindu
mind  has  taken  refuge,  either  to  meditate  on  the
great  problems  of  life,  or  to  free  itself  from  the
temptations  and  fetters  of  worldly  existence  by
penances  and  mortifications  of  the  most  exquisite
cruelty.  India  has  *always  been  teeming  with  re-
ligious sects,  and  as  far  as  we  can  lorok  back  into**
the  history  of  that  marvellous  country,  its  religious
life  has  been  broken  up  into  countless  local  centres
which  it  required  all  the  ingenuity  and  perseverance
of  a  priestly  caste  to  hold^  together  with  a  Semblance
of  dogmatic  uniformity.  Some  of  these  sects  may
almost  claim  the  title  of  independent  religions,  as,
for  instance,  the  once  famous  sect  of  the  Sikhs,
possessing  their  own  sacred  code  and  their  own


LECTURE  II,  59

priesthood,  and  threatening  for  a  time  to  become  a
formidable  rival  of  Brahmanism  and  Mohammedanism
in  India.  Political  circumstances  gave  to"  the  sect  of
Mnak«nts  historical  prominence  and  more  lasting
fame.  To  the  student  of  religion  it  is  but  0n£  out
of  many  sects  which  took  theirnorigin  in  the  fifteenth
and  s&teenth  centuries,  and  attempted  to  replace  the
corruptions  of  Hinduism  and  Mohammedanism  nby  a
purer  and  more  spiritual  worship.  The  Granth,  i.e.
the  Volume,  the  sacred  book  of  the  Sikhs,  though
tedious  as  a  whole,  contains  here  and  there  treasures
of  really  deep  and  poetical  thought:  and  we  may
soon  hope  to  have  a  complete  translation  of  iir  by
Dr.  Trumpp1.  But  there  are  other  collections  of
religious  poetry,  mgre  ancient  and  more  original  than
the  stanzas*of  N&nak ;  nay,  many  of  the  most  beau-
tiful1 verses  of  the  Granth  were  borrowed  from  these
earlier  authorities,  particularly  from  Kabir,  the  pupil
of  R&m&nand.  Here  there  is  enough  to  occupy  the
students  of  religion :  an  intellectual  flora  of  greater
variety  and  profuseness  than  even  the  natural  flora  of
that  fertile  country.

And  yet  we  have  not  said  a  word  as  yet  of  the
second  book-religion  of  Indian— of  the  religion  of
Buddha,  originally  one  only  out  of  numberless  sects,
but  possessing  a  vitality  which  has  made  its  branches
to  overshadow  the  largest  portion  of  the  inhabited
globe.  Who  can  say — I  do  not  speak  of  European
scholars*  only,  but  of  the  most  learned  members  of
the  Buddhist  fraternities — who  can  say  that  he  has

1  This  translation  has  since  been  published*  *  The  Adi  Gr*nth,  or  the
Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Sikhs,'  translated  from  the  original  Guraukhi
by  Dr.  E.  Trumpp,  London,  1877.


60        LECITUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OP  BELIGION.

read  the  whole  of  the  canonical  books  of  the  BuiL&hist
Church,  if  say  nothing  of  th&r  commentaries,  or  later
treatises  ?

According  to  a  tradition  preserved  Jby  the  Buddhist
scho8ls'  of  the  South  and  of  •the  North,  the  sacred
canon  comprised  originally  80,000  or  84,000  tracts,
but  most  of  them  were  lost,  so  that  4ihere  remained
only  5sooo  \  According  to  a  statement  in  the  Saddhar-
m&laikara,  the  text  and  commentary  of  the  Buddhist
canon  contain  together,  39,368*000  letters,  while  the
English  translation  of  the  Bible  is  said  to  contain
3,567,180  letters,  vowels  being  here  counted  as  sepa-
rate.from  the  consonants.

At  present  there  exist  two  sacred  canons  of  Bud-
dhist writings,  that  of  the  South,  in  P&li,  and  that  of
the  North,  in  Sapskrit.  The  Budihist  canon  in  P&li
has  been  estimated  as  twice  as  large  as  the  Bible,
though  in  an  English  translation  it  would  probably
be  four  times  as  large2.  Spence  Hardy  gave  the
number  of  stanzas  as  375,350  for  the  P&li  canon,  and
as  361,550  for  its  Commentary,  and  by  stanza  he  meant
a  line  of  33  syjjables.

The  Buddhist  canon  in  Sanskrit  consists  of  what
is  called  the  "Nine  Dkormas  V  In  its  Tibetan  trans-
lation that  canon,  divided  into  two  collections,  tbe  Kan-
jurandTanjur,  numbers  335  volumes  folio,  each  weigh-*
ing  in  the  Pekin  edition  from  four  to  five  pounds.

Besides  these  two  canons,  there  is  another  collate-
ral branch,  the  canon  of  the  ffainas.  The  ffaihas  trace

1  See  Burnouf,  'Introduction  &,  rhistojre  du  BuddLJfome  indien,*
p  37.    'Selected  Essays,'  ii.  p.  170,
•  '  Selected  Essays,1  ii.  p.  170.
8  Ibid.  p.  jSa.


LEOTUBE  H.  61

the  origin  of  their  religion  back  to  Mah&vira,  who  was
believed,  however,  to  halve  been  preceded  bv  23  Tir-
thakara?the  33rd  being  P&rsva.  (2,50  before  HaMyira).
Mahavfra  is  ca^LetL  also  tffl&taputra1  or  OT&tnputra
or  ^tiputra  by  both91  ffadnas  and  Eauddha&(lfSta-
putta  itf  P&li,  N&yaputta  in  ^aina  Prakrit),  and  is
reported  by  both  sects  to  have  died  at  P&pft.  The  date
of  his  death,  as  given  by  the  <?ainas,  527  :BUC,,  would
make  him  older  than  Buddha.  The  true  relation,
however,  of  the  #ainao  to  ther  Bauddhas,  or  followers
of  S&kyamuni,  remains  still  to  be  determined.  Their
sacred  books  are  written  in  a  Prakrit  dialect,  com-*
monly  called  Ardhamagadh!,  while  the  dialect  o£  the
Fall  scriptures  is  .called  Magadhi.  According  to  the
SiddhUnta-dharma-sara  these  #aina  scriptures  are  col-
lectively c%Ued  Sutras  or  Siddhantas9  and  classed,
first?  under  two  heads  of  Kalpa-siltra  and  Agama,
five  works  coming  under  the  former,  and  forty-five
under  the  latter  head;  and  secondly,  under  eight  dif-
ferent heads,  viz.  i,  eleven  Afigas;  2,  twelve  Upaiigas,
3,  four  MMa-sutras  ;  4,  five  Kalpa-sutras  ;  5,  six  £&edas  ;
6,  ten  Payannas;  7,  Nandi-sutra;  8,  Anuyogadvara-
sutra.  The  total  extent  of  these  fifty  works  together
with  their  commentaries  is,  according  to  6tadna  belief,
600,000  tflokas2*  In  the  form  in  which  we  now
possess  them,  the  <?ainas  Sutras  are  not  older  than
the  fifth  century  A.IX  (See  *  Indian  Antiquary,'  ix.
p.  161.)

Withfc  a  smaller  compass  lies  the  sacred  literature
of  the  third  of  the  Aryan4>ook-religioDS,  the  so-called


1  See  BQhlec,  'Indian  ^tiquaiy,'  m  p.  143;  HJaoobi,  «Chi
MaMvlra  and  his  predecessors,*  Indian  Antiquary,  is.  158;  also  bis
preface  to  the  Ejtlpftsdtara  of  KisdrabAliti,  1879*

*  EajendriUla,  Mitra,  'Noticce  of  Swakrit  MSS.'  vol.  iii.  p.  67.


62         LEOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  Ofl  RELIGION.

Zend-Avesta.  But  here  the  very  scantiness  of  the
ancient  texts  increases  the  difficulty  of  its  successful
interpretation,  and  th$  absence  of  native  commentaries
has  thro-wn  nearly  the  whole  burdetf  of  deciphjring.on
the  patience  and  ingenuity  of  European  scholars.

If  lastly  we  turn  to  £!hina,  we  find  that  th»  religion
of  Confucius  is  founded  on  the  Fivet  King  apd  the
Four*Shu— books  in  themselves  of  considerable  extent,
and  su$*ounded  by  voluminous  commentaries,  without
which  even  the  most  learned  scholars  would  not  ven-
ture to  fathom  the  depth  of  their  sacred  canon1.

Lao-tse,  the  contemporary,  or  rather  the  senior,  of
Confucius,  is  reported  to  have  written  a  large  number
of  books2:  no  less  than  930  on  different  questions  of
faith,  morality,  and  worship,  and  70  on  magic.  His
principal  work,  however,  the  TadHe-king,  which  re-
presents the  real  scripture  of  his  followers,  the«JTao-
sse,  consists  only  of  about  5,000  words3,  and  fills  no
more  than  thirty  pages.  But  here  again  we  find  that
fqr  that  very  reason  the  text  is  unintelligible  without
copious  commentaries,  so  that  M.  Julien  had  to  consult
more  than  sixty  commentators  for  the  purpose  of  his
translation,  the  earliest  going  back  as  far  as  the  year
163  B.C.

There  is  a  third  established  religion  yi  China,  that
of  Fo;  but  Fo  is  only  the  Chinese  corruption  of0

1  'The  Chinese  Classics,  with  a  Translation,  Notes,  Prolegomena,
and  Indexes/  By  James  Legge,  D.D.  7  vols.  See  also  'Sacred
Books  of  the  East,'  vols.  iii,  xvi,  *

*  Stan.  JuKen,  '  Tao-te-king,'  p.  rmi.

8  Ibid,  pp?  xaod.  xxxv.  The  texts  vary  from  5,610,  5,630,  5,688  to
5,722  words.  The  text  published  by  M.  Stan.  Julien  consists  of  5,320
words.  A  new  translation  of  the  '  Tao-te-king '  has  been  published  at
Leipzig  by  Dr.  Victor  von  Strauss,  1870.


LECTUEB  XL  63

Buddha,  and  though,  the  religion  of  Buddha,  as  trans-
ferred Irom  India  to  China,  has  assumed  a  peculiar
character*and  produced  an  enormous  literature  of  its
own,  yet  Chinese  Buddhism  cannot  be  called  an  inde-
pendent religion.  We  ftiust  distinguish  betwegn«tne
Buddhism  of  Ceylon,  Burmah,  and  Slam,  on  one  side,
and  thjrfi  of  Nepal,  Tibet,  Mongolia,  China,  Corea,
and  Japan  on  the  other.  In  China,  however,  although
the  prevailing  form  of  Buddhism  is  that  of  tlS  San-
skrit canon,  commonly,  called  the  Northern  canon,
some  of  the  books  belonging  to*  the  P&li  or  Southern
canon  have  been  translated  and  are  held  in  reverence
by  certain  schools.

But  even  after  we  have  collected  this  enormous
library  of  the  sacred  books  of  the  world,  with  their
indispensable  commentaries,  we  are  by  no  means  in
possession  of*  all  the  requisite  materials  for  studying
the  growth  and  decay  of  the  religious  convictions  of
mankind  at  large.  The  largest  portion  of  mankind,
— ay,  and  some  of  the  most  valiant  champions  in  the
religious  and  intellectual  struggles  of  the  world,  would
still  be  unrepresented  in  our  theological  library.  Think
only  of  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans  1  think  of  the
Teutonic,  the  Celtic,  and  Slavonic  nations  I  Where
fire  we  to  gain  jn  insight  into  what  we  may  call  their
jfcal  religious  convictions,  previous  to  the  compara-
tively recent  period  when  their  ancient  temples  were
levelled  to  the  ground  to  make  room  for  new  cathe-
drals, and  Jheir  sacred  oaks  were  felled  to  be  changed
into  crosses,  planted  along  -every  mountain  pass  stid
forest  lane  ?  Homer  and  Hesiod  do  not  tell  «$  what
was  the  religion,  the  refcl  hearir-religion,  of  the  Greeks,
nor  were  their  own  poems  ever  considered  as  sacred,


64         LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELKHON.

or  e-ven  as  authoritative  and  binding,  by  the  Hghest
intellects  among  the  Greeks  In  Rome  we  have  not
even  an  IHad  or  Odyssey ;  and  when  we  as*k  for  the
religious  worship  of  the  Teutonic?  the  Celtjp,  or  the
SldJVoctic  tribes,  the  very  names  of  many  of  the  deities
in  whom  they  believed  are  forgotten  and  lost  for  ever,
and  the  scattered*  notices  of  their  feith  ha^  to  be
picked  up  and  put  together  like  the  small  stones  of  a
broken  mosaic  that  once  formed  the  pavement  in  the
ruined  temples  of  Rome.

The  same  gaps,  the  same  want  of  representative
authorities,  which  we  witness  among  the  Aryan,  we
meet  again  among  the  Semitic  nations,  as  soon  as  we
step  out  of  the  circle  of  their  took-religions.  The
Babylonians,  Assyrians,  the  Phenicians  and  Cartha-
ginians, the  Arabs  before  their  c&nversign  to  Moham-
medanism, all  are  without  canonical  books,  «and  a
knowledge  of  their  religion  has  to  be  gathered,  as
well  as  may  be,  from  monuments,  inscriptions,  tra-
ditions, from  proper  names,  from  proverbs,  from  curses,
and  other  stray  notices  which  require  the  greatest
care  before  they  can  be  properly  sifted  and  success-
fully fitted  together1.

But  now  let  us  <go  on  further.  The  two  beds  in
which  the  stream  of  Aryan  and  Semitic  thought  has
been  rolling  on  for  centuries  from  south-east  to  nortB-

1  It  has  been  pointed  out  by  Professor  Noldeke  that  not  only  the
great  religions,  but  mere  sects  also  are  sometimes  in  possession  of  Sacred
Books.  Suoh  are  the  Mandseans  (representing  the  Aramsean  nation-
ality), the  Druses,  the  Yezidis,  Jttfosairis,  and,  it  may  DO,  some  more
half-pagaji.  sects  under  a  Muslim  garb.  Even  some  of  the  Manich&an
•writings,  of  which  fragments  exist,  might  be  added  to  this  class,  and
would  throw  much  light  on  the  independent  growth  of  gnosticism,
which  can  be  by  no  means  fully  explained  as  a  mere  mixture  of  Christian
and  Iranian  ideas.


LEdTUBE  II,  65

•west,  from  the  Indus  to  the  Thames,  from  the  Eu-
phrates "to  the  Jordan,  and  the  Mediterranean,  cover
but  a  narrow  tract  of  country  Compared  *mth  the
vastness  $f  our  gljbb.  As  we  rise  higher,  our  horizon
expands  on  every  side,  aftd  wherever  there  are  traCes
of  human  Mfe,  there  are  traces  als|p  of  religion.  Along
the  shoi$s  of  the,  ancient  Nile  we  •see  still  standing
the  Pyramids,  and  the  ruins  of  temples  and  labyrinths,
their  walls  covered  with  hieroglyphic  inscriptions,
and  with  the  strange  pietures  of  gods  and  goddesses.
On  rolls  of  papyrus,  which  have  defied  the  ravages  of
time,  we  have  even  fragments  of  what  may  be  in  a
certain  sense  called  the  sacred  books  of  the  Egyptians.
Yet,  though  much  hq,s  been  deciphered  in  the  ancient
records  of  that  mysterious  race,  the  main  spring  of
the  religion  of  Egypff  and  the  original  intention  of  its
cerem(»iial  worship  are  far,  as  yet,  from  being  fully
disclosed  to  us.

As  we  follow  the  sacred  stream  to  its  distant  sources,
the  whole  continent  of  Africa  opens  before  us,  and
wherever  we  see  kraals  and  cattle-pens,  depend  upon,
it  there  was  to  be  seen  once,  or  there  is  to  be  seen
even  now,  the  smoke  of  sacrifices  rising  up  from  earth
to  heaven.  The  relics  of  the  ancient  African  faith  are
rapidly  disappearing ;  but  what  has  been  preserved  is
fffll  of  interest  to  the  student  of  religion  with  its
strange  worship  of  snakes  and  ancestors,  its  vague
hope  of  a  future  life,  and  its  not  altogether  faded  re-
miniscence^of  a  Supreme  God,  the  Father  of  the  black
as  well  as  of  the  white  man1*.

1  Dr.  Oallaway,  ' UDkulunktlu,1  p.  45:  'It  is  as  though  we  sprang
from  Utblanga ;  we  do  not  know  where  we  were  made.  We  black  men
h*d  the  somei  origin  as  yon,  white  men.1


66        LECTURES  ON  THE  SOIEffOE  OF  BELICUON.

From  the  eastern  coast  of  AMca  our  eye  i&  tarried
across  ihe  sea  where,  from  -  Madagascar  to  Hawaii,
island  after  island  stands  out  like  so  many  pillars  of
8*  sunken  bridge  that  once0spannea  the  Indian  and
Pacific  oceans.  Everywheia,  whether  among  the
dark  Papuan  or  th»  yellowish  Malay,  or  the  brown
Polynesian  races*  scattered  -on  these  islands,  even
among  the  lowest  of  the  low  in  the  scale  of  hu-
manity, there  are,  if  we  will  but  listen,  whisperings
about  divine  beings  imagrnings  of  a  future  life;
there  are  prayers  and  sacrifices  which,  even  in  their
most  degraded  and  degrading  form,  still  bear  witness
to  that  old  and  ineradicable  faith  that  everywhere
there  is  a  God  to  hear  our  prayers,  if  we  will  but
call  on  Him,  and  to  accept  our  offerings,  whether
they  are  offered  as  a  ransom  for  sin,  01  as  a  token  of
a  grateful  heart.

Still  farther  east  the  double  continent  of  America
becomes  visible,  and  in  spite  of  the  unchristian  van-
dalism of  its  first  discoverers  and  conquerors,  there,
too,  we  find  materials  for  the  study  of  an  ancient,
and,  it  woul^L  seem,  independent  faith.  Unfortunately,
the  religious  and  mythological  traditions  collected  by
the  first  European*  who  came  in  contact  with  the
natives  of  America,  reach  back  but  ft  short  distance
beyond  the  time  when  they  were  written  down,  and
they  seem  in  several  cases  to  reflect  the  thoughts  of
the  Spanish  listeners  as  much  as  those  of  the  native
narrators.  The  quaint  hieroglyphic  manuscripts  of
Mexico  and  Guatemala  hltve  as  yet  told  us  very  little,
and  the  accounts  written  by 'natives  in,  their  native
Janguage  have  to  be  used  with  great  caution,  Still
the  ancient  religion  of  .the  Aztecs  of  Mexico  and  of


II.  6?

the  Irioas  of  Peru  is  full  of  interesting  problems.  As
we  advance  towards  tta  north  and  its  red^skinned
inhabitants,  our  information  becomes  more  meagre
still,  an<!  after  what  happened  some  years  ago,  mo
Livre  des  Sauvages  is  likely  to  come  to  our  assistance
again.  "?et  there  are  wild  and  home-grown  speci-
mens oftreligioua  faith  to  be  studied  even  now  among
the  receding  and  gradually  perishing  tribes  $f*the
Bed  Indians,  and,  in  their  languages  as  well  as  in
their  religions,  traces  may  possibly  still  be  found,
before  it  is  too  late,  of  pre-historic  migrations  of  men
from  the  primitive  Asiatic  to  the  American  continent,
either  across  the  stepping-stones  of  the  Aleutic  bridge
in  the  north,  or  low^r  south  by  drifting  with  favour-
able winds  from  island  to  island,  till  the  hardy  canoe
was  landed  or  wrecked  on  the  American  coast,  never
to  retilrn  again  to  the  Asiatic  home  from  which  it  had
started.

Ajad  when  in  our  religious  survey  we  finally  come
back  again  to  the  Asiatic  continent,  we  find  here  too,
although  nearly  the  whole  of  its  area  is  now  occupied
by  one  or  the  other  of  the  eight  book-religions,  by
Mosaisra,  Christianity,  and  Mohammedanism,  by
Brahmanism,  Buddhism,  and  Zoreadtrianism,  and  in
China  by  the  "religions  of  Confucius  and  Lao-tse,
that  nevertheless  partly  below  the  surface,  and  in
some  places  still  on  the  surface  too,  more  primitive
forms  of  worship  have  maintained  themselves.  I
mean  the  Shamanism  of  the  Mongolian  race,  and  the
beautiful  half-Homeric  mythology  of  the  Fimajsh  and
Esthonian  tribes.

And  now  that  I  have  displayed  this  world-wide
panorama  before  your  eyes,  you  will  share,  I  think,


68        LECTTTBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RELIGION",

the  feeling  of  dismay  with  which  the  studeq&bf  the
science  <pf  religion  looks  around,  and  aslsp  himself
whsre  to  fiegin  and  tiow  to  proceed*  That  there  are
materials  in  abundance,  capable  of  scientific  treatment,
no  on&  would  venture  to  deny.  But  how  are  they  to
be  held  together?  How  are  wo  to  discovdr  what  all
these  religions  share  in  common?  How  they  differ?
How  they  rise  and  how  they  decline  ?  What  they  arc
and  what  they  mean  ?

Let  us  tako  the  old  saying,  Divide  et  impera,  and
translate  it  somewhat  freely  by  *  Classify  and  un-
derstand/ and  I  believe  wo  shall  then  lay  hold  of
tfv9  old  thread  of  Ariadne  which  has  led  the  students
of  many  a  science  through  darker  labyrinths  even
than  the  labyrinth  of  the  religions  of  tho  world.  All
real  science  rests  on  classification,  and  oily  in  case  wo
cannot  succeed  in  classifying  tho  various  diaftcts  of
faith,  shall  we  have  to  confess  that  a  science  of  re-
ligion is  really  an  impossibility,,  If  the  ground  before
us  has  once  been  properly  surveyed  and  carefully  par-
colled  out,  each  ncholar  may  then  cultivate  his  own
glebe,  without  wasting  hi»  energies,  and  without  losing
sight  of  the  general  purposes  to  which  all  special  re-
searches must  be  subservient*

How,  then,  is  the  vast  domain  of  religion  to  ha
parcelled  out?  How  are  religions  to  be  classified,  or,
we  ought  rather  to  ask  first,  how  have  they  been
classified  before  now?  The  simplest  classification,  and
one  which  wo  find  adopted  in  almost  evftry  country,
is  thafcjnto  true  and/0/se  religions.  It  is  very  much
like  tho  first  classification  of  languages  into  one's  own
language  and  the  languages  of  the  rest  of  the  world ;
as  the  Greeks  would  say,  into  the  languages  of  the


LECTURE  II.  69

the  Barbarians ;  or,  as  the  Jews  would
say,  into  the  languages  of  the  Jews  and  th j  Sentiles ;
or,  as  the  Hindus  would  say,  in  to*  the  languages  of1  the
Aryas  aftd  Mleftfc&as ;  oy,  as  the  Chinese  would  §$y,
into  the  languages  of  tbe  Middle  Empire  and  t*hat  of
the  Outer* Barbarians.  I  need  tfot^say  why  that  sort
of  classification  fe  useless  for  scientific  purposes.

There  is  another  classification,  apparently  of  A  more
scientific  character,  but  if  examined  more  closely,
equally  worthless  to  the*  student  of  religion*  I  mean
the  well-known  division  into  revealed  and  natural
religions.

I  have  first  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  meaning
attached  to  natural  Religion.  That  word  is  constantly
used  in  very  different  acceptations.  It  is  applied  by
several  writers  to  certain  historical  forms  of  religion,
whiclf  are  looked  upon  as  not  resting  on  the  authority
of  revelation,  in  whatever  sense  that  word  may  be
hereafter  interpreted.  Thus  Buddhism  would  be  &
natural  religion  in  the  eyes  of  the  Brahmans,  Brah-
manism  would  be  a  natural  religion  in  the  eyes  of
the  Mohammedans.  With  us,  all  religions  except
Christianity  and,  though  in  a  lesser  degree,  Mosaism,
would  be  classed  as  merely  natural;  and  though
natural  does  not  imply  false,  yet  it  distinctly  implies
the  absence  of  any  sanction  beyond  the  sense  of  truth,
or  the  voice  of  conscience  that  is  within  us.

But  Natural  Beligion  is  also  used  in  a  very  dif-
ferent senlo,  particularly  by  the  philosophers  of  the
last  century*  When  people  began  to  subject  the
principal  historical  religions  to  &  critical  analysis,
they  found  that  after  removing  what  was  peculiar
to  each,  there  remained  certain  principles  which  they


70        LECTOTES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  EELIGIOtf,

all  shared  in  common.  These  were  suppose>i*to  be
the  principles  of  Natural  Religion.

Again,  when  everything  that  seemed  supernatural,
mi^culous,  and  irrational,  bad  been  removed  from
the  p^ges  of  the  New  Testament,  there  still  remained
a  kind  of  skeleton  ofrreligion,  and  this  too  was  passed
off  under  the  name  of  Natural  Religicm.

DuMg  the  last  century,  philosophers  who  were
opposing  the  spread  of  scepticism  and  infidelity,
thought  that  this  kin4  of  natural,  or,  as  it  was  also
called,  rational  religion,  might  serve  an  a  breakwater
against  utter  unbelief; — but  their  endeavours  loci  to
no*  result.  When  Diderot  said  that  all  revealed  re-
ligions were  tho  heresies  of  Natural  Religion,  ho
meant  by  Natural  Eeligion  a  Jbody  of  truths  im-
planted in  human  nature,  to  bo  discovered  by  the
eye  of  reason  alone,  and  independent  of  an^  such
historical  or  local  influences  as  give  to  each  roligion
its  peculiar  character  and  individual  aapuct,  Tho
existence  of  a  dotty,  the  nature  of  MB  attributes,
Buch  as  Omnipotences  Onminek'nco,  Omnipresence,
Eternity,  Htdf-exiskmec,  Spirituality,  tho  Goodness
also  of  the  Deity,  and,  connected  with  it,  the  ad-
mission of  an  absolwto  distinction  between  Good  and
Evil,  between  Virtue  and  Vice,  all  thisT  and  according
to  some  writers,  tho  Unity  and  PorHonality  also  of  the
Deity,  were  included  in  the?  domain  of  Natural  Re-
ligion. Tho  scientific  treatment  of  this  so-called
Natural  Religion  received^ the  name  of  NafUraJ  Theo-
logy, a, title  rendered  famous  in  tho  beginning  of  our
century  by  tho  much  praincd  $uid  much  abused  work
of  Paloy,

Natural  Eeligion  corresponds   in  the  science  of


LECTUKE  II.  71

religiof^o  what  in  the  science  of  language  used  to
be  called  Grammaire  generate,  a  collection  o£  funda-
mental rules  which  were  supposed  to  be  seff-evidant,
and  indispensable  in  every  grammar,  but  whicb,
strange  to  say,  never  e2yst  in  their  purity  and* com-
pleteness to  any  language  that -is  or  ever  has  been
spoken  tf>y  human  beings.  It  iS  the  same  with
religion.  There  never  has  been  any  real  rejigfion,
consisting  exclusively  of  the  pure  and  simple  tenets
of  Natural  Religion,  thcfagh  thgre  have  been  certain
philosophers  who  brought  themselves  to  believe  that
their  religion  was  entirely  rational,  was,  in  fact,  pure
and  simple  Deism.

If  we  speak,  therefore,  of  a  classification  of  all
historical  religions  into  revealed  and  natural,  what
is  meant  by*naturat  is  simply  the  negation  of  re-
vealed? and  if  we  tried  to  carry  out  the  classification
practically,  we  should  find  the  same  result  as  before.
We  should  have  on  one  side  Christianity  alone,  or,
according  to  some  theologians,  Christianity  and  Ju-
daism ;  on  the  other,  all  the  remaining  religions  of  the
world.

This  classification,  therefore,  whatever  may  be  its
practical  value,  is  perfectly  usele^  for  scientific  pur-
poses* A  mor£  extended  study  shows  us  very  soon
that  the  claim  of  revelation  is  sot  up  by  the  founders,
or  if  not  by  them,  at  all  events  by  the  later  preachers
and  advocates  of  most  religions ;  and  would  therefore
be  decline*  by  all  but  ourselves  as  a  distinguishing
feature  of  Christianity  and  Uudaism,  We  shall  000,
in  fact,  that  the  claims  to  a  revealed  authority  are
urged  far  more  stronger  and  elaborately  by  the  be-
lievers in  the  Veda,  than  by  the  apologetical  theolo*


72         LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  EELIGIOK.

gians  among  Jews  and  Christians,  Even  /ifuddha,
originally  the  most  thoroughly  human  and  self-de-
pendent among  ttfe  founders  of  religion,  is  by  a
sfcpange  kind  of  inconsistency  represented?  in  later
controversial  writings,  as  in  possession  of  revealed
truth1.  He  himself  could  not,  like  Numa  or  Zoro-
aster, or  Mohammed3,  claim  communication  with
higher  spirits;  still  less  could  he,  like  the  poets  of
the  Veda,  speak  of  divine  inspirations  and  god-given
utterances:  for  according  lo  him  there  was  none
among  the  spirits  greater  or  wiser  than  himself,  and
the  gods  of  the  Veda  had  become  his  servants  and
worshippers.  Buddha  himself  appoaln  only  to  whafc
we  should  call  the  inner  light3/  When  he  delivered
for  the  first  time  the  four  fundamental  doctrines  of
his  system,  he  said,  *  Mendicants,  for  i&6  attainment
of  these  previously  unknown  doctrines,  the  ^o,  the
knowledge,  the  wisdom,  the  clear  perception,  the  light
were  developed  within  me/  He  wan  called  Sarva///?a
or  omniflciont  by  his  earlioBt  pupils ;  but  when  in  later
times,  it  was  soen  that  on  several  points  Buddha  had
but  spokea-4ho  language  of  his  age,  and  had  shared
the  errors  current  among  his  contemporaries  with
regard  to  the  shapa  of  the  earth  and  the  movement
of  the  heavenly  bodies,  an  important"  concession  w$s
made  by  Buddhist  theologians*  They  limited  the
meaning  of  the  word  'omniscient,'  as  applied  to
Buddha,  to  a  knowledge  of  the  principal  doctrines
of  his  system,  and  concerning  these,  but*these  only,


1  'History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,*  by  Max  MUllw,  p.  83.
*  Sprenger,  '  Mohammad/  vol.  ii,  p.  496,
9  Gogerly,  'The  Evidences  And   Pootrioti  of  Christian
Colombo,  x  86a,   Parti


LECTURE  II.  73

they  cltqlared  him  to  have  been  infallible.  This  may
seem  to  Ije  a  late,  and  almost  modern  view,  but  whe-
ther modern  or  ancient,  it  certainly  reflects  "great  Cre-
dit on  the  Buddhist  ^heologians.  In  the  Milin$a
Prasna,  however,  whicl*  is  a  canonical  book,  we  see
that  the  same  idea  was  already  rising  in  the  mind  of
the  grett  Nagasena.  Being  asked  by  King  Milinda
whether  Buddha  is  omniscient,  he  replies :  *  Yes,  Great
King,  the  blessed  Buddha  is  omniscient.  But  JBuddha
does  not  at  all  times  Sxercis^,  his  omniscience.  By
meditation  ho  knows  all  things ;  meditating  he  knows
everything  he  desires  to  know/  In  this  reply  a  dis-
tinction is  evidently  intended  between  subjects  that
may  bo  known  by  Sense  and  reason,  and  subjects  that
can  be  known  by  meditation  only.  Within  the  do-
main of  sense  and  reason,  "N&gaHena  does  not  claim
omniSeieneo  or  infallibility  for  Buddha,  but  ho  claims
for  him  both  omniscience  and  infallibility  hi  all  that
is  to  be  perceived  by  meditation  only,  or,  as  wo  should
say,  in  matters  of  faith.

I  shall  have  to  explain  to  you  hereafter  the  extra-
ordinary contrivances  by  which  tho  Brajimans  endea*
voured  to  eliminate  every  human  element  from  the
hymns  of  tho  Voda,  and  to  establish,  not  only  the
^revealed,  but*tho  pro-historic  or  oven  ante-mundane
character  of  their  scriptures.  No  apologetic  writers
have  ever  carried  the  theory  of  revelation  to  greater
extremes,

In  the  present  stage  of  our  inquiries!  all  that  I  wish
to  point  out  is  this, — that  when  the  founders  or  de*
fenders  of  nearly  all  Jjbe  religions  of  the  world  appeal
to  some  kind  of  revelation  in  support  of  the  truth  of
their  doctrines,  it  could  answer  no  useful  purpose  were


74        LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RELIOION.


we  to  attempt  any  classification  on  such
ground.^  Whether  the  claim  of  a  natural  or  preter-
natpral  revelation,  put  forward  by  nearly  all  reli-
gions, is  well  founded  or  not,  is  not  the  question  at
preSent.  It  falls  to  the  pro^nce  of  Theoretic  Theo-
logy to  explain  the  trjjie  meaning  of  revelaticfa,  for  few
words  have  been  Used  so  vaguely  and  in  H*  many
different  senses.  It  falls  to  its  province  to  explain,
not  only  how  the  veil  was  withdrawn  that  intercepted
for  a  time  the  rays  of  divine  truth,  but,  what  is  a  far
more  difficult  problem,  how  there  could  ever  have
been  a  veil  between  truth  and  the  seeker  of  truth,
between  the  adoring  heart  and  the  object  of  the
highest  adoration,  between  the  Father  and  his  chil-
dren.

In  Comparative  Theology  our  task  is  different:  wo
have  simply  to  deal  with  tho  facts  such  as  w#  find
them.  If  people  regard  their  religion  aa  revealed,  it
IB  to  them  a  revealed  religion,  and  hu&  to  bo  treated
aa  such  by  every  impartial  hmtorian.

But  thin  principle  of  dn«Hificafcion  into  revoalwl  and
natural  roligionB  appuarn  atili  more  faulty,  wht*n  wo
Jook  at  it  from  another  point  of  view.  Kvon  if  wo
granted  that  all  religipiiH,  except  Christianity  and  Mo-
saiara,  derived  their  origin  from  those  faculties  of  th&
mind  only  which,  according  to  Paley,  arc  sufficient  by
themselves  for  calling  into  life  tha  fundamental  toneU
of  what  wo  explained  before  as  natural  religion,  the
clarification  of  Christianity  and  Judaism  on  one  »ido
as  rpw.<x??Jt  and  of  the  other  religions  as  natural,
would  slJlll  l>o  ddfoctivo,  for  tho  simple  reason  that  no
religion,  though  founded  on  revelation,  can  over  be
entirely  separated  from  natural  religion.  Tho  tenets


LECTUKE  II,  75

of  natural  religion,  though  they  never  constituted  by
themselveg  a  real  historical  religion,  supply  the  only
ground  on  which  even  revealed  religions  can  stand,
the  only. soil  where  they  can  strike  root,  and  from
which  they  can  receive  nourishment  and  life.  If  Ve
took  awa$  that  soil,  or  if  we  supposed  that  it,  too,
had  to  b$  supplied  hy  revelation',  wo  should  not  only
run  counter  to  the  letter  and  spirit  of  the  Old  and«the
New  Testament,  but  we  should  degrade  revealed  reli-
gion by  changing  it  into  a  mere  formula,  to  be  ac-
cepted by  a  recipient  incapable  of  questioning,  weigh-*
ing,  and  appreciating  ita  truth ;  we  should  indeed  have
the  germ,  but  we  should  have  thrown  away  the  con-
genial soil  in  which  «alone  the  germs  of  revealed  truth
can  live  and  grow.

Christianity,  addressing  itself  not  only  to  the  Jews,
but  ateo  to  the  Gentiles,  not  only  to  the  ignorant,  but
also  to  the  learned,  not  only  to  the  believer,  but,  in
the  first  instance,  to  the  unbeliever,  prenupposed  in  all
of  them  the  elements  of  natural  religion,  and  with
them  the  power  of  choosing  between  truth  and  un-
truth* Thus  only  could  St.  Paul  say:  *  Prove  all
things,  hold  fast  that  which  is  good/  ( i  Ttheas,  v,  at.)

The  same  is  true  with  regard  tj  the  Old  Testament.
There,  too,  tho»boliof  in  a  Doity,  and  in  Homo  at  least
of  its  indefeasible  attributes,  is  taken  for  granted,  and
tho  prophets  who  call  the  wayward  Jews  back  to  the
worship  of  Jehovah,  appeal  to  them  as  competent  by
the  truth-testing  power  that  is  within  them,  to  choose
between  Jehovah  and  the  gods  of  the  Gentiles,  be-
tween truth  and  untruth.  Thus  Joshua  gathered  all
the  tribes  of  Israel  to  Shechem,  and  called  for  the
elders  of  Israel,  and  for  their  heads,  and  for  their


76         LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION,


judges,  and  for  their  officers;    and  they
themselves  before  God.

'.And  Joshua  said  unto  all  the^people  :  Thus  saith
the  Lord  God  of  Israel:  Y$ur  fathers  dweit  on  the
other*  side  of  the  flood  in  old  time,  even  Terah,  the
father  of  Abraham,  *ind  the  father  of  Nachor:  and
they  served  other  "gods.'

j£n$  then,  after  reminding  them  of  all  that  God  has
done  for  them,  he  concludes  by  saying:

'Now,  therefore,  fear  the  *Lorci,  and  serve  him  in
sincerity  and  in  truth  ;  and  put  away  the  gods  which
your  fathers  served  on  the  other  side  of  the  ilood,  and
inJEgypt,  and  serve  ye  the  Lord.

'•And  if  it  seem  ovil  unto  you*  to  servo  the  Lord,
choose  ymi  this  'day  whom  ye  wiy  nerve;  whether  the
gods  which  your  fathers  served  that  *wero  on  tho
other  side  of  the  flood,  or  tho  gods  of  the  AmorTtes  in
whose  lands  ye  dwell  ;  but  as  for  mo  and  my  house,
wo  will  servo  tho  Lord/

In  order  to  choose  between  different  gods  anjj  dif-
ferent forms  of  faith,  a  man  must  possess  the  faculty  of
choosing,  theanstrurnents  of  testing  truth  and  untruth,
whether  revealed  or  not  :  ho  must  know  that  certain
fundamental  tenets  cannot  be  absent  in  any  true  reli-
gion, and  thut  thero  are  doctrines  agrflnat  which  hfc
rational  or  moral  conscience  revolts  as  incompatible
with  truth.  In  short,  there  must  be  the  foundation  of
religion,  there  must  bo  tho  solid  rock,  before  it  is  pos-
sible to  erect  an  altar,  a  temple,  or  a  chufth  :  and  if
we  callr  that  foundation  natural  religion,  it  is  clear
that  no  revealed  religion  can  bethought  of  which  does
not  rest  more  or  less  firmly  on  natural  religion.

These  difficulties  have  been  felt  distinctly  by  some


LECTUEE  II.  77

of  outmost  learned  divines,  who  have  attempted
various  Classifications  of  religions  from  their  own
point  of  view.  New  definitions*  of  natural  religion
have  therefore  beefi  proposed  in  order  to  avoid  the
overlapping  of  the  two  definitions  of  natural  and  Re-
vealed religion 1.  Natural  religion  has,  for  instance,
been  explained  as  the  religion  of/hature  before  revela-
tion, such  as  may  be  supposed  to  have  existed  ann>ng
the  patriarchs,  or  to  exist  still  among  primitive  people
who  have  not  yet  been^  enlightened  by  Christianity
or  debased  by  idolatry*

According  to  this  view  we  should  have  to  distin-
guish not  two,  but  three  classes  of  religion :  the  pri*
mitive  or  natural,  the  debased  or  idolatrous,  and  the
revealed.  But,  as  pointed  oiit  before,  the  first,  the
so-called  priinitivo  tfr  natural  religion,  exists  in  the
mindfibof  modern  philosophers  rather  than  of  ancient
poets  and  prophets.  History  never  tollw  us  of  any
race  with  whom  tho  simple  feeling  of  reverence  for
l^gher  powers  was  not  hidden  under  mythological
disguliisr  Nor  would  it  be  possible  even  thus  to
separate  the  three  classes  of  religion  by  sharp  and
definite  lines  of  demarcation,  because  botfi  the  debased
or  idolatrous  and  tho  purified  or  revealed  religions
would  of  necessity  include  within  themselves  tho
Cements  of  natural  religion.

Nor  do  we  diminish  these  difficulties  in  tho  classifi-
catory  stage  of  our  science  if,  in  tho  place  of  this
simple  natural  religion,  we  admit  with  other  theolo-
gians and  philosophers,  a  universal  primeval  revela-
tion. This  universal  primeval  revelation  Is  only
another  name  for  naftiral  religion,  and  it  rests  on

1  8de  Profeisor  Jowett's  *  Eswiy  oa  Natural  Religion,*  p.  458*


78        LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

no  authority  but  the.  speculations  of  philosophers.
The  same  class  of  philosophers,  considering^hat  Ian-
gujige  wfi,s  too  wonderful  an  achievement  for  the
human  mind,  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  admitting  a
universal  primeval   language,  revealed  directly  by
God  to  men,  or  rather  to  niute  beings;   while  the
more  thoughtful  toS  the  more  reverent  among  the
Fathers  of  the  Church,  and  among  the  founders  of
modern  philosophy  also  pointed  out  that  it  was  more
consonant  with  the  general*  working  of  an  all- wise
and  all-powerful  Creator,  that  he  should  have  en-
dowed human  nature  with  the  essential  conditions  of
speech,  instead  of  presenting  mute  beings  with  gram-
mars and  dictionaries  ready-mad*.    Is  an  infant  less
wonderful  than  a  man1?  an  acorn  less  wonderful  than
an  oak  tree?  a  cell,  including  potentially  within  itself
all  that  it  has  to  become  hereafter,  less  wonderful  than
all  the  moving  creatures  that  have  life?     The  same
applies  to  religion.    A.  universal  primeval  religion  re-
vealed direct  by  God  to  man,  or  rather  to  a  crowd  of
atheists,  may,  to  our  human  wisdom,  seem  the  best
solution   of  rt  all   difficulties :  but  a  higher  wisdom
speaks  to  us  from  out  the  realities  of  history,  and
teaches  us,  if  we  -vyjll  but  learn,  that  'we  have  all  to
feeek  the  Lord,  if  haply  we  may  feel  <after  him,  and
find  him,  though  he  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  us.**
Of  the  hypothesis  of  a  universal  primeval  reve-
lation and  all  its  self-created  difficulties  we  shall  have
to  speak  again :  for  the  present  it  must  aaffice  if  we
have  shown  that  the  problem  of  a  scientific  classifica-
tion of  "religions  is  not  brought  nearer  to  its  solution
by  the  additional  assumption  of  another  purely  hypo*
class  of  religions.


XEOTUBE  II.  79

Another  apparently  mote  scientific  classification  id
that  wifrnational  and  individual  religions,  the  former
comprehending  religions  the  founders  of  Winch  .are
unknown  to  us  as  fcey  were  to  those  who  believed  px
them;  the  latter  comprehending  religious  systlma
which  bear  the  names  of  those  by  whom  they  were
Buppose<J  to  have  been  originally0  planned  or  esta-
blished. To  the  former  class,  speaking  only  of®  the
religions  with  which  we  are  most  familiar,  \"ould
belong  those  of  the  ancient  Brahmans,  the  Greeks,
Eomans,  Teutons,  Slaves,  and* Celts;  to  the  latter
those  of  Moses,  Zoroaster,  Buddha,  Confucius,  Lao-tse,
Christ,  and  Mohammed.

This  division,  however,  though  easily  applied  in  a
general  way,  and  useful  for  certain  purposes,  fails  us
as  soon  as  w$  attempt  to  apply  it  in  a  more  critical
spirit*  It  is  quite  true  that  neither  a  Brahman,  nor  a
Greek,  nor  a  Roman  would  have  known  what  to
answer  when  asked,  who  was  the  founder  of  his  re-*
ligion,  who  first  declared  the  existence  of  Indra,  Zeus,
or  Jupiter;  but  the  student  of  antiquity  can  still  dis-
cover in  the  various  forms  which  the  ancient  Aryan
worship  has  assumed  in  India,  Greece,  and  Italy,  the
influence  of  individual  minds  orj&chools.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  we  ask  the  founders  of  so-called  indi-
vidual religions,  whether  their  doctrine  is  a  new  one,
-whether  they  preach  a  new  God,  we  almost  always
receive  a  negative  answer.  Confucius  emphatically
asserts  th%b  he  was  a  transmitter,  not  &  maker;
Buddha  delights  in  representing  himself  #s  *  w&t&
link  in  a  long  chain  of  enlightened  teacheraf  Christ
declares  that  he  came  to  fulfil,  not  to  destroy  the  L$w
or  the  Prophets;  and  even  Mohammed  insisted  on


80         LEOTTTEES  ON  THE  SOIEKOE  OF  BELHHOST.

tracing  his  faith  back  to  Ibr&hym,  i.e.  Abrahgim,  the
friend  of  God,  whom  he  called  a  Moslim,  afod  not  a
Jew  or  Christian,  (Koran  iii.  60,)  and  who,  He  main*
tained,  had  founded  the  temple  at  Mekka *.  To  de-
teiflnine  how  much  is  peculiar  to  the  supposed  founder
of  a  religion,  how  much  he  received  from  4u's  prede-
cessors, and  how  mu8h  was  added  by  his  disciples,  is
almost  impossible;  nay,  it  is  perfectly  true  that  no
religicJn  has  ever  struck  root  and  lived,  unless  it  found
a  congenial  soil  from  which  to  draw  its  real  strength
and  support.  If  they  find  such  a  soil,  individual  re-
ligions have  a  tendency  to  develope  into  universal
religions,  while  national  creeds  remain  more  exclusive,
and  in  many  cases  are  even  opposed  to  all  missionary
propaganda2.

We  have  not  finished  yet.  £  very  important  and,
for  certain  purposes,  very  useful  classification  has
been  that  into  polytheistic,  dualistic,  and  monotheistic
religions.  If  religion  rests  chiefly  on  a  belief  in  a
Higher  Power9  then  the  nature  of  that  Higher  Power
would  seem  to  supply  the  most  characteristic  feature
by  which  to  classify  the  religions  of  the  world.  Nor
do  I  deny  Siat  for  certain,  purposes  such  a  classifica-
tion has  proved  useful:  all  I  maintain  is  that  we
should  thus  have  to  class  together»religions  most
heterogeneous  in  other  respects,  though  agreeing  In
the  number  of  their  deities-  Besides,  it  would  cer-
tainly be  necessary  to  add  two  other  classes — the
henothewtic  and  the  atheistic.  Henotheistic  religions
differ  from  polytheistic  because,  although  they  recog-

1  Sprenger,  'Mohammad,'  vol.  iii.  ppf  49,  489.
a  See  'Hibbert  Lectures/  by  Professor  Kuenen,  1882.    'National
[Religions  and  Universal  Religions.'


LEOTUBE  II.  81

nise  th^  existence  of  various  deities,  or  names  of
deities,  they  represent  each  deity  as  independent  of
all  the  rest,  as  the  only  deity  present  in  the*  mind  of
the  worshipper  at  thfc  time  of  his  worship  and  prayer.
This  character  is  most  prominent  in  the  religion  of  tfte
Vedic  poeti.  Although  *many  gods  are  invoked  in
different  hymns,  sometimes  alsofcufche  same  hymn,
yet  there'is  no  rule  of  precedence  established  among
them ;  and,  according  to  the  varying  aspects  of  nftturej
and  the  varying  cravings  of  the  human  heart,  it  is
sometimes  Indra,  the  god  of  the*blue  sky,  sometimes
Agni,  the  god  of  fire,  sometimes  Varuna,  the  ancient
god  of  the  firmament,  that  are  praised  as  supreme
without  any  suspicion  of  rivalry,  or  any  idea  of
subordination.  This  peculiar  phase  of  religion,  this
worship  of  single  gods,  forms  probably  everywhere
the  firji  stage  in  the  growth  of  polytheism,  and  de-
serves therefore  a  separate  name  \

As  to  atheistic  religions,  they  might  seem  to  be  per-
fectly impossible ;  and  yet  the  fact  cannot  be  disputed
away  that  the  religion  of  Buddha  was  from  the  be-
ginning purely  atheistic.  The  idea  of  the  Godhead,
after  it  had  been  degraded  by  endless  mythological
absurdities  which  struck  and  repelled  the  heart  of
Buddha,  was,  fop  a  time  at  least,  entirely  expelled
fro*m  the  sanctuary  of  the  human  mind :  and  the
highest  morality  that  was  ever  taught  before  the  rise
of  Christianity  was  taught  by  men  with  whom  the
gods  had  b^some  mere  phantoms,  without  any  aitais,
not  even  an  altar  to  the  Unknown  God.

It  will  be  the  object  of  my  next  lecture  tc^sfeow

1  '  Hiatory  of  Ajooieut  Sanskrit  literature '  by  Max  MUUer,  second
edition,  p,  532.  '  Hibbert  Lectures/  p.  236.

a


82        LECTURES  ON  THSj  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.


that  the  only  scientific  and  truly  genetic  classification
of  religions  is  tliB  same  as  the  classification  of  Ian-1
guages,  and  that,  particularly  in  the  early  Instory  of
the  human  intellect,  there  exisft  the  most  intimate
relationship  between  language,  religion,  and  nation-
ality—a relationship  quite  independent  ofrthose  phy-
sical elements,  thelblood,  the  skull,  or  the  hair,  on
wMch  ethnologists  have  attempted  to  found  their
classification  of  the  human  race.


THIRD  EECTURE.

DEIgVEBED  AT  THE  BOYAL  INSTITUTION,
MABOH  5,  iS/O.

IF  we  approached  the  religions  »f  mankind  without
any  prejudices  or  predilections,  in  that  frame  of
mind  in  which  the  lover  of  truth  or  the  man  of
science  ought  to  approach  every  subject,  I  believe  w6
should  not  be  long  before  recognising  the  natural
lines  of  demarcation  which  divide  the  whole  religious
world  injo  sevefal  great  continents.  I  am  speaking,
of  course,  of  ancient  religions  only,  or  of  the  earliest
period  in  tiie  history  of  religious  thought.  In  that
primitive  period  which  might  be  {sailed,  if  act  prehi0-
toxic,  at  least  jmnely  ethnic,  because  what  we  ko&tr
of  it  -consists  only  in  the  general  movements  of  na-
tions, and  not  in  the  acts  of  individuals,  of  parties,  or
of  states— in  that  primitive  period,  I  say,  nations
have  been  called  languages;  and  ifl  our  best  works
ozt  the  ancient  history  of  mankind,  a  map  of  lan-
guages now  takes  the  place  of  a  map  of  nations.
But  during  the  same  primitive  period  nations  mighrti
with  equal  right  be  called  religions ;  for  there  is  *fc
that  time  the  same,  nay,  an  even  more  intimate,
lationship  between  Teligion  and  JiationaMty
.between  language  and  nationality.

In  order  clearly  to  explain  my  meaning,  I  shall
have  to  rrfei;  as  shortly  AS  possible,  to  the  specular

a  %


84        LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  Off  RELIGION.

tions  of  some  German  philosophers  on  the  true  rela-
tion 4»q|;ween  language,  religion,  and  nationality —
speculations  whicfi.  have  as  yet  Deceived  less  attention
«n  the  part  of  modem  ethnologists  than  they  seem  to
me  to  deserve.

It  was  Scheming,  one  of  the  proloundest  thinkers
of  Germany,  who  first  asked  the  question,  What
makes  an  ethnosl  What  is  the  true  origin  of  a
people?  How  did  human  beings  become  a  people?
And  the  answer  which  he  gave,  though  it  sounded
startling  to  me  when,  in  1845, 1  listened,  at  Berlin,  to
the  lectures  of  the  old  philosopher,  has  been  confirmed
^nore  and  more  by  subsequent  researches  into  the
history  of  language  and  religion.

To  say  that  man  is  a  gregarious  animal,  and  that,
like  swarms  of  bees,  or  herds  of  wilft  elephants,  men
keep  together  instinctively,  and  thus  form  themselves
into  a  people,  is  saying  very  little.  It  might  explain
the  agglomeration  of  one  large  flock  of  human  beings,
but  it  would  never  explain  the  formation  of  peoples
possessing  the  consciousness  of  their  national  indivi-
duality.

Nor  should  we  advance  much  towards  a  solution  of
our  problem,  if  we  were  told  that  men  break  up  into
peoples  as  bees  break  up  into  swarms,  by  following
different  queens,  by  owing  allegiance  to  different  go-
vernments^  Allegiance  to  the  same  government,  par-
ticularly in  ancient  times,  is  the  result  rather  than
the  cause  of  nationality;  while  in  historical  times,
suet  has  been  the  confusion  produced  by  extraneous
influences,  by  brute  force,  ar  .dynastic  ambition,  that
the  natural  development  of  peoples  has  been  entirely
Arrested,  and  we  frequently  find  one  and  the  same


LECTURE  III.  89

people  divided  by  different  governments,  and  different
peoples  united  under  the  same  ruler.

Our  question,  What  makes  a  people?  ha**  <x>  be
considered  in  reference  to  the  most  ancient  times,
How  did  men  form  themselves  into  a  people  bafoft,
there  were  'kings  or  shepherds  of  men?  Was  it
through  community  of  blood?  doubt  it.  Com-
munity of  blood  produces  families,  clans,  possibly
races,  but  it  does  not  produce  that  higher  and  pSrely
moral  feeling  which  binds  men  together  and  makes
them  a  people.

It  is  language  and  religion  that  make  a  people,  but
religion  is  even  a  more  powerful  agent  than  language.
The  languages  of  maay  of  the  aboriginal  inhabitants
of  Northern  America  are  but  dialectic  varieties  of  one
type,  but  thos^  who  spoke  these  dialects  seem  never
to  have*coalesced  into  a  people.  They  remained  mere
clans  or  wandering  tribes,  and  even  their  antagonism
to  foreign  invaders  did  not  call  out  the  sense  of  a
national  coherence  and  unity  among  them,  because
they  were  without  that  higher  sense  of  unity  which
is  called  forth,  or,  at  all  events,  strengtiiened,  by
worshipping  the  same  god  or  gods.  The  Greeks1,
on  the  contrary,  though  speakigg  their  strongly
marked,  and  I  doubt  whether  mutually  intelligible
dialects,  the  MQ&G,  the  Doric,  the  Ionics  felt  them-
selves at  all  times,  even  when  ruled  by  different
tyrants,  or  broken  up  into  numerous  republics,  *&
one  great  Hellenic  people.  What  was  it,  tbe$»


viil  144—  ASri^  rl

6«Sw  topSfurrt.  r«  m«t  >

t'Atopaiew  <&*&*&$%<*.  See  '  Bdiab.  BeviOTT,*  1874,

P-  433-


86        LEGTUB1S  Off  THE  SOIENOE  OF  BELIGHON.

preserved  in  their  hearts,  in  spite  of  dialects/bi  spite
of  dynasties,  in  spite  even  of  the  feuds  of  tribes  and
the  jealdusies  of  states,  the  deep^  feeling  of  that  ideal
jonity  which  constitutes^  jeople?  It  was  their  pri-
mitwe  religion ;  it  was  a.  dim  recollection  of  the
common  allegiance  they  owed  from  time  Immemorial
to  the  great  fafoef*  of  gods  and  men;  it^was  their
beiief  in  the  old  Zeus  of  Dodona,  the  Panhellenie
Zeus.

Perhaps  the  most  signal-confirmation  of  this  view
that  it  is  religion  even  more  than  language  which
supplies  the  foundation  of  nationality,  is  to  be  found
in  the  history  of  the  Jews,  the  chosen  people  of  God.
The  language  of  the  Jews  differed  from  that  of  the
Phenicians,  the  Moabites,  and  other  neighbouring
tribes  much  less  than  the  <Jreek  dialects  differed
from  each  other.  But  the  worship  of  Jehovdh  made
the  Jews  a  peculiar  people,  the  people  of  Jehovah,
separated  by  their  God,  though  not  ty  their  Ian*
guage,  from  the  people  of  Chemosh  (the  Moabites1)
and  from  the  worshippers  of  Baal  and  Ashtoreth.
It  was  their  faith  in  Jehovah  that  changed  the
wandering  tribes  of  Israel  into  a  nation.

CA  people/  as  Spelling  says,  'exists  only  when  it
has  determined  itself  with  regard  to  it&  mythology.
This  mythology,  therefore,  cannot  take  its  origin
after  a  national  separation  has  taken  place,  after.
a  people  has  become  a  people:  nor  could  it  spring
up  while  a  people  was  still  contained  as*an  invisible
part  in  the  whole  of  humanity;  but  its  origin  must
be  referred  to  that  very  period  of  transition  before

»  Numb,  ro.  29 ;  Jeremiah  xlviii.  7 :  '  And  Ohemoah  shall  go  forth
Into  captivity,  with  his  priests  and  his  princes  together.'


LECJTUBE  in.  87

a  peoplfe  has  assumed  its  definite  existence,  and  when
it  is  on  th^  point  of  separating  and  constituting  itself.
The  same  applies  to  the  language  of  a  people;  it
becomes  definite  at  the  same  time  that  a  people  be?
comes  definite1.'

Hegel,  tBe  great  rival  of  Schelling,  arrived  at  the
same  contusion.  In  his  Philoi&pKy  of  History  he
says :  c  The  idea  of  God  constitutes  the  general  founda-
tion of  a  people.  Whatever  is  the  form  of  a  religion,
the  same  is  the  form  of  la  state,,  and  its  constitution:
it  springs  from  religion,  so  much  so  that  the  Athenian
and  the  Eoman  states  were  possible  only  with  the
peculiar  heathendom  of  those  peoples,  and  that  ev#n
now  a  Eoman  Catholic  state  has  a  different  genius
and  a  different  constitution  from  a  Protestant  state.
The  genius  of  *a  people  is  a  definite,  individual  genius
which^becomes  conscious  of  its  individuality  in  dif-
ferent spheres :  in  the  character  of  its  moral  life,  its
political  constitution,  its  art,  religion  and  science2/

But  this  is  not  an  idea  of  philosophers  only.  His-
torians, and,  more  particularly,  the  students  of  the
history  of  law,  have  arrived  at  very  mu$i  the  same
conclusion.  Though  to  many  of  them  law  seems
naturally  to  be  the  foundation  *>f  society,  and  the

1  '  Vorlesungen  uber  Philosophic  der  Mythologie/  vol,  i.  p.  107  seq.

*  Though  these  words  of  Hegel's  were  published  long  before
Schelling's  lectures,  they  seem  to  me  to  breathe  the  spirit  of  Sohelling
rather  than  of  Hegel,  and  it  is  but  fair  therefore  to  state  that  Schelling's
lectures,  though  not  published,  were  printed  and  circulated  among
friends  twenty  years  before  they  were  delivered  at  Berlin.  1&&
question  of  priority  may  seem  of  little  importance  m  Baatto*  tfu&b  a*
these,  but  there  is  nevertheless  much  truth  in.  Schema  «**^  tfe*
philosophy  advances  not  so  ttoch  by  the  aagwes*  gtvea  to  difficult
problems,  as  by  the  starting  of  new  problems,  and  by  asking  questions
which  no  one  else  would  think  of  asking.


88         LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

bond  that  binds  a  nation  together,  those  wrfo  look
below  ihe  surface  have  quickly  perceived^  that  law
itself,  at  least  ancfent  law,  derives  its  authority,  its
foj;ce,  its  very  life,  from  religion.    Sir  H.  Maine  is  no
doubt  right  when,  in  the  case  of  the  so-called  Laws
of  Manu,  he  rejects  the  idea  of  the  Deity  dictating  an
entire  code  or  body  of  law,  as  an  idea  of  a  Decidedly
modem  origin.     Yet  the  belief  that  the  law-giver
enjoyed  some  closer  intimacy  with  the  Deity  than
ordinary  mortals,  pervades  the  ancient  traditions  of
many  nations.     Thus  Diodorus  Siculus  (1.  i.  c.  94),
tells  us  that  the  Egyptians  believed  their  laws  to
have  been  communicated  to  Mnevis  by  Hermes ;  the
Cretans  held  that  Minos  receivecT  his  laws  from  Zeus,
the  Lacedaemonians  that  Lykurgos  received  his  laws
from  Apollon.    According  to  the  Ariafts,  their  law-
giver, Zathraustes,  had  received  his  laws  from  the
Good  Spirit;  according  to  the  Getse,  Zamolxis  re-
ceived his  laws  from  the  goddess  Hestia;  and,  ac-
cording to  the  Jews,  Moses  received  his  laws  from  the
god  lao.

No  one  has  pointed  out  more  forcibly  than  Sir  H.
Maine  that  in  ancient  times   religion  as  a  divine
influence  was  underlying  and  supporting  every  re-
lation of  life  and  every  social  institution.    '  A  super-
natural presidency,'  he  writes,  'is  supposed  to  con-
secrate and  keep  together  all  the  cardinal  institutions
of  those  early  times,  the  state,  the  race,  and  the  family*
(p.  6).      'The  elementary  group  is  the  family;  the
aggregation  of  families  forms  the  gens  or  the  house.
The  aggregation  of  houses  makes  the  tribe.     The
aggregation  of  tribes  constitutes  the  commonwealth'
(p.  ia8).     Now  the  family  is  held  together  by  the


LECTURE  HI.  89

familyWcra  (p,  191),  and  so  were  the  gens,  the  tribe,
and  the  bommonwealth ;  and  strangers  could~only  be
admitted  to  these  Brotherhoods  tfy  being  admitted  to
their  aawa  (p.  13 1)1.  &t  >&  later  time,  law  breaks
away  from  religion  (p.«  193),  but  even  then  many
traces  remain  to  sh&w  that  the  hearth  was  the  first
altar,  thft  father  the  first  elder,  4is 'wife  and  children
and  slaves  the  first  congregation  gathered  together
round  the  sacred  fire — the  Hestia,  the  goddess  of  the
house,  and  in  the  end  the  goddess  of  the  people.  To
the  present  day,  marriage,  one  of  the  most  important
of  civil  acts,  the  very  foundation  of  civilised  life,  has
retained  something  of  the  religious  character  which*  it
had  from  the  very  beginning  of  history.

Let  us  see  now  ^yhat  religion  really  is  in  those
early  ages  of 'vwhich  we  are  here  speaking :  I  do  not
mean  religion  as  a  silent  power^  working  in  the  heart
of  man;  I  mean  religion  in  its  outward  appearance,
religion  as  something  outspoken,  tangible,  and  de-
finite, that  can  be  described  and  communicated  to
others.  We  shall  find  that  in  that  sense  religion
lies  within  a  very  small  compass.  A^few  words,
recognised  as  names  of  the  deity;  a  few  epithets  that
have  been  raised  from  their  material  meaning  to  a
higher  and  mSre  spiritual  stage, — I  mean  words
which  expressed  originally  bodily  strength,  or  bright-
ness, or  purity,  and  which  gradually  had  come  to
mean  greatness,  goodness,  and  holiness ;  lastly,  some

1  A  very  different  opinion  is  held  by  Varro.  'Varro  propterea  m
prius  de  rebus  humanis,  de  divinis  autem  postea  scripsiase  ifcestatur,
quod  prius  extiterint  civitatee,  deinde  ab  eis  haso  institute  aint  .  ,  .  .
sicut  prior  eat,  inquit,  pietor  quam  tabula  picta,  prior  &ber  quam
fcdifioium:  ita  priores  emit  oivitates  quam  ea  qua  a  oivitatibus
inatituta  sunt.1  (August. '  Civ.  Dei,'  6.  4).


90        MOTTOES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  EELIGION.

more  or  leas  technical  terms  expressive  of  suclf  ideas
as  sacrifice,  altar,  prayer,  possibly  virtue  ^and  sin,
body  and  Spirit — this  is  what  constitutes  the  outward
framework  of  the  incipient  religions  of  antiquity.  If
we  look  at  these  simple  manifestations  of  religion,  we
see  at  once  why  religion,  during  *those  earfy  ages  of
which  we  are  here*  speaking,  may  really  and^bruly  be
callerd  g  sacred  dialect  of  human  speech ;  how  at  all
events  early  religion  and  early  language  are  most
intimately  connected,  ^religioii  depending  entirely  for
its  outward  expression  on  the  more  or  less  adequate
resources  of  language.

And  if  this  dependence  of  early  religion  on  language
is  once  clearly  understood,  it  follows,  as  a  matter  of
course,  that  whatever  classification  has  "been  found
most  useful  in,  the  Science  of  Language  ought  to
prove  equally  useful  in  the  Science  of  Beligidn.  If
there  is  a  truly  genetic  relationship  of  languages,  the
same  relationship  ought  to  hold  together  the  religions
of  the  world,  at  least  the  most  ancient  religions

Before  we  proceed  therefore  to  consider  the  proper
classification  of  religions,  it  will  be  necessary  to  say
it  few  words  on  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge
viih  regard  to  the  genetic  relationship  of  languages.

If  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  Asiatic  continent
with  its  ijnportant  peninsula  of  Europe,  we  find  that
in  the  vast  desert  of  drifting  human  speech  three,  and
only  three,  oases  have  been  formed  in  which,  before
the  beginning  of  all  history,  language  became  per-
manen^  and  traditional,  assumed  in  fact  a  new
character,  a  character  totally  4iSerent  from  the  ori-
ginal character  of  the  floating  and  constantly  varying
speech  of  human  beings.  These  three  oases  of  Ian-


LEOTUBU  m.  91

are  known  by  the  name  of  Turanian,  Semitic,
and  Artywi. .  In  these  three  centres,  more  particularly
in  the  Aryan  and  Semitic,  language  ce&sed  to  be
natural;  its  growth,  was . arrested,  and  it  became
permanent,  solid,  petrified,  or,  if  you  like,  historical
speech.  *I  have  always  maintained  that  this  cen-
tralisati^n  and  traditional  conservation  of  language
could  only  have  been  the  result  of  religious*  and
political  influences,  and  I  now  intend  to  show  that
we  really  have  dear  eVidencet  of  three  independent
settlements  of  religion,  the  Turanian,  the  Semitic,  and
the  Aryan,  concomitantly  with  the  three  great  settle-
ments of  language.

Taking  Chinese  for  what  it  can  hardly  any  longer
be  doubted  that  it  is,  viz.  the  earliest  representative
of  Turanian*  speech,  we  find  in  China  an  ancient
colouf  less  and  unpoetical  religion,  a  religion  we  might
almost  venture  to  call  monosyllabic,  consisting  of  the
worship  of  a  host  of  single  spirits,  representing  the
sky,  the  sun,  storms  and  lightning,  mountains  aad
rivers,  one  standing  by  the  side  of  the  other  without
any  mutual  attraction,  without  any  higher  principle
to  hold  them  together.  In  addition  to  this,  we  like-
wise meet  in  China  with  the  worship  of  ancestral
spirits,  the  spirits  of  the  departed,  who  «&re  supposed
to  retain,  some  cognisance  of  human  affairs,  and  to
possess  peculiar  powers  which  they  exercise  for  good
or  for  evil.  This  double  worship  of  hmawn  aad  of
natural  sjSrits  constitutes  the  old  popular  r$Hgi$»  of
China*  aad  it  has  lived  on  to  the  preset  d*y^ftfc  &aet
in  the  lower  ranks  q£  sxxsiefey,  though,  ifee»e  twers
above  it  a  more  elevated  range  of  hall  religious  and
half  philosophical  faith,  $  baUaf  ia  two  higher  Powers


92        LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIG-TON.


•which,  in  the  language  of  philosophy,
and  Matter,  in  the  language  of  Ethics*  Qkod  and
JW/j  but  which  in  the  original  language  of  religion
andjnythology  are  represented  as  Heaven  and  Earth.

It  is'true  that  we  know  the  ancient  popular  religion
of  China  from  the  works  of  Confttcius  onl/,  or  from
even  more  modern  sources.  But  Confucius,*  though
he  is*c^led  the  founder  of  a  new  religion,  was  really
but  the  new  preacher  of  an  old  religion.  He  was
emphatically  a  transmitter,  not  a  maker  1.  He  says  of
himself,  c  I  only  hand  on  ;  I  cannot  create  new  things.
I  believe  in  the  ancients,  and  therefore  I  love  them2/

"We  find,  secondly,  the  ancient  worship  of  the  Se-
mitic  races,  clearly  marked  by  a  rtumber  of  names  of
the  Deity,  which  appear  in  the  pplytheistic  religions
of  the  Babylonians,  the  Phenicians,  and  Carthaginians,
as  well  as  in  the  monotheistic  creeds  of  Jews,  (Chris-
tians, and  Mohammedans.  It  is  almost  impossible  to
characterise  the  religion  of  people  so  different  from
each  other  in  language,  in  literature,  and  general
civilisation,  so  different  also  from  themselves  at  dif-
ferent periods  of  their  history  ;  but  if  I  ventured  to
characterise  the  worship  of  all  the  Semitic  nations  by
one  word,  I  should  say  it  was  pre-eminently  a  wor-
ship of  God  in  History,  of  God  as  affecting  the  des^
tinies  of  individuals  and  races  and  nations  rather  than
of  God  as  wielding  the  powers  of  nature.  The  names
of  the  Semitic  deities  are  mostly  words  expressive  of
moral  qualities  ;  they  mean  the  Strong,  the  Exalteda
the  Lor<J,  the  King  ;  and  they  grow  but  seldom  into
divine  personalities,  definite  in  tfceir  outward  appear-

1  See  Dr.  Legge,  f  Life  of  Confucius,'  p.  96.

8  liun-yu  (§  i.  a)  ;  Schott,  'Chiaeaiscta  Literatur,'  p.  jr.


IB.  68

&nceV>r  easily  to  be  recognised  by  strongly  marked
features\of  f>  real  dramatic  character.  Hence  many
of  the  ancient  Semitic  gods  have  a  tendency  to  run
together,  and  a  transition  ^from  the  worship  of  single
gods  to  the  worship  5?  o'ne  God  required  ng  great
effort.  In  the  monotonous  desert,  more  particularly,
the  worship  of  single  gods  glidf  d  away  almost  imper-
ceptibly into  the  worship  of  one  God.  If  I  w«re  to
add,  as  a  distinguishing  mark,  that  the  Semitic  reli-
gions excluded  the  feminine  gender  in  their  names
of  the  Deity,  or  that  all  their  female  deities  were  only
representatives  of  the  active  energies  of  older  and
sexless  gods,  this  would  be  true  of  some  only,  not  of
all ;  and  it  would*  require  nearly  as  many  limitations
as  the  statement  of  M.  Kenan,  that  the  Semitic  re-
ligions wer$  instinctively  monotheistic1,

"We  find  lastly  the  ancient  worship  of  the  Aryan
race  carried  to  the  most  distant  corners  of  the  earth
by  its  adventurous  sons,  and  easily  recognised,  whether
in  the  valleys  of  India  or  in  the  forests  of  Germany,
by  the  common  names  of  the  Deity,  all  originally  ex-
pressive of  natural  powers.  Their  worship  is  not,  as
has  been  so  often  said,  a  worship  of  nature.  But  if  it
had  to  be  characterised  by  one  yord,  I  should  venture
to  call  it  a  worship  of  God  in  Nature,  of  God  as  ap-
pearing behind  the  gorgeous  veil  of  Nature,  rather
than  as  hidden  behind  the  veil  of  the  sanctuary  of
the  human  heart.  The  gods  of  the  Aryan  pantheon
assume  an  individuality  so  strongly  marked  and  peer*
manent,  that  with  the  Aryans,  a  transition* to  mono-
theism required  a  powerful  struggle,  and  selclom  took

1  See  my  essay  on  *  Semitic  Monotheism,'  in  '  Chips  from  a  Gorman
Workshop, '  vol.  i.  pp.  342  380.


94         LECrClTRES  ON  THE  SCttEffOE  OF  RELIGION.

effect  without  iconoclastic  revolutions  or  philosophical
despair.

These  'three  classes  of  religion  are  not  to  be  mis-
taken,  as  little  as  the  three  classes  of  language,  the
Turanian,  the  Semitic,  and  tlje  Aryan.  They  mark
three  events  in  the  most  ancient  history  of  iftie  world,
events  which  have*  deiermined  the  whole  fatg  of  the
human  race,  and  of  which  we  ourselves  still  feel  the
consequences  in  our  language,  in  our  thoughts,  and  in
our  religion.

But  the  chaos  which  these  three  leaders  in  language,
thought,  and  religion,  the  Turanian,  the  Semitic,  and
the  Aryan,  left  behind,  was  not  altogether  a  chaos.
The 'stream  of  language  from  whick  these  three  chan-
nels had  separated,  rolled  on;  the  sacred  fire  of  re-
ligion from  which  these  three  altars  had  been  lighted
was  not  extinguished,  though  hidden  in  smoke*  and
ashes.  There  was  language  and  there  was  religion
everywhere  in  the  world,  but  it  was  natural  and  wild*
growing  language  and  religion;  it  had  no  history,  it
left  no  history,  and  it  is  therefore  incapable  of  that
peculiar  scientific  treatment  which  has  been  found
applicable  to  a  study  of  the  languages  and  the  religions
of  the  Chinese,  the  Semitic,  and  the  Aryan  nations.

People  wonder  why  the  students  of  language  have
not  succeeded  in  establishing  more  than  three  families
of  speech — or  rather  two,  for  the  Turanian  can  hardly
be  called  a  family,  in  the  strict  sense  of  that  word,
until  it  has  been  fully  proved  that  Chinese  forms  tiro
centre  of  the  two  Turanian  branches,  the  North  Tura-
nian on  one  side,  and  the  South  Turanian  on  the
other,  that  Chinese1  forms,  in  fact,  the  earliest  settle-
1  See  my  'Lecture  on  the  Stratification  of  Language/  p.  4.


LEOTUBB  HI.  95

ment\>f  that  unsettled  mass  of  speech,  which,  at  a
later  stage,  became  more  fixed  and  traditional, — •
in  the  north*,  in  Tungusic,  Mongolia,  TaAaric,  and
Mnnic,  and  in  thtf  south,  in  Taic,  Malaic,  Bhotiya*
and  Tainulic.

The  reason  why  scholars  have  discovered  no  more
than  these  two  or  three  great^fanailies  of  speech  is
very  sirSple.  There  were  no  more,  and  we  caanot
make  more.  Families  of  languages  are  very  jfeculiar
formations ;  they  are,  and  they  must  be,  the  excep-
tion, not  the  rule,  in  the  growth  of  language.  There
was  always  the  possibility,  but  there  never  was,  as
far  as  I  can  judge,  any  necessity  for  human  speech
leaving  its  primitive  stage  of  wild  growth  and  mid
decay.  If  it  had  not  been  for  what  I  consider  a
purely  spontaneous  act  on  the  part  of  the  ancestors  of
the  Samitic,  Aryan,  and  Turanian  races,  all  languages
might  for  ever  have  remained  ephemeral,  answering
the  purposes  of  every  generation  that  comes  and  goes,
struggling  on,  now  gaining,  now  losing,  sometimes
acquiring  a  certain  permanence,  but  after  a  season
breaking  up  again,  and  carried  away  like  blocks  of
ice  by  the  waters  that  rise  underneath  the  surface.
Our  very  idea  of  language  would  then  have  been
something  totally  different  from  what  it  is  now.

For  what  are  we  doing  1

"We  first  form  our  idea  of  what  language*  ought  to
be  from  those  exceptional  languages  which  were
arrested  in*  their  natural  growth  by  social,  religious,
political,  or  at  all  events  by  extraneous  influences,
and  we  then  turn  round  and  wonder  why  a*U  Ian*
guages  are  not  like  tnese  two  or  three  exceptional
channels  of  speech.  "We  might  as  well  wonder  why


96        LECTURES  OK  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

all  animals  are  not  domesticated,  or  why,  besides  the
garden  anemone,  there  should  be  endless  varieties  of
the  same  aower  growing  wild  on  the  meadow  and  in
the  woods.

li  the  Turanian  class,  i&  tfhich  the  original  concen-
tration was  never  so  powerful  as  in  the  Aryan  and
Semitic  families,  we  $an  still  catch  a  glimpse  of  the
natural  growth  of  language,  though  confinefl  within
eertairf  limits.  The  different  settlements  of  this  great
floating  mass  of  homogeneous  speech  do  not  show
such  definite  marks  t>f  relationship  as  Hebrew  and
Arabic,  Greek  and  Sanskrit,  but  only  such  sporadic
coincidences  and  general  structural  similarities  as  can
be 'explained  by  the  admission  of,a  primitive  concen-
tration, followed  by  a  new  period  of  independent
growth.  It  would  be  wilful  blindness  noi  to  recog-
nise the  definite  and  characteristic  features  which
pervade  the  North  Turanian  languages :  it  would  be
impossible  to  explain  the  coincidences  between  Hun-
garian, Lapponian,  Esthonian,  and  Finnish,  except  on
the  supposition  that  there  was  a  very  early  concen-
tration of  speech  from  which  these  dialects  branched
off*  We  see  uiis  less  clearly  in  the  South  Turanian
group,  though  I  confess  my  surprise  even  here  has
always  been,  not  that  there  should  be  go  few,  but  that
there  should  be  even  these  few  relics,  attesting  a
former  c8mmunity  of  these  divergent  streams  of  lan-
guage. The  point  in  which  the  South  Turanian  and
North  Turanian  languages  meet  goes  back  as  far  as
Chinese ;  for  that  Chinese  is  at  the  root  of  Mandshu
and  Mongolian  as  well  as  of  Siamese  and  Tibetan
becomes  daily  more  apparent  through  the  researches
of  Mr*  Edkins  and  other  Chinese  scholars.


LEOTUBE  III.  97

I  rea5ily  admit  that  there  is  no  hurry  for  pronouno
ing  definitely  qn  these  problems,  and  I  am  welljaware
of  what  may  be  said  against  these  wide  generalisations
affecting  the  'origin  of  species'  in  language.  My  chief
object  in  publishing,  mor§>*than  twenty  years  ago,  my
Letter  to  Brflasen '  On  the  Turanian  Languages/  in  which
these  views  were  first  put  forward,  w&s  to  counteract
the  dangerous  dogmatic  scepticism  which  at  that  time
threatened  to  stop  all  freedom  of  research,  ana  all
progress  in  the  Science  of  Language.  No  method  was
then  considered  legitimate  for  a  comparative  analysis
of  languages  except  that  which  was,  no  doubt,  the  only
legitimate  method  in  treating,  forinstances  the  Romance
languages,  but  was  »ot  therefore  the  only  possible
method  for  a  scientific  treatment  of  all  other  lan-
guages. No  prpofs  of  relationship  were  then  admitted
even  fof  languages  outside  the  pale  of  the  Aryan  and
Semitic  families,  except  those  which  had  been  found
applicable  for  establishing  the  relationship  between
the  various  members  of  these  two  great  families  of
speech.  My  object  was  to  show  that,  during  an  earlier
phase  in  the  development  of  language,  no  such  proofe
ought  ever  to  be  demanded,  because,  from  the  nature
of  the  case,  they  could  not  exisj>,  while  yet  their
absence  would  m  no  way  justify  us  in  denying  the
possibility  of  a  more  distant  relationship.  At  present
a  complete  change  has  taken  place  in  the  Science  of
Language,  as  in  other  branches  of  natural  science.
Owiog  chiefly  to  the  influence  of  the  ideas  which
Darwin,  has  brought  again  into  the  foreground  of  aJl
natural  philosophy,  students  are  now  directfaag^thOT
attention  everywhere  to  the  general  rather  than  to
the  special.  Every  kind  of  change,  under  ihe  name
H


98         LUOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELKHON.

of  development,  seems  now  conceivable  and/ admis-
sible, and  when  all  races  of  men  have  been  traced
back  to  •  one  common  source,  and  even  beyond  the
level  of  humanity^  no  difficulty  Is  felt  any  longer  as
ttf  ijie  possibility  of  a  'refationship  between  any  of
the  so-called  Turanian  languages,  nay,  oA  a  common
beginning  for  ail  -varieties  of  human  speech.  This
phase  of  thought  in  its  extreme  form  wilf  no  doubt
pass*1  away  like  the  former,  but  these  oscillations
should  teach  us  at  least  .this  one  lesson  that  no
dictatorial  authorit/'should  ever  stop  the  progress  of
science,  and  that  nothing  is  so  dangerous  as  a  belief
in  our  own  infallibility.

^If  we  turn  away  from  the  Asiatic  continent,  the
original  home  of  the  Aryan,  the  Semitic,  and  the
Turanian  languages,  we  find  that  ina  Africa,  too,  a
comparative  study  of  dialects  has  clearly  pioved  a
concentration  of  African  speech,  the  results  of  which
may  be  seen  in  the  uniform  B&ntu  dialects,  (Kafir,
Setchu£na,  Damara,  Otyiherero,  Angola,  Kongo,  Ki-
suah&i,  etc.),  spoken  from  the  equator  to  the  Keis-
kamma  \  North  of  this  body  of  B&ntu  or  Kafir  speech,
we  have  an  independent  settlement  of  Semitic  speech
in  the  Berber  and  the  Galla  dialects ;  south  of  it  we
have  only  the  Hot? entot  and  Bushm^i  tongues,  which
are  now  declared  by  Dr.  Th.  Hahn  to  be  closely  allied
to  each  t>ther.  Whether  there  is  any  real  linguistic  re-
lationship between  these  languages  in  the  South  of
Africa  and  the  Nubian,  and  even  the  aacient  Egyp-
tian, and  whether  these  languages  were  separated

1  Bleek,  '  Comparative  Grammar  ofrth©  South  African  Languages/
p.  a.  See  also  Dr.  Bleek's  'Report  concerning  his  Researches  into  the
Bushman  Language/  published  in  1873.


LBCTUEE  III.  99

from  each  other  by  the  intrusion  of  the  Kafir  tribes
is  a  problem,  the  solution  of  which  must  be.  left  to
the  future.  So  much  only  is  certain  that  tHe  ancient
Egyptian  represents  to  us  an  independent  primeval
concentration  of  intellectual  work  in  the  country
of  the  Ntte,  independent,  so  far  as  we  know  at
present,  of  the  ancient  .Aryan  and  Semitic  concentra-
tion of  language  and  religion.

But  while  the  spoken  languages  of  the  African
continent  enable  us  to  perceive  in  a  general  way  the
original  articulation  of  the  primitive  population  of
Africa — for  there  is  a  continuity  in  language  which
nothing  can  destroy — we  know,  and  can  know,  but
little  of  the  growth  and  decay  of  African  religion.
In  many  places  Mohammedanism  and  Christianity
have  swept  ^way  every  recollection  of  the  ancient
gods ;  find  even  when  attempts  have  been  made  by
missionaries  or  travellers  to  describe  the  religious
status  of  Zulus  or  Hottentots,  they  could  only  see  the
most  recent  forms  of  African  faith,  and  these  were
but  too  often  depicted  in  their  ridiculous  rather  than
in  their  serious  character.  It  is  here  where_the  theory
of  a  primitive  fetishism  has  done  most  mischief  in
blinding  the  eyes  even  of  accurate  observers  as  to
anything  that  aiight  lie  beyond  tne  growth  of  fetish
worship .

The  only  African  religion  of  which  we  possess
ancient  literary  records  is  the  religion  of  Egypt»
which  has  i*ng  been  a  riddle  to  us,  as  it  was  to  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  At  last,  however,  the  HgH  is
beginning  to  dawn  on  the  darkest  chambers  Sf  the
ancient  temples  of  Bgy^fc,  and  on  the  deepest  recesses
of  the  human  heart,  from  which  sprang  both  the  belief
H  3


100      LECTURES  ON  THE  SOIENOE  OF  BELIGUON.

and  the  worship  of  the  ancient  gods.  At  first  sight
nothing  seems  more  confused,  perplexing;  and  un-
promising than  the  religion  of  Egypt,  exhibiting  at
one  time  a  grovelling  worship  of  animals,  at  another
the  highest  flights  of  a  mysterious  wisdom.  It  can
hardly  be  said  that  even  now,  after  the  decipherment
of  the  ancient  latfguage  of  Egypt,  this  strange  contrast
ha^  b^een  entirely  accounted  for.  Still  no  one  can
rise  from  the  perusal  of  M.  Le  Page  Renouf  s  excellent
'Hibbert Lectures'  without  feeling  convinced  that  there
is  reason  in  the  religion  of  Egypt  also,  nay,  that  the
growth  of  religious  ideas  there  is  wonderfully  alike
thp  growth  of  religious  ideas  amongthe  Aryan  nations.

The  religion  of  the  Egyptians  was  not  from  the  first
a  mere  worship  of  brutes,  Egyptian  zoolatry  belonged
to  a  period  of  decay,  and  was  based  upen  symbols  de-
rived from  mythology.  Egyptian,  like  Aryan,  tnytho-
logy  dealt  originally  with  those  phenomena  of  nature
which  are  conspicuously  the  result  of  law,  such  as  the
rising  and  setting  of  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the
stars :  and  a  recognition  of  law  and  order  as  existing
throughout  the  universe,  underlies  the  whole  system
of  Egyptian  religion.  Like  the  Sanskrit  A'ta,  the
Egyptian  "Ma&t,  Derived  from  merely  sensuous  im-
pressions, became  in  the  end  the  nam8  for  moral  order
and  righteousness.

But  besides  the  several  powers  recognised  in  their
mythology,  most  of  which  have  now  been  traced  back
to  a  solar  origin,  the  Egyptians  from  tne  very  first
spoke  of  the  One  Power  also,  by  whom  the  whole
physical  and  moral  government  of  the  universe  is
directed,  upon  whom  each  individual  depends,  and  to
whom  it  is  responsible.  And  lastly  they  paid  honour


LECTUBE  III.  101

to  the  departed,  because  death  was  considered  as  the
beginning  of  a  new  life,  a  life  that  will  never  and.

With  all  this,  mythology,  as  an  inevitable  disease
of  language,  was  terribly  Aggravated  in  Egypt  by
the  early  development  of  art  and  the  forms  which  it
assumed.  *The  Power  which  the  Egyptians  recogniseS
without  a^y  mythological  adjundb,  to  whom  no  temple
was  ever  raised  (as  little  as  there  was  in  India  a,  sanc-
tuary dedicated  to  Para-Brahman,  the  Highest  Brah-
man), 'who  was  not  graven  on^stone/  'whose  shrine
was  never  found  with  painted  figures/  'who  had
neither  ministrants  nor  offerings,'  and  'whose  abode
was  unknown/  must  practically  have  been  forgotten
by  the  worshippers*  of  the  magnificent  temples  of
Memphis,  Heliopolis,  Abydos,  Thebes,  or  Dendera,
where  quite  ether  deities  received  the  homage  of
prayer^  and  praise,  and  sacrifice.  Efforts,  however,
are  visible,  in  Egypt  as  in  India,  to  cling  to  the  notion
of  the  unity  of  God  The  'self-existent,  or  self-
becoming  One,  the  One,  the  One  of  One,  the  One
without  a  second'  (as  in  Sanskrit,  svayambhu,  Ekam
advitiyam),  ' the  Beginner  of  becoming,  from  the  first,
who  made  all  things,  but  was  not  made/  are  expres-
sions constantly  met  with  in  the  religious  texts,  and
applied  to  this  t>r  that  god  (henotheistically),  each  in
his  turn  being  considered  as  the  supreme  Go4of  gods,
the  Maker  and  Creator  of  all  things.  Thus  Ba,  origi-
nally the  sun,  proceeding  from  Nu,  'the  father  of.tbp
gods/  and  limself  the  father  of  Shu  (air)
(dew),  was  worshipped  as  the  supreme  cele


Osiris,  the  eldest  of  the  five  children  of  Seb

and  Nut  (heaven),  'greater  than  his  father,  more

powerful  than  his  mother/  the  husband  of  lais,  the


102      LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

father  of  Horus,  was  another  representation  of  the
sun,  conceived  chiefly  in  his  character-  of  conqueror
of  darkness  (Set).  B&,  we  read,  eris  the  soul  of  Osiris,
anj.  Osiris  the  soul  of  B&/,  Horus  again  is  a  name
of  the  sun,  originally  of  the  morning  sun,  'whose  eyes
are  restored  at  the  dawn  of  da^/  Thoth  i-epresente
the  moon, '  the  measurer  of  the  earth/  '  the  distributor
of  time/  and,  at  last,  the  inventor  of  letters  and  arts.
Truly  does  M.  Le  Page  Renouf  remark :  e  Sanskrit
scholars  who  do  notrknow  a  word  of  Egyptian,  and
Egyptologists  who  do  not  know  a  word  of  Sanskrit,
will  give  different  names  to  these  personages.  But  the
comparative  mythologist  will  hardly  hesitate  about
assigning  his  real  name  to  eadh  of  them,  whether
Aryan  or  Egyptian/

We  may  sum  up  in  the  words  of  Mariette:  'On
the  summit  of  the  Egyptian  pantheon  hovers*  a  sole
God,  immortal,  uncreate,  invisible,  and  hidden  in  the
inaccessible  depths  of  his  own  essence.  He  is  the
creator  of  heaven  and  earth ;  he  made  all  that  exists,
and  nothing  was  made  without  him.  This  is  the  God,
the  knowledge  of  whom  was  reserved  for  the  initiated,
in  the  sanctuaries.  But  the  Egyptian  mind  could  not,
or  would  not,  remain  at  this  sublime  altitude.  It
considered  the  world,  its  formation^  the  principles
which  govern  it,  man  and  his  earthly  destiny,  as  an
immense  drama  in  which  the  one  Being  is  the  only
actor.  All  proceeds  from  him,  and  all  returns  to  him.
But  he  has  agents  who  are  his  own  personified  attri-
butes who  become  deities  in  visible  forms,  limited  in
their  activity,  yet  partaking  of  his  own  powers  aad
qualities  V

*  In  this  account  of  the  Egyptian  religion  I  have  cHefly  followed  M.


LECTURE  III*  108

If  we  turn  from  Africa  to  America,  we  find  there  in
the  North  numerous  languages  as  witnesses  of  ancient
migrations,  but  of  Ancient  religion  we  have  hardly
anything.  In  the  South^we  know  of  two  linguistic
and  political  centres;  and  there,  in  Mexico  and  Peru,
we  meet  with  curious,*  though  not  always  trustworthy,
traditions,  of  an  ancient  and  welt-established  system
of  religious  faith  and  worship.

Lastly,  as  it  is  possible  to  reconstruct  an  original
Polynesian  language  from*  what  is  common  to  the  dia-
lects of  the  islands  reaching  from  America  to  Africa
(Madagascar),  fragments  of  an  original  Polynesian
religion  also  are  gradually  brought  to  light,  which
would  amply  repay  <he  labours  of  a  new  Humboldt.

The  Science  of  Religion  has  this  advantage  over  the
Science  of  Lamguage,  if  advantage  it  may  be  called,
that  in*  several  cases  where  the  latter  has  materials
sufficient  to  raise  problems  of  the  highest  importance,
but  not  sufficient  for  their  satisfactory  solution,  the
former  has  no  materials  at  all  that  would  justify  even
a  mere  hypothesis.  In  many  parts  of  the  world  where
dialects,  however  degenerate,  still  allow  jas  a  dark
glimpse  of  a  distant  past,  the  old  temples  have  com-
pletely vanished,  and  the  very  n%mes  of  the  ancient
deities  are  cleaSi  forgotten.  We  know  nothing,  we
must  be  satisfied  with  knowing  nothing,  and^the  true
scholar  leaves  the  field  which  proves  all  the  more
attractive  to  the  dabblers  in  a  priori  theories.

But  even*  if  it  were  otherwise,  the  students  of  reli-
gion would,  I  think,  do  well  to  follow  tie  eximiple  of

Le  PageBenoufs  'Hibbert  Lectures'  of  1879,  < Lectares c* the  Origin
and  Growth  of  Beligion,  as  illustrated  by  the  Beligion  of  Ancieni
Egypt;1  also  Be  BOUJ&  <Sixr  1*  Beligion  des  anciens  £gyptteoB,*  ia
'  Annales  de  Philoeophie  Cfe&iean^1  NOT.  1869.


104      LEOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGUON.

the  students  of  language,  and  to  serve  their  first  ap-
prentiqpship  in  a  comparative  study  of  $he  Aryan  and
Semitic  feligions.  If  it  can  be  proved  that  the  reli-
gions of  the  Aryan  nationis  are  united  by  the  same
bonds  of  a  real  relationship  -grhich  have  enabled  us  to
treat  their  languages  as  so  many*  varieties  8f  the  same
type,  and  if  th£  same  fact  can  be  established  with
reference  to  the  Semitic  world,  the  field  thus  opened
is  vast  enough,  and  its  careful  clearing  and  cultivation
will  occupy  several  generations  of  scholars.  And  this
original  relationship,  1  believe,  can  be  proved.  Names
of  the  principal  deities,  words  also  expressive  of  the
most  essential  elements  of  religion,  such  as  prayer,
sacrifice,  altar,  spirit,  law,  and  faith,  have  been  pre-
served among  the  Aryan  and  among  the  Semitic
nations,  and  these  relics  admit  of  one  explanation
only.  After  that,  a  comparative  study  of  tfte  Tu-
ranian religions  may  be  approached  with  better  hope
of  success  \  for  that  there  was  not  only  a  primitive
Aryan  and  a  primitive  Semitic  religion,  but  likewise
a  primitive  Turanian  religion,  before  each  of  these
primeval  j$ces  was  broken  up  and  became  separated
in  language,  worship,  and  national  sentiment,  admits,
I  believe,  of  little  dgubt  at  present.

Let  us  begin  with  our  own  ancestors,  the  Aryans.
In  a  lecture  which  I  delivered  in  this  place  some  years
ago,  I  drew  a  sketch  of  what  the  life  of  the  Aryans
must  have  been  before  their  first  separation,  that  is,
before  the  time  when  Sanskrit  was  spok&i  in  India,
or  Greek  in  Asia  Minor  and  Europe.  The  outline  of
that  sketch  and  the  colours  with  which  it  was  filled
were  simply  taken  from  language.  We  argued  that
it  would  be  possible,  if  we  took  all  the  words  which


LECTtJBB  III.

exist  in  the  same  form  in  French,  Italian,  i

ish,  to  show  what  words,  and  therefore  wha^

must  have  been  known  to  the  people  who  aid  notTas
yet  speak  French,  Italiai^  apd  Spanish,  but  who  spoke
that  language  which  preceded  these  Romance  dialects.
We  happSn  to  know  that  language:  it  was  Latin;
but  if  w^  did  not  know  a  worck  of  'Latin  or  a  single
chapter  of  Roman  history,  we  should  still  be  ablf,  by
using  the  evidence  of  the  words  which  are  common  to
all  the  Romance  languages,  to  draw  some  kind  of  pic-
ture of  what  the  principal  thougnts  and  occupations
of  those  people  must  have  been  who  lived  in  Italy  a
thousand  years  at  least  before  the  time  of  Charle-
magne. We  could*  easily  prove  that  those  people
must  have  had  kings  and  laws,  temples  and  palaces,
ships  and  cawiages,  high  roads  and  bridges,  and  nearly
all  th$  ingredients  of  a  highly  civilised  life.  We  could
prove  this,  as  I  said,  by  simply  taking  the  names  of
all  these  things  as  they  occur  in  French,  Spanish,  and
Italian,  and  by  showing  that  as  Spanish  did  not  bor-
row them  from  French,  or  Italian  from  Spanish,  they
must  have  existed  in  that  previous  stratum  of  lan-
guage from  which  these  three  modern  Romance  dia-
lects took  their  origin.

Exactly  the^same  kind  of  argument  enabled  us  to
put  together  a  kind  of  mosaic  picture  of  the  earliest
civilisation  of  the  Aryan  people  before  the  time  of
their  separation.  As  we  find  in  Greek,  LS&B,  e&A
Sanskrit,  also  in  Slavonic,  Celtic,  and  TeoteaSfc,  Ai
same  word  for  house,  we  are  fully  justified  is  <3jp$te&*
ing  that  before  any  of  these  languages  had  susanmed  a
Separate  existence,  a  thousand  years  at  least  before
•kgamemnon  and  before  Manu,  the  ancestors  of  the


106      LECTURES  ON  THE  SdlEffCIE  OF  BELIGION.

Aryan,  races  were  no  longer  dwellers  in  tents,  but
builders  of  permanent  houses  l.  As  we  find  the  name
for  town  the  same  in  Sanskrit  and  Greek2,  we  can
conclude  with  equal  certainty  that,  if  not  towns,  in
ouf  sense  of  the  word,  ai  aU  events  strongholds  or
camps  were  known  to  the  Aryaas  before  ©reek  and
before  Sanskrit  was^poken.  As  we  find  the  name
for  king  the  same  in  Sanskrit,  Latin,  Teutonic,  and
Celtic  r,  we  know  again  that  some  kind  of  kingly
government  was  established*  and  recognised  by  the
Aryans  during  the  sarfle  pre-historic  period.

I  must  not  allow  myself  to  be  tempted  to  draw  the
whole  of  that  picture  of  primeval  civilisation  over
again*.  I  only  wish  to  call  back*to  your  recollection
the  fact  that  in  exploring  together  the  ancient  archives
of  language,  we  found  that  the  highest.  God  had  re-
ceived the  same  name  in  the  ancient  mythology  of
India,  Greece,  Italy,  and  Germany,  and  had  retained
that  name,  whe&er  worshipped  on  the  Himalayan
mountains,  or  among  the  oaks  of  Dodona,  on  the
Capitol,  or  in  the  forests  of  Germany.  I  pointed  out
that  his  name  was  Dyaus  in  Sanskrit,  Zeus  in  Greek,
Joui-8  in  Latin,  Tiu  in  German;  but  I  hardly  dwelt
with  sufficient  strength  on  the  startling  nature  of  this
discovery.  These  names  are  not  merft  names  :  they
are  historical  facts,  ay,  facts  more  immediate,  more
trustworthy,  than  many  facts  of  medieval  history.
These  words  are  not  mere  words,  but  they  bring
before  us,  with  all  the  vividness  of  an  e^ent  which


1  Sk.  dama»  MIMS,  damns,  Goth,  timrjan,  'to  build,'  SI.  dom;  Sk.
vew,  o7ffosy  vicus,  Goth,  veih-s.

*  Sk.  pur,  pur!,  or  puri,  Gk.  mJA«;  Sfc.  vftstu,  '  house,'

*  Sk.  Bty,  rtyan,  rex,  Goth,  reika,  IP.  riogh.
4  See  'Selected  Essays,'  vol.  1.  p.  317  se$.


LECTURE  III.  107

we  witnessed  ourselves  but  yesterday,  the  ancestors
of  the  whole  Aryan  race,  thousands  of  years  Jit  may
be  before  Homer  and  the  Veda,  worshipping  an  unseea
Being,  under  the  selfsame  pame,  the  best,  the  most
exalted  name  which  they  could  find  in  their  voeafiu-
lary — undSr  the  name  of  Light  and  Sky.

And  Iqjj  us  not  turn  away,  awl  day  that  this  was,
after  all,  but  nature-worship  and  idolatry.  Ho,j.t  Vas
not  meant  for  that,  though  it  may  have  been  degraded
into  that  in  later  times.  Dyaus  did  not  mean  the  blue
sky,  nor  was  it  simply  the  sky  personified:  it  was
meant  for  something  else.  We  have  in  the  Veda  the
invocations  Dyaus  pitar^  the  Greek  ZeiJ  irdtap,  the
Latin  Jupiter;  and'that  means  in  all  the  three  lan-
guages what  it  meant  before  these  three  languages  were
torn  asunder«-it  means  Heaven-Father  1  These  two
words* are  not  mere  words;  they  are  to  my  mind  the
oldest  poem,  the  oldest  prayer  of  mankind,  or  at  least
of  that  pure  branch  of  it  to  which  we  belong— and  I
am  as  firmly  convinced  that  this  prayer  was  uttered,
that  this  name  was  given  to  the  unknown  God  before
Sanskrit  was  Sanskrit  and  Greek  was  Gr^pk,  as,  when
I  see  the  Lord's  Prayer  in  the  languages  of  Polynesia
and  Melanesia,  I  feel  certain  thaj  it  was  first  uttered
in  the  languagS  of  Jerusalem.  We  little  thought  when
we  heard  for  the  first  time  the  name  of  Jijpiter,  de-
graded it  may  be  by  Homer  or  Ovid  into  &  scolding
husband  or  a  faithless  lover,  what  sacred  records  toy
enshrined  *Sn  tiiat  unholy  name.  We  stall  fctfw  Af
learn  the  same  lesson  again  and  again  in  &e  Setenee
of  Religion,  viz.  that  the  place  whereon  wo  sknd  is
holy  ground.  Thousands  of  years  bave  passed  since
the  Aryan  nations  separated  to  travel  to  the  North


108      LECTTOE3  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGUON.

and  the  South,  the  West  and  the  East.  They  nave
each  formed  their  languages,  they  have,  each  founded
empires  and  philosophies,  they  have  each  built  temples
and  razed  them  to  the  ground ;  they  have  all  grown
older,  and  it  may  be  wiser  aqd  better;  but  when  they
search  for  a  name  for  what  is  most  exalted  and  yet
most  near  and  cieartto  every  one  of  us,  when  they
wist  to  express  both  awe  and  love,  the  infinite  and
the  fhfite,  they  can  but  do  what  their  old  fathers  did
when  gazing  up  to  the  eternal  sky,  and  feeling  the
presence  of  a  Being  ds  far  as  far  and  as  near  as  near
can  be,  they  can  but  combine  the  selfsame  words,  and
utter  once  more  the  primeval  Aryan  prayer,  Heaven-
Father,  in  that  form  which  will  endure  for  ever, c  Our
Father,  which  art  in  heaven.'

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  early  region  of  the
Semitic  nations.  The  Semitic  languages,  it  is  well
known,  are  even  more  closely  connected  together
than  the  Aryan  languages,  so  much  so  that  a  com-
parative grammar  of  the  Semitic  languages  seems  to
have  but  few  of  the  attractions  possessed  by  a
comparative  study  of  Sanskrit,  Greek,  and  Latin.
Semitic  scholars  complain  that  there  is  no  work
worth  doing  in  comparing  the  grammars  of  Hebrew,
Syriac,  Arabic,  and  JEthiopic,  for  they  lave  only  to  be
placed  side  by  side1  in  order  to  show  their  close
relationsHip,  I  do  not  think  this  is  quite  true,  and
I  still  hope  that  M.  Kenan  will  carry  out  his  original
design,  and,  by  including  not  only  the  literary
branches  of  the  Semitic  family,  but  also  the  ancient
dialect^  of  Phoenicia,  Arabia,  Babylon,  and  Nineveh,
produce  a  comparative  grammar  of  the  Semitic  lan-

1  See  Bunsen's  'Christianity  and  Mankind;1  vol.  iii.  p.  246  *«?,


LECTURE  TU.  109

guage£  that  may  hold  its  place  by  the  side  of  Bopp's
great  work  on  the  Comparative  Grammar  f  the
Aryan  Languages.

But  what  is  still  faore  surprising  to  me  is  that  no
Semitic  scholar  should  have"  followed  the  exampleeof
the  Arya»  scholars,  «and  collected  from  the  different
Semitic  dialects  those  common^  wards  which  must
have  existed  before  Hebrew  was  Hebrew,  before  Syriac
was  Syriac,  and  before  Arabic  was  Arabic,  an<f  from
which  some  kind  of  idea«might  be  formed  as  to  what
were  the  principal  thoughts  arid  occupations  of  the
Semitic  race  in  its  earliest  undivided  state.      The
materials  seem  much  larger  and  much  more  easily
accessible1.     And  though  there  may  be  some  difficulty
arising  from  the  close  contact  which  continued  to
exist  between^several  branches  of  the  Semitic  family,
it  would  surely  be  possible,  by  means  of  phonetic
rules,  to  distinguish  between  common  Semitic  words,
and  words  borrowed,  it  may  be,  by  the  Arabs  from
Aramsean  sources.      The  principal  degrees  of  rela-
tionship, for  instance,  have  common  names  $mong
the  Semitic  as  among  the  Aryan  nations,  and  if  it
was  important  to  show  that  the  Aryans  had  named
and  recognised  not  only  the  natural  members  of  a
family,  such  as*father  and  mother,  son  and  daughter,
brother  and  sister,  but  also  the  more  distant  members,
the  father  and  mother-in-law,  the  son  and  laughter-
in-law,  the  brother  and  sister-in-law,  would  it  not  b«
of  equal  interest  to  show  that  the  Semitic  na^#*  fcact
reached  the  same  degree  of  civilisation  long  bSftroifa*
time  of  the  laws  of  Moses?

1  See  Bnnsen's  '  Christianity  and  Mankind,'  vol.  ift.  p.  246,  iv.
P-  345-


110      LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGUON.

Confining  ourselves  to  the  more  immediate 'object
of  our  researches,  we  see  "without  difficulty,  that  the
Semitic,  like  the  Aryan  languages,  possess  a  number
of  names  of  the  Deity  in  common,  which  must  have
esSstgd  before  the  Soutf&nf  or  Arabic,  the  Northern
or  Aramaic,  the  Middle  or  jffebr.aic  branckes  became
permanently  separated,  and  which,  therefore,  allow  us
an  insight  into  the  religious  conceptions  of*  the  once
united!  Semitic  race  long  before  Jehovah  was  wor-
shipped by  Abraham,  or  Baal  was  invoked  in  Phoenicia,
or  El  in  Babylon.

It  is  true,  as  I  pointed  out  before,  that  the  meaning
of  many  of  these  names  is  more  general  than  the
original  meaning  of  the  names  .of  the  Aryan  gods.
Many  of  them  signify  Powerful,  Venerable,  Exalted,
King>  Lord,  and  they  might  seem,  therefore,  like
honorific  titles,  to  have  been  given  independently  by
the  different  branches  of  the  Semitic  family  to  the
gods  whom  they  worshipped  each  in  their  own  sanc-
tuaries. But  if  we  consider  how  many  words  there
were  in  the  Semitic  languages  to  express  greatness,
strength,  or  lordship,  the  fact  that  the  same  ap-
pellatives occur  as  the  proper  names  of  the  deity  in
Syria,  in  Carthage,  in  Babylon,  and  in  Palestine,
admits  of  one  historical  explanation  only.  There
must  have  been  a  time  for  the  Semitic  as  well  as
for  the  Aryan  races,  when  they  fixed  the  names  of
their  deities,  and  that  time  must  have  preceded  the
formation  of  their  separate  languages  and  separate
religions.

On5  of  the  oldest  names  of  the  deity  among  the
ancestors  of  the  Semitic  nations  was  EL  It  meant
Strong.  It  occurs  in  the  Babylonian  inscriptions  as


LEOTTOE  III.  HI

Hu,  God x,  and  in  the  very  name  of  Bab-il,  &e  gate  or
temple  of  II.  In  Hebrew  it  occurs  both  in  its^general
sense  of  strong  or  hero,  and  as  a  name  of  God.  We
have  it  in  Beth-el? the  house  of  God,  and  in  many
other  names.  If  used  ^th*  the  article  as  ha-Sl,  the
Strong  Omes  or  the.  God,  it  always  is  meant  in  the
Old  Testament  for  Jehovah,  th^  tnte  God.  E13  how-
ever, always  retained  its  appellative  power,  anA  we
find  it  applied  therefore,  in  parts  of  tite  Old  Testament,
to  the  gods  of  the  gentiles  also.

The  same  El  was  worshiped  at  Byblus  by  the
Phoenicians,  and  he  was  called  there  the  son  of  Heaven
and  Earth2.  His  father  was  the  son  of  Eliun,  the
most  high  God,  who*  had  been  killed  by  wild  animals.
The  son  of  Eliun,  who  succeeded  him,  was  dethroned,
and  at  last  slain  by  his  own  son  El>  whom  Philo  iden-
tifies *rith  the  Greek  Kronos,  and  represents  as  the
presiding  deity  of  the  planet  Saturn8.  In  the  Eimy-
aritic  inscriptions,  too,  the  name  of  El  has  been
discovered4,  and  more  lately  in  many  Arab  proper
names6,  but  as  a  deity  El  was  forgotten  among  the
Arabs  from  the  very  earliest  times.


1  Scihrader,  in  the  'Zeitsohrift  der  Degtsdhen  Morgenlandischen
Gesellschaft,1  vol.  x£ii.  p.  350 ;  xxvi.  p.  180.
8  Bunaen,   'Egypt/  iv.  187.     'Eragmenta  Hist.  Grac.'  YoL  iii.

P-  567-

8  'Fragmenta  Hist.  Grac.'  vol.  iii.  pp.  567-571.  That  M  is  tie
presiding  deity  of  the  planet  Saturn  according  to  the  CMLdfflans  is  also
confirmed  by  JDiodorus  Sioulus,  ii  pp.  30-33.  See  also  Euaebins,
'Praep.  evang/  L  o.  x.  p.  90,  ed  G-aisfbrd,  K/w^os  Tolvwt  fa  of  *o&wrw
*EXov  irpocrayopctiavfft,  and  Bernays'  notes, '  Zn  SanohonxAihon, '  in  Khais.
Mns.  1864,  p.  632,  who  corrects  *H\ov  into*&\.

4  Oaiander,   'Zeitsotoift  der  Beutschen.  Mor^enUndisdie
achaft/  roL  x.  p,  61.

8  Noldeke,  'Monatsberiolite  der  BerL  Akademie/  1880,  p.  768.


112      LEOTUfcES  ON  THE  SOIENOE  OF  BELKHON".

With  the  name  of  El,  PMlo  connected  the  name  of
MoMm,  the  plural  of  Eloah.  In  the  battle  between
M  and  tii  father,  the  allies  of  El,  he  says,  were  called
JSloeim,  as  those  who  were  with  Kronos  were  called
JTrOntpt1.  This  is,  no  dfcuBt,  a  very  tempting  ety-
mology of  Elodh;  but  as  the  bgst  Semitic  scholars,
and  particularly  .Professor  Fleischer,  have  declared
against  it,  we  shall  have,  however  reluctantly,  to
surrender  it.

Eloah  is  the  same  word  a£  the  Arabic,  Hdh,  God,
In  the  singular,  Eloah  is  used  in  the  Bible  synonym-
ously with  El;  in  the  plural  it  may  mean  gods  in
general,  or  false  gods,  but  it  becomes  in  the  Old  Tes-
tament the  recognised  name  of  the  true  God,  plural
in  form,  but  singular  in  meaning.  In  Arabic,  Ildh,
without  the  article,  means  a  God  in  general:  with
the  article  Al-Ilah,  or  Allah3,  becomes  the  name  of
the  God  of  Mohammed,  as  it  was  the  name  of  the
God  of  Abraham  and  of  Moses.

The  origin  of  Eloah  or  Ildfi  has  been  frequently  dis-
cussed by  European  as  well  as  by  native  scholars.
The  K&nius  says  that  there  were  twenty,  Mohammad
El  Fas!  that  there  were  thirty,  opinions  about  it.

Professor  Fleischer3,  whose  judgment  in  such  matters
c

1  '  Fragmenta  Hist.  Greo.1  vol.  iii.  p.  568,  1 8  :  $  fe  fffypax01  *K**v
rov  Kp6vov  "EXoeJju  ^vtie^Orjaav,  els  hv  TS-p&vioi  oSroi  Tfffav  of  kerfjuvoi
lirl  Kp6vov.  *  The  plural  of  El,  i.e.  EHm,  gods,  occurs  in  Phoenician}
Noldeke,  L  c,  p.  775.

2  »Jf,  &!*,  *S%\,  *SL  On  the  original  meaning  of  this  AllAh  see
Sprenger,  f  Moluuninad,'  i.  p.  286.

3  See  a  note  by  Professor  Fleiaclier  in  Delitzsch,  '  Commentar  fiber
die  Genesis/  3rd  ed.f  1860,  p.  64;  also  'Zeitschriffc  der  Deutsohen
Morgenlandischen  GesellschafV  vol.  x,  p.  60;  and  *  Sitzungsberichte
der  konigl.  SdchsiBchen.  Gesellschaft  der  Wiasenschaften,  Phalosoph.
Hist.  ClaBse,'  vol.  rviii  (1866),  pp.  390-392.    Dr.  W.  Wright  adopts


LECTUBE  III.  113

we  may  trust  implicitly,  traces  El,  the  strong  one,
back  to  a  roo^c^  (with  middle  vav,  aval),  to  ba  thick
and  dense,  to  be  fleshy  and  strong1.  But  Tie  takes
JEloak  or  Ildh  for  an  absjrapt  noun,  in  the  sense  ^of
fear2,  derived  from  a  totally  different  root,  viz.  ulah,
to  be  agitfted,  confotmded,  perplexed.  From  mean-
ing fear,  JEloah  came  to  mean  the  object  of  fear  or
reverence,  and  thus  rose  to  be  a  name  of  God.  ^Uie
same  way  we  find  packad,  which  means  fear,  used  in
the  sense  of  God ;  Gen.  xlxi.  43— 6  Except  the  God  of
my  father,  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  fear  of  Isaac
had  been  with  me.'  And  again,  v.  54 — 'And  Jacob
sware  by  the  fear  of  his  father  Isaac/  In  Aramaic,
dachld,  fear,  is  the  recognised  name  for  God  or  for  an
idolj  while  in  Sanskrit  also,  Brahman  is  called  ca
great  fear8.'

The^ame  ancient  name  appears  also  in  its  feminine
form  as  Alldt*.  Her  famous  temple  at  Taif,  in  Arabia,
was  second  only  in  importance  to  the  sanctuary  at
Mekkah,  and  was  destroyed  at  the  command  of  Mo-
hammed. The  worship  of  Alldt,  however,  was  not
confined  to  this  one  place ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  Arabian  goddess  Alilat,  mentioned  by  He-
rodotus 5,  is  the  same  as  the  All&t$$  the  Koran,

Professor  Heischer's  derivation;  likewise  Professor  Knenen  in  his
work,  '  Be  Godsdienst  van  Israel,'  p.  45.

1  Professor  Noldeke,  L  o.  p.  774,  assigns  to  ibis  root  the  meaning  of
being  in  front,  leading.

*  Kuenen,  'Religion  of  Israel,'  i.  p.  41,  Eloah  is  only  aged  by  poets,
and  its  primitive  meaning  is  '  fear,'  hence,  '  that  which  is  fcacftd.*

*  Ka2&a-upanishad,  vi.  2,  monad  bhayam  vagrant  mlystaw  yaA.*

*  Osfonder,  •  Zeitschrift  der  Deutsohen  MorgenlandJB&

scharV  vii.  479-482,  ^UJ*  Allat,  goddess,  is  otetraetod  from
Al-H&liat.

*  Herod,  iii.  8 :  'Oo/«iC<»tfi  (oi  *A/H^toi)  rk  &  Aitowrov  'Oporto,

I


114      LBOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGHOJST.

Another  famous  name  of  the  deity,  traces  of  which
can  be^  found  among  most  of  the  Semitic  nations,  is
Baal,  of  Bel  The  Assyrians  and  Babylonians1,  the
Phoenicians  and  Carthaginians,  the  Moabites  and
Pfiilistines,  and,  we  mus£  actd,  the  Jews  also,  all  knew
of  Bel  or  Baal  as  a  great,  or  even  as  the  supreme
God.  Baal  cantar<Jlybe  considered  as  a  strange  and
foreign  god  in  the  eyes  of  the  Jewish  people,  who,  in
spite  of  the  protests  of  the  Hebrew  prophets,  wor-
shipped him  so  constantly  i»  the  groves  of  Jerusalem2.
He  was  felt  by  them  Almost  as  a  home  deity,  or  at  all
events,  as  a  Semitic  deity,  and  among  the  gods  whom
the  fathers  served  on  the  other  side  of  the  flood,  Baal  or
Bel  held  most  likely  a  very  prominent  place.  Though
originally  one 3,  Baal  became  divided  into  many  divine
personalities  through  the  influence  of  Jocal  worship.
We  hear  of  a  Baal-tsur,  Baal-tsidon,  Baal-tars,«origin-
ally  the  Baal  of  Tyre,  of  Sidon,  and  Tarsus.  On  two
candelabra  found  in  the  island  of  Malta  we  read  the
Phoenician  dedication  to  *  Melkarth,  the  Baal  of  Tyre.1


TJ)P  fa  Qipcnrbpr  *AAiX<£r.  In  Herod  i.  131, 138,  this  name  is  corrupted
to'AAirra.  See  Osiander, '  Zeiteohnft  der  Deutachen  Morgenlandischen
Gesellsehaft,'  vol.  ii  pp  ^.82,  483.  Sprenger,  'Mohammad,*  i  p.  292,
says,  '  I  hesitate  to  identify  the  Alilat  of  Herodotus  with  the  al-Lft t  of
T&ytf,  for  even  if  it  could  be  proved  that  this  goddess  had  been  worshipped
in  his  time*  he  (Herodotus)  would  not  have  heard  of  her.  Arabia  and
its  worship  extended  at  that  time  far  to  the  North,  and  one  should
compare  the  importance  of  Palmyra  with  that  of  T&yif.  Secondly,  the
form  L&t  is  purer  Arabic  and  older  than  H4t,  alwayg  supposing  that
the  root  is  l&h,  and  not  alh.'  See  also  his  '  Remarks  on  Arabian  idols/
1.  c,  p.  361.  Orotal  has  been  explained  as  'light*  or  'fire'  of  El.
Kuenen,  'Religion  of  Israel,1  vol  i.  p.  228

1  '  Fragmenta  Hist  Gweo.'  vol.  ii,  p.  498,  a,

a  Ibid.  vol.  iii  p  568,  21.

8  M,  de  Vogue^  'Journal  Asiatiqne/  1867,  p.  135.


LEG-TUBE  III,  115


At  Shechem  Baal  was  worshipped  as  Baal-berith1,  sup-
posed to  mean,  the  god  of  treaties;  at  Ekron  the
Philistines  worshipped  him  as  Baal-zebub*,  the  lord
of  flies,  while  the  Moabiteg,  ajid  the  Jews  too,  knew
him  also  by  the  name  of  Baal-peor*.  On  Phoenician
coins  Baal  ft  called  Bftal-Shltmayim,  on  Palmyrenian
inscriptions  (de  Vogue*,  No.  73^  B&al-sham&a,  the
Baal  of  heaven,  which  is  the  BeelsamSn  of  Philo,  iddh-
tified  by  him  with  the  sun4.  *  When  the  heat  became
oppressive,  the  ancient  rafees  of  Phoenicia,'  he  says,
'  lifted  their  hand  heavenward  to  the  sun.  For  him
they  considered  the  only  God,  the  lord  of  heaven,
calling  him  Beel-sam6n6,  which  with  the  Phoenicianj3
is  lord  of  heaven,  and  with  the  Greeks  Zeus/  We
likewise  hear  of  Baattm,  or  many  Baals  or  gods.
And  in  the  same  way  as  by  the  side  of  the  male  Ildh
or  MWJI  we  found  a  female  Alldt,  we  also  find  by  the
side  of  the  male  Baal,  a  female  deity  Baalt,  the  Biltu
of  the  Assyrians 6,  the  Baaltis  of  the  Phoenicians.  It
may  be  that  the  original  conception  of  female  deities
differs  among  Semitic  and  Aryan  nations,  and  that
these  feminine  forms  of  All&h  and  Baal  were  at  first
intended  only  to  express  the  energy  or  activity,  or  the

1  Judges  viii.  33 ;  i£  4.  a  a  Kings  i.  2,  $?  16.

8  Numbers  zrv.  3.

*  'Fragmenta  Hist.  Grssc '  vol.  iii.  p.  565,  5.  It  is  impossible  to
change  ijXwv  to  %\ov,  because  El  or  Kronos  is  mentioned  afterwards.

8  Is  this  the  S&U18  as  T^p.-rpft-mnp^  montdoned.  by  MJoses  of  OlM^ne
(His.  Arm.  TO!  i»p.  13)  as  a  deified  hero  worshipped  by  the  Syiwjs  f
Or  is  Barsamus  the  Son  of  Heaven  1  See  Bawtoon,  'Anoimt
Monarchies/  voL  i.  p.  116.  ^

8  See  Sohrader,  'Zeitsohrifb  der  Deutschen  Horgenl.  G*BaIIsdbaft,'
zxvi.  p.  193,  Professor  Noldeke  is  inclined  to  treaft  'Abraham  and
Sarah/  'the  High  Father  and  the  Princess/  as  a  sifiuLar  originally
di-vine  pair.


116      LBOTUEES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  07  RELIGION.

collective  powers  of  the  deity,  not  a  separate  being,
least  ^all  a  wife.  This  opinion1  i&  certainly  con-
firmed when  we  see  that  in  m$ny  Carthaginian  in-
Bflriptions  the  goddess  Tgmfc  is  called  the  face  of  Baal*,
and*  that  in  the  inscription  of  Eshmunazar,  the  Sido-
triim  Astarte  is  called  the  nam$  of  Saal^  In  course
of  time,  however,  this  abstract  idea  was  jaupplanted
by  that  of  a  female  power,  and  even  a  wife,  and  as
such  we  find  Baaltis  worshipped  by  Phoenicians4,
Babylonians,  and  Assyrians  6,  for  the  name  of  Mylitta
in  Herodotus6  is,  according  to  Dr.  Oppert,  a  mere  cor-
ruption of  Baaltis.

•  Another  female  goddess  is  Ashtoreth  or  Ashtaroth
(plural),  a  name  which  presupposes  a  masculine  deity,
Asktar.  Traces  of  this  god  or  goddess  have  been  dis-
covered in  the  Ishtar  of  the  Babylonian  inscriptions,
where  Ishtar  is  always  feminine,  the  Queen  of  heaven
and  earth7.  A  Palmyrene  inscription  also,  according
to  some  authorities,  and  the  Moabite  stone  speak  of
the  same  deity.  In  her  case,  however,  the  female
character  became  preponderant,  and  as  such  she  was
worshipped,  not  only  by  Carthaginians,  Phoenicians,
and  Philistines,  but  likewise  by  the  Jews8  when  they
forsook  the  Lord^  and  served  Baal  and  Ashtaroth  9.
The  Syrians  called  her  'Atharathah*  the  Atargatis  of
Straboi0.  The  Phoenicians  called  her  Astarte,  and  by

1  De  Vogue*,  'Journal  Asiatique,'  1867,  p.  138.


*  'Eragmenta  Hist.  Grac.*  vol.  iii.  p.  569,  25.

8  Ibid.  vol.  iv  p  283,  9.  fl  Herod,  i.  131,  199.

7  See  Sohrader,  ?.  d.  D.  M.  G.  ncvi.  p.  169.

*  i  Kings  xi.  5  ;  also  Genesis  xiv.  5.  •  Judges  ii.  13.

J0  See  Noldeke,  '2.  d.  D.  M,  G.1  zriv.  92,  109;  Sfrabo,  p,  667,  43;
636,48.


LECTURE  Itl,  117

that  otfinous  name  she  became  known  to  Greeks  and
Eomans.  She  may  have  been  a  moon-goddess,  as
Kuenen  supposes  ('Religion  of  Israel,1  vol.  i.  p-^o),  and
she  was  originally  a  fiumen  virginale  before  her  service
degenerated  into  wild  excesses!  When  Jeremiah  sp$a&s
of  the  Quean  of  Heaven1,  this  is  probably  meant  for
Astarte,  or  Baaltis.  Even  in  Southern  Arabia  there
are  traces'  jf  the  worship  of  this  ancient  goddess,
For  in  San&,  the  ancient  capital  of  the  Himjtoitic
kingdom,  there  was  a  magnificent  palace  and  temple
dedicated  to  Venus  (Bait  Ghumofc&n),  and  the  name  of
Athtar  has  been  read  in  the  Himyaritic  inscriptions  :
nay,  it  is  preceded  in  one  place  by  the  verb  in  the
masculine  gender2.

Another  word  meaning  originally  king,  which
must  have  beqn  fixed  upon  as  a  name  of  the  Deity
in  pre-Mstoric  times,  is  the  Hebrew  Meleck.  We  find
it  in  Moloch,  who  was  worshipped,  not  only  in
Carthage,  in  the  Islands  of  Crete  and  Rhodes,  but
likewise  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom.  We  find  the  same
word  in  Milcom,  the  god  of  the  Ammonites,  who  had
a  sanctuary  in  Mount  Olivet  3  ;  and  the  gods  Adram-
melech  and  Anammelech,  to  whom  the  Sepharvites
burnt  their  children  in  the  fire  4,  seem  again  but  local
varieties  of  the  same  ancient  Semitic  idol.


1  Jar.  TO!  18,

9  Osionder,  *  Zeiteehrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  GeseU-
sohaft.'  vii.  p.  472  ;  Gildemeister,  'Zeitsch.  der  D.  M,  G.'  vol.  aodv.
pp.  1  80,  181;  Jjenormant,  'Coznptee-rendus  des  stances  de  1'Acad.
dea  Inscriptions  et  Belles-lettres  del'tfonle  1867;'  I^evy,  'Zeitechiift
der  D.  M.  G-.'  vol.  zziv.  p.  189.

8  a  Kings  inmi.  13.

*  a  Sings  xvii.  31.  There  was  also  an  Assyrian  god  Adar,  see
Sobradeor,  Z.  d.  D.  M.  G,  xxvi.  pp.  140,  149,  and  another  god  A&u,  see
Schrader,  Lap.  141.


118      LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RELIGION.


i)  which  in  Hebrew  means  my  lord,  and  in
the  OJd  Testament  is  used  exclusively  of  Jehovah,
appears  *in  Phoenicia  as  the  name  of  the  Supreme
Deity,  and  after  undergoing  manifold  mythological
transformations,  the  same  name  has  become  familiar
to  us  through  the  Greek  tales  about  t£e  beautiful
young  Adonis,  foved  by  Aphrodite,  and  killed  by  the
wiid  _boar  of  Ares.

Elydn,  which  in  Hebrew  means  the  Highest,  is  used
in  the  Old  Testament  as  a  predicate  of  God.  It  occurs
also  by  itself  as  a  nfime  of  Jehovah,  Melchizedek  is
called  emphatically  the  priest  of  El  Elydn,  the  priest
of  the  most  high  God.

But  this  name  again  is  not  restricted  to  Hebrew.
It  occurs  in  the  Phoenician  cosmogony  as  Miun,  the
highest  God,  the  Father  of  Heaven,  who  was  the
father  of  El  Dr.  Oppert  has  identified  this  Eliun
with  the  Jlinus  mentioned  by  Damascius.

Another  word  used  in  the  Bible,  sometimes  in
combination  with  El,  and  more  frequently  alone,  as
a  name  of  the  supreme  deity,  is  Shaddai  \  the  violent
or  powerful.  It  has  been  derived  from  a  kindred  root
to  that  which  has  yielded  the  substantive  Shdd,
meaning  demon  i%  Syriac  and  in  the  language  of
the  Talmud,  and  the  plural  JShedim^  name  for  false
gods  or  idols  in  the  Old  Testament,  M,  de  Vogue*2


4.  J.  ----  ~      ---      ---

hieroglyphic  inscriptions.  It  occurs  there  as  the  name
of  a  god  introduced  by  the  Shepherds,  "and  having
Baal^as  one  of  his  epithets.  Lepsius3,  however,  is  op-


1  >Tfli  or  '?£  to  »  «  Journal  Asiatique,'  1867,  p.  160.

»  Lepsius,  'Der  erste  Aeg,  Ootterkrefe,'  p.  48.    See  also  Noldeke,


LECTURE  III.  119

posed  t!o  this  identification.  The  same  deity  Shaddai,
the  Powerful,  ^  has,  by  a  clever  conjecture,  begn  dis-
covered as  one  of  the  deities  worshipped  by  the
ancient  Phoenicians1.

While  these  names  of  the  Deity  and  some  more
are  shared?  in  common  by  all,  or  by  the  most  im-
portant branches  of  the  Semitif  family,  and  must
therefore  liave  existed  previous  to  the  first  Semitic
separation,  there  are  others  which  are  generally  sup-
posed to  be  peculiar  to  one  or  the  other  branch.  They
either  started  into  existence  after  the  first  Semitic
Separation,  or  at  all  events  they  became  in  after  times
the  peculiar  gods  of  their  own  peculiar  people,  such
as  Chemosh  of  the  Moabites,  Milcom  of  the  Am-
monites, Ashtaroth  of  the  Sidonians2.

Thus  the  name  of  Jehovah,  or  Jahveh*,  as  it  seems
originally  to  have  been  pronounced4,  has  generally
been  supposed  to  be  a  divine  name  peculiar  to  the
Jews.  It  is  true  that  in  a  well-known  passage  of
Lydus,  IAO  6  is  said  to  have  been  the  name  of  God
among  the  Chaldseans.  But  granting  that  IAO  was
the  same  word  as  Jahveh  or  Jehovah  or  Jah  (as  in

'Ztir  Kritik  des  A.  T.'  p.  160,  note  ;  and  Cheyne,  in  the  Academy,  1875,
P.  653.

1  Bunsen,  'EgyjrtJ1  iv.  221  ;  De  Vogue*,  'Melanges  d'Aicheologie,'
p.  77.  See  also  Noldeke,  1.  o  p.  775.

fl  i  Kings  xi,  5,  7  ;  2  Kings  xxii.  13  ;  Judges  si.  23,  24.  n

8  Theodoret  'Quaest.  xv.  ad  Exodum'  (420  A,D.):  ««Aou«  SJofirA
Sa/utpcfrat  IABE,  'lovSeuot  5i  IAH.    Diod.  Sic,  i.  94  (59  B.  0.)  :
rotV  'louSa/ot?  M0vffT)v  rbv  *I«a;  kiriKC&aijfjifvov  9t6v,  tc.  r.  X.

*  See  Kuenen,  'Hibberfc  Lectures,'  p.  308.

»  LyduB,  *De  Menribus,'  iv.  38,  14  :  Ol  XaX8aT«  rfa


u,  oltar  6  Mp  rois  iirrA  irrfAow,  rovriarw  b  SqfHQVpy6s  :    Bnnsen,
193;  Benan,   'SaobhonUaiaii,1  p.  44,  note.    And  sea
Diodorus  Siculua,  i.  94,  a.


120      LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OB1  RELIGION.

Hallelu-jah)>  may  not  Lydus  by  the  Chaldseaife  have
simply  meant  the  Jews?  We  should  be  driven  to
a  different  conclusion,  if  Jahu  did  really  occur  as  a
divine  name  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions.  Sir  Henry
RawHnson,  however,  to  "wtibm  I  applied  for  informa-
tion,* declares  himself  to  be  doubtful,  as  jset,  whether
the  Jahu  who  is  mentioned  in  the  Assyrian  inscrip-
tio^s  is  really  an  Assyrian  name.  He  thinks  it  may  be
a  Syrian  word  that  found  an  entrance  into  Assyrian,
like  several  other  foreign  words.  Other  scholars,  on
the  contrary,  such  as  Professor  Schrader,  express  them-
selves less  doubtfully  on  this  point,  and  claim  Jahu
as  one  of  the  old  Assyrian  gods.  Nay,  they  now  go
evfcn  a  step  further,  and  trace  his  first  beginning  back
to  Accadian.  Thus  Professor  Delitzsch  maintains  that
the  simple  sound  I  signified  in  Accadian  'god'  and
'the  supreme  god/  just  as  Ui,  ila  (Hebrew  fl)  did;
that  the  Assyrians  pronounced  this  I  with  the  nomi-
native termination  ia-u ;  that  accordingly  the  character
for  I  was  called  by  the  Assyrians  ia-u ;  and  that  it
can  only  be  regarded  as  an  accident  that  hitherto
Ya-u,  as  the  name  of  the  deity,  has  not  been  met  with
in  any  Assyrian  inscription1.

It  is  difficult  either  to  accept  or  to  reject  statements
of  facts  put  forward  with  so  much  authority,  and  it
seems  to  me  the  most  respectful  attitude  which  we
can  assume  with  regard  to  the  new  evidence  placed
before  us  by  Assyrian  and  Accadian  scholars,  if  for
the  present  we  keep  at  a  certain  distance,  and  wait
before  finally  recasting  our  received  notions  of  Semitic
religion.  That  the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  docu-

1  See  Kuemn,  'Hibbert  Lecture,'  p.  311.


LECTUBE  III.  121

merits  are  being  deciphered  in  a  truly  scientific  spirit
has  never  been  a  matter  of  doubt  to  me,  since  the
first  publication  of  the  Babylonian  version  of  the
Behistun  inscriptions.  Nor  have  I  been  in  the  least
surprised  at  the  frequent  cnanges  in  the  reading*  of
certain  ncftnes,  and  in  the  rendering  of  certain  sen-
tences. Though  unable  to  follow  Jhe  bold  investigators
of  these  Semitic  documents,  it  was  not  difficult  for  Any
one  acquainted  with  the  history  of  the  decipherment
of  the  Persian  Cuneiform*  inscriptions,  to  understand
why  there  should  be  at  first  stf  much  uncertainty  in
reading  an  alphabet  like  that  of  the  Semitic  Cunei-
form texts.  With  regard  to  the  Sumerian  decipher-
ments, I  have  no  right  to  say  even  so  much  as  tEis,
but  here  too  I  feel  we  ought  to  learn  to  wait,  and
not  discourage  those  laborious  explorers  who  try  to
translate  a  language  of  which  as  yet  no  more  is
really  known  than  that  it  is  neither  Semitic  nor
Aryan.  All  I  can  say  is,  that  if  their  endeavours  are
ever  crowned  with  complete  success,  their  achievement
will  be  more  wonderful  than  the  decipherment  of  all
other  inscriptions.

Taking  this  view  of  the  matter,  I  have,  whenever  I
had  to  treat  of  the  religion  of  the  Semitic  races,  simply
abstained  from*  touching  on  Babylonian  or  Assyrian,
still  more  on  Accadian  and  Sumerian  ground.  I  pre-
ferred leaving  a  gap  to  filling  it  with  materials  which,
from  the  nature  of  the  case,  were  as  yet  so  pliant  and
so  brittle.*  I  greatly  admire  the  courage  of  otfoae
students  of  ancient  religion,  and  partienterly  of  fto~
fessor  Tiele,  who  in  his  'Comparative  History  of  An-
cient Religions '  has  made  such  excellent  use  of  the
same  materials.  But  I  cannot  disregard  the  warning


12£       LEOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OP  RELIGION.

voices  of  other  scholars,  such  as,  for  instance,  M?.  Guy-
ard,  who  remarks  that  the  gods  of  the  Sumerian  and
Accadian*  religions  called  'Moulge,  Silik-moulon-chi'
are  in  reality  the  names  of  Bel  and  Mardak,  wrongly
deciphered1.  It  might  b£  sfSd  that  M.  Guyard  is  not
a  quite  impartial  authority  in  guch  questions.  But
he  quotes  Mr.  Binches,  whose  authority  will  hardly
be  questioned,  and  who  remarks  that  suCh  names
of  AcSadian  kings  as  Hammurabi  and  Burnaburias,
should  really  be  read  Kimtu  rapastu  and  Kidin-bel-
mat&ti.

I  say  again  that  even  such  portents  are  not  enough
to  shake  my  faith  in  that  method  of  Babylonian  and
ev&i  of  Accadian  decipherment  which  has  been  followed
for  years  by  so  many  eminent  scholars,  but  I  think  the
historian  of  ancient  religions  is  justified  in  waiting
before  he  either  accepts  or  definitely  rejects  tlw  new
light  that  the  ancient  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  are  meant
to  shed  over  the  most  remote  periods  of  Semitic  thought.
Thai  some  of  our  best  Semitic  scholars  should  be  less
patient,  and  point  out  what  seems  to  them  utter  im-
possibilities in  the  conclusions  to  which  Babylonian  and
Accadian  researches  seem  to  lead,  is  perfectly  natural.
Such  criticism  should  be  welcomed,  not  resented.  Thus
Professor  Kuenen,  tBe  great  historian  rf  the  'Religion
of  Israel,*  objects  to  the  Accadian  derivation  of  Jeho-
vah or  Jahveh,  because  he  sees  difficulties  which  must
be  removed  before  such  a  derivation  could  be  accepted.
He  remarks  that  as  early  as  the  inscription  of  Mesha,
about  900  B.  a,  the  name  of  Jahveh  occurs  in  its  qua-
driliteral  forms,  Y(a)hw(e)h,  and  such  a  form  could
never  have  growa  out  of  lau;  while  lau,  as  he  shows,

1  See  '  Athenaeum/  if  June,  1883.


LECTUBTfi  III.  128

might  well  be  understood  as  a  secondaiy  development
of  Y(a)hw(e)lj.    'In  the  eighth  century  ,'  as  ti\e  same
scholar  adds1,  'the  name  of  Jahveh  was  regarded  by
many,  rightly  or  wrongly^  as  a  derivative  of  the  verb
to  be.    It  was  explained  as  he  is,  and  in  it  was.  sSen
the  exprefeion  of  the  unchangeableness  and  faithful-
ness of  the  God  to  whose  essence  the  name  corres-
ponded.*   Professor  Kuenen  holds,  in  fact,  that  Ifoses
was  the  first  to  call  the  god  of  the  sons  or  Israel
Jahveh2,  instead  of  his  t>ld  name  El-Shaddai,  and  I
only  wonder  that  he  did  not  xfiention  that  the  name
of  Jahveh  occurs  for  the  first  time  in  the  name  of  the
mother  of  Moses,  Jochebed,  '  she  whose  glory  is  Jeho-
vah.'   He  leaves  it  open  to  explain  Jahveh,  either  as
He  who  is,  or  as  He  who  alone  is,  while  the  other  gods
are  not;  butjie  inclines  himself  to  take  the  root  in
a  caulal  sense,  and  to  take  the  name  of  Jahveh  as
meaning  he  who  gives  life,  who  causes  everything  to
exist,  the  creator.    This  would  make  Jahveh  almost
a  reproduction  of  the  old  Vedic  Asura,  the  life-giver,
from  as,  to  breathe,  to  be,  asu,  breath,  asura,  the
living  and  enlivening  god,  the  Ahura  of  the  Avesta,
showing  again  how  the  same  thoughts  and  the  same
names  may  crop  up  on  Aryan  and  Semitic  ground
without  necessitating  in  the  least  the  admission  of  an
actual  contact  during  pre-historic  periods  of  Aryans
and  Semites  in  Iran8.

But  whether  for  the  present  we  include  or  exdtute
the  name  V  Jehovah  from  the  stock  of  derate  a*$ftft


1  Ksenen,  '  Hibbert  Lectures,'  p.  311  ;  KB«H»,  <
vol.  i.  p.  42.

«  Kuenen,  '  EeHgion  of  Israel/  -voL  L  p.  378.
8  Ibid,  p,  354.


124      LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

shared  in  common  by  the  whole  Semitic  race,  we
have,  I^think,  sufficient  witnesses  to  establish  the  fact
that  ther£  was  a  period  during  which  the  ancestors  of
the  Semitic  family  had  not  yefc  teen  divided  either
in  language  or  religion.  That  period  transcends  the
recollection  of  every  one  of  the  Semitic  rdbes  in  the
same  way  as  neither  Hindus,  GreekSj  nor  Komans
have  any  recollection  of  the  time  when  tliey  spoke
a  common  language,  and  worshipped  their  Father  in
heaven  by  a  name  that  was»as  yet  neither  Sanskrit,
nor  Greek,  nor  Latin.*  I  do  not  hesitate  to  call  this
pre-historic  period  historical  in  the  best  sense  of  the
word.  It  was  a  real  period,  because,  unless  it  was
real,  all  the  realities  of  the  Semitic  languages  and  the
Semitic  religions,  such  as  we  find  them  after  their
separation,  would  be  unintelligible.  Hebrew,  Syriac,
and  Arabic  point  to  a  common  source  as  mtteh  as
Sanskrit,  Greek,  and  Latin;  and  unless  we  can  bring
ourselves  to  doubt  that  the  Hindus,  the  Greeks,  the
Romans,  and  the  Teutons  derived  the  worship  of  their
principal  deity  from  their  common  Aryan  sanctuary,
we  shall  not  be  able  to  deny  that  there  was  likewise
a  primitive  religion  of  the  whole  Semitic  race,  and
that  UK,  the  Strong  One  in  heaven,  was  invoked  by
the  ancestors  of  alf  the  Semitic  race$,  before  there
were  Babylonians  in  Babylon,  Phoenicians  in  Sidon
and  TynTs,  before  there  were  Jews  in  Mesopotamia
or  Jerusalem.  The  evidence  of  the  Semitic  is  the
same  as  that  of  the  Aryan  languages :  the  Conclusion
cannot  be  different.

We  "now  come  to  the  third  nucleus  of  language,
and,  as  I  hope  t<5  show,  of  religion  also— that  which
forms  the  foundation  of  the  Turanian  world.  The


LEOTTTBE  III.  125

subject  is  extremely  difficult,  and  I  confess  I  doubt
•whether  I  shall  succeed  in  engaging  your  syjnpathy
in  favour  of  the  religious  opinions  of  people  &>  strange,
so  far  removed  from  us,^as  the  Chinese,  the  Mongo-
lians, the  Samoyedes,  the 'Finns,  and  Lapps,.  We
naturally  %ake  an  interest  in  the  ancient  history  of
the  Aryan  and  Semitic  nations^f or,*  after  all,  -we  are
ourselves*Aryan  in  language,  and  Semitic,  at  least  to
a  certain  extent,  in  religion.  But  what  have*we  in
common  with  the  Turanians,  with  Chinese  and  Sa-
moyedes?  Very  little,  it  may  sdbm ;  and  yet  it  is  not
the  yellow  skin  and  the  high  cheekbones  that  make
the  man.  Nay,  if  we  look  but  steadily  into  those
black  Chinese  eyes,  we  shall  find  that  there,  too,  there
is  a  soul  that  responds  to  a  soul,  and  that  the  God
whom  they  wean  is  the  same  God  whom  we  mean,
however  helpless  their  utterance,  however  imperfect
their  worship.

That  the  languages  of  the  Finns,  Lapps,  Samoyedes,
Turks,  Mongol  and  Tungusians  presuppose  an  early,
though,  it  may  be,  not  a  very  firm  settlement,  is  now
admitted  by  all  competent  authorities.  That  the
Tamulic,  Lohitic,  Gangetic,  Malaie  and  Taic  languages
presuppose  a  similar  concentration,  is  as  yet  an  hy-
pothesis only,  while  the  convergence  of  these  two
branches,  the  North  Turanian  and  South  Turanian,
towards  the  most  ancient  Chinese  as  their  common
centre,  though  it  may  be  called  plausible,  has  certainly
not  yet  tifeen  established  by  sufficient  scientific  evi-
dence. If  therefore  we  endeavour  to  discover  among
the  religions  of  these  people  fragments,  and,  more  par-
ticularly, linguistic  fragments  which*  betray  the  same


126      LECTUKES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  0?  BELKHON,

source,  we  must  never  forget  that,  as  yet,  we  are  building
hypothesis  on  hypothesis  only,  and  that  our  pleading  for
the  existence  of  common  Turanian  concepts  of  the  Divine
cannot  count  on  the  same  willing  acceptance  which
is  fe^dily  accorded  to  arguments  in  favour  of  common
Aryan  and  Semitic  concepts  of.  the  Deit^  On  the
other  hand  it  skould  be  borne  in  mind  that,  if  we
succeeded  in  establisTiing  the  existence  of  *names  of
the  Deity  shared  in  common  by  some  at  least  of  the
Turanian  peoples,  this  would  supply  a  new  and  very
important  support  of*the  theory  that  the  Turanian
languages  possess  indeed  a  common  prehistoric  begin-
ning, and  a  common  historic  continuity.

11  we  take  the  religion  of  China  as  the  earliest
representative  of  Turanian  worship,  the  question  is,
whether  we  can  find  any  names  of  $he  Deity  in
Chinese  which  appear  again  in  the  religions  anS  my-
thologies of  other  Turanian  tribes,  such  as  the  Mand-
shus,  the  Mongolians,  the  Tatars,  or  Finns.  I  confess
tfeat,  considering  the  changing  and  shifting  character
<$  the  Turanian  languages,  considering  also  the  long
interval  of  time  that  must  have  passed  between  the
first  linguistic  and  religious  settlement  in  China,  and
the  later  gradual  and  imperfect  consolidation  of  the
other  Turanian  races,  I  was  not  very  (ftmguine  in  my
expectation  that  any  such  names  as  Dyaus  pitar
among  tffe  Aryans,  or  El  and  Baal  among  the  She*
mites,  could  have  survived  in  the  religious  traditions
of  the  vast  Turanian  world.  Such  preconceived
opinions,  however,  ought  not  to  keep  us  from  further
researches,  and  if  what  we  find  is  but  little,  we  must
never  forget  that  we  have  hardly  a  right  to,  expect
evea  this  little.  There  are  in  researches  of  this  kind


LBCT0BE  III.  127

different  degrees  of  certainty,  and  I  am  the  very  last
person  to  slu£  them  over,  and  to  represent  all  our
results  as  equally  certain.  But  if  we  want  lo  arrive
at  terra  ftrma,  we  must  3qpt  jnind  a  plunge  now  and
then ;  and  if  we  wish  to  mount  a  ladder,  we  musfc  not
be  afraid  <JF  taking  ifce  first  step.  The  coincidences
between  the  religious  phraseology  bf  Chinese  and
other  Turanian  languages  are  certainly  not  liljp  Ube
coincidences  between  Greek  and  Sanskrit,  or  between
Hebrew  and  Phoenician;  but  they  are  such  that  they
ought  not  to  be  passed  over  by  the  pioneers  of  a  new
science.

You  remember  that  the  popular  worship  of  anciept
China  was  a  worship  of  single  spirits,  of  powers,  or,
we  might  almost  say,  of  names,  the  names  of  the  most
prominent  powers  of  nature  which  are  supposed  to
exerdteft  an  influence  for  good  or  evil  on  the  life  of
man.  We  find  a  belief  in  spirits  of  the  sky,  the
sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  the  earth,  the  mountains,
the  rivers ;  to  say  nothing  as  yet  of  the  spirits  of  th$
departed.

In  China,  where  there  always  has  been  a  strong
tendency  towards  order  and  regularity,  some  kind  of
system  has  been  superinduced  by  the  recognition  of
two  powers,  one'  active,  the  other  passive,  one  male,
the  other  female,  which  comprehend  everything,  and
which,  in  the  mind  of.  the  more  enlightened,  tower
high  above  the  great  crowd  of  minor  spirits.  These
two  powers  %re  within  and  beneath  and  behind  every*
thing  that  is  double  in  nature,  and  they  have fre-
quently been  identified  with  heaven  and  earth.

We  can  clearly  see,  however,  that  the  spirit  of
heaven  occupied  from  the  beginning  a  much  higher


128       LECTURES  ON  THE  SOIENOB  Off  RELIGION.

position  than  the  spirit  of  the  earth.  It  is  in  i&e  his-
torica^books  only,  in  the  Shu-king1,  that  we  are  told
that  hetfven  and  earth  together  are  £he  father  and
mother  of  all  things.  In  the  most  ancient  poetry
Heayen  alone  is  both  fa&er  and  mother2.  This  spirit
of  heaven  is  known  in  Chinese,  by  the  natae  of  Tim,
and  wherever  in  other  religions  we  should  expect  the
name  of  the  supreme  deity,  whether  Jupitdr  or  Allah,
we  find  in  Chinese  the  name  of  Tien  or  sky.  This
Tien,  according  to  the  Imperial  Dictionary  of  Kanghee,
means  the  Great  Oflfc,  he  that  dwells  on  high  and
regulates  all  below.  We  see  in  fact  that  Tien,  ori-
ginally the  name  of  sky,  has  passed  in  Chinese
t&Vough  nearly  all  the  phases,  from  the  lowest  to  the
highest,  through  which  the  Aryan  name  for  sky,
dyaus,  passed  in  the  poetry,  the  religion,  the  my-
thology, and  philosophy  of  India  and  Greece.  The
sign  of  tien  in  Chinese  is  ^,  and  this  is  compounded
of  two  signs:  ^  ta,  which  means  great,  and  — »  yih,
which  means  one.  The  sky,  therefore,  was  conceived
as  the  One,  the  Peerless,  and  as  the  Great,  the  High,
the  Exalted.  I  remember  reading  in  a  Chinese  book,
*As  there  is  but  one  sky,  how  can  there  be  many
gods?'  In  fact,  their  belief  in  Ti^i,  the  spirit  of
heaven,  moulded  the  whole  of  the  religious  phraseo-
logy of  ihe  Chinese.  *  The  glorious  heaven/  we  read,
'is  called  bright,  it  accompanies  you  wherever  you

1  la  the  'Shu-king*  (3,  n)  Tien  is  called  Shaag-tien,  or  High
Heaven,  which  la  synonymous  with  Shang-te,  High  Spirit,  another  very
commjm  name  of  the  supreme  deity.  The  Confucians  never  made  any
image  of  Bhang-te,  but  the  Tao-sse  represented  their  (Yah-hwang)
Shang-te  under  thefcuman  form. — Medhurat,  'Inquiry,'  p.  46.

a  Chalmers,  'Origin of  the  Chinese/  p.  14;  Medhurst,  1.  c  p  124,
contrast  between  Shin  and  Shangti,


LECTTJBE  III.  129

go;  the  glorious  heaven  is  called  luminous,  it  goes
wherever  you  roam/  Tien  is  called  the  ancestor  of
all  things;  the  highest  that  is  above.  He  is  called
the  great  framer,  who  makes  things  as  a  potter  frames
an  earthen  vessel.  The  Chinese  also  speak  of  the  de-
crees and  tHe  will  of  Heaven,  of  the  steps  of  Heaven
or  Providence.  The  sages  who  Ijeach*  the  people  are
sent  by  heaven,  and  Confucius  himself  is  said  toji«ve
been  used  by  heaven  as  the  'alarum*  of  the  worid.
The  same  Confucius,  when  on  the  brink  of  despond-
ency, because  no  one  would  beliSve  in  him,  knows  of
one  comfort  only:  that  comfort  is:  'Heaven  knows
me.'  It  is  clear  from  many  passages  that  with  Con-
fucius Tien  or  the  Spirit  of  Heaven  was  the  supreme
deity,  and  that  he  looked  upon  the  other  gods  of  the
people,  the  spirits  of  the  air,  the  mountains  and  the
rivers,  Tihe  spirits  also  of  the  departed,  very  much
with  the  same  feelings  with  which  Sokrates  regarded
the  mythological  deities  of  Greece.  Thus  when  asked
on  one  occasion  how  the  spirits  should  be  served,  he
replied:  clf  we  are  not  able  to  serve  men,  how  can
we  serve  the  spirits?'  And  at  another  time  he  said,
in  his  short  and  significant  manner:  'Bespect  the
Gods,  and  keep  them  at  a  distance  L*

We  have  now\>  see  whether  we  can  find  any  traces
of  this  belief  in  a  supreme  spirit  of  heaven  among  the
other  branches  of  the  Turanian  class,  the  Mandshus,
Mongolians,  Tatars,  Finns,  or  Lapps.  As  there  are
many  name?  for  sky  in  the  Turanian  dialects,  it  would
not  be  absolutely  necessary  that  we  should  fincL  the
same  name  which  we  found  in  Chinese:  yet,  if  traces
of  that  name  could  be  found  among  Mongolians  and

1  Medhurst,  *BepIy  to  !Dr,  Booae/  p.  32.
K


ISO      LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELICUON.

Tatars,  our  argument  would,  no  doubt,  gain  far'greater
strength.  It  is  the  same  in  all  researches  of  compara-
tive mythology.  If  we  find  the  same  conceptions,
the  same  myths  and  legends,  in*  India,  Greece,  Italy,
and.  Germany,  there  is,  no  doubfc  some  presumption
in  favour  of  their  common  origin,  but  nocnore.  But
if  we  meet  with  gods  and  heroes,  having  the  same
names  in  the  mythology  of  the  Veda,  and? in  the  my-
thology of  Greece  and  Eome  and  Germany,  we  stand
on  firmer  ground.  We  hove  then  to  deal  with  real
facts  that  cannot  be^iisputed,  and  alt  that  remains  i$
to  explain  them.

In  Turanian  mythology,  however,  such  facts  are
not  easily  brought  together.  With  the  exception  of
China,  we  know  very  little  of  the  ancient  history  of
the  Turanian  races,  and  what  we  knqpr  of  their  pre-
sent state  comes  frequently  from  prejudiced  observers.
Besides,  their  old  heathendom  is  fast  disappearing  be-
fore the  advance  of  Buddhism,  Mohammedanism,  and
Christianity.  Yet  if  we  take  the  accounts  of  the  most
trustworthy  travellers  in  Central  and  Northern  Asia,
and  more  particularly  the  careful  observations  of
Castr&i,  we  cannot  but  recognise  some  most  striking
coincidences  in  the  scattered  notices  of  the  religion  of
the  Tungusic,  Mongolic,  Tataric,  afld  Finnic  tribes*
Everywhere  we  find  a  worship  of  the  spirita  of  nature,
of  the  "spirits  of  the  departed,  though  behind  an<J.
above  it  there  rises  the  belief  in  some  higher  power,
known  by  different  names,  sometimes  called  the
Fattier,  the  Old  One,  who  is  the  Maker  and  Protector
of  the  world,  and  who  always  resides  in  heaven  \
Chinjese  historians  are  the  only  writers  who  give  qp

'  Vorlesungen  ttbsr  Fimujsohe  Mytfcologie,'  p.  2.


LEOTTOB  III.  131

an  account  of  the  earlier  history  of  some  of  these
Turanian,  tribes,  particularly  of  the  Huns,  whom  they
GB^lHiangnu,  and  of  the  Turks9  whom  they  call  Tuhiu.
They  relate  that  the*  Huns  worshipped  the  sun,  ths
moon,  the  spirits  of  the  sfi:y*and  the  earth,  and.tMb
spirits  of  tke  depart^.,  and  that  their  priests,  the
Shamans,  possessed  a  power  over  the  clouds,  being
able  to  bri^g  down  snow,  hail,  rain",  and  wind1.

Menander,  a  Byzantine  historian,  relates  of  the  Arks
that  in  his  time  they  worshipped  the  fire,  the  water,
and  the  earth,  but  that  at  the  same  time  they  believed
in  a  God,  the  maker  of  the  world,  and  offered  to  him
sacrifices  of  camels,  oxen,  and  sheep.

Still  later  we  get  some  information  from  medieval
travellers,  such  as  Piano  Carpini2  and  Marco  Polo3,

1  Castrfc,  « VorleBungen  fiber  Pnmisohe  Mythologie,'  p.  36.

9  '  They  believe  in  one  God,  the  Maker  of  all  things,  visible  and
invisible,  and  the  Distributor  of  good  and  evil  in  this  world,  bnt  they
worship  him  not  with  prayers  or  praises  or  any  kind  of  service.
NathelesB  they  have  certain  idols  of  felt,  imitating  the  human  face,
and  having  underneath  the  face  something-  resembling  teats;  these
they  place  on  either  side  the  door.  These  they  believe  to  be  the
guardians  of  the  flocks,  from  whom  they  have  the  boons  of  milk  and
increase  Others  they  fabricate  of  bits  of  silk,  and  these  are  highly
honoured ....  and  whenever  they  begin  to  eat  and  drink,  they  first
offer  these  idols  a  portion  of  their  food  or  drinV  See  *  Maroo  Polo/  ed.
Yule,  vol.  i.  p.  249.

8  'This  is  the  fashion  of  their  religion.  They  say  there  is  a  Most
High  God  of  Heaven,  whom  they  worship  daily  with  thurible  and
incense,  but  they  pray  to  Him  only  for  health  of  mind  and  body.  But
they  have  also  certain  other  gods  of  theirs  called  Natigay,  and  £bey  say
he  is  the  god  of  fee  Earth,  who  watohes  over  their  children,  6**tf**'***
crops.  They  show  him  great  worship  and  honour,  and  evwy  J*a*  Mb
a  figure  of  him  in  his  house,  made  of  felt  aadolofch;  and  they  ftlflfl  pafr*
in  the  same  manner  images  of  his  wife  and  children.  Tfea  wife  thay  pui
on  the  left  hand,  and  the  children  in  front.  And  wfcen  they  eat,  they
take  the  fat  of  the  meat  and  grease  the  god'a  D&OQ&  withal,  as  well  as
the  mouths  of  his  wife  am*  ckiltoau  Than  thft?  take  off  the  broth  and
E  %


132       LEO-TUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

•who  say  that  the  Mongol  tribes  paid  great  reverence
to  th$  sun,  the  fire,  and  the  water,  but  that  they  be-
lieved also  in  a  great  and  powerful  God,  whom  they
called  Natagai  (Natigay)  qs  Itoga.

modern  times  we  have  chiefly  to  depend  on
Castr&i,  who  had  eyes  to  see  -and  ears  tt)  hear  what
few  other  travdlerj  would  have  seen  or  heard,  or  un-
dSr^jOod.  Speaking  of  the  Tungusic  trifles,  he  says,
'  they  worship  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  the  earth,
fire,  the  spirits  of  fbrestss«  rivers,  and  certain  sacred
localities ;  they  worship  even  images  and  fetishes,  but
with  all  this  they  retain  a  faith  in  a  supreme  being
which  they  call  Buga1.'  eThe  Samoyedes,'  he  says,
'  worship  idols  and  various  natural  objects ;  but  they
always  profess  a  belief  in  a  higher  divine  power  which
they  call  Num.'

This  deity  which  is  called  Num  is  also  callfd  Junta
by  the  Samoyedes2,  and  is  in  fact  the  same  deity
which  in  the  grand  mythology  of  Finland  is  known
under  the  name  of  Jumala.  The  mythology  of  Fin-
land has  been  more  carefully  preserved  than  the  my-
thologies of  all  the  other  Altaic  races,  and  in  their
ancient  epic  poems  which  have  been  kept  up  by  oral
tradition  for  cenijpries,  and  have  been  written  down


sprinkle  it  before  the  door  of  the  house ;  and  that  done,  they  deem  that
their  god,  and  his  family  have  had  their  share  of  the  dinner.1  '  Marco
Polo,1  ed.  Yule,  voL  i  p.  348,  Colonel  Yule  traces  these  Nagatay
back  to  the  Ongot  of  the  Tongues,  and  the  Noga&  of  the  Bnriatee,
Marco  Polo  himself  ascribes  the  same  worship  of  the  Nagatay  to  the
Catfcayans,  i.  e.  Chinese  (vol.  i.  p.  437),  but  Colonel  Yale  thinks  that
this  may  be  due  to  a  confusion  of  Chinese  with  Tartars.  See  also  vol.  ii.
p.  478

1  Is  this  the  Bussian  'bog/  god?

*  Castren,  'VorlesungenuberFinniBoheMythologie/p.  13.


LECTURE  III,  133

but  very  lately,  we  have  magnificent  descriptions  of
Jumala,  the  deity  of  the  sky.

Jumala  meant  origmally  the  sky.  It  is  derived,  as
Castre'n  has  shown  (p.  34)4  from  Juma,  thunder,  and
la,  the  place,  meaning  therefore  the  place  of  thunder,
or  the  sky.  *  It  is  used  first  of  all  for  sky,  secondly
for  the  god  of  the  sky,  and  thirdly  for  gods  in  general.
The  very  sefme  word,  only  modified  according  to  the
phonetic  rules  of  each  language,  occurs  among  the
Lapps  (p.  n),  the  Esthonians,  the  Syrjanes,  the
Tcheremissians,  and  the  Votyafes  (p.  34).  We  can
watch  the  growth  and  the  changes  of  this  heavenly
deity  as  we  catch  a  glimpse  here  and  there  of  the  re-
ligious thoughts  of  the  Altaic  tribes.  An  old  Sa-
moyede  woman  who  was  asked  by  Castre'n  (p.  16)
whether  she  e?er  said  her  prayers,  replied:  'Every
morning  I  step  out  of  my  tent  and  bow  before  the
sun,  and  say :  "  When  thou  riaest,  I,  too,  rise  from  my
bed."  And  every  evening  I  say :  "  When  thou  sinkest
down,  I,  too,  sink  down  to  rest."*  That  was  her
prayer,  perhaps  the  whole  of  her  religious  service  ;—
a  poor  prayer  it  may  seem  to  us,  but  not  to  her :  for
it  made  that  old  woman  look  twice  at  least  every  day
away  from  earth  and  up  to  heaven ;  it  implied  that
her  life  was  bouftd  up  with  a  larger  and  higher  life ;
it  encircled  the  daily  routine  of  her  earthly  existence
with  something  of  a  divine  light.  She  herself  was
evidently  proud  of  it,  for  she  added,  with  a  touch  of
self-righteouShess  ;  *  There  are  wild  people  who  never
say  their  morning  and  evening  prayers/

While  in  this  case  the  deity  of  the  sky  is  represented,
as  it  were,  by  the  sun,  we  see  Jumala,  under  different
circumstances,  conceived  as  the  deity  of  the  sea*


134       LECTUKES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  EELIGION.

"When  walking  one  evening  with  a  Samoyede  sailor
along.the  coast  of  the  Polar  Sea,  Casfcr&i  asked  him :
'  Tell  me,  where  is  NumT  (i.e.  ^umala.)  Without  a
moment's  hesitation  the  ol<i  sailor  pointed  to  the  dark,
distant  sea,  and  said :  '  He  is  there.9

Again,  in  the  epic  poem  Kal^&la,  wherf  the  hostess
of  Pohjola  is  in  labgur,  she  calls  on  Jumala,  and  says :
*  Obige  now  into  the  bath,  Jumala,  into  t&e  warmth,
0  Lord  of  the  air  I'  (p.  19).

At  another  time  Jumalafis  the  god  of  the  air,  and  ia
invoked  in  the  following  lines  (p.  31):

Harness  now  thyself,  Jumala,
Buler  of  the  air,  thy  horses  t
Bring  them  forth,  thy  rapid  racers,
Drive  the  sledge  with  glittering  colours,
Passing  through  our  bones,  our  ankles.
Through  our  flesh  that  shakes  and  trembles,
Through  our  veins  which  seem  all  broken.
Knit  the  flesh  and  bones  together.
Fasten  vein  to  vein  more  firmly.
Let  our  joints  be  filled  with  silver,
Let  our  veins  with  gold  be  running  1

In  all  these  cases  the  deity  invoked  is  the  same,  it
is  iihe  deity  of  the  sky,  Jumala ;  but  so  indefinite  is
his  character,  that  we  can  hardly  say  whether  he  is
the  god  of  the  sky,  t  or  the  sun,  or  tfce  sea,  or  the  air,
or  whether  he  is  a  supreme  deity  reflected  in  all  these
aspects.of  nature.

However,  you  will  naturally  ask,  where  is  there
any  similarity  between  the  name  of  tfyt  deity  and
the  Chinese  deity  of  the  sky,  Tim?  The  common
worship  of  Jumala  may  prove  some  kind  of  religious
concentration  among  the  different  Altaic  nations  in
the  North  of  Asia,  but  it  does  not  prove  any  pre-*
historic  community  of  worship  between  those  nation*


LEOTUBE  HI.  135

and  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  China.  It  is  true  that
the  Chinese  Tien,  with  its  three  meanings  of  sky,  god
of  the  sky,  ancf  god  in  general,  is  the  exact  xsounter-
part  of  the  North  Turanian^  Jumala  ;  hut  still  we  want
more  ;  we  want,  if  possible,  iSraces  of  the  same  n/tnfe
of  the  deitf  in  China*  in  Mongolia,  and  Tatary,  just
as  we  found  the  name  of  Jupiter  in  India  and  Italy,
and  the  naTne  of  El  in  Babylon  and  Palestine.

Well,  let  us  reinember  that  Chinese  is  a  fiono-
sy  liable  language,  and  thai  the  later  Turanian  dialects
have  entered  into  the  agglutinative  stage,  that  is  to
say,  that  they  use  derivative  suffixes,  and  we  shall
then  without  much  difficulty  discover  traces  of  the
Chinese  word  Tien,  with  all  its  meanings,  among
some  at  least  of  the  most  important  of  the  Turanian
races.  In  the.  Mongolian  language  we  find  Tmg-ri\
and  tihte  means,  first,  sky;  then,  god  of  the  sky;  then,
god  in  general  ;  and,  lastly,  spirit  or  demon,  whether
good  or  bad.

Thus  we  have  gained  the  first  firm  ground,  and  we
may  now  advance  another  step.  It  is  a  fortunate
accident  that  this  very  word  tengri  is  one  of  the  few
that  can  be  traced  back  historically  from  its  modern

1  Turkish  *tangry*((^£kk  or  ijjf3,  ted&n),  ihe  Yakuts  'tangara  '
The  Buriates  place  Dsaiagachi  or  'Chief  Creator  of  -Fortune'  in  the
middle  of  their  hut,  the  place  of  honour.  At  the  door  is  the  Emelgelji,
the  tutelary  of  the  herds  and  young  cattle,  made  of  sheepskins.  Outside
the  hut  is  the  Chandaghatu,  a  name  implying  that  the  idol  was  fanned:
of  a  white  har^kin,  the  tutelary  of  the  chase,  and  perhaps  of  wax.  Afl
these  have  been  eipelled  by  Buddhism  except  Daaia^cM,


Tengri,  and  introduced  among  the  Buddhist  drrifcitia*  Setf
Polo,'  ed.  Yule,  vol.  i.  p  2go.  'The  Supreme  Good  SJgordt  ajppfcars  to
have  been  called  by  the  Mongols  Tengri  (heav«n\and  Ehormuzda,  and
is  identified  by  Schmidt  with  ih*  Pe3nria»Ec™a$cL  IB  BuddH*  times
he  became  identified  vith  Ipdra,  L  o.  voL  i  p.  949.


136       LBOTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIQION.

to  its  more  ancient  forms.  Chinese  writers^  when
speaking  of  the  ancient  history  of  the  Huns,  tell  us
that  i3ie  title  which  the  Huns  gave  t*o  their  leaders
was  tangli-kutu  (or  tchen-jti)1.  This  title  is  said  to
have  had  in  their  language  the  meaning  of  'Son  of
Heaven,'  which  reminds  us  of  tlje  still  current  title  of
the  Emperor  of  China,  viz.  'Son  of  Heaven2/  tien-tze,
comyeying  the  meaTiing,  not,  as  is  commonly  sup-
posecHT  of  '  Son  of  God/  but  c  Son  of  Heaven/  or,  as
we  should  say,  'Emperor,  by  the  grace  of  God.'
Taking  therefore  tien*tse  as  corresponding  to  tangli-
kutu,  we  arrive  at  the  following  equation :

Hunnish  Mongolian  Chinese

tarig-li  teng-ri  tien.

Again,  in  the  historical  accounts  which  the  Chinese
give  of  the  Tukiu,  the  ancestors  of  the  Turks,  it  is
said  that  they  worshipped  the  Spirits  of  the  ISarth,
and  that  they  called  these  spirits  purteng-i~li.  Hero
the  first  syllable  must  be  intended  for  earth,  while  in
teng-irli  we  have  again  the  same  word  as  the  Mon-
golian tengri,  only  used,  even  at  that  early  time,  no
longer  in  the  sense  of  heaven,  or  god  of  heaven,  but
as  a  name  of  gods  and  spirits  in  general.  We  find
a  similar  transition  of  meaning  in  the  modern  Yakuto
word  tangara.  It  means  the  sky,  and^it  means  God ;
but  among  the  Christian  converts  in  Siberia,  tangara
is  also  used  to  signify '  the  Saints.'  The  wild  reindeer
is  called  in  Takute '  God's  reindeer/  because  it  lives  in
the  open  air,  or  because  God  alone  takes  c«fre  of  it.

Here,  then,  we  have  the  same  kind  of  evidence
whicf  enabled  us  to  establish  a  primitive  Aryan  and

1  See  Schott,  '  TJeber  das  Altaisolie  SprachgesohlechV  p.  o.
*  See  Sohott, '  Chinemsohe  Literatur/  p.  63.


LEOTUEB  III.  137

a  primitive  Semitic  religion:  we  have  a  common
name,  and  this  name  given  to  the  highest,  deity,
preserved  in  'the  monosyllabic  language  of  China,
and  in  the  cognate,  though  agglutinative,  dialects  of
some  of  the  principal  North  Turanian  tribes.  ,  We
find  in  these  words,«not  merely  a  vague  similarity
of  sound  and  meaning,  but,  by  watching  their  growth
in  Chines^,  Mongolian,  and  Turkish,  we  are  abl*  to
discover  in  them  traces  of  organic  identity.  Every-
where they  begin  with  the  meaning  of  sky,  they  rise
to  the  meaning  of  God,  and  they  sink  down  again  to
the  meaning  of  gods  and  spirits.  The  changes  in  the
meaning  of  these  words  run  parallel  with  the  changes
that  took  place  in  the  religions  of  these  nations
which  comprehended  the  first  intimation  of  the
Divine  under  ^the  name  of  the  sky,  and  thus  formed
for  tlfemselves  a  god  of  the  sky.  By  his  various
manifestations  that  god  of  the  sky  became  more  and
more  mythologically  individualised,  was  broken  up
into  many  gods,  and  these  many  gods  led  again  in
the  end  to  the  concept  of  a  God  in  general.  Thus
only  can  we  explain  historically,  i.  e.  phonetically  and
etymologically,  the  connection  between  the  French
divinit^  and  the  Vedic  Dyaus,  sky;  and  the  same
applies  to  the  Takute  tangcvra,  Samt,  in  its  historical
relation  to  the  Chinese  tien,  sky.

Did  we  allow  ourselves  to  be  guided  by  mere  simi-
larity of  sound  and  meaning,  it  would  be  easy  to  take
another  stSp  and  to  attempt  a  comparison  between
divine  names  occurring  in  the  Northern  and  the
Southern  branches  of  the  Turanian  class.  We  saw,
for  instance,  that  the  name  of  th£  supreme  deity
among  the  Samoyedes  was  Num,  and  we  are  told


138      LEOTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OB1  BELIGIOff.

that  among  the  Tibetans  Nam  means  godhead.  In
mere  seund  Nam  is  no  doubt  much  nearer  to  Num
than  Num  is  to  the  Finnish  Juwula.  Nevertheless
th$  real  affinity  of  the  Sjunayede  Mtm  and  the  Fin-
nish tfumala  admits  of  no  doubt,  while  it  would  be
mere  guesswork  to  connect  Samoyede  Num  and  Ti-
betan Nam\  unless  $i&  phonetic  rules  had  first  been
estaiil&hed  which  would  justify  the  change  of  a  into
u,  and  a  common  source  had  been  discovered  from
which  both  words  could  havQ  sprung.

If  we  now  turn  for  a  moment  to  the  minor  spirits
believed  in  by  the  large  masses  in  China,  we  shall
ea^ly  see  that  they,  too,  in  their  character  are  strik-
ingly like  the  spirits  worshipped  by  the  North  Tu-
ranian tribes.  These  spirits  in  Chinese  are  called
Shin  8,  which  is  really  the  name  given-  to  every  in-
visible power  or  influence  which  can  be  perceived  in
operation  in  the  universe.  Some  Shin  or  spirits  re-
ceive real  worship,  which  is  graduated  according  to
their  dignity;  others  are  looked  upon  with  fear.  The
spirits  of  pestilence  are  driven  out  and  dispersed  by
exorcism;  many  are  only  talked  about.  There  are
so  many  spirits  that  it  seems  impossible  to  fix  their
exact  number.  Th%  principal  classes  *  ^re  the  celes-
tial spirits  (tfan  shin),  the  terrestrial  spirits  (ti  fa'),
and  the  .Ancestral  spirits  (jin  kwd\  and  this  is  the


is  probably  intended  for  *he  word  whioli  Jaembkft  In  hi*
a-EngliBh  Dictionary,'  pf  309,  ^tes  Tnam,*  Thie  rawmi
heaven,  sky.  He  adds  that  ynam-f  el-dkrfr-po  is  Said  to  be  a  deity  of  the
Horpa-w:  Mongols.  Nam-mk'a  is  'the  space  above  ™  where  the  btafo
ore  flying,  and  the  saints  are  dotting,  where  it  lightens  and  thundwi/

•MedhmBt,  'Eeply/p.11,
*  •  Ibid,  p.  ax.


LECT0KE  in.  139

order1  in  which. they  are  ranked  according  to  their
dignity.  Ampng  celestial  spirits  (tim  shin)  vre  find
the  spirits  of  the  gun  and  the  moon  and  the  stars,
the  clouds,  wind,  thundery  and  rain;  among  terrestrial
spirits,  those  of  the  mountains,  the  fields,  the  grain,
the  rivers*  the  trees?  the  year.  Among  the  departed
spirits  ar^e  those  of  the  emperors,  the  sages,  and  other
public  benefactors,  which  are  to  be  revered^Jb^  the
whole  nation,  while  each  family  has  its  own  manes
which  are  treated  with  special  reverence  and  honoured
by  many  superstitious  rites 2.

The  same  state  of  religious  feeling  is  exhibited
among  the  North  Turanian  tribes,  only  without  those
minute  distinctions  and  regulations  in  which  the
Chinese  mind  delights.  The  Samoyedes,  as  we  saw,
believed  in  a  supreme  god  of  heaven,  called  JNum;
but  Oastre'n,  who  lived  so  long  among  them,  'says :
'The  chief  deities  invoked  by  their  priests  or  sorcer-
ers, the  Shamans,  are  the  so-called  Tadebcjos*,  invi-
sible spirits  dwelling  in  the  air,  the  earth,  the  water,
and  everywhere  in  nature.  I  have  heard  many  a
Samoyede  say  that  they  were  merely  the  spirits  of
the  departed,  but  others  look  upon  them  as  a  class
of  inferior  delves.'

The  same  scholar  tells  us  (p.  105)  that '  the  mytho-

1  Medhurst,  'Keply/  p  23.  'The  spirits  of  heaven  are  called  sUit;
the  spirits  of  earth  are  called  lei;  when  men  die,  theit  tfam&rfng  aft&
transformed  fibula  aad  spirits  are  called  £aet.'

9  Ibid.  p.  43,  *  The  great  sacrifices  are  offered  only  to  ^  <a-  Skvn$~te>
the  same  ad  Tien.  The  five  Te  which  used  to  be  Joined  Vftfajtkmy-te
At  the  great  border  sacrifice  were  only  the  fife  power*  o*  qttdtties  of
STtanff-te  personified.  Since  the  year  AJX  136$  the  wonftdp
five  2%  has  been  abolished.1

*  Castr&o,  'Fmmsohe  Mythologies,'  p.  12*.


140       LECTURES  ON  THE  SOIEffCE  OF  RELIGION.

logy  of  the  Finns  is  flooded  -with  names  of  deities.
Every  gbject  in  nature  has  a  genius,  called  haltia,
which  is  supposed  to  be  its  creator  and  protector.
These  spirits  were  not  tied  ^p  these  outward  objects,
bu£  wre  free  to  roam  at>out,  and  had  a  body  and
soul,  and  their  own  well-marked  personality.  Nor
did  their  existence  depend  on  the  existence  of  a
singfe  object;  for  though  there  was  no  Sbject  in
nature  without  a  genius,  the  genius  was  not  con-
fined to  any  single  object,»but  comprehended  the
whole  class  or  genus.  This  mountain-ash,  this
stone/  this  house  has  its  own  genius,  but  the  same
genius  cares  for  all  other  mountain-ashes,  stones,  and
houses.1

We  have  only  to  translate  this  into  the  language
of  logic,  and  we  shall  understand  at  once  what  has
happened  here  as  elsewhere  in  the  growth  of  religious
ideas  and  mythological  names.  What  we  call  a  gene-
ral concept,  or  what  used  to  be  called  'essentia  gene-
ralis,'  'the  tree-hood,9  'the  stone-hood/  'the  house-
hood/  in  fact,  the  genus  tree,  stone,  and  house,  is  what
the  Finns  and  Samoyedes  call  the  genius,  the  haltia,
the  tadelqo,  and  what  the  Chinese  call  Shin.  We
speak  very  glibly  of^an  essentia  genercdis,  but  to  the
unschooled  mind  this  was  too  great  an  Effort.  Some*
thing  substantial  and  individual  had  to  be  retained
when  trees  had  to  be  spoken  of  as  a  forest,  or  days
as  a  year;  and  in  this  transition  period  from  indi-
vidual to  general  conceptions,  from  the  intuitional  to
the  conceptual,  from  the  real  to  the  abstract,  the
shadow,  the  ghost,  the  power  or  the  spirit  of  the
forest,  of  the  yea'r,  of  the  clouds,  and  the  lightning,
took  possession  of  the  human  mind,  and  a  class  of


LECTUEE  IH.  141

being%  was  called  into  existence  which  stands  before
us  as  so-called  deities  in  the  religion  and  mythology
of  the  ancienf  world.

The  worship  of  ancestral  spirits  is  likewise  shared
in  common  by  the  North  Turanian  races  ar\d  the
Chinese.  I  do  not  lay  much  stresfi  on  that  fact,
because  the  worship  of  the  spirits  of  the  departed  is
perhaps  Uhe  most  widely  spread  form  of  natural  super-
stition all  over  the  world.  It  is  nevertheless  Uf  some
interest  that  we  should  i$eet  this  superstition  so  fully
developed  in  China  and  in  the  whole  North  of  Asia.
Most  of  the  Finnish  and  Altaic  tribes,  says  Castren
(p.  119),  cherish  a  belief  that  death,  which  they  look
upon  with  terrible  fear,  does  not  entirely  destroy
individual  existence.  And  even  those  who  do  not
profess  belief  in  a  future  life,  observe  certain  cere-
monits  which  show  that  they  think  of  the  departed
as  still  existing.  They  take  food,  dresses,  oxen,
knives,  tinder-boxes,  kettles,  and  sledges,  and  place
them  on  the  graves ;  nay,  if  pressed,  they  would  con-
fess that  this  is  done  to  enable  the  departed  to  hunt,
to  fish,  and  to  %ht,  as  they  used  to  do  when  alive.
Lapps  and  Finns  admit  that  the  body  decays,  but
they  imagine  that  a  new  body  is  given  to  the  dead
in  the  lower  ^rld.  Others  speSk  of  the  departed  as
ghosts  or  spirits,  who  either  stay  in  the  grave  or  in
the  realm  of  the  dead,  or  who  roam  about'on  earth,
particularly  in  the  dead  of  night,  and  during  storm
and  rain.  They  give  signs  of  themselves  in  the  howl-
ing of  the  wind,  the  rustling  of  leaves,  the  cracfcHng
of  the  fire,  and  in  a  thousand  other  ways.  TEey  are
invisible  to  ordinary  mortals,  but*the  sorcerers  or
Shamans  can  see  them,  and  can  even  divine  their


142      LEOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

•thoughts.  It  is  curious  that  in  general  these  Spirits
$re  supposed  to  he  mischievous ;  and  the  most  mis-
chievous of  all  are  the  spirits  of  the  departed  priests
(p,  123).  They  interrupt  the  sleef,  they  send  illness
&n«l  misfortunes,  and  they  frouble  the  conscience  of
their  "relatives.*  Everything  is  done  to  l|eep  them
away.  When  the  corpse  has  been  carried  out  of  the
houqe,  a  redhot  stonft  is  thrown  after  the  ^departed,
as  a  cfearm  to  prevent  his  return.  The  offerings  of
food  and  other  articles  deposited  on  the  grave  are
accounted  for  by  some,  as  depriving  the  dead  of  any
excuse  for  coming  to  the  house,  and  fetching  these
things  himself.  Among  the  Tchuvashes  a  son  uses
the«following  invocation  when  offering  sacrifice  to  the
spirit  of  his  father:  £We  honour  thee  with  a  feast;
look,  here  is  bread  for  thee,  and  different  kinds  of
meat;  thou  hast  all  thou  canst  want:  but  cl#  not
trouble  us,  do  not  come  near  us '  (p.  123).

It  is  certainly  a  general  belief  that  if  they  receive
no  such  offerings,  the  dead  revenge  themselves  by
sending  diseases  and  other  misfortunes.  The  ancient
Hiongnu  or  Huns  killed  the  prisoners  of  war  on  the
tombs  of  their  leaders;  for  the  Shamans  assured  them
that  the  anger  of  the  spirits  could  not  be  appeased
otherwise.  The  sanfe  Huns  had  regular  sacrifices  in
honour  of  their  ancestral  spirits.  One  tribe,  the
Topas,  wfeich  had  migrated  from  Siberia  to  Central
Asia,  sent  ambassadors  with  offerings  to  the  tombs  of
their  ancestors.  Their  tombs  were  protected  with
high  palings,  to  prevent  the  living  from  clambering
in,  anti  the  dead  from  clambering  out.  Some  of  these
tombs  were  magnificently  adorned1,  and  at  last  grew

1  Oastr&i,  '  Fianisolie  Mythologie,'  p.  I  aa.


LEOTUBE  III.  149

almost,  and  in  China1  altogether,  into  temples  where
the  spirits  of  the  departed  were  actually  worshipped,
All  this  taketf  place  by  slow  degrees  ;  it  begi&s  with
placing  a  flower  on*the  tomb  ;  it  ends  with  worship-
ping the  spirits  of  departed  emperors2  %s  equal*  »of
the  Supreme  Spirit,  the  Shang~te  or  3Hen,  and  as  en*
joying  a  divine  rank*far  above  other  spirits  or  Shin.

The  difference,  at  first  sight,  ^between  the  minute
ceremonial  of  China  and  the  homely  worship  oWftnns
and  Lapps  may  seem  enormous  ;  but  if  we  trace  both
back  as  far  as  we  can,  we  see  fyat  the  early  stages  of
their  religious  belief  are  curiously  alike.  Firat,  a
worship  of  heaven,  as  the  emblem  of  the  most  exalted
conception  which  the  untutored  mind  of  man  can  en-
tertain, expanding  with  the  expanding  thoughts  of
its  worshippers,  and  eventually  leading  and  lifting
the  s«il  from"  horizon  to  horizon  to  a  belief  in  that
which  is  beyond  all  horizons,  a  belief  in  that
which  is  infinite.  Secondly,  a  belief  in  deathless
spirits  or  powers  of  nature;  which  supplies  the  more
immediate  and  every-day  wants  of  the  religious  in-
stinct of  man,  satisfies  the  imagination,  and  furnished
the  earliest  poetry  with  elevated  themes.  Lastly,  a
belief  in  the  existence  of  ancestral  spirits  :  which  im-
plies, consciously  or  unconsciously  in  a  spiritual  or  in
a  material  form,  that  which  is  one  of  the  life-springs
of  all  religion,  a  belief  in  immortality.

Allow  me  in  conclusion  to  recapitulate  shortly  the
results  of  this  Lecture.


1  TOon  an  emperor  died,  and  men  erected  an  ajaoeBfcwl
eet  up  a  parental  tablet  (as  a  resting-place  for  the  '  rihin*  «r  Spe&of  the
departed),  they  called  him  Te.—  Medjwuat,  'ftupfry,'  p.  7;  from  the
Ze-ke,  voL  i.  p.  49.

y,'  p.  45,


144       LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION,

We  found,  first  of  all,  that  there  is  a  natural  con-
nexior^  between  language  and  religion,  and  that  there-
fore the  classification  of  languages  is  applicable  also
to  the  ancient  religions  of  the  world.

"W&  found,  secondly,  th&t  there  was  a  common  Aryan
religion  before"' the  separation  gf  the  Ary&n  race;  a
common  Semitic  religion  before  the  separation  of  the
Semitic  race;  and  jf  common  Tnranic  religion  before
the  sljmration  of  the  Chinese  and  the  other  tribes
belonging  to  the  Turanian  *ckss.  We  found,  in  fact,
three  ancient  centres^of  religion  as  we  had  before
thre§  ancient  centres  of  language,  and  we  have  thus
gained,  I  believe,  a  truly  historical  basis  for  a  scientific
tr&ttment  of  the  principal  religions  of  the  world.


FOUKTH


DELITORED  AT  THE  BOTAL
MABOH  12,  1870.

WHEN  I  came  to  deliver  ihe  first  of  this  short
course  of  lectures,  I  confess  I  felt  sorry  for
having  undertaken  so  difficult  a  task;  and  if  I  could
have  withdrawn  from  it  with  honour,  I  should  gladly
have  done  so.  Now  that  I  have  only  this  one  lecture
left,  I  feel  equally  sorry,  and  I  wish  I  could  continue
my  coiyse  in  order  to  say  something  more  of  what  I
wished  to  say,  and  what  in  four  lectures  I  could  say
but  very  imperfectly.  From  the  announcement  of
my  lectures  you  must  have  seen  that  in  what  I  called
'  An  Introduction  to  the  Science  of  Religion7 1  did  not
intend  to  treat  of  more  than  some  preliminary  ques-
tions. I  chiefly  wanted  to  show  in  what  sense  a  truly
scientific  study  of  religion  was  possible,  what  materials
there  are  to  eniible  us  to  gain  a  trustworthy  know-
ledge of  the  principal  religions  of  the  world,  and
according  to  what  principles  these  religions  rmay  be
classified.  It  would  perhaps  have  been  more  jn-
teresting  to*some  of  my  hearers  if  we  had  rn^e£a£
once  into  the  ancient  temples  to  look  #*  tt$?%&$»
idols  of  the  past,  and  to  discover,  if  possible,  seifib  of
the  ftmdamental  ideas  that  found  expression  in  the
ancient  systems  of  foifck  and  worship.  But  in  order
L


146        LECTURES  ON  THE  SOnBXTOK  OF  BELICUON.

to  explore  -with  real  advantage  any  ruins,  whether
of  stone  or  of  thought,  it  is  necessary  that  we  should
kno-vf  where  to  look  and  how  to  look.  In  most
works  on  the  history  of  ancient  religions  we  are
iriven  about  like  forlorn  tourists  in  a  vast  museum
whdre  ancien^  and  modern  statues,  gems^of  Oriental
and  European  workmanship,  Original  works  of  art
and  mere  copies  ate  piled  up  together,  ^nd  at  the
en3  of  our  journey  we  only  feel  bewildered  and  dis-
heartened. We  have  seen  much,  no  doubt,  but  we
carry  away  very  little.  It*  is  better,  before  we  enter
int<i  these  labyrinths,  that  we  should  spend  a  few
hours  in  making  up  our  minds  as  to  what  we  really
w^nt  to  see  and  what  we  may  pass  by;  and  if  in
these  introductory  lectures  we  have  only  arrived  at
a  dear  view  on  these  points,  you  will  find  hereafter
that  our  time  has  not  been  altogether  silent  ingrain.

You  will  have  observed  that  I  have  carefully  ab-
stained from  entering  on  the  domain  of  what  I  call
Theoretic,  as  distinguished  from  Comparative  Theology.
Theoretic  theology,  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  the
philosophy  of  religion,  has,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  its
right  place  at  the  end,  not  at  the  beginning  of  Com-
parative Theology.  I  have  made  no  secret  of  my  own
conviction  that  a  study  of  Comparative  Theology  will
produce  with  regard  to  Theoretic  Theology  the  same
revolution  which  a  study  of  Comparative  Philology
has  produced  in  what  used  to  be  called  the  Philosophy
of  language.  You  know  how  all  speculations  on  the
nature  of  language,  on  its  origin,  its  development,  its
natural  growth  and  inevitable  decay  have  had  to  be
taken  up  afresji  from  the  very  beginning,  after  the
new  light  thrown  on  the  history  of  language  by  the


LEOTUBE  IV.  147

comparative  method.  I  look  forward  to  the  same
results  with  respect  to  philosophical  inquiries  into
the  nature  of  religion,  its  origin,  and  its  development,
I  do  not  mean  to  say'that  all  former  speculations  on
these  subjects  will  become  Tisiless.  Plato's  Cratylut,
even  the  Sfymes  of  Harris,  and  Horn*  Tooke's  *ZW-
versions  of  Purl&y  have  not  become  useless  after  the
work  done  Jay  Grimm  and  Bopp,  by  Humboldt  ajid
Bunsen.  But  I  believe  that  philosophers  who  specu-
late on  the  origm  of  religion  and  on  the  psychological
conditions  of  faith,  will  in  future  write  more  circum-
spectly, and  with  less  of  that  dogmatic  assurance
which  has  hitherto  distinguished  so  many  speculations
on  the  philosophy  of  religion,  not  excepting  those  af
Schelling  and  Hegel.  Before  the  rise  of  geology
it  was  easy  to  speculate  on  the  origin  of  the  earth ;
before  the  rise*  of  glossology,  any  theories  on  the
revealed,  the  mimetic,  the  inter]  ectional,  or  the  con-
ventional origin  of  language  might  easily  be  held
and  defended.  Not  so  now,  when  facts  have  filled
the  place  that  was  formerly  open  to  theories,  and
when  those  who  have  worked  most  carefully  among
the  d&bris  of  the  earth  or  the  strata  of  languages  are
most  reluctant  to  approach  the  great  problem  of  the
first  beginnings.

So  much  in  order  to  explain  why  in  this  intro-
ductory fcourse  I  have  confined  myself  within  narrower
limits  than  some  of  my  hearers  seem  to  have  expected.
And  now,  as«I  have  but  one  hour  left,  I  shall  try  to
make  the  best  use  of  it  I  can,  by  devoting  it  entirely
to  a  point  on  which  I  have  not  yet  touched,  viz/7m
the  right  spirit  in  which  ancient  religions  ought  to  be
studied  and  interpreted.


148        LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RELIGHON.

No  judge,  if  he  had  before  him  the  tforst  of
criminals,  would  treat  him  as  most  historians  and
theologians  have  treated  the  religion^  of  the  -world.
Every  act  in  the  lives  of  their  founders  which  shows
ffliai  they  were  but  metf,  is  eagerly  seized  and  judged
without  merdjr;  every  doctrinp  that  is  not  carefully
guarded  is  interpreted  in  the  worst  sense  that  it  will
boftr;  every  act  of*worship  that  differs  frwn  our -own
way%f  serving  God  is  held  up  to  ridicule  and  con-
tempt. And  this  is  not  dpne  by  accident,  but  with  a
set  purpose,  nay,  vftth  something  of  that  artificial
serfse  of  duty  which  stimulates  the  counsel  for  the
defence  to  see  nothing  but  an  angel  in  his  own  client,
aSid  anything  but  an  angel  in  the  plaintiff  on  the
other  side.  The  result  has.  been — as  it  could  not  be
otherwise — a  complete  miscarriage  of  justice,  an  utter
misapprehension  of  the  real  character  and  purpose  of
the  ancient  religions  of  mankind ;  and,  as  a  necessary
consequence,  a  failure  in  discovering  the  peculiar
features  which  really  distinguish  Christianity  from
all  the  religions  of  the  world,  and  secure  to  its
founder  his  own  peculiar  place  in  the  history  of  the
world,  far  away  from  VasishiAa,  Zoroaster,  and  Buddha,
from  Moses  and  Mohammed,  from  Confucius  and
Lao-tse.  By  undtily  depreciating  aft  other  religions,
•we  3&ave  placed  our  own  in  a  position  -which  its
founder  never  intended  for  it;  we  have  torn  "it  away
from  the  sacred  context  of  the  history  of  the  world;
we  have  ignored,  or  wilfully  narrowed  the  sundry
times  and  divers  manners  in  which,  in  times  past,
God  spake  unto  the  fathers  by  the  prophets;  and  in-
stead of  recognising  Christianity  as  coming  in  the
fulness  of  time,  and  as  the  fulfilment  of  ttie  hopes  and


LECTURE  IV.  149

desires  of  the  whole  world,  we  have  brought  ourselves
to  look  upon  yis  advent  as  the  only  broken  link  in
that  unbroken  chain  which  is  rightly  called  the  Divine
government  of  the  world,

Nay,  worse  than  this :  there  are  people  who,  from
mere  ignorance  of  the  ancient  religions  of  mankind,
have  adopted  a  doctrine  more  unchristian  than  any
that  could  te  found  in  the  pages  of  the  religious  J?oftks
of  antiquity,  viz.  that  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,
before  the  rise  of  Christianity,  were  mere  outcasts,
forsaken  and  forgotten  of  thefr  Father  in  heaven,
without  a  knowledge  of  God,  without  a  hope  of  sal-
vation. If  a  comparative  study  of  the  religions  of  the
world  produced  but  this  one  result,  that  it  drove  this
godless  heresy  out  of  every  Christian  heart,  and  made
us  see  again  ia  the  whole  history  of  the  world  the
eternal  wisdom  and  love  of  God  towards  all  His
creatures,  it  would  have  done  a  good  work.

And  it  is  high  time  that  this  good  work  should  be
done.  We  have  learnt  to  do  justice  to  the  ancient
poetry,  the  political  institutions,  the  legal  enactments,
the  systems  of  philosophy,  and  the  works  of  art  of
nations  differing  from  ourselves  in  many  respects ;  we
have  brought  qjpselves  to  value  $ven  the  crude  and
imperfect  beginnings  in  all  these  spheres  of  mental
activity;  and  I  believe  we  have  thus  learn^  lessons
from  ancient  history  which  we  could  not  have  learnt
anywhere  else.  We  can  admire  the  temples  of  fee
ancient  world,  whether  in  Egypt*  Babytao,  or  Chepee  j
we  can  stand  in  raptures  before  the  statues  of  Hodias j
and  only  when  we  approach  the  religious  conceptions
which  find  their  expression  in  the  temples  of  Athene
and  in  the  statues  of  Zeus,  we  turn  away  with  pity


150        LEOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RELIGION.

or  scorn,  we  call  these  gods  mere  idols  and  images,
and  Mass  foeir  worshippers— Periklas,  Phidias,  So-
krates,  and  Plato— with  the  worshippers  of  stocks  and
stones.  I  do  not  deny  Jftsfc  the  religions  of  the  Baby-
lonTans,  Egyptians,  Greeks,  and  Romans  yrere  imper-
fect and  full  of  errors,  particularly  in  their  later
stages,  but  I  maintain  that  the  fact  of  tjjese  ancient
people  having  any  religion  at  all,  however  imper-
fect, raises  them  higher,  and  brings  them  nearer
to  us,  than  all  their  worfes  of  art,  all  their  poetry,
alUtheir  philosophy?  Neither  their  art  nor  their
poetry  nor  their  philosophy  would  have  been  possible
•without  religion ;  and  if  we  will  but  look  without
prejudice,  if  we  will  but  judge  as  we  ought  always  to
judge,  with  unwearying  love  and  charity,  we  shall  be
surprised  at  that  new  world  of  bedTuty  an£  truth
which,  like  the  azure  of  a  vernal  sky,  rises  before  us
from  behind  the  clouds  of  the  ancient  mythologies.

We  can  speak  freely  and  fearlessly;  we  can  afford
to  be  charitable.  There  was  a  time  when  it  was
otherwise.  There  was  a  time  when  people  imagined
that  truth,  particularly  the  highest  truth,  the  truth  of
religion,  could  only  conquer  by  blind  zeal,  by  fire  and
sword.  At  that  tkne  all  idols  were  to  be  overthrown,
their  altars  to  be  destroyed,  and  their  worshippers  to
be  cut  &>  pieces.  But  there  came  a  time  when  the
sword  was  to  be  put  up  into  its  place. . . .  And  if  even
after  that  time  there  was  a  work  to  worlj;  and  a  fight
to  fight,  which  required  the  fiery  zeal  of  apostles  and
martyrs,  that  time  also  is  now  past;  the  conquest  is
gained,  and  we^have  time  to  reflect  calmly  on  what  is
past  and  what  is  still  to  come.

Surely  we  need  not  be  afraid  of  Baal  or  Jupiter.


LECTTJBE  IV.  151

Our  dangers  and  our  difficulties  are  now  of  a  very
different  kind..  Those  who  believe  that  there  is  a
God,  and  that  He  created  heaven  and  earth,  and  that
He  ruleth  the  world  by'IEf  unceasing  providenqp,
cannot  believe  that  millions  of  human  beings;  all
created  like  ourselves*  in  the  image  of  God,  were,  in
their  time  of  ignorance,  so  utterly  abandoned  that
their  whole  religion  was  falsehood,  their  whole  w^rsTup
a  farce,  their  whole  life  a  mockery.  An  honest  and
independent  study  of  the*religions  of  the  world  will
teach  us  that  it  was  not  so  —  will  teach  us  the


lesson  which  it  taught  St.  Augustine,  that  there  is  no
religion  which  does  not  contain  some  grains  of  truth.
Nay,  it  will  teach  us  more;  it  will  enable  us  to  see
in  the  history  of  the  ancient  religions,  more  clearly
than  anywhere  else,  the  Divine  education  of  the  human
race.

I  know  this  is  a  view  which  has  been  much  ob-
jected to,  but  I  hold  it  as  strongly  as  ever.  If  we
must  not  read  in  the  history  of  the  whole  human  race
the  daily  lessons  of  a  Divine  teacher  and  guide,  if
there  is  no  purpose,  no  increasing  purpose  in  the  suc-
cession of  the  religions  of  the  world,  then  we  might
as  well  shut  uft  the  godless  book  <$f  history  altogether,
and  look  upon  men  as  no  better  than  the  grass  which
is  to-day  in  the  field  and  to-morrow  is  cast^  into  the
oven.  Ma.-n  would  then  be  indeed  of  less  value  than
the  sparrows,  for  none  of  them  is  forgotten  before
God.

But  those  who  imagine  that,  in  order  to  mafce^sure
of  their  own  salvation,  they  must  have  a  great  gulf
fixed  between  themselves  and  all  the  other  nations  of
the  world  —  between  iheir  own  religion  and  the  re-


152        LEOTCBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RELIGION.

ligions  of  Zoroaster,  Buddha,  or  Confucius — can  hardly
be  aw^&re  how  strongly  the  interpretation  of  the  his-
tory of  the  religions  of  the  world,  as  an  education  of
tfce  human  race,  can  be  "supported  by  authorities
before  which  l^ey  themselves  would  probably  bow  in
silence.  We  need  not  appeal  to  an  English  bishop  to
prove  the  soundness,  or  to  a  German  philosopher  to
pnfvBjbhe  truth,  of  this  view.  If  we  wanted  authori-
ties we  could  appeal  to  Popes,  to  the  Fathers  of  the
Church,  to  the  Apostles  thSmselves,  for  they  have  all
upheld  the  same  view  with  no  wavering  or  uncertain
voice.

I  pointed  out  before  that  the  simultaneous  study
of  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament,  with  an  occa-
sional reference  to  the  religion  and  philosophy  of
Greece  and  Borne,  had  supplied  Christian  Divines
with  some  of  the  most  useful  lessons  for  a  wider
comparison  of  all  the  religions  of  the  world.  In
studying  the  Old  Testament,  and  observing  in  it  the
absence  of  some  of  the  most  essential  truths  of  Chris-
tianity, they,  too,  had  asked  with  surprise  why  the
interval  between  the  fall  of  man  and  his  redemption
had  been  so  long,  why  men  were  allowed  so  long  to
walk  in  darkness.*  and  whether  the^  heathens  had
really  no  place  in  the  counsels  of  God,  Here  is  the
answer  gf  a  Pope,  of  Leo  the  Great1  (440-461)  *

'Let  those  who  with  impious  murnmrings  find  fault
with  the  Divine  dispensations,  and  who  complain
about  the  lateness  of  Our  Lord's  nativity,  cease  from
their  grievances,  as  if  what  was  carried  out  in  this
last  age  of  the  v^orld,  had  not  been  impending  in  time
past.  .  ,  .  What  the  apostles  preached,  the  prophets

1  Hardwick,  'Christ  and  other  Masters,*  vol.  i.  p,  85.


LECTUBB  IV.  163

had  announced  before,  and  what  has  always  been
believed,  cannot  be  said  to  have  been  fulfilled  too
late.  By  this  delay  of  His  work  of  salvation  the
wisdom  and  love  of  Qofl  fyave  only  made  us  m$ra
fitted  for  Jis  call ;  so  that,  what  had^een  announced
before  by  many  signs*and  words  and  mysteries  during
so  many  Centuries,  should  not  }&  doubtful  or  uncer-
tain in  the  days  of  the  Gospel, . . .  God  has  not 'pro-
vided for  the  interests  of  men  by  a  new  counsel  or
by  a  late  compassion ;  but  He  had  instituted  from  the
beginning  for  all  men  one  and  the  same  path  of  sal-
vation.'

This  is  the  language  of  a  Pope — of  Leo  the  Greai.

Now  let  us  hear  what  Irenseus  says,  and  how  he
explains  to  himself  the  necessary  imperfection  of  the
early,  religions  of  mankind.  'A  mother/  he  says,
'may  indeed  offer  to  her  infant  a  complete  repast,  but
her  infant  cannot  yet  receive  the  food  which  is  meant
for  full-grown  men.  In  the  same  manner  God  might
indeed  from  the  beginning  have  offered  to  man  the
truth  in  its  completeness,  but  man  was  unable  to
receive  it,  for  he  was  still  a  child.*

If  this,  too,  is  considered  a  presumptuous  reading
of  the  counsek  of  God,  we  have,  «.s  a  last  appeal,  the
words  of  St.  Paul,  that  'the  law  was  the  schoolmaster
to  ther  Jews/  joined  with  the  words  of  St,  Jeter,  *  Of
a  truth  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,
but  in  evejy  nation  he  that  feareth  him  «d  workeA
righteousness  is  accepted  with  him.'

But,  as  I  said  before,  we  need  not  appeal  toraay
authorities,  if  we  will  but  read  tk$  records  of  the
ancient  religions  of  the  world  wfth  an  open  heart
and  in  a  charitable  spirit — in  a  spirit  that  thinketh


154      LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OB1  BELIGUON.

no  evil,  but  rejoices  in  the  truth  wherever  it  can  be
found.

I  suppose  that  most  of  us,  sotfner  or  later  in  life,
hove  felt  how  the  whole  world — this  wicked  world,
as  w&  call  it— 4&  changed  as  if  by  magic,  if  once  we
can  make  up  our  mind  to  give"  men  credit  for  good
motives,  never  to  b^  suspicious,  never  to  think  evil,
never  -*o  think  ourselves  better  than  our  neighbours.
Trust  a  man  to  be  true  and  good,  and,  even  if  he  is
not,  your  trust  will  tend  to  "make  him  true  and  good.
It  ifiuthe  same  with  the  religions  of  the  world.  Let
us  but  once  make  up  our  mind  to  look  in  them  for
what  is  true  and  good,  and  we  shall  hardly  know  our
old  religious  again.  If  they  are  the  work  of  the  devil,
as  many  of  us  have  been  brought  up  to  believe,
then  never  was  there  a  kingdom  so  divided  Against
itself  from  the  very  beginning.  There  is  no  religion —
or  if  there  is,  I  do  not  know  it — which  does  not  say,
'Do  good,  avoid  evil.'  There  is  none  which  does  not
contain  what  Eabbi  Hillel  called  the  quintessence  of
all  religions,  the  simple  warning,  'Be  good,  my  boy.'
'Be  good,  my  boy/  may  seem  a  very  short  catechism;
but  let  us  add  to  it,  'Be  good,  my  boy,  for  God's  sake,'
and  we  have  in  it  rery  nearly  the  wh*le  of  the  Law
and  the  Prophets.

I  wishj  could  read  you  the  extracts  I  have  collected
from  the  sacred  books  of  the  ancient  world,  grains  of
truth  more  precious  to  me  iihan  grains  of  gold;  prayers
so  simple  and  so  true  that  we  could  all  join  in  them  if
we  once  accustomed  ourselves  to  the  strange  sounds  of
Sanskrit  or  Chinese.  I  can  to-day  give  you  a  few
specimens  only.

Here  is  a  prayer  of  YasishtfAa,  a  Vedic  prophet,


LEOTUBE  IV.  155

addressed  to  Vaniwa,  the  Greek  Oipavos,  an  ancient
name  of  the  $ky  and  of  the  god  who  resides  in  the
sky.

I  shall  read  you  one  v«rse  at  least  in  the  origina,}—
it  is  the  86th  hymn  of  the  seventh  book  of  the  Big-
veda — so  Jthat  you  tnay  hear  the  very  sounds  which
more  than  three  thousand  year^  ago  were  uttered  for
the  first  lime  in  a  village  on  the  borders  of  JJie^Sut-
ledge,  then  called  the  tfatadru,  by  a  man  who  felt  as
we  feel,  who  spoke  as  we  speak,  who  believed  in
many  points  as  we  believe— a  dark-complexioned
Hindu,  shepherd,  poet,  priest,  patriarch,  and  certainly
a  man  who,  in  the  noble  army  of  prophets,  deserves
a  place  by  the  side  of  David.  And  does  it  not  show
the  indestructibility  of  the  spirit,  if  we  see  how  the
waves  which?  by  a  poetic  impulse,  he  started  on  the
vast  ocean  of  thought  have  been  heaving  and  spread-
ing and  widening,  till  after  centuries  and  centuries
they  strike  to-day  against  our  shores  and  tell  us,  in
accents  that  cannot  be  mistaken,  what  passed  through
the  mind  of  that  ancient  Aryan  poet  when  he  felt  the
presence  of  an  almighty  Ood,  the  maker  of  heaven
and  earth,  and  felt  at  the  same  time  the  burden  of
his  sin,  and  grayed  to  his  God^that  He  might  take
that  burden  from  him,  that  He  might  forgive  him
his  sin?  When  you  listen  to  the  strange  pounds  of
this  Vedic  hymn,  you  are  listening,  even  in  this  Eoyal
Institution,  to  spirit-rapping — to  real  spirit-j&ppiBgs,
YasishtfAa*is  really  among  us  again,  and  if  ycm  will
accept  me  as  his  interpreter,  you  will  find  that  we
can  all  understand  what  the  old  poet  wished  to  say1:

1  M.  M,,  'History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature/  p.  540.


156      LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGUON.


*  Dhir&  tv  asya  mahinS,
TO  yas  tastambha  rodasi  Add  urvi,
pra  n&kam  n'shvam  nunude  briliantaw,
dvit&  nakshatram  pajjrathafc  k&  bhuma,
Wise  and  mighty  are  fiie  works  of  him  who  stem-
med asunder  the  wide  firmaments  (heaven  rind  earth).
He  lifted  on  high  the  bright  and  glorious  heaven  ;  he
streitehgd  out  apart  the  starry  sky  and  the  earth.

'  Do  I  say  this  to  my  own  self?  How  can  I  get  near
unto  Varuna?  Will  he  accept  my  offering  without
displeasure?  When  shS.ll  I,  with  a  quiet  mind,  see
him  propitiated?

(1  ask,  0  Varuwa,  wishing  to  know  this  my  sin;
I  go  to  ask  the  wise.  The  sages  all  tell  me  the  same:
rt  Varuna  it  is  who  is  angry  with  thee."

*  Was  it  for  an  old  sin,  0  Vaxuna,  thai  thou  wishest
to  destroy  thy  Mend,  who  always  praises  theeT  Tell
me,  thou  unconquerable  Lord  I  and  I  will  quickly
turn  to  thee  with  praise,  freed  from  sin.

(  Absolve  us  from  the  sins  of  our  fathers,  and  from
those  which  we  committed  with  our  own  bodies.
Release  Vasish^a,  0  King,  like  a  thief  who  has
feasted  on  stolen  cattle  ;  release  him  like  a  calf  from
the  rope.

clt  was  not  our  own  doing,  0  Yaruna,  it  was  a
slip  ;  an  ^intoxicating  draught,  passion,  dice,  thpught-
lessness.  The  old  is  there  to  mislead  the  young;
even  sleep  is  not  free  from  mischief.

'Let  me,  freed  from  sin,  do  service  to  the  angry
godlike  a  slave  to  his  lord1.  The  lord  god  enlight-
eneth  the  foolish  ;  he,  the  wisest,  leads  his  worshipper
to  wealth.

J  &*>  Benfey,  'Gottingar  Gelehrte  Nachribhten,'  1874,  p.  370.


LECTORS  IV,  1ST

«0  lord  Varuna,  may  this  song  go  well  to  thy
heait!  May  we  prosper  in  acquiring  and  peeping!
Protect  us,  0  gods,  always  with  your  blessings/

I  am  not  blind  to  ttye  blemishes  of  this  ancient
prayer,  but  I  am  not  blind4  to  its  beauty  either,  lad
I  think  yfcu  will  admit  that  the  discovery  of  even  one
such  poem  among  the  hymns  of  the  Rig-veda,  and
the  certainty  that  such  a  poem  #as  composed  in  india
at  least  three  thousand  years  ago,  without  any  inspi-
ration but  that  which  aU  can  find  who  seek  for  it  if
haply  they  may  find  it,  is  woll  worth  the  labour  of
a  life.  It  shows  that  man  was  never  forsaken  of  God,
and  that  conviction  is  worth  more  to  the  student  of
history  than  all  the  dynasties  of  Babylon  and  Egfypt,
worth  more  than  all  lacustrian  villages,  worth  more
than  the  slgills  and  jaw-bones  of  Neanderthal  or
Abb^ille.

I  add  a  few  more  translations  of  Vedic  hymns,  some
of  which  have  been  published  elsewhere,  while  one  is
given  here  for  the  first  time1

PHAYEB  FOB  FORGIVENESS  (BIG-VEDA  VH  89).

1.  Let  me  not  yet,  0  Varuna^ enter  into  the  house
of  earth ;  have  mercy,  almighty,  have  mercy!

2.  If  I  move  along  trembling,  like  a  cloud  driven;
by  the  wind ;  have  mercy,  almighty,  have  mercy  I

3.  Through  want   of  strength,  tiiou  .gstapqpg
bright  god,  have  I  gone  astray  5  have  H*ercy,  £b*^^,
have  mercy  I

4.  Thirst  came  upon  the  worshiper,  though  &a

1  See  <  Einleitnug  in  die  Voglefebefcd*  MigioDwiawnach^'  p.  an.


158      LECTURES  ON  THE  SOIENCE  OF  EELTGtION.

stood  in  the   midst   of  the  waters;   have  tfiercy,
Blmigbty,  have  mercy  1

5.  Whenever  we  men,  0  Varuna,  conttnit  an  offence
before  the  heavenly  host,  whenever  we  break  the  law
thfough  thoughtlessness  ;•  punish  us  not,  0  god,  for
that  offence*


OP  PBAISE  ADDBESSED  TO
(RIG-VEDA  I.  35).

i.  However  we  break  thy  laws  from  day  to  day,
men  as  we  are,  0  god,  Varuna,

3.  Do  not  deliver  us  unto  death,  nor  to  the  blow  of
the  Hurious  ;  nor  to  the  wrath  of  the  spiteful  I

3.  To  propitiate  thee,  0  Varuna,  we  unbend  thy
mind  with  songs,  as  the  charioteer  (unties)  a  weary
steed.

4.  Away  from  me  they  flee  dispirited,  intent  only
on  gaining  wealth  ;  as  birds  to  their  nests.

5.  When  shall  we  bring  hither  the  man,  who  is
victory  to  the  warriors  ;  when  shall  we  bring  Varuna,
the  wide-seeing,  to  be  propitiated?

[6,  They  (Mtra  and  Varuna)  take  this  in  common;
gracious,  they  never  Ml  the  faithful  grver.]

7.  He  who  knows  the  place  of  the  Tbirds  that  fly
through  the  sky,  who  on  the  waters   knows  the
ships  j  —

8.  He,  the  upholder  of  order,  who  knows  the  twelve
months  with  the  offspring  of  each,  and  knows  the
month  that  is  engendered  afterwards;—

9.  He  who  knows  the  track  of  the  wind,  of  the
wide,  the  bright/the  mighty;  and  knows  those  who
reside  on  high;  —


LECTUBE  IV.  159

io.*He,  the  upholder  of  order,  Yarurca,  sits  down
among  his  people ;  he,  the  wise,  sits  there  to  govern,

11.  From  tbence  perceiving  all  wondrous  things,  he
sees  what  has  been  and  what  will  be  done.

12.  May  he,  the  wise  A<Hty#,make  our  paths  straight
all  our  days ;  may  he  prolong  our  livgs !

13.  Yaruwa,  wearing  golden  mail,  has  put  on  his
shining  clgak ;  the  spies  sat  dowgi  around  him,

14.  The  god  whom  the  scoffers  do  not  ptovoke,
nor  the  tormentors  of  men,  nor  the  plotters  of  mis-
chief ;

15.  He,  who  gives  to  men  glory,  and  not  half  glory,
who  gives  it  even  to  our  own  selves ; —

1 6.  Yearning  for  him,  the  far-seeing,  my  thoughts
move  onwards,  as  kine  move  to  their  pastures.

17.  Let  us  speak  together  again,  because  my  honey
has  been  brought :  that  thou  mayest  eat  what  thou
likest,  like  a  friend1.

1 8.  Did  I  see  the  god  who  is  to  be  seen  by  all,  did
I  see  the  chariot  above  the  earth?     He  must  have
accepted  my  prayers.

19.  0  hear  this  my  calling,  Varuna,  be  gracious
now  I  longing  for  help,  I  have  called  upon  thee.

zo.  Thou,  0  wise  god,  art  lord  of  all,  of  heaven  and
earth:  listen  09.  thy  way!

21.  That  I  may  live,  take  from  me  the  upper  rope,
loose  the  middle,  and  remove  the  lowest  I

In  most  of  the  hymns  of  ihe  Eig-veda,  however,  tbd
gods  assume  a  far  more  mythological  character  tiban
in  these  songs  addressed  to  Yaruna,  though  the  spiri-

1  See  BdletDflan,  in  Orient  wid  Occident,  ii.  p.  147.  One  migfct  lead
totri-iva,  *  because  honey  hag  been,  fcroight  by  me,  as  by  a  prieet,  sweet
to  taste.'


160      LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

tual  and  ethical  character  of  the  'deity  is  but  Seldom
entirely  lost.  If  we  take  for  instance  a  short  hymn  ad-
dresseA  to  Agni  or  Fire,  we  easily  see  that  Agni  (ignis)
is  conceived  as  the  representative  of  fire,  yet  we  also
perceive  even  here  a  mgre  distant  background,  or  a
true  Qivine  element,  only  enveloped  in  a  mythological
shell.

HYMN  TO  AGNI  (RIO-VEDA  II.  6}

i.  JSgni,  accept  this  log  which  I  offer  to  thee,  accept
this  my  service ;  listen  well* to  these  my  songs.

3.  With  this  log,  0  Agni,  may  we  worship  thee,
thoif  son  of  strength,  conqueror  of  horses !  and  with
this  hymn,  thou  high-born  1

3-  May  we,  thy  servants,  serve  thee  with  songs,  0
granter  of  riches,  thou  who  lovest  songs  and  delightest
in  riches!

4.  Thou  lord  of  wealth  and  giver  of  wealth,  fob  thou
wise  and  powerful ;  drive  away  from  us  the  enemies  I

5.  He  gives  us  rain  from  heaven,  he  gives  us  in-
violable strength,  he  gives  us  food  a  thousandfold.

6.  Youngest  of  the  gods,  their  messenger,  their  in-
vofcer,  most  deserving  of  worship,  come,  at  our  praise,
to  him  who  worships  thee  and  longs  for  thy  help.

7.  For  thou,  0  sage,  goest  wisely  between  these
two  creations  (heaven  and  earth,  gods  and  men),  like
a  friendly  messenger  between  two  hamlets  I

8.  Thou  art  wise,  and  thou  hast  been  pleased:
perform  thou,  intelligent  Agni,  the  sacrifice  without
interruption,  sit  down  on  this  sacred  grass !

Here  we  may  clearly  observe  that  peculiar  blending
of  ethical  and  physical  elements  in  the  character  of
one  and  the  same  deity,  a  blending  which  seems


LEGTUBE  IV.  161

strange  to  us,  but  must  have  been  perfectly  natural
in  an  earlier  stage  of  religious  thought,  for  w«  meet
with  the  same  ideas  everywhere,  whenever  we  are  able
to  trace  back  the  growth  ef  religious  concepts  to  their
first  beginnings,  not  only  among  the  Aryan  nations,
but  in  Aftiea,  in  America,  and  eveln  in  Australia,
though  nowhere  with  the  same  clearness  and  fulness
as  in  the  h^mns  of  the  Yedic  Aryans.

I  have  often  expressed  my  opinion  tiiat  we  ought
to  be  careful  in  ascribing»the  same  high  antiquity  to
everything  occurring  in  the  Ei^-veda.  Not  that  I  re-
tract what  I  tried  to  prove  in  my  '  History  of  Ancient
Sanskrit  Literature,'  that  the  whole  collection  of  the
hymns  must  have  been  finished  to  the  last  lefter
before  the  beginning  of  the  Br&hmana  period.  Nor
am  I  aware  that  a  single  weak  joint  has  been  dis-
.cover$L  by  any  of  my  numerous  critics  in  the  chain
of  arguments  on  which  I  relied.  But  scientific  ho-
nesty obliges  me  nevertheless  to  confess  openly  that
I  cannot  even  now  feel  quite  convinced  in  my  own.
mind  that  all  the  hymns,  all  the  verses,  all  the  words
and  syllables  in  our  text  of  the  Edg-veda  are  really
of  the  same  high  antiquity.  No  doubt,  we  should
approach  all  such  questions  witiiout  any  preconceived
opinions,  but  we  cannot  on  the  o3ier  hand  forget  all
we  have  been  taught  by  a  study  of  post-Vedic  litera-
ture, or  by  a  study  of  other  ancient  literatures.  We
must  wait  for  further  evidence,  and  be  eareful^^rt  to
force  these  researches  into  a  false  directiw  by /^^
^mature  dicta.  In  order  to  gjlve  a  epacHnen  of  wfifct
J  mean,  I  shall  give  a  translation  of  the  wall-k&trtfa
hymn  to  Vwvaka^man  from  the  last  Handala,  a  Slan-
tfala  whiqh  &as  generally  been  Considered,  though,  as


162      LEGTTTBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  KELIGION.

yet,  without  very  definite  reasons,  as  a  repository  of
more  Inodern  poems.

The  very  name  of  the  deity,  addressed  in  this  hymn,
"SJsvakarman,  indicates  thafc  the  poet  did  not  belong  to
the  Earliest  period  of  Vedic  religion.  It  occurs  as  a
proper  name  in  the  tenth  Manefeia  only.  Originally
Vitfvakarman,  the  maker  of  all  things,  is  an  epithet  of
se-9%raj  old  gods.  Indra  is  called  Visvakannan1,  like-
wise Sfrrya,  the  sun2,  and  Visvakrit,  he  who  makes
everything,  occurs  in  the  j&fcharva-veda3  as  an  epithet
of  typi,  the  fire,  who  In  the  Br^hmawas4  also  is  iden-
tified with  Vwvakarman.  Visvakarman,  as  an  inde-
pepdent,  but  very  abstract  deity  appears,  like  Prar$-
pati  and  similar  divine  individuals,  as  the  creator,  or,
more  correctly,  as  the  fashioner  and  architect  of  the
universe.  In  the  hymns  dedicated  to  him  some  rays
break  through  here  and  there  from  the  dark  mytho-
logical background  through  which  and  from  which
the  concept  of  Visvakarman  arose.  Sometimes  we  are
still  able  to  recognise  the  traces  of  Agni,  sometimes  of
Sftrya,  although  the  poets  themselves  think  of  him
chiefly  as  the  Creator.  Thus  we  read  in  one  verse :

'The  seer  and  a  priest,  who  offering  all  the  worlds
as  a  sacrifice,  came»down  as  our  fathy,  he,  appearing
first,  entered  among  mortals,  desiring  wealth  with
blessing/

This,  at  first  sight,  is  not  very  clear,  nor  do  I  pre-
tend to  say  that  this  verse  has  as  yet  been  rendered
quite  intelligible,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  various
translators  and  commentators.  Still  we  may  see  a
little  light,  if  ^we  remember  that  Vwvakarman,  the

1  Big-Veda*  viii.  98,  a.  a  Ibid.  x.  170,  4.

3  Atharva-yeda,  vi.  47,  z.  *  &atapatha-1br&lunaft^  ir,  2,  a.


LECTURE  IV.  163

maker  of  all  things,  was  originally  Agni,  the  god  of
fire,  and  more  particularly,  the  god  of  the  fire  atfd  the
light  of  the  morning.  Agni,  as  the  god  of  the
morning  (aushasya),  is  often  conceived  as  a  priesi,
who,  with  his  splendour,  pours  out  the  whole  -World
and  offers  it  as  a  moraing  sacrifice.  Such  a  sacrifice
is  represented  as  taking  place  either  at  the  beginning
of  every  day,  or  at  the  beginning  of  a  new  yqar,*or,
by  another  step,  at  the  beginning  of  the  world.  The
light  of  the  morning  sun  wtis  perceived  by  the  poet  as
illuminating  the  world,  like  the  'actual  fires  lighteg  in
the  morning  on  every  hearth.  Or  the  poet  might  see
in  the  light  of  the  rising  sun  a  power  that  brings
forth  the  whole  world,  brings  it  into  sight  and  being,
in  fact  makes  or  creates  the  world.  This  is  a  poetical,
perhaps  a  fantastic  idea;  nevertheless  it  is  con-
ceivable ;  and  in  interpreting  the  words  of  the  Veda,
we  must  never  rest  till  we  arrive  at  something  that
is  at  least  conceivable.

The  poet  again  seems  to  think  of  Agni,  the  fire,
when  he  says  of  Vbvakarman  that  he  settled  down
as  a  father  among  men.  The  germ  of  this  conception
lies  in  the  light  of  the  morning  appearing  first  as
something  distant  and  divine,  but  fhen,  unlike  other
divine  powers,  remaining  with  men  on  earth,  on  the
very  hearth  of  every  dwelling.  This  thought  that
Agni  is  the  first  to  take  up  his  abode  with  men,  that
his  presence  is  the  condition  of  all  human,  activity,
workmanship,  and  art,  and  that  through  his  blessing
alone  men  obtain  health  and  wealth,  is  expressed  in
many  Vedic  songs  in  ever  varying  ways.

If  we  transfer  these  thoughts  to  the  Ykvakarman,
the  maker  or  shaper  of  all  things,  some  of  the  darfc
M  %


164)      LECTUBES  ON  THE  SdrENdE  OF  EELIGION.

•words  of  the  first  verse  become  more  intelligible,
•white  some  of  the  translations  hitherto  published
leave  the  impression  as  if  some  of  the  Vedic  poets
bad  really  connected  no  thought  whatever  with  their
metrical  effusions.

i.  l  *  What  was  the  place,  what  was  the  support,  and
where  was  it,  from  jrhence  the  all-seeing  "^vakarman
(the  Aaker  of  all  things),  when  producing  the  earth,
displayed  the  heaven  by  his  might?

z.  'He,  the  one  God,  whose  eyes  are  everywhere,
whese  mouth,  whose  arms,  whose  feet  are  everywhere ;
he,  when  producing  heaven  and  earth,  forges  them
together  with  his  arms  and  with  the  wings.

3.  2e  What  was  the  forest,  what  was  the  tree8,  from
which  they  cut  out  heaven  and  earth  ?   Ye  wise,  seek
in  your  mind  that  place  on  which  he  Stood  w^en  sup-
porting the  worlds.

4.  *  O  Visvakarman,  rejoicing  in  the  sacrifice,  teach
thy  friends  what  are  thy  highest  abodes,  and  what
are  thy  lowest,  and  what  are  these  thy  middle  abodes !
Sacrifice  for  thyself,  increasing  thy  body4.


1  Dr.  Muir  translates  this  verse :  '  Our  father,  who,  a  rishi  and  a
priest,  celebrated  a  saciifioe  offering  up  all  these  gjeatures,  he,  earnestly
desiring  substance,  he,  the  archetype,  entered  into  later  man.'
Langlois ;  '  Que  le  riohi  (droa),  notre  pontife  et  notre  pere,  qui  par  son
sacrifice  %  forme"  tons  ces  mondes,  vienne  s'aeseoir  (&  notr©  fttyer) .  Qa*il
desire  et  bemsse  nos  ofi&andea,  Habitant  des  regions  snperienrea,  il
descend  aussi  vers  nous.'

*  Of.  j8Veta*vatara  TJpan  lii.  3.

8  We  say  fai?  or  materies,  matter ;  Eig-Veda,  x.  31,  7.

This  expression  also  'Sacrifioe  for  thyself,  increasing  thy  body/
refers  primarily  to  Agni.  It  was  a  familiar  idea  with  the  Brahman*
to  look  upon  the  are  both  as  the  subject  and  the  object  of  a  sacrifice.
The  fire  embraced  the  offering,  and  was  thus  a  kind  of  priest ;  it  carried
•&  te-  the  god*,  and  wae  thus  a  kind  of  mediator  between  gods  and  men.


LECTURE  rv,  163

5.  *  maker  of  all  things,  growing  by  the  oblations,
sacrifice  for  thyself,  for  earth  and  for  heavenj   Let
other  men  wait  around  in  darkness,  but  among  us  let
the  wise  man  be  powerful^

6.  « Let  us  invoke  to-day,  for  our  protection  in  battlfe,
the  lord  of  speech,  Visvakannan,  th0  maker  of  all
things,  who  inspires  our  mind.    May  he  accept  all
our  offerings,  he  who  is  a  blessing  to  everybody,  jmd
who  performs  good  deeds  for  our  safety!1

My  next  extract  will  be  from  the  Zendavesta,  the
sacred  book  of  the  Zoroastrians,  older  in  its  language
than  the  cuneiform  inscriptions  of  Cyrus,  Darius,
Xerxes,  those  ancient  kings  of  Persia  who  knew  that
they  were  kings  by  the  grace  of  Awramazda>  the
Zend  Ahurd  magddo\  and  who  placed  his  sacred
image  high  on  the  mountain-records  of  Behistun,
That  *ncient  book,  or  its  fragments  at  least,  have
survived  many  dynasties  and  kingdoms,  and  are
still  believed  in  by  a  small  remnant  of  the  Persian
racg,  now  settled  at  Bombay,  and  known  all  over  th«
wond  by  the  came  of  Parsis.

The  first  extract  is  taken  from  the  Yagna,  forming
its  thirtieth  chapter.  It  has  been  translated  or,  I

But  the  fiie  represented  also  something  divine,  a  god  to  whom  honour
was  due,  and  thus  it  became  both  the  object  and  the  subject  of  the
sacrifice.*  Hence  the  idea  that  Agni  sacrifices  Mmyflfj  that  he  offers  a
sacrifice  to  himself,  and  likewise  that  he  offers  himself  as  a  sacrifice
This  led  to  many  later  legends,  see  Both,  'Kirukta,'  p.  142.  Agni  TO#
also  conceived  as  representing  the  rising  sun  and  the  wwon^  9f4  &W
that  point  of  view  sunrise  was  conceived  as  the  great  sacrifice  ia  ti&$toc&
the  light  serving,  lifce  a  sacrificial  flame,  for  tfee  gfcwy'WIwft'W&atta
eartft,  and,  at  the  same  time,  for  his  own  gkay.  Jffiaace  lastly  1fc»6
ooemogQiiic  ideas  by  which  the  <J*Uy  saxaiBce  %is  conceiva*  *u  *h«.
sacrifice  of  creation  and  as  the  glory  of  the  creator.

e.^Qi,  i.  p.  339.


166       LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RELIGION.

should  rather  say,  a  decipherment  of  it  has  been
attempted  by  several  scholars,  more  particularly  by
Professor  Spiegel  and  Professor  Haug*  It  has  also
been  referred  to  by  Bunsen  in  his  'God  in  History'
(fol.  i.  p.  277,  of  Misfl  winkworth's  translation),
and'l  may  quote  from  him  yhat  will  «erve  as  a
living,  though  imaginary,  background  for  this  striking


'Leffus  picture  to  ourselves,1  he  writes,  'one  of  the
holy  hills  dedicated  to  tlje  worship  of  fire,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  primeval  city  of  marvels  in
Central  Asia,  —  Bactra  "the  glorious,"  now  called
Balkh,  "the  mother  of  cities."  From  this  height
we1  look  down  in  imagination  over  the  elevated
plateau,  which  lies  nearly  3000  feet  above  the  level
of  the  sea,  sloping  downwards  toward  the  North  and
ending  in  a  sandy  desert,  which  does  not  even*  allow
the  stream  Bactrus  to  reach  the  neighbouring  Oxus.
On  the  southern  horizon,  the  last  spurs  of  the
Hindukush,  or,  as  the  historian  of  Alexander  terms
it,  the  Indian  Caucasus,  rear  their  lofty  peaks  5000
feet  high.  Out  of  those  hills,—  the  Paropamisus  or
Hindukush,  —  springs  the  chief  river  of  the  country,
the  Bactrus  or  Dehas,  which  near  the  city  divides
into  hundreds  of  Sanals,  making  tlffi  face  of  the
country  one  blooming  garden  of  richest  fruits.  To
this  point  converge  the  caravans,  which  travel  across
the  mountains  to  the  land  of  marvels,  or  bring
treasures  from  thence  .....  Thither,  on  occasion  of
the  peaceful  sacrifice  by  fire,  from  whose  ascending
flame  auguries  were  to  be  drawn,  Zarathustra  had
convened  the  nobles  of  the  land,  that  he  might  per-

f  •  Essays  on  the  Sacred  Language  of  the  Parsees/  i86a,  p.  141.


LECTUBE  IV.  167

form  *&  great  public  religious  act.  Arrived  there,
at  the  head  of  his  disciples,  the  seers  and  preachers,
lie  summons  the  princes  to  draw  nigh,  and  to  *choose
between  faith  and  superstition.'

I  give  the  translation  o£  the  hymn,  partly  after
Haug  (18^8),  partly  after  Spiegel  (1^59),  and  I*have
likewise  availed  myself  of  some  important  emenda-
tions proppsed  by  Dr.  Eubschm^nn1.  Yet,  I  must
confess  that,  in  numerous  passages,  my  translation  is
purely  tentative,  and  all  I  can  answer  for  is  the
general  tenour  of  the  hymn.

1.  'Now  I  shall  proclaim  to  all  who  have  come  to
listen,  the  praises  of  thee,  the  all-wise  Lord,  and  the
hymns  of  Vohumano  (the  good  spirit).    Wise  Asjia!
I  ask  that  (thy)  grace  may  appear  in  the  lights  of
heaven.

2.  «Hear  with  your  ears  what  is  best,  perceive  with
your  mind  what  is  pure,  so  that  every  man  may  for
himself  choose  his  tenets.  Before  the  great  doom,  may
the  wise  be  on  our  side !

3.  'Those  old  Spirits  who  are  twins,  each  with  his
own  work,  made  known2  what  is  good  and  what  is
evil  in  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds.     Those  who  are
good,  distinguished  between  the  two,  not  those  who
are  evil-doers.

4.  'When  these  two  Spirits  came  together,  they
made  'first  life  and  death,  so  that  there  should  be
at  last  the  most  wretched  life  for  the  bad,  but  for  the
good  blessedness.

1  '  "Em  ZoroastrischeB  Ijed,  mat  IttLckmcht  atrf  die  Tradition  fibe/seteb
tmd  erklart '  von  Dr.  H.  HubBchmann :  Miinchen,  18^2.

9  Hang  does  not  admit  the  causative  meaning  of  aervfttem,  bat
takes  it  in  the  sense  of  audiwrunt  or  auditi  sunt,  i.e.  they  were  known,
they  existed.


168       LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OT  BELKHON.

5.  *0f  these  two  Spirits  the  evil  one  chose  the
worstn  deeds  ;  the  kind  Spirit,  he  whose  garment  is
the  immovable  sky,  chose  what  is  right;  and  tyhey
also  who  faithfully  pleaje  Ahuramazda  by  good


6.  'Those  who  worshipped  the  Devas*  and  were
deceived,  did  not  rightly  distinguish  between  the
twq;  those  who  hwi  chosen  the  worst  Spirit  came
to  hola  counsel  together,  and  ran  to  Aeshma  in  order
to  afflict  the  life  of  man.

7.  'And  to  him  (the  good)  came  might,  and  with
wisdom  virtue;  and  the  everlasting  Armaiti  -herself

"  made  his  body  vigorous.    It  fell  to  thee  to  be  rich  by
he?  gifts.

8.  e  But  when  the  punishment  of  their  crimes  will
come,  and,  oh  Mazda,  thy  power  will^be  known  as
the  reward  of  piety  for  those  who  delivered  *{Druj)
falsehood  into  the  hand  of  truth  (Asha),

9.  «  Let  us  then  be  of  those  who  further  this  world  ;
oh  Ahuramazda,  oh  bliss-conferring  Ashal    Let  our
mind  be  there  where  wisdom  abides.

TO.  'Then  indeed  there  will  be  the  fall  of  the  per-
nicious Druj,  but  in  the  beautiful  abode  of  Vohumano,
of  Mazda  and  of  Asha,  will  be  gathered  for  ever  those
who  dwell  in  good  report,

n.  'Oh  men,  if  you  cling  to  these  commandments
which  Mazda  has  given,  .  ,  .  which  are  a  tornfent  to
the  wicked,  and  a  blessing  to  the  righteous,  then
there  wiU  be  victory  through  them.'

The  next  three  verses  are  taken  from  the  forty-
thinl  chapter  of  the  Ya9na1.


V  rifr.  3,  ed.  Brockhaus,  p.  I3o;  Spiegel,  'Yaai<p,  146;
Hang,  'Essays/  p.  150.  *


LECTURE  IV.  168

'I  ask  thee,  tell  me  the  truth,  0  Ahural  Who
was  from  the  beginning  the  father  of  the  pure  jrorld?
Who  has  macTe  a  path  for  the  sun  and  for  the  staarsl
Who  (but  thou)  makes  tia©  moon  to  increase  and  to
decrease?  That,  0  Mazda,  tod  other  things,  I. wish
to  know.

'I  ask  thee,  tell  me  the  truth,  O  Ahura!  Who
holds  the*earth  and  the  doucfe  that  they  do  •  not
fall?  Who  holds  the  sea  and  the  trees?  Wtto  has
given  swiftness  to  the  mnd  and  the  clouds?  Who
is  the  creator  of  the  good  spirits?

*  I  ask  thee,  tell  me  the  truth,  0  Ahura!  Whfi  has
made  the  kindly  light  and  the  darkness,  who  has
made  the  kindly  sleep  and  the  awaking?  Who  has
made  the  mornings,  the  noons,  and  the  nights,  they
who  remind  the  wise  of  his  duty2'

Whatever  the  difficulties  may  be,  and  they  are  no
doubt  most  formidable,  that  prevent  us  from  de-
ciphering aright  the  words  of  the  Zendavesta,  so
much  is  clear,  that  in  the  Bible  of  Zoroaster  every
man  is  called  upon  to  take  his  part  in  the  great
battle  between  Good  and  Evil  which  is  always  going
ons  and  is  assured  that  in  the  end  good  will  prevail.

What  shall^I  quote  from  Buddha?  for  we  have
so  much  left*of  his  sayings  ancl  his  parables  that
it  is  indeed  difficult  to  choose.  In  a  collection  of
his  sayings,  written  in  Pali — of  which  I  have  lately
published  a  translation1 — we  read:

i.  'All  that  we  are  is  the  result  of  whAfc  we  Jwra
thought:  it  is  founded  on  our  thoughts,  it  is  macte  up

1  The  Dhaminaj>%<3%  a  Collection  of  Verges,  bea$g  one  of  ike  canonical
books  of  the  Buddhists,  translated  from  P4U  by  F.  M*i  Mtiller,  In
'Sacred  Books  of  t&e  East,'  veL  z.  1881.


170      LECTTOES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELKHON.

of  our  thoughts.  If  a  man  speaks  or  acts  with  an
evil  ijiought,  pain  follows  him  as  the  wheel  follows
the  foot  of  the  ox  that  draws  the  cart. '

49.  c  As  the  bee  collects  toney  and  departs  without
ifijusing  the  flower,  or  its  colour,  or  scent,  so  let  a  sage
dwell  on  earth.  *

62.  '"These  sons  belong  to  me,  and  this  wealth
bel^Dgs  to  me,"  with  such  thoughts  a  fool  is  tor-
mented. He  himself  does  not  belong  to  himself,  how
much  less  sons  and  wealth  I

131,  122.  'Let  no  naan  think  lightly  of  evil,  saying
in  hlfe  heart,  It  will  not  come  nigh  unto  me.  Let  no
man  think  lightly  of  good,  saying  in  his  heart,  It  will
not  benefit  me.  Even  by  the  falling  of  water-drops
a  water-pot  is  filled.

173.  'He  whose  evil  deeds  are  covered  by  good
deeds,  brightens  up  this  world  like  the  moon*  when
she  rises  from  behind  the  clouds.

223.  'Let  a  man  overcome  anger  by  love,  evil  by
good,  the  greedy  by  liberality,  the  liar  by  truth1.

252.  'The  fault  of  others  is  easily  perceived,  but
that  of  oneself  is  difficult  to  perceive ;  a  man  winnows
his  ieighbour's  faults  like  chaff,  but  his  own  fault  he
bides,  as  a  cheat  hides  the  bad  die  from  the  player2.

264.  'Not  by  tonsure  does  an  undisciplined  man
who  speaks  falsehood  become  a  saint :  can  a  man  be
a  saint  *who  is  stiU  held  captive  by  desires  and
greediness  1

394.  'What  is  the  use  of  platted  hair,  0  fool1?

1  See  Rom.  rii.  ai .  'Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with
good,1

*  See  Matt  vii.  3.  'And  why  beholdest  thon  the  mote  that  is  in  thy
brother's  eye,  but  considerest  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye  ? ' .


LECTUBE  IV.  171

•what  of  the  raiment  of  goat-skins1}  Within  thee
there  is  ravening,  but  the  outside  thou  makest
clean1.'

In  no  religion  are  we^so  constantly  reminded  of
our  own  as  in  Buddhism,  and  yet  in  no  religiop.  l&s
man  been«drawn  aw#y  so  far  fronntruth  as  in  the
religion  of  Buddha.  Buddhism  and  Christianity  are
indeed  the«two  opposite  poles  wildi  regard  to  the  most
essential  points  of  religion:  Buddhism  igno&ag  all
feeling  of  dependence  on  &  higher  power9  and  there-
fore denying  the  very  existence  of  a  supreme  Deity;
Christianity  resting  entirely  on  a  belief  in  God  afc  the
Father,  in  the  Son  of  Man  as  the  Son  of  God,  and
making  all  men  children  of  God  by  faith  in  His  Eton.
Yet  between  the  language  of  Buddha  and  his  dis-
ciples and  thg  language  of  Christ  and  His  apostles
there  ^are  strange  coincidences.  Even  some  of  the
Buddhist  legends  and  parables  sound  as  if  taken
from  the  New  Testament,  though  we  know  that  many
of  them  existed  before  the  beginning  of  the  Christian
era.

Thus  we  read  of  Ananda,the  disciple  of  Buddha,  who,
after  a  long  walk  in  the  country,  meets  with  Matangt,
a  woman  of  the  low  caste  of  the  K&ndt&&$}  near  a
well,  and  ask?  her  for  some  water.  She  tells  him
what  she  is,  and  that  she  must  not  come  near  him.
But  he  replies,  *  My  sister,  I  ask  not  for  thy  caste  or
thy  family,  I  ask  only  for  a  draught  of  water/  She
afterwards  becomes  herself  a  disciple  of  Buddto*:

*  See  Lnke  xi.  39     'Now  do  ye  Pharisees  make  dean  the  outside  of
the  cup  and  the  platter;  but  your  inward  part  fr  full  of  ravening  and
wickedness/

*  Burnouf,  f  Introduction  fe  rHiatoire  du  Buddhigme,'  p.  305.


172       LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OP  RELIGION.

Sometimes  the  same  doctrine  which  in  the  New
Testament  occurs  in  the  simple  form  of  a  command-
ment, is  inculcated  by  the  Buddhists  in  the  form  of  a
pjrable.

A*Buddhist  priest,  we  read1,  was  preaching  to  the
multitudes  thaf  had  gathered  round  hiin.  In  the
crowd  there  was  a  king  whose  heart  was  full  of
sorrtre^  because  he  Bad  no  son  to  perpetuate  his  race.
While  he  was  listening,  the  preacher  said:

5  To  give  away  our  riches  is  considered  the  most
difficult  virtue  in  the  Vorld ;  he  who  gives  away  his
riches  is  like  a  man  who  gives  away  his  life :  for  our
very  life  seems  to  cling  to  our  riches.  But  Buddha,
when  his  mind  was  moved  by  pity,  gave  his  life,  like
grass,  for  the  sake  of  others ;  why  should  we  think  of
miserable  riches!  By  this  exalted  virtue,  Buddha,
when  he  was  freed  from  all  desires,  and  had  obtained
divine  knowledge,  attained  unto  Buddhahood.  There-
fore let  a  wise  man,  after  he  has  turned  away  his
desires  from  all  pleasures,  do  good  to  all  beings,  even
unto  sacrificing  his  own  life,  that  thus  he  may  attain
to  trjie  knowledge.

c Listen  to  me:  There  was  formerly  a  prince,  free
from  all  worldly  dq§ires.  Though  he  yas  young  and
handsome,  yet  he  left  his  palace,  and  embraced  the
Hfe  of  a,  travelling  ascetic.  This  aseetic  coming  one
day  to  the  house  of  a  merchant,  was  seen  by  his  young
wife,  and  she,  touched  by  the  loveliness  of  his  eyes,
exclaimed:  "How  was  this  hard  mode  of  life  em-
braced by  such  a  one  as  thou  art?  Blessed,  indeed,  is
that  woman  on  whom  thou  lookest  with  thy  lovely
eyes!"

i.  38,  i  wj.


LECTUBE  IV.  178

When  he  heard  this,  the  ascetic  plucked  out  one
eye,  placed  it  into  his  hand,  and  said  :  t(  Mothgr,  look
at  this  I  Take*  this  hideous  ball  of  flesh,  if  you  like  it.
The  other  eye  is  like  untft  this  ;  tell  me,  what  is  there
lovely  in  them?"'

The  prd&cher  continued  in  the  same  strain,  quoting
other  parables  to  the  same  purpose,  and  finished  by
inculcating  the  lesson  that  the  tme  sage  should  neither
care  for  riches,  nor  for  his  life,  and  that  he  shSuld  not
cling  to  his  wife  and  chjj.dren,  for  they  are  like  the
grass  that  is  cast  away.

It  is  impossible  to  read  such  parables  withoutHbeing
reminded  of  verses  of  the  Bible,  such  as  (Matt.  v.  29)  :
'  And  if  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out,  and  -cast
it  from  thee  l  ;'  and  again  (Matt.  six.  39)  :  *  Every  one
that  hath  forsaken  houses,  or  brethren,  or  sisters,  or
father,  or  mother,  or  wife,  or  children  ;'  and  again
(Luke  xii.  38):  'The  grass  which  is  to-day  in  the  field,
and  to-morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven/

In  the  same  collection,  the  Ocean  of  the  rivers  of
stories,  by  Somadeva  (vi.  37),  we  read  of  a  merchant
who  had  embraced  the  religion  of  Sugata,  and  showed
great  respect  to  the  Buddhist  monks.  His  yourijj  son,
however,  despised  his  father,  and  called  him  a  sinner.

1  Why  do  you  abuse  me?'  said^bhe  father.

The  son  replied  ;  '  You  have  abandoned  the  law  of
the  Vedas,  and  followed  a  new  law  which  is  no  law,
You  have  forsaken  the  Br&hmans,  and
fitonuwas.  What  is  the  use  of  the


1  In  the  Dialog  Greatitranm,  p.  I>  4^  it  ffl  toM  of  DenworiWiha*
hapqlled  out  bis  eyes,  (i)  because  they  prevented  5hJm  fcoto  mediation,
(2)  because  be  satt  &e  <frio&&l  50ttriBli,  ^tHSGatme  he  ooold  not  took  on


174      LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  EBLIGION.

which  is  followed  only  by  men  of  low  birth,  who  want
to  find  a  refuge  in  the  monasteries,  who  are  happy
when  they  have  thrown  away  their  foin  cloth,  and
shaved  off  every  hair  on  their  head;  who  eat  what-
ever rthey  please,  and  perform  neither  ablutions  nor
penances  1 '

The  father  replied:  *  There  are  different  forms  of
religion :  one  looks  to  another  world,  the  other  is  in-
tended for  the  masses.  But  surely  true  Brahmanism
also  consists  in  avoiding  of  passion,  in  truthfulness,
kindness  towards  all  Hbeings,  and  in  not  recklessly
breaEing  the  rules  of  caste.  Therefore  you  should  not
always  abuse  my  religion  which  grants  protection  to
all  "beings.,  For  surely  there  is  no  doubt  that  to  be
kind  cannot  be  unlawful,  and  I  know  no  other  kind-
ness  but  to  give  protection  to  all  living  beings.  There-
fore if  I  am  too  much  attached  to  my  religion  whose
object  is  love,  and  whose  end  is  deliverance,  what  sin
is  there  in  me,  0  child?1

However,  as  the  son  did  not  desist  from  his  abuse,
his  father  took  him  before  the  king,  and  the  king
ordered  him  to  be  executed.  He  granted  him  two
montRs  to  prepare  for  de^h,  At  the  end  of  the  two
months  the  son  wa^  brought  before  the  king  again,
and  when  the  king  saw  that  he  had  grown  thin  and
pale,  he  asked  for  the  reason.  The  culprit  repliejL  that
seeing  death  approach  nearer  and  nearer  every  day,  he
could  not  foiTyk  of  eating.  Then  the  Mng  told  him,
that  he  threatened  to  have  him  executed  in  order  that
he  Blight  know  the  anguish  that  every  creature  feels
at  the  approach  of  death,  and  that  he  might  learn  to
respect  a  religion  which  enforces  compassion  for  all
beings.  Having  known  the  fear  of  death,  he  ought


LECTURE  IV.  175

now  to  strive  after  spiritual  freedom,  and  never  again
abuse  his  father's  religion1.

The  son  waif  moved,  and  asked  the  king  how  he
could  obtain  spiritual  freedom.  The  king  hearing  that
there  was  a  fair  in  the  towns  ordered  the  young.msfii
to  take  a  TOssel  brimijil  of  oil,  and  to  «arry  it  through
the  streets  of  the  town  without  spilling  a  drop.  Two
executionens  with  drawn  swords  Were  to  walk  beltfnd
him,  and  at  the  first  drop  being  spilled,  they  -frere  to
cut  off  his  head.  When  tfre  young  man,  after  having
walked  through  all  the  streets  «f  the  city,  returned  to
the  king  without  having  spilled  one  drop,  the  king
said:  'Did  you  to-day,  while  walking  through  the
streets,  see  anybody  ?  *

The  young  man  replied :  e  My  thoughts  were  fixed
on  the  vessel,  and  I  saw  and  heard  nothing  else.9

Then  the  king  said :  '  Let  thy  thoughts  be  fixed  in
the  same  way  on  the  Highest  I  He  who  is  collected,
and  has  ceased  to  care  for  outward  life,  will  see  the
truth,  and  having  seen  the  truth,  will  not  be  caught
again  by  the  net  of  works.  Thus  I  have  taught  you
in  few  words  the  way  that  leads  to  spiritual  freedom/

According  to  Buddha,  the  motive  of  all  our  actions
should  be  pity,  or  what  we  should  call  love  for  our
neighbour,  and*  the  same  sentiment  is  inculcated  again
and  again  in  the  sacred  poetry  of  the  Brahmans.  Thus
we  reacl  in  the  Mah&bharata,  Udyoga-parva'cap.  38,
4  Thou  shalt  not  do  to  others  what  thou  likest  not  thy-
self. This  is  the  law  in  short,  everything  else  proceeds
from  passion/

M^Mbharata,  Amwasana-parva,  cap.  145 :

'Not  to  hurt  anybody  by  word,  thought*  or  deed,
10f.


176      LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGUON.

and  to  be  benevolent  and  charitable.  This  is  the
eterngl  law  of  the  good.'

Mah&bh&rata,  S&nti-parva,  cap.  i5o*

'Forgiveness  and  patience,  kindness  and  equable-
tffess,  truthfulness  and  •uprightness,  restraint  of  the
senses  and  energy,  gentleness  and  modesiy  and  gra-
vity, generosity  and  calmness,  contentment,  kindliness
of  ^peech,  and  absence  of  hatred  and  malice  —  these
together  make  up  self-control/

MaMhhftrata,  $Snti-parva,  cap.  no:

'Those  who  are  dreaded  by  none  and  who  them-
selves dread  no  one,  who  regard  all  mankind  like
themselves,  such  men  surmount  all  difficulties.'

•MaMbharata,  Anus&sana-parva,  cap.  144  :

'Those  who  always  treat  friends  and  foes  witfe  an
equal  heart,  being  friends  to  all,  such  men  shall  go  to
heaven1.'

And  as  in  Buddhism  and  Brahmanism,  so  again  in
the  writings  of  Confucius,  we  find  what  we  value  most
in  our  own  reHgion.  I  shall  quote  but  one  saying  of
the  Chinese  sage3:

'What  you  do  not  like  when  done  to  yourself,  do
notTlo  that  to  others/

One  passage  only  from  the  founder  of  the  second
religion  in  China,  from  Lao-tse  (cap.  2§)  a  :

'There  is  an  infinite  Being4,  which  existed  before
heaven  and  earth.


'the  Pandit,'  December,
1867.

*«Dr.  Legge's  '  Life  and  Teachings  of  Confucius,'  p  47.

8  (Le  Lira  de  la  Voie  et  de  la  Vertu,  compos*  dans  le  YI»  tiede
avant  1'ere  chre'tienne,  pax  Lao-tseu,'  iraduit  par  Stanislas  Julien,
Paris,  1842,  p.  91.

4  Stan.  Julien  traDBlatee,  fH  eat  UB  ^tre  oonfus/  and  lie  explains


LEOTtTEE  IY.  177

*  How  calm  it  is  1  how  free  1

e  It  lives  alone,  it  changes  not.

'  It  moves  evelywhere,  but  it  never  suffers.

'We  may  look  on  it  as  t£e  Mother  of  the  Universe.

CI,  I  know  not  its  nama

'In  ordei*to  give  it  a  title,  I  call  it  Tao  (the  Way).

*  When  I  try  to  give  it  a  name,  I  call  it  Great.
'After  calling  it  Great,  I  call  ii  Fugitive.
'After  calling  it  Fugitive,  I  call  it  Distant.

'After  calling  it  Distant,!  say  it  comes  back  to  me/
Need  I  say  that  Greek  and  Bpman  writers  abound
in  the  most  exalted  sentiments  on  religion  and  moral-
ity, in  spite  of  their  mythology  and  in  spite  of  their
idolatry  3  When  Plato  says  that  men  ought  to  strive
after  likeness  with  God,  do  you  think  that  he  thought
of  Jupiter,  or  Mars,  or  Mercury?  When  another  poet
exclaimed  that  the  conscience  is  a  god  for  all  men,
was  he  so  very  far  from  a  knowledge  of  the  true
God?

On  African  ground  the  hieroglyphic  and  hieratic
texts  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  show  the  same
strange  mixture  of  sublime  and  childish,  nay  worse
than  childish,  thoughts  to  which  all  students  of  *pri~
mitive  religion  have  become  accustomed,  nay  from
which  they  mtfst  learn  to  draw  Some  of  their  most
important  lessons.  It  is  easy  to  appreciate  what  is
simple,  "and  true,  and  beautiful  in  the  Sacred  Books
of  fiie  East,  but  those  who  are  satisfied  with 'such
gems,  itre  like  botanists  who  should  care  for


confus  according  to  the  Chinese  commentaries  by  *  ce  qu'fl  eat  impossible
de  distingue?  olairemeni.    Si  par  hazard  on  rn'mtewoge  sur  cef  6tre  (le
Tao),  ]e  re*pondi»f :  II  n'a  ni  commenoement,  si  fin,'  etc.  See,  however,
Dr.  J.  Legge,  'The  Religions  of  CMj%'  1880,  p.  313.
If


178      LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  &ELKHON.

etad  lilies  only,  and  in  whose  eyes  the  thorns  and
brier*  are  mere  weeds  and  rubbish.  This  is  not  the
true  spirit  in  which  the  natural  development  either
of  the  flowers  of  the  earth  or  of  the  products  of  the
mind  can  be  studied,  and  it  is  surprising  to  see  how
long  it  takes  before  the  students  of  antimfpology  will
learn  that  one  simple  lesson.

in  a  papyrus  at  Ttfrin1,  the  following  "wf>rds  are  put
into  tffe  mouth  of  'the  almighty  God,  tie  self-existent,
who  made  heaven  and  easth,  the  waters,  the  breaths
of  life,  fire,  the  gods*  men,  animals,  cattle,  reptiles,
bircfej  fishes,  kings,  men  and  gods.'  ...  *I  am  the
maker  of  heaven  and  of  the  earth,  I  raise  its  moun-
tains and  the  creatures  which  are  upon  it;  I  make  the
waters,  and  the  Mehura  comes  into  being.  ...  I  am
the  maker  of  heaven,  and  of  the  mysteries  of  the  two-
fold horizon.  It  is  I  who  have  given  to  all  the  gods
the  soul  which  is  within  them.  When  I  open  my
eyes,  there  is  light ;  when  I  close  them,  there  is  dark-
ness, . , .  I  make  the  hours,  and  the  hours  come  into
existence.  I  am  Chepera  in  the  morning,  IU  at  noon,
Tmu  in  the  evening.'

Jjid  again :  ( Kail  to  thee,  0  Ptah-tanu,  great  god
who  concealeth  his  form, . . .  thou  art  watching  when
at  rest;  the  father  of  all  fathers  and'  uf  all  gods. . . .
Watcher,  who  traversest  the  endless  ages  of  eternity.
The  heaven  was  yet  uncreated,  uncreated  was  the
earth"  the  water  flowed  not;  thou  hast  put  together
the  earth,  thou  hast  united  thy  limbs,  thou  hast  reck-
oned thy  members;  what  thou  hast  found  apart,  thou
hast  put  into  its  place ;  O  God,  architect  of  the  world,
thou  art  without  a  father,  begotten  by  thine  own
1  Le  Page  Eenouf, '  Hibbert  Lectures,'  p.  aai.


LEOTUBE  IV.  179

blessing;  thou  art  without  a  mother,  being  born
through  repetition  of  thyself.  Thou  drivest  aw&y  the
darkness  by  the  beams  of  thine  eyes.  Thou  ascendeat
into  the  zenith  of  heaven,  Ind  thou  comest  down  eve/)
as  thou  hast  risen.  When  tfiou  art  a  dweller  in*  the
infernal  world,  thy  knees  are  above*  the  earth,  and
thine  head  is  in  the  upper  sky.  Thou  sustainest  the
substances  vvhich  thou  hast  made.  It  is  by  thige  <?wn
strength  that  thou  mo  vest;  thou  art  raised  up  by  the
might  of  thine  own  arms.  .". .  The  roaring  of  thy  voice
is  in  the  cloud;  thy  breath  is  So.  the  mountain-^ops ;
the  waters  of  the  inundation  cover  the  lofty  trees  of
every  region.  .  .  .  Heaven  and  earth  obey  the  com-
mands which  thou  hast  given;  they  travel  by  the
road  which  thou  hast  laid  down  for  them,  they  trans-
gress not  the -path  which  thou  hast  prescribed  to
them,  and  which  thou  hast  opened  to  them. .  . .  Thou
restest,  and  it  is  night ;  when  thine  eyes  shine  forth,
we  are  illuminated. ...  0  let  us  give  glory  to  the  God
who  hath  raised  the  sky,  and  who  causeth  his  disk  to
float  over  the  bosom  of  Nut,  who  hath  made  the  gods
and  men  and  all  their  generations,  who  hath  madfc  all
land  and  countries  And  the  great  sea,  in  his  name  of
"Let-the-earth-te." . . .  The  babe  which  is  brought  forth
daily,  the  ancient  one  who  traverses  every  path,  the
height  Tphich  cannot  be  attained/

The  following  are  extracts  from  a  hymn  addressed
to  Amon,  the  great  divinity  of  Thebes,  preferrod  m
the  Museum  at  Bulak :

1  Hail  to  thee,  Amon  R&,  Lord  of  -the  thrones  of  &e
earth — the  ancient  of  heaven,  the  oldest  of  the  earth,
Lord  of  all  existences,  the  support  of  things;  the  sup-
port of  all  things.  The  One  in  his  works,  single

N  %


180     LECTURES  OK  THE  SCIENCE  OP  BELIGlON.

among  the  gods ;  the  beautiful  bull  of  the  cycle  of  the
gods,*chief  of  all  the  gods ;  Lord  of  Jjruth,  father  of
ihe  gods ;  maker  of  men,  creator  of  beasts,  maker  of
l^rbs,  feeder  of  cattle,  goc€  power  begotten  of  Ptah
,  .  ."to  whom  the  gods  give  honour  . . .  Most  glorious
one,  Lord  of  teAor,  chief  maker*  of  the  ea&h  after  his
image,  how  great  are  his  thoughts  above  every  god !
Hsfil  i$  thee,  B&,  Lorcl  of  law,  whose  shrine  is  hidden,
Lord  of  the  gods ;  Chepra  in  his  boat,  at  whose  com-
mand the  gods  were  madfc.  Atmu,  maker  of  men,
.  .  ,m  giving  them  life  * .  .  .  listening  to  the  poor  who
is  in  distress,  gentle  of  heart  when  one  cries  to  him
.  v .  Lord  of  wisdom,  whose  precepts  are  wise,  at
whose  pleasure  the  Nile  overflows:  Lord  of  mercy,
most  loving,  at  whose  coming  men  live:  opener  of
every  eye,  proceeding  from  the  firmament,  causer  of
pleasure  and  light;  at  whose  goodness  the  gods  re-
joice ;  their  hearts  revived  when  they  see  him.  0  B£,
adored  in  Thebes,  high  crowned  in  the  house  of  the
obelisk  (EeUopolis),  sovereign  of  life,  health,  and
strength,  sovereign  Lord  of  all  the  gods ;  who  art
visile  in  the  midst  of  the  horizon,  ruler  of  the  past
generations  and  the  nether  woild;  whose  name  is
hidden  from  his  creatures  .  .  .  Hail  io  thee  the  one,
alone  with  many  hands,  lying  awake  while  all  men
sleep,  tip  seek  out  the  good  of  his  creatures,  Amon,
sustainer  of  all  things.  Tmu  and  Horus  of  the
horizon  pay  homage  to  thee  in  jell  their  words.  Sa-
lutation to  thee,  because  thou  abidest  in  us,  adoration
tcfthee  because  thou  hast  created  us/

Are  there  many  prayers  uttered  by  kings  like  this
of  King  Barneses  II?

Who  then  art  thou,  0  my  father  Amonl    Doth  a


LECTURE  IV.  181

father  forget  his  son  1  Surely  a  wretched  lot  awaiteth
him  who  opposeth  thy  will ;  but  blessed  is  hg  who
knoweth  thee,  for  thy  deeds  proceed  from  a  heart  full
of  love.  I  call  upon  thees  f)  my  father  Amon!  behold
me  in  the  midst  of  many  peoples,  unknown  to  me.;  &l
nations  ar8  united  against  me,  and  I  am  alone ;  no
other  is  with  me.  My  many  soldiers  have  abandoned
me,  none  of  my  horsemen  hath?  looked  towards  me ;
and  when  I  called  them,  none  hath  listened*.*)  my
voice.  But  I  believe  that»Anion  is  worth  more  to  me
than  a  million  of  soldiers,  than  a  hundred  thousand
horsemen,  and  ten  thousands  of  brothers  and  %ons,
even  were  they  all  gathered  together.  The  work  of
many  men  is  nought ;  Amon  will  prevail  over  them.'

The  following  are  a  few  passages  translated  from
the  book  of  ftahhotep,  which  has  been  called  e  ihe
most  tacient  book  of  the  world/  and  would  indeed
have  a  right  to  that  title  if,  as  we  are  told,  the  Paris
MS.  containing  it  was  written  centuries  before  Moses
was  born,  while  the  author  lived  during  the  reign  of
King  Assa  Tatkara  of  the  fifth  dynasty1 :

slf  thou  art  a  wise  man,  bring  up  thy  son  in  the
love  of  God.'

'God  loveth  the  obedient  and  hateth  the  dis-
obedient.'

'  A  good  son  is  spoken  of  as  the  gift  of  God/

In  the  Maxims  of  Ani  we  read :

*  The  sanctuary  of  God  abhors '  (noisy  manJ&efca-
tionsl).  Pray  humbly  with  a  loving  heart
words  of  which  are  uttered  in  secret.  He  will
tect  thee  in  thine  affairs  ;  He  will  listen  to  thy  words.
He  will  accept  thine  offerings/

1  Le  Page  Eenouf,  'Hibbert  I^oturefi/  p.  76.


182      LEOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RELIGION.

'  The  God  of  the  world  is  in  the  light  above  the
firmament.  His  emblems  are  upon  earth ;  it  is  to
them,  that  worship  is  rendered  daily.'

In  conclusion,  I  add  a  few  sayings  from  funeral
nfonuments,  put  into  thep  mouth  of  the  departed 3 :

'Not  a  little  «ihild  did  I  injiye.  Not  a*widow  did
I  oppress.  Not  a  herdsman  did  I  ill-treat.  There
wa4  no  beggar  in  my  days ;  no  one  stafved  in  my
time.  Sjid  when  the  years  of  famine  came,  I  ploughed
all  the  lands  of  the  province  to  its  northern  and
southern  boundaries,  feeding  its  inhabitants  and  pro-
viding their  food.  There  was  no  starving  person  in
it,  and  I  made  the  widow  as  though  she  possessed  a
husband.'

In  another  inscription  the  departed  says :

*  Doing  that  which  is  right,  and  hating  that  which
is  wrong,  I  was  bread  to  the  hungry,  water  to  the
thirsty,  clothing  to  the  naked,  a  refuge  to  him  that
was  in  want ;  that  which  I  did  to  him,  the  great  God
hath  done  to  me ! '

It  is  difficult  to  stop  quoting.  With  every  year
new  treasures  are  brought  to  light  from  the  ancient
literature  of  Egypt,  and  I  doubt  net  that  in  time,  par-
ticularly if  the  hieroglyphic  documents  continue  to  be
deciphered  in  a  truly  scholarlike  spirit,*Egypt  will  be-
come one  of  the  richest  mines  to  the  student  of  religion.

But  wfc  must  look  now  at  sqme  at  least  of  the  black
inhabitants  of  Africa,  I  mean  those  whose  language  and
religion  have  been  carefully  studied  and  described  to
us  .by  trustworthy  men,  such  as  Bishop  Oolenso,
Bishop  Callaway,  Dr.  Bleek,  Dr.  Theophilus  Hahn;
more  partidilarly  the  Bdntu  tribes,  occupying  the
*  Le  Page  Beaouf,  'Bibbert  Lectures,*  p.  72.


LECTURE  IT.  183

Eastern  coast  from  beyond  the  Equator  to  the  Gape.
What  darkness  there  is  at  present  ^among  these  races
we  have  learnt'from  the  history  of  the  last  wars,  but
we  should  not  forget  howjiighly  some  of  these  races,
particularly  the  Zulus,  are. spoken  of  by  English
missionaries.  If  the  number  of  conve/ts  among  them
is  as  yet  small,  perhaps  it  is  well  that  it  should  be  so.
Bishop  Callaway  tells  us  that.one  lad,  the  first  he
baptized  in  Natal,  told  him  that  his  mother,  T*O  wit-
nessed the  battle  between  the  English  troops  under
Cathcart  and  the  Basutos",  an^  observed  the  terrible
effect  of  our  artillery,  was  so  much  struck  witk  the
power  displayed,  that  she  concluded  that  they  who
could  shake  the  very  earth,  could  not  be  mistaken  in
anything,  and  advised  her  son  to  accept  their  religion.
It  is  only  the^  old  story,  that  truth  is  on  the  side  of
the  big  battalions.  But  the  same  Bishop  is  evidently
gaining  influence  by  better  means,  and  chiefly  by
schools  which,  as  he  truly  says,  'must  be  the  seed-bed
of  the  Church,  because  Christianity  flourishes  with
more  vigour  in  the  cultivated  than  in  the  uncultivated
mind/  One  of  the  Zulus,  whose  confidence  Dr.  Calla-
way  had  gained,  sajid  to  him l :

'We  did  not  hear  first  from  the  white  men  nuuuu
the  King  wh5  is  above.  In  sufhmer-time,  when  it
thunders,  we  say,  "The  King  is  playing."  And  if
there  is  one  who  is  afraid,  the  elder  people  say  to  him,
"  It  is  nothing  but  fear.'  What  thing  belonging^  tba
King  have  you  eaten1? " '

Another  very  old  man  stated  (p.  £0)5  *
were  children,  it  was  said ;  "  The  King  is  i


1  Br,  OaJteway,  'tfaMBnkulu/p,  79*


184      LECTTJBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RELIGION.

they  used  to  point  to  the  King  on  high ;  we  did  not
hear  Jhis  name ;  we  heard  only  that  the  King  is  on
high.  We  heard  it  said  that  the  creator  of  the  world
(Umdabuko)  is  the  King  wfeich  is  above" '  (p.  60).

A, very  old  woman  When  examined  by  one  of  her
own  countrymea,  said  (p.  53)-  When  we  rifreak  of  the
origin  of  corn,  asking,  "Whence  came  this?"  the  old
people  said,  "It  came*from  the  creator  whC  created  all
things^  but  we  do  not  know  him."  When  we  asked
continually,  "  Where  is  the*creator?  for  our  chiefs  we
see,"  the  old  men  defied,  saying, "  And  those  chiefs,
too,  Whom  we  see,  they  were  created  by  the  creator."
And  when  we  asked,  "Where  is  he?  for  he  is  not
visible  at  all;  where  is  he  then?"  we  heard  our  fathers
pointing  towards  heaven,  and  saying,  *  The  Creator  of
all  things  is  in  heaven.  And  there  is  a  nation  of
people  there,  too  . . . ."  It  used  to  be  said  constantly,
"  He  is  the  King  of  kings."  Also  when  we  heard  it
said  that  the  heaven  had  eaten  the  cattle  at  such  a
village  (i.e.  when  the  lightning  had  struck  them),  we
said,  "The  King  has  taken  the  cattle  from  such  a
village."  And  when  it  thundered  the  people  took
courage  by  saying,  " The  "K^g  is  playing/' '

Again,  another  very  old  man,  belonging  to  the
Amantanja  tribe,  who  showed  four  wounds,  and  whose
people  had  been  scattered  by  the  armies  of  Utshaka,
said  (p.  J6) :  'The  old  faith  of  our  forefathers  was
this ;  they  said, "  There  is  Unkulunkulu,  who  is  a  man,
who  is  of  the  earth."  And  they  used  to  say,  "  There
is  a  king  in  heaven."  When  it  hailed,  and  thundered,
they  said,  "  The  king  is  arming ;  he  will  cause  it  to
hail;  put  things"in  order."  .,  As  to  the  source  of  being
I  know  that  only  which  is  in  heaven  (p.  59).  Tha


LEOTUBB  IV,  185

ancient  men  said,  "  The  source  of  being  (Umdabuko)
is  above,  which  gives  life  to  men."  ....  It  was  *aid  at
first,  the  rain  came  from  the  King,  and  that  the  sun
camQ  from  him,  and  the»moon  which  gives  a  white
light  during  the  night,  that  *nen  may  go  and  npt  Ibe
injured.

'If  lightning  struck  cattle,  the  people  were  not  dis-
tressed. It  used  to  be  said  (jft  60):  "The  Bang. has
slaughtered  for  himself  among  his  own  food?  Is  it
yours  1  Is  it  not  the  King's  ?  He  is  hungry ;  he  killa
for  himself."  If  a  village  is  stwick  by  lightning,  and  a
cow  is  killed,  it  is  said,  "This  village  will  be*pros-
perous."  If  a  man  is  struck  and  dies,  it  is  said,  "  The
King  has  found  fault  with  him."'

Another  name  of  the  Creator  is  Itongo,  the  Spirit,
and  this  is  fte  account  given  by  a  native  (p.  94) :
'  Whdh  he  says  Itongo,  he  is  not  speaking  of  a  man
who  has  died  and  risen  again ;  he  is  speaking  of  the
Up-bearer  of  the  earth,  which  supports  men  and  cattle.
The  Up-bearer  is  the  earth  by  which  we  live;  and
there  is  the  Up-bearer  of  the  earth  by  which  we  live,
and  without  which  we  could  not  be,  and  by  which
we  are.'

Thus  we  find  among  a  people  who  were  said  to  be
without  any  religious  life,  without  any  idea  of  a  Divine
power,  that  some  of  the  most  essential  elements  of
religion  are  fully  developed, — a  belief  in  an*  invisible
God,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  residing  in  heaven,
sending  rain  and  hail  and  thunder,  punishing  tho
wicked,  and  claiming  his  sacrifice  from  among  the
cattle  on  a  thousand  hills.  This  shows  how  careful-
we  should  be  before  we  accept  purely  negative  evi-
dence on  the  religion  or  the  absence  of  all  religion


186       LBOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGUON.

among  savage  tribes.  Suppose  an  educated  native  of
India  or  China  were  to  appear  suddenly  in  the  Black
country,  and  address  some  questions  inpscarcely  intel-
ligible English1  to  a  dust-begrimed  coal-heaver,  and
ask  him  what  his  ancestors  had  told  him  about  the
source  of  being  -*-  what  account  ^jcould  he  give  to  his
countrymen  of  the  state  of  religious  faith  in  England,
if  all  his  information  had  been  gathered  from  the
answer?  which  he  would  be  likely  to  receive  from
such  witnesses!  Perhaps  fte  would  never  hear  the
name  of  God  except  in  a,  *  God  bless  you ! '  which  people
uttered  in  England  as  well  as  in  Germany  and  many
other  countries,  when  any  one  present  sneezed.  It  was
in  such  an  exclamation  that  Dr.  Callaway  first  dis-
covered one  of  the  names  of  the  deity  among  the  Zulus.
Asking  an  old  man  who  lived  at  the  mission  station,
whether  the  word  Utik#o  had  come  into  use  after  the
arrival  of  the  missionaries,  he  received  the  answer
(p.  64) :  *  No ;  the  word  TJtik#o  is  not  a  word  we  learnt
from  the  English;  it  is  an  old  word  of  our  own.  It
used  to  be  always  said  when  a  man  sneezes,  "  May
Utikajo  ever  regard  me  with  favour." '  This  Utikajo
was  (Supposed  to  have  been  conceal^!  by  Unkulunkulu
(p.  67),  and  to  be  seen  by  no  one.  Men  saw  Unkulun-
kulu, and  said  that*he  was  the  creator*  of  all  things
(Umveli^angi) ;  they  said  this,  because  they  did  not
see  Him  who  madeTJnkulunkulu ;  they  therefore  said
that  Tfokulunkulu  was  God.
After  these  crude  fragments  picked  up  among  the

1  P.  67.  '  On  the  arrival  of  the  English  in  this  land  of  ours,  the
first  who  came  was  a  missionary  named  Uyegana.  On  his  arrival  he
taught  the  people,  but  they  did  not  understand  what  he  said  ....  and
although  he  did  not  understand  the  people's  language,  he  jabbered
constantly  to  the  people,  and  they  could  not  understand  what  he  said.'


LECTURE  IV.  187

uncultured  races  of  Africa,  who  have  not  yet  arrived  at
any  positive  form  of  faith,  let  us  now,  in  conclusion,
look  at  a  few  specimens  of  religious  thought,  emanat-
ing from  those  who  no  hng&r  hold  to  any  positive
form  of  faith.  I  take  as  theif  representative  Faiai,  tfie
"brother  of  ^.bulfazl,  one  of  that  small»company  at  the
Court  of  the  Emperor  Akbar,  who,  after  a  comparative
study  of  thfc  religions  of  the  world,  had  renounced*  the
religion  of  Mohammad,  and  for  whom,  as  we  shall  see1,
the  orthodox  Bad^oni  could  not  invent  invective  strong
enough  to  express  his  horror.  •Faizi  was  one  of  those
men  whom  their  contemporaries  call  heretics  and*blas-
phemers,  but  whom  posterity  often  calls  saints  and
martyrs,  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the  light  of  the  world ;  a
man  of  real  devotion,  real  love  for  his  fellow-creatures,
real  faith  in  God,  the  Unknown  God,  whom  we  ignor-
antly  Vorship,  whom  no  human  thought  and  no  human
language  can  declare,  and  whose  altar, — the  same  that
St.  Paul  saw  at  Athens— will  remain  standing  for  ever
in  the  hearts  of  all  true  believers.

*  Take  Faizi's  Df wan  to  bear  witness  to  the  wonder-
ful speeches  of  a  free-thinker  who  belongs  to  a  thousand
sects.

CI  have  be&ome  dust,  but  from  the  odour  of  my
grave,  people  shall  know  that  man  rises  from  such
dust,

'They  may  know  Faizi's2  end  from  the  beginning:
wiiihout  an  equal  he  goes  from  the  world,  aad  -wl&ptife
an  equal  he  rises.

*  In.  the  assembly  of  the  day  of  resTjirection,  when
past  things  shall  be  forgiven,  the  gins  of  the  Kabbah

i  a*4  p.  a  i  s,  a  Faizi  means  also  the  heart.


188      LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  Otf  RELIGION.

will  be  forgiven  for  the  sake  of  the  dust  of  Christian
churches1.

1 0  Thou  who  existest  from  eternity  and  abidest  for
ever,  sight  cannot  bear  Thy  light,  praise  cannot  ex-
press. Thy  perfection ;

f  Thy  light  melts  the  understanding,  and*Thy  glory
baffles  wisdom ;  to  think  of  Thee  destroys  reason.  Thy
essence  confounds  thdught.

'Thy" holiness  pronounces  that  the  blood-drops  of
human  meditation  are  shed,  in  vain  in  search  of  Thy
knowledge :  human  understanding  is  but  an  atom  of
dust."

*  Thy  jealousy,  the  guard  of  Thy  door,  stuns  human
thought  by  a  blow  in  the  face,  and  gives  human
ignorance  a  slap  on  the  nape  of  the  neck.

'Science  is  like  blinding  sand  of  the* desert  on  the
road  to  Thy  perfection.  The  town  of  literature  is  a
mere  hamlet  compared  with  the  world  of  Thy  know-
ledge. '

'My  foot  has  no  power  to  travel  on  this  path  which
misleads  sages ;  I  have  no  power  to  bear  the  odour  of
the  wine,  it  confounds  my  mind.

f  Man's  so-called  foresight  and  guiding  reason  wander
about  bewildered  in  the  city  of  Thy  glojy.

*  Human  knowledge  and  thought  combined  can  only
spell  the  first  letter  of  the  alphabet  "of  Thy  love.

'Mere  beginners  and  such  as  are  far  advanced  in
knowledge  are  both  eager  for  union  with  Thee;  but


1  The  sins  of  Islam  are  as  worthless  as  the  dust  of  Christianity.  On
{he  day  of  resurrection,  both  Muhammadanfl  and  Christiana  -will  see  the
vanity  of  their  religious  doctrines  Men  fight  about  religion  on  earth ;
in  heaven  they  shall  find  out  that  there  is  only  one  true  religion,  the
worship  of  God's  spirit.


LECTUBE  IV,  189

the  beginners  are  tattlers,  and  those  that  are  advanced
are  triflers.

'Each  brain1  is  full  of  thought  of  grasping  Thee;
the  brow  of  Plato  even  bjtrned  with  the  fever-heat  of
this  hopeless  thought.

'How  shall  a  thoughtless  man  Ijke  me  succeed,
when  Thy  jealousy  strikes  a  dagger  into  the  liver  of
saints1?

'  0  that  Thy  grace  would  cleanse  my  brauT;  for  if
not,  my  restlessness  will  end  in  madness.

'To  bow  down  the  head  upon  the  dust  of  Thy
threshold  and  then  to  look  up,  is  neither  rigfet  in
faith,  nor  permitted  by  truth.'


*  0  man,  tfcou  coin  bearing  the  double  stamp  of
body  and  spirit,  I  do  not  know  what  thy  nature  is ;
for  thou  art  higher  than  heaven  and  lower  than
earth.

'  Thy  frame  contains  the  image  of  the  heavenly  and
the  lower  regions ;  be  either  heavenly  or  earthly,  thou
art  at  liberty  to  choose.

'Do  not  act  against  thy  reason,  for  it  is  a  trust-
worthy counsellor;  put  not  thy  heart  on  illusions,  for
the  heart  is  allying  fool.

*  If  thou  wishest  to  understand  the  secret  meaning
of  theVords,  "to  prefer  the  welfare  of  othdts  to  thy
own,"  treat  thyself  with  poison,  and  others  with
sugar.

*  Accept  misfortune  with  a  joyful  look,  if  thou  art
in  the  service  of  Him  whom  people  serve.

*  Plunged  into  the  wisdom  of  Greece,  my  mind  ros<
again  from  the  deep  in  the  land  of  Ind ;  be  thou  as  i


190      LEOT0EES  Off  THE  SCJIENCE  OF  BBLKHOff,

thou  hadst  fallen  into  this  deep  abyss  (of  my  know-
ledge,^ e.  learn  of  me).

'If  people  would  withdraw  the  veil"  from  the  face
of  my  knowledge,  they  would  find  that  what  those
wfto  are  far  advanced  in*  knowledge  call  certainty,  is
with  me  the  faintest  dawn  of  thought.

*If  people  would  take  the  screen  from  the  eye  of
my  ^knowledge,  they  <would  find  that  what  is  reve-
lation (ecstatic  knowledge)  for  the  wise,  is  but  drunken
madness  for  me.  n

€If  I  were  to  bring0  forth  what  is  in  my  mind,  I
wonder  whether  the  spirit  of  the  age  could  bear  it.

'My  vessel  does  not  require  the  wine  of  the  friend-
ship of  time;  my  own  blood  is  the  basis  of  the  wine
of  my  enthusiasm/

I  wish  we  could  explore  together  in  this  spirit  the
ancient  religions  of  mankind,  for  I  feel  convinced  that
the  more  we  know  of  them,  the  more  we  shall  see
that  there  is  not  one  which  is  entirely  false;  nay,
that  in  one  sense  every  religion  was  a  true  religion,
being  the  only  religion  which  was  possible  at  the  time,
whicte  was  compatible  with  the  language,  the  thoughts,
and  the  sentiments  of  each  generation,  which  was
appropriate  to  the  8,ge  of  the  world.  *I  know  full
well  the  objections  that  will  be  made  to  this.  Was
the  worship  of  Moloch,  it  will  be  said,  a  true  religion
when  they  burnt  their  sons  and  their  daughters  in
the  fire  to  their  gods  ?  Was  the  worship  of  Mylitta,
or  is  the  worship  of  K&H  a  true  religion,  when  within
the  sanctuary  of  their  temples  they  committed  abo*
minataons  that  must  be  nameless?  Was  the  teaching
of  Buddha  a  true  religion,  when  men  were  asked  to


LECTTOB  IV.  191

believe  that  the  highest  reward  of  virtue  and  medi-
tation consisted  in  a  complete  annihilation  jpf  the
soul?

Such  arguments  may  toll  in  party  warfare,  though
even  there  they  have  provoked  fearful  retaliation.
Can  that*be  a  trae.reUgion,  it  ha*  been  answered,
which  consigned  men  of  holy  innocence  to  the  flames,
because  they  held  that  the  Son  was  like  unto,  the
Father,  but  not  the  same  as  the  Father,  or  l>eeause
they  would  not  worship  Jbhe  Virgin  and  the  Saints?
Can  that  be  a  true  religion  which  screened  the  same
nameless  crimes  behind  the  sacred  walls  of  nftnas-
teries?  Can  that  be  a  true  religion  which  taught  the
eternity  of  punishment  without  any  hope  of  pardon
or  salvation  for  the  sinner,  not  penitent  in  proper
time?

Feeble  who  judge  of  religions  in  that  spirit  will
never  understand  their  real  purport,  will  never  reach
their  sacred  springs.  These  are  the  excrescences,  the
inevitable  excrescences  of  all  religions.  We  might  as
well  judge  of  the  health  of  a  people  from  its  hospitals,
or  of  its  morality  from  its  prisons.  If  we  want  to
judge  of  a  religion*  we  must  try  to  study  it  as  touch
as  possible  in1  the  mind  of  its  founder;  and  when  thai*
is  impossible,*as  it  is  but  too  offen,  try  to  find  it  in
the  lonely  chamber  and  the  sick-room,  rather  than  in
the  colleges  of  augurs  and  the  councils  of  priests.

If  we  do  this,  and  if  we  bear  in  mind
must  accommodate  itself  to  the  intellaataal
of  those  whom  it  is  to  influence,  we  shall  fee  surprised,
to  find  much  of  true  religion  where  we  only  ex-
pected degrading  superstition  or  an 'absurd  worship
of  idols.


192      LEOTUEES  ON  THE  SCIENOE  OF  BELIGUON.

The  intention  of  religion,  wherever  we  meet  it,  is
alwayi  holy.  However  imperfect,  however  childish  a
religion  may  be,  it  always  places  the  human  soul  in
the  presence  of  God;  and  however  imperfect  and  how-
e^far  ghildish  the  conception  of  God  may  be,  it  always
represents  the  highest  ideal  of  perfection  <which  the
human  soul,  for  the  time  being,  can  reach  and  grasp.
Keljgion  therefore  places  the  human  sou!4n  the  pre-
sence o?  its  highest  ideal,  it  lifts  it  above  the  level  of
ordinary  goodness,  and  produces  at  least  a  yearning
after  a  higher  and  better  life — a  life  in  the  light  of
God.«

The  expression  that  is  given  to  these  early  manifes-
tations of  religious  sentiment  is  no  doubt  frequently
childish :  it  may  be  irreverent  or  even  repulsive.  But
has  not  every  father  to  learn  the  lesson  gf  a  charitable
interpretation  in  watching  the  first  stammerings  of
religion  in  his  children?  Why,  then,  should  people
find  it  so  difficult  to  learn  the  same  lesson  in  the
ancient  history  of  the  world,  and  to  judge  in  the  same
spirit  the  religious  utterances  of  the  childhood  of  the
human, race?  Who  does  not  recollect  the  startling  and
seemingly  irreverent  questionings*  of  children  about
God,  and  who  does  not  know  how  perfectly  guiltless
the  child's  mind  is  <K  real  irreverence?  Such  outbursts
of  infantine  religion  hardly  bear  repeating.  I  shall
only  mefltion  one  instance.  I  well  recollect  tne  dis-
may ^rhich  was  created  by  a  child  exclaiming,  e  Oh !
I  wish  there  was  at  least  one  room  in  the  house  where
I  could  play  alone,  and  where  God  could  not  see  me !'
People  who  heard  it  were  shocked ;  but  to  my  mind,
I  confess,  this  *  childish  exclamation  sounded  more
trutbfiil  and  wonderful  than  even  the  Psalm  of  David,


LBOTUBB  IV.  19&

'Whither  shall  I  go  from  Thy  Spirit?   or  whither
shall  I  flee  from  Thy  presence  V

It  is  the  same  with  the  childish  language  of  ancient
religion.  We  say  very  calmly  that  God  is  omniscient
and  omnipresent.  Heslod  speaks  of  the  sun,  as  ike
eye  of  Zeug,  that  sees  and  perceives  everything.  *Ara-
tus  wrote,  e  Full  of  £eus  are  all*  the"  streets,  all  the
markets  of^men ;  full  of  Him  js  the  sea  and  the  har-
bours ....  and  we  are  also  His  offspring/

A  Vedic  poet,  though  of  more  modern  date  than  the
one  I  quoted  before,  speaking  of  the  same  Varuna
whom  Vasishtfia  invoked,  says:  *The  great  lord  of
these  worlds  sees  as  if  he  were  near.  If  a  man  thinks
he  is  walking  by  stealth,  Ivhe  gods  know  it  all.  If  a
man  stands  or  walks  or  rides,  if  he  goes  to  lie  down
or  to  get  up,  what  two  people  sitting  together  whisper,
King  Yaruwa  \nows  it,  he  is  there  as  a  third.  This
earth,  too,  belongs  to  Varuna,  the  king,  and  this  wide
sky  with  its  ends  far  apart.  The  two  seas  (the  sky
and  the  ocean)  are  Varufta's  loins;  he  is  aJso  3p$$aM»d
in  this  small  drop  of  water.  He  who  should  ft&e  far
beyond  the  sky,  even  he  would  not  be  rid  of  Varuna,
the  king.  His  spies  proceed  from  heaven  towards
this  world;  with  thousand  eyes  they  overlook  this
earth.  King  ^aruwa  sees  all  thss,  what  is  between
heaven  and  earth,  and  what  is  beyond.  He  has
counted  the  twinklings  of  our  eyes.  As  <a  player
throws  down  the  dice,  he  settles  all  things  V

I  do  not  cteny  that  there  is  in  this  hymn  B|i$fcp8t
is  childish,  that  it  contains  expressions  W^tftiSf  of
the  majesty  of  the  Deity;  but  if  I  look  at  the  lan-
guage and  the  thoughts  of  the  people  who  composed

1  '  Chips  from  A  German  Woirfesfcop,'  L  4*.    '  Atlutfro-vedV  iv.  16,
O


194      LECTURES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELHHON.

these  hymns  more  than  three  thousand  years  ago,  I
wonder  rather  at  the  happy  and  pure  expression  which
they  iJave  given  to  these  deep  thoughts  than  at  the
occasional  harshnesses  which  jar  upon  our  ears,

<These  are  the  words  <jf  a  Hindu  convert,  when  he
wentlbaek  to  India  to  preach  the  Gospel:  'Jtfow  I  am
not  going  to  India  to  injure  the  feelings  of  the  people
by  saying,  "  Your  Scriptyire  is  all  nonsen^,  anything
outside  *the  Old  and  New  Testament  is  good  for  no-
thing." No,  I  tell  you,  I  will  appeal  to  the  Hindu
philosophers  and  moralists*  and  poets,  at  the  same
time  Jbringing  to  them  my  light,  and  reasoning  with
them  in  the  spirit  of  Christ,  That  will  be  my  work.
We. have  sayings  to  this  effect:  "He  who  would  be
greatest  shall  be  least."  You  cannot  call  this  non-
sense, for  it  is  the  saying  of  our  Saviour,  "  Whosoever
would  be  chief  among  you,  let  him  be  your  sewant."
The  missionaries,  kind,  earnest,  devoted  as  they  are,
do  not  know  these  things,  and  at  once  exclude  every-
thing bearing  the  name  of  Hindu.  Go  to  Egypt,  and
you  will  find  some  pieces  of  stone,  beautifully  carved
and  ornamented,  that  seem  to  have  been  part  of  some
&rge»  building,  and  by  examining  these,  you  can
imagine  how  magnificent  this  structure  must  have
'l^een.  Go  to  India,  %nd  examine  the  cdmmon  sayings
0ft  ike  people,  and  you  will  be  surprised  to  see  what
a  splendid  religion  the  Hindu  religion  must  have
been1/

Much  the  same  might  be  said  of  the  religion  of  the
Indians  of  North  America  also,  however  different  the
growth  of  their  religious  ideas  has  been  from  that  of

1  'Brief  Account  <$  Jognth.  Chandra  Gangooly,  a  Brahman  of  High.
$a0te  and  a  Convert  to  Oliriptianity,'  London,  1860.


LECTURE  IV.  195

their  namesakes  in  the  East.  The  early  missionaries
among  the  Red  Indians  were  struck  by  nothing  s*  much
as  by  their  apparent  pantheism,  by  their  seeing  the-
presence  of  the  Divine  everywhere,  even  in  what  we^e>
clearly  the  works  of  man.  Th&s  Roger  Williams  related
'that  wheif  they  talke^amongst  themsalves  of  the  Eng-
lish ships  and  great  buildings,  of  the  plowing  of  their
Fields,  and^specially  of  Bookss  and  Letters,  tjjiey«wiU
end  thus:  Manittflwock, "  they  are  Gods,"  Oummanitt&ay
"you  are  a  God." '  He  sees  in  these  idioms  an  expression^,
(of  the  strong  conviction  natural!  in  the  soule  of  m*D, ,
that  God  is  filling  all  things,  and  places,  and  ty&k  a£L
Excellencies  dwell  in  God,  and  proceed  from  him,  and1
that  they  only  are  blessed  who  have  that  Jehovah
for  their  portion/  It  may  have  been  so  when  Roger
Williams  wrote,  but  a  scholarlike  study  of  the  North
American  languages  such  as  has  lately  been  inaugu-
rated by  a  few  American  savants,  shows  that,  if  it
was  so,  the  equivocal  character  of  language  had  more
to  do  with  producing  this  peculiar  American  pan-
theism than  the  independent  evolution  of  thought,
Manito,  literally  'Manit,'  plur.  manMog  (see  TrumbuH
'Transact.  Am.  Phi^  Assoc.3  L  p.  120),  is  no  doubt  the
TyiJTfrTi-  name  (ox  their  Supreme  Spirit.  Lahontaine
defined  it  long  ago  as  a  name  given  by  the  savages
'  to  all  that  surpasses  their  understanding  and  proceeds
from  a  cauae  that  they  cannot  trace*  ('Voyages/ Engl
ed.  1703,  vol.  ii  39).  But  this  Manit  is  no*
of  ihe  »ky  or  the  sun  or  any  other
nomenon  gradually  developed  into  a
Dyaus  or  Zeus,  and  then  generalised  into  a  name  of
the  Divine,  like  deva  or  <few-  If  we^may  trust  the
best  students  of  the  American  languages  the  name  of
o  2


196      LEOT0RES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIGION.

Manit  began  with  an  abstract  concept.  It  was  formed
*  by  pifcfixing  the  indefinite  or  impersonal  particle  3m
to  the  subjunctive  participle  (anit)  of  *a  verb  which
signifies  **  to  surpass,"  w  to  be  more  than."  Anue,  which
is  an  impersonal  form  of  the  same  verb  (in  the  indicat.
present),  was  the*  sign  of  the  comparative  dfegree,  and
translated  by  "  more,*  "  rather." '  As  the  word  Manit,
however,  besides  being  the  name  of  the  Highest  God,
continued  to  be  used  in  ordinary  language  in  the  sense
of  excessive,  extraordinary,  wonderful,  the  missionaries
hearing  the  Indians  ai  the  apprehension  of  any  ex-
celleifey  in  men,  women,  birds,  beasts,  fish,  etc.,  crying
out  Manitoo,  took  it  in  the  sense  of  'it  is  a  God/
Possibly  the  two  meanings  of  the  word  may  have  run
together  in  the  minds  of  the  Indians  also,  and,  if  so,
we  should  have  here  another  instance  otthe  influence
of  language  on  thought,  or,  if  you  like,  of  petrified
on  living  thought,  though  in  this  case  due,  not  to
polyonomy,  but  to  homonymy.  The  result  is  the
same,  but  the  steps  which  led  to  the  expression  *  this
is  Manit*  are  different  from  the  steps  that  led  from
'  dyaus,'  sky,  to  our  saying  *  this  is  divine.'

Ajfbient  language  is  a  difficult  instrument  to  handle,
particularly  for  religious  purposes.  It  is^impossible  to
express  abstract  ideas  except  by  metaphor,  and  it  is
not  too  much  to  say  that  the  whole  dictionary  of  ancient
religion  b  made  up  of  metaphors.  With  us  these
metaphors  are  all  forgotten.  We  speak  of  spirit  without
thinking  of  breath,  of  heaven  without  ih^TriTig  of  the
sky,  of  pardon  without  thinking  of  a  release,  of  reve-
lation, without  thinking  of  a  veil.  But  in  ancient
language  every"  one  of  these  words,  nay,  every  word
that  does  not  refer  to  sensuous  objects,  is  still  in  a


LEOTUBE  IV.  197

chrysalis  stage:  half  material  and  half  spiritual,  and
rising  and  falling  in  its  character  according  «to  the
varying  capacities  of  speakers  and  hearers.  Here  is  a
constant  source  of  misunderstandings,  many  of  whjph
have  maintained  their  place  Tn  the  religion  and  in  the
mythology  of  the  ancient  world^  There  are  two  dis-
tinct tendencies  to  be  observed  in  the  growth  of  ancient
religion.  There  is,  on  the  on3  side,  the  struggle  of  the
mind  against  the  material  character  of  language,  a
constant  attempt  to  strip  words  of  their  coarse  cover-
ing, and  fit  them,  by  main  fofce,  for  the  purposes  of
abstract  thought.  But  there  is,  on  the  other  side,  a
constant  relapse  from  the  spiritual  into  the  material,
and,  strange  to  say,  a  predilection  for  the  material
sense  instead  of  the  spiritual.  This  action  and  reaction
has  been  goiag  on  in  the  language  of  religion  from  the
earliest  times,  and  it  is  at  work  even  now.

It  seems  at  first  a  fatal  element  in  religion  that  it
cannot  escape  from  this  flux  and  reflux  of  huioan
thought,  which  is  repeated  at  least  once  in  every
generation  between  father  and  son,  between  mother
and  daughter ;  but  if  we  watch  it  more  closely  we
shall  find,  I  think,<that  this  flux  and  reflux  constitutes
the  very  life  #f  religion.

Place  yourselves  in  the  position  of  those  who  first
are  saj.d  to  have  worshipped  the  sky.  We  say  that
they  worshipped  the  sky,  or  that  the  sky  was  their
god;  and  in  one  sense  this  is  true,  but  in  a  s$ra$,?iQr
different  from  that  which  is  usually  atfcad*e<$  &*ta0k
statements.  If  we  use  'god*  in  the  sense  which  it
has  now,  then  to  say  that  the  sky  was  their  god  is  to
say  what  is  simply  impossible.  Such  a  word  as  God,
in  the  sense  in  which  we  use  it— such  a  word  even


198      LECTITBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  RELIGION,


as  deus  and  fc&,  in  Latin  and  Greek,  or  deva  in  San-
skrit, *which  could  be  used  as  a  general  predicate  —
did  not  and  could  not  exist  at  that  early  time  in  the
history  of  thought  and  speech.  If  we  want  to  under-
stand ancient  religion,  we  must  first  try  to  understand
ancient  language.

Let  us  remember,"  then9  that  the  first  materials  of
language  supply  expressions  for  such  Impressions
only  as  are  received  through  the  senses.  If,  there-
fore, there  was  a  root  meajtfng  to  burn,  to  be  bright,
to  warm,  such  a  root  might  supply  a  recognised  name
for  tffe  sun  and  for  the  sky.

But  let  us  now  imagine,  as  well  as  we  can,  the
process  which  went  on  in  the  human  mind  before  the
name  of  sky  could  be  torn  away  from  its  material
object  and  be  used  as  the  name  of  something  totally
different  from  the  sky.  There  was  in  the  h&rt  of
man,  from  the  very  first,  a  feeling  of  incompleteness,
of  weakness,  of  dependence,  whatever  we  like  to
call  it  in  our  abstract  language.  We  can  explain  it
as  little  as  we  can  explain  why  the  newborn  child
feels  the  cravings  of  hunger  and  thirst.  But  it  was
so  fr3m  the  first,  and  is  so  even  cow.  Man  knows
not  whence  he  comes  and  whither  he  g<jes.  He  looks
for  a  guide,  for  a  friend;  he  wearies  for  some  one  on
whom  he  can  rest;  he  wants  something  like  a  father
in  heaven.  In  addition  to  all  the  impressions  which
he  received  from  the  outer  world,  there  was  in  the
heart  of  man  a  stronger  impulse  from  within  —  a
sigh,  a  yearning,  a  call  for  something  that  should  not
come  and  go  like  everything  else,  that  should  be  be-
fore, and  after,  *and  for  ever,  that  should  hold  and
support  everything,  that  should  make  man  feel  at


LBCTUBB  IV,  199

home  in  this  strange  world.  Before  this  vague
yearning  could  assume  any  definite  shape  it  wanted  a
name :  it  could  not  be  fiilly  grasped  or  clearly  con-
ceived except  by  naming  it.  But  where  to  look  for
a  name  ?  ^  No  doubt  the  stSrehouse  of  language  ww
there,  but  from  every  name  thajj  waft  tried  the  mind
of  man  shrank  back  because  it  did  not  fit,  because
it  seemed  \o  fetter  rather  tb&n  to  wing  the  jthdfcght
that  fluttered  within  and  called  for  light  and  freedom.
But  when  at  last  a  naifle  or  even  many  names  were
tried  and  chosen,  let  us  see  wBat  took  place,  as  far  as
the  mind  of  man  was  concerned,  A  certain  satisfac-
tion, no  doubt,  was  gained  by  having  a  name  or
several  names,  however  imperfect;  but  these  names,
like  all  other  names,  were  but  signs — poor,  imperfect
signs  j  they  *were  predicates,  and  very  partial  pre-
dicates, of  various  small  portions  only  of  that  vague
and  vast  something  which  slumbered  in  the  mind.
When,  the  name  of  the  brilliant  sky  bad  been  daoeen,
as  it  has  been  chosen  at  one  time  or  other  by  nearly
every  nation  upon  earth,  was  sky  the  full  expression
of  that  within  the  mind  which  wanted  expression?
Was  the  mind  satisfied  ?  Had  the  sky  been  recog-
nised as  its  ^jod?  Far  from  it^  People  knew*  per-
fectly well  what  they  meant  by  the  visible  sky ;  the
first  man  who,  after  looking  everywhere  foj  what  he
wanted,  and  who  at  kst  in  sheer  exhaustion  grasped
at  the  name  of  sky  as  better  than  nothing,  kjauaw  b&fc
too  well  that  his  success  was  after  all  A  miaoraWe
failure.  The  brilliant  sky  was.  no  doubt,  the  most
exalted,  it  was  the  only  unchanging  qpd  infinite  being
that  had  received  a  name,  and  that  could  lend  its
name  to  that  as  yet  unborn  Idea  of  the  Infinite  which


200      LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OP  RELIGION.

disquieted  the  human  mind.  But  let  us  only  see
this  dearly,  that  the  man  who  chgse  that  name
did  not  mean,  could  not  have  meant,  that  the  visible
slfcy  was  all  he  wanted,  that  the  blue  canopy  above
was  kis  god.

And  now  obSferv^  what  happens  when  the  name
sky  has  thus  been  given  and  accepted.    The  seeking
and*fin<Jing  of  such  a  nafce,  however  imperfect,  was  the
act  of  a  manly  mind,  of  a  poet,  of  a  prophet,  of  a
patriarch,  who  could  struggle,  like  another  Jacob,
with  the  idea  of  God  that  was  within  him,  till  he  had
conceived  it,  and  brought  it  forth,  and  given  it  its
name.    But  when  that  name  had  to  be  used  with  the
young  and  the  aged,  with  silly  children  and  doting
grandmothers,  it  was  impossible  to  preserve  it  from
being   misunderstood.     The   first   step  downwards
would  be  to  look  upon  the  sky  as  the  abode  of  that
Being  which  was  called  by  the  same  name ;  the  next
step  would  be  to  forget  altogether  what  was  behind
the  name,  and  to  implore  the  sky,  the  visible  canopy
over  our  heads,  to  send  rain,  to  protect  the  fields,  the
cattle^  and  the  corn,  to  give  to  man  his  daily  bread.
Nay,  very  soon  those  who  warned*  the  world  that  it
was  not  the  visible^  sky  that  was  meant,  but  that
what  was  meant  was  something  high  above,  deep
below,  far  away  from  tbe  blue  firmament,  wonld  be
looked^  upon  either  as  dreamers  whom  no  one  could
understand,  or  as  unbelievers  who  despised  the  sky,
the  great  benefactor  of  the  world.    Lastly,  many
things  that  were  true  of  the  visible  sky  would  be
told  of  its  divine^  namesake,  and  legends  would  spring
up,  destroying  every  trace  of  the  deity  that  once  wag,
hidden  beneath  that  ambiguous  name.


LEOTUBE  IV.  201

I  call  this  variety  of  acceptation,  this  misunder-
standing, which  is  inevitable  in  ancient  and  also  in
modem  religion,  the  dialectic  growth  and  decay,  or,  if
you  like,  the  dialectic  life  of  religion,  and  we  shall  qpe
again  and  again,  how  important  it  is  in  enabling  us
to  form  a*  right  estimate  of  religions  language  and
thought.  The  dialectic  shades  in  the  language  of
religion  ar8  almost  infinite;  they  explain  the  dacay,
but  they  also  account  for  the  life  of  religion.  You
may  remember  that  Jaoob  Grimm,  in  one  of  his
poetical  moods,  explained  the  origin  of  High  and  Low-
German,  of  Sanskrit  and  Prakrit,  of  Doric  and  Ionic,
by  looking  upon  the  high  dialects  as  originally  the
language  of  men,  upon  the  low  dialects  as  origin&lly
the  language  of  women  and  children.  We  can  ob-
serve, I  believe,  the  same  parallel  streams  in  the  lan-
guage*of  religion,  There  is  a  high  and  there  is  a  low
dialect ;  there  is  a  broad  and  there  is  a  narrow  dia-
lect; there  are  dialects  for  men  and  dialects  for  chil-
dren, for  clergy  and  laity,  for  the  noisy  streets  and
for  the  still  and  lonely  chamber.  And  as  the  child  on
growing  up  to  manhood  has  to  unlearn  the  language
of  the  nursery,  its*religion,  too,  has  to  be  translated
from  a  feminize  into  a  more  masguline  dialect.  This
does  not  take  place  without  a  struggle,  and  it  is  this
constantly  recurring  struggle,  this  inextinguishable
desire  to  recover  itself,  which  keeps  religion  from
utter  stagnation.  From  first  to  last  religion  Jg  #tt$^. ,
lating  between  these  two  opposite  poles>  and  $  &&$y
if  the  attraction  of  one  of  the  two  poles  becomes  too
strong,  that 'the  healthy  movement  cejtses,  and  stag-
nd  decay  set  in.  If  religkm  cannot  aecom-
itself  on  tte  on©  side  to  the  capacity  of


202      LECTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  BELIOION,

children,  or  if  on  the  other  side  it  fails  to  satisfy  the
requirements  of  men,  it  has  lost  its  vitality,  and  it
becomes  either  mere  superstition  or  mere  philosophy.

If  I  have  succeeded  in  expressing  myself  clearly,  I
taint  you  will  understand  in  what  sense  it  may  he
said  that  there  Js  truth  in  all  religions,  ^en  in  the
lowest.  The  intenfion  which  led  to  the  first  utter-
an<v  of  a  name  like  •sky,  used  no  lotiger  in  its
material  sense,  but  in  a  higher  sense,  was  right.  The
spirit  was  witting,  but  language  was  weak.  The
mental  process  was  »ot,  as  commonly  supposed,  an
identification  of  the  definite  idea  of  deity  with  sky.
Such  a  process  is  hardly  conceivable.  It  was,  on  the
contrary,  a  first  attempt  at  defining  the  indefinite  im-
pression of  deity  by  a  name  that  should  approxi-
mately or  metaphorically  render  at  least  one  of  its
most  prominent  features.  The  first  framer  of  that
name  of  the  deity,  I  repeat  it  again,  could  as  little
have  thought  of  the  material  heaven  as  we  do  when
we  speak  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven1.

And  now  let  us  observe  another  feature  of  ancient
religion  that  has  often  been  so  startling,  but  which,  if
we  dhly  remember  what  is  the  natoe  of  ancient  lan-
guage, becomes  likewise  perfectly  intejjigible.  It  is
well  known  that  ancient  languages  are  particularly
rich  in  synonymes,  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  ^that  in
them  the*same  object  is  called  by  many  names — is,  in
fact,  polyonymous.  While  in  modern  languages  most
objects  have  one  name  only,  we  find  in  ancient  San-
skrit, in  ancient  Greek  and  Arabic,  a  large  choice  of
words  for  the  same  object.  This  is  perfectly  natural,

1  Medhnirt,  'Eaqtdry,1  p.  20.


LECTUBE  IV.  208

Each  name  could  express  one  side  only  of  whatever
had  to  be  named,  and,  not  satisfied  with  one  partial
name,  the  early  framers  of  language  produced  one
name  after  the  other,  and  after  a  time  retained  those
which  seemed  most  useful  fo»special  purposes.  !£bus,
the  sky  m%ht  be  called  ^ot  only  th§  Brilliant,  but  the
dark,  the  covering,  the  thundering,  thfc  pain-giving.
This  is  tkQ+polyonomy  of  language,  and  it  iVwiw
are  accustomed  to  call  polytheism  in  religiot,
same  mental  yearning  wtych  found  its  first
tion  in  using  the  name  of  the  brilliant  sky  as  an  indi-
cation of  the  Divine,  would  soon  grasp  at  other  ifemea
of  the  sky,  not  expressive  of  brilliancy,  and  therefore
more  appropriate  to  a  religious  mood  in  which  the
Divine  was  conceived  as  dark,  awful,  all-powerful.
Thus  we  find*  by  the  side  of  Dyaus,  another  name
of  the*  covering  sky,  Varuwa,  originally  only  another
attempt  at  naming  the  Divine,  but  which,  like  the
name  of  Dyaus,  soon  assumed  a  separate  and  inde-
pendent existence.

And  this  is  not  all.  The  very  imperfection  of  all
the  names  that  had  been  chosen,  their  very  inadequacy
to  express  the  fulnqps  and  infinity  of  the  Divine,  tfould
keep  up  the  search  for  new  names,  till  at  last  every
part  of  nature  in  which  an  approach  to  the  Divine
could  be  discovered  was  chosen  as  a  name  of  the
Omnipresent.  If  the  presence  of  the  Divine*was  per-
ceived in  the  strong  wind,  the  strong  wind  b&&8&  iig
name ;  if  its,  presence  was  perceived  in  the  aa£^^sp&® '
and  the  firet  the  earthquake  and  the  fire  became  its
names.

Do  you  still  wonder  at  polytheisft  or  at  mytho-
logy? Why,  they  are  inevitable.    They  are,  if  you


204      LEOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  OP  BELIGION.

like*  a  parler  enfantin  of  religion.  But  the  world  has
its  childhood,  and  when  it  was  a  child  it  spoke  as  a
child,  it  understood  as  a  child,  it  thought  as  a  child;
and,  I  say  again,  in  that  it  spoke  as  a  child  its  lan-
guage was  true,  in  that  it  believed  as  a  child  its
religion  was  true.  The  fault  Crests  wittf  us,  if  we
insist  on  taking  flie  language  of  children  for  the
language  of  men,  if  w»  attempt  to  translate  literally
ancien?  into  modern  language,  oriental  into  occidental
speech,  poetry  into  prose1.

It  is  perfectly  true  that  at  present  few  interpreters,
if  airy,  would  take  such  expressions  as  the  head,  the
face,  the  mouth,  the  lips,  the  breath  of  Jehovah  in  a
literal  sense.

Per  questo  la  Scrittura  conde^ende
A  vostra  facilitate,  e  piedi  e  mano
Atfcribuisce  a  Dio,  et  altro  intende2.

But  what  does  it  mean,  then,  if  we  hear  one  of  our
most  honest  and  most  learned  theologians  declare  that
he  can  no  longer  read  from  the  altar  the  words  of  the
Bible,  'God  spake  these  words  and  said"?  If  we  can
make  allowance  for  mouth  and  lips  and  breath,  we
can  surely  make  tfle  same  allowance  for  words  and
their  utterance.  The  language  of  antiquity  is  the
language  of  childhood :  ayv  and  we  ourselveS,  when
we  try  to  reach  the  Infinite  and  the  Divine  by  means


1  'An  earl;  Oriental  historian  does  not  write  in  the  exact  and  accurate
style  of  a  nineteenth  century  Occidental  critic.'  Canon  Bawlinson,  in
the  Lectures  delivered  under  the  auspices  of  the  Christian  Evidence
Society.

•  Dante,  'Paradise,'  iv,  44-46.


LECTURE  IV.  305

4.

of  more  abstract  terms,  are  wo  even  now

than  children  trying  to  place  a  ladder  agains^
sky?

The  parkr  wifantin  in  religion  is  not  extinct',  it
never  will  be.  Not  only  hare  some  of  the  an^ieA
childish  religions  beenjkept  alive,  as,  {or  insbance,  the
religion  of  India,  which  is  to  m^  mind  like  a  half-
fossilised  megatherion  walking  about  in  the  brgad
daylight  of  the  nineteenth  century ;  but  in  oflr  oWn
religion  and  in  the  language  of  the  New  Testament,
there  are  many  things  which  disjelose  their  true  mean-
ing to  those  only  who  know  what  language  is  made
of,  who  have  not  only  ears  to  hear,  but  a  heart  to
understand  the  real  meaning  of  parables.

What  I  maintain,  then,  is  this,  that  as  we  put  the
most  charitatje  interpretation  on  the  utterances  of
children,  we  ought  to  put  the  same  charitable  inter-
pretation on  the  apparent  absurdities,  the  follies,  the
errors,  nay,  even  the  horrors  of  ancient  religion.
When  we  read  of  Belus,  the  supreme  god  of  the  Ba-
bylonians, cutting  off  his  head,  that  the  blood  flowing
from  it  might  be  mixed  with  the  dust  out  of  which
man  was  to  be  formed,  this  sounds  horrible  enough ;
but  depend  uijon  it  what  was  originally  intended  by
this  myth  was  no  more  than  this,  that  there  is  in
man  an  element  of  Divine  life :  that  *  we  are  also  His
blood,  or  His  offspring.'

The  same  idea  existed  in  the  ancient  rsligioa  j&£  the
Egyptians,  for  we  read  in  the  i?th  chapter  $F  fiwir
Bitual,  that  the  Sun  mutilated  himself,  and  that  frpm
the  stream  of  his  blood  he  created  all  beings1.  And

1  Vicomte  de  Roug<3,  in  'Ajanaies  de  PMloaophie  c&r&tenne,'  Nov.
I&69,  P-  33^.


206      MOTUBES  ON  THE  SCIENCE  Off  RELIGION.

the  author  of  Genesis,  too,  when  he  wishes  to  express
the  sa^jne  idea,  can  only  use  the  same  human  and  sym-
bolical language ;  he  can  only  say  tha*t  '  God  formed
man  from  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and  breathed  into
hfs  npstrils  the  breath  ofelife/

In  Mexico,  at  the  festival  of  BjuitzilpochtH,  an  image
of  ttuTgod,  made  of  the  seeds*  of  plants,  and  the  blood
of  igimolated  children,  was  pierced  by  a  preest  with  an
arrow  kt  the  end  of  the  ceremony.  The  king  ate
the  heart,  and  the  rest  of rthe  body  was  distributed
among  the  congregation.  This  custom  of  eating  the
bo<Jycof  God,  which  can  well  be  conceived  sym-*
helically,  is  apt  to  degenerate  into  crude  fetishism,
36  that  the  faithful  believes  in  the  end  that  he  really
feeds  on  his  God,  not  in  the  true,  the  spiritual,  but  in
the  false,  the  material,  sense1.

If  we  have  once  learnt  to  be  charitable  and  rea-
sonable in  the  interpretation  of  the  sacred  books  of
other  religions,  we  shall  more  easily  learn  to  fee
charitable  and  reasonable  in  the  interpretation  of  our
own.  We  shall  no  longer  try  to  force  a  literal
sense  on  words  which,  if  interpreted  literally,  must
lose  their  true  and  original  purport,  we  shall  no
longer  interpret  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  as  if  they
had  been  written  in0  the  English  of  our  own  century,
but  read  £hem  IB  a  truly  historical  spirit,  prepared
for  many'oiirlculties,  undismayed  by  many  contradic-
tions, %rhich,  so  far  from  disproving  the  authenticity,
become  to  the  historian  of  ancient  language  and
ancient  thought  the  strongest  confirmatory  evidence
of  the,  age,  the  genuineness,  and  the  real  truth  of

1  See  Wundt,  '  VarleBungen  dber  Msnsohen  und  Thierseele/  yd.  ii.
p.  262.


LEOTTOE  IV.

ancient  sacred  books.  Let  us  but  treat  our  own
sacred  books  with  neither  more  nor  less  mercy  than
the  sacred  books  of  any  other  nations,  and  they  will
soon  regain  that  position  and  influence  which  they?
once  possessed^  but  which  the  artificial  and
historical  theories  of  the  last  three  centuries
well-nigh  destroyed,
