# The Golden Dawn — Vol. 1

*Extracted from Golden-dawn-vol1-1937_text.pdf*

---

£

The Banner of the East

The Banner of the West

DEDICATED

To all true seekers of the Light.

May what they find herein sustain them in
their search for the Quintessence; the Stone of
the Philosophers, true Wisdom and perfect
Happiness, the Summum Bonum.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

VOLUME I

Introduction

First Knowledge Lecture

First Meditation

The Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram

The Pillars

Second Knowledge Lecture

Second Meditation

Third Knowledge Lecture

Third Meditation

Fourth Knowledge Lecture

Fourth Meditation

Notes on the Tarot

The Garden of Eden Before the Fall

On the General Guidance

and Purification of the Soul

The Garden of Eden After the Fall

Fifth Knowledge Lecture

Fifth Meditation

Diagrams

*

*

Miscellany omitted from Lectures

PAGE

13

99

105

106
no

119

124

129

133

135

140

141

144

146

150

153

160

16 r

163

—

Table of Contents

Continued

Angels of the Shem ha-Mephoresch

The Portal Work

Portal Meditation

Concerning the Tree of Life

The Microcosm Lecture

Task Undertaken by the Adeptus Minor

The Microcosms of Macrocosm

Obsession, Trance, Death

PAGE

170

175

190

19 r

203

217

222

226

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

1

PAGE

The Banners of the East and West

Frontispiece

The Serpent on the Tree of Life

Fylfot Cross

Two forms of the Caduceus

Solid Greek Cubical Cross

Tetrahedron

Greek Cross of 13 Squares
The Stolistes Cup

Mercury on the Tree of Life

The Garden of Eden Before the Fall

The Garden of Eden After the Fall

Tetragrammaton on the Tree

Calvary Cross of 12 Squares

Elemental Pyramid

Calvary Cross of 10 Squares

Hegemon’s Badge

Venus on the Tree

Seven Palaces

Symbol of Sulphur

Symbol of Salt

Operation of the Elements on the Tree

The Aura and The Middle Pillar
Minutum Mundum

123

131

13

137

* . . 137

137

138

138

147

153

154

156

157

157

157

138

164

168

168

169

180

191Operation of the Elements on the Tree

The Aura and The Middle Pillar
Minutum Mundum

123

131

13

137

* . . 137

137

138

138

147

153

154

156

157

157

157

138

164

168

168

169

180

191

“Howbeit we know after a time there will now be a general
reformation, both of divine and human things, according
to our desire and the expectation of others; for it is fitting
that before the rising of the Sun there should appear and
break forth Aurora, or some clearness, or divine light in
the sky* And so, in the meantime, some few, which shall
give their names, may join together, thereby to increase
the number and respect of our Fraternity, and make a
happy and wished for beginning of our Philosophical Canons,
prescribed to us by our Brother R* C., and be partakers with
us of our treasures (which can never fail or be wasted) in
all humility and love, to be eased of this world’s labours, and
not walk so blindly in the knowledge of the wonderful works
of God*”

Fama Fraternitatis, ( 1614 ).

IntroductionFama Fraternitatis, ( 1614 ).

Introduction

It was in the year 1890 that Dr. Franz Hartmann, in
an endeavour to provide a simple outline of the vicissi-
tudes of what came to be known as the Rosicrucian Or-
der, wrote a book entitled In the Pronaos of the Temple.
The central figure of this history was a monk Fr. R. C.
— described in the earliest Rosicrucian manifesto the
Fama Fraternitatis as the “pious, spiritual and highly-
illuminated Father ... It is said that he was a Ger-
man nobleman who had been educated in a convent, and
that long before the time of the Reformation he had
made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land in company with
another brother of this convent, and that while at Da-
mascus they had been initiated by some learned Arabs
into the mysteries of the secret science. After remaining
three years at Damascus, they went to Fez, in Africa,
and there they obtained still more knowledge of magic,
and of the relations existing between the macrocosm and
microcosm. After having also travelled in Spain, he re-
turned to Germany, where he founded a kind of convent
called Sanctus Spiritus, and remained there writing his
secret science and continuing his studies. He then ac-
cepted as his assistants, at first, three, and afterwards,
four more monks from the same convent in which he had
<i3>been educated, and thus founded the first society of the
Rosicrucians. They then laid down the results of their
science in books, which are said to be still in existence,
and in the hands of some Rosicrucians. ft is then said
that 120 years after his death, the entrance to his tomb
was discovered. A stair-case led into a subterranean
vault, at the door of which was written, Post annos CXX
patebo. There was a light burning in the vault, which,
however, became extinct as soon as it was approached.
The vault had seven sides and seven angles, each side
being five feet wide and eight feet high. The upper part
represented the firmament, the floor, the earth, and they
were laid out in triangles, while each side was divided
into ten squares. In the middle was an altar, bearing a
brass plate, upon which were engraved the letters, A-C.
R.C., and the words Hoc Universi Compendium vivus
mihi Sepulchrum feci. In the midst were four figures sur-
rounded by the words, Nequaquam Vacuum. Legis Jug-
um. Libertas Evangelii. Dei Gloria Intacta. Below the
altar was found the body of Rosenkreutz, intact, and
without any signs of putrefaction. In his hand was a
book of parchment, with golden letters marked on the
cover with a 'V, and at the end was written, Ex Deo nas-
cimur. In Jesus morimur. Per Spiritum Sanctum revi-
viscimus.”

It was upon this schema and from this original body,
to state it briefly, that the Hermetic Order of the Golden
Dawn claimed direct descent. Its history lecture, how-
ever, volunteered very few verifiable details as to the
historical facts which, from the scholarly point of view,

we should be acquainted with—the details for example
of the line of descent from, say, 1614 to 1865. Current
<H>we should be acquainted with—the details for example
of the line of descent from, say, 1614 to 1865. Current
<H>

within the present day Order was the belief that at var-
ious dates within the period named, the Order as an
organised body of students ceased to exist. Instead, there
was an oral continuation of teaching from isolated ini-
tiates here, there and everywhere, until more recent
times when religious and political conditions did not
militate against the advisability of formulating a group.
With the institution of a definite body, the original sys-
tem of grades was re-established, and the systems of
Alchemy, the Qabalah and Magic once more were
taught to zealous, aspiring Neophytes. As a cloak to
their activities, they likewise continued in the early
agreement of the Order which was:

'‘First, that none of them should profess any other

thing than to cure the sick, and that gratis.

Second, None of the posterity should be constrained
to wear one certain kind of habit, but therein to follow
the custom of the country.

Third, that every year, upon the day C. they should
meet together at the house Sanctus Spiritus, or write the

cause of his absence.

Fourth, Every Brother should look about for a worthy

person who, after his decease, might succeed him.

Fifth, The word R. C. should be their seal, mark, and

character.

Sixth, The Fraternity should remain secret one hun-

dred years.

With this preliminary account, we may turn to the
claims of the Order within the more historical times of
the late 19th century, though unfortunately, these
claims are no more verifiable and certainly no clearer
than those which characterised its beginning.

<I5><I5>

“The Order of the Golden Dawn/’ narrates the his-
tory lecture of that Order, “is an Hermetic Society whose
members are taught the principles of Occult Science and
the Magic of Hermes. During the early part of the sec-
ond half of last century, several eminent Adcpti and
Chiefs of the Order in France and England died, and
their death caused a temporary dormant condition of
Temple work.

“Prominent among the Adcpti of our Order and of
public renown were Eliphas Levi the greatest of mod-
em French magi; Ragon, the author of several books of
occult lore; Kenneth M. Mackenzie, author of the fa-
mous and learned Masonic Encyclopaedia; and Fred-
erick Hockley possessed of the power of vision in the
crystal, and whose manuscripts are highly esteemed.
These and other contemporary Adepti of this Order re-
ceived their knowledge and power from predecessors of
equal and even of greater eminence. They received in-
deed and have handed down to us their doctrine and
system of Theosophy and Hermetic Science and the
higher Alchemy from a long series of practised inves-
tigators whose origin is traced to the Fratres Roseae
Crucis of Germany, which association was founded by
one Christian Rosenkreutz about the year 1398 A. D.
“The Rosicrucian revival of Mysticism was but a
new development of the vastly older wisdom of the
Qabalistic Rabbis and of that very ancient secret know-
ledge, the Magic of the Egyptians, in which the Heb-
rew Pentateuch tells you that Moses the founder of
the Jewish system was ‘learned’, that is, in which he
had been initiated.”

In a slender but highly informative booklet entitled
<i6>In a slender but highly informative booklet entitled
<i6>

Data of the History of the Rosicrucians published in
1916 by the late Dr. William Wynn Westcott, we find
the following brief statement: “In 1887 by permission
of S.D.A. a continental Rosicrucian Adept, the Isis-
Urania Temple of Hermetic Students of the G.D. was
formed to give instruction in the mediaeval Occult
sciences. Fratres M.E.V. with S.A. and S.R.M.D. be-
came the chiefs, and the latter wrote the rituals in mod-
ern English from old Rosicrucian mss. (the property
of S.A.) supplemented by his own literary researches.”
In these two statements is narrated the beginning of
the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn — an organ-
isation which has exerted a greater influence on the
development of Occultism since its revival in the last
quarter of the 19th century than most people can rea-
lise. There can be little or no doubt that the Golden
Dawn is, or rather was until very recently, the sole de-
pository of magical knowledge, the only Occult Order
of any real worth that the West in our time has known.
A great many other occult organisations owe what little
magical knowledge is theirs to leakages issuing from that
Order and from its renegade members.

The membership of the Golden Dawn was recruited
from every circle, and it was represented by dignified
professions as well as by all the arts and sciences, to
make but little mention of the trades and business oc-
cupations. It included physicians, psychologists, clergy-
men, artists and philosophers. And normal men and wo-
men, humble and unknown, from every walk of life have
drawn inspiration from its font of wisdom, and un-
doubtedly many would be happy to recognise and admit
the enormous debt they owe to it.
< l 7>As an organisation, it preferred after the fashion of
its mysterious parent always to shroud itself in an im-
penetrable cloak of mystery. Its teaching and methods
of instruction were stringently guarded by serious penal-
ties attached to the most awe-inspiring obligations in
order to ensure that secrecy. So well have these obliga-
tions, with but one or two exceptions, been kept that the
general public knows next to nothing about the Order,
its teaching, or the extent and nature of its membership.
Though this book wall touch upon the teaching of the
Golden Dawn, concerning its membership as a whole
the writer will have nothing to say, except perhaps to
repeat what may already be more or less well-known.
For instance, it is common knowledge that W. B, Yeats,
Arthur Machen and, if rumour may be trusted, the late
Arnold Bennett were at one time among its members,
together with a good many other writers and artists.

With regard to the names given in Dr. Westcott’s
statement it is necessary that we bestow to them some
little attention in order to unravel, so far as may be pos-
sible, the almost inextricable confusion which has char-
acterised every previous effort to detail the history of
the Order. M.E.V. was the motto chosen by Dr. William
Robert Woodman, an eminent Freemason of the last
century. Sapere Aude and Non Omnis Moriar were the
two mottos used by Dr. Westcott, an antiquarian, scho-
lar, and coroner by profession. S. R. M. D. or S. Rhiogail
Ma Dhream was the motto of S. L. MacGregor Mathers,
the translator of The Greater Key of King Solomon, the
Book of the Sacred Magic of Ahramelin the Mage, and
The Kabbalah Unveiled, which latter consisted of certain
portions of the Zohar prefixed by an introduction of high
<i8>erudition. He also employed the Latin motto Deo Duce
Comite Ferro. S. D. A. was the abbreviation of the
motto Sapiens Dominabitur Astris chosen by a Frau-
lein Anna Sprengel of Nuremburg, Germany. Such were
the actors on this occult stage, this the dramatis per-
sonae in the background of the commencement of the
Order. More than any other figures who may later have
prominently figured in its government and work, these
are the four outstanding figures publicly involved in the
English foundation of what came to be known as The
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn.

How the actual instigation of the Order came to pass
is not really known. Or rather, because of so many con-
flicting stories and legends the truth is impossible to
discover. At any rate, so far as England is concerned,
without a doubt we must seek for its origin in the Soci et-
as Rosi crucian a in Anglia. This was an organisation
formulated in 1865 by eminent Freemasons, some of
them claiming authentic Rosicrucian irritation from con-
tinental authorities. Amongst those who claimed such
initation was one Kenneth H. Mackenzie, a Masonic
scholar and encyclopaedist, who had received his at the
hands of a Count Apponyi in Austria. The objects of
this Society which confined its membership to Free-
masons in good standing, was “to afford mutual aid and
encouragement in working out the great problems of
Life, and in discovering the secrets of nature; to facili-
tate the study of the systems of philosophy founded upon
the Kaballah and the doctrines of Hermes Trismegistus/’
Dr. Westcott also remarks that to-day its Fratres “are
concerned in the study and administration of medicines,
and in their manufacture upon old lines; they also teach
<i9>

and practise the curative effects of coloured light, and
cultivate mental processes which are believed to induce
spiritual enlightenment and extended powers of the hu-
man senses, especially in the directions of clairvoyance
and clairaudience.”The first Chief of this Society, its Supreme Magus
so-called, was one Robert Wentworth Little who is said
to have rescued some old rituals from a certain Masonic
storeroom, and it was from certain of those papers that
the Society’s rituals were elaborated. He died in 1878,
and in his stead was appointed Dr. William R. Wood-
man. Both Dr. Westcott and MacGregor Mathers were
prominent and active members of this body. In fact, the
former became Supreme Magus upon Woodman’s death,
the office of Junior Magus being conferred upon Mathers.
One legend has it that one day Westcott discovered in
his library a series of cipher manuscripts, and in order
to decipher them he enlisted the aid of MacGregor Math-
ers. It is said that this library was that of the Societas
Rosicruciana in Anglia, and it is likewise asserted that
those cipher manuscripts were among the rituals and
documents originally rescued by Robert Little from
Freemason’s Hall. Yet other accounts have it that West-
cott or a clerical friend found the manuscripts on a book-
stall in Farringdon Street. Further apocryphal legends
claim that they were found in the library of books and
manuscripts inherited from the mystic and clairvoyant,
Frederick Hockley who died in 1885. Whatever the real
origin of these mysterious cipher manuscripts, when
eventually deciphered with the aid of MacGregor Math-
ers, they were alleged to have contained the address of
a Fraulein Anna Sprengel who purported to be a Rosi-
< 20>crucian Adept, in Nuremburg. Here was a discovery
which, naturally, not for one moment was neglected.
Its direct result was a lengthy correspondence with Frau-
lein Sprengel, culminating in the transmission of author-
ity to Woodman, Westcott and Mathers, to formulate in
England a semi-public occult organisation which was to
employ an elaborate magical ceremonial, Qabalistie
teaching, and a comprehensive scheme of spiritual train-
ing, Its foundation was designed to include both men and
women on a basis of perfect equality in contradistinction
to the policy of the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia
which was comprised wholly of Freemasons. Thus, in
1887, the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn was
established. Its first English Temple, Isis-Urania, was
opened in the following year.

There is a somewhat different version as to its origin,
having behind it the authority of Frater F. R., the late
Dr. Felkin, who was the Chief of the Stella Matutina
as well as a member of the Societas Rosicruciana. Ac-
cording to his account, and the following words are sub-
stantially his own, prior to 1880 members of the Rosi-
crucian Order on the Continent selected with great care
their own candidates whom they thought suitable for
personal instruction. For these pupils they were each
individually responsible, the pupils thus selected being
trained by them in the theoretical traditional knowledge
now used in the Outer Order. After some three or more
years of intensive private study these pupils were pre-
sented to the Chiefs of the Order, and if approved and
passed by examination, they then received their initia-
tion into the Order of the Roseae Rubeae et Aureae

Crucis.

<2I>Crucis.

<2I>

The political state of Europe in the nineteenth century
was such that the strictest secrecy as to the activities
of these people was very necessary. England, however,
where many Masonic bodies and semi-private organisa-
tions were flourishing without interference, was recog-
nised as having far greater freedom and liberty than
the countries in which the continental Adepts were domi-
Some, but by no means all, suggested therefore
ciled.
that in England open Temple work might be inaugur-
ated. And Dr. Felkin here adds, though without the least
word of explanation as to what machinery was set in
motion towards the attainment of that end, “and so
it was ... It came about then that Temples arose in
London, Bradford, Weston-super-Mare, and Edinburgh.
The ceremonies we have were elaborated from cipher
manuscripts, and all went well for a time.”

Since the history of the Hermetic Order of the Golden
Dawn subsequent to this period has already been nar-
rated elsewhere there is little need to repeat it. Those who
may be interested in a detailed meticulous history of
the Rosicrucian claim as it has existed in Europe during
the past three hundred years are advised to consult
Arthur Edward Waite’s The Brotherhood of the Rosy
Cross. While in my small work My Rosicrucian Adven-
ture the events that occurred to the Golden Dawn, cul-
minating in this present publication of its teaching and
rituals, are delineated at some length. The motives which
have confirmed me in this decision to act contrary to the
obligation of secrecy arc there presented and discussed.
And with these directions, let us pass from historical
bones to what is the dynamic life and soul of the Order,
its teaching and ceremonial technique of initiation.

< 22>< 22>

Before one can grasp the nature of ceremonial initia-
tion, which was the assumed function of the Golden
Dawn, a few fundamental notions of the philosophy un-
derlying its practice must be grasped. The basic theory
of the Order system was such as to identify certain of
the grades with various spiritual principles existing in
the universe. Hence a philosophy which describes, class-
ifies, and purports to understand the nature of the uni-
verse must be studied before the significance of the
grades can be appreciated. One of the most important
backgrounds of the system is the scheme of the Qabalah,
a Jewish system described at length in my Tree of Life
and the knowledge lectures herein. Since it is primarily
a mystical method, the Qabalah has innumerable points
of identity with the more ancient systems elaborated
by other peoples in other parts of the world. Its most
important root concept is that the ultimate root from
which this universe, with all things therein, has evolved
is Ain Soph Aour, In finite or Limitless Light. So far as our
minds are capable of conceiving such metaphysical ab-
stractions, this is to be understood as an infinite ocean
of brilliance wherein all things are held as within a mat-
rix, from which all things w'ere evolved, and it is that
divine goal to which all life and all beings eventually
must return.

Issuing from or within this Boundless Light, there
manifests what is called the Tree of Life. Qabalists have
produced a conventional glyph indicating thereupon ten
numerations or Sephiroth which are the branches of that
Tree growing or evolving within space, ten different
< 23 >

modes of the manifestation of its radiation — ten vary-

ing degrees of but one ubiquitous substance-principle.modes of the manifestation of its radiation — ten vary-

ing degrees of but one ubiquitous substance-principle.

The first of these numerations is called Kether, the
Crown, and is the first manifestation from the Unknown,
a concentration of its Infinite Light. As the radiant apex
of this heavenly tree, it is the deepest sense of selfhood
and the ultimate root of substance. It constitutes the
divine centre of human consciousness, all the other
principles which comprise what we call man being rather
like so many layers of an onion around a central core.
From this metaphysical and universal centre duality
issues, two distinct principles of activity, the one named
Chokmah Wisdom, and the other Bvnah, Understanding.
Here we have the roots of polarity, male and female,
positive and negative, fire and water, mind and matter,
and these two ideas are the noumena of all the various
opposites in life of which we have cognisance.

These three emanations are unique in a special way,
and they especially symbolise that “Light which shineth
in darkness/’ the Light of the spiritual Self. As Light
shines into darkness, illuminating it without suffering
a diminution of its own existence, so the workings of the
Supernals, as these three Sephiroth are called, overflow
from their exuberant being without thereby diminish-
ing in any degree the reality or infinite vitality of their
source. They are considered hence to have but little re-
lation with the inferior Sephiroth which issue from them,
except as stem and root. Yet though hardly in any philo-
sophic relation to our phenomenal universe, we find
when engaged in magical working that it is customary
— even necessary — to open ourselves by invocation to
its influence so that this divine power of the Supernal
< 24>Light, descending through the human mind, may sanc-
tify and accomplish the object of the ceremony itself.
The Supernals are often portrayed diagrammatically
and symbolically as a woman clothed with the Sun, stars
above her head and the moon at her feet — the typical
anima figure of modern psychology.

.

She represents thus that First Matter of the Alchem-
ists, the description of which given by Thomas Vaughan
in his Coelum Terras is interesting to quote as indicating
further the nature and qualities of the Supernals: “A
most pure sweet virgin, for nothing as yet hath been gen-
. She yields to nothing but love, for
erated out of her .
her end is generation, and that was never yet performed
by violence. He that knows how to wanton and toy with
her, the same shall receive all her treasures. First, she
sheds at her nipples a thick heavy water, but white as
any snow; the philosophers call it Virgin’s Milk. Sec-
ondly, she gives him blood from her very heart; it is a
quick, heavenly fire; some improperly call it their sul-
phur. Thirdly and lastly, she presents him with a secret
crystal, of more worth and lustre than the white rock
and all her rosials. This is she, and these are her favours.”
From this first triad, a second triad of emanations is
reflected or projected downwards into a more coarse
degree of substance. They likewise reflect the negative
and positive qualities of two of the Supernals with the
addition of a third factor, a resultant which acts as a
reconciling principle. In passing, I should add that plan-
etary attributions are given to these Sephiroth as ex-
pressing the type of their operation. Kether is Spirit,
Chokmah refers to the Zodiac, and Binah is attributed
to Saturn.

< 25 >

The fourth Sephirah is Chesed, meaning Grace or
Mercy; also Gedulah is its other name, meaning Great-
ness, and to it is referred the astrological quality called
Jupiter. Its concept is one of construction, expansion
and solidification.Geburah is the fifth enumeration, Power or Might,
and it is a symbol of creative power and force. Its planet-
ary attribution is Mars, its quality being that destructive
force which demolishes all forms and ideas when their
term of usefulness and healthy life is done. It symbolises
not so much a fixed state of things, as an act, a further
passage and transition of potentiality Into actuality.

Six is the harmonising and reconciling Sephirah, Tiph-
areth. The word itself means beauty and harmony. It is
attributed to the Sun, the lord and centre of our solar
system. Just as Kether referred to the most secret depths
of the Unconscious, the core of man’s life, so Tiphareth
is its reflection, the ego, the ordinary human conscious-
ness. This Sephirah completes the second triad, which is

a triad of consciousness, as the first triad of the Super-
nal Light may be considered the triad of that which is
supremely divine, the Superconscious.

Netsach, Victory, to which the planet Venus is re-
ferred, is the first Sephirah of the third reflected triad,
and marks an entirely different order of things. Here
we enter the elemental sphere, where Nature’s forces
have their sway. It is also the region in the human
sphere of what we may term the Unconscious. The mag-
ical tradition classifies this Unconsciousness into several
strata, and to each of them is attributed some one of
the four elements, Fire, Water, Air and Earth. Netsach
is attributed to the element of Fire, and so far as concerns
<26>

the classification of man’s principles, it represents his
emotional life.

Its opposite pole on the Tree of Life, is Hod, which
means Splendour, which receives the attribution of the
planet Mercury, Its element is Water, and its action rep-
resents fluidic mind, the thinking, logical capacity in
man, as well as what may be called his magical or ner-
vous force — what the Hindu systems denominate as

Prana.Prana.

The third of that triad is Yesod, the Foundation, the
ninth Sephirah, the operation of the Sphere of the Moon.
This is the airy sphere of the fourth dimension, termed in
occultism the Astral plane. Here we find the subtle
electro-magnetic substance into which all the higher
forces are focussed, the ether, and it constitutes the
basis or final model upon which the physical world is
built. Its elemental attribution is that of Air, ever flow-
ing, shifting, and in a constant flux—yet because of that
flux, in perpetual stability. Just as the tremendous speed
of the particles insures the stability of the atom, so the
fleeting forms and motion of Yesod in all its implications
constitute the permanence and surety of the physical

world.

Pendant to these three triads in Malkuth, the King-
dom, referred to the element of Earth, the synthesis or
vehicle of the other elements and planets. Malkuth is the
physical world, and in man represents his physical body
and brain, the Temple of the Holy Ghost — the actual
tomb of the allegorical Christian Rosenkreutz.

These Sephiroth are not to be construed as ten dif-
ferent portions of objective space, each separated by
millions and millions of miles — though of course they
< 27>

must have their correspondences in different parts of
space. They are, rather, serial concepts, each condition
or state or serial concept enclosing the other. Each Sephi-
rah, be it spiritual, ethereal, or physical, has its own
laws, conditions, and “times,” if one may borrow ter-
minology from Dunne’s Experiment with Time. The
distinction between them is one of quality and density
of substance. The difference may well be one of dimen-
sion, besides representing different type-levels of con-sciousness, the “lower” worlds or Sephiroth being inter-
penetrated or held by the “higher.” Thus Kether, the
Crown, is in Malkuth, as one axiom puts it, by virtue
of the fact that its substance is of an infinitely rare, at-
tenuated, and ethereal nature, while Malkuth, the phy-
sical universe is enclosed within the all-pervading spirit
which is Kether in precisely the same way that Dunne
conceives Time No. 1, to be enclosed or contained, or
moving as a field of experience, within Serial Time No. 2.
So far as concerns the Supernals, for these are the
ideas which must principally interest us, the Qabalah
teaches us that they comprise an abstract impersonal
principle. That is, it is explained as an exalted condition
of consciousness rather than of substance; an essence or
spirit which is everywhere and at all times expressed in
terms of Light. In one sense, and from a comparative
point of view, it may help our understanding if we
imagine it to have certain similarities to what our lead-
ing Analytical Psychologists call the Collective Uncon-

scious.

Though wholly impersonal in itself, and without char-
acteristics that are readily understandable to the or-
dinary mind, the Supernals are, to all intents and pur-
<2B>scious.

Though wholly impersonal in itself, and without char-
acteristics that are readily understandable to the or-
dinary mind, the Supernals are, to all intents and pur-
<2B>

poses, what is commonly thought of as God. In the Tib-
etan Buddhist system, an analogous concept is Sunyata,
the Void. And the realisation of the Void through Yoga
processes and the technical meditations of the Sangha is,
to quote Dr. Evan-Wentz’s book The Tibetan Book of
the Dead, to attain “the unconditioned Dharmakaya,
or the Divine Body of Truth, the primordial state of
uncreatedness, of the Supramundane Bodhic, All-con-
sciousness — Buddhahood.” In man, this Light is rep-
resented by the very deepest levels of his Unconscious
— a mighty activity within his soul, which one magical
system calls the higher and Divine Genius. Though the
Golden Dawn rituals persistently use phraseology which
implies the belief in a personal God, that usage to my
mind is a poetic or dramatic convention. A number of
its very fine invocations are addressed to a deity con-
ceived of in a highly individualistic and personal manner,
yet if the student bears in mind the several Qabalistic
definitions, these rituals take on added and profound
meaning from a purely psychological point of view. That
is, they are seen to be technical methods of exalting the
individual consciousness until it comes to a complete
realisation of its own divine root, and that universal
pure essence of mind which ultimately it is.

It may be convenient for the reader if I tabulate the
names of the Sephiroth with the Grades employed" in
the Golden Dawn, together with a few important at-

tributions:-

< 29>

1. Kether.The Crown. Spirit

2. Chokmah. Wisdom.

3. Binah. Understanding.

4. Chesed. Mercy.

5. Geburah. Might.

6. Tiphareth. Harmony.

7. Netzach. Victory. Fire.

10.
8. Hod. Splendour. Water.

9. Yesod. Foundation. Air.

0
0
0

Ipsissimus

©—
®— GO
Magus
Magister Templi ©=GD

Adeptus

Exemptus

©=E6. Tiphareth. Harmony.

7. Netzach. Victory. Fire.

10.
8. Hod. Splendour. Water.

9. Yesod. Foundation. Air.

0
0
0

Ipsissimus

©—
®— GO
Magus
Magister Templi ©=GD

Adeptus

Exemptus

©=E

Adeptus Major ©—
Adeptus Minor @=0
©=0
®=GD
©—

Philosophus

Theoricus

Practicus

Malkuth. Kingdom, Earth

Zelator

In the consideration of the grades, T shall not discuss
any others than those existing between Zelator and
Adeptus Minor. My reason for doing so is that it is im-
possible for the ordinary individual to understand those
above the grade of Adeptus Minor, and individuals who
lay claim openly to such exalted grades, by that very
act place a gigantic question mark against the validity
of their attainment. He that is exalted is humble. And to
have tasted that which is conveyed by the Adeptus
Minor grade is so lofty an experience that few in their
right minds, unless they were extremely saintlike in
character, would consider themselves as having passed
officially to a higher spiritual state.

Before proceeding to an analysis of the grades, and
the ceremonies which were supposed to confer them, it
has been thought advisable to consider the nature of
< 3 °>Before proceeding to an analysis of the grades, and
the ceremonies which were supposed to confer them, it
has been thought advisable to consider the nature of
< 3 °>

initiation itself, which was the avowed function and pur-
pose of the Order. What exactly is Initiation? Those of
us who have read some of the neo-occult and pseudo-
Theosophical literature will also have heard the word
initiation just too often to feel wholly at ease. Lesser
Initiations and Greater Initiations have been written
of at some length. But the entire subject was surrounded
with that vague air of mystery, that halo of sanctity
and ambiguity whose only excuse can be ignorance on
the part of the writers thereof. The degree of phantasy
and attenuated sentimentality which has obtained ex-
pression from these sources, plus the real lack of know-
ledge as to the objects of these degrees and mysteries,
act as a constant source of irritation. Particularly, when
we remember that they were issued to satisfy people
spiritually hungry, and yearning with an indescribable
hunger for but a few crumbs of the divine wisdom.

Learned dissertations have been published describing
in great detail the folk customs of Australian aborigines
and Polynesian and other primitive peoples. All the
strange habits and unfamiliar rites of these tribes are pa-
raded before our gaze—from their hour of birth, through
the vicissitudes of their emotional life, to the moment of
death and interrment. We are asked to accept that these
are initiations. The sole import attached to the word
“initiation” in this connection is that of the formal ac-
ceptance of a boy at puberty, for example, into the com-
munal life of his people.

Moreover, Jane E. Harrison, Sir F. G. Frazer and a
host of other excellent scholars have provided us with
a wealth of anthropological data so far as the Greeks and
Romans of another day are concerned. Some knowledge
<3i>of their religious rites and observances is displayed. I he
daily habits of the people are carefully noted and re-
corded in many a tome.

They also describe, though more haltingly and with
rather less confidence, the circumstances surrounding
the Ancient Mystery Cults. The symbolism of these
mystery religions was, we see, in certain aspects uniform.
All were dramas of redemption, plans of salvation, ways
of purgation. Degrees of initiation, baptism by water,
a mystical meal for the privileged, dramatic plays de-
picting the life and death of some god or other — these
are the familiar incidents of the cults described by our

scholars.

But the obvious question arises, what spiritual value
have such things for us? Do they help our own interior
development so that we may solve our personal prob-
lems and handle more satisfactorily the rather difficult
process of living to-day? And is this sort of thing what
the Adepts of old implied by initiation? And if this all
there is to it, why should so many moderns have been
so curiously perturbed and excited by it all. Some other
meaning must be latent herein; some other purpose to
the rite must have been understood by their original
observers whereby they were spiritually assisted and
aided not only to deal adequately with life but to further
the conquest and manifestation of their own latent spir-
itual nature.

For despite every record, and every learned attempt
to penetrate into the significance of these rites, as to the
exact procedure of the Theurgic technique we still ob-
tain no lasting satisfaction, or understanding. There was
undoubtedly a secret about these celebrations, both
< 3 2>ethnic and early Christian, which no exoteric record has
divulged or common sense, so-called, succeeded wholly
to explain away. And the reason no doubt is this. Though
the early writers felt no hesitancy in expounding certain
principles of the philosophy of their Mysteries, none felt
it incumbent upon himself to record in black and white
the practical details of the magical technique. Hence it
is, in the absence of a description of the practical ele-
ments of these rites, that our scholars, anthropologists
and philosophers do not feel inclined to attach much
significance to the ancient Mysteries other than an or-
dinary religious or philosophic one. That is, it is their
belief that ordinary notions of an advanced theological
or philosophical nature were promulgated therein. For
I may add in passing the complete esoteric technique
of initiation has never previously passed into open
publication. It has been reserved in all secrecy for ini-
tiates of the sacred schools of Magic, While various doc-
uments explaining the principia of this wisdom were
circulated amongst the members of these schools, the
oaths of secrecy attaching to their receipt was such that
in recent times, as I have said, few lay exponents of the
ancient religions and philosophies have ever so much as
suspected the existence of these principia.

The root of the word itself means “to begin,” “to
commence anew.” Initiation is thus the beginning of a
new phase or attitude to life, the entry, moreover, into
an entirely new type of existence. Its characteristic is the
opening of the mind to an awareness of other levels of
consciousness, both within and without. Initiation means
above all spiritual growth — a definite mark in the span
of human life.

< 33 >< 33 >

Now one of the best methods for bringing about this
stimulus of the inner life, so that one does really begin
or enter upon an entirely new existence characterised
by an awareness of higher principles within, is the Cere-
monial technique. By this we mean that a Ceremony
is arranged in which certain ideas, teaching and admoni-
tions are communicated to the candidate in dramatic
form in a formally prepared Temple or Bodge room. Nor
is this all — otherwise, no claim could be made on behalf
of Magic that it really and not merely figuratively ini-
tiates. For the utterance of an injunction does not neces-
sarily imply that it can sink sufficiently deeply into con-
sciousness so as to arouse into renewed activity the dor-
mant spiritual qualities. And we have already witnessed
the invalidity and spiritual bankruptcy of innumerable
organisations, religious, secular, and fraternal so-called,
which have their own rituals and yet, taking them by
and large, have produced very few initiates or spirit-
ually-minded men and women, saints or adepts of any
outstanding merit.

The efficacy of an initiation ceremony depends almost
exclusively on the initiator. What is it that bestows the
power of successful initiation? This power comes from
either having had it awakened interiorly at the hands
of some other competent initiator, or that a very great
deal of magical and meditation work has successfully
been performed. It is hardly necessary at this juncture
to labour at a description of these exercises and tech-
nical processes of development which were undertaken
by candidates and would-be initiators. These have been
delineated at length elsewhere, both in my Tree of Life,
and in an incomparably fine form in the Golden Dawn
< 34>documents presented herein. But it is necessary to em-
phasise the fact that an anterior personal training and
prolonged magical effort are the sole means by which one
is enabled so to awaken the dormant spiritual life of
another that he may well and truly be called “initiated.”
Now we know from an examination of the above men-
tioned documents and of ancient literature that the
object of the Theurgic art, as the magical concept of
initiation was then termed, was so to purify the person-
ality that that which was there imprisoned could spring
into open manifestation. As one of the alchemical ex-
positors has expressed it: “Within the material extreme
of this life, when it is purified, the Seed of the Spirit is
at last found.” The entire object of all magical and al-
chemical processes is the purification of the natural man,
and by working upon his’nature to extract the pure gold
of spiritual attainment. This is initiation.

§

These Golden Dawn rituals and ceremonies of initia-
tion are worthy of a great deal of study and attention.
It is my sincere and fervent hope that meditation and a
close examination will be made of the text. Now, if we
examine these texts carefully, we shall find that we can
epitomise in a single word the entire teaching and ideal
of those rituals. If one idea more than any other is per-
sistently stressed from the beginning that idea is in the
word Light. From the candidate’s first reception in the
1 Tall of the Neophytes when the Hierophant ad jures him
with these words: “Child of Earth, long hast thou dwelt
in darkness. Quit the night and seek the day,” to the
< 35>transfiguration in the Vault ceremony, the whole system
has as its objective the bringing down of the Light. For
it is by that Light that the golden banner of the inner
life may be exalted; it is in light where lies healing and
the power of growth. Some vague intimation of the
power and splendour of that glory is first given to the
aspirant in the Neophyte Grade when, rising from his
knees at the close of the invocation, the Light is formu-
lated above his head in the symbol of the White Triangle
by the union of the implements of the three chief officers.
By means of the Adeptus Minor ritual, which identi-
fies him with the Chief Officer, he is slain as though by
the destructive force of his lower self. After being sym-
bolically buried, triumphantly he rises from the tomb
of Osiris in a glorious resurrection through the descent
of the white Light of the Spirit. The intervening grades
occupy themselves with the analysis of that Light as it
vibrates between the light and the darkness, and with
the establishment within the candidate’s personal sphere
of the rays of the many-coloured rainbow of promise.

“Before all things,” commences a phrase in one ritual,
“are the chaos, the darkness, and the Gates of the Land
of Night.” It is in this dark chaotic night so blindly
called life, a night in which we struggle, labour and war
incessantly for no reasonable end, that we ordinary hu-
man beings stumble and proceed about our various tasks.
These gates of the far-flung empire of the night indeed
refer eloquently to the material bondage which we our-
selves have created — a bondage whereby we are tied

to our circumstances, to our selves, to trial of every kind,
bound to the very things we so despise and hate. It is
not until we have clearly realised that we are enmeshed
< 3^>to our circumstances, to our selves, to trial of every kind,
bound to the very things we so despise and hate. It is
not until we have clearly realised that we are enmeshed
< 3^>

in darkness, an interior darkness, that we Can commence
to seek for that alchemical solvent which shall disperse
the night, and call a halt to the continual projection
outwards of the blackness which blinds our souls. As in
the Buddhist scheme, where the first noble truth is sor-
row, so not until we have been brought by experience
to understand life as sorrow, can we hope for the cessa-
tion of its dread ravage. Only then does the prospect
open of breaking the unconscious projection, the ending
of which discloses the world and the whole of life in a
totally different light. “One thing only, brother, do I
proclaim,” said the Buddha, “now as before. Suffering
and deliverance from suffering.”

These restricting circumstances and bonds are only
the gates of the wilderness. The use of the word “gate”
implies a means both of egress and ingress. By these gates
we have entered, and by them also may we go out if
so we choose, to enter the brilliance of the dawning Sun,
and perchance greet the rising of the spiritual splendour.
For “after the formless, the void, and the darkness, then
cometh the knowledge of the Light.” As intimated above,
one first must have realised that one’s soul is lost in
darkness before a remedy can be sought to that irrespon-
sible participation mystique, the unconscious projection
outwards of interior confusion, and aspire to that divine
land which is, metaphorically, the place of one’s birth.
In that land is no darkness, no formlessness, no chaos.

It is the place of the Light itself — that Light “which
no wind can extinguish, which burns without wicks or

fuel.”

Being “brought to the Light” then is a very apposite
description of the function of Initiation. It is the Great
< 37>fuel.”

Being “brought to the Light” then is a very apposite
description of the function of Initiation. It is the Great
< 37>

Work, There is no ambiguity in the conception of the
Rituals, for it appears throughout the entire work from
Neophyte to Adeptus Minor and perhaps beyond. For
the Path is a journeying upwards on the ladder of exist-
ence to the crown of the Tree of Life, a journey where
every effort made and every step taken brings one a
little nearer to the true glory of the Clear Light. As we
know, the experience of the rising of the Light in both
vision and waking state is common to mystics of every
age and of every people. It must be an experience of the
greatest significance in the treading of the Path because
its appearance seems always and everywhere an uncon-
ditional psychic thing. It is an experience which defies
definition, as well in its elementary flashes as in its most
advanced transports. No code of thought, philosophy
or religion, no logical process can bind it or limit it or
express it. But always it represents, spiritually, a marked
attainment, a liberation from the turmoil of life and
from psychic complications and, as Dr. C. G. Jung has
expressed the matter, it “thereby frees the inner person-
ality from emotional and imaginary entanglements,
creating thus a unity of being which is universally felt
as a release.” It is the attainment of spiritual puberty,
marking a significant stage in growth.

Symptomatic of this stage of interior growth is the
utter transformation that comes over what previously
appeared to be “the chaos, the darkness, and the Gates
of the Land of Night.” While man is assumed into god-
head, and the divine spirit is brought down into man-
hood, a new heaven and a new earth make their appear-
ance, and familiar objects take on a divine radiance
as though illumined by an internal spiritual light. And
< 38>this is what, in part at any rate, was meant by 1 the old
alchemists, for the finding of the Philosopher’s Stone
converts all base metals into the purest gold. In his book
Centuries of Meditation, Thomas Traherne gives an in-
teresting description of the rapture of the inner person-
ality, its reaction to the world, when it is freed by the
mystical experience from all entanglements. He says:
“The corn was orient and immortal wheat, which never
should be reaped, nor was ever sown. I thought it had
stood from everlasting to everlasting. The dust and the
stones of the street were as precious as gold; the gates
were at first the end of the world. The green trees when
I saw them first through one of the gates, transported
and ravished me, their sweetness and unusual beauty
made my heart to leap, and almost mad with ecstasy,
they were such strange and wonderful things. The men!
0 what venerable and reverend creatures did the aged
seem! Immortal Cherubim! And the young men glitter-
ing and sparkling angels, and maids, strange seraphic
pieces of life and beauty. Boys and girls tumbling in the
street, and playing, were moving jewels ... I knew not
that they were born or should die. But all things abided
eternally as they were in their proper places. Eternity
was manifest in the Light of the Day, and something
infinite behind everything appeared .

.

And to illustrate the magical attitude towards life and
the world when initiation has produced its true result,
there is another exalted panegyric by Traherne which
1 cannot desist from quoting. For let me add that Magic
does not countenance a retreat from life, an escape from
the turmoils of practical life. It seeks only to transmute
what formerly was dross into gold. Initiation has as its
<3 9>

..

object the commencement of a new life, to transform the
base and low into the pure and unutterably splendid.
“All appeared new and strange at first, inexpressibly rare
and delightful and beautiful. I was a little stranger which
at my entrance into the world was saluted and sur-
rounded with innumerable joys. My knowledge was Di-
vine; I knew by intuition those things which since my
Apostacy I collected again by the highest reason. My
very ignorance was advantageous. I seemed as one
brought into the state of innocence. All things were spot-
less and pure and glorious; yea, and infinitely mine and
joyful and precious. I knew not that there were any sins,
or complaints or laws. I dreamed not of poverties, con-
tentions, or vices. All tears and quarrels were hidden
from my eyes. Everything was at rest, free and immor-
tal. I knew nothing of sickness or death or exaction. In
the absence of these I was entertained like an angel with
the works of God in their splendour and glory; I saw
all in the peace of Eden ... All Time was Eternity, and
a perpetual Sabbath .

Such is the stone of the Philosophers, the Quintes-
sence, the Summum Ronum, true wisdom and perfect
happiness.

Psellus, the Neoplatonist, has written that the func-
tion of Initiatory Magic was “to initiate or perfect the
human soul by the powers of materials here on earth;
for the supreme faculty of the soul cannot by its own
guidance aspire to the sublimest intuition and to the
comprehension of Divinity,” It is a commonplace aphor-
ism in Occultism that “Nature unaided fails.” That is
to say that the natural life, if left to itself, and isolated
from the impact of a higher type of life or consciousness,
< 4°>can only produce a commonplace thing of the natural
life. It reminds us of the sentiment of the alchemists
who expressed contempt of their first matter as it existed
in its natural or impure state, in the condition where it
normally is found. But this first matter, cleansed and
purified by the psycho-chemical art of alchemy, that is
to say by Initiation — is that which is transformed into
the most precious thing in the whole world. But until
cleansed and purified it is of little or no value. Nature,
however, aided where she had left off by wise and devout
men, may surpass herself. And this is why Psellus claims
that the soul of itself and by itself is not able to attain
to divinity unless and until it is guided by Initiates and
thus enfolded into another life. It is to effect this integ-

ration, to bring about this initiation, this exaltation of
the consciousness above its natural state to the light
divine, that the magical system of the Golden Dawn, or
of any other legitimate initiating system, owes its exist-
ence. The function of every phase of its work, the avowed
intention of its principal rituals, and the explicit state-
ment of its teaching, is to assist the candidate by his own
aspirations to find that unity of being which is the inner
Self, the pure essence of mind, the Buddha-nature. Not
only does the system imply this by its ritualistic move-
ments and axiomata, but there are clear and unmistak-
able passages where these ideas are given unequivocal
expression. Thus, we find it written that the entire object
of initiation and mystical teaching is “by the interven-
tion of the symbol, ceremonial and sacrament, so to lead
the soul that it may be withdrawn from the attraction
of matter and delivered from the absorption therein,
whereby it walks in somnambulism, knowing not whence
<4i >it cometh nor whither it goeth.” And moreover, in the
same Ritual, celebrated at the autumnal and vernal
Equinoxes, the Chief Adept officiating recites an invoca-
tion beseeching guidance for the newly-installed Hiero-
phant. It is asked “that he may well and worthily direct
those who have been called from the tribulation of the
darkness into the Light of this little kingdom of Thy
love. And vouchsafe also, that going forward in love for
Thee, through him and with him, they may pass from
the Desire of Thy house into the Light of Thy presence.”
This is succeeded by sentences read by the Second and
Third Adepti: “The desire of Thy house hath eaten me
up,” and “I desire to be dissolved and to be with Thee.”
And finally, that not the least vestige of misunder-
standing or misconception may remain as to the objects
of this divine Theurgy, let me reproduce one last quota-
tion from this same ritual. Referring to the Supernals and
the Temple that in old time was built on high, the speech
adds: “The holy place was made waste and the Sons
of the house of Wisdom were taken away into the cap-
tivity of the senses. We have worshipped since then in
a house made with hands, receiving a sacramental min-
istration by a derived Light in place of the cohabiting
Glory. And yet, amidst Signs and symbols the tokens
of the Higher presence have never been wanting in our
hearts. By the waters of Babylon we have sat down and
wept, but we have ever remembered Zion; and that
memorial is a witness testifying that we shall yet return
with exultation into the house of our Father.”

Thus and unmistakeably is the true object of the Great
Work set before us, and we shall do well ever to keep
eye and aspiration firmly fixed thereto. For while the
<42>Thus and unmistakeably is the true object of the Great
Work set before us, and we shall do well ever to keep
eye and aspiration firmly fixed thereto. For while the
<42>

road to the spiritual Zion demands great exertion, and
because it is a way that at times proceeds by devious
routes, there is great temptation to linger by the road-
side, to stroll down pleasant side-lanes, or to play absent-
mindedly with toys or staves cut but to assist our for-
ward march. But if we forget not to what noble city the
winding path leads us, little danger can overtake any
who pursue it steadfast to the end. It is only when the
abiding city is forgotten that the road becomes hard,
and the way beset by unseen danger and difficulty.
Prior to attempting to describe a few of the salient
points of the Rituals — briefly, for since they appear
within these volumes, they must be individually studied
and experienced so that an individual point of view may
be acquired — it may be advisable to devote a few ex-
planatory words to the Art of Ceremonial Initiation itself.
A useful and significant preface may be taken from
Dr. Jung’s commentary to Wilhelm’s translation of The
Secret of The Golden Flower, where there is much that
explains the ritualistic functions of Magic. “Magical

practices are,” he declares, “the projections of psychic
events wrhich, in cases like these, exert a counter influence
on the soul, and act like a kind of enchantment of one’s
own personality. That is to say, by means of these con-
crete performances, the attention or better said the in-
terest, is brought back to an inner sacred domain which
is the source and goal of the soul. This inner domain
contains the unity of life and consciousness which,
though once possessed, has been lost and must now be
found again.”

From one point of view the officers employed in these
Rituals represent just such psychic projections. They
<43 >From one point of view the officers employed in these
Rituals represent just such psychic projections. They
<43 >

represent, even as figures in dreams do, different aspects
of man himself — personifications of abstract psycho-
logical principles inhering within the human spirit.
Through the admittedly artificial or conventional means
of a dramatic projection of these personified principles
in a well-ordered ceremony a reaction is induced in con-
sciousness. This reaction is calculated to arouse from
their dormant condition those hitherto latent faculties
represented objectively in the Temple of Initiation by
the officers. Without the least conscious effort on the
part of the aspirant, an involuntary current of sympathy
is produced by this external delineation of spiritual parts
which may be sufficient to accomplish the purpose of
the initiation ceremony. The aesthetic appeal to the
imagination — quite apart from what could be called
the intrinsic magical virtue with which the G. D. docu-
ments Z. 1. and Z. 3. deal at some length — stirs to
renewed activity the life of the inner domain. And the
entire action of this type of dramatic ritual is that the
soul may discover itself exalted to the heights, and dur-
ing that mystical elevation receive the rushing forth of
the Light.

Applying these ideas then,

to the Neophyte or
@=H] — so called because it is not attributed to any
of the enumerations or Sephiroth on the Tree of Life since
it is a preliminary or probationary grade — we find that
the Kerux is an officer who personifies the reasoning
faculties. He represents that intelligent active part of
the mind which functions ever in obedience to the Will
— the Qabalistic Ruach, in a word. The higher part of
that mind, the aspiring, sensitive, and the intuitive con-
sciousness is represented by the Hegemon, who seeks
<44>

,,

the rising of the Light. And the Hierophant, in this in-
itial ceremony of Neophyte, acts on behalf of the higher
spiritual soul of man himself, that divine self of which
too rarely, if ever at all, we become aware. “The essence
of mind is intrinsically pure,” is a definition of the Bod-
hisattva Sila Sutra, and it is this essential state of en-
lightenment, this interior Self, Osiris glorified through
trial and perfected by suffering, which is represented
by the Hierophant on the dais. He is seated in the place
of the rising Sun, on the throne of the East, and with
but two or three exceptions never moves from that sta-
tion in the Temple. As the Qabalah teaches, the ever-
lasting abode of the higher Self is in the Eden of Paradise
the supernal sanctuary which is ever guarded from chaos
by the flaming sword of the Kerubim whirling every way
on the borders of the abyss. From that aloof spiritual
stronghold it gazes down upon its vehicle, the lower man,
evolved for the purpose of providing it with experience
— involved in neither its struggles or tribulations, yet,
from another point of view, suffering acutely thereby.
And seldom does that Genius leave its palace of the
stars except when, voluntarily, the lower self opens itself
to the higher by an act of sincerest aspiration or self-
sacrifice, which alone makes possible the descent of the
Light within our hearts and minds. Thus when the Hier-
ophant leaves the Throne of the East, he represents
that Higher Self in action, and as Osiris marks the active
descent of the Supernal splendour. For he says, as he
leaves the dais with wand uplifted: “I come in the Power
of the Light. I come in the Light of Wisdom. I come in
the Mercy of the Light. The Light hath healing in its
wings.” And having brought the Light to the aspirant,
<45>

he returns to his throne, as though that divine Genius
ot whom he is the symbol awaited the deliberate willing
return of the aspirant himself to the everlasting abode
of the Light.he returns to his throne, as though that divine Genius
ot whom he is the symbol awaited the deliberate willing
return of the aspirant himself to the everlasting abode
of the Light.

Even in the communication of the usual claptrap of
secret societies, the signs and grips, all these are ex-
plained solely in terms of the quest for the Light. Also
the various groupings of officers and their movements
in the Temple are not without profound meaning. These
should be sought out, since they constantly reiterate
the implicit purpose of the rite. Thus, at the altar, the
three principal officers form about the candidate a Triad,
representing in symbolic formation again the Supernal
clear Light of the Void, and this also is represented by
the number of the circum ambulations about the con-
fines of the Temple. The white cord bound thrice about
the waist has reference to the same set of ideas. Even
upon the altar of the Temple are symbols indicating the
rise of Light. A red calvary cross of six squares as sym-
bolic of harmony and equilibrium is placed above a
white triangle — the emblem of the Golden Dawn. They
form the symbol of the Supernal Sephiroth which are
the dynamic life and root of all things, while in man they
constitute that triad of spiritual faculties which is the
intrinsically pure essence of mind. Hence the triangle
is a fitting emblem of the Light. And the place of the
Cross above the Triangle suggests not the domination
of the sacred spirit, but its equilibriation and harmony
in the heart of man. Despite the fact that the whole of
this intricate symbolism can hardly be realised by the
candidate at the time of his initiation, its intrinsic value
is such that unconsciously as an organised body of sug-
<46>

gestion it is perceived and noted and strikes the focal

centre.gestion it is perceived and noted and strikes the focal

centre.

We are taught by tradition that the entire object of
the sacred rites was the purification of the soul so that
its power could gradually dissolve the impediments of,
and percolate through, the heavy body and opaque
brain. “Know” says Synesius, “that the Quintessence
and hidden thing of our stone is nothing else than our
viscous celestial and glorious soul drawn out of its min-
Hence the entire trend of the pre-
era by our magistery
liminary Neophyte grade of the Golden Dawn is towards
the purification of the personality. It fulfils the testi-
mony of the Hermetic Art so that the Light within could
be fermented and perfected by the ceremonial method
of initiation. Purification and consecration — this is the
insistent and uncompromising theme caught by the can-
didate’s car. “Unpurified and unconsecrated thou canst
not enter our sacred Hall!” Fire and water assist in these
several consecrations until, eventually, the candidate is
placed in the position of balanced power, between the
two Pillars, where the first link is effected with his higher
and divine Genius.

§

The Neophyte Ritual really stands by itself. It is
an introductory ceremony shadowing forth all the major
formulae and techniques. With the Adeptus Minor rit-
ual it is concerned almost entirely with the Light itself.
The five grades that are placed between them have as
their object the awakening of the elemental bases of
what must develop into the instrument of the higher.
Awakened and purified, they may be consecrated to the
<47>

Great Work, in order that they may become worthy
vehicles for the indwelling of the Light. First, however,
it is necessary that they be awakened. For, psychological

truism that it is, until their presence is realised theirtruism that it is, until their presence is realised their

transmutation cannot be accomplished. In symbolic
form and pageantry, the ceremony of each grade calls
forth the spirits of a particular element. And as a steel
placed in close proximity to a magnet receives some de-
gree of its magnetism, and comparable to the electrical
phenomenon of induction, so the presence of power in-
duces power. Contact with the appropriate type of ele-
mental force produces an identical type of reaction with-
in the sphere of the Neophyte, and it is thus that growth
and advancement proceeds. The speeches of the officers
deal almost exclusively with the knowledge pertaining
to that element and grade, and excerpts from fragment-
ary remains of the ancient Mysteries and from certain
of the books of the Qabalah do much towards producing
an impressive atmosphere.

The element offered for the work of transmutation
in the Grade of Zelator is the earthy part of the Candi-
date. The ritual symbolically admits him to the first
rung of that mighty ladder whose heights are obscured
in the Light above. This first rung is the lowest sphere
of the conventional Tree of Life, Malkuth, the Sanctum
Regnum. To it are ascribed the first grade of Zelator, and
the element of Earth. Herein, after the Earth elementals
are invoked, the Candidate is ceremonially brought to
three stations, the first two being those of e*il and the
presence divine. At each of these stations the Guard-
ians reject him at the point of the sword, urging him in
his unprepared state to return. His third attempt to go
<4S>

forward places him in a balanced position, the path of
equilibrium, the Middle Way, where he is received. And
a way is cleared for him by the Hierophant, who again
represents the celestial soul of things. During his journey
along that path, the stability of earth is established
within him, that eventually it may prove an enduring
temple of the Holy Spirit.Some have criticised these elemental grades a little
harshly and severely; others have rejected them entirely.
In a letter sent to me from a former Praemonstrator of
one G. D. Temple, these rituals too were condemned in
that they were said to be simply a parade, redundant
and verbose, of the occult knowledge that one of the
Chiefs possessed at that time. In one sense, of course,
what those critics claim is perfectly true. The principal
formulae and teaching are concealed in the preliminary
Neophyte Grade and that of Adeptus Minor. It is the
development of the ideas in these ceremonies which con-
stitutes the Great Work — the disclosure of the essence

of mind, the invocation of the higher Genius. These,
however, are the high ends and the final goals of the
mystic term. Notwithstanding his limitations these are
ultimates to which every man must work. Meanwhile,
in order to render that attainment possible in its fullest
sense, several important matters require attention. The
personality must be harmonised. Every element therein
demands equilibriation in order that illumination ensu-
ing from the magical work may not produce fanaticism
and pathology instead of Adeptship and integrity. Bal-
ance is required for the accomplishment of the Great
Work. “Equilibrium is the basis of the soul.” Therefore,
the four grades of Earth, Air, Water and Fire plant the
<49>

seeds of the microcosm ic pentagram, and above them is
placed, in the Portal ceremony, the Crown of the Spirit,
the quintessence, added so that the elemental vehemence
may be tempered, to the end that all may work together
in balanced disposition. These grades are therefore an
important and integral part of the work, despite short-
sighted hostile criticism. To compare them, however,
with those which precede and follow, is symptomatic
of an intellectual confusion of function. It is rather asif one said that milk is more virtuous than Friday —
which, naturally, is absurd. Yet similar comparisons in
magical matters are constantly being made without ex-
citing ridicule. It is obvious that different categories may
not be so compared. The purpose of the Neophyte rit-
ual is quite distinct from that of Zclator, and it is mis-
taken policy to compare them. What rightly could be
asked is whether the Zelator and the other elemental
grades accomplish what they purport to do. That is an-
other matter. The concensus of experienced opinion is
on the whole that they do, and I am content for the
time being to accept that authority.

The candidate by these grades is duly prepared, so
it is argued, to enter the immeasurable region, to begin
to analyse and comprehend the nature of the Light which
has been vouchsafed him. The first three elemental
grades could be taken just as quickly as the candidate,
at the discretion of the Chiefs, desired. There were no
requirements other than to indicate by examination
that the appropriate meditations had been performed
and certain items of Qabalistic knowledge necessary to
the magical routine committed to memory.

Before proceeding further in the analysis of the grades-,
<S°>

there is one rather fine prose passage in the Zelator grade
which must be given here — a passage of beauty, high
eloquence, and lofty significance. “And Tetragramma-
ton placed Kerubim at the East of the Garden of Eden
and a Flaming Sword which turned every way to keep
the path of the Tree of Life, for He has created Nature
that man being cast out of Eden may not fall into the
Void. He has bound man with the stars as with a chain.
He allures him with scattered fragments of the Divine
Body in bird and beast and flower. And He laments
over him in the Wind and in the Sea and in the Birds.
And when the times are ended, He will call the Kerubim
from the East of the Garden, and all shall be consumed
and become infinite and holy.”It would be a happy task, were it advisable, to devote
several pages of this introduction to praising the excel-
lence of what are called the four elemental prayers. Each
one of the elemental Initiation ceremonies closes with a
long prayer or invocation which issues, as it were, from
the heart of the elements themselves. These must be
silently read, continuously meditated upon and frequent-
ly heard fully to be appreciated, when the reader will
find his own personal reactions crystallising. Recited by
the Hierophant at the end of the ceremony, these prayers
voice the inherent aspiration of the elements towards
the goal they are striving in their own way to reach, for
here they are conceived as blind dumb forces both within
and without the personal sphere of man. They are given
assistance by the human beings who, having invoked
them and used their power, strive to repay in some way
the debt owed to these other struggling lives.

The grade after the Earth ceremony is that of Theor-
<5i>

icus. It is referred to the Ninth Sephirah on the Tree of
Life, Yesod, the Foundation, and to it are attributed the
sphere of the operation of Luna and the element Air.
Here the candidate is conducted to the stations of the
four Kerubim, the Angelic choir of Yesod. The Kerubim
are defined in that ritual as the presidents of the element-
al forces, the vivified powers of the letters of Tetragram-
maton operating in the Elements. Over each of these
rules some one of the four letters of the mirific word and
the Kerubim. It is always through the power and author-
ity and symbol of the Kerub that the elemental spirits
and their rulers are invoked. In this ritual, as in all the
others, important practical formulae of ceremonial mag-
ic are concealed.At this juncture, of the ceremony, with the Airy elem-
ents vibrating about him and through him, the Zelator
is urged to be “prompt and active as the Sylphs, but a-
void frivolity and caprice. Be energetic and strong as the
Salamanders but avoid irritability and ferocity, Be flex-
ible and attentive to images, like the Undines, but avoid
idleness and changeability. Be laborious and patient like
the Gnomes, but avoid grossness and avarice. So shalt
thou gradually develop the powers of thy soul and fit
thyself to command the spirits of the elements.”

In each of the grades, several drawings and diagrams
are exhibited, each one conveying useful knowledge and
information required in the upward quest. The Tarot
Keys are also dealt with, as indicating pictorially the
stages of that journey, and depicting the story of the
soul. It may not be possible because of the exigencies of
space to reproduce in these volumes a pack of Tarot cards
based upon esoteric descriptions — though I should very
< 52>

much liked to have done so. But by using the Waite and
the available French and Italian packs, and by compar-
ing them with the accounts given in the rituals, the imag-
ination of the reader will render this omission unimpor-

tant.tant.

The third grade is that of Practicus referred to the
Sephirah Hod, the Splendour, the lowest of the Sephir-
oth on the left hand side of the Tree, the Pillar of Sever-
ity. Its attributions refer to the sphere of the operation of
Mercury, but more especially to the element of Water
which in this ceremony is invoked to power and presence.
As I have previously remarked, and it bears constant re-
iteration, the Tree of Life and the Qabalistic scheme as
a whole should be carefully studied so that the aptness of
the attributions both to the Sephiroth and the Paths
may be fully appreciated. Two Paths lead to the Sphere
of Splendour, the Path of Fire from Malkuth, and the
Path of the reflection of the sphere of the Sun from Ye-
sod. Water is germinative and maternal, whilst Fire is
paternal and fructifying. It is from their interior stimu-
lation and union, the alchemical trituration, that the
higher life is born, even as has been said, “Except ye be
baptised wr ith water and the Spirit ye cannot enter the
Kingdom of heaven.”

Therefore in this grade, the Candidate is led to the
sphere of stagnant water which by the presence of solar
and fiery elements is vitalised and rendered a perfect cre-
ative base. Most of the speeches in this ritual are depict-
ed as issuing from the Samothracian Kabiri, the deluge
Gods, though the main body of the ritual consists of the
sonorous and resonant versiclesof the Chaldaean Oracles,
the translation, I believe, of Dr. Westcott, with a few
< 53 >modifications authorised by Mathers. Briefly, the entire
symbolism of the Practicus grade is summarised by the
position on the altar of the principal Golden Dawn em-
blems so arranged that “the cross above the Triangle
represents the power of the Spirit rising above the tri-
angle of the Waters.” That also indicates the immediate
task of the Candidate. At this juncture, too, the diagrams
displayed begin to take on especial significance, and
though their theme apparently is biblical in nature,
accompanied by explanations in a curious phraseology
consonant therewith, they are nevertheless highly sug-

gestive, as containing the elements of a profound psy-
chology. After this grade follows an automatic wait of
three months, referred to the regimen of the elements,
a period as it were of silent incubation, during which
time the rituals were given to the candidate that he may
make copies for his own private use and study.

The fourth grade of Philosophus carries the candidate
one step further. The Sephirah involved is Netsach, Vic-
tory, to which is referred the operation of the planet
Venus and the clement of Fire, while the paths that con-
nect to the lower rungs of the ladder are principally of a
watery nature. Thus the elements encountered are of an
identical nature with those of the preceding grade, but
their order and power is quite reversed. Previously the
water was predominant. Now the Fire rages and whirls
in lurid storm, with water only as the complementary
element whereon it may manifest, and in order that due
equilibrium may be maintained, as it is written : — “The
Ruach Elohim moved upon the face of the Waters.”
These two are the primary terrestrial elements which,
intelligently controlled and creatively employed may
< 54>lead eventually to the restoration of the Golden Age. By
their transmutation a new paradise may be re-created
from the darkness and chaos into which formerly it had
fallen. For the Light may not legitimately be called forth
upon man, nor dwell within him, until chaos has been
turned into equilibrium of complete realisation and en-
lightenment. Not until order has been restored to the
lower elements of his earthy kingdom, neither peace nor
inner security may be his rightful lot.

The symbols depicted while traversing the Path of
Peh, which joins the spheres of Fire and Water, indicate
the results as it were of the first stages of the Path, for the
Tarot card shown demonstrates the destruction of a
Tower by lightning. The three holes blasted in the walls
symbolise the Supernal Triad, the establishment of the
divine through and following the destruction of the outer
self. Though Fire and Water, warmth and moisture, are
essentially creative, their stimulation within the being
of the Neophyte draws his attention, perhaps for the
first time, to the chaotic condition of his natural exist-
ence, and the complete psychic muddle into which his
ignorance and spiritual impotence have stranded him.
Evocative of the highest within his soul, these elements
equally call forth that which is base and low. The result of
the first step is analytical, an unbalancing, the levelling
down of all that man formerly held true and holy — the
chaos, the darkness, and the Gates of the Land of Night.
An unhappy state, but a very necessary one if progress
is to be made and if the preliminary chaos is to be trans-
cended. From these ruins may be erected the new temple
of Light, for it is always from the rubbish heap that are
selected the materials for the manifestation of god-head.
< 55>These symbols have a dual reference. Not only do they
refer to the epochs of creative evolution whose memory
has long since faded even from the visible memory of
nature, but also to the recapitulations of these periods
within personal progress on the Path. “The Aspirant on
the threshold of Initiation,” observes Crowley very apt-
ly, “finds himself assailed by the ‘complexes’ which have
corrupted him, their externalisation excruciating him,
and his agonised reluctance to their elimination plunging
him into such ordeals that he seems (both to himself and
to others) to have turned from a noble and upright man
into an unutterable scoundrel.” These arc the experi-
ences and events which occur to every aspirant when in-
itiation forces the realisation upon him that “all
sorrow.” In fact, it is my belief that the criterion or hall
mark of successful initiation is the occurrence of these or
similar experiences. The whole universe, under the stim-
ulation of the magical elements and inward analysis,
seems to tumble like a pack of cards crazily about one’s
feet. This is the solve half of the alchemical solve et coag-
ula formula.

is

Analysis must precede synthesis. Corruption is the
primitive base from which the pure gold of the spirit is
drawn. Moreover the alchemical treatises are eloquent
in their description of the poisonous nature of this condi-
tion which, though extremely unpleasant, is a highly
necessary one, and success in its production is at least one
symptom of good working. It is held that the highest
results may not be obtained until this particular type of
change has occurred. So far as the nature of the environ-
ment and the creative power of the personal self permits,
the task implied by the coagula formula is to assemble
<S6>them and remould them nearer to the heart’s desire. And
here again, the alchemists are adamant in their insistence
upon the aphorism that “Nature unaided fails.” For the
alchemist, so the tradition asserts, commences his work
where Nature has left off. And were this solvi phenom-
enon to occur spontaneously in the course of nature, the
result and the outcome — the coagulation of previously
dissolved elements — would not be very dissimilar to
that which previously existed. But with the technique
of initiation, the chaos is lifted up and fermented so to
speak, that from it, with the aid of the invoked white

Light of the divine Spirit, a higher species of being, illum-
ined and enlightened, may develop.

In two Altar diagrams — one called the Garden of
Eden, shown in the Practicus grade, and the other called
The Fall shown in the Philosophus grade, all these ideas
are expanded and synthesized. They should be carefully
studied and receive long meditation, for in them are
many clues to the spiritual and psychological problems
which beset the traveller on the Path, and they resume
the entire philosophy of Magic. Many hints, moreover,
which may be found useful as assisting meditation are
contained in The ‘Curse’ from a Philosophical Point of
View in the second volume of Blavatsky’s Secret Doc-
trine in connection with the Prometheus myth and the
awakening of Manas, mind.

Since both of these diagrams may be found reproduc-
ed in the body of the text very little by way of prolonged
explanation need here be said. The first depicts a personi-
fied representation of the three fundamental principles
in Man. Each of these is apparently separate, function-
ing independently on its own plane without co-opera-
< 57>tion with, because apparently unaware of, cither the
higher or the lower. Principally, it represents man in the
now departed morning of the race, in the primal rounds
of evolutionary effort when self-consciousness had not
yet been won by self-induced and self-devised efforts,
and when peace and harmony prevailed both within and
without by right of heritage rather than through per-
sonal labour. The diagram appears in the Water grade
of Practicus, since Water is a fitting representation of
this placid peace. At the summit of the diagram stands
the Apocalyptic woman clothed with the Sun of glory,
crowned with the twelve stars, and the moon lying at her
feet. Her symbolism pertains to the supernal essence of
mind, representing thus the type and symbol of the glit-
tering Augoeides, the Neschamah. Speaking of an analo-
gous psychological conception in his commentary to The
Secret of the Golden Flower, Dr. C. G. Jung remarks
that this figure represents “a line or principle of life that
strives after superhuman, shining heights.” At the base
of the tree stands Eve, the Nefhesch or unconscious who,
in opposition to this divine Genius, stands for the dark
“earthborn, feminine principle with its emotionality and
instinctiveness reaching far back into the depths of time,
and into the roots of physiological continuity.” Between
the two stands Adam, supported by the fundamental
strength of Eve, the Ruach or Ego not yet awakened to
a realisation of its innate power and possibility. From the
larger point of view he represents the race as a whole and
“is the personified symbol of the collective Logos, the
‘Host’, and of the Lords of Wisdom or the Heavenly Man,
who incarnated in humanity.” Otherwise he represents
the individual Candidate on the Path, prior to the awak-
< 58>

eningof the “sleeping dogs” within his being, to use Blav-
atsky’s apt expression.eningof the “sleeping dogs” within his being, to use Blav-
atsky’s apt expression.

Beneath these three figures sleeps a coiled dragon,
silent, unawakened. None it would seem is aware of that
latent power, titanic and promethean, coiled beneath —
the active magical power centered in man, his libido,
neutral, of vast potentialities but neither good nor evil in

itself.

Very similar in some respects is the diagram revealed
in the Philosophus Grade. As the divine peace of the gar-
den of Eden was manifested during the Water grade, so
in this Grade of Philosophus, the power of Fire is shown
to have called forth catastrophe. Formerly called be-
neath the tree, the hydra-headed dragon in this Diagram
has usurped its proper place. Its several horned heads
wind their way up into the very structure of the Tree of
Life, even unto Daath at the foot of the Supernals. Lured
downwards by the tree of knowledge — and remember-
ing in what sense the Bible speaks of the verb “to know,”
we gather that the root of the trouble was an imperfect
apprehension of creative power — towards the “darkly

splendid world wherein continually lieth a faithless
depth,” Eve, the lower self, ceases to give support to
Adam. She has yielded to the awful fascination of the
awakening psyche. Far easier is it to fall than to climb
to the distant heights. Yet only from one viewpoint is the
Fall catastrophic. The awareness of the rise of the Dragon
endows man also with consciousness of power — and
power is life and progress. The Dragon stands as the sym-
bol of the great enemy to be overcome, and, as the task of
equilibration proceeds, the great prize awaiting success.
The Fall as a state of consciousness is analagous to
< 59>that condition described by various mystics as the dark
Night of the Soul. It is accompanied by a sense of in-
tolerable dryness, a dreaded awareness of the fact that
all the powers of the soul seem dead, and the mind’s
vision closed in dumb protest, as it were, against the
harsh disciple of the Work itself. A thousand and one
seductions will tend to lure the candidate from the con-
templation of the magical goal, and there will be pre-
sented to him a thousand and one means of breaking
in spirit his vow “to persevere in the divine science”
without breaking it in letter. And it will appear that the
mind itself will run riot and become unstable, warning
the candidate that it were better for him to enjoy a lull
in his magical operations. This state is allegorically
referred to by the alchemists in their descriptions of the
poisonous Dragon which follows upon the corruption
of their First Matter. Vaughan calls it: “a horrible de-
vouring Dragon—creeping and weltering in the bottom
of her cave, without wings. Touch her not by any means,
not so much as with thy hands, for there is not upon
earth such a violent, transcendent poison.” But as the
mystics teach, if this condition be patiently endured, it
passes, a higher spiritual consciousness gradually dawn-
ing in the heart and mind. So also in the alchemical
writings, we find that Vaughan observes: “As thou hast
begun so proceed, and this Dragon will turn to a Swan,
but more white than the hovering virgin snow when
it is not yet sullied with the earth.”

The Qabalistic Sephirah of Daath is the conjunction
of Chokmah and Binah on the Tree of Life, the child of
Wisdom and Understanding—knowledge. It refers to
the symbolic sphere formed wdthin or above the Ruach
<6o>by means of experience obtained, and this assimilated
becomes transmuted into intuition and faculty of mind.
But fundamentally it is the ascent of the Dragon or, if
you wish, an upwelling of the Unconscious archetypes
—a highly dangerous and unbalancing ascent, until they
are assimilated to consciousness—which first renders
Daaih a possibility. It is the Fall which is responsible
for the acquisition of self-knowledge. “Thus it stands
proven ” claims B la vat sky, “that Satan, or the red Fiery
Dragon, the ‘Lord of Phosphorus’ and Lucifer, or
‘Light-bearer,’ is in us; it is our Mind—our tcmptor and
Redeemer, our intelligent liberator and saviour from
pure animalism.”

In the evolutionary scheme, the Fall occurs through
a higher type of intelligence coming into close contact
with nascent humanity, thus stimulating the psyche of
the race—or so the magical tradition has it. The re-
capitulation of this process within the individual sphere
of consciousness proceeds through the technique of
initiation whereby the Red Dragon is stirred into
activity through contact with the fructifying powers of
the elements, invoked through the skill and power of a
trained initiator. The use of the divine prerogative,
brought about by the magic of every-day experience,
the awakening of Daaih, brings disaster at first because
the awakened psyche is imperfectly understood and so
abused for personal ends. But that very disaster anu
and that abuse confers the consciousness of self, and is
instrumental, at least in part of breaking up the primi-
tive participation mystique. Consequently, the realisa-
tion of sorrow as it impinges on the ego, or at least the
sense of personal mental and emotional discomfort, and
<6i>an understanding of its causes, invariably constitute the
first impetus to perform the Great Work, even as it com-
prises the motive first to seek the services and aid of the
analytical psychologist. This impetus and this self-
consciousness are the prime implications of Daath. Its
signification is a higher type of consciousness, the be-
ginning of a spiritual rebirth. It acts as a self-evolved
link between the higher Genius, on the one hand, at
peace in its Supernal abode, and, on the other hand,
the human soul bound by its Fall to the world of illusion
and sense and matter. Not until that self-consciousness
and acquired knowledge are turned to noble and altruis-
tic ends, so long will sorrow and suffering be the inevita-
ble result. Continually will the Red Dragon, the in-
verted power of the eros, ravish the little kingdom of
self until such time as we open ourselves to the deepest
levels of our unconsciousness, reconciling and uniting
them with our conscious outlook, thus conquering the foe
by driving it back to its proper realm. In such a way may
we use, but neither ignore nor repress, the experience of
life and its fruit to transcend our own personal limita-
tions and attain to a participation mystique on a higher
and self-conscious leveh

Let me quote a few especially appropriate lines from
Jung in connection with this Fall, when the fundamental
basis of the Ruach has been attracted to the kingdom
of shells and when Malkuth has been dissociated from
the other Sephiroth: “Consciousness thus torn from its
roots and no longer able to appeal to the authority of
the primordial images, possesses a Promethean freedom,
it is true, but it also partakes of the nature of a godless
hybris. It soars above the earth, even above mankind,
<62>

but the danger of capsizing is there, not for every indi-
vidual to be sure, but collectively for the weak members
of such a society, who again Promethean-like, are bound
by the unconscious to the Caucasus.”For the Adept to be cut off from his roots, from con-
tact with the vitalising and necessary basis of his Un-
consciousness, will never do. He must unite and inte-
grate the various levels of his entire Tree. His task must
be to train and develop the titanic forces of his own
underworld, so that they may become as a powerful but
docile beast whereon he may ride.

§

The Adeptus minor grade continues the theme of
these two diagrams.
Escorted into the Vault, the
Aspirant is shown the lid of the Tomb of Osiris, the
Pastos, wherein is buried our Father, Christian Rosen-
kreutz, and on that lid is a painting which brings ful-
filment as it were to the narrative of the preceding dia-
grams. It is divided into two sections. The lower half
of the painting depicts a figure of Adam, similar to his
presentation in the Practicus grade diagram, though
here the heads of the Dragon are falling back from the
Tree, showing the Justified One, the illuminated adept,
by his immolation and self-sacrifice rescuing the fallen
kingdom of his natural self from the clutches of an out-
raged eros. But above this, as though to show the true
nature behind the deceptive appearance of things is
a noble figure of majesty and divinity
illustrated
described in the Ritual in these words. “And being
turned I saw seven golden Light-bearers, and in the
< 63 >

midst of the Light-bearers, one like unto the Ben Adam,
clothed with a garment down to the feet, and girt with
a golden girdle. His head and his hair were white as
snow, and his eyes as flaming fire; his feet like unto fine
brass as if they burned in a furnace. And his voice as
the sound of many waters. And he had in his right hand
seven stars and out of his mouth went the Sword of
Flame, and his countenance was as the Sun in his
strength.”It is to effect this redemption of the personality, to
regenerate the power of the dragon, and attempt to
bring the individual to some realisation of his potential
godhead, that is the object of the Adeptus Minor
Ceremony.

It is for this reason that I hold that the Golden Dawn
magic, the technique of initiation, is of supreme and in-
estimable importance to mankind at large. In it the work
of academic psychology may find a logical conclusion
and fruition, so that it may develop further its own par-
ticular contribution to modern life and culture. For this
psycho-magical technique of ceremonial initiation indi-
cates the psychological solution of the anima problem.
“Arise! Shine! For thy light is come!”

Between the grade of Phdosophus and the Portal, an
interval of seven months was prescribed, the regimen of
the planets. During that period, devised to assist the
gradual fructification of the seeds planted within, a re-
view was advised of all the preceding studies. Such a re-
view certainly was imperative. As one of the Chiefs of the
Order expressed it:—“Remember that there is hardly a
circumstance in the rituals even of the First Order which
has not its special meaning and application, and which
<64>does not conceal a potent magical formula. These cere-
monies have brought thee into contact with certain forces
which thou hast now to learn to awaken in thyself, and to
this end, read, study and re-read that w'hich thou hast
already received. Be not sure even after the lapse of
much time that thou hast fully discovered all that is to
be learned from these. And to be of use unto thee, this
must be the work of thine own inner self, thine own and
not the work of another for thee so that thou mayest
gradually attain to the knowledge of the Divine Ones.”
The Grade of the Portal, which conferred upon the
Candidate the title of Lord of the Paths of the Portal of
the Vault of the Adepti, is not referred to a Sephirah as
such. It may, however, be considered as an outer court to
Tiphareth, exactly as the Adeptus Minor ceremony may
be considered Tiphareth within. Its technical attribu-

tion is the element of Akasa, Spirit or Ether w'hich is
magically invoked by the usual procedure of invoking
pentagrams and the vibration of divine names following
upon the conjuration of the powers of the four subsidiary
elements. To this grade, there is attached no elemental
prayer as in the former grades, but there is one remark-
able invocation employed which bears quoting here. In
full Temple, the English version is not used, but it is

vibrated in the original Enochian or Angelic tongue — a
language which is at once sonorous, vibrant and dramat-
ically impressive. The following is the full version of
which an abridged one was normally used in the Temple:
“I reign over you, (here the Order version names the
three Archangels of the element) saith the God of Justice
in power exalted above the firmament of wrath. In whose
hands the Sun is as a sword and the Moon as a through-
<6S>thrusting fire. Who measureth your garments in the
midst of my vestures and trussed you together as the
palms of my hands. Whose seat I garnished with the fire
of gathering. Who beautified your garments with admir-
ation. To whom I made a law to govern the holy ones,
and delivered you a rod with the ark of knowledge. More-
over, ye lifted up your voices and sware obedience and
faith to him that liveth and triumpheth. Whose begin-
ning is not nor end cannot be. Who shineth as a flame in
the midst of your palaces and reigneth amongst you as
the balance of righteousness and truth. Move therefore
and show yourselves. Open the mysteries of your crea-
tion. Be friendly unto me, for I am the servant of the
same your God, a true worshipper of the Highest.”

This grade, referred to the veil Paroketh, which sep-
arates the First and Second Orders, is intermediate be-
tween the purely elemental grades and the spiritual grade
of Adeptus Minor. A crown to the four lower element,
this Rite formulates above Earth, Air, Water and Fire,
the uppermost point of the Pentagram, revealing the ad-
ministration of the Light over and through the kingdom
of the natural world. It concerns itself with the recapitu-
lation of the former grades, co-ordinating and equilibri-
ating the elemental self which, symbolically sacrificed
upon the mystical altar, is offered to the service of the
higher Genius. In that grade, too, aspiration to the divine
is strongly stressed as the faculty by which the veil of the
inner sanctuary may be rent. It is the way to realisation.
The five Paths leading from the grades of the First to the
Second Orders are symbolically traversed, and their sym-
bols impressed within the sphere of sensation.

A gestation period of at least nine months had to elapse
<66>A gestation period of at least nine months had to elapse
<66>

prior to initiation to the grade of Adeptus Minor, and
since there can be no misunderstanding the purpose and
nature of this beautiful ceremony it requires the mini-
mum of com ment from my pen. It explains itself com-
pletely in one of the speeches : “Buried with that Light in
a mystical death, rising again in a mystical resurrection,
cleansed and purified through him our Master, o brother
of the Cross of the Rose. Like him, o Adepts of all ages,
have ye toiled. Like him have ye suffered tribulation.
Poverty, torture and death have ye passed through; they
have been but the purification of the gold. In the alembic
of thine heart through the athanor of affliction, seek thou

the true stone of the wise.”

The form of this ritual is beautiful in its simplicity and
warrants a brief description. First of all, the candidate is
led in, arrayed with insignia and badges and calling him-
self by his various titles and mottos. But he is warned
that not in any vainglorious spirit are the mysteries to
be approached, but in simplicity alone. This is the signal
for him to be divested of all his ornaments and insignia,
and by the Temple entrance, just prior to being bound
upon a large upstanding cross of wood, he stands alone,
clad in a simple unornamented black gown. The reader is
earnestly recommended to study this Ritual again and
again, until almost it becomes a part of his very life, in-

corporated into the fabric of his being, for herein are
highly important and significant formulae of mystical
aspiration and of practical magic. In it is exemplified the
technical “Dying God” formula about which in The
Golden Bough Frazer has written so eloquently. Exam-
ples of this are to be found in every mythology and every
mystical religion that our world has ever known. But I
<67>doubt that it has ever attained to a more clarified and
definite expression than in this ceremony of the Adeptus
Minor grade. For we are clearly taught by precept and
by example that we are, in essence, gods of great power
and spirituality who died to the land of our birth in the
Garden of Hesperides, and mystically dying descended
into hell. And moreover the ritual demonstrates that like
Osiris, Christ, and Mithra, and many another type of
god-man, we too may rise from the tomb and become
aware of our true divine natures. The principal clause of
the lengthy Obligation assumed while bound to the
cross, indicating the trend of its teaching, and the import
of its objective, is: “I further solemnly promise and
swear that, with the Divine permission, I will from this
day forward apply myself unto the Great Work, which is
so to purify and exalt my spiritual nature that with Di-
vine aid I may at length attain to be more than human
and thus gradually raise and unite myself to my higher
and divine Genius, and that in this event, I will not abuse
the great power entrusted to me,”

The preface to the assumption of the obligation is un-
der these circumstances a tremendously impressive oc-
currence, and few could fail to be even faintly moved by
it. It consists of an invocation of an Angelic power: “In
the divine name IAO, I invoke Thee thou great avenging
Angel HUA, that thou mayest invisibly place thy hand
upon the head of this Aspirant in attestation of his obli-

gation .

.

It is not difficult to realise that this is a critical and
important phase of the ceremony. During this obligation,
because of the symbolism attached to it and because of
the active aspiration which is induced at this juncture,
<68>illumination may quite easily occur. In one of the docu-
ments describing certain effects ensuing from this initia-
tion, one of the Chiefs has written, that the object of the
ceremony conceived as a whole “is especially intended to
effect the change of the consciousness into the Nescha-
mah, and there are three places where this can take place.
The first is when the aspiration is on the cross, because
he is so exactly fulfilling the symbol of the abnegation of
the lower self and the Union with the higher."

The Obligation assumed, the candidate is now re-
moved from the cross, and the Officers then narrate to
him the principal facts in the history of the founder of
the Order—Christian Rosenkreutz. On a previous page
was given a summary of these historical facts. When the
History lecture mentions the discovery of the Vault
wherein the Tomb and body of the illustrious Father
were discovered, one of the initiating adepts draws aside
a curtain, admitting the candidate to a chamber erected
in the midst of the Temple similar to that described in
the lecture. A few words roughly describing it may not be
considered amiss. As a climax to the very simple Temple
furniture of the Outer grades, it comes as a psychological
spasm and as a highly significant symbol. The vault itself
is a small seven-sided chamber, each side representing
one of the seven planets, with their host of magical cor-
respondences. The mediaeval Rosicrucian manifesto the
in Arthur Edward
Fama Fraternitalis, translated
Waite’s Real History of the Rosicrucians, describes it at
great length, though I shall here quote but briefly: “We
opened the door, and there appeared to our sight a vault
of seven sides and seven corners, every side five foot broad
and the height of eight foot. Although the sun never
< 69>shined in this vault, nevertheless it was enlightened with
another Sun, which had learned this from the sun, and
was situated in the upper part of the centre of the ceiling.
In the midst, instead of a tomb-stone, was a round altar...
Now, as we had not yet seen the dead body of our care-
ful and wise Father, we therefore removed the altar
aside; then we lifted up a strong plate of brass, and found
a fair and worthy body, whole and unconsumed

”

Around this fundamental symbolism, the Golden
Dawn adepts, displaying a genius of extraordinary in-
sight and synthesis, had built a most awe-inspiring su-
perstructure. The usual Order symbolism of the Light
was represented by a white triangle centred by the Rose
— this placed upon the ceiling. The floor design was so
painted as to represent the Red Dragon and the forces of
the primitive archetypes upon which the candidate trod
as emblematic of his conquest. Placed in the centre of the
Vault was the Pastos of Rosenkreutz — though the Pas-
tos is also referred to as the Tomb of Osiris the justified
One. Both of these beings may be considered as the type
and symbol of the higher and divine Genius. Immedi-
ately above this coffin rested the circular altar mentioned
in the Kama. It bore paintings of the Kerubic emblems,
and upon these were placed the four elemental weapons
and a cross, the symbol of resurrection. At one point in
the ceremony, the acting Hierophant, or Chief Adept as
he is now called, is interred in the Pastos as though to rep-
resent the aspirant’s higher Self which is hidden and con-
fined within the personality, itself wandering blindly, lost
in the dark wilderness. The whole concatenation of sym-
bols is an elaborate and dramatic portrayal of the central
theme of the Great Work. In a word, it depicts the spirit-
< 7°>

ual rebirth or redemption of the candidate, his resurrec-
tion from the dark tomb of mortality through the power
of the holy Spirit.ual rebirth or redemption of the candidate, his resurrec-
tion from the dark tomb of mortality through the power
of the holy Spirit.

In the symbol of the Vault, the psychologist no doubt
will see a highly interesting and complex array of Mother
symbols, traces of which, used in very much the same
way, may be found in the literary fragments we inherit
from the mystery cults of antiquity. It would be possi-
ble, and quite legitimate so to interpret the Vault. For
even the Order interpretation refers the Vault in its
entirety to the Isis of Nature, the great and powerful
mother of mankind and all that is. And an analysis of the
separate parts of the Vault—the Venus door, the Pastos,
the two Pillars—would subscribe to that view. For re-
generation and the second birth have always as creative
psychological states been associated with the Mother.
And it may be recalled that the Neschamah or that prin-
ciple in man which constantly strives for the superhuman
shining heights, is always portrayed as a feminine prin-
ciple, passive, intuitive and alluring. Whilst the universal
counterpart of this human principle, represented on the
Tree of Life by the Supernals, is always described by the
mediaeval alchemists as a virginal figure, from whose life
and substance all things have issued, and through whose
agency man is brought to the second birth.

The reader is earnestly recommended to study this
Ritual again and again until almost it becomes a part of
his very life, incorporated into the very fabric of his be-
ing. Very little aesthetic appreciation will be required to
realise that in this and the other rituals are passages of
divine beauty and high eloquence. And the least learned
will find ideas of especial appeal to him, as the scholar
<7i>and the profound mystic will perceive great depth and
erudition in what may appear on the surface as simple
statement. Properly performed, with initiated technique
and insight, these rituals are stately ceremonies of great
inspiration and enlightenment.

The apparent complexity of the above delineated
scheme may be thought by some individuals to be en-
tirely too complicated for modern man and not suffi-
ciently simple in nature. While one can deeply sympa-
thise with the ideas of the extreme simplicity cult in
Mysticism, nevertheless it is evident that the complex
and arduous nature of the routine is no fault of Magic.
Man himself is responsible for this awkward situation,
lo be purified was considered by the alchemists and the
Theurgists of a hygone day as not nearly enough. That
purification and consecration was required to be repeated
and repeated, again and again. Because of countless cen-
turies of evolution and material development—some-
times in quite false directions—man has spiritually re-
pressed himself, and thus gradually forgotten his true
divine nature. Meanwhile, as a sort of compensation for
this loss, he has developed a complexity of physical and
psychic constitution for dealing adequately with the
physical world. Hence, methods of spiritual development
refusing to admit the reality of that many-principled or-
ganisation may not be recognised as valid, for the sole
reason that man is not a simple being. Fundamentally
and at root he may be simple; but in actuality he is not.
Having strayed from his roots, and lost his spiritual
birthright in a jungle of delusion, it is not always easy to
re-discover those roots or to find the way out from the
Gates of the Land of Night.

<72><72>

In contradistinction to the above mentioned type of
amorphous mystical doctrine, Magic does recognise the
many-faceted nature of man. If that intricate structure
so painfully constructed be considered an evil, as some
seem to think, it is a necessary evil. It is one to be faced
and used. Therefore Magic connives by its technique to
use, develop, and improve each of these several principles
to its highest degree of perfection. “Thou must prepare
thyself” councils Vaughan “till thou art conformable to
Him Whom thou wouldst entertain, and that in every re-
spect. Fit thy roof to thy God in what thou canst, and in
what thou canst not He will help thee. When thou hast
thus set thy house in order, do not think thy Guest will
come without invitation. Thou must tire Him out with
pious importunities.

Perpetual knockings at His door,

Tears sullying his transparent rooms,
Sighs upon sighs; weep more and more—

He comes.

This is the way thou must walk in, which if thou dost
thou shall perceive a sudden illustration, and there shall
then abide in thee fire with light, wind with fire, power
with wind, knowledge with power, and with knowledge
an integrity of sober mind!”

Not enough is it to be illuminated. The problem is not
quite as simple as that. It is in vain that the wine of the
Gods is poured into broken bottles. Each part of the soul,
each elemental aspect of the entire man must be strength-
ened and transmuted and brought into equilibrium and
harmony with the others. Integration must be the rule
<7 3 >

of the initiate, not pathology. In such a vehicle made
consecrate and truly holy by this equilibriation, the
higher Genius may find a worthy and fit dwelling. This
and this alone, may ever constitute the true nature of

initiation.

§initiation.

§

With each of the grades just described, a certain
amount of personal work was provided, principally of a
theoretical kind. The basic ideas of the Qabalah were im-
parted by means of so-called knowledge lectures, to-
gether with certain important symbols and significant
names in Hebrew were required to be memorised. The
Iamens— insignia worn over the heart—of the various
Officers were referred in divers ways to the Tree of Life,
thus explaining after a fashion the function of that parti-
cular office in the Temple of Initiation. Each path
traversed, and every grade entered, had a so-called Ad-
mission Badge. This usually consisted of one of the many
forms of the Cross, and of symbols of the type of the
Swastika, truncated Pyramid, and so forth. To these
astrological and elemental attributions were referred.
Most of these symbols possess great value, and since they
repeatedly recur under different guises through the
stages of personal magical work undertaken after the
Adeptus Minor grade, they should receive the benefit of
prolonged brooding and meditation.

Three of the most important items of personal study
to be accomplished while in the First or Outer Order,
apart from the memorisation of the rudiments of the
(a) The practice of the Pentagram
Qabalah were:
Ritual with the Qabalistic Cross, (b) Tatwa Vision, and
<74>

,

(c) Divination by Geomancy and the simple Tarot me-
thod described by Waite in his Key to the Tarot.,

(c) Divination by Geomancy and the simple Tarot me-
thod described by Waite in his Key to the Tarot.

The Pentagram Ritual was taught to the Neophyte
immediately after his initiation in order that he might
“form some idea of how to attract and come into com-
munication with spiritual and invisible things.”
Just
as the Neophyte Ceremony of admission contains the
essential symbolism of the Great Work, shadowing forth
symbolically the commencement of certain formulae of
the Magic of Light, so potential within the Pentagram
Ritual and the Qabalistic Cross are the epitomes of the
whole of that work. In all magical procedure it is funda-
mental, for it is a gesture of upraising the human con-
sciousness to its own root of perfection and enlighten-
ment by which the sphere of sensation and every act
performed under its surveillance are sanctified. Thus it
should precede every phase of magical work, elementary
as well as advanced. The written rubric has previously
appeared in my Tree of Life
and I may now add a word
or two concerning the further directions which are orally
imparted to the Candidate after his admission.

The prime factor towards success in that exercise is
to imagine that the astral form is capable of expansion,
that it grows tall and high, until at length it has the
semblance of a vast angelic figure, whose head towers
amongst the distant stars of heaven. When this imagin-
ative expansion of consciousness produces the sense that
the height is enormous, with the Earth as a tiny globe
revolving beneath the feet, then above the head should
be perceived or formulated a descending ray of brilliant
Light. As the candidate marks the head and then the
breast, so should this brilliance descend, even down to
< 75 >

his feet, a descending shaft of a gigantic cross of Light.
The act of marking the shoulders right and left whilst
vibrating the Sephirotic names, traces the horizontalhis feet, a descending shaft of a gigantic cross of Light.
The act of marking the shoulders right and left whilst
vibrating the Sephirotic names, traces the horizontal

shaft of the cross, equilibriating the Light within the
sphere of sensation. Since it has been argued above that
the Great Work consists in the search for the Light, this
ritual truly and completely performed leads to the ac-
complishment of that Work and the personal discovery
of the Light. The Pentagrams trace a cleansing and
protecting circle of force invoked by the four Names of
four letters each about the limits of the personal sphere,
and the Archangels are called, by vibration, to act as
great stabilising influences.

The study of the different types of divination may
seem difficult to understand in an Order which purported
to teach methods of spiritual development. Many will
no doubt be rather perplexed by this. Divination usually
is said to refer exclusively to the low occult arts, to
fortune-telling, and the prognostication of the future.
Actually, however, so far as the Order is concerned, the
principal object for these practical methods is that they
stimulate, as few exercises can, the faculties of clairvoy-
ance, imagination, and intuition. Though certain read-
ings or interpretations to the geomantic and Tarot sym-
bols may be found in the appropriate text books, these
rule of thumb methods do not conduce to the produc-
tion of an accurate delineation of the spiritual causes
behind material events. These interpretations are usual
to the beginner in the art, for he requires a foundation
of the principal definitions employed upon which his own
These textual delineations in
meditations can build.
actual practice serve only as a base for the working of
< 76>the inner faculties, provides for them a thrust-block as
it were from which they may <L
kick-off.” In short, the
effort to divine by these methods calls into operation the
intuitive and imaginative faculties to a very large extent.
Everyone without exception has this faculty of divining
in some degree, varying only in his ability to make it
manifest.

In most people it is wholly dormant.
Again, while divination as an artificial process may be
wholly unnecessary and a hindrance to the refined per-
ceptions of a fully developed Adept, who requires no such
convention to ascertain whence a thing comes and
whither it is going, yet these aids and stimuli have their
For those in training
proper place for the Neophyte.
they are not only legitimate but useful and necessary.
It may be interesting for the reader to attempt to ac-
quire intuitive knowledge on any matter without the
divinatory aids first, and it will be seen how extremely
difficult it is to get started, to pick upon any one fact or
incident which shall act as a prompt or a starter of the
interior mechanism. Having failed in this way, let him
see how much further he really may go by the judicious
and sensible use of one of the Order methods. There is
no doubt that the opening of the mind to an intuitive
perception is considerably aided by these methods. And
this is particularly true with regard to the rather lengthy
Tarot method which was given to the initiate while en-
gaged in the fulfilment of his Adeptus Minor curriculum.
Like all magical techniques, divination is open to abuse.
The fact, however, that abuse is possible does not, as
again and again must be reiterated, fully condemn the
abused technique. The application of common sense
to the magical art is as necessary as it is to all else.
< 77>There was a movement on foot in one of the Temples
a little while ago to eliminate the stndy and practice of
Geomancy from the scheme of training of the Outer
Order. The prevailing tendency is so to simplify the
road to Adeptship as to reduce the practical requisites to
an absolute minimum by eliminating every phase of the
work which does not come “naturally,” and whose study
might involve hard work. Most of the newly admitted
candidates to this Temple within the past five years or
more are utterly without any practical acquaintance
with this technique.

Originally, Astrology was taught as part of the regular
All instruction on this subject seems now to
routine.
have been thoroughly extirpated from the Order papers.
Perhaps in this particular instance the omission is just
as well. For recent years have seen a great deal of meti-
culous attention paid to this study by sincere and honest
researchers, and there have been published many first-
rate books explaining its intricacies.
All that the Order
demands of the Adeptus Minor is that he should be able
to draw up a map showing the position of Planets and
Signs, preparatory to certain operations requiring the
invocation of zodiacal forces.

Tatwa vision requires but little mention in this place,
for full instructions in this technical method of acquiring
clairvoyance may be seen in a later volume. They are
compiled from a number of documents and verbal in-
structions obtaining within the Order.
Since these oral
“tit-bits” and papers were very scattered, it has been
found necessary to reorganise the whole matter. In that
restatement, however, I have exercised no originality nor
uttered personal viewpoints on any phase of the techni-
< 78>que, confining my labour solely to rc-writing the material
in my possession.
It may be interesting for the psy-
chological critic to reflect upon the fact that it was this
technique to which most members of the Order devoted
the greatest attention—the only technique in which,
more than any other single branch of the work, there is
greater opportunity for deception and self-deception.
While in many ways the Order technique may appear
different from the vision method described in my Tree
For they teach
of Life, both are essentially the same.
the necessity of an imaginative formation of an intellec-
tual or astral form, the Body of Light, for the purpose of
exploring the different regions of the Tree of Life or the
several strata of one’s own psychic make-up. The simp-
ler aspects of this investigation are taught just after the
grade of Philosophus, though naturally the full possibili-
ties of this method and the complete details on the tech-
nical side do not reveal themselves until the teaching of
the Second Order has been received.

In addition to these technical methods there were
meditations on the symbols and ideas of the whole sys-
tem, and it was quite frequently suggested that the stu-
dent go through the ceremonies, after having taken the
grades, and build them up in his imagination so that he
re-lives them as vividly as when he was in the Temple.
The practical exercise that accompanied the Portal
grade was one in which the aspirant built up, again in
the imagination, a symbolic form of the Qabalistic Tree
of Life, paying at first particular attention to the formu-
lation of the Middle Pillar in the sphere of sensation or
aura. This latter was conceived to be an ovoid shape of
subtle matter, and the imaginative formulation of the
< 79>various Sephiroth therein whilst vibrating the appro-
priate Divine Names went far towards opening, in a safe
and balanced way, the psycho-spiritual centres of which
the Sephiroth were but symbols. This technique, with
the so-called Vibratory Formula of the Middle Pillar
which is a development therefrom, I consider to be one
of the most important practical systems employed in the
Order. Though the documents describe it in a very rudi-
mentary and sketchy fashion, nevertheless it is capable
of expansion in several quite astonishing directions.
I
have discussed and expanded this technique at consid-
erable length in my book The Art of True Healing.

So far, I have confined myself to a bird’s eye view of
the routine as established in the First or Outer Order of
the Golden Dawn. The graduated training of the en-
tire Outer was intended as a preparation for the practical
work to be performed in the Inner or Second Order of
the Roseae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis. The assignation
of personal magical work seems deliberately to have
been postponed until after the Vault reception. It was
held that the Ceremony formulated a link between the
Aspirant and his Augoeides, that connection serving
therefore as a guide and a powerful protection which is
clearly required in the works of Ceremonial Magic. Since
at the commencement of each serious operation the Ini-
tiate must needs exalt himself towards his higher and
divine Genius that through him may flow the divine
power which alone is capable of producing a pure magical
work, the initial forging of that link is a matter of
supreme importance.

Let me now detail the curriculum of work prescribed
in the Second Order. The training of the Adeptus Minor
<8o>

.

consisted of eight separate items, and I quote the follow-

ing from a syllabus “A—General Orders/' now in cir-

culation.

“Part One. A. Preliminary.

consisted of eight separate items, and I quote the follow-

ing from a syllabus “A—General Orders/' now in cir-

culation.

“Part One. A. Preliminary

Receive and copy: Notes
on the Obligation. The Ritual of the ©—GO Grade. The
manuscript, Sigils from the Rose. The Minutum Mun-
dum. Having made your copies of these and returned
the originals you should study them in order to prepare
to sit for the written examination. You must also arrange
with the Adept in whose charge you are, about your
examination in the Temple on the practical work.”

“Part Two.

Receive the Rituals of the Pentagram
and Hexagram. Copy and learn them. You can now sit
for the written examination in these subjects and com-
plete ‘A’ by arranging to be tested in your practical
knowledge in the Temple.

“Part One. B. Implements.

Receive the Rituals of
the Lotus Wand, Rose-Cross, Sword, and the Elemental
Weapons. Copy and return them. There is a written
examination on the above subjects—that is on the con-
struction, symbolism, and use of these objects, and the
general nature of a consecration ceremony and the form-
ing of invocations. This can be taken before the practi-
cal work of making is begun or at any stage during it.

“Part Two. This consists in the making of the Imple-
ments which must be passed as suitable before the con-
secration is arranged for, in the presence of a Chief or
other qualified Adept. The making and consecration are
done in the order given above unless it is preferred to do
all the practical work first, and make arrangements for
consecration as convenient.

<8i>

“ Part One. G. Neophyte Formulae. Receive and copy
Z. 1. on the symbols and formulae of the Neophyte
Ritual, Z. 3, the symbolism of the Neophyte in this
Ceremony. Copy the God-form designs of the Neophyte
Ritual. The written examination on the Z. manuscripts
may now be taken.“ Part Two. To describe to the Chief or other suitable
Adept in the Temple the arrangement of the Astral
Temple and the relative position of the Forms in it. To
build up any God-form required, using the correct Coptic
Name.”

The above three sections, A. B. G., completed the
course prescribed for the Zelator Adeptus Minor, the first
sub-grade. The passing of these examinations, con-
ferred the qualification for holding the office of Hiero-
phant, that is the initiator, in the Outer Order of the
G. D.

“Part One. C. Psychic.

in a written
examination in the Tatwa system.
Its method of use,
and an account of any one vision you have had from any
card.

This consists

“Part Two. This consists in making a set of Tatwa
cards, if you have not already done so, and sending them
to be passed by the Chief or other Adept appointed. To
take the examiner on a Tatwic journey, instructing him
as if he were a student and vibrating the proper names
for a selected symbol.

“ Part One. D. Divination.

Receive and study the
Tarot system, making notes of the principal attributions
of the Inner method.

<82>

“Part Two. Practical. On a selected question, either
your own, or the examiner’s, to work out a Divination
first by Geomancy, then by Horary Astrology, then by
the complete inner Tarot system, and send in a corre-
lated account of the result.

“Part One F. Angelic Tablets. Receive and make
copies of the Enochian Tablets, the Ritual of the Con-
course of the Forces, and the Ritual of the making of the
Pyramid, Sphinx, and God-form for any square. A
written examination on these subjects may now be
taken.“Part Two. Make and colour a pyramid for a selected
square, and to make the God-form and Sphinx suitable to
it, and to have this passed by an Adept. To prepare a
Ritual for practical use with this square, and in the pres-
ence of a Chief or other Adept appointed to build it up
astraily and describe the vision produced. To study and
play Enochian chess, and to make one of the Chess
boards and a set of Chessmen.

“Part One. E. Talismans.

Receive a manuscript on
the making and consecrating of Talismans. Gather
Names, Sigils, etc., for a Talisman for a special purpose.
Make a design for both designs of it and send it in for
a Chief to pass. Make up a special ritual for consecrat-
ing to the purpose you have in mind and arrange a time
with the Chief for the Ceremony of Consecration.

“II. Consecration and Evocation.

Subject: A cere-
mony on the formulae of Ritual Z. 2. Must be prepared
before Examiner and must meet with his approval as to
method, execution and effect.”
< 83 >

E.

F.

G.

H.

j.

K.

In the early Temples there was also issued a catalogue
of manuscripts, enumerating in alphabetical order the
documents circulated amongst the Zelatores Adepti
Minores.

A.

General Orders.

The Curriculum of Work pre-

scribed.

B. The Lesser and Supreme Rituals of the Pentagram.
C. The Rituals of the Hexagram.
D.

Description of Lotus Wand, and Ritual of Con-

secration.
Description of Rose Cross and the Ritual of Con-

secration.

Sigils from the Rose.
Sword and Four Implements, with Consecration

Ritual.
Clavicula Tabularum Enoch i.
Notes on the Obligation of the Adeptus Minor.
Consecration Ceremony of the Vault.
History Lecture.

L.
M. Hermes Vision, and Lineal Figures of the Sephiroth.
Complete Treatise on the Tarot, with
N. O. P. Q. R.

Star Maps.

S. The Attributions of the Enoch ian Tablets.
T. The Book of The Angelical Keys or Calls.

Lecture on Man, the Microcosm.

U.
W. Hodos Chamelionis, the Minutum Mundum.
X. The Egyptian God-forms as applied to the Enoch-Lecture on Man, the Microcosm.

U.
W. Hodos Chamelionis, the Minutum Mundum.
X. The Egyptian God-forms as applied to the Enoch-

ian Squares.

Y. Enochian Chess.

Z.

Symbolism of the Temple, Candidate, and Ritual
of the Neophyte grade.

< 84>

All the documents from A to Z listed above will be
found reproduced in these volumes, though 1 have not
retained that particular order. The sole omissions are
the documents lettered H. J . , L. and part of M.

“J” consists simply of an elaborated commentary upon
the Adeptus Minor Obligation, written in a florid pon-
derous style reminiscent of Eliphas Levi-cum-Arthur
Edward Waite.

“H” Clavicula Tabularum Enochi, is a more or less
lengthy manuscript, turgid and archaic, for the most
part repeating, though not as clearly, the contents of
“S, The Book of the Concourse of the Forces.” Inciden-
tally, this document is practically a verbatim duplicate
of part of a lengthy manuscript to be found in the Manu-
script Library of the British Museum, Sloane 307. A
good deal of the advice given is typically mediaeval, and
definitely unsound from a spiritual viewpoint, and is
certainly not in accord with the general lofty tenor of the
It explains how to find pre-
remaining Order teaching.
cious metals and hidden treasure, and how to drive away
It is an inferior piece
the elemental guardians thereof.

of wrork—as also is the document “L”, and so I have

decided to omit both.

“M” has two sections, the Hermes Vision which 1 do
propose to give, and the Lineal Figures of the Sephiroth.
Because of the extreme complexity of the latter, and be-
cause it will be impossible to reproduce the several geome-
trical drawings in colour which accompany that manu-
script, the writer has deemed it sufficient to restate it in
a general manner as a note to the instruction on Teles-
matic Images.

< 85 >< 85 >

The whole of the above described material I have ar-
ranged and classified in an entirely different way. The
contents of these volumes will be found divided up into
so many chapters or separate books, each complete by
itself. And the material in each book will be seen to be
consistent and appertain to parts of the magical tech-
nique which are placed with it. The Table of Contents
describes my method of arrangement.

Clearly from these disclosures there may be drastic
But the good, I trust, will immeasurably and
results.
ultimately outweigh whatever evil may come.
That
some careless people will hurt themselves and burn their
fingers experimenting with matters not wholly under-
stood seems almost inevitable.
Theirs, however, will
For the formulae of Magic require inten-
be the fault.
sive study prior to experimental work. And since all
the important formulae are given in their entirety,
and nothing withheld that is of the least value, there
should be no excuse for anybody harming himself. No
serious hurt should come to anyone. On the contrary,
the gain to those serious students of Magic and Mystic-
ism who have initiative and yet refuse to involve them-
selves with corrupt occidt orders, and it is to these that
I fain would speak, should be immeasurable.

You are being given a complete system of attainment.
This you must study and develop at your own leisure,
applying it in your own particular way. The system is
complete and effectual, as well as noble. The grade
rituals as I shall reproduce them have been tampered
with, in some cases unintelligently. Their efficacy, how-
ever, is not impaired, for the principal portion of those
grade rituals, which teaches the art of invocation, is in-
< 86>tact. So that the unwise editing that they have received
in the past several years has not actually damaged them;
all that has been removed are a few items, more or less
important, of Qabalistic knowledge. If the reader feels
that these might be value to him, and for the sake of
tolerable completeness would like to have them, by
Studying such Qabalistic texts as the Zohar and the
Sepher Y etzirah both of which are now in English trans-
lation, or some such work as Waite’s Holy Kaballah, he
will be in possession of the fundamental facts.
It is in
other parts of the Order work that injudicious tamper-
ing has been at work. Most of this is now restored and
I believe that this book is an accurate representation of
the whole of the Order work from Neophyte to Theoricus
Adeptus Minor.

Some portions of the manuscripts have required edit-
ing, principally from the literary point of view. Whole
paragraphs have had to be deleted, others shortened,
sentences made more clear, the redundant use of many
words eliminated, and a general coordination of the
manuscripts undertaken. Certain other sections—those
dealing at length with Talismans, Sigils, Clairvoyance,
Gcomancy and the Enochian Tablets—have been com-
pletely rewritten to render them more coherent.
But
nothing that is essential or vital to the magical tenor or
understanding of any document will be omitted, changed
or altered. This I avow and publicly swear. Where per-
sonally I have seen fit to make comment on any matter
in order to clarify the issue or to indicate its antecedents,
or connections in other parts of the work, that comment
or remark is so marked by me with initials.

Let me therefore urge upon the sincere reader whose
< 8/>Let me therefore urge upon the sincere reader whose
< 8/>

wish it is to study this magical system, to pay great at-
tention to the scheme of the grade rituals, to obtain a
bird’s eye view of the whole, to study every point, its
movement and teaching. This should be repeated again
and again, until the mind moves easily from one point
of the ritual to another. The synthetic outline of those
rituals presented in this Introduction should be found
helpful as assisting in this task. Let him also study the
diagrams of the Temple lay-out, and build up in his
imagination a clear and vivid picture of that Temple
together with the appropriate officers and their move-
ments. Then it will be an easy matter to devise a simple
form of self-initiation.
It will be simple to adapt the text
But a careful scrutiny and ex-
to solo performance.
amination of the entire system should long precede any
effort to do practical work, if serious harm and danger is
to be avoided. The language needs first of all to be
mastered, and the symbolic ideas of the whole system
assimilated and incorporated into the very fibre of one’s
Intellectual acquaintance with every aspect of
the subject is just as necessary as personal integrity and
selfless devotion to an ideal. Sincerity is indeed the most
trustworthy shield and buckler that any student may
possess, but if he neglects the intellectual mastery of the
subject, he will soon discover where his heel of Achilles
is located. But these two combined are the only safe-
guards, the fundamental requisites to an insight into the
significance of Magic. Not only are they the only sure
foundation, but they conduce to the continual recollec-
tion of the goal at the end, which understanding arises
through penetrating to the root of the matter, without
which the student may stray but too readily from the
< 88>

being.being.

narrow way stretching before him. No matter how
brilliant his intellectual capacity, no matter how ardent
his sincerity or potent his dormant magical power, al-
ways must he remember that they matter absolutely in
no way unless applied to the Great Work— the knowl-
edge and conversation of the Higher and Divine Genius.
“Power without wisdom,” said a poet, “is the name of
Death.” And as Frater D. D. C. F. so rightly said of
one phase of magical work, but which has its application
to the whole scheme, “Know thou that this is not to be
done lightly for thine amusement or experiment, seeing
that the forces of Nature were not created to be thy play-
Unless thou doest thy practical magical
thing or toy.
works with solemnity, ceremony and reverence, thou
shalt be like an infant playing with fire, and thou shalt
bring destruction upon thyself.” In deviation from these
injunctions lie the only actual dangers in the divine

science.

One of the essentials of preliminary work, is the com-
mitting to memory of the important correspondences and
attributions. And I cannot insist too strongly that this
is fundamental. The student must make himself familiar
first of all with the Hebrew Alphabet, and learn how to
write the names of the Sephiroth and Deity Names in
that tongue—he will realise their value when he ap-
proaches the practical work of invocation. Much time
should be spent studying and meditating upon the glyph
of the Tree of Life and memorising all the important at-
tributions—divine Names, names of Archangels, Angels
All the symbols referred to
and Spheres and elements.
the Iamens of the officers should be carefully meditated
upon, as also the various admission badges, and other
< 89>

symbols given in the knowledge lectures. Above all, a
great deal of time and attention should be paid to the
Middle Pillar technique and the Vibratory Formulae of
divine names.symbols given in the knowledge lectures. Above all, a
great deal of time and attention should be paid to the
Middle Pillar technique and the Vibratory Formulae of
divine names.

The student can easily adapt any fair-sized room to
the exigencies of a Temple. The writer has worked in
one hardly larger than a long cupboard, about ten feet
long by six or seven wide. All furniture from the centre
should be cleared away, leaving a central space in which
one may freely move and work. A small table covered
with a black cloth will suffice for the Altar, and the two
Pillars may be dispensed with but formulated in the ima-
gination as present. He may find it very useful to paint
flashing Angelic Tablets according to the instructions
found elsewhere, as well as the Banners of the East and
West, placing these in the appropriate cardinal quarters
of his improvised Temple. If he is able to obtain small

plaster-casts of the heads of the Kerubim—the lion, the
eagle, bull and man—and place these in the proper sta-
tions, they will be found together with the Tablets to
impart a considerable amount of magical vitality and
atmosphere to the Temple. What actually they do be-
stow is rather subtle, and perhaps indefinable. They are
not absolute essentials, however, and may be dispensed
But since Magic works by the intervention of
with.
symbol and emblem, the surrounding of the student’s
sphere with the correct forms of magical symbolism,
assists in the impressing of those symbols within the
aura or sphere of sensation, the true magical Temple.
This may be left to the ingenium and the convenience of
the student himself to discover after having made a close
examination of the documents involved.

< 9°>< 9°>

Another matter upon which brief comment must be
made concerns the Instruments.
It would have given
me great pleasure to have had illustrations of these re-
produced in colour, for only thus can one appreciate
their significance and the part they play in ceremonial.
But this unfortunately has not been possible. Thus they
are given only in black and white, which obviously can-
not impart anything but the merest fraction of their
actual beauty and suggestiveness. And T impress upon
the serious student, even implore him, to betake upon
himself the trouble of making these instruments himself.
They are very simple to fashion. And the results obtain-
ed, to say little of the knowledge acquired or the intuitive
processes that somehow are stimulated by that effort,
are well worth even a great deal of bother. To adopt
temporarily part of the terminology now current among
analytical psychologists, and identify the latent spiritual
self of man with what is known as the Unconscious, then
be it remembered that this vast subterranean stream of
vitality and memory and inspiration can only be reached
by means of a symbol. For the latter, states Jung, “is the
primitive expression of the Unconscious, while on the
other hand it is an idea corresponding to the highest
Thus these
intuition produced by consciousness.”
weapons and magical instruments are symbolic repre-
sentations of psychic events, of forces inhering within
the potentiality of the inner man. By means of their
personal manufacture, magical consecration and con-
tinual employment they may be made to affect and stim-
ulate the dormant side of man’s nature. It is an in-
teresting fact that in his practice, Jung encouraged his
patients to paint symbolic designs which sometimes
<9 r >It seems
were comparable to the Eastern mandalas.
that the effort to paint these designs had the effect of
straightening out stresses and knots in the unconscious,
thus accomplishing the therapeutic object of the an-
alysis. And not only were they thus means of self-ex-
pression but these designs produced a counter-effect of
fascinating, healing and stimulating to renewed activity
the hitherto unmanifested psyche.

With the exception that the ordinary magical student
is not neurotic or psychopathic, the techniques are rather
similar. For the magical tradition has always insisted
upon the routine to be followed by the aspirant to that
art. He was required to fashion the implements him-
self, and the more laborious he found that task, with the
greater difficulties thrown before him, by so much more
were those efforts of spiritual value. For not only are
these instruments symbols or expressions of inner reali-
ties, but what is infinitely more of practical worth, their
actual projection in this way from within outwards, the
physical fashioning and painting of these instruments,
also works an effect. They bring to life the man that was
asleep. They react upon their maker. They become
powerful magical agents, true talismans of power.

Thus, the Lotus Wand is declared in the Ritual to have
the colours of the twelve signs of the Zodiac painted on
its stem, and it is surmounted by the Lotus flower of
It symbolises the development of creation. The
Isis.
Wand has ever been a symbol of the magical Will, the
power of the spirit in action. And its description in the
instruction on the Lotus Wand is such that it is seen to
embrace the whole of nature—the Sephiroth, the spirit-
ual aspects of the elements, and the action of the Sun
< 92>upon all life by a differentiating process. Even as the
whole of nature is the embodiment of a dynamic will,
the visible form and vehicle of a spiritual consciousness.
The Lotus flower grows from the darkness and gloom of
the secret depths, through the waters, ever striving to
open its blossoms on the surface of the waters to the
rays of light of the Sun. So is the true magical or spirit-
ual will secreted within the hidden depths of the soul of
man. Unseen, sometimes unknown and unsuspected, it
lies latent through the whole of the life. By these rites
of Magic, its symbols and exercises, we are enabled to
assist its growth and development, by piercing through
the outer husks of the restricting shell, until it bursts into

full bloom— the flower of the human spirit, the Lotus of
the higher Soul. “Look for the flower to bloom in the
silence .... It shall grow, it will shoot up, it will make
branches and leaves and form buds while the storm con-
tinues, while the battle lasts .... It is the flower of the
soul that has opened.” Note, moreover, the description
of and the comment made by Jung to a symbolic design
brought to him by one of his patients, evidently a design
like to the Lotus Wand, for he says: “The plant is fre-
quently a structure in brilliant fiery colours and is shown
growing out of a bed of darkness and carrying the
blossom of light at the top, a symbol similar to the
Christmas tree.” This is highly suggestive, and students
both of Yoga and Magic will find in this curious indi-
cations of the universality of cogent symbols. Magical
processes and symbols are, in short, receiving confirma-
tion at the hands of experimental psychology.
mains for the reader to benefit thereby.

It re-

The Rose-Cross is a Lainen or badge synthesising a
<93 >It re-

The Rose-Cross is a Lainen or badge synthesising a
<93 >

vast concourse of ideas, representing in a single emblem
the Great Work itself—the harmonious reconciliation
in one symbol of diverse and apparently contradictory
concepts, the reconciliation of divinity and manhood. It
is a highly important symbol to be worn over the heart
during every important operation.
It is a glyph, in one
sense, of the higher Genius to whose knowledge and con-
versation the student is eternally aspiring.
Rituals it is described as the Key of Sigils and Rituals.

In the

The Sword is a weapon symbolising the critical dis-
persive faculty of the mind. It is used where force and
strength are required, more particularly for banishing
than for invoking—as though conscious intellection
were allied to the power of Will. When employed in cer-
tain magical ceremonies with the point upwards, its na-
ture is transformed into an instrument similar to the
Wand.
The Elemental weapons of the Wand, Cup,
Dagger, and Pentacle are symbolical representations of
the forces employed for the manifestation of the inner
self, the elements required for the incarnation of the
divine. They are attributed to the four letters of Tetra-
grammaton.
All of these are worth making, and by
creating them and continually employing them intelli-
gently in the ways shown by the various rituals, the stu-
dent will find a new power developing within him, a new
centre of life building itself up from within.

One last word of caution. Let me warn the student
against attempting difficult and complex ceremonies be-
fore he has mastered the more simple ones. The syllabus
provided on a former page for the use of the Minor Adept
grades the work rather well. The consecration cere-
< 94>monies for the magical implements are, of their kind, ex-
cellent examples of ceremonial work. Classical in nature,
they are simple in structure and operation, and provide
a harmonious and easily flowing ritual. A good deal of
experience should be obtained with the constant use of
these and similar types which the student should him-
self construct along these lines. A variety of things may
occur to his mind for which a variety of operations may
be performed. This of course, applies only to that phase
of his studies when the preliminary correspondences and
attributions have been thoroughly memorised and what
is more, understood, and when the meditations have
been performed. This likewise is another matter upon
which too much emphasis cannot be laid.

Above all, the Pentagram and Hexagram rituals
should be committed to memory so that no effort is re-
quired to recall at a moment’s notice the points or angles
of these figures from which the invocation of a certain
force commences. Short ceremonies should be devised
having as their object the frequent use of these lineal
figures so that they become a part of the very manner
in which the mind works during ceremonial. After some
time has elapsed, and after considerable experience with
the more simple consecration formulae, the student feel-
ing more confident of himself and his ritualistic capacity,
let him turn to the complex ceremonies whose formulae
are summarised in the manuscripts Z. 2. These require
much preparation, intensive study, and a great deal of
rehearsal and experience. Moreover, he must not be dis-
appointed if, at first, the results fall short of his antici-
Persistence is an admirable and necessary vir-
pations.
tue, particularly in Magic. And let him endeavour to
< 95>penetrate into the reasons for the apparent worthlessness
or puerility of the aims of these formulae, such as trans-
formation, evocation, invisibility, by reflection on the
spiritual forces which must flow through him in order to
effect such ends. And let him beware of the booby trap
which was set up in the Order—of doing but one of these
ceremonies, or superficially employing any phase of the
system as though to pass an examination, and consider-
ing in consequence that he is the master of the technique.

My work is now done.

.

“Let us work, therefore, my brethren and effect right-
eousness, because the Night cometh when no man shall
. May the Light which is behind the veil shine
labour .
through you from your throne in the East on the Fratres
and Sorores of the Order and lead them to the perfect
day, when the glory of this world passes and a great light
shines over the splendid sea.”

<9^>

—

First Knowledge Lecture

1. The Four Elements of the Ancients are duplicated

conditions of:

Heat and Dryness

Heat and Moisture

Cold and Dryness

Cold and Moisture

A
Fire
A
Am
Earth V
Water V

2. The Signs of the Zodiac are twelve:

1. Aries, the Ram
2. Taurus, The Bull

3. Gemini, The Twins
4. Cancer, The Crab
5. Leo, The Lion
6. Virgo, The Virgin
7. Libra, The Scales
8. Scorpio, The Scorpion

T
8
K
25

St

TTg

n't

9. Sagittarius, The Archer

#
10. Capricornus, The Goat
V$
11. Aquarius, The Water-Bearer ™
H
12. Pisces, The Fishes
< 99>

These Twelve Signs are distributed among the Four
Triplicities, or sets of three Signs, each being attributed
to one of the Four Elements, and they represent the
operation of the elements in the Zodiac.

Thus to Fire belong

Aries, Leo, Sagittarius:

Thus to Earth belong

T :

51

: *

Taurus, Virgo, Capricornus:

is

: nj : VS

Thus to Air belong

Gemini, Libra, Aquarius:

Thus to Water belong

X : ^ “

Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces.

95 :

ttl

: X

3. To the Ancients,T :

51

: *

Taurus, Virgo, Capricornus:

is

: nj : VS

Thus to Air belong

Gemini, Libra, Aquarius:

Thus to Water belong

X : ^ “

Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces.

95 :

ttl

: X

3. To the Ancients,

six Planets were known, besides THE SUN, which
they classed with the Planets. They also assigned cer-
tain planetary values to the North and South
NODES of the MOON — that is, the points where

her orbit touches that of the Ecliptic.

These they named

Caput Draconis Q, Head of the Dragon and
Cauda Draconis ?$ Tail of the Dragon

Since the discovery of two more distant Planets Nep-
tune and Uranus or Herschel, these two terms have
been partially replaced by them.

The effect of Caput Draconis is similar to that of
The effect of Catida Draconis is similar to that of U.
<IOO>

—

Sol

Venus ———

Mercury

——— G)

$

5

3)

The Moon

The Old Planets arei
Saturn —
Jupiter
Mars

—

T?

If

3

Luna

4. The Hebrew Alphabet

is given on page 103.
number and has also a meaning.

Each letter represents a

Five Letters

have a different shape when written at the end of a
word and also a different number.

Mem c (final) Of these finals, Mem is distinguished

by being the only oblong letter.

rr p : ]

: ^ : Y The other four

Kaph, Nun, Pe, Tzaddi,
have tails which should come below the line as
shown.

Hebrew and Chaldee letters are written from right to

left.

The Hebrew Qabalists

referred the highest and most abstract ideas to the
Emanations of Deity or Sephiroth. They made
them ten in number. Each one is a Sephira, and
when arranged in a certain manner they form The
Tree of Life.

Hebrew letters are holy symbols. They should be
carefully drawn and square.
<IOI>

—

'

The Sephiroth are\

Ch-S-D

B-I-N-H

K-Th-R

3. Binah

4. Chesed

1. K ETHER

2. Chokmah--Ch-K‘M-H

—The Crown
— Wisdom
— Understanding
—Mercy
—Severity
5. Geburah—-G-B-U-R-H
6. TiPHARETH-Th-Ph-A-R-Th —Beauty
— Victory
7. Netsach—
-N-Ts-Ch
—Glory
—The Foundation

9. Yesod
10. Malkuth—M-L-K-U-Th —The Kingdom9. Yesod
10. Malkuth—M-L-K-U-Th —The Kingdom

Y-S-O-D

8. Hod

H-O-D

nrD

HDHD

nra

inn

miaa

mxsn

mz

Tin

The Dagesh or pointing which represents the vowel
sounds in modern Hebrew script is not given. It was a

later invention to standardise pronounciation and is
described in Hebrew grammars.

< I02>

THE HEBREW ALPHABET

Letter

Power

Value

Final

Name

Meaning

K

2

3

n

?

n

D

n

2

D

1

D

y

2

s

p

tr

n

A

B,V

G, Gh

D, Dh

H

o,u,v

Z

Ch
T
L Y
K, Kh

L
M
N

S

Aa,Ngh

i

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

20,500

30

40,600

50,700

60

70

P, Ph

80,800

Tz

Q
R

S,Sh

T, Th

90,900

100

200

300

400

Aleph

Ox

Beth

House

Gimel

Camel

Daleth

Door

He

Vau

Window

Pin or Hook

Zayin

Sword or Armour

Cheth

Fence, Enclosure

Teth

Yod

Kaph

Snake

Hand

Fist

Lamed

Ox Goad

Mem

Nun

Water

Fish

Samekh

Prop

Ayin

Pe

Eye

Mouth

Tzaddi

Fish-hook

D

1

P|

r

Ear, Back of head

Head

Tooth

Cross

Q°P h

Resh

Shin

Tan

<i°3>Snake

Hand

Fist

Lamed

Ox Goad

Mem

Nun

Water

Fish

Samekh

Prop

Ayin

Pe

Eye

Mouth

Tzaddi

Fish-hook

D

1

P|

r

Ear, Back of head

Head

Tooth

Cross

Q°P h

Resh

Shin

Tan

<i°3>

(Note: Readers of the above who have perused my
Tree of Life and Garden of Pomegranates will note the
difference in Hebrew pronunciation, and in order to avoid
any further confusion an explanatory note must here be
added. As is true of every language, in Hebrew there are
several quite distinct dialects. There are, however, two
principal ones which should be mentioned. The Ashke-
nazic, a dialect mostly in employment in Germany, Po-
land, and Russia; and the Sephardic used in Spain, Por-
tugal, and the Mediterranean generally. Now since the
Qabalah attained its prominence in Spain, most Qabal-
ists have employed the Sephardic dialect. Personally I
have found that the Ashkenazic dialect answers more
nearly than the other to the requirements of translitera-
tion into English, and many problems that have assailed
modern students would have been non-existent had they
known of the pronunciation which I employed in my
former works. Actually, however, the student must dis-
cover which of these two suits his own personal predilec-
tion and answers to the necessity imposed by the results
of study and experience. The Order teaching employs
the Sephardic pronunciation, and I have not ventured
to interfere with that in any way at all. I simply mention
the matter here to render impossible the likelihood of

confusion arising. I. R.)

<I04>

MEDITATION No. 1

Let the Neophyte

consider a point as defined in mathematics—hav-
ing position, but no magnitude—and let him note
the ideas to which this gives rise. Concentrating his
faculties on this, as a focus, let him endeavour to
realise the Immanance of the Divine throughout
Nature, in all her aspects.Begin by finding a position, balanced, but sufficiently
comfortable. Breathe rhythmically until the body is still
and the mind quiet. Keep this state for a few minutes at
first—and for longer as you get more used to preventing
the mind from wandering. Think now of the subject for
meditation in a general way—then choose out one
thought or image and follow that to its conclusion.

The simplest rhythm for the beginner is the Four-

fold Breath.

1. Empty the lungs and remain thus while counting 4.

2. Inhale, counting 4 so that you feel filled with breath

to the throat.

3. Hold this breath while counting 4.

4. Exhale, counting 4 till the lungs are empty.

This should be practised, counting slowly or quickly

till you obtain a rhythm that suits you—one that is com-
forting and stilling.

Having attained this, count the breath thus for two or
three minutes, till you feel quiet, and then proceed with
the meditation.

< IOS>

—
THE LESSER RITUAL OF THE PENTAGRAM

Take a steel dagger in the right hand. Face East.

Invoking

Touch thy forehead

and say ateh ( thou art)

Touch thy breast

and say malkuth ( the Kingdom)

Touch thy right shoulder

and say ve-ceburaii ( and the Power)

Touch thy left shoulder

and say ve-cedulah ( and the Glory)

Clasp thy hands before thee

and say le-olam ( for ever)

Dagger between fingers, point up

and say amen.

Make in the Air toward the East the invoking penta-
gram as shown and, bringing the point of the dagger to
the centre of the Pentagram, vibrate the deity name
yod he vau he—imagining that your voice carries for-
ward to the East of the Universe.

Holding the dagger out before you, go to the South,
make the Pentagram and vibrate similarly the deity
name—Adonai.

Go to the West, make the Pentagram and vibrate

Eheieh.

Go to the North, make the Pentagram and vibrate

Agla.

<io6>

—

—

Return to the East and complete your circle by bring-
ing the dagger point to the centre of the first Pentagram.Eheieh.

Go to the North, make the Pentagram and vibrate

Agla.

<io6>

—

—

Return to the East and complete your circle by bring-
ing the dagger point to the centre of the first Pentagram.

Stand with arms outstretched in the form of a cross

and say:

Before me

Behind me

At my right hand

At my left hand

Raphael

Gabriel

Michael

Auriel

Before me flames the pentagram

Behind me shines the six-rayed star

Again make the Qabalistic Cross as directed above,

saying ateh, etc.

For Banishing use the same Ritual, but reversing the

direction of the lines of the Pentagram.

<I07>

THE USES OF THE PENTAGRAM RITUAL

1.

As a form of prayer the invoking ritual should be used
in the morning—the banishing in the evening.

2.

The names should be pronounced inwardly in the
breath vibrating it as much as possible and feeling
tjiat the whole body throbs with the sound and sends
out a wave of vibration directed to the ends of the
quarter.

3.

As a protection against impure magnetism. The Ban-
ishing Ritual can be used to get rid of obsessing or
disturbing thoughts. Give a mental image to your
obsession and imagine it formulated before you.
Project it out of your aura with the Saluting Sign of
a Neophyte, and when it is away about three feet,
prevent its return with the Sign of Silence.

Now imagine the form in the East before you and do
the Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram to disinte-
grate it, seeing it, in your mind’s eye, dissolving on
the further side of your ring of flame.

It can be used as an exercise in concentration. Seated
in meditation or lying down, formulate yourself stand-
ing up in robes and holding a dagger. Put your con-
<io8>

sciousness in this form and go to the East. Make your-
self ‘feel’ there by touching the wall, opening your
eyes, stamping on the floor, etc.

Begin the Ritual and go round the room mentally
vibrating the words and trying to feel them as coming
from the form.Begin the Ritual and go round the room mentally
vibrating the words and trying to feel them as coming
from the form.

Finish in the East and try to see your results in the
Astral Light, then walk back and stand behind the
head of your body and let yourself be re-absorbed.

(In the introduction I have given instructions for the
performance of the Qabalistic Cross. When tracing the
Pentagrams, the imagination should be exerted to visual-
ize them as flaming stars all about one. The impression
should be of a fire ring studded in four places with stars

of flame.

Likewise, when vibrating the angelic names, the stu-
dent should endeavour to imagine four vast towering
figures about him. But see further in my book “The
Middle Pillar.” I. R.)

< i°9>

THE PILLARS

In the explanation of the Symbols of the Grade of
Neophyte, your attention has been directed to the gen-
eral mystical meaning of the Two Pillars called in the
Ritual the “Pillars of Hermes” of “Seth” and of “Solo-
mon.” In the 9th chapter of the Ritual of the Dead they
are referred to as the “Pillars of Shu,” the “Pillars of the
Gods of the Dawning Light,” and also as “the North and
Southern Columns of the Gate of the Hall of Truth.” In
the I25th Chapter, they are represented by the sacred
gateway, the door to which the aspirant is brought when
he has completed the negative confession. The archaic
pictures on the one Pillar are painted in black upon a
white ground, and those on the other in white upon a
black ground, in order to express the interchange and
reconciliation of opposing forces and the eternal balance
of light and darkness which gives force to visible nature.

The black cubical bases represent darkness and mat-
ter wherein the Spirit, the Ruach Elohim, began to form-
ulate the Ineffable NAME, that Name which the ancient
Rabbis have said “rushes through the universe,” that
Name before which the Darkness rolls back at the birth
of time.The flaming red triangular capitals which crown the
summit of the Pillars represent the Triune manifestation
of the Spirit of Life, the Three Mothers of the Sepher
Yctsirah, the Three Alchemical Principles of Nature, the
Sulphur, the Mercury and the Salt.

Each Pillar is surmounted by its own light-bearer

veiled from the material world.

At the base of both Pillars rise the Lotus flowers, sym-
<no>

bols of regeneration and metempsychosis. The archaic
illustrations are taken from vignettes of the 17th and
125th chapter of the Ritual of the Dead, the Egyptian
Book of the “Per-em-Hru” or the “Book of Coming
Forth into the Day,” the oldest book in the world as yet
discovered. The Recension of the Priests of ON is to be
found in the walls of the Pyramids of the Kings of the 5th
and 6th Dynasties at Sakarah, the recension of the 11th
and 12th Dynasties on the sarcophagi of that period,
and the Theban recension of the 18th Dynasty and on-
ward is found on papyri, both plain and illuminated. No
satisfactory translation of these books is available, none
having been yet attempted by a scholar having the quali-
fications of mystic as well as Egyptologist.

The Ritual of the Dead, generally speaking, is a collec-
tion of hymns and prayers in the form of a series of cere-
monial Rituals to enable the man to unit himself with
Osiris the Redeemer. After this union he is no longer
called the man, but Osiris, with whom he is now symbol-
ically identified. “That they also may be One of us,” said
the Christ of the New Testament. “I am Osiris” said
the purified and justified man, his soul luminous and
washed from sin in the immortal and uncreated light,
united to Osiris, and thereby justified, and the son of
God; purified by suffering, strengthened by opposition,
regenerate through self-sacrifice. Such is the subject of
the great Egyptian Ritual.The 17th Chapter of the Theban recension consists of
a very ancient text with several commentaries, also ex-
tremely old, and some prayers, none of which come into
the scheme of the original text. It has, together with the
12th chapter, been very carefully translated for the pur-
<in>

”

pose of this lecture by the V. H. Frater M. W. T., and the
V. H. Soror S. S. D, D. has made many valuable sugges-
tions with regard to the interpretation. The Title and
Preface of the 17th Chapter reads:

“Concerning the exaltation of the Glorified Ones, of
Coming and Going forth in the Divine Domain, of the
Genies of the Beautiful land of Amentet. Of Coming
forth in the light of Day in any form desired, of Hearing
the Forces of Nature by being enshrined as a living Bai.”

And the rubric is:
“The united with Osiris shall recite it when he has en-
tered the Harbour, May glorious things be done thereby
upon earth. May all the words of the Adept be fulfilled.

Owing to the complex use of symbols, the ritual trans-
lation of the Chapter can only be understood by perpet-
ual reference to the ancient Egyptian commentaries, and
therefore the following paraphrase has been put together
to convey to modern minds as nearly as possible the
ideas conceived by the old Egyptians in this glorious
triumphal song of the Soul of Man made one with Osiris,
the Redeemer.

“I am TUM made One with all things.
“I have become NU. I am RA in his rising ruling by
right of his Power. I am the Great God self-begotten,
even NU, who pronounced His Names, and thus the
Circle of the Gods was created.

“I am Yesterday and know Tomorrow. I can never
more be overcome. I know the secret of Osiris, whose be-
ing is perpetually revered of RA. I have finished the work
which was planned at the Beginning,! am the Spirit made
manifest, and armed with two vast eagle’s plumes. Isis
and Nephthys are their names, made One with Osiris.

<U2><U2>

“I claim my inheritance. My sins have been uprooted
and my passions overcome. I am Pure White. I dwell in
Time. I live through Eternity, when Initiates make of-
fering to the Everlasting Gods. I have passed along the
Pathway. I know the Northern and the Southern Pillars,
the two Columns at the Gateway of the Hall of Truth.

“Stretch unto me your hands, O ye Dwellers in the
centre. For I am transformed to a God in your midst.
Made One with Osiris, I have filled the eye socket in the
day of the morning when Good and Evil fought together.
“I have lifted up the cloud-veil in the Sky of the Storm.
Till T saw RA born again from out the Great Waters. His
strength is my strength, and my strength is His strength.
Homage to you, Lords of Truth, chiefs who Osiris rules.
Granting release from Sin, Followers of Ma where rest
is Glorious. Whose Throne Anubis built in the day when
Osiris said:

“Lo! A man wins his way to Amcntet. I come before
you, to drive away my faults. As ye did to the Seven
Glorious Ones who follow their Lord Osiris. I am that
Spirit of Earth and Sun.

“Between the Two Pillars of Flame. I am RA when he
fought beneath the Ashad Tree, destroying the enemies
of the Ancient of Days, I am the Dweller in the Egg. I
am he who turns in the Disc. I shine forth from the Hori-
zon, as the gold from the mine. I float through the Pillars
of SHU in the ether. Without a peer among the Gods.
The Breath of my mouth is as a flame. I light upon the
Earth with my glory. Eye cannot gaze on my darting
beams, as they reach through the Heavens and lick up
the Nile with tongues of flame. I am strong upon Earth
with the strength of RA. I have come into Harbour as
< II 3>Osiris made perfect. Let priestly offerings be made to me
as one in the train of the ancient of Days. I brood as the
Divine Spirit. I move in the firmness of my Strength. I
undulate as the Waves that vibrate through Eternity.
Osiris has been claimed with acclamation, and ordained
to rule among the Gods. Enthroned in the Domain of
Horus where the Spirit and the Body are united in the
presence of the Ancient of Days. Blotted out are the sins
of his body in passion. He has passed the Eternal Gate,
and has received the New Year Feast with Incense, at
the marriage of Earth with Heaven.

“TUM has built his Bridal Chamber. RURURET has
founded his shrine. The Procession’s completed. HORUS
has purified, SET has consecrated, SHU made one with
OSIRIS, has entered his heritage.

“As TUM he has entered the Kingdom to complete
union with the Invisible. Thy Bride, O Osiris, is Isis, who
mourned Thee when she found Thee slain. In Isis, thou
art born again. From Nephthys is thy nourishment.
They cleansed thee in thy Heavenly Birth. Youth waits
upon thee, ardour is ready at thy hand. And their arms
shall uphold thee for millions of years. Initiates surround
Thee and Thine enemies are cast down. The Powers of
Darkness are destroyed. The Companions of Thy Joys
are with Thee. Thy Victories in the Battle await their
reward in the Pillar. The Forces of Nature obey Thee.
Thy Power is exceeding great. The Gods curse him that
curseth Thee. Thine Aspirations are fulfilled. Thou art
the Mistress of Splendour. They are destroyed who
barred Thy way.”

The 125th Chapter is concerned with the entry of an
Initiate into the Hall of the Two Columns of Justice, and
<H4>

commenced with a most beautiful and symbolic descrip-
tion of Death, as a journey from the barren wilderness of
Earth, to the Glorious Land which lies beyond. The lit-
eral translation of the opening lines is as follows:“I have come from afar to look upon thy beauties. My
hands salute Thy Name of Justice. 1 have come from
afar, where the Acacia Tree grew not. Where the tree
thick with leaves is not born. Where there come not
beams from herb or grass. I have entered the Place of
Mystery. I have communed with Set. Sleep came upon
me, I was wrapped therein, bowing down before the hid-
den things. I was ushered into the House of Osiris. I saw
the marvels that were there. The Princes of the Gates in
their Glory.”

The illustrations in this chapter represent the Hall
of Truth as seen through the open leaves of its door. The
Hall is presided over by a God who holds his right hand
over the cage of a hawk, and his left over the food of
eternity. On each side of the God is a cornice crowned by
a row of alternate feathers and Uraei symbolising justice
and fiery power. The door leaf which completes the right
hand of a stall is called “Possessor of Truth controlling
the Feet,” while that on the left is “Possessor of strength,
binding the male and female animals.” The 42 Judges of
the Dead are represented as seated in a long row, and
each of them has to be named, and the Sin over which he
presided has been denied.

This chapter describes the introduction of the initiate
into the Hall of Truth by ANUBIS, who, having ques-
tioned the aspirant, receives from him an account of his
Initiation, and is satisfied by his right to enter. He states
that he has been taken into the ante-chamber of the
<H5>

Temple and there stripped and blind-folded, he had to
grope for the entrance of the Hall, and having found it,
he was reclothed and annointed in the presence of the
Initiated. He is then asked for the Pass-words and de-
mands that his Soul should be weighed in the Great Bal-
ance of the Hall of Truth, whereupon ANUBIS again in-
terrogates him concerning the symbolism of the door of
the Hall, and his answers being found correct, ANUBIS
says: “Pass on, thou knowest it.”Among other things the Initiate states that he has
been purified four times, the same number of times that
the Neophyte is purified and consecrated in the cere-
mony of the Neophyte. He then makes the long Negative
Confession, stating to each Judge in turn that he is inno-
cent of that form of Sin over which he judges. Then he
invokes the Judges to do him justice, and afterwards
describes how he had washed in the washing place of the
South, and rested in the North, in the place called “Son
of the Deliverers” and he becomes the Dweller under the
Olive Tree of Peace, and how he was given a tall flame of
fire and a sceptre of cloud which he preserved in the salt-
ing tank in which mummies were swathed. And he found
there another sceptre called “Giver of Breath” and with
that he extinguished the flame and shattered the sceptre
of cloud, and made a lake of it. The initiate is then
brought to the actual Pillars, and has to name them and
their parts under the symbol of the Scales of a Balance.
He also has to name the Guardian of the Gateway, who
prevents his passage, and when all these are propitiated,
the plea of the Hall itself cries out against his steps, say-
ing “Because I am silent, because I am pure,” and it must
know that his aspirations are pure enough and high
<n6>

enough for him to be allowed to tread upon it. He is then
allowed to announce to Thoth that he is clean from all
evil, and has overcome the influence of the planets, and
THOTH says to him: “Who is He whose Pylons are of
Flame, whose wralls of Living Uraei, and the flames of
whose House are streams of Water?” And the Initiate
replies “Osiris!”

And it is immediately proclaimed: “Thy meat shall
be from the Infinite, and thy drink from the Infinite.
Thou art able to go forth to the sepulchral feasts on
earth, for thou hast overcome.”And it is immediately proclaimed: “Thy meat shall
be from the Infinite, and thy drink from the Infinite.
Thou art able to go forth to the sepulchral feasts on
earth, for thou hast overcome.”

Thus, these two chapters, which are represented by
their illustrations upon the Pillars, represent the ad-
vance and purification of the Soul and its union with
Osiris, the Redeemer, in the Golden Dawn of the Infinite
Light, in which the Soul is transfigured, knows all, and
can do all, for it is made One with the Eternal God.

KHABS AM PEKHT
KONX
LIGHT

OM PAX
IN

EXTENSION!

<H7>

—

—

Second Knowledge Lecture

The Names and Alchemical Symbols of the Three Prin-
ciples of Nature are :
SULPHUR 4

MERCURY $

SALT ©

The Metals Attributed to the Planets in Alchemy
are :

LEAD
TIN

IRON

1?

%

<J

GOLD
O
COPPER or BRASS 9
QUICKSILVER

$

SILVER 2>

The following terms are used in books about Alchemy.
They have the meanings given below.

Sol Philosophorum

The Pure Living Alchemical Spirit of Gold—the
Refined Essence of Heat and Fire.

Luna Philosophorum

The Pure Living Alchemical Spirit of Silver—the
Refined Essence of Heat and Moisture.

< JI 9>.

—

—

—

—

The Green Lion

The Stem and Root of the Radical Essence of
Metals.

The Black Dragon

Death—Put refaction'—Dec ay.

The King

Red—The Qabalistic Microprosopus.
Tiphareth—analogous to Gold and the Sun,

The Queen

White—The Qabalistic Bride of Microprosopus,
Malkah—analogous to Silver and the Moon.

The Four Orders of the Elementals Are:
Gnomes
Sylphs

1. The Spirits of the Earth
2. The Spirits of the Air
3. The Spirits of the Water
4. The Spirits of the Fire

Undines

Salamanders

These are the Essential Spiritual Beings called upon to
praise God in the *Benedicite Omnia Opera

The Kerubim are the Living Powers of Tetragrammation
on the Materia! Plane and the Presidents of the Four
Elements,The Kerubim are the Living Powers of Tetragrammation
on the Materia! Plane and the Presidents of the Four
Elements,

They operate through the Fixed or Kerubic Signs of the
Zodiac and are thus symbolised and attributed:
Kerub of Air—Man—Aquarius "
Kerub of Fire
Kerub of Earth—Bull—Taurus y
Kerub of Water

Eagle—Scorpio n\ or <s=^J

IAon—Leo

SI

< 1 20>

1

Tetragrammaton means Four-Lettered Name and re-
fers to the Unpronounceable Name of God symbolised by
Jehovah.

Tke Laver of Water of Purification refers to the Waters
of Binah, the Female Power reflected in the Waters of

Creation.

The Altar of Burnt Offering for the sacrifice of animals
symbolises the Qlippoth or Evil Demons of the plane
contiguous to and below the Material Universe. It points
out that our passions should be sacrificed.

The Qlippoth are the Evil Demons of Matter and the
Shells of the Dead.

The Altar of Incense in the Tabernacle was overlaid with
gold. Ours is Black to symbolise our work which is to
separate the Philosophic Gold from the Black Dragon
of Matter.

< 12

>

This altar diagram shows the Ten Sephiroth with all
the connecting Paths numbered and lettered, and the
Serpent winding over each Path. Around each Sephirah
are written the Names of the Deity, Archangel and An-
gelic Plost attributed to it. The Twenty Two Paths are
bound together by the Serpent of Wisdom. It unites the
Paths but does not touch any of the Sephiroth, which are
linked by the Flaming Sword.

The Flaming Sword is formed by the natural order of

the Tree of Life. It resembles a flash of Lightning.

Together the Sephiroth and the Twenty Two Paths
form the 32 Paths of the Sephcr Yetzirah or Book of
Formation.

The Two pillars either side of the Altar represent:

Active: The White Pillar on the South Side.

Male.
Adam.

Pillar of Light and Fire.

Right Kerub.

Metatron.

Passive: The Black Pillar on the North Side.

Female.

Eve.

Pillar of Cloud.

Left Kerub.

Sandalphon.

< 1 22>

.

Pillar qP
Mercy

TiUar
o9Pillar of Light and Fire.

Right Kerub.

Metatron.

Passive: The Black Pillar on the North Side.

Female.

Eve.

Pillar of Cloud.

Left Kerub.

Sandalphon.

< 1 22>

.

Pillar qP
Mercy

TiUar
o9

T^ildticss

<I23>

THE SECOND MEDITATION

—
—

LET THE ZELATOR meditate on a straight line. Let
him take a ruler or a pencil ant! by moving it a dis-

tance equal to its length, outline a square.

Having done this, let him, after quieting his mind with

the rhythmic breathing taught in the first medita-

tion, mentally formulate a cube, and endeavor to

discover the significance of this figure and its cor-

respondences.

Let him meditate upon minerals and crystals, choosing
especially a crystal of SALT, and entering into it,

actually feel himself of crystalline formation.

Looking out on the Universe from this standpoint, let
him identify himself with the EARTH SPIRITS
in love and sympathy, recalling as far as he can

their prayer as said in the closing of the Zelator

Grade.

Let him meditate upon the EARTH TRIPLICITY,
visualising the symbols of a BULL—a VIRGIN
a GOAT which stand for KERUBIC EARTH
MUTABLE EARTH—CARDINAL EARTH.

For the above terms consult a simple astrology
manual. Make notes of the ideas and pictures which

arise in your mind.

<t24>

The Four Worlds of the Qabalah are:
ATZILUTH, Archetypal—Pure Deity.
BRIAH, Creative—Archangelic.
YETZIRAH, Formative—Angelic.
ASSIAH, Action—Matter, Man, Shells, Demons,

nft'SS

hn'i;

pits'

Ttry

1.

The Ten Houses, or Heavens, of Assiah, the Material

World are:

Primum Mobile, Rashith ha Gilgalim. D'WrJn n'tswi

2. Sphere of the Zodiac, Mazloth.

3. Sphere of Saturn, Shabbathai.

4. Sphere of Jupiter, Tzedek.

5. Sphere of Mars, Madim.
10.
6. Sphere of the Sol, Shemesh.

7. Sphere of Venus, Nogah.

8. Sphere of Mercury, Kokab.

9. Sphere of Luna, Levanah,

nn'rro

'snnff

pi*

cno

3313

H33^

Sphere of the Elements, Olam Yesodoth. WHO'7. Sphere of Venus, Nogah.

8. Sphere of Mercury, Kokab.

9. Sphere of Luna, Levanah,

nn'rro

'snnff

pi*

cno

3313

H33^

Sphere of the Elements, Olam Yesodoth. WHO'

(This is sometimes rendered Cholem Yesodoth,
and translated “The Breaker of Foundations.” I
am pretty certain that this is a mistake no doubt
due to a printer’s error in reproducing “Ch” in place
of “Gh,” the latter being intended for “Ayin.”)

<I2S>

Q

i

n
-
jp“n
ru

n
nr
X
X-
tzwa

ti
u

£
o
-£s

Hj

°

E

w a3
c
Cm W

Sr;

OJi

P
ITn
i iX
JN

n
r
X

in

o
px:

"re
p
re
to

<u
re

u
s

' u
-C3
reo

n

5C

i -
iz

X
£3 C<u

%•' -a
re " -C

£ W

re
"a
"O
re

U

re

C
O
<

O
W

s 4

Hi

t
’W o
§ I
0 Hi

^ £

1 w."*4

Hi

§ 1
^ -

|l
5.*
S -
s ^
o
-
J2 ^

-3

|o

o

.
V-

e o

nrn

ia

n
O

Angels

mpn

ha-Qadesh

V
"
a

IT
h
p

r-

IJ

p
jvnJP
u

X
J^
rr
a

£i
r-
a

fii

(Yetsirah)

of

Choir

SEPHIRQTH

Chayoth

THE

Name

tniDDD

re

c
&
z$<

re

E

re

O

&
re—
<U
CO

pM

E

a>

o
S 3

r
X
r-

jr

;*»

3
X
0s-

M
n_
jr-X

n
P
X

JT'-

r
P
X

rz

X
nrX

uT

a

re

CL
re

15
'E

reX

r

rz

n

< i

x
n ,r.
*-> rz
r- *—. c c
3
£, C <1
W

>

>

TO

ATTRIBUTED

NAMES

DIVINE

THE

(Briah)

Archangelic

Metatron

_w
’3
CS

1)
’&
M 15

Cu

cfl

S3H

re

S3H

re

u
E
rew

iz

r
IZ

rz

X
j-
nw
u

W
>

x

iT-

%
ng-
u
n

o
s
s
IE
o
UJ W

Name

Atziluth)

(

Divine

Ehcieh

of

Sefhirah

No.

Kether

P

<I26>

itr

njnwna

lnnwn

Barschemoth

Schad

ha-Shartathan

ve-ad

«d^q

Tarshisim

Schechalim

irD'ahna

*tyi

nirvn

n^ntr

be

Ruachoth

Malkah

<u
ft

X

ft

ps3

X
X
o

ft

53

a

X

ra
60
o
2:

Gabriel

Levanah

NAMES

PLANETARY

<U
fcjj

c<

EL>e

et

fe

Oh £
^-g
°I
s*s

ct

Tj
J3
u
OQ

CTJ

V

<D

H

s
ftc
b
caN

£
B
S

fij

* CO
a
etu

r3X
ctXx
ftx

c/3

OJ

X

Xn

GJ
E
<uX

CjO

of"

*o G Of

X*

<I27>

The traditional Tarot consists of a pack of 78 cards
made up of Four Suits of 14 cards each, together with 22
Trumps, or Major Arcana, which tell the story of the
Soul.CjO

of"

*o G Of

X*

<I27>

The traditional Tarot consists of a pack of 78 cards
made up of Four Suits of 14 cards each, together with 22
Trumps, or Major Arcana, which tell the story of the
Soul.

Each suit consists of ten numbered cards, as in the
modern playing cards, but there are four instead of three
honours: King or Knight, Queen, Prince or Emperor,
Princess or Knave.

The Four Suits are:

1. Wands or Sceptres comparable to Diamonds

2. Cups or Chalices comparable to Hearts.

3. Swords comparable to Spades.

4. Pentacles or Coins comparable to Clubs.

<I28>

Third Knowledge Lecture

THE SOUL is divided by the Qabalists into three

Principal Parts:—
1. NESCHAMAH The Highest Part, answering to the

Three Supernals.

2. RUACH The Middle Part, answering to the six Seph-
iroth from CHESED to YESOD, inclusive.
3. NEPHESCH The lowest, answering to MALKUTH.
NESCHAMAH answers to the higher aspirations of the
Soul.
RUACH answers to the mind and reasoning powers.
NEPHESCH answers to the animal instincts.
CHIAH answers to CHOKMAH, YECHIDAH TO
KETHER, while NESCHAMAH itself is referred to
BINAH.

The Sepher Yetzirah divides the Hebrew Letters into
three Classes of Three, Seven, and Twelve.

Three Mothers

Seven Double Letters

Twelve Single Letters

-t?

:

o

N

;

n “i £ D " J 2
P xjJDi^'tannn

—

<I29>

—

The Holy Place embraces the symbolism of the 22

Letters.

The Table of Shew-Bread, the Single Letters.
The Altar of Incense the Three Mothers.

Astral Spirits are those belonging to the Astral Plane.
Such are false and illusionary forms, shells of the dead,
and Ghosts and Phantoms.

Elemental Spirits are those belonging to the nature of

the Elements; some are good and some are evil.

An Angel is a pure and high Spirit of unmixed good

in office and operation.

In the Tarot, the ten small cards of each suit refer to
the Sephiroth. The four suits refer to the Letters of Tet-
ragrammation thus:

Sceptres or Wands to— Yod
Heh
Cups
Vau
Swords
Heh (final)
PentaclesSceptres or Wands to— Yod
Heh
Cups
Vau
Swords
Heh (final)
Pentacles

The Four Suits also refer to the Four Worlds of the

Qabalists thus:—

Sceptres to
Cups
Swords
Pentacles

Atziluth

Briah

Yetzirah

Assiah

The Honours of the Tarot Pack are, as it were, the
Vice-gerants of the Great Name, in the Qabalistic World
to which each suit is referred. They also symbolise
Father, Mother, Son, Daughter; Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection.

< I 3°>

THE FYLFOT CROSS

The 17 Squares out of

a square of lesser squares,

refer to the Sun in the

twelve Signs of the Zodiac

and the Four Elements:

This form of the Cadu-
ceus of Hermes is that of
the Three Mother Letters
placed on one another

thus:

The Caduceus has an-
other meaning on th eTree
of Life. The upper part
touch Chokmah
wings
and Binah\ These are the
Three Su pern a Is.

The Seven lower Sephi-

roth are embraced by the

twin

Serpents

whose

heads rest upon Chesed

and Geburah.

< 1 3 1 >

The meaning of Luna on the Tree of Life is thus:

In its increase it embraces the side of Mercy; in its

decrease the side of Severity, and at the full, it reflects
the Sun of Tiphareth.

<I32>

MEDITATION

Let the Theoricus practise the Moon Breath, while
saying mentally the word AUM: (Moon breath is
through the left nostril only.)

Let him meditate upon the waxing and waning cres-
cents, while visualising a silver crescent upon an indigo
background.

Let him now call before his mind the Signs of the
Airy Triplicity X
zz and enclosed in these, let him
meditate upon the numbers nine and five and therewith
the forms of the Pentagram and Pentangle.

Let him now rise in imagination above the mineral
world into the world of trees and flowers and identify
himself in love and sympathy with the Powers of the
Elements behind these.

Let him realise the mental world where mind rules
over matter, and let him meditate upon the ideas of
appearance and reality.

<m>Let him realise the mental world where mind rules
over matter, and let him meditate upon the ideas of
appearance and reality.

<m>

Fourth Knowledge Lecture
The Figures of Geomancy
and Their Zodiacal Attributions

•
#
0 0
0

*
• 0
•
• •

• •
• m
0
• 0

• 1
* 0
0 •
• 0

•
•
•

• *
0 *
•
•

•
0
• 1
• 0

m m
•
•
• •

Puer

Amissio

Albus

Populus

sS>

Via

Fortuna
Major

<9

SI

Fortuna
Minor

cfi

Conjunctio

cp m

• •
! 0
0

8

X

0 *
0
0 •
! * 0

0 0
•
• •
0

•
0 0
0 •
•

• •
* •
• *
•

#
• *
• *
• m

0 #
•
»
0

#
0
0 !
• 0

<G5>

Puclla

Rubeus

Acquisitio /

Career

>5

Tristitia

Lactitia

3e

Caput
Draconis

Cauda
Draconis

—

The numbers and lineal figures appropriate to the

planets are:

Saturn

Jupiter

Mars

Sun

—

3

4

5

6

Venus

Mercury ——— -8
Moon

9

7

Triangle

Square

Pentagram

Hexagram

Heptagram

Octagram

Enneagram

THE MAGICAL SQUARES OF THE PLANETS
are formed of the squares of the number of the planet,
arranged so as to yield the same number each way. The
number of the sum of each column of figures and the
number of the total of all the numbers of the square, are
also numbers especially attached to the Planet. Thus
the number of the Planet SATURN is 3, square 9, sum
of all columns vertical, horizontal and diagonal 15; total
sum of all numbers, 45.

These numbers are then formed into Divine and Spirit
Names, as is demonstrated in that section of this book
dealing with sighs.

<I36>

THE SOLID GREEK
CUBICAL CROSS, the
Admission Badge for the
Path of tau, is com-
posed of 22 squares, an-

swering to the 22 letters
of the Hebrew Alphabet.

THE SOLID TRIAN-
GLE OR TETRAHED-
RON, or Pyramid of Fire,
the Admission Badge for
the Path of shin, repre-
sents the Simple Fire of
Nature and the Latent or
Hidden Fire.

The three upper trian-
gles refer to fire— Solar,
Volcanic and Astral,
while the lowest or basal

triangle

represents

the

latent heat.The three upper trian-
gles refer to fire— Solar,
Volcanic and Astral,
while the lowest or basal

triangle

represents

the

latent heat.

THE GREEK CROSS
of 13 Squares, the Admis-
sion Badge for the Path of
resh, is referred to the
sun in the Twelve Signs
of the Zodiac, and also in
the midst of the Four
Elements.

<* 37>

THE CUP OF STOLISTES,
the Admission Badge to the
Grade of © = GO, is thus referred
to the Tree of Life. It embraces
nine of the Sephiroth, exclusive
of Kether ,

Yesod and Malkuth are referred
to the triangle below, the former

to the apex, the latter to the base.
Like the Caducous, it further
represents the Three Elements:
Water, Fire and Air. The Cres-
cent refers to the Waters Above
the Firmament, the sphere to the
Firmament, and the basal tri-
angle to the consuming Fire,
which is opposed to the Fire
symbolised by the upper part of
the Caduceus.

THE SYMBOL of MERCURY
on the Tree of Life Embraces all
but Kether. The horns spring
from Daath (Knowledge) which
not, properly speaking, a
Sephira, but rather a conjunc-
tion of Chokmah and liinah.

is

<i38>

o

nE 2 Du

§

ATTRIBUTION OF THE TAROT TRUMPS

Path

No.

Tarot Trump

Letter Symbol

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

The Foolish Man
The Juggler
The High Priestess
The Empress
The Emperor
The Hierophant
The Lovers
The Chariot

Strength (Justice)

The Hermit (Prudence)

10 The Wheel of Fortune

11

12

13

Justice (Strength)
The Hanged Man
Death

14 Temperance

15

The Devil

16 Tower Struck by

Lightning

17 The Star
18 The Moon
19 The Sun

20

21

Last Judgment
The Universe.

< J 39>

t

3

:

i

M

1

T

n

B

'

3

D

3

D

H*
y

D

P

1

IT

n

A
$

3)

9
T
8
X
25
a

TIB

%

V
m.

V?

<3

AW
AW
X
O
A

I?

MEDITATION

Let the Practicus meditate upon the Symbols of the

Rhomboid and the Vesica.

Let him seek out their meanings and correspondences.

Let him contemplate the Symbol Mercury and the

Number 8.Let the Practicus meditate upon the Symbols of the

Rhomboid and the Vesica.

Let him seek out their meanings and correspondences.

Let him contemplate the Symbol Mercury and the

Number 8.

Let him now learn to control his emotions, on no ac-
count giving way to anger, hatred and jealousy, but to
turn the force he hitherto expended in these directions
towards the attainment of perfection, that the malarial
marsh of his nature may become a clear and limpid lake,
reflecting the Divine Nature truly and without distor-

tion.

Let him identify himself with the Powers of Water,
considering the Water Triplicity in all its aspects, with
its attributions and correspondences.

< r 4°>

NOTES ON THE TAROT
by FraterS. R.M. D.

In the Tree of Life in the Tarot, each path forms the
connecting link between two of the Sephiroth. The King
and the Queen are the correlations of the Abba and the
Alma in that suit; the Knight or Prince answers to Mic-
roprosopus, and the Knave or Princess which was an-
ciently a female figure, is referred to the Bride, Kallah
or Malkah.

Combining, then, the material attributions of the

Sephiroth and the Path, it results that:

0. Fool—The Crown of Wisdom, the Primum Mobile,

acting through the Air on the Zodiac.

1. The Juggler—The Crown of Understanding, the
beginning of material production, the Primum Mo-
bile acting through the Philosophic Mercury on

Saturn.

2. High Priestess—The Crown of Beauty, the begin-
ning of Sovereignty and Beauty, the Primum Mo-
bile, acting through the Moon on the Sun.

3. Empress—The Wisdom of Understanding, the
Union of the powers of Origination and Production;
the Sphere of the Zodiac acting through Venus upon
Saturn.

4. Emperor—The Wisdom of Sovereignty and Beauty,
and the originator of them; the Sphere of the Zodiac
< I 4 1 >

acting through Aries upon the Sun, and initiating

Spring.

5. Hierophant=The Wisdom and fountain of Mercy,
the Sphere of the Zodiac acting through Taurus upon

Jupiter.acting through Aries upon the Sun, and initiating

Spring.

5. Hierophant=The Wisdom and fountain of Mercy,
the Sphere of the Zodiac acting through Taurus upon

Jupiter.

6. The Lovers—The Understanding of Beauty and
Production of Beauty and Sovereignty. Saturn act-
ing through Gemini upon Sol.

7. Chariot—Understanding acting upon Severity. Sat-

urn acting through Cancer upon Mars.

8. Strength— Fortitude. Mercy tempering Severity.
The Glory of Strength. Jupiter acting through Leo
upon Mars.

9. Hermit—The Mercy of Beauty, the Magnificence of
Sovereignty, Jupiter acting through Virgo upon Sol.

10. Wheel of Fortune=The Mercy and Magnificence of
Victory. Jupiter acting through Jupiter direct upon
Venus.

11. Justice=The Severity of Beauty and Sovereignty.

Mars acting through Libra upon Sol.

12. The Hanged Man—The Severity of Splendour. Exe-
cution of Judgment. Mars acting through Water
upon Mercury.

13. Death=Thc Sovereignty and result of Victory. Sol
acting through Scorpio upon Venus, or Osiris under
the destroying power of Typhon afflicting Isis.
<I42>

14. Temperance=The Beauty of a firm Basis. The Sov-
ereignty of Fundamental Power. Sol acting through
Sagittarius upon Luna.

15. The Devil—The Sovereignty and Beauty of Mater-
splendour. Sol acting

ial (and therefore false)
through Capricorn upon Mercury.

16. The Tower—The Victory over Splendour. Venus
acting through Mars upon Mercury. Avenging force.

17 . Star—The Victory of Fundamental Strength. Venus

acting through Aquarius upon Luna. Hope.

18 . Moon—The Victory of the Material. Venus acting
through Pisces upon the Cosmic Elements, deceptive
effect of the apparent power of Material Forces.

19. Sun—The Splendour of the Material World. Mer-

cury acting through the Sun upon the Moon.

20. Judgment=The Splendour of the Material World.
Mercury acting through Fire upon the Cosmic Ele-
ments.cury acting through the Sun upon the Moon.

20. Judgment=The Splendour of the Material World.
Mercury acting through Fire upon the Cosmic Ele-
ments.

21. Universe—The Foundation of the Cosmic Elements
and of the Material World. Luna acting through
Saturn upon the Elements.

<H3>

—
THE GARDEN OF EDEN BEFORE THE FALL

This diagram is described in the Practicus Ritual. It
shows in a glyph the teaching proper to the Practicus
on entering the Sephirah HOD which he has reached
by the Paths of SHIN and RESH from MALKUTH and
YESOD respectively.

At the summit are the THREE SUPERNAL SEPHI-
ROTH summed up into ONE—AIMA ELOHIM, the
Mother Supernal—The Woman of the Apocalypse
(Chap. 12) clothed with the SUN, the MOON under her
feet, and on her head the Crown of Twelve Stars.

It is written ‘So the Name JEHOVAH is joined to the
Name ELOHIM, for JEHOVAH planted a Garden
Eastward in Eden.’

From the Three Supernals follow the other Sephiroth
of THE TREE OF LIFE. Below the TREE, proceed-
ing from MALKUTH is THE TREE OF KNOWL-
EDGE of GOOD AND of EVIL which is between the
Tree of Life and the World or Assiah or Shells, repre-
sented by the Coiled Up DRAGON with Seven Heads
and Ten Horns—being the Seven Infernal Palaces and
the Ten Averse Sephiroth. (These are described in the
text of the Rituals but are not read to the Candidate at
his Grade. When studying this diagram, these descrip-
tions should be looked up, but they are not required for
the exam.)

The River NAHER flows forth from the Supernal

Eden and in DAATH it is divided into Four Heads:

< 1 44>

PI SON: Fire—flowing to GEBURAII where there is

Gold.

GIHON: Water—the Waters of Mercy, flowing into

CHESED.

HIDDIKEL: Air—flowing into TIPHARETH.
Earth — flowing

PHRATH (Euphrates):

into

MALKUTH.

It is written “In DAATH the Depths are broken up

and the Clouds drop down dew.”

The word Naher has the meaning ‘perennial stream'
—‘never failing waters’ as opposed to other words mean-

ing Torrent or Brook.and the Clouds drop down dew.”

The word Naher has the meaning ‘perennial stream'
—‘never failing waters’ as opposed to other words mean-

ing Torrent or Brook.

The River going out of Eden is the River of the Apoca-
lypse, the Waters of Life, clear as crystal proceeding from
the Throne, on either side of the Tree of Life, bearing
all manner of Fruit.

Thus the Rivers form a Cross and on it The GREAT
ADAM, the SON who is to rule the Nations, was ex-
tended from TIPHARETH and his arms stretch out to
GEBURAH AND GEDULAH, and in MALKUTH is
EVE, supporting with her hands the TWO PILLARS.

<H5>

ON THE GENERAL GUIDANCE AND
PURIFICATION OF THE SOUL

Learn first, O Practicus of our Ancient Order, that true
Equilibrium is the basis of the Soul. If thou thyself hast
not a sure foundation, whereon wilt thou stand to direct
the forces of Nature?

Know then that as Man is born into this world amidst
the darkness of Nature and the strife of contending
forces, so must his first endeavour be to seek the Light
through their reconciliation. Thus, thou who hast trial
and trouble of this life, rejoice because of them, for in
them is strength, and by their means is a pathway opened
unto that Light Divine.

How should it be otherwise, O man, whose life is but
a day in Eternity a drop in the Ocean of Time? How, if
thy trials were not many, couldst thou purge thy soul
from the dross of Earth?How should it be otherwise, O man, whose life is but
a day in Eternity a drop in the Ocean of Time? How, if
thy trials were not many, couldst thou purge thy soul
from the dross of Earth?

Is it but now that the higher life is beset with dangers
and difficulties; hath it not been ever thus with the Sages
and Hierophants of the Past? They have been persecuted
and reviled, they have been tormented of men, yet
through this has their glory increased. Rejoice, therefore,
O Initiate, for the greater thy trial, the brighter thy tri-
umph. When men shall revile thee and speak against
thee falsely, hath not the Master said “Blessed art thou.”
Yet, O Practicus, let thy victories bring thee not vanity,
for with increase of knowledge should come increase of
wisdom. He who knows little, thinketh he knows much;
but he who knoweth much hath learned his own ignor-
ance. Seest thou a Man wise in his own conceit? There is
more hope of a fool than of him.

<i46>

Be not hasty to condemn other’s sin. How knowest
thou that in their place thou couldst have resisted the
temptation? And even were it so, why shouldst thou
despise one who is weaker than thyself? Be thou well sure
of this, that in slander and self-righteousness is sin. Par-
don therefore the sinner, but encourage not the sin. The
Master condemned not the adulterous woman, but
neither did he encourage her to commit the sin.Thou therefore who desirest magical gifts, be sure
that thy soul is firm and steadfast, for it is by flattering
thy weakness that the Evil One will gain power over
thee. Humble thyself before thy God, yet fear neither
man nor spirit. Fear is failure and the forerunner of fail-
ure; and courage is the beginning of virtue. Therefore
fear not the Spirits, but be firm and courteous with them,
for thou hast no right either to despise or to revile them,
and this too may lead thee into sin. Command and
banish the Evil ones. Curse them by the Great Names
of God, if need be; but neither mock nor revile them,
for so assuredly thou wilt be led into error.

A man is what he maketh himself within the limits
fixed by his inherited destiny; he is a part of mankind.
His actions affect not himself only, but also those with
whom he is brought into contact, either for good or for

evil.

Neither worship nor neglect the physical body, which
is thy temporary connection with the outer and material
world. Therefore let thy mental equilibrium be above
disturbances by material events. Restrain the animal
passions and nourish the higher aspirations; the emo-
tions are purified by suffering.

Do good unto others for God’s sake, not for reward,
<i47>

not for gratitude from them, not for sympathy. If thou
art generous, thou wilt not long for thine ears to be
tickled by expressions of gratitude. Remember that un-
balanced force is evil, that unbalanced severity is but
cruelty and oppression, but that also unbalanced Mercy
is but weakness which would allow and abet evil.True prayer is as much action as Word; it is Will. The
Gods will not do for man what his Higher Powers can do
for himself, if he cultivate Will and Wisdom. Remember
that this Earth is but an atom in the Universe, and thou
thyself but an atom thereon. And that even couldst thou
become the God of this Earth whereon thou crawlest
and grovellest, thou wouldst even then be but an atom
and one among many. Nevertheless, have the greatest
self-respect, and to that end sin not against thyself. The
sin which is unpardonable is knowingly and wilfully to
reject spiritual truth, but every sin and act leaveth its

effect.

To obtain magical Power, learn to control thought. Ad-
mit only true ideas which are in harmony with the end
desired, and not every stray and contradictory idea that
presents itself. Fixed thought is a means to an end; there-
fore pay attention to the power of silent thought and
meditation. The material act is but the outward expres-
sion of the thought, and therefore it hath been said that
“the thought of foolishness is sin.” Thought therefore
is the commencement of action, and if a chance thought
can produce much effect, what cannot fixed thought do?
Therefore, as has been already said, establish thyself
firmly in the Equilibrium of Forces, in the centre of the
cross of the elements, that Cross from whose centre the
creative word issued in the birth of the dawning uni-
verse.

<H8>

As it was said unto thee in the Grade of Theoricus: “Be
thou therefore prompt and active as the Sylphs, but avoid
frivolity and caprice. Be energetic and strong like the
Salamanders, but avoid irritability and ferocity. Be flexi-
ble and attentive to images like the Undines, but avoid
idleness and changeability. Be laborious and patient like
the Gnomes, but avoid grossness and avarice.” So shalt
thou gradually develop the powers of thy Soul and fit
thyself to command the spirits of the elements.For wert thou to summon the Gnomes to pander to thy
avarice, thou wouldst no longer command them, but they
would command thee. Wouldst thou abuse the pure crea-
tures of God’s creation to fill thy coffers and to satisfy
thy lust for Gold? Wouldst thou defile the Spirits of driv-
ing Fire to serve thy wrath and hatred? Wouldst thou
violate the purity of the Souls of the Water to pander to
thy lust and debauchery? Wouldst thou force the Spirits
of the evening breeze to minister to thy folly and caprice?
Know that with such desires thou canst but attract the
evil and not the good, and in that can the evil will have
power over thee.

In true religion there is no sect. Therefore take heed
that thou blaspheme not the name by which another
knoweth his God for if thou doest this thing in
Jupiter, thou wilt blaspheme YHVH; and in Osiris
YEHESHUAH.

“Ask of God and ye shall have,

Seek and ye shall find.

Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.”

<H9>

THE GARDEN OF EDEN AFTER THE FALL

This diagram is described in the Philosophus Ritual. It
shows in a glyph the teaching proper to a Philosophus
on entering the Sephirah NETZACH which he has
reached by the Three Paths of QOPH, TZADDI, AND
PEH from the SEPHIROTH—MALKUTH, YESOD
and HOD respectively.

The Great Goddess EVE, being tempted by the fruits
of the TREE OF KNOWLEDGE whose branches tend
upwards to the seven lower Sephiroth, but also downward
to the Kingdom of Shells, reached down to them and the
two pillars were left unsupported.

Then the Sephirotic Tree was shattered. She fell and
with her fell the Great ADAM. And the Great Red Dra-
gon arose with his seven heads and ten horns, and EDEN
was desolated—and the folds of the Dragon enclosed
MALKUTH and linked it to the Kingdom of the Shells.

And the heads of the Dragon rose into the seven lower
Sephiroth, even up to DAATH at the feet of Aima
Elohim.And the heads of the Dragon rose into the seven lower
Sephiroth, even up to DAATH at the feet of Aima
Elohim.

Thus were the four Rivers of EDEN desecrated and
the Dragon Mouth gave forth the Infernal Waters in
DAATH—and this is LEVIATHAN, The Piercing and
Crooked Serpent.

But TETRAGRAMMATON ELOHIM placed the
Four Letters YHVH of the NAME and the Flaming
Sword of the Ten Sephiroth between the devastated
Garden and the Supernal Eden, that this should not be
involved in the Fall of ADAM.
< I S°>

And it became necessary that a Second Adam should
arise to restore the System, and thus, as ADAM had been
spread on the Cross of the Four Rivers, so the Second
ADAM should be crucified on the Infernal Rivers of the
four armed Cross of DEATH—yet to do this He must
descend into the lowest, even MALKUTH the Earth,
and be born of her. (Psalm 74. ‘Thou breakest the Heads
of Leviathan in pieces.’)

And on the Dragon Heads were the names of the eight
Kings of EDOM and on his horns the names of the
Eleven Dukes of EDOM, for DAATH having developed
in the Dragon a new Head, the Seven Headed Dragon
with Ten Horns became Eight Headed and Eleven
Horned. (Genesis, 36 3 1 to 43. Chronicles 1. 43 to 54.)

NOTE: The Edomites were the descendants of Esau
who sold his birthright. Their Kings came to symbolise
unlawful and chaotic forces.

<i5i>

—

Fifth Knowledge Lecture

AZOTH is a word formed from the initial and final
letters of the Greek, Latin and Hebrew Alphabets
thus:-—A and Z, Aleph and Tau, Alpha and Omega. It
is used with various meanings by different writers but
generally signifies Essence.

The following names occur in Qabalistic writings:

AIN— the Negative
AIN SOPH
AIN SOPH AUR

P K (Nothing—Not)

ff10 r« (Limitless)

hn rpa

(The Limitless Light)

These are the Veils of the Negative Existence de-AIN— the Negative
AIN SOPH
AIN SOPH AUR

P K (Nothing—Not)

ff10 r« (Limitless)

hn rpa

(The Limitless Light)

These are the Veils of the Negative Existence de-

pending from Kether.
ARIK ANPIN r*w TIN—MACROPROSOPUS or The
Vast Countenance is a title of Kether, and another of its
titles is the Ancient of Days, AATIK YOMIN T 01 ' Yn V'
Kether or the Vast Countenance emanates first as
ABBA, the Supernal Father, and AIMA the Supernal
Mother.

ABBA N22N The Supernal Father is referred to YOD

of Tetragrammaton, and

AIMA ND'K The Supernal Mother is referred to HEH.
ELOHIM C'rffs is a name given to these two Persons

united.

< J S3>

<i54>

As Elohim they become the parents of THE SON
ZAUIR ANPIN pM» TiKt, also called MICROPRO-
SOPUS or the LESSER COUNTENANCE.

ABBA is referred to YOD and the Sephira CHOK-
MAH. AIMA is referred to HEH and the Sephirah
BINAH, ZAUIR ANPIN is referred to the six Sephi-
roth—Chesed, Geburah, Tiphareth, Netsach, Hod, and
Yesod, and of these especially to TIPHARETH.

MALKAH

The Queen, and KALAH FVio The
Bride are titles of MALKUTH considered as the Spouse
of Zauir Anpin, the Microprosopus.

The Letters of the Name YHVH contain these

meanings, thus:—

YOD is referred to ABBA. HEH to AIMA.
VAU to ZAUIR ANPIN. HEH (final) to MALKAH.

These Letters are also referred to the Four Worlds

and the Four Suits of the Tarot thus: —

YOD
HEH
VAU
HEH (f)

ATZILUTH
BRIAH
YETZIRAH
ASSIAH

WANDS
CUPS
SWORDS
PENTACLES

In each of the Four Worlds are the Ten Sephiroth
of that World, and each Sephirah has its own ten
Sephiroth, making 400 Sephiroth in all — the number
of the letter TAU, The Cross, The Universe, the Com-
pletion of all things.

The Tarot is thus referred to The Tree of Life:

<i55>

—The Tarot is thus referred to The Tree of Life:

<i55>

—

The Four Aces are placed on the Throne of Kether
the remaining small cards of the suit desired on the
respective Sephiroth, 2 on Chokmah, 3 on Binah, etc.
The 22 Trumps are then arranged on the Paths between
them, according to the Letters to which they correspond.

The King and Queen of the suit are placed beside
Chokmah and Binah respectively; the Knight and
Knave by Tiphareth and Malkuth.

Tiie Tarot Trumps thus receive the equilibrium of

the Sephiroth they connect.

The Admission Badges used in the grade of Philo-

sophus are as follows:

The Calvary Cross of Twelve Squares, admitting
to the Path of Qoph, the 29th Path, refers to the Zodiac
and to the Eternal River of Eden divided into Four
Heads:

T
X

'VW crs
'-D

Tt'b Si

4.

Naiiar — The River

1.

HlDDIKEL
PlSON
2.
3. Gihon

Phrath — —

"i" 3

Spin
pW'B

_ms

Tlx

*

YS

3e

The Pyramid of the Four
Elements admits to the Path of
Tzaddi, the 28th Path.

On the sides are the Hebrew
Names of the Elements. On the
apex is the word Eth — Essence,
and on the base the word Olam
meaning World.

<T56>

1

i.

'lJUa

5

3.

to -3 mm b.

7

s,
Ttvi

9,
"HO'

10.
irobw

JIB

1 2

to n

The Calvary Cross of Ten
Squares admits to the Path of
Peh, Mars — the 27th Path.
The Ten Squares are referred
to the Ten Sephiroth in balanc-
ed disposition.
It is also the
opened out form of the double
Cube of the Altar of Incense.

The Cross of the Hegemon’s
Badge admits to the Grade
of Philosophus. This cross
embraces Tiphareth, Netsach,
Hod and Yesod, and rests upon
Malkuth. The Calvary Cross
of Six Squares also refers to the
six Sephiroth of Microprosopus
and is the opened out form of
the cube.

<OS7>

—

—

The Symbol of Venus on the

Tree of Life embraces the

whole Ten Sephiroth, It is a

fitting emblem of the Isis of

Nature. As it contains all the

Sephiroth its circle should be

made larger than

that

of

Mercury,

NAMES especially connected with the Four Ele-fitting emblem of the Isis of

Nature. As it contains all the

Sephiroth its circle should be

made larger than

that

of

Mercury,

NAMES especially connected with the Four Ele-

ments:

EARTH:

Hebrew Name
Great Name
Cardinal Point
Archangel
Angel
Ruler
King
Elemental

AIR:

Hebrew Name
Great Name
Cardinal Point
Archangel
Angel
Ruler
King
Elementals

Aretz or Ophir —I'sy ; pw

Adonai ha-Aretz
North. Tzaphon
Auriel
Phorlakk
Keruh
Ghob
Gnomes

——
Mizrach—

Ruach
Shaddai El Chai
East.
Raphael
Chassan

Ariel
Paralda
Sylphs

<I5S>

pun

P 3^

1^*113

31*13

——nn

Tt /N 'Ht?
miD

I^n
J*mK
—

WATER:

Hebrew Name
Great Name

Cardinal Point

Archangel

Angel

Ruler

King

E'n

Maim
Elohim Tzabaoth —niiOif OVl^N
West, Maarab
Gabriel —
Taliahad

“irv^n

Tharsis

Nichsa

Elemental

Undines

FIRE:

Hebrew Name
Great Name

Asch

Yhvh Tzabaoth

rv.fcOX nirp

Cardinal Point

South. Darom

Archangel

Michael

Angel

King

Ruler

Aral

Seraph —-— — —

Djvn

Elementals

Salamanders

EVn

/SIN

< I S9>

MEDITATION

Let the PHILOSOPHUS meditate upon the symbol

of the Fire Triangle in all its aspects.

Let him contemplate the symbol of the Planet
VENUS until he realises the Universal Love which
would express itself in perfect service to all man-kind
and which embraces Nature both visible and invisible.

Let him identify himself with the powers of FIRE,
consecrating himself wholly until the Burnt Sacrifice is
consummated and the Christ is conceived by the Spirit.
Let him meditate upon the Triplicity of Fire—its at-

tributes and correspondences.

<i6o>

THE DIAGRAMS

As confusion is found to exist with regard to the Right
and Left Pillars of the Sephiroth on the Tree of Life in
relation to the right and left sides of a man, and as to the
phases of the Moon—you must note:That in every diagram and picture, the right hand
side of the observer is next the Pillar of Mercy—Chok-
mah, Chesed, and Netzach; while the Pillar of Severity
is on the observer’s left hand. Yet when you apply the
Tree of Life to yourself, your right side, arm, and leg
represent the side of Strength and Severity, Binah, Ge-
burah and Hod, and your left side refers to the Pillar of
Mercy. So that when you look at a diagram, you are look-
ing, as it were, at a man facing you, that your right side
faces his left. His Merciful side forms the right hand
Pillar in front of you, so that it is as if you looked at
yourself in a mirror.

Just as the man looks at you, so does the Moon look at
you and so you say that the Moon in her increase is on
the side of Mercy, the right hand pillar of the Sephiroth;
and in her decrease, the crescent is on the left hand Pillar
of Severity.

A Diagram, then, is a picture of a Man or the Moon

facing you. The Temple Pillars are similar:

Black Pillar

White Pillar

Black Pillar

White Pillar

Severity
Mercy

Boaz

Jachin

<i6i>

Left

Right

North

South

Stolistes

Dadouchos

That is, the white Mercy or Jachin Pillar is on your
right hand as you approach the Altar from the West and
from the Hiereus. (See Chronicles II. iii, 17.) “And call
the Name on the right hand (of him who enters) Jachin,
and the Name of that on the left, Boaz.”

Now Boaz— Strength, Severity, Binah, Black Pillar;

and Jachin—White Pillar of Mercy.

So in making the Qabalistic Cross on your breast it is
correct to touch the Forehead and say Ateh—Thou art;
the Heart—Malkuth; Right Shoulder, ve-Geburah; left
shoulder ve-Gedulah , and with the fingers clasped on
the breast say, Le, olahm, amen!(Note: The following items and attributions are those
which were formerly eliminated from the so-called
knowledge lectures and rituals. They have been assem-
bled here and added as an appendix since this was as-
sumed to be more satisfactory than inserting them once
again into the knowledge lectures.

I. R.)

<i6z>

TWO FURTHER ALCHEMICAL ATTRIBUTIONS
TO THE TREE OF LIFE

1. Kether
2. Chokmah
3. Binah

4. Chesed

5. Geburah

6. Tiphareth

Mercury

Salt

Sulphur

Silver

Gold

Iron

The Metallic Root

Lead

Tin

Silver

Gold

Iron

7 . Netzach

Copper

Hermaphroditical

8. Hod
9. Yesod

Tin

Lead

Brass

Brass

Mercury

10. Malkuth

Mercury

Medicina

Philosophorum

Metallorum

THE QLTPPOTH ON THE TREE OF LIFE

1. Kether
2. Chokmah
3. Binah

4. Chesed

5. Gcburah

6. Tiphareth

7. Netzach
8. Hod

9. Yesod

10. Malkuth

Thaumiel—The two contending Forces
Ghogiel—The Hinders
Satariel—The Concealers
Agshekeloh—The Breakers in Pieces
Golohab—The Burners
Tagiriron—The Disputers
Gharab Tzerek—The Ravens of Death
Samael—The Liar or Poison of God
Gamaliel—The Obscene Ones
Lilith—Queen of the Night and

of Demons
< i 63>

The Seven Palaces attributed to the

Ten Sephiroth

< i 64>

THE ASTROLOGICAL SYMBOLS
OF THE PLANETS
These are derived from the three primary forms of
the Cross, the Crescent and the Circle, either singly or
in combination.

The Circle denotes Sun and Gold; the Crescent the
Moon and Silver, respectively analogous to the Red and
White Alchemical natures.

The Cross is the symbol of corrosion. The corrosion
of metals is usually of the complementary colour to that
to which they naturally approximate. Thus Copper,
which is reddish, becomes green in
its corrosion of

verdigris, etc.

Mercury is the only planet which unites these three
primary forms in one symbol. Saturn is composed of the
cross and the crescent showing that Lead is corrosive
internally and Luna externally. Jupiter is the reverse.
Mars is Solar externally but corrosive externally.Venus is opposite. Copper is externally of the nature
of Gold, but internally corrosive. Hence the name of the
Sphere of Venus is Nogah—denoting External Splen-

dour but internal corruption.

The Serpent Nehushtan, which Moses made when the
Children of Israel were bitten by Serpents of Fire in the
Wilderness, is the Serpent of the Paths of the Tree. And
he set it on a pole—that is, twined it round the middle
Pillar of the Sephiroth. And the word used in the pas-
sage in Numbers 21 for Fiery Serpents is the same as the
Name of the Angels of Geburah, the same spelling, the
same pointing, Seraphim. Round the Middle Pillar of
the Sephiroth, because that is the Reconciler between
<i6s>

the Fires of Geburah or Severity, and the Waters of
Chesed or Mercy—and hence it is said in the New Testa-
ment that it is a type of Christ, the Reconciler. And the
Serpent is of Brass, the Metal of Venus, whose Sphere
is called Nogah, or External Splendour, as shewn further
by the Alchemical Symbol of Venus, wherein the Circle
of the Sun is exalted above the Cross of Corrosion. And
therefore it is said in the Zohar that “Alone of the Shells
is the Serpent Nogah found in Holiness” and he is called
the Balance of Justice. Why, then, is he called the Ex-
ternal or False Splendour? Because he indeed uniteth the
Paths, but comprehendeth not the Sephiroth. Neverthe-
less, he is also the Celestial Serpent of Wisdom. But the
Serpent of the Temptation is the Serpent of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and of Evil, and not that of the Tree

of Life.of Life.

Here is a method of writing Hebrew words by the Yet-
siratic attribution of the Alphabet, whence results some
curious hieroglyphic symbolism. Thus Tetragrammaton
will be written by Virgo, Aries, Taurus, Aries. Eheieh, by
Air, Aries, Virgo, Aries. From Yeheshua, the Qabalistic
mode of spelling Jesus, which is simply the Tetragramma-
ton with the letter Shin placed therein, we obtain a very
peculiar combination—Virgo, Aries, Fire, Taurus, Aries.
Virgo born of a Virgin, Aries the Sacrificial Lamb, Fire the
Fire of the Holy Spirit, Taurus the Ox of the Earth in
whose Manger He was laid, and lastly Aries the flocks
of sheep whose Herdsmen came to worship Him. Elohim
yields Air, Libra, Aries, Virgo, Water—the Firmament,
the Balanced Forces, the Fire of the Spirit (For Aries is
a fiery Sign), operating in the Zodiac, the Fire Goddess,
and the Waters of Creation.

<i66>

The terms Raven or Crow, Lion and Eagle have vari-

ous Alchemical significations. Generally

a

Raven—Initiation through blackness
Lion—-Heat and sulphurous action
Eagle—Sublimation

One great difference between Chemical and Alchem-
ical processes is that Alchemy only employs a gradual
heat continually but carefully increased, and does not
commence with violent heat.

The Cucurbite is a glass boiler attached to the lowrer
part of the Alembic. It consists of a tube, a head, and
a receiver added thereto for purposes of distillation.

The Athanor or Philosophical Furnace is to produce

a graduated heat.

The Balneum Marine is the modern water bath—
vessel of hot water in which was placed the vessel to be

heated.

The Balneum Arenae or sand bath is a vessel of sand

in which is placed the vessel to receive a dry heat.

The Philosophic Egg is an oval glass vessel in which is
placed the water or liquid to be acted upon, and which
may be hermetically sealed.

< i 67>

This represents the Alchemical
Symbol of Sulphur on the Tree of

It does not touch the four
Life.
lower Sephiroth. The Cross termi-< i 67>

This represents the Alchemical
Symbol of Sulphur on the Tree of

It does not touch the four
Life.
lower Sephiroth. The Cross termi-

nates in Tiphareth, whereby, as it

were, the Supernal Triangle is to

be grasped, and Tiphareth is the

purified Man.

The Hexagram of Tiphareth is formed from the Pillars
on each side. In Chesed is the Water triangle, in Geburah
the Fire triangle. And Tiphareth unites and reconciles
them so as to form a reconciliation between them in the

form of the hexagram.

The Symbol of Salt on the Tree of Life embraces all the
Sephiroth but Malkuth, and is as it were, the Reconciler
between the Sulphur and Mercury. The horizontal
dividing line implies the precept of Hermes “as above

so below.”

O

<i68>

The drawing represents the Trinity operating through
the Sephiroth and reflected downwards in the four tri-

angles of the Elements. Air is reflected from Kether
through Tiphareth to Ycsod. Water is reflected from
Binah through Chesed to Hod; Fire is reflected from
Chokmah through Geburah to Netzach; while Earth is
Malkuth, the receptacle of the other Three.

<i^9>

(Note: The following Angelic Names have been as-
sembled and tabulated systematically from a Philosophus
manuscript entitled “The Lecture on the Shemham-
phoresch.” This document deals principally with the tra-
ditional modes of forming Angelic Names. It describes
how various verses are taken from the book of Exodus,
and by methods of permutation, are formed into seventy
two names of three letters each. To each of these names is
added the suffix Yah or El, thus yielding angelic names
and formulae. These seventy two Angels are allotted to
each quinary, or division of 5°, in the celestial heavens,
so that with the other names a very complete hierarchy
is given. Thus every Sign of the Zodiac has an Archangel,
Angel, Angel of its corresponding house, and a vast sub-

hierarchy.hierarchy.

Too much space would have been consumed to detail
the methods by which these names are given. So I have
contented myself to list, simply, all the Archangel ic and
Angelic Names of the twelve Zodiacal Signs, and state
that they are very important names, and their arrange-
ment should be carefully studied. The documents on
Tarot attribute two of these Angels to each of the 36
small cards, and the anglicised transliteration of their
names will there be found. But I have thought it advis-
able here to give the Hebrew letters and spelling so that
the student may have them at his hand when deal-
ing with the matters of Sigits and Telesmatic Images,
which are, as elsewhere explained, formed from the
Hebrew spellings. I. R.)

< I 7°>

fil< S 3o

111

:§

fll
k t, t
<g - o
^
u

I £I *5QZ

ilSig

r* „
;=
F F rz
i-
x x
*r - j\
<

r\ ^ p a c» ^
Z- n €-H ^ r
o f3
r- n r H
r h
^fl^bcxfiKCr-
vi
' ^ S ' j' f- j" z z
-
c c

I.

*r

•-

1 -!

r\ a r (i
r, '
H {= p E a «
£ 1G j5 X

5C

n
i:n
Q

n
P

nr
t*a

fj

*in
r~X

o
P
£

h
4 £

rz

n

*o G o+

X»

*o

o

X

lf^

iz

c
*-X

X'v

vF-

a
n
r
X

II

a
IT

-3

o
X

X
r
r
XJV

X
a
p
F
X

JN.

JP"

IZ
f:

^
|“

20

<* 7*>

x

Q
f"
X
X

iT^

X
£1
n
-
i
jr-X

G
X# “
p
a

X

^ E C rt F p h >h
K P p o !.
r Z w
r"j5 f= J" K
51
rv J -

F. n s* q
i— " y r M vr

jj r r a q h ^ ' E y r r a
'r'^»=fc^iz^‘r'n ,z n

% n £ z.
y: ^

*?

*-

l

o
crx

1“
n
r~

x

jr-

#”inr

r~

1"
iz

*-

o
rr
jT*n
r:

o
#Tn

F"

z
n
X
r

iz

i“

X#"nw

rz

X & 3
||1

X ^ g
Cq u
-t.s
< 2 p

j

Ue:>3Q

Of

x>

*o o Of

XH

y g
!11

f<

-S £
Q £

3 .3 -Q
z
A

u5is

fl
JX
35

tio

3C
lT-

O
f
X

jr-

Q
r~a

0

ftx

*r-

&
r
Urx

r*
rt

jrxjv

x
r

C^

<I72>

X

H
crx

<X~

JJ
J^-
X
J*

rrn

n
c

^ g> c
tc.S g
c a-< C 5

O'

&.S 3
G ” Eb>
< 2 Q

UE33Q

S
Si~

f>

|

;l I
me

&
c<

o u
11
Q £

I .a

a%

r n r n ^ n j>
se[s?£e
5C P
j r *fc
*
•-

z~ *n j^.

£ n y
f 55 j?
II ^

ii

o n:
| h

£ X
I- n

7NnT>

fton

7«ei«

i

'nwp

n

£1
f~
n

O
n

r~

:>

n

£-|

;l I
me

&
c<

o u
11
Q £

I .a

a%

r n r n ^ n j>
se[s?£e
5C P
j r *fc
*
•-

z~ *n j^.

£ n y
f 55 j?
II ^

ii

o n:
| h

£ X
I- n

7NnT>

fton

7«ei«

i

'nwp

n

£1
f~
n

O
n

r~

:>

n

£-

a
b
-
r
#"

C
i“

X

jnm

MpTDK

O

o+

x>

2)

b

toDjmo

fa'poD

to’onK

nm

ntyp

X

n

i-

#~x

£
i^

a
x

<i

a
a#“

a
X

X

j

n
-
n#-X

II
II

£\

n_r
n

p9

<i73>

TJ % c
bfl .5 2
< 2 ^a

| |J
§
< 2 Q

UE33Q

60

I M

<

£
8

bQ

l

-s
&o

J 1> «
Q £

*
*
a * £
es r_ _£}
v
o
A
X

1

-

iT- r 1 *T; n fl
n y L n
n r r n p- r
rr n fr
*- ^

o — 1

5C

f r ;
rr ni—
a rra
r
•— n
x Ji rv ? f: y
J - * *
* h /c

p ^ o ;x ;a n
^ e JE r & £
n fc £ ¥ f: 5£
rr ^

T-

p
u

raw
Q
W
tz

rj

Q
a
a

ira
i-
#*
n
r

C*

*0 o x>

3£n
n

|-*

O

r<—
r
#

ri
rr

vl~'-

P
w

%
-
I
*—
#—

O

fi
1“
T
tr

*o

n
lanr
7\
r
tz

o
f-

3C
jr-

x
j^

tz

tz

3£n
aj—%

i*n
p
ii
x

nz
a
ri
r"
£

tzr
rr

<m>

^S'tPS

I’K'OU'l

‘ttriPJDK

vnn

Q'Jl

x

ON THE WORK TO BE UNDERTAKEN
BETWEEN PORTAL AND ©—

E

The work comes under six headings as follows:

1. A Thesis on the Rituals.

2. A meditation on the crosses which have been
used as admission badges in the Grades. This is
a preparation for the meditation which precedes
the ©—E Grade and should be applied for when
you have been a Portal Member for seven
months.

3. A complete diagram of The Tree of Life.

4. The practice of control of the Aura.

5. The placing of The Tree of Life in the Aura.
6. Tattwas—Astrology— Divination.

1. The Thesis. Read the rituals. Build them up in
imagination. Compare the Opening and Closing in the
various Grades. Note the general underlying scheme for
each Elemental Grade—and note where the differences
occur. Follow the careers of the various Officers. Note at
what Grade an Officer disappears.Make a precis of each Ritual so that the general
scheme becomes apparent. This is of the greatest assist-
ance when you are called on to take Office because you
will not then need to follow everything in the Ritual
but need only turn to the page where your Office is men-
tioned and when you have no more to say, you can turn
to the Closing and put the Ritual aside till required for
<i75>

—
that. Ability to do this and to move correctly in the
Temple adds greatly to the harmony and repose of the
whole Ceremony,

Note the positions of the various officers—what
mathematical shapes they make among themselves from
time to time as they take up their places in the Temple.
It may be a triangle, a cross, a pentagram, etc.

Read the speeches carefully, and read them some-
times aloud so that you get familiar with the sound of
your own voice in saying the words. Note that some
speeches are designed to create atmosphere by their ar-
chaic form and should be read rhythmically and sonor-
ously, while others are informative and should be read
in such a way as to make their points clear.

Examples of archaic passages are challenges of Gods:
“Thou canst not pass the Gate of the Western Heaven
unless thou canst tell me my Name.” And the speeches
of the Kabiri in the Grades of Practicus and Philoso-
phus. Information is given in speeches about Tarot
Keys and diagrams.

Note the technique for traversing the various Paths
the words, and the badges with which the Path is en-
tered, the length of the circumambulation and the spe-
cial symbolism described therein.

Let all these things soak into your mind, make notes
as ideas occur to you—and presently your personal re-
action to the Grades will crystallise out and you will be
able to write your thesis.

2. Make a list and drawings of the crosses which have
been given you as Admission Radges throughout the
<I76>2. Make a list and drawings of the crosses which have
been given you as Admission Radges throughout the
<I76>

Grades, from the Swastika of the Zelator to the Five-
squared cross which you put on as you stood at the Altar
at the second point of the Portal Grade. Read what is
said of them in the Rituals and knowledge lectures, and
make notes about them.

3. The Tree of Life. This should be done fairly large
in order that the writing and symbols should be clear.
It is essential to show the Deity Names, Names of Arch-
angels and Angels in Hebrew in the Sephiroth, and to
number the Paths and give their attributions. Apart
from this, the Tree should be your personal synthesis
of the Order symbolism as it applies to the Tree of Life.
Colours may be used.

4. Control of the Aura. If you are not already
familiar with the parts of your own body such as nervous
system, respiratory system, digestive system, get some
simple text-book such as is used in ambulance work, or
attend a course of first-aid lectures so that, before start-
ing to work on your subtle body, you may know some-
thing about your physical body.

Your physical body is interpenetrated by a subtle
body or aura which also surrounds the physical body like
an egg of light. You should now begin to practise con-
trolling this aura or Sphere of Sensation. This means that
you must first try to get your emotional reactions under
conscious control. Instead of automatically liking this,
disliking that, you must try to understand the mechan-
ism which underlies these feelings To assist you in this,
the study of psychology is recommended. There are
many books on the subject, of which the following are
easy to understand and clearly stated.

< I 77>

Psychology by Win. McDougall (Home University

Library).

Psychoanalysis for Normal People by Geraldine

Coster.

Psycho-synthesis by the Dean of Chester Cathedral.

Machinery of the Mind by Violet Firth.Library).

Psychoanalysis for Normal People by Geraldine

Coster.

Psycho-synthesis by the Dean of Chester Cathedral.

Machinery of the Mind by Violet Firth.

Having built up some idea of the mechanism of your
mental processes, you should now try to make yourself
negative or positive at will towards people or ideas. If
you are likely to meet someone who always makes you
argumentative and irritable, decide that your aura is
closed to their power of irritating you and that your
mind will not be disturbed by what they say. It is good
sometimes to listen to views with which you disagree
to teach you not only to make no verbal response, but
to keep your feelings in abeyance also. In this way you
come to learn how much of your disagreement is due to
prejudice or personal factors, and how much to your
regard for abstract truth.

Again, sometimes practise opening your aura to peo-
ple or ideas in an endeavour to see things from another’s
point of view.

The practice of deep breathing is also of help in estab-
lishing poise and in controlling nervousness. It is good
to expand the chest to its fullest extent and then to ex-
pand the diaphragm below the ribs as well and then to
let the breath out slowly and steadily on a vowel sound
such as ah or ‘0.’

If you are nervy, you will find that your breathing is
shallow and that your muscles are tense. You tend to
<i78>

clench your hands and tighten up the abdominal mus-
cles. To cure this, take a deep breath to full capacity,
hold it while tensing and relaxing alternately the ab-
dominal muscles. Do this (i.e. the tensing and relaxing
of the muscles) three times and then relax completely
into a chair. Allow all your muscles to go limp and let
your breath out to the last gasp. Do the whole process
three times, if necessary. It is designed to stimulate the
solar plexus which is the heart of the nervous system
which governs emotion.Another good exercise is to say the Deity Names aloud.
Take a deep breath and say them softly, smoothly and
slowly, imagining the while that your voice travels out
to the confines of the Universe. This can be done in con-
junction with the Pentagram Ritual,

5. The Tree of Life in the Aura. In the aura which
interpenetrates and surrounds our physical bodies, we
are to build up a replica of the Tree of Life. The Pillar
of Severity is on our right side, the Pillar of Mercy on our
left, and the Pillar of Benificence in our midst.

It is best to build up the middle Pillar first. To do this
stand up and raise yourself in imagination to your
kether—a brilliant light above your head. Imagine this
light descending to daatii, at the nape of your neck, and
thence to tiphareth in your heart where it glows like
sunlight and whence it radiates into the other Sephiroth.
From tiphareth the light goes to yesod in the region of
the hips, and thence to malkuth in which your feet are
planted. Having made a clear image of the Middle Pillar,
you can then establish the other Sephiroth by vibrating
<i79>

THE MIDDLE PILLAR
AND THE HUMAN BODY.

<i8o>

the Deity Names. This can be done as an alternative to
the Pentagram Ritual as a preparation for meditation.

1. Imagine yourself standing in the Temple, facing
West. The Black Pillar of Severity will be on your right
—the White Pillar of Mercy on your left. You will make
the Middle Pillar as you stand between them.

2. Imagine now that the Black Pillar is reflected in

your right side—the White Pillar in your left.

3. Take a deep breath and raise your consciousness to
your kether above your head and vibrate the Name
eheieh—which means i am. Imagine the Light flowing
down through daath (at the nape of your neck) to
TIPHARETH.

4. In the same manner, establish yesod in the name
shaddai el chai, and malkuth in the Name ADONAI
HA-ARETZ.4. In the same manner, establish yesod in the name
shaddai el chai, and malkuth in the Name ADONAI
HA-ARETZ.

5. Make the Qabalistic Cross to indicate that you have
called down the Light of your kether and balanced it
in your aura. Then let your imagination dwell on the
aura and see it oval and clear, pulsating with the glow
from TIPHARETH.

If you are called to see anyone who is ill, who is de-
pressed, or who has a depressing effect on you, you should
do this exercise beforehand. In the case of the person
who has a depressing effect on you, you may also imagine
that your aura is hardened at the edge so that they are
unable to penetrate it, and so deplete you of vitality
(which is generally what such sensations mean).

In all these practices it is well to remember that
'Strength is in Silence/ If you talk about them, save to
<i8i>

your Chief, or if you try to analyse their effects, you will
not benefit by them. Try them with simple faith and in
silence for a year before rationalising them.

It is better at first to keep your aura to yourself, rather
than to try to flow out towards others. Unless you are
particularly vital and well-balanced, you will only waste
energy. So-called modes of healing and of ‘doing good to
others’ should be eschewed for a time. Such methods
have a technique of their own and required trained and
balanced minds and bodies to carry them out. Get your-
self right first before you attempt to interfere with others
in any way but the ordinary ways of kindly decent

society.

When you have practised the exercise of the Middle
Pillar for some time and can visualise it easily, you can
establish the other Sephiroth.

6. Tatwas—Astrology— Divination. The Tatwassociety.

When you have practised the exercise of the Middle
Pillar for some time and can visualise it easily, you can
establish the other Sephiroth.

6. Tatwas—Astrology— Divination. The Tatwas

are designed to assist you in your researches into the Soul
of Nature. They are at first done with a senior member,
and later can be done alone or with a companion of your
own Grade. They should never be allowed to become un-
controlled day-dreams. The method taught should be
strictly adhered to—a definite time, preferably in the
morning being set aside—and they should not be at-
tempted when you are feeling tired or when your mind
is too occupied with other things to let you ‘get away.’
They should not be done too frequently—once in three
weeks or a month is enough, once a week if time and cir-
cumstances permit. Notes of the pictures and symbols
seen should be kept together in a book.

Astrology. This should be done as time permits. The
< i 82>

subject is vast and highly technical, and can be studied
fully through the various schools and correspondence
classes if you are interested in it. From the Order Lec-
ture, you should be able to set up a true birth horoscope
for any place and any time. You can practise setting up
horoscopes for the cases gvien in Alan Leo’s little book
“1001 Notable Nativities” and see whether you can tell
for what the horoscope was remarkable. You should at-
tempt the reading of a horoscope for someone you know
and then get the data for someone about whom you
know nothing, and see whether you can give a reading
which satisfies their friends.

The Order requires only that you should be able to
set up an accurate horoscope and that you should know
how to work out the aspects and how to make a simple
assessment of the good and bad factors in a horary figure.
If Astrology interests you further, it is a very fascinating

field of research.field of research.

Divination. You may try to develop your intuition
by the use of horary and natal astrology, geomancy, and
the reading of the Tarot Cards by the method given in
the small book by Mr. A. E. Waite.

You are advised to attempt only questions in which
you are not emotionally involved because methods of
divination can be a fruitful source of self-deception to
those who are psychic but not self-knowing. If you are
given to having intuitions you must learn to say not
only T was right about that’ but also ‘I was quite wrong
about that,’ and if you advertise only successes (as is
usual) at the bar of your own conscience, learn to assess
them honestly.

<i83>

—
The interval of time between portal and ©—E should
be given to the study of the whole make-up of yourself.
All these methods are designed to assist you to get as far
as you can along the road to self-knowledge.

You are to realise the different layers of your being
some of which you have been led through symbolically
in the Outer Grades—“Which in one sense quitteth not
malkuth”—the Kingdom of yourself.

This line of thought, coupled with the study of the
Rituals, may lead you to realise what it was you gathered
together in the first point of the Portal Ritual, and what
it is you are trying to perfect to lay on the Altar of the

Spirit.Spirit.

(Note: The reader or student who is interested par-
ticularly in this subject of the Sphere of Sensation, or
aura as it is called, would be well-advised to study very
carefully the Order Tarot teaching. There is much in that
set of documents which concerns the application of the
ideology of the Qabalistic Tree of Life to a sphere. In that
case the Pillar arrangement becomes slightly altered or
extended so as to produce 4 Pillars about an invisible
axis, the Middle Pillar. There is also much profound wis-
dom in the very skeletal attributions of the five divisions
of the Tarot Pack to the surface or parts of the solid
sphere. The Aces to the North pole, and the 36 decanate
Cards to the South pole up to the Ecliptic, while in be-
tween range the Princess cards which are the Thrones
of the Aces, the other Court cards, and the Trumps. The
studied application of this intricate scheme to the ex-
tended arrangement of the Tree of Life, and thence to
< i 84>

the human personality and sphere in all its branches will
yield a wealth of significant material.

I have also elaborated this scheme in two books. In
“The Art of True Healing” I have dealt with the Aura
and the Middle Pillar solely from the therapeutic point
of view. My other book, “The Middle Pillar,” considers
the technique from a considerably wider view. Moreover
it attempts to associate the results of training with the
terminology of Analytical Phychology. I. R.)

*

We are told in the Portal that the nine months’ wait
which must intervene before the Portal is again opened
for the Aspirant has a correspondence to the nine
months of gestation before birth. As the unborn child,
stage by stage, grows through the ancestral history of
the race so the Candidate in the Portal by a single cir-
cumambulation for each, recalls his past Grades and,
at the end of the first point regards their symbols upon
the Altar as parts of his body, and contemplates them as
coming together in one place—the unity of his person.In the second point, he sacrifices his name—symbol
of his idea of himself in order that the idea of a new self
and a new consciousness may be attained.

This has a correspondence in the birth of a child. It
emerges from the membranes and placenta which hither-
to have been its body and source of life and finds itself
not ‘dead’ after the dread change, but translated to a

larger consciousness.

Thus the Portal foreshadows the kind of change and
development necessary for understanding the symbol-
ism of the ©—GO.

<i85>

—
—
We do not know what consciousness the unborn child
has—how far it has choice in its development—through
what agency it unfolds the potencies of its tiny seed and
draws to itself the necessary materials for growth. The
miracle happens—and gives us courage to believe that a
similar miracle is even now enacting whereby a body will
be ready for us when this, which seems so real to us, shall
share the same fate as the placenta and membranes which
‘die’ at our birth.

But tradition, as embodied in our Order and shown
somewhat less directly in the revealed religions, teaches
that this development can be assisted by conscious effort
—indeed, that there comes a time when this effort must
be made through the body and mind we are now en-
dowed with. And realising that we are indeed in a Path
of Darkness groping for Light, we must feel our way to
an understanding of the meaning of life—the reason for

death.

To those who feel the call to make this effort, comes
the Order with a series of pictures, symbolic of the
growth of the soul to new life. The meditations given
with each Grade are designed to lead the mind towards
ideas which will assist
in self-knowledge—universal
impersonal ideas which each must find in his own way
‘the secrets which cannot be told save to those who know
them already.’The Aspirant is led to look backwards. First he must
acknowledge his debt to evolution through which has
been perfected the instrument wherein his mind works
and gathers material. Then, through meditation, he is
led to see himself as not only self-conscious—as one who
receives impressions—one who criticises and watches
<i86>

one whose will is interfered with—one who is misunder-
stood—one to whom others are ‘persons’ or masks (from
Latin persona, a mask)— but, standing outside himself,
he now becomes one who endeavours to sense how his
mask appears to others—sees himself as part of the con-
sciousness of others, as one who impresses, one who is
criticised and watched, one who interferes with the will
of others, one who misunderstands.

He may recall periods in his life when his convictions
were sure, his judgments harsh and unjust, his actions
shameful, and view himself in that picture dispassion-
ately as an entity operative in the give and take of life,
something growing and as outside the category of blame
as is the bitterness of unripe fruit.

As the knowledge of his place and relative importance
in the Universe matures, he will attain strength to be
honest with himself—ashamed of nothing he finds in his
mind—one watching the antics of his personality with
tolerant amusement—yet always learning.
He will reflect on words, and the power of words. He
will catch himself weaving them—twisting their mean-
ing-deceiving himself and others wdth them. He will
catch himself under obsession to them—he will see how
they fix and make possible the recall of events and emo-
tions, and with this knowdedge he will become aware of
how his words affect other people.

As he begins to realise the tremendous miracle of
words, the magic both good and evil of human commun-
ion by words, he will begin to grasp why the Order re-
iterates the importance of silence. The true Magician
must understand his tools and, in periods of silence, he
must contemplate words as one of them.

<i87><i87>

As he thus traverses the long road to dispassionate
self-knowledge, and no longer has to waste energy in
doing battle for and indulging wounded feelings in de-
fence of a totally false idea of himself, he is led to medi-
tate on the varied symbols of the cross, and from this
to contemplate the Crucified One, revealed to the West
as Jesus of Nazareth.

This life and the sayings of Jesus given in the Medita-

tion should be studied and pictured in the mind.

The mind must be taught to die to useless churnings
over past things and vain apprehensions about future
things. This is difficult, for human phantasies die hard,
but once the effort is made, however transient the re-
sult, it becomes easier with time to replace wasteful
thoughts with those that cluster round a powerful sym-

bol of eternal truth.

As the time for the ©=11] Ceremony approaches, the
Aspirant should withdraw as far as may be from exter-
nals that these symbols may work in his mind.

He will find them waiting on the threshold of his mind
ready to tell their story as he walks about or is occupied
in mechanical tasks. Once a place has been made for
is required to develop them. They grow in
them no ‘time
the waste places.

1

Definite times, too should be set aside for Meditation

wherein ideas may be formulated as far as possible.

Before going to sleep, the Aspirant should do the

<i88>

Pentagram Ritual and impress on his mind that he must
recall on waking any teaching that has been given him
in dream or vision. This may be assisted, if on waking,
he calls before his mind the Sun rising, thinly veiled in

clouds.

This should be done at least the week preceding the

Grade.

The Ceremony will be a true initiation for the Aspirant

only in so far as he has prepared himself to receive it.

Like a word, it is a symbol, the communication of
whose essence depends on the understanding and experi-
ence of the recipient.

<i8g>

MEDITATIONLike a word, it is a symbol, the communication of
whose essence depends on the understanding and experi-
ence of the recipient.

<i8g>

MEDITATION

Let the Aspirant meditate upon the Cross in its vari-
ous forms and aspects as shown in the Admission Badges
throughout the Grades.

Let him consider the necessity and prevalence of sac-

rifice throughout nature and religion.

Let him realise the saying of the Master 'Whosoever
shall save his life shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose
his life shall save it/

‘Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die,
it abideth alone, but if it die, it bringeth forth much
fruit/

Let him endeavour to realise his own place and rela-
tive importance in the Universe, striving to stand out-
side himself and allowing only such claims as he would
allow to another.

Let him carefully abstain from talking of himself, his
feelings or experiences that he may gain continence of
speech, and learn to control the wasteful activities of
his mind.

Let him contemplate the Sun as thinly veiled in

clouds.

<ig°>

The Mtnijtum Mundum

CONCERNING THE TREE OF LIFE

This is the Book of the Path of the Chameleon—the
knowledge of the colours of the forces which lie beyond
the physical universe. Study thou well that saying of
Henries ‘that which is below is like that which is above,’
for if that which is below is conformed according to the
Law of the Concealed One—Great is his Name—be thou
well assured that the closer thou adherest unto the Law
of the Universe in thy working, by so much the more is
thy Magical working just and true.Recall what was said unto thee in the Ritual of the
Paths of the Portal of the Vault of the Adepti. ‘Therefore,
by the straight and narrow path of Samekh, let the Philo-
sophus advance like the arrow from the Bow of Qesheth.’
Now Qesheth the Bow is the Rainbow of Promise
stretched above the earth, whose name is formed from
the letters of the Paths leading from Malkuth. If then
it be by the Path of Samekh that the Philosophus should
advance to the knowledge of the Adept, turning aside
neither unto the right hand nor unto the left, whereon
are the evil and threatening symbols of Death and the
Devil, he must have a perfect and absolute knowledge
of the Bow, ere he can follow the Path of the Arrow. But
the Bow is of brilliant and perfect colour, whose analysis
and synthesis yield others of 'the same scale, and hence
is this book entitled “The Book of the Path of the Cha-
meleon”—that Path, namely which ascendeth alone
through the force of Qesheth, the Bow.

And if thy knowledge and application of the outer
knowledge, which thou hast already learned, be faulty
<i9 J >

and incorrect how wilt thou be able to keep thyself from
turning aside unto thy hurt? Therefore, learn not knowl-
edge by rote only as an unreasoning child, but meditate,
search out and compare, and to the end, see that thou
think but little of thyself—for only he that humbleth

himself shall be exalted. Magical knowledge is not given
unto thee to tickle thy vanity and conceit, but that by
its means, thou mayest purify and equilibriate thy spir-
itual nature and honour the Vast and Concealed One.

This is the explanation of the first diagram of the

Paths—the Sephiroth being in the feminine scale and
the Paths in the masculine or King’s scale. It is the Key
of the Forces which lie in Qesheth the Bow. Treasure it
in thy heart and mark it well, seeing that therein is the
key of nature. Meditate on it and reveal it not unto the
profane, for many and great are its mysteries.NOTE: There are four scales of colour which corre-

spond to the Four Worlds. They are:

A tziluth Wands

The King Scale
The Queen Scale Uriah
The Prince Scale Yetzirah
The Princess Scale Assiah

Fire

Yod
Heh Water
Cups
Van
Swords
Pentacles Heh Earth

Air

The colours differ according to the World or aspect of

the Great Name they represent:

Thus Samech in:

Deep Blue

The King Scale is
The Queen Scale is
The Prince Scale is
The Princess Scale is Grey Blue

Yellow

Green

<I92>

Tiphareth in:

The King Scale is

Rose

—

The Queen Scale is
The Prince Scale is
The Princess Scale is Tawny Yellow

Pink

Gold

The tree of life for the use of an Adeptus Minor is
compounded of the first two scales. The sephiroth are in
the feminine, passive, or Queen Scale. The paths are in
the masculine, active, or King Scale. It thus represents
the forces of atziluth in the paths uniting the sephi-
roth as reflected in the Briatic World, one of the possible
arrangements of the powers inherent in yod he of the
GREAT NAME.

First are the Feminine colours of the Sephiroth, the
Queen's Scale. In Kethcr is the Divine White Brilliance,
the scintillation and corruscation of the Divine Glory
that Light which lighteth the universe—that Light which
surpasseth the glory of the Sun and beside which the
light of mortals is but darkness, and concerning which it
it not fitting that we should speak more fully. And the
Sphere of its Operation is called Rashith ha-Gilgalim—

the beginning of whirling (or whirls, or whorls), the
Primum Mobile or First Mover, which bestoweth the
gift of life in all things and filleth the whole Universe.
And Eheieh is the Name of the Divine Essence in Kether;
and its Archangel is the Prince of Countenances—Meta-
tron or Metraton, He who bringeth others before the
face of God. And the Name of its Order of Angels is
called Chaioth ha-Qadesh, the Holy Living Creatures,
which are also called the Order of Seraphim.

<i93>

-<i93>

-

In Chokmah is a cloud-like grey which containeth
various colours and is mixed with them, like a transpar-
ent pearl-hued mist, yet radiating withal, as if behind it
there was a brilliant glory. And the Sphere of its influence
is in Masloth , the Starry Heaven, wherein it disposeth
the forms of things. And Yah is the Divine Ideal Wis-
dom, and its Archangel is Ratziel , the Prince or Princes
of the knowledge of hidden and concealed things, and
the name of its Order of Angels is Auphanim, the Wheels
or the Whirling Forces which are also called the Order of
Kerubim.

In Binah is a thick darkness which yet veileth the
Divine Glory in which all colours are hidden, wherein is
mystery and depth and silence, and yet, it is the habita-
tion of the Supernal Light. There is the Supernal Triad
completed. And the Sphere of its Operation is Shab
bathai, or rest, and it giveth forms and similitudes unto
chaotic matter and it ruleth the sphere of action of the
planet Saturn. And Jehovah Elohim is the perfection of
Creation and the Life of the World to Come. And its
Archangel is Tzaphqiel, the Prince of the Spiritual Strife
against Evil, and the Name of the Order of Angels is
Aralim, the Strong and Mighty Ones who are also called
the Order of Thrones. The Angel Jophiel is also referred
unto Binah.

In Chokmah is the Radix of blue and thence is there
a blue colour pure and primitive, and glistening with a
spiritual Light which is reflected unto Chesed. And the
Sphere of its Operation is called Tzedek or Justice and
it fashioneth the images of material things, bestowing
peace and mercy; and it ruleth the sphere of the action
<i94>of the planet Jupiter. And Al is the title of a God strong
and mighty, ruling in Glory, Magnificence and Grace.
And the Archangel of Chesed is Tsadkiel, the prince of
Mercy and Beneficence, and the Name of the Order of
Angels is Chashmalim Brilliant Ones, who are also called
the Order of Dominions or Dominations. The Sephira
Chesed is also called Gedulah or Magnificence and Glory.
In Binah is the Radix of Red, and therein is there a
red colour, pure and scintillating and flashing with flame
which is reflected unto Geburah. The Sphere of its Opera-
tion is called Madim or violent rushing Force and it
bringeth fortitude, and war and strength and slaugh-
ter, as it were, the flaming Sword of an avenging God.
And it ruleth the Sphere of Action of the Planet Mars.
And Elohim Gibor is the Elohim, Mighty and Terrible,
judging and avenging evil, ruling in wrath and terror and
storm, and at whose steps are ligntning and flame. And
its Archangel is Kamael the Prince of Strength and Cour-
age, and the Name of the Order of Angels is Seraphim
the Flaming Ones who are also called the Order of Powers.
The Sephira Chesed is also called Gedulah or Magnifi-
cense and Glory, and the Sephira Geburah is also called
Pachad Terror and Fear.

In Kether is the Radix of a Golden Glory and thence
is there a pure, primitive and sparkling, gleaming golden
yellow which is reflected unto Tiphareth. Thus is the
first reflected Triad completed. And the Sphere of its
operation is that of Shemesh, the Solar Light, and
bestoweth Life, Light and Brilliancy in metallic matter,
and it ruleth the sphere of action of the Sun. And
Yhvh Eloha va-Daath is a God of Knowledge and Wis-
dom, ruling over the Light of the Universe; and its Arch-
<i95>angel is Raphael, the Prince of Brightness, Beauty and
Life. And the Name of the Order of Angels is Melechim
or Malakim, that is Kings or Angelic Kings, who are also
called the Order of Virtues, Angels and Rulers. The, An-
gels Peniel and Pelial are also referred unto this Seohira.
It especially rules the Mineral world.

The beams of Cbesed and of Tiphareth meet in Net-
zack and thence in Netsach arises a green, pure, brilliant,
liquid, and gleaming like an emerald. And the Sphere of
its operations is that of Nogak or External Splendour,
producing zeal, love, harmony, and it ruleth the Sphere
of Action of the Planet Venus and the nature of the Vege-
table World. And Jehovah Tzahaoth is a God of Hosts
and of Armies, of Triumph and of Victory, ruling the
Universe in Justice and Eternity. And its Archangel
Hanial is the Prince of Love and Harmony, and the
Name of the Order of Angels is Elohim or Gods who are
also called the Order of Principalities. The Angel Cervieh
is also referred unto this Sephira.

The beams of Geburah and Tiphareth meet in Hod
and thence arsies in Hod a brilliant pure and flashing
orange tawny. And the Sphere of its Operation is that
of Kokab, the stellar light, bestowing elegance, swiftness,
scientific knowledge and art, and constancy of speech,
and it ruleth the sphere of the action of the planet Mer-
cury. And Elohim Tzabaoth is also a God of Hosts and
of Armies, of Mercy and of Agreement, of Praise and
Honour, ruling the Universe in Wisdom and Harmony.
And its Archangel is Michael, the Prince of Splendour
and of Wisdom, and the Name of Order of Angels is Beni
Elohim, or Sons of the Gods, who are also called the
Order of Archangels.

<rg6><rg6>

The beams of Chesed and Geburah meet in Yesod and
thence ariseth in Yesod a brilliant deep violet-purple or
puce, and thus is the third Triad completed. And the
sphere of its operation is that of Levanah, the Lunar
beam, bestowing change, increase and decrease upon
created things and it ruleth the Sphere of Action of the
Moon and the nature of mankind. And Shaddai is a God
who sheddeth benefits, Omnipotent and Satisfying, and
Al Chai is the God of Life, the Living One. Its Archangel
is Gabriel the Prince of Change and Alteration. And the
name of the Order of Angels is Kerubim or Kerubic ones
who are also called the Order of Angels.

And from the rays of this Triad there appear three
colours in Malkuth together with a fourth which is their
synthesis. Thus from the orange tawny of Hod and the
green nature of Netsach, there goeth forth a certain
greenish ‘citrine’ colour, yet pure and translucent withal.
From the orange tawny of Ilod mingled with the puce
of Yesod there goeth forth a certain red russet brown,
‘russet’ yet gleaming tvith a hidden fire. And from the
green of Netsach and the puce of Yesod there goeth forth
a certain other darkening green ‘Olive’ yet rich and
glowing withal. And the synthesis of all these is a black-
ness which bordereth upon the Qlippoth.

Thus are the colours of the Sephiroth completed in

their feminine or Rainbow scale.

Moreover, though the 'Free of Life operates through all
the Ten Sephiroth, yet it is referred in a special manner
to Tiphareth. Also, through the branches of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil stretch into the seven lower
Sephiroth and downwards into the Kingdom of Shells,
<i97>

—

yet it is referred especially unto Malkuth. Similarly with
Netsach and Hod, the right and left columns of the
Sephiroth are referred respectively thereto.

In Malkuth, Adonai ha-Aretz is God, the Lord and
King, ruling over the Kingdom and Empire which is the
Visible Universe.In Malkuth, Adonai ha-Aretz is God, the Lord and
King, ruling over the Kingdom and Empire which is the
Visible Universe.

And Cholem Yesodoth the Breaker of Foundations,
(or Olam Yesodoth— the World of the Elements) is the
Name of the Sphere of Operation of Malkuth which is
called the Sphere of the Elements from which all things
are formed, and its Archangels are three:
Metatron,
the Prince of Countenance reflected from Kether, and
Sandalphon, the Prince of Prayer (feminine), and
Nephesch ha Messiah, the Soul of the Reconciler for
Earth. And the Order of Angels is Ashim or Flames of
Fire, as it is written ‘Who maketh his Angels Spirits and
his Ministers as a flaming Fire/ and these are also called
the Order of Blessed Souls, or of the Souls of the Just
made Perfect.

(Note the Three Archangels attributed to Malkuth
with reference to Christian symbolism in regard to Our
Father, Our Lady, and Our Lord.)

The following table consists of a classification of the
scales of colour in each of the Four Worlds. The numbers
1-10 refer to the Sephiroth, and those from 11-32 inclu-

sive to the Paths.

<i98>

Knave

or

(Assiah)

Empress

Prince

or

(Yetsirah)

Emperor

%m

Scale

(Briah)

Queen

&
3u

nj
C

cj

(Atsiluth)

Scale

King

P

(D
u
CD
qp
X
O

CD
Ut

J

HP
<U

O
CDm
cd
in £
3 c

q

Si
rt

Cl
oj
CD

<D

•a

SP

5
D
PC

t-H

Oh

M
On
<DU
Q G

Lh
rt

P
-
tT

Cj £
CD _o
CE
"d

CD

13

n

o>
Cu

u
ID
JC
4-"
o
s

jp
E

y

rt

HP
CD

a

HP
CD

<D
-Q
e

rt
hp

oa

4-1
4>

'lh
if
y
CO

C
O
c
c
nJ
LO
JP
JP
.&0
U
* C
PC s

4-1

+

HP
CD
Lh

4—1

y

CJ
U"
tO

~o
&D

>

!>

I>H

d
D
6

rt

o
CD
2
J2
E E

§D

CD

u
D
qp

o
o
c

PC
o

d
w
c

cj

PC

o>

jc

a
TP
<D
^4

CD

>

S

£o

s
O

13

fc

pq

flecked

Yellow-brown

Russet

Red

Orange

Violet-purple

Lh

D
pO

-3
o
© >
c
CAa
' nU

<DQ

Lh

CD
<D

feifl

D
a
C3
t—lo

c
'a

L—
C3
<D

0 s<

ja

U
G
2 S
' c
o
PC
to

i—r

rsj

ro

’*±I

1-0

'O

r>.

os

<i99>

EARTH

Knave

(final)

HEH

AIR

VAU—

or

(Assiah)

Empress<DQ

Lh

CD
<D

feifl

D
a
C3
t—lo

c
'a

L—
C3
<D

0 s<

ja

U
G
2 S
' c
o
PC
to

i—r

rsj

ro

’*±I

1-0

'O

r>.

os

<i99>

EARTH

Knave

(final)

HEH

AIR

VAU—

or

(Assiah)

Empress

u
C3w
c
2u

Prince

or

(Yetsirah)

Emperor

Ip4

Ui
-O
O
£
un

WATER

Scale

(Briah)

Queen

cx

aa

HEH—

FIRE

Scale

(Atsiluth)

'OD—

King

c
£

-2

rt
j-

^1o

rt

2Q

3

Sc

cc
to

fid
_o
o
uu

.xs
cj
ri

CJ
>

"o

<v
E

l-

O

^2
13

>

o

rH

o

ejo

OJ

o
qz

u
sw

£
y
u
L-
60

S
m

i

cA

ra

r o
S >v
o u
u
c S.

CJ

O o
t: «
_c t*
GO

Lo m

a

CJ

Si

c

CJ

4>

c
CJu
3 o
C
' lT
CX
WO

fee

CO
o
13
Oh

rs

>i
bHA
w

4>
S
O
iV X
u
3
S
CO U

T3

tc
c
f
o

C3

i

rj

PX

c

inclined

greenish-brown

grey

mauve

Brown

to

Reddish

Rich

Dark

olive

Russet

warm

yellow

bright

Deep

New

Rich

CJ

Indigo

Mauve

j3
3

i

co

&
o

4>

13
Cl

i

r§
* Cd
ca

4J

CO

a v-d
u
3
Oh 3 CO

C
a>0
t*o
3
13

1*.
4>

e

£

13

QJ

3

i—i

ol
T-H —

r*i

l-H

<2O0>

Deep

Pale

Maroon

Orange

Amber

Orange

Red

4-1
'X

n
CO

vo

>
rtjC

S -fl
g <

60
60

60

tsj

43U
c
' ^ ^v.
ex
i- Go -c:
5 s
6 ba ^
£W

(ft

(U

'rt ^u

LO C3
c!—i
5_
13 w
4J 02
a

U
«
c

<u
CL,

§

u

rt -c
u ^
CO
tc ' 53
rT w

E <W w

T3
=
C3
£

EARTH

final)

HEH(

AIR

VAU—

WATER

HEH—

FIRE

g

43
-X

CL
3 ^
£T £
Cm M-i
T3 °
O t*
Jk£
o ^
<u
o
an
0
S

<U

3
43
43
1-M

to

43
>

£X
CJ

43Q

c

<i>
<u

9

rt
43
C/3

c

<u
43

t-o

03

rs
a.

43

gto
o
3

a>

a
Q

o
_3
22

C

13
43

gi

M

9 u
to J3
_i
—I
PJ ^
Tp
d»
3

*•

HE
o
CJ

<w
_3

I
T3-
'>
>

rda

o

r3

d»

c
v
3
a>
O zz

i

q>
><

u
a
CO

.1=

O
3
CO

•n

V0
CN

o

3
£
E
hQ
©
g>-2
l-g

a>

N-H

*>

C
£
Q—
CO

L-,

-©

>

3
£O
~
3
Q

a>3

m£>
1c
<yu
o

i—

CNi

O
_Q
£

T3
~o
<u

a
s

~3
V
>,
cs
Ui

43 £
pH o
-° =5
_£ >-
tG
* C
22

o'

Oh

o 5
£ *
o £

J3

£>

43

L-o
qjw

rs
CO

3

43
43

1

JS

(ft

?
_o

aj

E

•M
CJ

O
>H >

uuo

o
Stb
3
Ok

Qm,

a>o
Cl

£
jd

co
ju
U

ON

0/
J3

HE
nj
t_9
B
W Q

CX
qj

o

<Nf

<N

ol
o»

ot

<201 >

EARTH

Knave£>

43

L-o
qjw

rs
CO

3

43
43

1

JS

(ft

?
_o

aj

E

•M
CJ

O
>H >

uuo

o
Stb
3
Ok

Qm,

a>o
Cl

£
jd

co
ju
U

ON

0/
J3

HE
nj
t_9
B
W Q

CX
qj

o

<Nf

<N

ol
o»

ot

<201 >

EARTH

Knave

or

(Assiah)

Pentacles

(final)

HEH

AIR

VAU—

Empress

Prince

or

Emperor

(Yetsirah)

Swords

WATER

Scale

Queen

HEH—

(Briah)

Cups

FIRE

Scale

YOD—

King

(Atsiluth)

Wands

blue

gold

(outside)

yellow,

flecked

red,

black

White,

Grey

Violet

Pure

colours.

outside

prismatic

violet

7

black)

purple

White

(nearly

Deep

Grey

Grey

merging

White,

black

Lavender

Oi

£
<U
“
£ ^3
JD
w
-© 3 So
3
ca X
c
u
3
o
X*;u
ID

u

PS

ccj

ca

S Ti

"Tu

rt

JO

£<

Ur
<y

£
ra
C3
*“
J3
u
cS

O
60
-o
V
Jbd
u
V
qX
U>
«

i-i

C3U
CO

£
£
o
O
=3
o UX
>r rr:
£
<2O >

"T3
’o

<D

*3u

CJ

tfj

fcJG

c
C3
c tai
O

feec
’S
0
O O

03

p©

c

©
Ui
2©

rto

<L>

-C

£<

tD
>

V
G

o

©

e©

©a

©

_feJQ

*s
3

3
Sa
-a

£2
os a
- «
^ s
^ o

~3 o

'C
pa

3
Cu
HD

tL>

to
3

-jx

&

_o

oo

<u
3
c

s

eu
u C2 &
Cfl o
3 £
fij -O

>
3
£
~c w ,2
js
_3
££

« 3

"3 £
J
4>
u y
o j;

tfc

^3
-O

55 m
c
o«
s
'CO

+W
JJ
o
w >
O
> D

03

0J

T3
V
04
C
. 5
~JM
CJ
c
>

PS

«su

in.
04

oo O

04

04

o —•

CO

CO

04
CO

co

32

Daath

< 202>

THE MICROCOSM—MAN

Thou shalt know that the whole Sphere of Sensation
which surroundeth the whole physical body of a man is
called “The Magical Mirror of the Universe.” For therein
are represented all the occult forces of the Universe pro-
jected as on a sphere, convex to the outer, but concave
to man. This sphere surroundeth the physical body of a
man as the Celestial Heavens do the body of a Star or a
Planet, having their forces mirrored in its atmosphere.
Therefore its allotment or organization is the copy of
that Greater World or Macrocosm. In this “Magical
Mirror of the Universe,” therefore, are the Ten Sephi-
roth projected in the form of the Tree of Life as in a solid
sphere. (See also the Astronomic view of the Tarot in
Part Eight.)A man’s physical body is within the Ten Sephiroth
projected in a sphere. The divisions and parts of the
body are formed from the Sephiroth of the Tree of Life,

thus.

Kether is above the Crown of the Head, and represents
a crown which indeed is powerful, but requires one wor-
thy to wear it. In the crown of the head is placed the
faculty of Neschamah, which is the power of Aspiration
unto that which is beyond. This power Neschamah is
especially attributed unto the Supernal Triad in Assiah,
of which there are three manifestations which are in-
cluded in the general concept, Neschamah.

From Chokmah and Binah are formed the sides of
the brain and head. Therein exist the intellectual facul-
ties of Wisdom and Understanding, shining into and illu-
<203 >

i

minating their inferior, the Ruach. They are the man-
sions of the practical administration of the intellect,
whose physical shewing forth is by reflection in Ruach.
In the Magical Mirror of the Universe, or the Sphere of
Sensation, Man is placed between four pillars of the Tree
of Life as projected in a sphere. These keep their place
and move not. But the Man himself places in his Sphere
of Sensation that point of the Zodiac which ascended at
the moment of his birth and conception (for the same
degree of the Zodiac ascendeth at both, otherwise the
birth could not take place) . That is to say that at those
times the same degree of the Zodiac is ascending in the
East of the Heavens of the Star whereon he is incarnated.
Thus doth he remain during that incarnation facing that
particular point in his sphere of sensation. That is to say,
this sphere doth not revolve about the physical body.

From Chesed and Geburah are formed the arms.
Therein exist the faculties of operative action, wherefore
at their extremities are the symbols of the f our Elements
and the Spirit, thus:—

Thumb

j ru i mgei

n rrp-T
T ti / Ipv IT
111UCA 1 lllgCI

_L/ 1 L L 1,C X1

Second Finger

—

Spirit

Fire

WltCF

Air
j. in

EarthThumb

j ru i mgei

n rrp-T
T ti / Ipv IT
111UCA 1 lllgCI

_L/ 1 L L 1,C X1

Second Finger

—

Spirit

Fire

WltCF

Air
j. in

Earth

The arms are the manifestors of the executive power
of the Ruach, and therein are the faculties of touch
strongly expressed.

<204>

From Tiphareth is formed the trunk of the body, free
from the members, and therein as in a receptacle of in-
fluences are situated the vital organs.

The blood is Spirit mingled with and governing the
watery principle. The lungs are the receptacles of Air
which tempereth the blood as the wind doth the waves
of the sea—the mephitic impurities of the blood in its
traversal of the body requiring the dispersing force of
the Air, even as the sea, under a calm, doth putrify and
become mephitic.

The heart is the great centre of the action of Fire, lend-
ing its terrible energy as an impulse unto the others.
Thence cometh from the fiery nature the red colour of

the blood.

The part above the heart is the chief abode of the
Ruach, as there receiving and concentrating the other
expressions of its Sephiroth. This part is the central cita-
del of the body and is the particular abode of the lower
and more physical will. The higher will is in the Kether
of the body. For the higher will to manifest, it must be
reflected into the lower will by Neschamah. This lower
will is immediately potent in the lower members and
thus, in the region about the heart, is the lower will
seated like the King of the body upon its throne.

The concentration of the other faculties of the Ruach
in and under the presidency of the Will, at the same
time reflecting the administrative governance of Chok-
mah and Binah, is what is called the human conscious-
ness. That is, a reflection of the two creative Sephiroth
under the presidency of the Four Elements, or the reflec-
<205>tion of Aima and Abba as the parents of the human
Jehovah. But the human Neschamah exists only when
the higher Will is reflected by the agency of aspiration
from Kcther into the lower body, and when the flaming
letter shin is placed like a crown on the head of Micro-
prosopus. Thus only doth the human will become the
receptacle of the higher Will and the action of Nescha-
mah is the link therewith. The lower will is the human
Jehovah—an angry and jealous God, the Shaker of the
Elements, the manifestor in the life of the body. But illu-
minated by the higher Will, he becometh yeheshuah,
no longer angry and jealous, but the self-sacrificer and
the Atoning and Reconciling One.

This as regards the action of the more physical man.

Unto this Ruach also are presented the reflections of
the Macrocosmic Universe in the Sphere of Sensation.
They surround the Ruach which, in the natural man,
feeleth them but vaguely and comprehendeth them not.
The faculties of the Earth are shown forth in the organs
which digest and putrify, casting forth the impurities,
even as the Earth is placed above the Qlippoth.

Thou wilt say, then, that the Ruach cannot be the
reasoning mind, seeing that it reflecteth its reason from
Chokmah and Binah — but it is the executive faculty
which reasoncth, which worketh with and combineth
the faculties reflected into it. The reasoning mind, there-
fore, is that which useth and combineth the Principia
of Chokmah and Binah so that the parts of Chokmah
and Binah which touch the Ruach are the initiators of
the reasoning power. The reason itself is a process and
but a simulacrum of the action of the higher Wisdom
<2o6>

and Understanding. For the Air is not the Light—only
the translator of the Light. Yet without the Air, the
operations of the Light could not so well be carried out.
The word Ruach , Spirit, also meaneth Air. It is like a
thing that goeth out thou knowest not whither, and
cometh in thou knowest not whence.‘The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest
the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh
nor whither it goeth. So is every one that is born of the

Spirit/

This Air, the Ruach, permeatcth the whole physical
body but its concentrated influence is about the heart.
Yet, were it not for the boundary force of Chokmah and
Binah above, of the sphere of sensation surrounding it,
and of Malkuth below, the Ruach could not concentrate
under the presidency of the Name, and the life of the
body would cease.

Thus far concerning the Ruach as a whole, that is,

the action of the Will in Tiphareth.

From Netzach and Hod are formed the thighs and
legs, and they terminate in the symbols of five, as do the
arms; but they are not so moveable, owing to the effect
of Malkuth. In them are placed the faculties of support
and firmness and balance; and they show the more
physical qualities of the Ruach. In them is the sustain-
ing force of the Ruach. They are the affirmation of the
Pillars of the Sephiroth, as answering to the Passive,
the arms more answering to the two pillars which are
Active. They are the columns of the Human Temple.

<207><207>

From Yesod are formed the generative and excretory
organs, and therein is the seat of the lower desires, as
bearing more on the double nature of, on the one hand,
the rejection of the Qlippoth, and on the other hand the
simulacrum of the vital forces in Tiphareth. It is the
special seat of the automatic consciousness. That is, not
the Will, but the simulacrum of the Will in Tiphareth.
Yesod is the lowest of the Sephiroth of the Ruach, and
representeth “Fundamental Action.” It therefore gov-
ernth generation. In Yesod is therefore the automatic
consciousness or simulacrum of the Will. This automatic
consciousness is to the Nephesch what the Daath action
is to the Ruach. Thus, therefore, there being a simulac-
rum or reflection of the heart and vital organs in the
parts governed by Yesod, if the consciousness of the
Tiphareth be given unto this wholly, it shall pave the
way for disease and death. For this will be a withdrawing
of the vital forces of the Name, which are in the citadel
of Tiphareth, to locate them in Yesod, which is a more
easily attacked position. For the automatic conscious-
ness is the translator of the Ruach unto the Nephesch.

From Malkuth is formed the whole physical body
under the command and presidency of the Nephesch.
The Nephesch is the subtle body of refined astral Light
upon which, as on an invisible pattern, the physical
body is extended. The physical body is permeated
throughout by the rays of the Ruach, of which it is the
material completion. The Nephesch shineth through
the Material body and formeth the Magical Mirror or
Sphere of Sensation. This Magical Mirror or Sphere of
Sensation is an imitation or copy of the Sphere of the
Universe. The space between the physical body and the
<2o8>

—

boundary of the sphere of Sensation is occupied by the
ether of the astral world; that is to say, the container or
recipient of the Astral Rays of the Macrocosm.

The Nephesch is divided into its seven Palaces, com-The Nephesch is divided into its seven Palaces, com-

bining the Sephirotic influences in their most material
forms. That is, the world of passions dominated by the
Ruach, or by the world which is beyond. That is, its
Sephiroth are passionate, expressing a passionate do-
minion, Thus, its three Supernal Sephiroth, Kether,
Chokmah and Binah, are united in a sense of feeling and
comprehending impressions. Its Chesed is expressed by
laxity of action. Its Geburah by violence of action. Its
Tiphareth is expressed by more or less sensual contem-
plation of beauty, and love of vital sensation. Its Hod
and Netzach, by physical well-being and health. Its
Yesod, by physical desires and gratifications. Its Mal-
kuth, by absolute increase and domination of matter in
the material body.

The Nephesch is the real, the actual body, of which
the material body is only the result through the action
of Ruach, which by the aid of the Nephesch, formeth
the material body by the rays of Ruach, which do not
ordinarily proceed beyond the limits of the physical
body. That is to say, in the ordinary man the rays of
Ruach rarely penetrate into the sphere of Sensation.

Shining through infinite worlds, and darting its rays
through the confines of space, in this Sphere of Sensation
is a faculty placed even as a light is placed within a lan-
tern. This is a certain sense placed in an aperture of the
upper part of the Ruach wherein act the rays from
Chokmah and Binah which govern the reason
Daath.

<2Q9><2Q9>

This faculty can be thrown downwards into the Ruach,
and thence can radiate into the Nephesch. It consists
of seven manifestations answering to the Hexagram, and
is like the Soul of Microprosopus or the Elohim of the
human Tetragrammaton. Therefore in the head, which
is its natural and chief seat, are formed the seven aper-
tures of the head. This is the Spiritual Consciousness as
distinct from the human consciousness. It is manifested
in 7 as just said or in 8 if Daath be included. The Father
is the Sun (Chokmah.) The Mother is the Moon
(Binah.) The Wind beareth it in his bosom, (Ruach.)
Its Nurse is the Earth, (Nephesch.) The power is mani-
fested when it can be vibrated through the Earth.

The following is the true attribution of the seven

apertures of the head:

Right Ear———Saturn
Right Eye

Left Ear —Jupiter
Mouth——Mercury (who is the messenger of the Gods)

Left Eye

Luna

Sol

Right Nostril

Mars

Left Nostril

Venus

These latter represent here the sonoriferous sense, The
right and left eye, the luminous sense, as the Sun and
Moon are the luminaries of the Macrocosm. The right
and left nostrils through which the breath passes, giving
strength to the physical body, are under Mars and
Venus. The mouth is under Mercury, the messenger and
the Speaker.

This spiritual consciousness is a focus of the action
of Neschamah. The lower will-power should control the
descent of this spiritual consciousness into the Ruach,
<2IO>

1This spiritual consciousness is a focus of the action
of Neschamah. The lower will-power should control the
descent of this spiritual consciousness into the Ruach,
<2IO>

1

and thence into the Nephesch, for the consciousness
must descend into the Nephesch before the images of
the Sphere of Sensation can be perceived. For it is only
the rays of this consciousness permeating the Ruach
that can take cognisance thereof. This faculty of the
spiritual consciousness is the seat of Thought. Thought
is a Light proceeding from the radiation of this spiritual
consciousness, traversing the Ruach as Light traverseth
Air, and encountering thereafter the symbols reflected
in the sphere of Sensation, or magical mirror of the Uni-
verse. These symbols are by its radiation (i. e. that of
the Thought) reflected again into the Spiritual Con-
sciousness where they are subjected unto the action of
the Reasoning Mind and of the Lower Will. That is, in
the ordinary natural man when awake, the thought
acteth through the Ruach, subject when there to the
action of the Lower Will, and submitted to the reasoning
power derived as aforesaid from Chokmah and Binah.
But in the ordinary man when sleeping, and in the mad-
man, the idiot, and the drunkard, the process is not quite
the same. In the sleeping man, the concentration of the
Ruach in his heart during the waking time hath pro-
duced a weakening of the action of the Ruach in its
subsidiary Sephiroth in the Physical Body. To preserve
the salutary conjunction of the Ruach with the Neph-
esch in the physical body (whose limits are fixed by the
Sephiroth of the Ruach) it is necessary to weaken the
concentration in Tiphareth to repair the strain which
is produced by the concentration of the Ruach therein
during the waking state. This reflux of the Ruach into
its subsidiary Sephiroth produceth naturally a weaken-
ing of the Lower Will; and the Ruach, therefore, doth

<21

><21

>

not reflect so clearly the Reasoning Faculty. Wherefore,
the thought of the spiritual consciousness reflecteth the
image in a confused series, which are only partially
realised by the lower will. (This is as regards the ordin-
ary natural man in sleep.)

In the madman, as considered apart from obsession
(thought-obsession is frequently the accompaniment of
mania, and still more frequently its cause) the thought
and lower will are very strongly exercised to the detri-
ment of the reasoning faculty. That is, that there is an
alliance between the two former which overpowereth
the action of Chokmah and Binah in the latter.

Monomania is shewn in the consideration of only one
certain symbol which is too attractive to the Will. A
chain of thought is therefore simply a graduated vi-
bration arising from the contact of a ray of thought with
a symbol. If controlled by the reasoning power and
licensed by the Will, such vibrations will be balanced
and of equal length. But if uncontrolled by the lower
Will and the Reason, they wall be unbalanced and in-
harmonious. (That is, of uneven length.)

In the case of the drunkard, the equilibrium of the
Sphere of Sensation and consequently of the Nephesch,
is disturbed. In consequence the thought rays are shaken
at each vibration, so that the sphere of sensation of the
Nephesch is caused to rock and waver at the extremities
of the Physical Body where the Ruach action is bounded.
The thought therefore is dazzled by the symbols of the
Sphere of Sensation, in the same way as the eyes can be
dazzled in front of a mirror if the latter be shaken or
waved. The sensation therefore then conveyed by the
<2I2>

thoughts is that of the Sphere of Sensation oscillating
and almost revolving about the physical body, bringing
giddiness, sickness, vertigo and the loss of idea of place
and position. Nearly the same may be said of Seasick-
ness, and the action of certain drugs.Restoration of the equilibrium of the Sphere of Sen-
sation after this naturally produced a slackening of
the concentration of the Ruach in Tiphareth, whence
sleep is an absolute necessity to the drunkard. This is so
imperative that he cannot fight against the need. If he

does so, or if this condition be constantly repeated, the
thought rays are launched through the Sphere of Sensa-
tion so irregularly and so violently that they pass its
boundary without either the lower Will or the Reasoning
Power or even the Thought itself consenting thereto;
and the latter is therefore without the protection of the
will. Thence arise the conditions of delirium tremens, and
an opening is made in the Sphere of Sensation which is
unguarded, and through which hostile influences may
enter. But this latter cometh under the head of obsession.

All thought action in the spiritual consciousness ori-
ginated in radiation, and radiation is as inseparable
from the spiritual consciousness as it is from Light.

This Spiritual Consciousness is the focus of the action
of Neschamah. The spiritual consciousness is, in its turn,
the Throne or Vehicle of the Life of the Spirit which is
Chiah; and these combined form the Chariot of that
Higher Will which is in Kether. Also it is the peculiar
faculty o/ Neschamah to aspire unto that which is be-
yond. The Higher Will manifests itself through Yechi-
dah. The Chiah is the real Life Principle, as distinct
<2I3>

from the more illusionary life of the Physical Body. The
Shining Flame of the Divine Fire, the Kether of the Body,
is the Real Self of the Incarnation. Yet but few of the sons
of men know it or feel its presence. Still less do they be-
lieve in or comprehend those Higher Potencies—An-

gelic, Archangelic or Divine, of which the manifestation
directly touching Yeckidah is the Higher Genius,gelic, Archangelic or Divine, of which the manifestation
directly touching Yeckidah is the Higher Genius,

This Y eckidah in the ordinary man can but rarely act
through the spiritual consciousness, seeing that for it to
do so the King of the Physical Body, that is the Lower
Will, must rise from his Throne to acknowledge his su-
perior. That is the reason why, in some cases, in sleep
only doth the Higher Will manifest itself by dream unto
the ordinary man. In other cases it may be manifested;
at times through the sincere practice of religious rites,
or in cases where the opportunity for self-sacrifice oc-
curreth. In all these cases the Lower Will hath for a
moment recognised a higher form of itself, and the yhvh
of the man hath reflected from the Eternal Lord of the
Higher Life. This Yeckidah is the only part of the man
which can truly say—eiieieh, I am. This is then but the

Kether of the Assiah of the Microcosm, that is, it is the
highest part of man as Man. It is that which toucheth,
or is the manifestation of a higher and greater range of
Being. This Ycchidah is at the same time the Higher
Human Self and the Lower Genius, the God of the Man,
the Atziluth of his Assiah, even as Chiah and Nescha-
mah form his Briah, and Ruach his Yetzirah. This is the
Higher Will and the Divine Consciousness, as Daath is
the Spiritual Consciousness, Tipharcth the Human Con-
sciousness, and Yesod the Automatic Consciousness.

<2I4>

It is the Divine Consciousness because it is the only
part of man which can touch the All-potent forces. Be-
hind Yechidah are Angelic and Archangelic Forces of
which Yechidah is the manifestor. It is therefore the
Lower Genius or Viceroy of the Higher Genius which is
beyond, an Angel Mighty and Terrible. This Great Angel
is the Higher Genius, beyond which are the Archangelic
and Divine.Recall the Tiphareth clause of an Adeptus Minor: “I
further solemnly promise and swear that with the divine
permission I will from this day forward apply myself
unto the Great Work which is so to purify and exalt my
spiritual nature, that with the Divine Aid I may at
length attain to be more than Human, and thus gradu-
ally raise and unite myself to my Higher and Divine
Genius, and that in this event, I will not abuse the great
power entrusted unto me.”

Note that this clause answereth unto Tiphareth, see-
ing that it is the Lower Will that must apply itself unto
this work, because it is the King of the Physical Man. All
the Shining Ones (whom we call Angels) are microcosms
of the Macrocosm Yetzirah, even as Man is the micro-
cosm of the Macrocosm or Assiah. All Archangelic forms
are microcosms of the Macrocosm of Briah, and the Gods
of the Sephiroth are consequently the Microcosms of the
Macrocosm of Atziluth. Therefore apply this perfecting
of the Spiritual Nature as the preparation of the Path-
way for the Shining Light, the Light Divine,

The evil persona of a man is in the Sphere of the Qhp-
poth, and the devils are the Microcosms of the Macro-
<2I5>

cosm of the Qlippoth. This evil persona hath its parts
and divisions, and of it the part which toucheth the Mal-
kuth of the Nephesch is its Kether. Tremble therefore
at the evil forces which be in thy own evil persona. And
as above the Kether of a Man are his Angelic and other
forms, so below the Malkuth of the Evil Persona are
awful forms, dangerous even to express or think of.

<2l6>

OF THE TASK UNDERTAKEN BY THE
ADEPTUS MINOR<2l6>

OF THE TASK UNDERTAKEN BY THE
ADEPTUS MINOR

This, then, is the task to be undertaken by the Adeptus
Minor. To expel from the Sephiroth of the Nephesch the
usurpation by the evil Sephiroth; to balance the action
of the Sephiroth of the Ruach in those of the Nephesch.
To prevent the Lower Will and Human Consciousness
from falling into and usurping the place of the Automatic
Consciousness. To render the King of the Body, the
Lower Will, obedient to and anxious to execute the com-
mands of the Higher Will, that he be neither a usurper
of the faculties of the Higher, nor a sensual despot—but
an Initiated Ruler, and an annointed King, the viceroy
and representative of the Higher Will, because inspired
thereby, in his Kingdom which is man. Then shall it
happen that the Higher Will, i.e., the Lower Genius, shall
descend into the Royal Habitation, so that the Higher
Will and the Lower Will shall be as one, and the Higher
Genius shall descend into the Kether of the Man, bring-
ing with him the tremendous illumination of his Angelic
Nature. And the Man shall become what is said of Enoch.
'‘And Chanokh made himself to walk with God, and he
was not, for God took him.” (Genesis, V. v. 24.)

Then also this shalt thou know, that the Nephesch of
the Man shall become as the Genius of the Evil Persona,
so that the evil persona itself shall be as the power of the
Divine in the Qlippoth, as it is said: “Whither shall I go
from thy Spirit, or whither from thy Presence shall I flee?
If I ascend up to Heaven, thou art there. If I make my
bed in Hell, behold thou art there.” (Ps. cxxxix.)

<2I7><2I7>

Therefore even the Evil Persona is not so evil when it
fulfileth its work. For it is the beginner of a dim reflection
of the Light unto the Qlippoth, and this is what is hidden
in the saying that “Typhon i s the brother of Osiris.” Hear
thou, then, a mystery of the knowledge of evil. The ©—GD
Ritual of the Adeptus Minor saith that even the “Evil
helpeth forward the Good.” When the evil Sephiroth are
expelled from the Nephesch into the Evil Persona, they
are, in a sense, equilibriated therein. The evil persona can
be rendered as a great and strong, yet trained, animal
whereupon the man rideth, and it then becometh a
strength unto his physical base of action. This Mystery
shalt thou keep from the knowledge of the First Order,
and still more from that of the Outer World, that is as a
formula, seeing that it is a dangerous secret.

Now then shalt thou begin to understand the saying
“He descended into Hell,” and also to comprehend in
part this strength, and thus begin to understand the
necessity of evil unto the material creation. Wherefore,
also, revile not overmuch the evil forces, for they have
also a place and a duty, and in this consisteth their right
to be. But check their usurpation, and cast them down
unto their plane. Unto this end, curse them by the mighty
names if need be, but thou shalt not revile them for their
condition, for thus also shalt thou be led into error.

There is also a great mystery that the Adeptus Minor

must know, viz.:

How the spiritual consciousness can act around and
beyond the sphere of Sensation. “Thought” is a mighty
force when projected with all the strength of the lower
Will under the guidance of the reasoning faculty and il-
<2l8>luminated by the Higher Will. Therefore, it is that, in
thy occult working, thou art advised to invoks the Di-
vine and Angelic Names, so that thy Lower Will may
willingly receive the influx of the Higher Will, which is
also the Lower Genius behind which are the all-potent
forces. This, therefore, is the magical manner of opera-
tion of the Initiate when “skrying” in the spirit vision.
Through his own arcane wisdom, he knows the disposi-
tion and correspondences of the Forces of the Macro-
cosmos. Selecting not many, but one symbol, and that
balanced and with its correlatives, then sendeth he a
thought-ray from his Spiritual Consciousness, illumi-
nated by his Higher Will, directly unto the part of his
Sphere of Sensation which is consonant with the symbol
employed. There, as in a mirror, doth he perceive its prop-
erties as reflected from the Macrocosmos, shining forth
into the Infinite Abyss of the Heavens. Thence can he
follow the ray of reflection therefrom, and while con-
centrating his united consciousness at that point of his
sphere of sensation, can receive the direct reflection of
the ray from the Macrocosmos. Thus receiving the direct
ray as then reflected into his Thought, he can unite him-
self with the ray of his Thought so as to make one con-
tinuous ray from the corresponding point of the Macro-
cosmos unto the centre of his consciousness. If, instead of
concentrating at that actual point of the sphere of Sensa-

tion he shall retain the thought-ray only touching the

sphere of sensation at that point, he shall, it is true, per-
ceive the reflection of the Macrocosmic Ray answering
to that symbol in the sphere of his Consciousness. Rut
he shall receive this reflection tinctured much by his own
nature, and therefore to an extent untrue, because his
< 2 *9>united consciousnesses have not been able to focus along
the thought-ray at the circumference of the Sphere of
sensation. And this is the reason why there are so many
and multifarious errors in untrained spirit visions. For
the untrained seer, even supposing him free from the de-
lusions of obsession, doth not know or understand how
to unite his consciousnesses and the harmonies between
his own sphere of sensation, and the universe, the macro-
cosmos. Therfore is it so necessary that the Adeptus
Minor should correctly understand the principia and
axiomata of our secret knowledge, which are contained
in our Rituals and Lectures.

OF TRAVELING IN THE SPIRIT VISION

The symbol, place, direction, or Plane being known
whereon it is desired to act, a thought-ray as before is
sent unto the corresponding part of the Sphere of Sensa-
tion of the Nephesch. The Thought-Ray is sent like an
arrow from the bow, right through the circumference
of the Sphere of Sensation direct unto the place desired.
Arrived there, a sphere of astral Light is formed by the
agency of the Lower Will, illuminated by the Higher
Will, and acting through the spiritual consciousness by
reflection along the Thought-Ray. This sphere of Astral
Light is partly drawn from the surrounding atmosphere.
This sphere being formed, a simulacrum of the person of
the Syryer is reflected into it along the thought-ray, and
this united consciousness is then projected therein. This
Sphere is then a duplicate, by reflection, of the Sphere of
Sensation. As it is said: “Believe thyself to be in a place
and thou art there.” In this Astral Projection, however,
a certain part of the consciousness must remain in the
< 220>

11

body to protect the Thought-Ray beyond the Sphere of
Sensation (as well as the Sphere itself at that point of
departure of the Thought-Ray) from attack by any hos-
tile force, so that the consciousness in this projection is
not quite so strong as the consciousness when concen-
trated in the natural body in ordinary life. The return
taketh place with a reversal of this process, and save to
persons whose Nephesch and physical body are excep-
tionally strong and healthy, the whole operation of
skrying and traveling in the Spirit Vision is of course
fatiguing.

Also there is another mode of astral projection which
can be used by the more practised and advanced Adept.
This consisteth in forming first a sphere from his own
Sphere of Sensation, casting his reflection therein, and
then projecting this whole sphere to the desired place,
as in the previous method. But this is not easy to be done
by any but the practised operator.

Thus far, regarding Skrying and Travelling in the

Spirit Vision.

(These instructions are considerably amplified with
practical examples in a later volume dealing with Astral
vision and clairvoyance. I. R.)

<22

>

CONCERNING THE MICROCOSMS
OF MACROCOSM(These instructions are considerably amplified with
practical examples in a later volume dealing with Astral
vision and clairvoyance. I. R.)

<22

>

CONCERNING THE MICROCOSMS
OF MACROCOSM

As thou well knowest there be many and numberless
other inhabitants of the Macrocosmos besides Man, An-
gels, and Devils. The animals are microcosms in a sense,
yet not so complete as man. In them are many and great
mysteries. They also have their magical mirror or sphere
of sensation. But its polarisation is usually horizontal
rather than perpendicular, and this isowing to the Sephi-
roth not being shewn therein. This Sphere, then, is not
bounded by the Sephirothic columns, but they are espe-
cially governed by the Stellar System without the Sephi-
roth. They are therefore ruled by the Paths, rather than
by the Sephiroth, and are consequently classed each un-
der an Element or a Planet, and a Sign. Thus each fol-
loweth a formula which may be translated into letters,
and these again form a vibratory name. As it is written:
“And Adam gave names unto all the cattle and to the
fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field.” (Gen. II,
v. 20.) Yet they arc ruled by the name yhvh, though
classed rather by one or more of its letters:

Thus, Fish, etc., are under the influence of Water

Birds are under the influence of Air

Quadrupeds are under the influence of Fire

Creeping things and insects are under the

influence of Earth

There are some which partake of two elements, but in
them one element is usually chief, and besides the Ele-
ments, each is under a Planet and a Sign.

< 222>

The vegetable kingdom is again under a somewhat dif-
ferent Law. These are under a Planet and a Sign, a planet
first differentiated by a Sign.< 222>

The vegetable kingdom is again under a somewhat dif-
ferent Law. These are under a Planet and a Sign, a planet
first differentiated by a Sign.

The Mineral Kingdom is under the Signs only. Vege-
tables have a Sphere of Sensation, but corresponding
only to the Planets and Zodiacal Signs. The Minerals
have also a Sphere which correspondeth unto the Signs
only. But the metals are under the Planets only, and
therein is the difference between them and the Minerals,
wherefore also are they stronger. Shining Stones are espe-
cially under the Light; and they are, as it were, centres
for the action thereof in the darkness of matter, as it is
said: “My light is concealed in all that shineth.” (This
passage is it is believed from the Zend-Avesta.) They are
therefore under the rule of the three active elements with
an earthy base.

Shining through all things as a whole, are the rays of
the Macrocosmos. Besides these classes of life there be
multitudinous existences representing Forces of the
Macrocosm, each with its own microcosm. Such are Ele-
mental Spirits, Planetary Spirits, Olympic Spirits, Fays,
Arch-Fays, Genii, and many other potencies which can-
not be classed under these forms.

Thus the Macrocosmic Universe is one vast and in-
finite sphere containing so many and diverse infinite
microcosm ic forms, of which the perfect knowledge is
only known unto the advanced Adept.

Also it shall here suffice to say that thou shalt make a
distinction between the Four-handed race (the quad-
<223>Also it shall here suffice to say that thou shalt make a
distinction between the Four-handed race (the quad-
<223>

rumana, Apes and monkeys) ) which be midway between
Man and Beast and other animals. For they be neither
the one or the other, but are the fallen and debased result
of a most ancient magical effect to formulate a material
and immediate link between the human and animal
microcosms. This is elsewhere treated of, and it shall
here be sufficient to say that they are not an ascent, from
the beast unto the Man, but a mistaken magical fall from
a man unto a beast. Anciently they were a terrible power
upon this planet, as then having more of the man than
of the animal, whereas now they have more of the animal
than of Man. The ancient traditions of their primal con-
ditions are preserved unto this day in the legends of
ogres and, in certain records, cannibalism and its rites.

Regarding the beasts, they are, for the most part,
easily obsessed, and they have not the spiritual responsi-
bility of the man. Their nature is not evil, but, following
a natural law—seeing that man is head of the Assiatic
creation—so the animal is higher than the vegetables or
mineral. Also bear thou well in mind that the race of the
transformers are given unto cruelty. Such are above all
the race of creeping things. As Man hath his Ruach which
is upright in the.Tree of Life, so hath the beast his Ruach
which is horzontal; as it is said: “The Ruach of a man
which goeth upwards (i.e. directeth itself upwards), and
the Ruach of the beast which goeth downwards (or cross-
wise) in the Earth.” The Neschamah in the Beast is not.
The beast consisteth of a Ruach and a Nephesch with a
rudimentary Daath or Spiritual Consciousness. This
Daath ever seeketh that which is beyond it and thence are
beasts not responsible, but are submitted unto obsession,
and herein is a great mystery. Man, therefore, is placed
<224>at the head of the beasts. Woe, woe, unto him if he teach-
eth their elementary Daath cruelty and injustice instead
of mercy and justice. For the Man is a God unto the
Beast, and the aspiration of the Beast is toward the Man,
and great is the office of the Beast, for he prepareth the
foundation for the man. Man is responsible for creation,
and since he was originally placed in creation to be its
Lord, as he is, so will the creation follow him. And thus
it is possible for the Genius of a Nation to change the
climate of a country, and the nature of the beasts
therein. Men fell from primal estate, and then they who
were formless became imaged in form, deformed. And
this is a mystery of the Demonic Plane which entereth
not into this section.

The Elemental Spirits and other of their kind are an
organisation not quite so complete as man. In spiritual
consciousness more keen, and yet in some ways his spir-
itual superior though organically bis inferior. They are
the formers of the primal Man, that is the Elementary
Man, and they have other and greater offices, for in them
are many worlds and ranks and spheres. They are as the
younger man (i.e. child) and towards them also is Man
responsible, and he hath wrought them much injustice.

<225>

OF OBSESSION, TRANCE, DEATH<225>

OF OBSESSION, TRANCE, DEATH

Obsession always entereth through a cutting off of the
Higher from the Lower Will, and it is ordinarily first in-
duced by a Thought-Ray of the Spiritual consciousness
(whence one danger of evil thoughts) ill-governed, pene-
trating the Sphere of Sensation and admitting another
potency, either human embodied, or human disem-
bodied, elemental or demonic. The first action of such a
force is to flatter the lower will, until he shall have estab-
lished firmly an entrance into the Sphere of Sensation,
and thus shall cause a strain on the Nephesch which shall
render the Ruach less concentrated. As soon as the Ruach
is sufficiently dispersed to repair the strain on the phys-
ical body, the lower will is weakened, and is soon seized
upon and bound by the invader. Whence arise the sensa-
tions of chill and drowsiness which are the usual forerun-
ners of obsession. Now to yield the force necessary to
overpower the lower will from any chance of communica-
tion with the higher the obsessing idea proceeds by
seizing upon the Daath, and this consequently is the
great point of attack, especially the part in the physical
body which is at the back of the head about the junction
with the Spine. Now unless the lower Will shall volun-
tarily endeavour to restore the connection, it is impos-
sible for the Higher Will to intervene, seeing that the
Lower Will is King of the Physical Body. Remember
that no obsessing force can overpower the lower will, if
that shall bravely and in spite of all opposition aspire
unto the Higher Will.

Trance may arise from the action of obsession, or from

<226>

the action of the Higher Will, therefore its aspects are

varied.Trance may arise from the action of obsession, or from

<226>

the action of the Higher Will, therefore its aspects are

varied.

Death superveneth in the natural man, when the
mental action of the Ruach and the Nephesch is definite-
ly and thoroughly interrupted in the physical body. In
the Adept death can only supervene when the Higher
Will consenteth thereto, and herein is implied the whole
Mystery of the Elixir of Life.

End of Volume One