Author: Laurence Dermott (1756)
ID: ToB-0119
Archive: ahimanrezonabrid00derm
File Size: 15.46 MB

AHIMAN REZON
ABRIDGED AND DIGESTED :
ASA
Help to all that are, or would be
Free and Accepted MASONS.
I
TO WHICH IS ADDED,
A SERMON,
Pleached in CHRIST-CHURCH, Philadelphia,
At a General Communication,
Celebrated, agreeable to the Constitutions, ont
Mpnday, December 28, 1778, as the Anniver¬
sary of St. JOHN the Evangelist.
PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF
The Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania,
By WILLIAM SMITH, D. D,
PHILADELPHIA:
Printed by HALL and SELLERS,.
M, D C C, L XXX I I I.

Grand Lodge of Pennfylvania.
November 22, 1781.
<nr*HE Abridgement of the Book of
Constitutions being read, the
fame was unanimoufy approved of and ordered *
to be printed', and aljo, that the ‘Thanks of
this Grand Lodge- be given to our beloved
Brother, the Reverend William Smith,
D. D. Grand Secretary, for the great Care
and Attention he has befowed in revifng and
abridging the faid Book ^ Constitutions.
Extract from the Minutes,
Joseph Howell, jun. D. G. Secr’y.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY
GEORGE WASHINGTON,- Esq.
GENERAL AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF
OF THE
Armies of the United States
o F
AMERICA:
TN Tejlimony, as well of his exalted Ser-
vices to his Country, as of that noble
Philanthropy which diftinguifhes Him
among Masons, the following Consti¬
tutions of the moil ancient and honorable
Fraternity of Free and Accepted Mafons, by
Order and in Behalf of the Grand Lodge
of Rennjylvanidy 6cc. is dedicated.
By his Exeellency's
Mofl humble Servant,
And faithful Brother',
William Smith, G. Secretary.
June 24, 1782.

TABLE or CONTENTS,
AL E T T E R of the great Philofopher, Mr.
Locke, with an old Manufcript, on the An¬
tiquity of Free Mafonry, Tage i —12
CHAP. I.
Of the Temper and Qualities requifite in thofe who
would be free and accepted Masons, 13
Their Duties, in Refpebt to God and Religion, 14
In Relpett to Government and the Civil Magijlrate, 15—17
Private Qualities and Duties; particularly, Love,
Humility, Self-Denial, Candour, Secrecy, &c. 17—24
Rules and Cautions in propofmg Neva Members, 24—27
c H a p. 11.
General Regulations among ancient York-Masons, viz.
Concerning a Lodge and its Government,
The ancient Manner of conilituting a Lodge,
On the Behaviour of Masons, as Members of a
Lodge, viz. concerning their Attendance,
Behaviour while the Lodge is open,
—-— when the Lodge is clojcd.
Private Behaviour out of the Lodge,
In the Prefence of Strangers, not known to be Ma-
fons.
Towards a foreign Brother,
Behind a Brother’s Back as well as before his Face,
Concerning Differences and Law-fuits, if any fhould
happen among Brethren,
The Election, Office and Duty of the Master of a
Lodge,
Of the Office and Duty of Wardens,
And of the Secretary, ■
The Treasurer,
The Tyler,
c H A P. III.
General Rules of the Grand Lodge,
Of the Election, Office and Prerogatives of the
Grand Master,
Of the Eleflion, or Appointment of the Deputy
Grand Master, and his Duty,
Of the Election of'Grand Wardens,
Of the Nomination, Appointment and Office of the
Grand Secretary,
27—32
53— 33
38—40
4°—41
ibid
42
43
44
ibid
45—46
47—54
54— 55
56
57
53
58—65
65—69
69—70
7c—71

The CONTENTS.
Of the Election and Office of Grand Treasurer,
Of the Grand Tyler, Grand Pursuivant and
Grand Deacons,
Rules for conducting the Bufinefs of the Grand
Lodge, in the Abfence of any of the Grand
Officers,
Of Grand Vifitations, Communications, Annual
Feafts, &c.
Some particular Rules of the Grand Lodge of
Pennfylvania,
Regulations for governing the Grand Lodge, in
Time of public Buiinefs,
Regulations for Charity,
ExtraCt of fome late Refolutions of the Grand
Lodges of England, Ireland and Scotland,
Anlwers of Laurence Dermott, Efq; Deputy
Grand Mailer of Mafons in London, to certain
important Quejlions, propofed by a learned Mailer
of a Lodge in Philadelphia, concerning Difpen-
fatiom, and the different Plights and Prerogatives
of certain Grand Officers,
73—74
75— 76
76— 79
79—Si
81—85
85—S8
88—92
93—99
99—105
C II A P. IV.
A fhort Charge to a new admitted Mafon,
A Prayer at opening a Lodge, or making a new
Brother,
Another Praver moil common at makisio- or open-
ing, and alfo a Prayer ufed among the primitive
Chriltian Masons,
A Prayer ufed in the Royal-Arch Lodge at Jeru-
falem,
A fhort Collection of Mafonic Songs
A Sermon preached in Cbnjl-Church, Philadel¬
phia (for the Benefit of the Poor) by Appoint¬
ment of and before the Genera! Communication
of Free and Accepted Masons of the State of
Pennfylvania, on Monday, December 28, 1778.
Celebrated, agreeable to their Conllitution, as
the Anniverfary of St. John, the Evangelill.
A Prayer, by William Smith, D. D. and
Grand Secretary, at the Opening the Firil
Grand Communication, December 20th,
1779, m Grand Lodge of Philadelphia,
alter fomt Years interruption by the American
War.
106—109
109—111
111— 112
112— 114
115—144.
145—163
165—166
PREFACE.

PREFACE.
H E defign of the following work
JL (according to the appointment of the
Grand LodgeJ is only to extradl, abridge and
digeft under diftindl heads, the feveral parts
of Ahiman Rezon, fo as to be mod: in¬
telligible and ufeful to operative Masons
in America. The officers of Lodges, and
thofe members who wiffi to be more com-
pleatly learned in the grand fcience and fub-
limer myfteries of ancient Masonry,
will think it their duty, as opportunities of¬
fer, to furnifh themfelves, or their Lodges,
with at lead; one copy of all approved and
duly authorifed books of Mafonry, which
may be publiffied by the learned Lodges, or
illudrious brethren, in different languages and
countries of the world, from time to time.
Upon this plan, therefore, it will not be
neceffary to detain the reader with any long
account of the antiquity of the Royal Art.
Certain it is, that when the jirjl man was
formed in the image of God\ the principles
of Mafomy, as a divine gift from heaven,
were damped upon his heart by the great
Architect of the universe. The fame
principles were afterwards renewed and pla-

ced upon everlafting foundations, by the
wifdom of his glorious Son; and they
are daily cultivated in every foul that delights
in order, harmony, brotherly love, morality
and religion, through the grace and goodnefk
' of his divine Spirit—thrice blessed
Three, in one eternal God-head !
Thus inftructed from above, the fublime
operative and mechanic part of Mafonry was
praCtifed by Adam in the bowers of Paradife,
and propagated among chofen men of his
pofterity, in a leffer or greater degree of per¬
fection, through the different nations of the
world (as learned brethren have fully fhewn)
nor was the noble art loft by the lfraelites9
either during their peregrination in Egypt,
or journeyings in the defarts of Arabia. For
there it pleated the fupreme Architect to in-
fpire thofe great Majler Mafons, Bezaleel
and Aholiab, and to put 44 wifdom and
44 understanding into their heart, and to
44 teach them how to work all manner of
44 work, for the Service of the * SanBuary,
44 and ereCting that moft glorious Tent or
44 Tabernacle, wherein the divine Shechi-
44 nah vouchfafed to promife a Special re-
44 fidence; which, although not of (tone or
44 brick, was framed by Geometry, a moft
44 beautiful piece of architecture (and after-
4,4 wards the model of Solomon’s Temple)
44 accord-
Exodus xxxvi.

VIII
P R E F A C E.
<£ according to the pattern that God had
<£ fhewn to Moses in the Mount.”
And thus Moses, a man fupremely {kill’d
in all the Egyptian learning, who, to his
other titles, added that of King of Jefurun,
being divinely taught in the art of building,
became Grand M ASTER -MASON OR
Builder among the Xfraelites, “ and of-
“ ten marfhalled them into a regular and
“ general Lodge, while in the wildernefs;
“ and gave them wife charges and ordersy
<c had they been but well obferved.”—But of
this no more mull be mentioned.
We pafs on to fpeak more particularly of
Solomon’s Temple, at the building of
which, under the divine direction, were dis¬
played, in an unparalleled degree, all the glo¬
ry, beauty and lublimity of Mafonry ; there
being no fewer than * three thoufand fix hun-
dred Master Masons, eighty thoufand
Fellow Craftsmen, andfeventy thoufand
Labourers, employed in this magnificent
and Heaven-condudied work.
But above all the reft, our Grand Ma-
ster'Hiram fhone fuperlatively great, as
chief Director, and the mod: accomplifhed
Mafon upon earth. For to this character of
him the holy Scripture gives teflimony, in
the recommendatory letter which Hiram,
King
* i Kings v. 15.“*“2 Chron, xi. i8.

PREFACE.
IX
King of Tyre fent with him to King Solo¬
mon,—“ And now I have fent a cunning
 many endued with underflanding, the for*
<c of a woman of the daughters of Dan
“ and his father was a man of Tyre, fkilful
4‘ to work in gold and in filver, in brafs, in
“ iron, in ftone and in timber, in purple,
“ in blue and in fine linen, and in crimfon;
“ alfo to grave any manner of graving, and
“ to find out every device which fhall be
“ put to him with thy cunning men, and
“ with the cunning men of my Lord David,
“ thy Father *.
Thus we fee that our great Master
Hiram was accomplifhed in almoft every
art and fcience then known upon earth; as
all thofe fhould afpire to be, who wifh to
become ufefulMafonsy the Maflers of Lodges,
and the Rulers or Inftrudiors of others. It
is here further to be obferved, that fo highly
was this Chief of Masons honored by
his maftcr the King of Tyre, that in alj.
probability he had called him Hiram, or
Hu ram, after his own royal name.
It would be foreign to our prefent defign
(as already hinted) to mention the illuftrious
Mafons that in all ages, from the building of
Solomon’s Temple down to the ages of ge¬
neral darknefs and barbarity, have adorned
the different countries of the world; as Sy-
b ' ria,
* 2 Chron. ii. 13, 14,

X
PREFACE.
ria, Mesopotamia, AJjyria, Chaldea, Babylonia,
Media, Perfia, Arabia, Africa, lelfer Afia,
Grecia, Rome, &c. &c. The remains of
temples, pyramids and mighty towers, yet
declare their bnilder’s glory; and, even in
Gothic ages, the chief monuments of tafte
and grandeur are to be feen in the works of
Mafonry and Architecture.
Seven hundred years ago, William,
called the Conqueror, built the Tower of
London; his fon William Rufus, built
Wejlminfter Hall; which, as one room or
Lodge, is faid to be the larged: in the known
world ;—which grand monuments of Gothic
Architecture were all railed in the tafte and
fpirit, delivered down from thofe ancient
Craftfmen and learned Mafons font into
England, at the requeft of the Saxon Kings,
by Charles Martell, King of France#
more than one thoifand years ago.
But for the further inftrudtion of the
reader, concerning the foundation and anti¬
quity of what is called York Masonry,
the following record, written in the reign of
Edward IV. of England, viz. three hundred
years ago, is here inferted; which, with
another famous record, publilhed by the
great Philofopher John Locke, Efq; (and
likewile herein after inferted) will be enough
on this fubjeet.
ce Although
■HI

PREFACE. xi
ts Although the ancient records of the
brotherhood in England were many of
“ them deftroyed or loft in the wars of the
Saxons and Danes, yet it is known that
“ King Athelstan, the grandfon of Al-
<< fred the Great, who was a mighty archi-
<< tedf, the firft true King of England, and
“ who tranilated the holy Bible into the
<< Saxon tongue, when he had brought the
land into reft and peace, built many great
*< works, and encouraged many Mafons from
<< France, who v/ere appointed overfeers
“ thereof, and brought with them the char-
“ ges and regulations of the Lodges preferv-
<< ed lince the Roman times. Thefe Mafons
*e likewife prevailed with the King to im-
«« prove the Constitution of the Englifh
 Lodges according to the foreign model, and
“ to encreafe the wages of ^working Mafons.
“ The faid King Athelstan’s youngeft
<< fon Edwin being taught Mafonry, and
“ taking upon him the charges of a Ma-
«« ster Mason, for the love he had to the
«« faid craft, and the honorable principles
“ whereon it is grounded, purchaled a free
“ charter of his father; giving the Mafons
“ a right of corredlion among themfelves (as
“ it was anciently expreffed) or a freedom
*< and power to rcgidate themjehes, to amend
“ what might happen amifs, and to hold an
“ Yearly Communication, or General Ajjembly.
b 2 “ In

Xll
PREFACE.
“ In virtue of this charter. Prince Ed¬
win fummoned ail the Masons in Eng¬
land to meet him in a Congregation
at York; who accordingly attended his
fummons, and compofed a General
Lodge, of which he was Grand Ma¬
ster ; and having brought with them
and collected together all the writings and
records which were extant concerning
Masonry (fome in Latin, fome in
french, and other languages) from the
contents of the whole, that Affembly or
grand Congregation did frame the Con¬
stitution and Charges of the Englifh
or great ancient York Lodge; and made
a law to prei.ervc and obferve the fame in
all future time, ordaining likewife good
pay for working Mafons.—And the faid
confutation, charges and laws, having been
afterwards feen and perufed by Henry the
VI. and by the Lords of his Council
(mold of whom were Mafons) were con¬
tented to and allowed to be right, good
and reafonable to be holden, as they were
thus drawn out and collected from the
records of ancient times.” The great
Philofopher, Mr Locke, already mention¬
ed, likewife tells us that the famous manu¬
script, on the antiquity of Free Mafonry,
found in the Bodleian Library (herein after
pubhfhed) is faid to have been originally
in “ the hand-writing of the fame King
Henry.”
’Tis
it
it
tt
it
« t
it
*t
<t
it
it
it
it
it
it
it
it
it
i<
it
it
it
it
it
' tt

PREFACE.
Xlll
’Tis true, while this Prince was an in¬
fant, and his Parliament, it is believed, not
very wife (learning being then deemed a
crime, and Geometry palling for Conjuration)
a law was pafled which deprived Mafons of
fome of their ancient charter privileges, by
forbidding them “ to confederate themfelves
“ in Chapters and Congregations.”
“ Whereas (fays the law) by yearly
“ Congregations and Confederacies, made
“ by the Mafons in their General Alfemblies,
“ the good courfe and effect of the ftatutes
“ for labourers be openly violated and bro-
“ ken, in fubverfion of the law, and to the
“ great damage of all the commons, our
“ Sovereign Lord the King, willing in this
“ cafe to provide a remedy, by the advice
“ and affent aforefaid, and at the fpecial re-
“ quell; of the commons, hath ordained and
“ ellablilhed that fuch Chapters and Congre-
“ gat ions fhall not hereafter be holden; and
“ if any fuch be made, that they caufe fuch
“ Chapters and Congregations to be afiem-
“ bled and holden, if they thereof be con-
“ vidt, fhall be judged for felons, and that
“ the other Mafons that come to fuch Chap-
“ ters and Congregations be punilhed by
“ imprifonment of their bodies, and make
“ fine and ranfom at the King’s will.”--
Co. Lift. 3.
But,

XIV
P R E F A C E.
But, as was faid before, this Parliament
*Ioes not ieem to have been made up of ma¬
ny wife heads, and tradition informs us alfo
that they were too much influenced by the
ignorant Monks and illiterate Clergy (not like
thofe of modem days, or of the early ages,
who were many of them eminent Majo?zs and
friends to Mafons) but a fett of men, who
thought they had a right to know all men’s
fecrets, by means of confejjton; and therefore
hated the Mafonsy and reprefented them as
dangerous to the date, becaufe they kept their
own jecrets, and made no ufe of Conjefors at
all. But the King, when he came to man’s
eftate, approved the Mafonic Conftifution, as
above fet forth, without any regard to the
laid Aft of Parliament ; which the great
Lord Coke tells us is now of no effect—-
44 For, fays he, all the Statutes concerning
44 labourers, whereunto this aft doth refer,
are repealed by the Statute V. Eliz. Chap.
44 IV; whereby the caufe and end of mak-
44 ing this A61 is taken away, and confe-
44 quently this A<St is. become of no force or
44 effect; for cefante rat tone Legis, cejfat ipfa
44 Lex. And the indictment of felony upon
44 this Statute mud contain, that thofe Chap-
44 ters and Congregations were to the violating
44 and breaking of the good coiirfe and eftcl of
“ the Statutes of labourers; which now can-
44 not be fo alledged, becaufe tliefe Statutes
44 be repealed.” This quotation is- thought
to confirm the tradition that this mod learned

PREFACE.
We read farther, that Queen 'Elizabeth once
entertained fome confiderable prejudices con¬
cerning the truly ancient and honorable body
of Free Masons. We know it was part
of this Queen-s character, among all her rare
and princely virtues, to be of a jealous tem¬
per, with a great curiofity to be Mijlrefs of
all Secrets, and an enemy to all meetings
or affemblies of her fubjechs, whofe bu fine is
Ihc was not. duly apprized of. Being told by
fome of her ignorant and bufy meddling
Courtiers, that the Masons had fecrets that
could not be revealed to her, and that aitho'
as a woman, fhe could govern a Nation,
yet fhe could not govern a Lodge, nor be
made Grand Master (or Mistress) of
Masons ; die therefore fent an armed force
to break up the annual Grand Lodge at York,
on St. John’s Day, December 27th, 1561.
Sir Thomas Sackville, then Grand Mafter, in-
dead of being difmayed at fuch an unexpect¬
ed vifit, gallantly told the officers that no¬
thing could give him greater pleafure than
feeing them in the Grand Lodge, as it would
give him an opportunity of convincing them
that Free Mafonry was the mod honorable
inditution that ever was founded, and truly
confonant to Laws both divine and moral.
The confequence was that he made the chief
men Free Mafons who, on their return,
made

XVI
P R E F A C E,
made an honorable report to the Queen, fo
that lire never more attempted to diflodge or
difturb them, but e(teemed them as a pecu¬
liar fort of men, that cultivated peace and
friendfhip, arts and fciences, without med¬
dling in the affairs of Church or State.
Thus hath Mafonry fiourifhed through
different ages in the old world, and hath
obtained a very noble and folid foundation in
this new or American world. Were it ne-
ceffary, we might proceed to fhew that from
this ancient Fraternity, ££ the Societies or
<e Orders of Warlike Knights, and even fome
<£ religious Orders and Societies, have bor-
“ rowed many of their wifeft inflitutions
“ and mod folemn ufages. For none of
“ them were better inflituted, more decent-
££ ly inftalled, or did more facredly obferve
<£ their Laws and Charges, than the Free and
££ Accepted Masons have done; and there -
££ fore their whole body, thus cemented,
££ refembles a flrong and well built Arch>
<£ having as its members and parts, for time
<£ immemorial. Princes and Nobles, Gentle-
<£ men, Clergymen, learned Scholars and Artifts
££ of the firft rank, in all countries.”
A LETTER

A
LETTER
Of the celebrated Philosopher
JOHN LOCKE, Efquire,
To the Right Hon. *, Earl of *, with
an old Manufcript, on the Antiquity of
Free-Masonry ; which feems to have
been written at Oates (the Country Seat of
Sir Francis Mafham) in EJfex, where Mr.
Locke died October 28, 1704, in the 73d
Year of his Age.
<c My Lord, May 6, 1696.
IH A V E at length, by the Help of
Mr. C—ns, procured a Copy of that
“ Manufcript in the Bodleian Library, which
“ you were fo curious to fee; and, in Obe-
“ dience to your Lordfhip’s Commands, I
“ herewith fend it to you. Mod; of the
“ Notes annexed to it are what I made Ye-
“ fterday for the reading of my Lady Ma-
“ sham, who is become fo fond of Mafonry
“ as to fay, that lhe now more than ever
A wifies

wishes herfelf a Man, that (he might be
capable of Admifjion into the Fraternity.
“ The Manufcript, of which this is a
Copy, appears to be about one hundred and
Jixty (now two hundred and forty-four)
Years old ; yet (as your Lordfhip will ob-
ferve by the Title) it is itfelf a Copy of one
more ancient, by about one hundred Tears;
for the Original is faid to have been the
Hand-writing of King He nr y VI. Where
that Prince had it is at prefent an Uncer¬
tainty. But it feems to me to be an Exa¬
mination (taken perhaps before the King)
of lome one of the Brotherhood of Mafons;
among whom he entered himfelf, it is
faid, when he came out of his Minority,
and thenceforth put a Stop to the Pexecu¬
tion that had been raifed againft them.-—>
But I muft not detain your Lordfhip long¬
er by my Prefaces from the Thing itfelf.”
i
Certayne

Certayne Questyons,
WITH
Awnsweres to the fame,
CONCERNYNGE THE
Mystery of Maconrye ;
Wryttenne by the Hande of Kynge Henrye the
Six the of the Name, and jay thfully e copyed
by me JOHAN LEYLANDE, (i)
Antiq^uarius, by the Commaunde of his
Highnejfe (2).
Id hey be as followethe :
nuefi. \\THAT mote ytt be ? (3)
W Anf Ytt beeth the Sky lie
of Nature, theUnderflondynge of the Myghte
that ys hereynne, and its fondrye Werckynges;
fonderlycke, the Skyile of Reclenyngcs, of
Waightes and Metynges, and the treu Manere
of Faconnynge al thynges for Mannes Ufe ;
headlye Dwellynges and Buyldynges of alle
Kindes,
Notes by Mr. LOCK E.
(1) John Leylande was appointed by King Henry the Eighth*
at the Diflolution of Monaferies, to fearch for, and fave, fuch
Books and Records as were valuable among them. He was a
Man of great Labor and Induftry.
(2) His Highnejfe, meaning the faid King Henry the Eighth.
Our Kings had not then the Title of Majelly.
(3) What mote ytt he P That is, what may this Mvflery of
Mafonry be ? The Anfwer imports, that it confifts in Natural,
Mathematical and Mechanical Knowledge; fome Part of which
(as appears by what follows) the Mafons pretend to have taught
the reft of Mankind, and fome Part they Hill conceal.

[ 4 ]
Kindes, and al odher thynges that make Gudde
to Manne.
Queft. Where dyd ytt begyne?
Anf. Ytt dyd begynne with the (4) fyrfte
Menne yn the Este, whych were before the
(5) fyrfte Menne of the Weste, and com-
ytt hath broughte herwyth alle
Comfortes to the Wyld and Cornfortleffe.
$ueft. Who dyd brynge ytt Weftlye?
Anf. The (6) Venetians, who beynge
Grate Merchaundes, corned ffyrfle ffromme
the Efle ynn Venetia, ffor the Commodytye
of
Notes by Mr. LOCKE.
(4* 5) Fyrfie Menrteyn the Efte, See. It Ihould feem by this
that Mafons believe there were Men in the Eajl before Adam,
who is called the ffyrfle Manne cf the Wejle ; and that Arts and
Sciences began in the Eajl. Some Authors of great Note for
Learning have been of the fame opinion ; and it is certain that
Europe and Africa (which in RefpeCl to AJia may be called
Weftern Countries) were wild and favage, long after Arts and
Politenefs of Manners were in great Perfection in China and
the hidies.
.[N. B. Our great Philofopher, as might he expebled, is here
miftaken in fuppofng that by the Words—ffyrfte Manne of the
Welle—M asons mean Adam, or that there were Men in the
Eaft before him. The true Mafonic Signification of the Word
Man is underfiood only by a Brother; and means fomething more
than the Animal of erebl Stature, with Arms, Legs, Voice arti¬
culate, tS c. And our fugacious Philofopher, in the concluding
Part of the above Note, comes near the Meaning, when he allows,
with Mafons, that the Arts and Sciences, which they cultivate,
had their Origin in the Eaft, for, in that Senfe there were Men
in the Eaft long before there was a Man in the Weft.]
(6) The Venetians, &c. In Times of Monkilh Ignorance, ’tis
no Wonder that the Phenicians Ihould be miftaken for the Vene¬
tians. Or, perhaps, if the People were not taken one for the
other. Similitude of Sound might deceive the Clerk who firft
took down the Examination. The Phenicians were the greateft
Voyagers among the Ancients, and were in Europe thought to
be the Inventors of Letters, which perhaps they brought from
the Eajl with other Arts.

[ 5 ] ■
of Marchaundyfynge, beithe EJie and Wejle,
bey the Redde and Myddlelonde Sees.
. Queft. Howe comede ytt yn Engelonde?
Anf. Peter Gower (7) a Grecian, jour-
neyedde ffor Kunnynge yn Egypte, and yn Sy¬
ria, and yn everyche Londe whereas the Ve¬
netians hadde plauntedde Maconrye ; Wynn-
ynge Entraunce yn al hodges of Maconnes, he
lerned muche and retournedde, and woned in
Grecia Magna (8), wackfynge and becomm-
ynge a myghtye Wyfeacre (9), and gratelychc
renowned, and her he framed a grate Lodge
at
Notes by Mr. LOCKE.
(7) Peter Gower. This muft be another Miftake of the
Writer (or Clerk). 1 was puzzled at firft to guefs who Peter
Gower fhould be, the Name being perfectly Englijh, or how
a Greek Ihould come by fuch a Name. But affoon as I
thought of Pythagoras, I could fcarce forbear fmiling to find
that Philofopher had undergone a Metempfychofis he never
dreamt of. We need only confider the French Pronunciation
of his Name, Pvthagore, that is Petagore, to conceive how
eafy fuch a Miltake might be made by an unlearned Clerk.
That Pythagoras travelled for Knowledge into Egypt, &c. is
known to all the learned, and that he was initiated into feveral
different Orders of Priejis, who in thofe Days kept all their
Learning fecret from the Vulgar, is well known. Pythagoras
alfo made every Geometrical Theorem a Secret, and admitted
only fuch to the Knowledge of them, as had firft undergone a
five Years Silence. He is fuppofed to be
* This Proportion the Inventor of the * 47th Propofition of
is the Foundation of Euclid's firft Book, for which in the Joy
all Operative Ma- of his Heart, ’tis faid, he facrificed a He-
fonry• catomb. He alfo knew the true Syftem of
the World lately revived by Copernicus ;
and was certainly a moft wonderful Man. See his Life by
Dion Hal.
(S) Grecia Magna. A Part of Italy, formerly fo called, in
which the Greeks had fettled a large Colony.
(9) Wyfeacre. This Word at prefent fignifies Simpleton, but
foimerly had a quite contrary Meaning. IVeifager, in the old
Saxon, is Philofopher, Wifeman or Wizard.———

[ 6 ] '
at Groton (i o) and maked many Maconnes*
fome whereoffe dyd journeye yn Fraunce,
and maked many Maconnes; wherefromme,
yn Proceffe of Tyme, the Arte palled yn
Engelonde.
^ueji. Do the Maconnes defcouer here
Artes untb Odhers?
Anf. Peter Gower whennehejournedde
to lernne, was ffyrfte made (i i), and anonne
techedde; evenne foe fhulde all odhers be yn
recht. Nathelefs (12) Maconnes hauethe.
alweysy yn everyche Tyme, from Tyme to
Tyme, communycatedde toMannkyndefoche
of her Secrettes as generallyche myghte be
ufefulle ; they haueth keped backe foche al-
lein as fhulde be harmefulle yff they comede
yn
Notes by Mr. LOCKE.
(to) Groton is the Name of a Place in England. But the
Place here meant is Crotona, a City of Grecia Magna [men¬
tioned above] which in the Time of Pythagoras was very
populous.
(11) Fyrjie made. The Word made, I fuppofe, has a par¬
ticular Meaning among the Mafons-—perhaps it fignifies ini¬
tiated.
(12) Maconnes hauethe cotnmunycatedde, &c. This Paragraph
hath fomething remarkable in it. It contains a Juftification
of the Secrecy fo much boafted of by Mafons, and lb much
blamed by others; alferting that they have in all Ages difco-
vered fuch Things as might be ufeful, and that they conceal
fuch only as would be hurtful either to the World or themfelves.
What thefe Secrets are, we fee afterwards.
[ N. B. Mr. Locke, inftead of faying the Mafons conceal fuch
Things only as would be hurtful to the World or themfelves,
fhould have followed the Anfiwer (as it is above) more clofely ;
and then he would have faid that Mafons conceal from the World
only fuch Things as might be hurtful to the World or themfelves
by falling into evil Hands, or from which no Benefit is to be de¬
rived unlefs through a Brother, duly infirufied in the Wifdom of-
the Lodge. ]

[ 7 ]
yn euylle Haundes oder foche as ne myghte
be holpynge wythouten the Fecbynges to be
joynedde herwythe in the Lodge ; oder foche
as do bynde the Freres more ftrongelyche to-
geder, bey the ProfFytte and Commodytye
comynge to the Confrerie herfromme.
Queji. Whatte Artes haueth the Ma-
connes techedde Mankynde ?
Anf, The Arts, viz. Agricultura (13)
Architectura, Astronomia, Geome-
tria, Numeres, Musica, Poesie, Ky-
mistrye. Governments and Relygy-
onne.
Quejl. Howe commethe Maconnes more
Teachers than odher Menne ?
Anf.
Notes by Mr. LOCKE.
(13) The Arts, Agricultura, &c. It feeifts a bold Pre¬
tence, this, of the Mafons, that they have taught Mankind all
thefe Arts. They have their own Authority for it; and l
know not how we lhall difprove them. But what appears mojl
odd is, that they reckon Religion among the Arts.
[ N. B . Our Philofopher needed not to-have underjlood the
Word, Arts, as applied here, in its Jlrift and limited Sen/e, hut
more generally, as comprehending every Thing that tends to im¬
prove the human Mind. Religion, as it is founded on Divine
Revelation, is indeed the highefi Knowledge, the Perfection of all
Arts and Sciences, the fupreme Happinefs of Man ; and as fucb
is venerated and obeyed in the Lodge. But when enumerated vjith
other (alt ho’ inferior) Branches of practical Wifdotn, as culti¬
vated in the Lodge, it need not appear odd to have it reckoned
an Art, and indeed one of the nobleft Arts, namely, the Art of
living well—a Phrafe which the foundefi Divine will not blame.
Had Religion been called a Science, the Term might have been
applied to mere fpeculative Knowledge, a Furniture of the Head,
without any Regard to Life and Manners. Had it been enume¬
rated among the Crafts, the Term would have appeared fill tncre
odd; and it might well have awakened that facred Jealoufy,
which, like a truly enlightened Philofopher, the great Mr. Locke
ever entertained for the Honor of Chrijlianity.]

[ 8 ]
Anf They hemfelfe haueth allein the (14)
Arte of fFyndynge neue Artes, whyche Arte
the ffyrjie Maconnes receaued from Godde ;
by the whyche Arte they fyndethe whatte
Artes hem plefethe, and the treu Way of tech-
yng the fame. Whatt odher Menne doethe
ffynde out, ys onelyche bey Chaunce, and
herfore but lytel I tro.
Queft' What dothe the Maconnes con-
cele and hyde ?
Anf. They concelethe the Arte of fFynd¬
ynge neue Artes, and that ys for here owne
Proffyte and (15) Preife. They concelethe
the Arte of kepynge (16) Secrettes, that fo
the
Notes by Mr. LOCKE.
(14) Arte of ffyndynge neue Artes. The Art of inventing;
Arts, muft certainly be a moft ufeful Art. My Lord Bacon’s
Novum Organum is an Attempt towards fomewhat of the fame
Kind. But I much doubt, if ever the Mafons had it, they
have now loft it; fince fo few new Arts have been lately in¬
vented, and fo many are wanted. The Idea I have of fuch an
Art is, that it muft be fomething proper to be applied in all
the Sciences generally, as Algebra is in Numbers; by the
Help of which new Rules of Arithmetic are, and may be,
found.
(15) Preife. It feqms the Mafons have a great Regard to
the Reputation as well as the Profit of their Order; fince they
make it one Reafon for not divulging an Art in common, that
it may do Honor to the Profeftors of it. I think in this par¬
ticular they fhew too much Regard for their own Society, and
too little for the reft of Mankind.
[ N. B. Our Philofopber might have got over this Difficulty
by candidly attending to what is Jaid above, viz. that divulging
the Art can be of no Ufe to any but a Brother duly inftrufted;
and Mafons alvuays divulge it to fuch. T"o others it would be.
hurtful, as is fet forth in the Anfwer.~\
(16) Arte of kepynge Secrettes. What Kind of Art this is,
I can by no Means imagine. But certainly fuch an Art the
Mafons

[ 9 ] ,
the Worlde mayeth nothinge concele from
them. They concelethe the Arte of Wiin--
derwerckynge, and of forefayinge 'Thynges to
comme, thatt fo thay fame Artes may not be
ufedde of the Wyckedde to an euylle Ende;
thay alfo concelethe the Arte of Chaunges
(17) , the Wey of Wynnynge the Facultye
(18) of AbraCy the Skylle of becommynge
gude and parfyghte wythouten the Holpynges
of Fere and Hope; and the Univerfelle
Longage of Maccnnes (19).
Quejl. Wylle he teche may the fame
Artes ?
Anf Ye fhalle be techedde yff ye be wer-
thye, and able to lerne.
Quejl. Dothe alle Maconnes kunne more’
than odher Menne ?
Anf. Not fo. Thay onlyche haueth recht
Occafyonne more than odher Menne to kunne
butt manye doeth fale yn Capacity, and ma-
nye more doeth want Induftrye, that isper-
necefarye for the gaynynge all Kunnynge.
Quejl. Are Maconnes gudder Menne then
odhers ? B
* Anf
Notes by Mr. LOCKE.
Mafcns mufi have; for though, as fome People (uppofe, they
thould have no Secret at all, even that mult be a Secret, which,
being difeovered, would expofe them to the highelt Ridicule
and therefore it requires the utmoit Caution to conceal it.
(17) Arte cf Chaunges. I know not what this means, un-
lefs it be the Tranfmutation of Metals.
(18) Facultye rf Afo'ac. Here 1 am utterly in the Dark.
f N. 11. By the Light of MaJ'onry we / rofefs to had out of
this Darknefs.j

Anf Some Maconnes are nott fo vertuous,
ds fome odher Menne; but in the mod Parte^
they be more gude then thay woulde be yft
they war nott Maconnes,
kueft. Doth Maconnes love eidther od¬
her myghtyly, as beeth fayde ?
Anf. Yea verylyche, and yt may nott od-
herwife be. For gudde Menne and true,
kennynge eidther odher to be foche, doeth
always love the more as they be more Gude.
Here endethe the Questyonnes and
Awns were s.
Mr. Lo gke upon (19) the Words—Uni-
verfelle Longage of Maconnes, concludes his
Letter as follows, viz.
“ An univerfal Language has heen much
k< deliredN by the Learned of many Ages.
“ ’Tis a Thing rather to be wifhed than
“ hoped for. But it feems the Mafons pre-
“ tend to have fuch a Thing among them.
If it be true, I gtiefs it muff be fomething
like the Language of the Pantomimes a-
ie mong the ancient Romans, who are faid to
e< have been able, by Signs only, to exprefs
“ and deliver any Oration intelligibly to
Men of all Nations and Languages. A
Man, who has all thefe Arts and Advan-
<e tages, is certainly to be envied. But we
are told that is not the Cafe with all Ma-
fons} for though thefe Arts are among
them.

[ u ]
 them, and all have a Right and Oppor-
t( tunity to know them, yet fome want the
 Capacity and others the Induftry to ac-?
<( quire them.
“ However, of all their Arts and Se-
" crets, that which I mod; defire to know
“ is—The Sky lie of becommynge gude and fiar-
fygbte; and I wifh it were communicated
(e to all Mankind, lince there is nothing
“ more true than the beautiful Sentence
<{ contained in the laft Anfwer,—- that the
<e better Men are, the more they love one ano-
S( therVirtue having in itfelf fomething
“ fo amiable, as to charm the Hearts of all
that behold it.
“ I know not what Effect the Sight of
“ this old Paper may have upon your Lord-
“ fhip ; but for my own Part, I cannot de-
“ ny that it has fo much raifed my Curio-
<( dty, as to induce me to enter myfelf into
“ the Fraternity; which I am determined to
“ do (if I may be admitted) the next Time
sc I go to London, and that will be fliortly,
I am, my Lord,
Tour Lordfhifis mofi obedient,
And mofi humble Servant,
JOHN LOCKE.”

<I'o explain the Words in Italick
Characters in the foregoing.
yfLLEIN^ only
Alweys, always
Beithe, both
Commodytye, Conveniency
Confrerte, Fraternity
jVaconnynge, forming
fayinge, prophecying
Freres, Brethren
JAeadlye, chiefly
Hem plefethe, they pleafe
Hemfelfe, themfelves
//cr, there, their
Jrlereynne, therein
Herwyth, with it
Iiolpynge, beneficial
Kunns, know
Kunnynge, Knowledge
MakeGudde, are beneficial
Metynges, Meafures
may
Myddlelonde, Mediterra¬
nean
Myghle, Power
Occafyonne, Opportunity
OtfVr, or
Onelyche, only
Pernecejfarye, abfolutely
neceffary '
Preife, Honour
Recht, Right
Reckenyngs, Numbers
Sonderlyche, particularly
Skylle, Knowledge
Wackfynge, growing
Werck, Operation
Way
Whereas, where
Waned, dwelt
Wunderwerkynge, work¬
ing Miracles
Wylde, favage
Wynnyngey gaining
into
AHIMAN

AHIMAN REZON,
DIGESTED AND ABRIDGED :
With the Addition of the lateft Regulations,
for the ufe of Operative Mafons, in the
American Ledges, &c.
CHAP. I.
Of the Temper and Qualities requifite in
thofe who would be free and accepted
Masons.
BEFORE we enter upon the duties of
the operative Mafon, in the various of¬
fices and ftations to which he may be called
in the Lodge, it is proper to give fome
account of the temper and qualities which are
abfolutely requifite in all who afpire to par¬
take of the fublime honors and advantages,
belonging to thofe who are duly initiated in¬
to the myjleries, and inftrudted in the art of
.ancient Masonry.
Sect.

14 AHIMAN R E Z O N.
Sect. I. Concerning God and Religion,
Whoever, from love of knowledge, 'in-
tereft, or curiofity, defires to be a Mafon, is
to know that, as his foundation and great
corner-flone, he is to believe firmly in the,
eternal God, and to pay that worfhip
which is due to him, as the great Arc bit eB
and Governor of the univerfe. A Mafon is
alfo obliged, by his tenure, to obferve the
moral law, as a true Noacbida *; and if he
rightly underftands the royal art, he cannot
tread in the irreligious paths of the unhappy
libertine, the deijiy or ftupid atheiji; nor, in
any cafe, a£t againft the great inward light of
his own confcience.
He will likewife fhun the grofs errors of
bigotry and fuperflition; making a due ufe
of his own reafon, according to that liberty
wherewith a Mafon is made free. For al¬
though, in ancient times, the Chriftian Ma-
fons were charged to comply with the
Chrifian ufages of the countries where they
fojourned or worked (being found in all na¬
tions, and of divers religions and perfua^
fions) yet it is now thought mod; expedient
that the brethren in general fhould only be
CHART
* Sons of Noah ; the firft name for Free-Mafons.

A Jri 1 JVI A IN KfiAUiN.
*5
charged to adhere to the ejfentials of reli¬
gion in which all men agree* leaving each
brother to his own private judgment, as to
particular modes and forms. Whence it fol¬
lows, that all Mafons are to be good men and
true—men of honour and honefty, by what¬
ever religious names or perfualions diftin-
guilhed; always following that golden pre^
cept of “ doing unto all men as (upon a
*« change of conditions) they would that all
*e men fhould do unto them.’1
Thus, fmce Mafons, by their tenure*
muft agree in the three great articles of
Noah, Mafonry becomes the center of
union among the brethren, and the happy
means of conciliating, and cementing into
one body, thofe who might otherwife have
remained at a perpetual diftance 5 thereby
ftrengthening and not weakening the divine
obligations of religion and love !
Sect. II. Concerning Government and the
Civil Magiftrate,
Whoever would be a true Mafon is fur¬
ther to know that, by the rules of his art,
his obligations as a fubjeft and citizen will
not be relaxed but enforced. He is to be a
lover

lover of quiet, peaceable and obedient to the
civil powers, which yield him protediion,
and are fet over him where he refides or
works; fo far as they infringe not the limit¬
ed bounds of reafon and religion. Nor can
a real craftfman ever be concerned in plots
againft the ftate, or be difrefpedful to the
magiftracy; becaufe the welfare of his coun¬
try is his peculiar care.
But if'any brother, by forgetting for a
time the rules of his craft, and liftening to
evil councils, fhould unhappily fall into a
contrary condud, he is not to be countenan¬
ced in his crimes or rebellion againfl the
Hate; but he forfeits all benefits of the
Lodge, and his fellows would refufe to aflo-
ciate or converfe with him in private, while
he continues in his crimes; that neither of¬
fence nor umbrage may be given to lawful
government. But fuch a perfon is ftill con-
fidered as a Mafon, his character as fuch be¬
ing indefeafible; and hopes are to be enter¬
tained, that the rules of the craft may again
prevail with him over every evil council and
device that may have led him afiray.
From this quiet and meek temper of true
Mafons, and their confiant defire to adorn
the

AHIMAN REZON.
*7
the countries where they refide with all ufe-
ful arts, crafts and improvements, they have
Been, from the earlieSt ages, encouraged and
protected by the wifeft rulers of States and
commonwealths, who have likewife thought
it an honor to have their names enrolled a-
mong the fraternity. And thus Mafonry
having always flourished moft in the mod:
flourishing and peaceable times of every coun¬
try, and having often differed in a particular
manner through the calamitous effeCts of
war, bloodshed and devastation* the craftf-
men are therefore the more Strongly engaged
to aCt agreeable to the rules of their art, in
following peace and love, as far as poflihle,
with all men.
Sect. III. Concerning private Qualities and
Duties.
In regard to himself, whoever would be
a Mafon fhould know how to praCtife all the
private virtues. He fhould avoid all manner
of intemperance or excefs, which might ob¬
struct his performance of the laudable duties
of his craft, or lead him into crimes which
would refledt difhonour upon the ancient
fraternity. He is to be induftrious in his
profeflion, and true to the Lord and Matter
C he

18 AHIMAN REZON.
he ferves. He is to labour juftly, and not
to eat any man’s bread for nought; but to
pay truly for his meat and drink. What
leifure his labour allows, he is to employ in
fludying the arts and fciences with a diligent
mind, that he may the better perform all his
duties (as aforefaid) to his Creator, his coun¬
try, his neighbour and himfelf. For in a
few words,—<£ To walk humbly in the fight
e‘ of God, to do jufiice and love mercy,”
are the true indifpenfible charadteriftics of a
real free and accepted Mafon.
For the better attainment of thefe finning
qualities, he is to feek and acquire, as far as
pofiible, the virtues of patience, meeknefs,
felf-denial, forbearance and the like, which
give him the command over himfelf, and
enable him to govern his own family with
aifedtion, dignity and prudence; at the fame
time checking every difpofition injurious to
the world, and promoting that love and
fervice, which brethren, of the fame Lodge
or houfhold, owe to each other. Therefore,
to afford fuccour to the diftrelfed, to divide
our bread with the induftrious poor, and to
put the mifguided traveller into the way, are
qualities inherent in the craft, and fuitable
to

to its dignity. But though a Mafon is never
to fhut his ear unkindly to the complaints
of any of the human fpecies; yet when a
brother is opprerted or fuffers, he is in a
more peculiar manner called to open his
whole foul in love and companion to him, " I
and to relieve without prejudice, according
to his capacity.
It is further neceffary that all who would
be true Mafo?is fhould learn to abrtain from
all malice and flander, evil-fpeaking, back¬
biting, unmannerly, fcornful, provoking, re¬
proachful and ungodly language; and that
he fhould know how to obey thofe who are
fet over him on account of their fuperior
qualifications as Mafons, however inferior
they may be in worldly rank or rtation. For
although Mafonry diverts no man of his tem¬
poral honors, or titles, but on the contrary
highly refpedts them, yet, in the Lodge,
pre-eminence of virtue and knowlege in the
roval art is confidered as the true fountain
of all nobility, rule and government.
The laft quality and virtue which I fhall
mention, as abfolutely requirtte in thofe who
would be Mafons, is that of secrecy;
which indeed, from its importance, ought

to have held the firft place in this chapter,
if it had not been intended to treat of it
more fully, as a conclufion of the whole.
So great ftrefs is laid upon this particu¬
lar quality or virtue, that it is enforced a-
mong Mafons under the ftrongeft penalties
and obligations; nor, in their efteem, is any
man to be counted wise, who is void of in¬
tellectual ftrength and ability fufficient to
cover and conceal fuch honejl fecrets as are
committed to him, as well as his own more
ferious affairs. Both facred and profane hi¬
story teacheth us that numerous virtuous at¬
tempts have failed of their intended fcope
and end, through defeCt offecret concealment.
17. i
The ancient philofophers and wife men
(the Princes of whom were Mafons) were fo
fully perfuaded of the great virtue of secre¬
cy, that it was the firft lelfon which they
taught their pupils and followers. Thus,
in the fchool of Pythagoras, we find it was a
rule that every noviciate was to be filent for
a time, and refrain from fpeaking, unlefs
when a queftion was afked; to the end that
the valuable fecrets which he had to com¬
municate might be the better preferved and
valued. Lycurgus made a perpetual law,
obliging

AHIMAN REZON.
21
obliging every man to keep fecret whatever
was committed to him, unlefs it were to the
injury of the ftate. And Cato, the Roman
Cenfor, told his friends, that of three things
(if ever he happened to be guilty) he always
repented, viz.-^ift. Jf he divulged a Jecrety
2d. If he went on water, when he might
flay on dry land; and 3d. If he fuffered a
day to pafs without doing (or endeavouring
to do) fome good. We alfo read that the
Perlian law puniihed the betraying of a fccret
more grievoufly than any other common
crime.
Nor is the virtue of secrecy recom¬
mended only by the wifeft heathen, philofo-
phers and law-givers; but likewife by the
fathers of the church, and by infpired wri¬
ters and law-givers.
St. Ambrose places the patient gift of
silence among the principal foundations of
virtue; and the wife King Solomon deems
the man unworthy to reign or have any rule
over others, who cannot command himfelf,
and keep his own fecrets. A difeoverer of
fecrets he deems infamous and a traitor; but
him that conceals them he accounts a faith¬
ful brother. “ A tale-bearer, fays he, reveal-
“ eth

22 AHIMAN REZON.
£c eth fecrets; but he that is of a faithful
<c fpirit concealeth them. Difcover not a
“ fecret to another, left he that heareth it
 put thee to fhame, and thine infamy turn
“ not away—He that keepeth his tongue,
“ keepeth his own foul.”—To the fame
purpofe, in the book of Ecclefiafticus (chap,
xxvii) we meet with the following beauti¬
ful paffages, worthy to be for ever recorded
in the hearts of all Mafons.-*
<£ Whofoever difcovereth fecrets, lofeth
“ his credit, and ftiall never ftnd a friend to
(( his mind. Love thy friend, and be faith-
tf ful unto him ; but if thou bewrayeft his
“ fecrets, follow no more after him: For as
“ a man hath deftroyed his enemy, fo haft
£e thou loft the love of thy neighbour: As
<e one that letteth a bird go out of his hand,
£< fo haft thou let thy neighbour go, and
“ fhall not get him again. Follow after
<e him no more, for he is too far off; he is
fc as a roe efcaped out of the fnare. As for
“ a wound, it may be bound up; and after
<e reviling there may be reconcilement: but
c( he that bewray eth fecrets, is without hope”
Thus far hath been fpoken of the internal
qualities and virtues required in all who afpire
to

AHIMAN REZON. 23
to the fublime honor and advantage of be¬
coming free and accepted Mafons. We fpeak
next of the external qualitiesy and the fleps
to be purfued, in order to obtain initiation
and admijjion into a duly warranted Lodge of
ancient Tork-Mafons.
Be it known to you then, in the drib
place. That no perfon is capable of becom¬
ing a member of fuch a Lodge, unlefs (in
addition to the qualities and virtues men¬
tioned above, or at lead; a difpodtion and
capacity to feek and acquire them) he is alfo
“ free born5 of mature and difcreet age; of
“ good report; of fufficient natural endow-
“ ments and the fenfes of a man; with an
“ eflate, office, trade, occupation, or fome
“ vifible way of acquiring an honed: liveli-
“ hood, and of working in his craft, as
“ becomes the members of this mod; an-
“ cient and honorable fraternity, who ought
“ not only to earn what is fufficient for
“ themfelves and families, but likewife
ie fomething to fpare for works of charity,
“ and for fupporting the ancient grandeur
fc and dignity of the royal craft. Every
“ perfon defiring admiffion mud: alfo be up-
“ right in body, not deformed or difmem-
“ bered.

24 AHIMAN REZON.
“ bered, at the time of making, but of hale
“ and entire limbs, as a man ought to be.”
Thus, you fee, a drift (although private
and impartial) enquiry will be made into
your character and ability, before you can
be admitted into any Lodge; and by the
rules of Mafonry, no friend, who may widi
to propofe you, can £hew you any favour in
this refpeft. But if you have a friend who
is a Mafon, and is every way fatisfied in thefe
various points and particulars, his duty is
defcribed as follows, viz..—-
Sect. IV. Concerning the propofng new
Members in a Lodge.
cc Every perfon defirous of being made
a free Mafon in any Lodge fhall be propofed
by a member thereof, who lhall give an
account of the candidate’s name, age, quali¬
ty, title, trade, place of refidence, deicrip-
tion of his perfon, and other neceffary re¬
quires, as mentioned in the foregoing fec-
tions. And it is generally required that fuch
propofal be alfo feconded by fome one or more
members, who likewife know fomething of
the candidate. Such propofal (hall alfo be
made

AHIMAN REZON. i$
ftlade in Lodge * houi*s, at lead: one Lodge-
night before initiation in order that the
brethren may have fufficient time and op¬
portunity to make a ftridt enquiry into the
morals, character and circumftances of the
candidate; for which purpofe, a fpeeial
committee is fometimes appointed.”
v t . • c
“ The brother who propofes a candidate
ihall, at the fame time, depofit fuch a fum
of money for him as the rules or bye-laws
qf the Lodge may require which is forfeit¬
ed to the Lodge if the candidate fhould not
attend according to his propofal; but is to
be returned to him if he fhould not be ap¬
proved or elected. In cafe he is elected, he
is to pay (in addition to his depofit) fuch
further fum as the laws of the Lodge may
require, and eloathe the Lodge, or make fome
other prefent, if his circumftances will ad¬
mit, and the brethren agree to accept the
fame for the benefit of the craft, and of di-
ftrefTed members.”
Having fhewn that a ftritf: enquiry will
be made into your character, juftice requires
D that •
* That is from March 25th to September 25th, between
the hours of feven and ten; and from September 25 th to
March 25 th, between the hours of fix and nine.

z6 A H I M A N R E Z O N.
that you fhould alfo be advifed to be alike
circumfpedt on your fide, and to make en¬
quiry into the chara&er of the Lodge into
which you defire admiffion; for there is no
excellence without its oppqfite, and no true coin
without counterfeits.
In the drib place, then, you have a right,
before admiffion, to defire your friend to
ffiew you the warrant or difpenfation by which
the Lodge is held; which, if genuine, you
will find to be an inftrument printed or writ¬
ten upon parchment, and figned by feme
noble Grand Mafter, his Deputy, and Grand
Wardens, and Grand Secretary; fealed with
the Grand Lodge Seal; conftituting particu¬
lar perfons (therein named) as Mafters and
Wardens, with full power to congregate and
hold a Lodge at fuch a place, and therein
t( make and admit Free-Mafons, according
<{ to the mofl ancient and honourable cuflom
“ of the royal craft, in all ages and nations,
“ throughout the known world, with full
tc power and authority to nominate and
“ chufe their fuccefibrs, &c.”
You may alfo requeft the perufal of the
bye -laws, which, being fhort, you may read
in the prefence of your friend; or he will
read

AHIMAN REZON.
27
read to you, and Jhew you alfo a lift of the
members of the Lodge; by all which you
will be the better able to judge whether you
would ehufe to aflbciate with them, and
fubmit to be conformable to their rules. Be¬
ing thus free to judge for yourfelf, you will
not be liable to the dangers of deception,
nor of having your pocket picked by impo-
ftors, and of being perhaps afterwards laugh¬
ed at into the bargain; but, on the contrary,
you will be admitted into a fociety, where
you will converfe with men of honour and
honefty; be exercifed in all the offices of
brotherly love; and be made acquainted
with myfteries of which it is not lawful to
fpeak further, or to reveal, out of the Lodge.
CHAP. II.
Of the General Regulations among
ancient York-Mafons.
HAYING, in the foregoing chapter,
treated as briefly as poflible “ of the
« temper and qualities required in thofe who
“ wifi to become free and accepted Ma-
“ sons,”—I now proceed (according to pur
propofed method) to coiled:, and digeft un¬
der proper heads, thofe general regu-
D 2 LATIONS

lations (old as well as newJ which more
immediately concern operative Mafons-, avoid¬
ing prolixity, and the infertion of fuch old
regulations as are explained or fupplied by
fubfequent ones, univerfally received and
now in force in all the Lodges.
Sect. I. Concerning a Lodge and its Go¬
vernment,
1. A Lodge is a place in which Mafons
meet to work. The affembly, or organized
body, of Mafons, is alfo called a Lodgejuft
as the word Church is expreffive both of
the congregation of people, and of the place
in which tjiey meet to worihip.
2. The qualities requifite in thofe who
are to be admitted as members of a Lodge
have been fully mentioned in the foregoing
chapter and it is only neceftary to repeat
here in general that they are to be “ men of
good report, free-born, of mature * age,
hale and found, not deformed or difmem-
“ bered
* That is, of the age of twenty-one; and this ft a proper
rule for general obfervation, before a perfon can be advanced
to the fublime degree of Mafier MaJ'on; yet, in America,
where perfons come fooner to maturity than in the more
northern European countries, this rule is fometimes difpenfed
>vith, efpecially in favour of perfons going abroad or to travel.

AHIMAN REZON.
29
 bered at the time of their making, and no
 woman or eunuch.”
3. A Lodge ought to afiemble for work
at leaft once in each kalendar month; and
muft confift of one Master, two War¬
dens, fenio'r and junior, one Secretary,
one Treasurer, and as many members as
the Mafter and the majority of the Lodge
{hall from time to time think proper; al¬
though more than forty or fifty (when they
can attend regularly, as the wholelome rules
of the craft require) are generally found in¬
convenient for working to advantage, and
therefore, when a Lodge comes to be thus
numerous, fome of the able ft mafter-work-
men, and others under their direction, will
obtain leave to feparate and apply to the
Grand Lodge for a warrant to work by
themfelves, in order to the further advance¬
ment of the craft, as the laws hereafter to
be delivered will more particularly {hew.
But fuch warrant cannot be granted to any
number of Mafons, nor can a new Lodge be
formed, unlefs there be among them three
Majler Mafons to be nominated and inftalled
officers,' for governing and inftrudling the
brethren of.fuch Lodge, and promoting them
in due time according to their merit.
4. When

3°
n 1 1V1 A IN XV Lj 1M.
4. When men of eminent quality, learn¬
ing, rank or wealth, apply to be made and
admitted into the Lodge, they are to be ac¬
cepted with proper refpedt, after due exami¬
nation ; for among fuch are often found thofe
who afterward prove good Lords, or Found¬
ers, of work; excellent officers and the
ableft deligners, to the great honour and
ftrength of the Lodge. From among them
alfo the fraternity can generally have fome
noble, honourable or learned Grand Ma¬
ster, and other Grand Officers. But
ftill thofe brethren are equally fubjedt to all
the charges and regulations, except in what
more immediately concerns operative Ma-
fons; and their preferment, as well as the
preferment of all other Mafons, muft be go¬
verned by the general rule that is to fay,
founded upon real worth and perfonal merit,
and not upon mere feniority or any other
particular rank or quality.
5. In order that due decorum be obferved,
while the Lodge is engaged in what is ferious
and folemn, and for the better prefervation
of fecrecy and good harmony, a brother well
Ikilled in the Majlers part ffiall be appointed
and paid for tyling the Lodge door, during the
time of communication.
6. Every

A HI MAN REZON.
31
6. Every Lodge {hall keep a book, con¬
taining their bye-laws, the names of their
members, with a lid; of all the Lodges under
the fame Grand Lodge and united in general
communication, with the ufual times and places
of meeting in fuch Lodges, and fuch other
neceflary parts of their tranfaclions as are
proper to be written.
7. No Lodge fhall make more than five
new brethren at one time, unlefs by difpen-
fation from the Grand Mailer, or Deputy in
his abfence; nor fhall any perfon be made or
admitted a member of a Lodge without be¬
ing propofed one month before, that due no¬
tice may be given to all the members to
make the neceffary enquiries into the candi¬
date’s character, and that there may be fuch
unanimity in the election and admiffion of
members as the laws require; nor can there
be any difpenfation in this cafe, becaufe una¬
nimity is eflential to the being of every Lodge,
and its own members are the beft judges in
this matter; for if it were allowed that any
foreign or even fuperior jurifdidtion might im-
pofe a fradtious or difagreeable member upon
them, it might deftroy their harmony, a$id
would intrench upon their liberty, to the great
injury, if not the total diffolution, of fuch
Lodge.
8. Every

32 AHIMAN k e z on*
8. Every Lodge has the right to keeps
itfelf an entire body, and therefore no num¬
ber of brethren can withdraw or" feparate
themfelves from the Lodge in which they
*were made, or were afterwards admitted
members> unlefs fuch Lodge becomes too nu¬
merous for working; nor even then, unlefs
they pay up all dues to their Lodge, and
give them notice that they intend to apply
to the Grand Lodge for a difpenfation to fe¬
parate j in which cafe, if a difpenfation is
granted, they muft either join themfelves to
fuch other Lodge as fhall unanimoufly con-
font to receive them; or they muft obtain a
warrant from the Grand Lodge to form them—
felves into a new Lodge. And no fett of
Mafons, without fuch warrant, fhall ever
take upon themfelves to work together, or
form any Lodge.
9. The majority of every particular Lodge*
when duly congregated, have the privilege of
inftruaing their Majler and Wardensy for their
conduct in the Grand Lodge, and quarterly
communicationsand all particular Lodges, in
the fame general communication, ftiall, as
much as poflible, obferve the fame rules and
ufages, and appoint fome of their members to
uijit each other in the different Lodges as of
ten as it may be convenient.
; Sect,

AHIMAN REZON. 33
Sect. II. Lhe ancient manner of conjtituting
a Lodge.
A new Lodge, for avoiding many irregu¬
larities, fhould be folemnly conftituted by
the Grand Mafter, with his Deputy and
Wardens; or, in the Grand Mailer’s abfence,
the Deputy a£ts for his Worfhip, the fenior
Grand Warden as Deputy, the junior Grand
Warden as the fenior, and the prefent Mafter
of a Lodge as the junior : Or if the Deputy
is alfo abfent, the Grand Mafter may depute
either of his Grand Wardens, who can ap¬
point others to a£t as Grand Wardens pro
tempore
The Lodge being opened, and the candi¬
dates or new Mafter and Wardens being yet
E among
* When Conftitutions are required, and where the diftance
is fo great as to render it impoflible for the Grand CfEcers to
attend, the Grand Mafter, or his Deputy, iflues a written
inftrument, under his hand and private feal, to fome worthy
brother (who has been properly inftalled Mailer of a Lodge)
with full power to congregate, inftall, and conjlitute the peti¬
tioners.
If the Grand Mafter, or Deputy, be abfent, or (through
ficknefs) rendered incapable of a£ting, the Grand Wardens,
and Grand Secretary, jointly, may iftue a like power under
their hands and feal of the Grand Lodge ; provided the Grand
Mafter has firft figned a warrant for holding fuch new Lodge:
But the Grand Wardens muft never iflue any Mafonical writ¬
ings under their private feal or feals.

AHIMAN REZON.
34
among the fellow crafts, the Grand Mailer
fhall aik his Deputy if he has examined them,
and whether he finds the Mailer well ikilled
in the noble fcience and the royal art, and
duly inilrufled in our myileries, &c. The
Deputy, anfwering in the affirmative, ihall
(by the Grand Mailer’s order) take the can¬
didate from amongil his fellows and prefent
him to the Grand Majier, faying,—“ Right
“ Worfhipful Grand Mailer, the brethren
“ here deiire to be formed into a regular
t( Lodge; and I prefent my worthy brother
“ A. B. to be (inilalled) their Mailer, whom
i( I know to be of good morals and great
“ ikill, true and truily, and a lover of the
“ whole fraternity, wherefoever difperfed
«f over the face of the earth.”
Then the Grand Mailer, placing the
candidate on his left hand, and having aiked
and obtained the unanimous confent of the
brethren, fhall fay (after fome other cere¬
monies and expreffions that cannot be writ¬
ten) 41 I conflitute and form thefe good bre-
«« tbren into a new regular Lodge,, and ap-
« point you, brother A. B. the Master of
it, not doubting of your capacity and care
<*« to prefeive the Lenient of the Lodge, &c.”
Upon
I PH

AHIM AN REZON. 35
Upon this the Deputy, or fome other
brother for him, (hall rehearfe the charge of
a Matter; and the Grand Matter (hall aik
the Candidate, faying. Do you fubmit to tkefe
charges as Mafiers have done in all ages f And
the new Matter fignifying his cordial fub~
miflion thereto, the Grand Matter ttiall, by
certain JigniJicant ceremonies and ancient ufages,
install him, and prefent him with his
Warrant, the Book of Confutations, the Lodge-
book, and the inftruments of his office, one
after another; and after each of them the
Grand Mafter, his Deputy, or fome brother
for him, ttiall rehearfe the ttiort and pithy
charge that is fuitable to the thing prefent.
Next, the members of this new Lodge,
bowing altogether to the Grand Mafter, ttiall
return his Worfhip their thanks (according
to the cuftom of Matters) and ttiall immedi¬
ately do homage to their new Matter, and
(as faithful craftfmen) fignify their promife
of fubjedtion and obedience to him by ufual
congratulations.
The Deputy and Grand Wardens, and
any other brethren that are not members of
this new Lodge, fhall next congratulate the
new Mafter, and he ttiall return his becom-
E 2 iRg

36 AHIMAN REZON.
ing acknowledgments (as Mafter Mafons)
firft to the Grand Mailer and grand officerSj
and to the reft in their order.
Then the Grand Mafter orders the new
Mafter to enter immediately upon the exer-
cife of his office, and calling forth his fenior
Warden, a fellow craft * (Mafter Mafon)
prefents him to the Grand Mafter for his
Worffiip’s approbation, and to the new
Lodge for their confent upon which the
fenior or junior Grand Warden, or fome
brother for him, ffiall rehearfe the charge of
a Warden, &c. of a private Lodge, and he,
ftgnifying his cordial fubmiffion thereto, the
new Mafter ffiall prefent him fingly with the
feveral inftruments of his office, and, in an¬
cient manner and due form, inftall him in
his proper -j- place.
In like manner, the new Mafter ffiall call
forth his junior Warden, who fhall be a
Mafter Mafon, and prefented (as above) to
the
* They were called fellow crafts, becaufe the Mafons of
old times never gave any man the title of Mafter Mafon un¬
til he had firft pafted the Chair.
f The Grand Wardens generally inftall the Wardens at
new Inftitutions; as being befl qualified for tranfatting fucb
bufinefs.
.:-

AHIMAN REZON.
37
the junior Grand Warden, or fome other
brother in his (lead, and ttiall in the above
manner be inftalled in his proper place; and
the brethren of this new Lodge Aiall fignify
their obedience to thefe new Wardens, by
the ufual congratulations due to Wardens.
The Grand Matter then gives all the bre¬
thren joy of their Matter and Wardens, &c.
and recommends harmony. See. hoping their
only contention will be, a laudable emulation
in cultivating the royal art, and the focial ,
virtues.
• , . , «L
Then the Grand Secretary, or fome bro¬
ther for him (by the Grand Majlers order)
in the name of the Grand Lodge, declares
and proclaims this new Lodge duly conftitut-
ed No. , Sec.
Upon which all the new Lodge together
(after the cuftom of Matters) return their
hearty and lincere thanks for the honour of
this conftitution.
The Grand Matter alfo orders the Grand
Secretary to regifter this new Lodge in the
Grand Lodge book, and to notify the fame
to the other particular Lodges and after
fome other ancient cuttoms and demonftra-
tions

38
AHIMAN REZON.
tions of joy and fatisfadtion, he orders the
fenior Grand Warden to clofe the Lodge.
Sect. III. Concerning the Behaviour of
MASONS, as Members of a Lodge.
i. Of Attendance.
Every brother ought to belong to fome
regular Lodge, and fhould always appear
therein properly clothed, and in clean and
decent apparel truly fubjedting himfelf to
all its bye-laws and the general regulations.
He muft attend all meetings, whether fated
or emergent, when duly fummcned, unlefs
he can offer to the Mailer and Wardens fuch
plea of neceffity for his abfence as the faid
laws and regulations admit.
By the ancient rules and ufages of Mafon-
ry (which are generally adopted among the
bye-laws of every Lodge) no plea was judged
fufficient to excuie any abfentee, unlefs he
could fatisfy the Lodge that he was fick,
lame, in confinement, upwards of three
miles from the place of meeting, or detained
by fome extraordinary and unfonefeen necef-
fity.
2. Of Working.
All Mafons fhould work hard and ho-
neflly, on 'working days 3 that they may live
reputa-

AHIMAN REZON. 39
reputably* and appear in a decent and be¬
coming manner on holidays. All the work¬
ing hours appointed by law, or confirmed
by cuftom, are to be flridtly obferved under
the penalties and fines hereafter to be laid
down. The hours of working are—from
“ feven o’clock in the evening till ten, be-
“ tween the 25th of March and the 25th of
“ September; and from fix till nine between
*' the 25th of September and the 25th of
" March.”
*
*
The Ma/ter and Mafons fhall faithfully
finiih the Lord’s work, whether talk or jour¬
ney ; nor fhall they take the work at talk
which hath been accuftomed to journey.
None /hall envy a brother’s profperity, nor
fupplant or put him out of his work, if ca¬
pable to fini/h it.
All Mafons fhall meekly receive their
wages without murmuring or mutiny, nor dc-
fert the Mailer till the Lord’s work is fini/h-
cd. They mu/l avoid all unbecoming modes
of exprefiion, calling each other brother and
fellow, both within and without the Lodge,
with much courtefy as befeemeth. They
fhall in/lruft the younger brothers to become
bright

4o AHIMAN REZON,
bright and expert workmen, that the Lord's
materials may not be fpoiled. But, as free
and accepted Mafons, they muft not allow
Cowans to work with them* nor even be
themfelves employed by Cowans, without
an urgent neceftity. And when fuch necef-
fity happens, they (hall have a feparate com¬
munication, and not fuffer Cowans to learn
from them* nor any labourer to be employed
in the proper work of Free-Majors.
3. Of Behaviour in the Lodge, while open.
While the Lodge is open for work*
Mafons muft hold no private converfation or
committees, without leave from the Mafter*
nor talk of any thing foreign or impertinent
to the work in hand, nor interrupt the Ma¬
iler or Wardens, or any brother addreffing
himfelf to the Chair* nor a£t ludicroufly
while the Lodge is engaged in what is ferious
and folemn* but every brother ftiall pay due
reverence to the Mafter, the Wardens, and
all his fellows, and put them to worftiip.
Every brother found guilty of a fault
ftiall ftand to the award of the Lodge, unlefs
he appeals to the Grand Lodge. But if a
Lord’s work be hindered in the mean while,
a particular reference may be made.
No

AHIMAN REZON. 41
No private piques, or quarrels about na¬
tions, families, religions, or politics, mull;
be brought within the doors of the Lodge ;
as being diredly contrary to the rules already
laid down—Mafons, as fuch, being there
declared to be of the oldeft catholic and uni-
verfally acknowledged religion, likewife of
all nations; bound to live upon the fquare,
level and plumb with each other; following
the Reps of their predeceffors in cultivating
the peace and harmony of the Lodge, with¬
out diftindtion of fed or political party.
4. Of Behaviour after the Lodge is clofed, and
before the Brethren depart Home.
When the Lodge is clofed, and the la¬
bours of the day finifhed, the brethren, be¬
fore they depart home to their reft, may
enjoy themfelves with innocent mirth, enli¬
vened and exalted with their own peculiar
Jongs and fublime pieces of mufic; treating
one another according to ability, but avoid¬
ing all excefs and compulfion, both in eating
and drinking; confidering each other, in the
hours both of labour and fejlivity, as always
free. And therefore no brother is to be
hindered from going home when he pleafes;
for although, after Lodge hours, Mafons are
as other men, yet if they ihould fall into
F excefs.

42 A HIM AN RE'ZON.
excefs, the blame, though unjuftly, may be
call upon the fraternity, by the ignorant of
the envious world.
Sect. IV. Concerning the Behaviour of Ma~
fins* m their private Char after.
i. When a Number of Brethren happen to meet,
without any Strangers among them, and not
in a formed Lodge.
In fuch cafe you are to falute each other
in a courteous manner, as you are, or may
be inftruded in the Lodge; calling each
other brother; and freely communicating
hints of knowledge, but without difcloling
fecrets, unlefs to thofe who have given long
proof of ‘ their taciturnity and honour; and
taking care in all your actions and converfa-
tion that you are neither overfeen or over¬
heard of Grangers. In this friendly inter-
courfe, no brother Ihall derogate from the
refped due to another, were he not a Mafon.
For though all Mafom&i as brothers, are upon
the level, yet Mafonry (as was faid in a for¬
mer fedion) divefts no man of the honours
due to him before, or that may become due
after, he was made a Mafon. On the con¬
trary it increafes his refped, teaching us to
add to all his other honours, thofe which as
Mafons

r
AH IM AN RE 2 ON. 43
Mafons we cheerfully pay to an eminent
brother ; diflinguifiiing him above all of his
rank and flation, and ferving him readily
according to our ability.
2. When in the Prefence of Strangers, who are
not Mafons.
Before thofe who are not Mafons, you
muft be cautious in your words, carriage and
motions; fo that the moft penetrating {han¬
ger {hall not be able to difcover what is not
proper to be intimated. The impertinent
and enfnaring queftions, or ignorant and idle
difcourfe, of thofe who feek to pry into the
fecrets and myfteries committed to you, mud
be prudently anfwered and managed, or the
difcourfe wifely diverted to another fubjeft,
as your difcretion and duty (hall direct.
3. When at Home and in your Neighbourhood1
Masons ought to be moral men, and
fully qualified as is required in the foregoing
fe&ions and charges. Confequently they
ihould be good hufbands, good parents,
good fons and good neighbours; not flaying
too long from home, avoiding all excefs in¬
jurious to themfelves or families; and wife
•a$ to all affairs, both of their own houfhoid
F 2 and

44 AHIMAN REZON.
and of the Lodge, for certain reafons known
to themfelves.
4. 0/ Behaviour towards a foreign Brother,
or Stranger.
You are cautioufly to examine a flrariger
or foreign brother, as prudence and the rules
of the craft dired, that you may not be im-
pofed upon by a pretender ; and if you dif-
. cover any one to be fucb, you are to rejed:
him with fcorn and fhame, taking care to
give him no hints. But fuch as are found
to be true and faithful, you are to refpect
as brothers, according to what is directed
above; relieving them, if in want, to your
utmoft power; or directing them how to
find relief, and employing them if you can,
or elfe recommending them to employment.
6. Of Behaviour behind a Brother s Back as
well as before his Face.
Free and accepted Mafons have ever been
charged to avoid all manner of flandering*
and back-biting of true and faithful brethren,
with all malice and unjufl refentment, or
talking difrefpedfully of a brother’s perfon
or performance. Nor muft they fuffer any
others to fpread unjufl reproaches or calum¬
nies againfl a brother behind his back, nor

AHI.MAN REZON, 45
to injure him in his fortune, occupation or
character; but they fhall defend fuch a bro¬
ther, and give him notice of any danger or
injury wherewith he may be threatened, to
enable him to efcape the fame, as far as is
confiftent with honour, prudence, and the
fafety of religion, morality and the ftate, but
no further.
7. Concerning Differences and Law-
Suits, if any fuch jhould unhappily arife
among Brethren.
If a brother do you injury, or if you have
any difference with him about any worldly
or temporal bufmefs or intereft, apply firft
to your own or his Lodge, to have the matter
in difpute adjufted by the brethren. And if
either party be not fatisfied with the deter¬
mination of the Lodge, an appeal may be
carried to the Grand Lodge; and you are
never to enter into a law-fuit, till the matter
cannot be decided as above. And if it be a
matter that wholly concerns Mafonry, law-
fuits are to be entirely avoided, and the good
advice of prudent brethren is to be followed,
as they are the befl referees of fuch differ¬
ences.
But

46 AH I MAN R E 2 Q N.
But where references are either imprac¬
ticable or unfuccefsful, and courts of law or
equity mull at laft decide, you muft Rill fol¬
low the general rules of Mafonry already laid
down, avoiding all wrath* malice, rancour
and perfonal ill-will, in carrying on the fuit
with a brother; neither faying or doing any
thing to hinder the continuance or renewal
of that brotherly love and friendlhip which
are the glory and cement of this ancient
Fraternity.
Thus fhall we fhew to all the world the
benign influences of Mafonry, as wife, true,
and faithful brethren, before us, have done
from the beginning of time ; and as all who
fhall follow us, and would be thought wor¬
thy of that name, will do till archite&ure
fhall be diflblved, with the great fabric of
the world, in the lafl: general conflagration !
These charges, and fuch others as JJmiII
he given to you, in a way that cannot be writ-
ten, you are fricily and confcientioufy to ob-
ferve; and that they may be the better obferved,
they Jhould be read or made known to new bre¬
thren at then' makings and at other times
as the Mafter fall dire 51.
Amen! So mote it be!
Sect.

Sect. V. Of the Master of a Lodge, his
Election, Office and Duty.
No brother can be Master of a Lodge
till he has firft ferved the office of Warden
fomewhere; unlefs in extraordinary cafes,
or when a new Lodge is to be formed, and
no paft or former Warden is to be found
among the members. In fuch cafes, three
Majler-Mafons, although they have ferved in
ho former offices (if they be well learned)
may be conftituted Mafter and Wardens of
fuch new Lodge, or of any old Lodge in the
like emergency.
The Matter of every Lodge ffiall be chofen
by ballot on the {fated Lodge night, next
before each St. John's Day, and the prefent
Wardens (where they regularly are) {hall be
put up among the number of candidates for
the Chair; but ffiall then withdraw, while
every free member (viz. all who have paid
up their fines and dues, or have been excuf-
ed payment according to law) gives his vote
in favor of him whom he deems mod wor¬
thy. Each free member hath one vote, and
the Matter two votes, where the number of
votes happens to be equal; otherwife he has
but one vote.
When

4b ahiman rezon.
When the ballot is clofed, and before it
be examined, the former Mailer ihall order
the candidates to be brought back before
him, and to take their feats again as Wardens.
He ihall then carefully examine the poll,
and audibly declare him that hath the majo¬
rity of votes duly elected.
■
The Mailer-ele£t ihall then nominate one-
for the fenior Warden’s Chair, and the pre-
fent Mailer and brethren ihall nominate one
in oppofition; both of whom ihall withdraw
till the ballot is clofed as aforefaid; after
which they ihall be called before the Mailer,
and the poll ihall be examined and declared
by him as above directed j—in like manner
ihall the Lodge proceed in the choice of all
the inferior officers; great care being taken
that none be put in nomination, for favor or
affection, birth or fortune, excluiive of the
consideration of real merit, and ability to fill
his office for the honor and advancement of
Mafonry. No Mafon chofen into any office
can refufe to ferve, without incurring the
penalties laid down in the chapter of fines,
unlefs he has ferved in the fame office before.
The Mailer of every regular Lodge, thus
duly elected and inilalled, has it in fpecial
charge (as appurtenant to his office, duty
and

AHIMAN REZON.
49
and dignity) to fee that all the bye-laws of
his Lodge, as well as the general regulations
from the Grand Lodge, be duly ohferved;
that his Wardens difcharge their office faith¬
fully, and be examples of diligence and fo-
briety to the craft; that true and exadl mi¬
nutes and entries of all proceedings be made
and kept by the Secretarythat the Trea-
furer keep and render exacft and juft accounts
at the ftated times, according to the bye-laws
and orders of the Lodge; and in general,
that all the goods and monies belonging to
the body be truly managed and difpenfed, as
if they were thofe of his own private houf-
hold, according to the vote and direction of
the majority, whether in charity or in work¬
ing; and that no more wages than are juft
be given to any Fellow or Apprentice.
The Mafter ffiall further take care that
no Apprentice or Fellow be taken into his
houfe or Lodge, unlefs he has fufficient em¬
ployment for him, and finds him to be the
fon of honeft parents, 'a perfed: youth, with¬
out maim or defecft in body, of full age,*
and otherwife duly qualified (according to
G the
* At a Grand Lodge, November 27, 1781, it was ordered,
that the note, page 28, fhould be repealed, and that no per-
fon be made in future under the age of Twenty-one.

5o A H I M A N REZON.
the rules before laid down) for learning and
uhder'ftanding the fublime myfteries of the
art. Thns dr all the Lords or Founders be
well ferved, and the craft not defpifed. Thus
alfo toll fuch Apprentices, when expert in
the bufinefs of their apprenticefhip, be ad¬
mitted, upon further improvement, as Fel¬
low-Grafts ; and, in due time, be raifed to
the fublime degree of Majier-Mafons; ca¬
pable themfelves to undertake their Lord’s
work ; animated with the profped: of pa fling
in future through all the higher honors of
Mafonry, viz. thofe of Wardens and Majlers
of their Lodges, and perhaps at length of
Grand Wardens and Grand Masters
of all the Lodges, according to their merit.
The Mafter of a particular Lodge has the
right and authority of calling his Lodge, or
congregating the members into a chapter, at
pleafure, upon the application of any of the
brethren, and upon any etnergency and oc¬
currence which in his judgment may require
their meeting; and he is to fill the Chair
when prefent. It is likewife his duty, toge¬
ther with his Wardens, to attend the Grand
Lodge at the quarterly communications, and
alfo the Steward’s Lodge, and fuch occafional
or fpecial grand communications as the good
of

A H I M 4 N H E Z Q N. 51
of the craft may require, when duly fum-
moned by the Grand Secretary, and yeithip
fuch reafonabfe diftance of the place of hold¬
ing the Grand Lodge, as the laws of the fame
may have afcertained on that head. When
in the Grand or Steward’s Lodge, and at
general as well as fpecial communications,
the Mailer and Wardens, or either of them,
have full power and authority to reprefent
their Lodge, and to tranfad all matters rela¬
tive thereto, as well and truly as if the whole
body were theie prelent.
The Mailer has the right of appointing
forne brother (>vho is moil commonly the
Secretary of the Lodge) to keep the book of
bye-laws, and other laws given to the Lodge
by the proper authority; and in this book
lhall alfo be kept the names of all the mem¬
bers of the Lodge, and a lift of all the Lodges
within the fame grand communication, with
the ufual times and places Gf their meeting.
The Mailer has alfo the particular right
of preventing the removal of his Lodge from
one houfe to another and whereas feveral
difputes have arifen on this head, and it hath
been made a queftion in whom the power of
removing a Lodge to any new place is invert¬
ed, when the old place of meeting appears to
G 2 be

AHIMAN REZON.
52
be inconvenient, the following rule for this;
purpofe hath been finally agreed upon and
fettled by lawful authority, viz.—
* * 5
4.
££ That no Lodge be removed without
<c the Mafter s knowledge, nor any motion
<£ made for that purpofe in the Lodge when
“ he is ahfent. But if the Mafter be pre-
££ fent, and a motion be made for moving
*£ the Lodge to fome other more convenient
££ place (within the diftricft afiigned in the
(t warrant of fuch Lodge) and if the faid
“ motion be feconded and thirdedy the Mafter
<e {hall order fummonfes to every individual
<£ member of the Lodge, fpecifying the bu-
“ finefs, and appointing a day for hearing
££ and determining the affair, at leaft ten
<£ days before, and the determination {hall
“ be made by the majority. But if the
££ Mafter is not of the majority, the Lodge
<£ fhall not be removed, unlefs full two-
<£ thirds of the members prefent have voted
<£ for fuch removal.
<£ But if the Mafter refufe to diredt fuch
« fummons to be iffued (upon a motion duly
<£ made as aforefaid) then either of the War-
<s dens may direcft the fame; and if the Ma¬
te fter negle&s to attend on the day fixed,
££ the

AHIMAN REZON. 53
“ the Warden may prefide in determining
“ the affair in the manner above prefcribed.
“ But the Lodge fhall not, in the Matter’s
“ abfence (on fuch fpecial call) enter upon
“ any other caufe or bufinefs, but what is
( particularly mentioned in the faid fum*
i( mons.
• a 2, ‘ 1 • ■ «,. „ i . ♦
(t If the Lodge is thus regularly ordered
“ to be removed, the Matter or Warden
“ fhall fend notice to the Grand Secretary,
“ that fuch removal may be notified and
“ duly entered in the Grand Lodge books
“ at the next Grand Lodge.”
N. B. It is alfo a good method to have
a certificate from the Grand Lodge, that fuch
removal hath been allowed, confirmed and
duly regiftered in their books; which will
be a bufinefs of courfe, unlefs an appeal be
lodged againft fuch removal by the minority,
and then a hearing will be given to both par¬
ties in the Grand Lodge, before fuch removal
be confirmed or regittered in their books.
The Matter’s duty in making and admit¬
ting new brethren, and fome other particular
duties of his office, being fuch as cannot be
written, fave on the tablet of his heart, are
there-

54 A II I M 4 N REZO N.
therefore not to be looked for in this place;
and moreover, fuch duties as more particu¬
larly belong to the Maher and other officers
of Lodges, when they fit as members of the
Grand Lodge, are to be learned from the
chapter which treats of the Granp Lodge.
Sect. VI. Of the Wardens of a Lodge.
1. None but Mafter-Mafons can be
Wardens of a Lodge. The manner of their
election, and feveral of their duties, being
connected with the election and duties of the
Mafter, have been mentioned in the former
fedtion.
2. The Senior Warden fucceeds to all the
duties of the Mafter, and fills the Chair
when he is abfent. Gr if the Mafter goes
abroad on bufinefs, refigns, demits or is de-
pofed, the Senior Warden fliall forthwith fill
his place till the next ftated time of eledtion.
And although it was formerly held, that in
fuch cafes the Mailer’s authority ought to
revert to the laft paft Mafter who is prefent,
yet it is now the fettled rule that the autho¬
rity devolves upon the Senior Warden, and in
his abfence upon the Junior Warden, even
although a former Mafter be prefent. But
the Wardens will generally wave this privi¬
lege

AHIMAN REZO N.
55
lege in honor of any paid Matter that may
be prefent, and will call on him to take the
Chair, upon the prefumption of his experi¬
ence and fkill in conducting the bufinefs of
the Lodge. Neverthelefs, fuch paft Matter
ttill derives his authority under the Senior
Warden, and cannot aCt till he congregates
the Lodge. * If none of the officers be
prefent, nor any former Matter to take the
Chair, the members according to feniority
and merit fhall fill the places of the abfent
officers, -f-
The bufinefs of the Wardens in the
Lodge is, generally, to affift the Matter in
conducing the bufinefs thereof, and ma¬
naging the craft, in due order and form,
when the Matter is prefent and in doing
his duties (as above fet forth) when he is
neceflarily abfent; ail which is to be learned
from the foregoing feCtion. Particular Lodges
do likewife, by their bye-laws, affign parti¬
cular duties to their Wardens for their own
better government; which fuch Lodges have
a right to do, provided they tranigrefs not
the old land-marks, nor in any degree violate
the true genius andfpirit of Mafonry.
Sect,
 See eld o.nd »env Regulations, No. 2.
f See Rules and Orders, No. 13.

56 AHIMAN REZON,
Sect. VII. Of the Secretary of a Lodge.
The Secretary fhall keep a regular
regifter or record of all tranladdons and pro¬
ceedings of the Lodge, that are fit to be
committed to writing ; which fhall be faith¬
fully entered in the Lodge-books, from the
minutes taken in open Lodge, after being
duly read, amended (if neceffary) and ap¬
proved of, before the clofe of every meet¬
ing; in order that the faid tranfa&ions, o
authentic copies thereof, may be ready t
be laid before the Grand-Lodge, once in
every quarter, if required.
In particular, the Secretary fhall keep ex-
a£t lifts of all the Members of the Lodge,
with the times of admiflion of new mem¬
bers ; and, upon or near every St. Johns
Day, fhall prepare, and fend to the Secre¬
tary of the Grand-Lodge, the lift of mem¬
bers for the time being, which fhall be fign-
ed not only by the new inftalled officers of
each Lodge, but alfo by the laft paft officers ;
to the intent that the Grand Secretary, and
confequently the members of the Grand Lodge,
may be at all times’enabled to know the
names and number of members in each
Lodge under their jurifdiftion, with the
hand-

A HIM AN REZON.
57
hand-writing of the different officers; and
to pay all due refpedt to the brethren re¬
commended or certified by them from time
to time.
Sect. VIII. Of the Treasurer of a Lodge.
The Treafurer is to receive and keep exadl
accounts of all monies raifed, or paid in ac¬
cording to rule, for the advancement of the
Lodge and benefit of the brethren > and to
pay all orders duly drawn upon him by the
authority of the Lodge. He is to keep re¬
gular entries both of his receipts and difburf-
ments; and to have his books and vouchers
always ready for examination at fuch flated
times as the bye-laws require, or when fpe-
cially called upon by order of the Mailer and
brethren.
The Treafurer is likewife to have the
charge and cuflody of the chefl, jewels and
furniture of the Lodge; unlefs when the
Mafler and majority may judge it more con¬
venient to appoint fome other refponfible
brother for that particular duty; or when
the officers of the Lodge may take the charge
immediately upon themfelves. The warrant
in particular is in the charge and cuflody of
the Master. Sect.

58 AHIMAN REZGN,
Sect. IX. Of the Tyler of a Lodge.
The Tyler (hall be a Mafter-Mafon, of
knowledge and experience; and generally a
brother is to be preferred, to whom the fees
of the office may be neceffary and ferviceable,
on account of his particular circumflances.
H is duty is fixed by cuftom and known to
every brother; and his chief charge is, not
to admit any perfon (not even a member,
while the Lodge is fitting) without the
knowledge and confent of the prefiding offi¬
cer ; neither fhall he admit any vifitor (that
is not a member of a warranted Lodge) a
fecond time, fojourners producing certificates
excepted.
CHAP. III.
Sect. I. Of the Grand Lodge in general.
THE Grand Lodge confifts of, and
is formed by, the Mafters and War¬
dens of all the regular particular Lodges upon
record, with the Grand Mafer at their head,
the Deputy Grand Mafter on his left, and
the Grand Wardens in their proper places;
attended alfo by the Grand Secretary, Grand
Treafiirer, Grand Tyler, Grand Purfuivant,
and

AHIMAN REZON.
59
and other neceffary officers, as will be ex¬
plained in the proper places. But though the
Mafter and Wardens of all Lodges on record
have feats and a voice in every Grand Lodge-
general, yetparticular Grand Lodges are com-
pofed properly of the officers of the different
regular Lodges under the fame diilindt Grand
Jurifdiction ; and to form fuch Grand Lodge,
there muff be prefent, on due and legal no¬
tice, no lefs than the Mailers and Wardens
of five regular Lodges, together with one at
leail (and where poffible or convenient, all)
of the Grand Officers at their head.
No new Lodge is owned, nor can their
officers be admitted into the Grand Lodge,
until fuch new Lodge is firil regularly confii-
tuted by the authority of the Grand Lodge,
and regiilered in the fame.
All pail Grand,Mailers, pail Deputy
Grand Mailers, pail Grand Wardens, and
pail Mailers of warranted Lodges on record,
whilil they continue members of any regular
Lodge, are likewife, by courtefy as well as
cuilom, confidered as members of, and ad¬
mitted to vote in, all Grand Lodges. By
courtefy alfo, pail Grand Secretaries, and
Grand Treafurers, have, the fame privilege
H 2 .of

6o AHIMAN REZON.
of fitting in all Grand Lodges, and voting in
fuch matters, as (by the rules of the Grand
Lodge) they might or could have voted in,
while in office.
No Master, Warden, or other member
of the Grand Lodge fhall ever attend the
fame, without the jewels which he ought to
wear in his own particular Lodge, except for
fome good .and fufficient reafon to be allowed
of in the Grand Lodge. And when the of¬
ficer of any particular Lodge, from fuch
urgent bufinefs or neceffity as may regularly
plead his excufe, cannot perfonally attend
the Grand Lodge, he may nominate and‘fend
a brother of his Lodge, with his jewel and
cloathing, to fupply his room, and fupport
the honor of his Lodge in the Grand Lodge,
provided fuch brother hath heretofore been
in the fame office with the brother who de¬
putes him, or in fome higher office. And
from this rule it fhould feem to follow, that
if a fingle brother is deputed to reprefent all
the officers of any particular Lodge (and
confequently fuch Lodge itfelf) in the Grand
Lodge, he ought not to be under the rank of
a paft Mafter, or one who hath otherwife
duly paft the Chair in fome regular Lodge.
A BRO-

ahiman rezon.
6i
A brother of eminence, and of the
rank of Mafte-r, having bufinefs, or whofe
attendance be neceffary in any point ot evi¬
dence or intelligence, may be admitted into
the Grand Lodge upon motion, or leave
afked and given j but fuch brother or Gran¬
ger thus admitted fhall have no vote, nor be
allowed to fpeak to any queftion, without
leave, or unlefs defired to give his opinion;
and then he is to confine himfelf to matters
that concern Mafonry only.
The Grand Loclge mu ft meet four times
a year ftatedly, for quarterly communica¬
tions, and fhall alfo have occalional meet¬
ings and adjournments monthly or otherwife,
as bufinefs may require; and fuch meetings
fhall be held in the Grand Lodge room only,
unlefs for fome particular convenience the
Grand Mafter fhould think fit to appoint
fome other place of fpecial meeting.
All matters in the Grand Lodge are de¬
termined by a majority of votes, each mem¬
ber having one vote, and the Grand Mafter
two votes, unlefs the Grand Lodge leave
any particular thing to the determination of
the Grand Mafter, for the fake of expedi¬
tion.
The

6 2
A H I M AN REZON.
The main bujinefs of the Grand Lodge,
whether at quarterly communications or o-
ther meetings, is ferioully to difcourfe of,
and fedately to confider, tranfacl and fettle
all matters that concern, the profperity of the
craft and the fraternity in general, or pri¬
vate Lodges and fmgle brothers in particu¬
lar. Here, therefore, all differences, that
cannot be made up and accommodated pri¬
vately nor by a particular Lodge, are to be
ferioully confidered and decided. And if
any brother thinks himfelf aggrieved by
fuch decifion, he may, by lodging an appeal
in writing with the Grand Secretary, have
the matter re-heard, and finally determined
upon at the next enfuing quarterly com¬
munication, provided it be not the Annual
Grand Lodge, or the Teaffc-days of St. 'John;
on which, by the new and wife regulations,
it is agreed and ordered that no petitions or
appeals fhall be heard, nor any bufinefs
tranfadled, that tends to interrupt the har¬
mony of the affembly, but all fl^all be refer¬
red to the next Grand Lodge or Steward’s
Lodge. And in general, whatever bufinefs
cannot be tranfadied or finifhed at any one
meeting of the Grand Lodge may be either
adjourned to the next meeting of the fame,
or,

AHIMAN REZON. 63
or, in the mean while, referred to a proper
committee, to be by them maturely heard,
confidered and reported upon to the faid
next meeting.
By the ancient regulations, Apprentices
made in private Lodges could not, without
a difpenfation from the Grand Mailer, be
admitted Fellow-Crafts and Mailers in the
faid private Lodges, but in the Grand Lodge
only. But this regulation hath been long
in dif-ufe; and the Mailer of every private
Lodge, with his Wardens and the requiiite
number of his Lodge aifembled in due form,
can make Fellows and Mailers at diferetion,
keeping within the legal number for any
one night.
It is neverthelefs ilill the prerogative of
the Grand Lodge, and the Right Worihipful
Grand Mailer has full power and authority
(when the Grand Lodge is duly aifembled)
to make, or caufe to be made in his Wor-
fhip’s prefence, free and accepted Mafons at
fight, and fuch making is good; but they
cannot be made out of his Worihip’s pre¬
fence, without his written difpenfation for
that purpofe ; nor is any warranted Lodge
obliged

A H I M A N R E Z O N.
obliged to receive any of the perfons fo made
as members, except by vote, and with the
full confent of the body of fuch Lodge. But
the Right Worfhipful Grand Mafter, with
the authority of the Grand Lodge, may
grant them a warrant, and form them into
a new Lodge.
The officers of all private Lodges, under
the jurifdiCtion of the Grand Lodge, ffiall
at every quarterly communication deliver an
exaCt lift of fuch members as have been
made, or even admitted by them, fince the
laft preceding communication; and books
ftiall be kept in the Grand Lodge, by tome
able brother to be appointed Grand Secreta¬
ry, in which the faid lifts and returns fhall be
duly recorded, together with all the Lodges
in communication, the ufual times and places
of their forming, and the names of all their
members. In the faid books are alfo to be
regiftered, all the proceedings and other af¬
fairs of the Grand Lodge, which are proper
to be written.
The Grand Lodge fhall likewife confider
of the moft prudent and effe&ual means of
collecting and managing what money may
accrue'

AHIMAN REZON. 65
accrue to the general charity fund, agreeable
to the rules hereinafter inferred for that pur-
pofe. And for the better conducting of this
bufinefs, they mu ft have aTreafurer, a bro¬
ther of worldly fubftance, whofe duty and
privileges, as a member of the Grand Lodge,
will be laid down under the head of Grand
Treafurer.
Sect. II. Of the EleBion of the Grand
Master.
The Grand Lodge muft meet in fome
convenient place, on St. John the Evange-
lift’s day (December 27th) in every year, in
order to proclaim the new, or recognize the
old officers. But it is found convenient that
the election, or re-appointment, of Grand
Officers fhould be held or made a confidera-
ble time before St. Johns day. The general
ufage now is, that fuch election or re-appoint¬
ment fhould be held or made on the firft
Wednefday in December, or even fooner;
in order that the Grand Lodge may be com-
pleatly organized and duly prepared for the
celebration of the annual feaft, and other
important bufinefs of the feafon.
But although it be the inherent right of
the Grand Lodge to chufe a new Grand Matter,
I as

66 AHIMAN REZON.
as well as his Deputy and other Grand Offi¬
cers yearly by ballot, if a majority of the
Grand Lodge fhould fo require it, yet fuch
has been the harmony of all Grand Lodges,
as far back as can be remembered (a few in-
ttances only excepted) that the general ufage
for the re-appointment or new ele&ion of a
Grand Matter and other Grand Officers is as
follows, viz.
Application is to be made to the pre-
fent Grand Majier by his Deputy (or, if he
negledts it, by fome other brother appointed
by the Grand Lodge) at leaft one month be¬
fore St. John the Evangelift’s day, in order
to know whether it will be convenient for
his Worfhip to favor or honor the frater¬
nity with his fervices and continuance in
office for another year. If he confents to
continue, then one of the Grand Lodge, de¬
puted for that purpofe, fhall reprefent to the
brethren his Worfhip’s good government and
other valuable qualities $ and, in name of
the Grand Lodge, fhall humbly requeft the
favor or honor of his continuance in office
another year. If he accepts of this nomina¬
tion and re-appointment (in fuch addrefs to
the Lodge as he may think fuitable and pro-
per)

AHIMAN REZON. 67
per) the Grand Secretary fhall thrice
proclaim him aloud ——
Grand Master of Masons.
All the members of the Grand Lodge fhall
then falute him in due form (if prefent) ac¬
cording to the ancient and laudable cuftom
of Mafons.
But if on fuch application (to be made as
aforefaid one month at leaf!: before St. John
the Evangelifl’s day) the prefent Grand
Master, for reafons fufficient to himfelf,
fhould abfolutely declare it inconvenient for
him to continue another year in office, his
advice and recommendation are then to be
requefled concerning fome able and fit bro¬
ther as his fucceffor, who on the day of elec¬
tion is to be propofed to the Grand Lodge,
with any other brother or brothers that may
be put in nomination by two or more mem¬
bers. And the election fhall be made either
by holding up of hands or by ballot, as rrjay
be agreed by the majority on motion made
and Jfeconded for that purpofe ; provided al¬
ways, that the brother recommended by the
Grand Matter in office, as his fucceffor, be
the firfl voted for, either by holding up of
hands or by ballot, and if he is not chofen,
the other candidates in the order they were
I 2 pro-

68 AHIMAN REZON.
piropofed, till one has the majority of voices
or ballot^. When the election is thus made,,
he is to be proclaimed, inilalled and faluted
as above fet forth, if prefent; but if not
prefent, a day is to be appointed for this
ceremony, which is a molt noble and grand
one, but not to be defcribed in writing, nor
ever to be known by any but true Matter
Mafons. The ceremony of inftalling the new
Grand Mailer is to be conducted by the lail
Grand Mailer, but he may neverthelefs order
any brother well ikilled in the ceremony to
affiil him, or to act as his Deputy on the
occaiion.
If the prefent Grand Mailer fhould be at
a diilance from the Grand Lodge at the time
propofed for requeuing his continuance in
office, or his recommendation of a fucceffor;
or if the fucceffor he may recommend fhould
he at a diilance, the Grand Secretary
fhall, in behalf of the Lodge, write to one
or both of them as the cafe may require, in
order to be informed of their intentions,
fhould the choice or appointment of Grand
Mailer fall upon them; and copies of fuch
letters, as well as of the anfwers, fhall be
inferted in the Grand Lodge books.
In

AHIMAN REZON. 69
In cafe the new Grand Matter, when no¬
minated or chofen as above, cannot attend
at the time appointed for his inftalment, he
may be inftalled by proxy, on fignifying his
acceptance of the office; but fuch proxy mutt
be either the laft or a former Grand Matter,
or elfe a very reputable paft Mafter.
Sect. III. Of the Election or Appointment
of the Deputy Grand Master.
The laft Grand Matter thus continued,
or a new Grand Matter thus appointed and
inftalled, it hath always been confidered as
his inherent right to nominate and appoint
the Deputy Grand Mafter (either the laft or
a new one;) becaufe as the Grand Mafter iSL
generally a brother of the firft eminence for
birth, as well as abilities and long expe¬
rience, and cannot be fuppofed to be able
to give his attendance on every emergency,
it hath been always judged needful not only
to allow him a Deputy, but that iuch De¬
puty ftiould be a perfon in whom he can
perfectly confide, and with whom he can
have full harmony; for which reafon it is
proper that the Grand Mafter ftiould have
the nomination of his Deputy; although (as
aforefaid) cafes may arife when the Grand
LocDe

Lodge may exercife the right of rejecting
the Grand Matter's nomination, and of
chufing for themfelves ; of which cafes (al-
tho’ they feldom happen) a majority of the
Lodge can only be judges. The Deputy
Grand Matter being thus continued, or a
new one appointed or chofen as above, he
ttiall be proclaimed, faluted and congratu¬
lated in due form on his firft appearance in
the Lodge; for neither the Deputy nor
Grand Wardens can be allowed to appear
by proxy, this being the foie prerogative
of the Grand Matter.
Sect. IV. Of the Election of Grand
W ARDENS.
Agreeably to the old regulations, the
Grand Mafier had alfo the nomination of
both the Grand Wardens, they and all the
officers being only conlidered as his fubfti-
tutes and affiftants; or fuch as might have
occafion at different times to fupply his ab-
fence in the Lodge.
But this old regulation having been fome-
times found inconvenient, the Grand Lodge
now referve to themfelves the election of
Grand Wardens, and any member has a right
to propofe one or both the candidates, either
the

ahiman rezon.
71
the old Wardens, or new ones; and the two
perfons who have the majority of votes or
ballots, ftill preferving due harmony, are
declared duly ele&ed. The brother who has
the greater number of votes of the two (if
chofen by a joint vote) is ftiled Senior Grand
Wardeny and the other Junior Grand Warden;
although it feems. a better cuftom to have
feparate ballots or votes, viz. Firft for the
Senior and next for the Junior Grand War¬
den ; or to write Senior and Junior againft
the names of the refpedtive candidates in the
ballot, or other method of electing.
Sect. V. Of the Nomination, Appointment
and Office of the Grand Secretary.
The office of Grand Secretary hath become
of very great importance in the Grand Lodge,
from the multiplicity of matters committed
to his care, and from the abilities and learn¬
ing requifite in the management of them.
All the tranfadfions of the Lodge are to be
drawn into form and duly recorded by him.
All petitions, applications and appeals are to
pafs through his hands. No warrant, cer¬
tificate or inftrument of writing from the
Grand Lodge is authentic, without his atte¬
ntion and fignature, and his affixing the
Grand Seal as the laws require. The gene¬
ral

72 AHIMAN REZON.
ral correfponclence with Lodges and brethren
over the whole world is to be managed by
him, agreeable to the voice of the Grand
Lodge, and directions of the Grand Matter
or his Deputy, whom he muft, therefore, be
•always ready to attend, with his Affillants
or Clerk, and the books of the Lodge, in
order to give all necelfary information con¬
cerning the general Hate of matters, and
what is proper to be done upon any emer¬
gency.
For thefe reafons, at every annual election
or appointment of Grand Officers, the no¬
mination or appointment of the Grand Se¬
cretary is conlidered as the inherent right of
the Grand Matter, being properly his Ama-
nuenfis, and an officer as necelfary to him as
his Deputy. It is therefore held, under the old
regulations, which yet Hand unrepealed, that
if the Grand Lodge ffiould difapprove either
of the Deputy Grand Mailer, or Grand Se¬
cretary, they cannot difannul their appoint¬
ment without chuling a new Grand Mailer,
by which all his appointments will be ren¬
dered void. But this is a cafe which hath
but very feldom happened, and which all
true Mafons hope there never will be any
occalion to make a provilion againll.
The

AH I MAN REZ0N, 73
The Grand Secretary, by virtue of his
office, is a member of the Grand Lodge,
and hath a vote in every thing except in
chufin^ Grand Officers. He alfo hath the
right of appointing his own Deputy, or Af-
iiftant Grand Secretary and Clerk. But fuch
Deputy or Clerk muft be a Mailer Mafon,
and ihall not be a member of the Grand
Lodge by virtue of his appointment, nor
fpeak without being allowed or commanded,
unlefs he hath otherwife a right, by having
paffied the Chair in the Grand or feme regu¬
lar,private Lodge,
Sect. VI, Of the Election and Office of
Grand Treasurer.
The Grand Treasurer is elected by
the body of the Grand Lodge, in the fame
manner as the Grand Wardens; he being
confidered as an officer peculiarly refponfible
to all the members in due form affembled,
as having the charge of their common ilock
and property. For to him is committed the
care of all money raifed for the general cha¬
rity and other ufes of the Grand Lodge; an
account of which he is regularly to enter in
a book, with the refpe&ive ends and ufes for
K which

74 AHIMAN REZON.
which the feveral dims are intended. He is
likewife to pay out, expend or difburfe the
fame upon fuch orders, iigned, as the rules of
the Grand Lodge in this refpedt fhall allow
to be valid.
' l 1 C ' • "'Ii : ( '
The Grand Treafurer, by virtue of his
office, is a member of the Grand Lodge, and
hath power to move the fame in any matter
that concerns his office, and to vote in all
bufinefs (provided he hath pad: the Chair)
except in the choice of Grand Officers. He
hath a right to appoint an Affidant or Clerk,
who muft be a Mailer Mafon, but fhall have
no vote, nor be a member of the Grand
Lodge, nor fpeak without being allowed or
commanded, unlefs otherwife entitled to a
feat, as having pad: the Chair in the prand
or fome regular private Lodge.
s ,
The Grand Treafurer, or his Affiftant or
Clerk, fhall always be prefent in the Lodge,
and ready to attend the Grand Mader and
other Grand Officers, with his books for
infpedlion when required; and likewife any
Grand Committee that may be appointed for
adjuding and examining his accounts.

AHIMAN REZON. 75
Sect. VII. Of the Grand 'Tyler, and Grand
Purfuivant.
These officers and minifters of the Grand
Lodge muft be Mafter Mafons, but none of
them are members of the Grand Lodge, nor
allowed to fpeak without orders. The Ty¬
ler’s duty is t6 look after the door on the
outward fide, to fee that none but members
enter in, and to fummon the members on
fpecial occafions and emergencies, by order
of the Grand Mafter or his Deputy, fignified
to him under the hand of the Grand Secre¬
tary or his Deputy.
The bufinefs of the Purfuivant is to ftand
at the inward door of the Grand Lodge, and
to report the names and titles of all that
want admittance, as reported to him by the
Tyler. He is alfo to go upon meflages, and
^perform fundry other fervices known only in
the Lodge.
The Grand Deacons, whofe duty is well
known in the Grand Lodge, as particular
affiftants to the Grand Mafter and Senior
Warden in conducting the bufinefs of the
Lodge, are always, members of the fame;
and may be either nominated occafionally on
K 2 every

76 AH'IMAK rez on.
every Lodge night from among the members
prefent, or appointed annually by the Grand
Mafter and Senior Grand'Warden.
These in general are the prefent duties
of thefe officers r and when, any thing further
fhail be made their duty in the Grand Lodge,
it will be explained by a new regulation.
Sect. VIII. General Rules for conducing the
Bufmefs of the Grand Lodge, in cafe of the
Abfence of any of the Grand Officers.
If the Grand Matter is abfent at any meet¬
ing of the Grand Lodge, Rated, occattonal,
monthly, or annual, the Deputy is to fupplv
his place.
If the Deputy be likewife abfeilt the Se¬
nior Grand Warden takes the Chair, and in
his abfence the Junior Grand Warden. iAnd
although, by the old regulations, any Matter
or paft Matter of a Lodge, that had been
longett a Mafon, had the preference of the
Chair in the abfence of the Grand Matter
and his Deputy, yet now the rule is, that all
Grand Officers, prefent and patt, take place
of every Matter of a Lodge, and the prefent
Grand Officers take place of all patt Grand
Officers. Neverthelefs, any of them may
wave

AHIMAN REZON. 77
Wave their privilege, to do honor to any
eminent brother and pall Mailer, whom the
Lodge may be willing to place in the Chair
on any particular occalion.
If neither any of the prefent nor pall
Grand Officers are prefent at any Grand
Lodge duly fummoned, the Mailer of the
fenior private Lodge who may be prefent is
to take the Chair, although there may be
Mailers of Lodges prefent, who are older
Mafons than him.
But to prevent difputes, the Grand Mailer,
when he finds he mull be neceffarily abfent
from any Grand Lodge, ufually gives a fpe-
cial commiffion, under his hand and feal of
office, counterfigned by the Grand Secretary,
to the Senior Grand Warden, or in his ab-
fence to the Junior, or in cafe of the abfence
of both, to any other Grand Officer or par¬
ticular Mailer of a Lodge, pall or prefent,
to fupply his place, pro hac vice, if the De¬
puty Grand Mailer fhould not attend, or be
neceffarily abfent.
But if there be no fpecial commiffion
appointing matters otherwife, the general
rule of precedence is, that the Junior Grand
War-

78 AHIMAN REZON.
Warden fupplies the place of the Senior in
his abfence; and if both are abfent, the
oldeft former Grand Wardens take place im¬
mediately, and aft as Grand Wardens pro
tempore, unlefs (as abovefaid) they ffiould
wave their privilege.
When neither the Grand Wardens of the
prefent, nor of any former, year are in com¬
pany, the Grand Matter, or he that legally
prefides in his head, calls forth whom he
pleafes to aft as Deputy Grand Maher and
Grand Wardens pro tempore ; although the
preference is generally given to the Maher
or pah Maher of the oldeh Lodge prefent.
The prefiding Grand Officer has the further
privilege of appointing a Secretary or any
other Grand Officer pro tempore, if neither
the hated Officers, nor the Deputies of fuch
of them as have a right to nominate a Depu¬
ty, be prefent; for the bufinefs of the Lodge
inuh never hand hill for want of officers.
In cafe of the death of a Grand Mas¬
ter, the fame order of fucceffion and pre¬
cedency takes place, as is above fet forth,
till a new Grand Maher is duly chofen and
inhalled.
Old

AHIMAN REZON.
79
Old Grand Officers may be again chofen
officers of private Lodges, and this does not
deprive them of any of the privileges to
which, as old Grand Officers, they are en¬
titled in the Grand Lodge; only an old
Grand Officer, being the officer of a private
Lodge, muft depute a pall officer of hi§ par¬
ticular Lodge to adt pro tempore for him in
the Grand Lodge, when he afeends to his
former rank in the fame.
Sect. IX. Of Grand Vftations, Commu¬
nications, Annual FeaJls, &c.
The Grand Matter, with his Deputy, the
Grand Wardens and Grand Secretary, ffiall,
during his Mafferffiip, or if poffible annual¬
ly, go at leaft once round, and vifit all the
Lodges under his jurifdidtion ; or when this
laudable duty becomes impracticable, from
the extent of his jurifdidtion and large num¬
ber of Lodges, he ffiall as often as neceffary
(and if poffible annually) appoint vifitors of
different diftridts, compofed of his Grand
Officers and fuch other Affiftants as he may
think proper, who ffiall make faithful report
of their proceedings to the Grand Lodge,
according to the inftrudtions given them.
When

8o AHIMAN REZON.
•When both the Grand Mailers are abfent,
the Senior or Junior Grand Warden may
prefide as Deputy in vifiting Lodges, or in
conftituting any new Lodge ; neither of
which can be done without at lead: one of
the prefent Grand Officers, except in places
at too great a diftance from the Grand Lodge.
In fuch cafe fome faithful brother, who has
paffed the Chair, &c. ffiall have a pfoper
deputation under the Grand Lodge feal, if
the order is made in the abfence of the
Grand Mailer and his Deputy, or under
their private feals, if they are prefent and
fign the fame. But it mull alfo be counter¬
signed and attefted by the Grand Secretary,
to have the full authority of the Grand
Lodge.—Under fuch authority, the brother
fo appointed ffiall a& as Grand Mailer, pro
tempore, in vifiting old Lodges, or conflitut-
ing new ones, in places far diflan t from the
feat of the Grand Lodge, and in remote
countries, or beyond feas, where the Grand
Officers cannot poffibly attend.
The brethren of all the regular Lodges,
in the fame general jurifdi&ion lin'd Grand
Communication, if within any reafonable
and practicable dillance, ffiall meet in fome
convenient place on St. John s Day, and
when.

81
AHIMAN REZON.
- * jr* i S 1
when bufinefs is over, they may repair to
their feftival dinners, either in their own, or
any other regular Lodge, as they fhall think
mo ft convenient. And any brethren around
the globe (who are found true aud faithful
members of the ancient craft) may be ad¬
mitted as fojourners, till they have built a
boufe of their own. But only thofe who are
members of the Grand Lodge muft be within
doors, during the election of Grand Officers.
Sect. X. IP articular Rules in the Grand
Lodge of Pe?2?ifyhflnia.
Every Grand Lodge has an inherent
power and authority to make local ordinances
and new regulations, as well as to amend and
explain the old ones, for their own particular
benefit and the good of Mafonry in general;
provided always, that the ancient land marks
be carefully preferved, and that fuch regula¬
tions be firft duly propofed in writing for the
confideration of all the members, and be at
laft duly enabled with the confent of the
majority. This has never been difputed;
for the members of every Grand Lodge are
the true rcprefentatives of ail the fraternity
in communication, and are an abfolute and
independent body, with legiflative authori¬
ty, provided (as aforefaid) that the Grand
L ' Ma-

2
AHIMAN REZ'OIt
Masonic Constitution be never violat¬
ed, nor any of the old land marks removed.
Upon thefe principles, the following parti¬
cular rules have been made, or adopted, in
the Grand Lodge of Pennfylvania, viz.
r. “ The Quarterly Communication of
« all the Lodges under the Mafonic jurif-
« didtion of this Grand Lodge fhall be held
« in the Grand Lodge Room, at Philadel-
“ phia, on the four following days annually
« for ever; that is to lay, on the laft Mon-
■ day in March, on the Monday-week *
“ before St. John the Baptift’s day (June
“ 24th on the laft Monday in September;
« and on the Monday-week before St. John
 the Evangelift’s day (December 24th;)
“ and the different Lodges are to attend on
“ thefe days, by their proper Officers or
<c Deputies, with or without notice for that
purpofe.”
< i
a
2. “ None but a Mafter Mafon, who
has paffed the Chair in fome regular
Lodge, and is a refident or honorary
member of the Lodge he is chofen to re-
* Drefent,
Th e Monday-week before St. John’s Day is appointed, to
give the members fufficient time to return from the general
Communications, to keep thefe feftivals in their own Lodges,
if they think proper.

AHIMAN REZON, 83
•« prefent, can be admitted as the proxy of
« fuch Lodge, or have a voice in the pro-
 ceedings of this Grand Lodge. And his
« commiffion, as proxy, muft be under the
«« feal of the Lodge that appoints him, fign-
“ ed by the Matter, and counterfigned by
“ the Secretary.”
g.  Every member of this Grand Lodge
“ fhall pay quarterly into the Treafury of
“ the fame, One-third of a Spantfh milled
<< Dollar, and the fame fum on default of
“ attendance at any Quarterly Meeting ;
“ without fuch excufe as the bye-lav/s admit
“ to be reafonable.
4. <e Every member of a conftituted
£< Lodge, under this Grand Lodge, fhall pay
<< One Shilling quarterly to the Charity Fund
 of the fame.
5. «« Ever y perfon who obtains the bene-*
<< fit of Mafonry in any regular Lodge, under
<( the jurifdiction of this Grand Lodge, fhall
cc pay Five Shillings to the Charity Fund of
fC the fame; all which dues fhall be made
l< good by every particular Lodge to the
t( Grand Lodge, at leaft once a year, at
« either of the Communications before St.
<£ John the Evangelift’s day.
L 2 6. “ Eve-

84 A li I M A N REZON.
6. “ Every brother who fhall be return*-
“ fed by his Lodge, and regifiered in the
“ Grand Lodge books, fhall pay One Shilling
“ to the Grand Secretary for the fame.
7. “ Every member requiring a Grand
“ Lodge Certificate (which in this Grand
“ Lodge is printed on parchment from an
“ engraving, in Latin, French and Englijh)
“ rnuft pay the expence of parchment, &c.
fC that the Grand Lodge may be put to no
“ coft thereby; and likewife pay fuch fur-
“ ther' fum to the Grand Secretary for filling
“ up the blanks and for figning the fame,
<e and affixing the Grand Seal, as the bye-
“ laws * of the Grand Lodge may from time
“ to time allow. Nor is ahy rtiember enti-
<c tied to fuch Grand Certificate without a
« “ previous Certificate from the Lodge of
“ which he is a member, fetting forth his
“ regular behaviour, and that he hath dif-
<( charged all Lodge dues.
8. “ On
* The old fee to the Grand Secretary,, exclufive of parch¬
ment and the copper-plate, &c. was One-third of a filver Dol-r
lar. But the Secretary now provides the parchment, pays the
copper-plate-tprinter, affixes the feal, and compleats the Certi¬
ficate ; and the whole expence is about One filver Dollar, or
a little more, according to the price of parchment, and the
printer^ bill.

AHIMAN REZON. 85
8. 44 On either St. John’s Day, every re-
44 gular Mafon may attend the Grand Lodge
44 in perfon to pay his dues as aforefaid, with
44 his proportion of the expences of the day;
44 otherwife they mull be fent (as directed
44 above, in the fifth paragraph) by the
44 member or members, who are appointed
44 to attend on behalf of his Lodge, at the
44 Communication preceding.”
Sect. XI. Regulations for the Govern¬
ment of the Grand Lodge, during the
4Time of public Bujinefs.
1. No Brothers fhall be admitted into
the Grand Lodge, but the immediate mem¬
bers thereof, viz. The four prefent and all
former Grand Officers, the Treafurer and
Secretary, the Mailers, Wardens and paft
Mailers of all regular Lodges; except a
brother who is a petitioner or witnefs in
fome cafe, or one called in by motion.
2. At the third ilroke of the Grand Ma¬
iler’s gavel, there ihall be a general iilence;
and he who breaks filence, without leave
from the Chair, ihall be publicly repri¬
manded.
3. Un-

26 A’H'IMAN REZO N.
3. Under the fame penalty every brother
fhall keep his feat, and keep ftrid: filence
whenever the Grand Mafter or Deputy lhall
think fit to rife from the Chair and call t@
order.
4. In the Grand Lodge, every member
lhall keep in his feat (according to the num¬
ber of his Lodge) and not move about from
place to place during the Communication, ex¬
cept the Grand Wardens, as having more
immediately the care of the Grand Lodge,
5. That no brother is to fpeak but once
to the fame affair, unlefs to explain himfelf,
or when called upon by the Chair to fpeak.
6. Every one that fpeaks fhall rife and
keep Handing, addrefling himfelf in a pro¬
per manner to the Chair 3 nor fhall any pre¬
fume to interrupt him, under the aforefaid
penalty, unlefs the Grand Mafter find him
wandering from the point in hand, and fhall
think fit to reduce him to order; for then
the faid fpeaker fhall fit down. But after he
has been fet right, he may again proceed, if
he pleafes.
7. If,

A H I M A N REZON. 87
7. If, in the Grand Lodge, any member
is twice called to order at any one affembly
for tranfgreffing thefe rules, and is guilty of
a third offence of the fame nature, the Chair
fhall peremptorily order him to quit the
Lodge-room for that night.
8. Whoever fhall be fo rude as to-hifs
at any brother, or at what another fays or
has faid,. he fhall be forthwith folemnly ex¬
cluded the Communication, and declared
incapable of ever being a member of any
Grand Lodge for the future, till another
time he publicly owns his fault, and his
grace be granted.
9. No motion for a new regulation,, or
for the continuance or alteration of an old
one, fhall be made till it be firft handed up
in writing to the Chair; and after it has
been perufed by the Grand Mafter, at leafl
about ten minutes, the thing may be moved
publicly, and then it fhall be audibly read
by the Secretary; and if it be feconded and
thirdedy it mull: immediately be committed
to the confideration of the whole affembly,
that their fenfe may be fully heard about it;
after which the queflion fhall be put, pra
and con.
10. The

88
AHIMAN REZON.
io. The opinion or votes of the p} embers
are to be fignified by holding up of hands,
that is, one hand, each member; which
uplifted hands the Grand Wardens are to
count, unlefs the number of hands be fo
unequal as to render the counting them ufe-
lefs. Nor fhould any other kind of divilion
ever be admitted among Free Mafons.
In order to preferve harmony, it was
thought neceffary to ufe counters and a bal-
loting-box, when occalion requires.
My fon, forget not my law, but let thine
heart keep my commandments; and remove not
the ancient land-marks which thy fathers have
fet' Solomon.
Sect. XII. The Regulations for
Charity, obferved in the Qrand Lodge
of England; and to be followed here, fo far
as the difference of Circumftances and gene¬
ral Convenience will allow.
i. The Committee of Charity con-
lifts of all prefent and former Grand Officers,
Secretary and Treafurer, with the Mafters
of ten regular Lodges, who are fummoned
and obliged to attend in their turns ; that is
to

AHIMAN REZON, 89
to fay, five from the oldeft and jive from the
youngeft Lodges are fummoned to meet on
the third Wednefday in every month, to
hear all petitions, &c. and to order fuch
relief to diftrelfed petitioners, as their cafe
may require, and prudence may direct.
2. All collections, contributions- and
/t *
fums of money for charitable purpofes, given
or belonging to the Grand Lodge Fund, are
to be depofited in the hands of the Grand
Treafurer (or fuch other perfons as the
Grand Lodge may fpecially appoint;) no
part of which muft be dilburfed or expended
on any account, without an order from the
Committee of Charity, iigned by the pre-
liding officer and counterhgned by the Secre¬
tary, after being approved by the majority
of the Committee (or Stewards) then prefent,
and entered in their tranfa&ion book, with
the name or names of the perfon or perfons
to whom the fame is given.
3. No anonymous letter, petition, or
recommendation, by or from any perfon or
perfons, mull be introduced or read in the
Committee; and only regiftered Mafons,
who have themfelves contributed twelve
months to the Grand Lodge Charity Fund,
M and

qq A H I M AN REZO N.
and were members of a warranted Lodge
during that time, are to be confidered and
relieved. Sojourners and travelling Mafons,
if duly certified and recommended, are to be
relieved by private contributions made for
them on the occafion, or out of the general
fund, as the majority fhall think proper.
4. All petitions or recommendations are
to be figned by the Mafter and Wardens of
the petitioner’s Lodge; fome of whom, if
in town, muff attend the Committee or
Stewards Lodge, to vouch the truth of the
petition, or anfwer any neceflary queftions.
The petitioner or petitioners (if within any
convenient diftance, or unlefs detained by
ficknefs, lamenefs or imprifonment) muft
alfo attend, and prove to the fatisfadtion of
the Committee or Stewards, that hp or they
have been formerly in reputable, or at lead
in tolerable circumftances. And although
any Brother may fend ip. a petition or recom¬
mendation, yet none can be admitted to fit
and hear the debates, except the Stewards,
or members of the Committee, as above
defcribed.
5. It is the inherent right of this Com-
~*nittee (commonly called the Stewards
Lodge)

AHIMAN REZON. 91
Lodge) to difpofe of the Grand Charity
Fund, under the reflridlions aforefaid, to
fuch as appear really neceflitous and deferv-
ing, either by weekly fupport or otherwife,
as to them fhall feem meet; provided always
that no perfon made in a clandelline manner,
with a view only to partake of this charity,
nor any Brother who has ever affiHed at any
fuch clandelline making, can ever be quali¬
fied to receive any affiftance out of the faid
fund.
1 *
6. This Committee has likewife power
to hear and adjuft all matters concerning
Free Mafons and Mafonry, that may be laid
before them (except making new regulations,
which power is veiled only in the Grand
Lodge ;) and the determinations of the
Committee are final, unlefs an appeal be
made to the Quarterly Grand Lodge.
7. For the fpeedy relief of difirefied pe¬
titioners, three of the five Mailers who are
fummoned are a quorum to proceed to bu-
finefs, as prudence and brotherly love fhall
diredl, with or without the Grand Officers;
provided the Grand Secretary and the books
are prefent. And all tranfadlions of this
Committee of Charity, or Stewards Lodge,
M 2 are

92 AHIMAN R E Z O N.
arc to be read audibly, by the faid Grand
Secretary, before all the members of the
Grand Lodge, upon the firft Wednefdays in
March, June, September and * December,
yearly.
8. So far as this Committee fhall exer-
cife the power veiled in them (as above, in
the iixth paragraph) to hear complaints and
punifh delinquents, according to the laws of
the Craft, they are inftru&ed to adhere mod:
religiouily to the old Hebrew regulation,
viz. “ If a complaint be made againfl a
“ Brother by another Brother, and he be
“ found guilty, he fhall ftand to the deter-
ee mination of this Committee, or the Grand
“ Lodge. But if the accufer or complainant
tc cannot fupport his charge, he fhall incur
“ fuch penalty as the accufed would have
“ done, had he been really convi&ed.”
Sect.
* Agreeable to the Conftitution of the Grand Lodge of
Pennfylvania, thefe tranfattions are more properly read at the
four Quarterly Communications in the faid months.

Sect. XIII. ExtraEl of fome late Reso¬
lutions of the Grand Lodges of England,
Ireland and Scotland, for maintaining Bro¬
therly Correfpondence ; which Jhonld be adop¬
ted among the different Grand Lodges of
America; and, as far as poffible, over all
the World, for the fame good Purpofe.
GRAND LODGE of the Moft Ancient
and Honorable Fraternity of Free and
Accepted Masons, held at the Half-
Moon Tavern, Cheapfide, London, Sep¬
tember 2, 1/72.
Lhe Moft Noble Prince JOHN, Duke of
Atholl, Grand Mafter.
LAURENCE DERMOTT, Esc^uire,
Deputy Grand Mafter, in the Chair.
HEARD a letter from Brother Tho¬
mas Corker, Deputy Grand Secre¬
tary of Ireland, to Laurence Dermott,
Efq; Deputy Grand Mafter of this Grand
Lodge, fetting forth the ftate of the Craft,
&c. in that kingdom, and having taken the
fame into confideration,
“ Refolved, It is the opinion of this Grand
“ Lodge, that a brotherly connection and
" correfpondence with the Right Worfhip-
“ ful

94 A H I M A N REZON.
(t ful Grand Lodge of Ireland has been,
“ and will always be, found productive of
“ honor and advantage to the Craft,, in both
“ kingdoms.”
“ Ordered, That the Grand Secretary
“ fhall tranfmit the names of the officers of
<£ this Grand Lodge to the Secretary of the
ik Grand Lodge of Ireland yearly, or as of-
ten as any new choice is made; together
tc with fuch informations as may tend to the
xt honor and intereft of the ancient Craft:
t( And that all fuch informations or corre-
“ fpondence fhall be conveyed in the moft
“ refpecftful terms, fuch as may fuit the ho-
£C nor and dignity of both Grand Lodges.”
“ Ordered) That no Mafon (who has
<£ been made under the fandtion of the
<£ Grand Lodge of Ireland) fhall be admit-
“ ted a member, nor partake of the general
“ charity, without having firft produced a
i{ certificate (of his good behaviour) from
tc the Secretary of the Grand Lodge of Ire-
<c land but upon producing fuch certifi-
tc cate, he fhall receive all the honors due
“ to a faithful Brother of the fame houihold
“ with us.”
The

AHIMAN REZON.
95
The Deputy Grand Mailer propofed that
a correfpondence fhould be opened by this
Grand Lodge with the Grand Lodge of
Scotland, when they unanimoufly came to
the fame refolutions as fet forth for the
Grand Lodge of Ireland.
GRAND LODGE of the Mod: Ancient
and Honorable Fraternity of Frfe and
Accepted Masons, Dublin, Novem¬
ber 5, 1772.
The Right Honorable W I L L I A M, Lord
Viscount Dunluce, Grand Mafter.
ARCHIBALD RICHARDSON, Esc^
Deputy Grand Majier, in the Chair.
"O E CE IV E D and read the refolutions
A of the Grand Lodge of England, tranf-
mitted by their Grand Secretary, Brother
William Dickey, and having taken the
fame into confideration, came to the fol¬
lowing refolution :
“ Refolved, That this Lodge do entirely
u agree with the Grand Lodge of England,
“ that a brotherly connexion and correfpon-
“ dence between the Grand Lodge of Eng-
“ land

96 A H I M A N REZO N.
“ land and the Grand Lodge of Ireland
e< have been, and will always be, found
<c productive of honor and advantage to the
Craft in both kingdoms.”
cc
s c
sc
sc
cc
sc
J
sc
sc
sc
sc
sc
sc
sc
ss
sc
sc
cc
sc
sc
cc
sc Ordered, That the Grand Secretary
fhall continue to tranfmit, from time to
time, the particular occurrences of this
Grand Lodge to the Grand Secretary of
England; and that hereafter no Englifh
Mafon fhall be confidered worthy of their
charity, without producing a certificate
from the Grand Lodge of England; and
that we fhall always confider fuch Bre¬
thren as may be recommended to us from
the Grand Lodge of England, equally
objects of our attention with thofe of the
fraternity in Ireland :—Nor can the Grand
Lodge of Ireland omit this opportunity of
teftifying their high fenfe of the honor
they have received, in this invitation of
a mutual and friendly intercourfe, which
they fhall fludy to preferve and ftrengthen
by every aCt of good offices and brotherly
l°Ve* By Order,
Fielding Ould, jun. Grand Sec.
Bo the Mojl Nohle Prince JOHN, Duke of
Atholl, Grand Mafer of England.
GRAND

AHIMAN REZON. 97
CRAND LODGE of the Moll Ancient
and Honorable Fraternity of Free and
Accepted Masons in Scotland, held in
the City of Edinburgh, Nov. 30, 1772.
The Right Hon. and Mofi Worfirpful
PATRICK, Earl of Dumfries,
Grand Mafter.
The Right Hon. and Mojl Worjhipful
GEORGE, Earl of Dalhousie,
late Grand Ma/ier, in the Chair. .
%
T T was reported to the Brethren, that the
^ Grand Lodge of England, according to
the old inflitiitions, on the fecond of Septem¬
ber laft, palled a refolution and order, relative
to a conftant correfpondence betwixt them
and the Grand Lodge of Scotland; a copy of
which had been lately tranfmitted by their
Secretary, along with a letter containing
the names of their officers, to the Secretary
of this Grand Lodge.--The refolution and
letter being read, the Grand Lodge were of
opinion, that the brotherly intercourfe and
correfpondence, which the Right Worfhipful
the Grand Lodge of England were defirous
to eftablifh, would be ferviceable to both
Grand Lodges, and productive of honor and
N advan-

9b ahiman rezon.
advantage to the fraternity in general; and
to promote this beneficial purpofe,
 Ordered, That the Grand Secretary do
^tranfmit to the Secretary of the Grand
<f Lodge of England, the names of the offi-
t( cers of the Grand Lodge of Scotland,
“ elected this day; and ffiall henceforth
<( tranfmit the names of the Grand Officers
“ yearly, or as often as any new change is
et made, and ffiall lay fuch letters, orders
“ or informations^ as he may, from time to
time, receive from the Grand Lodge of
<c England, before this Grand Lodge, their
te Quarterly Communication, or ftanding
“ Committee; and alfo ffiall tranfmit fuch
“ informations as may tend to the honor
“ and advantage of the Craft, according as
“ h*e ffiall be by them directed ; and that he
f< affures the Right Worffiipful Grand Lodge
<( of England, in the mod: refpedtful man-
ner, of the defire the Grand Lodge of
Scotland have to cultivate a connexion
with them, by a regular correfpondence
u< for the intereft: of the ancient Craft, fuit-
able to the honor and dignity of both
u Grand Lodges.”
“ Ordered,

AHIMAN-REZON.
99
“ Ordered, That no Mafon (made under
“ the fandtion of the Grand Lodge of Eng-
“ land, according to the old inftitution)
“ {hall be admitted a member of the Grand
“ Lodge of Scotland, nor partake of the
(e general charity, without having firft pro-
ie duced a Certificate (of his good behaviour)
“ from the Secretary of the Grand Lodge of
“ England. But upon producing fuch Cer-
<£ tificate, he fhall receive all the honors
<e and bounty due to a faithful brother of
<e the fame houfhold with us.”
By Order of the Grand Lodge of Scotland>
Alex. M‘Doug all, G. Secretary.
To the Right Worjhipful the Grand
Lodge of England.
Sect. XIV. Extracts from Answers
given (May 15, 1772,J by Laurence
D e r m o t t, Efq\ Deputy Grand Mafter
of Majors in London, to certain Qu estions
propofed to him by a learned Majier of a
Lodge in Philadelphia; intended (fo far as
is proper in print) for the further explana¬
tion of fundry of the foregoing Regulations
and Conflitutions.
From the do&rine before laid down, a
Provincial Grand Mafter, within his Jurif-
N 2 di&ion,.

loo A H I M AN REZON*
has
the old
diction 3
inftitution, to grant a * Dispensation,,
authorizing and empowering any regular
and trufly Mafier Majon to congregate
(by proper invitation) a fufficient number
of worthy brethren at fome certain place,
to form and open a Ledge after the manner
44 of ancient Mafonsj and in the faid Lodge,
44 while thus open, to admit, enter and
44 make Free Mafons, according to the true
44 ancient euftom, and not otherwifewith
44 the foie intent and view that the brethren
fo congregated, admitted, entered and
made, when they become a fufficient
number, may in good order and time be
44 duly warranted and conjlituted for being
and holding a regular Lodge, for the fur¬
ther promoting the Craft and encreafing
44 the number of worthy brethren.” Now
in granting fueh difpenfations, as well as in
all proceedings thereupon, the following
particulars and reftridions are to be carefully
attended to, in order that the rights and
privileges of the Grand Matter and his De¬
puty, as wrell as of individual Lodges and
members, be duly underftood and prefer-
ved’ viz‘ i. The
t(
€C
«<
tc
« (
t (
((
<{
* The form of fuch difpenfatien is preserved among the
ether arcana of the Grand Lodge, for the ufe of the proper
officers.

AHI M AN REZON, iqi
1. The Provincial Grand Mafter may
grant fuch difpenfation without confent of
the Deputy Grand Mafter.
2. The Deputy Grand Mafter can like-
wife grant fuch
of the Grand Mafter, and without acquaint¬
ing him; but he is anfwerable for the con-
fequences.
3. Such difpenfation muft be under the
hand of the Grand Mafter or his Deputy,
and the feal of the Grand Lodge, counter-
figped by the Grand Secretary. It can be
granted only to continue in force for one
month, and may be renewed for another
month, if necefiity require, but cannot be
renewed again for any longer time. Care is
alfo to be taken, that fuch difpenfation be
not fent to any place too remote for the
Grand Officers, or Grand Secretary, perfon-
ally to infpedfc the execution thereof.
4. Dispensations being partly granted
for making Mafons, cannot operate to hin¬
der or forbid the making of any; nor muft
fuch difpenfation be granted or directed to
more than one Mafter Mafon in one place;
becaufe all other Mafter Mafons (whom it
may
difpenfation in the abfenee

io2 AHIMAN REZON.
may b'e convenient for him to invite) are not
only authorized, but alfo required, to aid
and aiffih, as far as circumhances will permit.
.5. Masons made under a difpenfation
have a right to vilit warranted Lodges, while
fuch difpenfation is in force; but no longer,
until they belong to fome warranted Lodge
themfelves.
6. The officers chofen or appointed to a<h
in any Lodge under a difpenfation, cannot
be admitted as members of the Grand Lodge*,
nor enrolled in its books, until their Lodge
is warranted, nor even then, without being
properly injialled.
7. What a Grand Lodge properly con«~
fifcs of has been fully explained in the pro¬
per place; to which it is to be here added,
that if the Mahers and Wardens of five
waranted Lodges, or more, ffiould meet,
where no Grand Officer exihs or can be
prefent, fuch meeting will bear the title of
a Grand Committee, Convention or Sub-Com¬
munication of Mafons, and the next Grand
Maher may confirm their tranfadions, if
laudable; or they may, by proper authority,
be formed into a new Grand Lodge, All
new

AHIMAN REZON. fo3
new regulations made, Or pretended to be
made out of a Grand Lodge, are illegal;
although every private Lodge may make
their own bye-laws (as hath been already
faid) provided they do not remove the ancient
land marks. A general meeting of Lodges,
fummoned by the Grand Secretary, may
propofe and form fuch laws as they (hall
think proper ; but they cannot have the
force of laws, nor be put in execution,
without the aflent of the Grand Mafter,
duly given by the voice and authority of the
Grand Lodge. If the Grand Mafter be ab-
fent, the Deputy Grand Mafter, in his name,
confirms the orders of the Grand Lodge, and
commands the Grand Secretary to record
them in the Grand Lodge books, and there.-
fore no Grand Lodge is compleat without
the Grand Secretary, or his Deputy.
$. All books, records, writings, jewels,
and the feal of the Grand Lodge, (hould be
at all times in the poflefiion of the Gran.d
Secretary, who is therefore obliged, as well
as the Grand Treafurer (either in their pet-
fons or by their Deputies, according to the
regulations in the foregoing fedtions) to at¬
tend the Grand Mafter or his Deputy, with
thfcir -books, &c. in private, for examining
the

104 A n i ivi A iN J\ Z; U .
the Rock of the Grand Lodge, and other
needful affairs, as often as thereto required.
But the Grand Officers have no authority to
examine the private ftoc-k of any particular
Lodge, except they be appointed to that
bufinefs as members of fuch private Lodge 5
although the Grand Secretary hath neverthe-
lefs an undoubted authority to order the re-
giftry, and all the tranfadiion books of any
private Lodge (the caffi-book excepted) to
be laid before the Grand Lodge once a
quarter,
9. The members of the Grand Lodge,
and of all warranted Lodges, fo far as they
have abilities or numbers, have an undoubt¬
ed right to exercife all degrees of the ancient
crafty and confequently the RoVal Arch ;
but no Mafons of any denomination can hold
any Lodge without a warrant for the place
Where held. Neverthelefs Royal Arch-Ma¬
fons muff not at a proceffion, nor in any
other place except in the Royal Arch Lodge,
be diftinguifhed by any garment or badge
different from what belongs to them as of¬
ficers or members of the Grand, of their own
private Lodge.

AHIMAN REZON. 105
10. Although, by the general regula¬
tions in the foregoing fe&ions, the Matter
or Wardens of a Lodge may (upon a fpecial
emergency, when they or either of them
cannot attend in perfon) fend a brother (qua¬
lified as the rule requires) to wear their
jewel and fupport the honor of fuch Lodge
in the Grand Lodge, and at General Com¬
munications } yet, upon the queftion put to
Brother DerMott,—te Whether the Ma-
ie fters and Wardens of particular Lodges
 have a right to nominate a fubftitute to
“ reprefent them in the Grand Lodge?” He
anfwers—1te That Grand Majiers only are al-
<f lowed Deputies, Subftitutes or Proxies.”
From which it would feem to be underttood
(comparing the old regulations with this
anfwer) that although Matters and Wardens
may nominate Subftitutes as aforefaid on fpe-
cial occafions of neceflity, yet they cannot
appoint Subftitutes or Deputies to reprefent
them generally, during the time of their
continuance in office.
O
C H A P,

io6 A H I M A N REZON.
CHAP. IV.
CHARGES, PRAYERS,
A jhort Charge to a new admitted Mason.
Brother,
YOU are now admitted, by the full and
due confent of this Lodge, a Fellow
of our mod: ancient and honorable Society—
ancient, as having fubdfted from time imme¬
morial—and honorable, as tending in every
particular to do honor to thofe who conform
to its noble precepts. The greateft mo-
narchs, and mod: exalted heroes and patriots,
of all ages and countries throughout the
known world, have been encouragers of the
Royal Art; and many of them have prefided
as Grand Masters of Mafons in their
refpedfive territories; not thinking it any
leffening of their highed: dignities to level
themfelves with their brethren in Mafonry,
and to adt upon the fame fcpiare as they did.
The world’s great architect is our
fupreme Mafier; and the unerring rule he has
given us, is that by which we work; reli¬
gious difputes are never differed within the
Lodge; for, as Mafons, we only purfue the
univer-

AHIMAN R E Z O N. 107
univerfal religion, or the religion of nature.
This is the centre which unites the moft
different principles in one facred band, and
brings together thofe who were the moft di-
ftant from one another.
There are three general heads of duty
which Mafons ought always to inculcate,
viz. to God, our neighbour, and our¬
selves ;—to God, in never mentioning
his name but with that reverential awe which
a creature ought to bear to his Creator, and
to look upon him always as the fummum bo-
num which we came into the world to enjoy,
and according to that view to regulate all our
purfuits ;—to our neighbour, in a&ing
upon the fquare, or doing as we would be
done by;—to ourselves, in avoiding all
intemperance and excefles, whereby we may
be rendered incapable of following our work,
or led into behaviour unbecoming our lau¬
dable profeffion, and always keeping within
due bounds, and free from all pollution.
In the ftate, a Mafon is to behave as a
peaceable and dutiful fubjedt, conforming
chearfully to the government under which
he lives.
O 2 He

io8 AHIMAN REZON.
He is to pay a due deference to his fupe-
Hors} and from his inferiors he is rather to
receive honor with fome reluctance, than
to extort it. He is to be a man of benevo¬
lence and charity, not fitting down con¬
tented while his fellow creatures (but much
more his brethren) are in want, when it is
in his power (without prejudicing himfelf
or his family) to relieve them.
In the Lodge he is to behave with all due
decorum, left the beauty and harmony there¬
of fhould be difturbed or broke; he is to be
obedient to the Matter and the preliding of¬
ficers, and to apply himfelf clofely to the
bufinefs of Mafonry, that he may the fooner
become a proficient therein, both for his
own credit, and for that of the Lodge.
He is not to negled his own neceftary
avocations for the fake of Mafonry, nor to
involve himfelf in quarrels with thofe who
through ignorance may fpeak evil of or ridi¬
cule iti
He is to be a lover of the arts and feien-
ces, and is to take all opportunities to im¬
prove himfelf therein.
If

If he recommends a friend to be made a
Mafon, he muft vouch him to be fuch as he
really believes will conform to the aforefaid
duties, left by his mifcondudt, at any time,
the Lodge ftiould pafs under fome evil im¬
putations.
Nothing can prove more {hocking to all
faithful Mafons, than to fee any of their
brethren profane or break through the facred
rules of their order; and fuch as can do it,
they wilh had never been admitted.
A Prater faid at the opening of the Lodge,
or making a new Brother, &c. nfed by
Jewifh Free-Mafons.
LORD, excellent art thou in thy
\J truth, and there is nothing great in
comparifon to thee; for thine is the praife,
from all the works of thy hands, for ever¬
more.
Enlighten us, we befeech thee, in the
true knowledge of Mafonry: By the forrows
of Adam, thy firft made man; by the blood
of Abel, the holy one; by the righteoufnefs
of Seth, in whom thou art well pleafed;
and by thy covenant with Noah, in whofe
arch-

116 A HIM AN REZON.
architecture tl^pu waft pleafed to fave the
feed of thy beloved; number us not among
thofe that know not thy ftatutes, nor the
divine myfteries of the fecret Cabala.
But grant, we befeech thee, that the
ruler • of this Lodge may be endued with
knowledge and wifdom, to inflruCt us and
explain his fecret myfteries, as our holy bro¬
ther Mofes * did (in his Lodge) to Aaron,
to Eleazar and Ithamar (the fons of Aaron)
and the feventy elders of Ifrael.
And
* In the preface to the Mifhna, we find this tradition of the
Jews explained as follows :
God not only delivered the law to Mofes on Mount Sinai,
but the explanation of it likewife: When Mofes came down
from the mount, and entered into his tent, Aaron went to vi-
lit him, and Mofes acquainted Aaron with the laws he had re¬
ceived from God, together with the explanation of them:
After this Aaron placed himfelf at the right-hand of Mofes, and
Eleazar and Ithamar (the fons of Aaron) were admitted, td
whom Mofes repeated what he had juft before told to Aaron :
Thefe being feated, the one on the right-hand, the other on
the left hand of Mofes, the feventy elders of Ifrael, who com-
pofed the Sanhedrim, came in, and Mofes again declared the
fame laws to them, with the interpretation of them, as he had
done before to Aaron and his fons. Laftly, all who pleafed of
the common people were invited to enter, and Mofes inftrudted
them likewife in the fame manner as the reft: So that Aaron
heard four times what Mofes had been taught by God upon
Mount Sinai, Eleazar and Ithamar three times, the feventy el¬
ders twice, and the people once. Mofes afterwards reduced
* the

AHIMAN REZON, m
And grant that we may underftand, learn,
and keep all the ftatutes and commandments
of the Lord, and this holy myftery, pure
and undefiled unto our lives end. Amen,
Lord.
A P R a Y e r ufed amongjl the 'primitive
Chriftian M A S O N S.
The might of the Father of heaven,
and the wifdom of his glorious Son,
through the grace and goodnefs of the Holy
Ghoft, being three perfons in one Godhead,
be with us at our beginning, and give us
grace fo to govern us here in our living, that
we may come to his blifs that never fhall
have end. Amen.
Another Prayer, and that which is mojt general
at Making or Opening.
MOST holy and glorious Lord God,
thou great archited of heaven and
earth, who art the giver of all good gifts and
graces, and haft promifed that when two or
three
the laws which he had received into writing, but not the ex¬
planations of them; thefe he thought it fulficient to trufl: to
the memories of the abovementioned perfons, who, being per¬
fectly jnftru&ed in them, delivered them to their children, and
thefe again to theirs, from age to age.

.112 A HI MAN REZ ON.
three are gathered together in thy name,
thou wilt be in the midft of them : In thy
name we affemble and meet together, moil
humbly befeeching thee to blefs us in all our
undertakings, that we may know and ferve
thee aright, that all our doings may tend to
thy glory and the falvation of our fouls.
And we befeech thee, O Lord God, to
blefs this our prefent undertaking, and grant
that this our new brother may dedicate his
life to thy fervice, and be a true and faithful
brotheryamong us: Endue him with a com¬
petency of thy divine wifdom, that he may,
with the fecrets of Free Mafonry, be able to
unfold the myfteries of Godlinefs and Chri-
ftianity. This we moil humbly beg, in the
name and for the fake of Jesus Christ,
our Lord and Saviour. Amen.
*AHABATH OLAM.
A Prayer repeated in the Royal-Arch Lodge
at Jerufalem.
HOU haft loved us, O Lord our God,
with eternal love; thou haft fpared
us with great and exceeding patience, our
Father and our King, for thy great name's
fake.
* See Dr. Wooten on the Mijkna.»

AHIMAN REZOE
fake, and for our fathers fake, who trufted
in thee, to whom thou.didfl teach the fta-
tutes of life, that they might do after the
ftatutes of thy good pleafure with a perfedd
heart: So be thou merciful unto us, O our
Father ! Merciful Father, that fheweth mer¬
cy, have mercy upon us, we befeech thee,
and put underftanding into our hearts, that
we may underftand, be wife, hear, learn,
teach, keep, do, and perform all the words
of the do&rine of thy law in love, and en¬
lighten our eyes in thy commandments, and
caufe our hearts to cleave to thy law, and
unite them in the love and fear of thv
name; we will not be afhamed, nor con¬
founded, nor ftumble, for ever and ever.
Because we have trufted in thy iioly„
GREAT, MIGHTY, and TERRIBLE NAME,
we will rejoice and be glad in thy falvation,
and in thy mercies, O Lord our God; and
the multitude of thy mercies {hall not for-
fake us for ever: Selah. And now make
hafte and bring upon us a blefling, and peace
from the four corners of the earth; For
thou art a God that worked; falvation, and
has chofen us out of every people and lan¬
guage 5 and thou, our King, has caufed us
to cleave to thy great NAME, in love to
P praife

ii4 AHIMAN REZON.
praife thee, and to be united to thee, and to
love thy name: Blefled art thou, O Lord
God, who haft chofen thy people Ifrael in
love.
A COL

A
COLLECTION
o F
MASONS SONGS.
I. The Grand Master’s Song.
I.
WE Ting of Mafons ancient fame,
When four]core thoufand Craftfmen Hood,
Under the Masters of great name,
'Three thoufand and fix hundred good ;
Employ’d by Solomon, the Sire,
And General Master-Mason too;
As Hiram was in ftately Tyre,
Like Salem, built by Mafons true.
The Royal Art was then divine.
The Craftfmen counfell’d from above,
The Temple did all works outftiine.
The wond’ring world did all approve.
Ingenious men, from every place.
Came to furvey the glorious pile;
And, when return’d, began to trace,
And imitate its lofty Jlyle.
P 2
r*'

116 MASONS SONGS,
III.
At length the Grecians came to know
Geometry, and learn’d the Art,
Which great Pythagoras did fhew.
And glorious Euclid did impart;
Th’ amazing Archimedes too.
And many other fcholars good,
3Till ancient Romans did review
The Art and Science underftood.
IV.
But when ■proud Asia they had quell’d,
And Greece and Egypt overcome.
In Architecture they excell’d,
And brought the learning all to Rome ;
Where wife Vitruvius, Majier prime
Of Architects, the Art improv’d,
In Great Augustus peaceful time,
When Arts and Artijis were belov’d.
V.
They brought the knowledge from the Eafi,
And as they made the nations yield,
They fpread it thro’ the North and PEeJl,
And taught the world the Art to build.
Witnefs their citadels and tozv’rs,
To fortify their legions fine.
Their temples, palaces and bow’rs.
That fpoke the Mafons Grand Design.
VI.
Thus mighty Eafiern Kings, and fome
Of Abram's race and Monarchs good.
Of

MASONS SONGS.
1l7
Of Egypt, Syria, Greece and Rome,
True Architecture underftood:
No wonder then if Mafons join
To celebrate thofe Mafon Kings,
With folemn note and flowing wine,
Whilfl: ev’ry Brother jointly lings.
CHORUS.
Who can unfold the Royal Art,
Or fing its fecrets in a fong ?
They’re fafely kept in Mafon’s heart,
And to the ancient Lodge belong.
SONG II.
*Tbe Progress of Masonry.
I.
PRAY lend me your ears, my dear brethren, awhile,
Full fober my fenfe, tho’ joaking my ftyle;
I fing of great wonders unknown to all thofe.
Who flutter in verfe or who hobble in profe.
Derry down, down, down deny down.
II.
As all in confufion the chaos yet lay,
E’re evening and morning had made the firfb day,
The unform’d materials lay tumbling together.
Like fo many Dutchmen in thick foggy weather.
Derry down, &c.
III.
When to this confufion no end there appear’d,
The fovereign Mafon’s word fudden was heard;
Then

118 MASONS SONGS.
Then teem’d mother Chaos with maternal throes.
By which this great Lodge of the world then arofe,
Derry down, &c.
IV.
Then earth and the heavens with jubilee rung.
And all the creation of Mafonry fung;
When lo! to compleat and adorn the gay ball,
Old Adam was made the Grand Matter of all.
Derry down, &c.
V.
But Satan met Eve, when fhe was a gadding,
And fet her (as fince all her daughters) a madding}
To find out the fecrets of Free-Mafonry,
She eat of the fruit of the forbidden tree.
Derry down, &c.
VI.
Then as fhe was filled with high flowing fancies,
Ase’ er was fond girl who deals in romances;
She thought her with knowledge fufliciently cram’d,
And faid .to her fpoufe. My dear, eat and be d—d.
Derry down, &c.
i
VII.
But Adam aflonifli’d like one ftruck with thunder.
Beheld her from head to foot over with wonder 5
Now you have done this thing, Madam, faid he.
For your fake no women Free-Mafons Jhall be.
Derry down, &c.
VIII.
Now as fhe bewail’d her in forrowful ditty,
The good man beheld her, and on her took pity ;
Free-

MASONS SONGS.
119
Free-Mafons are tender, fo for the fad dame,
He made her an apron to cover her flume,
Derry down, &c.
IX.
Then did they folace in mutual joys,
Till in procefs of time they had two chopping boys 5
The priefts of the parifli, as gofiips devis’d,
By names Cain and Abel the youths circumcis’d.
Derry down, &c.
X.
Old father Seth next mounts on the ftage.
In manners fevere, but in Mafonry fage;
He built up two pillars that were tall and thick.
One was made of ftone, the other of brick.
Derry down, &c.
XI.
On them he engrav’d with wonderful (kill.
Each lib’ral fcience with adamant quill j
Proportion and rule he form’d by the fquare,
And directed the ufe of all Mafonry there.
Derry down, &c.
XII.
But foon did mankind behave paft enduring.
In drinking, h fwearing, in fighting and whoring \
Then Jove arofe, and fierce in his anger,
Said, Vhat he wou'd fuffer Juch mifcreants no longer.
Derry down, &c.
XIII.
Then from their high windows the heavens did pour.
Forty days and nights one continual fhower;
’ Till

i2o MASONS SONGS.
Till nought could be feen but the waters around.
And in this great deluge molt mortals were drowned,
Derry down, &c.
xiv.
Sure ne’er was beheld fo dreadful a fight.
As the old world in fuch a very odd plight;
For there were to be feen all animals fwimming.
Men, monkeys, priefts, lawyers, cats, lapdogs, and
women.
Derry down, &c.
XV.
There floated a debtor away from his duns.
And next father grey-beard ftark naked ’midft nuns j
Likewife a poor hufband not minding his life.
Contented in drowning to fliake off his wife.
Derry down, &c.
XVI.
A king and a cobler next mingled to view,
And fpendthrift young heirs there were not a few;
A whale and a Dutchman came down with the tide.
And a reverend old bifhop by a young wench’s fide.
Derry down, &c.
XVII.
But Noah being wifeft, faithful and upright,
He built him an ark fo flout and fo tight;
Tho5 heaven and earth feem’d to come together,1
He was fafe in his Lodge and fear’d not the weather.1
Derry down, &c.
Then

MASONS SONGS. 121
XVIII.
Then after the flood, like a brother fo true.
Who (till had the good of the Craft in his view.
He delved the ground and he planted the vine,
He form’d a Lodge, aye, and gaye his Lodge winef
Derry down, &c,
XIX.
Let ftatefmen tofs, tumble, and jumble the ball;
We fit fafe in our Lodge, and we laugh at them all;
Let Bifliops wear lawn fleeves, and Kings have their
ointment.
Free Mafonry fure is by heaven’s appointment,
Derry down, &c.
XX.
Now charge, my dear brethren, and chorus with me,
A health to all Mafons both honeft and free ;
Nor lefs be our duty unto the Thirteen,
American Freedom let each brother fing*
Derry down, &c,
SONG lit
Tune—Rule Britannia.
1.
WHEN earth’s foundation firft was laid.
By the Almighty artift’s hand ;
It was then our perfed, our perfed laws were made*’
Eftablifh’d by his ftrid command.
Hail! myfterious hail! glorious Mafonry,
That makes us ever great and free;.
CL As

122 MASONS SONGS.
II.
As man throughout for fhelter fought,
In vain from place to place did roam ;
Until from heaven, from heaven he was taught,
To plan, to build, and fix his home.
Hail! myfterious, See.
III.
Hence illuftrious rofe our art.
And now in beauteous piles appear;
Which 0 all to endlefs, to endlefs time impart;
How worthy and how great we are.
Hail! Myfterious, &c.
IV.
Nor we lefs fam’d for ev’ry tie,
By which the human thought is bound;
Love, truth, and friendfhip, and friendlhip focially.
Doth join our hearts and hands around.
Hail! myfterious, &c.
V.
Our a&ions ftill by virtue bleft.
And to our precepts ever true ;
The world admiring, admiring fhall requeft
To learn, and our bright paths purfue.
Hail! myfterious, &c.
To all true Mafons and upright,
Who fazv the eaft where rofe the light. *
SONG,

MASONS SONGS.
123
SONG IV.
I.
KING Solomon, that wife projedor.
In Mafonry took great delight;
And Hiram, that great architedor.
Whole adions fhall ftiine ever bright:
From the heart of a true honeft Mafon,
There’s none can the fecret remove ;
Our maxims are juftice, morality,
Friendfliip, and brotherly love.
Then who would not be a Free-mafon,
So happy and jovial are we j
To Kings, Dukes, and Lords, we are brothers.
And in every Lodge we are free.
II.
We meet like true friends on the fquare,
And part on a level that’s fair *,
Alike we refped King 2nd beggar.
Provided they’re juft and fincere:
We fcorn an ungenerous adion,
None can with Free-mafons compare ;
We love for to live within compafs,
By rules that are honeft and fair.
Then, &c. ,
III.
Succefs to all accepted Mafons,
There’s none can their honour pull down j
For e’er fince the glorious creation,
Thefe brave men were held in renown:
Q 2
When

"When Adam was King of all nations,
He formed a plan with all fpeed,
And foon made a fweet habitation,
For him and his companion Eve.
Then, &c.
IV.
We exclude all talkative fellows,
That babble and prate pad; their wit s
They ne’er fhall come into our fecret.
For they’re neither worthy nor fit:
But the perfons that's well recommended,
And we find them honefl and true $
When our Lodge is well tyl’d we’ll prepare *
Like Mafons our work we’ll purfue*
Then, &c.
V.
There’s fome foolifli people rejeft us,
For which they’re highly to blame}
They cannot fhew any objection,
Or reafon for doing the fame:
The art’s a divine infpiration,
As all honeft men will declare;
So here’s to all true-hearted brothers,
.That live within compafs and fquare.
Then, &c*
vi.
Like an arch well cemented together,
So firmly cemented we Band ;
And lovingly drink to each other.
With plumb, line and level in hand t

MASONS SONGS.
125
Till the world is confumed by fire*
And judgment is pafs’d on us all,
There’s none fhall come into our fecrets,
Nor we from Free-mafonry fall.
Then, &c.
To all thofe who live within cotnpajs and fquare.
SONG V.
I. -
SOME folks have with curious impertinence drove.
From Free-mafons bofoms their fecrets to move.
I’ll tell them in vain their endeavours mud prove,
Which nobody can deny,
II.
Of that happy fecret, when we are poflefs’d,
Our tongues can’t explain what is lodg’d in our
breads,
For the bleding’s fo great, it can ne’er be exprefs’d.
Which nobody can deny, &V.
III.
By friendffiip’s drift ties we brothers are join’d,
With mirth in each heart and content in each mind.
And this is a difficult fecret to find.
Which nobody can deny, &V.
IV.
But you, who would fain our grand fecret expole.
One thing bed conceal’d to the world you difclofe.
Much folly in blaming what none of you knows.
Which nobody can deny,
Truth,

126 MASONS SONGS.
V.
Truth, charity, juftice, our principles are.
What one doth poflefs the other may lhare,
All thefe in the world are fecrets mod rare,
Which nobody can deny, &c.
vi.
While then we are met. the world’s wonder and boaft,
And all do enjoy what pleafes each mod,
1*11 give you the beft and mod glorious toad.
Which nobody can deny, &c.
VII.
Here’s a health to the gen’rous, brave and the good,
To all thofe who think, and who a<5t as they lhould.
In all this the Free-mafon’s health’s underdood.
Which nobody can deny, &V.
To all true and faithful Brethren, 6cc»
SONG VI.
1.
W E have no idle prating,
Of either Whig or Tory-,
But each agrees.
To live at eafe.
And dng or tell a dory.
C H O-

MASONS SONGS,
127
CHORUS.
Fill to him.
To the brim.
Let it round the table rowl;
The divine.
Tells you wine,
Cheers the body and the foul,
II.
We’re always men ofpleafure,
Defpifing pride and party;
While knaves and fools,
Prefcribe us rules,
We are fincere and hearty.
Chor, Fill to him, &c,
III.
If an accepted Mafon,
Should talk of high or low church 5
We’ll fet him down,
A fhallow clown,
And underftand him no church.
Cher, Fill to him, &c,
IV.
The world is all in darknefs.
About us they conje&ure ;
But little think,
A fong and drink.
Succeeds the Mafon’s ledture.'
Cbor, Fill to him, &c.
Then

328 MASONS SONGS,
V.
Then landlord bring a hoglhead,
And in a corner place it;
Till it rebound.
With hollow found.
Each Mafon here will face it.
Char. Fill to him, &c.
STo the memory of him who firjl planted a vine♦
SONG VII.
Tune. What tho’ they call me country lafs.
I.
WHAT tho* they call us Mafon-fools,
We prove, by g’ometry, our rules
Surpafs the arts they teach in fchools.
They charge us falfely then ;
We make it plainly to appear.
By our behaviour every where.
That* when you meet with Mafons, there
You meet with gentlemen.
if.
5Tis true we once have charged been,
With difobedience to our Queen *,
But after Monarchs plain have feen.
The fecrets Ihe had fought.
We hatch no plots againft the flate.
Nor ’gainfl: great men in power prate.
But all that’s noble, good and great.
Is daily by us taught.
Thefe
* See in the preface the account of Queen Elizabeth s jea-
loufy of the Mafons.

Thefe noble ftruflures which we fee.
Rais’d by our fam?d fociety,
Surprife the world j then fhall not wes
Give praife to Mafonry :
Let thofe who do defpife the art.
Live in a cave or (bine defart,
To herd with beafts from men apart.
For their ftupidity.
But view thofe favage nations, where
Free-mafonry did ne’er appear.
What flrange unpolilh’d brutes they are i
Then think on Mafonry >
It makes us courteous men alway,
Gen’rous, hofpitable, and gay,
What other art the like can fay i
Then a health to Mafons free.
< ■»
Profperity to the mojl ancient and moji honorable
J ' c RAF t.
VIII. The Enter’d ’Prentices Song,
I.
COME let us prepare,
We brothers that are,
Afiembled on merry occahon ;
Let’s drink, laugh and fing.
Our wine has a fpring,
Here’s a health to an accepted Mafon.
R The

I30 MASONS SONGS.
II.
The world is in pain,
Our fecrets to gain.
And ftill let them wonder and gaze on;
Till they’re brought to the light.
They’ll ne’er know the right
Word or fign of an accepted Mafon.
III.
’Tis this and ’tis that.
They cannot tell what.
Why fo many great men of the nation,
Should aprons put on.
To make themfelves one,
sWith a free and an accepted Mafon.
IV.
Great Kings, Dukes and Lords,
Have laid by their fwords,
Our myft’ry to put a good grace on 5
And thought themfelves fam’d.
To hear themfelves nam’d.
With a free and an accepted Mafon.
V.
Antiquity’s pride.
We have on our fide.
Which maketh men juft in their ftation ;
There’s nought but what’s good,
To be underftood,
By a free and an accepted Mafon.
We’re

We’re true and fincere,
And juft to the fair,
They’ll truft us on any occafion ;
No mortal can more.
The ladies adore
Than a free and an accepted Mafon.
VII.
Then join hand in hand.
By each brother firm fiand,
Let’s be merry and put a bright face on ;
What mortal can boaft.
So noble a toaft,
As a free and an accepted Mafon.
[ Thrice repeated in due form. ]
* To all the Fraternity round the Globe.
SONG IX.
To the tune of—the Enter’d Apprentice.
I.
COME are you prepar’d.
Your fcaffolJs well rear’d.
Bring mortar a >d temper it purely ;
’Tis all fafe I hope.
Well brac’d with each rope,
Your ledgers and putlocks fecurely.
R 2
Then

MASONS SONGS,
II.
Then next your bricks- bring.
It is time to begin,
For the fun with its rays is adorning %
The day’s fair and clear.
No rain you need fear,
*Tis a charming, lovely, fine morning,
III.
Pray where are your tools,
Your line and plumb-rules,
Each man to his work, let him (land boys,'
Work folid and fure,
Upright and fecure,
And your building be fure will be ftrong boys*
IV.
Pray make no mi (lake,
But true your joints break,
And take care that you follow your leaders %
Work, rake, back, and tueth.
And make your work fmooth,
And be fure that you fill up your headers*
X* Fhe Fellow-Craft’s Song.
I.
HAIL Mafonry ! thou craft divine!
Glory of earth, from Heav’n reveal’d!
Which dofb with jewels precious fhine.
From all but Mafons eyes conceal’d.
Chor. Tby praijes due who can r shearfe.
In nervous profe3 or flowing verfe.
As
I

*33
MASONS SONGS.
II.
As men from brutes didinguifh’d are,
A Mafon other men excels •,
For what’s in knowledge choice and rare.
But in his bread fecurely dwells.
Chor. His filent breajl and faithful hearty
Preferve the fecrets of the art,
III.
From fcorching heat and piercing cold ;
From beads whofe roar the fored rends;
From the aflaults of warriors bold.
The Mafons art mankind defends.
Chor. Be to this art due honour -paid,
From which mankind receives fuch aid*
IV.
Enfigns of date that feed our pride,
Didindtions troublefome and vain 5
By Mafons true are laid afide.
Art’s free-born fons fuch toys difdain.
Chor. Innobl'd by the name they bear,
Fiftinguifb'd by the badge they wear.
V.
Sweet fellowfhip, from envy free,
Friendly converfe of brotherhood 5
The Lodge’s lading cement be.
Which has for ages firmly dood.
Chor. A Ledge, thus built, for ages paft,
Has lajled, and Jhall ever lafl.
Then

*34
MASONS SONGS.
VI.
Then in our fongs be juftice done.
To thofe who have enrich’d the art.
From Jabal down to Burlington,
And let each brother bear a part.
Chor. Let noble Mafons healths go rounds
Their praije in lofty Lodge refound.
XI. The Lreafurer s Song.
Tune.—Near Tome cool Shade.
I.
GRANT me kind Heav’n what I requeft.
In Mafonry let me be bleft^
Diredt me to that happy place,
Where friend (hip fmiles in every face %
Where freedom and fweet innocence.
Enlarge the mind and cheer the fenfe.
II.
Where fcepter’d reafon from her throne,
Surveys the Lodge and makes us one",
And harmony’s delightful fway.
Forever Iheds ambrofial day;
Where we bleft Eden's pleafures tafte.
While balmy joys are our repaft.
III.
Our Lodge the focial virtues grace.
And wifdom’s rules we fondly trace j
Whole nature open to our view,
Points out the paths we fhould purfue |
Let us fubfid in lafting peace,
And may our happinefs increafe.
No

MASONS SONGS.
*35
IV.
No prying eye can view us here.
No fool or knave difturb our cheer ;
Our well form’d laws fet mankind free,
And give relief to mifery j
The poor, opprefs’d with woe and grief.
Gain, from our bounteous hands, relief.
To all well difpofed charitable Mafons,
SONG XII.
Tune.«"-»Young Damon once the happy Twain.
I. ' '
A MASON’s daughter fair and young.
The pride of all the virgin throng,
Thus to her lover faid ;
Tho’ Damon I your flame approve.
Your actions praife, your perfon love,
Yet (till I’ll live a maid.
II.
None fliall untie my virgin zone.
But one to whom the fecret’s known, -
Of fam’d Free-mafonry;
In which the great and good combine,
To raife with generous deflgn,
Man to felicity.
The

i36 MASONS SONGS.
III.
The Lodge excludes the fop and fool 5
The plodding knave and party-tool.
That liberty would fell ;
The noble, faithful, and the brave.
No golden charms can e*er deceive.
In flavery to dwell.
IV.
This faid, he bow’d and went away,
Apply’d, was made without delay.
Return’d to her again ;
The fair-one granted his requeft.
Connubial joys their days have bled:.
And may they e’er remain.
To Mafons and to Mafons bairns,
And women with both wit and charms,
That love to lie in Mafons arms.
SONG XIII.
Tune.-—The Fairy Elves.
I.
COME follow, Follow me.
Ye jovial Mafons free ;
Come follow all the rules.
That e’er was taught in fchools.
By Solomon, that Mafon King,
Who honours to the craft did bring.
He’s

MASONS SONGS. n 7
II.
He’s juftly call’d the wife.
His fame doth reach the fkies j
He flood upon the fquare,
And did the temple rear ;
With true level, plumb and gage.
He prov’d the wonder of the age.
III.
The mighty Mafon Lords,
Stood firmly to their words ;
They had it in efleem.
For which they’re juftly deem’d ;
Why fhould not their example prove,
Our prefent craft to live in love.
IV.
The royal art and word,
Is kept upon record ;
In upright hearts and pure.
While fun and moon endure ;
Not written, but indented on
The heart of every Arch-mafon,
V.
And as for Hiram's art.
We need not to impart:
The fcripture plainly fhews.
From whence his knowledge flows ;
His genius was fo much refin’d.
His peer he has not left behind.
S
Then

13 8. MASONS SONGS.
VI.
Then let not any one,
Forget the widow’s Ton ;
But toaft his memory.
In glafles charg’d full high ;
And when our proper time is come.
Like brethren part,, and fo go home.
To. him that did the temple rear, &c.
SONG XIV.
I.
Y E Mafons look round, and hark to the found,
To none but the worthy ’tis known ;
3Tis not ev’ry he, who fays I am free,
Deferves to be reckon’d as one.
II.
When I enter’d the road, drefs’d a-la-mode.
My gold it mod brilliantly fhone.
More clothes I put on, by the help of friend John*
Who freely difpos’d of his own.
X III.
When deeper I fought, arofe a frefh thought.
Of the glorious thing I did fee;
A jewel molt bright appear’d to my fight,
A rock and foundation to me.
IV.
I’m fure it is true, call me Chriftian or Jew,
Its rays I beheld in the eaft;
From whence the wife came to honour and fame,
Declaring the Author of Peace.
Be

139
MASONS SONGS.
V.
Be ev’ry Lodge night condu&ed upright.
Abide by the things that are pure ;
No evil take in, choofe virtue, quit fin.
Then fhall the Lodge ever endure.
VI.
What a glorious found encircles us round.
When once form’d the method to peace;
No afflidtions near, no griefs interfere,
To leflen thofe meafures of blifs.
VII.
O ! ye angels above, unite us in love,
Proclaim through the world Mafonry ;
Our adtions fhine bright, as we come to the light,
When enter’d, and once are made Free.
An ODE on Masonry.
By Brother Lieutenant Colonel John Park, A. M. P. M.
Addreffed to Brother Colonel Procter, K. T.
Ab ipfo
Ducit opes, animumque ferro.
Full Chorus.
HAIL! coeleftial Mafonry,
Craft that maks us wife and free !
Heav’n-born cherub ! bring along
The tuneful band, the patriot fang;
See Washington, he leads the train,
’Tis he commands the grateful ftrain ;
See ev’ry crafted fon obeys,
And to the god-like brother homage pays.
S 2
Hor.
Thei •n

140
MASONS SONGS.
Song.
Then give to merit what is due.
And twine the myjlic bays ;
In joyful drains his deeds renew.
And ring the hero’s praife.
Recitative.
While time brings mortal honours to decay,
’Tis freedom gives, what time can’t deal away;
Song.
Unbend his brow from martial care.
And give the patriot red:;
Who nobly brav’d the dorms of war.
To make his country bled.
Recitative.
S Wake from the tomb the fouls of martyrs Free,
To view this hemifphere of liberty.
Let them with ravifh’d eyes look down upon
The glorious work perform’d by Washington.
Song.
V
Then brethren to my lays attend,
And hail our father and our friend ;
Let fame refound him thro’ the land.
And echo “ ’Tis cur Mafier Grand”
Recitative.
Begin, ye Ions of Solomon,
Prepare the wreath for Washington :
’Tis he our ancient craft fhall fway,
Whild we with three times three obey.
Song,

MASONS SONGS.
141
Song.
When evening’s folemn hours pervade,
We choofe the ftill mafonic fhade ;
With hearts fincere, our hands upon>
We blefs the widow's myjlic fon.
Recitative.
For you, my friend, the infpired mufes fing,
Thou firm oppofer of a tyrant king;
Go imitate in fact our glorious head,
And in the Lodge, O Procter, take the lead,
Air.
I.
Support the Craft with honefl pride ;
When in the field, our foes confound,
Difplay your iron thunders wide.
And ftrew the bleeding courfes round.
II.
Let patriot fire ftrain ev’ry nerve.
For Washington upon you Imiles;
With him ’tis more than fame to ferve,
’Tis fame with him to fhare his toils.
Grand Chorus.
Hail coeleftial Mafonry!
Craft that makes us wife and free *,
Heav’n-born cherub! bring along,
The tuneful band, the patriot fong •, .
See Washington, he leads the train,
’Tis he commands the grateful ftrain j
See ev’ry crafted fon obeys.
And to the god-like brother homage pays.
February 7, 1779. J* P.

142 MASONS SONGS.
ODE for the Feftival of St. John Evan¬
gelist, in South-Carolina, 5772*
By the Moft Worlhipful the Honorable Sir EGERTON
LEIGH, Baronet, GRAND MASTER, l$c. tftc
&c.
Set to Mufic by Brother PETER VALTON.
Recitative.
BEHOLD the Social Band appears!
Imparting joy, difpelling fears !
And wak’d by duty and by choice.
Command the Sons of Freedom to rejoice.
Song.
Boast not, mortals, human fkill.
If the fculptur’d dome you raife,
Works of art, by fancy’s will.
Lead us oft through folly’s maze.
What if Phidia’s chifiel guide ?
What if Titian’s pencil grace?
Marble flatters but our pride.
Bane of all the human race !
Recitative.
5Tis from the watchful culture of the mind,
A well directed foul, a fenfe refin’d,
That heav’nly virtues fpring to grace the man;
This be our noble conflict and our plan !
Air.
Let the diamond’s luftre blaze.
Call its water bright and clear,
But

MASONS SONGS. 143
But confefs the greater praife,
Refts on pity’s tender tear.
May the focial virtues bind.
Tune each fympathetic heart,
Raife the feeble, lead the blind.
Wipe the tear that fwells to part.
Recitative.
Ye blelfed minifters above.
Who guard the good with pureft love,
Propitious hear the notes of praife,
Whilft Br itain’s Sons their voices raife.
Air .
Blessings await this Western Land,
Bleffings o’erflow with lib’ral hand,
Commerce uprears our infant State,
And golden currents make us great:
Fair Science lifts her head and cries,
e< I come to make you good and wife:’5
Thefe be the glories of each day,
Marking our Monarch’s gentle fway.
Recitative.
Our Social Band, by love and honour join’d,
Unite their Zeal, as friends to human kind :
The Myftic fenfe is out, the fign does move,
Behold the Sign !—Peace, Haimony and Love.
Duetto.
Let the day be ever prais’d
When the Royal Craft was rais’d,
Let the Social Virtues fhine,
Doing good is fure divine.
Chorus,
r.

' 6+198
144 MASONS SONGS.
Chorus.
Give the heroes all their due.
Twine their brows with laurels too j
But lhall we no laurels find.
For our love to human kind ?
Let the Social Virtues fhine.
Doing good is fure divine,

SERMON
/. ' z'
PREACHED IN
Christ-Church, PHILADELPHIA,
[ For the Benefit of the POOR]
BY APPOINTMENT OF AND BEFORE
The General Communication
o F
Free and Accepted MASONS
.OF THE
State of PENNSYLVANIA,
On MONDAY, December 28, 1778.
Celebrated, acreeable to their Constitution,
as the ANNIVERSARY of
St. JOHN the Evangelist,
By WILLIAM SMITH, D. D.
Provost of the College and Academy of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia: Re-printed by HALL and SELLERS.

I
qTHE Right Worjhipful GRAND MA-
J- STER and GRAND OFFICERS
of the Ancient and Honorable Society of
Free and Accepted MASONS of the
State of Pennfylvania, &c. with the Offi¬
cers of the different Lodges under their
Jurifdittion, beg Leave to return their mofi
fincere Thanks to their Reverend Brother
Dr. Smith, for the Sermon delivered by
Him at their Requeft in Chriff-Church Ye-
flerday. And as they conceive, from its Ex¬
cellency, that the Publication thereof would
contribute to the further Promotion of the
Charity for which it was originally intended,
they requeft that he will favor them with a
Copy for that Purpofe, as foon as pojfble.
- i
By Order of the R. W. G. M. &c. &c.
JOHN COATS, G. Sec. pro Tern.
/
Philadelphia, Dec. 29, 1778.
To the Rev. Dr. Smith.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY
GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esc*.
GENERAL AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF
OF THE
Armies of the United States
O F
NORTH-AMERICA;
THE FRIEND
Of his Country and Mankind,
AMBITIOUS OF NO HIGHER TITLE,
IF HIGHER WAS POSSIBLE;
THE FOLLOWING SERMON,
Honored with his Presence when delivered,
IS DEDICATED,
IN TESTIMONY
OF THE
SlNCEREST BROTHERLY AFFECTION
AND
ESTEEM OF HIS MERIT.
BY ORDER OF THE BRETHREN,
JOHN COATS, G. S. pro. Ter..

Ill
£ Ifl & W .
ifeteSiK.;
MKBMMBfeg
aaHwKBBBMHBi
$tHHHh
x<$~- i
G. Stuart Pinx.
1). Edwin sc. j
t!7mm ^Ih/u///
i
/ ,j£t: /t>

%
A
SERMON, Qfc.
, V /* | -» 4 ^
I Peter, ii. 16,
ij Fr ee, and not ufing your Liberty as a Cloak of Mali-
cioufnefs ; but as the Servants of God.
LIBERTY, evangelical and focial! Jewel of ineftii
mable Price ! Thou Bleffing, of all Bleftlngs the firft !
Woo’d and courted by many; won and wedded by
few! Ever near us; yet often at a Diftance fancied ! rI hro*
all the Modes of Faith, by the Saint purfued ; and, in every
Frame of Government, by the Patriot fought ! O thou
cosleftial Good—or rather Thou who art the Author of
all Good, terreftrial and cceleftial—-Supreme Architect
of the Universe j who, by our great and Spiritual Mas¬
ter thy Son, haft taught us the true Way of Liberty—-the
Way of being free and accepted thro’ Him ! May I now be
enlightened and enlivened by a Ray from Thee, while I en¬
deavour to fhcw, that the Do&rine delivered in my Text for
the Enjoyment and Exercife of Liberty, among Christians
in general, is what the Members of this Ancient Society
(by whofe Appointment I appear in this Place) have bound
themfelves by the ftrongeft Obligations to follow, in the feve-
ral Relations they fuftain ; viz.
Fir ft. In all their Meetings and Communications with each
other.
Secondly, In Society at large. And
Thirdly, In private Life, as Individuals glowing with thtf
Love of their Species; and feeking to promote their
Happinefs, as far as Opportunities can reach, or the wide
Wilh of Benevolence extend.
Upon

Upon thefe Three Grand Pillars, founded on the
adamantine Rock of Eternal Truth, we profefs to fup-
port the Fabric f cur Labors; convinced that other Founda¬
tion than what the great Master-Builder hath laid, can
no Man lay. ajid we prefume to depart from this, or propofe
to cultivate a Science, which hath any thing lefs for its Objeft
than the Contemplation and Imitation of that everlafting Or¬
der, Harmony and Proportion, which (“ in Meafure, Number
and Weight”) HP hath edablifhed through all his Works;
I fhould confider our Foundations as laid in the Sand, and
our Superdruftures raifed of Stubble. Whatever Curiofity
might have at fird prompted me to pry into the Secrets of this
Science, the mod folemn Obligations could not have engaged
my Adherence to it, when found repugnant to antecedent
Obligations, which are indifpenfibffi, and therefore more
folemn.
Thefe were my early * Declarations. Many Years have
fince roll’d over my Head. That Serioufnefs, which I ever widi d
to maintain on grave and ferious Occafions, is now (thro
various Trials and Viciffitudes, public and private) become
habitual to me. I would not, therefore, upon this Occafion,
or in this facred Place, rife up to indulge the wanton Sport of
Imagination : But my Hope is that, in Difcharge of the pre-
fent Duty affigned me by the Brotherhood, I may be in fome
Degree indrumental, among all who honor us with their At¬
tendance, in that bed Office of a Chridian Minider-the
rendering God more feared and more adored, and Mankind
more happy and more in Love with each other.
I proceed, then, to apply the Apodle’s Do&rine to my firfi
Head of Difcourfe; and, for that End, it is neceffiary to recite
fome preceding Parts of his fublime Charge.
tc Wherefore, fays he, laying afide all Malice, and all
“ Guile, and Hypocrifies, and Envies, and all Evil-Speak-
ing”-—be ye as “ living Stones, built up a fpiritual Houfe—
as Free, and not udng your Liberty as a Cloak of Ma-
“ licioufnefs, but as the Servants of God.”
For
* Sermon preach’d on St. John Baptift’s Daj».

APPENDIX.
15t
For the better underftanding thefe Words it mull be obferv-
ed, that, as in our modern Times, fo likewife from the firft
Stages of the Go/pel, its true Purpofe refpe&ing Liberty, both
fpiritual and temporal, hath been mifunderftood or mifinter-
preted by many.
From the Power of Bigotry, the Strength of Prejudice, a
ftrange Meannefs and unhallowed Frame of Mind, fome, who
were firft called into evangelic Freedom, had ftill rooted in
their Temper a beggarly Hankering after the old abrogated
Rites and Cultoms, both JewiJh and Pagan.
Aftoniflied at this, St. Paul, with his ufual Fervor of Elo¬
quence, cries out—O foolifti Galatians! who hath bewitch-
" ed you ?■—After having known God, or rather are known
“ of Him, how turn ye back to the weak and beggarly Ele-
“ ments, wherewith ye defire again to be united Quit
this Folly --be perfuaded to “ hand fail in the Liberty,
“ wherewith Christ has made us Free; and be not en-
“ tangled again with the Yoke of Bondage.’’
Others there were, and ftill are, in the contrary Extreme ;
fo hardly do Men ever /quart their Condudl by the golden Rule
recommended in the Text.
Such were many of the early Jewiih Converts. The new
Law of Christ, which promifed them Liberty from the
ancient fpiritual Bondage, they interpreted into a Scheme of
ftich unbounded Licentioufnefs, as diifolved all Obligations
even of their own moral Law ; which, he expreily told them,
he “ came not to deftroy, but to fulfil.” Affedting to confider
themfelves as the peculiar Favorites of God, and under his
foie Government, they fought an Exemption from the Autho¬
rities of this World, and were for trampling under Foot the
Powers ordained, or permitted, by him.
Thus, forgetting the Spirit of the Gofpel, and blown up
with the Pride of their own Spirit, they treated with Con¬
tempt all whom they confidered as Unbelievers, or lefs righ¬
teous than themfelves. In private Life, they thought that
their

APPENDIX.
their fuperior Profeffions of San.ftity and furious Zeal would
attone for all Sorts of “ Malice, Guile, Hypocrify, Envies
“ and Evil Speaking and, in public Life, would juhify
Seditions, Murders, and the Deftruftion of their Brethren—"—
Miferable Infatuation! as if the God of all Love and
Goodnefs could be ferved, by extirpating from our Hearts not
only thofe native Dictates of Humanity, which were implanted
to give us fome Degree of Happinefs in this World, but
thofe nobler Lelfons of Christian Charity, which are our
belt Preparation for the unbounded Happinefs of the World
to come!
*
The Apoftle, in my Text, contends earneftly againlt this
fad Miftake ; teaching that it leads not to the Vfe, but deplo¬
rable Abufe of true Liberty ; making it a Covering for every
wicked Purpofe, and enflaving us more and more to thofe in¬
fernal Paflions, from which our Divine Master came to fet
jis Free.
To the like Purpofe are we taught by another great and
moife Mafer.—~“ Six Things,” fays Solomon, “ doth the Lord
t* hate; yea. Seven are an Abomination to him, viz.
FirB—A proud Look.
Second-—A lying Tongue.
Third—Hands that Jhed innocent Blood.
Fourth—A Heart that de<vifeth nvicked Imaginations.
Fifth—Fcet that be fwift in running to Mifchief.
Sixth-—A falfe Witnefs that fpeaketh Lies.
Seventh—Him that foweth Difcord among Brethren.
/
Thefe /even Abominations of Solomon, comprehended alfo
by St. Peter under the general Term Malicioufnefs, mull ever
be peculiarly hateful to Us, as a Society of Friends;
linked together by a Itrong Tie of Brotherly Love, as
well as by every other Tie of Religion and Law, for the
Advancement of true Humanity, genuine good Humour, un-
diflembled Virtue:, rational Liberty and ufeful Science.
Indeed

Indeed the whole Dodlrine of the Text (calling us to con-
fider ourfelves “ as the Servants of God,” in the Ufe of every
Thing which he offers for our Enjoyment here) mult flill be
neceffary among all Societies of Men, in a World wrapt up
in falfe Peace; trailing too much to external Profeflions, and
where Multitudes have yet to learn,—That True Religion'
is fbmething fpiritual, and delign’d to perfect the Soul in
Holinefs, thro’ the Fear and Love of God—That fhe mull lie
deeper than in Ordinances and Profeflions—“ Mud reach the
“ inner Parts, or rather take her Rife there, even in the hid-
den Man of the Heart, where Chrill bruifes the Serpent,
“ fubdues our natural Corruptions,” erefts his Throne within
«s, and confecrates us Temples of the Holy Gholl.
It is in this Senfe only, that Men can be conlidered as liv¬
ing Stones, built up a fpiritual Houfe ! It is in this Senfe only,
that they can enjoy Liberty as the Servants of God; without
“ Malicioufnefs,” and without Licentioufnefs!
As to you, Brethren ! I hope I need not remind you that if
rone be accepted among us, but fuch as drive daily, thro’ the
Grace of Heaven, to lay afide thofe evil Palfions, condemned
by the Apodle; then fhall the Lodge be truly denominated a
“ Spiritual Houfe,” and all its Members “ Living Stones,”
hewn out of the Rock of uiges, and adorned with Jewels of
unfpeakable Value. Then fhall they be free indeed ! for the
great Spiritual Master lhall have fet them free from the
Turbulence of Padion, the Stings of Guilt, and the Thraldom
of Slavery, both of Body and Mind. In Wisdom, Strength
and Beauty fhall they ever appear—
That Wisdom which defeends from on high—“ a pure In-
“ fluence flowing from the Glory of the Almighty—which
“ is the Brightnefs of the everlafling Light, the unfpotted
“ Mirror of the Power of God, and the Image of his
“ Goodness—more beautiful than the Sun and above all
“ the Order of Stars—pure, peaceable, gentle and eafy to
“ be entreated—which whofoever findeth, flndeth Life”—
s *
The Stre ngth, which depends not on the Arm of Flefh,
nor delights in Opprcffion and Confufion ; but is a Refuge to
V the

*54
APPENDIX.
the Diftrefs’d, a Band of Union among Brethren, and a
Source of Comfort in our own Hearts—
That Beauty, which lhines forth in the Ornaments of
Holinefs, the Jewels of Mercy, the Cloathing of Humility,
and the Practice of all Religious, Moral and Social Duties.
In Conclufion, therefore, to this firfl Head of Dilcourfe ;
let me, in the Fullnefs of my pledged AfFedtion, exhort you
to remember, in all your Meetings and Communications, that
you are Brethren ; although free, yet on the Level; bound to
keep within the Compafs of mutual Good-Will ; and to frame
your Condudl by the Square of Doing as you would be done
by. Keep an open Heart to every fuffering Brother, ready to
receive him as a Tempell-driven Voyager into a Port of
Safety; feeking among you that Relief and Shelter, which
he fought in vain, while tofs’d upon the reillefs Ocean of,
common Life.
Be of one Mind. Avoid all Levity of Converfation. Be
fober and temperate ; abhaining from every Excels that
would enervate the Body, debale the Underflanding, cherilh
Strife and diihonor your Calling. Study to be quiet, and to
do your own Bulinefs with your own Hands % as knowing
that “ a wife Brother's Delight is in the Work of his
“ Craft.” Learn when to be filent, and when to fpeak ;
for “ a Babbler is an Abomination, becaufe of the unfpeaka-
hie Words, which a Man may not utter,” but in a proper
Place.
Thefe are fundamental Principles, and Practices of immu¬
table Obligation in our Society. Flowing from the Fountain¬
head of Antiquity, they have roll’d down to us, in pure and
nncorfupted Streams, through the Channels of Time ; and,
we trull, will Hill roll, broader and deeper, until the dread
Order of this terrestrial Fabrick fhall be conlum-
mated in the endlefs Order of Eternity. While we draw
from fuch fucred Sources, our true Members, as in Times
jail, fo lihewife now and in Times to come, in different
Climes

*55
APPENDIX.
Climes and Ages, fhall be able to filence “ the Tribe of
if Scornersand to convince them that the only Qualities
we wilh to honor are thofe which form good Men and good
Citizens; and the only Buildings we feek to raife, are Tem¬
ples for Virtue and Dungeons for Vice.
1 he other Societies of this World—Emoires, Kingdoms
and Commonwealths—being of lefs perfeft Conftitutions,
have been of lefs permanent Duration. Although Men have
buficd themfelves, thro* all Ages, in farming and reforming
them, in calling down and building up ; yet dill their La¬
bours have been vain ! The Reafon was—hear it and be wife,
ye Builders of the prefent Day—the Reafon was, that
they daub'd nvitb untemper'd Mortar, and admitted into
their Structures the bafe, difeordant, heterogeneous Ma¬
terials of Pride, Ambition, Selfilhnefs, “ Malice, Guile,
“ Hypocrifies, Envies and Evil Speaking”—which we rejeft.
Hence their fabrics, unable to fupport themfelves, tumbled
to the foundation, through internal Weaknefs, or were
fliaken to Pieces, by external Violence.
The Egyptian, the Babylonian, the Assyrian, the
Persian Empires; the Commosinvealths of Athens, of Spar¬
ta, and of Rome, with many more of later Date—Where
are they now ? “ Fall’n—Fall’n—Fall’n”—the weep¬
ing Voice of Hillory replied ! The Meteors of an Age, the
Gaze of one Part of the World ; they rofe—they blaz’d
awhile on high—they burll and funk again, beneath the
Horizon, to that Place of Oblivion, where the pale Gholts
of departed Grandeur fleet about in fad Lamentation of their
former Glory 1
Such have been the Changes and Revolutions which, as a
Fraternity, we have feen. From the Bofom of the Lodge,
(feated on an Eminence) its Foundations reaching the Center
and its Summit the Sky ; we have beheld, as upon a turbu¬
lent Ocean at an immenfe Diftance beneath us, the States of
this World alternately mounted up and call down, as they
have regarded or neglefted the Principlesnlefcribed above;
V 2 while

APPENDIX.
156
while, fupported by them, the fublime Fabric of our confti-
tution has remained unlhaken through Ages—and, thus fup¬
ported, it lhall ftill remain, while the Sun opens the Day to
gild its Cloud-cap’d Towers, or the Moon leads on the Night
to chequer its Harry Canopy. The Current of Things may
roll along its Balls: # the Tide of Chance and 1 ime may
beat againil: its Walls; the Itormy Gulls of Malice may af-
fault its lofty Battlements, and the heavy Rains of Calumny
may defcend upon its fpacious Roof—but all in vain. A
Building, thus cor.ftru&ed and fupported, is impregnable,
from without; and can then only be diHelved when the Pil¬
lars of the Univerfe lhall be lhaken, and “ the great Globe
<£ itfelf, yea all which it inherit, lhall, like the bafelefs
“ Fabric of a Vifion,” pafs away before the Almighty
Architect !
But altho’ we have feen thole Changes, Convullions and
Dilfolutions ; we have not feen them with Infenlibility, nor
without Heart-felt Grief and a fympathetic Tear. And this
brings me to my—
Second Head, which was to lhew—That our Love to
God and Man leads us to cultivate the fame rational and
evangelic Ufe of Liberty in Society at large, as in our own
fubordinate Societies.
This, we know, is a more arduous Labour; becaufe the
fame watchful Care cannot be fo ealily applied to the Admif>
lion, Rejection or Government of Members, in large Socie¬
ties as in fmall. Neverthelefs, if every Man, firft in his
own Houfe, and then in all thofe lelfer Societies of Brethren
with whom he may be connected, would learn, in the Apo-
ftle’s Ufe of Liberty, to fubdue every evil and difeordant
Paliion ; the blelfed Habit would eafily be carried forth ip to
Society at large. Individual States would not only be happy,
durable,
* A few Sentences which were left out of the London Editions of the
Sermon, on St, John Baptift’s Day, 1755, as relating only to the Society
before whom it was pieached, are interwoven in this and the 153d Page.

APPENDIX.
lS7
durable, and free from inteltine Broils and Convulfions; but
“ Nation would no more rife againft Nation” in dreadful
Havoc and Opprelfion. The whole World would be as one
.harmonious Lodge, knit together in Brotherly Love, and
obedient to the Will of the great Heavenly Master !
Such a glorious JEra many believe to be promifed, and
hope it may yet come. Our Principles lead us to cherilh this
Hope; and, as the belt Means, under Providence, for its
Accomplilhment, to refill Violence and to fupport Juliice,
Truth, Freedom and Happinefs, in the Governments to which
we belong.
The Dodlrine that One Man’s Grandeur, or the Grandeur
of a Few, is to be the Mifery of All, can have no reception
among us. We can acknowledge no abfolute uncontroulable
Power upon Earth ; and can form no Conjecture whence fuch
Power could come, or be pretended. From God, the fu-
preme Fountain of all Power, it could not come; without
fuppofing he granted it to dilhonour his own Perfections,
deface his Image in his Works, and debafe his whole Crea¬
tion. From Man it could not come ; unlefs we fuppofe
him, voluntarily and in his fober Ser.fes, confenting to his
own immediate Mifery and Deflrudtion.
In our Eflimation, therefore, no Goverment can be of
divine Original, but as it refembles God’s own Government ;
round whofe eternal Throne, Juliice and Mercy wait. And
all Governments mull be fo far divine., as the Laws rule ;
and every Thing is ordered, under God, by free and common
confent.”
To contend for fuch Governments, with a holy, enlighten¬
ed, and unquenchable Zeal, is the higheft temporal Glory.
Wherefore, we dwell with Rapture upon the Records of for¬
mer Renown, and contemplate with Veneration thofe tran-
feendent Scenes of Heroifm ; in which we beheld the Bravs
and the Free wearing upon their Swords the Fate of Mil¬
lions—while the divine Genius of Victory, efpoufing
their

APPENDIX.
their Caufe, hovers o’er their Heads with expanded Wing ;
reaching forth the immortal Wreath that is to furround their
triumphant Crow ; and fmiling upon the deeijt-ve Moment
that is to fix the Happinefs of future Generations !
They who (from a Senfeof Duty to God and their Country,
feeking that LinERTr and Peace which Heaven approves)
have thus afted their Part, whether in more elevated or infe¬
rior Stations, form the firft Clafs in the Roll of Worthies.
And when they defeend again into private Life, calling behind
them vain Pomp and faflidious Pride, to mingle with their
Fellow-Citizens in all the tender Charities and endearing Of¬
fices of Society and Humanity ; their Characters, if pofhble,
become ffcill more illuflrious. Their very Maims and Scars are
nobly honorable. The RefpeCt which they command, grows
with their growing Years ; and they approach the Horizon
of Life, as the Sun in ferene and fetting Glory, with Orb
more enlarged and mitigated, though lefs dazzling and fplen-
did. Even their garrulous old Age, while it can only recount
the Feats of former Days, will be liflened to with Attention :
Or fhould they furvive all the aCtive Powers both of Eody and
Mind, yet ftill, like fome grand Structure, tottering and
crumbling beneath the Hand of Time, they will be confider-*
ed as majeltic in Ruins, and venerable even in Decay !
And w'hen at laft the MelTenger, Death, who comes to
all, fhall come to them, undaunted they will obey the Sum¬
mons j_ in confcious Hope of being fpeedily united and beati¬
fied with their Com-patr;ots and Fore-runners, in the Man-
fions of endlefs Blifs!
Such, to name no more, was the Character of a Cincin*
natus in ancient Times; rifing “ awful from the Plough”
to fave his Country ; and, his Country fa-ued, returning to the
Plough again, with increafed Dignity and Luftre. Such too,
if we divine aright, will future Ages pronounce to have been
the Character of a ##■####, but you all anticipate me
In a Name, which Delicacy forbids me, on this Occafion, to
mention. Honoured with his Prefence as a Brother, you will
feek

’APPENDIX.
J59
feek to derive Virtue from his Example; and never let it be
faid, that any Principles you profefs can render you deaf to
the Calls of your Country; but, on the contrary, have ani¬
mated you with intrepidity in the Hour of Danger, and Hu¬
manity in the Moments of Triumph.
True Courage confiils not in any Thing external to a Man—-
in the Trappings of Drefs, the Parade of Office, the Pride of
Looks, a quarrelfome Temper, or loud-founding Soaks ; but
in a Soul ferenely fixed on Duty, and unconfcious of Guilt,
as knowing that Death has no Terrors but what he derives
from Sin. For it hath been well faid on this Subjedt, that
“ Fire may as eafily be flruck out of Ice, as Valour out of
“ Crimes; and he has the Chance of moll Valour who lives
“ belt.”
True Religion, therefore, is a Man’s Glory and Strong
Hold in every Situation of Life, whether Public or Private;
and this brings me to my—
Third Head, Under which it was prppofed briefly to
remind you, as a Fraternity, of the Principles by which you
profefs to regulate your Condudf towards Individuals in pri¬
vate Life ; which kill having that ^-^/.Commandment of our
heavenly Master, Brotherly Love, as the chief Corner-
Stone, every Thing railed upon it fhould be fuperlatively
Grand and Fair.
Hence, therefore, we mult feek to expand our Souls to the
whole human Species ; ever driving to promote their Happi-
nefs to the utmoft of our Power. Whatever is illiberal, par¬
tial and contra&ed—a felnfli and unfeeling Heart, coiled up
within its own fcanty Crb—-we mud rejedt from among us.
Looking far beyond the little Diftindtions of Sea or Party
(by which too many feek to know, and be known by, each
other) we fhould labour to imitate the great Creator, in re¬
garding thofe of every Nation, Religion and Tongue, who
“ fear Him, and work Righteoufnefs.”
Such Condua becomes thofe who profefs to believe that
when our Master Christ fhall come again to reward his
faith-

160 A P P E N D I X.
faithful Workmen and Servants; He will not afk whether we
were of Luther or of Calvin ? Whether we prayed to him
in White, Black, or Grey; in Purple, or in Rags; in fine
Linen, or in Sackcloth ; in a Woollen Frock, or peradventure
in a Leather Apron ? Whatever is considered as mod con¬
venient, mod in Character, mod for Edification, and in¬
fringes lead: on Spiritual Liberty, will be admitted as good in
this Cafe.
But although we may believe that none of thefe Things
will be afked in that Great Day; let us remember that it will
be affuredly afked—*Were we of Christ Jesus? “ Did wc
e: pray to him with the Spirit and with the Underftanding:
Had we the true Marks of his Goipel in our Lives ? Were
\ve “ meek and lowly of Heart ?” Did we nail our rebelli¬
ous Affections to his Crofs, and drive to fubdue our Spirits to
the Rule of his Spirit? But above all, it will be afked us—
Were we cloathed with the Wedding-garment of Love ? Did
we recognize our heavenly Master in the Sufferings of
thofe whom he died to fave ? Did we, for his fake, open
our Souls wide to the Cries of His distressed Poor ?
When they were Hungry, did we give them Meat? When
“ Thirdy, did we give them Drink ? When Strangers, did
“ we take them in? When Naked, did we clothe them?
“ When Sick, did we vidt them ? When in Prifon, did we
come unto them” with Comfort and Relief?
This Day, my Brethren—nay, a few Moments hence—
will furnifh you with an Opportunity of laying up in your
own Conferences, and fending before you to Heaven, an
Anfwer to thofe important Quedions, againd the awful Day
of final Retribution.
Hark! do you not this indant hear—amidd the unavoidable
Calamities of your Country, the deep Didreffes of War, the
extreme Rigour of the Seafon, the unufual Price and Scarcity
of the chief NeceJJaries cf Life—Bread, Cloathing, and
Fuel,—Hark! I fay, Do you not, amidd thefe complicated
Didreffes, this indant, hear the loud Cries of many Hungry,
Naked, Cold, Sick, and almod ready to Perijb f—
I know

APPENDIX. i6?
I know you hecr them, and have come, with open Heart
and open Hand, to relieve them. This was the chief' Furpofe
of the prefent Solemnity; and I have your Inftrudtions to prefs
it Home, as the bed Exercife of thofe Principles, in which
you profefs mod eminently to fhine. Nor will your Prattice,
I trud, ever fall fhort of your ProfeJJion\ or give Room to ap¬
ply the Prophet’s farcajlic Rebuke, either to yourlelves, or
your Preacher—— “ Lo ! thou art unto them as a very lovely
“ Song, of one that hath a pleafant Voiced and can play well
“ upon an Indrument—for they bear thy Words, but they do
“ them not.” No, Brethren! you will never fufFer this-to be
judly faid of you ; but, on the contrary, that you are always
as ready to do as to hear.
i % s *
Many of you will remember, that near the fourth Part of a
Century—-a Period that hath been big with important Events
and Revolutions—hath paffed away fince our lad Meeting in
this Place, on a fimilar Occafion. Let the Poor, then, have
Reafon to confider our prefent Meeting, as a Jubilee to them
rather than to us.
And while I addrefs You on this Snbjeft, I would, at the
fame Time, beg Leave to addrefs the Whole of this numerous
and refpectable Auditory—for Charity is the Concern of
all; and we are peculiarly called to its highed Exercife at this
particular Time.
But a few Days have pad, fince we were joining together in
the Song of Angels; giving Thanks and “ Glory to God
“ in the Higheft” for the Birth of a Saviour, and the
Spiritual Deliverance accomplHhed by him. In a few Days *
more, we are again, by fpecial Appointment, to offer up
Thank/givings to God for whatever temporal Bleffings and De¬
liverances we have received through his Goodnefs. On both
Accounts, one of the belt Sacrifices of Tbankfgiving which we
can offer, is—to raife the drooping Mourner ; cheer the lones
ly Heart of Woe; and be the Inllrum^nts of Heaven for en-
' crcafing the Number of the Thankful.
X This *
* The Tbankf/iflng Day appointed for Dtccr.ber 3»th,

162
APPENDIX.
This is the Return of Gratitude which Christ peculi¬
arly requires ; namely, that, from the Conflderation of his
unbounded Love to us, our Heart fhould overflow with Love
to each other. Such Love is juftly ftiled—“ the fulfilling of
“ the whole Law,”—the Sum and Subffance of all Obedience.
For true Religion being an Emanation from on high, cannot
but Ihed Light upon the Undemanding, and Love upon the
Heart—even that Love, which, when genuine, will gradu¬
ally confume every Thing that is grofs and earthly within
us; and mount up our Affedlions, at laft, in a pure Flame, to
the omnipotent Source of all Love.
Deeds of Love are the chief Employment of the Angels of
God; and into a Soul, which overflows with Love and Chari¬
ty, Heaven may be faid to have defcended, while on Earth.
The other Virtues and Graces bring us nearer to God, as it
were, by flow Approachesbut, by the Divine Virtue of Cha-
rity, we are borne into his direft Prefence, as in a fiery Cha¬
riot! This is the only Virtue which we can carry with us into
tjxe other World : Our Faith, after Death, fliall be fwallowed
up in Sight, our Hope in Enjoyment; but our Charity, when,
we {hake off this Mortality, fliall then only begin to have its
full Scope, enlarging itfelf into unbounded Dimenfions, as
the main Ingredient of crur Happinefs, in the Regions of
Eternal Love !
But I will detain you no longer. Brethren!—You all pant
to have a Foretafte of the Joy of Angels, by calling forth into
immediate Exercife this heavenly Virtue of Charity ; where¬
by you will give * Glory to the THRICE BLESSED
T H R E E, Father, Son, a»d. Holy Gholl, one God over all!
* At the Word “ Glory,” the Bhithren rcje together; and, in reve¬
rential Fofhire, cn pronouncing the Names of the T R I - U N E GOD, accom¬
panied the fame Ly a correfpondent Repitition of the Ancient Sign or Symbol cf
Bivine Homage and Obcifame ; concluding with the following Response,--->*.
“ Amen ! So let it ever be !*

APPENDIX.
l6-3
The following Short ACCOUNT of the Procession
of the Brethren to and from Church, &c. is recorded
here by Defre.
AT Nine o’Clock, A. M. ne.ar Three Hundred of the Body
affembled at the College; where being properly cloath-
ed—the Officers in the Jewels of their Lodges,, and other
Badges of their Dignity——«*the Proceffion began at Eleven
o’Clcck, viz.
i. The Sword-Bearer.
2. Two Deacons, bearing Wands, tipt with Gold.
3• dhe Three Orders, Doric, Ionic, aaid Corinthian ;
borne by Three Brethren.
4- The Hoi y Bible and Book of Confitutions, on Crimlbn
Velvet Cu.lhions; borne by the Grand Tre-afurer and
Grand Secretary. •
5. A reverend Brother.
6. Four Deacons, bearing Wands.
7. His Excellency,' our illuflrious Brother George Wash¬
ington, Efq; fupported by the Grand Master and
his Deputy.
8. The Two Grand Wardens, bearing the proper Pillars.
9. The pad Mafers of different Lodges.
10. The prefent Mailers of Ditto.
11. The Senior Wardens,
12. The Junior Wardens,
13. The Secretaries,
14. The Treaftirers,
15. Brother Prodlor’s Band of Mufic.
16. Viliting Brethren : And
17. Members of different Lodges; Two and Two, according
to Seniority.
The Proceffion entered the Church in the Order of March ;
and being feated in the Middle Hie, Prayers were read by the
Reverend Mr. White; and the following Anthem fung
in its proper Place by fundry of the Brethren, accompanied
with the Organ and other Inllrumental Mulic, viz.
\ 2
Of different private Lodges.
A Grand

164 APPENDIX.
A Grand Symphony.
f Chorus. Behold, how good and joyful a Thing it is,
Brethren, to dwell together in Unity.
Solo. I will give Thanks unto Thee, O Lord ! with my
whole Heart. Secretly among the Brethren, and in the Con¬
gregation will I praife Thee ! I will fpeak the marvellous
Works of thy Hands ; the Sun, the Moon and the Stars,
which thou haft ordained.
Solo. The People that walked in Darknefs have feen a
great Light ; and on them that dwelt in the Land of the
Shadow of Death, doth the glorious Light of Jehovah fliine.
Solo. Thou lialh gathered Us from the East, and from
the West, and from the North, and from the South—
Thou hall made us Companions for the Mighty upon Earth-
even for Princes of great Nations.
Trio. O! I AM! Infpire tis with Wisdom and Strength
to fnpport us in all our Troubles, that we may Worlhip Thee
in the Beauty of Holiness !
..... I *
After Sermon, near Four Hundred Pounds were col¬
lected for the P>.elief of the Poor. The Brethren then
returned to the College in the fame Order as above deferibed;
from thence they departed to their feveral Lodges, and fpent
the remainder of the Day with their ufual good Harmony and
Sociability.
A PRAYER,

APPENDIX.
i65
A PRAYER,
» B Y
William Smith, D. D. and Grand Secretary,
At the Opening the Firjl Grand Communication,
December 20th, 1779*  the G R A N D L 0 D G E ^ Phl"
ladelphia, after feme Tears Interruption from the American
Publilhed by Order of the Grand Lodge.
FATHER cf Light, of Life and of Love! Supreme
Architect and Ruler of Heaven and Earth! Infi¬
nitely glorious God-Thou, at the Beginning, willing to
communicate Happinefs, and to eftablilh Beauty, Order an
Harmony, did ft, from the Womb of thine own awful Eter¬
nity, give Birth to Time ; and, commanding the jarring
Elements of Matter to ceafe their Strife, didft marlhal them
into an Universe compleat ! Then, while the heavenly
Hierarchies, with Voice and Harp, fung the loud Anthem of
Joy, thou didft crown thy glorious Work, by breathing the
Breath of Life into thine own Image—Man !
Be Thou with us at our prefent Beginning and to the End.
In thy Name we affemble, and in thy Name we defire to pro¬
ceed in all our Doings. Let the Wifdom of thy blelfed Son,
through the Grace and Goodnefs of the Holy Ghost, fo
fubdue every difeordant Paffion within us, fo harmonize and
enrich our Hearts with a Portion of thine own Love and Good-
fiefs, that the Lodge at this Time may be a fincere, though
humble. Copy of that Order and Beauty and Unity, which
reign for ever before thy heavenly Throne.
We thankfully acknowledge that Thou haft loved us, O
Lord our God, with an exceeding great and eternal Love ;
and haft chofen us out of every People and Language. Our
Fathers trufted in Thee, and were not alhamed—for Thou
didft teach them the Statutes of Life, that they might do 01 thy
<*ood Pleafure with a perfect and willing Heart. As Thou
* ‘ didft

i66
APPENDIX.
didft untb them, fo do Thou unto us; ftill remembering thy
gracious Promife, “ That where Two or Three are met toge-
“ ther in thy Name, Thou wilt be in the midftcf them,” [*]
By thus feeking and loving Thee, and by loving each other
for thy Sake, lhall thy Blejfmg and Peace be upon tas from the
four Corners of the Earth. Thou flialt put Undemanding in¬
to cmr Hearts, and make us diligent to bear, to teach, and to
do, all the Words of thy Law in Love—So fhall we be built
tap a Spiritual Lodge, never to be fliaken; but cleaving to thy.
great Name, and united to Thee in Love and Praife and Free¬
dom of Soul for ever !
AMEN! SO MAY IT BE, FOR THE SAKE
OF CHRIST OUR SAVIOUR!
N. B. All the Members of the Lodge Jhould audibly repeat this
laft Line, viz. “ Amen! fo may it be, for the Sake of Chrijl our
Saviour!”
[ * ] Where the Crotchets /land above, the following Paragraph hath
been added by the Author, when called to affift in Prayer at the Opening os
Dedicating a Naw Lodgs ; and may he ufed by others on the like Occa¬
sion, viz.-
<•' May the prefent and fucceeding Rulers of this Lodge be endued
“ with divine Knowledge to inftruSi, and with Juftice and P-udence to
“ govern the Brethren, according to the true Laws of our Royal Craft
*•' as founded in thy holy Word ; and may all the Members of this Lodge
u be bleft with a teachable Difpofition, and a Spirit of Love and juft Sub-
ts million to thofe in Authority over them.”
<J By thus feeking and loving Thee,” &c. as above_
FINIS*

WASHINGTON! AN A.
M. THOMAS & SONS, Auctioneers.
CATALOGUE
OF A COLLECTION OF
BOOKS,
Rare Maps, Plans of Cities, Revolutionary
Battle Fields, &c.
LART OF THE LIBRARY OF
Gen. George Washington,
Many of the Works contain his Autograph.
ALSO, FOR OTHER ACCOUNTS,
Rare Works relating to American History, Early
Imprints, Pamphlets, Almanacs, Autograph
Letters, Cfc., Rfc., &c.
TO BE SOLI)
TUESDAY AFTERNOON, NOV. 28,76,
AT 2 O’CLOCK,
fr the Ruction jTooM.s, 139^141 ^outh ^ourth^t.
M. THOMAS & SONS, Auctioneers.
:Persons unable to attend the Sale ran hare purchases
made for them with out extra charge.
Si£L)it£iMUit & Mookb, Printers, 501 Chestnut Street, Phiia.

Jfubit (T.ivtfi proton
tibrorn
JBroum Mnmcrsitu

ik.«9
