^HV  Of  PRIfv??^


^^^CG.'c^L  SE>^■^:^'^


BL1010.S3v.39

Sacred  Books  of  China,  ttie  texts  of  iaac


THE


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST


[39]


f onbon
HENRY    FROWDE


^5^-


Oxford  University  Press  Warehouse
Amen  Corner,  E.C.


THE


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST


TRANSLATED


BY  VARIOUS  ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS


AND    EDITED    BY

F.   MAX    MULLER


VOL.    XXXIX


AT     THE     CLARENDON     PRESS
1891

[  All  rights  reserved  ]


0;cfor5

PRINTED    AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS

IIY   HORACK   HART,   PRINTER  TO  THH  VNIVKRSITY


THE


SACRED    BOOKS    OF   CHINA


THE   TEXTS   OF   TAOISM


TRANSLATED   BY


JAMES     LEGGE


PART    I

THE    TAO   TEH    ^ING
THE   WRITINGS    OF   iiTWANG-SZE

BOOKS   I— XVII


AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS
1891

[All  rights  reserved^


CONTENTS


PAGE


PREFACE xi

INTRODUCTION.

CHAP.

I.  Was  Taoism  older  than  Lao-jze.?         .       .       .       .        i
Three  Religions  in  China.     Peculiarity  of  the  Tao  Teh  ATing.

II.  The  Texts  of  the  Tao  Teh  ICwg  and  A^wang-jze

ShCt,  as  regards  their  authenticity  and  genuine-
ness, AND  THE  ARRANGEMENT  OF   THEM        ...  4

i.  The  Tao  Teh  A'ing.  The  evidence  of  Sze-ma  AVnen,  the
historian  ;  of  Lieh-^ize,  Han  Fei-jze,  and  other  Taoist  writers ;
and  of  Pan  Ku.  The  Catalogue  of  the  Imperial  Library  of
Han ;  and  that  of  the  Sui  dynasty.  The  Commentaries  of
'  the  old  man  of  the  Ho-side,'  and  of  Wang  Pi.  Division
into  Parts  and  Chapters,  and  number  of  Characters  in  the  Text.

ii.  The  Writings  of  isfwang-jze.  Importance  to  Taoism  of
those  Writings.  The  division  of  the  Books  into  three  Parts.
Their  general  Title  and  its  meaning.

III.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  name  Tao?  and  the

CHIEF   POINTS   OF   BELIEF    IN   TAOISM  .  .  .  .12

Meaning  of  the  name.  Usage  of  the  term  Thien.  Peculiar
usage  of  it  by  K\va.ng-^ze.  Mr.  Giles's  view  that  the  name
'  God'  is  the  equivalent  of  Thien.  Relation  of  the  Tao  to  the
name  Ti.  No  idea  of  Creation-proper  in  Taoism.  Man  is
composed  of  body  and  spirit.  That  the  cultivation  of  the
Tao  promotes  longevity.  Startling  results  of  the  Tdo ;  and
how  It  proceeds  by  contraries.  The  paradisiacal  state.  The
decay  of  Taoism  before  the  growth  of  knowledge.  The  moral
and  practical  teachings  of  Lao-jze.  Humility ;  his  three  Jewels  ;
that  good  is  to  be  returned  for  evil.

IV.  Accounts    of    Lao-jze    and    ATwang-^ze   given    by

Sze-ma  A'z/ien 33

V.  On  the  Tractate  of  Actions  and  their  Retributions      38

Peculiar  style  and  nature  of  the  Treatise.  Its  date.  Meaning
of  the  Title.  Was  the  old  Taoism  a  Religion  ?  The  Kang
family.     Influence  of  Buddhism  on  Taoism.


VI 11  CONTENTS.


THE    TAO   TEH   A'lNG.


Part  I  (Chapters  i  to  xxxvii) 45  to  79

Ch.  1.  Embodying  the  Tao,  p.  47.  2.  The  Nourishment  of
the  Person,  pp.  47,  48.  3.  Keeping  the  People  at  Rest,  p.  49.
4.  The  Fountainless,  pp.  49,  50.  5.  The  Use  of  Emptiness,
p.  50.  6.  The  Completion  of  Material  Forms,  p.  51.  7.  Sheath-
ing the  Light,  p.  52.  8.  The  Placid  and  Contented  Nature,
PP-  52,  53-  9-  Fulness  and  Complacency  contrary  to  the  Tao,
p.  53.  10.  Possibilities  through  the  Tao,  pp.  53,  54.  11.  The
Use  of  what  has  no  Substantive  Existence,  pp.  54,  55.  12.  The
Repression  of  the  Desires,  p.  55.  13.  Loathing  Shame,  p.  56.
14,  The  Manifestation  of  the  Mystery',  p.  57.  15.  The  Ex-
hibition of  the  Qualities  of  the  Tao,  pp.  58,  59.  16.  Returning
to  the  Root,  pp.  59,  60.  17.  The  Unadulterated  Influence,
pp.  60,  61.  18.  The  Decay  of  Manners,  p.  61.  19.  Returning  to
the  Unadulterated  Influence,  p.  62.  20.  Being  Different  from
Ordinary  Men,  pp.  62,  63.  21.  The  Empty  Heart,  or  the  Tao
in  its  Operation,  p.  64.  22.  The  Increase  granted  to  Humility,
p.  65.  23.  Absolute  Vacancy,  pp.  65,  66.  24.  Painful  Gracious-
ness,  p.  (i-j.  25.  Representations  of  the  Mystery,  pp.  67,  68.
2G.  The  Quality  of  Gravity,  p.  69.  27.  Dexterity  in  Using  the
Tao,  p.  70.  28.  Returning  to  Simplicity,  p.  71.  29.  Taking  no
Action,  pp.  71,  72.  30.  A  Caveat  against  War,  pp.  72,  T^)-  31.
Stilling  War,  pp.  73,  74.  32.  The  Tao  with  no  Name,  pp.  74,
75.  33.  Discriminating  between  Attributes,  p.  75.  34.  The
Task  of  Achievement,  pp.  76,  Tj.  35.  The  Attribute  of  Bene-
volence, p.  -]■].  36.  Minimising  the  Light,  p.  ^'^.  37.  The
Exercise  of  Government,  p.  79.

Part  II  (Chapters  xxxviii  to  Ixxxi) Soto  124

Ch.  38.  About  the  Attributes  of  the  Tao,  pp.  80,  81.  39.
The  Origin  of  the  Law,  pp.  82,  83.  40.  Dispensing  with  the
Use  (of  Means),  pp.  83,  84.  41.  Sameness  and  Difference,
pp.  84,  85.  42.  The  Transformations  of  the  Tao,  p.  85.  43.  The
Universal  Use  (of  the  Action  in  Weakness  of-the  Tao),  p.  87.
44.  Cautions,  pp.  Z-j,  88.  45.  Great  or  Overflowing  Virtue,  p.  88.
40.  The  Moderating  of  Desire  or  Ambition,  pp.  88,  89.  47.
Surveying  what  is  Far-off,  p.  89.  48.  Forgetting  Knowledge,
p.  90.  49.  The  Quality  of  Indulgence,  p.  91.  50.  The  Value
set  on  Life,  pp.  92,  93.  51.  The  Operation  (of  the  Tao)  in
Nourishing  Things,  pp.  93,  94.  52.  Returning  to  the  Source,
pp.  94,  95.  53.  Increase  of  Evidence,  pp.  96,  97.  54.  The  Culti-
vation (of  the  TAo),  and  the  Observation  (of  its  Effects),  pp.  97,
98.     55.  The  Mysterious  Charm,  p.  99.     56.  The  Mysterious


CONTENTS.  IX


Excellence,  p.  loo.     57.  The  Genuine  Influence,  pp.  loo,  loi.

58.  Transformation  according  to  Circumstances,  pp.  loi,  102.

59.  Guarding  the  Tao,  pp.  102,  103.  60.  Occupying  the  Throne,
pp.  103,  104.  61.  The  Attribute  of  Humility,  pp.  104,  105.  62.
Practising  the  Tao,  pp.  105,  106.  63.  Thinking  in  the  Begin-
ning, pp.  106,  107.  64.  Guarding  the  Minute,  pp.  107,  108.  65.
Pure,  unmixed  Excellence,  pp.  108,  109.  66.  Putting  One's  Self
Last,  p.  109.  67.  Three  Precious  Things,  p.  no.  68.  Matching
Heaven,  pp.  in,  112.  69.  The  Use  of  the  Mysterious  (Tao),
p.  112.  70.  The  Difficulty  of  being  (rightly)  Known,  pp.  112,
113.  71.  The  Disease  of  Knowing,  p.  113.  72.  Loving  One's
Self,  p.  114.  73.  Allowing  Men  to  take  their  Course,  p.  116.
74.  Restraining  Delusion,  p.  117.  75.  How  Greediness  In-
jures, pp.  117,  118.  76.  A  Warning  against  (Trusting  in)
Strength,  pp.  118,  119.  77.  The  Way  of  Heaven,  p.  119.  78.
Things  to  be  Believed,  p.  120.  79.  Adherence  to  Bond  or
Covenant,  p.  121.  80.  Standing  Alone,  p.  122.  81.  The  Mani-
festation of  Simplicity,  p.  123.


THE  WRITINGS    OF   ArWANG-3ZE.

INTRODUCTION.

PAGE

Brief  Notices  of  the  different  Books    .        .        .       .127

PART  I.

BOOK

I.  i.  Hsiao-yao  Yu,  or  Enjoyment  in  Untroubled  Ease        .  164

II.  ii.  KhX  Wu  Lun,  or  the  Adjustment  of  Controversies        .  176

III.  iii.  Yang  Shang  Ku,  or  Nourishing  the  Lord  of  Life.         .  198

IV.  iv.  Zan  A'ien  Shih,  or  Man  in  the  World,  Associated  with

other  Men 203

V.  V.     Teh  A7mng  FiJ,  or  the  Seal  of  Virtue  Complete    .         .  223
VI.  vi.    Ta   Bung   Shih,  or  the  Great  and    Most    Honoured

Master 236

VII.  vii.  Ying  Ti  Wang,  or  the  Normal  Course  for  Rulers  and

Kings 259

PART  II.

VIII.  i.  Phien  Mau,  or  Webbed  Toes 268

IX.  ii.  Ma  Thi,  or  Horses's  Hoofs 276

X.  iii.  Kh\\.  A'/Heh,  or  Cutting  Open  Satchels  .         .         .281

XL  iv.  3ai  Yu,  or  Letting  Be,  and  Exercising  Forbearance     .  291


CONTENTS.


BOOK

XII.  V.  Thien  Ti,  or  Heaven  and  Earth    .

XIII.  vi.  Thien  Tao,  or  the  Way  of  Heaven

XIV.  vii.  Thien  Yiin,  or  the  Revolution  of  Heaven
XV.  viii.  Kho  t,  or  Ingrained  Ideas     .

XVI.  ix,  Shan  Hsing,  or  Correcting  the  Nature.

XVII.  X.  A7/iu  Shui,  or  the  Floods  of  Autumn    .


FACE

345
363
368

374


Transliteration  of  Oriental  Alphabets  adopted  for  the  Transla-
tions of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East


393


PREFACE.

In  the  Preface  to  the  third  volume  of  these  'Sacred
Books  of  the  East'  (1879),  I  stated  that  I  proposed  giving
in  due  course,  in  order  to  exhibit  the  System  of  Taoism,
translations  of  the  Tao  Teh  J^ing  by  Lao-jze  (sixth
century  B.C.),  the  Writings  of /^wang-jze  (between  the
middle  of  the  fourth  and  third  centuries  B.C.),  and  the
Treatise  of 'Actions  and  their  Retributions '  (of  our
eleventh  century)  ;  and  perhaps  also  of  one  or  more  of  the
other  characteristic  Productions  of  the  System.

The  two  volumes  now  submitted  to  the  reader  are  a
fulfilment  of  the  promise  made  so  long  ago.  They  contain
versions  of  the  Three  Works  which  were  specified,  and,  in
addition,  as  Appendixes,  four  other  shorter  Treatises  of
Taoism  ;  Analyses  of  several  of  the  Books  of  A^wang-jze  by
Lin  Hsi-/l'ung  ;  a  list  of  the  stories  which  form  so  important
a  part  of  those  Books  ;  two  Essays  by  two  of  the  greatest
Scholars  of  China,  written  the  one  in  A.  D.  586  and  illus-
trating the  Taoistic  beliefs  of  that  age,  and  the  other  in
A.  D.  1078  and  dealing  with  the  four  Books  of  A'wang-jze,
whose  genuineness  is  frequently  called  in  question.  The
concluding  Index  is  confined  very  much  to  Proper  Names.
For  Subjects  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  Tables  of
Contents,  the  Introduction  to  the  Books  of  ^wang-jze
(vol.  xxxix,  pp.  127-163),  and  the  Introductory  Notes  to
the  various  Appendixes.

The  Treatise  of  Actions  and  their  Retributions
exhibits  to  us  the  Taoism  of  the  eleventh  century  in
its  moral  or  ethical  aspects ;  in  the  two  earlier  Works
we  see  it  rather  as  a  philosophical  speculation  than  as  a
religion  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  that  term.  It  was  not
till  after  the  introduction  of  Buddhism  into  China  in  our
first  century  that  Taoism  began  to   organise  itself  as  a


XU  PREFACE.


Religion,  having  its  monasteries  and  nunneries,  its  images
and  rituals.  While  it  did  so,  it  maintained  the  super-
stitions peculiar  to  itself: — some,  like  the  cultivation  of  the
Tdo  as  a  rule  of  life  favourable  to  longevity,  come  down
from  the  earliest  times,  and  others  vi^hich  grew  up
during  the  decay  of  the  A'du  dynasty,  and  subsequently
blossomed ; — now  in  Mystical  Speculation ;  now  in  the
pursuits  of  Alchemy;  now  in  the  search  for  the  pills  of
Immortality  and  the  Elixir  vitae;  now  in  Astrological
fancies ;  now  in  visions  of  Spirits  and  in  Magical  arts  to
control  them ;  and  finally  in  the  terrors  of  its  Purgatory
and  everlasting  Hell.  Its  phases  have  been  continually
changing,  and  at  present  it  attracts  our  notice  more  as  a
degraded  adjunct  of  Buddhism  than  as  a  development  of
the  speculations  of  Lao-jze  and  A'wang-jze.  Up  to  its  con-
tact with  Buddhism,  it  subsisted  as  an  opposition  to  the
Confucian  system,  which,  while  admitting  the  existence  and
rule  of  the  Supreme  Being,  bases  its  teachings  on  the  study
of  man's  nature  and  the  enforcement  of  the  duties  binding
on  all  men  from  the  moral  and  social  principles  of  their
constitution.

It  is  only  during  the  present  century  that  the  Texts
of  Taoism  have  begun  to  receive  the  attention  which
they  deserve.  Christianity  was  introduced  into  China
by  Nestorian  missionaries  in  the  seventh  century ;  and
from  the  Hsi-an  monument,  which  was  erected  by
their  successors  in  7(Si,  nearly  150  years  after  their  first
entrance,  we  perceive  that  they  were  as  familiar  with  the
books  of  Lao-5ze  and  /iTwang-jze  as  with  the  Confucian
literature  of  the  empire,  but  that  monument  is  the  only
memorial  of  them  that  remains.  In  the  thirteenth  century
the  Roman  Catholic  Church  sent  its  earliest  missionaries
to  China,  but  we  hardly  know  anything  of  their  literary
labours.

The  great  Romish  missions  which  continue  to  the  present
day  began  towards  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  ;  and
there  exists  now  in  the  India  Office  a  translation  of  the
T^o  Teh  ATing  in  Latin,  which  was  brought  to  England


PREFACE.  XIU


by  a  Mr.  Matthew  Raper,  and  presented  by  him  to  the
Royal  Society,  of  which  he  was  a  Fellow,  on  January  loth,
1788.  The  manuscript  is  in  excellent  preservation,  but  we
do  not  know  by  whom  the  version  was  made.  It  was  pre-
sented, as  stated  in  the  Introduction,  p.  12,  to  Mr.  Raper
by  P.  de  Grammont, '  Missionarius  Apostolicus,  ex-Jesuita.'
The  chief  object  of  the  translator  or  translators  was  to
show  that  'the  Mysteries  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity  and
of  the  Incarnate  God  were  anciently  known  to  the  Chinese
nation.'  The  version  as  a  whole  is  of  little  value.  The
reader  will  find,  on  pp.  115,  116,  its  explanation  of  Lao's
seventy-second  chapter; — the  first  morsel  of  it  that  has
appeared  in  print.

Protestant  missions  to  China  commenced  in  1807  ;  but  it
was  not  till  1868  that  the  Rev.  Dr.  Chalmers,  a  member  of
one  of  them,  published  his  '  Speculations  on  Metaphysics,
Polity,  and  Morality  of  "  The  Old  Philosopher,"  Lao-Tsze.'
Meanwhile,  Abel  Remusat  had  aroused  the  curiosity  of
scholars  throughout  Europe,  in  1833,  by  his  'Memoir  on
the  Life  and  Opinions  of  Lao-Tseu,  a  Chinese  Philosopher
of  the  sixth  century  before  our  era,  who  professed  the
opinions  commonly  attributed  to  Pythagoras,  to  Plato,  and
to  their  disciples.'  Remusat  was  followed  by  one  who  had
received  from  him  his  first  lessons  in  Chinese,  and  had  be-
come a  truly  great  Chinese  scholar, — the  late  Stanislas  Julien.
He  published  in  1842  'a  complete  translation  for  the  first
time  of  this  memorable  Work,  which  is  regarded  with
reason  as  the  most  profound,  the  most  abstract,  and  the
most  difficult  of  all  Chinese  Literature.'  Dr.  Chalmers's
translation  was  also  complete,  but  his  comments,  whether
original  or  from  Chinese  sources,  were  much  fewer  than
those  supplied  by  Julien.  Two  years  later,  two  German
versions  of  the  Treatise  were  published  at  Leipzig ; — by
Reinhold  von  Planckner  and  Victor  von  Strauss,  differing
much  from  each  other,  but  both  marked  by  originality  and
ability.

I  undertook  myself,  as  stated  above,  in  1879  to  translate
for  'The  Sacred  Books  of  the  East'  the  Texts  of  Taoism


XIV  PREFACE.

which  appear  in  these  volumes ;  and,  as  I  could  find  time
from  my  labours  on  '  The  Texts  of  Confucianism,'  I  had
written  out  more  than  one  version  of  Lao's  work  by  the  end
of  1880.  Though  not  satisfied  with  the  result,  I  felt  justified
in  exhibiting  my  general  views  of  it  in  an  article  in  the
British  Quarterly  Review  of  July,  1883.

In  1884  Mr.  F.  H.  Balfour  published  at  Shanghai  a  ver-
sion of  '  Taoist  Texts,  Ethical,  Political,  and  Speculative.'
His  Texts  were  ten  in  all,  the  Tao  Teh  King  being  the
first  and  longest  of  them.  His  version  of  this  differed  in
many  points  from  all  previous  versions ;  and  Mr.  H.  A.
Giles,  of  H.  M.'s  Consular  Service  in  China,  vehemently
assailed  it  and  also  Dr.  Chalmers's  translation,  in  the
China  Review  for  March  and  April,  1886.  Mr.  Giles,
indeed,  occasionally  launched  a  shaft  also  at  Julien  and
myself;  but  his  main  object  in  his  article  was  to  discredit
the  genuineness  and  authenticity  of  the  Tao  Teh  ATing
itself  '  The  work,'  he  says,  '  is  undoubtedly  a  forgery.  It
contains,  indeed,  much  that  Lao  Tzii  did  say,  but  more
that  he  did  not.'  I  replied,  so  far  as  was  necessary,  to
Mr.  Giles  in  the  same  Review  for  January  and  February,
1888  ;  and  a  brief  summary  of  my  reply  is  given  in  the
second  chapter  of  the  Introduction  in  this  volume.  My
confidence  has  never  been  shaken  for  a  moment  in  the
Tao  Teh  A'ing  as  a  genuine  relic  of  Lao-jze,  one  of  the
most  original  minds  of  the  Chinese  race.

In  preparing  the  version  now  published,  I  have  used : —
First,  'The  Complete  Works  of  the  Ten  Philosophers  ; ' —
a  Su-/'au  reprint  in  1804  of  the  best  editions  of  the  Philo-
sophers, nearly  all  belonging  more  or  less  to  the  Taoist  school,
included  in  it.  It  is  a  fine  specimen  of  Chinese  printing,
clear  and  accurate.  The  Treatise  of  Lao-^ze  of  course
occupies  the  first  place,  as  edited  by  Kwei  Yu-kwang
(better  known  as  Kwei  A'an-shan)  of  the  Ming  dynasty.
The  Text  and  Commentary  are  those  of  Ho-shang  Kung
(Introd.,  ]).  7),  along  with  the  division  of  the  whole  into
Parts  and  eighty-one  chapters,  and  the  titles  of  the  several
chapters,  all  attributed  to  him.     Along  the  top  of  the  page,


PREFACE.  XV


there  is  a  large  collection  of  notes  from  celebrated  com-
mentators and  writers  down  to  the  editor  himself.

Second,  the  Text  and  Commentary  of  Wang  Pi  (called
also  Fu-sze),  who  died  A.  D.  249,  at  the  early  age  of  twenty-
four.     See  Introduction,  p.  8.

Third,  'Helps  (lit.  Wings)  to  Lao-jze;'  by  3iao  Hung
(called  also  Zao-hau),  and  prefaced  by  him  in  1587.  This
is  what  Julien  calls  '  the  most  extensive  and  most  important
contribution  to  the  understanding  of  Lao-jze,  which  we  yet
possess.'  Its  contents  are  selected  from  the  ablest  writings
on  the  Treatise  from  Han  Fei  (Introd.,  p.  5)  downwards,
closing  in  many  chapters  with  the  notes  made  by  the  com-
piler himself  in  the  course  of  his  studies.  Altogether  the
book  sets  before  us  the  substance  of  the  views  of  sixty-four
writers  on  our  short  A'ing.  Julien  took  the  trouble  to
analyse  the  list  of  them,  and  found  it  composed  of  three
emperors,  twenty  professed  Taoists,  seven  Buddhists,  and
thirty-four  Confucianists  or  members  of  the  Literati.  He
says,  '  These  last  constantly  explain  Lao-jze  according  to
the  ideas  peculiar  to  the  School  of  Confucius,  at  the  risk  of
misrepresenting  him,  and  with  the  express  intention  of
throttling  his  system ; '  then  adding,  '  The  commentaries
written  in  such  a  spirit  have  no  interest  for  persons  who
wish  to  enter  fully  into  the  thought  of  LAo-jze,  and  obtain
a  just  idea  of  his  doctrine.  I  have  thought  it  useless,
therefore,  to  specify  the  names  of  such  commentaries  and
their  authors.'

I  have  quoted  these  sentences  of  Julien,  because  of  a
charge  brought  by  Mr.  Balfour,  in  a  prefatory  note  to  his
own  version  of  the  Tao  Teh  King,  against  him  and  other
translators.  '  One  prime  defect,'  he  says,  though  with  some
hesitation,  '  lies  at  the  root  of  every  translation  that  has
been  published  hitherto ;  and  this  is,  that  not  one  seems
to  have  been  based  solely  and  entirely  on  commentaries
furnished  by  members  of  the  Taoist  school.  The  Con-
fucian element  enters  largely  into  all ;  and  here,  I  think,  an
injustice  has  been  done  to  Lao-^Jjze.  To  a  Confucianist  the
Taoist  system  is  in  every  sense  of  the  word  a  heresy,  and


XVI  PREFACE.


a  commentator  holding  this  opinion  is  surely  not  the  best
expositor.  It  is  as  a  Grammarian  rather  than  as  a  Philo-
sopher that  a  member  of  the  Ju  Chia  deals  with  the  Tao
Teh  A'ing  ;  he  gives  the  sense  of  a  passage  according  to
the  syntactical  construction  rather  than  according  to  the
genius  of  the  philosophy  itself;  and  in  attempting  to  ex-
plain the  text  by  his  own  canons,  instead  of  by  the  canons  of
Taoism,  he  mistakes  the  superficial  and  apparently  obvious
meaning  for  the  hidden  and  esoteric  interpretation.'

Mr.  Balfour  will  hardly  repeat  his  charge  of  imperfect  or
erroneous  interpretation  against  Juhen  ;  and  I  believe  that  it
is  equally  undeserved  by  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  other  trans-
lators against  whom  it  is  directed.  He  himself  adopted  as
his  guide  the  '  Explanations  of  the  Tao  Teh  iiTing,'  current
as  the  work  of  Lii  Yen  (called  also  Lii  3",  Lu  Tung-pin,  and
Lu  K/mn-ysing),  a  Taoist  of  the  eighth  century.  Through
Mr.  Balfour's  kindness  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  ex-
amining this  edition  of  Lao's  Treatise  ;  and  I  am  com-
pelled to  agree  with  the  very  unfavourable  judgment  on  it
pronounced  by  Mr.  Giles  as  both  '  spurious  '  and  '  ridiculous.'
All  that  we  are  told  of  Lii  Yen  is  very  suspicious  ;  much  of
it  evidently  false.  The  editions  of  our  little  book  ascribed
to  him  are  many.  I  have  for  more  than  twenty  years
possessed  one  with  the  title  of  'The  Meaning  of  the  Tao
Teh  King  Explained  by  the  TRUE  Man  of  AVnm-yang,'
being  a  reprint  of  1690,  and  as  different  as  possible  from
the  work  patronised  by  Mr.  Balfour.

Fourth,  the  Thai  Shang  H  wun  Hsiian  Tao  Teh  A"an
King,— a.  work  of  the  present  dynasty,  published  at  Shang-
hai, but  when  produced  I  do  not  know.  It  is  certainly  of
the  Lii  ^u  type,  and  is  worth  purchasing  as  one  of  the
finest  specimens  of  block-printing.  It  professes  to  be  the
production  of'  The  Immortals  of  the  Eight  Grottoes,'  each
of  whom  is  styled  '  a  Divine  Ruler  (Ti  A' tin).'  The  eighty-
one  chapters  are  equally  divided  for  commentary  among
thcm,excepting  that 'the  Divine  Ruler,  the  Universal  Refiner,'
has  the  last  eleven  assigned  to  him.  The  Text  is  ever}'-
whcrc  broken  up  into  short  clauses,  which  are  explained  in


PREFACE.  XVU


a  very  few  characters  by  '  God,  the  True  Helper,'  the  same,
I  suppose,  who  is  also  styled,  '  The  Divine  Ruler,  the  True
Helper,'  and  comments  at  length  on  chapters  31  to  40.
I  mention  these  particulars  as  an  illustration  of  how  the
ancient  Taoism  has  become  polytheistic  and  absurd.  The
name  '  God,  the  True  Helper,'  is  a  title,  I  imagine,  given  to
Lii  ^u.  With  all  this  nonsense,  the  composite  commentary  is
a  good  one,  the  work,  evidently,  of  one  hand.  One  of  several
recommendatory  Prefaces  is  ascribed  to  Wan  K/iang,  the
god  of  Literature  ;  and  he  specially  praises  the  work,  as
'explaining  the  meaning  by  examination  of  the  Text.'

Fifth,  a  '  Collection  of  the  Most  Important  Treatises  of
the  Taoist  Fathers  (Tao  3u  ATan  Kwan  Ki  Y^o).'  This
was  reprinted  in  1877  at  KhdLng-kaM  in  ^iang-su  ;  begin-
ning with  the  Tao  Teh  King,  and  ending  with  the  Kan
Ying  Phien.  Between  these  there  are  fourteen  other
Treatises,  mostly  short,  five  of  them  being  among  Mr.  Bal-
four's '  Taoist  Texts.'  The  Collection  was  edited  by  a  Lu
Yii  ;  and  the  Commentary  selected  by  him,  in  all  but  the
last  Treatise,  was  by  a  Li  Hsi-yiieh,  who  appears  to  have
been  a  recluse  in  a  monastery  on  a  mountain  in  the  depart-
ment of  Pao-ning,  Sze-z^/nvan,  if,  indeed,  what  is  said  of
him  be  not  entirely  fabulous.

Sixth,  the  Commentary  on  the  Tao  Teh  ^ing,  by
Wu  /v//ang  (a.d.  1 249-1333)  of  Lin  iT/zwan.  This  has
been  of  the  highest  service  to  me.  Wu  Khang  was  the
greatest  of  the  Yiian  scholars.  He  is  one  of  the  Literati
quoted  from  occasionally  by  3iao  Hung  in  his -Wings;'
but  by  no  means  so  extensively  as  Julien  supposes  (Obser-
vations Detachees,  p.  xli).  My  own  copy  of  his  work  is  in
the  1 2th  Section  of  the  large  Collection  of  the  '  Yueh-ya
Hall,' published  in  1853.  Writing  of  Wu  AV^ang  in  1865
(Proleg.  to  the  Shu,  p.  0^6),  I  said  that  he  was  '  a  bold
thinker  and  a  daring  critic,  handling  his  text  with  a  freedom
which  I  had  not  seen  in  any  other  Chinese  scholar.'  The
subsequent  study  of  his  writings  has  confirmed  me  in  this
opinion  of  him.  Perhaps  he  might  be  characterised  as  an
independent,  rather  than  as  a  bold,  thinker,  and  the  daring

'x^      [39]  b


XVlll  PREFACE.


of  his  criticism  must  not  be  supposed  to  be  without  caution.
(See  Introd,,  p.  9.)

The  Writings  of  TTwang-^ze  have  been  studied  by
foreigners  still  less  than  the  Treatise  of  Lao-^ze.  When
I  undertook  in  1879  to  translate  them,  no  version  of  them
had  been  published.  In  1881,  however,  there  appeared  at
Shanghai  Mr.  Balfour's  '  The  Divine  Classic  of  Nan-hua
(Introd.,  pp.  II,  12),  being  the  Works  of  Chuang  Tsze,
Taoist  Philosopher.'  It  was  a  '  bold '  undertaking  in
Mr.  Balfour  thus  to  commence  his  translations  of  Chinese
Books  with  one  of  the  most  difficult  of  them.  I  fancy  that  he
was  himself  convinced  of  this,  and  that  his  undertaking  had
been  '  too  bold,'  by  the  criticism  to  which  his  work  was
subjected  in  the  China  Review  by  Mr.  Giles.  Never-
theless, it  was  no  small  achievement  to  be  the  first  to
endeavour  to  lift  up  the  veil  from  ATwang-^ze.  Even  a  first
translation,  though  imperfect,  is  not  without  benefit  to
others  who  come  after,  and  are  able  to  do  better.  In
preparing  the  draft  of  my  own  version,  which  draft  was
finished  in  April,  1887,  I  made  frequent  reference  to  the
volume  of  Mr.  Balfour.

Having  exposed  the  errors  of  Mr.  Balfour,  Mr.  Giles
proceeded  to  make  a  version  of  his  own,  which  was  pub-
lished last  year  in  London,  with  the  title  of  '  Chuang  Tztr,
Mystic,  Moralist,  and  Social  Reformer.'  It  was  not,
however,  till  I  was  well  through  with  the  revision  of  my
draft  version,  that  I  supplied  myself  with  a  copy  of  his
volume.  I  did  not  doubt  that  Mr.  Giles's  translation
would  be  well  and  tersely  done,  and  I  preferred  to  do
my  own  work  independently  and  without  the  help  which
he  would  have  afforded  me.  In  carrying  my  sheets  through
the  press,  I  have  often  paused  over  my  rendering  of  a  passage
to  compare  it  with  his  ;  and  I  have  pleasure  in  acknowledging
the  merits  of  his  version.  The  careful  and  competent  reader
will  see  and  form  his  own  judgment  on  passages  and  points
where  we  differ.

Before   describing   the   editions  of  A'wang-^zc  which   I


PREFACE.  XIX


have  consulted,  I  must  not  omit  to  mention  Professor
Gabelentz's  'Treatise  on  the  Speech  or  Style  of  A'wang-jze,'
as  '  a  Contribution  to  Chinese  Grammar,'  published  at
Leipzig  in  1888.  It  has  been  a  satisfaction  to  me  to  find
myself  on  almost  every  point  of  usage  in  agreement  with
the  views  of  so  able  a  Chinese  scholar.

The  works  which  I  employed  in  preparing  my  version
have  been : —

First,  '  The  True  King  of  Nan-hwa,'  in  '  The  Complete
Works  of  the  Ten  Philosophers,'  which  has  been  described
above.  The  Commentary  which  it  supplies  is  that  of  Kwo
Hsiang  (Introd.,  pp.  9,  10),  with  '  The  Sounds  and  Meanings
of  the  Characters'  from  Lu  Teh  Ming's  '  Explanations  of
the  Terms  and  Phrases  of  the  Classics,'  of  our  seventh
century.  As  in  the  case  of  the  Tao  Teh  King,  the  Ming
editor  has  introduced  at  the  top  of  his  pages  a  selection  of
comments  and  notes  from  a  great  variety  of  scholars  down
to  his  own  time.

Second,  '  Helps  (Wings)  to  A'wang-jze  by  3iao  Hung,' —
a  kindred  work  to  the  one  with  a  similar  title  on  Lao-jze ;
by  the  same  author,  and  prefaced  by  him  in  1588.  The
two  works  are  constructed  on  the  same  lines.  3i^o  draws
his  materials  from  forty-eight  authorities,  from  Kwo  Hsiang
to  himself.  He  divides  the  several  Books  also  into  para-
graphs, more  or  fewer  according  to  their  length,  and  the
variety  of  subjects  in  them  ;  and  my  version  follows  him
in  this  lead  with  little  or  no  change.  He  has  two  con-
cluding Books;  the  one  containing  a  collation  of  various
readings,  and  the  other  a  collection  of  articles  on  the
history  and  genius  of  /^wang-jze,  and  different  passages
of  his  Text.

Third,  the  ATwang-^ze  Hsueh  or  '  A'wang-jze  made
like  Snow,'  equivalent  to  our  '/^wang-jze  Elucidated  ;'  by
a  Lu  Shu-z^-ih  of  Canton  province,  written  in  1796.  The
different  Books  are  preceded  by  a  short  summary  of  their
subject-matter.  The  work  goes  far  to  fulfil  the  promise  of
its  title.

Fourth,    Kwang-^ze    Yin,    meaning    'The    Train    of

b  2


XX  PREFACE.


Thought  in  AVang-;ze  Traced  in  its  Phraseology.'  My
copy  is  a  reprint,  in  1880,  of  the  Commentary  of  Lin
Hsi-/^ung.  who  Hved  from  the  Ming  into  the  present
dynasty,  under  the  editorship  of  a  Lu  K/iu-\va.ng  of  Alang-
su  province.  The  style  is  clear  and  elegant,  but  rather
more  concise  than  that  of  the  preceding  work.  It  leaves
out  the  four  disputed  Books  (XXVIII  to  XXXI) ;  but  all
the  others  are  followed  by  an  elaborate  discussion  of  their
scope  and  plan.

Fifth,  '  The  X'an-hwa  Classic  of  ATwang-^ze  Explained,'
published  in  1621,  by  a  Hsiian  Ying  or  3ung  (^  ^^,
^i  ^%  '  ^^^  name  is  printed  throughout  the  book,  now
in  one  of  these  ways,  now  in  the  other),  called  also
Mdu-kung.  The  commentary  is  carefully  executed  and
ingenious ;  but  my  copy  of  the  book  is  so  incorrectly
printed  that  it  can  only  be  used  with  caution.  Mr.  Balfour
appears  to  have  made  his  version  mainly  from  the  same
edition  of  the  work ;  and  some  of  his  grossest  errors
pointed  out  by  ]\Ir.  Giles  arose  from  his  accepting  without
question  the  misprints  of  his  authority.

Sixth,  '  Independent  Views  of  A'wang-;ze  (^J  -^  :^
^)  ;'— by  Hu  Wan-ying,  published  in  1751.  Occasionally,
the  writer  pauses  over  a  passage,  which,  he  thinks,  has  defied
all  preceding  students,  and  suggests  the  right  explanation
of  it,  or  leaves  it  as  inexplicable.

It  only  remains  for  me  to  refer  to  the  Repertories  of
'  Elegant  Extracts,'  called  by  the  Chinese  Ku  Wan,  wiiich
abound  in  their  literature,  and  where  the  masterpieces  of
composition  are  elucidated  with  more  or  less  of  critical
detail  and  paraphrase.  I  have  consulted  nearly  a  dozen  of
these  collections,  and  would  mention  my  indebtedness
especially  to  that  called  Mei  AV/wan,  which  discusses
passages  from  twelve  of  iTwang-^ze's  books.

When  consulting  the  editions  of  Lin  Hsi->^ung  and  Lu
Shu-^ih,  the  reader  is  surprised  by  the  frequency  with
which  they  refer  to  the  'old  explanations'  as  'incomplete
and  unsatisfactory,'  often  as  'absurd,'  or  'ridiculous,'  and  he


PREFACE.  XXI

finds  on  examination  that  they  do  not  so  express  themselves
without  reason.  He  is  soon  convinced  that  the  transla-
tion of  /v  wang-jze  calls  for  the  exercise  of  one's  individual
judgment,  and  the  employment  of  every  method  akin  to
the  critical  processes  by  which  the  meaning  in  the  books  of
other  languages  is  determined.  It  was  the  perception  of
this  which  made  me  prepare  in  the  first  place  a  draft
version  to  familiarise  myself  with  the  peculiar  style  and
eccentric  thought  of  the  author.

From  iTwang-jze  to  the  Tractate  of 'Actions  and  their
Retributions '  the  transition  is  great.  Translation  in  the
latter  case  is  as  easy  as  it  is  difficult  in  the  former.  It
was  Remusat  who  in  1816  called  attention  to  the  Kan
Ying  Phien  in  Europe,  as  he  did  to  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing
seven  years  later,  and  he  translated  the  Text  of  it  with
a  few  Notes  and  Illustrative  Anecdotes.  In  1828  Klaproth
published  a  translation  of  it  from  the  Man-chau  version  ;
and  in  1830  a  translation  in  English  appeared  in  the
Canton  Register,  a  newspaper  published  at  Macao.  In
1828  Julien  published  what  has  since  been  the  standard
version  of  it ;  with  an  immense  amount  of  additional
matter  under  the  title — 'Le  Livre  Des  Recompenses
et  Des  Peines,  en  Chinois  et  en  Fran9ais;  Ac-
compagne  de  quatre  cent  Legendes,  Anecdotes
et  Histoires,  qui  font  connaitre  les  Doctrines,  les
Croyances  et  les  Mceurs  de  la  Secte  des  Tao-sse.'

In  writing  out  my  own  version  I  have  had  before  me : —

First,  'The  Thai  Shang  Kan  Ying  Phien,  with
Plates  and  the  Description  of  them;'  a  popular
edition,  as  profusely  furnished  with  anecdotes  and  stories
as  Juhen's  original,  and  all  pictorially  illustrated.  The
notes,  comments,  and  corresponding  sentences  from  the
Confucian  Classics  are  also  abundant.

Second,  'The  Thai  Shang  Kan  Ying  Phien,  with
explanations  collected  from  the  Classics  and  Histories  ; ' —
a  Cantonese  reprint  of  an  edition  prepared  in  the  KJiitw-
lung  reign  by  a  Hsia  ATiu-hsia.


XXU  PREFACE.


Third,  the  edition  in  the  Collection  of  Taoist  Texts
described  above  on  p.  xvii ;  by  Hsii  Hsiu-teh.  It  is
decidedly  Taoistic ;  but  without  stories  or  pictures.

Fourth,  'The  Thai  Shang  Kan  Ying  Phien  ATu;'  by
Hui  Tung,  of  the  present  dynasty.  The  Work  follows  the
Commentary  of  Wu  A'/zang  on  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing  in  the
Collection  of  the  Yiieh-}'a  Hall.  The  preface  of  the  author
is  dated  in  1 749.  The  Commentary,  he  tells  us,  was  written
in  consequence  of  a  vow,  when  his  mother  was  ill,  and  he
was  praying  for  her  recovery.  It  contains  many  extracts
from  Ko  Hung  (Introduction,  p.  5,  note),  to  whom  he
always  refers  by  his  nom  de  plume  of  Pao-phoh  3ze,
or  '  Maintainer  of  Simplicity.'  He  considers  indeed  this
Tractate  to  have  originated  from  him.

I  have  thus  set  forth  all  that  is  necessary  to  be  said  here  by
way  of  preface.  For  various  information  about  the  Treatises
comprised  in  the  Appendixes,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the
preliminary  notes,  which  precede  the  translation  of  most  of
them.  I  have  often  sorely  missed  the  presence  of  a  competent
native  scholar  who  would  have  assisted  me  in  the  quest  of
references,  and  in  talking  over  difficult  passages.  Such  a
helper  would  have  saved  me  much  time ;  but  the  result,
I  think,  would  scarcely  have  appeared  in  any  great  alteration
of  my  versions.

J.L.
Oxford,

Decanhcr  20,  1890.


THE   TEXTS   OF    TAOISM.


THE  TEXTS   OF  TAOISM.


INTRODUCTION.

CHAPTER  I.
Was  TAoism  older  than  Lao-3ze?

I.  In  writing  the  preface  to  the  third  volume  of  these
Sacred  Books  of  the  East  in  1879,  I  referred  to  Lio-jze  as
'  the  acknowledged  founder '  of  the  system  of  Taoism.  Pro-
longed study  and  research,  however,  have  brought  me  to
the  conclusion  that  there  was  a  Taoism  earlier  than  his  ;
and  that  before  he  wrote  his  Tao  Teh  King,  the  princi-
ples taught  in  it  had  been  promulgated,  and  the  ordering
of  human  conduct  and  government  flowing  from  them
inculcated.

For  more  than  a  thousand  years  '  the  Three  Religions '
Three  Religions  ^as   been    a    Stereotyped    phrase    in    China,

m  China.  meaning  what  we  call  Confucianism,  Taoism,
and  Buddhism.  The  phrase  itself  simply  means  '  the
Three  Teachings,'  or  systems  of  instruction,  leaving  the
subject-matter  of  each  'Teaching'  to  be  learned  by  inquiry.
Of  the  threcj  Buddhism  is  of  course  the  most  recent,  having
been  introduced  into  China  only  in  the  first  century  of  our
Christian  era.  Both  the  others  were  indigenous  to  the
country,  and  are  traceable  to  a  much  greater  antiquity,  so
that  it  is  a  question  to  which  the  earlier  origin  should  be
assigned.  The  years  of  Confucius's  life  lay  between  B.C.
55^  and  478  ;  but  his  own  acknowledgment  that  he  was
'  a  transmitter  and  not  a  maker,'  and  the  testimony  of  his
grandson,  that  '  he  handed  down  the  doctrines  of  Yao  and
Shun  (B.C.  2300),  and  elegantly  displayed  the  regulations

[39]  B


THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  I.


of  Wan  and  \Vu  (15. C.  1200),  taking  them  as  his  model/  are

well  known.

2.  LAo-jze's  birth  is  said,  in  the  most  likely  account  of  it,
to  have  taken  place  in  the  third  year  of  king  Ting  of  the
A'ftu  dynasty,  (b.  C.)  604.  He  was  thus  rather  more  than
fifty  years  older  than  Confucius.  The  two  men  seem  to
have  met  more  than  once,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think  that
the  name  of  Lao-^ze,  as  the  designation  of  the  other,  arose
from  Confucius's  styling  him  to  his  disciples  'The  Old
"^  Philosopher.'  They  met  as  Heads  of  different  schools  or
schemes  of  thought ;  but  did  not  touch,  so  far  as  we  know,
on  the  comparative  antiquity  of  their  views.  It  is  a  pecu-
liarity of  the  TaoTeh  A^ing  that  any  historical  element  in

it  is  of  the  vaguest  nature  possible,  and  in  all
PeculL-inty  of  °         ,  .      ,

the  Tao  Teh   its  chapters  there  is  not  a  smgle  proper  name.

■Aing.  Y^j.  ^\^QYe  are  some  references  to  earlier  sages
whose  words  the  author  was  copying  out,  and  to  '  sentence-
makers  '  whose  maxims  he  was  introducing  to  illustrate  his
own  sentiments  ^  In  the  most  distant  antiquity  he  saw  a
happy  society  in  which  his  highest  ideas  of  the  Tao  were
realised,  and  in  the  seventeenth  chapter  he  tells  us  that  in
the  earliest  times  the  people  did  not  know  that  there  were
their  rulers,  and  when  those  rulers  were  most  successful  in
dealing  with  them,  simply  said,  '  We  are  what  we  are  of
ourselves.'  Evidently,  men  existed  to  Lao-Jze  at  first  in
a  condition  of  happy  innocence, — in  what  we  must  call  a
paradisiacal  state,  according  to  his  idea  of  what  such  a
state  was  likely  to  be.

When   wc   turn    from    the   treatise   of  Liio-3ze   to    the
writings  of  A'wang-jzc,  the  greatest  of  his  followers,  we  are


'  'ITic  sixth  chapter  of  Lao's  treatise,  that  about  'the  Spirit  of  the  Valley,'
is  referred  to  in  Lich-^ze  (I,  i**),  as  being  from  Hwang  Ti,  from  which  the
commentator  Tu  Tao-zJ-im  (about  A.  u.  1300)  t.ikes  occasion  to  say:  'From
whicli  wc  know  that  Lao-jze  was  accustomed  to  (]uoie  in  his  treatise  passages
from  cnrlicr  records,— as  when  he  refers  to  the  remarks  of  "  some  sage,"  of
"  some  nncii-nt,"  of  "  the  sentence-makers,"  and  of  "  some  writer  on  war."  In
nil  these  cases  he  is  clearly  introducing  the  words  of  earlier  wise  men.  The
case  is  like^that  of  Confucius  when  he  said,  "I  am  a  transmitter  and  not  a
nmkcr,"  &c.'     Found  in  3iao  Hung,  in  loc.


CH.  I.  INTRODUCTION.


^/


not  left  in  doubt  as  to  his  belief  in  an  early  state  of
paradisiacal  Taoism.  Hwang  Ti,  the  first  year  of  whose
reign  is  placed  in  B.C.  2697,  is  often  introduced  as  a  seeker
of  the  Tdo,  and  is  occasionally  condemned  as  having  been
one  of  the  first  to  disturb  its  rule  in  men's  minds  and  break
up  '  the  State  of  Perfect  Unity.'  He  mentions  several
sovereigns  of  whom  we  can  hardly  find  a  trace  in  the
records  of  history  as  having  ruled  in  the  primeval  period,
and  gives  us  more  than  one  description  of  the  condition  of
the  world  during  that  happy  time  ^.

I  do  not  think  that  iiTwang-jze  had  any  historical
evidence  for  the  statements  which  he  makes  about  those
early  days,  the  men  who  flourished  in  them,  and  their
ways.  His  narratives  are  for  the  most  part  fictions,  in
which  the  names  and  incidents  are  of  his  own  devising.
They  are  no  more  true  as  matters  of  fact  than  the  accounts
of  the  characters  in  Bunyan's  Pilgrim's  Progress  are
truC;  with  reference  to  any  particular  individuals  ;  but  as
these  last  are  grandly  true  of  myriads  of  minds  in  different
ages,  so  may  we  read  in  iTwang-jze's  stories  the  thoughts
of  Taoistic  men  beyond  the  restrictions  of  place  and  time.
He  believed  that  those  thoughts  were  as  old  as  the  men  to
whom  he  attributed  them.  I  find  in  his  belief  a  ground  for
believing  myself  that  to  Taoism,  as  well  as  to  Confucianism,
we  ought  to  attribute  a  much  earlier  origin  than  the  famous
men  whose  names  they  bear.  Perhaps  they  did  not  differ
so  much  at  first  as  they  came  afterwards  to  do  in  the  hands  ,
of  Confucius  and  Lao-jze,  both  great  thinkers,  the  one
more  of  a  moralist,  and  the  other  more  of  a  metaphysician.
When  and  how,  if  they  were  ever  more  akin  than  they
came  to  be,  their  divergence  took  place,  are  difficult  ques-
tions on  which  it  may  be  well  to  make  some  remarks  after
we  have  tried  to  set  forth  the  most  important  principles  of
Taoism.

Those  principles  have  to  be  learned  from  the  treatise  of
Lao-jze  and  the  writings  of  A"wang-jze.     We  can  hardly


1  See  in  Books  IX,  X,  and  XI F.
B  2


THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  IT.


sa>-  that  the  Taoism  taught  in  them  is  the  Taoism  now
current  in  China,  or  that  has  been  current  in  it  for  many
centuries ;  but  in  an  inquiry  into  the  nature  and  origin  of
rcHgions  these  are  the  authorities  that  must  be  consulted
for'raoism,  and  whose  evidence  must  be  accepted.  The
treatise,  'Actions  and  the  Responses  to  them,'  will  show
one  of  the  phases  of  it  at  a  much  later  period.

CHAPTER  II.
The  Texts  of  the  Tao  Teh  Ki^g  and  ^Twang-

3ZE   Slltr,  AS   REGARDS   THEIR   AUTHENTICITY   AND
GENUINENESS,   AND   THE   ARRANGEMENT   OF  THEM.

I.I.I  will  now  state  briefly,  first,  the  grounds  on  which  I
accept  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing  as  a  genuine  production  of  the
age  to  which  it  has  been  assigned,  and  the  truth  of  its
authorship  by  Lao-^ze  to  whom  it  has  been  ascribed.  It
would  not  have  been  necessary  a  few  years  ago  to  write  as
if  these  points  could  be  called  in  question,  but  in  1886
A'Mr.  Herbert  A.  Giles,  of  Her  Majesty's  Consular  Service
in  China,  and  one  of  the  ablest  Chinese  scholars  living,
vehemently  called  them  in  question  in  an  article  in  the
China  Review  for  the  months  of  March  and  April.  His
strictures  have  been  replied  to,  and  I  am  not  going  to
revive  here  the  controversy  which  they  produced,  but  only
to  state  a  portion  of  the  evidence  which  satisfies  my  own
mind  on  the  two  points  just  mentioned.

2.  It  has  been  said  above  that  the  year  B.  C.  604  was,

probably,  that  of  Liio-jze's  birth.     The  year  of  his  death  is

not  recorded.     Sze-ma  /v//ien,  the  first  great  Chinese  his-

T,       . ,         ,  torian,  who  died  in  about  B.C.  i>'^,  commences

riic  evidence  "'      .  .  .

S/e-in;'i  A7;ien,  his  '  Biographies  '  with  a  short  account  of  Lao-

3zc.  He  tells  us  that  the  philosopher  had  been  a

curator  of  the  Royal  Library  of/v'au,  and  that,  mourning  over

the  decadence  of  the  d\-nasty,  he  wished  to  withdraw  from

the  world,  and  proceeded  to  the  pass  or  defile  of  Hsien-ku  ^


'  111  the  i)rcsent  district  ofLing-pao,  Shan  Aau,  province  of  Ho-nan.


CH.  II.  INTRODUCTION.


leading  from  China  to  the  west.  There  he  was  recognised
by  the  warden  of  the  pass,  Yin  Hsi  (often  called  Kwan
Yin),  himself  a  well-known  Taoist,  who  insisted  on  his
leaving  him  a  writing  before  he  went  into  seclusion.
Lao-jze  then  wrote  his  views  on  '  The  Tao  and  its  Charac-
teristics,' in  two  parts  or  sections,  containing  more  than
5000  characters,  gave  the  manuscript  to  the  warden,  and
went  his  way  ^ ;  '  nor  is  it  known  where  he  died.'  This
account  is  strange  enough,  and  we  need  not  wonder  that  it
was  by  and  by  embellished  with  many  marvels.  It  con-
tains, however,  the  definite  statements  that  Lao-jze  wrote
the  Tao  Teh  King  in  two  parts,  and  consisting  of  more
than  5000  characters.  And  that  AVnen  was  himself  well
acquainted  with  the  treatise  is  apparent  from  his  quotations
from  it,  with,  in  almost  every  case,  the  specification  of  the
author.  He  thus  adduces  part  of  the  first  chapter,  and
a  large  portion  of  the  last  chapter  but  one.  His  brief
references  also  to  Lio-jze  and  his  writings  are  numerous.

3.  But  between  Lao-jze  and  Sze-ma  K/iien  there  were

many  Taoist  writers  whose  works  remain.     I  may  specify

of  them  Lieh-jze  (assuming  that  his  chapters,

Fei-jze'and"    though  not  composed  in  their  present  form  by


other  Taoist  i^[^^  ^lay  yet  be  accepted  as  fair  specimens
of  his  teaching) ;  /i  wang-jze  (of  the  fourth
century  B.C.  We  find  him  refusing  to  accept  high  ofiice
from  king  Wei  of  K/iu,  B.C.  339-299) ;  Han  Fei,  a  volumi-
nous author,  who  died  by  his  own  hand  in  B.C.  230;  and
Liu  An,  a  scion  of  the  Imperial  House  of  Han,  king  of
Hwai-nan,  and  better  known  to  us  as  Hwai-nan  ^ze,  who
also  died  by  his  own  hand  in  B.C.  122.  In  the  books  of  all
these  men  we  find  quotations  of  many  passages  that  are  in
our  treatise.  They  are  expressly  said  to  be,  many  of  them,
quotations  from  Lio-jze ;    Han  Fei  several  times  all  but


1  In  an  ordinary  Student's  Manual  I  find  a  note  with  reference  to  this  incident
to  which  it  may  be  worth  while  to  give  a  place  here  : — The  warden,  it  is  said,
set  before  Lao-jze  a  dish  of  tea  ;  and  this  was  the  origin  of  the  custom  of  tea-
drinking  between  host  and  guest  (see  the  ^  ^  ^  ^  3^  7j^,
ch.  7,  on  Food  and  Drink).


6  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  ir.

shows  the  book  beneath  his  eyes.  To  show  how  numerous
the  quotations  by  Han  Fci  and  Liu  An  are,  let  it  be  borne
in  mind  that  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing  has  come  down  to  us  as
divided  into  eighty-one  short  chapters  ;  and  that  the  whole
of  it  is  shorter  than  the  shortest  of  our  Gospels.  Of  the
cii;hty-onc  chapters,  either  the  whole  or  portions  of  seventy-
one  arc  found  in  those  two  writers.  There  are  other  authors
not  so  decidedly  Taoistic,  in  whom  we  find  quotations  from
the  little  book.  These  quotations  arc  in  general  wonderfully
correct.  V\irious  readings  indeed  there  are ;  but  if  we  were
sure  that  the  writers  did  trust  to  memory,  their  differences
would  only  prove  that  copies  of  the  text  had  been  multiplied
from  the  very  first.

In  passing  on  from  quotations  to  the  complete  text,  I  will
Evidence  of  Pan  clinch    the   assertion    that    A'/Hen    was   well
^"  acquainted  with  our  treatise,  by  a   passage

from  the  History  of  the  Former  Han  Dynasty  (B.C.  206-
A.D.  24),  which  was  begun  to  be  compiled  by  Pan  Ku,  who
died  however  in  92,  and  left  a  portion  to  be  completed  by  his
sister,  the  famous  Pan  A'ao.  The  thirty-second  chapter  of
his  Biographies  is  devoted  to  Sze-ma  KJn^n,  and  towards
the  end  it  is  said  that  '  on  the  subject  of  the  Great  Tao  he
preferred  Hwang  and  Ldo  to  the  six  A'ing.'  '  Hwang  and
Lao '  must  there  be  the  writings  of  Hwang-Ti  and  LiTo-jze.
The  association  of  the  two  names  also  illustrates  the  anti-
(juity  claimed  for  Taoism,  and  the  subject  of  note  1,  p.  2.

4-  We  go  on  from  quotations  to  complete  texts,  and  turn,
first,  to  the  catalogue  of  the  Imperial  Library  of  Han,  as
compiled  by  Liu  Hsin,  not  later  than  the  commencement  of
our  Chriiitian  era.  There  are  entered  in  it  Taoist  works  by
Cntnlofnie  of  the  ^'>i>'ty-seven  different  authors,  containino-  in  all
InM-cM.i  LiUnry  993  chapters  or  sections  (phicn).  1  Yin,  the
premier  of  A'/fang  Thang  (b.c.  1766),  heads
the  list  w.ih  fifty-one  sections.  There  are  in  it  four  editions
ol  Lao-3ze  s  work  with  commentaries  :-by  a  Mr.  Lin,  in
four  sections;  a  Mr.  Fu,  in  thirty-seven  sections;  a  Mr.
Hsu.  m  s.x  sections;  and  by  Liu  Hsiang,  Hsin's  own
father,  m  fin.r  sections.  All  these  four  works  have  since
perished,  but  there  they  were  in  the  Imperial  Library  before


CH.  II.  INTRODUCTION.  7


our  era  began.  ATwang-jze  is  in  the  same  list  in  fifty-two
books  or  sections,  the  greater  part  of  which  have  happily
escaped  the  devouring  tooth  of  time.

We  turn  now  to  the  twentieth  chapter  of  K/nens
Biographies,  in  which  he  gives  an  account  of  Yo  I,  the
scion  of  a  distinguished  family,  and  who  himself  played  a
famous  part,  both  as  a  politician  and  military  leader,  and
became  prince  of  Wang-X'u  under  the  kingdom  of  A'ao  in
B.  c.  279.  Among  his  descendants  was  a  Yo  AV/an,  who
learned  in  KM  '  the  words,'  that  is,  the  Taoistic  writings  '  of
Hwang-Ti  and  Lao-jze  from  an  old  man  who  lived  on  the
Ho-side.'  The  origin  of  this  old  man  was  not  known,  but
Yo  AV/an  taught  what  he  learned  from  him  to  a  Mr.  Ko,
who  again  became  preceptor  to  3hao  3han,  the  chief
minister  of  KM,  and  afterwards  of  the  new  dynasty  of  Han,
dying  in  B.C.  190.

5-  Referring  now  to  the  catalogue  of  the  imperial
Library  of  the  dynasty  of  Sui  (a.d.  589-618),  we  find  that
The  catalogue  it  Contained  many  editions  of  Lao's  treatise
oftheSui  dynasty,  ^j^h  commentaries.  The  first  mentioned  is
'The  Tao  Teh  ATing,'  with  the  commentary  of  the  old
man  of  the  Ho-side,  in  the  time  of  the  emperor  Wan  of  Han
(B.C.  179-142).  It  is  added  in  a  note  that  the  dynasty  of
Liang  (a.d.  502-556)  had  possessed  the  edition  of  the  old
man  of  the  Ho-side,  of  the  time  of  the  Warring  States  ;
but  that  with  some  other  texts  and  commentaries  it  had
disappeared.'  I  find  it  difficult  to  believe  that  there  had
been  two  old  men  of  the  Ho-side  ^,  both  teachers  of  Taoism
and  commentators  on  our  A'incf,  but  I  am  willing  to  con-
tent  myself  with  the  more  recent  work,  and  accept  the  copy
that  has  been  current — say  from  B.C.  150,  when  Sze-ma
KMen  could  have  been  little  more  than  a  boy.  Taoism  was
a  favourite  study  with  many  of  the  Han  emperors  and
their  ladies.     Hw^i-nan  3ze,  of  whose  many  quotations  from

^  The  earlier  old  man  of  the  Ho-side  is  styled  in  Chinese  j[pj      p  j)(^  yv>

the  other    VnT     I-'    ^^\ ;    but   the   designations  have   the    same    meaning.

Some  critical  objections  to  the  genuineness  of  the  latter's  commentary  on  the
ground  of  the  style  are  without  foundation.


8  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  ir.

the  text  of  Lao  I  have  spoken,  was  an  uncle  of  the
emperor  Wan.  To  the  emperor  A'ing  (B.C.  156-143),  the
son  of  WCin,  there  is  attributed  the  designation  of  Lao's
treatise  as  a  A'ing.  a  work  of  standard  authority.  At  the
beginning  of  his  reign,  we  are  told,  some  one  was  com-
mending to  him  four  works,  among  which  were  those  of
Lao-)ze  and  A'wang-^ze.  Deeming  that  the  work  of
Hwang-}ze  and  Lao-3ze  was  of  a  deeper  character  than  the
others,  he  ordered  that  it  should  be  called  a  A'ing,  estab-
lished a  board  for  the  study  of  Taoism,  and  issued  an  edict
that  the  book  should  be  learned  and  recited  at  court,  and
throughout  the  country  ^  Thenceforth  it  was  so  styled.
We  find  riwang-fu  Mi  (a.d.  215-282)  referring  to  it  as  the
T  A  o  Teh  A'  i  n  g.

The  second  place  in  the  Sui  catalogue  is  given  to  the
text  and  commentary  of  W^ang  Pi  or  Wang  Fu-sze,  an
The  work  of  extraordinary  scholar  who  died  in  A.  D.  249,
w-nngi'l.  ^t;  ti^g  Q^^iy  j^gg  Qf  twenty-four.  This  work
has  always  been  much  prized.  It  was  its  text  which  Lu
Teh-ming  used  in  his  '  Explanation  of  the  Terms  and
Phrases  of  the  Classics,'  in  the  seventh  centur}^  Among
the  editions  of  it  which  I  possess  is  that  printed  in  1794
with  the  imperial  moveable  metal  types.

I  need  not  speak  of  editions  or  commentaries  subsequent
to  Wang  Pi's.  They  soon  begin  to  be  many,  and  are  only
not  so  numerous  as  those  of  the  Confucian  Classics.

6.  All   the  editions  of  the  book  are  divided   into   two
Divisions  into    parts,  the  former  called  Tao,  and  the  latter
EmnnUT  of"  '^^^'  ^'^^^'^^S  the  Qualities  or  Characteristics
characters  in  the  of  the  Tao,  but  this  distinction  of  subjects  is
by  no  means  uniformly  adhered  to.
I  referred  already  to  the  division  of  the  whole  into  eighty-
one  .short  chapters  {37  +  44).  which  is  by  common  tradition
attributed   to   ll<,-shang  Kung,  or  'The  old   man  of  the
Ho-su!e.'      Another  very  early  commentator,   called  Yen
Jun  or  Yen  A'lin-phing,  made  a  division  into  seventy-two
chapters  (40  +  32),  under  the  innuence,  no  doubt,  of  some


Sec  3iao  Tiling's  Wings  or  Helps,  ch.  v,  p.  11..


CH.  II.  INTRODUCTION.


mystical  considerations.  His  predecessor,  perhaps,  had  no
better  reason  for  his  eighty-one ;  but  the  names  of  his
chapters  were,  for  the  most  part,  happily  chosen,  and  have
been  preserved.  Wu  Kh3.ng  arranged  the  two  parts  in
sixty-seven  chapters  (31+36).  It  is  a  mistake,  however,
to  suppose,  as  even  Mr.  Wylie  with  all  his  general  accuracy
did  \  that  Wu  '  curtails  the  ordinary  text  to  some  extent,'
He  does  not  curtail,  but  only  re-arranges  according  to  his
fashion,  uniting  some  of  Ho-shang  Kung's  chapters  in  one,
and  sometimes  altering  the  order  of  their  clauses.

Sze-ma  AT/^ien  tells  us  that,  as  the  treatise  came  from
Lao-jze,  it  contained  more  than  5000  characters  ;  that  is,
as  one  critic  says,  '  more  than  5000  and  fewer  than  6000.'
Ho-shang  Kung's  text  has  5350,  and  one  copy  5590 ;
Wang  Pi's,  S^^3i  and  one  copy  5610.  Two  other  early
texts  have  been  counted,  giving  5720  and  5635  characters
respectively.  The  brevity  arises  from  the  terse  conciseness
of  the  style,  owing  mainly  to  the  absence  of  the  embellish-
ment of  particles,  which  forms  so  striking  a  peculiarity  in
the  composition  of  Mencius  and  A'wang-^ze.

In  passing  on  to  speak,  secondly  and  more  briefly,  of  the
far  more  voluminous  writings  of  ^wang-^ze,  I  may  say  that
I  do  not  know  of  any  other  book  of  so  ancient  a  date  as
the  Tao  Teh  ^ing,  of  which  the  authenticity  of  the  origin
and  genuineness  of  the  text  can  claim  to  be  so  well  sub-
stantiated.

II.  7.  In  the  catalogue  of  the  Han  Library  we  have  the
entry  of  'ATwang-^ze   in   fifty-two  books  or  sections.'     By

The  Books  of   the  time  of  the  Sui  dynasty,  the  editions  of

A%ang-jze.  j^jg  -^^ork  amounted  to  nearly  a  score.  The
earliest  commentary  that  has  come  down  to  us  goes  by  the
name  of  Kwo  Hsiang's.  He  was  an  officer  and  scholar  of
the  3in  dynasty,  who  died  about  the  year  312.  Another
officer,  also  of  ^\n,  called  Hsiang  Hsiu,  of  rather  an  earlier
date,  had  undertaken  the  same  task,  but  left  it  incom-
plete ;  and  his  manuscripts  coming  (not,  as  it  appears,  by


'  Notes  on  Chinese  Literature,  p.  173.


lO  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  ir.


any  fraud)  into  Kwo's  hands,  he  altered  and  completed
them  as  suited  his  own  views,  and  then  gave  them  to  the
public.  In  the  short  account  of  Kwo,  given  in  the  twentieth
chapter  of  the  Biographies  of  the  3in  history,  it  is  said
that  several  tens  of  commentators  had  laboured  unsatis-
factorily on  A'wang's  writings  before  Hsiang  Hsiu  took
them  in  hand.  As  the  joint  result  of  the  labours  of  the
two  men,  however,  we  have  only  thirty-three  of  the  fifty-
two  sections  mentioned  in  the  Han  catalogue.  It  is  in
vain  that  I  have  tried  to  discover  how  and  when  the
other  nineteen  sections  were  lost.  In  one  of  the  earliest
commentaries  on  the  Tao  Teh  King,  that  by  Yen  3un,  we
have  several  quotations  from  /^wang-3;ze  which  bear  evi-
dently the  stamp  of  his  handiwork,  and  are  not  in  the
current  Hooks;  but  they  would  not  altogether  make  up  a
single  section.  We  have  only  to  be  thankful  that  so  large
a  proportion  of  the  original  work  has  been  preserved.  Sii
Shih  (3ze-/('an,  and  Tung-pho),  it  is  well  known,  called  in
question  the  genuineness  of  Books  28  to  31  ^  Books  15  and
16  have  also  been  challenged,  and  a  paragraph  here  and
there  in  one  or  other  of  the  Books.  The  various  readings,
according  to  a  collation  given  by  ^lao  Hung,  are  few.

<S.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Books  of  A^wang-jze
were  hailed   by  all   the  friends   of  Taoism.      It  has   been

mentioned  above  that  the  names  '  Hwang-Ti '
Importance  to  ,    ,  ^  ^  ,  .         ,  ,

Taoism  of  the  'i"d  Lao-^ze  wcrc  associated  together  as
Hooks  of  denoting  the  masters  of  Taoism,  and  the
phrase,  '  the  words  of  Hwang-Ti  and  Lao-^ze,
came  to  be  no  more  than  a  name  for  the  Tao  Teh  King.
Gradually  the  two  names  were  contracted  into  'Hwang
LAo,'  as  in  the  passage  quoted  on  p.  6  from  Pan  KO.
Alter  the  llan  dynasty,  the  name  Hwang  gave  place  to
A'wang.  and  the  names  Lao  A' wang,  and,  sometimes  in-
verted, A'wang  Lao,  were  employed  to  denote  the  system
'•r  the  texts  of  Taoism,     la  the  account,  for  instance,  o{ Ki


'  A  lirothcr  of  Sl>il>,  Sii  A'ih  3zc-yii  and  Ying-pin\  wrote  a  remarkable
commentary  on  thcTaoTch  A'inj;;  Init  it  w.is  Shih  who  first  discredited  those
four  Hooks,  in  Ids  Inscription  for  tiic  temple  of  Awang-jze,  prepared  in  1078.


CH.ir.  INTRODUCTION.  II

Khang,  in  the  nineteenth  chapter  of  the  Biographies  of  3in,
we  have  a  typical  Taoist  brought  before  us.  When  grown
up,  '  he  loved  Lao  and  A'wang ; '  and  a  visitor,  to  produce
the  most  favourable  impression  on  him,  says,  '  Lao-jze  and
Kwang  Kau  are  my  masters.'

9.  The   thirty-three    Books    of  TTwang-jze   are    divided

into  three  Parts,  called  Nei,  or  'the  Inner;'  Wai,  or  'the

Outer;'  and  3 a,  'the  Miscellaneous.'     The  first  Part  com-

T^.  .  .       . ,,       prises  seven  Books  ;  the  second,  fifteen  ;  and
Division  01  the     ^  ^  ■>  ■>

Books  into  three  the  third,  eleven.  '  Inner '  may  be  under-
Stood  as  equivalent  to  esoteric  or  More  Im-
portant. The  titles  of  the  several  Books  are  significant,
and  each  expresses  the  subject  or  theme  of  its  Book.
They  are  believed  to  have  been  prefixed  by  iTwang-jze
himself,  and  that  no  alteration  could  be  made  in  the  com-
position but  for  the  worse.  '  Outer '  is  understood  in  the
sense  of  supplementary  or  subsidiary.  The  fifteen  Books
so  called  are  '  Wings '  to  the  previous  seven.  Their  titles
were  not  given  by  the  author,  and  are  not  significant  of
the  Taoistic  truth  which  all  the  paragraphs  unite,  or  should
unite,  in  illustrating  ;  they  are  merely  some  name  or  phrase
taken  from  the  commencement  of  the  first  paragraph  in
each  Book, — like  the  names  of  the  Books  of  the  Confucian
Analects,  or  of  the  Hebrew  Pentateuch.  The  fixing  them
originally  is  generally  supposed  to  have  been  the  work  of
Kwo  Hsiang.  The  eleven  Miscellaneous  Books  are  also
supplementary  to  those  of  the  first  Part,  and  it  is  not  easy
to  see  why  a  difi"erence  was  made  between  them  and  the
fifteen  that  precede.

10.  ATwang-^ze's  writings  have  long  been  current  under
the  name  of  Nan  Hwa  Kan  ^ing.     He  was  a  native  of

The  general  title  ^^^^  duchy  of  Sung,  born  in  what  was  then
of  Awang-jze's  called  the  district  of  Mang,  and  belonged  to
^°^  ^'  the  state  or  kingdom  of  Liang  or  Wei.  As
he  grew  up,  he  filled  some  official  post  in  the  city  of  3hi-
yiian, — the  site  of  which  it  is  not  easy  to  determine  with
certainty.  In  A.D.  742,  the  name  of  his  birth-place  was
changed  (but  only  for  a  time)  to  Nan-hwa,  and  an  im-
perial order  was   issued   that  i^wang-jze   should    thence-


THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  III.


forth  be  styled  'The  True  Man  of  Nan-hwa,'  and  his
Book,  'The  True  Book  of  Nan-hwa ^'  To  be  'a  True
Man'  is  the  highest  Taoistic  achievement  of  a  man,  and
our  author  thus  canonised  communicates  his  glory  to  his
Book.

CHAPTER    III.
What  is  the  meaning  of  the  name  Tao?    And

THE  CHIEF   points   OF   BELIEF   IN  TaOISM.

1.  The  first  translation  of  the  Tao  Teh  A^ing  into  a

Western  language  was  executed  in  Latin  by  some  of  the

Mcaniogofthe  Roman  Catholic  missionaries,  and  a  copy  of

name  Tao.  jj.  ^^^^  brought  to  England  by  a  Mr.  Matthew
Raper,  F.  R.S.,  and  presented  by  him  to  the  Society  at  a
meeting  on  the  loth  January,  1788, — being  the  gift  to  him  of
P.  Jos.  de  Grammont, '  Missionarius  Apostolicus,  ex-Jesuita.'
In  this  version  Tao  is  taken  in  the  sense  of  Ratio,  or  the
Supreme  Reason  of  the  Divine  Being,  the  Creator  and
Governor.

M.  Abel  Rcmusat,  the  first  Professor  of  Chinese  in  Paris,
does  not  seem  to  have  been  aware  of  the  existence  of  the
above  version  in  London,  but  his  attention  was  attracted  to
Lilo's  treatise  about  1820,  and,  in  1823,  he  wrote  of  the
character  Tao,  '  Ce  mot  me  semble  ne  pas  pouvoir  etre
bien  traduit,  si  ce  n'est  par  le  mot  Ao'yos^  dans  le  triple  sens
de  souvcrain  Etre,  de  raison,  et  de  parole.'

Remusat's  successor  in  the  chair  of  Chinese,  the  late
Stanislas  Julien,  published  in  1842  a  translation  of  the
whole  treatise.  -Having  concluded  from  an  examination  of
It,  and  the  earliest  Taoist  writers,  such  as  /iTwang-^ze,  Ho-
kwan  3ze,  and  Ho-shang  Kung,  that  the  Tao  was  devoid
of  action,  of  thought,  of  judgment,  and  of  intelli-
gence, he  concluded  that  it  was  impossible  to  understand
l>y  it  'the  I'rimordial  Reason,  or  the  Sublime  Intelli-
gence which  created,  and  which  governs  the  world,'  and  to


'  Sec  ll.c  Khang-hsJ  Thesaurus  (JH  ^  g(4  Jf^^),  under  ^


CH.  in.  INTRODUCTION.


13


this  he  subjoined  the  following  note: — '  Quelque  Strange
que  puisse  paraitre  cette  idee  de  Lao-3ze,  elle  n'est  pas  sans
exemple  dans  Fhistoire  de  la  philosophic.  Le  mot  nature
n'a-t-il  pas  ete  employe  par  certains  philosophes,  que
la  religion  et  la  raison  condamnent,  pour  designer  une
cause  premiere,  egalement  depourvue  de  pensee  et  d'in-
telligence?'  Julien  himself  did  not  doubt  that  Lao's  idea
of  the  character  was  that  it  primarily  and  properly  meant
'a  way,'  and  hence  he  translated  the  title  Tao  Teh
King  by  'Le  Livre  de  la  Voie  et  de  la  Vertu,'
transferring  at  the  same  time  the  name  Tao  to  the  text
of  his  version.

The  first  English  writer  who  endeavoured  to  give  a  dis-
tinct account  of  Taoism  was  the  late  Archdeacon  Hardwick,
while  he  held  the  office  of  Christian  Advocate  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Cambridge.  In  his  '  Christ  and  other  Masters'
(vol.  ii,  p.  67),  when  treating  of  the  religions  of  China,  he
says, '  I  feel  disposed  to  argue  that  the  centre  of  the  system
founded  by  Lao-jze  had  been  awarded  to  some  energy  or
power  resembling  the  "  Nature "  of  modern  speculators.
The  indefinite  expression  Tao  was  adopted  to  denominate
an  abstract  cause,  or  the  initial  principle  of  life  and  order,
to  which  worshippers  were  able  to  assign  the  attributes  of
immateriality,  eternity,  immensity,  invisibility.'

It  was,  probably,  Julien's  reference  in  his  note  to  the  use
of  the  term  nature,  which  suggested  to  Hardwick  his
analogy  between  Lao-jze's  Tao,  and  'the  Nature  of  modern
speculation.'  Canon  Farrar  has  said,  'We  have  long  per-
sonified under  the  name  of  Nature  the  sum  total  of  God's
laws  as  observed  in  the  physical  world  ;  and  now  the  notion
of  Nature  as  a  distinct,  living,  independent  entity  seems  to
be  ineradicable  alike  from  our  literature  and  our  systems  of
philosophy^.'  But  it  seems  to  me  that  this  metaphorical
or  mythological  use  of  the  word  nature  for  the  Cause  and
Ruler  of  it,  implies  the  previous  notion  of  Him,  that  is,  of
God,  in  the  mind.  Does  not  this  clearly  appear  in  the
words  of  Seneca? — 'Vis  ilium  (h.e.  Jovem  Deum)  naturam

^  Language  and  Languages,  pp.  184, 1S5.


14


THE   TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  iir.


vocare,  non  peccabis :— hie   est   ex  quo  nata  sunt  omnia,
cujus  spiritu  vivimus  ^'

In  his  translation  of  the  Works  of  Kwang-^ze  in  i88t,
Mr.  Balfour  adopted  Nature  as  the  ordinary  rendering  of
the  Chinese  Tao.  He  says,  'When  the  word  is  translated
Way.  it  means  the  Way  of  Nature, —  her  processes,  her
methods,  and  her  laws;  when  translated  Reason,  it  is  the
same  as  li, — the  power  that  works  in  all  created  things,
producing,  preserving,  and  life-giving,— the  intelligent  prin-
ciple of  the  world  ;  when  translated  Doctrine,  it  refers  to
the  True  doctrine  respecting  the  laws  and  mysteries  of
Nature.'  He  calls  attention  also  to  the  point  that  'he  uses
Nature  in  the  sense  of  Natura  naturans,  while  the
Chinese  expression  wan  wu  (=  all  things)  denotes  Natura
naturata.'  But  this  really  comes  to  the  metaphorical  use
of  nature  which  has  been  touched  upon  above.  It  can
claim  as  its  patrons  great  names  like  those  of  Aquinas,
Giordano  Bruno,  and  Spinoza,  but  I  have  never  been  able
to  see  that  its  barbarous  phraseology  makes  it  more  than
a  figure  of  speech^.

The  term  Nature,  however,  is  so  handy,  and  often  fits
so  appropriately  into  a  version,  that  if  Tao  had  ever  such
a  signification  I  should  not  hesitate  to  employ  it  as  freely
as  Mr.  lialfour  has  done;  but  as  it  has  not  that  signifi-
cation, to  try  to  put  a  non-natural  meaning  into  it,  only
perplexes  the  mind,  and  obscures  the  idea  of  Lao-jze.

Mr.  Balfour  himself  says  (p.  xviii),  'The  primary  signifi-
cation of  Tao  is  simply  "road."'  Beyond  question  this
meaning  underlies  the  use  of  it  by  the  great  master  of
Taoism  and  b)-  A'wang-^ze  ''\  Let  the  reader  refer  to  the
version  of  the  twenty-fifth  chapter  of  Lao's  treatise,  and  to


•  Nntiir.  Quacst.  lib.  II,  cap.  xlv.

»  Mnrtintnu's  '  Types  of  Ethical  Theory,"  I,  p.  286,  and  his  whole  '  Conjectural
llistnry  of  .S|)inr)za's  Thought.'

'  2l  '■'•  tqi'ivalcnt  to  the  Greek  f/  o5os,  the  way.  AYhere  this  name  for  the
Christian  system  occurs  in  our  Revised  Version  of  the  New  Testament  in  the
Act*  of  the  Apostles,  the  literal  rendering  is  adhered  to.  Way  being  printed  with
n  cai>ilal  W.     See  Acts  i.\.  2  ;  xix.  ij,  23 ;  x.\ii.  4  ;  xxiv,  14,  22.


CH.  III.  INTRODUCTION.  1 5


the  notes  subjoined  to  it.     There  Tao  appears  as  the  spon-
taneously operating  cause  of  all  movement  in  the  pheno-
mena of  the  universe  ;  and  the  nearest  the  writer  can  come
to  a  name  for  it  is  '  the  Great  Tao.'   Having  established  this
name,  he  subsequently  uses  it  repeatedly;   see  chh.  xxxiv
and  liii.     In  the  third  paragraph  of  his  twentieth  chapter,
iTwang-jze  uses   a   synonymous   phrase  instead   of  Lao's
'  Great  Tao,'  calling  it  the  'Great  Thu,'  about  which  there
can  be  no  dispute,  as  meaning  '  the  Great  Path,'  '  Way,'
or  '  Course  ^'      In  the  last  paragraph  of  his  twenty-fifth
Book,  A'wang-jze  again  sets  forth  the  metaphorical  origin
of  the  name  Tao.    'Tao,'  he  says,  'cannot  be  regarded  as
having  a  positive  existence  ;  existences  cannot  be  regarded
as  non-existent.     The  name  Tao  is  a  metaphor  used  for
the  purpose  of  description.     To  say  that  it  exercises  some
causation,  or  that  it  does  nothing,  is  speaking  of  it  from  the
phase  of  a  thing ; — how  can  such  language  serve  as  a  de-    1
signation  of  it  in  its  greatness  .^      If  words  were  sufficient  /
for  the  purpose,  we  might  in  a  day's  time  exhaust  the  sub-  [
ject  of  the  Tao.     Words  not  being  sufficient,  we  may  talk  \
about  it  the  whole  day,  and  the  subject  of  discourse  will
only  have  been  a  thing.     Tao  is  the  extreme  to  which
things  conduct  us.     Neither  speech  nor  silence  is  sufficient     \
to  convey  the  notion  of  it.     When  we  neither  speak  nor
refrain  from  speech,  our  speculations  about  it  reach  their       \
highest  point.'

The  Tao  therefore  is  a  phenomenon ;  not  a  positive
being,  but  a  mode  of  being.  Lao's  idea  of  it  may  become
plainer  as  we  proceed  to  other  points  of  his  system.  In
the  meantime,  the  best  way  of  dealing  with  it  in  translating
is  to  transfer  it  to  the  version,  instead  of  trying  to  introduce
an  English  equivalent  for  it.  ,.  *

2.  Next  in  importance  to  Ta'^s  the  name  Thien,  mean-
ing at  first  tlie  vaulted  sky  or  the  open  firmament  of  heaven.
In  the  Confucian  Classics,  and  in  the  speech  of  the  Chinese

^  xC  ^^*  ^^^  Khang-hsi  dictionary  defines  thu  by  lu,  road  or  way.
Medhurst  gives  '  road.'  Unfortunately,  both  Morrison  and  Williams  overlooked
this  definition  of  the  character.  Giles  has  also  a  note  in  1  oc,  showing  how  this
synonym  settles  the  original  meaning  of  Tao  in  the  sense  of  '  road.'


1 6  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  III.


people,  this  name  is  used  metaphorically  as  it  is  by  our-
Usageofthe  sclves  for  the  Supreme  Being,  with  reference
u-rmThicn.  especially  to  His  will  and  rule.  So  it  was
that  the  idea  of  God  arose  among  the  Chinese  fathers ;  so
it  was  that  they  proceeded  to  fashion  a  name  for  God,
calling  Him  Ti,  and  Shang  Ti,  'the  Ruler,'  and  'the
Supreme  Ruler.'  The  Taoist  fathers  found  this  among
their  people  ;  but  in  their  idea  of  the  Tao  they  had  already
a  Supreme  Concept  which  superseded  the  necessity  of  any
other.  The  name  Ti  for  God  only  occurs  once  in  the  Tao
Teh  A'ing ;  in  the  well-known  passage  of  the  fourth  chapter,
where,  speaking  of  the  Tao,  Lao-jze  says,  '  I  do  not  know
whose  Son  it  is  ;  it  might  seem  to  be  before  God.'

Nor  is  the  name  Thien  very  common.  We  have  the
phrase,  '  Heaven  and  Earth,'  used  for  the  two  great  con-
stituents of  the  kosmos,  owing  their  origin  to  the  Tao,  and
also  for  a  sort  of  binomial  power,  acting  in  harmony  with
the  Tao,  covering,  protecting,  nurturing,  and  maturing  all
things.  Never  once  is  Thien  used  in  the  sense  of  God,  the
Supreme  Being.  In  its  peculiarly  Taoistic  employment,
it  is  more  an  adjective  than  a  noun.  '  The  Tao  of  Heaven '
means  the  Tao  that  is  Heavenly,  the  course  that  is  quiet
and  undemonstrative,  that  is  free  from  motive  and  effort,
V  such  as  is  seen  in  the  processes  of  nature,  grandly  pro-
ceeding and  successful  without  any  striving  or  crying.
The  Tao  of  man,  not  dominated  by  this  Tao,  is  contrary
to  it,  and  shows  will,  purpose,  and  effort,  till,  submitting  to
it,  it  becomes  '  the  Tao  or  Way  of  the  Sages,'  which  in  all
its  action  has  no  striving.

The  characteristics  both  of  Heaven  and  man  are  dealt
with  more  fully  by  A' wang  than  by  Lao.  In  the  conclusion
of  his  eleventh  Book,  for  instance,  he  says  : — 'What  do  we
mean  by  Tao  ?  There  is  the  Tao  (or  Way)  of  Heaven,  and
there  is  the  Tao  of  man.  Acting  without  action,  and  yet
altracling  all  honour,  is  the  Way  of  Heaven.  Doing  and
being  embarrassed  thereby  is  the  Way  of  man.  The  Way
t)f  I  leaven  should  play  the  part  of  lord  ;  the  Way  of  man,
the  part  of  minister.  The  two  are  far  apart,  and  should  be
distinguished  from  each  other.'


CH.  III.  INTRODUCTION.


17


In  his  next  Book  (par.  2),  /f  wang-jze  tells  us  what  he
intends  by  '  Heaven  : ' — '  Acting  without  action,— this  is
what  is  called  Heaven.'  Heaven  thus  takes  its  law  from
the  Tao.  'The  oldest  sages  and  sovereigns  attained  to  do
the  same,'— it  was  for  all  men  to  aim  at  the  same  achieve-
ment. As  they  were  successful,  'vacancy,  stillness,
placidity,  tastelessness,  quietude,  silence,  and  non-action '
would  be  found  to  be  their  characteristics,  and  they  would
go  on  to  the  perfection  of  the  Tao\

The  employment  of  Thien  by  the  Confucianists,  as  of
Heaven  by  ourselves,  must  be  distinguished  therefore  from
the  Taoistic  use  of  the  name  to  denote  the  quiet  but
mighty  influence  of  the  impersonal  Tao  ;  and  to  translate
it  by  '  God '  only  obscures  the  meaning  of  the  Taoist
writers.  This  has  been  done  by  Mr.  Giles  in  his  version  of
A'wang-jze,  which  is  otherwise  for  the  most  part  so  good.
Everywhere  on  his  pages  there  appears  the  great  name
'God;' — a  blot  on  his  translation  more  painful  to  my  eyes
and  ears  than  the  use  of  '  Nat-ure'  for  Tao  by  Mr.  Balfour.
I  know  that  Mr.  Giles's  plan  in  translating  is  to  use  strictly
English  equivalents  for  all  kinds  of  Chinese  terms ^.  The
plan  is  good  where  there  are  in  the  two  languages  such
strict  equivalents ;  but  in  the  case  before  us  there  is  no
ground  for  its  application.  The  exact  English  equivalent
for  the  Chinese  thien  is  our  heaven.  The  Confucianists
often  used  thien  metaphorically  for  the  personal  Being
whom  they  denominated  Ti  (God)  and  Shang  Ti  (the
Supreme  God),  and  a  translator  may  occasionally,  in
working  on  books  of  Confucian  literature,  employ  our  name
God  for  it.  But  neither  Lao  nor  A'wang  ever  attached
anything  like  our  idea  of  God  to  it ;  and  when  one,  in
working  on  books  of  early  Tioist  literature,  translates
thien  by  God,  such  a  rendering  must  fail  to  produce  in
an  English  reader  a  correct  apprehension  of  the  meaning.

There  is  also  in  A'wang-,5ze  a  peculiar  usage  of  the  name
Thien.    He  applies  it  to  the  Beings  whom  he  introduces  as

1  The  Tao  Teh  A'ing,  eh.  25,  and  A'wang-^ze,  XIII,  par.  i.

-  See  '  Strange  Stories  from  a  Chinese  Studio,'  vol.  i,  p.  i,  note  2.

[39]  C


,3  THE    TEXTS    OF   TAOISM.  CH.  ill.


Masters  of  the  Tao,  generally  with  mystical
''rr  Thierir  appellations  in  order  to  set  forth  his  own
A'wany-jze.  yjcws.  Two  instances  from  Book  XI  will
suffice  in  illustration  of  this.  In  par.  4,  Hwang-Ti  does
reverence  to  his  instructor  Kwang  A7/ang-jze  \  saying,  '  In
Kwang  AV/ang-jze  we  have  an  example  of  what  is  called
Ik-avc^Ji,' which  Mr.  Giles  renders  'Kwang  Kh^ng  3ze  is
surely  God.'  In  par.  5,  again,  the  mystical  Yun-/'iang  is
made  to  say  to  the  equally  fabulous  and  mystical  Hung-
mung, 'O  Heaven,  have  you  forgotten  me?'  and,  farther
on,  '  O  Heaven,  you  have  conferred  on  me  (the  knowledge
of)  your  operation,  and  revealed  to  me  the  mystery  of  it ;'
in  both  which  passages  Mr.  Giles  renders  thien  by  'your
I  lolincss.'

Hut    Mr.   Giles   seems  to   agree  with  me  that  the   old

Taoists  had  no  idea  of  a  personal  God,  when  they  wrote  of

,.    ,..,   ,  Thien  or  Heaven.     On  his  sixty- eighth  page,

Mr.  Giles  s  own  .  ,_       ,    .^^_  .  ,

ilka  of  the  near  the  beginning  of  Book  VI,  we  meet  with
JIime'"God''rs  ^^^^  following  sentence,  having  every  appear-
the  equivalent  of  ance  of  beinfj   translated   from   the   Chinese

'I  h  i

text : — '  God  is  a  principle  which  exists  by
virtue  of  its  own  intrinsicality,  and  operates  without  self-
manifestation.'  By  an  inadvertence  he  has  introduced  his
own  definition  of  'God'  as  if  it  were  A'wang-jze's  ;  and
though  I  can  find  no  characters  in  the  text  of  which  I
can  suppose  that  he  intends  it  to  be  the  translation,  it  is
valuable  as  helping  us  to  understand  the  meaning  to  be
attached  to  the  Great  Name  in  his  volume.

I  have  referred  above  (p.  1 6)  to  the  only  passage  in  Lao's

treatise,  wiicre  he  uses  the  name  Ti  or  God  in  its  highest

The  relation  of  scnse,  Saying  that  '  the   Tao  might  seem  to

ihcTaotoTi.  ^^^^,^  1^^,^,^  hcioYc  llini.'     He  might  well  say

so,  for  in  his  first  chapter  he  describes  the  Tao, '  (conceived

of  as)  having   no   name,  as  the  Originator  of  heaven  and


'   Kwanj;  AV/anj,' -^zc  li.  n.ls  the  list  of  characters  in  Ko  Ilung's  'History  of

Spirit-like  Immortals  (;||l|)    [jjj   j^^ ),'  written  in  our  fourth  century.     '  He

was,'  it  is  Baid,  'an   Inmiorlal  of  old,  who  lives  on  the  hill  of  M'ung-thung
in  a  grotto  of  rocks.'


CH.  III.  INTRODUCTION.


19


earth,  and  (conceived  of  as)  having  a  name,  as  the  Mother
of  all  things.'  The  reader  will  also  find  the  same  predicates
of  the  Tao  at  greater  length  in  his  fifty-first  chapter.

The  character  Ti  is  also  of  rare  occurrence  in /Avang-^ze,
excepting  as  apphed  to  the  five  ancient  Tis.  In  Bk.  Ill,
par.  4,  and  in  one  other  place,  we  find  it  indicating  the
Supreme  Being,  but  the  usage  is  ascribed  to  the  ancients.
In  Bk.  XV,  par.  3,  in  a  description  of  the  human  Spirit,
its  name  is  said  to  be  '  Thung  Ti,'  which  Mr.  Giles  renders
'  Of  God  ; '  Mr.  Balfour,  '  One  with  God;'  while  my  own
version  is  '  The  Divinity  in  Man.'  In  Bk.  XII,  par.  6,  we
have  the  expression  '  the  place  of  God  ; '  in  Mr.  Giles,  '  the
kingdom  of  God  ;'  in  Mr.  Balfour,  '  the  home  of  God.'  In
this  and  the  former  instance,  the  character  seems  to  be  used
with  the  ancient  meaning  which  had  entered  into  the  folk-
lore of  the  people.  But  in  Bk.  VI,  par.  7,  there  is  a  passage
which  shows  clearly  the  relative  position  of  Tao  and  Ti  in
the  Taoistic  system  ;  and  having  called  attention  to  it,  I  will
go  on  to  other  points.  Let  the  reader  mark  well  the  follow-
ing predicates  of  the  Tao  : — '  Before  there  were  heaven  and
earth,  from  of  old,  there  It  was,  securely  existing.  From  It
came  the  mysterious  existence  of  spirits  ;  from  It  the
mysterious  existence  of  Ti  (God).  It  produced  heaven,
It  produced  earth  \'  This  says  more  than  the  utterance  of
Lao, — that  'the  Tao  seemed  to  be  before  God;' — does  it
not  say  that  Tao  was  before  God,  and  that  He  was  what
He  is  by  virtue  of  Its  operation?

3.  Among  the  various  personal  names  given  to  the  Tao

NoideaofCrea-   ^^'^  ^^^°^^  °^  ^ao  Hwa,  'Maker  and  Trans-

tion  proper  in     former,'  and  3  ao  Wu  iTe, '  Maker  of  things.'

Instances  of  both  these  names  are  found  in  Bk.

VI,  parr.  9, 10.  '  Creator'  and  '  God'  have  both  been  employed

for  them  ;  but  there  is  no  idea  of  Creation  in  Taoism.

Again  and  again  A'wang-jze  entertains  the  question  of


^  For  this  sentence  we  find  in  Mr.  Balfour  : — '  Spirits  of  the  dead,  receiving
It,  become  divine  ;  the  very  gods  themselves  owe  their  divinity  to  its  influence  ;
and  by  it  both  Heaven  and  Earth  were  produced.'  The  version  of  it  by
Mr.  Giles  is  too  condensed  : — '  Spiritual  beings  drew  their  spirituality  there-
from, while  the  universe  became  what  we  see  it  now.'

C  2


20  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  in.


how  it  was  at  the  first  beginning  of  things.  Different  views
arc  stated.  In  Bk.  II,  par.  4-  he  says  :—' Among  the  men
of  old  their  knowledge  reached  the  extreme  point.  What
was  that  extreme  point  ?

'  Some  held  that  at  first  there  was  not  anything.  This
is  the  extreme  point,— the  utmost  limit  to  which  nothing
can  be  added.

'A  second  class  held  that  there  was  something,  but  with-
out any  responsive  recognition  of  it  (on  the  part  of  man).

'A  third  class  held  that  there  was  such  recognition,  but
there  had  not  begun  to  be  any  expression  of  different
opinions  about  it.  It  was  through  the  definite  expression
of  different  opinions  about  it  that  there  ensued  injury  to
the  (doctrine  of  the)  T  a  o  ^'

The  first  of  these  three  views  was  that  which  i^wang-^ze
himself  preferred.     The  most  condensed  expression  of  it  is
given  in  Bk.  XII.  par.  8  : — •  In  the  Grand  Beginning  of  all
things  there  was  nothing  in  all  the  vacancy  of  space  ;  there
was  nothing  that  could  be  named  ^.     It  was  in  this  state
that  there  arose  the  first  existence ;  the  first  existence,  but
still  without  bodily  shape.     From  this  things  could  be  pro-
duced, (receiving)  what  we  call  their  several    characters.
That  which  had  no  bodily  shape   was   divided,  and  then
without  intermission  there  was  what  we  call  the  process  of
conferring.     (The  two  processes)  continued  to  operate,  and
things  were  produced.     As   they   were   completed,  there
appeared  the  distinguishing  lines  of  each,  which  w^e  call  the
bodily  shape.     That  shape  was  the  body  preserving  in  it
the  spirit,  and  each  had   its  peculiar  manifestation  which
we  call  its  nature.'

Such  was  the  genesis  of  things  ;  the  formation  of  heaven

'  Compare  also  lik.  XXII,  parr.  7,  8,  and  XXIII,  par.  10.

'  Mr.  H:ilfour  h.id  given  for  this  sentence: — 'In  the  beginning  of  all  things
there  was  not  even  nothing.  There  were  no  names;  these  arose  afterwards.'
In  hi*  crili(|uc  on  .Mr.  i;alfour's  version  in  1S82,  Mr.  Giles  proposed  : — '  At  the
Uginning  oi  all  things  there  was  notiung ;  but  this  nothing  had  no  name.'  He
now  in  his  own  version  gives  for  it,  '  At  the  beginning  of  the  beginning,  even
nothing  did  not  e.xisl.  Then  came  the  period  of  the  nameless  ; '—an  improve-
ment, certainly,  on  the  other;  but  which  can  hardly  be  accepted  as  the  correct
version  of  the  text.


CH.  in.  INTRODUCTION.  21


and  earth  and  all  that  in  them  is,  under  the  guidance  of
the  Tao.  It  was  an  evolution  and  not  a  creation.  How
the  Tao  itself  came,— I  do  not  say  into  existence,  but
into  operation, — neither  Lao  nor  A'wang  ever  thought  of
saying  anything  about.  We  have  seen  that  it  is  nothing
material^  It  acted  spontaneously  of  itself.  Its  sudden
appearance  in  the  field  of  non-existence,  Producer,  Trans-
former, Beautifier,  surpasses  my  comprehension.  To  Lao
it  seemed  to  be  before  God.  I  am  compelled  to  accept
the  existence  of  God,  as  the  ultimate  Fact,  bowing  before
it  with  reverence,  and  not  attempting  to  explain  it,  the
one  mystery,  the  sole  mystery  of  the  universe.

4.  '  The  bodily  shape  was  the  body  preserving  in  it  the
spirit,  and  each  had  its  peculiar  manifestation  which  we
call  its  nature.'  So  it  is  said  in  the  passage  quoted  above
from  A^wang-jze's  twelfth  Book,  and  the  language  shows
T>,     .  ,  how  Taoism,  in  a  loose  and  indefinite  way,

Man  IS  composed  '  •' '

of  body  and  Considered  man  to  be  composed  of  body  and
^^^"  ■  spirit,  associated  together,  yet  not  necessarily

dependent  on  each  other.  Little  is  found  bearing  on  this
tenet  in  the  Tao  Teh  A^ing.  The  concluding  sentence
of  ch.  o^'>^,  '  He  who  dies  and  yet  does  not  perish,  has  lon-
gevity,' is  of  doubtful  acceptation.  More  pertinent  is  the
description  of  life  as  'a  coming  forth,'  and  of  death  as  'an
entering-;'  but  iiTwang-^ze  expounds  more  fully,  though
after  all  unsatisfactorily,  the  teaching  of  their  system  on
the  subject.

At  the  conclusion  of  his  third  Book,  writing  of  the  death
of  Lao-jze,  he  says,  '  When  the  master  came,  it  was  at  the
proper  time ;  when  he  went  away,  it  was  the  simple  se-
quence (of  his  coming).  Quiet  acquiescence  in  what  happens
at  its  proper  time,  and  quietly  submitting  (to  its  sequence),
afford  no  occasion  for  grief  or  for  joy.  The  ancients  de-
scribed (death)  as  the  loosening  of  the  cord  on  which  God
suspended  (the  life).  What  we  can  point  to  are  the  faggots
that  have  been  consumed  ;  but  the  fire  is  transmitted  else-
where, and  we  know  not  that  it  is  over  and  ended.'

1  The  Tao  Teh  A'ing,  ch.  14;  et  al.  ^  Ch.  50.


22  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  III.


It  is.  however,  in  connexion  with  the  death  of  his  own
wife,  as  rehited  in  the  eighteenth  Book,  that  his  views  most
fully— I  do  not  say  'clearly '—appear.  We  are  told  that
when  that  event  took  place,  his  friend  Hui-jze  went  to  con-
dole with  him,  and  found  him  squatted  on  the  ground,
drumming  on  the  vessel  (of  ice),  and  singing.  His  friend
said  to  him,  '  When  a  wife  has  lived  with  her  husband,
brought  up  children,  and  then  dies  in  her  old  age,  not  to
wail  for  her  is  enough.  When  you  go  on  to  drum  on  the
vessel  and  sing,  is  it  not  an  excessive  (and  strange)  demon-
stration?' A'wang-5ze  replied,  'It  is  not  so.  When  she
first  died,  was  it  possible  for  me  to  be  singular,  and  not
affected  by  the  event?  But  I  reflected  on  the  commence-
ment of  her  being,  when  she  had  not  yet  been  born  to  life.
Not  only  had  she  no  life,  but  she  had  no  bodily  form.  Not
only  had  she  no  bodily  form,  but  she  had  no  breath.
.Suddenl)'  in  this  chaotic  condition  there  ensued  a  change,
and  there  was  breath  :  another  change,  and  there  was  the
bodily  form;  a  further  change,  and  she  was  born  to  life;
a  change  now  again,  and  she  is  dead.  The  relation  be-
tween those  changes  is  like  the  procession  of  the  four
seasons, — spring,  autumn,  winter,  and  summer.  There  she
lies  with  her  face  up,  sleeping  in  the  Great  Chamber^;  and
if  I  were  to  fall  sobbing  and  going  on  to  wail  for  her,
I  should  think  I  did  not  understand  what  was  appointed
for  all.     1  therefore  restrained  myself.'

The  next  paragraph  of  the  same  Book  contains  another
story  about  two  ancient  men,  both  deformed,  who,  when
looking  at  the  graves  on  Kwan-lun,  begin  to  feel  in  their
own  frames  the  symptoms  of  approaching  dissolution.  One
says  to  the  other,  'Do  you  dread  it?'  and  gets  the  reply,
'  No.  Why  should  I  chcad  it  ?  Life  is  a  borrowed  thing.
I  he  living  frame  thus  borrowed  is  but  so  much  dust.  Life
.ind  death  are  like  day  and  night.'

In  every  birth,  it  wouUl  thus  appear,  there  is,  somehow,
a  rcjK-liti.Mi  of  what  it  is  said,  as  we  have  seen,  took  place
■It  'the  (;i;ui<l  ]5eginning  of  all  things,'  when  out  of  the


I  li.1t  is.  bclwcca  heaven  ami  cailli.


CH.  in.  INTRODUCTION.  2  3

primal  nothingness,  the  Tao  somehow  appeared,  and  there
was  developed  through  its  operation  the  world  of  tilings, —
material  things  and  the  material  body  of  man,  which  en-
shrines or  enshrouds  an  immaterial  spirit.  This  returns
to  the  Tao  that  gave  it,  and  may  be  regarded  indeed  as
that  Tao  operating  in  the  body  during  the  time  of  life,  and
in  due  time  receives  a  new  embodiment.

In  these  notions  of  Taoism  there  was  a  preparation  for
the  appreciation  by  its  followers  of  the  Buddhistic  system
when  it  came  to  be  introduced  into  the  country,  and  which
forms  a  close  connexion  between  the  two  at  the  present
day,  Taoism  itself  constantly  becoming  less  definite  and
influential  on  the  minds  of  the  Chinese  people.  The  Book
which  tells  us  of  the  death  of  A^wang-jze's  wife  concludes
with  a  narrative  about  Lieh-jze  and  an  old  bleached  skull ^,
and  to  this  is  appended  a  passage  about  the  metamorphoses
of  things,  ending  with  the  statement  that  '  the  panther  pro-
duces the  horse,  and  the  horse  the  man,  who  then  again
enters  into  the  great  machinery  (of  evolution),  from  which
all  things  come  forth  (at  birth)  and  into  which  they  re-enter
(at  death).'  Such  representations  need  not  be  charac-
terised.

5.  Ku  Hsi, '  the  prince  of  Literature,'  described  the  main

object  of  Taoism  to  be  '  the  preservation  of  the  breath  of

_,  life  ;'  and  Liu  Mi,  probably  of  our  thirteenth

The  Tao  as  ^  1  •       -A  •  r^

promotive  of  ccntury  ^,  m  his  '  Dispassionate  Comparison
longevity.  ^f  ^j^^  i:\,x&^  Religions,'  declares  that  '  its
chief  achievement  is  the  prolongation  of  longevity.'  Such
is  the  account  of  Taoism  ordinarily  given  by  Confucian  and
Buddhist  writers,  but  our  authorities,  Lao  and  A'wang,
hardly  bear  out  this  representation  of  it  as  true  of  their
time.     There  are  chapters  of  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing  which


1  Quoted  in  the  Amplification  of  the  Sixteen  Precepts  or  Maxims  of  the
second  emperor  of  the  present  dynasty  by  his  son.  The  words  are  irom
Dr.  Milne's  version  of  '  the  Sacred  Edict,'  p.  137.

2  In  his  Index  to  the  Tripi/aka,  Mr.  Bunyio  Nanjio  (p.  359)  assigns  Liu  Mi
and  his  work  to  the  Yiian  dynasty.  In  a  copy  of  the  work  in  my  possession
they  are  assigned  to  that  of  Sung.  The  author,  no  doubt,  lived  under  both
dynasties, — from  the  Sung  into  the  Yiian.


24  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  in,

presuppose  a  peculiar  mana<:jenient  of  the  breath,  but  the
treatise  is  singularly  free  from  anything  to  justify  what  Mr,
lialfour  well  calls  '  the  antics  of  the  Kung-fu,  or  system  of
mystic  and  recondite  calisthenics  ^'  Lao  insists,  however,
on  the  Tao  as  conducive  to  long  life,  and  in  A'wang-^ze  we
have  references  to  it  as  a  discipline  of  longevity,  though
even  he  mentions  rather  with  disapproval  '  those  who  kept
blowing  and  breathing  with  open  mouth,  inhaling  and
exhaling  the  breath,  expelling  the  old  and  taking  in  new ;
passing  their  time  like  the  (dormant)  bear,  and  stretching
anti  twisting  (their  necks)  like  birds.'  He  says  that  'all
this  simply  shows  their  desire  for  longevity,  and  is  what
the  scholars  who  manage  the  breath,  and  men  who  nourish
the  body  and  wish  to  live  as  long  as  Phang-ju,  are  fond  of
doing  -,'  My  own  opinion  is  that  the  methods  of  the  Tao
were  first  cultivated  for  the  sake  of  the  longevity  which
they  were  thought  to  promote,  and  that  Lao,  discoun-
tenancing such  a  use  of  them,  endeavoured  to  give  the
doctrine  a  higher  character  ;  and  this  view  is  favoured  by
passages  in  A'wang-^ze.  In  the  seventh  paragraph,  for
instance,  of  his  Book  VI,  speaking  of  parties  who  had  ob-
tained the  Tao,  he  begins  with  a  prehistoric  sovereign,  who
'  got  it  and  by  it  adjusted  heaven  and  earth,'  Among  his
other  instances  is  Phang-ju,  who  got  it  in  the  time  of  Shun,
and  lived  on  to  the  time  of  the  five  leading  princes  of  A'au,
—a  longevity  of  more  than  1 800  years,  greater  than  that
ascribed  to  Methuselah!  In  the  paragraph  that  follows
there  appears  a  Nii  Yu,  who  is  addressed  by  another  famous
Taoist  in  the  words,  'You  are  old.  Sir,  while  your  com-
plexion is  like  that  of  a  child  ;— how  is  it  so.?'  and  the
rcpl)-  is,  '  I  became  acquainted  with  the  Tao.'

I  will  adduce  onl\'  one  more  passage  of  A'wang.  In  his
eleventh  Pook,  and  the  fourth  paragraph,  he  tells  us  of
Miterviews  between  1 1 wang-Ti,  in  the  nineteenth  year  of  his
rei-n,  which  would  be  l'..  c.  2679,  and  his  instructor  Kwang
A//ang-?zc.     The  Taoist  sage  is  not   readily  prevailed  on


'  Sec  note  on  j).  1.S7  of  his  Awanji-ize.
'  Seeltk.  XV,  par.  I.


CH.  III.  INTRODUCTION.  2  C


to  unfold  the  treasures  of  his  knowledge  to  the  sovereign,
but  at  last  his  reluctance  is  overcome,  and  he  says  to  him,
'  Come,  and  I  will  tell  you  about  the  Perfect  Tao.  Its
essence  is  surrounded  with  the  deepest  obscurity ;  its
highest  reach  is  in  darkness  and  silence.  There  is  nothino-
to  be  seen,  nothing  to  be  heard.  When  it  holds  the  spirit
in  its  arms  in  stillness,  then  the  bodily  form  will  of  itself
become  correct.  You  must  be  still,  you  must  be  pure  ;
not  subjecting  your  body  to  toil,  not  agitating  your  vital
force  : — then  you  may  live  for  long.  When  your  eyes  see
nothing,  your  ears  hear  nothing,  and  your  mind  knows
nothing,  your  spirit  will  keep  your  body,  and  the  body  will
live  long.  Watch  over  what  is  within  you  ;  shut  up  the
avenues  that  connect  you  with  what  is  external ;— much
knowledge  is  pernicious.  I  will  proceed  with  you  to  the
summit  of  the  Grand  Brilliance,  where  we  come  to  the
bright  and  expanding  (element)  ;  I  will  enter  with  you  the
gate  of  the  dark  and  depressing  element.  There  heaven
and  earth  have  their  Controllers;  there  the  Yin  and
Yang  have  their  Repositories.  Watch  over  and  keep
your  body,  and  all  things  will  of  themselves  give  it  vigour.
I  maintain  the  (original)  unity  (of  these  elements).  In
this  way  I  have  cultivated  myself  for  1200  years,  and
my  bodily  form  knows  no  decay.'  Add  1300  to  2679,
and  we  obtain  3879  as  the  year  B.C.  of  Kwang  A'/zang-
jze's  birth !

6.  Lao-^ze  describes  some  other  and  kindred  results  of
cultivating  the  Tao  in  terms  which  are  sufficiently  startling.
Startling  results  and  which  it  is  difficult  to  accept.  In  his
of  the  Tao.  fiftieth  chapter  he  says,  '  He  who  is  skilful  in
managing  his  life  travels  on  land  without  having  to  shun
rhinoceros  or  tiger,  and  enters  a  host  without  having  to
avoid  buff  coat  or  sharp  weapon.  The  rhinoceros  finds  no
place  in  him  into  which  to  thrust  its  horn,  nor  the  tiger  a
place  in  which  to  fix  its  claws,  nor  the  weapon  a  place  to
admit  its  point.  And  for  what  reason  .?  Because  there  is
in  him  no  place  of  death.'  To  the  same  effect  he  says  in
his  fifty-fifth  chapter,  '  He  who  has  in  himself  abundantly
the  attributes  (of  the  Tao)  is  like  an  infant.     Poisonous


26  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  III.


insects  will  not  sting  him  ;  fierce  beasts  will  not  seize  him  ;
birds  of  prey  will  not  strike  him.'

Such  assertions  startle  us  by  their  contrariety  to  our
obser\'ation  and  experience,  but  so  does  most  of  the  teaching
of  Taoism.  What  can  seem  more  absurd  than  the  declara-
tion that  "the  Tao  does  nothing,  and  so  there  is  nothing
that  it  docs  not  do  ? '  And  yet  this  is  one  of  the  fundamental
axioms  of  the  system.  The  thirty-seventh  chapter,  which
enunciates  it,  goes  on  to  say,  '  If  princes  and  kings  were
able  to  maintain  (the  Tao),  all  things  would  of  themselves
be  transformed  by  them.'  This  principle,  if  we  can  call  it
so,  is  generalised  in  the  fortieth,  one  of  the  shortest  chapters,
and  partly  in  rhyme: —

•The  movement  of  the  Tao
By  contraries  proceeds ;
And  weakness  marks  the  course
Of  Tao's  mighty  deeds.

All  things  under  heaven  sprang  from  it  as  existing  (and
named) ;  that  existence  sprang  from  it  as  non-existent
(and  not  named).'

Ilo-shang  Kung,  or  whoever  gave  their  names  to  the
chapters  of  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing,  styles  this  fortieth  chapter
'  Dispensing  with  the  use  (of  means).'  If  the  wish  to  use
means  arise  in  the  mind,  the  nature  of  the  Tao  as  '  the
Nameless  Simplicity '  has  been  vitiated ;  and  this  nature
is  celebrated  in  lines  like  those  just  quoted  : —

'  Simplicity  without  a  name
Is  IVce  from  all  external  aim.
With  no  desire,  at  rest  and  siill,
All  things  go  right,  as  of  their  will.'

I  do  not  cull  any  passages  from  A'wang-ijze  to  illustrate
these  points.  In  his  eleventh  Book  his  subject  is  Govern-
ment by  'Let-a-be  and  the  exercise  of  Forbearance.'

7.  Ihis  Tao  ruled  men  at  first,  and  then  the  world  was

in  a  paradisiacal  state.     Neither  of  our  authorities  tells  us

The  p.ira(lisiacnl   how  long  this  condition  lasted,  but  as  Lao

*"^^''-  observes  in  his  eighteenth  chapter,  'the  Tao

ceased    to    be   observed.'     A'wang-^ze,  however,   gives   us


CH.  III.  INTRODUCTION.


27


more  than  one  description  of  what  he  considered  the  para-
disiacal state  was.  He  calls  it  '  the  age  of  Perfect  Virtue.'
In  the  thirteenth  paragraph  of  his  twelfth  Book  he  says,
'  In  this  age,  they  attached  no  value  to  wisdom,  nor  employed
men  of  ability.  Superiors  were  (but)  as  the  higher  branches
of  a  tree  ;  and  the  people  were  like  the  deer  of  the  wild.
They  were  upright  and  correct,  without  knowing  that  to
be  so  was  Righteousness ;  they  loved  one  another,  without
knowing  that  to  do  so  was  Benevolence ;  they  were  honest
and  leal-hearted,  without  knowing  that  it  was  Loyalty ;
they  fulfilled  their  engagements,  without  knowing  that  to
do  so  was  Good  Faith  ;  in  their  movements  they  employed
the  services  of  one  another,  without  thinking  that  they  were
conferring  or  receiving  any  gift.  Therefore  their  actions
left  no  trace,  and  there  was  no  record  of  their  affairs.'

Again,  in  the  fourth  paragraph  of  his  tenth  Book,  address-
ing an  imaginary  interlocutor,  he  says,  'Are  you,  Sir,  un-
acquainted with  the  age  of  Perfect  Virtue?'  He  then  gives
the  names  of  twelve  sovereigns  who  ruled  in  it,  of  the
greater  number  of  whom  we  have  no  other  means  of  know-
ing anything,  and  goes  on  : — Tn  their  times  the  people  used
knotted  cords  in  carrying  on  their  business.  They  thought
their  (simple)  food  pleasant,  and  their  (plain)  clothing
beautiful.  They  were  happy  in  their  (simple)  manners,
and  felt  at  rest  in  their  (poor)  dwellings.  (The  people  of)
neighbouring  states  might  be  able  to  descry  one  another ;
the  voices  of  their  cocks  and  dogs  might  be  heard  from
one  to  the  other ;  they  might  not  die  till  they  were  old  ;
and  yet  all  their  life  they  would  have  no  communication
together.     In  those  times  perfect  good  order  prevailed.'

One  other  description  of  the  primeval  state  is  still  more
interesting.  It  is  in  the  second  paragraph  of  Bk.  IX  :—
'  The  people  had  their  regular  and  constant  nature : — they
wove  and  made  themselves  clothes  ;  they  tilled  the  ground
and  got  food.  This  was  their  common  faculty.  They  were
all  one  in  this,  and  did  not  form  themselves  into  separate
classes ;  so  were  they  constituted  and  left  to  their  natural
tendencies.  Therefore  in  the  age  of  Perfect  Virtue  men
walked  along  with  slow  and  grave  step,  and   with  their


28  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  in.


looks  steadily  directed  forwards.  On  the  hills  there  were
no  footpaths  nor  excavated  passages ;  on  the  lakes  there
were  no  boats  nor  dams.  All  creatures  lived  in  companies,
and  their  places  of  settlement  were  made  near  to  one
another.  Birds  and  beasts  multiplied  to  flocks  and  herds  ;
the  grass  and  trees  grew  luxuriant  and  long.  The  birds
and  beasts  might  be  led  about  without  feeling  the  con-
straint ;  the  nest  of  the  magpie  might  be  climbed  to,  and
peeped  into.  Yes,  in  the  age  of  Perfect  Virtue,  men  lived
in  common  with  birds  and  beasts,  and  were  on  terms  of
equality  with  all  creatures,  as  forming  one  family; — how
could  they  know  among  themselves  the  distinctions  of
superior  men  and  small  men  ?  Equally  without  knowledge,
they  did  not  leave  the  path  of  their  natural  virtue  ;  equally
free  from  desires,  they  were  in  the  state  of  pure  simplicity.
In  that  pure  simplicity,  their  nature  was  what  it  ought
to  be.'

Such  were  the  earliest  Chinese  of  whom  Kwang-^ze
could  venture  to  give  any  account.  If  ever  their  ancestors
had  been  in  a  ruder  or  savage  condition,  it  must  have
been  at  a  much  antecedent  time.  These  had  long  passed
out  of  such  a  state ;  they  w^ere  tillers  of  the  ground,  and
acquainted  with  the  use  of  the  loom.  They  lived  in  happy
relations  with  one  another,  and  in  kindly  harmony  with  the
tribes  of  inferior  creatures.  But  there  is  not  the  slightest
allusion  to  any  sentiment  of  piety  as  animating  them  indi-
vidually, or  to  any  ceremony  of  religion  as  observed  by
them  in  common.  This  surely  is  a  remarkable  feature  in
their  condition.  I  call  attention  to  it,  but  I  do  not  dwell
upon  it.

<S.   But  by  the  time  of  Lao  and  /v'wang  the  cultivation  of

the   Tao   liad    fallen   into  disuse.     The    simplicity   of  life

which  it   demanded,  with   its  freedom   from
The  decay  of  the       n    i-  4      i  •  1    i.-  j

Tao  before  the    '^'^  cisturbuig  speculation  and  action,  was  no

Krowtii  of       longer  to  be  found  in  individuals  or  in  govern-

kiiowlenge.  '^

mcnt.  It  was  the  general  decay  of  manners
and  of  s<)ci;il  order  which  unsettled  the  mind  of  Lao,  made
liiin  resign  his  position  as  a  curator  of  the  Royal  Library,
and  ileterniinc  to  wilhdniw   from  China  and  hide  himself


CH.  in.  INTRODUCTION.  29

among  the  rude  peoples  beyond  it.     The  cause  of  the  de-
terioration of  the  Tao  and  of  all  the  evils  of  the  nation
was  attributed  to  the  ever-growing  pursuit  of  knowledge,
and  of  what  we  call  the  arts  of  culture.    It  had  commenced
very  long  before; — in  the  time  of  Hwang-Ti,  ^wang  says
in  one  place  ^;  and  in  another  he  carries  it  still  higher  to
Sui-zan  and  Fu-hsi^.     There  had   been  indeed,  all  along
the  line  of  history,  a  groping  for  the  rules  of  life,  as  indi-
cated by  the  constitution  of  man's  nature.     The  results
were  embodied  in  the  ancient  literature  which  was  the  life-
long study  of  Confucius.     He  had  gathered  up  that  litera-
ture ;  he  recognised  the  nature  of  man  as  the  gift  of  Heaven
or  God.     The  monitions  of  God  as  given  in  the  convictions
of  man's  mind  supplied  him  with  a  Tao  or  Path  of  duty
very  different  from  the  Tao  or  Mysterious  Way  of  Lao.
All  this  was  gall  and  wormwood  to  the  dreaming  librarian
or  brooding  recluse,  and  made  him  say,  '  If  we  could  re-
nounce our  sageness  and  discard  our  wisdom,  it  would  be
better  for  the  people  a  hundredfold.     If  we  could  renounce
our  benevolence  and  discard  our  righteousness,  the  people
would  again  become  filial  and   kindly.     If  we  could   re-
nounce our  artful  contrivances  and  discard  ovir  (scheming
for)  gain,  there  would  be  no  thieves  nor  robbers^.'

We  can  laugh  at  this.  Taoism  was  wrong  in  its  opposi-
tion to  the  increase  of  knowledge.  Man  exists  under  a  law
of  progress.  In  pursuing  it  there  are  demanded  discretion
and  justice.  Moral  ends  must  rule  over  material  ends,  and
advance  in  virtue  be  ranked  higher  than  advance  in  science.
So  have  good  and  evil,  truth  and  error,  to  fight  out  the
battle  on  the  field  of  the  world,  and  in  all  the  range  of
time  ;  but  there  is  no  standing  still  for  the  individual  or
for  society.  Even  Confucius  taught  his  countrymen  to  set
too  high  a  value  on  the  examples  of  antiquity.  The  school
of  Lao-jze  fixing  themselves  in  an  unknown  region  beyond
antiquity, — a  prehistoric  time  between  '  the  Grand  Begin-
ning of  all  things '  out  of  nothing,  and  the  unknown  com-
mencement  of  societies  of  men, — has   made   no  advance

1  Bk,  XI,  par.  5.  '  Bk.  XVI,  par.  2.

'^  Tao  Teh  Alng,  ch.  19.


-O  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  III.


but  rather  retrograded,  and  is  represented  by  the  still  more
degenerate  Taoism  of  the  present  day.

There  is  a  short  parabolic  story  of  /Avang-jze,  intended
to  represent  the  antagonism  between  Taoism  and  know-
ledge, which  has  always  struck  me  as  curious.  The  last
paragraph  of  his  seventh  Book  is  this  :— '  The  Ruler  (or
god  Ti)ofthe  Southern  Ocean  was  Shu  (that  is,  Heedless);
the  Ruler  of  the  Northern  Ocean  was  H  u  (that  is,  Hasty);
and  the  Ruler  of  the  Centre  was  Hwun-tun  (that  is,
Chaos).  Shu  and  Hu  were  continually  meeting  in  the  land
of  Hwun-tun,  who  treated  them  very  well.  They  con-
sulted together  how  they  might  repay  his  kindness,  and
said,  "Men  have  all  seven  orifices  for  the  purposes  of  seeing,
hearing,  eating,  and  breathing,  while  this  (poor)  Ruler  alone
has  not  one.  Let  us  try  and  make  them  for  him."  Ac-
cordingly they  dug  one  orifice  in  him  every  day;  and  at
the  end  of  seven  daj's  Chaos  died.'

So  it  was  that  Chaos  passed  away  before  Light.  So  did
the  nameless  Simplicity  of  the  Tao  disappear  before  Know-
ledge. But  it  was  better  that  the  Chaos  should  give  place
to  the  Kosmos.    'Heedless'  and  '  Hasty'  did  a  good  deed.

9.  I  have  thus  set  forth  eight  characteristics  of  the  Tao-
istic  system,  having  respect  mostly  to  what  is  peculiar  and
mystical  in  it.     I  will  now  conclude  my  exhibition  of  it  by

~,         ...     bringing  together  under  one  head  the  prac-

rhc  pracUcal  t>     o        !=>  ...

lessons  of       tical  lessons  of  its  author  for  men  individually,
■^o-iic.        ,^j^j   |-^^.  ^j^^   administration   of  government.

The  praise  of  whatever  excellence  these  possess  belongs  to

Lfio  himself:  A'wang-^ze  devotes   himself  mainly  to  the

illustration  of  the  abstruse  and  difficult  points.

I''irst,  it  docs  not  surprise  us  that  in  his  rules  for  individual

man,  Lao  should  place  Humility  in  the  foremost  place.    A

favourite  illustration  with  him  of  the  Tao  is  water.     In.  his

eighth  chai^tcr  he  says  : — 'The  hisfhest  exccl-

Huniiliiv.       ,  .     ,  ,  „

Icnce  IS  like  that  of  water.     The  excellence

of  water  appears   in    its    benefiting  all  things,  and    in   its

occujiying,  without  striving  to  the  contrary,  the  low  ground

which   all    men   dislike.     Hence  (its  way)  is  near  to  that

of  the  Tao.'     To  the  same  effect    in    the    seventy-eighth


CH.  III.  INTRODUCTION.


31


chapter: — 'There  is  nothing  in  the  world  more  soft  and
weak  than  water,  and  yet  for  attacking  things  that  are
firm  and  strong  there  is  nothing  that  can  take  precedence
■  of  it.  Every  one  in  the  world  knows  that  the  soft  over-
comes the  hard,  and  the  weak  the  strong ;  but  no  one  is
able  to  carry  it  out  in  practice.'

In  his  sixty-seventh  chapter  Lao  associates  with  Humility
two  other  virtues,  and  calls  them  his  three  Precious  Things  or

Lao's  three     Jewels.    They  are  Gentleness,  Economy,  and

Jewels.         Shrinking  from   taking  precedence  of  others.

'  With  that  Gentleness,'  he  says,  '  I  can  be  bold  ;  with  that

Economy  I  can  be  liberal ;  Shrinking  from  taking  precedence

of  others,  I  can  become  a  vessel  of  the  highest  honour.'

And  in  his  sixty-third  chapter,  he  rises  to  a  still  loftier
height  of  morality.  He  says,  '(It  is  the  way  of  the  Tao)
to  act  without  (thinking  of)  acting,  to  conduct  affairs  with-
out (feeling)  the  trouble  of  them ;  to  taste  without  discern-
ing any  flavour,  to  consider  the  small  as  great,

^"for'evil°°     ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  many,  and  to  recompense
injury  with  kindness.'

Here  is  the  grand  Christian  precept,  '  Render  to  no  man
evil  for  evil.  If  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him  ;  if  he  thirst,  V
give  him  drink.  Be  not  overcome  with  evil,  but  overcome
evil  with  good.'  We  know  that  the  maxim  made  some
noise  in  its  author's  lifetime  ;  that  the  disciples  of  Confucius
consulted  him  about  it,  and  that  he  was  unable  to  receive
it^.  It  comes  in  with  less  important  matters  by  virtue  of
the  Taoistic  'rule  of  contraries.'  I  have  been  sur-
prised to  find  what  little  reference  to  it  I  have  met  with  in
the  course  of  my  Chinese  reading.  I  do  not  think  that
iTwang-jze  takes  notice  of  it  to  illustrate  it  after  his  fashion.
There,  however,  it  is  in  the  Tao  Teh  King.  The  fruit  of
it  has  yet  to  be  developed.

Second,  Lao  laid  down  the  same  rule  for  the  policy  of
the  state  as  for  the  life  of  the  individual.  He  says  in  his
sixty-first  chapter,  '  What  makes  a  state  great  is  its  being
like   a  low-lying,  down-flowing   stream  ; — it    becomes    the

^  Confucian  Analects,  XIV,  36.


32  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  iii.


centre  to  which  tend  all  (the  small  states)  under  heaven.'
He  then  uses  an  illustration  which  will  produce  a  smile: —
'Take  the  case  of  all  females.  The  female  always  over-
comes the  male  by  her  stillness.  Stillness  may  be  con-'
sidercd  (a  sort  of)  abasement.'  Resuming  his  subject,  he
adds, 'Thus  it  is  that  a  great  state,  by  condescending  to
small  states,  gains  them  for  itself;  and  that  small  states,
by  abasing  themselves  to  a  great  state,  win  it  over  to  them.
In  the  one  case  the  abasement  tends  to  gaining  adherents  ;
in  the  other  case,  to  procuring  favour.  The  great  state
only  wishes  to  unite  men  together  and  nourish  them  ;  a
small  state  only  wishes  to  be  received  by,  and  to  serve,
the  other.  Each  gets  what  it  desires,  but  the  great  state
must  learn  to  abase  itself.'

'All  very  well  in  theory,'  some  one  will  exclaim,  'but,
the  world  has  not  seen  it  yet  reduced  to  practice.'  So  it  is.
The  fact  is  deplorable.  No  one  saw  the  misery  arising
from  it,  and  exposed  its  unreasonableness  more  unsparingly,
than  A'wang-^ze.  But  it  was  all  in  vain  in  his  time,  as  it
has  been  in  all  the  centuries  that  have  since  rolled  their
course.  Philosophy,  philanthrop}%  and  religion  have  still
to  toil  on,  '  faint,  yet  pursuing,"  believing  that  the  time  will
yet  come  when  humility  and  love  shall  secure  the  reign  of
peace  and  good  will  among  the  nations  of  men.

While  enjoining  humility,  Lao  protested  against  war.
In  his  thirty-first  chapter  he  says,  'Arms,  however  beau-
tiful, are  instruments  of  evil  omen  ;  hateful,  it  may  be  said,
to  all  creatures.  They  who  have  the  Tao  do  not  like  to
employ  them.'  Perhaps  in  his  sixty-ninth  chapter  he  allows
defensive  war,  but  he  adds,  'There  is  no  calamity  greater  ,;
than  that  of  lightly  engaging  in  war.  To  do  that  is  near
losing  the  gentleness  which  is  so  precious.  Thus  it  is  that
when  weai)ons  are  (actually)  crossed,  he  who  deplores  the
(situation)  conquers.'

Tlierc  are  some  other  i^oints  in  the  practical  lessons  of
Taoism  t<.  which  I  should  like  to  call  the  attention  of  the
reader,  but  I  must  refer  him  for  them  to  the  chapters  of
the  Tao  Teh  A'ing,  and  the  Books  of  A'wang-3ze.  Its
salient  features  have  been  set  forth  somewhat  fully.     Not-


CH.  IV.  INTRODUCTION.  33

withstanding  the  scorn  poured  so  freely  on  Confucius  by
A'wang-^ze  and  other  Taoist  writers,  he  proved  in  the
course  of  time  too  strong  for  Lao  as  the  teacher  of  their
people.  The  entrance  of  Buddhism,  moreover,  into  the
country  in  our  first  century,  was  very  injurious  to  Taoism,
which  still  exists,  but  is  only  the  shadow  of  its  former  self.
It  is  tolerated  by  the  government,  but  not  patronised  as  it
was  when  emperors  and  empresses  seemed  to  think  more
of  it  than  of  Confucianism,  It  is  by  the  spread  of  know-
ledge, which  it  has  always  opposed,  that  its  overthrow  and
disappearance  will  be  brought  about  ere  long.


CHAPTER  IV.
Accounts   of   Lao-3ze   and  A'wang-3ze   given

BY     SZE-MA    KHlY.l<i.

It  seems  desirable,  before  passing  from  Lao  and
ii"wang  in  this  Introduction,  to  give  a  place  in  it  to
what  is  said  about  them  by  Sze-ma  A'//ien.  I  have
said  that  not  a  single  proper  name  occurs  in  the  Tao
Teh  A'ing.  There  is  hardly  an  historical  allusion  in  it.
Only  one  chapter,  the  twentieth,  has  somewhat  of  an
autobiographical  character.  It  tells  us,  however,  of  no
incidents  of  his  life.  He  appears  alone  in  the  world  through
his  cultivation  of  the  Tao,  melancholy  and  misunderstood,
yet  binding  that  Tao  more  closely  to  his  bosom.

The  Books  of  A'wang-^ze  are  of  a  different  nature,
abounding  in  pictures  of  Taoist  life,  in  anecdotes  and
narratives,  graphic,  argumentative,  often  satirical.  But
they  are  not  historical.  Confucius  and  many  of  his  dis-
ciples, Lao  and  members  of  his  school,  heroes  and  sages
of  antiquity,  and  men  of  his  own  day,  move  across  his
pages ;  but  the  incidents  in  connexion  with  which  they
are  introduced  are  probably  fictitious,  and  devised  by  him
'to  point  his  moral  or  adorn  his  tale.'  His 'names  of
individuals  and  places  are  often  like  those  of  Bunyan  in
his  Pilgrim's  Progress  or  his  Holy  War,  emblematic
of  their  characters  and  the   doctrines  which  he   employs

[39]  D


V^


^  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  iv.


them  to  illustrate.  He  often  comes  on  the  stage  himself,
and  there  is  an  air  of  verisimilitude  in  his  descriptions,
possibly  also  a  certain  amount  of  fact  about  them  ;  but  we
cannot  appeal  to  them  as  historical  testimony.  It  is  only
to  Sze-ma  A7/ien  that  we  can  go  for  this ;  he  always  writes
in  the  spirit  of  an  historian ;  but  what  he  has  to  tell  us  of
the  two  men  is  not  much.

y\nd  first,  as  to  his  account  of  Lao-^ze.  When  he
wrote,  about  the  beginning  of  the  first  century  B.C.,  the
Taoist  master  was  already  known  as  Lao-3;ze.  Khxen,  how-
ever, tells  us  that  his  surname  was  Li,  and  his  name  R,
meaning  '  Ear,' which  gave  place  after  his  death  to  Tan,
meaning  "  Long-eared,'  from  which  we  may  conclude  that
he  was  named  from  some  peculiarity  in  the  form  of  his
ears.  He  was  a  native  of  the  state  of  AVm,  which  had
then  extended  far  beyond  its  original  limits,  and  his
birth-place  was  in  the  present  province  of  Ho-nan  or  of
An-hui.  He  was  a  curator  in  the  Royal  Library  ;  and  when
Confucius  visited  the  capital  in  the  year  B.C.  517,  the  two
men  met.  AV/ien  says  that  Confucius's  visit  to  Lo-yang  was
that  he  might  question  Lao  on  the  subject  of  ceremonies.
He  might  have  other  objects  in  mind  as  well ;  but  however
that  was,  the  two  met.  Li  said  to  Khung,  '  The  men  about
whom  you  talk  arc  dead,  and  their  bones  are  mouldered  to
dust ;  only  their  words  are  left.  Moreover,  when  the  superior
man  gets  his  opportunity,  he  mounts  aloft ;  but  when  the
time  is  against  him,  he  is  carried  along  by  the  force  of
circumstances  ^  I  have  heard  that  a  good  merchant,
though  Ik-  have  rich  treasures  safely  stored,  appears  as  if
he  were  pour ;  and  that  the  superior  man,  though  his
virtue  be  complete,  is  yet  to  outward  seeming  stupid.
Put  away  your  proud  air  and  many  desires,  your  in-
sinuating habit  and  w  ild  will.  They  are  of  no  advantage
to  you  ;  this  is  all  I  have  to  tell  you.'  Confucius  is  made
to  say  to  his  disciples  after  the  interview  :    '  I  know  how


'  Jiilirn  trnnslntcs  this  by  ' il  errc  h.  ravcnturc'  In  i86r  I  rendered  it,  '  He
moves  as  if  his  feel  were  cnlanj^'led.'  To  one  critic  it  suggests  the  idea  of  a
bundle  or  wisp  of  brusiiwood  rolled  about  over  the  ground  by  the  wind.


CH.  IV.  INTRODUCTION.  35

birds  can  fly,  fishes  swim,  and  animals  run.  But  the
runner  may  be  snared,  the  swimmer  hooked,  and  the
flyer  shot  by  the  arrow.  But  there  is  the  dragon : — I
cannot  tell  how  he  mounts  on  the  wind  through  the  clouds,
and  rises  to  heaven.  To-day  I  have  seen  Lao-^ze,  and  can
only  compare  him  to  the  dragon.'

In  this  speech  of  Confucius  we  have,  I  believe,  the  origin
of  the  name  Lao-?;ze,  as  applied  to  the  master  of  Taoism.
Its  meaning  is  '  The  Old  Philosopher,'  or  '  The  Old  Gen-
tleman^.' Confucius  might  well  so  style  Li  R.  At  the
time  of  this  interview  he  was  himself  in  his  thirty-fifth
year,  and  the  other  was  in  his  eighty-eighth.  AVden  adds,
'  Lao-^ze  cultivated  the  Tao  and  its  attributes,  the  chief
aim  of  his  studies  being  how  to  keep  himself  concealed
and  remain  unknown.  He  continued  to  reside  at  (the
capital  of)  A'au,  but  after  a  long  time,  seeing  the  decay
of  the  dynasty,  he  left  it  and  went  away  to  the  barrier-
gate,  leading  out  of  the  kingdom  on  the  north-west.
Yin  Hsi,  the  warden  of  the  gate,  said  to  him,  "  You  are
about  to  withdraw  yourself  out  of  sight.  Let  me  insist
on  your  (first)  composing  for  me  a  book."  On  this,  Lao-,^ze
wrote  a  book  in  two  parts,  setting  forth  his  views  on  the
Tao  and  its  attributes,  in  more  than  5000  characters.  He
then  went  away,  and  it  is  not  known  where  he  died.  He
was  a  superior  man,  who  liked  to  keep  himself  unknown.'

Kh'itn  finally  traces  Lao's  descendants  down  to  the  first
century  B.C.,  and  concludes  by  saying,  '  Those  who  attach
themselves  to  the  doctrine  of  Lao-jze  condemn  that  of
the  Literati,  and  the  Literati  on  their  part  condemn  Lao-
jze,  verifying  the  saying,  "  Parties  whose  principles  are
different  cannot  take  counsel  together."  Li  R  taught  that
by  doing  nothing  others  are  as  a  matter  of  course  trans-

^  The  characters  may  mean  '  the  old  boy,'  and  so  understood  have  given  rise
to  various  fabulous  legends;  that  his  mother  had  carried  him  in  her  womb  for
seventy-two  years  (some  say,  for  eighty-one),  and  that  when  bom  the  child  had
the  white  hair  of  an  old  man.  Julian  has  translated  the  fabulous  legend  of
Ko  Hung  of  our  fourth  century  about  him.  By  that  time  the  legends  of
Buddhism  about  6'akyamuni  had  become  current  in  China,  and  were  copied  and
applied  to  Lao-jze  by  his  followers.  Looking  at  the  meaning  of  the  two  names,
I  am  surprised  no  one  has  characterized  Lao-jze  as  the  Chinese  Seneca.

D   2


•


36  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  IV


formed,  and  that  rectification  in  the  same  way  ensues  from
being  pure  and  still.'

This  morsel  is  all  that  we  have  of  historical  narrative
about  Lao-5ze.  The  account  of  the  writing  of  the  Tao
Teh  Kinga.t  the  request  of  the  warden  of  the  barrier-gate
has  a  doubtful  and  legendary  appearance.  Otherwise,  the
record  is  free  from  anything  to  raise  suspicion  about  it.
It  says  nothing  about  previous  existences  of  Lao,  and
nothing  of  his  travelling  to  the  west,  and  learning  there
the  doctrines  which  are  embodied  in  his  work.  He  goes
through  the  pass  out  of  the  domain  of  Kau,  and  died  no
one  knowing  where.

It  is  difficult,  however,  to  reconcile  this  last  statement
with  a  narrative  in  the  end  of  A'wang-^ze's  third  Book.
There  we  see  Lao-^ze  dead,  and  a  crowd  of  mourners
wailing  round  the  corpse,  and  giving  extraordinary  demon-
strations of  grief,  which  offend  a  disciple  of  a  higher  order,
who  has  gone  to  the  house  to  offer  his  condolences  on  the
occasion.  But  for  the  peculiar  nature  of  most  of  A"wang's
narratives,  we  should  say,  in  opposition  to  K/ilen,  that  the
place  and  time  of  Lao's  death  were  well  known.  Possibly,
however,  i^wang-jze  may  have  invented  the  whole  story,
to  give  him  the  opportunity  of  setting  forth  what,  according
to  his  ideal  of  it,  the  life  of  a  Tdoist  master  should  be,  and
how  even  Lao-^ze  himself  fell  short  of  it.

Second,  AV/ien's  account  of  A'wang-.^ze  is  still  more  brief.
He  was  a  native,  he  tells  us,  of  the  territory  of  Mang,  which
belonged  to  the  kingdom  of  Liang  or  Wei,  and  held  an
office,  he  does  not  say  what,  in  the  city  of  K/n-yiian.
A'wang  was  thus  of  the  same  part  of  China  as  Lao-jze,  and
probably  grew  up  familiar  with  all  his  speculations  and
lessons.  He  lived  during  the  reigns  of  the  kings  Hui  of
Liang,  Hsiian  of  K/d,  and  Wei  of  AT/m.  We  cannot  be
wrong  therefore  in  assigning  his  period  to  the  latter  half  of
the  third,  and  earlier  part  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.  He
^was  thus  a  contemporary  of  Mencius.  They  visited  at  the
same  courts,  and  yet  neither  ever  mentions  the  other.  They
were  the  two  ablest  debaters  of  their  day,  and  fond  of
exposing  what  they  deemed  heresy.     But  it  would  only  be


CH.  IV.  INTRODUCTION.  37

a  matter  of  useless  speculation  to  try  to  account  for  their
never  having  come  into  argumentative  collision.

K/ntn  says  :  '  A'wang  had  made  himself  well  acquainted
with  all  the  literature  of  his  time,  but  preferred  the  views
of  Lao-^ze,  and  ranked  himself  among  his  followers,  so  that
of  the  more  than  ten  myriads  of  characters  contained  in  his
published  writings  the  greater  part  are  occupied  with  meta-
phorical illustrations  of  Lao's  doctrines.  He  made  "  The
Old  Fisherman,"  "  The  Robber  K'lh.''  and  "  The  Cutting
open  Satchels,"  to  satirize  and  expose  the  disciples  of  Con-
fucius, and  clearly  exhibit  the  sentiments  of  Lao.  Such
names  and  characters  as  "  Wei-lei  Hsii "  and  "  Khang-sang
3ze  "  are  fictitious,  and  the  pieces  where  they  occur  are
not  to  be  understood  as  narratives  of  real  events  ^.

'  But  A'wang  was  an  admirable  writer  and  skilful  com-
poser, and  by  his  instances  and  truthful  descriptions  hit
and  exposed  the  Mohists  and  Literati.  The  ablest  scholars
of  his  day  could  not  escape  his  satire  nor  reply  to  it,  while
he  allowed  and  enjoyed  himself  with  his  sparkling,  dashing
style  ;  and  thus  it  was  that  the  greatest  men,  even  kings
and  princes,  could  not  use  him  for  their  purposes.

'  King  Wei  of  Khn,  having  heard  of  the  ability  of  A'wang
Kkn,  sent  messengers  with  large  gifts  to  bring  him  to  his
court,  and  promising  also  that  he  would  make  him  his  chief
minister.  A'wang-jze,  however,  only  laughed  and  said  to
them,  "  A  thousand  ounces  of  silver  are  a  great  gain  to  me,
and  to  be  a  high  noble  and  minister  is  a  most  honourable
position.  But  have  you  not  seen  the  victim-ox  for  the
border  sacrifice  ?  It  is  carefully  fed  for  several  years,  and
robed  with  rich  embroidery  that  it  may  be  fit  to  enter  the
Grand  Temple.  When  the  time  comes  for  it  to  do  so,  it
would  prefer  to  be  a  little  pig,  but  it  cannot  get  to  be  so.
Go  away  quickly,  and  do  not  soil  me  with  your  presence.


1  Khang-sang  3ze  is  evidently  the  Kang-sang  Khix  of  A'wang's  Book  XXIII.
Wei-lei  Hsii  is  supposed  by  Sze-ma  A^ng  of  the  Thang  dynasty,  who  called
himself  the  Lesser  Sze-ma,  to  be  the  name  of  a  Book ;  one,  in  that  case,  of  the
lost  books  of  Awang.  But  as  we  find  the  '  Hill  of  Wei-lei '  mentioned  in
Bk.  XXIII  as  the  scene  of  Kang-sang  AVnVs  Taoistic  labours  and  success,  I
suppose  that  AV/ien's  reference  is  to  that.  The  names  are  quoted  by  him  from
memory,  or  might  be  insisted  on  as  instances  of  different  readings.


38  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  V.

I  had  rather  amuse  and  enjoy  myself  in  the  midst  of  a
filthy  ditch  than  be  subject  to  the  rules  and  restrictions  in
the  court  of  a  sovereign.  I  have  determined  never  to  take
office,  but  prefer  the  enjoyment  of  my  own  free  will." '

TT/zien  concludes  his  accountof  A^wang-jze  with  the  above
story,  condensed  by  him,  probably,  from  two  of  Kwangs
own  narratives,  in  par.  11  of  Bk.  XVII,  and  13  of  XXXII,
to  the  injury  of  them  both.  Paragraph  14  of  XXXII  brings
before  us  one  of  the  last  scenes  of  Kwa.ng-^zes  life,  and  we
may  doubt  whether  it  should  be  received  as  from  his  own
pencil.  It  is  interesting  in  itself,  however,  and  I  introduce
it  here :  '  When  A'wang-jjze  was  about  to  die,  his  disciples
signified  their  wish  to  give  him  a  grand  burial.  "  I  shall
have  heaven  and  earth,"  he  said,  "  for  my  coffin  and  its
shell ;  the  sun  and  moon  for  my  two  round  symbols  of  jade  ;

the  stars   and   constellations  for  my  pearls  and  jewels  ;

will  not  the  provisions  for  my  interment  be  complete  ?
What  would  you  add  to  them  ? "  The  disciples  replied,
"We  are  afraid  that  the  crows  and  kites  will  eat  our
master."  TsTwang-^ze  rejoined,  "Above,  the  crows  and  kites
will  eat  me  ;  below,  the  mole-crickets  and  ants  will  eat  me  ;
to  take  from  those  and  give  to  these  would  only  show
your  partiality." '

Such  were  among  the  last  words  of  A"wang-5ze.  His
end  was  not  so  impressive  as  that  of  Confucius;  but  it
was  in  keeping  with  the  general  magniloquence  and  strong
assertion  of  independence  that  marked  all  his  course.


CHAPTER  V.

On  THE  Tractate  of  Actions  and  their
Retributions.

I.  The  contrast  is  great  between  the  style  of  the  Tao

Teh  A-ing  and  the  Books  of  ATwang-jze  and  that  of  the

Peculiar  style   ^^^^  ^'^^^S  Phien,  a  translation  of  which  is

thexTilTinl  "°'^.^"^"^^"ed  as  a  specimen  of  the  Texts  of

I'hien.  "^  Taoism.    The  works  of  Lao  and  ATwang  stand

alone  in  the  literature  of  the  system.     What


CH.v.  INTRODUCTION.  39

it  was  before  Lao  cannot  be  ascertained,  and  in  liis  chap-
ters it  comes  before  us  not  as  a  religion,  but  as  a  subject
of  philosophical  speculation,  together  with  some  practical
applications  of  it  insisted  on  by  Lao  himself.  The  bril-
liant pages  of  jfirwang-jze  contain  little  more  than  his  inge-
nious defence  of  his  master's  speculations,  and  an  aggregate
of  illustrative  narratives  sparkling  with  the  charms  of  his
composition,  but  in  themselves  for  the  most  part  unbe-
lievable, often  grotesque  and  absurd.  This  treatise,  on
the  other  hand,  is  more  of  what  we  understand  by  a  sermon
or  popular  tract.  It  eschews  all  difficult  discussion,  and
sets  forth  a  variety  of  traits  of  character  and  actions  which
are  good,  and  a  still  greater  variety  of  others  which  are  bad,
exhorting  to  the  cultivation  and  performance  of  the  former,
and  warning  against  the  latter.  It  describes  at  the  outset
the  machinery  to  secure  the  record  of  men's  doings,  and
the  infliction  of  the  certain  retribution,  and  concludes  with
insisting  on  the  wisdom  of  repentance  and  reformation.
At  the  same  time  it  does  not  carry  its  idea  of  retribution
beyond  death,  but  declares  that  if  the  reward  or  punish-
ment is  not  completed  in  the  present  life,  the  remainder
will  be  received  by  the  posterity  of  the  good-doer  and  of
the  offender.

A  place  is  given  to  the  treatise  among  the  Texts  of
Taoism  in  '  The  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,'  because  of  its
popularity  in  China.  '  The  various  editions  of  it,'  as  ob-
served by  Mr.  Wylie,  'are  innumerable;  it  has  appeared
from  time  to  time  in  almost  every  conceivable  size,  shape,
and  style  of  execution.  Many  commentaries  have  been
written  upon  it,  and  it  is  frequently  published  with  a  collec-
tion of  several  hundred  anecdotes,  along  with  pictorial  illus-
trations, to  illustrate  every  paragraph  seriatim.  It  is  deemed
a  great  act  of  merit  to  aid  by  voluntary  contribution  to-
wards the  gratuitous  distribution  of  this  work^'

2.  The  author  of  the  treatise  is  not  known,  but,  as  Mr.

Wylie  also  observes,  it  appears  to  have  been  written  during

The  origin  of    the  Sung  dynasty.     The  earliest  mention  of

the  treatise.      jt  which  I  have  met  with  is  in  the  continua-


^  Notes  on  Chinese  Literature,  p.  1 79.


40  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  v.

tion  of  Ma-t\van  Lin's  encyclopedic  work  by  Wang  KhX,
first  published  in  1586,  the  fourteenth  year  of  the  fourteenth
emperor  of  the  Ming  dynasty.  In  Wang's  supplement  to
his  predecessor's  account  of  Taoist  works,  the  sixth  notice
is  of  'a  commentary  on  the  Thai  Shang  Kan  Ying
Phien  by  a  Li  AV^ang-Iing,'  and  immediately  before  it  is
a  commentary  on  the  short  but  well-known  Yin  Fii  /i'ing
by  a  Lu  Tien,  who  lived  1042-1102.  Immediately  after
it  other  works  of  the  eleventh  century  are  mentioned.  To
that  same  century  therefore  we  may  reasonably  refer  the
origin  of  the  Kan  Ying  Phien.

As  to  the  meaning  of  the  title,  the  only  difficulty  is  with
the  two  commencing  characters  Thai  Shang.  Julien  left
The  meaning  of  them  Untranslated,  with  the  note,  however,
the  title.  that  they  were  '  I'abreviation  de  Thai  Shang
Lao  ^iin,  expression  honorifique  par  laquelle  les  Tao-sze
designent  L^o-^ze,  le  fondateur  de  leur  secte  ^.'  This  is
the  interpretation  commonly  given  of  the  phrase,  and  it
is  hardly  worth  while  to  indicate  any  doubt  of  its  correct-
ness ;  but  if  the  characters  were  taken,  as  I  believe  they
were,  from  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  the
Tao  Teh  iTing,  I  should  prefer  to  understand  them  of
the  highest  and  oldest  form  of  the  Taoistic  teaching-.

3.  I  quoted  on  page  13  the  view  of  Hardwick,  the  Chris-
tian Advocate  of  Cambridge,  that  '  the  indefinite  expression


*  See  '  Le  Livre  des  Recompense  et  des  Peines  en  Chinois  et  en  Fran9ois '
(London,  1S35).

^  The  designation  of  Lao-jze  as  Thai  Shang  Lao  A'iin  originated  probably
in  the  Thang  dynasty.  It  is  on  record  that  in  666  Kao  3ung,  the  third  em'-
peror,  went  to  Lao-jze's  temple  at  Po  Aau  (the  place  of  Lao's  birth,  and  still
called  by  the  same  name,  in  the  department  of  Fang-yang  in  An-hui\  and  con-
ferred on  him  the  title  of  Thai  Shang  Yiian  Yiian  Hwang  Ti,  'The  Great
God,  the  Mysterious  Originator,  the  Most  High.'  '  Then,'  says  Mayers,  Manual,
p.  113,  '  for  the  first  time  he  was  ranked  among  the  gods  as  "  Great  Supreme,
the  Emperor  (or  Imperial  God)  of  the  Dark  First  Cause."  '    The  whole  entry  is

Later  on,  in  1014,  we  find  Aan  Bung,  the  fourth  Sung  emperor,  also  visiting
Po  Aau,  and  in  Lao's  temple,  which  has  by  this  time  become  '  the  Palace  of
Grand  Purity,'  enlarging  his  title  to  Thai  Shang  Lao  A'un  Hwun  Yiian
bhang  Teh  Hwang  Tt,  '  The  Most  High,  the  Ruler  Lao,  the  Great  God  of
Grand  Virtue  at  the  Chaotic  Origin.'    But  such  titles  are  not  easily  translated.


CH.  V.  INTRODUCTION.  4 1


Tao  was  adopted  to  denominate  an  abstract  Cause,  or
Was  the  old  the  initial  principle  of  life  and  order,  to
Taoism  a  religion?  which  worshippers  were  able  to  assign
the  attributes  of  immateriality,  eternity,  immensity,  in-
visibility.' His  selection  of  the  term  worshippers  in  this
passage  was  unfortunate.  Neither  Lao  nor  A'wang  says
anything  about  the  worship  of  the  Tao,  about  priests  or
monks,  about  temples  or  rituals.  How  could  they  do  so,
seeing  that  Tio  was  not  to  them  the  name  of  a  personal
Being,  nor  '  Heaven '  a  metaphorical  term  equivalent  to  the
Confucian  Ti,  'Ruler,'  or  Shang  Ti,  'Supreme  Ruler.'
With  this  agnosticism  as  to  God,  and  their  belief  that  by
a  certain  management  and  discipline  of  the  breath  life
might  be  prolonged  indefinitely,  I  do  not  see  how  any-
thing of  an  organised  religion  was  possible  for  the  old
Taoists.

The  Taoist  proclivities  of  the  founder  of  the  Khm  dyn-
asty are  well  known.  If  his  life  had  been  prolonged,  and
the  dynasty  become  consolidated,  there  might  have  arisen
such  a  religion  in  connexion  with  Taoism,  for  we  have  a
record  that  he,  as  head  of  the  Empire,  had  eight  spirits^
to  which  he  offered  sacrifices.  AV/in,  however,  soon  passed
away ;  what  remained  in  permanency  from  it  was  only  the
abolition  of  the  feudal  kingdom.

4.  We  cannot  here  attempt  to  relate  in  detail  the  rise
and  growth  of  the  A'ang  family  in  which  the  headship  of
Taoism  has  been  hereditary  since  our  first  Christian  cen-
tury, with  the  exception  of  one  not  very  long  interruption.
The  family  of    One  of  the    earliest    members   of  it,  isTang
■^'^.ng.  Liang,  must  have  been  born  not  long  after

the  death  of  A'wang-^ze,  for  he  joined  the  party  of  Liu


^  The  eight  spirits  were  : — i.  The  Lord  of  Heaven  ;  2.  The  Lord  of  Earth  ;
3.  The  Lord  of  War ;  4.  The  Lord  of  the  Yang  operation  ;  5.  The  Lord  of  the
Yin  operation;  6.  The  Lord  of  the  Moon;  7.  The  Lord  of  the  Sun;  and
8.  The  Lord  of  the  Four  Seasons.  See  Mayers's  C.  R.  Manual,  pp.  327,  328.
His  authority  is  the  sixth  of  Sze-ma  AVnen's  monographs.  AVnen  seems  to  say
that  the  worship  of  these  spirits  could  be  traced  to  Thai  Rung,  one  of  the
principal  ministers  of  kings  Wan  and  Wu  at  the  rise  of  the  A  au  dynasty  in  the
twelfth  century  B.  c,  and  to  whom  in  the  list  of  Taoist  writings  in  the  Imperial
Library  of  Han,  no  fewer  than  237  phien  are  ascribed.


42  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.  v.

Pang,  the  founder  of  the  dynasty  of  Han,  in  B.  C.  208,  and
by  his  wisdom  and  brav^ery  contributed  greatly  to  his  suc-
cess over  the  adherents  of  Khin,  and  other  contenders  for
the  sovereignty  of  the  empire.  Abandoning  then  a  poHtical
career,  he  spent  the  latter  years  of  his  life  in  a  vain  quest
for  the  elixir  of  life.

Among  Liang's  descendants  in  our  first  century  was  a
^ang  Tao-ling,  who,  eschewing  a  career  in  the  service  of
the  state,  devoted  himself  to  the  pursuits  of  alchemy,  and
at  last  succeeded  in  compounding  the  grand  elixir  or  pill,
and  at  the  age  of  123  was  released  from  the  trammels  of
the  mortal  body,  and  entered  on  the  enjoyment  of  immor-
tality, leaving  to  his  descendants  his  books,  talismans  and
charms,  his  sword,  mighty  against  spirits,  and  his  seal.
Tao-ling  stands  out,  in  Taoist  accounts,  as  the  first  patri-
arch of  the  system,  with  the  title  of  Thien  Shih,  'Master
or  Preceptor  of  Heaven.'  Hslian  3ung  of  the  Thang  dyn-
asty in  748,  confirmed  the  dignity  and  title  in  the  family ;
and  in  1016  the  Sung  emperor  A'an  3ung  invested  its  repre-
sentative with  large  tracts  of  land  near  the  Lung-hu  moun-
tain in  A'iang-hsi.  The  present  patriarch — for  I  suppose
the  same  man  is  still  alive — made  a  journey  from  his  resi-
dence not  many  years  ago,  and  was  interviewed  by  several
foreigners  in  Shanghai.  The  succession  is  said  to  be  per-
petuated by  the  transmigration  of  the  soul  of  A^ang  Tao-
ling  into  some  infant  or  youthful  member  of  the  family ;
whose  heirship  is  supernaturally  revealed  as  soon  as  the
miracle  is  effected^.

This  superstitious  notion  shows  the  influence  of  Buddhism
on  Taoism.  It  has  been  seen  from  the  eighteenth  of
the  Books  of  A'wang-5ze  what  affinities  there  were  between

Innucnce  of    '^^^'sm  and  the  Indian  system  ;  and  there  can

Buddhism  on    be  no  doubt  that  the  introduction  of  the  latter
'laoism.         •    *.      r^i  •  ^^  ^  ,  ,  .  ,

into  Uliina  did   more  than   anything  else   to

affect  the  development  of  the  Taoistic  system.     As  early

as  the  time  of  Confucius  there  were  recluses  in  the  country,

men  who  had  withdrawn  from  the  world,  disgusted  with  its


*  See  Mayers's  C.  R.  Manual,  Part  I,  article  35.


CH.  V.  IfvITRODUCTION.


vanities  and  in  despair  from  its  disorders.  Lao  would
appear  to  have  himself  contemplated  this  course.  When
their  representatives  of  our  early  centuries  saw  the  Bud-
dhists among  them  with  their  images,  monasteries,  and
nunneries,  their  ritual  and  discipline,  they  proceeded  to
organise  themselves  after  a  similar  fashion.  They  built
monasteries  and  nunneries,  framed  images,  composed  litur-
gies, and  adopted  a  peculiar  mode  of  tying  up  their  hair.
The  '  Three  Precious  Ones  '  of  Buddhism,  emblematic  to
the  initiated  of  Intelligence  personified  in  Buddha,  the  Law,
and  the  Community  or  Church,  but  to  the  mass  of  the
worshippers  merely  three  great  idols,  styled  by  them
Buddha  Past,  Present,  and  To  Come  :  these  appeared  in
Taoism  as  the  '  Three  Pure  Ones,'  also  represented  by
three  great  images,  each  of  which  receives  the  title  of
'  His  Celestial  Eminence,'  and  is  styled  the  '  Most  High
God  (Shang  Ti).'  The  first  of  them  is  a  deification  of
Chaos,  the  second,  of  Lao-^ze,  and  the  third  of  I  know  not
whom  or  what ;  perhaps  of  the  Tao.

But  those  Three  Pure  Ones  have  been  very  much  cast
into  the  shade,  as  the  objects  of  popular  worship  and  vene-
ration, by  Yii  Hwang  Ti  or  Yu  Hwang  Shang  Ti.
This  personage  appears  to  have  been  a  member  of  the
A'ang  clan,  held  to  be  a  magician  and  venerated  from  the
time  of  the  Thang  dynasty,  but  deified  in  1116  by  the
Sung  emperor  Hui  3ung  at  the  instigation  of  a  charlatan
Lin  Ling-sii,  a  renegade  Buddhist  monk.  He  is  the  god
in  the  court  of  heaven  to  whom  the  spirits  of  the  body  and
of  the  hearth  in  our  treatise  proceed  at  stated  times  to
report  for  approval  or  condemnation  the  conduct  of  men.

Since  the  first  publication  of  the  Kan  Ying  Phien,
the  tenets  of  Buddhism  have  been  still  further  adopted
by  the  teachers  of  Taoism,  and  shaped  to  suit  the  na-
ture of  their  own  system.  I  have  observed  that  the  idea
of  retribution  in  our  treatise  does  not  go  beyond  the
present  life ;  but  the  manifestoes  of  Taoism  of  more
recent  times  are  much  occupied  with  descriptions  of  the
courts  of  purgatory  and  thr^atenings  of  the  everlasting
misery  of  hell  to  those  whom  their  sufferings  in  those  courts


44  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  CH.V.


fail  to  wean  from  their  wickedness.  Those  manifestoes  are
published  by  the  mercy  of  Yu  Hwang  Shang  Ti  that
men  and  women  may  be  led  to  repent  of  their  faults  and
make  atonement  for  their  crimes.  They  emanate  from  the
temples  of  the  tutelary  deities^  which  are  found  throughout
the  empire,  and  especially  in  the  walled  cities,  and  are
under  the  charge  of  Taoist  monks.  A  visitor  to  one  of  the
larger  of  these  temples  may  not  only  see  the  pictures  of
the  purgatorial  courts  and  other  forms  of  the  modern
superstitions^  but  he  will  find  also  astrologers,  diviners,
geomancers,  physiognomists,  et  id  genus  omne,  plying
their  trades  or  waiting  to  be  asked  to  do  so,  and  he  will
wonder  how  it  has  been  possible  to  affiliate  such  things
with  the  teachings  of  Lao-ue.

Other  manifestoes  of  a  milder  form,  and  more  like  our
tractate,  are  also  continually  being  issued  as  from  one  or
other  of  what  are  called  the  state  gods,  whose  temples  are
all  in  the  charge  of  the  same  monks.  In  the  approxima-
tion which  has  thus  been  going  on  of  Taoism  to  Buddhism,
the  requirement  of  celibacy  was  long  resisted  by  the  pro-
fessors of  the  former ;  but  recent  editions  of  the  Penal
Code  ^  contain  sundry  regulations  framed  to  enforce  celi-
bacy, to  bind  the  monks  and  nuns  of  both  systems  to  the
observance  of  the  Confucian  maxims  concerning  filial  piety,
and  the  sacrificial  worship  of  the  dead  ;  and  also  to  restrict
the  multiplication  of  monasteries  and  nunneries.  Neither
Lao  nor  A'wang  was  a  celibate  or  recommended  celibacy.
The  present  patriarch,  as  a  married  man,  would  seem  to  be
able  still  to  resist  the  law.


'  Called  A'Aang  Hwang  Miao,  'Wall  and  Moat  Temples,' Palladia  of
the  city.

^  See  Dr.  Eitel's  third  edition  of  his  '  Three  Lectures  on  Buddhism,'  pp.
36-45  (Hongkong:  Lane,  Crawford  &  Co.,  1SS4).  The  edition  of  the  Penal
Code  to  which  he  refers  is  of  1879.


THE   TAO   TEH    KING,


OR


THE   TAO
AND    ITS   CHARACTERISTICS.


THE    TAO    TEH    A^ING.


PART    I.

Ch.  1.  I.  The  Tao  that  can  be  trodden  is  not  the
enduring  and  unchanging  Tao.  The  name  that  can
be  named  is  not  the  endurine  and  unchanmno-  name.

2.  (Conceived  of  as)  having  no  name,  it  is  the
Originator  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  (conceived  of  as)
having  a  name,  it  is  the  Mother  of  all  things.

3.  Always  without  desire  we  must  be  found,
If  its  deep  mystery  we  would  sound  ;
But  if  desire  always  within  us  be,

Its  outer  fringe  is  all  that  we  shall  see.

4.  Under  these  two  aspects,  it  is  really  the  same  ;
but  as  development  takes  place,  it  receives  the  dif-
ferent names.  Together  we  call  them  the  Mystery.
Where  the  Mystery  is  the  deepest  is  the  gate  of  all
that  is  subtle  and  wonderful.

fl  M'  'Embodying  the  Tao.'  The  author  sets  forth,
as  well  as  the  difficulty  of  his  subject  would  allow  him,  the
nature  of  the  Tao  in  itself,  and  its  manifestation.  To
understand  the  Tao  one  must  be  partaker  of  its  nature.

Par.  3  suggests  the  words  of  the  apostle  John,  '  He  that
loveth  not  knoweth  not  God  ;  for  God  is  love.'  Both  the
Tao,  Lao-3ze's  ideal  in  the  absolute,  and  its  Teh,  or  opera-  ^
tion,  are  comprehended  in  this  chapter,  the  latter  being  the
T^o  with  the  name,  the  Mother  of  all  things.  See  pages  1 2,
13  in  the  Introduction  on  the  translation  of  the  term  Tao.

2.  I.  All  in  the  world  know  the  beauty  of  the
beautiful,  and  in  doing  this  they  have  (the  idea  of)


/


48  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  I.


what  ugliness  is  ;  they  all  know  the  skill  of  the  skil-
ful, and  in  doing  this  they  have  (the  idea  of)  what
the  want  of  skill  is.

2.  So  it  is  that  existence  and  non-existence  give
birth  the  one  to  (the  idea  of)  the  other ;  that  diffi-
culty and  ease  produce  the  one  (the  idea  of)  the
other  ;  that  length  and  shortness  fashion  out  the  one
the  figure  of  the  other;  that  (the  ideas  of)  height
and  lowness  arise  from  the  contrast  of  the  one  with
the  other ;  that  the  musical  notes  and  tones  become
harmonious  through  the  relation  of  one  with  another;
and  that  being  before  and  behind  give  the  idea  of
one  following  another.

3.  Therefore  the  sage  manages  affairs  without
doing  anything,  and  conveys  his  instructions  without
the  use  of  speech.

4.  All  things  spring  up,  and  there  is  not  one
which  declines  to  show  itself;  they  grow,  and  there
is  no  claim  made  for  their  ownership ;  they  go
through  their  processes,  and  there  is  no  expecta-
tion (of  a  reward  for  the  results).  The  work  is
accomplished,  and  there  is  no  resting  in  it  (as  an
achievement).

The  work  is  done,  but  how  no  one  can  see ;
'Tis  this  that  makes  the  power  not  cease  to  be.

^  ^,  '  The  Nourishment  of  the  Person.'  But  many  of
Ho-shang  Kung's  titles  are  more  appropriate  than  this.

The  chapter  starts  with  instances  of  the  antinomies,
which  suggest  to  the  mind  each  of  them  the  existence  of  its
corresponding  opposite  ;  and  the  author  finds  in  them  an
analogy  to  the  '  contraries '  which  characterize  the  operation
of  the  Tao,  as  stated  in  chapter  40.  He  then  proceeds  to
describe  the  action  of  the  sage  in  par.  3  as  in  accordance
with  this  law  of  contraries  ;  and,  in  par.  4,  that  of  heaven


CH.  IV.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'ING.  49


and  earth,  or  what  we  may  call  nature,  in  the  processes  of
the  vegetable  world.

Par.  2  should  be  •  rhymed,  but  I  could  not  succeed  to
my  satisfaction  in  the  endeavour  to  rhyme  it.  Every  one
who  can  read  Chinese  will  see  that  the  first  four  members
rhyme.  The  last  two  rhyme  also,  the  concluding  [^
being  pronounced  so; — see  the  Khang-hsi  dictionary
in  voc.

3.  I.  Not  to  value  and  employ  men  of  superior
ability  is  the  way  to  keep  the  people  from  rivalry
among  themselves ;  not  to  prize  articles  which  are
difficult  to  procure  is  the  way  to  keep  them  from
becoming  thieves  ;  not  to  show  them  wdiat  is  likely
to  excite  their  desires  is  the  way  to  keep  their  minds
from  disorder.

2.  Therefore  the  sage,  in  the  exercise  of  his
government,  empties  their  minds,  fills  their  bellies,
weakens  their  wills,  and  strengthens  their  bones.

3.  He  constantly  (tries  to)  keep  them  without
knowledge  and  without  desire,  and  where  there  are
those  who  have  knowledge,  to  keep  them  from  pre-
suming to  act  (on  it).  When  there  is  this  abstinence
from  action,  good  order  is  universal.

^  ^,  '  Keeping  the  People  at  Rest.'  The  object  of
the  chapter  is  to  show  that  government  according  to  the
Tao  is  unfavourable  to  the  spread  of  knowledge  among  the
people,  and  would  keep  them  rather  in  the  state  of  primi-
tive simplicity  and  ignorance,  thereby  securing  their  rest-
fulness  and  universal  good  order.  Such  is  the  uniform
teaching  of  Lao-^ze  and  his  great  follower  iTwang-^ze,  and
of  all  Taoist  writers.

4.  I.  The  Tao  is  (like)  the  emptiness  of  a  vessel  ;
and  in  our  employment  of  it  we  must  be  on  our
guard  against   all    fulness.      How  deep   and    unfa-

[39]  E


^O  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  I.


^J


thomable  it  is,  as  if  it  were  the  Honoured  Ancestor
of  all  things  !

2.  We  should  blunt  our  sharp  points,  and  unravel
the  complications  of  things;  we  should  attemper
our  brightness,  and  bring  ourselves  into  agreement
with  the  obscurity  of  others.  How  pure  and  still
the  Tao  is,  as  if  it  would  ever  so  continue !

3.  I  do  not  know  whose  son  it  is.  It  might
appear  to  have  been  before  God.

iff  ")n5  '  The  Fountainless.'  There  is  nothing  before
the  Tao;  it  might  seem  to  have  been  before  God.  And
yet  there  is  no  demonstration  by  it  of  its  presence  and
operation.  It  is  like  the  emptiness  of  a  vessel.  The  second
character  =  ;^ftl  =  ^; — see  Khang-hsi  on  the  latter.  The
practical  lesson  is,  that  in  following  the  Tao  we  must  try
to  be  like  it.

5.  I.  Heaven  and  earth  do  not  act  from  (the  im-
pulse of)  any  wish  to  be  benevolent ;  they  deal  with

all  things  as  the  clogs  of  grass  are  dealt  with.     The
fc>  00

sages  do  not  act  from  (any  wish  to  be)  benevolent  ;
they  deal  with  the  people  as  the  dogs  of  grass  are
dealt  with.

2.  May  not  the  space  between  heaven  and  earth
be  compared  to  a  bellows  ?

'Tis  emptied,  yet  it  loses  not  its  power ;
'Tis  moved  again,  and  sends  forth  air  the  more.
Much  speech  to  swift  exhaustion  lead  we  see ;
Your  inner  being  guard,  and  keep  it  free.

^  j^,  '  The  Use  of  Emptiness.'  Quiet  and  unceasing
is  the  operation  of  the  Tao,  and  effective  is  the  rule  of  the
sage  in  accordance  with  it.

The  grass-dogs  in  par.  i  were  made  of  straw  tied  up  in
the  shape  of  dogs,  and  used  in  praying  for  rain  ;  and  after-


CH.  VI.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'ING.  5 1


wards,  when  the  sacrifice  was  over,  were  thrown  aside  and
left  uncared  for.  Heaven  and  earth  and  the  sages  dealt  so
with  all  things  and  with  the  people  ;  but  the  illustration
does  not  seem  a  happy  one.  Both  ATwang-^ze  and  Hwai-
nan  mention  the  grass- dogs.  See  especially  the  former,
XIV,  25  a,  b.  In  that  Book  there  is  fully  developed  the
meaning  of  this  chapter.  The  illustration  in  par.  2  is  better.
The  Chinese  bellows  is  different  to  look  at  from  ours,  but
the  principle  is  the  same  in  the  construction  of  both.  The
par.  concludes  in  a  way  that  lends  some  countenance  to  the
later  Taoism's  dealing  with  the  breath.

6.   The  valley  spirit  dies  not,  aye  the  same ;
The  female  mystery  thus  do  we  name.
Its  gate,  from  which  at  first  they  issued  forth,
Is  called    the    root  from  which  grew  heaven  and

earth.
Long  and  unbroken  does  its  power  remain,
Used  gently,  and  without  the  touch  of  pain.

J^  ^,  'The  Completion  of  Material  Forms.'  This
title  rightly  expresses  the  import  of  this  enigmatical
chapter ;  but  there  is  a  foundation  laid  in  it  for  the  de-
velopment of  the  later  Taoism,  which  occupies  itself  with
the  prolongation  of  life  by  the  management  of  the  breath
(^)  or  vital  force.

'  The  valley '  is  used  metaphorically  as  a  symbol  of
'  emptiness  '  or  'vacancy  ;'  and  '  the  spirit  of  the  valley'  is
the  something  invisible,  yet  almost  personal,  belonging  to
the  Tao,  which  constitutes  the  Teh  (|^)  in  the  name  of
our  ICing.  '  The  spirit  of  the  valley '  has  come  to  be  a
name  for  the  activity  of  the  Tao  in  all  the  realm  of  its
operation.  'The  female  mystery'  is  the  Tdo  with  a  name
of  chapter  i,  which  is  '  the  Mother  of  all  things.'  All  living-
beings  have  a  father  and  mother.  The  processes  of  gene-
ration and  production  can  hardly  be  imaged  by  us  but
by  a  recognition  of  this  fact ;  and  so  Lao-jze  thought  of  the
existing  realm  of  nature — of  life — as  coming  through  an

E  2


r2  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  I.


evolution  (not  a  creation)  from  the  primal  air  or  breath,
dividing  into  two,  and  thence  appearing  in  the  forms  of
things,  material  and  immaterial.  The  chapter  is  found  in
Lieh-^ze  (I,  i  b)  quoted  by  him  from  a  book  of  Hwang-Ti ;
and  here  Lao-^ze  has  appropriated  it,  and  made  it  his  own.
See  the  Introduction,  p.  2.

7.  I.  Heaven  is  long-enduring  and  earth  continues
long.  The  reason  why  heaven  and  earth  are  able
to  endure  and  continue  thus  long  is  because  they  do
not  live  of,  or  for,  themselves.  This  is  how  they  are
able  to  continue  and  endure.

2.  Therefore  the  sage  puts  his  own  person  last,
and  yet  it  is  found  in  the  foremost  place ;  he  treats
his  person  as  if  it  were  foreign  to  him,  and  yet  that
person  is  preserved.  Is  it  not  because  he  has  no
personal  and  private  ends,  that  therefore  such  ends
are  realised  ?

bS  ^    '  Sheathing  the  Light.'     The   chapter   teaches
/        that  one's  best  good  is  realised  by  not  thinking  of  it,  or
seeking  for  it.     Heaven  and  earth  afford  a  pattern  to  the
sage,  and  the  sage  affords  a  pattern  to  all  men.

8.  I.  The  highest  excellence  is  like  (that  of)
water.  The  excellence  of  water  appears  in  its  bene-
fiting all  things,  and  in  its  occupying,  without  striving
(to  the  contrary),  the  low  place  which  all  men  dislike.
Hence  (its  way)  is  near  to  (that  of)  the  Tao.

2.  The  excellence  of  a  residence  is  in  (the  suita-
bility of)  the  place ;  that  of  the  mind  is  in  abysmal
stillness ;  that  of  associations  is  in  their  being  with
the  virtuous ;  that  of  government  is  in  its  securing
good  order ;  that  of  (the  conduct  of)  affairs  is  in  its
ability;  and  that  of  (the  initiation  of)  any  movement
is  in  its  timeliness.


^


CH.  X.  .  THE    TAO    TEH    TING.


3.  And  when  (one  with  the  highest  excellence)
does  not  wrangle  (about  his  low  position),  no  one
finds  fault  with  him.


^  ft'  'The  Placid  and  Contented  Nature.'  Water,  as
an  illustration  of  the  way  of  the  Tao,  is  repeatedly  em-
ployed by  Lao-jze.

The  various  forms  of  what  is  excellent  in  par.  2  arc
brought  forward  to  set  forth  the  more,  by  contrast,  the
excellence  of  the  humility  indicated  in  the  acceptance  of
the  lower  place  without  striving  to  the  contrary.

9.  I.  It  is  better  to  leave  a  vessel  unfilled,  than
to  attempt  to  carry  it  when  it  is  full.  If  you  keep
feeling  a  point  that  has  been  sharpened,  the  point
cannot  long  preserve  its  sharpness.

2.  When  gold  and  jade  fill  the  hall,  their  possessor
cannot  keep  them  safe.  When  wealth  and  honours
lead  to  arrogancy,  this  brings  its  evil  on  itself  When  ^
the  work  is  done,  and  one's  name  is  becoming  dis-
tinguished, to  withdraw  into  obscurity  is  the  way  of
Heaven.

jH  ^  ;  but  I  cannot  give  a  satisfactory  rendering  of
this  title.  The  teaching  of  the  chapter  is,  that  fulness  and
complacency  in  success  are  contrary  to  the  Tao.

The  first  clauses  of  the  two  sentences  in  par.  1,  ^^  f^

M  ^,  IS  ffii  «i  Z=^  tfii  ^  ;S,  «t  ffn  IS  ^,

are  instances  of  the  '  inverted  '  style  not  uncommon  in  the
oldest  composition.  '  The  way  of  Heaven  '=  '  the  Heavenly
Tao'  exemplified  by  man.

10.    I.  When    the    intelligent    and    animal    souls
are  held  together  in  one  embrace,  they  can  be  kept-
from   separating.     When    one   gives    undivided  at-
tention  to  the    (vital)   breath,  and  brings  it  to  the
utmost  degree  of  pliancy,  he  can  become  as  a  (tender)


54


THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  .  PT.  I.


babe.  When  he  has  cleansed  away  the  most  mys-
terious sights  (of  his  imagination),  he  can  become
without  a  flaw.

2.  In  loving  the  people  and  ruling  the  state,  can-
not he  proceed  without  any  (purpose  of)  action  ?  In
the  opening  and  shutting  of  his  gates  of  heaven,
cannot  he  do  so  as  a  female  bird  ?  While  his  intelli-
gence reaches  in  every  direction,  cannot  he  (appear
to)  be  without  knowledge  ?

3.  (The  Tao)  produces  (all  things)  and  nourishes
'*'  them  ;  it  produces  them  and  does  not  claim  them  as
y        its  own  ;  it  does  all,  and  yet  does  not  boast  of  it ;  it

presides  over  all,  and  yet  does  not  control  them.
This  is  what  is  called  '  The  mysterious  Quality'  (of
the  Tao).

Hb  '^'  '  Possibilities.'  This  chapter  is  one  of  the  most
difficult  to  understand  and  translate  in  the  whole  work.
Even  Ku  Hsi  was  not  able  to  explain  the  first  member
satisfactorily.  The  text  of  that  member  seems  well  sup-
ported ;  but  I  am  persuaded  the  first  clause  of  it  is  some-
how corrupt.
y  The  whole  seems  to  tell  what  can  be  accomplished  by
one  who  is  possessed  of  the  Tao.  In  par.  3  he  appears
free  from  all  self-consciousness  in  what  he  does,  and  of  all
self-satisfaction  in  the  results  of  his  doing.  The  other  two
I)aragraphs  seem  to  speak  of  what  he  can  do  under  the
<,nndance  of  the  Tao  for  himself  and  for  others.  He  can
by  his  management  of  his  vital  breath  bring  his  body  to
the  state  of  Taoistic  perfection,  and  keep  his  intelligent
and  animal  souls  from  being  separated,  and  he  can  rule
men  without  purpose  and  effort.  '  The  gates  of  heaven '
in  par.  2  is  a  Taoistic  phrase  for  the  nostrils  as  the  organ
of  the  breath  ; — see  the  commentary  of  Ho-shang  Kung.

11.  The  thirty  spokes  unite  in  the  one  nave;  but
it  is  on   the  empty  space   (for  the  axle),   that  the


CH.   XII.


THE    TAO    TEH    ZTNG.  55


use  of  the  wheel  depends.  Clay  is  fashioned  into
vessels ;  but  it  is  on  their  empty  hollowness,  that
^_  their  use  depends.  The  door  and  windows  are  cut
out  (from  the  walls)  to  form  an  apartment ;  but  it  is
on  the  empty  space  (within),  that  its  use  depends.
Therefore,  what  has  a  (positive)  existence  serves
for  profitable  adaptation,  and  what  has  not  that  for
(actual)  usefulness.

^  M,  'The  Use  of  what  has  no  Substantive  Existence.'
The  three  illustrations  serve  to  set  forth  the  freedom  of  the
Tao  from  all  pre-occupation  and  purpose,  and  the  use  of
what  seems  useless.

12.   I.  Colour's  five  hues  from  th'  eyes  their  sight
will  take ;
Music's  five  notes  the  ears  as  deaf  can  make ;
The  flavours  five  deprive  the  mouth  of  taste  ;
The  chariot  course,  and  the  wild  hunting  waste
Make  mad  the  mind  ;  and  objects  rare  and  strange,
Sought  for,  men's  conduct  will  to  evil  change.
2.  Therefore  the  sage  seeks  to  satisfy  (the  craving
of)  the  belly,  and  not  the  (insatiable  longing  of  the)
eyes.     He  puts  from  him  the  latter,  and  prefers  to
seek  the  former.

't^  ^,  '  The  Repression  of  the  Desires.'  Government
in  accordance  with  the  Tao  seeks  to  withdraw  men  from
the  attractions  of  what  is  external  and  pleasant  to  the
senses  and  imagination,  and  to  maintain  the  primitive
simplicity  of  men's  w^ays  and  manners.  Compare  chap.  2.
The  five  colours  are  Black,  Red,  Green  or  Blue,  White,
and  Yellow ;  the  five  notes  are  those  of  the  imperfect
Chinese  musical  scale,  our  G,  A,  B,  D,  E  ;  the  five  tastes
are  Salt,  Bitter,  Sour,  Acrid,  and  Sweet.

I  am  not  sure  that  Wang  Pi  has  caught  exactly  the
author's  idea  in  the  contrast  between  satisfying  the  belly


56  TliE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  I.

and  satisfying  the  eyes  ;  but  what  he  says  is  ingenious  :
'  In  satisfying  the  belly  one  nourishes  himself;  in  gratifying
the  eyes  he  makes  a  slave  of  himself.'

13.  I.  Favour  and  disgrace  would  seem  equally
to  be  feared ;  honour  and  great  calamity,  to  be  re-
garded as  personal  conditions  (of  the  same  kind).

2.  What  is  meant  by  speaking  thus  of  favour  and
disgrace  }  Disgrace  Is  being  In  a  low  position
(after  the  enjoyment  of  favour).  The  getting  that
(favour)  leads  to  the  apprehension  (of  losing  it),  and
the  losing  It  leads  to  the  fear  of  (still  greater  cala-
mity) : — this  is  what  is  meant  by  saying  that  favour
and  disgrace  would  seem  equally  to  be  feared.

And  what  is  meant  by  saying  that  honour  and
great  calamity  are  to  be  (similarly)  regarded  as  per-
sonal conditions  1  What  makes  me  liable  to  great
calamity  is  my  having  the  body  (which  I  call  myself)  ;
If  I  had  not  the  body,  what  great  calamity  could
come  to  me  ?

3.  Therefore  he  who  would  administer  the  kine-
dom,  honouring  it  as  he  honours  his  own  person,
may  be  employed  to  govern  it,  and  he  who  would
administer  it  with  the  love  which  he  bears  to  his
own  person  may  be  entrusted  with  It.


;^iil>,  '  Loathing  Shame.'  The  chapter  is  difficult  to
construe,  and  some  disciples  of  Ki\  Hsi  had  to  ask  him  to
explain  it  as  in  the  case  of  ch.  10.  His  remarks  on  it  are
not  to  my  mind  satisfactory.  Its  object  seems  to  be  to
show  that  the  cultivation  of  the  person  according  to  the
Tao,  is  the  best  qualification  for  the  highest  offices,  even
for  the  government  of  the  world.  Par.  3  is  found  in
A'wang-jze  (XI,  i8b)  in  a  connexion  which  suggests  this
view  of  the  chapter.  It  may  be  observed,  however,  that  in
him  the  position  of  the  verbal  characters  in  the  two  clauses


CH.  XIV.  THE    TAO    TEH    ZING.  57

of  the  paragraph  is  the  reverse  of  that  in  the  text  of  Ho-
shang  Kung,  so  that  we  can  hardly  accept  the  distinction
of  meaning  of  the  two  characters  given  in  his  commentary,
but  must  take  them  as  synonyms.  Professor  Gabelcntz
gives  the  following  version  of  A'wang-jze :  'Darum,  ge-
braucht  er  seine  Person  achtsam  in  der  Verwaltung  des
Reiches,  so  mag  man  ihm  die  Reichsgewalt  anvertrauen  ;
.  .  .  liebend  (schonend)  .   .  .  iibertragen.'

14.  I.  We  look  at  it,  and  we  do  not  see  it,  and
we  name  it  '  the  Equable.'  We  listen  to  it,  and  we
do  not  hear  it,  and  we  name  it  '  the  Inaudible.'  We
try  to  grasp  it,  and  do  not  get  hold  of  it,  and  we
name  it  '  the  Subtle.'  With  these  three  qualities,  it
cannot  be  made  the  subject  of  description  ;  and  hence
we  blend  them  together  and  obtain  The  One.

2.  Its  upper  part  is  not  bright,  and  its  lower  part
is  not  obscure.  Ceaseless  in  its  action,  it  yet  cannot
be  named,  and  then  it  again  returns  and  becomes
nothing.  This  is  called  the  Form  of  the  Formless,
and  the  Semblance  of  the  Invisible  ;  this  is  called
the  Fleeting  and  Indeterminable.

3.  We  meet  it  and  do  not  see  its  Front ;  we  follow
it,  and  do  not  see  its  Back.  When  we  can  lay  hold
of  the  Tao  of  old  to  direct  the  things  of  the  present
day,  and  are  able  to  know  it  as  it  was  of  old  in
the  beginning,  this  is  called  (unwinding)  the  clue
of  Tao.

^  ^,  'The  Manifestation  of  the  Mystery.'  The  subject
of  par.  I  is  the  Tao,  but  the  Tao  in  its  operation,  and  not
the  primal  conception  of  it,  as  entirely  distinct  from  things,
which  rises  before  the  mind  in  the  second  paragraph.  The
Chinese  characters  which  I  have  translated  'the  Equable,
'the  Inaudible,'  and  'the  Subtle,'  are  now  pronounced  t,
Hi,  and  Wei,  and  in  1823  Remusat  fancied  that  they  were


^8  THE    TEXTS    OF   TAOISM.  PT.  r.

intended  to  give  the  Hebrew  tetragrammaton  Tl^Tl'^  which
he  thought  had  come  to  Lao-jze  somehow  from  the  West,
or  been  found  by  him  there.  It  was  a  mere  fancy  or
dream  ;  and  still  more  so  is  the  recent  attempt  to  revive
the  notion  by  Victor  von  Strauss  in  1870,  and  Dr.  Edkins
in  1884.  The  idea  of  the  latter  is  specially  strange,
maintaining,  as  he  does,  that  we  should  read  the  cha-
racters according  to  their  old  sounds.  Lao-jze  has  not
in  the  chapter  a  personal  Being  before  his  mind,  but  the
procedure  of  his  mysterious  Tao^  the  course  according  to
which  the  visible  phenomena  take  place,  incognisable  by
human  sense  and  capable  of  only  approximate  description
by  terms  appropriate  to  what  is  within  the  domain  of  sense.
See  the  Introduction,  pp.  14,  15.

15.  I.  The  skilful  masters  (of  the  Tao)  in  old
times,  with  a  subtle  and  exquisite  penetration,  com-
prehended its  mysteries,  and  were  deep  (also)  so  as
to  elude  men's  knowledge.  As  they  were  thus  beyond
men's  knowledge,  I  will  make  an  effort  to  describe
of  what  sort  they  appeared  to  be.

2.  Shrinking  looked  they  like  those  who  wade
through  a  stream  in  winter  ;  irresolute  like  those
who  are  afraid  of  all  around  them ;  grave  like  a
guest  (in  awe  of  his  host) ;  evanescent  like  ice  that
is  melting  away  ;  unpretentious  like  wood  that  has
not  been  fashioned  into  anything ;  vacant  like  a
valley,  and  dull  like  muddy  water.

3.  Who  can  (make)  the  muddy  water  (clear)  ?
Let  it  be  still,  and  it  will  gradually  become  clear.
Who  can  secure  the  condition  of  rest  ?  Let  move-
ment go  on,  and  the  condition  of  rest  will  gradually
arise.

4.  They  who  preserve  this  method  of  the  Tao  do
not  wish  to  be  full  (of  themselves).  It  is  through
their  not  being   full   of  themselves    that  they  can


CH.  XVI.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'TNG.  59

afford   to    seem    worn    and   not    appear    new   and
complete.

m  ^M,  'The  Exhibition  of  the  Quahty,'  that  is,  of  the
Tao,  which  has  been  set  forth  in  the  preceding  chapter.
Its  practical  outcome  is  here  described  in  the  masters  of  it
of  old,  who  in  their  own  weakness  were  yet  strong  in  it,
and  in  their  humility  were  mighty  to  be  co-workers  with  it
for  the  good  of  the  world.

The  variety  of  the  readings  in  par.  4  is  considerable,  but
not  so  as  to  affect  the  meaning.  This  par.  is  found  in  Hwai-
nan  (XII,  23  a)  with  an  unimportant  variation.  From  the
illustration  to  which  it  is  subjoined  he  understood  the
fuhiess,  evidently  as  in  ch.  9,  as  being  that  of  a  vessel
filled  to  overflowing.  Both  here  and  there  such  fulness  is
used  metaphorically  of  a  man  overfull  of  himself;  and
then  Lao-^ze  sHdes  into  another  metaphor,  that  of  a  worn-
out  garment.  The  text  of  par.  3  has  been  variously
tampered  with.  I  omit  the  ^  of  the  current  copies,  after
the  example  of  the  editors  of  the  great  recension  of  the
Yung-lo  period  (a.d.  1403-1424)  of  the  Ming  dynasty.

16.  I.  The  (state  of)  vacancy  should  be  brought
to  the  utmost  degree,  and  that  of  stillness  guarded
with  unwearying  vigour.  All  things  alike  go  through
their  processes  of  activity,  and  (then)  we  see  them
return  (to  their  original  state).  When  things  (in
the  vegetable  world)  have  displayed  their  luxuriant
growth,  we  see  each  of  them  return  to  its  root.  This
returninof  to  their  root  is  what  we  call  the  state  of
stillness  ;  and  that  stillness  may  be  called  a  reporting
that  they  have  fulfilled  their  appointed  end.

2.  The  report  of  that  fulfilment  is  the  regular,  un-
changing rule.  To  know  that  unchanging  rule  is  to  be
intelligent ;  not  to  know  it  leads  to  wild  movements
and  evil  issues.  The  knowledge  of  that  unchanging
rule  produces  a  (grand)  capacity  and  forbearance,  and


^<^


60  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  Px.  I.

that  capacity  and  forbearance  lead  to  a  community
(of  feeling  with  all  things).  From  this  community  of
feeling  comes  a  kingliness  of  character ;  and  he  who
is  kincr-like  oroes  on  to  be  heaven-like.  In  that  like-
ness  to  heaven  he  possesses  the  Tao.  Possessed
of  the  Tao,  he  endures  long;  and  to  the  end  of  his
bodily  life,  is  exempt  from  all  danger  of  decay.

^  ^^,  '  Returning  to  the  Root.'  The  chapter  exhibits
the  operation  of  the  Tao  in  nature,  in  man,  and  in  govern-
ment ;  an  operation  silent,  but  all-powerful ;  unaccompanied
with  any  demonstration  of  its  presence,  but  great  in  its
results.

An  officer  receives  a  charge  or  commission  from  his
superior  (^  -^j  ;  when  he  reports  the  execution  of  it
he  is  said  ^  ^.  So  all  animate  things,  including  men,
receive  their  charge  from  the  Tao  as  to  their  life,  and  when
they  have  fulfilled  it  they  are  represented  as  reporting  that
fulfilment ;  and  the  fulfilment  and  report  are  described  as
their  unchanging  rule,  so  that  they  are  the  Tao's  impassive  in-
struments, having  no  will  or  purpose  of  their  own, — according
to  Lao-jze's  formula  of  '  doing  nothing  and  yet  doing  all

The  getting  to  possess  the  Tao,  or  to  be  an  embodiment
of  it,  follows  the  becoming  Heaven  or  Heaven-like  ;  and  this
is  in  accordance  with  the  saying  in  the  fourth  chapter  that
'the  Tao  might  seem  to  have  been  before  God.'  But,  in
A'wang-jze  especially,  we  often  find  the  full  possessor  and
displayer  of  the  Tao  spoken  of  as  '  Heaven.'  The  last  sen-
tence, that  he  who  has  come  to  the  full  possession  of  the  Tao
is  exempt  from  all  danger  of  decay,  is  generally  illustrated  by
a  reference  to  the  utterances  in  ch.  50 ;  as  if  Lao-jze  did  indeed
see  in  the  Tao  a  preservative  against  death.

17.  I.  In  the  highest  antiquity,  (the  people)  did
not  know  that  there  were  (their  rulers).  In  the
next  age  they  loved  them  and  praised  them.     In  the


CH.  XVIII.  THE    TAO    TEH    ATING.  6l

next  they  feared  them  ;  in  the  next  they  despised
them.  Thus  it  was  that  when  faith  (in  the  Tao)
was  deficient  (in  the  rulers)  a  want  of  faith  in  them
ensued  (in  the  people).

2.  How  irresolute  did  those  (earliest  rulers)
appear,  showing  (by  their  reticence)  the  importance
which  they  set  upon  their  words  !  Their  work  was
done  and  their  undertakings  were  successful,  while
the  people  all  said,  'We  are  as  we  are,  of  ourselves  ! '

\^  )^,  'The  Unadulterated  Influence.'.  The  influence
is  that  of  the  Tao,  as  seen  in  the  earliest  and  paradisiacal
times.  The  two  chaf)ters  that  follow  are  closely  connected
with  this,  showing  how  the  silent,  passionless  influence  of
the  Tao  was  gradually  and  injunously  superseded  by  'the
wisdom  of  the  world,'  in  the  conduct  of  government.  In
the  first  sentence  there  is  a  small  various  reading  of  ^^  for
^,  but  it  does  not  affect  the  meaning  of  the  passage.  The
first  clause  of  par.  3  gives  some  difficulty;  ^  ^  ^5  'they
made  their  words  valuable  or  precious,'  i.  e.  '  they  seldom
spake;'  cp.  i  Sam.  iii.  1.

18.  I.  When  the  Great  Tao  (Way  or  Method)
ceased  to  be  observed,  benevolence  and  righteous-
ness came  into  vogue.  (Then)  appeared  wisdom
and  shrewdness,  and  there  ensued  great  hypocrisy.

2.  When  harmony  no  longer  prevailed  throughout
the  six  kinships,  filial  sons  found  their  manifestation  ;
when  the  states  and  clans  fell  into  disorder,  loyal
ministers  appeared.

■^  ^,  '  The  Decay  of  Manners.'  A  sequel  to  the
preceding  chapter,  and  showing  also  how  the  general  decay
of  manners  afforded  opportunity  for  the  display  of  certain
virtues  by  individuals.  Observe  'the  Great  Tdo,'  oc-
curring here  for  the  first  time  as  the  designation  of  'the

TA  >

ao.


v/


62  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  I.

19,  I.  If  we  could  renounce  our  sageness  and
discard  our  wisdom,  it  would  be  better  for  the  people
a  hundredfold.  If  w^e  could  renounce  our  benevo-
lence and  discard  our  righteousness,  the  people
would  again  become  filial  and  kindly.  If  we  could
renounce  our  artful  contrivances  and  discard  our
(scheming  for)  gain,  there  would  be  no  thieves  nor
robbers.

2.  Those  three  methods  (of  government)
Thought  olden  ways  in  elegance  did  fail
And  made  these  names  their  want  of  worth  to  veil  ;
But  simple  view^s,  and  courses  plain  and  true
Would  selfish  ends  and  many  lusts  eschew.

§  f^,  '  Returning  to  the  Unadulterated  Influence.'
The  chapter  desires  a  return  to  the  simplicity  of  the  Tao,
and  shows  how  superior  the  result  would  be  to  that  of  the
more  developed  systems  of  morals  and  government  which
had  superseded  it.  It  is  closely  connected  with  the  two
chapters  that  precede.  LAo-^ze's  call  for  the  renunciation
of  the  methods  of  the  sages  and  rulers  in  lieu  of  his  fancied
paradisiacal  state  is  repeated  ad  nauseam  by  A'wang-^ze.

20.  I.  When  we  renounce  learning  we  have  no
troubles.

The  (ready)  '  yes,'  and  (flattering)  '  yea  ;  '—

Small  is  the  difference  they  display.

But  mark  their  issues,  good  and  ill ; —

What  space  the  gulf  between  shall  fill  ?
What  all    men   fear  is  indeed   to  be    feared  ;    but
how  wide  and  without  end  is  the  range  of  questions
(asking  to  be  discussed) !

2.  The  multitude  of  men  look  satisfied  and
pleased;  as  if  enjoying  a  full  banquet,  as  if  mounted
on  a  tower  in  spring.  I  alone  seem  listless  and  still,
my  desires  having  as  yet  given  no  indication  of  their


CH.  XX.  THE    TAO    TEH    ^ING.  63

presence.  I  am  like  an  infant  which  has  not  yet
smiled.  I  look  dejected  and  forlorn,  as  if  I  had  no
home  to  go  to.  The  multitude  of  men  all  have
enough  and  to  spare.  I  alone  seem  to  have  lost
everything.  My  mind  is  that  of  a  stupid  man  ;  I
am  in  a  state  of  chaos.

Ordinary  men  look  bright  and  intelligent,  while  I
alone  seem  to  be  benighted.  They  look  full  of
discrimination,  while  I  alone  am  dull  and  confused.
I  seem  to  be  carried  about  as  on  the  sea,  drifting  as
if  I  had  nowhere  to  rest.  All  men  have  their  spheres
of  action,  while  I  alone  seem  dull  and  incapable,  like
a  rude  borderer.  (Thus)  I  alone  am  different  from
other  men,  but  I  value  the  nursing-mother  (the
Tao).

-S.  ^^,  '  Being  Different  from  Ordinary  Men.'  The  chap-
ter sets  forth  the  difference  to  external  appearance  which  the
pursuit  and  observance  of  the  Tao  produces  between  its
votaries  and  others  ;  and  Lao-.^ze  speaks  in  it  as  himself  an
example  of  the  former.  In  the  last  three  chapters  he  has
been  advocating  the  cause  of  the  Tao  against  the  learning
and  philosophy  of  the  other  school  of  thinkers  in  the  country.
Here  he  appears  as  having  renounced  learning,  and  found
an  end  to  the  troubles  and  anxieties  of  his  own  mind ;  but
at  the  expense  of  being  misconceived  and  misrepresented
by  others.  Hence  the  chapter  has  an  autobiographical
character.

Having  stated  the  fact  following  the  renunciation  of
learning,  he  proceeds  to  dwell  upon  the  troubles  of  learning
in  the  rest  of  par.  i.  Until  the  votary  of  learning  knows
everything,  he  has  no  rest.  But  the  instances  which  he
adduces  of  this  are  not  striking  nor  easily  understood.  I
cannot  throw  any  light  on  the  four  lines  about  the  '  yes  '  and
the  'yea.'

Confucius  (Ana.  XVI,viii)  specifies  three  things  of  which
the  superior  man  stands  in  awe  ;  and  these  and  others  ot


64  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  r.


a  similar  nature  may  have  been  the  things  which  Lao-^ze
had  in  his  mind.  The  nursing-mother  at  the  end  is,  no
doubt,  the  Tao  in  operation,  'with  a  name,'  as  in  ch.  i  ;
'  the  mysterious  virtue  '  of  chapters  51  and  52.

21.  The  erandest  forms  of  active  force
From  Tao  come,  their  only  source.
Who  can  of  Tao  the  nature  tell  ?
Our  sight  it  flies,  our  touch  as  well.
Eluding  sight,  eluding  touch,
The  forms  of  things  all  in  it  crouch  ;
Eluding  touch,  eluding  sight,
There  are  their  semblances,  all  right.
Profound  it  is,  dark  and  obscure  ;
Things'  essences  all  there  endure.
Those  essences  the  truth  enfold
Of  what,  when  seen,  shall  then  be  told.
Now  it  is  so  ;  'twas  so  of  old.
Its  name — what  passes  not  away  ;
So,  in  their  beautiful  array.
Things  form  and  never  know  decay.
How  know  I  that  it  is  so  with  all  the  beauties  of
existing  things  ?     By  this  (nature  of  the  Tao).

^  J\^^,  '  The  Empty  Heart.'  But  I  fail  to  see  the
applicability  of  the  title.  The  subject  of  the  chapter  is  the
Tao  in  its  operation.  This  is  the  significance  of  the  |^
in  the  first  clause  or  line,  and  to  render  it  by  '  virtue,'  as
Julicn  and  Chalmers  do,  only  serves  to  hide  the  meaning.
Julicn,  however,  says  that  'the  virtue  is  that  of  the  Tao;
and  he  is  right  in  taking  ^,  the  last  character  of  the
second  line,  as  having  the  sense  of  '  from,'  '  the  source
from,'  and  not,  as  Chalmers  does,  in  the  sense  of  '  following,'

Lao-^zc's  mind  is  occupied  with  a  very  difficult  subject —
to  describe  the  production  of  material  forms  by  the  Tao;
how  or  from  what,  he  does  not  say.  What  I  have  rendered
'semblances,'  Julicn   'les   images,'  and    Chalmers   'forms.'


CH.  xxiil.  THE    TAO    TEH    ^ING.  65

seems,  as  the  latter  says,  in  some  way  to  correspond  to
the  'Eternal  Ideas'  of  Plato  in  the  Divine  Mind.  But
Lao-jze  had  no  idea  of  'personality'  in  the  Tao.

22.  I.  The  partial  becomes  complete;  the  crooked,
straight;  the  empty,  full;  the  worn  out,  new.  He
whose  (desires)  are  few  gets  them  ;  he  whose  (desires)
are  many  goes  astray.

2.  Therefore  the  sage  holds  In  his  embrace  the
one  thing  (of  humility),  and  manifests  It  to  all  the
world.  He  Is  free  from  self-display,  and  therefore
he  shines ;  from  self-assertion,  and  therefore  he  is
distinguished  ;  from  self-boasting,  and  therefore  his
merit  Is  acknowledged ;  from  self-complacency,  and
therefore  he  acquires  superiority.  It  Is  because  he
is  thus  free  from  striving  that  therefore  no  one  in  the
world  Is  able  to  strive  with  him.

3.  That  saying  of  the  ancients  that  '  the  partial
becomes  complete '  was  not  vainly  spoken  : — all
real  completion  Is  comprehended  under  it.

^^  ^^,  '  The  Increase  granted  to  Humility.'  This  title
rightly  expresses  the  subject-matter  of  the  chapter.  I  cannot
translate  the  first  clause  otherwise  than  I  have  done.  It  was
an  old  saying,  which  Lao-^ze  found  and  adopted.  Whether
it  was  intended  to  embrace  all  the  cases  which  are  men-
tioned may  be  questioned,  but  he  employs  it  so  as  to  make
it  do  so.

'  The  emptiness '  which  becomes  full  is  literally  the
hollowness  of  a  cavity  in  the  ground  which  is  sure  to  be
filled  by  overflowing  water  ; — see  Mencius,  IV,  ii,  18,  '  The
worn  out'  is  explained  by  the  withered  foliage  of  a  tree,
which  comes  out  new  and  fresh  in  the  next  spring.  I  have
taken  the  first  sentence  of  par.  2  as  Wu  AV/ang  does  ; — see
his  commentary  in  loc.

23.  I.  Abstaining  from  speech  marks  him  who  Is
obeying  the  spontaneity  of  his   nature.     A  violent

[39]  F


65  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  I.


wind  does  not  last  for  a  whole  morning ;  a  sudden
rain  does  not  last  for  the  whole  day.  To  whom  is
it  that  these  (two)  things  are  owing  ?  To  Heaven
and  Earth,  If  Heaven  and  Earth  cannot  make
such  (spasmodic)  actings  last  long,  how  much  less

can  man !

2.  Therefore  when  one  is  making  the  Tao  his
business,  those  who  are  also  pursuing  it,  agree  with
him  in  it,  and  those  who  are  making  the  manifestation
of  its  course  their  object  agree  with  him  in  that ;
while  even  those  who  are  failing  in  both  these  things
agree  with  him  where  they  fail.

3.  Hence,  those  with  whom  he  agrees  as  to  the
Tao  have  the  happiness  of  attaining  to  it;  those
with  whom  he  agrees  as  to  its  manifestation  have
the  happiness  of  attaining  to  it ;  and  those  with  whom
he  agrees  in  their  failure  have  also  the  happiness  of
attaining  (to  the  Tao).  (But)  when  there  is  not
faith  sufficient  (on  his  part),  a  want  of  faith  (in  him)
ensues  (on  the  part  of  the  others).

^  ^,  'Absolute  Vacancy.'  This,  I  think,  is  the  meaning
of  the  title,  '  Emptiness  and  Nothingness,'  an  entire  con-
/  formity  to  the  Tao  in  him  who  professes  to  be  directed  by
it.  Such  an  one  will  be  omnipotent  in  his  influence  in  all
others.  The  Tao  in  him  will  restrain  all  (spasmodic)
loquacity.  Those  who  are  described  in  par.  3  as  '  failing  '
are  not  to  be  thought  of  as  bad  men,  men  given  up,  as
Julien  has  it,  au  crime.  They  are  simply  ordinary  men,
who  have  failed  in  their  study  of  the  Tao  and  practice  of
it,  but  arc  won  to  truth  and  virtue  by  the  man  whom  the
author  has  in  mind.  As  we  might  expect,  however,  the
mention  of  such  men  has  much  embarrassed  the  com-
mentators.

Compare  the  concluding  sentence  with  the  one  at  the
end  of  par.  i  in  ch.  17.


CH.  XXV.  THE    TAO    TEH    iilNG.  6*]

24.  He  who  stands  on  his  tiptoes  does  not
stand  firm  ;  he  who  stretches  his  legs  does  not  walk
(easily).  (So),  he  who  displays  himself  does  not
shine ;  he  who  asserts  his  own  views  is  not  distin-
guished ;  he  who  vaunts  himself  does  not  find  his
merit  acknowledged ;  he  who  is  self-conceited  has  no
superiority  allowed  to  him.  Such  conditions,  viewed
from  the  standpoint  of  the  Tao,  are  like  remnants
of  food,  or  a  tumour  on  the  body,  which  all  dislike.
Hence  those  who  pursue  (the  course)  of  the  Tao  do
not  adopt  and  allow  them.

^  J§1'  '  Painful  Graciousness.'  The  chapter  should  be
so  designated.  This  concludes  the  subject  of  the  two  pre-
vious chapters, — pursuing  the  course,  the  course  of  the
unemotional  Tao  without  vain  effort  or  display.

The  remnants  of  food  were  not  used  as  sacrificial  offer-
ings ; — see  the  Li  K\  (vol.  xxvii,  p.  82).  In  what  I  have
rendered  by  '  a  tumour  attached  to  the  body,'  the  ^  is
probably,  by  a  mistake,  for  ^ ;— see  a  quotation  by  Wu
AV/ang  from  Sze-ma  iT/den.  'Which  all  dislike'  is,  liter-
ally, '  Things  are  likely  to  dislike  them,'  the  '  things '  being
'  spirits  and  men,'  as  Wu  explains  the  term.

25.  I.  There  was  something  undefined  and  com-
plete, coming  into  existence  before  Heaven  and
Earth.  How  still  it  was  and  formless,  standing
alone,  and  undergoing  no  change,  reaching  every-
where and  in  no  danger  (of  being  exhausted)  !  It
may  be  regarded  as  the  Mother  of  all  things.

2.  I  do  not  know  its  name,  and  I  give  it  the
designation  of  the  Tao  (the  Way  or  Course).
Making  an  effort  (further)  to  give  it  a  name  I  call  it
The  Great.

3.  Great,  it  passes  on  (in  constant  flow).     Passing

F  2


58  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  I.


on,  it  becomes  remote.  Having  become  remote,  it
returns.  Therefore  the  Tao  is  great;  Heaven  is
great ;  Earth  is  great ;  and  the  (sage)  king  is  also
great.  In  the  universe  there  are  four  that  are  great,
and  the  (sage)  king  is  one  of  them.

4.  Man  takes  his  law  from  the  Earth  ;  the  Earth
takes  its  law  from  Heaven  ;  Heaven  takes  its  law
from  the  Tao.  The  law  of  the  Tao  is  its  being
what  it  is.

^  ;^,  'Representations  of  the  Mystery.'  In  this
chapter  Lao  approaches  very  near  to  give  an  answer  to  the
question  as  to  what  the  Tao  is,  and  yet  leaves  the  reader
disappointed.  He  commences  by  calling  it  '  a  thing  (^) ; '
but  that  term  does  not  necessitate  our  regarding  it  as  '  mate-
rial.' We  have  seen  in  the  preceding  chapter  that  it  is
used  to  signify  '  spirits  and  men.'  Nor  does  his  going  on
to  speak  of  it  as  '  chaotic  (j[^  )^)  '  necessarily  lead  us  to
conceive  it  as  made  up  of  the  '  material  elements  of  things ; '
we  have  the  same  term  applied  in  ch.  14  to  the  three  im-
material constituents  there  said  to  be  blended  in  the  idea
of  it.

'  He  does  not  know  its  name,'  and  he  designates  it  by  the
term  denoting  a  course  or  way  (Tao,  ^),  and  indicating
the  phenomenal  attribute,  the  method  in  which  all  pheno-
mena come  before  our  observation,  in  their  development  or
evolution.  And  to  distinguish  it  from  all  other  methods  of
evolution,  he  would  call  it  '  the  Great  Method,'  and  so  he
employs  that  combination  as  its  name  in  ch.  18  and  else-
where ;  but  it  cannot  be  said  that  this  name  has  fully
maintained  itself  in  the  writings  of  his  followers.  But
understood  thus,  he  here  says,  as  in  ch.  t,  that  it  is  'the
Mother  of  all  things.'  And  yet,  when  he  says  that  'it
was  before  Heaven  and  Earth  were  produced,'  he  comes
very  near  his  affirmations  in  chapters  i  and  4,  that  '  the
nameless  Tao  was  the  beginning  (or  originating  cause)  of
Heaven  and  Earth,'  and  '  might  seem  to  have  been  before


CH.  XXVI.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'ING.  69

God.'  Was  he  groping  after  God  if  haply  he  might  find
Him  ?  I  think  he  was,  and  he  gets  so  far  as  to  conceive  of
Him  as  '  the  Uncaused  Cause,'  but  comes  slioil  of  the  idea
of  His  personahty.  The  other  subordinate  causes  which
he  mentions  all  get  their  force  or  power  from  the  Tao,  but
after  all  the  Tao  is  simply  a  spontaneity,  evolving  from
itself,  and  not  acting  from  a  personal  will,  consciously  in
the  direction  of  its  own  wisdom  and  love.  '  Who  can  by
searching  find  out  God  ?  Who  can  find  out  the  Almighty
to  perfection  ? '

The  predicate  of  the  Tao  in  the  chapter,  most  perplexing
to  myself,  is  'It  returns,'  in  par.  3.  '  It  flows  away,  far
away,  and  comes  back;' — are  not  the  three  statements
together  equal  to  '  It  is  everywhere  ? '

26.  I.  Gravity  is  the  root  of  lightness  ;  stillness,
the  ruler  of  movement.

2.  Therefore  a  wise  prince,  marching  the  whole
day,  does  not  go  far  from  his  baggage  waggons.
Although  he  may  have  brilliant  prospects  to  look  at,
he  quietly  remains  (in  his  proper  place),  indifferent
to  them.  How  should  the  lord  of  a  myriad  chariots
carry  himself  lightly  before  the  kingdom  ?  If  he
do  act  lightly,  he  has  lost  his  root  (of  gravity) ;  if
he  proceed  to  active  movement,  he  will  lose  his
throne.

^  ip^,  '  The  Quality  of  Gravity.'  Gravity  and  stillness
are  both  attributes  of  the  Tao;  and  he  who  cultivates  it
must  not  give  way  to  lightness  of  mind,  or  hasty  action.

The  rule  for  a  leader  not  to  separate  from  his  baggage
waggons  is  simply  the  necessity  of  adhering  to  gravity.
I  have  adopted  from  Han  Fei  the  reading  of  'the  wise
prince '  for  '  the  sage,'  which  is  found  in  Ho-shang  Kung ;
and  later  on  the  reading  of  '  has  lost  his  root '  for  his
'loses  his  ministers/  though  the  latter  is  found  also  in
Han  Fei.


70  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  pt.  l.


27.  I.  The  skilful  traveller  leaves  no  traces  of  his
wheels  or  footsteps  ;  the  skilful  speaker  says  nothing
that  can  be  found  fault  with  or  blamed  ;  the  skilful
reckoner  uses  no  tallies ;  the  skilful  closer  needs  no
bolts  or  bars,  while  to  open  what  he  has  shut  will  be
impossible ;  the  skilful  binder  uses  no  strino-s  or
knots,  while  to  unloose  what  he  has  bound  will  be
impossible.  In  the  same  way  the  sage  is  always
skilful  at  saving  men,  and  so  he  does  not  cast  away
any  man ;  he  is  always  skilful  at  saving  things,  and
so  he  does  not  cast  away  anything.  This  is  called
'  Hiding  the  light  of  his  procedure.'

2.  Therefore  the  man  of  skill  is  a  master  (to  be
looked  up  to)  by  him  who  has  not  the  skill ;  and  he
who  has  not  the  skill  is  the  helper  of  (the  reputation
of)  him  who  has  the  skill.  If  the  one  did  not
honour  his  master,  and  the  other  did  not  rejoice  in
his  helper,  an  (observer),  though  intelligent,  might
greatly  err  about  them.  This  is  called  'The  utmost
degree  of  mystery.'

^^  ffl'  '  Dexterity  in  Using,'  that  is,  in  the  application
of  the  Tao.  This  is  the  substance  of  the  chapter,  cele-
brating the  effective  but  invisible  operation  of  the  Tao,
and  the  impartial  exercise  of  it  for  the  benefit  of  all  men
and  all  things.

I  have  given  the  most  natural  construction  of  the  two
characters  at  the  end  of  par.  i,  the  only  possible  construc-
tion of  them,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  suitable  to  the  context.
The  action  of  the  Tao  (non-acting  and  yet  all-efficient)  and
that  of  the  sage  in  accordance  with  it,  are  veiled  by  their
nature  from  the  sight  of  ordinary  men.

It  is  more  difficult  to  catch  the  scope  and  point  of  par.  2.
If  there  were  not  the  conditions  described  in  it,  it  would  be
hard  for  even  an  intelligent  onlooker  to  distinguish  between
the  man  xn  ho  had  the  skill  and  the  man  without  it,  between


CH.  XXIX.  THE    TAO    TEH    KmC.  7I

him   who  possessed  the  Tao,  and  him  who  had  it  not,
which  would  be  strange  indeed.

28.  I.  Who  knows  his  manhood's  strength,
Yet  still  his  female  feebleness  maintains ;
As  to  one  channel  flow  the  many  drains,
All  come  to  him,  yea,  all  beneath  the  sky.
Thus  he  the  constant  excellence  retains  ; —
The  simple  child  again,  free  from  all  stains.

Who  knows  how  white  attracts,
Yet  always  keeps  himself  within  black's  shade.
The  pattern  of  humility  displayed,
Displayed  in  view  of  all  beneath  the  sky  ;
He  in  the  unchanging  excellence  arrayed.
Endless  return  to  man's  first  state  has  made.

W^ho  knows  how  glory  shines,
Yet  loves  disgrace,  nor  e'er  for  it  is  pale ;
Behold  his  presence  in  a  spacious  vale,
To  which  men  come  from  all  beneath  the  sky.
The  unchanging  excellence  completes  its  tale  ;
/    The  simple  infant  man  in  him  we  hail.
2.  The  unwrought   material,   when    divided   and
distributed,  forms   vessels.       The   sage,  when    em-
ployed, becomes   the    Head  of  all  the   Officers  (of
government) ;    and  in  his    greatest   regulations    he
employs  no  violent  measures.

^  >g|,  'Returning  to  Simplicity.'  The  chapter  sets
forth  humility  and  simplicity,  an  artless  freedom  from  all
purpose,  as  characteristic  of  the  man  of  Tao,  such  as  he
was  in  the  primeval  time.  '  The  sage  '  in  par.  2  may  be
'  the  Son  of  Heaven,'— the  Head  of  all  rule  in  the  kingdom,
or  the  feudal  lord  in  a  state.

29.  I.  If  any  one  should  wish  to  get  the  kingdom
for  himself,  and  to  efl"ect  this  by  what  he  does,  I  see


72  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  pt.  I.

that  he  will  not  succeed.  The  kingdom  is  a  spirit-
like thing,  and  cannot  be  got  by  active  doing.  He
who  would  so  win  it  destroys  it ;  he  who  would  hold
it  in  his  grasp  loses  it.

2.  The  course  and  nature  of  things  is  such  that

What  was  in  front  is  now  behind  ;

What  warmed  anon  we  freezinpf  find.

Strength  is  of  weakness  oft  the  spoil ;     '

The  store  in  ruins  mocks  our  toil.

Hence  the  sage  puts  away  excessive  effort,  extrava-
gance, and  easy  indulgence.

ffi  ^'  'Taking  no  Action.'  All  efforts  made  with  a
purpose  are  sure  to  fail.  The  nature  of  the  Tao  necessi-
tates their  doing  so,  and  the  uncertainty  of  things  and
events  teaches  the  same  lesson.

That  the  kingdom  or  throne  is  a  '  spirit-like  vessel '  has
become  a  common  enough  saying  among  the  Chinese.
Julien  has,  '  L'Empire  est  comme  un  vase  divin;'  but  I
always  shrink  from  translating  jjj^  by  '  divine.'  Its
English  analogue  is  'spirit,'  and  the  idea  in  the  text  is
based  on  the  immunity  of  spirit  from  all  material  law,  and
the  uncertain  issue  of  attempts  to  deal  with  it  according  to
ordinary  methods.  Wu  A'/zang  takes  the  phrase  as  equiva-
lent to  '  superintended  by  spirits,'  which  is  as  inadmissible
as  Julien's  'divin.'  The  Tao  forbids  action  with  a  personal
purpose,  and  all  such  action  is  sure  to  fail  in  the  greatest
things  as  well  as  in  the  least.

30.  I.  He  who  would  assist  a  lord  of  men  in
harmony  with  the  Tao  will  not  assert  his  mastery  in
the  kingdom  by  force  of  arms.  Such  a  course  is
sure  to  meet  with  its  proper  return.

2.  Wherever  a  host  is  stationed,  briars  and  thorns
spring  up.  In  the  sequence  of  great  armies  there
are  sure  to  be  bad  years.


CH.  xxxr.  THE    TAO    TEH   ^ING.  73

3.  A  skilful  (commander)  strikes  a  decisive  blow,
and  stops.  He  does  not  dare  (by  continuing  his
operations)  to  assert  and  complete  his  mastery.  He
will  strike  the  blow,  but  will  be  on  his  guard  against
being  vain  or  boastful  or  arrogant  in  consequence  of
it.  He  strikes  it  as  a  matter  of  necessity  ;  he  strikes
it,  but  not  from  a  wish  for  mastery.

4.  When  things  have  attained  their  strong  matu-
rity they  become  old.  This  may  be  said  to  be  not
in  accordance  with  the  Tao  :  and  what  is  not  in
accordance  with  it  soon  comes  to  an  end.


^  ^,  '  A  Caveat  against  War.*  War  is  contrary  to
the  spirit  of  the  Tao,  and,  as  being  so,  is  productive  of
misery,  and  leads  to  early  ruin.  It  is  only  permissible  in
a  case  of  necessity,  and  even  then  its  spirit  and  tendencies


must  be  guarded  against.


In  translating  -1^  by  '  striking  a  decisive  blow,'  I  have,
no  doubt,  followed  Julien's  '  frapper  un  coup  decisif '  The
same  ^  occurs  six  times  in  par.  3,  followed  by  ]^,  and
3iao  Hung  says  that  in  all  but  the  first  instance  the  ff\]
should  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  j^,  so  that  we  should
have  to  translate,  '  He  is  determined  against  being  vain,'  &c.
But  there  is  no  necessity  for  such  a  construction  of  j^.

'  Weakness '  and  not  '  strength '  is  the  character  of  the
Tao  ;  hence  the  lesson  in  par.  4.

31.  I.  Now  arms,  however  beautiful,  are  Instru-
ments of  evil  omen,  hateful,  it  may  be  said,  to  all
creatures.  Therefore  they  who  have  the  Tao  do
not  like  to  employ  them.

2.  The  superior  man  ordinarily  considers  the  left
hand  the  most  honourable  place,  but  in  time  of  war
the  right  hand.  Those  sharp  weapons  are  instru-
ments of  evil  omen,  and  not  the  instruments  of  the


74  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  I.

superior  man ; — he  uses  them  only  on  the  compul-
sion of  necessity.  Calm  and  repose  are  what  he
prizes  ;  victory  (by  force  of  arms)  is  to  him  undesir-
able. To  consider  this  desirable  would  be  to  delight
in  the  slaughter  of  men  ;  and  he  who  delights  in  the
slaughter  of  men  cannot  oret  his  will  in  the  kingfdom.
3.  On  occasions  of  festivity  to  be  on  the  left  hand
is  the  prized  position  ;  on  occasions  of  mourning,  the
right  hand.  The  second  in  command  of  the  army
has  his  place  on  the  left ;  the  general  commanding
in  chief  has  his  on  the  right ; — his  place,  that  is,  is
assiofned  to  him  as  in  the  rites  of  mourning.  He
who  has  killed  multitudes  of  men  should  weep  for
them  with  the  bitterest  grief ;  and  the  victor  In  battle
has  his  place  (rightly)  according  to  those  rites.

j^  ^,  '  Stilling  Wan'  The  chapter  continues  the  subject
of  the  preceding.  The  imperially-appointed  editors  of
Wang  Pi's  Text  and  Commentary  (1765)  say  that  from
the  beginning  of  par.  3  to  the  end,  there  is  the  appearance
of  text  and  commentary  being  mixed  together ;  but  they
make  no  alteration  in  the  text  as  it  is  found  in  Ho-shang
Kung,  and  in  all  other  ancient  copies.

The  concluding  sentence  will  suggest  to  some  readers  the
words  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  that  to  gain  a  battle  was
the  saddest  thing  next  to  losing  it.

32.  I,  The  Tao,  considered  as  unchanging,  has
no  name.

2,  Though  in  its  primordial  simplicity  it  may  be
small,  the  whole  world  dares  not  deal  with  (one
embodying)  it  as  a  minister.  If  a  feudal  prince  or
the  king  could  guard  and  hold  it,  all  would  sponta-
neously submit  themselves  to  him.

3.  Heaven  and  Earth  (under  its  guidance)  unite
together  and  send  down  the  sweet  dew,  which,  with-


en.  XXXIII,  THE    TAO    TEH    ^ING.  75

out  the  directions  of  men,  reaches  equally  everywhere
as  of  its  own  accord.

4.  As  soon  as  it  proceeds  to  action,  it  has  a  name.
When  it  once  has  that  name,  (men)  can  know  to
rest  in  it.  When  they  know  to  rest  in  it,  they  can
be  free  from  all  risk  of  failure  and  error.

5.  The  relation  of  the  Tao  to  all  the  world  is  like
that  of  the  great  rivers  and  seas  to  the  streams  from
the  valleys.

^  |m.  Chalmers  translates  this  by  'sagely  virtue.'
But  I  cannot  adopt  that  rendering,  and  find  it  difficult  to
supply  a  better.  The  '  virtue '  is  evidently  the  Attribute  of
the  Tao  come  out  from  the  condition  of  the  Absolute,  and
capable  of  being  named.  In  the  former  state  it  has  no
name ;  in  the  latter,  it  has.  Par.  1  and  the  commencement
of  par.  4  must  both  be  explained  from  ch.  1.

The  'primordial  simphcity '  in  par.  2  is  the  Tao  in  its
simplest  conception,  alone,  and  by  itself,  and  the  ^  ^Ij
in  par.  4  is  that  Tao  come  forth  into  operation  and  become
Teh,  the  Teh  which  affords  a  law  for  men.  From  this  to
the  end  of  the  paragraph  is  very  obscure.  I  have  trans-
lated from  the  text  of  Wang  Pi.  The  text  of  Ho-shang
Kung  is  different,  and  he  comments  upon  it  as  it  stands,
but  to  me  it  is  inexplicable.

33.  I.  He  who  knows  other  men  is  discerning;
he  who  knows  himself  is  intellis^ent.  He  who  over-
comes  others  is  strong  ;  he  who  overcomes  himself
is  mighty.  He  who  is  satisfied  with  his  lot  is  rich  ;
he  who  goes  on  acting  with  energy  has  a  (firm)  will.

2.  He  who  does  not  fail  in  the  requirements  of
his  position,  continues  long ;  he  who  dies  and  yet
does  not  perish,  has  longevity.

^  1^,  'Discriminating  between  (different)  Attributes.'
The  teaching  of  the  chapter  is  that  the  possession  of  the


76  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  I.


Tao  confers  the  various  attributes  which  are  here  most  dis-
tinguished. It  has  been  objected  to  it  that  elsewhere  the
Tao  is  represented  as  associated  with  dulness  and  not
intelligence,  and  with  weakness  and  not  with  strength.
But  these  seem  to  be  qualities  viewed  from  without,  and
acting  on  what  is  beyond  itself  Inwardly,  its  qualities
are  the  very  opposite,  and  its  action  has  the  effect  of
enlightening  what  is  dark,  and  overcoming  what  is  strong.

More  interesting  are  the  predicates  in  par.  2.  3iao  Hung
gives  the  comment  on  it  of  the  Indian  monk,  Kumara^^iva,
'  one  of  the  four  suns  of  Buddhism,'  and  who  went  to  China
in  A.D.  401 :  'To  be  alive  and  yet  not  alive  may  well  be
called  long;  to  die  and  yet  not  be  dead  may  well  be
called  longevity.'  He  also  gives  the  views  of  Lu  Nang-
shih  (a.d.  1043-1 102)  that  the  freedom  from  change  of
Lieh-jize,  from  death  of  ATwang-jze,  and  from  extinction  of
the  Buddhists,  have  all  the  same  meaning  as  the  concluding
saying  of  Lao-^ze  here ;  that  tlie  human  body  is  like  the
covering  of  the  caterpillar  or  the  skin  of  the  snake ;  that
we  occupy  it  but  for  a  passing  sojourn.  No  doubt,  Lao-jze
believed  in  another  life  for  the  individual  after  the  present.
Many  passages  in  TTwang-jze  indicate  the  same  faith.

34.  I.  All-pervading  is  the  Great  Tao!  It  may
be  found  on  the  left  hand  and  on  the  right.

2.  All  things  depend  on  it  for  their  production,
which  it  gives  to  them,  not  one  refusing  obedience
to  it.  When  its  work  is  accomplished,  it  does  not
claim  the  name  of  having  done  it.  It  clothes  all
things  as  with  a  garment,  and  makes  no  assumption
of  being  their  lord  ; — it  may  be  named  in  the  smallest
things.  All  things  return  (to  their  root  and  disap-
pear), and  do  not  know  that  it  is  it  which  presides
over  their  doing  so ;— it  may  be  named  in  the
greatest  things.

3.  Hence  the  sage  is  able  (in  the  same  way)  to
accomplish  his  great  achievements.      It  is  through


CH.  XXXV.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'lNG.  "]"]


his  not   making  himself  great  that  he  can  accom-
pHsh  them.

fi  ^)  '  The  Task  of  Achievement.'  The  subject  is  the
greatness  of  what  the  Tao,  called  here  by  Lao's  own  name
for  it  in  ch.  35,  does ;  and  the  unconscious  simpHcity  with
which  it  does  it ;  and  then  the  achievements  of  the  sage
who  is  permeated  by  the  Tao.  Par.  2  is  descriptive  of
the  influence  of  the  Tao  in  the  vegetable  world.  The
statements  and  expressions  are  much  akin  to  those  in  parts
of  chapters  2,  10,  and  51,  and  for  Ho-shang  Kung's  difficult
reading  of  ^  ;g  :^  some  copies  give  f^Tl  ^  J§)  as  in
chapter  2.

35.  I,  To  him  who  holds  in  his  hands  the  Great
Image  (of  the  invisible  Tao),  the  v^hole  world  re-
pairs. Men  resort  to  him,  and  receive  no  hurt,  but
(find)  rest,  peace,  and  the  feeling  of  ease.

2.  Music  and  dainties  will  make  the  passing  guest
stop  (for  a  time).  But  though  the  Tao  as  it  comes
from  the  mouth,  seems  insipid  and  has  no  flavour,
though  it  seems  not  worth  being  looked  at  or
listened  to,  the  use  of  it  is  inexhaustible.

-^1^^,  'The  Attribute  of  Benevolence.'  But  there
seems  little  appropriateness  in  this  title.  The  subject  of
the  chapter  is  the  inexhaustible  efficacy  of  the  Tdo  for  the
good  of  the  world.

The  Great  Image  (of  the  invisible  Tao)  is  a  name  for
the  Tao  in  its  operation  ;  as  in  chapters  14  and  41.  He
who  embodies  this  in  his  government  will  be  a  centre  of
attraction  for  all  the  world.  Or  the  ^  ~J\  ^^  may  be
taken  as  a  predicate  of  the  holder  of  the  Great  Image :
— 'If  he  go  all  under  heaven  teaching  the  Tao.'  Both
constructions  are  maintained  by  commentators  of  note.
In  par.  2  the  attraction  of  the  Tao  is  contrasted  with  that
of  ordinary  pleasures  and  gratifications.


y8  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  I.


36.  I.  When  one  is  about  to  take  an  inspiration,
he  is  sure  to  make  a  (previous)  expiration  ;  when  he
is  going  to  weaken  another,  he  will  first  strengthen
him  ;  when  he  is  going  to  overthrow  another,  he  will
first  have  raised  him  up  ;  when  he  is  going  to  despoil
another,  he  w^ill  first  have  made  gifts  to  him : — this
is  called  'Hiding  the  light  (of  his  procedure).'

2.  The  soft  overcomes  the  hard  ;  and  the  weak
the  strong.

3.  Fishes  should  not  be  taken  from  the  deep ;
instruments  for  the  profit  of  a  state  should  not  be
shown  to  the  people.

&  ^,  'Minimising  the  Light;'  equivalent,  as  Wu
K/ning  has  pointed  out,  to  the  ^  ^  of  ch.  27.

The  gist  of  the  chapter  is  to  be  sought  in  the  second
paragraph,  where  we  have  two  instances  of  the  action  of
the  Tao  by  contraries,  supposed  always  to  be  for  good.

But  there  is  a  difficulty  in  seeing  the  applicability  to
this  of  the  cases  mentioned  in  par.  i.  The  first  case,
indeed,  is  merely  a  natural  phenomenon,  having  no  moral
character ;  but  the  others,  as  they  have  been  illustrated  from
historical  incidents,  by  Han  Fei  and  others  at  least,  belong  to
schemes  of  selfish  and  unprincipled  ambitious  strategy,  which
it  would  be  injurious  to  Lao-jze  to  suppose  that  he  intended.

Par.  3  is  the  most  frequently  quoted  of  all  the  passages
in  our  King,  unless  it  be  the  first  part  of  ch.  i.  Fishes
taken  from  the  deep,  and  brought  into  shallow  water,  can
be  easily  taken  or  killed  ;  that  is  plain  enough.  '  The  sharp
instruments  of  a  state'  are  not  its  'weapons  of  war,'  nor
its  'treasures,'  nor  its  'instruments  of  government,'  that  is,
its  rewards  and  punishments,  though  this  last  is  the  inter-
pretation often  put  on  them,  and  sustained  by  a  foolish
reference  to  an  incident,  real  or  coined,  in  the  history  of  the
dukedom  of  Sung.  The  li  /c/ii  are  '  contrivances  for  gain,'
machines,  and  other  methods  to  increase  the  wealth  of
a  state,  but,  according  to  the  principles  of  Lao-^ze,  really
injurious  to  it.     These  should  not  be  shown  to  the  people,


CH.  XXXVII.  THE    TAO    TEH    i^ING.  79

whom  the  Taoistic  system  would  keep  in  a  state  of
primitive  simplicity  and  ignorance.  This  interpretation  is
in  accordance  with  the  meaning  of  the  characters,  and  with
the  general  teaching  of  Taoism.  In  no  other  way  can
I  explain  the  paragraph  so  as  to  justify  the  place  un-
doubtedly belonging  to  it  in  the  system.

37.  I .  The  Tao  in  its  regular  course  does  nothing
(for  the  sake  of  doing  it),  and  so  there  is  nothing
which  it  does  not  do.

2.  If  princes  and  kings  were  able  to  maintain  it,
all  things  would  of  themselves  be  transformed  by
them.

3.  If  this  transformation  became  to  me  an  object
of  desire,  I  would  express  the  desire  by  the  nameless
simplicity.

Simplicity  without  a  name
Is  free  from  all  external  aim.
With  no  desire,  at  rest  and  still.
All  things  go  right  as  of  their  will.

■^  jj^,  '  The  Exercise  of  Government.'  This  exercise
should  be  according  to  the  Tao,  doing  without  doing,
governing  without  government.

The  subject  of  the  third  paragraph  is  a  feudal  prince  or
the  king,  and  he  is  spoken  of  in  the  first  person,  to  give
more  vividness  to  the  style,  unless  the  ^, '  I,'  may,  possibly,
be  understood  of  Lao-3ze  himself  personating  one  of  them.


8o  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.


PART    II.

38.  I.  (Those  avIio)  possessed  in  highest  degree
the  attributes  (of  the  Tao)  did  not  (seek)  to  show
them,  and  therefore  they  possessed  them  (in  fullest
measure).  (Those  who)  possessed  in  a  lower  de-
gree those  attributes  (sought  how)  not  to  lose  them,
and  therefore  they  did  not  possess  them  (in  fullest
measure).

2.  (Those  who)  possessed  in  the  highest  degree
J     those  attributes  did  nothing  (with  a  purpose),  and

had  no  need  to  do  anything.  (Those  who)  possessed
them  in  a  lower  degree  were  (always)  doing,  and  had
need  to  be  so  doing.

3.  (Those  who)  possessed  the  highest  benevolence
were  (always  seeking)  to  carry  it  out,  and  had  no
need  to  be  doing  so.  (Those  who)  possessed  the
highest  righteousness  were  (always  seeking)  to  carry
it  out,  and  had  need  to  be  so  doing.

4.  (Those  who)  possessed  the  highest  (sense  of)
propriety  were  (always  seeking)  to  show  it,  and  when
men  did  not  respond  to  it,  they  bared  the  arm  and
marched  up  to  them.

5.  Thus  it  was  that  when  the  Tao  was  lost,  its
/    attributes  appeared  ;  when  its  attributes  were  lost,

benevolence  appeared ;  when  benevolence  was  lost,
righteousness  appeared;  and  when  righteousness
was  lost,  the  proprieties  appeared.

6.  Now  propriety  is  the  attenuated  form  of  leal-
heartedness  and  good  faith,  and  is  also  the  com-
mencement   of    disorder ;     swift    apprehension    is


CH.  XXXVIII.


THE    TAO    TEH    A'lNG.  8 1


(only)  a  flower  of  the  Tao,  and  is  the  beginning  of
stupidity.

7.  Thus  it  is  that  the  Great  man  abides  by  what
is  soh'd,  and  eschews  what  is  flimsy  ;  dwells  with  the
fruit  and  not  with  the  flower.  It  is  thus  that  he
puts  away  the  one  and  makes  choice  of  the  other.

1^  ^M,  'About  the  Attributes;'  of  Tao,  that  is.  It  is
not  easy  to  render  teh  here  by  any  other  English  term
than  'virtue,'  and  yet  there  would  be  a  danger  of  its  thus
misleading  us  in  the  interpretation  of  the  chapter.

The  'virtue'  is  the  activity  or  operation  of  the  Tao,
which  is  supposed  to  have  come  out  of  its  absoluteness.
Even  Han  Fei  so  defines  it  here, — 'Teh  is  the  meritorious
work  of  the  Tao.'

In  par.  5  we  evidently  have  a  resume  of  the  preceding
paragraphs,  and,  as  it  is  historical,  I  translate  them  in  the
past  tense ;  though  what  took  place  on  the  early  stage  of
the  world  may  also  be  said  to  go  on  taking  place  in  the
experience  of  every  individual.  With  some  considerable
hesitation  I  have  given  the  subjects  in  those  paragraphs  in
the  concrete,  in  deference  to  the  authority  of  Ho-shang
Kung  and  most  other  commentators.  The  former  says,
'By  "the  highest  teh"  is  to  be  understood  the  rulers  of
the  greatest  antiquity,  without  name  or  designation,  whose
virtue  was  great,  and  could  not  be  surpassed.'  Most
ingenious,  and  in  accordance  with  the  Taoistic  system,
is  the  manner  in  which  Wii  K/iang  construes  the  passage,
and  I  am  surprised  that  it  has  not  been  generally  accepted.
By  'the  higher  teh'  he  understands  'the  Tao,'  that  which
is  prior  to  and  above  the  Teh  ( J;^  f^»  ^»  ^^  f^  ^  _t'
^  't^)  '  ^y  '^^^^  lower  teh,'  benevolence,  that  which  is
after  and  below  the  Teh;  by  'the  higher  benevolence,'
the  Teh  which  is  above  benevolence;  by  'the  higher
righteousness,'  the  benevolence  which  is  above  righteous-
ness ;  and  by  '  the  higher  propriety,'  the  righteousness
which  is  above  propriety.  Certainly  in  the  summation
of  these  four  paragraphs  which  we  have  in  the  fifth,  the
[39]  G


82  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.


subjects  of  them  would  appear  to  have  been  in  the  mind
of  Lao-jze  as  thus  defined  by  Wu.

In  the  remainder  of  the  chapter  he  goes  on  to  speak
depreciatingly  of  ceremonies  and  knowledge,  so  that  the
whole  chapter  must  be  understood  as  descriptive  of  the
process  of  decay  and  deterioration  from  the  early  time  in
which  the  Tao  and  its  attributes  swayed  the  societies
of  men.

39.  I.  The  things  which  from  of  old  have  got
the  One  (the  Tao)  are —

Heaven  which  by  it  is  bright  and  pure ;

Earth  rendered  thereby  firm  and  sure ;

Spirits  with  powers  by  it  suppHed ;

Valleys  kept  full  throughout  their  void  ;

All  creatures  which  through  it  do  live  ;

Princes  and  kinofs  who  from  it  get

The  model  which  to  all  they  give.
All  these  are  the  results  of  the  One  (Tao).

2.  If  heaven  were  not  thus  pure,  it  soon  would
rend  ;

If  earth  were   not   thus   sure,  'twould    break   and

bend  ;
Without  these  powers,  the  spirits  soon  would  fail  ;
If  not  so  filled,  the  drought  would  parch  each  vale  ;
Without  that  life,  creatures  would  pass  away  ;
Princes  and  kings,  without  that  moral  sway,
Howcve-  grand  and  high,  would  all  decay.

3,  Thus  it  is  that  dignity  finds  its  (firm)  root  in
its  (previous)  meanness,  and  what  is  lofty  finds  its
stability  in  the  lowness  (from  which  it  rises).  Hence
princes  and  kings  call  themselves  '  Orphans,'  '  Men
of  small  virtue,'  and  as  '  Carriaores  without  a  nave.'
Is  not  this  an  acknowledgment  that  in  their  con-
sidering themselves  mean  they  see  the  foundation  of


CH.  XL.  THE    TAO    TEH    KING.  S^


their  dignity  ?  So  it  is  that  in  the  enumeration  of
the  different  parts  of  a  carriage  we  do  not  come  on
what  makes  it  answer  the  ends  of  a  carriage.  They
do  not  wish  to  show  themselves  eleeant-lookino-  as
jade,  but  (prefer)  to  be  coarse-looking  as  an  (ordinary)
stone.

^  2|5C'  '  The  Origin  of  the  Law.'  In  this  title  there  is
a  reference  to  the  Law  given  to  all  things  by  the  Tao,  as
described  in  the  conclusion  of  chapter  25.  And  the  Tao
afTords  that  law  by  its  passionless,  undemonstrative  nature,
through  which  in  its  spontaneity,  doing  nothing  for  the  sake
of  doing,  it  yet  does  all  things.

The  difficulty  of  translation  is  in  the  third  paragraph.
The  way  in  which  princes  and  kings  speak  depreciatingly
of  themselves  is  adduced  as  illustrating  how  they  have  in-
deed got  the  spirit  of  the  Tao;  and  I  accept  the  last
epithet  as  given  by  Ho-shang  Kung,  '  naveless '  (_^),
instead  of  S^  (  =  'the  unworthy'),  which  is  found  in  Wang
Pi,  and  has  been  adopted  by  nearly  all  subsequent  editors.
To  see  its  appropriateness  here,  we  have  only  to  refer  back
to  chapter  11,  where  the  thirty  spokes,  and  the  nave,  empty
to  receive  the  axle,  are  spoken  of,  and  it  is  shown  how  the
usefulness  of  the  carriage  is  derived  from  that  emptiness  of
the  nave.  This  also  enables  us  to  give  a  fair  and  consistent
explanation  of  the  difficult  clause  which  follows,  in  which
also  I  have  followed  the  text  of  Ho-shang  Kung.     For  his


,  Wang  Pi  has  iS,  which  also  is  found  in  a  quotation  of
it  by  Hwai-nan  ^ze  ;  but  this  need  not  affect  the  meaning.
In  the  translation  of  the  clause  we  are  assisted  by  a  some-
what similar  illustration  about  a  horse  in  the  twenty-fifth
of /^wang-jze's  Books,  par.  10.

40.   I.   The  movement  of  the  Tao
By  contraries  proceeds ;
And  weakness  marks  the  course
Of  Tao's  mighty  deeds.
G  2


§4  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.


2.  All  things  under  heaven  sprang  from  It  as
existing  (and  named) ;  that  existence  sprang  from  It
as  non-existent  (and  not  named).

^  ffl,  '  Dispensing  with  the  Use  (of  Means);'— with  their
use,  that  is,  as  it  appears  to  us.  The  subject  of  the  brief
chapter  is  the  action  of  the  Tao  by  contraries,  leading  to  a
result  the  opposite  of  what  existed  previously,  and  by
means  which  might  seem  calculated  to  produce  a  contrary

result.

In  translating  par.  2  I  have  followed  3iao  Hung,  who
finds  the  key  to  it  in  ch.  i.  Having  a  name,  the  Tao  is
'  the  Mother  of  all  things  ; '  having  no  name,  it  is  '  the  Ori-
ginator of  Heaven  and  Earth.'  But  here  is  the  teaching  of
Lao-jze: — 'If  Tao  seems  to  be  before  God,'  Tao  itself
sprang  from  nothing.

41.  I.  Scholars  of  the  highest  class,  when  they
hear  about  the  Tao,  earnestly  carry  it  into  practice.
Scholars  of  the  middle  class,  when  they  have  heard
about  it,  seem  now  to  keep  it  and  now  to  lose  it.
Scholars  of  the  lowest  class,  when  they  have  heard
about  it,  laugh  greatly  at  it.  If  it  were  not  (thus)
lauehed  at,  it  would  not  be  fit  to  be  the  Tao.

2.,  Therefore  the  sentence-makers  have  thus  ex-
pressed themselves  : —
'  The  Tao,  when  brightest  seen,  seems  light  to  lack;

Who  progress  in  it  makes,  seems  drawing  back ;

Its  even  way  is  like  a  rugged  track.

Its  highest  virtue  from  the  vale  doth  rise ;

Its  greatest  beauty  seems  to  offend  the  eyes  ;

And  he  has  most  whose  lot  the  least  supplies.

Its  firmest  virtue  seems  but  poor  and  low;

Its  solid  truth  seems  change  to  undergo  ;

Its  largest  square  doth  yet  no  corner  show" ;

A  vessel  great,  it  is  the  slowest  made ;


CH.  XLil.  THE    TAO    TEII    X'ING.  85

Loud  is  its  sound,  but  never  word  it  said  ;

A  semblance  great,  the  shadow  of  a  shade.'
3.  The  Tao  is  hidden,  and  has  no  name  ;  but  it
is  the  Tao  which  is  skilful  at  imparting  (to  all  thinc^s
what  they  need)  and  making  them  complete.


j5|  ^,  '  Sameness  and  Difference.'  The  chapter  is  a
sequel  of  the  preceding,  and  may  be  taken  as  an  illustra-
tion of  the  Tao's  proceeding  by  contraries.

Who  the  sentence-makers  were  whose  sayings  are  quoted
we  cannot  tell,  but  it  would  have  been  strange  if  L^o-^ze
had  not  had  a  large  store  of  such  sentences  at  his  command.
The  fifth  and  sixth  of  those  employed  by  him  here  are
found  in  Lieh-jze  (II,  15  a),  spoken  by  Lao  in  reproving
Yang  Ku,  and  in  VII,  3  a,  that  heretic  appears  quoting  an
utterance  of  the  same  kind,  with  the  words, '  according  to  an
old  saying  {^^  ^  ^^  ZV

42.  I.  TheTao  produced  One;  One  produced  Two;
Two  produced  Three  ;  Three  produced  All  things.
All  things  leave  behind  them  the  Obscurity  (out  of
which  they  have  come),  and  go  forward  to  embrace
the  Brightness  (into  which  they  have  emerged),
while  they  are  harmonised  by  the  Breath  of
Vacancy.

2.  What  men  dislike  is  to  be  orphans,  to  have
little  virtue,  to  be  as  carriages  without  naves  ;  and
yet  these  are  the  designations  which  kings  and
princes  use  for  themselves.  So  it  is  that  some
things  are  increased  by  being  diminished,  and  others
are  diminished  by  being  increased.

3.  What  other  men  (thus)  teach,  I  also  teach.
The  violent  and  strong  do  not  die  their  natural
death.      I  will  make  this  the  basis  of  my  teaching.

^^/  The  Transformations  of  the  Tao.'     In  par.  2  we


S6  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  ii.

have  the  case  of  the  depreciating  epithets  giv^en  to  them-
selves by  kings  and  princes,  which  we  found  before  in
ch.  39,  and  a  similar  lesson  is  drawn  from  it.  Such  depre-
ciation leads  to  exaltation,  and  the  contrary  course  of  self-
exaltation  leads  to  abasement.  This  latter  case  is  stated
emphatically  in  par.  3,  and  Lio-jze  says  that  it  was  the
basis  of  his  teaching.  So  far  therefore  we  have  in  this
chapter  a  repetition  of  the  lesson  that  '  the  movement  of
the  Tao  is  by  contraries,'  and  that  its  weakness  is  the  sure
precursor  of  strength.  But  the  connexion  between  this
lesson  and  what  he  says  in  par.  i  it  is  difficult  to  trace.  Up
to  this  time  at  least  it  has  baffled  m}-self.  The  passage
seems  to  give  us  a  cosmogony.  '  The  Tao  produced  One.'
We  have  already  seen  that  the  Tao  is  '  The  One.'  Are  we
to  understand  here  that  the  Tao  and  the  One  were  one  and
the  same  ?  In  this  case  what  would  be  the  significance  of
the  ^  ('produced')?— that  the  Tao  which  had  been  pre-
viously '  non-existent '  now  became  '  existent,'  or  capable  of
being  named?  This  seems  to  be  the  view  of  Sze-nui
Kwang  (a.  D.  1009-1086).

The  most  singular  form  which  this  view  assumes  is  in
one  of  the  treatises  on  our  A'ing,  attributed  to  the  l^aoist
patriarch  Lii  (g  f£  jg  |g  |^  g|),  that  'the  One  is
Heaven,  which  was  formed  by  the  congealing  of  the  Tao.'
According  to  another  treatise,  also  assigned  to  the  same  Lu
(M  fS  M^^n'  M)^  the  One  was  'the  primordial  ether;'
the  Two,  'the  separation  of  that  into  its  Yin  and  Yang
constituents  ; '  and  the  Three,  '  the  production  of  heaven,
earth,  and  man  by  these.'  In  quoting  the  paragraph  Hwai-
nan  ^zc  omits  ^  ;^  — ,  and  commences  with  — -  ^  Zl,
and  his  glossarist,  Kao  Yu,  makes  out  the  One  to  be  the
Tao,  the  Two  to  be  Spiritual  Intelligences  (jjj^  ^),  and
the  Three  to  be  the  Harmonising  Breath.  From  the
mention  of  the  Yin  and  Yang  that  follows,  I  believe  that
Lao-3ze  intended  by  the  Two  these  two  qualities  or  ele-
ments in  the  primordial  ether,  which  would  be  '  the  One.'
I  dare  not  hazard  a  guess  as  to  what  '  the  Three '  were.


CH.  XLIV.  THE    TAO    TEH    ^ING.  87

43.  I,  The  softest  thing  in  the  world  dashes
against  and  overcomes  the  hardest  ;  that  which  has
no  (substantial)  existence  enters  where  there  is  no
crevice,  I  know  hereby  what  advantage  belongs  to
doing  nothing  (with  a  purpose).

2.  There  are  few  in  the  world  who  attain  to  the
teaching  without  words,  and  the  advantage  arising
from  non-action.

"^  ffl,  '  The  Universal  Use  (of  the  action  in  weakness
of  the  Tao).'  The  chapter  takes  us  back  to  the  lines  of
ch.  40,  that

'Weakness  marks  the  course
Of  Tao's  mighty  deeds.'

By  '  the  softest  thing  in  the  world  '  it  is  agreed  that  we  are
to  understand  '  water,'  which  will  wear  away  the  hardest
rocks.  '  Dashing  against  and  overcoming '  is  a  metaphor
taken  from  hunting.  Ho-shang  Kung  says  that  '  what  has
no  existence'  is  the  Tao  ;  it  is  better  to  understand  by  it
the  unsubstantial  air  (^)  which  penetrates  everywhere,
we  cannot  see  how.

Compare  par.  2  with  ch.  2,  par.  3.

44.  I,  Or  fame  or  life,

Which  do  you  hold  more  dear  ?
Or  life  or  wealth,

To  which  would  you  adhere  ?
Keep  life  and  lose  those  other  things  ;
Keep  them  and  lose  your  life: — which
brino^s

Sorrow  and  pain  more  near  ?

2.   Thus  we  may  see.

Who  cleaves  to  fame
Rejects  what  is  more  great  ;
Who  loves  large  stores
Gives  up  the  richer  state.


88  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  pt.  II.

3.  Who  is  content

Needs  fear  no  shame.
Who  knows  to  stop
Incurs  no  blame.
From  danger  free
Long-  live  shall  he.

•jV  J\^,  '•  Cautions.'  The  chapter  warns  men  to  let  nothing
come  into  competition  with  the  value  which  they  set  on  the
Tao.  The  Tao  is  not  named,  indeed,  but  the  idea  of  it
was  evidently  in  the  writer's  mind.

The  whole  chapter  rhymes  after  a  somewhat  peculiar
fashion  ;  familiar  enough,  however,  to  one  who  is  acquainted
with  the  old  rhymes  of  the  Book  of  Poetry.

45,   I.  W^ho  thinks  his  great  achievements  poor
Shall  find  his  vioour  longf  endure.
Of  greatest  fulness,  deemed  a  void,
Exhaustion  ne'er  shall  stem  the  tide.
Do  thou  what's  straight  still  crooked  deem ;
Thy  greatest  art  still  stupid  seem,
And  eloquence  a  stammering  scream.
2.   Constant   action   overcomes   cold ;    beingf    still

overcomes   heat.      Purity    and    stillness    give    the

correct  law  to  all  under  heaven.

^^  t^'  'Great  or  Overflowing  Virtue.'  The  chapter  is
another  illustration  of  the  working  of  the  Tao  by  contraries.

According  to  Wu  AV^ang^  the  action  which  overcomes
cold  is  that  of  the  Yang  element  in  the  developing  primor-
dial ether ;  and  the  stillness  which  overcomes  heat  is  that
of  the  contrary  Yin  element.  These  may  have  been  in
Lao-jze's  mind,  but  the  statements  are  so  simple  as  hardly
to  need  any  comment.  Wu  further  says  that  the  purity
and  stillness  are  descriptive  of  the  condition  of  non-action.

40.  I.  When  the  Tao  prevails  in  the  world,  they
send  back  their  swift  horses  to  (draw)  the  dung-carts.


CH.  XLVII.


THE    TAO    TEH    iiTING.  89


When  the  Tao  is  disregarded  in  the  world,  the  war-
horses  breed  in  the  border  lands.

2.  There  is  no  guilt  greater  than  to  sanction
ambition  ;  no  calamity  greater  than  to  be  discon-
tented with  one's  lot ;  no  fault  greater  than  the
wish  to  be  getting.  Therefore  the  sufficiency  of
contentment  is  an  endurinor  and  unchanorino-  suffi-
ciency.

"^  ^,  '  The  Moderating  of  Desire  or  Ambition.'  The
chapter  shows  how  the  practice  of  the  Tao  must  conduce
to  contentment  and  happiness.

In  translating  par.  i  I  have,  after  Wu  K/ising,  admitted  a
^  after  the  ^,  his  chief  authority  for  doing  so  being  that
it  is  so  found  in  a  poetical  piece  by  A'ang  Hang  (a.  d.  7(S-
139).  A'u  Hsi  also  adopted  this  reading  (^  -^  ^  ^,
XVIII,  7  a).  In  par.  3  Han  Ying  has  a  tempting  variation
of  ^  ^  for  "pj*  ^,  but  I  have  not  adopted  it  because  the
same  phrase  occurs  elsewhere.

47.  I,  Without  going  outside  his  door,  one  under-
stands (all  that  takes  place)  under  the  sky ;  without
looking  out  from  his  window,  one  sees  the  Tao  of
Heaven.  The  farther  that  one  goes  out  (from
himself),  the  less  he  knows.

2.  Therefore  the  sao^es  eot  their  knowledgfe  with-
out  travelling ;  gave  their  (right)  names  to  things
without  seeing  them  ;  and  accomplished  their  ends
without  any  purpose  of  doing  so.

^  1m,'  '  Surveying  what  is  Far-off.'  The  chapter  is  a
lesson  to  men  to  judge  of  things  according  to  their  internal
conviction  of  similar  things  in  their  own  experience.  Short
as  the  chapter  is,  it  is  somewhat  mystical.  The  phrase,
'  The  Tao'  or  way  of  Heaven,  occurs  in  it  for  the  first  time  ;
and  it  is  difficult  to  lay  down  its  precise  meaning.  Lao-^ze
would  seem  to  teach  that  man  is  a  microcosm ;  and  that^  if


90  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.

he  understand  the  movements  of  his  own  mind,  he  can
understand  the  movements  of  all  other  minds.  There  are
various  readings,  of  which  it  is  not  necessary  to  speak.

I  have  translated  par.  2  in  the  past  tense,  and  perhaps
the  first  should  also  be  translated  so.  Most  of  it  is  found
in  Han  Ying.  preceded  by  '  formerly  '  or  '  anciently.'

48.  I.  He  v/ho  devotes  himself  to  learning  (seeks)
from  day  to  day  to  increase  (his  knowledge) ;  he  who
devotes  himself  to  the  Tao  (seeks)  from  day  to  day
to  diminish  (his  doing).

2.  He  diminishes  it  and  again  diminishes  it,  till
he  arrives  at  doing  nothing  (on  purpose).  Having
arrived  at  this  point  of  non-action,  there  is  nothing
which  he  does  not  do.

3.  He  who  gets  as  his  own  all  under  heaven  does
so  by  giving  himself  no  trouble  (with  that  end).  If
one  take  trouble  (with  that  end),  he  is  not  equal  to
getting  as  his  own  all  under  heaven.

^  ^H, '  Forgetting  Knowledge  ; ' — the  contrast  between
Learning  and  the  Tao.  It  is  only  by  the  Tao  that  the
world  can  be  won.

3iao  Hung  commences  his  quotations  of  commentary  on
this  chapter  with  the  following  from  Kumara^iva  on  the
second  par.  : — •  He  carries  on  the  process  of  diminishing
till  there  is  nothing  coarse  about  him  which  is  not  put
away.  He  puts  it  away  till  he  has  forgotten  all  that  was  bad
in  it.  He  then  puts  away  all  that  is  fine  about  him.  He
does  so  till  he  has  forgotten  all  that  was  good  in  it.  But
the  bad  was  wrong,  and  the  good  is  right.  Having  dimi-
nished the  wrong,  and  also  diminished  the  right,  the  process
is  carried  on  till  they  are  both  forgotten.  Passion  and
desire  are  both  cut  off;  and  his  virtue  and  the  Tao  are  in
such  union  that  he  does  nothing :  but  though  he  does
nothing,  he  allows  all  things  to  do  their  own  doing,  and  all
things  are  done.'  Such  is  a  Buddhistic  view  of  the  passage,
not  very  intelligible,  and  which  I  do  not  endorse.


CH.  XLIX.  THE    TAO    TEII   ZING.  9 1

In  a  passage  in  the  '  Narratives  of  the  School '  (Bk.  IX,
Art.  2),  we  have  a  Confucian  view  of  the  passage  : — '  Let
perspicacity,  intelligence,  shrewdness,  and  wisdom  be
guarded  by  stupidity,  and  the  service  of  the  possessor  will
affect  the  whole  world ;  let  them  be  guarded  by  com-
plaisance, and  his  daring  and  strength  will  shake  the  age ;
let  them  be  guarded  by  timidity,  and  his  wealth  will  be  all
within  the  four  seas  ;  let  them  be  guarded  by  humility,  and
there  will  be  what  we  call  the  method  of  "  diminishing  it,
and  diminishing  it  again."  '     But  neither  do  I  endorse  this.

My  own  view  of  the  scope  of  the  chapter  has  been  given
above  in  a  few  words.  The  greater  part  of  it  is  founci  in
A^wang-jze.

49.  I.  The  saee  has  no  invariable  mind  of  his
own  ;  he  makes  the  mind  of  the  people  his  mind.

2.  To  those  who  are  good  (to  me),  I  am  good  ;
and  to  those  who  are  not  good  (to  me),  I  am  also
good  ; — and  thus  (all)  get  to  be  good.  To  those
who  are  sincere  (with  me),  I  am  sincere  ;  and  to
those  who  are  not  sincere  (with  me),  I  ani  also
sincere  ; — and  thus  (all)  get  to  be  sincere.

3.  The  sage  has  in  the  world  an  appearance  of
indecision,  and  keeps  his  mind  in  a  state  of  indifter-
ence  to  all.  The  people  all  keep  their  eyes  and  ears
directed  to  him,  and  he  deals  with  them  all  as  his
children.  ^

f^  |iM,  '  The  Quality  of  Indulgence.'  The  chapter  shows
how  that  quality  enters  largely  into  the  dealing  of  the  sage
with  other  men,  and  exercises  over  them  a  transforming
influence,  dominated  as  it  is  in  him  by  the  Tao.

My  version  of  par.  1  is  taken  from  Dr.  Chalmers.  A  good
commentary  on  it  was  given  by  the  last  emperor  but  one  of
the  earlier  of  the  two  great  Sung  dynasties,  in  the  period
A.  D.  1 II 1-1 1 17  : — '  The  mind  of  the  sage  is  free  from  pre-
occupation and  able  to  receive;  still,  and  able  to  respond.'

In  par.  3  I  adopt  the  reading  of  ^^  ('  to  get  ')  instead  of


92  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.

the  more  common  :|^  (' virtue'  or  'quality').  There  is
a  passage  in  Han  Ying  (IX,  3  b,  4  a),  the  style  of  which,
most  readers  will  probably  agree  with  me  in  thinking,  was
moulded  on  the  text  before  us^  though  nothing  is  said  of
any  connexion  between  it  and  the  saying  of  Lao-jze.
I  must  regard  it  as  a  sequel  to  the  conversation  between
Confucius  and  some  of  his  disciples  about  the  principle
(LAo's  principle)  that  '  Injury  should  be  recompensed  with
Kindness,'  as  recorded  in  the  Con.  Ana.,  XIV,  36.  We
read  : — '  3ze-lu  said,  "  When  men  are  good  to  me,  I  will  also
be  good  to  them  ;  when  they  are  not  good  to  me,  I  will
also  be  not  good  to  them."  3ze-kung  said,  "  W^hen  men
are  good  to  me,  I  will  also  be  good  to  them  ;  when  they
are  not  good  to  me,  I  will  simply  lead  them  on,  forwards
it  may  be  or  backwards."'  Yen  Hui  said,  "  When  men  are
good  to  me,  I  will  also  be  good  to  them  ;  when  they  are
not  good  to  me,  I  will  still  be  good  to  them."  The  views
of  the  three  disciples  being  thus  different,  they  referred  the
point  to  the  Master,  who  said,  "  The  words  of  3ze-lu  are
such  as  might  be  expected  among  the  (wild  tribes  of)  the
Man  and  the  Mo  ;  those  of  3ze-kung,  such  as  might  be
expected  among  friends  ;  those  of  Hui,  such  as  might  be
expected  among  relatives  and  near  connexions." '  This  is
all.  The  Master  was  still  far  from  Lao-^ze's  standpoint,
and  that  of  his  own  favourite  disciple,  Yen  Hui.

50.  I.  INIen  come  forth  and  live  ;  they  enter  (again)
and  die.

2.  Of  every  ten  three  are  ministers  of  life  (to  them-
selves) ;  and  three  are  ministers  of  death.

3.  There  are  also  three  in  every  ten  whose  aim  is
to  live,  but  whose  movements  tend  to  the  land  (or
place)  of  death.  And  for  what  reason  ?  Because
of  their  excessive  endeavours  to  perpetuate  life.

4.  But  I  have  heard  that  he  who  is  skilful  in
managing  the  life  entrusted  to  him  for  a  time  travels
on  the  land  without  having  to  shun   rhinoceros   or


CH.  LI.  THE    TAO    TEH    ^ING.  93

tiger,  and  enters  a  host  without  having  to  avoid
buff  coat  or  sharp  weapon.  The  rhinoceros  finds  no
place  in  him  into  which  to  thrust  its  horn,  nor  the
tiger  a  place  in  which  to  fix  its  claws,  nor  the  weapon
a  place  to  admit  its  point.  And  for  what  reason  ?
Because  there  is  in  him  no  place  of  death.        ^

^  >^,  '  The  Value  set  on  Life.'  The  chapter  sets  forth
the  Tao  as  an  antidote  against  decay  and  death.

In  par.  i  life  is  presented  to  us  as  intermediate  between
two  non-existences.  The  words  will  suggest  to  many
readers  those  in  Job  i.  21.

In  pars.  2  and  3  I  translate  the  characters  -p  ^  ^
by  'three  in  ten,'  instead  of  by  'thirteen,'  as  Julien  and
other  translators  have  done.  The  characters  are  suscep-
tible of  either  translation  according  to  the  tone  in  which
we  read  the  ^.  They  were  construed  as  I  have  done
by  Wang  Pi ;  and  many  of  the  best  commentators  have
followed  in  his  wake.  '  The  ministers  of  life  to  them-
selves '  would  be  those  who  eschewed  all  things,  both  in-
ternal and  external,  tending  to  injure  health  ;  '  the  ministers
of  death,'  those  who  pursued  courses  likely  to  cause  disease
and  shorten  life ;  the  third  three  v/ould  be  those  who
thought  that  by  mysterious  and  abnormal  courses  they
could  prolong  life,  but  only  injured  it.  Those  three  classes
being  thus  disposed  of,  there  remains  only  one  in  ten  rightly
using  the  Tao,  and  he  is  spoken  of  in  the  next  paragraph.

This  par.  4  is  easy  of  translation,  and  the  various  read-
ings in  it  are  unimportant,  differing  in  this  respect  from
those  in  par.  3.  But  the  aim  of  the  author  in  it  is  not  clear.
In  ascribing  such  effects  to  the  possession  of  the  Tao,  is  he
'  trifling,'  as  Dr.  Chalmers  thinks  ?  or  indulging  the  play  of
his  poetical  fancy  .^  or  simply  saying  that  the  Taoist  will
keep  himself  out  of  danger  ?

51.  I.  All  things  are  produced  by  the  Tao,  and
nourished  by  its  outflowing  operation.  They  receive
their  forms  according^  to  the  nature  of  each,  and  are


94  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.


completed  according  to  the  circumstances  of  their
condition.  Therefore  all  things  without  exception
honour  the  Tao,  and  exalt  its  outflowing  operation.

2.  This  honouring  of  the  Tao  and  exalting  of  its
operation  is  not  the  result  of  any  ordination,  but
ahva)s  a  spontaneous  tribute.

3.  Thus  it  is  that  the  Tao  produces  (all  things),
nourishes  them,  brings  them  to  their  full  growth,
nurses  them,  completes  them,  matures  them,  main-
tains them,  and  overspreads  them.

4.  It  produces  them  and  makes  no  claim  to  the
possession  of  them  ;  it  carries  them  through  their
processes  and  does  not  vaunt  its  ability  in  doing  so  ;
it  brings  them  to  maturity  and  exercises  no  control
over  them ; — this  is  called  its  mysterious  operation.

^  ^^^,  'The  Operation  (of  the  Tao)  in  Nourishing
Things.'  The  subject  of  the  chapter  is  the  quiet  passionless
operation  of  the  Tao  in  nature,  in  the  production  and
nourishing  of  things  throughout  the  seasons  of  the  year  ; —
a  theme  dwelt  on  by  Lao-^ze,  in  II,  4,  X,  3,  and  other
places.

The  Tao  is  the  subject  of  all  the  predicates  in  par.  i,and
what  seem  the  subjects  in  all  but  the  first  member  should
be  construed  adverbially.

On  par.  2  Wu  AV^ang  says  that  the  honour  of  the  Son  of
Heaven  is  derived  from  his  appointment  by  God,  and  that
then  the  nobility  of  the  feudal  princes  is  derived  from  him  ;
but  in  the  honour  given  to  the  Tao  and  the  nobility  ascribed
to  its  operation,  we  are  not  to  think  of  any  external  ordina-
tion. There  is  a  strange  reading  of  two  of  the  members  of
par.  3  in  Wang  Pi,  viz.  ^  ;^  #  ;^  for  ^  ;^  fb  ;2.
This  is  quoted  and  predicated  of  '  Heaven,'  in  the  Nes-
torian  Monument  of  Hsi-an  in  the  eighth  century.

52.  I.  (The  Tao)  which  originated  all  under  the
sky  is  to  be  considered  as  the  mother  of  them  all.


CH.LII.  THE    TAO    TEH    TING.


95


2.  When  the  mother  is  found,  we  know  what  her
children  should  be.  When  one  knows  that  he  is  his
mother's  child,  and  proceeds  to  guard  (the  qualities
of)  the  mother  that  belong  to  him,  to  the  end  of  his
life  he  will  be  free  from  all  peril.

3.  Let  him  keep  his  mouth  closed,  and  shut  up
the  portals  (of  his  nostrils),  and  all  his  life  he  will  be
exempt  from  laborious  exertion.  Let  him  keep  his
mouth  open,  and  (spend  his  breath)  in  the  promotion
of  his  affairs,  and  all  his  life  there  will  be  no  safety
for  him.

4.  The  perception  of  what  is  small  is  (the  secret
of)  clear-sightedness  ;  the  guarding  of  what  is  soft
and  tender  is  (the  secret  of)  strength.

5.  Who  uses  well  his  light,
Reverting  to  its  (source  so)  bright,
Will  from  his  body  ward  all  blight.

And  hides  the  unchanmno-  from  men's  sioht.

^  7C'  '  Returning  to  the  Source.'  The  meaning  of  the
chapter  is  obscure,  and  the  commentators  give  little  help  in
determining  it.  As  in  the  preceding  chapter,  Lao-jze
treats  of  the  operation  of  the  Tao  on  material  things,  he
seems  in  this  to  go  on  to  the  operation  of  it  in  man,  or  how
he,  with  his  higher  nature,  should  ever  be  maintaining  it
in  himself.

For  the  understanding  of  paragraph  i  we  must  refer  to
the  first  chapter  of  the  treatise,  where  the  Tao,  'having  no
name,'  appears  as  '  the  Beginning '  or  '  First  Cause  '  of  the
world,  and  then,  '  having  a  name,'  as  its  '  Mother.'  It  is
the  same  thing  or  concept  in  both  of  its  phases,  the  ideal
or  absolute,  and  the  manifestation  of  it  in  its  passionless
doings.  The  old  Jesuit  translators  render  this  par.  by
'  Mundus  principium  et  causam  suam  habet  in  Divino  ^^,
seu  actione  Divinae  sapientiae  quae  dici  potest  ejus  mater.'
So  far  I  may  assume  that  they  agreed  with  me  in  under-
standing that  the  subject  of  the  par.  was  the  Tao.


96  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.

Par.  2  lays  down  the  law  of  life  for  man  thus  derived
from  the  Tao.  The  last  clause  of  it  is  given  by  the  same
translators  as  equivalent  to  '  Unde  fit  ut  post  mortem  nihil
ei  timendum  sit,' — a  meaning  which  the  characters  will  not
bear.  But  from  that  clause,  and  the  next  par.,  I  am  obliged
to  conclude  that  even  in  Lao-jze's  mind  there  was  the  germ
of  the  sublimation  of  the  material  frame  which  issued  in  the
asceticism  and  life-preserving  arts  of  the  later  Taoism.

Par.  3  seems  to  indicate  the  method  of  'guarding  the
mother  in  man,'  by  watching  over  the  breath,  the  proto-
plastic '  one '  of  ch.  42,  the  ethereal  matter  out  of  which  all
material  things  were  formed.  The  organs  of  this  breath  in
man  are  the  mouth  and  nostrils  (nothing  else  should  be
understood  here  by  ^^  and  P^  ; — see  the  explanations  of
the  former  in  the  last  par.  of  the  fifth  of  the  appendixes  to
the  Yi  in  vol.  xvi,  p.  432) ;  and  the  management  of  the  breath
is  the  mystery  of  the  esoteric  Buddhism  and  Taoism.

In  par.  4  '  The  guarding  what  is  soft '  is  derived  from  the
use  of  '  the  soft  lips '  in  hiding  and  preserving  the  hard  and
strong  teeth.

Par.  5  gives  the  gist  of  the  chapter : — Man's  always  keeping
before  him  the  ideal  of  the  Tao,  and,  without  purpose,
simply  doing  whatever  he  finds  to  do;  Tao-like  and
powerful  in  all  his  sphere  of  action.

I  have  followed  the  reading  of  the  last  character  but  one,
which  is  given  by  3iao  Hung  instead  of  that  found  in  Ho-
shang  Kung  and  Wang  Pi.

53.  I.  If  I  were  suddenly  to  become  known,  and
(put  into  a  position  to)  conduct  (a  government)
according  to  the  Great  Tao,  what  I  should  be  most
afraid  of  would  be  a  boastful  display.

2.  The  great  Tao  (or  way)  is  very  level  and  easy  ;
but  people  love  the  by-ways.

3.  Their  court(-yards  and  buildings)  shall  be  well
kept,  but  their  fields  shall  be  ill-cultivated,  and  their
granaries  very  empty.     They  shall  wear  elegant  and


CH.  LIV.  THE    TAO    TEH   KmC.  97

ornamented  robes,  carry  a  sharp  sword  at  their  girdle,
pamper  themselves  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  have
a  superabundance  of  property  and  wealth  ; — such
(princes)  may  be  called  robbers  and  boasters.  This
is  contrary  to  the  Tao  surely!

-^  P^'  '  Increase  of  Evidence.'  The  chapter  contrasts
government  by  the  Tao  with  that  conducted  in  a  spirit  of
ostentation  and  by  oppression.

In  the  'I'  of  paragraph  i  does  Lao-^ze  speak  of  himself?
I  think  he  does.  Wu  K/ia.ng  understands  it  of 'any  man,'  i.e.
any  one  in  the  exercise  of  government ; — which  is  possible.
What  is  peculiar  to  my  version  is  the  pregnant  meaning
given  to  ^  ^ff,  common  enough  in  the  mouth  of  Confu-
cius. I  have  adopted  it  here  because  of  a  passage  in  Liu
Hsiang's  Shwo-wan  (XX,  13  b),  where  Lao-jze  is  made  to
say  '  Excessive  is  the  difficulty  of  practising  the  Tao  at  the
present  time,'  adding  that  the  princes  of  his  age  would  not
receive  it  from  him.  On  the  '  Great  Tao,'  see  chapters  25,
34,  et  al.  From  the  twentieth  book  of  Han  Fei  (12  b  and
13  a)  I  conclude  that  he  had  the  whole  of  this  chapter  in
his  copy  of  our  King,  but  he  broke  it  up,  after  his  fashion,
into  fragmentary  utterances,  confused  and  confounding.  He
gives  also  some  remarkable  various  readings,  one  of  which
(^,  instead  of  Ho-shang  Kung  and  Wang  Pi's  ^^,
character  48)  is  now  generally  adopted.     The  passage  is

quoted  in  the  Khang-hsi  dictionary  under  ^  with  this
reading.

54.    I.  What  (Tao's)  skilful  planter  plants
Can  never  be  uptorn  ;
What  his  skilful  arms  enfold,

From  him  can  ne'er  be  borne.
Sons  shall  bring  in  lengthening  line,
Sacrifices  to  his  shrine.
2.   Tao  when  nursed  within  one's  self,
His  vigour  will  make  true  ;
[39]  H


98  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.

And  where  the  family  it  rules

What  riches  will  accrue  !
The  neighbourhood  where  it  prevails

In  thriving  will  abound  ;
And  when  'tis  seen  throughout  the  state,

Good  fortune  will  be  found.
Employ  it  the  kingdom  o'er,

And  men  thrive  all  around.

3.  In  this  way  the  effect  will  be  seen  in  the  person,
by  the  observation  of  different  cases  ;  in  the  family  ;
in  the  neighbourhood ;  in  the  state  ;  and  in  the
kingdom.

4.  How  do  I  know  that  this  effect  is  sure  to
hold  thus  all  under  the  sky  ?  By  this  (method  of
observation).


^,  '  The  Cultivation  (of  the  Tao),  and  the  Observa-
tion (of  its  Effects).'  The  sentiment  of  the  first  paragraph
is  found  in  the  twenty-seventh  and  other  previous  chap-
ters,— that  the  noiseless  and  imperceptible  acting  of  the
Tao  is  irresistible  in  its  influence;  and  this  runs  through
to  the  end  of  the  chapter  with  the  additional  appeal  to  the
influence  of  its  effects.  The  introduction  of  the  subject  of
sacrifices,  a  religious  rite,  though  not  presented  to  the
Highest  Object,  will  strike  the  reader  as  peculiar  in  our
A'ing.

The  Teh  mentioned  five  times  in  par.  2  is  the  'virtue'
of  the  Tao  embodied  in  the  individual,  and  extending  from
him  in  all  the  spheres  of  his  occupation,  and  is  explained
differently  by  Han  Fei  according  to  its  application  ;  and
his  example  I  have  to  some  extent  follow^ed.

The  force  of  pars.  3  and  4  is  well  given  by  Ho-shang
Kung.  On  the  first  clause  he  says,  '  Take  the  person  of
one  who  cultivates  the  Tao,  and  compare  it  with  that  of
one  who  does  not  cultivate  it ; — which  is  in  a  state  of  decay  ?
and  which  is  in  a  state  of  preservation  ? '


CH.  LV.  THE    TAO    TEH    K-ING.  99


55.  I.  He  who  has  in  himself  abundantly  the
attributes  (of  the  Tao)  is  like  an  infant.  Poison-
ous insects  will  not  sting  him  ;  fierce  beasts  will  not
seize  him  ;  birds  of  prey  will  not  strike  him.

2.  (The  infant's)  bones  are  weak  and  its  sinews
soft,  but  yet  its  grasp  is  firm.  It  knows  not  yet  the
union  of  male  and  female,  and  yet  its  virile  member
may  be  excited ; — showing  the  perfection  of  its
physical  essence.  All  day  long  it  will  cry  without
its  throat  becoming  hoarse  ; — showing  the  harmony
(in  its  constitution).

3.  To  him  by  whom  this  harmony  is  known,
(The  secret  of)  the  unchanging  (Tao)  is  shown.
And  in  the  knowledge  wisdom  finds  its  throne.
All  life-increasing  arts  to  evil  turn ;

Where  the  mind  makes  the  vital  breath  to  burn,
(False)   is    the   strength,   (and    o'er    it  we    should
mourn.)

4.  When  things  have  become  strong,  they  (then)
become  olcl,  which  may  be  said  to  be  contrary  to
the  Tao.  Whatever  is  contrary  to  the  Tao  soon
ends.

^  /f^,  '  The  Mysterious  Charm  ; '  meaning,  apparently,
the  entire  passivity  of  the  Tao.

With  pars,  i  and  3,  compare  what  is  said  about  the  in-
fant in  chapters  10  and  20,  and  about  the  immunity  from
dangers  such  as  here  described  of  the  disciple  of  the  Tao
in  ch.  50.  My  '  evil'  in  the  second  triplet  of  par.  3  has  been
translated  by  '  felicity;'  but  a  reference  to  the  Khang-hsi
dictionary  will  show  that  the  meaning  which  I  give  to  jjj^
is  well  authorised.  It  is  the  only  meaning  allowable  here.
The  third  and  fourth   ^  in  this  par.  appear  in  Ho-shang

Kung's  text  as  ^ ,  and  he  comments  on  the  clauses  accord-

H  2


lOO  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  IT.

jngly  ;    but  ^  is  now  the  received  reading.     Some  light
is  thrown  on  this  paragraph  and  the  next  by  an  apocryphal
•  conversation  attributed  to  Lao-^ze  in  Liu  Hsiang's  Shwo-
wan,  X,  4  a.

56.  I.  He  who  knows  (the  Tao)  does  not  (care
to)  speak  (about  it) ;  he  who  is  (ever  ready  to)  speak
about  it  does  not  know  it.

2.  He  (who  knows  it)  will  keep  his  mouth  shut
and  close  the  portals  (of  his  nostrils).  He  will
blunt  his  sharp  points  and  unravel  the  complications
of  things  ;  he  will  attemper  his  brightness,  and  bring
himself  into  agreement  with  the  obscurity  (of  others).
This  is  called  '  the  Mysterious  Agreement.'

3.  (Such  an  one)  cannot  be  treated  familiarly  or
distantly  ;  he  is  beyond  all  consideration  of  profit  or
Injury;  of  nobility  or  meanness  : — he  Is  the  noblest
man  under  heaven.

^  fS'  '  The  Mysterious  Excellence.'  The  chapter  gives
us  a  picture  of  the  man  of  Tao,  humble  and  retiring,  obH-
vious  of  himself  and  of  other  men,  the  noblest  man  under
heaven.

Par.  I  is  found  in  A'wang-^ze  (XIII,  20  b),  not  expressly
mentioned,  as  taken  from  Lao-jze,  but  at  the  end  of  a  string
of  sentiments,  ascribed  to  '  the  Master,'  some  of  them,  like
the  two  clauses  here,  no  doubt  belonging  to  him,  and  the
others,  probably  A'wang-jze's  own.

Par.  2  is  all  found  in  chapters  4  and  52,  excepting  the
short  clause  in  the  conclusion.

57.  I.  A  state  may  be  ruled  by  (measures  of)
correction  ;  weapons  of  war  may  be  used  with  crafty
dexterity;  (but)  the  kingdom  Is  made  one's  own
(only)  by  freedom  from  action  and  purpose.

2.  How  do   I   know   that  it   Is    so  .^      By   these


1

CH.  LVIII.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'ING,  lOI


facts  : — In  the  kingdom  the  mukipHcation  of  prohibi-
tive enactments  increases  the  poverty  of  the  people ;
the  more  implements  to  add  to  their  profit  that  the
people  have,  the  greater  disorder  is  there  in  the
state  and  clan ;  the  more  acts  of  crafty  dexterity
that  men  possess,  the  more  do.  strange  contrivances
appear;  the  more  display  there  is  of  legislation,
the  more  thieves  and  robbers  there  are.

3.  Therefore  a  sage  has  said,  '  I  will  do  nothing
(of  purpose),  and  the  people  will  be  transformed  of
themselves ;  I  will  be  fond  of  keeping  still,  and  the
people  will  of  themselves  become  correct.  I  will
take  no  trouble  about  it,  and  the  people  will  of
themselves  become  rich  ;  I  will  manifest  no  ambi-
tion, and  the  people  will  of  themselves  attain  to  the
primitive  simplicity.'

{$  ®<'  '  The  Genuine  Influence.'  The  chapter  shows
how  government  by  the  Tao  is  alone  effective,  and  of  uni-
versal application  ;  contrasting  it  with  the  failure  of  other
methods.

After  the  'weapons  of  war'  in  par.  i,  one  is  tempted  to
take  '  the  sharp  implements'  in  par.  2  as  such  weapons,  but
the  meaning  which  I  finally  adopted,  especially  after  studying
chapters  ;^6  and  80,  seems  more  consonant  with  Lao-^ze's
scheme  of  thought.  In  the  last  member  of  the  same  par.,
Ho-shang  Kung  has  the  strange  reading  of  |^  ^,  and  uses
it  in  his  commentary  ;  but  the  better  text  of  ^  -^  is  found
both  in  Hwai-nan  and  .Sze-ma  K/iien,  and  in  Wang  Pi.

We  do  not  know  if  the  writer  were  quoting  any  par-
ticular sage  in  par.  3,  or  referring  generally  to  the  sages  of
the  past ; — men  Hke  the  '  sentence-makers  '  of  ch.  41.

58.   I.   The  Pfovernment  that  seems  the  most  un-
wise,
Oft  goodness  to  the  people  best  supplies  ;


I02  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.


That  which  Is  meddHng,  touching  everything,
Will  work  but  ill,  and  disappointment  bring.

Misery ! — happiness    is    to    be   found    by    its    side !

Happiness  ! — misery  lurks  beneath  it !     Who  knows

what  either  will  come  to  in  the  end  ?

2.  Shall  we  then  dispense  with  correction  ?  The
(method  of)  correction  shall  by  a  turn  become  dis-
tortion, and  the  good  in  it  shall  by  a  turn  become
evil.  The  delusion  of  the  people  (on  this  point)  has
indeed  subsisted  for  a  long  time.

3.  Therefore  the  sage  is  (like)  a  square  which  cuts
no  one  (with  its  angles) ;  (like)  a  corner  which  injures
no  one  (with  its  sharpness).  He  is  straightforward,
but  allows  himself  no  license  ;  he  is  bright,  but  does
not  dazzle,

jlP  ^,  'Transformation  according  to  Circumstances;'
but  this  title  does  not  throw  Hght  on  the  meaning  of  the
chapter ;  nor  are  we  helped  to  an  understanding  of  it  by
Han  Fei,  with  his  additions  and  comments  (XI,  3  bj  4  b),
nor  by  Hwai-nan  with  his  illustrations  (XII,  21  a,  b).  The
difficulty  of  it  is  increased  by  its  being  separated  from  the
preceding  chapter  of  which  it  is  really  the  sequel.  It  con-
trasts still  further  government  by  the  Tao,  with  that  by
the  method  of  correction.  The  sage  is  the  same  in  both
chapters,  his  character  and  government  both  marked  by
the  opposites  or  contraries  which  distinguish  the  procedure
of  the  Tao,  as  stated  in  ch.  40.

59.  I.  For  regulating  the  human  (in  our  consti-
tution) and  rendering  the  (proper)  service  to  the
heavenly,  there  is  nothing  like  moderation.

2.  It  is  only  by  this  moderation  that  there  Is
effected  an  early  return  (to  man's  normal  state).
That  early  return  is  what  I  call  the  repeated  accumu-
lation of  the  attributes  (of  the  Tao).     With  that


CH.  LX.  THE    TAO    TEH    ATING.  IO3

repeated  accumulation  of  those  attributes,  there
comes  the  subjugation  (of  every  obstacle  to  such
return).  Of  this  subjugation  we  know  not  what
shall  be  the  limit ;  and  when  one  knows  not  what
the  limit  shall  be,  he  may  be  the  ruler  of  a  state.

3.  He  who  possesses  the  mother  of  the  state  may
continue  long.  His  case  is  like  that  (of  the  plant)
of  which  we  say  that  its  roots  are  deep  and  its  flower
stalks  firm  : — this  is  the  way  to  secure  that  its  endur-
ing life  shall  long  be  seen.

^  ^'  'Guarding  the  Tao.'  The  chapter  shows  how
it  is  the  guarding  of  the  Tao  that  ensures  a  continuance
of  long  life,  with  vigour  and  success.  The  abuse  of  it  and
other  passages  in  our  King  helped  on,  I  must  believe,  the  ^
later  Taoist  dreams  about  the  elixir  vitae  and  life-pre-
serving pills.  The  whole  of  it,  with  one  or  two  various
readings,  is  found  in  Han  Fei  (VI,  4  b-6  a),  who  speaks
twice  in  his  comments  of  '  The  Book.'

Par.  I  has  been  translated,  Tn  governing  men  and  in
serving  Heaven,  there  is  nothing  like  moderation.'  But  by
'Heaven'  there  is  not  intended  'the  blue  sky'  above  us,
nor  any  personal  Power  above  it,  but  the  Tao  embodied
in  our  constitution,  the  Heavenly  element  in  our  nature.
The  '  moderation '  is  the  opposite  of  what  we  call  '  living
fast,'  'burning  the  candle  at  both  ends.'

In  par.  2  I  must  read  ^,  instead  of  the  more  com-
mon ^g.  I  find  it  in  Lu  Teh-ming,  and  that  it  is  not  a
misprint  in  him  appears  from  his  subjoining  that  it  is  pro-
nounced like  ^^.  Its  meaning  is  the  same  as  in  ^  ^
^  H^  in  ch.  53,  par.  5.  Teh  is  not '  virtue  '  in  our  common
meaning  of  the  term,  but  'the  attributes  of  the  Tao,'  as
almost  always  with  Lao-jze.

In  par.  3  'the  mother  of  the  state'  is  the  Tao  as  in
ch.  I,  and  especially  in  ch.  52,  par.  i.

60.  I.  Governing  a  great  state  is  like  cooking
small  fish.


I04  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  il.

2.  Let  the  kingdom  be  governed  according  to  the
Tao,  and  the  manes  of  the  departed  will  not  mani-
fest their  spiritual  energy.  It  is  not  that  those
manes  have  not  that  spiritual  energy,  but  it  will  not
be  employed  to  hurt  men.  It  is  not  that  it  could  not
hurt  men,  but  neither  does  the  ruling  sage  hurt  them.

3.  When  these  two  do  not  injuriously  affect  each
other,  their  good  influences  converge  in  the  virtue
(of  the  Tao).

^  ^,  'Occupying  the  Throne;'  occupying  it,  that  is,
according  to  the  Tao,  noiselessly  and  purposelessly,  so
that  the  people  enjoy  their  lives,  free  from  all  molestation
seen  and  unseen.

Par.  I .  That  is,  in  the  most  quiet  and  easy  manner.  The
whole  of  the  chapter  is  given  and  commented  on  by  Han
Fei  (VI,  6  a-7  b) ;  but  very  unsatisfactorily.

The  more  one  thinks  and  reads  about  the  rest  of  the
chapter,  the  more  does  he  agree  with  the  words  of  Julien  : —
'  It  presents  the  frequent  recurrence  of  the  same  characters,
and  appears  as  insignificant  as  it  is  unintelligible,  if  we  give
to  the  Chinese  characters  their  ordinary  meaning.' — The
reader  will  observe  that  we  have  here  the  second  mention
of  spirits  (the  manes;  Chalmers,  'the  ghosts;'  Julien,  les
demons).     See  ch.  39.

Whatever  Lao-jze  meant  to  teach  in  par.  3,  he  laid  in  it
a  foundation  for  the  superstition  of  the  later  and  present
Taoism  about  the  spirits  of  the  dead ; — such  as  appeared
a  few  years  ago  in  the  'tail-cutting'  scare.

61.  I.  What  makes  a  great  state  is  its  being  (like)
a  low-1)  ing,  down-flowing  (stream)  ; — it  becomes  the
centre  to  which  tend  (all  the  small  states)  under
heaven.

2.  (To  illustrate  from)  the  case  of  all  females  : — the
female  always  overcomes  the  male  by  her  stillness.
Stillness  may  be  considered  (a  sort  of)  abasement.


CH.  I.XII.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'ING.


TO5


3.  Thus  it  is  that  a  great  state,  by  condescending
to  small  states,  gains  them  for  itself;  and  that
small  states,  by  abasing  themselves  to  a  great
state,  win  it  over  to  them.  In  the  one  case  the
abasement  leads  to  gaining  adherents,  in  the  other
case  to  procuring  favour.

4.  The  great  state  only  wishes  to  unite  men  to-
gether and  nourish  them ;  a  small  state  only  wishes
to  be  received  by,  and  to  serve,  the  other.  Each
gets  what  it  desires,  but  the  great  state  must  learn
to  abase  itself.

^^fj^, '  The  Attribute  of  Humility ;' — a  favourite  theme
with  Lao-^ze ;  and  the  illustration  of  it  from  the  low-lying
stream  to  which  smaller  streams  flow  is  also  a  favourite
subject  with  him.  The  language  can  hardly  but  recall  the
words  of  a  greater  than  Lao-^ze: — '  He  that  humbleth  him-
self shall  be  exalted.'

62.   I.  Tao  has  of  all  thincrs  the  most  honoured

O

place.
No  treasures  give  good  men  so  rich  a  grace;
Bad  men  it  guards,  and  doth  their  ill  efface.

2.  (Its)  admirable  words  can  purchase  honour ;
(its)  admirable  deeds  can  raise  their  performer  above
others.  Even  men  who  are  not  good  are  not  aban-
doned by  it.

3.  Therefore  when  the  sovereign  occupies  his
place  as  the  Son  of  Heaven,  and  he  has  appointed
his  three  ducal  ministers,  though  (a  prince)  were  to
send  in  a  round  symbol-of-rank  large  enough  to  fill
both  the  hands,  and  that  as  the  precursor  of  the  team
of  horses  (in  the  court-yard),  such  an  offering  would
not  be  equal  to  (a  lesson  of)  this  Tao,  which  one
might  present  on  his  knees.

4.  Why  was  it  that  the  ancients  prized  this  Tao


I06  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  pt.  II.

SO  much  ?  Was  it  not  because  it  could  be  got  by-
seeking  for  it,  and  the  guilty  could  escape  (from  the
stain  of  their  guilt)  by  it  ?  This  is  the  reason  why
all  under  heaven  consider  it  the  most  valuable  thing.

'^  iM*,  '  Practising  the  T a o.'  m  ^,  '  The  value  set
on  the  Tao,'  would  have  been  a  more  appropriate  title.
The  chapter  sets  forth  that  value  in  various  manifestations
of  it.

Par.  I.  For  the  meaning  of  ^,  see  Confucian  Analects,
III,  ch.  13.

Par.  2.  I  am  obliged  to  adopt  the  reading  of  the  first
sentence  of  this  paragraph  given  by  Hwai-nan,  ^^  "^  "pT

\il  ti  M^  ^  ^y  ^  ^  1)U  A ;— see  especially  his
quotation  of  it  in  XVIII,  10  a,  as  from  a  superior  man,
I  have  not  found  his  reading  anywhere  else.

Par.  3  is  not  easily  translated,  or  explained.  See  the
rules  on  presenting  offerings  at  the  court  of  a  ruler  or  the
king,  in  vol.  xxvii  of  the  '  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,'  p.  84,
note  3,  and  also  a  narrative  in  the  3o  K-wan  under  the
thirty-third  year  of  duke  Hsi.

63.  I.  (It  is  the  way  of  the  Tao)  to  act  without
(thinking  of)  acting  ;  to  conduct  affairs  without  (feel-
ing the)  trouble  of  them  ;  to  taste  without  discerning
any  flavour ;  to  consider  what  is  small  as  great,  and
a  few  as  many ;  and  to  recompense  injury  with
kindness.

2.  (The  master  of  it)  anticipates  things  that  are
difficult  while  they  are  easy,  and  does  things  that
would  become  great  while  they  are  small.  All  diffi-
cult things  in  the  world  are  sure  to  arise  from  a
previous  state  in  which  they  were  easy,  and  all
great  things  from  one  in  which  they  were  small.
Therefore  the  sage,  while  he  never  does  what  is
great,  is  able  on  that  account  to  accomplish  the
greatest  things.


CH.  LXIV.  THE    TAO    TEH    ^ING.  IO7

3.  He  who  lightly  promises  is  sure  to  keep  but
little  faith  ;  he  who  is  continually  thinking  things
easy  is  sure  to  find  them  difficult.  Therefore  the
sage  sees  difficulty  even  in  what  seems  easy,  and  so
never  has  any  difficulties.

^S»  ^p,  'Thinking  in  the  Beginning.'  The  former  of
these  two  characters  is  commonly  misprinted  M ,  and  this
has  led  Chalmers  to  mistranslate  them  by  '  The  Beginning
of  Grace.'  The  chapter  sets  forth  the  passionless  method
of  the  Tao,  and  how  the  sage  accordingly  accomplishes  his
objects  easily  by  forestalling  in  his  measures  all  difficulties.
In  par.  i  the  clauses  are  indicative,  and  not  imperative,
and  therefore  we  have  to  supplement  the  text  in  translat-
ing in  some  such  way,  as  I  have  done.  They  give  us  a
cluster  of  aphorisms  illustrating  the  procedure  of  the  Tao
'  by  contranes,'  and  conclude  with  one,  which  is  the  chief
glory  of  Lao-^ze's  teaching,  though  I  must  think  that  its
value  is  somewhat  diminished  by  the  method  in  which  he
reaches  it.  It  has  not  the  prominence  in  the  later  teaching
of  Taoist  writers  which  we  should  expect,  nor  is  it  found
(so  far  as  I  know)  in  ATwang-^ze,  Han  Fei,  or  Hwai-nan.
It  is  quoted,  however,  twice  by  Liu  Hsiang ; — see  my  note
on  par.  2,  of  ch.  49.

It  follows  from  the  whole  chapter  that  the  Taoistic
'  doing  nothing '  was  not  an  absolute  quiescence  and  inac-
tion, but  had  a  method  in  it.

64.  I.  That  which  is  at  rest  is  easily  kept  hold  of;
before  a  thing  has  given  indications  of  its  presence,
it  is  easy  to  take  measures  against  it ;  that  which  is
brittle  is  easily  broken  ;  that  which  is  very  small  is
easily  dispersed.  Action  should  be  taken  before  a
thing  has  made  its  appearance ;  order  should  be
secured  before  disorder  has  begfun.

2.  The  tree  which  fills  the  arms  grew  from  the
tiniest  sprout ;  the  tower  of  nine  storeys  rose  from  a


A


1 08  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  11.


(small)  heap  of  earth  ;  the  journey  of  a  thousand  li
commenced  with  a  single  step.

3.  He  who  acts  (with  an  ulterior  purpose)  does
harm ;  he  who  takes  hold  of  a  thing  (in  the  same
way)  loses  his  hold.  The  sage  does  not  act  (so),  and
therefore  does  no  harm  ;  he  does  not  lay  hold  (so),
and  therefore  does  not  lose  his  hold.  (But)  people
in  their  conduct  of  affairs  are  constantly  ruining  them
when  they  are  on  the  eve  of  success.  If  they  were
careful  at  the  end,  as  (they  should  be)  at  the  begin-
ning, they  would  not  so  ruin  them.

4.  Therefore  the  sage  desires  what  (other  men)
do  not  desire,  and  does  not  prize  things  difficult  to
get ;  he  learns  what  (other  men)  do  not  learn,  and
turns  back  to  what  the  multitude  of  men  have
passed  by.  Thus  he  helps  the  natural  development
of  all  things,  and  does  not  dare  to  act  (with  an
ulterior  purpose  of  his  own).

^  :J|j^,  '  Guarding  the  Minute.'  The  chapter  is  a  con-
tinuation and  enlargement  of  the  last.  Wu  TT/zang,  indeed,
unites  the  two,  blending  them  together  with  some  ingenious
transpositions  and  omissions,  which  it  is  not  necessary  to
discuss.  Compare  the  first  part  of  par.  3  with  the  last  part
of  par.  I,  ch.  29.

65.  I.  The  ancients  who  showed  their  skill  in  prac-
tising the  Tao  did  so,  not  to  enlighten  the  people,
but  rather  to  make  them  simple  and  ignorant.

2.  The  difficulty  in  governing  the  people  arises
from  their  having  much  knowledge.  He  who  (tries
to)  govern  a  state  by  his  wisdom  is  a  scourge  to  it ;
while  he  who  does  not  (try  to)  do  so  is  a  blessing.

3.  He  who  knows  these  two  things  finds  in  them
also   his   model    and   rule.      Ability   to   know   this


CH.  LXVI.  THE    TAO    TEH    ^ING.  lOQ


model  and  rule  constitutes  what  we  call  the  myste-
rious excellence  (of  a  governor).  Deep  and  far-
reaching  is  such  mysterious  excellence,  showing
indeed  its  possessor  as  opposite  to  others,  but  lead-
ing them  to  a  great  conformity  to  him.

*/?*  f^' '  P'J^^'  unmixed  Excellence.'  The  chapter  shows
the  powerful  and  beneficent  influence  of  theTao  in  govern-
ment, in  contrast  with  the  appHcations  and  contrivances  of
human  wisdom.  Compare  ch.  19.  My 'simple  and  igno-
rant' is  taken  from  Julien.  More  literally  the  translation
would  be  '  to  make  them  stupid.'  My  '  scourge  '  in  par.  a
is  also  after  Julien's  'fleau.'

66.  I.  That  whereby  the  rivers  and  seas  are  able
to  receive  the  homage  and  tribute  of  all  the  valley
streams,  is  their  skill  in  being  lower  than  they  ; — it  is
thus  that  they  are  the  kings  of  them  all.  So  it  is
that  the  sage  (ruler),  wishing  to  be  above  men,  puts
himself  by  his  words  below  them,  and,  wishing  to  be
before  them,  places  his  person  behind  them.

2.  In  this  way  though  he  has  his  place  above
them,  men  do  not  feel  his  weight,  nor  though  he  has
his  place  before  them,  do  they  feel  it  an  injury  to
them.

3.  Therefore  all  in  the  world  delight  to  exalt  him
and  do  not  weary  of  him.  Because  he  does  not
strive,  no  one  finds  it  possible  to  strive  with  him.

^  Q^,  'Putting  one's  self  Last.'  The  subject  is  the
power  of  the  Tao,  by  its  display  of  humility  in  attracting
men.  The  subject  and  the  way  in  which  it  is  illustrated
are  frequent  themes  in  the  i^Ting.  See  chapters  8,  32,  39,
42,  61,  et  al.

The  last  sentence  of  par.  3  is  found  also  in  ch.  22.  There
seem  to  be  no  quotations  from  the  chapter  in  Han  Fei  or
Hwai-nan ;    but  Wu  AV/ang  quotes   passages  from  Tung


no  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.

A'ung-shu  (of  the  second  century  B.  c),  and  Yang  Hsiung
(B.C.  53-A.D.  18),  which  seem  to  show  that  the  phraseology
of  it  was  famiUar  to  them.  The  former  says : — '  When  one
places  himself  in  his  qualities  below  others,  his  person  is
above  them  ;  when  he  places  them  behind  those  of  others,
his  person  is  before  them  ;'  the  other,  '  Men  exalt  him  who
humbles  himself  below  them  ;  and  give  the  precedence  to
him  who  puts  himself  behind  them.'

67.  I.  All  the  world  says  that,  while  my  Tao  is
great,  it  yet  appears  to  be  inferior  (to  other  systems
of  teaching).  Now  it  is  just  its  greatness  that  makes
it  seem  to  be  inferior.  If  it  were  like  any  other
(system),  for  long  would  its  smallness  have  been
known  !

2.  But  I  have  three  precious  things  which  I  prize
and  hold  fast.  The  first  is  gentleness ;  the  second  is
economy ;  and  the  third  is  shrinking  from  taking
precedence  of  others.

3.  With  that  gentleness  I  can  be  bold ;  with  that
economy  I  can  be  liberal ;  shrinking  from  taking
precedence  of  others,  I  can  become  a  vessel  of  the
highest  honour.  N  ow-a-days  they  give  up  gentleness
and  are  all  for  being  bold  ;  economy,  and  are  all  for
being  liberal ;  the  hindmost  place,  and  seek  only  to
be  foremost ; — (of  all  which  the  end  is)  death.

4.  Gentleness  is  sure  to  be  victorious  even  in
battle,  and  firmly  to  maintain  its  ground.  Heaven
will  save  its  possessor,  by  his  (very)  gentleness  pro-
tecting him.

—'  ^, '  The  Three  Precious  Things.'  This  title  is  taken
from  par.  2,  and  suggests  to  us  how  the  early  framer  of
these  titles  intended  to  express  by  them  the  subject-matter
of  their  several  chapters.  The  three  things  are  the  three
distinguishing  qualities  of  the  possessor  of  the  Tao,  the


CH.  LXVIII.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'ING.  Ill

three  great  moral  qualities  appearing  in  its  followers,  the
qualities,  we  may  venture  to  say,  of  the  Tao  itself.  The
same  phrase  is  now  the  common  designation  of  Buddhism
in  China, — the  Tri-ratna  or  Ratna-traya,  'the  Precious
Buddha,'  '  the  Precious  Law/  and  '  the  Precious  Priesthood
(or  rather  Monkhood)  or  Church;'  appearing  also  in  the
'  Tri-j-ara;/a,'  or  '  formula  of  the  Three  Refuges,'  what  Dr.
Eitel  calls  'the  most  primitive  formula  fidei  of  the  early
Buddhists,  introduced  before  Southern  and  Northern  Bud-
dhism separated.'  I  will  not  introduce  the  question  of
whether  Buddhism  borrowed  this  designation  from  Taoism,
after  its  entrance  into  China.  It  is  in  Buddhism  the  formula
of  a  peculiar  Church  or  Religion  ;  in  Taoism  a  rule  for  the
character,  or  the  conduct  which  the  Tao  demands  from  all
men.  '  My  Tao '  in  par.  i  is  the  reading  of  Wang  Pi ;
Ho-shang  Kung's  text  is  simply  3]^.  Wang  Pi's  reading
is  now  generally  adopted.

The  concluding  sentiment  of  the  chapter  is  equivalent  to
the  saying  of  Mencius  (VII,  ii,  IV,  2),  '  If  the  ruler  of  a
state  love  benevolence,  he  will  have  no  enemy  under  heaven.'
'  Heaven  '  is  equivalent  to  '  the  Tao,'  the  course  of  events, —
Providence,  as  we  should  say.

68.    He  who  in  (Tao's)  wars  has  skill

Assumes  no  martial  port  ;
He  who  fiorhts  with  mostgrood  will

To  rage  makes  no  resort.
He  who  vanquishes  yet  still

Keeps  from  his  foes  apart ;
He  whose  bests  men  most  fulfil

Yet  humbly  plies  his  art.

Thus  we  say,  '  He  ne'er  contends,

And  therein  is  his  mioht.'
Thus  we  say,  '  Men's  wills  he  bends,

That  they  with  him  unite.'
Thus  we  say,  '  Like  Heaven's  his  ends,

No  sage  of  old  more  bright.'


112  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  11.

g^  ^,  '  Matching  Heaven.'  The  chapter  describes  the
work  of  the  practiser  of  the  Tao  as  accomplished  like  that
of  Heaven,  without  striving  or  crying.  He  appears  under
the  figure  of  a  mailed  warrior  (^)  of  the  ancient  chariot.
The  chapter  is  a  sequel  of  the  preceding,  and  is  joined  on
to  it  by  Wu  K/tang,  as  is  also  the  next.

69.  I,  A  master  of  the  art  of  war  has  said,  '  I  do
not  dare  to  be  the  host  (to  commence  the  war) ;  I
prefer  to  be  the  guest  (to  act  on  the  defensive).
I  do  not  dare  to  advance  an  inch  ;  I  prefer  to  retire
a  foot.'  This  is  called  marshalling  the  ranks  where
there  are  no  ranks  ;  baring  the  arms  (to  fight)  where
there  are  no  arms  to  bare;  grasping  the  weapon
where  there  is  no  weapon  to  grasp ;  advancing  against
the  enemy  where  there  is  no  enemy.

2.  There  is  no  calamity  greater  than  lightly
engaging  in  war.  To  do  that  is  near  losing  (the
gentleness)  which  is  so  precious.  Thus  it  is  that
when  opposing  weapons  are  (actually)  crossed,  he
who  deplores  (the  situation)  conquers.

^  jH,  'The  Use  of  the  Mysterious  (Tao).'  Such
seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  title.  The  chapter
teaches  that,  if  war  were  carried  on,  or  rather  avoided,
according  to  the  Tao,  the  result  would  be  success.  Lao-
jze's  own  statements  appear  as  so  many  paradoxes.  They
are  examples  of  the  procedure  of  the  Tao  by  'contraries,'
or  opposites.

We  do  not  know  who  the  master  of  the  military  art
referred  to  was.  Perhaps  the  author  only  adopted  the
style  of  quotation  to  express  his  own  sentiments.

70.  I.  My  words  are  very  easy  to  know,  and  very
easy  to  practise ;  but  there  is  no  one  in  the  world
who  is  able  to  know  and  able  to  practise  them.

2.  There  is  an  originating  and  all-comprehending


CH.  Lxxr.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'ING.


113


(principle)  in  my  words,  and  an  audioritative  law  for
the  things  (which  I  enforce).  It  is  because  they  do
not  know  these,  that  men  do  not  know  me.

3.  They  who  know  me  are  few,  and  I  am  on  that
account  (the  more)  to  be  prized.  It  is  thus  that  the
sage  wears  (a  poor  garb  of)  hair  cloth,  while  he
carries  his  (signet  of)  jade  in  his  bosom.

^P  l^l,  '  The  Difficulty  of  being  (rightly)  Known.'  The
Tao  comprehends  and  rules  all  Lao-^ze's  teaching,  as  the
members  of  a  clan  were  all  in  the  loins  of  their  first  father
(:^)'  ^^^  continue  to  look  up  to  him  ;  and  the  people  of
a  state  are  all  under  the  direction  of  their  ruler  ;  yet  the
philosopher  had  to  complain  of  not  being  known.  Lao-jze's
principle  and  rule  or  ruler  was  the  Tao.  His  utterance
here  is  very  important.  Compare  the  words  of  Confucius
in  the  Analects,  XIV,  ch.  ^y,  et  al.

Par.  2,  is  twice  quoted  by  Hwai-nan,  though  his  text  is
not  quite  the  same  in  both  cases.

71.  I.  To  know  and  yet  (think)  we  do  not  know
is  the  highest  (attainment)  ;  not  to  know  (and  yet
think)  we  do  know  is  a  disease.

2.  It  is  simply  by  being  pained  at  (the  thought  of)
having  this  disease  that  we  are  preserved  from  it.
The  sage  has  not  the  disease.  He  knows  the  pain
that  would  be  inseparable  from  it,  and  therefore  he
does  not  have  it.

^H  ^,  'The  Disease  of  Knowing.'  Here,  again,  we
have  the  Tao  working  'by  contraries,' — in  the  matter  of
knowledge.  Compare  par.  i  with  Confucius's  account  of
what  knowledge  is  in  the  Analects,  II,  ch.  17.  The  par.  1
is  found  in  one  place  in  Hwai-nan,  lengthened  out  by  the
addition  of  particles  ;  but  the  variation  is  unimportant.
In  another  place,  however,  he  seems  to  have  had  the
correct  text  before  him.

Par.  2  is  in  Han  Fei  also  lengthened  out,  but  with  an

[39]  I


TI4  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  FT.  II.

important  variation  (^  ^  for  ^  ^),  and  I  cannot
construe  his  text.  His  ^  is  probably  a  transcriber's
error.

72.  I.  When  the  people  do  not  fear  what  they
ought  to  fear,  that  which  is  their  great  dread  will
come  on  them.

2.  Let  them  not  thoughtlessly  indulge  themselves
in  their  ordinary  life  ;  let  them  not  act  as  if  weary
of  what  that  life  depends  on.

3.  It  is  by  avoiding  such  indulgence  that  such
weariness  does  not  arise.

4.  Therefore  the  sage  knows  (these  things)  of
himself,  but  does  not  parade  (his  knowledge)  ;  loves,
but  does  not  (appear  to  set  a)  value  on,  himself
And  thus  he  puts  the  latter  alternative  away  and
makes  choice  of  the  former.

^^  2i5  '  Loving  one's  Self  This  title  is  taken  from  the
expression  in  par.  4 ;  and  the  object  of  the  chapter  seems
to  be  to  show  how  such  loving  should  be  manifested,  and
to  enforce  the  lesson  by  the  example  of  the  '  sage,'  the  true
master  of  the  Tao.

In  par.  i  '  the  great  dread '  is  death,  and  the  things
which  ought  to  be  feared  and  may  be  feared,  are  the
indulgences  of  the  appetites  and  passions,  which,  if  not
eschewed,  tend  to  shorten  life  and  accelerate  the  approach
of  death.

Pars.  2  and  3  are  supplementary  to  i.  For  M^,  the
second  character  of  Ho-shang  Kung's  text  in  par.  2,  Wang
Pi  reads  1^^,  which  has  the  same  name  as  the  other ;  and
according  to  the  Khang-hsi  dictionary,  the  two  characters
are  interchangeable.  I  have  also  followed  Wu  AV^ang  in
adopting  ;^Jp  for  the  former  of  the  two  J^  in  par.  3.  Wu
adopted  this  reading  from  a  commentator  Liu  of  Lii-ling.
It  gives  a  good  meaning,  and  is  supported  by  the  structure
of  other  sentences  made  on  similar  lines.


CH,  LXXII.  THE    TAO    TEH    Kmc  II5

In  par.  4  '  the  sage '  must  be  '  the  ruler  who  is  a  sage,'
a  master  of  the  Tao,  'the  king'  of  ch.  25.  He  'loves
himself,'  i.e.  his  life,  and  takes  the  right  measures  to
prolong  his  life,  but  without  any  demonstration  that  he
is  doing  so.

The  above  is,  I  conceive,  the  correct  explanation  of  the
chapter ;  but  as  to  the  Chinese  critics  and  foreign  trans-
lators of  it,  it  may  be  said,  'Quot  homines,  tot  scn-
tentiae.'  In  illustration  of  this  I  venture  to  subjoin  what
is  found  on  it  in  the  old  version  of  the  Jesuit  missionaries,
which  has  not  been  previously  printed  : —

Prima  explicatio  juxta  interpretes.

I.  Populus,  ubi  jam  principis  iram  non  timet,  nihil  non
audet  ut  jugum  excutiat,  resque  communis  ad  extremum
discrimen  adducitur.

3.  Ambitio  principis  non  faciat  terram  angustiorem,  et
vectigalium  magnitudine  alendo  populo  insufficientem ;
numquam  populus  patriae  pertaesus  alias  terras  quaeret.

3.  Vitae  si  non  taedet,  neque  patrii  soli  taedebit.

4.  Ouare  sanctus  sibi  semper  attentus  potentiam  suani
non  ostentat.

5.  Quia  vere  se  amat,  non  se  pretiosum  facit ;  vel  quia
sibi  recte  consulit  non  se  talem  aestimat  cujus  felicitati
et  honori  infelices  populi  unice  servire  debeant,  immo  potius
eum  se  reputat  qui  populorum  felicitati  totum  se  debeat
impendere.

6.  Ergo  illud  resecat,  istud  amplectitur.

Alia  explicatio.

1.  Populus  si  non  ita  timet  principis  majestatem,  sed
facile  ad  eum  accedit,  majestas  non  minuitur,  immo  ad
summum  pervenit.

2.  Vectigalibus  terra  si  non  opprimitur,  sua  quisque
contentus  alias  terras  non  quaeret,  si  se  non  vexari  populus
experitur.

3.  Vitae  si  non  taedet,  nee  patrii  soli  taedebit.

4.  Quare  sanctus  majestatis  fastum  non  affectat,  immo
similem  se  caeteris  ostendit.

I  2


Il6  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  tl.


5.  Sibi  recte  consulens,  populorum  amans,  non  se  pre-
tiosum  et  inaccessibilem  facit.

6.  Quidquid  ergo  timorem  incutere  potest,  hoc  evitat ;
quod  amorem  conciliat  et  benignitatem,  se  demonstrat
hoc  eligi  et  ultro  amplectitur.

73.   I.  He  whose  boldness  appears  in  his  daring

(to  do  wrong,  in  defiance  of  the  laws)  is  put  to  death  ;

he  whose  boldness  appears  in  his  not  daring  (to  do

so)  lives  on.     Of  these  two  cases  the  one  appears

to  be  advantageous,  and  the  other  to  be  injurious.

But

When  Heaven's  anger  smites  a  man,

Who  the  cause  shall  truly  scan  ?

On  this  account   the   sage  feels  a  difficulty   (as  to

what  to  do  in  the  former  case).

2.  It  is  the  way  of  Heaven  not  to  strive,  and  yet

it  skilfully  overcomes ;  not  to  speak,  and  yet  it  is

skilful  in  (obtaining)  a  reply  ;  does  not  call,  and  yet

men  come  to  it  of  themselves.      Its  demonstrations

are  quiet,  and  yet  its  plans  are  skilful  and  effective.

The  meshes  of  the  net  of  Heaven  are  large  ;  far

apart,  but  letting  nothing  escape.

fi  j^)  'Allowing  Men  to  take  their  Course.'  The
chapter  teaches  that  rulers  should  not  be  hasty  to  punish,
especially  by  the  infliction  of  death.  Though  they  may
seem  to  err  in  leniency,  yet  Heaven  does  not  allow  offenders
to  escape.

While  Heaven  hates  the  ill-doer,  yet  we  must  not  always
conclude  from  Its  judgments  that  every  one  who  suffers  from
them  is  an  ill-doer;  and  the  two  lines  which  rhyme,  and
illustrate  this  point,  are  equivalent  to  the  sentiment  in  our
Old  l^ook,  '  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him.'
They  are  ascribed  to  Lao-jze  by  Lieh-j(ze  (VI,  7  a) ;  but,
it  has  been  said,  that  they  are  quoted  by  him  'in  an
entirely  different  connexion.'      But  the  same  text  in  two


CH.LXXV.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'lNG.  I  17

different  sermons  may  be  said  to  be  in  different  connexions.
In  Lieh-jze  and  our  A"ing  the  lines  have  the  same  meaning,
and  substantially  the  same  application.  Indeed  A'ang  ATan,
of  our  fourth  century,  the  commentator  of  Lieh-jze,  quotes
the  comment  of  Wang  Pi  on  this  passage,  condensing  it
into,  'Who  can  know  the  mind  of  Heaven?  Only  the  sage
can  do  so.'

74.  I.  The  people  do  not  fear  death;  to  what
purpose  is  it  to  (try  to)  frighten  them  with  death  ?
If  the  people  were  always  in  awe  of  death,  and  I
could  always  seize  those  who  do  wrong,  and  put
them  to  death,  who  would  dare  to  do  wrong  ?

2.  There  is  always  One  who  presides  over  the  in-
fliction of  death.  He  who  would  inflict  death  in  the
room  of  him  who  so  presides  over  it  may  be  de-
scribed as  hewing  wood  instead  of  a  great  carpenter.
Seldom  is  it  that  he  who  undertakes  the  hewing,
instead  of  the  great  carpenter,  does  not  cut  his  own
hands !

-^Ij  ^,  'Restraining  Delusion.'  The  chapter  sets  forth
the  inefficiency  of  capital  punishment,  and  warns  rulers
against  the  infliction  of  it.  Who  is  it  that  superintends
the  infliction  of  death  ?  The  answer  of  Ho-shang  Kung
is  very  clear : — '  It  is  Heaven,  which,  dwelling  on  high
and  ruling  all  beneath,  takes  note  of  the  transgressions
of  men.'  There  is  a  slight  variation  in  the  readings  of  the
second  sentence  of  par.  2  in  the  texts  of  Ho-shang  Kung
and  Wang  Pi,  and  the  reading  adopted  by  ^'islo  Hung
differs  a  little  from  them  both  ;  but  the  meaning  is  the
same  in  them  all.

This  chapter  and  the  next  are  rightly  joined  on  to  the
preceding  by  Wu  AV/ang.

75.  I.  The  people  suffer  from  famine  because  of
the  multitude  of  taxes  consumed  by  their  superiors.
It  is  through  this  that  they  suffer  famine.


Il8  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.


2.  The  people  are  difficult  to  govern  because  of
the  (excessive)  agency  of  their  superiors  (in  govern-
ino-  them).     It  is  through  this  that  they  are  difficult


to  orovern.


1
O-


.  The  people  make  light  of  dying  because  of  the
o-reatness  of  their  labours  in  seekino-  for  the  means
of  livino-.  It  is  this  which  makes  them  think  light
of  dying.  Thus  it  is  that  to  leave  the  subject  of
livino-  altogether  out  of  view  is  better  than  to  set  a
high  value  on  it.

■^  ^tM,  'How  Greediness  Injures.'  The  want  of  the
nothing-doing  Tao  leads  to  the  multiplication  of  exactions
by  the  government,  and  to  the  misery  of  the  people,  so  as
to  make  them  think  lightly  of  death.  The  chapter  is
a  warning  for  both  rulers  and  people.

It  is  not  easy  to  determine  whether  rulers,  or  people,  or
both,  are  intended  in  the  concluding  sentence  of  par.  2.

76.  I.  Man  at  his  birth  is  supple  and  weak;  at
his  death,  firm  and  strong.  (So  it  is  with)  all  things.
Trees  and  plants,  in  their  early  growth,  are  soft  and
brittle  ;  at  their  death,  dry  and  withered.

2.  Thus  it  is  that  firmness  and  strength  are  the
concomitants  of  death  ;  softness  and  weakness,  the
concomitants  of  life.

3.  Hence  he  who  (relies  on)  the  strength  of  his
forces  does  not  conquer  ;  and  a  tree  which  is  strong
will  fill  the  out-stretched  arms,  (and  thereby  invites
the  feller.)

4.  Therefore  the  place  of  what  is  firm  and  strong
is  below,  and  that  of  what  is  soft  and  weak  is  above.

f^  i^iji ,  '  A  Warning  against  (trusting  in)  Strength.'  To
trust  in  one's  force  is  contrary  to  the  Tao,  whose  strength
is  more  in  weakness  and  humility.

In  par.  1  the  two  characters  which  I  have  rendered  by


CH.  Lxxvil.  THE    TAO    TEH    ZING.  II9

'  (so  it  is  with)  all  things '  are  found  in  the  texts  of  both
Ho-shang  Kung  and  Wang  Pi,  but  Wu  K/iang  and  3iao
Hung  both  reject  them.  I  should  also  have  neglected
them,  but  thev  are  also  found  in  Liii  Hsiang's  Shwo  Wan
(X,  4  a),  with  all  the  rest  of  pars,  i  and  2,  as  from  Lao-^zc.
They  are  an  anakoluthon,  such  as  is  elsewhere  found  in
our  King;  e.g.  ^  "][%  ^  ^|^  in  ch.  21,  par.  2.

The  'above'  and  'below'  in  par.  4  seem  to  be  merely
a  play  on  the  words,  as  capable  of  meaning  '  more  and  less
honourable.'

77.  I.  May  not  the  Way  (or  Tao)  of  Heaven  be
compared  to  the  (method  of)  bending  a  bow  ?  The
(part  of  the  bow)  which  was  high  is  brought  low,
and  what  was  low  is  raised  up.  (So  Heaven)  dimin-
ishes where  there  is  superabundance,  and  supple-
ments where  there  is  deficiency.

2.  It  is  the  Way  of  Heaven  to  diminish  super-
abundance, and  to  supplement  deficiency.  It  is  not
so  with  the  way  of  man.  He  takes  away  from  those
who  have  not  enough  to  add  to  his  own  super-
abundance.

3.  Who  can  take  his  own  superabundance  and
therewith  serve  all  under  heaven  ?  Only  he  who  is
in  possession  of  the  Tao  !

4.  Therefore  the  (ruling)  sage  acts  without  claim-
ing the  results  as  his ;  he  achieves  his  merit  and
does  not  rest  (arrogantly)  in  it : — he  does  not  wish
to  display  his  superiority.

^  ^, '  The  Way  of  Heaven  ;'  but  the  chapter  contrasts
that  way,  unselfish  and  magnanimous,  with  the  way  of
man,  selfish  and  contracted,  and  illustrates  the  point  by  the
method  of  stringing  a  bow.  This  must  be  seen  as  it  is
done  in  China  fully  to  understand  the  illustration.  I  have
known  great  athletes  in  this  country  tasked  to  the  utmost


I  20  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  ll.

of  their  strength  to  adjust  and  bend  a  large  Chinese  bow
from  Peking.

The  'sage '  of  par.  4  is  the  'King'  of  ch.  25.  Compare
what  is  said  of  him  with  ch.  2,  par.  4,  et  al.

78.  I.  There  is  nothinof  in  the  world  more  soft
and  weak  than  water,  and  yet  for  attacking  things
that  are  firm  and  strong  there  is  nothing-  that  can
take  precedence  of  it  ; — for  there  is  nothing  (so
effectual)  for  which  it  can  be  changed.

2.  Every  one  in  the  world  knows  that  the  soft
overcomes  the  hard,  and  the  weak  the  strono-,  but
no  one  is  able  to  carry  it  out  in  practice.

3.  Therefore  a  sage  has  said,

'  He  who  accepts  his  state's  reproach,
Is  hailed  therefore  its  altars'  lord  ;
To  him  who  bears  men's  direful  woes
They  all  the  name  of  King  accord.'

4.  Words  that  are  strictly  true  seem  to  be  para-
doxical.

ft  fj'  '  Things  to  be  Believed.'  It  is  difficult  to  give
a  short  and  appropriate  translation  of  this  title.  The
chapter  shows  how  the  most  unlikely  results  follow  from
action  according  to  the  Tao.

Par.  I.  Water  was  Lao-^ze's  favourite  emblem  of  the
Tao.     Compare  chapters  8,  66,  et  al.

Par.  2.  Compare  ch.  ^6,  par.  2.

Par.  3.  Of  course  we  do  not  know  who  the  saee  was
from  whom  Lao-jze  got  the  lines  of  this  paragraph.  They
may  suggest  to  some  readers  the  lines  of  Burns,  as  they
have  done  to  me  : —

'  The  honest  man,  though  e'er  so  poor,
Is  king  o'  men  for  a'  that.'

But  the  Taoist  of  Lao-jze  is  a  higher  ideal  than  Burns's
honest  man.


CH.  LXXIX.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'ING.  12  1

Par.  4  is  separated  from  this  chapter,  and  made  to  begin
the  next  by  Wu  K/ia.ng.

79,  I.  When  a  reconciliation  is  effected  (between
two  parties)  after  a  great  animosity,  there  is  sure  to
be  a  grudge  remaining  (in  the  mind  of  the  one  who
was  wTong).  And  how  can  this  be  beneficial  (to  the
other)  ?

2.  Therefore  (to  guard  against  this),  the  sage
keeps  the  left-hand  portion  of  the  record  of  the
engagement,  and  does  not  insist  on  the  (speedy)
fulfilment  of  it  by  the  other  party.  (So),  he  who
has  the  attributes  (of  the  Tao)  regards  (only)  the
conditions  of  the  engagement,  while  he  who  has  not
those  attributes  regards  only  the  conditions  favour-
able to  himself.

3.  In  the  Way  of  Heaven,  there  is  no  partiality  of
love  ;  it  Is  always  on  the  side  of  the  good  man.

fj^  ^,  'Adherence  to  Bond  or  Covenant.'  The  chapter
shows,  but  by  no  means  clearly,  how  he  who  holds  fast  to  the
Tao  will  be  better  off  in  the  end  than  he  who  will  rather
try  to  secure  his  own  interests.

Par.  I  presents  us  with  a  case  which  the  statements  of
the  chapter  are  intended  to  meet : — two  disputants,  one
good,  and  the  other  bad  ;  the  latter,  though  apparently
reconciled,  still   retaining  a  grudge,  and  ready  to  wreak

his  dissatisfaction,  when  he  has  an  opportunity.     The  -^
=  '  for,'  '  for  the  good  of.'

Par.  2  is  intended  to  solve  the  question.  The  terms  of
a  contract  or  agreement  were  inscribed  on  a  slip  of  wood,
which  was  then  divided  into  two ;  each  party  having  one
half  of  it.  At  the  settlement,  if  the  halves  perfectly  fitted
to  each  other,  it  was  carried  through.  The  one  who  had
the  right  in  the  dispute  has  his  part  of  the  agreement,  but
does  not  insist  on  it,  and  is  forbearing ;  the  other  insists  on
the  conditions  being  even  now  altered  in  his  favour.     The


122  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  PT.  II.


characters  by  which  this  last  case  is  expressed,  are  very
enigmatical,  having;  reference  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
government  dues  of  Lao-jze's  time, — a  subject  into  which
it  would  take  much  space  to  go.

Par.  3  decides  the  question  by  the  action  of  Heaven,
which  is  only  another  name  for  the  course  of  the  Tao.

80.  I.  In  a  little  state  with  a  small  population,  I
would  so  order  it,  that,  though  there  were  individuals
with  the  abilities  of  ten  or  a  hundred  men,  there
should  be  no  employment  of  them  ;  I  would  make
the  people,  while  looking  on  death  as  a  grievous
thing,  yet  not  remove  elsewhere  (to  avoid  it).

2.  Though  they  had  boats  and  carriages,  they
should  have  no  occasion  to  ride  in  them ;  though
they  had  buff  coats  and  sharp  weapons,  they  should
have  no  occasion  to  don  or  use  them.

3.  I  would  make  the  people  return  to  the  use  of
knotted  cords  (instead  of  the  written  characters).

4.  They  should  think  their  (coarse)  food  sweet ;
their  (plain)  clothes  beautiful ;  their  (poor)  dwellings
places  of  rest ;  and  their  common  (simple)  ways
sources  of  enjoyment.

5.  There  should  be  a  neighbouring  state  within
sight,  and  the  voices  of  the  fowls  and  dogs  should  be
heard  all  the  way  from  it  to  us,  but  I  would  make
the  people  to  old  age,  even  to  death,  not  have  any
intercourse  with  it.


jjL,  '  Standing  Alone.'  The  chapter  sets  forth  what
Lao-jze  conceived  the  ancient  government  of  simplicity
was,  and  what  he  would  have  government  in  all  time  to
be.  He  does  not  use  the  personal  pronoun  '  I '  as  the
subject  of  the  thrice-recurring  ^^,  but  it  is  most  natural
to  suppose  that  he  is  himself  that  subject ;  and  he  modestly
supposes  himself  in  charge  of  a  little  state   and  a  small


CH.  LXXXI.  THE    TAO    TEH    A'ING.  I23

population.  The  reader  can  judge  for  himself  of  the  con-
summation that  would  be  arrived  at ;  —  a  people  rude
and  uninstructed,  using  quippos,  abstaining  from  war  and
all  travelling,  kept  aloof  from  intercourse  even  with  their
neighbours,  and  without  the  appliances  of  what  we  call
civilisation.

The  text  is  nearly  all  found  in  Sze-ma  K/ntn  and
/Twang-^ze.  The  first  member  of  par.  i,  however,  is  very
puzzling.  The  old  Jesuit  translators,  Julien,  Chalmers,
and  V.  von  Strauss,  all  differ  in  their  views  of  it.  Wu
Kh3.ng  and  ^\3.o  Hung  take  what  I  have  now  rendered  by
'  abilities,'  as  meaning  '  implements  of  agriculture,'  but  their
view  is  based  on  a  custom  of  the  Han  dynasty,  which  is  not
remote  enough  for  the  purpose,  and  on  the  suppression,
after  Wang  Pi,  of  a  J\^  in  Ho-shang  Kung's  text.

81.  I.  Sincere  words  are  not  fine  ;  fine  words  are
not  sincere.  Those  who  are  skilled  (in  the  Tao)
do  not  dispute  (about  it) ;  the  disputatious  are  not
skilled  in  it.  Those  who  know  (the  Tao)  are  not
extensively  learned  ;  the  extensively  learned  do  not
know  it.

2.  The  sage  does  not  accumulate  (for  himself).
The  more  that  he  expends  for  others,  the  more  does
he  possess  of  his  own  ;  the  more  that  he  gives  to
others,  the  more  does  he  have  himself.

3.  With  all  the  sharpness  of  the  Way  of  Heaven,
it  injures  not ;  with  all  the  doing  in  the  way  of  the
sage  he  does  not  strive.

^  ^,  '  The  Manifestation  of  Simplicity.'  The  chapter
shows  how  quietly  and  effectively  the  Tao  proceeds,  and
by  contraries  in  a  way  that  only  the  master  of  it  can
understand.  The  author,  says  Wu  KhdiWg,  'sums  up  in
this  the  subject-matter  of  the  two  Parts  of  his  Treatise,
showing  that  in  all  its  five  thousand  characters,  there  is
nothing  beyond  what  is  here  said.'


I  24  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  pt,  li.

Par.  3  suggests  to  Dr.  Chalmers  the  well-known  lines  of
Bunyan  as  an  analogue  of  it : —

'A  man  there  was,  though  some  did  count  him  mad,
The  more  he  gave  away,  the  more  he  had.'

Wii  /sT/^ang  brings  together  two  sentences  from  A'wang-jze
(XXXIII,  21  b,  22  a),  written  evidently  with  the  characters
of  this  text  in  mind,  which,  as  from  a  T^oist  mint,  are
a  still  better  analogue,  and  I  venture  to  put  them  into
rhyme : —

'  Amassing  but  to  him  a  sense  of  need  betrays ;
He  hoards  not,  and  thereby  his  affluence  displays.'

I  have  paused  long  over  the  first  pair  of  contraries  in
par.  3  (^Ij  and  ^)»  Those  two  characters  primarily
mean  'sharpness'  and  'wounding  by  cutting;'  they  are
also  often  used  in  the  sense  of  'being  beneficial,'  and
'being  injurious;'  —  'contraries,'  both  of  them.  Which
'  contrary '  had  Lao-jze  in  mind  ?  I  must  think  the  former,
though  differing  in  this  from  all  previous  translators.  The
Jesuit  version  is,  'Celestis  Tao  natura  ditat  omnes,
nemini  nocet;'  Julien's,  'II  est  utile  aux  etres,  et  ne
leur  nuit  point;'  Chalmers's,  'Benefits  and  does  not
injure;'  and  V.  von  Strauss's,  'Des  Himmels  Weise
ist  wolthun  und  nicht  beschadigen.'


THE


WRITINGS  OF/^WANG-3ZE.


THE

WRITINGS  OF/<^WANG-3ZE.


INTRODUCTION.

Brief  Notices  of  the  different  Books.

Book  I.    Hsiao-yao  Yu.

The  three  characters  which  form  the  title  of  this  Book
have  all  of  them  the  ideagram  ^  (-^o)»  which  gives  the
idea,  as  the  Shwo  Wan  explains  it,  of  'now  walking,  now
halting.'  We  might  render  the  title  by  '  Sauntering  or
Rambling  at  Ease ; '  but  it  is  the  untroubled  enjoyment  of
the  mind  which  the  author  has  in  view.  And  this  enjoy-
ment is  secured  by  the  Tao,  though  that  character  does
not  once  occur  in  the  Book.  A'wang-jze  illustrates  his
thesis  first  by  the  cases  of  creatures,  the  largest  and  the
smallest,  showing  that  however  different  they  may  be  in
size,  they  should  not  pass  judgment  on  one  another,  but
may  equally  find  their  happiness  in  the  Tao.  From  this
he  advances  to  men,  and  from  the  cases  of  Yung-.^ze  and
Lieh-jze  proceeds  to  that  of  one  who  finds  his  enjoyment
in  himself,  independent  of  every  other  being  or  instru-
mentality ;  and  we  have  the  three  important  definitions
of  the  accomplished  Taoist,  as  'the  Perfect  Man,'  'the
Spirit-like  Man,'  and  '  the  Sagely  Man.'  Those  definitions
are  then  illustrated  ; — the  third  in  Yao  and  Hsii  Yu,  and  the
second  in  the  conversation  between  A^ien  Wu  and  Lien  Shu.
The  description  given  in  this  conversation  of  the  spirit-
like man  is  very  startling,  and  contains  statements  that  are
true  only  of  Him  who  is  a  '  Spirit,'  '  the  Blessed  and  only
Potentate,'  '  Who  covereth  Himself  with  light  as  with
a  garment,  Who  stretcheth  out  the  heavens  as  a  curtain,


128  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  ir.

Who  layeth  the  beams  of  His  chambers  in  the  waters,  Who
maketh  the  clouds  His  chariot,  Who  walketh  on  the  wings
of  the  wind,'  '  Who  rideth  on  a  cherub,'  '  Who  inhabiteth
eternity.'  The  most  imaginative  and  metaphorical  ex-
pressions in  the  Tao  Teh  King  about  the  power  of  the
possessor  of  the  Tao  are  tame,  compared  with  the  language
of  our  author.  I  call  attention  to  it  here,  as  he  often  uses
the  same  extravagant  style.  There  follows  an  illustration
of  'the  Perfect  Man,'  which  is  comparatively  feeble,  and
part  of  it,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  inappropriate,  though  Lin
Hsi-y^ung  says  that  all  other  interpretations  of  the  sen-
tences are  ridiculous.

In  the  seventh  and  last  paragraph  we  have  two  illus-
trations that  nothing  is  really  useless,  if  only  used  Tao-
istically;  'to  the  same  effect,'  says  ^mo  Hung,  'as
Confucius  in  the  Analects,  XVH,  ii.'  They  hang  loosely,
however,  from  what  precedes.

An  old  view  of  the  Book  was  that  A'wang-jze  intended
himself  by  the  great  phang,  'which,'  says  Lu  Shu-Zih,
'  is  wide  of  the  mark.'

Book  H.    ^^i  Wu  Lun.

Mr.  Balfour  has  translated  this  title  by  '  Essay  on  the
Uniformity  of  All  Things;'  and,  the  subject  of  the  Book
being  thus  misconceived,  his  translation  of  it  could  not
fail  to  be  very  incorrect.  The  Chinese  critics,  I  may  say
without  exception,  construe  the  title  as  I  have  done.  The
second  and  third  characters,  Wu  Lun,  are  taken  together,
and  mean  '  Discussions  about  Things,'  equivalent  to  our
'  Controversies.'  They  are  under  the  government  of  the
first  character  K/ii,  used  as  a  verb,  with  the  signification
of  'Harmonising,'  or  'Adjusting.'  Let  me  illustrate  this
by  condensing  a  passage  from  the  '  Supplementary  Com-
mentary of  a  Mr.  A'ang,  a  sub-secretary  of  the  Imperial
Chancery,'  of  the  Ming  dynasty  (gg  ^  i  f  "f  Ii)-  ^^
says,  '  What  A^wang-jze  calls  "  Discussions  about  Things  "
has  reference  to  the  various  branches  of  the  numerous
schools,  each  of  which  has  its  own  views,  conflicting  with


BK.  II.       BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.       I  29


the  views  of  the  others.'  He  goes  on  to  show  that  if  they
would  only  adopt  the  method  pointed  out  by  A'wang-jze.
'  their  controversies  would  be  adjusted  (^^  |^  ^),'  now
using  the  first  Khi  in  the  passive  voice.

This  then  was  the  theme  of  our  author  in  this  Book.  Tt
must  be  left  for  the  reader  to  discover  from  the  translation
how  he  pursues  it.  I  pointed  out  a  peculiarity  in  the
former  Book,  that  though  the  idea  of  the  Tao  underlies
it  all,  the  term  itself  is  never  allowed  to  appear.  Not  only
does  the  same  idea  underlie  this  Book,  but  the  name  is
frequently  employed.  The  Tao  is  the  panacea  for  tlic
evils  of  controversy,  the  solvent  through  the  use  of  which
the  different  views  of  men  may  be  made  to  disappear.

That  the  Tao  is  not  a  Personal  name  in  the  conception
of  A'wang-jze  is  seen  in  several  passages.  We  have  not  to
go  beyond  the  phenomena  of  nature  to  discover  the  reason
of  their  being  what  they  are ;  nor  have  we  to  go  beyond
the  bigoted  egoism  and  vaingloriousness  of  controversialists
to  find  the  explanation  of  their  discussions,  various  as  these
are,  and  confounding  like  the  sounds  of  the  wind  amon<r
the  trees  of  a  forest.  To  man,  neither  in  nature  nor  in  the
sphere  of  knowledge,  is  there  any  other  '  Heaven '  but
what  belongs  to  his  own  mind.  That  is  his  only  '  True
Ruler.'  If  there  be  any  other,  we  do  not  see  His  form,  nor
any  traces  of  His  acting.  Things  come  about  in  their
proper  course.  We  cannot  advance  any  proof  of  Creation.
Whether  we  assume  that  there  was  something  '  in  the
beginning'  or  nothing,  we  are  equally  landed  in  contra-
diction and  absurdity.  Let  us  stop  at  the  limit  of  what
we  know,  and  not  try  to  advance  a  step  beyond  it.

Towards  the  end  of  the  Book  our  author's  agnosticism
seems  to  reach  its  farthest  point.  All  human  experience
is  spoken  of  as  a  dream  or  as  '  illusion.'  He  who  calls
another  a  dreamer  does  not  know  that  he  is  not  dreaming
himself.  One  and  another  commentator  discover  in  such
utterances  something  very  like  the  Buddhist  doctrine  that  ^
all  life  is  but  so  much  illusion  (^).  This  notion  has  its
consummation  in  the  story  with  which  the  Book  concludes.
[39]  K


I  30  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  ill,

A'wang-jze  had  dreamt  that  he  was  a  butterfly.  When  he
awoke,  and  was  himself  again,  he  did  not  know  whether  he,
Kwang  Kiu,  had  been  dreaming  that  he  was  a  butterfly,
or  was  now  a  butterfly  dreaming  that  it  was  Kwang  Kau.
And  yet  he  adds  that  there  must  be  a  diff"erence  between
A'au  and  a  butterfly,  but  he  does  not  say  what  that
difiference  is.  But  had  he  ever  dreamt  that  he  was  a
butterfly,  so  as  to  lose  the  consciousness  of  his  personal
identity  as /Avang  A'au  ?  T  do  not  think  so.  One  may,
perhaps,  lose  that  consciousness  in  the  state  of  insanity  ;
but  the  language  of  Young  is  not  sufficiently  guarded  when
he  writes  of

'  Dreams,  -where  thought,  in  fancy's  maze,  runs  mad.'

When  dreaming,  our  thoughts  are  not  conditioned  by  the
categories  of  time  and  space ;  but  the  conviction  of  our
identity  is  never  lost.

Book  III.    Yang  Shang  ATu.

•  The  Lord  of  Life  '  is  the  Tao.  It  is  to  this  that  we  are
indebted  for  the  origin  of  life  and  for  the  preservation  of  it.
Though  not  a  Personal  Being,  it  is  here  spoken  of  as
if  it  were, — 'the  Lord  of  Life;'  just  as  in  the  preceding
Book  it  is  made  to  appear  as  'a  True  Governor,'  and
'a  True  Ruler.'  But  how  can  we  nourish  the  Tao?  The
reply  is,  By  avoiding  all  striving  to  do  so  ;  by  a  passionless,
unstraining  performance  of  what  we  have  to  do  in  our
position  in  life;  simply  allowing  the  Tao  to  guide  and
nourish  us,  without  doing  anything  to  please  ourselves
or  to  counteract  the  tendency  of  our  being  to  decay  and
death.

Par.  1  exhibits  the  injury  arising  from  not  thus  nourishing
the  life,  and  sets  forth  the  rule  we  are  to  pursue.

Par.  2  illustrates  the  observance  of  the  rule  by  the  perfect
skill  with  which  the  cook  of  the  ruler  Wan-hui  of  Wei  cut
up  the  oxen  for  his  employer  without  trouble  to  himself,  or
injury  to  his  knife.


BK.  IV,       BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.      I31

Par.  3  illustrates  the  result  of  a  neglect  of  one  of  the
cautions  in  par.  i  to  a  certain  master  of  the  Left,  who  had
brought  on  himself  dismemberment  in  the  loss  of  one  of
his  feet.

Par.  4  shows  how  even  Lao-jze  had  failed  in  nourishing
'  the  Lord  of  Life '  by  neglecting  the  other  caution,  and
allowing  in  his  good-doing  an  admixture  of  human  feeling,
which  produced  in  his  disciples  a  regard  for  him  that  was
inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  the  Tao,  and  made  them
wail  for  him  excessively  on  his  death.  This  is  the  most
remarkable  portion  of  the  Book,  and  it  is  followed  by
a  sentence  which  implies  that  the  existence  of  man's
spirit  continues  after  death  has  taken  place.  His  body
is  intended  by  the  '  faggots '  that  are  consumed  by  the  fire.
That  fire  represents  the  spirit  which  may  be  transferred
elsewhere.

Some  commentators  dwell  on  the  analogy  between  this
and  the  Buddhistic  transrotation  of  births ;  which  latter
teaching,  however,  they  do  not  seem  to  understand.  Others
say  that  '  the  nourishment  of  the  Lord  of  Life '  is  simply
acting  as  Yii  did  when  he  conveyed  away  the  flooded
waters  '  by  doing  that  which  gave  him  no  trouble  ; ' — see
Mencius,  IV,  ii,  26.

In  iTwang-jze  there  are  various  other  stories  of  the  same
character  as  that  about  king  Wan-hui's  cook, — e.g.  XIX,
3  and  XXII,  9.  They  are  instances  of  the  dexterity
acquired  by  habit,  and  should  hardly  be  pressed  into  the
service  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Tao.


Book  IV.    Zan  A'ien  Shih.

A  man  has  his  place  among  other  men  in  the  world  ;  he
is  a  member,  while  he  lives,  of  the  body  of  humanity.
And  as  he  has  his  place  in  society,  so  also  he  has  his
special  duties  to  discharge,  according  to  his  position,  and
his  relation  to  others.  Taoist  writers  refer  to  this  Book
as  a  proof  of  the  practical  character  of  the  writings  of
A'wang-jze.

K  2


132  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  iv.

They  are  right  to  a  certain  extent  in  doing  so ;  but  the
cases  of  relationship  which  are  exhibited  and  prescribed  for
are  of  so  pecuhar  a  character,  that  the  Book  is  of  Httle
value  as  a  directory  of  human  conduct  and  duty.  In  the
first  two  paragraphs  we  have  the  case  of  Yen  Hui,  who
wishes  to  go  to  Wei,  an-d  try  to  reform  the  character  and
government  of  its  oppressive  ruler  ;  in  the  third  and  fourth,
that  of  the  duke  of  Sheh,  who  has  been  entrusted  by  the
king  of  KJm  with  a  difficult  mission  to  the  court  of  AV/i,
which  is  occasioning  him  much  anxiety  and  apprehension ;
and  in  the  fifth,  that  of  a  Yen  Ho,  who  is  about  to  undertake
the  office  of  teacher  to  the  son  of  duke  Ling  of  Wei,  a
young  man  with  a  very  bad  natural  disposition.  The
other  four  paragraphs  do  not  seem  to  come  in  naturally
after  these  three  cases,  being  occupied  with  two  immense
and  wonderful  trees,  the  case  of  a  poor  deformed  cripple,
and  the  lecture  for  the  benefit  of  Confucius  by  '  the  madman
of  AV/u,'  In  all  these  last  paragraphs,  the  theme  is  the
usefulness,  to  the  party  himself  at  least,  of  being  of  no  use.

Confucius  is  the  principal  speaker  in  the  first  four  para-
graphs. In  what  he  says  to  Yen  Hui  and  the  duke  of
Sheh  there  is  much  that  is  shrewd  and  good  ;  but  we  prefer
the  practical  style  of  his  teachings,  as  related  by  his  own
disciples  in  the  Confucian  Analects.  Possibly,  it  was  the
object  of  A'wang-5ze  to  exhibit  his  teaching,  as  containing,
without  his  being  aware  of  it,  much  of  the  mystical  char-
acter of  the  Taoistic  system.  His  conversation  with  the
duke  of  Sheh,  however,  is  less  obnoxious  to  this  charee
than  what  he  is  made  to  say  to  Yen  Hui.  The  adviser  of
Yen  Ho  is  a  A'ii  Po-yii,  a  disciple  of  Confucius,  who  still
has  a  place  in  the  sage's  temples.

In  the  conclusion,  the  Taoism  of  our  author  comes  out  in
contrast  with  the  methods  of  Confucius.  His  object  in  the
whole  treatise,  perhaps,  was  to  show  how  'the  doing
nothing,  and  yet  thereby  doing  everything,'  was  the  method
to  be  pursued  in  all  the  intercourses  of  society.


BK.  V.        BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.       I  33


Book  V.    Teh  Khung  Fu.

The  fu  {^)  consisted  in  the  earliest  times  of  two  slips
of  bamboo  made  with  certain  marks,  so  as  to  fit  to  each
other  exactly,  and  held  by  the  two  parties  to  any  agree-
ment or  cov^enant.  By  the  production  and  comparison  of
the  slips,  the  parties  verified  their  mutual  relation  ;  and
the  claim  of  the  one  and  the  obligation  of  the  other  were
sufficiently  established.  '  Seal '  seems  the  best  translation
of  the  character  in  this  title.

By  '  virtue '  ( ^m)  we  must  understand  the  characteristics
of  the  Tao.  Where  those  existed  in  their  full  proportions
in  any  individual,  there  was  sure  to  be  the  evidence  or
proof  of  them  in  the  influence  which  he  exerted  in  all  his
intercourse  with  other  men  ;  and  the  illustration  of  this  is
the  subject  of  this  Book,  in  all  its  five  paragraphs.  That
influence  is  the  '  Seal '  set  on  him,  proving  him  to  be  a  true
child  of  the  Tao.

The  heroes,  as  I  may  call  them,  of  the  first  three  para-
graphs are  all  men  who  had  lost  their  feet,  having  been
reduced  to  that  condition  as  a  punishment,  just  or  unjust,
of  certain  offences  ;  and  those  of  the  last  two  are  distin-
guished by  their  extraordinary  ugliness  or  disgusting  de-
formity. But  neither  the  loss  of  their  feet  nor  their
deformities  trouble  the  serenity  of  their  own  minds,  or
interfere  with  the  effects  of  theii"  teaching  and  character
upon  others;  so  superior  is  their  virtue  to  the  deficiencies  in
their  outward  appearance.

Various  brief  descriptions  of  the  Tao  are  interspersed  in
the  Book.  The  most  remarkable  of  them  are  those  in
par.  1,  where  it  appears  as  'that  in  which  there  is  no
element  of  falsehood,'  and  as  '  the  author  of  all  the  Changes
or  Transformations '  in  the  world.  The  sentences  where
these  occur  are  thus  translated  by  Mr.  Balfour : — '  He
seeks  to  know  Him  in  whom  is  nothing  false.  He  would
not  be  affected  by  the  instability  of  creation  ;  even  if  his
life  were  involved  in  the  general  destruction,  he  would  yet
hold  firmly  to  his  faith  (in  God).'     And  he  observes  in  a


134  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  vi.

note,  that  the  first  short  sentence  '  is  explained  by  the
commentators  as  referring  to  Kan  3ai  (S  ^),  the  term
used  by  the  Taoist  school  for  God.'  But  we  met  with
that  name  and  synonyms  of  it  in  Book  II,  par.  2,  as  appel-
lations of  the  Tao,  coupled  with  the  denial  of  its  per-
sonality. A'an  3^i,  'the  True  Governor  or  Lord,'  may
be  used  as  a  designation  for  god  or  God,  but  the  Taoist
school  denies  the  existence  of  a  Personal  Being,  to  whom
we  are  accustomed  to  apply  that  name.

Hui-^ze,  the  sophist  and  friend  of  /Twang-^ze,  is  intro-
duced in  the  conclusion  as  disputing  with  him  the  propriety
of  his  representing  the  Master  of  the  Tao  as  being  still  'a
man  ;'  and  is  beaten  down  by  him  with  a  repetition  of  his
assertions,  and  a  reference  to  some  of  Hui-jze's  well-known
peculiarities.  What  would  ATwang-jze  have  said,  if  his
opponent  had  affirmed  that  his  instances  were  all  imaginary,
and  that  no  man  had  ever  appeared  who  could  appeal  to
his  possession  of  such  a  '  seal '  to  his  virtues  and  influence
as  he  described  ?

Lu  Fang-wang  compares  with  the  tenor  of  this  Book
what  we  find  in  Mencius,  VII,  i,  21,  about  the  nature  of
the  superior  man.  The  analogy  between  them,  however,  is
very  faint  and  incomplete.

Book  VI.    Ta  3ung  Shih.

So  I  translate  the  title  of  this  Book,  taking  Bi-ing  as  a
verb,  and  3ung  Shih  as  ='  The  Master  who  is  Honoured.'
Some  critics  take  3ung  in  the  sense  of  'Originator,'  in
which  it  is  employed  in  the  Tao  Teh  A'i  n  g,  Ixx,  2.  Which-
ever rendering  be  adopted,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  title
is  intended  to  be  a  designation  of  the  T^o  ;  and  no  one  of
our  author's  Books  is  more  important  for  the  understanding
of  his  system  of  thought.

The  key  to  it  is  found  in  the  first  of  its  fifteen  para-
graphs. There  are  in  man  two  elements  ; — the  Heavenly
or  Taoistic,  and  the  human.  The  disciple  of  the  Tao,
recognising  them  both,  cultivates  what  he  knows  as  a  man


BK.  VI.        BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.       I  35

SO  as  to  become  entirely  conformed  to  the  action  of  the
Tao,  and  submissive  in  all  the  most  painful  experiences
in  his  lot,  which  is  entirely  ordered  by  it.  A  seal  will  be
set  on  the  wisdom  of  this  course  hereafter,  when  he  has
completed  the  period  of  his  existence  on  earth,  and  re-
turns to  the  state  of  non-existence,  from  which  the  Tao
called  him  to  be  born  as  a  man.  In  the  meantime  he  may
attain  to  be  the  True  man  possessing  the  True  knowledge.

Our  author  then  proceeds  to  give  his  readers  in  five
paragraphs  his  idea  of  the  True  Man.  Mr.  Balfour  says
that  this  name  is  to  be  understood  '  in  the  esoteric  sense,
the  partaking  of  the  essence  of  divinity,'  and  he  translates
it  by  '  the  Divine  Man.'  But  we  have  no  right  to  intro-
duce here  the  terms  '  divine  '  and  '  divinity.'  Nan-hwai
(VII,  5  b)  gives  a  short  definition  of  the  name  which  is
more  to  the  point: — 'What  we  call  "the  True  Man"  is
one  whose  nature  is  in  agreement  with  the  Tao  (j^  g^  '^
A.  ^  '[^  ^  ~^  jM!  ili ''  ^"*^  ^^^^  commentator  adds  in  a
note,  'Such  men  as  Fu-hsi,  Hwang-Ti,  and  Lao  Tan.'  The
Khang-hsi  dictionary  commences  its  account  of  the  character
j^.  or  '  True'  by  a  definition  of  the  True  Man  taken  from
the  Shwo  Wan  as  a  |j||  ^,  'a  recluse  of  the  mountain,
whose  bodily  form  has  been  changed,  and  who  ascends  to
heaven ; '  but  when  that  earliest  dictionary  was  made.
Taoism  had  entered  into  a  new  phase,  different  from  what
it  had  in  the  time  of  our  author.  The  most  prominent
characteristic  of  the  True  Man  is  that  he  is  free  from  all
exercise  of  thought  and  purpose,  a  being  entirely  passive  in
the  hands  of  the  Tao.  In  par.  3  seven  men  are  mentioned,
good  and  worthy  men,  but  inferior  to  the  True.

Having  said  what  he  had  to  say  of  the  True  Man,
TTwang-^ze  comes  in  the  seventh  paragraph  to  speak  directly
of  the  Tao  itself,  and  describes  it  with  many  wonderful  pre-
dicates which  exalt  it  above  our  idea  of  God  ;— a  concept
and  not  a  personality.  He  concludes  by  mentioning  a
number  of  ancient  personages  who  had  got  the  Tao,  and  by
it  wrought  wonders,  beginning  with  a  Shih-wei,  who  pre-
ceded  Fu-hsi,  and  ending  with  Fu  Yiieh,  the  minister  of


156  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  vii.


Wu-ting,  in  the  fourteenth  century  B.C.,  and  who  finally  be-
came a  star  in  the  eastern  portion  of  the  zodiac.  Phang  3u
is  also  mentioned  as  living,  through  his  possession  of  the  Tao,
from  the  twenty-third  century  B.C.  to  the  seventh  or  later.
The  sun  and  moon  and  the  constellation  of  the  Great  Bear
are  also  mentioned  as  its  possessors,  and  the  fabulous  Being
called  the  Mother  of  the  Western  King.  The  whole  passage
is  perplexing  to  the  reader  to  the  last  degree.

The  remaining  paragraphs  are  mostly  occupied  with
instances  of  learning  the  Tao,  and  of  its  effects  in  making
men  superior  to  the  infirmities  of  age  and  the  most  ter-
rible deformities  of  person  and  calamities  of  penury;  as
'Tranquillity'  under  all  that  might  seem  most  calculated  to
disturb  it.  Very  strange  is  the  attempt  at  the  conclusion  of
par.  8  apparently  to  trace  the  genesis  of  the  knowledge  of
the  Tao.  Confucius  is  introduced  repeatedly  as  the  ex-
lounder  of  Taoism,  and  made  to  praise  it  as  the  ne  plus
ultra  of  human  attainment.

Book  VII.    Yixg  Ti  Wang.

The  first  of  the  three  characters  in  this  title  renders  the
translation  of  it  somewhat  perplexing.  Ying  has  different
meanings  according  as  it  is  read  in  the  first  tone  or  in  the
third.  In  the  first  tone  it  is  the  symbol  of  what  is  right,
or  should  be ;  in  the  third  tone  of  answering  or  responding
to.  I  prefer  to  take  it  here  in  the  first  tone.  As  Kwo
Hsiang  says,  '  One  who  is  free  from  mind  or  purpose  of  his
own,  and  loves  men  to  become  transformed  of  themselves,
is  fit  to  be  a  Ruler  or  a  King,'  and  as  3hui  A^wan,  another
early  commentator,  says,  '  He  whose  teaching  is  that  which
is  without  words,  and  makes  men  in  the  world  act  as  if
they  were  oxen  or  horses,  is  fit  to  be  a  Ruler  or  a  King.'
This  then  is  the  object  of  the  Book— to  describe  that
government  which  exhibits  the  Tao  equally  in  the  rulers
and  the  ruled,  the  world  of  men  all  happy  and  good
without  purpose  or  effort.

It  consists  of  seven  paragraphs.     The  first  shows  us  the
iuodel  ruler  in  him  of  the  line  of  Thai,  whom  I  have  not


UK.  vir.      BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.       I  37


succeeded  in  identifying.  The  second  shows  us  men  under
.such  a  rule,  uncontrolled  and  safe  like  the  bird  that  flies
high  beyond  the  reach  of  the  archer,  and  the  mouse  secure
in  its  deep  hole  from  its  pursuers.  The  teacher  in  this
portion  is  AT/aeh-yii,  known  in  the  Confucian  school  as  '  the
madman  of  AVm,'  and  he  delivers  his  lesson  in  opposition
to  the  heresy  of  a  Zah-kung  Shih,  or  'Noon  Beginning.'
In  the  third  paragraph  the  speakers  are  '  a  nameless  man,'
and  a  Thien  Kan,  or  '  Heaven  Root.'  In  the  fourth  para-
graph Lao-^ze  himself  appears  upon  the  stage,  and  lectures
a  Yang  3ze-/^u,  the  Yang  A'u  of  Mencius.  He  concludes  by
saying  that  '  where  the  intelligent  kings  took  their  stand
could  not  be  fathomed,  and  they  found  their  enjoyment  in
(the  realm  of)  nonentity.'

The  fifth  paragraph  is  longer,  and  tells  us  of  the  defeat
of  a  wizard,  a  physiognomist  in  A'ang,  by  Hu-^ze,  the
master  of  the  philosopher  Lieh-3ze,  who  is  thereby  delivered
from  the  glamour  which  the  cheat  was  throwing  round  him.
I  confess  to  not  being  able  to  understand  the  various  pro-
cesses by  which  Hu-^ze  foils  the  wizard  and  makes  him  run
away.  The  whole  story  is  told,  and  at  greater  length,  in
the  second  book  of  the  collection  ascribed  to  Lieh-^ze,  and
the  curious  student  may  like  to  look  at  the  translation  of
that  work  by  Mr.  Ernst  Faber  (Der  Naturalismus  bei
den  alten  Chinesen  sowohl  nach  der  Seite  des  Panthe-
ismus  als  des  Sensualismus,  oder  die  Sammtlichen  Werke
des  Philosophen  Licius,  1H77).  The  effect  of  the  wizard's
defeat  on  Lieh-^ze  was  great.  He  returned  in  great  humi-
lity to  his  house,  and  did  not  go  out  of  it  for  three  years.
He  did  the  cooking  for  his  wife,  and  fed  the  pigs  as  if  he
were  feeding  men.  He  returned  to  pure  simplicity,  and
therein  continued  to  the  end  of  his  life.  But  I  do  not  see
the  connexion  between  this  narrative  and  the  government
of  the  Rulers  and  Kings.

The  sixth  paragraph  is  a  homily  by  our  author  himself
on  'non-action.'  It  contains  a  good  simile,  comparing  the
mind  of  the  perfect  man  to  a  mirror,  which  reflects  faith-
fully what  comes  before  it,  but  does  not  retain  any  image
of  it,  when  the  mind  is  gone.


138  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  VIII.

The  last  paragraph  is  an  ingenious  and  interesting  alle-
gory relating  how  the  gods  of  the  southern  and  northern
seas  brought  Chaos  to  an  end  by  boring  holes  in  him.
Thereby  they  destroyed  the  primal  simplicity,  and  ac-
cording to  Taoism  did  Chaos  an  injury !  On  the  whole
I  do  not  think  that  this  Book,  with  which  the  more  finished
essays  of  /iTwang-jze  come  to  an  end,  is  so  successful  as
those  that  precede  it.

Book  VIII.    Phien  Mau.  '

This  Book  brings  us  to  the  Second  Part  of  the  writings
of  our  author,  embracing  in  all  fifteen  Books.  Of  the  most
important  difference  between  the  Books  of  the  First  and  the
other  Parts  some  account  has  been  given  in  the  Introduc-
tory Chapter.  We  have  here  to  do  only  with  the  different
character  of  their  titles.  Those  of  the  seven  preceding
Books  are  so  many  theses,  and  are  believed  to  have  been
prefixed  to  them  hy  Kwang-^ze  himself;  those  of  this  Book
and  the  others  that  follow  are  believed  to  have  been  pre-
fixed by  Kwo  Hsiang,  and  consist  of  two  or  three  charac-
ters taken  from  the  beginning,  or  near  the  beginning  of
the  several  Books,  after  the  fashion  of  the  names  of  the
Books  in  the  Confucian  Analects,  in  the  works  of  Mencius,
and  in  our  Hebrew  Scriptures.  Books  VIII  to  XIII  are
considered  to  be  supplementary  to  VII  by  Au-yang  Hsiu.

The  title  of  this  eighth  Book,  Phien  Mdu,  has  been  ren-
dered by  Mr.  Balfour,  after  Dr.  Williams,  '  Double  Thumbs.'
But  the  Mau,  which  may  mean  either  the  Thumb  or  the
Great  Toe,  must  be  taken  in  the  latter  sense,  being  distin-
guished in  this  paragraph  and  elsewhere  from  A'ih, '  a  finger,'
and  expressly  specified  also  as  belonging  to  the  foot.  The
character  phien,  as  used  here,  is  defined  in  the  Khang-hsi
dictionary  as  '  anything  additional  growing  out  as  an  ap-
pendage or  excrescence,  a  growing  out  at  the  side.'  This
would  seem  to  justify  the  translation  of  it  by  'double.'
But  in  paragraph  3,  while  the  extra  finger  increases  the
number  of  the  fingers,  this  growth  on  the  foot  is  represented
as  diminishing  the  number  of  the  toes.     I  must  consider


BK.VIII.     BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.      1 39

the  phien  therefore  as  descriptive  of  an  appendage  by
which  the  great  toe  was  united  to  one  or  all  of  the  other
toes,  and  can  think  of  no  better  rendering  of  the  title  than
what  I  have  given.  It  is  told  in  the  3o  /^wan  (twenty-third
year  of  duke  Hsi)  that  the  famous  duke  Wan  of  3in  had
phien  hsi  eh,  that  is.  that  his  ribs  presented  the  appear-
ance of  forming  one  bone.     So  much  for  the  title.

The  subject-matter  of  the  Book  seems  strange  to  us  ; —
that,  according  to  the  Tao,  benevolence  and  righteousness
are  not  natural  growths  of  humanity,  but  excrescences  on
it,  like  the  extra  finger  on  the  hand,  and  the  membranous
web  of  the  toes.  The  weakness  of  the  Taoistic  system
begins  to  appear.  A'wang-^ze's  arguments  in  support  of
his  position  must  be  pronounced  very  feeble.  The  ancient
Shun  is  introduced  as  the  first  who  called  in  the  two  great
virtues  to  distort  and  vex  the  world,  keeping  society  for
more  than  a  thousand  years  in  a  state  of  uneasy  excite-
ment. Of  course  he  assumes  that  prior  to  Shun,  he  does
not  say  for  how  long  a  time  (and  in  other  places  he  makes
decay  to  have  begun  earlier),  the  world  had  been  in  a  state  of
paradisiacal  innocence  and  simplicity,  under  the  guidance  of
the  Tao,  untroubled  by  any  consideration  of  what  was  right
and  what  was  wrong,  men  passively  allowing  their  nature
to  have  its  quiet  development,  and  happy  in  that  condition.
All  culture  of  art  or  music  is  wrong,  and  so  it  is  wrong  and
injurious  to  be  striving  to  manifest  benevolence  and  to
maintain  righteousness.

He  especially  singles  out  two  men,  one  of  the  twelfth  cen-
tury B.C.,  the  famous  Po-i,  who  died  of  hunger  rather  than
acknowledge  the  dynasty  of  A'au  ;  and  one  of  a  more
recent  age,  the  robber  Shih,  a  great  leader  of  brigands,  who
brought  himself  by  his  deeds  to  an  untimely  end  ;  and  he
sees  nothing  to  choose  between  them.  We  must  give  our
judgment  for  the  teaching  of  Confucianism  in  preference  to
that  of  Taoism,  if  our  author  can  be  regarded  as  a  fair
expositor  of  the  latter.  He  is  ingenious  in  his  statements
and  illustrations,  but  he  was,  like  his  master  Lao-jze,  only
a  dreamer.


140  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  IX,


Book  IX.    MA  Thi.

'  Horses  '  and  '  Hoofs  '  are  the  first  two  characters  of  the
Text,  standing  there  in  the  relation  of  regent  and  regimen.
The  account  of  the  teaching  of  the  Book  given  by  Lin  Hsi-
y^'ung  is  so  concise  that  I  will  avail  myself  of  it.     He  says  : —

'  Governing  men  is  like  governing  horses.  They  may
be  governed  in  such  a  way  as  shall  be  injurious  to  them,
just  as  Po-lao  governed  the  horse; — contrary  to  its  true
nature.  His  method  was  not  different  from  that  of
the  (first)  potter  and  carpenter  in  dealing  with  clay  and
wood  ; — contrary  to  the  nature  of  those  substances.  Not-
withstanding this,  one  age  after  another  has  celebrated
the  skill  of  those  parties ;  —  not  knowing  what  it  is
that  constitutes  the  good  and  skilful  government  of
men.  Such  government  simply  requires  that  men  be
made  to  fulfil  their  regular  constant  nature, — the  quali-
ties which  they  all  possess  in  common,  with  which  they
are  constituted  by  Heaven,  and  then  be  left  to  themselves.
It  was  this  which  constituted  the  age  of  perfect  virtue  ;
but  when  the  sages  insisted  on  the  practice  of  benevo-
lence, righteousness,  ceremonies,  and  music,  then  the
people  began  to  be  without  that  perfect  virtue.  Not  that
they  were  in  themselves  different  from  what  they  had  been,
but  those  practices  do  not  really  belong  to  their  regular
nature  ;  they  arose  from  their  neglecting  the  characteristics
of  the  Tao,  and  abandoning  their  natural  constitution  ;—
it  was  the  case  of  the  skilful  artisan  cutting  and  hacking
his  raw  materials  in  order  to  form  vessels  from  them.
There  is  no  ground  for  doubting  that  Po-lao's  management
of  horses  gave  them  that  knowledge  with  which  they  went
on  to  play  the  part  of  thieves,  or  that  it  was  the  sages*
government  of  the  people  which  made  them  devote  them-
selves to  the  pursuit  of  gain  ; — it  is  impossible  to  deny  the
error  of  those  sages.

'  There  is  but  one  idea  in  the  Book  from  the  beginning
to  the  end  ; — it  is  an  amplification  of  the  expression  in  the
preceding  Book  that  "  all  men  have  their  regular  and  con-


BK.  X.       BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.       I41

stant  constitution,"  and  is  the  most  easily  construed  of  all
iTwang-^ze's  compositions.  In  consequence,  however,  of
the  wonderful  touches  of  his  pencil  in  describing  the  sym-
pathy between  men  and  other  creatures  in  their  primal
state,  some  have  imagined  that  there  is  a  waste  and  em-
bellishment of  language,  and  doubted  whether  the  Book  is
really  his  own,  but  thought  it  was  written  by  some  one  in
imitation  of  his  style.  I  apprehend  that  no  other  hand
would  easily  have  attained  to  such  a  mastery  of  that  style.'
There  is  no  possibility  of  adjudicating  definitely  on  the
suspicion  of  the  genuineness  of  the  Book  thus  expressed  in
Hsi-^ung's  concluding  remarks.  The  same  suspicion  arose
in  my  own  mind  in  the  process  of  translation.  My  surprise
continues  that  our  author  did  not  perceive  the  absurdity  of
his  notions  of  the  primal  state  of  men,  and  of  his  condem-
nation of  the  sages.


^fc>^


Book  X.    Kn\j  AV/ieh.

It  is  observed  by  the  commentator  Kwei  A'an-zC'/aian
that  one  idea  runs  through  this  Book : — that  the  most  sage
and  wise  men  have  ministered  to  theft  and  robbery,  and
that,  if  there  were  an  end  of  sageness  and  wisdom,  the  world
would  be  at  rest.  Between  it  and  the  previous  Book  there
is  a  general  agreement  in  argument  and  object,  but  in  this
the  author  expresses  himself  with  greater  vehemence,  and
almost  goes  to  excess  in  his  denunciation  of  the  institu-
tions of  the  sages.

The  reader  will  agree  with  these  accounts  of  the  Book.
A'wang-jze  at  times  becomes  weak  in  his  attempts  to  estab-
lish his  points.  To  my  mind  the  most  interesting  portions
of  this  Book  and  the  last  one  are  the  full  statements  which
we  have  in  them  of  the  happy  state  of  men  when  the  Tao
maintained  its  undisputed  sway  in  the  world,  and  the
names  of  many  of  the  early  Taoistic  sovereigns.  How  can
we  suppose  that  anything  would  be  gained  by  a  return  to
the  condition  of  primitive  innocence  and  simplicity  ?  The
antagonism  between  Taoism  and  Confucianism  comes  out
in  this  Book  very  decidedly.


J  42  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xr.


The  title  of  the  Book  is  taken  from  two  characters  in  the
first  clause  of  the  first  paragraph.

Book  XI.    3ai  Yu.

The  two  characters  of  the  title  are  taken  from  the  first
sentence  of  the  Text,  but  they  express  the  subject  of  the
Book  more  fully  than  the  other  titles  in  this  Part  do,  and
almost  entitle  it  to  a  place  in  Part  I.  It  is  not  easy  to
translate  them,  and  Mr.  Balfour  renders  them  by  '  Leniency
towards  Faults,'  probably  construing  3a-i  as  equivalent  to
our  preposition  '  in,'  which  it  often  is.  But  iTwang-jze  uses
both  3a i  and  Yu  as  verbs,  or  blends  them  together,  the
chief  force  of  the  binomial  compound  being  derived  from
the  significance  of  the  3ai.  3ai  is  defined  by  3hun  (^),
which  gives  the  idea  of  '  preserving '  or  '  keeping  intact,'
and  Yu  by  Kh wan  (W), '  being  indulgent '  or  '  forbearing.'
The  two  characters  are  afterwards  exchanged  for  other
two,  wu  wei  (&£  '^),  'doing  nothing,'  'inaction,'  a
grand  characteristic  of  the  Tao.

The  following  summary  of  the  Book  is  taken  from  Hsiian
Ying's  explanations  of  our  author; — 'The  two  characters  3^i
Yu  express  the  subject-matter  of  the  Book,  and  "govern-
ing" points  out  the  opposite  error  as  the  disease  into  which
men  are  prone  to  fall.  Let  men  be,  and  the  tendencies  of
their  nature  will  be  at  rest,  and  there  will  be  no  necessity
for  governing  the  world.  Try  to  govern  it,  and  the
world  will  be  full  of  trouble ;  and  men  will  not  be  able  to
rest  in  the  tendencies  of  their  nature.  These  are  the  sub-
jects of  the  first  two  paragraphs.

'  In  the  third  paragraph  we  have  the  erroneous  view  of
3hui  AV/ii  that  by  government  it  was  possible  to  make
men's  minds  good.  He  did  not  know  that  governing  was
a  disturbing  meddling  with  the  minds  of  men  ;  and  how
Lao-jze  set  forth  the  evil  of  such  government,  going  on
till  it  be  irretrievable.  This  long  paragraph  vigorously
attacks  the  injury  done  by  governing.

'  In  the   fourth  paragraph,  when    Hwang-Ti    questions


BK.  XII.     BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.       I43

Kwang  K/iang'ize,  the  latter  sets  aside  his  inquiry  about
the  government  of  the  world,  and  tells  him  about  the
government  of  himself;  and  in  the  fifth,  when  Yiin  A'iang
asks  Hung  Mung  about  governing  men,  the  latter  tells  him
about  the  nourishing  of  the  heart.  These  two  great  para-
graphs set  forth  clearly  the  subtlest  points  in  the  policy  of
Let-a-be.     Truly  it  is  not  an  empty  name.

'  In  the  two  last  paragraphs,  A'wang  in  his  own  words
and  way  sets  forth,  now  by  affirmation,  and  now  by  nega-
tion, the  meaning  of  all  that  precedes.'

This  summary  of  the  Book  will  assist  the  reader  in
understanding  it.  For  other  remarks  that  will  be  helpful,
I  must  refer  him  to  the  notes  appended  to  the  Text.  The
Book  is  not  easy  to  understand  or  to  translate  ;  and  a
remark  found  in  the  K\a.-k/nng  edition  of  '  the  Ten
Philosophers,'  by  Lii  HsiCi-fu,  who  died  in  1279,  was  wel-
come to  me, '  If  you  cannot  understand  one  or  two  sentences
of  A^wang-^ze,  it  does  not  matter.'


Book  XII.    Thien  Tf.

The  first  two  characters  of  the  Book  are  adopted  as  its
name; — Thien  Ti,  'Heaven  and  Earth.'  These  are  em-
ployed, not  so  much  as  the  two  greatest  material  forms  in
the  universe,  but  as  the  Great  Powers  whose  influences
extend  to  all  below  and  upon  them.  Silently  and  effec-
tively, with  entire  spontaneity,  their  influence  goes  forth,
and  a  rule  and  pattern  is  thus  given  to  those  on  whom  the
business  of  the  government  of  the  world  devolves.  The
one  character  '  Heaven  '  is  employed  throughout  the  Book
as  the  denomination  of  this  purposeless  spontaneity  which
yet  is  so  powerful,

Lu  Shu-/^ih  says  : — '  This  Book  also  sets  forth  clearly
how  the  rulers  of  the  world  ought  simply  to  act  in  accord-
ance with  the  spontaneity  of  the  virtue  of  Heaven  ;  abjuring
sageness  and  putting  away  knowledge;  and  doing  nothing:
— in  this  way  the  Tao  or  proper  Method  of  Government
will  be  attained  to.     As  to  the  coercive  methods  of  Mo  Ti


144  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK,  xiii,

and  Hui-jze,  they  only  serve  to  distress  those  who  follow
them.'

This  object  of  the  Book  appears,  more  or  less  distinctly,
in  most  of  the  illustrative  paragraphs  ;  though,  as  has  been
pointed  out  in  the  notes  upon  it;  several  of  them  must  be
considered  to  be  spurious.  Paragraphs  6,  7,  and  11  are
thus  called  in  question,  and,  as  most  readers  will  feel,  with
reason.  From  13  to  the  end,  the  paragraphs  are  held  to  be
one  long  paragraph  where  A'wang-jze  introduces  his  own
reflections  in  an  unusual  style  ;  but  the  genuineness  of  the
whole,  so  far  as  I  have  observed,  has  not  been  called  in
question.

Book  XIII.    Thien  Tao.

'Thien  Tao,'  the  first  two  characters  of  the  first
paragraph,  and  prefixed  to  the  Book  as  the  name  of  it,  are
best  translated  by  '  The  Way  of  Heaven,'  meaning  the
noiseless  spontaneity,  which  characterises  all  the  operations
of  nature,  proceeding  silently,  yet  '  perfecting  all  things.'
As  the  rulers  of  the  world  attain  to  this  same  way  in  their
government,  and  the  sages  among  men  attain  to  it  in  their
teachings,  both  government  and  doctrine  arrive  at  a  corre-
sponding perfection.  '  The  joy  of  Heaven  '  and  '  the  joy  of
Men '  are  both  realised.  There  ought  to  be  no  purpose  or
will  in  the  universe.  '  Vacancy,  stillness,  placidity,  tasteless-
ness,  quietude,  silence,  and  non-action  ;  this  is  the  perfection
of  the  Tao  and  its  characteristics.'

Our  author  dwells  especially  on  doing-nothing  or  non-
action as  the  subject-matter  of  the  Book.  But  as  the  world
is  full  of  doing,  he  endeavours  to  make  a  distinction  between
the  Ruling  Powers  and  those  subordinate  to  and  employed
by  them,  to  whom  doing  or  action  and  purpose,  though
still  without  the  thought  of  self,  are  necessary ;  and  by
this  distinction  he  seems  to  me  to  give  up  the  peculiarity
of  his  system,  so  that  some  of  the  critics,  especially  Au-
yang  Ilsiu,  are  obliged  to  confess  that  these  portions  of
the  Book  are  unlike  the  writing  of  A^wang-jize.  Still  the
antagonism  of  Taoism  to  Confucianism  is  very  apparent


BK.  XIV.     BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.      1 45

throughout.  Of  the  illustrative  paragraphs,  the  seventh,
relating  the  churlish  behaviour  of  Lao-3ze  to  Confucius,
and  the  way  in  which  he  subsequently  argues  with  him
and  snubs  him,  is  very  amusing.  The  eighth  paragraph,
relating  the  interview  between  Lao  and  Shih-/^//ang  Kh\,  is
very  strange.  The  allusions  in  it  to  certain  incidents  and
peculiarities  in  Lao's  domestic  life  make  us  wish  that  we
had  fuller  accounts  of  his  history ;  and  the  way  in  which
he  rates  his  disciple  shows  him  as  a  master  of  the  lans-uatre
of  abuse.

The  concluding  paragraph  about  duke  Hwan  of  Kh\  is
interesting,  but  I  can  only  dimly  perceive  its  bearing  on
the  argument  of  the  Book.

Book  XIV.    Thien  Yun.

The  contrast  between  the  movement  of  the  heavens
(^  ^),  and  the  resting  of  the  earth  (i-jjj  ^),  requires
the  translation  of  the  characters  of  the  title  by  'The
Revolution  of  Heaven.'  But  that  idea  does  not  enter
largely  into  the  subject-matter  of  the  Book.  '  The  whole,'
says  Hsiian  Ying,  'consists  of  eight  paragraphs,  the  first
three  of  which  show  that  under  the  sky  there  is  nothing
which  is  not  dominated  by  the  Tao,  with  which  the
Tis  and  the  Kings  have  only  to  act  in  accordance;  while
the  last  five  set  forth  how  the  T  a  o  is  not  to  be  found  in
the  material  forms  and  changes  of  things,  but  in  a  spirit-
like energy  working  imperceptibly,  developing  and  con-
trolling all  phenomena.'

I  have  endeavoured  in  the  notes  on  the  former  three
paragraphs  to  make  their  meaning  less  obscure  and  uncon-
nected than  it  is  on  a  first  perusal.  The  five  illustrative
paragraphs  are,  we  may  assume,  all  of  them  factitious,  and
can  hardly  be  received  as  genuine  productions  of  A'wang-
3ze.  Li  the  sixth  paragraph,  or  at  least  a  part  of  it,  Lin
Hsi-^'ung  acknowledges  the  hand  of  the  forger,  and  not
less  unworthy  of  credence  are  in  my  opinion  the  rest  of  it
and  much  of  the  other  four  paragraphs.     If  they  may  be


146  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XV.


/


taken  as  from  the  hand  of  our  author  himself,  he  was  too
much  devoted  to  his  own  system  to  hold  the  balance  of
judgment  evenly  between  Lao  and  Khung.

Book  XV.    Kho  t.

I  can  think  of  no  better  translation  for  J|]  ^,  the  two
first  characters  of  the  Book,  and  which  appear  as  its  title,
than  our  '  Ingrained  Ideas;'  notions,  that  is,  held  as  firmly
as  if  they  were  cut  into  the  substance  of  the  mind.  They
do  not  belong  to  the  whole  Book,  however,  but  only  to
the  first  member  of  the  first  paragraph.  That  paragraph
describes  six  classes  of  men,  only  the  last  of  which  are  the
right  followers  of  the  Tao  ; — the  Sages,  from  the  Taoistic
point  of  view,  who  again  are  in  the  last  sentence  of  the  last
paragraph  identified  w^ith  '  the  True  Men '  described  at
length  in  the  sixth  Book.  The  fifth  member  of  this  first
paragraph  is  interesting  as  showing  how  there  was  a  class
of  Taoists  who  cultivated  the  system  with  a  view  to  obtain
longevity  by  their  practices  in  the  management  of  the
breath  ;  yet  our  author  does  not  accord  to  them  his  full
approbation,  while  at  the  same  time  the  higher  Taoism  ap-
pears in  the  last  paragraph,  as  promoting  longevity  without
the  management  of  the  breath.  K/zu  Po-hsiu,  in  his  com-
mentary on  ^wang-jze,  which  was  published  in  laio,  gives
Po-i  and  Shu-,^/n  as  instances  of  the  first  class  spoken
of  here  ;  Confucius  and  Mencius,  of  the  second  ;  1  Yin  and
Fu  Yiieh,  of  the  third ;  KJiko  Fu  and  Hsu  Via,  as  instances
of  the  fourth.  Of  the  fifth  class  he  gives  no  example,  but
that  of  Phang  3u  mentioned  in  it.

That  which  distinguishes  the  genuine  sage,  the  True
Man  of  Taoism,  is  his  pure  simplicity  in  pursuing  the  Way,
as  it  is  seen  in  the  operation  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  and
nourishing  his  spirit  accordingly,  till  there  ensues  an
ethereal  amalgamation  between  his  Way  and  the  orderly
operation  of  Heaven.  This  subject  is  pursued  to  the  end  of
the  Book.  The  most  remarkable  predicate  of  the  spirit  so
trained  is  that  in  the  third  paragraph, — that  'Its  name  is  the


BK,  XVI.     BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.      I47

same  as  Ti  or  God  ; '  on  which  none  of  the  critics  has  been
able  to  throw  any  satisfactory  light.  Balfour's  version
is  : — '  Its  name  is  called  "  One  with  God  ;  "  '  Giles's,  '  Its
name  is  then  "  Of  God," '  the  '  then '  being  in  conse-
quence of  his  view  that  the  subject  is  'man^s  spiritual
existence  before  he  is  born  into  the  world  of  mortals.'  My
own  view  of  the  meaning  appears  in  my  version.

Lin  Hsi-/??ung,  however,  calls  the  genuineness  of  the
whole  Book  into  question,  and  thinks  it  may  have  proceeded
from  the  same  hand  as  Book  XIII.  They  have  certainly
one  peculiarity  in  common  ; — many  references  to  sayings
which  cannot  be  traced,  but  are  introduced  by  the  formula
of  quotation,  '  Therefore,  it  is  said.'


Book  XVI.    Shan  Hsing.

'  Rectifying  or  Correcting  the  Nature  '  is  the  meaning  of
the  title,  and  expresses  sufificiently  well  the  subject-matter
of  the  Book.  It  was  written  to  expose  the  '  vulgar  '  learn-
ing of  the  time  as  contrary  to  the  principles  of  the  true
Taoism,  that  learning  being,  according  to  Lu  Shu-^nh,
'the  teachings  of  Hui-^ze  and  Kung-sun  Lung.'  It  is  to  be
wished  that  we  had  fuller  accounts  of  these.  But  see  in
Book  XXXIII.

Many  of  the  critics  are  fond  of  comparing  the  Book
with  the  2ist  chapter  of  the  7th  Book  of  Mencius,  part  i, —
where  that  philosopher  sets  forth  '  Man's  own  nature  as  the
most  important  thing  to  him,  and  the  source  of  his  true
enjoyment,'  which  no  one  can  read  without  admiration.
But  we  have  more  sympathy  with  Mencius's  fundamental
views  about  our  human  nature,  than  with  those  of  iTwang-
jze  and  his  Taoism.  Lin  Hsi-/('ung  is  rather  inclined  to
doubt  the  genuineness  of  the  Book.  Though  he  admires  its
composition,  and  admits  the  close  and  compact  sequence  of
its  sentences,  there  is  yet  something  about  it  that  does  not
smack  of  iirwang-3ze's  style.  Rather  there  seems  to  me  to
underlie  it  the  antagonism  of  Lao  and  ATwang  to  the
learning  of  the  Confucian  school.     The  only  characteristic

L  2


/


148  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xvii.

of  our  author  which  I  miss,  is  the  illustrative  stories  of
which  he  is  generally  so  profuse.  In  this  the  Book  agrees
with  the  preceding.

Book  XVII.    Kmii  Shui.

A' //ill  Shui,  or  'Autumn  Waters,'  the  first  two  characters
of  the  first  paragraph  of  this  Book,  are  adopted  as  its  title.
Its  subject,  in  that  paragraph,  however,  is  not  so  much  the
waters  of  autumn,  as  the  greatness  of  the  Tao  in  its  spon-
taneity, when  it  has  obtained  complete  dominion  over  man.
No  illustration  of  the  Tao  is  so  great  a  favourite  with
Lao-jze  as  water,  but  he  loved  to  set  it  forth  in  its  quiet,
onward  movement,  always  seeking  the  lowest  place,  and
always  exercising  a  beneficent  influence.  But  water  is  here
before  A"wang-ue  in  its  mightiest  volume,— the  inundated
Ho  and  the  all  but  boundless  magnitude  of  the  ocean  ;  and
as  he  takes  occasion  from  those  phenomena  to  deliver  his
lessons,  I  translate  the  title  by  'The  Floods  of  Autumn.'

To  adopt  the  account  of  the  Book  given  by  Lu  Shu-
^ih  : — '  This  Book,'  he  says,  '  shows  how  its  spontaneity
is  the  greatest  characteristic  of  the  Tao,  and  the  chief
thing  inculcated  in  it  is  that  we  must  not  allow  the  human
element  to  extinguish  in  our  constitution  the  Heavenly.

'  First,  using  the  illustrations  of  the  Ho  and  the  Sea,  our
author  gives  us  to  see  the  Five  Tis  and  the  Kings  of  the
Three  dynasties  as  only  exhibiting  the  Tao  in  a  small  de-
gree, while  its  great  development  is  not  to  be  found  in  out-
ward form  and  appliances  so  that  it  cannot  be  described  in
words,  and  it  is  difficult  to  find  its  point  of  commencement,
which  indeed  appears  to  be  impracticable,  while  still  by  doing
nothing  the  human  may  be  united  with  the  Heavenly,  and
men  may  bring  back  their  True  condition.  By  means  of
the  conversations  between  the  guardian  spirit  of  the  Ho  and
Zo  (the  god)  of  the  Sea  this  subject  is  exhaustively  treated.

'Next  (in  paragraph  8),  the  khwei,  the  millepede,  and
other  subjects  illustrate  how  the  mind  is  spirit-like  in  its
spontaneity  and  doing  nothing.  The  case  of  Confucius  (in
par.  9)  shows  the  same  spontaneity,  transforming  violence.


BK.  xviil.   BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.     I49

Kung-SLin  Lung  (in  par.  10),  refusing  to  comply  with  that
spontaneity,  and  seeking  victory  by  his  sophistical  reason-
ings, shows  his  wisdom  to  be  only  like  the  folly  of  the  frog
in  the  well.  The  remaining  three  paragraphs  bring  before
us  A^wang-jze  by  the  spontaneity  of  his  Tao,  now  superior
to  the  allurements  of  rank  ;  then,  like  the  phoenix  flying
aloft,  as  enjoying  himself  in  perfect  ease ;  and  finally,  as
like  the  fishes,  in  the  happiness  of  his  self-possession.'  Such
is  a  brief  outline  of  this  interesting  chapter.  Many  of  the
critics  would  expunge  the  ninth  and  tenth  paragraphs  as
unworthy  of  A'wang-;;ze,  the  former  as  misrepresenting
Confucius,  the  latter  as  extolling  himself.  I  think  they
may  both  be  allowed  to  stand  as  from  his  pencil.

Book  XVIII.     A'iti  Lo.

The  title  of  this  Book,  A'ih  Lo,  or  '  Perfect  Enjoyment,'
may  also  be  received  as  describing  the  subject-matter  of  it.
But  the  author  does  not  tell  us  distinctly  what  he  means  by
'  Perfect  Enjoyment.'  It  seems  to  involve  two  elements, —
freedom  from  trouble  and  distress,  and  freedom  from  the
fear  of  death.  What  men  seek  for  as  their  chief  good
would  only  be  to  him  burdens.  He  does  not  indeed  alto-
gether condemn  them,  but  his  own  quest  is  the  better  and
more  excellent  way.  His  own  enjoyment  is  to  be  obtained
by  means  of  doing  nothing  ;  that  is,  by  the  Tao  ;  of  which
passionless  and  purposeless  action  is  a  chief  characteristic  ;
and  is  at  the  same  time  the  most  effective  action,  as  is  illus-
trated in  the  operation  of  heaven  and  earth.

Such  is  the  substance  of  the  first  paragraph.  The  second
is  interesting  as  showing  how  his  principle  controlled
Kwang-^ze  on  the  death  of  his  wife.  Paragraph  3  shows
us  two  professors  of  Taoism  delivered  by  it  from  the  fear
of  their  own  death.  Paragraph  4  brings  our  author  be-
fore us  talking  to  a  skull,  and  then  the  skull's  appearance
to  him  in  a  dream  and  telling  him  of  the  happiness  of
the  state  after  death.  Paragraph  5  is  occupied  with  Con-
fucius and  his  favourite  disciple  Yen  Hui.  It  stands  by
itself,   unconnected    with   the    rest   of  the   Book,  and    its


I  50  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XIX.

genuineness  is  denied  by  some  commentators.  The  last
paragraph,  found  in  an  enlarged  form  in  the  Books  ascribed
to  Lieh-(^ze,  has  as  little  to  do  as  the  fifth  with  the  general
theme  of  the  Book,  and  is  a  strange  anticipation  in  China
of  the  transrotation  or  transformation  system  of  Buddhism.
Indeed,  after  reading  this  Book,  we  cease  to  wonder  that
Taoism  and  Buddhism  should  in  many  practices  come  so
near  each  other.


Book  XIX.    TA  Shang.

I  have  been  inclined  to  translate  the  title  of  this  Book
by  '  The  Fuller  Understanding  of  Life,'  with  reference  to
what  is  said  in  the  second  Book  on  '  The  Nourishment  of
the  Lord  of  Life.'  There  the  Life  before  the  mind  of  the
writer  is  that  of  the  Body  ;  here  he  extends  his  view  also
to  the  Life  of  the  Spirit.  The  one  subject  is  not  kept,
however,  with  sufficient  distinctness  apart  from  the  other,
and  the  profusion  of  illustrations,  taken,  most  of  them,  from
the  works  of  Lieh-^^ze,  is  perplexing.

To  use  the  words  of  Lu  Shu-/^ih  : — '  This  Book  shows
how  he  who  would  skilfully  nourish  his  life,  must  maintain
his  spirit  complete,  and  become  one  with  Heaven.  These
two  ideas  preside  in  it  throughout.  In  par,  2,  the  words  of
the  Warden  Yin  show  that  the  spirit  kept  complete  is
beyond  the  reach  of  harm.  In  3,  the  illustration  of  the
hunchback  shows  how  the  will  must  be  maintained  free
from  all  confusion.  In  4,  that  of  the  ferryman  shows  that
to  the  completeness  of  the  spirit  there  is  required  the  dis-
regard of  life  or  death.  In  5  and  6,  the  words  of  Thien
Khai-/l'ih  convey  a  warning  against  injuring  the  life  by  the
indulgence  of  sensual  desires.  In  7,  the  sight  of  a  sprite  by
duke  Hwan  unsettles  his  spirit.  In  8,  the  gamecock  is
trained  so  as  to  preserve  the  spirit  unagitated.  In  9,  we
see  the  man  in  the  water  of  the  cataract  resting  calmly  in
his  appointed  lot.  In  10,  we  have  the  maker  of  the  bell-
stand  completing  his  work  as  he  did  in  accordance  with
the  mind  of  Heaven.     All  these  instances  show  how  the


BK.  XXI.    BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.       I51

spirit  is  nourished.  The  reckless  charioteering  of  Tung  Ye
in  par.  11,  not  stopping  when  the  strength  of  his  horses  was
exhausted,  and  the  false  pretext  of  Sun  Hsiu,  clear  as  at
noon-day,  are  instances  of  a  different  kind  ;  while  in  the
skilful  Shui,  hardly  needing  the  application  of  his  mind,  and
fully  enjoying  himself  in  all  things,  his  movements  testify  of
his  harmony  with  Heaven,  and  his  spiritual  completeness.'


Book  XX.    Shan  Mu.

It  requires  a  httle  effort  to  perceive  that  Shan  M  d,  the
title  of  this  Book,  does  not  belong  to  it  as  a  whole,  but
only  to  the  first  of  its  nine  paragraphs.  That  speaks  of  a
larere  tree  which  our  author  once  saw  on  a  mountain.  The
other  paragraphs  have  nothing  to  do  with  mountain  trees,
large  or  small.  As  the  last  Book  might  be  considered  to
be  supplementary  to  '  the  Nourishment  of  Life,'  discussed
in  Book  III,  so  this  is  taken  as  having  the  same  relation
to  Book  IV,  which  treats  of '  Man  in  the  World,  associated
with  other  men.'  It  shows  by  its  various  narratives,  some
of  which  are  full  of  interest,  how  by  a  strict  observance  of
the  principles  and  lessons  of  the  Tao  a  man  may  preserve
his  life  and  be  happy,  may  do  the  right  thing  and  enjoy
himself  and  obtain  the  approbation  of  others  in  the  various
circumstances  in  which  he  may  be  placed.  The  themes
both  of  Books  I  and  IV  blend  together  in  it.  Paragraph
<S  has  more  the  character  of  an  apologue  than  most  of
A'wang-jze's  stories.


Book  XXI.    Thien  3ze-fang.

Thien  3ze-fang  is  merely  the  name  of  one  of  the  men
who  appear  in  the  first  paragraph.  That  he  was  a  his-
torical character  is  learned  from  the  '  Plans  of  the  Warring
States,'  XIV,  art.  6,  where  we  find  him  at  the  court  of  the
marquis  Wan  of  Wei  (b.  C.  424-387),  acting  as  counsellor  to
that  ruler.     Thien  was  his  surname ;  3ze-fang  his  designa-


152  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xxil.

tion,  and  Wu-<^ai  his  name.     He  has  nothing  to  do  with
any  of  the  paragraphs  but  the  first.

It  is  not  easy  to  reduce  all  the  narratives  or  stories  in  the
Book  to  one  category.  The  fifth,  seventh,  and  eighth,  indeed,
are  generally  rejected  as  spurious,  or  unworthy  of  our
author  ;  and  the  sixth  and  ninth  are  trivial,  though  the
ninth  bears  all  the  marks  of  his  graphic  style.  Paragraphs
3  and  4  are  both  long  and  important.  A  common  idea  in
them  and  in  1,  2,  and  10  seems  to  be  that  the  presence  and
power  of  the  Tao  cannot  be  communicated  by  words,  and
are  independent  of  outward  condition  and  circumstances.


Book  XXIL    Km  Pei  Yu.

With  this  Book  the  Second  Part  of  iTwang-^ze's  Essays
or  Treatises  ends.  '  All  the  Books  in  it/  says  Lu  Shu-/&ih,
'  show  the  opposition  of  Taoism  to  the  pursuit  of  know-
ledge as  enjoined  in  the  Confucian  and  other  schools ;  and
this  Book  may  be  regarded  as  the  deepest,  most  vehement,
and  clearest  of  them  all.'  The  concluding  sentences  of
the  last  paragraph  and  Lao-jze's  advice  to  Confucius  in
par.  5,  to  '  sternly  repress  his  knowledge,'  may  be  referred
to  as  illustrating  the  correctness  of  Lu's  remark.

Book  seventeenth  is  commonly  considered  to  be  the  most
eloquent  of  ATwang-jze's  Treatises,  but  this  twenty-second
Book  is  not  inferior  to  it  in  eloquence,  and  it  is  more  charac-
teristic of  his  method  of  argument.  The  way  in  which  he
runs  riot  in  the  names  with  which  he  personifies  the  attri-
butes of  the  Tao,  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  subtle
manner  in  which  he  often  brings  out  his  ideas  ;  and  in  no
other  Book  does  he  set  forth  more  emphatically  what  his
own  idea  of  the  Tao  was,  though  the  student  often  fails  to
be  certain  that  he  has  exactly  caught  the  meaning.

The  title,  let  it  be  observed,  belongs  only  to  the  first
paragraph.  The  A'ih  in  it  must  be  taken  in  the  sense  of
'  knowledge,'  and  not  of  '  wisdom.'


BK.  XXIV.    BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.     I  53


Book  XXIII.    Kang-sang  A'^u.

It  is  not  at  all  certain  that  there  ever  was  such  a  per-
sonage as  Kang-sang  AVm,  who  gives  its  name  to  the  Book.
In  his  brief  memoir  of  A^wang-:;ze,  Sze-ma  K/n&n  spells,  as
we  should  say,  the  first  character  of  the  surname  differently,
and  for  the  Kang  (^),  employs  Khang  (/l),  adding  his
own  opinion,  that  there  was  nothing  in  reality  corresponding
to  the  account  given  of  the  characters  in  this  and  some
other  Books.  They  would  be  therefore  the  inventions  of
ATwang-jze,  devised  by  him  to  serve  his  purpose  in  setting
forth  the  teaching  of  Lao-jze.  It  may  have  been  so,  but
the  value  of  the  Book  would  hardly  be  thereby  affected.

Lu  Shu-/^ih  gives  the  following  very  brief  account  of  the
contents.  Borrowing  the  language  of  Mencius  concerning
Yen  Hui  and  two  other  disciples  of  Confucius  as  compared
with  the  sage,  he  says,  '  Kang-sang  K/m  had  all  the  mem-
bers of  Lao-^ze,  but  in  small  proportions.  To  outward
appearance  he  was  above  such  as  abjure  sagehood  and  put
knowledge  away,  but  still  he  was  unable  to  transform  Nan-
yung  K/m,  whom  therefore  he  sent  to  Lao-jze  ;  and  he
announced  to  him  the  doctrine  of  the  Tao  that  everything
was  done  by  doing  nothing.'

The  reader  will  see  that  this  is  a  very  incomplete  sum-
mary of  the  contents  of  the  Book.  We  find  in  it  the
Taoistic  ideal  of  the  '  Perfect  Man,'  and  the  discipline  both
of  body  and  mind  through  the  depths  of  the  system  by
means  of  which  it  is  possible  for  a  disciple  to  become  such.

Book  XXIV.    Hsij  Wu-kwei.

This  Book  is  named  from  the  first  three  characters  in  it,
the  surname  and  name  of  Hsii  Wu-kwei,  who  plays  the
most  important  part  in  the  first  two  paragraphs,  and  does
not  further  appear.  He  comes  before  us  as  a  well-known
recluse  of  Wei,  who  visits  the  court  to  offer  his  counsels  to
the  marquis  of  the  state.     But  whether  there  ever  was  such


154  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XXV.

a  man,  or  whether  he  was  only  a  creation  of  ATwang-jze,  we
cannot,  so  far  as  I  know,  tell.

Scattered  throughout  the  Book  are  the  lessons  so  common
with  our  author  against  sagehood  and  knowledge,  and  on
the  quality  of  doing  nothing  and  thereby  securing  the  doing
of  everything.  The  concluding  chapter  is  one  of  the  finest
descriptions  in  the  whole  Work  of  the  Tao  and  of  the
Taoistic  idea  of  Heaven.  '  There  are  in  the  Book,'  says
Lli  Fang,  '  many  dark  and  mysterious  expressions.  It  is
not  to  be  read  hastily ;  but  the  more  it  is  studied,  the  more
flavour  will  there  be  found  in  it.'


Book  XXV.    3eh-yang.

This  Book  is  named  from  the  first  two  characters  in  it, —
'3eh-yang,'  which  again  are  the  designation  of  a  gentle-
man of  Lu,  called  Phang  Yang,  who  comes  before  us  in
Klixx,  seeking  for  an  introduction  to  the  king  of  that  state,
with  the  view,  we  may  suppose,  of  giving  him  good  counsel.
Whether  he  ever  got  the  introduction  which  he  desired  we  do
not  know.  The  mention  of  him  only  serves  to  bring  in  three
other  individuals,  all  belonging  to  Kh\x^  and  the  characters
of  two  of  them  ;  but  we  hear  no  more  of  3eh-yang.  The
second  and  third  paragraphs  are,  probably,  sequels  to  the
first,  but  his  name  does  not  appear.

The  paragraphs  from  4  to  9  have  more  or  less  interest  in
themselves  ;  but  it  is  not  easy  to  trace  in  them  any  sequence
of  thought.  The  tenth  and  eleventh  are  more  important.
The  former  deals  with  '  the  Talk  of  the  Hamlets  and  Vil-
lages,' the  common  sentiments  of  men,  which,  correct  and
just  in  themselves,  are  not  to  be  accepted  as  a  sufficient
expression  of  the  Tao  ;  the  latter  sets  forth  how  the  name
Tao  itself  is  only  a  metaphorical  term,  used  for  the  pur-
pose of  description  ;  as  if  the  Tao  were  a  thing,  and  not
capable,  therefore,  from  its  material  derivation  of  giving
adequate  expression  to  our  highest  notion  of  what  it  is.

'  The  Book,'  says  Lu  Shu-^^ih,  '  illustrates  how  the  Great
Tao  cannot  be  described  by  any  name  ;  that  men  ought  to


BK.  XXVII.  BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.    I  55


Stop  where  they  do  not  really  know,  and  not  try  to  find  it
in  any  phenomenon,  or  in  any  event  or  thing.  They  must
forget  both  speech  and  silence,  and  then  they  may  approxi-
mate to  the  idea  of  the  Great  Tao.'

Book  XXVI.    Wai  Wu.

The  first  two  characters  of  the  first  paragraph  are  again
adopted  as  the  title  of  the  Book,— Wai  Wu,  'External
Things ;'  and  the  lesson  supposed  to  be  taught  in  it  is  that
expressed  in  the  first  sentence,  that  the  influence  of  external
things  on  character  and  condition  cannot  be  determined
beforehand.  It  may  be  good,  it  may  be  evil.  Mr.  Balfour
has  translated  the  two  characters  by  '  External  Advantages.'
Hu  Wan-ying  interprets  them  of  '  External  Disadvantages.'
The  things  may  in  fact  be  either  of  these.  What  seems
useless  may  be  productive  of  the  greatest  services  ;  and
what  men  deem  most  advantageous  may  turn  out  to  be
most  hurtful  to  them.

What  really  belongs  to  man  is  the  Tao.  That  is  his
own,  sufiicient  for  his  happiness,  and  cannot  be  taken  from
him,  if  he  prize  it  and  cultivate  it.  But  if  he  neglect  it,  and
yield  to  external  influences  unfavourable  to  it,  he  may
become  bad,  and  suffer  all  that  is  most  hateful  to  him  and
injurious.

Readers  must  judge  for  themselves  of  the  way  in  which
the  subject  is  illustrated  in  the  various  paragraphs.  Some
of  the  stories  are  pertinent  enough  ;  others  are  wide  of  the
mark.  The  second,  third,  and  fourth  paragraphs  are  gene-
rally held  to  be  spurious,  '  poor  in  composition,  and  not  at
all  to  the  point.'  If  my  note  on  the  '  six  faculties  of  percep-
tion '  in  par.  9  be  correct;,  we  must  admit  in  it  a  Buddhistic
hand,  modifying  the  conceptions  of  Kwang-^zQ  after  he
had  passed  away.

Book  XXVII.    Yt)  Yen.

Yu  Yen,  '  Metaphorical  Words,'  stand  at  the  commence-
ment of  the  Book,  and  have  been  adopted  as  its  name.


15^  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xwill.


They  might  be  employed  to  denote  its  first  paragraph,  but
are  not  appHcable  to  the  Book  as  a  whole.  Nor  let  the
reader  expect  to  find  even  here  any  disquisition  on  the
nature  of  the  metaphor  as  a  figure  of  speech.  Translated
literally,  'YiiYen'  are  'Lodged  Words,'  that  is,  Ideas
that  receive  their  meaning  or  character  from  their  environ-
ment, the  narrative  or  description  in  which  they  are
deposited.

i^wang-3ze  wished,  I  suppose,  to  give  some  description
of  the  style  in  which  he  himself  wrote  :— now  metaphorical,
now  abounding  in  quotations,  and  throughout  moulded  by
his  Taoistic  views.  This  last  seems  to  be  the  meaning
of  his  /iTih  Yen,— literally,  'Cup,  or  Goblet,  Words,'  that  is,
words,  common  as  the  water  constantly  supplied  in  the
cup,  but  all  moulded  by  the  T^oist  principle,  the  element
of  and  from  Heaven  blended  in  man's  constitution  and  that
should  direct  and  guide  his  conduct.  The  best  help  in  the
interpretation  of  the  paragraph  is  derived  from  a  study  of
the  difficult  second  Book,  as  suggested  in  the  notes.

Of  the  five  paragraphs  that  follow  the  first,  the  second
relates  to  the  change  of  views,  which,  it  is  said,  took  place
in  Confucius  ;  the  third,  to  the  change  of  feeling  in  3ang-jze
in  his  poverty  and  prosperity  ;  the  fourth,  to  changes  of
character  produced  in  his  disciple  by  the  teachings  of  Tung-
kwo  ^ze-k/n  ;  the  fifth,  to  the  changes  in  the  appearance  of
the  shadow  produced  by  the  ever-changing  substance ;
and  the  sixth,  to  the  change  of  spirit  and  manner  produced
in  Yang  K\x  by  the  stern  lesson  of  Lio-^ze.

Various  other  lessons,  more  or  less  appropriate  and  im-
portant, are  interspersed.

Some  critics  argue  that  this  Book  must  have  originally
been  one  with  the  thirty-second,  which  was  made  into  two
by  the  insertion  between  its  Parts  of  the  four  spurious
intervening  Books,  but  this  is  uncertain  and  unlikely.


Book  XXVIII.    Zang  Wang.
ZangWang,  explaining  the  characters  as  I  have  done,


BK.  XXIX.    BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.  I  57


fairly  indicates  the  subject-matter  of  the  Book.  Not  that
we  have  a  king  in  every  ilhistration,  but  the  personages
adduced  are  always  men  of  worth,  who  decline  the  throne,
or  gift,  or  distinction  of  whatever  nature,  proffered  to  them,
and  feel  that  they  have  something  better  to  live  for.

A  persuasion,  however,  is  widely  spread,  that  this  Book
and  the  three  that  follow  are  all  spurious.  The  first  critic
of  note  to  challenge  their  genuineness  was  Su  Shih  (better
known  as  Su  Tung-pho,  A.  D.  1036-1101);  and  now,  some
of  the  best  editors,  such  as  Lin  Hsi-/^ung,  do  not  admit
them  into  their  texts,  while  others  who  are  not  bold  enoueh
to  exclude  them  altogether,  do  not  think  it  worth  their
while  to  discuss  them  seriously.  Hu  Wan-ying,  for  in-
stance, says,  '  Their  style  is  poor  and  mean,  and  they  are,
without  doubt,  forgeries.  I  will  not  therefore  trouble
myself  with  comments  of  praise  or  blame  upon  them.  The
reader  may  accept  or  reject  them  at  his  pleasure.'

But  something  may  be  said  for  them.  Sze-ma  AV^ien
seems  to  have  been  acquainted  with  them  all.  In  his
short  biographical  notice  of  A' wang-^ze,  he  says,  '  He  made
the  Old  Fisherman,  the  Robber  A'ih,  and  the  Cutting
Open  Satchels,  to  defame  and  calumniate  the  disciples  of
Confucius.'  A'/zien  does  not  indeed  mention  our  present
Book  along  with  XXX  and  XXXI,  but  it  is  less  open  to
objection  on  the  ground  he  mentions  than  they  are.  I  think
if  it  had  stood  alone,  it  would  not  have  been  condemned.


Book  XXIX.    Tao  A-ih.

It  has  been  seen  above  that  Sze-ma  Kh\&x\  expressly
ascribes  the  Book  called  '  the  Robber  A"ih  '  to  ATwang-
jze.  A"//ien  refers  also  in  another  place  to  A'ih,  adducing
the  facts  of  his  history  in  contrast  with  those  about
Confucius'  favourite  disciple  Yen  Hui  as  inexplicable  on
the  supposition  of  a  just  and  wise  Providence.  We  must
conclude  therefore  that  the  Book  existed  in  AV/ien's
time,  and  that  he  had  read  it.  On  the  other  hand  it  has
been  shown  that  Confucius  could  not  have  been  on  terms


158  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XXX.

of  friendship  with  Liii-hsia  K\,  and  all  that  is  related  of  his
brother  the  robber  wants  substantiation.  That  such  a  man
ever  existed  appears  to  me  very  doubtful.  Are  we  to  put
down  the  whole  of  the  first  paragraph  then  as  a  jeu
d' esprit  on  the  part  of  iTwang-^ze,  intended  to  throw
ridicule  on  Confucius  and  what  our  author  considered  his
pedantic  ways.?  It  certainly  does  so,  and  we  are  amused
to  hear  the  sage  outcrowed  by  the  robber.

In  the  other  two  paragraphs  we  have  good  instances  of
/Twang-jze's  '  metaphorical  expressions,'  his  coinage  of
names  for  his  personages,  more  or  less  ingeniously  indi-
cating their  characters ;  but  in  such  cases  the  element  of
time  or  chronology  does  not  enter  ;  and  it  is  the  anachro-
nism of  the  first  paragraph  which  constitutes  its  chief
difficulty.

The  name  of  '  Robber  A'ih '  may  be  said  to  be  a  coinage  ;
and  that  a  famous  robber  was  popularly  indicated  by  the
name  appears  from  its  use  by  Mencius  (III,  ii,  ch.  10,  3),  to
explain  which  the  commentators  have  invented  the  story  of
a  robber  so-called  in  the  time  of  Hwang-Ti,  in  the  twenty-
seventh  century  B.  C. !  Was  there  really  such  a  legend  ?
and  did  iiTwang-jze  take  advantage  of  it  to  apply  the  name
to  a  notorious  and  disreputable  brother  of  Liu-hsia  K\}
Still  there  remain  the  anachronisms  in  the  paragraph  which
have  been  pointed  out.  On  the  whole  we  must  come  to
a  conclusion  rather  unfavourable  to  the  genuineness  of  the
Book.  But  it  must  have  been  forged  at  a  very  early  time,
and  we  have  no  idea  by  whom.

Book  XXX.    Yueh  .^ien.

We  need  not  suppose  that  anything  ever  occurred  in
A^wang-jze's  experience  such  as  is  described  here.  The
whole  narrative  is  metaphorical ;  and  that  he  himself  is
made  to  play  the  part  in  it  which  he  describes,  only  shows
how  the  style  of  writing  in  wdiich  he  indulged  was  ingrained
into  the  texture  of  his  mind.  We  do  not  know  that  there
ever  was  a  ruler  of  A'ao  who  indulged  in  the  love  of  the


BK.  XXXI.    BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.    I  59

sword-fight,  and  kept  about  him  a  crowd  of  vulgar  bravoes
such  as  the  story  describes.  We  may  be  assured  that  our
author  never  wore  the  bravo's  dress  or  girt  on  him  the
bravo's  sword.  The  whole  is  a  metaphorical  representation
of  the  way  in  which  a  besotted  ruler  might  be  brought  to
a  feeling  of  his  degradation,  and  recalled  to  a  sense  of  his
duty  and  the  way  in  w^hich  he  might  fulfil  it.  The  narrative
is  full  of  interest  and  force.  I  do  not  feel  any  great  difficulty
in  accepting  it  as  the  genuine  composition  of  A'wang-^ze.
Who  but  himself  could  have  composed  it  ?  Was  it  a  good-
humoured  caricature  of  him  by  an  able  Confucian  writer  to
repay  him  for  the  ridicule  he  was  fond  of  casting  on  the
sage .''

Book  XXXI.    Ytj-Ft^.

'  The  Old  Fisherman '  is  the  fourth  of  the  Books  in  the
collection  of  the  writings  of  K\va.ng-^ze  to  which,  since  the
time  of  Su  Shih,  the  epithet  of  '  spurious  '  has  been  attached
by  many.  My  own  opinion,  however,  has  been  already
intimated  that  the  suspicions  of  the  genuineness  of  those
Books  have  been  entertained  on  insufficient  grounds ;  and
so  far  as  'the  Old  Fisherman'  is  concerned,  I  am  glad  that  it
has  come  down  to  us,  spurious  or  genuine.  There  may  be
a  certain  coarseness  in  '  the  Robber  A'ih,'  which  makes  us
despise  Confucius  or  laugh  at  him ;  but  the  satire  in  this
Book  is  delicate,  and  we  do  not  like  the  sage  the  less  when
he  walks  up  the  bank  from  the  stream  where  he  has  been
lectured  by  the  fisherman.  The  pictures  of  him  and  his
disciples  in  the  forest,  reading  and  singing  on  the  Apricot
Terrace,  and  of  the  old  man  slowly  impelling  his  skiff  to
the  land  and  then  as  quietly  impelling  it  away  till  it  is  lost
among  the  reeds,  are  delicious ;  there  is  nothing  finer  of  its
kind  in  the  volume.  What  hand  but  that  of  /i  wang-jze,
so  light  in  its  touch  and  yet  so  strong,  both  incisive  and
decisive,  could  have  delineated  them }


l6o  THE   TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xxxii.


Book  XXXII.     Lieh  Yu-khau.

Lieh  Yli-khau,  the  surname  and  name  of  Lieh-^ze,  with
which  the  first  paragraph  commences,  have  become  current
as  the  name  of  the  Book,  though  they  have  nothing  to  do
with  any  but  that  one  paragraph,  which  is  found  also  in  the
second  Book  of  the  writings  ascribed  to  Lieh-^ze.  There
are  some  variations  in  the  two  Texts,  but  they  are  so  shght
that  we  cannot  look  on  them  as  proofs  that  the  two  passages
are  narratives  of  independent  origin.

Various  difficulties  surround  the  questions  of  the  existence
of  Lieh-^ze,  and  of  the  work  which  bears  his  name.  They
will  be  found  distinctly  and  dispassionately  stated  and
discussed  in  the  146th  chapter  of  the  Catalogue  of  the
K/i'ien-lung  Imperial  Library.  The  writers  seem  to  me  to
make  it  out  that  there  was  such  a  man,  but  they  do  not
make  it  clear  when  he  lived,  or  how  his  writings  assumed
their  present  form.  There  is  a  statement  of  Liu  Hsiang
that  he  lived  in  the  time  of  duke  Mu  of  Kang  (B.C.  637-
606) ;  but  in  that  case  he  must  have  been  earlier  than
Lao-jze  himself,  whom  he  very  frequently  quotes.  The
writers  think  that  Liu's  '  Mu  of  A'ang '  should  be  Mu  of  Lu
(B.C.  409-377),  which  would  make  him  not  much  anterior
to  Mencius  and  ATwang-jze  ;  but  this  is  merely  an  ingenious
conjecture.  As  to  the  composition  of  his  chapters,  they  are
evidently  not  at  first  hand  from  Lieh,  but  by  some  one  of
his  disciples ;  whether  they  were  current  in  ATwang-^ze's
days,  and  he  made  use  of  various  passages  from  them,  or
those  passages  were  Kwang-^ze's  originally,  and  taken  from
him  by  the  followers  of  Lieh-^ze  and  added  to  what  frag-
ments they  had  of  their  master's  teaching  ; — these  are  points
which  must  be  left  undetermined.

Whether  the  narrative  about  Lieh  be  from  ATwang-^ze
or  not,  its  bearing  on  his  character  is  not  readily  appre-
hended ;  but,  as  we  study  it,  we  seem  to  understand  that
his  master  Wu-;:an  condemned  him  as  not  having  fully
attained  to  the  Tao,  but  owing  his  influence  with  others


BK.  XXXII.    BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.     l6l


mainly  to  tlie  manifestation  of  his  merely  human  quaHties.
And  this  is  the  lesson  which  our  author  keeps  before  him,
more  or  less  distinctly,  in  all  his  paragraphs.  As  Lu
Shu-Zih  says  : —

'This  Book  also  sets  forth  Doing  Nothing  as  the
essential  condition  of  the  Tao.  Lieh-jze,  frightened  at  the
respect  shown  to  him  by  the  soup-vendors,  and  yet  by  his
human  doings  drawing  men  to  him,  disowns  the  rule  of  the
heavenly ;  Hwan  of  A'ang,  thinking  himself  different  from
other  men,  does  not  know  that  Heaven  recompenses  men
according  to  their  employment  of  the  heavenly  in  them  ;
the  resting  of  the  sages  in  their  proper  rest  shows  how  the
ancients  pursued  the  heavenly  and  not  the  human  ;  the
one  who  learned  to  slay  the  Dragon,  but  afterwards  did  not
exercise  his  skill,  begins  with  the  human,  but  afterwards
goes  on  to  the  heavenly ;  in  those  who  do  not  rest  in  the
heavenly,  and  perish  by  the  inward  war,  we  see  how  the
small  men  do  not  know  the  secret  of  the  Great  Repose;
3hao  Shang,  glorying  in  the  carriages  which  he  had  ac-
quired, is  still  farther  removed  from  the  heavenly;  when
Yen  Ho  shows  that  the  sage,  in  imparting  his  instructions,
did  not  follow  the  example  of  Heaven  in  dift using  its
benefits,  we  learn  that  it  is  only  the  Doing  Nothing  of
the  True  Man  which  is  in  agreement  with  Heaven  ;  the
difficulty  of  knowing  the  mind  of  man,  and  the  various
methods  required  to  test  it,  show  the  readiness  with  which,
when  not  under  the  rule  of  Heaven,  it  seems  to  go  after
what  is  right,  and  the  greater  readiness  with  which  it  again
revolts  from  it ;  in  Khao-fu,  the  Correct,  we  have  one
indifferent  to  the  distinctions  of  rank,  and  from  him  we
advance  to  the  man  who  understands  the  great  condition
appointed  for  him,  and  is  a  follower  of  Heaven  ;  then
comes  he  who  plays  the  thief  under  the  chin  of  the  Black
Dragon,  running  the  greatest  risks  on  a  mere  peradventure
of  success,  a  resolute  opponent  of  Heaven  ;  and  finally  we
have  A'wang-^^ze  despising  the  ornaments  of  the  sacrificial
ox,  looking  in  the  same  way  at  the  worms  beneath  and  the
kites  overhead,  and  regarding  himself  as  quite  independent
[39]  M


1 62  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xxxiil,

of  them,  thus  giving  us  an  example  of  the  embodiment  of
the  spiritual,  and  of  harmony  with  Heaven.'

So  does  this  ingenious  commentator  endeavour  to  ex-
hibit the  one  idea  in  the  Book,  and  show  the  unity  of  its
different  paragraphs.

Book  XXXIII.    Thien  Hsia.

The  Thien  Hsia  with  which  this  Book  commences  is  in
regimen,  and  cannot  be  translated,  so  as  to  give  an  adequate
idea  of  the  scope  of  the  Book,  or  even  of  the  first  paragraph
to  which  it  belongs.  The  phrase  itself  means  literally '  under
heaven  or  the  sky,'  and  is  used  as  a  denomination  of  '  the
kingdom,'  and,  even  more  widely,  of '  the  world  '  or '  all  men.'
'Historical  Phases  of  Taoist  Teaching'  would  be  nearly
descriptive  of  the  subject-matter  of  the  Book ;  but  may  be  ob-
jected to  on  two  grounds: — first,  that  a  chronological  method
is  not  observed,  and  next,  that  the  concluding  paragraph  can
hardly  be  said  to  relate  to  Taoism  at  all,  but  to  the  sophisti-
cal teachers,  which  abounded  in  the  age  of  Kwang-'^ze.

Par.  I  sketches  with  a  light  hand  the  nature  of  Taoism
and  the  forms  which  it  assumed  from  the  earliest  times  to
the  era  of  Confucius,  as  imperfectly  represented  by  him  and
his  school.

Par.  2  introduces  us  to  the  system  of  Mo  Ti  and  his
school  as  an  erroneous  form  of  Taoism,  and  departing,  as  it
continued,  farther  and  farther  from  the  old  model.

Par.  3  deals  with  a  modification  of  Mohism,  advocated
by  scholars  who  are  hardly  heard  of  elsewhere.

Par.  4  treats  of  a  further  modification  of  this  modified
Mohism,  held  by  scholars  'whose  Tao  was  not  the  true
Tao,  and  whose  "  right  "  was  really  "  wrong."  '

Par.  5  goes  back  to  the  era  of  Lao-jze,  and  mentions  him
and  Kwan  Yin,  as  the  men  who  gave  to  the  system  of  Tao
a  grand  development.

Par.  6  sets  forth  A'wang-^ze  as  following  in  their  steps
and  going  beyond  them,  the  brightest  luminary  of  the
system.


BK.  XXXIII.   BRIEF  NOTICES  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS.   I  63

Par.  7  leaves  Taoism,  and  brings  up  Hui  Shih  and  other
sophists.

Whether  the  Book  should  be  received  as  from  A'wang-^ze
himself  or  from  some  early  editor  of  his  writings  is  '  a  vexed
question.'  If  it  did  come  from  his  pencil,  he  certainly  had
a  good  opinion  of  himself.  It  is  hard  for  a  foreign  student
at  this  distant  time  to  be  called  on  for  an  opinion  on  the
one  side  or  the  other.


M   2


THE

WRITINGS  OF  /nVANG-3ZE.


BOOK  I.

Part  I.    Section  I.


Hsiao-yao  Yu,  or  'Enjoyment   in   Untroubled

Ease  \'

I.  In  the  Northern  Ocean  there  is  a  fish,  the  name
of  which  is  Khwan'-, — I  do  not  know  how  many  li
in  size.  It  changes  into  a  bird  with  the  name  of
Phang,  the  back  of  which  is  (also) — I  do  not  know
how  many  li  in  extent.  When  this  bird  rouses  itself
and  flies,  its  wings  are  like  clouds  all  round  the  sky.
When  the  sea  is  moved  (so  as  to  bear  it  along),  it
prepares  to  remove  to  the  Southern  Ocean.  The
Southern  Ocean  is  the  Pool  of  Heaven.

^  See  notice  on  pp.  127,  128,  on  the  Title  and  Subject-matter
of  the  Book.

2  The  khwan  and  the  phang  are  both  fabulous  creatures,  far
transcending  in  size  the  dimensions  ascribed  by  the  wildest  fancy
of  the  West  to  the  kraken  and  the  roc.  AVang-^ze  represents
them  as  so  huge  by  way  of  contrast  to  the  small  creatures  which
he  is  intending  to  introduce  ; — to  show  that  size  has  nothing  to  do
with  the  Tao,  and  the  perfect  enjoyment  which  the  possession  of
it    affords.     The  passage   is  a  good   specimen   of  the  Yu  Yen

(^  W")'  nietaphorical  or  parabolical  narratives  or  stories,  which
are  the  chief  characteristic  of  our  author's  writings ;  but  the  reader
must  keep  in  mind  that  the  idea  or  lesson  in  its  '  lodging '  is  gene-
rally of  a  Taoistic  nature.


PT.  I,  SECT. I.       THE    WRITINGS    OF   A'WANG-3ZE.  165

There  is  the  (book  called)  Kh\  Hsieh  ^ — a  record
of  marvels.  We  have  in  it  these  words  : — '  When
the  phang  is  removing  to  the  Southern  Ocean  it
flaps  (its  wings)  on  the  water  for  3000  It.  Then  it
ascends  on  a  whirlwind  90,000  li,  and  it  rests  only
at  the  end  of  six  months.'  (But  similar  to  this  is  the
movement  of  the  breezes  which  we  call)  the  horses
of  the  fields,  of  the  dust  (which  quivers  in  the  sun-
beams), and  of  living  things  as  they  are  blown
against  one  another  by  the  air  ^.  Is  its  azure  the
proper  colour  of  the  sky  ?  Or  is  it  occasioned  by  its
distance  and  illimitable  extent  '^  If  one  w^ere  looking
down  (from  above),  the  very  same  appearance  w^ould
just  meet  his  view.

2.  And  moreover,  (to  speak  of)  the  accumulation
of  water  ; — if  it  be  not  great,  it  will  not  have  strength
to  support  a  large  boat.  Upset  a  cup  of  water  in  a
cavity,  and  a  straw  will  float  on  it  as  if  it  were  a
boat.  Place  a  cup  in  it,  and  it  will  stick  fast ; — the
w^ater  is  shallow  and  the  boat  is  large.  (So  it  is
with)  the  accumulation  of  wind  ;  if  it  be  not  great,
it  will  not  have  strength  to  support  great  wings.
Therefore  (the  phang  ascended  to)  the  height  of
90,000  li,  and  there  was  such  a  mass  of  wind  be-
neath it ;  thenceforth  the  accumulation  of  wind  was
sufficient.  As  it  seemed  to  bear  the  blue  sky  on  its
back,  and  there  was  nothing  to  obstruct  or  arrest  its
course,  it  could  pursue  its  way  to  the  South.


^  There  may  have  been  a  book  with  this  tide,  to  \\\\\c\\  A'wang-jze
appeals,  as  if  feehng  that  what  he  had  said  needed  to  be  substantiated.

-  This  seems  to  be  interjected  as  an  al'terthought,  suggesting  to
the  reader  that  the  phang,  soaring  along  at  such  a  height,  was
only  an  exaggerated  form  of  the  common  phenomena  with  which
he  was  familiar.


1 66  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK,  I.

A  cicada  and  a  little  dove  laughed  at  it,  saving,
'  We  make  an  effort  and  fly  towards  an  elm  or  sapan-
wood  tree  ;  and  sometimes  before  we  reach  it,  we  can
do  no  more  but  drop  to  the  ground.  Of  what  use
is  it  for  this  (creature)  to  rise  90,000  li,  and  make
for  the  South  ? '  He  who  goes  to  the  grassy  suburbs  \
returning  to  the  third  meal  (of  the  day),  will  have
his  belly  as  full  as  when  he  set  out ;  he  who  goes  to
a  distance  of  100  It  will  have  to  pound  his  grain
where  he  stops  for  the  night ;  he  w4io  goes  a  thou-
sand li,  will  have  to  carry  with  him  provisions  for
three  months.  What  should  these  two  small  crea-
tures know  about  the  matter  ?  The  knowledge  of
that  which  is  small  does  not  reach  to  that  which  is
great ;  (the  experience  of)  a  few  years  does  not  reach
to  that  of  many.  How  do  we  know  that  it  is  so  ?
The  mushroom  of  a  morning  does  not  know  (what
takes  place  between)  the  beginning  and  end  of  a
month  ;  the  short-lived  cicada  does  not  know  (what
takes  place  between)  the  spring  and  autumn.  These
are  instances  of  a  short  term  of  life.  In  the  south
of  KJiix"-  there  is  the  (tree)  called  Ming-ling^
whose  spring  is  500  years,  and  its  autumn  the  same  ;
in  high  antiquity  there  was  that  called  Ta-/('//un  ■^,

^  In  Chinese,  INI  an  g  3  hang;  but  this  is  not  the  name  of  any
particular  place.  The  phrase  denotes  the  grassy  suburbs  (from
their  green  colour),  not  far  from  any  city  or  town.

■^  The  great  state  of  the  South,  having  its  capital  Ying  in  the
present  Hu-pei,  and  afterwards  the  chief  competitor  with  KJnn  for
the  sovereignty  of  the  kingdom.

^  Taken  by  some  as  the  name  of  a  tortoise.

^  This  and  the  ]\Iing-ling  tree,  as  well  as  the  mushroom  men-
tioned above,  together  with  the  khwan  and  phang,  are  all
mentioned  in  the  fifth  Book  of  the  writings  of  Lieh-jze,  referred  to
in  the  next  paragraph.


PT.  r.  SECT.  I.       THE    WRITINGS    OF   A'WANG-3ZE.  167

whose  spring  was  8000  years,  and  its  autumn  the
same.  And  Phang  3"-^^  is  the  one  man  renowned
to  the  present  day  for  his  length  of  hfe  : — if  all  men
were  {to  wish)  to  match  him,  would  they  not  be
miserable  ?

''^  3.  In  the  questions  put  byThang^  to  Ki  we  have
similar  statements  : — '  In  the  bare  and  barren  north
there  is  the  dark  and  vast  ocean, —  the  Pool  of
Heaven.  In  it  there  is  a  fish,  several  thousand  li
in  breadth,  while  no  one  knows  its  length.  Its  name
is  the  khwan.  There  is  (also)  a  bird  named  the
phang;  its  back  is  like  the  Thai  mountain,  while
its  wings  are  like  clouds  all  round  the  sky.  On  a
whirlwind  it  mounts  upwards  as  on  the  whorls  of
a  goat's  horn  for  90,000  li,  till,  far  removed  from  the
cloudy  vapours,  it  bears  on  its  back  the  blue  sky,
and  then  it  shapes  its  course  for  the  South,  and  pro-
ceeds to  the  ocean  there.'  A  quail  by  the  side  of  a
marsh  laughed  at  it,  and  said, '  Where  is  it  going  to  ?
I  spring  up  with  a  bound,  and  come  clown  again
when  I  have  reached  but  a  few  fathoms,  and  then
fly  about  among  the  brushwood  and  bushes  ;    and


^  Or  '  the  patriarch  Phang.'  Confucius  compared  himself  to
him  (Analects,  VII,  i)  ; — -'our  old  Phang;'  and  Kii  Hsi  thinks  he
was  a  worthy  officer  of  the  Shang  dynasty.  Whoever  he  was,  the
legends  about  him  are  a  mass  of  Taoistic  fables.  At  the  end  of
the  Shang  dynasty  (b.  c.  11 23)  he  was  more  than  767  years  old,
and  still  in  unabated  vigour.  We  read  of  his  losing  49  wives  and
54  sons ;  and  that  he  still  left  two  sons,  Wu  and  I,  who  died  in
Fu--('ien,  and  gave  their  names  to  the  Wii-i,  or  Bu-i  hills,  from
which  we  get  our  Bohea  tea  !  See  Mayers'  '  Chinese  Reader's
IManual,'  p.  175.

^  The  founder  of  the  Shang  dynasty  (b.  c.  1766-1754).  In
Lieh-jze  his  interlocutor  is  called  Hsia  Ko,  and  ^zt-k\.


l68  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  bk,  I.


this  is  the  perfection  of  flying.  Where  is  that  crea-
ture eoino-  to  ?  '  This  shows  the  difference  between
the  small  and  the  great.

Thus  it  is  that  men,  whose  wisdom  is  sufficient
for  the  duties  of  some  one  office,  or  whose  conduct
will  secure  harmony  in  some  one  district,  or  whose
virtue  is  befitting  a  ruler  so  that  they  could  efficiently
govern  some  one  state,  are  sure  to  look  on  them-
selves in  this  manner  (like  the  quail),  and  yet  Yung-
jze  ^  of  Sung  ^  would  have  smiled  and  laughed  at
them.  (This  Yung-^ze),  though  the  whole  world
should  have  praised  him,  would  not  for  that  have
stimulated  himself  to  greater  endeavour,  and  though
the  whole  world  should  have  condemned  him,  would
not  have  exercised  any  more  repression  of  his
course ;  so  fixed  Avas  he  in  the  difference  between
the  internal  (judgment  of  himself)  and  the  external
(judgment  of  others),  so  distinctly  had  he  marked
out  the  bounding  limit  of  glory  and  disgrace.  Here,
how^ever,  he  stopped.  His  place  in  the  world  indeed
had  become  indifferent  to  him,  but  still  he  had  not
planted  himself  firmly  (in  the  right  position).

There  was  Lieh-^ze  -,  who  rode  on  the  wind  and
pursued  his  way,  with  an  admirable  indifference  (to

^  We  can  hardly  tell  who  this  Yung-^ze  was.  Sung  was  a
duchy,  comprehending  portions  of  the  present  pro\inces  of  Ho-
nan,  An-hui,  and  ^iang-su.

^  See  note  on  the  title  of  Book  XXXII.  Whether  there  ever
was  a  personage  called  Lieh-jze  or  Lieh  Yu-khdu,  and  what  is  the
real  character  of  the  writings  that  go  under  his  name,  are  questions
that  cannot  be  more  than  thus  alluded  to  in  a  note.  He  is  often
introduced  by  A'wang-jze,  and  many  narratives  are  common  to
their  books.  Here  he  comes  before  us,  not  as  a  thinker  and  writer,
but  as  a  semi-supernatural  being,  who  has  only  not  yet  attained  to
the  highest  consummations  of  the  Tao.


PT.  I.  SECT.  I.        THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  1 69

all  external  things),  returning,  however,  after  fifteen
days,  (to  his  place).  In  regard  to  the  things  that
(are  supposed  to)  contribute  to  happiness,  he  was
free  from  all  endeavours  to  obtain  them ;  but  though
he  had  not  to  walk,  there  was  still  something  for
which  he  had  to  wait.  But  suppose  one  who  mounts
on  (the  ether  of)  heaven  and  earth  in  its  normal
operation,  and  drives  along  the  six  elemental  ener-
gies of  the  changing  (seasons),  thus  enjoying  himself
in  the  illimitable, — what  has  he  to  wait  for^?  There-
fore it  is  said,  'The  Perfect  man  has  no  (thought  of)
self;  the  Spirit-like  man,  none  of  merit ;  the  Sagely-
minded  man,  none  of  fame  \'

4.  Yao  ^  proposing  to  resign  the  throne  to  Hsii
Yu  '■%  said,  '  When  the  sun  and  moon  have  come
forth,  if  the  torches  have  not  been  put  out,  would  it
not  be  difficult  for  them  to  give  light  ?  When  the
seasonal  rains  are  coming  down,  if  we  still  keep
waterino-  the  ground,  will  not  our  toil  be  labour  lost
for  all  the  good  it  will  do  ?  Do  you.  Master,  stand
forth  (as  sovereign),  and  the  kingdom  will  (at  once)
be  well  governed.  If  I  still  (continue  to)  preside
over  it,  I  must  look  on  myself  as  vainly  occupying
the  place  ; — I  beg  to  resign  the  throne  to  you,'    Hsli

^  The  description  of  a  master  of  the  Tdo,  exalted  by  it,  unless
the  predicates  about  him  be  nothing  but  the  ravings  of  a  wild  ex-
travagance, above  mere  mortal  man.  In  the  conclusion,  however,
he  is  presented  under  three  different  phrases,  which  the  reader
will  do  well  to  keep  in  mind.

^  The  great  sovereign  with  whom  the  documents  of  the  Shii
^ing  commence  : — b.  c.  2357-2257.

^  A  counsellor  of  Yao,  who  is  once  mentioned  by  Sze-ma  A7/ien
in  his  account  of  Po-i, — in  the  first  Book  of  his  Biographies
(?lj  fli)-  Hs^  ^'^^  ^^  ^^^^^  ^'^^  instance  of  'the  Sagely  man,'
with  whom  the  desire  of  a  name  or  fame  has  no  influence.


I  70  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  r,

Yu  said,  '  You,  Sir,  govern  the  kingdom,  and  the
kingdom  is  well  governed.  If  I  in  these  circum-
stances  take  your  place,  shall  I  not  be  doing  so  for
the  sake  of  the  name  ?  But  the  name  is  but  the
guest  of  the  reality; — shall  I  be  playing  the  part  of
the  guest  ?  The  tailor-bird  makes  its  nest  in  the
deep  forest,  but  only  uses  a  single  branch  ;  the  mole  ^
drinks  from  the  Ho,  but  only  takes  what  fills  its
belly.  Return  and  rest  in  being  ruler, — I  will  have
nothinor  to  do  with  the  throne.  Thouoh  the  cook
were  not  attending  to  his  kitchen,  the  representative
of  the  dead  and  the  officer  of  prayer  would  not  leave
their  cups  and  stands  to  take  his  place.'

5.  ATien  Wu  ^  asked  Lien  Shu  2,  saying,  '  I  heard
A7/ieh-yu  ^  talking  words  which  were  great,  but  had
nothing  corresponding  to  them  (in  reality) ; — once
gone,  they  could  not  be  brought  back.  I  was  fright-
ened by  them  ; — they  were  like  the  Milky  Way  ^
which  cannot  be  traced  to  its  beo-innine  or  end.
They  had  no  connexion  with  one  another,  and  were
not  akin  to  the  experiences  of  men.'  '  What  were
his  words  ? '  asked  Lien  Shu,  and  the  other  replied,
(He  said)  that  'Far  away  on  the  hill  of  Ku-shih  ^
there  dwelt  a  Spirit-like  man  whose  flesh  and  skin


'  Some  say  the  tapir.

"^  Known  to  us  only  through  A'wang-jze.

^  '  The  madman  of  A7/u'  of  the  Analects,  XVIII,  5,  who  eschews
intercourse  with  Confucius.  See  Hwang-fu  ]\Ii's  account  of  him,
under  the  surname  and  name  of  Lu  Thung,  in  his  Notices  of  Emi-
nent Taoists,  I,  25.

*  Literally,  '  the  Ho  and  the  Han ; '  but  the  name  of  those
rivers  combined  was  used  to  denote  '  the  IMilky  Way.'

•■'  See  the  Khang-hsi  Thesaurus  under  the  character  avf.  All
which  is  said  about  the  hill  is  that  it  was  '  in  the  North  Sea.'


PT.  I.  SECT.  I.       THE   WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  I7I

were  (smooth)  as  ice  and  (white)  as  snow ;  that  his
manner  was  elegant  and  dehcate  as  that  of  a  virgin ;
that  he  did  not  eat  any  of  the  five  grains,  but  in-
haled the  wind  and  drank  the  dew ;  that  he  mounted
on  the  clouds,  drove  along  the  flying  dragons,  ram-
bling and  enjoying  himself  beyond  the  four  seas ;
that  by  the  concentration  of  his  spirit-like  powers  he
could  save  men  from  disease  and  pestilence,  and
secure  every  year  a  plentiful  harvest'  These  words
appeared  to  me  wild  and  incoherent  and  I  did  not
believe  them.  'So  it  is,'  said  Lien  Shu.  '  The  blind
have  no  perception  of  the  beauty  of  elegant  figures,
nor  the  deaf  of  the  sound  of  bells  and  drums.  But
is  it  only  the  bodily  senses  of  which  deafness  and
blindness  can  be  predicated  ?  There  is  also  a  simi-
lar defect  in  the  intelligence  ;  and  of  this  your  words
supply  an  illustration  in  3Aourself.  That  man,  with
those  attributes,  though  all  things  were  one  mass  of
confusion,  and  he  heard  in  that  condition  the  whole
world  crying  out  to  him  to  be  rectified,  would  not
have  to  address  himself  laboriously  to  the  task,  as
if  it  were  his  business  to  rectify  the  world.  Nothing
could  hurt  that  man  ;  the  greatest  floods,  reaching
to  the  sky,  could  not  drown  him,  nor  would  he  feel
the  fervour  of  the  greatest  heats  melting  metals  and
stones  till  they  flowed,  and  scorching  all  the  ground
and  hills.  From  the  dust  and  chaff  of  himself,  he
could  still  mould  and  fashion  Yaos  and  Shuns  ^;  —
how  should  he  be  willing  to  occupy  himself  with
things  -?'


^  Shun  was  the  successor  of  Yao  in  the  ancient  kingdom.

^  All  this  description  is  to  give  us  an  idea  of  the  '  Spirit-like
man.'  We  have  in  it  the  results  of  the  Tao  in  its  fullest  em-
bodiment.


y


172  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  I.

6.  A  man  of  Sung,  who  dealt  in  the  ceremonial
caps  (of  Yin)  ^,  went  with  them  to  Yiieh^,  the  people
of  which  cut  off  their  hair  and  tattooed  their  bodies,
so  that  they  had  no  use  for  them.  Yao  ruled  the
people  of  the  kingdom,  and  maintained  a  perfect
government  within  the  four  seas.  Having  gone  to
see  the  four  (Perfect)  Ones  ^  on  the  distant  hill  of
Ku-shih,  when  (he  returned  to  his  capital)  on  the
south  of  the  Fan  water*,  his  throne  appeared  no
more  to  his  deep-sunk  oblivious  eyes  ^

7.  Hui-jze^  told  AVang-jze,  saying,  'The  king  of
Wei  "^  sent  me  some  seeds  of  a  large  calabash,  which
I  sowed.  The  fruit,  when  fully  grown,  could  contain
five  piculs  (of  anything).     I  used  it  to  contain  water,


1  See  the  U  K\,  IX,  iii,  3.

^  A  state,  part  of  the  present  province  of  ^ieh-/^iang.
^  Said  to  have   been   Hsii   Yu   mentioned    above,  with    Nieh
A7/ueh,  Wang  I,  and  Phi-i,  who  will  by  and  by  come  before  us.

*  A  river  in  Shan-hsi,  on  which  was  the  capital  of  Yao  ; — a  tribu-
tary of  the  Ho.

°  This  paragraph  is  intended  to  give  us  an  idea  of '  the  Perfect
man,'  who  has  no  thought  of  himself.  The  description,  however,
is  brief  and  tame,  compared  with  the  accounts  of  Hsii  Yu  and  of
'  the  Spirit-like  man.'

*  Or  Hui  Shih,  the  chief  minister  of  '  king  Hui  of  Liang  (or
Wei),  (b.  c.  370-333),'  with  an  interview  between  whom  and  INIen-
cius  the  works  of  that  philosopher  commence.  He  was  a  friend
of  A'wang-jze,  and  an  eccentric  thinker ;  and  in  Book  XXXIII
there  is  a  long  account  of  several  of  his  views.  I  do  not  think
that  the  conversations  about  '  the  great  calabash  '  and  '  the  great
tree '  really  took  place ;  A^wang-jze  probably  invented  them,  to
illustrate  his  point  that  size  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Tao,  and
that  things  which  seemed  useless  were  not  really  so  when  rightly
used.

■^  Called  also  Liang  from  the  name  of  its  capital.  Wei  was  one
of  the  three  states  (subscqucnlly  kingdoms),  into  which  the  great
fief  of  3in  was  divided  about  b.  c.  400.


PT.  I.  SECT.  I.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-SZE.  I  73

but  it  was  so  heavy  that  I  could  not  Uft  it  by  myself.
I   cut   it   in   two   to   make   the   parts    into   drinking
vessels ;    but   the   dried   shells   were   too   wide  and
unstable  and  would  not  hold  (the  liquor)  ;  nothing
but  laree  useless  thinsrs  !     Because  of  their  useless-
ness  I  knocked  them  to  pieces.'    AVang-jze  replied,
'  You  were  indeed  stupid,  my  master,  in  the  use  of
what  was  larQ-e.     There  was  a  man  of  Suno-  who
was  skilful  at  making  a  salve  which  kept  the  hands
from  getting  chapped ;  and  (his  family)  for  genera-
tions had  made  the  bleaching   of  cocoon-silk  their
business.     A  stranger  heard  of  it,  and  proposed  to
buy  the  art  of  the  preparation  for  a  hundred  ounces
of  silver.     The  kindred  all  came  together,  and  con-
sidered the  proposal.     "  We  have,"  said  they,  "  been
bleaching  cocoon-silk  for  generations,  and  have  only
gained  a  little  money.     Now  in  one  morning  we  can
sell  to  this  man  our  art  for  a  hundred  ounces  ; — let
him  have  it."     The  stranger  accordingly  got  it  and
w^ent  away  with  it  to  give  counsel  to  the  king  of
Wu\whowas  then  eneaofed  in  hostilities  with  Ytieh.
The  king  gave  him  the  command  of  his  fleet,  and
in  the  winter  he  had  an  engagement  with  that  of
Ylleh,  on  which  he  inflicted  a  great  defeat  -,  and  was
invested  with  a  portion  of  territory  taken  from  Ytieh.
The  keeping  the  hands  from  getting  chapped  was
the  same  in  both  cases;  but  in  the  one  case  it  led  to
the  investiture  (of  the  possessor  of  the  salve),  and


^  A  great  and  ancient  state  on  the  sea-board,  north  of  Yiieh.
The  name  remains  in  the  district  of  Wu-X-iang  in  the  prefecture  of
Su-Mu.

"^  The  salve  gave  the  troops  of  Wii  a  great  advantage  in  a  war
on  the  A'iang,  especially  in  winter.


I  74  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  I.


in  the  other  it  had  only  enabled  its  owners  to  con-
tinue their  bleaching.  The  difference  of  result  was
owinof  to  the  different  use  made  of  the  art.  Now
you,  Sir,  had  calabashes  large  enough  to  hold  five
piculs  ; — why  did  you  not  think  of  making  large
bottle-gourds  of  them,  by  means  of  which  you  could
have  floated  over  rivers  and  lakes,  instead  of  giving
yourself  the  sorrow  of  finding  that  they  were  useless
for  holding  anything.  Your  mind,  my  master,  would
seem  to  have  been  closed  against  all  intelligence !'

Hui-jze  said  to  y^Twang-^ze,  '  I  have  a  large  tree,
which  men  call  the  Ailantus\  Its  trunk  sw^ells  out
to  a  large  size,  but  is  not  fit  for  a  carpenter  to  apply
his  line  to  it ;  its  smaller  branches  are  knotted  and
crooked,  so  that  the  disk  and  square  cannot  be  used
on  them.  Though  planted  on  the  wayside,  a  builder
would  not  turn  his  head  to  look  at  it.  Now  your
words,  Sir,  are  great,  but  of  no  use ; — all  unite  in
putting  them  away  from  them.'  /vwang-jze  replied,
'  Have  you  never  seen  a  wild  cat  or  a  weasel  ?  There
it  lies,  crouching  and  low,  till  the  wanderer  ap-
proaches ;  east  and  west  it  leaps  about,  avoiding
neither  what  is  high  nor  what  is  low,  till  it  is  caught
in  a  trap,  or  dies  in  a  net.  Again  there  is  the  Yak  -,
so  large  that  it  is  like  a  cloud  hanging  in  the  sky.
It  is  large  indeed,  but  it  cannot  catch  mice.  You,
Sir,  have  a  large  tree  and  are  troubled  because  it  is
of  no  use ; — why  do  you  not  plant  it  in  a  tract  where
there  is  nothing  else,  or  in  a  wide  and  barren  wild  ?


'  The  Ailantus  glandulosa,  common  in  the  north  of  China,
called  *  the  fetitl  tree,'  from  the  odour  of  its  leaves.

"^  The  bos  grunniens  of  Thibet,  the  long  tail  of  which  is  in
great  demand  for  making  standards  and  chowries.


PT.  I.  SECT.  I.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    iiWANG-3ZE.  I  75

There  you  might  saunter  idly  by  its  side,  or  iu
the  enjoyment  of  untroubled  ease  sleep  beneath  it.
Neither  bill  nor  axe  would  shorten  its  existence  ;
there  would  be  nothing  to  injure  it.  What  is  there
in  its  uselessness  to  cause  you  distress  ?'


I  76  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK,  II.


BOOK    II.

Part  I.     Section  II.

Kh\  Wu  Lun,  or  '  The  Adjustment  of
Controversies  ^'

I.  Nan-kwo  ^z&-kk\ "-  was  seated,  leaning  for-
ward on  his  stool.  He  was  looking  up  to  heaven
and  breathed  gently,  seeming  to  be  in  a  trance,  and
to  have  lost  all  consciousness  of  any  companion.
(His  disciple).  Yen  AV^ang  3ze-yu  ^,  who  was  in
attendance  and  standing  before  him,  said,  '  What  is
this  ?  Can  the  body  be  made  to  become  thus  like  a
withered  tree,  and  the  mind  to  become  like  slaked
lime  ?  His  appearance  as  he  leans  forward  on  the
stool  to-day  is  such  as  I  never  saw  him  have  before
in  the  same  position.'  3ze-/'//i  said,  'Yen,  you  do
well  to  ask  such  a  question,  I  had  just  now  lost
myself^;  but  how  should  you  understand  it?     You


'  See  pp.  128-130.

^  Nan-kwo,  '  the  southern  suburb,'  had  probably  been  the
quarter  where  ^zQ-kJA  had  resided,  and  is  used  as  his  surname.
He  is  introduced  several  times  by  A'wang-^ze  in  his  writings  : —
Books  IV,  7  ;  XXVII,  4,  and  perhaps  elsewhere.

^  We  have  the  surname  of  this  disciple,^^Ye  n  (^^);  his  name,

Yen  (|(§)  ;  his  honorary  or  posthumous  epithet  (AV/ang);  and
his  ordinary  appellation,  3ze-yu.  The  use  of  the  epithet  shows
that  he  and  his  master  had  lived  before  our  author.

■*  'He  had  lost  himself;'  that  is,  he  had  become  unconscious  of
all  around  him,  and  even  of  himself,  as  if  he  were  about  to  enter


PT.  r.  SECT.  11.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    ^WANG-8ZE.  1 77

may  have  heard  the  notes  ^  of  Man,  but  have  not
heard  those  of  Earth  ;  you  may  have  heard  the  notes
of  Earth,  but  have  not  heard  those  of  Heaven.'

3ze-yu  said,  '  I  venture  to  ask  from  you  a  descrip-
tion of  all  these.'  The  reply  was,  'When  the  breath
of  the  Great  Mass  (of  nature)  comes  strongly,  it  is
called  Wind.  Sometimes  it  does  not  come  so;  but
when  it  does,  then  from  a  myriad  apertures  there
issues  its  excited  noise  ; — have  you  not  heard  it  in
a  prolonged  gale  ?  Take  the  projecting  bluff  of  a
mountain  forest ; — in  the  great  trees,  a  hundred
spans  round,  the  apertures  and  cavities  are  like  the
nostrils,  or  the  mouth,  or  the  ears ;  now  square,  now
round  like  a  cup  or  a  mortar  ;  here  like  a  wet  foot-
print, and  there  like  a  large  puddle.  (The  sounds
issuing  from  them  are  like)  those  of  fretted  water,  of
the  arrowy  whizz,  of  the  stern  command,  of  the  in-
haling of  the  breath,  of  the  shout,  of  the  gruff  note,
of  the  deep  wail,  of  the  sad  and  piping  note.  The
first  notes  are  slight,  and  those  that  follow  deeper,
but  in  harmony  with  them.  Gentle  winds  produce
a  small  response  ;  violent  winds  a  great  one.  When
the  fierce  gusts  have  passed  away,  all  the  apertures


into  the  state  of  '  an  Immortal/  a  mild  form  of  the  Buddhistic
s  am  ad  hi.  But  his  attitude  and  appearance  were  intended  by
A'wang-3;ze  to  indicate  Avhat  should  be  the  mental  condition  in
reference  to  the  inquiry  pursued  in  the  Book; — a  condition,  it
appears  to  me,  of  agnosticism.  See  the  account  of  Lao-jze  in
a  similar  trance  in  Book  XXI,  par.  4.

^  The  Chinese  term  here  (lai)  denotes  a  reed  or  pipe,  with  three
holes,  by  a  combination  of  which  there  was  formed  the  rudimentary
or  reed  organ.  Our  author  uses  it  for  the  sounds  or  notes  heard  in
nature,  various  as  the  various  opinions  of  men  in  their  discussions
about  thin  OS.

[39]  N


178  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  Ii.

are  empty  (and  still); — have  you  not  seen  this  in  the
bending  and  quivering  of  the  branches  and  leaves  ?  '
3ze-yLi  said,  '  The  notes  of  Earth  then  are  simply
those  which  come  from  its  myriad  apertures  ;  and
the  notes  of  Man  may  just  be  compared  to  those
which  (are  brought  from  the  tubes  of)  bamboo  ; —
allow  me  to  ask  about  the  notes  of  Heaven  \'  3^^-
Mi  replied,  '  When  (the  wind)  blows,  (the  sounds
from)  the  myriad  apertures  are  different,  and  (its
cessation)  makes  them  stop  of  themselves.  Both  of
these  things  arise  from  (the  wind  and  the  apertures)
themselves  : — should  there  be  any  other  agency
that  excites  them  ?'

2.  Great  knowledge  is  wide  and  comprehensive  ;
small  knowledge  is  partial  and  restricted.  Great
speech  is  exact  and  complete ;  small  speech  is
(merely)  so  much  talk  ^.  When  we  sleep,  the  soul
communicates  with  (what  is  external  to  us) ;  when
we  awake,  the  body  is  set  free.  Our  intercourse
with  others  then  leads  to  various  activity,  and  daily
there  is  the  striving  of  mind  with  mind.  There  are
hesitancies ;  deep  difficulties  ;  reservations  ;  small
apprehensions   causing  restless  distress,   and  great


'  The  sounds  of  Earth  have  been  described  fully  and  graphic-
ally. Of  the  sounds  of  Man  very  little  is  said,  but  they  form  the
subject  of  the  next  paragraph.  Nothing  is  said  in  answer  to  the
disciple's  inquiry  about  the  notes  of  Heaven.  It  is  intimated,  how-
ever, that  there  is  no  necessity  to  introduce  any  foreign  Influence
or  Power  like  Heaven  in  connexion  with  the  notes  of  Earth.  The
term  Heaven,  indeed,  is  about  to  pass  with  our  author  into  a  mere
synonym  of  Tao,  the  natural  'course'  of  the  phenomena  of  men
and  things.

-  Words  are  the  '  sounds '  of  Man ;  and  knowledge  is  the  *  wind'
by  which  they  are  excited.


PT.  I.  SECT.  II.       THE    WRITINGS    OF   X'WANG-SZE.  1 79

apprehensions  producing  endless  fears.  Where  their
utterances  are  like  arrows  from  a  bow,  we  have
those  who  feel  it  their  charge  to  pronounce  what  is
right  and  what  is  wrong  ;  where  they  are  given  out
like  the  conditions  of  a  covenant,  we  have  those  who
maintain  their  views,  determined  to  overcome.  (The
weakness  of  their  arguments),  like  the  decay  (of
things)  in  autumn  and  winter,  shows  the  failing  (of
the  minds  of  some)  from  day  to  day ;  or  it  is  like
their  water  which,  once  voided,  cannot  be  gathered
up  again.  Then  their  ideas  seem  as  if  fast  bound  with
cords,  showinof  that  the  mind  is  become  like  an  old
and  dry  moat,  and  that  it  is  nigh  to  death,  and
cannot  be  restored  to  vigour  and  brightness.

Joy  and  anger,  sadness  and  pleasure,  anticipation
and  regret,  fickleness  and  fixedness,  vehemence  and
indolence,  eagerness  and  tardiness ; — (all  these
moods),  like  music  from  an  empty  tube,  or  mush-
rooms from  the  warm  moisture,  day  and  night
succeed  to  one  another  and  come  before  us,  and  we
do  not  know  whence  they  sprout.  Let  us  stop  !  Let
"US  stop !  Can  we  expect  to  find  out  suddenly  how
they  are  produced  ?

If  there  were  not  (the  views  of)  another,  I  should
not  have  mine  ;  if  there  were  not  I  (with  my  views),
his  would  be  uncalled  for  : — this  is  nearly  a  true  state-
ment of  the  case,  but  we  do  not  know  what  it  is  that
makes  it  be  so.  It  mig-ht  seem  as  if  there  would  be
a  true  Governor  ^  concerned  in  it,  but  we  do  not  find


^  '  A  true  Governor '  would  be  a  good  enough  translation  for
'  the  true  God.'  But  ^wang-jze  did  not  admit  any  supernatural
Power  or  Being  as  working  in  man.  His  true  Governor  was  the
Tao;  and  this  will  be  increasingly  evident  as  we  proceed  with  the
study  of  his  Books.

N  2


l80  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  H.


any  trace  (of  his  presence  and  acting).  That  such
an  One  could  act  so  I  believe  ;  but  we  do  not  see
His  form.     He  has  affections,  but  He  has  no  form.

Given  the  body,  with  its  hundred  parts,  its  nine
openings,  and  its  six  viscera,  all  complete  in  their
places,  which  do  I  love  the  most  ?  Do  you  love
them  all  equally  ?  or  do  you  love  some  more  than
others  ?  Is  it  not  the  case  that  they  all  perform  the
part  of  your  servants  and  waiting  women  ?  All  of
them  being  such,  are  they  not  incompetent  to  rule
one  another  ?  or  do  they  take  it  in  turns  to  be  now
ruler  and  now  servants  ?  There  must  be  a  true
Ruler  (among  them)  ^  whether  by  searching  you  can
find  out  His  character  or  not,  there  is  neither  advan-
tage nor  hurt,  so  far  as  the  truth  of  His  operation
is  concerned.  When  once  we  have  received  the
bodily  form  complete,  its  parts  do  not  fail  to  perform
their  functions  till  the  end  comes.  In  conflict  with
things  or  in  harmony  with  them,  they  pursue  their
course  to  the  end,  with  the  speed  of  a  galloping
horse  which  cannot  be  stopped  ; — is  it  not  sad  ?  To
be  constantly  toiling  all  one's  lifetime,  without  see-
ing the  fruit  of  one's  labour,  and  to  be  weary  and
worn  out  with  his  labour,  without  knowing  where  he
is  going  to  : — is  it  not  a  deplorable  case  ?  Men
may  say,  '  But  it  is  not  death  ;'  yet  of  what  advan-
tage is  this  ?  When  the  body  is  decomposed,  the
mind  will  be  the  same  along  with  it : — must  not  the
case  be  pronounced  very  deplorable  ^  ?     Is  the  life

^  The  name  '  Ruler  '  is  different  from  '  Governor  '  above  ;  but
they  both  indicate  the  same  concept  in  the  author's  mind.

^  The  proper  reply  to  this  would  be  that  the  mind  is  not  dis-
solved with  the  body;  and  A'wang-^ze's  real  opinion,  as  we  shall
find,  was  that  life  and  death  were  but  phases  in  the  phenomenal


PT.  I.  SECT.  II.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  l8l

of  man  indeed  enveloped  in  such  darkness  ?  Is  it  I
alone  to  whom  it  appears  so  ?  And  does  it  not
appear  to  be  so  to  other  men  ?

3.  If  we  were  to  follow  the  judgments  of  the  pre-
determined mind,  who  would  be  left  alone  and  without
a  teacher  ^  ?  Not  only  would  it  be  so  with  those  who
know  the  sequences  (of  knowledge  and  feeling)  and
make  their  own  selection  among  them,  but  it  would
be  so  as  well  wuth  the  stupid  and  unthinking.  For
one  who  has  not  this  determined  mind,  to  have  his
affirmations  and  negations  is  like  the  case  described
in  the  saying, '  He  went  to  Yiieh  to-day,  and  arrived
at  it  yesterday  -.'  It  would  be  making  what  was  not
a  fact  to  be  a  fact.  But  even  the  spirit-like  Yii  ^
could  not  have  known  how  to  do  this,  and  how  should
one  like  me  be  able  to  do  it  ?

But  speech  is  not  like  the  blowing  (of  the  wind)  ;
the  speaker  has  (a  meaning  in)  his  words.  If,  how-
ever, what  he  says,  be  indeterminate  (as  from  a
mind  not  made  up),  does  he  then  really  speak  or
not  ?  He  thinks  that  his  words  are  different  from  the
chirpings  of  fledgelings  ;  but  is  there  any  distinction
between  them  or  not?  But  how  can  the  Tao  be
so  obscured,  that  there  should  be  '  a  True  '  and  '  a
False'  in  it?  How  can  speech  be  so  obscured  that
there  should  be  '  the  Right'  and  '  the  Wrong'  about
them  ?     Where  shall  the  Tao  go  to  that  it  will  not

development.     But  the  course  of  his  argument  suggests  to  us  the
question  here,  '  Is  hfe  worth  living  ? '

1  This  'teacher'  is  'the  Tao.'

2  Expressing  the  absurdity  of  the  case.  This  is  one  of  the
sayings  of  Hui-,5ze; — see  Book  XXXIII,  par.  7.

^  The  successor  and  counsellor  of  Shun,  who  coped  with  and
remedied  the  flood  of  Yao.


t82  the    texts    of    TAOISM.  BK.  H.


be  found  ?  Where  shall  speech  be  found  that  it
will  be  inappropriate?  Tao  becomes  obscured
through  the  small  comprehension  (of  the  mind),  and
speech  comes  to  be  obscure  through  the  vain-glori-
ousness  (of  the  speaker).  So  it  is  that  we  have  the
contentions  between  the  Literati^  and  the  Mohists -,
the  one  side  affirming  what  the  other  denies,  and
vice  versa.  If  we  would  decide  on  their  several
affirmations  and  denials,  no  plan  is  like  bringing  the
(proper)  light  (of  the  mind)  ^  to  bear  on  them.

All  subjects  may  be  looked  at  from  (two  points  of
view), — from  that  and  from  this.  If  I  look  at  a
thing  from  another's  point  of  view,  I  do  not  see  it ;
only  as  I  know  it  myself,  do  I  know  it.  Hence  it  is
said,  '  That  view  comes  from  this  ;  and  this  view  is
a  consequence  of  that : ' — which  is  the  theory  that
that  view  and  this — (the  opposite  views) — produce
each  the  other  "*.  Although  it  be  so,  there  is  affirmed
now  life  and  now  death  ;  now  death  and  now  life  ;
now  the  admissibility  of  a  thing  and  now  its  inadmis-
sibility ;  now  its  inadmissibility  and  now  its  admis-
sibility. (The  disputants)  now  affirm  and  now  deny;
now  deny  and  now  affirm.  Therefore  the  sagely
man  does  not  pursue  this  method,  but  views  things
in  the  light  of  (his)  Heaven^  (-ly  nature),  and  hence
forms  his  judgment  of  what  is  right.

^  The  followers  of  Confucius.

^  The  disciples  of  IVIih-^ze,  or  INIih  Ti,  the  heresiarch,  whom
Mencius  attacked  so  fiercely; — see  Mencius,  V,  i,  5,et  al.  His  era
must  be  assigned  between  Confucius  and  Mencius.

^  That  is,  the  perfect  mind,  the  principle  of  the  Tao.

*  As  taught  by  Hui-^ze  ; — see  XXXIII,  7  ;  but  it  is  doubtful  if
the  quotation  from  Hui's  teaching  be  complete.

^  Equivalent  to  the  Tao.  See  on  the  use  in  Lao-jze  and
ATwang-jze  of  the  term  '  Heaven,'  in  the  Introduction,  pp.  16-18.


PT.I.  SECT.  11.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  183

This  view  is  the  same  as  that,  and  that  view  is
the  same  as  this.  But  that  view  involves  both  a
rieht  and  a  wrong: ;  and  this  view  involves  also  a
rieht  and  a  wrons^ : — are  there  indeed,  or  are  there
not  the  two  views,  that  and  this  ?  They  have  not
found  their  point  of  correspondency  which  is  called
the  pivot  of  the  Tao.  As  soon  as  one  finds  this
pivot,  he  stands  in  the  centre  of  the  ring  (of  thought),
where  he  can  respond  without  end  to  the  changing
views  ; — without  end  to  those  affirming,  and  without
end  to  those  denying.  Therefore  I  said,  '  There  is
nothing  like  the  proper  light  (of  the  mind).'

4.  By  means  of  a  finger  (of  my  own)  to  illustrate
that  the  finger  (of  another)  is  not  a  finger  is  not  so
good  a  plan  as  to  illustrate  that  it  is  not  so  by  means
of  what  is  (acknowledged  to  be)  not  a  finger ;  and
by  means  of  (what  I  call)  a  horse  to  illustrate  that
(what  another  calls)  a  horse  is  not  so,  is  not  so  good
a  plan  as  to  illustrate  that  it  is  not  a  horse,  by
means  of  what  is  (acknowledged  to  be)  not  a  horse  ^
(All  things  in)  heaven  and  earth  may  be  (dealt  with
as)  a  finger ;  (each  of)  their  myriads  may  be  (dealt
with  as)  a  horse.  Does  a  thing  seem  so  to  me  ?  (I  say
that)  it  is  so.  Does  it  seem  not  so  to  me  ?  (I  say
that)  it  is  not  so.      A  path  is  formed  by  (constant)


1  The  lanc:ua2:e  of  our  author  here  is  understood  to  have  refer-
ence  to  the  views  of  Kung-sun  Lung,  a  contemporary  of  Hui-^ze,
and  a  sophist  like  him.  One  of  his  treatises  or  arguments  had  the
title  of  'The  White  Horse,'  and  another  that  of  'Pointing  to
Things.'  If  these  had  been  preserved,  we  might  have  seen  more
clearly  the  appropriateness  of  the  text  here.  But  the  illustration
of  the  monkeys  and  their  actions  shows  us  the  scope  of  the  whole
paragraph  to  be  that  controversialists,  whose  views  are  substantially
the  same,  may  yet  differ,  and  that  with  heat,  in  words.


1 84  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  II.

treading  on  the  ground.  A  thing  is  called  by  its
name  through  the  (constant)  application  of  the  name
to  it.  How  is  it  so  ?  It  is  so  because  it  is  so.  How
is  it  not  so  ?  It  is  not  so,  because  it  is  not  so.
Everything  has  its  inherent  character  and  its  proper
capability.  There  is  nothing  which  has  not  these.
Therefore,  this  being  so,  if  we  take  a  stalk  of  grain  ^
and  a  (large)  pillar,  a  loathsome  (leper)  and  (a  beauty
like)  Hsi  Shih  -,  things  large  and  things  insecure,
things  crafty  and  things  strange  ; — they  may  in  the
light  of  the  Tao  all  be  reduced  to  the  same  category
(of  opinion  about  them).

It  was  separation  that  led  to  completion  ;  from  ^^
completion  ensued  dissolution.  But  all  things,  with-
out regard  to  their  completion  and  dissolution,  may
again  be  comprehended  in  their  unity; — it  is  only  the
far  reachinor  in  thought  who  know  how  to  comprehend
them  in  this  unity.  This  being  so,  let  us  give  up
our  devotion  to  our  own  views,  and  occupy  ourselves
with  the  ordinary  views.  These  ordinary  views  are
grounded  on  the  use  of  things.  (The  study  of  that)
use  leads  to  the  comprehensive  judgment,  and  that
judgment  secures  the  success  (of  the  inquiry).  That
success  gained,  we  are  near  (to  the  object  of  our
search),  and  there  we  stop.  When  we  stop,  and  yet
we  do  not  know  how  it  is  so,  we  have  what  is  called
the  Tao.

When  we  toil  our  spirits  and  intelligence,  obstin-


^  The  character  in  the  text  means  both  '  a  stalk  of  grain  '  and
'  a  horizonta]  beam.'     Each  meaning  has  its  advocates  here.

-  A  famous  beauty,  a  courtezan  presented  by  the  king  of  Yiieh
to  his  enemy,  the  king  of  Wii,  and  who  hastened  on  his  progress
to  ruin  and  death,  she  herself  perishing  at  the  same  time.


V


PT.  I.  SECT.  II.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  1 85

ately  determined  (to  establish  our  own  view),  and  do
not  know  the  agreement  (which  underhes  it  and  the
views  of  others),  we  have  what  is  called  '  In  the
morning  three.'  What  is  meant  by  that  '  In  the
morning  three  ? '  A  keeper  of  monkeys,  in  giving
them  out  their  acorns,  (once)  said,  *  In  the  morning
I  will  give  you  three  (measures)  and  in  the  evening
four.'  This  made  them  all  angry,  and  he  said,  'Very
well.  In  the  morning  I  will  give  you  four  and  in
the  evening  three.'  His  two  proposals  were  substan-
tially the  same,  but  the  result  of  the  one  was  to  make
the  creatures  angry,  and  of  the  other  to  make  them
pleased  :— an  illustration  of  the  point  I  am  insisting
on.  Therefore  the  sagely  man  brings  together  a
dispute  in  its  affirmations  and  denials,  and  rests  In
the  equal  fashioning  of  Heaven  \  Both  sides  of  the
question  are  admissible.

5.  Among  the  men  of  old  their  knowledge  reached
the  extreme  point.  What  was  that  extreme  point  ?
Some  held  that  at  first  there  was  not  anything.
This  is  the  extreme  point,  the  utmost  point  to  which
nothinor  can  be  added  ^.  A  second  class  held  that
there  was  something,  but  without  any  responsive
recognition  ^  of  it  (on  the  part  of  men).

A  third  class  held  that  there  was  such  recognition,
but  there  had  not  begun  to  be  any  expression  of
different  opinions  about  it.


^  Literally,  '  the  Heaven-Mould  or  Moulder,' — another  name  for
the  Tao,  by  which  all  things  are  fashioned.

^  See  the  same  passage  in  Book  XXIII,  par.  10.

^  The  ordinary  reading  here  is  fang  {^^),  'a  boundary'  or  'dis-
tinctive limit,'  Lin  Hsi-Z'ung  adopts  the  reading  ^,  '  a  response,'
and  I  have  followed  him.


1 86  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  II.

It  was  through  the  definite  expression  of  different
opinions  about  it  that  there  ensued  injury  to  (the
doctrine  of)  the  Tao.  It  was  this  injury  to  the
(doctrine  of  the)  Tao  which  led  to  the  formation  of
(partial)  preferences.  Was  it  indeed  after  such  pre-
ferences were  formed  that  the  injury  came  ?  or  did
the  injury  precede  the  rise  of  such  preferences  ?  If
the  injury  arose  after  their  formation,  Kkos  method
of  playing  on  the  lute  was  natural.  If  the  injury
arose  before  their  formation,  there  would  have  been
no  such  playing  on  the  lute  as  A'ao's  \

A'ao  Wan's  playing  on  the  lute,  Shih  Kwang's
indicating  time  widi  his  staff,  and  Hui-jze's  (giving
his  views),  while  leaning  against  a  dryandra  tree
(were  all  extraordinar}).  The  knowledge  of  the
three  men  (in  their  several  arts)  was  nearly  perfect,
and  therefore  they  practised  them  to  the  end  of  their
lives.  They  loved  them  because  they  were  different
from  those  of  others.  They  loved  them  and  wished
to  make  them  known  to  others.  But  as  they  could
not  be  made  clear,  though  they  tried  to  make
them  so,  they  ended  with  the  obscure  (discussions)
about  '  the  hard  '  and  '  the  white.'  And  their  sons  -,
moreover,  with  all  the  threads  of  their  fathers'  com-
positions, yet  to  the  end  of  their  lives  accomplished
nothing.  If  they,  proceeding  in  this  way,  could  be
said  to  have  succeeded,  then  am  I  also  successful ;

^  A'ao  Wan  and  Shih  Kwang  were  both  musicians  of  the  state
of  3in.  Shih,  which  appears  as  Kwang's  surname,  was  his  denomi-
nation as  '  music-master,'  It  is  difficult  to  understand  the  reason
why  AVang-^ze  introduces  these  men  and  their  ways,  or  how  it
helps  his  argument.

'  Perhaps  we  should  read  here  '  son,'  with  special  reference  to
the  son  of  Hui-^ze.


PT.  r.  SECT.  II.      THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  187

if  they  cannot  be  pronounced  successful,  neither  I
nor  any  other  can  succeed.

Therefore  the  scintillations  of  light  from  the  midst
of  confusion  and  perplexity  are  indeed  valued  by
the  sagely  man  ;  but  not  to  use  one's  own  views  and
to  take  his  position  on  the  ordinary  views  is  what  is
called  using  the  (proper)  light.

6.  But  here  now  are  some  other  sayings  ^  : — I  do
not  know  whether  they  are  of  the  same  character  as
those  which  I  have  already  given,  or  of  a  different
character.  Whether  they  be  of  the  same  character
or  not  when  looked  at  along  with  them,  they  have  a
character  of  their  own,  which  cannot  be  distinguished
from  the  others.  But  though  this  be  the  case,  let
me  try  to  explain  myself.

There  was  a  beginning.  There  was  a  beginning
before  that  beginning  ^.  There  was  a  beginning
previous  to  that  beginning  before  there  was  the
beGrinninof.

There  was  existence  ;  there  had  been  no  existence.
There  was  no  existence  before  the  besfinninor  of  that
no  existence  ^.  There  was  no  existence  previous  to
the  no  existence  before  there  was  the  beginning
of  the  no  existence.  If  suddenly  there  was  non-
existence, we  do  not  know  whether  it  was  really
anything  existing,  or  really  not  existing.  Now
I  have  said  what  I  have  said,  but  I  do  not  know
whether  what  I  have  said  be  really  anything  to  the
point  or  not.


*  Referring,  I  think,  to  those  below  commencing  '  There  was  a
beginning.'

^  That  is,  looking  at  things  from  the  standpoint  of  an  original
non-existence,  and  discarding  all  considerations  of  space  and  time.


1 88  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  11.

■  f  Under  heaven  there  is  nothing  greater  than  the
tip  of  an  autumn  down,  and  the  Thai  mountain  is
small.  There  is  no  one  more  long-lived  than  a  child
which  dies  prematurely,  and  Phang  ^u  did  not  live
out  his  time.  Heaven,  Earth,  and  I  w^ere  produced
together,  and  all  things  and  I  are  one.  Since  they
are  one,  can  there  be  speech  about  them  ?  But
since  they  are  spoken  of  as  one,  must  there  not  be
room  for  speech  ?  One  and  Speech  are  two  ;  two
and  one  are  three.  Going  on  from  this  (in  our
enumeration),  the  most  skilful  reckoner  cannot
reach  (the  end  of  the  necessary  numbers),  and  how
much  less  can  ordinary  people  do  so  !  Therefore
from  non-existence  we  proceed  to  existence  till  we
arrive  at  three ;  proceeding  from  existence  to  exist-
ence, to  how  many  should  we  reach  ?  Let  us
abjure  such  procedure,  and  simply  rest  here  ^

y  7.  The  Tao  at  first  met  with  no  responsive  recog-
nition. Speech  at  first  had  no  constant  forms  of
expression.  Because  of  this  there  came  the  demar-
cations (of  different  views).  Let  me  describe  those
demarcations  : — they  are  the  Left  and  the  Right  ^ ;
the  Relations  and  their  Obligations^;  Classifications*

'  On  this  concluding  clause,  3iao  Hung  says  : — 'Avoiding  such
procedure,  there  will  be  no  affirmations  and  denials  (no  contraries).
The  phrase  j^  ^^  2t  occurs  in  the  Book  several  times,  and  in-
terpreters have  missed  its  meaning  from  not  observing  that  ;^  ^
serve  merely  as  a  final  particle,  and  often  have  the  [^  added  to
them,  without  affecting  its  meaning.'  See  also  Wang  Yin  on  the
usages  of  |^  in  the  ^  "^  |^  f]^,  ch.  1208,  art.  6.

^  That  is,  direct  opposites.

^  Literally, '  righteousnesses ; '  the  proper  way  of  dealing  with  the
relations.

*  Literally,  '  separations.'


PT.  I.  SECT.  II.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  1 89

and  their  Distinctions  ;  Emulations  and  Contentions.
These  are  what  are  called  '  the  Ei^ht  Qualities.'
Outside  the  limits  of  the  world  of  men  \  the  sage
occupies  his  thoughts,  but  does  not  discuss  about
anything- ;  inside  those  limits  he  occupies  his
thoughts,  but  does  not  pass  any  judgments.  In  the
Khun  Khm  ^  which  embraces  the  history  of  the
former  kings,  the  sage  indicates  his  judgments,  but
does  not  argue  (in  vindication  of  them).  Thus  it  is
that  he  separates  his  characters  from  one  another
without  appearing  to  do  so,  and  argues  without  the
form  of  argument.  How  does  he  do  so  ?  The  sao^e
cherishes  his  views  in  his  own  breast,  while  men
generally  state  theirs  argumentatively,  to  show  them
to  others.  Hence  we  have  the  saying,  '  Disputation
is  a  proof  of  not  seeing  clearly.'

The  Great  Tao  ^  does  not  admit  of  being  praised.
The  Great  Argument  does  not  require  words.
Great  Benevolence  is  not  (officiously)  benevolent.
Great  Disinterestedness  does  not  vaunt  its  humility.
Great  Courage  is  not  seen  in  stubborn  bravery.

The  Tao  that  is  displayed  is  not  the  Tao.  Words
that  are  argumentative  do  not  reach  the  point.
Benevolence  that  is  constantly  exercised  does  not
accomplish  its  object.  Disinterestedness  that  vaunts
its  purity  is  not  genuine.    Courage  that  is  most  stub-


^  Literally,  '  the  six  conjunctions,'  meaning  the  four  cardinal
points  of  space,  with  the  zenith  and  nadir  ;  sometimes  a  name  for
the  universe  of  space.  Here  we  must  restrict  the  meaning  as  I
have  done.

"^  '  The  Spring  and  Autumn ; ' — Confucius's  Annals  of  Lu,  here
complimented  by  AVang-^ze.     See  in  Mencius,  IV,  ii,  21.

^  Compare  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing,  ch.  25,  et  al.


190  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  II.

born  is  ineffectual.  These  five  seem  to  be  round
(and  complete),  but  they  tend  to  become  square  (and
immovable)  ^  Therefore  the  knowledge  that  stops
at  what  it  does  not  know  is  the  orreatest.  Who
knows  the  argument  that  needs  no  words,  and  the
Way  that  is  not  to  be  trodden  ^  ?

He  who  is  able  to  know  this  has  what  is  called
'The  Heavenly  Treasure-housed'  He  may  pour
into  it  without  its  being  filled ;  he  may  pour  from  it
without  its  being  exhausted  ;  and  all  the  while  he
does  not  know  whence  (the  supply)  comes.  This  is
what  is  called  '  The  Store  of  Liorht  ^'

Therefore  of  old  Yao  asked  Shun,  saying,  *  I  wish
to  smite  (the  rulers  of)  S^ng,  Kwei,  and  Hsii-ao*.
Even  when  standing  in  my  court,  I  cannot  get  them
out  of  my  mind.  How  is  it  so?'  Shun  replied,
'  Those  three  rulers  live  (in  their  little  states)  as  if
they  were  among  the  mugwort  and  other  brushwood;
— how  is  it  that  you  cannot  get  them  out  of  your
mind  ?  Formerly,  ten  suns  came  out  together,  and
all  things  were  illuminated  by  them  ; — how  much
should  (your)  virtue  exceed  (all)  suns  ! '

8.  Nieh  /C/iuoh^  asked  Wang  1^,  saying,  '  Do  you
know,  Sir,  what  all  creatures  agree  in  approving  and


^  Compare  the  use  of  ^  in  the  Shu  A'ing,  I,  iii,  11,

^  The  classic  of  Lao,  in  chaps,  i,  2.

^  Names  for  the  Tao.

*  Three  small  states.  Is  Yao's  wish  to  smite  an  instance  of  the
'  quality '  of  '  emulation '  or  jealousy  ?

■'  Both  Taoistic  worthies  of  the  time  of  Yao,  supposed  to  have
been  two  of  the  Perfect  Ones  whom  Yao  visited  on  the  distant  hill
of  KCi-shih  (I,  par.  6).  According  to  Hwang  M\,  Wang  I  was
the  teacher  of  Nieh  AV/iieh,  and  he  again  of  Hsii  Yu.


PT.  I.  SECT.  11.       THE    WRITINGS    OF  ZWANG-3ZE.  I91

affirming  ?'  '  How  should  I  know  it  ? '  was  the  reply.
'  Do  you  know  what  it  is  that  you  do  not  know  ? '
asked  the  other  again,  and  he  got  the  same  reply.
He  asked  a  third  time, — '  Then  are  all  creatures  thus

A

without  knowledge  ?'  and  Wang  I  answered  as  before,
(adding  however),  '  Notwithstanding,  I  will  try  and
explain  my  meaning.  How  do  you  know  that  when
I  say  "  I  know  it,"  I  really  (am  showing  that)  I  do
not  know  it,  and  that  when  I  say  "  I  do  not  know
it,"  I  really  am  showing  that  I  do  know  it  \'  And
let  me  ask  you  some  questions  : — '  If  a  man  sleep  in
a  damp  place,  he  will  have  a  pain  in  his  loins,  and
half  his  body  will  be  as  if  it  were  dead  ;  but  will  it
be  so  with  an  eel  ?  If  he  be  living  in  a  tree,  he  will
be  frightened  and  all  in  a  tremble  ;  but  will  it  be  so
with  a  monkey  ?  And  does  any  one  of  the  three
know  his  right  place  ?  Men  eat  animals  that  have
been  fed  on  grain  and  grass  ;  deer  feed  on  the  thick-
set grass  ;  centipedes  enjoy  small  snakes  ;  owls  and
crows  delight  in  mice  ;  but  does  any  one  of  the  four
know  the  right  taste  ?  The  dog-headed  monkey
finds  its  mate  in  the  female  gibbon  ;  the  elk  and  the
axis  deer  cohabit ;  and  the  eel  enjoys  itself  with
other  fishes.  Mao  3liiang  ^  and  Li  /Ci  -  were  ac-
counted by  men  to  be  most  beautiful,  but  when
fishes  saw  them,  they  dived  deep  in  the  water  from
them  ;  when  birds,  they  flew  from  them  aloft ;  and

^  Compare  par.  i  of  Book  XXII.

"  Two  famous  beauties;  —  the  former,  a  contemporary  of  Hsi
Shih  (par.  4,  note  2),  and  like  her  also,  of  the  state  of  Yiieh  ;  the
latter,  the  daughter  of  a  barbarian  chief  among  the  Western  Jung.
She  was  captured  by  duke  Hsien  of  3hi,  in  b.  c.  672.  He  subse-
quently made  her  his  wife, — to  the  great  injury  of  his  family
and  state.


192  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  II.

when  deer  saw  them,  they  separated  and  fled  away  ^
But  did  any  of  these  four  know  which  in  the  world
is  the  right  female  attraction  ?  As  I  look  at  the
matter,  the  first  principles  of  benevolence  and  right-
eousness and  the  paths  of  approval  and  disapproval
are  inextricably  mixed  and  confused  together  : — how
is  it  possible  that  I  should  know  how  to  discriminate
among  them  ?'

Nieh  A7/ueh  said  (further),  '  Since  3'ou,  Sir,  do  not
know  what  is  advantageous  and  what  is  hurtful,  is
the  Perfect  man  also  in  the  same  way  without  the

A

knowledge  of  them  ?'  Wang  I  replied,  '  The  Perfect
man  is  spirit-like.  Great  lakes  might  be  boiling
about  him,  and  he  would  not  feel  their  heat ;  the
Ho  and  the  Han  might  be  frozen  up,  and  he  w^ould
not  feel  the  cold  ;  the  hurrying  thunderbolts  might
split  the  mountains,  and  the  wind  shake  the  ocean,
without  being  able  to  make  him  afraid.  Being  such,
he  mounts  on  the  clouds  of  the  air,  rides  on  the  sun
and  moon,  and  rambles  at  ease  beyond  the  four
seas.  Neither  death  nor  life  makes  any  change  in
him,  and  how  much  less  should  the  considerations
of  advantage  and  injury  do  so  - ! '

9.   Kh\\  3hiao-5ze  ^  asked  A7/ang-wu  3^G^  saying,


^  Not  thinking  them  beautiful,  as  men  did,  but  frightened  and
repelled  by  them.

^  Compare  Book  I,  pars.  3  and  5.

'  We  know  nothing  of  the  former  of  these  men,  but  what  is
mentioned  here  ;  the  other  appears  also  in  Book  XXV,  6,  q.  v.  If
'  the  master '  that  immediately  follows  be  Confucius  they  must  have
been  contemporary  with  him.  The  A7/iCi  in  A'/^ang-wu's  reply
would  seem  to  make  it  certain  '  the  master '  was  Confucius,  but
the  oldest  critics,  and  some  modern  ones  as  well,  think  that  A7/ang-
wu's  name  was  also  Kh\^.     But  this  view  is  attended  with  more


PT.  I.  SECT.  ir.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.         .       T93


'  I  heard  the  Master  (speaking  of  such  language  as
the  followuig)  : — "  The  sagely  man  does  not  occupy
himself  with  worldly  affairs.  He  does  not  put  him-
self in  the  way  of  what  is  profitable,  nor  try  to  avoid
what  is  hurtful ;  he  has  no  pleasure  in  seeking  (for
anything  from  any  one);  he  does  not  care  to  be  found
in  (any  established)  Way ;  he  speaks  without  speak-
ing ;  he  does  not  speak  when  he  speaks  ;  thus  finding
his  enjoyment  outside  the  dust  and  dirt  (of  the
world)."  The  Master  considered  all  this  to  be  a
shoreless  flow  of  mere  words,  and  I  consider  it  to
describe  the  course  of  the  Mysterious  Way. — What
do  you,  Sir,  think  of  it  ? '  AV/ang-wu  3ze  replied,
'  The  hearing  of  such  words  would  have  perplexed
even  Hwang-Ti,  and  how  should  KJAiX  be  competent
to  understand  them  ?  And  you,  moreover,  are  too
hasty  in  forming  your  estimate  (of  their  meaning).
You  see  the  &^g^y  and  (immediately)  look  out  for  the
cock  (that  is  to  be  hatched  from  it)  ;  you  see  the
bow,  and  (immediately)  look  out  for  the  dove  (that  is
to  be  brought  down  by  it)  being  roasted.  I  will  try
to  explain  the  thing  to  you  in  a  rough  way ;  do  you
in  the  same  way  listen  to  me.

'  How  could  any  one  stand  by  the  side  of  the  sun
and  moon,  and  hold  under  his  arm  all  space  and  all
time  ?  (Such  language  only  means  that  the  sagely
man)  keeps  his  mouth  shut,  and  puts  aside  questions
that  are  uncertain  and  dark ;  making  his  inferior
capacities  unite  with  him  in  honouring  (the  One
Lord).     Men  in  general  bustle  about  and  toil  ;  the

difficulties  than  the  other.  By  the  clause  interjected  in  the  trans-
lation after  the  first  '  Master,'  I  have  avoided  the  incongruity  of
ascribing  the  long  description  of  Taoism  to  Confucius.

[39]  O


194  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  II.

sagely  man  seems  stupid  and  to  know  nothing  \  He
blends  ten  thousand  years  together  in  the  one  (con-
ception of  time) ;  the  myriad  things  all  pursue  their
spontaneous  course,  and  they  are  all  before  him  as
doinof  so.

'  How  do  I  know  that  the  love  of  life  is  not  a
delusion  ?  and  that  the  dislike  of  death  is  not  like
a  young  person's  losing  his  way,  and  not  knowing
that  he  is  (really)  going  home  ?  Li  A'i  ^  was  a  daugh-
ter of  the  border  Warden  of  Ai.  When  (the  ruler
of)  the  state  of  ^'m  first  got  possession  of  her,  she
wept  till  the  tears  wetted  all  the  front  of  her  dress.
But  when  she  came  to  the  place  of  the  king%  shared
with  him  his  luxurious  couch,  and  ate  his  grain-and-
grass-fed  meat,  then  she  regretted  that  she  had  wept.
How  do  I  know  that  the  dead  do  not  repent  of  their
former  cravinof  for  life  ?

*  Those  who  dream  of  (the  pleasures  of)  drinking
may  in  the  morning  wail  and  weep  ;  those  who  dream
of  wailing  and  weeping  may  in  the  morning  be  going
out  to  hunt.  When  they  were  dreaming  they  did
not  know  it  was  a  dream ;  in  their  dream  they
may  even  have  tried  to  interpret  it  ^ ;  but  when
they  awoke  they  knew  that  it  was  a  dream.     And

^  Compare  Lao-^ze's  account  of  himself  in  his  Work,  ch.  20.

^  See  note  2  on  page  191.  The  lady  is  there  said  to  have
been  the  daughter  of  a  barbarian  chief ;  here  she  appears  as  the
child  of  the  border  Warden  of  Ai.  Sut  her  maiden  surname  of
A'i  (j(I5)  shows  her  father  must  have  been  a  scion  of  the  royal
family  of  A'au.  Had  he  forsaken  his  wardenship,  and  joined  one
of  the  Ti  tribes,  which  had  adopted  him  as  its  chief?

^  ^\n  was  only  a  marquisate.  How  does  A  wang-jze  speak  of  its
ruler  as  '  a  king  ? '

*  This  could  not  be;  a  man  does  not  come  to  himself  in  his
dream,  and  in  that  state  try  to  interpret  it.


PT.  I.  SECT.  II.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    X'WANG-SZE.  1 95

there  is  the  great  awaking,  after  which  we  shall
know  that  this  life  was  a  great  dream  ^  All  the
while,  the  stupid  think  the}^  are  awake,  and  with  nice
discrimination  insist  on  their  knowledge ;  now  play-
ing the  part  of  rulers,  and  now  of  grooms.  Bigoted
was  that  KJl\\\.  \  He  and  you  are  both  dreaming.  I
who  say  that  you  are  dreaming  am  dreaming  myself.
These  words  seem  very  strange ;  but  if  after  ten
thousand  asfes  we  once  meet  with  a  ereat  saoe  who
knows  how  to  explain  them,  it  will  be  as  if  we  met
him  (unexpectedly)  some  morning  or  evening.

10.  '  Since  you  made  me  enter  into  this  discussion
with  you,  if  you  have  got  the  better  of  me  and  not  I
of  you,  are  you  indeed  right,  and  I  indeed  wrong  ?
If  I  have  got  the  better  of  you  and  not  you  of  me,
am  I  indeed  right  and  you  indeed  wrong  ?  Is  the
one  of  us  right  and  the  other  wrong  ?  are  we  both
right  or  both  wrong  ?  Since  we  cannot  come  to  a
mutual  and  common  understanding,  men  will  cer-
tainly continue  in  darkness  on  the  subject.

'  Whom  shall  I  employ  to  adjudicate  in  the  matter?
If  I  employ  one  who  agrees  with  )ou,  how  can  he,
agreeing  with  you,  do  so  correctly  ?  And  the  same
may  be  said,  if  I  employ  one  who  agrees  with  me.
It  will  be  the  same  if  I  employ  one  who  differs  from
us  both  or  one  who  agrees  with  us  both.  In  this
way  I  and  you  and  those  others  would  all  not
be  able  to  come  to  a  mutual  understanding ;  and
shall  we  then  wait  for  that  (great  sage)  ?  (We  need
not  do  so.)  To  wait  on  others  to  learn  how  con-
flicting opinions  are  changed  is  simply  like  not  so

^  Compare  XVIII,  par.  4.
O  2


196  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  11.


waiting  at  all.  The  harmonising  of  them  is  to  be
found  in  the  invisible  operation  of  Heaven,  and  by
following  this  on  into  the  unlimited  past.  It  is  by
this  method  that  we  can  complete  our  years  (without
our  minds  being  disturbed)  ^

'What  is  meant  by  harmonising  (conflicting  opi-
nions) in  the  invisible  operation  of  Heaven  ?  There
is  the  affirmation  and  the  denial  of  it ;  and  there  is
the  assertion  of  an  opinion  and  the  rejection  of  it.
If  the  affirmation  be  according  to  the  reality  of  the
fact,  it  is  certainly  different  from  the  denial  of  it : — ■
there  can  be  no  dispute  about  that.  If  the  assertion
of  an  opinion  be  correct,  it  is  certainly  different  from
its  rejection: — neither  can  there  be  any  dispute  about
that.  Let  us  forget  the  lapse  of  time  ;  let  us  forget
the  conflict  of  opinions.  Let  us  make  our  appeal  to
the  Infinite,  and  take  up  our  position  there  ^.'

II.  The  Penumbra  asked  the  Shadow ^  saying,
'  Formerly  you  were  walking  on,  and  now  you  have
stopped ;  formerly  you  were  sitting,  and  now  you
have  risen  up  : — how  is  it  that  you  are  so  without
stability  ? '  The  Shadow  replied,  '  I  wait  for  the
movements  of  something  else  to  do  what  I  do,  and
that  something  else  on  which  I  wait  waits  further


1  See  this  passage  again  in  Book  XXVII,  par.  i,  where  the  phrase
which  I  have  called  here  '  the  invisible  operation  of  Heaven,'  is
said  to  be  the  same  as  '  the  Heavenly  IMould  or  ]\Ioulder,'  that  is,
the  Heavenly  Fashioner,  one  of  the  Taoistic  names  for  the  Tao.

2  That  is,  all  things  being  traced  up  to  the  unity  of  the  Tao,  we
have  found  the  pivot  to  which  all  conflicting  opinions,  all  affirma-
tions, all  denials,  all  positions  and  negatives  converge,  and  bring  to
bear  on  them  the  proper  light  of  the  mind.    Compare  paragraph  3.

^  A  story  to  the  same  effect  as  this  here,  with  some  textual  varia-
tions, occurs  in  Book  XXVII,  immediately  after  par.  i  referred  to
above.


PT.  I.  SECT.  11.       TPIE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  1 97

on  another  to  do  as  it  does  \  My  waiting, — is  it  for
the  scales  of  a  snake,  or  the  wrings  of  a  cicada-?
How  should  I  know  why  I  do  one  thing,  or  do  not
do  another  ^  ?

'  Formerly,  I,  A^vang  A'au,  dreamt  that  I  was  a
butterfly,  a  butterfly  flying  about,  feeling  that  it
was  enjoying  itself  I  did  not  know  that  it  was  K^.u.
Suddenly  I  awoke,  and  was  myself  again,  the  veri-
table A'au.  I  did  not  know  whether  it  had  formerly
been  A'au  dreaming  that  he  was  a  butterfly,  or  it
was  now  a  butterfly  dreaming  that  it  was  A'au.  But
between  ATau  and  a  butterfly  there  must  be  a  differ-
enced This  is  a  case  of  what  is  called  the  Trans-
formation of  Things'*.'

^  The  mind  cannot  rest  in  second  causes,  and  the  first  cause,  if
there  be  one,  is  inscrutable.

2  Even  these  must  wait  for  the  will  of  the  creature ;  but  the  case
of  the  shadow  is  still  more  remarkable.

3  I  have  put  this  interrogatively,  as  being  more  graphic,  and
because  of  the  particle  ^jj,  which  is  generally,  though  not  neces-
sarily, interrogative.

*  Hsiian  Ying,  in  his  remarks  on  these  two  sentences,  brings
out  the  force  of  the  story  very  successfully : — '  Looking  at  them  in
their  ordinary  appearance,  there  was  necessarily  a  difference  between
them,  but  in  the  delusion  of  the  dream  each  of  them  appeared  the
other,  and  they  could  not  distinguish  themselves  !  A'au  could  be  a
butterfly,  and  the  butterfly  could  be  ATau  ; — we  may  see  that  in  the
world  all  traces  of  that  and  this  may  pass  away,  as  they  come  under
the  influence  of  transformations/  For  the  phrase, '  the  transforma-
tion of  things,'  see  in  Book  XI,  par.  5,  et  al.  But  the  Taoism  here
can  hardly  be  distinguished  from  the  Buddhism  that  holds  that  all
human  experience  is  merely  so  much  may  a  or  illusion.


1 98  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  III.


BOOK    III.

Part  I.  Section  III.

Yang  Shang  A^u,  or  'Nourishing the  Lord  of  Life'.'

1.  There  is  a  limit  to  our  Hfe,  but  to  knowledge
there  is  no  limit.  With  what  is  limited  to  pursue
after  what  is  unlimited  is  a  perilous  thing ;  and  when,
knowing  this,  we  still  seek  the  increase  of  our  know-
ledge, the  peril  cannot  be  averted  '^  There  should
not  be  the  practice  of  what  is  good  with  any
thought  of  the  fame  (which  it  will  bring),  nor  of
what  is  evil  with  any  approximation  to  the  punish-
ment (which  it  will  incur)  ^: — an  accordance  with  the
Central  Element  (of  our  nature)  ^  is  the  regular  way
to  preserve  the  body,  to  maintain  the  life,  to  nourish
our  parents,  and  to  complete  our  term  of  years.

2.  His  cook^  was  cutting  up  an  ox  for  the  ruler
Wan-hui^.  Whenever  he  applied  his  hand,  leaned
forward  with  his  shoulder,  planted  his  foot,  and  em-

^  See  pp.  130,  131.

'^  Under  what  is  said  about  knowledge  here  there  lies  the
objection  of  Taoists  to  the  Confucian  pursuit  of  knowledge  as
the  means  for  the  right  conduct  of  life,  instead  of  the  quiet
simplicity  and  self-suppression  of  their  own  system.

'■  This  is  the  key  to  the  three  paragraphs  that  follow.  But  the
text  of  it  is  not  easily  construed.  The  *  doing  good '  and  the
'  doing  evil '  are  to  be  lightly  understood.

*  A  name  for  the  Tao.

°  '  The  ruler  Wan-hui '  is  understood  to  be  '  king  Hui  of  Liang
(or  Wei),'  with  the  account  of  an  interview  between  whom  and
Mencius  the  works  of  that  philosopher  commence.


PT.I.  SECT.  III.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  1 99

ployed  the  pressure  of  his  knee,  in  the  audible  rip-
ping off  of  the   skin,  and   slicing  operation  of  the
knife,  the  sounds  were  all  in  regular  cadence.  Move-
ments and  sounds  proceeded  as  in  the  dance  of  '  the
Mulberry  Forest  ^ '  and  the  blended  notes  of  '  the
King  Shau  ^'     The  ruler  said,   '  Ah  !    Admirable  !
That  your  art  should    have    become    so   perfect ! '
(Having  finished  his  operation),  the  cook  laid  down
his  knife,  and  replied  to  the   remark,  '  What  your
servant  loves  is  the  method  of  the  Tao,  somethine
in  advance  of  any  art.     When  I  first  began  to  cut
up  an  ox,   I  saw  nothing  but  the  (entire)  carcase.
After  three  years  I  ceased  to  see  it  as  a  whole.    Now
I  deal  with  it  in  a  spirit-like  manner,  and  do  not  look
at  it  with  my  eyes.     The  use  of  my  senses  is  dis-
carded, and  my  spirit  acts  as  it  wills.    Observing  the
natural    lines,   (my    knife)   slips   through   the   great
crevices  and  slides  through  the  great  cavities,  taking
advantage  of  the  facilities  thus  presented.      My  art
avoids  the  membranous  ligatures,  and  much  more
the  great  bones.

'A  good  cook  changes  his  knife  every  year; — (It
may  have  been  injured)  in  cutting  ;  an  ordinary  cook
changes  his  every  month ; — (it  may  have  been)
broken.  Now  my  knife  has  been  in  use  for  nine-
teen years  ;  it  has  cut  up  several  thousand  oxen,  and
yet  its  edge  is  as  sharp  as  if  it  had  newly  come  from
the  whetstone.  There  are  the  interstices  of  the
joints,  and  the  edge  of  the  knife  has  no  (appreciable)
thickness ;  when  that  which  is  so  thin  enters  where
the  Interstice  is,  how  easily  It  moves  along !     The


^  Two  pieces  of  music,  ascribed  to  AV^ang  Thang  and  Hwang-
Ti.


200  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  III.

blade  has  more  than  room  enough.  Nevertheless,
whenever  I  come  to  a  complicated  joint,  and  see  that
there  will  be  some  difficulty,  I  proceed  anxiously  and
with  caution,  not  allowing  my  eyes  to  wander  from
the  place,  and  moving  my  hand  slowly.  Then  by  a
very  slight  movement  of  the  knife,  the  part  is  quickly
separated,  and  drops  like  (a  clod  of)  earth  to  the
ground.  Then  standing  up  with  the  knife  in  my
hand,  I  look  all  round,  and  in  a  leisurely  manner,
with  an  air  of  satisfaction,  wipe  it  clean,  and  put  it
in  its  sheath.'  The  ruler  Wan-hui  said,  '  Excellent !
I  have  heard  the  words  of  my  cook,  and  learned
from  them  the  nourishment  of  (our)  life.'

3.  When  Kung-wan  Hsien^  saw  the  Master  of  the
Left,  he  was  startled,  and  said,  '  What  sort  of  man
is  this  ?  How  is  it  he  has  but  one  foot  ?  Is  it  from
Heaven?  or  from  Man?'  Then  he  added-,  'It
must  be  from  Heaven,  and  not  from  Man.  Heaven's
making  of  this  man  caused  him  to  have  but  one  foot.
In  the  person  of  man,  each  foot  has  its  marrow.
By  this  I  know  that  his  peculiarity  is  from  Heaven,
and  not  from  Man.  A  pheasant  of  the  marshes  has
to  take  ten  steps  to  pick  up  a  mouthful  of  food,  and
thirty  steps  to  get  a  drink,  but  it  does  not  seek  to  be
nourished  in  a  coop.  Though  its  spirit  would  (there)
enjoy  a  royal  abundance,  it  does  not  think  (such
confinement)  good.'


^  There  was  a  family  in  Wei  with  the  double  surname  Kung-wan.
This  would  be  a  scion  of  it.

^  This  is  Hsien  still  speaking.  We  have  to  understand  his
reasoning  ad  sensum  and  not  ad  verbum.  The  master  of
the  Left  had  done  '  evil,'  so  as  to  incur  the  punishment  from
which  he  suffered;  and  had  shown  himself  less  wise  than  a
pheasant.


PT.  I.  SECT.  III.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  20I

4.  When  Lao  Tan  died  \  Kh\w  Shih  ^  went  to  con-
dole (with  his  son),  but  after  crying  out  three  times,
he  came  out.  The  disciples  ^  said  to  him,  *  Were
you  not  a  friend  of  the  Master  ? '  'I  was,'  he  re-
phed,  and  they  said,  '  Is  it  proper  then  to  offer  your
condolences  merely  as  you  have  done?'  He  said,
'It  is.  At  first  I  thought  he  was  the  man  of  men,
and  now  I  do  not  think  so.  W^hen  I  entered  a  little
ago  and  expressed  my  condolences,  there  were
the  old  men  wailing  as  if  they  had  lost  a  son,  and
the  young  men  wailing  as  if  they  had  lost  their
mother.  In  his  attracting-  and  uniting  them  to  him-
self  in  such  a  way  there  must  have  been  that  which
made  them  involuntarily  express  their  words  (of
condolence),  and  involuntarily  wail,  as  they  were
doing.  And  this  was  a  hiding  from  himself  of  his
Heaven  (-nature),  and  an  excessive  indulgence  of  his
(human)  feelings  ; — a  forgetting  of  what  he  had  re-
ceived (in  being  born) ;  what  the  ancients  called  the
punishment  due  to  neglecting  the  Heaven  (-nature)  "*.
When  the  Master  came  ^,  it  was  at  the  proper  time ;
when  he  went  away,  it  was  the  simple  sequence  (of
his  coming).  Quiet  acquiescence  in  what  happens
at  its  proper  time,  and  quietly  submitting  (to  its
ceasing)  afford  no  occasion  for  grief  or  for  joy  ^  The
ancients  described  (death)  as  the  loosening  of  the

^  Then  the  account  that  Lao-^ze  went  westwards,  and  that
nothing  is  known  as  to  where  he  died,  must  be  without  foundation.

""  Nothing  more  is  known  of  this  person.

^  Probably  the  disciples  of  Lao-jze.

*  Lao  had  gone  to  an  excess  in  his  '  doing  good,'  as  if  he  were
seeking  reputation.

^  Into  the  world.

"  See  A'wang-jze's  remarks  and  demeanour  on  the  death  of  his
wife,  in  Book  XVHI.


202  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  in.

cord  on  which  God  suspended  (the  Hfe)  \  What  we
can  point  to  are  the  faggots  that  have  been  con-
sumed ;  but  the  fire  is  transmitted  (elsewhere),  and
we  know  not  that  it  is  over  and  ended  ^.

^  This  short  sentence  is  remarkable  by  the  use  of  the  character  T  i
(*^)'  '  ^°*^''  ^^  '^^>  ^  usage  here  ascribed  to  the  ancients.

^  The  concluding  sentence  might  stand  as  a  short  paragraph
by  itself.  The  '  faggots  '  are  understood  to  represent  the  body,  and
the  '  fire '  the  animating  spirit.  The  body  perishes  at  death  as  the
faggots  are  consumed  by  the  fire.  But  the  fire  may  be  transmitted
to  other  faggots,  and  so  the  spirit  may  migrate,  and  be  existing
elsewhere.


PT.  I.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  X-VVANG-SZE.


BOOK  IV.

Part  I.    Section  IV.

Zan  A^ien  Shih,  or  '  Man  in  the  World,  Associated

with  other  Men  ^'

I.  Yen  Hui^  went  to  see  /v'ung-ni^  and  asked
leave  to  take  his  departure.  '  Where  are  you  going
to  ?  '  asked  the  Master.  '  I  will  go  to  Wei  * '  was  the
reply.  '  And  with  what  object  ? '  'I  have  heard
that  the  ruler  of  Wei '  is  in  the  vigour  of  his  years,
and  consults  none  but  himself  as  to  his  course.
He  deals  with  his  state  as  if  it  were  a  light  matter,
and  has  no  perception  of  his  errors.  He  thinks
lightly  of  his  people's  dying  ;  the  dead  are  lying
all  over  the  country  as  if  no  smaller  space  could
contain  them ;  on  the  plains  '^  and  about  the
marshes,  they  are  as  thick  as  heaps  of  fuel.  The
people  know  not  where  to  turn  to.  I  have  heard
you,   Master,   say,   "  Leave    the    state    that    is  well


^  See  pp.  131,  132.

2  The  favourite  disciple  of  Confucius,  styled  also  3ze-yuan.

^  Of  course,  Confucius ; — his  designation  or  married  name.

*  A  feudal  state,  embracing  portions  of  the  present  provinces  of
Ho-nan,  ^ih-li,  and  Shan-tung.  There  was  another  state,  which
we  must  also  call  Wei  in  English,  though  the  Chinese  characters  of
them  are  different; — one  of  the  fragments  of  the  great  state  of  3i».
more  to  the  west.

^  At  this  time  the  marquis  Yuan,  known  to  us  by  his  post-
humous tide  of  duke  Ling  ; — see  Book  XXV,  9.

°  Adopting  Lin's  reading  of  ^p  instead  of  the  common  ^.


204  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  IV.

governed  ;  go  to  the  state  where  disorder  prevails  ^"
At  the  door  of  a  physician  there  are  many  who  are
ill.  I  wish  through  what  I  have  heard  (from  you)
to  think  out  some  methods  {of  dealing  with  Wei),  if
peradventure  the  evils  of  the  state  may  be  cured.'

ATung-ni  said,  'Alas!  The  risk  is  that  you  will
go  only  to  suffer  in  the  punishment  (of  yourself) !
The  right  method  (in  such  a  case)  will  not  admit
of  any  admixture.  With  such  admixture,  the  one
method  will  become  many  methods.  Their  multi-
plication will  embarrass  you.  That  embarrassment
will  make  you  anxious.  However  anxious  you  may
be,  you  will  not  save  (yourself).  The  perfect  men
of  old  first  had  (what  they  wanted  to  do)  in  them-
selves, and  afterwards  they  found  (the  response  to
it)  in  others.  If  what  they  wanted  in  themselves
was  not  fixed,  what  leisure  had  they  to  go  and
interfere  with  the  proceedings  of  any  tyrannous
man  ?

'  Moreover,  do  you  know  how  virtue  is  liable  to
be  dissipated,  and  how  wisdom  proceeds  to  display
itself?  Virtue  is  dissipated  in  (the  pursuit  of)  the
name  for  it,  and  wisdom  seeks  to  display  itself  in  the
striving  with  others.  In  the  pursuit  of  the  name
men  overdirow  one  another ;  wisdom  becomes
a  weapon  of  contention.  Both  these  things  are
instruments  of  evil,  and  should  not  be  allowed  to
have  free  course  in  one's  conduct.  Supposing  one's
virtue  to  be  great  and  his  sincerity  firm,  if  he  do
not  comprehend  the  spirit  of  those  (whom  he  wishes
to  influence) ;    and  supposing  he   is   free  from  the

^  Compare  in  the  Analects,  VIII,  xiii,  2,  where  a  different
lesson  is  given ;  but  Confucius  may  at  another  time  have  spoken
as  Hui  says.


PT.  r.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  iSTWANG-SZE.  205

disposition  to  strive  for  reputation,  if  he  do  not
comprehend  their  minds ; — when  in  such  a  case  he
forcibly  insists  on  benevolence  and  righteousness,
setting  them  forth  in  the  strongest  and  most  direct
language,  before  the  tyrant,  then  he,  hating  (his
reprover's)  possession  of  those  excellences,  will  put
him  down  as  doing  him  injury.  He  who  injures
others  is  sure  to  be  injured  by  them  in  return.
You  indeed  will  hardly  escape  being  injured  by  the
man  (to  whom  you  go) !

'  Further,  if  perchance  he  takes  pleasure  in  men
of  worth  and  hates  those  of  an  opposite  character,
what  is  the  use  of  your  seeking  to  make  yourself
out  to  be  different  (from  such  men  about  him)  ?
Before  you  have  begun  to  announce  (your  views),
he,  as  king  and  ruler,  will  take  advantage  of  you,
and  immediately  contend  with  you  for  victory.
Your  eyes  will  be  dazed  and  full  of  perplexity ;
you  will  try  to  look  pleased  with  him  ;  you  will
frame  your  words  with  care ;  your  demeanour  will
be  conformed  to  his  ;  you  will  confirm  him  In  his
views.  In  this  way  you  will  be  adding  fire  to  fire,
and  water  to  water,  increasing,  as  we  may  express
it,  the  evils  (which  you  deplore).  To  these  signs
of  deferrine  to  him  at  the  first  there  will  be  no  end.
You  will  be  in  danger,  seeing  he  does  not  believe
you,  of  making  your  words  more  strong,  and  you
are  sure  to  die  at  the  hands  of  such  a  tyrant.

'And  formerly  A'ieh^  killed   Kwan   Lung-fang ^
and    A'au^   killed   the    prince    Pi-kan  ^      Both    of


^  The  tyrant  with  whom  the  dynasty  of  Hsia  ended.

^  A  worthy  minister  of  A'ieh.

^  The  tyrant  with  whom  the  dynasty  of  Shang  or  Yin  ended.

■*  A  half-brother  of  A'au,  the  tyrant  of  the  Yin  dynasty.


206  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  IV.


these  cultivated  their  persons,  bending  down  in
sympathy  with  the  lower  people  to  comfort  them
suffering  (as  they  did)  from  their  oppressors,  and  on
their  account  opposing  their  superiors.  On  this
account,  because  they  so  ordered  their  conduct,
their  rulers  compassed  their  destruction : — such
regard  had  they  for  their  own  fame.  (Again),  Yao
anciently  attacked  (the  states  of)  3hung-/C'ih  ^  and
Hsii-ao  \  and  Yu  attacked  the  ruler  of  Hu  \  Those
states  were  left  empty,  and  with  no  one  to  continue
their  population,  the  people  being  exterminated.
They  had  engaged  in  war  without  ceasing;  their
craving  for  whatever  they  could  get  was  insatiable.
And  this  (ruler  of  Wei)  is,  like  them,  one  who
craves  after  fame  and  greater  substance  ; — have  you
not  heard  it  ?  Those  sages  were  not  able  to  over-
come the  thirst  for  fame  and  substance  ; — how  much
less  will  you  be  able  to  do  so !  Nevertheless  you
must  have  some  ground  (for  the  course  which  you
wish  to  take) ;  pray  try  and  tell  it  to  me.'

Yen  Hui  said,  '  May  I  go,  doing  so  in  uprightness
and  humility,  using  also  every  endeavour  to  be
uniform  (in  my  plans  of  operation)  ? '  '  No,  indeed  ! '
was  the  reply.  '  How  can  you  do  so  ?  This  man
makes  a  display  ^  of  being  filled  to  overflowing  (with
virtue),  and  has  great  self-conceit.  His  feelings
are  not  to  be  determined  from  his  countenance.
Ordinary  men  do  not  (venture  to)  oppose  him,  and
he  proceeds  from  the  way  in  which  he  affects  them


^  See  in  par.  7,  Book  II,  where  Hsu-ao  is  mentioned,  though  not
3hung-/(-ih.     See  the  ShQ,  III,  ii.

2  I  take  ^  here  as  =  ^^ ;— a  meaning  given  in  the  Khang-hsi
dictionary.


PT.  I.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  207


to  seek  still  more  the  satisfaction  of  his  own  mind.
He  may  be  described  as  unaffected  by  the  (small
lessons  of)  virtue  brought  to  bear  on  him  from  day
to  day ;  and  how  much  less  will  he  be  so  by  your
great  lessons  ?  He  will  be  obstinate,  and  refuse
to  be  converted.  He  may  outwardly  agree  with
you,  but  inwardly  there  will  be  no  self-condemna-
tion ; — how  can  you  (go  to  him  in  this  way  and  be
successful)  ? '

(Yen  Hui)  rejoined,  'Well  then;  while  inwardly
maintaining  my  straightforward  intention,  I  will
outwardly  seem  to  bend  to  him.  I  will  deliver  (my
lessons),  and  substantiate  them  by  appealing  to
antiquity.  Inwardly  maintaining  my  straightforward
intention,  I  shall  be  a  co-worker  with  Heaven.
When  I  thus  speak  of  being  a  co-worker  with
Heaven,  it  is  because  I  know  that  (the  sovereign,
whom  we  style)  the  son  of  Heaven,  and  myself,  are
equally  regarded  by  Heaven  as  Its  sons.  And
should  I  then,  as  if  my  words  were  only  my  own,
be  seeking  to  find  whether  men  approved  of  them,
or  disapproved  of  them  ?  In  this  way  men  will
pronounce  me  a  (sincere  and  simple  ^)  boy.  This
is  what  is  called  being  a  co-worker  with  Heaven.

*  Outwardly  bending  (to  the  ruler),  I  shall  be  a
co-worker  with  other  men.  To  carry  (the  memo-
randum tablet  to  court)  ^,  to  kneel,  and  to  bend  the
body  reverentially : — these  are  the  observances  of
ministers.  They  all  employ  them,  and  should  I
presume  not  to  do  so  ?  Doing  what  other  men  do,
they  would  have  no  occasion  to  blame  me.     This


*  Entirely  unsophisticated,  governed  by  the  Tao.
^  See  the  Li  A'l,  XI,  ii,  16,  17.


208  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  IV.

is  what  is  called  being  a  fellow-worker  with  other
men.

'  Full)'  declaring  my  sentiments  and  substantiat-
ing them  by  appealing  to  antiquity,  I  shall  be  a
co-worker  with  the  ancients.  Although  the  words
in  which  I  convey  my  lessons  may  really  be  con-
demnatory (of  the  ruler),  they  will  be  those  of
antiquity,  and  not  my  own.  In  this  way,  though
straightforward,  I  shall  be  free  from  blame.  This
is  what  is  called  being  a  co-worker  with  antiquity.
May  I  go  to  Wei  in  this  way,  and  be  successful?'
'  No  indeed!'  said  A'ung-ni.  '  How  can  you  do  so  ?
You  have  too  many  plans  of  proceeding,  and  have
not  spied  out  (the  ruler's  character).  Though  you
firmly  adhere  to  your  plans,  you  may  be  held  free
from  transgression,  but  this  will  be  all  the  result.
How  can  you  (in  this  way)  produce  the  trans-
formation (which  you  desire)  ?  All  this  only  shows
(in  you)  the  mind  of  a  teacher  ! '

2.  Yen  Hui  said,  '  I  can  go  no  farther ;  I  venture
to  ask  the  method  from  you,'  A'ung-ni  replied,  '  It
is  fasting  \  (as)  I  will  tell  you.  (But)  when  you
have  the  method,  will  you  find  it  easy  to  practise
it  ?  He  who  thinks  it  easy  will  be  disapproved
of  by  the  bright  Heaven.'  Hui  said,  '  My  family
is  poor.  For  months  together  we  have  no  spirituous
drink,  nor  do  we  taste  the  proscribed  food  or  any
strong-smelling  vegetables  - ; — can  this  be  regarded
as  fasting?'  The  reply  was,  'It  is  the  fasting-
appropriate  to  sacrificing,  but  it  is  not  the  fasting


^  The  term  is  emphatic,  as  Confucius  goes  on  to  explain.
^  Such  as  onions  and  garlic,  with  horse,  dog,  cow,  goose,  and
pigeon.


PT.  I.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  i:WANG-3ZE.  209


of  the  mind.'  '  I  venture  to  ask  what  that  fastino-
of  the  mind  is,'  said  Hui,  and  A'ung-ni  answered,
'  Maintain  a  perfect  unity  in  every  movement  of
your  will.  You  will  not  wait  for  the  hearing  of
your  ears  about  it,  but  for  the  hearing  of  your
mind.  You  will  not  wait  even  for  the  hearine  of
your  mind,  but  for  the  hearing  of  the  spirit  ^  Let
the  hearing  (of  the  ears)  rest  with  the  ears.  Let  the
mind  rest  in  the  verification  (of  the  rightness  of
what  is  in  the  will).  But  the  spirit  is  free  from  all
pre-occupation  and  so  waits  for  (the  appearance  of)
things.  Where  the  (proper)  course  is  ^,  there  is
freedom  from  all  pre-occupation  ; — such  freedom  is
the  fasting  of  the  mind.'  Hui  said  ^,  '  Before  it  was
possible  for  me  to  employ  (this  method),  there  I
was,  the  Hui  that  I  am  ;  now,  that  I  can  employ  it,
the  Hui  that  I  was  has  passed  away.  Can  I  be  said
to  have  obtained  this  freedom  from  pre-occupation  ?'
The  Master  replied,  '  Entirely.  I  tell  you  that  you
can  enter  and  be  at  ease  in  the  enclosure  (where  he
is),  and  not  come  into  collision  with  the  reputation
(which  belongs  to  him).  If  he  listen  to  your
counsels,  let  him  hear  your  notes  ;  if  he  will  not
listen,  be  silent.  Open  no  (other)  door ;  employ  no
other  medicine ;  dwell  with  him  (as  with  a  friend)
in  the  same  apartment,  and  as  if  you  had  no  other
option,  and  you  will  not  be  far  from  success  in  your
object.  Not  to  move  a  step  is  easy ;  to  walk
without  treading  on  the  ground  is  difficult.  In
acting  after  the  manner  of  men,  it  is  easy  to  fall

^  The  character  in  the  text  for  '  spirit '  here  is  ^^,  '  the  breath.'

'  The  Tao.

^  *  Said ; '  probably,  after  having  made  trial  of  this  fasting.

[39]  P


2IO  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  IV.

into  hypocrisy ;  in  acting  after  the  manner  of
Heaven,  it  is  difficult  to  play  the  hypocrite.  I  have
heard  of  flying  with  wings ;  I  have  not  heard  of
flying  without  them.  I  have  heard  of  the  know-
ledge of  the  wise ;  I  have  not  heard  of  the
knowledge  of  the  unwise.  Look  at  that  aperture
(left  in  the  wall) ; — the  empty  apartment  is  filled
with  light  through  it.  Felicitous  influences  rest  (in
the  mind  thus  emblemed),  as  in  their  proper  resting
place.  Even  when  they  do  not  so  rest,  we  have
what  is  called  (the  body)  seated  and  (the  mind)
galloping  abroad.  The  information  that  comes
through  the  ears  and  eyes  is  comprehended  in-
ternally, and  the  knowledgfe  of  the  mind  becomes
something  external : — (when  this  is  the  case),  the
spiritual  intelligences  will  come,  and  take  up  their
dwelling  with  us,  and  how  much  more  will  other
men  do  so !  All  thino-s  thus  undergo  a  trans-
forming  influence.  This  was  the  hinge  on  which
Yil  and  Shun  moved ;  it  was  this  which  Fu-hsi  ^
and  Ki-kkW  -  practised  all  their  lives  :  how  much
more  should  other  men  follow  the  same  rule  ! '

3.  3ze-kao  ^,  duke  of  Sheh,  being  about  to  proceed
on  a  mission  to  Kki,  asked  A'ung-ni,  saying,  *  The
king  is  sending  me,  A"u-liang  ^,  on  a  mission  which


^  Often  spoken  of  as  Fo-hi,  the  founder  of  the  Chinese  kingdom.
His  place  in  chronology  should  be  assigned  to  him  more  than
B.C.  3000  rather  than  under  that  date.

^  A  predecessor  of  Fu-hsi,  a  sovereign  of  the  ancient  para-
disiacal time.

^  The  name  of  Sheh  remains  in  Sheh-hsien,  a  district  of  the
department  Nan-yang,  Ho-nan.  Its  governor,  who  is  the  subject
of  this  narrative,  was  a  Shan  A'li-liang,  styled  3ze-kao.     He  was


PT.  I.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  2  I  I

is  very  important.  Kh\  will  probably  treat  me  as  his
commissioner  with  great  respect,  but  it  will  not  be
in  a  hurry  (to  attend  to  the  business).  Even  an
ordinary  man  cannot  be  readily  moved  (to  action),
and  how  much  less  the  prince  of  a  state !  I  am
very  full  of  apprehension.  You,  Sir,  once  said  to
me  that  of  all  things,  great  or  small,  there  were
few  which,  if  not  conducted  in  the  proper  way^,
could  be  brought  to  a  happy  conclusion  ;  that,  if
the  thing  were  not  successful,  there  was  sure  to  be
the  evil  of  being  dealt  with  after  the  manner  of
men  ^' ;  that,  if  it  were  successful,  there  was  sure
to  be  the  evil  of  constant  anxiety  ^ ;  and  that,
whether  it  succeeded  or  not,  it  was  only  the
virtuous  man  who  could  secure  its  not  beinof  fol-
lowed  by  evil.  In  my  diet  I  take  what  is  coarse,
and  do  not  seek  delicacies, — a  man  whose  cookery
does  not  require  him  to  be  using  cooling  drinks.
This  morning  I  received  my  charge,  and  in  the
evening  I  am  drinkinef  iced  water; — am  I  not
feeling  the  internal  heat  (and  discomfort)  ?  Such  is
my  state  before  I  have  actually  engaged  in  the
affair; — I  am  already  suffering  from  conflicting
anxieties.  And  if  the  thing  do  not  succeed,  (the
king)  is  sure  to  deal  with  me  after  the  manner
of  men.  The  evil  is  twofold ;  as  a  minister,  I  am
not  able  to  bear  the  burden  (of  the  mission).     Can


not  a  duke,  but  as  the  counts  of  A7/u  had  usurped  the  name  of
king,  they  gave  high-sounding  names  to  all  their  ministers  and
officers.

^  Or,  'according  to  the  Tao.'

^  As  a  criminal ;  punished  by  his  sovereign.

^  Anxiety  '  night  and  day,'  or  '  cold  and  hot '  fits  of  trouble ; — a
peculiar  usage  of  Yin  Yang.

r  2


212  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK,  iv.

you,  Sir,  tell  me  something  (to  help  me  in  the
case) ? '

A'ung-ni  replied,  'In  all  things  under  heaven  there
are  two  great  cautionary  considerations  : — the  one
is  the  requirement  implanted  (in  the  nature)^  ;  the
other  is  the  conviction  of  what  is  right.  The  love
of  a  son  for  his  parents  is  the  implanted  require-
ment, and  can  never  be  separated  from  his  heart ;
the  service  of  his  ruler  by  a  minister  is  what  is
right,  and  from  its  obligation  there  is  no  escaping
anywhere  between  heaven  and  earth.  These  are
what  are  called  the  great  cautionary  considerations.
Therefore  a  son  finds  his  rest  in  serving  his
parents  without  reference  to  or  choice  of  place  ;  and
this  is  the  height  of  filial  duty.  In  the  same  way
a  subject  finds  his  rest  in  serving  his  ruler,  without
reference  to  or  choice  of  the  business  ;  and  this
is  the  fullest  discharge  of  loyalty.  When  men  are
simply  obeying  (the  dictates  of)  their  hearts,  the
considerations  of  grief  and  joy  are  not  readily  set
before  them.  They  know  that  there  is  no  alterna-
tive to  their  acting  as  they  do,  and  rest  in  it  as
what  is  appointed ;  and  this  is  the  highest  achieve-
ment of  virtue.  He  who  is  in  the  position  of  a
minister  or  of  a  son  has  indeed  to  do  what  he
cannot  but  do.  Occupied  with  the  details  of  the
business  (in  hand),  and  forgetful  of  his  own  person,
what  leisure  has  he  to  think  of  his  pleasure  in  living
or  his  dislike  of  death  ?  You,  my  master,  may  well
proceed  on  your  mission.

'But  let  me  repeat  to  you  what  I  have  heard  : — In

1  The  Ming  of  the  text  here  is  that  in  the  first  sentence  of  the
A'ung  Yung.


PT.  I.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  2  I  3

all  intercourse  (between  states),  if  they  are  near  to
each  other,  there  should  be  mutual  friendliness,  veri-
fied by  deeds  ;  if  they  are  far  apart,  there  must  be
sincere  adherence  to  truth  in  their  messages.  Those
messages  will  be  transmitted  by  internuncios.  But
to  convey  messages  which  express  the  complacence
or  the  dissatisfaction  of  the  two  parties  is  the  most
difficult  thing  in  the  world.  If  they  be  those  of
mutual  complacence,  there  is  sure  to  be  an  overflow
of  expressions  of  satisfaction  ;  if  of  mutual  dissatis-
faction, an  overflow  of  expressions  of  dislike.  But
all  extravagance  leads  to  reckless  language,  and
such  lanmiaee  fails  to  command  belief.  When  this
distrust  arises,  woe  to  the  internuncio !  Hence  the
Rules  for  Speech^  say, "  Transmit  the  message  exactly
as  it  stands  ;  do  not  transmit  it  with  any  overflow  of
language  ;  so  is  (the  internuncio)  likely  to  keep  him-
self whole."

4.  '  Moreover,  skilful  wrestlers  begin  with  open
trials  of  strength,  but  always  end  with  masked
attempts  (to  gain  the  victory)  ;  as  their  excitement
grows  excessive,  they  display  much  wonderful  dex-
terity. Parties  drinking  according  to  the  rules  at
first  observe  good  order,  but  ahvays  end  with  dis-
order ;  as  their  excitement  grows  excessive,  their  fun
becomes  uproarious  -.  In  all  things  it  is  so.  People
are  at  first  sincere,  but  always  end  with  becoming  rude ;
at  the  commencement  thincrs  are  treated  as  trivial,


^  Probably  a  Collection  of  Directions  current  at  the  time ;    and
which  led  to  the  name  of  Yang  Hsiung's  Treatise  with  the  same
name  in  our  first  century.
See  the  Shih,  II,  vii,  6.


2  14  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  iv.

but  as  the  end  draws  near,  they  assume  great  pro-
portions. Words  are  (like)  the  waves  acted  on  by
the  wind  ;  the  real  point  of  the  matters  (discussed  by
them)  is  lost.  The  wind  and  waves  are  easily  set  in
motion  ;  the  success  of  the  matter  of  which  the  real
point  is  lost  is  easily  put  in  peril.  Hence  quarrels
are  occasioned  by  nothing  so  much  as  by  artful  words
and  one-sided  speeches.  The  breath  comes  angrily,
as  when  a  beast,  driven  to  death,  wildly  bellows  forth
its  rage.  On  this  animosities  arise  on  both  sides.
Hasty  examination  (of  the  case)  eagerly  proceeds,
and  revengeful  thoughts  arise  in  their  minds  ; — they
do  not  know  how.  Since  they  do  not  know  how
such  thoughts  arise,  who  knows  how  they  will  end  ?
Hence  the  Rules  for  Speech^  say,  "Let  not  an  in-
ternuncius  depart  from  his  instructions.  Let  him
not  urge  on  a  settlement.  If  he  go  beyond  the
regular  rules,  he  will  complicate  matters.  Departing
from  his  instructions  and  urging  on  a  settlement  im-
perils negotiations.  A  good  settlement  is  proved  by
its  lastinof  lonof,  and  a  bad  settlement  cannot  be
altered ; — ought  he  not  to  be  careful  ?  "

'  Further  still,  let  your  mind  find  its  enjoyment  in
the  circumstances  of  your  position  ;  nourish  the  cen-
tral course  which  you  pursue,  by  a  reference  to  your
unavoidable  obligations.  This  is  the  highest  object
for  you  to  pursue  ;  what  else  can  you  do  to  fulfil  the
charge  (of  your  father  and  ruler)  -.  The  best  thing
you  can  do  is  to  be  prepared  to  sacrifice  your  life ;
and  this  is  the  most  difficult  thinof  to  do.'


^  See  above,  on  preceding  page.

^  Not  meaning  the  king  of  A7m;   but  the  Tao,  whose  will  was
to  be  found  in  his  nature  and  the  conditions  of  his  lot.


PT.  I.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  iTWANG-BZE.  2  I  5

5.  Yen  Ho  \  being  about  to  undertake  the  office  of
Teacher  of  the  eldest  son  of  duke  Ling  of  Wei,  con-
sulted KW  Po-yii^.  '  Here,'  said  he,  'is  this  (young)
man,  whose  natural  disposition  is  as  bad  as  it  could
be.  If  I  allow  him  to  proceed  in  a  bad  way,  it  will
be  at  the  peril  of  our  state  ;  if  I  insist  on  his  proceed-
ing in  a  right  way,  it  will  be  at  the  peril  of  my  own
person.  His  wisdom  is  just  sufficient  to  know  the
errors  of  other  men,  but  he  does  not  know  how
he  errs  himself.  What  am  I  to  do  in  such  a
case  ? '  A'u  Po-yii  replied,  'Good  indeed  is  your  ques-
tion !  Be  on  your  guard ;  be  careful ;  see  that  you
keep  yourself  correct !  Your  best  plan  will  be,  with
your  person  to  seek  association  with  him,  and  with
your  mind  to  try  to  be  in  harmony  with  him  ;  and
yet  there  are  dangers  connected  with  both  of  these
things.  While  seeking  to  keep  near  to  him,  do  not
enter  into  his  pursuits  ;  while  cultivating  a  harmony
of  mind  with  him,  do  not  show  how  superior  you  are
to  him.  If  in  your  personal  association  you  enter
into  his  pursuits,  you  will  fall  with  him  and  be  ruined,
you  will  tumble  down  with  a  crash.  If  in  maintaining
a  harmony  with  his  mind,  you  show  how  different
you  are  from  him,  he  will  think  you  do  so  for  the
reputation  and  the  name,  and  regard  you  as  a
creature  of  evil  omen  ^  If  you  find  him  to  be  a  mere
boy,  be  you  with  him  as  another  boy  ;  if  you  find
him  one  of  those  who  will  not  have  their  ground
marked   out   in  the  ordinary  way,  do  you  humour


^  A  member  of  the  Yen  family  of  Lu.     We  shall  meet  with  him
again  in  Books  XIX,  XXVIII,  and  XXXII.

2  A  minister  of  Wei;  a  friend  and  favourite  of  Confucius.
^  Compare  in  the  A'ung  Yung,  ii,  ch.  24.


2l6  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  iv.

him  in  this  characteristic  ^ ;  if  you  find  him  to  be  free
from  lofty  airs,  show  yourself  to  be  the  same  ; —
(ever)  leading  him  on  so  as  to  keep  him  free  from
faults.

'  Do  you  not  know  (the  fate  of)  the  praying
mantis  ?  It  angrily  stretches  out  its  arms,  to  arrest
the  progress  of  the  carriage,  unconscious  of  its  in-
ability for  such  a  task,  but  showing  how  much  it
thinks  of  its  own  powers.  Be  on  your  guard ;  be
careful.  If  you  cherish  a  boastful  confidence  in
your  own  excellence,  and  place  yourself  in  collision
with  him,  you  are  likely  to  incur  the  fate  (of  the
mantis).

'  Do  you  not  know  how  those  who  keep  tigers
proceed  ?  They  do  not  dare  to  supply  them  with
living  creatures,  because  of  the  rage  which  their
killing  of  them  will  excite.  They  do  not  (even)  dare
to  give  them  their  food  whole,  because  of  the  rage
which  their  rending  of  it  will  excite.  They  watch
till  their  hunger  is  appeased,  (dealing  with  them)
from  their  knowledge  of  their  natural  ferocity.  Tigers
are  different  from  men,  but  they  fawn  on  those  who
feed  them,  and  do  so  in  accordance  with  their  nature.
When  any  of  these  are  killed  by  them,  it  is  because
they  have  gone  against  that  nature.

'  Those  again  who  are  fond  of  horses  preserve
their  dung  in  baskets,  and  their  urine  in  jars.  If
musquitoes  and  gadflies  light  on  them,  and  the
grooms  brush  them  suddenly  away,  the  horses
break  their  bits,  injure  (the  ornaments  on)  their
heads,  and  smash  those  on  their  breasts.  The  more
care  that  is  taken  of  them,  the  more  does  their  fond-

^  Equivalent  to  '  Do  not  cross  him  in  his  peculiarities.'


PT.  I.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  2  I  7


ness  (for  their  attendants)  disappear.  Ought  not
caution  to  be  exercised  (in  the  management  of
them)  ? '

6.  A  (master)  mechanic,  called  Shih,  on  his  way  to
Kill,  came  to  iOu-ytian  \  where  he  saw  an  oak-tree,
which  was  used  as  the  altar  for  the  spirits  of  the
land.  It  was  so  large  that  an  ox  standing  behind
it  could  not  be  seen.  It  measured  a  hundred  spans
round,  and  rose  up  eighty  cubits  on  the  hill  before  it
threw  out  any  branches,  after  which  there  w^ere  ten
or  so,  from  each  of  which  a  boat  could  be  hollow^ed
out.  People  came  to  see  it  in  crowds  as  in  a  market
place,  but  the  mechanic  did  not  look  round  at  it,  but
held  on  his  way  without  stopping.  One  of  his  work-
men, however,  looked  long  and  admiringly  at  it,  and
then  ran  on  to  his  master,  and  said  to  him,  '  Since  I
followed  you  with  my  axe  and  bill,  I  have  never
seen  such  a  beautiful  mass  of  timber  as  this.  Why
would  you.  Sir,  not  look  round  at  it,  but  went  on
without  stopping  ? '  '  Have  done,'  said  Mr.  Shih,
'  and  do  not  speak  about  it.  It  is  quite  useless.  A
boat  made  from  its  w^ood  would  sink  ;  a  coffin  or
shell  would  quickly  rot  ;  an  article  of  furniture
would  soon  go  to  pieces  ;  a  door  would  be
covered  with  the  exuding  sap  ;  a  pillar  would  be
riddled  by  insects ;  the  material  of  it  is  good  for
nothing,  and  hence  it   is  that  it  has  attained  to  so


o^reat  an  agfe  -.'

o  o


^  The  name  of  a  place ;  of  a  road ;  of  a  bend  in  the  road ;  of
a  hill.  All  these  accounts  of  the  name  are  found  in  different
editions  of  our  author,  showing  that  the  locality  had  not  been
identified.

^  No  one  has  thought  it  worth  cutting  down.


2l8  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  IV.

When  Mr.  Shih  was  returning,  the  altar-oak
appeared  to  him  in  a  dream,  and  said,  '  What  other
tree  will  you  compare  with  me  ?  Will  you  compare
me  to  one  of  your  ornamental  trees  ?  There  are
hawthorns,  pear-trees,  orange-trees,  pummelo-trees,
gourds  and  other  low  fruit-bearing  plants.  When
their  fruits  are  ripe,  they  are  knocked  down  from
them,  and  thrown  among  the  dirt  ^  The  large
branches  are  broken,  and  the  smaller  are  torn  away.
So  it  is  that  their  productive  ability  makes  their
lives  bitter  to  them  ;  they  do  not  complete  their
natural  term  of  existence,  but  come  to  a  premature
end  in  the  middle  of  their  time,  bringing  on  them-
selves the  destructive  treatment  which  they  ordin-
arily receive.  It  is  so  with  all  things.  I  have
sought  to  discover  how  it  was  that  I  was  so  useless ;
— I  had  long  done  so,  till  (the  effort)  nearly  caused
my  death  ;  and  now  I  have  learned  it : — it  has  been
of  the  greatest  use  to  me.  Suppose  that  I  had
possessed  useful  properties,  should  I  have  become  of
the  great  size  that  I  am  ?  And  moreover  you  and  I
are  both  things ; — how  should  one  thing  thus  pass
its  judgment  on  another  ?  how  is  it  that  you  a  use-
less man  know  all  this  about  me  a  useless  tree  ? '
When  Mr.  Shih  awoke,  he  kept  thinking  about  his
dream,  but  the  workman  said,  '  Being  so  taken  with
its  uselessness,  how  is  it  that  it  yet  acts  here  as  the
altar  for  the  spirits  of  the  land  ? '  'Be  still,'  was  the
master's  reply,  'and  do  not  say  a  word.  It  simply
happened  to  grow  here ;  and  thus  those  who  do  not
know  it  do  not  speak  ill  of  it  as  an  evil  thing.  If  it
were  not  used  as  the  altar,  would  it  be  in  danger  of

^  This  is  the  indignity  intended.


PT.  I.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A;WANG-3ZE.  219


being  cut  down  ?  Moreover,  the  reason  of  its  being
preserved  is  different  from  that  of  the  preservation
of  things  generally  ;  is  not  your  explaining  it  from
the  sentiment  which  you  have  expressed  wide  of  the
mark  ? '

7.  Nan-po  ^z^-khi  ^  in  rambling  about  the  Heights
of  Shang  ^,  saw  a  large  and  extraordinary  tree.  The
teams  of  a  thousand  chariots  might  be  sheltered
under  it,  and  its  shade  would  cover  them  all !  ^ze-
k/ii  said, '  What  a  tree  is  this  !  It  must  contain  an
extraordinary  amount  of  timber  !  When  he  looked
up,  however,  at  its  smaller  branches,  they  were  so
twisted  and  crooked  that  they  could  not  be  made
into  rafters  and  beams  ;  when  he  looked  down  to  its
root,  its  stem  was  divided  into  so  many  rounded  por-
tions that  neither  coffin  nor  shell  could  be  made  from
them.  He  licked  one  of  its  leaves,  and  his  mouth
felt  torn  and  wounded.  The  smell  of  it  would  make
a  man  frantic,  as  if  intoxicated,  for  more  than  three
whole  days  together.  '  This,  indeed,'  said  he,  '  is  a
tree  good  for  nothing,  and  it  is  thus  that  it  has
attained  to  such  a  size.  Ah  !  and  spirit-like  men
acknowledge  this  worthlessness  (and  its  result)  ^'

In  Sung  there  is  the  district  of  A'ing-shih  '^,  in
which  catalpae,  cypresses,  and  mulberry  trees  grow
well.  Those  of  them  which  are  a  span  or  two  or
rather  more  in  circumference  ^  are  cut  down  by  per-
sons who  want  to  make  posts  to  which  to  tie  their

^  Probably  the  Nan-kwo  '^zt-kh\  at  the  beginning  of  the  second
Book.

'^  In  the  present  department  of  Kwei-teh,  Ho-nan.
^  A  difficult  sentence  to  construe.
*  In  what  part  of  the  duchy  we  do  not  know.
®  See  Mencius,  VI,  i,  13.


2  20  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  iv.

monkeys ;  those  which  are  three  or  four  spans
round  are  cut  down  by  persons  who  want  beams  for
their  lofty  and  famous  houses  ;  and  those  of  seven
or  eight  spans  are  cut  clown  by  noblemen  and  rich
merchants  who  want  single  planks  for  the  sides  of
their  coffins.  The  trees  in  consequence  do  not
complete  their  natural  term  of  life,  and  come  to  a
premature  end  in  the  middle  of  their  growth  under
the  axe  and  bill  ; — this  is  the  evil  that  befalls  them
from  their  supplying  good  timber.

In  the  same  way  the  A^ieh  ^  (book)  specifies  oxen
that  have  white  foreheads,  pigs  that  have  turned-up
snouts,  and  men  that  are  suffering  from  piles,  and
forbids  their  being  sacrificed  to  the  Ho.  The
wizards  know  them  by  these  peculiarities  and  con-
sider them  to  be  inauspicious,  but  spirit-like  men
consider  them  on  this  account  to  be  very  fortunate.

8.  There  was  the  deformed  object  Shu^.  His  chin
seemed  to  hide  his  navel ;  his  shoulders  were  higher
than  the  crown  of  his  head ;  the  knot  of  his  hair
pointed  to  the  sky ;  his  five  viscera  were  all  com-
pressed into  the  upper  part  of  his  body,  and  his  two
thigh  bones  were  like  ribs.  By  sharpening  needles
and  washing  clothes  he  was  able  to  make  a  living.
By  sifting  rice  and  cleaning  it,  he  was  able  to  support
ten  individuals.  When  the  o-overnment  was  callino-
out  soldiers,  this  poor  Shu  would  bare  his  arms
among  the  others  ;  when  it  had  any  great  service
to  be  undertaken,  because  of  his  constant  ailments,
none  of  the  work  was  assigned  to  him  ;  when  it  was

^  Probably  the  name  of  an  old  work  on  sacrifices.  But  was  there
ever  a  time  in  China  when  human  sacrifices  were  offered  to  the  Ho,
or  on  any  altar  ?

^  One  of  ^wang-^ze's  creations.


PT.  I.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  i^WANG-3ZE.  22  1


giving  out  grain  to  the  sick,  he  received  three  /§ung,
and  ten  bundles  of  firewood.  If  this  poor  man,  so
deformed  in  body,  was  still  able  to  support  him-
self, and  complete  his  term  of  life,  how  much  more
may  they  do  so,  whose  deformity  is  that  of  their
faculties^ !

9.  When  Confucius  went  to  Kku."^,  A'/^ieh-yu,  the
madman  of  A'/m^,  as  he  was  wandering  about,  passed
by  his  door,  and  said,  '  O  Phoenix,  O  Phoenix,  how
is  your  virtue  degenerated !  The  future  is  not  to
be  waited  for ;  the  past  is  not  to  be  sought  again  !
When  good  order  prevails  in  the  world,  the  sage
tries  to  accomplish  all  his  service  ;  when  disorder
prevails,  he  may  preserve  his  life  ;  at  the  present
time,  it  is  enough  if  he  simply  escape  being  punished.
Happiness  is  lighter  than  a  feather,  but  no  one  knows
how  to  support  it ;  calamity  is  heavier  than  the  earth,
and  yet  no  one  knows  how  to  avoid  it.  Give  over !
give  over  approaching  men  with  the  lessons  of  your
virtue  !  You  are  in  peril !  you  are  in  peril,  hurrying
on  where  you  have  marked  out  the  ground  against
your  advance  !  I  avoid  publicity,  I  avoid  publicity,
that  my  path  may  not  be  injured.  I  pursue  my
course,  now  going  backwards,  now  crookedly,  that
my  feet  may  not  be  hurt  •*.


^  The  deficiency  of  their  faculties — here  mental  faculties — would
assimilate  them  to  the  useless  trees  in  the  last  two  paragraphs,
whose  uselessness  only  proved  useful  to  them.

^  The  great  state  of  the  south,  having  its  capital  in  the  present
Hil-pei.

'  See  the  Analects,  XVIII,  v.

*  The  madman  would  seem  to  contrast  his  own  course  with  that
of  Confucius ;  but  the  meaning  is  very  uncertain,  and  the  text
cannot  be  discussed  fully  in  these  short  notes.     There  is  a  jingle


2  22  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  IV.

'  The  mountain  by  its  trees  weakens  itself  ^
The  grease  which  ministers  to  the  fire  fries  itself.
The  cinnamon  tree  can  be  eaten,  and  therefore  it  is
cut  down.  The  varnish  tree  is  useful,  and  therefore
incisions  are  made  in  it.  All  men  know  the  advan-
tage of  being  useful,  but  no  one  knows  the  advantage
of  being  useless.'

of  rhyme  also  in  the  sentence,  and  some  critics  find  something  like
this  in  them :

'Ye  ferns,  ye  thorny  ferns,  O  injure  not  my  way!
To  save  my  feet,  I  backward  turn,  or  winding  stray ! '

^  Literally,  '  robs  itself; ' — exhausts  its  moisture  or  productive
strength.


PT.  I.  SECT.  V.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  isTWANG-SZE.  223


BOOK   V.
Part  I.    Section  V.

Teh  Khung  Fu,  or  'The  Seal  of  Virtue

Completed'

I.  In  Lu^  there  was  a  Wang  Thai^  who  had  lost
both  his  feet  ^ ;  while  his  disciples  who  follow^ed  and
went  about  with  him  were  as  numerous  as  those  of
A^mg-ni.  AO^ang  Ki  ■'  asked  A'ung-ni  about  him,
saying,  '  Though  Wang  Thai  is  a  cripple,  the  dis-
ciples who  follow  him  about  divide  Lii  equally  with
you,  Master.  When  he  stands,  he  does  not  teach
them  ;  when  he  sits,  he  does  not  discourse  to  them.
But  they  go  to  him  empty,  and  come  back  full.  Is
there  indeed  such  a  thing  as  instruction  without
words ^  ?  and  while  the  body  is  imperfect,  may  the
mind  be  complete  ?     What  sort  of  man  is  he  ?  '

Kung-ni  replied,  '  This  master  is  a  sage.      I  have

»  See  pp.  133,  134.

^  The  native  state  of  Confucius,  part  of  the  present  Shan-tung.

^  A  Taoist  of  complete  virtue ;  but  probably  there  was  not  really
such  a  person.     Our  author  fabricates  him  according  to  his  fashion.

*  The  character  uh  (Tli)  does  not  say  that  he  had  lost  both  his
feet,  but  I  suppose  that  such  is  the  meaning,  because  of  what  is
said  of  Toeless  below  that  '  he  walked  on  his  heels  to  see  Confucius.'
The  feet  must  have  been  amputated,  or  mutilated  rather  (justly  or
unjustly),  as  a  punishment ;  but  A'wang-jze  wished  to  say  nothing
on  that  point.

^  Perhaps  a  disciple  of  Confucius  ; — not  elsewhere  mentioned  as
such.


c


See  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing,  ch.  2


2  24  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  v.

only  been  too  late  in  going  to  him.  I  will  make
him  my  teacher ;  and  how  much  more  should  those
do  so  who  are  not  equal  to  me !  Why  should
only  the  state  of  Lu  follow  him  ?  I  will  lead  on  all
under  heaven  with  me  to  do  so.'  AV/ang  K\  re-
joined, '  He  is  a  man  who  has  lost  his  feet,  and  yet
he  is  known  as  the  venerable  Wang  ^ ; — he  must  be
very  different  from  ordinary  men.  What  is  the
peculiar  way  in  which  he  employs  his  mind  ? '  The
reply  was,  '  Death  and  life  are  great  considerations.
but  they  could  work  no  change  in  him.  Though
heaven  and  earth  were  to  be  overturned  and  fall,
they  would  occasion  him  no  loss.  His  judgment  is
fixed  regarding  that  in  which  there  is  no  element
of  falsehood  ^ ;  and,  while  other  things  change,  he
chanofes  not.  The  transformations  of  thino-s  are  to
him  the  developments  prescribed  for  them,  and  he
keeps  fast  hold  of  the  author  of  them  ^'

A'/^ang  K\  said,  '  What  do  you  mean  ? '  '  When
we  look  at  things,'  said  A'ung-ni,  *  as  they  differ,  we
see  them  to  be  different,  (as  for  instance)  the  liver
and  the  gall,  or  Khi\  and  Ytieh  ;  when  we  look  at
them,  as  they  agree,  we  see  them  all  to  be  a  unity.
So  it  is  with  this  (Wang  Thai).  He  takes  no  know-
ledge of  the  things  for  which  his  ears  and  eyes  are
the  appropriate  organs,  but  his  mind  delights  itself
in  the  harmony  of  (all  excellent)  qualities.  He  looks
at  the  unity  which  belongs  to  things,  and  does  not
perceive  where  they  have  suffered  loss.     He  looks

^  Literally,  '  the  Senior ; '  often  rendered  '  Teacher.'
^  'That  in  which  there  is  no  element  of  falsehood'  is  the  Tao,
which  also  is  the  'Author'  of  all  the  changes  that  take  place  in
time  and  space.     See  the  Introductory  Note  on  the  title  and  subject
of  the  Book,


PT.  I.  SECT.v.        THE  WRITINGS    OF   ;irWANG-3ZE.  225

on  the  loss  of  his  feet  as  only  the  loss  of  so  much
earth.'

AV/ang  K\  said,  '  He  is  entirely  occupied  with  his
(proper)  self  \  By  his  knowledge  he  has  discovered
(the  nature  of)  his  mind,  and  to  that  he  holds  as
what  is  unchangeable  ^ ;  but  how  is  it  that  men  make
so  much  of  him?'  The  reply  was,  'Men  do  not
look  into  running  water  as  a  mirror,  but  into  still
water ; — it  is  only  the  still  water  that  can  arrest
them  all,  and  keep  them  (in  the  contemplation  of
their  real  selves).  OT  things  which  are  what  they
are  by  the  influence  of  the  earth,  it  is  only  the  pine
and  cypress  which  are  the  best  instances  ; — in  winter
as  in  summer  brightly  green  ^.  Of  those  which  were
what  they  were  by  the  influence  of  Heaven^,  the
most  correct  examples  were  Yao  and  Shun  ;  for-
tunate in  (thus)  maintaining  their  own  life  correct,
and  so  as  to  correct  the  lives  of  others.

'  As  a  verification  of  the  (power  of)  the  original
endowment,  when  it  has  been  preserved,  take  the
result  of  fearlessness, — how  the  heroic  spirit  of  a
single  brave  soldier  has  been  thrown  into  an  army
of  nine  hosts  ^.  If  a  man  only  seeking  for  fame  and
able  in  this  way  to  secure  it  can  produce  such  an
effect,  how  much  more  (may  we  look  for  a  greater

^  Wang  Thai  saw  all  things  in  the  Tao,  and  the  Tao  in  all
things.     Comp.  Book  XI,  par.  7,  et  al.

*  Notwithstanding  his  being  a  cripple.  He  forgets  that  circum-
stance himself,  and  all  others  forget  it,  constrained  and  won  by
his  embodiment  of  the  Tao.  What  follows  is  an  illustration  of
this,  exaggerated  indeed,  but  not  so  extravagantly  as  in  many
other  passages.

^  In  the  Taoistic  meaning  of  the  term.

*  The  royal  army  consisted  of  six  hosts ;  that  of  a  great  feudal
prince  of  three.     '  Nine  hosts '  =  a  very  great  army.

[39]  Q


2  26  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  V.

result)  from  one  whose  rule  is  over  heaven  and
earth,  and  holds  all  things  in  his  treasury,  who
simply  has  his  lodging  in  the  six  members  ^  of  his
body,  whom  his  ears  and  eyes  serve  but  as  convey-
ing emblematic  images  of  things,  who  comprehends
all  his  knowledge  in  a  unity,  and  whose  mind  never
dies  !  If  such  a  man  were  to  choose  a  day  on  which
he  would  ascend  far  on  high,  men  would  (seek  to)
follow  him  there.  But  how  should  he  be  willing  to
occupy  himself  with  other  men  ?  '

2.  Shan-thu  A'ia^  was  (another)  man  who  had  lost
his  feet.  Along  with  ^z^-kh^cxv'  of  A^'ang^  he  studied
under  the  master  Po-hwan  Wu-2'an  ^.  ^z^-khkw  said
to  him  (one  day),  '  If  I  go  out  first,  do  you  remain
behind ;  and  if  you  go  out  first,  I  will  remain  be-
hind.' Next  day  they  were  again  sitting  together
on  the  same  mat  in  the  hall,  when  3ze-/{'/^an  spoke
the  same  words  to  him,  adding,  '  Now  I  am  about  to
go  out ;  will  you  stay  behind  or  not  ?  Moreover,
when  you  see  one  of  official  rank  (like  myself),  you
do  not  try  to  get  out  of  his  way; — do  you  consider
yourself  equal  to  one  of  official  rank  ? '  Shan-thu
K'm.  replied,  '  In  our  Master's  school  is  there  indeed
such  recognition  required  of  official  rank  ?  You  are
one.  Sir,  whose  pleasure  is  in  your  official  rank,  and
would  therefore  take  precedence  of  other  men.     I

^  The  arms,  legs,  head,  and  trunk.

^  Another  cripple  introduced  by  our  author  to  serve  his  purpose.

'  Kung-sun  AV^iao;  a  good  and  able  minister  of  A'ang,  an
earldom  forming  part  of  the  present  Ho-nan.  He  was  a  con-
temporary of  Confucius,  who  wept  when  he  heard  of  his  death  in
B.C.  522.  He  was  a  scion  of  the  ruling  house,  which  again  was
a  branch  of  the  royal  family  of  Khi.

^  A  Taoist  teacher.     See  XXI,  par.  9;  XXXII,  par.  i.


PT.  I.  SECT.V.       THE  WRITINGS    OF    ATWANG-SZE.  227


have  heard  that  when  a  mirror  is  bright,  the  dust
does  not  rest  on  it ;  when  dust  rests  on  it  the  mirror
is  not  bright.     When  one  dwells  long  with  a  man  of
ability  and  virtue,  he  comes   to  be  without   error.
There  now  is  our  teacher  whom  you  have  chosen  to
make  you  greater  than  you  are ;  and  when  you  still
talk  in  this  way,  are  you  not  in  error  ? '     3ze-/7/an
rejoined,  'A  (shattered)  object  as  you  are,  you  would
still  strive  to  make  yourself  out  as  good  as  Yao  !    If
I  may  form  an  estimate  of  your  virtue,  might  it  not  be
sufficient  to  lead  you  to  the  examination  of  yourself  ?'
The  other  said, 'Most  criminals,  in  describing  their
offences,  would  make  it  out  that  they  ought  not  to
have  lost  (their  feet)  for  them  ;  few  would  describe
them  so  as  to  make  it  appear  that  they  should  not
have  preserved  their  feet.  They  are  only  the  virtuous
who  know  that  such  a  calamity  was  unavoidable,  and
therefore  rest  in  it  as  what  was  appointed  for  them.
When  men  stand  before  (an  archer  like)  I  ^  with  his
bent  bow,  if  they  are  in  the  middle  of  his  field,  that
is  the  place  where  they  should  be  hit ;  and  if  they
be  not   hit,  that   also  was   appointed.     There    are
many  with   their  feet  entire  who  laugh  at  me  be-
cause   I   have  lost  my  feet,  which   makes   me  feel
vexed  and  angry.     But  when  I  go  to  our  teacher,
I  throw   off  that   feeling,  and  return  (to  a  better
mood)  ; — he  has  washed,  without  my  knowing  it,  the
other  from  me  by  (his  instructions  in)  what  is  good.
I  have  attended  him  now  for  nineteen  years,  and
have  not  known  that  I  am  without  my  feet.      Now,
you.  Sir,  and  I  have  for  the  object  of  our  study  the

^  A  famous  archer  of  antiquity  in  the  twenty-second  century
B.  c,  or  perhaps  earlier.

Q  2


2  28  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  bk.  v.

(virtue)  which  is  internal,  and  not  an  adjunct  of  the
body,  and  yet  you  are  continually  directing  your
attention  to  my  external  body; — are  you  not  wrong
in  this  ? '  3ze-/J'/^an  felt  uneasy,  altered  his  manner
and  looks,  and  said,  *  You  need  not,  Sir,  say  any-
thing more  about  it'

3.   In  Lu  there  was  a  cripple,  called  Shu-shan  the
Toeless\  who   came   on  his   heels  to  see  A'une-ni.
A'ung-ni  said  to  him,  '  By  your  want  of  circumspec-
tion in  the  past.  Sir,  you  have  incurred  such  a  cala-
mity;— of  what  use  is   your  coming  to   me  now?'
Toeless  said,  '  Through  my  ignorance  of  my  proper
business   and  taking  too  litde  care  of  my  body,    I
came  to  lose  my  feet.     But  now  I  am  come  to  you,
still  possessing  what  is  more  honourable  than  my
feet,  and  which  therefore  I  am  anxious  to  preserve
entire.     There  is  nothing  which  Heaven  does  not
cover,  and  nothing  which  Earth  does  not  sustain  ;
you.  Master,  were  regarded  by  me  as  doing  the  part
of  Heaven  and  Earth; — how  could  I  know  that  you
would  receive  me  in  such  a  way  ? '     Confucius  re-
joined, '  I   am  but   a  poor   creature.      But  why,  my
master,  do  you  not  come  inside,  where  I  will  try  to
tell  you  what  I  have  learned  ? '     When  Toeless  had
gone  out,  Confucius  said,  '  Be  stimulated  to  effort,
my  disciples.     This  toeless  cripple  is  still  anxious  to
learn  to  make  up  for  the  evil  of  his  former  conduct ;
— how  much  more  should  those  be  so  whose  conduct
has  been  unchallenged  ! '

Mr.  Toeless,  however,  told  Lao  Tan  (of  the  inter-


^  '  Toeless '  is  a  sort  of  nickname.     Shu-shan  or  Shu  hill  was,
probably,  where  he  dwelt :— '  Toeless  of  Shu  hill.'


PT.  I.  SECT.  V.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  229

view),  saying,  '  Khung  Kk\\\,  I  apprehend,  has  not
yet  attained  to  be  a  Perfect  man.  What  has  he  to  do
with  keeping  a  crowd  of  disciples  around  him  ?  He
is  seeking  to  have  the  reputation  of  being  an  extra-
ordinary and  marvellous  man,  and  does  not  know  that
the  Perfect  man  considers  this  to  be  as  handcuffs
and  fetters  to  him.'  Lao  Tan  said,  'Why  did  you  not
simply  lead  him  to  see  the  unity  of  life  and  death,
and  that  the  admissible  and  inadmissible  belong  to
one  category,  so  freeing  him  from  his  fetters  ?
Would  this  be  possible?'  Toeless  said,  '  It  is  the
punishment  inflicted  on  him  by  Heaven  ^  How  can
he  be  freed  from  it  ? '

4.  Duke  Ai  of  Lu-  asked  A'ung-ni,  saying, 'There
was  an  ugly  man  in  Wei,  called  Ai-thai  Tho  'K  His
father-in-law,  who  lived  with  him,  thought  so  much  of
him  that  he  could  not  be  away  from  him.  His  wife,
when  she  saw  him  (ugly  as  he  was),  represented  to
her  parents,  saying,  "  I  had  more  than  ten  times
rather  be  his  concubine  than  the  wife  of  any  other
man  ^"  He  was  never  heard  to  take  the  lead  in  dis-
cussion, but  always  seemed  to  be  of  the  same  opinion
with  others.  He  had  not  the  position  of  a  ruler,  so
as  to  be  able  to  save  men  from  death.  He  had  no
revenues,  so  as  to  be  able  to  satisfy  men's  craving
for  food.      He  was  ugly  enough,  moreover,  to  scare

^  'Heaven'  here  is  a  synonym  of  Tao.  Perhaps  the  meaning
is  '  unavoidable ; '  it  is  so  in  the  Taoistic  order  of  things.

^  It  was  in  the  sixteenth  year  of  duke  Ai  that  Confucius  died.
Ai  was  marquis  of  Lu  from  b.c.  494  to  468.

^  The  account  of  Ai-thai  Tho  is  of  course  ^wang-5ze's  own
fabrication.  Ai-thai  is  understood  to  be  descriptive  of  his  ugliness,
and  Tho  to  be  his  name.

*  Perhaps  this  was  spoken  by  his  wife  before  their  marriage.


230  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.V.

the  whole  world.  He  agreed  with  men  instead  of
trying  to  lead  them  to  adopt  his  views ;  his  know-
ledge did  not  go  beyond  his  immediate  neighbour-
hood \  And  yet  his  father-in-law  and  his  wife  were
of  one  mind  about  him  in  his  presence  (as  I  have
said); — he  must  have  been  different  from  other  men.
I  called  him,  and  saw  him.  Certainly  he  was  ugly
enough  to  scare  the  whole  world.  He  had  not  lived
with  me,  however,  for  many  months,  when  I  was
drawn  to  the  man  ;  and  before  he  had  been  with
me  a  full  year,  I  had  confidence  in  him.  The  state
being  without  a  chief  minister,  I  (was  minded)  to
commit  the  government  to  him.  He  responded  to
my  proposal  sorrowfully,  and  looked  undecided  as  if
he  would  fain  have  declined  it.  I  was  ashamed  of
myself  (as  inferior  to  him),  but  finally  gave  the
government  into  his  hands.  In  a  little  time,  how-
ever, he  left  me  and  went  away.  I  was  sorry  and
felt  that  I  had  sustained  a  loss,  and  as  if  there  were
no  other  to  share  the  pleasures  of  the  kingdom  with
me.     What  sort  of  man  was  he  ?  '

ATung-ni  said, '  Once  when  I  was  sent  on  a  mission
to  AT/m,  I  saw  some  pigs  sucking  at  their  dead  mother.
After  a  little  they  looked  with  rapid  glances,  when
they  all  left  her,  and  ran  away.  They  felt  that  she
did  not  see  them,  and  that  she  was  no  longer  like
themselves.  What  they  had  loved  in  their  mother
was  not  her  bodily  figure,  but  what  had  given  anima-
tion to  her  figure.  When  a  man  dies  in  battle,  they
do  not  at  his  interment  employ  the  usual  appendages


^  One  sees  dimly  the  applicability  of  this  illustration  to  the  case
in  hand.  What  made  Ai-thai  Tho  so  much  esteemed  was  his  mental
power,  quite  independent  of  his  ugly  person.


PT.  r,  SECT.v.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ZWANG-3ZE.  23 1

of  plumes  ^  :  as  to  supplying  shoes  to  one  who  has
lost  his  feet,  there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  care
for  them  ; — in  neither  case  is  there  the  proper  reason
for  their  use '.  The  members  of  the  royal  harem
do  not  pare  their  nails  nor  pierce  their  ears  - ;  when
a  man  is  newly  married,  he  remains  (for  a  time)
absent  from  his  official  duties,  and  unoccupied  with
them  -.  That  their  bodies  might  be  perfect  was
sufficient  to  make  them  thus  dealt  with ; — how
much  greater  results  should  be  expected  from  men
whose  mental  gifts  are  perfect !  This  Ai-thai  Tho
was  believed  by  men,  though  he  did  not  speak  a
word  ;  and  was  loved  by  them,  though  he  did  no
special  service  for  them.  He  made  men  appoint
him  to  the  government  of  their  states,  afraid  only
that  he  would  not  accept  the  appointment.  He
must  have  been  a  man  whose  powers  ^  were  perfect,
thoueh  his  realisation  of  them  ^  was  not  manifested
in  his  person,'

Duke  Ai  said, '  What  is  meant  by  saying  that  his
powers  were  complete  ? '  A'ung-nt  replied,  '  Death
and  life,  preservation  and  ruin,  failure  and  success,
poverty  and  wealth,  superiority  and  inferiority,
blame  and  praise,  hunger  and  thirst,  cold  and  heat ; —
these  are  the  changes  of  circumstances,  the  operation
of  our  appointed  lot.  Day  and  night  they  succeed
to  one  another  before  us,  but  there  is  no  wisdom


^  See  the  Li  A'i,  VIII,  i,  7  ;  but  the  applicabiUty  of  these  two
illustrations  is  not  so  clear.

2  These  two  have  force  as  in  '  reasoning  from  the  less  to  the
greater.'  With  the  latter  of  the  two  compare  the  mosaical  provision
in  Deuteronomy  xxiv.  5.

^  '  Powers'  are  the  capacities  of  the  nature, — the  gift  of  the  Tao.
'  Virtue '  is  the  realisation  or  carrying  out  of  those  capacities.


232  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  V,

able  to  discover  to  what  they  owe  their  origination.
They  are  not  sufficient  therefore  to  disturb  the  har-
mony (of  the  nature),  and  are  not  allowed  to  enter  into
the  treasury  of  intelligence.  To  cause  this  harmony
and  satisfaction  ever  to  be  diffused,  while  the  feeling
of  pleasure  is  not  lost  from  the  mind  ;  to  allow  no
break  to  arise  in  this  state  day  or  night,  so  that  it  is
always  spring-time  ^  in  his  relations  with  external
things ;  in  all  his  experiences  to  realise  in  his  mind
what  is  appropriate  to  each  season  (of  the  year)^: —
these  are  the  characteristics  of  him  whose  powers
are  perfect'

*  And  what  do  you  mean  by  the  realisation  of
these  powers  not  being  manifested  in  the  person?'
(pursued  further  the  duke).  The  reply  was,  '  There
is  nothing  so  level  as  the  surface  of  a  pool  of  still
water.  It  may  serve  as  an  example  of  what  I  mean.
All  within  its  circuit  is  preserved  (in  peace),  and  there
comes  to  it  no  agitation  from  without.  The  virtuous
efficacy  is  the  perfect  cultivation  of  the  harmony
(of  the  nature).  Though  the  realisation  of  this  be
not  manifested  in  the  person,  things  cannot  separate
themselves  (from  its  influence).'

Some  days  afterwards  duke  Ai  told  this  conversa-
tion to  Min-^ze^,  saying,  '  Formerly  it  seemed  to  me
the  work  of  the  sovereio-n  to  stand  in  court  with  his
face  to  the  south,  to  rule  the  kingdom,  and  to  pay
good  heed  to  the  accounts  of  the  people  concerned,
lest  any  should  come  to  a  (miserable)  death  ; — this


^  Specially  the  season  of  complacent  enjoyment.
^  So,  in  Lin  Hsi-/('ung  ;   but  the  meaning  has  to  be  forced  out
of  the  text,

^  The  disciple  Min  Sun  or  JNIin  ^zQ-kh\ex\.


PT.  I.  SECT.  V.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  KWANGSZE.  233

I  considered  to  be  the  sum  (of  his  duty).  Now  that
I  have  heard  that  description  of  the  Perfect  man,  I
fear  that  my  idea  is  not  the  real  one,  and  that,  by
employing  myself  too  lightly,  I  may  cause  the  ruin
of  my  state.  I  and  Khung  A7/iu  are  not  on  the
footing  of  ruler  and  subject,  but  on  that  of  a  virtuous
friendship.'

5.  A  person  who  had  no  lips,  whose  legs  were
bent  so  that  he  could  only  walk  on  his  toes,  and  who
was  (otherwise)  deformed  \  addressed  his  counsels  to
duke  Ling  of  Wei,  who  was  so  pleased  with  him,
that  he  looked  on  a  perfectly  formed  man  as  having
a  lean  and  small  neck  in  comparison  with  him.
Another  who  had  a  large  goitre  like  an  earthenware
jar  ^  addressed  his  counsels  to  duke  Hwan  of  AV/i  -,
who  was  so  pleased  with  him  that  he  looked  on  a
perfectly  formed  man  as  having  a  neck  lean  and
small  in  comparison  with  him  ^  So  it  is  that  when
one's  virtue  is  extraordinary,  (any  deficiency  in)  his
bodily  form  may  be  forgott  :n.  When  men  do  not
forget  what  is  (easily)  forgotten,  and  forget  what  is
not  (easily)  forgotten,  we  have  a  case  of  real  oblivion.
Therefore  the  sagely  man  has  that  in  which  his  mind
finds  its  enjoyment,  and  (looks  on)  wisdom  as  (but)
the  shoots  from  an  old  stump ;  agreements  with
others  are  to  him  but  so  much  o-lue  ;  kindnesses  are


^  These  two  men  are  undoubtedly  inventions  of  AVang-^ze,
They  are  brought  before  us,  not  by  surnames  and  names,  but
by  their  several  deformities.

^  The  first  of  the  five  presiding  chiefs ;  marquis  of  A7n  from
B.C.  685  to  643.

^  Lin  Hsi-/('ung  wonders  whether  the  story  of  the  man  who  was
so  taken  with  the  charms  of  a  one-eyed  courtesan,  that  he  thought
other  women  all  had  an  eye  too  many,  was  taken  from  this !


y


234  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  V.

(but  the  arts  of)  intercourse ;  and  great  skill  is  (but
as)  merchants'  wares.  The  sagely  man  lays  no
plans  ; — of  what  use  would  wisdom  be  to  him  ?  He
has  no  cutting  and  hacking  to  do  ; — of  what  use
would  glue  be  to  him  ?  He  has  lost  nothing  ; —
of  what  use  would  arts  of  intercourse  be  to  him  ?
He  has  no  goods  to  dispose  of; — what  need  has  he
to  play  the  merchant  ?  (The  want  of)  these  four
things  are  the  nourishment  of  (his)  Heavenly  (nature) ;
that  nourishment  is  its  Heavenly  food.  Since  he
receives  this  food  from  Heaven,  what  need  has  he
for  anything  of  man's  (devising)  ?  He  has  the  bodily
form  of  man,  but  not  the  passions  and  desires  of
(other)  men.  He  has  the  form  of  man,  and  therefore
he  is  a  man.  Being  without  the  passions  and  desires
of  men,  their  approvings  and  disapprovlngs  are  not
to  be  found  In  him.  How  Insignificant  and  small  is
(the  body)  by  which  he  belongs  to  humanity  !  How
grand  and  great  Is  he  In  the  unique  perfection  of  his
Heavenly  (nature)  !

Hul-jze  said  to  AVang-jze,  '  Can  a  man  Indeed
be  without  desires  and  passions  ? '  The  reply  was,
'  He  can.'  '  But  on  what  grounds  do  you  call  him  a
man,  who  Is  thus  without  passions  and  desires  ? '
A'wang-jze  said,  '  The  Tao^  gives  him  his  personal
appearance  (and  powers) ;  Heaven  -  gives  him  his
bodily  form  ;  how  should  we  not  call  him  a  man  ?'
Hui-jze  rejoined,  '  Since  you  call  him  a  man,  how

^  Lu  Shu-/('ih  maintains  here  that  'the  Tao'  and  '  Heaven'  have
the  same  meaning ;    nor  does  he  make  any  distinction  between

mac  (^1^),  'the   personal  appearance,'  and  hsing  {J^\   'the
figure,'  or  '  bodily  form.'

^  Compare  in  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing  expressions  in  li,  2,  and
Iv,  5.


PT.  I.  SECT.  V.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  i^-WANG-SZE.  235

can  he  be  without  passions  and  desires  ? '  The
reply  was,  '  You  are  misunderstanding  what  I  mean
by  passions  and  desires.  What  I  mean  when  I  say
that  he  is  without  these  is,  that  this  man  does  not  by
his  Hkings  and  dishkings  do  any  inward  harm  to  his
body  ; — he  always  pursues  his  course  without  effort,
and  does  not  (try  to)  increase  his  (store  of)  life.'
Hui-jze  rejoined,  *  If  there  were  not  that  increasing
of  (the  amount)  of  life,  how  would  he  get  his  body  ^  ?'
ATwang-jze  said,  '  The  Tao  gives  him  his  personal
appearance  (and  powers)  ;  Heaven  gives  him  his
bodily  form  ;  and  he  does  not  by  his  likings  and  dis-
likings  do  any  internal  harm  to  his  body.  But  now
you,  Sir,  deal  with  your  spirit  as  if  it  were  something
external  to  you,  and  subject  your  vital  powers  to  toil.
You  sing  (your  ditties),  leaning  against  a  tree ;  you
go  to  sleep,  grasping  the  stump  of  a  rotten  dryandra
tree.  Heaven  selected  for  you  the  bodily  form  (of
a  man),  and  you  babble  about  what  is  strong  and
what  is  white  ^.'


^  Apparently  a  gross  meaning  attached  by  Hui-jze  to  ^wang-jze's
words.

^  J^wang-jze  beats  down  his  opponent,  and  contemptuously
refers  to  some  of  his  well-known  peculiarities; — as  in  II,  par.  5,
XXXIII,  par.  7,  and  elsewhere.


236  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM,  bk.  vi.


BOOK  VI.
Part  I.     Section  VI.

Ta  3ung  Shih,  or  'The  Great  and  Most
Honoured  Master  ^.'

I.  He  who  knows  the  part  which  the  Heavenly^
(in  him)  plays, and  knows  (also)  that  which  the  Human -
(in  him  ought  to)  play,  has  reached  the  perfection
(of  knowledge).  He  who  knows  the  part  which  the
Heavenly  plays  (knows)  that  it  is  naturally  born
with  him  ;  he  who  knows  the  part  which  the  Human
ought  to  play  (proceeds)  with  the  knowledge  which
he  possesses  to  nourish  it  in  the  direction  of  what
he  does  not  (yet)  know": — to  complete  one's  natural
term  of  years  and  not  come  to  an  untimely  end  in
the  middle  of  his  course  is  the  fulness  of  knowledge.
Although  it  be  so,  there  is  an  evil  (attending  this
condition).  Such  knowledcre  still  awaits  the  con-
firmation  of  it  as  correct ;  it  does  so  because  it  is
not  yet  determined  ^     How  do  we  know  that  what


'  See  pp.  134-136-

"^  Both  '  Heaven  '  and  '  Man  '  here  are  used  in  the  Taoistic
sense; — the  meaning  which  the  terms  commonly  have  both  with
Lao  and  A'wang.

^  The  middle  member  of  this  sentence  is  said  to  be  the  practical
outcome  of  all  that  is  said  in  the  Book ;  conducting  the  student  of
the  Tao  to  an  unquestioning  submission  to  the  experiences  in  his
lot,  which  are  beyond  his  comprehension,  and  approaching  nearly
to  what  we  understand  by  the  Christian  virtue  of  Faith.

*  That  is,  there  may  be  the  conflict,  to  the  end  of  life,  between


PT.  I.  SECT,  VI.        THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  2^^*]

we  call  the  Heavenly  (in  us)  is  not  the  Human  ?  and
that  what  we  call  the  Human  is  not  the  Heavenly  ?
There  must  be  the  True  man\  and  then  there  is
the  True  knowledge.

2.  What  is  meant  by  'the  True  Man-?'  The
True  men  of  old  did  not  reject  (the  views  of)  the
few ;  they  did  not  seek  to  accomplish  (their  ends)
like  heroes  (before  others) ;  they  did  not  lay  plans
to  attain  those  ends  ^.  Being  such,  though  they
might  make  mistakes,  they  had  no  occasion  for
repentance ;  though  they  might  succeed,  they  had
no  self-complacency.  Being  such,  they  could  ascend
the  loftiest  heights  without  fear  ;  they  could  pass
through  water  without  being  made  wet  by  it ;  they
could  (^o  into  fire  without  beiuQ^  burnt ;    so  it  was


j^V^       X....W       ...^        .. v....       ^^.,.^


faith  and  fact,  so  graphically  exhibited  in  the  Book  of  Job,  and  com-
pendiously described  in  the  seventy-third  Psalm.

^  Here  we  meet  with  the  True  Man,  a  Master  of  the  Tao.
He  is  the  same  as  the  Perfect  Man,  the  Spirit-like  Man,  and
the  Sagely  Man  (see  pp.  127,  128),  and  the  designation  is  some-
times interchanged  in  the  five  paragraphs  that  follow  with  '  the
Sagely  Man.'  IMr.  Balfour  says  here  that  this  name  '  is  used  in  the
esoteric  sense, — "partaking  of  the  essence  of  divinity;"'  and  he
accordingly  translates  ^^  K  by  '  the  divine  man.'  But  he  might
as  well  translate  any  one  of  the  other  three  names  in  the  same  way.
The  Shwo  Wan  dictionary  defines  the  name  by  'jj||  K^  '  a  recluse
of  the  mountain,  whose  bodily  form  has  been  changed,  and  who
ascends  to  heaven  ; '  but  when  this  account  was  made,  Taoism  had
entered  into  a  new  phase,  different  from  what  it  had  in  the  time  of
our  author.

^  In  this  description  of  'the  True  Man,'  and  in  what  follows,
there  is  what  is  grotesque  and  what  is  exaggerated  (see  note
on  the  title  of  the  first  Book,  p.  127).  The  most  prominent  charac-
teristic of  him  was  his  perfect  comprehension  of  the  Tao  and
participation  of  it.

-f"  has  here  the  sense  of  ^^


238  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  VI.

that  by  their  knowledge  they  ascended  to  and
reached  the  Tao\

The  True  men  of  old  did  not  dream  when  they
slept,  had  no  anxiety  when  they  awoke,  and  did
not  care  that  their  food  should  be  pleasant.  Their
breathing  came  deep  and  silently.  The  breathing
of  the  true  man  comes  (even)  from  his  heels,  while
men  generally  breathe  (only)  from  their  throats.
When  men  are  defeated  in  argument,  their  words
come  from  their  gullets  as  if  they  were  vomiting.
Where  lusts  and  desires  are  deep,  the  springs  of  the
Heavenly  are  shallow.

The  True  men  of  old  knew  nothing  of  the  love
of  life  or  of  the  hatred  of  death.  Entrance  into  life
occasioned  them  no  joy ;  the  exit  from  it  awakened
no  resistance.  Composedly  they  went  and  came.
They  did  not  forget  what  their  beginning  had  been,
and  they  did  not  inquire  into  what  their  end  would
be.  They  accepted  (their  life)  and  rejoiced  in  it ;
they  forgot  (all  fear  of  death),  and  returned  (to  their
state  before  life)  \  Thus  there  was  in  them  what  is
called  the  want  of  any  mind  to  resist  the  Tao,  and
of  all  attempts  by  means  of  the  Human  to  assist
the  Heavenly.  Such  were  they  who  are  called  the
True  men.

3.  Being  such,  their  minds  were  free  from  all
thought  ^ ;  their  demeanour  was  still  and  unmoved ;


^  Was  not  this  the  state  of  non-existence  ?  We  cannot  say  of
Pantaoism.  However  we  may  describe  that,  the  Tao  operates
in  nature,  but  is  not  identical  with  it.

j\^^  ^^  ai)pears  in  the  common  editions  as  j\^  ^^,  which
must  have  got  into  the  text  at  a  very  early  time.  '  The  mind
forgetting,'  or  '  free  from  all  thought  and  purpose,'  appears  every-


PT.  I.  SECT.vi.        THE  WRITINGS  OF  i:WANG-3ZE.  239

their  foreheads  beamed  simpHcity.  Whatever  cold-
ness came  from  them  was  Hke  that  of  autumn ;
whatever  warmth  came  from  them  was  Hke  that
of  spring.  Their  joy  and  anger  assimilated  to  what
we  see  in  the  four  seasons.  They  did  in  regard  to
all  things  what  was  suitable,  and  no  one  could  know
how  far  their  action  would  go.  Therefore  the  sagely
man  might,  in  his  conduct  of  war,  destroy  a  state
without  losing  the  hearts  of  the  people  ^ ;  his  benefits
and  favours  might  extend  to  a  myriad  generations
without  his  being  a  lover  of  men.  Hence  he  who
tries  to  share  his  joys  with  others  is  not  a  sagely
man  ;  he  who  manifests  affection  is  not  benevolent ;
he  who  observes  times  and  seasons  (to  regulate  his
conduct)  is  not  a  man  of  wisdom  ;  he  to  whom  profit
and  injury  are  not  the  same  is  not  a  superior  man  ;
he  who  acts  for  the  sake  of  the  name  of  doing  so,
and  loses  his  (proper)  self  is  not  the  (right)  scholar ;
and  he  who  throws  away  his  person  in  a  way  which
is  not  the  true  (way)  cannot  command  the  service  of
others.  Such  men  as  Hu  Pu-/('ieh,  Wu  Kwang,
Po-i,  Shii-Zv/n,  the  count  of  I\i,  Hsii-yu,  Ki  Tha,  and
Shan-thu  Ti,  all  did  service  for  other  men,  and
sought  to  secure  for  them  what  they  desired,  not
seeking  their  own  pleasure  -.

where  in  the  Book  as  a  characteristic  of  the  True  Man.  Not  a  few
critics  contend  that  it  was  this,  and  not  the  Tao  of  which  it  is  a
quality,  that  A'wang-jze  intended  by  the  '  Master '  in  tlie  title.

^  Such  antithetic  statements  are  startling,  but  they  are  common
with  both  Lao-jze  and  our  author.

^  The  seven  men  mentioned  here  are  all  adduced,  I  must  sup-
pose, as  instances  of  good  and  worthy  men,  but  still  inferior  to  the
True  Man.  Of  Hu  Pij-Z'ieh  all  that  we  are  told  is  that  he  was  '  an
ancient  worthy.'  One  account  of  Wu  Kwang  is  that  he  was  of  the
time  of  Hwang-Ti,  with  ears  seven  inches  long ;  another,  that  he


240  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  vi,

4.  The  True  men  of  old  presented  the  aspect  of
judging  others  aright,  but  without  being  partisans  ;
of  feeHng  their  own  insufficiency,  but  being  without
flattery  or  cringing.  Their  pecuharities  were  natural
to  them,  but  they  were  not  obstinately  attached  to
them ;  their  humility  was  evident,  but  there  was
nothing  of  unreality  or  display  about  it.  Their
placidity  and  satisfaction  had  the  appearance  of  joy;
their  ever}^  movement  seemed  to  be  a  necessity  to
them.  Their  accumulated  attractiveness  drew  men's
looks  to  them  ;  their  blandness  fixed  men's  attach-
ment to  their  virtue.  They  seemed  to  accommodate
themselves  to  the  (manners  of  their  age),  but  with  a
certain  severity  ;  their  haughty  indifference  was  be-
yond its  control.  Unceasing  seemed  their  endea-
vours to  keep  (their  mouths)  shut ;  when  they  looked
down,  they  had  forgotten  what  they  wished  to  say.

They  considered  punishments  to  be  the  substance
(of  government,  and  they  never  incurred  it)  ;  cere-
monies to  be  its  supporting  wings  (and  they  always
observed  them)  ;  wisdom  (to  indicate)  the  time  (for
action,  and  they  always  selected  it);  and  virtue  to  be
accordance  (with  others),  and  they  were  all-accordant.
Considering  punishments  to  be  the  substance  (of
government),  yet  their  generosity  appeared  in  the
(manner  of  their)  infliction  of  death.  Considering
ceremonies  to  be  its  supporting  wings,  they  pursued

was  of  the  time  of  Thang,  of  the  Shang  dynasty.  Po-i  and  Shu-
kh\  are  known  to  us  from  the  Analects ;  and  also  the  count  of
Kh\,  whose  name,  it  is  said,  was  Hsii-yii.  I  can  find  nothing
about  K\  Tha ; — his  name  in  3iao  Hung's  text  is  ^»P  ^'M  y^.
Shan-thu  Ti  was  of  the  Yin  dynasty,  a  contemporary  of  Thang.
He  drowned  himself  in  the  Ho.  Most  of  these  are  referred  to  in
other  places.


PT.  I.  SECT.  vr.         THE  WRITINGS  OF  isTWANG-SZE,  241

by  means  of  them  their  course  in  the  world.  Con-
sidering wisdom  to  indicate  the  time  (for  action),
the)^  felt  it  necessary  to  employ  it  in  (the  direction
of)  affairs.  Considering  virtue  to  be  accordance
(with  others),  they  sought  to  ascend  its  height  along
with  all  who  had  feet  (to  climb  it).  (Such  were  they),
and  yet  men  really  thought  that  they  did  what  they
did  by  earnest  effort  \

5.  In  this  way  they  were  one  and  the  same  in  all
their  likings  and  dislikings.  Where  they  liked,  they
were  the  same  ;  where  they  did  not  like,  they  were
the  same.  In  the  former  case  where  they  liked,  they
were  fellow-workers  with  the  Heavenly  (in  them) ;
in  the  latter  where  they  disliked,  they  were  co-
workers with  the  Human  in  them.  The  one  of
these  elements  (in  their  nature)  did  not  overcome
the  other.  Such  were  those  who  are  called  the
True  men.

Death  and  life  are  ordained,  just  as  we  have  the
constant  succession  of  night  and  day  ; — in  both  cases
from  Heaven.  Men  have  no  power  to  do  anything
in  reference  to  them  ; — such  is  the  constitution  of
things  ^.  There  are  those  who  specially  regard
Heaven^  as  their  father,  and  they  still  love  It
(distant  as  It  is)  ^; — how  much  more  should  they  love


^  All  this  paragraph  is  taken  as  illustrative  of  the  True  man's
freedom  from  thought  or  purpose  in  his  course.

"^  See  note  3  on  par.  i,  p.  236.

^  Love  is  due  to  a  parent,  and  so  such  persons  should  love
Heaven.  There  is  in  the  text  here,  I  think,  an  unconscious  refer-
ence to  the  earliest  time,  before  the  views  of  the  earliest  Chinese
diverged  to  Theism  and  Taoism.  We  cannot  translate  the
here.

[39]  R


J


242  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  bk.  vi.

That  which  stands  out  (Superior  and  A  lone)  M  Some
specially  regard  their  ruler  as  superior  to  them-
selves, and  will  give  their  bodies  to  die  for  him  ; —
how  much  more  should  they  do  so  for  That  which
is  their  true  (Ruler)  ^ !  When  the  springs  are  dried
up,  the  fishes  collect  together  on  the  land.  Than
that  they  should  moisten  one  another  there  by  the
damp  about  them,  and  keep  one  another  wet  by  their
slime,  it  would  be  better  for  them  to  forget  one
another  in  the  rivers  and  lakes  ^.  And  when  men
praise  Yao  and  condemn  Aleh,  it  would  be  better
to  forget  them  both,  and  seek  the  renovation  of
the  Tao.

6.  There  is  the  great  Mass  (of  nature) ; — I  find  the
support  of  my  body  on  it ;  my  life  is  spent  in  toil  on
it ;  my  old  age  seeks  ease  on  it ;  at  death  I  find  rest
in  it ; — what  makes  my  life  a  good  makes  my  death
also  a  good  ^  If  you  hide  away  a  boat  in  the  ravine
of  a  hill,  and  hide  away  the  hill  in  a  lake,  you  will
say  that  (the  boat)  is  secure ;  but  at  midnight  there
shall  come  a  strong  man  and  carry  it  off  on  his  back,
while  you  in  the  dark  know  nothing  about  it.  You
may  hide  away  anything,  whether  small  or  great,  in
the  most  suitable  place,  and  yet  it  shall  disappear
from  it.  But  if  you  could  hide  the  world  in  the
world  ■*,  so  that  there  was  nowhere  to  which  it  could
be  removed,  this  would  be  the  grand  reality  of  the

^  The  great  and  most  honoured  Master, — the  Tao.

2  This  sentence  contrasts  the  cramping  effect  on  the  mind  of
Confucianism  with  the  freedom  given  by  the  doctrine  of  the  Tao.

^  The  Tao  does  this.  The  whole  paragraph  is  an  amphfication
of  the  view  given  in  the  preceding  note.

*  The  Tao  cannot  be  taken  away.  It  is  with  its  possessor,  an
'  ever-during  thing.'


PT.  I.  SECT.  v'l.        THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  243

ever-cluring  Thing  \  When  the  body  of  man  comes
from  its  special  mould  -,  there  is  even  then  occasion
for  joy  ;  but  this  body  undergoes  a  myriad  trans-
formations, and  does  not  immediately  reach  its  per-
fection ; — does  it  not  thus  afford  occasion  for  joys
incalculable  ?  Therefore  the  sagely  man  enjoys
himself  in  that  from  which  there  is  no  possibility
of  separation,  and  by  which  all  things  are  preserved.
He  considers  early  death  or  old  age,  his  beginning
and  his  ending,  all  to  be  good,  and  in  this  other  men
imitate  him  ; — how  much  more  will  they  do  so  in
regard  to  That  Itself  on  which  all  things  depend,
and  from  which  every  transformation  arises  !

7.  This  Is  the  Tao; — there  is  in  It  emotion  and
sincerity,  but  It  does  nothing  and  has  no  bodily
form  ^  It  may  be  handed  down  (by  the  teacher),
but  may  not  be  received  (by  his  scholars).  It  may
be  apprehended  (by  the  mind),  but  It  cannot  be
seen.  It  has  Its  root  and  ground  (of  existence)  in
Itself.  Before  there  were  heaven  and  earth,  from
of  old,  there  It  was,  securely  existing.  From  It
came  the  mysterious  existences  of  spirits,  from  It  the
mysterious  existence  of  God  ^  It  produced  heaven  ;
It  produced  earth.      It  was  before  the  ThaWci  ^  and

^  See  p.  242,  note  4.

^  Adoptingthereadingof  ^n  for:^!^,  supplied  byHwai-nan  3ze.

•''  Our  author  has  done  with  '  the  True  Man,'  and  now  brings  in
the  Tao  itself  as  his  subject.  Compare  the  predicates  of  It  here
with  Bk.  II,  par.  2.  But  there  are  other,  and  perhaps  higher,
things  said  of  it  here.

*  Men  at  a  very  early  time  came  to  believe  in  the  existence  of
their  spirits  after  death,  and  in  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Ruler  or
God.     It  was  to  the  Tao  that  those  concepts  were  owing.

^  The  primal  ether  out  of  which  all  things  were  fashioned  by  the
interaction  of  the  Yin  and  Yang.     This  was  something  like  the

R  2


244  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  vi.

yet  could  not  be  considered  high  ^ ;  It  was  below  all
space,  and  yet  could  not  be  considered  deep  ^  It
was  produced  before  heaven  and  earth,  and  yet
could  not  be  considered  to  have  existed  long^;  It
was  older  than  the  highest  antiquity,  and  yet  could
not  be  considered  old  ^

Shih-wei  got  It^,  and  by  It  adjusted  heaven  and
earth.  Fti-hst  got  It,  and  by  It  penetrated  to  the
mystery  of  the  maternity  of  the  primary  matter.  The
Wei-tau^  got  It,  and  from  all  antiquity  has  made  no
eccentric  movement.  The  Sun  and  Moon  got  It,  and
from  all  antiquity  have  not  intermitted  (their  bright
shining).  Khan-pei  got  It,  and  by  It  became  lord
of  Khwan-lun  ^  Fang-i^  got  It,  and  by  It  enjoyed
himself  in  the  Great  River.  A'ien  Wu  ^  got  It,  and
by  It  dwelt  on  mount  Thai.  Hwang-Ti'^  got  It,
and  by   It  ascended  the   cloudy  sky.      A'wan-hsil  ^

current  idea  of  protoplasm;  hut  while  protoplasm  lies  down  in
the  lower  parts  of  the  earth,  the  Thai->('i  was  imagined  to  be  in
the  higher  regions  of  space.

'  The  Tao  is  independent  both  of  space  and  time.

^  A  prehistoric  sovereign.

^  A  name  for  the  constellation  of  the  Great  Bear.

■*  Name  of  the  spirit  of  the  Khwan-lun  mountains  in  Thibet,  the
fairy-land  of  Taoist  writers,  very  much  in  Taoism  what  mount
Sumeru  is  in  Buddhism.

^  The  spirit  presiding  over  the  Yellow  River  ; — see  IMayers's
Manual,  pp.  54,  55.

^  Appears  here  as  the  spirit  of  mount  Thai,  the  great  eastern
mountain  ;  we  met  with  him  in  I,  5,  but  simply  as  one  of  A'wang-
^ze's  fictitious  personages.

''  Appears  before  in  Bk.  11;  the  first  of  Sze-ma  A7^ien's  'Five
Tis;'  no  doubt  a  very  early  sovereign,  to  whom  many  important
discoveries  and  inventions  are  ascribed ;  is  placed  by  many  at  the
head  of  Taoism  itself

^  The  second  of  the  'Five  Tis;'  a  grandson  of  Hwang-Ti.  I  do
not  know  what  to  say  of  his  '  Dark  Palace.'


PT.  I.  SECT.  VI.        THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  245

got  It,  and  by  It  dwelt  in  the  Dark  Palace.
Yu-/{7/iang^  got  It,  and  by  It  was  set  on  the  North
Pole.  Hsi  Wang-mu^  got  It,  and  by  It  had  her  seat
in  (the  palace  of)  Shao-kwang.  No  one  knows  Its
beginning  ;  no  one  knows  Its  end.  Phang  3*^^  got
It,  and  lived  on  from  the  time  of  the  lord  of  Yii
to  that  of  the  Five  Chiefs  ^.  F^u  Yiieh  ^  got  It,  and
by  It  became  chief  minister  to  Wu-ting^,  (who  thus)
in  a  trice  became  master  of  the  kingdom.  (After
his  death),  Fu  Yiieh  mounted  to  the  eastern  portion
of  the  Milky  Way,  where,  riding  on  Sagittarius  and
Scorpio,  he  took  his  place  among  the  stars.

8.  Nan-po  3ze-khwei  ^  asked  Nil  Yu  <',  saying,
'  You  are  old,  Sir,  while  your  complexion  is  like
that  of  a  child  ; — how  is  it  so  ?  '  The  reply  was,
'  I  have  become  acquainted  with  the  Tao.'  The
other  said,  'Can  I  learn  the  Tao  ?'  Nil  Yii  said,
'  No.  How  can  you  ?  You,  Sir,  are  not  the  man
to  do  so.  There  w^as  Pu-liang  1  '  who  had  the
abilities  of  a  sagely  man,  but  not  the  Tao,  while
I  had  the  Tao,  but  not  the  abilities.  I  wished,
however,  to  teach  him,  if,  peradventure,  he  might


^  The  Spirit  of  the  Northern  regions,  with  a  man's  face,  and  a
bird's  body,  &c.

2  A  queen  of  the  Genii  on  mount  Khwan-lun.  See  Mayers's
Manual,  pp.  178,  179.

^  Phang  3u  has  been  before  us  in  Bk.  I.  Shun  is  intended  by
'  the  Lord  of  Yu.'     The  five  Chiefs  ;— see  Mencius,VI,  ii,  7.

*  See  the  Shu,  IV,  viii ;  but  we  have  nothing  there  of  course
about  the  INIilky  Way  and  the  stars. — This  passage  certainly
lessens  our  confidence  in  .ff'wang-jze's  statements.

^  Perhaps  the  same  as  Nan-po  "^zQ-khx  in  Bk.  IV,  par.  7.

^  Must  have  been  a  great  Taoist.  Nothing  more  can  be  said
of  him  or  her.

''  Only  mentioned  here.


246  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  vi,

become  the  sagely  man  indeed.  If  he  should  not
do  so,  it  was  easy  (I  thought)  for  one  possessing
the  Tao  of  the  sagely  man  to  communicate  it  to
another  possessing  his  abilities.  Accordingly,  I
proceeded  to  do  so,  but  with  deliberation  ^  After
three  days,  he  was  able  to  banish  from  his  mind
all  worldly  (matters).  This  accomplished,  I  continued
my  intercourse  with  him  in  the  same  way;  and  in
seven  days  he  was  able  to  banish  from  his  mind
all  thought  of  men  and  things.  This  accomplished,
and  my  instructions  continued,  after  nine  days,  he
was  able  to  count  his  life  as  foreign  to  himself.
This  accomplished,  his  mind  was  afterwards  clear
as  the  morning ;  and  after  this  he  was  able  to  see
his  own  individuality  -.  That  individuality  per-
ceived, he  was  able  to  banish  all  thought  of  Past
or  Present.  Freed  from  this,  he  was  able  to  pene-
trate to  (the  truth  that  there  is  no  difference  be-
tween) life  and  death ; — (how)  the  destruction  of
life  is  not  dying,  and  the  communication  of  other
life  is  not  living.  (The  Tao)  is  a  thing  which
accompanies  all  other  things  and  meets  them,  which
is  present  when  they  are  overthrown  and  when
they  obtain  their  completion.  Its  name  is  Tran-
quillity amid  all  Disturbances,  meaning  that
such  Disturbances  lead  to  Its  Perfection  ■\'

'  And  how  did  you,  being  alone  (without  any
teacher),  learn  all  this  ? '  'I  learned  it,'  was  the
reply,  '  from  the  son  of  Fu-mo  * ;  he  learned  it  from


^  So  the  -f-H  is  explained.

"  Standing  by  himself,  as  it  were  face  to  face  with  the  Tao.
^  Amid  all  changes,  in  life  and  death,  the  possessor  of  the  Tao
has  peace.

*  Meaning  writings  ;  literally,  '  the  son  of  the  assisting  pigment.'


PT,  I,  SECT.  VI.        THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  247

the  grandson  of  Lo-sung ;  he  learned  it  from  Shan-
ming ;  he  learned  it  from  Nieh-hsli ;  he,  from
Hsli-yi ;  he,  from  Wu-ao ;  he,  from  Hsiian-ming ;
he,  from  3han-liao  ;  and  he  learned  it  from  I-shih.'

9.  3ze-sze  \  3^C"y^^  ^  3ze-li  \  and  3ze-lai  \  these
four  men,  were  talking  together,  when  some  one
said,  'Who  can  suppose  the  head  to  be  made  from
nothing,  the  spine  from  life,  and  the  rump-bone
from  death  ?  Who  knows  how  death  and  birth,
living  on  and  disappearing,  compose  the  one  body  ?
— I  would  be  friends  with  him  2.'  The  four  men
looked  at  one  another  and  laughed,  but  no  one
seized  with  his  mind  the  drift  of  the  questions.
All,  however,  were  friends  together.

Not  long  after  3ze-yu  fell  ill,  and  3ze-sze  went  to
inquire  for  him.  '  How  great,'  said  (the  sufferer),
'is  the  Creator^!  That  He  should  have  made  me
the  deformed  object  that  I  am  ! '  He  was  a  crooked
hunchback  ;  his  five  viscera  were  squeezed  into  the


We  are  not  to  suppose  that  by  this  and  the  other  names  that
follow  individuals  are  intended,  ^wang-^ze  seems  to  have  wished
to  give,  in  his  own  fashion,  some  notion  of  the  genesis  of  the  idea
of  the  Tao  from  the  first  speculations  about  the  origin  of  things.

^  We  need  not  suppose  that  these  are  the  names  of  real  men.
They  are  brought  on  the  stage  by  our  author  to  serve  his  purpose.
Hwai-nan  makes  the  name   of  the  first  to  have    been  3ze-shui

^  Compare  the  same  fepresentation  in  Bk,  XXIII,  par.  10.
A^'u  Teh-y^ih  says  on  it  here,  '  The  head,  the  spine,  the  rump-bone
mean  simply  the  head  and  tail,  the  beginning  and  end.  All  things
begin  from  nothing  and  end  in  nothing.  Their  birth  and  their
death  are  only  the  creations  of  our  thought,  the  going  and  coming
of  the  primary  ether.  When  we  have  penetrated  to  the  non-reality
of  life  and  death,  what  remains  of  the  body  of  so  many  feet  ? '

'  The  '  Creator'  or  'Maker'  (^  ^i?  ^)  is  the  Tao.


248  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  VI.

upper  part  of  his  body ;  his  chin  bent  over  his
navel ;  his  shoulder  was  higher  than  his  crown ;
on  his  crown  was  an  ulcer  pointing  to  the  sky ;
his  breath  came  and  went  in  gasps  ^ : — yet  he  was
easy  in  his  mind,  and  made  no  trouble  of  his  con-
dition. He  limped  to  a  well,  looked  at  himself
in  it,  and  said,  'Alas  that  the  Creator  should  have
made  me  the  deformed  object  that  I  am ! '  ^zg
said,  '  Do  you  dislike  your  condition  ?  '  He  replied,
'  No,  why  should  I  dislike  it  ?  If  He  were  to
transform  my  left  arm  into  a  cock,  I  should  be
watching  with  it  the  time  of  the  night;  if  He  were
to  transform  my  right  arm  into  a  cross-bow,  I
should  then  be  looking  for  a  hsiao  to  (bring  down
and)  roast;  if  He  were  to  transform  my  rump-bone
into  a  wheel,  and  my  spirit  into  a  horse,  I  should
then  be  mounting  it,  and  would  not  change  it  for
another  steed.  Moreover,  when  we  have  got  (what
we  are  to  do),  there  is  the  time  (of  life)  in  which
to  do  it ;  when  we  lose  that  (at  death),  submission
(is  what  is  required).  When  we  rest  in  what  the
time  requires,  and  manifest  that  submission,  neither
joy  nor  sorrow  can  find  entrance  (to  the  mind)  ^.
This  would  be  what  the  ancients  called  loosing-  the
cord  by  which  (the  life)  is  suspended.  But  one
hung  up  cannot  loose  himself; — he  is  held  fast  by
his  bonds  ^     And  that  creatures  cannot  overcome


^  Compare  this  description  of  3ze-yu's  deformity  with  that  of
the  poor  Shfl,  in  IV,  8.

^  Such  is  the  submission  to  one's  lot  produced  by  the  teaching
of  Taoism.

^  Compare  the  same  phraseology  in  III,  par,  4,  near  the  end.  In
correcting  Mr.  Balfour's  mistranslation  of  the  text,  Mr.  Giles  him-
self falls  into  a  mistranslation  through  not  observing  that  the  ut


PT.  I.  SECT.  VI.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  249

Heaven    (the    inevitable)    is    a    long-acknowledged
fact ; — why  should  I  hate  my  condition  ? '

10.  Before  long  3ze-lai  fell  ill,  and  lay  gasping
at  the  point  of  death,  while  his  wife  and  children
stood  around  him  wailing  ^  S^e-li  went  to  ask  for
him,  and  said  to  them,  'Hush!  Get  out  of  the
way!  Do  not  disturb  him  as  he  is  passing  through
his  chancre.'  Then,  leaning  aoainst  the  door,  he
said  (to  the  dying  man),  '  Great  indeed  is  the
Creator!  What  will  He  now  make  you  to  become  }
Where  will  He  take  you  to  ?  Will  He  make  you
the  liver  of  a  rat,  or  the  arm  of  an  insect  ^ } '
3ze-lai  replied,  '  Wherever  a  parent  tells  a  son  to
go,  east,  west,  south,  or  north,  he  simply  follows
the  command.  The  Yin  and  Yang  are  more  to
a  man  than  his  parents  are.  If  they  are  hastening
my  death,  and  I  do  not  quietly  submit  to  them,
I  shall  be  obstinate  and  rebellious.  There  is  the
great  Mass  (of  nature) ; — I  find  the  support  of  my
body  in  it ;  my  life  is  spent  in  toil  on  it ;  my  old
age  seeks  ease  on  it ;  at  death  I  find  rest  on  it : —
what  has  made  my  life  a  good  will  make  my  death
also  a  QTood.

'  Here  now  is  a  great  founder,  casting  his  metal.
If  the  metal  were  to  leap  up  (in  the  pot),  and  say,
"  I  must  be  made  into  a  (sword  like  the)  Mo-yeh  ^,"


is  passive,  having  the  j^  that  precedes  as  its  subject  (observe  the

force  of  the  j^  after  ^^  in  the  best  editions),  and  not  active,  or

governing  the  ^^  that  follows.

^  Compare  the  account  of  the  scene  at  Lao-ijze's  death,  in  III,
par.  4.

^  Here  comes  in  the  belief  in  transformation.

^  The  name  of  a  famous  sword;  made  for  Ho-lii,  the  king  of


250  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  vi.

the  great  founder  would  be  sure  to  regard  it  as
uncanny.  So,  again,  when  a  form  is  being  fashioned
in  the  mould  of  the  womb,  if  it  were  to  say,  "  I
must  become  a  man  ;  I  must  become  a  man,"  the
Creator  would  be  sure  to  regard  it  as  uncanny.
When  we  once  understand  that  heaven  and  earth
are  a  great  melting-pot,  and  the  Creator  a  great
founder,  where  can  we  have  to  go  to  that  shall
not  be  right  for  us  ?  We  are  born  as  from  a  quiet
sleep,  and  we  die  to  a  calm  awaking,'

II.  3ze-sang  Hu  \  Mang  3ze-fan  \  and  ^z^-kJi\\\
A'ang  \  these  three  men,  were  friends  together.
(One  of  them  said),  '  Who  can  associate  together
without  any  (thought  of)  such  association,  or  act
together  without  any  (evidence  of)  such  co-opera-
tion ?  Who  can  mount  up  into  the  sky  and  enjoy
himself  amidst  the  mists,  disporting  beyond  the
utmost  limits  (of  things)  -,  and  forgetting  all  others
as  if  this  were  living,  and  would  have  no  end  ? '
The  three  men  looked  at  one  another  and  laughed,
not  perceiving  the  drift  of  the  questions  ;  and  they
continued  to  associate  together  as  friends.

Suddenly,  after  a  time^,  3ze-sang  Hu  died.  Before
he  was  buried,  Confucius  heard  of  the  event,  and

Wu  (b.  c.  514-494).     See  the  account  of  the  forging  of  it  in  the

^^  /M  ^U  H  ^>  ^'^'  74-  "^^^^  mention  of  it  would  seem  to
indicate  that  3ze-lai  and  the  other  three  men  were  of  the  time  of
Confucius.

^  These  three  men  were  undoubtedly  of  the  time  of  Confucius,
and  some  would  identify  them  with  the  3ze-sang  Po-jze  of  Ana.
VI,  I,  Mang  A'ih-fan  of  VI,  13,  and  the  Lao  of  IX,  vi,  4.  This
is  very  unlikely.     They  were  Taoists.

2  Or,  '  without  end.'

'^  Or,  '  Some  time  went  by  silently,  and.'


PT.  I.  SECT.  VI.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  J£-WANG-3ZE.  25  I

sent  3ze-kung  to  go  and  see  if  he  could  render
any  assistance.  One  of  the  survivors  had  com-
posed a  ditty,  and  the  other  was  playing  on  his
lute.     Then  they  sang  together  in  unison,

'Ah!   come,  Sang  Hu  !     ah!  come,  Sang  Hu!
Your  being  true  you've  got  again,
While  we,  as  men,  still  here  remain

Ohone  ^ ! '

3ze-kung  hastened  forward  to  them,  and  said,
'  I  venture  to  ask  whether  it  be  accordino-  to  the
rules  to  be  singing  thus  in  the  presence  of  the
corpse  ? '  The  two  men  looked  at  each  other,  and
laughed,  saying,  '  What  does  this  man  know  about
the  idea  that  underlies  (our)  rules  ? '  3ze-kung
returned  to  Confucius,  and  reported  to  him,  saying,
'  What  sort  of  men  are  those  ?  They  had  made
none  of  the  usual  preparations  ^,  and  treated  the
body  as  a  thing  foreign  to  them.  They  were
singing  in  the  presence  of  the  corpse,  and  there  was
no  change  in  their  countenances.  I  cannot  describe
them  ; — what  sort  of  men  are  they  ?  '  Confucius
replied,  '  Those  men  occupy  and  enjoy  themselves
in  what  is  outside  the  (common)  ways  (of  the  world),
while  I  occupy  and  enjoy  myself  in  what  lies  within
those  ways.  There  is  no  common  ground  for  those
of  such  different  ways ;  and  when  I  sent  you  to
condole  with  those  men,  I  was  acting  stupidly.
They,  moreover,  make  man  to  be  the  fellow  of  the

^  In  accordance  with  the  ancient  and  modern  practice  in  China
of  calling  the  dead  back.  But  these  were  doing  so  in  a  song  to
the  lute.

"  Or,  '  they  do  not  regulate  their  doings  (in  the  usual  way).'


252  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  vi.

Creator,  and  seek  their  enjoyment  in  the  formless
condition  of  heaven  and  earth.  They  consider
hfe  to  be  an  appendage  attached,  an  excrescence
annexed  to  them,  and  death  to  be  a  separation  of
the  appendage  and  a  dispersion  of  the  contents
of  the  excrescence.  With  these  views,  how  should
they  know  wherein  death  and  life  are  to  be  found,
or  what  is  first  and  what  is  last  ?  They  borrow
different  substances,  and  pretend  that  the  common
form  of  the  body  is  composed  of  them  \  They
dismiss  the  thought  of  (its  inward  constituents  like)
the  liver  and  gall,  and  (its  outward  constituents),
the  ears  and  eyes.  Again  and  again  they  end
and  they  begin,  having  no  knowledge  of  first
principles.  They  occupy  themselves  ignorantly  and
vaguely  with  what  (they  say)  lies  outside  the  dust
and  dirt  (of  the  w^orld),  and  seek  their  enjoyment
in  the  business  of  doing-  nothinof.  How  should
they  confusedly  address  themselves  to  the  cere-
monies practised  by  the  common  people,  and
exhibit  themselves  as  doing  so  to  the  ears  and  eyes
of  the  multitude  ?  '

3ze-kung  said,  '  Yes,  but  why  do  you,  Master,
act  according  to  the  (common)  ways  (of  the  world)  ?  '
The  reply  was,  '  I  am  in  this  under  the  condemning
sentence  of  Heaven-.     Nevertheless,  I  will  share

^  The  idea  that  the  body  is  composed  of  the  elements  of  earth,
wind  or  air,  fire,  and  water.

^  A  strange  description  of  himself  by  the  sage.  Literally,  '  I  am
(one  of)  the  people  killed  and  exposed  to  public  view  by  Heaven;'
referring,  perhaps,  to  the  description  of  a  living  man  as  '  suspended
by  a  string  from  God.'  Confucius  was  content  to  accept  his
life,  and  used  it  in  pursuing  the  path  of  duty,  according  to  his  con-
ception of  it,  without  aiming  at  the  transcendental  method  of  the
Taoists.     I  can  attach  no  other  or  better  meaning  to  the  expression.


PT.  I.  SECT. VI.        THE  WRITINGS  OF  A:WANG-3ZE.  253

with  you  (what  I  have  attained  to).'  3ze-kung  re-
joined, '  I  venture  to  ask  the  method  which  you
pursue  ;'  and  Confucius  said,  'Fishes  breed  and  grow
in  the  water;  man  developes  in  the  Tao.  Growing
in  the  water,  the  fishes  cleave  the  pools,  and  their
nourishment  is  supplied  to  them.  Developing  in
the  Tao,  men  do  nothing,  and  the  enjoyment  of
their  life  is  secured.  Hence  it  is  said,  "  Fishes  for-
get one  another  in  the  rivers  and  lakes ;  men  forget
one  another  in  the  arts  of  the  Tao."  '

3ze-kung  said,  '  I  venture  to  ask  about  the  man
who  stands  aloof  from  others  ^'  The  reply  was,
'  He  stands  aloof  from  other  men,  but  he  is  in  accord
with  Heaven !  Hence  it  is  said,  "  The  small  man
of  Heaven  is  the  superior  man  among  men  ;  the
superior  man  among  men  is  the  small  man  of
Heaven  ^ ! "  '

12.  Yen  Hui  asked  A^mg-ni,  saying,  'When  the
mother  of  Mang-sun  3hai  ^  died,  in  all  his  wailing  for
her  he  did  not  shed  a  tear ;  in  the  core  of  his  heart
he  felt  no  distress  ;  during  all  the  mourning  rites,  he
exhibited  no  sorrow.  Without  these  three  things,
he  (was  considered  to  have)  discharged  his  mourn-
ing well ; — is  it  that  in  the  state  of  Lu  one  who  has
not  the  reality  may  yet  get  the  reputation  of  having
it  ?     I   think    the    matter   very   strange.'     A'ung-ni


^  Misled  by  the  text  of  Hsiiang  Ying,  Mr.  Balfour  here  reads
^  instead  of  H^.

"  Here,  however,  he  aptly  compares  with  the  language  of  Christ
in  Matthew  vii.  28. — A'wang-^ze  seems  to  make  Confucius  praise
the  system  of  Taoism  as  better  than  his  own  !

"  Must  have  been  a  member  of  the  IMang  or  Mang-sun  family
of  Lu,  to  a  branch  of  which  Mencius  belonged.


l^'


2  54  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  vi.

said,  '  That  Mang-sun  carried  out  (his  views)  to  the
utmost.  He  was  advanced  in  knowledge;  but  (in
this  case)  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  appear  to  be
negligent  (in  his  ceremonial  observances)  ^,  but  he
succeeded  in  being  really  so  to  himself.  Mang-sun
does  not  know  either  what  purposes  life  serves,  or
what  death  serves  ;  he  does  not  know  which  should
be  first  sought,  and  which  last  ^.  If  he  is  to  be  trans-
formed into  something  else,  he  will  simply  await  the
transformation  which  he  does  not  yet  know.  This
is  all  he  does.  And  moreover,  when  one  is  about
to  undergo  his  change,  how  does  he  know  that  it  has
not  taken  place  ?  And  when  he  is  not  about  to  un-
dergo his  change,  how  does  he  know  that  it  has
taken  place  ^  ?  Take  the  case  of  me  and  you  : — are
we  in  a  dream  from  which  we  have  not  begun  to
awake  *  ?

'  Moreover,  Mang-sun  presented  in  his  body  the
appearance  of  being  agitated,  but  in  his  mind  he  was
conscious  of  no  loss.  The  death  was  to  him  like  the
issuing  from  one's  dwelling  at  dawn,  and  no  (more
terrible)  reality.  He  was  more  awake  than  others
were.  When  they  wailed,  he  also  wailed,  having  in
himself  the  reason  why  he  did  so.  And  we  all  have
our  individuality  which  makes  us  what  we  are  as
compared  together ;  but  how  do  we  know  that  we


^  The  people  set  such  store  by  the  mourning  rites,  that  Mang-
sun  felt  he  must  present  the  appearance  of  observing  them.  This
would  seem  to  show  that  Taoism  arose  after  the  earlier  views  of
the  Chinese.

^  I  adopt  here,  with  many  of  the  critics,   the  reading  of  ^h
instead  of  the  more  common  ^Ji^,
^  This  is  to  me  very  obscure.
*  Are  such  dreams  possible.?    See  what  I  have  said  on  II,  par.  9.


PT.  I.  SECT.vi.        THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'\VANG-3ZE.  255

determine  in  any  case  correctly  that  individuality  ?
Moreover  you  dream  that  you  are  a  bird,  and  seem
to  be  soaring  to  the  sky ;  or  that  you  are  a  fish,  and
seem  to  be  diving-  in  the  deep.  But  you  do  not
know  whether  we  that  are  now  speaking  are  awake
or  in  a  dreamt  It  is  not  the  meeting  with  what  is
pleasurable  that  produces  the  smile ;  it  is  not  the
smile  suddenly  produced  that  produces  the  arrange-
ment (of  the  person).  When  one  rests  in  what  has
been  arranged,  and  puts  away  all  thought  of  the
transformation,  he  is  in  unity  with  the  mysterious
Heaven.'

A

1 3.  l-r  3ze-  having  gone  to  see  Hsii  Yii,  the  latter
said  to  him, '  What  benefit  have  you  received  from
Yao  ? '  The  reply  was,  '  Yao  says  to  me,  You
must  yourself  labour  at  benevolence  and  righteous-
ness, and  be  able  to  tell  clearly  which  is  right  and
which  wrong  (in  conflicting  statements).'  Hsii  Yu
rejoined,  '  Why  then  have  you  come  to  me  ?  Since
Yao  has  put  on  you  the  brand  of  his  benevolence
and  righteousness,  and  cut  off  your  nose  with  his
right  and  wrong ",  how  will  you  be  able  to  wander
in  the  way  of  aimless  enjoyment,  of  unregulated
contemplation,  and  the  ever-changing  forms  (of  dis-
pute) ?'      I-r  .3ze  said,  '  That  may  be  ;  but  I  should


^  This  also  is  obscure ;  but  Confucius  is  again  made  to  praise
the  Taoistic  system.

^  I-r  is  said  by  Li  I  to  have  been  '  a  worthy  scholar ; '  but  I-r  is
an  old  name  for  the  swallow,  and  there  is  a  legend  of  a  being  of
this  name   appearing  to   king  Mu,    and    then   flying   away   as   a

swallow ; — see   the  Khang-hsi   Thesaurus  under   j^.     The  per-
sonage is  entirely  fabulous.

^  Dismembered  or  disfigured  you.


256  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  vr.

like  to  skirt  along  its  hedges.'  '  But/  said  the  other,
*  it  cannot  be.  Eyes  without  pupils  can  see  nothing
of  the  beauty  of  the  eyebrows,  eyes,  and  other
features  ;  the  blind  have  nothing  to  do  with  the
green,  yellow,  and  variegated  colours  of  the  sacri-
ficial robes.'  I-r  ^zg  rejoined,  '  Yet,  when  Wu-
/('wang^  lost  his  beauty,  A^ii-liang  ^  his  strength,
and  Hwang-Ti  his  wisdom,  they  all  (recovered
them)  2  under  the  moulding  (of  your  system) ; — how
do  you  know  that  the  Maker  will  not  obliterate  the
marks  of  my  branding,  and  supply  my  dismember-
ment, so  that,  again  perfect  in  my  form,  I  may  follow
you  as  my  teacher  ?  '  Hsii  Yu  said,  '  Ah  !  that  can-
not yet  be  known.  I  will  tell  you  the  rudiments.
O  my  Master!  O  my  Master!  He  gives  to  all
things  their  blended  qualities,  and  does  not  count  it
any  righteousness ;  His  favours  reach  to  all  genera-
tions, and  He  does  not  count  it  any  benevolence ;
He  is  more  ancient  than  the  highest  antiquity,  and
does  not  count  Himself  old  ;  He  overspreads  heaven
and  supports  the  earth  ;  He  carves  and  fashions  all
bodily  forms,  and  does  not  consider  it  any  act  of
skill ; — this  is  He  in  whom  I  find  my  enjoyment.'

14.  Yen  Hui  said, '  I  am  making  progress.'  A'ung-
ni  replied,  '  What  do  you  mean  ?  '  'I  have  ceased
to  think  of  benevolence  and  righteousness,'  was  the
reply.     '  Very  well ;  but  that  is  not  enough.'

Another  day,  Hui  again  saw  A'ung-ni,  and  said,
'I  am   making  progress.'     'What  do  you   mean.?'


^  Names  of  parties,  of  whom  we  know  nothing.  It  is  implied,
wc  must  suppose,  that  they  had  suffered  as  is  said  by  their  own
inadvertence.

^  Wc  must  suppose  that  they  had  done  so.


PT.  I.  SECT.  VI.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  257

'  I  have  lost  all  thought  of  ceremonies  and  music'
'  Very  well,  but  that  is  not  enough.'

A  third  day,  Hui  again  saw  (the  Master),  and
said, '  I  am  making  progress.'  'What  do  you  mean  ?'
*  I  sit  and  forget  everything  ^'  A^ung-ni  changed
countenance,  and  said,  '  What  do  you  mean  by  say-
ing that  you  sit  and  forget  (everything)  ? '  Yen  Hui
replied,  '  My  connexion  with  the  body  and  its  parts
is  dissolved ;  my  perceptive  organs  are  discarded.
Thus  leaving  my  material  form,  and  bidding  fare-
well to  my  knowledge,  I  am  become  one  with  the
Great  Pervader  ^.  This  I  call  sitting  and  forgetting
all  things.'  A'ung-ni  said,  '  One  (with  that  Pervader),
you  are  free  from  all  likings  ;  so  transformed,  you
are  become  impermanent.  You  have,  indeed,  be-
come superior  to  me  !  I  must  ask  leave  to  follow
in  your  steps  ^.'

15.  3ze-yu  *  and  3ze-sang  *  were  friends.  (Once),
when  it  had  rained  continuously  for  ten  clays,  3ze-yu
said,  '  I  fear  that  3ze-sang  may  be  In  distress.'  So
he  wrapped  up  some  rice,  and  went  to  give  It  to  him
to  eat.  When  he  came  to  3ze-sang's  door,  there
issued  from  It  sounds  between  sincjinor  and  wailino- ;


^  'I  sit  and  forget;' — generally  thus  supplemented  (ffiE  ^J^  ^^
"^).  Hui  proceeds  to  set  forth  the  meaning  he  himself  attached
to  the  phrase.

^  Another  denomination,  1  think,  of  the  Tao.  The  ^7^  |S
is  also  explained  as  meaning,  '  the  great  void  in  which  there  is  no
obstruction  (^C  ^  ;^  M  ^)/

^  Here  is  another  testimony,  adduced  by  our  author,  of  Confu-
cius's  appreciation  of  Taoism  ;  to  which  the  sage  would,  no  doubt,
have  taken  exception.

*  Two  of  the  men  in  pars.  9,  10.

[39]  S


258  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  EK.  vi.

a  lute  was  struck,  and  there  came  the  words,  '  O
Father  !  O  Mother  !  O  Heaven !  O  Men  ! '  The
voice  could  not  sustain  itself,  and  the  line  was  hur-
riedly pronounced.  3ze-yu  entered  and  said,  '  Why
are  you  singing,  Sir,  this  line  of  poetry  in  such  a
way?'  The  other  replied,  '  I  was  thinking,  and  think-
ing in  vain,  how  it  was  that  I  was  brought  to  such
extremity.  Would  my  parents  have  wished  me  to  be
so  poor  ?  Heaven  overspreads  all  without  any  par-
tial feeling,  and  so  does  Earth  sustain  all ; — would
Heaven  and  Earth  make  me  so  poor  with  any  un-
kindly feeling  ?  I  was  trying  to  find  out  who  had
done  it,  and  I  could  not  do  so.  But  here  I  am  in  this
extremity! — it  is  what  was  appointed  for  me^!'

^  Here  is  the  highest  issue  of  Taoism  ;— unquestioning  sub-
mission to  what  is  beyond  our  knowledge  and  control.


PT.  I.  SECT. VII.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  259


BOOK  VII.

Part  I.     Section  VII.

Ying  Ti  Wang\  or  'The  Normal  Course  for
Rulers  and  Kings^'

I.  Nieh  A7/ueh^  put  four  questions  to  Wang  i  ^,
not  one  of  which  did  he  know  (how  to  answer).  On
this  Nieh  I^/meh.  leaped  up,  and  in  great  delight
walked  away  and  informed  Phu-i-^ze  ^  of  it,  who  said
to  him, '  Do  you  (only)  now  know  it  ?'  He  of  the  line
of  Yii  *  was  not  equal  to  him  of  the  line  of  Thai  ^.
He  of  Yii  still  kept  in  himself  (the  idea  of)  bene-
volence by  which  to  constrain  (the  submission  of)
men  ;  and  he  did  win  men,  but  he  had  not  begun  to
proceed  by  what  did  not  belong  to  him  as  a  man.
He  of  the  line  of  Thai  would  sleep  tranquilly,  and
awake  in  contented  simplicity.  He  would  consider
himself  now  (merely)  as  a  horse,  and  now  (merely)
as  an  ox  *"'.    His  knowledge  was  real  and  untroubled

^   See  pp.  136-138.

-  See  p.  190,  note  5.

^  An  ancient  Taoist,  of  the  time  of  Shun.  So,  Hwang-fii  Mi,
who  adds  that  Shun  served  him  as  his  master  when  he  was  eight
years  old.  I  suppose  the  name  indicates  that  his  clothes  were  made
of  rushes.

*  Shun.     See  p.  245,  note  3.

®  An  ancient  sovereign,  earlier,  no  doubt,  than  Fu-hsi ;  but
nothing  is  known  of  him.

"  He  thought  nothing  about  his  being,  as  a  man,  superior  to  the
lower  creatures.  Shun  in  governing  employed  his  acquired  know-
ledge ;  Thai  had  not  begun  to  do  so.

S  2


26o  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.Vil.


by  doubts ;  and  his  virtue  was  very  true  : — he  had
not  begun  to  proceed  by  what  belonged  to  him  as
a  man.

2.  A'ien  Wu^  went  to  see  the  mad  (reckise),
A'/zieh-yli^,  who  said  to  him,  'What  did  Zah-iung
Shih^  tell  you  ?'  The  reply  was,  '  He  told  me  that
when  rulers  gave  forth  their  regulations  according  to
their  own  views  and  enacted  righteous  measures,  no
one  would  venture  not  to  obey  them,  and  all  would
be  transformed.'  AV/ieh-yti  said,  '  That  is  but  the
hypocrisy  of  virtue.  For  the  right  ordering  of  the
world  it  would  be  like  trying  to  wade  throuo-h  the
sea  and  dig  through  the  Ho,  or  employing  a  mus-
quito  to  carry  a  mountain  on  its  back.  And  when
a  sage  is  governing,  does  he  govern  men's  out-
ward actions  ?  He  is  (himself)  correct,  and  so  (his
government)  goes  on  ; — this  is  the  simple  and  certain
way  by  which  he  secures  the  success  of  his  affairs.
Think  of  the  bird  which  flies  high,  to  avoid  being  hurt
by  the  dart  on  the  string  of  the  archer,  and  the  little
mouse  which  makes  its  hole  deep  under  Shan-
/t'/i'm  ^  to  avoid  the  danger  of  being  smoked  or  dug
out ;— are  (rulers)  less  knowing  than  these  two  little
creatures  ?'

3.  Thien  Kan^  rambling  on  the  south  of  (mount)
Yin",  came  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Liao-water.


^  See  p.  170,  note  2.
^  See  p.  170,  note  3.
'■'  A  name  ;— '  a  worthy,'  it  is  said.
*  Name  of  some  hill,  or  height,

•'  A  name  ('  Root  of  the  sky'),  but  probably  mythical.     There  is
a  star  so  called.

«  Probably  the  name  of  a  mountain,  though  this  meaning  of
Yin  is  not  given  in  the  dictionary.


PT.  I.  SECT.  VII.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ZWANG-3ZE.  261

Happening  there  to  meet  with  the  man  whose  name  is
not  known \  he  put  a  question  to  him,  saying, '  I  beg  to
ask  what  should  be  done  -  in  order  to  (carry  on)  the
government  of  the  world,'  The  nameless  man  said,
'  Go  away ;  you  are  a  rude  borderer.  Why  do  you
put  to  me  a  question  for  which  you  are  unprepared  '  ?
I  would  simply  play  the  part  of  the  Maker  of  (all)
things  ^  When  wearied,  I  would  mount  on  the  bird
of  the  light  and  empty  air,  proceed  beyond  the  six
cardinal  points,  and  wander  in  the  region  of  non-
entity, to  dwell  in  the  wilderness  of  desert  space.
What  method  have  you,  moreover,  for  the  govern-
ment of  the  world  that  you  (thus)  agitate  my  mind  ?'
(Thien  Kan),  however,  again  asked  the  question,
and  the  nameless  man  said,  '  Let  your  mind  find  its
enjoyment  in  pure  simplicity ;  blend  yourself  with
(the  primary)  ether  in  idle  indifference ;  allow  all
things  to  take  their  natural  course  ;  and  admit  no
personal  or  selfish  consideration : — do  this  and  the
world  will  be  governed.'

4.  Yang  3ze-/tu^,  having  an  Interview  with   Lao
Tan,  said  to  him, '  Here  is  a  man,  alert  and  vigorous


^  Or,  '  a  nameless  man.'  We  cannot  tell  whether  A'wang-^;;ze
had  any  particular  Being,  so  named,  in  view  or  not.

^  The  objectionable  point  in  the  question  is  the  supposition  that
*  doing  '  was  necessary  in  the  case.

^  Or,  '  I  am  unprepared.'  But  as  Thien  Kan  repeats  the
question,  it  seems  better  to  supply  the  second  pronoun.  He  had
thought  on  the  subject.

*  See  the  same  phraseology  in  VI,  par.  11.  What  follows  is
merely  our  author's  way  of  describing  the  non-action  of  the
Tao.

^  The  Yang  Xu,  whom  Mencius  attacked  so  fiercely.  He  was,
perhaps,  a  contemporary  and  disciple  of  Lao-jze.


262  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.


BK.  VII.


in  responding  to  all  matters  \  clearsighted  and
widely  intelligent,  and  an  unwearied  student  of  the
Tao  ; — can  he  be  compared  to  one  of  the  intelligent
kings  ? '  The  reply  was,  '  Such  a  man  is  to  one  of
the  intelligent  kings  but  as  the  bustling  underling  of
a  court  who  toils  his  body  and  distresses  his  mind
with  his  various  contrivances-.  And  moreover,  it  is
the  beauty  of  the  skins  of  the  tiger  and  leopard
which  makes  men  hunt  them  ;  the  agility  of  the
monkey,  or  (the  sagacity  of)  the  dog  that  catches
the  yak,  which  make  men  lead  them  in  strino-s ;
but  can  one  similarly  endowed  be  compared  to  the
intelligent  kings  ? '

Yang  5ze-/^u  looked  discomposed  and  said,  '  I
venture  to  ask  you  what  the  government  of  the
intelligent  kings  is.'  Lao  Tan  replied,  '  In  the
governing  of  the  intelligent  kings,  their  services
overspread  all  under  the  sky,  but  they  did  not  seem
to  consider  it  as  proceeding  from  themselves ;  their
transforming  influence  reached  to  all  things,  but  the
people  did  not  refer  it  to  them  with  hope.  No  one
could  tell  the  name  of  their  agency,  but  they  made
men  and  things  be  joyful  in  themselves.  Where
they  took  their  stand  could  not  be  fathomed,  and
they  found  their  enjoyment  in  (the  realm  of)
nonentity.'

5.    In  A'ang  there  was  a  mysterious  wizard"^  called


^  The  ^  may  be  taken  as  =  fnj ,  in  which  case  we  must
understand  a  ^  as  its  object ;  or  as  =  ^,  '  an  echo,'  indicating
the  quickness  of  the  man's  response  to  things.

-  Compare  the  language  of  Lao  Tan,  in  Bk.  XII,  par.  8,  near
the  beginning.

'  M  is  generally  feminine,  meaning  '  a  witch.'     We  must  take


PT.  I.  SECT.  VII.        THE    WRITINGS    OF   ^VVANG-3ZE.  26'^

A'i-hsien.  He  knew  all  about  the  deaths  and  births
of  men,  their  preservation  and  ruin,  their  misery  and
happiness,  and  whether  their  Hves  would  be  long  or
short,  foretelling  the  year,  the  month,  the  decade
and  the  day  like  a  spirit.  When  the  people  of  ICang
saw  him,  they  all  ran  out  of  his  way.  Lieh-jze  went
to  see  him,  and  was  fascinated^  by  him.  Returning,
he  told  Hu-3ze  of  his  interview,  and  said,  *  I  con-
sidered your  doctrine,  my  master,  to  be  perfect,  but
I  have  found  another  which  is  superior  to  it.'  Hu-jze-
replied,  '  I  have  communicated  to  you  but  the  out-
ward letter  of  my  doctrine,  and  have  not  communi-
cated its  reality  and  spirit ;  and  do  you  think  that
you  are  in  possession  of  it  ?  However  many  hens
there  be,  if  there  be  not  the  cock  among  them,
how  should  they  lay  (real)  eggs  ^  ?  When  you  con-
front the  world  with  your  doctrine,  you  are  sure
to  show  in  your  countenance  (all  that  is  in  your
mind)  ^  and  so  enable  (this)  man  to  succeed  in  inter-
preting your  physiognomy.  Try  and  come  to  me
with  him,  that  I  may  show  myself  to  him.'

On  the  morrow,  accordingly,  Lieh-^ze  came  with
the  man  and  saw  Hu-jze.     When  they  went  out,  the

it  here  as  masculine  (=3^V  The  general  meaning  of  the  cha-
racter is  '  magical,'  the  antics  of  such  performers  to  bring  down  the
spirits.

^  Literally,  '  intoxicated.'

-  The  teacher  in  Taoism  of  Lieh-^ze,  called  also  Hu  AV^iu,  with

the  name  Lin  (^).  See  the  remarks  on  the  whole  paragraph  in
the  Introductory  Notice  of  the  Book.

^  '  The  hens '  signify  the  letter  of  the  doctrine ;  '  the  cock,'  its
spirit ;  '  the  eggs,'  a  real  knowledge  of  it.

*  '[^  is  here  in  the  first  tone,  and  read  as  ^^,  meaning  '  to
stretch,'  '  to  set  forth.'


264  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  vii.

wizard  said,  '  Alas  !  your  master  is  a  dead  man.  He
will  not  live  ; — not  for  ten  days  more  !  I  saw  some-
thing strange  about  him  ; — I  saw  the  ashes  (of  his
life)  all  slaked  with  water ! '  When  Lieh-jze  re-
entered, he  wept  till  the  front  of  his  jacket  was  wet
with  his  tears,  and  told  Hu-3ze  what  the  man  had
said.  Hu-jze  said,  '  I  showed  myself  to  him  with  the
forms  of  (vegetation  beneath)  the  earth.  There  were
the  sprouts  indeed,  but  without  (any  appearance  of)
growth  or  regularity: — he  seemed  to  see  me  with
the  springs  of  my  (vital)  power  closed  up.  Try  and
come  to  me  with  him  again.'

Next  day,  accordingly,  Lieh-jze  brought  the  man
again  and  saw  Hu-jze.  When  they  went  out,  the
man  said,  '  It  is  a  fortunate  thing  for  your  master
that  he  met  with  me.  He  will  get  better  ;  he  has
all  the  signs  of  living !  I  saw  the  balance  (of  the
springs  of  life)  that  had  been  stopped  (inclining  in
his  favour).'  Lieh-jze  went  in,  and  reported  these
words  to  his  master,  who  said,  '  I  showed  myself  to
him  after  the  pattern  of  the  earth  (beneath  the)  sky.
Neither  semblance  nor  reality  entered  (into  my  ex-
hibition), but  the  springs  (of  life)  were  issuing  from
beneath  my  feet ; — he  seemed  to  see  me  with  the
springs  of  vigorous  action  in  full  play.  Try  and
come  with  him  again.'

Next  day  Lieh-jze  came  with  the  man  again,
and  again  saw  Hu-jze  with  him.  When  they  went
out,  the  wizard  said,  '  Your  master  is  never  the
same.  I  cannot  understand  his  physiognomy.  Let
him  try  to  steady  himself,  and  I  will  again  view  him.'
Lieh-jze  went  in  and  reported  this  to  Hu-jze,  who
said,  '  This  time  I  showed  myself  to  him  after  the
pattern  of  the  grand  harmony  (of  the  two  elemental


PT.  I.  SECT.VIT.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  265

forces),  with  the  superiority  inchning  to  neither.
He  seemed  to  see  me  with  the  springs  of  (vital)
power  in  equal  balance.  Where  the  water  wheels
about  from  (the  movements  of)  a  dugong  \  there  is
an  abyss  ;  where  it  does  so  from  the  arresting  (of  its
course),  there  is  an  abyss ;  where  it  does  so,  and  the
water  keeps  flowing  on,  there  is  an  abyss.  There
are  nine  abysses  with  their  several  names,  and  I
have  only  exhibited  three  of  them.  Try  and  come
with  him  again.'

Next  day  they  came,  and  they  again  saw  Hu-^ze.
But  before  he  had  settled  himself  in  his  position,
the  wizard  lost  himself  and  ran  away.  '  Pursue
him,'  said  Hu-jze,  and  Lieh-^ze  did  so,  but  could
not  come  up  with  him.  He  returned,  and  told
Hu-^ze,  saying,  '  There  is  an  end  of  him ;  he  is
lost;  I  could  not  find  him.'  Hu-jze  rejoined,  '  I  was
showing  him  myself  after  the  pattern  of  what  was
before  I  began  to  come  from  my  author.  I  con-
fronted him  w'th  pure  vacancy,  and  an  easy  in-
difference. He  did  not  know  what  I  meant  to
represent.  Now  he  thought  it  was  the  Idea  of  ex-
hausted strength,  and  now  that  of  an  onward  flow,
and  therefore  he  ran  away.'

After  this,  Lieh-jze  considered  that  he  had  not
yet  begun  to  learn  (his  master's  doctrine).  He
returned  to  his  house,  and  for  three  years  did  not
go  out.  He  did  the  cooking  for  his  wife.  He  fed
the  pigs  as  if  he  were  feeding  men.     He  took  no  part


^  One  of  the  dugong.     It  has  various  names  in  Chinese,  one  being

A^ ,  '  the  Man-Fish,'  from  a  fancied  resemblance  of  its  head
and  face  to  a  human  being ; — the  origin  perhaps  of  the  idea  of  the
mermaid.


266  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  vii.

or  interest  In  occurring  affairs.  He  put  away  the
carving  and  sculpture  about  him,  and  returned  to
pure  simpHcity.  Like  a  clod  of  earth  he  stood  there
in  his  bodily  presence.  Amid  all  distractions  he
was  (silent)  and  shut  up  in  himself.  And  in  this
way  he  continued  to  the  end  of  his  life.

6.  Non-action  (makes  its  exemplifier)  the  lord  of
all  fame ;  non-action  (serves  him  as)  the  treasury  of
all  plans  ;  non-action  (fits  him  for)  the  burden  of
all  offices  ;  non-action  (makes  him)  the  lord  of  all
wisdom  ^  The  range  of  his  action  is  inexhaustible,
but  there  is  nowhere  any  trace  of  his  presence.  He
fulfils  all  that  he  has  received  from  Heaven^,  but
he  does  not  see  that  he  was  the  recipient  of  anything.
A  pure  vacancy  (of  all  purpose)  is  what  characterises
him.  When  the  perfect  man  employs  his  mind,  it  is
a  mirror.  It  conducts  nothing  and  anticipates  no-
thing ;  it  responds  to  (what  is  before  it),  but  does
not  retain  it.  Thus  he  is  able  to  deal  successfully
with  all  things,  and  injures  none.

7.  The  Ruler"'  of  the  Southern  Ocean  was  Shu^,  the

^  The  four  members  of  this  sentence  occasion  the  translator  no
small  trouble.  They  are  constructed  on  the  same  lines,  and  seem
to  me  to  be  indicative  and  not  imperative.  Lin  Hsi--^ung  observes
that  all  the  explanations  that  had  been  offered  of  them  were  inap-
propriate. My  own  version  is  substantially  in  accordance  with  his
interpretations.  The  chief  difficulty  is  with  the  first  member,
which  seems  anti-Taoistic ;  but  our  author  is  not  speaking  of  the
purpose  of  any  actor,  but  of  the  result  of  his  non-action.  F*
is  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  qp,  'lord,'  'exercising  lordship."
The  Jel  in  the  third  sentence  indicates  a  person  or  persons  in  the
author's  mind  in  what  precedes.

^  =  the  Heavenly  or  self-determining  nature.

^  Perhaps  '  god  '  would  be  a  better  translation.

*  Meaning  '  Heedless.'


PT.  I.  SECT.  VII.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  KWANG-SZTL.  267


Ruler  of  the  Northern  Ocean  was  Hu^  and  the  Ruler
of  the  Centre  was  Chaos.  Shu  and  Hu  were  continu-
ally meeting  in  the  land  of  Chaos,  who  treated  them
very  well.  They  consulted  together  how  they  might
repay  his  kindness,  and  said,  '  Men  all  have  seven
orifices  for  the  purpose  of  seeing,  hearing,  eating,
and  breathing,  while  this  (poor)  Ruler  alone  has  not
one.  Let  us  try  and  make  them  for  him.'  Accord-
ingly they  dug  one  orifice  in  him  every  day ;  and
at  the  end  of  seven  days  Chaos  died  ^.

'  Meaning  '  Sudden.'

"^  The  little  allegory  is  ingenious  and  amusing.  '  It  indicates,'
says  Lin,  '  how  action  (the  opposite  of  non-inaction)  injures  the
first  condition  of  things.'  More  especially  it  is  in  harmony  with
the  Taoistic  opposition  to  the  use  of  knowledge  in  government.
One  critic  says  that  an  '  alas  ! ;  might  well  follow  the  concluding
'  died.'  But  surely  it  was  better  that  Chaos  should  give  place  to
another  state.     '  Heedless'  and  '  Sudden'  did  not  do  a  bad  work.


268  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.         '  BK.  viii.


BOOK  VIII.
Part  II.     Section  I.

Phi  en  Man,  or  'Webbed  Toes  ^'

1.  A  liofament  imitinor  the  blof  toe  with  the  other
toes  and  an  extra  finger  may  be  natural  -  growths,
but  they  are  more  than  is  good  for  use.  '  Excres-
cences on  the  person  and  hanging  tumours  are
growths  from  the  body,  but  they  are  unnatural
additions  to  it.  There  are  many  arts  of  benevolence
and  righteousness,  and  the  exercise  of  them  is  dis-
tributed among  the  five  viscera  ^ ;  but  this  is  not  the
correct  method  accordinor  to  the  characteristics  of  the
Tao.  Thus  it  is  that  the  addition  to  the  foot  is  but
the  attachment  to  it  of  so  much  useless  flesh,  and
the  addition  to  the  hand  is  but  the  planting  on  it  of
a  useless  finger.  (So  it  is  that)  the  connecting  (the
virtues)  with  the  five  viscera  renders,  by  excess  or
restraint,  the  action  of  benevolence  and  righteous-
ness bad,  and  leads  to  many  arts  as  in  the  employ-
ment of  (great)  powers  of  hearing  or  of  vision.

2.  Therefore   an   extraordinary  power  of  vision


1  See  pp.  138,  139.

'^  *  Come  out  from  the  nature,'  but  '  nature '  must  be  taken  here
as  in  the  translation.     The  character  is  not  Tao.

^  The  five  viscera  are  the  heart,  the  liver,  the  stomach,  the  lungs,
and  the  kidneys.  To  the  liver  are  assigned  the  element  '  wood,'
and  the  virtue  of  benevolence ;  to  the  lungs,  the  element  '  metal,'
and  the  virtue  of  righteousness.


PT.  II.  SECT.  I.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  269

leads  to  the  confusion  of  the  five  colours  ^  and  an
excessive  use  of  ornament.  (Its  possessor),  in  the
resplendence  of  his  green  and  yellow,  white  and
black,  black  and  green,  will  not  stop  till  he  has  be-
come a  Li  A'u  -.  An  extraordinary  power  of  hear-
ing- leads  to  a  confusion  of  the  five  notes ",  and  an
excessive  use  of  the  six  musical  accords  ^.  (Its
possessor),  in  bringing  out  the  tones  from  the  instru-
ments of  metal,  stone,  silk,  and  bamboo,  aided  by
the  Hwang-zi'ung^  and  Ta-lii*  (tubes),  will  not
stop  till  he  has  become  a  Shih  Khwang  ^  (So),
excessive  benevolence  eagerly  brings  out  virtues
and  restrains  its  (proper)  nature,  that  (its  possessor)
may  acquire  a  famous  reputation,  and  cause  all  the
oreans  and  drums  in  the  world  to  celebrate  an  un-
attainable  condition  ;  and  he  will  not  stop  till  he  has
become  a  3^ng  (Shan)^  or  a  Shih  (3hiu)'.     An  ex-

^  Black,  red,  azure  (green,  blue,  or  black),  white,  and  yellow.

'^  The  same  as  the  Li  Lau  of  Mencius  (IV,  i,  i), — of  the  time  of
Hwang-Ti.  It  is  not  easy  to  construe  the  text  here,  and  in  the
analogous  sentences  below.  Hsiian  Ying,  having  read  on  to  the
'}M.  '}^  ^^  ^^^  uninterrupted  predicate  of  the  sharp  seer,  says,  '  Is
not  this  a  proof  of  the  extraordinary  gift  ? '  What  follows  would
be,  '  But  it  was  exemplified  in  Li  A'u.'  The  meaning  that  is  given
in  the  version  was  the  first  that  occurred  to  myself.

^  The  five  notes  of  the  Chinese  musical  scale.

*  There  are  twelve  of  these  musical  notes,  determined  by  the
twelve  regulating  tubes;  six,  represented  here  by  Hwang->^ung,
the  name  of  the  first  tube,  giving  the  sharp  notes ;  and  six,  repre-
sented by  Ta-lii,  giving  the  flat  notes.

^  See  in  II,  par.  5.

^  The  famous  3ang-3ze,  or  3ang  Shan,  one  of  Confucius's  ablest
disciples.

^  An  officer  of  Wei  in  the  sixth  century  b.  c.  He  belonged  to  a
family  of  historiographers,  and  hence  the  surname  Shih  (_^).
Confucius  mentions  him  in   the  most  honourable  terms  in  the


270  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.viil.

traordinary  faculty  in  debating  leads  to  the  piling  up
of  arguments  like  a  builder  with  his  bricks,  or  a  net-
maker  with  his  string.  (Its  possessor)  cunningly
contrives  his  sentences  and  enjoys  himself  in  dis-
cussing what  hardness  is  and  what  whiteness  is,
where  views  agree  and  where  they  differ,  and  pressing
on,  though  weary,  with  short  steps,  with  (a  multitude
of)  useless  words  to  make  good  his  opinion  ;  nor  will
he  stop  till  he  has  become  a  Yang  (A'u)^  or  Mo  (Ti)\
But  in  all  these  cases  the  parties,  with  their  re-
dundant and  divergent  methods,  do  not  proceed  by
that  which  is  the  correct  path  for  all  under  the
sky.  That  which  is  the  perfectly  correct  path  is  not
to  lose  the  real  character  of  the  nature  with  which
we  are  endowed.  Hence  the  union  (of  parts)  should
not  be  considered  redundance,  nor  their  divergence
superfluity ;  what  is  long  should  not  be  considered
too  long,  nor  what  is  short  too  short.  A  duck's  legs,
for  instance,  are  short,  but  if  we  try  to  lengthen
them,  it  occasions  pain ;  and  a  crane's  legs  are  long,
but  if  we  try  to  cut  off  a  portion  of  them,  it  produces
grief.  Where  a  part  is  by  nature  long,  we  are  not  to
amputate,  or  where  it  is  by  nature  short,  we  are  not
to  lengthen  it.  There  is  no  occasion  to  try  to
remove  any  trouble  that  it  may  cause.

3.  The  presumption  is  that  benevolence  and  right-
eousness are  not  constituents  of  humanity ;  for  to
how  much  anxiety  does  the  exercise  of  them  give
rise !     Moreover  when  another  toe  is  united  to  the


Analect  XV,  vi,  by  the  name    Shih  Yii.      '  Righteousness '  was
his  great  attribute.

^  The  two  heresiarchs  so  much  denounced  by  Mencius.     Both
have  appeared  in  previous  Books.


PT.  II.  SECT.  I.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^-WANG-SZE.  271

great  toe,  to  divide  the  membrane  makes  you
weep ;  and  when  there  is  an  extra  finger,  to  gnaw  it
off  makes  you  cry  out.  In  the  one  case  there  is  a
member  too  many,  and  in  the  other  a  member  too
few ;  but  the  anxiety  and  pain  which  they  cause  is
the  same.  The  benevolent  men  of  the  present  age
look  at  the  evils  of  the  world,  as  with  eyes  full  of
dust,  and  are  filled  with  sorrow  by  them,  while  those
who  are  not  benevolent,  having  violently  altered  the
character  of  their  proper  nature,  greedily  pursue
after  riches  and  honours.  The  presumption  there-
fore is  that  benevolence  and  righteousness  are  con-
trary to  the  nature  of  man  : — how  full  of  trouble  and
contention  has  the  world  been  ever  since  the  three
dynasties  ^  began  !

And  moreover,  in  employing  the  hook  and  line,
the  compass  and  square,  to  give  things  their  correct
form  you  must  cut  away  portions  of  what  naturally
belongs  to  them ;  in  employing  strings  and  fasten-
ings, glue  and  varnish  to  make  things  firm,  you  must
violently  interfere  with  their  qualities.  The  bendings
and  stoppings  in  ceremonies  and  music,  and  the  fac-
titious expression  In  the  countenance  of  benevolence
and  righteousness,  in  order  to  comfort  the  minds  of
men  : — these  all  show  a  failure  in  observing^  the
regular  principles  (of  the  human  constitution).  All
men  are  furnished  with  such  regular  principles ;  and
according  to  them  what  Is  bent  is  not  made  so  by
the  hook,  nor  what  is  straight  by  the  line,  nor  what
is  round  by  the  compass,  nor  what  is  square  by  the
carpenter's   square.     Nor  Is    adhesion    effected   by

'  Those    of  Hsia,    Shang,    and   A'au;— from  the  twenty-third
century  b.  c.  to  our  author's  own  time.


272  THE   TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  viri.

the  use  of  glue  and  varnish,  nor  are  things  bound
together  by  means  of  strings  and  bands.  Thus  it
is  that  all  in  the  world  are  produced  what  they  are
by  a  certain  guidance,  while  they  do  not  know  how
they  are  produced  so ;  and  they  equally  attain  their
several  ends  while  they  do  not  know  how  it  is  that
they  do  so.  Anciently  it  was  so,  and  it  is  so  now ;
and  this  constitution  of  thingfs  should  not  be  made
of  none  effect.  Why  then  should  benevolence  and
righteousness  be  employed  as  connecting  (links),  or
as  glue  and  varnish,  strings  and  bands,  and  the
enjoyment  arising  from  the  Tao  and  its  character-
istics be  attributed  to  them  ? — it  is  a  deception  prac-
tised upon  the  world.  Where  the  deception  is  small,
there  will  be  a  change  in  the  direction  (of  the  objects
pursued) ;  where  it  is  great,  there  will  be  a  change  of
the  nature  itself.  How  do  I  know  that  it  is  so  ?
Since  he  of  the  line  of  Yli  called  in  his  benevolence
and  righteousness  to  distort  and  vex  the  world,  the
world  has  not  ceased  to  hurry  about  to  execute
their  commands  ; — has  not  this  been  by  means  of
benevolence  and  righteousness  to  change  (men's
views)  of  their  nature  ?

4.  I  will  therefore  try  and  discuss  this  matter.
From  the  commencement  of  the  three  dynasties
downwards,  nowhere  has  there  been  a  man  who
has  not  under  (the  influence  of  external)  things
altered  (the  course  of)  his  nature.  Small  men  for
the  sake  of  gain  have  sacrificed  their  persons ;
scholars  for  the  sake  of  fame  have  done  so ;  great
officers,  for  the  sake  of  their  families ;  and  sagely
men,  for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom.  These  several
classes,  with  different  occupations,  and  different  repu-


PT.  II.  SECT.  I.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  273

tations,  have  agreed  in  doing  injury  to  their  nature
and  sacrificing  their  persons.  Take  the  case  of  a
male  and  female  slave  ^ ; — they  have  to  feed  the  sheep
together,  but  they  both  lose  their  sheep.  Ask  the
one  what  he  was  doing,  and  you  will  find  that  he
was  holding  his  bamboo  tablets  and  reading.  Ask
the  other,  and  you  will  find  that  she  was  amusing
herself  with  some  game  -.  They  were  differently
occupied,  but  they  equally  lose  their  sheep.  (So),
Po-t  ^  died  at  the  foot  of  Shau-yang  *  to  maintain  his
fame,  and  the  robber  A''ih^  died  on  the  top  of  Tung-
linof  '^  in  his  eacferness  for  grain.  Their  deaths  were
occasioned  by  different  causes,  but  they  equally
shortened  their  lives  and  did  violence  to  their
nature  ; — why  must  w^e  approve  of  Po-i,  and  condemn
the  robber  A'ih  ?  In  cases  of  such  sacrifice  all  over
the  world,  when  one  makes  it  for  the  sake  of  bene-
volence and  righteousness,  the  common  people  style
hini  '  a  superior  man,'  but  when  another  does  it  for
the  sake  of  goods  and  riches,  they  style  him  '  a  small
man.'  The  action  of  sacrificing  is  the  same,  and  yet
we  have  '  the  superior  man  '  and  '  the  small  man !  '
In  the  matter  of  destroying  his  life,  and  doing  injury
to  his  nature,  the  robber  A''ih  simply  did  the  same  as
Po-i ; — why  must  we  make  the  distinction  of '  superior
man '  and  '  small  man  '  between  them  ?


^  See  the  Khang-hsi  dictionary  under  the  character  ^

2  Playing  at  some  game  with  dice.  ^  See  VI,  par.  3.

*  A  mountain  in  the  present  Shan-hsi,  probably  in  the  depart-
ment of  Ph(i-/{'au.

^  A  strange  character,  but  not  historical,  represented  as  a  brother
of  Liu-hsia  Hui.     See  Bk.  XXIX.

«  'The  Eastern  Height,' =  the  Thai  mountain  in  the  present
Shan-tung.

[39]  T


2  74  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM,  BK.Viil.


5,  Moreover,  those  who  devote  their  nature  to
(the  pursuit)  of  benevolence  and  righteousness,
though  they  should  attain  to  be  like  3ang  (Shan)
and  Shih  (3hiu),  I  do  not  pronounce  to  be  good ;
those  who  devote  it  to  (the  study  of)  the  five
flavours,  though  they  attain  to  be  like  Shu-r  ^  I  do
not  pronounce  to  be  good  ;  those  who  devote  it  to
the  (discrimination  of  the)  five  notes,  though  they
attain  to  be  like  Shih  Khwang,  I  do  not  pronounce
to  be  quick  of  hearing  ;  those  who  devote  it  to
the  (appreciation  of  the)  five  colours,  though  they
attain  to  be  like  Li  Kii,  I  do  not  pronounce  to  be
clear  of  vision.  When  I  pronounce  men  to  be  good,
I  am  not  speaking  of  their  benevolence  and  right-
eousness ; — the  goodness  is  simply  (their  possession
of)  the  qualities  (of  the  Tao).  When  I  pronounce
them  to  be  good,  I  am  not  speaking  of  what  are
called  benevolence  and  righteousness  ;  but  simply
of  their  allowing  the  nature  with  which  they  are
endowed  to  have  its  free  course.  When  I  pronounce
men  to  be  quick  of  hearing,  I  do  not  mean  that  they
hearken  to  anything  else,  but  that  they  hearken  to
themselves  ;  when  I  pronounce  them  to  be  clear  of
vision,  I  do  not  mean  that  they  look  to  anything
else,  but  that  they  look  to  themselves.  Now  those
who  do  not  see  themselves  but  see  other  thing-s
who  do  not  get  possession  of  themselves  but  get
possession  of  other  things,  get  possession  of  what
belongs  to  others,  and  not  of  what  is  their  own  ;  and
they  reach  forth  to  what  attracts  others,  and  not  to
that  in  themselves  which  should  attract  them.     But


1  Different  from  Yih-ya,  the  famous  cook  of  duke  Hwan  of  A7n.
This  is  said  to  have  been  of  the  time  of  Hwang-Ti.  But  there  are
different  readings  of  the  name.


PT.  II.  SECT. I.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  275

thus  reaching  forth  to  what  attracts  others  and  not
to  what  should  attract  them  in  themselves,  be  they
like  the  robber  A'ih  or  like  Po-i,  they  equally  err  in
the  way  of  excess  or  of  perversity.  What  I  am
ashamed  of  is  erring"  in  the  characteristics  of  the
Tao,  and  therefore,  in  the  higher  sphere,  I  do  not
dare  to  insist  on  the  practice  of  benevolence  and
righteousness,  and,  in  the  lower,  I  do  not  dare
to  allow  myself  either  in  the  exercise  of  excess  or
perversity.


T  2


"^1^  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  ix.


BOOK   IX.
Part  II.     Section  II.

Ma  Thi,  or  'Horses's  Hoofs  i.'

I.  Horses  can  with  their  hoofs  tread  on  the  hoar-
frost and  snow,  and  with  their  hair  withstand  the
wind  and  cold  ;  they  feed  on  the  grass  and  drink
water ;  they  prance  with  their  legs  and  leap  : — this
is  the  true  nature  of  horses.  Though  there  were
made  for  them  grand  towers  -  and  large  dormitories,
they  would  prefer  not  to  use  them.  But  when  Po-
lao  3  (arose  and)  said,  '  I  know  well  how  to  manage
horses,'  (men  proceeded)  ^  to  singe  and  mark  them,
to  clip  their  hair,  to  pare  their  hoofs,  to  halter  their
heads,  to  bridle  them  and  hobble  them,  and  to  con-
fine them  in  stables  and  corrals.  (When  subjected
to  this  treatment),  two  or  three  in  every  ten  of  them
died.  (Men  proceeded  further)  to  subject  them  to
hunger  and  thirst,  to  gallop  them  and  race  them,


^  See  pp.  140,  141.

^  Literally,  'righteous  towers;'  but  ^  is  very  variously  applied,
and  there  are  other  readings.  Compare  the  name  of  ling  thai,
given  by  the  people  to  the  tower  built  by  king  Wan  ;  Shih,  III,  i,  8.

^  A  mythical  being,  the  first  tamer  of  horses.  The  name  is
given  to  a  star,  where  he  is  supposed  to  have  his  seat  as  superin-
tendent of  the  horses  of  heaven.  It  became  a  designation  of  Sun
Yang,  a  famous  charioteer  of  the  later  period  of  the  Aau  dynasty,
but  it  could  not  be  he  whom  Awang-^ze  had  in  view.

*  Po-lao  set  the  example  of  dealing  with  horses  as  now  de-
scribed; but  the  supplement  which  I  have  introduced  seems  to
bring  out  better  our  author's  meaninii.         -^


'6  '-'">•  i-/>-LLvi    Will    auiiiwi  3  iiicaiiiuy.


PT,  II.  SECT.  II.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  277

and  to  make  them  go  together  in  regular  order.  In
front  were  the  evils  of  the  bit  and  ornamented  breast-
bands,  and  behind  were  the  terrors  of  the  whip  and
switch.  (When  so  treated),  more  than  half  of  them
died.

The  (first)  potter  said,  '  I  know  well  how  to  deal
with  clay ; '  and  (men  proceeded)  to  mould  it  into
circles  as  exact  as  if  made  by  the  compass,  and  into
squares  as  exact  as  if  formed  by  the  measuring
square.  The  (first)  carpenter  said,  '  I  know  well
how  to  deal  with  wood ;  '  and  (men  proceeded)  to
make  it  bent  as  if  by  the  application  of  the  hook,  and
straight  as  if  by  the  application  of  the  plumb-line.
But  is  it  the  nature  of  clay  and  wood  to  require  the
application  of  the  compass  and  square,  of  the  hook
and  line  ?  And  yet  age  after  age  men  have  praised
Po-lao,  saying,  '  He  knew  well  how  to  manage
horses,'  and  also  the  (first)  potter  and  carpenter,
saying,  '  They  knew  well  how  to  deal  with  clay  and
wood.'  This  is  just  the  error  committed  by  the
Sfovernors  of  the  world.

2.  According  to  my  idea,  those  who  know  well  to
govern  mankind  would  not  act  so.  The  people  had
their  regular  and  constant  nature  ^ : — they  wove  and
made  themselves  clothes  ;  they  tilled  the  ground  and
got  food  ^.  This  was  their  common  faculty.  They
were  all  one  in  this,  and  did  not  form  themselves
into  separate  classes ;  so  were  they  constituted  and
left  to  their  natural  tendencies  ^     Therefore  in  the


^  Compare  the  same  language  in  the  previous  Book,  par.  3.
^  But  the  weaver's  or  agriculturist's  art  has  no  more  title  to  be
called  primitive  than  the  potter's  or  carpenter's.

^  A  difficult  expression ;  but  the  translation,  probably,  gives  its


278  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  IX.

age  of  perfect  virtue  men  walked  along  with  slow
and  grave  step,  and  with  their  looks  steadily  directed
forwards.     At  that  time,  on  the  hills  there  were  no
foot-paths,   nor  excavated  passages  ;    on   the  lakes
there  were  no  boats  nor  dams  ;  all  creatures  lived  in
companies  ;  and  the  places  of  their  settlement  were
made  close  to  one  another.     Birds  and  beasts  multi-
plied to  flocks  and  herds  ;  the  grass  and  trees  grew
luxuriant  and  long.     In  this  condition  the  birds  and
beasts  might  be  led  about  without  feeling  the  con-
straint ;  the  nest  of  the  magpie  might  be  climbed  to,
and  peeped  into.     Yes,  in  the  age  of  perfect  virtue,
men   lived  in  common  with  birds  and  beasts,  and
were  on    terms  of  equality  with   all   creatures,   as
forming  one  family  ; — how  could  they  know  among
themselves   the    distinctions    of  superior   men    and
small  men  ?     Equally  without  knowledge,  they  did
not  leave  (the  path  of)  their  natural  virtue  ;  equally
free  from  desires,  they  were  in   the  state  of  pure
simplicity.      In    that   state  of   pure    simplicity,    the
nature  of  the  people  was  what  it  ought  to  be.     But
when  the  sagely  men  appeared,  limping  and  wheeling
about  in   (the    exercise   of)    benevolence,    pressing
along  and  standing  on  tiptoe  in  the  doing  of  right-
eousness,  then   men  universally  began  to  be   per-
plexed.    (Those  sages  also)  went  to  excess  in  their
performances  of  music,  and  in  their  gesticulations  in
the  practice  of  ceremonies,  and  then  men  began  to
be  separated  from  one  another.     If  the  raw  materials

true  significance.  '  Heaven'  here  is  synonymous  with  'the  Tao  ;'
but  its  use  shows  how  readily  the  minds,  even  of  Lao  and  A'wang,
had  recourse  to  the  earliest  term  by  which  the  Chinese  fathers  had
expressed  their  recognition  of  a  Supreme  and  Controlling  Power
and  Government.


PT.  11,  SECT.  II,       THE  WRITINGS  OF  i^-WANG-SZE.  2  79

had  not  been  cut  and  hacked,  who  could  have  made
a  sacrificial  vase  from  them  ?  If  the  natural  jade
had  not  been  broken  and  injured,  who  could  have
made  the  handles  for  the  libation-cups  from  it  ?  If
the  attributes  of  the  Tao  had  not  been  disallowed,
how  should  they  have  preferred  benevolence  and
righteousness?  If  the  instincts  of  the  nature  had
not  been  departed  from,  how  should  ceremonies  and
music  have  come  into  use  ?  If  the  five  colours  had
not  been  confused,  how  should  the  ornamental  figures
have  been  formed  ?  If  the  five  notes  had  not  been
confused,  how  should  they  have  supplemented
them  by  the  musical  accords  ?  The  cutting  and
hacking  of  the  raw  materials  to  form  vessels  was  the
crime  of  the  skilful  workman  ;  the  injury  done  to  the
characteristics  of  the  Tao  in  order  to  the  practice  of
benevolence  and  righteousness  was  the  error  of  the
sagely  men,

3.  Horses,  when  living  in  the  open  country,  eat
the  grass,  and  drink  water ;  when  pleased,  they
intertwine  their  necks  and  rub  one  another ;  when
enraged,  they  turn  back  to  back  and  kick  one
another ; — this  is  all  that  they  know  to  do.  But
if  we  put  the  yoke  on  their  necks,  with  the  moon-
like frontlet  displayed  on  all  their  foreheads,  then
they  know  to  look  slily  askance,  to  curve  their  necks,
to  rush  viciously,  trying  to  get  the  bit  out  of  their
mouths,  and  to  filch  the  reins  (from  their  driver)  ; —
this  knowledge  of  the  horse  and  its  ability  thus  to
act  the  part  of  a  thief  is  the  crime  of  Po-lao.  In
the  time  of  (the  Ti)  Ho-hsil  \  the  people  occupied

^  An  ancient  sovereign  ;  but  nothing  more  definite  can  be  said
about  him.     JNIost  of  the  critics  identify  him  with  Shan-nang,  the


28o  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  IX.

their  dwellings  without  knowing  what  they  were
doing,  and  walked  out  without  knowing  where  they
were  going.  They  filled  their  mouths  with  food
and  were  glad ;  they  slapped  their  stomachs  to  ex-
press their  satisfaction.  This  was  all  the  ability
which  they  possessed.  But  when  the  sagely  men
appeared,  with  their  bendings  and  stoppings  in  cere-
monies and  music  to  adjust  the  persons  of  all,  and
hanging  up  their  benevolence  and  righteousness  to
excite  the  endeavours  of  all  to  reach  them,  in  order
to  comfort  their  minds,  then  the  people  began  to
stump  and  limp  about  in  their  love  of  knowledge,
and  strove  with  one  another  in  their  pursuit  of  gain,
so  that  there  was  no  stopping  them  : — this  was  the
error  of  those  sagely  men.

Father  of  Husbandry,  who  occupies  the  place  in  chronological
tables  after  Fu-hsi,  between  him  and  Hwang-Ti.  In  the  Tables
of  the  Dynastic  Histories,  published  in  1817,  he  is  placed  seventh
in  the  list  of  fifteen  reigns,  which  are  placed  without  any  specifica-
tion of  their  length  between  Fu-hsi  and  Shan-nang.  The  name
is  written  as  ^  ^  and  |^  ^.


FT.  II.  SECT.  III.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  28 1


BOOK  X.
Part  II.     Section  III.

Kh\\  Kh\^\\,  or  '  Cutting  open  Satchels ^'

I.  In  taking  precautions  against  thieves  who  cut
open  satchels,  search  bags,  and  break  open  boxes,
people  are  sure  to  cord  and  fasten  them  well,  and  to
employ  strong  bonds  and  clasps ;  and  in  this  they
are  ordinarily  said  to  show  their  wisdom.  When  a
great  thief  comes,  however,  he  shoulders  the  box,
lifts  up  the  satchel,  carries  off  the  bag,  and  runs
away  with  them,  afraid  only  that  the  cords,  bonds,
and  clasps  may  not  be  secure  ;  and  in  this  case  what
was  called  the  wisdom  (of  the  owners)  proves  to  be
nothing-  but  a  collectino^  of  the  thinors  for  the  o-reat
thief.  Let  me  try  and  set  this  matter  forth.  Do
not  those  who  are  vulgarly  called  wise  prove  to  be
collectors  for  the  great  thieves  ?  And  do  not  those
who  are  called  sages  prove  to  be  but  guardians  in
the  interest  of  the  great  thieves  ?

How  do  I  know  that  the  case  is  so  ?  Formerly,
in  the  state  of  A7/i,  the  neiohbouringf  towns  could  see
one  another ;  their  cocks  and  dogs  never  ceased  to
answer  the  crowino-  and  barkino-  of  other  cocks  and
dogs  (between  them).  The  nets  were  set  (in  the
water  and  on  the  land) ;  and  the  ploughs  and  hoes
were  employed  over  more  than  a  space  of  two  thou-
sand li  square.     All  within  its  four  boundaries,  the

^  See  pp.  141,  142.


282  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  X.

establishment  of  the  ancestral  temples  and  of  the
altars  of  the  land  and  grain,  and  the  ordering  of  the
hamlets  and  houses,  and  of  every  corner  in  the
districts,  large,  medium,  and  small,  were  in  all  parti-
culars according  to  the  rules  of  the  sages  \  So  it
was  ;  but  yet  one  morning,  Thien  AV/ang-^ze  -  killed
the  ruler  of  A7/i,  and  stole  his  state.  And  was  it
only  the  state  that  he  stole  ?  Along  with  it  he  stole
also  the  regulations  of  the  sages  and  wise  men
(observed  in  it).  And  so,  though  he  got  the  name
of  being  a  thief  and  a  robber,  yet  he  himself  con-
tinued to  live  as  securely  as  Yao  and  Shun  had  done.
Small  states  did  not  dare  to  find  fault  with  him ;
great  states  did  not  dare  to  take  him  off;  for  twelve
generations  (his  descendants)  have  possessed  the
state  of  Kh\  '\  Thus  do  we  not  have  a  case  in
which  not  only  did  (the  party)  steal  the  state  oi  Khi,

^  The  meaning  is  plain ;  but  to  introduce  the  various  geograph-
ical terms  would  make  the  translation  cumbrous.  The  concluding
{ffj  is  perplexing,

^  This  event  is  mentioned  in  the  Analects,  XIV,  xxii,  where  the
perpetrator  of  the  murder  is  called  AVian  AV^ang-^ze,  and  A7;an
Hang.  Hang  was  his  name,  and  A7/ang  the  honorary  title  given  to
him  after  his  death.  The  family  to  which  he  belonged  had  origin-
ally taken  refuge  in  A7zi  from  the  state  of  A7;an  in  b.  c.  672.  Why
and  when  its  chiefs  adopted  the  surname  Thien  instead  of  A7/an  is
not  well  known.  The  murder  took  place  in  482.  Hang  did  not
immediately  usurp  the  marquisate ;  but  he  and  his  successors  dis-
posed of  it  at  their  pleasure  among  the  representatives  of  the  old
House  till  386,  when  Thien  Ho  was  recognised  by  the  king  ot
A'au  as  the  marquis ;  and  his  next  successor  but  one  took  the  title
of  king.

^  The  kingdom  of  Kh\  came  to  an  end  in  b,  c.  221,  the  first
year  of  the  dynasty  of  A7;in,  after  it  had  lasted  through  five
reigns.  How  AVang-jze  made  out  his  '  twelve  generations '  we
cannot  tell.  There  may  be  an  interpolation  in  his  text  made  in
the  time  of  Kh'm,  or  subsequently.


PT.  II.  SECT.  III.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  283

but  at  the  same  time  the  req-ulations  of  its  sagfes  and
wise  men,  which  thereby  served  to  guard  the  person
of  him,  thief  and  robber  as  he  was  ?

2.  Let  me  try  to  set  forth  this  subject  (still  fur-
ther). Have  not  there  been  among  those  vulgarly
styled  the  wisest,  such  as  have  collected  (their
wealth)  for  the  great  chief?  and  among  those  styled
the  most  sage  such  as  have  guarded  it  for  him  ?
How  do  I  know  that  it  has  been  so  ?  Formerly,
Lung-fang  ^  was  beheaded ;  Pi-kan  -  had  his  heart
torn  out ;  I^/mng  Hung'^  was  ripped  open  ;  and  3ze-
hstl  *  was  reduced  to  pulp  (in  the  A'iang).  Worthy
as  those  four  men  were,  they  did  not  escape  such
dreadful  deaths.  The  followers  of  the  robber
A'ih  ^  asked  him,  saying,  *  Has  the  robber  also  any
method  or  principle  (in  his  proceedings)?'  He
replied,  '  What  profession  is  there  which  has  not  its
principles  ?  That  the  robber  in  his  recklessness
comes  to  the  conclusion  that  there  are  valuable  de-
posits in  an  apartment  shows  his  sageness ;  that  he
is  the  first  to  enter  it  shows  his  bravery ;  that  he  is
the  last  to  quit  it  shows  his  righteousness ;  that  he
knows  whether  (the  robbery)  may  be  attempted  or
not  shows  his  wisdom  ;  and  that  he  makes  an  equal


*  See  on  Book  IV,  par.  i.
^  See  on  Book  IV,  par.  i.

^  A  historiographer  of  A'au,  with  whom  Confucius  is  said  to
have  studied  music.  He  was  weakly  and  unjustly  put  to  death,  as
here  described  by  king  ^ang,  in  b.  c.  492.

*  Wu  3ze-hsu,  the  hero  of  revenge,  who  fled  from  I^/iu  to  Wu,
which  he  long  served.  He  was  driven  at  last  to  commit  suicide,
and  his  body  was  then  put  into  a  leathern  wine-sack,  and  thrown
into  the  JTmug  near  the  present  Su-ztau  ; — about  b.  c.  475.

°  See  on  Book  VIII,  par.  4.


284  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  X.

division  of  the  plunder  shows  his  benevolence.  With-
out all  these  five  qualities  no  one  in  the  world  has
ever  attained  to  become  a  great  robber.'  Looking
at  the  subject  in  this  way,  we  see  that  good  men  do
not  arise  without  having  the  principles  of  the  sages,
and  that  A'ih  could  not  have  pursued  his  course
without  the  same  principles.  But  the  good  men  in
the  world  are  few,  and  those  who  are  not  good  are
manv ; — it  follows  that  the  sagfes  benefit  the  world
in  a  few  instances  and  injure  it  in  many.  Hence  it  is
that  we  have  the  sayings,  '  When  the  lips  are  gone
the  teeth  are  cold^ ;'  'The  poor  wine  of  Lu  gave  occa-
sion to  the  siege  of  Han-tan-;'  '  When  sages  are  born
great  robbers  arise ".'  When  the  stream  is  dried,
the  valley  is  empty;  when  the  mound  is  levelled,
the  deep  pool  (beside  it)  is  filled  up.  When  the
sages  have  died,  the  great  robbers  will  not  arise ;
the  world  would  be  at  peace,  and  there  would  be  no
more  troubles.  While  the  sagely  men  have  not
died,  great  robbers  will  not  cease  to  appear.  The
more  right  that  is  attached  to  (the  views  of)  the
sagely  men  for  the  government  of  the  world,  the
more  advantage  will  accrue  to  (such  men  as)  the
robber  ATih.    If  w^e  make  for  men  pecks  and  bushels

^  This  is  an  instance  of  cause  and  effect  naturally  happening.

^  At  a  meeting  of  the  princes,  presided  over  by  king  Hsiian  of
Khn  (b.  c.  369-340),  the  ruler  of  Lu  brought  very  poor  wine  for
the  king,  which  was  presented  to  him  as  wine  of  A'ao,  in  conse-
quence of  a  grudge  against  that  kingdom  by  his  officer  of  Avines.
In  consequence  of  this  king  Hsiian  ordered  siege  to  be  laid  to
Han-tan,  the  capital  of  A'ao.  This  is  an  instance  of  cause  and
effect  occurring  irregularly.

^  There  seems  to  be  no  connexion  of  cause  and  effect  here ;
but  A^vang-^ze  goes  on  in  his  own  way  to  make  out  that  there  is
such  a  connexion.


PT.  II.  SECT.  III.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  285

to  measure  (their  wares),  even  by  means  of  those
pecks  and  bushels  should  we  be  teaching  them  to
steal  ^ ;  if  we  make  for  them  weights  and  steelyards
to  weigh  (their  wares),  even  by  means  of  those
weights  and  steelyards  shall  we  be  teaching  them
to  steal.  If  we  make  for  them  tallies  and  seals  to
secure  their  good  faith,  even  by  means  of  those
tallies  and  seals  shall  we  be  teaching  them  to  steal.
If  we  make  for  them  benevolence  and  righteousness
to  make  their  doings  correct,  even  by  means  of  bene-
volence and  righteousness  shall  we  be  teachino-  them
to  steal.  How  do  I  know  that  it  is  so  ?  Here  is
one  who  steals  a  hook  (for  his  girdle)  ; — he  is  put  to
death  for  it :  here  is  another  who  steals  a  state  ; — he
becomes  its  prince.  But  it  is  at  the  gates  of  the
princes  that  we  find  benevolence  and  righteousness
(most  strongly)  professed  ; — is  not  this  stealing  bene-
volence and  riohteousness,  sas^eness  and  wisdom  ?
Thus  they  hasten  to  become  great  robbers,  carry
off  princedoms,  and  steal  benevolence  and  righteous-
ness, with  all  the  gains  springing  from  the  use  of
pecks  and  bushels,  weights  and  steelyards,  tallies
and  seals : — even  the  rewards  of  carriages  and
coronets  have  no  power  to  influence  (to  a  different
course),  and  the  terrors  of  the  axe  have  no  power  to
restrain  in  such  cases.  The  giving  of  so  great  gain
to  robbers  (like)  A'ih,  and  making  it  impossible  to
restrain  them ; — this  is  the  error  committed  by  the


sages.


o-


In  accordance  with  this  it  is  said,  'Fish  should


^  The  verb  '  to  steal '  is  here   used    transitively,   and   with    a
hiphil  force.


286  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.


BK.  X.


not   be   taken    from   (the   protection  of)   the    deep
waters  ;  the  agencies  for  the  profit  of  a  state  should
not  be  shown  to  men  \'     But  those  sages  (and  their
teachings)  are  the    agencies    for  the    profit  of  the
world,  and  should  not  be  exhibited  to  it.     Therefore
if  an  end  were  put  to  sageness  and  wisdom  put  away,
the  great  robbers  would  cease  to  arise.    If  jade  were
put  away  and  pearls  broken  to  bits,  the  small  thieves
would  not  appear.      If  tallies  were  burned  and  seals
broken  in  pieces,  the  people  would  become  simple
and  unsophisticated.     If  pecks  were  destroyed  and
steelyards  snapped  in  two,  the  people  would  have  no
wrangling.     If  the  rules  of  the  sages  were  entirely
set  aside  in  the  world,  a  beginning  might  be  made
of  reasoning  with  the   people.     If  the  six   musical
accords  were  reduced  to  a  state  of  utter  confusion,
organs  and  lutes   all   burned,  and  the  ears  of  the
(musicians  like  the)  blind  Khwang^  stopped  up,  all
men   would    begin    to    possess    and    employ   their
(natural)  power  of  hearing.     If  elegant  ornaments
were  abolished,  the  five  embellishing  colours  disused,
and   the  eyes  of  (men  like)  Li  A'u  ^  glued   up,  all
men   would    begin    to    possess    and    employ   their
(natural)  power  of  vision.    If  the  hook  and  line  were
destroyed,  the  compass  and  square  thrown  away,  and
the  fingers  of  men  (like)  the  artful  Khm  *  smashed,
all  men  would  begin  to  possess  and  employ  their
(natural)  skill ;— as  it  is  said,  'The  greatest  art  is


^  See  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing,  ch.  36.  Our  author's  use  of  it
throws  hght  on  its  meaning.

2  Note  I,  p.  i86.

^  Note  2,  p.  269.

*  A  skilful  maker  of  arrows  of  the  time  of  Yao, — the  Kung-
kung  of  the  Shu,  II,  i,  21 ;  V,  xxii,  19.


PT.  n.  SECT.  III.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  287

like  stupidity \'  If  conduct  such  as  that  of  ^^ng
(Shan)2  ^j^(-[  Shih  (A'//iu)3  were  discarded,  the  mouths
of  Yang  {A"u)  '^  and  Mo  (Ti)  gagged,  and  bene-
volence and  righteousness  seized  and  thrown  aside,
the  virtue  of  all  men  would  begin  to  display  its
mysterious  excellence.  When  men  possessed  and
employed  their  (natural)  power  of  vision,  there  would
be  no  distortion  in  the  world.  When  they  possessed
and  employed  their  (natural)  power  of  hearing,  there
would  be  no  distractions  in  the  world.  When  they
possessed  and  employed  their  (natural)  faculty  of
knowleds^e,  there  would  be  no  delusions  in  the  world.
When  they  possessed  and  employed  their  (natural)
virtue,  there  would  be  no  depravity  in  the  w^orld.
Men  like  3ang  (Shan),  Shih  (A7/iu),  Yang  (A'u),  Mo
(Ti),  Shih  Khwang  (the  musician),  the  artist  AV^ui,
and  Li  A'u,  all  display  their  qualities  outwardly,  and
set  the  world  in  a  blaze  (of  admiration)  and  confound
it ; — a  method  which  is  of  no  use  !

4.  Are  you,  Sir,  unacquainted  with  the  age  of
perfect  virtue  ?  Anciently  there  were  Yung-/7/ang,
Ta-thing,  Po-hwang,  A^'ang-yang,  Li-lu,  Li-/(7m,
Hsien-yiian,  Ho-hsii,  5'-ii"^'lu,  A'u-yung,  Fu-hsi,
and  Shan-nang^.      In  their  times  the  people  made


^  The  Tao  Teh  ^ing,  ch.  45.

^  Note  6,  p.  269.

^  Note  7,  p.  269.

*  Note  5,  p.  261,

^  Of  the  twelve  names  mentioned  here  the  reader  is  probably
familiar  with  those  of  Fu-hsi  and  Shan-nang,  the  first  and  second
of  the  Ti  in  chronology.  Hsien-yiian  is  another  name  for  Hwang-
Ti,  the  third  of  them.  A'ia-yung  was,  perhaps,  a  minister  of  Hwang-
Ti.  Ho-hsii  has  occurred  before  in  Book  IV.  Of  the  other  seven,
five  occur  among  the  fifteen  sovereigns  placed  in  the  '  Compendium


288  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.


BK.  X.


knots  on  cords  in  carrying  on  their  affairs.  They
thought  their  (simple)  food  pleasant,  and  their
(plain)  clothing  beautiful.  They  were  happy  in
their  (simple)  manners,  and  felt  at  rest  in  their
(poor)  dwellings.  (The  people  of)  neighbouring
states  might  be  able  to  descry  one  another;  the
voices  of  their  cocks  and  dogs  might  be  heard  (all
the  way)  from  one  to  the  other ;  they  might  not  die
till  they  were  old  ;  and  yet  all  their  life  they  would
have  no  communication  together  \  In  those  times
perfect  good  order  prevailed.

Now-a-days,  however,  such  is  the  state  of  things
that  you  shall  see  the  people  stretching  out  their
necks,  and  standing  on  tiptoe,  while  they  say,  '  In
such  and  such  a  place  there  is  a  wise  and  able
man.'  Then  they  carry  with  them  whatever  dry
provisions  they  may  have  left,  and  hurry  towards
it,  abandoning  their  parents  in  their  homes,  and
neglecting  the  service  of  their  rulers  abroad.  Their
footsteps  may  be  traced  in  lines  from  one  state
to  another,  and  the  ruts  of  their  chariot-wheels  also
for  more  than  a  thousand  1 1.  This  is  owine  to  the
error  of  their  superiors  in  their  (inordinate)  fondness
for  knowledge.  When  those  superiors  do  really  love
knowledge,  but  do  not  follow  the  (proper)  course,
the  whole  world  is  thrown  into  great  confusion.

How  do  I  know  that  the  case  is  so  ?  The  know-
ledge shown  in  the  (making  of)  bows,  cross-bows,
hand-nets,  stringed  arrows,  and  contrivances  with
springs  is  great,  but  the  birds  are  troubled  by  them


of  History '  between  Fii-hsi  and  Shan-nang.     The  remaining  two
may  be  fomid,  I  suppose,  in  the  Lu  Shih  of  Lo  Pf.
^  See  the  eightieth  chapter  of  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing.


PT,  II.  SECT.  III.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  289

above  ;  the  knowledge  shown  in  the  hooks,  baits,
various  kinds  of  nets,  and  bamboo  traps  is  great,
but  the  fishes  are  disturbed  by  them  in  the  waters  ;
the  knowledge  shown  in  the  arrangements  for
setting  nets,  and  the  nets  and  snares  themselves,
is  great,  but  the  animals  are  disturbed  by  them  in
the  marshy  grounds.  (So),  the  versatility  shown
in  artful  deceptions  becoming  more  and  more
pernicious,  in  ingenious  discussions  as  to  what  is
hard  and  what  is  white,  and  in  attempts  to  disperse
the  dust  and  reconcile  different  view^s,  is  great,  but
the  common  people  are  perplexed  by  all  the  sophistry.
Hence  there  is  great  disorder  continually  in  the
world,  and  the  guilt  of  it  is  due  to  that  fondness
for  knowledge.  Thus  it  is  that  all  men  know  to
seek  for  the  knowledge  that  they  have  not  attained  i
to  ;  and  do  not  know  to  seek  for  that  which  they  \
already  have  (in  themselves) ;  and  that  they  know
to  condemn  what  they  do  not  approve  (in  others),
and  do  not  know  to  condemn  what  they  have
allowed  in  themselves  ; — it  is  this  wdiich  occasions
the  great  confusion  and  disorder.  It  is  just  as  if,
above,  the  brightness  of  the  sun  and  moon  were
darkened  ;  as  if,  beneath,  the  productive  vigour  of
the  hills  and  streams  were  dried  up ;  and  as  if,
between,  the  operation  of  the  four  seasons  were
broucjht  to  an  end  : — in  which  case  there  would  not
be  a  single  weak  and  wriggling  insect,  nor  any  plant
that  grows  up,  which  would  not  lose  its  proper
nature.  Great  indeed  is  the  disorder  produced  in
the  world  by  the  love  of  knowledge.  From  the
time  of  the  three  dynasties  downwards  it  has  been  so.
The  plain  and  honest-minded  people  are  neglected,
and  the  plausible  representations  of  restless  spirits

[39]  ^


290  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  X.

received  with  pleasure ;  the  quiet  and  unexciting
method  of  non-action  is  put  away,  and  pleasure
taken  in  ideas  garrulously  expressed.  It  is  this
garrulity  of  speech  which  puts  the  world  in  dis-
order.


PT.  II.  sr.CT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  7^WANG-3ZE.  29 1


BOOK  XI.

Part  II.     Section  IV.

3ai  Yu,  or  'Letting  Be,  and  Exercising  For-
bearance \'

I,  I  have  heard  of  letting  the  world  be,  and
exercising  forbearance  ;  I  have  not  heard  of  govern-
ing the  world.  Letting  be  is  from  the  fear  that
men,  (when  interfered  with),  will  carry  their  nature
beyond  its  normal  condition ;  exercising  forbearance
is  from  the  fear  that  men,  (when  not  so  dealt  with),
will  alter  the  characteristics  of  their  nature.  When
all  men  do  not  carry  their  nature  beyond  its  normal
condition,  nor  alter  its  characteristics,  the  good
government  of  the  world  is  secured.

Formerly,  Yao's  government  of  the  world  made
men  look  joyful  ;  but  when  they  have  this  joy  in
their  nature,  there  is  a  want  of  its  (proper)
placidity.  The  government  of  the  world  by  A'ieh,
(on  the  contrary),  made  men  look  distressed ;  but
when  their  nature  shows  the  symptoms  of  distress,
there  is  a  want  of  its  (proper)  contentment.  The
want  of  placidity  and  the  want  of  contentment  are
contrary  to  the  character  (of  the  nature) ;  and  where
this  obtains,  it  is  impossible  that  any  man  or  state
should  anywhere  abide  long.  Are  men  exceedingly
joyful  ? — the  Yang  or  element  of  expansion  in  them
is    too    much    developed.      Are    they    exceedingly

^  See  pp.  142,  143.
U  2


292  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xr.

irritated? — the  Yin  or  opposite  element  is  too
much  developed.  When  those  elements  thus  pre-
dominate in  men,  (it  is  as  if)  the  four  seasons
were  not  to  come  (at  their  proper  times),  and  the
harmony  of  cold  and  heat  were  not  to  be  main-
tained ; — would  there  not  result  injury  to  the  bodies
of  men  ?  Men's  joy  and  dissatisfaction  are  made  to
arise  where  they  ought  not  to  do  so ;  their  move-
ments are  all  uncertain  ;  they  lose  the  mastery  of
their  thoughts  ;  they  stop  short  midway,  and  do  not
finish  what  they  have  begun.  In  this  state  of
things  the  world  begins  to  have  lofty  aims,  and
jealous  dislikes,  ambitious  courses,  and  fierce  ani-
mosities, and  then  we  have  actions  like  those  of  the
robber  A'ih,  or  of  3^"g'  (Shan)  and  Shih  (3hiu)^.
If  now  the  whole  world  were  taken  to  reward  the
good  it  would  not  suffice,  nor  w^ould  it  be  possible
with,  it  to  punish  the  bad.  Thus  the  world,  great
as  it  is,  not  sufficing  for  rewards  and  punishments,
from  the  time  of  the  three  dynasties  downwards,
there  has  been  nothinof  but  bustle  and  excitement.
Always  occupied  with  rewards  and  punishments,
what  leisure  have  men  had  to  rest  in  the  instincts
of  the  nature  with  which  they  are  endowed  ?

2.  Moreover,  delight  in  the  power  of  vision  leads


^  I  supply  the  '  it  is  as  if,'  after  the  example  of  the  critic  Lu  Shu-
X'ih,  who  here   introduces  a  ^^  in  his  commentary  (^^  [7^   0^

'O  ^L  ^P  ^^  j^  "2r  "TT)-  What  the  text  seems  to  state  as  a
fact  is  only  an  illustration.  Compare  the  concluding  paragraphs
in  all  the  Sections  and  Parts  of  the  fourth  Book  of  the  Li  A^i.

^  Our  moral  instincts  protest  against  Taoism  which  thus  places
in  the  same  category  such  sovereignjs  as  Yao  and  Aleh,  and  such
men  as  the  brigand  A'ih  and  Bang  and  Shih.


PT.  II.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  il'WANG-SZE.  29  ^^


to  excess  in  the  pursuit  of  (ornamental)  colours ;
delight  in  the  power  of  hearing,  to  excess  in  seeking
(the  pleasures  of)  sound ;  delight  in  benevolence
tends  to  disorder  that  virtue  (as  proper  to  the
nature) ;  delight  in  righteousness  sets  the  man  in
opposition  to  what  is  right  in  reason  ;  delight  in  (the
practice  of)  ceremonies  is  helpful  to  artful  forms  ;
delight  in  music  leads  to  voluptuous  airs  ;  delight
in  sageness  is  helpful  to  ingenious  contrivances ;
delight  in  knowledge  contributes  to  fault-finding.
If  all  men  were  to  rest  in  the  instincts  of  their
nature,  to  keep  or  to  extinguish  these  eight  delights
might  be  a  matter  of  indifference  ;  but  if  they  will
not  rest  in  those  instincts,  then  those  eight  delights
begin  to  be  imperfectly  and  unevenly  developed  or
violently  suppressed,  and  the  world  is  thrown  into
disorder.  But  when  men  begin  to  honour  them,
and  to  long  for  them,  how  great  is  the  deception
practised  on  the  world!  And  not  only,  when  (a
performance  of  them)  is  once  over,  do  they  not
have  done  with  them,  but  they  prepare  themselves
(as)  with  fasting  to  describe  them,  they  seem  to
kneel  reverentially  when  they  bring  them  forward,
and  they  go  through  them  with  the  excitements  of
music  and  singing;  and  then  what  can  be  done
(to  remedy  the  evil  of  them)  ?  Therefore  the
superior  man,  who  feels  himself  constrained  to  en-
gage in  the  administration  of  the  world  will  find  it
his  best  w^ay  to  do  nothing \  In  (that  policy  of)
doine  nothinor  he  can  rest  in  the  instincts  of  the
nature  with  which  he  is  endowed.  Hence  he  who
will    administer    (the    government    of)    the    world


^  Here  is  the  Taoistic  meaning  of  the  title  of  this  Book.


294  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XI,

honouring  it  as  he  honours  his  own  person,  may
have  that  government  committed  to  him,  and  he
who  will  administer  it  lovinof  it  as  he  loves  his  own
person,  may  have  it  entrusted  to  him  ^  Therefore,
if  the  superior  man  will  keep  (the  faculties  lodged
in)  his  five  viscera  unemployed,  and  not  display  his
powers  of  seeing  and  hearing,  while  he  is  motionless
as  a  representative  of  the  dead,  his  dragon-like
presence  will  be  seen ;  while  he  is  profoundly  silent,
the  thunder  (of  his  words)  will  resound ;  while  his
movements  are  (unseen)  like  those  of  a  spirit,  all
heavenly  influences  will  follow  them ;  while  he  is
(thus)  unconcerned  and  does  nothing,  his  genial
influence  will  attract  and  gather  all  things  round
him  : — what  leisure  has  he  to  do  anything  more  for
the  government  of  the  world  ?

3.  3^"^ui  KhW^  asked  Lao  Tan,  saying,  '  If  you  do
not  govern  the  world,  how  can  you  make  men's
minds  good  ? '  The  reply  was,  '  Take  care  how  you
meddle  with  and  disturb  men's  minds.  The  mind,
if  pushed  about,  gets  depressed ;  if  helped  forward,
it  gets  exalted.  Now  exalted,  now  depressed,  here
it  appears  as  a  prisoner,  and  there  as  a  wrathful  fury.
(At  one  time)  it  becomes  pliable  and  soft,  yielding
to  what  is  hard  and  strong ;  (at  another),  it  is  sharp
as  the  sharpest  corner,  fit  to  carve  or  chisel  (stone
or  jade).  Now  it  is  hot  as  a  scorching  fire,  and  anon
it  is  cold  as  ice.  It  is  so  swift  that  while  one  is
bending  down  and  lifting  up  his  head,  it  shall  twice


^  A  quotation,  but  without  any  indication  that  it  is  so,  from  the
Tao  Teh  A'ing,  ch.  13.

^  Probably  an  imaginary  personage.


PT.  II.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^-WANG-BZE.  295


have  put  forth  a  soothing  hand  beyond  the  four  seas.
Resthig,  it  is  still  as  a  deep  abyss  ;  moving,  it  is  like
one  of  the  bodies  in  the  sky ;  in  its  resolute  haughti-
ness, it  refuses  to  be  bound ; — such  is  the  mind  of
man  ^  !'

Anciently,  Hwang-Ti  was  the  first  to  meddle  with
and  disturb  the  mind  of  man  with  his  benevolence
and  righteousness  -.  After  him,  Yao  and  Shun  wore
their  thiohs  bare  and  the  hair  off  the  calves  of  their
legs,  in  their  labours  to  nourish  the  bodies  of  the
people.  They  toiled  painfully  with  all  the  powers
in  their  five  viscera  at  the  practice  of  their  benevo-
lence and  righteousness  ;  they  tasked  their  blood
and  breath  to  make  out  a  code  of  laws  ; — and  after
all  they  were  unsuccessful.  On  this  Yao  sent  away
Hwan  Tau  to  AV^ung  hill,  and  (the  Chiefs  of)  the
Three  Miao  to  San-wei,  and  banished  the  Minister  of
Works  to  the  Dark  Capital  ;  so  unequal  had  they
been  to  cope  with  the  world  ^  Then  we  are  carried
on  to  the  kings  of  the  Three  (dynasties),  when  the
world  was  in  a  state  of  great  distraction.  Of  the
lowest  type  of  character  there  were  A'ieh  and  A'ih  ;
of  a  higher  type  there  were  S^ng  (Shan)  and  Shih
(3hiu).     At  the  same  time  there  arose  the  classes  of


^  I  must  suppose  that  the  words  of  Lao-jze  stop  here,  and  that
what  follows  is  from  A%ang-jze  himself,  down  to  the  end  of  the
paragraph.  We  cannot  have  Lao-jze  referring  to  men  later  than
himself,  and  quoting  from  his  own  Book.

2  Hitherto  Yao  and  Shun  have  appeared  as  the  first  disturbers
of  the  rule  of  the  Tao  by  their  benevolence  and  righteousness.
Here  that  innovation  is  carried  further  back  to  Hwang-Ti.

^  See  these  parties,  and  the  way  they  were  dealt  with,  in  the  Shu
King,  Part  II,  Book  I,  3.  The  punishment  of  them  is  there
ascribed  to  Shun ;  but  Yao  was  still  alive,  and  Shun  was  acting  as
his  viceroy.


296  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XI,

the  Literati  and  the  Mohists.     Hereupon,  compla-
cency in,  and  hatred  of,  one  another  produced  mutual
suspicions ;  the  stupid  and  the  wise  imposed  on  one
another ;    the  good  and   the  bad    condemned   one
another;  the  boastful  and  the  sincere  interchanged
their  recriminations  ; — and  the  world  fell  into  decay.
Views  as  to  what  was  greatly  virtuous  did  not  agree,
and  the  nature  with  its  endowments  became  as  if
shrivelled  by  fire  or  carried  away  by  a  flood.  All  were
eager  for  knowledge,  and  the  people  were  exhausted
with   their  searchings  (after  what  was  good).      On
this  the  axe  and  the  saw  were  brought  into  play  ;
guilt  was  determined  as  by  the  plumb-line  and  death
inflicted  ;    the   hammer  and   gouge   did  their  work.
The  world  fell  into  great  disorder,  and  presented  the
appearance  of  a  jagged  mountain  ridge.     The  crime
to  which   all   was  due  was  the  meddling  with  and
disturbing-  men's  minds.      The  effect  was  that  men
of  ability  and  worth  lay  concealed  at  the  foot  of  the
crags  of  mount  Thai,  and  princes  of  ten  thousand
chariots  were  anxious  and  terrified  in  their  ancestral
temples.      In  the  present  age  those  who  have  been
put  to  death  in  various  ways  lie  thick  as  if  pillowed  on
each  other ;  those  who  are  wearing  the  cangue  press
on  each  other  (on  the  roads) ;  those  who  are  suffer-
ing the  bastinado  can  see  each  other  (all  over  the
land).     And  now  the  Literati  and  the  Mohists  begin
to  stand,  on  tiptoe  and  with  bare  arms,  among  the
fettered  and  manacled  crowd  !    Ah  !  extreme  is  their
shamelessness,  and  their  failure  to  see  the  disgrace !
Strange  that  we  should  be  slow  to  recognise  their
sageness  and  wisdom  in  the  bars  of  the  cangue,  and
their  benevolence  and  riofhteousness  in  the  rivets  of
the  fetters  and  handcuffs  !     How  do  we  know  that


PT.  II.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A:WANG-3ZE.  297


5ang  and  Shih  are  not  the  whizzing  arrows  of  A'ieh
and  A^ih  ^  ?  Therefore  it  is  said,  '  AboHsh  sageness
and  cast  away  knowledge,  and  the  world  will  be
brought  to  a  state  of  great  order  -.'

4.  Hwang-Ti  had  been  on  the  throne  for  nineteen
years  ^  and  his  ordinances  were  in  operation  all
through  the  kingdom,  when  he  heard  that  Kwang
K/mng-^zQ  ^  was  living  on  the  summit  of  Khung-
thung^,  and  went  to  see  him.  'I  have  heard,'  he
said,  '  that  you,  Sir,  are  well  acquainted  with  the
perfect  Tao.  I  venture  to  ask  you  what  is  the
essential  thing  in  it.  I  wish  to  take  the  subtlest
influences  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  assist  with  them
the  (growth  of  the)  five  cereals  for  the  (better)
nourishment  of  the  people.  I  also  wish  to  direct
the  (operation  of  the)  Yin  and  Yang,  so  as  to
secure  the  comfort  of  all  livine  beines.  How  shall
I  proceed  to  accomplish  those  objects  ? '  Kwang
AV^ang-^ze  replied,  '  What  you  wish  to  ask  about
is  the  original  substance  of  all  things  *' ;  what  you

^  Compare  this  picture  of  the  times  after  Yao  and  Shun  with
that  given  by  INIencius  in  III,  ii,  ch.  9  et  al.  But  the  conclusions
arrived  at  as  to  the  causes  and  cure  of  their  evils  by  him  and  our
author  are  very  different.

^  A  quotation,  with  the  regular  formula,  from  the  Tao  Teh
King,  ch.  19,  with  some  variation  of  the  text.

^  ?  in  B.C.  2678.

*  Another  imaginary  personage ;  apparently,  a  personification  of
the  Tao.  Some  say  he  was  Lao-^ze, — in  one  of  his  early  states
of  existence;  others  that  he  was  'a  True  Man,'  the  teacher  of
Hwang-Ti.     See  Ko  Hung's  '  Immortals,'  I,  i.

^  Equally  imaginary  is  the  mountain  Khung-thung.  Some
critics  find  a  place  for  it  in  the  province  of  Ho-nan  ;  the  majority
say  it  is  the  highest  point  in  the  constellation  of  the  Great  Bear.

•^  The  original  ether,  undivided,  out  of  which  all  things  were
formed.


298  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xr.


wish  to  have  the  direction  of  is  that  substance  as  it
was  shattered  and  divided  \  According  to  your
government  of  the  world,  the  vapours  of  the  clouds,
before  they  were  collected,  would  descend  in  rain  ;
the  herbs  and  trees  would  shed  their  leaves  before
they  became  yellow ;  and  the  light  of  the  sun  and
moon  would  hasten  to  extinction.  Your  mind  is
that  of  a  flatterer  with  his  plausible  words  ; — it  is
not  fit  that  I  should  tell  you  the  perfect  Tao.'

Hwang-Ti  withdrew,  gave  up  (his  government  of)
the  kingdom^  built  himself  a  solitary  apartment,
spread  in  it  a  mat  of  the  white  mao  grass,  dwelt  in  it
unoccupied  for  three  months,  and  then  went  again  to
seek  an  interview  with  (the  recluse).  Kwang  AV^ang-
jze  was  then  lying  down  with  his  head  to  the  south.
Hwang-Ti,  with  an  air  of  deferential  submission,
went  forward  on  his  knees,  twice  bowed  low  with  his
face  to  the  ground,  and  asked  him,  saying,  *  I  have
heard  that  you.  Sir,  are  well  acquainted  with  the
perfect  Tao; — I  venture  to  ask  how  I  should  rule
my  body,  in  order  that  it  may  continue  for  a  long
time.'  Kwang  A7^ang-jze  hastily  rose,  and  said,  '  A
good  question  !  Come  and  I  will  tell  you  the  per-
fect Tao.  Its  essence  is  (surrounded  with)  the
deepest  obscurity;  its  highest  reach  is  in  darkness
and  silence.  There  is  nothinof  to  be  seen  ;  nothingf
to  be  heard.  When  it  holds  the  spirit  in  its  arms
in  stillness,  then  the  bodily  form  of  itself  will  become
correct.  You  must  be  still ;  you  must  be  pure  ;
not  subjecting  your  body  to  toil,  not  agitating  your
vital   force ; — then   you  may  live   for  long.     When

^  The  same  ether,  now  in  motion,  now  at  rest,  divided  into  the
Yin  and  Yang.


PT,  ir.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  299

your  eyes  see  nothing,  your  ears  hear  nothhig,  and
your  mind  knows  nothing,  your  spirit  will  keep  your
body,  and  the  body  will  live  long.  Watch  over  what
is  within  you,  shut  up  the  avenues  that  connect  you
with  what  is  external ; — much  knowledge  is  perni-
cious. I  (will)  proceed  with  you  to  the  summit  of
the  Grand  Brilliance,  where  we  come  to  the  source
of  the  bright  and  expanding  (element)  ;  I  will  enter
with  you  the  gate  of  the  Deepest  Obscurity,  where
we  come  to  the  source  of  the  dark  and  repressing
(element).  There  heaven  and  earth  have  their  con-
trollers ;  there  the  Yin  and  Yang  have  their  Reposi-
tories. Watch  over  and  keep  your  body,  and  all
things  will  of  themselves  give  it  vigour.  I  maintain
the  (original)  unity  (of  these  elements),  and  dwell  in
the  harmony  of  them.  In  this  way  I  have  cultivated
myself  for  one  thousand  and  two  hundred  years,  and
my  bodily  form  has  undergone  no  decay  ^'

Hwang-Ti  twice  bowed  low  with  his  head  to  the
ground,  and  said,  '  In  Kwang  AV/ang-^ze  we  have  an
example  of  what  is  called  Heaven^.'  The  other  said,
'  Come,  and  I  will  tell  you  : — (The  perfect  Tao)  is
something  inexhaustible,  and  yet  men  all  think  it
has  an  end ;  it  is  something  unfathomable,  and  yet
men  all  think  its  extreme  limit  can  be  reached.  He
who  attains  to  my  Tao,  if  he  be  in  a  high  position,
will  be  one  of  the  August  ones,  and  in  a  low  posi-
tion, will  be  a  king.  He  who  fails  in  attaining  it,
in  his  highest  attainment  will  see  the  light,  but  will

^  It  seems  very  clear  here  that  the  earliest  Taoism  taught  that
the  cultivation  of  the  Tao  tended  to  prolong  and  preserve  the  bodily
life.

-  A  remarkable,  but  not  a  singular,  instance  of  ^wang-jze's  appli-
cation of  the  name  '  Heaven.'


o


OO  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XT.


descend  and  be  of  die  Earth.  At  present  all  things
are  produced  from  the  Earth  and  return  to  the  Earth.
Therefore  I  will  leave  you,  and  enter  the  gate  of  the
Unending,  to  enjoy  myself  in  the  fields  of  the  Illi-
mitable. I  will  blend  my  light  with  that  of  the  sun
and  moon,  and  will  endure  while  heaven  and  earth
endure.  If  men  agree  with  my  views,  I  will  be
unconscious  of  it ;  if  they  keep  far  apart  from  them,
I  will  be  unconscious  of  it ;  they  may  all  die,  and  I
will  abide  alone  ^ ! '

5.  Ylin  K'mng^,  rambling  to  the  east,  having  been
borne  along  on  a  gentle  breeze  ^,  suddenly  encoun-
tered Hung  Mung  -,  who  was  rambling  about,  slap-
ping his  buttocks  ^  and  hopping  like  a  bird.  Amazed
at  the  sight,  Yiin  Alang  stood  reverentially,  and
said  to  the  other,  '  Venerable  Sir,  who  are  you  ?  and
why  are  you  doing  this  ? '  Hung  Mung  went  on
slapping  his  buttocks  and  hopping  like  a  bird,  but
replied,  '  I  am  enjoying  myself.'    Yun  K'mng  said,  '  I


^  A  very  difificult  sentence,  in  interpreting  which  there  are  great
differences  among  the  critics.

^  I  have  preferred  to  retain  Yiin  ^lang  and  Hung  Mung  as  if
they  were  the  surnames  and  names  of  two  personages  here  intro-
duced. Mr.  Balfour  renders  them  by  '  The  Spirit  of  the  Clouds,'
and  '  Mists  of  Chaos.'  The  Spirits  of  heaven  or  the  sky  have  still
their  place  in  the  Sacrificial  Canon  of  China,  as  '  the  Cloud-
Master,  the  Rain-Master,  the  Baron  of  the  Winds,  and  the  Thunder
]\Iaster.'  Hung  Mung,  again,  is  a  name  for  '  the  Great  Ether,'  or,
as  Dr.  Medhurst  calls  it,  '  the  Primitive  Chaos.'

^  Literally,  'passing  by  a  branch  of  Fu-yao; '  but  we  find  fu-
yao  in  Book  I,  meaning  'a  whirlwind.'  The  term  'branch'  has
made  some  critics  explain  it  here  as  '  the  name  of  a  tree,'  which  is
inadmissible.  I  have  translated  according  to  the  view  of  Lu
Shu-X'ih.

*  Or  '  stomach,' — according  to  another  reading.


PT.  II.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  i'WANG-3ZE.  3OI

wish  to  ask  you  a  question.'  Hung  Mung  lifted  up
his  head,  looked  at  the  stranger,  and  said,  '  Pooh  ! '
Yun  Alang,  however,  continued,  '  The  breath  of
heaven  is  out  of  harmony ;  the  breath  of  earth  is
bound  up ;  the  six  elemental  influences  ^  do  not  act
in  concord  ;  the  four  seasons  do  not  observe  their
proper  times.  Now  I  wish  to  blend  together  the
essential  qualities  of  those  six  influences  in  order  to
nourish  all  living  things  ; — how  shall  I  go  about  it  ?  '
Hung  Mung  slapped  his  buttocks,  hopped  about,  and
shook  his  head,  saying,  '  I  do  not  know ;  I  do  not
know ! '

Yun  A^iang  could  not  pursue  his  question;  but  three
years  afterwards,  when  (again)  rambling  in  the  east,
as  he  was  passing  by  the  wild  of  Sung,  he  happened
to  meet  Hung  Mung.  Delighted  with  the  ren-
contre, he  hastened  to  him,  and  said,  '  Have  you
forgotten  me,  O  Heaven  ?     Have  you  forgotten  me,

0  Heaven^?'  At  the  same  time,  he  bowed  twice
with  his  head  to  the  ground,  wishing  to  receive  his
instructions.  Hung  Mung  said,  'Wandering  listlessly
about,  I  know  not  what  I  seek  ;  carried  on  by  a  wild
impulse,  I  know  not  where  I  am  going.  I  wander
about  in  the  strange  m.anner  (which  you  have  seen),
and  see  that  nothing  proceeds  without  method  and
order ^; — what  more  should  I  know?'  Ytin  A'iang
replied,  '  I  also  seem  carried  on  by  an  aimless  influ-
ence, and  yet  the  people  follow  me  wherever  1  go.

1  cannot  help  their  doing  so.      But  now  as  they  thus


^  Probably,  theyin,  the  yang,  wind,  rain,  darkness,  and  light  ;-
see  Mayers,  p.  323.

^  See  Introduction,  pp.  17,  18.
^  Compare  in  Book  XXIII,  par.  i.


o


02  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XI.


imitate  me,  I  wish  to  hear  a  word  from  you  (in  the
case).'  The  other  said,  '  What  disturbs  the  regular
method  of  Heaven,  comes  into  colHsion  with  the
nature  of  things,  prevents  the  accompHshment  of
the  mysterious  (operation  of)  Heaven,  scatters  the
herds  of  animals,  makes  the  birds  all  sing  at  night,
is  calamitous  to  vegetation,  and  disastrous  to  all
insects ; — all  this  is  owing,  I  conceive,  to  the  error
of  governing  men.'  '  What  then,'  said  Yun  ATiang,
'shall  I  do  ?'  'Ah,'  said  the  other,  'you  will  only
injure  them !  I  will  leave  you  in  my  dancing  way,
and  return  to  my  place.'  Ylin  A'iang  rejoined,  '  It
has  been  a  difficult  thing  to  get  this  meeting  with
you,  O  Heaven !  I  should  like  to  hear  from  you  a
word  (more).'  Hung  Mung  said,  '  Ah !  your  mind
(needs  to  be)  ncmrished.  Do  you  only  take  the
position  of  doing  nothing,  and  things  will  of  them-
selves become  transformed.  Neglect  your  body ;
cast  out  from  you  your  power  of  hearing  and  sight ;
forget  what  you  have  in  common  with  things ;  cul-
tivate a  grand  similarity  with  the  chaos  of  the  plastic
ether ;  unloose  your  mind  ;  set  your  spirit  free ;  be
still  as  if  you  had  no  soul.  Of  all  the  multitude  of
things  every  one  returns  to  its  root.  Every  one  re-
turns to  its  root,  and  does  not  know  (that  it  is  doing
so).  They  all  are  as  in  the  state  of  chaos,  and
during  all  their  existence  they  do  not  leave  it\     If

*  They  never  show  any  will  of  their  own. — On  the  names  Yiin
^ang  and  Hung  Mung,  Lu  Shu-X'ih  makes  the  following  re-
marks : — '  These  were  not  men,  and  yet  they  are  introduced  here
as  questioning  and  answering  each  other ;  showing  us  that  our
author  frames  and  employs  his  surnames  and  names  to  serve  his
own  purpose.  Those  names  and  the  speeches  made  by  the  parties
are  all  from  him.  We  must  believe  that  he  introduces  Confucius,
Yao,  and  Shun  just  in  the  same  way.'


PT.  II.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  JsTWANG-SZE.  303


they  knew  (that  they  were  returning  to  their  root),
they  would  be  (consciously)  leaving  it.  They  do
not  ask  its  name ;  they  do  not  seek  to  spy  out  their
nature ;  and  thus  it  is  that  things  come  to  life  of
themselves.'

Yiin  A^iang  said,  '  Heaven,  you  have  conferred  on
me  (the  knowledge  of)  your  operation,  and  revealed
to  me  the  mystery  of  it.  All  my  life  I  had  been
seeking  for  it,  and  now  I  have  obtained  it'  He
then  bowed  twice,  with  his  head  to  the  ground,  arose,
took  his  leave,  and  walked  away.

6.  The  ordinary  men  of  the  world  ^  all  rejoice  in
men's  agreeing  with  themselves,  and  dislike  men's
being  different  from  themselves.  This  rejoicing  and
this  dislike  arise  from  their  being  bent  on  making
themselves  distinguished  above  all  others.  But
have  they  who  have  this  object  at  heart  so  risen  out
above  all  others  ?  They  depend  on  them  to  rest
quietly  (in  the  position  which  they  desire),  and  their
knowledge  is  not  equal  to  the  multitude  of  the  arts
of  all  those  others  - !  When  they  wish  again  to  ad-
minister a  state  for  its  ruler,  they  proceed  to  employ
all  the  methods  which  the  kings  of  the  three  dynasties
considered  profitable  without  seeing  the  evils  of  such
a  course.  This  is  to  make  the  state  depend  on  the
peradventure  of  their  luck.  But  how  seldom  it  is
that  that  peradventure  does  not  issue  in  the  ruin  of
the  state !  Not  once  in  ten  thousand  instances  wall
such  men  preserve  a  state.  Not  once  will  they  suc-
ceed, and  in  more  than  ten  thousand  cases  will  they

^  Meaning  eccentric  thinkers  not  Taoists,  like  Hui-^ze,  Kung-
sun  Lung,  and  others.

^  The  construing  and  connexion  of  this  sentence  are  puzzling.


304  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XI.

ruin  it,  Alas  that  the  possessors  of  territory, — {the
rulers  of  states), — should  not  know  the  danger  (of
employing  such  men) !  Now  the  possessors  of  terri-
tory possess  the  greatest  of  (all)  things.  Possessing
the  greatest  of  all  things, — (possessing,  that  is,  men),
— they  should  not  try  to  deal  with  them  as  (simply)
things.  And  it  is  he  who  is  not  a  thing  (himself)
that  is  therefore  able  to  deal  with  (all)  things  as
they  severally  require.  When  (a  ruler)  clearly  under-
stands that  he  who  should  so  deal  with  all  thines  is
not  a  thing  himself,  will  he  only  rule  the  kingdom  ?
He  will  go  out  and  in  throughout  the  universe  (at
his  pleasure) ;  he  will  roam  over  the  nine  regions  \
alone  in  going,  alone  in  coming.  Him  we  call  the
sole  possessor  (of  this  ability) ;  and  the  sole  possessor
(of  this  ability)  is  what  is  called  the  noblest  of  all.

The  teaching  of  (this)  great  man  goes  forth  as  the
shadow  from  the  substance,  as  the  echo  responds  to
the  sound.  When  questioned,  he  responds,  ex-
hausting (from  his  own  stores)  all  that  is  in  the
(enquirer's)  mind,  as  if  front  to  front  with  all  under
heaven.  His  resting-place  gives  forth  no  sound ;
his  sphere  of  activity  has  no  restriction  of  place.
He  conducts  every  one  to  his  proper  goal,  proceed-
ing to  it  and  bringing  him  back  to  it  as  by  his  own
movement.  His  movements  have  no  trace;  his
going  forth  and  his  re-enterings  have  no  deviation ;
his  course  is  like  that  of  the  sun  without  beeinnine
(or  ending).

^  '  The  nine  regions  '  generally  means  the  nine  provinces  into
which  the  Great  Yii  divided  the  kingdom.  As  our  author  is  here
describing  the  grand  Taoist  ruler  after  his  fashion  in  his  relation  to
the  universe,  we  must  give  the  phrase  a  wider  meaning;  but  I  have
not  met  with  any  attempt  to  define  it.


PT.  II.  SECT.  IV.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  305

If  you  would  praise  or  discourse  about  his  per-
sonality, he  is  united  with  the  great  community  of
existences.  He  belongs  to  that  great  community,
and  has  no  individual  self.  Having  no  individual
self,  how  should  he  have  anything  that  can  be  called
his  ?  If  you  look  at  those  who  have  what  they  call
their  own,  they  are  the  superior  men  of  former  times  ;
if  you  look  at  him  who  has  nothing  of  the  kind,  he
is  the  friend  of  heaven  and  earth.

7.  Mean,  and  yet  demanding  to  be  allowed  their
free  course  ; — such  are  Things.  Low,  and  yet  re-
quiring to  be  relied  on ; — such  are  the  People.
Hidden  (as  to  their  issues),  and  yet  requiring  to  be
done  ; — such  are  Affairs.  Coarse,  and  yet  necessary
to  be  set  forth  ; — such  are  Laws.  Remote,  and  yet
necessary  to  have  dwelling  (in  one's  self) ; — such  is
Righteousness.  Near,  and  yet  necessary  to  be
widely  extended  ; — such  is  Benevolence.  Restrictive,
and  yet  necessary  to  be  multiplied ; — such  are  Cere-
monies. Lodged  in  the  centre,  and  yet  requiring  to
be  exalted  ; — such  is  Virtue.  Always  One,  and  yet
requiring  to  be  modified  ; — such  is  the  Tao.  Spirit-
like, and  yet  requiring  to  be  exercised ;— such  is
Heaven  ^

Therefore  the  sages  contemplated  Heaven,  but
did  not  assist  It.  They  tried  to  perfect  their  virtue,
but  did  not  allow  it  to  embarrass  them.  They  pro-
ceeded according  to  the  Tao,  but  did  not  lay  any
plans.  They  associated  benevolence  (with  all  their
doings),  but  did  not  rely  on  it.    They  pursued  right-

^  All  these  sentences  are  understood  to  show  that  even  in  the
non-action  of  the  Master  of  the  Tao  there  are  still  things  he
must  do.

[39]  X


306  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XI.


0


eousness  extensively,  but  did  not  try  to  accumulate
it.  They  responded  to  ceremonies,  but  did  not  con-
ceal (their  opinion  as  to  the  troublesomeness  of
them).  They  engaged  in  affairs  as  they  occurred,
and  did  not  decline  them.  They  strove  to  render
their  laws  uniform,  but  (feared  that  confusion)  might
arise  from  them.  They  relied  upon  the  people,  and
did  not  set  light  by  them.  They  depended  on  things
as  their  instruments,  and  did  not  discard  them  ^

They  did  not  think  things  equal  to  what  they  em-
ployed them  for,  but  yet  they  did  not  see  that  they
could  do  without  employing  them.  Those  who  do
not  understand  Heaven  are  not  pure  in  their  virtue.
Those  who  do  not  comprehend  the  Tao  have  no
course  which  they  can  pursue  successfully.  Alas  for
them  who  do  not  clearly  understand  the  Tao  !

What  is  it  that  we  call  the  Tao  -  ?  There  is  the
Tao,  or  Way  of  Heaven;  and  there  is  the  Tao,  or
Way  of  Man.  Doing  nothing  and  yet  attracting  all
honour  is  the  Way  of  Heaven ;  Doing  and  being
embarrassed  thereby  is  the  Way  of  Man.  It  is  the
Way  of  Heaven  that  plays  the  part  of  the  Lord  ;
it  is  the  Way  of  Man  that  plays  the  part  of  the
Servant.  The  Way  of  Heaven  and  the  Way  of
Man  are  far  apart.  They  should  be  clearly  dis-
tinguished from  each  other.

^  Antithetic  to  the  previous  sentences,  and  showing  that  what
such  a  Master  does  does  not  interfere  with  his  non-action.

^  This  question  and  what  follows  shows  clearly  enough  that,  even
with  AVang-^ze,  the  character  Tao  {^)  retained  its  proper
meaning  of  the  Way  or  Course.


PT.  II.  SECT.  V.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  307


BOOK  XII.
Part  II.     Section  V.

Thien  Ti,  or  'Heaven  and   Earths'

I.  Notwithstanding  the  greatness  of  heaven  and
earth,  their  transforming  power  proceeds  from  one
lathe  ;  notwithstanding  the  number  of  the  myriad
things,  the  government  of  them  is  one  and  the
same  ;  notwithstanding  the  multitude  of  mankind,
the  lord  of  them  is  their  (one)  ruler-.  The  ruler's
(course)  should  proceed  from  the  qualities  (of
the  Tao)  and  be  perfected  by  Heaven'',  when  it
is  so,  it  is  called  '  Mysterious  and  Sublime.'  The
ancients  ruled  the  world  by  doing  nothing ; — simply
by  this  attribute  of  Heaven ^

If  we  look  at  their  words  ^  in  the  light  of  the  Tao,
(we  see  that)  the  appellation  for  the  ruler  of  the

^  See  pp.  143,  144.

-  Implying  that  that  ruler,  '  the  Son  of  Heaven,'  is  only  one.

^  '  Heaven  '  is  here  defined  as  meaning  '  Non-action,  what  is  of

itself  (^  ^  Q  PM)'>'  ^^^  ^^^  (fS)  ^^  ^'^^  virtue,  or  qualities  of
the  Tao  ; — see  the  first  paragraph  of  the  next  Book.

*  This  sentence  gives  the  thesis,  or  subject-matter  of  the  whole
Book,  which  the  author  never  loses  sight  of.

®  Perhaps  we  should  translate  here,  'They  looked  at  their  words,'
referring  to  '  the  ancient  rulers.'  So  Gabelentz  construes  : — '  Dem
Tao  gemass  betrachteten  sie  die  reden.'  The  meaning  that  I  have
given  is  substantially  the  same.  The  term  '  words '  occasions  a
difficulty.  I  understand  it  here,  with  most  of  the  critics,  as
^  ^  ^' ,  '  the  words  of  appellation.'

X  2


308  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.XII.

world  ^  was  correctly  assigned  ;  if  we  look  in  the
same  light  at  the  distinctions  which  they  instituted,
(we  see  that)  the  separation  of  ruler  and  ministers
was  right ;  if  we  look  at  the  abilities  which  they
called  forth  in  the  same  light,  (we  see  that  the
duties  of)  all  the  offices  were  well  performed  ;  and
if  we  look  generally  in  the  same  way  at  all  things,
(we  see  that)  their  response  (to  this  rule)  w^as  com-
plete^. Therefore  that  which  pervades  (the  action
of)  Heaven  and  Earth  is  (this  one)  attribute  ;  that
which  operates  in  all  things  is  (this  one)  course  ;
that  by  which  their  superiors  govern  the  people  is
the  business  (of  the  various  departments) ;  and  that
by  which  aptitude  is  given  to  ability  is  skill.  The
skill  was  manifested  in  all  the  (departments  of)
business ;  those  departments  were  all  administered
in  righteousness  ;  the  righteousness  was  (the  outflow
of)  the  natural  virtue  ;  the  virtue  was  manifested
according  to  the  Tao;  and  the  Tao  was  according
to  (the  pattern  of)  Heaven.

Hence  it  is  said  %  'The  ancients  who  had  the
nourishment  of  the  world  wished  for  nothing  and
the  world  had  enough ;  they  did  nothing  and  all
things  were  transformed  ;  their  stillness  was  abysmal,
and  the  people  were  all  composed.'  The  Record
says^,  'When  the  one  (Tao)  pervades  it,  all  business


''  Weaning,  probably,  his  appellation  as  Thien  3ze,  '  the  Son  of
Heaven.'

■^  That  is,  '  they  responded  to  the  Tao,'  without  any  constraint
but  the  example  of  their  rulers.

"  Here  there  would  seem  to  be  a  quotation  wliich  I  have  not
been  able  to  trace  to  its  source.

*  This  '  Record '  is  attributed  to  Lao-^ze ;  but  we  know  nothing
of  it.     In  illustration  of  the  sentiment  in  the  sentence,  the  critics


PT.  11.  SECT.  V.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  309


is  completed.     When  the  mind  gets  to  be  free  from
all  aim,  even  the  Spirits  submit.'

2.  The  Master  said^,  '  It  is  the  Tao  that  over-
spreads and  sustains  all  things.  How  great  It  is  in
Its  overflowing  influence!  The  Superior  man  ought
by  all  means  to  remove  from  his  mind  (all  that  is  con-
trary to  It).  Acting  without  action  is  what  is  called
Heaven(-like).  Speech  coming  forth  of  itself  is
what  is  called  (a  mark  of)  the  (true)  Virtue.  Loving
men  and  benefitino-  thinos  is  what  is  called  Benevo-
lence.  Seeing  wherein  things  that  are  different  yet
agree  is  what  is  called  being  Great.  Conduct  free
from  the  ambition  of  beino-  distinouished  above
others  is  what  is  called  being  Generous.  The  pos-
session in  himself  of  a  myriad  points  of  dift'erence
is  what  is  called  being  Rich.  Therefore  to  hold
fast  the  natural  attributes  is  what  is  called  the
Guiding  Line  (of  government)  - ;  the  perfecting  of
those  attributes  is  what  is  called  its  Establishment ;
accordance  with  the  Tao  is  what  is  called  beins:
Complete ;  and  not  allowing  anything  external  to
affect  the  will  is  what  is  called  being  Perfect.  When
the  Superior  man  understands  these  ten  things,
he  keeps  all  matters  as  it  were  sheathed  in  himself,
showing  the  greatness  of  his  mind ;  and  through
the  outflow  of  his  doings,  all  things  move  (and  come
to  him).  Being  such,  he  lets  the  gold  lie  hid  in  the
hill,  and  the   pearls  in  the  deep ;   he  considers  not

refer  to  par.  34  in  the  fourth  Appendix  to  the  Yi  King;  but  it  is
not  to  the  point.

1  Who  is  '  the  IMaster '  here  ?  Confucius  ?  or  Lao-jze  ?  I  think
the  latter,  though  sometimes  even  our  author  thus  denominates
Confucius  ; — see  par.  9.

2  .?  the  Tao.


^lO  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xil.

property  or  money  to  be  any  gain  ;  he  keeps  aloof
from  riches  and  honours  ;  he  rejoices  not  in  long  life,
and  grieves  not  for  early  death  ;  he  does  not  account
prosperity  a  glory,  nor  is  ashamed  of  indigence ;  he
would  not  grasp  at  the  gain  of  the  whole  world
to  be  held  as  his  own  private  portion ;  he  would
not  desire  to  rule  over  the  whole  world  as  his  own
private  distinction.  His  distinction  is  in  under-
standing that  all  things  belong  to  the  one  treasury,
and  that  death  and  life  should  be  viewed  in  the
same  way^'

3.  The  Master  said,  '  How  still  and  deep  is  the
place  where  the  Tao  resides!  How  limpid  is  its
purity!  Metal  and  stone  without  It  would  give
forth  no  sound.  They  have  indeed  the  {power  of)
sound  (in  them),  but  if  they  be  not  struck,  they  do
not  emit  it.  Who  can  determine  (the  qualities  that
are  in)  all  things  ?

'  The  man  of  kingly  qualities  holds  on  his  way
unoccupied,  and  is  ashamed  to  busy  himself  with
(the  conduct  of)  affairs.  He  establishes  himself  in
(what  is)  the  root  and  source  (of  his  capacity),  and
his  wisdom  grows  to  be  spirit-like.  In  this  way  his
attributes  become  more  and  more  great,  and  when
his  mind  goes  forth,  whatever  things  come  in  his
way,  it  lays  hold  of  them  (and  deals  with  them).
Thus,  if  there  were  not  the  Tao,  the  bodily  form
would  not  have  life,  and  its  life,  without  the  attri-
butes (of  the  Tao),  would  not  be  manifested.  Is
not  he  who  preserves  the  body  and  gives  the  fullest
development  to  the  life,  who  establishes  the  attri-

^  Balfour  : — '  The  diflference  between  life  and  death  exists  no
more  ; '  Gabelentz  : — '  Sterben  und  Leben  haben  gleiche  Ersch-
einung.'


PT.  II.  SECT.  V.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  ^  I  I


butes  of  the  Tao  and  clearly  displays  It,  possessed
of  kingly  qualities  ?  How  majestic  is  he  in  his
sudden  issuings  forth,  and  in  his  unexpected  move-
ments, when  all  things  follow  him! — This  we  call
the  man  whose  qualities  fit  him  to  rule.

'  He  sees  where  there  is  the  deepest  obscurity ;  he
hears  where  there  is  no  sound.  In  the  midst  of  the
deepest  obscurity,  he  alone  sees  and  can  distinguish
(various  objects)  ;  in  the  midst  of  a  soundless
(abyss),  he  alone  can  hear  a  harmony  (of  notes).
Therefore  where  one  deep  is  succeeded  by  a  greater,
he  can  people  all  with  things  ;  where  one  mysterious
range  is  followed  by  another  that  is  more  so,  he
can  lay  hold  of  the  subtlest  character  of  each.  In
this  way  in  his  intercourse  with  all  things,  while  he
is  farthest  from  having  anything,  he  can  yet  give
to  them  what  they  seek;  while  he  is  always  hurrying
forth,  he  yet  returns  to  his  resting-place ;  now  large,
now  small ;   now  long,  now  short ;   now  distant,  now


near^.


4.  Hwang-Ti,  enjoying  himself  on  the  north  of
the  Red-water,  ascended  to  the  height  of  the
Khwan-lun  (mountain),  and  having  looked  towards
the  south,  was  returning  home,  when  he  lost  his
dark-coloured  pearl  2.  He  employed  Wisdom  to
search  for  it,  but  he  could  not  find  it.  He  employed
(the   clear-sighted)  Li  A'li  to  search  for  it.  but  he


^  I  can  hardly  follow  the  reasoning  of  A%ang-jze  here.  The  whole
of  the  paragraph  is  obscure.  I  have  translated  the  two  concluding
characters  ^0  ]^,  ^s  if  they  were  ^  ^,  after  the  example  of  Lin
Hsi-yi,  whose  edition  of  A wang-jze  was  first  published  in  1261.

^  Meaning  the  Tao.  This  is  not  to  be  got  or  learned  by
wisdom,  or  perspicacity,  or  man's  reasoning.  It  is  instinctive  to
man,  as  the  Heavenly  gift  or  Truth  (^  ^)'


3  I  2  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XII.

could  not  find  it.  He  employed  (the  vehement
debater)  7v'//ieh  A'/^au^  to  search  for  it,  but  he  could
not  find  it.  He  then  employed  Purposeless  \  who
found  it;  on  which  Hwang-Ti  said,  'How  strange
that  it  was  Purposeless  who  was  able  to  find  it ! '

5.  The  teacher  of  Yao  was  Hsti  Yu  ^ ;  of  Hsu
Yu,  Nieh  /^/meh-;  of  Nieh  A'/ziieh,  Wang  !  ^  of
Wang  I,  Phei-i -.  Yao  asked  Hsti  Yu,  saying,  'Is
Nieh  A"/aieh  fit  to  be  the  correlate  of  Heaven^?
(If  you  think  he  is),  I  will  avail  myself  of  the
services  of  Wang  I  to  constrain  him  (to  take  my
place).'  Hsti  Yu  replied,  'Such  a  measure  would
be  hazardous,  and  full  of  peril  to  the  kingdom !
The  character  of  Nieh  AVaieh  is  this; — he  is  acute,
perspicacious,  shrewd  and  knowing,  ready  in  reply,
sharp  in  retort,  and  hasty  ;  his  natural  (endowments)
surpass  those  of  other  men,  but  by  his  human
qualities  he  seeks  to  obtain  the  Heavenly  gift ;
he  exercises  his  discrimination  in  suppressing  his
errors,  but  he  does  not  know  what  is  the  source
from  which  his  errors  arise.  Make  him  the  corre-
late of  Heaven !  He  would  employ  the  human
qualities,  so  that  no  regard  would  be  paid  to  the
Heavenly  gift.  Moreover,  he  would  assign  different
functions  to  the  different  parts  of  the  one  perSon  *.

^  The  meaning  of  the  characters  shows  what  is  the  idea  emblemed
by  this  name ;  and  so  with  Hsiang  Wang, — '  a  Semblance,'  and
'  Nonentity  ;  '  =  '  Mindless,'  '  Purposeless.'

^  All  these  names  have  occurred,  excepting  that  of  Phei-i,  who
heads  Hwang-fu  jMi's  list  of  eminent  Taoists.  We  shall  meet  with
him  again.     He  is  to  be  distinguished  from  Phia-i.

^  '  JMatch  Heaven ; '  that  is,  be  sovereign  below,  as  Heaven
above  ruled  all.

''  We  are  referred  for  the  meaning  of  this  characteristic  to  ^-f"  j]M
J,  in  Bk.  V,  par.  r.


PT.  II.  SECT.  V.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  313

Moreover,  honour  would  be  given  to  knowledge,
and  he  would  have  his  plans  take  effect  with  the
speed  of  fire.  Moreover,  he  would  be  the  slave  of
everything  he  initiated.  Moreover,  he  would  be
embarrassed  by  things.  Moreover,  he  would  be
looking  all  round  for  the  response  of  things  (to  his
measures).  Moreover,  he  would  be  responding  to
the  opinion  of  the  multitude  as  to  what  was  right.
Moreover,  he  would  be  changing  as  things  changed,
and  would  not  begin  to  have  any  principle  of  con-
stancy. How  can  such  a  man  be  fit  to  be  the
correlate  of  Heaven  ?  Nevertheless,  as  there  are
the  smaller  branches  of  a  family  and  the  common
ancestor  of  all  its  branches,  he  might  be  the  father
of  a  branch,  but  not  the  father  of  the  fathers  of  all
the  branches  \  Such  government  (as  he  would
conduct)  would  lead  to  disorder.  It  would  be
calamity  in  one  in  the  position  of  a  minister,  and
ruin  if  he  were  in  the  position  of  the  sovereign.'

6.  Yao  was  looking  about  him  at  Hwa^  the
border-warden  of  which  said,  '  Ha  !  the  sage  !  Let
me  ask  blessings  on  the  sage  !      May  he  live  long  ! '

^  That  is,  Nieh  might  be  a  minister,  but  could  not  be  the
sovereign.  The  phraseology  is  based  on  the  rules  for  the  rise  of
sub-surnames  in  the  same  clan,  and  the  consequent  division  of
clans  under  different  ancestors  ; — see  the  Li  A'i,  Bk.  XIII,  i,  10-14,
and  XIV,  8.

-  'Hwa'  is  evidently  intended  for  the  name  of  a  place,  but
where  it  was  can  hardly  be  determined.  The  genuineness  of  the
whole  paragraph  is  called  in  question;  and  I  pass  it  by,  merely
calling  attention  to  what  the  border-warden  is  made  to  say  about
the  close  of  the  life  of  the  sage  (Taoist),  who  after  living  a  thousand
years,  ascends  among  the  Immortals  ('|^=fll|),  ^^'^^  arrives  at
the  place  of  God,  and  is  free  from  the  three  evils  of  disease,  old
age,  and  death;  or  as  some  say,  after  the  Buddhists,  water,  fire,  and
wind  !


314  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XII.

Yao  said,  '  Hush ! '  but  the  other  went  on,  '  May  the
sage  become  rich  ! '  Yao  (again)  said,  '  Hush  ! '  but
(the  warden)  continued,  '  May  the  sage  have  many
sons ! '  When  Yao  repeated  his  '  Hush,'  the  warden
said,  '  Long  hfe,  riches,  and  many  sons  are  what  men
wish  for ; — how  is  it  that  you  alone  do  not  wish  for
them  ? '  Yao  repHed,  '  Many  sons  bring  many  fears  ;
riches  bring  many  troubles ;  and  long  life  gives
rise  to  many  obloquies.  These  three  things  do  not
help  to  nourish  virtue ;  and  therefore  I  wish  to
decline  them.'  The  warden  rejoined,  '  At  first  I
considered  you  to  be  a  sage ;  now  I  see  in  you  only
a  Superior  man.  Heaven,  in  producing  the  myriads
of  the  people,  is  sure  to  have  appointed  for  them
their  several  offices.  If  you  had  many  sons,  and
gave  them  (all  their)  offices,  what  would  you  have
to  fear  ?  If  you  had  riches,  and  made  other  men
share  them  with  you,  what  trouble  would  you  have  ?
The  sage  finds  his  dwelling  like  the  quail  (without
any  choice  of  its  own),  and  is  fed  like  the  fledgling ;
he  is  like  the  bird  which  passes  on  (through  the
air),  and  leaves  no  trace  (of  its  flight).  When  good
order  prevails  in  the  world,  he  shares  in  the  general
prosperity.  When  there  is  no  such  order,  he  culti-
vates his  virtue,  and  seeks  to  be  unoccupied.  After
a  thousand  years,  tired  of  the  world,  he  leaves  it,
and  ascends  among  the  immortals.  He  mounts  on
the  white  clouds,  and  arrives  at  the  place  of  God.
The  three  forms  of  evil  do  not  reach  him,  his
person  is  always  free  from  misfortune ; — what
obloquy  has  he  to  incur  ? '

With  this  the  border-warden  left  him.  Yao  fol-
lowed him,  saying,  '  I  beg  to  ask —  ; '  but  the  other
said,  '  Begone  ! '


PT.  II.  SECT.  V.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-8ZE.  315

7.  When  Yao  was  ruling  the  world,  Po-Z'/^ang-  3ze-
kao  ^  was  appointed  by  him  prince  of  one  of  the
states.  From  Yao  (afterwards)  the  throne  passed  to
Shim,  and  from  Shun  (again)  to  Yli ;  and  (then)  Po-
Ma.ng  3ze-kao  resigned  his  principality  and  began
to  cultivate  the  ground.  Yli  went  to  see  him,  and
found  him  ploughing  in  the  open  country.  Hurry-
ing to  him,  and  bowing  low  in  acknowledgment  of
his  superiority,  Yii  ihen  stood  up,  and  asked  him,
saying,  '  Formerly,  when  Yao  was  ruling  the  world,
you.  Sir,  were  appointed  prince  of  a  state.  He
gave  his  sovereignty  to  Shun,  and  Shun  gave  his  to
me,  when  you,  Sir,  resigned  your  dignity,  and  are
(now)  ploughing  (here) ; — I  venture  to  ask  the  rea-
son of  your  conduct.'  3ze-kao  said,  '  When  Yao
ruled  the  world,  the  people  stimulated  one  another
(to  what  was  right)  without  his  offering  them  re-
wards, and  stood  in  awe  (of  doing  wrong)  without
his  threatening  them  with  punishments.  Now  you
employ  both  rewards  and  punishments,  and  the
people  notwithstanding  are  not  good.  Their  virtue
will  from  this  time  decay  ;  punishments  will  from  this
time  prevail ;  the  disorder  of  future  ages  will  from
this  time  begin.  Why  do  you,  my  master,  not  go
away,  and  not  interrupt  my  work?'  With  this  he
resumed  his  ploughing  with  his  head  bent  down,  and
did  not  (again)  look  round.

8.  In  the  Grand  Beginning  (of  all  things)  there
was  nothing  in  all  the  vacancy  of  space ;  there  was
nothinor  that  could  be  named".     It  was  in  this  state

^  Some  legends  say  that  this  Po-X7/ang  3ze-kao  was  a  pre-incar-
nation  of  Lao-^ze ;  but  this  paragraph  is  like  the  last,  and  cannot
be  received  as  genuine.

^  This    sentence   is    differently  understood,    according   as  it  is


3l6  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  Xll.

that  there  arose  the  first  existence  ^  ; — the  first  exis-
tence, but  still   without  bodily  shape.      From  this
things  could  then  be  produced,  (receiving)  what  we
call  their  proper  character  ^     That  which  had  no
bodily  shape  was  divided  ^ ;  and  then  without  inter-
mission there  was  what  we  call  the  process  of  con-
ferring*.    (The  two  processes)  continuing  in  opera-
tion, things  were  produced.     As   things  were  com-
pleted, there  were  produced  the  distinguishing  lines
of  each,  which  we  call  the  bodily  shape.     That  shape
was  the  body  preserving  in  it  the  spirit  ^,  and  each
had    its    peculiar    manifestation,   which  we    call    its
Nature.     When  the  Nature  has  been  cultivated,  it
returns  to  its  proper  character  ;  and  when  that  has
been  fully  reached,  there  is  the  same  condition  as  at
the    Beginning.     That  sameness    is    pure  vacancy,
and  the  vacancy  is  great.      It  is  like  the  closing  of
the  beak  and  silencing  the  singing  (of  a  bird).      That
closinof  and  silencino-  is  like  the  union  of  heaven  and
earth  (at  the  beginning)  *'.     The  union,  effected,  as  it

punctuated  ;-:f  M  M,  ^  M  ;g,  or  ^  ilE,  M  :^  M

^.  Each  punctuation  has  its  advocates.  For  myself,  1  can  only
adopt  the  former;  the  other  is  contrary  to  my  idea  of  Chinese
composition.  If  the  author  had  wished  to  be  understood  so,  he
would  have  written  differently,  as,  for  instance,  ffl£  ^^l^  ^^  ^^.

^  Probably,  the  primary  ether,  what  is  called  the  Thai  A'ih.

^  This  sentence  is  anticipatory.

^  Into  what  we  call  the  yin  and  the  yang; — the  same  ether,
now  at  rest,  now  in  motion.

*  The  conferring  of  something  more  than  what  was  material.
By  whom  or  what  ?  By  Heaven ;  the  Taoist  understanding  by
that  term  the  Tao.

^  So  then,  man  consists  of  the  material  body  and  the  immaterial
spirit.

®  The  potential  heaven  and  earth,  not  yet  fashioned  from  the
primal  ether.


PT.  II.  SECT.  V.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-SZE.  317

is,  might  seem  to  indicate  stupidity  or  darkness,  but
it  is  what  we  call  the  '  mysterious  quality'  (existing
at  the  beginning) ;  it  is  the  same  as  the  Grand  Sub-
mission (to  the  Natural  Course).

9.  The  Master  ^  asked  Lao  Tan,  saying,  '  Some
men  regulate  the  Tao  (as  by  a  law),  which  they  have
only  to  follow ; — (a  thing,  they  say,)  is  admissible  or
it  is  inadmissible  ;  it  is  so,  or  it  is  not  so.  (They
are  like)  the  sophists  who  say  that  they  can  dis-
tinguish what  is  hard  and  what  is  white  as  clearly
as  if  the  objects  were  houses  suspended  in  the  sky.
Can  such  men  be  said  to  be  sages  ^  ?'  The  reply  was,
*  They  are  like  the  busy  underlings  of  a  court,  who
toil  their  bodies  and  distress  their  minds  with  their
various  artifices  ; — dogs,  (employed)  to  their  sorrow
to  catch  the  yak,  or  monkeys^  that  are  brought
from  their  forests  (for  their  tricksiness).  AV/iu,  I
tell  you  this  ; — it  is  what  you  cannot  hear,  and  what
you  cannot  speak  of: — Of  those  who  have  their
heads  and  feet,  and  yet  have  neither  minds  nor  ears,
there  are  multitudes;  while  of  those  who  have  their
bodies,  and  at  the  same  time  preserve  that  which
has  no  bodily  form  or  shape,  there  are  really  none.
It  is  not  in  their  movements  or  stoppages,  their
dying  or  living,  their  falling  and  rising  again,  that
this  is  to  be  found.  The  regulation  of  the  course
lies  in  (their  dealing  with)  the  human  element  in
them.     When  they  have  forgotten  external  things,

^  This  '  IMaster '  is  without  doubt  Confucius.

^  The  meaning  and  point  of  Confucius's  question  are  not  clear.
Did  he  mean  to  object  to  Lao-^^ze  that  all  his  disquisitions  about
the  Tao  as  the  one  thing  to  be  studied  and  followed  were
unnecessary  ?

^  Compare  in  Bk.  VII,  par.  4.


3^8  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  bk.  xii.


and  have  also  forgotten  the  heavenly  element  in
them,  they  may  be  named  men  who  have  forgotten
themselves.  The  man  who  has  forgotten  himself  is
he  of  whom  it  is  said  that  he  has  become  identified
with  Heaven  \'

lo.  At  an  interview  with  K\  Kkth.  2,  iTiang-lu
Mien 2  said  to  him,  'Our  ruler  of  Lu  asked  to  receive
my  instructions.  I  declined,  on  the  ground  that  I
had  not  received  any  message  ^  for  him.  After-
wards, however,  I  told  him  (my  thoughts).  I  do  not
know  whether  (what  I  said)  was  right  or  not,  and  I
beg  to  repeat  it  to  you.  I  said  to  him,  "  You  must
strive  to  be  courteous  and  to  exercise  self-restraint ;
you  must  distinguish  the  public-spirited  and  loyal,
and  repress  the  cringing  and  selfish ; — who  among
the  people  will  in  that  case  dare  not  to  be  in  har-
mony with  you?"'  Ki  Khth  laughed  quietly  and
said, '  Your  words,  my  master,  as  a  description  of  the
right  course  for  a  Ti  or  King,  were  like  the  threaten-
ing movement  of  its  arms  by  a  mantis  which  would
thereby  stop  the  advance  of  a  carriage  ; — inadequate
to  accomplish  your  object.  And  moreover,  if  he
guided  himself  by  your  directions,  it  would  be  as  if  he
were  to  increase  the  dang-erous  heio^ht  of  his  towers

^  Their  action  is  like  tliat  of  Heaven,  silent  but  most  effective,
without  motive  from  within  or  without,  simply  from  the  impulse  of
the  Tao.

^  These  two  men  are  only  known  by  the  mention  of  them  here.
They  must  have  been  officers  of  Lu,  K\  A7;eh  a  member  of
the  great  Ki  or  A'i-sun  family  of  that  state.  He  would  appear
also  to  have  been  the  teacher  of  the  other ;  if,  indeed,  they  were
real  personages,  and  not  merely  the  production  of  ATwang-^ze's
imagination.

^  That   is   any  lessons  or  instructions   from  you,  my  master,
which  I  should  communicate  to  him.


PT.  II.  SECT.  V.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-SZE.  319

and  add  to  the  number  of  his  valuables  collected  in
them  ; — the  multitudes  (of  the  people)  would  leave
their  (old)  ways,  and  bend  their  steps  in  the  same
direction.'

A'iang-lu  Mien  was  awe-struck,  and  said  in  his
fright,  '  I  am  startled  by  your  words,  Master,  never-
theless, I  should  like  to  hear  you  describe  the  in-
fluence (which  a  ruler  should  exert).'  The  other
said,  '  If  a  great  sage  ruled  the  kingdom,  he  would
stimulate  the  minds  of  the  people,  and  cause  them  to
carry  out  his  instructions  fully,  and  change  their
manners  ;  he  would  take  their  minds  which  had  be-
come evil  and  violent  and  extinguish  them,  carrying
them  all  forward  to  act  in  accordance  with  the
(good)  will  belonging  to  them  as  individuals,  as  if
they  did  it  of  themselves  from  their  nature,  while
they  knew  not  what  it  was  that  made  them  do
so.  Would  such  an  one  be  willing  to  look  up  to  Yao
and  Shun  in  their  instruction  of  the  people  as  his
elder  brothers  ?  He  would  treat  them  as  his  juniors,
belonging  himself  to  the  period  of  the  original  plas-
tic ether  ^  His  wish  would  be  that  all  should
agree  with  the  virtue  (of  that  early  period),  and
quietly  rest  in  it.'

II,  3^e"l^ung  had  been  rambling  in  the  south  in
Khi\,  and  was  returning  to  ^\\\.  As  he  passed  (a
place)  on  the  north  of  the  Han,  he  saw  an  old  man
who  was  going  to  work  on  his  vegetable  garden.
He  had  dug  his  channels,  gone  to  the  well,  and  was
bringing  from  it  in  his  arms  a  jar  of  water  to  pour
into  them.     Toiling  away,  he  expended  a  great  deal

^  The  Chinese  phrase  here  is  explained  by  Dr.  WilHams  : —
'  A  vivifying  influence,  a  vapour  or  aura  producing  things.'


320  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  Xll.

of  Strength,  but  the  result  which  he  accomplished
was  very  small.  3ze-kung  said  to  him,  '  There  is  a
contrivance  here,  by  means  of  which  a  hundred
plots  of  ground  may  be  irrigated  in  one  day.  With
the  expenditure  of  a  very  little  strength,  the  result
accomplished  is  great.  Would  you,  Master,  not  like
(to  try  it)  ? '  The  gardener  looked  up  at  him,  and
said,  '  How  does  it  work  ? '  3ze-kung  said,  'It  is  a
lever  made  of  wood,  heavy  behind,  and  light  in
front.  It  raises  the  water  as  quickly  as  you  could  do
with  your  hand,  or  as  it  bubbles  over  from  a  boiler.
Its  name  is  a  shadoof.'  The  gardener  put  on  an
angry  look,  laughed,  and  said,  *  I  have  heard  from
my  teacher  that,  where  there  are  ingenious  contri-
vances, there  are  sure  to  be  subtle  doings  ;  and  that,
where  there  are  subtle  doings,  there  is  sure  to  be  a
scheming  mind.  But,  when  there  is  a  scheming  mind
in  the  breast,  its  pure  simplicity  is  impaired.  When
this  pure  simplicity  is  impaired,  the  spirit  becomes
unsettled,  and  the  unsettled  spirit  is  not  the  proper
residence  of  the  Tao.  It  is  not  that  I  do  not  know
(the  contrivance  which  you  mention),  but  I  should  be
ashamed  to  use  it.'

(At  these  words)  3ze-kung  looked  blank  and
ashamed  ;  he  hung  down  his  head,  and  made  no
reply.  After  an  interval,  the  gardener  said  to  him,
'  Who  are  you.  Sir  ?  '  'A  disciple  of  Khung  AV/iu,'
was  the  reply.  The  other  continued,  '  Are  you  not
the  scholar  whose  great  learning  makes  you  com-
parable to  a  sage,  who  make  it  your  boast  that  you
surpass  all  others,  who  sing  melancholy  ditties  all
by  yourself,  thus  purchasing  a  famous  reputation
throughout  the  kingdom  ?  If  you  would  (only)  for-
get the  energy  of  your  spirit,  and  neglect  the  care  of


PT.  II.  SECT.  V.  THE  WRITINGS  OF  ATWANG-SZE.  32 1

your  body,  you  might  approximate  (to  the  Tao).
But  while  you  cannot  regulate  yourself,  what  leisure
have  you  to  be  regulating  the  world  ?  Go  on  your
way,  Sir,  and  do  not  interrupt  my  work.'

3ze-kung  shrunk  back  abashed,  and  turned  pale.
He  was  perturbed,  and  lost  his  self-possession,  nor  did
he  recover  it,  till  he  had  walked  a  distance  of  thirty
li.  His  disciples  then  said,  '  Who  was  that  man  ?
Why,  Master,  when  you  saw  him,  did  you  change
your  bearing,  and  become  pale,  so  that  you  have
been  all  day  without  returning  to  yourself?'  He
replied  to  them, '  Formerly  I  thought  that  there  was
but  one  man  ^  in  the  world,  and  did  not  know  that
there  was  this  man.  I  have  heard  the  Master  say
that  to  seek  for  the  means  of  conductinor  his  under-
takings  so  that  his  success  in  carrying  them  out  may
be  complete,  and  how  by  the  employment  of  a  little
strength  great  results  may  be  obtained,  is  the  way
of  the  sage.  Now  (I  perceive  that)  it  is  not  so  at
all.  They  who  hold  fast  and  cleave  to  the  Tao
are  complete  in  the  qualities  belonging  to  it.  Com-
plete in  those  qualities,  they  are  complete  in  their
bodies.  Complete  in  their  bodies,  they  are  com-
plete in  their  spirits.  To  be  complete  in  spirit  is
the  way  of  the  sage.  (Such  men)  live  in  the  world
in  closest  union  with  the  people,  going  along  with
them,  but  they  do  not  know  where  they  are  going.
Vast  and  complete  is  their  simplicity  !  Success,
gain,  and  ingenious  contrivances,  and  artful  clever-
ness, indicate  (in  their  opinion)  a  forgetfulness  of  the
(proper)  mind  of  man.  These  men  will  not  go
where  their  mind  does  not  carry  them,  and  will  do

^  Confucius.
[39]  Y


^22  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xii.


3


nothing  of  which  their  mind  does  not  approve.
Though  all  the  world  should  praise  them,
they  would  (only)  get  what  they  think  should
be  loftily  disregarded ;  and  though  all  the  world
should  blame  them,  they  would  but  lose  (what  they
think)  fortuitous  and  not  to  be  received;  —  the
world's  blame  and  praise  can  do  them  neither  benefit
nor  injury.  Such  men  may  be  described  as  possess-
ing all  the  attributes  (of  the  Tao),  while  I  can  only  be
called  one  of  those  who  are  like  the  waves  carried
about  by  the  wind.'  When  he  returned  to  Lu,  (3ze-
kung)  reported  the  interview  and  conversation  to
Confucius,  who  said,  '  The  man  makes  a  pretence  of
cultivating  the  arts  of  the  Embryonic  Age^  He
knows  the  first  thing,  but  not  the  sequel  to  it.  He
regulates  what  is  internal  in  himself,  but  not  what  is
external  to  himself.  If  he  had  intelliorence  enough
.  to  be  entirely  unsophisticated,  and  by  doing  nothing
^■«'  to  seek  to  return  to  the  normal  simplicity,  embody-
/  ^'  ^^&  {^^^^  instincts  of)  his  nature,  and  keeping  his
iV  spirit  (as  it  were)  in  his  arms,  so  enjoying  himself  in

^Q^'  I  the  common  ways,  you  might  then  indeed  be  afraid
of  him  !  Biit  what  should  you  and  I  find  in  the  arts
of  the  embryonic  time,  worth  our  knowing?'

12.  A'un  Mang^,  on  his  way  to  the  ocean,  met  with
J        Yiian   Fung^  on  the  shore  of  the  eastern  sea,  and


^  The  '  arts  of  the  Embryonic  Age' suggests  the  idea  of  the
earliest  men  in  their  struggles  for  support;  not  the  Tao  of  Heaven
in  its  formation  of  the  universe.  But  the  whole  of  the  paragraph,
not  in  itself  uninteresting,  is  believed  to  be  a  spurious  introduction,
and  not  the  production  of  -A'vvang-jze.

^  These  are  not  names  of  men,  but  like  Yun  Alang  and  Hung
Mung  in  the  fifth  paragraph  of  the  last  Book.  By  A'un  Mang,  it
is  said,  we  are  to  understand  'the  great  primal  ether,'  and  by  Yiian


PT.  II.  SECT.V.  THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  323

was  asked  by  him  where  he  was  going.  *  I  am
going,'  he  repHed,  '  to  the  ocean  ; '  and  the  other
again  asked,  '  What  for  ? '  A'lm  Mang  said,  '  Such
is  the  nature  of  the  ocean  that  the  waters  which
flow  into  it  can  never  fill  it,  nor  those  which  flow
from  it  exhaust  it.  I  will  enjoy  myself,  rambling  by
it.'  Ytian  Fung  replied,  '  Have  you  no  thoughts
about  mankind  ^  ?  I  should  like  to  hear  from  you
about  sagely  government.'  iTun  Mang  said, '  Under
the  government  of  sages,  all  offices  are  distributed
according  to  the  fitness  of  their  nature  ;  all  appoint-
ments are  made  according  to  the  ability  of  the  men  ;
whatever  is  done  is  after  a  complete  survey  of  all
circumstances ;  actions  and  words  proceed  from  the
inner  impulse,  and  the  whole  world  is  transformed.
Wherever  their  hands  are  pointed  and  their  looks
directed,  from  all  quarters  the  people  are  all  sure  to
come  (to  do  what  they  desire)  : — this  is  what  is
called  government  by  sages.'

'  I  should  like  to  hear  about  (the  government  of)
the  kindly,  virtuous  men  ^,'  (continued  Ytian  Fung).
The  reply  was,  '  Under  the  government  of  the  vir-
tuous, when  quietly  occupying  (their  place),  they
have  no  thought,  and,  when  they  act,  they  have  no
anxiety;  they  do  not  keep  stored  (in  their  minds)
what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong,  what  is  good  and

Fung,  '  the  east  wind.'  Why  these  should  discourse  together  as
they  are  here  made  to  do,  only  ^wang-jze  himself  could  tell.

^  Literally,  '  men  with  their  cross  eyes  ;'  an  appellation  for  man-
kind, men  having  their  eyes  set  across  their  face  more  on  the  same
plane  than  other  animals  ; — '  an  extraordinary  application  of  the
characters,'  says  Lin  Hsi->^ung.

^  The  text  is  simply  '  virtuous  men ; '  but  the  reply  justifies  us
in  giving  the  meaning  as  '  kindly '  as  well.     |ei  has  often  this


signification.


Y  2


324  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xir.

what  is  bad.  They  share  their  benefits  among  all
within  the  four  seas,  and  this  produces  what  is  called
(the  state  of)  satisfaction ;  they  dispense  their  gifts
to  all,  and  this  produces  what  is  called  (the  state  of)
rest.  (The  people)  grieve  (on  their  death)  like
babies  who  have  lost  their  mothers,  and  are  per-
plexed like  travellers  who  have  lost  their  way.
They  have  a  superabundance  of  wealth  and  all
necessaries,  and  they  know  not  whence  it  comes ;
they  have  a  sufficiency  of  food  and  drink,  and  they
know  not  from  whom  they  get  it : — such  are  the
appearances  (under  the  government)  of  the  kindly
and  virtuous.'

*  I  should  like  to  hear  about  (the  government  of)  the
spirit-like  men,'  (continued  Yiian  Fung  once  more).

The  reply  was,  '  Men  of  the  highest  spirit-like
qualities  mount  up  on  the  light,  and  (the  limitations
of)  the  body  vanish.  This  we  call  being  bright  and
ethereal.  They  carry  out  to  the  utmost  the  powers
with  which  they  are  endowed,  and  have  not  a  single
attribute  unexhausted.  Their  joy  is  that  of  heaven
and  earth,  and  all  embarrassments  of  affairs  melt
away  and  disappear ;  all  things  return  to  their
proper  nature  : — and  this  is  what  is  called  (the  state
of)  chaotic  obscurity  \'

13.  Man  Wu-kwei  ^  and  /^ih-Z-ang  Man-/'//i  -  had
been  looking  at  the  army  of  king  Wu,  when  the
latter  said,  '  It  is  because  he  was  not  born  in  the
time  of  the  Lord  of  Yu  ^,  that  therefore  he  is  in-

^  When  no  human  element  had  come  in  to  mar  the  development
of  the  Tao.

^  If  these  be  the  names  of  real  personages,  they  must  have  been
of  the  time  of  king  Wh,  about  b.  c.  11 22.

'  Generally  understood  to  mean  '  He  is  not  equal  to  the  Lord  of


PT.  II.  SECT.V.         THE  WRITINGS  OF  ^WANG-3ZE.  325

volved  in  this  trouble  (of  war).'  Man  W{i-kwei
replied,  '  Was  it  when  the  kingdom  was  in  good
order,  that  the  Lord  of  Yu  governed  it  ?  or  was  it
after  it  had  become  disordered  that  he  governed
it  ? '  The  other  said,  '  That  the  kingdom  be  in  a
condition  of  good  order,  is  what  (all)  desire,  and  (in
that  case)  what  necessity  would  there  be  to  say  any-
thing about  the  Lord  of  Yii  ?  He  had  medicine  for
sores  ;  false  hair  for  the  bald  ;  and  healing  for  those
who  were  ill : — he  was  like  the  filial  son  carrying  in
the  medicine  to  cure  his  kind  father,  with  every  sign
of  distress  in  his  countenance.  A  sage  would  be
ashamed  (of  such  a  thing)  ^

'  In  the  age  of  perfect  virtue  they  attached  no
value  to  wisdom,  nor  employed  men  of  ability.
Superiors  were  (but)  as  the  higher  branches  of  a  tree  ;
and  the  people  were  like  the  deer  of  the  wild.  They
were  upright  and  correct,  without  knowing  that  to
be  so  was  Righteousness ;  they  loved  one  another,
without  knowine  that  to  do  so  was  Benevolence  ;
they  were  honest  and  leal-hearted,  without  knowing
that  it  was  Loyalty;  they  fulfilled  their  engage-
ments, without  knowing  that  to  do  so  was  Good
Faith  ;  in  their  simple  movements  they  employed
the  services  of  one  another,  without  thinking  that
they  were  conferring  or  receiving  any  gift.  There-
fore their  actions  left  no  trace,  and  there  was  no
record  of  their  affairs.'

14.  The  filial  son  who  does  not  flatter  his  father.


Yii,'  or  Shun.  The  meaning  which  I  have  given  is  that  propounded
by  Hu  Wan-ying,  and  seems  to  agree  better  with  the  general  pur-
port of  the  paragraph.

^-  Ashamed  that  he  had  not  been  able  to  keep  his  father  from
getting  sick,  and  requiring  to  be  thus  attended  to.


326  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XII.

and  the  loyal  minister  who  does  not  fawn  on  his
ruler,  are  the  highest  examples  of  a  minister  and  a
son.  When  a  son  assents  to  all  that  his  father  says,
and  approves  of  all  that  his  father  does,  common
opinion  pronounces  him  an  unworthy  son ;  when  a
minister  assents  to  all  that  his  ruler  says,  and  ap-
proves of  all  that  his  ruler  does,  common  opinion
pronounces  him  an  unworthy  minister.  Nor  does
any  one  reflect  that  this  view  is  necessarily  correct  ^
But  when  common  opinion  (itself)  affirms  anything
and  men  therefore  assent  to  it,  or  counts  anything
good  and  men  also  approve  of  it,  then  it  is  not  said
that  they  are  mere  consenters  and  flatterers ; — is
common  opinion  then  more  authoritative  than  a
father,  or  more  to  be  honoured  than  a  ruler  ?  Tell
a  man  that  he  is  merely  following  (the  opinions)  of
another,  or  that  he  is  a  flatterer  of  others,  and  at
once  he  flushes  with  anger.  And  yet  all  his  life  he
is  merely  following  others,  and  flattering  them.  His
illustrations  are  made  to  agree  with  theirs  ;  his  phrases
are  glossed: — to  win  the  approbation  of  the  multi-
tudes. From  first  to  last,  from  beginning  to  end,  he
finds  no  fault  with  their  views.  He  will  let  his  robes
hang  down^,  display  the  colours  on  them,  and  arrange
his  movements  and  bearing,  so  as  to  win  the  favour
of  his  age,  and  yet  not  call  himself  a  flatterer.  He
is  but  a  follower  of  those  others,  approving  and  dis-

^  We  can  hardly  tell  whether  this  paragraph  should  be  under-
stood as  a  continuation  of  A7ah-X'ang's  remarks,  or  as  from  ^wang-
^ze  himself.  The  meaning  here  is  that  every  one  feels  that  this
opinion  is  right,  without  pausing  to  reason  about  it.

^  See  the  Yi  King,  Appendix  III,  ii,  15,  where  this  letting  his
robes  hang  down  is  attributed  to  Shun.  Ought  we  to  infer  from
this  that  in  this  paragraph  we  have  /^Mh-^'ang  still  speaking  about
and  against  the  common  opinion  of  Shun's  superiority  to  king  Wu  ?


PT.  II.  SECT.V.         THE  WRITINGS  OF  iTVVANG-SZE.  327

approving  as  they  do,  and  yet  he  will  not  say  that
he  is  one  of  them.      This  is  the  height  of  stupidity.

He  who  knows  his  stupidity  is  not  very  stupid  ;
he  who  knows  that  he  is  under  a  delusion  is  not
greatly  deluded.  He  who  is  greatly  deluded  will
never  shake  the  delusion  off;  he  who  is  very  stupid
will  all  his  life  not  become  intellioent.  If  three  men
be  walking  together,  and  (only)  one  of  them  be
under  a  delusion  (as  to  their  wa)'),  they  may  yet
reach  their  goal,  the  deluded  being  the  fewer ;  but
if  two  of  them  be  under  the  delusion,  they  will  not
do  so,  the  deluded  being  the  majority.  At  the  pre-
sent time,  when  the  whole  world  is  under  a  delusion,
though  I  pray  men  to  go  in  the  right  direction,  I
cannot  make  them  do  so  ; — is  it  not  a  sad  case  "^

Grand  music  does  not  penetrate  the  ears  of  vil-
lagers ;  but  if  they  hear  '  The  Breaking  of  the  Wil-
low,' or  '  The  Bright  Flowers  ^'  they  will  roar  with
laughter.  So  it  is  that  lofty  words  do  not  remain  in
the  minds  of  the  multitude,  and  that  perfect  words
are  not  heard,  because  the  vulgar  words  predomi-
nate. By  two  earthenware  instruments  the  (music  of)
a  bell  will  be  confused,  and  the  pleasure  that  it  would
afford  cannot  be  obtained.  At  the  present  time  the
whole  world  is  under  a  delusion,  and  though  I  wish
to  go  in  a  certain  direction,  how  can  I  succeed  in
doinof  so  ?  Knowinof  that  I  cannot  do  so,  if  I  were
to  try  to  force  my  way,  that  would  be  another  de-
lusion. Therefore  my  best  course  is  to  let  my  pur-
pose go,  and  no  more  pursue  it.  If  I  do  not  pursue
it,  wOiom  shall  I  have  to  share  in  my  sorrow  -  .'^

^  The  names  of  two  songs,  favourites  with  tiie  common  people.
^  I  shall  only  feel  the  more  that  I  am  alone  without  any  to  sym-
pathise with  me,  and  be  the  more  sad.


328  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xii.

.^ , 1

If  an  ugly  man  ^  have  a  son  born  to  him  at  mid-
night, he  hastens  with  a  Hght  to  look  at  it.  Very
eagerly  he  does  so,  only  afraid  that  it  may  be  like
himself.

15^.  From  a  tree  a  hundred  years  old  a  portion
shall  be  cut  and  fashioned  into  a  sacrificial  vase,
with  the  bull  figured  on  it,  which  is  ornamented
further  with  green  and  yellow,  while  the  rest  (of
that  portion)  is  cut  away  and  thrown  into  a  ditch.
If  now  we  compare  the  sacrificial  vase  with  what
was  thrown  into  the  ditch,  there  will  be  a  difference
between  them  as  respects  their  beauty  and  ugliness  ;
but  they  both  agree  in  having  lost  the  (proper)
nature  of  the  wood.  So  in  respect  of  their  practice
of  righteousness  there  is  a  difference  between  (the
robber)  A'ih  on  the  one  hand,  and  ^a.ng  (Shan)  or
Shih  (3hiu)  on  the  other ;  but  they  all  agree  in
having  lost  (the  proper  qualities  of)  their  nature.

Now  there  are  five  things  which  produce  (in  men)
the  loss  of  their  (proper)  nature.  The  first  is  (their
fondness  for)  the  five  colours  which  disorder  the
eye,  and  take  from  it  its  (proper)  clearness  of  vision  ;
the  second  is  (their  fondness  for)  the  five  notes  (of
music),  which  disorder  the  ear  and  take  from  It  its

^  ^  should  perhaps  be  translated  '  a  leper.'  The  illustra-
tion is  edited  by  ^iao  Hung  and  others  as  a  paragraph  by  itself.
They  cannot  tell  whether  it  be  intended  to  end  the  paragraph  that
precedes  or  to  introduce  the  one  that  follows.

^  This  paragraph  must  be  our  author's  own.  ^/nh-/'ang,  of  the
time  of  king  Wfi,  could  not  be  criticising  the  schemes  of  life  pro-
pounded by  Mo  and  Yang,  whose  views  were  so  much  later  in
time.  It  breathes  the  animosity  of  Lao  and  AVang  against  all
schemes  of  learning  and  culture,  as  contrary  to  the  simplicity  of
life  according  to  the  Tao.


PT.  II.  SECT.  V.         THE  WRITINGS  OF  i^WANG-3ZE.  329

(proper)  power  of  hearing ;  the  third  is  (their  fond-
ness for)  the  five  odours  which  penetrate  the  nos-
trils, and  produce  a  feehng  of  distress  all  over  the
forehead  ;  the  fourth  is  (their  fondness  for)  the  five
flavours,  which  deaden  the  mouth,  and  pervert  its
sense  of  taste  ;  the  fifth  is  their  preferences  and
dislikes,  which  unsettle  the  mind,  and  cause  the
nature  to  go  flying  about.  These  five  things  are  all
injurious  to  the  life ;  and  now  Yang  and  Mo  begin
to  stretch  forward  from  their  different  standpoints,
each  thinking  that  he  has  hit  on  (the  proper  course
for  men).

But  the  courses  they  have  hit  on  are  not  what  I
call  the  proper  course.  What  they  have  hit  on  (only)
leads  to  distress ; — can  they  have  hit  on  what  is
the  right  thing  ?  If  they  have,  we  may  say  that  the
dove  in  a  cage  has  found  the  right  thing  for  it.
Moreover,  those  preferences  and  dislikes,  that  (fond-
ness for)  music  and  colours,  serve  but  to  pile  up  fuel
(in  their  breasts) ;  while  their  caps  of  leather,  the
bonnet  with  kingfishers'  plumes,  the  memorandum
tablets  which  they  carry,  and  their  long  girdles,
serve  but  as  restraints  on  their  persons.  Thus  in-
wardly stuffed  full  as  a  hole  for  fuel,  and  outwardly
fast  bound  with  cords,  when  they  look  quietly  round
from  out  of  their  bondage,  and  think  they  have  got
all  they  could  desire,  they  are  no  better  than  criminals
whose  arms  are  tied  together,  and  their  fingers  sub-
jected to  the  screw,  or  than  tigers  and  leopards  in
sacks  or  cages,  and  yet  thinking  that  they  have  got
(all  they  could  wish).


2,3^  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  Xlll.


X


BOOK    XIII.
Part  II.    Section  VI.

Thien  Tao,  or  '  The  Way  of  Heaven \'

I.  The  Way  of  Heaven  operates  (unceasingly),
and  leaves  no  accumulation  -  (of  its  influence)  in  any
particular  place,  so  that  all  things  are  brought  to
perfection  by  it;  so  does  the  Way  of  the  Tis
operate,  and  all  under  the  sky  turn  to  them  (as  their
directors) ;  so  also  does  the  Way  of  the  Sages
operate,  and  all  within  the  seas  submit  to  them.
Those  who  clearly  understand  (the  Way  of)  Heaven,
who  are  in  sympathy  with  (that  of)  the  sages,  and
familiar  through  the  universe  and  in  the  four  quarters
(of  the  earth)  with  the  work  of  the  Tis  and  the  kings,
yet  act  spontaneously  from  themselves  : — with  the
appearance  of  being  ignorant  they  are  yet  entirely
still.

The  stillness  of  the  sabres  does  not  belono-  to  them
as  a  consequence  of  their  skilful  ability^;  all  things
are  not  able  to  disturb  their  minds  ; — it  is  on  this
account  that  they  are  still.  When  water  is  still,  its
clearness  shows   the   beard  and  eyebrows   (of   him


^  See  pp.  144,  145.

^  That  is,  its  operation  is  universal.  The  Chinese  criiics  gene-
rally explain  '  accumulation '  here  by  '  rest,'  which  is  not  quite  the
idea.

^  Such  is  the  meaning  here  of  the  ^,  as  in  the  Tao  Teh
A^ing,  chaps.  2,  8,  and  often.


PT.  II.  SECT.  VI.       THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  33  I

who  looks  into  it).  It  is  a  perfect  Level  ^,  and  the
greatest  artificer  takes  his  rule  from  it.  Such  is  the
clearness  of  still  water,  and  how  much  greater  is  that
of  the  human  Spirit!  The  still  mind  of  the  sage
is  the  mirror  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  glass  of  all
things.

Vacancy,  stillness,  placidity,  tastelessness,  quietude,
silence,  and  non-action  ; — this  is  the  Level  of  heaven
and  earth,  and  the  perfection  of  the  Tao  and  its
characteristics^'.  Therefore  the T is,  Kings,  and  Sages
found  in  this  their  resting-place  ".  Resting  here,
they  were  vacant ;  from  their  vacancy  came  fullness  ;
from  their  fullness  came  the  nice  distinctions  (of
things).  From  their  vacancy  came  stillness  ;  that
stillness  was  followed  by  movement ;  their  move-
ments were  successful.  From  their  stillness  came
their  non-action.  Doing-nothing,  they  devolved  the
cares  of  office  on  their  employes.  Doing-nothing  was
accompanied  by  the  feeling  of  satisfaction.  Where
there  is  that  feeling  of  satisfaction,  anxieties  and
troubles  find  no  place ;  and  the  years  of  life  are
many.

Vacancy,  stillness,  placidity,  tastelessness,  quietude,
silence,  and  doing-nothing  are  the  root  of  all  things.
When  this  is  understood,  we  find  such  a  ruler  on  the
throne  as  Yao,  and  such  a  minister  as  Shun.  When
with  this  a  high  position  is  occupied,  we  find  the  attri-
butes of  the  Tis  and  kings, — the  sons  of  Heaven  ;
with  this  in  a  low  position,  we  find  the  m3'Sterious


here,  is  contracted  in  many  editions  into  ^■^,  which  some
have  mistaken  for  |^.

^  Such  are  the  natural  characteristics  of  tlie  Taoistic  mind.
^  Impl}ing  cessation  from  all  thought  and  purpose.


2,32  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  Xlll.

sages,  the  uncrowned  kings,  with  their  ways.  With  this
retiring  (from  pubHc  Hfe),  and  enjoying  themselves
at  leisure,  we  find  the  scholars  who  dwell  by  the
rivers  and  seas,  among  the  hills  and  forests,  all  sub-
missive to  it ;  with  this  coming  forward  to  active  life
and  comforting  their  age,  their  merit  is  great,  and
their  fame  is  distinguished ; — and  all  the  world
becomes  united  in  one.

2.  (Such  men)  by  their  stillness  become  sages  ;
and  by  their  movement,  kings.  Doing-nothing,  they
are  honoured ;  in  their  plain  simplicity,  no  one  in  the
world  can  strive  with  them  (for  the  palm  of)  excel-
lence. The  clear  understandino-  of  the  virtue  of
Heaven  and  Earth  is  what  is  called  '  The  Great
Root,'  and  '  The  Great  Origin  ; ' — they  who  have  it
are  in  harmony  with  Heaven,  and  so  they  produce
all  equable  arrangements  in  the  world  ; — they  are
those  who  are  in  harmony  with  men.  Being  in
harmony  with  men  is  called  the  Joy  of  men  ;  being
in  harmony  with  Heaven  is  called  the  Joy  of  Heaven.
A!wang-jze  said,  'My  Master!  my  Master!  He
shall  hash  and  blend  all  things  in  mass  without  being
cruel  ;  he  shall  dispense  his  favours  to  all  ages  with-
out beino-  benevolent.  He  is  older  than  the  hio^hest
antiquity,  and  yet  is  not  old.  He  overspreads  the
heavens  and  sustains  the  earth  ;  from  him  is  the
carving  of  all  forms  without  any  artful  skill  ^ !  This
is  what  is  called  the  Joy  of  Heaven.  Hence  it  is
said,  "Those  who  know  the  Joy  of  Heaven  during
their  life,  act  like  Heaven,  and  at  death  undergo
transformation  like  (other)  things  ^ ;  in  their  stillness

^  Compare  in  Bk.VI,  pars.  13  and  7.

^  They  do  not  cease  to  be,  but  only  become  transformed   or
changed.


PT.  II.  SECT.  VI.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    ZWANG-3ZE.  333

they  possess 'the  quaHty  of  the  Yin,  and  in  their
movement  they  flow  abroad  as  the  Yang.  There-
fore he  who  knows  the  Joy  of  Heaven  has  no  mur-
muring against  Heaven,  nor  any  fault-finding  with
men:  and  suffers  no  embarrassment  from  thines,  nor
any  reproof  from  ghosts.  Hence  it  is  said,  '  His
movements  are  those  of  Heaven  ;  his  stilhiess  is
that  of  Earth  ;  his  whole  mind  is  fixed,  and  he  rules
over  the  world.  The  spirits  of  his  dead  do  not  come
to  scare  him  ;  he  is  not  worn  out  by  their  souls.
His  words  proceeding  from  his  vacancy  and  stillness,
yet  reach  to  heaven  and  earth,  and  show  a  communi-
cation with  all  things  : — this  is  w^hat  is  called  the  Joy
of  Heaven.  This  Joy  of  Heaven  forms  the  mind  of
the  sage  whereby  he  nurtures  all  under  the  sky  ^'  "  '

3.  It  was  the  Way  ^  of  the  Tis  and  Kings  to
regard  Heaven  and  Earth  as  their  Author,  the  Tao
and  its  characteristics  as  their  Lord,  and  Doine-
nothing  as  their  constant  rule.  Doing-nothing,  they
could  use  the  whole  world  in  their  service  and  mioht
have  done  more  ;  acting,  they  were  not  sufficient  for
the  service  required  of  them  by  the  world.  Hence
the  men  of  old  held  non-inaction  in  honour.  When
superiors  do  nothing  and  their  inferiors  also  do
nothing,  inferiors  and  superiors  possess  the  same
virtue  ;  and  when  inferiors  and  superiors  possess  the
same  virtue,  there  are  none  to  act  as  ministers.
When  inferiors  act,  and  their  superiors  also  act,
then  superiors  and  inferiors  possess  the  same  Tao  ;
and  when  superiors  and  inferiors  possess  the  same


^  I  suppose  that  from  '  It  is  said  '  to  this  is  all  quotation,  but
from  what  book  we  do  not  know.

^  '  The  virtue,'  or  attribute  ;  =  the  way.


334  '^^E    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  Bit.  XIII.

Tao,  there  is  none  to  preside  as  Lord.  But  that
the  superiors  do  nothing  and  yet  thereby  use  the
world  in  their  service,  and  that  the  inferiors,  while
acting,  be  employed  in  the  service  of  the  world,  is
an  unchangeable  principle.  Therefore  the  ancient
kings  who  presided  over  the  world,  though  their
knowledge  embraced  (all  the  operations  of)  Heaven
and  Earth,  took  no  thought  of  their  own  about
them  ;  though  their  nice  discrimination  appreciated
the  fine  fashioning  of  all  things,  they  said  not  a  word
about  it ;  though  their  power  comprehended  all
within  the  seas,  they  did  nothing  themselves.
Heaven  produces  nothing,  yet  all  things  experience
their  transformations  ;  Earth  effects  no  growth,  yet  all
things  receive  their  nurture;  the  Tis  and  Kings  did
nothing,  yet  all  the  world  testified  their  effective  ser-
vices. Hence  it  is  said, 'There  is  nothing  more  spirit-
like than  Heaven;  there  is  nothing  richer  than  Earth  ;
there  are  none  greater  than  the  Tis  and  Kings.'  Hence
it  is  said  (further),  '  The  attributes  of  the  Tis  and
kings  corresponded  to  those  of  Heaven  and  Earth.'
It  was  thus  that  they  availed  themselves  of  (the
operations  of)  Heaven  and  Earth,  carried  all  things
on  unceasingly  (in  their  courses),  and  employed  the
various  classes  of  men  in  their  service.

4.  Originating  belongs  to  those  in  the  higher
position  ;  details  (of  work)  to  those  who  are  in  the
lower.  The  compendious  decision  belongs  to  the
lord ;  the  minutiae  of  execution,  to  his  ministers.
The  direction  of  the  three  hosts  ^  and  their  men  with
the  five  weapons  -  is  but  a  trifling  quality  ;  rewards

^  '  Three  hosts '  constituted  the  military  force   of  one   of  the
largest  states.

^  The  bow,  the  club,  the  spear,  the  lance,  the  javelin.     Other


PT.  II.  SECT.  VI.     THE  WRITINGS  OF  a:wang-3ze.         335

and  penalties  with  their  advantages  and  sufferings,
and  the  inflictions  of  the  five  punishments  ^  are  but
trivial  elements  of  instruction ;  ceremonies,  laws,
measures,  and  numbers,  with  all  the  minutiae  of
jurisprudence  ^,  are  small  matters  in  government ;
the  notes  of  bells  and  drums,  and  the  display  of
plumes  and  flags  are  the  slightest  things  in  music,
and  the  various  grades  of  the  mourning  garments  are
the  most  unimportant  manifestations  of  grief.  These
five  unimportant  adjuncts  required  the  operation  of
the  excited  spirit  and  the  employment  of  the  arts  of
the  mind,  to  bring  them  into  use.  The  men  of  old
had  them  indeed,  but  they  did  not  give  them  the
first  place.

The  ruler  precedes,  and  the  minister  follows  ;  the
father  precedes,  and  the  son  follows ;  the  elder
brother  precedes,  and  the  younger  follows ;  the
senior  precedes,  and  the  junior  follows;  the  male
precedes,  and  the  female  follows  ;  the  husbanci  pre-
cedes, and  the  wife  follows.

This  precedence  of  the  more  honourable  and  se-
quence of  the  meaner  is  seen  in  the  (relative)  action
of  heaven  and  earth,  and  hence  the  sages  took  them
as  their  pattern.  The  more  honourable  position  of
heaven  and  the  lower  one  of  earth  are  equivalent  to
a  designation  of  their  spirit-like  and  intelligent
qualities.  The  precedence  of  spring  and  summer
and  the  sequence  of  autumn  and  winter  mark  the


enumerations  of  ihem  are  given.     See  the  '  Officers  of  ^au,'  Bk.
XXXII.

^  Branding,  cutting  off  the  nose,  cutting  off  the  feet,  castra-
tion, death.

^  I  read  here  ^l]  (not  ^);g.


336  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  Xlll.

order  of  the  four  seasons.  In  the  transformations
and  growth  of  all  things,  every  bud  and  feature  has
its  proper  form  ;  and  in  this  we  have  their  gradual
maturing  and  decay,  the  constant  flow  of  transforma-
tion and  change.  Thus  since  Heaven  and  Earth,
which  are  most  spirit-like,  are  distinguished  as  more
honourable  and  less,  and  by  precedence  and  sequence,
how  much  more  must  we  look  for  this  in  the  ways
of  men  !  In  the  ancestral  temple  it  is  to  kinship  that
honour  is  given  ;  in  court,  to  rank  ;  in  the  neigh-
bourhoods and  districts,  to  age  ;  in  the  conduct  of
affairs,  to  wisdom ;  such  is  the  order  in  those  great
ways.  If  we  speak  of  the  course  (to  be  pursued  in
them),  and  do  not  observe  their  order,  we  violate
their  course.  If  we  speak  of  the  course,  and  do  not
observe  It,  why  do  w^e  apply  that  name  to  it  ?

5.  Therefore  the  ancients  who  clearly  understood
the  great  Tao  first  sought  to  apprehend  w^hat  was
meant  by  Heaven  \  and  the  Tao  and  its  characteris-
tics came  next.  When  this  was  apprehended,  then
came  Benevolence  and  Rio^hteousness.  When  these
were  apprehended,  then  came  the  Distinction  of  duties
and  the  observance  of  them.  This  accomplished,
there  came  objects  and  their  names.  After  objects
and  their  names,  came  the  employment  of  men
according  to  their  qualities:  on  this  there  followed
the  examination  of  the  men  and  of  their  work.  This
led  to  the  approval  or  disapproval  of  them,  which
again  was  succeeded  by  the  apportioning  of  rewards
and  penalties.  After  this  the  stupid  and  the  intelli-
gent understood  what  was  required  of  them,  and  the
honourable  and  the  mean  occupied  their  several  posi-

*  The  meaning,  probably,  is  '  spontaneity.'


PT.  II.  SECT. VI.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  ^^'^J


tions.  The  good  and  the  able,  and  those  inferior
to  them,  sincerely  did  their  best.  Their  ability
was  distributed  ;  the  duties  implied  in  their  official
names  were  fulfilled.  In  this  way  did  they  serve
their  superiors,  nourish  their  inferiors,  regulate
things,  and  cultivate  their  persons.  They  did  not  call
their  knowledge  and  schemes  into  requisition  ;  they
were  required  to  fall  back  upon  (the  method  of)
Heaven  : — this  was  what  is  called  the  Perfection  of
the  Rule  of  Great  Peace.  Hence  it  is  said  in  the
Book  ^  'There  are  objects  and  there  are  their  names.'
Objects  and  their  names  the  ancients  had  ;  but  they
did  not  put  them  in  the  foremost  place.

When  the  ancients  spoke  of  the  Great  Tao,  it
was  only  after  four  other  steps  that  they  gave  a
place  to  '  Objects  and  their  Names,'  and  after  eight
steps  that  they  gave  a  place  to  '  Rewards  and
Penalties.'  If  they  had  all  at  once  spoken  of
'Objects  and  their  Names,'  they  w^ould  have  shown
an  ignorance  of  what  is  the  Root  (of  government) ;  if
they  had  all  at  once  spokenof  Rewards  and  Penalties,'
they  would  have  shown  an  ignorance  of  the  first
steps  of  it.  Those  whose  words  are  thus  an  in-
version of  the  (proper)  course,  or  in  opposition  to  it,
are  (only  fit  to  be)  ruled  by  others  ; — how  can  they
rule  others  ?  To  speak  all  at  once  of  '  Objects  and
their  Names,'  and  of  '  Rewards  and  Penalties,'  only
shows  that  the  speaker  knows  the  instruments  of
government,  but  does  not  know  the  method  of  it.
is  fit  to  be  used  as  an  instrument  in  the  world,  but
not  fit  to  use  others  as  his  instruments : — he  is  what
we  call  a  mere  sophist,  a  man  of  one  small   idea.

^  We  cannot  tell  what  book  or  books.
[39]  Z


2,^S  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  Xlii.

Ceremonies,  laws,  numbers,  measures,  with  all  the
minutiae  of  jurisprudence,  the  ancients  had  ;  but  it
is  by  these  that  inferiors  serve  their  superiors  ;  it  is
not  by  them  that  those  superiors  nourish  the  world,

6.  Anciently,  Shun  asked  Yao,  saying',  '  In  what
way  does  your  Majesty  by  the  Grace  of  Heaven^
exercise  your  mind  ? '  The  reply  was,  '  I  simply
show  no  arrogance  towards  the  helpless ;  I  do  not
neglect  the  poor  people  ;  I  grieve  for  those  who  die  ;
I  love  their  infant  children  ;  and  I  compassionate
their  widows,'  Shun  rejoined,  '  Admirable,  as  far  as
it  goes  ;  but  it  is  not  what  is  Great.'  'How  then,'
asked  Yao,  '  do  you  think  I  should  do  ? '  Shun  re-
plied, 'When  (a  sovereign)  possesses  the  virtue  of
Heaven,  then  when  he  shows  himself  in  action,  it  is
in  stillness.  The  sun  and  moon  (simply)  shine,
and  the  four  seasons  pursue  their  courses.  So  it  is
with  the  regular  phenomena  of  day  and  night,  and
with  the  movement  of  the  clouds  by  which  the  rain
is  distributed,'  Yao  said,  '  Then  I  have  only  been
persistently  troubling  myself!  What  you  wish  is
to  be  in  harmony  with  Heaven,  while  I  wish  to
be  in  harmony  with  men.'  Now  (the  Way  of)
Heaven  and  Earth  was  much  thought  of  of  old,
and  Hwang-Ti,  Yao,  and  Shun  united  in  admiring  it.
Hence  the  kings  of  the  world  of  old  did  nothing,
but  tried  to  imitate  that  Way.

7.  Confucius  went  to  the  west  to  deposit  (some)
writings  in  the  library  of  Kku  -,  when  3ze-lu  coun-


^  So,  in  the  '  Spring  and  Autumn '  Chronicle,  the  rightful  reign-
ing sovereign  is  ordinarily  designated,  '  Heaven's  King,'  It  is  not
a  Taoistic  mode  of  speaking  of  him.

^  It  is  supposed  rtiat  Confucius,  disappointed  by  his  want  of


PT.  II.  SECT.  VI.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    ATWANG-SZE.  339

selled  him,  sayinor,  '  J  have  heard  that  the  officer  in
charge  of  this  A'ang^   Repository  of  ATaii  was  one
Lao  Tan,  who  has  given  up  his  office,  and  is  Hving
in  his  own  house.     As  you.  Master,  vv^ish  to  deposit
these  writings  here,  why  not  go  to  him,  and  obtain
his  help  (to  accompHsh   your  object)  \'     Confucius
said,  'Good;'  and  he  went  and  saw  Lao  Tan,  who
refused  his  assistance.      On   this   he   proceeded  to
give  an  abstract  of  the  Twelve  Classics  ^  to  bring
the  other  over  to  his  views  '^.      Lao  Tan,  however,
interrupted   him  while  he  was   speaking,  and  said,
'  This  is  too  vague  ;    let  me  hear  the  substance  of
them  in  brief.'     Confucius  said,  '  The  substance  of
them  is  occupied  with  Benevolence  and  Righteous-
ness.'     The  other  said,  '  Let  me  ask  whether  you
consider   Benevolence   and    Righteousness    to    con-
stitute the  nature  of  man  ? '     'I  do,'  was  the  answer.
*  If  the  superior  man  be  not  benevolent,  he  will  not
fulfil  his  character  ;  if  he  be  not  righteous,  he  might
as  well    not   have   been    born.       Benevolence    and
Righteousness  are  truly  the  nature  of  man.'     Lao
Tan  continued,  '  Let  me  ask  you  what  you  mean  by
Benevolence   and   Righteousness.'     Confucius    said,
'  To  be  in  one's  inmost  heart  in  kindly  sympathy


success,  wished  to  deposit  the  writings  or  books  which  he  prized  so
much  in  the  Royal  Library,  that  they  might  not  be  lost,  and  be
available  for  some  future  teacher,  more  fortunate  than  himself.

^  The  name  of  the  Royal  Library  (^^)  ;  meaning,  perhaps,
'  Approved.'

^  That  is,  help  him  to  get  his  books  deposited  in  the  Library.

^  Meaning,  perhaps,  the  '  Spring  and  Autumn,'  containing  a
chronicle  of  twelve  marquises  of  Lii.  We  know  of  no  collection  in
the  time  of  Confucius  which  could  be  stvled  the  '  Twelve  Classics.'


g&  is  to  be  read  shui.


Z   2


34^  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xiiu

with  all  things  ;  to  love  all  men  ;  and  to  allow  no
selfish  thoughts ; — this  is  the  nature  of  Benevolence
and  Righteousness.'  Lao  Tan  exclaimed,  'Ah!  you
almost  show  your  inferiority  by  such  words  !  "  To
love  all  men  !  "  is  not  that  vao-ue  and  extravagant  ?
"  To  be  seeking  to  allow  no  selfish  thoughts  !  " — that
is  selfishness  ^ !  If  you,  Master,  wish  men  not  to  be
without  their  (proper)  shepherding,  think  of  Heaven
and  Earth,  which  certainly  pursue  their  invariable
course  ;  think  of  the  sun  and  moon,  which  surely
maintain  their  brightness ;  think  of  the  stars  In  the
zodiac,  which  preserve  their  order  and  courses ;
think  of  birds  and  beasts,  which  do  not  fail  to  collect
together  in  their  flocks  and  herds ;  and  think  of
the  trees,  which  do  not  fail  to  stand  up  (in  their
places).  Do  you,  Master,  imitate  this  way  and  carry
It  Into  practice  ;  hurry  on,  following  this  course,  and
you  will  reach  your  end.  Why  must  you  further  be
vehement  In  putting  forward  your  Benevolence  and
Righteousness,  as  if  you  were  beating  a  drum,  and
seeking  a  fugitive  son,  (only  making  him  run  away
the  more)  ?  Ah  !  Master,  you  are  introducing  dis-
order into  the  nature  of  man  ! '

8.  Shih-/c/iang  Kh\  2,  having  an  interview  with
Lao-^ze,  asked  him,  saying,  '  I  heard.  Master,  that
you  were  a  sage,  and  I  came  here,  wishing  to  see
you,  without  grudging  the  length  of  the  journey.
During  the  stages  of  the  hundred  days,  the  soles
of  my  feet  became  quite  callous,  but  I  did  not  dare
to  stop  and  rest.     Now  I  perceive  that  )'ou  are  not

^  The  unselfishness  was  not  spontaneous.

2  We  know  nothing  of  this  personage,  but  what  is  related  here ;
nor  does  the  whole  paragraph  serve  to  advance  the  arguments  of
the  Book.


PT.  II.  SECT. VI.        THE    WRITINGS    OF    ATWANG-SZE.  34 1

a  sao-e.  Because  there  was  some  rice  left  about  the
holes  of  the  rats,  you  sent  away  your  younger  sister,
which  was  unkind  ;  when  your  food,  whether  raw
or  cooked,  remains  before  you  not  all  consumed,
you  keep  on  hoarding  it  up  to  any  extent '.'  Lao-
jze  looked  indifferent,  and  gave  him  no  answer.

Next  day  KIA  again  saw  Lao-jze,  and  said,
'  Yesterday  I  taunted  you  ;  but  to-day  I  have  gone
back  to  a  better  mood  of  mind.  What  is  the  cause
(of  the  change)  -  ? '  Laoize  replied,  '  I  consider  that
I  have  freed  myself  from  the  trammels  of  claiming  to
be  artfully  knowing,  spirit-like,  and  sage.  Yesterday
if  you  had  called  me  an  ox,  )ou  might  have
done  so  ;  or  if  you  had  called  me  a  horse,  you
might  have  done  so  ^.  If  there  be  a  reality  (corre-
sponding to  men's  ideas),  and  men  give  it  a  name,
which  another  will  not  receive,  he  will  in  the  sequel
suffer  the  more.  My  manner  w^as  what  I  constantly
observe  ; — -I  did  not  put  it  on  for  the  occasion.'

Shih-Z'/zang  KJi\  sidled  away  out  of  Lao's  shadow;
then  he  retraced  his  steps,  advanced  forward,  and
asked  how  he  should  cultivate  himself.  The  reply
was,  '  Your  demeanour  is  repelling ;  you  stare
with  your  eyes ;  your  forehead  is  broad  and  yet
tapering ;  you  bark  and  growl  with  your  mouth  ;
your  appearance  is  severe  and  pretentious  ;  you  are
like  a  horse  held  by  its  tether,  you  would  move,  but
are  restrained,  and  (if  let  go)  would  start  off  like  an


^  These  seem  strange  charges  to  bring  against  Lao-jze,  and  no
lisrht  is  thrown  on  them  from  other  sources.

^  The  change  had  been  produced  by  the  demeanour  of  Lao-^ze  ;
the  other  could  not  tell  how.  Other  explanations  of  the  question
are  given  by  some  of  the  critics.

^  Compare  in  the  first  paragraph  of  Book  VII.


342  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XIII.

arrow  from  a  bow ;  you  examine  all  the  minutiae  of
a  thing ;  your  wisdom  is  artful,  and  yet  you  try  to
look  at  ease.  All  these  are  to  be  considered  proofs
of  your  want  of  sincerity.  If  on  the  borders  one
were  to  be  found  with  them,  he  would  be  named  a
Thief;

9.  The  Master^  said,  'The  Tao  does  not  exhaust
itself  in  what  is  greatest,  nor  is  it  ever  absent  from
what  is  least ;  and  therefore  it  is  to  be  found  com-
plete and  diffused  in  all  things.  How  wide  is  its
universal  comprehension !  How  deep  is  its  un-
fathomableness  !  The  embodiment  of  its  attributes
in  benevolence  and  righteousness  is  but  a  small
result  of  its  spirit-like  (working) ;  but  it  is  only  the
perfect  man  who  can  determine  this.  The  perfect
man  has  (the  charge  of)  the  world ; — is  not  the
charge  great  ?  and  yet  it  is  not  sufficient  to  em-
barrass him.  He  wields  the  handle  of  power  over
the  whole  world,  and  yet  it  is  nothing  to  him.  His
discrimination  detects  everything  false,  and  no  con-
sideration of  gain  moves  him.  He  penetrates  to
the  truth  of  things,  and  can  guard  that  which  is
fundamental.  So  it  is  that  heaven  and  earth  are  ex-
ternal to  him,  and  he  views  all  things  with  indifference,
and  his  spirit  is  never  straitened  by  them.  He  has
comprehended  the  Tao,  and  is  in  harmony  with  its
characteristics;  he  pushes  back  benevolence  and
righteousness  (into  their  proper  place),  and  deals
with  ceremonies  and  music  as  (simply)  guests : —
yes,  the  mind  of  the  perfect  man  determines  all
things  aright.'

^  No  doubt,  Lao-^ze.     In  the  '  Complete  Works  of  the  Ten
Philosophers,'  the  text  is  ^^  -?-  and  not  -^  ■^.


PT.  II.  SECT.  VI.        THE    WRITINGS    OF    rWANG-3ZE.  343

10.  What  the  world  thinks  the  most  valuable  ex-
hibition of  the  Tao  is  to  be  found  in  books.  But
books  are  only  a  collection  of  words.  Words  have
what  is  valuable  in  them ; — what  is  valuable  in
words  is  the  ideas  they  convey.  But  those  ideas
are  a  sequence  of  something  else  ; — and  what  that
something  else  is  cannot  be  conveyed  by  words.
When  the  world,  because  of  the  value  which  it
attaches  to  words,  commits  them  to  books,  that
for  which  it  so  values  them  may  not  deserve  to  be
valued ; — because  that  which  it  values  is  not  what
is  really  valuable.

Thus  it  is  that  what  we  look  at  and  can  see  is
(only)  the  out\vard  form  and  colour,  and  what  we
listen  to  and  can  hear  is  (only)  names  and  sounds.
Alas  !  that  men  of  the  world  should  think  that  form
and  colour,  name  and  sound,  should  be  sufficient  to
give  them  the  real  nature  of  the  Tao.  The  form
and  colour,  the  name  and  sound,  are  certainly  not
sufficient  to  convey  its  real  nature ;  and  so  it  is
that  '  the  wise  do  not  speak  and  those  who  do  speak
are  not  wise,'  How  should  the  world  know  that
real  nature  ?

Duke  Hwan\  seated  above  in  his  hall,  was  (once)
reading  a  book,  and  the  wheelwright  Phien  was
making  a  wheel  below  it  -.  Laying  aside  his
hammer  and  chisel,  Phien  went  up  the  steps,  and
said,  '  I  venture  to  ask  your  Grace  what  words  )Ou
are  reading  ? '  The  duke  said,  '  The  words  of
the  sabres/     'Are   those  sap-es  alive?'   Phien   con-

^  No  doubt,  duke  Hwan  of  Kh\,  the  first  of  the  five  presiding
chiefs  of  the  ^au  dynasty.

"^  See  in  INIencius  I,  i,  vii,  4  a  similar  reference  to  the  hall  and
the  courtyard  below  it.


344  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XIII.

tinned.  '  They  are  dead,'  was  the  reply.  '  Then,'
said  the  other,  'what  you,  my  Ruler,  are  reading  are
only  the  dregs  and  sediments  of  those  old  men.'
The  duke  said,  '  How  should  you,  a  wheelwright,
have  anything  to  say  about  the  book  which  I  am
reading?  If  you  can  explain  yourself,  very  well;
if  you  cannot,  you  shall  die!'  The  wheelwright
said,  '  Your  servant  will  look  at  the  thing  from  the
point  of  view  of  his  own  art.  In  making  a  wheel,
if  I  proceed  gently,  that  is  pleasant  enough,  but  the
workmanship  is  not  strong;  if. I  proceed  violently,
that  is  toilsome  and  the  joinings  do  not  fit.  If  the
movements  of  my  hand  are  neither  (too)  gentle  nor
(too)  violent,  the  idea  in  my  mind  is  realised.  But
I  cannot  tell  (how  to  do  this)  by  word  of  mouth  ; —
there  is  a  knack  in  it.  I  cannot  teach  the  knack  to
my  son,  nor  can  my  son  learn  it  from  me.  Thus  it
is  that  I  am  in  my  seventieth  year,  and  am  (stih)
making  wheels  in  my  old  age  ^  But  these  ancients,
and  what  it  was  not  possible  for  them  to  convey,  are
dead  and  gone  : — so  then  what  you,  my  Ruler,  are
reading  is  but  their  dregs  and  sediments ! '

^  Compare  the  story  in  Book  III  about  the  ruler  Wan-hui  and
his  butcher;  and  other  passages.


PT.ii.SECT.Vll.        THE  WRITINGS  OF  A'WANG-3ZE.  345


BOOK   XIV.
Part  II.     Section  VII.

Thien  Yiin,  or  '  The  Revolution  of  Heaven^'

I.  How  (ceaselessly)  heaven  revolves!  How
(constantly)  earth  abides  at  rest!  And  do  the  sun
and  moon  contend  about  their  (respective)  places  ?
Who  presides  over  and  directs  these  (things)  ?  Who
binds  and  connects  them  together  ?  Who  is  It  that,
without  trouble  or  exertion  on  his  part,  causes  and
maintains  them  ?  Is  it,  perhaps,  that  there  is  some
secret  spring,  in  consequence  of  which  they  cannot
be  but  as  they  are  ?  Or  Is  It,  perhaps,  that  they
move  and  turn  as  they  do,  and  cannot  stop  of
themselves  ?

(Then)  how  the  clouds  become  rain !  And  how
the  rain  ao-ain  forms  the  clouds !  Who  diffuses
them  so  abundantly  ?  Who  is  It  that,  without
trouble  or  exertion  on  his  part,  produces  this  ele-
mental enjoyment,  and  seems  to  stimulate  It?

The  winds  rise  in  the  north  ;  one  blows  to  the
west,  and  another  to  the  east ;  while  some  rise
upwards,  uncertain  In  their  direction.  By  whose
breathing  are  they  produced  ?  Who  is  it  that,
without  any  trouble  and  exertion  of  his  own,  effects
all  their  undulations  ?    I  venture  to  ask  their  cause-.


1  See  pp.  145,  146.

2  Down  to  this  we  have  a  description  of  the  phenomena  of
heaven  and  earth  and  of  nature  generally  as  proceeding  regularly


346  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XIV.

Wu-hsien  Thiao^  said,  'Come,  and  I  will  tell  you.
To  heaven  there  belonof  the  six  Extreme  Points,  and
the  five  Elements  ^.  When  the  Tis  and  Kings  acted
in  accordance  with  them,  there  was  good  govern-
ment ;  when  they  acted  contrary  to  them,  there  was
evil.  Observing  the  things  (described)  in  the  nine
divisions  (of  the  writing)  of  Lo  ^,  their  government
was  perfected  and  their  virtue  was  complete.  They
inspected  and  enlightened  the  kingdom  beneath
them,  and  all  under  the  sky  acknowledged  and  sus-
tained them.  Such  was  the  condition  under  the
august  (sovereigns^)  and  those  before  them.'

2.  Tang^,  the  chief  administrator  of  Shang^,  asked
iTwang-^ze  about  Benevolence  *^,  and  the  answer
was,  '  Wolves  and  tigers  are  benevolent.'  '  What  do
you  mean  ? '  said  Tang.  A'wang-^ze  replied, '  Father
and  son  (among  them)  are  affectionate  to  one  an-
other.   Why  should  they  be  considered  as  not  bene-


and  noiselessly,  without  any  apparent  cause ;  which  is  the  chief
subject  of  the  Book.  As  the  description  is  not  assigned  to  any
one,  we  must  suppose  it  to  be  from  A%ang-jze  himself;  and  that
it  is  he  who  asks  the  question  in  the  last  three  characters.

^  This  is  said  by  the  critics  to  have  been  a  minister  of  the  Shang
dynasty,  under  Thai-mau  in  the  seventeenth  century  b.c.  ;  but  even
A'wang-jze  would  hardly  so  violate  the  unity  of  time.

^  Generally  means  'the  Five  Regular  Virtues;'  supposed  to
mean  here  '  the  Five  Elements.'

^  Probably  the  '  Nine  Divisions  of  the  Great  Plan,'  in  the  Shii
King,  V,  iv,  fancied  to  be  derived  from  the  writing,  which  a  tortoise
from  the  Lo  river  exhibited  to  the  great  Yii.

*  Possibly  Fu-hsi,  Shan  Nang,  and  Hwang-Ti.

®  '  Shang '  must  be  taken  as  the  duchy  of  Sung,  assigned  by
king  Wu  to  the  representative  of  the  kings  of  the  dynasty  of
Shang.  '  Tang '  would  be  a  principal  minister  of  it  in  the  time  of
^wang-,5ze.

•^  The  chief  of  all  the  virtues  according  to  Confucianism.


PT.  II.  SECT.  vil.       THE    WRITINGS   OF   ZWANG-SZE.  347

volent  ?'  'Allow  me  to  ask  about  perfect  benevo-
lence,' pursued  the  other.  A'wang-^ze  said,  *  Perfect
benevolence  ^  does  not  admit  (the  feeling)  of  affec-
tion.' The  minister  said,  '  I  have  heard  that,  with-
out (the  feeling  of)  affection  there  is  no  love,  and
without  love  there  is  not  filial  duty ; — is  it  permis-
sible to  say  that  the  perfectly  benevolent  are  not
filial  ? '  A'wang-jze  rejoined,  '  That  is  not  the  way
to  put  the  case.  Perfect  Benevolence  is  the  very
highest  thing  ; — filial  duty  is  by  no  means  sufficient
to  describe  it.  The  saying  which  you  quote  is  not  to
the  effect  that  (such  benevolence)  transcends  filial
duty; — it  does  not  refer  to  such  duty  at  all.  One,
travelling  to  the  south,  comes  (at  last)  to  Ying^,  and
there,  standing  with  his  face  to  the  north,  he  does  not
see  mount  Ming^.  Why  does  he  not  see  it?  Because
he  is  so  far  from  it.  Hence  it  is  said,  "  Filial  duty
as  a  part  of  reverence  is  easy,  but  filial  duty  as  a
part  of  love  is  difficult.  If  it  be  easy  as  a  part  of
love,  yet  it  is  difficult  to  forget*  one's  parents.  It
may  be  easy  for  me  to  forget  my  parents,  but  it  is
difficult  to  make  my  parents  forget  me.  If  it  were
easy  to  make  my  parents  forget  me,  it  is  difficult  for
me  to  forget  all  men  in  the  world.  If  it  were  easy
to  forget  all  men  in  the  world,  it  is  difficult  to  make
them  all  forget  me."

'  This  virtue  might  make  one  think  light  of  Yao
and  Shun,  and  not  wish  to  be  they\     The  profit

1  A  denomination  here  for  the  Tao,  employed  by  A'wang-jze  for
the  purpose  of  his  argument.

2  The  capital  of  the  state  of  AVni  in  the  south.

3  Name  of  a  hill  in  the  extreme  north.

*  The  Tao  requires  such  forgetfulness  on  the  part  of  both  giver
and  receiver ;  it  is  a  part  of  its  '  doing-nothing.'
^  I  think  this  is  the  meaning.


348  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xiv.

and  beneficial  influences  of  it  extend  to  a  myriad
ages,  and  no  one  in  the  world  knows  whence  they
come.  How  can  you  simply  heave  a  great  sigh,
and  speak  (as  you  do)  of  benevolence  and  filial  duty  ?
Filial  duty,  fraternal  respect,  benevolence,  righteous-
ness, loyalty,  sincerity,  firmness,  and  purity; — all
these  may  be  pressed  into  the  service  of  this  virtue,
but  they  are  far  from  sufficient  to  come  up  to  it.
Therefore  it  is  said,  "  To  him  who  has  what  is  most
noble \  all  the  dignities  of  a  state  are  as  nothing- ;  to
him  who  has  what  is  the  greatest  riches,  all  the
wealth  of  a  state  is  as  nothing ;  to  him  who  has
all  that  he  could  wish,  fam.e  and  praise  are  as
nothing,"  It  is  thus  that  the  Tao  admits  of  no
substitute.'

3.  Pel-man  A^/^ang  ^  asked  Hwang-Ti,  saying,
'  You  were  celebrating,  O  Ti,  a  performance  of  the
music  of  the  Hsien-/7/ih  *,  in  the  open  country  near
the  Thung-thing  lake.  When  I  heard  the  first  part
of  it,  I  was  afraid  ;  the  next  m.ade  me  weary  ;  and
the  last  perplexed  me.  I  became  agitated  and  un-
able to  speak,  and  lost  my  self-possession.'  The  Ti
said,  '  It  was  likely  that  it  should  so  affect  you  !  It
was  performed  with  (the  instruments  of)  men,  and  all
attuned  according  to  (the  influences  of)  Heaven.     It


1  The  Tao.

^  This  free  version  takes  4^  as  =  j^.  So  the  Khang-lisi
dictionary  explains  it.

^  Only  heard  of,  so  far  as  I  know,  in  this  passage.

*  The  name  of  Hwang-Ti's  music ;  I  do  not  venture  to  translate
it.  In  his  elaborate  description  of  it,  our  author  intended  to  give
an  idea  of  the  Tao,  and  the  effect  which  the  study  of  it  was
calculated  to  produce  on  the  mind;  as  appears  from  the  concluding
sentence  of  the  paragraph.


PT.  II.  SECT.vil.       THE    WRITINGS    OF   ATWANG-SZE.  349

proceeded  according  to  (the  principles  of)  propriety
and  righteousness,  and  was  pervaded  by  (the  idea  of)
the  Grand  Purity.

'  The  Perfect  Music  first  had  its  response  in  the
affairs  of  men,  and  was  conformed  to  the  principles
of  Heaven  ;  It  indicated  the  action  of  the  five  virtues,
and  corresponded  to  the  spontaneity  (apparent  in
nature).  After  this  it  showed  the  blended  distinc-
tions of  the  four  seasons,  and  the  grand  harmony  of
all  thino's  ; — the  succession  of  those  seasons  one  after
another,  and  the  production  of  things  in  their  proper
order.  Now  it  swelled,  and  now  it  died  away,  its
peaceful  and  military  strains  clearly  distinguished
and  given  forth.  Now  it  was  clear,  and  now  rough,
as  if  the  contracting  and  expanding  of  the  elemen-
tal processes  blended  harmoniously  (in  Its  notes).
Those  notes  then  flowed  away  in  waves  of  light,
till,  as  when  the  hibernating  insects  first  begin  to
move,  I  commanded  the  terrifying  crash  of  thunder.
Its  end  was  marked  by  no  formal  conclusion,  and  it
began  again  without  any  prelude.  It  seemed  to  die
away,  and  then  it  burst  into  life  ;  it  came  to  a  close,
and  then  it  rose  again.  So  it  went  on  regularly  and
inexhaustibly,  and  without  the  intervention  of  any
pause  : — It  was  this  which  made  you  afraid.

'  In  the  second  part  (of  the  performance),  I  made
it  describe  the  harmony  of  the  Yin  and  Yang,  and
threw  round  it  the  brilliance  of  the  sun  and  m.oon.
Its  notes  were  now  short  and  now  long,  now  soft
and  now  hard.  Their  changes,  however,  were
marked  by  an  unbroken  unity,  though  not  domi-
nated by  a  fixed  regularity.  They  filled  every
valley  and  ravine ;  you  might  shut  up  every  crevice,
and  guard  your  spirit  (against  their  entrance),  yet


350  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XIV.

there  was  nothing  but  gave  admission  to  them.
Yea,  those  notes  resounded  slowly,  and  might  have
been  pronounced  high  and  clear.  Hence  the  shades
of  the  dead  kept  in  their  obscurity ;  the  sun  and
moon,  and  all  the  stars  of  the  zodiac,  pursued  their
several  courses.  I  made  (my  instruments)  leave  off,
when  (the  performance)  came  to  an  end,  and  their
(echoes)  flowed  on  without  stopping.  You  thought
anxiously  about  it,  and  were  not  able  to  understand
it;  you  looked  for  it,  and  were  not  able  to  see  it;
you  pursued  it,  and  were  not  able  to  reach  it.  All-
amazed,  you  stood  in  the  way  all  open  around  you,
and  then  you  leant  against  an  old  rotten  dryandra-
tree  and  hummed.  The  power  of  your  eyes  was  ex-
hausted by  what  you  wished  to  see ;  your  strength
failed  in  your  desire  to  pursue  it,  while  I  myself
could  not  reach  it.  Your  body  was  but  so  much
empty  vacancy  while  you  endeavoured  to  retain
your  self-possession  ^ : — it  was  that  endeavour  which
made  you  weary.

'  In  the  last  part  (of  the  performance),  I  employed
notes  which  did  not  have  that  wearying  effect.  I
blended  them  together  as  at  the  command  of  spon-
taneity. Hence  they  came  as  if  following  one  an-
other in  confusion,  like  a  clump  of  plants  springing
from  one  root,  or  like  the  music  of  a  forest  pro-
duced by  no  visible  form.  They  spread  themselves
all  around  without  leaving  a  trace  (of  their  cause)  ;
and  seemed  to  issue  from  deep  obscurity  where
there  was  no  sound.  Their  movements  came  from
nowhere ;  their  home  was  in  the  deep  darkness  ; —

*  See  the  usage  of  the  two  characters  ^^  ^*g  in  the  Shih  King,
I,  ii.  Ode  3.


PT.  II.  SECT. VII.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    i:WANG-3ZE.  35 1

conditions  which  some  would  call  death,  and  some
life  ;  some,  the  fruit,  and  some,  (merely)  the  flower.
Those  notes,  moving  and  flowing  on,  separating-  and
shifting,  and  not  following  any  regular  sounds,  the
world  might  well  have  doubts  about  them,  and  refer
them  to  the  judgment  of  a  sage,  for  the  sages  under-
stand the  nature  of  this  music,  and  judge  in  accord-
ance with  the  prescribed  (spontaneity).  While  the
spring  of  that  spontaneity  has  not  been  touched,
and  yet  the  regulators  of  the  five  notes  are  all
prepared  ;  —  this  is  what  is  called  the  music  of
Heaven,  deliehtinof-  the  mind  without  the  use  of
words.  Hence  it  is  said  in  the  eulogy  of  the  Lord
of  Piao  \  "  You  listen  for  it,  and  do  not  hear  its
sound  ;  you  look  for  it,  and  do  not  perceive  its  form  ;
it  fills  heaven  and  earth  ;  it  envelopes  all  within  the
universe."  You  wished  to  hear  it,  but  could  not
take  it  in  ;   and  therefore  you  were  perplexed.

'  I  performed  first  the  music  calculated  to  awe  ;
and  you  were  frightened  as  if  by  a  ghostly  visita-
tion. I  follow^ed  it  with  that  calculated  to  weary  ;
and  in  your  weariness  you  would  have  withdrawn.
I  concluded  with  that  calculated  to  perplex  ;  and  in
your  perplexity  you  felt  your  stupidity.  But  that
stupidity  is  akin  to  the  Tao;  you  may  with  it
convey  the  Tao  in  your  person,  and  have  it  (ever)
with  you.'

4.  When  Confucius  was  travelling  in  the  west  in
Wei,  Yen  Ytian  asked  the  music-master  Km  -,  say-


'  Some  sovereign  of  antiquity,  of  whom  it  is  difficult  to  find  any
other  mention  but  this.  Even  in  the  Lu  Shih  I  have  not  discovered
him.  The  name  is  said  to  be  pronounced  Piao;  in  which
case  it  should  consist  of  three  ^,  and  not  of  three  j/^.

^  Onlv  heard  of  here.


352  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XIV.


O


ing,  *  How  is  it,  do  you  think,  with  the  course  of  the
Master  ? '  The  music-master  repHed,  'Alas!  it  is  all
over  with  your  Master!'  'How  so?'  asked  Yen
Ylian  ;  and  the  other  said,  '  Before  the  crrass-does^
are  set  forth  (at  the  sacrifice),  they  are  deposited  in
a  box  or  basket,  and  wrapt  up  with  elegantly
embroidered  cloths,  while  the  representative  of  the
dead  and  the  officer  of  prayer  prepare  themselves
by  fasting  to  present  them.  After  they  have  been
set  forth,  however,  passers-by  trample  on  their  heads
and  backs,  and  the  grass-cutters  take  and  burn  them
in  cooking.  That  is  all  they  are  good  for.  If  one
should  again  take  them,  replace  them  in  the  box  or
basket,  wrap  them  up  with  embroidered  cloths,  and
then  in  rambling,  or  abiding  at  the  spot,  should  go
to  sleep  under  them,  if  he  do  not  get  (evil)  dreams,
he  is  sure  to  be  often  troubled  w^ith  the  nightmare.
Now  here  is  your  Master  in  the  same  way  taking  the
grass-dogs,  presented  by  the  ancient  kings,  and  lead-
ing his  disciples  to  wander  or  abide  and  sleep  under
them.  Owing  to  this,  the  tree  (beneath  which  they
were  practising  ceremonies)  in  Sung  was  cut  down^ ;
he  was  obliged  to  leave  Wei  ^ ;  he  was  reduced  to
extremities  in  Shang^  and  A'au^: — were  not  those
experiences  like  having  (evil)  dreams  ?  He  was  kept
in  a  state  of  siege  between  A7^an  and  3hai  ^,  so  that
for  seven  days  he  had  no  cooked  food  to  eat,  and
was  in  a  situation  between  life  and  death  : — were
not  those  experiences  like  the  nightmare  ?


^  See  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing,  ch.  5.  ^  Analects  III,  xxii.

^  In  consequence  of  the  dissoluteness  of  the  court ;    Analects
VI,  xxvi;  IX,  17.

*  Meaning  Sung  and  ^^'ei.  ^  Analects  XI,  ii,  i.


PT.  II.  SECT.  VII.       THE   WRITINGS    OF   A'WANG-3ZE.  353


*  If  you  are  travelling  by  water,  your  best  plan  is
to  use  a  boat ;  if  by  land,  a  carriage.  Take  a  boat,
which  will  go  (easily)  along  on  the  water,  and  try
to  push  it  along  on  the  land,  and  all  your  lifetime  it
will  not  go  so  much  as  a  fathom  or  two  : — are  not
ancient  time  and  the  present  time  like  the  water
and  the  dry  land  ?  and  are  not  A^au  and  Lu  like  the
boat  and  the  carriage  ?  To  seek  now  to  practise
(the  old  ways  of)  A'au  in  Lu  is  like  pushing  along  a
boat  on  the  dry  land.  It  is  only  a  toilsome  labour,
and  has  no  success  ;  he  who  does  so  is  sure  to  meet
with  calamity.  He  has  not  learned  that  in  handing
down  the  arts  (of  one  time)  he  is  sure  to  be  reduced
to  extremity  in  endeavouring  to  adapt  them  to  the
conditions  (of  another).

'And  have  you  not  seen  the  working  of  a  shadoof?
When  (the  rope  of)  it  is  pulled,  it  bends  down ;  and
when  it  is  let  go,  it  rises  up.  It  is  pulled  by  a  man,
and  does  not  pull  the  man ;  and  so,  whether  it  bends
down  or  rises  up,  it  commits  no  offence  against  the
man.  In  the  same  way  the  rules  of  propriety,
righteousness,  laws,  and  measures  of  the  three
Hwangs  ^  and  five  Tis  ^  derived  their  excellence,
not  from  their  being  the  same  as  those  of  the  pre-
sent day,  but  from  their  (aptitude  for)  government.
We   may  compare  them  to  haws  ^,  pears,  oranges,

^  It  is  impossible  to  speak  definitely  of  who  these  three  Hwangs
(Augustuses)  and  five  Tis  were,  or  whom  the  speaker  intended
by  them.  The  former  would  seem  to  lead  us  to  the  purely
fabulous  ages,  when  twelve  (or  thirteen)  Heavenly  Hwangs,  eleven
Earthly,  and  nine  Human  ruled  over  the  young  world,  for  a  period
of  576,000  years.  There  is  a  general  agreement  of  opinion  that
the  five  Tis  ended  with  Yao  and  Shun.

^  See  Williams's  Dictionary,  sub  voc.     He  says  it  is  the  Cra-

[39]  A  a


354  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XIV.

and  pummeloes,  which  are  different  in  flavour,  but  all
suitable  to  be  eaten.  Just  so  it  is  that  the  rules  of
propriety,  righteousness,  laws,  and  measures,  change
according  to  the  time.

*  If  now  you  take  a  monkey,  and  dress  it  in  the
robes  of  the  duke  of  A^au,  it  will  bite  and  tear  them,
and  will  not  be  satisfied  till  it  has  grot  rid  of  them
altogether.  And  if  you  look  at  the  difference
between  antiquity  and  the  present  time  it  is  as  great
as  that  between  the  monkey  and  the  duke  of  IvdiU.
In  the  same  way,  when  Hsi  Shih  ^  was  troubled  in
mind,  she  would  knit  her  brows  and  frown  on  all  in
her  neighbourhood.  An  ugly  woman  of  the  neigh-
bourhood, seeing  and  admiring  her  beauty,  went
home,  and  also  laying  her  hands  on  her  heart  pro-
ceeded to  stare  and  frown  on  all  around  her.  When
the  rich  people  of  the  village  saw  her,  they  shut  fast
their  doors  and  would  not  go  out ;  when  the  poor
people  saw  her,  they  took  their  wives  and  children
and  ran  away  from  her.  The  woman  knew  how  to
admire  the  frowning  beauty,  but  she  did  not  know
how  it  w^as  that  she,  though  frowning,  was  beautiful.
Alas  !  it  is  indeed  all  over  with  your  Master  ^ ! '

5.  When  Confucius  was  in  his  fifty-first  year  2,  he
had  not  heard  of  the  Tao,  and  went  south  to  Phei  ^

taegus  cuneata  and  pinnatifida,  common  in  China,  and  much
esteemed  for  its  acidity.

^  A  famous  beauty, — the  concubine  of  king  Fft-X'Mi  of  Wu.

^  The  comparisons  in  this  paragraph  are  not  complimentary  to
Confucius.  Of  course  the  conversation  never  took  place,  and  must
have  been  made  up  to  ridicule  the  views  of  the  sage.

^  This  would  be  in  b.c.  503  or  502,  and  Lao-jze  would  be  more
than  a  hundred  years  old.

*  Probably  in  what  is  now  the  district  of  Phei,  department  of
Hsu-X:au,  A'iang-su.


PT.  II.  SECT.  VII.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    X'WANG-SZE.  355

to  see  Lao  Tan,  who  said  to  him,  '  You  have  come,
Sir  ;  have  you  ?  I  have  heard  that  you  are  the
wisest  man  of  the  North  ;  have  you  also  got  the
Tao  ? '  '  Not  yet,'  was  the  reply  ;  and  the  other
went  on,  *  How  have  you  sought  it  ? '  Confucius
said,  '  I  sought  it  in  measures  and  numbers,  and
after  five  years  I  had  not  got  it.'  '  And  how
then  did  you  seek  it?'  'I  sought  it  in  the  Yin
and  Yang,  and  after  twelve  years  I  have  not  found
it'  Lao-^ze  said,  'Just  so!  If  the  Tao  could  be
presented  (to  another),  men  would  all  present  it  to
their  rulers  ;  if  it  could  be  served  up  (to  others),
men  would  all  serve  it  up  to  their  parents  ;  if  it
could  be  told  (to  others),  men  would  all  tell  it  to
their  brothers ;  if  it  could  be  given  to  others,  men
would  all  orive  it  to  their  sons  and  grandsons.  The
reason  why  it  cannot  be  transmitted  is  no  other  but
this, — that  if,  within,  there  be  not  the  presiding  prin-
ciple, it  will  not  remain  there,  and  if,  outwardly,  there
be  not  the  correct  obedience,  it  will  not  be  carried
out.  When  that  which  is  mven  out  from  the  mind
(in  possession  of  it)  is  not  received  by  the  mind
without,  the  sage  will  not  give  it  out ;  and  when,
entering  in  from  without,  there  is  no  power  in  the
receiving  mind  to  entertain  it,  the  sage  will  not
permit  it  to  lie  hid  there  \  Fame  is  a  possession
common  to  all ;  we  should  not  seek  to  have  much
of  it.  Benevolence  and  righteousness  were  as  the
lodging-houses  of  the  former  kings ;  we  should  only
rest  in  them  for  a  night,  and  not  occupy  them  for


^  That  is,  the  sage  will  not  deposit  it,  where  it  will  lie  hidden  :
compare  Analects  XVI,  vi.

A  a  2


356  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XIV.

long.     If  men  see  us  doing  so,  they  will  have  much
to  say  against  us.

'  The  perfect  men  of  old  trod  the  path  of  benevo-
lence as  a  path  which  they  borrowed  for  the  occasion,
and  dwelt  in  Righteousness  as  in  a  lodging  which  they
lised  for  a  night.  Thus  they  rambled  in  the  vacancy
of  Untroubled  Ease,  found  their  food  in  the  fields  of
Indifference,  and  stood  in  the  gardens  which  they  had
not  borrowed.  Untroubled  Ease  requires  the  doing  of
nothing ;  Indifference  is  easily  supplied  with  nourish-
ment ;  not  borrowing  needs  no  outlay.  The  ancients
called  this  the  Enjoyment  that  Collects  the  True.

'  Those  who  think  that  wealth  is  the  proper  thing
for  them  cannot  give  up  their  revenues  ;  those  who
seek  distinction  cannot  give  up  the  thought  of  fame  ;
those  who  cleave  to  power  cannot  give  the  handle  of
it  to  others.  While  they  hold  their  grasp  of  those
things,  they  are  afraid  (of  losing  them).  When  they
let  them  go,  they  are  grieved  ;  and  they  will  not  look
at  a  single  example,  from  which  they  might  perceive
the  (folly)  of  their  restless  pursuits  : — such  men  are
under  the  doom  of  Heaven  \

'  Hatred  and  kindness;  taking  and  giving;  reproof
and  instruction  ;  death  and  life  : — these  eight  things
are  instruments  of  rectification,  but  only  those  are
able  to  use  them  who  do  not  obstinately  refuse  to
comply  with  their  great  changes.  Hence  it  is  said,
"  Correction  is  Rectification."     When  the  minds  of


^  See  the  same  expression  used  in  Book  VI,  par.  11,  used
by  Confucius  of  himself.  Comparing  the  two  passages  together,
I  must  doubt  the  correctness  of  my  note  there  (2,  p.  252),  that
'Heaven'  is  used  in  the  Confucian  sense  of  Ti,  or  God.  The
men  here  pursued  and  toiled  after  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  rather
than  the  quiet  satisfactions  of  the  Tao.


PT.  II.  SECT. VII.       THE    WRITINGS    OF   A'WANG-3ZE.  357

some  do  not  acknowledge  this,  it  is  because  the  gate
of  Heaven^  (in  them)  has  not  been  opened.'

6.   At    an    interview    with     Lao    Tan,    Confucius
spoke  to  him  of  benevolence  and  righteousness.   Lao
Tan  said, '  If  you  winnow  chaff,  and  the  dust  gets  into
your  e}es,  then  the  places  of  heaven  and  earth  and
of  the  four  cardinal  points  are  all  changed  to  you.
If  musquitoes  or  gadflies  puncture  your  skin,  it  will
keep  you   all  the  night  -  from  sleeping.      But  this
painful  iteration  of  benevolence  and  righteousness
excites  my  mind  and  produces  in  it  the  greatest  con-
fusion.    If  you,  Sir,  would  cause  men  not  to  lose
their  natural  simplicity,  and  if  you  would  also  imitate
the  wind  in  its  (unconstrained)  movements,  and  stand
forth  in  all  the  natural  attributes  belonging  to  you  !
— why  must  you  use  so  much  energy,  and  carry  a
great  drum  to  seek  for  the  son  whom  you  have  lost"'?
The  snow-goose  does  not  bathe  every  day  to  make
itself  white,  nor  the  crow  blacken  itself  every  day  to
make  itself  black.     The  natural  simplicity  of  their
black  and  white  does  not  afford  any  ground  for  con-
troversy ;  and  the  fame  and  praise  which  men  like
to  contemplate  do  not  make  them  greater  than  they
naturally  are.     When   the    springs    (supplying    the
pools)  are  dried  up,  the  fishes  huddle  together  on
the  dry  land.      Than  that  they  should  moisten  one
another  there  by  their  gasping,  and  keep  one  another
wet  by  their  milt,  it  would  be  better  for  them   to
foro-et  one  another  in  the  rivers  and  lakes  ^'


1  See  Book  XXIII,  par.  9.    The  phrase  =  g  JfJ.

2  The  common  reading  ^  is  a  mistake  for  y  .

^  Compare  the  same  illustration  in  the  preceding  Book,  par.  7.

*  This  illustration  is  from  Book  VI,  par.  5.


J


58  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XIV.


From  this  interview  with  Lao  Tan,  Confucius
returned  home,  and  for  three  days  did  not  speak.
His  disciples  (then)  asked  him,  saying,  '  Master,  you
have  seen  Lao  Tan ;  in  what  way  might  you  ad-
monish and  correct  him  ? '  Confucius  said,  '  In  him
(I  may  say)  that  I  have  now  seen  the  dragon.  The
dragon  coils  itself  up,  and  there  is  its  body ;  it
unfolds  itself  and  becomes  the  dragon  complete.  It
rides  on  the  cloudy  air,  and  is  nourished  by  the  Yin
and  Yang.  I  kept  my  mouth  open,  and  was  unable
to  shut  it ; — how  could  I  admonish  and  correct  Lao
Tan?'

7.  3ze-kung  ^  said, '  So  then,  can  (this)  man  indeed
sit  still  as  a  representative  of  the  dead,  and  then
appear  as  the  dragon  ?  Can  his  voice  resound  as
thunder,  when  he  is  profoundly  still  ?  Can  he
exhibit  himself  in  his  movements  like  heaven  and
earth?  May  I,  3^"^ze,  also  get  to  see  him?'  Accord-
ingly with  a  message  from  Confucius  he  went  to  see
Lao  Tan.

Lao  Tan  was  then  about  to  answer  (his  salutation)
haughtily  in  the  hall,  but  he  said  in  a  low  voice,
'  My  years  have  rolled  on  and  are  passing  away,
what  do  you.  Sir,  wish  to  admonish  me  about  ?  '  ^zq-
kung  replied,  'The  Three  Kings  and  Five  Tis  ^  ruled

^  3ze-kung  would  seem  to  have  undertaken  this  expedition  to
maintain  the  reputation  of  the  Master  and  his  school ; — only  to  be
defeated  by  Lao-jze  more  signally  than  Confucius  had  been.

^  These  are  different  probably,  though  the  text  is  not  quite
certain,  from  the  three  Hwangs  and  five  Tis  of  par.  3.  The
Hwangs  (or  August  Sovereigns)  preceded  the  Tis;  the  Kings
(Wangs)  came  after  them.  The  Three  Kings  are  the  three  lines
of  kings  commencing  with  the  dynasty  of  Hsia,  and  following
Shun.  From  the  names  mentioned  by  3ze-kung,  we  ought
certainly  so  to  understand  the  designation  here.


PT.  n.  SECT.vir.       THE    WRITINGS    OF   ^WANG-3ZE.  359

the  world  not  in  the  same  way,  but  the  fame  that  has
accrued  to  them  is  the  same.  How  is  it  that  you
alone  consider  that  they  were  not  sages  ? '  '  Come
forward  a  little,  my  son.  Why  do  you  say  that  (their
government)  was  not  the  same  ? '  '  Yao,'  was  the
reply,  '  gave  the  kingdom  to  Shun,  and  Shun  gave
it  to  Yli.  Yii  had  recourse  to  his  strength,  and
Thang  to  the  force  of  arms.  King  Wan  was
obedient  to  A"au  (-hsin),  and  did  not  dare  to  rebel ;
kine  Wu  rebelled  aoainst  A'^au,  and  would  not
submit  to  him.  And  I  say  that  their  methods  were
not  the  same.'  Lao  Tan  said,  '  Come  a  little  more
forward,  my  son,  and  I  will  tell  you  how  the  Three
Hwangs  and  the  Five  Tis^  ruled  the  world.  Hwang-
Ti  ruled  it,  so  as  to  make  the  minds  of  the  people
all  conformed  to  the  One  (simplicity).  If  the  parents
of  one  of  them  died,  and  he  did  not  wail,  no  one
blamed  him.  Yao  ruled  it  so  as  to  cause  the  hearts
of  the  people  to  cherish  relative  affection.  If  any,
however,  made  the  observances  on  the  death  of
other  members  of  their  kindred  less  than  those  for
their  parents,  no  one  blamed  them  -.  Shun  ruled  it,
so  as  to  produce  a  feeling  of  rivalry  in  the  minds
of  the  people.  Their  wives  gave  birth  to  their
children  in  the  tenth  month  of  their  pregnancy,  but
those  children  could  speak  at  five  months  ;  and
before  they  were  three  years  old,  they  began  to  call
people  by  their  surnames  and  names.  Then  it  was
that  men  began  to  die  prematurely.  Yii  ruled  it,
so  as  to  cause  the  minds  of  the  people  to  become
chana;ed.     Men's  minds  became  scheming,  and  they


&


^  See  note  2,  preceding  page.

2  Referring  to  some  abuses,  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  rela-
tionship.


360  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xiv.

used  their  weapons  as  if  they  might  legitimately  do
so,  (saying  that  they  were)  killing  thieves  and  not
killing  other  men.  The  people  formed  themselves
into  different  combinations  ; — so  it  was  throughout
the  kingdom.  Everywhere  there  was  great  con-
sternation, and  then  arose  the  Literati  and  (the
followers  of)  Mo  (Ti).  From  them  came  first  the
doctrine  of  the  relationships  (of  society) ;  and  what
can  be  said  of  the  now  prevailing  customs  (in  the
marrying  of)  wives  and  daughters  ?  I  tell  you
that  the  rule  of  the  Three  Kings  and  Five  Tis  may
be  called  by  that  name,  but  nothing  can  be  greater
than  the  disorder  which  it  produced.  The  wisdom
of  the  Three  Kings  was  opposed  to  the  brightness
of  the  sun  and  moon  above,  contrary  to  the  exquisite
purity  of  the  hills  and  streams  below,  and  subversive
of  the  beneficent  gifts  of  the  four  seasons  between.
Their  wisdom  has  been  more  fatal  than  the  sting-  of
a  scorpion  or  the  bite  of  a  dangerous  beast  ^  Unable
to  rest  in  the  true  attributes  of  their  nature  and  con-
stitution, they  still  regarded  themselves  as  sages  : —
was  it  not  a  thing  to  be  ashamed  of  ?  But  they  were
shameless.'  5ze-kung  stood  quite  disconcerted  and
ill  at  ease.

8.  Confucius  said  to  Lao  Tan,  '  I  have  occupied
myself  with  the  Shih,  the  Shu,  the  Li,  the  Yo,  the
Yi,  and  the  AV/un  Kh'm,  those  six  Books,  for  what  I
myself  consider  a   long  time  -,  and  am  thoroughly


^  What  beast  is  meant  here  cannot  be  ascertained  from  the
characters  in  the  text, — i(\^  ^^  ^  1^.

^  But  with  the  preparation  of  the  Khun  Khm  Confucius's  Hfe
ended ; — it  is  very  plain  that  no  conversation  such  as  ^wang-^ze  has
fabricated  here  could  ever  have  taken  place.


PT.  II.  SECT.  Yii.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  36 1

acquainted  with  their  contents.  With  seventy-two
rulers,  all  offenders  against  the  right,  I  have  dis-
coursed about  the  ways  of  the  former  kings,  and  set
forth  the  examples  of  (the  dukes  of)  Kd.w  and
Shao  ;  and  not  one  of  them  has  adopted  (my  views)
and  put  them  in  practice  : — how  very  difficult  it  is  to
prevail  on  such  men,  and  to  make  clear  the  path  to
be  pursued ! '

Lao-jze  replied,  '  It  is  fortunate  that  you  have
not  met  with  a  ruler  fitted  to  rule  the  aoe.     Those

o

six  writings  are  a  description  of  the  vestiges  left  by
the  former  kings,  but  do  not  tell  how  they  made
such  vestiges  ;  and  what  you,  Sir,  speak  about  are
still  only  the  vestiges.  But  vestiges  are  the  prints
left  by  the  shoes  ; — are  they  the  shoes  that  produced
them  ?  A  pair  of  white  herons  look  at  each  other
with  pupils  that  do  not  move,  and  impregnation  takes
place  ;  the  male  insect  emits  its  buzzing  sound  in
the  air  above,  and  the  female  responds  from  the  air
below,  and  impregnation  takes  place  ;  the  creatures
called  lei  are  both  male  and  female,  and  each
individual  breeds  of  itself  \  The  nature  cannot
be  altered ;  the  conferred  constitution  cannot  be
changed  ;  the  march  of  the  seasons  cannot  be
arrested;  the  Tao  cannot  be  stopped.  If  you  get
the  Tao,  there  is  no  effect  that  cannot  be  produced  ;
if  you  miss  it,  there  is  no  effect  that  can.'

Confucius  (after  this)  did  not  go  out,  till  at  the
end  of  three  months  he  went  again  to  see  Lao  Tan,
and  said,  '  I  have  got  it.  Ravens  produce  their
young  by  hatching  ;  fishes  by  the  communication  of
their  milt ;  the   small-waisted  wasp  by  transforma-

'  Where  had  Lao-jze  or  his  author  learned  his  zoology?


362  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XIV.

tion  ^ ;  when  a  younger  brother  comes,  the  elder
weeps  -.  Long  is  it  that  I  have  not  played  my  part
in  harmony  with  these  processes  of  transformation.
But  as  I  did  not  play  my  part  in  harmony  with
such  transformation,  how  could  I  transform  men  ? '
Lao-^ze  said,  '  You  will  do.  Khm,  you  have  found
the  Tao.'

^  See  the  Shih  King,  II,  v,  Ode  II,  3,  about  the  sphex.

^  Because,  as  we  say,  '  his  nose  is  put  out.'  But  the  sentiment,
though  it  is  ascribed  to  Confucius,  is  rarely  according  to  the  fact  of
the  case.


PT.  II.  SECT.VIII.        THE    WRITINGS    OF    ^WANG-3ZE.  363


BOOK   XV.
Part  II.     Section  VIII.

Kho  1,  or  '  Ingrained  Ideas  \'

I.  Ihofrained  Ideas  and  a  hioh  estimate  of  their
own  conduct ;  leaving  the  world,  and  pursuing  un-
common ways ;  talking  loftily  and  in  resentful
disparagement  of  others  ; — all  this  is  simply
symptomatic  of  arrogance.  This  is  what  scholars
who  betake  themselves  to  the  hills  and  valleys,  who
are  always  blaming  the  world,  and  who  stand  aloof
like  withered  trees,  or  throw  themselves  into  deep
pools  ^,  are  fond  of.

Discoursing  of  benevolence,  righteousness,  loyalty,
and  good  faith  ;  being  humble  and  frugal,  self-forget-
ful and  courteous  ; — all  this  is  simply  symptomatic  of
(self-)cultivation.  This  is  what  scholars  who  wish
to  tranquillise  the  world,  teachers  and  Instructors,
men  who  pursue  their  studies  at  home  and  abroad,
are  fond  of.

Discoursing  of  their  great  merit  and  making  a
great  name  for  themselves  ;  insisting  on  the  cere-
monies between  ruler  and  minister  ;  and  rectifying
the  relations  between  high  and  low  ; — all  this  shows
their  one  object  to  be  the  promotion  of  government.
This  is  what  officers  of  the  court,  men  who  honour
their  lord  and  would  strengthen  the  state  and  who


^  See  pp.  146,  147.

2  As  did  Shan-thu  Ti.     See  in  Book  VI,  par.  3.


.!)


64  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XV.


would  do  their  utmost  to   incorporate  other  states
with  their  own,  are  fond  of.

Resorting  to  marshes  and  lakes  ;  dwelling  in
solitary  places ;  occupying  themselves  with  angling
and  living  at  ease  ; — all  this  shows  their  one  object
to  be  to  do  nothing.  This  is  what  gentlemen  of  the
rivers  and  seas,  men  who  avoid  the  society  of  the
world  and  desire  to  live  at  leisure,  are  fond  of.

Blowing  and  breathing  with  open  mouth  ;  inhaling
and  exhaling  the  breath  ;  expelling  the  old  breath
and  taking  in  new  ;  passing  their  time  like  the  (dor-
mant) bear  \  and  stretching  and  twisting  (the  neck)
like  a  bird  ^  ; — all  this  simply  shows  the  desire  for
longevity.  This  is  what  the  scholars  who  manipu-
late their  breath,  and  the  men  who  nourish  the
body  and  wish  to  live  as  long  as  Pang  ^u,  are
fond  of.

As  to  those  who  have  a  lofty  character  without
any  ingrained  ideas  ;  who  pursue  the  path  of  self-
cultivation  without  benevolence  and  righteousness ;
who  succeed  in  crovernment  without  p^reat  services  or
fame  ;  who  enjoy  their  ease  without  resorting  to  the
rivers  and  seas  ;  who  attain  to  longevity  without  the
management  (of  the  breath) ;  who  forget  all  things
and  yet  possess  all  things ;  whose  placidity  is  un-
limited, while  all  things  to  be  valued  attend  them  : —
such  men  pursue  the  way  of  heaven  and  earth,  and
display  the  characteristics  of  the  sages.  Hence  it
is  said  -,  '  Placidity,  indifference,   silence,    quietude,

^  This  is  probably  the  meaning.  The  text  is  simply : — '  Bear-
passing,  bird-stretching.'

^  'It  is  said : ' — where  ?  and  by  whom  .?  These  questions  we
cannot  answer.  We  have  met  indeed  already  with  the  same  cha-
racteristics of  the  Tao;    but  A'wang-jze  is  not  likely  to  be  quoting


PT.  II.  SECT.  VIII.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    X-WANG-SZE.  365

absolute  vacancy,  and  non-action  : — these  are  the
qualities  which  maintain  the  level  of  heaven  and
earth  and  are  the  substance  of  the  Tao  and  its
characteristics.'

2.  In  accordance  with  this  it  is  said,  '  The  sage  is
entirely  restful,  and  so  (his  mind)  is  evenly  balanced
and  at  ease.  This  even  balance  and  ease  appears
in  his  placidity  and  indifference.  In  this  state  of
even  balance  and  ease,  of  placidity  and  indifference,
anxieties  and  evils  do  not  find  access  to  him,  no
depraving  influence  can  take  him  by  surprise  ;
his  virtue  is  complete,  and  his  spirit  continues
unimpaired.'

Therefore  it  is  (also)  said,  '  The  life  of  the  sage  is
(like)  the  action  of  Heaven ;  and  his  death  is  the
transformation  common  to  (all)  things.  In  his  still-
ness his  virtue  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Yin,  and
in  movement  his  diffusiveness  is  like  that  of  the
Yang.  He  does  not  take  the  initiative  in  produc-
ing either  happiness  or  calamity.  He  responds  to
the  influence  acting  on  him,  and  moves  as  he  feels
the  pressure.  He  rises  to  act  only  when  he  is  obliged
to  do  so.  He  discards  wisdom  and  the  memories
of  the  past;  he  follows  the  lines  of  his  Heaven
(-given  nature) ;  and  therefore  he  suffers  no  calamity
from  Heaven,  no  involvement  from  things,  no
blame  from  men,  and  no  reproof  from  the  spirits  of
the  dead  \  His  life  seems  to  float  along  ;  his  death
seems  to  be  a  resting.      He  does  not  indulge  any

himself.  On  the  '  It  is  said,'  and  the  five  recurrences  of  the  phrase
below,  Lu  Shu-^-ih  says  that  ^wang-^^ze  is  quoting  from  sentences
current  among  the  adherents  of  Taoism,— the  sentence-makers
often  drawn  on  by  Lao-jze;  compare  the  Tao  Teh  A'ing,  ch.  xli.
^  See  Book  XIII,  par.  2.


366  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xv.

anxious  doubts  ;  he  does  not  lay  plans  beforehand.
His  light  is  without  display;  his  good  faith  is  with-
out previous  arrangement.  His  sleep  is  untroubled
by  dreams  ;  his  waking  is  followed  by  no  sorrows.
His  spirit  is  guileless  and  pure;  his  soul  is  not  sub-
ject to  weariness.  Vacant  and  without  self-assertion,
placid  and  indifferent,  he  agrees  with  the  virtue  of
Heaven.'

Therefore  it  is  said  (further),  '  Sadness  and  plea-
sure show  a  depraving  element  in  the  virtue  (of  those
who  feel  them) ;  joy  and  anger  show  some  error  in
their  course  ;  love  and  hatred  show  a  failure  of  their
virtue.  Hence  for  the  mind  to  be  free  from  sorrow
and  pleasure  is  the  perfection  of  virtue  ;  to  be  of
one  mind  that  does  not  change  is  the  perfection  of
quietude  ;  to  be  conscious  of  no  opposition  is  the
perfection  of  vacancy ;  to  have  no  intercourse  with
(external)  things  is  the  perfection  of  indifference ;
and  to  have  no  rebellious  dissatisfactions  is  the
perfection  of  purity.'

3.  Therefore  it  is  said  (still  further),  '  If  the  body
be  toiled,  and  does  not  rest,  it  becomes  worn  out ;
if  the  spirit  be  used  without  cessation,  it  becomes
toiled  ;  and  when  toiled,  it  becomes  exhausted.  It
is  the  nature  of  water,  when  free  from  admixture,
to  be  clear,  and,  when  not  agitated,  to  be  level ;
while  if  obstructed  and  not  allowed  to  flow,  it  cannot
preserve  its  clearness ; — being  an  image  of  the
virtue  of  Heaven.'  Hence  it  is  said  (once  again),
'  To  be  guileless  and  pure,  and  free  from  all  admix-
ture ;  to  be  still  and  uniform,  without  undergoing
any  change  ;  to  be  indifferent  and  do  nothing  ;  to
move  and  yet  to  act  like  Heaven : — this  is  the  wa}-
to  nourish    the    spirit.     Now  he  who    possesses    a


PT.  II.  SECT.  VIII.       THE    WRITINGS    OF   JiTWANG-SZE.  367


sword  made  at  Kan-yueh  '  preserves  it  carefully  in
a  box,  and  does  not  dare  to  use  it ; — it  is  considered
the  perfection  of  valuable  swords.  But  the  human
spirit  -  goes  forth  in  all  directions,  flowing  on  with-
out limit,  reaching  to  heaven  above,  and  wreathing
round  the  earth  beneath.  It  transforms  and
nourishes  all  things,  and  cannot  be  represented  by
any  form.  Its  name  is  "  the  Divinity  (in  man)^"  It
is  only  the  path  of  pure  simplicity  which  guards  and
preserves  the  Spirit.  When  this  path  is  preserved
and  not  lost,  it  becomes  one  with  the  Spirit ;  and  in
this  ethereal  amalgamation,  it  acts  in  harmony  with
the  orderly  operation  of  Heaven.'

There  is  the  vulgar  saying,  '  The  multitude  of
men  consider  gain  to  be  the  most  important  thing  ;
pure  scholars,  fame ;  those  who  are  wise  and  able
value  their  ambition  ;  the  sage  prizes  essential
purity.'  Therefore  simplicity  is  the  denomination
of  that  in  which  there  is  no  admixture  ;  purity  of
that  in  which  the  spirit  is  not  impaired.  It  is  he
who  can  embody  simplicity  and  purit}^  whom  we  call
the  True  Man  ^.

^  Both  of  the  seaboard  states  of  Wu  and  Yiieh  were  famous
for  the  swords  produced  in  them.  Kan-yiieh  appears  to  have
been  the  name  of  a  valley  or  place  in  Wu,  famous  for  the
weapons  made  in  it;  unless  indeed  we  should  read  -J-*  j^^
instead  of  -=p  ^,  and  take  -^  ^  as  equivalent  to  ^  j^,
which  is  found  in  the  3°  -A.7/wan  as  the  name  of  Yiieh.

^  Might  be  translated  '  the  subtle  spirit.'

^  A  very  remarkable  use  of  Ti  rifj^)  for  the  human  spirit  in  the
sense  of  God.  The  subject  of  the  clause,  let  the  reader  observe,  is
that  spirit,  and  not  the  Tao.  See  pp.  146,  147,  where  I  have  said
something  about  it.

*  See  the  full  account  of  '  the  True  Man'  in  Book  VI.


368  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xvi.


BOOK   XVI.

Part  II.     Section  IX.

Shan   Hsing,  or  'Correcting  the  Nature^'

I.  Those  who  would  correct  their  nature  by
means  of  the  vulgar  learning^,  seeking  to  restore
it  to  its  original  condition,  and  those  who  would
regulate  ^  their  desires,  by  the  vulgar  ways  of  think-
ing, seeking  thereby  to  carry  their  intelligence  to
perfection,  must  be  pronounced  to  be  deluded  and
ignorant  people.  The  ancients  who  regulated  the
Tao  nourished  their  faculty  of  knowledge  by  their
placidity,  and  all  through  life  abstained  from
employing  that  faculty  in  action  ; — they  must  be
pronounced  to  have  (thus  also)  nourished  their
placidity  by  their  knowledge  ^.

When  the  faculty  of  knowledge  and  the  placidity

^  See  pp.  147,  148.

"^  '  Vulgar '  must  mean  '  common,'  and  '  the  vulgar  learning '  is
the  teaching  popular  in  the  time  of  our  author,  and  which  he
regarded  as  contrary  to  the  principles  of  Taoism,  of  which  he
was  an  adherent.  The  Chinese  criiics  say  that  '  vulgar '  here  is
used  as  the  opposite  of  '  true.'

3  ^*a*  is  generally  explained  by  rB[j ,  '  to  confuse,'  but  I  cannot
construe  the  sentence  with  that  meaning  of  the  term.  In  the
Khang-hsi  dictionary  which  I  have  followed,  the   character  is

defined  by  V'^  with  special  reference  to  this  passage.

*  This  sentence  is  the  clue  to  the  author's  aim  in  the  whole
Book.  The  '  knowledge '  is  defined  by  !^  ^ ,  '  the  faculty  of
perception  and  apprehension.'


PT.  ir.  SECT.  IX.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-SZE,  369


(thus)  blend  together,  and  they  nourish  each  other,
then  from  the  nature  there  come  forth  harmony  and
orderly  method.  The  attributes  (of  the  Tao)  con-
stitute the  harmony;  the  Tao  (itself)  secures  the
orderly  method.  When  the  attributes  appear  in  a
universal  practice  of  forbearance,  we  have  Benevo-
lence ;  when  the  path  is  all  marked  by  orderly
method,  we  have  Righteousness  ;  when  the  right-
eousness is  clearly  manifested,  and  (all)  things  are
regarded  with  affection,  we  have  Leal-heartedness ;
when  the  (heart's)  core  is  thus  (pure)  and  real,  and
carried  back  to  its  (proper)  qualities,  we  have  Music  ;
when  this  sincerity  appears  in  all  the  range  of  the
capacity,  and  its  demonstrations  are  in  accordance
with  what  is  elegant,  we  have  Ceremony.  If  Cere-
monies and  Music  are  carried  out  in  an  imperfect
and  one-sided  manner,  the  world  is  thrown  into  con-
fusion. When  men  would  rectify  others,  and  their
own  virtue  is  beclouded,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  ex-
tend itself  to  them.  If  an  attempt  be  made  so  to
extend  it,  they  also  will  lose  their  (proper)  nature.

2.  The  men  of  old,  while  the  chaotic  condition
was  yet  undeveloped  \  shared  the  placid  tranquillit}'
which  belons^ed  to  the  whole  world.  At  that  time
the  Yin  and  Yang  were  harmonious  and  still ;  their
resting  and  movement  proceeded  without  any  dis-
turbance ;  the  four  seasons  had  their  definite  times  ;
not  a  single  thing  received  any  injury,  and  no  living
being  came  to   a   premature   end.      Men  might  be


^  These  'men  of  old '  were  what  we  ma}-  call  '  prhneval  men ; ' —
men  in  the  lowest  stage  of  development;  but  which  our  author
considered  to  be  the  highest  or  paradisiacal  condition  of  their
nature.

[39]  B  b


370  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xvi.

possessed  of  (the  faculty  of)  knowledge,  but  they
had  no  occasion  for  its  use.  This  was  what  is  called
the  state  of  Perfect  Unity.  At  this  time,  there  was
no  action  on  the  part  of  any  one,  but  a  constant
manifestation  of  spontaneity.

This  condition  (of  excellence)  deteriorated  and
decayed,  till  Sui-san  and  Fu-hsi  arose  and  com-
menced their  administration  of  the  world  ^ ;  on
which  came  a  compliance  (with  their  methods),  but
the  state  of  unity  was  lost.  The  condition  going  on
to  deteriorate  and  decay,  Shan  Nang  and  Hwang-Ti
arose,  and  took  the  administration  of  the  world,  on
which  (the  people)  rested  (in  their  methods),  but
did  not  themselves  comply  with  them.  Still  the
deterioration  and  decay  continued  till  the  lords
of  Thano-  and  Yli  ^  beoan  to  administer  the  world.
These  introduced  the  method  of  governing  by  trans-
formation, resorting  to  the  stream  (instead  of  to  the
spring)  ^,  thus  vitiating  the  purity  and  destroying
the  simplicity  (of  the  nature).  They  left  the  Tao,
and  substituted  the  Good  for  it,  and  pursued  the
course  of  Haphazard  Virtue.  After  this  they  for-
sook their  nature  and  followed  (the  promptings  of)
their  minds.  One  mind  and  another  associated
their  knowledge,  but  were  unable  to  give  rest  to  the
world.     Then   they  added   to   this   knowledge   (ex-

^  ^wang-jze  gives  no  hint  of  how  long  he  considered  this
highest  condition  to  have  lasted.  Sui-san,  '  the  man  of  the  Burning
Speculum,'  '  the  Fire-producer,'  whom  Williams  calls  '  the  Pro-
metheus of  China,'  appears  before  Fii-hsi,  as  the  first  in  the  line  of
the  Rulers  of  the  world,  who  broke  up  the  Primal  Unity.

^  These  were  Yao  and  Shun,  named  from  the  principalities  over
which  their  fathers  ruled.

^  '  The  streams '  were  the  methods  of  culture  that  arose  after  the
simple  virtues  and  spontaneity  of  the  Tao  were  lost.


PT.  11.  SECT.  IX.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    KWANGSZE.  37 1

ternal  and)  elegant  forms,  and  went  on  to  make
these  more  and  more  numerous.  The  forms  ex-
tuiguished  the  (primal)  simplicity,  till  the  mind  was
drowned  by  their  multiplicity.  After  this  the  people
began  to  be  perplexed  and  disordered,  and  had  no
way  by  which  they  might  return  to  their  true  nature,
and  brinor  back  their  origrinal  condition.

3.  Looking  at  the  subject  from  this  point  of  view,
we  see  how  the  world  lost  ^  the  (proper)  course,  and
how  the  course  (which  it  took)  only  led  it  further
astray \  The  world  and  the  Way,  when  they  came
together,  being  (thus)  lost  to  each  other,  how
could  the  men  of  the  Way  make  themselves  con-
spicuous in  the  world  ?  and  how  could  the  world
rise  to  an  appreciation  of  the  Way  ?  Since  the  Way
had  no  means  to  make  itself  conspicuous  in  the
world,  and  the  world  had  no  means  of  rising  to  an
appreciation  of  the  Way,  though  sagely  men  might
not  keep  among  the  hills  and  forests,  their  virtue
was  hidden  ; — hidden,  but  not  because  they  them-
selves souofht  to  hide  it.

Those  whom  the  ancients  called  '  Retired  Scholars'
did  not  conceal  their  persons,  and  not  allow  them-
selves to  be  seen  ;  they  did  not  shut  up  their  words,
and  refuse  to  give  utterance  to  them  ;  they  did  not
hide  away  their  knowledge,  and  refuse  to  bring  it
forth.  The  conditions  laid  on  them  by  the  times
were  very  much  awry.  If  the  conditions  of  the
times  had  allowed  them  to  act  in  the  world  on  a
great  scale,  they  would  have  brought  back  the  state
of  unity  without  any  trace  being  perceived  (of  how


^  It  is  the  same  character  in  the  text  which  I  have  been  obliged
to  translate  thus  differently, —  ^\

B  b  2


•7


72  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XVI.


they  did  so).  When  those  conditions  shut  them  up
entirely  from  such  action,  they  struck  their  roots
deeper  (in  themselves),  were  perfectly  still  and
waited.  It  was  thus  that  they  preserved  (the  Way
in)  their  own  persons.

4.  The  ancients  who  preserved  (the  Way  in)  their
own  persons  did  not  try  by  sophistical  reasonings
to  gloss  over  their  knowledge ;  they  did  not  seek  to
embrace  (everything  in)  the  world  in  their  know-
ledge, nor  to  comprehend  all  the  virtues  in  it.
Solitary  and  trembling  they  remained  where  they
were,  and  sought  the  restoration  of  their  nature.
What  had  they  to  do  with  any  further  action  ?  The
Way  indeed  is  not  to  be  pursued,  nor  (all)  its  charac-
teristics to  be  known  on  a  small  scale.  A  little
knowledge  is  injurious  to  those  characteristics  ;  small
doings  are  injurious  to  the  Way ; — hence  it  is  said,
'  They  simply  rectified  themselves.'  Complete  enjoy-
ment is  what  is  meant  by  '  the  Attainment  of  the
Aim.'

What  was  anciently  called  '  the  Attainment  of  the
Aim '  did  not  mean  the  getting  of  carriages  and
coronets  ^ ;  it  simply  meant  that  nothing  more  was
needed  for  their  enjoyment.  Now-a-days  what  is
called  'the  Attainment  of  the  Aim  '  means  the  getting
of  carriaoes  and  coronets.  But  carriaores  and  coronets
belong  to  the  body ;  they  do  not  affect  the  nature
as  it  is  constituted.  When  such  things  happen  to
come,  it  is  but  for  a  time ;  being  but  for  a  time,
their  coming  cannot  be  obstructed  and  their  going
cannot    be    stopped  2.     Therefore   we    should    not

^  That  is,  worldly  distinction.

^  Because  they  depend  on  others.  Compare  Mencius  VI,  i,
ch.  17,  2.


PT.  II.  SECT.  IX.       THE    WRITINGS    OF    iTWANG-BZE.  373

because  of  carriages  and  coronets  indulge  our  aims,
nor  because  of  distress  and  straitness  resort  to  the
vulgar  (learning  and  thinking) ;  the  one  of  these
conditions  and  the  other  may  equally  conduce  to
our  enjoyment,  which  is  simply  to  be  free  from
anxiety.  If  now  the  departure  of  what  is  transient
takes  away  one's  enjoyment,  this  view  shows  that
what  enjoyment  it  had  given  was  worthless.  Hence
it  is  said,  'They  who  lose  themselves  in  their  pursuit
of  things,  and  lose  their  nature  in  their  study  of
what  is  vulgar,  must  be  pronounced  people  who  turn
things  upside  down.'


374  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  bk.  xvii.


BOOK  XVII.

Part  II.     Section  X.

Kk'iiX  Shu  I,  or  '  The  Floods  of  Autumn  ^'

I.  The  time  of  the  autumnal  floods  was  come,  and  -A
the  hundred  streams  were  all  discharging  themselves
into  the  Ho,  Its  current  was  greatly  swollen^,  so
that  across  its  channel  from  bank  to  bank  one  could
not  distinguish  an  ox  from  a  horse.  On  this  the
(Spirit-)  earl  of  the  Ho  ^  laughed  with  delight,  think-
ing that  all  the  beauty  of  the  world  was  to  be  found
in  his  charge.  Along-  the  course  of  the  river  he
walked  east  till  he  came  to  the  North  Sea,  over
which  he  looked,  with  his  face  to  the  east,  without
beino^  able  to  see  where  its  waters  beo-an.  Then  he
began  to  turn  his  face  round,  looked  across  the  ex-
panse, (as  if  he  M^ere)  confronting  Zo  ^  and  said  with
a  sigh,  '  What  the  vulgar  saying  expresses  about
him  who  has  learned  a  hundred  points  (of  the  Tao),
and  thinks  that  there  is  no  one  equal  to  himself,  was
surely  spoken  of  me.     And  moreover,  I  have  heard

^  See  pp.  148,  149.
(fM  ^^^^  perhaps  means  '  turbid.'     It  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  river  A'ing.

^  See  Mayers's  Manual,  p.  54.  Our  author  adopts  the  common
beHefs  or  superstitions  of  his  time,  and  after  his  fashion  puts  his
own  reasonings  into  the  mouths  of  these  mythological  personages.
It  is  more  difficult  to  collect  the  legends  about  Zo  of  the  sea,  or
of  the  Northern   Sea.     See  the  Khang-hsi  Thesaurus  under


PT.  II.  SECT.X.         THE    WRITINGS    OF    X-WANG-RZE.  375

parties  making  little  of  the  knowledge  of  /vTung-ni
and  the  righteousness  of  Po-i,  and  at  first  I  did  not
believe  them.  Now  I  behold  the  all-but-boundless
extent  (of  your  realms).  If  I  had  not  come  to  your
gate,  I  should  have  been  in  danger  (of  continuing
in  my  ignorance),  and  been  laughed  at  for  long  in
the  schools  of  our  great  System  \'

Zo,  (the  Spirit-lord)  of  the  Northern  Sea,  said,
*A  froof  in  a  well  cannot  be  talked  with  about  the
sea  ; — he  is  confined  to  the  limits  of  his  hole.  An
insect  of  the  summer  cannot  be  talked  with  about
ice  ; — it  knows  nothing  beyond  its  own  season.  A
scholar  of  limited  views  cannot  be  talked  with  about
the  Tao; — he  is  bound  by  the  teaching  (which  he
has  received).  Now  you  have  come  forth  from  be-
tween your  banks,  and  beheld  the  great  sea.  You
have  come  to  know  your  own  ignorance  and  infe-
riority, and  are  in  the  way  of  being  fitted  to  be
talked  with  about  great  principles.  Of  all  the  waters
under  heaven  there  are  none  so  great  as  the  sea.
A  myriad  streams  flow  into  it  without  ceasing,  and
yet  it  is  not  filled  ;  and  afterwards "  it  discharges
them  (also)  without  ceasing,  and  yet  it  is  not  emptied.
In  spring  and  in  autumn  it  undergoes  no  change  ;  it
takes  no  notice  of  floods  or  of  drought.  Its  supe-
riority over  such  streams  even  as  the  Alang  and  the


^  Thus  the  Confucian  learning  and  its  worthies  were  to  the
system  of  the  Tao  only  as  the  waters  of  the  Ho  to  the  great  sea.

2  I  have  translated  here  as  if  the  reading  were  ^  ^,
which  is  given  by  Lin  Hsi-/'ung.  The  correct  reading,  however,
so  far  as  depends  on  edidons  and  dictionaries,  is  ^  \^'>  ^vhich  is
explained  in  the  Khang-hsi  dictionary  as  '  a  great  Rock  in  Fu-
sang  on  the  East,'  against  which  the  water  of  the  sea  collects,  and
is  all  evaporated  !


2,']6  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XVII.

Ho  cannot  be  told  by  measures  or  numbers  ;  and
that  I  have  never,  notwithstanding  this,  made  much
of  myself,  is  because  I  compare  my  own  bodily  form
with  (the  greatness  of)  heaven  and  earth,  and  (re-
member that)  I  have  received  my  breath  from  the
Yin  and  Yane.  Between  heaven  and  earth  I  am
but  as  a  small  stone  or  a  small  tree  on  a  great  hill.
So  long  as  I  see  myself  to  be  thus  small,  how  should
I  make  much  of  myself  ?  I  estimate  all  within  the
four  seas,  compared  with  the  space  between  heaven
and  earth,  to  be  not  so  large  as  that  occupied  by
a  pile  of  stones  in  a  large  marsh !  I  estimate  our
Middle  States,  compared  with  the  space  between  the
four  seas,  to  be  smaller  than  a  single  little  grain  of
rice  in  a  great  granary !  When  we  would  set  forth
the  number  of  things  (in  existence),  we  speak  of  them
as  myriads  ;  and  man  is  only  one  of  them.  Men
occupy  all  the  nine  provinces ;  but  of  all  whose  life
is  maintained  bv  strain -food,  wherever  boats  and
carriages  reach,  men  form  only  one  portion.  Thus,
compared  with  the  myriads  of  things,  they  are  not
equal  to  a  single  fine  hair  on  the  body  of  a  horse.
Within  this  range  are  comprehended  all  (the  terri-
tories) which  the  five  Tis  received  in  succession
from  one  another ;  all  which  the  royal  founders  of
the  three  dynasties  contended  for ;  all  which  excited
the  anxiety  of  Benevolent  men ;  and  all  which  men
in  office  have  toiled  for.  Po-i  was  accounted  famous
for  declining  (to  share  in  its  government),  and  Knng-
ni  was  accounted  great  because  of  the  lessons  which
he  addressed  to  it.  They  acted  as  they  did,  making
much  of  themselves ; — therein  like  you  who  a  little
time  ago  did  so  of  yourself  because  of  your  (volume
of)  water ! '


PT,  11.  SECT.  X.         THE    WRITINGS    OF    ATWANG-SZE.  377


2.  The  earl  of  the  Ho  said,  '  Well  then,  may  I
consider  heaven  and  earth  as  (the  ideal  of)  what  Is
great,  and  the  point  of  a  hair  as  that  of  what  is
small  ?  '  Zo  of  the  Northern  Sea  replied,  '  No.  The
(different)  capacities  of  things  are  illimitable  ;  time
never  stops,  (but  is  always  moving  on) ;  man's  lot  is
ever  chancrins^ ;  the  end  and  the  beoinninor  of  thinos
never  occur  (twice)  in  the  same  way.  Therefore
men  of  great  wisdom,  looking  at  things  far  off  or
near  at  hand,  do  not  think  them  insignificant  for
being  small,  nor  much  of  them  for  being  great : —
knowing  how  capacities  differ  illimitably.  They  ap-
peal with  intelligence  to  things  of  ancient  and  recent
occurrence,  without  being  troubled  by  the  remote-
ness of  the  former,  or  standing  on  tiptoe  to  lay  hold
of  the  latter  : — knowing  that  time  never  stops  in  its
course.  They  examine  with  discrimination  (cases  of)
fulness  and  of  want,  not  overjoyed  by  success,  nor
disheartened  by  failure  : — knowing  the  inconstancy
of  man's  lot.  They  know  the  plain  and  quiet  path
(In  which  things  proceed),  therefore  they  are  not
overjoyed  to  live,  nor  count  It  a  calamity  to  die : —
the  end  and  the  beoflnninsf  of  thlngrs  never  occurrlnof
(twice)  In  the  same  way.

*  We  must  reckon  that  what  men  know  is  not  so
much  as  what  they  do  not  know,  and  that  the  time
since  they  w^ere  born  Is  not  so  long  as  that  which
elapsed  before  they  were  born.  When  they  take
that  which  is  most  small  and  try  to  fill  with  it  the
dimensions  of  what  Is  most  great,  this  leads  to  error
and  confusion,  and  they  cannot  attain  their  end.
Looking  at  the  subject  In  this  way,  how  can  }ou
know  that  the  point  of  a  hair  Is  sufficient  to  deter-
mine the  minuteness  of  what  is  most  small,  or  that


378  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xvii.

heaven   and   earth   are    sufficient   to    complete   the
dimensions  of  what  is  most  large  ?  '

3.  The  earl  of  the  Ho  said,  '  The  dispiiters  of  the
world  all  say,  "  That  which  is  most  minute  has  no
bodily  form  ;  and  that  which  is  most  great  cannot  be
encompassed  ;" — is  this  really  the  truth  ?'  Zo  of  the
Northern  Sea  replied,  '  When  from  the  standpoint
of  what  is  small  we  look  at  what  is  great,  we  do  not
take  it  all  in  ;  when  from  the  standpoint  of  what  is
great  we  look  at  what  is  small,  we  do  not  see  it
clearly.  Now  the  subtile  essence  is  smallness  in  its
extreme  degree ;  and  the  vast  mass  is  greatness  in
its  largest  form.  Different  as  they  are,  each  has  its
suitability, — according  to  their  several  conditions.
But  the  subtile  and  the  gross  both  presuppose  that
they  have  a  bodily  form.  Where  there  is  no  bodily
form,  there  is  no  longer  a  possibility  of  numerical
division ;  where  it  is  not  possible  to  encompass  a
mass,  there  is  no  longer  a  possibility  of  numerical
estimate.  What  can  be  discoursed  about  in  words
is  the  grossness  of  things ;  what  can  be  reached  in
idea  is  the  subtilty  of  things.  What  cannot  be  dis-
coursed about  in  words,  and  what  cannot  be  reached
by  nice  discrimination  of  thought,  has  nothing  to
do  either  with  subtilty  or  grossness.

'  Therefore  while  the  actions  of  the  Great  Man
are  not  directed  to  injure  men,  he  does  not  plume
himself  on  his  benevolence  and  kindness  ;  while  his
movements  are  not  made  with  a  view  to  gain,  he
does  not  consider  the  menials  of  a  family  as  mean ;
while  he  does  not  strive  after  property  and  wealth,
he  does  not  plume  himself  on  declining  them  ;  while
he  does  not  borrow  the  help  of  others  to  accomplish
his  affairs,  he  does  not  plume  himself  on  supporting


PT.  II.  SECT.  X.        THE    WRITINGS    OF   A'WANG-3ZE.  379

himself  by  his  own  strength,  nor  does  he  despise
those  who  in  their  greed  do  what  is  mean ;  while
he  differs  in  his  conduct  from  the  vultrar,  he  docs
not  plume  himself  on  being  so  different  from  them  ;
while  it  is  his  desire  to  follow  the  multitude,  he  docs
not  despise  the  glib-tongued  flatterers.  The  rank
and  emoluments  of  the  world  furnish  no  stimulus  to
him,  nor  does  he  reckon  its  punishments  and  shame
to  be  a  disgrace.  He  knows  that  the  right  and  the
wrong  can  (often)  not  be  distinguished,  and  that
what  is  small  and  what  is  great  can  (often)  not  be
defined.  I  have  heard  it  said,  "The  Man  of  Tao
does  not  become  distinguished ;  the  greatest  virtue
is  unsuccessful ;  the  Great  Man  has  no  thought
of  self;" — to  so  great  a  degree  may  the  lot  be
restricted.'

4.  The  earl  of  the  Ho  said, '  Whether  the  subject
be  what  is  external  in  things,  or  Avhat  is  internal,
how  do  we  com.e  to  make  a  distinction  between  them
as  noble  and  mean,  and  as  great  or  small  ? '  Zo  of
the  Northern  Sea  replied,  '  When  we  look  at  them
in  the  light  of  the  Tao,  they  are  neither  noble
nor  mean.  Looking  at  them  in  themselves,  each
thinks  itself  noble,  and  despises  others.  Looking
at  them  in  the  light  of  common  opinion,  their  being
noble  or  mean  does  not  depend  on  themselves,
Lookine  at  them  in  their  differences  from  one
another,  if  we  call  those  great  which  are  greater
than  others,  there  is  nothing  that  is  not  great,  and
in  the  same  way  there  is  nothing  that  is  not  small.
We  shall  (thus)  know  that  heaven  and  earth  is  but
(as)  a  grain  of  the  smallest  rice,  and  that  the  point
of  a  hair  is  (as)  a  mound  or  a  mountain ; — such  is
the  view  given  of  them  by  their  relative  size.    Look-


380  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XVII.

ing  at  them  from  the  services  they  render,  allowing
to  everything  the  service  which  it  does,  there  is  not
one  which  is  not  serviceable ;  and,  extending  the
consideration  to  what  it  does  not  do,  there  is  not
one  which  is  not  unserviceable.  We  know  (for  in-
stance) that  East  and  West  are  opposed  to  each
other,  and  yet  that  the  one  cannot  be  without
(suggesting  the  idea  of)  the  other ; — (thus)  their
share  of  mutual  service  is  determined.  Looking  at
them  with  respect  to  their  tendencies,  if  we  approve
of  what  they  approve,  then  there  is  no  one  who  may
not  be  approved  of ;  and,  if  we  condemn  what  they
condemn,  there  is  no  one  who  may  not  be  con-
demned. There  are  the  cases  of  Yao  and  i^ieh,
each  of  whom  approved  of  his  own  course,  and
condemned  the  other ; — such  is  the  view  arising
from  the  consideration  of  tendency  and  aim.

*  Formerly  Yao  and  Shun  resigned  (their  thrones),
and  yet  each  continued  to  be  Ti ;  A^ih-khwai  ^  re-
signed (his  marquisate)  which  led  to  his  ruin.  Thang
and  Wu  contended  (for  the  sovereignty),  and  each
became  king ;  the  duke  of  Pai  -  contended  (for
AV/u),  which  led  to  his  extinction.  Looking  at  the
subject  from  these  examples  of  striving  by  force  and
of  resigning,  and  from  the  conduct  of  Yao  (on  the
one  hand)  and  of  A'ieh  (on  the  other),  we  see  that
there  is  a  time  for  noble  acting,   and  a   time  for

^  See  Mencius  II,  ii,  ch.  8,  and  I,  ii,  chaps.  10,  11,  with  the
notes.     "^^  is  probably  a  mistake  for  -jp.

^  See  the  last  narrative  but  one  in  the  3o  AVnvan,  under  the

A.

sixteenth  year  of  duke  Ai  of  Lu, — the  year  in  which  Confucius  died.
'  The  duke  of  Pai '  was  merely  the  chief  of  a  district  of  Khh  ;  but
rebelling  against  the  Ruler  of  the  State,  he  was  defeated,  and
strangled  himself.


PT.  11.  SECT.  X.         THE   WRITINGS    OF   ^WANG-3ZE.  38  I


mean; — these  characteristics  are  subject  to   no  re-
gular rule.

5.  'A  battering  ram  may  be  used  against  the  wall
of  a  city,  but  it  cannot  be  employed  to  stop  up  a
hole  ; — the  uses  of  implements  are  different.  The
(horses)  Kh'A\-k\  and  Hwa-liu  ^  could  in  one  day
gallop  1000  li,  but  for  catching  rats  they  were  not
equal  to  a  wild  dog  or  a  weasel ; — the  gifts  of
creatures  are  different.  The  white  horned  owl  col-
lects its  fleas  in  the  night-time,  and  can  discern  the
point  of  a  hair,  but  in  bright  day  it  stares  with  its
eyes  and  cannot  see  a  mound  or  a  hill ; — the  natures
of  creatures  are  different.

'  Hence  the  sayings,  "  Shall  we  not  follow  and
honour  the  right,  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  the
wrong  ?  shall  we  not  follow  and  honour  those  who
secure  good  government,  and  have  nothing  to  do
with  those  who  produce  disorder  }  "  show  a  want  of
acquaintance  with  the  principles  of  Heaven  and
Earth,  and  with  the  different  qualities  of  things.
It  is  like  followincr  and  honourinof  Heaven  and
taking  no  account  of  Earth  ;  it  is  like  following  and
honourinof  the  Yin  and  takinof  no  account  of  the
Yang.  It  is  clear  that  such  a  course  cannot  be
pursued.  Yet  notwithstanding  they  go  on  talking
so  : — if  they  are  not  stupid,  they  are  visionaries.
The  Ti  sovereigns  resigned  their  thrones  to  others
in  one  way,  and  the  rulers  of  the  three  dynasties
transmitted  their  thrones  to  their  successors  in
another.  He  who  acts  differently  from  the  require-
ments of  his  time  and  contrary  to  its  custom  is
called  an  usurper;   he  who  complies  with  the  time

^  Two  of  kins'  ]\Iu's  team  of  eight  famous  steeds.


382  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xvii.

and  follows  the  common  practice  is  said  to  be  right-
eous. Hold  your  peace,  O  earl  of  the  Ho.  How
should  you  know  what  constitutes  being  noble  and
being  mean,  or  who  are  the  small  and  who  the  great?'

6.  The  earl  of  the  Ho  said,  *  Very  well.  But
what  am  I  to  do  ?  and  what  am  I  not  to  do  ?  How
am  I  to  be  guided  after  all  in  regard  to  what  I
accept  or  reject,  and  what  I  pursue  or  put  away
from  me  ?  '  Zo  of  the  Northern  Sea  replied,  'From
the  standpoint  of  the  Tao,  what  is  noble  ?  and  what
is  mean  ?  These  expressions  are  but  the  different
extremes  of  the  average  level.  Do  not  keep  per-
tinaciously to  your  own  ideas,  which  put  you  in
such  opposition  to  the  Tao.  What  are  few?  and
what  are  many  ?  These  are  denominations  which
we  employ  in  thanking  (donors)  and  dispensing
gifts.  Do  not  study  to  be  uniform  in  doing  so  ; —
it  only  shows  how  different  you  are  from  the  Tao.
Be  severe  and  strict,  like  the  ruler  of  a  state  who
does  not  selfishly  bestow  his  favours.  Be  scrupu-
lous, yet  gentle,  like  the  tutelary  spirit  of  the  land,
when  sacrifice  is  offered  to  him  who  does  not
bestow  his  blessing  selfishly.  Be  large-minded
like  space,  whose  four  terminating  points  are  illimit-
able, and  form  no  particular  enclosures.  Hold  all
things  in  your  love,  favouring  and  supporting  none
specially.  This  is  called  being  without  any  local
or  partial  regard ;  all  things  are  equally  regarded ;
there  is  no  long  or  short  among  them.

*  There  is  no  end  or  beofinnino^  to  the  Tao.  Thincrs
indeed  die  and  are  born,  not  reaching  a  perfect  state
which  can  be  relied  on.  Now  there  is  emptiness,
and  now  fulness ; — they  do  not  continue  in  one
form.      The    years    cannot    be    reproduced ;    time


PT.  II.  SECT.  X.         THE    WRITINGS    OF    isTWANG-SZE.  383

cannot  be  arrested.  Decay  and  growth,  fulness
and  emptiness,  when  they  end,  begin  again.  It  is
thus  that  we  describe  the  method  of  great  righteous-
ness, and  discourse  about  the  principle  pervading
all  things.  The  life  of  things  is  like  the  hurrying
and  galloping  along  of  a  horse.  With  every  move-
ment there  is  a  change ;  with  every  moment  there
is  an  alteration.  What  should  you  be  doing  ?  what
should  you  not  be  doing  ?  You  have  only  to  be
allowino-  this  course  of  natural  transformation  to
be  oroinof  on.'

7.  The  earl  of  the  Ho  said,  'What  then  is  there
so  valuable  in  the  Tao  ? '     Zo  of  the  Northern  Sea
replied,  '  He  who  knows  the  Tao  is  sure  to  be  well
acquainted  with  the  principles  (that  appear  in  the
procedures    of    things).       Acquainted    with    (those)
principles,  he  is  sure  to  understand  how  to  regulate
his  conduct  in  all  varying  circumstances.     Having
that    understanding,    he    will    not    allow    things    to
injure  himself.      Fire  cannot  burn  him  who  is  (so)
perfect  in  virtue,  nor  water  drown  him  ;  neither  cold
nor  heat  can  affect  him  injuriously ;  neither  bird  nor
beast  can  hurt  him.     This  does  not  mean  that  he  is
indifferent  to  these  things  ;    it  means  that  he  dis-
criminates between  where  he  may  safely  rest  and
where  he  will  be  in  peril ;  that  he  is  tranquil  equally
in  calamity  and  happiness  ;   that  he  is  careful  what
he  avoids  and  what  he  approaches  ; — so  that  nothing
can  injure  him.     Hence  it  is  said,  "What  is  heavenly
is  internal ;  what  is  human  is  external."     The  virtue
(of  man)  is  in  what  is  Heavenly.     If  you  know  the
operation  of  what  is  Heavenly  and  what  is  Human,
you  will  have  your  root  in  what  is   Heavenly  and
your  position  in  Virtue.     You  will  bend  or  stretch


384  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  XVIT.

(only)  after  the  (necessary)  hesitation  ;  you  will  have
returned  to  the  essential,  and  may  be  pronounced
to  have  reached  perfection.'

'  What  do  you  mean,'  pursued  the  earl,  '  by  the
Heavenly,  and  by  the  Human  ?  '  Zo  replied,  'Oxen
and  horses  have  four  feet; — that  is  what  I  call  their
Heavenly  (constitution).  When  horses'  heads  are
haltered,  and  the  noses  of  oxen  are  pierced,  that
is  what  I  call  (the  doing  of)  Man.  Hence  it  is
said,  "  Do  not  by  the  Human  (doing)  extinguish  the
Heavenly  (constitution) ;  do  not  for  your  (Human)
purpose  extinguish  the  appointment  (of  Heaven)  ;
do  not  bury  your  (proper)  fame  in  (such)  a  pursuit
of  it ;  carefully  guard  (the  Way)  and  do  not  lose
it : — this  is  what  I  call  reverting  to  your  True
(Nature)." '

8.  The  khwei  ^  desires  to  be  like  -  the  millipede^ ;
the  millipede  to  be  like  the  serpent ;  the  serpent
like  the  wind  ;  the  wind  to  be  like  the  eye  ;  and  the
eye  to  be  like  the  mind  ^

The  khwei  said  to  the  millipede,  'With  my  one
leg  I  hop  about,  and  can  hardly  manage  to  go
along.  Now  you  have  a  myriad  feet  which  you  can
employ ;  how  is  it  that  }-ou  are  so  abundantly  fur-
nished ?  '  The  millipede  said,  '  It  is  not  so.  Have
you  not  seen  one  ejecting  saliva  ?  The  largest
portion  of  It  is  like  a  pearl,  while  the  smaller
portions  fall  down  like  a  shower  of  mist  in  innumer-

^  I'he  khwei  is  'a  sort  of  dragon  (it  may  be,  a  worm)  with
one  foot.'  The  hsien  has  many  feet;  one  account  calls  it  'a
centipede.'

^  Such  is  the  meaning  of  the  lin  or  lien.  The  best  commenta-
tors explain  it  by  hsien  (^),  '  to  covet  and  desire.'

^  Compare  Book  I,  par.  3,  towards  the  end.


PT.  n.  SECT.  X.        THE    WRITINGS    OF    A-WANG-3ZE.  385

able  drops.      Now  I  put  in  motion  the  springs  set
in  me  by  Heaven,  without  knowing  how  I  do  so.'

The  millipede  said  to  the  serpent,  '  I  go  along
by  means  of  my  multitude  of  feet ;  and  yet  how
is  it  that  I  do  not  go  so  fast  as  you  who  have  no
feet  at  all } '  The  serpent  replied,  '  How  can  the
method  of  moving  by  the  springs  set  in  us  l)y
Heaven  be  changed  }  How  could  I  make  use  of
feet  ? '

The  serpent  said  to  the  wind,  '  I  get  along  by
moving  my  backbone  and  ribs,  thus  appearing  to
have  some  (bodily)  means  of  progression.  But  now
you.  Sir,  rise  with  a  blustering  force  in  the  North
Sea,  and  go  on  in  the  same  way  to  the  South  Sea ;
— seemingly  without  any  such  means.  How  does  it
take  place  ?  '  The  wind  said,  '  Yes.  With  such  a
blusterino-  force  I  rise  in  the  North  Sea  and  o;o
on  to  the  South  Sea.  But  you  can  point  to  me,
and  therein  are  superior  to  me,  as  you  are  also  in
treading  on  me.  Yet  notwithstanding,  it  is  only  I
who  can  break  great  trees,  and  blow  down  great
houses.  Therefore  he  whom  all  that  are  small
cannot  overcome  is  a  great  overcomer.  But  it  is
only  he  who  is  the  sagely  man  ^  that  is  the  Great
Conqueror  (of  all).'

9.  When  Confucius  was  travelling  in  Khwang-,

^  The  sagely  man  is  'the  True  man,'  who  embodies  the  Tao.
The  Tao  has  given  to  the  khwei,  the  millipede,  the  serpent,  and  ii
may  be  said  also  to  the  wind,  their  means  of  progression  and  action.
Nothing  is  said  of  the  eye  and  the  mind  ;— it  was  not  necessary  to
dwell  on  the  Tao  in  them.

2  See  Confucian  Analects,  IX,  v  and  XI,  xxii.  Our  author's
account  of  this  event  is  his  own,  constructed  by  him  to  convey  his
own  Taoistic  lessons.

[39]  c  c


386  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xvil.

some  people  of  Sung  (once)  surrounded  him  (widi
a  hostile  intention)  several  ranks  deep ;  but  he  kept
singing  to  his  lute  without  stopping.  3ze-lu  came
in,  and  saw  him,  and  said,  *  How  is  it,  Master,  that
you  are  so  pleased?'  Confucius  said,  'Come  here,
and  I  will  tell  you.  I  have  tried  to  avoid  being
reduced  to  such  a  strait  for  a  long  time ;  and  that
I  have  not  escaped  shows  that  it  was  so  appointed
for  me.  I  have  sought  to  find  a  ruler  that  would
employ  me  for  a  long  time,  and  that  I  have  not
found  one,  shows  the  character  of  the  time.  Under
Yao  and  Shun  there  was  no  one  in  the  kingdom
reduced  to  straits  like  mine ;  and  it  was  not  by  their
sagacity  that  men  succeeded  as  they  did.  Under
A^ieh  and  A'au  no  (good  and  able  man)  in  the  king-
dom found  his  way  to  employment ;  and  it  was  not
for  (want  of)  sagacity  that  they  failed  to  do  so.  It
was  simply  owing  to  the  times  and  their  character.

*  People  that  do  business  on  the  water  do  not
shrink  from  meeting  ip-uanodons  and  dragoons  ; — that
is  the  courao-e  of  fishermen.  Those  who  do  busi-
ness  on  land  do  not  shrink  from  meeting  rhinoce-
roses and  tigers  ; — that  is  the  courage  of  hunters.
When  men  see  the  sharp  weapons  crossed  before
them,  and  look  on  death  as  going  home  ; — that  is  the
courao-e  of  the  determined  soldier.  When  he  knows
that  his  strait  is  determined  for  him,  and  that  the
employment  of  him  by  a  ruler  depends  on  the  cha-
racter of  the  time,  and  then  meeting  with  great
distress  is  yet  not  afraid  ; — that  is  the  courage  of  the
sagely  man.  Wait,  my  good  Yu,  and  you  will  see
what  there  is  determined  for  me  in  my  lot.'  A  little
afterwards,  the  leader  of  the  armed  men  approached
and  took  his  leave,  saying,  '  We  thought  you  were


PT.  II.  SFXT.  X.        THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  387

Yang  Hu\  and  therefore  surrounded  you.  Now
we  see  our  mistake.'  (With  this)  he  begged  to  take
his  leave,  and  withdrew.

10.  Kung-sun  Lung-  asked  Man  of  Wei  ^',  saying,
'  When  I  W'as  young,  I  learned  the  teachings  of  the
former  kings ;  and  when  I  was  grown  up,  I  became
proficient  in  the  practice  of  benevolence  and  right-
eousness. I  brought  together  the  views  that  agreed
and  disagreed;  I  considered  the  questions  about
hardness  and  whiteness  "* ;  I  set  forth  what  w^as  to  be
affirmed  and  what  was  not,  and  what  was  allowable
and  w^hat  was  not ;  I  studied  painfully  the  various
schools  of  thought,  and  made  myself  master  of  the
reasoninofs  of  all  their  masters.  I  thouoht  that  T
had  reached  a  good  understanding  of  every  subject ;
but  now  that  I  have  heard  the  words  of  /i'wang-jze,
they  throw  me  into  a  flutter  of  surprise.  I  do  not
know  whether  it  be  that  I  do  not  come  up  to  him  in
the  power  of  discussion,  or  that  my  knowledge  is  not
equal  to  his.  But  now  I  do  not  feel  able  to  open  my
mouth,  and  venture  to  ask  you  what  course  I  should
pursue.'  Kung-jze  Mau  leant  forward  on  his  stool,
drew  a  long  breath,  looked  up  to  heaven,  smiled,  and


1  No  doubt  the  Yang  Ho  of  Analects  XVII,  i.

2  The  grandson  (Kung-sun)  of  one  of  the  rulers  of  Alo  (one  of
the  three  states  into  which  the  great  state  of  Bin  had  been  broken
up).  He  has  come  down  to  us  as  a  philosophic  sophist,  -whose
views  it  is  not  easy  to  define.  See  Mayers's  Manual,  p.  288,  and
Book  XXXIII,  par.  7.

^  Wei  was  another  of  the  divisions  of  3in,  and  I\Iau  was  one  of
the  sons  of  its  ruler  at  this  time,  a  great  admirer,  evidently,  of
AVang-jze,  and  more  than  a  match  for  the  sophist  Lung.

*  Holding,  it  is  supposed,  that  '  the  attributes  of  material  objects,
such  as  hardness  and  colour,  are  separate  existences  :  '^so  IMayers,

after  Wylie.

C  C   2


388  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xvii.

said,  '  Have  you  not  heard  of  the  frog  of  the  dilapi-
dated well,  and  how  it  said  to  the  turtle  of  the
Eastern  Sea,  "How  I  enjoy  myself?  I  leap  upon
the  parapet  of  this  well.  I  enter,  and  having  by
means  of  the  projections  formed  by  the  fragments  of
the  broken  tiles  of  the  lining  proceeded  to  the  water,
I  draw  my  legs  together,  keep  my  chin  up,  (and
strike  out).  When  I  have  got  to  the  mud,  I  dive
till  my  feet  are  lost  in  it.  Then  turning  round,  I  see
that  of  the  shrimps,  crabs,  and  tadpoles  there  is  not
one  that  can  do  like  me.  Moreover,  when  one  has
entire  command  of  all  the  water  in  the  gully,  and
hesitates  to  go  forward,  it  is  the  greatest  pleasure  to
enjoy  one's  self  here  in  this  dilapidated  well  ^  ; — why
do  not  you.  Master,  often  come  and  enter,  and  see  it
for  yourself?"  The  turtle  of  the  Eastern  Sea  (was
then  proceeding  to  go  forward),  but  before  he  had
put  in  his  left  foot,  he  found  his  right  knee  caught
and  held  fast.  On  this  he  hesitated,  drew  back,  and
told  (the  frog)  all  about  the  sea,  saying,  "  A  distance
of  a  thousand  li  is  not  sufficient  to  express  its  extent,
nor  would  (a  line  of)  eight  thousand  cubits  be  equal
to  sound  its  depth.  In  the  time  of  Yii,  for  nine
years  out  of  ten  the  flooded  land  (all  drained  into  it),
and  its  water  was  not  sensibly  increased  ;  and  in  the
time  of  Thang  for  seven  years  out  of  eight  there
was  a  drought,  but  the  rocks  on  the  shore  (saw)  no
diminution  of  the  water  because  of  it.  Thus  it  is
that  no  change  is  produced  in  its  waters  by  any
cause  operating  for  a  short  time  or  a  long,  and  that
they  do  not  advance  nor  recede  for  any  addition  or
subtraction,  whether  great  or  small ;  and  this  is  the
great  pleasure  afforded  by  the  Eastern  Sea."   When

^  A  passage  diflicult  to  construe.


PT.  II.  SECT.  X.        THE    WRITINGS    OF   A'WANG-3ZE.  389

the  frog-  of  the  dilapidated  well  heard  this,  he
was  amazed  and  terror-struck,  and  lost  himself  in
surprise.

'  And  moreover,  when  you,  who  have  not  wisdom
enouoh  to  know  where  the  discussions  about  what
is  right  and  what  is  wTong  should  end,  still  desire  to
see  through  the  words  of  AVang-^ze,  that  is  like
employing  a  mosquito  to  carry  a  mountain  on  its
back,  or  a  millipede  ^  to  gallop  as  fast  as  the  Ho  runs;
— tasks  to  which  both  the  insects  are  sure  to  be  un-
equal. Still  further,  when  you,  who  have  not  wisdom
enough  to  know  the  w^ords  employed  in  discussing
very  mysterious  subjects,  yet  hasten  to  show  your
sharpness  of  speech  on  any  occasion  that  may  occur,
is  not  this  being  like  the  frog  of  the  dilapidated
well  ?

'  And  that  (AVang-jze)  now  plants  his  foot  on  the
Yellow  Springs  (below  the  earth),  and  anon  rises  to
the  height  of  the  Empyrean.  Without  any  regard  to
south  and  north,  with  freedom  he  launches  out  in
every  direction,  and  is  lost  in  the  unfathomable.
Without  any  regard  to  east  and  west,  starting  from
what  is  abysmally  obscure,  he  comes  back  to  what  is
grandly  intelligible.  (All  the  while),  you,  Sir,  in
amazement,  search  for  his  views  to  examine  them,
and  grope  among  them  for  matter  for  discussion  ;
— this  is  just  like  peeping  at  the  heavens  through  a
tube,  or  aiming  at  the  earth  with  an  awl ;  are  not
both  the  implements  too  small  for  the  purpose  ?  Go
your  ways,  Sir.

'  And  have  you  not  heard  of  the  young  learners  of

^  A  different  character  from  that  for  a  millipede  in  the  last  para-
graph; — a  Shang  A'ii,  evidently  some  small  insect,  but  we  cannot
tell  what.


390  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xvii,

Shau-ling\  and  how  they  did  in  Han-tan?  Before
they  had  acquired  what  they  might  have  done  in  that
capital,  they  had  forgotten  what  they  had  learned  to
do  in  their  old  city,  and  were  marched  back  to  it  on
their  hands  and  knees.  If  now  you  do  not  go  away,
you  will  forget  your  old  acquirements,  and  fail  in
your  profession.'

Kung-sun  Lung  gaped  on  the  speaker,  and  could
not  shut  his  mouth,  and  his  tongue  clave  to  its  roof.
He  slank  away  and  ran  off.

1 1 .  Awang-jze  was  (once)  fishing  in  the  river  Phu  ^,
when  the  king  of  Kim  ^  sent  two  great  officers  to
him,  with  the  message,  '  I  wish  to  trouble  you  with
the  charge  of  all  within  my  territories.'  /v'wang-jze
kept  on  holding  his  rod  without  looking  round,  and
said,  '  I  have  heard  that  in  IC/iu  there  is  a  spirit-like
tortoise-shell,  the  wearer  of  which  died  3000  years
ago  ^,  and  which  the  king  keeps,  in  his  ancestral
temple,  in  a  hamper  covered  with  a  cloth.  Was  it
better  for  the  tortoise  to  die,  and  leave  its  shell  to
be  thus  honoured  ?  Or  would  it  have  been  better
for  it  to  live,  and  keep  on  dragging  its  tail  through
the  mud?'  The  two  officers  said,  '  It  would  have
been  better  for  it  to  live,  and  draw  its  tail  after  it
over  the  mud  ^.'  '  Go  your  ways.  I  will  keep  on
drawing  my  tail  after  me  through  the  mud.'

^  A  cily  of  A'ao,  as  Han-tan  was  its  capital.  Of  the  incident
referred  to,  I  have  not  been  able  to  learn  anything.  The  '  were
marched  '  gives  my  idea  of  what  it  may  have  been.

~  A  river,  which  still  gives  its  name  to  Phii-Mu,  department
^/zao-X'au,  Shan-tung.

^  Probably  king  Wei,  b.  c.  339-330.

*  A  good  antiquity  for  X/m  !

•"^  ?  A  species  of  Testudo  Serpentina,  such  as  is  often  seen  on
pieces  of  Japanese  lacquer-ware.


PT.  II.  SECT.  X.         THE    WRITINGS    OF    A'WANG-3ZE.  39  I


12.  Hui-^ze  being  a  minister  of  state  in  Liang  \
A'wancr-ue  went  to  see  him.  Some  one  had  told
Hui-jze  that  A'wang-5ze  was  come  with  a  wish  to
supersede  him  in  his  office,  on  which  he  was  afraid,
and  instituted  a  search  for  the  stranger  all  over  the
kingdom  for  three  days  and  three  nights.  (After
this)  ATwang-jze  went  and  saw  him,  and  said,  'There
is  in  the  south  a  bird,  called  "  the  Young  Phoenix  -;"
—do  you  know  it  ?  Starting  from  the  South  Sea,  it
flies  to  the  Northern ;  never  resting  but  on  the
bignonia^,  never  eating  but  the  fruit  of  the  melia
azederach  ■*,  and  never  drinking  but  from  the  purest
springs.  An  owl,  which  had  got  a  putrid  rat,  (once),
when  a  phoenix  went  passing  overhead,  looked  up
to  it  and  gave  an  angry  scream.  Do  you  wish  now,
in  your  possession  of  the  kingdom  of  Liang,  to
frighten  me  with  a  similar  scream  ? '

13.  A'wang-jze    and     Hui-3;ze    were    M^alking    on     ]1^
the   dam   over  the    Hao  ^  when    the    former   said,

'  These  thryssas  come  out,  and  play  about  at  their
ease  ; — that  is  the  enjoyment  of  fishes.'  The  other
said,  '  You  are  not  a  fish  ;  how  do  you  know^  w'hat


^  Another  name  for  Wei,  so  called  from  its  capital; — in  the
present  department  of  Khai-fang.

2  So  the  critics  explain  the  name.  Williams  thinks  the  bird  may
be  '  the  argus  pheasant,'  or  '  a  variety  of  the  peacock.'  But  what
the  bird  was  does  not  affect  the  meaning  of  our  author's  reference
to  it.

^  One  of  the  Eleococcae,  the  Dryandra  Cordifolia  of
Thunberg.

*  All  the  editions  I  have  seen  give  ^^  here,  which  makes  no
sense.  The  character  should  doubtless  be  ^^,  with  the  meaning
which  I  have  given  ;  and  not  '  bamboo,'  which  is  found  in  the
critics.     It  is  also  called  '  the  Pride  of  India.'

'^  A  river  in  the  department  and  district  of  Fung-yang,  An-hui.


392  THE    TEXTS    OF    TAOISM.  BK.  xvii.

constitutes  the  enjoyment  of  fishes^  ?'  A^vang-jze
rejoined,  'You  are  not  I.  How  do  you  know  that  I  do
not  know  what  constitutes  the  enjoyment  of  fishes  ?'
Hui-,^ze  said, '  I  am  not  you  ;  and  though  indeed  I  do
not  fully  know  you,  you  certainly  are  not  a  fish,  and
(the  argument)  is  complete  against  your  knowing
what  constitutes  the  happiness  of  fishes.'  A'wang-^ze
replied,  '  Let  us  keep  to  your  original  question.  You
said  to  me,  "  How  do  you  know  what  constitutes  the
enjoyment  of  fishes  ?  "  You  knew  that  I  knew  it,
and  yet  you  put  your  question  to  me  ; — well,  I  know
it  (from  our  enjoying  ourselves  together)  over  the
Hao.'


^  Surely  a  captious  question.     We  infer  the  feelings  of  other
creatures  from  their  demonstrations.


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS.


393


-^  5    •    •


n  n  '^  '^  n-


rr  52  c  ^v  C


D


'"D


>«  -    iJoJU


(J-OJ


D


\)


'0


«   -    UoJl)


li)


U-txJ


^  q   *1<>J


.=!


S


«^>i3  Q^OJ


S


•2/


IS  15  r  p^


K»     n*'


p  |Cf  tir  1^  tr


m

H

<

o
(/}

O

u


<=^-  ^.


M


fcc  ■^.   a-


a


^  -     ==   .-==


CO
o

I— I


c


o

u


X/3


o


t-c     C5     CO     ■*     U5


«3

to


(U

a.

00


.-.        03       g       tc


O

.OS


.«3


O


r^      eS


<u


o

c3
O  ^

o     ^

(— <
j3    P<


o


t^   00   c;   o   — '   iM


c
CO


"a.


•  —      a?
03     <i


CO     »>»


[39]


r^d


;94


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS


c   — .


M         •        N


n;  n;    .  t^  t~    -  «-»~r^


.B    Ci    "    iA


0   -»


•o     D-D


•-^'b


*b<->


.1      D-D


<3


-     ^-^


•->


9  <i^


^-^


V^


?  -S       8'>:?


^


^


^


K-


h=  ^


hr  7f


IT  t€  IS


CP


S


■:i^     «c      tl


i
u


C    — '


tn

H  .

<  5!

^  3

o  it

tn  s


c4
u
O

>


CO


S    .2

a,   c

00

3


Xfl

C3      O


CO

3


3
03


0?

d

(S

n


CO

OS


cj    r3


cS      cd


05        M


o

s


t-l     (M


CO        <0

=^    3
e  6


3
c


CO


c8

O


'

»4

t!

0")

m

s

e3

3

a,

CO

(3

p

on

H

^

A

•

^

•^

««

**

02


CO


'*iL'5y5N.COC^OT-<<MCO'*il,OOt*
(M(M(M(M(M(MCOMCOi:<:)eOCOCOC0


FOR    THE    SACRED    BOOKS    OF    THE    EAST.


395


.    ^


^     -Oh         •  •


S         ^


o


a  tn  r\  n


n


-a  ^


h


->


1


^  ^


'>


y-


z-


^


?


^


1


5)


<if


^Lr


^/TN


^


to     to     tVf     t^     ^     ^


•»-     'S     "S     ^       S


8-


^


u>


P-


IT  »s=  rr  »


tr


(D

a


m

o


!-4


03  -J


nr  T'  p


'^      -^      "q


s   &   ^


OS
o


03


oj
o
o
>


a


'a


OS


Oh


on


a
M


•i-i
c3


OS

S-i


r  ^3


'Sh

to

c3


S


C


03

O

>


a


02


<cS

c3

>

to

r.         to

^

c

OS

to

<!i

>

00C5O'— i<MW"*l0^l^


396


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS.


.s
0

Jrt

•                                 ....                                     'S......

•

:3       •

<U

X

..              .

1       •••#-■ ••  /^      :•       :       •       •       •       1-  .*#-

•                                                                              ••••                                                                             •■•                                              ••••■

6

1

■<         1

:  >l  ^  .  i^, :  :  :  :.  .1   :  :>i^  :  :  :  :;i^  :  :  :  :

Persian.

: »  ^  .  L], :  :  :  : .  -1^  :  :«i)  :  :  :  :;]^  :  :  :  :

C

a.

c     5

cpi-Sq-o ^.<-j....«-.

^^«       ^                    ■                    •••••                    •                    ••■•                     •••••

■6
c

N

....         S^/  .    .    .         ^  .    ,    .    .

:              .  :  :  :       5^  :  :  •       §.::::

Sanskrit.

^     ^  B?   p  iw'ft*'  |S»  tfi?*  fp  1??*  IP  p     i  jv  ^tv     *.     !     !  ^  '^^     '.     *     '.     .

w
a
<

X
a.

<
<

o

in

0

t-t

«•■••••••«•••••■•••••••             •

•    •    •  s.   •  S S'S^'    •    -SJ,'    •    '    •

u

O     JOJ     >0      e3    <irt    —    «     ;S    JS     'i:     "?!      2     <3      <u    ^   ^g    S   jS      O      ^      g    ^^    :c«     :~     :S     :0

m

.    -    - 1

c3                       ..;::;

J     4-

:    c
1    (^

•  •

•  •

•

i  '-^

I    -5
1     0
3    S

S       1=1

5    0
5    r^

J     (N

.      .    ^                 .      .    .5

Cj                                    ..'^

•S      ^.     ?-                    -      c^     -^

:.:::::.:::::  s  g^  p  :,:,  -r:  §3  i  :;.  :

•

•

-
•

•

'^
1-1    c

;;:..;.::::  ^  5  3         ^  g  =         ;

1/)
J

5

s  2 .2  c«   •   •  •   •  .  ^  •   •  -^     1        -^  "^  f        i

=           '3          .52          .2          ^            m            0^2                  0-0                 -^    .2
C              a              eS              OS              s            "^              3             -^^       "       "     ^            ^        "      f.     r-      a

jioeupJiJoQ           OQ           OPL

r-(rtr^,-,r-<,-Hr-(F-l,-<r-lCSlC^]<MC-JWCS

Sacred  Books  of  the  East

TRANSLATED     BY

VARIOUS    ORIENTAL    SCHOLARS

AND    EDITED   BY

F.      MAX      MULLER

'  ***  T/ns  Scries  is  publislicd  ivitli  the  sanction  and  co-operation  of  the  Secretary  of

State  for  India  i)i  Council.


BEPOKT  presented   to  the  ACA.I5EIIffIE   DES   IHSCRIPTIONS,  May  11,

1883,  by  M.   EKIfEST   KEIfAN.


'  M.  Renan  presente  trois  nouveaiix
volumes  de  la  grande  collection  des
"  Livres  sacres  de  I'Orient "  (Sacred
Books  of  the  East',  que  dirige  a  Oxford,
avec  one  si  vaste  erudition  et  une  critique
si  sure,  le  savant  associe  de  I'Academie
des  Inscriptions,  M.  Max  Midler.  ...  La
premiere  serie  de  ce  beau  recueil,  com-
posee  de  24  volumes,  est  presque  achevee.
M.  Max  Miiller  se  propose  d'en  publier


une  seconde,  dont  I'interet  historiqiie  et
religieux  iie  sera  pas  moindre.  M.  Max
Muller  a  su  se  procurer  la  collaboration
des  savans  les  plus  eminens  d'Europe  et
d'Asie.  L'Universite  d'Oxford,  que  cette
grande  publication  honore  an  plus  haut
degre,  doit  tenir  a  continuer  dans  les  plus
larges  proportions  une  o^uvre  aussi  philo-
sophiquement  con9ue  que  savamment
executee.'


EXTRACT  from  the  QUARTERLY  REVIEW.


'  We  rejoice  to  notice  that  a  second
series  of  these  translations  has  been  an-
nounced and  has  actually  begun  to  appear.
The  stones,  at  least,  out  of  which  a  stately
edifice  may  hereafter  arise,  are  here  being
brought  together.  Prof.  Max  Muller  has
deserved  well  of  scientific  history.  Not
a  few  minds  owe  to  his  enticing  words
their  first  attraction  to  this  branch  of
study.     But  no  work  of  his,  not  even  the


great  edition  of  the  Rig- Veda,  can  com-
pare in  importance  or  in  usefulness  with
this  English  translation  of  the  Sacred
Books  of  the  East,  which  has  been  devised
by  his  foresight,  successfully  brought  so
far  by  his  persuasive  and  organising
power,  and  will,  we  trust,  by  the  assist-
ance of  the  distinguished  scholars  he  has
gathered  round  him,  be  carried  in  due
time  to  a  happy  completion.'


Professor  S.  HARDY,  Inatigural  Lecture  in  the  University  of  Freiburg',  1887.


'  Die  allgemeine  vergleichende  Reli-
gionswissenschaft  datirt  von  jenem  gross-
artigen,  in  seiner  Art  einzig  dastehenden
Untemehmen,  zu  welchem  auf  Anregung
Max  IMiillers  im  Jahre    1874   auf  dem


internationalen  Orientalistencongrcss  in
London  der  Grundstein  gelcgt  worden
war,  die  Ubersetzung  der  hciligcn  Biicher
des   Ostens'    {the   Sacred  Books   of  the

East).


Oxfore>


AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS
LONDON :    HENRY  FROWDE

OXFORD     UNIVERSITY    PRESS     WAREHOUSE,     AMEN     CORNER,     E.C.


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST.


FIRST   SERIES.


Vol.  I.     The  Upanishads.

Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller.  Part  I.  The  A7/andogya-
upanishad,  The  Talavakara-upanishad,  The  Aitareya-arawyaka,
The  Kaushitaki-brahmawa-iipanishad,  and  The  Va^asaneyi-
sarahita-upanishad.     8vo,  cloth,  lo^-.  6d.

The  Upanishads  contain  the  philosophy  of  the  Veda.  They  have
become  the  foiuidation  of  the  later  Veddnta  doctrines,  and  indirectly
of  Buddhis?n.  Schopenhauer,  speakiyig  of  the  Upanishads,  says  :
'  In  the  whole  tvorld  there  is  no  study  so  beneficial  and  so  elevating
as  that  of  the  Upanishads.  It  has  been  the  solace  of  my  life,  it  zvill
be  the  solace  of  my  death.'

[See  also  Vol.  XV.]

A

Vol.  II.     The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas,

As  taught  in  the  Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  Vasish///a,
and  Baudhayana.  Translated  by  Georg  Buhler.  Part  I.
Apastamba  and  Gautama.     8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d.

The  Sacred  Lazvs  of  the  Aryas  contain  the  original  treatises  on
ivhich  the  Laivs  of  Man u  and  other  lawgivers  ivere  founded.

[See  also  Vol.  XIV.]

Vol,  III.     The  Sacred  Books  of  China.

The  Texts  of  Confucianism,  Translated  by  James  Legge.
Part  I.  The  Shu  King,  The  Religious  Portions  of  the  Shih
King,  and  The  Hsiao  King.     8vo,  cloth,  12^.  dd.

Confucius  was  a  collector  of  ancient  traditions,  not  the  founder  of
a  new  religion.     As  he  lived  iti  the  sixth  and  fifth  centuries  B.  C.
his  works  are  of  unique  interest  for  the  study  of  Ethology.
[See  also  Vols.  XVI,  XXVII,  XXVIII,  XXXIX,  and  XL.]

VOL.  IV.     The  Zend-Avesta.

Translated  by  James  Darmesteter.  Part  I.  The  Vendidad.
Svo,  cloth,  10s.  6d.

The  Zend-Avesta  contains  the  relics  of  ivhat  ivas  the  religio7i  of
Cyrus,  Darius,  and  Xerxes,  atid,  but  for  the  battle  of  I\Iarathon,
might  have  beco?ne  the  religion  of  Europe.  It  forms  to  the  present
day  the  sacred  book  of  the  Par  sis,  the  so-called  fire-worshippers.
Tivo  more  volumes  zvill  complete  the  translation  of  all  that  is  left  us
of  Zoroaster  s  religion.

[See  also  Vols.  XXIII  and  XXXI. ]


EDITED  BY  F.  MAX  MULLER.  3

VOL.  V.     Pahlavl  Texts.

Translated  by  E.  W.  Wkst.     Part  I.   The  Bundahij,  Bahman
Yajt,  and  Shayast  la-shayast.     8vo,  cloth,  \2s.  dd.
The  Pahlavi  Texts  comprise  the  theological  literature  of  the  revival
of  Zoroaster  s  religion,  beginning  witli  the  Sassanian  dynasty.    They
are  important  for  a  study  of  Gnosticism.

VOLS.  VI  AND   IX.     The  Our'an.

Parts  I  and  II.  Translated  by  E.  H.  Palmer.  8vo,  cloth,  2\s.
This  translation,  carried  out  according  to  his  own  peculiar  views
of  the  origin  of  the  Qur'dn,  was  the  last  great  work  ofE.  H.  Palmer,
before  he  was  murdered  in  Egypt.

Vol.  VII.     The   Institutes  of  Vishz/u.

Translated  by  Julius  Jolly.     8vo,  cloth,  \os.  6d.
A  collection  'of  legal  aphorisms,  closely  connected  ivith  one  of  the
oldest  Vedic  schools,  the  Ka///as,  but  considerably  added  to  in  later
time.     Of  importance  for  a  critical  study  of  the  Laws  of  Manu.

VOL.  VIII.    The  Bhagavadgita,  with  The  Sanatsu^atiya,
and  The  Anugita.

Translated   by   Kashinath    Trimbak    Telang.       8vo,   cloth,
\QS.  6d.

The  earliest  philosophical  and  religious  poem  of  India.     It  has  been
paraphrased  in  Arnold's  'Song  Celestial.'

Vol.  X.     The  Dhammapada,

Translated  from  Pali  by  F.  Max  Muller;  and

The  Sutta-NIpata,

Translated  from  Pali  by  V.  Fausboll  ;  being  Canonical  Books

of  the  Buddhists.     8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d.
The  Dhammapada  contains  the  quintessence  of  Buddhist  morality.
The  Sutta-Nipdta  gives  the  authentic  teaching  of  Buddha  on  some
of  the  fundamental  prijiciples  of  religion.

VOL.  XI.     Buddhist  Suttas.

Translated  from  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids,  t.  The  IMaha-
parinibbana  Suttanta ;  2.  The  Dhamma-X-akka-ppavattana
Sutta.  3.  The  Tevi^^^a  Suttanta ;  4.  The  Akafikheyya  Sutta ;
5.  The  A'etokhila  Sutta;  6.  The  Maha-sudassana  Suttanta;
7.  The  Sabbasava  Sutta.  8vo,  cloth,  10^.  6d.
A  collection  of  the  most  important  religious,  moral,  and  philosophical
discourses  taken  from  the  sacred  canon  of  the  Buddhists.


SACRED  BOOKS   OF  THE  EAST.


Vol.  XII.     The  ^'atapatha-Brahma/^a,  according  to  the

Text  of  the  Madhyandina  School.

Translated  by  Julius  Eggeling.  Part  I.  Books  I  and  II.
8vo,  cloth,  12^-.  6d.

A   viinute  account  of  the  sacrificial ^  ceremonies  of  the   Vedic  age.
It  contains  the  earliest  account  of  the  Deluge  in  India.

[See  also  Vol.  XXVI.]

VOL.  XIII.     Vinaya  Texts.

Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann

Oldenberg.   Part  I.    The  Patimokkha.    The  Mahavao-s:a,  I-IV.

8vo,  cloth,  \os.  dd.

The  Vinaya  Texts  give  for  the  first  time  a  translation  of  the  moral

code  of  the  Buddhist  religion  as  settled  in  the  third  century  B.C.

[See  also  Vols.  XVII  and  XX.]

Vol.  XIV.     The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Ar^'as,

As  taught  in  the  Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  Vasish//5a,
and  Baudhayana.  Translated  by  Georg  Buhler.  Part  II.
Vasish///a  and  Baudhayana.     8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d.

Vol.  XV.     The   Upanishads.

Translated  by  F.  Max  IMuller.  Part  II.  The  Ka///a-upanishad,
The  IMuz/fl'aka-upanishad,  The  Taittiriyaka-upanishad,  The
B/vbadarawyaka-upanishad,  The  -S'vetajvatara-upanishad,  The
Praj;7a-upanishad,  and  The  Maitraya/a-brahmawa-upanishad.
8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d.

VOL.  XVI.    The  Sacred   Books  of  China.

The  Texts  of  Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Legge.
Part  II.    The  Yi  King.     8vo,  cloth,  loj.  6^^.

Vol.  XVII.    Vinaya  Texts.

Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann
Oldenberg.  Part  II.  The  Mahavagga  V-X.  The  A'ullavagga,
I-III.     8vo,  cloth,  IDS.  6d.

VOL.  XVIII.     Pahlavi  Texts.

Translated  by  E.  W.  West.  Part  II.  The  Da^fistan-I  Dinik
and  The  Epistles  of  INIaniuZnhar.     8vo,  cloth,  12s.  6d.

Vol.  XIX,     The  Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

A  Life  of  Buddha  by  Ajvaghosha  Bodhisattva,  translated  from

Sanskrit  into  Chinese  by  Dharmaraksha,  a.d.  420,  and  from

Chinese  into  English  by  Samuel  Beal.     8vo,  cloth,  loj.  6d.

This  life  of  Buddha  was  translated  from  Satiskrit  into  Chinese,

A.D.  420.     //  contaijis  many  legends,  soine  of  which  show  a  certain

similarity  to  the  Evangeliiim  infant iae,  ^-c.


EDITED  BY  F.  MAX  MULLER.


Vol.  XX.     Vinaya  Texts.

Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann
Oldenberg.  Part  III.  The  A'ullavagga,  IV-XII.  8vo,  cloth,
\os.  6d.

Vol.  XXI.    The  Saddharma-pu;^(/arika ;  or,  The  Lotus
of  the   True  Law.

Translated  by  H.  Kern.     8vo,  cloth,  12s.  6d.

'  The  Lotus  of  the  true  Laiv^,  a  cano?n'cal  book  of  the  Northern
Buddhists,  translated  from  Sanskrit.  There  is  a  Chinese  transla-
tion of  this  book  ivhich  zvas  finished  as  early  as  the  year  286  A.D.

Vol.  XXII.     Caina-Siitras.

Translated  from  Prakrit  by  Hermann  Jacobi.  Part  I.  The
A^'arahga- Sutra  and  The  Kalpa-Sutra.    8vo,  cloth,  ios.6d.

The  religion  of  the  Gainas  zvas  founded  by  a  contemporary  of  Buddha.
It  still  counts  numerous  adJicrents  i?i  India,  w/iile  there  are  no
Buddhists  left  in  India  proper.

VOL.  XXIII.     The  Zend-Avesta.

Translated  by  James  Darmesteter.  Part  II.  The  Sirozahs,
Ya^-tSj  and  Nyayi^.     8vo,  cloth,  ios.6d.

Vol.  XXTV.     Pahlavi  Texts.

Translated  by  E.  W.  West.  Part  III.  Dina-i  Mainog-i
Khira<-/,  ^"ikand-gumanik  Vi_i,^ar,  and  Sad  Dar.  8vo,  cloih,
los.  6r/.


SECOND   SERIES.

Vol.  xxv.    Manu.

Translated  by  Georg  Buhler.     8vo,  cloth,  21s.

This  translation-  is  founded  on  that  of  Sir  William  Jones,  which  has  been
carefully  revised  and  corrected  with  the  help  of  seven  native  Commentaries.
An  Appendix  contains  all  the  quotations  from  l\Ianu  which  are  found  in  the
Hindu  Law-books,  translated  for  the  use  of  the  Law  Courts  in  India.
Another  Appendix  gives  a  synopsis  of  parallel  passages  from  the  six
Dharma-sutras,  the  other  Sm;7tis,  the  Upanishads,  the  Mahabharata,  &c.

Vol.  XXVI.     The  6'atapatha-Brahma;/a.

Translated  by  Julius  Eggeling.    Part  II.    Books  III  and  IV.
Bvo,  cloth,  1 2S.  (>d.


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST.


Vols.    XXVII   and    xxvill.      The  Sacred   Books  of
China.

The  Texts  of  Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Legge.
Parts  III  and  IV.  The  Li  K\,  or  Collection  of  Treatises  on
the  Rules  of  Propriety,  or  Ceremonial  Usages.  8vo,  cloth,
\2S.  6d.  each.

Vol.  XXIX.      The    Gr/hya-Sutras,    Rules    of    Vedic
Domestic   Ceremonies.

Part  I.  -Sahkhayana,  A^valayana,  Paraskara,  Khadira.  Trans-
lated by  Hermann  Oldenberg.     8vo,  cloth,  1 2s.  6d.

These  rules  of  Domestic  Ceremonies  describe  the  home  life  of  the  ancient
Aryas  with  a  completeness  and  accuracy  unmatched  in  any  other  literature.
Some  of  these  rules  have  been  incorporated  in  the  ancient  Law-books.

Vol.  XXX.    The  Gr/hya-Sutras.  Part  II.  [Iji /he  Press i\

Vol.  XXXI.      The  Zend-Avesta.

Part  III.  The  Yasna,  Visparad,  Afrinagan,  Gahs,  and
Miscellaneous  Fragments.  Translated  by  L.  H.  Mills.  8vo,
cloth,  I2S.  6d.

Vol.  XXXII.    Vedic  Hymns.  ^

Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller.     Part  I.     Bvo,  cloth,  iSs.  ^ -

VOL.  XXXIII.     The  Minor  Law-books.

Translated  by  Julius  Jolly.  Part  I.  Narada,  Bnliaspati.
8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d.

Vol.  XXXIV.    The    Vedanta-Sutras,    with    the    Com-
mentary by  ^'aiikara/^'arya.

Translated  by  G.  Thibaut.     8vo,  cloth,  12s.  6d.

Vol.  XXXV.  The  Questions  of  King  MiHnda.  Trans-
lated from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids.     8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d.

Vol.  XXXVII.  The  Contents  of  the  Nasks,  as  stated
in  the  Eighth  and  Ninth  Books  of  the  Dinka;7/.  Translated
by  E.  W.  West.    [/;/  //w  Fnss.]

Vols.  XXXIX  and  xl.     The  Sacred  Books  of  China.

The  Texts  of  Taoism.  Translated  by  James  Legge.  8vo,
cloth,  21s.

***   The  Second  Series  will  consist  of  Twenty-four  Volumes  in  all.


RECENT  ORIENTAL    WORKS.


SOME  ORIENTAL  WORKS

RECENTLY  PUBLISHED  BY  THE   CLARENDON   PRESS.

A  Practical  Aradic  Grarmnar.     Part  I.

Compiled  by  A.  O.  Green,  Brigade  IMajor,  Royal  Engineers.
Second  Edilio7i,  Enlarged.     Crown  8vo,  7^'.  dd.

First  Lessons  in   Tamil ;   or,  an  Introduction  to  the

Common  Dialect  of  that  Language.  With  an  easy  Catechism
in  Tamil  of  both  the  Colloquial  and  Classical  Dialects.  By
the  Rev.  G.  U.  Pope,  W.A.,  D.D.     Crown  8vo,  7^.  dd.

Grammar  of  the  Bengali  Language,  Literary  and
Colloquial.     By  John  Beajies.     Crown  8vo.  4^.  ()d.

A  Catalogue  of  the  Chinese  Translation  of  the  Bud-
dhist Tripi/aka,  the  Sacred  Canon  of  the  Buddhists
in  China  and  "Japan.

Compiled  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India  by
BuNYiu  Nanjio,  Priest  of  tiie  Temple,  Eastern  Hongwansi,
Japan;  Member  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society.     4to,  32X.  6d.

'An  immense  service  rendered  to  Oriental  scholarship.' — Saturday  Review.

The  Chinese  Classics :  with  a  Translation,  Critical  and
Exegetical  Notes,  Prolegomena,  and  Copious  Indexes.  By
James  Legge,  D.D.,  LL.D.     In  Seven  Volumes.     Royal  8vo.

Vol.  I.     Confucian  Analects^  <S-r.     \Out  of  printi\

Vol.  II.     The  Works  of  Mcncius.     it.  los.

Vol.  III.      The    Shoo-King,    or    the   Book    of  Historical
Documents.     In  two  Parts,     i/.  xos.  each.

Vol.  IV.     The  She-King.,  or  the  Book  of  Poetry.     In  two
Parts,      i/.  10^.  each.

Vol.  V.     The  Ch'un  Tsezv,  zuith  the  Tso  Cluien.     In  two
Parts,      i/.  xos.  each.

Record  of  Buddhistic  Kingdoms  ;  being  an  Account  by

the  Chinese  IMonk  Fa-hien  of  his  Travels  in  India  and  Ceylon
(a.d.  399-414)  in  search  of  the  Buddhist  Books  of  Discipline.
Translated  and  annotated,  with  a  Corean  recension  of  the
Chinese  Text,  by  James  Legge,  I\I.A.,  LL.D,  Crown  4to,
boards,  \os.  6d.


8  RECENT  ORIENTAL    WORKS.

ARYAN    SERIES.

Buddhist  Texts  from  Japan.  I.  Va^ra/^/^//edika  ;  The
Diamond-Ciitter .

Edited  by  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.     Small  4to,  3^-.  dd.
One  of  the  most  famous  metaphysical  treatises  of  the  Mahayana  Buddhists.

Buddhist  Texts  from.  Japan.  II.  Sukhavati-Vyuha  :
Description  of  Sukhdvaii,  the  Land  of  Bliss.

Edited  by  F.  Max  Mijller,  M.A.,  and  Bunyiu  Nanjio.     With
two  Appendices:  (i)  Text  and  Translation  of  Sanghavarman's
Chinese  Version  of  the   Poetical  Portions  of  the  Sukhavati-
Vyuha;    (2)  Sanskrit  Text  of  the  Smaller  Sukhavati-Vyuha.
Small  4to,  7^-.  dd.
The  editio  princcps  of  the  Sacred  Book  of  one  of  the  largest  and  most
influential  sects  of  Buddhism,  numbering  more  than  ten  millions  of  followers
in  Japan  alone.

Buddhist  Texts  from  Japan.  III.  The  Ancient  Palm-
Leaves  containing'  the  Prac'7/a-Paramita-Hr/daya-
Sutra  and  the  Ush//isha-Vii;>-aya-Dhara/^i.

Edited  by  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.,  and  Bunyiu  Nanjio,  M.A.
With  an  Appendix  by  G.  Buhler,  CLE.    With  many  Plates.
Small  4to,  10s.
Contains  facsimiles  of  the  oldest  Sanskrit  MS.  at  present  known.

DhsirmaSa.^no^rs.hs.,  a7i  A^icient  Collection  of  Buddhist
Technical  Terms.

Prepared  for  publication  by  Kenjiu  Kasawara,  a  Buddhist
Priest  from  Japan,  and,  after  his  death,  edited  by  F.  Max
Muller  and  H.  Wenzel.     Small  4to,  7^.  6d.

Katayana's    Sarvanukrama;^i   of   the  7?/gveda.

With  Extracts  from  Sha<'/guru.fishya's  Commentary  entitled
Vedarthadipika.  Edited  by  A.  A.  Macdonell,  M.A.,  Ph.D.
i6j.


AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS
LONDON:     HENRY    FROWDE

OXFORD   UNIVERSITY    PRESS   WAREHOUSE,   AMKN   CORNER,    E.G.


Princeton


T»S.9i«lS.afLKffir


■IMWn  ^^247   1407
