Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2010  with  funding  from

University  of  Toronto


http://www.archive.org/details/findingofwinelanOOreev


^  y.^


THE     FINDING     OF     WINELAND


THE     GOOD


Oíforí

PRINTED   AT   THE    CLARENDON    PRESS

BY   HORACE   HART,    PRINTER   TO    THE   fNlVERSlTY

Plates  by  Pacht  and  Crone,  Capenliagen


3'>


THE  FINDING  OF  WINELAND
THE  GOOD

Z^t  ^iBtox^  of  (^t  3cefanbic  ©íacovér^  of  ilmerica


ED/TED  AND   TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  EARLIEST  RECORDS


ARTHUR    MIDDLETON    REEVES


WITH     PHOTOTYPE     PLATES     OF     THE     VELLUM     MSS.     OF     THE     SAGAS


Bonöott
HENRY    FROWDE

OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS   WAREHOUSE
AMEN   CORNER,   E.C.


(y'W  CL  Q^  tvv^


afr'l


wv


PREFACE.


A  CHAPTER  title  in  the  Codex  Frisianus,  '  Fundit  Vinland  goi-a '  [Wineland
the  Good  found],  which  has  been  reproduced  in  enlarged  facsimile  on  the
cover,  has  suggested  the  title  for  this  book.  The  chapter  which  this  title
heads  will  be  found  on  page  14.  The  Icelandic  text  there  cited  has  been
copied  directly  from  the  original,  and  this  method  has  also  been  pursued  in
the  other  cases  where  citations  of  strictly  historical  matter  have  been  made.
In  printing  these  citations,  accents,  punctuation  and  capital  letters  have  been
added,  and  supplied  contractions  have  been  printed  in  italics.  Passages  which
have  not  been  regarded  as  clearly  historical  have  also  been  given  in  the  original,
but  in  this  case  it  has  been  deemed  sufficient  to  print  after  the  best  published
texts.  Icelandic  proper  names,  where  they  occur  in  the  translations,  have  been
somewhat  altered  from  their  correct  form,  to  the  end  that  they  might  appear
less  strange  to  the  English  reader.  This  liberty  has  been  taken  with  less
hesitancy  since  it  has  been  possible  to  give  these  names  in  their  proper  forms
in  the  Index.

To  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Bruun,  Librarian  of  the  Royal  Library  of
Copenhagen,  I  am  indebted  for  the  privilege  which  has  made  the  photographic
reproduction  of  the  Wineland  History  of  the  Flatey  Book  possible.  I  am
under  like  obligation  to  the  Arna-Magnæan  Legation  for  the  use,  for  a  similar
purpose,  of  the  manuscripts  AM.'  557  4to  and  544  410.  To  one  member  of
the  Arna-Magnæan  Legation,  Dr.  Kristian  Kálund,  I  am  under  still  further
obligation    for   very    many    favours,    which     his    profound    acquaintance    with

'  This  contraction  is  used  throughout  to  describe  the  manuscripts  belonging  to  the  Arna-Magnæan
Collection.


vi  PREFACE.

Icelandic  manuscripts,  and  especially  with  those  in  his  charge  as  Librarian
of  the  Arna-lMagnæan  Library,  have  rendered  particularly  valuable.  To
Professor  Gustav  Storm  I  feel  myself  peculiarly  indebted  for  the  kindly  help,
which  he  so  freely  tendered  me  at  a  time  when  the  courtesy  was  extended
at  the  expense  of  his  own  personal  engagements.  My  thanks  are  also  due
to  Dr.  Finnur  Jónsson,  for  his  supervision  of  the  photographing  of  the
Arna-Magnæan  manuscripts,  and  for  other  friendly  acts.  I  am  likewise  under
obligation  to  Captain  Holm,  of  the  Danish  Navy,  and  Captain  Phythian,
of  the  United  States  Navy,  for  help,  which  finds  more  particular  mention
elsewhere.  Finally  and  especially,  I  owe  to  Dr.  Valtýr  GuSmundsson  an
expression  of  the  appreciation  I  feel  for  his  frequent  and  ever  ready  assistance,
and  particularly  forjhis  review  of  the  proofs  of  the  Icelandic  texts.

The  kindness  which  these  friends  have  shown  me  has  contributed  in  no
small  degree  to  the  pleasure  which  the  making  of  these  pages  has  afforded.

A.  M.  R.

Berlin,  July,  1890.


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS.


PAGE

Introductory            i

I.     Early  pRAGirENTARY  References  to  Wineland  ........  7

II.     The  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red          . 19

III.  The  Wineland  History  of  the  Flatey  Book 53

IV.  Wineland  in  the  Icelandic  Annals 79

V.     Notices  of  doubtful  value  ;  Fictions .  84

VI.     The  Publication  of  the  Discovery 92

VII.     The  Icelandic  Texts 99

(i)  Hauksbók 104

(ii)  AM.  557  4to.        . 12.2

(iii)  Flateyjarbók  :   (a)  Þáttr  Eiríks  rauba 140

(b)  Grœnlendinga  Httr 145

Notes          ................  159


THE   FINDING   OF  WINELAND   THE   GOOD.


INTRODUCTORY.


The  Icelandic  discovery  of  America  was  first  announced,  in  print,  more  than  two
centuries  and  a  half  ago.  Within  the  past  fifty  years  of  this  period,  the  discovery
has  attracted  more  general  attention  than  during  all  of  the  interval  preceding,— a  fact,
which  is  no  doubt  traceable  to  the  publication,  in  1837,  of  a  comprehensive  work
upon  the  subject  prepared  by  the  Danish  scholar,  Carl  Christian  Rafn.  Although
it  is  now  more  than  half  a  century  since  this  book  was  published,  Rafn  is  still
very  generally  regarded  as  the  standard  authority  upon  the  subject  of  which  he
treats.  But  his  zeal  in  promulgating  the  discovery  seriously  prejudiced  his  judg-
ment. His  chief  fault  was  the  heedless  confusing  of  all  of  the  material  bearing
directly  or  indirectly  upon  his  theme, — the  failure  to  winnow  the  sound  historical
material  from  that  which  is  unsubstantiated.  Rafn  offered  numerous  explanations
of  the  texts  which  his  work  contained,  and  propounded  many  dubious  theories  and
hazardous  conjectures.  With  these  the  authors,  who  have  founded  their  investiga-
tions upon  his  work,  have  more  concerned  themselves  than  with  the  texts  of  the
original  documents.  If  less  effort  had  been  apphed  to  the  dissemination  and  defence
of  fantastic  speculations,  and  more  to  the  determination  of  the  exact  nature  of  the  facts
which  have  been  preserved  in  the  Icelandic  records,  the  discovery  should  not  have
failed  to  be  accepted  as  clearly  established  by  sound  historical  data.  Upon  any  other
hypothesis  than  this  it  is  difficult  to  account  for  the  disposition  American  historians
have  shown  to  treat  the  Icelandic  discovery  as  possible,  from  conjectural  causes,
rather  than  as  determined  by  the  historical  records  preserved  by  the  fellow-country-
men of  the  discoverers.

B


2  THE  FIXDIXG   OF    WIXELAND    THE    GOOD.

Bancroft,  in  his  History  of  the  United  States,  gave  form  to  this  tendency  many
years  ago,  when  he  stated,  that :

'The  story  of  the  colonization  of  America  by  Northmen  rests  on  narratives  mythological
in  form,  and  obscure  in  meaning,  ancient  yet  not  contemporary'.  The  intrepid  mariners
who  colonized  Greenland  could  easily  have  extended  their  voyages  to  Labrador,  and  have
explored  the  coasts  to  the  south  of  it.  No  clear  historic  evidence  establishes  the  natural
probability  that  they  accomplished  the  passage,  and  no  vestige  of  their  presence  on  our
continent  has  been  found  -.'

The  latest  historian  of  America,  traversing  the  same  field,  virtually  iterates
this  conclusion,  when  he  saj^s :

'  The  extremely  probable  and  almost  necessary'  pre-Columbian  knowledge  of  the  north-
eastern parts  of  America  follows  from  the  venturesome  spirit  of  the  mariners  of  those  seas
for  fish  and  traffic,  and  from  the  easy  transitions  from  coast  to  coast  by  which  they  would
have  been  lured  to  meet  more  southerly  climes.  The  chances  from  such  natural  causes  are
quite  as  strong  an  argument  in  favor  of  the  early  Northmen  venturings  as  the  somewhat
questionable  representations  of  the  Sagas  ^'

The  same  writer  states,  elsewhere,  in  this  connection,  that :

'  Everywhere  else  where  the  Northmen  went  they  left  proofs  of  this  occupation  on  the
soil,  but  nowhere  in  America,  except  on  an  island  on  the  east  shore  of  Baffin's  Bay,  has
any  authentic  runic  inscription  been  found  outside  of  Greenland  *.'

If  the  authenticity  of  the  Icelandic  discovery  of  America  is  to  be  determined
by  runic  inscriptions  or  other  archaeological  remains  left  by  the  discoverers,  it  is
altogether  probable  that  the  discovery  will  never  be  confirmed.  The  application
of  this  same  test,  however,  would  render  the  discovery  of  Iceland  very  problematical.
The  testimony  is  the  same  in  both  cases,  the  essential  difference  between  the  two
discoveries  being,  after  all,  that  the  one  led  to  practical  results,  while  the  other,
apparently,  did  not  (l).  The  absence  of  any  Icelandic  remains  south  of  Baffin's  Bay
makes  neither  for  nor  against  the  credibility  of  the  Icelandic  discovery, — although  it
may  be  said,  that  it  is  hardly  reasonable  to  expect  that,  in  the  brief  period  of  their
sojourn,  the  explorers  would  have  left  any  buildings  or  implements  behind  them,
which  w^ould  be  likely  to  sur\'ive  the  ravages  of  the  nine  centuries  that  have  elapsed
since  the  discovery.

'  If  by  colonizalion  is  meant  the  permanent  settlement  or  continuous  occupation  of  the  country  for
a  long  series  of  years,  it  should  be  noted  that  its  story  rests  on  the  fertile  imaginations  of  comparatively
recent  editors,  not  upon  the  original  Icelandic  records.

'  Bancroft,  History  of  the  United  States,  vol.  i.  ch.  i.  of  the  earlier  editions.

'  Narrative  and  Critical  History  of  America,  edited  by  Justin  Winsor,  vol.  ii.  p.  33.

*  Winsor,  loc.  cit.,  vol.  i.  pp.  66,  67.


INTRODUCTORY.  3

The  reall}^  important  issue,  which  is  raised  by  the  paragraphs  quoted,  is  the
broader  one  of  the  credibihty  of  the  Icelandic  records^.  These  records,  in  so
far  as  they  relate  to  the  discovery,  disentangled  from  wild  theories  and  vague
assumptions,  would  seem  to  speak  best  for  themselves.  It  is  true  that  Icelandic
historical  sagas  do  differ  from  the  historical  works  of  oiher  lands,  but  this  difference
is  one  of  form.  The  Icelandic  saga  is  peculiarly  distinguished  for  the  pre-
sentation of  events  in  a  simple,  straightforward  manner,  without  embellishment  or
commentary  by  the  author.  Fabulous  sagas  there  are  in  Icelandic  literature,  but
this  literature  is  by  no  means  unique  in  the  possession  of  works  both  of  history
and  romance,  nor  has  it  been  customary  to  regard  works  of  fiction  as  discrediting
the  historical  narratives  of  a  people  which  has  created  both.  It  is  possible  to
discriminate  these  two  varieties  of  literary  creation  in  other  languages,  it  is  no  less
possible  in  Icelandic.  There  is,  indeed,  no  clear  reason  why  the  statements  of
an  historical  saga  should  be  called  in  question,  where  these  statements  are  logically
consistent  and  collaterally  confirmed.

The  information  contained  in  Icelandic  literature  relative  to  the  discovery  of
America  by  the  Icelanders,  has  been  brought  together  here,  and  an  attempt  has  been
made  to  trace  the  history  of  each  of  the  elder  manuscripts  containing  this  information.
Inconsistencies  have  been  noted,  and  discriminations  made  in  the  material,  so  far  as
the  facts  have  seemed  to  warrant,  and  especially  has  an  effort  been  made  to  avoid
any  possibihty  of  confusion  between  expressions  of  opinion  and  the  facts.

It  is  not  altogether  consistent  with  the  plan  of  this  book,  to  suggest  what  seems
to  be  established  by  the  documents  which  it  presents,  these  documents  being  offered
to  bear  witness  for  themselves  ;  but  a  brief  recapitulation  of  the  conclusions  to  which
a  study  of  the  documents  has  led,  may  not  be  amiss,  since  these  conclusions  differ
radically,  in  many  respects,  from  the  views  advanced  by  Rafn  and  his  followers,  and
are  offered  with  a  view  to  point  further  enquiry,  rather  than  to  supplant  it.

The  eldest  surviving  manuscript  containing  an  account  of  the  discovery  of
Wineland  the  Good,  as  the  southernmost  land  reached  by  the  Icelandic  discoverers
was  called,  was  written  not  later  than  1334.  This,  and  a  more  recent  manuscript
containing  virtually  the  same  saga,  present  the  most  cogent  and  consistent  account  of
the  discovery  which  has  been  preserved.      Many  of  the  important  incidents  therein

'  Thus  formulated  by  Winsor,  1.  c,  vol.  i.  p.  87:  'In  regard  to  the  credibility  of  the  sagas,  the
northern  writers  recognize  the  change  which  came  over  the  oral  traditionary  chronicles  when  the
romancing  spirit  was  introduced  from  the  more  southern  countries,  at  a  time  while  the  copies  of
the  sagas  which  we  now  have  were  malnng,  after  having  been  for  so  long  a  time  orally  handed  down  ;
but  they  are  not  so  successful  in  making  plain  what  influence  this  imported  spirit  had  on  particular
sagas,  which  we  are  asked  to  receive  as  historical  records.'

B  2


4  THE  FINDING  OF   WINELAND   THE   GOOD.

set  forth  are  confirmed  by  other  Icelandic  records  of  contemporary  events,  and  the
information  which  this  saga  affords  is  simply,  naturally  and  intelligibly  detailed.  This
information  is  of  such  a  character,  that  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  it  was  derived
from  the  statements  of  those  who  had  themselves  visited  the  lands  described :  it  is  not
conceivable  from  what  other  source  it  could  have  been  obtained,  and,  except  its
author  was  gifted  with  unparalleled  prescience,  it  could  not  have  been  a  fabrication.
According  to  this  history,  for  such  it  clearly  is,  Wineland  was  discovered  by  a  son  of
Eric  Thorvaldsson,  called  the  Red,  the  first  Icelandic  explorer  and  colonist  of
Greenland.  This  son,  whose  name  was  Leif,  returning  from  a  voyage  to  Norway,
probably  not  later  than  the  year  looo,  was  driven  out  of  the  direct  track  to  Greenland,
and  came  upon  a  country  of  which  he  had  previously  had  no  knowledge.  He
returned  thence  to  Greenland,  and  reported  what  he  had  found,  and  an  ineffectual
attempt  was  made  soon  after  to  reach  this  strange  land  again.  A  few  years  later  one
Thorfinn  Thordarson,  called  Karlsefni,  an  Icelander,  who  had  recently  arrived  in
Greenland,  determined  to  renew  the  effort  to  find  and  explore  the  unknown  country
which  Leif  had  seen.  He  organized  an  expedition  and  sailed  away  from  Greenland
toward  the  south-west.  He  first  sighted  a  barren  land,  which,  because  of  the  large
flat  stones  that  lay  strewn  upon  its  surface,  received  the  name  of  Helluland.
Continuing  thence,  with  winds  from  the  north,  the  explorers  next  found  a  wooded
land,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of  Markland,  from  its  trees,  which,  to  these  in-
habitants of  a  treeless  land,  were  a  sufficiently  distinguishing  characteristic.  Proceed-
ing thence,  they  next  descried  a  coast-land,  along  which  they  sailed,  having  the  land
upon  their  starboard  side.  The  first  portion  of  this  land-fall  proved  to  be  a  long,,
sandy  shore,  but  when  they  had  followed  it  for  some  time,  they  found  it  indented  with
bays  and  creeks,  and  in  one  of  these  they  stopped,  and  sent  two  of  their  company
inland  to  explore  the  country.  These  explorers,  when  they  returned,  brought  with
them,  the  one  a  bunch  of  grapes,  the  other  an  ear  of  wild  ['self-sown']  grain.  They
hoisted  anchor  then,  and  sailed  on  until  they  came  to  a  bay,  at  the  mouth  of  which
was  an  island  with  strong  currents  flowing  about  it.  They  laid  their  course  into  the
bay,  and,  being  pleased  with  the  country  thereabouts,  decided  to  remain  there  the  first
winter,  which  proved  to  be  a  severe  one.  In  the  following  j'ear,  Karlsefni,  with  the
greater  portion  of  his  company,  continued  the  advance  southward,  halting  finally  at  a
river,  which  flowed  down  from  the  land  into  a  lake  and  thence  into  the  sea.  About
the  mouth  of  this  river  was  shoal  water,  and  it  could  only  be  entered  at  flood-tide;
they  proceeded  up  the  river  with  their  ship,  and  established  themselves  not
far  from  the  sea,  and  remained  here  throughout  the  second  winter.  There  were
woods  here,  and  in  the  low-lands  fields  of  wild  '  wheat,'  and  on  the  ridges  grapes
growing  wild.    Here  for  the  first  time  they  encountered  the  inhabitants  of  the  country,


INTRODUCTORY.  5

to  whom  they  gave  the  name  of  SkreUings  (Skrælingjar),  a  name  which  seems  to  bear
evidence  of  their  opprobrium.  In  the  spring  after  their  arrival  at  this  spot,  they  were
visited  for  the  second  time  by  the  SkreUings,  with  whom  they  now  engaged  in  barter;
their  visitors,  however,  becoming  alarmed  at  the  bellowing  of  a  bull,  which  Karlsefni  had
brought  with  him,  fled  to  their  skin-canoes  and  rowed  away.  For  three  weeks  after
this,  nothing  was  seen  of  the  natives;  but,  at  the  end  of  this  inter\-al,  they  returned  in
great  numbers  and  gave  battle  to  Karlsefni  and  his  companions.  The  SkreUings
finally  withdrew,  having  lost  several  of  their  number,  while  two  of  Karlsefni's  men
had  fallen  in  the  affray.  The  explorers,  although  they  were  well  content  with  the
country,  decided,  after  this  experience,  that  it  would  be  unwise  for  them  to  attempt  to
remain  in  that  region  longer,  and  they  accordingly  returned  to  the  neighbourhood
in  which  they  had  passed  the  first  winter,  where  they  remained  throughout  the  third
winter,  and  in  the  following  spring  set  sail  for  Greenland.

In  a  manuscript  written  probably  between  1370  and  1390,  but  certainly  before
the  close  of  the  fourteenth  century,  are  two  detached  narratives  which,  considered
together,  form  another  version  of  the  history  of  the  discovery  and  exploration  of
Wineland.  In  this  account  the  discovery  is  ascribed  to  one  Biarni  Heriulfsson,
and  the  date  assigned  to  this  event  is  fixed  several  years  anterior  to  that  of
Leif  Ericsson's  vo3'age  ;  indeed,  according  to  this  account,  Leif's  vo3^age  to  Wineland
is  not  treated  as  accidental,  but  as  the  direct  result  of  Biarni's  description  of  the  land
which  he  had  found.  This  version  differs  further,  from  that  already  described,  in
recounting  three  vo3'ages  besides  that  undertaken  by  Leif,  making  in  all  four  voyages
of  exploration — the  first  headed  by  Leif,  the  second  by  Leif's  brother,  Thorvald,  the
third  by  Karlsefni,  and  the  fourth  and  last  led  by  Freydis,  a  natural  daughter  of  Eric
the  Red.  This  account  of  the  discovery  is  treated  at  length,  and  certain  of  its  incon-
sistencies pointed  out  in  another  place,  and  it  is,  therefore,  not  necessary  to  examine
it  more  particularly  here.  The  statement  concerning  the  discovery  of  Wineland  by
Biarni  Heriulfsson  is  not  confirmed  by  any  existing  collateral  evidence,  while  that
which  would  assign  the  honour  to  Leif  Ericsson  is ;  moreover,  beyond  the  testimony
of  this,  the  Flatey  Book,  version,  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  more  than  a  single
voyage  of  exploration  took  place,  namel}',  that  of  Thorfinn  Karlsefni.  So  far  as  the
statements  of  this  second  version  coincide  with  that  of  the  first,  there  seems  to  be  no
good  reason  for  calling  them  in  question ;  where  they  do  not,  they  may  well  receive
more  particular  scrutiny  than  has  been  directed  to  them,  hitherto,  since  the  Flatey
Book  narrative  is  that  which  has  generally  been  treated  as  the  more  important,  and
its  details  have,  in  consequence,  received  the  greater  publicity.

Especially  has  one  of  the  statements,  which  appears  in  this  second  version,  claimed
the  attention  of  writers,  who  have  sought  to  determine  from  it  the  site  of  Wineland.


6  THE  FIXDTXG   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

Rafn,  b}'  the  ingenious  application  of  a  subtile  theor}',  succeeded  in  computing  from
this  statement  the  exact  latitude,  to  the  second,  of  the  southernmost  winter-quarters
of  the  explorers,  and  for  nearly  fifty  years  after  its  publication  Rafn's  method  of  inter-
pretation remained  essentially  unassailed.  In  1883,  however.  Professor  Gustav  Storm,
of  Christiania,  propounded  a  novel,  but  withal  a  simple  and  scientific  interpretation
of  this  passage  ^  which  can  hardly  fail  to  appeal  to  the  discernment  of  any  reader  who
may  not  in  advance  have  formed  his  conclusions  as  to  where  Wineland  ought  to  have
been.  Professor  Storm's  method  of  interpretation  does  not  seek  to  determine  from
the  passage  the  exact  spot  which  the  explorers  reached  (for  which,  it  may  be  remarked,
the  passage  does  not  afford  sufficiently  accurate  data),  but  he  is  enabled  by  his  process
of  reasoning  to  determine  a  limit,  north  of  which  Wineland  could  not  have  been,  and
this  limit  is  approximately  49°.  A  region  not  far  removed  to  the  southward  of  this
latitude  conforms  sufficiently  well  to  the  descriptions  of  the  country,  given  in  the
narratives  of  the  exploration,  to  serve  to  confirm  Professor  Storm's  result,  and  also
the  relative  accuracy  of  the  mooted  passage  itself.  It  will  be  apparent  from  an
examination  of  this  author's  treatise  that  it  is  not  necessarily  proven  that  Wineland
may  not  have  been  situated  to  the  southward  of  latitude  49°,  but  it  would  seem  to
be  wellnigh  certain  that  thus  far  south  it  must  have  been.

There  is  no  suggestion  in  Icelandic  writings  of  a  permanent  occupation  of  the
country,  and  after  the  exploration  at  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  centurj-,  it  is
not  known  that  Wineland  was  ever  again  visited  by  Icelanders,  although  it  would
appear  that  a  voyage  thither  was  attempted  in  the  year  1121,  but  with  what  result  is  not
known.  That  portion  of  the  discovery  known  as  Markland  was  revisited  however,
in  1347,  by  certain  seamen  from  the  Icelandic  colony  in  Greenland.

It  will  be  seen  from  this  summary  that  the  Wineland  history  is  of  the  briefest,
but  brief  as  it  is,  it  has  been  put  in  jeopardy  no  less  by  those  who  would  prove
too  much,  than  by  those  who  would  deny  all.  It  may  not  be  unprofitable  in  the
present  aspect  of  the  question  to  appeal  to  the  records  themselves.

'  Published  in  Arkiv  for  Nordisk  Filologi,  November,  1885,  under  the  title  'Om  Betydningen  af
"  Eyktarstaðr  "  i  Flat0bogens  Beretning  om  Vinlandsreiserne.'


CHAPTER    I.

Early  Fragmentary  References  to  Wineland.

WiNELAND  the  Good  is  first  mentioned  in  Icelandic  literature  by  the  Priest  Ari
Thorgilsson  [Þorgilsson],  in  a  passage  contained  in  his  so-called  íslendingabók  [Ice-
landers' Book].  Ari,  commonly  called  the  Learned  [fróöi],  an  agnomen  which
he  received  after  his  death',  was  born  in  Iceland  in  the  year  1067 ^  and  lived  to
the  ripe  age  of  eighty-one  ^,  acquiring  a  positive  claim  to  the  appellation  '  hinn
gamli'  [the  Old,  the  Elder],  which  is  once  given  him*;  in  this  instance,  however,
to  distinguish  him  from  another  of  the  same  name  \  Of  Ari,  the  father  of  Icelandic
historiography,  the  author  of  Heimskringla'',  the  most  comprehensive  of  Icelandic
histories,  says  in  the  prologue  to  his  work :

'  The  priest  Ari  Thorgilsson  the  Learned,  Gelli's  grandson,  was  the  first  of  men  here
in  the  land  [Iceland]  to  write  ancient  and  modern  lore  in  the  Northern  tongue  ;  he  wrote
chiefly  in  the  beginning  of  his  book,  concerning  Iceland's  colonization  and  legislation,  then
of  the  law-speakers  (2),  how  long  each  was  in  office ',  down  to  the  introduction  of  Christianity
into  Iceland,  and  then  on  to  his  own  day.  Therein  he  also  treats  of  much  other  old  lofe,
both  of  the  lives  of  the  kings  of  Norway  and  Denmark,  as  well  as  of  those  of  England,  as
likewise  of  the  important  events,  which  have  befallen  here  in  the  land,  and  all  of  his
narrations  seem  to  me  most  trustworthy.  ...  It  is  not  strange  that  Ari  should  have  been
well-informed  in  the  ancient  lore,  both  here  and  abroad,  since  he  had  both  acquired  it  from
old  men  and  wise,  and  was  himself  eager  to  learn  and  gifted  with  a  good  memory".'

'  fslendingabóc,  ed.  Finnur  Jónsson,  Copenhagen,  1887,  p.  vi.

^  Or,  1068.  Cf.  Maurer,  '  tJber  Ari  Thorgilsson  und  sein  Islanderbuch/  Germania,  xv.  p.  293  ;
Möbius,  Are's  Islanderbuch,  Leipzig,  1869,  p.  iv.  n.  4.  The  date  of  Ari's  birth  is  twice  assigned,  in  the
Icelandic  Annals,  to  1066,  but  this  date  is  without  collateral  support.  Cf.  Islandske  Annaler,  ed.  Storm,
Christiania,  1888,  pp.  58,  471.

^  Chr.  Worm  says  '91;'  an  obvious  blunder,  as  is  the  explanation  of  'hinn  gamli'  immediately
following.     Vide,  Aræ  Multiscii  Schedæ  de  Islandia,  Oxford,  17 16,  p.  184.

*  Kristni-Saga,  Copenh.  1773,  p.  104.

^  Cf.  Werlauff,  De  Ario  Multiscio,  Copenh.  1808,  p.  13.
By  this  name  the  great  historical  work,  '  The  Lives  of  the  Kings  of  Norway,'  is  generally  known.
The  name  is  derived  from  the  introductory  words  of  the  history,  '  Kringla  heimsins  sú  er  mannfólkit
byggir,'  i.e.  ^  the  world's  orb,  which  is  inhabited  by  mankind.'

'  Lit.  'how  long  each  spoke.'

'  Heimskringla,  ed.  Unger,  Christiania,  1868,  pp.  2,  3.


8  THE   FINDING   OF    WIN  EL  AND    THE   GOOD.

In  the  introduction  to  the  íslendingabók,  Ari  says:

'  I  first  composed  an  fslendingabók  for  our  Bishops  Thorlak  [Þorlákr]  and  Ketil  [Ketill],
and  showed  it  to  them,  as  well  as  to  Sæmund  (Sæmundr)  the  Priest.  And  forasmuch  as  they
were  pleased  [either]  to  have  it  thus,  or  augmented,  I  accordingly  wrote  this  [the  "libellus"'],
similar  in  character,  with  the  exception  of  the  genealogy  and  lives  of  the  kings,  and  have
added  that  of  which  I  have  since  acquired  closer  knowledge,  and  which  is  now  more
accurately  set  forth  in  this  [the  "libellus"]  than  in  that  I'

These  words  conjoined  with  the  quoted  statement  concerning  the  character
of  the  historian's  work,  and  supplemented  by  references  to  Ari  in  other  Icelandic
writings  ^  have  given  rise  to  a  controversy  as  to  the  probable  scope  of  Ari's  literary
activity.  Whether  the  conclusion  be  reached  that  Ari  was  the  author  of  several
books,  as  has  been  claimed,  or  that  the  íslendingabók,  which  has  perished,  to  which
he  refers  in  the  words  above  quoted,  was  a  much  larger  and  more  comprehensive
work  than  the  so-called  íslendingabók  which  has  been  preserved  to  us,  there  seems  to
be  abundant  reason  for  the  belief  that  all  of  Ari's  historical  material  was  by  no  means
comprised  in  the  only  book  of  his  now  existing,  about  whose  authorship  there
can  be  no  room  for  dispute*.  Of  this  book,  the  so-called  íslendingabók,  the  oldest
manuscripts  are  two  paper  copies,  of  a  lost  parchment  manuscript,  belonging  to
the  Arna-Magnæan  Collection  in  the  University  Library  of  Copenhagen,  which  are
known  as  113  fl  and  113  b  fol.    At  the  end  of  113  a,  the  scribe  has  written  as  follows :

'  These  "  Schedæ "  and  narratives  of  the  priest  Ari  the  Learned  are  copied  from  a
vellum  in  his  own  hand,  as  men  believe,  at  Villingaholt,  by  the  priest  John  Ellindsson  [Jon
Erlendsson],  Anno  domini  1651,  the  next  Monday  after  the  third  Sunday  after  Easter.'

This  John  Erlendsson  is  known  to  have  made  transcripts  of  many  of  the  sagas

'  Ari,  himself  (?),  heads  the  introduction  to  the  so-called  fslendingabók  with  a  Latin  title,  '  Incipit
libellus  Islandorum,'  wherefore  the  Icelandic  tide  of  the  later  composition  should  be  íslendinga-
bœklingr,  rather  than  fslendingabók.     Cf.  IMaurer,  Uber  Ari  Thoigilsson,  ubi  sup.,  p.  312.

*  The  proper  interpretation  of  the  passage,  which  is  by  no  means  as  obvious  as  could  be  wished,  is
critically  considered  by  Björn  M.  Ólsen  in  an  article  entitled  '  Om  Forholdet  mellem  de  to  Bearbejdelser
af  Are's  Islændingebog,'  contained  in  Aarb0gcr  for  Nordisk  Oldkyndighed  og  Historic,  Copenh.  1885,
]).  34 1  et  seq.

'  As  in  Landnámabók  [Eook  of  Settlement :  the  Domesday  Book  of  Iceland]  :  '  So  Ari  Thorgilsson
says,  that  twenty-five  ships  sailed  to  Greenland  that  .summer,'  &c.,  ch.  14,  pt.  2  ;  and  again,  ch.  15,  pt.  5  :
'  Now  we  have  considered  briefly  the  settlement  of  Iceland,  according  to  that  which  learned  men  have
written,  first,  the  priest  Ari  Thorgilsson  the  Learned,'  &c.

*  The  various  views  concerning  the  scope  of  Ari's  authorship  will  be  found  in  I\Iaurer's  and  Olsen's
articles,  loc.  tit.,  and  in  the  latter  author's  admirable  treatise,  'Ari  Þorgilsson  hinn  fróði,'  in  Timarit  bins
isl.  b(')kmenntaljelags,  Reykjavik,  1889,  pp.  214-40.  Further,  in  the  introduction  to  the  Tslanderbuch '
(jf  Möbius,  ubi  sup.,  and  in  '  Bemcrkningcr  om  Are  frodcs  Forfattervirksomhed,'  contained  in  Pt.  I.  of
Undcrs0gcIsc  af  Kongesagacns  Fremvæxt  by  A.  Gjessing,  Christiania,  1873.


EARLY  FRAGMENTARY  REFERENCES.  g

for  Bryniolf  [Brynjólfr]  Sveinsson,  Bishop  of  Skálholt^  To  this  worthy  bishop's^
literary  ardour,  and  zeal  in  collecting  the  neglected  treasures  of  his  language,  we
owe  the  presenilation  of  many  manuscripts,  which  would,  but  for  him,  doubtless,
have  perished  before  the  coming  of  the  indefatigable  collector,  Arni  Magnusson.

Bishop  Brj'niolf,  unfortunately,  left  no  heir,  interested  in  the  preser\'ation  of  his
library,  and  his  books  were  soon  scattered.  When  Arni  Magnusson  visited  Iceland,
thirty  years  after  the  Bishop's  death,  and  ransacked  the  island  for  surviving  manu-
scripts, the  vellum  of  the  íslendingabók,  doubtless  one  of  the  oldest  of  Icelandic
manuscripts,  had  entirely  disappeared^.  Concerning  the  two  paper  copies  of  this
vellum,  which  he  succeeded  in  obtaining,  Arni  has  inserted  the  following  memor-
andum in  the  manuscript  described  as  113  b.  fol. :

'  The  various  different  readings  noted  here  throughout  in  my  hand,  are  taken  from  another
copy  [113  a.  fol.]  written  by  the  Rev.  John  Erlendsson  in  1651.  This  was  formerly  the
property  of  the  Rev.  Torfi  Jonsson  [Jónsson]  of  Bær,  who  inherited  it  from  Bishop  Bryniolf
Sveinsson ;  I  obtained  it,  however,  from  Thorlak,  son  of  Bishop  Thord  [{"orlakr  Þórðarson]  ;
it  formed  originally  a  portion  of  a  large  book,  which  I  took  apart,  separating  the
treatises.  This  copy  I  have  called  "  Codex  B,"  signifying  either  "  Baiensis  V'  or  the  second,
from  the  order  of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet.  Concerning  'Codex  B,'  it  is  my  conjecture
that  the  Rev.  John  copied  it  first  from  the  vellum  ;  that  Bishop  Br;yTiiolf  did  not  like  the
copy  [for  this  Codex  is  less  exact  than  Codex  A,  as  may  be  seen  by  comparing  them].  .  .  .
wherefore  the  Rev.  John  made  a  new  copy  of  the  parchment  manuscript,  taking  greater  care
to  follow  the  original  literally,  whence  it  is  probable  that  this  Codex  A  was  both  the  later
and  the  better  copy.'

Both  of  the  paper  manuscripts  '  A '  and  '  B '  were  written,  it  is  believed,  within
the  same  year,  and  in  each  of  them  the  paragraphs  containing  the  reference  to  Wine-
land  are  almost  identical ;  the  Icelandic  name  in  '  A '  being  spelt  Winland,  in  '  B '
Vinland,  a  clerical  variation,  devoid  of  significance.  This  paragraph,  which  is  the
sixth  in  Ari's  history,  is  as  follows :

'  That  country  which  is  called  Greenland,  was  discovered  and  colonized  from  Iceland.
Eric  the  Red  [Eirekr  enn  Rauþi]  was  the  name  of  the  man,  an  inhabitant  of  Breidafirth

'  At  that  time  an  episcopal  seat  in  southern  Iceland.

'  A  brief  but  entertaining  account  of  this  remarkable  man  is  contained  in  the  Introduction  to  the
Corpus  Poeticum  Boreale,  Vigfusson  and  Powell,  Oxford,  1883,  vol.  i.  pp.  xxii-xxv.

^  Bishop  Brynjólf  died  in  1675.  Arm's  visit  was  made  between  the  years  1702  and  1712.  For  an
account  of  Arni  Rlagnusson's  life  and  labours,  see  '  Biographiske  Efterretninger  om  Arne  Magnussen ' ;
ved  Jon  Olafsen  fra  Grunnavik.  Med  Indledning,  &c.,  af  E.  C.  Werlauff,  contained  in,  Nordisk  Tidskrift
for  Oldlij-ndighed,  Copenh.  1836,  pp.  1-166.

*  From  the  farmstead  of  Beer  (Gaulverjabœr),  at  which  it  was  obtained.

c


lo  THE  FINDING  OF  WINELAND  THE  GOOD.

[Breiþfirscr],  who  went  out  thither  from  here,  and  settled  at  that  place,  which  has  since  been
called  Ericsfirth  [Eiríksfigrþr].  He  gave  a  name  to  the  country,  and  called  it  Greenland,
and  said,  that  it  must  persuade  men  to  go  thither,  if  the  land  had  a  good  name.  They  found
there,  both  east  and  west  in  the  country,  the  dwellings  of  men,  and  fragments  of  boats,  and
stone  implements  ^,  such  that  it  may  be  perceived  from  these,  that  that  manner  of  people  had
been  there  who  have  inhabited  Wineland,  and  whom  the  Greenlanders  call  Skrellings
[Scrælinga,  nom.  Skrælingjar].  And  this,  when  he  set  about  the  colonization  of  the  country,
was  XIV  or  XV  winters^  before  the  introduction  of  Christianity  here  in  Iceland',  according
to  that  which  a  certain  man  [lit.  he],  who  himself  accompanied  Eric  the  Red  thither,  informed
Thorkel  [Þorkell]  Gellisson.'

This  mention  of  Wineland,  which  in  itself  may  appear  to  be  of  little  importance,
acquires  its  greatest  value  from  that  which  it  leaves  unsaid ;  for  had  Ari  not  known
that  his  reference  to  Wineland  and  its  inhabitants  would  be  entirely  intelligible  to  his
readers,  he  would  hardly  have  employed  it,  as  he  does,  to  inform  his  Greenland  chronicle.
This  passing  notice,  therefore,  indicates  a  general  diffusion  of  the  knowledge  of  the
Wineland  discoveries  among  Ari's  contemporaries  at  the  time  when  the  paragraph
was  composed.  The  '  libellus '  [íslendingabók]  was  probably  written  about  the  3'ear
:  1 134*,  and  we  are  accordingly  apprised  that  at  that  time  the  facts  concerning  the  Wine-
land discovery,  upon  an  acquaintance  with  which  Ari  seems  to  rely,  were  notorious.
It  is  impossible,  however,  to  determine  whether  Ari  presumed  upon  a  knowledge
derived  from  particulars,  which  he  had  himself  previously  published,  or  upon  a
prevalent  acquaintance  wáth  the  accounts  of  the  explorers  themselves.  It  is,  at  least,
questionable  whether  Ari  would  have  been  content  to  presuppose  such  local  historical
knowledge  if  he  had  not  already  sealed  it  with  his  own  authority  elsewhere.  Nor  is
the  importance  which  he  may  have  assigned  to  the  Wineland  discovery  material  to
this  view.  He  had  set  about  writing  a  chronicle  of  his  fatherland,  and  his  passing
allusion  to  Wineland,  without  a  word  of  explanation,  appears  incompatible  with  the
duty  which  he  had  assumed,  unless,  indeed,  he  had  already  dealt  with  the  subject  of
the  Wineland  discovery  in  a  previous  work.  Be  this  as  it  may,  however,  certain  it  is,
that  Wineland  has  found  further  mention  in  two  Icelandic  works,  which  in  their
primitive  form  have  been  very  generally  accredited  to  Ari,  namely  the  Landn:\mabók
[Book  of  Settlement]  and  the  Kristni-Saga  [the  Narrative  of  the  Introduction  of

'  Cf:  Nordisk  Tidskrift  for  Oldkyndighed,  Copenh.  1832,  pp.  223-4,  where  certain  of  these  implements
are  described.

"  The  customary  expression  for  years,  corresponding  with  our  use  of  the  word,  '  summers,'  as  in
the  expression,  he  was  a  lad  of  twelve  summers

°  Christianity  became  the  legalized  religion  of  Iceland  in  the  year  1000  ;  the  settlement  of  Greenland, '
therefore,  according  to  Ari's  chronology,  must  have  taken  place  in  985  or  9S6.

*  Cf.  Mobius,  Arc's  Islanderbuch,  pj).  xv,  xvi ;  Rlaurer,  loc.  cit.  p-  315  ;  íslcndingabóc,  ed.  Jónsson,
p.  vi.


EARLY  FRAGMENTARY  REFERENCES.  ii

Christianity  into  Iceland]  \  The  first  of  these,  in  a  passage  already  cited  ^,  expressly
acknowledges  Ari's  share  in  the  authorship  ^  One  manuscript  of  this  work,  from
which  the  passage  is  taken,  [No.  371,  4to,  in  the  Arna-Magnæan  Collection],  while  it  is
the  oldest  extant  manuscript  containing  the  Landnámabók  [now  in  an  incomplete
state]  presents  this  in  a  later  recension  of  the  original  work,  than  that  which  is
contained  in  the  much  more  modern  manuscript,  AM.  107,  fol.  This  latter  manuscript,
like  the  copy  of  íslendingabók,  was  written  by  the  Rev.  John  Erlendsson  for  Bishop
Bryniolf  Sveinsson  *.  Both  of  the  references  to  Wineland  in  the  Landnámabók  occur
incidentally  in  the  course  of  the  history,  and  are  of  the  briefest.  The  first  of  these
treats  of  the  adventure  of  Ari  Marsson  [Mársson] ;  it  is  to  be  found  in  Chapter  22,  of
the  second  part  of  the  book,  and  is  as  follows :

'. .  .  their''  son  was  Ari.  He  was  driven  out  of  his  course  at  sea  to  White-men's-Iand
[Hvitramanna-land],  which  is  called  by  some  persons  Ireland  the  Great  [friand  it  mikla]  (58) ;
it  lies  westward  in  the  sea  near  Wineland  the  Good  [V inland  it  góða]  ;  it  is  said  to  be  six
"  dœgra'"  sail  west  of  Ireland  ;  Ari  could  not  depart  thence,  and  was  baptized  there.  The  first
account  of  this  was  given  by  Rafn  who  sailed  to  Limerick  (3)  [Hlimreksfari],  and  who  remained
for  a  long  time  at  Limerick  in  Ireland.  So  Thorkel  [f-orkell]  Geitisson'  states  that  Ice-
landers report,  who  have  heard  Thorfinn,  Earl  of  the  Orkneys  (4)  [Þorfinnr  jarl  í  Orkneyjum]
say,  that  Ari  had  been  recognized  there,  and  was  not  permitted  to  leave  [lit.  could  not  leave],
but  was  treated  with  great  respect  there.'

The  names  of  Ari  Marsson's  wife,  and  of  his  three  sons  are  given  in  the  same
passage  from  which  the  quotation  is  made,  and  additional  concurrent  evidence  is
not  wanting  to  ser\'e  to  establish  the  existence  of  this  man  ;  any  particulars,  however,
which  might  serve  to  enlighten  this  narrative,  or  aid  in  determining  whence  Rafn
and  Earl  Thorfinn  derived  their  intelligence,  are  lacking.    Without  free  conjectural

'  Cf.  Storm,  Snorre  Sturlassöns  Historieskrivning,  Copenh.  1873,  pp.  50,  51  ;  Vigfusson,  Prole-
gomena to  Sturlunga  Saga,  Oxford,  1S78,  vol.  i.  pp.  sxx,  xxsi,  and  xxxiv;  Brenner,  Uber  die  Knstni-
Saga,  Munich,  1878,  pp.  4,  5.

'^  Note  3,  p.  8.

5  In  the  Saga  of  Bishop  Paul  it  is  stated  that  '  The  priest  Ari  the  Learned,  who  has  related  much
old  lore,  tells  how  greatly  our  land  was  bowed  down  upon  the  death  of  Bishop  Gizur,  whom  the  people
looked  upon  as  the  foremost  man  in  Iceland.'  Pals  saga,  in  Biskupa  Sögur,  Copenh.  1858,  vol.  i.  p.  145.
This  passage  Vigfusson  regards  as  a  recognition  of  Ari's  share  in  the  authorship  of  the  Kristni-Saga.
Cf.  Prolegomena  to  Sturiunga  Saga,  p.  xxxiv.

*  The  Landnámabók  containing,  as  it  does,  the  ground-wodc  of  Icelandic  biographical  history,  was
a  favourite  subject  for  the  copyist.  The  editor  of  the  first  printed  edition  states  in  his  preface  that  his
text  was  diligently  compiled  and  collated  from  five  different  manuscripts.  Cf.  Pref.  Sagan  Landnáma,
Skáholt,  1688.

^  '  their,'  i.e.  IMár  of  Reykhólar  and  Þórkatla.  "  Cf.  note  46.

'  Or  Gellisson.     Cf.  Gronlands  historiske  Mindesmærker,  Copenh.  1838,  vol.  i.  pp.  167,  8.

c  2


12  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

emendation  to  aid  in  its  interpretation,  this  description  of  Ari  Marsson's  visit  to
Ireland  the  Great  is  of  the  same  doubtful  historical  value  as  a  later  account  of  another
visit  to  an  unknown  land,  to  be  considered  hereafter.

The  second  reference  to  Wineland  in  the  Landnámabók  is  contained  in  a  list  of
the  descendants  of  Snorri  Head-Thord's  son  [Snorri  H9f?ia-í'órbarson]:

'  Their  ^  son  was  Thord  Horse-head  [Þórðr  Hest-hgfði],  father  of  Karlsefni,  who  found
Wineland  the  Good,  Snorri's  father,'  &c.^

A  genealogy  which  entirely  coincides  with  that  of  the  histories  of  the  discovery
of  Wineland,  as  well  as  with  that  of  the  episcopal  genealogy  appended  to  the  íslend-
ingabók  ^  The  Landnámabók  contains  no  other  mention  of  Wineland,  but  a  more
extended  notice  is  contained  in  the  work  alread}^  named,  which,  in  its  present  form,  is
supposed  to  retain  evidence  of  the  learned  Ari's  pen.

The  Kristni-Saga,  which  is  supplementary,  historically,  to  the  Landnámabók,  is
given  in  its  entirety  in  AM.  105,  fol.  This  is  a  paper  copy  of  an  earher  manuscript
made  by  the  same  industrious  cleric,  John  Erlendsson,  for  Bishop  Bryniolf.  A
portion  of  the  same  history  has  also  been  preser\'ed  along  with  the  detached  leaves
of  the  Landnámabók  now  deposited  in  the  Arna-Magnæan  Collection,  No.  371,  4to.
These  fragments  of  the  two  histories  originally  belonged  to  one  work,  the  so-called
Hauk's  Book  [Hauksbók],  a  vellum  manuscript  of  the  fourteenth  century,  hereafter  to
be  more  fully  described.  The  history  of  the  Wineland  discovery  is  contained  in  the
eleventh  chapter  of  the  printed  edition  of  the  Kristni-Saga,  in  the  following  words :

'That  summer  (5)  King  Olaf  [Tr3'ggvason]  went  from  the  country  southward  to  Vindland
[the  land  of  the  Wends] ;  then,  moreoverj  he  sent  Leif  Ericsson  [Leifr  Eiriksson]  to
Greenland,  to  proclaim  the  faith  there.  On  this  voyage  [lit.  then]  Leif  found  Wineland  the
Good ;  he  also  found  men  on  a  wreck  at  sea,  wherefore  he  was  called  Leif  the  Lucky  [Leifr
hinn  heppni]  \'

Of  the  same  tenor  as  this  brief  paragraph  of  the  Kristni-Saga,  is  a  chapter  in  the
Codex  Frisianus  [Fríssbók],  number  45,  fol.,  of  the  Arna-Magnæan  manuscripts.  This
Codex  Frisianus,  or,  as  it  has  been  more  appropriately  called,  the  Book  of  Kings
[Konungabók],  is  a  beautifully  written  and  well-preser\-ed  parchment  manuscript  of
124  leaves;  it  obtains  its  name  from  a  former  owner,  Otto  Friis  of  Sailing;  it  subse-

"  'Their,'  i.e.  Snorri  Head-Thordsson  and  Thorhild  Ptarmigan  [Þórhildr  rjúpa],  the  daughter  of
Thord  the  Yeller  [l'órðr  gellir].

^  Landnámabók,  Part  IIL  chap.  x.  '  Cf.  Islendingabóc,  ed.  Jónsson,  p.  18.

*  '  {"at  sumar  for  Ólafr  konúngr  or  landi  suðr  til  Vindlands ;  þi  sendi  hann  ok  Leif  Eirikssun  til
Grcenalands,  at  boða  þar  trú ;  þá  fiinn  Lcifr  Vínland  hit  g<'iða,  hann  fann  ok  menn  á  skipílaki  í  hafi,  því
var  hann  kallaðr  Lcifr  hinn  hcppni.'     Kristni  saga,  ed.  in  Biskupa  Sögiu-,  Copenh.  1858,  vol.  i.  p.  20.


EARLY  FRAGMENTARY  REFERENCES.  13

quently  became  the  property  of  one  Jens  Rosenkranz,  and  next  passed  into  the
possession  of  Ami  Magnusson '.  Friis'  Book  was,  in  all  probability,  written  about  the
beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century  ^ ;  and  if  the  conjectures  as  to  its  age  are  correct,
it  is,  perhaps,  the  oldest  extant  Icelandic  manuscript  containing  an  account  of  the  Wine-
land  discovery.  It  is  believed,  from  internal  evidence,  that  the  greater  part  of  the
Codex  was  written  by  an  Icelander,  in  Norway,  possibly  for  a  Norwegian,  and  that  the
manuscript  was  never  in  Iceland  ^.  The  early  history  of  the  Codex  is  not  known.
Certain  marginal  notes  appear  to  have  been  inserted  in  the  manuscript  about  the  year
1550  by  Lawman  Laurents  Hanssön,  and  it  is  conjectured  that  the  book  was  then
owned  in  Bergen  * ;  fifty  years  later  we  find  it  in  Denmark ;  for  about  the  year  1600
a  Dane,  by  the  name  of  Slangerup  [Slangendorpius],  inserted  his  name  upon  a
fly-leaf  in  the  book,  which  leaf,  Arni  Magnusson  tells  us,  was  removed  when  he  had
the  manuscript  bound'.  In  this  'Book  of  Kings,'  the  Saga  of  Olaf  Tryggvason,  in
which  the  history  of  the  discovery  of  Wineland  occurs,  follows  closely  the  same  saga
as  it  was  written  in  the  two  lost  parchment  manuscripts  of  the  '  Heimskringla,'  as
we  are  enabled  to  determine  from  the  copies  of  these  lost  vellums  made  by  the  Ice-
lander, Asgeir  Jonsson  [Ásgeirr  Jónsson]*'.  It  is  not  known  whether  the  author  of
the  '  Heimskringla '  had  access  to  the  history  of  the  Wineland  discovery  in  some
such  extended  form  as  that  contained  in  Hauk's  Book ;  indeed  it  has  been  suggested,
that  he  may  only  have  been  acquainted  with  the  brief  narrative  of  the  Kristni-Saga '',
but  certain  it  is,  that  his  account  of  the  discovery  was  not  influenced  by  the  version
presented  in  the  Flatey  Book,  which  narrative  appears  in  the  first  printed  edition
of  the  'Heimskringla,'  where  it  was  interpolated  by  the  editor,  Johann  Peringskiöld**.

'  Thus  Arni  Magnusson's  entry :  '  Bókina  hefir  átt  Otto  Fiiis  í  Sailing.  Síðan  Etats-Raad  Jens
Rosencrantz,  og  eptir  hann  eignadest  eg  bókina.'  Cf.  Katalog  over  den  Arna-]\Iagnæanske  Hándskrift-
samling,  Copenli.  i888,  vol.  i.  p.  33.

^  Cf.  Unger,  Code.x  Frisianus,  Christiania,  187 1 :  Forord,  p.  iii  [i.e.  p.  i].  Dr.  Gustav  Storm  gives
the  date  as  about  the  year  1300;  cf.  his  Sigurd  Ranessön's  Proces,  Christiania,  1877,  p.  44;  Vigfusson
would  make  the  manuscript  still  older,  namely  '  c.  1260-80.'  Cf.  Corpus  Poeticum  Boreale,  Oxford,
1883,  vol.  i.  p.  xlix.  If  this  last  view  is  sound,  then  the  MS.  is  decidedly  older  than  Hauk's  Book,  the
earliest  manuscript  mentioning  Wineland,  of  whose  date  we  have  certain  knowledge.

'  Cf.  Unger,  Codex  Frisianus,  Christiania,  1871,  Forord.

*  Cf.  Storm,  Sigurd  Rannessöns  Proces,  ubi  sup.  p.  44.
^  Cf.  Katalog  o.  d.  AM.  Hdslcrsmlg.,  vol.  i.  p.  33.

"  The  two  parchment  manuscripts  belonging  to  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Copenhagen,  called
Kringla  [i.e.  Heimskringla],  and  Jgfraskinna  (King's  vellum),  were  destroyed  by  the  fire  of  1728.  The
copies,  which  had,  fortunately,  been  made,  have  been  preserved.  Cf.  Unger,  Heimskringla,  Christiania,
1868,  Forord,  p.  iii  (i.e.  p.  i).

'  Cf.  Storm,  Snorre  Sturlassöns  Historieskrivning,  Copenh.  1873,  p.  60.

*  Cf.  Peringskiöld's  edition,  Heimskringla,  EUer  Snorre  Sturlusons  Nordlandske  Sagor,  Stockholm,
1697,  chs.  civ-cxi.  vol.  i.  pp.  326-50.


14  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

Similarl}',  any  trace  of  the  Flatey  Book  version  of  the  discovery  is  lacking  from
Friis'  Book,  although  the  author  of  the  saga  of  Olaf  Tr3^gg\'ason,  therein  contained,
appears  to  have  been  acquainted  with  a  somewhat  more  detailed  account  of  Leif
Ericsson's  life  than  that  afforded  by  the  Kristni-Saga,  if  we  may  judge  from  his  own
language,  as  we  find  it  in  column  136,  page  34  h,  of  the  manuscript :

'WiNELAND   THE    GoOD    FoUND.

'Leif,  a  son  of  Eric  the  Red,  passed  this  same  winter,  in  good  repute,  with  King
Olaf,  and  accepted  Christianity.  And  that  summery  when  Gizur  went  to  Iceland,  King
Olaf  sent  Leif  to  Greenland  to  proclaim  Christianity  there.  He  sailed  that  summer  to
Greenland.  He  found  men  upon  a  wreck  at  sea  and  succoured  them.  Then,  likewise,  he
discovered  Wineland  the  Good,  and  arrived  in  Greenland  in  the  autumn.  He  took  with  him
thither  a  priest  and  other  spiritual  teachers,  and  went  to  Brattahlid  to  make  his  home  with
his  father,  Eric.  People  aftenvards  called  him  Leif  the  Lucky.  But  his  father,  Eric,  said  that
one  account  should  balance  the  other,  that  Leif  had  rescued  the  ship's  crew,  and  this  that  he
had  brought  the  trickster  to  Greenland.     This  -  was  the  priest '.'

Almost  identical  with  the  history  of  the  discovery  contained  in  Friis'  Book  is  that
of  the  so-called  longer  saga  of  Olaf  Trji-ggvason.  This  saga,  in  its  printed  form,  has
been  compiled  from  several  manuscripts  of  the  Arna-Magnæan  collection,  the  most
important  of  which  is  No.  61,  fol.,  a  codex  dating  from  about  the  year  1400  *.  This
account  is  contained  in  the  231st  chapter  of  the  printed  version '  as  follows :

'King  Olaf  then^  sent  Leif  to  Greenland  to  proclaim  Christianity  there.  The  king
sent  a  priest  and  other  holy  men  with  him,  to  baptize  the  people  there,  and  to  instruct  them

'  The  summer  of  the  year  in  which  King  Olaf  Trygg\-ason  fell,  i.e.  the  summer  of  the  year  1000.

^  i.e.  'the  trickster.'

'  '  Fvnd//  Vinlawd  góða.  Þenwa  sama  vetr  sar  Leifr  %on  Eiriks  bins  Ravða  med  Ó\á/i  ko/iungi  vel
metiw/,  ok  tók  w?  kr/stni.  En«  þí/ta  s\Tnar,  er  Gizurr  for  Ul  fskwdz  sendi  6\á/r  konungr  Leif  Xil
Grænl<2«dz,  at  boða  þar  kr/stni.  For  haim  þa/  svmirr  t?7  Grænkwdz.  Han«  fan«  Í  hafi  menn  á
skips-flaki  ok  hialpaði  þeim.  Þá  fan«  \_han7i]  ok  Vín-lí7;;d  hit  góða,  ok  kom  of  havstit  t;7  Grænl<7«dz.
Ha««  hafði  þan?;ig  prist  ok  aðra  'kenni-menn,  ok  for  t/7  vistar  Í  Bratta-hlíð  ill  'Eiúks  {gSur  sins.
Mf««  kgllz/^w  hann  síðan  Leif  hin«  hepna.  En«  Eir/Xr,  fað/r  bans,  %agði  si'á  at  þa/  \ar  samskvllda,  er
Leifr  hafði  borgit  skips-hgfa  manna  Í  hafi,  ok  þa/  er  hann  hafði  flutt  skæman/;in;í  t;7  Grænli7«í/z.  ^aí
var  prestnnn.'

*  Of.  Katalog  0.  d.  AM.  Ildskrsmlg.,  Copenh.  1888,  vol.  i.  p.  40.

''  Fornmanna-sögur,  Copenh.  1826,  vol.  ii.  pp.  245,  246.

"  In  the  summer  of  the  year  1000,  according  to  Vigfusson's  reckoning.  If  the  chronolog)'  be
controlled  by  the  statement  in  the  same  paragraph  of  the  saga  corresponding  to  that  of  Friis'  Book,  that
Leif  made  this  voyage  in  the  same  year  in  which  King  Olaf  despatched  Gizur  the  White  [hviti]  and  Iljalti
Skcggjason  to  Iceland  on  a  similar  mission,  then,  according  to  Vigfusson,  the  date  of  Leif  s  voyage,  here
described,  would  apjjcar  to  have  been  the  year  1000.  Cf.  Vigfusson, '  Um  Timalal  Í  fslondlnga  Sögum,'
in,  Safn  til  Sögu  Islands,  Copenh.  1856,  vol.  i.  pp.  432,  433.


EARLY  FRAGMENTARY  REFERENCES.  15

in  the  true  faith.  Leif  sailed  to  Greenland  that  summer,  and  rescued  at  sea  the  men  of
.  a  ship's  crew,  who  were  in  great  peril  and  were  clinging  to  [lit.  lay  upon]  the  shattered
wreckage  of  a  ship ;  and  on  this  same  voyage  he  found  Wineland  the  Good,  and  at  the  end
of  the  summer  arrived  in  Greenland,  and  betook  himself  to  Brattahlid,  to  make  his  home
with  his  father,  Eric.  People  afterwards  called  him  Leif  the  Lucky,  but  his  father,  Eric,
said  that  the  one  [deed]  offset  the  other,  in  that  Leif  had  on  the  one  hand  rescued  and
restored  the  men  of  the  ship's  crew  to  life,  while  on  the  other  he  had  brought  the  trickster'
to  Greenland,  for  thus  he  called  the  priest'.'

In  composition,  doubtless,  much  more  recent  than  the  notices  already  cited,  is  a
passage  in  the  collectanea  of  Middle-age  wisdom  known  as  No.  194,  8vo,  of  the  Arna-
Magnæan  Library.  This  manuscript  contains  fifty-two  pages,  part  of  which  are  in
Icelandic  and  part  in  Latin,  written  between  the  years  1400-1450  ^.  From  a  sHp  in
Ami  Magnusson's  hand,  inserted  in  the  collection,  it  appears  that  Arni  obtained  it
from  the  Rev.  Thorvald  Stephensson  [Þorvaldr  Stefánsson]  in  the  year  1707.  What-
ever its  condition  may  have  been  at  that  time,  the  parchment  upon  which  it  is  written
is  now  in  a  sad  state  of  decay.  In  this  respect  page  10  of  the  vellum,  upon  the  back
of  which  the  Wineland  chorography  is  written,  in  Icelandic,  is  no  exception ;  fortu-
nately, however,  the  lacunae  are  so  inconsiderable  in  this  page,  that  they  may  be
readily  supplied  from  that  which  survives,  and  the  Wineland  passage  appears  as
follows :

'Southward  from  Greenland  is  Helluland,  then  comes  [lit.  is]  Markland;  thence  it  is  not
far  to  Wineland  the  Good,  which  some  men  believe  extends  from  Africa,  and,  if  this  be  so,
then  there  is  an  open  sea  flowing  in  between  Wineland  and  Markland.  It  is  said,  that
Thorfinn  *  Karlsefni  hewed  a  "  house-neat-timber  "  (6)  and  then  went  to  seek  Wineland  the  Good,
and  came  to  where  they  believed  this  land  to  be,  but  they  did  not  succeed  in  exploring  it,  or
in  obtaining  any  of  its  products  (7).     Leif  the  Lucky  first  found  Wineland,  and  he  then  found

'  Skœmanninn.  This  word  is  employed  in  old  Icelandic  to  translate  the  '  hypocrite '  of  the  New
Testament.     Vide  Vigfusson,  Diet.  s.  v.  ski.

^  '  [Á]  þz'é  sama  vári  sendi  C)\áfr  Vonungx  QAziir  ok  Hjal/i  \.il  lúanáz,  sem  ádr  er  ríta^,  þá  sendi
]iiomivgT  ok  Leif  Eiriksscw  iil  Grænl<7«dz,  at  boða  þar  kr/stni.  Fek^'  konungi  honum  prest  ok  ngckurra.
aðra  vígda  menn,  at  skira  þí7r  folk  ok  ken«a  þ«m  trií  rét/a.  For  Leifr  þa/  sum^r  U'l  Grœn\a>idz.  Hann
tók  Í  hafi  skipshgfn  þf/ra  manna,  er  þá  van  viarir,  ok  lágu  á  skips-flaki  albrðtnu,  ok  Í  þei'ii  sgmv
icrb  fan;z  h.ann  Vindljwd  (sic)  hit  góða  ok  koM  at  á-liðnu  þzv  %\mri  til  Grœrúatiáz,  ok  for  iil  vistar  í
Brattahlíð  U'l  'EÁxtks  fgþwr  sins.  Kglludu  mcnn  hann  síþan  Leif  hin«  heppna.  E«  'Eiiikr  iacfir  hans
sagði  at  þaí  var  samskullda,  er  Leifr  hafði  borgit  ok  ged'l  Iff  skips-hgfn  manna  ok  þal  er  hann  \iafdi
flutt  skeman^zinn  Xil  QræxAanAz,  svá  kallaði  hann  pn'Stin.  En  þó  af  ráðuw  ok  eggian  Leifs  var  Eirikr
sk/rðr  ok  alt  folk  á  Grænk«di.'     AM.  61  fol.,  col.  2,  p.  60  5,  and  col.  i,  p.  61.

'  The  date  is  given  upon  the  authority  of  Dr.  Kalund,  the  Librarian  of  the  Arna-Magnæan  Library.

*  In  the  Codex ;  '  {"orfior,'  equivalent  to  Þorfinnr,  as  in  the  terminations  -ðr,  -nnr,  in  maðr,  mannr,
'  man,'  Cf.  Tamm,  '  Altnordisch  NNR,  ÐR,'  in  Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Sprache  und
Literatur,  Halle,  o.  S.,  1880,  pp.  443-54.


i6  THE   FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

merchants  in  evil  plight  at  sea,  and  restored  them  to  life  by  God's  mercy ;  and  he  introduced
Christianity  into  Greenland,  which  waxed  there  so,  that  an  episcopal  seat  was  established
there,  at  the  place  called  Gardar.  England  and  Scotland  are  one  island,  although  each
of  them  is  a  kingdom.  Ireland  is  a  great  island.  Iceland  is  also  a  great  island  [to  the  north
of]  Ireland.     These  countries  are  all  in  that  part  of  the  world  which  is  called  Europe  \'

In  a  fascicle  of  detached  vellum  fragments,  brought  together  in  AM.  No.  736,  4to,
there  are  two  leaves  containing,  besides  certain  astronomical  material,  a  concise
geographical  compilation.  In  this  Wineland  is  assigned  a  location  identical  with
that  in  the  codex  from  which  the  quotation  has  just  been  made,  and  the  notice  of
Wineland  is  limited  to  this  brief  statement :

'From  Greenland  to  the  southward  lies  Helluland,  then  Markland ;  thence  it  is  not  far
to  Wineland,  which  some  men  believe  extends  from  Africa.  England  and  Scotland  are  one
island,'  &c.  -

While  the  reference  to  Wineland  omits  the  account  of  Thorfinn's  visit  and  Leif's
discovery,  the  language  in  which  the  location  of  the  land  is  given,  as  well  as  the
language  of  the  context,  has  so  great  a  likeness  to  that  of  194,  8vo,  that,  although  it
was  perhaps  written  a  few  years  earlier,  there  seems  to  be  a  strong  probability  that
each  of  the  scribes  of  these  manuscripts  derived  his  material  from  a  common  source.

Somewhat  similar  in  character  to  the  above  notices  is  the  brief  reference  written
in  the  vellum  fragment  contained  in  AM.  764,  4to.  This  fragment  comprises  a  so-
called  '  totius  orbis  brevis  descriptio,'  WTÍtten  probably  about  the  year  1400  ^.  Upon
the  second  page  of  this  '  brief  description  '  is  the  passage :

*  '  Suðr  irá  Grirnlizwdi  er  Hellula«d,  þá  er  Markl<7«d :  þ[á  e]r  (or,  þd3an  er)  agi  langt  U'l  \m\anaz
ens  góða,  er  snirn'r  menn  ætla  at  ga'igi  af  Affrika  ok  ef  sua  er,  þá  er  úthaf  in«fallanda  á  milli  Vínlí7«dz
ok  Marklaiiáz.  Pa/  er  sagt  ath  Þorfiðr  Karlsefni  hjog^i  husasnotrotr/,  ok  færi  síði7«  ath  leita  Vinla«dz
ens  góða  ok  kæmi  þar  er  þeír  ætluðu  þj/  lattd  ok  náðu  eigí  ath  kan7;a  ok  einguw  lí7;;dzkostu;«.  Leifr
hin«  hepni  fan«  fystr  Vínkwd,  ok  þá  fan«  hami  kaupmíww  í  hafinu  illa  stadda  ok  gaf  þc/m  líf  mtð  gu^s
miskun« :  ok  haun  íom  kr/slni  á  [GríZ?n]lí7«d  ok  óx  þar  svá  ath  þar  \ar  b/íX7/psstóll  settr,  þar  er  í
Ggibum  hehír.  Einglawd  ok  SkoUawd  er  ein  ey,  ok  er  þó  sitt  h[verl]  k[d;/!/«]g[s]  rí^'i.  f  rl<77/d  [er]
ey  mikil.  ís\and  er  ok  cy  niikil  [í  norðr  frá  frlffwdi].  Pcssi  Igwd  ero  gll  í  þt/m  h/«ta  hciws  er
Ejrópa  heití>.'

The  words  or  portions  of  words  which  are  enclosed  between  brackets  are  either  wholly  or  partially
wanting,  by  reason  of  defects  in  the  vellum  ;  they  have  been  supplied  either  from  the  traces,  which  are
still  decipherable,  or  from  the  context.  It  will  be  noticed  that  no  considerable  break  occurs  in  that
part  of  the  paragraph  which  deals  particularly  with  Wineland.

*  '  Yrá  Grænlí/«di  í  suðr  lig[g]r  Ilellv-land,  þá  l\Iark-1.7;;d,  þaðan  er  eigi  langt  t//  Vinlad  (sic),  er'
sum/r  mcn«  ætla  at  gangi  af  AfTríca.  England  oc  Scotlí7«d  eru  ein  ey.'  AM.  736,  I,  4to,  p.  i,
11.  28,  29.

'  The  opinion  of  Dr.  Finnur  Jónsson,  the  editor  of  íslcndingabóc,  Eddalicdcr,  etc.


EARLY  FRAGMENTARY  REFERENCES.  17

'  From  Biarmaland  uninhabited  regions  extend  from  the  north,  until  Greenland  joins
them.  South  from  Greenland  lies  Helluland,  then  Markland.  Thence  it  is  not  far  to
Wineland.     Iceland  is  a  great  island/  &c.  ^

Differing  in  nature  from  these  geographical  notices  [but  of  even  greater  interest
and  historical  value  by  reason  of  the  corroborative  evidence  which  it  affords  of
certain  particulars  set  forth  in  the  leading  narrative  of  the  Wineland  discovery]  is  the
mention  of  Wineland  contained  in  a  chapter  of  the  Eyrbyggja  Saga  [Saga  of  the  People
of  Eyrr].  No  complete  vellum  manuscript  of  this  saga  has  been  preserved.  The
eldest  manuscript  remnant  of  the  saga  is  deposited  in  AM.  162  E,  foL,  and  consists  of
two  leaves  written  about  1300";  these  leaves  do  not,  however,  contain  that  portion  of
the  saga  with  which  we  are  concerned.  Of  another  vellum  codex  containing  this
saga,  which  has  entirely  perished,  we  have  certain  knowledge.  This  was  the  so-
called  Vatnshyrna  or  Vatnshorn's  Book  [Vatzhornsbók],  a  manuscript  which  at  one
time  belonged  to  the  eminent  Danish  scholar,  Peder  Hans  Resen,  from  whom
it  received  the  name  by  which  it  is  sometimes  cited,  Codex  Resenianus.  It  was
bequeathed  by  Resen  to  the  University  Library  of  Copenhagen,  where  it  was
deposited  after  his  death  in  1688^.  It  perished  in  the  great  fire  of  October,  1728*,
but  fortunately  paper  copies,  which  had  been  made  from  it,  survived  the  conflagration.
The  Vatnshorn  Codex,  it  has  been  conjectured,  was  prepared  for  the  same  John  Hacons-
son,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the  great  Flatey  Book,  and  was,  apparently,  written
about  the  year  1400,  or,  possibly,  toward  the  close  of  the  fourteenth  century  ^.  The
most  complete  vellum  manuscript  of  the  Eyrbyggja  Saga  now  extant,  forms  a  part  of  the
so-called  Codex  Wolphenbuttelensis,  belonging  to  the  Ducal  Library  of  Wolfenbuttel,
for  which  it  was  purchased  in  the  seventeenth  century,  at  a  public  sale  in  Holstein.
This  manuscript  was  probably  written  about  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century ",
and  although  the  first  third  of  the  Eyrb^'ggja  Saga  has  been  lost  from  the  codex,  that
portion  of  the  history  which  contains  the  chapter  referring  to  Wineland  has  been
preserved,  and  is  as  follows :

'  '  Af  Biarmalawdi  gawga  Ignd  óbygd  af  ncrdr  sett,  unz  Grænland  tekr  md.  Sudr  frá  Grænlízwdz'
liggr  Hellu  li?«d,  þá  '^larWanA.     Þa^an  er  e/^z'Iangt  lil  Uinlan</z.'     AM.  764,  4to,  p.  i  (b),  II.  27,  28.

^  Cf.  Katalog  over  den  Arnamag.  Hindskr.  Saml.,  Copenh.  1888,  vol.  i.  p.  123.

'  Cf.  Fornsögur,  ed.  Vigfusson  and  Möbius,  Leipzig,  i860,  p.  xiv;  Worm,  Lexicon,  HeIsing0er,
1 771,  I  Deel,  p.  256.

*  It  was  among  the  most  valuable  of  the  manuscripts  which  were  lost  in  this  fire,  the  same  which
destroyed  many  of  Arni  Magnusson's  treasured  books,  and,  no  doubt,  hastened  the  end  of  that  ardent
bibliophile,  for  he  survived  the  loss  little  more  than  a  year,  dj'ing  on  the  6th  of  January,  1730.

^  Cf.  Fornsögur,  ubi  sup.  pp.  xv,  xvi;  Bárðar  saga  snæfellsáss,  &c.,  ed.  Vigfusson,  Copenh.  i860,
p.  xi.

^  Vigfusson,  Eyrbyggja  Saga,  Leipzig,  1864,  pp.  xxiii,  xxiv.

D


1 8  THE  FINDING   OF    WIN  ELAND    THE    GOOD.

'After  the  reconciliation  between  Steinthor  and  the  people  of  Alpta-firth,  Thorbrand's
sons,  Snorri  and  Thorleif  Kimbi,  went  to  Greenland.  From  him'  Kimbafirth  [Kimbafjgrðr],
(in  Greenland),  gets  its  name.  Thorleif  Kimbi  lived  in  Greenland  to  old  age.  But  Snorri
went  to  Wineland  the  Good  with  Karlsefni ;  and  when  they  were  fighting  with  the  Skrellings
there  in  Wineland,  Thorbrand  Snorrason",  a  most  valiant  man,  was  killed  '■'

The  foregoing  brief  notices  of  Wineland,  scattered  through  so  many  Icelandic
writings,  yield  no  very  great  amount  of  information  concerning  that  countrj'.  They
do  afford,  however,  a  clear  insight  into  the  wide  diffusion  of  the  intelligence  of  the
discovery'  in  the  earlier  saga  period,  and  in  every  instance  confirm  the  Wineland
history  as  unfolded  in  the  leading  narrative  of  the  discovery,  now  to  be  considered.

'  i.  e.  from  Thorleif,  who  was  called  Þorleifr  kimbi.

-  Cod.  Wolph.  has  Snorri  Thorbrandsson,  apparently  a  clerical  slip,  for  other  manuscripts  have,
correctly,  Thorbrand  Snorrason.

^  'Eptir  sætt  þízra  Steinðórs  ok  Alptfirþwga,  íóru  {"oz-brandz  synir  til  Grænalí7«dz,  Snorri  ok
f'orleifr  kimbi,  uit  [hann]  er  kendr  KimbafJQrðr  [á  Grœnlandi].  Bió  ÞöHeifr  kimbi  á  Grænla/zdi  Xil
elli.  En  Snorri  for  \.il  Uínlandz  hins  góða  með  Karlsefni ;  ok  er  þf/r  bgrðuz  á  Uínlí7«di  uid  Skrælinga
þá  fiell  Snorri'  Þðrbrandz  son  hiiut  hraustazti  maffr.'     Codex  Wolphenbuttelensis,  p.  20,  11,  12-16.


CHAPTER    II.

The  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red.

The  clearest  and  most  complete  narrative  of  the  discovery  of  Wineland,  preser\'ed
in  the  ancient  Icelandic  literature,  is  that  presented  in  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red.
Of  this  narrative  two  complete  vellum  texts  have  sur\úved.  The  eldest  of  these  texts
is  contained  in  the  Arna-Magnæan  Codex,  No.  544,  4to,  which  is  commonly  known  as
Hauk's  Book  [Hauksbók].  This  manuscript  has  derived  its  name  from  its  first  owner,
for  whom  the  work  was  doubtless  written,  and  who  himself  participated  in  the  labour
of  its  preparation.  This  man,  to  whom  the  manuscript  traces  its  origin,  has,  happily,
left,  not  only  in  the  manuscript  itself,  but  in  the  history  of  his  time,  a  record  which
enables  us  to  determine,  with  exceptional  accuracy,  many  dates  in  his  life,  and  from
these  it  is  possible  to  assign  approximate  dates  to  that  portion  of  the  vellum  which
contains  the  narrative  of  the  discovery.  This  fact  possesses  the  greater  interest  since
of  no  one  of  those  who  participated  in  the  conservation  of  the  elder  sagas,  have  we
data  so  precise  as  those  which  have  been  preserved  to  us  of  Hauk  Erlendsson  [Haukr
Erlendsson],  to  whose  care,  actual  and  potential,  this  manuscript  owes  its  existence.

We  know  that  Jorunn,  the  mother  of  this  man,  was  the  direct  descendant  of  a
famous  Icelander  ^  His  paternal  ancestry  is  not  so  clearly  established.  It  has  been
conjectured  that  his  father,  Erlend  Olafsson,  surnamed  the  Stout  [Erlendr  sterki
Óláfsson],  was  the  son  of  a  man  of  humble  parentage,  and  by  birth  a  Norwegian  ^
This  view  has  been  discredited,  however,  and  the  fact  pretty  clearly  established
that  Erlend's  father,  Olaf,  was  no  other  than  a  certain  Icelander  called  Olaf  Tot
[Óláfr  tottr]^  Hauk's  father,  Erlend,  was  probably  the  '  Ellindr  bóndi '  of  a  letter
addressed  by  certain  Icelanders  to  the  Norwegian  king,  Magnus  Law-Amender,
in   the   year    1275''.     In   the    year   1283   we   find    indubitable   mention    of  him   in

'  Her  genealogy  is  given  at  length  in  Landnámabók,  pt.  ii.  ch.  xxv.

^  Cf.  Munch,  '  Om  Rigsraaden  Hr.  Hauk  Erlendsson,'  in  Annaler  forNordisk  Oldkyndighed,  Copenh.
1847,  pp.  172,  173.

'  Cf.  Jon  Þorkelsson,  Nokkur  blöð  úr  Hauksbók,  Reykjavik,  1865,  pp.  iii-vi.

*  Cf.  Diplomatarium  Islandicum,  Copenh.  1888,  vol.  ii.  p.  125,  and,  Safn  til  Sögu  Islands,  Copenh.
1 86 1,  vol.  ii.  p.  44.

D  2


20  THE  FIXDIXG   OF    WINELAND   THE   GOOD.

Icelandic  annals  as  'legifer,'  he  having  in  that  j-ear  'come  out'  to  Iceland  from
Norway  vested  with  the  dignity  of  '  lawman  ^'  It  is  as  the  incumbent  of  a  similar
office,  to  which  he  appears  to  have  been  appointed  in  1294,  that  we  first  find  Hauk
Erlendsson  mentioned'-.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  Hauk  had  visited  Norway  prior
to  1301 ;  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  was  in  that  country  in  the  latter  part  of  that
year,  for  he  was  a  'lawman'  in  Oslo  [the  modern  Christiania]  upon  the  28th  of
January,  1302,  since  upon  that  date  he  published  an  autographic  letter,  which  is  still  in
existence^.  Whether  the  rank  of  knighthood,  which  carried  with  it  the  title  of
'  herra*,'  had  already  been  conferred  upon  him  at  this  time  is  not  certain.  He  is  first
mentioned  with  this  title,  in  Icelandic  annals,  in  1306,  elsewhere  in  1305  *,
although  it  has  been  claimed  that  he  had  probably  then  enjo3^ed  this  distinction  for
some  years*',  but  upon  what  authority  is  not  clear.  While  Hauk  revisited  Iceland
upon  more  than  one  occasion  after  the  year  1302,  much  of  the  remainder  of  his  life
appears  to  have  been  spent  in  Nor^va}',  where  he  died  in  the  year  1334 ''.

On  the  back  of  page  21  of  Hauk's  Book  Ami  Magnusson  has  written,  probably
with  a  view  to  preserve  a  fading  entry  upon  the  same  page,  the  words  :  '  This  book
belongs  to  Teit  Paulsson  [Teitr  Pálsson],  if  he  be  not  robbed  *.'  It  is  not  known  who
this  Teit  Paulsson  was,  but  it  is  recorded  that  a  man  of  this  name  sailed  from  Iceland
to  Norwa3^  in  the  j-ear  1344'.  He  may  have  been  the  one-time  owner  of  the  book,
and,  if  the  manuscript  was  then  in  Norwa}^,  may  have  carried  it  back  to  Iceland  with
him.  Apart  from  this  conjecture,  the  fact  remains  that  the  early  history  of  Hauk's  Book
is  shrouded  in  obscurity.     It  is  first  mentioned  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth

'  Islandske  Annaler,  ed.  Storm,  Christiania,  1888,  pp.  50,  142,  &c.

"  Islandske  Annaler,  ubi  sup.  pp.  144, 198,  485  ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  one  entry  [Flatey  Annals],
p.  385,  gives  this  date,  1295.

^  Cf.  Þorkelsson,  loc.  cit.  p.  vii.

*  Cf.  Arna  biskups  saga  :    '  A  þessu  ári  gaf  Magnus  konúngr  lendum  mönnum  banlna  nöfn  ok
herra,  en  skutilsveinum  riddara  nöfn  ok  herra.'     ('  In  this  year  [1277]  King  INIagnus  conferred  upon  the
"  landed  men"  the  titles  of  "  baron  "  and  "  herra,"  and  upon  the  table-pages  the  titles  of  "  knight "  ■
and  "herra." ')     Biskupa  Sögur,  Copenh.  1858,  vol.  i.  p.  706.

°  Islandske  Annaler,  ubi  sup.  passim.  He  is  last  named  in  Norwegian  documents  without  the
title  in  1304,  and  is  called  simply  '  Ilaukr  Erlendsson  Iggmaðr,'  Diplomatarium  Norvegicum,  Chris-
tiania, 1849,  vol.  '•  P-  93j  ^^o-  '03-  The  tide  'herra'  is  first  assigned  him  in  these  documents  in
1305,  Dip.  Norv.  vol.  i.  p.  96,  No.  106.

'  Cf.  Þorkelsson,  loc.  cit.  p.  \'iii;  Munch,  loc.  cit.  p.  176.

'  Islandske  Annaler,  ubi  sup.  passim,  excei)t  p.  219,  where  the  year  of  his  death  is  given  as  1332,
which  date,  however,  is  not  reconcilable  with  Munklífabók,  ed.  Christiania,  1845,  p.  89.  Munch,  loc.  cit.
p.  178,  gives  the  date  of  his  death  June  3rd,  1334.

*  Cf.  Formáli,  Biskupa  Sögur,  Copenh.  1858,  vol.  i.  p.  xviii,  and  Katalog  over  den  Arnamagnæanske
Hándskriftsamling,  Copenh.  1889,  vol.  i.  p.  686.

*  Islandske  Annaler,  ubi  sup.  p.  353.


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE  RED.  21

century  by  John  the  Learned  [Jon  lærSi]\  possibly  about  1600^,  and  a  few  years  later
by  Arngrim  Jonsson  [Arngrimr  Jónsson]^;  it  was  subsequently  loaned  to  Bishop
Bryniolf  Sveinsson,  who  caused  the  transcripts  of  the  Landnámabók  and  the  Kristni
Saga  to  be  made  from  it,  as  has  already  been  related.  This  part  of  the  codex
the  Bishop  may  have  returned  to  the  owner,  himself  retaining  the  remainder,  for,  with
the  exception  of  the  two  sagas  named.  Ami  Magnusson  obtained  the  codex  from
Gaulveriabœr  in  the  south  of  Iceland,  and  subsequently  the  remaining  leaves  of  the
missing  sagas  from  the  Rev.  Olaf  Jonsson  [Sira  Óláfr  Jonsson],  who  was  the  clergy-
man at  Stad  in  Grunnavik  [Stabr  í  Grunnavik],  in  north-western  Iceland,  between  the
years  1703  and  1707*.

Hauk's  Book  originally  contained  about  200  leaves  ^  with  widely  varied
contents.  Certain  leaves  of  the  original  manuscript  have  been  detached  from  the
main  body  of  the  book,  and  are  now  to  be  found  in  the  Arna-Magnæan  Collection,
under  Nos.  371  and  675,  4to ;  a  portion  has  been  lost,  but  107  leaves  of  the  original
codex  are  preserved  in  AM.  544,  4to.  With  the  exception  of  those  portions  just
referred  to,  that  part  of  the  manuscript  which  treats  of  the  Wineland  discovery  is  to
be  found  in  this  last  mentioned  volume,  from  leaves  93  to  loi  \back'\  inclusive.  The
saga  therein  contained  has  no  title  contemporary  with  the  text,  but  Arni  Magnusson
has  inserted,  in  the  space  left  vacant  for  the  title,  the  words :  'Here  begins  the  Saga
of  Thorfinn  Karlsefni  and  Snorri  Thorbrandsson  '  ['  Her  hefr  upp  sggu  þeirra  Þorfinnz

'  Cf.  Ami  Magnusson's  note  in,  Katalog  over  den  Arnamagnæanske  Hándskriftsamling,  vol.  i.
p.  590.

"-  Formáli,  Biskupa  Sögur,  ubi  sup.  p.  xii.

'  Arngrimus  lonas,  Specimen  Islandiae  Historicum,  Amsterdam,  1643,  p.  154.

*  Arni  Magnusson's  own  words  are :  '  These  leaves  of  Landnáma  book,  as  well  as  those  of
Christendom's  saga,  I  have  obtained,  for  the  most  part,  from  Sr.  Olaf  Jonsson,  but  Sr.  Olafs  father  [Sr.
John  Torfason  of  Stad  in  Súgandis-firth]  obtained  these  leaves  from  a  neighbouring  farmer  there  in  the
west,  and  took  them  all  apart,  separating  each  sheet  from  the  other  to  use  them  for  binding.  .  .  .  But
the  volume  itself  ...  I  obtained  [if  I  remember  aright]  from  Gaulveriabær  in  Flói,  whither,  without
doubt,  it  drifted  after  the  death  of  Mag.  Bryniolf.  ...  It  is  most  probable  that  the  book  came  first  from
the  West  firths,  and  that  its  owner,  from  whom  Mag.  Bryniolf  borrowed  it,  carried  back  Landnáma  to
the  West,  while  the  rest  remained  in  the  South,  unless  Landnáma  had  already  been  separated  from  the
volume,  when  it  came  into  Mag.  Bryniolf's  hands,  and  he  accordingly  had  the  book  in  two  parts.'
Ami's  notes,  in  the  same  code.x  from  which  the  above  is  quoted,  would  indicate,  that  the  greater  part  of
the  manuscript  had  come  into  his  possession  before  1702  ;  a  few  leaves  he  obtained  subsequently,  and
how  greatly  he  prized  this  manuscript  is  indicated  by  his  own  words  in  a  letter,  which  he  wrote  in  the
hope  that  it  might  still  be  possible  to  obtain  the  missing  leaves  of  Landnáma ;  in  this  letter  he  calls
the  fragment,  which  he  had  already  secured,  '  inter  pretiosissmia  eorum  quae  mihi  sunt.'  Cf.  Katalog
over  den  Arnamagnæanske  Handskriftsamling,  ubi  sup.  vol.  i.  p.  590.

"•  Cf.  Formáli,  Biskupa  Sögur,  ubi  sup.  vol.  i.  p.  xviii;  Prolegomena,  Sturiunga  Saga,  O.xford,  1878,
vol.  i.  p.  clx.


22  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

Karlsefnis  oc  Snorra  Þorbrandzsonar '],  although  it  is  not  apparent  whether  he  himself
invented  this  title,  or  derived  it  from  some  now  unknown  source.

The  Saga  of  Thorfinn  Karlsefni  was  written  by  three  different  persons ;  the  first
portion  is  in  a  hand  commonly  ascribed  to  Hauk's  so-called  '  first  Icelandic  secretary.'
On  p.  99,  1.  14,  the  ink  and  the  hand  change,  and  beginning  with  the  words  Eirikr
svarar  vel,  the  chirography  is  Hauk's  own,  as  is  readily  apparent  from  a  comparison
with  the  autographic  letter  of  1302,  already  referred  to  ^.  Hauk's  own  work  continues
throughout  this  and  the  following  page,  ceasing  at  the  end  of  the  second  line  on  p.  100,
with  the  words  kglliihu  i  Hóþt,  where  he  gives  place  to  a  new  scribe,  his  so-called
'  second  Icelandic  secretary.'  Hauk,  however,  again  resumes  the  pen  on  the  back  of
p.  loi,  and  himself  concludes  the  saga.  Two  of  the  leaves  upon  which  the  saga  is
written  are  of  an  irregular  shape,  and  there  are  holes  in  two  other  leaves;  these
defects  were,  however,  present  in  the  vellum  from  the  beginning,  so  that  they  in  no
wise  affect  the  integrity  of  the  text ;  on  the  other  hand  the  lower  right-hand  corner  of
p.  99  has  become  badly  blackened,  and  is,  in  consequence,  partially  illegible,  as  is  also
the  left-hand  corner  of  p.  loi ;  similarly  pp.  100  and  loi  [back]  are  somewhat  indistinct,
but,  in  the  original,  still  not  undecipherable.  Initial  letters  are  inserted  in  red  and
blue,  and  the  sub-titles  in  red  ink,  which  has  sadly  faded.  There  are  three  pagina-
tions, of  which  the  latest,  in  red,  is  the  one  here  adopted.

The  genealogy  appended  to  the  saga  has  been  brought  down  to  Hauk's  own
time,  and  Hauk  therein  traces  his  ancestry  to  Karlsefni's  Wineland-born  son.  By
means  of  this  genealogical  list  we  are  enabled  to  determine,  approximately,  the  date
of  this  transcript  of  the  original  saga,  for  we  read  in  this  list  of  Hallbera,  'Abbess
of  Reyniness,'  and  since  we  know  that  Hallbera  was  not  consecrated  abbess  until
the  year  1299  -,  it  becomes  at  once  apparent  that  the  saga  could  not  have  been
completed  before  that  year.  This  conclusion  is  corroborated  by  additional  evidence
furnished  by  this  ancestral  list,  for  in  this  list  Hauk  has  given  himself  his  title
'herra.'  As  has  been  stated,  Hauk  is  first  accorded  this  title  in  1305,  he  is  last
mentioned  without  the  title  in  1304;  which  fact  not  only  confirms  the  conclusion
already  reached,  but  enables  us  to  advance  the  date,  prior  to  which  the  transcript
of  the  saga  could  not  have  been  concluded,  to  1304.  It  is  not  so  easy  to  determine
positively  when  the  saga  was  finished.  As  Hauk's  own  hand  brings  the  saga  to
a  conclusion,  it  is  evident  that  it  must  have  been  completed  before,  or  not  later
than,  the  year  1334,  the  year  of  his  death.  If  we  accept  the  words  of  the  genealogical
list  literally,  it  would  appear  that  Hauk  wrote  this  list  not  many  years  before  his

'  A  facsimile  of  this  letter  is  contained  in  Annaler  for  Nordisk  Oldkyndighed,  Copenli.  1847.
"  Islandske  Annaler,  ubi  sup.  p.  1 99.


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE  RED.  23

death,  for  it  is  there  stated  that  Fru  Ingigerd's  daughter  'ztws'  Fru  Hallbera,  the
Abbess.  But  Hallbera  lived  until  1330^,  and  the  strict  construction  of  Hauk's
language  might  point  to  the  conclusion  that  the  reference  to  Hallbera  was  made
after  her  death,  and  therefore  after  1330.  Hauk  was  in  Iceland  in  the  years  1330
and  1331  -,  doubtless  for  the  last  time.  One  of  the  scribes  who  aided  him  in
writing  the  codex  was  probably  an  Icelander,  as  may  be  gleaned  from  his  orthograph)',
and  as  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  contents  of  the  codex  were  for  the  most  part
copied  from  originals  owned  in  Iceland,  it  may  be  that  the  transcript  of  this
saga,  as  well  as  the  book  itself,  was  completed  during  this  last  visit.  It  has  been
claimed  that  a  portion  of  Hauk's  book,  preceding  the  Saga  of  Thorfinn,  was  written
prior  to  Hauk's  acquirement  of  his  title,  a  \'iew  founded  upon  the  fact  that  his  name
is  there  cited  without  the  addition  of  his  title,  and  this  view  is  supported  by  the
corresponding  usage  of  the  Annals^.  If  this  be  true,  then,  upon  the  above  hypothesis,
a  period  of  more  than  twenty-five  years  must  have  elapsed  between  the  inception  of
the  work  and  the  completion  of  the  '  Thorfinn's  Saga.'  Doubtless  a  considerable  time
was  consumed  in  the  compilation  and  transcription  of  the  contents  of  this  manuscript ;
but  it  seems  scarcely  probable  that  so  long  a  time  should  have  intervened  between  the
preparation  of  the  different  portions  of  the  work.  Wherefore,  if  the  reference  to  the
Abbess  Hallbera  be  accepted  literally,  the  conjecture  that  the  earlier  portion  of  the
codex  was  written  prior  to  1299  would  appear  to  be  doubtful,  and  it  may  be  necessary
either  to  advance  the  date  of  this  portion  of  the  manuscript  or  place  the  date  of  the
Saga  of  Thorfinn  anterior  to  that  suggested.  However  this  may  be,  two  facts
seem  to  be  clearly  established,  first,  that  this  saga  was  not  written  before  1299,
and  second,  that  this  eldest  surviving  detailed  narrative  of  the  discovery  of
Wineland  was  written  not  later  than  the  year  1334.

In  the  vellum  codex,  known  as  Number  557,  4to,  of  the  Arna-Magnæan
Collection,  is  an  account  of  the  Wineland  discovery,  so  strikingly  similar  to  that
of  Hauk's  Book,  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  both  histories  were  derived  from
the  same  source.  The  history  of  the  discovery  contained  in  the  above  codex  is
called  the  'Saga  of  Eric  the  Red'  [Saga  Eireks  rauSa].  This  may  well  have
been  the  primitive  title  of  the  saga  of  Hauk's  Book,  which,  as  has  been  noted,
obtains  its  modern   name,  'Thorfinns   Saga  Karlsefnis,'    from  the  entry  made  by

'  Islandske  Annaler,  ubi  sup.  p.  219.

^  Islandske  Annaler,  ubi  sup.  pp.  206,  219,  347,  397.

=  Cf.  Munch,  loc.  cit.  p.  209  ;  fslendinga  Sögur,  Copenh.  1843,  wl.  i.  pp.  xsiv,xxv.  Both  of  these
authorities  agree  in  the  statement  that  the  title  of '  herra '  was  first  applied  to  Hauk  in  a  Norwegian
diploma  of  1303,  but  as  they  do  not  cite  their  authority,  it  is  not  apparent  whence  the  statement  was
derived.


24  THE  FINDING    OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

Arni  Magnusson,  early  in  the  eighteenth  century.  That  both  sagas  were  copied
from  the  same  vellum  is  by  no  means  certain ;  if  both  transcripts  be  judged  strictly
by  their  contents  it  becomes  at  once  apparent  that  this  could  not  have  been  the
fact,  and  such  a  conjecture  is  onl}^  tenable  upon  the  theory  that  the  scribes  of
Hauk's  Book  edited  the  saga  which  they  copied.  This,  while  it  is  very  doubtful
in  the  case  of  the  body  of  the  text  of  the  Hauk's  Book  Saga  of  Thorfinn,  may  not
even  be  conjectured  of  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red.  The  latter  saga  was  undoubtedly
a  literal  cop}'  from  the  original,  for  there  are  certain  minor  confusions  of  the  text,
which  indicate,  unmistakably,  either  the  heedlessness  of  the  cop3-ist,  or  that  the
scribe  was  working  from  a  somewhat  illegible  original  whose  defects  he  was  not
at  pains  to  supply.  If  both  sagas  were  copied  from  different  early  vellums,  the
simpler  language  of  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  would  seem  to  indicate  that  it  was
a  transcript  of  a  somewhat  earlier  form  of  the  saga  than  that  from  which  the  saga
of  Hauk's  Book  was  derived.  This,  however,  is  entirely  conjectural,  for  the  codex
containing  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  was  not  written  for  many  years  after  Hauk's
Book,  and  probably  not  until  the  following  century.  So  much  the  orthography
and  hand  of  557,  4to,  indicate,  and,  from  the  application  of  this  test,  the  codex  has
been  determined  to  date  from  the  fifteenth  century  ^  and  has  been  ascribed  by
very  eminent  authority  to  ca.  1400^.

The  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  begins  with  the  thirteenth  line  of  page  27  of  the
codex  [the  title  appears  at  the  top  of  this  page],  and  concludes  in  the  fifth  line
on  the  back  of  page  35,  the  hand  being  the  same  throughout.  Spaces  were  left
for  initial  letters,  but  these  were  not  inserted,  except  in  one  case  by  a  different  and
indifferent  penman.  With  the  exception  of  a  very  few  words,  or  portions  of  words,
upon  page  30  \back'\  and  page  31,  the  manuscript  of  the  saga  is  clearly  legible
throughout.  Certain  slight  defects  in  the  vellum  have  existed  from  the  beginning,
and  there  is,  therefore,  no  material  hiatus  in  the  entire  text,  for  the  sense  of  the
few  indistinct  words  is  either  clearly  apparent  from  the  context,  or  may  be  supplied
from  the  sister  text  of  Hauk's  Book.

In  his  catalogue  of  parchment  manuscripts^,  Arni  Magnusson  states,  that  he
obtained  this  manuscript  from  Bishop  John  Vidalin  [Mag.  Jon  Vidalin]*  and  adds  the
conjecture,  that  it  had  either  belonged  to  the  Skálholt  Church,  or  came  thither  from

'  Katalog   over  den  Amamagnæanske    Hándskriftsamling,   ubi   sup.  vol.  i.  p.   708 ;    fslendinga
Sögur,  Copcnh.  1847,  '^'ol-  "•  P-  x.xviii.

*  Vigfusson,  Corpus  Pocticum  Borealc,  Oxford,  1883,  vol.  i.  p.  xli,  note  i.
'  AM.  435,  410.

*  John  Vidalin  became  bishop  of  Skálholt  in  December,  1697,  and  died  in  1720.     Cf.  Worm,
Lexicon,  Hclsing0er,  1771,  i  Dcel,  p.  580.


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE  RED.  25

among  Bishop  Brjmiolf's  books.  This  conjecture,  that  the  book  belonged  to  the
Church  of  Skálholt,  has,  however,  been  disputed,  and  the  place  of  its  compilation,  at
the  same  time,  assigned  to  the  north  of  Iceland  ^

These  sagas  in  Hauk's  Book  and  AM.  557,  4to,  are  so  closely  allied,  belong  so
naturally  together  and  each  so  enlightens  the  other,  that  the  two  texts  have  been
collated,  and  the  translation,  which  follows,  is  prepared  from  both.  In  the  body  of
the  text  of  the  translation,  the  saga  as  contained  in  Hauk's  Book  has  been  in  the  main
more  closely  followed,  but  the  language  of  the  saga  of  AM.  557,  4to,  is  occasionally
substituted  or  added,  where  such  treatment  has  seemed  to  ser\'e  in  any  degree  to
inform  the  narrative.  In  all  cases,  however,  where  any  considerable  differences  exist
between  the  two  texts,  these  differences  are  recorded  in  the  notes,  the  abbreviations
'EsR',  and  'i'sK'  indicating  the  language  of  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  [Eiriks
saga  RauSa]  and  that  of  the  Saga  of  Thorfinn  Karlsefni  [Þorfinns  saga  Karlsefnis]
respectively.

The  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  [and  both  texts  are  included  under  this  title]  presents  a
clear  and  graphic  account  of  the  discovery  and  exploration  of  Wineland  the  Good.
In  this  narrative  the  discovery  is  ascribed  to  Leif,  the  son  of  Eric  the  Red,  who  hit
upon  the  land,  b}'  chance,  during  a  voj-age  from  Norway  to  Greenland.     This  voyage,  t-
as  has  already  been  stated,  probably  took  place  in  the  year  1000.

After  his  return  to  Greenland,  Leifs  account  of  the  land  which  he  had
discovered,  seems  to  have  persuaded  his  brother,  Thorstein,  and  possibly  his
father,  to  undertake  an  expedition  to  the  strange  country.  This  voyage,  which
was  not  destined  to  meet  with  a  successful  issue,  may  well  have  fallen  in  the
year  following  Leifs  return,  and  therefore,  it  may  be  conjectured,  in  the  year
looi.  About  this  time  there  had  arrived  in  Greenland  an  Icelander  of  considerable
prominence,  an  old  friend  of  Eric's,  named  Thorbiorn  Vifilsson,  who  had  brought
with  him  his  daughter,  Gudrid,  or,  as  she  is  also  called,  Thurid.  He  must  have
arrived  before  Thorstein  Ericsson's  voyage,  for  we  are  told,  that  it  was  in  Thor-
biorn's  ship  that  this  voyage  was  undertaken.  It  seems  probable  that  Thorbiorn
arrived  at  Brattahlid  [Eric's  home]  during  Leifs  absence  from  Greenland,  and  if
this  be  true,  it  follows,  that  Thorbiorn  and  Gudrid  must  have  been  converted  to
Christianity  before  its  acceptance  in  Iceland  as  the  legalized  religion  of  the  land ;
for  very  soon  after  their  arrival  in  Greenland,  Gudrid  alludes  to  the  fact  of  her
being  a  Christian,  and,  from  the  language  of  the  saga,  there  can  be  no  question
that  her  father  had  likewise  embraced  the  new  faith.  The  presence  of  these
companions  in  the  faith  may  have  materially  aided  Leif  in  the  work  of  proselytism,
in  which  he  engaged,  upon  his  return  to  Greenland.    We  are  told,  that  Thorbiorn

'  Biskupa  Sogur,  ubi  sup.  vol.  i.  p.  Ixx.
E


26  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE   GOOD.

did  not  arrive  at  Brattahlid  until  the  second  j-ear  after  his  departure  from  Ice-
land, wherefore,  if  the  assumption  that  he  arrived  during  Leif's  absence  be  sound,
it  becomes  apparent  that  he  must  have  left  Iceland  in  the  summer  of  the  year
998  or  999.

Eric's  son,  Thorstein,  wooed  and  married  Gudrid,  and  the  wedding  was  cele-
brated at  Brattahlid  in  the  autumn.  It  is  recorded  in  the  saga  that  Gudrid  was
regarded  as  a  most  desirable  match.  Thorstein  may  have  promptly  recognized
her  worth,  and  his  marriage  may  have  occurred  in  the  autumn  of  the  same  }'ear  in
which  he  returned  from  his  unlucky  vo3'age.  It  could  not  well  have  been  celebrated
in  the  previous  year,  for  Thorstein's  allusions  on  his  death-bed  to  the  religion  of
Greenland,  indicate  that  Christianity  must  have  been  for  a  longer  time  the  accepted
faith  of  the  land  than  it  could  have  been  at  the  close  of  the  year  1000.

In  the  winter  after  his  marriage,  Thorstein  died,  and  in  the  spring,  Gudrid
returned  to  Brattahlid.  Thorfinn  Karlsefni  arrived  at  Brattahlid  about  this  time,
possibly  the  next  autumn  after  Thorstein's  death,  and  in  his  company  came  Snorri
Thorbrandsson.  Karlsefni  was  married  to  Gudrid  shortly  after  the  Yule-tide
following  his  arrival.  If  he  arrived  in  Greenland  in  the  autumn  of  the  3'ear  1002,
this  wedding  ma}^  accordingl}^,  have  taken  place  about  the  beginning  of  the  3'ear
1003  \     In  the  summer  following  his  marriage,  Thorfinn  appears  to  have  undertaken

'  Vigfusson,  in  his  essay,  '  Um  timatal  í  fslendínga  sögum  í  fornöld,'  in  Safn  til  sögu  Islands,  loc,
cit.  vol.  i.  p.  339,  and  also  in  his  edition  of  the  Eyrbjggja  Saga,  loc.  cit.  p.  129,  assigns  as  the  date
of  Snorri's  departure  to  Greenland,  and,  by  the  same  token,  Karlsefni's,  the  year  998  [or  999].  This
conclusion  he  reaches  from  the  passage  in  Eyrbyggja,  alread)'  cited  p.  1 8,  wherein  it  is  stated  that  '  after
the  reconciliation  of  the  people  of  Eyrr  and  the  people  of  Alpta-firth,  Thorbrand's  sons,  Snorri  and
Thorleif,  went  to  Greenland.'  In  Vigfusson's  edition  of  the  Erybyggja  Saga,  the  chapter  containing  this
statement  is  numbered  48,  and  the  next  succeeding  chapter  begins :  '  Next  to  this,  Gizur  the  White  and
Hialti,  his  son-in-law,  came  out  to  proclaim  the  gospel,  and  all  the  people  of  Iceland  were  baptized,  and
Christianity  was  legally  accepted  by  the  Althing.'  The  words  '  next  to  this '  in  the  position  which  they
thus  occupy  seem  to  refer  to  the  words  of  the  preceding  chapter:  'After  the  reconciliation  of  the  people
of  Eyrr  and  the  people  of  Alpta-firth,'  that  is,  '  next  after  this '  reconciliation  Gizur  and  his  son-in-law
came  to  Iceland.  But  Gizur  and  Hialii  came  to  Iceland  on  this  mission  in  999,  and  the  obvious  inference
is  that  the  reconciliation  was  accomplished  prior  to  this,  according  to  Vigfusson  in  the  previous  year,
998.  [Cf.  Eyrbyggja  Saga,  ed.  Vigfusson,  p.  129.]  In  the  eldest  vellum  fragment  of  the  Eyrbyggja
Saga  which  we  now  possess,  AM.  162  E.  fol.,  chapter  48  of  the  Vigfusson  text  does  not  occupy  the
place  preceding  the  account  of  the  arrival  of  Gizur  on  his  mission.  The  limited  contents  of  this  fragment
do  not,  unfortunately,  enable  us  to  determine  where  the  chapter  did  stand  in  this  test,  but  presumably
it  occupied  the  same  position  as  that  in  which  it  occurs  in  the  Codex  Wolphenbuttelensis,  as  well  as  in
the  vellum  fragment  of  the  saga  contained  in  AM.  445 15,  410,  namely,  after  chapter  53  of  the  Vigfusson
edition.  [Cf.,  in  that  edition,  note  11,  p.  91.]  To  the  events  described  in  this  chapter  55,  Vigfusson
[Eyrbyggja,  p.  129]  assigns  the  date  looi.  The  chapter  immediately  following  this  chapter  55  begins
with  the  words ;  '  Snorri  Godi  dwelt  at  Helgafell  eight  years  after  Christianity  became  the  legal  religion


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE  RED.  27

his  voyage  of  exploration  to  Wineland,  that  is  to  say  in  the  summer  of  the  5'ear  1003.
A  longer  time  may  well  have  elapsed  after  Gudrid's  arrival  before  her  marriage  with
Thorstein,  and  similarly  it  is  even  more  probable  that  a  longer  inter\'al  elapsed
between  Thorstein's  death  and  Gudrid's  second  marriage.  The  purpose  of  this
conjectural  chronology  is  to  determine,  if  possible,  a  date  prior  to  which  Thorfinn
Karlsefni's  voyage  to  Wineland  could  not  have  been  undertaken.  While,  therefore,
it  is  altogether  probable  that  this  voyage  was  made  after  the  year  1003,  it  does
not  appear  to  be  possible,  for  the  reasons  presented,  that  it  could  have  taken  place
before  that  year.

Problems  suggested  by  the  text  of  another  version  of  the  history  of  the  discovery
and  exploration,  namely,  that  contained  in  the  Flatey  Book,  are  considered  elsewhere,
as  are  also  points  of  difference  between  that  narrative  and  the  history  as  set  forth  in
the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red.  It  remains  to  be  said,  that  the  text  of  this  saga  does  not
present  such  difficulties  as  those  which  are  suggested  by  a  critical  examination  of  the
narrative  of  the  Flatey  Book.  This  version  of  the  history  of  the  discovery  does  contain,
however,  one  statement,  which  is  not  altogether  intelligible  and  which  is  not  susceptible
of  very  satisfactory  explanation,  namely,  that  '  there  came  no  snow '  in  the  land  which
the  Wineland  explorers  had  found.  This  assertion  does  not  consist  with  our  present
knowledge  of  the  winter  climate  of  the  eastern  coast  of  that  portion  of  North  America
situated  within  the  latitude  which  was  probably  reached  by  the  explorers.  The  ob-
servation may,  perhaps,  be  best  explained  upon  the  theory  that  the  original  verbal
statement  of  the  explorers  was,  that  there  was  no  snow  in  Wineland,  such  as  that  to
which  they  were  accustomed  in  the  countries  with  which  they  were  more  familiar  *.
With  this  single  exception  there  appears  to  be  no  statement  in  the  Saga  of  Eric  the

of  Iceland.'  The  fact,  therefore,  that  the  record  of  the  voyage  of  Thorbrand's  sons  to  Greenland  does,  in
certain  other  late  manuscripts,  occupy  the  place  which  Vigfusson  assigns  it,  would  not  seem  to  afford
sufficient  reason  for  establishing  the  date  of  this  voyage,  by  the  words  of  a  subsequent  passage,  when,  as
has  been  stated,  this  passage  does  not  indeed  follow,  but  precedes  the  chapter  in  the  oldest  manuscripts
now  existing.  If  Snorri  [and  Karlsefni]  sailed  to  Greenland  immediately  after  the  reconciliation,  as
Vigfusson  conjectures,  a  fatal  flaw  in  the  chronology  at  once  appears.  By  a  comparison  with  the
language  of  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red,  it  will  be  seen  that  if  Karlsefni  and  Snorri  sailed  to  Greenland  in
998  or  999,  Karlsefni's  voyage  of  exploration,  which  was  undertaken  in  the  year  after  his  arrival  in
Greenland,  would  fall  either  in  the  year  prior  to  that  assigned  to  Leif's  discovery  of  Wineland,  or  in  the
year  of  that  discovery,  both  of  which  hypotheses  are,  of  course,  impossible.  The  simpler  explanation,
and  one  entirely  consistent  with  the  language  of  the  Eyrbyggja  Saga,  would  seem  to  be  that  the  word
'  after '  in  the  sentence,  '  Thorbrand's  sons  went  to  Greenland  after  the  reconciliation,'  does  not  mean
the  same  year  or  the  next  year  after  the  reconciliation,  but  some  time  thereafter,  and  necessarily  later
than  the  year  looi,  the  earliest  date  assignable  for  Thorstein  Ericsson's  ill-fated  vo3-age,  and  which  is
also  the  date  of  the  event  immediately  preceding  this  sentence  in  the  elder  texts  of  the  Eyrb}ggja  Saga.
'  Cf.  post,  Note  No.  55,  upon  this  passage  in  the  saga.

E  2


28  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

Red  which  is  not  lucid,  and  which  is  not  reasonably  consistent  with  our  present  know-
ledge of  the  probable  regions  visited.  The  incident  of  the  adventure  with  the  Uniped
may  be  passed  without  especial  mention  in  this  connection ;  it  gives  evidence  of  the
prevalent  superstition  of  the  time,  it  is  true,  but  it  in  no  way  reflects  upon  the  keenness
of  obsen-ation  or  relative  credibility  of  the  explorers.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the
accounts  of  the  discovery  contained  in  Hauk's  Book  and  AM.  557,  4to,  whether  they
present  the  eldest  form  of  the  narrative  of  the  Wineland  explorers  or  not,  do  afford
the  most  graphic  and  succinct  exposition  of  the  discovery,  and,  supported  as  they
are  throughout  by  contemporaneous  history,  appear  in  every  respect  most  worthy
of  credence.

The  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red,  also  called  The  Saga  of  Thorfinn  Karlsefni

AND    SXORRI    ThORBRAXDSSON.

Olaf  was  the  name  of  a  warrior-king  \  w^ho  was  called  Olaf  the  White.  He  was
the  son  of  King  Ingiald,  Helgi's  son,  the  son  of  Olaf,  Gudraud's-  son,  son  of
Halfdan  Whiteleg^  king  of  the  Uplands-men  (8).  Olaf  engaged  in  a  Western  free-
booting  expedition  and  captured  Dublin  in  Ireland  and  the  Shire  of  Dublin,  over
which  he  became  king  (9).  He  married  Aud  the  Wealthy*,  daughter  of  Ketil
Flatnose^  son  of  Biom  Buna",  a  famous  man  of  Norway.  Their  son  was  called
Thorstein  the  Red'.  Olaf  was  killed  in  battle  in  Ireland,  and  Aud  (10)  and  Thorstein
went  then  to  the  Hebrides  (11);  there  Thorstein  married  Thurid^  daughter  of
Ey\'ind  Easterling^  sister  of  Helgi  the  Lean";  they  had  many  children.  Thorstein
became  a  warrior-king,  and  entered  into  fellowship  with  Earl  Sigurd  the  Mighty",
son  of  Eystein  the  Rattler'-.  They  conquered  Caithness  and  Sutherland,  Ross
and  Moray,  and  more  than  the  half  of  Scotland.  Over  these  Thorstein  became
king,  ere  he  was  betrayed  by  the  Scots,  and  was  slain  there  in  battle.  Aud  was  at
Caithness  when  she  heard  of  Thorstein's  death ;  she  thereupon  caused  a  ship  (12)  to
be  secretly  built  in  the  forest,  and  when  she  was  ready,  she  sailed  out  to  the
Orkneys.  There  she  bestowed  Groa,  Thorstein  the  Red's  daughter,  in  marriage ;  she
was  the  mother  of  Grelad ' ',  whom  Earl  Thorfinn,  Skull-cleaver  '*,  married.  After  this
Aud  set  out  to  seek  Iceland,  and  had  on  board  her  ship  twenty  freemen  (13).  Aud
arrived  in  Iceland,  and  passed  the  first  winter  at  Biarnarhöfn  with  her  brother,  Biom.

'  EsR  :  '  konungr,'  king.  "^  ÞsK  :  Gudred's  son  ;  EsR :  Gudrid's  son.

'  hviibeinn.  *  EsR :  djúpauðga ;  f>sK :  djúpúðga,  i.  e.  deep-minded,  wise.

'  flatnefr.  °  the  Ungartered  ?  '  rauðr.  «  tsK  :  Þóríðr.

»  austmaðr.  '«  hinn  magri.  "  hinn  riki.  "  glumra.

"  EsR :  Gunnlad.  "  hausakljúfr.


THE  SAGA    OF  ERIC   THE  RED.  29

Aud  afterwards  took  possession  of  all  the  Dale  country  (14)  between  Dögurdar  river
and  Skraumuhlaups  river.  She  lived  at  Hvamm,  and  held  her  orisons  at  Krossholar,
where  she  caused  crosses  to  be  erected,  for  she  had  been  baptized  and  was  a  devout
believer.  With  her  there  came  out  [to  Iceland]  many  distinguished  men,  who  had
been  captured  in  the  Western  freebooting  expedition,  and  were'  called  slaves.
Vifil  was  the  name  of  one  of  these :  he  was  a  highborn  man,  who  had  been  taken
captive  in  the  Western  sea,  and  was  called  a  slave,  before  Aud  freed  him ;  now  when
Aud  gave  homesteads  to  the  members  of  her  crew,  Vifil  asked  wherefore  she  gave
him  no  homestead  as  to  the  other  men.  Aud  replied,  that  this  should  make  no
difference  to  him,  saying,  that  he  would  be  regarded  as  a  distinguished  man  wherever
he  was.    She  gave  him  Vifilsdal  (15),  and  there  he  dwelt.     He  married  a  woman

whose  name  was ';  their  sons  were  Thorbiorn  and  Thorgeir.     They  were

men  of  promise,  and  grew  up  with  their  father.

Eric  the  Red  finds  ^  Greenland.

There  was  a  man  named  Thorvald ;  he  was  a  son  of  Asvald,  Ulf 's  son,  Eyxna-
Thori's  son.  His  son's  name  was  Eric  ^.  He  and  his  father  went  from  Jaederen  (16)  to
Iceland,  on  account  of  manslaughter,  and  settled  on  Hornstrandir,  and  dwelt  at
Drangar(l7).  There  Thorvald  died,  and  Eric  then  married  Thorhild,  a  daughter  of
Jorund,  Atli's  son,  and  Thorbiorg  the  Ship-chested*,  who  had  been  married  before  to
Thorbiorn  of  the  Haukadal  family  ^  Eric  then  removed  from  the  North,  and  cleared
land  in  Haukadal,  and  dwelt  at  Ericsstadir  by  Vatnshorn.  Then  Eric's  thralls  caused  a
land-slide  on  Valthiofs  farm,  Valthiofsstadir.  Eyiolf  the  FouP,  Valthiof's  kinsman,
slew  the  thralls  near  Skeidsbrekkur  above  Vatnshorn.  For  this  Eric  killed  Eyiolf  the
Foul,  and  he  also  killed  Duelling-Hrafn  ^,  at  Leikskalar.  Geirstein  and  Odd  of  Jorva,
Eyiolf's  kinsmen,  conducted  the  prosecution  for  the  slaying  of  their  kinsmen,  and  Eric
was,  in  consequence,  banished  from  Haukadal.  He  then  took  possession  of  Brokey
and  Eyxney,  and  dwelt  at  Tradir  on  Sudrey,  the  first  winter  (18).  It  was  at  this  time
that  he  loaned  Thorgest  his  outer  dais-boards  (19) ;  Eric  afterwards  went  to  Eyxney,
and  dwelt  at  Ericsstad.  He  then  demanded  his  outer  dais-boards,  but  did  not  obtain
them '.  Eric  then  carried  the  outer  dais-boards  away  from  Breidabolstad,  and  Thorgest
gave  chase.  They  came  to  blows  a  short  distance  from  the  farm  of  Drangar(20).
There  two  of  Thorgest's  sons  were  killed  and  certain  other  men  besides.     After  this

1  EsR  :  simply,  '  he  married  a  wife.'  "  Lit.  '  found.'  '  EsR  :  '  Eric  the  Red.'

*  knarrar-bringa.  ^  hinn  haulidœlski.  ^  saurr.  '  Holrnggngu-Hrafn.

^  EsR :  '  He  then  took  possession  of  Brokey,  and  dwelt  at  Tradir.  The  first  winter,  however,

Eric  went  to  Auxney.     He  then  loaned  his  outer  dais-boards  to  Thorgest.  He  dwelt  at  Ericsstadir.'


30  THE  FIXDIXG   OF    WIXELAXD    THE   GOOD.

each  of  them  retained  a  considerable  body  of  men  with  him  at  his  home.  St3T  gave
Eric  his  support,  as  did  also  Eyiolf  of  Sviney,  Thorbiorn,  Vifil's  son,  and  the  sons  of
Thorbrand  of  Alptafirth ;  while  Thorgest  was  backed  by  the  sons  of  Thord  the
Yeller\  and  Thorgeir  of  Hitardal,  Aslak  of  Langadal  and  his  son,  Illugi.  Eric  and
his  people  were  condemned  to  outlawry  at  Thorsness-thing(21).  He  equipped  his
ship  for  a  vo3'age,  in  Ericsvag;  while  E3'iolf  concealed  him  in  Dimunar\'ag  (22),  when
Thorgest  and  his  people  were  searching  for  him  among  the  islands.  He  said  to  them,
that  it  was  his  intention  to  go  in  search  of  that  land  which  Gunnbiorn  (23),  son  of  Ulf
the  Crow  ^,  saw  when  he  was  driven  out  of  his  course,  westward  across  the  main,  and
discovered  Gunnbiorns-skerries.  He  told  them  that  he  would  return  again  to  his
friends,  if  he  should  succeed  in  finding  that  countr}'.  Thorbiorn,  and  E3'iolf,  and  St3T
accompanied  Eric  out  be3'ond  the  islands,  and  the3'  parted  with  the  greatest  friend-
liness ;  Eric  said  to  them  that  he  would  render  them  similar  aid,  so  far  as  it  might  lie
within  his  power,  if  they  should  ever  stand  in  need  of  his  help.  Eric  sailed  out  to  sea
from  Snaefells-iokul,  and  arrived  at  that  ice-mountain  (24)  which  is  called  Blacksark  ^
Thence  he  sailed  to  the  southward,  that  he  might  ascertain  whether  there  was  habit-
able country  in  that  direction.  He  passed  the  first  winter  at  Ericsey,  near  the  middle
of  the  Western-settlement.  In  the  following  spring  he  proceeded  to  Ericsfirth,  and
selected  a  site  there  for  his  homestead.  That  summer  he  explored  the  western
uninhabited  region,  remaining  there  for  a  long  time,  and  assigning  many  local  names
there.  The  second  winter  he  spent  at  Ericsholms  be3-ond  Hvarfsgnipa.  But  the
third  summer  he  sailed  northward  to  Snaefell,  and  into  Hrafnsfirth.  He  believed
then  that  he  had  reached  the  head  of  Ericsfirth  ;  he  turned  back  then,  and  remained
the  third  winter  *  at  Ericsey  at  the  mouth  of  Ericsfirth  (25).  The  following  summer  he
sailed  to  Iceland,  and  landed  in  Breidafirth.  He  remained  that  winter  with  Ingolf  (26)
at  Holmlatr.  In  the  spring  he  and  Thorgest  fought  together,  and  Eric  was  defeated  ;
after  this  a  reconciliation  was  effected  between  them.  That  summer  Eric  set  out  to
colonize  the  land  which  he  had  discovered,  and  which  he  called  Greenland,  because,
he  said,  men  would  be  the  more  readily  persuaded  thither  if  the  land  had  a
good  name.

CoxcERMXG  Thorbiorn.

Thorgeir,  Vifil's  son,  married,  and  took  to  wife  Arnora,  daughter  of  Einar  of
Laugarbrekka,  Sigmund's  son,  son  of  Ketil  Thistil,  who  settled  Thistilsfirth.  Einar
had  another  daughter  named  Hallveig ;  she  was  married  to  Thorbiorn,  Mfil's  son  (27),

'  gellir.  '^  kráka.  =  i'sK  :  Bláscrkr.     EsR  :  Ilvitserkr,  Whitesark.

*  EsR :  '  the  fourth  and  third  winter.'


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE  RED.  31

who  got  with  her  Laugarbrekka-land  on  Hellisvellir.  Thorbiorn  moved  thither,  and
became  a  very  distinguished  man.  He  was  an  excellent  husbandman  \  and  had  a
great  estate.  Gudrid  was  the  name  of  Thorbiorn's  daughter.  She  was  the  most
beautiful  of  her  sex,  and  in  every  respect  a  very  superior  woman.  There  dwelt  at
Arnarstapi  a  man  named  Orm,  whose  wife's  name  was  Halldis.  Orm  was  a  good
husbandman,  and  a  great  friend  of  Thorbiorn,  and  Gudrid  lived  with  him  for  a  long
time  as  a  foster-daughter.  There  was  a  man  named  Thorgeir,  who  lived  at
Thorgeirsfell  (28) ;  he  was  very  wealthy  and  had  been  manumitted ;  he  had  a  son
named  Einar,  who  was  a  handsome,  well-bred  man,  and  very  showy  in  his  dress.
Einar  was  engaged  in  trading-voyages  from  one  country  to  the  other,  and  had
prospered  in  this.  He  alwa3'S  spent  his  winters  alternately  either  in  Iceland  or
in  Norway.

Now  it  is  to  be  told,  that  one  autumn,  when  Einar  was  in  Iceland,  he  went  with
his  wares  out  along  Snaefellsness-,  with  the  intention  of  seUing  them.  He  came  to
Arnarstapi,  and  Orm  invited  him  to  remain  with  him,  and  Einar  accepted  this  invita-
tion, for  there  was  a  strong  friendship  [between  Orm  and  himself].  Einar's  wares
were  carried  into  a  store-house,  where  he  unpacked  them,  and  displayed  them  to  Orm
and  the  men  of  his  household,  and  asked  Orm  to  take  such  of  them  as  he  liked.
Orm  accepted  this  offer,  and  said  that  Einar  was  a  good  merchant,  and  was  greatly
favoured  by  fortune.  Now,  while  they  were  busied  about  the  wares,  a  woman  passed
before  the  door  of  the  store-house.  Einar  enquired  of  Orm  :  '  Who  was  that  hand-
some woman  who  passed  before  the  door?  I  have  never  seen  her  here  before.'
Orm  rephes :  '  That  is  Gudrid,  my  foster-child,  the  daughter  of  Thorbiorn  of  Laugar-
brekka.'  'She  must  be  a  good  match,'  said  Einar;  'has  she  had  any  suitors?'  Orm
replies  :  '  In  good  sooth  she  has  been  courted,  friend,  nor  is  she  easily  to  be  won,  for
it  is  believed  that  both  she  and  her  father  will  be  very  particular  in  their  choice  of
a  husband.'  '  Be  that  as  it  may,'  quoth  Einar,  '  she  is  the  woman  to  whom  I  mean  to
pay  my  addresses,  and  I  would  have  thee  present  this  matter  to  her  father  in  my
behalf,  and  use  every  exertion  to  bring  it  to  a  favourable  issue,  and  I  shall  reward
thee  to  the  full  of  my  friendship,  if  I  am  successful.  It  may  be  that  Thorbiorn  will
regard  the  connection  as  being  to  our  mutual  advantage,  for  [while]  he  is  a  most
honourable  man  and  has  a  goodly  home,  his  personal  effects,  I  am  told,  are  somewhat
on  the  wane  ^ ;  but  neither  I  nor  my  father  are  lacking  in  lands  or  chattels,  and
Thorbiorn  would  be  greatly  aided  thereby,  if  this  match  should  be  brought  about.'
'  Surely  I  believe  myself  to  be  thy  friend,'  replies  Orm,  '  and  yet  I  am  by  no  means
disposed  to  act  in  this  matter,  for  Thorbiorn  hath  a  very  haughty  spirit,  and  is  more-

'  EsR  :  '  Godord-man,'  cf.  note  72.      -  tsK  :  Snowfells-strand.     '  EsR  :  '  are  much  on  the  wane.'


32


THE   FINDING   OF    WIN  ELAND    THE    GOOD.


over  a  most  ambitious  man.'  Einar  replied  that  he  wished  for  nought  else  than  that
his  suit  should  be  broached ;  Orm  replied,  that  he  should  have  his  will.  Einar  fared
again  to  the  South  until  he  reached  his  home.  Sometime  after  this,  Thorbiorn  had
an  autumn  feast,  as  was  his  custom,  for  he  was  a  man  of  high  position.  Hither  came
Orm  of  Arnarstapi,  and  many  other  of  Thorbiorn's  friends.  Orm  came  to  speech
with  Thorbiorn,  and  said,  that  Einar  of  Thorgeirsfell  had  visited  him  ^  not  long  before,
and  that  he  was  become  a  ver}^  promising  man.  Onn  now  makes  known  the  proposal
of  marriage  in  Einar's  behalf,  and  added  that  for  some  persons  and  for  some  reasons
it  might  be  regarded  as  a  very  appropriate  match :  '  thou  ma3'est  greatly  strengthen
thyself  thereby,  master,  by  reason  of  the  property.'  Thorbiorn  answers :  '  Little  did
I  expect  to  hear  such  words  from  thee,  that  I  should  marry  my  daughter  to  the  son
of  a  thrall  (29) ;  and  that,  because  it  seems  to  thee  that  my  means  are  diminishing,  where-
fore she  shall  not  remain  longer  with  thee  '^  since  thou  deemest  so  mean  a  match  as
this  suitable  for  her.'  Orm  afterward  returned  to  his  home,  and  all  of  the  invited
guests  to  their  respective  households,  while  Gudrid  remained  behind  with  her  father,
and  tarried  at  home  that  winter.  But  in  the  spring  Thorbiorn  gave  an  entertainment
to  his  friends,  to  which  man}^  came  ^  and  it  was  a  noble  feast,  and  at  the  banquet
Thorbiorn  called  for  silence,  and  spoke :  '  Here  have  I  passed  a  goodly  lifetime,  and
have  experienced  the  good-will  of  men  toward  me,  and  their  affection  ;  and,  methinks,
our  relations  together  have  been  pleasant ;  but  now  I  begin  to  find  myself  in  straitened
circumstances,  although  my  estate  has  hitherto  been  accounted  a  respectable  one.
Now  will  I  rather  abandon  my  farming,  than  lose  my  honour,  and  rather  leave  the
country',  than  bring  disgrace  upon  my  family ;  wherefore  I  have  now  concluded  to
put  that  promise  to  the  test,  which  my  friend  Eric  the  Red  made,  when  we  parted
company  in  Breidafirth.  It  is  my  present  design  to  go  to  Greenland  this  summer,
if  matters  fare  as  I  wish.'  The  folk  were  greatly  astonished  at  this  plan  of  Thor-
biorn's*, for  he  was  blessed  with  many  friends,  but  they  were  convinced  that  he
was  so  firmly  fixed  in  his  purpose,  that  it  would  not  avail  to  endeavour  to  dissuade
him  from  it.  Thorbiorn  bestowed  gifts  upon  his  guests,  after  which  the  feast
came  to  an  end,  and  the  folk  returned  to  their  homes.  Thorbiorn  sells  his  lands
and  buys  a  ship,  which  was  laid  up  at  the  mouth  of  Hraunhöfn  (30).  Thirty  persons
joined  him  in  the  voyage;  among  these  were  Orm  of  Arnarstapi,  and  his  wife,  and
other  of  Thorbiorn's  friends,  who  would  not  part  from  him.  Then  they  put  to  sea.
When  they  sailed  the  weather  was  favourable,  but  after  they  came  out  upon  the

■  Lit.  '  had  been  there.'  "^  EsR  :  '  go  with  thee.'  '^  Lit.  '  many  men  came  thither.'

♦  ÞsK  :  '  People  were  greatly  astonished  at  this  change  of  condition.'  EsR :  '  People  thought  these
great  tidings,  concerning  this  design  of  Eric's.'  This  may  refer  to  Eric's  promise,  mentioned  above,  or,
as  seems  more  probable,  the  '  Eric '  has  been  erroneously  inserted  for  Thorbiorn.


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE   RED.  33

high-seas  the  fair  wind  failed,  and  there  came  great  gales  S  and  they  lost  their  way,
and  had  a  very  tedious  voyage  that  summer.  Then  illness  appeared  among  their
people,  and  Orm  and  his  wife  Halldis  died,  and  the  half  of  their  company.  The
sea  began  to  run  high,  and  they  had  a  very  wearisome  and  wretched  voyage  in
many  ways,  but  arrived,  nevertheless,  at  Heriolfsness  in  Greenland,  on  the  very
eve  of  winter^.  At  Heriolfsness  lived  a  man  named  Thorkel.  He  was  a  man  of
ability  and  an  excellent  husbandman.  He  received  Thorbiorn  and  all  of  his  ship's
company,  and  entertained  them  well  during  the  winter''.  At  that  time  there  was  a
season  of  great  dearth  in  Greenland ;  those  who  had  been  at  the  fisheries  had  had  poor
hauls,  and  some  had  not  returned.  There  was  a  certain  woman  there  in  the  settle-
ment, whose  name  was  Thorbiorg.  She  was  a  prophetess,  and  was  called  Little
Sibyl  (31).  She  had  had  nine  sisters,  all  of  whom  were  prophetesses,  but  she  was
the  only  one  left  alive.  It  was  Thorbiorg's  custom  in  the  winters,  to  go  to  entertain-
ments, and  she  was  especially  sought  after  at  the  homes  of  those  who  were  curious
to  know  their  fate,  or  what  manner  of  season  might  be  in  store  for  them  ;  and  inasmuch
as  Thorkel  was  the  chief  yeoman  in  the  neighbourhood,  it  was  thought  to  devolve
upon  him  to  find  out  when  the  evil  time,  which  was  upon  them,  would  cease.
Thorkel  invited  the  prophetess  to  his  home,  and  careful  preparations  were  made  for
her  reception,  according  to  the  custom  which  prevailed,  when  women  of  her  kind  were
to  be  entertained.  A  high  seat  was  prepared  for  her,  in  which  a  cushion  filled
with  poultry  feathers*,  was  placed.  When  she  came  in  the  evening,  with  the
man  who  had  been  sent  to  meet  her,  she  was  clad  in  a  dark-blue  cloak,  fastened  with
a  strap,  and  set  with  stones  quite  down  to  the  hem.  She  wore  glass  beads  around  her
neck,  and  upon  her  head  a  black  lamb-skin  hood,  hned  with  white  cat-skin.  In  her
hands  she  carried  a  staff,  upon  which  there  was  a  knob,  which  was  ornamented  with
brass,  and  set  with  stones  up  about  the  knob.  Circling  her  waist  she  wore  a  girdle
of  touch-wood,  and  attached  to  it  a  great  skin  pouch,  in  which  she  kept  the  charms
which  she  used  when  she  was  practising  her  sorcery.  She  wore  upon  her  feet  shaggy
calf-skin  shoes,  with  long,  tough  latchets,  upon  the  ends  of  which  there  were  large
brass  buttons'.  She  had  cat-skin  gloves  upon  her  hands,  which  were  white  inside
and  lined  with  fur.  When  she  entered,  all  of  the  folk  felt  it  to  be  their  duty  to  offer
her  becoming  greetings.  She  received  the  salutations  of  each  individual  according
as  he  pleased  her.  Yeoman  Thorkel  took  the  sibyl  by  the  hand,  and  led  her  to  the
seat  which  had  been  made  ready  for  her.  Thorkel  bade  her  run  her  eyes  overman  and

'  ThusEsR.

^  EsR :  '  at  the  winter-night-tide.'     The  thi-ee  days  which  begin  the  winter  season  are  so  called.
'  EsR  adds :  '  Thorbiorn  and  all  his  shipmates  were  well  pleased.'

*  Lit.  '  in  which  there  should  be  poultry  feathers.'  ^  fsK  :  '  tin-buttons.'

F


34  THE  FINDING   OF    IVINELAND    THE    GOOD.

beast  and  home.  She  had  little  to  say  concerning  all  these.  The  tables  were  brought
forth  in  the  evening,  and  it  remains  to  be  told  what  manner  of  food  was  prepared  for
the  prophetess.  A  porridge  of  goat's  beestings  was  made  for  her,  and  for  meat  there
were  dressed  the  hearts  of  every  kind  of  beast,  which  could  be  obtained  there.  She
had  a  brass  spoon,  and  a  knife  with  a  handle  of  walrus  tusk,  with  a  double  hasp  of
brass  around  the  haft,  and  from  this  the  point  was  broken.  And  when  the  tables
were  removed,  Yeoman  Thorkel  approaches  Thorbiorg,  and  asks  how  she  is  pleased
with  the  home,  and  the  character  of  the  folk,  and  how  speedily  she  would  be  likely  to
become  aware  of  that  concerning  which  he  had  questioned  her,  and  which  the  people
were  anxious  to  know.  She  replied  that  she  could  not  give  an  opinion  in  this  matter
before  the  morrow,  after  that  she  had  slept  there  through  the  night.  And  on  the
morrow,  when  the  day  was  far  spent,  such  preparations  were  made  as  were  necessary
to  enable  her  to  accomplish  her  soothsaying.  She  bade  them  bring  her  those  women,
who  knew  the  incantation,  which  she  required  to  work  her  spells,  and  which  she
called  Warlocks  ;  but  such  women  were  not  to  be  found.  Thereupon  a  search  was  made
throughout  the  house,  to  see  whether  any  one  knew  this  [incantation].  Then  says
Gudrid  :  '  Although  I  am  neither  skilled  in  the  black  art  nor  a  sibyl,  yet  my  foster-mother,
Halldis,  taught  me  in  Iceland  that  spell-song,  which  she  called  Warlocks.'  Thorbiorg
answered  :  '  Then  art  thou  wise  in  season  ^ ! '  Gudrid  replies  :  '  This  is  an  incantation
and  ceremony  of  such  a  kind,  that  I  do  not  mean  to  lend  it  any  aid,  for  that  I  am  a
Christian  woman.'  Thorbiorg  answers  :  '  It  might  so  be  that  thou  couldst  give  thy  help
to  the  company  here,  and  still  be  no  worse  woman  than  before ;  however  I  leave  it
with  Thorkel  to  provide  for  my  needs.'  Thorkel  now  so  urged  Gudrid,  that  she  said
she  must  needs  comply  with  his  wishes.  The  women  then  made  a  ring  round  about,
while  Thorbiorg  sat  up  on  the  spell-dais.  Gudrid  then  sang  the  song,  so  sweet  and
well,  that  no  one  remembered  ever  before  to  have  heard  the  melody  sung  with  so
fair  a  voice  as  this.  The  sorceress  thanked  her  for  the  song,  and  said :  '  She  has
indeed  lured  many  spirits  hither,  who  think  it  pleasant  to  hear  this  song,  those  who
were  wont  to  forsake  us  hithcito  and  refuse  to  submit  themselves  to  us.  Many
things  are  now  revealed  to  me,  which  hitherto  have  been  hidden,  both  from  me  and
from  others.  And  I  am  able  to  announce  that  this  period  of  famine  will  not  endure
longer,  but  the  season  will  mend  as  spring  approaches.  The  visitation  of  disease,  which
has  been  so  long  upon  you,  will  disappear  sooner  than  expected.  And  thee,  Gudrid,  I
shall  reward  out  of  hand,  for  the  assistance,  which  thou  hast  vouchsafed  us,  since  the
fate  in  store  for  thee  is  now  all  made  manifest  to  me.  Thou  shalt  make  a  most  worthy
match  here  in  Greenland,  but  it  shall  not  be  of  long  duration  for  thee,  for  thy  future^

'  EsR  :  '  wiser  than  I  supposed.'  '  ÞsK  :  vegar  þínir,  thy  ways;  EsR  :  vegir  þínir.


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC   THE  RED.


35


path  leads  out  to  Iceland,  and  a  lineage  both  great  and  goodly  shall  spring  from  thee,
and  above  thy  line  brighter  rays  of  light  shall  shine,  than  I  have  power  clearly  to
unfold  \  And  now  fare  well  and  health  to  thee,  my  daughter ! '  After  this  the  folk
advanced  to  the  sibyl,  and  each  besought  information  concerning  that  about  which  he
was  most  curious.  She  was  very  ready  in  her  responses,  and  little  of  that  which  she
foretold  failed  of  fulfilment.  After  this  they  came  for  her  from  a  neighbouring  farm-
stead, and  she  thereupon  set  out  thither.  Thorbiorn  was  then  sent  for,  since  he  had  not
been  willing  to  remain  at  home  while  such  heathen  rites  ^  were  practising.  The
weather  improved  speedily,  when  the  spring  opened'',  even  as  Thorbiorg  had
prophesied.  Thorbiorn  equipped  his  ship  and  sailed  away,  until  he  arrived  at
Brattahlid.  Eric  received  him  with  open  arms'*,  and  said  that  it  was  well  that
he  had  come  thither.  Thorbiorn  and  his  household  remained  with  him  during  the
winter,  while  quarters  were  provided  for  the  crew  among  the  farmers.  And  the  follow-
ing spring  Eric  gave  Thorbiorn  land  on  Stokkaness,  where  a  goodly  farmstead  was
founded,  and  there  he  lived  thenceforward.

Concerning  Leif  the  Lucky  and  the  Introduction  of  Christianity  into

Greenland.

Eric  was  married  to  a  woman  named  Thorhild  ^  and  had  two  sons  ;  one  of  these
was  named  Thorstein,  and  the  other  Leif.  They  were  both  promising  men.  Thor-
stein  lived  at  home  with  his  father,  and  there  was  not  at  that  time  a  man  in  Greenland
who  was  accounted  of  so  great  promise  as  he.  Leif  had  sailed  (32)  to  Norway,  where
he  was  at  the  court  of  King  Olaf  Tr)'gg\'ason.  When  Leif  sailed  from  Greenland,  in
the  summer,  they  were  driven  out  of  their  course  to  the  Hebrides.  It  was  late
before  they  got  fair  winds  thence,  and  they  remained  there  far  into  the  summer.
Leif  became  enamoured  of  a  certain  woman,  whose  name  was  Thorgunna.  She
was  a  woman  of  fine  family,  and  Leif  observed  that  she  was  possessed  of  rare
intelligence  "  (33).  When  Leif  was  preparing  for  his  departure  Thorgunna  (34)  asked
to  be  permitted  to  accompany  him.  Leif  enquired  whether  she  had  in  this  the
approval  of  her  kinsmen.  She  replied  that  she  did  not  care  for  it.  Leif  responded
that  he  did  not  deem  it  the  part  of  wisdom  to  abduct  so  high-born  a  woman  in  a
strange  country,  '  and  we  so  few  in  number.'     '  It  is  by  no  means  certain  that  thou

'  EsR :  '  and  above  thy  race  shall  shine  a  bright  beam  of  light.'

^  ÞsK :  '  superstitions.'  ^  Omitted  in  ÞsK.

*  Lit.  '  with  both  hands.'     ÞsK  has  '  receives  him  well  with  graciousness.'

^  EsR :  Thiodhild.

'  EsR :  lit.  '  knew  more  than  a  little.'

F  2


36  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

shall  find  this  to  be  the  better  decision,'  said  Thorgunna.  '  I  shall  put  it  to  the
proof,  notwithstanding,'  said  Leif.  'Then  I  tell  thee,'  said  Thorgunna,  'that
I  am  no  longer  a  lone  woman,  for  I  am  pregnant,  and  upon  thee  I  charge  it.
I  foresee  that  I  shall  give  birth  to  a  male  child.  And  though  thou  give  this  no
heed,  yet  will  I  rear  the  boy,  and  send  him  to  thee  in  Greenland,  when  he  shall  be
fit  to  take  his  place  with  other  men.  And  I  foresee  that  thou  wilt  get  as  much
profit  of  this  son  as  is  thy  due  from  this  our  parting ;  moreover,  I  mean  to  come  to
Greenland  myself  before  the  end  comes.'  Leif  gave  her  a  gold  finger-ring,  a  Greenland
wadmal  mantle,  and  a  belt  of  walrus-tusk.  This  boy  came  to  Greenland,  and  was
called  Thorgils.  Leif  acknowledged  his  paternity,  and  some  men  will  have  it  that  this
Thorgils  came  to  Iceland  in  the  summer  before  the  Fródá-wonder(35).  However,
this  Thorgils  was  afterwards  in  Greenland,  and  there  seemed  to  be  something  not
altogether  natural  about  him  before  the  end  came.  Leif  and  his  companions  sailed  away
from  the  Hebrides,  and  arrived  in  Norway  in  the  autumn.  Leif  went  to  the  court  of
King  Olaf  Tr3rgg\'ason.  He  was  well  received  by  the  king,  who  felt  that  he  could
see  that  Leif  was  a  man  of  great  accomplishments.  Upon  one  occasion  the  king
came  to  speech  with  Leif,  and  asks  him,  '  Is  it  thy  purpose  to  sail  to  Greenland  in  the
summer  ? '  '  It  is  my  purpose,'  said  Leif,  '  if  it  be  your  will.'  '  I  believe  it  will  be  well,'
answers  the  king,  '  and  thither  thou  shalt  go  upon  my  errand,  to  proclaim  Christianity
there.'  Leif  replied  that  the  king  should  decide,  but  gave  it  as  his  belief  that  it  would
be  difficult  to  carry  this  mission  to  a  successful  issue  in  Greenland.  The  king
replied  that  he  knew  of  no  man  who  would  be  better  fitted  for  this  undertaking,  '  and
in  thy  hands  the  cause  will  surely  prosper.'  'This  can  only  be,'  said  Leif,  'if  I
enjoy  the  grace  of  your  protection.'  Leif  put  to  sea  when  his  ship  was  ready  for  the
voyage.  For  a  long  time  he  was  tossed  about  upon  the  ocean,  and  came  upon
lands  of  which  he  had  previously  had  no  knowledge.  There  were  self-sown  wheat
fields  and  vines  growing  there.  There  were  also  those  trees  there  which  are  called
'mausur '  (36),  and  of  all  these  they  took  specimens.  Some  of  the  timbers  were  so  large
that  they  were  used  in  building.  Leif  found  men  upon  a  wreck,  and  took  them  home
with  him,  and  procured  quarters  for  them  all  during  the  winter.  In  this  wise  he
showed  his  nobleness  and  goodness,  since  he  introduced  Christianity  into  the  country,
and  saved  the  men  from  the  wreck  ^ ;  and  he  was  called  Leif  the  Lucky  -  ever  after.
Leif  landed  in  Ericsfirth,  and  then  went  home  to  Brattahlid ;  he  was  well  received  by
every  one.  He  soon  proclaimed  Christianity  throughout  the  land,  and  the  Catholic
faith,  and  announced  King  Olaf  Tryggvason's  messages  to  the  people,  telling  them
how  much  excellence  and  how  great  glory  accompanied  this  faith.     Eric  was  slow  in

1  EsR  :  '  as  in  many  other  waj'S,  for  he  brought  Christianity  to  tlie  country.'  -  hinn  licppni.


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE  RED.  _     37

forming  the  determination  to  forsake  his  old  belief,  but  Thiodhild  (37)  embraced  the
faith  promptly,  and  caused  a  church  to  be  built  at  some  distance  from  the  house.
This  building  was  called  Thiodhild's  Church,  and  there  she  and  those  persons  who
had  accepted  Christianity,  and  they  were  many,  were  wont  to  offer  their  prayers.
Thiodhild  would  not  have  intercourse  with  Eric  after  that  she  had  received  the  faith,
whereat  he  was  sorely  vexed.

At  this  time  there  began  to  be  much  talk  about  a  voyage  of  exploration '  to
that  country  which  Leif  had  discovered.  The  leader  of  this  expedition  was  Thorstein
Ericsson,  who  was  a  good  man  and  an  intelligent,  and  blessed  with  many  friends.
Eric  was  likewise  invited  to  join  them,  for  the  men  believed  that  his  luck  and  foresight
would  be  of  great  furtherance.  He  was  slow  in  deciding,  but  did  not  say  nay,  when  his
friends  besought  him  to  go.  They  thereupon  equipped  that  ship  in  which  Thorbiorn
had  come  out,  and  twenty  men  were  selected  for  the  expedition.  They  took  little
cargo  with  them,  nought  else  save  their  weapons  and  provisions  ^.  On  that  morning
when  Eric  set  out  from  his  home  he  took  with  him  a  little  chest  containing  gold
and  silver;  he  hid  this  treasure,  and  then  went  his  way.  He  had  proceeded
but  a  short  distance,  however,  when  he  fell  from  his  horse  and  broke  his  ribs
and  dislocated  his  shoulder^,  whereat  he  cried  'Ai,  ai*!'  By  reason  of  this
accident  he  sent  his  wife  word '  that  she  should  procure  the  treasure  which  he  had
concealed,  for  to  the  hiding  of  the  treasure  he  attributed  his  misfortune  (38).  There-
after they  sailed  cheerily  out  of  Ericsfirth  in  high  spirits  over  their  plan.  They
were  long  tossed  about  upon  the  ocean,  and  could  not  lay  the  course  they  wished.
They  came  in  sight  of  Iceland,  and  likewise  saw  birds  from  the  Irish  coast".  Their
ship  was,  in  sooth,  driven  hither  and  thither  over  the  sea.  In  the  autumn  they  turned
back,  worn  out  by  toil,  and  exposure  to  the  elements,  and  exhausted  by  their  labours,
and  arrived  at  Ericsfirth  at  the  very  beginning  of  winter.  Then  said  Eric,  '  More
cheerful  were  we '  in  the  summer,  when  we  put  out  of  the  firth,  but  we  still  live ",
and  it  might  have  been  much  worse  ^'  Thorstein  answers,  '  It  will  be  a  princely
deed  to  endeavour  to  look  well  after  the  wants  of  all  these  men  who  are  now
in  need,  and  to  make  provision  for  them  during  the  winter.'  Eric  answers,  '  It
is  ever  true,  as  it  is  said,  that  "  it  is  never  clear  ere  the  answer  comes,"  and  so  it

1  EsR :  '  From  this  there  began  to  be  much  talk,  that  he  should  explore.'

2  EsR  :  '  mostly  weapons  and  provisions.'

'  {"sK  :  '  injured  his  arm  at  the  shoulder-joint.'  ^  Lacking  in  ÞsK.

°  ÞsK  :  lit.  '  he  told  his  wife.'

"  Lit.  '  had  birds  from  Ireland;'   that  is,  came  near  enough  to  the  coast  of  Ireland  to  see  land  birds.

'  EsR  has  '  ye  '  instead  of  '  we '  throughout.

*  Lit.  '  but  now  we  are.'

"  Lit.  '  and  there  is  still  much  good  left;'  that  is,  we  have  still  much  to  be  grateful  for.


38  THE   FINDIXG   OF    WIXELAND    THE   GOOD.

must  be  here.  We  will  act  now  upon  thy  counsel  in  this  matter  i.'  All  of  the
men,  who  were  not  otherwise  provided  for,  accompanied  the  father  and  son.  They
landed  thereupon,  and  went  home  to  Brattahlid,  where  they  remained  throughout
the  winter.

Thorstein  Ericsson  weds  Gudrid-;  Apparitions.

Now  it  is  to  be  told  that  Thorstein  Ericsson  sought  Gudrid,  Thorbiorn's  daughter,
in  wedlock.  His  suit  was  favourablj'  received  both  by  herself  and  by  her  father,  and
it  was  decided  that  Thorstein  should  marry  Gudrid,  and  the  wedding  was  held  at
Brattahlid  in  the  autumn.  The  entertainment  sped  well,  and  was  very  numerously
attended.  Thorstein  had  a  home  in  the  Western-settlement  at  a  certain  farmstead,
which  is  called  Lysufirth.  A  half  interest  in  this  property  belonged  to  a  man  named
Thorstein,  whose  wife's  name  was  Sigrid.  Thorstein  went  to  Lysufirth,  in  the
autumn,  to  his  namesake,  and  Gudrid  bore  him  company  ^  They  were  well  received,
and  remained  there  during  the  winter.  It  came  to  pass  that  sickness  appeared  in
their  home  early  in  the  winter.  Gard  was  the  name  of  the  overseer  there  ;  he  had
few  friends  ;  he  took  sick  first,  and  died.  It  was  not  long  before  one  after  another
took  sick  and  died.  Then  Thorstein,  Eric's  son,  fell  sick,  and  Sigrid,  the  wife  of  Thor-
stein, his  namesake ;  and  one  evening  Sigrid  wished  to  go  to  the  house,  which  stood
over  against  the  outer-door,  and  Gudrid  accompanied  her;  they  were  facing  the  outer-
door  when  Sigrid  uttered  a  loud  cry*.  'We  have  acted  thoughtlessl}','  exclaimed
Gudrid,  '  yet  thou  needest  not  crj',  though  the  cold  strikes  thee  ^ ;  let  us  go  in  again
as  speedily  as  possible.'  Sigrid  answers,  '  This  may  not  be  in  this  present  plight.  All
of  the  dead  folk  are  drawn  up  here  before  the  door  now ;  among  them  I  see  thy
husband,  Thorstein,  and  I  can  see  myself  there,  and  it  is  distressful  to  look  upon.'  But
directly  this  had  passed  she  exclaimed,  '  Let  us  go  now,  Gudrid ;  I  no  longer  see  the
band ! '  The  overseer  *  had  vanished  from  her  sight,  whereas  it  had  seemed  to  her  before
that  he  stood  with  a  whip  in  his  hand  and  made  as  if  he  would  scourge  the  flock.  So
they  went  in,  and  ere  the  morning  came  she  was  dead,  and  a  coffin  was  made  ready  for
the  corpse  ;  and  that  same  day  the  men  planned  to  row  out  to  fish,  and  Thorstein
accompanied  them  to  the  landing-place,  and  in  the  twilight'  he  went  down  to  see  their

'  EsR :  '  Eric  answers,  "  These  words  shall  control  here."  All  of  those,  who  had  not  been
provided  for  before,  [obtained]  accommodation  with  Eric  and  his  son.'  The  passage,  apparently  by
reason  of  a  clerical  confusion,  is  not  clear  without  emendation.

'  Lit.  '  wedded  Thurid.'  '  Lit.  '  both  he  and  Gudrid.'  *  EsR  :  '  then  Sigrid  cried,  O I '

"  Thus  the  literal  rendering ;  the  more  intelligible  translation  would  appear  to  be :  '  Give  heed  lest
■  the  cold  stiike  thee  !'

'  tsK  :  Thorstein.  '  Lit.  '  the  second  light.'


THE  SAGA  OF  ERIC  THE  RED.  39

catch.  Thorstein,  Eric's  son,  then  sent  word  to  his  namesake  that  he  should  come  to
him,  saying  that  all  was  not  as  it  should  be  there  ^,  for  the  housewife  was  endeavour-
ing to  rise  to  her  feet,  and  wished  to  get  in  under  the  clothes  beside  him,  and  when
he  entered  the  room  she  was  come  up  on  the  edge  of  the  bed.  He  thereupon  seized
her  hands  and  held  a  pole-axe  (39)  before:  her  breast.  Thorstein,  Eric's  son,  died
before  night-fall.  Thorstein,  the  master  of  the  house,  bade  Gudrid  lie  down  and
sleep,  saying  that  he  would  keep  watch  over  the  bodies  during  the  night ;  thus  she  did,
and  early  in  the  night,  Thorstein,  Eric's  son,  sat  up  and  spoke,  saying  that  he  desired
Gudrid  to  be  called  thither,  for  that  it  was  his  wish  to  speak  with  her  :  '  It  is  God's  will
that  this  hour  be  given  me  for  my  own  and  for  the  betterment  of  my  condition.'
Thorstein,  the  master,  went  in  search  of  Gudrid,  and  waked  her,  and  bade  her  cross
herself,  and  pray  God  to  help  her ;  '  Thorstein,  Eric's  son,  has  said  to  me  that  he
wishes  to  see  thee  ^ ;  thou  must  take  counsel  with  thyself  now,  what  thou  wilt  do,  for
I  have  no  advice  to  give  thee.'  She  replies,  '  It  may  be  that  this  is  intended  to  be
one  of  those  incidents  which  shall  afterward  be  held  in  remembrance,  this  strange
event,  and  it  is  my  trust  that  God  will  keep  watch  over  me  ;  wherefore,  under  God's
mercy,  I  shall  venture  to  go  to  him,  and  learn  what  it  is  that  he  would  say,  for  I  may
not  escape  this  if  it  be  designed  to  bring  me  harm.  I  will  do  this,  lest  he  go
further,  for  it  is  my  belief  that  the  matter  is  a  grave  one.'  So  Gudrid  went  and
drew  near  to  Thorstein,  and  he  seemed  to  her  to  be  weeping.  He  spoke  a  few  words
in  her  ear,  in  a  low  tone,  so  that  she  alone  could  hear  them ;  but  this  he  said  so  that
all  could  hear,  that  those  persons  would  be  blessed  who  kept  well  the  faith,  and  that  it
carried  with  it  all  help  and  consolation,  and  yet  many  there  were,  said  he,  who  kept  it
but  ill.  '  This  is  no  proper  usage,  which  has  obtained  here  in  Greenland  since
Christianity  was  introduced  here,  to  inter  men  in  unconsecrated  ^  earth,  with  nought
but  a  brief  funeral  sei-vice.  It  is  my  wish  that  I  be  conveyed  to  the  church,  together
with  the  others  who  have  died  here ;  Gard  *,  however,  I  would  have  you  burn
upon  a  pyre,  as  speedily  as  possible,  since  he  has  been  the  cause  of  all  of  the
apparitions  which  have  been  seen  here  during  the  winter.'  He  spoke  to  her  also  of
her  own  destiny,  and  said  that  she  had  a  notable  future  in  store  for  her,  but  he
bade  her  beware  of  marrying  any  Greenlander ;  he  directed  her  also  to  give  their
property  to  the  church  and  to  the  poor^,  and  then  sank  down  again  a  second  time.
It  had  been  the  custom  in  Greenland,  after  Christianity  was  introduced  there,  to  bury
persons  on  the  farmsteads  where  they  died,  in  unconsecrated  ^  earth ;  a  pole  was

'  Lit.  '  that  it  was  hardly  peaceful  there.'

-  EsR  :  '  and  tells,  what  Thorstein,  Eric's  son,  had  said  to  him ;  and  he  wishes  to  see  thee.'
'  EsR  :  '  consecrated,'  obviously  incorrectly.  *  fsK  :  Garðarr.

°  EsR:  'or  to  the  poor;'  ÞsK  :  'and  some  to  the  poor.'


40  THE   FINDING   OF    WIN  EL  AND    THE    GOOD.

erected  in  the  ground,  touching  the  breast  of  the  dead,  and  subsequently,  when  the
priests  came  thither,  the  pole  was  withdrawn  and  holy  water  poured  in  [the  orifice],
and  the  funeral  service  held  there,  although  it  might  be  long  thereafter.  The  bodies
of  the  dead  ^  were  conveyed  to  the  church  at  Ericsfirth,  and  the  funeral  services  held
there  by  the  clergy.  Thorbiorn  died  soon  after  this,  and  all  of  his  property  then
passed  into  Gudrid's  possession.  Eric  took  her  to  his  home  and  carefully  looked
after  her  aflfairs  ^.

CONCERNIXG    ThORD   OF    HÖFDI.

There  was  a  man  named  Thord,  who  lived  at  Höfdi  on  Höfdi-strands.  He
married  Fridgerd,  daughter  of  Thori  the  Loiterer  ■'  and  Fridgerd,  daughter  of  Kiarval
the  King  of  the  Irish.  Thord  was  a  son  of  Biorn  Chestbutter  *,  son  of  Thorvald
Spine  ^  Asleik's  son,  the  son  of  Biorn  Iron-side",  the  son  of  Ragnar  Shaggj'-breeks ''.
They  had  a  son  named  Snorri.  He  married  Thorhild  Ptarmigan  ^  daughter  of  Thord
theYeller^  Their  son  was  Thord  Horse-head".  Thorfinn  Karlsefni "  was  the  name  of
Thord's  son  (40).  Thorfinn's  mother's  name  was  Thorunn  ^^.  Thorfinn  was  engaged
in  trading  voyages,  and  was  reputed  to  be  a  successful  merchant.  One  summer
Karlsefni  equipped  his  ship,  with  the  intention  of  saihng  to  Greenland.  Snorri,
Thorbrand's  son",  of  Alptafirth  (41)  accompanied  him,  and  there  were  forty  men  on
board  the  ship  with  them.  There  was  a  man  named  Biarni,  Grimolf's  son,  a  man
from  Breidafirth,  and  another  named  Thorhall,  Gamli's  son  (42),  an  East-firth  man.
They  equipped  their  ship,  the  same  summer  as  Karlsefni,  vrith  the  intention  of  making
a  voyage  to  Greenland ;  they  had  also  forty  men  in  their  ship.  When  they  were
ready  to  sail,  the  two  ships  put  to  sea  together  ".  It  has  not  been  recorded  how  long
a  voyage  they  had ;  but  it  is  to  be  told,  that  both  of  the  ships  arrived  at  Ericsfirth  in
the  autumn.  Eric  and  other  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  rode  to  the  ships,  and  a
goodly  trade  was  soon  established  between  them.  Gudrid^*  was  requested  by  the
skippers  to  take  such  of  their  wares  as  she  wished,  while  Eric,  on  his  part,  showed

'  ÞsK :  '  of  Thorstein  and  the  others.'

"  ÞsK  :  '  Eric  received  Gudrid,  and  acted  as  a  father  toward  her.  Shortly  thereafter  Thorbiorn
died ;  then  all  of  the  property  passed  into  her  possession  ;  Eric  tlicn  took  her  to  his  hoine,  and  looked
well  after  her  affairs.'  '  hi'ma.  ■*  byrðusmigr.

°  hryggr.  '  járnsíða.  '  loðbrók.  "  rjtipa.  "  gellir.

'"  hesthgfði.  "  Karlsefni,  one  who  gives  promise  of  becoming  a  man.

"  EsR  :  Instead  of  this  genealogical  list  has :  '  There  was  a  man  named  Thorfinn  Karlsefni,  a  son
of  Thord  Horse-head,  who  lived  in  the  north,  at  Reyniness,  in  Skagafinh,  as  it  is  now  called.  Karl-
sefni was  a  man  of  fine  family  and  was  very  well-to-do.'  "  EsR  :  þorbiazrson.

"  þsK :  '  Karlsefni  and  the  others  put  to  sea  with  these  two  ships,  when  they  were  ready.'

"  ÞsK:  Eric.


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE  RED.  41

great  munificence  in  return,  in  that  he  extended  an  invitation  to  both  crews  to  accom-
pany him  home  for  winter  quarters  at  Brattahhd.  The  merchants  accepted  this
invitation  ^,  and  went  with  Eric.  Their  wares  were  then  conveyed  to  Brattahhd ;  nor
was  there  lack  there  of  good  and  commodious  store-houses,  in  which  to  keep  them ;
nor  was  there  wanting  much  of  that,  which  they  needed,  and  the  merchants  w^ere  well
pleased  with  their  entertainment  at  Eric's  home  during  that  winter.  Now  as  it  drew
toward  Yule,  Eric  became  very  taciturn,  and  less  cheerful  than  had  been  his  wont.
On  one  occasion  Karlsefni  entered  into  conversation  with  Eric,  and  said :  '  Hast  thou
aught  weighing  upon  thee,  Eric  ?  The  folk  have  remarked,  that  thou  art  somewhat
more  silent^  than  thou  hast  been  hitherto.  Thou  hast  entertained  us  with  great
liberality,  and  it  behooves  us  to  make  such  return  as  may  lie  within  our  power.  Do
thou  now  but  make  known  the  cause  of  thy  melancholy.'  Eric  answers  :  '  Ye  accept
hospitality  gracefully,  and  in  manly  wise,  and  I  am  not  pleased  that  ye  should  be  the
sufferers  by  reason  of  our  intercourse;  rather  am  I  troubled  at  the  thought,  that  it
should  be  given  out  elsewhere,  that  ye  have  never  passed  a  worse  Yule  than  this,
now  drawing  nigh,  when  Eric  the  Red  was  your  host  at  Brattahhd  in  Greenland.'
'  There  shall  be  no  cause  for  that,'  replies  Karlsefni,  '  we  have  malt,  and  meal,  and
corn  in  our  ships,  and  j'ou  are  welcome  to  take  of  these  whatsoever  you  wish,  and  to
provide  as  liberal  an  entertainment  as  seems  fitting  to  you.'  Eric  accepts  this  offer,
and  preparations  were  made  for  the  Yule  feast  (43),  and  it  was  so  sumptuous,  that
it  seemed  to  the  people  they  had  scarcely  ever  seen  so  grand  an  entertainment
before  ^  And  after  Yule,  Karlsefni  broached  the  subject  of  a  marriage  with  Gudrid
to  Eric,  for  he  assumed  that  with  him  rested  the  right  to  bestow  her  hand  in
marriage*.  Eric  answers  favourably,  and  says,  that  she  would  accomplish  the  fate
in  store  for  her,  adding  that  he  had  heard  only  good  reports  of  him  °.  And,  not
to  prolong  this,  the  result  was,  that  Thorfinn  was  betrothed  to  Thurid,  and  the
banquet  was  augmented,  and  their  wedding  was  celebrated " ;  and  this  befell  at
Brattahhd  during  the  winter''.

'  ÞsK  :  adds,  '  and  thanked  him.'

''■  ÞsK  :  '  less  cheerful.'  '  ÞsK  :  adds,  '  in  a  poor  country.'

*  EsR :  adds,  '  and  she  seemed  to  him  a  handsome  and  accomplished  woman.'

^  EsR :  '  Eric  answers,  saying,  that  his  offer  should  be  well  considered,  and  adding  that  she  was
worthy  of  a  goodly  match ;  "  moreover,  it  is  probable,  that  she  will  fulfil  her  appointed  destiny,"  even  if
she  should  be  married  to  him,  and  said  that  good  reports  had  come  concerning  him.'

*  ÞsK  :  '  ok  drukkit  brullaup  þeira,'  and  their  bridal  drunk.

'  EsR :  '  There  was  great  good  cheer  at  Brattahlid  during  the  winter.  Whereat  much  discussion
arose,  that  there  was  much  table-play  afoot,  and  story-telling  and  much  of  the  like  which  might  contribute
to  the  amusement  of  the  household.'  The  clause  '  whereat  much  discussion  arose '  appears  to  have
been  inserted  by  accident  from  the  succeeding  paragraph.

G


42  THE  FINDING    OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.


Beginning  of  the  Wineland  Voyages.

About  this  time  there  began  to  be  much  talk  at  Brattahhd,  to  the  effect  that
Wineland  the  Good  should  be  explored,  for,  it  was  said,  that  country  must  be
possessed  of  many  goodly  qualities.  And  so  it  came  to  pass,  that  Karlsefni  and
Snorri  fitted  out  their  ship,  for  the  purpose  of  going  in  search  of  that  country  in  the
spring  ^  Biarni  and  Thorhall  joined  the  expedition  with  their  ship,  and  the  men
who  had  borne  them  company  -.  There  was  a  man  named  Thorvard ;  he  was  wedded
to  Freydis  (44),  a  natural  daughter  of  Eric  the  Red.  He  also  accompanied  them,
together  with  Thorvald,  Eric's  son,  and  Thorhall,  who  was  called  the  Huntsman.  He
had  been  for  a  long  time  with  Eric  as  his  hunter  and  fisherman  during  the  summer,
and  as  his  steward  during  the  winter^.  Thorhall  was  stout  and  swarthy,  and  of
giant  stature ;  he  was  a  man  of  few  words,  though  given  to  abusive  language,  when
he  did  speak,  and  he  ever  incited  Eric  to  evil.  He  was  a  poor  Christian ;  he  had
a  wide  knowledge  of  the  unsettled  regions  *.  He  was  on  the  same  ship  with  Thorvard
and  Thorx'ald  '^.  They  had  that  ship  which  Thorbiorn  had  brought  out.  They  had
in  all  one  hundred  and  sixty  men,  when  they  sailed  to  the  Western-settlement  (45),
and  thence  to  Bear  Island".  Thence  they  bore  away  to  the  southward  two
'dœgr'  (46).    Then  they  saw  land,  and  launched  a  boat,  and  explored  the  land,  and

'  EsR :  '  Karlsefni  and  Snorri  determined  to  go  in  search  of  Wineland,  and  this  gave  rise  to  much
talk.'  [Cf.  preceding  note.]  '  And  the  end  of  the  matter  was,  that  Karlsefni  and  Snorri  equipped  their
ship  and  determined  to  go  in  search  of  Wineland  during  the  summer.'

"^-  ÞsK :  '  With  them  went  also  that  man,  who  was  named  Biarni,  and  likewise  Thorhall,  who  have
before  been  mentioned,  with  their  ship.'

'  EsR :  '  There  was  a  man  named  Thorvald ;  he  was  a  relative  by  marriage  of  Eric  the  Red.
Thorhall  was  called  the  Huntsman  [veiðimaðr] ;  he  had  long  lived  with  Eric,  engaging  in  fishing  and
hunting  expeditions  during  the  summer,  and  was  general  care-taker '  [lit.  had  many  things  under  his
charge].

*  EsR :  '  Thorhall  was  a  man  of  great  stature,  swart  and  giant-like ;  he  was  rather  stricken  with
years,  overbearing  in  manner,  taciturn,  and  usually  a  man  of  few  words,  underhanded  in  his  dealings,
and  yet  given  to  offensive  language,  and  always  ready  to  stir  up  evil ;  he  had  concerned  himself  little
with  the.  true  faith  after  its  introduction  into  Greenland.  Thorhall  was  not  very  popular,  but  Eric  had
long  been  accustomed  to  seek  his  advice.'

"  EsR  .  '  with  Thorvald  and  his  companions,  because  he  had  extensive  knowledge  of  the  uninhabited
regions.'

°  EsR  :  '  and  they  joined  Karlsefni  and  his  companions  in  their  expedition,  and  they  were  mostly-

Greenland  men  on   board.     There  were  on  their  ships  forty  men  off  the  second  hundred  [i.e.  one

hundred  and  sixty  men].     Then  they  sailed  away  to  the  Western-settlement,  and  to  the  Bear  Isles.'

{"sK  has, '  xj.  men  and  c ; '  but  as  the  early  duodecimal  hundred  of  twelve  tens  is  doubtless  meant  by

c,'  the  numbers  agree  in  both  accounts.


THE    SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE  RED.


43


found  there  large  flat  stones  [Iiellur],  and  many  of  these  were  twelve  ells  wide ;  there
were  many  Arctic  foxes  there.  They  gave  a  name  to  the  country,  and  called  it  Hellu-
land  [the  land  of  flat  stones]  ^  Then  they  sailed  with  northerly  winds  two  '  dœgr/
and  land  then  la}^  before  them,  and  upon  it  was  a  great  wood  and  many  wild  beasts  ;
an  island  lay  off  the  land  to  the  south-east,  and  there  they  found  a  bear,  and  they
called  this  Blarney  [Bear  Island],  while  the  land  where  the  wood  was  they  called
Markland  [Forest-land]^.  Thence  they  sailed  southward  along  the  land  for  a  long
time,  and  came  to  a  cape ;  the  land  lay  upon  the  starboard ;  there  were  long  strands
and  sandy  banks  there.  They  rowed  to  the  land  and  found  upon  the  cape  there  the
keel  of  a  ship  (47),  and  they  called  it  there  Kialarnes  [Keelness] ;  they  also  called  the
strands  Furdustrandir  [Wonder-strands],  because  they  were  so  long  to  sail  by^.  Then
the  country  became  indented  with  bays,  and  they  steered  their  ships  into  a  bay*.  It
was  when  Leif  was  with  King  Olaf  Trygg\'ason,  and  he  bade  him  proclaim  Christianity
to  Greenland,  that  the  king  gave  him  two  Gaels  (48) ;  the  man's  name  was  Haki,  and
the  woman's  Haekia.  The  king  advised  Leif  to  have  recourse  to  these  people,  if  he
should  stand  in  need  of  fleetness,  for  they  were  swifter  than  deer  ^.  Eric  and  Leif
had  tendered  Karlsefni  the  services  of  this  couple.  Now  when  the}'  had  sailed  past
Wonder-strands,  they  put  the  Gaels  ashore,  and  directed  them  to  run  to  the  south-
ward, and  investigate  the  nature  of  the  countrj^,  and  return  again  before  the  end  of
the  third  half-day.  They  were  each  clad  in  a  garment,  which  they  called  '  kiafal  ^'
which  was  so  fashioned,  that  it  had  a  hood  at  the  top,  was  open  at  the  sides,  was
sleeveless,  and  was  fastened  between  the  legs  with  buttons  and  loops,  while  elsewhere
they  were  naked.     Karlsefni  and  his  companions  cast  anchor,  and  lay  there  during

'  EsR  :  '  Thence  they  sailed  away  beyond  the  Bear  Isles,  with  northerly  winds.  They  were  out  two
"  dœgr ; "  then  they  discovered  land,  and  rowed  thither  in  boats,  and  explored  the  country,  and  found
there  many  flat  stones  [hellur],  so  large,  that  two  men  could  well  spurn  soles  upon  them'  [i.e.  lie  at  full
length  upon  them,  sole  to  sole]  ;  '  there  were  many  Arctic  foxes  there.'

^  ÞsK  :  '  Thence  they  sailed  two  "  dœgr,"  and  bore  away  from  the  south  toward  the  south-east,
and  they  found  a  wooded  country,  and  on  it  many  animals ;  an  island  lay  there  off  the  land  toward
the  south-east ;  they  killed  a  bear  on  this  [island],  and  called  it  afterwards  Bear  Isle,  but  the  country
Forest-land.'

'  EsR:  'Then  when  two  "dœgr"  had  elapsed,  they  descried  land,  and  they  sailed  off  this  land;
there  was  a  cape  to  which  they  came.  They  beat  into  the  wind  along  this  coast,  having  the  land  upon
the  starboard  side.  This  was  a  bleak  coast,  with  long  and  sandy  shores.  They  went  ashore  in  boats,
and  found  the  keel  of  a  ship,  so  they  called  it  Keelness  there ;  they  likewise  gave  a  name  to  the  strands,
and  called  them  Wonder-strands,  because  they  were  long  to  sail  by.'

*  EsR  :  •  to  the  bays.'

^  ÞsK :  '  King  Olaf  Tryggvason  had  given  Leif  two  Gaelic  people,  the  man's  name  was  Haki,  and
she  Hekia.     They  were  fleeter  than  deer.     These  people  were  on  board  Karlsefni's  ship.'

«  EsR :  '  biafal.'


44  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

their  absence';  and  when  they  came  again,  one  of  them  carried"  a  bunch  of  grapes,
and  the  other  an  ear  of  new-sown  wheats  They  went  on  board  the  ship,  whereupon
Karlsefni  and  his  followers  held  on  their  way,  until  they  came  to  where  the  coast  was
indented  with  bays.  They  stood  into  a  bay  with  their  ships.  There  was  an  island
out  at  the  mouth  of  the  bay,  about  which  there  were  strong  currents,  wherefore  they
called  it  Straumey  [Stream  Isle].  There  were  so  many  birds  there,  that  it  was  scarcely
possible  to  step  between  the  eggs  *.  They  sailed  through  the  firth,  and  called  it
Straumfiord  [Streamfirth],  and  carried  their  cargoes  ashore  from  the  ships,  and  esta-
blished themselves  there.  They  had  brought  with  them  all  kinds  of  live-stock.  It  was
a  fine  country  there.  There  were  mountains  thereabouts.  They  occupied  themselves
exclusively  with  the  exploration  of  the  country.  They  remained  there  during  the
winter,  and  they  had  taken  no  thought  for  this  during  the  summer.  The  fishing
began  to  fail,  and  they  began  to  fall  short  of  food '.  Then  Thorhall  the  Huntsman
disappeared.  They  had  already  prayed  to  God  for  food,  but  it  did  not  come
as  promptly  as  their  necessities  seemed  to  demand.  They  searched  for  Thorhall
for  three  half-da3's,  and  found  him°  on  a  projecting  crag.  He  was  lying  there,
and  looking  up  at  the  sky,  with  mouth  and  nostrils  agape,  and  mumbling  some-
thing''. They  asked  him  why  he  had  gone  thither;  he  replied,  that  this  did  not
concern  anyone  *.  They  asked  him  then  to  go  home  with  them,  and  he  did  so.
Soon  after  this  a  whale  appeared  there,  and  they  captured  it',  and  flensed  it,  and
no  one  could  tell  what  manner  of  whale  it  was";  and  when  the  cooks  had  prepared

'  Lit.  '  for  this  period.'  °  Lit.  '  had  in  the  hand.'

'  EsR  :  '  and  when  three  days  [sic]  had  passed,  they  ran  down  from  the  land,  and  one  of  them
carried  in  the  hand  a  wine-vessel '  [vin-ker,  doubtless  a  clerical  error  for  '  vin-ber,'  grapes],  '  and  the
other  wheat  self-sown.     Karlsefni  said  that  they  seemed  to  have  found  goodly  indigenous  products  ! '

*  ÞsK :  '  There  were  so  many  eider-ducks  on  the  island,  that  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  walk  for
the  eggs.'

°  EsR :  '  they  explored  the  nature  of  the  land.  There  were  mountains  there,  and  the  country  round
about  w^as  fair  to  look  upon.  They  did  nought  but  explore  the  country.  There  was  tall  grass  there.
They  remained  there  during  the  winter,  and  they  had  a  hard  winter,  for  which  they  had  not  prepared,
and  they  grew  short  of  food,  and  the  fishing  fell  off.  Then  they  went  out  to  the  island,  in  the  hope  that
something  might  be  forthcoming  in  the  way  of  fishing  or  flotsam.  There  was  little  food  left,  however,
although  their  live-stock  fared  well  there.  Then  they  invoked  God,  that  he  might  send  them  food,  but
they  did  not  get  response  so  soon  as  they  needed.     Thorhall  disappeared,'  &c.

*  EsR:  'on  the  fourth  half-day  Karlsefni  and  Biarni  found  him.'

"'  EsR:  'and  with  eyes,  mouth  and  nostrils  wide-stretched,  and  was  scratching  himself,  and
muttering  something.'

"  EsR  adds,  '  he  told  them  not  to  be  surprised  at  this ;  adding  that  he  had  lived  sufficiently  long  to
render  it  unnecessary  for  them  to  take  counsel  for  him.'

"  Lit.  '  they  went  to  it.'

'"  EsR  adds,  '  Karlsefni  had  much  knowledge  of  whales,  but  he  did  not  know  this  one.'


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE  RED.  45

it,  they  ate  of  it,  and  were  all  made  ill  by  it.  Then  Thorhall,  approaching  them,
says :  '  Did  not  the  Red-beard  (49)  prove  more  helpful  than  your  Christ  ?  This  is
my  reward  for  the  verses  which  I  composed  to  Thor,  the  Trustworthy  ^ ;  seldom  has
he  failed  me.'  When  the  people  heard  this,  they  cast  the  whale  down  into  the  sea,
and  made  their  appeals  to  God  ^.  The  weather  then  improved,  and  they  could  now
row  out  to  fish,  and  thenceforward  they  had  no  lack  of  provisions,  for  they  could
hunt  game  on  the  land,  gather  eggs  on  the  island,  and  catch  fish  from  the  sea^.


Concerning  Karlsefni  and  Thorhall.

It  is  said,  that  Thorhall  wished  to  sail  to  the  northward  beyond  Wonder-strands,
in  search  of  Wineland,  while  Karlsefni  desired  to  proceed  to  the  southward,  off  the
coast*.  Thorhall  prepared  for  his  voyage  out  below  the  island,  having  only  nine  men
in  his  party,  for  all  of  the  remainder  of  the  company  went  with  Karlsefni.  And  one
day  when  Thorhall  was  carrying  water  aboard  his  ship,  and  was  drinking,  he  recited
this  ditty :

When  I  came,  these  brave  men  told  me,

Here  the  best  of  drink  I  'd  get,
Now  with  water-pail  behold  me, —

Wine  and  I  are  strangers  yet.
Stooping  at  the  spring,  I  've  tested

All  the  wine  this  land  affords;
Of  its  vaunted  charms  divested,
Poor  indeed  are  its  rewards'^.

'  fuUtrúann,  lit.  a  person  in  whom  one  reposes  all  confidence.

^  EsR :  '  and  when  the  people  knew  this,  none  of  them  would  eat,  and  they  cast  [it]  down  over  the
rocks,  and  invoked  God's  mercy.'

'  EsR  :  '  They  were  then  able  to  row  out  to  fish,  and  they  had  no  longer  any  lack  of  the  necessities
of  life.  In  the  spring  they  went  into  Streamfirth,  and  obtained  provisions  from  both  regions,  hunting
on  the  mainland,  gathering  eggs,  and  deep-sea  fishing.'

•*  EsR:  This  introductory  paragraph  reads:  'Now  they  took  counsel  together  concerning  their
expedition,  and  came  to  an  agreement.  Thorhall  the  Huntsman  wished  to  go  northward  around
Wonder-strands,  and  past  Keelness,  and  so  seek  Wineland ;  while  Karlsefni  wished  to  proceed  south-
ward along  the  land  and  to  the  eastward,  believing  that  country  to  be  greater,  which  is  farther  to  the
southward,  and  it  seemed  to  him  more  advisable  to  explore  both.'

*  The  order  of  the  words  of  the  verse  is  as  follows :  Weiðar  [trees]  malm  þings  [of  the  metal-
meeting,  i.  e.  of  battle,  trees  of  battle,  warriors,  men]  kváðu  mik  hafa  [said  that  I  should  have]  drykk  inn
bazta  [the  best  of  drink],  er  ek  kom  hingat  [when  I  came  hither],  mér  samir  lasta  land  fyrir  lýðum  [it
behooves  me  to  blame  the  land  'fore  all] ;  bilds  hattar  [bildr,  an  instrument  for  letting  blood,  i.  e.  a
sword,  bilds  hattar,  the  sword's  hat,  i.e.  the  helmet]  beiðitJ'T  [the  god  who  demands,  wherefore,  bilds  hattar


46  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

And  when  they  were  read}',  they  hoisted  sail ;  whereupon  Thorhall  recited  this  ditty  ^ :

Comrades,  let  us  now  be  faring

Homeward  to  our  own  again !
Let  us  try  the  ^sea-steed's  daring,

Give  the  chafing  courser  rein.
Those  who  will  may  bide  in  quiet.

Let  them  praise  their  chosen  land,
Feasting  on  a  whale-steak  diet.

In  their  home  by  Wonder-strand  ^

Then  they  sailed  away  to  the  northward  past  Wonder-strands  and  Keelness,
intending  to  cruise  to  the  westward  around  the  cape.  They  encountered  westerly
gales,  and  were  driven  ashore  in  Ireland,  where  they  were  grievously  maltreated
and  thrown  into  slavery.  There  Thorhall  lost  his  life,  according  to  that  which
traders  have  related.

It  is  now  to  be  told  of  Karlsefni,  that  he  cruised  southward  off  the  coast,  with
Snorri  and  Biarni,  and  their  people.    They  sailed  for  a  long  time,  and  until  they  came

beiðitýr,  he,  or  the  god,  who  demands  the  helmet,  the  warrior,  i.  e.  man],  ek  verð  at  reiða  byttu  [I  must
bear  the  pail]  ;  heldr  er  svá  at  ek  kryp  at  keldu  [I  have  rather  to  stoop  to  the  spring]  ;  komat  vin  á  grgn
mina  [wine  has  not  touched  my  lips].

The  prose  sense  of  the  verse  is :  IMen  promised  me,  when  I  came  hither,  that  I  should  have  the  best
of  drink,  it  behooves  me  before  all  to  blame  the  land,  [ÞsK]  ['  little  to  blame  it,'  EsR].  See,  oh,  man !
how  I  must  raise  the  pail ;  instead  of  drinking  wine,  I  have  to  stoop  to  the  spring.

^  EsR :  '  Then  they  put  to  sea,  and  Karlsefni  accompanies  them  out  off  the  island.  Before  they
hoisted  sail,  Thorhall  uttered  this  ditty.'

°  The  order  of  the  words  in  the  verse  is  as  follows  :  Fgrum  aptr  þar  er  órir  landar  eru  [Let  us  go
back  where  our  countr}-men  are],  latum  kenni  sandhimins  [sandhiminn,  the  canopy  of  the  sands,  the  sea,
kenni  sandhimins,  the  knowing  one  of  the  sea,  the  sailor,  wherefore,  latum  kenni  sandhimins,  let  the
sailor],  val  kanna  [explore  well]  en  breiðu  knarrarskeið  [the  broad  courses  of  the  ships,  i.  e.  the  sea]  ;
meðan  bilstyggvir  [while  the  rest-hating]  laufaveðrs  bellendr  [laufiveðr,  sword-storm,  i.  e.  battle,  bellendr,
wagers,  givers,  laufaveðrs  bellendr,  the  givers  of  battle,  rest-hating  givers  of  battle,  warriors,  men],  þeir
er  leyfa  Ignd  [they  who  praise  the  land],  byggja  ok  vella  hval  á  Furðustrpndum  [live  and  cook  whale
on  Wonder-strands].

The  prose  sense  of  the  verse  is:  Let  us  return  to  our  countrymen,  leaving  those,  who  like  the
country  here,  to  cook  their  whale  on  Wonder-strands.

EsR  has  ærir  for  órir,  and  kæti  for  kenni,  which  words  are  not  readily  intelligible.  The  paper
manuscripts  have  still  other  variants,  certain  of  them  clearly  unintelligible.  The  verse,  as  given  in
ÞsK,  appears  to  be  the  least  corrupted.  The  form  órir,  nom.  plur.  from  várr,  disappeared  at  the
beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century,  being  supplanted  by  the  form  v.irir.  [Cf  Konr.  Gislason,  Ældre
og  nyere  Böining  af  F0rstc  Persons  Plural-posscssiv  i  Oldnordisk-Islandsk.,  in  Aarb.  for  nord.  Oldk.  og
Hist.  1889,  pp.  343  et  scq.]  From  this  it  is  apparent  that  the  verse  is  much  older  than  cither  text  of
the  saga  which  we  have,  and  must  have  been  composed  at  least  a  hundred  years  before  Hauk's  Book
was  written ;  although  it  may  well  be  much  older  than  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  ccntur}-.


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE  RED.  47

at  last  to  a  river,  which  flowed  down  from  the  land  into  a  lake,  and  so  into  the  sea.
There  were  great  bars  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  so  that  it  could  only  be  entered  at
the  height  of  the  flood-tide.  Karlsefni  and  his  men  sailed  into  the  mouth  of  the  river,
and  called  it  there  Hop  [a  small  land-locked  bay].  They  found  self-sown  wheat-fields
on  the  land  there,  wherever  there  were  hollows,  and  wherever  there  was  hilly  ground,
there  were  vines  (50).  Every  brook  there  was  full  of  fish.  They  dug  pits,  on  the
shore  where  the  tide  rose  highest,  and  when  the  tide  fell,  there  were  halibut  (51)
in  the  pits.  There  were  great  numbers  of  wild  animals  of  all  kinds  in  the  woods.
They  remained  there  half  a  month,  and  enjoyed  themselves,  and  kept  no  watch.
They  had  their  live-stock  with  them.  Now  one  morning  early,  when  they  looked
about  them,  they  saw  a  great  number  of  skin-canoes  ^  and  staves  (52)  were  brand-
ished from  the  boats,  with  a  noise  like  flails,  and  they  were  revolved  in  the  same
direction  in  which  the  sun  moves.  Then  said  Karlsefni :  '  What  may  this  betoken  ? '
Snorri,  Thorbrand's  son,  answers  him :  '  It  may  be,  that  this  is  a  signal  of  peace,
wherefore  let  us  take  a  white  shield  (53)  and  display  it.'  And  thus  they  did.  There-
upon the  strangers  rowed  toward  them,  and  went  upon  the  land,  marvelling  at
those  whom  they  saw  before  them.  They  were  swarthy  men-,  and  ill-looking,  and
the  hair  of  their  heads  was  ugly.  They  had  great  eyes,  and  were  broad  of
cheek  (54).  They  tarried  there  for  a  time  looking  curiously  at  the  people  they  saw
before  them,  and  then  rowed  away,  and  to  the  southward  around  the  point.

Karlsefni  and  his  followers  had  built  their  huts  above  the  lake,  some  of  their
dwellings  being  near  the  lake,  and  others  farther  away*.  Now  they  remained  there
that  winter.  No  snow  came  there  *,  and  all  of  their  live-stock  lived  by  grazing  (55).
And  when  spring  opened,  they  discovered,  early  one  morning,  a  great  number  of
skin-canoes,  rowing  from  the  south  past  the  cape,  so  numerous,  that  it  looked  as  if
coals  had  been  scattered  broadcast  out  before  the  bay ;  and  on  every  boat  staves  were
waved.  Thereupon  Karlsefni  and  his  people  displayed  their  shields,  and  when  they
came  together,  they  began  to  barter  with  each  other.  Especially  did  the  strangers
wish  to  buy  red  cloth  ^,  for  which  they  ofl'ered  in  exchange  peltries  and  quite
grey  skins.  They  also  desired  to  buy  swords  and  spears,  but  Karlsefni  and  Snorri
forbade  this.  In  exchange  for  perfect  unsullied  skins,  the  SkreUings  would  take
red  stuff  a  span  in  length,  which  they  would  bind  around  their  heads.  So  their
trade  went  on  for  a  time,  until  Karlsefni  and  his  people  began  to  grow  short  of
cloth,  when  they  divided  it  into  such  narrow  pieces,  that  it  was  not  more  than  a

'  EsR :  '  nine  skin-canoes.'  -  EsR  :  '  small  men,'  instead  of '  swarthy  men.'

'  EsR  :  '  some  dwellings  were  near  the  mainland,  and  some  near  the  lake.'

*  EsR:  '  no  snow  whatever.'  ^  ÞsK  :  skrúð,  a  kind  of  stuff ;  EsR:  klæði,  cloth.


48  THE  FINDING  OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

finger's  breadth  wide,  but  the  Skrellings  still  continued  to  give  just  as  much  for
this  as  before,  or  more.

It  so  happened,  that  a  bull,  which  belonged  to  Karlsefni  and  his  people,  ran  out
from  the  woods,  bellowing  loudly.  This  so  terrified  the  Skrellings,  that  they  sped
out  to  their  canoes,  and  then  rowed  awa}-  to  the  southward  along  the  coast.  For
three  entire  weeks  nothing  more  was  seen  of  them.  At  the  end  of  this  time,  however,
a  great  multitude  of  Skrelling  boats  was  discovered  approaching  from  the  south,
as  if  a  stream  were  pouring  down,  and  all  of  their  staves  were  waved  in  a  direction
contrarj^  to  the  course  of  the  sun,  and  the  Skrellings  were  all  uttering  loud  cries.
Thereupon  Karlsefni  and  his  men  took  red  shields  (53)  and  displayed  them.  The
Skrellings  sprang  from  their  boats,  and  they  met  then,  and  fought  together.  There
was  a  fierce  shower  of  missiles,  for  the  Skrellings  had  war-slings.  Karlsefni  and
Snorri  obser\-ed,  that  the  Skrellings  raised  up  on  a  pole  ^  a  great  ball-shaped  body,
almost  the  size  of  a  sheep's  belty,  and  nearly  black  in  colour,  and  this  they  hurled  from
the  pole  up  on  the  land  above  Karlsefni's  followers,  and  it  made  a  frightful  noise,
where  it  fell.  Whereat  a  great  fear  seized  upon  Karlsefni,  and  all  his  men,  so  that
the}'  could  think  of  nought  but  flight,  and  of  making  their  escape  up  along  the  river
bank,  for  it  seemed  to  them,  that  the  troop  of  the  Skrellings  was  rushing  towards
them  from  every  side,  and  they  did  not  pause,  until  they  came  to  certain  jutting  crags,
where  they  offered  a  stout  resistance.  Frej-dis  came  out,  and  seeing  that  Karlsefni
and  his  men  were  fleeing,  she  cried :  '  Why  do  ye  flee  from  these  wTetches,  such
worthy  men  as  5-e,  when,  meseems,  ye  might  slaughter  them  like  cattle.  Had  I  but  a
weapon,  methinks,  I  would  fight  better  than  any  one  of  you ! '  They  gave  no  heed  to
her  words.  Freydis  sought  to  join  them,  but  lagged  behind,  for  she  was  not  hale  - ;
she  followed  them,  however,  into  the  forest,  while  the  Skrellings  pursued  her ;  she
found  a  dead  man  in  front  of  her ;  this  was  Thorbrand,  Snorri's  son,  his  skull  cleft  by
a  flat  stone ;  his  naked  sword  lay  beside  him ;  she  took  it  up,  and  prepared  to  defend
herself  with  it.  The  Skrellings  then  approached  her,  whereupon  she  stripped  down  her
shift,  and  slapped  her  breast  with  the  naked  sword.  At  this  the  Skrellings  were
terrified  and  ran  down  to  their  boats,  and  rowed  away.  Karlsefni  and  his  companions,
however,  joined  her  and  praised  her  valour.  Two  of  Karlsefni's  men  had  fallen,  and  a
great  number  of  the  Skrellings  ^.  Karlsefni's  party  had  been  overpowered  by  dint  of
superior  numbers.  They  now  returned  to  their  dwellings,  and  bound  up  their
wounds,  and  weighed  carefully  what  throng  of  men  that  could  have  been,  which  had
seemed  to  descend  upon  them  from  the  land  ' ;  it  now  seemed  to  them,  that  there

'  EsR  :  '  on  poles.'  '  '  eigi  hcil,'  a  euphemism  for  pregnant.

'  EsR  :  'four  of  the  Skrellings.'  *  EsR:  simply  'from  the  land.'


THE   SAGA    OF  ERIC   THE  RED.


49


could  have  been  but  the  one  party,  that  which  came  from  the  boats,  and  that  the  other
troop  must  have  been  an  ocular  delusion  ^  The  Skrellings,  moreover,  found  a  dead
man,  and  an  axe  lay  beside  him.  One  of  their  number  picked  up  the  axe,  and  struck
at  a  tree  with  it,  and  one  after  another  [they  tested  it],  and  it  seemed  to  them  to
be  a  treasure,  and  to  cut  well;  then  one  of  their  number  seized  it,  and  hewed  at
a  stone  with  it,  so  that  the  axe  broke,  whereat  they  concluded  that  it  could  be  of  no
use,  since  it  would  not  withstand  stone,  and  they  cast  it  away  ^.

It  now  seemed  clear  to  Karlsefni  and  his  people,  that  although  the  country
thereabouts  was  attractive,  their  life  would  be  one  of  constant  dread  and  turmoil  by
reason  of  the  [hostility  of  the]  inhabitants  ^  of  the  country,  so  they  forthwith  prepared
to  leave,  and  determined  to  return  to  their  own  country.  They  sailed  to  the  north-
ward off"  the  coast,  and  found  five  Skrellings,  clad  in  skin-doublets,  lying  asleep  near
the  sea.  There  were  vessels  beside  them,  containing  animal  marrow,  mixed  with
blood.  Karlsefni  and  his  company  concluded  that  they  must  have  been  banished
from  their  own  land.  They  put  them  to  death.  They  afterwards  found  a  cape,
upon  which  there  was  a  great  number  of  animals,  and  this  cape  looked  as  if  it
were  one  cake  of  dung,  by  reason  of  the  animals  which  lay  there  at  night*.  They
now  arrived  again  at  Streamfirth,  where  they  found  great  abundance  of  all  those
things  of  which  they  stood  in  need.  Some  men  say,  that  Biarni  and  Freydis''
remained  behind  here  with  a  hundred  men,  and  went  no  further ;  while  Karlsefni  and
Snorri  proceeded  to  the  southward  with  forty  men,  tarrying  at  Hop  barely  two
months,  and  returning  again  the  same  summer.  Karlsefni  then  set  out  with  one
ship,  in  search  of  Thorhall  the  Huntsman,  but  the  greater  part  of  the  company
remained  behind.  They  sailed  to  the  northward  around  Keelness,  and  then  bore
to  the  westward,  having  land  to  the  larboard.  The  country  there  was  a  wooded
wilderness,  as  far  as  they  could  see,  with  scarcely  an  open  space '' ;  and  when  they
had  journeyed  a  considerable  distance,  a  river  flowed  down  from  the  east  toward
the  west.     They  sailed  into  the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  lay  to  by  the  southern  bank.

The  Slaying  of  Thorvald,  Eric's  Son.

It  happened  one  morning,  that  Karlsefni  and  his  companions  discovered  in  an
open  space  in  the  woods  above  them,  a  speck,  which  seemed  to  shine  toward  them,
and  they  shouted  at  it :  it  stirred,  and  it  was  a  Uniped  (56),  who  skipped  down  to  the

'  EsR  :  '  þversýningar,'  lit.  cross-sight.

'^  EsR  has  instead  of  the  above :  '  one  of  their  people  hewed  at  a  stone,  and  broke  the  axe ;  it
seemed  to  him  of  no  use,  since  it  would  not  withstand  stone,  and  he  cast  it  down.'

'  EsR  :  '  for  those  who  dwelt  there  before.'  *  EsR  :  '  during  the  winter.'

^  ÞsK  :  Gudrid.  ^  EsR  has  simply,  '  there  were  wooded  w-iklernesses  there.'

H


50  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE   GOOD.

bank  of  the  river  by  which  they  were  lying.  Thorvald,  a  son  of  Eric  the  Red,  was
sitting  at  the  helm,  and  the  Uniped  shot  an  arrow  into  his  inwards.  Thorvald  drew
out  the  arrow,  and  exclaimed  :  '  There  is  fat  around  my  paunch  ;  we  have  hit  upon  a
fruitful  country,  and  yet  we  are  not  like  to  get  much  profit  of  it  ^'  Thorvald  died  soon
after  from  this  wound.  Then  the  Uniped  ran  away  back  toward  the  north.  Karlsefni
and  his  men  pursued  him,  and  saw  him  from  time  to  time  -.  The  last  they  saw  of
him,  he  ran  down  into  a  creek.  Then  they  turned  back ;  whereupon  one  of  the  men
recited  this  ditty:

Eager,  our  men,  up  hill  down  dell,
Hunted  a  Uniped ;

Hearken,   Karlsefni,  while  they  tell
How  swift  the  quarry  fled !'

Then  they  sailed  away  back  toward  the  north,  and  believed  they  had  got  sight  of
the  land  of  the  Unipeds ;  nor  were  they  disposed  to  risk  the  lives  of  their  men  any
longer.  They  concluded  that  the  mountains  of  Hop,  and  those  which  they  had  now
found,  formed  one  chain,  and  this  appeared  to  be  so  because  they  were  about  an
equal  distance  removed  from  Streamfirth,  in  either  direction*.  They  sailed  back,
and  passed  the  third  winter  at  Streamfirth.  Then  the  men  began  to  divide  into
factions  *,  of  which  the  women  were  the  cause ;  and  those  who  were  without  wives,
endeavoured  to  seize  upon  the  wives  of  those  who  were  married,  whence  the  greatest
trouble  arose.  Snorri,  Karlsefni's  son,  was  born  the  first  autumn,  and  he  was  three
winters'  old  ^  when  they  took  their  departure.  When  they  sailed  away  from  Wine-
land,  they  had  a  southerly  wind,  and  so  came  upon  Markland,  where  they  found  five
Skrellings,  of  whom  one  was  bearded,  two  were  women,  and  two  were  children.  Karl-
sefni and  his  people  took  the  boys,  but  the  others  escaped,  and  these  SkreUings  sank
down  into  the  earth.  They  bore  the  lads  away  with  them,  and  taught  them  to  speak,
and  they  were  baptized.     They  said,  that  their  mother's  name  was  VætiUdi,  and  their

'  In  EsR  the  text  of  this  passage  seems  to  be  somewhat  confused,  apparently  through  a  clerical
error.  It  reads  :  '  and  runs  down  thither  to  where,  they  [the  companions  of]  Thorvald,  the  son  of  Eric
the  Red,  lay  ;  then  said  Thorvald  :  "  We  have  found  a  good  land."  Then  the  Uniped  runs  away,  back
toward  the  north,  having  first  shot  an  arrow  into  Thorvald's  intestines  ;  he  drew  out  the  arrow,  then
Thorvald  said :  "  There  is  fat  about  the  paunch."     They  pursued  the  Uniped,'  &c.

'^  EsR  adds,  '  and  it  seemed  as  if  he  were  trying  to  escape.'

'  Lit.  '  The  men  pursued,  most  true  it  is,  a  Uniped  down  to  the  shore,  but  the  strange  man  took  to
running  swift  over  the  banks.     Hear  thou,  Karlsefni ! '

*  EsR  :  '  They  intended  to  explore  all  the  mountains,  those  which  were  at  Hop,  and  [those]  which
they  discovered.'

°  EsR  :  '  gengu  menn  þfi  mjgk  sleitum,'  the  men  then  began  to  grow  quarrelsome  [?].

°  EsR  :  '  ok  var  þar  þann  er  þeir  fóru  á  brott,'  and  was  there  '  that '  when  they  went  away.  It  is  not
clear  to  w'hat  the  '  þann '  refers.


THE    SAGA    OF  ERIC  THE  RED.


51


father's  Uvægi  ^  They  said,  that  kings  governed  the  Skrellings  ^,  one  of  whom  was
called  Avalldamon  ^,  and  the  other  Valldidida  (57).  They  stated,  that  there  were  no
houses  there,  and  that  the  people  lived  in  caves  or  holes.  They  said,  that  there  was
a  land  on  the  other  side  over  against  their  country,  which  was  inhabited  by  people
who  wore  white  garments,  and  yelled  loudty,  and  carried  poles  before  them,  to  which
rags  were  attached*;  and  people  beheve  that  this  must  have  been  Hvitramanna-land
[White-men's-land '^],  or  Ireland  the  Great  (58).  Now  they  arrived  in  Greenland,  and
remained  during  the  winter  with  Eric  the  Red  ^.

Biarni,  Grimolfs  son,  and  his  companions  were  driven  out  into  the  Atlantic'',
and  came  into  a  sea,  which  was  filled  with  worms,  and  their  ship  began  to  sink
beneath  them^  They  had  a  boat^  which  had  been  coated  with  seal-tar;  this
the  sea-worm  does  not  penetrate.  They  took  their  places  in  this  boat,  and  then
discovered  that  it  would  not  hold  them  all ".  Then  said  Biarni :  '  Since  the
boat  will  not  hold  more  than  half  of  our  men,  it  is  my  advice,  that  the  men
who  are  to  go  in  the  boat,  be  chosen  by  lot,  for  this  selection  must  not  be  made
according  to  rank.'  This  seemed  to  them  all  such  a  manly  offer,  that  no  one  opposed
it  ^'.  So  they  adopted  this  plan,  the  men  casting  lots ;  and  it  fell  to  Biarni  to  go  in  the
boat,  and  half^-  of  the  men  with  him,  for  it  would  not  hold  more".  But  when  the
men  were  come  into  the  boat,  an  Icelander^*,  who  was  in  the  ship,  and  who  had
accompanied  Biarni  from  Iceland,  said:  'Dost  thou  intend,  Biarni,  to  forsake  me
here?'     'It  must  be  even   so,'  answers  Biarni.     'Not  such  was  the  promise  thou

'  EsR :  '  they  called  their  mother  Vætilldi  and  Uvægi,'  apparently  a  clerical  error.

2  EsR  :  'the  land  of  the  Skrellings.'  «  ÞsK  :  '  Avalldama  '  [?]

■*  EsR  :  '  and  they  yelled  loudly,  and  carried  poles,  and  went  with  rags.'

^  EsR  simply,  '  men  believe  that  White-men's-land.'

^  In  ÞsK  this  sentence  is  lacking.

'  ÞsK :  Irlands  haf,  lit.  Ireland's  sea.  EsR  :  Grœnlands  haf,  lit.  Greenland's  sea,  the  term  used  of
the  sea  between  Iceland  and  Greenland.

*  EsR :  '  they  did  not  discover  this,  before  the  ship  was  all  worm-eaten  beneath  them.  Thereupon
they  debated  what  they  should  do.'

^  EsR  :  '  an  after-boat,'  a  jolly-boat  usually  towed  '  after '  the  ship,  whence  the  name.

"  EsR :  '  people  say,  that  the  shell-worm  does  not  bore  in  wood,  which  has  been  coated  with  seal-
tar.  It  was  the  advice  and  decision  of  most  of  the  men,  to  transfer  to  the  boat  as  many  as  it  would
contain.     But  when  this  was  tried,  the  boat  would  not  hold  more  than  half  the  men.'

"  EsR  :  '  Biarni  said  then,  that  men  should  go  in  the  boat,  and  that  this  should  be  determined
by  casting  lots,  and  not  by  rank.  For  all  of  the  men  who  were  there  wished  to  go  in  the  boat;
it  would  not  carry  all,  wherefore  they  adopted  this  plan,  to  choose  men  by  lot  for  the  boat,  and  from  the
ship.'  '^  EsR  :  '  nearly  half.'

"  EsR :  '  Then  they,  who  had  been  chosen,  left  the  ship  and  entered  the  boat.'

"  EsR  :  '  a  young  Icelander.'

H  2


52  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

gavest  my  father,'  he  answers,  '  when  I  left  Iceland  with  thee,  that  thou  wouldst  thus
part  with  me,  when  thou  saidst,  that  we  should  both  share  the  same  fate.'  '  So  be  it,
it  shall  not  rest  thus,'  answers  Biarni ;  '  do  thou  come  hither,  and  I  will  go  to  the  ship,
for  I  see  that  thou  art  eager  for  hfe  \'  Biarni  thereupon  boarded  the  ship,  and  this
man  entered  the  boat,  and  they  went  their  way,  until  they  came  to  Dublin  in  Ireland,
and  there  the}^  told  this  tale ;  now  it  is  the  belief  of  most  people,  that  Biarni  and  his
companions  perished  in  the  maggot-sea,  for  they  were  never  heard  of  afterward  ^.

Karlsefxi  and  his  Wife  Thurid's  Issue.

The  following  summer  Karlsefni  sailed  to  Iceland  and  Gudrid^  with  him,  and  he
went  home*  to  Reyniness  (59).  His  mother  believed  that  he  had  made  a  poor  match,
and  she^  was  not  at  home  the  first  winter.  However,  when  she  became  convinced
that  Gudrid  was  a  very  superior  woman,  she  returned  to  her  home,  and  they  lived
happily  together.  Hallfrid  was  a  daughter  of  Snorri,  Karlsefni's  son,  she  was  the
mother  of  Bishop  Thorlak,  Runolfs  son  (60).  They  had  a  son  named  Thorbiorn,  whose
daughter's  name  was  Thorunn,  [she  was]  Bishop  Biorn's  mother.  Thorgeir  was  the
name  of  a  son  of  Snorri,  Karlsefni's  son,  [he  was]  the  father  of  Ing\'eld,  mother  of
Bishop  Brand  the  Elder".  Steinunn  was  a  daughter  of  Snorri,  Karlsefni's  son,  who
married  Einar,  a  son  of  Grundar-Ketil,  a  son  of  Thoi-vald  Crook",  a  son  of  Thori  of
Espihol.  Their  son  was  Thorstein  the  Unjust^,  he  was  the  father  of  Gudrun,  who
married  Jorund  of  Keldur.  Their  daughter  was  Halla,  the  mother  of  Flosi,  the  father
of  Valgerd,  the  mother  of  Herra  Erlend  the  Stout'',  the  father  of  Herra  Hauk  the
Lawman.  Another  daughter  of  Flosi  was  Thordis,  the  mother  of  Fru  Ingigerd  the
Mighty  1°.  Her  daughter  was  Fru  Hallbera,  Abbess  of  Reyniness  at  Stad  (59).  Many
other  great  people  in  Iceland  are  descended  from  Karlsefni  and  Thurid,  who  are  not
mentioned  here.     God  be  with  us,  Amen !

'  EsR  :  '  "  Such  was  not  thy  promise  to  me,"  says  he,  "  when  I  set  out  from  Iceland  with  thee,  from
my  father's  home."  Biarni  says  :  "  I  see  no  other  course  left  here,  however ;  but "  [answers]  "  what
suggestion  hast  thou  to  offer?"  He  says  :  "  I  have  to  suggest,  that  we  change  places,  do  thou  come
hither,  and  I  will  go  thither."  Biarni  answers  :  "  So  be  it.  I  see,  indeed,  that  thou  clingest  eagerly  to
life,  and  holdest  it  hard  to  die."     So  they  changed  places.'

'  EsR :  '  And  men  say,  that  Biarni  perished  there  in  the  maggot-sea,  together  with  those  men,  who
were  there  with  him  in  the  ship.  But  the  boat,  and  they  who  were  in  it,  went  their  way,  until  they
reached  land,  and  afterwards  told  this  tale.'

'  EsR  :  '  Snorri.'  *  EsR  :  '  to  his  home.'  ^  PsK  :  '  Gudrid.'

"  '  hinn  fyrri.'     EsR :  '  and  there  this  saga  ends.'  '  krókr.

'  ranglátr.  »  sterki.  '"  ríka.


CHAPTER   III.

The  Wineland   History  of  the   Flatey   Book.

The  Flatey  Book  [Flateyjarbók]  is  the  most  extensive  and  most  perfect  of
Icelandic  manuscripts.  It  is  in  itself  a  comprehensive  historical  library  of  the  era
with  which  it  deals,  and  so  considerable  are  its  contents,  that  they  fill  upwards
of  1700  large  octavo  pages  of  printed  text^.  On  the  title-page  of  the  manuscript^
we  are  informed,  that  it  belonged  originally  to  John  Haconsson  [Jon  Hákonarson],
for  whom  it  was  written  by  the  priests  John  Thordsson  [Jon  Þóri^arson]  and  Magnus
Thorhallsson  [Magnus  Þórhallsson].  We  have  no  information  concerning  the  date
when  the  book  was  commenced  by  John  Thordsson;  but  the  most  important  portion
of  the  work  appears  to  have  been  completed  in  the  year  1387  ^,  although  additions
were  made  to  the  body  of  the  work  by  one  of  the  original  scribes  *,  and  the  annals,
appended  to  the  book,  brought  down  to  the  year  1394.  Toward  the  close  of  the
fifteenth  century,  the  then  owner  of  the  book,  whose  name  is  unknown,  inserted  three
quaternions  of  additional  historical  matter  in  the  manuscript  ^,  to  fill  a  hiatus  in  the
historical  sequence  of  the  work,  not,  however,  in  that  part  of  the  manuscript  which
treats  of  Wineland.

It  has  been  conjectured  that  the  manuscript  was  written  in  the  north  of  Iceland",

'  '  Five  pages  or  ten  columns  of  it  fill  twenty-eight  printed  pages.'  Vigfusson,  Preface  to  the
Rolls  Ed.  'Icelandic  Sagas,'  London,  1887,  vol.  i.  p.  xxvii.

^  '  The  only  title-page  found  in  any  Icelandic  MS.'     Ibid.  p.  xxv.

'  Cf.  Storm,  Islandske  Annaler,  Christiania,  1888,  pp.  xxxiv-xxxvi.  This  view,  however,  conflicts
with  the  opinion  held  by  others  that  this  date  should  be  1380.  Cf.  Flateyjarbók,  ed.  Vigfusson  and
Unger,  Christiania,  1860-68,  vol.  iii,  Fortale,  i-iii ;  Finnur  Jónsson,  Eddalieder,  Halle,  o.  S.,  1888,
i.  p.  viii.  ^  Magnus  Thorhallsson.

^  Cf.  Preface,  Icelandic  Sagas,  ubi  sup.  vol.  i.  p.  xxx.

"  '  Annales  non  in  occidentali  Islandia,  sed  potius  aut  Vididalstungae  aut  in  monasterio  Thingey-
rensi  [qui  uterque  locus  in  septentrionali  Islandia  situs  est]  scripti  esse  videntur.'  Islenzkir  Annálar,
Copenh.  1847,  p.  xv.  This  opinion  is  partially  sanctioned  by  Storm,  who  suggests  that  Magnus'
predecessor  probably  had  his  home  in  the  north  of  Iceland.  Cf.  Storm,  Islandske  Annaler,  Christiania,
1888,  p.  xxxiv.


54  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

but,  according  to  the  editors  of  the  printed  text,  the  facts  are  that  the  manuscript  was
owned  in  the  west  of  Iceland  as  far  back  as  we  possess  any  knowledge  of  it,  and
there  is  no  positive  evidence  where  it  was  written  \  We  have,  indeed,  no  further
particulars  concerning  the  manuscript  before  the  seventeenth  century,  when  we  find
that  it  was  in  the  possession  of  John  Finsson  [J on  Finsson],  who  dwelt  in  Flatey  in
Breidafirth  [Brei^afjörSr],  as  had  his  father,  and  his  father's  father  before  him.  That
the  book  had  been  a  family  heirloom  is  evident  from  an  entry  made  in  the  manuscript
by  this  same  John  Finsson  :

'This  book  I,  John  Finsson,  own;  the  gift  of  my  deceased  father's  father,  John
Biarnsson','  &c.

From  John  Finsson  the  book  descended  to  his  nephew,  John  Torfason  ^  from
whom  that  worthy  bibliophile.  Bishop  Bryniolf  of  Skálholt,  sought,  in  vain,  to
purchase  it,  as  is  related  in  an  anecdote  in  the  bishop's  biography:

'  Farmer  John  of  Flate}',  son  of  the  Rev.  Torfi  Finsson,  owned  a  large  and  massive
parchment-book  in  ancient  monachal  writing,  containing  sagas  of  the  Kings  of  Norway,  and
many  others ;  and  it  is,  therefore,  commonly  called  Flatey  Book  *.  This,  Bishop  Bryniolf
endeavoured  to  purchase,  first  for  money,  and  then  for  five  hundreds  of  land.  But  he,  never-
theless, failed  to  obtain  it ;  however,  when  John  bore  him  company,  as  he  was  leaving  the
island,  he  presented  him  the  book;  and  it  is  said,  that  the  Bishop  rewarded  him  liberally
for  it  ^'

The  Flatey  Book  was  among  a  collection  of  vellum  manuscripts  intrusted  to  the
care  of  Thormod  Torfæus,  in  1662,  as  a  present  from  Bishop  Br3'niolf  to  King
Frederick  the  Third  of  Denmark,  and  thus  luckily  escaped  the  fate  of  others  of
the  bishop's  literary  treasures.  In  the  Roj-al  Library  of  Copenhagen  it  has  ever
since  remained,  where  it  is  known  as  No.  1005,  fol.  of  the  Old  Roj-al  Collection.

Interpolated  in  the  Saga  of  Olaf  Tryggvason  in  the  Flatey  Book  are  two  minor
historical  narratives.  The  first  of  these,  in  the  order  in  which  they  appear  in  the
manuscript,  is  called,  a  Short  Story  of  Eric  the  Red  [Þáttr  Eireks  Rau>a],  the  second,
a  Short  Story  of  the  Greenlanders  [Grœnlendinga  íÞáttr].  Although  these  short
histories  are  not  connected  in  any  way  in  the  manuscript,  being  indeed  separated
by  over  fifty  columns  of  extraneous  historical  matter,  they  form,  if  brought  together,

'  Cf.  Flateyjarbók,  Fortale,  ubi  sup.  p.  vi.  John  Ilaconsson  appears  to  have  lived  at  one  time  in
the  north  of  Iceland  at  Víðidalstunga  (cf.  Safn  til  sögu  Islands,  Copenh.  1861,  vol.  ii.  p.  77),  which  in
some  measure  may  tend  to  confirm  the  view  that  the  book  originated  in  the  north  of  Iceland.

'  Ibid.  p.  iii.

'  Cf.  VigfusBon,  Icelandic  Sagas,  ubi  sup.  vol.  i.  p.  xxx.

*  That  is  from  Flatey  [Flat  Island],  the  home  of  the  owners  of  the  book.

»  Cf.  Vigfusson,  'Prolegomena'  in  Siuriunga  Saga,  Oxford,  1878,  vol.  i.  p.  cxliii,  note  i.


THE    WIN  ELAND  HISTORY  OF  THE  FLATEY  BOOK.  55

what  may  be  called,  the  Flatey  Book  version  of  the  history  of  the  Wineland  discovery,
— a  version  which  varies  materially  from  the  accounts  of  the  discovery,  as  they  have
been  preserved  elsewhere.  Before  considering  these  points  of  difference,  it  may  be
stated  that,  as  we  have  no  certain  knowledge  where  the  Flatey  Book  was  written,
neither  have  we  any  definite  information  concerning  the  original  material  from  which
the  transcripts  of  these  two  narratives  were  made.  The  original  manuscripts  of  these
narratives  would  appear  to  have  shared  a  common  fate  with  the  other  originals  from  which
the  scribes  of  the  Flatey  Book  compiled  their  work ; — all  of  this  vast  congeries  of  early
manuscripts  has  entirely  disappeared.  This  is  the  conclusion  reached  by  that  eminent
authority,  the  late  Dr.  Vigfusson  \  whose  profound  knowledge  of  the  written  literature
of  the  North  was  supplemented  in  the  present  instance  by  that  close  acquaintance
which  he  had  gained  with  the  Flatey  Book,  by  reason  of  his  having  transcribed
the  entire  manuscript  for  publication  ^.

This  total  disappearance  of  all  trace  of  the  archetypes  of  the  Flatey  Book,  although
it  is  by  no  means  the  only  case  of  the  kind  in  the  history  of  Icelandic  paleography^,  is
especially  to  be  deplored  in  connection  with  the  Wineland  narrative,  since  it  leaves  us
without  a  clue,  which  might  aid  us  in  arriving  at  a  solution  of  certain  enigmas  which
this  narrative  presents.

In  the  Flatey  Book  version  of  the  discovery  it  is  stated  that  Biarni  Heriulfsson,
during  a  voyage  from  Iceland  to  Greenland,  having  been  driven  to  the  southward  out
of  his  course,  came  upon  unknown  lands ;  that,  following  upon  this,  and  as  the  direct
result  of  Biarni's  reports  of  his  discoveries,  Leif  Ericsson  was  moved  to  go  in  search
of  the  strange  lands  which  Biarni  had  seen  but  not  explored  ;  that  he  found  these  in
due  course,  '  first  that  land  which  Biarni  had  seen  last,'  and  finally  the  southernmost
land,  to  which,  '  after  its  products,'  he  gave  the  name  of  Wineland.  This  account
differs  entirely  from  the  history  contained  in  the  other  manuscripts  which  deal  with

'  He  says  :  '  Though  I  believe  I  have  had  in  my  hands  every  scrap  of  the  Old  Norse  or  Icelandic
vellum  writing  existing  in  Scandinavia,  I  have  never  been  able  to  identify  a  scrap  of  the  material  they
used,  nay  more,  I  never  remember  having  found  a  line  in  the  well-known  hand  of  either  John  or
Magnus,  though  it  is  not  probable  that  the  Flatey  Book  was  their  first  or  only  work,  so  great  has  been
the  destruction  of  MSS.  Again,  there  would  have  seemed  great  likelihood  of  the  Flatey  Book  being
much  copied ;  it  was  easy  to  read,  and  very  complete  in  its  contents.  Yet,  with  one  exception,  there  is  no
vellum  transcript  of  it,  and  the  great  book  for  some  250  years  apparently  lay  unseen.  The  one  exception  is
AM.  309  fol.,  which  contains  parts  of  Tryggwasson's  Saga,  and  gives  its  date  thus :  "  He  was  then  king
when  the  book  %vas  written,  when  there  had  passed  from  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  1387
years,  but  there  be  now  gone  at  the  time  when  this  book  is  written  1498  years."'  Vigfusson,  Pref.
Icelandic  Sagas,  ubi  sup.  vol.  i.  p.  xxix.

'  Cf.  Corpus  Poeticum  Boreale,  Oxford,  1883,  vol.  i.  p.  xlix.

'  Cf.  e.g.  Corp.  Poet.  Boreale,  ubi  sup.  vol.  i.  p.  xlii.


56  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

this  subject,  all  of  which  agree  in  ascribing  the  discoveiy  to  Leif  Ericsson,  and  unite
in  the  statement  that  he  found  Wineland  accidentally,  during  a  voj^age  from  Norway  to
Greenland,  which  he  had  undertaken  at  the  instance  of  King  Olaf  Trj'ggx-ason,  for
the  purpose  of  introducing  Christianity  to  his  fellow-countrymen  in  Greenland.  Not
only  is  Biarni's  discovery  unknown  to  any  other  Icelandic  writing  now  existing,  but
the  man  himself,  as  well  as  his  daring  voyage,  have  failed  to  find  a  chronicler  else-
where, although  his  father  was  '  a  most  distinguished  man,'  the  grandson  of  a  '  settler,'
and  a  kinsman  of  the  first  Icelandic  colonist.

The  first  portion  of  the  Flatey  Book  version,  the  '  Short  Story  of  Eric  the  Red,'
concludes  with  the  words,  '  Biarni  now  went  to  his  father,  gave  up  his  voyaging,  and
remained  with  his  father  during  Heriulf's  lifetime,  and  continued  to  dwell  there  after
his  father.'  The  second  portion  of  this  version  of  the  Wineland  history,  the  '  Short
Story  of  the  Greenlanders,'  begins  with  the  words,  '  It  is  now  next  to  this,  that  Biarni
Heriulfsson  came  out  from  Greenland  on  a  visit  to  Earl  Eric,'  &c.  As  has  already  been
stated,  the  two  portions  of  the  history  of  the  Wineland  discovery,  as  they  appear  in  the
Flatey  Book,  are  not  in  any  way  connected  with  each  other.  The  first  narrative  oc-
cupies its  appropriate  place  in  the  account  of  the  life  of  King  Olaf  Tryggvason,  as  do
the  other  narratives,  similar  in  character,  which  are  introduced  into  this  as  into  the  other
sagas  in  the  manuscript,  and  there  appears  to  be  no  reason  why  the  second  narrative,
'  A  Short  Story  of  the  Greenlanders,'  should  be  regarded  as  having  received  treatment
different,  in  this  respect,  from  other  interpolated  narratives  of  the  same  class.  If,  there-
fore, we  interpret  the  opening  words  of  this  story  of  the  Greenlanders,  '  It  is  now  next
to  this,'  to  mean  that  the  incident  which  follows  is  related  next  in  chronological  order
after  that  part  of  the  saga  which  has  immediately  preceded  it,  it  becomes  apparent  that
Biarni's  visit  must  have  taken  place  after  the  battle  of  Svoldr,  in  which  King  Olaf
Trygg\'ason  fell,  and  Earl  Eric  was  victorious  ^.  This  battle  took  place  on  the  gth
of  September,  in  the  j-ear  looo.  As  it  is  not  probable  that  Biarni  would  have
undertaken  his  voyage  to  Norway  before  the  summer  following,  the  earliest  date
which  could  reasonably  be  assigned  for  Biarni's  sojourn  at  the  Earl's  court  would
appear  to  be  the  winter  of  the  years  1001-1002  ^.  We  are  told  in  the  same  place
that  Biarni  returned  to  Greenland   the   following  summer,  and  that  subsequent  to

'  Schöning,  who  adopted  the  narrative  of  the  Flatey  Book  in  his  edition  of  Heimskringla,  assigns
the  date  of  Biarni's  visit  to  the  Earl  to  the  year  988  or  989.  With  him,  in  this  view,  the  editors  of
Grönlands  historiske  Mindesmærker  seem  inclined  to  agree,  but  the  Flatey  Book  itself  does  not  appear
to  furnish  any  support  for  this  conjecture.  Cf.  Grönlands  historiske  Rlindcsmærker,  Copenh.  1838,
vol.  i.  pp.  266-7.

'  Amgrimr  Jónsson,  in  his  Gronlandia,  the  earliest  account  of  the  Wineland  discovery  printed  in
Iceland,  gives  as  the  date  of  Biarni's  voyage  the  year  1002.     Cf  Gronlandia,  Skálholt,  1688,  ch.  i.\.


THE    W IRELAND  HISTORY  OF  THE  PLATE Y  BOOK.  57

his  return  Leif  purchased  his  ship,  and  went  in  search  of  the  land  which  Biarni  had
seen,  but  had  failed  to  explore,  in  the  year  985,  according  to  the  chronology  of  the
'  Short  Story.'

Leif 's  voyage  of  exploration,  as  described  in  the  Flatey  Book,  could,  therefore,
scarcely  have  taken  place  before  the  year  1002  ^  But,  according  to  the  other  historical
data  already  cited,  Leif  discovered  Wineland  during  a  voyage  to  Greenland,  under-
taken at  the  request,  and  during  the  lifetime,  of  King  Olaf  Tryggvason,  hence
obviously  not  later  than  the  year  1000.  The  Flatey  Book  refers  to  this  voyage  in  the
following  words  :  '  That  same  summer  he  [King  Olaf  Tryggvason]  sent  Gizur  and
Hialti  to  Iceland,  as  has  already  been  written.  At  that  time  King  Olaf  sent  Leif  to
Greenland  to  preach  Christianity  there.  The  King  sent  with  him  a  priest  and  certain
other  holy  men  to  baptize  the  folk,  and  teach  them  the  true  faith.  Leif  went  to  Green-
land that  summer  and  took  [on  board  his  vessel]  a  ship's-crew  of  men,  who  were  at
the  time  in  great  peril  upon  a  wreck.  He  arrived  in  Greenland  late  in  the  summer,
and  went  home  to  his  father,  Eric,  at  Brattahlid.  The  people  afterwards  called
him  Leif  the  Lucky,  but  his  father,  Eric,  said  that  Leif's  having  rescued  the
crew  and  restored  the  men  to  life,  might  be  balanced  against  the  fact  that  he
had  brought  the  impostor  to  Greenland,  so  he  called  the  priest.  Nevertheless,
through  Leif's  advice  and  persuasion,  Eric  was  baptized,  and  all  of  the  people  of
Greenland  -.'

It  will  be  observ^ed,  that,  in  this  record  of  Leif's  missionary  voyage,  no  allusion
is  made  to  the  discovery  of  Wineland,  as  in  the  other  accounts  of  the  same  voyage,
with  which,  in  other  respects,  this  passage  agrees.  By  this  variation  a  conflict  with
Biarni's  claim  to  the  priority  of  discovery,  previously  promulgated  in  the  '  Short  Story
of  Eric  the  Red,'  is  avoided.  A  portion  of  this  passage  may  not,  however,  be  so
happily  reconciled.  It  is  said  that,  through  Leif's  advice  and  persuasion,  Eric  the
Red  was  baptized,  while  we  find  in  the  '  Short  Story  of  the  Greenlanders,'  the  state-
ment, that  '  Eric  the  Red  died  before  Christianity.'  Moreover  we  have,  in  the  '  Short
Story  of  the  Greenlanders,'  in  addition  to  this  direct  conflict  of  statement,  an  apparent
repetition  of  the  incident  of  the  rescue  of  the  shipwrecked  mariners,  when  we  are
told  that  Leif  effected  a  rescue  of  castaways  on  his  return  from  a  voyage  of  exploration
to  Wineland,  and  was  therefore  called  Leif  the  Lucky.  If  this  be  not  a  repetition  of
the  same  incident,  then  we  must  conclude  that  Leif  upon  two  different  voyages  saved

'  Munch,  the  eminent  Norwegian  historian,  says  looi.  Concerning  this  date  there  may  well  be  a
diflference  of  opinion,  but  Munch,  while  accepting  the  Flatey  Book's  account  of  Biarni's  discovery,  fixes
the  date  of  it  in  the  year  1000,  a  date  which  does  not  at  all  agree  with  the  chronology  afforded  by
the  narrative  itself.     Cf.  Munch,  Det  norske  Folks  Historic,  Christiania,  1853,  Part  i.  vol.  ii.  p.  461.

2  Flateyjarbók,  Christiania,  i860,  vol.  i.  p.  448.

I


58  THE  FINDING   OF  WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

the  lives  of  a  crew  of  ship-wrecked  mariners,  for  which  he  twice  received  the  same
title  from  the  same  people  !  In  the  description  of  the  rescue,  contained  in  the  '  Short
Story  of  the  Greenlanders,'  we  read  that  the  leader  of  the  castaways  was  one  Thori
Easterling  [Þórir  austmaSr],  whose  wife,  Gudrid,  Thorbiorn's  daughter  [GuSríír
Þorbjarnardóttir],  seems  to  have  been  among  the  rescued.  This  Thori  is  mentioned
nowhere  save  in  the  Flatey  Book.  His  wife  was  so  famous  a  personage  in  Icelandic
annals  that  it  seems  passing  strange  this  spouse  should  have  been  so  completely
ignored  by  other  Icelandic  chronicles,  which  have  not  failed  to  record  Gudrid's
marriage  to  Thorstein  Ericsson,  and  subsequently  to  Thorfinn  Karlsefni.  Indeed,
according  to  the  biography  of  this  '  most  noble  lady,'  as  written  in  the  Saga  of  Eric
the  Red,  there  is  no  place  for  Thori,  for  Gudrid  is  said  to  have  come  to  Greenland
in  much  less  romantic  fashion,  namely,  as  an  unmarried  woman,  in  the  same  ship
with,  and  under  the  protection  of  her  father,  Thorbiorn.

Another  chronological  error  occurs  in  that  paragraph  of  the  '  Short  Storj'  of
Eric  the  Red,'  wherein  it  is  stated  that,  'after  sixteen  winters  had  lapsed  from  the
time  when  Eric  the  Red  went  to  colonize  Greenland,  Leif,  Eric's  son,  sailed  out  from
Greenland  to  Nonvay.  He  arrived  in  Drontheim  in  the  autumn  when  King  Olaf
Tryggvason  was  come  down  from  the  North  out  of  Halogaland.'  It  has  previously
been  stated  in  this  same  chronicle  that  Eric  set  out  to  colonize  Greenland  fifteen  years
before  Christianity  was  legally  adopted  in  Iceland,  that  is  to  say  in  the  year  985.
Whence  it  follows,  from  this  chronology,  that  Leif's  voyage  must  have  been  under-
taken in  the  year  looi,  but  since  Olaf  Tryggvason  was  killed  in  the  autumn  of  the
year  1000,  this  is,  from  the  context,  manifestly  impossible.  If  we  may  suppose  that  the
scribe  of  the  Flatey  Book,  by  a  careless  verbal  substitution,  wrote  '  for  at  byggja'  [went
to  colonize],  instead  of  'for  at  leita'  [went  in  search  of],  the  chronology  of  the  narrative
becomes  reconcilable.

In  the  '  Short  Story  of  the  Greenlanders '  inaccuracies  of  lesser  import  occur,  one
of  which,  at  least,  appears  to  owe  its  origin  to  a  clerical  blunder.  In  the  narrative  of
Freydis'  voyage,  we  are  told,  that  she  waited  upon  the  brothers  Helgi  and  Finnbogi,
and  persuaded  them  to  join  her  in  an  expedition  to  Wineland ;  according  to  the  text,
however,  she  enters  into  an  agreement  governing  the  manning  of  their  ships,  not  with
them,  but  with  Karlsefni.  Yet  it  is  obvious,  from  the  context,  that  Karlsefni  did  not
participate  in  the  enterprise,  nor  does  it  appear  that  he  had  any  interest  whatsoever
in  the  undertaking.  The  substitution  of  Karlsefni's  name  for  that  of  Helgi  or
Finnbogi,  by  a  careless  scribe,  may  have  given  rise  to  this  lack  of  sequence.  A
blunder,  which  has  crept  into  the  genealogical  list,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  history,
ma}',  perhaps,  owe  its  origin  to  a  somewhat  similar  cause.  In  this  list,  it  will  be
noted,  Bishop  Thorlak  [i'orlákr]  is  called  the  grandson  of  Hallfrid  [Hallfri&r],  Snorri's


THE    WIN  ELAND  HISTORY  OF  THE  PLATE  Y  BOOK.  59

daughter;  in  the  words  of  the  manuscript,  'Hallfrid  was  the  name  of  the  daughter
of  Snorri,  Karlsefni's  son ;  she  was  the  mother  of  Runolf  [Runólfr],  the  father  of  Brshop
Thorlak.'  Now  Runolf  was,  indeed,  the  father  of  Bishop  Thorlak,  but  he  was  the
husband  and  not  the  son  of  Hallfrid.  If  we  may  suppose  the  heedless  insertion
of  the  word  'mother'  in  the  place  of  'wife,'  the  palpable  error,  as  the  text  now  stands
would  be  removed.  '

It  has  been  conjectured  that  the  Wineland  History  of  the  Flatey  Book  has  been
drawn  from  a  more  primitive  source  than  the  narrative  of  the  discovery  which  has  been
preserved  in  the  two  manuscripts,  Hauk's  Book  and  AM.  557,  ^to\  Two  passages  in  the
Flatey  Book  narrative  lend  a  certain  measure  of  plausibility  to  this  conjecture.    In  the
'Short  Story  of  Eric  the  Red'  it  is  stated,  that  Eric  called  his  land-fall  in  Greenland
Midiokul  [MibJ9kull],  in   the  words  of  the   history;   'this   is  now  called   Blacksark
[Bláserkr].'     In  Hauk's  Book  this  mountain  is  also  called  Blacksark ;  in  AM.  557
4to,  it  is  called  Whitesark  [Hvitserkr];  neither  of  these  manuscripts,  however,  recalls
the  earlier  name.    Again,  in  the  list  of  the  descendants  of  Snorri,  Karlsefni's  Wine-
land-born  son,  appended  to  the  'Short  Stoiy  of  the  Greenlanders,'  Bishop  Brand  is
so  called  without  qualification,  while  in  both  texts  of  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  he  is
referred  to  as  Bishop  Brand  the  Elder  [hin  fyrri].      The  second  Bishop  Brand  ^vas
ordamed  m  12632.    This  fact,  while  it  would,  without  the  other  evidence  which  we
possess,  establish  a  date  prior  to  which  neither  Hauk's  Book  nor  AM.  557,  4to,  could
have  been  written,  seems,  at  the  same  time,  to  afford  negative  evidence  in 'support  of
the  claim  for  the  riper  antiquity  of  the  source  from  which  the  Flatey  Book  narrative
was   drawn.      However  this   may  be,  the   lapses   already  noted,  together  with  the
mtroduction  of  such  incidents  as  that  of  the  apparition  of  the  big-eyed  Gudrid  to
her  namesake,  Karlsefni's  spouse;   the  narrative  of  Freydis'  unpalliated  treachery;
the  account  of  Wineland  grapes  which  produced  intoxication,  and  which  apparently
ripened  at  all  seasons  of  the  year,  of  honey-dew  grass,  and  the  like,  all  seem  to
point  either  to  a  deliberate  or  careless  corruption  of  the  primitive  history.     Never-
theless, despite  the  discrepancies  existing  between  the   account  of  the  Wineland
discovery,  as  it  has  been  presented  in  the  Flatey  Book  and  as  it  is  given  elsewhere,
so  striking  a  parallelism  is  apparent  in  these  different  versions  of  this  history,  in  the
chief  points  of  historical  interest,  as  to  point  conclusively  to  their  common  origin.  Í/

The  two  disjoined  'accounts'  of  the  Flatey  Book,  which  relate  to  the  Wineland
discovery,  are  brought  together  in  the  translation  which  follows.

'  Cf.  IMaurer,  '  Grönland  im  Jlittelalter,'  contained  in  Die  zweite  deutsche  Nordpolarfahrt    Leipsic
1873,  vol.  i.  n.  2,  p.  206.  '  '

■  Cf.  Biskupa  tal  á  fslandi,  in  Safn  til  Sögu  islands,  Copenh.  1856,  vol.  i.  p.  4.


I  2


6o  THE  FINDING  OF  WINELAND  THE  GOOD.


A  Brief  History  of  Eric  the  Red^

There  was  a  man  named  Thorvald,  a  son  of  Osvald,  Ulfs  son,  E3'xna-Thori's  son.
Thorvald  and  Eric  the  Red,  his  son,  left  Jaederen  [in  Norway],  on  account  of
manslaughter,  and  went  to  Iceland.  At  that  time  Iceland  was  extensively  colonized.
They  first  lived  at  Drangar  on  Horn-strands,  and  there  Thorvald  died.  Eric  then
married  Thorhild,  the  daughter  of  Jorund  and  Thorbiorg  the  Ship-chested  -,  who
was  then  married  to  Thorbiorn  of  the  Haukadal  famiI3^  Eric  then  removed  from
the  north,  and  made  his  home  at  Ericsstadir  by  Vatnshorn.  Eric  and  Thorhild's
son  was  called  Leif.

After  the  killing  of  E3-iulf  the  FouP,  and  Duelling-Hrafn,  Eric  was  banished
from  Haukadal,  and  betook  himself  westward  to  Breidafirth,  settling  in  Eyxney
at  Ericsstadir.  He  loaned  his  outer  dais-boards  to  Thorgest,  and  could  not  get
these  again  when  he  demanded  them.  This  gave  rise  to  broils  and  battles  between
himself  and  Thorgest,  as  Eric's  Saga  relates  *.  Eric  was  backed  in  the  dispute
by  StjT  Thorgrimsson,  Ejdulf  of  Svinej',  the  sons  of  Brand  of  Alptafirth  and
Thorbiorn  Vifilsson,  while  the  Thorgesters  were  upheld  by  the  sons  of  Thord
the  Yeller '  and  Thorgeir  of  Hitardal.  Eric  was  declared  an  outlaw  at  Thorsness-
thing.  He  thereupon  equipped  his  ship  for  a  voj'age,  in  Ericsvag,  and  when
he  was  ready  to  sail,  StjT  and  the  others"'  accompanied  him  out  beyond  the
islands.  Eric  told  them,  that  it  was  his  purpose  to  go  in  search  of  that  country
which  Gunnbiorn,  son  of  Ulf  the  Crow',  had  seen,  when  he  was  driven  westward
across  the  main,  at  the  time  when  he  discovered  Gunnbiorns-skerries ;  he  added,
that  he  would  return  to  his  friends,  if  he  should  succeed  in  finding  this  country'.
Eric  sailed  out  from  Snaefellsiokul,  and  found  the  land.  He  gave  the  name  of
Midiokul  to  his  landfall*;  this  is  now  called  Blacksark.  From  thence  he  proceeded
southward  along  the  coast,  in  search  of  habitable  land.  He  passed  the  first  winter
at  Ericsey,  near  the  middle  of  the  Eastern-settlement,  and  the  following  spring  he
went  to  Ericsfirth,  where  he  selected  a  dwelling-place.  In  the  summer  he  visited
the  western  uninhabited  country,  and  assigned  names  to  many  of  the  localities.
The  second  winter  he  remained  at  Holmar  by  Hrafnsgnipa',  and  the  third  summer
he  sailed   northward   to   Snæfell,  and  all  the  way  into  Hrafnsfirth;   then   he  said

■  [Flatey  Book,  column  221.]  ^  knarrarbringa.  ''  saurr.

'  '  sem  segir  Í  sggu  Eircks : '  lit.  as  it  says  in  Eric's  Saga.  '  gellir.

'  '  þeir  Styrr  : '  lit.  they  Styrr.  '  kráka.

"  '  kom  utan  at  því,  þar  sem  hann  kallaði  Miðjgkul : '  lit.  came  out  to  that,  which  he  called  ]\I.
'  The  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  and  Landnáma  have :  '  Hvarfsgnipa.'


THE    WIN  ELAND  HISTORY  OF  THE  FLATEY  BOOK.  6i

he  had  reached  the  head  of  Ericsfirth.  He  then  returned  and  passed  the  third
winter  in  Ericsey  at  the  mouth  of  Ericsfirth.  The  next  summer  he  sailed  to
Iceland,  landing  in  Breidafirth.  He  called  the  country,  which  he  had  discovered,
Greenland,  because,  he  said,  people  would  be  attracted  thither,  if  the  country  had
a  good  name.  Eric  spent  the  winter  in  Iceland,  and  the  following  summer  set
out  to  colonize  the  country.  He  settled  at  Brattahlid  in  Ericsfirth,  and  learned
men  say,  that  in  this  same  summer,  in  which  Eric  set  out  to  settle  Greenland,
thirty-five^  ships  sailed  out  of  Breidafirth  and  Borgarfirth;  fourteen  of  these
arrived  there  safely,  some  were  driven  back  and  some  were  lost.  This  was  fifteen
years  before  Christianity  was  legally  adopted  in  Iceland".  During  the  same
summer  Bishop  Frederick  and  Thorvald  Kodransson  (61)  went  abroad  [from
Iceland].  Of  those  men,  who  accompanied  Eric  to  Greenland,  the  following  took
possession  of  land  there:  Heriulf,  Heriulfsfirth,  he  dwelt  at  Heriulfsness;  Ketil,
Ketilsfirth;  Hrafn,  Hrafnsfirth;  Solvi,  Solvadal ;  Helgi  Thorbrandsson,  Alptafirth ;
Thorbiorn  Gleamer^,  Siglufirth ;  Einar,  Einarsfirth;  Hafgrim,  Hafgrimsfirth  and
Vatnahverfi ;  Arnlaug,  Arnlaugsfirth ;  while  some  went  to  the  Western-settlement.


Leif  the  Lucky  baptized*.

After  that  sixteen  winters  had  lapsed,  from  the  time  when  Eric  the  Red  went
to  colonize  Greenland,  Leif,  Eric's  son,  sailed  out  from  Greenland  to  Norway.
He  arrived  in  Drontheim'  in  the  autumn,  when  King  Olaf  Tryggvason  was
come  down  from  the  north,  out  of  Halagoland.  Leif  put  in  to  Nidaros  with  his
ship,  and  set  out  at  once  to  visit  the  king.  King  Olaf  expounded  the  faith  to
him,  as  he  did  to  other  heathen  men  who  came  to  visit  him.  It  proved  easy  for
the  king  to  persuade  Leif,  and  he  was  accordingly  baptized,  together  with  all  of
his  shipmates.  Leif  remained  throughout  the  winter  with  the  king,  by  whom  he
was  well  entertained.


BlARNI   GOES   IN   QUEST  OF"   GREENLAND.

Heriulf  (62)  was  a  son  of  Bard  Heriulfsson.     He  was   a  kinsman   of  Ingolf,
the  first  colonist.     Ingolf  allotted  land  to   Heriulf  between  Vág  and  Reykianess,

'  '  hálfr  Ijórði  t0gr  : '  lit.  half  of  the  fourth  ten,  i.  e.  three  decades  and  a  half:  the  ancient  Icelandic
method  of  numeration.                                        -  Hence,  a.  d.  985.  ^  glóra.

*  '  var  skírðr : '  ht.  was  baptized.  "^  Þrándheimr,  Throndhjem.  °  Lit.  sought.

'  '  þeim  Herjúlfi  : '  lit.  to  them  Heriulf,  i.  e.  to  Heriulf  and  his  people.


62  THE  FIXDIXG   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

and  he  dwelt  at  first  at  Drepstokk.  Heriulf's  wife's  name  was  Thorgerd,  and
their  son,  whose  name  was  Biarni,  was  a  most  promising  man.  He  formed  an
inclination  for  voyaging  ^  while  he  was  still  young,  and  he  prospered  both  in
property  and  public  esteem.  It  was  his  custom  to  pass  his  winters  alternately
abroad  and  with  his  father.  Biarni  soon  became  the  owner  of  a  trading-ship,  and
during  the  last  winter  that  he  spent  in  Norway,  [his  father],  Heriulf  determined  to
accompany  Eric  on  his  voyage  to  Greenland,  and  made  his  preparations  to  give  up
his  farm  2.  Upon  the  ship  with  Heriulf  was  a  Christian  man  from  the  Hebrides  ^
he  it  was  who  composed  the  Sea-Rollers'  Song (63),  which  contains  this  stave:

Mine  adventure  to  the  Meek  One,

Monk-heart-searcher*,  I  commit  now^;
He,  who  heaven's  halls  doth  govern",

Hold  the  hawk's-seat '  ever  o'er  me!

Heriulf  settled  at  Heriulfsness,  and  was  a  most  distinguished  man.  Eric  the  Red
dwelt  at  BrattahUd,  where  he  was  held  in  the  highest  esteem,  and  all  men  paid  him
homage «.  These  were  Eric's  children :  Leif,  Thor\'ald,  and  Thorstein,  and  a  daughter
whose  name  was  Freydis  ;  she  was  wedded  to  a  man  named  Thorvard,  and  they  dwelt
at  Gardar,  where  the  episcopal  seat  now  is.  She  was  a  very  haughty  woman,
while  Thorvard  was  a  man  of  little  force  of  character,  and  Freydis  had  been  wedded
to  him  chiefly  because  of  his  wealth  ^  At  that  time  the  people  of  Greenland  were
heathen.

Biarni  arrived  with  his  ship  at  EjTar  [in  Iceland]  in  the  summer  of  the  same  5'ear,

*  '  fýstisk  utan : '  lit.  hankered  to  go  abroad.
"  '  bra  búi  sínu,'  broke  up  his  home.

'  '  Suðreyskr  maðr,'  a  Sodor  man,  a  man  from  the  Suðreyjar,  or  Southern  Islands,  as  the  Hebrides
were  called.

*  '  meinalausan  múnka  reyni : '  lit.  the  faultless  monk  prover ;  meina-Iauss,  faultless ;  mtinka  reynir,
lit.  prover  of  monks,  or  searcher  of  monks ;  the  faultless  or  innocent  searcher  of  monks,  a  poetical
epithet  for  Christ.

"  Arranged  in  prose  order,  the  passage  would  read :  I  bid  the  faultless  monk-prover  forward  my
travels.

«  '  dróttinn  foldar  hattar  hallar : '  lit.  the  lord  of  the  halls  of  the  earth's  hood ;  foldar  hgttr,  earth's
hat,  or  hood,  i.e.  the  sky;  hallar  foldar  hattar,  the  halls  of  the  sky,  i.e.  the  heavens;  dróttinn  foldar
hattar  hallar,  the  lord  of  the  heavens,  i.  e.  Christ.

'  '  heiðis  stallr,'  the  seat  of  the  hawk,  i.  e.  the  hand.  Haldi  heiðis  stalli  yfir  mdr,  hold  the  hand  above
me,  i.  e.  protect  me.

"  '  lutu  allir  til  hans,'  all  bowed  down  [louted]  to  him.

'  '  var  hon  mJQk  gcfm  til  fjár : '  lit.  she  was  chiefly  given  for  money.


THE    WINELAND  HISTORY  OF  THE  PLATE Y  BOOK.  63

in  the  spring  of  wiiicli  his  father  had  sailed  away.     Biarni  was  much  surprised  when
he  heard  this  news  \  and  would  not  discharge  his  cargo.     His  shipmates  enquired  of
him  what  he  intended  to  do,  and  he  replied  that  it  was  his  purpose  to  keep  to  his
custom,  and  make  his  home  for  the  winter  with  his  father  ^;  'and  I  will  take  the  ship
to  Greenland,  if  you  will  bear  me  company.'    They  all  rephed  that  they  would  abide
by  his  decision.    Then   said   Biarni,  '  Our  voyage  must   be  regarded  as  foolhardy,
seeing  that  no  one  of  us  has  ever  been  in  the  Greenland  Sea  3.'    Nevertheless  they
put  out  to  sea  when  they  were  equipped  for  the  voyage,  and  sailed  for  three  days,
until  the  land  was  hidden  by  the  water,  and  then  the  fair  wind  died  out,  and  north
winds  arose,  and  fogs,  and  they  knew  not  whither  they  were  drifting,  and  thus  it
lasted  for  many  '  dœgr.'     Then  they  saw  the  sun  again,  and  were  able  to  determine  the
quarters  of  the  heavens  ^ ;  they  hoisted  sail,  and  sailed  that  'dcegr'  through  before  they
saw  land.     They  discussed  among  themselves  what  land  it  could  be,  and  Biarni  said
that  he  did  not  believe  that  it  could  be  Greenland.    They  asked  whether  he  wished  to
sail  to  this  land  or  not.     '  It  is  my  counsel '  [said  he],  '  to  sail  close  to  the  land.'    They
did  so,  and  soon  saw  that  the  land  was  level,  and  covered  with  woods  \  and  that  there
were  small  hillocks  upon  it.    They  left  the  land  on  their  larboard,  and  let  the  sheet
turn  toward  the  land.    They  sailed  for  two  'dœgr'  before  they  saw  another  land.
They  asked  whether  Biarni  thought  this  was  Greenland  yet.     He  replied  that  he  did
not  think  this  any  more  hke  Greenland  than  the  former,  '  because  in  Greenland  there
are  said  to  be  many  great  ice-mountains.'    They  soon  approached  this  land,  and  saw
that  it  was  a  flat  and  wooded  country.    The  fair  wind  failed  them  then,  and  the  crew
took  counsel  together,  and  concluded  that  it  would  be  wise  to  land  there,  but  Biarni
would  not  consent  to  this.    They  alleged  that  they  were  in  need  of  both  wood  and
water.     '  Ye  have  no  lack  of  either  of  these,'  says  Biarni— a  course,  forsooth,  which
won  him  blame  among  his  shipmates.     He  bade  them  hoist   sail,  which  they  did,
and  turning  the  prow  from  the  land  they  sailed  out  upon  the  high  seas,  with  south-
westerly gales,  for  three  '  dœgr,'  when  they  saw  the  third  land  ;  this  land  was  high  and
mountainous,  with  ice-mountains  upon  it  (64).    They  asked  Biarni  then  whether  he
would  land  there,  and  he  replied  that  he  was  not  disposed  to  do  so,  '  because  this  land
does  not  appear  to  me  to  offer  any  attractions  <=.'     Nor  did  they  lower  their  sail,  but
held  their  course  off  the  land,  and  saw  that  it  was  an  island.    They  left  this  land

'  þau  tíðindi  þóttu  Bjarna  mikil : '  lit.  these  tidings  seemed  great  to  Biarni.
"  '  þiggja  at  fgður  sínum  vetr-vist : '  lit.  receive  from  his  father  winter-quarters.
^  That  part  of  the  ocean  between  Iceland  and  Greenland  was  so  called.
"  '  deila  ættir,'  to  distinguish  the  airts,  i.  e.  as  we  should  say,  to  tell  the  points  of  the  compass.
^  '  óQgllótt  ok  skógi  vaxit : '  lit.  not  mountainous  and  grown  with  woods.
°  '  ógagnvænligt : '  lit,  unprofitable,  i.  e.  sterile.


64  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

astern  ^,  and  held  out  to  sea  with  the  same  fair  wind.  The  wind  waxed  amain,  and
Biarni  directed  them  to  reef,  and  not  to  sail  at  a  speed  unbefitting  their  ship  and
rigging.  They  sailed  now  for  four  '  dœgr,'  when  they  saw  the  fourth  land.  Again  they
asked  Biarni  whether  he  thought  this  could  be  Greenland  or  not.  Biarni  answers,
'  This  is  likest  Greenland,  according  to  that  which  has  been  reported  to  me  concerning
it,  and  here  we  will  steer  to  the  land.'  They  directed  their  course  thither,  and  landed
in  the  evening,  below  a  cape  upon  which  there  was  a  boat,  and  there,  upon  this  cape,
dwelt  Heriulf  (65),  Biarni's  father,  whence  the  cape  took  its  name,  and  was  afterwards
called  Heriulfsness.  Biarni  now  went  to  his  father,  gave  up  his  voyaging,  and  re-
mained with  his  father  while  Heriulf  lived,  and  continued  to  live  there  after  his
father.

Here  begins  the   Brief   History  of  the  Greenlanders  ".

Next  to  this  is  now  to  be  told  how  Biarni  Heriulfsson  came  out  from  Greenland  on
a  visit  to  Earl  Eric,  by  whom  he  was  well  received.  Biarni  gave  an  account  of  his
travels  [upon  the  occasion]  when  he  saw  the  lands,  and  the  people  thought  that  he  had
been  lacking  in  enterprise  ^,  since  he  had  no  report  to  give  concerning  these  countries,
and  the  fact  brought  him  reproach.  Biarni  was  appointed  one  of  the  Earl's  men,  and
went  out  to  Greenland  the  following  summer.  There  was  now  much  talk  about
V03'ages  of  discovery.  Leif,  the  son  of  Eric  the  Red,  of  Brattahlid,  visited  Biarni
Heriulfsson  and  bought  a  ship  of  him,  and  collected  a  crew,  until  they  formed
altogether  a  company  of  thirty-five  men  *.  Leif  invited  his  father,  Eric,  to  become  the
leader  of  the  expedition,  but  Eric  declined,  saying  that  he  was  then  stricken  in  years,
and  adding  that  he  was  less  able  to  endure  the  exposure  of  sea-life  than  he  had  been.
Leif  replied  that  he  would  nevertheless  be  the  one  who  would  be  most  apt  to
bring  good  luck  ^,  and  Eric  yielded  to  Leif's  solicitation,  and  rode  from  home  when
they  were  ready  to  sail.  When  he  was  but  a  short  distance  from  the  ship,  the  horse
which  Eric  was  riding  stumbled,  and  he  was  thrown  from  his  back  and  wounded  his
foot,  whereupon  he  exclaimed,  '  It  is  not  designed  for  me  to  discover  more  lands
than  the  one  in  which  we  are  now  living,  nor  can  we  now  continue  longer  together.'
Eric  returned   home  to  Brattahlid,  and  Leif  pursued  his  way  to  the  ship  with  his

'  '  settu  cnn  starn  við  því  landit : '  lit.  moreover  they  set  the  '  stafn '  against  that  land.  '  Stafn,'
stem,  is  used  of  both  the  bow  and  stern  of  a  vessel.

'  [Flatey  Book,  column  281.]  '  '  liforvitinn  : '  lit.  incurious.

■•  See  note  i,  p.  61.

^  '  hann  enn  mundi  mestri  heill  st/ra  af  þcim  frændum : '  lit.  he  would,  nevertheless,  win  the  greatest
luck  of  them,  the  kinsmen.


THE    WINE  LAND  HISTORY  OF   THE  PLATE  Y  BOOK.  65

companions,  thirty-five  men ;  one  of  the  company  was  a  German  ^  named  Tyrker.
They  put  the  ship  in  order,  and  when  they  were  ready,  they  sailed  out  to  sea,  and
found  first  that  land  which  Biarni  and  his  ship-mates  ^  found  last.  They  sailed  up  to  the
land  and  cast  anchor,  and  launched  a  boat  and  went  ashore,  and  saw  no  grass  there  •
great  ice  mountains  lay  inland  back  from  the  sea  ^  and  it  was  as  a  [table-land  of]  flat
rock  all  the  way  from  the  sea  to  the  ice  mountains,  and  the  country  seemed  to  them
to  be  entirely  devoid  of  good  qualities.  Then  said  Leif,  '  It  has  not  come  to  pass  with
us  in  regard  to  this  land  as  with  Biarni,  that  we  have  not  gone  upon  it.  To  this
country  I  will  now  give  a  name,  and  call  it  Helluland^ '.  They  returned  to  the  ship,
put  out  to  sea,  and  found  a  second  land.  They  sailed  again  to  the  land,  and  came
to  anchor,  and  launched  the  boat,  and  went  ashore.  This  was  a  level  wooded  land,
and  there  were  broad  stretches  of  white  sand,  where  they  went,  and  the  land  was  level
by  the  sea  =.  Then  said  Leif,  '  This  land  shall  have  a  name  after  its  nature,  and  we
will  call  it  Markland «.'  They  returned  to  the  ship  forthwith,  and  sailed  away  upon  the
mam  with  north-east  winds,  and  were  out  two  'dœgr'  before  they  sighted  land.  They
sailed  toward  this  land,  and  came  to  an  island  which  lay  to  the  northward  off  the
land.  There  they  went  ashore  and  looked  about  them,  the  weather  being  fine,  and  they
observ^ed  that  there  was  dew  upon  the  grass,  and  it  so  happened  that  they  touched  the
dew  with  their  hands,  and  touched  their  hands  to  their  mouths,  and  it  seemed  to  them
that  they  had  never  before  tasted  anything  so  sweet  as  this.  They  went  aboard  their
ship  again  and  sailed  into  a  certain  sound,  which  lay  between  the  island  and  a  cape,
which  jutted  out  from  the  land  on  the  north,  and  they  stood  in  westering  past  the
cape.  At  ebb-tide  there  were  broad  reaches  of  shallow  water  there,  and  they  ran  their
ship  aground  there,  and  it  was  a  long  distance  from  the  ship  to  the  ocean  ^;  yet
were  they  so  anxious  to  go  ashore  that  they  could  not  wait  until  the  tide  should  rise
under  their  ship,  but  .hastened  to  the  land,  where  a  certain  river  flows  out  from  a  lake.
As  soon  as  the  tide  rose  beneath  their  ship,  however,  they  took  the  boat  and  rowed  to
the  ship,  which  they  conveyed  up  the  river,  and  so  into  the  lake,  where  they  cast  anchor
and  carried  their  hammocks  ashore  from  the  ship,  and  built  themselves  booths  there.
They  afterwards  determined  to  establish  themselves  there  for  the  winter,  and  they
accordingly  built  a  large  house.    There  was  no  lack  of  salmon  there  either  in  the

Suðrmaðr : '  lit.  a  Southern  man  ;  a  German  was  so  called  as  contradistinguished  from  Norðmaðr,
a  Northman.  ^    _  .  <  þ^ir  Bjarni : '  lit.  they  Biarni.

'  allt  hit  efra : '  lit.  all  the  upper  part,  i.  e.  away  from  the  shore.
*  Helluland,  the  land  of  flat  stone ;  from  hella,  a  flat  stone.
'  ósæbrattr :   lit.  un-sea-steep,  i.  e.  not  steep  toward  the  sea.
^  Markland,  Forest-land ;  from  mgrlc,  a  forest.

'  '  var  þá  langt  til  sjóvar  at  sjá  frá  skipinu : '  lit.  it  was  far  to  see  from  the  ship  to  the  sea.

K


66  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

river  or  in  the  lake,  and  larger  salmon  than  the}'  had  ever  seen  before.  The  country
thereabouts  seemed  to  be  possessed  of  such  good  quahties  that  cattle  would  need
no  fodder  there  during  the  winters.  There  was  no  frost  there  in  the  winters  ^,
and  the  grass  withered  but  little.  The  days  and  nights  there  were  of  more  nearly
equal  length  than  in  Greenland  or  Iceland.  On  the  shortest  day  of  winter  the  sun
was  up  between  '  e3-ktarstad '  and  '  dagmalastad  (66) '-.'  When  they  had  completed
their  house  Leif  said  to  his  companions,  '  I  propose  now  to  di\ade  our  company  into
two  groups,  and  to  set  about  an  exploration  of  the  country  ;  one  half  of  our  party  shall
remain  at  home  at  the  house,  while  the  other  half  shall  investigate  the  land,  and  they
must  not  go  be3'ond  a  point  from  which  they  can  return  home  the  same  evening,  and
are  not  to  separate  [from  each  other].'  Thus  they  did  for  a  time ;  Leif  himself,  by
turns,  joined  the  exploring  party  or  remained  behind  at  the  house.  Leif  was  a  large
and  powerful  man,  and  of  a  most  imposing  bearing,  a  man  of  sagacity,  and  a  very
just  man  in  all  things.


Leif  the  Lucky  finds  ^  Men  upon  a  Skerry  at  Sea.

It  was  discovered*  one  evening  that  one  of  their  company  was  missing,  and  this
proved  to  be  TjTker,  the  German.  Leif  was  sorely  troubled  by  this,  for  Tyrker  had
lived  with  Leif  and  his  father  ^  for  a  long  time,  and  had  been  very  devoted  to  Leif,
when  he  was  a  child.  Leif  severely  reprimanded  his  companions,  and  prepared  to
go  in  search  of  him,  taking  twelve  men  wdth  him.  They  had  proceeded  but  a  short
distance  from  the  house,  when  they  were  met  by  Tyrker,  whom  they  received  most
cordiall3^  Leif  obser\'ed  at  once  that  his  foster-father  was  in  lively  spirits.  Tyrker
had  a  prominent  forehead,  restless  e3-es,  small  features",  was  diminutive  in  stature,
and  rather  a  sorry-looking  individual  withal,  but  was,  nevertheless,  a  most  capable
handicraftsman.  Leif  addressed  him,  and  asked  :  '  Wherefore  art  thou  so  belated,
foster-father  mine,  and  astray  from  the  others?'  In  the  beginning  TjTker  spoke
for  some  time  in  German,  rolling  his  eyes,  and  grinning,  and  they  could  not
understand  him ;   but  after  a  time  he  addressed  them  in  the  Northern  tongue :  '  I


'  '  þar  kvátnu  engi  frost  á  vetrum,'  no  frost  came  there  in  the  winters.

'  '  sol  hafði  þar  eyktarstað  ok  dagmálastað  um  skamdegi : '  lit.  the  sun  had  there  '  eyktarstad '  and
'  dagmalastad '  on  the  short-day.  '  Lit.  found.

*  '  bar  þat  til  tíðinda  : '  lit.  it  came  to  tidings.
"  '  nicð  jjeim  feðgum : '  lit.  with  them,  the  father  and  son.
'  '  smáskitligr  Í  andliti : '  lit.  very  small  in  face.


THE    WINELAND  HISTORY  OF  THE  FLATEY  BOOK.  67

did  not  go  much  further  \than  yoii],  and  yet  ^  I  have  something  of  novelty  to  relate.
I  have  found  vines  and  grapes.'  '  Is  this  indeed  true,  foster-father?'  said  Leif.  'Of
a  certainty  it  is  true,'  quoth  he,  '  for  I  was  born  where  there  is  no  lack  of  either  grapes
or  vines.'  They  slept  the  night  through,  and  on  the  morrow  Leif  said  to  his  shipmates :
'  We  will  now  divide  our  labours  ^  and  each  day  will  either  gather  grapes  or  cut  vines
and  fell  trees,  so  as  to  obtain  a  cargo  of  these  for  my  ship.'  They  acted  upon  this
advice,  and  it  is  said,  that  their  after-boat  was  filled  with  grapes.  A  cargo  sufficient
for  the  ship  was  cut,  and  when  the  spring  came,  they  made  their  ship  ready,  and
sailed  away ;  and  from  its  products  Leif  gave  the  land  a  name,  and  called  it  Wineland.
They  sailed  out  to  sea,  and  had  fair  winds  until  they  sighted  Greenland,  and  the  fells
below  the  glaciers ;  then  one  of  the  men  spoke  up,  and  said,  '  Why  do  you  steer  the
ship  so  much  into  the  wind  ? '  Leif  answers :  '  I  have  my  mind  upon  my  steering,  but
on  other  matters  as  w^ell.  Do  ye  not  see  anything  out  of  the  common  ^  ? '  They
replied,  that  they  saw  nothing  strange  *.  '  I  do  not  know,'  says  Leif,  '  whether  it  is
a  ship  or  a  skerry  that  I  see.'  Now  they  saw  it,  and  said,  that  it  must  be  a  skerry;  but
he  was  so  much  keener  of  sight  than  they,  that  he  was  able  to  discern  men  upon  the
skerry.  '  I  think  it  best  to  tack,'  says  Leif,  '  so  that  we  may  draw  near  to  them,  that
we  may  be  able  to  render  them  assistance,  if  they  should  stand  in  need  of  it ;  and  if
they  should  not  be  peaceably  disposed,  we  shall  still  have  better  command  of  the
situation  than  they'.'  They  approached  the  skerry,  and  lowering  their  sail,  cast
anchor,  and  launched  a  second  small  boat,  which  they  had  brought  with  them.  Tyrker
inquired  who  was  the  leader  of  the  party.  He  replied  that  his  name  was  Thori,  and
that  he  was  a  Norseman;  'but  what  is  thy  name?'  Leif  gave  his  name.  'Art  thou
a  son  of  Eric  the  Red  of  Brattahlid  ? '  sa3's  he.  Leif  responded  that  he  was.  '  It  is
now  my  wish,'  says  Leif,  '  to  take  you  all  into  my  ship,  and  likewise  so  much  of  your
possessions  as  the  ship  will  hold.'  This  offer  was  accepted,  and  [with  their  ship]  thus
laden,  they  held  away  to  Ericsfirth,  and  sailed  until  they  arrived  at  Brattahlid.
Having  discharged  the  cargo,  Leif  invited  Thori,  with  his  wife,  Gudrid,  and  three
others,  to  make  their  home  with  him,  and  procured  quarters  for  the  other  members
of  the  crew,  both  for  his  ow^n  and  Thori's  men.     Leif  rescued  fifteen  persons  from

^  If  the  word  in  the  MS.  be  'þit'  and  not  '  þó '  [cf.  Icelandic  text,  page  147,  line  59],  the  words
'  and  yet '  should  be  italicised  as  supplied,  and  the  words  now  italicised  in  the  translation  should  then
stand  unbracketed.

°  '  hafa  tvennar  s/slur  fram  : '  lit.  carry  on  two  occupations.

'  '  eðr  hvat  sjái  þér  til  tiðinda  : '  lit.  but  what  do  you  see  of  tidings.

*  '  er  tíðindum  sætti,'  which  amounted  to  tidings.

^  '  þá  eigum  vér  allan  kost  undir  oss,  en  þeir  ekki  undir  ser : '  lit.  we  shall  have  all  the  choice  under  us
[in  our  control],  but  they  not  under  themselves.

K2


68  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE   GOOD.

the  skerry.  He  was  afterward  called  Leif  the  Lucky.  Leif  had  now  goodly  store
both  of  property  and  honour.  There  was  serious  illness  that  winter  in  Thori's  party,
and  Thori  and  a  great  number  of  his  people  died.  Eric  the  Red  also  died  that  winter.
There  was  now  much  talk  about  Leif's  Wineland  journey,  and  his  brother,  Thorvald,
held  that  the  country  had  not  been  sufficiently  explored.  Thereupon  Leif  said  to
Thorvald  :  '  If  it  be  thy  will,  brother,  thou  mayest  go  to  Wineland  with  my  ship,  but
I  wish  the  ship  first  to  fetch  the  wood,  which  Thori  had  upon  the  skerr}^'  And  so  it
was  done.

Thorvald  goes  to  Wineland'.

Now  Thorvald,  with  the  advice  of  his  brother,  Leif,  prepared  to  make  this
voyage  with  thirty  men.  They  put  their  ship  in  order,  and  sailed  out  to  sea;  and
there  is  no  account  of  their  voyage  before  their  arrival  at  Leif's-booths  in  Wineland.
They  laid  up  their  ship  there,  and  remained  there  quietly  during  the  winter,  supplying
themselves  with  food  by  fishing.  In  the  spring,  however,  Thorvald  said  that  they
should  put  their  ship  in  order,  and  that  a  few  men  should  take  the  after-boat,  and
proceed  along  the  western  coast,  and  explore  [the  region]  thereabouts  during  the
summer.  They  found  it  a  fair,  well-wooded  country ;  it  was  but  a  short  distance
from  the  woods  to  the  sea,  and  [there  were]  white  sands,  as  well  as  great  numbers  of
islands  and  shallows.  They  found  neither  dwelling  of  man  nor  lair  of  beast ;  but  in
one  of  the  westerly  islands,  they  found  a  wooden  building  for  the  shelter  of  grain  (67).
They  found  no  other  trace  of  human  handiwork,  and  they  turned  back,  and  arrived  at
Leifs-booths  in  the  autumn.  The  following  summer  Thorvald  set  out  toward  the  east
with  the  ship  ^  and  along  the  northern  coast.  They  were  met  by  a  high  wind  off"  a
certain  promontory,  and  were  driven  ashore  there,  and  damaged  the  keel  of  their  ship,
and  were  compelled  to  remain  there  for  a  long  time  and  repair  the  injury  to  their
vessel.  Then  said  Thor\'ald  to  his  companions :  '  I  propose  that  we  raise  the  keel
upon  this  cape,  and  call  it  Keelness  ^'  and  so  they  did.  Then  they  sailed  away,  to  the
eastward  off  the  land,  and  into  the  mouth  of  the  adjoining  firth,  and  to  a  headland,
which  projected  into  the  sea  there,  and  which  was  entirely  covered  with  woods.  They
found  an  anchorage  for  their  ship,  and  put  out  the  gangway  to  the  land,  and  Thorvald
and  all  of  his  companions  went  ashore.  '  It  is  a  fair  region  here,'  said  he,  '  and  here  I
should  like  to  make  my  home.'  They  then  returned  to  the  ship,  and  discovered  on
the  sands,  in  beyond  the  headland,  three  mounds ;  they  went  up  to  these,  and  saw
that  they  were  three  skin-canoes,  with  three  men  under  each.     They,  thereupon

'  Lit.  Thorvald  went  to  Wineland.  "-  '  kaupskipit : '  lit.  merchant-ship.

'  Kjalarnes,


THE    WIN  ELAND   HISTORY  OF   THE  FLATEY  BOOK.  69

divided  their  party,  and  succeeded  in  seizing  all  of  the  men  but  one,  who  escaped  with
his  canoe.  They  killed  the  eight  men,  and  then  ascended  the  headland  again,  and
looked  about  them,  and  discovered  within  the  firth  certain  hillocks,  which  they  con-
cluded must  be  habitations.  They  were  then  so  overpowered  with  sleep  ^  that  they
could  not  keep  awake,  and  all  fell  into  a  [hea\y]  slumber,  from  which  they  were
awakened  by  the  sound  of  a  cry  uttered  above  them  ^;  and  the  words  of  the  cry  were
these :  '  Awake,  Thorvald,  thou  and  all  thy  company,  if  thou  wouldst  save  thy  life ;
and  board  thy  ship  with  all  thy  men,  and  sail  with  all  speed  from  the  land ! '  A  count-
less number  of  skin-canoes  then  advanced  toward  them  from  the  inner  part  of  the  firth,
whereupon  Thorvald  exclaimed  :  'We  must  put  out  the  war-boards  (68),  on  both  sides
of  the  ship,  and  defend  ourselves  to  the  best  of  our  ability,  but  offer  little  attack.'  This
they  did,  and  the  Skrellings,  after  they  had  shot  at  them  for  a  time,  fled  precipitately,
each  as  best  he  could.  Thorvald  then  inquired  of  his  men,  whether  any  of  them
had  been  wounded,  and  they  informed  him  that  no  one  of  them  had  received  a  wound.
'  I  have  been  wounded  in  my  arm-pit  ^'  says  he ;  '  an  arrow  flew  in  between  the  gunwale
and  the  shield,  below  m}'  arm.  Here  is  the  shaft,  and  it  will  bring  me  to  my  end  * ! '  I
counsel  you  now  to  retrace  your  way  with  the  utmost  speed.  But  me  ye  shall  convey
to  that  headland  which  seemed  to  me  to  offer  so  pleasant  a  dwelling-place ;  thus  it
may  be  fulfilled,  that  the  truth  sprang  to  my  lips,  when  I  expressed  the  wish  to  abide
there  for  a  time  ^.  Ye  shall  bury  me  there,  and  place  a  cross  at  my  head,  and  another
at  my  feet,  and  call  it  Crossness "  for  ever  after.'  At  that  time  Christianity  had  obtained
in  Greenland ;  Eric  the  Red  died,  however,  before  [the  introduction  of]  Christianity.

Thor\'ald  died,  and  when  they  had  carried  out  his  injunctions,  they  took  their
departure,  and  rejoined  their  companions,  and  they  told  each  other  of  the  ex-
periences which  had  befallen  them''.  They  remained  there  during  the  winter,  and
gathered  grapes  and  wood  with  which  to  freight  the  ship.  In  the  following  spring
they  returned  to  Greenland,  and  arrived  with  their  ship  in  Ericsfirth,  where  they
were  able  to  recount  great  tidings  to  Leif.


'  '  sló  á  þá  hgfga  svá  miklum,  at,'  they  were  stricken  with  so  heavy  a  sleep,  that —

^  '  ia  kom  kail  yfir  þá : '  lit.  then  there  came  a  call  over  them.

'  '  undir  hendi : '  lit.  under  the  arm.

♦  '  mun  mik  þetta  til  bana  leiða  : '  lit.  this  must  lead  me  to  my  bane  [death];  i.  e.  this  will  be  the  death
of  me.

^  '  at  ek  muni  þar  búa  á  urn  stund : '  lit.  that  I  should  dwell  up  there  for  a  time.

^  Krossanes.

'  'sggðu  hvárir  gðrum  slík  tíðindi  sem  vissu : '  lit.  they  told  each  other  such  tidings  as  they
knew.


70  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

Thorstein  Ericsson  Dies  ^  in  the  Western  Settlement.

In  the  meantime  it  had  come  to  pass  in  Greenland,  that  Thorstein  of  Ericsfirth
had  married,  and  taken  to  wife  Gudrid,  Thorbiorn's  daughter,  [she]  who  had  been  the
spouse  of  Thori  Eastman  (69),  as  has  been  already  related.  Now  Thorstein  Ericsson,
being  minded  to  make  the  vo3'age-  to  Wineland  after  the  body  of  his  brother,  Thon^ald,
equipped  the  same  ship,  and  selected  a  crew  of  twenty-five  men  ^  of  good  size  and
strength ^  and  taking  with  him  his  wife,  Gudrid,  when  all  was  in  readiness,  they  sailed
out  into  the  open  ocean,  and  out  of  sight  of  land.  They  were  driven  hither  and  thither
over  the  sea  all  that  summer,  and  lost  all  reckoning  ^,  and  at  the  end  of  the  first  week
of  winter  they  made  the  land  at  L3'sufirth  in  Greenland,  in  the  Western-settlement.
Thorstein  set  out  in  search  of  quarters  for  his  crew,  and  succeeded  in  procuring  homes
for  all  of  his  shipmates;  but  he  and  his  wife  were  unprovided  for,  and  remained
together  upon  the  ship  for  two  or  more  days ".  At  this  time  Christianity  was  still  in
its  infancy  in  Greenland.  It  befell,  early  one  morning,  that  men  came  to  their  tent,
and  the  leader  inquired  who  the  people  were  within  the  tent.  Thorstein  replies  :  '  We
are  twain,'  says  he ;  '  but  who  is  it  who  asks  ? '  '  My  name  is  Thorstein,  and  I  am
known  as  Thorstein  the  Swarthy'',  and  my  errand  hither  is  to  offer  you  two,  husband
and  wife,  a  home  with  me.'  Thorstein  rephed,  that  he  would  consult  with  his  wife,
and  she  bidding  him  decide,  he  accepted  the  invitation.  '  I  will  come  after  you  on  the
morrow  with  a  sumpter-horse,  for  I  am  not  lacking  in  means  wherewith  to  provide
for  you  both,  although  it  will  be  lonely  living  with  me,  since  there  are  but  two  of  us,
my  wife  and  m3'self,  for  I,  forsooth,  am  a  very  hard  man  to  get  on  with  ^ ;  moreover,
my  faith  is  not  the  same  as  yours  ^,  albeit  methinks  that  is  the  better  to  which  you
hold.'  He  returned  for  them  on  the  morrow,  with  the  beast,  and  they  took  up  their
home  vsnth  Thorstein  the  Swarth}-,  and  were  well  treated  by  him.  Gudrid  was
a  woman  of  fine  presence,  and  a  clever  woman,  and  very  happy  in  adapting  herself  to
strangers.

Early  in  the  winter  Thorstein  Ericsson's  party  was  visited  by  sickness,  and
many  of  his  companions  died.  He  caused  coffins  to  be  made  for  the  bodies  of  the
dead,  and  had  them  convej-ed  to  the  ship,  and  bestowed  there ;  '  for  it  is  my  purpose
to  have  all  the  bodies  taken  to  Ericsfirth  in  the  summer.'     It  was  not  long  before

'  '  andaðisk  : '  lit.  died.  -  '  f\'stisk  ...  at  fara  : '  lit.  hankered  to  go.

"  '  hálfan  þriðja  tgg,'  half  of  the  third  ten;  cf.  noic  i,  p.  6i.

*  '  valdi  hann  lið  at  afli  ok  vexti : '  lit.  selected  a  company  for  their  strength  and  size.
"  '  vissu  eigi  hvar  þau  fóru  : '  lit.  they  did  not  know  where  they  went.

*  '  tvau  npkkurar  nseir : '  Ht.  some  two  nights.  '  svartr.

*  'er  einþykkr  mjgk : '  am  very  obstinate.  '  i.e.  he  was  not  a  Christian.


THE    WINE  LAND  HISTORY  OF  THE  PLATE  Y  BOOK.  71

illness  appeared  in  Thorstein's  home,  and  his  wife,  whose  name  was  Grimhild,  was
first  taken  sick.     She  was  a  very  vigorous  woman,  and  as  strong  as  a  man,  but  the
sickness  mastered  her;  and  soon  thereafter  Thorstein  Ericsson  was  seized  with  the
illness,  and  they  both  lay  ill  at  the  same  time;  and  Grimhild,  Thorstein  the  Swarthy's
wife,  died,  and  when  she  was  dead  Thorstein  went  out  of  the  room  to  procure  a  deal,
upon  which  to  lay  the  corpse.     Thereupon  Gudrid  spoke.     'Do  not  be  absent  long
Thorstein  mine!'  says  she.     He  rephed,  that  so  it  should  be.     Thorstein  Ericsson
then  exclaimed :  'Our  house-wife  is  acting  now  in  a  man-ellous  fashion,  for  she  is  raising
herself  up  on  her  elbow,  and  stretching  out  her  feet  from  the  side  of  the  bed,  and
groping  after  her  shoes.'     At  that  moment  Thorstein,  the  master  of  the  house  ',
entered,  and  Grimhild   laid   herself  down,  wherewithal   every  timber   in  the  room
creaked.     Thorstein  now  fashioned  a  coffin  for  Grimhild's  body,  and  bore  it  away,
and  cared  for  it.     He  was  a  big  man,  and  strong,  but  it  called  for  all  [his  strength]'
to  enable  him  to  remove  the  corpse  from  the  house.     The  illness  grew  upon  Thor-
stem  Ericsson,  and  he  died,  whereat  his  wife,  Gudrid,  was  sorely  grieved.    They  were
all  in  the  room  at  the  time,  and  Gudrid  was  seated  upon  a  chair  before  the  bench,  upon
which  her  husband,  Thorstein,  was  lying.     Thorstein,  the  master  of  the  house  \  then
taking  Gudrid  in  his  arms,  [carried  her]  from  the  chair,  and  seated  himself,  with  her,
upon  another  bench,  over  against  her  husband's  body,  and  exerted  himself  in  divers
ways  to  console  her,  and  endeavoured  to  reassure  her,  and  promised  her  that  he  would
accompany  her  to  Ericsfirth  with  the  body  of  her  husband,  Thorstein,  and  those  of
his  companions :  '  I  will  likewise  summon  other  persons  hither,'  says  he,  '  to  attend
upon  thee,  and  entertain  thee.'     She  thanked  him.    Then  Thorstein  Ericsson  sat  up,
and  exclaimed:  'Where  is  Gudrid?'    Thrice  he  repeated  the  question,  but  Gudrid
made  no  response.    She  then  asked  Thorstein,  the  master,  '  Shall  I  give  answer  to
his  question,  or  not?'     Thorstein,  the  master,  bade  her  make  no  reply,  and  he  then
crossed  the  floor,  and  seated  himself  upon  the  chair,  with  Gudrid  in  his  lap,  and  spoke,
saying:  'What  dost  thou  wish,  namesake?'    After  a  little  while,  Thorstein  replies:
'  I  desire  to  tell  Gudrid  of  the  fate  which  is  in  store  for  her^,  to  the  end  that  she  may
be  better  reconciled  to  my  death,  for  I  am  indeed  come  to  a  goodly  resting-place-'.
This  I  have  to  tell  thee,  Gudrid,  that  thou  art  to  marry  an  Icelander,  and  that  ye  are
to  have  a  long  wedded  life  together,  and  a  numerous  and  noble  progeny,  illustrious,
and  famous,  of  good  odour  and  sweet  virtues.    Ye  shall  go  from  Greenland  to  Norway,
and  thence  to  Iceland,  where  ye  shall  build  your  home.    There  ye  shall  dwell  together

Þorsteinn  bóndi : '  the  word  bóndi  signifies  a  man  who  is  the  owner  and  manager  of  a  home.
-  '  segja  Guðríði  forlpg  sin  : '  tell  Gudrid  her  fate.
=  '  hvíldar-staðr : '  lit.  place  of  rest,  i.e.  paradise;  cf.  Fritzner,  Ordbog,  s.v.


72  THE  FINDING    OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

for  a  long  time,  but  thou  shalt  outlive  him,  and  shalt  then  go  abroad  and  to  the  South  \
and  shalt  return  to  Iceland  again,  to  thy  home,  and  there  a  church  shall  then  be  raised,
and  thou  shalt  abide  there  and  take  the  veil,  and  there  thou  shalt  die.'  When  he  had
thus  spoken,  Thorstein  sank  back  again,  and  his  body  was  laid  out  for  burial,  and
borne  to  the  ship.  Thorstein,  the  master,  faithfully  performed  all  his  promises  to
Gudrid.  He  sold  his  lands  and  live-stock  in  the  spring,  and  accompanied  Gudrid  to
the  ship,  with  all  his  possessions.  He  put  the  ship  in  order,  procured  a  crew,  and
then  sailed  to  Ericsfirth.  The  bodies  of  the  dead  were  now  buried  at  the  church,  and
Gudrid  then  went  home  to  Leif  at  Brattahlid,  while  Thorstein  the  Swarthy  made  a
home  for  himself  on  Ericsfirth,  and  remained  there  as  long  as  he  lived,  and  was
looked  upon  as  a  very  superior  man.


Of  the  Wixeland  Voyages  of  Thorfinn  and  his  Compaxioxs.

That  same  summer  a  ship  came  from  Norwa}^  to  Greenland.  The  skipper's
name  was  Thorfinn  Karlsefni  - ;  he  was  a  son  of  Thord  Horsehead^  and  a
grandson  of  Snorri,  the  son  of  Thord  of  Höfdi.  Thorfinn  Karlsefni,  who  was
a  very  wealthy  man,  passed  the  winter  at  Brattahlid  with  Leif  Ericsson.  He  very
soon  set  his  heart  upon  Gudrid,  and  sought  her  hand  in  marriage ;  she  referred
him  to  Leif  for  her  answer,  and  was  subsequently  betrothed  to  him,  and  their
marriage  was  celebrated  that  same  winter.  A  renewed  discussion  arose  concerning
a  Wineland  voj-age,  and  the  folk  urged  Karlsefni  to  make  the  venture,  Gudrid
joining  with  the  others*.  He  determined  to  undertake  the  voyage,  and  assembled
a  company  of  sixty  men  and  five  women,  and  entered  into  an  agreement  with  his
shipmates  that  they  should  each  share  equally  in  all  the  spoils  of  the  enterprise  *.
They  took  with  them  all  kinds  of  cattle,  as  it  was  their  intention  to  settle  the  country,
if  they  could.  Karlsefni  asked  Leif  for  the  house  in  Wineland,  and  he  rephed,
that  he  would  lend  it  but  not  give  it.  They  sailed  out  to  sea  with  the  ship,  and
arrived  safe  and  sound  at  Leifs-booths,  and  carried  their  hammocks  ashore  there.
They  were  soon  provided  with  an  abundant  and  goodly  supply  of  food,  for
a  whale  of  good  size  and  quality  was  driven  ashore  there,  and  they  secured  it,
and  flensed  it,  and  had   then  no  lack  of  provisions.    The  cattle  were  turned  out

'  '  ganga  suðr,'  go  to  the  South  ;  an  expression  employed  here,  doubtless,  as  in  many  other  places  in
Icelandic  sagas,  to  signify  a  pilgrimage  to  Rome.

'  Karls-efni :  a  person  who  has  about  him  the  promise  of  becoming  a  capable  man.

'  hesthgfði.  *  '  bæði  Guðríðr  ok  aðrir  menn : '  lit.  both  Gudrid  and  others.

^  '  er  þeir  fengi  til  gœða  : '  lit.  which  they  might  get  of  good  things.


THE    WIN  ELAND  HISTORY  OF  THE  PL  ATE  Y  BOOK.  73

upon  the  land  \  and  the  males  soon  became  very  restless  and  vicious ;  they  had
brought  a  bull  with  them.  Karlsefni  caused  trees  to  be  felled,  and  to  be  hewed
into  timbers,  wherewith  to  load  his  ship,  and  the  wood  was  placed  upon  a  cliff
to  dry.  They  gathered  somewhat  of  all  of  the  valuable  products  of  the  land,
grapes,  and  all  kinds  of  game  and  fish,  and  other  good  things.  In  the  summer
succeeding  the  first  winter,  Skrellings  were  discovered  ^.  A  great  troop  of  men
came  forth  from  out  the  woods.  The  cattle  were  hard  by,  and  the  bull  began
to  bellow  and  roar  with  a  great  noise,  whereat  the  Skrellings  were  frightened,  and
ran  away,  with  their  packs  wherein  were  grey  furs,  sables,  and  all  kinds  of  peltries.
They  fled  towards  Karlsefni's  dwelling,  and  sought  to  effect  an  entrance  into  the
house,  but  Karlsefni  caused  the  doors  to  be  defended  [against  them].  Neither
[people]  could  understand  the  other's  language.  The  Skrellings  put  down  their
bundles  then,  and  loosed  them,  and  offered  their  wares  [for  barter],  and  were
especially  anxious  to  exchange  these  for  weapons,  but  Karlsefni  forbade  his  men  to
sell  their  weapons,  and  taking  counsel  with  himself,  he  bade  the  women  carry  out
milk  ^  to  the  Skrellings,  which  they  no  sooner  saw,  than  they  wanted  to  buy  it,  and
nothing  else.  Now  the  outcome  of  the  Skrellings'  trading  was,  that  they  carried
their  wares  away  in  their  stomachs,  while  they  left  their  packs  and  peltries  behind
with  Karlsefni  and  his  companions,  and  having  accomplished  this  [exchange]  they  went
away.  Now  it  is  to  be  told,  that  Karlsefni  caused  a  strong  wooden  palisade  to  be  con-
structed and  set  up  around  the  house.  It  was  at  this  time  that  Gudrid,  Karlsefni's
wife,  gave  birth  to  a  male  child,  and  the  boy  was  called  Snorri.  In  the  early  part
of  the  second  winter  the  Skrellings  came  to  them  again,  and  these  were  now  much
more  numerous  than  before,  and  brought  with  them  the  same  wares  as  at  first.
Then  said  Karlsefni  to  the  women :  '  Do  ye  carry  out  now  the  same  food,  which
proved  so  profitable  before,  and  nought  else.'  When  they  saw  this  they  cast  their
packs  in  over  the  palisade.  Gudrid  was  sitting  within,  in  the  doorway,  beside  the
cradle  of  her  infant  son,  Snorri,  when  a  shadow  fell  upon  the  door,  and  a  woman
in  a  black  namkirtle  (70)  entered.  She  was  short  in  stature,  and  wore  a  fillet  about
her  head;  her  hair  was  of  a  light  chestnut  colour,  and  she  was  pale  of  hue,  and
so  big-eyed,  that  never  before  had  eyes  so  large  been  seen  in  a  human  skull.  She
went  up  to  where  Gudrid  was  seated,  and  said:  'What  is  thy  name?'  'My  name
is  Gudrid ;  but  what  is  thy  name?'  '  My  name  is  Gudrid,'  says  she.  The  housewife,
Gudrid,  motioned  her  with  her  hand  to  a  seat  beside  her ;  but  it  so  happened,  that,


'  gekk  þar  á  land  upp  : '  lit.  went  up  on  the  land  there.
'  þá  urðu  þeir  varir  við  Skrælingja  : '  lit.  they  became  aware  of  Skrellings.
'  búnyt : '  milk,  or  an  article  of  food  prepared  from  milk ;  of.  Fritzner,  Ordbog,  s.  v.

L


74  THE  FINDING   OF   WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

at  that  very  instant  Gudrid  heard  a  great  crash,  whereupon  the  woman  vanished,  and
at  that  same  moment  one  of  the  SkrelHngs,  who  had  tried  to  seize  their  weapons  ^
was  killed  by  one  of  Karlsefni's  followers.  At  this  the  Skrellings  fled  precipitately,
leaving  their  garments  and  wares  behind  them ;  and  not  a  soul,  save  Gudrid  alone,
beheld  this  woman.  '  Now  we  must  needs  take  counsel  together,'  says  Karlsefni,
'  for  that  I  believe  they  will  visit  us  a  third  time,  in  great  numbers  ^,  and  attack  us.
Let  us  now  adopt  this  plan :  ten  of  our  number  shall  go  out  upon  the  cape,  and
show  themselves  there,  while  the  remainder  of  our  company  shall  go  into  the
woods  and  hew  a  clearing  for  our  cattle,  when  the  troop  approaches  from  the
forest.  We  will  also  take  our  bull,  and  let  him  go  in  advance  of  us.'  The  lie
of  the  land  was  such  that  the  proposed  meeting-place  had  the  lake  upon  the  one
side,  and  the  forest  upon  the  other.  Karlsefni's  advice  was  now  carried  into
execution.  The  Skrellings  advanced  to  the  spot  which  Karlsefni  had  selected
for  the  encounter,  and  a  battle  was  fought  there,  in  which  great  numbers  of  the
band  of  the  Skrellings  were  slain.  There  was  one  man  among  the  Skrellings,  of
large  size  and  fine  bearing,  whom  Karlsefni  concluded  must  be  their  chief.  One
of  the  Skrellings  picked  up  an  axe,  and  having  looked  at  it  for  a  time,  he  brandished
it  about  one  of  his  companions,  and  hewed  at  him,  and  on  the  instant  the  man  fell
dead.  Thereupon  the  big  man  seized  the  axe,  and  after  examining  it  for  a
moment,  he  hurled  it  as  far  as  he  could,  out  into  the  sea;  then  they  fled  helter-
skelter  into  the  woods,  and  thus  their  intercourse  came  to  an  end.  Karlsefni  and  his
party  ^  remained  there  throughout  the  winter,  but  in  the  spring  Karlsefni  announces,
that  he  is  not  minded  to  remain  there  longer,  but  will  return  to  Greenland.  They  now
made  ready  for  the  voyage,  and  carried  away  with  them  much  booty  in  vines  and
grapes*,  and  peltries.  They  sailed  out  upon  the  high  seas,  and  brought  their  ship
safely  to  Ericsfirth,  where  they  remained  during  the  winter.

Frevdis  causes'  the  Brothers  to  be  put  to  Death.
There  was  now  much  talk  anew,  about  a  Wineland-voj^age,  for  this  was  reckoned
both  a  profitable  and  an  honourable  enterprise.    The  same  summer  that  Karlsefni
arrived  from  Wineland,  a  ship  from  Norway  arrived  in  Greenland.     This  ship  was

'  '  þvíat  hann  hafði  viljat  taka  vápn  þcira  : '  lit.  because  he  had  wished  to  take  their  weapons.

"  '  með  úfriði  ok  fjplnienni : '  lit.  with  un-peace  [war]  and  a  multitude  of  men.

'  '  i'eir  Karlsefni,'  they  Karlsefni.

*  'vínviði  ok  bcrjum:'  lit.  'wine-wood'  and  berries.  Vines  are  called  in  Icelandic  'wine-wood,'
and  grapes  '  wine-berries.'  The  relation  between  the  words  of  the  sentence  would  indicate  that  the
'  berries '  here  named  are  '  wine-berries '  or  grapes.

■*  '  let  drepa : '  lit.  caused  to  be  put  to  death.


THE    WIN  ELAND   HISTORY  OF  THE  FLATEY  BOOK.  75

commanded  by  two  brothers,  Helgi  and  Finnbogi,  who  passed  the  winter  in  Green-
land. They  were  descended  from  an  Icelandic  family  of  the  East-firths  ^  It  is  now
to  be  added,  that  Freydis,  Eric's  daughter,  set  out  from  her  home  at  Gardar,  and
waited  upon  the  brothers,  Helgi  and  Finnbogi,  and  invited  them  to  sail  with  their
vessel  to  Wineland,  and  to  share  with  her  equally  all  of  the  good  things  which
they  might  succeed  in  obtaining  there.  To  this  they  agreed,  and  she  departed
thence  to  visit  her  brother,  Leif,  and  ask  him  to  give  her  the  house  which  he
had  caused  to  be  erected  in  Wineland,  but  he  made  her  the  same  answer  [as  that
which  he  had  given  Karlsefni],  saj-ing,  that  he  would  lend  the  house,  but  not  give
it.  It  was  stipulated  between  Karlsefni  and  Frej'dis,  that  each  should  have  on
ship-board  thirty  able-bodied  men  ^,  besides  the  women ;  but  Frej^dis  immediately
violated  this  compact,  by  concealing  five  men  more  [than  this  number],  and  this
the  brothers  did  not  discover  before  they  arrived  in  Wmeland.  They  now  put
out  to  sea,  having  agreed  beforehand,  that  they  would  sail  in  company,  if  possible,
and  although  they  were  not  far  apart  from  each  other,  the  brothers  arrived  somewhat
in  advance,  and  carried  their  belongings  up  to  Leif's  house.  Now  when  Freydis
arrived,  her  ship  was  discharged,  and  the  baggage  carried  up  to  the  house,  whereupon
Frej'dis  exclaimed  :  '  Why  did  j'ou  carry  j'our  baggage  in  here  ? '  '  Since  we  believed,'
said  they,  '  that  all  promises  ^  made  to  us  would  be  kept.'  '  It  was  to  me  that  Leif  loaned
the  house,'  saj^s  she,  'and  not  to  you.'  Whereupon  Helgi  exclaimed  :  'We  brothers
cannot  hope  to  rival  thee  in  wrong-dealing.'  They  thereupon  carried  their  baggage
forth,  and  built  a  hut,  above  the  sea,  on  the  bank  of  the  lake,  and  put  all  in  order  about
it ;  while  Fre3-dis  caused  wood  to  be  felled,  with  which  to  load  her  ship.  The  winter
now  set  in,  and  the  brothers  suggested,  that  they  should  amuse  themselves  by  playing
games.  This  they  did  for  a  time,  until  the  folk  began  to  disagree  ^  when  dissensions
arose  between  them,  and  the  games  came  to  an  end,  and  the  visits  between  the  houses
ceased  ;  and  thus  it  continued  far  into  the  winter.  One  morning  early,  Freydis  arose
from  her  bed,  and  dressed  herself,  but  did  not  put  on  her  shoes  and  stockings.  A
hea\y  dew  had  fallen ',  and  she  took  her  husband's  cloak,  and  wrapped  it  about  her,
and  then  walked  to  the  brothers'  house,  and  up  to  the  door,  which  had  been  only
partly  closed "  by  one  of  the  men,  who  had  gone  out  a  short  time  before.    She  pushed

'  '  islenzkir  at  kyni,  ok  or  Austfjgrðum  : '  lit.  of  Icelandic  descent  and  from  the  East-firths.
^  '  vigir  menn  : '  lit.  men  capable  of  bearing  arms.
'  '  ákveðin  orð  : '  lit.  fixed  words,  i.  e.  explicit  agreements.

*  'menn  bárnsk  verra  í  milli :'  lit.  men  introduced  a  worse  condition  among  them.
'  '  veðri  var  svá  farit,  at  dggg  var  fallin  mikil  : '  the  weather  was  of  such  a  character  that  a  heavy  dew
had  fallen.

^  '  lokit  hurð  aptr  á  miðjan  klofa : '  lit.  closed  the  door  behind  to  the  middle  of  the  groove.

L  2


76  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

the  door  open,  and  stood,  silently,  in  the  doonvay  for  a  time.  Finnbogi,  who  was
lying  on  the  innermost  side  of  the  room,  was  awake,  and  said  :  '  What  dost  thou  wish
here,  Freydis?'  She  answers :  '  I  wish  thee  to  rise,  and  go  out  with  me,  for  I  would
speak  with  thee.'  He  did  so,  and  they  walked  to  a  tree,  which  lay  close  by  the  wall
of  the  house,  and  seated  themselves  upon  it.  '  How  art  thou  pleased  here?'  says  she.
He  answers :  '  I  am  well  pleased  with  the  fruitfulness  of  the  land,  but  I  am  ill-content
with  the  breach  which  has  come  between  us,  for,  methinks,  there  has  been  no  cause
for  it.'  '  It  is  even  as  thou  saj^est,'  saj's  she,  '  and  so  it  seems  to  me  ;  but  my  errand
to  thee  is,  that  I  wish  to  exchange  ships  with  j'ou  brothers,  for  that  ye  have  a  larger
ship  than  I,  and  I  wish  to  depart  from  here.'  '  To  this  I  must  accede,'  says  he,  '  if  it  is
th}'  pleasure.'  Therewith  the}'  parted,  and  she  returned  home,  and  Finnbogi  to  his  bed.
She  climbed  up  into  bed,  and  awakened  Thor\'ard  with  her  cold  feet,  and  he  asked
her  why  she  was  so  cold  and  wet.  She  answered,  with  great  passion  :  '  I  have  been  to
the  brothers,'  says  she,  '  to  \xy  to  buy  their  ship,  for  I  wished  to  have  a  larger  vessel,
but  they  received  mj'  overtures  so  ill,  that  they  struck  me,  and  handled  me  very
roughly ;  what  time  thou,  poor  wretch,  wilt  neither  avenge  my  shame  nor  thy  own,
and  I  find,  perforce,  that  I  am  no  longer  in  Greenland,  moreover  I  shall  part  from
thee  unless  thou  wreakest  vengeance  for  this.'  And  now  he  could  stand  her  taunts
no  longer,  and  ordered  the  men  to  rise  at  once,  and  take  their  weapons,  and  this
they  did,  and  they  then  proceeded  directl}'  to  the  house  of  the  brothers,  and  entered  it,
while  the  folk  were  asleep  \  and  seized  and  bound  them,  and  led  each  one  out,  when
he  was  bound  ;  and  as  they  came  out,  Freydis  caused  each  one  to  be  slain.  In  this
wise  all  of  the  men  were  put  to  death,  and  only  the  women  were  left,  and  these  no
one  would  kill.  At  this  Freydis  exclaimed  :  '  Hand  me  an  axe!'  This  was  done,  and
she  fell  upon  the  five  women,  and  left  them  dead.  They  returned  home,  after  this
dreadful  deed,  and  it  was  very  evident  that  Freydis  was  well  content  with  her  work.
She  addressed  her  companions,  saying:  'If  it  be  ordained  for  us,  to  come  again  to
Greenland,  I  shall  contrive  the  death  of  any  man  who  shall  speak  of  these  events.
We  must  give  it  out,  that  we  left  them  living  here,  when  we  came  awa}'.'  Earl}'  in
the  spring,  they  equipped  the  ship,  which  had  belonged  to  the  brothers,  and  freighted
it  with  all  of  the  products  of  the  land,  which  they  could  obtain,  and  which  the  ship
would  carry.  Then  they  put  out  to  sea,  and,  after  a  prosperous  voyage,  arrived  with
their  ship  in  Ericsfirth  early  in  the  summer.  Karlsefni  was  there,  with  his  ship
all  ready  to  sail,  and  was  awaiting  a  fair  wind ;  and  people  say,  that  a  ship  richer
laden,  than  that  which  he  commanded,  never  left  Greenland.

■  '  at  þeim  sof9ndum  : '  lit.  to  them  sleeping.


THE    WIN  ELAND  HISTORY  OF  THE  PLATE  Y  BOOK.  77

Concerning  Freydis.

Freydis  now  went  to  her  home,  since  it  had  remained  unharmed  during  her
absence.  She  bestowed  Hberal  gifts  upon  all  of  her  companions,  for  she  was  anxious
to  screen  her  guilt.  She  now  established  herself  at  her  home ;  but  her  companions
were  not  all  so  close-mouthed,  concerning  their  misdeeds  and  wickedness,  that
rumours  did  not  get  abroad  at  last.  These  finally  reached  her  brother,  Leif,  and  he
thought  it  a  most  shameful  story.  He  thereupon  took  three  of  the  men,  who  had  been
of  Freydis'  party,  and  forced  them  all  at  the  same  time  to  a  confession  of  the  affair,  and
their  stories  entirely  agreed.  '  I  have  no  heart,'  says  Leif,  '  to  punish  my  sister,
Freydis,  as  she  deserves,  but  this  I  predict  of  them,  that  there  is  little  prosperity  in
store  for  their  offspring.'  Hence  it  came  to  pass,  that  no  one  from  that  time  forward
thought  them  worthy  of  aught  but  evil.  It  now  remains  to  take  up  the  story  from  the
time  when  Karlsefni  made  his  ship  ready,  and  sailed  out  to  sea.  He  had  a  successful
voyage^,  and  arrived  in  Norway  safe  and  sound.  He  remained  there  during  the
winter,  and  sold  his  wares,  and  both  he  and  his  wife  were  received  with  great  favour
by  the  most  distinguished  men  of  Norway.  The  following  spring  he  put  his  ship  in
order  for  the  voyage  to  Iceland ;  and  when  all  his  preparations  had  been  made,  and
his  ship  was  lying  at  the  wharf,  awaiting  favourable  winds,  there  came  to  him  a
Southerner  ^,  a  native  of  Bremen  in  the  Saxonland,  who  wished  to  buy  his  '  house-
neat  ^.'  '  I  do  not  wish  to  sell  it,'  said  he.  '  I  will  give  thee  half  a  "  mörk  "  in  gold  for
it'  (71),  says  the  Southerner.  This  Karlsefni  thought  a  good  offer,  and  accordingly
closed  the  bargain.  The  Southerner  went  his  way,  with  the  'house-neat,'  and  Karl-
sefni knew  not  what  wood  it  was,  but  it  was  '  mösur*,'  come  from  Wineland.

Karlsefni  sailed  away,  and  arrived  with  his  ship  in  the  north  of  Iceland,  in  Skaga-
firth.  His  vessel  was  beached  there  during  the  winter,  and  in  the  spring  he  bought
Glaumbœiar-land  (59),  and  made  his  home  there,  and  dwelt  there  as  long  as  he  lived,
and  was  a  man  of  the  greatest  prominence.  From  him  and  his  wife,  Gudrid,  a  nu-
merous and  goodly  lineage  is  descended.  After  Karlsefni's  death,  Gudrid,  together
with  her  son,  Snorri,  who  was  born  in  Wineland,  took  charge  of  the  farmstead ;  and
when  Snorri  was  married,  Gudrid  went  abroad,  and  made  a  pilgrimage  to  the  South ',
after  which  she  returned  again  to  the  home  of  her  son,  Snorri,  who  had  caused  a
church  to  be  built  at  Glaumbœr.  Gudrid  then  took  the  veil  and  became  an  anchorite,
and  lived  there  the  rest  of  her  days.    Snorri  had  a  son,  named  Thorgeir,  who  was  the

'  '  Honum  fórsk  vel : '  lit.  it  went  well  with  him.

^  Suðrmaðr  :  a  Southerner,  i.e.  a  German;  cf.  note  i,  p.  65.

'  hiisa-snotra.     Cf.  note  6.

*  Or  '  mausur,'  as  in  the  MS.;  cf.  note  36,  ^  Cf.  note  i,  p.  72,


78  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

father  of  Ing\-eld,  the  mother  of  Bishop  Brand.  Hallfrid  was  the  name  of  the
daughter  of  Snorri,  Karlsefni's  son  ;  she  was  the  mother  of  Runolf,  Bishop  Thorlak's
father.  Biorn  was  the  name  of  [another]  son  of  Karlsefni  and  Gudrid ;  he  was  the
father  of  Thorunn,  the  mother  of  Bishop  Biorn.  Many  men  are  descended  from
Karlsefni,  and  he  has  been  blessed  with  a  numerous  and  famous  posterity;  and
of  all  men  Karlsefni  has  given  the  most  exact  accounts  of  all  these  voyages,  of
which  something  has  now  been  recounted.


CHAPTER   IV.

WiNELAND    IN   THE    ICELANDIC   AnNALS.

In  addition  to  the  longer  sagas  of  the  discovery  and  exploration  of  Wineland,  and
the  scattered  references  in  other  Icelandic  historical  hterature,  already  adduced,  the
country  finds  mention  in  still  another  class  of  Icelandic  records.  These  records  are
the  chronological  hsts  of  notable  events,  in  and  out  of  Iceland,  which  are  known
as  the  Icelandic  Annals.  It  has  been  conjectured  that  the  archetype  of  these  Annals
was  compiled  either  by  the  learned  Ari,  the  father  of  Icelandic  historiography,  or  in
the  century  in  which  he  livedo  Although  there  is  the  best  of  reasons  for  the  behef,
that  the  first  writer  of  Icelandic  Annals  was  greatly  indebted  to  Ari  the  Learned  for
the  knowledge  of  many  of  the  events  which  he  records,  such  written  evidence  as  we
have  from  the  century  in  which  Ari  lived,  would  seem  to  indicate  that  this  kind  of
literature  had  not  then  sprung  into  being-.

A  recent  writer  in  an  able  disquisition  upon  this  subject  arrives  at  the  conclusion,
that  the  first  book  of  Annals  was  written  in  the  south  of  Iceland  about  the  year  1280  ^.
While  this  theory  is  apparently  well  grounded,' it  is,  nevertheless,  true  that  the  first
writer  of  Icelandic  Annals  of  whom  we  have  definite  knowledge,  was  an  Icelandic
priest  named  Einar  Haflidason  [Einarr  HafliSason],  who  was  born  in  1307,  and  died
in  1393  *.     The  fact  that  Einar  was  the  compiler  of  such  a  book  is  gleaned  from  his

'  Cf.  Langebek,  Scriptores  rerum  Danicarum,  Copenh.  1773,  vol.ii.  p.  177  ;  Bjorn  Jónsson  á  Skaiðsá,
Annálar,  Hrappsey,  1774,  vol.  i.  p.  4 ;  Grönlands  historiske  Mindesmærker,  Copeiih.  1838,  vol.  ii.
PP-  577-8;  Antiquarisk  Tidskrift,  Copenh.  1846-8,  p.  122.

^  Cf.  Snorra  Edda,  Copenh.  1852,  vol.  ii.  p.  12  :  'Á  þessu  landi  bæði  lög  og  áttvísi  eða  þýðingar  helgar,
eða  svá  hin  spakligu  fræði,  er  Ari  f'orgilssoii  hefir  á  bœkr  sett  af  skynsamligu  viti.'  ['  In  this  land  both
laws  and  genealogical  lore,  or  translations  of  sacred  writings,  or  also  of  those  learned  records,  which
through  a  gifted  wisdom,  Ari  Thorgilsson  has  committed  to  books.']  'Learned  records'  ['spakligu
fræði ']  does  not  explicitly  exclude  the  Annals,  but  the  language  of  Hungrvaka,  a  work  contemporary
with  that  from  which  the  above  quotation  is  made,  does,  in  the  following  passage  :  '  þat  er  á  norrænu  er
ritað  ;  log,  eðr  sögur,  eðr  mannfræði '  ['  that  which  is  written  in  the  Northern  tongue  [Icelandic]  laws,
or  sagas,  or  genealogies'].     Biskupa  Sogur,  Copenh.  1858,  vol.  i.  p.  59.

=  Storm,  Islandske  Annaler,  Christiania,  1888,  pp.  Ixviii-Ixxxiii,  &c.

'  Cf.  Finnr  Jónsson,  Historia  Ecclesiastica  Islandiæ,  Copenh.  1772,  vol.  i.  pp.  592,  593.


8o  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

own  work,  through  an  entry  under  the  year  1304,  in  which  his  birth  is  recorded  in
such  wise  as  to  point  unmistakably  to  his  authorship '.  This  collection  of  Annals  is
contained  in  the  parchment  manuscript  AM.  420  b,  410,  which  has  received  the  name,
Lawman's  Annals  [Lögmanns-Annáll],  probably  from  the  office  held  by  some  one  of  its
former  owners^.  Under  the  year  1121,  we  find  in  these  Annals  the  entry:  'Bishop
Eric  Uppsi  ^  sought  Wineland  *.'

The  next  considerable  collection  of  Annals,  the  date  of  which  we  are  enabled  to
determine  with  tolerable  accuracy,  is  that  appended  to  the  Flatey  Book,  the  manu-
script of  which  has  already  been  described.  These  Annals  were  written  by  the  priest
Magnus  Thorhallsson  ^,  and  doubtless  completed  before  the  year  1395,  for  all  entries
cease  in  the  previous  year.  Among  the  recorded  events  of  the  year  1121  it  is  stated
that '  Eric,  Bishop  of  Greenland,  went  in  search  of  Wineland "'.'

Of  a  riper  antiquity  than  either  of  the  foregoing  works,  are,  in  all  likehhood,  the
so-called  Annales  Reseniani,  the  original  vellum  manuscript  of  which  was  destroyed
by  the  fire  of  1728.  A  paper  copy  from  this  original,  written  by  Arni  Magnusson,  is
preserved  in  AM.  424,  4to.  The  dates  included  in  these  Annals  extend  from  the  year
228  to  1295  inclusive,  and  it  has  been  conjectured  that  these  records  were  compiled
before  the  year  1319''.  Here,  under  the  year  1121,  occurs  the  statement:  'Bishop
Eric  sought  Wineland*.'

'  The  entry  is  as  follows :  '  Rev.  Einar  Haflidason  born,  "  in  octava  nativitatis  gloriosæ  Virginia
Mariæ."  I,  a  sinful  man,  bid  you  who  may  read  or  hear  these  letters  pray  to  God  for  me,  that  at  the
day  of  judgment  I  may  be  numbered  among  his  chosen  men,'  &c.  ['  Fœddr  Síra  Einar  Hafliðason,  in
Octava  nativitatis  gloriosæ  virginis  Marie.  Bið  ek  syndugr  maðr  þetta  letr  lesandi  eðr  heyrandi,  at  þér
biðit  fyrir  mér  til  Guðs,  svá  at  ek  mætti  reiknast  á  dómsdegi  í  meðal  hans  valdra  manna.'j  Prof.  Storm
agrees  with  Ami  Magnusson  in  the  opinion  that  Einar  himself  wrote  these  Annals,  from  the  beginning
down  to  the  year  1362.     Cf.  Storm,  Isl.  Ann.  ubi  sup.  pp.  xxi  and  264.

"^  Cf.  Hálfdan  Einarsson,  Sciagraphia  Historise  Literariæ  Islandicæ,  Copenh.  1777,  p.  133;  Storm,
Isl.  Ann.  p.  xxiv.

'  Vigfusson  [Diet.  s.  v.]  translates  uppsi,  the  fish  ' gadus  vt'reiis;'  Ivar  Aasen  [Diet.  s.v.  Ufs],  on  the
other  hand,  renders  the  Norwegian  word  '  store  Sei  [large  coal-fish],  Isl.  [i.  e.  Icelandic]  Upsi.'  This  is
confirmed  by  Benedikt  Gröndal  [Dýrafræði,  Reykjavik,  1878,  p.  89],  who  calls  the  Upsi,  Merlangus
carbonarius,  deriving  the  descriptive  carbonarius,  from  the  black  colour  of  the  mouth  of  the  full-
grown  fish.

*  '  Eirikr  hiskn^  \ppse  leitade  Vinlandz.'

"  Cf.  Introductory  notice  of  authorship  in  Flatey  Book.     FIate3Jarbók,  loc.  cit.  vol.  i.

"  'Eir/Xr  b;'i/{-«p  af  Grðnlandi  iór  at  leita  Vin  lawdz.'  The  verb  '  leita '  has  the  double  significance,
'  to  go  to  for  aid,'  and  '  to  go  in  search  of.'  The  entry  here  seems  to  point  clearly  to  the  latter  interpreta-
tion, literally, '  went  lo  seek.'

'  Cf.  Storm,  Isl.  Ann.  p.  vii ;  Islenzkir  Annálar,  Copenh.  1847,  pp.  xxxi,  xxxii.

'  'Eirikr  byscop  lcitaði  Vin  landz.'  In  another  copy  of  these  Annals,  contained  in  the  de  la  Gardie
Collection  in  the  Upsala  University  Library,  Nos.  25-29,  the  original  entry  under  the  year  1121  appears


WIN  EL  AND  IN  THE  ICELANDIC  ANNALS.  8i

A  parchment  manuscript  is  preserved  in  the  Royal  Library  of  Copenhagen,  No.
2087,  4to,  old  collection,  which  contains  the  annals  known  as  Annales  regii.  These
are  written  in  various  hands,  and  are  brought  down  to  the  year  1341.  From  the  first
entry  down  to  the  year  1306,  the  hand  is  the  same,  and  from  this  fact  the  conclusion
has  been  drawn,  that  this  portion  of  the  manuscript  was  completed  not  later  than
1307^.  Against  the  year  1121  we  find  the  entry:  'Bishop  Eric  of  Greenland  went
in  search  of  Wineland  -.'

Similar  entries  to  these  occur  in  two  other  collections  of  Icelandic  Annals,  which
may  be  mentioned  here,  for,  while  these  are,  in  their  present  form,  of  much  more
recent  creation  than  those  already  noticed,  they  still  seem  to  have  drawn  their
material  from  elder  lost  vellums.  One  of  these,  Henrik  Höyer's  Annals,  derives
its  name  from  its  first  owner,  who  died  in  Bergen  in  the  year  1615.  It  is  a  paper
manuscript  contained  in  AM.  22,  fol.,  and  bears  strong  internal  evidence  of  having
been  copied  from  an  Icelandic  original,  which  has  since  disappeared  ^  The  entry  in
this  manuscript  under  the  year  1121  is  :  '  Bishop  Eric  sought  Wineland  ^.'

The  other  modern  collection,  known  as  Gottskalk's  Annals,  is  contained  in  a
parchment  manuscript  in  the  Royal  Library  of  Stockholm,  No.  5,  8vo,  which  it  is
believed  was  chiefly  written  by  one  Gottskalk  Jonsson  [Gottskálk  Jónsson],  a  priest,
who  lived  in  the  north  of  Iceland  in  the  sixteenth  century,  and  it  has  been  conjectured,
from  internal  evidence,  that  the  portion  of  the  compilation  prior  to  the  year  1394  was
copied  from  a  lost  manuscript  °.  The  entry  under  the  year  1121  corresponds  with
those  already  quoted :  '  Eric,  the  Greenlanders'  bishop,  sought  Wineland  ^.'

From  these  different  records,  varying  slightly  in  phraseology,  but  all  of  the  same
purport,  we  may  safely  conclude  that,  in  the  year  1121,  a  certain  Bishop  of  Greenland,
called  Eric  Uppsi,  went  upon  a  voyage  in  search  of  Wineland.  It  is  the  sum  of
information  which  the  Annals  have  to  give  concerning  that  country,  and  is  meagre
enough,  for  we  are  not  only  left  unenlightened  as  to  why  the  voyage  was  undertaken,

to  have  been  confused  or  misunderstood  by  the  copyist.  It  reads :  '  Thorgils  Erche  biskup  leitati
Vlnlands.'  ['  Arch-bishop  Thorgils  sought  Wineland.']  The  name  Eirikr  appears  to  have  been  mis-
read, and  that  of  Thorgils  carried  over  from  the  preceding  sentence,  as  may  be  better  seen  by  comparison
with  Arni  Magnusson's  entry  of  the  same  year :  '  Sætt  Hafliða  oc  Þorgils,  Eirikr  byscop  leitaði  Vín-
landz.'

'  Cf.  Langebek,  Scr.  rer.  Dan.  vol.  iii.  p.  2  ;  Storm,  Isl.  Ann.  p.  xi.

^  '  Eirikr  hisku-p  af  Grðnlan«di  for  at  leita  Vinlanwdz.'

'  Cf.  Katalog  over  den  Arnamagn.  Hándskr.  Saml.  Copenh.  vol.  i.  pp.  19,  20 ;  Storm,  Isl.  Ann.  p.  x.

*  '  Eirikr  b/ííap  leitad/  Uink^ds.'

^  Cf.  Storm,  Isl.  Ann.  pp.  xxv-xsviii.

°  '  Eirekr  Grœnlendinga  byskup  leitadi  Vindlands.'     A  variant  of  this  collection  of  Annals,  AM.
412,  4to,  the  so-called  Hóla-Annáll,  has,  correctly,  '  Vinlands.'

M


82  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

but  we  are  not  even  informed  whether  the  bishop  succeeded  in  finding  the  country
of  which  he  went  in  search.  It  is  not  possible  to  obtain  much  additional  knowledge
concerning  this  Bishop  Eric  elsewhere.  It  seems  altogether  probable  that  he  was  the
'  Greenlanders'  bishop  Eric  Gnup's  son,'  mentioned  in  a  genealogical  list  in
Landnáma  ^,  and  it  is  clear  that  if  this  be  the  same  Eric,  he  was  by  birth  an  Icelander.
This  \\&\v  is  in  a  slight  measure  confirmed  by  an  entry  in  the  Lawman's  Annals
under  the  j-ear  1112  [in  the  Annals  of  the  Flatey  Book  under  the  3-ear  1113]  wherein
the  journey  of  Bishop  Eric  is  recorded-,  a  'journey'  presumably  undertaken  away
from  Iceland,  and  probably  to  Greenland.  In  the  ancient  Icelandic  scientific  work
called  Rimbegla,  in  a  list  of  those  men  who  had  been  bishops  at  Gardar,  the  episcopal
seat  in  Greenland,  Eric  heads  the  list  ^  while  in  a  similar  list  of  Greenland  bishops
in  the  Flatey  Book,  Eric's  name  is  mentioned  third  *.  No  record  of  Bishop  Eric's
ordination  has  been  preser\-ed,  and  none  of  his  fate,  unless  indeed,  it  be  wTÍtten  in
the  brief  memorial  of  his  Wineland  voyage.  It  has  been  conjectured  that  this  voj-age
to  W'ineland  was  undertaken  as  a  missionary  enterprise,  a  speculation  which  seems  to
have  been  suggested  solely  by  the  ecclesiastical  office  of  the  chief  participant.  It  has
been  further  conjectured,  since  we  read  in  the  Annals  of  the  ordination  of  a  new  bishop
for  Greenland  in  1124^,  that  Eric  must  have  perished  in  the  undertaking.  The  date  of
his  death  is  nowhere  given,  and  it  is  possible  that  the  entry  in  the  Annals,  under  the
year  1121,  is  a  species  of  necrological  record.  It  is,  in  any  event,  the  last  sur\*i\nng
mention  of  Wineland  the  Good  in  the  elder  Icelandic  literature.

Although  no  subsequent  visit  to  Wineland  is  recorded,  a  portion  of  the  American
coastland,  seen  by  the  original  explorers,  does  appear  to  have  been  visited  by  certain
of  the  Greenland  colonists,  more  than  a  hundred  j'ears  after  Bishop  Eric's  Wineland
voyage.

A  parchment  manuscript,  AM.  4200,  4to,  contains  a  collection  of  Annals,  known
as  the  Elder  Skálholt  Annals  [Skálholts-Annáll  hinn  fomi],  not  heretofore  cited
because  of  a  lacuna  covering  the  year  1121.  This  manuscript,  which  Arni  Magnusson
obtained  from  Skálholt,  in  the  south  of  Iceland,  and  which  he  conjectures  may  have
belonged  to  Skálholt  church,  or  to  Bishop  Bryniolf's  private  librar}-  *',  is  believed  to

'  Landnáma,  Part  i.  ch.  xiii.  ^  '  ¥crá  Eireks  b;U;<ps.'

'  Similarly  the  MS.  Klsl.  413,  410.     Ci.  Langebek,  Scr.  rer.  Dan.  vol.  vi.  p.  620.

'  Rymbegla,  Copcnh.  1780,  p.  320;  Flateyjarbók,  loc.  cit.  vol.  iii.  p.  454.

°  Bishop  Arnoki  [Amaldr] ;  he  was  duly  ordained  Bishop  of  Greenland,  at  Lund,  and  was  clearly
the  first  bishop  of  Greenland  so  ordained.  Cf.  Grœnlendinga  Þáitr  [Einars  Þáttr  Sokkasonar],  Flatey-
jarbók,  Christiania,  1868,  vol.  iii.  pp.  445,  446.  Annales  Reseniani,  Annales  regii,  Flatey  Book  Annals,
Gottskalk's  Annals,  and  Ilöyer's  Annals  all  give  this  date  1124,  the  Lawman's  Annals  alone  assigns
the  event  to  1125.

•  Katalog  o.  d.  AM.  Ilandskr.  Saml.  vol.  i.  p.  625.


WIN  ELAND   IN  THE  ICELANDIC  ANNALS.  83

have  been  written  about  the  year  1362  ^.  We  find  in  this,  against  the  year  1347,  the
following  record :  '  There  came  also  a  ship  from  Greenland,  less  in  size  than  small
Icelandic  trading  vessels.  It  came  into  the  outer  Stream-firth.  It  was  without  an
anchor.  There  were  seventeen  men  on  board,  and  they  had  sailed  to  iVIarkland,  but
had  afterwards  been  driven  hither  by  storms  at  sea  ^.'  The  Annals  of  Gottskalk  record
the  simple  fact  in  the  same  year:  'a  ship  from  Greenland  came  into  the  mouth  of
Stream-firth  ^.'  On  the  other  hand  the  Annals  of  the  Flatey  Book,  under  the  year
1347,  have  the  following  more  particular  record  :  '  A  ship  came  then  from  Greenland,
which  had  sailed  to  Markland,  and  there  were  eighteen  men  on  board  ■*.'

This  scanty  record  is  the  last  historical  mention  of  a  voyage  undertaken  by  Leif's
fellow-countrymen  to  a  part  of  the  land  which  he  had  discovered  three  hundred  years
before.  The  nature  of  the  information  indicates  that  the  knowledge  of  the  discovery
had  not  altogether  faded  from  the  memories  of  the  Icelanders  settled  in  Greenland.
It  seems  further  to  lend  a  measure  of  plausibility  to  a  theory  that  people  from  the
Greenland  colony  may,  from  time  to  time,  have  visited  the  coast  to  the  south-west  of
their  home  for  supplies  of  wood,  or  for  some  kindred  purpose.  The  visitors  in
this  case  had  evidently  intended  to  return  directly  from  Markland  to  Greenland,  and
had  they  not  been  driven  out  of  their  course  to  Iceland,  the  probability  is  that  this
voyage  would  never  have  found  mention  in  Icelandic  chronicles,  and  all  knowledge
of  it  must  have  vanished  as  completely  as  did  the  colony  to  which  the  Markland
visitors  belonged.

*  Storm,  Isl.  Ann.  pp.  xv,  xvi.

^  '  ta  koOT  ok  skip  af  Grænl(7;/cll  min;2a  at  vexti  en«  smá  fsk«dz  for.  Þa/  ko;«  í  Strauw  fiðrð  in«
yira.  ^al  ^ar  akkiris  laust.  \ar  váru  i  xvij  mean  ok  höfðu  farit  t/7  Markhndz  en«  síðan  vorðit
hingat  hafreka.'

^  '  Kom  skip  j  Straumfiardar  ós  af  Grænlandi.'

*  '  M  kom  skip  af  Grænla«di,  þa/  er  sótt  hafdi  til  Marklandz,  ok  áttián  mam  L'


CHAPTER  V.
Notices  of  Doubtful  Value  ;  Fictions.

It  will  be  remembered  that  a  passage  in  the  Book  of  Settlement  [Landnámabók]
recites  the  discovery,  by  one  Ari  Marsson,  of  a  country  lying  westward  from  Ireland,
called  White-men's-land,  or  Ireland  the  Great.  This  White-men's-land  is  also  men-
tioned in  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red,  and  in  both  places  is  assigned  a  location  in  the
vicinity  of  Wineland  the  Good.  Many  writers  have  regarded  this  White-men's-land
as  identical  with  a  strange  country,  the  discovery  of  which  is  recounted  in  the
Eyrb3'ggja  Saga,  having  been  led  to  this  conclusion,  apparently,  from  the  fact  that
both  unknown  lands  lay  to  the  'westward,'  and  that  there  is  a  certain  remote  resem-
blance between  the  brief  particulars  of  the  Eric's  Saga  and  the  more  detailed  narrative
of  Eyrbyggja.

It  is  related  in  the  Eyrb3'ggja  Saga^  that  a  certain  Biorn  Asbrandsson  [Bjorn
Asbrandsson]  became  involved  in  an  intrigue  with  a  married  woman  named  Thurid,
which  resulted  in  his  wounding  the  affronted  husband  and  slaying  two  of  the  husband's
friends,  for  which  he  was  banished  from  Iceland  for  the  term  of  three  3^ears.  Biorn
went  abroad,  led  an  adventurous  life,  and  received  the  name  of  '  kappi '  [champion,
hero]  on  account  of  his  valorous  deeds.  He  subsequently  returned  to  Iceland,  where
he  was  afterwards  known  as  the  Broadwickers'-champion  [Breibvikingakappi].  He
brought  with  him  on  his  return  not  only  increase  of  fame,  but  the  added  graces  of
bearing  due  to  his  long  fellowship  with  foreign  chieftains,  and  he  soon  renewed  his
attentions  to  his  former  mistress.  The  husband,  fearing  to  cope  alone  with  so  powerful
a  rival,  invoked  the  aid  of  one  skilled  in  the  black  art  to  raise  a  storm,  which  should
overwhelm  the  object  of  his  enmity.  The  hero,  however,  after  three  days  of  exposure
to  the  preternaturally-agitated  elements,  returned  exhausted,  but  in  safety,  to  his  home.
The  husband  then  prevailed  upon  his  powerful  brother-in-law,  the  godi  (72)  Snorri,  to
come  to  his  assistance,  and  as  a  result  of  Snorri's  intervention,  Biorn  agreed  to  leave
the  country.     He  accordingly  rode  '  south,  to  a  ship  in  Lava-haven  -',  in  which  he  took

'  Eyrbyggja  Saga,  ed.  Gudbrand  Vigfusson,  Leipsic,  1864,  chaps.  29,  40,  47.

^"  Ilrauiihöfn,  situated  on  the  southern  side  of  the  promontory  of  Sncefellsncss  in  western  Iceland.


NOTICES  OF  DOUBTFUL    VALUE;    FICTIONS.  85

passage  that  same  summer,  but  they  were  rather  late  in  putting  to  sea.  They  sailed
away  with  a  north-east  wind,  which  prevailed  far  into  the  summer,  but  nothing  was
heard  of  this  ship  for  a  long  time  afterwards  ^'

Further  on  in  the  same  saga  we  read  of  the  fortuitous  discovery  of  this  same
Biorn  by  certain  of  his  fellow-countrymen,  and  as  the  account  of  their  strange  meeting
contains  the  sole  description  of  this  unknown  land,  it  may  best  be  given  in  the  words
of  the  saga.  '  It  was  in  the  latter  days  of  Olaf  the  Saint  ^  that  Gudleif  [Gubleifr
Guiilaugsson]  engaged  in  a  trading-voyage  westward  to  Dublin,  and  when  he  sailed
from  the  west  it  was  his  intention  to  proceed  to  Iceland.  He  sailed  to  the  westward
of  Ireland,  and  had  easterly  gales  and  winds  from  the  north-east,  and  was  driven  far
to  the  westward  over  the  sea  and  toward  the  south-west,  so  that  they  had  lost  all
track  of  land.  The  summer  was  then  far  spent,  and  they  uttered  many  prayers  that
they  might  be  permitted  to  escape  from  the  sea,  and  it  befell  thereupon  that  they
became  aware  of  land.  It  was  a  great  country,  but  they  did  not  know  what  country
it  was.  Gudleif  and  his  companions  determined  to  sail  to  the  land,  for  they  were
weary  with  battling  with  the  tempestuous  sea.  They  found  a  good  harbour  there,
and  they  had  been  alongside  the  land  but  a  short  time  when  men  came  toward  them.
They  did  not  recognize  a  single  man,  but  it  rather  seemed  to  them  that  they  were
speaking  Irish  ;  soon  so  great  a  throng  of  men  had  drawn  about  them  that  they
amounted  to  several  hundreds.  These  people  thereupon  seized  them  all  and  bound
them,  and  then  drove  them  up  upon  the  land.  They  were  then  taken  to  a  meeting,  at
which  their  case  was  considered.  It  was  their  understanding  that  some  [of  their  captors]
wished  them  to  be  slain,  while  others  would  have  them  distributed  among  the  people^
and  thrown  into  bondage.  While  this  was  being  argued  they  descried  a  body  of  men
riding,  and  a  banner  was  carried  in  their  midst*,  from  which  they  concluded  that
some  manner  of  chieftain  must  be  in  the  company;  and  when  this  band  drew  near  they
saw  a  tall  and  warlike  man  riding  beneath  the  banner ;  he  was  far  advanced  in  years,
however,  and  his  hair  was  white.  All  of  the  people  assembled  bowed  before  this  man,
and  received  him  as  he  had  been  their  lord ;  they  soon  observed  that  all  questions  and
matters  for  decision  were  submitted  to  him.  This  man  then  summoned  Gudleif  and  his
fellows,  and  when  they  came  before  him  he  addressed  them  in  the  Northern  tongue  [i.e.
Icelandic],  and  asked  them  to  what  country  they  belonged.  They  responded  that  they
were,  for  the  most  part,  Icelanders.  This  man  asked  which  of  them  were  the  Icelanders.

'  '  Annan  dag  eptir  reið  Björn  suðr  í  Hraunhöfn  til  skips  ok  tók  sér  þar  þegar  fari  um  sumarit,  ok
urðu  heldr  síðbúnir.  t-eir  tóku  út  landnyrðing,  ok  viðraði  þat  löngum  um  sumarit,  en  til  skips  þess
spurðist  eigi  síðan  langan  tíina.'     Eyrbyggja  Saga,  loc.  cit.  p-  91-

^  That  is  to  say,  toward  the  end  of  Olaf  s  reign.     Olaf  died  in  1030.

'  Lit.  '  divided  for  their  sustenance.'  *  Lit-  '  in  the  company.'


86  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

Gudleif  then  advanced  before  this  man,  and  greeted  him  worthily,  and  he  received  his
salutations  graciously,  and  asks  from  what  part  of  Iceland  they  came,  and  Gudleif  replies
that  he  comes  from  Borgarfirth.  He  then  enquired  from  what  part  of  Borgarfirth  he
came,  and  Gudleif  informs  him.  After  this  he  asked  particularly  after  every  one  of  the
leading  men  of  Borgarfirth  and  Breidafirth,  and  in  the  course  of  the  conversation  he
asks  after  Snorri  Godi  and  Thurid,  of  Fródá  [Fróbá],  his  sister,  and  he  enquired  espe-
cially after  all  details  concerning  Fródá,  and  particularly  regarding  the  boy  Kiartan  \
who  was  then  the  master  at  Fródá.  The  people  of  the  country,  on  the  other  hand,
demanded  that  some  judgment  should  be  reached  concerning  the  ship's  crew.  After
this  the  tall  man  left  them,  and  called  about  him  twelve  of  his  men,  and  they  sat
together  for  a  long  time  in  consultation,  after  which  they  betook  themselves  to  the
[general]  meeting.  Thereupon  the  tall  man  said  to  Gudleif  and  his  companions :  "  We,
the  people  of  this  country,  have  somewhat  considered  your  case,  and  the  inhabitants
have  given  your  affair  into  my  care,  and  I  will  now  give  you  permission  to  go  whither
ye  list ;  and  even  though  it  may  seem  to  you  that  the  summer  is  far  spent,  still  I
would  counsel  you  to  leave  here,  for  the  people  here  are  untrustworthy  and  hard  to
deal  with,  and  have  already  formed  the  belief  that  their  laws  have  been  broken."
Gudleif  replied :  "  If  it  be  vouchsafed  us  to  reach  our  native  land,  what  shall  we  say
concerning  him  who  has  granted  us  our  freedom."  He  answers  :  "  That  I  may  not  tell
you,  for  I  cannot  bear  that  my  relatives  and  foster-brothers  should  have  such  a  voyage
hither,  as  ye  would  have  had  if  ye  had  not  had  m}^  aid ;  but  now  I  am  so  advanced
in  years,"  said  he,  "  that  the  hour  may  come  at  any  time  when  age  shall  rise  above  my
head;  and  even  though  I  should  live  yet  a  little  longer,  still  there  are  those  here  in  the
land  who  are  more  powerful  than  I  who  would  offer  little  mercy  to  strangers,  albeit
these  are  not  in  this  neighbourhood  where  ye  have  landed."  Aftenvard  this  man
aided  them  in  equipping  their  ship,  and  remained  with  them  until  there  came  a  fair
wind,  which  enabled  them  to  put  to  sea.  But  before  he  and  Gudleif  parted,  this  man
took  a  gold  ring  from  his  hand  and  handed  it  to  Gudleif,  and  with  it  a  goodly  sword ;
and  he  then  said  to  Gudleif:  "  If  it  be  granted  thee  to  come  again  to  thy  father-land,
then  do  thou  give  this  sword  to  Kiartan,  the  master  at  Fródá,  and  the  ring  to  his
mother."  Gudleif  said  :  "  What  shall  I  reply  as  to  who  sends  these  precious  things?"
He  answers:  "Say  that  he  sends  them  who  was  more  of  a  friend  of  the  mistress  at
Fródá,  than  of  the  Godi  at  Helgafell,  her  brother.  But  if  any  persons  shall  think
they  have  discovered  from  this  to  whom  these  treasures  belonged,  give  them  my
message,  that  I  forbid  any  man  to  go  in  search  of  me,  for  it  would  be  a  most
desperate  undertaking,  unless  he  should  fare  as  successfully  as  ye  have  in  finding

'  This  Kiartan  was  Thurid's  son.


NOTICES  OF  DOUBTFUL    VALUE;    FICTIONS.  87

a  landing-place ;  for  here  is  an  extensive  country  with  few  harbours,  and  over  all  a
disposition  to  deal  harshly  with  strangers,  unless  it  befall  as  it  has  in  this  case."
After  this  they  parted.  Gudleif  and  his  men  put  to  sea,  and  arrived  in  Ireland  late  in
the  autumn,  and  passed  the  winter  in  Dublin ;  but  in  the  summer  they  sailed  to  Ice-
land, and  Gudleif  delivered  the  treasures,  and  all  men  held  of  a  verity  that  this  man
was  Biorn  Broadwickers'-champion  ;  but  people  have  no  other  proof  of  this,  save  these
particulars,  which  have  now  been  related  (73).'

It  will  be  observed  that  the  narrator  of  the  saga  does  not  in  this  incident  once
connect  this  unknown  land  with  White-men's-land,  nor  does  he  offer  any  suggestion
as  to  its  situation.  The  work  of  identifying  this  strange  country  with  White-men's-
land,  and  so  with  Wineland  the  Good,  has  been  entirely  wrought  by  the  modern
commentator  ^  If  we  accept  as  credible  a  meeting  so  miraculous  as  the  one  here
described,  if  we  disregard  the  statements  of  the  narrative  showing  the  existence  of
horses  in  this  unknown  land,  which  the  theorist  has  not  hesitated  to  do  -,  and,  finally,
if  we  assume  that  there  was  at  this  time  an  Irish  colony  or  one  speaking  a  kindred
tongue  in  North  America,  we  may  conclude  that  Biorn's  adopted  home  was  some-
where on  the  eastern  North-American  coast.  If,  however,  we  read  the  statements  of
the  saga  as  we  find  them,  they  seem  all  to  tend  to  deny  this  postulate,  rather  than  to
confirm  it.  The  entire  story  has  a  decidedly  fabulous  appearance,  and,  as  has  been
suggested  by  a  learned  editor  of  the  saga,  a  romantic  cast,  which  is  not  consonant
with  the  character  of  the  history  in  which  it  appears  ^.  A  narrative,  the  tmth  of
which  the  narrator,  himself,  tells  us  had  not  been  ratified  by  collateral  evidence,
and  whose  details  are  so  vague  and  indefinite,  seems  to  afford  historical  evidence
of  a  character  so  equivocal,  that  it  may  well  be  dismissed  without  further  con-
sideration.

Of  an  altogether  different  nature  from  the  narrative  of  discovery  above  recited,  is
the  brief  notice  of  the  finding  of  a  new  land,  set  down  in  the  Icelandic  Annals  toward
the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century.     In  the  Annales  regii,  in  the  year  1285,  the  record

'  Cf.  Torfæus,  Historia  Vinlandice  Antiquæ,  Copenh.  1 715,  p.  72  :  '  Nescio  an  ad  banc  Vinlandiam
aut  incertam  aliam  Americæ  partem  referenda  sit  terra  ilia,  ad  quam  historia  Eyrbyggensium  memorat
Gudleifum  Gunnlaugi  filium,'  &c.     Other  later  writers  have  spoken  with  less  hesitancy.

^  '  Dass  Biorn  zu  Pferde  an  den  Strand  gekommen,  konnte  einer  von  den  gewöhnlichen  Zusatzen
der  Sagaschreiber  seyn,  die  keinen  Anstand  nehmen,  die  einzelnen  Umstande  nach  Wahrscheinlichkeit
auszumahlen,  damit  die  Sache  anschaulicher  werde.'  Muller,  Sagaenbibliothek,  aus  der  Danischen
Handschrift  iibers.  v.  Lachmann,  Berlin,  1816,  p.  144.

'  '  Die  Geschichte  von  Björn  Breiðvíkingakappi  urspriinglich  vielleicht  eine  selbststandige  kleine
Erzahlung,  hier  aber  vom  Verf.  ohne  weiteres  der  Eb.  eingefiigt,  [sie]  hat  etwas  romanhaftes,  das
nichts  weniger  als  mit  dem  sonstigen  Ernste  der  Saga  iibereinstimmt.'  Vigfusson,  ed.  Eyrbyggja,
p.  xvii.


88  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

reads:  'Adalbrand  and  Thor\-ald,  Helgi's  sons,  found  New-land';'  in  the  Annals  of
the  Flatey  Book,  under  the  same  year, '  Land  was  found  to  the  westward  off  Iceland-;'
and  again  in  Gottskalk's  Annals  an  entry  exactly  similar  to  that  of  the  Flatey  Book.
In  Höyer's  Annals  the  entry  is  of  a  different  character:  'Helgi's  sons  sailed  into
Greenland's  uninhabited  regions'.'

In  the  parchment  manuscript  AM.  415,  410,  written,  probably,  about  the  beginning
of  the  fourteenth  century*,  is  a  collection  of  annals,  called  '  Annales  vetustissimi,'  and
here,  under  the  year  1285,  is  an  entry  similar  to  that  of  the  Flatey  Book :  '  Land  found
to  the  westward  off  Iceland".'  In  the  Skálholt  Annals,  on  the  other  hand,  the  only
corresponding  entry  against  the  j^ear  1285,  is  :  '  Down-islands  discovered  ^'

It  required  but  the  similarity  between  the  names  New-land  and  Newfoundland  to
arouse  the  effort  to  identify  the  two  countries ;  and  the  theory  thus  created  was  sup-
posed to  find  confirmation  in  a  passage  in  a  copy  of  a  certain  document  known  as
Bishop  Gizur  Einarsson's  Register  pbréfa-bók],  for  the  years  1540-47,  which  is
contained  in  a  paper  manuscript  of  the  seventeenth  century',  AM.  266,  fol.  This
passage  is  as  follows:  'Wise  men  have  said,  that  you  must  sail  to  the  south-west  from
Krisuvik  mountain  to  Newland*.'  Krisuvik  mountain  is  situated  on  the  promontory
of  Reykianess,  the  south-western  extremity  of  Iceland,  and,  as  has  been  recently
pointed  out',  to  sail  the  course  suggested  by  Bishop  Gizur  would  in  all  probability
land  the  adventurous  mariner  in  south-eastern  Greenland.  The  record  of  the  Annals,
however,  is  so  explicit,  that,  in  determining  the  site  of  '  Newland,'  we  do  not  need  to
orient  ourselves  by  extraneous  evidence.  We  are  informed,  that,  in  1285,  Helgi's  sons
sailed  into  Greenland's  '  óbygSir,'  the  name  by  which  the  Greenland  colonists  were
wont  to  designate  the  uninhabited  east  coast  of  Greenland  ;  and  as  it  is  elsewhere
distinctly  stated  that  the  '  Newland,'  which  these  men  discovered  in  the  same  year,  lay
to  the  'westward  off  Iceland'",'  there  can  be  little  room  for  hesitancj'  in  reaching  the
conclusion  that  '  Newland,'  the  '  óbygSir'  and  the  '  Down-islands,'  all  lie  together,  and

'  '  Fuwdu  Helga  synjV  nýia  la«d  Adalbrandr  ok  Þorvalldr.'  These  men  were  priests  of  some
prominence  in  their  time.  Cf.  Arna  saga  biskups,  Biskupa  Sögur,  Copenh.  1858,  vol.  i.  The  above
entry  is  in  a  later  hand  than  that  of  the  other  entries  under  the  same  year.

^  '  Fanz  la//d  vestr  undan  íslawdi.'  '  '  Helga  i>ymr  sigldu  Í  Grœnkwdz  óbijoðir  (óbygðir).'

*  Cf.  Katalog  over  den  AM.  Handskriftsamling,  vol.  i.  p.  619.

''  '  Fandz  \and  vestr  vndan  fsk^de.'  '  '  Funduz  Dúneyiar.'

'  Cf.  Katalog  AM.  Handskrifter,  vol.  i.  p.  240.  It  is,  perhaps,  worthy  of  note  that  Adalbrand
was  a  priest  in  the  south  of  Iceland,  not  far  from  Skálholt,  where  Bishop  Gizur's  book  was,  doubtless,
written,  and  whither  any  record  which  Adalbrand  or  his  brother  may  have  left,  might  easily  have  found
its  way.

*  '  Ilafa  vitrir  mcnn  sagt  at  suðvcstr  skal  sigla  til  Nýalands  undir  Krísuvíkr  bergi.'

"  Storm,  Ilistorisk  Tidskrift,  Christiania,  1888,  p.  264.  '"  '  vestr  undan  islandi.'


NOTICES   OF  DOUBTFUL    VALUE;    FICTIONS.  89

are  probably  only  different  names  for  the  same  discovery.  However  this  may  be,  it  is
at  least  manifest,  from  the  record,  that  if  Newland  was  not  a  part  of  the  eastern  coast
of  Greenland  \  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  it  was  any\vhere  in  the  region  of
Newfoundland.

A  few  years  after  this  discovery  is  recorded,  namely  in  1289,  we  find  the  following
statement  in  the  Flatey  Annals :  '  King  Eric  sends  Rolf  to  Iceland  to  seek  New-land  - ;'
and  again  in  the  next  year :  '  Rolf  travelled  about  Iceland  soliciting  men  for  a  New-land
voyage  ^'  No  additional  information  has  been  preserved  touching  this  enterprise,  and
it  therefore  seems  probable  that  if  the  voyage  was  actually  undertaken,  it  was  barren
of  results.  The  Flatey  Annals  note  the  death  of  Rolf,  Land-Rolf  [Landa-Rólf]  as  he
was  called,  in  1295*,  and  as  no  subsequent  seeker  of  Newland  is  named  in  Icelandic
history,  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  spirit  of  exploration  died  with  him.

This  brief  record  of  the  Annals  is  unquestionably  historically  accurate,  moreover
there  may  be  somewhat  of  an  historical  foundation  for  the  adventures  of  the  Broad-
wickers'-champion  recounted  in  the  Eyrbyggja  Saga ;  neither  of  these  notices  of  dis-
covery, however,  appears  to  have  any  connection  with  the  discovery  of  Wineland ;
they  have  been  considered  here  chiefly  because  of  the  fact  that  they  have  been  treated
in  the  past  as  if  they  had  a  direct  bearing  upon  the  Wineland  history.

The  historical  and  quasi-historical  material  relating  to  the  discovery  of  Wine-
land, has  now  been  presented.  A  few  brief  notices  of  Helluland,  contained  in  the
later  Icelandic  literature,  remain  for  consideration.  These  notices  necessarily  partake
of  the  character  of  the  sagas  in  which  they  appear,  and  as  these  sagas  are  in  a  greater
or  less  degree  pure  fictions,  the  notices  cannot  be  regarded  as  possessing  any  historical
value.

First  among  these  unhistorical  sagas  is  the  old  mythical  tale  [fornsaga]  of  Arrow-
Odd  [Orvar-Odds  Saga],  of  which  two  recensions  exist;  the  more  recent  °  and  inferior
version  ^  is  that  which  contains  the  passages  wherein  Helluland  is  mentioned,  as
follows  :  '  "  But  I  will  tell  thee  where  Ogmund  [Qgmundr]  is  ;  he  is  come  into  that  firth
which  is  called  Skuggi',  it  is  in  Helluland's  deserts  .  .  . ;  he  has  gone  thither  because

'  It  has  even  been  suggested  that  the  supposed  land  may  have  been  an  ice-floe.  Cf.  Zahrtniann,
'  Om  Zeniernes  Reiser  i  Norden,'  in  Nordisk  Tidskrift  for  Oldkyndighed,  Copenh.  1833,  p.  24.

-  '  'Eixikr  konungr  sendi  Rolf  U'l  íslandz  at  leita  nfia.  landz.'  The  '  Eirikr  konungr '  was  King  Eric
Magnusson  of  Norway,  who  died  1299.

'  '  For  Rólfr  vm  ísla«d  ok  kraidi  menu  U'l  nýia  latidz  ffrdar.'

*  '  Andadiz  L<7«da-Rólfr.'  "•  Cf.  Boer,  Qrvar-Odds  Saga,  Leiden,  1888,  p.  xxiv.

^  Maurer,  Ueber  die  Ausdrlicke:  altnord.,  altnorw.,  u.  island.,  Sprache,  Munich,  1867,  p.  210.

'  This  firth  is  also  referred  to  in  the  fictitious  Gunnars  saga  keldugnúpsfífls,  Copenh.  i866,  p.  51.
Although  Helluland  is  not  mentioned  by  name,  the  context  appears  to  indicate  that  the  firth  was
intended  to  have  a  location  similar  to  that  assigned  it  in  Arrow-Odd's  Saga.

N


go  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

he  does  not  wish  to  meet  thee ;  now  thou  mayest  track  him  home,  if  thou  wishest,  and
see  how  it  fares."  Odd  said  thus  it  should  be.  Thereupon  they  sail  until  they  come
into  Greenland's  sea,  when  they  turn  south  and  west  around  the  land.  .  .  .  They  sail
now  until  they  come  to  Helluland,  and  lay  their  course  into  the  Skuggi-firth.  And
when  they  had  reached  the  land  the  father  and  son  went  ashore,  and  walked  until
they  saw  where  there  was  a  fortification,  and  it  seemed  to  them  to  be  very  strongly
built  1.'

In  the  same  category  with  Arrow-Odd's  Saga  may  be  placed  two  other  mythical
sagas,  the  Saga  of  Halfdan  Eysteinsson  [Hálfdanar  saga  Eysteinssonar],  and  the  Saga
of  Halfdan  Brana's-fosterling  [Hálfdanar  saga  Brpnufóstra]  ;  in  the  first  of  these  the
passage  containing  the  mention  of  Helluland  is  as  follows :  '  Raknar  brought  Hellu-
land's  deserts  under  his  sway,  and  destroyed  all  the  giants  there  ^.'  In  the  second  of
these  last-mentioned  sagas  the  hero  is  driven  out  of  his  course  at  sea,  until  he  finally
succeeds  in  beaching  his  ship  upon  '  smooth  sands '  beside  '  high  cliffs  ; '  '  there  was
much  drift-wood  on  the  sands,  and  they  set  about  building  a  hut,  which  was  soon
finished.  Halfdan  frequently  ascended  the  glaciers,  and  some  of  the  men  bore  him
company  ....  The  men  asked  Halfdan  what  country  this  could  be.  Halfdan
replied  that  they  must  be  come  to  Helluland's  deserts  ^'

Belonging  to  a  class  of  fictitious  sagas  known  as  '  landvættasögur '  [stories  of  a
country's  guardian  spirits],  is  the  folk-tale  of  Bard  the  Snow-fell-god  [Báröar  saga
Snæfellsáss].  The  first  chapter  of  this  tale  begins  :  '  There  was  a  king  named  Dumb,
who  ruled  over  those  gulfs,  which  extend  northward  around  Helluland  and  are  now
called  Dumb's  sea*.'     Subsequently  we  find  brief  mention  of  a  king  of  Helluland,  of

'  '  "  En  segja  mun  ek  þér  til,  hvar  Qgmundr  er ;  hann  er  kominn  Í  fjgrð  þann,  er  Skuggi  heitir,  hann
er  Í  Hellulands  úbygðum,  .  .  . ;  er  hann  því  þar  kominn,  at  hann  hirðir  ekki  þik  at  finna ;  nu  máttu
sœkja  hann  heim,  ef  þií  vik,  ok  vita  hversu  er  gengr."  Oddr  sagði  svá  skj-klu  vera.  Síðan  sigla  þeir  þar
til  er  þeir  kómu  í  Grœnlands  haf,  snila  þá  suðr  ok  vestr  fyTÍr  landit.  .  .  .  Sigla  þar  til,  at  þeir  koma  til
Hellulands,  ok  leggja  inn  á  fjgrðinn  Skugga.  En  er  þeir  em  landfastir  orðnir,  ganga  þeir  feðgar  á  land,
ok  þar  til  sem  þeir  sjá,  hvar  virki  stendr,  ok  sýniz  þeim  þat  harðla  raniing0rt.'  Qrvar-Odds  Saga,  ed.
Boer,  Leyden,  1888,  pp.  131,  132  ;  cf.  also  the  verse  in  the  Ævidrápa,  same  edition,  p.  206.

"  '  Raknar  lagði  undir  sik  Hellulands  óbygðir,  ok  eyddi  þar  öllum  jötnum.'  Hálfdánar  saga
Eysteinssonar,  ed.  Rafn,  Fornald.  sögur  Nordrl.  Copenh.  1830,  vol.  iii.  p.  556.

'  '  Viðr  var  þar  rekinn  niikill  á  sandinn,  ok  taka  þeir  þar  til  skálasmíðar,  ok  var  skjólt  algjör.
Hálfdán  gengr  á  jökla  jafnan,  ok  nökkrir  men  með  honuni,  .  .  .  Menn  Hálfdánar  spurðu,  hvat  land
þetta  væri.  Hálfdán  kvað  þá  mundu  vera  komna  at  Hellulands  óbygðum.'  Hálfdánar  saga  Brönu-
fóstra,  ed.  Rafn,  Fornald.  sög.  Nordrl.  vol.  iii.  p.  568.

*  '  Dumbr  hcfir  koniíngr  heitið,  hann  rdð  fyrir  hafsbotnum  þeim,  er  ganga  norðr  um  Helluland  ok
nú  er  kallat  Dumbshaf.'  Bárðar  saga  Snæfellsás,  ed.  Vigfusson,  Copenh.  i86o.  The  edition  of  this
saga,  contained  in  Biörn  Marcusson's  Notkrer  Marg-Frooder  Sogu-^ætter  fslcndinga,  Hólar,  1756,
however,  gives  Dumb  dominion  over  the  gulfs,  v^hich  extend  from  Risaland  to  the  south-east :  '  Hann


NOTICES  OF  DOUBTFUL    VALUE;    FICTIONS.  91

whom  Gest,  the  son  of  the  hero  of  the  saga,  says :  '  I  have  never  seen  him  before,
but  I  have  been  told  by  my  relatives  that  the  king  was  called  Rakin  ^,  and  from  their
account  I  beheve  I  recognize  him;  he  at  one  time  ruled  over  Helluland  and  many
other  countries,  and  after  he  had  long  ruled  these  lands  he  caused  himself  to  be  buried
alive,  together  with  five  hundred  men,  at  Raknslodi ;  he  murdered  his  father  and
mother,  and  many  other  people  ;  it  seems  to  me  probable,  from  the  reports  of  other
people,  that  his  burial-mound  is  northward  in  Helluland's  deserts  ^.'  Gest  goes  in
quest  of  this  mound,  sails  to  Greenland's  deserts,  where,  having  traversed  the  lava-
fields  [!]  for  three  days  on  foot,  he  at  length  discovers  the  burial-mound  upon  an  island
near  the  sea-coast ;  '  some  men  say  that  this  mound  was  situated  to  the  northward
off  Helluland,  but  wherever  it  was,  there  were  no  settlements  in  the  neighbourhood  ^'
The  brief  extracts  here  quoted  will  suffice  to  indicate  not  only  the  fabulous
character  of  the  sagas  in  which  they  appear,  but  they  serve  further  to  show  how
completely  the  discoveries  of  Leif,  and  the  explorations  of  Karlsefni  had  become
distorted  in  the  popular  memory  of  the  Icelanders  at  the  time  these  tales  were
composed,  which  was  probably  in  the  thirteenth  or  fourteenth  century*.  The  Hellu-
land of  these  stories  is  an  unknown  region,  relegated,  in  the  popular  superstition,  to
the  trackless  wastes  of  northern  Greenland.

ried  fvri  hafs  Botnum  þeim  er  gánga  af  Risalande,  i  Lands-sudur,'  1.  c.  p.  163.  This  text  was
probably  drawn  from  Vatnshyrna  ;  cf.  Bárðar  saga  Snæfellsáss,  ed.  Vigfusson,  p.  i,  n.  i.

'  The  edition  of  the  saga  of  1756  has  Ragnar  ;  cf.  the  quotation  from  Hálfd.  saga  Eysteinssonar.

^  '  Ekki  hef  ek  sbt  hann  fyrr,  en  sagt  hefir  mfer  verit  af  frændum  mínum,  at  konúngr  hefir  heitið
Rakin,  ok  af  þeirri  sögn  þikkjumst  ek  kenna  hann ;  hefir  hann  ráðit  fyrir  Hellulandi  ok  morgum  öðrum
löndum,  ok  er  hann  hafði  lengi  ráðit  let  hann  kviksetja  sik  með  ccccc  manna  á  Raknslóða ;  hann  myrði
föður  sinn  ok  móður,  ok  mart  annat  folk ;  þikki  mhr  van,  at  haugr  hans  muni  vera  norðarliga  Í  Hellu-
lands  óbygðum  at  annarra  manna  frásögn.'     Báröar  saga,  ed.  Vigfusson,  pp.  38,  39.

'  '  Segja  sumir  menn,  at  sjil  haugr  hafi  staðit  norðarliga  fyrir  Hellulandi,  en  hvar  sem  þat  hefir  verit,
þá  hafa  þar  engar  bygðir  Í  nánd  verit.'     Bárðar  saga,  loc.  cit.  p.  41.

*  Cf.  Maurer,  Ueber  die  Ausdriicke,  &c.,  p.  25  ;  Vigfusson,  Prolegomena,  Sturlunga  Saga,  p.  Ixii,


CHAPTER  VI.

The   Publication  of  the   Discovery.

The  earliest  foreign  mention  of  Wineland  appears  in  the  work  of  the  prebendary,
Adam  of  Bremen,  called  Dcscriptio  insidanun  aqnilonis'^.  The  material  for  this  work
was  obtained  by  its  author  during  a  sojourn  at  the  court  of  the  Danish  king,  Svend
Estridsson,  after  the  year  1069,  and  probably,  very  soon  thereafter,  for  his  history
appears  to  have  been  completed  before  the  year  1076,  the  date  of  king  Svend's  death  ^.
The  most  important  manuscript  of  Adam's  longer  work,  the  Gesta  Hammahurgensis
ccclesice  pontificimi,  is  the  Codex  Vindobonensis,  deposited  in  the  Imperial  Library  of
Vienna  under  the  number  413.  This  manuscript,  written  in  the  thirteenth  century^,
contains  also  the  complete  '  description  of  the  Northern  islands,'  which  is  partially
lacking  in  the  fine  manuscript  of  the  same  century,  contained  in  the  Royal  Library  of
Copenhagen.  This  '  description '  was  first  printed'*  in  Lindenbruch's  edition  of  Adam's
work,  published  in  1595°,  and  is  the  first  printed  reference  to  Wineland,  being  as
follows :  '  Moreover  he "  spoke  of  an  island  in  that  ocean  discovered  by  many,  which
is  called  Wineland,  for  the  reason  that  vines  grow  wild  there,  which  yield  the  best  of
wine.  Moreover  that  grain  unsown  grows  there  abundantly,  is  not  a  fabulous  fancy,
but,  from  the  accounts  of  the  Danes,  we  know  to  be  a  fact.  Beyond  this  island,  it  is
said,  that  there  is  no  habitable  land  in  that  ocean,  but  all  those  regions  which  are
beyond  are  filled  with  insupportable  ice  and  boundless  gloom,  to  which  Martian  thus
refers  :  "  One  day's  sail  bej'ond  Thile  the  sea  is  frozen."  This  was  essa3'ed  not  long
since  by  that  very  enterprising  Northmen's  prince,  Harold '',  who  explored  the  extent
of  the  northern  ocean  with  his  ship,  but  was  scarcely  able  by  retreating  to  escape  in

'  Also  called  by  editors  '  De  situ  Daniæ;'  cf.  ed.  Lindenbruch,  1595,  Stephanius,  1629.

"^  Cf.  Adami  gesta  Hammaburgensis  ecclcsice  pontificum,  ex  rccensione  Lappenbergii,  2nd  ed.
Hanover,  1876,  p.  ii.

^  Adami  gesta  Hammab.  ed.  1876,  p.  vii.  '  Idem,  p.  xiv.

"■'  '  M.  Adami  Ilistoria  F.cclesiastica,  .  .  .  eivsdem  avctoris  libellvs  de  Sitv  Daniæ,'  .  .  .  Cura  ac
labore  Erpoldi  Lindcnbrvch,  Lugd.  Bat.  1595.

"  Cf.  preceding  lines:  '  Itaquc  rex  Danorum  cum  multis  aliis  contcstatus  est,'  &c.

'  Probably  King  Harold  Hardrcde,  who  was  slain  in  1066,


THE  PUBLICATION  OF   THE  DISCOVERY.


93


safety  from  the  gulf's  enormous  abyss ',  where  before  his  eyes  the  vanishing  bounds  of
earth  were  hidden  in  gloom  -.'

The  learned  cleric,  it  will  be  observed,  is  very  careful  to  give  his  authority  for  a
narrative,  which  evidently  impressed  him  as  bordering  sharply  upon  the  fabulous.
The  situation,  which  he  would  ascribe  to  the  strange  country  is  inaccurate  enough,
but  the  land  where  vines  grow  wild  and  grain  self-sown,  stripped  of  the  historian's
adornments,  would  accord  sufficiently  well  with  the  accounts  of  the  discoverers  of
Wineland  to  enable  us  to  identify  the  country,  if  Adam  had  not  himself  given  us  the
name  of  this  land,  and  thus  arrested  all  uncertainty  ^.  It  is  not  strange,  however,  that
with  the  lapse  of  time  the  knowledge  of  such  a  land  should  have  been  erased  from  the
recollection  of  the  outer  world.  The  author  of  the  so-called  '  Breve  Chronicon  Nor-
vegiæ*'  is,  therefore,  constrained  to  omit  all  reference  to  this  wonderful  land,  although
his  reference  to  Greenland  indicates  an  acquaintance  with  that  tradition,  which  in  Ice-
landic geographical  notices,  already  cited,  would  ascribe  Wineland  to  a  more  southerly
clime,  bordering  indeed,  upon  Africa.  The  manuscript  of  this  history,  which  has  been
preserved,  belongs  to  the  Earl  of  Dalhousie  ^,  and  was  probably  written  between  the
years  1443  and  1460  ^.     The  passage  mentioned,  while  it  is  not  strictly  pertinent,  in  a

*  As  to  the  possible  significance  of  these  words  and  the  passage  in  AM.  194,  8vo,  'then  there
is  an  open  sea  flowing  in  between  Wineland  and  Markland,'  quoted  page  15,  ante,  cf.  Storm,  '  Gin-
nungagap  i  Mythologien  og  i  Geografien/  in  Arkiv  for  nordisk  Filologi,  Lund,  1890,  pp.  340-50.

*  '  Praeterea  unam  adliuc  insukim  recitavit  a  multis  in  eo  repertam  occeano,  quae  dicitur  Winland,
eo  quod  ibi  vites  sponte  nascantur,  vinum  optimum  ferentes.  Nam  et  fruges  ibi  non  seminatas
habundare,  non  fabulosa  opinione,  sed  certa  comperimus  relatione  Danorum.  Post  quam  insulam,  ait,
terra  non  invenitur  habitabilis  in  illo  occeano,  sed  omnia  quae  ultra  sunt  glacie  intolerabili  ac  caligine
inmensa  plena  sunt.  Cuius  rei  Warcianus  ita  meminit :  "  Ultra  Thilen,"  inquiens,  "  navigatione  unius
diei  mare  concretum  est."  Temptavit  hoc  nuper  e.xperientissimus  Nordmannorum  princeps  Haraldus.
Qui  latitudinem  septentrionalis  occeani  perscrutatus  navibus,  tandem  caligantibus  ante  ora  deficientis
mundi  finibus,  inmane  abyssi  baratrum  retroactis  vestigiis  pene  vix  salvus  evasit.'     Ed.  1876,  p.  187.

'  As  late  as  1673  [1689  .']  Olof  Rudbeck  would  seek  to  identify  this  '  Winland,'  which  Adam  men-
tions, with  Finland.  '  Ne  tamen  poetis  solis  hoc  loquendi  genus  in  suis  regionum  laudationibus  familiare
fuisse  quis  existimet,  sacras  adeat  literas  quæ  Palæstinæ  fæcunditatem  appellatione  fluentorum  laclis
S)  vidlis  designant.  Tale  aliquid,  sine  omni  dubio,  Adamo  Bremensi  quondam  persuaserat  insulam
esse  in  ultimo  septentrione  sitam,  mari  glaciali  vicinam,  vini  feracem,  &  ea  propter  fide  tamen  Danorum,
Vinlandiam  dictam  prout  ipse  in  de  situ  Daniæ  p.  m.  37.  fateri  non  dubitat.  Sed  deceptum  eum  hac
sive  Danorum  fide,  sive  credulitate  sua  planum  facit  afline  isti  vocabulum  Finlandiœ  provinciæ  ad
Regnum  nostrum  pertinentis,  pro  quo  apud  Snorronem  &  in  Hist.  Regum  non  semel  occurrit  VMamliœ
nomen,  cujus  promontorium  ad  ultimum  septentrionem  &  usque  ad  mare  glaciale  sese  extendit.'  Ole
Rudbeks,  Atland  eller  Manheim,  Upsala.  n.  d.  [1689?],  pp.  291,  292.

*  First  printed  by  Munch  in  Symbolæ  ad  Historiam  Antiquiorem  Rerum  Nor\-egicarum,  Christiania,
1850.

^  Cf.  Storm,  Monumenta  Historica  Norvegiæ,  Christiania,  1880,  p.  xvi.

*  Idem,  p.  xvii ;  Munch,  Symbolæ,  p.  ii.


94  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

measure  indicates,  perhaps,  the  information  accessible  at  this  period,  to  an  author  who
must  have  been  more  or  less  acquainted  with  the  current  lore  of  the  land  in  which  the
Wineland  history  was  still  preserved.  Greenland,  this  author  writes,  '  which  country
was  discovered  and  settled  by  the  inhabitants  of  Thule  [Telensibus],  and  strengthened
by  the  Catholic  faith,  lies  at  the  western  boundary  of  Europe,  almost  bordering  upon
the  African  isles,  where  the  overflowing  sea  spreads  out\'  No  quickening  evidence
came  from  Iceland  until  long  afterward,  and  those  who  saw  Adam's  Wineland  recital,
probabty  regarded  it  as  the  artless  testimony  of  a  too-credulous  historian.

After  the  publication  of  Adam  of  Bremen's  work,  in  1595,  the  name  of  Wineland
next  recurs  in  print,  in  a  poem  written  by  the  Danish  clergyman,  Claus  Christoffersson
Lyschander,  called  'Den  Grpnlandske  Chronica'  [the  Chronicle  of  Greenland],  which
was  published  in  Copenhagen  in  1608.  Founded,  apparently,  upon  the  scantiest  of
historical  material,  which  material  was  treated  with  the  broadest  of  poetic  licence,  the
Chronicle  is  devoid  of  historical  value  ^.  Lj-schander  seems  to  have  derived  from
Icelandic  Annals^  the  knowledge  of  Bishop  Eric's  Wineland  voj-age,  and  to  have
elaborated  this  entry,  with  the  aid  of  his  vivid  imagination,  into  three  lines  of  doggerel
in  somewhat  the  following  manner :

And  Eric  of  Greenland  did  the  deed.
Planted  in  Wineland  both  folk  and  creed,
Which  are  there  e'en  now  surviving*.

A  few  j-ears  prior  to  this  rhapsody  of  L3-schander's,  the  geographer  Ortelius  had
ascribed  to  the  Northmen  the  credit  of  the  discovery  of  America.  According  to
Alexander  von  Humboldt,  Ortelius  announced  this  opinion  in  1570,  and  he  cites
Ortelius'  work,  '  Theatrum  orbis  terrarum,'  in  the  edition  of  1601  °.  The  edition  of
1584  of  Ortelius'  work  does  not  so  credit  the  discovery,  but  the  English  edition  of


'  '  Que  patria  a  Telensibus  reperta  et  inhabitata  ac  fide  catholica  roborata  terminus  est  ad  occasum
Europe  fere  contingens  affricanas  insulas  ubi  inundant  oceani  refluenta.'     Munch,  Symbolæ,  p.  2.

'  Cf.  Storm,  Om  Kilderne  till  Lyschanders  Grpnlandske  Chronica,'  in  Aarb.  f.  Nord.  Oldk.  og  Hist.,
1888,  pp.  197-218.  '  Idem,  pp.  210,  211.

*  '  Oc  Erich  paa  Gr0nland  lagde  haand  oppaa

Plandtet  paa  Yjniand  baade  Folck  oc  Tro
Som  er  der  endnu  ved  Ijge.'

'  '  Le  mérite  d'avoir  reconnu  la  premiere  dicouverte  de  l'Amérique  continentale  par  les  Normands,
apparlient  indubitablcment  au  gdographe  Ortelius,  qui  annonca  cette  opinion  dbs  I'annde  1570,  prcsque
encore  du  vivant  de  Banhdlcmi  de  Las  Casas,  le  célebre  contcmporaine  de  Colomb  et  de  Cortez.'
Alex.  V.  Humboldt,  Examen  critique  dc  I'histoire  de  la  gdographie  du  Nouveau  Continent,  Paris,  1837,
voL  ii.  p.  120.


THE  PUBLICATION  OF   THE  DISCOVERY.  95

i6c6  does  explicitly,  and  clearly  sets  forth  upon  what  foundation  the  author  rests  his
statement  ^  Ortelius  does  not  seem  to  have  had,  and  could  not  well  have  had  at  the
time  he  wrote,  any  acquaintance  with  Icelandic  records ;  his  opinion,  as  he  himself
tells  us,  was  based  upon  the  marvellous  relation  of  the  voyages  of  the  brothers  Zeni,
first  pubhshed  in  1558.  It  is  not  pertinent  to  dwell  here  upon  the  authenticity  of  the
Zeni  discoveries,  and  while  it  is  true  that  Ortelius  stated  the  fact,  when  he  announced
that  the  'New  World  was  entered  upon  many  ages  past  by  certain  "islanders"  of
Greenland  and  Iceland,'  he  travelled  to  it  by  a  circuitous  route,  and  hit  upon  it,  after
all,  by  a  happy  chance.

The  debased  taste  in  Iceland,  which  followed  the  age  when  the  greater  sagas
were  committed  to  writing,  found  its  gratification  in  the  creation  of  fictitious  tales,
in  recounting  the  exploits  of  foreign  heroes,  and  for  a  time,  the  garnered  wealth
of  their  historical  literature  was  disregarded  or  forgotten  by  the  people  of  Iceland.
With  the  revival  of  learning,  which  came  in  post-Reformation  times,  after  a  long  period
of  comparative  literary  inactivity,  came  a  reawakening  of  interest  in  the  elder  literature,
and  the  Icelandic  scholars  of  this  era  heralded  abroad  the  great  wealth  of  the  discarded
treasures  which  their  ancestors  had  amassed.

The  first  writer  in  modern  times  to  glean  from  Icelandic  records,  and  to  publish,
as  thus  established,  the  discovery  made  by  his  countrymen,  was  Arngrim  Jonsson
[Arngrimr  Jonsson],  who  was  born  in  Iceland  in  1568.  His  various  historical  works,
pubhshed  during  his  life-time,  were  written  in  Latin,  and  all,  with  the  exception  of  the
first  edition  of  a  single  work,  issued  from  presses  on  the  Continent.  His  writings
were,  for  the  most  part,  devoted  to  the  history  of  his  fatherland  and  to  its  defence,  but
incidentally  two  of  these,  at  least,  refer  to  the  Wineland  discovery.  The  first  of  these
works,  '  Crymogœa,  sive  Rerum  Islandicarum,'  was  published  in  Hamburg  in  1610,
1614,  1630.  The  notice  in  this  book  refers  to  the  discovery  of  '  New  Land '  in  1285,
and  Land-Rolf's  expedition  to  Iceland  [undertaken  with  a  view  to  the  exploration  of
this  land],  diverges  into  a  consideration  of  the  Frislanda  of  the  Zeni  narrative,  which

1  '  losephus  Acosta  in  his  booke  De  Natura  notii  orhis  indeuors  by  many  reasons  to  proue,  that  this
part  of  America  was  originally  inhabited  by  certaine  Indians,  forced  thither  by  tempestuous  weather  ouer
the  South  sea  which  now  they  call  Mare  del  Zur.  But  to  me  it  seemes  more  probable,  out  of  the  historic
of  the  two  Zeni,  gentlemen  of  Veitice  [which  I  haue  put  down  before  the  Fable  of  the  South  sea,  and
before  that  of  Scandia]  that  this  New  World  many  ages  past  was  entred  vpon  by  some  islanders  of
Europe,  as  namely  of  Groenland,  Island,  and  Fr island;  being  much  neerer  thereunto  than  the  Indians,
nor  disioyned  thence  [as  appeares  out  of  the  Map]  by  an  Ocean  so  huge,  and  to  the  Indians  so  vnnaui-
gable.  Also,  what  else  may  we  coniecture  to  be  signified  by  this  Noruvibega  [the  name  of  a  North  region
oi  America\  but  that  from  Norway,  signifying  a  North  land,  some  Colonic  in  times  past  hath  hither
beene  transplanted?'  The  Theatre  of  the  Whole  World:  Set  forth  by  that  Excellent  Geographer
Abraham  Ortelius,  London,  1606,  p.  5.


96  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

the  author  regards  as  Iceland,  and  concludes :  '  In  truth  we  believe  the  country  which
Land-Rolf  sought  to  be  Wineland,  formerly  so-called  by  the  Icelanders,  concerning
which  island  of  America,  in  the  region  of  Greenland,  perhaps  the  modern  Estote-
landia,  elsewhere  ^ ; '  a  statement  chiefly  interesting  from  the  fact  that  it  is  the  first
printed  theory  as  to  the  location  of  Wineland.

In  a  second  book,  written  ca.  1635^,  but  not  published  until  1643,  Arngrim  refers
at  some  length  to  Karlsefni  and  his  Wineland  voyage  ^,  which  information  he  states  he
draws  from  Hauk's  history,  and  also  makes  mention  of  Bishop  Eric's  Wineland
vo3'age,  noting  incidentally  Adam  of  Bremen's  reference  to  that  country*.

Arngrim  died  in  1648,  leaving  behind  him  an  unprinted  Latin  manuscript,  which
was  subsequently  translated  into  Icelandic  and  published  in  Iceland  under  the  title
'  Gronlandia  ^.'  In  this  treatise  he  deals  more  minutely  with  the  Wineland  discovery,
but  it  is  probable  that  this  book  failed  to  obtain  as  wide  a  circulation  among  the
scholars  of  Europe  as  his  earlier  works,  and  even  though  it  had  become  well
known,  it  was  destined  to  be  followed,  a  few  years  later,  by  a  much  more  exhaustive
work,  which  must  have  supplanted  it.

Although  the  Icelandic  discovery  had  now  been  published,  the  chief  documents
from  which  the  knowledge  of  the  discovery  was  drawn,  remained  for  many  years  in
Iceland,  where  they  were  practically  inaccessible  to  the  foreign  student.  Arngrim
Jonsson  was  himself,  probably,  the  first  to  set  the  example,  which,  actively  followed
after  his  death,  soon  placed  the  Icelandic  manuscripts  within  comparatively  easy  reach
of  the  students  of  the  Continent ''.  We  have  already  seen,  incidentally,  how  certain  of
these  codices  were  exported  ;  it  remained  for  the  tireless  bibliophile,  Arni  Magnusson,
to  complete  the  deportation  of  manuscripts  from  his  fatherland,  so  that  early  in  the
eighteenth  century  all  of  the  more  important  early  vellums  containing  the  Wineland
narrations  were  lodged  in  the  libraries  of  Copenhagen.    The  hugest  of  all  these

'  '  Terram  veró  Landa  Rolfoni  quæsitam  existamarem  esse  Vinlandiani  olim  Islandis  sic  dictam  ;  de
qua  alibi  insulam  nempe  Americæ  e  regione  Gronlandiæ,  quæ  forte  hodie  Estotelandia,'  &c.  Crymogœa,
p.  120.

^  Vigfusson  and  Powell,  Corp.  Poet.  Bor.  vol.  i.  p.  x.x.

'  Specimen  de  Islandiæ  historicvm,  et  Magna  ex  parte  Chorographicvm,  Amsterdam,  1643,  PP-  i53>
154-

■*  Idem,  p.  148.

"  Gronlandia  edur  Grænlands  Saga  Vr  Islendskum  Sagna  Bookum  eg  Afialum  samaiitekin  og  á
Latinski  mál  Skrifud  af  þeim  licidurliga  &  luUærda  Manni,  Syra  Arngrime  Jonssine  ...  En  a  Norrænu
utl0gd  af  Einare  Ejolfssjne.     Þryckt  i  SkalhoUte  Af  Hendrick  Kruse,  Anno,  i688.

"  Arngrim  presented  a  manuscript  of  Edda  to  the  Danish  scholar,  Olc  Worm,  about  1628.  It  was,
perhaps,  the  first  Icelandic  manuscript  thus  sent  from  Itehnd.  Cf.  Vigfusson,  Sturlunga  Saga,  Pro-
legomena, p.  cxlv.


THE  PUBLICATION  OF   THE  DISCOVERY.  97

manuscripts,  the  Flatey  Book,  had  been  brought  by  the  talented  Icelander,  Thormod
Torfæus  ^  from  Iceland  to  Denmark,  as  a  gift  to  King  Frederick  the  Third.

In  the  3'ear  1715  Torfæus  published  the  first  book  devoted  exclusively  to  the
discovery  of  Wineland.  In  this  little  work  the  place  of  priority  is  assigned  to  the
account  of  the  discovery  as  unfolded  in  the  Flatey  Book  - ;  this  is  followed  by  a
compendium  of  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  [Thorfinns  Saga],  with  which  the  author
seems  to  have  become  acquainted  through  a  transcript  of  the  Hauk's  Book  Saga,  made
by  Biorn  of  Skardsá  [Björn  á  SkaríJsá]  I  The  interest  which  Torfasus'  little  book
elicited  was  of  such  a  character  that  the  general  dissemination  of  the  knowledge  of  the
discovery  may  almost  be  said  to  date  from  its  appearance ;  the  publication  of  the  texts
of  the  sagas  upon  which  Torfæus'  book  was  based  was  not  accomplished,  however,
until  the  present  century.

In  1837  the  sumptuous  work  entitled  '  Antiquitates  Americanæ  * '  was  published
by  the  Royal  Society  of  Northern  Antiquaries  of  Copenhagen.  The  book  was  edited
by  Carl  Christian  Rafn,  with  whom  were  associated  Finn  Magnusen  and  Sveinbiörn
Egilsson  ;  the  associate  editors,  however,  especially  the  last-named,  seem  to  have
shared  to  a  very  limited  extent  in  the  preparation  of  the  work  ;  all  were  scholarly  men,
well  versed  in  the  literature  of  Iceland.  This  book  was  by  far  the  most  elaborate
which  had  been  published  up  to  that  time  upon  the  subject  of  the  Icelandic  discovery
of  America,  and  in  it  the  texts  of  the  sagas  relating  to  the  discovery  were  first  printed,
and  with  these  the  lesser  references  bearing  upon  the  discovery,  which  were  scattered
through  other  Icelandic  writings.  Side  by  side  with  the  Icelandic  texts,  Latin  and
Danish  versions  of  these  texts  were  presented,  arid  along  with  these  the  interpretations
and  theories  of  the  gifted  editor,  Rafn.  The  book  obtained  a  wide  circulation,  and
upon  it  have  been  based  almost  all  of  the  numerous  treatises  upon  the  same  subject,
which  have  since  appeared.  Rafn's  theories  touching  the  Old  Stone  Tower  at  New-
port, R.  I.,  and  the  Dighton  Picture  Rock  near  Taunton,  Mass.,  have  latterly  fallen
into  disfavour,  but  others  of  his  errors,  less  palpable  than  these,  if  we  may  judge  by

'  Þormóðr  Torfason  was  born  in  Iceland  in  1636,  and  died  at  his  home  in  Norway  in  17 19.  Cf.
Worm,  Lexicon.

°  Justin  Winsor  states,  in  his  Narrative  and  Critical  History  of  America  [vol.  i.  note  i,  pp.  91,  92],
that,  '  the  Codex  Flatoyensis  .  .  .  seems  to  have  been  unknown  to  Torfæus.'  A  mistake  rendered
the  more  inexplicable  by  the  fact  that  the  learned  editor  reproduces  a  page  of  Torfæus'  '  Vinlandia,'
the  contents  of  which  work  so  clearly  confute  this  statement.

'  Cf.  Torfæus,  Historia  Vinlandiæ  Antiquæ,  p.  29.

*  Antiquitates  Americanæ,  sive  Scriptores  rerum  Ante-Columbianarum  in  America.  Samling  af  de
Nordens  Oldskrifter  indeholdte  Efterretninger  cm  de  gamle  Nordboers  Opdagelsesreiser  til  America  fra
det  I  ode  til  det  i4de  Aarhundrede.  Edidit  Societas  Regia  Antiquarior.  Septentrionalium,  Copenh.
1837-


98  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

recent  publications,  still  exercise  potent  sway.  While  the  editor  of  the  '  Antiquitates
Americanæ '  deserves  great  praise  for  having  been  the  first  to  publish  to  the  world  the
original  records,  he  has  seriously  qualified  the  credit  to  which  he  is  entitled  by  the
extravagant  theories  and  hazardous  statements  to  which  he  gave  currency,  and  which
have  prejudiced  many  readers  against  the  credibihty  of  the  records  themselves.

Since  the  publication  of  the  '  Antiquitates  Americanæ '  the  most  important  and
original  treatise  upon  the  Wineland  discovery  which  has  appeared,  is  that  recently
published  byDr.  Gustav  Storm,  Professor  of  History  in  the  University  of  Christiania,
entitled,  '  Studies  relating  to  the  Wineland  voyages,  Wineland's  Geography  and  Eth-
nography ^'  These  '  Studies '  appear  to  have  been  the  natural  sequence  of  an  article
upon  the  vexed  question,  affecting  the  site  of  Wineland,  to  which  reference  has  already
been  made  ^.  Professor  Storm's  method  of  treatment  is  altogether  different  from  that
of  Rafn  ;  it  is  philosophical,  logical,  and  apparently  entirely  uninfluenced  by  precon-
ceived theories,  being  based  strictly  upon  the  records.  These  records  of  the  Icelandic
discovery  have  now  been  presented  here.  They  clearly  establish  the  fact  that  some
portion  of  the  eastern  coast  of  North  America  was  visited  by  people  of  Iceland  and  the
Icelandic  colony  in  Greenland  early  in  the  eleventh  century.  In  matters  of  detail,
however,  the  history  of  the  discovery  leaves  wide  the  door  to  conjecture  as  to  the
actual  site  of  Wineland.  It  was  apparently  not  north  of  the  latitude  of  northern  New-
foundland ;  present  climatic  conditions  indicate  that  it  was  situated  somewhat  south  of
this  latitude,  but  how  far  south  the  records  do  not  show.

'  '  Studier  over  Vinlandsreiserne,  Vinlands  Geografi  og  Ethnografi,'  in  Aarb.  f.  Nord.  Oldk.  og
Hist.,  Copenh.  1887,  pp.  293-372.  -  Cf.  ante,  p.  6.


CHAPTER   VII.
The   Icelandic  Texts.

The  following  texts  of  the  leading  sagas,  relating  to  the  discovery  of  Wineland,
have  been  edited  to  conform,  line  by  line,  with  the  manuscripts,  but  with  normalized
orthography,  since  the  reproduction  of  the  manuscripts  in  type  would  have  no  especial
significance  where  the  facsimiles  of  the  vellums  are  themselves  given.  The  chief  diffi-
culty which  the  reading  of  these  manuscripts  offers  to  the  unpractised  reader  is  that
of  supplying  the  numerous  contractions.  This  is  a  difficulty  which  they  share  with  all
other  Icelandic  manuscripts,  but,  except  in  a  very  slight  measure,  it  is  not  complicated
by  the  real  crux,  which  many  Icelandic  vellums  offer,  in  their  faded  writing  or  blackened
parchment ;  and  the  phototypic  reproductions  are  therefore,  except  in  portions  of  two
of  the  pages  of  Hauk's  Book,  substantially  as  legible  as  the  originals.

Although  there  are  many  paper  copies  of  the  so-called  Þorfinns  saga  karlsefnis  of
Hauk's  Book,  and  of  Eiriks  saga  rauSa  of  AM.  557,  4to(74),  they  are  based  upon  the
vellum  manuscripts  of  these  sagas  here  given  in  facsimile,  and  it  has  not,  therefore,
been  deemed  necessary  to  record  the  variants  which  they  contain,  or  to  make  especial
note  of  their  readings,  except  in  cases  where  the  vellum,  manuscripts  are  now  indistinct.
Certain  paper  manuscripts,  notably  AM.  281,  4to,  770  b,  4to,  and  118,  8vo,  appear  to
have  derived  their  texts  of  Þorfinns  saga  karlsefnis  from  Hauk's  Book,  when  the  two
pages  100  b  and  loi  were  in  better  state  than  they  now  are,  and  these  have  been  of  great
assistance  in  the  preparation  of  the  printed  text  ^ ;  in  the  few  minor  instances  in  which
the  vellum  originals  are  not  clearly  to  be  read,  the  words  of  the  paper  manuscripts
are  given.

If  it  be  remembered  that  i  and  /,  /  and  _;',  u  and  v,  are  used  in  these  manuscripts
more  or  less  interchangeably,  the  unskilled  reader  should  have  httle  difficulty  in
following  the  facsimiles  of  these  sagas  and  comparing  these  with  the  normalized
texts.

'  In  editing  the  text  of  these  two  pages  of  Hauk's  Book  I  have  been  very  materially  aided  by  Dr.  Valt/r
Guðmundsson.  Portions  of  these  pages  would  be  well-nigh  undecipherable  in  the  original  manuscript,
without  the  help  afforded  by  the  paper  manuscripts,  but  these  indistinct  portions  are  very  inconsiderable.

O  2


loo  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

The  Hauk's   Book  Text.

The  first  scribe  of  Þorfinns  saga  karlsefnis,  as  the  Hauk's  Book  text  of  the  Saga
of  Eric  the  Red  has  been  called,  has  been  known  as  Hauk's  '  first  Icelandic  secretary.'
He  is,  perhaps,  chiefly  distinguished  from  his  collaborators,  particularly  from  Hauk
himself,  b}^  the  variety  of  forms  which  he  employs,  many  of  which  are,  doubtless,  due
to  carelessness.  He  generally  writes  both  ce  and  œ,  f,  but  frequently  simply  e.  He  uses
V  for  the  most  part  for  both  u  and  v,  but  in  a  few  instances  reverses  this  usage  and
employs  %i  in  the  dual  capacity.  He  distinguishes  between  d  and  ]>,  and  occasionally
between  d  and  d,  although  he  generally  writes  d  for  both  d  and  d,  in  one  instance,
however,  WTÍting  the  same  word  upon  the  same  page  with  both  d  and  d,  as  on  p.  93,
Aiið,  And.  He  writes  both. Jyrsia  and Jysia,/yn  andjin,  cristni  [p.  97,  1.  3]  and  kristni
[p.  97,  1.  11],  Vivils  and  Vifvils,  and  once,  apparently  a  slip,  cmcirr  [cmciK]  for  incirr.
Many  words  are  written  with  a  single  instead  of  a  double  consonant,  as /joka  for  Jjokka,
knor  for  kngrr,  Snort  for  Snorri,  skapstor  for  skapstón;  many  verbs,  on  the  other  hand,
are  written  with  double  in  place  of  single  /,  as  giallda  {gjalda],  villdi  \znld{\.  He  writes
the  genitive  [in  s]  for  the  most  part  with  s,  frequently  with  double  5,  as  Kelliss,  Einarss,
the  leading  exception  being  in  the  case  of  proper  names,  as  Islandz,  Granlandz,  Asvallds,
porhrandc,  although  he  also  writes  [p.  98, 1.  12]  til  moz  [til  mots],  and  [p.  93  b,  1.  32]  /ands
[lajtds.]  He  -wntes/odr  iorfghir,  brodr  for  bródiir,  besti  for  bczti,  scniiligaz  for  sœmiligast.
The  prepositions  t  and  d  he  usually  connects  with  the  succeeding  noun,  writing  both
preposition  and  noun  as  one  word,  as  iskogi  \_i  skogi],  avaldiofs  st\gduni\  \á  Valfyofs
stg^um].  He  uses  for  his  negative  prefix  0  [0]  almost  exclusively,  although  he  writes
[p.  99,  1.  3]  tgkdi  [ligki^t],  and  for  the  feminine  pronoun  he  employs  the  form  hvn,  hun
[hon],  and  writes  gem  [gem,  g(prd\,  vom  [vdrii].  He  writes  his  reflexive  forms  only
with  a  z,  as  bordnz  \bor3iisk\  gerdiz  [ger^isk],  kvez  \kvezk\  The  forms  which  he  uses
seem  to  indicate  clearly,  however,  that  the  scribe  was,  indeed,  an  Icelander,  for  they
belong  to  Icelandic,  not  to  Norse,  paleography.  A  single  expression,  however,  which
he  employs,  acquires  a  certain  noteworthiness  when  contrasted  with  the  language  of
the  scribe  of  Eiriks  saga  rauSa.  This  'first  Icelandic  secretary'  writes  [p. 94, 11.  30-1]
Einarr  var  á  íslandi,  while  the  scribe  of  AM.  557,  4to,  has  [p.  28,  1.  28]  Einarr  var  út
her.  The  first  expression  would  ordinarily  have  no  significance  whatever  in  determin-
ing where  the  '  Icelandic  secretary'  was  writing,  and  in  all  likelihood  has  none  here.
If,  however,  the  secretary  had  written  lit  her  ['  out  here ']  as  the  scribe  of  EsR  has,
instead  of  á  íslandi  ['  in  Iceland  '],  we  should  be  better  warranted  in  concluding  that
his  work  was  done  in  Iceland.

Hauk,  who  follows  the  '  first  Icelandic  secretary,'  if  he  wrote  in  Iceland,  wrote
with  one  of  the  peculiarities  to  be  found  in  Norse  vellums,  the  uniform  omission  of  h


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  loi

before  the  sibilant  /  in  such  words  as  liodlyndr  \]iljóölyndr\  Intadir  [/i/iiia?{r],  laiipa
[lilaupa].  He,  unhke  any  of  the  other  scribes  of  these  manuscripts  [except  the  second
secretary,  as  noted  below],  distinguishes  between  œ  and  œ,  and  usually  discriminates
these  correctly,  although  he  writes  [p.  99  b,  1.  16]  bœcíi  for  bœ3i.  Hauk  distinguishes
between  daná  9,  and  between  ^  and  þ,  but  writes  siþan  {stSan'],  and  Iiefjji  [licfSi'].  He
uses  V  for  both  Ji  and  v  throughout  his  work,  and  again,  in  contrast  with  the  first  scribe,
writes  en  in  place  of  enn.  He  writes  ck  instead  of  kk,  as  ecki  for  ckki,  ockr  for  okkr,
nockot  {nýkkiit),  and  also  qva3  {or  kvad.  He  writes  iamnan  iov  jafnan,  and  substitutes
/  for  p  in  such  words  as  aptr,  lopt,  knept ;  he  writes  sun  for  son,  and  not  only  many
verbs  with  double  //,  but  such  words  as  helldr,  sialldan.  He  uses  the  same  reflexive
terminations  as  the  first  writer.

The  third  scribe  of  Þorfinns  saga  karlsefnis  is  Hauk's  so-called  '  second  Icelandic
secretary.'  If  this  secretary  was,  indeed,  an  Icelander,  he  must  have  been  brought
under  strong  Norwegian  influence,  for  he  employs  throughout  such  Norse  forms  as
vurdii  \iirdii\,  rid  \hr0\,  Hop  \Jiljop'\  and  hiiggj  [/«/o].  He  writes,  for  the  most  part,
both  œ  and  œ  with  e,  although  he  also  writes  nor  \}iccr\  and  cinfótingr  [Eín/œítngr] ;
while  discriminating  between/  and  3,  as  in  the  normalized  orthography,  he  writes  both
^  and  d  with  d.  He  difí"ers  from  Hauk  in  using  both  ic  and  v,  and  from  both  Hauk
and  the  first  secretary  in  writing  /laar  [/uir],  saad  [sác^,  sáit'],  and  also  in  writing  seal/
\_sjálf'\,  sea  [s/a].  For  eigi  he  writes  both  eige  and  eighe ;  medr  for  me^,  vidr  for  viff,
iamrnykit  ior  jafnmikif,  iamlangt  for  jafnlangt.  He  has  hafdu  for  hifdii,  bannadu  for
bgnnnðii,  and  writes  his  reflexive  verbal  forms  as  Hauk  and  the  first  secretary,  as
komaz  \koniask\  byz  \þýsk\  but  also  fundiist  \_fundusk\  biuggust  \þjoggusk\  and
parallel  with  Hauk's  lutadn  \]ilutudii\,  he  writes  skemtadii  \skantndu\  No  one  of  the
three  scribes  uses  accents,  and  the  p  of  the  printed  texts,  except  in  the  verbal  forms
above  noted,  is  generally  written  0,  although  occasionally  an.

The  am.  557,  4to  Text.

The  pecuharities  of  the  text  of  the  Saga  Eireks  rauda,  as  it  is  called  in  the  Codex,
AM.  557, 4to ;  many  of  them  point  to  a  later  date  for  this  text  than  that  of  either  Hauk's
Book  or  the  Flatey  Book,  for  we  find  here  such  forms  as  giora  \_g$rd\,  sied\sét\,þier
[_þe'r],  ^^i^i^  \Jíc>''],  hicllt  \]iclt\  and  also  other  forms  indicating  the  modern  pronunciation,
as  eirn  \cinn\  tall  [yar/],  ^os/cirn  ['^orsicinn'].  The  scribe  does  not  discriminate  between
ti  and  V,  nor  between  3  and  d,  writing  d  throughout,  although  he  employs  /j  as  in  the
normalized  orthography.  He  writes  both  cv  and  œ  with  ce;  and  p,  while  frequently
written  simply  0,  is  occasionally  also  written  an,  as  niaurg  {fngrg"],  baurn  [bgrn},  laiind
[Ipnd],  &c.     He  writes  d  both  'aa'  and  a,  q  is  writtenin  qvat  [kva^],  ck  for  kk,  as


102  THE  FINDING   OF   WINE  LAND   THE    GOOD.

Jjickia  iþykkjd],  ecki  \€kki\  ockr  \okkr\  Fysta  is  written  for  fyrsta ;  drcing  for  drcng,
and  similarly  Icingi  for  lengi,  geingr  for  gengr,  þveingi  for  Jjvaigi ;  liafva  is  written  for
hafa,  kvomu  for  kvdmu  [koinii],  and  while  i  is  usually  employed  as  in  the  normalized
texts,  the  scribe  also  writes  Eirckr,  saker,  epter.  He  writes  many  proper  names  as
Styrr,  Einarr,  "Þorgeirr  in  the  nominative  with  a  single  final  r,  and  occasionally
omits  the  second  r  in  other  words ;  /ghir  is  written  both  /edr  and  fandr,  broStir  is
written  hrodr,  and  the  omission  of  the  u  in  such  inflected  forms,  and  in  the  nominative
plural  of  certain  nouns  is  very  common.  He  generally  writes  the  genitive  form  [in  5]
with  5,  although  occasionally  with  z,  as  Ingiallz  [Iitgjalds],  ogctis  manz  [dgais  uianns],
lambskins  \lambskinns\ ;  he  also  writes  leingzt  \_lengst\  samiligazt  \sœuiUigast\  likazt
\likast\.  He  generally  writes  hun  [//o;?]  while  his  contraction  indicates  hon,  but  he  also
writes  haun  [hon],  and  liatnuiin  [/loiiimi].  He  uses  throughout  the  same  reflexive  forms
[except  in  one  instance  skyzz  for  skýzk],  writing  giordizt  {g0i'3isk'\,  lituduzt  \litudusk\
kvezt  [þvczk],  &c.  Finally,  as  has  already  been  suggested,  the  errors,  verbal  and
textual,  of  which  there  are  many  scattered  through  the  saga,  seem  to  point  pretty
clearly  to  the  faults  of  a  copyist,  working,  perhaps,  from  a  somewhat  illegible  original.

The   Flatey  Book  Text.

In  the  reproduction  of  the  original  manuscript  of  this  version  of  the  history  it  has
been  found  necessary,  in  order  to  preserx^e  the  text  in  its  actual  size,  and  at  the  same
time  have  this  conform  in  size  to  the  page  of  the  quarto  manuscripts,  to  divide  each
column  of  the  Flatey  Book  text  into  two  parts,  and  as  there  are  two  columns  to  each  page
of  this  folio  manuscript,  each  page  of  this  phototj'pic  reproduction  represents  one-fourth
of  the  page  of  the  original.  The  first  portion  of  the  narrative,  Eiriks  þáttr  rauSa,  begins
with  the  second  line  from  the  bottom  of  col.  221  of  the  Flatey  Book,  and  ends  in  col.
223,  twenty  lines  from  the  bottom,  with  the  words  '  mcSan  Hcrjólfr  lif3i,  ok  siðan  bjó
hann  J>ar  cþtir  ff/hir  sinn.'  The  second  part  of  the  narrative,  Grœnlendinga  þáttr,
begins  in  col.  281,  fifteen  lines  from  the  bottom  of  the  page,  and  is  brought  to  a
conclusion  in  col.  288,  in  the  twenty-sixth  hne  from  the  top  of  the  page.  The  hand,
which  is  the  same  throughout,  is  that  of  John  Thordsson.  In  the  photographic
reproduction  of  the  manuscript  it  has,  of  course,  been  impossible  to  preserve  the
colours  of  the  illuminated  initials,  which  are  inserted  in  the  original  in  red  and  green
and  blue ;  the  sub-titles,  which,  like  those  of  Hauk's  Book,  are  written  in  red,  have,
like  the  Hauk's  Book  titles,  been  printed  in  bolder  type.

Contrasted  with  the  other  texts,  the  most  marked  peculiarity  of  this  scribe  is,
perhaps,  the  use  of  œ  for  e,  for  which,  with  very  few  exceptions,  it  is  uniformly  written
at  the  beginning  of  words,  as  evigi  [ei'gi],  œinn  [ciwt],  Æirekr  \Eirih\  and  very


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  103

frequently,  though  not  so  constantly,  in  the  body  of  such  words  as  mœira  [meira],
7-a'ida  [j-ei3a\,  lœitan  \lcitan\  Lcrifr  [Leifr].  This  ce  of  the  scribe,  which  has  more  the
appearance  of  œ  than  that  of  his  co-worker  Magnus,  is  used  generally  for  both  œ  and
ce,  although  f  is  occasionally  similarly  used,  there  being  no  discrimination  between  ce
and  ce;  p  is  generally  written  ð,  but  occasionally  also  au,  and  yet  again  simply  0  ;  a  is
in  a  few  instances  written  '  aa ' ;  y  is  uniformly  used  for  the  preposition  /,  as  is  generally
the  case  in  the  other  manuscripts,  and  accented  t  is  occasionally  written  tj,  as  vijda
[vicTa],  Vijidand  [Vinlaitci] ;  e  is  almost  constantly  used  in  the  place  of  /at  the  end  of
words,  and  sometimes  elsewhere,  as  aller  \allir\ ;  e  is  occasionally  written  for  j,  as  in
fear  [J/'dr],  sea  [sj'd] ;  ic  and  v  are  used  interchangeably ;  d  is  written  throughout  for
both  ^and  d;  þ  \s  written  normally,  although  in  the  initial  at  the  beginning  of  Eiriks
þáttr  we  find  Ðoriialldr  [Porvaldr] ;  n  and  /  are  frequently  reduplicated  in  such  words
as  na/tin  [na/n],  Biarnnc  [Bjami].  The  double  forms  7m^  and  mik,  eftir  and  eptir
occur,  although  the  usual  forms  are  mig,  sig  \inik,  sik^  and  eftir,  aftr  [eptir,  aptr\  Fyrst
is  written  _^'s/,  the  forms  id  {if\,  ad  [at]  occur,  as  also  ath  [af\,  aiidith  [aiiðit],  voth  [vat],  veer
[ve'r],  kallar  [karlar],  &c.  SiSast  is  written  sidazsf,  as  are  other  similar  forms,  and
reflexive  forms  are  written  with  the  same  termination,  as  fystizst  [fýstisk],  kiictzst
[kvezk].  The  genitive  [in  5]  is  usually  written  with  5,  although  the  forms  íslandz,  as  also
lanz,  Branz  occur ;  q  is,  for  the  most  part,  substituted  for  k  in  kveda  and  its  mflected
forms.  In  this  manuscript,  as  in  Hauk's  Book,  and  AM.  557,  4to,  med  is  almost  always
written  with  the  contracted  equivalent,  and  so  also  is  ok  (and)  with  a  sign  correspond-
ing to  our  symbol  (&).

The  facsimiles  are  throughout  exact  reproductions  of  the  manuscripts,  so  far  as  it
is  possible  to  reproduce  these  by  photographic  process.


104  ^^^   FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  93.]  ÞORFINNS   SAGA   KARLSEFNIS— 1.


Her  hefr  upp  sggu  þeira  Þor-

finns  karlsefnis  ok  Snorra  Þorbrandssonar.

17.  Óláfr  hét  herkonungr,  er  kallaðr,  var  Óláfr'  hvíti,

18.  hann  var  son  Ingjalds  konungs  Helgasonar,  Óláfssonar,  Guðr^ðarsonar^  Hálfdanar-

19.  sonar  hvítbeins  Upplendinga  konungs.     Óláfr  herjaði  í  vestrvíking,  ok  vann

20.  Dyflinni  á  frlandi,  ok  Dyflinnarsker '.     Þar  gerðisk  hann  konungr  yfir.     Hann  fekk

21.  Auðar  djúpúðgu,  dóttur  Ketils  flatnefs,  Bjarnarsonar  bunu,  ágæts  manns  ór  Noregi;

22.  Þorsteinn  rauðr  hét  son    þeira.     Óláfr   fell  á  írlandi  í  orrostu,  en  Auðr  ok  Þorsteinn  fóru  þá

í  Suðr-

23.  eyjar;   þar  fekk  Þorsteinn  Þuríðar*,  dóttur  Eyvindar  austmanns,  systur  Helga  hins  ma-

24.  gra;   þau  áttn  mgrg  bgrn.     Þorsteinn  gerðisk  herkonungr.     Hann  rézk  til  lags  með

25.  Sigurði  jarli  hinum  ríka,  syni  Eysteins  glumru;   þeir  unnu  Katanes  ok  Suðr-

26.  land,  Ros  ok  Merævi,  ok  meirr  en  hálft  Skotland.     Gerðisk  Þorsteinn  þar  konungr  yfir,

27.  áðr  Skotar  sviku  hann,  ok  fell  hann  þar  í  orrostu.    Auðr  var  þá  á  Katanesi,  er  hon

28.  spurði  fall  Þorsteins;   hon  lét  þá  g0ra  kngrr  í  skógi  á  laun,  ok  er  hon  var  búin,  helt

29.  hon  út  í  Orkneyjar;   þar  gipti  hon  Gró,  dóttur  Þorsteins  rauðs;   hon  var  móðir  Grela-

30.  ðar^  er  Þorfinnr  jarl  hausakljúfr  átti.    Eptir  þat  fór  Auðr  at  leita  islands;

31.  hon  hafði  á  skipi  xx  karla  frjálsa.     Auðr  kom  til  Islands,  ok  var  hinn  fyrsta

'  MS.  oloafr.  "  MS.  giidrcdarsonar.  "  i.  e.  Dyflinnarskiri.  '  MS.  þoridar.

'  Laxdœla  Saga  has  Greilaðar ;  cf.  Laxdœla  Saga,  ed.  Kalund,  Copenh.  iSSg,  p.  8.


vi^tloii  ívrAtii  .-«y*w<l"b>í<?ííi  ci4i.^.*«ffv«>  v<^t^<«J<rt'í£^<»H^  ,y^

Strict)  ^^1t)ettft!li^vif•Hí^**'|^^

etv  -n^n  ctf-tl'  'Y'ttrt)  j»cv  Utt*ím  et>>a5Í j^  *t-^.***  inmijft:*.

•  i


^


..JtJS*^


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  93  Í.]  i-ORFINNS    SAGA    KARLSEFNIS— 2.

1.  vetr  f  Bjarnarhgfn  með  Birni,  bróður  sínum.     Síðan  nam  Auðr  gll  Dala-

2.  Ignd  milli  Dpgurðarár  ok  Skrámuhlaupsár  \     Hon  bjó  Í  Hvammi.     Hon  hafði

3.  bœnahald^  í  Krosshólum;   þar  let  hon  reisa  krossa,  því  at  hon  var

4.  skírð  ok  vel  trúuð.     Með  henni  kómu  út  margir  ggfgir  menn,  þeir  er  herteknir  hofðu

5.  verit  í  vestrvíking,  ok  váru  kallaðir  ánauðgir.     Einn  af  þeini  hét  Vífill;   hann

6.  var  ættstórr  maðr,  ok  hafði  verit  hertekinn  fyri  vestan  haf,  ok  var  kallaðr

7.  ánauðigr  áðr  Auðr'  leysti  hann ;    ok  er  Auðr  gaf  bústaði  skipverjum  sínum,

8.  þá  spurði  Vífill  hví  Auðr  gæfi  honum  0ngan  bústað,  sem  Qðrum  mpnnum.

9.  Auðr  kvað  þat  engu*  mundu  skipta,  kallaði  hann  þar  gpfgan  mundu  þikkja,

10.  sem  hann  var.     Hon  gaf  honum  Vífilsdal,  ok  bjó  hann  þar.     Hann  átti  konu,  er  hét

11.  þeira  synir  váru  þeir  ÞorbJQrn  ok  Þorgeirr.     Þeir  váru  efniligir  menn,  ok  óxu  upp

12.  Þorvaldr  hdt  maðr;   hann  var  son  Eiríkr  rauði  fann  Grœnland.     með  fgiður  sínum.

13.  Ásvalds  Úlfssonar,  Oxna-Þórissonar  ^     Eiríkr  hét  son  hans.     Þeir  feðgar  fóru  af

14.  Jaðri  til  Islands,  fyri  víga  sakir,  ok  námu  land  á  Hornstrgndum,  ok  bjoggu  at

15.  Drongum.     Þar  andaðisk  Þorvaldr;   en  Eiríkr  fekk  þá  Þórhildar,  dóttur  Jgru-

16.  ndar  Atiasonar  ok  torbjargar  knarrarbringu,  er  þá  átti  f'orbjgrn  hinn  haukdœlski,

17.  ok  bjó  á  Eiríksstgðum  síðan,  er  Eiríkr  rdzk  norðan ;   þat  er  hjá  Vatnshorni.

18.  M  feldu  þrælar  Eiríks  skiiðu  á  bœ  Valþjófs  á  Valþjófsstgðum ".     Eyjólfr  saurr,

19.  frændi  hans,  drap  þrælana  hjá  Skeiðsbrekkum,  upp  frá  Vatnshorni.     Fyri  þat  vá  Eirí-

20.  kr  Eyjólf  saur;    hann  vá  ok  Hólmggngu-Hrafn  at  Leikskálum'.     Geirsteinn  ok  Oddr

21.  á  Jgrva,  frændr  Eyjólfs,  vildu  eptir  hann  mæla;   þá  var  Eiríkr  gerr  brott  ór^  Hau-

22.  kadal.     Hann  nam  þá  Brokey  ok  0xne^,  ok'  bjóat  Trgðimi  í  Suðrey  enn  fyrsta  vetr.

23.  Þá  léði  hann  Þorgesti  setstokka.     Síðan  fór  Eiríkr  í  0xney,  ok  bjó  á  Eiríks-

24.  stgðum.     Hann  heimti  þá  setstokkana,  ok  náði  eigi.     Eiríkr  sótti  þá  setstokk-

25.  ana  á  Breiðabólstað,  en  Þorgestr  fór  eptir  honum.     Þeir  bgrðusk  skamt  frá'"

26.  garði  at  Drgngum.     Þar  fellu  II  synir  Þorgests  ok  ngkku-

27.  rir  menn  aðrir.     Eptir  þat  hgfðu  hvárirtveggju  setu  fjglmenna.     Styrr  veitti  Eiríki

28.  ok  Eyjólfr  ór  Svíney,  ÞorbJQrn  Vífilsson  "  ok  synir  Þorbrands  í  Alptafirði.     En  Þor-

29.  gesti  veittu  synir  Þórðar  gellis,  ok  Þorgeirr  ór  Hítardal,  ÁsMkr  ór  Langadal

30.  ok  lUugi,  son  hans.     Þeir  Eiríkr  urðu  sekir  á  Þórsnessþingi.     Hann  bjó  skip  í  Ei-

31.  ríksvági,  en  Eyjólfr  leyndi  honum  í  Dímunarvági,  meðan  þeir  Þorgestr

32.  leituðu  hans  um  eyjarnar.     Hann  sagði  þeim,  at  hann  ætlaði  at  leita  lands

33.  þess,  er  Gunnbjgrn,  son  Úlfs  kráku,  sá,  er  hann  rak  vestr  um  haf,  ok  hann  fann

34.  Gunnbjarnarsker.     Hann  kvezk  aptr  mundu  leita  til  vina  sinna,  ef  hann

'  MS.  skravmv  hlavps  ar.  ^  MS.  bena  halld.  '  Auðr  repeated  in  MS.  *  MS.  eyngv.

'  MS.  yxna  þoriss  sonar.  «  MS.  valdiofs  avaldiofs  s\.<jöum.  '  MS.  leikslalum.

'  MS.  o.  9  MS.  i.  "  skamt  fra  repeated  in  MS.  "  MS.  vivils  so;/.


io6  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  94.]        ÞORFINNS   SAGA  IvARLSEFNIS— 3.

1.  fyndi  landit.     Þeir  Þorbjorn  ok  Eyjólfr  ok  Styrr  fylgðu  Eiríki  út  um  eyja-

2.  mar.     Skilðusk  þeir  með  hinni  mestu  vináttu.     Kvezk  Eiríkr  þeim  skyldu

3.  verða  at  þvílíku  trausti,  ef  hann  mætti  sér  við  koma,  ok  kynni  þeir

4.  bans  at  þurfa.     Sigldi  Eirikr  á  haf  undan  SnjófellsJQkli ;    hann  kom

5.  utan  at  jgkli  þeim,  er  heitir  Bláserkr.     For  hann  þaðan  suðr,  at  leita  ef

6.  þar  væri  byggjanda.     Hann  var  hinn  fjTsta  vetr  í  Eiríksey,  nær  mi-

7.  ðri  hinni  vestri  bygð.     Um  várit  eptir  for  hann  til  Eiríksíjarðar,  ok  tók  sér  þar

8.  bústað.     Hann  for  þat  sumar  í  vestri  óbygð,  ok  var  þar  lengi.     Hann  gaf

9.  þar  víða  0rnefni.     Hann  var  annan  vetr  í  Eiríkshólmum  fyri  Hvarfs-

10.  gnúpi.     En  hit  þriðja  sumar  for  hann  allt  norðr  til  Snjófells,  ok  inn  í

11.  HrafnsfjQrð.     H  kvezk  hann  kominn  fyri  botn  Eiríksfjarðar ;   hverfr  hann  þá  aptr,

12.  ok  var  hinn  þriðja  vetr  Í  Ein'ksey  fyri  mynni  Eiríksfjarðar.     En  eptir,

13.  nm  sumarit,  for  hann  til  Islands,  ok  kom  Í  Breiðafjgrð.     Hann  var  þann  vetr  með

14.  Ingólfi  á  Hólmlátri.     Um  várit  bprðusk  þeir  Þorgestr,  ok  fekk

15.  Eiríkr  úsigr.     Eptir  þat  váru  þeir  sættir.     Þat  sumar  fór  Eiríkr  at  byggja

16.  land  þat,  sem  hann  hafði  fundit,  ok  kallaði  Grœnland,  því  at  hann  kvað  menn  þat

17.  mjgk  mundu  f/sa  þangat,  ef  landit  héti  vel.    Af  Þorbirni.

18.  Þorgeirr  Vífilsson^  kvángaðisk,  ok  fekk  Arnóru,  dóttur  Einars  frá

19.  Laugarbrekku,  Sigmundarsonar,  Ketilssonar  þistOs,  er  numit  hafði  Þist-

20.  ilsíjgrð.     Qnnur  dóttir  Eiríks"  hét  Hallveig;   hennar  fekk  Þorbjgm,  ok  tók  með  Laugar-

21.  brekkuland  á  Hellisvpllum.     Rézk  Þorbjgrn  þangat  bygðum,  ok  gerðisk

22.  ggfugmenni  mikit.     Hann  var  góðr  bóndi,  ok  hafði  rausnar  ráð.     Guðr-

23.  íðr  hét  dóttir  Þorbjamar ;   hon  var  kvenna  vænst  ok  hinn  mesti  skgningr  í  gllu

24.  athæfi  sínu.     Maðr  hét  Ormr,  er  bjó  at  Amastapa;   hann  átti  konu,

25.  er  Halldís  hdt.     Ormr  var  góðr  bóndi,  ok  vinr  Þorbjarnar  mikiU,  ok  var  Guðríðr

26.  þar  Igngum  at  fóstri  með  honum.     Þorgeirr  hét  maðr;   hann  bjó  at  Þorgeirsfelli.

27.  Hann  var  auðigr  at  fé,  ok  hafði  verit  leysingi;   hann  átti  son,  er  Einarr  hét;   hann  var

28.  vænn  maðr,  ok  vel  mannaðr,  hann  var  ok  skartsmaðr  mikill.     Einarr  var  1  sig-

29.  lingum  meðal  landa,  ok  tóksk  honum  þat  vel;   var  hann  jafnan  sinn  vetr  hvárt

30.  á  íslandi  eða  í  Noregi.    Nú  er  frá  því  at  segja  eitt  haust,  þá  cr  Einarr

31.  var  á  íslandi,  fór  hann  mcð  varning  sinn  út  eptir  Snjófellsstrgnd,  ok  \'il-

32.  di  selja.     Hann  kemr  til  Arnastapa;   Orrar  býðr  honum  þar  at  vera,  ok

33.  þat  þiggr  Einarr,  þvf  at  þar  var  vinátta.     Var  borinn  inn  varnin-

34.  gr  hans  1  citt  útibúr.     Einarr  braut  upp  varning  sinn,  ok  sýndi  Ormi

'  MS.  viívils  ion.  '  Obvionsly  erroneously  for,  Einars.


').sa


V  [íUíl  :^  VuMyttl  ^h^  ^A  Omjr  bvV-W(>Ar*ír  vV^


J


Í-trfbh  evf)  v4  S^^  |A*Wy>  -^lvíííyv  irtl)45  -^t^nfc^  Ct^


fw)  Wtó  ^U*^  AnU«l  ^g^^vtt>4>  l^íttrt'  Ikc^asW-^.Uvíiilj Hi

ix^  ^U^^.^H9^l  At' tti)Aíí  vc*f  ^AT  tW  ^A  (xmS  1««*  'lí^f"


í^


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  107


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  94  ^,]         ÞORFINNS   SAGA  KARLSEFNIS— 4.

1.  ok  heimamgnnum,  ok  bauð  honum  af  at  hafa  slilit  er  hann  vildi.     Ormr  þá  þetta,

2.  ok  talði  Einar  vera  góðan  fardreng  ok  auðnumann  mikinn.     En  er  þeir

3.  heldu  á  varninginum  gekk  kona  fyri  útibúrs  dyrrin.     Einarr  spyrr  Orm:

4.  'Hver  væri  sú  hin  fagra  kona,  er  þar  gelck  fyri  dyrrin.     Ek  hefi  eigi

5.  hana  her  fyrri  set.'      Ormr   svarar :    '  Þat  er  Guðríðr,  fóstra   mín,  dóttir  Þorbjarnar   at   Lau-

garbrekku.'

6.  Einarr  mælti:  'Hon  mun  vera  kostr  góðr,  eða  hafa  ngikkurir  menn  til

7.  komit  at  biðja  hennar?'     Ormr  segir:     'Beðit  hefir  hennar  víst  verit,  ok  liggr  þat  eigi  kiust

8.  fyri ;   finnsk  þat  á,  at  hon  mun  vera  mannvgnd,  ok  svá  faðir  hennar.'     '  Svá

9.  með  þvf,'  sagði  Einarr,  'at  her  er  sú  kona,  er  ek  ætla  mér  [at]  biðja,  ok  vil-

10.  da  ek  at  þessa  mala  leitaðir  þú  við  Þorbjgrn,  fgður  hennar,  ok  legðir

11.  allan  hug  á,  at  þetta  mætti  framgengt  verða.     Skal  ek  þe'r  fullkomna

12.  vináttu  fyri  gjalda,  ef  ek  get  ráðit.     Má  Þorbjgrn  bóndi  þat  sjá,

13.  at  okkr  væri  vel  hendar  tengðir,  því  at  hann  er  sómamaðr  mikiU

14.  ok  á  staðfestu  góða,  en  lausafé  hans  er  mér  sagt  heldr  á  fgrum;

15.  en  mik  skortir  hvárki  land  né  lausafé,  ok  okkr  feðga,  ok  mundi  Þorbirni

16.  verða  at  þessu  hinn  mesti  styrkr,  ef  þetta  tœkísk.'     Ormr  segir:    '  Víst  þylckjumk  [ek]

17.  vinr  þinn  vera,  en  þó  em  ek  eigi  við  mitt  ráð  fiíss,  at  vit  berim

18.  þetta  upp,  því  at  Þorbjgrn  er  skapstórr,  ok  þó  metnaðarmaðr  mikill.

19.  Einarr  kvezk  ekki  vilja  annat  en  [at]  iipp  væri  borit  bónorðit.     Orrar  kvað  hann  rá-

20.  ða  skyldu.     Ferr  Einarr  suðr  aptr  unz  hann  kemr  heira.     Ngkkuru  síðar  ha-

21.  fði  Þorbjgrn  haustboð,  sem  hann  átti  vanda  til,  því  at  hann  var  stórmenni  mik-

22.  it.  Kom  þar  Ormr  frá  Arnastapa,  ok  margir  aðrir  vinir  Þorbjarnar.     Ormr  kom  at  má-

23.  li  við  Þorbjgrn,  ok  sagði,  at  Einarr  var  þar  skgmmu  frá  forgeirsfelli,  ok  gerðisk

24.  hinn  efniligsti  maðr.     Hefr  Ormr  nú  upp  bónorðit  fyri  hgnd  Einars,

25.  ok  segir  þat  vel  hent  fyri  sumra  hluta  sakir,  'má  þér,  bóndi,  verða  at  því

26.  styrkr  mikill  f}TÍ  fjárkosta  sakir.'     Þorbjgrn  svarar :    '  Eigi  varði  mik  slíkra

27.  orða  af  þér,  at  ek  munda  ^  gipta  þræls  syni  dóttur  mína;   ok  þat  finni  þér  nú,  at

28.  fé  mitt  þverr,  er  slíli  ráð  gefið  mér;    ok  eigi  skal  hon  með  þér  vera  lengr,  er

29.  þér  þótti  hon  svá  lítils  gjaforðs  verð.'     Síðan  fór  Ormr  heim,  ok  hverr

30.  annarr  bóndmanna^  til  sins  heimilis.     Guðríðr  var  eptir  með  fgður  sínum,

31.  ok  var  heima  þann  vetr.     En  at  vári  hafði  Þorbjgrn  vinaboð,  ok  kom  þar

32.  mart  manna,  ok  var  hin  bezta  veizla.     Ok  at  veizlunni  krafði  Þorbjgrn  sér

33-  hljóðs,  ok  mælti:    'Her  hefi  ek  búit  langa  æfi,  ok  hefi  ek  reynt^  góðvilja

34-  manna  við  mik  ok  ástúð;   kalla  ek  vcl  farit  hafa  var  skipti;   en  mi

'  MS.  mundi.  a  ^^^^  3  jjS.  reyn.


io8  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  95.]  ÞORFINNS  SAGA  KARLSEFNIS— 5.

1.  tekr '  hagr  minn  at  úhœgjask  f3TÍ  lausafjár  sakir,  en  her  til

2.  hefir  kallat  verit  heldr  virðingar  ráð.     Nú  vil  ek  fyrr  búinu  breg-

3.  ða,  en  sœmðinni  týna.     Ætla  ek  ok  fyrr  af  landi  fara,  en  ætt  mína  svívirða,

4.  ok  vitja  heita  Eiriks  hins  rauða,  vinar  mins,  er  hann  hafði,  þá  er  vit

5.  skilðum  á  Breiðafirði.     Ætla  ek  nú  at  fara  til  Grœnlands  í  sumar,  ef  svá

6.  ferr  sem  ek  vildi.     Mgnnum  þótti  mikil  þessi  ráðabreytni,  því  at

7.  ÞorbJQrn  var  vinsæll  maðr,  en  þóttusk  vita  at  ÞorbJQrn  mundi  svá  fremi  þetta  upp

8.  hafa  kveðit,  at  ekki  mundi  tjóa  at  letja  hann.     Gaf  ÞorbJQrn  mpnnum  gjafir,

9.  ok  var  brugðit  veizlunni;    síðan  for  hverr  til  sins  heima.     ÞQrbjgrn  selr  Ignd

10.  sin,  ok  kaupir  sér  skip,  er  uppi  stóð  í  Hraunhafnarósi.     Réðusk  til

11.  ferðar  með  honum  XXX  manna ;    var  þar  í  ferð  Ormr  frá  Arnastapa,

12.  ok  kona  hans,  ok  aðrir  vinir  torbjarnar,  þeir  er  eigi  vildu  við  hann  skilja.     Síðan

13.  léiu  þeir  í  haf,  ok  er  þeir  váru  í  hafi  tók  af  byri ;   fengu  þeir  hafvillur,

14.  ok  fórsk  þeini  ógreitt  um  sumarit.     Því  næst  kom  sótt  í  lið  þeira,

15.  ok  andaðisk  Ormr  ok  Halldís,  kona  hans,  ok  helmingr  liðs  þeira.     Sjó  tók

16.  at  stœra,  ok  þolðu  menn  hit  mesta  vás  ok  vesgld  á  marga  vega;    en

17.  tóku  þó  Herjólfsnes  á  Grœnlandi  við  vetr  sjálfan.     Sá  maðr  hét

18.  Þorkell,  er  bjó  á  Herjólfsnesi ;    hann  var  hinn  bezti  bóndi.     Hann  tók  við

19.  Þorbirni  ok  gllum  skipverjum  hans  um  vetrinn.     Þorkell  veitti  þeim  skgru-

20.  liga.     f  þenna  tíma  var  hallæri  mikit  á  Grœnlandi ;    hgfðu  menn  fen-

21.  git  lítit  fang,  þeir  er  í  veiðiferðir  hgfðu  farit,  en  sumir  ekki  ap-

22.  tr  komnir.     Sii  kona  var  þar  í  bygð -,  er  Þorbjgrg  hét ;    hon  var  spákona,

23.  ok  var  kglluð  lítil  vglva.     Hon  hafði  átt  sér  IX  systur,  ok  váru

24.  allar  spákonur,  en  hon  ein  var  þá  á  lífi.     Þat  var  háttr  Þorbjargar

25.  um  vetrum,  at  hon  for  at  veizlum,  ok  [buðu  ^]  þeir  menn  henni  mest  heim,

26.  er  for\'itni  var  á  at  vita  forlgg  sin  eða  árferð;    ok  með  þvi

27.  at  Þorkell  var  þar  mestr  bóndi,  þá  þótti  til  hans  koma  at  vita,

28.  nær  létta  mundi  óárani  þessu,  sem  yfir  stóð.     Býðr  Þorkell  spákonunni

29.  heim,  ok  er  henni  þar  vel  fagnat,  sem  siðr  var  tO,  þá  er  við  þess  hátiar

30.  konum  skyldi  taka.     Var  henni  búit  hásæti,  ok  lagt  undir  hana  hœgindi,

31.  þar  skyldi  í  vera  hœnsafiðri*;   en  er  hon  kom  um  kveldit,  ok  sá  maðr,

32.  er  móti  heimi  var  sendr,  þá  var  hon  svá  búin,  at  hon  haiði  yfir

33.  sér  tuglamgttul  blán,  ok  var  settr  steinum  allt  í  skaut  ofan  ;

>  MS.  tek.  '  MS.  byð.  =  MS.  ok  þí/r  xaam  henHÍ  þiír  mest  heiw.  '  MS.  hesna  fidri,  i.e.  hcesn.ifiðri.


)V


9ó^


ie^(h»)  éÍWtíi'  ^<*5tí  \»«ö  Mati  tkt^


ij^lett^  %í^  ortw*^  ^(^  [<^^  ýf  l^  ^í^  V<«^  ^h  U^u^  -


^fjp^


■M


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  109


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  95  3.]         ÞORFINNS    SAGA    KARLSEFNIS— 6.

1.  hon  hafði  á  hálsi  sér  glertglur,  ok  lambskinns  kofra  svartan

2.  á  hpfði,  ok  við  innan  kattskinn  hvít,  ok  hon  hafði  staf  í  hendi,

3.  ok  var  á  knappr;    hann  var  búinn  með  mersingu,  ok  settr  steinum  ofan

4.  um  knappinn;    hon  hafði  um  sik  hnjóskulinda,  ok  var  þar

5.  á  skjóðupungr  mikill,  ok  varðveitti  hon  þar  í  taufr  sín,

6.  þau  er  hon  þurfti  til  fróðleiks  at  hafa.     Hon  hafði  á  fótum

7.  kálfskinns-skúa  loðna,  ok  í  þvengi  langa  ok  á  tinknappar  miklir

8.  á  endunum;    hon  hafði  á  hgndum  sér  kattskinns-glófa,  ok  váru  hv-

9.  ítir  innan  ok  loðnir.     En  er  hon  kom  inn,  þótti  gllum  mgnnum  skylt  at  velja

10.  henni  sœmiligar  kveðjur.     Hon  tók  því  sem  henni  váru  menn  geðjaðir  til.     Tók  Þorkell

11.  bóndi  [í]  hgnd  henni,  ok  leiddi  hana  til  þess  sætis,  sem  henni  var  búit.     Þorkell  bað

12.  hana  þá  renna  þar  augum  yfir  hjú  ok  hjgrð^  ok  svá  híbýli.     Hon  var  fá-

13.  málug  um  allt.     Borð  váru  upp  tekin  um  kveldit,  ok  er  frá  því

14.  at  segja,  hvat  spákonunni  var  matbúit.     Henni  var  gerr  grau-

15.  tr  á  kiðjamjólk,  ok  matbúin  hjprtu  ór  gllum  kykvendum  þeim,

16.  er  þar  váru  til.     Hon  hafði  mersingarspón  ok  kníf  tannskeptan^  tvíliolk-

1 7.  aðan  af  eiri,  ok  var  brotinn  af  oddrinn  ^     En  er  borð  váru  upp  tekin,  þá

18.  gengr  forkell  bóndi  fyri  ÞorbJQrgu,  ok  spyrr  hversu  henni  þikki  þar  um  at  lítask,

19.  eða  hversu  skapfeld  henni  eru  þar  híbýli  eða  hættir  manna,  eða  hversu

20.  fljótliga  hon  mun  vís  verða  þess,  er  hann  hefir  spurt  hana  ok  mgnnum  er

21.  mest  forvitni  at  vita.     Hon  kallask  ekki  munu  segja  fyrr

22.  en  um  morgininn  eptir,  er  hon  hafði  áðr  sofit  um  nóttina.

23.  En  um  morgininn  at  áliðnum  degi,  var  henni  veittr  sá  umbúnin-

24.  gr,  sem  hon  þurfti  at  hafa  til  at  fremja  seiðinn.     Hon  bað  ok

25.  fa  sér  konur  þær,  er  kunnu  frœði  þat,  sem  til  seiðsins  þarf,  ok  var-

26.  ðlokkur  hétu;    en  þær  konur  fundusk  eigi.     M  var  leitat  at

27.  um  bœinn,  ef  ngkkur  kynni.     M  segir  Guðríðr :    '  Hvárki  em  ek  fJQlkunn-

28.  ig  né  vísinda  kona,  en  þó  kendi  Halldis,  fóstra  mín,  mér  á  fslandi

29.  þat  kvæði,  er  hon  kallaði  varðlokkur.'     i»orkell  segir :    '  M  ertu  happfróð.'

30.  Hon  segir :    '  Þetta  er  þat  eitt  atferli,  er  ek  ætla  í  0ngum  atbeina  at

31.  vera,  því  at  ek  em  kristin  kona.'     Þorbjgrg  segir:   '  Svá  mætti  verða,  at  þú

32.  yrðir  mpnnum  at  liði  her  um,  en  þú  værir  þá  kona  ekki  verri  en

33.  áðr;    en  við  Þorkel  mun  ek  meta,  at  fá  þá  hluti,  er  hafa

»  MS.  evidently  by  a  slip,  hrord.  2  MS.  tan«  skepan.  =■  MS.  oddin«.


THE   FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  96.]  ÞORFINNS  SAGA  KARLSEFNIS— 7.

1.  þarf.'     Þorkell  herðir  nú  á  Guðn'ði,  en  hon  kvezk  gþra  mundu  sem  hann  vildi.

2.  Slógu  þá  konur  hring  um  hjallinn,  en  Þorbjprg  sat  á  uppi.     Kvað  Guð-

3.  ríðr  þá  kvæðit  svá  fagrt  ok  vel,  at  engi  þóttisk  hejTt  hafa  með

4.  fegri  rgdd  kvæði  kveðit,  sá  er  þar  var  hjá.     Spákonan  þakkar

5.  henni  kvæðit,  ok  kvað :   '  IMargar  þær  náttúrur  nú  til  hafa  sótt,

6.  ok  þikkja  fagrt  at  he}Ta,  er  kvæðit  var  svá  vel  flutt,  er  áðr

7.  vildu  við  oss  skiljask,  ok  enga  hlýðni  oss  veita.    En  mér  era  nú  margir

8.  þeir  hlutir  auðsýnir,  er  áðr  var  ek  dulið,  ok  margir  aðrir.    En  ek

9.  kann  þér  þat  at  segja,  Þorkell,  at  hallærí  þetta  mun  ekki  haldask

10.  lengr  en  í  vetr,  ok  mun  batna  árangr  sem  várar.     Sóttarfar

11.  þat,  sem  á  heíir  legit,  man  ok  batna  vánu  bráðara.    En  þdr,  Guð-

12.  ríðr,  skal  ek  launa  í  hgnd  liðsinni  þat,  er  oss  hefir  af  þér  staðit,  því

13.  at  þín  forlgg  eru  mér  nú  allglgggsæ.     Þú  munt  gjaforð  fá  hér

14.  á  Grœnlandi,  þat  er  sœmiligast  er,  þó  at  þér  verði  þat  eigi  til  langæðar,

15.  því  at  vegar  þínir  liggja  út  til  islands,  ok  man  þar  koma  frá  þér

16.  bæði  mikil  ætt  ok  góð,  ok  yíir  þínum  kynkvíslum  skína  bjar-

17.  tari  geislar,  en  ek  hafa  megin  til  at  geta  slikt  vandliga

18.  sét;   enda  far  þú  nú  heil  ok  vel,  dóttirl'     Síðan  gengu  menn  at  vísinda-

19.  konunni,  ok  frétti  þá  hverr  þess,  er  mest  forvitni  var  á  at  vita.     Hon

20.  var  ok  góð  af  frásQgnum ;   gekk  þat  ok  lítt  í  taum,  er  hon  sagði.     Þessu

21.  næst  var  komit  eptir  henni  af  gðrum  bœ.     For  hon  þá  þangat.

22.  Þá  var  sent  eptir  Þorbirni,  því  at  hann  vildi  eigi  heima  vera  meðan

23.  slík  hindr\-itni  var  framið.     Veðrátta  batnaði  skjótt,  sem  Þorbjgrg

24.  hafði  sagt.     B/r  ÞorbJQrn  skip  sitt,  ok  ferr  þar  til  er  hann  kemr  1  Bratta-

25.  hlíð.     Eiríkr  tekr  vel  \-ið  honum  með  blíðu,  ok  kvað  þat  vel  er  hann  var  þar

26.  kominn.     Var  Þorbjprn  með  honum  um  vetrinn,  ok  skuldalið  hans,  en  þeir

27.  vistuðu  háseta  með  bóndum.     Eptir  um  várit  gaf  Eirílir  Þorbirni

28.  land  á  Stokkanesi,  ok  var  þar  gerr  sœmiligr  bœr,  ok  bjó  hann  þar  síðan.

29.  Eiríkr  átti  þá  konu,  er  Þórhildr  hét,  Af  Leif  enum  heppna  ok  kristni  kom  á  Grœnland.

30.  ok  við  henni  II  sonu ;   hét  annarr  Þorsteinn,  en  annarr  Leifr.     þeir  váru  báðir

31.  efniligir  menn,  ok  var  Þorsteinn  heima  með  fgður  sínum,  ok  var  eigi  sá  maðr  á  Grœn-

32.  landi,  er  jafnmannvænn  þólti  sem  hann.    Leifr  hafði  siglt  til  Noregs,

33.  ok  var  með  Óláíi  konungi  Tryggvasyni.    En  er  Leifr  sigldi  af  Grœnlandi  um  sumarit,


I


'  A^*'T^<  ^'í*'  t*^^**"  vfítatM  Winjái  (tiíyrt-  pm  hd


r


fletfY^Ub^hi^  bei^^\e^^  ^jtiMt^B^.  l^í^.^^


'filf  jwpoi  pvn (>m*«*<6^  a^ílt-n^el;^  (>ettti  if/\t^  Wtyf
Ce^  yrWfaA^  1>«-*^A  Ar  A  ^í^  jp4*íi  U»já  Æ  <^í*^       !

^\á  «A  mei^xil  ^reíifójz/  í^'pV

'^fir  fm V*mÍa/^  n)aív  ^y^  tní-  .^(.  8tMt  U v,^»»' ttí  5t^
^  ^h^7  «^  «k  tjí^lcj:'^  iH-|bv.^u.  viy.'te-fj.  ítífCr


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  96  !>.}  ÞORFINNS    SAGA    KARLSEFNIS.— 8.

1.  urðu  þeir  sæhafa  til  Suðreyja.     Þaðan  byijaði  þeim  seint,  ok  dvglðusk

2.  þeir  þar  lengi  um  sumarit.     Leifr  lagði  þokka  á  konu  þá,  er  Þórgunna

3.  hét.     Hon  var  kona  ættstór,  ok  skilði  Leifr,  at  hon  mundi  vera  margkunnig.     En

4.  er  Leifr  bjósk  brott,  beiddisk  Þórgunna  at  fara  með  honum.     Leifr  spurði

5.  hvárt  þat  væri  ngkkut  vili  frænda  hennar.     Hon  kvezk  þat  ekki  hirða '.

6.  Leifr  kvezk  eigi  þat  kunna  sjá  at  sínu  ráði,  at  g0ra  hertekna  svá  stór-

7.  ættaða  konu  í  ókunnu  landi ;   'en  vér  liðfáir.'     Þórgunna  mælti ;    '  Eigi  er  víst,

8.  at  þér  þikki  því  betr  ráðit.'     '  Á  þat  mun  ek  þó  hætta,'  sagði  Leifr,

9.  '  Þá  segi  ek  þér,'  sagði  Þórgunna,  '  at  ek  man  fara  kona  eigi  einsam-

10.  an,  ok  em  ek  með  barni ;    segi  ek  þat  af  þínum  vgildum.     Get  ek  at

11.  þat  mun  vera  sveinbarn,  þá  er  fœðisk.    En  þóttú  vilir  ^ngvan  gaum

12.  at  gefa,  þá  man  ek  upp  fœða  sveininn,  ok  þér  senda  til  Grœn-

13.  lands,  þegar  fara  ma  með  gðrum  mgnnum.     En  ek  get,  at  þér  ver-

14.  ði  at  þvílíkum  nytjum  sonareignin,  sem  mi  verðr  skilna-

15.  ðr  okkar  til.    En  koma  ætla  ek  mér  til  Grœnlands,  áðr  lýkr.'

16.  Leifr  gaf  henni  fingrgull,  ok  vaðmáls  mgttul  grœnlenzkan

17.  ok  tannbelti.     Þessi  sveinn  kom  til  Grœnlands,  ok  nefndisk  Þorgils.     Leifr  tók

18.  við  honum  at  faðerni,  ok  er  þat  sumra  manna  sggn,  at  þessi  Þorgils

19.  hafi  komit  til  Islands  fyri  Fróðárundr  um  sumarit.     En  sjá

20.  Þorgils  var  síðan  á  Grœnlandi,  ok  þóui  þar  enn  eigi  kynjalaust  um

21.  hann  verða,  áðr  lauk.     Þeir  Leifr  sigldu  brott  ór  Suðreyjum,  ok  tóku

22.  Noreg  um  haustit.    Fór  Leifr  til  hirðar  Óláfs  konungs  Tryggvasonar.     Lagði  konungr  á  hann

23.  góða  virðing,  ok  þóttisk  sjá,  at  hann  mundi  vera  vel  mentr  maðr.

24.  Eitt  sinn  kom  konungr  at  máli  við  Leif,  ok  segir:    'Ætlar  þú  út  til  Grœ-

25.  nlands  í  sumar?'      'f>at   ætla    ek,'    sagði    Leifr,  'ef  þat  er  yðvarr  vili.'      Konungr   svarar :

'  Ek  get,

26.  at  þat  mun  vel  vera,  ok  skaltu  þangat  fara  með  járindum

27.  mínum,  ok  boða  þar  kristni.'     Leifr  kvað  hann  ráða  skyldu,  en  kvezk

28.  hyggja,  at  þat  0rindi  mundi  torflutt  á  Grœnlandi.     Konungr  kvezk  eigi  þann

29.  mann  sjá,  er  betr  væri  til  fallinn  en  hann,  '  ok  muntu  giptu  til  bera.'

30.  '  Þat  mun  því  at  eins,'  segir  Leifr,  '  ef  ek  nýt  yðvar  við.'     Lætr  Leifr

31.  í  haf,  ok  er  lengi  úti,  ok  hitti  á  Ignd  þau,  er  hann  vissi  áðr  enga  ván

32.  til.     Váru  þar  hveitiakrar  sjálfsáriir,  ok  vínviðr  vaxinn.     Þar

33.  váru  þau  tré,  er  mgsurr  heita,  ok  hgfðu  þeir  af  þessu  qIIu  ngkkur

1  MS.  hirta.


THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  97.]  ÞORFINNS   SAGA  KARLSEFNIS— 9.

1.  merki,  sum  tré  svá  mildl,  at  Í  hús  váru  Ipgð.     Leifr  fann  menn

2.  á  skipflaki,  ok  flutti  heim  með  sér.     Sýndi  hann  í  því  hina  mestu  stór-

3.  mensku  ok  drengskap,  sem  mgrgu  gðru,  er  hann  kom  kristni  á  landit,

4.  ok  vai"  jafnan  síðan  kallaðr  Leifr  hinn  heppni.     Leifr  tók  land

5.  í  Eiríksfirði,  ok  fór  heim  síðan  í  Brattahlíð ;   tóku  þar  allir  menn  vel

6.  við  honum.     Hann  boðaði  brátt  kristni  um  landit  ok  almenniliga  trú,  ok  sý-

7.  ndi  mgnnum  orðsending  Óláfs  konungs  Trj'ggvasonar,  ok  sagði  hversu  mgrg  ágæti  ok  mik-

8.  il  dýrð  fylgði  þessum  sið.     Eiríkr  tók  því  máli  seint,  at  lata

9.  sið  sinn,  en  Þjóðhildr  gekk  skjótt  undir,  ok  lét  gjára  kirkju  eigi  allnær

10.  húsunum.     Þat  hus  var  kallat  Þjóðhildar  kirkja.     Hafði  hon  þar  fram

1 1 .  bœnir  sínar,  ok  þeir  menn  sem  við  kristni  tóku.     Þjóðhildr  vildi  ekki  sam-

12.  ræði  við  Eirík,  síðan  hon  tók  trú,  en  honum  var  þetta  mjgk  móti

13.  skapi.     Á  þessu  gfSrðisk  orð  mikit,  at  menn  mundu  leita  lands  þess,

14.  er  Leifr  hafði  fundit.     Var  þar  formaðr  at  Þorsteinn  Eiríks-

15.  son,  fróðr  maðr  ok  vinsæll.     Eiríkr  var  ok  til  beðinn,  ok  trúðu  menn  hans  gæ-

16.  fu  framast  ok  forsjá.     Hann  var  lengi  fyri,  en  kvað  eigi  nei  við,  er  vinir

17.  hans  báðu  hann  til,  bjoggu  síðan  skip  þat,  er  Þorbjgrn  hafði  út  haft,  ok  váru

18.  til  ráðnir  XX  menn,  ok  hgfðu  lítit  fé,  eigi  nieira  en  vápn  ok  vistir.

19.  Þann  morgin  reið  Eiríkr  heiman,  tók  hann  einn  kistil,  ok  var  þar

20.  í  guU  ok  silfr;   fal  hann  þat,  ok  fór  síðan  leiðar  sinnar,  ok  bar  svá  til

21.  at  hann  fell  af  baki,  ok  brotna  rifin  Í  síðunni,  en  lesti  hgndina  í  ax-

22.  larliðnum.     Af  þeim  atburð  sagði  hann  Þórhildi,  konu  sinni,  at  hon

23.  tœki  féit  á  brott,  lézk  þess  hafa  at  goldit,  er  hann  hafði  féit  fólgit.

24.  Síðan  sigldu  þeir  út  ór  Eiríksfirði  með  gleði  mikiUi ;    þótti  þeim  allvæ-

25.  nt  sitt  efni.     Þá  velkti  úti  lengi  í  haíi,  ok  kómu  þeir  ekki  á  þær  sló-

26.  ðir,  sem  þeir  vildu.     Þeir  kómu  í  sýn  við  Island,  ok  svá  hgfðu  þeir  fugl  af

27.  írlandi.     Rak  þá  skip  þeira  um  haf  innan.     Fóru  aptr  um  haustit,  ok  váru

28.  allmjgk  væstir  ok  þrekaðir;   koma  við  vetr  sjálfan  á  Eiríksljgrð.

29.  Þá  mælti  Eiríkr :    '  Kátari  sigldu  vdr  í  sumar  út  ór  firðinum,  en  nú  eru

30.  vér,  ok  eru  þó  enn  mgrg  góð  at.'     Þorsteinn  svarar :    '  Þat  er  nú  hgfð-

31.  ingligt  bragð,  at  sjá  ngkkut  gott  ráð  fyri  þeim

32.  mgnnum  gllum,  sem  hér  eru  nú  ráðstafalausir,

33.  ok  fá  þeim  vist  í  vetr.'    Eiríkr  svarar:  'Þat  er


mm


AA-ft^A^^Xjav^J^x^^f^Avii^e*^^^


ívéiÁf^


THE   ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  113


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  97  3.]         ÞORFINNS  SAGA  KARLSEFNIS— 10.

1.  jafnan  salt,  sem  mælt  er,  at  eigi  veit  fyrr  en  svarat  er,  ok  svá  man

2.  her  fara.     Skal  nú  hafa  ráð  þín  um  þetta/     Fóru  nú  allir,  þeir  er  eigi

3.  hgfðu  aðrar  vistir,  með  þeim  feðgum.     Síðan  fóru  þeir  heim  í  Brattahlíð,

4.  ok  váru  þar  um  vetrinn.     Þorsteinn  Eiríksson  fekk  Þuríðar.     Apti'g9ngur.

5.  Nií  er  frá  þvl  at  segja,  at  Þorsteinn  Ein'ksson  vakði  bónorð

6.  við  Guðriði,  ok  var  því  máli  vel  svarat,  bæði  af  henni  ok  af  fyður

7.  hennar.     Er  þetta  at  ráði  gert.     Þorsteinn  gengr  at  eiga  Guðríði,  ok  var

8.  þetta  brúðkaup  í  Brattahlíð  um  haustit.     Fór  sjá  veizla  vel  fram,  ok  var

9.  all^glmennt.     Þorsteinn  átti  bú  í  Vestrbygð,  á  bœ  þeim,  er  hét  í  Lýsufirði.     En

10.  sá  maðr  átti  þar  helming  í  biíi,  er  Þorsteinn  hét ;    Sigríðr  hét  kona  hans.

11.  Fór  forsteinn  1  L/sufj9rð,  um  haustit,  til  nafna  síns,  ok  þau  Guðríðr  bæði.    '

12.  Var  þar  við  þeim  vel  tekit.     Váru  þau  þar  um  vetrinn.     Þat  gerðisk  til

13.  tíðinda,  at  sótt  kom  í  bce  þeira,  er  lítit  var  af  vetri.     Garðr  hét  þar

14.  verkstjóri;   hann  var  ekki  vinsæll  maðr;   hann  tók  fyrst  sótt,  ok  andaðisk.     Síð-

15.  an  var  skamt  at  bíða,  at  hverr  lézk  at  gðrum.     í>á  tók  sótt  Þorsteinn  Eiríks-

16.  son,  ok  Sigríðr,  kona  Þorsteins,  nafna  hans;  ok  eitt  kveld  ffstisk  Sign'ðr  at

17.  ganga  til  náðahúss,  er  stóð  Í  gegn  utidyrum.     Guðríðr  fylgði  henni,

18.  ok  horfðu  þær  móti  útidurunum.     M  kvað  hon  við  hátt,  Sigríðr.     Guð-

19.  ríðr  mælti:    '  Vit  hgfum  óvarliga  farit,  ok  áttu  0ngan'  stað  við  at

20.  kalt  komi  á  þik,  ok  fgru  vit  heim  sem  skjótast.'     Sigríðr  svarar:    'Eigi  er  foert

21.  at  svá  búnu.     Hér  er  nú  liðit  þat  allt  hit  dauða  fyri  durunum,  ok  Þor-

22.  steinn,  bóndi  þinn,  ok  þar  kenni  ek  mik,  ok  er  slíkt  hprmung  at  sjá.'     Ok

23.  er  þetta  leið  af,  mælti  hon :    '  Fpru  vit  nú,  Guðríðr.    Nú  sé  ek  ekki  liðit.'

24.  Var  þá  Þorsteinn  horfinn  henni;    þótti  hann  áðr  haft  hafa  svipu  í  hendi,

25.  ok  vilja  berja  liðit.     Síðan  gengu  þær  inn,  ok  áðr  morginn  kœmi,  þá

26.  var  hon  látin ;   ok  var  ger  kista  at  líkinu.     Ok  þenna  sama  dag  æt-

27.  luðu  menn  at  róa,  ok  leiddi  Þorsteinn  þá  til  vara,  ok  í  annan  lit  for  hann  at

28.  sjá  veiðiskap  þeira.     Þá  sendi  Þorsteinn  Eiríksson  nafna  sínum  orð,  at  hann

29.  kœmi  til  hans,  ok  sagði  svá,  at  þar  væri  varla  kyrt,  ok  húsfreyja  vil-

30.  di  fœrask  á  fœtr,  ok  vildi  undir  klæðin  hjá  honum,  ok  er  hann  kom

31.  inn,  var  hon  komin  upp  á  rekkjustokkinn.     M  tók  hann

32.  hana  hgndum,  ok  lagði  boljjxi  f}TÍ  brjóst

33.  henni.     Þorsteinn  Eiriksson  andaðisk

'  MS.  eyngan.


114  THE  FINDING  OF    WIN  ELAND   THE   GOOD.


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  98.]         ÞORFINNS  SAGA  KARLSEFNIS— 11.

1.  nær  dagsetri^     Þorsteinn  bóndi  bað  Guðríði  leggjask  niðr  ok  sofa;   en  hann  kv-

2.  ezk  vaka  mundu  um  nóttina  yfir  líkinu.     Hon  g0rir  svá,  ok  er  skamt  leið  á

3.  nóttina,  settisk  Þorsteinn  Eiríksson  upp,  ok  mælti;    kvezk  vilja  at  Guðríðr  væri

4.  þangat  kglluð,  ok  kvezk  vilja  tala  við  hana :    '  Guð  vill  at  þessi  stund  sé

5.  mér  gefin  til  leyfis  ok  umbótar  míns  ráðs.'     Þorsteinn  bóndi  gengr  á  fu-

6.  nd  Guðríðar,  ok  vakði  hana,  biðr  hana  signa  sik  ok  biðja  sér  guð  hjálpar,

7.  ok  segir  hvat  Þorsteinn  Eiríksson  hafði  talat  við  hann;    'ok  hann  vill  finna  þik.

8.  Verðr  þú  ráð  fyri  at  sjá   hvat  þú  vill  upp  taka,  því  at  ek  kann  hér

9.  um  hvárskis  at  fýsa.'     Hon  svarar :    '  Vera  kann,  at  þetta  sé  ætlat  til  ngk-

10.  kurra  þeira  hluta,  er  síðan  sé  í  minni  hafðir,  þessi  hinn  undarligi  hlu-

11.  tr,  en  ek  vænti  at  guðs  gæzla  ^  mun  yfir  mér  standa ;  mun  ek

12.  ok  á  hætta  með  guðs  miskunn,  at  fara  til  móts  við  hann,  ok  vita  hvat

13.  hann  vill  tala,  því  at  ek  mun  eigi  forðask  mega,  ef  mér  skal  mein

14.  at  verða.     Vil  ek  síðr  at  hann  gangi  víðara;    en  mik  grunar,  at  þat

15.  man  á  liggja.'     Nu  for  Guðríðr,  ok  hitti  Þorstein;    sýndisk  henni  sem

16.  hann  feldi  tar.     Hann  mælti  í  eyra  henni  ngkkur  orð  hljótt,  svá  at  hon

17.  ein  vissi.    En  þat  mælti  hann  svá  at  allir  heyrðu,  at  þeir  menn  væri

18.  sælir,  er  trilna  heldu,  ok  henni  fylgði  gll  hjálp  ok  miskunn,  ok  sagði

1 9.  þó,  at  margir  heldi  hana  ilia ;    '  er  þat  engi  háttr,  sem  her  hefir

20.  verit  á  Grœnlandi,  síðan  kristni  kom  her,  at  setja  menn  niðr  í  úví-

21.  gða  mold  við  lída  yfirsgngva.     Vil  ek  mik  lata  flytja

22.  lil  kirkju  ok  aðra  þá  menn,  sem  hér  hafa  andazk,  en  Garðar

23.  vil  ek  brenna  lata  á  báli  sem  skjótast,  því  at  hann  veldr

24.  gllum  aptrggngum  þeim,  sem  hér  hafa  verit  í  vetr.'     Hann  sagði

25.  henni  ok  um  sína  hagi,  ok  kvað  hennar  forlgg  mikil  mundu  ver-

26.  ða,  en  bað  hana  varask  at  giptask  grœnlenzkum  mgnnum;

27.  bað  at  hon  legði  fé  þeira  tU  kirkju,  ok  sumt  fátœ-

28.  kum  mgnnum,  ok  þá  hné  hann  aptr  gðru  sinni.     Sá  hafði

29.  háttr  verit  á  Grœnlandi,  síðan  kristni  kom

30.  þangat,  at  menn  váru  grafnir  á  bœjum,

31.  þar  sem  gnduðusk,  í  úvígðri  moldu;

32.  skyldi  setja  staur  upp  af

33.  brjósti  hinum  dauða.     En

'  MS.  dag  satri.  ''  MS.  gjtla.


llJKimjyiiPi:  ■■«


^■'t'nT*'^^^*^


-^-


,^>'<^>dÍI[V^:L.'^ii3^


■%


^  "^ftUjC  ^mf  li^  )íH  >nt^ve«^.ibt?tta.^^^^


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  98  3.]         ÞORFINNS  SAGA  ICARLSEFNIS— 12.

1.  En'  síðan,  er  kennimenn  kómu  til,  þá  skyldi  upp  kippa  staurinum,  ok  he-

2.  Ua  þar  í  vígðu  vatni,  ok  veita  þar  yfirsgngva,  þótt  þat  væri  mi-

3.  klu  síðar.     Lík  þeira  Þorsteins  váru  fœrð  til  kirkju  í  EiríksfJQrð,  ok  veittir

4.  þar  yfirs9ng\'ar  af  kennimpnnum.     Tók  Eiríkr  við  Guðríði,  ok  var

5.  henni  í  fgður  stað.     Lítlu  síðar  andaðisk  Þorbjgrn ;   bar  þá  fé  allt  undir  Guðríði.

6.  Tók  Eiríkr  hana  tO  sín,  ok  sá  vel  um  hennar  kost.     Af  Hofða-Þórði.

7.  Þórðr  hét  maðr,  er  bjó  at  H^fða  á  Hgfðastrgnd.     Hann  átti  Friðger-

8.  ði,  dóttur  Þóris  hímu  ok  Friðgerðar,  dóttur  Kjarvals  fra-

9.  konungs.     {"oror  var  son  Bjarnar  byrðusmjprs,  Þorvaldssonar  hryggs,  Ásleiks-

10.  sonar,  Bjarnarsonar  járnsíðu,  Ragnarssonar  loðbrókar.     f>au  áttu  son,  er  Snorri

11.  hét ;   hann  átti  Þórhildi  rjúpu,  dóttur  Þórðar  gellis.     Þeira  son  var  Þórðr  hest-

12.  hgfði.     Þorfinnr  karlsefni  hét  son  Þórðar.     IMóðir  Þorfinns  hét  Þór-

13.  unn.     Þorfinnr  var  í  kaupferðum,  ok  þótti  góðr  fardrengr.     Eitt

14.  sumar  býr  Karlsefni  skip  sitt,  ok  ætlar  til  Grœnlands.     Snorri  Þorbran-

15.  dsson  ferr  með  honum  ór  Álptafirði,  ok  váru  XL  manna  á  skipi.     Maðr  hét  Bjarni

16.  Grímólfsson,  breiðfirzkr^  at  ætt.     Annarr  hét^  Þórhallr  Gam-

17.  lason,  austfirzkr  maðr.     Þeir  bjoggu  hit  sama  sumar  skip  sitt,  ok  ætlu-

18.  ðu  til  Grœnlands;   þeir  váru  ok  IIII  tigir  manna  á  skipi.     Lata  þeir  Karlsef-

19.  ni  í  haf  þessum  11  skipum,  þegar  þeir  váru  búnir.     Ekld  er  um  þat  getit,  hversu

20.  langa  útivist  þeir  hgfðu.     En  frá  því  er  at  segja,  at  bæði  þessi

21.  skip  kómu  á  Eiríksfjgrð  um  haustit.     Eiríkr  reið  til  skips,  ok  aðrir

22.  landsmenn.     Tóksk  með  þeim  greiölig  kaupstefna.  ■  Buðu  stýrimenn  Eirí-

23.  ki  at  hafa  sllkt  af  varningi,  sem  harm  vildi.     En  Eiríkr  sýnir

24.  þeim  stórmensku  af  sér  í  móti,  því  at  hann  bauð  þessum  II

25.  skipshgfnum  til  sin  heim  um  vetrinn  í  Brattahlíð.     Þetta  þá-

26.  gu  kaupmenn,  ok  þgkkuðu  honum.     Síðan  var  fluttr  heim  var-

27.  ningr  þeira  í  Brattahlíð.     Skorti  þar  eigi  útibúr  stór

28.  til  at  varðveita  í  varning  þeira;  skorti  þar  ekki

29.  mart  þat,  er  hafa  þurfti,  ok  líkaði  þeim  vel  um

30.  vetrinn.     En  er  dró  at  jólum,  tók  Eiríkr  fæð

31.  mikla,  ok  var  óglaðari  en  hann  átti  vana

32.  til.     Eitt  sinn  kom  Karlsefni  at  má-

33.  11  við  Eirík,  ok  mælti:   'Er  þér

34.  þungt,  Eiríkr  bóndi-?

'  En«  repeated  in  MS.  '  MS.  freidfirdskr,  ob^^ously  a  clerical  slip.

^  3.nnnrr  hét  repeated  in  MS.


Q  2


"5


ii6  THE  FINDING   OF    WIN  ELAND   THE    GOOD.

[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  99.]  ÞORFINNS  SAGA  KARLSEFNIS— 13.

1.  Menu  þikkjask  finna,  at  þú  ert  óglaðari  en  þú  átt  vana  til.     tu  hefir

2.  veitt  OSS  með  hinni  mestu  rausn,  ok  eru  vér  skyldir  til  at  launa  þér

3.  slíku  góðu,  sem  vér  hgfum  fgng  á.     Nú  segðu  hvat  úgleði  [þinni  veldr].'     Eirflir  svarar :

4.  '  Ér  þiggit  vel  ok  góðmannliga.     Nú  leilcr  mér  þat  eigi  í  hug,  at  á  yðr  verði

5.  hallt  um  vár  skipti,  hitt  er  heldr,  at  mér  þikki  uggligt,  þá  er  þér

6.  komit  annarsstaðar,  at  þat  flytisk,  at  þér  hafit  engi  jól  verri  haft

7.  en  þessi,  er  nú  koma,  ok  Eiríkr  hirm  rauði  veitti  yðr  í  Brattahlíð  á  Grœn-

8.  landi.'     '  Þat  niun  eigi  svá  fara,  bóndi,'  segir  Karlsefni,  '  vér  hQfum  [á]  skipi  vá-

9.  ru  bæði  malt  ok  korn,  ok  hafið  þar  af  slíkt,  er  þér  vilið,  ok  g0ríð

10.  veizlu  svá  stórmannliga,  sem  yðr  líkar  fyri  því.'     Þetta  þiggr  Eiríkr,  ok

11.  var  þá  búit  til  jólaveizlu,  ok  var  hon  hin  sœmiligsta,  svá  at  menn

1 2.  þóttusk  trautt  þvílíka  rausn  sét  hafa  í  fátœku  landi.     Ok  eptir  jól-

13.  in  vekr  Karlsefni  bónorð  fyri  Eirík  um  Guðríði,  því  at  honum

14.  leizk  sem  hann  mundi  forræði  á  hafa.     Eiríkr  svarar  vel,  ok  segir,  at  hon  man  sínum  for-

15.  Iggum  verða  at  fylgja,  ok  kvezk  góða  eina  frétt  af  honum  hafa ;    ok  lauk  svá,  at  Þorfinnr  festi

16.  Þuríði,  ok  var  þá  aukin  veizlan,  ok  drukkit  brullaup  þeira,  ok  var  þetta  í  Brattahlíð  um  vetrinn,

17.  f  Brattahlíð  hófusk  miklar  umrœður,  at  menn  skyldu  leita  Vínlands     Hófsk  VínlandsferS,

18.  ens  góða,  ok  var  sagt,  at  þangat  mundi  vera  at  vitja   góðra   landskosta.       Ok   þar   kom,    at

Karlse-

19.  fni  ok  Snorri  bjoggu  skip  sitt,  at  leita  landsins  um  várit.     Með  þeim  fór  ok  sá  maðr,  er  Bjarni

20.  hét,  ok  annarr  Þórhallr,  er  fyrr  eru  nefndir,  með  sínu  skipi.     Maðr  hét  forvaror ;    hann  átti

Frej'-

21.  dísi,   dóttur   EirílvS  rauða,  laungetna.      Hann   fór  ok   með  þeim,  ok  f'orvaldr,  son  Eiríks,  ok

Þórhallr,

22.  er  kallaðr  var  veiðimaðr.     Hann  hafði  lengi  verit  með  Eiríki,  veiðimaðr  hans  um  sumrum,  en

23.  bryti   um   vetrum.      Hann   var   mikiU   maðr,  ok   stcrkr  ok    svartr  ok   þursligr,   hljóðlyndr   ok

illorðr,  þat  er  hann

24.  mælti,  ok  eggjaði  jafnan  Eirík  ens  verra.     Hann  var  illa  kristinn.      Honum  var  víða  kunnigt

í  ijbygðum.

25.  Hann  var  á  skipi  nieð  Þorvarði  ok  Þorvaldi.     ^eir  hpfðu  þat  skip,  er  Þorbjprn  hafði  lít  haft.

26.  i»eir  hgfðu  alls  XL  manna  ok  C,  er  þeir  sigldu  til  Vestrib}-gðar,  ok  þaðan  til  Bjarneyjar.

27.  Þaðan  sigldu  þcir  II  dœgr  í  suðr.     Þá  sá  þeir  land,  ok  skutu  báti  ok  kgnnuðu  landit,  funnu

28.  þar  hellur  stórar,  ok  margar  XII  álna  víðar;  fJQlði  var  þar  melrakka.     Þeir  gáfu

29.  þar  nafn,  ok  kgilluðu  Helluland.     Þaðan  sigldu  þeir   II  dœgr,  ok  brá  til  landsuðrs  ór  suðri,

30.  ok  fundu  land  skóg\-axit,  ok  mgrg  dýr  á.     Ey  lá  þar  undan  1  landsuðr,  þar  i  drápu  þeir

31.  cinn  bJQrn,  ok  kglluðu  þar  síðan  Bjarncy,  en  landit  IMarkland.      Þaðan  sigldu  þeir  suðr  með

32.  landinu  langa  stund,  ok  kómu  at  ncsi  einu,  l;i  landit  á  sljórn ;    váru  þar  strandir  langar

33.  ok  sandar.     Þcir  reru  til  lands,  ok  fundu  þar  á  nesinu  kjgl  af  skipi,  ok  kglluðu  þar

34.  Kjalarnes.     {"cir  kplluðu  ok  strandirnar  Furðustrandir,  því  at  langt  þótli  fyr '  at  sigla.

'  þótli  f)r,  sii])plitd  from  paper  MSS.,  AM.  2S1,  4(0,  59"  b,  410 ;  Ihc  words  are  not  decipherable  in  the  vellum.


^áCJ' Wv  ^,{i3;iiíí!^^«l  ^  L,  Aör '


»  -         ,111      "V^A-c^t


*iW^!^yWlVií>j»í':


'>tiwv.^*^■iT^slitli5v6\b«1vöt]»A^)<^^


■»<j^


THE  ICELANDIC   TEXTS.  117

[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  99  Í.]         ÞORFINNS  SAGA  KARLSEFNIS-14.

1.  Þá  gprðisk   landit    vágskorit.      Þeir  helJu  skipunum  í  einn  vág.      Óláfr  konungr  Trvggvason

hafði

2.  gefit  Leifi  tvá  menn  skozka,  hét  maðrinn  Haki,  en  hon  Hekja  ^     Þau  váru  dýrum

3.  skjótari.     Þessir  menn  váru  í  skipi  með  Karlsefni ;    en  er  þeir  hgfðu   siglt  fjrir  Furðustrandir,

þá  lé-

4.  tu  þeir  ena  skozku  menn  á  land,  ok  báðu  þau  hlaupa  suðr  á  landit,  at  leita  landskosta  ok  koma

5.  aptr  áðr  III  dœgr  væri  liðin.     Þau  hQfðu  þat  klæði,  er  þau  kplluðu  kjafal,  þat  var  svá  g0rt,

6.  at  hattr  var  á  upp,  ok  opit  at  hliðunum,  ok  engar  ermar  á,  knept  saman  miUi  fóta  með

7.  knappi  ok  nezlu,  en  ber  váru  þau  annarsstaðar.     Þeir  biðuðu  þar  þá  stund,  en  er  þau  kómu  ap-

8.  tr,  hafði  annat  í  hendi  vínberja  kongul,  en  annat  hveitiax  nýsáit.     Gengu  þau  á  skip

9.  út,  ok  sigklu  þeir  síðan  leiðar  sinnar.     Þeir  sigldu  inn  á  fjprð  einn;    þar  lá  ein  ey  fyrir  utan ;

10.  þar  um  váru  straumar  miklir;    því  kglluðu  þeir  hana  Straumey.     Svá  var  mprg  æðr  í

11.  eynni,   at   varla   mátti   ganga  fyrir  eggjum.       Þeir   kglluou   þar  Straumfjgrð.       Þeir  báru  þar

farm  af

12.  skipum   sínum,  ok   bjoggusk  þar  um,      Þeir  hgfðu  nieð  sér  allskonar  fénað.      Þar  var  fagrt

landsleg.     Þeir  gá-

13.  ðu  enkis  utan  at  kanna  landit.     Þeir  váru  þar  um  vetrinn,  ok  var  ekki  fyrir  unnit  um  sumarit.

Tókusk  af

14.  veiðarnar,   ok   gj^rðisk   illt    til    matar.      fa   hvarf  brott  Þórhallr   veiðimaðr.      Þeir    hgfðu    áðr

heitit  á

15.  guð  til  matar,  ok  varð  eigi  við  svá  skjótt,  sem  þeir  þóttusk  þurfa.     Þeir  leituðu  Þórhalls  um

III  dœgr,

16.  ok  fundu  hann  á  hamargnípu  einni.     Hann  lá  þar,  ok  horfði  í  lopt  upp,  ok  gapti  bæði  munni

ok  npsum,  ok

17.  þulði    ngkkut.     Þeir    spurðu    hví    hann    var   þar   kominn.     Hann   kvað   þá   engu    þat    varða.

Þeir  báðu  hann  fara  heim

18.  með   sér,    ok  hann  g0rði    svá.      Lítlu    sfðar  kom  þar  hvalr,   ok   fóru  þeir   til,  ok  skáru,   ok

kendi  engi  maðr  hvat  hvala

1 9.  var,  ok  er  matsveinar  suðu,  þá  álu  þeir,  ok  varð  ollum  illt  af.     f>á  mælti  Þórhallr :    '  Drjiígari

varð  enn

20.  rauðskeggjaði  nú  en  Kristr  yðarr.     Hefir  ek  þetta  nú  fyrir  skáldskap  minn,  er  ek  orta  um  Þór  fu-

21.  lltrúann ;    sjaldan   hefir   hann   mér   brugðizk.'     Ok    er   menn   vissu   þetta,  báru    þeir    hvalinn

allan  á  kaf,

22.  ok  skutu  sínu  máli  til  guðs.     Batnáði  þá  veðrátta,  ok  gaf  þeim  útróðra,  ok  skorti  þá  síðan

23.  eigi  fgng,  því  at  þá  var  dýraveiðr  á  landinu,  en  eggver  í  eynni,  en  fiski  ór  sjónum.     Af  Karlsefni

24.  Svá  er  sagt,  at  Þórhallr  viU  fara  norðr  fyrir  Furðustrandir,  at  leita  Vínlands,         ok  Þórhalli.

25.  en   Karlsefni    %'ill  fara  suðr   fyrir   landit.      Býsk   í'órhallr  út  undir   eynni,  ok  verða  þeir  eigi

fleiri  saman

26.  en  IX  menn;   en  allt  annat  lið  fór  með  Karlsefni.     En  er  f'órhallr  bar  vatn  á  skip  sitt,  ok

27.  draklc,  þá  kvað  hann  vísu  :  '  Hafa  kváðu  mik  meiðar  málmþings,  er  ek  kom  hingat,  mér

28.  samir  land  fyrir  l/ðum  lasta,  drykkinn  bazta.     Bílds  hattar  verðr  buttu  beiðitýr  at  stýra,  heldr

29.  er  svá  at  ek  krýp  at  keldu  ;    komat  vín  á  grgn  mína.'     Ok  er  þeir  váru  búnir,  undu  þeir  segl.

30.  Þá   kvað    torhallr :    '  F9rum  aptr   þar  er  órir  eru,  sandhimins,  landar,  latum  kenni  val  kanna

knarrar

31.  skeið  en  breiðu;meðan  bilstj-ggvir  byggja  bellendr,  ok  hval  vella,  laufa  veðrs,  þeir  er

32.  leyfa  Ignd  á  Furðustrgndum.'     Síðan  sigídu  þeir  norðr  fyrir  Furðustrandir  ok  Kjalarnes,

33.  ok  vildu  beita  vestr  fyrir.      Þá  kom  móti  þeim  vestanveðr,  ok  rak  þá  upp  á  frlandi,  ok  váru

þeir

34.  þar  barðir  ok  þjáðir,  ok  lét  ÞórhaUr  þar  líf  sitt,  eptir  því  scm  kaupmenn  hafa  sagt.      Nú  er

[at]  segja  af

35.  Karlsefni,  at  hann  for  suðr  fyrir  landit,  ok  Snorri  ok  Bjarni  með  sínu  fólki.     Þeir  fóru  lengi,

ok  ailt  þar

'  MS.,  apparently  through  a  clerical  slip,  eu  hon  haki  en  hon  hekia.


ii8  THE  FIXDIXG   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  100.]  i-ORFINNS    SAGA    KARLSEFNIS— 15.

1.  til  er  þeir  kómu  at  á  einni,  er  fell  af  landi  ofan  ok  í  vatn  eitt  til    sjóvar.       E}Tar   váru    þar

miklar,

2.  ok   mátti    eigi   komask   í  ana  utan  at  háflœðum.       Þeir  Karlsefni  sigldu  Í  ósinn,  ok  kglluðu

Í  Hópi.

3.  Þeir  fundu  þar  á  landi  sjálfsána  hveitiakra,  þar  sem  lægðir

4.  váru,  en  vínvið  allt  þar  sem  holta  vissi.     Hverr  lœkr  var  þar  fuUr  af

5.  fiskum.     Þeir  gfírðu  grafir  þar  sem  mœttisk  landit,  ok  flóðit  gekk  ofast,

6.  ok  þá  er  út  fell  sjórinn,  váru  helgir  fiskar  í  grgfunum.     Þar  var  mikill  fjgl-

7.  ði  dy-ra  á  skóginum  með  gllu  móti.     Þeir  váni  þar  hálfan  má-

8.  nað,  ok  skemtuðu^  sér,  ok  urðu^  við  ekki  varir.     Fé  sitt  hgf-

9.  ðu  þeir  með  sér.     Ok  einn  morgin  snemma,  er  þeir  litu-

10.  ðusk'  um,  sá  þeir  mikinn  fjglða  húðkeipa,  ok  var  veift

11.  trjám*  á  skipunum,  ok  lét  því  líliast  sem  í  hálmþust,  [ok]

12.  var  veift  sólarsinnis.     M  mælti  Karlsefni:    '  Hvat  man  þetta  hafa  [at]

13.  teikna?'     Snorri  Þorbrandsson  svarar  honum:    'Vera  kann  at  þetta  sé  friðar-

14.  mark,  ok  tgkum  skjgild  hvítan,  ok  berum  at  móti ; '    ok  svá  g0rðu  þeir.     Þá

15.  reru  þeir  í  mót,  ok  undraðusk^  þá,  sem  fyrir  váru,  ok  gengu  á  land  upp.     Þeir  váru  svar-

16.  tir  menn  ok  iUiligir,  ok  hgfðu  illt  hár  á  hgfði.     Þeir  váru  mJQk  eygðir  ok  breiðir

17.  í  kinnum.      Dvglðusk  þeir  of  stund,  ok  undruðusk  '  þá,  sem  f}TÍr  váru,  ok  reru  sí-

18.  ðan  í  brott,  ok  suðr  fyrir  nesit.     Þeir  Karlsefni  hgfðu  gjárt  búðir  sínar  upp  frá

ig.  vatninu,  ok  váru  sumir  skálarnir  nær  vatninu,  en  sumir  firr.     Nú  váru  þeir  þar  þann

20.  vetr.     Þar  kom  enginn  snjór,  ok  allt  gekk  fé  þeira  sjálfala  fram.     En  er  vá-

21.  ra  tók,  sá  þeir  einn  morgin  snemma,  at  fjelði  húðkeipa  reri  sunnan

22.  fyrir  nesit,  svá  mart  sem  kolum  væri  sáit  fjTÍr  hópit ;    var  þá  ok  veift  [á]  hverju

23.  skipi  trjánum  °.     Þeir  Karlsefni  brugðu  þá  skJQldum  upp,  ok  er  þelr  fundusk,  tó-

24.  ku  þeir  kaupstefnu  sín '  á  miUi,  ok  vildi  þat  folk  helzt  hafa  rautt

25.  skrúð.     í'eir  hgfðu  móti  [at]  gefa  skinnavgru  ok  algrá  skinn.     Þeir  vildu  ok  kaupa  sverð

26.  ok  spjót,  en  þat  bgnnuðu  þeir  Karlsefni  ok  Snorri.     Þeir  Skrælingar  tóku  sp-

27.  annarlangt  rautt  skrúð  fyrir  úfglvan  belg,  gk  bundu  um  hgfuð  sér.     Gekk

28.  svá  kaupstefna  þcira  um  hríð.     Þá  tók  at  fættask  skrúðit  með  þeim

29.  Karlsefni,  ok  skáru  þeir  þá  svá  smátt  í  sundr,  at  eigi  var  breiðara  en  þvers

30.  fingrs,  ok  gáfu  Skrælingar  þó  jafnmikit  fyrir  sem  áðr  eða  meira.     Þat  bar

31.  til,  at  graðungr  hljóp  ór  skógi,  er  þeir  Karlsefni  áttu,  ok  gellr  hátt.     Þetta  fæ-

32.  lask  Skrælingar,  ok  hlaupa  út  á  keipana  ok  reru  síðan  suðr  fyrir  landit.

33.  Vcrðr  þá  ekki  vart  við  þfi  þrjár  vikur  í  samt.    En  er  sjá  stund  var  liðin,

34.  sjá  þcir  fara  sunnan  mikinn  fjglða  Skrælinga  skipa,  svá  sem  straumr  stœði,  var

35.  þá  trjánum"  gllum  vcift  andsœlis,  ok  ýla  upp  allir  nijgk  hátt.     M  tóku

'  MS.  skcmuda.  '  MS.  unrdu,  i.e.  vBr8u.  '  MS.  litadust.  »  MS.  triom.

'  MS.  undradust.  '  MS.  trionuw.  '  sin  repeated  in  MS.


'tiI'tSÍ-     íi-.-íií-


*tt7  ftCW


tmivn,  «  ít,jW«.Í  W  W  l'Uli-  >*«m1  UUt
n>tt«n,  nH^S   Vtutto  öf  fem,  ftr  -m^tt


^•0   nm*1  1-r:


mtL,


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  119


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  100  Í.]       ÞORFINNS  SAGA  KARLSEFNIS— 16.

1.  þeir  Karlsefni  rauðan  skjgld,  ok  bam  at  móti.     Skrælingar  hljópu  *  af  ski-

2.  pum,  ok  síðan  gengu  þeir  saman,  ok  bprðusk.     Varð  þar  skothríð  hQrð,  því  at

3.  SkræKngar  hgfðu  valslpngur.     Þat  sá  þeir  Karlsefni,  at  Skrælingar  fœrðu  iipp  á

4.  stgng  kngtt  stundar  mikinn,  því  nær  til  at  jafna  sem  sauðarvQmb,

5.  ok  helzt  blán  at  lit,  ok  fleygðu  af  stgnginni  upp  á  landit  yfir  lið  þeira

6.  Karisefnis,  ok  lét  iUiliga  við,  þar  sem  niðr  kom.     Við

7.  þetta  sló  ótta  miklum  á  Karlsefni  ok  allt  lið  hans,

8.  svá  at  þá  fýsti  engis  annars  en  flýja,  ok  halda  undan

9.  upp  með  ánni,  því  at  þeim  þótti  lið  Skrælinga  drífa  at  sér

10.  Qlliun  megin,  ok  létta  eigi  fyrr  en  þeir  koma  til  ham-

11.  ra  ngldiurra,  ok  veittu  þar  viðrtgku  harða.     Freydís  kom  iít,

12.  ok  sá  at  þeir  Karlsefni  heldu  undan,  ok  kallaði :    '  Hví  renni  þdr  undan

13.  þessum  auvirðismgnnum,  svá  gildir  menn  sem  þér  eruð,  er  mér  þótti  seni  þér

14.  mættið  drepa  niðr  svá  sem  búfé;    ok  ef  ek  hefða  vápn,  þótti  mér  sem

15.  ek  skylda  betr  berjask,  en  einnhverr  yðarl'    Þeir  gáfu  engan  gaum  hennar^
i6.  orðum.     Freydís  vildi  fylgja  þeim,  ok  varð  seinni,  því  at  hon  var  eigi  heil ;

17.  gekk  hon  þó  eptir  þeim  í  skóginn.     En  Skrælingar  sœkja  at  henni.     Hon  fann  fyrir

18.  sér  mann  dauðan,  þar  var  Þorbrandr  Snorrason,  ok  stóð  hellusteinn  í  hgfði

19.  honum;   sverðit  lá  bert  í  hjá  honum;    tók  hon  þat  upp,  ok  býsk  at  verja  sik.

20.  M  kómu  Skrælingar  at  henni,  en  hon  dró  þá  út  brjóstit  undan  klæðunum,  ok

21.  slettir  á  beru  sverðinu.     Við  þetta  óttask  Skrælingar,  ok  hljópu'  undan  á  sldp  sín,

22.  ok  reru  í  brott.     Þeir  Karlsefni  finna  [nú]  hana',  ok  lofa  kapp  hennar.     Tveir  menn

23.  fellu  af  þeim  Karlsefni,  en  fjglði  af  þeim  Skrælingum.     Urðu  þeir  Karls-

24.  efni  ofrliði  bornir,  ok  fóru  nú  heim  eptir  þetta  til  búða  sinna,  ok  bundu  sár  sín,

25.  ok  íhuga  hvat  fJQlmenni  þat  myndi  verit  hafa,  er  at  þeim  sótti  af  landi-

26.  nu  ofan.     Sýnisk  þeim  nú  sem  þat  eina  mun  liðit  verit  hafa,  er  af  ski-

27.  punum  kom,  en  hitt  fólkit  man  verit  hafa  sjónhverfingar.     Þeir  Skrælingar  fun-

28.  du  einn  mann  dauðan,  ok  lá  0x  í  hjá.     Einn  þeira  tók  upp  0sina,  ok  hjó  *

29.  með  tré,  ok  þá  hverr  at  gðrum,  ok  þótti  þeim  vera  gjzSrsimi,  ok  bíta  veP ;    síðan

30.  tók  einn  ok  hjó*  í  stein,  svá  at  brotnaði  0xin,  ok  þá  þótti  þeim  engu

31.  nýt,  er  eigi  stóðsk  grjótit,  ok  kQstuðu^  niðr.     Þeir  Karlsefni  þóttusk  nú

32.  sjá,  þótt  þar  væri  landskostir  góðir,  at  þar  myndi  jafnan  ótti  ok  úfriðr

33.  á  liggja  af  þeim,  er  þar  bjoggu.     Síðan  bjoggusk  þeir  á  brott,  ok  ætluðu  til

34.  sins  lands,  ok  sigldu  norðr  fyrir  landit,  ok  funnu  V  Skrælinga  í  skinnhjúpum

'  MS.  lupu.  ^  MS.  adds  syllable  'or,'  repeated  in  next  line.

'  Bjora  á  Skarðsá  [AM.  Ii8,  8vo]  writes  in  place  of  'finna  nu  hana,"  which  is  not  clear  in  the  vellnm,  'finna  nú
Freydís.'  «  MS.  huggj.  =  MS.  val.  '  MS.  kastadu.


THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  101.]        ÞORFINXS  SAGA  KARLSEFNIS— 17.

1.  sofnaða  nær  sjó  ;    þeir  hgfðu  með  sér  stokka,  ok  í  dýramerg  dreyra  blandinn.     Þót-

2.  tusk  þeir  Karlsefni  þat  skilja,  at  þessir  menn  myndu  hafa  verit  g0rvir  brott  af

3.  landinu ;  þeir  drápu  þá.     Síðan  fundu  þeir  Karlsefni  nes  eitt,  ok  á  fjglða  dýra;

4.  var  nesit  at  sjá,  sem  mykiskán  væri,  af  því  at  dýrin  lágu  þar  um  nætrnar.

5.  Nú  koma  þeir  Karlsefni  aptr  í  StraumfjQrð,  ok  váru  þar  fyrir  alls  gnóttir,  þess  er  þeir

6.  þurftu  at  hafa.     Þat  er  sumra  marma  sggn,  at  þau  Bjarni  ok  Guðríð'  hafi  þar

7.  eptir  verit,  ok  X  tigir  manna  með  þeim,  ok  hafi  eigi  farit  lengra.     En  þeir  Karlsefni  ok  Snorri

8.  hafi  suðr  farit,  ok  XL  manna  með  þeim,  on  hafi  eigi  lengr  verit  Í  Hópi  en  vart

9.  tvá  mánaði,  ok  hafi  sama  sumar  aptr  komit.     Karlsefni  for  þá  einu  skipi

10.  at  leita  Þórhalls  veiðimarms,  en  annat  liðit  var  eptir;    ok  fóru  þeir  norðr  fyrir  Kjalarnes,

11.  ok  berr  þá  fj-rir  vestan  fram,  ok  var  landit  á  bakborða  þeim.     Þar  váru  þá  eyðimerkr  einar  allt

12.  at  sjá  fyrir  þeim,  ok  nær  hvergi  rjóðr  í.     Ok  er  þeir  hgfðu  lengi  farit,  fellr  á  af  lan-

13.  di  ofan  ór  austri  ok  í  vestr;    þeir  Ipgðu  inn  í  árósinn,  ok  lágu  við  hinn  syðra  bakkann.

14.  Þat  var  einn  morgin,  er  þeir  Karlsefni  sá  fyrir  ofan  Víg  Þorvalds  Eiríkssonar.

15.  rjóðrit  flekk  npkkiirn,  sem  glitraði  við  þeim,  ok  œpUi  þeir  á  þat ;   þat  hrœrðisk,

16.  ok  var  þat  Einfœtingr,  ok  skauzk  ofan  á  þann  árbakkann,  sera  þeir  lágu  við.     Þorvaldr,

17.  Eiríks  son  rauða,  sat  %'ið  st/ri,  ok  skaut  Einfœtingr  gr  í  smáþarma  honum.     Þor-

18.  valdr  dró  út  grina,  ok  mælti:    'Feitt  er  um  ístruna,  gott  land  hpfum  vér  fengit

19.  kostum,  en  þó  megum  vér  varla  njóta!  '     Þorvaldr  dó  af  sári  þessu  lítlu  síðar.

20.  Þá  hlej-pr  Einfœtingr  á  braut,  ok  norðr  aptr.     f'eir  Karlsefni  fóru  eptir  honum,  ok  sá  harm

21.  Etundum.     t'at  sá  þeir  síðast  til  hans,  at  harm  hljóp  á  vág  ng>kkurn.     Þá  hurfu  þeir  Karlsefni

22.  aptr.     Þá  kvað  einn  maðr  kviðUng  þenna :    '  Eltu  seggir,  allsatt  var  þat,  einn  Einfœting

23.  ofan  til  strandar;   en  kynligr  maðr  kostaði  rásar  hart  um  stopir.     Heyrðu  Karls-

24.  efni!'     f'eir  fóru  þá  í  brott,  ok  norðr  aptr,  ok  þóttusk  sjá  Einfœtingaland.     Vildu  þeir  þá

25.  eigi  hætta  liði  sínu  lengr.     Þeir  ætluðu  qU  ein  fjoll,  þau  er  í  Hópi  váru,  ok  þessi,  er  nú

26.  funnu  þeir,  ok  þat  stœðisk  mjgk  svá  á,  ok  væri  jafnlangt  ór  Straumfirði  beggja

27.  vegna.     Hinn  þriðja  vetr  váru  þeir  í  Straumfirði.     Gengu  menn  þá  mjgk  í  sveitir,  ok

28.  varð  þeim  til  um  konur,  ok  vildu  þeir,  er  úkvændir  váru,  sœkja  til  í  hendr  þeim,  sem  kvæn-

29.  dir  váru,  ok  stóð  af  því  hin  mesta  úró.     Þar  kom  til  hit  fyrsta  haust  Snorri,

30.  son  Karlsefnis,  ok  var  hann  þá  þrévetr,  er  þeir  fóru  brott.     Þá  er  þeir  sigldu  af  Vínlandi  tó-

31.  ku  þeir  suðrœn  veðr,  ok  hittu  þá  Markland,  ok  funnu  þar  SkræUnga  V,  ok  var  einn

32.  skeggjaðr,  konur  váru  II,  ok  bgrn  tvau.     Tóku  þeir  Karlsefni  sveinana,  en  hinir  kó-

33.  musk  undan,  ok  sukku  þeir  Skrælingar  í  jgrð  niðr.     Sveina  þessa  II  hofðu  þeir  með  sér

34.  Þeir  kendu  þeim  mál,  ok  váru  skírðir.     Þeir  nefndu  móður  sína  Vethilldi,  ok  fgður

35.  Uvege.     Þeir  sggðu  at  konungar  stjórnuðu  Skrœlingum,  ok  hét  annarr  þeira  Avalldama,

36.  en  annarr  Avilldudida^     Þeir  kváðu  þar  engin  hús,  lágu  menn  þar  í  helium  eða  holum.

37.  f'eir  sggðu  þar  liggja  land  gðrum  megin  gagnvart  sínu  landi,  er  þeir  menn  byg-

38.  Öi,  er  váru  í  hvítum  klæðum,  ok  báru  stangir  fyrir  sdr,  ok  váru  festar  við  flíkar,  ok  œp-

39.  ðu  hátt,  ok  ætla  mcnn,  at  þat  hafi  verit  Hvítramannaland  eða  írland  ct  mikla.

40.  Þá  Bjarna  Gn'mólfsson  bar  í  frlands  haf,  ok  kómu  í  maðksjó,  ok

'  MS.  sic.  '  Bjbrn  á  Skardsa  [AM.  iiS,  8vo]  has  '  Avalldainna'  and  '  VallJidida.


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.


[HAUKSBÓK,  p.  101  b:\       ÞORFINNS  SAGA  KARLSEFNIS— 18.

1.  sgkk  drjúgum  skipit  undir  þeim;  þeir  hgfðu  bát  þann,  er  bræddr  var  með  seltJQru,  því  at  þar

fær  eigi  sjómaðkr

2.  á.     Þeir  gengu  í  báiinn,  ok  sá   þeir  þá,  at   þeim   mátti   hann   eigi  gllum  vinnask.     Þá  mælti

Bjarni :    '  Af  því  at  bátrinn  tekr

3.  eigi  meira  en  helming  manna  várra,  þá  er  þat  ríitt  ráð,  at  menn  sé  hlutaðir  í  bátinn,  því  at

þetta  skal  ekki  fara  at

4.  mannvirðingu.'     Þetta  þótti  gllum  svá    drengiliga  boðit,  at  engi  vildi  móti  mæla.     G0rðu  þeir

svá,  at  [þeir]

5.  hlutuðu  mennina,  ok  hlaut    Bjarni    at    fara  í  bátinn,  ok  helmingr   manna  með  honum,  því  at

bátrinn  tók  ekki  meira.

6.  En  er  þeir  váru  komnir  í  bátinn,  þá  mælti  einn  íslenzkr  maðr,  er  þá  var  í  skipinu,  ok  Bjarna

hafði  fylgt  af

7.  íslandi:    'Ætlar    þií,    Bjarni,    her    at    skiljask   við   mik?'     Bjarni   svarar :     '  Svá  verðr  nú  at

vera.'    Hann  svarar :    '  Qðru  hézk

8.  þú  fgður  mínum,  þá  er  ek  fór  af  fblandi  með  þér,  en  skiljask  svá  \'ið  mik,  þá  er  þú  sagðir,

at  eitt  sk-

9.  yldi  ganga  yfir  okkr  báða.'     Bjarni  svarar :    '  Eigi  skal  ok   svá  vera,  gakk  þú  hingat  í  bátinn,

en  ek  man  upp

10.  fara  1  skipit,  því  at  ek  sé,  at   þú  ert   svá   filss  til   fj^rsins.'     Gekk  Bjarni  þá  upp  Í  skipit,  en

þessi  maðr  í

11.  bátinn,  ok   fóru    þeir   síðan   leiðar    sinnar,  til   þess    er   þeir  kómu   til  Dyflinnar  á  írlandi,  ok

SQgðu  þar  þessa  sggu ;    en

12.  þat    er  flestra    manna    ætlan,  at   Bjarni   ok   bans   kumpánar  hafi  látizk  í  maðksjónum,  því  at

ekki  spurðisk  til  þeira

13.  Annat  sumar  eptir  fór  Karlsefni  tU  islands,  ok  Guðríðr  Ættartala  frá  Karlsefni  ok  ÞuríSi,

konu  hans.     síðan '.

14.  með  honum,  ok  fór  heim  í  Reynisnes.     Móður  bans  þótti  sem  hann  hefði  lítt  til  kostar  tekit,

ok  var  Guðr-

15.  íðr  eigi  heima  enn  fyrsta  vetr.     En  er  hon  prófaði,  at  Guðríðr  var  kvennskgrungr  mikill,  fór

16.  hon  heim,  ok  váru  samfarar  þeira  góðar.      Dóttir  Snorra  Karlsefnissonar  var  Hallfríðr,  móðir

forlaks  biskups

17.  Runólfssonar.     Þau  áttu  son,  er  Þorbjgrn  hét ;    hans  dóttir  bét  Þórunn,  móðir  Bjarnar  biskups.

Þorgeirr  hét
i8.     son  Snorra  Karlsefnissonar,  faðir  Yngvildar,  móður  Brands  biskups  hins  fyrra.     Dóttir  Snorra,
Karlsefnis-

19.  sonar  var  ok  Steinunn,  er  átti  Einarr,  son  Grundar-Ketils,  Þorvaldssonar  króks,  Þórissonar

20.  á  Espihóli.     Þeira    son  var    Þorsteinn  ranglátr,  hann    var   faðir  Guðrúnar,  er   átti   Jgrundr   at

Keldum  ;

21.  þeira  dótlir  var  Halla,  móðir  Flosa,  fgður  Valgerðar,  móður  herra  Erlends  sterka,  fgður  herra

Hauks

22.  Iggmanns.     Qnnur  dóttir  Flosa  var  þórdís,  móðir  frú  Ingigerðar  ríku.     Hennar   dóttir  var  frú

Hallbera,  ab-

23.  badís  í  Reynisnesi  at  Stað.     Mart  stórmenni  er  komit  annat  á  íslandi  frá  Karlsefni  ok  Þuríði,

þat  er  ekki

24.  er  hér  skráð.    Veri  guð  með  oss,  amen.

'  '  síðan '  to  be  read  at  the  end  of  line  12.


THE  FINDING  OF    WINELAND   THE   GOOD.


[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  27.]  EIRÍKS    SAGA    RAUÐA'— 1.


1 3.  [Ó]láfr  ^  hét  konungT,  er  kallaðr  var  Óláfr  hvíti.     Hann  var  son  Ingjalds  konungs

14.  Helgasonar,  Óláfssonar,  Guðr0ðarsonar ',  Hálfdanarsonar  hvítbeins  Upple-

15.  ndinga  konungs.     Óláfr  herjaði  í  vestn-íking,  ok  vann  Dyflinni*  á  fr-

16.  landi  ok  Dyflinnarskíri,  ok  g0rðisk  konungr  yfir.     Hann  fekk^  Auðar  d-

17.  júpauðgu,  dóttur  Ketils  flatnefs,  Bjarnarsonar  bunu,  ágæts  inanns  ór  N-

18.  oregi ;    Þorsteinn  rauðr  hét  son  þeira.     Óláfr  fell  á  írlandi  í  orrostu,  en  Au-

19.  ðr  ok  Þorsteinn  fóru  þá  í  Suðreyjar;    þar  fekk  Þorsteinn  Þun'ðar,  dóttur  Eyvindar

20.  austmanns^  systur  Helga  hins  magra;    þau  áttu  mprg  bgrn.     Þorstei-

21.  nn  g0rðisk  herkonungr.     Hann  rézk  til  lags  með  Sigurði  enum  ríka,  syni  Eyste-

22.  ins  glumru.     Þeir  unnu  Katanes  ok  Suðrland,  Ros  ok  Mœri,  ok  meirr  en

23.  hálft  Skodand.     G0rðisk  {"orsteinn  þar  konungr  yfir,  áðr  Skotar  sviku  hann,  ok

24.  feU  hann  þar  í  orrostu.     Auðr  var  þá  á  Katanesi,  er  hon  spurði  fall  Þorsteins.

25.  Hon  lætr  þá  g0ra  kngrr  í  skógi  á  laun,  en  er  hon  var  búin,  helt  hon  út

26.  1  Orkneyjar.      Þar  gipti  hon  Gró,  dóttur  Þorsteins,  ok  hon  var  móðir  Gunnlaðar,  er   Þorfinnr

27.  jarl  hausakljúfr  átti.     Eptir  þat  fór  Auðr  at  leita  islands;    hon  hafði  á

28.  skipi  tuttugu  karla  frjálsa.     Auðr  kom  til  islands,  ok  var  hinn  fyrsta  vetr

29.  Í  Bjamarhgifn  með  Bimi  bróður  sínum.     Síðan  nam  Auðr  9II  Dalalpn-

30.  d,  milli  DQgurðarár  ok  Skrámuhlaupsár,  ok  bjó  í  Hvammi.     Hon  hafði  b-

31.  œnahald  Í  Krosshólum.     Þar  Idt  hon  reisa  krossa,  því  at  hon  var  skírð  ok  vel

'  MS.  saga  eireks  randa.  '  MS.  [0]leifr.  ^  MS.  gudridar  sonar.  '  MS.  diflina.

"  ha«n  feck  repeated  in  MS.  '  MS.  austz  maiiiiz.


í^TSi


A^^\u   fí'/h*  fJcí'^'l  í;mf  iii/1^^4«  pm>/»íco  -Mtí»u»t»  9>t»2>/<  pðfí^í^ — r3
i»»r. 5fírcv .  ér  vmu  í/ift4  ikzT.  ý- ft»/fv  ^fj?  rSf  t-  «i»«i2«  e-  m j»r  aiT'


'i^/i^Í  0.4Ufr  1  evðV  f^^fvtii  p'f^:  íf  vdif^  Ot-Jir-l-  (5r  b    V  f^.t^  í-  XiQ^


fi/m*!  uij^id f-M^. g,df,  5>úrje„;bis. p»..«toi«ij  .«5r3jí„s,vc!


:ik.


í^  v<i  í?  (>olii»5,'iiniá>w-  m^»|?»»-/tc  fail^'t^ATtnn  .á^^yfbOiií'  ^oSS\'<iif*
I??;  fiií  4 .  cifÍlr  foitiSHT. 04  fíoutm"^  fan-  ^c€^»«4  t- 1^

'^       rt        ^*      *    •    li-ÍJ    .^       '    ö.'    i£^  l}:hSl^«4&^«T  t«^A..jfln>  -MAS. /El


Rf^'


\


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  123


[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  27  3.]  EIRÍKS    SAGA    RAUDA— 2.

1.  trúuð.     Með  ^  henni  kvámu  út  margir  ggfgir  menn,  þeir  er  herteknir  hgfð-

2.  u  verit  Í  vestrviking,  ok  váru  kallaðir  ánauðgir.     Einn  af  þeim  hét  VífiU ;    hann

3.  varr  ættstórr  maðr,  ok  hafði  verit  hertekinn  fyrir  vestan  haf,  ok  var  kallaðr  án-

4.  auðigr,  áðr  Auðr  leysti  hann  ;    ok  er  Auðr  gaf  bústaði  ''■  skipverjum  sínura,  þá

5.  spurði  VífiU  því  Auðr  gæfi  honum  eigi  bústað,  sem  gðrum  mgnnum.     Auðr  kvað

6.  eigi  mundu  skipta,  kvað  hann  þar  gofgan  þikkja  mundu,  sem  hann  væri.     Honum  ga-

7.  f  Auðr  Vífilsdal,  ok  bjó  hann  þar.     Hann  átti  konu ;    þeira  synir  váru  þeir  Þorgeirr  ok

8.  forbigrn.     Þeir  váru  efniligir  menn,  ok  óxu  upp  með  fgður  sínum.

9.  Þorvaldr  hét  maðr ;   hann  var  son  Ásvalds,  tJIfssonar,  0xna-Þórissonar  ^    Ei-

10.  ríkr  rauði  hét  son  bans.     Þeir  feðgar  fóru  af  Jaðri  til  Islands,  fyrir  víga

11.  sakir,  ok  námu  land  á  Hornstrgndum,  ok  bjoggu  at  Drgngum.     Þar  an-     •

12.  daðisk  {"orvaldr;    Eirílir  fekk  þá  Þórhildar,  dóttur  Jgrundar  Atlasonar  ok

13.  Þorbjargar  knarrarbringu,  en  þá  átti  áðr  í'orbjgm  hinn  haukdœlski.

14.  Rézk  Eiríkr  þá  norðan,  ok  ruddi  land  í  Haukadal,  ok  bjó  á  Eir-

1 5.  íksstgðum,  hjá  Vatnshorni.     í>á  feldu  þrælar  Eiríks  skriðu  ^  á  bœ  Valþjó-

16.  fs  á  Valþjófsstgðum.     Eyjólfr  saurr,  frændi  hans,  drap  þrælana  h-

17.  já  Skeiðsbrekkum,  upp  frá  Vatnshorni.     Fyrir  þat  vá  Eiríkr  Eyjólf  saur;

18.  hann  vá  ok  Hólmggngu-Hrafn  at  Leikskálum.     Geirsteinn  ok  Oddr  á  Jgr-

19.  va^,  frændr  Eyjólfs,  mæltu  eptir  hann;    þá  var  Eiríkr  g0rr  á  brott  ór

20.  Haukadal.     Hann  nam  þá  Brokey,  ok  bjó  at  Trgðum  í  Suðrey.    En  hi-

21.  nn  fyrsta  vetr  fór  Eiríkr  í  0xney.     Þá  léði  harm  Þorgesti  setstokka.

22.  Hann  bjó  á  Eiríksstgðum ;   þá  heimti  hann  setstokkana,  ok  náði  eigi.      E-

23.  iríkr  sótti  setstoklcana  á  Breiðabólstað,  en  Þorgestr  fór  eptir  honum.

24.  Þeir  bgrðusk  skamt  frá  garði  á  Drgngum.     Þar  fellu  tveir  synir  Þorgests,

25.  ok  ngkkurir  menn  aðrir.     Eptir  þat  hgfðu  hvárirtveggju  setu  fjglmenna.     St}Tr

26.  veitti  Eiríki,  ok  Eyjólfr  ór  Svíney,  Þorbjgrn  Vífilsson",  (ok)  synir  Þorvalds  ór  Álpt-

27.  afirði'.     En  Þorgesti  veittu*  synir  Þórðar  gellis,  ok  Þorgeirr  ór  Hítardal,  ok  Ás-

28.  lákr  ór  Langadal  ok  Illugi  son  hans.     Þeir  Eiríkr  urðu  sekir  á  Þórnesþ-

29.  ingi.     Hann  bjó  skip  sitt  í  Eiríksvági,  en  Eyjólfr  leyndi  honum  í  Dím-

30.  unarvági,  meðan  þeir  Þorgestr  leituðu  hans  um  eyjarnar.     Hann  sagði  þeim,

31.  at  hann  ællaði  at  leita  lands  þess,  er  Gunnbjgrn,  son  Úlfs  kráku,  sá,  er

32.  hann  rak  vestr  um  haf,  þá  [er]  hann  fann  Gunnbjarnarnessker.     Hann  kvezk  aptr

33.  mundu  leita  til  vina  sinna,  ef  hann  fyndi  landit.     þeir  Þorbjgrn  ok  Styrr  ok  Ey-

'  MS.  af.  '^  MS.  bvstad.  ^  MS.  eyxna  þoris  sonar.  *  MS.  skylldv.

'  MS.  iorfa.  «  MS.  uifils,  the  son  has  been  omitted.  '  MS.  alt-a  Uríi.  *  MS,  veitti.


124  "^HE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.


[AM.  55",  4to,  p.  28.]  EIRÍKS  SAGA  RAUÐA.— 3.

1.  jólfr  fylgðu  Eiriki  út  um  eyjar,  ok  skilðu  með  hinni  mestu  vin-

2.  áttu.     Kvezk  Eirikr  þeim  skyldu  verða  at  þvílíku  trausti,  sem  hann  mætti

3.  sér  við  koma,  ef  þeir  k}Tini  hans  at  þurfa.     Sigldi  Eirikr  á  haf  undan

4.  Snæfellsjgkli,  ok  kom  utan  at  jgkli  þeim,  er  Hvitserkr  heitir.     Hann  for

5.  þaðan  suör,  at  leita  ef  þangat  er  byggjanda.     Hann  var  hinn  fyrsta  ve-

6.  tr  Í  Eirikseyju,  nær  miðri  enni  vestri  bygðinni.     Um  várit  eptir  for

7.  hann  til  Eiríksfjarðar,  ok  tók  sér  þar  bústað.     Hann  for  þat  sumar  í  hina  vestri  óby-

8.  gð,  ok  gaf  víða  0rnefni.     Hann  var  annan  vetr  Í  Eiríkshólmum  við  Hvarfs-

9.  gnípu  \     En  hit  þriðja  sumar  for  harm  allt  norðr  til  Snæfells,  ok  inn  Í  Hrafhs-

10.  fjgrð.     Þá  þóttisk  hann  kominn  f)TÍr  botn  Eiríksfjarðar ;    hverfr  hann  þá  aptr,  ok  var

11.  hiim  íjórða  ok  þriðja  vetr  í  Eiríksej'ju  fyrir  munni  Eiríksijarðar.     Eptir  um  sumarit

12.  for  hann  til  Islands,  ok  kom  í  Breiðafjgrð.     Hann  var  þann  vetr  með  Ingólfi  á  Hólmlátri-.

13.  Um  várit  bgrðusk  þeir  Þorgestr,  ok  fekk  Eiríkr  úsigr;   eptir  þat  váru  þeir

14.  sáttir  g0rðir.     Þat  sumar  fór  Eiríkr  at  b}-ggja  landit,  þat  er  hann  hafði  fun-

15.  dit,  ok  harm  kallaði  Grœnland.     Hann  kvað  þess  menn  mimdu  mjgk  fýsa  þangat,

16.  ef  landit  héti  vel.     Þorgeirr  Vífilsson  kvángaðisk,  ok  fekk  Arnóru,  dóttur  E-

1 7.  inars  frá  Laugarbrekku,  Sigmundarsonar,  Ketilssonar  Þistils,  er  numit  hafði  Þist-

18.  ilsfjgrð.     Qnnur  dóttir  Einars  hét  Hallveig ;    hennar  fekk  Þorbjgrn  Vífilsson,  ok  t-

19.  ók  með  land  á^  Laugarbrekku  á  Hellisvgllimi.     Rézk  Þorbjgrn  þa-

20.  ngat  bygðum,  ok  g0rðisk  ggfugmenni  mikit.     Hann  var  goðorðsmaðr,  ok  h-

21.  afði  rausnar  bú.     Guðríðr  hét  dóttir  Þorbjarnar;   hon  var  kvenna  vænst  ok  hinn

22.  mesti  skgrungr  í  gllu  alhæfi  sínu.     Maðr  hét  Ormr,  er  bjó  at  Arnarst-

23.  apa ;   hann  átti  konu  þá,  er  Halldís  hét.     Ormr  var  góðr  bóndi,  ok  vinr  Þor-

24.  bjamar  mikill;    var  Guðríðr  þar  Igngum  at  fóstri  með  honum.     Maðr  hét  í»orgeirr,

25.  er  bjó  at  Þorgeirsfelli ;    hann  var  vellauðigr  at  fé,  ok  hafði  verit  leysingi^;

26.  hann  átti  son,  er  Einarr  hét,  hann  var  vænn  maðr  ok  vel  mannaðr,  ok  skartsmaðr '  mikill

27.  Einarr  var  í  siglingum  landa  í  milli,  ok  teksk  þat  vel;   var  jafnan  sinn  hvárt  vetr

28.  á  fslandi  eða  í  Noregi.     Nú  er  frá  því  at  segja  eitt  haust,  er  Einarr  var  út  her,  at  hann

29.  for  með  varning  sinn  út  eptir  Snæfellsnesi,  ok  skyldi  selja.     Hann  kemr

30.  til  Arnarstapa;    Ormr  býðr  honum  þar  at  vera,  ok  þat  þiggr  Einarr,  því  at  þar  var  v-

31.  inátta  við  k0rin.     Varningrinn  Einars  var  borinn  í  eitthvert  útibúr.     Einarr

32.  brýtr  upp  varninginn,  ok  s<ndi  Ormi  ok  heimamgnnmn,  ok  bauð  Ormi  sli-

'  MS.  hvaHsnipv.  "  MS.  holatri.  '  MS.  apparently  by  a  clerical  slip,  land  a  lan«di  a.

'  MS.  lavsinHg.  '  MS.  skazz  mair.


^  pic^juinií?  00  uiií  fill,  i7h .  6;^ p0  aw  aí  ot^ ]^up  Jfr"  Cam^  pajp  im


Pmfpe^/»«öz5>^  2^V  •**♦»»»•  ^**"-'  *??*  Pi»»r^"''»"*i^f»5»


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  125


[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  28  Í.]  EIRÍKS    SAGA  RAUDA.— 4.

1.  kt  af  at  taka  sem  hann  vildi.     Ormr  þá  þetta,  ok  talði  Einar  vera  gó-

2.  ðan  fardreng  ok  auðnumann  mikinn.     En  er  þeir  heldu  á  varninginum,

3.  gekk  kona  fyrir  útibúrs  dyrnar.     Einarr  spurði  Orm  hver  sú  en  fagra  kona

4.  væri,  er  þar  gekk  fyrir  dyrnar;    'ek  hefi  hana  ekki  her  fyrr  set.'     Ormr  segir :    'tat

5.  er  Guðríð ',  fóstra  mín,  dóttir  Þorbjarnar  bónda  frá  Laugarbrekku.'     Einarr

6.  mælti :    '  Hon  mun  vera  góðr  kostr,  eða  hafa  ngkkurir  menn  til  komit

7.  at  biðja  hennar?'     Ormr  svarar:    'Beðit  hefir  hennar  víst  verit,  vinr,  ok  liggr

8.  eigi  laust  fyrir;   finnr  þat  á,  at  hon  mun  vera  mannvgnd,  ok  faðir  hennar.'

9.  'Svá  fyrir  þat,'  kvað  Einarr,  'at  hon  er  sú  kona,  er  ek  æda  mér  at  biðja,  ok  vilda  ek

10.  á  þessi  mál  kœmir  þú  fyrir  mik  við  fgður  hennar,  ok  legðir  á  alendu^  at

11.  flytja,  því  at  ek  skal  þér  fullkomna  vináttu  fyrir  gjalda.     Má  f'orbJQrn  bó-

12.  ndi  á  h'ta,  at  okkr  væri  vel  hentar  tengðir,  því  at  hann  er  sómamaðr  mikiU

13.  ok  á  staðfestu  góða,  en  lausafé  hans  er  me'r  sagt  at'  mjgk  sé  á  fg-

14.  rum.     Skortir  mik  hvárki  land  né  lausafé,  ok  okkr  feðga,  ok  mundi  Þorbir-

15.  ni  verða  at  því  hinn  mesti  styrkr,  ef  þessi  ráð  tœkisk.'     Ormr  svarar:   '  Ví-

16.  st  þikkjumk  ek  vin  þinn  vera.     En  þó  em  ek  ekki  fuss  at  bera  þessi  m-

17.  ál  upp,  því  at  Þorbjgrn  er  skapstórr  ok  þó  metnaðarmaðr  mikill.'     Einarr  kv-

18.  ezk  ekki  vilja  [annat]  en  [at]  upp  væri  [borit]  bónorðit.     Ormr  kvað  hann  ráða  skyldu.     Ei-

19.  narr  for  suðr  aptr  unz  hann  kemr  heim.     Ngkkuru  síðar  ha-

20.  fði  Þorbjgrn  haustboð,  sem  hann  átti  vanda  til,  því  at  hann  var  stórmenni  mikit.

21.  Kom  þar  Ormr  frá  Arnarstapa   ok  margir  aðrir  vinir  torbjarnar.     Ormr  ke-

22.  mr  at  máli  \ið  Þorbjgrn,  ok  segir,  at  Einarr  sé  þar  skamt  *  frá  Þorgeirsfelli,

23.  ok  g0rðisk  efniligr  maðr;    hefr  Ormr  nú  upp  bónorðit  fyrir  hgnd^  Einars,

24.  ok  sagði  at  þat  væri  vel  hent  fyTÍr  sumra  manna  sakir  ok  hluta.     'Ma

25.  þér,  bóndi,  at  því  verða  styrkr  mikill  fyrir  fjarkosta  sakir.'     Þorbjgrn  svarar :   '  Eigi  var-

26.  ði  mik  slikra  orða  af  þér,  at  ek  munda  þræls  syni  gipta  dóttur  mína ;

27.  ok  þat  íinnið  þér  at  fé  mitt  þverr,  ok  eigi  skal  hon  fara  með  þér,  ef  þér  þœ-

28.  tti  hon  svá  lítils  gjaforðs  verð.'     For  Ormr  heim,  ok  hverr  boðsmanna  til  sinna

29.  heimkynna.     Guðríðr "  var  eptir  með  fgður  sínum,  ok  var  heima  þann  vetr.     En

30.  at  vári  hafði  forfajgrn  vinaboð,  ok  var  veizla  góð  búin,  ok  kom  þar  mar-

31.  gt  manna,  ok  var  veizlan  hin  bezta.     Ok  at  veizlunni  kvaddi  Þorbjgm  sér

32.  hljóðs,  ok  mælti :    '  Her  hefi  ek  bdit  langa  æfi ;   hefi  ek  reynt  góðvilja

'  ^'S-  "^-  "  MS.  alen«da.  a  ms.  apparently  et.

'  Properly,  skgmmu.  =  MS.  haun.  «  MS.  Guðm«?ídr.


126  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.


[A:*!.  557,  4to,  p.  29.]  EIRfKS  SAGA  RAUÐA— 5.

1 .  manna  við  mik  ok  ástúð  ;   kalla  ek  vel  vár  skipti  farit  hafa.     En  mi  tekr

2.  íjárhagr '  minn  at  úhœgjask,  en  kallat  hefir  verit  hingat  til  ekki  lívirðuli-
3-  gt  '^  ráð.     NÚ  vil  ek  fyrr  búi  mínu  bregða,  en  sœmð  minni  týna ;    f}Tr

4.  af  landi  fara,  en  ætt  mína  svívirða.     Ætla  ek  mi  at  vitja  um  mál  Eiríks

5.  rauða,  vinar  míns,  er  hann  hafði,  þá  er  vér  skilðumsk  á  Breiðafirði.     Ætla  ek

6.  nú  at  fara  til  Grœnlands  í  sumar,  ef  svá  ferr  sem  ek  vilda.'     Mgnnum  þ-

7.  ótti  mikil  tíðindi  um  þessa  ráðag0rð  Þorbjarnar'.     Þorbjorn  hafði  len-

8.  gi  vinsæll  verit,  en*  þóttusk  vita,  at  Þorbjpm  mundi  þetta  hafa  sv-

9.  á  framt  upp  kveðít,  at^  hann  mundi  ekki  stoða  at  letja.     Gaf  Þorbjorn  mgnnum  gja-

10.  fir,  ok  var  veizlu  brugðit  eptir  þetta,  ok  fóru  menn  heim  til  heimkynna

11.  sinna.     Þorbjprn  selr  lendur  sínar,  ok  kaupir  skip,  er  stóð  uppi  í  Hraunhafnarósi.     Ré-

12.  ðusk  til  ferðar  með  honum  þrír  tigir  manna.     Var  þar  Ormr  frá  Arnarstapa  ok  kona  hans,

13.  ok  þeir  vinir  Þorbjarnar,  er  eigi  vildu  við  hann  skilja.     Síðan  létu  þeir  í  haf.     Þá  er

14.  þeir  hpfðu  út  látit,  var  veðr  hagstœtt.     En  er  þeir  kvámu  í  haf,  tók

15.  af  byri,  ok  fengu  þeir  mikil  veðr,  ok  fórsk  þeim  úgreitt  um  sumarit.     Því  næ-

16.  st  kom  sótt  i  lið  þeira,  ok  andaðisk  Ormr  ok  Halldís,  kona  hans,  ok  helmingr

17.  þeira.     Sjó  tók  at  stœrka",  ok  fengu  þeir  vás  mikit  ok  vesgld  á  marga  vega,

18.  ok  tóku  þó  Herjólfsnes  á  Grœnlandi  við  vetrnætr  sjálfar.     Sá  maðr  bjó

19.  á  Herjólfsnesi,  er  Þorkell  hét.     Hann  var  nytjamaðr "  ok  hinn  bezti  bóndi.     Hann  t-

20.  6k  við  Þorbimi  ok  gllum  skipverjum  hans  um  vetrinn.     Þorkell  veitti  þeim  skgr-

21.  uliga.     Líkaði  Þorbirni  vel  ok  gllum  skipverjum  hans.  [lítit,  þeir  sem  í  v- *,

22.  [I]  þenna  tíma  var  hallæri  mildt  á  Grœnlandi;    hgfðu  menn  fengit

23.  eiðiferð "  hgfðu  verit,  en  sumir  eigi  aptr  komnir.     Sú  kona  var  í  by-

24.  gð,  er  Þorbjgrg  hét;    hon  var  spákona;   hon  var  kglluð  lítil  vglva  "".     Hon  hafði

25.  átt  sér  níu  systr,  ok  var  hon  ein  eptir  á  lífi.     Þat  var  háttr  Þorbjargar  á  vetr-

26.  um,  at  hon  fór  á  veizlur,  ok  buðu  menn  henni  heim,  mest  þeir,  er  forvitni

27.  var  á  um  forlgg  sín  eða  alferðir;   ok  með  því  at  Þorkell  var  þar  mestr  bóndi,  þ-

28.  á  þótti  til  hans  koma  at  vita  hvenær"  létta  mundi  úárani  þessu,  sem  yf-

29.  ir  stóð.     Þorkell  býðr  spákonu  þangat,  ok  er  henni  búin  góð  viðtaka,

30.  sem  siðr  var  til,  þá  cr  við  þcss  háttar  konum  skyldi  taka.     Búit  var  henni

31.  hásæti,  ok  lagt  undir  hœgindi;    þar  skyldi  í  vera  hœnsafiðri.     En  er  hon

32.  kom  um  kveldit,  ok  sá  maðr,  er  í  móti  henni  var  sendr,  þá  var  hon  svá  búin,

33.  at  hon  hafði  yfir  sér  tuglamgttul '-  blán,  ok  var  settr  steinum  aUt  í  sk-

34.  aut  ofan.     Hon  hafði  á  hálsi  sér  glertglur ;   hon  hafði  á  hgfði  lanib-

35.  skinns  kofra  svartan,  ok  við  innan  kattarskiim  hvítt.     Staf  hafði  hon  í  hendi,  ok

'  MS.  fiarhugr.  '  MS.  v/Hvligt.  '  MS.  Eireks.

*  ck  is  added  in  MS.  after  en,  obviously  by  a  slip  :  menn  should  be  supplied  in  its  stead.  ■'  MS.  (tr.

'  MS.  Btatka.  '  nytiv  xaatir.  *  The  bracketed  words  belong  at  the  end  of  line  11.

»  MS.  vcdr  fird.  '»  MS.  litill  volve.  "  MS.  hven<rr  at  vita.  "  MS.  tygla  mauttvl.


^Ha  -^  j^ofv  fat^' im*  Í-  |2*ij?  |i2«G  2  ^S>  -  v^<"i  J>t:ltiri  Oíi)íi»  ^p  5C


|.(\Jt0^  itr  ftf^A  *  |»tfw^tf  |5v*Pd;»  iml^rr  *•  ttc:(o^ A  »«^4  yig/i-
M0A  (,^Ai  I  '"^  of*  -iunv  j^ip t/»i»iM  13;«^ .//  //  frné,  j^  ^^^,  ,


vm<  í*r  !?*'«<»»•  íl  ucu^' -t^Qytt^v  ítTf^aiti  ^tf»íí»  t»»<i(i-  p7'  <£  lY^zv^rii!
V  A"  will  '^otíuOf  fkiT- 4*'^  -p^^*  Irj^i^  I?  ,iT.pö*l-<»U  u  Ú*  tiiÆ^*  é6%^ty)ú


Q


Oi/1  JVmutf  g,",,4^/:  t„«^ö»'  ,ji  ttndViTú''  íf  i^^wá^Tíl-  0-'»»w»*^  fe?*  (^^


tT-  fíw^>míiv  ^vístitífi  e-tV^fií*-  (Ja-TTit.  <ui  p^* ^^««- |íií»t>t/^c  i


\


'^


íl


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  127


[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  29  3.]  EIRÍKS  SAGA  RAUÐA.— 6.

1.  var  á  knappr;    hann  var  búinn  messingu,  ok  settr  ^  steinum  ofan  um  kn-

2.  appinn.     Hon  hafði  um  sik  hnjóskulinda,  ok  var  þar  á  skjóðupungr  miki-

3.  II ;   varðveitti  hon  þar  í  taufr  þau,  er  hon  þurfti  til  fróðleiks  at  hafa.     Hon

4.  hafði  kálfskinns-skó  loðna  á  fótum,  ok  í  þvengi  langa  ok  sterkli-

5.  ga,  látúnsknappar  miklir  á  endunum.     Hon  hafði  á  hgndum  sér  katt-

6.  skinns-glófa,  ok  váru  hvítir  innan  ok  loðnir.     En  er  hon  kom  inn,  þótti

7.  gllum  mgnnum  skylt'^  at  velja  henni  sœmiligar  kveðjur.    En  hon  tók  því  e-

8.  ptir  sem  henni  váru  menn  skapfeldir  til.     Tók  Þorkell  bóndi  í  hgnd  vís-

9.  endakonunni,  ok  leiddi  hann  hana  til  þess  sætis,  er  henni  var  búit.     Þorkell

10.  bað  hana  renna  þar  augum  yfir  hjgrð  ok  hjú  ok  hýbýli.     Hon  var  fámálug  um

11.  allt.     Borð  váru  upp  tekin'  um  kveldit,  ok  er  frá  því  at  segja

12.  at  spákonunni  var  matbúit.     Henni  var  g0rr  grautr  af  kiðjamjólk,

13.  en  til  matar  henni  váru  búin  hjgrtu  ór  allskonar  kvikendimi,  þeim  sem

14.  þar  váru  til.     Hon  hafði  messingarspón  ok  kníf^  tannskeptan,  tvíholkaða-

15.  n  af  eiri,  ok  var  af  brotinn  oddrinn.     En  er  borð  váru  upp  tekin,  gengr  Þ-

16.  orkell  bóndi  fyrir  Þorbjijrgu,  ok  spyrr  hversu  henni  virðisk*  þar  hýbýli  eða

17.  hættir  manna,  eða  hversu  fljótliga  hann  mun  þess  vís  verða,  er  hann  hefir

18.  spurt  eptir,  ok  menn  vildu  vita.     Hon  kvezk  þat  eliki  mundu  upp  bera  f-

19.  yrr  en  um  morgininn^,  þá  er  hon  hefði  sofit  þar  um  nóttina.     En

20.  eptir  á  áliðnum  degi  var  henni  veittr  sá  umbúningr,  sem  hon  skyldi  se-

21.  iðinn'  fremja.     Bað  hon  fá  sér  konur  þær,  sem  kynni  frœði  þat,  er  þyrft-

22.  i  til  seiðinn  at  fremja ',  ok  varðlokkur'  heita ;  en  þær  konur  fundusk  eigi.

23.  H  var  at  leitat  um  bœinn,  ef  ngkkur  kynni.     Þá  svarar  Guðríðr:    '  Hvárki

24.  em"  ek  fjglkunnig  né  vísenda  kona,  en  þó  kendi  Halldís,  fóstra  mí-

25.  n,  mér  á  íslandi,  þat  frœði,  er  hon  kallaði  varðlokkur '.'     Þorbjgrg  svaraði :    •  Þá

26.  ertu  fróðari  en  ek  ællaða.'    Guðríðr  segir :    '  Þetta  er  þess  konar  frœði  ok

27.  atferli,  at  ek  ætla  í  0ngum  atbeina  at  vera,  því  at  ek  em'"  kona  krist-

28.  in.'     Þorbjgrg"  svarar:    '  Svá  mætti  verða,-  at  þú  yrðir  mgnnum  at  liði  hér  um,

29.  en  værir  kona  [eigi]  at  verri ;   en  við  Þorkel  met  ek  at  fá  þá  hluti  hér  til,

30.  er  þarf.'     forkell  herðir  nú  at  Guðn'ði,  en  hon  kvezk  mundu  g0ra  sem  h-

31.  ann  vildi.     Slógu  konur  bring  umhverfis,  en  Þorbjgrg  uppi  á  seið-

32.  hjallinum.     Kvað  Guðríðr  þá  kvæðit  svá  fagrt  ok  vel,  at  engi  þótti-

33.  isk  fyrr  heyrt  hafa  með  fegri  raust  kveðit,  sá  er  þar  var.     Spákon-

34.  a  þakkar  henni  kvæðit;    'hon  hafði  margar  náttúrur  hingat  at  sótt,  ok

'  MS.  settum.  =  MS.  skyll.  ^  mS.  upp  tekin  um  teldn«.  '  MS.  hnif.  '  MS.  vizdizt.

"  MS.  morgvnin«.  '  MS.  se  in,  apparently  a  clerical  omission.  *  MS.  seidin«ar  fremia.

'  MS.  vard  lokr.  "  MS.  er.  "  MS.  þorbjam.


128  THE  FIXDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.


[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  30.]  EIRÍKS  SAGA  RAUDA— 7.

1.  þótti  fagTt '  at  heyra  þat  er  kveðit  var,  er  áðr  vildi  frá  oss  snúa-

2.  sk,  ok  OSS  0ng\'a  hl/ðni  veita.     En  mér  eru  nii  margir  þeir  hlutir  a-

3.  uðsýnir,  er  áðr  var  bæði  ek  ok  aðrir  dulðir.     En  ek  kann  þat  at

4.  segja,  at  hallæri  þetta  mun  ekki  haldask  lengr,  ok  mun  batna

5.  árangr  sem  várar.     Sóttarfar  þat,  sem  lengi  hefir  legit,  mun  batna  v-

6.  ánu  bráðara.     En  þér,  Guðriðr,  skal  ek  launa  í  hgind  liðsinni  þat,  se-

7.  m  OSS  hefir  af  [þér]  staðit,  því  at  þín  forlpg  eru  mér  nú  9II  glpggsæ.     Þat

8.  muntu  gjaforð  fá  hér  á  Grœnlandi,  er  sœmiligast  er  til,  þó  at  þér  ver-

9.  ði  þat  eigi  til  langæðar,  því  at  vegir  þínir  liggja  út  til  Islands,  ok  mun  þar  ko-

10.  ma  frá  þér  ættbogi  bæði  mikill  ok  góðr,  ok  yfir  þínum  ættkvíslum  m-

11.  un  skína  bjartr  geisli ;   enda  far  nú  vel  ok  heil,  dóttir  mín ! '     Síðan  ge-

12.  ngu  menn  at  vísenda-konunni,  ok  frétti  hverr  eptir  því  sem  mest  forvitni  var  á.

13.  Var  hon  ok  góð  af  frásggnum;     gekk   þat  ok  lítt   í  tauma,  sem   hon    [sagði].      Þessu   næst

var  k-

14.  omit  eptir  henni  af  gðrum  bœ,  ok  fór  hon  þá  þangat.     Var  sent  eptir  Þorbirni,  þ-

15.  ví  at  hann  vildi  eigi  heima  vera  meðan  sUk  heiðni  var  framin^.     Veð-

16.  rátta'  batnaði  skjótt,  þegar  er  vara  ték,  sem  ÞorbJQrg  hafði  sagt.     B-

17.  ýr  Þorbjgrn  skip  sitt,  ok  ferr  unz  harm  kemr  í  Brattahlíð.     Tekr  Eiríkr  \ið

18.  honum  báðum  hQndum,    ok  kvað   þat   vel,   er   hann   var   þar   kominn.      Var   Þorbj^rn   með

honum  um

19.  vetrinn,  ok  skuldalið  hans.     Eptir  um  várit  gaf  Eiríkr  Þorbimi  land  á  Stok-

20.  kanesi,  ok  var  þar  g0rr  sœmiligr  bœr,  ok  bjó  hann  þar  síðan.     Eiríkr  átti  þá  ko-

21.  nu,  er  Þjóðhildr  hét,  ok  tvá  sonu  ;   hét  annarr  torsteinn,  en  annarr  Leifr.     Þ-

22.  eir  váru  báðir  efniligir  menn;  var  Þorsteinn  heima  með  fgður  sínum,  ok  var  eigi  þá  s-

23.  á  maðr  á  Grœnlandi,  er  jafnmannvænn  þótti  sem  hann.     Leifr  hafði

24.  siglt  til  Noregs;   var  hann  þar  með  Óláfi  konungi  Tryggvasyni.     En  er  Leifr  sigldi
2,3.  af  Grœnlandi  um  sumarit,  urðu  þeir  sæhafa  til  Suðreyja.     í'að-

26.  an  byrjaði  þeim  seint,  ok  dvglðusk  þar  lengi  um  sumarit.     Leifr

27.  lagði  hug  á  konu  þá,  er  Þórgunna  hét.     Hon  var  kona  ættstór.     í>at  sá

28.  Leifr,  at  hon  mundi  kunna  fleira  en  fátt  eitt;   en  er  Leifr  sigldi  á

29.  brott,*  beiddisk  Þórgunna  at  fara  með  honum.     Leifr  spurði  hvárt  þat  v-

30.  æri  ngkkut  vili  frænda  hennar.     Hon  kvezk  ekki  at  því  fara.     Leifr

31.  kvezk  eigi  kunna  at  g0ra  hertekna  svá  stórættaða  konu  í  ókunn-

32.  u  landi;   'en  vér  liðfáir.'     t>órgunna  mælti :    'Eigi  er  víst,  at  þdr  þikki

33.  því  betr  ráðit.'     '  A  þat  mun  ek  hætta/  sagði  Leifr.     '  M  segi

34.  ek  þér,'  sagði  Þórgunna,  '  at  ek  fer  eigi  einsaman,  ok  mun  ek  vera

>  MS.  fag\-rt.  "  MS.  framau.  »  MS.  veJradtta.  '  MS.  bm.


t'L


Oí^í^'VlL^:


^-5a^


♦0'$^  /tH  -


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  129


[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  30  3.]  EIRÍKS  SAGA  RAUÐA-8.

1.  með  barni,  ok  segi  ek  þat  af  þínum  vgldum.     Þess  get  ek  ok,  at  ek  muni'

2.  svein  fœða,  þá  er  þar  kenir  til.     En  þóttú  vilir  0ngvan  gaum  at  gef-'

3.  a,  þá  mun  ek  upp  fœða  sveininn,  ok  þér  senda  til  Grœnlands,  þegar  fara  má^

4.  með  gðrum  mgnnum.     En  ek  get,  at  þér  verði  at  þvílíkum  nytjum  sonareignin'

5.  við  mér,  sem  nú  verðr  skilnaðr  okkar  til ' ;   en  koma  ætla  ek  til  Grœnlands '

6.  áðr  en  l^-kr.'     Hann  gaf  henni  fingrgull,  ok  mgttul  grœnlenzkan  ok  t-^

7.  annbelti.     Þessi  sveinn  kom  til  Grœnlands,  ok  nefndisk  f'orgils.     Leifr  tó-

8.  k  við  honum  at  faðerni;  en  þat  [er]  sumra  manna  spgn,  at  þessi  Þorgils  k-

9.  œmi  til  islands  í  Fróðárundr  um  sumarit.     En  sjá  Þorgils  kom  á  Gr-

10.  œnland,  ok  þótti  enn  eigi  kynjalaust  um  verða,  áðr  lauk.     í>eir  Leifr  sigldu

11.  í  brott  ór  Suðreyjum,  ok  tóku  Noreg  um  haustit.     Rézk  Leifr  til  hirðar

12.  Óláfs  konungs  Tryggvasonar,  ok  lagði  konungr  á  hann  góða  virðing,  ok  þóttisk  sjá  at

13.  Leifr  mundi  vera  vel  mentr  maðr.     Eitt  sinn  kom  konungr  at  máli  við  Leif,  ok  sp-

14.  yrr  hann  :    'Ætlar  þú  til  Grœnlands  í  sumar  at  sigla?'   Leifr  svarar:    '  f>at  vilda'

15.  ek,  ef  sá  er  yðvarr  vili.'     Konungr  svarar:    '  Ek  get,  at  svá  muni  vel  vera.     Skaltu  fara  m-

16.  eð  0rindum  minum,  at  boða  kristni  á  Grœnlandi.'     Leifr  kvað  hann  ráða

17.  mundu,  en  kvezk  hyggja,  at  þat  0nndi  mundi  torflutt  á  Grœnlandi.

18.  En  konungr  kvezk  eigi  þann  mann  sja,  er  betr  væri  til  fallinn  en  hann,  'ok  muntu

19.  giptu  til  bera.'     '  Þat  mun  því  at  eins,'  kvað  Leifr,  'at  ek  njóta '  yðvar  við.'

20.  Leifr  let  í  haf,  þegar  hann  var  búinn.     Leif  velkti  lengi  úti,  ok  hitti  hann  á

21.  Ignd  þau,  er  hann  vissi  áðr  0ngva  van  Í.     Váru  þar  hveitiakrar  sjálfs-

22.  ánir,  ok  vínviðr  vaxinn.     Þar  váru  ok  þau  tré,  er  mQsurþ]*  hétu,  ok  hgfðu  þ-

23.  eir  af  gllu  þessu  ngkkur  merki.     Leifr  flutti  heim  með  sér,  ok  fekk

24.  gllum  vist  um  vetrinn  ^     S/ndi  hann  svá  mikla  stórmensku  ok  gœzku  af

25.  sér,  [er]  hann  kom  kristni  á  landit,  ok  hann  bjargaði  mgnnunum ;   var  hann  kallaðr

26.  Leifr  hinn  heppni.     Leifr  tók  land  í  Eiríksfirði,  ok  fór  hann  heim  í  Bratta-

27.  hlíð.     Tóku  menn  vel  við  honum.     Hann  boðaði  brátt  kristni  um  landit,  ok  alme-

28.  nniliga  trú,  ok  sýndi  mginnum  orðsendingar  Óláfs  konungs  Tryggvasonar  ok  segir

29.  hversu  mgrg  ágæti  ok  mikil  dýrð  þessum  sið«  fylgði.     Eirí-

30.  kr  tók  því  máli  seint,  at  lata  sið  sinn.     En  í>jóðhildr  gekk  skjótt  un-

31.  dir,  ok  lét  g0ra  kirkju  eigi  allnær  húsum.     Var  þat  hús  kallat  Þjóðhil-

32.  darkirkja.     Hafði  hon  þar  fram  bœnir  sínar,  ok  þeir  menn  sem  við  kristni  tóku,  en

33.  þeir  váru  margir.     þjóðhildr  vildi  ekki  halda  samfarir  við  Eirík,  síðan

34.  er  hon  tók  trú,  en  honum  var  þat  mjgk  í  móti  skapi.     Af  þessu  g0rðisk

'  The  words  and  syllables  thus  marked  are  not  clearly  legible  in  the  vellum.

»  MS.  vildi.  3  MS.  nioti.  •  MS.  mavsvr.

'  The   scribe  has  apparently   omitted  a  line  after  merki,  the  reference  in  this  sentence  being  clearly   to  the  ship
wrecked  mariners.  6  Repeated  in  MS.


130  THE    FINDING   OF   WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

[A]\I.  557,  4to,  p.  31.]  EIRÍKS  SAGA  RAUÐA— 9.

1.  orð  mikit,  at  hann  mundi  leita  lands  þess,  er  Leifr  hafði  fundit.     Var  þar  for-

2.  maðr '  at^  Þorsteinn'  Eirílisson,  góðr  maðr  ok  fróðr,  ok  vinsæll.     Eiríkr  var  ok  til  beðinn,  ok

3.  trúðu  menn'  því,  at  hans  gæfa  mundi  framast  vera  ok  forsjá.     Hann  var  þá

4.  við ",  er  vinir  hans  fýstu  hann  til.     Bjoggu  þeir  skip  þat  síðan,  er  Þorbjgrn

5.  hafði  út  haft,  ok  váru  til  ráðnir  tuttugu  menn.     Hgfðu  þeir  fé  lítit,  en

6.  mest  vápn  ok  vistir.     Þann  morgin  er  Eiríkr  fór  heiman  tók  hann  kistil,  ok  var

7.  þar  í  guU  ok  silfr ;   fal  hann  þat  fé,  ok  fór  síðan  leiðar  sinnar;    ok  er  hann  var  skam-

8.  t  á  leið  kominn,  fell  hann  af  baki,  ok  braut  rif  sín,  ok  lesti  qxI  sín-

9.  a,  ok  kvað  við :    '  a  iai ! '     Af  þessum  atburð  sendi  hann  konu  sinni  orð,  at  hon

10.  tœki  féit  á  brott,  þat'  er  hann  hafði  fólgit ;    lét  þess  hafa  at  go-

11.  Idit,  er  hann  hafði  féit  fólgit.     Síðan  sigldu  þeir  út  ór  Eiríksfirði

12.  með  gleði,  ok  þótti  vænt  um  sitt  ráð.     M  velkði  lengi  út  í  hafi,  ok

13.  kvámu  ekki  á  þær  sæin^  slóðir,  [er]  þeir  vildu.     Þeir  kvámu  í  sýn  við  Isl-

14.  and,  ok  svá  hgifðu  þeir  fugl  af  Irlandi.     Reiddi  þá  skip  þeira  um  haf

15.  innan.     Fóru  aptr  um  haustit,  ok  váru  mœddir  ok  mjgk  þrekaðir,  ok  kvá-

16.  mu  við  sjálfan  Eirílisfjgrð.     '  Kátari  váru  þér  í  sumar,  er  þér  fóruð  út  ór^  firðinum,

17.  en  nú  eru  þér,  ok  eru  nii  þó  mprg  góð  at.'     Þorsteinn  mælti :    '  Þat  er  þó

18.  hgfðingligt  bragð,  at  sjá  npkkut  ráð  fyrir  þeim  mgnnum,  sem  nú  eru

19.  ráðlausir,  ok  fá  þeim  vistir.'     Eiríkr  svarar:    '  Skal  þeim  orð  um  þetta  fara  °  qU- '

20.  um  þeim  er  eigi  hgfðu  áðr  vistir,  með  þeim  feðgum.     Síðan  tóku  þeir  la-

21.  nd,  ok  fóru  heim.  [Guðríði  Þorbjarnardóttur.     Var  því  m-'

22.  Nú  er  frá  því  at  segja,  at  {"orsteinn  Eiríksson  vakði  bónorð  við

23.  áli  vel  svarat,  bæði  af  henni,  ok  svá  af  fgður  hennar ;  ok  er  þetta

24.  at  ráðum  g0rt,  at  Þorsteinn  gekk  at  eiga  Guðríði,  ok  var  brúðkaupit

25.  í  Brattahlíð  um  haustit.     Fór  sú  veizla  vel  fram,  ok  var  mJQk  fjglmennt.

26.  Þorsteinn  átti  bú  í  Vestribygð  á  bœ  þeim,  er  í  Lysufirði  heitir.     Sá  maðr  átti'

27.  þar  helming  í  búi,  er  Þorsteinn  hét ;    Sigríðr  hit  kona  hans.     Fór  Þorst-'

28.  einn  í  Lýsufjgrð.     Fór  Þorsteinn  í  Lýsufjgrð  *  ok  [þau]  Guðríðr  bæði.     Var  þar  vel

29.  við  þeim  tekit.     Vám  þau  þar  um  vetrinn'.     Þat  g0rðisk  þar  til  tíðind-

30.  a,  at  sótt  kom  í  bœ  þeira,  er  lítit  var  af  vetri.     Garði  hét  þar  verkstjóri ;

31.  hann  var  óvinsæll  maðr;   hann  tók  fyrst  sótt,  ok  andaðisk.     Síðan  var  skamt  at'

32.  bíða,  at  hverr  tók  sótt  at  gðrum,  ok  Qnduðusk.     M  tók  sótt  Þorste-

33.  inn  Eiríksson,  ok  Sigríðr,  kona  Þorsteins;    ok  eitt  kveld  ffstisk  hon  at  gan-

34.  ga  til  garðs  þess,  er  stóð  gegnt  útidyrum.     Guðríðr  fylgði,  ok  sát-

35.  u  þær  í  mót  durunum;    þá  kvað  Sigríðr,  'o!'    Guðríðr  mæki :    Vit  hgfum

36.  farit  óhyggiliga,  ok  áttu  0ngvan  stað  við,  at  í  kalt  veðr  koma '",

37.  ok  fgrum  inn  sera  skjótast.     Sigríðr  svarar :    '  Eigi  fer  ek  at  svá  biínu.     Hér

38.  er'  Íiðit  allt  hit"  dauða  fyrir  dyrunum,  ok  þar  í  sveit  kenni  ek  Þorstein

39.  bónda  þinn,  ok  kenni  ek  mik,  ok  er  slíkt  hgrmung  at  sjá;'   ok  er  þetta  leið

'  The  words  and  syllables  so  marked  are  not  clearly  decipherable.

"  The  passage  between  þá  and  vi5  is  not  decipherable  in  tlie  vellum,  and  the  paper  copies  are  not  agreed  in  their
readings.  The  Kail.  Coll.  [Royal  Library,  Copenhagen,]  Ö16,  410,  New  Roy.  Coll.  1697,  4to,  AM.  563  #,  4to,  401,  fol.
[amended],  Rask  Coll.  30,  have  '  var  hann  brátt  þessa  fuss  ; '  Thott.  Coll.  984a,  fol.  and  1 776,  4to  [Royal  Library,  Copen-.
hagen],  New  Roy.  Coll.  1714,  4to,  AM.  931,  4to,  1'iob,  4to,  932,  410,  401,  fol.,  have  '  var  hann  skipsþurli  við.'

'  MS.  apparently  þau.  '  sic.  ••  MS.  vrvt.

•  There  is  an  omission  or  clerical  blunder  here  which  can  only  be  rectified  by  free  emendation.
'  The  bracketed  passage  belongs  to  the  end  of  line  22.

'  Apparently  a  clerical  repetition.

•  MS.  vinturinn.  '"  This  sentence  as  it  stands  is  unintelligible.  "  MS.  vid.


-#f«^««v   -e.'^t  íH  jí^r^tM  ri«*<.**.^^  MíMi^'l^  í*w««wv  »|5<i»  t«,.


Fm


^^


'IC^TVÍP*


f^  í;  tflíl   Uffp'lP- pÖ^^^ít-  CT'^I  X»^YÍp4lfn.   tfU'Tialll^f   9*il!i)í/%

«'^-»ftm"i^^  j^m^píjíJjíj  «|A''iM»i^  lulus'  tirr  frrfíl  i>^fíJiíil5


t*  !  ÉtT*i»i»  1»


-^J


,^n


biZllifl  ^'


'tl     X>í'ÍTtft'íi'uAÍr*t   ^


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  131

[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  31  Í.]  EIRIKS  SAGA  RAUÐA— 10.

1.  af,  mælti  hon':    'Nú  sé  ek  eigi  liðit.'     Var  þá  ok  verkstjórinn  horfinn^  er  henni  þ-

2.  ótti  áðr  hafa  svipu  í  hendi,  ok  vilja  berja  liðit.     Síðan  gengu  þær  inn,

3.  ok  áðr  morgunn  kœmi,  var  hon  gnduð,  ok  var  g0r  kista  at  líkinu.     Ok  þann  sama

4.  dag  ætluðu  menn  út  at  róa,  ok  leiddi  Þorsteinn  þá  til  vara,  ok  í  annan  li-

5.  t  fór  hann  at  sjá  um  veiðiskap  þeira.     M  sendi  forsteinn  Eiríksson  naf-

6.  na  sínum  orð,  at  hann  kœmi  til  bans,  ok  sagði  svá,  at  þar  var  varla  kyrt,  ok

7.  húsfreyja  vildi  fœrask  á  fœtr,  ok  vildi  undir  klæðin  hjá  honum,  ok

8.  er  hann  kom  inn,  var  hon  komin  á  rekkjustokkinn  hjá  honum.     Hann  tók  hana

9.  hgindum,  ok  lagði  bolj^xi  fyrir  brjóstit.     Þorsteinn  Eiríksson  andaðisk

10.  nær  dagsetri.     í>orsteinn  bað  Guðríði  leggjask  niðr  ok  sofa;    en

11.  hann  kvezk  vaka  mundu  um  nóttina  yfir  líkunum.     Hon  g0rir  svá.     Guðríðr  so-

12.  fnar  brátt,  ok  er  skamt  leið  á  nóttina,  reistisk  hann  upp,  Þorsteinn,  ok  kv-

13.  ezk  vilja  at  Guðríðr  væri  þangat  kglluð,  ok  kvezk  vilja  mæla  við  hana;

14.  'Guð  vill  at  þessi  stund  sé  mér  gefin  til  leyfis  ok  umbóta  míns  rá-

15.  ðs.'     Þorsteinn  gengr  á  fund  Guðríðar,  ok  vakði  hana,  ok  bað  hana  si-

16.  gna  sik,  ok  biðja  sér  guð  hjálpa:    '  Þorsteinn  Eiríksson  hefir  mælt  við

17.  mik,  at  hann  vill  finna  þik.     Sjá  þú  nú  ráð  fyrir,  hvárskis  kann  ek  fýsa.'     Hon
i8.  svarar:   'Vera  kann,  at  þetta  sé  ætlat'  til  ngkkurra  hluta  þeira,  sem  síð-

19.  an  eru  í  minni  hafðir,  þessi  hinn  undarligi  hlutr,  en  ek  vænti,  at

20.  guðs  gæzla  mun  yfir  mér  standa.     Mun  ek  á  hætta  með  guðs

21.  miskunn  at  mæla  við  hann,  því  at  ek  má  nú  ekki  forðask  mein  til

22.  mín.     Vil  ek  síðr  at  hann  gangi*  víðara.     En  mik  grunar,  at  þat

23.  sé  at  gðrum  kosti.'     Nú  fór  Guðríðr,  ok  hitti  Þorsteinn,  ok  s/ndisk  henni

24.  sem  hann  feldi  tár;   ok  mælti  í  eyra  henni  n^kkur  orð  hljótt,  sv-

25.  á  at  hon  ein  vissi,  ok  sagði  at  þeir  menn  væri  sælir,  er  trúna  heldu

26.  vel,  ok  henni  fylgði  miskunn'^  ok  hjálp,  ok  sagði  þó,  at  margir  heldi

27.  hana  illa;    '  er  þat  engi  háttr,  sem  hér  hefir  verit  á  Grœnlandi,  síða-

28.  n  kristni  var  hér,  at  setja  menn  niðr  í  óvígða''  mold  við  lítla  yfirsgng-

29.  va.     Vil  ek  mik  lata  flytja  til  kirkju  ok  aðra  þá  menn,  sem  hér  hafa  an-

30.  dazk,  en  Garða  vil  ek  lata  brenna  á  báli  sem  skjótast,  því  at  hann  vel-

31.  dr  Qllum  aptrggngum  þeim,  sem  hér  hafa  orðit''  í  vetr.'     Hann

32.  sagði  henni  ok  um  sína  hagi,  ok  kvað  hennar  forlpg  mikil  m-

33.  undu  verða.     En  harm  bað  hana  varask  at  giptask  grœnlenz-

34.  kum  manni;   bað  hann  ok  at  hon  legði  fé  þeira  til  kirkju,  eða  gefa  þ-

35.  at  fátœkum  mpnnum,  ok  þá  hneig  hann  aptr  í  QÖru  [sinni].     Sá  hafði  háttr  v-

36.  erit  á  Grœnlandi,  síðan  kristni  kom  út  þangat,  at  menn  váru  graf-

37.  nir  þar  á  bœjum^,  er  menn  gnduðusk',  í  óvígðri '<>  moldu;    skyldi  þar  se-

38.  tja  staur  upp  af  brjósti"  en  síðan,  er  kennimenn  kvámu  til,  þá  sky-

39.  Idi  kippa  upp  staurinum,  ok  hella  þar  í  vígðu  vatni,  ok  veita  þar

■  MS.  hon  mælti.  ^  Repeated  in  MS.  ^  MS.  ætla.  *  MS.  ganga.  =  MS.  myskynw.

'  MS.  rigda.  '  MS.  vordit.  «  MS.  bænvw.  »  MS.  aunduzt.  "  MS.  vigri.  "  MS.  bristi.

S  2


132  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  32.]  EIRIKS  SAGA  RAUDA— 11.

1.  yfirsgngva,  þótt  þat  væri  miklu  síðar.     Líkin  váru  fœrð  til  kirkju  í  Eiríks-

2.  fjgrð,  ok  veittir  yfirsgngvar  af  kennimgnnum.     Eptir  þat  andaðisk  Þorbjg-

3.  rn;   bar  þá  féit  allt  undir  Guðríði.     Tók  Eiríkr  við  henni,  ok  sá  vel  um  kost  hennar.

4.  [M]aðr  hét  Þorfinnr  karlsefni,  son  t'órðar  hestligfða,  er  bjó  norðr  í  Re-

5.  yninesi  í  Skagafirði,  er  nú  er  kallat.     Karlsefni  var  ættgóðr

6.  maðr,  ok  vel  auðigr  at  fé.     Þórunn  hét  móðir  hans.     Hann  var  í  kaupferðum  ok  þó-

7.  tti  fardrengr  góðr.     Eitt  sumar  býr  Karlsefni  skip  sitt,  ok  ætlaði  til

8.  Grœnlands.     Rézk  til  ferðar  með  honum  Snorri  Þorbrandsson '  ór  Álptafirð-

9.  i,  ok  váru  XL  manna  með  þeim.     Maðr  hét  Bjarni  Grímólfsson,  breiðfirzkr  maðr ;
I  o.  annarr  hét  Þórhallr  Gamlason,  austfirzkr  ^  maðr.     teir  bjoggu  skip  sitt  samsum-

11.  ars  sem  Karlsefni,  ok  ætluðu  til  Grœnlands.     Þeir  váru  á  sldpi  XL  mann-

12.  a.     Lata  þeir  í  haf  fram  tvennum  skipum,  þegar  þeir  eru  búiiir.     Eigi  var  um

13.  þat  getit,  hversu  langa  útivist  þeir  hgfðu.     En  frá  því  er  at  seg-

14.  ja,  at  bæði  þessi  sldp  kvámu  í  Eiríksfjgrð  um  haustit.     Eirflcr  reið

15.  til  skips,  ok  aðrir  landsmenn,  ok  tóksk  með  þeim  greiðlig  kaupstefna.

16.  Buðu  stýrimenn  Guðríði  at  hafa  slíkt  af  varninginum,  sem  hon  v-

17.  ildi.     En  Eiríkr  sýndi  mikla  stórmensku  af  sér  í  móti,  því  at  hann  bauð

18.  þessum  skipverjunum  báðum  heim  til  sin  til  vetrvistar  í  Bratta-

19.  hlíð.     Þetta  þágu  kaupmenn,  ok  fóru  með  Eiríki.     Síðan  var  fluttr  heim

20.  varningr  þeira  í  Brattahlíð;    skorti  þar  eigi  góð  ok  stór  útibúr  at  var-

21.  ðveita  í;   líkaði  kaupmgnnum  vel  með  Eiríki  um'  vetrinn.     En  er  '

22.  dró  at  jólum,  tók  Eiríkr  at  verða  óglaðari  en  ^  hann  átti  vanda  til.     Eitt

23.  sinn  kom  Karlsefni  at  máli  við  Eirík,  ok  mæki :    'Er  [þér]  þungt,  Eirílir?     Ek

24.  þikkjumk  finna,  at  þú  ert  ngkkuru  fálátari  en  verit  hefir,  ok  þú  vei-

25.  tir  oss  ineð  mikilli  rausn,  ok  eru  vér  skyldir  at  launa  þér  eptir  því

26.  sem  vér  hgfum  fgng  á.     Nú  segðu  hvat  ógleði  þinni  veldr.'

27.  Eiríkr  svarar:    '  Þér  þiggið  vel  ok  góðmannliga.     Nú  leikr  mér  þat  eigi  í

28.  hug,  at  á  yðr  hallisk  um  vár  viðskipti ;   hitt  er  heldr,  at  mér  þikkir

29.  illt,  ef  at  er  spurt,  at  þér  hafið  verit  her  svá  jólin  þessi,  er  nú  ko-

30.  ma  í  hgnd.'     Karlsefni  svarar:   'Þat  mun  ekki  á  þá  leið,  vér  hgfum  á  skipum

31.  varum  malt  ok  mjgl  ok  korn,  ok  er  yðr  heimilt  at  hafa  af  sl-

32.  Ikt  sem  þdr  vilið,  ok  g0rið  veizlu  slflsa,  sem  slórmensku  ber  til;'   ok  þat

33.  þiggí  hann.     Var  þá  búit  til  jólaveizlu,  ok  varð  hon  svá  skgrulig,  at  menn

34.  þótiusk  trault  slika  rausnarveizlu  set  hafa.     Ok  eptir  jólin  vekr

35.  Karlsefni  við  Eirík  um  ráðahag  við  Guðríði,  er  honum  leizk  sem  þat  m-

36.  undi  á  hans  forræði;   en  honum  leizk  kona  fríð  ok  vol  kunnandi.     Ein'kr

37.  svarar ;   kvezk  vel  mundu  undir  taka  hans  mdl,  en  kvað  hana  gó-

38.  ðs  gjaforðs  verða;    'er  þat  ok  líkligt,  at  hon  fylgi  sínum  forlpgu-

39.  m,'  þó  at  hon  væri  honum  gefin;   ok  kvað  góða  frdtt  af  honum  koma.

'  MS.  þorbiazr  son.  ^  ^'S.  austfizdzkr.

'  Repealed  in  M.S.  '  MS.  ugladr  er.


líír  ^a^rííriiA^Bjtiír^ir  ti?  r:*i^*í:  \^í^  t^r..,^  *..ö.:-:  <-.-^  -_.       ift^


-^


f


fc


m


W


ft^-i-X  1111  at

V2*«<^.|l  fit^O  YtM§& ----- ^     i^    -    rtfl.i    .^  t!'

];»•»"*■•  on  Wrt   9tu^v  f§i)l  fttt- .  *rtccfi|5\»  ^fiwA  wÍiVíTS;;^  %»m|a


ChTiííHSi  «1??  (JtiT  w  «1^4


i}^vi^@vp^f^


pí757  *  vai-c  'l;^1?.íl  Bww  *  F-Mtnt^ygHi  PnZvTr-  «-AjtmSHí  Ðíív  t^a


^4t5r^'i«V  ^T^^fAfA  ^ozíSfr  «05  íftóé  Ý^-^S^Jr  í}cí>\»M  ^9


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  133

[AM.  537,  4to,  p.  32  b.]  EIRIKS  SAGA  RAUÐA— 12.

1.  NÚ  er  vakit  mál  við  hana,  ok  \ét  hon  þat  sitt  ráð,  sem  Eirikr  vildi  fyrir

2.  sjá;    ok  er  nú  ekki  at  lengja  um  þat,  at  þessi  ráð  tókusk,  ok  var  þá  ve-

3.  izla  aukin,  ok  g0rt  brullaup.     Gleði  mikil  var  í  Brattahlíð  um  vet-

4.  rinn.     Á  því  léku  miklar  umrœður  um  vetrinn '  í  Brattahlíð  ^  at  þar  váru

5.  mjgk  tgfl  uppi  hgfð  ok  sagnaskemtan,  ok  margt  þat,  er  til  hýbýl-

6.  abótar  mátti  vera.     Ætluðu  þeir  Karlsefni  ok  Snorri  at  leita  Vín-

7.  lands,  ok  tpluðu  menn  margt  um  þat.     En  því  lauk  svá,  at  þeir  Karlse-

8.  fni  ok  Snorri  bjoggu  skip  sitt,  ok  ætluðu  at  leita  Vínlands  um  su-

9.  marit.     Til  þeirar  ferðar  réðusk  þeir  Bjarni  ok  Þórhallr,  með  skip  sitt,

10.  ok  þat  fgruneyti,  er  þeim  hafði  fylgt.     Maðr  hét  Þorvaldr;    h-

11.  ann  var  mágr  Eirí!«  rauða.     Þórhallr  var  kallaðr  veiðimaðr ;  hann  haf-

12.  ði  lengi  verit  í  veiðifgrum  með  Eirílci  um  sumrum,  ok  hafði  hann

13.  margar  varðveizlur.     torhallr  var  mikiU  vexti,  svartr  ok  þursligr;    harin

14.  var  heldr  við  aldr,  ódæll  í  skapi,  hljóðlyndr,  fámálugr  hvers-

15.  dagliga,  undirfgrull,  ok  þó  atmælasamr,  ok  fýstisk  jafnan

16.  hins  verra.     Hann  hafði  lítt  við  trú  blandazk,  síðan  hon  ko-

17.  m  á  Grœnland.     f>órhallr  var  lítt  vinsældum  horfinn,  en  þó  hafði

18.  Eiríkr  lengi  tal  af  honum  haldit.     Harm  var  á  skipi  með  þeim  Þ-

19.  orvaldi,  því  at  honum  var  víða  kunnigt  í  óbygðum.     Þeir  hgfðu  þat  sk-

20.  ip,  er  Þorbjprn  hafði  út  þangat,  ok  réðusk  til  ferðar  með  þ-

21.  eim  Karlsefni,  ok  váru  þar  fleslir  grœnlenzldr  menn  á.     Á  skipum  þe-

22.  eira  var  fjgrutigi  manna  annars  hundraðs.     Sigldu  þeir  undan  sí-

23.  ðan  til  Vestribygðar'',  ok  til  Bjarneyja.     Sigldu  þeir  undan  Bjar-

24.  neyjum,  norðanveðr.     Váru  þeir  úti  tvau  dœgr ;    þá  fundu  þeir

25.  land  ok  reru  fyrir  á  bátum,  ok  kgnnuðu  landit,  ok  fundu  þar  he-

26.  llur  margar,  ok  svá  stórar,  at  tveir  menn  máttu  vel  spyrnask  í  iljar :

27.  melrakkar  váru  þar  margir.     Þeir  gáfu  nafn  landinu,  ok  kglluðu  Hell-

28.  uland.     M  sigldu  þeir  norðanveðr  tvau  dœgr,  ok  var  þá  land  fyrir  þ-

29.  eim,  ok  var  á  skógr  mildll,  ok  dýr  mgrg;   ey  lá  í  landsuðr  und-

30.  an  landinu,  ok  fundu  þeir  þar  bjarndýr,  ok  kglluðu  Bjarney.     En

31.  landit  kglluðu  þeir  Markland,  þar  er  skógrinn  *  [var].     M  er  liðin  váru  tv-

32.  au  dœgr,  sjá  þeir  land,  ok  þeir  sigldu  undir  landit;    þar  var  nes,  er  þeir

33.  kvámu  at.     Þeir  beittu  með  landinu,  ok  létu  landit  á  stjórnborð-

34.  a;   þar  var  0rœfi,  ok  strandir  langar  ok  sandar.     Fara  þeir  á  bátum  til

35.  lands,  ok  fengu  kjgl '  af  skipi,  ok  kglluðu  þar  Kjalarnes.     Þeir  gá-

36.  fu  ok  nafn  strgndunum,  ok  kglluðu  Furðustrandir,  því  at  la-

37.  ngt  var  með  at  sigla.     M  g^rðisk  vágskorit  landit,  ok  heldu  "^

38.  þeir  skipunum  at  vágunum.     Þat  var  þá,  er  Leifr  var  með  Óláfi  konungi

39.  Tryggvasyni,  ok  hann  bað  hann  boða  kristni  á  Grœnlandi,  ok

'  MS.  vetvrin».

^  This  sentence  appears  to  have  been  interpolated  here  by  a  clerical  blunder ;  it  belongs  properly  to  line  6,  before
'  Ætluðu  þeir  Karlsefni,'  &c.

'  New  Roy.  Coll.  ^Copenhagen^  No.  1714,  4to,  AM.  931,  410,  563  i,  4to,  401  fol.  (amended),  932,  410,  Rask  Coll.
30  and  36,  have  'til  vestri  óbygðar.'  *  MS.  skogvrin«.  '•  MS.  skiol.  '  'ok  helldu'  repeated  in  MS.


134  THE   FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  33.]  EIRÍKS  SAGA  RAUÐA— 13.

1.  þá  gaf  konungr  honum  tvá  menn  skozka,  hét  karlmaðrinn  Haki,  en  konan  Hæk-

2.  ja.     Konungr  bað  Leif  taka  til  þessara  manna,  ef  hann  þyrfti  skjótleiks

3.  við,  því  at  þau  váru  dýrum  skjótari.     Þessa  menn  fengu  þeir  Leifr '  ok  Eirfkr  til

4.  fylgðar  við  Karlsefni.     En  er  þeir  hgfðu  siglt  f>TÍr  Furðustrandir,  þ-

5.  á  létu  þeir  ena  skozku  menn  á  land,  ok  báðu  þau  hlaupa  í  suðr-

6.  átt,  ok  leita  landskosta,  ok  koma  aptr  áðr  þrjú  dœgr  væri  liðin.

7.  Þau  váru  svá  búin,  at  þau  hgfðu  þat  klæði,  er  þau  kglluðu

8.  biafal,  þat  var  svá  g0rt,  at  hattrinn^  var  á  upp,  ok  opit  at  hliðum,  ok  e-

9.  ngar  ermar  á,  ok  knept  í  milli  fóta;   hek  þar  saman  knappr

10.  ok  nezla,  en  ber  vám  [þau]  annarsstaðar.     Þeir  kgstuðu  akkerum,

11.  ok  lágu  þar  þessa  stund,  ok  er  þrír  dagar  váru  liðnir,  hljópu  þau  af

12.  landi  ofan,  ok  hafði  annat  þeira  í  hendi  vínber',  en  annat  hvei-

13.  ti  sjálfsáit.     Sagði  Karlsefni  at  þau  þóttusk*  fundit  hafa  landsk-

14.  osti  góða.     Tóku  þeir  þau  á  skip  sitt,  ok  fóru  leiðar  sinnar,  þar  til  er  var-

15.  ð  fjarðskorit.     Þeir  iQgðu  skipunum  inn  á  íjgirðinn;   þar  var  ey  ein  ú-

1 6.  t  f)TÍr,  ok  váru  þar  straumar  miklir  ^  ok  um  e}-na ;   þeir  kglluðu  hana  Straums-

17.  ey.     Fugl  var  þar  svá  margr,  at  trautt  mátti  fœti  niðr  kotna  í  m-

18.  illi  eggjanna.     Þeir  heldu  inn  með  firðinum,  ok  kglluðu  hann  Straumsfj-

19.  grð,  ok  báru  farminn  af  skipunum,  ok  bjoggusk  þar  um.     Þeir  hgfðu  m-

20.  eð  sér  allskonar  fé,  ok  leituðu  sér  þar  landsnytja.     FjqU  váru  þar,  ok  fa-

21.  grt  var  þar  um  at  litask.     Þeir  gáðu  enskis  nema  at  kanna  land-

22.  it.     Þar  váru  grgs  mikil.     Þar  váru  þeir  um  vetrinn,  ok  g0rðisk  vetr  m-

23.  ikiU,  en  ekki  fyrir  unnit,  ok  g0rðisk  illt  til  matarins,  ok  tókusk  af  v-

24.  eiðarnar^     M  fóru  þeir  út  í  eyna,  ok  væntu  at  þar  mundi  gefa  ngkku-

25.  t  af  veiðum  eða  rekum.     Þar  var  þó  lítit  til  matfanga,  en  fé  þeira

a  6.  varð  þar  vel.     Síðan  hétu  þeir  á  guð,  at  hann  sendi  þeim  ngkkut  til

27.  matfanga,  ok  var  eigi  svá  brátt  við  látit,  sem  þeim  var  annt  til.     Þórha-

28.  Ur  hvarf  á  brott,  ok  gengu  menn  at  leita  bans;   stóð  þat  yfir  þrjú  dœgr

29.  í  samt.     Á  hinu  fjórða  dœgri  fundu  þeir  Karlsefni  ok  Bjami'',  hann  Þórha-

30.  11  á  hamargnípu  einni ;   hann  horfði  í  lopt  upp,  ok  gapti  hann  bæði  aug-

31.  um  ok  munni  ok  ngsum,  ok  klóraði  sér,  ok  klýpti  sik,  ok  þulði  ngkk-

32.  ut.     Þeir  spurðu  hví*'  hann  væri  þar  kominn.     Hann  kvað  þat  0ngu  skipta ;

33.  bað.hann  þá  ekki  þat  undrask ;    kvezk  svá  lengst  lifat  hafa

34.  at  þeir  þurftu  ekki  ráð  fyrir  honum  at  g0ra.     Þeir  báðu  hann  fara  heim

35.  meö  sér.     Hann  g0rði  svá.     Líilu  síðar  kom  þar  hvalr,  ok  drifu  menn  til,  ok

36.  skáru  hann,  en  þó  kendu  menn  eigi  hvat  hval  þat  var.     Karlsefni  kunni  mikla  sk-

37.  yn  á  hvalnum,  ok  kcndi  hann  þó  eigi.     Þenna  hval  suðu  matsvcinar,  ok  á-

38.  tu  af,  ok  varð  þó  gllum  illt  af.     H  gengr  Þórhallr  at,  ok  mælti :   'Var  eigi

39.  svá,  at  hinn  rauðskeggjaði  varð  drjúgari  en  Kristr  yðvarr?    Þclta  haíða

'  MS.  leifi.  »  MS.  h.->ttnrin7j.  '  MS.  apparently  vinker.  '  MS.  þottirt.

»  MS.  miklL  '  MS.  veidimar.  '  MS.  b/armadi.  •  MS.  þvi.


Í


.-^xx-  V  l'*tr»ii  'n-^r«Tvi?T-  pT^  f^íM^o  da%»yv»f  »«ei«i^  f*r  ^nfíít  <í1>  ^
?.  \?'v  ft^v%%»f  HM#»P  Vf^v^  P^  v>M  iKmtzín  -e-  s\f»«»rðP<^  «««•  i.i

-u6  ji'MoT-S^^.'^t  f?í2re*»  pv?"  .<».a,v>  ítr^íJrT  ^iiS^i  |lMrtiíK»r^t>T  x

^r  f^wV:  í«  l>z»nr  ?-a^i7^  iiTitr  Parrot  fjTip.  ATOÍy.'jt"^*) v  ^tu  :^^
4      |'»jp»»>»r  B^:^>Í0  yrtSi'S^i  Í>?i^t7  |?wMl?^  pí^  P4»'P  *^  írm,4ft2  ^  pfiH^í


fÆ»l|  ;^.-)


5-v.


ig««ii  flints  fa.4«imi?2  ai.-ttf^ltMti  p^|^«nm#a»»fÉ<l«!«i«^  a,

«tv  R;7\.;Í  í?zv^^  f  4*-  ^""tiífr-  l^  «»»»í^  í»^>e^  ^'^^  ^t^^  <

^  11«  vmS.4  fív  oin  tt^t-^'  f"^  «^  Rítr^víi  -r  ftónt.^lCPtfi-^íínt*  v&  ri

W  iltmW  -J««  '^míýu  4H^V4^v  4i  V,  fiííík.v  114-4'  (Vuí^  fi»«  <»«*^  J  1


^


V  nth^'  uir<tc  'Murártlf  4H:?iri^í^  ^  ^^»;  »vif  ♦^ÍIS^  CÍtoi  Píirto


y^sttft*


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  135

[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  33  3.]  EIRÍKS  SAGA  RAUÐA.— 14.

1.  ek  nú  fyrir  skáldskap  minn,  er  ek'  orta  um  Þór  fulltrúann ;    sjaldan  he-

2.  fir  hann  mér  brugðizL'     Ok  er  menn  vissu  þetta  vildu  0ngvir  nýta,  ok  kgstuðu

3.  f}rir  bJQrg  ofan,  ok  sneru  sinu  máli  til  guðs  miskunnar.     Gaf  þeim  þá  ú-

4.  t  at  róa,  ok  skorti  þá  eigi  birgðir.     Um  várit  fara  þeir  inn  í  Stiaumsfjg-

5.  rð,  ok  hgfou  fgng  af  livárutveggja  landinu,  veiðar  af  meg-

6.  inlandinu,  eggver  ok  útróðra  af  sjónum.  [iðimaðr  fara  ^

7.  [N]ú  rœða  þeir  um  ferð  sína  ok  hafa  tilskipan.     Vill  Þórhallr  ve-

8.  norðr  um  Furðustrandir,  ok  fyrir  Kjalarnes,  ok  leita  svá  Vín-

9.  lands;   en  Karlsefni  vill  fara  suðr  fyrir  land  ok  fyrir  austan,  ok  þikkir  land  því  m-

10.  eira,  sem  suðr  er  meir,  ok  þikkir  honum  þat  ráðligra,  at  kanna  hvár-

11.  tveggja.     NÚ  býsk  Þórhallr  út  undir  eyjum,  ok  urðu  [eigi]  meir  í  ferð  með  h-

12.  onum  en  niu  menn.     En  með  Karlsefni  for  annat  liðit  þeira.     Ok  einn  dag,  er

13.  Þórhallr  bar  vatn  á  skip  sitt,  þá  drakk  hann,  ok  kvað  vísu  þessa:    'Hafa  k-

14.  váðu  mik  meiðar  málmþings,  er  ek  kom  hingat,  mér  samir  litt  fyrir  lý-

15.  ðum  lasta,  drykk  inn  bazta.     Bilds  hattar'  verð  ek  byttu  beiðitýr  at

16.  reiða,  heldr  er  svá  at  ek  krýp  at  keldu ;   komat*  vin  á  grgn

17.  mina.'     Lata  þeir  út  síðan,  ok  fylgir  Karlsefni  þeim  undir  eyna.     Áðr  þeir

18.  drógu  seglit  upp,  kvað  Þórhallr  vísu :    '  Fprum  aptr  þar  er  ærir  eru,  sandhimi-

19.  ns,  landar,  latum  val  kanna  kæti  knarrar  skreið  hin  breiðu ;   me-

20.  ðan  bilstyggvir  byggja  bellendr,  ok  hval  vella,  laufa  veðrs,  þann

21.  er  leyíir  Igind  á  Furðustrgndum  1'     Síðan  skilðu  þeir,  ok  sigld-

22.  u  norðr  fyrir  Furðustrandir  ok  Kjalarnes,  ok  vildu  beita  þar  fyrir

23.  vestan  ;   kom  þá  veðr  á  móti  þeim,  ok  rak  þá  upp  við  Irland,  ok  vár-

24.  u  þar  mjpk  þjáðir  ok  barðir.     M  lét  Þórhallr  líf  sitt.

25.  Karlsefni  for  suðr  fyrir  land,  ok  Snorri  ok  Bjarni,  ok  annat  1-

26.  ið  þeira.     Þeir  fóru  lengi,  ok  til  þess,  er  þeir  kvámu  at  á  þeiri,  er  fe-

27.  11  af  landi  ofan  ok  í  vatn,  ok  svá  til  sjóvar.     Eyjar  váru  þar  miklar  fyrir  ár-

28.  ósinum,  ok  mátti  eigi  komask  inn  í  ána  nema  at  háflœðum.     Sigldu  þ-

29.  eir  Karlsefni  þá  til  ár-óssins,  ok  kglluðu  í  Hópi  landit.     Þar  fundu  þeir  sjá-

30.  Ifsána  hveitiakra,  þar  sem  lægðir  váru,  en  vínviðr  allt  þar

31.  sem  hoka  kendi.     Hverr  lœkr  var  þar  fullr  af  fiskum.     Þeir  gprðu  þar

32.  grafir,  sem  landit  mœttisk,  ok  flóðit  gekk  efst,  ok  er  út  fell,  váru

33.  helgir  fiskar  í  grgfunum.     í>ar  var  mikiU  fjglði  dýra  á  skógi  m-

34.  eð  gllu  móti.     Þeir  váru  þar  hálfan  mánuð,  ok  skemtu  sér,  ok  urðu  við

35.  ekki  varir.     Fé  sitt  hgfðu  þeir  með  sér.     Ok  einn  morgin  snemma,  er  þeir

36.  lituðusk  um,  sá  þeir  níu  húðkeipa,  ok  var  veift  trjánum  af  skipu-

37.  num,  ok  lét  því  líkast  í  sem  í  hálmþustum,  ok  ferr  sólarsinnis.     M  m-

38.  ælti  Karlsefni:    '  Hvat  mun  þetta  tákna  ? '     Snorri  svarar  honum  :    'Vera  kann  at'

39.  þetta  sé  friðartákn,  ok  tgkum  skjgld  hvítan,  ok  berum  í  mót.'     Ok  svá

'  a  is  inserted  in  the  MS.  after  ek,  apparently  a  clerical  error.        ^  The  bracketed  words  belong  to  the  end  of  line  7.
3  MS.  hattr.  '  MS.  liomit.  =  MS.  a.


136  THE   FINDING   OF    WIN  ELAND    THE   GOOD.


[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  34.]  EIRÍKS  SAGA  RAUÐA— 15.

1.  g0rðu  þeir.     Þá  reru  hinir  í  mót,  ok  undruðusk  þá,  ok  gengu  þeir  á  land.     Þ-

2.  eir  váru  smáir  menn  ok  iUiligir,  ok  illt  hQfðu  þeir  hár  á  hgifði ;    eygðir   vá-

3.  ru  þeir  mjpk  ok  breiðir  í  kinnunum.     Ok  dvglðusk  þar  um  stund  ok  undruðusk;

4.  reru  síðan  í  brott,  ok  suðr  fyrir  nesit.     í>eir  hgfðu  g0rt  bygðir  sínar  upp  frá

5.  vatninu,  ok  váru  sumir  skálarnir  nær  meginlandinu,  en  sumir  nær  vatni-

6.  nu.     Nú  váru  þeir  þar  þann  veir.     Þar  kom  alls  engi  snjár,  ok  allr  fénaðr

7.  gekk  þar  úti  sjálfala.  [húðkeipa  reri  sunnan  fyrir  nesit ',

8.  En  er  vara  tók,  geta  þeir  at  líta,  einn  morgin  snemma,  at  íjolði

9.  svá  margir  sem  kolum  væri  sáit,  ok  var  þá '^  veift  á  hverju  skipi  tr-
io, jánum.     Þeir  brugðu  þá  skjgldum  upp,  ok  tóku  kaupstefnu  sín  á  mill-

11.  um,  ok  \'ildi  þat  folk  helzt  kaupa  rautt  klæði,  þeir  vildu  ok  kaup-

12.  a  sverð  ok  spjót,  en  þat  bgnnuðu  þeir  Karlsefni  ok  Snorri.     Þeir  hQfðu  ófplv-

13.  an  belg  f}TÍr  klæðit,  ok  tóku  spannarlangt  klæði  fyrir  belg,  ok  bundu  um

14.  hgfuð  sér;    ok  fór  svá  um  stund ;   en  er  minka  tók  klæðit,  þá  skáru

15.  þeir  í  sundr  svá  at  eigi  var  breiðara  en  þvers  fingrar  breitt.     Gáfu  þeir  Sk-

16.  rælingar  jafnmikit  fyrir  eða  meira.     Þat  bar  til,  at  griðungr  hljóp  ór

17.  skógi,  er"  þeir  Karlsefni  áttu,  ok  gall  hátt  við.     Þeir  fælask  við,  Skrælingar,  ok  hlaupa  ú-

18.  t  á  keipana,  ok  reru  suðr  fyrir  land.     Varð  þá  ekki  vart  við  þá  þrjár  vikur

19.  í  samt.     En  er  sjá  stund  var  liðin,  sjá  þeir  sunnan  fara  mikinn  fjg-

20.  Iða  skipa  Skrælinga,  svá  sem  straumr  stœði ;   var

21.  þá  veift  trjánum  gllum  rangsœlis,  ok  ýla  allir  Skrælingar  há-

22.  tt  upp.     Þá  tóku  þeir  rauða  skjgldu  ok  báru  í  mót.     Gengu  þeir  þá  sa-

23.  man  ok  bgrðusk ;    varð  þar  skothríð  hgrð.     {"eir  hgfðu  ok  valslg-

24.  ngur,  Skrælingar.     Þat  sjá  þeir  Karlsefni  ok  Snorri,  at  þeir  fœrðu  upp  á  stgng-

25.  um,  Slu-ælingarnir,  kngtt  mikinn,  ok  blán  at  lit,  ok  fló  upp  á  land  y-

26.  fir  liðit,  ok  let  illiliga  við,  þar  er  niðr  kom.     Við  þetta  sló  ótta  miklum

27.  yfir  Karlsefni  ok  á  lið  hans,  svá  at  þá  fýsti  enskis  annars,  en  ha-

28.  Ida  undan,  ok  upp  með  ánni,  ok  til  hamra  ngkkurra;   veittu  þeir  þar

29.  viðtgku  harða.     Freydís  kom  út,  ok  sá  er  þeir  heldu  undan.     Hon

30.  kallaði :    '  Hví  ^  renni  þér  undan,  slíkum  auvirðis  ^  mgnnum,  svá  gildir  menn,

31.  er  mdr  þœtti  líldigt  at  þér  mættið  drepa  þá  svá  sem  búfé;   ok

32.  ef  ek  hefða  vápn,  þoetti  mér  sem  ek  munda  betr  berjask

33.  en  einnhverr  yðvar.'     Þeir  gáfu  0ngvan  gaum  hvat  sem  hon  sagði.

34.  Freydís  vildi  fylgja  þeim,  ok  varð  hon  heldr  sein,  því  at  hon  var  eigi

35.  hell;   gekk  hon  þá  eptir  þcim  í  skóginn ;    en  °  Skrælingar  sœkja  at  henni.

36.  Hon  fann  fyrir  sér  mann  dauðan,  Þorbrand  Snorrason,  ok  stóð  hellu-

37.  steinn  Í  hgfði  honum  ;   sverðit  lá  hjá  honum,  ok  hon  tók  þat  upp,  ok

38.  býsk  at  verja  sik  með.     Vi.  koma  Skrælingar  at  henni ;    hon  tekr  brjóst-

39.  it  upp  or  serkinum,  ok  slcttir  á  sverðit;   þeir  fælask  við,  ok  hlaupa  undan,

»  The  bracketed  words  belong  to  the  end  of  Hne  8.  '  MS.  þo,  i.  e.  þó.  '  MS.  en».

*  MS.  þvi,  '  MS.  V  virdis,  i.e.  ú-virðis.  '  MS.er.


'11''"  ^  u4*fA  T*P^«r!»  RPát^Rrí^  ðaú -»«*«2d'*trfh^TiA  í*t  1J«>í5í>  .^

-  *»»  *•  tt41$i''0.'tr  ijoilp  QáSX^  ^luiM  *vtim:  0%s>i"ip  «»H^  ^  ^í»w|í
íHT  6<»%  f%9 ð'^ir  «-n>^ f^^é&H*  F^yr^  Sf^  )^if  6a%  ^9uu^  mn


ii«  ft^ÍT'  Cj^iMtú  lirr'i.v  íW.  f^iTuitinit  V^o\t%'^i  i^ti^iT-  Pi^t?  wmh


I


pí»«


<2i


»of4J«-  ^yriT*  r?«Tru?T- f*.-!  <ísii  |j-')«n»^^.vns-  u«iiNu  f/«^  p-'«  a


THE  ICELANDIC   TEXTS.  137


[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  34  ^.]  EIRÍKS  SAGA  RAUÐA— 16.


r.  ok  á  skip  sin,  ok  heldu  á  brottu.     Þeir  Karlsefni  finna  hana,  ok  lofa^  happ

2.  hennar.     Tveir  menn  fellu  af  Karlsefni,  en  fjórir  af  Skrælingum,  en  þó  u-

3.  rðu  þeir  ofrliði  bornir.     Fara  þeir  nú  til  búða  sinna,  ok  íhuga  hvat  fjg-

4.  Imenni  þat  var,  er  at  þeim  sótti  á  landinu;   s/nisk  þeim  nú,  at  þat  eina  m-

5.  un  liðit  hafa  verit,  er  á  skipunum  kom,  en  annat  liðit  mun

6.  hafa  verit  þversýningar.     Þeir  Skrælingar  fundu  ok  mann  dauðan,  ok  la

7.  fþi  hjá  honum;   einn  þeira  hjó  í  stein,  ok  brotnaði  ^xin;   þótti  honum  þá

8.  þngu  nýt  er  eigi  stóð  við  grjótinu,  ok  kastaði  niðr.     Þeir  þóttusk  n-

9.  ú  sjá,  þótt  þar  væri  landskostir  góðir,  at  þar  mundi  jafn  ófriðr

10.  ok  ótti  á  liggja,  af  þeim-  er  fyrir  bjoggu.     Bjoggusk  þeir  á  brott,  ok  ætl-

11.  uðu  til  sins  lands.     Sigldu  þeir  norðr  fyrir,  ok  fundu  fimm  Skræli-

12.  nga  í  skinnhjúpum  sofanda,  ok  hgfðu  með  sér  skrokka'  ok  í  dýramerg

13.  dreyra  blandinn.     Virtu  þeir  svá,  at  þeir  mundu  g0rvir  af  landinu.     Þeir

14.  drápu  þá.     Síðan  fundu  þeir  nes  eitt  ok  fJQlða  d/ra,  ok  þann  veg  *

15.  var  nesit  at  sjá,  sem  mykiskán  væri,  af  því  at  d/rin  lágu  þ-

i6.  ar  um  vetrna.     Nú  koma  þeir  í  Straumsfjgirð,  ok  er  þar  allskonar  [gnóttir].

17.  Er  þat  sumra  manna  sggn,  at  þau  Bjarni  ok  Freydís  hafi  þar  eptir  verit,

18.  ok  tíu  tigir  manna  með  þeim,  ok  hafi  eigi  farit  lengra.     En  þeir  Karlsefni  ok  Sno-

19.  rri  hgfðu  suðr  farit,  ok  XL  manna,  ok  hafði  eigi  lengr  verit

20.  í  Hópi,  en  vart  tvá  mánaði'*,  ok  hafði  hit  sama  su-

21.  mar  aptr  komit.     Karlsefni  for  á  einu  skipi,  at  leita  Þórha-

22.  lis,  en  liðit  var  eptir,  ok  fóru  þeir  norðr  fyrir  Kjalarnes,  ok  berr  þá

23.  fyrir  vestan  fram,  ok  var  landit  á  bakborða  þeim.     Þar  váru  eyðime-

24.  rkr  einar;   ok  er  þeir  hgfðu  lengi  farit,  felli-  á  af  landi  ofan  ór  au-

25.  stri  ok  í  vestr.     Þeir  lágu  inn  í  árósinum,  ok  lágu  við  hinn  syðra  bak-

26.  kann.     Þat  var  einn  morgin,  sjá  þeir  Karlsefni  f3TÍr  ofan  rjóðrit  flekk  ngkk-

27.  urn,  svá  sem  glitaði  við  þeim,  ok  œptu  þeir  á.     Þat  hrcerðisk,  ok  var  þat

28.  Einfœtingr,  ok  skýzk  ofan  þangat  sem  þeir  lágu,  forvaldr,  son  Eiríks  hin-

29.  s  rauða;    þá  mælti  f'orvaldr'^ :    '  Gott  land  hgfum  vér  fengit.'     Þá  hley-

30.  pr  Einfœtingrinn  á  brott,  ok  norðr  aptr,  ok  skaut  áðr  í  smáþar-

31.  ma  á  Þorvaldi.     Harm  dró  út  grina;   þá  mælti  Þorvaldr:    'Feitt  er  um  ístruna.'

32.  teir  hljópu '  eptir  Einfœtingi,  ok  sá '  hann  stundum,  ok  þótti  sem  hann

33.  leitaði  undan;   hljóp  hann  út  á  vág  einn.     Þá  hurfu  þeir  aptr.

34.  Þá  kvað  einn  maðr  kviðling  þenna :    '  Eltu  seggir,  allsatt  var  þat,  ei-

35.  nn  Einfœting  ofan  til  strandar;    en  kynligr  maðr  kostaði  rás-

36.  ar  hart  of  stopi  ;   hejTÖu  Karlsefni  1 '     {"eir  fóru  þá  í  brott,  ok

37.  norðr  aptr,  ok  þóttusk  sjá  Einfœtingaland.     Vildu  þeir  þá  eigi

38.  lengr  hætta  liði  sínu.     Þeir  ætluðu  at  kanna  pll  fjgll,  þau

39.  er  í  Hópi  váru,  ok  er  þeir  fundu.     Fóru  þeir  aptr,  ok  váru  í  Straumsfirði

•  MS.  lof.  ^  MS.  en«  \Hr.  '  skokka  ?  *  MS.  vag.  <>  MS.  manndn.

'  There  is  an  obvious  clerical  confusion  here,  as  also  in  the  following  passage,  which,  except  in  arrangement,  conforms

to  the  similar  passage  in  J>sK.  '  MS.  hlippu.  '  MS.  san.


138  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE   GOOD.

[AIM.  557,  4to,  p.  35.]  EIRÍKS  SAGA  RAUÐA— 17.

1.  hinn  þriðja  vetr'.     Gengu  menn  þá  mjgk  sleitum;    sóttu  [þeir]  er  kvánlausir  váru  í  hen-

2.  dr  þeim,  er  kvángaðir  váru.     far  kom  til  hit  fjTsta  haust  Snorri,  son  Karlsefnis,  ok  var  þar

3.  þann,  er  þeir  fóru  á  brott ;   hpfðu  þeir  sunnanveðr-  ok  hittu  Markland,  ok  fun-

4.  du  Skrælinga  fimm,  var  einn  skeggjaðr,  ok  tvær  konur,  bgrn  tvau.     Tóku

5.  þeir  Karlsefni  til  sveinanna,  en  hitt  komsk  undan,  ok  sukku  í  jgirð  niðr.    E-

6.  n  sveinana  hgfðu  þeir  með  sér,  ok  kendu  þeim  mál,  ok  váru  skírðir.     í>eir  n-

7.  efndu  móður  sína  VætiUdi  ok  Uvægi'.     Þeir  spgðu  at  konungar  stjórnuðu

8.  Skrælingalandi.    Hét  annarr  Avalldamon,  en  annarr  hét  Valldidida.     Þeir  kv-

9.  áðu  þar  engi  hús,  ok  lágu  menn  í  helium  eða  holum.     Þeir  sggðu  land  þar  g-
10.  ðrumegin  gagnvart  sínu  landi,  ok  gengu  menn  þar  í  hvítum  klæðum,  ok  ce-
il pðu  hátt,  ok  báru  stangir,  ok  fóru  með  flíkr.     Þat  ætla  menn  Hvítramannaland.

12.  Nú  kómu  þeir  til  Grœnlands,  ok  eru  með  Eiríki  rauða  um  vetrinn.     Þá  Bja-

13.  rna  Grímólfsson  bar  í  Grœnlandshaf,  ok  kómu*  í  maðkasjá ;  fundu  þeir

14.  ei  fpr  en  skipit  g0rísk  maðksmogit  undir^  þeim.     M  to-

15.  luðu  þeir  um  hvert  ráð  þeir  skyldu  taka.     Þeir  hgfðu  eptirbát  þann,

16.  er  bræddr  var  seltjgru;   þat  segja  menn,  at  skelmaðkrinn  smjúgi  eigi  þat  tré

17.  er  selljgrunni  er  brætt.     Var  þat  flestra  manna  sggn  og  tillaga,  at  skipa  m-

18.  gnnum  bátinn,  svá  sem  hann  tœki  upp.     En  er  þat  var  reynt,  þá  tók  bá-

19.  trinn  eigi  meirr  upp  en  helming  manna.     Bjarni  mælti  þá,  at  menn  skyldi

20.  fara  í  bátinn,  ok  skyldi  þat  fara  at  hlutfgllum,  en  eigi  at  mannvLrðing-

21.  um^     En  hverr  þeira  nianna  vildi  fara  1  bátinn,  sem  þar  vám ;   þá  mátti  hann  eigi  við  g-

22.  llum  taka.     F)TÍr  því  tóku  þeir  þetta  ráð,  at  hluta  menn  í  bátinn  ok  af  k-

23.  aupskipinu'.     Hlutaðisk  þar  svá  til,  at  Bjarni  hlaut  at  fara  í  bátinn  ok  n-

24.  ær  helmingr  manna  með*  honum.     Þá  gengu  þeir  af  skipinu,  ok  í  bátinn,  er  til

25.  þess  hgfðu  hlotizk.     Þá  er  menn  váru  komnir  í  bátinn,  mælti  einn  ungr  maðr

26.  íslenzkr,  sá  er  verit  hafði  fgrunautr  Bjarna:    'Ætlar  þú,  Bjarni,  at  skiljask  hér  við

27.  mik?'     Bjarni  svarar  :    '  Svá  verðr  nú  at  vera.'     Hann  segir :    '  Svá  með  því,  at  þú  hézk  mér

eigi  þvf,

28.  þá  er  ek  fór  með  þér  af  fslandi  frá  búi  fgður  míns.'     Bjarni  segir:   'Eigi  sé  ek  her

29.  þó  annat  ráð  til;   eða  svara,  hvat  leggr  þú  hér  til  ráðs.'     Hann  segir :    '  Sé  ek  ráðit

30.  til,  at  vit  skiptumsk  í  rúmunum,  ok  farir  þú  hingat  en  ek  mun  þan-

31.  gatV     Bjarni  svarar:    '  Svá  skal  vera.     Ok  þat  sé  ek,  at  þú  vinnr  gjarna  til  lífs,  ok  þikkir

32.  mikit  fyrir  at  dejja.'     Skiptusk  þeir  þá  í  rúmunum.    Gekk  þessi  maðr  í  b-

33.  átinn,  cn  Bjami"  upp  í  skipit;   ok  er  þat  sggn  manna,  at  Bjarni  létisk  þar  í

34.  maðkahafinu,  ok  þeir  menn,  sem  í  skipinu  váru  með  honum.     En  bátrinn  ok

35.  þeir,  er  þar  váru  á,  fóru  lciðar  sinnar,  til  þess  er  þeir  tóku  land,

36.  ok  sggðu  þessa  sggu  síðan.  [fór  hann  heim  til"

37.  Annat  sumar  eptir  fór  Karlsefni  til  islands,  ok  Snorri  með  honum,  ok

38.  bus  sins  Í  Rc}-nines.     Móður  bans  þótti  sem  hann  hefð-

39.  i  litt  til  kostar  tckit,  ok  var  hon  eigi  heim[a]  þar  hinn  fjTsta  vetr;   ok  er  Hon

'  MS.  vintr.

'  er  þeir  fórn  á  brott  may  belong  to  this  clause;  there  is,  in  any  reading,  an  obviotis  error  ia  the  preceding  words.
'  fjSur  should,  perhaps,  be  supplied  before  Uvægi,  as  in  þsK.  '  MS.  kom.  '  MS.  undir  vndi.

•  MS.  man«v/>(iinvm.  '  MS.  erroneously  kavpskipvnvw;.  '  MS.  mci  xaeb.  •  MS.  þanat.

'°  MS.  biama.  "  The  bracketed  words  belong  to  the  end  of  line  },'.


U


^     — ,— .


1-/2^.^


^M


t-4í  j,


P
\**%


ill  c


««>Tr


" /vtíííS^^  í?H»t'"»i  -e-'pr^.íítfírtt*  »f^ioi»ív  w  wv<T»"-ó?»^í?*^riu^.lM-«-


íVír  T-  ^oft^.^^c^nr  «-  w^  if.ít  ^U^


IJÍ.T  -J^y^f?^  t#*rí=~f-  <i»iS?      ^


s4.4Biieí^í3»-


-joi*'-  aaCx^i;-  -^■""


mmmmmmm


^■ui?«»»tí  íl'r»»itat*


,i^»|W^


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.


139


[AM.  557,  4to,  p.  35  Í.]  EIRÍKS  SAGA  RAUÐA— 18.


reyndi  at  Guðríðr  var  skgrungr  mikil!,  for  hon  heim,  ok  váru  samfarar'

þeira  góðar.     Dóttir  Snorra  Karlsefnissonar  var  Hallfríðr,  móðir  Thorlaks"  biskups  R-

unólfssonar ;   þau  áttu  son,  er  ÞorbJQrn  hét.     Hans  dóttir  hét  Þórunn,  móðir  Bj-

arnar  biskups.     Þorgeirr  hét  sonr  Snorra  Karlsefnissonar,  faðir  Ingveldar,  m-

óður  Brands  biskups  hins  fyrra.     Ok  lýkr  þar  þessi  sggu.


'  MS.  samfædi.


'  MS.  sic.


140  THE  FINDING  OF   WINELAND   THE   GOOD.


[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  221  Í.]     EIRÍKS  ÞÁTTR  RAUÐA— 1.


59.  Þorvaldr  hét  maðr,  Þáttr  Eiríks  rauSa.     Capitulum.

60.  son  Ósvalds  Úlfssonar,  pxna-Þónssonar.     Þorvaldr  ok  Ei-


|í^^ep^ihi^a  m^oirvhS^-o  ho^V^i^  arBeíW^áp  feír'
lítutr  ba  w  ár^^ticjptiaur  f  Sifífng  -^j^huoc  c  i)>Wl2

i^  mp>  ííT  B^i  ^  ^ftic  wrfhi  'iítmí  ?:  b^iHej|^r>
^^l<h?»5truí^«?rin^^t '-^-  ■*"  "'


oir  yiAw  lckr  ti  Þn^'Bgc  Ijio  arir  js^  l^p  fir  l;4pf  í  nnr  « oge
íh  ctr  ^  itthr  hutri  ^ulgiu  p  ftiK^  HBi  w wn  eýUr  anir  límí
^^f^áí^^tírknid  \ám  (»crcr ÍHíri&i^n  fati  ulpf  Mw  6
ctrw  upfhriim  ^«*|i  V4  ce  ^  pAó  gutibiátm  lí»cr.  t^um  í^  áp
trtfiíu  ItTttl  ol  tittia l»»úi  cp  \ffmíc  TnS^fr.  aniP.  tíglA*  miáíilj
I       «fá\i  \otíi\)fáfí  IStr* torn  utBti  rtt tí  Udt^tct^  f  MláA*  mi3

c^  ntxv  tmd  \j\ne  cvrtvt  l»ýpó  imi  ujyir  cpr  pi^  Ij'r  cvtr.p* »

uo»^  hnirp-  It'tim'-áncíii  iirtrf  holmu  lur  Vntpiirpnipif
^     lítrj^A  fttmdinf  poí^riilteiþom  l^  imq  jf  b?CTl»f  ^

^       ?^^?  "^  ^í^^  eif  Wnbir  tion  tíj:an^  mhr  Atith:  um  iuto  e  v
*        rtmTir  r^^^^iír  biif  id  fttSir  ^  bio  f  b?arrd  l»lið  <  onirp^
^,      luQ  tP8Ítt  mT)2i'^m  drftji  iHniA  fiimiír  ^anr  2?<»uárpM|jrhM

^      ]^  cn  píáítdn  Worn í«rt-  ajt  pigih-  íbni  wt  rtpnr  c  IIjm  TÍ\n


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  141

[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  222.]    EIRÍKS  ÞÁTTR  RAUÐA— 2.


1.  rikr  hinn  rauði,  son  bans,  fóru  af  Jaðri  til  islands,  fjTÍr  víga  sakir.     M  var  víða

2.  bygt  island.     Þeir  bjoggu  fyrst  at  Drgngum  á  Homstrgndum.     far  andaði-

3.  sk  Þorvaldr.     Eiríkr  fekk  þá  Þórhildar,  dóttur  Jgrundar  ok  Þorbjargar  knarrar-

4.  bringu,  er  þá  átti  Þorbjgrn  hinn  haukdoelski.     Rézk  Eiríkr  þá  norðan,  ok  bjó

5.  á  EiríksstQðum  hjá  Vatnshorni.     Son  Eiríks  ok  Þórhildar  hét  Leifr.    En

6.  eptir  víg  Ejjúlfs  saurs  ok  Hólmggngu-Hrafns  var  Eiríkr  g0rr  brott

7.  6r  Haukadal ;    fór  hann  vestr  tO  BreiðaOarðar,  ok  bjó  í  0xney  á  Eiríksstgðum.     Hann  lé-

8.  ði  Þorgesti  setstokka,  ok  náði  eigi  [þá  er]  hann  kaUaði  til.     Þaðan  af  g^rðusk  deilur  ok

9.  bardagar  með  þeim  Þorgesti,  sem  segir  1  sggu  Eirílcs.     StjTr  Þorgrímsson  veitti  Eiríki  at

10.  malum,  ok  Ejjúlfr  or  Svíney  ok  synir  Brands  or  Álptafirði,  ok  ÞorbJQrn  Vífils-

11.  son.    En  Þorgestlingum  veittu  synir  Þórðar  gellis  ok  Þorgeirr  or  Hitardal;

12.  Eirfkr  varð  sekr  á  Þórsnes-þingi.     Bjó  Eiríkr  skip  sitt  [til]  hafs,  í  Eiríksvágí  ;

13-  en  er  hann  var  búinn,  fylgðu  þeir  Styrr  honum  út  um  eyjar.    Eirikr  sagði

14-  þeim,  at  hann  ætlaði  at  leita  lands  þess,  er  Gunnbjgm,  son  Úlfs  kráku,  sá,

15.  er  [hann]  rak  vestr  um  haf,  þá  er  hann  fann  Gunnbjarnarsker ;    kvezk  hann  ap-

i6.  tr  mundu  leita  til  vina  sinna,  ef  hann  fyndi  landit.     Eirikr  sigldi  undan  Sn-

17.  æfellsjgkli.     Hann  fann  landit,  ok  kom  utan  at  því,  þar  sem  hann  kallaði  IMið-

18.  jgkul;    sá  heitir  nú  Bláserkr.     Hann  for  þá  þaðan  suðr  með  landinu,  at

19.  leita  ef  þaðan  væri  byggjanda  landit.     Hann  var  hinn  fyrsta  vetr  Í  Eiriks-

20.  ey,  nær  miðri  hinni  eystri  bygð ;   um  várit  eptir  for  hann  til  Eiríksijarðar,  ok

21.  tók  sér  þar  bústað.     Hann  for  þat  sumar  í  hina  vestri  úbygð,  ok  gaf

22.  víða  0rnefni.     Hann  var  annan  vetr  Í  Hólmum  \ið  Hrafnsgnípu.     En

23.  hit  þriðja  sumarit  for  hann  til  Islands,  ok  kom  skipi  sinu  í  Breiðafjgrð.     Hann

24.  kallaði  landit,  þat  er  hann  hafði  fundit,  Grœnland,  því  at  hann  kvað  þat  mundu

25.  f/sa  menn  þangat,  er  landit  héti  vel.     Eirikr  var  á  fslandi  um  vetrinn;   en  um

26.  sumarit  eptir  for  hann  at  byggja  landit.     Hann  bjó  Í  Brattahlíð  í  Eiríksfirði.

27.  Svá  segja  fróðir  menn  at  á  því  sama  sumri,  er  Eirílcr  rauði  fór  at  by-

28.  ggja  Grœnland,  þá  fór  hálfr  fjórði  t^gr  skipa  6r  Breiðafirði  ok  Borgar-

29.  firði,  en  fjórtán  kvámusk  út  þangat ;   sum  rak  aptr,  en  sum  týn-

30.  dusk,    Þat  var  XV  vetrum  fyrr  en  kristni  var  Iggtekin  á  Island!.    A


i4a  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  222  Í.]    EIRÍKS  ÞÁTTR  RAUDA— 3.


31.  því  sama  sumri  for  utan  Friðrekr  biskup  ok  Þorvaldr  Koðránsson.     Þessir  menn  ná-

32.  mu  land  á  Grœnlandi,  er  þá  fóru  út  með  Eirfld:    Herjúlfr  Herjúlfsfjgrð,  hann  bjó

33.  á  Herjúlfsnesi ;   Ketill  Ketilsfjgrð;   Hrafn  Hrafnsíjgrð  ;    Sghi  Sglvad-

34.  al ;   Helgi  Þorbrandsson  ÁlptafjQrð ;    Þorbjgrn  glóra  Siglufjgrð ;   Einarr  EinarsfjQrð;

35.  Hafgrímr  HafgrímsíjQrð  ok  Vatnahverfi ;    Arnlaugr  Arnlaugsfjgrð;

36.  en  sumir  fóni  til  Vestribygðar.  Leifr  heppni  var  skírðr.

37.  Þá  er  sextan  vetr  váru  liðnir  frá  því  er  Eiríkr  rauði  fór

38.  at  byggja  Grœnland,  þá  fór  Leifr,  son  Eiríks,  utan  af  Grœn-

39.  landi  til  Noregs.     Kom  hann  til  frándheims  um  haustit,  þá  er  Óláfr  konungr

40.  Tryggvason  var  kominn  norðan  af  Hálogalandi.    Leifr  lagði  ski-

41.  pi  sínu  inn  til  Niðaróss,  ok  for  þegar  á  fund  Óláfs  konungs.     Boðaði  konungr  trú

42.  honum  sem  gðrum  heiðnum  mgnnum,  er  á  hans  fund  kómu.     Gekk  konungi  þat  au-

43.  ðveldliga  við  Leif;   var  hann  þá  skírðr  ok  allir  skipverjar  hans.     Var  Le-

44.  ifr  með  konungi  um  vetrinn  vel  haldinn.  Bjarni  leitaði  Grœnlands.

45.  Herjúlfr  var  Bárðarson,  Herjúlfssonar ;   hann  var  frændi  Ingó-

46.  Ifs  landnámamanns.     Þeim  Herjúlfi  gaf  Ingólfr  land  á  mill-

47.  i  Vágs  ok  Reykjaness.     Herjúlfr  bjó  f3TSt  á  Drepstokki ;   Þorgerðr  hét

48.  kona  hans,  en  Bjarni  son  þeira,  ok  var  hinn  efniligsti  maðr.     Hann

49.  ffstisk  utan  þegar  á  unga  aldri.     Yarð  honum  gott  bæði  til  fjár  ok

50.  mannvirðingar,  ok  var  sinn  vetr  hvárt  utan  lands  eða  með  fgður  sínum.     B-

51.  rátt  átti  Bjarni  skip  í  fgrum ;    ok  hinn  síðasta  vetr,  er  hann  var  í  Noregi,

52.  þá  brá  Herjúlfr  til  Grœnlandsferðar  með  Eiríki,  ok  brá  búi  sínu.

53.  Með  Herjúlfi  var  á  skipi  suðreyskr  maðr  kristinn,  sá  er  orti  Hafger-

54.  ðingar  drápu ;   þar  er  þetta  stef  í :    '  INIÍnar  biðr  ek  múnka-

55.  reyni  meinalausan  fara  beina  heiðis  haldi  hattar  foldar

56.  hallar  dróttinn  yfir  mér  stalli.'     Herjúlfr  bjó  á  Herjúlfsnesi ;   hann  var

57.  hinn  ggfgasti  maðr.     Eiríkr  rauði  bjó  í  Brattahlíð;   hann  var

58.  þar.með  mestri  virðingu,  ok  lutu  allir  til  hans.     Þessi  váru  bgrn  Eiríks:

59.  Leifr,  Þorvaldr  ok  Þorsteinn,  en  Freydis  hdt  dóttir  hans;   hon  var  gipt  þeim  manni,

60.  er  Þorvarðr  hét,  ok  bjoggu  þau  í  Ggrðum,  þar  sem  nú  er  biskupsstóU.     Hon


Á^


Sjfámá  Uimíe^  vr  jp^rfr  Bp  tr^tiáil^  ^J^OnC^-fnt^^


„^  j»tn^tÓ4i3 » foni  l^í yrtínMíf  iim  ^ufttr |>d  r' oPF
mjéuð  íbíi  u  fotti7liö?ðttti  d^  1^a)o0d7r)te*  ín»ir  íi>8^<^

Hín  ftfttt  oi^  hoí^M  ttmi  W  a  lírmmð  &am«  b«^í^  ^tpdií
)yi)cUf|^d  \íir1ct^  UitrFl^u  'ib'XVfOt  í^ííllMf  ikptíiáir^iJV-^
^^    íjprni;  ^ wti  ticrii  iiiljiiil^tn  h\A\n\\  btwí»t /riííi{tvi'

)^  rfntniid  nitrin^Ji  !^**^P^*  9«*^  ^neoW  K>  dtniH
KonA  ^ri'^i  biönic  fon  jiíti  -j-v  l;ft*i  epnilig^^ih  mút^  fiii

ititlwiJÖiná^  u  rtii  iictr  biioír  vr  lífiið^  c«y  rtirjjri^  fínií  \>
Víixr  áéi  [náime \h\í  ffO^ l^^m  íiío^tú  iieor ev'^^íf^^vf
]>á\»A  \ym\fTT9vm\)m^tvieni-m^  csnr.  m  \i^a  bin  ííntt^

bw9ör ^'dim*|3«^  pr  ]^ffá  thr^jf-  (I^ítT  biJ^  pfe  tnuní*a
-ycmumsinftlilufdnj^d  banfid  J>wínri^tillif^héi^^lt:f*
IjíferÍV'omti  ijp^  tti  thríJr  IJmlpr  buj  tíljuílprtidc  fi'iT
mtt  go^Btelh^  mtí2^  n?tr.  Pdiif^  bío  ^  Iwtífhj  ^lift  ^  wrtóf
iftrtm  wethn  wöfnöu  -Zrluni  riHir  tit^f-Fi  v  boftí  ömF*:  •;

l^  w^di?^  1^5t;i^tMét«  }^aufQ^^  f\]nti  nu  c  S^ftoU^i


iueiíÍénm  ^ýheA  smUSi  ^  pf  tea  -fihnA  Vim  io-1»cmític
^i  ten  Ae^  &n^&'^^^&^  \^t^tt%]t^mV(tíé^'\>Aa

^jH^  fern  a?fnac  uoj  >)cp  Vomá^J^lfeljdp  cnþöyl  -
ttfiptr  iia£h^  |>C9  l&r^  bunctr  ^  Hglou  ^^  ^ga  |)4r  r  e1«t>ir


llíi  cáí  á  W  in»ir  p«d  ík- fipU  f  ndnd  mr  Wb.  fuo  fid  f^íojt  ^^  W^
Taj  l^Oii-  tírl?ítf  imro^dullonr  ^.  1K151  uaytr 2r  findr TJœóíír    ^. w«>t
tllStim  i1«n  tjtt- ðtdK  1i(^ía  í:1vtu íVdTir  lioí^  alnö  fiiö

örToKrfir  Piriiimog  ttn)H»ríögau-dJiKrGtrnol0MAu2^1if&  f
niílo^hu  pr  ts  %1  iW  1,ðllía  m;  iShpj  -tmí  ^  Hi  ör Fv  eötí  -  '


THE  ICELANDIC   TEXTS.  14;

[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  223.]    EIRÍKS  ÞÁTTR  RAUDA— 4.


1.  [var]  svarri  mikill,  en  Þon-arðr  var  litilmenni.     Var  hon  mjgk  geiin  til  fjár.

2.  Heiðit  var  folk  á  Grœnlandi  í  þann  tíma.     Þat  sama  sumar  kom  Bjarni

3.  skipi  sínu  á  Eyrar,  er  faðir  hans  hafði  brott  siglt  um  várit.     Þau

4.  tíðindi  þóttu  Bjarna  mikil,  ok  vildi  eigi  bera  af  sklpi  sínu.     Þá  spur-

5.  ðu  hásetar  hans,  hvat  er  hann  bærisk  fyrir,  en  hann  svarar,  at  hann  ætlaði  at

6.  halda  siðvenju  sinni,  ok  þiggja  at  fgður  sínum  vetrvist ;   '  ok  vil  ek  h-

7.  alda  skipinu  til  Grœnlands,  ef  þér  vilit  mér  fylgð  veita.'     Allir  kváð-

8.  usk  hans  ráðum  fylgja  vilja.     Þá  mælti  Bjarni :    '  úvitrlig  mun  þikkja

9.  vár  ferð,  þar  sem  engi  várr  hefir  komit  í  Grœnlandshaf.'     En  þó  hal-

10.  da  þeir  nú  í  haf,  þegar  þeir  váru  búnir,  ok  sigldu  þrjá  daga,  þar  til  er  landit

11.  var  vatnat;   en  þá  tók  af  byTÍna,  ok  lagði  á  norrœnur  ok  þokur,

12.  ok  vissu  þeir  eigi  hvert  at  þeir  fóru,  ok  skipti  þat  mgrgum  dœgrum.     Eptir  þat  sá  þeir

13.  sól'  ok  máttu  þá  deila  ættir;   vinda  nú  segl,  ok  sigla  þetta  dœgr

14.  áðr  þeir  sá  land,  ok  rœddu  um  með  sér,  hvat  landi  þetta  mun  vera.     En  Bjarni  kve-

15.  zk  hyggja,  at  þat  mundi  eigi  Grœnland.     Þeir  spyrja,  hvárt  hann  viU  sigla  at  þessu

1 6.  landi  eða  eigi ;    '  Þat  er  mitt  ráð,  at  sigla  í  nánd  við  landit.'     Ok  svá  g0ra  þeir  ok

17.  sá  þat  brátt,  at  landit  var  óíjgllótt,  ok  skógi  vaxit,  ok  smár  hæðir

18.  á  landinu,  ok  létu  landit  á  bakborða,  ok  létu  skaut  horfa  á  land.     Síðan

19.  sigla  þeir  tvau  dœgr,  áðr  þeir  sá  land  annat.     Þeir  spyrja  hvárt  Bjarni  æt-

20.  laði  þat  enn  Grœnland.     Harm  kvazk  eigi  heldr  ætla  þetta  Grœnland  en  hit  fyrra ;    '  því

21.  at  jgklar  eru  mjgk  miklir  sagðir  á  Grœnlandi.'     Þeir  nálguðusk  brátt

22.  þetta  land,  ok  sá  þat  vera  slétt  land  ok  viði  vaxit.     Þá  tók  af  b)T  fyrir  þeim.     Þá  r-

23.  œddu  hásetar  þat,  at  þeim  þótti  þat  ráð,  at  taka  þat  land,  en  Bjarni  vUI  þat  eigi.

24.  Þeir  þóttusk  bæði  þurfa  við  ok  vatn.     '  At  0ngu  eru  þdr  því  óbirgir,'

25.  segir  Bjarni.     En  þó  fekk  hann  af  því  nQkkut  ámæli  af  hásetum  sínum.     Hann  bað

26.  þá  vinda  segl,  ok  svá  var  g0rt,  ok  settu  framstafn  frá  landi;  ok  sigla  i

27.  haf  útsynnings  b}T  þrjú  dœgr,  ok  sá  land  it  þriðja;   en  þat  land  var  h-

28.  átt  ok  fjgllótt  ok  jgkull  á.     Þeir  spyrja  þá,  ef  Bjarni  vildi  at  landi

29.  lata  þar;   en  hann  kvazk  eigi  þat  vilja;    'því  at  mér  lízk  þetta  land  ógagnvænligt.'

30.  Nú  Iggðu  þeir  eigi  segl  sitt,  halda  með  landinu  fram,  ok  sá,  at  þat  var  eyland;

'  MS.  has  sia  [i.  e.  sjá]  after  sól.


144  "^HE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE   GOOD.

[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  223  ^.]    EIRÍKS  í'ÁTTR  RAUÐA— 5.


31.  settu  enn  stafn  við  því  landi,  ok  heldu  í  haf  hinn  sama  b}'!;   en  ve-

32.  or  ÓX  Í  hgnd,  ok  bað  Bjarni  þá  svipta,  ok  eigi  sigla  meira  en  bæði  dy-

33.  gði  vel  skipi  þeira  ok  reiða.     Sigldu  nú  fjogur  dœgr;  þá  sá  þeir  land

34.  hit  íjórða.     Þá  spurðu  þeir  Bjarna,  hvárt  hann  ætlaði  þetta  vera  Grœnland  eða  eigi.

35.  Bjarni  svarar:   '  Þetta  er  líkast  því,  er  mér  er  sagt  frá  Grœnlandi,  ok  hér  munu  vér  at  landi

36.  halda.'     Svá  g0ra  þeir,  ok  taka  land  undir  einhverju  nesi  at  kveldi  dags,

37.  ok  var  þar  bátr  á  nesinu;   en  þar  bjó  Herjúlfr,  faðir  Bjarna,  á  því  nasi,

38.  ok  af  því  hefir  nesit  nafn  tekit,  ok  er  síðan  kallat  Herjúlfsnes.     Fór

39.  Bjarni  nú  til  fgður  síns,  ok  hættir  nú  siglingu,  ok  er  með  fgður  sínum

40.  meðan  Herjiílfr  lifði,  ok  síðan  bjó  hann  þar  eptir  fpður  sinn.


a2tiírib»V»  V^  i^Vtetia  r»Bl6u  nn  jioptiv  i^]»A  föprín^
B'ííifc WeirM«^ft- V *^''" rt^l^P^ t^^  eiítöi  5^1j't?i V  órtSl

*  iidrMr  bdktr  dnefmii  «i  jpair  íio  ijmterf^í^''^*  **|»  "*^'
^  tip  U  i)c^  iitfíT  nd^n  wfe^  *  w  Piíttit  ^W  ^*«íp_k*  ^»pf  V^

^^  •  "-íuljir  [íM^  ^  fiám  í>io  FW ctft-^- ftn-  ^^  - 3»P
-i^uú^tr  l^rtpíf  w Viiefhríonba  fiiH  pH^i^ Í5ií
II;^^   R.Y-  lon  j)dpí&  ^i^a  i»enr  m^n  ticf  é  pu^f 'K^  -

fe  K  öutH';  m1  VI timídr.  cti^cgT  17 ío  nl  ÍJ&  tut  "^  ^ V**^^
\»ðiir  tmií  liy  tisi  ^Q)hc  pii  hœioJi  Ihr  wd  ro^  O)  é  jí^
1« fd th-lir mtti)!  ndrtomT aHtií^ V ba IctroAuKv íír 9^5
íjfattð  ^  biiðu  Ppt  rtjrþingliod  Í^IIAu  ibA  wm  tSrr^  ft^Boix^
Htr  At  uiIlJSti  tiftiifl  ^  iMí^  t»1»«  hcí^í»«  cn]>QtA  ijnðr  oU
^tr^ft  r  |nolirtr  |>»iif|  ftrtiftte ^^tjÍ^Í'hoíh  ^ar  nillt  a  í
dttíiö  ^«w  ml  |)tngÍod  w  -ot.|  \>jl»iiia  ^kf»&?  WV^^íl^

^olír  ftr bud  PflT  fua  Iptngi  vnntfllnir  feni'Jto™  ^^n^
ioö  a§í  i)]i-  gudíl  ^rwEh  þoö-  tfr^  «« ijjnrt&tr  tit  act
^flum  ttti;  lidíir  i?ti  finiir0ftlh  l]Hpai»^-^'l&''?bí*«^  *

0  wstair  up^  till  a  miUíÍú  bfl  cir  o1^  fe  u*r  tioj^  ^'  lí5i  lew


Mt)


%^


ílín'


'■■ó


íf  Witn  th-  ^m*  mlt  ^ \íþ  dh M  At  \,ví  1)á  hd^Jé^  I/'f ouT       |
(ctt  u  itóKk'  c^  um  itíTfir'  irS^p  ^  ilW-  fiiA  dr  &  9  k^ni'a  í

■    nu^»UT;i-íTr  ninrnc  ijmbiT  fm>vrö    .
rt|» ^vSnÚ  áfunh  tsew\^ txsií-^y}^  ^  '

Wink  gStí*  mi*ívu»dN  f  3=  ^íy-vjrr  gtijtite^  futiii  cpr
»ár  nu  mi  W  vm  batíö  Vm  íítíM  líCinín •  letpir  l?  cm-  ptfii


mcrt?  lictl!  íh^ra  ^^  ínðíí  3=(»mi  let  <m  cpr  ^í^^  mftj  Iv


THE  ICELANDIC   TEXTS.  ,,-


[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  281  Í.]        GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— 6.


46.  Þat  er  Her  hefr  Grœnlendinga  þátt.     Capitulxim.

47.  nú  þessu  næst,  at  Bjarni  Herjúlfsson  kom  utan

48.  af  Grœnlandi  á  fund  Eiríks  jarls,  ok  tók  jarl  við  honum  vel.

49.  Sagði  Bjarni  frá  ferðum  sínum,  er  hann  hafði  Ignd

50.  sét,  ok  þótti  mgnnum  hann  verit  hafa  úforvitinn,  er  hann

51.  hafði  ekki  at  segja  af  þeim  Igndum,  ok  fekk  hann  af  því  npkkut  ámæli.

52.  Bjarni  g0rðisk  hirðmaðr  jarls,  ok  fór  út  til  Grœnlands  um  sumarit  eptir.

53.  Var  nú  mikil  umrœða  um  landaleitan.     Leifr,  son  Eiríks  rau-

54.  ða  ór  Brattahlíð,  fór  á  fund  Bjarna  Herjúlfssonar,  ok  keypti

55.  skip  at  honum,  ok  réð  til  háseta,  svá  at  þeir  váru  hálfr  fjórði  t^gr

56.  manna  saman.     Leifr  bað  sinn  fgður  Eirík,  at  hann  mundi  enn  fyrir  vera  fgr-

57.  inni.     Eiríkr  talðisk  heldr  undan ;   kvezk  þá  vera  hniginn  í  aldr,

58.  ok  kvezk  minna  mega  við  vási  gllu  en  var.     Leifr  kveðr  hann  enn  mundu

59.  mestri  heill  stýra  af  þeim  frændum ;    ok  þetta  lét  Eiríkr  eptir  Leifi,  ok  ríðr  h-

60.  eiman,  þá  er  þeir  eru  at  því  búnir,  ok  var  þá  skamt  at  fara  til  skipsins.


146  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.


[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  282.]         GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— 7.

1.  Drepr  hestrinn  fœti,  sá  er  Eiríkr  reið,  ok  fell  hann  af  bald,  ok  lestisk

2.  fótr  hans.     M  mælti  Eiríkr :   'Ekki  mun  mér  ætlat  at  finna  iQnd  fleiri  en

3.  þetta,  er  nú  byggjum  vér;   munum  vér  nú  ekki  lengr  fara  allir  samt.'

4.  For  Eirflcr  heim  í  Brattahlíð,  en   Leifr  rézk  til  skips  ok  félagar  hans  með

5.  honum ;    hálfr  íjórði  t0gr  manna.     Þar  var  suðrmaðr  eiim  í  ferð,  er  Tyrker

6.  hét.     Nú  bjoggu  þeir  skip  sitt,  ok  sigldu  í  haf,  þá  [er]  þeir  váru  biínir;   ok

7.  fundu  þá  þat  land  fyrst,  er  þeir  Bjarni  fundu  síðast.     Þar  sigla

8.  þeir  at  landi,  ok  kgstuðu^  akkerum,  ok  skutu  báti,  ok  fóru  á  land,  ok  sá  þar

9.  eigi  gras;  jgklar  miklii-  váru  allt  hit  efra,  en  sem  ein  hella  væri  all-

10.  t  til  joklanna  frá  sjónum,  ok  sýndisk  þeim  þat  land  vera  gœðalaust.

11.  Þá  mælti  Leifr:    'Eigi  er  oss  nú  þat  orðit  um  þetta  land  sem  Bjarna,  at  vér  hafim  eigi

12.  ko.mit  á  landit.     Nú  mun  ek  gefa  nafn  landinu,  ok  kalla  Helluland.'

13.  Síðan  fóru  þeir  til  skips.     Eptir  þetta  sigla  þeir  í  haf,  ok  fundu  land  annat.

14.  Sigla  eim  at  landi,  ok  kasta  akkerum;   skjóta  síðan  báti,  ok  ganga  á  landit.

15.  tat  land  var  slétt,  ok  skógi  vaxit,  ok  sandar  hvítir  víða,  þar  sem  þeir  fóru,

16.  ok  ósæbratt.     M  mælti  Leifr:    'Af  kostum^  skal  þessu  landi  nafn  gefa',  ok  kalla

17.  Markland.'     Fóru  síðan  ofan  aptr  til  skips  sem  fljótast.     Nú

18.  sigla  þeir  þaðan  í  haf  landnyrðings-veðr,  ok  váru  úti  II  dœgr

19.  áðr  þeir  sá  land,  ok  sigldu  at  landi,  ok  kómu  at  ey  einni,  er  la  norðr

20.  af  landinu,  og  gengu  þar  upp,  ok  sásk  um,  í  góðu  veðri,  ok  fundu

21.  þat  at  dpgg  var  á  grasinu  ok  varð  þeim  þat  fyrir*,  at  þeir  tó-

22.  ku  hgndum  sínum  í  dgggina^  ok  brugðu  í  munn  sér,  ok  þóttusk  ekki  jaf-

23.  nsœtt  kent  hafa,  sem  þat  var.     Síðan  fóru  þeir  til  skips  sins,  ok  sigl-

24.  du  Í  sund  þat,  er  la  milli  eyjarinnar,  ok  ness  þess,  er  norðr  gekk^

25.  af  landinu;   stefndu  i  vestrætt  fyrir  nesit.     tar  var  grunnsævi  m-

26.  ikit  at  íjgru-sjóvar,  ok  stóð  þá  uppi  skip  þeira,  ok  var  þá  langt

27.  til  sjóvar  at  sjá  frá  skipinu.    En  þeim  var  svá  mikil  forvitni  a,  at

28.  fara  til  landsins,  at  þeir  nentu  eigi  þess  at  bíða,  at  sjór  felli  un-

29.  dir  skip  þeira,  ok  runnu  til  lands  þar  er  á  ein  fell  or  vatni  einu.     En

30.  þegar  sjór  fell  undir  skip  þeira,  þá  tóku  þeir  bátinn,  ok  reru  til  skip-

'  MS.  kostnde.  -  MS.  kustum  ?  '  MS.  gef.  '  varð  þeim  þat  f>TÍr  repeated  io  MS.

»  MS.  dðgina.  «  MS.  gek.


Wðacíí-  Ki^  ]JC9U  !í mi\  o««tl  ftprí  tt)  íW^f  tF  ^hími2#  itu
ft^  tn^tuí  3.  ^u  bairttp  -h  ^uuft^  í  90ÍU  ucA»i  V^iJimtMi

60^  ár ^(o?o  Itoyár  ?  íltvd  ^  it^  íVt|i  tra  %iw*tr  ^ð  l«*ne^
td  fio^  dr  lid^  ^  íl»ípmu  c^  uör  far.  mi^V^-uiroi  <i  öt


-jiiyc  th-JíAv  iidr  tiío  906?  u>»,  [.^iö^  ár  4>ui  ctr  k  dírm^ .
M?>  ^íil^í^Wilá-  Ötí^  un,  ícírijtr  Wí>u  lní^tt|f  '


\'


d^  tinlí>urt5i}  tuv;


-j  fir


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  147

[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  282  b.]        GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— 8.


31.  sins,  ok  fluttu  þat  upp  Í  ana,  síðan  i  vatnit,  ok  kgstuðu  þar  akkerum,

32.  ok  báru  af  skipi  húðfot  sin,  ok  g0rðu  þar  búðir;   tóku  þat  ráð  síðan

33.  at  búask  þar  um  þann  vetr,  ok  gprðu  þar  hús  mikil.     Hvárki  sk-

34.  orti  þar  lax  í  ánni  né  i  vatninu,  ok  stœrra  lax  en  þeir  hefði

35.  fyrr  sét.     Þar  var  svá  góðr  landskostr,  at  því  er  þeim  sýndisk,

36.  at  þar  mundi  engi  fénaðr  fóðr  þurfa  á  vetrum.     Þar  kvá-

37.  mu  engi  frost  á  vetrum,  ok  lítt  rénuðu  þar  grgs.     Meira

38.  var  þar  jafndœgri  en  á  Grœnlandi  eða  fslandi :   s61  hafði  þar  eyktar-

39.  stað  ok  dagmálastað  um  skammdegi.    En  er  þeir  hgfðu  loldt  hús-

40.  g0rð  sinni,  þá  mælti  Leifr  við  fgruneyti  sitt :   '  Nu  vil  ek  skipta  lata  liði  váru

41.  í  II  staði,  ok  \'il  ek  kanna  lata  landit,  ok  skal  helmingr  liðs  vera  við

42.  skála  heima,  en  annarr  helmingr  skal  kanna  landit,  ok  fara  eigi  lengra

43.  en  þeir  komi  heim  at  kveldi,  ok  skilisk  eigi.'     Nú  g0rðu  þeir  svá  um  stund.

44.  Leifr  g0rði  ýmist,  at  hann  fór  með  þeim  eða  var  heima  at  skála.     Leifr  var  mik-

45.  ill  maðr  ok  sterkr,  manna  skgruligastr  at  sjá,  vitr  maðr  ok  góðr

46.  hófsmaðr  um  alia  hluti.     Leifr  hinn  heppni  fann  menu  í  skeri  á  hafi.

47.  Á  einhverju  kveldi  bar  þat  til  tíðinda,  at  manns  var  vant

48.  af  liði  þeira,  ok  var  þat  Tyrker  suðrmaðr.    Leifr  kunni  því  stórilla,

49.  því  at  Tyrker  hafði  lengi  verit  með  þeim  feðgum,  ok  el-

50.  skat  mjgk  Leif  í  barnœsku.     Talði  Leifr  nú  mjgká  hendr  fpru-

51.  nautum  sínum,  ok  bjósk  til  ferðar  at  leita  hans,  ok  XII  menn  með  honum.

52.  En  er  þeir  váru  skamt  komnir  frá  skála,  þá  gekk  Tyrker  í  mót  þeim,

53.  ok  var  honum  vel  fagnat.     Leifr  fann  þat  brátt,  at  fóstra  hans  var  ska-

54.  pgott.     Hann  var  brattleitr  ok  lauseygr,  smáskitligr  í  andliti,  lí-

55.  till  vexti,  ok  vesalligr',  en  íþróttamaðr  á  allskonar  hagleik.     M

56.  mælti  Leifr  til  hans:    'Hví  vartu  svá  seinn,  fóstri  minn,  ok  fráskili  fgruneytinu ? '     Hann

57.  talaði  þá  fyrst  lengi  á  þýzku,  ok  skaut  marga  vega  augu-

58.  num,  ok  gretti  sik ;   en  þeir  skilðu  eigi  hvat  er  hann  sagði.     Hann  mælti  þá  á  nor-

59.  rœnu,  er  stund  leið:    'Ek  var  genginn  eigi  miklu  lengra  en  þit;   kann

60.  ek  ngkkur  nj^næmi  at  segja.     Ek  fann  vínvið  ok  vínber.'     Mun

•  MS.  nesaligr.


148  THE   FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.


[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  283.]        GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— 9.

1.  þat  salt,  fóstri  minn?'    kvað  Leifr.     'At  visu  er  þat  satt,'  kvað  hann,  'því  at  ek  var  þar

2.  fœddr,  er  hvárki  skorti  vínvið  né  vínber.'     Nú  sváfu  þeir  af  þá

3.  nótt;   en  um  morguninn  mælti  Leifr  við  háseta  sína:    'Nú  skal  hafa

4.  tvennar  sýslur  fram,  ok  skal  sinn  dag  hvárt  lesa  vínber  eða

5.  hgggva  vímdð,  ok  fella  mgrkina,  svá  at  þat  verði  farmr  til  skips

6.  míns.'     Ok  þetta  var  ráðs  tekit.     Svá  er  sagt,  at  eptirbátr  þeira  var  f-

7.  yldr  af  vínberjum.     Nú  var  hgggvinn  farmr  á  skipit ;   ok  er  várar,  þá  b-

8.  joggusk  þeir,  ok  sigldu  brott,  ok  gaf  Leifr  nafn  landinu  eptir  land-

9.  kostum,  ok  kallaði  Vínland.     Sigla  nú  síðan  í  haf,  ok  gaf  þeim  vel  byri

10.  þar  til  er  þeir  sá  Grœnland,  ok  íjgll  undir  jgklum  ;   þá  tók  einn  maðr  til  máls,

11.  ok  mælti  við  Leif:    '  Hví  stýrir  þú  svá  mjgk  undir  veðr  skipinu.?'     Leifr  svarar:

12.  '  Ek  h3'gg  at  stjórn  minni,  en  þó  enn  at  fleira,  eða  hvat  sjái  þér  til

13.  tíðinda?'     Þeir  kváðusk  ekki  sjá  þat  er  tíðindum  sætti.     'Ek  veit  eigi,'

14.  segir  Leifr,  'hvárt  ek  sé  skip  eða  sker.'     Nú  sjá  þeir,  ok  kváðu  sker  vera.     Hann

15.  sá  því  framar  en  þeir,  at  hann  sá  menn  í  skerinu.     '  Nú  vil  ek,  at  vér  bei-

1 6.  tim  undir  veðrit,'  segir  Leifr,  '  svá  at  (vér)  náim  til  þeira,  ef  menn  eru  þurftugir

17.  at  ná  varum  fundi,  ok  er  nauðsyn  á  at  duga  þeim ;   en  með  því  at

18.  þeir  sé  eigi  friðmenn,  þá  eigum  vér  aUan  kost  undir  oss,  en  þeir  ekki  undir

19.  sér.'     Nú  sœkja  þeir  undir  skerit,  ok  lægðu  [segl]  sitt,  kQStuðu  akkeri,  ok  sku-

20.  tu  lítlum  báti  QÖrum,  er  þeir  hQfðu  með  sér.     M  spurði  TjTker,  hverr

21.  þar  réði  fyTÍr  liði.     Sá  kvezk  Þórir  heita,  ck  vera  norrœnn  maðr  at

22.  kyni;   '  eða  hvert  er  þitt  nafn?'     Leifr  segir  til  sin.     'Ertu  son  Eiríks  ra-

23.  uða  ór  Brattahlíð?'    segir  hann.     Leifr  kvað  svá  vera.     'Nú  vil  ek,'  segir  Leifr,  '  bjóða

24.  yðr  gllum  á  mitt  skip,  ok  fémunum  þeim,  er  skipit  má  við  taka.'     Þeir  þ-

25.  águ  þann  kost,  ok  sigldu  síðan  til  Eiríksfjarðar  með  þeim  farmi,  þar  til  er

26.  þeir  kómu  til  Brattahlíðar,     Báru  farminn  af  skipi ;    síðan  bau-

27.  ð  Leifr  Þóri  til  vistar  með  sér,  ok  Guðríði,  konu  hans,  ok  III  mgnnum  gðrum,

28.  en  fekk'  vistir  gðrum  hásetum,  bæði  Þóris  ok  sínum  félggum.     Leifr  tók

29.  XV  menn  ór  skerinu.     Hann  var  síðan  kallaðr  Leifr  liinn  heppni '.     Leifi  varð  n-

30.  ú  bæði  gott  til  fjár  ok  mannvirðingar.     Þann  vetr  kom  sótt  mik-

»  MS.  fek.  "  MS.  hcpni.


noá^r'»iii«QiTOrm1» Ittptrv       l^ifetA  find tm  Y^y^fiMi:.
iu0iefrpr2-ríöldu  l^V^!:>aií  ír;^.ir  nö^n  ín^írtu  etí'B-


^rxi^  K  lÍHrtmtu  í,  tidtrriöni  t>d}]a2s?  Flmt  k-jini-  t\>i>i\


^íV  ^"^Jiiltn  >o;tíd!lí:^  l^oií'tjfo^  MViKt  hmát\}áfáy)


^up  li»ititt  í  Utr  \M)irMtt  ^  t»t5tt-  \j4l  ftJi  dr^  iíeí>»  IntH


>V.:vAl


bto  »>i  »>í>


n'  íníéí  tt«  lul  cí»  íH  r^


^4-iúo:^


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  149

[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  283  <5.]     GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— 10.


31.  il  Í  lið  Þóris,  ok  andaðisk  hann  torir  ok  mikill  hluti  liðs  bans.     Þann  ve-

32.  tr  andaðisk  ok  Eirikr  rauði.     Nú  var  umrœða  mikil  um  Vinlands-

33.  fgr  Leifs,  ok  þótti  Þorvaldi,  bróður  bans,  of  úvíða  kannat  hafa  ver-

34.  it  landit.     Þá  mælti  Leifr  við  Þorvald :    '  Þú  skalt  fara  með  skip  mitt,  bróðir,  e-

35.  f  þú  vill  til  Vínlands,  ok  vil  ek  þó,  at  skipit  fari  áðr  eptir  viði

36.  þeim,  er  Þórir  átti  í  skerinu.'     Ok  svá  var  gert.     Þorvaldr  fór  til  Vínlands.

37.  Nú  bjósk  Þorvaldr  til  þeirar  ferðar  með  XXX  manna,  með  umráði  Leifs,

38.  bróður  síns.     Síðan  bjoggu  þeir  skip  sitt,  ok  heldu  í  haf  ok  er

39.  engi  frásQgn  um  ferð  þeira,  fyrr  en  þeir  koma  til  Vínlands  til

40.  Leifsbúða,  ok  bjoggu  þar  um  skip  sitt,  ok  sátu  um  kyrt  þann  vetr,  ok

41.  veiddu  fiska  til  matar  sér.     En  um  várit  mælti  Þorvaldr,  at  þeir  skyldu  bú-

42.  a  skip  sitt,  ok  skyldi  eptirbátr  skipsins,  ok  ngkliurir  menn  með,  fara  fyrir

43.  vestan  landit,  ok  kanna  þar  um  sumarit.     Þeim  sýndisk  landit  fagrt  ok

44.  skógótt,  ok  skamt  milli  skógar  ok  sjóvar,  ok  hvitir  sandar.     Þar  var  ey-

45.  jótt  mjgk,  ok  grunnsævi  mikit.     Þeir  fimdu  hvergi  manna  vistir  né

46.  dýra,  en  í  eyju  einni  vestarliga  fundu  þeir  kornhjálm

47.  af  tré.     Eigi  fundu  þeir  fleiri  mannaverk,  ok  fóru  aptr,  ok  kvámu

48.  til  Leifsbúða  at  hausti.    En  at  sumri  QÖru  for  Þorvaldr  fyrir  austan  með

49.  kaupskipit,  ok  hit  nyrðra  fyrir  landit.     Þá  g^rði  at  þeim  veðr  hva-

50.  sst  fyrir  andnesi  einu,  ok  rak  þá  þar  upp,  ok  brutu  kjglinn  undan  ski-

51.  pinu,  ok  hgfðu  þar  langa  dvgl,  ok  bœttu  skip  sitt.     M  mælti

52.  í'orvaldr  við  fgrunauta  sína :    '  Nú  vil  ek  at  vér  reisim  her  upp  kjplinn

53.  á  nesinu,  ok  kallim  Kjalarnes ','  ok  svá  g0rðu  þeir.     Síðan  sigla  þeir

54.  þaðan  í  braut,  ok  austr  fyrir  landit,  ok  inn  í  íjarðarkjapta  þá,

55.  er  þar  váru  næstir,  ok  at  hgfoa  þeim,  er  þar  gekk  fram;   hann  var  allr

56.  skógi  vaxinn.     Þá  leggja  þeir  fram  sldp  sín  í  lægi,  ok  skjóta  bry-

57.  ggjum  á  land,  ok  gengur  Þorvaldr  þar  á  land  upp  með  alia  fgrunauta  sína.     Hann

58.  mælti  þá :    '  Hér  er  fagrt,  ok  hér  vilda  ek  bœ  minn  reisa ; '   ganga  síðan  til

59.  skips,  ok  sjá  á  sandinum  inn  frá  hgfðanum  III  hæðir,  ok  fóru  til

60.  þangat,  ok  sjá  þar  húðkeipa  III,  ok  III  menn  undir  hverjum.     M  skip-

'  MS.  kíalnar  nes.


150  THE    FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.


[FLATEYJARBÓK;  Column  284.]    GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— 11.

1.  tu  þeir  liði  sínu,  ok  hgfðu  hendr  á  þeim  gllum,  nema  einn  komsk  í  braut

2.  með  keip  sinn.     þeir  drepa  hina  VIII,  ok  ganga  síðan  aptr  á  hgfðann,

3.  ok  sjásk  þar  um,  ok  sjá  inn  í  fjgrðinn  hæðir  ngkkurar,  ok  ætluð-

4.  u  þeir  þat  vera  bygðir.     Eptir  þat  sló  á  þá  hgfga  svá  miklum,  at  þeir

5.  máttu  eigi  vgku  halda,  ok  sofna  þeir  allir.     Þá  kom  kall  y-

6.  fir  þá,  svá  at  þeir  vgknuðu  allir.     Svá  segir  kallit :    '  Vaki  þú  Þor-

7.  valdr  ok  allt  fgruneyti  þitt,  ef  þú  vill  líf  þitt  hafa,  ok  far  þú  á

8.  skip  þitt,  ok  allir  menn  þínir,  ok  farið  frá  landi  sem  skjótast.'     M  fór

9.  ínnan  eptir  firðinum  útal  húðkeipa,  ok  Iggðu  at  þeim.     Þorvaldr  mælti  þá :    '  Vér

10.  skulum  fœra  út  á  borð  vígfleka,  ok  verjask  sem  bezt,  en  vega  lítt  í

11.  mót.'     Svá  g0ra  þeir,  en  Skrælingar  skutu  á  þá  um  stund,  en  flýja

12.  síðan  í  brott'  sem  ákafast,  hverr  sem  mátti.     Þá  spurði  Þcrvaldr  menn

13.  sína,  ef  þeir  væri  ngkkut  sárir.     Þeir  kváðusk  eigi  sárir  vera.     'Ek  he-

14.  fir  fengit  sár  undir  hendi,'  segir  hann,  '  ok  fló  gr  milli  skipborðsins  ok

15.  skjaldarins  undir  hgnd  mér,  ok  er  hér  grin;    en  mun  mik  þetta  til  b-

16.  ana  leiða.     Nú  ræð  ek,  at  þér  búið  ferð  yðra  sem  fljótast  aptr

17.  á  leið  en^  þér  skulut  fœra  mik  á  hgfða  þann,  er  mér  þótti  byggi-

18.  ligastr^  vera;   má  þat  vera,  at  mér  hafi  satt  á  munn  komit,  at  ek  muni

19.  þar  búa  á  um  stund.     Þar  skulu  þér  mik  grafa,  ok  setja  krossa  at  hgfðum

20.  mér  ok  at  fótum,  ok  kallið  þat  Krossanes  jafnan  síðan.'     Grœnland  var  þá

21.  kristnat,  en  þó  andaðisk  Eiríkr  rauði  fyrir  kristni.     Nú  andaðisk  {"or-

22.  valdr,  en  þeir  g0rðu  allt  eptir  því  sem  hann  hafði  mælt,  ok  fóru  síðan,  ok  hittu

23.  þar  fgrunauta  sína,  ok  sggðu  hvárir  gðrum  slík  tíðindi  sem  vissu,  ok  bjoggu  *

24.  þar  þann  vetr,  ok  fengu  sér  vínber  ok  vínvið  til  skipsins.     Nú  búask

25.  [þeir]  þaðan  um  várit  eptir  til  Grœnlands,  ok  kvámu  skipi  sínu  í  Eiríksfjgrð

26.  ok  kunnu  Leifi  at  segja  mikil  tíðindi.     Þorsteinn  Eiríksson  andatSisk  í  VestribygíJ.

27.  Þat  hafði  gpírzk  til  tíðinda  meðan  á  Grœnlandi,  at  Þorsteinn  I  Eiríksfirði

28.  hafði  kvángask,  ok  fengit  Guðríðar  Þorbjarnardóttur,  er

29.  átt  hafði  Þórir  austmaðr,  er  fyrr  var  frá  sagt.    Nú  fýstisk

30.  Þorsteinn  Eiríksson  at  fara  til  Vínlands  eptir  líki  f'orvalds,  bróður  síns,  ok

'  MS.  burt.  2  cn  is  repeated  in  the  MS.  '  MS.  byg^iligazst  '  biiigf.


:<■:.


.  }ít*é^hiUr\  ^^ <  r    '     r        /—  -- " -

iriíum  é  iiííhu  hállíúo^    Íh^tiA  fer  íif/mr  Ua  ¥5  húUtj

|fa'mBtrrairuti6*^lTn2^iJít!  í''2-^o  t|?  mUlc  imp  twífefmí?:
áÍiííí  PTi  tíijí  igor^oPtft^iKdlicpittpi  ertnwrjjojrt  b*^

m  *  tir |t»tu  ^  ^rtHíf  p  U^m  Ticf  líipttft  iTöá-  Gt^&  v  Ja
Wiftii  <ir  «1  ]jo  ftti  öftAtaít  otw  iSAuJÉ  p^  þtníhw  -  iiu  ðn»áhn{^

l^arf  Uötirt  i>nd  ^la^öu  V^J^o^^'i^  "ön'*-'  í?»iru  ^hius


"bio  Ifetpljrt^mA  ^tidla?Tltaar  áplrVtœrth  3\)iif&nivt^


a  ^aípðn  paw  rog  ttre  i- ^ðjífp  tKmit  itna  i^itgw  1  ija^fi^  ■  1  L  |

^wiÉ  á  ^ft^u^  íljtne  lUíftiii  bygd  'pftí'lníftrtíé^v-tíið^íi^  jjj  "

n)i>ctt3rrmiírlttti0*rtlrptufl  bioZö  úftr  tidtrtnotttifiii^^
fWrtil  ittT.  ft^^^ift  uiítrt  };<t^  *  v  Fft*í^  kiitu  rtitdt-  c  tf  hi  V


|uJ  hntfá  «r|>^ IjA^ir  rm  ^  ^^ qrr Ji  ^w  ifítí?9iíT»T tm^P^W  ',

'  ^-^  PIdh  ft  til  œir-  p  .hrlttihí  ;  í u  <^  li  c  T  \h.  ir  ar!iíí

{:     -'-Voji  Uftrtífe^n^  2:Ih?t^t^^ctnfetIalr?'p^^^c

rfe^i»!!ai»*|>d tníl  >.  tti>  irnMtjfifiir  lí  Ká»  I  nu


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.


[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  284  3.]     GRŒNLENDINGA  f-ATTR— 12.

31.  bjó  skip  hit  sama,  ok  valdi  hann  lið  at  afli  ok  vexti,  ok  hafði  með

32.  sér  hálfan  þriðja  tjzíg  manna,  ok  Guðríði  konu  sína  ;    ok  sigla  í  haf,  þe-

33.  gar  þau  eru  búin,  ok  ór  landsýn.     Þau  velkði  úti  allt  sumarit,  ok  viss-

34.  u  eigi  hvar  þau  fóru ;   ok  er  vika  var  af  vetri,  þá  tóku  þeir  land  í  Lýsu-

35.  firði  á  Grœnlandi,  í  hinni  vestri  bygð.     {"orsteinn  leitaði  þeim  um  vistir,  ok

36.  fekk  vistir  gllum  hásetum  sínum,  en  hann  var  vistlaus,  ok  kona  hans.     Nú

37.  váru  þau  eptir  at  skipi  tvau  ngikkurar  nætr.     Þá  var  enn  ung  krist-

38.  ni  á  Grœnlandi.     Þat  var  einn  dag,  at  menn  kvámu  at  tjaldi  þeira  snemma.

39.  Sá  spurði,  er  fyrir  þeim  var,  hvat  manna  væri  í  tjaldinu.     Þorsteinn  svarar :    '  II  menn,'  segir

40.  hann,  '  eða  hverr  spyrr  at  ? '     '  Þorsteinn  heiti  ek  ok  er  kallaðr  Þorsteinn  svartr ;  en  þat  er

41.  0rindi  mitt  hingat,  at  ek  vil  bjóða  ykkr  báðum  hjónum  til  vi-

42.  star  til  mín.'     Þorsteinn  kvezk  vilja  hafa  uniræði  konu  sinnar,  en  hon  ba-

43.  ð  hann  ráða,  ok  nú  játar  hann  þessu.     '  I'd  mun  ek  koma  eptir  ylikr  á

44.  morgin  með  eyki,  því  at  [mik]  skortir  ekki  til  at  veita  ykkr  vist,  en  fá-

45.  sinni  er  mikit  með  mér  at  vera,  því  at  II  eru  vit  þar  hjón,  því  at  ek  er

46.  einþykkr  mjgk.     Annan  sið  hefir  ek  ok  en  þér  hafið,  ok  ætla  ek  þann

47.  þó  betra,  er  þér  hafið.'     Nú  kom  hann  eptir  þeim  um  morgininn  með  eyki,

48.  ok  fóru  þau  með  Þorsteini  svarta  til  vistar,  ok  veitti  hann  þeim  vel.     Guð-

49.  ríðr  var  skgrulig  kona  at  sjá,  ok  vitr  kona,  ok  kunni  vel  at  ver-

50.  a  með  ókunnum  mgnnum.     Þat  var  snemma  vetrar,  sótt  kom  í  lið  Þorsteins  Eiríkssonar,

51.  ok  andaðisk  þar  margir  fprunautar  [hans].     Þorsteinn  bað^  g0ra  kistur  at  líkum  þ-

52.  eira,  er  gnduðusk,  ok  fœra  til  skips,  ok  búa  þar  um;    'því  at  ek  vil

53.  lata  flytja  til  Eiríksfjarðar  at  sumri,  gll  lildn.'     Nii  er  þess  skamt  at  bi-

54.  ða,  at  sótt  kemr  Í  hýbýli  þorsteins,  ok  tók  kona  hans  sótt  fyrst,  er  hét

55.  Gn'mhildr.     Hon  var  ákafliga  mildl,  ok  sterk  sem  karlar^,  en  þó  kom  só-

56.  ttin  henni  undir;   ok  brátt  eptir  þat  tók  sóttina  Þorsteinn  Eiríksson,  ok  lágu  þau

57.  bæði  senn;   ok  andaðisk  Grímhildr,  kona  Þorsteins  svarta.     En  er  hon  var  dau-

58.  ð,  þá  gekk  Þorsteinn  fram  ór  stofunni  eptir  fjgl,  at  leggja  á  líkit.     Guð-

59.  ríðr  mælti  þá :    '  Vertu  lítla  hríð  í  brott,  Þorsteinn  minn,'   segir  hon.     Hann  kvað  svá  vera

60.  skyldu.     M  mælti  Þorsteinn  Eiríksson :    '  IMeð  undarligum  hætli  er  nú  um  húsfr-

'  MS.  bat.  ^  MS.  kallar.


152  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.


[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  285.]     GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— 13.

1.  eyju'  vára^,  því  at  nú  grglask  hon  upp  við  glnboga,  ok  þokar  fótum  sí-

2.  num  frá  stokki,  ok  þreifar  til  skua  sirma ;    ok  Í  því  kom  i'orsteinn  bóndi  inn,

3.  ok  lagðisk  Gn'mhildr  niðr  í  því,  ok  brakaði  þá  í  hverju  tré  í  stofunni.

4.  Nú  g0rir  Þorsteinn  kistu  at  líki  Grímhildar,  ok  fœrði  í  brott,  ok  bjó  um.     Hann  var  bæ-

5.  ði  mikiU  maðr  ok  sterkr,  ok  þurfti  hann  þess  alls,  áðr  hann  kom  henni  brott  ^  af

6.  bœnum.     Nú  elnaði  sóttin  Þorsteini  Eiríkssyni,  ok  andaðisk  hann.     Guðríðr  kon-

7.  a  hans,  kunni  því  lítt.     Þá  váru  þau  gll  í  stofunni.     Guðríðr  hafði  setit

8.  á  stóli  frammi  fyrir  bekknum,  er  hann  hafði  legit  [á],  Þorsteinn  bóndi  hennar.     I'd  tó-

9.  k  Þorsteinn  bóndi  Guðríði  af  stólinum  í  fang  sér,  ok  settisk  í  bekkinn  ann-

10.  an  með  hana,  gegnt  líki  Þorsteins,  ok  talði  um  fyrir  henni  marga  vega,  ok  huggaði

11.  hana,  ok  hét  henni  því,  at  hann  mundi  fara   með   henni  til   Eiríksfjarðar,  með   líki   torsteins,

bónda  hennar,

12.  ok  fgrunauta  hans;    'ok  svá  skal  ek  taka  hingat  hjón  fleiri/  segir  hann,  'þér  til

13.  hugganar  ok  skemtanar.'     Hon  þakkaði  honum.     Þorsteinn  Eiríksson  settisk  þá  upp,

1 4.  ok  mælti :    '  Hvar  er  Guðríðr  ? '     III  tíma  mæki  hann  þetta,  en  hon  þagði.      Þá  mælti   hon

^•ið

15.  Þorstein  bónda:    'Hvárt  skal  ek  svgir  veita  hans  máli  eða  eigi  ? '     Hann  bað  hana  eigi

16.  svara.     Þá  gekk  Þorsteinn  bóndi  yfir  gólfit,  ok  settisk  á  stólinn,  en  Guðríðr  sat  í  kn-

17.  jám  honum,  ok  þá  mælti  þorsteinn  bóndi :    '  Hvat  viltu,  nafni?'     segir  hann.      Hann    svar'ar,

er  stun-

18.  d  leið :   '  Mér  er  annt  til  þess,  at  segja  Guðríði  forlpg  sín,  til  þess  at

19.  hon  kunni  þá  betr  andláti  mínu;   því  at  ek  er  kominn  til  góðra  hvíl-

20.  dastaða.     En  þat  er  þér  at  segja,  Guðríðr,  at  þú  munt  gipt  vera  islenzkum  manni,

21.  ok  munu  langar  vera  samfarar  ykkrar,  ok  mart  manna  mun  frá  )kkr

22.  koma,  þroskasamt,  bjart  ok  ágætt,  sœtt  ok  ilmat  vel.     Munu  þit

23.  fara  af  Grœnlandi  til  Noregs,  ok  þaðan  til  islands,  ok  g0ra  bú  á  fslandi.     Þar  munu  þit  le-

24.  ngi  búa,  ok  muntu  honum  lengr  lifa.     Þú  mimt  utan  fara,  ok  ganga  suðr,  ok

25.  koma  út  aptr  til  Islands  til  bus  þíns,  ok  þá  mun  þar  kirkja  reist  vera,

26.  ok  muntu  þar  vera  ok  taka  nunnuvigslu,  ok  þar  muntu  andask.'     Ok  þá

27.  hnígr  i'orsteinn  aptr,  ok  var  búit  um  lik  hans,  ok  foert  til  skips,     i'orsteinn  bóndi


'  MS.  h«jfr-reiu.


^«,rtr. ,.   ...      ._        o^  V  .        /    .  ^^^

f^-  hmfi  \iuo^  r?pU  fiionjcvntítfrmtilp  tbf  t^  Ifiti^fa  w-

öjnyí  1«  a»  thtrt:  |icr  (tr  %iá  p:i?f.  ^c^iUtig  ffii  til  pTrtdf
Iflft  ftíítt-e^«^^pdt  iV**  e^  iirjwim-  0^iiii  ife^iTw

jngc  bitft  ^  ttttu  inn  Icmigir  hpd  jju  tm-At?  fd  %  00*  Itti^'ólí


-)  I  fhiití  Mfet^' 4ttio0  &dtr ^Mr b«fc  1?ulf--i díí»i-  viti o

^J  zöfia á^6w fv iifec^tJjarcT irr-^át fopníi  jjtiírtí jíbtjnM p

ö^  e  ^[>  h&ir  Alttí>  uj|i  ?|  jííír  b?ftn      „    .   ^ .  -^6  tmgr  ok  *

=fr  í^eaii  imzmj  ííiT  'oi,.  :mr  í?n<trc  fri. V  ^^   t^  ?  i^ud


THE  ICELANDIC  TEXTS.  153

[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  285  h.]     GRŒNLENDINGA  &ÁTTR— 14.

28.  efndi  vel  við  Guðríði  allt  þat,  er  hann  hafði  heitit.     Hann  seldi  urn  várit  jgr-

29.  ð  sína  ok  kvikfé,  ok  for  til  skips  með  Guðríði,  með  allt  sitt ;   bjó  skipit,  ok  fekk

30.  menn  til,  ok  for  síðan  til  Eiríksfjarðar.     Váru  nú  líldn  jgrðut  at  kirkju.     Guðn'ðr  fór  til

31.  Leifs  í  Brattahlíð,  en  Þorsteinn  svarti  g0rði  bú  í  Eirílisfirði,  ok  bjó  þar  meðan  hann

32.  lifði,  ok  þótti  vera  hinn  vaskasti  maðr.     Fra  Vínlandsferðum  Þorflnns  ok  þeira  felogum.

33.  Þat  sama  sumar  kom  skip  af  Noregi  til  Grœnlands.     Sá  maðr  hét  Þorfinnr

34.  Karlsefni,  er  því  skipi  st/rði.     Hann  var  son  Þórðar  hesthgf-

35.  ða,  Snorrasonar,  í>órðarsonar  frá  [Hgfða].     forfinnr  karlsefni  var  stór-

36.  auðigr  at  fé,  ok  var  urn  vetrinn  í  Brattahlíð  með  Leiíi  Eiríkssyni.

37.  Brátt  feldi  hann  hug  til  Guðríðar,  ok  bað  hennar,  en  hon  veik  til  Leifs  svgrum

38.  fyrir  sik.     Síðan  var  hon  honum  fgstnuð,  ok  g0rt  brúðhlaup  þeira  á  þeim

39.  vetri.     Hin  sama  var  umrœða  á  Vínlandsfpr  sem  fyrr,  ok  f/-

40.  stu  menn  Karlsefni  mjpk  þeirar  ferðar,  bæði  Guðríðr  ok  aðrir  menn.     Nú  var

41.  ráðin  ferð  hans,  ok  réð  hann  sér  skipverja,  LX  karla  ok  konur  V.     fíann  mál-

42.  daga  g0rðu  þeir  Karlsefni  ok  hásetar  hans,  at  jpfnum  hpndum  skyldi  þeir

43.  hafa  allt  þat,  er  þeir  hgfðu  fengit^  til  gœða.     Þeir  hgfðu  með  sér  al-

44.  Ibkonar  fénað,  því  at  þeir  ætluðu  at  byggja  landit,  ef  þeir  mætti

45.  þat.     Karlsefni  bað  Leif  húsa  á  Vínlandi,  en  hann  kvezk  Ijá  mundu  hú-

46.  sin,  en  gefa  eigi.     Síðan  heldu  þeir  í  haf  skipinu,  ok  kómu  til  Leifsbú-

47.  ða  með  heilu  ok  hgldnu,  ok  báru  þar  upp  húðfgt  sin.     Þeim  bar  brátt  í

48.  hendr  mikil  fgng  ok  góð :   því  at  reyðr  var  þar  upp  rekin,  bæði  m-

49.  ikil  ok  góð;   fóru  til  síðan,  ok  skáru  hvalinn.     Skorti  þá  eigi  mat.     Fén-

50.  aðr  gekk  þar  á  land  upp ;    en  þat  var  brátt  at  graðfé  varð  úrigt,  ok

51.  gprði  mikit  um  sik.     Þeir  hpfðu  haft  með  sér  graðung  einn.     Karlsefni  let

52.  fella  viðu,  ok  telgja  til  skipsins,  ok  lagði  viðinn  á  bjarg  eitt  til

53.  þurkanar.     í>eir  hpfðu  gll  gœði  af  landkostum  þeim,  er  þar  váru,  bæði  af  vín-

54.  berjum  ok  allskonar  veiðum  ok  gœðum.     Eptir  þann  vetr  hinn  fyrsta  kom  su-

55.  mar ;   þá  urðu  þeir  varir  við  Skrælingja,  ok  fór  þar  ór  skógi  fram

56.  mikill  flokkr  manna.     Þar  var  nær  nautfé  þeira,  en  graðun"-r

57.  tók  at  belja,  ok  gjalla  ákafliga  hátt ;   en  þat  hræddusk  Skrælingar,

58.  ok  Iggðu  undan  með  byrðar  sínar,  en  þat  var  grávara  ok  safa-

59.  li,  ok  allskonar  skinnavara,  ok  snúa  til  bœjar  Karlsefnis,  ok  vildu

60.  þar  inn  í  húsin,  en  Karlsefni  le't  verja  dyrnar.     Hvárigir  skilðu  ann-

'  More  correctly,  er  þeir  fengi.


154  THE  FINDING  OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  286.]     GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— 15.


1.  ars  mál.     M  tóku  Skrælingjar  ofan  bagga'  sina,  ok  leystu,  ok  buðu  þeim,

2.  ok  vildu  vápn  helzt  fyrir;    en  Karlsefni  bannaði  þeim  at  selja  vápnin,  ok  nú  1-

3.  eitar  hann  ráðs  með  þeim  hætti,  at  hann  bað  konur  bera  út  búnyt  at  þeim,  ok  þe-

4.  gar  er  þeir  sá  búnyt,  þá  vildu  þeir  kaupa  þat,  en  ekki  annat.     Nú  var  s-

5.  ú  kaupfgr  Skrælingja,  at  þeir  báru  sinn  varning  í  brott  í  mQg-

6.  um  sínum,  en  Karlsefni  ok  fgrunautar  hans  hQÍðu  eptir  bagga  þeira  ok  sk-

7.  innavgru ;    fóru  þeir  við  svá  búit  í  brott^     Nú  er  frá  því  at  segja,  at

8.  Karlsefni  lætr  g0ra  skíðgarð  ramligan  um  bœ  sinn,  ok  bjoggusk  þar  um.

9.  f  þann  tíma  fœddi  Guðríðr  sveinbarn,  kona  Karlsefnis,  ok  hét  sá  sveinn  S-

10.  norri.     Á  pndverðum  gðrum  vetri  kvámu  Skrælingjar  til  móts  við  þá,  ok  váru  m-

11.  iklu  fleiri  en  fyrr,  ok  hgfðu  slíkan  varnað  sem  fyrr.     í>á  mælti  Karlsefni  við

12.  konur:    '  Nú  skulu  þér  béra  út  slíkan  mat  sem  fyrr  var  rífas-

13.  tr,  en  ekki  annat;'    ok  er  þeir  sá  þat  þá  kQStuðu  þeir  bgggunum  sínum  inn

14.  yfir  skíðgarðinn.     En  Guðn'ðr  sat  í  dynim  inni  með  vQggu  Snorra,  sonar  sins,

15.  þá  bar  skugga  í  dyrrin,  ok  gekk  þar  inn  kona  í  svgrtum  námkyrtli

16.  heldr  lág,  ok  hafði  dregil  um  hgfuð,  ok  Ijósjgrp  á  hár,  fglleit'

17.  ok  mjgk  eygð,  svá  at  eigi  hafði  jafnmikil  augu  sét  í  einum  manns-

1 8.  hausi.     Hon  gekk  þar  at,  er  Guðríðr  sat,  ok  mælti :    '  Hvat  heitir  þú  ? '    se-

19.  gir  hon.     'Ek  heiti  Guðríðr,  eða  hvert  er  þitt  heiti?'     'Ek  heiti  Guðríðr,'  segir  Hon.

20.  M  rétti  Guðríðr  húsfreyja  hgnd  sína  til  hennar,  at  hon  sæti  hjá  henni,  en

21.  þat  bar  allt  saman,  at  þá  heyrði  Guðríðr  brest  mikinn,  ok  var  þá  k-

22.  onan  horfin,  ok  í  því  var  ok  veginn  einn  Skrælingja  af  einum  húskarli

23.  Karlsefnis,  því  at  hann  hafði  viljat  taka  vápn  þeira.     Ok  fóru  nú  í  brott  sem

24.  tíðast,  en  klæði  þeira  lágu  þar  eptir  ok  varningr.     Engi  maðr  hafði

25.  konu  þessa  sét  utan  Guðríðr  ein.     'Nú  munum  vér  þurfa  til  ráða  at  t-

26.  aka,'  segir  Karlsefni,  '  því  at  ek  hygg  at  þeir  muni  vitja  vár  hit  þriðja

27.  sinni  með  úfriði  ok  fjglmenni.     Nú  skulum  vér  taka  þat  ráð,  at  X  menn  fari  fram

28.  á  nes  þetta,  ok  s/ni  sik  þar,  en  annat  lið  várt  skal  fara  í  skóg,  ok  hg-

29.  ggva  þar  rjóðr  fyrir  nautfé  váru,  þá  er  liðit  kemr  fram  ór  skógi-

30.  num.     Vér  skulum  ok  taka  griðung  várn,  ok  lata  hann  fara  fyrir  oss.'     En  þar


^(  \nú\'\iAtoU  ikirfinfliar  ai  1>Í«0<  link  ^\tx)U  %  b|i2>ti  b|
^ Uillftu uiifio IjdM^ f  e Mfe e^  M^k ár1jAiáVQ^%mí/

€lmúct)  Mfec^2:|m'iuttfrlfrl)í»|íJm  m  l«e''J^^2-í^
^'áutiw  ^  to»A»  i'^iobuttf  b'mt-'fVij  t'rmTl|a  íh-í^  /^ia  t*r

^^«  tmiíl  ^wíJbpuííí.  furt  Iftrti  Vatia  W-Trhetr  fé öietii  ^
titrtcftöutímdM  o&y  iirt-J2ft^u«  (^fií)or  -^vKðB^'vM
«Wi |íl«irc Fptn--^ lio^ö Hí^n  vndt ic~]?yí    (jð mFheS^v


þöftJ  hwúr  1J  l)/r^íV  uuiar  tííbrt  uopn  WSa  »  ^  nu  f  bíaíple
^tmu  pd  iVr  ucön  Quí^  tt^ni  -iíu  mm?  V?  þinrpd  tMÍA  att


^*   ftttd y*»T inoí^  ff^ður ^r -»>  jjii ttrliair ^etm^ htrj« iiþo^t


mee  pva  mi  ttftpó?  ortii  Jjid  ífetí^níkf  up  öVj  cííid  ^íwr
A  imi  rttmö  ^  PttftJí'  ár jtdd04  Oni!  3^  ho  tá  %C  fii  pcö  þp0  ^
lauíV  JJ^  ttiKfo  btn  nil) Wr  miifc?  -oir  ó^nnV  Wlcrr  ú  v  íHitií

V  pr  l>ir  )>dtr p& uprr  aHð^étfr  vo?i  þa  l^re -plp  dtlj  uill  c  f


;^vgo  i^Tp  tí^  «íy  «1  ginlfe  m* IÍM»o  öp tnnc  |»  ft»ipe  t^^
rs  4 .  ^*LCö?  ifi-,  dg  1  -1:  ptn  b  ops'  ^r  f  pw  wetr  íi5nl25p>r  fe-S  iíÍ

.♦dironv^t'tr)^  -^  ^ú  lj«m  w  Be«e«í  ^|ms>*  trimlTv  V4

;híVn;^ljitíptí  IjfiímTg  prríarfHtrdv  ÍTdp^  f  ^^'peflti^nw?

r^dttí^friv^J^/b  ðð  láTtröufníS:  cti^lö^bítítt  ItJinfl  Nr''
^ft-  ha  -TÍ;>ii  ímfen  b^«*  «•  i^  ^  indliagi  mjþ  ^dl^Wnt  ^

u  jjtá  c  ^trtwb.r  Wd  dp  |>  |2Cg  -^  Ijdp^.v- irit  p]  eifá  Ij-lptftt
ÖJ  U  ^  inrð  u  pir  S  ðp  |; irrt^ v  fjd.ííir  r  jiv  h»tnu  1:  vTt»2-  nu
\enx  \jd«  ^'1  jdp  ^  UopöM  r  jidT  tiiTr  tf^5  rf  r  hm  ^"j^fS^jJ,  .


THE    ICELANDIC    TEXTS.  i^^


[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  286  /5.]     GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— IG.


31.  var  svcá  háttat,  er  fundr  þeira  var  ætlaðr,  at  vatn  var  gðru-

32.  megin,  en  skógr  á  annan  veg.     Nd  váru  þessi  ráð  hgfð,  er  Karlsefni  I-

33.  agði  til.     Nú  kómu  Skrælingjar  í  þann  stað,  er  Karlsefni  hafði  ætlat  til  bar-

34.  daga.     Nú  var  þar  bardagi,  ok  fell  fjglði  af  liði  Skrælingja.     Einn

35.  maðr  var  mikill  ok  vænn  í  liði  Skrælingja,  ok  þótti  Karlsefni  sem  hann  mundi  vera  hgfð-

36.  ingi  þeira.     Nú  hafði  einn  þeira  Skrælingja  tekit  upp  0xi  eina,  ok  leit

37.  á  um  stund,  ok  reiddi  at  félaga  sínum,  ok  hjó  til  bans;   sá  fell  þegar

38.  dauðr.     M  tók  sá  hinn  mikli  maðr  við  0xinni,  ok  leit  á  um  stund,

39.  ok  varp  henni  síðan  á  sjóinn  sem  lengst  mátti  hann;   en  síðan  flýja  þeir

40.  á  skóginn,  svá  hverr  sem  fara  mátti,  ok  l/kr  þar  nú  þeira  viðskiptum.

41.  Váru  þeir  Karlsefni  þar  þann  vetr  allan,  en  at  vári  þá  \ýúr  Karlsefni,  at  hann  viH  eigi  þar

42.  vera  lengr,  ok  vill  fara  til  Grœnlands.     Nú  búa  þeir  ferð  sína,  ok  hg.fðu  það-

43-  an  mgrg  gœði  í  vínviði  ok  berjum  ok  skinnavgru.     Nú  sigla  þeir  í  ha-

44-  f,  ok  kvámu  til  Eiríksfjarðar  skipi  sínu  heilu;  ok  váru  þar  um  vetrinn.     Preydís

45.  Nú  teksk  umrœða  at  n<ju  um  Vínlandsferð,  lét  drepa  brœðr

46.  því  at  sú  ferð  þykkir  bæði  góð  til  íjár  ok  virðingar.     f>at  sama  sumar

47.  kom  skip  af  Noregi  til  Grœnlands,  er  Karlsefni  kom  af  Vínlandi.     Þvl  skipi  st-

48.  ýrðu  brœðr  II,  Helgi  ok  Finnbogi,  ok  váru  þann  vetr  á  Grœnlandi.     Þeir  brœðr  váru  isl-

49.  enzkir  at  kyni,  ok  6r  Austfjgrðum.     Þar  er  nú  til  at  taka,  at  Fre-

50.  ydís  Eirflcsdóttir  g0rði  ferð  sína  heiman  ór  Ggrðum,  ok  fór  til  fundar  við  þá

51.  brœðr  Helga  ok  Finnboga,  ok  beiddi  þá,  at  þeir  fœri  til  Vínlands  með  farko-

52.  st  sinn,  ok  hafa  helming  gœða  allra  við  hana,  þeira  er  þar  fengisk.     Nú  j-

53-  áttu  þeir  því.     i-aðan  fór  hon  á  fund  Leifs  bróður  síns,  ok  [bað],  at  hann  gæfi  henni

54.  hús  þau,  er  hann  hafði  gj!Íra  látit  á  Vínlandi.     En  hann  svarar  hinu  sama,  kve-

55-  zk  Ijá  mundu  hús,  en  gefa  eigi.     Sá  var  máldagi  með  þeim  Karlsefni  ok  Fre-

56.  ydísi,  at  hvárir  skyldu  hafa  XXX  vígra  manna  á  skipi,  ok  konur

57.  um  fram;    en  Freydís  brá  af  því  þegar,  ok  hafði  V  mgnnum  fleira,  ok  leyn-

58.  di  þeim,  ok  urðu  þeir  brœðr  eigi  fyrri  við  þá  varir,  en  þeir  kómu  til  Vínlands.     Nú

59.  létu  þau  í  haf,  ok  hpfðu  til  þess  mælt  áðr,  at  þau  mundi  samflo-

60.  ta  hafa,  ef  svá  vildi  verða,  ok  þess  var  lítill  munr,  en  þó  kómu  þeir  brœðr


THE    FINDING    OF    WINE  LAND    THE    GOOD.


[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  287.]         GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— 17.

1.  npkkuru  fjrri,  ok  hgfðu  uppborit  f^ng  sin  til  húsa  Leifs.     En  er  Fr-

2.  eydis  kom  at  landi,  þá  ryðja  þeir  skip  sitt,  ok  bera  upp  til  húss  fgng

3.  sin.     M  mælti  Freydís  :    '  Hví  báru  þér  inn  her  fgng  yðr  ? '     '  í>ví  at  vér  hug-

4.  öum/  segja  þeir,  '  at  haldask  muni  gll  ákveðin  orð  með  oss.'     '  Wér  léði

5.  Leifr  húsanna,'  segir  hon,  '  en  eigi  yðr.'     Þá  mælti  Helgi :    '  Þrjóta  mun  okkr  brœðr  ill-

6.  sku  við  þik.'     Báru  nú  út  fgng,  ok  g0rðu  sér  skála,  ok  settu

7.  þann  skála  firr  sjónum  á  vatnsstrgndu,  ok  bjoggu  vel  um.     En  Freydís  lét

8.  fella  viðu  til  skips  sins.     Nú  tók  at  vetra,  ok  tgluðu  þeir  brœðr,

9.  at  takask  mundu  upp  leikar,  ok  væri  hQÍð  skemtan.     Svá  var  g0rt

10.  um  stund,  þar  til  er  menn  bárusk  verra  i  miUi,  ok  þá  g0rðisk  sundr-

1 1 .  þykki  með  þeim,  ok  tókusk  af  leikar,  ok  0ngvar  g0rðusk  kvámur  milli

1 2 .  skálanna,  ok  fór  svá  fram  lengi  vetrar.     Þat  var  einn  morgin  snemma

13.  at  Freydís  stóð  upp  ór  rúmi  sínu,  ok  klæddisk,  ok  fór  eigi  í  skóklæðin ;

14.  en  veðri  var  svá  farit,  at  dggg  var  fallin  mikil.     Hon  tók  kápu

15.  bónda  sins,  ok  for  í,  en  siðan  gekk  hon  til  skála'  þeira

16.  brœðra,  ok  til  dyra,  en  maðr  einn  hafði  út  gengit  lítlu  áðr,  ok  lokit  hurð

17.  aptr  á  miðjan  klofa.    Hon  lauk  upp  hurðinni,  ok  stóð  í  gáttum  stund

1 8.  þá  ok  þagði ;   en  Finnbogi  lá  innstr  í  skálanum,  ok  vakði.     Hann  mælti :

19.  '  Hvat  viltu  hingat,  Freydis  ? '     Hon  svarar:    'Ek  vil  at  þii  standir  upp,  ok  gangir

20.  út  með  mér,  ok  vil  ek  tala  við  þik.'     Svá  g0rir  hann.     Þau  ganga  at  tré,  er

21.  !á  undir  skálavegginum,  ok  settusk^  þar  niðr.     '  Hversu  líkar  þér?'    segir  hon.      Hann  svarar  :

22.  '  Góðr  þikki'  mér  landskostur,  en  iUr  þikki^  mér  þústr  sá,  er  vár  í  milli  er,

23.  þvi  at  ek  kalla  ekki  hafa  til  orðit.'     '  Þá  segir  þú  sem  er,'  segir  hon,  '  ok  svá  þ-

24.  ikki^  mér;    en  þat  er  prindi''  mitt  á  þinn  fund,  at  ek  vildi  kaupa  skipum

25.  við  ykkr  brœðr,  því  at  þit  hafit  meira  skip  en  ek,  ok  vilda  ek  Í  brott

26.  heðan.'  '  Þat  mun  ek  lata  gangask,'  segir  hann,  '  ef  þér  likar  þá  vel.'     Nú  skilja  þau

27.  við  þat.     Gengr  hon  heim,  en  Finnbogi  til  hvilu  sinnar.     Hon  stigr  upp  Í  riimit  kgldum

28.  fotum,  ok  vaknar  hann  Þorvarðr  við,  ok  spyrr  hvi  at  hon  væri  svá  kgld  ok  vat.

29.  Hon  svarar  með  miklum  þjósti :    'Ek  var  gengin,'  segir  hon,  'til  þeira  brœðra,  at  fala  sk-

30.  ip  at  þeim,  ok  vilda  ek  kaupa  meira  skip ;    en  þeir  urðu  við  þat  svá  ilia,

'  gekk  hon  til  skála  repeated  in  MS.  '  MS.  settizst.  '  MS.  þiki.

'  MS.  eyreKde.


í^tt  t^Vii  pr  fttjjðHa^  tminr.-OI  ^KueÖt  ívö  rt^  or.  lií  fiív  a
FliuidiiA  rc0  1)0  e,.  Of  ^^.Uíi  inu  Mat  t^tott!  m»  ol^  íP'i^i

E^á  wíöt^ii  Wö^a  U*  IthiK  Tip  htiiramc  ^  ttea/ftdíTií-tttms
r  tuHm  Vtn^dr p.  )/*  OÍI  eit  ml  Arþu  ^tántvf  "i  gattf


#■


f  Uttini  (te  Jnlar minuet- ai  ikhnJr -w  j»ig \Æ  þu ^c|»tVp 5^
^h^uayn  fm -^  í  «a  ^^k  fee 3-  ^  begArí-  ifecrirt  pa  ^.-tfl^

(jálr  dlfcr  Mjár  djcptT'  etó  tto$u  c^  ^tjtflí^  «»91  hcevl
fhrpofíii  ^v.  «Mr  bar  ^  ^íír^íl;»  ^  óiuáú-  im  ^  W ttl iW


■|»y


THE    ICELANDIC    TEXTS.  j^-j


[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  287  i.]        GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— 18.

31.  at  þeir  bprðu  mik,  ok  Ic'ku  sárliga;   en  þú,  vescell  niaðr,  munt  hvárki  vilja  rek-

32.  a  minnar'  skammar  né  þinnar,  ok  mun  ek  þat  nú  finna,  at  ek  er

33.  Í  brottu  af  Grœnlandi,  ok  mun  ek  g0ra  skilnað  við  þik,  utan  þú  hefnir  þessa.'     Ok

34.  nú  stóðsk  hann  eigi  átglur  hennar,  ok  bað  menn  upp  standa  sem  skjótast,  ok

35.  taka  vápn  sín ;   ok  svá  gjára  þeir,  ok  fara  þegar  til  skála  þeira  brœðra,  ok

36.  gengu  inn  at  þeim  sofgndum^  ok  tóku  þá,  ok  fœrðu  í  bgnd,  ok  leiddu  svá

37.  út  hvern  sem  bundinn  var,  en  Freydís  lét  drepa  hvern  sem  út  kom.     Nú  váru

38.  þar  allir  karlar'  drepnir,  en  konur  váru  eptir,  ok  vildi  engi  þær  d-

39.  repa.     M  mælti  Freydís  :    '  Fái  mér  0xi  í  hgnd.'     Svá  var  g^rt;   síðan  vegr  hon

40.  at  konum  þeim  V,  er  þar  váru,  ok  gekk  af  þeim  dauðum.     Nú  fóru  þau  til  ská-

41.  la  síns  eptir  þat  it  illa  verk,  ok  fannsk  þat  eitt  á,  at  Freydís  þóttisk  all-

42.  vel  hafa  umráðit,  ok  mælti  við  félaga  sína:    '  Ef  oss  verðr  auðit,

43.  at  koma  til  Grœnlands/  segir  hon,  '  þá  skal  ek  þann  mann  ráða  af  lífi,  er

44.  segir  frá  þessum  atburðum.     Nú  skulu  vér  þat  segja,  at  þau  búi  hér  ep-

45.  tir,  þá  er  vér  fórum  í  brott.'     Nú  bjoggu  þeir  skipit  snemma  um  várit,  þat

46.  er  þeir  brœðr  hgfðu  átt,  með  þeim  gllum  gœðum,  er  þau  máttu  til  fá  ok  sk-

47.  ipit  bar;    sigla  síðan  í  haf,  ok  urðu  vel  reiðfara,  ok  kómu  í  Ein^sfjgrð

48.  skipi  sínu  snemma  sumars.     Nú  var  þar  Karlsefni  fyrir,  ok  hafði  albúit  sk-

49.  ip  sitt  til  hafs,  ok  beið  byrjar,  ok  er  þat  mál  manna,  at  eigi  mundi  auð-

50.  gara  skip  gengit  hafa  af  Grœnlandi,  en  þat  er  hann  stýrði.     Frá  Freydísi.

51.  Freydís  fór  nú  til  bus  sins,  því  at  þat  hafði  staðit  meðan  úsk-

52.  att.     Hon  fekk  mikin  feng  fjár  gllu  fgruneyti  sínu,  því  at  hon

53.  vildi  leyna  lata  údáðum  sínum.     Sitr  hon  nú  í  búi  sínu.     Eigi

54.  urðu  allir  svá  haldinorðir,  at  þegði  yfir  údáðum  þeira  eða  ills-

55.  ku,  at  eigi  kœmi  upp  um  síðir.     Nú  kom  þetta  upp  um  síðir  fyrir  Leif,  bró-

56.  ður  hennar,  ok  þótti  honum  þessi  saga  allill.     í>á  tók  Leifr  III  menn  af  liði  þeira

57.  Freydísar,  ok  píndi  þá  [til]  sagna^  um  þenna  atburð  allan  jafnsaman,  ok  var

58.  með  einu  móti  sggn  þeira.     '  Eigi  nenni  ek/  segir  Leifr,  'at  g0ra  þat  at  við  Freydísi  sy-

59.  stur  mína,  sem  hon  væri  verð,  en  spá  mun  ek  þeim  þess,  at  þeira  afkvæmi

60.  mun  lítt  at  þrifum  verða.'     Nú  leið  þat  svá  fram,  at  0ngum  þótti  um  þau

'  MS.  mitar  minnar.  '  MS.  sofundum.  '  MS.  kallar.  '  MS.  sagnara }


158  THE    FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE  GOOD.


[FLATEYJARBÓK,  Column  288.]         GRŒNLENDINGA  ÞÁTTR— 19.

1.  þau'  vert  þaðan  í  frá,  nema  ills.     Nú  [er]  at  segja  frá  því  er

2.  Karlsefni  býr  skip  sitt,  ok  sigldi  1  haf.     Honum  fórsk  vel,  ok  kom  til  Noregs

3.  með  heilu  ok  hgldnu,  ok  sat  þar  um  vetrinn,  ok  seldi  varning

4.  sinn,  ok  hafði  þar  gott  yfirlæti,  ok  þau  bæði  hjón,  af  hinum

5.  gipfgustum  mgnnum  í  Noregi.     En  um  várit  eptir  bjó  hann  skip  sitt  til

6.  Islands,  ok  er  hann  var  albúinn,  ok  skip  bans  la  til  byrjar  fyrir  brygg-

7.  junum,  þá  kom  þar  at  honum  suðrmaðr  einn,  ættaðr  af  Brimum  or

8.  Saxlandi.     Hann  falar  at  Karlsefni  húsasnotru  hans.     'Ek  vil  eigi  seija,'  sa-

9.  gði  hann.     'Ek  mun  gefa  þér  við  hálfa^  mgrk  gulls/  segir  suðrmaðr.     Karlsefni  þótti

10.  vel  við  boðit,  ok  keí-ptu  síðan.     For  suðrmaðr  í  brott'  með  húsas-

11.  notruna,  en  Karlsefni  vissi  eigi  hvat  tré  var ;   en  þat  var  mgsurr  ^  kominn

12.  af  Vínlandi.     Nú   siglir  Karlsefni  í  haf,  ok  kom  skipi  sínu  fyrir  norðanland

13.  í  Skagaljgrð,  ok  var  þar  upp  sett  skip  hans  um  vetrinn;    en  um  várit

14.  keypti  hann  Glaumbœjarland,  ok  gjzirði  bú  á,  ok  bjó  þar  meðan  hann  lifði,  ok

15.  var  hit  mesta  ggfugmenni,  ok  er  mart  manna  frá  honum  komit  ok

16.  Guðríði,  konu  hans,  ok  góðr  ættbogi.     Ok  er  Karlsefni  var  andaðr  tók  Guðríðr

17.  við  bus  varðveizlu  ok  Snorri,  son  hennar,  er  fœddr  var  á  Vínlandi ;    ok  er

18.  Snorri  var  kvángaðr,  þá  for  Guðríðr  utan,  ok  gekk  suðr,  ok  kom  ut  ap-

19.  tr  til  bus  Snorra,  sonar  sins,  ok  hafði  hann  þá  látit  g0ra  kirkju  í  Gl-

20.  aumbœ.     Síðan  varð  Guðríðr  nunna  ok  einsetukona,  ok  var  þar  meðan

21.  hon  lifði.     Snorri  átti  son  þann,  er  Þorgeirr  hét,  hann  var  faðir  Ingveldar,  mó-

22.  ður  Brands  biskups.     Dóttir  Snorra  Karlsefnissonar  hét  liallfríðr  ;   hon  var  móðir  Runól-

23.  fs,  fgður  Þorláks  biskups.     Bjgrn  hét  son  Karlsefnis  og  Guðríðar ;   hann   var  faðir   Þórunnar,

móður  B-

24.  jarnar  biskups.     Fjglði  manna  er  frá  Karlsefni  komit,  ok  er  hann  kynsæll  maðr  or-

25.  ðinn,  ok  hefir  Karlsefni  p0rst  sagt  allra  manna  atburði  um  farar  þessar  allar,

26.  er  nú  er  ngkkut  orði  á  komit.

'.þau  repeated  in  MS.  =  ms_  ti^if_  s  MS.  burt.  *  MS.  mausurr.


ítt  Vt  jl^á*M


NOTES.


(1)  It  has  been  claimed  that  the  Icelandic  discovery  attained  a  practical  result  through  the
imparting  of  information  to  those  to  whom  the  discovery  of  America  has  been  generally
ascribed,  and  notably  to  Columbus  and  the  Cabots.  The  tendency  to  qualify  Columbus'  fame
as  the  original  discoverer  dates  from  the  time  of  Ortelius ',  while  the  effort  to  show  that  his
first  voyage  was  influenced  by  information  which  he  received  from  Icelandic  sources  was,
perhaps,  first  formulated  in  extenso  within  the  present  century  ^  The  theory  that  Columbus
obtained  definite  information  from  Icelandic  channels  rests,  after  all,  upon  the  following  vague
letter,  which  is  cited  by  Columbus'  son  in  the  biography  of  his  father,  as  follows :

'In  the  month  of  February,  of  the  year  1477,  I  sailed  one  hundred  leagues  beyond  the
island  of  Tile,  the  southern  portion  of  which  is  seventy-three  degrees  removed  from  the
equinoctial,  and  not  sixty-three,  as  some  will  have  it ;  nor  is  it  situated  within  the  line  which
includes  Ptolemy's  west,  but  is  much  further  to  the  westward ;  and  to  this  island,  which  is  as
large  as  England,  the  English  come  with  their  wares,  especially  those  from  Bristol.  And  at
the  time  when  I  went  thither  the  sea  was  not  frozen,  although  the  tides  there  are  so  great
that  in  some  places  they  rose  twenty-six  fathoms,  and  fell  as  much.  It  is,  indeed,  the  fact  that
that  Tile,  of  which  Ptolemy  makes  mention,  is  situated  where  he  describes  it,  and  by  the
moderns  this  is  called  Frislanda  ^'

John  and  Sebastian  Cabot  are  supposed,  by  similar  theorists,  to  have  derived  knowledge

'  '"Christophe  Colombe,"  dit  Ortelias,  "a  seulement  mis  le  Nouvean-Monde  en  rapport  durable  de  commerce 'et
d'utilité  avec  I'Europe."  [Theatr.  Orbis  terr.  ed.  1601,  pp.  5  et  6.]  Ce  jugement  est  beaucoup  trop  severe.  D'ailleurs
ropinion  du  géographe  n'était  point  basée  sur  l'expédition  an  Vinland  dont  il  ne  fait  aucimement  mention,  peut-etre  parce
que  les  ouvrages  d'Adam  de  Breme  ne  fiirent  imprimés  qu'en  1579,  mais  sur  les  voyages  de  Nicolo  et  Antonio  Zeni  [13S8-
1404],  dont,  pour  le  moins,  la  localité  est  restée  problématique.'  Alex.  v.  Himiboldt,  Examen  critique,  Paris,  1837,
vol.  ii.  p.  120.

2  Finn  Magnusen,  'Om  de  Engelskes  Handel  og  Færd  paa  Island  i  det  isde  Aarhundrede,  isser  med  Hensyn  til
Columbus's  formentlige  Reise  dertil  i  Aaret  1477,'  in  Nord.  Tidskr.  for  01dk}-ndighed,  Copenh.  1833.  pp.  112-169.

^  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  that  the  original  of  this  letter  is  in  existence.  The  quotation  i-s  made  from  the  Italian
edition  of  tlie  Biography,  entitled  :  Historic  Del.  S.  D.  Fernando  Colombo  ;  nelle  quali  s'  ha  particolare,  &  vera  relatione
della  vita,  &  de'  fatti  dell'  Ammiraglio  D.  Christoforo  Colombo,  suo  padre,  *  *  noouamente  di  lingua  Spagnuola  tradotta
nell  Italiana  dal  S.  Alfonso  VUoa,  Venice,  1571.  On  page  9  of  this  book,  the  letter  is  thus  printed :  'Jo  nauigai  1'  anno
MCCCCLXXVn  nel  mese  di  Febraio  oltra  Tile  isola  cento  leghe,  la  cui  parte  Anstrale  h  lontana  dall'  Equinottiale  settantatre
gradi,  &  non  sessantatre,  come  alcuni  vogliono :  ne  giace  dentro  della  linea,  che  include  1'  Occidente  di  Tolomeo,  ma  é
molto  piii  Occidentale.  Et  a  quest'  isola,  che  é  tanto  grande  come  1'  Jnghilterra,  vanno  gl"  Jnglesi  con  de  loro  mercatantie,
specialmente  quelli  di  Bristol.  Et  al  tiempo,  che  io  vi  andai,  non  era  congelato  il  mare,  quantunque  vi  fossero  si  grosse
maree,  che  in  alcuni  luoghi  ascendeua  ventisei  braccia,  et  discendeua  altre  tanti  in  altezza.  E  bene  il  vero,  che  Tile,  quella
di  cui  Tolomeo  fa  mentione,  giace  doue  egli  dice ;  &  questa  da'  moderni  é  chiaraata  Frislanda.


i6o  THE  FINDTXG   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

of  the  Icelandic  discovery  through  the  English,  and  especially  the  Bristol  trade  with  Iceland'.
These  theories  do  not  require  further  consideration  here,  since  they  have  no  bearing  on  the
primitive  history  of  the  Wineland  discovery.

(2)  Lpgsggumenn  [sing.  Iggspgumaðr],  lit.  law-saying  men,  publishers  of  the  laws.  The
office  was  introduced  into  Iceland  contemporaneously  with  the  adoption  of  the  law  code  of
Ulfliot  [Úlfljótr],  and  the  establishment  of  the  Althing  [Popular  Assembly]  in  the  year  930,
and  was,  probabl}',  modelled  after  a  similar  Norwegian  office.  It  was  the  duty  of  the  'law-
sayer '  to  give  judgment  in  all  causes  which  were  submitted  to  him,  according  to  the  common
law  established  by  the  Althing.  The  '  law-sayer '  appears  to  have  presided  at  the  Althing,
where  it  was  his  custom  to  regularly  announce  the  laws.  From  this  last,  his  most  important,
function  called  'law-saying'  [Iggsaga],  the  office  received  its  name.  From  the  time  of  its
adoption,  throughout  the  continuance  of  the  Commonwealth,  the  office  was  elective,  the
incumbent  holding  office  for  a  limited  period  [three  years]  although  he  was  eligible  for  re-
election". [Vigfusson,  Diet.  s.  v.,  states  that  during  the  first  hundred  years  the  law-speakers
were  elected  for  life.]

(3)  Little  is  known  of  Rafn  beyond  his  genealogy,  which  is  given  in  Landnáma,  Ft.  1 1,
ch.  xxi,  and  again  in  Sturlunga  Saga  I,  ch.  vii  [Vigfusson's  ed.  p.  5].  Rafn  was  distantly
related  to  Ari  Marsson  and  Leif  Ericsson.  His  ancestor,  Steinolf  the  Short  [Steinólfr  hinn
lági],  was  the  brother  of  Thorbiorg,  Ari  Marsson's  grandmother,  and  through  the  same
ancestor,  Steinolf,  Rafn  was  remotely  connected  with  Thiodhild,  Leif  Ericsson's  mother.

(4)  By  this  Thorfinn,  the  second  earl  of  that  name,  is  probably  meant,  i.  e.  Thorfinn
Sigurd's  son.  '  He  was  the  most  powerful  of  all  the  Orkney  earls.  *  *  *  Thorfinn  was  five
3'ears  old  when  the  Scotch  king,  Malcolm,  his  maternal  grandfather,  gave  him  the  title
of  earl,  and  he  continued  earl  for  seventy  years.  He  died  in  the  latter  days  of  Harold
Sigurdsson,'  [ca.  a.d.   1064] '.

(5)  It  is  recorded  in  Icelandic  Annals  [Annales  regii,  Skálholt,  Gottskalk's,  and  Flatey
Annals]  that  King  Olaf  Tr3'ggvason  eftected  the  Christianization  of  Halogaland  in  the  j'ear
999.  In  this  year,  according  to  the  Saga  of  Olaf  Trj'ggvason  in  '  Heimskringla,'  '  King  Olaf
came  with  his  men  the  same  autumn  to  Drontheim,  and  betook  himself  to  Nidaros,  where  he
established  himself  for  the  \\-inter ; '  and  in  the  same  place  we  read,  '  Leif,  the  son  of  Eric  the
Red,  he  who  first  settled  Greenland,  was  come  that  summer  from  Greenland  to  Norway ;  he
waited  upon  King  Olaf,  accepted  Christianity,  and  spent  the  winter  with  King  Olaf.'  In  the
spring  following,  and  hence  in  the  spring  of  the  year  1000,  for  Olaf  was  killed  in  the  autumn
of  that  3'ear,  '  King  Olaf  sent  Leif  Ericsson  to  Greenland  to  proclaim  Christianity  there,  and  he
sailed  that  summer  to  Greenland.     He  rescued  at  sea  a  ship's  crew  of  men  who  were  in

'  '  Bristol,  wo  die  Gabotti  [Cabots]  ihre  zweitc  Heiniath  gefiinden  hatten,  iinterliielt  damals  mit  Island  einen  lebhaften
Handelsverkehr,  und  da  wir  Sebastian  Cabot  auf  seiner  zweiten  Fahrt  Island  beriihrcn  sehen,  so  hat  man  nicht  ohne  Grund
vcrniuthet,  dass  die  beidcn  Vcnetianer  von  den  Entdeckungen  der  Norinannen  nnterrichtet  gewesen  sind,  deren  AndeUken
auf  jcncr  Insel  noch  jetzl  in  aller  Frische  sich  crhalten  h.at.'  rcschcl,  Geschichte  der  Erdkunde,  Munich,  1S65,
pp.  260-1.

'  Cf.  Maurer,  Die  Entstehung  des  Isliindischen  Staats  und  seiner  Verfassung,  Munich,  1852,  pp.  147,  15J-3,  and  the
eamc  author's,  Island  von  seiner  erstcn  Entdeckung  bis  zum  Unlergangc  des  Freistaats,  Munich,  1874,  pp.  52-3.

'  Orkncyinga  Saga,  cd.  A'igfusson,  in  Icelandic  Sagas,  London,  1S87,  ch  xxxviii.  p.  58.


NOTES.  i6i

desperate  straits,  and  were  clinging  to  a  wreck,  and  he  then  found  Wineland  the  Good.'
[Heimskringla,  ed.  Unger,  pp.  192,  196,  204.]  The  preponderance  of  evidence  certainly  points
to  the  year  1000  as  the  year  of  Leifs  discovery.

(6)  Húsa-snotro-tré,  ht.  '  house-neat-wood.'  The  word  húsa-snotra  is  of  infrequent
occurrence,  and  its  exact  significance  has  given  rise  to  widely  diverging  opinions.  Saxo
Grammaticus  renders  it  '  gubernaculum,'  in  an  excerpt  from  Arrow-Odd's  Saga  [Book  v,  of
Historia  Danica,  ed.  P.  E.  Muller,  Copenh.  1839,  vol.  ii.  p.  251].  Torfæus,  in  his  '  Historia
Vinlandias '  [p.  28],  renders  the  word  '  coronis ; '  '  vir  quidam  Bremensis  coronidem  ejus
[husasnotra  habetur]  licitabat,'  leaving  us  in  doubt  as  to  what  he  meant  by  'coronis;'  it  may
be  conjectured,  however,  that  he  had  in  mind  the  same  meaning  which  was  subsequently
given  to  the  word  by  Biorn  Haldorsen,  in  his  dictionary,  namely,  '  coronis  domus.'  WerlauiF
[Sjonbolae  ad  geographiam  medii  ævi,  ex  monumentis  Islandicis,  p.  14]  translated  the  word,
as  it  occurs  in  this  passage,  '  scopæ.'  '  Fertur  Thorfinnum  Karlsefni  scopas  ex  ligno  sibi
aptasse.'  Vigfusson  [Diet.  s.  v.]  defines  the  word,  'house-neat,'  'house-cleaner,'  inclining
evidently  to  WerlaufTs  interpretation,  but  quoting  Finn  Magnusen  as  having  suggested
the  translation  'broom.'  Fritzner  [Diet.  s.  v.]  defines  the  word  'a  weather-vane,  or  other
ornament,  at  the  point  of  the  gable  of  a  house  or  upon  a  ship.'  This  interpretation  of
Fritzner's  is  confirmed  by  Dr.  Valt/r  Guðmundsson,  in  a  critical  study  of  the  meaning
of  the  word,  wherein  he  shows  the  close  relationship  existing  between  the  probable  specific
names  for  the  parts  connected  with  the  ornamented  point,  occasionally  vane-capped,  both
upon  the  peak  of  the  house-gable  and  the  peculiarly  carved  prow  of  the  ship.  That  the
names  should  have  been  used  interchangeably  for  the  similar  object,  in  both  house  and
ship,  is  the  less  remarkable,  since  we  read  of  a  portion  of  a  ship's  prow  having  been
removed  from  a  vessel  and  placed  above  the  principal  entrance  of  a  house,  that  is,  in  some
part  of  the  gable-end  of  the  dwelling  \

(7)  This  passage  is  somewhat  obscure.  It  may,  perhaps,  indicate  that  the  'house-neat-
wood  '  was  obtained  at  Stream-firth,  although  it  is  stated  in  general  terms  in  Flatey  Book
that  the  'house-neat-wood'  came  from  Wineland.  If  the  meaning  is,  as  suggested  in  this
passage,  that  the  'house-neat'  was  hewed  to  the  northward  of  Hop,  the  only  intelligible
interpretation  of  the  following  clause  would  seem  to  be  that,  although  Karlsefni  attained  the
region  which  corresponded  with  Leifs  accounts  of  Wineland,  he  did  not  succeed,  on  account
of  the  hostility  of  the  natives  which  compelled  him  to  beat  a  retreat,  in  accomplishing  a
thorough  exploration  of  the  country,  nor  was  he  able  to  carry  back  with  him  any  of  the
products  of  the  land.  This  author,  it  will  be  noted,  records  only  the  two  voyages  described  in
the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red,  namely,  Leifs  voyage  of  discovery,  and  Karlsefni's  voyage  of
exploration.

(8)  Lit.  the  Uplanders,  i.e.  the  people  of  the  Norwegian  Oplandene ;  a  name  given  to  a
district  in  Norway  comprising  a  part  of  the  eastern  inland  counties.

(9)  Olaf  the  White  is  called  in  the  Eyrbyggja  Saga  '  the  greatest  warrior-king  in  the
western  sea,'  [mestr  herkonungr  fyrir  vestan  haf].  This  expedition,  in  which  he  effected  the
capture  of  Dublin,  appears  to  have  been  made  about  the  year  852.      [Cf  Munch,   Norske

'  Cf.  Guðmundsson,  Privatboligen  paa  Island  i  Sagatiden,  Copenhagen,  1889,  pp.  154,  15S-60.

Y


i62  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

Folks  Historic,  pt.  i.  vol.  i.  p.  441.]  The  title,  which  is  assigned  him,  '  herkonungr,'  signifies
a  king  of  troops,  a  warrior-king.  Norway,  prior  to  the  reign  of  Harold  Fairhair,  was  divided
into  numerous  petty  states,  called  '  fylki.'  The  rulers  of  these  small  kingdoms  were  called
'  fylkiskonungar '  [fylki-kings],  as  contradistinguished  from  those  '  kings '  who  had  command
over  a  troop  of  warriors  or  a  war-ship,  but  who  were  not  necessarily  rulers  of  the  land.  These
warrior-kings  were  called  'herkonungar,'  or  occasionally  'sjokonungar  [sea-kings].  [Cf.
Keyser,  Norges  Stats-  og  Retsforfatning  i  Middelalderen,  in  his  '  Efterladte  Skrifter,'  Chr'a,
1867,  vol.  ii.  p.  2oetseq.]  As  the  forays  of  these  'warrior-kings'  were  mainly  directed  against
the  people  living  in  and  about  the  British  Isles,  and  hence  to  the  westward  of  Norway,  the
expression,  '  at  herja  í  vestrvíking,'  '  to  engage  in  a  westerly  foray,'  came  to  be  a  general  term
for  a  viking  descent  upon  some  part  of  the  coast  of  Great  Britain,  Ireland,  or  the  adjacent
islands.  These  free-booting  expeditions  began  on  the  Irish  coasts,  perhaps  as  early  as
795.  In  798,  the  Norsemen  plundered  the  Hebrides,  and  in  807  obtained  a  lodgment
upon  the  mainland  of  Ireland  \

(10)  Aud,  or  as  she  is  also  called  Unnr,  [cf.  ante,  note  4,  p.  15],  the  Enormously-
wealthy  [hin  djúpauðga]  or  Deep-minded  [hin  djúpúðga],  was  one  of  the  most  famous  of  the
Icelandic  colonists.  Her  genealogy  is  thus  given  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Laxdœla  Saga:
'  There  was  a  man  named  Ketil  Flat-nose,  a  son  of  Biorn  Buna ;  he  was  a  mighty  chieftain  in
Norwaj',  and  a  man  of  noble  lineage ;  he  dwelt  at  Romsdal  in  the  Romsdal-fylki,  which  is
between  South  Mœr  and  North  Moer.  Ketil  Flat-nose  married  Ingvild,  daughter  of  Ketil
Wether,  a  famous  man  ;  they  had  five  children.  .  .  .  Unn,  the  Enormously-wealthy,  was  Ketil's
daughter,  [she]  who  married  Olaf  the  White,  Ingiald's  son,  son  of  Frodi  the  Brave,  who  slew
the  Swertlings.'  Aud  was  one  of  the  few  colonists  who  had  accepted  the  Christian  religion
before  their  arrival  in  Iceland.  Her  relatives,  however,  seem  to  have  lapsed  into  the  old  faith
soon  after  her  death,  for  on  the  same  hill  on  which  Aud  had  erected  her  cross,  they  built  a
heathen  altar,  and  offered  sacrifices,  believing  that,  after  death,  they  would  pass  into  the  hill.
[Landnáma,  Pt.  ii.  ch.  xvi.]  Earl  Sigurd  the  Mighty,  with  whom  Aud's  son,  Thorstein,
formed  his  alliance,  was  the  first  earl  of  the  Orkneys,  and  this  league  was  formed  ca.  880.
[Orkneyinga  Saga,  ed.  Vigfusson,  1.  c.  p.  5.]  Vigfusson  makes  the  date  of  Thorstein  the  Red's
fall,  ca.  888,  of  Aud's  arrival  in  Iceland,  ca.  892,  and  of  her  death,  ca.  908-10.  [Timatal
1.  c,  p.  494];  Munch,  on  the  other  hand,  gives  the  date  of  Aud's  death  as  900.  [Norske
Historic,  pt  i.  p.  802.]

(11)  Suðreyjar  [Sodor],  lit.  the  southern  islands;  a  name  applied  specifically,  as  here,  to
the  Hebrides.

(12)  Knprr,  a  kind  of  trading-ship.  It  was  in  model,  doubtless,  somewhat  similar  to  the
modern  Nordlands-jægter,  the  typical  sailing  craft  of  northern  Norway.  It  was,  probably,
a  clinker-built  ship,  pointed  at  both  ends,  haU-deckcd,  [fore  ?J  and  aft,  and  these  half  decks  were
in  the  larger  vessels  connected  by  a  gangway  along  the  gunwale.  The  open  space  between
the  decks  was  reserved  for  the  storage  of  the  cargo,  which,  when  the  ship  was  laden,  was  pro-
tected by  skins  or  some  similar  substitute  for  tarpaulins.  The  vessel  was  provided  with  a  single
mast,  and  was  propelled  by  a  rude  square  sail,  and  was  also  supplied  with  oars.     The  rudder

'  Cf,  OrkncyÍÐga  Saga,  translated  by  Iljaltalin  and  Goudic,  Edinburgh,  1S73,  p.  x.\i.


NOTES.  163

was  attached  to  the  side  of  the  ship,  upon  the  starboard  quarter,  and  the  anchor,  originally  of
stone,  was  afterward  supplanted  by  one  of  iron,  somewhat  similar  in  form  to  those  now  in  use.
When  the  vessel  was  in  harbour  a  tent  was  spread  over  the  ship  at  both  ends.  The  vessel
was  supplied  with  a  large  boat,  called  the  '  after-boat,'  sometimes  large  enough  to  hold  twenty
persons  [Egils  Saga  Skallagrimssonar,  ch.  27],  which  was  frequently  towed  behind  the  ship ;
in  addition  lo  this,  a  smaller  boat  often  appears  to  have  been  carried  upon  the  ship.  [Cf.  Egils
Saga  Slcallagn'mssonar,  ch.  60,  wherein  we  are  told  that  three  men  enter  the  smaller  boat,  but
eighteen  the  'after-boat '].  The  kn^rr  was  swift  and  more  easily  controlled  than  the  long-ship
[langskip]  or  war-ship,  as  we  may  conclude  from  a  passage  in  the  Saga  of  Olaf  Tryggvason,
ch.  184,  wherein  Earl  Hacon  tells  Sigmund  Brestisson,  when  the  latter  is  preparing  to  sail  to
the  Færoes,  to  take  vengeance  for  his  father,  '  the  voyage  is  not  so  long  as  it  is  difficult,  for
long-ships  cannot  go  thither  on  account  of  the  storms  and  currents,  which  are  oftentimes  so
severe  there,  that  a  merchant-ship  [byrðingr]  can  scarcely  cope  with  these,  [wherefore]  it  seems
to  me  best,  that  I  should  cause  two  "  knerrir  "  to  be  equipped  for  your  voyage.'  Upon  Queen
Aud's  vessel  there  were  twenty  freemen,  and  besides  these  there  were  probably  as  many
more  women  and  children,  perhaps  forty  or  fifty  persons  in  all.  As  Aud  was  going  to  a  new
country  to  make  it  her  permanent  home,  she  took  with  her,  no  doubt,  a  considerable  cargo  of
household  utensils,  timber,  grain,  live-stock,  &c.  In  the  Egils  Saga  mention  is  made  of  two
vessels  (knerrir,  sing,  kngrr),  presumably  of  about  the  same  size  as  this  '  kngrr,'  in  which  Aud  and
her  people  made  the  voyage  to  Iceland.  We  read  there,  that  after  the  death  of  Thorolf
Kveldulfsson,  who  received  his  death-wound  from  Harold  Fairhair's  own  hand,  because  of  his
refusal  to  pay  tribute  to  the  king,  that  Kveldulf,  Thorolf 's  father  and  Skallagrim,  his  brother,
decided  to  go  to  Iceland.  '  Early  in  the  spring  [878],  Kveldulf  and  his  son  each  made  his  ship
ready.  They  had  a  considerable  ship's  company,  and  a  goodly  one.  They  made  ready  two
large  "  knerrir,"  having  upon  each  thirty  able-bodied  men,  besides  women  and  young  persons.
They  took  with  them  all  of  the  property  which  they  could.'  [Egils  Saga  Skallagrimssonar,  ed.
Finnur  Jonsson,  Copenh.  1886,  p.  81.]  A  recent  writer,  Tuxen,  reasoning  from  this  passage,
concludes,  that  there  could  not  have  been  less  than  forty  persons  on  board  each  ship,  there
may  well  have  been  more,  and  to  transport  these,  together  with  their  probable  cargo,  would,
he  estimates,  require  a  sloop  of  not  less  than  forty  tons  burden,  which  would  belong  to  the
smallest  class  of  vessels  now  making  the  voyage  between  Copenhagen  and  Iceland.  Reasoning
from  a  comparison  of  a  vessel  of  this  size  with  the  ship  unearthed  at  the  farm  of  Gokstad,
north  of  Sandefiord,  Norway,  in  1880,  he  concludes,  that  such  a  'kngrr'  would  have  been
somewhat  over  forty-two  feet  long,  with  a  breadth  of  beam  of  from  sixteen  to  eighteen  feet,
that  is  to  say  rather  more  than  twenty  feet  shorter  than  the  Gokstad  ship,  with  about  the
same  breadth  of  beam,  but  probably  considerably  deeper  from  gunwale  to  keel.  It  is  not
clear,  however,  why  so  small  a  size  should  be  assigned  to  the  '  kngrr ; '  there  seems  excellent
reason  for  the  conclusion  that  these  vessels  were  not  only  as  large,  but  even  decidedly  larger,
than  the  Gokstad  ship.  Sailing  free,  before  the  wind,  these  ships  could  doubtless  attain
a  very  creditable  rate  of  speed,  but  the  nature  of  the  sail  and  its  adjustment  was  apparently
such  that  they  could  not  make  such  favourable  progress  when  beating  into  the  wind,  especially
in  land-locked  waters,  and  hence  the  frequent  recurrence  in  the  sagas  of  the  statement,  that
'  the  ship  waited  for  a  fair  wind '  [byrr],    before  setting  sail.     It  was,  probably,  in  ships  of  a

Y  2


i64  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

similar  model  to  that  of  the  '  knprr,'  that  Leif  and  Karlsefni  made  their  voyages.  These
vessels,  while  they  seem  to  have  been  constructed  with  little  regard  to  the  comfort  of  their
crews,  were  well  adapted  to  fulfill  their  duties  in  the  more  essential  features  of  sea-
worthiness and  speed  '.

(13)  Frjáls,  a  freedman,  from  frí-háls,  i.e.  having  the  neck  free;  a  ring  worn  about  the
neck  having  been  a  badge  of  servitude.  Slaves  were  called  þrælar,  thralls.  The  thrall
was  entirely  under  the  control  of  his  master,  and  could  only  obtain  his  freedom  by  purchase,
with  the  master's  approval.  He  was  occasionally  freed  by  his  lord,  as  a  reward  for  some
especial  act  of  devotion,  for  a  long  period  of  faithful  service,  or,  in  Christian  times,  as  an
act  of  atonement  or  propitiation  on  the  part  of  the  master.  The  early  settlers  of  Iceland
brought  with  them  many  of  their  thralls  from  Norway ;  others  were  captured  in  the  westerly
forays,  or  purchased  in  the  British  Isles, — indeed  the  ranks  of  the  slaves  would  appear,  both
from  actual  record  and  from  their  names,  to  have  been  mainly  recruited  from  the  British
Isles.  The  majority  of  these  were,  probably,  not  serfs  by  birth,  but  by  conquest,  as  witness
the  case  of  Vifil  in  this  saga.  The  freeing  of  thralls  was  very  common  in  Iceland,  and
there  are  frequent  references  in  the  sagas  to  men  who  were  themselves,  or  whose  fathers
had  been,  'leysingjar,'  freedmen.  The  master  could  kill  his  own  thrall  without  punishment ;
if  he  killed  the  slave  of  another  he  was  required  to  pay  to  the  master  the  value  of  the  slave,
within  three  days,  or  he  laid  himself  liable  to  condemnation  to  the  lesser  outlawry.  The
thralls  were  severely  punished  for  their  misdeeds,  but  if  one  man  took  into  his  own  hands
the  punishment  of  the  thralls  of  another,  it  was  held  to  be  an  affront  which  could  be,
and  usually  was,  promptly  revenged  by  their  master.  It  was  this  right  of  revenge  for
such  an  affront,  which  led  Eric  the  Red  to  kill  Eyiolf  Saur,  who  had  punished
Eric's  thralls  for  a  crime  committed  against  Eyiolf's  kinsman,  Valthiof.  The  master,
however,  was  made  liable  for  the  misdeeds  of  his  thrall,  and  could  be  prosecuted  for  these ;
the  offence  in  Eyiolf's  case  was,  that  he  took  the  execution  of  the  law  into  his  own  hands  ^

(14)  Dalalgnd,  lit.  the  Dale-lands.  The  region  of  which  Aud  took  possession  is  in
the  western  part  of  Iceland,  contiguous  to  that  arm  of  the  Breidafirth  [Broad-firthJ  which  is
known  as  Hvamms-firth.  Hvammr  is  on  the  northern  side  of  this  firth  at  its  head,  and
Krosshólar  [Cross-hill]  is  hard  by.  Both  Hvammr  and  Krossholar  still  retain  their
ancient  names.

(15)  Vifilsdalr  [Vifilsdale]  unites  with  Laugardalr  to  form  the  Hörðadalr,  through  which
the  Hörda-dale  river  flows  from  the  south  into  Hvamms-firth,  at  the  south-eastern  bight  of
that  firth.

(16)  Jæderen  was  a  district  in  south-western  Norway,  in  which  the  modern  Stavanger
is  situated.

(17)  Drangar  on  Horn-strands,  where  Eric  and  his  father  first  established  themselves,

»  Cf.  Tuxen,  'Dc  Nordiske  Laneskibe,'  in  Aarb^ger  for  Nord.  Oldk.  og  Hist.,  i888,  pp.  47-134-  For  a  description
of  the  Gokstad  ship  see  also.  The  Viking-ship  discovered  at  Gokstad  in  Norway,  described  by  N.  Nicolaysen,  Christiania,
188].

»  Cf.  Maurer,  Die  Frcigelassencn  nach  altnorwegischem  Rcchte,  Munich,  iS;S  ;  KSIund,  Familielivct  pa  Island  i  den
f^rste  Saga  Periode  [indlil  1030],  Copenh.  1S70,  pp.  354-364;  Keyscr,  Stats-  og  Kctiforratning  i  Middelaldercn,  Chr'a.,
1867,  pp.  389-395.


NOTES.  165

is  on  the  northern  shore  of  the  north-west  peninsula  of  Iceland.  Erics-stead,  to  which
Eric  removed  after  his  father's  death  and  his  own  marriage  to  Thorhild,  was  in  Haukadalr,
in  western  Iceland,  in  Queen  Aud's  'claim;'  through  this  valley  the  Haukadale  river  flows,
from  the  east,  into  the  south-easterly  bight  of  Hvamms-firth.

(18)  Brokey  [Brok-island,  which  receives  its  name  from  a  kind  of  grass  called  '  brok ']  is
the  largest  of  the  numerous  islands  at  the  mouth  of  Hvamms-firth,  where  it  opens  into
Breida-firth.  Eyxney,  Oxney  [Ox-islandJ  is  separated  from  Brokey  by  a  narrow  strait.  Suðrey
[South-island]  is  in  the  same  archipelago,  immediately  south  of  Brokey.  It  is  said  that
the  first  dwelling  upon  Brokey  was  built  in  the  last  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,
Suðrey  is  no  longer  inhabited ;  the  present  dwelling  on  Oxney  is  situated  on  the  southern
side  of  the  island,  while  Eric's  home,  it  is  claimed,  was  upon  the  northern  side  of  the
island,  at  the  head  of  a  small  bay  or  creek,  called  Eiríksvágr,  and  it  is  stated  that  low
mounds  can  still  be  seen  on  both  Oxney  and  Suðrey,  which  are  supposed  to  indicate  the
sites  of  Eric's  dwellings'.

(19)  In  the  skáli,  which  was,  perhaps,  at  the  time  of  which  this  saga  treats,  used  as
a  sleeping-room,  there  was  a  raised  dais  or  platform,  called  the  'set,'  on  either  side  of  what
may  be  called  the  nave  of  the  apartment,  extending  about  two-thirds  the  length  of  the  room.
This  'set'  was  used,  as  a  sleeping-place  by  night,  and  the  planks  or  timbers  with  which  the
'set '  was  covered  were  called  '  set-stokkar,'  although  this  name  seems  to  have  been  especially
applied  to  those  timbers,  which  formed  the  outer  portion  of  the  '  set  -.'

(20)  Drangar  [Monoliths]  and  Breiðabólstaðr  [Broad-homestead]  were  both  situated  on
the  mainland,  a  short  distance  to  the  southward  of  the  islands  on  which  Eric  had  established
himself.

(21)  One  of  the  famous  '  settlers '  of  Iceland,  named  Thorolf  Moster-beard  [Mostrarskegg] ;
like  many  another  'settler'  [landnámsmaðr],  because  he  would  not  acknowledge  the  supremacy
of  king  Harold  Fairhair,  left  his  home  in  the  island  of  Moster,  in  south-western  Norway,
and  sailed  to  Iceland,  where  he  arrived  about  the  year  884  [Vigfusson,  Timatal,  1.  c.  p.  493].
He  was  a  believer  in  the  'old '  or  heathen  faith,  and  when  he  reached  the  land,  he  cast  the
pillars  of  the  'place  of  honour'  of  his  Norwegian  home  into  the  sea;  upon  these  the  figure
of  the  god  Thor  was  carved,  and  where  these  penates  were  cast  up  by  the  sea,  according
to  the  custom  of  men  of  his  belief,  he  established  himself.  The  cape  upon  which  the
wooden  image  of  the  god  drifted,  Thorolf  called  Thorsness.  This  cape  is  on  the  southern
side  of  Breidafirth,  at  the  mouth  of  Hvamms-firth,  and  here  Thorolf  subsequently
established  a  district  court  [héraðsþing]  which  received  from  his  'claim*  the  name  of
'  Thorsness-thing.'  The  exact  site  of  this  '  thing '  is  somewhat  uncertain.  Vigfusson
[Eyrbyggja  Saga,  Vorrede,  p.  xix]  suggests  that  it  was,  probably,  somewhat  to  the  westward
of  the  mouth  of  Hvamms-firth.  When  the  '  Quarter-courts '  were  established  in  the  tenth
century,  Thorsness-thing  was  removed  farther  to  the  eastward  [Eyrbyggja  Saga,  ed.  Vig-
fusson, p.  12] — and  there  have  been  those,  who  claim  to  have  been  able  to  discover  the


'  Cf.  Ami  Thorlacius,  '  Um  Örnefni  í  fióraes  þíngi,'  in  Safn  til  Sögu  Islands,  vol.  ii.  pp.  283,  293,  296;  Kalnnd,
Bidrag  til  en  historisk-topografisk  Beskrivelse  af  Island,  Copenh.  1877,  '^"^-  '•  PP-  455"6.
'  Cf.  Guðmundsson,  Privatboligen  pa  Island  i  Sagatiden,  pp.  213-14.


i66  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

true  site  of  this  ancient  court.  [Cf.  Finn  Magnusen,  Grönlands  historiske  Mindesmærker,
vol.  i.  pp.  520  et  seq. ;  Thorlacius,  Um  Örnefni  í  Þórnes  þíngi.,  I.  c.  pp.  294-5.]  Vigfusson
says  of  Magnusen's  supposed  discovery,  that  it  had  in  it  more  of  'poetry  than  truth'  ['ist
mehr  Dichtung  als  Wahrheit '],  and  this  opinion  seems  to  be  entirely  confirmed  by  Dr.
Kálund.  [Cf.  Vigfusson,  EjTbyggja  Saga,  Vorrede,  p.  xix ;  Kálund,  Bidr.  til  en  hist.-top.
Beskr.  af  Island,  vol.  i.  p.  443.]  It  was  at  this  court  that  Eric  the  Red,  despite  the
assistance  which  he  received  from  his  friends,  was  condemned  to  outlawrj'.

(22)  Dímunarvágr  [Dimun-inlet]  was,  probabl}',  in  that  group  of  small  islets  called
Dimun,  situated  north-east  of  Brokey  at  the  mouth  of  Hvamms-firth.

(23)  Verj'  little  information  has  been  preserved  concerning  Gunnbiorn,  or  his  discovery.
His  brother,  Grimkell,  was  one  of  the  early  Icelandic  colonists,  and  settled  on  the  western
coast  of  Snowfells-ness,  his  home  being  at  Saxaholl.  [Landnáma,  pt.  ii.  ch.  viii.]  Gunn-
biorn's  sons,  Gunnstein  and  Halldor,  settled  in  the  North-west  peninsula,  on  arms  of  the
outer  Ice-firth  [fsafjarðardjúp]  [Landnáma,  pt.  ii.  ch.  xxix].  It  is  not  known  whether
Gunnbiorn  ever  lived  in  Iceland,  but  it  would  seem  to  be  probable  that  it  was  upon
a  voj^age  to  western  Iceland,  that  he  was  driven  westward  across  the  sea  between  Iceland
and  Greenland,  and  discovered  the  islands,  which  received  his  name,  and  likewise  saw  the
Greenland  coast.  Eric  sailed  westward  from  Snowfells-ness,  the  same  cape  upon  which
Gunnbiorn's  brother  had  established  himself,  and  it  is,  perhaps,  not  unlikely',  that  it  was  from
somewhere  in  the  region  of  Grimkell's  '  claim '  that  Gunnbiorn  was  driven  westward,  and
that  the  knowledge  of  this  may  have  guided  Eric  in  lajdng  his  course.

(24)  Blacksark  [Bláserkr]  and  Whitesark  [Hvitserkr]  may  have  been  either  on  the
eastern  or  the  south-eastern  coast  of  Greenland.  It  is  not  possible  to  determine  from  the
description  here  given,  whether  Blacksark  was  directly  west  of  Snæfellsjökull,  nor  is  it
clear  whether  Blacksark  and  Whitesark  are  the  same  mountain,  or  whether  there  has  been
a  clerical  error  in  one  or  the  other  of  the  manuscripts.

(25)  An  effort  was  made  by  the  editors  of  '  Grönlands  historiske  Mindesmærker,'  to
determine  the  actual  site  of  the  different  firths,  islands  and  mountains  here  named.  In  the
light  of  subsequent  explorations,  it  may  be  said,  this  eftbrt  was  crowned  with  rather  dubious
success.  So  much  seems  to  be  tolerably  certain,  from  Captain  Gustav  Holm's  explorations
cf  the  eastern  coast  of  Greenland,  accomplished  in  1883-5,  'l^^t  there  were  no  Icelandic
settlements  upon  that  coast ;  wherefore  both  the  Eastern  and  Western  Settlement  must  be
sought  upon  the  western  coast  of  Greenland,  that  is,  to  the  westward  of  Cape  Farewell,
and  between  that  cape  on  the  south  and  Disco  Island  on  the  north ;  for,  according  to
Stcenstrup,  the  only  ruin  in  northern  Greenland,  not  of  Eskimo  origin,  of  which  we  have
any  knowledge,  is  the  so-called  'Bear-trap'  on  Nugsuak  Cape',  on  the  mainland,  a  short
distance  north  of  Disco  Island.  [Stcenstrup,  '  Undersdgelsesrejserne  i  nord-Gr0nland  i
Aarene  1878-80,'  in  Meddelelser  om  Gr^nland,  Copenh.  1883,  p.  51.]  The  principal  Norse
remains  [i.e.  remains  from  the  Icelandic  colony  in  Greenland]  have  been  found  in  two
considerable  groups ;  one  of  these  is  in  the  vicinity  of  the  modern  Godthaab,  and  the  other
in  the  region  about  the  modern  Julianehaab  [the  famous  Kakortok  church   ruin  being  in

'  It  is  Captain  Holm's  opinion  that  this  '  Bear-trap '  is  not  of  Icelandic  but  of  Eskimo  origin.


NOTES.  176

the  latter  group].  It  may  be,  that  the  first  or  Godthaab  ruins,  are  upon  the  site  of  the  Western
Settlement,  and  the  second,  or  Julianehaab  group,  upon  that  of  the  Eastern  Settlement.  It  is
not  apparent,  however,  whether  the  Western  uninhabited  region  was  between  Godthaab  and
Julianehaab  or  beyond  Godthaab  to  the  north,  but  it  seems  clear,  that  Erics-firth,  Hrafns-firth,
Snowfell,  Hvarfsgnipa,  and  Ericsey,  were  all  situated  upon  the  western  coast  of  Greenland '.

(26)  This  Ingolf  was  called  Ingolf  the  Strong  [hinn  sterki].  There  is  some  confusion
in  Landnáma  concerning  his  genealogy;  he  was  probably  a  son  of  one  of  the  Icelandic
colonists,  named  Thorolf  Sparrow  [spgrr].  His  home,  Hólmslátr  [Holm-litter],  was  on  the
southern  side  of  Hvamms-firth.

(27)  Thorbiorn's  and  Thorgeir's  father  was  the  same  Vifil,  who  came  out  to  Iceland
with  Queen  Aud,  and  who  received  from  her  the  land  on  which  he  settled,  Vifilsdale,  as
has  been  narrated  in  this  saga,  and  is  thus  told  in  Landnáma :  'Vifil  was  the  name  of  a
freedman  of  Aud's.  .  .  She  gave  him  Vifilsdale,  where  he  dwelt.  .  .  His  son  was  Thorbiorn,
father  of  Gudrid,  who  married  Thorstein,  the  son  of  Eric  the  Red,  and  afterwards  Thorfinn
Karlsefni,  from  whom  are  descended  Bishops  Biorn,  Thorlak,  and  Brand.  Another  son  of
Vifil's  was  Thorgeir,  who  married  Arnora,'  &c.  [Landnáma,  pt.  ii.  ch.  xvii.]  The  estate
which  Thorbiorn  received  with  his  wife,  and  upon  which  he  lived  after  his  marriage,  called
Laugarbrekka  [Warm-spring-slope]  on  Hellisvellir  [Cave-fields],  is  situated  on  the  southern
side  of  Snowfells-ness,  near  the  outer  end  of  that  cape.  Arnarstapi  [Eagle-crag],  where
Gudrid's  foster-father  lived,  was  a  short  distance  to  the  north-east  of  Laugarbrekka.

(28)  Thorgeirsfell  was  upon  the  southern  side  of  Snowfells-ness,  to  the  eastward  of
Arnarstapi.

(29)  The  simple  fact,  that  Thorgeir  was  a  freedman,  would  seem  to  have  offered  no  valid
reason  for  Thorbiorn's  refusal  to  consider  his  son's  offer  for  Gudrid's  hand,  since  Thorbiorn
was  himself  the  son  of  a  man  who  had  been  a  thrall ;  the  real  ground  for  his  objection
was,  perhaps,  not  so  much  the  former  thraldom  of  Einar's  father,  as  the  fact  that  he  was
a  man  of  humble  birth,  which  Thorbiorn's  father,  although  a  slave,  evidently  was  not.

(30)  Hraunhöfn  [Lava-haven]  was  on  the  southern  side  of  Snowfells-ness,  nearly  midway
between  Laugarbrekka  and  Thorgeirsfell.  It  was  this  harbour  from  which  Biorn  Broad-
wickers'-champion  set  sail,  as  narrated  in  Eyrbyggja^

(31)  Litil-vglva.  The  word  vglva  signifies  a  prophetess,  pythoness,  sibyl,  a  woman
gifted  with  the  power  of  divination.  The  characterization  of  the  prophetess,  the  minute
description  of  her  dress,  the  various  articles  of  which  would  seem  to  have  had  a  sjmibolic
meaning,  and  the  account  of  the  manner  of  working  the  spell,  whereby  she  was  enabled  to
forecast  future  events,  form  one  of  the  most  complete  pictures  of  a  heathen  ceremony
which  has  been  preserved  in  the  sagas.

(32)  The  expression  '  Leif  had  sailed '  ['  Leifr  hafði  siglt '],  would  seem  to  refer  to  an
antecedent  condition,  possibly  to  the  statement  concerning  the  arrival  of  Thorbiorn  and
his  daughter  at  Brattahlid ;    i.e.   'Leif  had  sailed,'  when  they  arrived.     If  this  be,   indeed,

'  An  account  of  the  explorations  of  the  ruins  in  the  vicinity  of  Godthaab  will  be  found  in  Meddelelser  om  Gr^nland,
Copenhagen,  1889,  in  Jensen's  article  entitled,  '  Undersi/igelse  af  Gr(finlands  Vestkyst  [1S84-85]  fra  64°  til  67°N.'  For
a  description  of  the  ruins  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Julianehaab,  cf.  Holm,  '  Beskrivelse  af  Rniner  i  Jiúianehaabs  Distrikt,
uiiders((igte  i  Aaret  iSSo,'  in  Meddelelser  om  Grijinland,  Copenh.  18S3.

^  Cf.  ante,  p.  84.


i68  THE  FIXDING   OF   WINELAND   THE   GOOD.

the  fact,  it  follows  that  Thorbiorn  and  his  daughter  must  have  arrived  at  Brattahlid  during
Leif's  absence  in  Norway,  and  obviously  before  his  return  to  Greenland,  in  the  autumn  of
the  year  looo.  Upon  this  h;y-pothesis,  it  is  clear,  that  Thorbiorn  and  Gudrid  must  have
been  converted  to  Christianity  before  its  legal  acceptance  in  Iceland,  that  is  to  say,  before
the  year  looo;  and  further,  that  Thorstein  Ericsson  may  have  been  married  to  Gudrid  in
the  autumn  after  his  return  from  his  unsuccessful  voyage,  namely,  in  the  autumn  of  the
year  looi ;  accordingly  Karlsefni  may  have  arrived  in  the  following  year,  have  been  wedded
to  Gudrid  at  the  next  Yule-tide,  1002-3,  ^"d  have  undertaken  his  voyage  to  Wineland  in
the  3'ear  1003.  This  chronology  is  suggested  with  the  sole  aim  of  fixing  the  earliest  possible
date  for  Karlsefni's  voyage  of  exploration.

(33)  The  expression  of  ÞsK.  '  margkunnig,'  conveys  the  impression  that  Thorgunna  was
gifted  with  preternatural  wisdom.

(34)  It  has  been  suggested,  that  this  Thorgunna  is  the  same  woman  of  whom  we  read  in
the  EjTbyggja  Saga  :  '  That  summer,  when  Christianity  was  accepted  by  law  in  Iceland,
a  ship  arrived  out  by  Snowfells-ness ;  this  was  a  Dublin  ship  .  ,  .  There  was  a  woman  of  the
Hebrides  on  board,  whose  name  was  Thorgunna;  the  ship's  folk  reported,  that  she  had
brought  with  her  such  precious  articles  as  were  very  rare  in  Iceland.  And  when  Thurid,
the  mistress  of  Fródá,  heard  this,  she  was  very  curious  to  see  these  treasures ;  for  she  was
fond  of  finery,  and  showy  in  her  dress ;  she  accordingly  went  to  the  ship,  where  she  met
Thorgunna,  and  enquired  of  her  whether  she  had  any  woman's  garb  of  surpassing  beauty.
She  replied,  that  she  had  no  precious  things  to  sell,  but  that  she  had  finery  in  which
she  felt  it  no  disgrace  to  appear  at  feasts  or  other  assemblies.  Thurid  asked  to  see
these  articles,  and  was  well  pleased  \vith  them,  and  thought  them  very  becoming,  but
not  of  very  great  value.  Thurid  endeavoured  to  purchase  these  articles,  but  Thorgunna
would  not  sell  them.  Thereupon  Thurid  invited  her  to  make  her  home  with  her,  for  she
knew  that  Thorgunna  had  many  treasures,  and  she  thought  that,  sooner  or  later,  she  might
succeed  in  obtaining  them.  Thorgunna  replies :  "  I  am  well  content  to  make  my  home  with
thee,  but  thou  shalt  know  that  I  am  inclined  to  give  but  little  for  my  maintenance,  since  I  am
well  able  to  work ;  wherefore  I  will  mj-self  decide  what  I  shall  give  for  my  support  from  such
property  as  I  possess."  Thorgunna  spoke  about  the  matter  somewhat  harshly,  but  Thurid
still  insisted  that  she  should  accompany  her.  Thorgunna's  belongings  were  then  carried  from
the  ship  ;  they  were  contained  in  a  large  locked  chest  and  a  portable  box  ;  these  were  carried
to  Fródá,  and  when  Thorgunna  came  to  her  lodgings,  she  asked  to  be  provided  with  a  bed,
and  a  place  was  assigned  her  in  the  innermost  part  of  the  sleeping-apartment.  She  then
unlocked  her  chest,  and  took  from  it  bed-clothes,  which  were  all  verj'  elaborately  wrought ;
she  spread  an  English  sheet  and  silk  quilt  over  the  bed ;  she  took  bed-curtains  from  the  chest
together  with  all  the  precious  hangings  of  a  bed  ;  all  of  these  were  so  fine  that  the  folk  thought
they  had  never  seen  the  like.  Thereupon  Mistress  Thurid  exclaimed  :  "  Fix  a  price  upon  the
bed-clothing."  Thorgunna  replies :  "  I  shall  not  lie  in  straw  for  thee,  even  if  thou  art
fine-mannered  and  earnest  thyself  proudly."  Thurid  was  displeased  at  this,  and  did  not
again  seek  to  obtain  the  precious  articles.  Thorgunna  worked  at  weaving  every  day,  when
there  was  no  hay-making ;  but  when  the  weather  was  dry,  she  worked  at  hay-making  in  the
in-fields,  and  she  had  a  rake  made  especially  for  her,  and  would  use  no  other.    Thorgunna


NOTES.  169

was  a  large  woman,  tall,  and  very  stout;  with  dark  brown  ej-es  set  close  together,
and  thick  brown  hair;  she  was  for  the  most  part  pleasant  in  her  bearing,  attended
church  every  morning  before  she  went  to  her  work,  but  was  not,  as  a  rule,  easy  of
approach  nor  inclined  to  be  talkative.  It  was  the  common  opinion  that  Thorgunna  must  be
in  the  sixties.'  [EjTbyggja  Saga,  ed.  Vigfusson,  pp.  92-3.]  In  the  autumn  after  her  arrival
Thorgunna  died,  and  the  strange  events  accompanying  her  last  illness,  are  recorded  in  the
chapter  following  that  above  quoted.  As  she  approached  her  end,  she  called  the  master  of
the  house  to  her,  and  said  :  '  "  It  is  my  last  wish,  if  I  die  from  this  illness,  that  my  body  be
conveyed  to  Skálholt,  for  I  foresee  that  it  is  destined  to  be  one  of  the  most  famous  spots  in
this  land,  and  I  know  that  there  must  be  priests  there  now  to  chant  my  funeral  service.
I  would,  therefore,  request  thee  to  have  my  body  conveyed  thither,  for  which  thou  shalt  have
suitable  compensation  from  my  possessions ;  while  of  my  undivided  property  Thurid  shall
receive  the  scarlet  cloak,  and  I  thus  direct,  that  she  may  be  content,  if  I  make  such  dis-
position of  mj'  other  property  as  I  see  fit ;  moreover,  I  would  have  thee  requite  thyself  for
such  expense  as  thou  hast  incurred  in  my  behalf,  with  such  articles  as  thou  wishest,  or  she
may  choose,  of  that  which  I  so  appoint.  I  have  a  gold  ring,  which  is  to  go  with  my  body  to
the  church,  but  my  bed  and  hangings  I  wish  to  have  burned,  for  these  will  not  be  of  profit
to  any  one ;  and  this  I  say,  not  because  I  would  deprive  any  one  of  the  use  of  these  things,
if  I  believed  that  they  would  be  useful ;  but  I  dwell  so  particularly  upon  this,"  says  she,
"  because  I  should  regret,  that  so  great  affliction  should  be  visited  upon  any  one,  as  I  know
must  be,  if  my  wishes  should  not  be  fulfilled." '     [EjTbyggja  Saga,  1.  c.  pp.  95-6.]

The  age  here  assigned  to  Thorgunna  hardly  agrees  with  the  probable  age  of  the  He-
bridean  Thorgunna  of  Leif's  acquaintance.  Indeed  the  description  of  this  remarkable
woman,  as  given  in  '  Eyrbyggja,'  would  seem  to  indicate  that  there  may  have  been  an  error
in  the  age  there  assigned  her,  possibly  a  clerical  error ;  if  this  is  not  the  fact,  it  is  pretty  clear,
that  the  Hebridean  Thorgunna  of  Leif's  acquaintance  and  the  Thorgunna  of  'Eyrbyggja'
cannot  be  the  same  person.  We  are  given  to  understand  in  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red,  that
the  woman  of  Leif's  intrigue  was  a  woman  out  of  the  ordinary  rank ;  we  are  also  told,  that  Leif
gave  her  many  precious  bits  of  finery,  among  the  rest  a  gold  ring,  and  a  mantle  of  wadmal.
The  Thorgunna  of  '  Eyrbyggja  '  was  certainly  an  extraordinary  woman,  and  was  distinguished
also  for  the  apparel  and  ornaments  which  she  possessed.  The  parallelism  is  sufficiently
striking  to  point  to  the  possibility,  that  the  Thorgunna  of  '  Eyrbyggja '  was  the  Thorgunna
of  Eric's  Saga,  who  had,  perhaps,  come  to  Iceland  to  seek  a  passage  to  Greenland,  in
pursuance  of  her  intention  as  announced  to  Leif  at  their  parting.  It  is  stated  in  Eric's
Saga  to  have  been  rumoured,  that  Thorgunna's  son  came  to  Iceland  in  the  summer  before  the
Fródá-wonder.  The  Thorgunna  of  the  Eyrb3-ggja  Saga  arrived  in  Iceland  the  summer  before
this  'wonder,'  which  indeed,  owed  its  origin  to  her  coming,  but  there  is  no  mention  in
this  saga  of  her  having  had  a  son,  a  singular  omission,  truly,  if  it  be  an  omission,  in  so  minute
a  description  as  the  saga  has  preserved  of  this  remarkable  woman.  Finally,  it  is  evident,
if  Leif's  voyage  to  Norway  was  made  in  999,  and  the  Thorgunna  of  Leif's  intrigue  and  she
of  '  Eyrbyggja '  are  the  same,  that  Thorgiuina's  son  must  have  been  of  a  very  tender  age  at
the  time  of  his  mother's  arrival  in  Iceland.  In  view  of  these,  as  well  as  certain  chronological
difficulties,  which  this  narrative  presents,  it  seems  not  improbable  that  the  whole  account  of

z


I70  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

Thorgunna  and  the  Fródá-wonder,  as  contained  in  '  Eyrbyggja,'  was  a  popular  tale  interjected
in  the  saga  for  a  reason  not  now  apparent.  This  tale  may  well  have  been  builded  upon  a
historical  foundation,  but  the  remains  of  this  foundation  are  not  sufficiently  well-preserved  to
enable  us  to  separate  accurately  the  sound  from  the  unsound  material '.

(35)  The  Fródá-wonder  is  the  name  given  to  the  extraordinary  occurrences,  which  befell
at  the  farmstead  of  Fródá  soon  after  Thorgunna's  death.  The  'wonder'  began  with  the
appearance  of  a  'weird-moon,'  which  was  supposed  to  betoken  the  death  of  some  member  of
the  family.  This  baleful  prophecy  was  followed  by  the  death  of  eighteen  members  of  the
household,  and  subsequently  by  the  nightly  apparitions  of  the  dead.  The  cause  of  this  marvel
was  attributed  to  the  fact,  that  the  Mistress  of  Fródá  had  prevailed  upon  her  husband  to
disregard  Thorgunna's  injunction  to  burn  the  drapery  of  her  bed  ;  and  not  until  these  hangings
were  burned  was  the  evil  influence  exorcised,  and  the  ghostly  apparitions  laid,  the  complete
restoration  of  the  normal  condition  of  affairs  being  further  facilitated  by  the  timely  recom-
mendations of  a  priest,  whose  sen-ices  had  been  secured  to  that  end  ^

(36)  It  is  not  certain  what  variety  of  wood  is  meant ;  the  generally  accepted  view  has
been,  that  it  was  some  species  of  maple.  It  has  also  been  suggested  that  the  word  mausurr
mgsurr,  may  be  allied  to  the  modern  Swedish  Masbjörk,  veined-birch,  German,  Maser-birke,
and  again  [cf.  Grönl.  hist.  Mindesm.  vol.  i.  p.  280]  to  the  German  Meussdorn,  a  view  which
Arngrim  Jonsson  was  the  first  to  advance  [Gronlandia,  ch.  x].  It  was  believed,  that  this
last-named  received  its  name,  '  darumb  das  diser  dorn  den  Meusen  und  ratten  zu  wder  ist,'
[Bock,  Kreuter  Buch,  ch.  cxliij].  The  same  author  writes  of  this  wood  :  '  ist  man  fro  das
man  Meussdorn  zu  Besen  bekommen  kan,  als  zu  Venedig  vnd  sunst  auf  den  Meerstetten.
Die  Meuss  vnd  Ratten  werden  mit  disen  dornen  verscheucht'  [HieronjTnus  Bock  [Tragus],
Kreuter  Buch,  1546,  p.  347].  It  may  be,  that  this  or  a  similar  passage  suggested  to  Finn
Magnusen  and  Werlauff  the  interpretation,  'besom,'  'broom,'  which  they  gave  to  husasnotra
[af  mgsurtré  ;  cf  note  6].  That  the  tree  called  mpsurr  was  also  indigenous  in  Norway  is
in  a  manner  confirmed  by  a  passage  in  the  Short  Story  of  Helgi  Thorisson  [Þáttr  Helga
Þórissonar],  contained  in  Flatey  Book  [vol.  i.  p.  359]  :  '  One  summer  these  brothers  engaged
in  a  trading  voyage  to  Finmark  in  the  north,  having  butter  and  pork  to  sell  to  the  Finns.
They  had  a  successful  trading  expedition,  and  returned  when  the  summer  was  far-spent,
and  came  by  day  to  a  cape  called  Vimund.  There  were  very  excellent  woods  here.  They
went  ashore,  and  obtained  some  "mgsurr"  wood.'  The  character  of  this  narrative,  and
the  locality  assigned  to  the  'mgsurr'  trees,  affect  the  trustworthiness  of  the  information.
It  is  reasonably  clear,  however,  that  the  wood  was  rare  and,  whether  it  grew  in  Finmark  or
not,  it  was  evidently  highly  prized  \

(37)  Thiodhild  is  also  called  Thorhild,  and  similarly  Gudrid  is  called  Thurid.  It  has
been  conjectured,  that  Thorhild  and  Thurid  were  the  earlier  names,  which  were  changed
by  their  owners  after  their  conversion  to  Christianitj',  because  of  the  suggestion  of  the
heathen  god  in  the  first  syllable  of  their  original  names  *.

(38)  Such  a  fall  as  this  of  Eric's  does  not  seem  to  have  been  generally  regarded  as

•  Cf.  Vigfusson,  Ejibyggja  Saga,  Vorrede,  p.  xvii.  ^  Cf.  E)Tbygeja  Saga,  cd.  Vigfusson,  pp.  98-103.

'  Cf.  Saga  Haralds  harðráða,  Fommannasögur,  vol.vi.  p.  1S4.  '  Cf.  Gronl.  hist.  Mindesm.  vol.  i.  256-7,  47'-


NOTES.


171


an  evil  omen,  if  we  may  be  guided  by  the  proverb  :  '  Fall  er  farar  heill '  [Óláfs  saga  Trj'gg-
vasonar,  Flate3'jarbók.  1.  c.  vol.  i.  p.  231].  The  complete  saying  is  given  by  Guðmundr
Jónsson  [Safn  af  fslenzkum  Orðskviðum,  Copenh.  1830.  p.  100] :  '  Fall  er  fararheill  frá
garði  en  ei  1  garð,'  'a  fall  bodes  a  lucky  journey  from  the  house  but  not  toward  it.'

(39)  The  display  of  an  axe  seems  to  have  been  peculiarly  efficacious  in  laying  such
fetches.  From  among  numerous  similar  instances  the  following  incident  may  be  cited :
'Thorgils  heard  a  knocking  outside  upon  the  roof;  and  one  night  he  arose,  and  taking
an  axe  in  his  hand,  went  outside,  where  he  saw  a  huge  malignant  spectre  standing  before
the  door.  Thorgils  raised  his  axe,  but  the  spectre  turned  away,  and  directed  itself  toward
the  burial-mound,  and  when  they  reached  it,  the  spectre  turned  against  him,  and  they
began  to  wrestle  with  each  other,  for  Thorgils  had  dropped  his  axe  ^'

(40)  Thorfinn  Karlsefni's  ancestral  line  was  of  rare  excellence ;  it  is  given  in  Land-
náma  at  rather  greater  length,  but  otherwise  as  here :  '  Thord  was  the  name  of  a  famous
man  in  Norway,  he  was  a  son  of  Biorn  Byrdusmior,'  &c.  '  Thord  went  to  Iceland  and  took
possession  of  Höfdaströnd  in  Skaga-firth,  .  .  and  dwelt  at  Höfdi  [Headland].  Headland-
Thord  married  Fridgerd,'  &c.  'They  had  nineteen  children.  Biorn  was  their  son,  .  .
Thorgeir  was  the  second  son  .  .  Snorri  was  the  third,  he  married  Thorhild  Ptarmigan,
daughter  of  Thord  the  Yeller '  [Landnáma,  pt.  iii.  ch.  x].  Karlsefni's  mother  is  not  named
in  Landnáma.  His  grandmother's  father,  Thord  the  Yeller,  was  one  of  the  most  famous
men  in  the  first  century  of  Iceland's  history ;  he  it  was  who  established  the  Quarter-courts.

(41)  Alptafjörðr  [Swan-firth]  is  on  the  southern  side  of  Hvamms-firth,  near  its  junction
with  Breida-firth,  in  western  Iceland.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  two  ships  sailed  from
Breida-firth,  the  starting-point  for  so  many  of  the  Greenland  colonists.

(42)  It  has  been  claimed  that  this  Thorhall,  Gamli's  son,  was  no  other  than  the  Thorhall,
Gamli's  son,  of  Grettis  Saga.  [Cf  Vigfusson  and  Powell,  Icelandic  Reader,  p.  381 ;  Storm,
Studier  over  Vinlandsreiserne,  p.  305.  The  latter  author  calls  attention,  in  his  treatise,  to  Vig-
fusson's  confusion  of  Thorhall  the  Huntsman  with  Thorhall,  Gamli's  son.]  In  the  vellum  manu-
script AM.  152  fol.,  Grettis  Saga,  p.  6  b,  col.  23,  we  read  of  a  Thorvallr  [sic]  Vindlendingr,  and
in  the  same  manuscript  of  a  Thorhall,  son  of  Gamli  Vinlendingr  [p.  176,  col.  68].  In  the  Grettis
Saga  of  the  vellum  AM.  551  a,  4to,  in  corresponding  passages,  we  read  first  of  a  Thoralldr
[sic]  Vinlendingr,  and  subsequently  of  Thorhall,  a  son  of  Gamli  Vidlendingr.  Again,  in  the
parchment  manuscript  AM.  556  a,  4to,  we  find  mention  [p.  11,  U.  6-7]  of  a  Thorhalldr
Vidlendingr,  and  in  the  same  manuscript  [p.  23, 1.  11]  of  Thorhall,  a  son  of  Gamli  Vidlendingr.
From  these  passages  it  would  appear  that  both  Thorhall  and  his  father  Gamli  are  called
Vindlendingr,  Vidlendingr,  and,  once,  Vinlendingr.  This,  in  itself,  would  appear  to  preclude
the  conjecture  that  this  Thorhall  received  the  appellation,  Vinlendingr  [Winelander],  because
of  his  visit  to  Wineland,  for  his  father  had  possessed  the  same  title  before  him  ;  moreover  the
Thorhall,  Gamli's  son,  of  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red,  is  said  to  be  an  Eastfirth  man,  while  the
Thorhall  of  Grettis  Saga  belonged  to  a  northern  family  living  at  Hrútafirth,  in  the  Húnaflói.
We  find  from  the  probable  chronology  of  Grettis  Saga  that  Thorhall's  son  was  married,  and
living  at  Melar,  in   Hriitafirth,  in   1014.     [Cf.  Timatal  í  Islendínga  Sögum,  p.  473.]     If  the

'  Hóamanna  Saga,  ch.  13,  ed.  Vigfusson  and  Mobius,  in  Fomsögur,  Leipsic,  1S60.
Z  2


172  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

Thorhall  who  went  to  Wineland  was  a  young  man  and  unmarried,  as  is  not  improbable,  it  is
manifest  that  he  could  not  have  had  a  married  son  living  in  Iceland  in  1014,  and  chronologically
it  would  then  appear  to  be  impossible  to  identify  the  Thorhall,  Gamli's  son  of  Grettis  Saga,
with  the  man  of  the  same  name  in  Eric's  Saga ;  this  is,  of  course,  purely  conjectural,  but  from
the  other  data  previously  cited,  it  would  appear  to  be  pretty  clearly  established,  that  the
Thorhall,  Gamli's  son  of  Grettis  Saga,  was  called  after  his  father  Vindlendingr  [Wendlander],
and  that  he  was  an  altogether  different  man  from  the  Thorhall,  Gamli's  son,  of  the  Saga  of
Eric  the  Red.

(43)  The  celebration  of  Yule  was  one  of  the  most  important  festivals  of  the  year,  in  the
North,  both  in  heathen  and  in  Christian  times.  Before  the  introduction  of  Christianity,  it
was  the  central  feast  of  three,  which  were  annually  held.  Of  the  significance  of  these  three
heathen  ceremonials,  we  read  :  '  Odin  established  in  his  realm  those  laws,  which  had  obtained
with  the  Ases  ...  At  the  beginning  of  winter  a  sacrificial  banquet  was  to  be  held  for  a  good
j'ear  [til  árs],  in  mid-winter  they  should  offer  sacrifice  for  increase  [til  gróðrar],  and  the  third
[ceremonial],  the  sacrifice  for  victory,  was  to  be  held  at  the  beginning  of  summer  [at  sumri].'
[Ynglinga  Saga,  'Lagasetning  Óðins,'  in  Heimskringla,  ed.  linger,  Chr'a.,  1868,  p.  9.]  As  to
the  exact  time  of  the  holding  of  the  Yule-feast,  it  is  stated  in  the  Saga  of  Hacon  the  Good  :
'He  established  the  law,  that  the  keeping  of  Yule  should  be  made  to  conform  to  the  time
fixed  by  Christians,  and  ever3'  one  should  then  stand  possessed  of  a  measure  of  ale,  or  should
pay  the  equivalent,  and  should  hold  the  whole  >;  ule-tide  sacred.  Before  this  Yule  began  with
[lit.  had  been  kept  on]  "  hgku  "  night,  which  was  the  mid-winter  night,  and  Yule  was  kept  for
three  nights.'  [Saga  Hákonar  góða,  in  Heimskringla,  ed.  Unger,  p.  92.]  The  heathen  Yule
seems  not  to  have  coincided  exactly  with  the  Christian  Christmas  festival,  and  hence  the  change
adopted  by  Hacon,  who  was  a  Christian,  and  who  hoped,  no  doubt,  to  aid  the  propagation
of  his  faith  by  thus  blending  the  two  festivals.  Of  the  manner  in  which  the  three  heathen
festivals  were  transformed  into  Christian  holidaj'S  by  those  who  had  experienced  a  change  of
faith,  we  read  :  'There  was  a  man  named  Sigurd.  .  .  .  He  was  accustomed,  while  heathendom
survived,  to  hold  three  sacrifices  every  winter;  one  at  the  beginning  of  winter  [at  vetrnottum],
a  second  at  mid-winter,  a  third  at  the  beginning  of  summer  [at  sumri].  But  when  he  accepted
Christianity,  he  still  retained  his  old  custom  regarding  the  feasts.  He  gave  a  great  banquet
to  his  friends  in  the  autumn ;  a  Yule-feast  in  the  winter,  to  which  he  also  invited  many
persons ;  the  third  banquet  he  held  at  Easter,  and  to  this  also  he  invited  many  guests.'  [Saga
Óláfs  bins  helga,  in  Heimskringla,  ed.  Unger,  p.  351-52.]  We  learn  from  the  Saga  of  the
Foster-brothers,  that  the  celebration  of  the  Yule-tide  in  this  fashion,  was  of  rare  occurrence  in
Greenland,  ['því  at  sjaldan  var  Jóladrykkja  á  Grœnlandi.'  Fóstbrœðra  Saga,  Copenh.  1822,
p.  138.  Konrad  Gislason's  edition  of  the  same  saga  has  :  '  því  at  hann  vil  jóladr3'kkju  hafa,  ok
gera  sér  þat  til  ágœtis — því  at  sjaldan  voro  drykkjur  á  Grenlandi,'  '  for  he  desired  to  give  a
Yule-wassail,  and  get  himself  fame  thereby, — for  they  seldom  had  drinking-bouts  in  Greenland.'
Fóstbræðra  Saga,  Copenh.  1852,  p.  84.]

(44)  Freydis  also  accompanied  the  expedition,  as  appears  further  on  in  the  saga.

(45)  This  passage  is  one  of  the  most  obscure  in  the  saga.  If  the  conjecture  as  to  the
probable  site  of  the  Western  Settlement,  in  the  vicinity  of  Godthaab  is  correct,  it  is  not
apparent  why  Karlscfni  should  have  first  directed  his  course  to  the  north-west,  when   his


NOTES.


173


destination  lay  to  the  south-west.  It  is  only  possible  to  explain  the  passage  by  somewhat
hazardous  conjecture.  Leif  may  have  first  reached  the  Western  Settlement  on  his  return
from  the  voyage  of  discovery,  and  Karlsefni,  reversing  Leif 's  itinerary,  may  have  been  led  to
make  the  Western  Settlement  his  point  of  departure;  or  there  may  have  been  some  reason,
not  mentioned  in  the  saga,  which  led  the  voyagers  to  touch  first  at  the  Western  Settlement.
[Prof.  Storm  would  argue  from  the  situation  of  Lysu-firth,  the  home  of  Gudrid's  first  husband
in  that  Settlement,  that  the  expedition  may  have  set  sail  from  there.  Cf  Storm,  Studier  over
Vinlandsreiserne,  pp.  326-8.  In  this  place  Storm  calls  attention  to  the  fact,  that  Thorstein
Ericsson's  unsuccessful  voyage  was  directed  from  Eric's-firth,  which  lay  considerably  farther
to  the  eastward  than  the  Western  Settlement,  and  that  he  would  therefore  be  less  apt  to  hit
the  land,  than  Karlsefni  who  sailed  from  the  Western  Settlement.]  The  language  of  EsR.
would  admit  of  the  conclusion,  that  the  Bear  Islands  were  not  far  removed  from  the  Western
Settlement  ['til  Vestri-bygdar  ok  til  Biarmeyia '  [sic]] ;  the  statement  of  fsK.,  however,  which
speaks  of  Bear  Island  [in  the  singular]  seems  to  indicate  that  the  point  of  departure  was  not
immediately  contiguous  to  that  settlement  ['  til  Vestri-bygðar  ok  þaðan  til  Biarneyiar '].

(46)  Dœgr  is  thus  defined  in  the  ancient  Icelandic  work  on  chronometry  called  Rimbegla  :
'  In  the  day  there  are  two  "dœgr; "  in  the  "doegr"  twelve  hours.'  This  reckoning,  as  applied  to
a  sea-voyage,  is  in  at  least  one  instance  clearly  confirmed,  namely  in  the  Saga  of  Olaf  the  Saint,
wherein  it  is  stated  that  King  Olaf  sent  Thorarin  Nefiolfsson  to  Iceland:  'Thorarin  sailed  out
with  his  ship  from  Drontheim,  when  the  King  sailed,  and  accompanied  him  southward  to
Mœri.  Thorarin  then  sailed  out  to  sea,  and  he  had  a  wind  which  was  so  powerful  and  so
favourable  [hraðbyrr],  that  he  sailed  in  eight  "doegr"  to  Eyrar  in  Iceland,  and  went  at  once  to
the  Althing.'  [Saga  Óláfs  konungs  ens  helga,  ed.  Munch  and  Unger,  Chr'a.,  1853,  pp.  125-6.]
Thorarin's  starting-point  was,  doubtless,  not  far  from  Stad,  the  westernmost  point  of  Norway,
the  Eyrar,  at  which  he  arrived,  probably,  the  modern  Eyrar-bakki,  in  southern  Iceland,  the
nearest  harbour  to  the  site  of  the  Althing.  The  time  which  was  consumed  in  this  phenomenal
voyage  is  confirmed  by  Thorarin's  words  on  his  arrival  at  the  Althing :  '  I  parted  with  King
Olaf,  Harold's  son,  four  nights  ago'  [Oláfs  saga  bins  helga,  1.  c.  p.  126].  It  is  tolerably  clear
from  this  passage,  that  this  could  not  have  been  a  normal  voyage,  and  j'et  we  are  told  in
Landnáma,  that  from  Stad,  in  Norway,  to  Horn,  on  the  eastern  side  of  Iceland,  is  seven
'dœgra-sigling '  [a  sail  of  seven  'doegr'].  In  the  same  connection  it  is  also  stated,  that  from
Snowfells-ness  the  shortest  distance  to  Hvarf  in  Western  Greenland,  is  a  sail  of  four  'dcegr  ;'
from  Reykianess,  on  the  southern  coast  of  Iceland,  southward  to  Jölduhlaup  in  Ireland  is  five
[some  MSS.  have  three]  'doegr'  of  sea  [Landnáma,  pt.  i.  ch.  i].  These  and  similar  state-
ments elsewhere,  have  led  many  writers  to  the  conclusion,  that  the  word  '  doegr '  may  also
indicate  a  longer  period  than  twelve  hours,  and  possibly  the  same  as  that  assigned  to  dagr,  a
day  of  twenty-four  hours.  The  meaning  of  the  word  is  not  so  important  to  enable  us  to
intelligently  interpret  the  saga,  as  is  the  determination  of  the  distance,  which  was  reckoned
to  an  average  '  doegr's '  sail ;  that  is  to  say,  the  distance  which,  we  may  safely  conclude,  was
traversed,  under  average  conditions,  in  a  single  'dœgr'  by  Icelandic  sailing  craft.  It  seems
possible  to  obtain  this  information  with  little  difficulty.  The  sailing  distance,  as  given  in
Landnáma,  from  Rej'kianess  to  Ireland,  may  best  be  disregarded  because  of  the  confusion
in  the  manuscripts ;  the  sailing  distance  from  Snowfells-ness  to  Hvarf  in  Greenland  gives


174  ^^^  FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

rather  better  data,  although  it  is  only  possible  to  determine  approximately  the  site  of  Hvarf ;
but  the  distance  from  Stad  in  Norway  to  Cape  Horn  in  Iceland,  can  be  determined  accurately,
and  as  this  was  the  voyage,  with  which  Icelanders  were  most  familiar,  it  affords  us  a  trust-
worthy standard  of  measurement,  from  which  it  is  possible  to  determine  the  distance  which
was  traversed  in  a  sail  of  one  'dœgr;'  and  the  discussion  of  the  mooted  question,  whether  the
'  dcegr '  of  Rimbegla,  and  of  King  Olaf  the  Saint's  Saga  is  the  same  as  that  of  Landnáma,  is  not
material  to  this  determination.  Having  regard  to  the  probable  course  sailed  from  Norway  to
Iceland,  it  would  appear  that  a  '  dœgr's '  sail  was  approximately  one  hundred  and  eight  miles.
This  result  precludes  the  possibility,  that  any  point  in  Labrador  could  have  been  within  a
sailing  distance  of  two  '  dosgr '  from  the  Western  Settlement.  It  has  been  noted  that  there  are
variations  in  the  different  manuscripts  touching  the  comparatively  little  known  voyage  from
Iceland  to  Ireland  ;  if,  similarly,  there  may  have  been  such  a  variation  in  EsR,  for  example,
'  tvau  '  (two)  having  been  written  for  the  somewhat  similar  '  f  iau '  (seven),  of  an  elder  text,
it  then  becomes  apparent  that  the  distance  could  have  been  traversed  in  a  sail  of  seven  '  doegr.'
Such  corruption  might  have  taken  place  because  of  lack  of  accurate  knowledge  to  correct  the
error  at  the  time  in  which  our  MSS.  were  written.  The  winds  appear  to  have  been  favourable
to  the  explorers;  the  sail  of  seven  '  doegr '  'to  the  southward,'  from  Greenland  with  the  needful
westering,  would  have  brought  Karlsefni  and  his  companions  off  the  Labrador  coast.  Apart
from  this  conjecture,  it  may  be  said  that  the  distance  sailed  in  a  certain  number  of  '  doegr  *
(especially  where  such  distances  were  probably  not  familiar  to  the  scribes  of  the  sagas),  seem
in  many  cases  to  be  much  greater  than  is  reconcilable  with  our  knowledge  of  the  actual
distances  traversed,  whether  we  regard  the  '  doegra '  sail  as  representing  a  distance  of  one
hundred  and  eight  miles  or  a  period  of  twenty-four  hours.

(47)  This  may  well  have  been  the  keel  of  one  of  the  lost  ships  belonging  to  the  colonists
who  had  sailed  for  Greenland  with  Eric  the  Red  a  few  years  before ;  the  wreckage  would
naturally  drift  hither  with  the  Polar  current  \

(48)  MS.  Skotzka,  lit.  Scotch.  This  word  seems  to  have  been  applied  to  both  the  people
of  Scotland  and  Ireland.  The  names  of  the  man  and  woman,  as  well  as  their  dress,  appear
to  have  been  Gaelic,  they  are,  at  least,  not  known  as  Icelandic ;  the  minute  description  of  the
dress,  indeed,  points  to  the  fact  that  it  was  strange  to  Icelanders.

(49)  Enn  rauðskeggjaði,  i.e.  Thor.  It  has  been  suggested,  that  Thorhall's  persistent  ad-
herence to  the  heathen  faith  may  have  led  to  his  being  regarded  with  ill-concealed  disfavour  ^

(50)  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  '  self-sown  wheat '  was  wild  rice.  The  habit  of
this  plant,  its  growth  in  low  ground  as  here  described,  and  the  head,  which  has  a  certain
resemblance  to  that  of  cultivated  small  grain,  especially  oats,  seem  clearly  to  confirm  this  view.
The  explorers  probably  had  very  slight  acquaintance  with  cultivated  grain,  and  might  on  this
account  more  readily  confuse  this  wild  rice  with  wheat.  There  is  not,  however,  the  slightest
foundation  for  the  theory,  that  this  'wild  wheat'  was  Indian  corn,  a  view  which  has  been
advanced  by  certain  writers.  Indian  corn  was  a  grain  entirely  unknown  to  the  explorers,  and
they  could  not  by  any  possibility  have  confused  it  with  wheat,  even  if  they  had  found  this  corn
growing  wild,  a  conjecture  for  which  there  is  absolutely  no  support  whatever.     [Cf.  Schubeler,

'  C{.  Landnámabók,  pt.  ii.  ch.  xiv,  see  also  Ihe  similar  passage  in  the  Flatcy  Book  narrative,  p.  6i,  ante.
'  Cf.  Icelandic  Reader,  O.xford,  1879,  p.  3S1.


NOTES.


175


'Om  den  Hvede,  som  Nordmændene  i  Aaret  1000  fandt  vildtvoxende  i  Vinland,'  in  Forhand-
linger  i  Videnskabets-Selskab,  Chr'a.,  1859,  pp.  21-30.]  The  same  obser\'ation  as  that  made
by  the  Wineland  discoverers  was  recorded  by  Jacques  Cartier  five  hundred  years  later,
concerning  parts  of  the  Canadian  territory  which  he  explored.  Of  the  Isle  de  Bryon  we  have
this  description,  'Nous  la  trouuames  plaine  de  beaulx  arbres,  champs  de  blé  sauuaige,'  &c.,
and  in  the  same  narrative,  with  reference  to  another  portion  of  the  discovery,  we  are  informed
that  the  explorers  found  '  blé  sauuaige,  comme  seille,  quel  il  semble  y  abuoir  esté  seme  et  labouré.'
[Relation  Originale  du  Voyage  de  Jacques  Cartier  au  Canada  en  1534,  ed.  Michelant  and
Ramé,  Paris,  1867,  pp.  19  and  25.]  It  is  no  less  true  that  this  same  explorer  found  grapes
growing  wild,  in  a  latitude  as  far  north  as  that  of  Nova  Scotia,  and,  as  would  appear  from  the
record,  in  considerable  abundance :  '  Apres  que  nous  feusmes  arriuez  auec  noz  barques
ausdictz  nauires  &  retournez  de  la  riuyere  saincte  Croix,  le  cappitaine  Hinanda  apprester
lesdictes  barques  pour  aller  a  terre  a  la  dicte  ysle  veoir  les  arbres  qui  sembloient  fort
beaulx  a  veoir,  &  la  nature  de  la  terre  d'icelle  ysle.  Ce  que  fut  faict,  &  nous  estans  a
ladicte  ysle  la  trouuasmes  plaine  de  fors  beaulx  arbres  de  la  sorte  des  nostres.  Et  pareil-
lement  y  trouuasmes  force  vignes,  ce  que  n'auyons  veu  par  cy  deuant  a  toute  la  terre,  &  par
ce  la  nommasmes  I'ysle  de  Bacchus.'  [Bref  recit,  &c.,  de  la  Navigation  faite  en  1535-6
par  le  Capitaine  Jacques  Cartier  aux  lies  de  Canada,  Hochelaga,  Saguenay  et  autres,
ed.  D'Avezac,  Paris,  1863,  p.  14  b  and  15.]  Again,  in  the  following  century,  we  have  an
account  of  an  exploration  of  the  coast  of  Nova  Scotia,  in  which  the  following  passage  occurs  :
'  all  the  ground  betweene  the  two  Riuers  was  without  Wood,  and  was  good  fat  earth  hauing
seuerall  sorts  of  Berries  growing  thereon,  as  Gooseberry,  Straw-berry,  Hyndberry,  Rasberry,
and  a  kinde  of  Red-wine-berry :  As  also  some  sorts  of  Graine,  as  Pease,  some  eares  of  Wheat,
Barley,  and  Rye,  growing  there  wild,'  &c.  [Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,  London,  1625,  vol.  iv,
Bk.  X,  ch.  vi,  p.  1873.]

(51)  Helgir  fiskar,  lit.  'holy  fish.'  The  origin  of  the  name  is  not  known.  Prof.  Maurer
suggests  that  it  may  have  been  derived  from  some  folk-tale  concerning  St.  Peter,  but  adds
that  such  a  story,  if  it  ever  existed,  has  not  been  preserved  ^

(52)  It  is  not  clear  what  the  exact  nature  of  these  staves  may  have  been.  Hauk's  Book
has  for  the  word  translated  'staves,'  both  '  triom '  and  'trionum,'  AM.  557  has  'trianum.'
The  word  trjonum  has  the  meaning  of  'snout,'  but  the  first  form  of  the  word,  as  given  in
Hauk's  Book,  '  triom,'  i.  e.  trjom  [trjám],  seems  to  be  the  correct  form  [from  tré,  tree].  These
'  staves  '  may  have  had  a  certain  likeness  to  the  long  oars  of  the  inhabitants  of  Newfoundland,
described  in  a  notice  of  date  July  29th,  1612  :  'They  haue  two  kinde  of  Oares,  one  is  about  foure
foot  long  of  one  peece  of  Firre ;  the  other  is  about  ten  foot  long  made  of  two  peeces,  one  being
as  long,  big  and  round  as  a  halfe  Pike  made  of  Beech  wood,  which  by  likelihood  they  made  of
a  Biskin  Oare,  the  other  is  the  blade  of  the  Oare,  which  is  let  into  the  end  of  the  long  one  slit,
and  whipped  very  strongly.  The  short  one  they  use  as  a  Paddle,  and  the  other  as  an  Oare.'
[Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,  London,  1625,  vol.  iv.  p.  1880.]

(53)  The  white  shield,  called  the  '  peace-shield '  [friðskjgldrj,  was  displa^-ed  by  those  who
wished  to  indicate  to  others  with  whom  they  desired  to  meet  that  their  intentions  were  not

'  Cf.  Maurer,  Islandische  Volkssagen  der  Gegaiwart,  Leipsic,  1S60,  p.  195.      The  fish,  now  so  called,  is  halibut,  and
is  described  by  Eggert  Olafeen,  Reise  durch  Island,  Copeuh.  and  Leipsic,  1774,  Pt.  I,  p.  191.


176  THE  FINDING   OF    WIN  ELAND    THE   GOOD.

hostile,  as  in  Magnus  Barefoot's  Saga,  '  the  barons  raised  aloft  a  white  peace-shield '  [Saga
Magnus  berfcetts,  in  Codex  Frisianus,  ed.  Unger,  Chr'a.,  1869,  p.  267].  The  red  shield,  on
the  other  hand,  was  the  war-shield,  a  signal  of  enmity,  as  Sinfiotli  declares  in  the  Helgi  song,
'Quoth  Sinfiotli,  hoisting  a  red  shield  to  the  yard,  .  .  .  "tell  it  this  evening,  .  .  .  that  the
Wolfings  are  come  from  the  East,  lusting  for  war.'"  [Cf.  Helga  kviþa  Hundingsbana,  in  Edda-
lieder,  ed.  Finnur  Jónsson,  Halle  o.  S.  1890,  Pt.  II,  verses  34-5,  pp.  4  and  5.]  The  use  of  a
white  flag-of-truce  for  a  purpose  similar  to  that  for  which  Snorri  recommended  the  white
shield,  is  described  in  the  passage  quoted  in  note  52,  '  Nouember  the  sixt  two  Canoas
appeared,  and  one  man  alone  coming  towards  vs  with  a  Flag  in  his  hand  of  a  Wolfes  skin,
shaking  it  and  making  a  loud  noise,  which  we  tooke  to  be  for  a  parley,  whereupon  a  white
Flag  was  put  out,  and  the  Barke  and  Shallop  rowed  towards  them.'  [Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,
1.  c.  vol.  iv.  p.  1880.]

(54)  The  natives  of  the  country  here  described  were  called  by  the  discoverers,  as  we
read,  Skrælingjar ;  since  this  was  the  name  applied  by  the  Greenland  colonists  to  the  Eskimo,
it  has  generally  been  concluded  that  the  Skrælingjar  of  Wineland  were  Eskimo.  Prof.
Storm  has  recently  pointed  out  that  there  may  be  sufficient  reason  for  caution  in  hastily
accepting  this  conclusion,  and  he  would  identify  the  inhabitants  of  Wineland  with  the
Indians  [Beothuk  or  Micmac],  adducing  arguments  philological  and  ethnographical  to
support  his  theory'.  The  description  of  the  savages  of  Newfoundland,  given  in  the  passage
in  Purchas'  '  Pilgrims,'  already  cited,  offers  certain  details,  which  coincide  with  the  description
of  the  Skrellings,  contained  in  the  saga.  These  savages  are  said  by  the  English  explorers
to  be  '  full-eyed,  of  a  black  colour ;  the  colour  of  their  hair  was  diuers,  some  blacke,  some
browne,  and  some  yellow,  and  their  faces  something  flat  and  broad.'  Other  details,  which
are  given  on  the  same  authority,  have  not  been  noted  by  the  Icelandic  explorers,  and  one
statement,  at  least,  '  they  haue  no  beards  V  is  directly  at  variance  with  the  saga  statement  con-
cerning the  Skrellings  seen  by  the  Icelanders  on  their  homeward  journey.  The  similarity  of
description  may  be  a  mere  accidental  coincidence,  and  it  by  no  means  follows  that  the
English  writer  and  Karlsefni's  people  saw  the  same  people,  or  even  a  kindred  tribe.

(55)  John  Guy,  in  a  letter  to  Master  Slany,  the  Treasurer  and  '  Counsell '  of  the  New-
found-land Plantation,  writes :  '  the  doubt  that  haue  bin  made  of  the  extremity  of  the  winter
season  in  these  parts  of  New-found-land  are  found  by  our  experience  causelesse ;  and  that  not
onely  men  may  safely  inhabit  here  without  any  neede  of  stoue,  but  Nauigation  may  be  made  to
and  fro  from  England  to  these  parts  at  any  time  of  the  j-eare.  .  .  .  Our  Goates  haue  liued
here  all  this  winter ;  and  there  is  one  lustie  kidde,  which  was  yeaned  in  the  dead  of  winter.'
[Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,  vol.  iv.  p.  1878.]  '  Captaine  Winne '  writes,  on  the  seventeenth  of
August,  1622,  concerning  the  climate  of  Newfoundland  :  '  the  Winter  [is]  short  &  tolerable,
continuing  onely  in  lanuary,  February  and  part  of  March :  the  day  in  Winter  longer  then  in
England :  .  .  .  Neither  was  it  so  cold  here  the  last  Winter  as  in  England  the  yeere  before.
I  remember  but  three  seuerall  dayes  of  hard  weather  indeed,  and  they  not  extreame  neither :
for  I  haue  knowne  greater  Frosts,  and  farre  greater  Snowcs  in  our  owne  Countrey.'
[Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,  vol.  iv.  p.  i8go.]

'  Cf.  .Storm,  Studier  over  Vinlandsreiscrne,  1.  c.  pp.  346-05-
"  Cf.  I'lirchas  his  I'ilgrimcs,  vol.  iv.  p.  iSSi.


NOTES.  1^7

(56)  Einfœtingr,  i.  e.  a  One-footer,  a  man  with  one  leg  or  foot.  In  the  Flatey  Book
Thorvald's  death  is  less  romantically  described.  The  mediæval  belief  in  a  country  in  which
there  lived  a  race  of  one-legged  men,  was  not  unknown  in  Iceland,  for  mention  is  made  in
Rimbegla,  of  'a  people  of  Africa  called  One-footers,  the  soles  of  whose  feet  are  so  large,  that
they  shade  themselves  with  these  against  the  heat  of  the  sun  when  they  sleep.'  [Rimbegla,
1.  c.  p.  344.]  This  fable  seems  to  have  been  derived,  originally,  from  Ctesias  :  ['  Item  hominum
genus,  qui  Monosceli  [Monocoli]  vocarentur,  singulis  cruribus,  miræ  pernicitatis  ad  saltum :
eosdemque  Sciapodas  vocari,  quod  in  maiori  aestu  humi  iacentes  resupini,  umbra  se  pedum
protegant :  non  longe  eos  a  Troglodytis  abesse,'  [Ctesiæ  Cnidii  quæ  supersunt,  ed.  Lion,  Göt-
tingen,  1823,  p.  264],  and  was  very  widely  diffused  [cf  C.  Plinius  Secundus,  Naturalis  Historia,
lib.  vii,  ch.  2 ;  Aulus  Gellius,  Noctes  Atticæ,  lib.  ix,  iv,  9 ;  C.  Jul.  Solinus,  Polyhistor,  ch.  Ixv,
&c.]  It  is  apparent  from  the  passages  from  certain  Icelandic  works  already  cited  [pp.  15,  16,
ante],  that,  at  the  time  these  works  were  written,  Wineland  was  supposed  to  be  in  some  way
connected  with  Africa.  Whether  this  notice  of  the  finding  of  a  Uniped  in  the  Wineland  region
may  have  contributed  to  the  adoption  of  such  a  theory,  it  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  determine.
The  reports  which  the  explorers  brought  back  of  their  having  seen  a  strange  man,  who,  for
some  reason  not  now  apparent,  they  believed  to  have  but  one  leg,  may,  because  Wineland
was  held  to  be  contiguous  to  Africa,  have  given  rise  to  the  conclusion  that  this  strange  man
was  indeed  a  Uniped,  and  that  the  explorers  had  hit  upon  the  African  '  land  of  the  Unipeds.'
It  has  also  been  suggested  •  that  the  incident  of  the  appearance  of  the  '  One-footer '  may  have
found  its  way  into  the  saga  to  lend  an  additional  adornment  to  the  manner  of  Thorvald's
taking-off.  It  is  a  singular  fact  that  Jacques  Cartier  brought  back  from  his  Canadian  explora-
tions reports  not  only  of  a  land  peopled  by  a  race  of  one-legged  folk,  but  also  of  a  region  in
those  parts  where  the  people  were  'as  white  as  those  of  France;'  'Car  il  (Taignoagny)  nous
a  certiffié  auoir  esté  a  la  terre  de  Saguenay,  en  laqlle  y  a  infini  or,  rubis  &  aultres  richesses.
Et  y  sont  les  homes  blancs  comme  en  France  &  accoutrez  de  dras  de  laynes.  .  .  .  Plus  diet
auoir  esté  en  autre  pais  de  Picquemyans  &  autres  pais,  ou  les  gens  n'ont  que  vne  iambe.'
[Voyage  de  I.  Cartier,  ed.  d'Avezac,  Paris,  1863,  p.  40  b.}

(57)  These  words,  it  has  been  supposed,  might  afford  a  clue  to  the  language  of  the
Skrellings,  which  would  aid  in  determining  their  race.  In  view  not  only  of  the  fact,  that
they  probably  passed  through  many  strange  mouths  before  they  were  committed  to  writing,
but  also  that  the  names  are  not  the  same  in  the  different  manuscripts,  they  appear  to
afford  very  equivocal  testimony.  Prof  Storm  with  reference  to  these  names,  which  he  cites
thus,  Avalldamon,  Avaldidida,  Vætilldi  and  Uvæge,  says,  that,  while  the  information  they
afford  is  very  defective :  '  So  much  seems  to  be  clear,  that  in  their  recorded  form,  they  [these
words]  cannot  be  Eskimo,  for  d  is  entirely  wanting  in  Eskimo,  and  even  g  is  rare  except  as  a
nasal  sound  [he  refers  :  Fr.  v.  Mailer,  Grundriss  der  Sþrachwissenschaft,  ii.  164] ;  Avalldamon
especially  cannot  be  Eskimo,  for  Eskimo  words  must  either  end  with  a  vowel,  or  one  of  the
mute  consonants  b,  k,  [q],  t,  p.  .  .  .  Especially  is  the  soft  melody  of  these  Skrelhng-words
altogether  different  from  the  harsh  guttural  sounds  of  the  Eskimo  language.  We  must
therefore  refer  for  the  derivation  of  these  words  to  the  Indians,  whom  we  know  in  this  region

'  Vigfusson  and  Powell,  Icelandic  Reader,  1.  c.  p.  3S4.
A  a


178  THE  FINDING   OF   WINE  LAND   THE  GOOD.

in  later  times.  The  inhabitants,  whom  the  discoverers  of  the  sixteenth  century  found  in  New-
foundland, and  who  called  themselves  "  Beothuk  "  [i.e.  men],  received  from  the  Europeans  the
name  of  Red  Indians,  because  they  smeared  themselves  with  ochre;  they  have  now  been
exterminated,  partly  by  the  Europeans,  partly  by  the  Micmac  Indians,  who  in  the  last  century
wandered  into  Newfoundland  from  New  Brunswick.  Of  their  language  only  a  few  remnants
have  been  preserved,  but  still  enough  to  enable  us  to  form  a  tolerably  good  idea  of  it.  This
language  lacks  f,  but  possesses  b,  d,  g,  I,  m,  n,  v  as  well  as  the  vowels  a,  e,  i,  0,  u,  so  that  its
sounds  conform  entirely  to  the  requirements  of  the  four  Skrelling-words.  Unfortunately  no
glossary  for  the  words  father,  mother,  king,  has  been  preserved,  so  that  a  direct  comparison
is  impossible ;  however,  the  female  name  Shana.ndií/iít  and  the  word  adadimit  [spoon]  bear  a
remarkable  resemblance  to  the  ending  -didida  in  Avilldidida,  and  the  words  buggishaman  or
bukashaman  [man,  boy]  and  anyemen  [bow]  may  also  be  compared  to  the  termination  -amon  in
Avalldamon  [Ref  Gatchet,  two  discourses  before  the  Amer.  Philos.  Society,  19  June,  1885,
and  7  May,  1886].  This  is,  of  course,  only  suggested  conjecturally;  since  the  Beothuk  seem
now  to  have  died  out,  we  shall  probably,  never  succeed  in  obtaining  more  accurate  results.
I  must,  however,  not  omit  to  mention,  that  the  Micmac  language  [in  Nova  Scotia  and  New
Brunswick]  also  has  such  sounds,  as  to  render  it  possible  that  these  words  might  have  been
derived  from  them  ;  but  the  glossaries,  which  I  have  examined,  and  which  are  much  more
complete  than  that  of  the  Beothuk  tongue,  afford  no  especial  resemblance  to  the  Skrelling-
words  under  consideration.'     [Storm,  Studier  over  Vinlandsreiserne,  1.  c.  pp.  349-51.]

Captain  Gustav  Holm,  of  the  Danish  Navy,  whose  explorations  both  upon  the  east  and  west
coast  of  Greenland,  and  whose  prolonged  residence  in  that  country  entitle  him  to  speak  with
authority,  has,  at  my  request,  acquainted  me  with  his  conclusions  respecting  the  possible
resemblance  between  the  Skrelling-words  and  the  Eskimo  language,  and  also  with
reference  to  the  points  of  resemblance  between  the  Skrellings  of  the  saga  and  the  present
inhabitants  of  Greenland.     These  conclusions  are  as  follows  :

'  I.  Although  the  four  names,  Vætilldi,  Uvcegi,  Avalldamon  and  Valdidida  have  nothing
in  common  with  Eskimo  words,  it  cannot  be  gainsaid  that  they  may  be  of  Eskimo  origin,
since

'  {a)  We  do  not  know  whether  they  have  been  properlj'  understood  and  recorded.

'  (b)  The  different  manuscripts  of  the  saga  give  the  names  in  entirely  different  forms
[e.g.  Avalldania  instead  of  Avalldamon].

'{c)  Even  if  the  names  have  been  correctly  understood  and  recorded,  there  is  nothing  to
prevent  their  being  Eskimo ;  as  illustrative  of  this,  the  name-list  of  East-Green-
landers  may  be  cited,  [in  'Den0stgr0nlandske  Expedition,'  Copenh.  1888,  pt.  II.  p.  183
et  seq.],  in  which  many  names,  although  they  are  recorded  by  a  Greenlandcr  [my
steersman,  who  was  a  remarkably  intelligent  and  talented  man]  have  quite  as  little
appearance  of  being  Eskimo  as  the  four  under  consideration.

'  (</)  The  Eskimo  language  has  not  always  the  harsh  guttural  sound  which  has  hitherto
been  ascribed  to  it.  The  Angmagsalik  language  is,  on  the  contrary,  very  soft ;  they
use  d  instead  of  ts  and  t,  g  instead  of  k,  &c.  [Cf.  Den  0stgr0nlandske  Expedition,
I.  p.  156;  II.  p.  213.]


NOTES.


179


'{é)  It  is  not  impossible,  that  the  names  may  have  been  derived  from  Eskimo  originals.

I  would  mention  Uvœgi,  the  father's  name,  for  instance,  which  name,  as  recorded,

follows  that  of  the  mother.     "Uve"with  the  suffix  "uvia,"  signifies  in   Danish,

" hendes Ægtefælle "  [i.e.  her  husband],  [vide  Kleinschmidt's  Gr0nlandske  Ordbog,

p.  403].     That  "  Uvœgi "  should  have  any  connection  with  the  Greenland  word

"  uve  " '  is,  as  a  matter  of  course,  a  mere  guess,  by  which  I  have  sought  to  point

out,  that  the  possibility  of  Eskimo  origin  may  not  be  rashly  rejected.

'2.  The  description  of  the  Skrellings  would  apply  to  the  Eskimo,  with  the  exception,

that  their  eyes  cannot  be  called    large,   but  neither  can  this  be  said  of  the  eyes  of  the

North  American  Indians.

'  Even  as  there  are  on  the  north-western  coast  of  North  America  races  which  seem  to
me  to  occupy  a  place  between  the  Indian  and  the  Eskimo,  so  it  appears  to  me  not  sufficiently
proven,  that  the  now  extinct  race  on  America's  east  coast,  the  Beothuk,  were  Indians.
Their  mode  of  life  and  belief  have  many  points  of  resemblance,  by  no  means  unimportant,
with  the  Eskimo  and  especially  with  the  Angmagsalik.  It  is  not  necessary  to  particularize
.  these  here,  but  I  wish  to  direct  attention  to  the  possibility,  that  in  the  Beothuk  we  may
perhaps  have  one  of  the  transition  links  between  the  Indian  and  the  Eskimo.'

It  will  be  seen  that  Captain  Holm,  while  he  differs  from  Professor  Storm  in  many  of  his
views,  still  arrives  at  much  the  same  conclusion.

(58)  The  sum  of  information  which  we  possess  concerning  White-men's-land  or  Ireland  the
Great,  is  comprised  in  this  passage  and  in  the  quotation  from  Landnáma  (ante,  p.  11).  It  does
not  seem  possible  from  these  very  vague  notices  to  arrive  at  any  sound  conclusions  concerning
the  location  of  this  country.  Rafn  [Grönlands  historiske  Mindesmærker,  vol.  iii.  p.  886]
concludes  that  it  must  have  been  the  southern  portion  of  the  eastern  coast  of  North  America.
Vigfusson  and  Powell  [Icelandic  Reader,  p.  384]  suggest  that  the  inhabitants  of  this  White-
men's-land  were  'Red  Indians  ;'  with  these,  they  say,  'the  Norsemen  never  came  into  actual
contact,  or  we  should  have  a  far  more  vivid  description  than  this,  and  their  land  would  bear  a
more  appropriate  title.'  Storm  in  his  '  Studier  over  Vinlandsreiserne  '  (1.  c.  p.  355-363)  would
regard  'Greater  Ireland'  as  a  semi-fabulous  land,  tracing  its  quasi-historical  origin  to  the  Irish
visitation  of  Iceland  prior  to  the  Norse  settlement.  No  one  of  these  theories  is  entirely
satisfactory,  and  the  single  fact  which  seems  to  be  reasonably  well  established  is  that  '  Greater
Ireland  '  was  to  the  Icelandic  scribes  terra  incognita.

(59)  Staðr  í  Reynines,  the  modern  Rej'nistaðr,  is  situated  in  Northern  Iceland,  a  short
distance  to  the  southward  of  Skaga-firth.  Glaumboer,  as  it  is  still  called,  is  somewhat  farther
south,  but  hard  by.

(60)  Thorlak  Runolfsson  was  the  third  bishop  of  Skálholt.  He  was  consecrated  bishop
in  the  year  1118,  and  died  1133  [Jon  Sigurðsson,  'Biskupa  tal  á  fslandi,'  in  Safn  til  Sögu
islands,  vol.  i.  p.  30].  Biorn  Gilsson  was  the  third  bishop  of  Holar,  the  episcopal  seat  of
northern  Iceland;  he  became  bishop  in  1147,  and  died  in  the  year  1162.  Bishop  Biorn's
successor  was  Brand  Sæmundsson,  '  Bishop  Brand  the  Elder,'  who  died  in  the  year  1201
[Jon  Sigurðsson,    Biskupa    tal  á  fslandi,  ubi  sup.  p.  4].     As  AM.  557,  4to,  refers  to  this

1  Cf.  in  this  connection,  Rink,  Tales  and  Traditions  of  the  Eskimo,  Edinb.  and  London,  1875,  p.  13,  where  we  find ;
'u\-iga  =  my  husband,'  and  again,  p.  74:  '  Uvœge,  probably  the  Greenlandish  uziia,  signifying  husband.'

A  a  2


i8o  THE  FINDING   OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

Bishop  Brand  as  '  Bishop  Brand  the  Elder,'  it  is  apparent  that  it,  as  well  as  Hauk's  Book,  must
have  been  written  after  the  second  Bishop  Brand's  accession  to  his  sacred  office.  Bishop
Brand  Jonsson,  the  second  Bishop  Brand,  became  Bishop  of  Hólar  in  the  year  1263,  and  died
in  the  following  year  [Biskupa  tal,  ubi  sup.  p.  4].

(61)  We  read  concerning  the  introduction  of  Christianity  into  Iceland  :  '  Thor\'ald  [Kod-
ransson]  travelled  widely  through  the  southern  countries  ;  in  the  Saxon-land  [Germany]  in  the
south,  he  met  with  a  bishop  named  Frederick,  and  was  b}'  him  converted  to  the  true  faith  and
baptised,  and  remained  with  him  for  a  season.  Thon'ald  bade  the  bishop  accompany  him  to
Iceland,  to  baptise  his  father  and  mother,  and  others  of  his  kinsmen,  who  would  abide  by  his
advice  ;  and  the  bishop  consented.'  ['  Kristni  Saga'  in  Biskupa  Sögur,  ed.  Vigfusson,  Copenh.
1858,  vol.  i.  p.  3.]  According  to  Icelandic  annals,  Bishop  Frederick  arrived  in  Iceland,  on  this
missionary  emprise,  in  the  j-ear  981 ;  from  the  same  authority  we  learn  that  he  departed  from
Iceland  in  985.

(62)  Heriulf  or  Heriolf,  who  accompanied  Eric  the  Red  to  Greenland,  was  not,  of  course,
the  same  man  to  whom  Ingolf  allotted  land  between  Vág  and  Reykianess,  for  Ingolf  set  about  the
colonization  of  Iceland  in  874,  more  than  a  century  before  Eric  the  Red's  voyage  to  Greenland.
The  statement  of  Flatey  Book  is,  therefore,  somewhat  misleading,  and  seems  to  indicate
either  carelessness  or  a  possible  confusion  on  the  part  of  the  scribe.  Heriulf,  Eric  the  Red's
companion,  was  a  grandson  of  the  'settler'  Heriulf,  as  is  clearly  set  forth  in  two  passages  in
Landnáma.  In  the  first  of  these  passages  the  Greenland  colonist  is  called  '  Heriulf  the
Younger '  [Landnáma,  pt.  ii,  ch.  xiv] ;  the  second  passage  is  as  follows :  '  Heriolf,  who  has
previously  been  mentioned,  was  Ingolfs  kinsman  and  foster-brother,  for  which  reason
Ingolf  gave  him  land  between  Vog  and  Reykianess;  his  son  was  Bard,  father  of  that
Heriolf,  who  went  to  Greenland  and  came  into  the  "  Sea-rollers." '  [Landnáma,  pt.  iv,
ch.  xiv.]  As  has  already  been  stated,  there  is  no  mention  in  Landnáma  or  other  Icelandic
saga,  save  that  of  the  Flatey  Book,  of  Heriulfs  son,  Biarni.  Reykianess,  the  southern
boundary  of  Heriulfs  'claim,'  is  at  the  south-western  extremity  of  Iceland;  Vág  was,
probably,  situated  a  short  distance  to  the  north  of  this  cape,  on  the  western  coast  of  the
same  peninsula.

(63)  In  the  'King's  Mirror'  [Konungs  Skuggsjá],  an  interesting  Norwegian  work  of  the
thirteenth  century,  wherein,  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue,  a  father  is  supposed  to  be  imparting
information  to  his  son  concerning  the  physical  geography  of  Greenland,  he  says  :  '  Now  there
is  another  mar\-el  in  the  Greenland  Sea,  concerning  the  nature  of  which  I  am  not  so
thoroughly  informed,  this  is  that,  which  people  call  "  Sea-rollers "  [hafgerðingar].  This  is
likest  all  the  sea-storm  and  all  the  billows,  which  are  in  that  sea,  gathered  together  in  three
places,  from  which  three  billows  form  ;  these  three  hedge  in  the  whole  sea,  so  that  no  break  is
to  be  seen,  and  they  are  higher  than  tall  fells,  are  like  steep  peaks,  and  few  instances  are
known  of  persons  who,  being  upon  the  sea  when  this  phenomenon  befell,  have  escaped
therefrom.'  [Speculum  regale,  ed.  Brenner,  Munich,  1881,  p.  47.]  A  Danish  scholar,  in.  a
treatise  upon  this  subject,  concludes  that  the  hafgerðingar  were  earth-quake  waves,  and  that
those  here  celebrated  were  such  tidal-waves  caused  by  an  unusually  severe  earth-quake  in  the
year  986.  [Cf.  Steenstrup,  Hvad  er  Kongespeilets  'Havgcrdinger  ?'  Copenh.  1871,  esp.
p.  49.]     However  this  may  be,  there  can  be  little  question  that  Heriulf  experienced  a  perilous


NOTES.  ,  i8i

voyage,  since  out  of  the  large  number  of  ships,  which  set  sail  for  Greenland  at  the  same  time,
so  few  succeeded  in  reaching  their  destination.

(64)  This  has  been  assumed  by  many  writers  to  have  been  Labrador,  but  the  description
does  not  accord  with  the  appearance  which  that  country  now  presents.

(65)  Certainly  a  marvellous  coincidence,  but  it  is  quite  in  character  with  the  no  less
surprising  accuracy  with  which  the  explorers,  of  this  history,  succeed  in  finding  'Leif's-booths'
in  a  country  which  was  as  strange  to  them  as  Greenland  to  Biarni.

(66)  This  statement  has  attracted  more  attention,  perhaps,  than  any  other  passage  in  the
account  of  the  Icelandic  discovery  of  America,  since  it  seems  to  afford  data  which,  if  they  can
be  satisfactorily  interpreted,  enable  us  to  determine  approximately  the  site  of  the  discovery.
The  observation  must  have  been  made  within  the  limits  of  a  region  wherein,  early  in  the
eleventh  century,  the  sun  was  visible  upon  the  shortest  day  of  the  year  between  dagmálasla3r
and  cyktarstadr ;  it  is,  therefore,  apparent  that  if  we  can  arrive  at  the  exact  meaning  of  either
dagtnálastadr  or  eyktarstadr,  or  the  length  of  time  intervening  between  these,  it  should  not  be
difficult  to  obtain  positive  information  concerning  the  location  of  the  region  in  which  the
observation  was  made.  We  are  informed  by  a  treatise,  inserted  in  the  printed  text  of
Rimbegla,  written  by  Bishop  John  Arnason,  that  the  method  adopted  by  the  ancient  Icelanders
for  the  determination  of  the  various  periods  of  the  day,  was  to  select  certain  so-called  '  eykt-
marks'  [eyktamörk]  about  every  dwelling,  as,  peaks,  knolls,  valleys,  gorges,  cairns,  or
the  like,  and  to  note  the  position  of,  and  course  of  the  sun  by  day,  or  the  moon  and  stars  by
night,  with  relation  to  these  '  eykt-marks  '.'  The  circle  of  the  horizon  having  been  thus  arti-
ficially divided,  in  the  absence  of  clocks  or  watches,  certain  names  were  assigned  to  the  position
which  the  sun  occupied  at,  as  we  should  say,  certain  'hours'  of  the  day;  'dagmálastaðr,'  lit.  'day-
meal-stead,'  indicates  the  position  of  the  sun  at  the  '  day-meal,'  which  was  the  principal  morning
meal.  We  have,  unfortunately,  no  accurate  data  which  might  enable  us  to  determine  the
position  of  the  sun  at  'dagmálastaðr ; '  such  information  we  have,  however,  concerning  'eykt,'
for  it  is  stated,  in  an  ancient  Icelandic  law-code,  that  '  if  the  south-west  octant  be  divided  into
thirds,  it  is  "eykt"  when  the  sun  has  traversed  two  divisions  and  one  is  left  untraversed  '
['þá  er  eykð  er  útsuðrsætt  erdeild  í  þriðjunga,  ok  hefirsól  gengna  tváhluti,  en  einn  ogenginn;'
Kristinnréttr  Þorláks  ok  Ketils,  Copenh.  1775,  p.  92.  Cf.  also  Grágás,  ed.  Finsen,  Copenh.
1852,  Pt.  I,  p.  26].  There  seems  to  be  little  room  for  question  that  the  '  eykt '  of '  Kristinnréttr '
and  the  eyktarstadr  of  the  Flatey  Book  are  the  same,  and  the  statement  of  '  Kristinnrettr '
accordingly  affords  a  clear  and  concise  definition  of  the  position  of  that  point  upon  the  horizon
at  which  the  sun  set  on  the  shortest  day  of  the  year  in  Wineland,  and  which  the  explorers
called  '  eyktarstaðr.'  Nevertheless  the  rational  and  simple  scientific  application  of  this  know-
ledge has  been,  until  very  recently,  completely  ignored,  in  the  effort  to  reach,  through  this
definition,  the  solution  of  the  problem  involving  the  exact  clock-time  of  dagmdlastaSr  and
eyktarstadr  and  thus  the  hour  at  which  the  sun  rose  and  set  on  the  shortest  Wineland  day.

The  widely  divergent  views  of  the  leading  writers  upon  this  subject  have  been
concisely  summarized  by  Professor  Gustav  Storm,  in  a  very  able  treatise  wherein  he  points
out   the  real  value  of  the  information,   to  be  derived  from  the  passage   in  '  Kristinnrettr.'

'  Cf.  Rimbegla,  1.  c.  Eiktamork  íslendsk,  pp.  2,  4,  and  23,  recently  reprinted  in  'Kvæði  eptir  Stefan  Ólafsson,'  ed.
Jon  þorkelsson,  Copenh.  18S6,  vol.  ii.  pp.  358,  364-5.


i82  THE  FIXDIXG   OF    WINELAXD    THE    GOOD.

With  the  addition  of  a  few  minor  details  as  to  authorities,  cited  by  Professor  Storm,  which
additions  are  here  itahcized,  his  summary  is  as  follows  :

'  The  first  WTÍter  in  modern  times  to  seek  to  determine  Wineland's  geographical  situation
was  Arngrim  Jonsson  in  "  Gronlandia ; "  he,  as  well  as  all  subsequent  investigators,  has
employed  to  this  end  the  passage  in  the  Grœnlendinga-þáttr  of  the  Flatey  Book,  in  which
mention  is  made  of  the  duration  of  the  shortest  day  in  Wineland  \the  passage  under  considera-
iion'] ;  but  as  to  the  significance  of  this  passage  many  different  opinions  have  been  advanced,
and,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  there  seem  to  be  strong  objections  to  them  all.  Arngrim  Jonsson
translated  "  sol  in  ipso  solstitio  hyberno,  circiter  6  plus  minus  supra  horizontem  commorat ; "
he  writes  by  way  of  caution  "  plus  minus  "  [about],  since  he  adds  "  sciotericiis  enim  destitue-
bantur  "  [Gronlandia,  ch.  ix,  p.  jj  of  the  Latin  MS.,  gl.  kg/.  Sam/.  [Royal  Library  of  Copenli.]
No.  2S-j6,  4to,  but  at  p.  J},  of  the  Icelandic  printed  text,  heretofore  cited,  fromwhichlatter, however,  all
qualification  is  omitted,  and  the  statement  reads  simply,  "  the  sun  could  be  seen  fully  six  hours  on
the  shortest  day,"  "  sva  par  matte  sol  sia  urn  skanidcigid  sialft  vel  sex  stundcr"].  This  explana-
tion was,  doubtless,  only  known  to  the  few  Danish  scholars  of  the  seventeenth  centur}',  who  had
access  to  Arngrim's  "  Gronlandia ; "  it  first  became  more  widely  disseminated  in  the  Icelandic
translation,  which  was  published  at  Skálholt  in  1688.  Arngrim's  explanation  was  also  accepted
bj'  Torfæus  in  his  "  Vinlandia  "  [1705] :  "  Brumales  dies  ibi  qvam  vel  in  Islandia,  vel  Gron-
landia longiores,  ad  horam  nonam  circa  solstitia  sol  oriebatur,  tertiam  occidit "  [Vinlandia,
1.  c.  pp.  6  and  7],  although  Torfæus  remarks  that  this  observation  must,  on  account  of  the
fruitfulness  of  the  country,  be  regarded  as  inaccurate,  since  it  points  to  a  latitude  of  58'  26'.
While  his  work  was  in  the  press  Torfæus  became  acquainted  with  Peringskiöld's — or  more
correctly  the  Icelander,  Gudmund  Olafsson's — translation  in  the  printed  edition  of  Heims-
kringla  \  which  he  properly  enough  rejected,  but  which  caused  him  to  undertake  a  renewed
consideration  of  the  subject.  With  the  passage  from  Grágás  [i.  e.  the  passage  defining  "  eyki"}
as  a  basis,  he  now  arrived  at  the  following  interpretation  of  this  :  "  spatium  qvod  sol  á  meridie
in  occidentem  percurrit,  sex  horas  reqvirit,  ex  qvibus  singuli  trientes  duas  constituunt,  bes
desinit  in  horam  qvartam  pomeridianam."  [Vinlandia,  Addenda,  pp.  6  and  7].  Now  if
"  eykt "  be  four  o'clock,  p.m.— and  the  shortest  day  accordingly  eight  hours — Wineland's
latitude  becomes  49°,  i.  e.  Newfoundland,  or  the  corresponding  Canadian  coast.  This  new
interpretation  became,  by  reason  of  the  attention  which  Torfæus'  writings  attracted  in  the
learned  world,  most  widely  disseminated  in  the  last  century ;  thus  we  find  it  accepted  by  the
German  investigator,  J.  R.  Forster,  who  concludes  that  Wineland  was  either  Gander  Bay  or
the  Bay  of  Exploits,  in  Newfoundland,  or  on  the  coast  of  the  northern  side  of  the  Gulf  of
St.  Lawrence  [  49"]  [Joh.  Reinh.  Forster,  Geschichte  der  Entdeckungen  und  Schiff"fahrten
im  Norden,  Frankf.  1784,  p.  112];  the  same  interpretation  is  also  accepted  by  Make  Brun,
Precis  de  la  Géographie  universelle,  Paris,  1812,  I.  394.  Meanwhile,  early  in  this  century,
Icelandic  scholars  began  to  advance  a  new  view,  which  has  gradually  forced  its  way  into
general  recognition.  This  view  was  first  suggested  by  Vice-lawman  Pall  Vidah'n  in  his  un-
published  Skyringar '',  subsequently  adopted  by  Bishop  Finnr  Jonsson  [1772]  in  his  Hist.

"  '  The  (lay  was  longer  tliere  than  in  Greenland  or  Iceland,  for  the  sun  had  there  its  hour  of  increase  and  the  day-
raeal-stcad  or  place  of  rising  at  breakfast-time  [about  six  or  seven  o'clock]  on  the  shortest  day.'  Heimskringla,
cd.  I'eringskiold,  vol.  i.  p.  33.  Suliin  inclined  to  this  opinion  in  Kjobh.  Selsk.  Skrifter,  viii.  80,  and  believed  that
Wineland  was  '  Pennsylvania,  Mar)land,  or  perhaps  Carolina.'

'  yidalin's  work  7vas  written  prior  to  1727,  hut  was  itot  pul'llslicd  until  1854,  when  it  appeared  in  Rej'kjavik
under  the  title,  Skýriiigar  yfir  Foniyrii  Lögtiótar  Jteirrar,  er  Jómhfk  kallast  [Commentaries  on  ancient  terms  in  the
law-took  called  Jónsbók\.     The  subject  under  consideration  is  treated  in  this  work,  pp.  56-S2,


NOTES.  183

Eccl.  Isl.  153  et  seq.  [i.e.  isj-s6  note],  it  was  next  approved  by  Schöning  in  a  note  to
Heimskringla  [Heiinskriiigla,  Copenli.  /777,  vol.  i.  p.  joc)],  and  in  his  history  of  Norway
\_Norgcs  Rigcs  Historic,  Copaih.  lySi,  vol.  Hi.  4ig],  and  in  this  century  was  more  elaborately
developed  by  Rafn  and  Finn  Magnusen.  The  new  point  of  departure  in  this  theory  is  Snorri's
expression  in  Edda  concerning  the  seasons  of  the  year,  "  Frá  jafndœgri  er  haust  til  þess  er
sol  sezt  Í  eykðar  stað"  ["Autumn  lasts  from  the  equinox  tmtil  the  sun  sets  in  '  eyktarstaSr,'  "  Edda
Snorra  Sturlusonar,  Copenh.  1848,  vol.  i.  p.  510] ;  since  it  was  assumed  that  the  beginning  of
winter,  according  to  Snorri,  coincided,  as  a  matter  of  course,  with  the  beginning  of  winter
according  to  the  Icelandic  calendar  [the  week  from  the  nth  to  the  17th  of  October],  it  was
found  that  the  sun  set  at  Reykholt  [Snorri's  home]  on  the  17th  of  October  at  four  o'clock  ;  to
conform  with  this,  "  Eyktarstaðr  "  was  interpreted  to  mean  the  end  of  "  Eykt,"  and  "  Eykt  "
became  the  period  of  tvme  from  3.30  to  4.30.  Now  if  the  sun  was  above  the  horizon  in  Wine-
land  on  the  shortest  day  from  Dagmál  to  Eyktarstaðr,  a  day  nine  hours  in  length  was  obtained,
which  Prof.  Thomas  Bugge  computed  gave  a  latitude  of  4o'"22',  or,  according  to  Rafn  and  Finn
Magnusen,  more  exactly,  4i'^24'io".  Rafn  believed  that  it  followed  of  a  certainty  that  Wine-
land  was  identical  with  the  southern  coast  of  Rhode  Island-  and  Connecticut,  directly  to  the
westward  of  Cape  Cod.  But  very  serious  objections  to  this  theory  suggest  themselves.
When  Leif  Ericsson — according  to  the  Flatey  Book — approached  Wineland,  he  saw  at  first
an  island  to  the  northward  of  the  land  ;  he  then  sailed  to  the  westward  into  a  sound  between
the  island  and  the  land's  most  northerly  cape,  and  still  farther  west,  they  arrived  at  a  river  and
lake,  where  they  established  themselves ;  the  composer  of  the  saga  accordingly  had  in  mind
a  country  facing  toward  the  north,  and  upon  whose  northern  shore  Leif  and  his  people
established  themselves  in  "  Leifsbúðir."  Nevertheless  Rafn  renders  this  thus  [Annaler  for
Nord.  Oldkyndigh.  Copenh.  1840-41,  pp.  6  and  16]  :  "They  came  to  an  island,  which  lay  to
the  east  off  the  land,  and  sailed  into  a  sound  between  this  island  and  a  cape,  which  projected
toward  the  east  [and  north]  from  the  land." '  [Gustav  Storm,  Om  Betydningen  af  '  Eyktar-
staðr'  i  Flatpbogens  Beretning  om  Vinlandsreiserne,  foredraget  i  Christiania  Videnskabsselskab
2den  Nov.  1883,  pp.  1-4.  The  article  has  since  been  published  in  Arkiv  for  Nordisk  Filologi,
November,  1885.]

Professor  Storm,  in  this  same  treatise,  points  out  the  inaccuracy  of  Rafn's  astronomical
calculation,  which  corrected,  would  change  the  latitude  to  42°  21',  the  vicinity  of  Boston,  which
region  does  not,  however,  correspond  to  the  descriptions  of  the  saga.  He  further  shows  the
error  in  the  interpretation  of  the  passage  in  Snorri's  Edda,  upon  which  this  theory  is  based.
The  cause  of  the  confusion  in  these  different  theories  is  satisfactorily  explained  by  the
following  paragraph  in  Professor  Storm's  article,  the  contribution  of  the  astronomer,  Mr.
Geelmuyden,  to  whom  Professor  Storm  had  submitted  the  astronomical  data  for  solution :

'  For  the  correct  understanding  of  the  passages  in  the  old  sagas,  wherein  these  day-
marks  [i.  e.  the  eyktamörk  of  Rimbcgla]  are  mentioned,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  bear  in
mind  that  they  were  in  practical  use  ;  nor  should  it  be  forgotten  that  the  sun's  position  above
a  certain  day-mark  only  gives  a  certain  horizontal  projection,  and  especially  it  will  not  do  to
transfer  the  stroke  of  the  clock  corresponding  to  a  certain  day-mark— whether  that  correspond-
ing to  a  certain  season  of  the  year  be  taken,  or  the  mean  for  the  entire  year— to  the  similar
day-mark  at  other  places  on  the  earth.

'When,   therefore,    the  Greenlanders  found,  according  to  the  statement  in  the  Flatey


1 84  THE  FINDING  OF    WIN  EL  AND    THE   GOOD.

Book,  that  the  sun  upon  the  shortest  day  "  had  Dagmálastaðr  and  Eyktarstaðr,"  this  does  not
mean  that  the  sun  was  visible  until  a  certain  hour,  for  they  lacked  the  means  of  determining
the  hour,  according  to  our  understanding  of  the  word,  but  it  does  mean  that  the  sun  was  visible
in  certain  horizontal  directions  which  they  were  experienced  in  determining.'

Applying  the  passage  in  Kristinnréttr  to  the  determination  of  the  position  of  the  sun  at
sunset,  on  the  shortest  day  of  the  year  in  Wineland,  Mr.  Geelmuyden  concludes  that :

'  Since  Útsuðrsætt  is  the  octant,  which  has  S.  W.  in  its  centre,  therefore  between  22-5°
and  675^  Azimuth,  Eyktarstaðr  must  be  in  the  direction  22-5°  + 1  of  45°=52-5°  from  the  south
toward  the  west.  Solving  the  latitude  in  which  the  sun  set  in  this  direction  on  the  shortest
day  [in  the  eleventh  century]  we  find  it  to  be  49°55'.  Here,  therefore,  or  farther  to  the  south
the  observation  must  have  been  made.'

I  am  indebted  to  Capt.  R.  L.  Phythian,  U.  S.  N.,  Superintendent  of  the  U.  S.  Naval
Observatory,  Washington,  for  the  following  detailed  computation  undertaken,  at  my  request,
from  a  brief  statement  of  the  problem  :

'As  the  solution  of  the  question  j'ou  propose  depends,  of  course,  upon  the  interpratation
of  the  data  furnished,  it  is  necessary  that  I  should  give  in  detail  the  process  by  which  the
amplitude  of  the  sun  is  derived  from  the  statement  contained  in  your  letter.

'  "  Eyktarstad  "  is  assumed  to  be  the  position  of  the  sun  in  the  horizon  when  setting.  The
south-west  octant  you  define  to  be  the  octant  having  S.W.  as  its  centre  ;  its  limits,  therefore,
are  S.  221°  W.  and  S.  67^°  W.

' "  It  is  eykt  when,  the  south-west  octant  having  been  divided  into  thirds,  the  sun  has
traversed  two  of  these  and  has  one  still  to  go."  That  is,  it  is  eykt  when  the  point  of  the
horizon  is  30°  west  of  S.  22^  W.,  or  S.  52^°  W.  From  this  the  sun's  amplitude  when  in  this
point  of  the  horizon  is  W.  37°  30'  S.

'The  sun's  declination  on  the  shortest  day  of  the  }-ear  1015  was  S.  23°  34'  30"  [nearly].

'The  simple  formula  for  finding  the  sun's  amplitude  when  in  the  true  horizon  is
sufficiently  accurate  for  the  conditions  of  this  case.

'  It  is  sin  A  =  sin  d  sec.  L,

from  which  sec  L  =  sin  A  cosec.  d.

'  Solving  with  the  above  data  :

A  =-37°  30' log.  sin.      -978445

d=  -23°  34' 30" log,  cosec.  -0-39799

L=  -f48  56 log.  sec.       4-018244.

'  If  I  have  been  in  error  in  the  process  by  which  the  amplitude  has  been  arrived  at,  the
substitution  of  its  correct  value  in  the  above  computation  will  give  the  proper  latitude.'

This  computation  was  undertaken  independently  of  Mr.  Geelmuyden's  conclusions,  and  in
reply  to  my  query,  evoked  by  the  slight  discrepancy  in  the  two  results,  which  was  then  first
brought  to  his  attention,  Capt.  Phythian  writes,  as  follows  :

'The  formula  by  which  I  computed  the  latitude  is  the  simplest  form  that  can  be  em-
ployed for  the  purpose,  but  was,  for  reasons  that  will  be  mentioned  later,  deemed  sufficiently
accurate.


NOTES.  185

'  It  assumes  that  the  bearing  of  the  sun  was  taken  when  its  centre  was  actually  on  the
horizon,  and  the  latitude  is  found  by  the  solution  of  a  spherical  right-angled  triangle.
Manifestly  the  learned  Professor  has  taken  into  account  the  effect  of  refraction,  and  solved  an
oblique  triangle.  By  this  method,  calling  the  refraction  33',  we  find  the  latitude  to  be
49°  5o'-2.  The  slight  difference  between  this  result  and  that  of  the  Professor  [less  than  5'j  is
accounted  for  by  the  supposition  that  he  did  not  assume  the  same  refraction.

'  The  conditions  of  this  case  do  not  seem  to  give  additional  value  to  a  rigorous  solution.
Since  the  explorers  were  on  the  eastern  coast  of  the  continent  they  must  have  observed  the
setting  of  the  sun  over  land,  and  probably  recorded  its  bearing  before  it  reached  the  horizon.
In  such  a  case,  the  introduction  of  refraction  and  semi-diameter  would  lead  to  a  result  more  in
error  than  the  simpler  solution.

'  The  data  furnished  are  not  sufficiently  definite  to  warrant  a  more  positive  assertion  than
that  the  explorers  could  not  have  been,  when  the  record  was  made,  farther  north  than  Lat.
[say]  49".'

The  result,  therefore,  of  the  application  of  Professor  Storm's  simple  and  logical  treatment
to  this  passage  in  Flatey  Book,  '  the  sun  had  there  Eyktarstad,'  &c.,  is  summed  up  in  Capt.
Phythian's  statement,  '  the  explorers  could  not  have  been,  when  the  record  was  made,  farther
north  than  Lat.  [saj']  49° ; '  that  is  to  say,  Wineland  may  have  been  somewhat  farther  to  the
south  than  northern  Newfoundland  or  the  corresponding  Canadian  coast,  but,  if  we  may  rely
upon  the  accuracy  of  this  astronomical  observation,  it  is  clear  that  tims  far  south  it  must
have  been.

(67)  Kornhjálmr  af  tré,  a  wooden  granary.  The  word  'hjalmr '  appears  to  have  a  double
significance.  In  the  passage  in  the  Saga  of  King  Olaf  the  Saint:  'Wilt  thou  sell  us  grain,
farmer?  I  see  that  there  are  large  "hjálmar"  here'  [Heimskringla,  ed.  Unger,  p.  353],
the  word  '  hjálmar '  may  have  the  meaning  of  stacks  of  grain.  The  use  of  the  word  as  indicat-
ing a  house  for  the  storage  of  grain  is,  however,  clearly  indicated  in  the  Jydske  Lov  of  1241,
wherein  we  read  :  '  But  if  one  build  upon  the  land  of  another  either  a  "hialm  "  or  any  other
house,'  &c.  ['æn  byggær  man  annænds  iord  antugh  mæth  hialm  æth  mæth  nokær  andre  hus,'
&c.  Danmarks  gamle  Provindslove,  ed.  Thorsen,  Copenh.  1853,  pp.  79-80].  As  there  is  no
suggestion  in  the  saga  of  the  finding  of  cultivated  fields,  it  is  not  apparent  for  what  uses  a
house  for  the  storage  of  grain  could  have  been  intended.

(68)  Vigflaki,  lit.  a  war-hurdle.  This  was  a  protection  against  the  missiles  of  the  enemy
raised  above  the  sides  of  the  vessel.  In  this  instance,  as  perhaps  generally  on  ship-board,
this  protecting  screen  would  appear  to  have  been  formed  of  shields  attached  to  the  bulwarks,
between  these  the  arrow,  which  caused  Thorvald's  death,  doubtless,  found  its  way.

(69)  The  Landnámabók  makes  no  mention  of  this  Thori ;  its  language  would  seem  to
preclude  the  probability  of  a  marriage  between  such  a  man  and  Gudrid ;  the  passage  with
reference  to  Gudrid  being  as  follows :  '  His  son  was  Thorbiorn,  father  of  Gudrid  who  married
Thorstein,  son  of  Eric  the  Red,  and  afterwards  Thorfinn  Karlsefni ;  from  them  are  descended
bishops  Biorn,  Thorlak  and  Brand.'     Landnáma,  pt.  ii,  ch.  xvii.

(70)  Námkyrtill  [namkirtle]  is  thus  explained  by  Dr.  Valtýr  Guðmundsson,  in  his
unpublished  treatise  on  ancient  Icelandic  dress:  'Different  writers  are  not  agreed
upon  the  meaning  of  "  námkyrtill ; " '  Sveinbjörn  Egilsson  [Lexicon  poet.]  interprets  it  as
signifying  a  kirtle  made  from  some  kind  of  material  called   'nam.'     In  this  definition   he

Bb


i86  THE  FINDING    OF    WINELAND    THE   GOOD.

is  followed  by  Keyser  [Nordmændenes  private  Liv  i  Oldtiden],  and  Vigfusson  [Diet.].  The
Icelandic  painter,  Sigurðr  Guðmundsson  ['  Um  kvennabúninga  á  fslandi  að  fornu  og  nfju,'  in
Ný  fjelagsrit,  vol.  xvii],  has,  on  the  other  hand,  regarded  the  word  as  allied  to  the  expression  :
'at  nema  at  beini'  [i.e.  fitting  close  to  the  leg,  narrow],  and  concludes  that  ' námk3'rtill '
should  be  translated,  'narrow  kirtle,'  in  which  view  Eirikr  Jonsson  [Oldnordisk  Ordbog]  and
K.  Weinhold  [Altnordisches  Leben]  coincide.

'  I  cannot  agree  with  either  of  these  interpretations.  The  mention  in  Flatey  Book  is
so  indefinite,  that  nothing  can  be  determined  from  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  meaning  of  this
word  becomes  apparent  from  a  passage  in  Laxdœla  Saga,  if  this  be  compared  with  other
references  to  female  dress  in  ancient  times,  contained  in  the  elder  literature.  This  passage  in
Laxdoela  Saga  is  as  follows  :  "  Gudrun  wore  a  '  námkyrtill '  and  a  close-fitting  upper  garment
[vefjarupphlutr],  with  a  large  head-dress ;  she  wore  WTapped  about  her  an  apron  with  dark
embroidery  upon  it  and  fringed  at  the  ends"  ["Guðrúnvar  í  námkjTtli,  ok  við  vefjarupphlutr
þrgngr,  en  sveigr  mikill  á  hgfði ;  hon  hafði  knf tt  um  sik  blæju  ok  váru  í  mgrk  blá  ok  trof  fyrir
enda."]  "  Námk3.Ttill "  evidently  means  here  half-kirtle  or  petticoat,  for  with  it  an  "  upphlutr  "
[waist]  of  different  stuff  is  worn,  which  in  Snorra  Edda  [ii.  494]  is  called  "helfni"  [i.e.
half  kirtle].  The  origin  of  the  word  seems  to  me  to  have  been  as  follows :  In  the  ordinary
woman's  gown  [kirtle]  the  upper  part,  or  "upphlutr,"  was,  obviously,  much  narrower  [i.e.
closer-fitting]  than  the  lower  part  of  the  gannent,  and  was,  in  consequence,  worn  out  sooner
than  the  lower  part.  With  the  better  class  of  people  the  kirtle  was  usually  made  from  some
foreign  stuflT  of  bright  colour,  especially  red.  Now  when  the  upper  part  [upphlutr]  was  worn
out,  the  wearers,  indisposed  to  abandon  the  lower  part  of  the  garment,  which  was  still  senáceable,
took  [námu]  or  cut  off  the  lower  part,  and  wore  it  with  an  upper  garment  made  from  domestic
stuff  [homespun],  the  so-called  vvadmal  [vefjarupphlutr].  The  lower  detached  part  of  the  gar-
ment or  skirt  then  received  the  name  of  "nam  "  or  "námkyrtill "  [cf.  landnám,  órnám]  because  it
had  been  taken  [numið]  from  the  entire  kirtle.  By  the  preservation  of  the  serviceable  lower  part
of  the  garment,  with  its  foreign  stuff  of  sho^\'y  colour,  the  dress  was  rendered  more  ornamental
than  it  would  have  been  if  both  the  lower  and  upper  portion  of  the  kirtle  had  been  made  from
wadmal,  which  it  was  not  easy  to  obtain,  in  Iceland,  dyed  in  colours.  Such  I  conclude  to  have
been  the  origin  of  the  word  "  nam  "  or  "  námkjTtill."  The  word  subsequently  continued  in  use,
regardless  of  the  fact  whether  the  skirt  or  lower  half-kirtle,  to  which  it  was  applied,  had  been
cut  from  an  old  kirtle  or  not'.'

(71)  A  '  mgrk '  was  equal  to  eight  '  aurar '  [cf  Laxdoela  Saga,  ch.  26,  ed.  Kalund,  Copenh.
1889,  p.  90];  an  'ejTÍr'  [plur.  'aurar']  of  silver  was  equal  to  144  skillings  [cf  Vídalín,
Skyn'ngar  yfir  Fom3TOi  Lögbókar,  Reykjavik,  1854,  p.  351].  An  'ejTÍr '  would,  therefore,  have
been  equal  to  three  crowns  [kroner],  modern  Danish  coinage,  since  sixteen  skillings  are  equal
to  one-third  of  a  crown  [33,',  0re],  and  a  half  '  mgrk '  of  silver  would  accordingly  have  been
equal  to  twelve  crowns,  Danish  coinage.  As  the  relative  value  of  gold  and  silver  at  the  time
described  is  not  clearly  established,  it  is  not  possible  to  determine  accurately  the  value  of
the  half  '  mgrk '  of  gold.  It  was,  doubtless,  greater  at  that  time,  proportionately,  than  the
value  here  assigned,  while  the  purchasing  power  of  both  precious  metals  was  very  much
greater  then  than  now.

'  Cf.  also  the  same  aulhor's  reference  to  'námk)Ttill '  in  Grundriss  dcr  Germ.  Philol.  XIII,  Abschnitt,  Sitte  I,  §  31.


NOTES.  187

(72)  At  the  time  of  the  '  settlement '  of  Iceland  the  homestead  of  the  more  prominent
'settler'  became  the  nucleus  of  a  little  community.  The  head  of  this  little  community,  who  was
the  acknowledged  leader  in  matters  spiritual  and  temporal,  was  called  the  'goði.'  With  the
introduction  of  Christianity  the  'goði'  or  '  goðorðsmaðr '  lost  his  religious  character  though
he  still  retained  his  place  of  importance  in  the  Commonwealth.

(73)  'fat  var  ofarliga  á  dögum  Ólafs  hins  helga,  at  Guðleifr  hafði  kaupferð  vestr  til
Dýflinnar;  en  er  hann  sigldi  vestan,  ætlaði  hann  til  Islands;  hann  sigldi  fyrir  vestan  frland,  ok
fekk  austanveðr  ok  landnyrðinga,  ok  rak  þá  langt  vestr  í  haf  ok  í  útsuðr,  svá  at  þeir  vissu  ekki  til
landa ;  en  þá  var  mjök  áliðit  sumar,  ok  hetu  þeir  mörgu,  at  þá  bæri  or  hafinu,  ok  þá  kom  þar,
at  þeir  urðu  við  land  varir;  þat  var  mikit  land,  en  eigi  vissu  þeir  hvert  land  þat  var.  Þat  ráð
tóku  þeir  Guðleifr,  at  þeir  sigldu  at  landinu,  þvíat  þeim  þótti  illt  at  eiga  lengr  við  hafsmegnit.
Þeir  féngu  þar  höfn  góða ;  en  er  þeir  höfðu  þar  litla  stund  við  land  verit,  þá  koma  menn  til
fundar  við  þá ;  þeir  kendu  þar  engan  mann,  en  helzt  þótti  þeim,  sem  þeir  mælti  írsku  ;  brátt
kom  til  þeirra  svá  mikit  fjölmenni,  at  þat  skipti  mörgum  hundruðum.  þeir  tóku  þá  höndum
alia  ok  bundu,  ok  ráku  þá  síðan  á  land  upp.  Þá  vóru  þeir  færðir  á  mót  eitt,  ok  dæmt  um  þá.
Þat  skildu  þeir,  at  sumir  vildu  at  þeir  væri  drepnir,  en  sumir  vildu  at  þeim  væri  skipt  á  vistir
ok  væri  þeir  þjáðir.  Ok  er  þetta  var  kært,  sjá  þeir  hvar  reið  flokkr  manna,  ok  var  þar  borit
merki  í  flokkinum  ;  þóttust  þeir  þá  vita,  at  höfðingi  nökkurr  mundi  vera  í  flokkinum ;  ok  er
flokk  þenna  bar  þangat  at,  sá  þeir,  at  undir  merkinu  reið  mikill  maðr  ok  garpligr,  ok  var  þó
mjök  á.efra  aldr  ok  hvítr  fyrir  hærum.  Allir  menn  er  þar  vóru  fyrir,  hnigu  þeim  manni,  ok
fögnuðu  sem  herra  sínum  ;  fundu  þeir  þá  brátt,  at  þangat  var  skotið  öllum  ráðum  ok  atkvæðum,
sem  hann  var.  Síðan  sendi  þessi  maðr  eptir  þeim  Guðleifi  ;  ok  er  þeir  kómu  fyrir  þenna  mann,
þá  mælti  hann  til  þeirra  á  norrænu,  ok  spyrr,  hvaðan  af  löndum  þeir  vóru.  Þeir  sögðu,  at  þeir
væri  flestir  íslenzkir.  Þessi  maðr  spurði  hverir  þeir  væri  þessir  íslenzku  menn  ;  gékk  Guðleifr
þá  fyrir  þenna  mann  ok  kvaddi  hann  virðuliga,  en  hann  tók  því  vel,  ok  spyrr  hvaðan  af  Islandi
þeir  væri,  en  Guðleifr  segir  at  hann  væri  ór  Borgarfirði- ;  þá  spurði  hann  hvaðan  ór  Borgarfirði
hann  var ;  en  Gunnlaugr  segir[þat].  Eptir  þat  spurði  hann  vandliga  eptir  sérhverjum  hinna
stærri  manna  í  Borgarfirði  ok  Breiðafirði.  Ok  er  þeir  töluðu  þetta,  spyrr  hann  eptir  Snorra
goða  ok  Þuríði  frá  Fróðá,  systur  hans,  ok  hann  spurði  vandliga  eptir  öllum  hlutum  frá  Fróðá
ok  mest  at  sveininum  Kjartani,  er  þá  var  bóndi  at  Fróðá.  Landsmenn  kölluðu  í  öðrum  stað,
at  nökkurt  ráð  skyldi  gjöra  fyrir  skipshöfninni.  Eptir  þat  gékk  þessi  mikli  maðr  brott  frá  þeim,
ok  nefndi  með  sér  xij  menn  af  sínum  mönnum,  ok  sátu  þeir  langa  hrlð  á  tali.  Eptir  þat  géngu
þeir  til  mannfundarins.  Þá  mælti  inn  mikli  maðr  til  þeirra  Guðleifs  :  "  Vér  landsmenn  höfum
talat  nökkut  [mál]  yðar,  ok  hafa  landsmenn  nú  gefit  yðvart  mál  á  mitt  vald,  en  ek  vil  nú  gefa
yðr  fararleyfi  þangat  sem  þér  vilit  fara  ;  en  þó  yðr  þykki  nú  mjök  á  liðit  sumar,  þá  vil  ek  þó
ráða  yðr,  at  þér  látið  á  brott  héðan,  þvíat  hér  er  folk  útrútt  ok  illt  viðreignar :  en  þeim  þykkja
áðr  brotin  lög  á  sér."  Guðleifr  mælti :  "  Hvat  skulum  vér  til  segja,  ef  oss  verðr  auðit  at  koma
til  ættjarða  várra,  hverr  oss  hafi  frelsi  gefit  ? "  Hann  svarar :  "  Þat  mun  ek  yðr  eigi  segja,
þvíat  ek  ann  eigi  þess  frændum  mínum  ok  fóstbræðrum,  at  þeir  hafi  híngat  þvílíka  ferð,  sem
þér  mundut  haft  hafa,  ef  þér  nytið  eigi  mín  víð  ;  en  nú  er  svá  komit  aldri  mínum,"  sagði  hann,
"at  þat  er  á  öngri  stundu  örvænt,  nær  elli  stígr  yfir  höfuð  mér ;  en  þóat  ek  li£a  enn  um
stundar  sakir,  þá  eru  hér  á  landi  ríkari  menn  en  ek,  þeir  at  lítinn  frið  munu  gefa  útlendum
mönnum,  þóat  þeir  sé  eigi  híngat  nálægir,  sem  þér  erut  at  komnir,     Síðan  lét  þessi  maðr  búa

B  b  2


i88  THE  FINDING  OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

skipit  með  þeim,  ok  var  þar  við  til  þess  er  byrr  kom,  sá  er  þeim  var  hagstæðr  út  at  taka.  En
áðr  þeir  Guðleifr  skildu,  tók  þessi  maðr  gullhring  af  hendi  sér,  ok  fær  í  hendr  Guðleifi,  ok  þar
með  gott  sverð  ;  en  síðan  mælti  hann  við  Guðleif :  "  Ef  þér  verðr  auðit  at  koma  til  fóstr-jarðar
þinnar,  þá  skaltú  færa  sverð  þetta  Kjartani,  bóndanum  at  Fróðá,  en  hringinn  Þuríði  móður
hans."  Guðleifr  mælti :  "  Hvat  skal  ek  til  segja,  hverr  þeim  sendi  þessa  gripi  ? "  Hann
svarar:  "  Seg,  at  sá  sendi,  at  meiri  vin  var  húsfreyjunnar  at  Fróðá  en  goðans  at  Helgafelli,
bróður  hennar.  En  ef  nökkurr  þykkist  vita  þar  af,  hverr  þessa  gripi  hefir  átta,  þá  seg  þau  mín
orð,  at  ek  banna  hverjum  manni  á  minn  fund  at  fara,  þvíat  þat  er  en  mesta  úfæra,  nema  þeim
takist  þann  veg  giptusamliga  um  landtökuna,  sem  yðr  hefir  tekizt ;  er  hér  ok  land  [vítt  ok]  illt
til  hafna,  en  ráðinn  ófriðr  allstaðar  útlendum  mönnum,  nema  svá  beri  til  sem  nú  hefir  orðit."
Eptir  þetta  skildu  þeir.  [Þeir]  Guðleifr  létu  í  haf,  ok  tóku  frland  síð  um  haustið,  ok  vóru  í
D.vflinni  um  vetrinn  ;  en  um  sumarit  sigldu  þeir  til  islands,  ok  færði  Guðleifr  þá  af  höndum
gripina,  ok  höfðu  allir  þat  fyrir  satt,  at  þessi  maðr  hafi  verit  Björn  Breiðvíkingakappi ;  en
engi  önnur  sannjTidi  hafa  menn  til  þess,  nema  þau  sem  nú  vóru  sögð.'  Eyrbyggja  Saga,  ed.
Vigfusson,  pp.  119-22.

(74)  The  paper  manuscripts  founded  upon  the  text  of  the  saga  presented  in  H auk's  Book
are  as  follows :

In  the  Arna-Magnæan  Collection,  Copenhagen.

No.  118,  8vo.  The  first  page  of  this  manuscript  bears  the  following  title  :  '  Hier  hefur
Grænlan[ds  Ann]ál.  Er  fyrst  Saga  e.dr  [Hisjtoria  Þorfinns  Krt;-lsef[nis]  Þordar  sonar.'  The
saga,  which  fills  twenty-four  sheets,  was  written  in  the  seventeenth  century  by  Björn  á  Skarðsá.
There  are  certain  interpolations  in  the  text,  as  on  p.  15  b,  concerning  '  Helluland  hið  mikla,'
p.  16,  on  the  origin  of  the  name  '  Markland,'  and  on  p.  19  b,  concerning  the  Skrelling  boats.
With  the  exception  of  these  inserted  passages,  and  a  few  minor  verbal  changes,  the  text
follows  closely  that  of  ÞsK.

No.  281,  4to.  On  the  back  of  p.  83  [modern  pagination]  of  this  book  is  the  title :
'Hier  hef«r  s0gu  Þorfins  Kallsefnis  Þordarsonar.'  It  is  a  neatly  written  manuscript,  in  a
hand  somewhat  resembling  the  elder  vellum  hands.  On  the  back  of  p.  84  the  passage  from
Landnáma:  'So  se^/rAri  forgylsson  ad  þa/  sumar  fóru  XXII  skip,'  &c.,  together  with  the
list  of  colonists  as  given  in  the  Flatey  Book  text,  have  been  inserted  by  the  scribe,  and  the
fact  noted  at  the  bottom  of  the  page.  On  p.  93  the  saga  concludes  with  the  words  :  '  Vera
Gud  med  oss,'  as  in  Hauk's  Book,  which  words  are  usually  omitted  from  the  paper  transcripts
of  ÞsK.  It  is  a  good  clear  copy  of  the  Hauk's  Book  text,  one  of  the  most  accurate  and
useful.  It  was  made  by  Sigurður  Jónsson  of  Knör  toward  the  close  of  the  seventeenth
century.  [Cf  AM.  Katalog.]

No.  597  b,  4to.  In  the  centre  of  p.  32  [modern  pagination]  is  the  title:  'Hier  hefur
S0gu  Þorfins  Kallsefnes  Þordrtrsonan'  This  text,  like  that  of  281,  410,  has  the  interpolated
passage  from  Landnáma,  above  noted ;  unlike  281,  4to,  however,  it  is  a  careless  copy,  and
contains  many  errors,  as  :  '  kirtel '  for  '  kistil,'  '  fuller  vonn  '  for  '  fulltrúann,'  &c.  It  contains
numerous  marginal  notes  in  an  old  hand,  ends  on  the  back  of  p.  41,  and  was  written  [cf.
AM.  Katalog]  in  the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century.

No.  768,  4to.    At  the  head  of  the  first  page  of  text  of  this  manuscript  is  the  title  :  '  Hier


NOTES.  189

hefur  Grænlands  Annal,  er  fyrst  Saga  edur  Historia  Þorfins  Kails  efnis  Þordar  Sonar.'
The  saga  contains  thirty-eight  pages,  based  upon  the  text  of  Hauk's  Book,  although  with
numerous  additions  from  the  narrative  of  the  Flatey  Book,  as  also  concerning  Helluland  it
mikla,  &c.  It  is  written  in  German  script,  dates  from  the  seventeenth  century,  having  belonged,
according  to  Arni  Magnusson's  conjecture,  in  1669,  to  Bishop  Thord,  from  whom  Thormod
Torfæus  received  it.  It  would  appear  from  a  passage  on  p.  5  of  this  manuscript,  that
the  scribe  had  access  to  Hauk's  Book,  for  he  writes :  '  Þesser  efterfarandi  Capituli  er
einfalldliga  efter  Hauks  Bök  skrifadir,'  &c.

No.  770  b,  4to.  This  manuscript  contains  two  sagas  written  about  1770.  The  first
of  these,  covering  thirty-six  pages,  bears  the  title :  '  Hier  hefur  Sögu  Þorfinns  Karlsefnis
f'órdarsonar.'     It  is  an  almost  literal  transcript  of  the  text  of  ÞsK.

No.  1008,  4to.  Near  the  middle  of  this  book  is  the  saga  bearing  the  title :  '  Her  hefr
vpp  sogu  þeirra  Þorfinnz  Karlsefnis  oc  Snorra  Þorbrandz  sonar.'  In  the  margin,  in  an
old  hand,  are  the  words  '  Fordret  Mag.  Joon  Arnesen  af  AM,'  and  upon  the  same  page
Dr.  Gudbrand  Vigfusson  has  written  'eptir  Hauksbók.'  It  is  a  fair  copy  of  i'sK,  written
ca.  1700.

In  the  Royal  Library,  Copenhagen.

No.  1692,  4to  [Ny  kgl.  Saml.].  This  copy,  written  in  cursive  hand,  in  the  last  century,
fills  one  hundred  pages,  and  is  entitled  :  '  Sagan  af  Þorfinni  Karlsefni  Þórðar  syni.'  Accord-
ing to  an  inserted  note,  the  copy  was  made  by  J.  Johnsen  [Jon  Jónsson]  from  AM.  281,  4to.

No.  1698,  4to  [Ny  kgl.  Saml.].  This  saga,  which  follows  closely  ÞsK,  under  the  title  :
'Her  hefur  upp  S0gu  þeirra  Þorfin^s  Karls-Efnis  og  Snorra  Þorbrandssonar,'  fills  twenty-
seven  pages  of  the  manuscript,  and  was  written,  in  German  script,  probably  in  the  last
century.  This  text  is  peculiarly  interesting  because  of  the  variant  it  has  from  the  words
of  the  original  in  the  passage  describing  the  distance  from  Bjarneyjar  to  Helluland,  which
is  thus  given  in  this  text:  'þaðan  sigldu  [þeir]  iii  dægur,'  &c.     [Cf.  Note  46,  p.  174.]

No.  1734,  4to  [Ny  kgl.  Saml.].  This  manuscript,  while  it  does  not  contain  ÞsK,  does
contain  certain  notabilia  concerning  Eric  the  Red,  Greenland,  the  situation  of  Wineland,
Albania  [Hvitramannaland],  &c.,  and  on  pp.  21  et  seq.  has  an  account  of  Þorbjörn,  [sic]  Kallz
Efni.  It  was  written  in  the  last  half  of  the  last  century  by  J.  Johnson  [Jónsson]  after  AM.
770  b,  4to.

No.  1754,  4to  [Thott.  Saml.].  This  text  of  the  saga,  with  the  title:  'Her  hefr  upp
sogu  þeirra  Þorfinnz  Karlsefnis  oc  Snorra  f-orbrandzsonar,'  contains  seventy-two  pages,
copied  'Ex  codice  vetusto  membraneo  in  Bibl.  Acad.  Hafn.  inter  MSS.  Arnse  Magnæi,  No.
544  in  4to.'  As  the  scribe  states,  '  there  are  certain  lacunae  here  and  there  in  the  Codex
illegible  by  reason  of  smoke  and  age,  which  have  caused  certain  lacunæ  in  this  copy ; '
it  is  otherwise  a  good  clear  copy,  in  running  hand,  of  ÞsK,  made  at  a  time  when  Hauk's
Book  was  in  no  better  state  than  at  present,  as  the  lacunæ  of  the  copy  indicate.

The  paper  manuscripts  founded  upon  the  text  [EsR]  of  AM.  557,  4to,  are  as  follows  :

In  the  Arna-Magnæan  Collection.
No.  563  b,  4to.     This  is  an  inferior  copy  from  the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century.
It  is  in  running  hand  and  contains  nineteen  pages.     According  to  a  slip,  in  Arni  Magnusson's


rgo  THE  FINDING  OF    WINELAND   THE    GOOD.

hand,  inserted  in  the  manuscript,  it  has  been  compared  with  a  copy  in  quarto  'written
by  the  Rev.  Vigfus  Gudbrandsson,'  and  is  filled  with  interlineations  and  corrections,  which
bring  it  to  a  fair  likeness  with  the  text  of  557,  4to.

No.  770  b,  4to.  The  second  saga  in  this  manuscript  has  the  title :  '  Hier  hefst  Saga
af  Ein'ki  Rauda,'  beside  which  title  Ami  Magnusson  has  written  'er  mipg  o  correct'
['is  very  incorrect'].  It  is  an  inferior  transcript  of  EsR,  in  the  same  hand  as  that  of
the  text  of  ÞsK  which  precedes  it.

No.  931,  4to.  At  the  foot  of  p.  13  of  this  manuscript  is  the  title  '  Her  Byriar  Sauguna
Af  Eyreke  Rauda  Þorv-aldss.'  This  text  covers  twenty-two  pages,  completed,  as  is  stated  at
the  end  of  the  saga,  in  the  year  1734  ['oc  likr  her  þessare  s0gu  þann  3.  Januarij  Anno
1734 '].  It  is  a  good  clear  copy  of  the  text  of  EsR,  omitting,  however,  the  verses  of  Þorw.
[sic]  the  Huntsman,  and  the  Einfceting  ditty.

No.  932,  4to.  This  collection  of  sagas  was  written,  as  is  stated  on  the  title-page,  in  the
year  1821.  On  p.  268  of  the  manuscript  the  'Saga  fra  Eyreci  Rauda'  begins,  and  is  con-
cluded on  p.  297.  While  it  follows  the  text  of  EsR,  certain  of  the  minor  errors  of  that  text
have  been  corrected  in  conformity  with  the  language  of  ÞsK.

No.  401,  fol.  This  transcript  of  the  '  Saga  Ein'ks  Rauða '  contains  forty-four  pages  in
cursive  hand,  with  notes  at  the  foot  and  in  the  margin  of  the  text.  Originally  a  close  copy
of  AM.  557,  4to,  it  has  been  corrected  in  many  places  apparently  to  conform  to  the  text  of
ÞsK.     According  to  the  '  Katalog '  this  copy  was  made  in  the  latter  half  of  the  last  century.

No.  30  Rask  Coll.  The  text  here  presented  under  the  title  '  Sagann  af  Eireke  Rauda,'
is  a  rather  inexact  copy  of  EsR,  written  ca.  1770.  This  text  makes  Thorvald  Ericsson  shoot
the  Uniped,  and  has  such  minor  variants  from  the  original  as  '  Þorvalldr  var  kallrtdr
veidimadr,'  'samtymnis  lanþar'  in  the  second  line  of  the  second  verse,  &c.

No.  36  Rask  Coll.  On  p.  116  of  this  collection  of  sagas  this  copy  of '  Sagann  af  Eyrike
enum  Rauda'  begins,  and  is  brought  to  a  conclusion  on  p.  129.  It  was  written,  as  is  stated
at  the  end  of  the  saga,  by  Olaf  Sigurdsson,  and  by  him  completed  in  January  1810.  While
it  is  founded  upon  EsR,  it  is  rather  a  paraphrase  than  a  literal  copy  of  that  text.


In  the  Royal  Library,  Copenhagen.

No.  1697,  4to  [Ny  kgl.  Saml.].  This  text,  which  fills  115  pages,  was  copied  [probably
late  in  the  last  century],  as  is  stated  in  the  manuscript,  from  AM.  563  b,  \X.o,  by  J.  Johnsson.
The  scribe  has  followed  the  corrected  text  of  the  manuscript  from  which  his  copy  was  made.

No.  1714,  4to  [Ny  kgl.  Saml.].  This  'Saga  af  Eyreke  Rauda'  contains  eighteen  pages,
written  in  1715.  While  it  follows  in  the  main  EsR,  it  is  not  without  minor  changes  due
apparently  to  the  influence  of  ÞsK.

No.  1 1 73,  fol.  [Ny  kgl.  Saml.].  This  manuscript,  from  the  early  part  of  the  present
century  (?),  contains  both  the  Icelandic  text  and  a  Latin  translation  of  the  '  Saga  af  Eireke
Rauda,'  derived,  as  is  stated,  from  AM.  557,  410,  compared  with  AM.  281  and  563,  4to,  and
Hauk's  Book,  together  with  an  excerpt  from  AM.  770,  8vo.

No.  616,  4to  [Kail.  Saml. J.     The  'Saga  Eireks  Rauda,'  which  occupies  the  ninth  place


NOTES.  igi

in  this  collection,  fills  twelve  pages.  It  is  written  in  a  good  hand  of  the  early  part  of  the
last  century,  or  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  follows  the  text  of  AM.  557  aXo
closely.

No.  1776,  4to  [Thott.  Saml.].  In  this  bundle  of  sagas  the  text  of  'Sagan  af  Eyreke
Rauda '  forms  a  separate  tractate.  This  is  a  copy  of  EsR  made,  probably,  in  the  latter
part  of  the  last  century,  with  unimportant  variants  of  the  original  text  as  '  Þorvallþr  veiþimadr ; '
in  Thorhall's  second  ditty  'knarrar  skurd,'  instead  of  'knarrar  skeið,'  &c.

No.  984  a,  fol.  [Thott.  Saml.].  In  this  collection  of  folios  there  are  two  texts  of  EsR ;
one  has  the  title  'Saga  Eyreks  Rauda,'  the  other  'Saga  af  Eyreke  Rauda.'  The  first
contains  twenty-six  pages,  following  closely  the  text  of  AM.  557,  4to,  except  in  the  omission
of  the  stanzas  of  {"orvald  [sic]  the  Huntsman,  and  that  which  refers  to  the  Uniped.  The
second  text  contains  twenty-eight  pages,  and,  like  the  first,  is  a  close  copy  of  the  text  of  AM.
557,  4to,  except,  in  this  case,  in  the  orthography.  Both  transcripts  appear  to  have  been  made
in  the  latter  half  of  the  last  century.


In  the  British  Museum  Library.

No.  11,123.  At  the  end  of  this  quarto  manuscript  are  fifty-three  pages,  in  running
hand,  containing  '  Sagan  af  Eirike  Rauða.'  This  saga  is  a  fairly  literal  transcript  of  the  text
of  EsR.  It  is  preceded  by  a  woodcut  of  Eric  the  Red,  being  the  same  as  that  contained  in
Arngrim  Jonsson's  '  Gronlandia,'  and  is  followed  by  a  few  pages  of '  Annals '  and  notes
the  concluding  notice  bearing  the  title  'Af  {"orbirni  Karlsefni,'  with  the  entry,  at  the  end,
written  at  Borgartiin,  1775,  by  Oddr  Jonsson.

No.  11,126.  This  is  a  folio  manuscript  of  thirty-seven  pages.  On  an  inserted  fly-leaf  is
the  note  '  Saga  Eiriks  Rauda  ex  membrana  in  Arnæ  Magnæi  Bibliotheca  in  4to,  Num.  557.'
There  are  a  few  marginal  corrections  of  the  clerical  errors  of  AM.  557,  4to,  as  'skridu  '  for
'skylldu,'  'fundu  kiol '  for  'fengu  skiol,'  &c.,  and  a  few  lacunæ  in  the  transcript  where  the
scribe  has  not  been  able  to  read  the  words  of  the  vellum.  According  to  the  Manuscript
Catalogue,  this  copy  was  made  in  Copenhagen  in  1768  by  Odd  Jonsson.  Both  11,123,  and
11,126  are  from  the  collection  of  Finn  Magnusen.

No.  4,867  [Banks  Coll.].  A  manuscript  in  folio  containing  many  sagas,  of  which  the
third  in  the  collection  is  '  Sagann  af  Eyreke  Ravda,'  which  fills  sixteen  pages,  and  is  a  fairly
accurate  copy  of  the  text  of  AM.  557,  4to,  written,  as  would  appear  from  an  entry  at  the  end
of  the  saga,  in  1691.

In  addition  to  these  paper  manuscripts  of  the  text  of  EsR  there  are  others  in  the  National
Library  of  Reykjavik  [143,  4to,  150,  410,  and  151,  4to],  and  one  in  the  Royal  Library  pf  Stock-
holm, which  I  have  not  found  it  possible  to  examine.  The  text  of  the  Stockholm  manuscript.
No.  35,  fol.,  conforms  to  that  of  AM.  557,  4to  [cf.  Arwidsson,  Förteckning  öfver  Kongl.
Bibliothekets  i  Stockholm  Islandska  Handskrifter,  Stockholm,  1848,  pp.  66-7],  and  it  is  not
probable  that  the  Reykjavik  manuscripts  offer  any  peculiarities  differing  from  those  exhibited
by  the  paper  transcripts  above  mentioned.

Of  the  Wineland  history  of  the  Flatey  Book  there  is  in  the  Arna-Magnæan  Collection  a


192  THE   FINDING   OF    WINELAND    THE    GOOD.

paper  copy  of  the  Saga  of  Olaf  Tryggvason,  being  No.  57,  fol.,  which  contains  the  Þáttr  Eireks
Rauda'  [pp.  1064-73,  new  pagination  5336-38],  as  well  as  the  '  Grænlendingha  þáttr'  [pp.
1361-94,  new  pagination  682-986],  This  is  a  literal  transcript  of  the  narrative  of  the  Flatey
Book.

It  seems  safe  to  conclude  that  the  texts  of  all  these  paper  manuscripts  are  derived,
directly  or  indirectly,  from  the  vellum  manuscripts  which  have  been  preserved,  and  of  which
facsimiles  are  here  given.  In  the  numerous  transcripts  of  the  texts  of  EsR  and  ÞsK  there  are
no  passages  which  indicate  an  origin  other  than  the  two  vellum  manuscripts,  AM.  544
and  557,  4to,  and  the  numerous  variants  from  these  originals  have,  in  all  likelihood,  arisen
either  through  the  editorial  care  or  clerical  carelessness  of  the  scribes  of  these  transcripts.


INDEX.


NAMES    OF    PERSONS.


Aasen,  Ivar,  80.

Acosta,  Josephus,  95.

Adalbrand,  Helgi's  son,  [Aðalbrandr  Helgason],

88.
Adam  of  Bremen,  92,  93,  94,  159.
Anmagsaliks,  178,  179.
Ari  Marsson,  [Ari  Mársson],  11,  12,  84,  160.
Ari  Thorgilsson,  the  Learned,   [Ari  Þorgilsson

hinn  fróði],  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  79,  188.
Arnason,  John,  Bishop,  [JónÁrnason],  181, 189.
Arngrim  Jonsson,  [Arngrimr  Jónsson],  21,   56,

95,  96,  170,  182,  191.
Ami  Magnusson,  vide  IMagnusson.
Arni  Thorlacius,  vide  Thorlacius.
Ami    Thorlaksson,    Bishop,    [Ami    forláksson

biskup  Í  Skálholti],  20,  88.
Amlaug  of  Arnlaugsfirth,  [Arnlaugr],  61,  142.
Arnold,  Bishop,  [Arnaldr  biskup],  82.
Arrow-Odd,  [Qrvar-Oddr],  89,  90,  161.
Asgeirr  Jonsson,  vide  Jonsson.
Aslak  of  Langadal,  [Áslákr  or   Langadal],  30,

io5>  123-

Asleik,  son  of  Biorn  Iron-side,  [Ásleikr  Bjar-

narson  járnsíðu],  40,  115.
Asvald,  Ulfs  son,  [Ásvaldr  Ulfsson],  29,  60, 105,

123,  140.
Atli,  Ulfs  son,  [Atli  hinn  rauði  Ulfsson],  29, 105,

123.
Aud  the  Wealthy,  or  Wise,  [Auðr  hin  djúpauðga

[djúpúðga]   Ketilsdóttir],   28,   29,    100,   104,

105,  122,  123,  162,  163,  164,  165,  167.


Avaldidida,  vide  Valldidida.

Avalldamon,    Avalldainna,    [Avalldama,    Avall-

dania],  51,  120,  138,  177,  178.
Avezac-llacaya,  I\Iarie  Armand  Pascal  d',  175,

177.
A\-illdudida,  vide  Valldidida.

Bancroft,  George  P.,  2.

Bard  Heriulfsson,  [Bárðr  Herjúlfsson],6 1,142,180.

Bard  the  Snow-fell-god,  [Bárðr  Snæfellsáss],  90,

91.
Beothuks,  176,  178,  179.
Biarni,  Grimolf's  son,  [Bjarni  Grímólfsson],  40,

42,  44,  46,   49,  51,  52,  115,  116,  117,  120,

121,  132,  133,  134,  135,  137,  138.
Biarni  Heriulfsson,  [Bjarni  Herjúlfsson],  5,  55,

56,  57,   61,  62,  63,  64,  65,   142,   143,  144,

145,  146,  180.
Biamsson,  John,  [Jon  Biamsson],  54.
Biorn  Asbrandsson,  the  Broadwickers'-champion,

[Bjgrn  Asbrandsson  Breiðvíkingakappi],  84,

85,  86  [.?],  87,  89,  167,  187,  188.
Biorn,  Aud's  brother,  [Bjprn  Ketilsson],  28,  105,

122.
Biorn'Buna,  the  Ungartered  [?],  [Bjgrn  Grimsson

buna],  28,  104,  122,  162.
Biorn  Chest-butter,  [Bjgrn  byrðusmjgr],  40, 115,

171.
Biorn,  Bishop,  [Bjgrn  Gilsson,  biskup  á  Hólum],

52,  78,  121,  139,  158,  167,  179,  185.
Biorn  Haldorsen,  [Bjorn  Halldórsson],  i6i.


194


INDEX.— NAMES  OF  PERSONS.


Biorn  Iron-side,  [Bjgrn  jámsíða],  40,  115.
Biorn  of  Skardsá,  [Björn  Jónssoná  Skarðsá],  97,

119,  120,  188.
Biorn,  Karlsefni's    son,  vide   Thorbiom,    Karl-

sefni's  son.
Biorn  Marcusson,  vide  Marcusson.
Biorn,  Thord's  son,  [Bjgrn  Þórðarson],  171.
Bock,  Hieronj-mus,  170.
Boer,  R.  C,  89,  90.
Brand  of  Alptafirth,  [Brandr  or  Alptaíirði],  60,

141,  cf.  Thorbrand  of  Alptafirth.
Brand,  Bishop,  the  Younger,  [Brandr  Jónsson,

biskup  á  Hólum],  59,  180.
Brand,  Bishop,  [Brandr   Sæmundsson,  biskup  á

Hólum],  52,  59,  78,  121,  139,  158,  167, 179,

180,  185.
Brenner,  Oscar,  ir,  180.
Bryniolf  Sveinsson,  [Br}Tijólfr  Sveinsson,  biskup

Í  Skálholti],  9,  12,  21,  25,  54,  82.
Bugge,  Thomas,  183.

Cabot,  John,  159,  160.
Cabot,  Sebastian,  159,  160.
Cartier,  Jacques,  175,  177.
Columbus,  Cristopher,  94,  159.
Columbus,  Fernando,  159.
Cortez,  Hernando,  94.
Ctesias,  177.

Dalhousie,  Earl  of,  93.
Danes,  13,  92,  93.
Duelling-Hrafn,  vide  Hrafn,
Dumb,  King,  [Dumbr  konungr],  90.

Egil  Skallagrimsson,  163.

Egilsson,  Sveinbjörn,  97,  185.

Einar  of  Einarsfirth,  [Einarr],  61,  142.

Einarr  Eyjólfsson,  96.

Einar,    Grundar-Kctil's    son,    [Einarr   Grundar-

Kclilsson],  52,  121.
Einar  Haflidason,  [Einarr  Hafliðason],  79,  80.
Einar  of  Laugarbrckka,  [Einarr  Sigmundarson  á

Laugarbrekka],  30,  106,  124.
Einar,  Thorgeir's  son,  [Einarr  Þorgeirsson],  31,

32,  100,  io6,  107,  124,  125,  167.
Einarsson,  Hálfdan,  80.


Einfœtingr,  vide  Uniped,

Ellindsson,  vide  Erlendsson.

English,  159,  176.

Eric,  Earl,  [Eirikr  jarl  Hákonarson],  56,64, 145.

Eric,  Magnus'  son,  King,  [Eirikr  Magnússon,
konungr],  89.

Eric  the  Red,  Thorvald's  son,  [Eirikr  hinn  rauði
Þorvaldsson],  4,  5,  9,  14,  15,  19,  22,  23,  25,
26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  32,  35,  36,  37,  38,  40,41,
42,  43.  50,  51,  54,  56,  57.  58,  59,  60,  61,  62,
64,  66,  67,  68,  69,  75,  84,  94,  97,  99,  loo,
loi,  102,  103,  105,  106,  108,  no,  112,  113,
115,  116,  120,  123,  124,  126,  128,  129,  130,
132.  133,  134.  137.  138.  140.  141,  142,  145.
146,  147,  148,  149,  150,  155,  161,  164,  165,
166,  169,  170,  171,  172,  174,  180,  185,  189,
190,  191,  192.

Eric  Uppsi,  Bishop,  [Eirikr  uppsi  [upsi]  biskup
Gniipsson],  80,  81,  82,  94,  96.

Ericsson,  Leif,  vide  Leif.

Ericsson,  Thorstein,  vide  Thorstein  Ericsson.

Ericsson,  Thorvald,  vide  Thorvald  Ericsson.

Erlend  Olafsson,  [Erlendr  sterki  Óláfsson],  19,
52,  121.

Erlendsson,  Hauk,  vide  Hauk  Erlendsson.

Erlendsson,  John,  [Jon  Ellindsson  (Erlendsson)],
8,  9,  II,  12.

Eskimo,  166,  176,  177,  178,  179.

Europeans,  178.

Eyiolf  of  Sviney,  [Eyjólfr  Æsuson  6r  Svíney],  30,
60,  105,  106,  123,  124,  141.

Eyiolf  the  Foul,  [Eyjólfr  saurr],  29,60,  105, 123,
141.

Eystein  the  Rattler,  [Eysteinn  glumra  fvarsson],
28,  104,  122.

Eyvind  Easterhng,  [Eyvindr  austmaðr],  28,  104,
122.

Eyxna-Thori,  vide  Thori.

Finnbogi,  [Finnbogi  or  Auslijgrðum],  58,  74,  75,

76,  155.  156,  157-
Finns,  170.

Finsen,  V.,  [Vilhjálmur  Finsson],  181.
Finsson,  John,  [Jon  Finsson],  54.
Finsson,  Torfi,  vide  Torfi  Finsson.
Flosi,  Halla's  son,  [Flosi  Bjarnarson],  52,  121.


INDEX.— NAMES  OF  PERSONS.


195


Forster,  Joh.  Reinhold,  182.

Frederick,  Bishop,   [Friðrekr  biskup],  61,  142,

180.
Frederick  the  Third,  King  of  Denmark,  54,  97.
Freydis,  Eric's  daughter,  [Freydis  Eiríksdóttir],

5,  42,  48,  49,  58,  59,  62,  74,  75,  76,  77.  "6,

119,  136,  137,  142,  143,  155,  156,  157,  158,

172.
Fridgerd,  Kiarval's  daughter,  [Friðgerðr  Kjarvals-

dóttir],  40,  113.
Fridgerd,  daughter  of  Thori  the  Loiterer,  [Frið-

gerðr  f'órisdóttir  hímu],  40,  115,  171.
Fritzner,  Johan,  71,  73,  161.
Frodi  the  Brave,  [Fróði  hinn  frœkni],  162.

Gaels,  [Skozkr],  vide  Haki  and  Hækia.

Gamli  the  Wendlander,    [GamH    Vindlendingr],

171,  172.
Gard,  [Garð  [Garðarr]  verkstjóri  Þorsteins  svarta

1  Lýsufirði],  38,  39,  113,  114,  130,  131.
Gardie,  de  la,  Magnus,  80.
Gatschet,  A.  S.,  178.
Geelmuyden,  183,  184.
Geirstein,  [Geirsteinn],  29,  105,  123.
Geitisson  [Gellisson  ?],  vide  Thorkel  Geitisson,
Gellir  Thorkelsson,  [Gellir  Þorkelsson],  7.
Gellisson,  Thorkel,  vide  Thorkel  Gelhsson.
Gellius,  Aulus,  177.
German,  A.  [Suðrmaðr],  77,  158.
Gest,  Bard's  son,  [Gestr  Bárðarson],  91.
Gizur   Einarsson,    Bishop,    [Gizurr    Einarsson,

biskup  Í  Skálholti],  88.
Gizur  the  White,  [Gizurr  Teitsson  hvltij,  11,  14,

15.  26,  57.
Gislason,  Konrad,  46,  172.
Gjessing,  Gustav  Antonio,  8.
Gottskalk  Jonsson,  [Gottskálk  Jónsson],  81,  82,

83,  88.
Goudie,  Gilbert,  162.
Greenlanders,   54,   56,  57,  58,  59,  64,  81,  82,

114,  131,  133,  i45>  183-
Grelad,  Groa's  daughter,  [Grel0ð   Gróudóttir],

28,  104,  122.
Grimhild,  [Grímhildr  [cf  s.  v.  Sigrid,  Sigiíðr  kona

Þorsteins  svarta],  70,  71,  151,  152.
Grimkell,  Ulf's  son,  [GrimkeU  tJlfsson],  166.


Groa,  Thorstein  the  Red's  daughter,  [Gr6a  Þor-

steinsdóttir  rauða],  28,  104,  122.
Gröndal,  Benedikt,  80.
Grundar-Ketil,  vide  Ketil.
Gudbrandsson,  Vigfus,  [Vigfús  Guðbrandsson],

190.
Gudleif  Gudlaugsson,    [Guðleifr   GuðlaugssonJ,

85,  86,  87,  187,  188.
Guðmundr  Jónsson,  vide  Jónsson.
Guðmundr  Oláfsson,  vide  Olafsson.
Guðmundsson,  Sigurður,  186.
Guðmundsson,  Valtýr,  99,  161,  165,  185,  186.
Gudraud,  Halfdan's  son,  [Guðr0ðr  Hálfdanarson],

28,  104,  122.
Gudrid,  the  Skrelling  woman,  [Guðríðr],  59,  73,

74,  154-
Gudrid,  Thorbiorn's  daughter,  [Guðríðr  Þorbjar-
nardóttir],  25,  26,  27,  31,  32,  34,  35,  38,  39,
40,  41,  49,  52,  58,  59,  67,  70,  71,  72,  73.
74,  77,  78,  106,  107,  109,  iio,  113,114,
115,  ii6,  120,  121,  124,  125,  127,  128,  130,

131,  132,  133.  139,  148,  150,  151,  152,  153.

154,  158,  167,  168,  170,  173,  185.
Gudrun,  Osvif's  daughter,  [Guðrún  Ósvífrsdóttir],

186.
Gudrun,   Thorstein's   daughter,    [Guðriin    Þor-

steinsdóttir],  52,  121.
Gunnarr  Keldugnúpsfífl,  89.
Gunnbiorn,  son  of  Ulf  the  Crow,   [Gunnbj^rn

Úlfsson  kráku],  30,  60,  105,  123,  141,  166.
Gunnlad,  [Gunnl0ð],  vide  Grelad.
Gunnstein,  Gunnbiorn's  son,  [Gunnsteinn  Gunn-

bjarnarson],  166.
Guy,  John,  176,

Hacon  the  Good,  King,  [Hákon  enn  góði  Aðal-

steinsfóstri],  172.
Hacon,  Earl,  [Hákon  jarl  enn  ríki  Sigurðarson],

163.
Haconsson,  John,  [Jón  Hákonarson],  17,  53.
Hækia,  vide  Hekia.

Hafgrim  of  Hafgrimsfirth,  [Hafgrímr],  61,  142.
Hafliði  Mársson,  81.
Haki,  43,  44,  117,  134.
Halfdan    Brana's-fosterling,    [Hálfdan    Brgnu-

fóstri],  90.


196


INDEX.— NAMES   OF  PERSONS.


Hálfdan  Einarsson,  vide  Einarsson.

Halfdan  Whiteleg,  [Hálfdan  hvítbeinn],  28,  104,

122.
Halfdan  Eysteinsson,  [Halfdan  Eysteinsson],  90.
Halla,  Jorund's  daughter,  [Halla  Jgrundardóttir],

52,  121.
Hallbera,  Ingigerd's  daughter,  Abbess,  [Hallbera

Þorsteinsdóttir,  abbadís  í  Reyninesi],  22,  23,

52,  121.
Halldis,  Orm's  wife,  [Halldis  kona  Orms],  31,

32,  33,  34,  106,  108,  109,  124,  126,  127.
Halldor,  Gunnbiorn's  son,  [Halldórr  Gunnbjar-

narson],  166.
Hallfrid,  [Hallfríðr  Snorradóttir],  52,  58,  59,  78,

121,  139,  158.
Hallveig,    Einar's    daughter,    [Hallveig    Einars-

dóttir],  30,  106,  124.
Hanssön,  Laurents,  13.
Harold   Fairhair,  King,  [Haraldr   enn  hárfagri,

konungr],  162,  163,  165.
Harold   Hardrede,  I^ng,   [Haraldr  Sigurðarson

harðráði,  konungr],  92,  93,  160.
Hauk  Erlendsson,  [Haukr  Erlendsson],  12,  13,

19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  24,  25,  28,  46,  52,59,96,

97,   99,   100,   loi,   102,   103,  121,  175,  180,

188,  189,  190.
Hebridean,  The,    [Suðreyskr  maðr],  author  of

the  Sea-Rollers,  Song,  62,  142.
Hekia,  [Hækia],  43,  44,  117,  134.
Helgi  of  the  Eastfirths,  [Helgi  or  AustfjgrðumJ,

58,  74,  75.  76,      5.  156,  157-
Helgi,  Olaf's  son,  [Helgi  Óláfsson],  28,  104,  122.
Helgi  the  Lean,  [Helgi  hinn  magri  Eyvindarson],

28,  104,  122.
Helgi  Hundingsbani  Sigmundarson,  176.
Helgi  Thorbrandsson,  [Helgi  Þorbrandsson],  61,

142,
Helgi,  Thori's  son,  [Helgi  Þórisson],  1 70.
Hcriulf,  [Herjulfr  Bárðarson],  56,  61,  62,  63,  64,

102,  142,  143,  144,  180.
Heriulf  the  Settler,  [Herjulfr  landnámsmaðr],  61,

142,  180.
Heriulfsson,  Biarni,  vide  Biarni  Heriulfsson.
Hinanda,  Captain,  175.
Hjaltalin,  John  A.,  (J6n  A.  Hjaltalin),  162.
Hjalti  Skcggjason,  vide  Skcggiason.


Holm,  Gustav,  166,  178,  179,

Hólmgpngu-Hrafn,  vide  Hrafn,  Duelling-.

Höyer,  Henrik,  81,  82,  88.

Hrafn  of  Hrafnsfirth,  [Hrafn],  61,  142.

Hrafn,  Duelling-,   [Hólmggngu-Hrafn],   29,  60,

105,  123,  141-

Humboldt,  Alexander  von,  94,  159.

Icelander,   An,  [Biarni's   companion],   51,    121,

138.
Icelanders,  3,  19,  82,  83,  85,  91,  96,  100,  loi,

174,  176,  180.
Icelandic  Secretaries,  Hauk's,  22,  100,  loi.
Illugi,  [Illugi  Ásláksson],  30,  105,  123.
Indians,  95.

Indians,  North  American,  176,  177,  179.
Ingiald,    Frodi's   son,    [Ingjaldr    Fróðason   ens

frœkna],  162.
Ingiald,    Helgi's    son.  King,    [Ingjaldr  konungr

Helgason],  28,  104,  122.
Ingigerd,   Fru,   [Frd   Ingigerðr   ríka  Philippus-

dóttir],  23,  52,  121.
Ingolf  Arnarson,    [Ingólfr   Arnarson],    56,    61,

142,  180.
Ingolf  of  Holmlatr,   [Ingólfr  á  Hólmlátri],  30,

106,  124.

Ingolf  the  Strong,  [Ingólfr  hinn  sterki],  167.
Ingveld,   Thorgeir's    daughter,    [Ingveldr     {"or-

geirsdóttir],  52,  78,  121,  139,  158.
Ingvild,  Ketil's  daughter,  [Yngvildr  Ketilsdóttir

veðrs],  162.

Jensen,  J.  A.  D.,  167.

John  the  Learned,  [Jon  lærði],  21.

Jón  Biarnsson,  vide  Biarnsson.

Jon  Ellindsson,  vide  EUindsson.

Jon  Finsson,  vide  Finsson.

Jon  Hákonarson,  vide  Haconsson.

Jon  Óláfsson,  vide  Olafsson.

Jon  I^órðarson,  vide  Thordsson.

Jon  Torfason,  vide  Torfason.

Jon  Vídalín,  vide  Vidalin.

Jonsson,  Arngrim,  vide  Arngrim.

Jonsson,  Asgeir,  [Asgeirr  Jonsson],  13.

Jonsson,  Björn,  vide  Biorn  of  Skardsá.

Jonsson,  Eirikr,  186.

Jonsson,  Finnr,  79,  182.


INDEX.— NAMES   OF  PERSONS.


197


Jónsson,  Finnur,  7,  10,  12,  16,  53,  163,  176.

Jónsson,  Gottskálk,  vide  Gottskalk.

Jónsson,  Guðmundr,  171.

Jónsson,  Jón,  189,  190.

Jónsson,  Oddr,  191.

Jonsson,  Olaf,  The  Rev.,  [Síra  Óláfr  Jónsson],  21.

Jónsson,  Sigurður,  188.

Jonsson,  Torfi,  The  Rev.,  [Síra  Toifi  Jónsson],  9.

Jorund,  Atli's  son,  [Jgrundr  Atlason],   29,    60,

105,  123,  141.
Jorand  of  Keldur,  [Jgrundr  at  Keldum],  52,  121.
Jorunn,  [Jórunn  Helgudóttir],  19.

Kálund,  P.  E.  Kristian,  15,  104,  164,  166,  i86.

Karlsefni,  vide  Thorfinn  Karlsefni.

Ketil  Flatnose,   [Ketill  flatnefr  Bjarnarson],  28,

104,  122,  162.
Ketíl  of  Ketilsfirth,  [Ketill],  61,  142.
Ketil  Thistil,  [Ketill  þistill],  30,  106,  124.
Ketil,  Thorstein's  son,  Bishop,  [Ketill  í>orsteinsson,

biskup  á  Hólum],  8.
Ketil,  Grundar-,  [Ketill  Þorvaldsson],  52,  121.
Ketil  Wether,  [Ketill  veðr],  162.
Keyser,  Rudolf,  162,  164,  186.
Kiartan,  Thurid's  son,  [Kjartan  á  Fróðá],   86,

187,  188.
Kiarval,  king  of  the  Irish,  [Kjarval  frakonungr],

40,  115.
Kleinschmidt,  Samuel,  179.
Kveldulf,  [Kveldulfr],  163.

Lachmann,  Karl,  87.

Landa-Rólfr,  vide  Rolf.

Langebek,  Jacob,  79,  81,  82.

Lappenberg,  Johann  Martin,  92.

Las  Casas,  Barthelemy  de,  94.

Leif  the  Lucky,  Eric's  son,  [Leifr  hinn  heppn:
Eiriksson],  4,  5,  12,  14,  15,  16,  25,  26,  27
3S,  36,  37.  38,  43.  55,  56,  57.  58.  60,  61
62,  64,  65,  66,  67,  68,  69,  72,  75,  77,  83
91,  103,  no.  III,  H2,  113,  117,  128,  129,
130.  133,  134,  141.  142.  145.  146,  147.  148
149,  150,  153,  155,  156,  157,  160,  161,  164
167,  168,  169,  173,  183.

Lindenbruch,  Erpoldus,  92.

Lyschander,  Glaus  Christofferson,  94.


Magnus  Barefoot,  King,  [Magnus  berfoetti,  kon-

ungr],  176.
Magnus  Law-amender,  King,  [Magnus  Hákonar-

son  lagabœtir,  konungr],  19,  20.
]\Iagnús  Þórhallsson,  vide  Thorhallsson.
Magnusen,  Finn,  [Finnr  Magnusson],  97,  159,

161,  166,  170,  183,  191.
Magnusson,  Arni,  [Árni  Magnusson],  9,  13,  15,

17,  20,  21,  24,  80,  81,  82,  96,  189,  190,  191.
IMalcoIm,  King,  160.
Make  Brun,  Victor  Adolphe,  182.
Mar  of  Reykholar,  [Mar  Atlason á  Reykhólum],  1 1.
Marcian,  92,  93.
Marcusson,  Biörn,  90.
Maurer,  Konrad,  7,  8,  10,  59,  89,  91,  160,  164,

175-
Michelant,  H.,  175.
]\Iicmac  Indians,  176,  178.
Möbius,  Theodor,  7,  8,  10,  17,  171.
Monocoli,  IMonosceli,  177.
Miiller,  Fr.  von,  177.
IMiiller,  Peter  Erasmus,  87,  161.
Munch,  Peder  Andreas,  19,  20,' 23,  57,  93,  94,

161,  162.

Nefiolfsson,  Thorarin,  vide  Thorarin.

Nicolaysen,  N.,  164.

Northmen,  2,  92,  93,  94,  160,  179.

Odd  of  Jorvi,  [Oddr  á  Jgrva],  29,  105,  123.

Odin,  [Óðinn],  172.

Ogmund,  [Qgmundr],  89,  90.

Olaf,  Gudraud's  son,  [Óláfr  Guðr0ðarson],  28

104,  122.
Olaf  the  Saint,  King,  [Óláfr  helgi  Haraldsson,

konungr],  85,  173,  187.
Olaf  the  White,  King,  [Óláfr  hinn  hviti  Ingjalds-

son,  konungr],  28,  104,  122,  161,  162.
Óláfr  Jonsson,  vide  Jonsson.
Olaf  Tot,  [Óláfr  tottr],  19.
Olaf    Tryggvason,    King,    [Óláfr    Tryggvason,

konungr],  12,  13,  14,  15,  35,  36,  43,  54,  55,

56,  57,  58,  61,  no.  III,  112,  117,  128,  129,

133.  134,  142,  160,  163.
Olafsen,  Eggert,  175.

Olafsen,  Jon,  [Jon  Óláfsson  frá  Grunnavík],  9.
Óláfbson,  Erlendr,  vide  Erlend  Olafsson.


INDEX.— NAMES   OF  PERSONS.


Olafsson,  Gudmund,  [Guðmundr  Óláfsson],  182.

Ólsen,  Björn  Magnússon,  8.

Orm  of  Arnarstapi,  [Ormr  á  Arnarstapi],  31,  32,

33,  106,  107,  108,  124,  125,  126.
Qrn  {'orisson  viðleggs,  84.
Ortelius,  Abraham,  94,  95,  159.
Qrvar-Oddr,  vide  Arrow-Odd.
Osvald,  Ulf  s  son,  vide  Asvald,  Ulf  s  son.

Paul,  Bishop,  [Páll  Jónsson,  biskup  í  Skálholti],

II.
Paulsson,  Teit,  vide  Teit  Paulsson.
Peringskiöld,  Johan,  13,  182.
Peschel,  Oscar  Ferdinand,  160.
Phythian,  R.  L.,  184,  185.
Picquemyans,  177.
Plinius,  C,  Secundus,  177.
Powell,  Frederick  York,  9,  96,  171,  177,  179.
Ptolemy,  159.
Purchas,  Samuel,  175,  176.

Rafn,  Carl  Christian,  r,  3,  6,  90,  97,  98,   179,

183.
Rafn,  Duelling-,  vide  Hrafn.
Rafn  the  Limerick-traveller,  [Rafn  Hlimreksfari],

II,  160.
Ragnar,  Shaggy-breeks,  [Ragnarr  loðbrók],  40,

115-

Raknar,  Ragnarr,  Rakinn,  King,  90,  91.
Ramé,  A.,  175.
Red-beard,  The,  vide  Thor.
Resen,  Peder  Hans,  17,  80,  82.
Rink,  H.,  179.

Rolf-Landa,  [Landa-Rólfr],  89,  95,  96.
Rosenkrantz,  Jens,  13.
Rudbeck,  Olof,  93.

Runolf,  father  of  Bishop  Thorlak,  [Runólfr  faðir
torlaks  biskups],  52,  59,  78,  121,  139,  158.

Sæmund  the  Priest,  [Sæmundr  enn  fróði   Sig-

fiisson,  prestr  Í  Odda],  8.
Saxo  Grammaticus,  161.
Schöning,  Gerhard,  56,183.
Schiibeler,  Frederik  Christian,  174.
Sciapodes,  177.

Scots,  [Skotar],  28,  104,  122,  174.
Secretaries,  Hauk's,  22,  100,  10 1.


Shanandiihit,  178.

Sigmund  Brestisson,  [Sigmundr  Brestisson],  163.

Sigmund,  son  of  Ketil  Thistil,  [Sigmundr  Ketils-

son  þistils],  30,  106,  124.
Sigrid,  [Sigríðr  kona  i'orsteins  svarta  Í  Lýsuíirði],

38,  39,  113.  130.  131-
Sigurd,  Thori's  son,  [Sigurðr  Þórisson],  172.
Sigurd  the  Mighty,  Earl,  [Sigurðr  jarl  enn  riki

Eysteinsson],  28,  104,  122,  162.
Sigurðsson,  Jón,  179.
Sinfiotli,  [Sinfjptli  Sigmundarson],  176.
Skallagrim,  Kveldulf's  son,   [Skallagrimr  Kvel-

diilfsson],  163.
Skeggiason,  Hialti,  [Hjalti  Skeggjason],  14,  15,

26,  57-
Skrellings,  [Skrælingjar],  5,  10,  18,  47,  48,  49,

50,  51,  68,  69,   73,  74,  118,  119,  120,  135,

136,  137.  138,  149.  150.  153.  154,  155.  161,

176,  177,  178,  179,  188.
Slangerup,  Slangendorpius,  13.
Slany,  Master,  176.
Snorri,  Head-Thord's   son,  [Snorri  Hgfða-Í'ór-

ðarson],  12,  40,  72,  100,  115,  153,  171.
Snorri  Sturluson,  79,  93,  183.
Snorri  Thorbrandsson,  [Snorri    Þorbrandsson],

18,  21,  22,  26,  27,  28,  30,  40,  42,  46,  47,

48,  49,  6o[?],  104,  105,  115,  1x6,  117,  118,

120,  132,  133,  135,  136,  137,  176,  189.
Snorri  Thorfinsson,  [Snorri  i'orfinsson  karlsefnis],

12,  22,  50,  52,  58,  59,  73,  77,  78,  120,  121,

138,  139,  154,  158-
Snorri  Godi,  [Snorri  goði  Þorgrímsson],  26,  84,

86,  187,  188.
Solinus,  C.  Jul.,  177.
Solvi  of  Solvadal,  [Sglvi],  61,  142.
Steenstrup,  J.  J.  S.,  180.
Steenstrup,  K.  J.  V.,  166.
Steinolf  the  Short,  [Steinólfr  enn  lági],  1 60.
Steinunn,  Snorri's  daughter,  [Steinunn  Snorra-

dóttir],  52,  121.
Stephanius,  S.  J.,  92.
Storm,  Gustav,  6,  7,  13,  20,  53,  79,  80,  81,  83,

88,  93.  94,  98,  17«.  173.  176,  1777  178,  179.
181,  182,  183,  185.
Siyr,  Thorgrim's  son,  [Styrr  Þorgrímsson,  Víga-
Siyrr],  30,  60,  102,  105,  106,  123,  141.


INDEX.— NAMES   OF  PERSONS.


199


Suðrmaðr,  vide  German.
Suhm,  Peter  Frederik,  182.
Sveinsson,  Bryniolf,  vide  Bryniolf.
Svend  Estridsson,  King,  92.
Swertlings,  [Svertingar],  162.

Taignoagny,  177.

Tamm,  Fridrik,  15.

Teit  Paulsson,  [Teitr  Pálsson],  20.

Thiodhild,  [Þjóðhildr],  vide  Thorhild,  Jorund's

daughter.
Thor,  the  Red-beard,  [Þórr  hinn  rauðskeggjaði],

45.  "7.  134,  135.  165,  174.
Thorarin    Nefiolfsson,    [f'órarinn    Nefjólfsson],

173-

Thorbiorg  the  Ship-chested,  [ÞorbJQrg  knarrar-

bringa  Gilsdóttir],  29,  60,  105,  123,  141.
Thorbiorg,  Ari  Marsson's  grandmother,  [i'orb-

jgrg  Hrólfsdóttir],  160.
Thorbiorg  the  Little  Sibyl,  [Þorbjgrg  lítil  vglva],

33>  34>  35>  i°8>  i°9i    i'°>    126,   127,  128,

167.
Thorbiorn  Gleamer,  [{"orbj^rn  glóra],  61,  142.
Thorbiorn  of  the   Haukadal    family,    [Þorbjgrn

hinn  haukdœlski],  29,  60,  105,  123,  141.
Thorbiorn,  Karlsefni's  son,  [Þorbjgrn  Þorfinnsson

karlsefnis],  52,  78,  121,  139,  158.
Thorbiorn   Vifilsson,    [Þorbjgrn   Vífilsson],    25,

29.  30.  31.  32,  33,  35>  37.  38,  40,  42,  58.
60,  105,  106,  107,  108,  no,  113,  115,  123,
124,  125,  126,  128,  130,  132,  141,  167,  185.

Thorbrand  of  Alptafirth,  [Þorbrandr  Í  Álptafirði],

18,  26,  30,  105,  i23(?),  141.
Thorbrand  Snorrason,   [Þorbrandr   Snorrason],

18,  48,  119,  136.
Thord,    Bishop,    [Þórðr    Þorláksson,    biskup   Í

Skálholti],  189.
Thordof  Höfdi,  [ÞórðrBjarnarson],  40,  115, 171.
Thord  Horse-head,  [Þórðr  hesthgfði],  12,  40,  72,

115,  132,  153-
Thord  the  Yeller,   [Þórðr  gellir  Óláfsson],  12,

30,  40,  60,  105,  115,  123,  141,  171.
Thordis,  Flosi's  daughter,  [{"ordis  Flosadóttir],

52,  121.
Thordsson,  John,  [Jon  Þórðarson],  53,  55,  102,
103.


Thordsson,  Thorlak,  vide  Thorlak  Thordsson.

Thorfinn,  SkuU-cIeaver,  Earl,  [Þorfinnr  jarl  hau-
sakljúfr],  28,  104,  122.

Thorfinn,  Earl  of  the  Orkneys,  [Þorfinnr  jarl  Í
Orkneyjum],  11,  160.

Thorfinn  Karlsefni,  Thord's  son,  [Þorfinnr  karl-
sefni  i^oroarson],  4,  5,  12,  15,  16,  18,  21,  22,
23,  24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  40,  41,  42,  43,  44,
45.  46.  47,  48,  49,  5°,  52,  58.  59.  72,  73.
74.  75,  76,  77,  78,  91,  96,  97,  99,  too,  loi,

104,  115,  116,  117,  118,  119,  120,  121,  132,
133,  134.  135,  136,  137,  138,  139,  153.  154,
155,  157,  158,  161,  164,  167,  168,  171,  172,
173,  174,  176,  185,  188,  189.

Thorgeir  of  Hitardal,  [Þorgeirr  or  Hitardal],  30,

60,  105,  123,  141.
Thorgeir,    Snorri's    son,    [torgeirr   Snorrason],

52.  77.  121,  139,  158.

Thorgeir,   Thord's    son,    [Þorgeirr    Þórðarson],

171.
Thorgeir  of  Thorgeirsfell,  [Þorgeirr  or  Þorgeirs-

felli],  31,  106,  107,  124,  125.
Thorgeir  Vifilsson,  [{"orgeirr  Vifilsson],  29,  30,

105,  106,  123,  124,  167.

Thorgerd,  Heriulfs  wife,  [Þorgerðr  kona  Her-

júlfs],  62,  142.
Thorgest  Steinsson,  [f'orgestr  enn  gamli  Stein-

sson],  29,  30,  60,  105,  106,  123,  124,  141.
Thorgesters,  [Þorgestlingur],  60,  141.
Thorgils,  Leif's  son,  [Þorgils  Leifsson],  36,  in,

129,  169.
Thorgils  Oddason,  [Þorgils  Oddason],  81.
Thorgils,  Thord's  son,  [{"orgils  í'órðarson],  171.
Thorgrima  Galdrakinn,  [Þorgríma  galdrakinn],

84.
Thorgunna,  [Þorgunna],  35,  36,  in,  128,  129,

168,  169,  170.
Thorhall,  Gamli's  son,  [Þórhallr  Gamlason],  40,

42,  115,  116,  132,  133,  171,  172.
Thorhall,  son  of  Gamli  the  Wendlander,  [forhallr

Gamlason  Vindlendings],  171,  172.
Thorhall  the   Huntsman,    [Þórhallr   veiðimaðr],

42,  44,  45,  46,  49,  "6,  117,  120,  133,  134,

135,  137,  171,  174.  19°,  I9I-
Thorhallsson,  Magnus,    [Magnus   þórhallsson],

53,  55,  80,  103.


INDEX.— NAMES  OF  PERSONS.


Thorhild,  Jorund's  daughter,  [Þórhildr  Jgrundar-
dóttir],  29,  35,  37,  60,  105,  112,  123,  129,
130,  141,  160,  165,  170.

Thorhild  Ptarmigan,  [Þórhildr  foroardottir  rjiipa],

12,  40,  115,  171.
Thori  Easterling,  (a  Norseman),  [{'órir  austmaðr],

58,  67,  68,  70,  148,  149,  150,  185.
Thori  of  Espihol,  [Þórir  á  Espihóli],  52,  121.
Thori,  Eyxna-,  [0xna-f'órir],  29,  60,  105,  123,

140.
Thori  the  Loiterer,  [Þórir  híma],  40,  115.
Thorkatla,  Hergil's  daughter,  [Þorkatla  Hergils-

dóttir],  II.
Thorkel  Geitisson,  [Þorkell  Geitisson],  11.
Thorkel  Gellisson,  [Þorkell  Gellisson],  10.
Thorkel  of  Heriolfsness,  [Þorkell  á  Herjólfsnesi],

33,  34,  108,  109,  no,  126,  127.
Thorkelsson,  Jon,  [Jon  Þorkelsson],  19,  20.
Þorkelsson,  Jón,  181.
Thorlacius,  Árni,  165,  166.
Thorlak,  Bishop,  [torlakr  Runólfsson,  biskup  í

Skálholti],  8,  52,  58,  59,  78,  121,  139,  158,

167,  179,  185.
Thorlak  Thordsson,  [Þorlákr  í'órðarson  biskups],

9-

Thorleif  Thorbrandsson,  [Þorleifr  Þorbrandsson
kimbi],  18,  26,  27,  30,  6o[?],   105,   123  [?],

i4i[?].
Thorodd,    the    husband   of    Thurid   of  Fródá,

[Þóroddr  skatikaupandi],  84,  169,  170.
Thorolf   Kveldulfsson,    [í>órólfr    Kveldúlfsson],

163.
Thorolf  ]\Ioster-beard,   [Þórólfr  Mostrarskegg],

165.

Thorolf  the  Sparrow,  [Þórólfr  spgrr],  167.

Thorsen,  P.  G.,  185.

Thorstein  Ericsson,  [Þorsteinn  Ein'ksson],  25,
26,  27,  35,  37,  38,  39.  58,  6z,  70,  71,  72,
no,  112,  113,  114,  115,  128,  130,  131,  142,
150,  151,  152,  167,  168,  173,  185.

Thorstein  die  Red,  [Þorsteinn  Óláfsson  rauðr],
28,  104,  122,  162.

Thorstein,  Thori's  son,  [Þorsteinn  I'órisson],
170.

Thorstein  the  Unjust,  [torslcinn  ranglátr  Einar-
sson],  52,  121.


Thorstein  the  Swarthy,  [Þorsteinn  svartr  Í  L/su-
firði],  38,  39,  70,  71,  72,  113,  114,  130,  131,

151,  152.  153-
Thorunn,   Thorbiorn's  daughter,   [Þórunn  Þor-

bjarnardóttir],  52,  78,  121,  139,  158.
Thorunn,    Karlsefni's   mother,    [Þórunn    móðir

Þorfinns  karlsefnis],  40,  52,  115,  121,  132,

138,  139-
Thorvald  of  Alptafirth  (MS.  Þorvallr),   123,  cf.

Thorbrand  of  Alptafirth.
Thorvald  Spine,  [Þorvaldr  hryggr  Asleiksson],

40,  115.
Thorvald,  Asvald's  son,  [Þorvaldr  Ásvaldsson],

29,  60,  103,  105,  123,  140,  164,  165.
Thorvald  Ericsson,  [Þorvaldr  Eiríksson],  5,  42,

49,  50,  62,  68,  69,  70,  116,  120,  137,  142,

149,  150,  177,  185,  190.
Thorvald,    Helgi's    son,    [Þorvaldr    Helgason],

88.
Thorvald  Kodransson,    [Þorvaldr  Koðránsson],

61,  142,  180.
Thorvald  Stephensson,  The  Rev.,  [Sira  Þorvaldr

Stefánsson],  15.
Thorvald  Crook,  [Þorvaldr  krókr  Þórisson],  52,

121.
Thorvaldsson,  Eric,  vide  Eric  the  Red.
Thorvard,  [Þorvarðr],  42,  62,  76,  77,  116,  [Þor-

valdr],  133,  142,  143,  156,  157,  158.
Thurid,    [Þuríðr],    vide    Gudrid,     Thorbiorn's

daughter.
Thurid  of  Fródá,  [Þuríðr  Barkardóttir],  84,  86,

168,  169,  170,  187,  188.
Thurid,  Eyvind   Easterling's    daughter,    [Þuríðr

[Þórfðr]  Eyvindardóttir  austmanns],  28,  104,

122.
Torfæus,    Thormod,    [f'ormóðr   Torfason],    54,

87,  97,  161,  189.
Torfason,  John,  the  Rev.,  [Sira  Jon  Torfason],

21,  54-
Torfi  Finsson,  54.
Torfi,  Sira,  vide  Jonsson.
Tragus,  vide  Bock.

Tryggvason,  King  Olaf,  vide  Olaf  Trygg\'ason.
Tu.xen,  N.  E.,  163.

Tyrker  the  German,  [Tyrker  suðrmaðr],  65,  66,
67,  146,  147,  148.


INDEX.— NAMES   OF  PLACES.


Ulf  the  Crow,  fÚlfr  Hreiðarson  kráka],  30,  60,

105.  123.  141-
Ulf,   Eyxna-Thori's  son,  [LJlfr  0xna-f'órisson],

29,  60,  105,  123,  140.
Ulfliot,  [ÚlfljótrJ,  160.
Ulloa,  Alfonso,  159.

Unger,  Carl  Richard,  7, 13,  53,  i6r,  172,176,  185.
Uniped,  [Einfœtingr],  28,  49,  50,  120,  137,  177,

190,  191.
Uplands-men,  [Upplendingar],  28,  104,  122,  161.
Uvægi,  Uvege,  51,  120,  138,  177,  178,  179.

Vaetilldi,  Vethilldi,  50,  51,  120,  138,  177,  178.
Valgerd,  Flosi's  daughter,  [Valgerðr  Flosadóttir],

52,  121.
Valldidida,  51,  120,  138,  177,  178.
Valr  í'órisson  viðleggs,  84.
Valthiof,  [Valþjófr],  29,  105,  123,  164.
Venetians,  160.
Vidalin,  John,  Bishop,  [Mag.  Jon  Vídalín],  24.


Vídalín,  Páll,  182,  186.

Viíil,  [Vífill],  29,  100,  105,  106,  123,  164,  167.

Vigfusson,  Gudbrand,  9,  11,  13,  14,  ig,  1^^
24.  26,  27,  53,  54,  55,  80,  87,  90,  91,  96,
160,  162,  165,  166,  169,  170,  171,  177,  179,
180,  186,  188,  189.

Weinhold,  Karl,  186.

Werlauíf,  Erich  Christian,  7,  9,  161,  170.

Wends,  [Vindir],  12.

Winsor,  Justin,  2,  3,  97.

Woifings,  [Ylfingar],  176.

Worm,  Christen,  7.

Worm,  Jens,  17,  24,  97.

Worm,  Ole,  96.

Yngvildr,  vide  Ingveldr.

Zahrtmann,  Christian  Christopher,  89.
Zcni,  Antonio,  95,  159.
Zeni,  Niccolo,  95,  159.


NAMES    OF    PLACES.


Africa,  [AfiTrika],  15,  16,  93,  94,  177.

Albania,  vide  White-men's-land.

Alpta-firth,  [Álptafjprðr],  18,  26,  30,  40,  60,  105,

"5.  123,  132,  141,  171-^
Alpta-firth  in  Gi"Eenland,  [Álptafjijrðr  Í   Grcen-

landi],  61,  142.
America,  i,  2,  3,  27,  82,  87,  94,  95,  96,  97,  98,

159.  179.  iSi..
Arnarstapi,  Arnastapi,  31,   32,    106,    107,    108,

124,  125,  126,  167.
Arnlaugsfinh,  [Arnlaugsíjgrðr],  61,  142.
Atlantic,  [frlandshaf],  51,  120.

Bacchus,  Isle  de,  175.

Baffin's  Bay,  2.

Bear  Island,  near  :\Iarkland,  [Bjarney  hjá  Mark-

landi],  43,  116,  133.
Bear  Isle,  Bear   Islands,  [Bjarney,  Bjarneyjar],

42,  116,  133,  173,  189.


D  d


Bergen,  13,  81.

Biarmaland,  [Bjarmaland],  17.

Biarnarhöfn,  (Bjarnarhgfn),  28,  105,  122.

Blacksark,    [Bláserkr],   30,    59,    60,    106,    141,

166.
Bœr,  vide  Gaulverjabœr.
Borgarfirth,  [Borgarfjörðr],  61,  86,  141,  187.
Borgartiín,  191.
Boston,  183.
Brattahlid,  [Brattahlíð],  14,  15,  25,  26,  35,  36,

38,  41,  42,  57,  61,  62,  64,  67,  72,  no,  112,

113,  115,  116,  128,  129,  130,  132,  133,  141,

142,  145,  146,  148,  153,  167,  168.
Breidabolstad,  [Breiðabólstaðr  á  Skógarströnd],

29,  105.  123.  165-
Breidafirth,  [Breiðafjörðr,  Breiðifjörðr],  9,  30,  32,

40,  54,  60,  61,  86,  106,  108,  124,  126,  141,

164,  165,  171^  187.
Bremen,  [BrimarJ,  77,  92,  93,  94,  158,  161.


INDEX.— NAMES   OF  PLACES.


Bristol,  159,  160.
British  Isles,  162,  164.
Brokey,  29,  105,  123,  165,  166.

Caithness,  [Katanes],  28,  104,  122.

Canada,  175,  182,  185.

Carolina,  182.

Christiania,  [Oslo],  6,  20,  98.

Cod,  Cape,  183.

Connecticut,  183.

Copenhagen,  8,  13,  17,  54,  81,  92,  94,  96,  130,

133!  163,  182,  i88,  189,  190.
Crossness,  [Krossanes  í  Vínlandi],  69,  150.

Dale-countr}',  [Dalalgnd  í  Breiðafirði],  29,  105,

122,  164.
Denmark,  7,  13,  54,  97.
Dighton,  97.

Dimun,  166.

Dimun-inlet,  [Dímunarvágr],  166.

Dögurdar  river,  [Dggurðará],  29,  105,  122.

Down-islands,  [Dúneyjar],  88.

Drangar,   [Drangar  á   Hornstrondum],   29,   60,

103,  123,  141,  164.
Drangar,  [Drangar  á  Skógarströndum],   29,  105,

123,  165-

Drepstokk,  [Drepstokkr],  62,  142.

Drontheim,  [Þrándheimr,  Throndhjem],  58,  61,

142,  160,  173.
Dublin,  [Dyflinn],  28,  52,  85,  87,  104,  121,  122,

161,  168,  187,  188.
Dumb's  sea,  [Dumbshaf],  90.

Eastern-settlement,  [Eystribygð,  Austrib}-gð],  60,

141,  166,  167.
East-firths,  [Austfirðir],  40,   75,   115,   132,   155,

171.
Einarsfirth,  [Einarsfjgrðr  í  Grœnlandi],  61,  142.
Einfœtingaland,  vide  Uniped-land.
England,  7,  16,  159,  176.
Ericsey,  [Eiríksey],  30,  60,  61,  106,  124,  141,

167.
Ericsfirth,  [Eiríksljgrðr],   10,  30,  36,  37,  40,  60,

61,  67,  69,  70,  71,  72,  74,  76,  106,  112,  115,

124,  129,  '30.  132.  M'.  15°!  '5'.  '52.  »53.
155.  157.  167,  173.


Ericsholms,  [Eiríkshólmar],  30,  60  [?],  106,  124,

141  [?].
Erics-island,  vide  Ericsey.
Ericsstadir  on  Eyxney,  [ELríksstaðir  á  0xneyju],

29,  60,  105,  123,  141.
Ericsstadir     by    Vatnshorn,     [Eiríksstaðir     hjá

Vatnshorni],  29,  60,  105,  123,  141,  165.
Ericsvag,  [Eiríksvágr  í  0xney],  30,60,  105,  123,

141,  163.
Espihól,  52,  121.
Estotelandia,  96.
Europe,  16,  94,  95,  96,  159.
Eyrar,  62,  143,  [Eyrarbakki  ?],  173.
Eyrr,  [mod.  Eyri],  17,  26.
Eyxney,  [0xney,  Yxney,  Eyxney,  Auxney],  29,

60,  105,  123,  141,  165.
Exploits,  Bay  of,  182.

Færoes,  [Færeyjar],  163.

Farewell,  Cape,  166.

Finland,  93.

Finmark,  170.

Flatey,  [Flatey  á  Breiðafirði],  54.

Flói,  21.

France,  177.

Frislanda,  Frisland,  95,  159.

Fródá,  [Fróðá],  36,  86,  iii,  129,  168,  169,  170,

187,  188.
Furðustrandir,  vide  Wonder-strands.

Gander  Bay,  182.

Gardar,  [Garðar],  16,  62,  75,  82,  142,  155.

Gaulverjabœr,  9,  21.

Germany,  [Saxland],  77,  158,  179.

Ginnungagap,  93.

Glaumbcer,  Glaumbœjarland,  77,  158,  180.

Godthaab,  Greenland,  166,  167,  172.

Gokstad,  163.

Greenland,  [Grœnland,  Grenland,  Grœnaland],
2,  4,  5,  6,  8,  9,  10,  12,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  25,
26,  27,  29,  30,  32,  33, 34,  35,  36,  39,40,41,  42,
43.  51,  55.  56,  57.  58,  59.  61,  62,  63,  64,  66,
67,  69,  70,  71,  72,  74,  75,  76,  80,  81,  82,  83,
88,  89,  91,  93,  94,  95,  96,  98,  100,  105,  io6,
108,  no.  III,  114,  115,  116,  124,  126,  128,
129,  131,  132,  133,  138,  141,  142,  143,  144,


INDEX.— NAMES  OF  PLACES.


203


145,  147,  148,  150,  151,  152,  153,  155,  157,

160,  166,  167,  168,  169,  171,  172,  173,  174,

178,  179,  180,  182,  188,  189-.
Greenland  Sea,  [Grœnlandshaf],  51,  63,  90,  138,

143,  180.
Grunnavík,  9.
Gunnbiorns-skerries,    [Gunnbjarnarsker,  Gunnb-

jarnarnessker],  30,  60,  105,  123,  141,  166.

Hafgrimsfirth,  [Hafgrímsfjgrðr  í  Grœnlandi],  61,

142.
Halogaland,  [Hálogaland],  58,  61,  142.
Hamburg,  95.

Haukadal,  [Haukadalr],  29,  60,  105,  123,141,165.
Haukadale  river,  [Haukadalsá],  165.
Hebrides,  [Suðreyjar],  28,  35,  36,  62,  104,  iir,

122,  128,  129,  162,  168.
Helgafell,  [Helgafell  Í  Snæfellsnes-sýslu],  26,  86,

188.
Hellisvellir,  31,  106,  124,  167.
Helluland,  4, 15,  16,  17,  43,  65,  89,  90,  91,  116,

133,  146,  188,  189.
Heriolfsness,    [Herjólfsnes],    33,    61  [?],    62  [?],

64  [?],  108,  126,  142,  144.
Heriulfsfirth,  [Herjúlfsfjgrðr],  61,  142.
Hitardal,  [Hitardalr],  30,  105,  123.
Höfdi,    [Hgfði  á  Hgfðastrgnd],  40,    115,   153,

171.
Höfdi-strand,  [Hgfðastrgnd],  vide  Höfdi.
Hólar,  81,  179.

Holmar,  [Hólmar],  60,  141,  cf.  Ericsholms.
Holmlatr,  [Hólmlátr,  Hólmslátr],  30,  io6,  124,

167.
Holstein,  17.

Hóp,  22,  47,  49,  50,  118,  120,  135,  137,  161.
Hörðadalr,  164.

Hördadale  river,  [Hörðadalsá],  164.
Horn,  Cape,  Iceland,  173,  174.
Hornstrandir,  29,  105,  123,  141,  164.
Hrafnsfirth,    [Hrafnsfjgrðr],    30,    60,    61,    106,

124,  142,  167.
Hrafnsgnipa,  [Hrafnsgnípa],  60,  141,  cf.  Hvarf-

sgnipa.
Hraunhöfn,  [Hraunhgfn  á  Snæfellsnesi],  32,  84,

85,  108,  126,  167.
Hrútafirth,  [Hrútafjörðr],  171.


Húnaflói,  171.

Hvamm,   [Hvammr  í   Hvammssveit],   29,    105,

122,  164.
Hvammsfirth,  [Hvammsfjörðrj,   164,    165,    166,

167,  171.
Hvarf,  Greenland,  173.
Hvarfsgnipa,  [Hvarfsgnípa,  Hvarfsgnúpr,  Hvarf-

snípa],  30,  60  [?],  106,  124,  141  [?],  167.
Hvítramannaland,  vide  White-men's-land.
Hvítserkr,  vide  Whitesark.

Icefirth,  [Isafjarðardjúpr],  166.

Iceland,  [Island],  7,  8,  9,  10,  1 1,  13,  16,  17,  20,
21,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  31,  34,  36,  37,  51,
52.  53>  54,  55,  56,  57,  58,  60,  61,  63,  66,  71,
72,  77,  79,  81,  82,  83,  84,  «5,  86,  87,  88,  89,
94,  95,  96,  97,  98,  100,  103,  104,  105,  106,
109,  iio,  III,  112,  121,  122,  123,  124,  127,
128,  129,  130,  138,  141,  147,  152,  158,  160,
162,  163,  164,  165,  166,  167,  168,  169,  171,

172,  173,  174,  177,  179,  180,  182,  186,  187,
188.

Ireland,  [frland],  11,  16,  28,  37,  46,  52,  84,  85,
87,  104,  112,  117,  121,  122,  130,  135,  162,

173,  174,  187,  188.

Ireland  the  Great,  [frland  it  mikla],   11,  12,  51,

84,  120,  179.
írlandshaf,  vide  Atlantic.

Jœderen,  [Jaðarr],  29,  60,  105,  123,  141,  164.
Jölduhlaup,  [Jglduhlaupr],  173.
Jorvi,  [Jgrvi],  29,  105,  123.
Julianehaab,  Greenland,  166,  167.

Kakortok,  166.

Keelness,  [Kjalarnes],  43,  45,  46,  49,68,  116,

117,  120,  133,  135,  137,  149-
Keldur,  52,  121.

Ketilsfirth,  [Ketilsfjgrðr  í  Grœnlandi],  61,  142.
Kiinbaíirth,  [Kimbafjgrðr],  18.
Knör,  188.
Krísuvík,  88.

Krossanes,  vide  Crossness.
Krossholar,  [Krosshólar],  29,  105,  122,  164.

Labrador,  174,  181.

Langadal,  [Langadalr],  30,  105,  123.


D  d  2


204


INDEX.— NAMES   OF  PLACES.


I.augarbrekka,  30,  31,  106,  107,  124,  125,  167.

Laugardal,  [Laugardair],  164.

Lava-haven,  vide  Hraunhöfn.

Leif  s-booths,  Wineland,  [Leifsbúðir  í  Vínlandi],

68,  72,  75,  149,  153,  155,  181,  183.
Leikskalar,  [Leikskálar],  29,  105,  123.
Limerick,  1 1 .
Lund,  82.
Lysufirth,    [Lfsufjgrðr    í  Vestribygð],    38,    70,

113.  13°.  151.  173-

Markland,  4,  6,   15,   16,  17,  43,  50,  65,  83,  93,

116,  120,  133,  138,  146,  188.
Maryland,  182.

Melar,  in  Hrutafirth,  [Melar  á  Hrútafírði],  171.
]\Iidiokul,  [MiðJQkull],  vide  Blacksark.
ISIcer,  South  and  North,  Norwa}',  162.
INIoeri,  173.

Moray,  [Merævi,  Mœri],  28,  104,  122.
Moster,  165.

New  Brunswick,  178.

Newfoundland,  88,  89,  175,  176,  178,  182,  185.

New-land,  [Nfjaland,  N<-aland],  88,  89.

Newport,  R   1,97.

Nidaros,  [Niðarós],  61,  142,  160.

Norðmœri,  vide  Mœr.

Norumbega,  95.

Nonvay,  [Noregi],  4,  7,  13,  20,  25,  28,  31,  35,
36,  54.  56,  58,  60,  61,  62,  71,  72,  74,  77,  95,
97,  104,  106,  no.  III,  122,  124,  128,  129,
142,  152,  153,  155,  158,  160,  161,  162,  163,
164,  165,  168,  169,  170,  171,  173,  174,  183.

Nova  Scotia,  175,  178

Nugsuak  Cape,  Greenland,  166.

Orkneys,  [Orkneyjar],  11,  28,  104,  122,  162.
Oslo,  [Oslo],  vide  Christiania.
0xney,  vide  Eyxney.

Pennsylvania,  18  2

Raknslodi,  [Raknslóði"],  91.

Reykholar,  [Reykhólar],  11.

Rcykholt,  183.

Reykianess,  [Reykjanes],  6i,  88,  142,  173,  180.

Reykjavik,  191.


Reyniness  in  Skagafirth,  [Reynines,  Reynisnes,  Í

Skagafirði],  40,  52,  121,  132,  138,  179.
Reynistaðr,  179.
Rhode  Island,  183.
Risaland,  90,  91.
Rome,  72,  77,  152.
Romsdal,  162.
Ross,  [Ros],  28,  104,  122.

Saguenay,  177.

St.  Croix  river,  175.

St.  Lawrence,  Gulf  of,  182.

Sailing,  12.

Sandefiord,  Norway,  163.

Saxahóll,  166.

Saxonland,  [Saxland],  vide  Germany.

Scandia,  95.

Scandinavia,  55.

Scotland,  [Skotkind],  16,  28,  104,  122,  174.

Siglufirth,  [Siglufjorðr  í  Grœnlandi],  61,  142.

Skagafirth,  [Skagafjörðr],  40,  77,  132,  158,  171,

179.
Skálholt,  9,  24,  25,  82,  88,  169,  179.
Skeidsbrekkur,  [Skeiðsbrekkur],  29,  105,  123.
Skraumuhiaups    river,    [Skraumuhiaupsá,    Skrá-

muhlaupsá],  29,  105,  122.
Skrelling-land,  [Skrælingaland],  138.
Skuggi-firth,  [Skuggifjgrðr],  89,  90.
Snæfell,  Snjófell,  30,  60,  106,  124,  167.
Snæfells-iokul,    [Snæfellsjökull,    Snjófellsjökull],

30,  60,  106,  124,  141,  166.
Snæfellsness,      Snowfells-strand,      [Snæfellsnes,

Snjófellsströnd],  31,  84,   106,    124.  166,  167.

168,  173.
Sodor,  vide  Hebrides.
Solvadal,  [Sglvadalr],  61,  142.
South  Sea,  95.

Stad  in  Grunnavik,  [Staðr  í  Grunnavíkl,  21.
Stad  in  Norway,  173,  174.
Stad  in  Skagafirth,  [Staðr  í  Skagafnði],  52.  121,

179.
Stad  in  Súgandisfirth,  [Staðr  í  Súgandisfirði],  21,
Stavangcr,  Norway,  164.
Stockholm,  81,  191.
Stokkancss,  [Stokkanes  á  Grœnlandi],  35.  iio,

128.


Streamfirth  in  Iceland,  [Straumfjgrðr  á  fslandi],

83-

Streamfirth  in  Wineland,  [Straumfjgrðr,  Straums-
fjgrðr],  44,  45,  49,  50,  117,  120,  134,  135,
137,  161.

Sudrey,  [Suðrey  á  Hvammsfirði],  29,  105,  123,
165.

Suðreyjar,  vide  Hebrides.

Sunnmœri,  vide  Mœr.

Sutherland,  [Suðrland],  28,  104,  122.

Sviney,  [Svíney],  30,  105,  123.

Svoldr,  56.

Taunton,  Mass.,  97.
Thingeyrar,  [Þingeyrar],  53.
Thistilsfirth,  [Þistilsfjgrðr],  30,  106,  124.
Thorgeirsfell,  [Þorgeirsfell],   31,   32,    106,    107,

124,  125,  167.
Thorsness,  [Þórsnes],  165.
Thorsness-thing,  [Þórsnesþing,  Þórnesþing],  30,

60,  105,  123,  141,  165,  166.
Þrándheimr,  vide  Drontheim.
Thule,  Thile,  Tile,  92,  93,  94,  159.
Tradir,  [Traðir  Í  Suðrey],  29,  105,  123.


INDEX.— NAMES   OF  PLACES.

9,60,  105,  123,  141.


205


Uniped-land,    [Einfcetingaland],  50,

177.
Upsala,  80.


120,    137,


Vag,  [Vágr,  Vogr],  61,  142,  18
Valthiofsstadir,    [Valþjófsstaðir

123.
Vatnahverfi,  61,  142.


29,    100,   105,


Vatnshorn,  17,
Venice,  95.

Vididalstunga,  [Víðidalstunga],  53.
Vienna,  92.

Vifilsdal,  [Vifilsdalr],  29,  105,  123,  164^  167.
Villingaholt,  8.
Vimund,  Cape,  1 70.

Vindland,  [Land  of  the  Wends],  12,  171.
Vinland,  [Vindland,  Vinlad,  Vinland,  Winland],
vide  Wineland  the  Good.

Western-settlement,  [Vestribygð,  Vestrbygð],  30,
38,  42,  61,  70,  106,  113,  116,  124,  130,  133,
142,  150,  151,  166,  167,  172,  173,  174.

Western  uninhabited  region,  [Vestri  óbygð],  60,
106,  124,  141,  167.

White-men's-land,  [Hvitramannaland],  11,  51,
84,87,  120,  138,  179,  189.

Whitesark,  [Hvitserkr],  30,  59,  124,  166.

\Mneland  the  Good,  [Vinland  it  góða],  3,  4,  5,
6,  7,  9,  10,  II,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,
21,  22,  23,  25,  27,  28,  42,  45,  50,  53,  55,  56,
57>  58,  59.  67.  68,  70,  72,  74,  75,  77,  79,  80,
81,  82,  84,  87,  89,  92,  93,  94,  95,  96,  97,  98,
99,  103,  116,  117,  120,  133,  135,  148,  149,
15°.  153.  i55>  1581  160,  161, 168,  171,  172,
175,  176,  177,  181,  182,  183,  185,  189,  191.

Wolfenbiittel,  1 7 .

Wonder-strands,  [Furðustrandir],  43,  45,  46,
116,  117,  133,  134,  135-

Zur,  Mare  del,  vide  South  Sea.


^
