# Morals and Dogma of the Craft

**Author:** Albert Pike (1871)
**ID:** ToB-0116
**Archive:** pike-morals-and-dogma_202311
**File Size:** 2.49 MB

---

MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE 
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry , prepared for the 
Supreme Council of the Thirty Third Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: 
Charleston, 1871.

MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE 
SHORT BIOGRAPHY 
TITLES OF DEGREES

1º - Apprentice  
2º - Fellow-craft  
3º - Master  
4º - Secret Master  
5º - Perfect Master  
LUCIFER, the Light-bearer! Strange 
and mysterious name to give to the 
Spirit of Darknesss! Lucifer, the Son 
of the Morning! Is it he who  
bears the Light, and with its 
splendors intolerable blinds feeble,  
sensual or selfish Souls ? Doubt it 
not!

6º - Intimate Secretary  
7º - Provost and Judge  
8º - Intendant of the Building  
9º - Elu of the Nine  
10º - Elu of the Fifteen  
11º - Elu of the Twelve  
12º - Master Architect  
13º - Royal Arch of Solomon  
14º - Perfect Elu  
15º - Knight of the East  
16º - Prince of Jerusalem  
17º - Knight of the East and West  
18º - Knight Rose Croix  
19º - Pontiff  
20º - Master of the Symbolic Lodge  
21º - Noachite or Prussian Knight  
22º - Knight of the Royal Axe or Prince of Libanus  
23º - Chief of the Tabernacle  
24º - Prince of the Tabernacle  
25º - Knight of the Brazen Serpent  
26º - Prince of Mercy  
27º - Knight Commander of the Temple  
28º - Knight of the Sun or Prince Adept ( Part 1 )  
28º - Knight of the Sun or Prince Adept ( Part 2 )  
28º - Knight of the Sun or Prince Adept ( Part 3 )  
28º - Knight of the Sun or Prince Adept ( Part 4 )  
30º - Knight Kadosh  
31º - Inspector Inquistor  
32º - Master of the Royal SecretAlbert Pike, born December 29, 1809, was the oldest of six children 
born to Benjamin and Sarah Andrews Pike. Pike was raised in a 
Christian home and attended an Episcopal church. Pike passed the 
entrance examination at Harvard College when he was 15 years old, 
but could not attend because he had no funds. After traveling as far 
west as Santa Fe, Pike settled in Arkansas, where he worked as 
editor of a newspaper before being admitted to the bar. In Arkansas, 
he met Mary Ann Hamilton, and married her on November 28, 1834. 
To this union were born 11 children.  
He was 41 years old when he applied for admission in the Western 
Star Lodge No. 2 in Little Rock, Ark., in 1850. Active in the Grand 
Lodge of Arkansas, Pike took the 10 degrees of the York Rite from 
1850 to 1853. He received the 29 degrees of the Scottish Rite in 
March 1853 from Albert Gallatin Mackey in Charleston, S.C. The 
Scottish Rite had been introduced in the United States in 1783. 
Charleston was the location of the first Supreme Council, which 
governed the Scottish Rite in the United States, until a Northern Supreme Council was 
established in New York City in 1813. The boundary between the Southern and Northern 
Jurisdictions, still recognized today, was firmly established in 1828. Mackey invited Pike to join 
the Supreme Council for the Southern Jurisdiction in 1858 in Charleston, and he became the 
Grand Commander of the Supreme Council the following year. Pike held that office until his 
death, while supporting himself in various occupations such as editor of the Memphis Daily 
Appeal from February 1867 to September 1868, as well as his law practice. Pike later opened 
a law office in Washington, D.C., and argued a number of cases before the U.S. Supreme 
Court. However, Pike was impoverished by the Civil War and remained so much of his life, 
often borrowing money for basic living expenses from the Supreme Council before the council 
voted him an annuity in 1879 of $1,200 a year for the remainder of his life. He died on April 2, 
1892, in Washington, D.C.  
Realizing that a revision of the ritual was necessary if Scottish Rite Freemasonry were to 
survive, Mackey encouraged Pike to revise the ritual to produce a standard ritual for use in all 
states in the Southern Jurisdiction. Revision began in 1855, and after some changes, the 
Supreme Council endorsed Pike's revision in 1861. Minor changes were made in two degrees 
in 1873 after the York Rite bodies in Missouri objected that the 29th and 30th degrees revealed 
secrets of the York Rite.  
Pike is best known for his major work, Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted 
Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, published in 1871. Morals and Dogma should not be confusedMORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE 
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry , prepared for the 
Supreme Council of the Thirty Third Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: 
Charleston, 1871.
SHORT BIOGRAPHY

with Pike's revision of the Scottish Rite ritual. They are separate works. Walter Lee Brown 
writes that Pike "intended it [Morals and Dogma] to be a supplement to that great 'connected 
system of moral, religious and philosophical instruction' that he had developed in his revision 
of the Scottish ritual."  
Morals and Dogma was traditionally given to the candidate upon his receipt of the 14th degree 
of the Scottish Rite. This practice was stopped in 1974. Morals and Dogma has not been given 
to candidates since 1974. A Bridge to Light, by Rex R. Hutchens, is provided to candidates 
today. Hutchens laments that Morals and Dogma is read by so few Masons. A Bridge to Light 
was written to be "a bridge between the ceremonies of the degrees and their lectures in Morals 
and Dogma."  
M

MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE 
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry , prepared for the 
Supreme Council of the Thirty Third Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: 
Charleston, 1871. 
1º - Apprentice

THE TWELVE-INCH RULE AND THE COMMON GAVEL.

FORCE, unregulated or ill-regulated, is not only wasted in the void, like that of 
gunpowder burned in the open air, and steam unconfined by science; but, striking in the 
dark, and its blows meeting only the air, they recoil and bruise itself. It is destruction and 
ruin. It is the volcano, the earthquake, the cyclone;-not growth and progress. It is 
Polyphemus blinded, striking at random, and falling headlong among the sharp rocks by 
the impetus of his own blows.The blind Force of the people is a Force that must be economized, and also managed, 
as the blind Force of steam, lifting the ponderous iron arms and turning the large wheels, 
is made to bore and rifle the cannon and to weave the most delicate lace. It must be 
regulated by Intellect. Intellect is to the people and the people's Force, what the slender 
needle of the compass is to the ship--its soul, always counselling the huge mass of wood 
and iron, and always pointing to the north. To attack the citadels built up on all sides 
against the human race by superstitions, despotisms, and prejudices, the Force must 
have a brain and a law. Then its deeds of daring produce permanent results, and there is 
real progress. Then there are sublime conquests. Thought is a force, and philosophy 
should be an energy, finding its aim and its effects in the amelioration of mankind. The 
two great motors are Truth and Love. When all these Forces are combined, and guided 
by the Intellect, and regulated by the RULE of Right, and Justice, and of combined and 
systematic movement and effort, the great revolution prepared for by the ages will begin 
to march. The POWER of the Deity Himself is in equilibrium with His WISDOM. Hence 
the only results are HARMONY.

It is because Force is ill regulated, that revolutions prove failures. Therefore it is that so 
often insurrections, coming from those high mountains that domineer over the moral 
horizon, Justice, Wisdom, Reason, Right, built of the purest snow of the ideal after a long 
fall from rock to rock, after having reflected the sky in their transparency, and been 
swollen by a hundred affluents, in the majestic path of triumph, suddenly lose themselves 
in quagmires, like a California river in the sands.The onward march of the human race requires that the heights around it should blaze 
with noble and enduring lessons of courage. Deeds of daring dazzle history, and form 
one class of the guiding lights of man. They are the stars and coruscations from that 
great sea of electricity, the Force inherent in the people. To strive, to brave all risks, to 
perish, to persevere, to be true to one's self, to grapple body to body with destiny, to 
surprise defeat by the little terror it inspires, now to confront unrighteous power, now to 
defy intoxicated triumph--these are the examples that the nations need and the light that 
electrifies them.

There are immense Forces in the great caverns of evil beneath society; in the hideous 
degradation, squalor, wretchedness and destitution, vices and crimes that reek and 
simmer in the darkness in that populace below the people, of great cities. There 
disinterestedness vanishes, every one howls, searches, gropes, and gnaws for himself. 
Ideas are ignored, and of progress there is no thought. This populace has two mothers, 
both of them stepmothers--Ignorance and Misery. Want is their only guide--for the 
appetite alone they crave satisfaction. Yet even these may be employed. The lowly sand 
we trample upon, cast into the furnace, melted, purified by fire, may become resplendent

crystal. They have the brute force of the HAMMER, but their blows help on the great 
cause, when struck within the lines traced by the RULE held by wisdom and discretion.crystal. They have the brute force of the HAMMER, but their blows help on the great 
cause, when struck within the lines traced by the RULE held by wisdom and discretion.

Yet it is this very Force of the people, this Titanic power of the giants, that builds the 
fortifications of tyrants, and is embodied in their armies. Hence the possibility of such 
tyrannies as those of which it has been said, that "Rome smells worse under Vitellius 
than under Sulla. Under Claudius and under Domitian there is a deformity of baseness 
corresponding to the ugliness-of the tyranny. The foulness of the slaves is a direct result 
of the atrocious baseness of the despot. A miasma exhales from these crouching 
consciences that reflect the master; the public authorities are unclean, hearts are 
collapsed, consciences shrunken, souls puny. This is so under Caracalla, it is so under 
Commodus, it is so under Heliogabalus, while from the Roman senate, under Caesar, 
there comes only the rank odour peculiar to the eagle's eyrie."

It is the force of the people that sustains all these despotisms, the basest as well as the 
best. That force acts through armies; and these oftener enslave than liberate. Despotism 
there applies the RULE. Force is the MACE of steel at the saddle-bow of the knight or of 
the bishop in armour. Passive obedience by force supports thrones and oligarchies, 
Spanish kings, and Venetian senates. Might, in an army wielded by tyranny, is the 
enormous sum total of utter weakness; and so Humanity wages war against Humanity, in 
despite of Humanity. So a people willingly submits to despotism, and its workmen submit 
to be despised, and its soldiers to be whipped; therefore it is that battles lost by a nation 
are often progress attained. Less glory is more liberty. When the drum is silent, reason 
sometimes speaks.Tyrants use the force of the people to chain and subjugate--that is, enyoke the people. 
Then they plough with them as men do with oxen yoked. Thus the spirit of liberty and 
innovation is reduced by bayonets, and principles are struck dumb by cannonshot; while 
the monks mingle with the troopers, and the Church militant and jubilant, Catholic or 
Puritan, sings Te Deums for victories over rebellion.

The military power, not subordinate to the civil power, again the HAMMER or MACE of 
FORCE, independent of the RULE, is an armed tyranny, born full-grown, as Athene 
sprung from the brain of Zeus. It spawns a dynasty, and begins with Caesar to rot into 
Vitellius and Commodus. At the present day it inclines to begin where formerly dynasties 
ended.Constantly the people put forth immense strength, only to end in immense weakness. 
The force of the people is exhausted in indefinitely prolonging things long since dead; in 
governing mankind by embalming old dead tyrannies of Faith; restoring dilapidated 
dogmas; regilding faded, worm-eaten shrines; whitening and rouging ancient and barren 
superstitions; saving society by multiplying parasites; perpetuating superannuated 
institutions; enforcing the worship of symbols as the actual means of salvation; and tying 
the dead corpse of the Past, mouth to mouth, with the living Present. Therefore it is that it 
is one of the fatalities of Humanity to be condemned to eternal struggles with phantoms, 
with superstitions, bigotries, hypocrisies, prejudices, the formulas of error, and the pleas 
of tyranny. Despotisms, seen in the past, become respectable, as the mountain, bristling 
with volcanic rock, rugged and horrid, seen through the haze of distance is blue and 
smooth and beautiful. The sight of a single dungeon of tyranny is worth more, to dispel 
illusions, and create a holy hatred of despotism, and to direct FORCE aright, than the 
most eloquent volumes. The French should have preserved the Bastile as a perpetual 
lesson; Italy should not destroy the dungeons of the Inquisition. The Force of the people 
maintained the Power that built its gloomy cells, and placed the living in their granite 
sepulchres.

The FORCE of the people cannot, by its unrestrained and fitful action, maintain and 
continue in action and existence a free Government once created. That Force must be 
limited, restrained, conveyed by distribution into different channels, and by roundabout 
courses, to outlets, whence it is to issue as the law, action, and decision of the State; as 
the wise old Egyptian kings conveyed in different canals, by sub-division, the swellingwaters of the Nile, and compelled them to fertilize and not devastate the land. There 
must be the jus et norma, the law and Rule, or Gauge, of constitution and law, within 
which the public force must act. Make a breach in either, and the great steam-hammer, 
with its swift and ponderous blows, crushes all the machinery to atoms, and, at last, 
wrenching itself away, lies inert and dead amid the ruin it has wrought.

The FORCE of the people, or the popular will, in action and exerted, symbolized by the 
GAVEL, regulated and guided by and acting within the limits of LAW and ORDER, 
symbolized by the TWENTY-FOUR-INCH RULE, has for its fruit LIBERTY, EQUALITY, 
and FRATERNITY,--liberty regulated by law; equality of rights in the eye of the law; 
brotherhood with its duties and obligations as well as its benefits.

You will hear shortly of the Rough ASHLAR and the Perfect ASHLAR, as part of the 
jewels of the Lodge. The rough Ashlar is said to be "a stone, as taken from the quarry, in 
its rude and natural state." The perfect Ashlar is said to be "a stone made ready by the 
hands of the workmen, to be adjusted by the working-tools of the Fellow-Craft." We shall 
not repeat the explanations of these symbols given by the York Rite. You may read them 
in its printed monitors. They are declared to allude to the self-improvement of the 
individual craftsman,--a continuation of the same superficial interpretation.

The rough Ashlar is the PEOPLE, as a mass, rude and unorganized. The perfect Ashlar, 
or cubical stone, symbol of perfection, is the STATE, the rulers deriving their powers from 
the consent of the governed; the constitution and laws speaking the will of the people; 
the government harmonious, symmetrical, efficient, --its powers properly distributed and 
duly adjusted in equilibrium.

If we delineate a cube on a plane surface thus:If we delineate a cube on a plane surface thus:

we have visible three faces, and nine external lines, drawn between seven points. The 
complete cube has three more faces, making six; three more lines, making twelve; and 
one more point, making eight. As the number 12 includes the sacred numbers, 3, 5, 7, 
and 3 times 3, or 9, and is produced by adding the sacred number 3 to 9; while its own 
two figures, 1, 2, the unit or monad, and duad, added together, make the same sacred 
number 3; it was called the perfect number; and the cube became the symbol of 
perfection.

Produced by FORCE, acting by RULE; hammered in accordance with lines measured by 
the Gauge, out of the rough Ashlar, it is an appropriate symbol of the Force of the 
people, expressed as the constitution and law of the State; and of the State itself the 
three visible faces represent the three departments,--the Executive, which executes the 
laws; the Legislative, which makes the laws; the Judiciary, which interprets the laws, 
applies and enforces them, between man and man, between the State and the citizens. 
The three invisible faces, are Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity, the threefold soul of the 
State--its vitality, spirit, and intellect.

Though Masonry neither usurps the place of, nor apes religion, prayer is an essential 
part of our ceremonies. It is the aspiration of the soul toward the Absolute and Infinite 
Intelligence, which is the One Supreme Deity, most feebly and misunderstandingly 
characterized as an "ARCHITECT." Certain faculties of man are directed toward the 
Unknown--thought, meditation, prayer. The unknown is an ocean, of which conscience is 
the compass. Thought, meditation, prayer, are the great mysterious pointings of the 
needle. It is a spiritual magnetism that thus connects the human soul with the Deity. 
These majestic irradiations of the soul pierce through the shadow toward the light.It is but a shallow scoff to say that prayer is absurd, because it is not possible for us, by 
means of it, to persuade God to change His plans. He produces foreknown and 
foreintended effects, by the instrumentality of the forces of nature, all of which are His 
forces. Our own are part of these. Our free agency and our will are forces. We do not 
absurdly cease to make efforts to attain wealth or happiness, prolong life, and continue 
health, because we cannot by any effort change what is predestined. If the effort also is

predestined, it is not the less our effort, made of our free will. So, likewise, we pray. Will 
is a force. Thought is a force. Prayer is a force. Why should it not be of the law of God, 
that prayer, like Faith and Love, should have its effects? Man is not to be comprehended 
as a starting-point, or progress as a goal, without those two great forces, Faith and Love. 
Prayer is sublime. Orisons that beg and clamour are pitiful. To deny the efficacy of 
prayer, is to deny that of Faith, Love, and Effort. Yet the effects produced, when our 
hand, moved by our will, launches a pebble into the ocean, never cease; and every 
uttered word is registered for eternity upon the invisible air.

Every Lodge is a Temple, and as a whole, and in its details symbolic. The Universe itself 
supplied man with the model for the first temples reared to the Divinity. The arrangement 
of the Temple of Solomon, the symbolic ornaments which formed its chief decorations, 
and the dress of the High-Priest, all had reference to the order of the Universe, as then 
understood. The Temple contained many emblems of the seasons--the sun, the moon, 
the planets, the constellations Ursa Major and Minor, the zodiac, the elements, and the 
other parts of the world. It is the Master of this Lodge, of the Universe, Hermes, of whom 
Khurum is the representative, that is one of the lights of the Lodge.For further instruction as to the symbolism of the heavenly bodies, and of the sacred 
numbers, and of the temple and its details, you must wait patiently until you advance in 
Masonry, in the mean time exercising your intellect in studying them for yourself. To 
study and seek to interpret correctly the symbols of the Universe, is the work of the sage 
and philosopher. It is to decipher the writing of God, and penetrate into His thoughts.

This is what is asked and answered in our catechism, in regard to the Lodge. 
* * * * * *

A "Lodge" is defined to be "an assemblage of Freemasons, duly congregated, having the 
sacred writings, square, and compass, and a charter, or warrant of constitution, 
authorizing them to work." The room or place in which they meet, representing some part 
of King Solomon's Temple, is also called the Lodge; and it is that we are now 
considering.

It is said to be supported by three great columns, WISDOM, FORCE or STRENGTH, and 
BEAUTY, represented by the Master, the Senior Warden, and the Junior Warden; and 
these are said to be the columns that support the Lodge, "because Wisdom, Strength, 
and Beauty, are the perfections of everything, and nothing can endure without them." 
"Because," the York Rite says, "it is necessary that there should be Wisdom to conceive, 
Strength to support, and Beauty to adorn, all great and important undertakings." "Know 
ye not," says the Apostle Paul, "that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you? If any man desecrate the temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the 
temple of God is holy, which temple ye are."The Wisdom and Power of the Deity are in equilibrium. The laws of nature and the moral 
laws are not the mere despotic mandates of His Omnipotent will; for, then they might be 
changed by Him, and order become disorder, and good and right become evil and 
wrong; honesty and loyalty, vices; and fraud, ingratitude, and vice, virtues. Omnipotent 
power, infinite, and existing alone, would necessarily not be constrained to consistency. 
Its decrees and laws could not be immutable. The laws of God are not obligatory on us 
because they are the enactments of His POWER, or the expression of His WILL; but 
because they express His infinite WISDOM. They are not right because they are His 
laws, but His laws because they are right. From the equilibrium of infinite wisdom and 
infinite force, results perfect harmony, in physics and in the moral universe. Wisdom, 
rower, and Harmony constitute one Masonic triad. They have other and profounder 
meanings, that may at some time be unveiled to you.

As to the ordinary and commonplace explanation, it may be added, that the wisdom of 
the Architect is displayed in combining, as only a skillful Architect can do, and as God 
has done everywhere,--for example, in the tree, the human frame, the egg, the cells of 
the honeycomb--strength, with grace, beauty, symmetry, proportion, lightness,ornamentation. That, too, is the perfection of the orator and poet--to combine force, 
strength, energy, with grace of style, musical cadences, the beauty of figures, the play 
and irradiation of imagination and fancy; and so, in a State, the warlike and industrial 
force of the people, and their Titanic strength, must be combined with the beauty of the 
arts, the sciences, and the intellect, if the State would scale the heights of excellence, 
and the people be really free. Harmony in this, as in all the Divine, the material, and the 
human, is the result of equilibrium, of the sympathy and opposite action of contraries; a 
single Wisdom above them holding the beam of the scales. To reconcile the moral law, 
human responsibility, free-will, with the absolute power of God; and the existence of evil 
with His absolute wisdom, and goodness, and mercy,-- these are the great enigmas of 
the Sphynx.You entered the Lodge between two columns. They represent the two which stood in the 
porch of the Temple, on each side of the great eastern gateway. These pillars, of bronze, 
four fingers breadth in thickness, were, according to the most authentic account--that in 
the First and that in the Second Book of Kings, confirmed in Jeremiah-- eighteen cubits 
high, with a capital five cubits high. The shaft of each was four cubits in diameter. A cubit 
is one foot and 707/1000. That is, the shaft of each was a little over thirty feet eight 
inches in height, the capital of each a little over eight feet six inches in height, and the 
diameter of the shaft six feet ten inches. The capitals were enriched by pomegranates of 
bronze, covered by bronze net-work, and ornamented with wreaths of bronze; and 
appear to have imitated the shape of the seed-vessel of the lotus or Egyptian lily, a 
sacred symbol to the Hindus and Egyptians. The pillar or column on the right, or in the 
south, was named, as the Hebrew word is rendered in our translation of the Bible, 
JACHIN: and that on the left BOAZ. Our translators say that the first word means, "He 
shall establish;" and the second, "In it is strength."

These columns were imitations, by Khurum, the Tyrian artist, of the great columns 
consecrated to the Winds and Fire, at the entrance to the famous Temple of Malkarth, in 
the city of Tyre. It is customary, in Lodges of the York Rite, to see a celestial globe on 
one, and a terrestrial globe on the other; but these are not warranted, if the object be to 
imitate the original two columns of the Temple. The symbolic meaning of these columns 
we shall leave for the present unexplained, only adding that Entered Apprentices keep 
their working-tools in the column JACHIN; and giving you the etymology and literal 
meaning of the two names.

The word JACHIN, in Hebrew, probably pronounced Ya-kayan, and meant, as a verbal 
noun, He that strengthens; and thence, firm, stable, upright.The word JACHIN, in Hebrew, probably pronounced Ya-kayan, and meant, as a verbal 
noun, He that strengthens; and thence, firm, stable, upright.

The word Boaz is Baaz which means Strong, Strength, Power, Might, Refuge, Source of 
Strength, a Fort. The prefix means "with" or "in," and gives the word the force of the Latin 
gerund, roborando--Strengthening

The former word also means he will establish, or plant in an erect position--from the verb 
Kun, he stood erect. It probably meant Active and Vivifying Energy and Force; and Boaz, 
Stability, Permanence, in the passive sense.

The Dimensions of the Lodge, our Brethren of the York Rite say, "are unlimited, and its 
covering no less than the canopy of Heaven." "To this object," they say, "the mason's 
mind is continually directed, and thither he hopes at last to arrive by the aid of the 
theological ladder which Jacob in his vision saw ascending from earth to Heaven; the 
three principal rounds of which are denominated Faith, Hope, and Charity; and which 
admonish us to have Faith in God, Hope in Immortality, and Charity to all mankind." 
Accordingly a ladder, sometimes with nine rounds, is seen on the chart, resting at the 
bottom on the earth, its top in the clouds, the stars shining above it; and this is deemed to 
represent that mystic ladder, which Jacob saw in his dream, set up on the earth, and the 
top of it reaching to Heaven, with the angels of God ascending and descending on it. The 
addition of the three principal rounds to the symbolism, is wholly modern and 
incongruous.The ancients counted seven planets, thus arranged: the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, 
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. There were seven heavens and seven spheres of these 
planets; on all the monuments of Mithras are seven altars or pyres, consecrated to the 
seven planets, as were the seven lamps of the golden candelabrum in the Temple. That 
these represented the planets, we are assured by Clemens of Alexandria, in his 
Stromata, and by Philo Judaeus.

To return to its source in the Infinite, the human soul, the ancients held, had to ascend, 
as it had descended, through the seven spheres. The Ladder by which it reascends, has, 
according to Marsilius Ficinus, in his Commentary on the Ennead of Plotinus, seven 
degrees or steps; and in the Mysteries of Mithras, carried to Rome under the Emperors, 
the ladder, with its seven rounds, was a symbol referring to this ascent through the 
spheres of the seven planets. Jacob saw the Spirits of God ascending and descending 
on it; and above it the Deity Himself. The Mithraic Mysteries were celebrated in caves, 
where gates were marked at the four equinoctial and solstitial points of the Zodiac; and 
the seven planetary spheres were represented, which souls needs must traverse in 
descending from the heaven of the fixed stars to the elements that envelop the earth; 
and seven gates were marked, one for each planet, through which they pass, in 
descending or returning.We learn this from Celsus, in Origen, who says that the symbolic image of this passage 
among the stars, used in the Mithraic Mysteries, was a ladder reaching from earth to 
Heaven, divided into seven steps or stages, to each of which was a gate, and at the 
summit an eighth one, that of the fixed stars. The symbol was the same as that of the 
seven stages of Borsippa, the Pyramid of vitrified brick, near Babylon, built of seven 
stages, and each of a different colour. In the Mithraic ceremonies, the candidate went 
through seven stages of initiation, passing through many fearful trials--and of these the 
high ladder with seven rounds or steps was the symbol.

You see the Lodge, its details and ornaments, by its Lights. You have already heard what 
these Lights, the greater and lesser, are said to be, and how they are spoken of by our 
Brethren of the York Rite.

The Holy Bible, Square, and Compasses, are not only styled the Great Lights in 
Masonry, but they are also technically called the Furniture of the Lodge; and, as you 
have seen, it is held that there is no Lodge without them. This has sometimes been made 
a pretext for excluding Jews from our Lodges, because they cannot regard the New 
Testament as a holy book. The Bible is an indispensable part of the furniture of a 
Christian Lodge, only because it is the sacred book of the Christian religion. The Hebrew 
Pentateuch in a Hebrew Lodge, and the Koran in a Mohammedan one, belong on the 
Altar; and one of these, and the Square and Compass, properly understood, are the 
Great Lights by which a Mason must walk and work.

The obligation of the candidate is always to be taken on the sacred book or books of his 
religion, that he may deem it more solemn and binding; and therefore it was that you 
were asked of what religion you were. We have no other concern with your religious 
creed.The Square is a right angle, formed by two right lines. It is adapted only to a plane 
surface, and belongs only to geometry, earth-measurement, that trigonometry which 
deals only with planes, and with the earth, which the ancients supposed to be a plane. 
The Compass describes circles, and deals with spherical trigonometry, the science of the 
spheres and-heavens. The former, therefore, is an emblem of what concerns the earth 
and the body; the latter of what concerns the heavens and the soul. Yet the Compass is 
also used in plane trigonometry, as in erecting perpendiculars; and, therefore, you are 
reminded that, although in this Degree both points of the Compass are under the Square, 
and you are now dealing only with the moral and political meaning of the symbols, and 
not with their philosophical and spiritual meanings, still the divine ever mingles with the 
human; with the earthly the spiritual intermixes; and there is something spiritual in the 
commonest duties of life. The nations are not bodies politic alone, but also souls-politic;and woe to that people which, seeking the material only, forgets that it has a soul. Then 
we have a race, petrified in dogma, which presupposes the absence of a soul and the 
presence only of memory and instinct, or demoralized by lucre. Such a nature can never 
lead civilization. Genuflexion before the idol or the dollar atrophies the muscle which 
walks and the will which moves. Hieratic or mercantile absorption diminishes the 
radiance of a people, lowers its horizon by lowering its level, and deprives it of that 
understanding of the universal aim, at the same time human and divine, which makes the 
missionary nations. A free people, forgetting that it has a soul to be cared for, devotes all 
its energies to its material advancement. If it makes war, it is to subserve its commercial 
interests. The citizens copy after the State, and regard wealth, pomp, and luxury as the 
great goods of life. Such a nation creates wealth rapidly, and distributes it badly. Thence 
the two extremes, of monstrous opulence and monstrous misery; all the enjoyment to a 
few, all the privations to the rest, that is to say, to the people; Privilege, Exception, 
Monopoly, Feudality, springing up from Labour itself: a false and dangerous situation, 
which, making Labour a blinded and chained Cyclops, in the mine, at the forge, in the 
workshop, at the loom, in the field, over poisonous fumes, in miasmatic cells, in 
unventilated factories, founds public power upon private misery, and plants the greatness 
of the State in the suffering of the individual. It is a greatness ill constituted, in which all 
the material elements are combined, and into which no moral element enters. If a people, 
like a star, has the right of eclipse, the light ought to return. The eclipse should not 
degenerate into night.The three lesser, or the Sublime Lights, you have heard, are the Sun, the Moon, and the 
Master of the Lodge; and you have heard what our Brethren of the York Rite say in 
regard to them, and why they hold them to be Lights of the Lodge. But the Sun and Moon 
do in no sense light the Lodge, unless it be symbolically, and then the lights are not they, 
but those things of which they are the symbols. Of what they are the symbols the Mason 
in that Rite is not told. Nor does the Moon in any sense rule the night with regularity.

The Sun is the ancient symbol of the life-giving and generative power of the Deity. To the 
ancients, light was the cause of life; and God was the source from which all light flowed; 
the essence of Light, the Invisible Fire, developed as Flame manifested as light and 
splendour. The Sun was His manifestation and visible image; and the Sabaeans 
worshipping the Light--God, seemed to worship the Sun, in whom they saw the 
manifestation of the Deity.

The Moon was the symbol of the passive capacity of nature to produce, the female, of 
which the life-giving power and energy was the male. It was the symbol of Isis, Astarte, 
and Artemis, or Diana. The "Master of Life" was the Supreme Deity, above both, and 
manifested through both; Zeus, the Son of Saturn, become King of the Gods; Horus, son 
of Osiris and Isis, become the Master of Life; Dionusos or Bacchus, like Mithras, become 
the author of Light and Life and Truth.

* * * * *

The Master of Light and Life, the Sun and the Moon, are symbolized in every Lodge by 
the Master and Wardens: and this makes it the duty of the Master to dispense light to the 
Brethren, by himself, and through the Wardens, who are his ministers."Thy sun," says ISAIAH to Jerusalem, "shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon 
withdraw itself; for the LORD shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy 
mourning shall be ended. Thy people also shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the 
land forever." Such is the type of a free people.

Our northern ancestors worshipped this tri-une Deity; ODIN, the Almighty FATHER; 
FREA, his wife, emblem of universal matter; and THOR, his son, the mediator. But above 
all these was the Supreme God, "the author of everything that existeth, the Eternal, the 
Ancient, the Living and Awful Being, the Searcher into concealed things, the Being that 
never changeth." In the Temple of Eleusis (a sanctuary lighted only by a window in the

roof, and representing the Universe), the images of the Sun, Moon, and Mercury, were 
represented.

"The Sun and Moon," says the learned Bro.'. DELAUNAY, "represent the two grand 
principles of all generations, the active and passive, the male and the female. The Sun 
represents the actual light. He pours upon the Moon his fecundating rays; both shed their 
light upon their offspring, the Blazing Star, or HORUS, and the three form the great 
Equilateral Triangle, in the centre of which is the omnific letter of the Kabalah, by which 
creation is said to have been effected."The ORNAMENTS of a Lodge are said to be "the Mosaic Pavement, the Indented 
Tessel, and the Blazing Star." The Mosaic Pavement, chequered in squares or lozenges, 
is said to represent the ground-floor of King Solomon's Temple; and the Indented Tessel 
"that beautiful tessellated border which surrounded it." The Blazing Star in the centre is 
said to be "an emblem of Divine Providence, and commemorative of the star which 
appeared to guide the wise men of the East to the place of our Saviour's nativity." But 
"there was no stone seen" within the Temple. The walls were covered with planks of 
cedar, and the floor was covered with planks of fir. There is no evidence that there was 
such a pavement or floor in the Temple, or such a bordering. In England, anciently, the 
Tracing-Board was surrounded with an indented border; and it is only in America that 
such a border is put around the Mosaic pavement. The tesserae, indeed, are the squares 
or lozenges of the pavement. In England, also, "the indented or denticulated border" is 
called "tessellated," because it has four "tassels," said to represent Temperance, 
Fortitude, Prudence, and Justice. It was termed the Indented Trassel; but this is a misuse 
of words. It is a tesserated pavement, with an indented border round it.

The pavement, alternately black and white, symbolizes, whether so intended or not, the 
Good and Evil Principles of the Egyptian and Persian creed. It is the warfare of Michael 
and Satan, of the Gods and Titans, of Balder and Lok; between light and shadow, which 
is darkness; Day and Night; Freedom and Despotism; Religious Liberty and the Arbitrary 
Dogmas of a Church that thinks for its votaries, and whose Pontiff claims to be infallible, 
and the decretals of its Councils to constitute a gospel.The edges of this pavement, if in lozenges, will necessarily be indented or denticulated, 
toothed like a saw; and to complete and finish it a bordering is necessary. It is completed 
by tassels as ornaments at the corners. If these and the bordering have any symbolic 
meaning, it is fanciful and arbitrary.

To find in the BLAZING STAR of five points an allusion to the Divine Providence, is also 
fanciful; and to make it commemorative of the Star that is said to have guided the Magi, 
is to give it a meaning comparatively modern. Originally it represented SIRIUS, or the 
Dog-star, the forerunner of the inundation of the Nile; the God ANUBIS, companion of 
ISIS in her search for the body of OSIRIS, her brother and husband. Then it became the 
image of HORUS, the son of OSIRIS, himself symbolized also by the Sun, the author of 
the Seasons, and the God of Time; Son of ISIS, who was the universal nature, himself 
the primitive matter, inexhaustible source of Life, spark of uncreated fire, universal seed 
of all beings. It was HERMES, also, the Master of Learning, whose name in Greek is that 
of the God Mercury. It became the sacred and potent sign or character of the Magi, the 
PENTALPHA, and is the significant emblem of Liberty and Freedom, blazing with a 
steady radiance amid the weltering elements of good and evil of Revolutions, and 
promising serene skies and fertile seasons to the nations, after the storms of change and 
tumult.In the East of the Lodge, over the Master, inclosed in a triangle, is the Hebrew letter 
YOD. In the English and American Lodges the Letter G.'. is substituted for this, as the 
initial of the word GOD, with as little reason as if the letter D., initial of DIEU, were used 
in French Lodges instead of the proper letter. YOD is, in the Kabalah, the symbol of 
Unity, of the Supreme Deity, the first letter of the Holy Name; and also a symbol of the 
Great Kabalistic Triads. To understand its mystic meanings, you must open the pages of 
the Sohar and Siphra de Zeniutha, and other kabalistic books, and ponder deeply on

their meaning. It must suffice to say, that it is the Creative Energy of the Deity, is 
represented as a point, and that point in the centre of the Circle of immensity. It is to us in 
this Degree, the symbol of that unmanifested Deity, the Absolute, who has no name.

Our French Brethren place this letter YOD in the centre of the Blazing Star. And in the 
old Lectures, our ancient English Brethren said, "The Blazing Star or Glory in the centre 
refers us to that grand luminary, the Sun, which enlightens the earth, and by its genial 
influence dispenses blessings to mankind." They called it also in the same lectures, an 
emblem of PRUDENCE. The word Prudentia means, in its original and fullest 
signification, Foresight; and, accordingly, the Blazing Star has been regarded as an 
emblem of Omniscience, or the All-seeing Eye, which to the Egyptian Initiates was the 
emblem of Osiris, the Creator. With the YOD in the centre, it has the kabalistic meaning 
of the Divine Energy, manifested as Light, creating the Universe.The Jewels of the Lodge are said to be six in number. Three are called "Movable," and 
three "Immovable." The SQUARE, the LEVEL, and the PLUMB were anciently and 
properly called the Movable Jewels, because they pass from one Brother to another. It is 
a modern innovation to call them immovable, because they must always be present in 
the Lodge. The immovable jewels are the ROUGH ASHLAR, the PERFECT ASHLAR or 
CUBICAL, STONE, or, in some Rituals, the DOUBLE CUBE, and the TRACING-BOARD, 
or TRESTLE-BOARD.

Of these jewels our Brethren of the York Rite say: "The Square inculcates Morality; the 
Level, Equality; and the Plumb, Rectitude of Conduct." Their explanation of the 
immovable Jewels may be read in their monitors.

Our Brethren of the York Rite say that "there is represented in every well-governed 
Lodge, a certain point, within a circle; the point representing an individual Brother; the 
Circle, the boundary line of his conduct, beyond which he is never to suffer his prejudices 
or passions to betray him."

This is not to interpret the symbols of Masonry. It is said by some, with a nearer 
approach to interpretation, that the point within the circle represents God in the centre of 
the Universe. It is a common Egyptian sign for the Sun and Osiris, and is still used as the 
astronomical sign of the great luminary. In the Kabalah the point is YOD, the Creative 
Energy of God, irradiating with light the circular space which God, the universal Light, left 
vacant, wherein to create the worlds, by withdrawing His substance of Light back on all 
sides from one point.Our Brethren add that, "this circle is embordered by two perpendicular parallel lines, 
representing Saint John the Baptist and Saint John the Evangelist, and upon the top rest 
the Holy Scriptures" (an open book). "In going round this circle," they say, "we 
necessarily touch upon these two lines as well as upon the Holy Scriptures; and while a 
Mason keeps himself circumscribed within their precepts, it is impossible that he should 
materially err."

It would be a waste of time to comment upon this. Some writers have imagined that the 
parallel lines represent the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, which the Sun alternately 
touches upon at the Summer and Winter solstices. But the tropics are not perpendicular 
lines, and the idea is merely fanciful. If the parallel lines ever belonged to the ancient 
symbol, they had some more recondite and more fruitful meaning. They probably had the 
same meaning as the twin columns Jachin and Boaz. That meaning is not for the 
Apprentice. The adept may find it in the Kabalah. The JUSTICE and MERCY of God are 
in equilibrium, and the result is HARMONY, because a Single and Perfect Wisdom 
presides over both.

The Holy Scriptures are an entirely modern addition to the symbol, like the terrestrial and 
celestial globes on the columns of the portico. Thus the ancient symbol has been 
denaturalized by incongruous additions, like that of Isis weeping over the broken column 
containing the remains of Osiris at Byblos.

* * * * * *

Masonry has its decalogue, which is a law to its Initiates. These are its Ten 
Commandments:

I. God is the Eternal, Omnipotent, Immutable WISDOM and Supreme INTELLIGENCE 
and Exhaustless Love. 
Thou shalt adore, revere, and love Him ! 
Thou shalt honour Him by practising the virtues!I. God is the Eternal, Omnipotent, Immutable WISDOM and Supreme INTELLIGENCE 
and Exhaustless Love. 
Thou shalt adore, revere, and love Him ! 
Thou shalt honour Him by practising the virtues!

II. Thy religion shall be, to do good because it is a pleasure to thee, and not merely 
because it is a duty. 
That thou mayest become the friend of the wise man, thou shalt obey his precepts ! 
Thy soul is immortal ! Thou shalt do nothing to degrade it !

III. Thou shalt unceasingly war against vice! 
Thou shalt not do unto others that which thou wouldst not wish them to do unto thee ! 
Thou shalt be submissive to thy fortunes, and keep burning the light of wisdom !

IV. Thou shalt honour thy parents ! 
Thou shalt pay respect and homage to the aged! 
Thou shalt instruct the young! 
Thou shalt protect and defend infancy and innocence !

V. Thou shalt cherish thy wife and thy children! 
Thou shalt love thy country, and obey its laws!

VI. Thy friend shall be to thee a second self ! 
Misfortune shall not estrange thee from him ! 
Thou shalt do for his memory whatever thou wouldst do for him, if he were living!

VII. Thou shalt avoid and flee from insincere friendships ! 
Thou shalt in everything refrain from excess. 
Thou shalt fear to be the cause of a stain on thy memory!

VIII. Thou shalt allow no passions to become thy master ! 
Thou shalt make the passions of others profitable lessons to thyself! 
Thou shalt be indulgent to error !

IX. Thou shalt hear much: Thou shalt speak little: Thou shalt act well ! 
Thou shalt forget injuries! 
Thou shalt render good for evil ! 
Thou shalt not misuse either thy strength or thy superiority !

X. Thou shalt study to know men; that thereby thou mayest learn to know thyself ! 
Thou shalt ever seek after virtue ! 
Thou shalt be just! 
Thou shalt avoid idleness !X. Thou shalt study to know men; that thereby thou mayest learn to know thyself ! 
Thou shalt ever seek after virtue ! 
Thou shalt be just! 
Thou shalt avoid idleness !

But the great commandment of Masonry is this: "A new commandment give I unto you: 
that ye love one another! He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, remaineth 
still in the darkness."

Such are the moral duties of a Mason. But it is also the duty of Masonry to assist in 
elevating the moral and intellectual level of society; in coining knowledge, bringing ideas 
into circulation, and causing the mind of youth to grow; and in putting, gradually, by the 
teachings of axioms and the promulgation of positive laws, the human race in harmony 
with its destinies.To this duty and work the Initiate is apprenticed. He must not imagine that he can effect 
nothing, and, therefore, despairing, become inert. It is in this, as in a man's daily life. 
Many great deeds are done in the small struggles of life. There is, we are told, a 
determined though unseen bravery, which defends itself, foot to foot, in the darkness, 
against the fatal invasion of necessity and of baseness. There are noble and mysterious 
triumphs, which no eye sees, which no renown rewards, which no flourish of trumpets 
salutes. Life, misfortune, isolation, abandonment, poverty, are battle-fields, which have 
their heroes,--heroes obscure, but sometimes greater than those who become illustrious. 
The Mason should struggle in the same manner, and with the same bravery, against 
those invasions of necessity and baseness, which come to nations as well as to men. He 
should meet them, too, foot to foot, even in the darkness, and protest against the national 
wrongs and follies; against usurpation and the first inroads of that hydra, Tyranny. There 
is no more sovereign eloquence than the truth in indignation. It is more difficult for a 
people to keep than to gain their freedom. The Protests of Truth are always needed. 
Continually, the right must protest against the fact. There is, in fact, Eternity in the Right. 
The Mason should be the Priest and Soldier of that Right. If his country should be robbed 
of her liberties, he should still not despair. The protest of the Right against the Fact 
persists forever. The robbery of a people never becomes prescriptive. Reclamation of its 
rights is barred by no length of time. Warsaw can no more be Tartar than Venice can be 
Teutonic. A people may endure military usurpation, and subjugated States kneel to 
States and wear the yoke, while under the stress of necessity; but when the necessity 
disappears, if the people is fit to be free, the submerged country will float to the surface 
and reappear, and Tyranny be adjudged by History to have murdered its victims.Whatever occurs, we should have Faith in the Justice and overruling Wisdom of God, 
and Hope for the Future, and Lovingkindness for those who are in error. God makes 
visible to men His will in events; an obscure text, written in a mysterious language. Men 
make their translations of it forthwith, hasty, incorrect, full of faults, omissions, and 
misreadings. We see so short a way along the arc of the great circle! Few minds 
comprehend the Divine tongue. The most sagacious, the most calm, the most profound, 
decipher the hieroglyphs slowly; and when they arrive with their text, perhaps the need 
has long gone by; there are already twenty translations in the public square--the most 
incorrect being, as of course, the most accepted and popular. From each translation, a 
party is born; and from each misreading, a faction. Each party believes or pretends that it 
has the only true text, and each faction believes or pretends that it alone possesses the 
light. Moreover, factions are blind men, who aim straight, errors are excellent projectiles, 
striking skillfully, and with all the violence that springs from false reasoning, wherever a 
want of logic in those who defend the right, like a defect in a cuirass, makes them 
vulnerable.

Therefore it is that we shall often be discomfited in combating error before the people. 
Antaeus long resisted Hercules; and the heads of the Hydra grew as fast as they were 
cut off. It is absurd to say that Error, wounded, writhes in pain, and dies amid her 
worshippers. Truth conquers slowly. There is a wondrous vitality in Error. Truth, indeed, 
for the most part, shoots over the heads of the masses; or if an error is prostrated for a 
moment, it is up again in a moment, and as vigorous as ever. It will not die when the 
brains are out, and the most stupid and irrational errors are the longest-lived.Nevertheless, Masonry, which is Morality and Philosophy, must not cease to do its duty. 
We never know at what moment success awaits our efforts--generally when most 
unexpected--nor with what effect our efforts are or are not to be attended. Succeed or 
fail, Masonry must not bow to error, or succumb under discouragement. There were at 
Rome a few Carthaginian soldiers, taken prisoners, who refused to bow to Flaminius, 
and had a little of Hannibal's magnanimity. Masons should possess an equal greatness 
of soul. Masonry should be an energy; finding its aim and effect in the amelioration of 
mankind. Socrates should enter into Adam, and produce Marcus Aurelius, in other 
words, bring forth from the man of enjoyments, the man of wisdom. Masonry should not 
be a mere watch-tower, built upon mystery, from which to gaze at ease upon the world, 
with no other result than to be a convenience for the curious. To hold the full cup of

thought to the thirsty lips of men; to give to all the true ideas of Deity; to harmonize 
conscience and science, are the province of Philosophy. Morality is Faith in full bloom. 
Contemplation should lead to action, and the absolute be practical; the ideal be made air 
and food and drink to the human mind. Wisdom is a sacred communion. It is only on that 
condition that it ceases to be a sterile love of Science, and becomes the one and 
supreme method by which to unite Humanity and arouse it to concerted action. Then 
Philosophy becomes Religion.And Masonry, like History and Philosophy, has eternal duties-- eternal, and, at the same 
time, simple--to oppose Caiaphas as Bishop, Draco or Jefferies as Judge, Trimalcion as 
Legislator, and Tiberius as Emperor. These are the symbols of the tyranny that degrades 
and crushes, and the corruption that defiles and infests. In the works published for the 
use of the Craft we are told that the three great tenets of a Mason's profession, are 
Brotherly Love, Relief, and Truth. And it is true that a Brotherly affection and kindness 
should govern us in all our intercourse and relations with our brethren; and a generous 
and liberal philanthropy actuate us in regard to all men. To relieve the distressed is 
peculiarly the duty of Masons--a sacred duty, not to be omitted, neglected, or coldly or 
inefficiently complied with. It is also most true, that Truth is a Divine attribute and the 
foundation of every virtue. To be true, and to seek to find and learn the Truth, are the 
great objects of every good Mason.As the Ancients did, Masonry styles Temperance, Fortitude, Prudence, and Justice, the 
four cardinal virtues. They are as necessary to nations as to individuals. The people that 
would be Free and Independent, must possess Sagacity, Forethought, Foresight, and 
careful Circumspection, all which are included in the meaning of the word Prudence. It 
must be temperate in asserting its rights, temperate in its councils, economical in its 
expenses; it must be bold, brave, courageous, patient under reverses, undismayed by 
disasters, hopeful amid calamities, like Rome when she sold the field at which Hannibal 
had his camp. No Cannae or Pharsalia or Pavia or Agincourt or Waterloo must 
discourage her. Let her Senate sit in their seats until the Gauls pluck them by the beard. 
She must, above all things, be just, not truckling to the strong and warring on or 
plundering the weak; she must act on the square with all nations, and the feeblest tribes; 
always keeping her faith, honest in her legislation, upright in all her dealings. Whenever 
such a Republic exists, it will be immortal: for rashness, injustice, intemperance and 
luxury in prosperity, and despair and disorder in adversity, are the causes of the decay 
and dilapidation of nations.

MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE 
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry , prepared for the 
Supreme Council of the Thirty Third Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: 
Charleston, 1871. 
2º - Fellow-craftIn the Ancient Orient, all religion was more or less a mystery and there was no divorce 
from it of philosophy. The popular theology, taking the multitude of allegories and 
symbols for realities, degenerated into a worship of the celestial luminaries, of imaginary 
Deities with human feelings, passions, appetites, and lusts, of idols, stones, animals, 
reptiles. The Onion was sacred to the Egyptians, because its different layers were a 
symbol of the concentric heavenly spheres. Of course the popular religion could not 
satisfy the deeper longings and thoughts, the loftier aspirations of the Spirit, or the logic 
of reason. The first, therefore, was taught to the initiated in the Mysteries. There, also, it 
was taught by symbols. The vagueness of symbolism, capable of many interpretations, 
reached what the palpable and conventional creed could not. Its indefiniteness 
acknowledged the abstruseness of the subject: it treated that mysterious subject 
mystically: it endeavored to illustrate what it could not explain; to excite an appropriate 
feeling, if it could not develop an adequate idea; and to rmake the image a mere 
subordinate conveyance for the conception, which itself never became obvious or 
familiar. Thus the knowledge now imparted by books and letters, was of old conveyed by 
symbols; and the priests invented or perpetuated a display of rites and exhibitions, which 
were not only more attractive to the eye than words, but often more suggestive and more 
pregnant with meaning to the mind. Masonry, successor of the Mysteries, still follows the ancient manner of teaching. Her 
ceremonies are like the ancient mystic shows,--not the reading of an essay, but the 
opening of a problem, requiring research, and constituting philosophy the arch-
expounder. Her symbols are the instruction she gives. The lectures are endeavors, often 
partial and one-sided, to interpret these symbols.MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE 
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry , prepared for the 
Supreme Council of the Thirty Third Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: 
Charleston, 1871. 
2º - Fellow-craft

Her symbols are the instruction she gives. The lectures are endeavors, often 
partial and one-sided, to interpret these symbols. He who would become an 
accomplished Mason must not be content merely to hear, or even to understand, the 
lectures; he must, aided by them, and they having, as it were, marked out the way for 
him, study, interpret, and develop these symbols for himself 
* * * * * * 
Though Masonry is identical with the ancient Mysteries, it is so only in this qualified 
sense: that it presents but an imperfect image of their brilliancy, the ruins only of their 
grandeur, and a system that has experienced progressive alterations, the fruits of social 
events, political circumstances, and the ambitious imbecility of its improvers. After 
leaving Egypt, the Mysteries were modified by the habits of the different nations among 
whom they were introduced, and especially by the religious systems of the countries into 
which they were transplanted. To maintain the established government, laws, and 
religion, was the obligation of the Initiate everywhere; and everywhere they were the 
heritage of the priests, who were nowhere willing to make the common people co-
proprietors with themselves of philosophical truth. Masonry is not the Coliseum in ruins. It is rather a Roman palace of the middle ages, 
disfigured by moderll architectural improvements, yet built on a Cyclopcean foundation 
laid by the Etruscans, and with many a stone of the superstructure taken from dwellings 
and temples of the age of Hadrian and Antoninus.Christianity taught the doctrine of FRATERNITY; but repudiated that of political 
EQUALITY, by continually inculcating obedience to Caesar, and to those lawfully in 
authority. Masonry was the first apostle of EQUALITY. In the Monastery there is fraternity 
and equality, but no liberty. Masonry added that also, and claimed for man the three-fold 
heritage, LIBERTY, EQUALITY, and FRATERNITY. It was but a development of the original purpose of the Mysteries, which was to teach 
men to know and practice their duties to themselves and their fellows, the great practical 
end of all philosophy and all knowledge. Truths are the springs from which duties flow; and it is but a few hundred years since a 
new Truth began to be distinctly seen; that MAN IS SUPREME OVER INSTITUTIONS, 
AND NOT THEY OVER HIM. Man has natural empire over all institutions. They are for 
him, aecording to his development; not he for them. This seems to us a very simple 
statement, one to which all men, everywhere, ought to assent. But once it was a great 
new Truth,--not revealed until governments had been in existence for at least five 
thousand years. Once revealed, it imposed new duties on men. Man owed it to himself to 
be free. He owed it to his country to seek to give her freedom, or maintain her in that 
possession. It made Tyranny and Usurpation the enemies of the Human Race. It created 
a general outlawry of Despots and Despotisms, temporal and spiritual. The sphere of 
Duty was immensely enlarged. Patriotism had, henceforth, a new and wider meaning. Free Government, Free Thought, Free Conscience, Free Speech! All these came to be 
inalienable rights, which those who had parted with them or been robbed of them, or 
whose ancestors had lost them, had the right summarily to retake. Unfortunately, as 
Truths always become perverted into falsehoods, and are falsehoods when misapplied, 
this Truth became the Gospel of Anarchy, soon after it was first preached.All these came to be 
inalienable rights, which those who had parted with them or been robbed of them, or 
whose ancestors had lost them, had the right summarily to retake. Unfortunately, as 
Truths always become perverted into falsehoods, and are falsehoods when misapplied, 
this Truth became the Gospel of Anarchy, soon after it was first preached. Masonry early comprehended this Truth, and recognized its own enlarged duties. Its 
symbols then came to have a wider meaning; but it also assumed the mask of Stone-
masonry, and borrowed its working-tools, and so was supplied with new and apt 
symbols. It aided in bringing about the French Revolution, disappeared with the 
Girondists, was born again with the restoration of order, and sustained Napoleon, 
because, though Emperor, he acknowledged the right of the people to select its rulers, 
and was at the head of a nation refusing to receive back its old kings. He pleaded, with 
sabre, musket, and cannon, the great cause of the People against Royalty, the right of 
the French people even to make a Corsican General their Emperor, if it pleased them. Masonry felt that this Truth had the Omnipotence of God on its side; and that neither 
Pope nor Potentate could overcome it. It was a truth dropped into the world's wide 
treasury, and forming a part of the heritage which each generation receives, enlarges, 
and holds in trust, and of necessity bequeaths to mankind; the personal estate of man, 
entailed of nature to the end of time. And Masonry early recognized it as true, that to set 
forth and develop a truth, or any human excellence of gift or growth, is to make greater 
the spiritual glory of the race; that whosoever aids the march of a Truth, and makes the 
thought a thing, writes in the same line with MOSES, and with Him who died upon the 
cross; and has an intellectual sympathy with the Deity Himself. The best gift we can bestow on man is manhood.Her symbols are the instruction she gives. The lectures are endeavors, often 
partial and one-sided, to interpret these symbols. He who would become an 
accomplished Mason must not be content merely to hear, or even to understand, the 
lectures; he must, aided by them, and they having, as it were, marked out the way for 
him, study, interpret, and develop these symbols for himself 
* * * * * * 
Though Masonry is identical with the ancient Mysteries, it is so only in this qualified 
sense: that it presents but an imperfect image of their brilliancy, the ruins only of their 
grandeur, and a system that has experienced progressive alterations, the fruits of social 
events, political circumstances, and the ambitious imbecility of its improvers. After 
leaving Egypt, the Mysteries were modified by the habits of the different nations among 
whom they were introduced, and especially by the religious systems of the countries into 
which they were transplanted. To maintain the established government, laws, and 
religion, was the obligation of the Initiate everywhere; and everywhere they were the 
heritage of the priests, who were nowhere willing to make the common people co-
proprietors with themselves of philosophical truth. Masonry is not the Coliseum in ruins. It is rather a Roman palace of the middle ages, 
disfigured by moderll architectural improvements, yet built on a Cyclopcean foundation 
laid by the Etruscans, and with many a stone of the superstructure taken from dwellings 
and temples of the age of Hadrian and Antoninus.

And Masonry early recognized it as true, that to set 
forth and develop a truth, or any human excellence of gift or growth, is to make greater 
the spiritual glory of the race; that whosoever aids the march of a Truth, and makes the 
thought a thing, writes in the same line with MOSES, and with Him who died upon the 
cross; and has an intellectual sympathy with the Deity Himself. The best gift we can bestow on man is manhood. It is that which Masonry is ordained of 
God to bestow on its votaries: not sectarianism and religious dogma; not a rudimental 
morality, that may be found in the writings of Confucius, Zoroaster, Seneca, and the 
Rabbis, in the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes; not a little and cheap common-school 
knowledge; but manhood and science and philosophy. Not that Philosophy or Science is in opposition to Religion. For Philosophy is but that 
knowledge of God and the Soul, which is derived from observation of the manifested 
action of God and the Soul, and from a wise analogy. It is the intellectual guide which the 
religious sentiment needs. The true religious philosophy of an imperfect being, is not a 
system of creed, but, as SOCRATES thought, an infinite search or approximation.Philosophy is that intellectual and moral progress, which the religious sentiment inspires 
and ennobles. As to Science, it could not walk alone, while religion was stationary. It consists of those 
matured inferences from experience which all other experience confirms. It realizes and 
unites all that was truly valuable in both the old schemes of mediation,--one heroic, or the 
system of action and effort; and the mystical theory of spiritual, ccntemplative 
commullion. "Listen to me," says GALEN, "as to the voice of the Eleusinian Hierophant, 
and believe that the study of Nature is a mystery no less important than theirs, nor less 
adapted to display the wisdom and power of the Great Creator. Their lessons and 
demonstrations were obscure, but ours are clear and unmistakable." 
We deem that to be the best knowledge we can obtain of the Soul of another man, which 
is furnished by his actions and his life-long conduct. Evidence to the contrary, supplied by 
what another man informs us that this Soul has said to his, would weigh little against the 
former. The first Scriptures for the human race were written by God on the Earth and 
Heavens. The reading of these Scriptures is Science. Familiarity with the grass and 
trees, the insects and the infusoria, teaches us deeper lessons of love and faith than we 
can glean from the writings of FENELON and AUGUSTINE. The great Bible of God is 
ever open before mankind. Knowledge is convertible into power, and axioms into rules of utility and duty. But 
knowledge itself is not Power. Wisdom is Power; and her Prime Minister is JUSTICE, 
which is the perfected law of TRUTH. The purpose, therefore, of Education and Science 
is to make a man wise. If knowledge does not make him so, it is wasted, like water 
poured on the sands. To know the formulas of Masonry, is of as little value, by itself, as 
to know so many words and sentences in some barbarous African or Australasian 
dialect.If knowledge does not make him so, it is wasted, like water 
poured on the sands. To know the formulas of Masonry, is of as little value, by itself, as 
to know so many words and sentences in some barbarous African or Australasian 
dialect. To know even the meaning of the symbols, is but little, unless that adds to our 
wisdom, and also to our charity, which is to justice like one hemisphere of the brain to the 
other. Do not lose sight, then, of the true object of your studies in Masonry. It is to add to your 
estate of wisdom, and not merely to your knowledge. A man may spend a lifetime in 
studying a single specialty of knowledge,-- botany, conchology, or entomology, for 
instance,--in committing to memory names derived from the Greek, and classifying and 
reclassifying; and yet be no wiser than when he began. It is the great truths as to all that 
most concerns a man, as to his rights, interests, and duties, that Masonry seeks to teach 
her Initiates. The wiser a man becomes, the less will he be inclined to submit tamely to the imposition 
of fetters or a yoke, on his conscience or his person. For, by increase of wisdom he not 
only better knows his rights, but the more highly values them, and is more conscious of 
his worth and dignity. His pride then urges him to assert his independence. He becomes 
better able to assert it also; and better able to assist others or his country, when they or 
she stake all, even existence, upon the same assertion. But mere knowledge makes no 
one independent, nor fits him to be free. It often only makes him a more useful slave. Liberty is a curse to the ignorant and brutal.And Masonry early recognized it as true, that to set 
forth and develop a truth, or any human excellence of gift or growth, is to make greater 
the spiritual glory of the race; that whosoever aids the march of a Truth, and makes the 
thought a thing, writes in the same line with MOSES, and with Him who died upon the 
cross; and has an intellectual sympathy with the Deity Himself. The best gift we can bestow on man is manhood. It is that which Masonry is ordained of 
God to bestow on its votaries: not sectarianism and religious dogma; not a rudimental 
morality, that may be found in the writings of Confucius, Zoroaster, Seneca, and the 
Rabbis, in the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes; not a little and cheap common-school 
knowledge; but manhood and science and philosophy. Not that Philosophy or Science is in opposition to Religion. For Philosophy is but that 
knowledge of God and the Soul, which is derived from observation of the manifested 
action of God and the Soul, and from a wise analogy. It is the intellectual guide which the 
religious sentiment needs. The true religious philosophy of an imperfect being, is not a 
system of creed, but, as SOCRATES thought, an infinite search or approximation.

It often only makes him a more useful slave. Liberty is a curse to the ignorant and brutal. Political science has for its object to ascertain in what manner and by means of what 
institutions political and personal freedom may be secured and perpetuated: not license, 
or the mere right of every man to vote, but entire and absolute freedom of thought and 
opinion, alike free of the despotism of monarch and mob and prelate; freedom of action 
within the limits of the general law enacted for all; the Courts of Justice, with impartial 
Judges and juries, open to all alike; weakness and poverty equally potent in those 
Court.s as power and wealth; the avenues to office and honor open alike to all the 
worthy; the military powers, in war oY peaee, in strict subordination to the civil power; 
arbitrary arrests for acts not known to the law as crimes, impossible; Romish Inquisitions, 
Star-Chambers, Military Commissions, unknown; the means of instruction within reach ofthe children of all; the right of Free Speech; and accountability of all public omcers, civil 
and military. If Masonry needed to be justified for imposing political as well as moral duties on its 
Initiates, it would be enough to point to the sad history of the world. It would not even 
need that she should turn back the pages of history to the chapters written by Tacitus: 
that she should recite the incredible horrors of despotism under Caligula and Domitian, 
Caracalla and Commodus, Vitellius and Maximin. She need only point to the centuries of 
calamity through which the gay French nation passed; to the long oppression of the 
feudal ages, of the selfish Bourbon kings; to those times when the peasants were robbed 
and slaughtered by their own lords and princes, like sheep; when the lord claimed the 
firstfruits of the peasant's marriage-bed; when the captured city was given up to 
merciless rape and massacre; when the State-prisons groaned with innocent victims, and 
the Church blessed the banners of pitiless murderers, and sang Te Deums for the 
crowning mercy of the Eve of St. Bartholomew. We might turn over the pages, to a later chapter,--that of the reign of the Fifteenth Louis, 
when young girls, hardly more than children, were kidnapped to serve his lusts; when 
lettres de cachet filled the Bastile with persons accused of no crime, with husbands who 
were in the way of the pleasures of lascivious wives and of villains wearing orders of 
nobility; when the people were ground between the upper and the nether millstone of 
taxes, customs, and excises; and when the Pope's Nuncio and the Cardinal de la Roche-
Ayman, devoutly kneeling, one on each side of Madame du Barry, the king's abandoned 
prostitute, put the slippers on her naked feet, as she rose from the adulterous bed. Then, 
indeed, suffering and toil were the two forms of man, and the people were but beasts of 
burden.We might turn over the pages, to a later chapter,--that of the reign of the Fifteenth Louis, 
when young girls, hardly more than children, were kidnapped to serve his lusts; when 
lettres de cachet filled the Bastile with persons accused of no crime, with husbands who 
were in the way of the pleasures of lascivious wives and of villains wearing orders of 
nobility; when the people were ground between the upper and the nether millstone of 
taxes, customs, and excises; and when the Pope's Nuncio and the Cardinal de la Roche-
Ayman, devoutly kneeling, one on each side of Madame du Barry, the king's abandoned 
prostitute, put the slippers on her naked feet, as she rose from the adulterous bed. Then, 
indeed, suffering and toil were the two forms of man, and the people were but beasts of 
burden. The true Mason is he who labors strenuously to help his Order effect its great purposes. Not that the Order can effect them by itself; but that it, too, can help. It also is one of 
God's instruments. It is a Force and a Power; and shame upon it, if it did not exert itself, 
and, if need be, sacrihce its children in the cause of humanity, as Abraham was ready to 
offer up Isaac on the altar of sacrifice. It will not forget that noble allegory of Curtius 
leaping, all in armor, into the great yawning gulf that opened to swallow Rome. It will 
TRY.It will not forget that noble allegory of Curtius 
leaping, all in armor, into the great yawning gulf that opened to swallow Rome. It will 
TRY. It shall not be its fault if the day never comes when man will no longer have to fear 
a conquest, an invasion, a usurpation, a rivalry of nations with the armed hand, an 
interruption of civilization depending on a marriage-royal, or a birth in the hereditary 
tyrannies; a partition of the peoples by a Congress, a dismemberment by the downfall of 
a dynasty, a combat of two religions, meeting head to head, like two goats of darkness 
on the bridge of the Infinite: when they will no longer have to fear famine, spoliation, 
prostitution from distress, misery from lack of work, and all the brigandages of chance in 
the forest of events: when nations will gravitate about the Truth, like stars about the light, 
each in its own orbit, without clashing or collision; and everywhere Freedom, cinctured 
with stars, crowned with the celestial splendors, and with wisdom and justice on either 
hand, will reign supreme. In your studies as a Fellow-Craft you must be guided by REASON, LOVE and FAITH. We do not now discuss the differences between Reason and Faith, and undertake to 
define the domain of each. But it is necessary to say, that even in the ordinary affairs of 
life we are governed far more by what we believe than by what we know; by FAITH and 
ANALOGY, than by REASON. The "Age of Reason" of the French Revolution taught, we 
know, what a folly it is to enthrone Reason by itself as supreme. Reason is at fault when 
it deals with the Infinite. There we must revere and believe. Notwithstanding the 
calamities of the virtuous, the miseries of the deserving, the prosperity of tyrants and the 
murder of martyrs, we must believe there is a wise, just, merciful, and loving God, an 
Intelligence and a Providence, supreme over all, and caring for the minutest things and 
events. A Faith is a necessity to man.It often only makes him a more useful slave. Liberty is a curse to the ignorant and brutal. Political science has for its object to ascertain in what manner and by means of what 
institutions political and personal freedom may be secured and perpetuated: not license, 
or the mere right of every man to vote, but entire and absolute freedom of thought and 
opinion, alike free of the despotism of monarch and mob and prelate; freedom of action 
within the limits of the general law enacted for all; the Courts of Justice, with impartial 
Judges and juries, open to all alike; weakness and poverty equally potent in those 
Court.s as power and wealth; the avenues to office and honor open alike to all the 
worthy; the military powers, in war oY peaee, in strict subordination to the civil power; 
arbitrary arrests for acts not known to the law as crimes, impossible; Romish Inquisitions, 
Star-Chambers, Military Commissions, unknown; the means of instruction within reach of

Notwithstanding the 
calamities of the virtuous, the miseries of the deserving, the prosperity of tyrants and the 
murder of martyrs, we must believe there is a wise, just, merciful, and loving God, an 
Intelligence and a Providence, supreme over all, and caring for the minutest things and 
events. A Faith is a necessity to man. Woe to him who believes nothing!We believe that the soul of another is of a certain nature and possesses certain qualities, 
that he is generous and honest, or penurious and knavish, that she is virtuous and 
amiable, or vicious and ill-tempered, from the countenance alone, from little more than a 
glimpse of it, without the means of knowing. We venture our fortune on the signature of a 
man on the other side of the world, whom we never saw, upon the belief that he is honest 
and trustworthy. We believe that occurrences have taken place, upon the assertion of 
others. We believe that one will acts upon another, and in the reality of a multitude of 
other phenomena that Reason cannot explain. But we ought not to believe what Reason authoritatively denies, that at which the sense 
of right revolts, that which is absurd or self-contradictory, or at issue with experience or 
science, or that which degrades the character of the Deity, and would make Him 
revengeful, malignant, cruel, or unjust. A man's Faith is as much his own as his Reason is. His Freedom consists as much in his 
faith being free as in his will being uncontrolled by power. All the Priests and Augurs of 
Rome or Greece had not the right to require Cicero or Socrates to believe in the absurd 
mythology of the vulgar. All the Imaums of Mohammedanism have not the right to require 
a Pagan to believe that Gabriel dictated the Koran to the Prophet. All the Brahmins that 
ever lived, if assembled in one conclave like the Cardinals, could not gain a right to 
compel a single human being to believe in the Hindu Cosmogony. No man or body of 
men can be infallible, and authorized to decide what other men shall believe, as to any 
tenet of faith. Except to those who first receive it, every religion and the truth of all 
inspired writings depend on human testimony and internal evidences, to be judged of by 
Reason and the wise analogies of Faith.No man or body of 
men can be infallible, and authorized to decide what other men shall believe, as to any 
tenet of faith. Except to those who first receive it, every religion and the truth of all 
inspired writings depend on human testimony and internal evidences, to be judged of by 
Reason and the wise analogies of Faith. Each man must necessarily have the right to 
judge of their truth for himself; because no one man can have any higher or better right to 
judge than another of equal information and intelligence. Domitian claimed to be the Lord God; and statues and images of him, in silver and gold, 
were found throughout the known world. He claimed to be regarded as the God of all 
men; and, according to Suetonius, began his letters thus: "Our Lord and God commands 
that it should be done so and so;" and formally decreed that no one should address him 
otherwise, either in writing or by word of mouth. Palfurius Sura, the philosopher, who was 
his chief delator, accusing those who refused to recognize his divinity, however much he 
may have believed in that divinity, had not the right to demand that a single Christian in 
Rome or the provinces should do the same. Reason is far from being the only guide, in morals or in political science. Love or loving-
kindness must keep it company, to exclude fanaticism, intolerance, and persecution, to 
all of which a morality too ascetic, and extreme political principles, invariably lead. We 
must also have faith in ourselves, and in our fellows and the people, or we shall be easily 
discouraged by reverses, and our ardor cooled by obstacles. We must not listen to 
Reason alone. Force comes more from Faitll and Love: and it is by the aid of these that 
man scales the loftiest heights of morality, or becomes the Saviour and Redeemer of a 
People. Reason must hold the helm; but these supply the motive power. They are the 
wings of the soul.Notwithstanding the 
calamities of the virtuous, the miseries of the deserving, the prosperity of tyrants and the 
murder of martyrs, we must believe there is a wise, just, merciful, and loving God, an 
Intelligence and a Providence, supreme over all, and caring for the minutest things and 
events. A Faith is a necessity to man. Woe to him who believes nothing!

Reason must hold the helm; but these supply the motive power. They are the 
wings of the soul. Enthusiasm is generally unreasoning; and without it, and Love and 
Faith, there would have been no RIENZI, or TELL, or SYDNEY, or any other of the great 
patriots whose names are immortal. If the Deity had been merely and only All-wise and 
All-mighty, He would never have created the Universe. * * * * * * 
It is GENIUS that gets Power; and its prime lieutenants are FORCE and WISDOM. The 
unruliest of men bend before the leader that has the sense to see and the will to do. It is 
Genius that rules with God-like Power; that unveils, with its counsellors, the hidden 
human mysteries, cuts asunder with its word the huge knots, and builds up with its word 
the crumbled ruins. At its glance fall down the senseless idols, whose altars have been 
on all the high places and in all the sacred groves. Dishonesty and imbecility standabashed before it. Its single Yea or Nay revokes the wrongs of ages, and is heard among 
the future generations. Its power is immense, because its wisdom is immense. Genius is 
the Sun of the political sphere. Force and Wisdom, its ministers, are the orbs that carry 
its light into darkness, and answer it with their solid reflecting Truth. Development is symbolized by the use of the Mallet and Chisel; the development of the 
energies and intellect, of the individual and the people. Genius may place itself at the 
head of an unintellectual, uneducated, unenergetic nation; but in a free country, to 
cultivate the intellect of those who elect, is the only mode of securing intellect and genius 
for rulers. The world is seldom ruled by the great spirits, except after dissolution and new 
birth. In periods of transition and convulsion, the Long Parliaments, the Robespierres and 
Marats, and the semi-respectabilities of intellect, too often hold the reins of power. The 
Cromwells and Napoleons come later. After Marius and Sulla and Cicero the rhetorician, 
CAESAR. The great intellect is often too sharp for the granite of this life. Legislators may 
be very ordinary men; for legislation is very ordinary work; it is but the final issue of a 
million minds. The power of the purse or the sword, compared to that of the spirit, is poor and 
contemptible. As to lands, you may have agrarian laws, and equal partition. But a man's 
intellect is all his own, held direct from God, an inalienable fief. It is the most potent of 
weapons in the hands of a paladin. If the people comprehend Force in the physical 
sense, how much more do tlley revelence the intellectual! Ask Hildebrand, or Luther, or 
Loyola. They fall prostrate before it, as before an idol. The mastery of mind over mind is 
the only conquest worth having. The other injures both, and dissolves at a breath; rude 
as it is, the great cable falls down and snaps at last. But this dimly resembles the 
dominion of the Creator.The other injures both, and dissolves at a breath; rude 
as it is, the great cable falls down and snaps at last. But this dimly resembles the 
dominion of the Creator. It does not need a subject like that of Peter the Hermit. If the 
stream be but bright and strong, it will sweep like a spring-tide to the popular heart. Not in 
word only, but in intellectual act lies the fascination. It is the homage to the Invisible. This 
power, knotted with Love, is the golden chain let down into the well of Truth, or the 
invisible chain that binds the ranks of mankind together. Influence of man over man is a law of nature, whether it be by a great estate in land or in 
intellect. It may mean slavery, a deference to the eminent human judgment. Society 
hangs spiritually together, like the revoiving spheres above. The free country, in which 
intellect and genius govern, will endure. Where they serve, and other influences govern, 
the national life is short. All the nations that have tried to govern themselves by their 
smallest, by the incapables, or merely respectables, have come to nought. Constitutions 
and Laws, without Genius and Intellect to govern, will not prevent decay. In that case 
they have the dry-rot and the life dies out of them by degrees. To give a nation the franchise of the Intellect is the only sure mode of perpetuating 
freedom. This will compel exertion and generous care for the people from those on the 
higher seats, and honorable and intelligent allegiance from those below. Then political 
public life will protect all men from self-abasement in sensual pursuits, from vulgar acts 
and low greed, by giving the noble ambition of just imperial rule. To elevate the people by 
teaching loving-kindness and wisdom, with power to him who teaches best: and so to 
develop the free State from the rough ashlar:-- this is the great labor in which Masonry 
desires to lend a helping hand.Reason must hold the helm; but these supply the motive power. They are the 
wings of the soul. Enthusiasm is generally unreasoning; and without it, and Love and 
Faith, there would have been no RIENZI, or TELL, or SYDNEY, or any other of the great 
patriots whose names are immortal. If the Deity had been merely and only All-wise and 
All-mighty, He would never have created the Universe. * * * * * * 
It is GENIUS that gets Power; and its prime lieutenants are FORCE and WISDOM. The 
unruliest of men bend before the leader that has the sense to see and the will to do. It is 
Genius that rules with God-like Power; that unveils, with its counsellors, the hidden 
human mysteries, cuts asunder with its word the huge knots, and builds up with its word 
the crumbled ruins. At its glance fall down the senseless idols, whose altars have been 
on all the high places and in all the sacred groves. Dishonesty and imbecility stand

Then political 
public life will protect all men from self-abasement in sensual pursuits, from vulgar acts 
and low greed, by giving the noble ambition of just imperial rule. To elevate the people by 
teaching loving-kindness and wisdom, with power to him who teaches best: and so to 
develop the free State from the rough ashlar:-- this is the great labor in which Masonry 
desires to lend a helping hand. All of us should labor in building up the great monument of a nation, the Holy House of 
the Temple. The cardinal virtues must not be partitioned among men, becoming the 
exclusive property of some, like the common crafts. ALL are apprenticed to the partners, 
Duty and Honor. Masonry is a march and a struggle toward the Light. For the individual as well as the 
nation, Light is Virtue, Manliness, Intelligence, Liberty. Tyranny over the soul or body, is 
darkness. The freest people, like the freest man, is always in danger of relapsing into 
servitude. Wars are almost always fatal to Republics. They create tyrants, andconsolidate their power. They spring, for the most part, from evil counsels. When the 
small and the base are intrusted with power, legislation and administration become but 
two parallel series of errors and blunders, ending in war, calamity, and the necessity for a 
tyrant. When the nation feels its feet sliding backward, as if it walked on the ice, the time 
has come for a supreme effort. The magnificent tyrants of the past are but the types of 
those of the future. Men and nations will always sell themselves into slavery, to gratify 
their passions and obtain revenge. The tyrant's plea, necessity, is always available; and 
the tyrant once in power, the necessity of providing for his safety makes him savage. Religion is a power, and he must control that. Independent, its sanctuaries might rebel. Then it becomes unlawful for the people to worship God in their own way, and the old 
spiritual despotisms revive. Men must believe as Power wills, or die; and even if they 
may believe as they will, all they have, lands, houses, body, and soul, are stamped with 
the royal brand. "I am the State," said Louis the Fourteenth to his peasants; "the very 
shirts on your backs are mine, and I can take them if I will." 
And dynasties so established endure, like that of the Caesars of Rome, of the Caesars of 
Constantinople, of the Caliphs, the Stuarts, the Spaniards, the Goths, the Valois, until the 
race wears out, and ends with lunatics and idiots, who still rule. There is no concord 
among men, to end the horrible bondage. The State falls inwardly, as well as by the 
outward blows of the incoherent elements. The furious human passions, the sleeping 
human indolence, the stolid human ignorance, the rivalry of human castes, are as good 
for the kirlgs as the swords of the Paladins. The worshippers have all bowed so long to 
the old idol, that they cannot go into the streets and choose another Grand Llama.The furious human passions, the sleeping 
human indolence, the stolid human ignorance, the rivalry of human castes, are as good 
for the kirlgs as the swords of the Paladins. The worshippers have all bowed so long to 
the old idol, that they cannot go into the streets and choose another Grand Llama. And 
so the effete State floats on down the puddled stream of Time, until the tempest or the 
tidal sea discovers that the worm has consumed its strength, and it crumbles into 
oblivion. * * * * * * 
Civil and religious Freedom must go hand in hand; and Persecution matures them both. A people content with the thoughts made for them by the priests of a church will be 
content with Royalty by Divine Right,-- the Church and the Throne mutually sustaining 
each other. They will smother schism and reap infidelity and indifference; and while the 
battle for freedom goes on around them, they will only sink the more apathetically into 
servitude and a deep trance, perhaps occasionally interrupted by furious fits of frenzy, 
followed by helpless exhaustion. Despotism is not dimcult in any land that has only known one master from its childhood; 
but there is no harder problem than to perfect and perpetuate free government by the 
people themselves; for it is not one king that is needed: all must be kings. It is easy to set 
up Masaniello, that in a few days he may fall lower than before. But free govermnent 
grows slowly, like the individual human faculties; and like the forest-trees, from the inner 
heart outward. Liberty is not only the common birth-right, but it is lost as well by non-user 
as by mis-user. It depends far more on the universal effort than any other human 
property. It has no single shrine or holy well of pilgrimage for the nation; for its waters 
should burst out freely from the whole soil. The free popular power is one that is only known in its strength in the hour of adversity: 
for all its trials, sacrifices and expectations are its own.Then political 
public life will protect all men from self-abasement in sensual pursuits, from vulgar acts 
and low greed, by giving the noble ambition of just imperial rule. To elevate the people by 
teaching loving-kindness and wisdom, with power to him who teaches best: and so to 
develop the free State from the rough ashlar:-- this is the great labor in which Masonry 
desires to lend a helping hand. All of us should labor in building up the great monument of a nation, the Holy House of 
the Temple. The cardinal virtues must not be partitioned among men, becoming the 
exclusive property of some, like the common crafts. ALL are apprenticed to the partners, 
Duty and Honor. Masonry is a march and a struggle toward the Light. For the individual as well as the 
nation, Light is Virtue, Manliness, Intelligence, Liberty. Tyranny over the soul or body, is 
darkness. The freest people, like the freest man, is always in danger of relapsing into 
servitude. Wars are almost always fatal to Republics. They create tyrants, and

It has no single shrine or holy well of pilgrimage for the nation; for its waters 
should burst out freely from the whole soil. The free popular power is one that is only known in its strength in the hour of adversity: 
for all its trials, sacrifices and expectations are its own. It is trained to think for itself, and 
also to act for itself. When the enslaved people prostrate themselves in the dust before 
the hurricane, like the alarmed beasts of the field, the free people stand erect before it, in 
all the strength of unity, in self-reliance, in mutual reliance, with effrontery against all but 
the visible hand of God. It is neither cast down by calamity nor elated by success. This vast power of endurance, of forbearance, of patience, and of performance, is only 
acquired by continual exercise of all the functions, like the healthful physical human 
vigor, like the individual moral vigor.And the maxim is no less true than old, that eternal vigilance is the price of liberty. It is 
curious to observe the universal pretext by which the tyrants of all times take away the 
national liberties. It is stated in the statutes of Edward II., that the justices and the sheriff 
should no longer be elected by the people, on account of the riots and dissensions which 
had arisen. The same reason was given long before for the suppression of popular 
election of the bishops; and there is a witness to this untruth in the yet older times, when 
Rome lost her freedom, and her indignant citizens declared that tumultuous liberty is 
better than disgraceful tranquillity. * * * * * * 
With the Compasses and Scale, we can trace all the figures used in the mathematics of 
planes, or in what are called GEOMETRY and TRIGONOMETRY, two words that are 
themselves deficient in meaning. GEOMETRY, which the letter G. in most Lodges is said 
to signify, means measurement of land or the earth--or Surveying; and 
TRIGONOMETRY, the measurement of triangles, or figures with three sides or angles.GEOMETRY, which the letter G. in most Lodges is said 
to signify, means measurement of land or the earth--or Surveying; and 
TRIGONOMETRY, the measurement of triangles, or figures with three sides or angles. The latter is by far the most appropriate name for the science intended to be expressed 
by the word "Geometry." Neither is of a meaning sufficiently wide: for although the vast 
surveys of great spaces of the earth's surface, and of coasts, by which shipwreck and 
calamity to mariners are avoided, are effected by means of triangulation;--though it was 
by the same method that the French astronomers measured a degree of latitude and so 
established a scale of measures on an immutable basis; though it is by means of the 
immense triangle that has for its base a line drawn in imagination between the place of 
the earth now and its place six months hence in space, and for its apex a planet or star, 
that the distance of Jupiter or Sirius from the earth is ascertained; and though there is a 
triangle still more vast, its base extending either way from us, with and past the horizon 
into immensity, and its apex infinitely distant above us; to which corresponds a similar 
infinite triangle below--what is above equalling what is below, immensity equalling 
immensity; yet the Science of Numbers, to which Pythagoras attached so much 
importance, and whose mysteries are found everywhere in the ancient religions, and 
most of all in the Kabalah and in the Bib]e, is not sufficiently expressed by either the word 
"Geometry" or the word "Trigonometry." For that science includes theseJ with Arithmetic, 
and also with Algebra, Logarithms, the Integral and Differential Calculus; and by means 
of it are worked out the great problems of Astronomy or the Laws of the Stars. * * * * * * 
Virtue is but heroic bravery, to do the thing thought to be true, in spite of all enemies of 
flesh or spirit, in despite of all temptations or menaces.The latter is by far the most appropriate name for the science intended to be expressed 
by the word "Geometry." Neither is of a meaning sufficiently wide: for although the vast 
surveys of great spaces of the earth's surface, and of coasts, by which shipwreck and 
calamity to mariners are avoided, are effected by means of triangulation;--though it was 
by the same method that the French astronomers measured a degree of latitude and so 
established a scale of measures on an immutable basis; though it is by means of the 
immense triangle that has for its base a line drawn in imagination between the place of 
the earth now and its place six months hence in space, and for its apex a planet or star, 
that the distance of Jupiter or Sirius from the earth is ascertained; and though there is a 
triangle still more vast, its base extending either way from us, with and past the horizon 
into immensity, and its apex infinitely distant above us; to which corresponds a similar 
infinite triangle below--what is above equalling what is below, immensity equalling 
immensity; yet the Science of Numbers, to which Pythagoras attached so much 
importance, and whose mysteries are found everywhere in the ancient religions, and 
most of all in the Kabalah and in the Bib]e, is not sufficiently expressed by either the word 
"Geometry" or the word "Trigonometry." For that science includes theseJ with Arithmetic, 
and also with Algebra, Logarithms, the Integral and Differential Calculus; and by means 
of it are worked out the great problems of Astronomy or the Laws of the Stars. * * * * * * 
Virtue is but heroic bravery, to do the thing thought to be true, in spite of all enemies of 
flesh or spirit, in despite of all temptations or menaces. Man is accountable for the 
uprightness of his doctrine, but not for the rightness of it. Devout enthusiasm is far easier 
than a good action. The end of thought is action; the sole purpose of Religion is an Ethic.It has no single shrine or holy well of pilgrimage for the nation; for its waters 
should burst out freely from the whole soil. The free popular power is one that is only known in its strength in the hour of adversity: 
for all its trials, sacrifices and expectations are its own. It is trained to think for itself, and 
also to act for itself. When the enslaved people prostrate themselves in the dust before 
the hurricane, like the alarmed beasts of the field, the free people stand erect before it, in 
all the strength of unity, in self-reliance, in mutual reliance, with effrontery against all but 
the visible hand of God. It is neither cast down by calamity nor elated by success. This vast power of endurance, of forbearance, of patience, and of performance, is only 
acquired by continual exercise of all the functions, like the healthful physical human 
vigor, like the individual moral vigor.

Devout enthusiasm is far easier 
than a good action. The end of thought is action; the sole purpose of Religion is an Ethic. Theory, in political science, is worthless, except for the purpose of being realized in 
practice. In every credo, religious or political as in the soul of man, there are two regions, the 
Dialectic and the Ethic; and it is only when the two are harmoniously blended, that a 
perfect discipline is evolved. There are men who dialectically are Christians, as there are 
a multitude who dialectically are Masons, and yet who are ethically Infidels, as these are 
ethically of the Profane, in the strictest sense:--intellectual believers, but practical 
atheists:-- men who will write you "Evidences," in perfect faith in their logic, but cannot 
carry out the Christian or Masonic doctrine, owing to the strength, or weakness, of the 
flesh. On the other hand, there are many dialectical skeptics, but ethical believers, as 
there are many Masons who have never undergone initiation; and as ethics are the end 
and purpose of religion, so are ethical believers the most worthy. He who does right is 
better than he who thinks right.But you must not act upon the hypothesis that all men are hypocrites, whose conduct 
does not square with their sentiments. No vice is more rare, for no task is more difficult, 
than systematic hypocrisy. When the Demagogue becomes a Usurper it does not follow 
that he was all the time a hypocrite. Shallow men only so judge of others. The truth is, that creed has, in general, very little influence on the conduct; in religion, on 
that of the individual; in politics, on that of party. As a general thing, the Mahometan, in 
the Orient, is far more honest and trustworthy than the Christian. A Gospel of Love in the 
mouth, is an Avatar of Persecution in the heart. Men who believe in eternal damnation 
and a literal sea of fire and brimstone, incur the certainty of it, according to their creed, on 
the slightest temptation of appetite or passion. Predestination insists on the necessity of 
good works. In Masonry, at the least flow of passion, one speaks ill of another behind his 
back; and so far from the "Brotherhood" of Blue Masonry being real, and the solemn 
pledges contained in the use of the word "Brother" being complied with, extraordinary 
pains are taken to show that.Masonry is a sort of abstraction, which scorns to interfere in 
worldly matters. The rule may be regarded as universal, that, where there is a choice to 
be made, a Mason will give his vote and influence, in politics and business, to the less 
qualified profane in preference to the better qualified Mason. One will take an oath to 
oppose any unlawful usurpation of power, and then become the ready and even eager 
instrument of a usurper. Another will call one "Brother," and then play toward him the part 
of Judas Iscariot, or strike him, as Joab did Abner, under the fifth rib, with a lie whose 
authorship is not to be traced. Masonry does not change human nature, and cannot 
make honest men out of born knaves.Another will call one "Brother," and then play toward him the part 
of Judas Iscariot, or strike him, as Joab did Abner, under the fifth rib, with a lie whose 
authorship is not to be traced. Masonry does not change human nature, and cannot 
make honest men out of born knaves. While you are still engaged in preparation, and in accumulating principles for future use, 
do not forget the words of the Apostle James: "For if any be a hearer of the word, and not 
a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass, for he beholdeth 
himself, and goeth away, and straightway forgetteth what ma1lner of man he was; but 
whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth, he being not a forgetful 
hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his work. If any man among 
you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this 
man's religion is vain.... Faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being an abstraction. A man is 
justified by works, and not by faith only.... The devils believe,--and tremble.... As the body 
without the heart is dead, so is faith without works." 
* * * * * * 
In political science, also, free governments are erected and free constitutions framed, 
upon some simple and intelligible theory. Upon whatever theory they are based, no 
sound conclusion is to be reached except by carrying the theory out without flinching, 
both in argumcnt on constitutional qucstions and in practice. Shrink from the true theory 
through timidity, or wander from it througll want of the logical faculty, or transgress 
against it througll passion or on the plea of necessity or expediency, and you have denial 
or invasion of rights, laws that offend against first principles, usurpation of illegal powers, 
or abnegation and abdication of legitimate authority.Devout enthusiasm is far easier 
than a good action. The end of thought is action; the sole purpose of Religion is an Ethic. Theory, in political science, is worthless, except for the purpose of being realized in 
practice. In every credo, religious or political as in the soul of man, there are two regions, the 
Dialectic and the Ethic; and it is only when the two are harmoniously blended, that a 
perfect discipline is evolved. There are men who dialectically are Christians, as there are 
a multitude who dialectically are Masons, and yet who are ethically Infidels, as these are 
ethically of the Profane, in the strictest sense:--intellectual believers, but practical 
atheists:-- men who will write you "Evidences," in perfect faith in their logic, but cannot 
carry out the Christian or Masonic doctrine, owing to the strength, or weakness, of the 
flesh. On the other hand, there are many dialectical skeptics, but ethical believers, as 
there are many Masons who have never undergone initiation; and as ethics are the end 
and purpose of religion, so are ethical believers the most worthy. He who does right is 
better than he who thinks right.

Upon whatever theory they are based, no 
sound conclusion is to be reached except by carrying the theory out without flinching, 
both in argumcnt on constitutional qucstions and in practice. Shrink from the true theory 
through timidity, or wander from it througll want of the logical faculty, or transgress 
against it througll passion or on the plea of necessity or expediency, and you have denial 
or invasion of rights, laws that offend against first principles, usurpation of illegal powers, 
or abnegation and abdication of legitimate authority. Do not forget, either, that as the showy, superficial, impudent and self-conceited will 
almost always be preferred, even in utmost stress of danger and calamity of the State, to 
the man of solid learning, large intellect, and catholic sympathies, because he is nearer 
the common popular and legislative level, so the highest truth is not acceptable to the 
mass of mankind. When SOLON was asked if he had given his countrymen the best laws, he answered, 
"The best they are capable of receiving." This is one of the profoundest utterances on 
record; and yet like all great truths, so simple as to be rarely comprehended. It contains 
the whole philosophy of History. It utters a truth which, had it been recognized, would 
have saved men an immensity of vain, idle disputes, and have led them into the clearer 
paths of knowledge in the Past. It means this,--that all truths are Truths of Period, andnot truths for eternity; that whatever great fact has had strength and vitality enough to 
make itself real, whether of religion, morals, government, or of whatever else, and to find 
place in this world, has been a truth for the time, and as good as men were capable of 
receiving. So, too, with great men. The intellect and capacity of a people has a single measure,--
that of the great men whom Providence gives it, and whom it receives. There have 
always been men too great for their time or their people. Every people makes such men 
only its idols, as it is capable of comprehending. To impose ideal truth or law upon an incapable and merely real man, must ever be a vain 
and empty speculation. The laws of sympathy govern in this as they do in regard to men 
who are put at the head. We do not know, as yet, what qualifications the sheep insist on 
in a leader. With men who are too high intellectually, the mass have as little sympathy as 
they have with the stars. When BURKE, the wisest statesman England ever had, rose to 
speak, the House of Commons was depopulated as upon an agreed signal. There is as 
little sympathy between the mass and the highest TRUTHS. The highest truth, being 
incomprehensible to the man of realities, as the highest man is, and largely above his 
level, will be a great unreality and falsehood to an unintellectual man. The profoundest 
doctrines of Christianity and Philosophy would be mere jargon and babble to a 
Potawatomie Indian. The popular explanations of the symbols of Masonry are fitting for 
the multitude that have swarmed into the Temples,--being fully up to the level of their 
capacity. Catholicism was a vital truth in its earliest ages, but it became obsolete, and 
Protestantism arose, flourished, and deteriorated. The doctrines of ZOROASTER were 
the best which the ancient Persians were fitted to receive; those of CONFUCIUS were 
fitted for the Chinese; those of MOHAMMED for the idolatrous Arabs of his age.Catholicism was a vital truth in its earliest ages, but it became obsolete, and 
Protestantism arose, flourished, and deteriorated. The doctrines of ZOROASTER were 
the best which the ancient Persians were fitted to receive; those of CONFUCIUS were 
fitted for the Chinese; those of MOHAMMED for the idolatrous Arabs of his age. Each 
was Truth for the time. Each was a GOSPEL, preached by a REFORMER; and if any 
men are so little fortunate as to remain content therewith, when others have attained a 
higher truth, it is their misfortune and not their fault. They are to be pitied for it, and not 
persecuted. Do not expect easily to convince men of the truth, or to lead them to think aright. The 
subtle human intellect can weave its mists over even the clearest vision. Remember that 
it is eccentric enough to ask unanimity from a jury; but to ask it from any large number of 
men on any point of political faith is amazing. You can hardly get two men in any 
Congress or Convention to agree;--nay, you can rarely get one to agree with himself. The 
political church which chances to be supreme anywhere has an indefinite number of 
tongues. How then can we expect men to agree as to matters beyond the cognizance of 
the senses? How can we compass the Infinitc and the Invisible with any chain of 
evidence? Ask the small sea-waves what they murmur among the pebbles ! How many 
of those words that come from the invisible shore are lost, like the birds, in the long 
passage ? How vainly do we strain the eyes across the long Infinite ! We must be 
content, as the children are, with the pebbles that have been stranded, since it is 
forbidden us to explore the hidden depths. The Fellow-Craft is especially taught by this not to become wise in his own conceit. Pride 
in unsound theories is worse than ignorancc. Humility becomes a Mason.Upon whatever theory they are based, no 
sound conclusion is to be reached except by carrying the theory out without flinching, 
both in argumcnt on constitutional qucstions and in practice. Shrink from the true theory 
through timidity, or wander from it througll want of the logical faculty, or transgress 
against it througll passion or on the plea of necessity or expediency, and you have denial 
or invasion of rights, laws that offend against first principles, usurpation of illegal powers, 
or abnegation and abdication of legitimate authority. Do not forget, either, that as the showy, superficial, impudent and self-conceited will 
almost always be preferred, even in utmost stress of danger and calamity of the State, to 
the man of solid learning, large intellect, and catholic sympathies, because he is nearer 
the common popular and legislative level, so the highest truth is not acceptable to the 
mass of mankind. When SOLON was asked if he had given his countrymen the best laws, he answered, 
"The best they are capable of receiving." This is one of the profoundest utterances on 
record; and yet like all great truths, so simple as to be rarely comprehended. It contains 
the whole philosophy of History. It utters a truth which, had it been recognized, would 
have saved men an immensity of vain, idle disputes, and have led them into the clearer 
paths of knowledge in the Past. It means this,--that all truths are Truths of Period, and

Pride 
in unsound theories is worse than ignorancc. Humility becomes a Mason. Take some 
quiet, sober moment of life, and add together the two ideas of Pride and Man; behold 
him, creature of a span, stalking through infinite space in all the grandeur of littleness ! Perched on a speck of the Universe, every wind of Heaven strikes into his blood the 
coldness of death; his soul floats avvay from his body like the melody from the string. Day and night, like dust on the wheel, he is rolled along the heavens, through a labyrinth 
of worlds, and all the creations of God are flanling on every side, further than even his 
imagination can reach. Is this a creature to make for himself a crown of glory, to deny his 
own flesh, to mock at his fellow, sprung with him from that dust to which both will soon 
return? Does the proud man not err? Does he not suffer? Does he not die? When he 
reasons, is he never stopped short by difficulties ? When he acts, does he never 
succumb to the temptations of pleasure? When he lives, is he free from pain? Do the 
diseases not claim him as their prey? When he dies, can he escape the common grave ?Pride is not the heritage of man. Humility should dwell with frailty, and atone for 
ignorance, error and imperfection. Neither should the Mason be over-anxious for office and honor, however certainly he 
rmay feel that he has the capacity to serve the State. He should neither seek nor spurn 
honors. It is good to enjoy the blessings of fortune; it is better to submit without a pang to 
their loss. The greatest deeds are not done in the glare of light, and before the eyes of 
the populace. He whom God has gifted with a love of retirement possesses, as it were, 
an additional sense; and among the vast and noble scenes of nature, w e find the balm 
for the wounds we have received among the pitiful shifts of policy; for the attachment to 
solitude is the surest preservative from the ills of life. But Resignation is the more noble in proportion as it is the less passive. Retirement is 
only a morbid selfishness, if it prohibit exertions for others; as it is only dignified and 
noble, when it is the shade whence the oracles issue that are to instruct mankind; and 
retirement of this nature is the sole seclusion which a good and wise man will covet or 
command. The very philosophy which makes such a man covet the quiet, will make him 
eschew the inutility of the hermitage. Very little praiseworthy would LORD 
BOLINGBROKE have seemed among his haymakers and ploughmen, if among 
haymakers and ploughmen he had looked with an indifferent eye upon a profligate 
minister and a venal Parliament. Very little interest would have attached to his beans and 
vetches, if beans and vetches had caused him to forget that if he vvas happier on a fann 
he could be more useful in a Senate, and made him forego, in the sphere of a bailiff, all 
care for re-entering that of a legislator. Remember, also, that therc is an education which quickens the Intellect, and leaves the 
heart hollower or harder than before.Very little interest would have attached to his beans and 
vetches, if beans and vetches had caused him to forget that if he vvas happier on a fann 
he could be more useful in a Senate, and made him forego, in the sphere of a bailiff, all 
care for re-entering that of a legislator. Remember, also, that therc is an education which quickens the Intellect, and leaves the 
heart hollower or harder than before. There are ethical lessons in the laws of the 
heavenly bodies, in the properties of earthly elements, in geography, chemistry, geology, 
and all the material sciences. Things are symbols of Truths. Properties are symbols of 
Truths. Science, not teaching moral and spiritual truths, is dead and dry, of little more 
real value than to commit to the menlory a long row of unconnected dates, or of the 
names of bugs or butterflies. Christianity, it is said, begins from the burning of the false gods by the people 
themselves. Education begins with the burning of our intellectual and moral idols: our 
prejudices, notions, conceits, our worth]ess or ignoble purposes. Especially it is 
necessary to shake off the love of worldly gain. With Freedom comes the longing for 
worldly advancement. In that race men are ever falling, rising, running, and falling again. The lust for wealth and the abject dread of poverty delve the furrows on many a noble 
brow. The gambler grows old as he watches the chances. Lawful hazard drives Youth 
away before its time; and this Youth draws heavy bills of exchange on Age. Men live, like 
the engines, at high pressure, a hundred years in a hundred months; the ledger becomes 
the Bible, and the day-book the Book of the Morning Prayer. Hence flow overreachings and sharp practice, heartless traffic in which the capitalist buys 
profit with the lives of the laborers, speculations that coin a nation's agonies into wealth, 
and all the other devilish cnginery of Mammon.Pride 
in unsound theories is worse than ignorancc. Humility becomes a Mason. Take some 
quiet, sober moment of life, and add together the two ideas of Pride and Man; behold 
him, creature of a span, stalking through infinite space in all the grandeur of littleness ! Perched on a speck of the Universe, every wind of Heaven strikes into his blood the 
coldness of death; his soul floats avvay from his body like the melody from the string. Day and night, like dust on the wheel, he is rolled along the heavens, through a labyrinth 
of worlds, and all the creations of God are flanling on every side, further than even his 
imagination can reach. Is this a creature to make for himself a crown of glory, to deny his 
own flesh, to mock at his fellow, sprung with him from that dust to which both will soon 
return? Does the proud man not err? Does he not suffer? Does he not die? When he 
reasons, is he never stopped short by difficulties ? When he acts, does he never 
succumb to the temptations of pleasure? When he lives, is he free from pain? Do the 
diseases not claim him as their prey? When he dies, can he escape the common grave ?

Men live, like 
the engines, at high pressure, a hundred years in a hundred months; the ledger becomes 
the Bible, and the day-book the Book of the Morning Prayer. Hence flow overreachings and sharp practice, heartless traffic in which the capitalist buys 
profit with the lives of the laborers, speculations that coin a nation's agonies into wealth, 
and all the other devilish cnginery of Mammon. This, and greed for office, are the two 
columns at the entrance to the Temple of Moloch. It is doubtful whether the latter, 
blossoming in falsehood, trickery, and fraud, is not even more pernicious than the former. At all events they are twins, and fitly mated; and as either gains control of the unfortunate 
subject, his soul withers away and decays, and at last dies out. The souls of half the 
human race leave them long before they die. The two greeds are twin plagues of the 
leprosy, and make the man unclean; and whenever they break out they spread until "they 
cover all the skin of him that hath the plague, from his head even to his foot." Even the 
raw flesh of the heart becomes unclean with it. Alexander of Macedon has left a saying behind him which has survived his conquests: 
"Nothing is nobler than work." Work only can keep even kings respectable. And when aking is a king indeed, it is an honorable office to give tone to the manners and morals of a 
nation; to set the example of virtuous conduct, and restore in spirit the old schools of 
chivalry, in which the young manhood may be nurtured to real greatness. Work and 
wages will go together in men's minds, in the most royal institutions. We must ever come 
to the idea of real work. The rest that follows labor should be sweeter than the rest which 
follows rest. Let no Fellow-Craft imagine that the work of the lowly and uninfluential is not worth the 
doing. There is no legal limit to the possible influences of a good deed or a wise word or 
a generous effort. Nothing is really small. Whoever is open to the deep penetration of 
nature knows this. Although, indeed, no absolute satisfaction may be vouchsafed to 
philosophy, any more in circumscribing the cause than in limiting the effect, the man of 
thought and contemplation falls into unfathomable ecstacies in view of all the 
decompositions of forces resulting in unity. All works for all. Destruction is not 
annihilation, but regeneration. Algebra applies to the clouds; the radiance of the star benefits the rose; no thinker would 
dare to say that the perfume of the hawthorn is useless to the constellations. Who, then, 
can calculate the path of the molecule? How do we know that the creations of worlds are 
not determined by the fall of grains of sand ? Who, then, understands the reciprocal flow 
and ebb of the inrlnitely great and the infinitely small; the echoing of causes in the 
abysses of beginning, and the avalanches of creation? A fleshworm is of account; the 
small is great; the great is small; all is in equilibrium in necessity. There are marvellous 
relations between beings and things; in this inexhaustible Whole, from sun to grub, there 
is no scorn: all need each other.A fleshworm is of account; the 
small is great; the great is small; all is in equilibrium in necessity. There are marvellous 
relations between beings and things; in this inexhaustible Whole, from sun to grub, there 
is no scorn: all need each other. Light does not carry terrestrial perfumes into the azure 
depths, without knowing what it does with them; night distributes the stellar essence to 
the sleeping plants. Every bird which flies has the thread of the Infinite in its claw. Germination includes the hatching of a meteor, and the tap of a swallow's bill, breaking 
the egg; and it leads forward the birth of an earth-worm and the advent of a Socrates. Where the telescope ends the microscope begins. Which of them the grander view ? A 
bit of mould is a Pleiad of flowers --a nebula is an ant-hill of stars. There is the same and a still more wonderful interpenetration between the things of the 
intellect and the things of matter. Elements and principles are mingled, combined, 
espoused, multiplied one by another to such a degree as to bring the material world and 
the moral world into the same light. Phenomena are perpetually folded back upon 
themselves.Elements and principles are mingled, combined, 
espoused, multiplied one by another to such a degree as to bring the material world and 
the moral world into the same light. Phenomena are perpetually folded back upon 
themselves. In the vast cosmical changes the universal life comes and goes in unknown 
quantities, enveloping all in the invisible mystery of the emanations, losing no dream from 
no single sleep, sowing an animalcule here, crumbling a star there, oscillating and 
winding in curves; making a force of Light, and an element of Thought; disseminated and 
indivisible, dissolving all save that point without length, breadth, or thickness, The 
MYSEF; reducing everything to the Soul-atom ; making everything blossom into God; 
entangling all activities, from the higllest to the lowest, in the obscurity of a dizzying 
mechanism; hanging the flight of an insect upon the movement of the earth; 
subordinating, perhaps, if only by the identity of the law, the eccentric evolutions of the 
comet in the firmament, to the whirlings of the infusoria in the drop of water. A 
mechanism made of mind, the first motor of which is the gnat, and its last wheel the 
zodiac. A peasant-boy, guiding Blucher by the right one of two roads, the other being impassable 
for artillery, enables him to reach Waterloo in time to save Wellington from a defeat that 
would have been a rout; and so enables the kings to imprison Napoleon on a barren rock 
in mid-ocean. An unfaithful smith, by the slovenly shoeing of a horse, causes his 
lameness, and, he stumbling, the career of his world-conquering rider ends, and the 
destinies of empires are changed. A generous officer permits an imprisoned monarch to 
end his game of chess before leading him to the block; and meanwhile the usurper dies, 
and the prisoner reascends the throne.Men live, like 
the engines, at high pressure, a hundred years in a hundred months; the ledger becomes 
the Bible, and the day-book the Book of the Morning Prayer. Hence flow overreachings and sharp practice, heartless traffic in which the capitalist buys 
profit with the lives of the laborers, speculations that coin a nation's agonies into wealth, 
and all the other devilish cnginery of Mammon. This, and greed for office, are the two 
columns at the entrance to the Temple of Moloch. It is doubtful whether the latter, 
blossoming in falsehood, trickery, and fraud, is not even more pernicious than the former. At all events they are twins, and fitly mated; and as either gains control of the unfortunate 
subject, his soul withers away and decays, and at last dies out. The souls of half the 
human race leave them long before they die. The two greeds are twin plagues of the 
leprosy, and make the man unclean; and whenever they break out they spread until "they 
cover all the skin of him that hath the plague, from his head even to his foot." Even the 
raw flesh of the heart becomes unclean with it. Alexander of Macedon has left a saying behind him which has survived his conquests: 
"Nothing is nobler than work." Work only can keep even kings respectable. And when a

An unfaithful smith, by the slovenly shoeing of a horse, causes his 
lameness, and, he stumbling, the career of his world-conquering rider ends, and the 
destinies of empires are changed. A generous officer permits an imprisoned monarch to 
end his game of chess before leading him to the block; and meanwhile the usurper dies, 
and the prisoner reascends the throne. An unskillful workman repairs the compass, or 
malice or stupidity disarranges it, the ship mistakes her course, the waves swallow a 
Caesar, and a new chapter is written in the history of a world. What we call accident isbut the adamantine chain of indissoluble connection between all created things. The 
locust, hatched in the Arabian sands, the small worm that destroys the cotton-boll, one 
making famine in the Orient, the other closing the mills and starving the vvorkmen and 
their children in the Occident, with riots and massacres, are as much the ministers of 
God as the earthquake; and the fate of nations depends more on them than on the 
intellect of its kings and legislators. A civil war in America will end in shaking the world; 
and that war may be caused by the vote of some ignorant prize-fighter or crazed fanatic 
in a city or in a Congress, or of some stupid boor in an obscure country parish. The 
electricity of universal sympathy, of action and reaction, pervades everything, the planets 
and the motes in the sunbeam. FAUST, with his types, or LUTHER, with his sermons, 
worked greater results than Alexander or Hannibal. A single thought sometimes suffices 
to overturn a dynasty. A silly song did more to unseat James the Second than the 
acquittal of the Bishops. Voltaire, Condorcet, and Rousseau uttered words that will ring, 
in change and revolutions, throughout all the ages. Remember, that though life is short, Thought and the influences of what we do or say are 
immortal; and that no calculus has yet pretended to ascertain the law of proportion 
between cause and effect. The hammer of an English blacksmith, smiting down an 
insolent official, led to a rebellion which came near being a revolution. The word well 
spoken, the deed fitly done, even by the feeblest or humblest, cannot help but have their 
effect. More or less, the effect is inevitable and eternal. The echoes of the greatest deeds 
may die away like the echoes of a cry among the cliffs, and what has been done seem to 
the human judgment to have been without result. The unconsidered act of the poorest of 
men may fire the train that leads to the subterranean mine, and an empire be rent by the 
explosion.The echoes of the greatest deeds 
may die away like the echoes of a cry among the cliffs, and what has been done seem to 
the human judgment to have been without result. The unconsidered act of the poorest of 
men may fire the train that leads to the subterranean mine, and an empire be rent by the 
explosion. The power of a free people is often at the disposal of a single and seemingly an 
unimportant individual;--a terrible and truthful power; for such a people feel with one 
heart, and therefore can lift up their myriad arms for a single blow. And, again, there is no 
graduated scale for the measurement of the influences of different intellects upon the 
popular mind. Peter the Hermit held no office, yet what a work he wrought ! * * * * * * 
From the political point of view there is but a single principle,-- the sovereignty of man 
over himself. This sovereignty of one's self over one's self is called LIBERTY. Where two 
or several of these sovereignties associate, the State begins. But in this association there 
is no abdication. Each sovereignty parts with a certain portion of itself to form the 
common right. That portion is the same for all. There is equal contribution by all to the 
joint sovereignty. This identity of concession which each makes to all, is EQUALITY. The 
common right is nothing more or less than the protection of all, pouring its rays on each. This protection of each by all, is FRATERNITY. Liberty is the summit, Equality the base. Equality is not all vegetation on a level, a society 
of big spears of grass and stunted oaks, a neighborhood of jealousies, emasculatillg 
each other. It is, civilly, all aptitudes having equal opportunity; politically, all votes having 
equal weight; religiously, all consciences having equal rights. Equality has an organ;--gratuitous and obligatory instruction. We must begin with the 
right to the alphabet. The primary school obligatory upon all; the higher school offered to 
all. Such is the law.An unfaithful smith, by the slovenly shoeing of a horse, causes his 
lameness, and, he stumbling, the career of his world-conquering rider ends, and the 
destinies of empires are changed. A generous officer permits an imprisoned monarch to 
end his game of chess before leading him to the block; and meanwhile the usurper dies, 
and the prisoner reascends the throne. An unskillful workman repairs the compass, or 
malice or stupidity disarranges it, the ship mistakes her course, the waves swallow a 
Caesar, and a new chapter is written in the history of a world. What we call accident is

The primary school obligatory upon all; the higher school offered to 
all. Such is the law. From the same school for all springs equal society. Instruction ! Light ! all comes from Light, and all returns to it. We must learn the thoughts of the common people, if we would be wise and do any good 
work. We must look at men, not so much for what Fortune has given to them with her 
blind old eyes, as for the gifts Nature has brought in her lap, and for the use that has 
been made of them. We profess to be equal in a Church and in the Lodge: we shall be 
equal in the sight of God when He judges the earth. We may well sit on the pavementtogether here, in communion and conference, for the few brief moments that constitute 
life. A Democratic Government undoubtedly has its defects, because it is made and 
administered by men, and not by the Wise Gods. It cannot be concise and sharp, like the 
despotic. When its ire is aroused it develops its latent strength, and the sturdiest rebel 
trembles. But its habitual domestic rule is tolerant, patient, and indecisive. Men are 
brought together, first to differ, and then to agree. Affirmation, negation, discussion, 
solution: these are the means of attaining truth. Often the enemy will be at the gates 
before the babble of the disturbers is drowned in the chorus of consent. In the Legislative 
office deliberation will often defeat decision. Liberty can play the fool like the Tyrants 
Refined society requires greater minuteness of regulation; and the steps of all advancing 
States are more and more to be picked among the old rubbish and the new matcrials. The difficulty lies in discovering the right path through the chaos of confusion. The 
adjustment of mutual rights and wrongs is also more difficult in democracies. We do not 
see and estimate the relative importance of objects so easily and clearly from the level or 
the waving iand as from the elevation of a lone peak, towering above the plain; for each 
looks through his own mist. Abject dependence on constituents, also, is too common. It is as miserable a thing as 
abject dependence on a minister or the favorite of a Tyrant. It is rare to find a man who 
can speak out the simple truth that is in him, honestly and frankly, without fear, favor, or 
affection, either to Emperor or People. Moreover, in assemblies of men, faith in each other is almost always wanting, unless a 
terrible pressure of calamity or danger from without produces cohesion. Hence the 
constructive power of such assemblies is generally deficient.Moreover, in assemblies of men, faith in each other is almost always wanting, unless a 
terrible pressure of calamity or danger from without produces cohesion. Hence the 
constructive power of such assemblies is generally deficient. The chief triumphs of 
modern days, in Europe, have been in pulling down and obliterating; not in building up. But Repeal is not Reform. Time must bring with him the Restorer and Rebuilder. Speech, also, is grossly abused in Republics; and if the use of speech be glorious, its 
abuse is the most villainous of vices. Rhetoric, Plato says, is the art of ruling the minds of 
men. But in democracies it is too common to hide thought in words,to overlay it, to 
babble nonsense. The gleams and glitter of intellectual soap-and-water bubbles are 
mistaken for the rainbow-glories of genius. The worthless pyrites is continually mistaken 
for gold. Even intellect condescends to intellectual jugglery, balancing thoughts as a 
juggler balances pipes on his chin. In all Congresses we have the inexhaustible flow of 
babble, and Faction's clamorous knavery in discussion, until the divine power of speech, 
that privilege of man and great gift of God, is no better than the screech of parrots or the 
mimicry of monkeys. The mere talker, however fluent, is barren of deeds in the day of 
trial. There are men voluble as women, and as well skilled in fencing with the tongue: 
prodigies of speech, misers in deeds. Too much calking, like too much thinking, destroys 
the power of action. In human nature, the thought is only made perfect by deed. Silence 
is the mother of both. The trumpeter is not the bravest of the brave. Steel and not brass 
wins the day. The great doer of great deeds is mostly slow and slovenly of speech. There 
are some men born and brcd to betray. Patriotism is their trade, and their capital is 
speech. But no noble spirit can plead like Paul and be false to itself as Judas.The primary school obligatory upon all; the higher school offered to 
all. Such is the law. From the same school for all springs equal society. Instruction ! Light ! all comes from Light, and all returns to it. We must learn the thoughts of the common people, if we would be wise and do any good 
work. We must look at men, not so much for what Fortune has given to them with her 
blind old eyes, as for the gifts Nature has brought in her lap, and for the use that has 
been made of them. We profess to be equal in a Church and in the Lodge: we shall be 
equal in the sight of God when He judges the earth. We may well sit on the pavement

Patriotism is their trade, and their capital is 
speech. But no noble spirit can plead like Paul and be false to itself as Judas. Imposture too commonly rules in republics; they seem to be ever in their minority; their 
guardians are self-appointed; and tlhe unjust thrive better than the just. The Despot, like 
the night-lion roaring, drowns all the clamor of tongues at once, and speech, the birthright 
of the free man, becomes the bauble of the enslaved. It is quite true that republics only occasionally, and as it were accidentally, select their 
wisest, or even the less incapable among the incapables, to govern them and legislatefor them. If genius, armed with learning and knowledge, will grasp the reins, the people 
will reverence it; if it only modestly offers itself for office, it will be smitten on the face, 
even when, in the straits of distress and the agonies of calamity, it is indispensable to the 
salvation of the State. Put it upon the track with the showy and superficial, the conceited, 
the ignorant, and impudent, the trickster and charlatan, and the result shall not be a 
moment doubtful. The verdicts of Legislatures and the People are like the verdicts of 
juries,--sometimes right by accident. 
Offices, it is true, are showered, like the rains of Heaven, upon the just and the unjust. 
The Roman Augurs that used to laugh in each other's faces at the simplicity of the vulgar, 
were also tickled with their own guile; but no Augur is needed to lead the people astray. 
They readily deceive themselves. Let a Republic begin as it may, it will not be out of its 
minority before imbecility will be promoted to high places; and shallow pretence, getting 
itself puffed into notice, will invade all the sanctuaries. The most unscrupulous 
partisanship will prevail, even in respect to judicial trusts; and the most unjust 
appointments constantly be made, although every improper promotion not merely 
confers one undeserved favor, but may make a hundred honest cheeks smart with 
injustice.The country is stabbed in the front when those are brought into the stalled seats who 
should slink into the dim gallery. Every stamp of Honor, ill-clutched, is stolen from the 
Treasury of Merit. 
Yet the entrance into the public service, and the promotion in it, affect both the rights of 
individuals and those of the nation. Injustice in bestowing or withholding office ought to 
be so intolerable in democratic communities that the least trace of it should be like the 
scent of Treason. It is not universally true that all citizens of equal character have an 
equal claim to knock at the door of every public office and demand admittance. When 
any man presents himself for service he has a right to aspire to the highest body at once, 
if he can show his fitness for such a beginning,--that he is fitter than the rest who offer 
themselves for the same post. The entry into it can only justly be made through the door 
of merit. And whenever any one aspires to and attains such high post, especially if by 
unfair and disreputable and indecent means, and is afterward found to be a signal failure, 
he should at once be beheaded. He is the worst among the public enemies. 
When a man sumciently reveals himself, all others should be proud to give him due 
precedence. When the power of promotion is abused in the grand passages of life 
whether by People, Legislature, or Executive, the unjust decision recoils on the judge at 
once. That is not only a gross, but a willful shortness of sight, that cannot discover the 
deserving. If one will look hard, long, and honestly, he will not fail to discern merit, 
genius, and qualification; and the eyes and voice of the Press and Public should 
condemn and denounce injustice wherever she rears her horrid head. 
"The tools to the workmen!" no other principle will save a Republic from destruction, 
either by civil war or the dry-rot. They tend to decay, do all we can to prevent it, like 
human bodies. If they try the experiment of governing themselves by their smallest, they 
slide downward to the unavoidable abyss with tenfold velocity; and there never has been 
a Republic that has not followed that fatal course. 
But however palpable and gross the inherent defects of democratic governments, and 
fatal as the results finally and inevitably are, we need only glance at the reigns of 
Tiberius, Nero, and Caligula, of Heliogabalus and Caracalla, of Domitian and 
Commodus, to recognize that the difference between freedom and despotism is as wide 
as that between Heaven and Hell. The cruelty, baseness, and insanity of tyrants are 
incredible. Let him who complains of the fickle humors and inconstancy of a free people, 
read Pliny's character of Domitian. If the great man in a Republic cannot win omcewithout descending to low arts and whining beggary and the judicious use of sneaking 
lies, let him remain in retirement, and use the pen. Tacitus and Juvenal held no office. Let History and Satire punish the pretender as they crucify the despot. The revenges of 
the intellect are terrible and just. Let Masonry use the pen and the printing-press in the free State against the Demagogue; 
in the Despotism against the Tyrant. History offers examples and encouragement. All 
history, for four thousand years, being filled with violated rights and the sufferings of the 
people, each period of history brings with it such protest as is possible to it. Under the 
Caesars there was no insurrection, but there was a Juvenal. The arousing of indignation 
replaces the Gracchi. Under the Caesars there is the exile of Syene; there is also the 
author of the Annals. As the Neros reign darkly they should be pictured so. Work with the 
graver only would be pale; into the grooves should be poured a concentrated prose that 
bites. Despots are an aid to thinkers. Speech enchained is speech terrible. The writer doubles 
and triples his style, when silence is imposed by a master upon the people. There 
springs from this silence a certain mysterious fullness, which filters and freezes into 
brass in the thoughts. Compression in the history produces conciseness in the historian. The granitic solidity of some celebrated prose is only a condensation produced by the 
Tyrant. Tyranny constrains the writer to shortenings of diameter which are increases of 
strength. The Ciceronian period, hardly sumcient upon Verres, would lose its edge upon 
Caligula. The Demagogue is the predecessor of the Despot. One springs from the other's loins. He 
who will basely fawn on those who have office to bestow, will betray like Iscariot, and 
prove a miserable and pitiable failure.One springs from the other's loins. He 
who will basely fawn on those who have office to bestow, will betray like Iscariot, and 
prove a miserable and pitiable failure. Let the new Junius lash such men as they 
deserve, and History make them immortal in infamy; since their influences culminate in 
ruin. The Republic that employs and honors the shallow, the superficial, the base, 
"who crouch 
Unto the offal of an office promised," 
at last weeps tears of blood for its fatal error. Of such supreme folly, the sure fruit is 
damnation. Let the nobility of every great heart, condensed into justice and truth, strike 
such creatures like a thunderbolt ! If you can do no more, you can at least condemn by 
your vote, and ostracise by denunciation. It is true that, as the Czars are absolute, they have it in their power to select the best for 
the public service. It is true that the beginner of a dynasty generally does so; and that 
when monarchies are in their prime, pretence and shallowness do not thrive and prosper 
and get power, as they do in Republics. All do not gabble in the Parliament of a Kingdom, 
as in the Congress of a Democracy. The incapables do not go undetected there, all their 
lives. But dynasties speedily decay and run out. At last they dwindle down into imbecility; and 
the dull or flippant Members of Congresses are at least the intellectual peers of the vast 
majority of kings. The great man, the Julius Caesar, the Charlemagne, Cromwell, 
Napoleon, reigns of right. He is the wisest and the strongest. The incapables and 
imbeciles succeed and are usurpers; and fear makes them cruel. After Julius came 
Caracalla and Galba; after Charlemagne, the lunatic Charles the Sixth. So the Saracenic 
dynasty dwindled out; the Capets, the Stuarts, the Bourbc1ns; the last of these producing 
Bomba, the ape of Domitian. Man is by nature cruel, like the tigers.The country is stabbed in the front when those are brought into the stalled seats who 
should slink into the dim gallery. Every stamp of Honor, ill-clutched, is stolen from the 
Treasury of Merit. 
Yet the entrance into the public service, and the promotion in it, affect both the rights of 
individuals and those of the nation. Injustice in bestowing or withholding office ought to 
be so intolerable in democratic communities that the least trace of it should be like the 
scent of Treason. It is not universally true that all citizens of equal character have an 
equal claim to knock at the door of every public office and demand admittance. When 
any man presents himself for service he has a right to aspire to the highest body at once, 
if he can show his fitness for such a beginning,--that he is fitter than the rest who offer 
themselves for the same post. The entry into it can only justly be made through the door 
of merit. And whenever any one aspires to and attains such high post, especially if by 
unfair and disreputable and indecent means, and is afterward found to be a signal failure, 
he should at once be beheaded. He is the worst among the public enemies. 
When a man sumciently reveals himself, all others should be proud to give him due 
precedence. When the power of promotion is abused in the grand passages of life 
whether by People, Legislature, or Executive, the unjust decision recoils on the judge at 
once. That is not only a gross, but a willful shortness of sight, that cannot discover the 
deserving. If one will look hard, long, and honestly, he will not fail to discern merit, 
genius, and qualification; and the eyes and voice of the Press and Public should 
condemn and denounce injustice wherever she rears her horrid head. 
"The tools to the workmen!" no other principle will save a Republic from destruction, 
either by civil war or the dry-rot. They tend to decay, do all we can to prevent it, like 
human bodies. If they try the experiment of governing themselves by their smallest, they 
slide downward to the unavoidable abyss with tenfold velocity; and there never has been 
a Republic that has not followed that fatal course. 
But however palpable and gross the inherent defects of democratic governments, and 
fatal as the results finally and inevitably are, we need only glance at the reigns of 
Tiberius, Nero, and Caligula, of Heliogabalus and Caracalla, of Domitian and 
Commodus, to recognize that the difference between freedom and despotism is as wide 
as that between Heaven and Hell. The cruelty, baseness, and insanity of tyrants are 
incredible. Let him who complains of the fickle humors and inconstancy of a free people, 
read Pliny's character of Domitian. If the great man in a Republic cannot win omce

So the Saracenic 
dynasty dwindled out; the Capets, the Stuarts, the Bourbc1ns; the last of these producing 
Bomba, the ape of Domitian. Man is by nature cruel, like the tigers. The barbarian, and the tool of the tyrant, and the 
civilized fanatic, enjoy the sufferings of others, as the children enjoy the contortions ofmaimed flies. Absolute Power, once in fear for the safety of its tenure, cannot but be 
cruel. As to ability, dynasties invariably cease to possess any after a few lives. They become 
mere shams, governed by ministers, favorites, or courtesans, like those old Etruscan 
kings, slumbering for long ages in their golden royal robes, dissolving forever at the first 
breath of day. Let him who complains of the shortcomings of democracy ask himself if he 
would prefer a Du Barry or a Pompadour, governing in the name of a Louis the Fifteenth, 
a Caligula making his horse a consul, a Domitian, "that most savage monster," who 
sometimes drank the blood of relatives, sometimes employing himself with slaughtering 
the most distinguished citizens before whose gates fear and terror kept watch; a tyrant of 
frightful aspect, pride on his forehead, fire in his eye, constantly seeking darkness and 
secrecy, and only emerging from his solitude to make solitude. After all, in a free 
government, the Laws and the Constitution are above the Incapables, the Courts correct 
their legislation, and posterity is the Grand Inquest that passes judgment on them. What 
is the exclusion of worth and intellect and knowledge from civil office compared with trials 
before Jeffries, tortures in the dark caverns of the Inquisition, Alvabutcheries in the 
Netherlands, the Eve of Saint Bartholomew, and the Sicilian Vespers? * * * * * * 
The Abbe Barruel in his Memoirs for the History of Jacobinism, declares that Masonry in 
France gave, as its secret, the words Equality and Liberty, leaving it for every honest and 
religious Mason to explain them as would best suit his principles; but retained the 
privilege of unveiling in the higher Degrees the meaning of those words, as interpreted by 
the French Revolution.What 
is the exclusion of worth and intellect and knowledge from civil office compared with trials 
before Jeffries, tortures in the dark caverns of the Inquisition, Alvabutcheries in the 
Netherlands, the Eve of Saint Bartholomew, and the Sicilian Vespers? * * * * * * 
The Abbe Barruel in his Memoirs for the History of Jacobinism, declares that Masonry in 
France gave, as its secret, the words Equality and Liberty, leaving it for every honest and 
religious Mason to explain them as would best suit his principles; but retained the 
privilege of unveiling in the higher Degrees the meaning of those words, as interpreted by 
the French Revolution. And he also excepts English Masons from his anathemas, 
because in England a Mason is a peaceable subject of the civil authorities, no matter 
where he resides, engaging in no plots or conspiracies against even the worst 
government. England, he says, disgusted with an Equality and a Liberty, the 
consequences of which she had felt in the struggles of her Lollards, Anabaptists, and 
Presbyterians, had "purged her Masonry" from all explanations tending to overturn 
empires; but there still remained adepts whom disorganizing principles bound to the 
Ancient Mysteries. Because true Masonry, unemasculated, bore the banners of Freedom and Equal Rights, 
and was in rebellion against temporal and spiritual tyranny, its Lodges were proscribed in 
1735, by an edict of the States of Holland. In 1737, Louis XV. forbade them in France. In 
1738, Pope Clement XII. issued against them his famous Bull of Excommunication, 
which was renewed by Benedict XIV.; and in 1743 the Council of Berne also proscribed 
them.So the Saracenic 
dynasty dwindled out; the Capets, the Stuarts, the Bourbc1ns; the last of these producing 
Bomba, the ape of Domitian. Man is by nature cruel, like the tigers. The barbarian, and the tool of the tyrant, and the 
civilized fanatic, enjoy the sufferings of others, as the children enjoy the contortions of

In 
1738, Pope Clement XII. issued against them his famous Bull of Excommunication, 
which was renewed by Benedict XIV.; and in 1743 the Council of Berne also proscribed 
them. The title of the Rull of Clement is, "The Condemnation of the Society of 
Conventicles de Liberi Muratori, or of the Freemasons, under the penalty of ipso facto 
excommunication, the absolution from which is reserved to the Pope alone, except at the 
point of death." And by it all bishops, ordinaries, and inquisitors were empowered to 
punish Freemasons, "as vehemently suspected of heresy," and to call in, if necessary, 
the help of the secular arm; that is, to cause the civil authority to put them to death. * * * * * * 
Also, false and slavish political theories end in brutalizing the State. For example, adopt 
the theory that offices and employments in it are to be given as rewards for services 
rendered to party, and they soon become the prey and spoil of faction, the booty of the 
victory of faction;--and leprosy is in the flesh of the State. The body of the commonwealth 
becomes a mass of corruption, like a living carcass rotten with syphilis. All unsound 
theories in the end develop themselves in one foul and loathsome disease or other of the 
body politic. The State, like the man, must use constant effort to stay in the paths of 
virtue and manliness. The habit of electioneering and begging for office culminates in 
bribery with office, and corruption in office.A chosen man has a visible trust from God, as plainly as if the commission were 
engrossed by the notary. A nation cannot renounce the executorship of the Divine 
decrees. As little can Masonry. It must labor to do its duty knowingly and wisely. We must 
remember that, in free States, as well as in despotisms, Injustice, the spouse of 
Oppression, is the fruitful parent of Deceit, Distrust, Hatred, Conspiracy, Treason, and 
Unfaithfulness. Even in assailing Tyranny we must have Truth and Reason as our chief 
weapons. We must march into that fight like the old Puritans, or into the battle with the 
abuses that spring up in free government, with the flaming sword in one hand, and the 
Oracles of God in the other. The citizen who cannot accomplish well the smaller purposes of public life, cannot 
compass the larger. The vast power of endurance, forbearance, patience, and 
performance, of a free people, is acquired only by continual exercise of all the functions, 
like the healthful physical human vigor. If the individual citizens have it not, the State 
must equally be without it. It is of the essence of a free government, that the people 
should not only be concerned in making the laws, but also in their execution. No man 
ought to be more ready to obey and administer the law than he who has helped to make 
it. The business of government is carried on for the benefit of all, and every co-partner 
should give counsel and cooperation. Remember also, as another shoal on which States are wrecked, that free States always 
tend toward the depositing of the citizens in strata, the creation of castes, the 
perpetuation of the jus divinurn to office in families. The more democratic the State, the 
more sure this result. For, as free States advance in power, there is a strong tendency 
toward centralization, not from deliberate evil intention, but from the course of events and 
the indolence of human nature.The more democratic the State, the 
more sure this result. For, as free States advance in power, there is a strong tendency 
toward centralization, not from deliberate evil intention, but from the course of events and 
the indolence of human nature. The executive powers swell and enlarge to inordinate 
dimensions; and the Executive is always aggressive with respect to the nation. Offices of 
all kinds are multiplied to reward partisans; the brute force of the sewerage and lower 
strata of the mob obtains large representation, first in the lower offices, and at last in 
Senates; and Bureaucracy raises its bald head, bristling with pens, girded with 
spectacles, and bunched with ribbon. The art of Government becomes like a Craft, and 
its guilds tend to become exclusive, as those of the Middle Ages. Political science may be much improved as a subject of speculation; but it should never 
be divorced from the actual national necessity. The science of governing men must 
always be practical, rather than philosophical. There is not the same amount of positive 
or universal truth here as in the abstract sciences; what is true in one country may be 
very false in another; what is untrue to-day may become true in another generation, and 
the truth of to-day be reversed by the judgment of to-morrow. To distinguish the casual 
from the enduring, to separate the unsuitable from the suitable, and to make progress 
even possible, are the proper ends of policy. But without actual knowledge and 
experience, and communion of labor, the dreams of the political doctors may be no better 
than those of the doctors of divinity. The reign of such a caste, with its mysteries, its 
myrmidons, and its corrupting influence, may be as fatal as that of the despots. Thirty 
tyrants are thirty times worse than one. Moreover, there is a strong temptation for the governing people to become as much 
slothful and sluggards as the weakest of absolute kings.In 
1738, Pope Clement XII. issued against them his famous Bull of Excommunication, 
which was renewed by Benedict XIV.; and in 1743 the Council of Berne also proscribed 
them. The title of the Rull of Clement is, "The Condemnation of the Society of 
Conventicles de Liberi Muratori, or of the Freemasons, under the penalty of ipso facto 
excommunication, the absolution from which is reserved to the Pope alone, except at the 
point of death." And by it all bishops, ordinaries, and inquisitors were empowered to 
punish Freemasons, "as vehemently suspected of heresy," and to call in, if necessary, 
the help of the secular arm; that is, to cause the civil authority to put them to death. * * * * * * 
Also, false and slavish political theories end in brutalizing the State. For example, adopt 
the theory that offices and employments in it are to be given as rewards for services 
rendered to party, and they soon become the prey and spoil of faction, the booty of the 
victory of faction;--and leprosy is in the flesh of the State. The body of the commonwealth 
becomes a mass of corruption, like a living carcass rotten with syphilis. All unsound 
theories in the end develop themselves in one foul and loathsome disease or other of the 
body politic. The State, like the man, must use constant effort to stay in the paths of 
virtue and manliness. The habit of electioneering and begging for office culminates in 
bribery with office, and corruption in office.

Thirty 
tyrants are thirty times worse than one. Moreover, there is a strong temptation for the governing people to become as much 
slothful and sluggards as the weakest of absolute kings. Only give them the power to get 
rid, when caprice prompts them, of the great and wise men, and elect the little, and as to 
all the rest they will relapse into indolence and indifference. The central power, creation 
of the people, organized and cunning if not enlightened, is the perpetual tribunal set up 
by them for the redress of wrong and the rule of justice. It soon supplies itself with all the 
requisite machinery, and is ready and apt for all kinds of interference. The people may be 
a child all its life. The central power may not be able to suggest the best scientific 
solution of a problem; but it has the easiest means of carrying an idea into effect. If the 
purpose to be attained is a large one, it requires a large comprehension; it is proper for 
the action of the central power. If it be a small one, it may be thwarted by disagreement. The central power must step in as an arbitrator and prevent this. The people may be too 
averse to change, too slothful in their own business, unjust to a minority or a majority.The central power must take the reins when the people drop them. France became centralized in its government more by the apathy and ignorance of its 
people than by the tyranny of its kings. When the inmost parish-life is given up to the 
direct guardianship of the State, and the repair of the belfry of a country church requires 
a written order from the central power, a people is in its dotage. Men are thus nurtured in 
imbecility, from the dawn of social life. When the central government feeds part of the 
people it prepares all to be slaves. When it directs parish and county affairs, they are 
slaves already. The next step is to regulate labor and its wages. Nevertheless, whatever follies the free people may commit, even to the putting of the 
powers of legislation in the hands of the little competent and less honest, despair not of 
the final result. The terrible teacher, EXPERIENCE, writing his lessons on hearts 
desolated with calamity and wrung by agony, will make thelll wiser in time. Pretence and 
grimace and sordid beggary for votes will some day cease to avail. Have FAITH, and 
struggle on, against all evil influences and discouragements! FAITH is the Saviour and 
Redeemer of nations. When Christianity had grown weak, profitless, and powerless, the 
Arab Restorer and Iconoclast came, like a cleansing hurricane. When the battle of 
Damascus was about to be fought, the Christian bishop, at the early dawn, in his robes, 
at the head of his clergy, witll trle Cross once so triumphant raised in the air, came down 
to the gates of the city, and laid open before the army the Testament of Christ. The 
Christian general, THOMAS, laid his hand on the book, and said, "Oh God ! If our faith be 
true, aid us, and deliver us not into the hands of its enemies!" But KHALED, "the Sword 
of God," who had marched from victory to victory, exclaimed to his wearied soldiers, "Let 
no man sleep!The 
Christian general, THOMAS, laid his hand on the book, and said, "Oh God ! If our faith be 
true, aid us, and deliver us not into the hands of its enemies!" But KHALED, "the Sword 
of God," who had marched from victory to victory, exclaimed to his wearied soldiers, "Let 
no man sleep! There will be rest enough in the bowers of Paradise; sweet will be the 
repose never more to be followed by labor." The faith of the Arab had become stronger 
than that of the Christian, and he conquered. The Sword is also, in the Bible, an emblem of SPEECH, or of the utterance of thought. Thus, in that vision or apocalypse of the sublime exile of Patmos, a protest in the name 
of the ideal, overwhelming the real world, a tremendous satire uttered in the name of 
Religion and Liberty, and with its fiery reverberations smiting the throne of the Gesars, a 
sharp two-edged sword comes out of the mouth of the Semblance of the Son of Man, 
encircled by the seven golden candlesticks, and holding in his right hand seven stars. "The Lord," says Isaiah, "hath made my mouth like a sharp sword." "I have slain them," 
says Hosea, "by the words of my mouth." "The word of God," says the writer of the 
apostolic letter to the Hebrews, "is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged 
sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit." "The sword of the Spirit, 
which is the Word of God," says Paul, writing to the Christians at Ephesus. "I will fight 
against them with the sword of my mouth," it is said in the Apocalypse, to the angel of the 
church at Pergamos. * * * * * * 
The spoken discourse may roll on strongly as the great tidal wave; but, like the wave, it 
dies at last feebly on the sands. It is heard by few, remembered by still fewer, and fades 
away, like an echo in the mountains, leaving no token of power. It is nothing to tlle living 
and coming generations of men. It was the written hulllan speech, that gave power and 
permanence to human thought.Thirty 
tyrants are thirty times worse than one. Moreover, there is a strong temptation for the governing people to become as much 
slothful and sluggards as the weakest of absolute kings. Only give them the power to get 
rid, when caprice prompts them, of the great and wise men, and elect the little, and as to 
all the rest they will relapse into indolence and indifference. The central power, creation 
of the people, organized and cunning if not enlightened, is the perpetual tribunal set up 
by them for the redress of wrong and the rule of justice. It soon supplies itself with all the 
requisite machinery, and is ready and apt for all kinds of interference. The people may be 
a child all its life. The central power may not be able to suggest the best scientific 
solution of a problem; but it has the easiest means of carrying an idea into effect. If the 
purpose to be attained is a large one, it requires a large comprehension; it is proper for 
the action of the central power. If it be a small one, it may be thwarted by disagreement. The central power must step in as an arbitrator and prevent this. The people may be too 
averse to change, too slothful in their own business, unjust to a minority or a majority.

It is nothing to tlle living 
and coming generations of men. It was the written hulllan speech, that gave power and 
permanence to human thought. It is this that makes the whole human history but one 
individual life. To write on the rock is to write on a solid parchment; but it requires a pilgrimage to see it. There is but one copy, and Time wears even that. To write on skins or papyrus was to 
give, as it were, but one tardy edition, and the rich only could procure it. The Chinese 
stereotyped not only the unchanging wisdom of oid sages, but also the passing events. The process tended to suffocate thought, and to hinder progress; for there is continual 
wandering in the wisest minds, and Truth writes her last words, not on clean tablets, but 
on the scrawl that Error has made and often mended.Printing made the movable letters prolific. Thenceforth the orator spoke almost visibly to 
listening nations; and the author wrote, like the Pope, his cecumenic decreesJ urbi et 
orbi, and ordered them to be posted up in all the market-places; remaining, if he chose, 
impervious to human sight. The doom of tyrannies was thenceforth sealed. Satire and 
invective became potent as armies. The unseen hands of the Juniuses could launch the 
thunderbolts, and make the ministers tremble. One whisper from this giant fills the earth 
as easily as Demosthenes filled the Agora. It will soon be heard at the antipodes as 
easily as in the next street. It travels with the lightning under the oceans. It makes the 
mass one man, speaks to it in the same comtnon language, and elicits a sure and single 
response. Speech passes into thought, and thence promptly into act. A nation becomes 
truly one, with one large heart and a single throbbing pulse. Men are invisibly present to 
each other, as if already spiritual beings; and the thinker who sits in an Alpine solitude, 
unknown to or forgotten by all the world, among the silent herds and hills, may flash his 
words to all tlle cities and over all the seas. Select the thinkers to be Legislators; and avoid the gabblers. Wisdom is rarely 
loquacious. Weight and depth of thougbt are unfavorable to volubility. The shallow and 
superficial are generally voluble and often pass for eloquent. More words, less thought,--
is the general rule. The man who endeavors to say something worth remembering in 
every sentence, becomes fastidious, and condenses like Tacitus. The vulgar love a more 
diffuse stream. The ornamentation that does not cover strength is the gewgaws of 
babble. Neither is dialectic subtlety valuable to public men. The Christian faith has it, had it 
formerly more than now; a subtlety that might have entangled Plato, and which has 
rivalled in a fruitless fashion the mystic lore of Jewish Rabbis and Indian Sages.Neither is dialectic subtlety valuable to public men. The Christian faith has it, had it 
formerly more than now; a subtlety that might have entangled Plato, and which has 
rivalled in a fruitless fashion the mystic lore of Jewish Rabbis and Indian Sages. It is not 
this which converts the heathen. It is a vain task to balance the great thoughts of the 
earth, like hollow straws, on the fingertips of disputation. It is not this kind of warfare 
whicll makes the Cross triumphant in the hearts of the unbelievers; but the actual power 
that lives in the Faith. So there is a political scholasticism that is merely useless. The dexterities of subtle logic 
rarely stir the hearts of the people, or convince them. The true apostle of Liberty, 
Fraternity and Equality makes it a matter of life and death. His combats are like those of 
Bossuet,-- combats to the death. The true apostolic fire is like the lightning: it flashes 
conviction into the soul. The true word is verily a two-edged sword. Matters of 
government and political science can be fairly dealt with only by sound reason, and the 
logic of common sense: not the common sense of the ignorant, but of the wise. The 
acutest thinkers rarely succeed in becoming leaders of men. A watchword or a catchword 
is more potent with the people than logic, especially if this be the least metaphysical. When a political prophet arises, to stir the dreaming, stagnant nation, and hold back its 
feet from the irretrievable descent, to heave the land as with an earthquake, and shake 
the silly-shallow idols from their seats, his words vvill come straight from God's own 
nlouth, and be thundered into the conscience. He will reason, teach, warn, and rule. The 
real "Sword of the Spirit" is keener than the brightest blade of Damascus. Such men rule 
a land, in the strength of justice, with wisdom and with power.It is nothing to tlle living 
and coming generations of men. It was the written hulllan speech, that gave power and 
permanence to human thought. It is this that makes the whole human history but one 
individual life. To write on the rock is to write on a solid parchment; but it requires a pilgrimage to see it. There is but one copy, and Time wears even that. To write on skins or papyrus was to 
give, as it were, but one tardy edition, and the rich only could procure it. The Chinese 
stereotyped not only the unchanging wisdom of oid sages, but also the passing events. The process tended to suffocate thought, and to hinder progress; for there is continual 
wandering in the wisest minds, and Truth writes her last words, not on clean tablets, but 
on the scrawl that Error has made and often mended.

The 
real "Sword of the Spirit" is keener than the brightest blade of Damascus. Such men rule 
a land, in the strength of justice, with wisdom and with power. Still, the men of dialectic 
subtlety often rule well, because in practice they forget their finely-spun theories, and use 
the trenchant logic of common sense. But when the great heart and large intellect are left 
to the rust in private life, and small attorneys, brawlers in politics, and those who in the 
cities would be only the clerks of notaries, or practitioners in the disreputable courts, are 
made national Legislators, the country is in her dotage. even if the beard has not yet 
grown upon her chin. In a free country, human speech must needs be free; and the State must listen to the 
maunderings of folly, and the screechings of its geese, and the brayings of its asses, as 
well as to the golden oracles of its wise and great men. Even the despotic old kings 
allowed their wise fools to say what they liked. The true alchelllist will extract the lessons 
of wisdom from the babblings of folly. He will hear what a man has to say on any given 
subject, even if the speaker end only in proving himself prince of fools. Even a fool willsometimes hit the mark. There is some truth in all men who are not compelled to 
suppress their souls and speak other men's thoughts. The finger even of the idiot may 
point to the great highway. A people, as well as the sages, must learn to forget. If it neither learns the new nor 
forgets the old, it is fated, even if it has been royal for thirty generations. To unlearn is to 
learn; and also it is sometimes needful to learn again the forgotten. The antics of fools 
make the current follies more palpable, as fashions are shown to be absurd by 
caricatures, which so lead to their extirpation. The buffoon and the zany are useful in 
their places. The ingenious artificer and craftsman, like Solomon, searches the earth for 
his materials, and transforms the misshapen matter into glorious workmanship. The 
world is conquered by the head even more than by the hands. Nor will any assembly talk 
forever. After a time, when it has listened long enough, it quietly puts the silly, the 
shallow, and the superficial to one side,--it thinks, and sets to work. The human thought, especially in popular assemblies, runs in the most singularly 
crooked channels, harder to trace and follow than the blind currents of the ocean. No 
notion is so absurd that it may not find a place there. The master-workman must train 
these notions and vagaries with his two-handed hammer. They twist out of the way of the 
sword-thrusts; and are invulnerable all over, even in the heel, against logic. The martel or 
mace, the battle-axe, the great double-edged two-handed sword must deal with follies; 
the rapier is no better against them than a wand, unless it be the rapier of ridicule. The SWORD is also the symbol of war and of the soldier. Wars, like thunder-storms, are 
often necessary to purify the stagnant atmosphere. War is not a demon, without remorse 
or reward. It restores the brotherhood in letters of fire.War is not a demon, without remorse 
or reward. It restores the brotherhood in letters of fire. When men are seated in their 
pleasant places, sunken in ease and indolence, with Pretence and Incapacity and 
Littleness usurping all the high places of State, war is the baptism of blood and fire, by 
which alone they can be renovated. It is the hurricane that brings the elemental 
equilibrium, the concord of Power and Wisdom. So long as these continue obstinately 
divorced, it will continue to chasten. In the mutual appeal of nations to God, there is the acknowledgment of His might. It 
lights the beacons of Faith and Freedom, and heats the furnace through which the 
earnest and loyal pass to immortal glory. There is in war the doom of defeat, the 
quenchless sense of Duty, the stirring sense of Honor, the measureless solemn sacrifice 
of devotedness, and the incense of success. Even in the flame and smoke of battle, the 
Mason discovers his brother, and fulfills the sacred obligations of Fraternity. Two, or the Duad, is the symbol of Antagonism; of Good and Evil, Light and Darkness. It 
is Cain and Abel, Eve and Lilith, Jachin and Boaz, Ormuzd and Ahriman, Osiris and 
Typhon. THREE, or the Triad, is most significantly expressed by the equilateral and the right-
angled triangles. There are three principal colors or rays in the rainbow, which by 
intermixture make seven. The three are the blue, the yelloW, and the red. The Trinity of 
the Deity, in one mode or other, has been an article in all creeds. He creates, preserves, 
and destroys. He is the generative power, the productive capacity, and the result. The 
immaterial man, according to the Kabalah, is composed of vitality, or life, the breath of 
life; of soul or mind, and spirit. Salt, sulphur, and mercury are the great symbols of the 
alchemists. To them man was body, soul, and spirit. FOUR is expressed by the square, or four-sided right-angled figure.The 
real "Sword of the Spirit" is keener than the brightest blade of Damascus. Such men rule 
a land, in the strength of justice, with wisdom and with power. Still, the men of dialectic 
subtlety often rule well, because in practice they forget their finely-spun theories, and use 
the trenchant logic of common sense. But when the great heart and large intellect are left 
to the rust in private life, and small attorneys, brawlers in politics, and those who in the 
cities would be only the clerks of notaries, or practitioners in the disreputable courts, are 
made national Legislators, the country is in her dotage. even if the beard has not yet 
grown upon her chin. In a free country, human speech must needs be free; and the State must listen to the 
maunderings of folly, and the screechings of its geese, and the brayings of its asses, as 
well as to the golden oracles of its wise and great men. Even the despotic old kings 
allowed their wise fools to say what they liked. The true alchelllist will extract the lessons 
of wisdom from the babblings of folly. He will hear what a man has to say on any given 
subject, even if the speaker end only in proving himself prince of fools. Even a fool will

To them man was body, soul, and spirit. FOUR is expressed by the square, or four-sided right-angled figure. Out of the symbolic 
Garden of Eden flowed a river, dividing into four streams,--PISON, which flows around 
the land of gold, or light; GIHON, which flows around the land of Ethiopia or Darkness; 
HIDDEKEL, running eastward to Assyria; and the EUPHRATES. Zechariah saw four 
chariots coming out from between two mountains of bronze, in the first of which were red 
horses; in the second, black; in the third, white; and in the fourth, grizzled: "and thesewere the four winds of the heavens, that go forth from standing before the Lord of all the 
earth." Ezekiel saw the four living creatures, each with four faces and four wings, the 
faces of a man and a lion, an ox and an eagle; and the four wheels going upon their four 
sides; and Saint John beheld the four beasts, full of eyes before and behind, the LION, 
the young Ox, the MAN, and the flying EAGLE. Four was the signature of the Earth. Therefore, in the 148th Psalm, of those who must praise the Lord on the land, there are 
four times four, and four in particular of living creatures. Visible nature is described as the 
four quarters of the world, and the four corners of the earth. "There are four," says the old 
Jewish saying, "which take the first place in this world: man, among the creatures; the 
eagle among birds; the ox among cattle; and the lion among wild beasts." Daniel saw 
four great beasts come up from the sea. FIVE is the Duad added to the Triad. It is expressed by the five-pointed or blazing star, 
the mysterious Pentalpha of Pythagoras. It is indissolubly connected with the number 
seven. Christ fed His disciples and the multitude with five loaves and two fishes, and of 
the fragments there remained twelve, that is, five and seven, baskets full. Again He fed 
them with seven loaves and a few little fishes, and there remained seven baskets full. The five apparently small planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, with the 
two greater ones, the Sun and Moon, constituted the seven celestial spheres. SEVEN was the peculiarly sacred number. There were seven planets and spheres 
presided over by seven archangels. There were seven colors in the rainbow; and the 
Phoenician Deity was called the HEPTAKIS or God of seven rays; seven days of the 
week; and seven and five made the number of months, tribes, ancl apostles. Zechariah 
saw a golden candlestick, with seven lamps and seven pipes to the lamps, and an olive-
tree on each side.There were seven colors in the rainbow; and the 
Phoenician Deity was called the HEPTAKIS or God of seven rays; seven days of the 
week; and seven and five made the number of months, tribes, ancl apostles. Zechariah 
saw a golden candlestick, with seven lamps and seven pipes to the lamps, and an olive-
tree on each side. Since he says, "the seven eyes of the Lord shall rejoice, and shall see 
the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel." John, in the Apocalypse, writes seven epistles 
to the seven churches. In the seven epistles there are twelve promises. What is said of 
the churches in praise or blame, is completed in the number three. The refrain, "who has 
ears to hear," etc., has ten words, divided by three and seven, and the seven by three 
and four; and the seven epistles are also so divided. In the seals, trumpets, and vials, 
also, of this symbolic vision, the seven are divided by four and three. He who sends his 
message to Ephesus, "holds the seven stars in his right hand, and walks amid the seven 
golden lamps." 
In six days, or periods, God created the Universe, and paused on the seventh day. Of 
clean beasts, Noah was directed to take by sevens into the ark; and of fowls by sevens; 
because in seven days the rain was to commence. On the seventeenth day of the month. the rain began; on the seventeenth day of the seventh month, the ark rested on Ararat. When the dove returned, Noah waited seven days before he sent her forth again; and 
again seven, after she returned with the olive-leaf. Enoch was the seventh patriarch, 
Adam included, and Lamech lived 777 years. There were seven lamps in the great candlestick of the Tabernacle and Temple, 
representing the seven planets. Seven times Moses sprinkled the anointing oil upon the 
altar. The days of consecration of Aaron and his sons were seven in number.To them man was body, soul, and spirit. FOUR is expressed by the square, or four-sided right-angled figure. Out of the symbolic 
Garden of Eden flowed a river, dividing into four streams,--PISON, which flows around 
the land of gold, or light; GIHON, which flows around the land of Ethiopia or Darkness; 
HIDDEKEL, running eastward to Assyria; and the EUPHRATES. Zechariah saw four 
chariots coming out from between two mountains of bronze, in the first of which were red 
horses; in the second, black; in the third, white; and in the fourth, grizzled: "and these

Seven times Moses sprinkled the anointing oil upon the 
altar. The days of consecration of Aaron and his sons were seven in number. A woman 
was unclean seven days after child-birth; one infected with leprosy was shut up seven 
days; seven times the leper was sprinkled with the blood of a slain bird; and seven days 
afterwards he must remain abroad out of his tent. Seven times, in purifying the leper, the 
priest was to sprinkle the consecrated oil; and seven times to sprinkle with the blood of 
the sacrificed bird the house to be purified. Seven times the blood of the slain bullock 
was sprinkled on the mercy-seat; and seven times on the altar. The seventh year was a 
Sabbath of rest; and at the end of seven times seven years came the great year of 
jubilee. Seven days the people ate unleavened bread, in the month of Abib. Seven 
weeks were counted from the time of first putting the sickle to the wheat. The Feast of 
the Tabernacles lasted seven days. Israel was in the hand of Midian seven years before Gideon delivered them. The bullock 
sacrificed by him was seven years old. Samson told Delilah to bind him with seven greenwithes; and she wove the seven locks of his head, and afterwards shaved them off. 
Balaam told Barak to build for him seven altars. Jacob served seven years for Leah and 
seven for Rachel. Job had seven sons and three daughters, making the perfect number 
ten. He had also seven thousand sheep and three thousand camels. His friends sat 
down with him seven days and seven nights. His friends were ordered to sacrifice seven 
bullocks and seven rams; and again, at the end, he had seven sons and three daughters, 
and twice seven thousand sheep, and lived an hundred and forty, or twice seven times 
ten years. Pharaoh saw in his dream seven fat and seven lean kine, seven good ears 
and seven blasted ears of wheat; and there were seven years of plenty, and seven of 
famine. Jericho fell, when seven priests, with seven trumpets, made the circuit of the city 
on seven successive days; once each day for six days, and seven times on the seventh. 
"The seven eyes of the Lord," says Zechariah, "run to and fro through the whole earth." 
Solomon was seven years in building the Temple. Seven angels, in the Apocalypse, pour 
out seven plagues, from seven vials of wrath. The scarlet-colored beast, on which the 
woman sits in the wilderness, has seven heads and ten horns. So also has the beast that 
rises Up out of the sea. Seven thunders uttered their voices. Seven angels sounded 
seven trumpets. Seven lamps of fire, the seven spirits of God, burned before the throne; 
and the Lamb that was slain had seven horns and seven eyes. 
EIGHT is the first cube, that of two. NINE is the square of three, and represented by the 
triple triangle. 
TEN includes all the other numbers. It is especially seven and three; and is called the 
number of perfection. Pythagoras represented it by the TETRACTYS, which had many 
mystic meanings. This symbol is sometimes composed of dots or points, sometimes of 
commas or yods, and in the Kabalah, of the letters of the name of Deity. It is thus 
arranged: 
, 
, , 
, , , 
, , , , 
The Patriarchs from Adam to Noah, inclusive, are ten in number, and the same number 
is that of the Commandments. 
TWELVE is the number of the lines of equal length that form a cube. It is the number of 
the months, the tribes, and the apostles; of the oxen under the Brazen Sea, of the stones 
on the breast-plate of the high priest.MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE 
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry , prepared for the 
Supreme Council of the Thirty Third Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: 
Charleston, 1871. 
3º - MasterTo understand literally the symbols and allegories of Oriental books as to ante-historical 
matters, is willfully to close our eyes against the Light. To translate the symbols into the 
trivial and commonplace, is the blundering of mediocrity. All religious expression is symbolism; since we can describe only what we see, and the 
true objects of religion are THE SEEN. The earliest instruments of education were 
symbols; and they and all other religious forms differed and still differ according to 
external circumstances and imagery, and according to differences of knowledge and 
mental cultivation. All language is symbolic, so far as it is applied to mental and spiritual 
phenomena and action. All words have, primarily, a material sense, however they may 
afterward get, for the ignorant, a spiritual non-sense. "To retract," for example, is to draw 
back, and when applied to a statement, is symbolic, as much so as a picture of an arm 
drawn back, to express the same thing, would be. The very word "spirit" means "breath," 
from the Latin verb spiro, breathe. To present a visible symbol to the eye of another is not necessarily to inform him of the 
meaning which that symbol has to you. Hence the philosopher soon superadded to the 
symbols explanations addressed to the ear, susceptible of more precision, but less 
effective and impressive than the painted or sculptured forms which he endeavored to 
explain. Out of these explanations grew by degrees a variety of narrations, whose true 
object and meaning were gradually forgotten, or lost in contradictions and incongruities. And when these were abandoned, and Philosophy resorted to definitions and formulas, 
its language was but a more complicated symbolism, attempting in the dark to grapple 
with and picture ideas impossible to be expressed.MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE 
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry , prepared for the 
Supreme Council of the Thirty Third Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: 
Charleston, 1871. 
3º - Master

Out of these explanations grew by degrees a variety of narrations, whose true 
object and meaning were gradually forgotten, or lost in contradictions and incongruities. And when these were abandoned, and Philosophy resorted to definitions and formulas, 
its language was but a more complicated symbolism, attempting in the dark to grapple 
with and picture ideas impossible to be expressed. For as with the visible symbol, so with 
the word: to utter it to you does not inform you of the exact meaning which it has to me; 
and thus religion and philosophy became to a great extent disputes as to the meaning of 
words. The most abstract expression for DEITY, which language can supply, is but a sign 
or symbol for an object beyond our comprehension, and not more truthful and adequate 
than the images of OSIRIS and VISHNU, or their names, except as being less sensuous 
and explicit. We avoid sensuousness only by resorting to simple negation. We come at 
last to define spirit by saying that it is not matter. Spirit is--spirit. A single example of the symbolism of words will indicate to you one branch of Masonic 
study. We find in the English Rite this phrase: "I will always hail, ever conceal, and never 
reveal;" and in the Catechism, these: 
Q.'. "I hail." 
A.'. "I conceal," 
and ignorance, misunderstanding the word "hail," has interpolated the phrase, "From 
whence do you hail." 
But the word is really "hele," from the Anglo-Saxon verb elan, helan, to cover, hide, or 
conceal. And this word is rendered by the Latin verb tegere, to cover or roof over. "That 
ye fro me no thynge woll hele," says Gower. "They hele fro me no priuyte," says the 
Romaunt of the Rose. "To heal a house," is a common phrase in Sussex; and in the westof England, he that covers a house with slates is called a Healer. Wherefore, to "heal" 
means the same thing as to "tile,"--itself symbolic, as meaning, primarily, to cover a 
house with tiles,--and means to cover, hide, or conceal. Thus language too is symbolism, 
and words are as much misunderstood and misused as more material symbols are. Symbolism tended continually to become more complicated; and all the powers of 
Heaven were reproduced on earth, until a web of fiction and allegory was woven, partly 
by art and partly by the ignorance of error, which the wit of man, with his limited means of 
explanation, will never unravel. Even the Hebrew Theism became involved in symbolism 
and image-worship, borrowed probably from an older creed and remote regions of Asia,--
the worship of the Great Semitic Nature-God AL or ELS and its symbolical 
representations of JEHOVA Himself were not even confined to poetical or illustrative 
language. The priests were monotheists: the people idolaters. There are dangers inseparable from symbolism, which afford an impressive lesson in 
regard to the similar risks attendant on the use of language. The imagination, called in to 
assist the reason, usurps its place or leaves its ally helplessly entangled in itsweb. Names which stand for things are confounded with them; the means are mistaken for the 
end; the instrument of interpretation for the object; and thus symbols come to usurp an 
independent character as truths and persons.The imagination, called in to 
assist the reason, usurps its place or leaves its ally helplessly entangled in itsweb. Names which stand for things are confounded with them; the means are mistaken for the 
end; the instrument of interpretation for the object; and thus symbols come to usurp an 
independent character as truths and persons. Though perhaps a necessary path, they 
were a dangerous one by which to approach the Deity; in which many, says PLUTARCH, 
"mistaking the sign for the thing signified, fell into a ridiculous superstition; while others, 
in avoiding one extreme, plunged into the no less hideous gulf of irreligion and impiety." 
It is through the Mysteries, CICERO says, that we have learned the first principles of life; 
wherefore the term "initiation" is used with good reason; and they not only teach us to 
live more happily and agrceably, but they soften the pains of death by the hope of a 
better life hereafter. The Mysteries were a Sacred Drama, exhibiting some legend significant of nature's 
changes, of the visible Universe in which the Divinity is revealed, and whose import was 
in many respects as open to the Pagan as to the Christian. Nature is thc great Teacher of 
man; for it is the Revelation of God. It neither dogmatizes nor attempts to tyrannize by 
compelling to a particular creed or special interpretation. It presents its symbols to us, 
and adds nothing by way of explanation. It is the text without the commentary; and, as 
we well know, it is chiefly the commentary and gloss that lead to error and heresesy and 
persecution. The earliest instructors of mankind not only adopted the lessons of Nature, 
but as far as possible adhered to her method of imparting them. In the Mysteries, beyond 
the current traditions or sacred and enigimatic recitals of the Temples, few explanations 
were given to the spectators, who were left, as in the school of nature, to make 
inferences for themselves.Out of these explanations grew by degrees a variety of narrations, whose true 
object and meaning were gradually forgotten, or lost in contradictions and incongruities. And when these were abandoned, and Philosophy resorted to definitions and formulas, 
its language was but a more complicated symbolism, attempting in the dark to grapple 
with and picture ideas impossible to be expressed. For as with the visible symbol, so with 
the word: to utter it to you does not inform you of the exact meaning which it has to me; 
and thus religion and philosophy became to a great extent disputes as to the meaning of 
words. The most abstract expression for DEITY, which language can supply, is but a sign 
or symbol for an object beyond our comprehension, and not more truthful and adequate 
than the images of OSIRIS and VISHNU, or their names, except as being less sensuous 
and explicit. We avoid sensuousness only by resorting to simple negation. We come at 
last to define spirit by saying that it is not matter. Spirit is--spirit. A single example of the symbolism of words will indicate to you one branch of Masonic 
study. We find in the English Rite this phrase: "I will always hail, ever conceal, and never 
reveal;" and in the Catechism, these: 
Q.'. "I hail." 
A.'. "I conceal," 
and ignorance, misunderstanding the word "hail," has interpolated the phrase, "From 
whence do you hail." 
But the word is really "hele," from the Anglo-Saxon verb elan, helan, to cover, hide, or 
conceal. And this word is rendered by the Latin verb tegere, to cover or roof over. "That 
ye fro me no thynge woll hele," says Gower. "They hele fro me no priuyte," says the 
Romaunt of the Rose. "To heal a house," is a common phrase in Sussex; and in the west

The earliest instructors of mankind not only adopted the lessons of Nature, 
but as far as possible adhered to her method of imparting them. In the Mysteries, beyond 
the current traditions or sacred and enigimatic recitals of the Temples, few explanations 
were given to the spectators, who were left, as in the school of nature, to make 
inferences for themselves. No other method could have suited every degree of cultivation 
and capacity. To employ nature's universal symbolism instead of the technicalities of 
language, rewards the humblest inquirer, and discloses its secrets to every one in 
proportion to his preparatory training and his power to con1prellend them. If their 
philosophical meaning was above the comlirellension of some, their moral and political 
meanlngs are within the reach of all. These mystic shows and performances were not the reading of a lecture, but the opening 
of a problem. Requiring research, they were calculated to arouse the dormant intellect. They implied no hostility to Philosophy, because Philosophy is the great expounder of 
symbolism; although its ancient interpretations were often illfounded and incorrect. The 
alteration from symbol to dogma is fatal to beauty of expression, and leads to intolerance 
and assumed infallibility. * * * * * * 
If, in teaching the great doctrine of the divine nature of the Soul, and in striving to explain 
its longings after immortality, and in proving its superiority over the souls of the animals,which have no aspirations Heavenward, the ancients struggled in vain to express the 
nature of the soul, by comparing it to FIRE and LIGHT, it will be well for us to consider 
whether, with all our boasted knowledge, we have any better or clearer idea of its nature, 
and whether we have not despairingly taken refuge in having none at all. And if they 
erred as to its original place of abode, and understood literally the mode and path of its 
descent, these were but the accessories of the great Truth, and probably, to the Initiates, 
mere allegories, designed to make the idea more palpable and impressive to the mind. They are at least no more fit to be smiled at by the self-conceit of a vain ignorance, the 
wealth of whose knowledge consists solely in words, than the bosom of Abraham, as a 
home for the spirits of the just dead; the gulf of actual fire, for the eternal torture of spirits; 
and the City of the New Jerusalem, with its walls of jasper and its edifices of pure gold 
like clear glass, its foundations of precious stones, and its gates each of a single pearl. "I 
knew a man," says PAUL, "caught up to the third Heaven;.... that he was caught up into 
Paradise, and heard ineffable words, which it is not possible for a man to utter." And 
nowhere is the antagonism and conflict between the spirit and body more frequently and 
forcibly insisted on than in the writings of this apostle, nowhere the Divine nature of the 
soul more strongly asserted. "With the mind," he says, "I serve the law of God; but with 
the flesh the law of sin....As many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons of GOD.... The earnest expectation of the created waits for the manifestation of the sons of God.... The created shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, of the flesh liable to 
decay, into the glorious liberty of the children of God." 
* * * * * * 
Two forms of government are favorable to the prevalence of falsehood and deceit.The earnest expectation of the created waits for the manifestation of the sons of God.... The created shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, of the flesh liable to 
decay, into the glorious liberty of the children of God." 
* * * * * * 
Two forms of government are favorable to the prevalence of falsehood and deceit. Under 
a Despotism, men are false, treacherous, and deceitful through fear, like slaves dreading 
the lash. Under a Democracy they are so as a means of attaining popularity and office, 
and because of the greed for wealth. Experience will probably prove that these odious 
and detestable vices will grow most rankly and spread most rapidly in a Republic. When 
office and wealth become the gods of a people, and the most unworthy and unfit most 
aspire to the former, and fraud becomes the highway to the latter, the land will reek with 
falsehood and sweat lies and chicane. When the offices are open to all, merit and stern 
integrity and the dignity of unsullied honor will attain them only rarely and by accident. To 
be able to serve the country well, will cease to be a reason why the great and wise and 
learned should be selected to render service. Other qualifications, less honorable, will be 
more available.The earliest instructors of mankind not only adopted the lessons of Nature, 
but as far as possible adhered to her method of imparting them. In the Mysteries, beyond 
the current traditions or sacred and enigimatic recitals of the Temples, few explanations 
were given to the spectators, who were left, as in the school of nature, to make 
inferences for themselves. No other method could have suited every degree of cultivation 
and capacity. To employ nature's universal symbolism instead of the technicalities of 
language, rewards the humblest inquirer, and discloses its secrets to every one in 
proportion to his preparatory training and his power to con1prellend them. If their 
philosophical meaning was above the comlirellension of some, their moral and political 
meanlngs are within the reach of all. These mystic shows and performances were not the reading of a lecture, but the opening 
of a problem. Requiring research, they were calculated to arouse the dormant intellect. They implied no hostility to Philosophy, because Philosophy is the great expounder of 
symbolism; although its ancient interpretations were often illfounded and incorrect. The 
alteration from symbol to dogma is fatal to beauty of expression, and leads to intolerance 
and assumed infallibility. * * * * * * 
If, in teaching the great doctrine of the divine nature of the Soul, and in striving to explain 
its longings after immortality, and in proving its superiority over the souls of the animals,

To 
be able to serve the country well, will cease to be a reason why the great and wise and 
learned should be selected to render service. Other qualifications, less honorable, will be 
more available. To adapt one's opinions to the popular humor; to defend, apologize for, 
and justify the popular follies; to advocate the expedient and the plausible; to caress, 
cajole, and flatter the elector; to beg like a spaniel for his vote, even if he be a negro 
three removes from barbarism; to profess friendship for a competitor and stab him by 
innuendo; to set on foot that which at third hand shall become a lie, being cousin-german 
to it when uttered, and yet capable of being explained away,--who is there that has not 
seen these low arts and base appliances put into practice, and becoming general, until 
success cannot be surely had by any more honorable means ?--the result being a State 
ruled and ruined by ignorant and shallow mediocrity, pert self-conceit, the greenness of 
unripe intellect, vain of a school-boy's smattering of knowledge. The faithless and the false in public and in political life, will be faithless and false in 
private. The jockey in politics, like the jockey on the race-course, is rotten from skin to 
core. Everywhere he will see first to his own interests, and whoso leans on him will be 
pierced with a broken reed. His ambition is ignoble, like himself; and therefore he will 
seek to attain omce by ignoble means, as he will seek to attain any other coveted object,-
-land, money, or reputation. At length, office and honor are divorced. The place that the small and shallow, the knave 
or the trickster, is deemed competent and fit to fill, ceases to be worthy the ambition of 
the great and capable; or if not, these shrink from a contest, the weapons to be used 
wherein are unfit for a gentleman to handle. Then the habits of unprincipled advocates in 
law courts are naturalized in Senates, and pettifoggers wrangle there, when the fate ofthe nation and the lives of millions are at stake. States are even begotten by villainy and 
brought forth by fraud, and rascalities are justified by legislators claiming to be honorable. Then contested elections are decided by perjured votes or party considerations; and all 
the practices of the worst times of corruption are revived and exaggerated in Republics. It is strange that reverence for truth, that manliness and genuine loyalty, and scorn of 
littleness and unfair advantage, and genuine faith and godliness and large-heartedness 
should diminish, among statesmen and people, as civilization advances, and freedom 
becomes more general, and universal suffrage implies universal worth and fitness ! In the 
age of Elizabeth, without universal suffrage, or Societies for the Diffusion of Useful 
Knowledge, or popular lecturers, or Lycaea, the statesman, the merchant, the burgher, 
the sailor, were all alike heroic, fearing God only, and man not at all. Let but a hundred or 
two years elapse, and in a Monarchy or Republic of the same race, nothing is less heroic 
than the merchant, the shrewd speculator, the office-seeker, fearing man only, and God 
not at all. Reverence for greatness dies out, and is succeeded by base envy of 
greatness. Every man is in the way of many, either in the path to popularity or wealth. There is a general feeling of satisfaction when a great statesman is displaced, or a 
general, who has been for his brief hour the popular idol, is unfortunate and sinks from 
his high estate. It becomes a misfortune, if not a crime, to be above the popular level. We should naturally suppose that a nation in distress would take counsel with the wisest 
of its sons. But, on the contrary, great men seem never so scarce as when they are most 
needed, and small men never so bold to insist on infesting place, as when mediocrity and 
incapable pretence and sophomoric greenness, and showy and sprightly incompetency 
are most dangerous.We should naturally suppose that a nation in distress would take counsel with the wisest 
of its sons. But, on the contrary, great men seem never so scarce as when they are most 
needed, and small men never so bold to insist on infesting place, as when mediocrity and 
incapable pretence and sophomoric greenness, and showy and sprightly incompetency 
are most dangerous. When France was in the extremity of revolutionary agony, she was 
governed by an assembly of provincial pettifoggers, and Robespierre, Marat, and 
Couthon ruled in the place of Mirabeau, Vergniaud, and Carnot. England was governed 
by the Rump Parliament, after she had beheaded her king. Cromwell extinguished one 
body, and Napoleon the other. Fraud, falsehood, trickery, and deceit in national affairs are the signs of decadence in 
States and precede convulsions or paralysis. To bully the weak and crouch to the strong, 
is the policy of nations governed by small mediocrity. The tricks of the canvass for office 
are re-enacted in Senates. The Executive becomes the dispenser of patronage, chiefly to 
the most unworthy; and men are bribed with offices instead of money, to the greater ruin 
of the Commonwealth. The Divine in human nature disappears, and interest, grced, and 
selfishness takes it place. That is a sad and true allegory which represents the 
companions of Ulysses changed by the enchantments of Circe into swine. * * * * * 
"Ye cannot," said the Great Teacher, "serve God and Mammon." When the thirst for 
wealth becomes general, it will be sought for as well dishonestly as honestly; by frauds 
and overreachings, by the knaveries of trade, the heartlessness of greedy speculation, 
by gambling in stocks and commodities that soon demoralizes a whole community. Men 
will speculate upon the needs of their neighbors and the distresses of their country. Bubbles that, bursting, impoverish multitudes, will be blown up by cunning knavery, with 
stupid credulity as its assistants and instrument.To 
be able to serve the country well, will cease to be a reason why the great and wise and 
learned should be selected to render service. Other qualifications, less honorable, will be 
more available. To adapt one's opinions to the popular humor; to defend, apologize for, 
and justify the popular follies; to advocate the expedient and the plausible; to caress, 
cajole, and flatter the elector; to beg like a spaniel for his vote, even if he be a negro 
three removes from barbarism; to profess friendship for a competitor and stab him by 
innuendo; to set on foot that which at third hand shall become a lie, being cousin-german 
to it when uttered, and yet capable of being explained away,--who is there that has not 
seen these low arts and base appliances put into practice, and becoming general, until 
success cannot be surely had by any more honorable means ?--the result being a State 
ruled and ruined by ignorant and shallow mediocrity, pert self-conceit, the greenness of 
unripe intellect, vain of a school-boy's smattering of knowledge. The faithless and the false in public and in political life, will be faithless and false in 
private. The jockey in politics, like the jockey on the race-course, is rotten from skin to 
core. Everywhere he will see first to his own interests, and whoso leans on him will be 
pierced with a broken reed. His ambition is ignoble, like himself; and therefore he will 
seek to attain omce by ignoble means, as he will seek to attain any other coveted object,-
-land, money, or reputation. At length, office and honor are divorced. The place that the small and shallow, the knave 
or the trickster, is deemed competent and fit to fill, ceases to be worthy the ambition of 
the great and capable; or if not, these shrink from a contest, the weapons to be used 
wherein are unfit for a gentleman to handle. Then the habits of unprincipled advocates in 
law courts are naturalized in Senates, and pettifoggers wrangle there, when the fate of

Men 
will speculate upon the needs of their neighbors and the distresses of their country. Bubbles that, bursting, impoverish multitudes, will be blown up by cunning knavery, with 
stupid credulity as its assistants and instrument. Huge bankruptcies, that startle a country 
like the earthquakes, and are more fatal, fraudulent assignments, engulfment of the 
savings of the poor, expansions and collapses of the currency, the crash of banks, the 
depreciation of Government securities, prey on the savings of self-denial, and trouble 
with their depredations the first nourishment of infancy and the last sands of life, and fill 
with inmates the churchyards and lunatic asylums. But the sharper and speculator thrives 
and fattens. If his country is fighting by a levy en masse for her very existence, he aids 
her by depreciating her paper, so that he may accumulate fabulous amounts with little 
outlay. If his neighbor is distressed, he buys his property for a song. If he administers 
upon an estate, it turns out insolvent, and the orphans are paupers. If his bank explodes, 
he is found to have taken care of himself in time. Society worships its paper-and-credit 
kings, as the old Hindus and Egyptians worshipped their worthless idols, and often themost obsequiously when in actual solid wealth they are the veriest paupers. No wonder 
men think there ought to be another world, in which the injustices of this may be atoned 
for, when they see the friends of ruined families begging the wealthy sharpers to give 
alms to prevent the orphaned victims from starving, until they may findways of supporting 
themselves. 
* * * * * * 
States are chiefly avaricious of commerce and of territory. The latter leads to the violation 
of treaties, encroachments upon feeble neighbors, and rapacity toward their wards 
whose lands are coveted. Republics are, in this, as rapacious and unprincipled as 
Despots, never learning from history that inordinate expansion by rapine and fraud has 
its inevitable consequences in dismen1berment or subjugation. When a Republic begins 
to plunder its neighbors, the words of doom are already written on its walls. There is a 
judgment already pronounced of God upon whatever is unrighteous in the conduct of 
national affairs. When civil war tears the vitals of a Republic, let it look back and see if it 
has not been guilty of injustices; and if it has, let it humble itself in the dust !When a nation becomes possessed with a spirit of commercial greed, beyond those just 
and fair limits set by a due regard to a moderate and reasonable degree of general and 
individual prosperity, it is a nation possessed by the devil of commercial avarice, a 
passion as ignoble and demoralizing as avarice in the individual; and as this sordid 
passion is baser and more unscrupulous than ambition, so it is more hateful, and at last 
makes the infected nation to be regarded as the enemy of the human race. To grasp at 
the lion's share of commerce, has always at last proven the ruin of States, because it 
invariably leads to injustices that make a State detestable; to a selfishness and crooked 
policy that forbid other nations to be the friends of a State that cares only for itself. 
Commercial avarice in India was the parent of more atrocities and greater rapacity, and 
cost more human lives, than the nobler ambition for extended empire of Consular Rome. 
The nation that grasps at the commerce of the world cannot but become selfish, 
calculating, dead to the noblest impulses and sympathies which ought to actuate States. 
It will submit to insults that wound its honor, rather than endanger its commercial 
interests by war; while, to subserve those interests, it will wage unjust war, on false or 
frivolous pretexts, its free people cheerfully allying themselves with despots to crush a 
commercial rival that has dared to exile its kings and elect its own ruler. 
Thus the cold calculations of a sordid self-interest, in nations commercially avaricious, 
always at last displace the sentiments and lofty impulses of Honor and Generosity by 
which they rose to greatness; which made Elizabeth and Cromwell alike the protectors of 
Protestants beyond the four seas of England, against crowned Tyranny and mitred 
Persecution; and, if they had lasted, would have forbidden alliances with Czars and 
Autocrats and Bourbons to re-enthrone the Tyrannies of Incapacity, and arm the 
Inquisition anew with its instruments of torture. The soul of the avaricious nation petrifies, 
like the soul of the individual who makes gold his god. The Despot will occasionally act 
upon noble and generous impulses, and help the weak against the strong, the right 
against the wrong. But commercial avarice is essentially egotistic, grasping, faithless, 
overreaching, crafty, cold, ungenerous, selfish, and calculating, controlled by 
considerations of self-interest alone. Heartless and merciless, it has no sentiments of 
pity, sympathy, or honor, to make it pause in its remorseless career; and it crushes down 
all that is of impediment in its way, as its keels of commerce crush under them the 
murmuring and unheeded waves. 
A war for a great principle ennobles a nation. A war for commercial supremacy, upon 
some shallow pretext, is despicable, and more than aught else demonstrates to what 
immeasurable depths of baseness men and nations can descend. Commercial greedvalues the lives of men no more than it values the lives of ants. The slave-trade is as 
acceptable to a people enthralled by that greed, as the trade in ivory or spices, if the 
profits are as large. It will by-and-by endeavor to compound with God and quiet its own 
conscience, by compelling those to whom it sold the slaves it bought or stole, to set them 
free, and slaughtering them by hecatombs if they refuse to obey the edicts of its 
philanthropy. Justice in no wise consists in meting out to another that exact measure of reward or 
punishment which we think and decree his merit, or what we call his crime, which is more 
often merely his error, deserves. The justice of the father is not incompatible with 
forgiveness by him of the errors and offences of his child. The Infinite Justice of God 
does not consist in meting out exact measures of punishment for human frailties and 
sins. We are too apt to erect our own little and narrow notions of what is right and just 
into the law of justice, and to insist that God shall adopt that as His law; to measure off 
something with our own little tape-line, and call it God's love of justice. Continually we 
seek to ennoble our own ignoble love of revenge and retaliationJ by misnaming it justice. Nor does justice consist in strictly governing our conduct toward other men by the rigid 
rules of legal right. If there were a community anywhere, in which all stood upon the 
strictness of this rule, there should be written over its gates, as a warning to the 
unfortunates desiring admission to that inhospitable realm, the words which DANTE says 
are written over the great gate of Hell: LET THOSE WHO ENTER HERE LEAVE HOPE 
BEHIND !Nor does justice consist in strictly governing our conduct toward other men by the rigid 
rules of legal right. If there were a community anywhere, in which all stood upon the 
strictness of this rule, there should be written over its gates, as a warning to the 
unfortunates desiring admission to that inhospitable realm, the words which DANTE says 
are written over the great gate of Hell: LET THOSE WHO ENTER HERE LEAVE HOPE 
BEHIND ! It is not just to pay the laborer in field or factory or workshop his current wages 
and no more, the lowest market-value of his labor, for so long only as we need that labor 
and he is able to work; for when sickness or old age overtakes him, that is to leave him 
and his family to starve; and God will curse with calamity the people in which the children 
of the laborer out of work eat the boiled grass of the field, and mothers strangle their 
children, that they may buy food for themselves with the charitable pittance given for 
burial expenses. The rules of what is ordinarily termed "Justice," may be punctiliously 
observed among the fallen spirits that are the aristocracy of Hell. * * * * * * 
Justice, divorced from sympathy, is selfish indifference, not in the least more laudable 
than misanthropic isolation. There is sympathy even among the hair-like oscillatorias, a 
tribe of simple plants, armies of which may be discovered with the aid of the microscope, 
in the tiniest bit of scum from a stagnant pool. For these will place themselves, as if it 
were by agreement, in separate companies, on the side of a vessel containing them, and 
seem marching upward in rows; and when a swarm grows weary of its situation, and has 
a mind to change its quarters, each army holds on its way without confusion or 
intermixture, proceeding with great regularity and order, as if under the directions of wise 
leaders.When a nation becomes possessed with a spirit of commercial greed, beyond those just 
and fair limits set by a due regard to a moderate and reasonable degree of general and 
individual prosperity, it is a nation possessed by the devil of commercial avarice, a 
passion as ignoble and demoralizing as avarice in the individual; and as this sordid 
passion is baser and more unscrupulous than ambition, so it is more hateful, and at last 
makes the infected nation to be regarded as the enemy of the human race. To grasp at 
the lion's share of commerce, has always at last proven the ruin of States, because it 
invariably leads to injustices that make a State detestable; to a selfishness and crooked 
policy that forbid other nations to be the friends of a State that cares only for itself. 
Commercial avarice in India was the parent of more atrocities and greater rapacity, and 
cost more human lives, than the nobler ambition for extended empire of Consular Rome. 
The nation that grasps at the commerce of the world cannot but become selfish, 
calculating, dead to the noblest impulses and sympathies which ought to actuate States. 
It will submit to insults that wound its honor, rather than endanger its commercial 
interests by war; while, to subserve those interests, it will wage unjust war, on false or 
frivolous pretexts, its free people cheerfully allying themselves with despots to crush a 
commercial rival that has dared to exile its kings and elect its own ruler. 
Thus the cold calculations of a sordid self-interest, in nations commercially avaricious, 
always at last displace the sentiments and lofty impulses of Honor and Generosity by 
which they rose to greatness; which made Elizabeth and Cromwell alike the protectors of 
Protestants beyond the four seas of England, against crowned Tyranny and mitred 
Persecution; and, if they had lasted, would have forbidden alliances with Czars and 
Autocrats and Bourbons to re-enthrone the Tyrannies of Incapacity, and arm the 
Inquisition anew with its instruments of torture. The soul of the avaricious nation petrifies, 
like the soul of the individual who makes gold his god. The Despot will occasionally act 
upon noble and generous impulses, and help the weak against the strong, the right 
against the wrong. But commercial avarice is essentially egotistic, grasping, faithless, 
overreaching, crafty, cold, ungenerous, selfish, and calculating, controlled by 
considerations of self-interest alone. Heartless and merciless, it has no sentiments of 
pity, sympathy, or honor, to make it pause in its remorseless career; and it crushes down 
all that is of impediment in its way, as its keels of commerce crush under them the 
murmuring and unheeded waves. 
A war for a great principle ennobles a nation. A war for commercial supremacy, upon 
some shallow pretext, is despicable, and more than aught else demonstrates to what 
immeasurable depths of baseness men and nations can descend. Commercial greed

There is sympathy even among the hair-like oscillatorias, a 
tribe of simple plants, armies of which may be discovered with the aid of the microscope, 
in the tiniest bit of scum from a stagnant pool. For these will place themselves, as if it 
were by agreement, in separate companies, on the side of a vessel containing them, and 
seem marching upward in rows; and when a swarm grows weary of its situation, and has 
a mind to change its quarters, each army holds on its way without confusion or 
intermixture, proceeding with great regularity and order, as if under the directions of wise 
leaders. The ants and bees give each other mutual assistance, beyond what is required 
by that which human creatures are apt to regard as the strict law of justice. Surely we need but reflect a little, to be convinced that the individual man is but a fraction 
of the unit of society, and that he is indissolubly connected with the rest of his race. Not 
only the actions, but the will and thoughts of other men make or mar his fortunes, control 
his destinies, are unto him life or death, dishonor or honor. The epidemics, physical and 
moral, contagious and infectious, public opinion, popular delusions, enthusiasms, and the 
other great electric phenomena and currents, moral and intellectual, prove the universal 
sympathy. The vote of a single and obscure n1an, the utterance of self-will, ignorance, 
conceit, or spite, deciding an election and placing Folly or Incapacity or Baseness in a 
Senate, involves the country in war, sweeps away our fortunes, slaughters our sons, 
renders the labors of a life unavailing, and pushes on, helpless, with all our intellect to 
resist, into the grave. These considerations ought to teach us that justice to others and to ourselves is the 
same; that we cannot define our duties by mathematical lines ruled by the square, butmust fill with them the great circle traced by the compasses; that the circle of humanity is 
the limit, and we are but the point in its centre, the drops in the great Atlantic, the atom or 
particle, bound by a mys terious law of attraction which we term sympathy to every other 
atom in the mass; that the physical and moral welfare of others cannot be indifferent to 
us; that we have a direct and immediate interest in the public morality and popular 
intelligence, in the well-being and physical comfort of the people at large. The ignorance 
of the people, their pauperism and destitution, and consequent degradation, their 
brutalization and demoralization, are all diseases; and we cannot rise high enough above 
the people, nor shut ourselves up from them enough, to escape the miasmatic contagion 
and the great magnetic currents. Justice is peculiarly indispensable to nations. The unjust State is doomed of God to 
calamity and ruin. This is the teaching of the Eternal Wisdom and of history. "Righteousness exalteth a nation; but wrong is a reproach to nations." "The Throne is 
established by Righteousness. Let the lips of the Ruler pronounce the sentence that is 
Divine; and his mouth do no wrong in judgment !" The nation that adds province to 
province by fraud and violence, that encroaches on the weak and plunders its wards, and 
violates its treaties and the obligation of its contracts, and for the law of honor and fair-
dealing substitutes the exigencies of greed and the base precepts of policy and craft and 
the ignoble tenets of expediency, is predestined to destruction; for here, as with the 
individual, the consequences of wrong are inevitable and eternal. A sentence is written against all that is unjust, written by God in the nature of man and in 
the nature of the Universe, because it is in the nature of the Infinite God. No wrong is 
really successful. The gain of injustice is a loss; its pleasure, suffering.No wrong is 
really successful. The gain of injustice is a loss; its pleasure, suffering. Iniquity often 
seems to prosper, but its success is its defeat and shame. If its consequences pass by 
the doer, they fall upon and crush his children. It is a philosophical, physical, and moral 
truth, in the form of a threat, that God visits the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, to 
the third and fourth generation of those who violate His laws. After a long while, the day 
of reckoning always comes, to nation as to individual; and always the knave deceives 
himself, and proves a failure. Hypocrisy is the homage that vice and wrong pay to virtue and justice. It is Satan 
attempting to clothe himself in the angelic vesture of light. It is equally detestable in 
morals, politics, and religion; in the man and in the nation. To do injustice under the 
pretence of equity and fairness; to reprove vice in public and commit it in private; to 
pretend to charitable opinion and censoriously condemn; to profess the principles of 
Masonic beneficence, and close the ear to the wail of distress and the cry of suffering; to 
eulogize the intelligence of the people, and plot to deceive and betray them by means of 
their ignorance and simplicity; to prate of purity, and peculate; of honor, and basely 
abandon a sinking cause; of disinterestedness, and sell one's vote for place and power, 
are hypocrisies as common as they are infamous and disgraceful.It is equally detestable in 
morals, politics, and religion; in the man and in the nation. To do injustice under the 
pretence of equity and fairness; to reprove vice in public and commit it in private; to 
pretend to charitable opinion and censoriously condemn; to profess the principles of 
Masonic beneficence, and close the ear to the wail of distress and the cry of suffering; to 
eulogize the intelligence of the people, and plot to deceive and betray them by means of 
their ignorance and simplicity; to prate of purity, and peculate; of honor, and basely 
abandon a sinking cause; of disinterestedness, and sell one's vote for place and power, 
are hypocrisies as common as they are infamous and disgraceful. To steal the livery of 
the Court of God to serve the Devil withal; to pretend to believe in a God of mercy and a 
Redeemer of love, and persecute those of a different faith; to devour widows' houses, 
and for a pretence make long prayers; to preach continence, and wallow in lust; to 
inculcate humility, and in pride surpass Lucifer; to pay tithe, and omit the weightier 
matters of the law, judgment, mercy and faith; to strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel; to 
make clean the outside of the cup and platter, keeping them full within of extortion and 
excess; to appear outwardly righteous unto men, but within be full of hypocrisy and 
iniquity, is indeed to be like unto whited sepulchres, which appear beautiful outward, but 
are within full of bones of the dead and of all uncleanness. The Republic cloaks its ambition with the pretence of a desire and duty to "extend the 
area of freedom," and claims it as its "manifest destiny" to annex other Republics or the 
States or Provinces of others to itself, by open violence, or under obsolete, empty, and 
fraudulent titles. The Empire founded by a successful soldier, claims its ancient or natural 
boundaries, and makes necessity and its safety tlle plea for open robbery.There is sympathy even among the hair-like oscillatorias, a 
tribe of simple plants, armies of which may be discovered with the aid of the microscope, 
in the tiniest bit of scum from a stagnant pool. For these will place themselves, as if it 
were by agreement, in separate companies, on the side of a vessel containing them, and 
seem marching upward in rows; and when a swarm grows weary of its situation, and has 
a mind to change its quarters, each army holds on its way without confusion or 
intermixture, proceeding with great regularity and order, as if under the directions of wise 
leaders. The ants and bees give each other mutual assistance, beyond what is required 
by that which human creatures are apt to regard as the strict law of justice. Surely we need but reflect a little, to be convinced that the individual man is but a fraction 
of the unit of society, and that he is indissolubly connected with the rest of his race. Not 
only the actions, but the will and thoughts of other men make or mar his fortunes, control 
his destinies, are unto him life or death, dishonor or honor. The epidemics, physical and 
moral, contagious and infectious, public opinion, popular delusions, enthusiasms, and the 
other great electric phenomena and currents, moral and intellectual, prove the universal 
sympathy. The vote of a single and obscure n1an, the utterance of self-will, ignorance, 
conceit, or spite, deciding an election and placing Folly or Incapacity or Baseness in a 
Senate, involves the country in war, sweeps away our fortunes, slaughters our sons, 
renders the labors of a life unavailing, and pushes on, helpless, with all our intellect to 
resist, into the grave. These considerations ought to teach us that justice to others and to ourselves is the 
same; that we cannot define our duties by mathematical lines ruled by the square, but

The Republic cloaks its ambition with the pretence of a desire and duty to "extend the 
area of freedom," and claims it as its "manifest destiny" to annex other Republics or the 
States or Provinces of others to itself, by open violence, or under obsolete, empty, and 
fraudulent titles. The Empire founded by a successful soldier, claims its ancient or natural 
boundaries, and makes necessity and its safety tlle plea for open robbery. The great 
Merchant Nation, gaining foothold in the Orient, finds a continual necessity for extending 
its dominion by arms, and subjugates India. The great Royalties and Despotisms, withouta plea, partition among themselves a Kingdom, dismember Poland, and prepare to 
wrangle over the dominions of the Crescent. To maintain the balance of power is a plea 
for the obliteration of States. Carthage, Genoa, and Venice, commercial Cities only, must 
acquire territory by force or fraud, and become States. Alexander marches to the Indus; 
Tamerlane seeks universal empire; the Saracens conquer Spain and threaten Vienna. The thirst for power is never satisfied. It is insatiable. Neither men nor nations ever have 
power enough. When Rome was the mistress of the world, the Emperors caused 
themselves to be worshipped as gods. The Church of Rome claimed despotism over the 
soul, and over the whole life from the cradle to the grave. It gave and sold absolutions for 
past and future sins. It claimed to be infallible in matters of faith. It decimated Europe to 
purge it of heretics. It decimated America to convert the Mexicans and Peruvians. It gave 
and took away thrones; and by excommunication and interdict closed the gates of 
Paradise against Nations, Spain, haughty with its dominion over the Indies, endeavored 
to crush out Protestantism in the Netherlands, while Philip the Second married the 
Queen of England, and the pair sought to win that kingdom back to its allegiance to the 
Papal throne. Afterward Spain attempted to conquer it with her "invincible" Armada. Napoleon set his relatives and captains on thrones, and parcelled among them half of 
Europe. The Czar rules over an empire more gigantic than Rome. The history of all is or 
will be the same,--acquisition, dismemberment, ruin. There is a judgment of God against 
all that is unjust. To seek to subjugate the will of others and take the soul captive, because it is the 
exercise of thc highest power, seems to be the highest object of human ambition. It is at 
the bottom of all proselyting and propagandism, from that of Mesmer to that of the 
Church of Rome and the French Republic.To seek to subjugate the will of others and take the soul captive, because it is the 
exercise of thc highest power, seems to be the highest object of human ambition. It is at 
the bottom of all proselyting and propagandism, from that of Mesmer to that of the 
Church of Rome and the French Republic. That was the apostolate alike of Joshua and 
of Mahomet. Masonry alone preaches Toleration, the right of man to abide by his own 
faith, the right of all States to govern themselves. It rebukes alike the monarch who seeks 
to extend his dominions by conquest, the Church that claims the right to repress heresy 
by fire and steel, and the confederation of States that insist on maintaining a union by 
force and restoring brotherhood by slaughter and subjugation. It is natural, when we are wronged, to desire revenge; and to persuade ourselves that we 
desire it less for our own satisfaction than to prevent a repetition of the wrong, to which 
the doer would be encouraged by immunity coupled with the profit of the wrong. To 
submit to be cheated is to encourage the cheater to continue; and we are quite apt to 
regard ourselves as God's chosen instruments to inflict His vengeance, and for Him and 
in His stead to discourage wrong by making it fruitless and its punishment sure. Revenge 
has been said to be "a kind of wild justice;" but it is always taken in anger, and therefore 
is unworthy of a great soul, which ought not to suffer its equanimity to be disturbed by 
ingratitude or villainy. The injuries done us by the base are as much unworthy of our 
angry notice as those done us by the insects and the beasts; and when we crush the 
adder, or slay the wolf or hyena, we should do it without being moved to anger, and with 
no more feeling of revenge than we have in rooting up a noxious weed.The Republic cloaks its ambition with the pretence of a desire and duty to "extend the 
area of freedom," and claims it as its "manifest destiny" to annex other Republics or the 
States or Provinces of others to itself, by open violence, or under obsolete, empty, and 
fraudulent titles. The Empire founded by a successful soldier, claims its ancient or natural 
boundaries, and makes necessity and its safety tlle plea for open robbery. The great 
Merchant Nation, gaining foothold in the Orient, finds a continual necessity for extending 
its dominion by arms, and subjugates India. The great Royalties and Despotisms, without

Revenge 
has been said to be "a kind of wild justice;" but it is always taken in anger, and therefore 
is unworthy of a great soul, which ought not to suffer its equanimity to be disturbed by 
ingratitude or villainy. The injuries done us by the base are as much unworthy of our 
angry notice as those done us by the insects and the beasts; and when we crush the 
adder, or slay the wolf or hyena, we should do it without being moved to anger, and with 
no more feeling of revenge than we have in rooting up a noxious weed. And if it be not in human nature not to take revenge by way of punishment, let the Mason 
truly consider that in doing so he is God's agent, and so let his revenge be measured by 
justice and tempered by mercy. The law of God is, that the consequences of wrong and 
cruelty and crime shall be their punishment; and the injured and the wronged and the 
indignant are as much His instruments to enforce that law, as the diseases and public 
detestation, and the verdict of history and the execration of posterity are. No one will say 
that the Inquisitor who has racked and burned the innocent; the Spaniard who hewed 
Indian infants, living, into pieces with his sword, and fed the mangled limbs to his 
bloodhounds; the military tyrant who has shot men without trial, the knave who has 
robbed or betrayed his State, the fraudulent banker or bankrupt who has beggared 
orphans, the public officer who has violated his oath, the judge who has sold injustice, 
the legislator who has enabled Incapacity to work the ruin of the State, ought not to be 
punished. Let them be so; and let the injured or the sympathizing be the instruments of 
God's just vengeance; but always out of a higher feeling than mere personal revenge.Remember that every moral characteristic of man finds its prototype an1ong creatures of 
lower intelligence; that the cruel foulness of the hyena, the savage rapacity of the wolf, 
the merciless rage of the tiger, the crafty treachery of the panther, are found among 
mankind, and ought to excite no other emotion, when found in the man, than when found 
in the beast. Why should the true man be angry with the geese that hiss, the peacocks 
that strut, the asses that bray, and the apes that imitate and chatter, although they wear 
the human form? Always, also, it remains true, that it is more noble to forgive than to take 
revenge; and that, in general, we ought too much to despise those who wrong us, to feel 
the emotion of anger, or to desire revenge. At the sphere of the Sun, you are in the region of LIGHT. * * * * The Hebrew word for 
gold, ZAHAB, also means Light, of which the Sun is to the Earth the great source. So, in 
the great Oriental allegory of the Hebrews, the River PISON compasses the land of Gold 
or Light; and the River GIHON the land of Ethiopia or Darkness. What light is, we no more know than the ancients did. According to the modern 
hypothesis, it is not composed of luminous particles shot out from the sun with immense 
velocity; but that body only impresses, on the ether which fills all space, a powerful 
vibratory movement that extends, in the form of luminous waves, beyond the most distant 
planets, supplying them with light and heat. To the ancients, it was an outflowing from the 
Deity. To us, as to them, it is the apt symbol of truth and knowledge. To us, also, the 
upward journey of the soul through the Spheres is symbolical; but we are as little 
informed as they whence the soul comes, where it has its origin, and whither it goes after 
death. They endeavored to have some belief and faith, some creed, upon those points.To us, also, the 
upward journey of the soul through the Spheres is symbolical; but we are as little 
informed as they whence the soul comes, where it has its origin, and whither it goes after 
death. They endeavored to have some belief and faith, some creed, upon those points. At the present day, men are satisfied to think nothing in regard to all that, and only to 
believe that the soul is a something separate from the body and out-living it, but whether 
existing before it, neither to inquire nor care. No one asks whether it emanates from the 
Deity, or is created out of nothing, or is generated like the body, and the issue of the 
souls of the father and the mother. Let us not smile, therefore, at the ideas of the 
ancients, until we have a better belief; but accept their symbols as meaning that the soul 
is of a Divine nature, originating in a sphere nearer the Deity, and returning to that when 
freed from the enthralhment of the body; and that it can only return there when purified of 
all the sordidness and sin which have, as it were, become part of its substance, by its 
connection with the body. It is not strange that, thousands of years ago, men worshipped the Sun, and that to-day 
that worship continues among the Parsees. Originally they looked beyond the orb to the 
invisible God, of whom the Sun's light, seemingly identical with generation and life, was 
the manifestation and outflowing. Long before the Chaldcean shepherds watched it on 
their plains, it came up regularly, as it now does, in the morning, like a god, and again 
sank, like a king retiring, in the west, to return again in due time in the same array of 
majesty. We worship Immutability. It was that steadfast, immutable character of the Sun 
that the men of Baalbec worshipped. His light-giving and life-giving powers were 
secondary attributes.Revenge 
has been said to be "a kind of wild justice;" but it is always taken in anger, and therefore 
is unworthy of a great soul, which ought not to suffer its equanimity to be disturbed by 
ingratitude or villainy. The injuries done us by the base are as much unworthy of our 
angry notice as those done us by the insects and the beasts; and when we crush the 
adder, or slay the wolf or hyena, we should do it without being moved to anger, and with 
no more feeling of revenge than we have in rooting up a noxious weed. And if it be not in human nature not to take revenge by way of punishment, let the Mason 
truly consider that in doing so he is God's agent, and so let his revenge be measured by 
justice and tempered by mercy. The law of God is, that the consequences of wrong and 
cruelty and crime shall be their punishment; and the injured and the wronged and the 
indignant are as much His instruments to enforce that law, as the diseases and public 
detestation, and the verdict of history and the execration of posterity are. No one will say 
that the Inquisitor who has racked and burned the innocent; the Spaniard who hewed 
Indian infants, living, into pieces with his sword, and fed the mangled limbs to his 
bloodhounds; the military tyrant who has shot men without trial, the knave who has 
robbed or betrayed his State, the fraudulent banker or bankrupt who has beggared 
orphans, the public officer who has violated his oath, the judge who has sold injustice, 
the legislator who has enabled Incapacity to work the ruin of the State, ought not to be 
punished. Let them be so; and let the injured or the sympathizing be the instruments of 
God's just vengeance; but always out of a higher feeling than mere personal revenge.

It was that steadfast, immutable character of the Sun 
that the men of Baalbec worshipped. His light-giving and life-giving powers were 
secondary attributes. The one grand idea that compelled worship was the characteristic 
of God which they saw reflected in his light, and fancied they saw in its originality the 
changelessness of Deity. He had seen thrones crwnble, earthquakes shake the world 
and hurl down mountains. Beyond Olympus, beyond the Pillars of Hercules, he had gone 
daily to his abode, and had come daily again in the morning to behold the temples they 
built to his worsl1ip. They personified him as BRAHMA, AMUN, OSRIS, BEL, ADONIS, 
MALKARTH, MITHRAS, and APOLLO; and the nations that did so grew old and died. Moss grew on the capitals of the great columns of his temples, and he shone on the 
moss. Grain by grain the dust of his temples crumbled and fell, and was borne off on the 
wind, and still he shone on crumbling column and architrave. The roof fell crashing on the 
pavement, and he shone in on the Holy of Holies with unchanging rays. It was not 
strange that men worshipped the Sun. There is a water-plant, on whose broad leaves the drops of water roll about without 
uniting, like drops of mercury. So arguments on points of faith, in politics or religion, roll 
over the surface of the mind. An argument that convinces one mind has no effect onanother. Few intellects, or souls that are the negations of intellect, have any logical 
power or capacity. There is a singular obliquity in the human mind that makes the false 
logic more effective than the true with nine-tenths of those who are regarded as men of 
intellect. Even among the judges, not one in ten can argue logically. Each mind sees the 
truth, distorted through its own medium. Truth, to most men, is like matter in the 
spheroidal state. Like a drop of cold water on the surface of a red-hot metal plate, it 
dances, trembles, and spins, and never comes into contact with it; and the mind may be 
plunged into truth, as the hand moistened with sulphurous acid may into melted metal, 
and be not even warmed by the immersion. * * * * * * 
The word Khairum or Khurum is a compound one. Gesenius renders Khurum by the 
word noble or free-born: Khur meaning white, noble. It also means the opening of a 
window, the socket of the eye. Khri also means white, or an opening; and Khris, the orb 
of the Sun, in Job viii. 13 and x. 7. Krishna is the Hindu Sun-God. Khur, the Parsi word, is 
the literal name of the Sun. From Kur or Khur, the Sun, comes Khora, a name of Lower Egypt. The Sun, Bryant says 
in his Mythology, was called Kur; and Plutarch says that the Persians called the Sun 
Kuros. Kurios, Lord, in Greek, like Adonai, Lord, in Phcenician and Hebrew, was applied 
to the Sun. Many places were sacred to the Sun, and called Kura, Kuria, Kuropolis, 
Kurene, Kureschata, Kuresta, and Corusia in Scythia. The Egyptian Deity called by the Greeks "Horus," was Her-Ra, or Har-oeris, Hor or Har, 
the Sun. Hari is a Hindu name of the Sun. Ari-al, Ar-es, Ar, Aryaman, Areimonios, the AR 
meaning Fire or Flame, are of the same kindred. Hewnes or Har-mes, (Aram, Remus, 
Haram, Harameias), was Kadmos, the Divine Light or Wisdom. Mar-kuri, says Movers, is 
Mar, the Sun. In the Hebrew, AOOR, is Light, Fire, or the Sun. Cyrus, said Ctesias, was so named from 
Kuros, the Sun.In the Hebrew, AOOR, is Light, Fire, or the Sun. Cyrus, said Ctesias, was so named from 
Kuros, the Sun. Kuris, Hesychius says, was Adonis. Apollo, the Sun-god, was called 
Kurraios, from Kurra, a city in Phocis. The people of Kurene, originally Ethiopians or 
Cuthites, worshipped the Sun under the title of Achoor and Achor. We know, through a precise testimony in the ancient annals of Tsur, that the principal 
festivity of Mal-karth, the incarnation of the Sun at the Winter Solstice, held at Tsur, was 
called his rebirth or his awakening, and that it was celebrated by means of a pyre, on 
which the god was supposed to regain, through the aid of fire, a new life. This festival 
was celebrated in the month Peritius (Barith), the second day of which corresponded to 
the 25th of December. KHUR-UM, King of Tyre, Movers says, first performed this 
ceremony. These facts we learn from Josephus, Servius on the AEneid, and the 
Dionysiacs of Nonnus; and through a coincidence that cannot be fortuitous, the same 
day was at Rome the Dies Natalis Solis Invicti, the festal day of the invincible Sun. Under 
this title, HERCULES, HAR-acles, was worshipped at Tsur. Thus, while the temple was 
being erected, the death and resurrection of a Sun-God was annually represented at 
Tsur, by Solomon's ally, at the winter solstice, by the pyre of MAL-KARIH, the Tsurian 
Haracles. AROERIS or HAR-oeris, the elder HORUS, is from the same old root that in the Hebrew 
has the form Aur, or, with the definite article prefixed, Haur, Light, or the Light, splendor, 
flame, the Sun and his rays.It was that steadfast, immutable character of the Sun 
that the men of Baalbec worshipped. His light-giving and life-giving powers were 
secondary attributes. The one grand idea that compelled worship was the characteristic 
of God which they saw reflected in his light, and fancied they saw in its originality the 
changelessness of Deity. He had seen thrones crwnble, earthquakes shake the world 
and hurl down mountains. Beyond Olympus, beyond the Pillars of Hercules, he had gone 
daily to his abode, and had come daily again in the morning to behold the temples they 
built to his worsl1ip. They personified him as BRAHMA, AMUN, OSRIS, BEL, ADONIS, 
MALKARTH, MITHRAS, and APOLLO; and the nations that did so grew old and died. Moss grew on the capitals of the great columns of his temples, and he shone on the 
moss. Grain by grain the dust of his temples crumbled and fell, and was borne off on the 
wind, and still he shone on crumbling column and architrave. The roof fell crashing on the 
pavement, and he shone in on the Holy of Holies with unchanging rays. It was not 
strange that men worshipped the Sun. There is a water-plant, on whose broad leaves the drops of water roll about without 
uniting, like drops of mercury. So arguments on points of faith, in politics or religion, roll 
over the surface of the mind. An argument that convinces one mind has no effect on

Thus, while the temple was 
being erected, the death and resurrection of a Sun-God was annually represented at 
Tsur, by Solomon's ally, at the winter solstice, by the pyre of MAL-KARIH, the Tsurian 
Haracles. AROERIS or HAR-oeris, the elder HORUS, is from the same old root that in the Hebrew 
has the form Aur, or, with the definite article prefixed, Haur, Light, or the Light, splendor, 
flame, the Sun and his rays. The hieroglyphic of the younger HORUS was the point in a 
circle; of the Elder, a pair of eyes; and the festival of the thirtieth day of the month Epiphi, 
when the sun and moon were supposed to be in the same right line with the earth, was 
called "The birth-day of the eyes of Horus." 
In a papyrus published by Champollion, this god is styled "Haroeri, Lord of the Solar 
Spirits, the beneficent eye of the Sun." Plutarch calls him "Har-pocrates," but there is notrace of the latter part of the name in the hieroglyphic legends. He is the son of OSIRIS 
and Isrs; and is represented sitting on a throne supported by lions; the same word, in 
Egyptian, meaning Lion and Sun. So Solomon made a great throne of ivory, plated with 
gold, with six steps, at each arm of which was a lion, and one on each side to each step, 
making seven on each side. 
Again, the Hebrewword Khi, means "living;" and ram, "was, or shall be, raised or lifted 
up." The latter is the same as room, aroom, harum, whence Aram, for Syria, or Aramoea, 
High-land. Khairum, therefore, would mean "was raised up to life, or living." 
So, in Arabic, hrm, an unused root, meant, "was high," "made great," "exalted;" and Hirm 
means an ox, the symbol of the Sun in Taurus, at the Vernal Equinox. 
KHURUM, therefore, improperly called Hiram, is KHUR-OM, the same as Her-ra, Her-
mes, and Her-acles, the "Heracles Tyrius Invictus," the personification of Light and the 
Son, the Mediator, Redeemer, and Saviour. From the Egyptian word Ra came the Coptic 
Ouro, and the Hebrew Aur, Light. Har-oeri, is Hor or Har, the chief or master. Hor is also 
heat; and hora, season or hour; and hence in several African dialects, as names of the 
Sun, Airo, Ayero, eer, uiro, ghurrah, and the like. The royal name rendered Pharaoh, was 
PHRA, that is, Pai-ra, the Sun. 
The legend of the contest between Hor-ra and Set, or Set-nu-bi, the same as Bar or Bal, 
is older than that of the strife between Osiris and Typhon; as old, at least, as the 
nineteenth dynasty. It is called in the Book of the Dead, "The day of the battle between 
Horus and Set." The later myth connects itself with Phoenicia and Syria. The body of 
OSIRIS went ashore at Gebal or Byblos, sixty miles above Tsur. You will not fail to notice 
that in the name of each murderer of Khurum, that of the Evil God Bal is found. 
* * * * * 
Har-oeri was the god of TIME, as well as of Life. The Egyptian legend was that the King 
of Byblos cut down the tamarisk-tree containing the body of OSIRIS, and made of it a 
column for his palace. Isis, employed in the palace, obtained possession of the column, 
took the body out of it, and carried it away. Apuleius describes her as "a beautiful female, 
over whose divine neck her long thick hair hung in graceful ringlets ;" and in the 
procession female attendants, with ivory combs, seemed to dress and ornament the 
royal hair of the goddess. The palm-tree, and the lamp in the shape of a boat, appeared 
in the procession. If the symbol we are speaking of is not a mere modern invention, it is 
to these things it alludes. 
The identity of the legends is also confirmed by this hieroglyphic picture, copied from an 
ancient Egyptian monument, which may also enlighten you as to the Lion's grip and the 
Master's gavel.in the ancient Phcenician character, and in the Samaritan, A B, (the two letters 
representing the numbers 1, 2, or Unity and Duality, means Father, and is a primitive 
noun, common to all the Semitic languages.

It also means an Ancestor, Originator, Inventor, Head, Chief or Ruler, Manager, 
Overseer, Master, Priest, Prophet.is simply Father, when it is in construction, that is, when it precedes another word, and in 
English the preposition "of" is interposed, as Abi-Al, the Father of Al. Also, the final Yod means "my"; so that by itself means "My father. David my father, 2 
Chron. ii. 3. (Vav) final is the possessive pronoun "his"; and Abiu (which we read "Abif") means "of 
my father's." Its full meaning, as connected with the name of Khurum, no doubt is, 
"formerly one of my father's servants," or "slaves." 
The name of the Phcenician artificer is, in Samuel and Kings, [2 Sam. v. 11; 1 Kings v. 15; 1 Kings vii. 40]. In Chronicles it is with the addition of [2 Chron. ii. 12]; and of [2 
Chron. iv. 16]. It is merely absurd to add the word "Abif," or "Abiff," as part of the name of the artificer. And it is almost as absurd to add the word "Abi," which was a title and not part of the 
name. Joseph says [Gen. xlv. 8], "God has constituted me 'Ab l'Paraah, as Father to 
Paraah, i.e., Vizier or Prime Minister." So Haman was called the Second Father of 
Artaxerxes; and when King Khurum used the phrase "Khurum Abi," he meant that the 
artificer he sent Schlomoh was the principal or chief workman in his line at Tsur. A medal copied by Montfaucon exhibits a female nursing a child, with ears of wheat in 
her hand, and the legend (Iao). She is seated on clouds, a star at her head, and three 
ears of wheat rising from an altar before her. HORUS was the mediator, who was buried three days, was regenerated, and triumphed 
over the evil principle. The word HERI, in Sanscrit, means Shepherd, as well as Savior. CRISHNA is called 
Heri, as Jesus called Himself the Good Shepherd. Khur, means an aperture of a window, a cave, or the eye. Also it means white. It also means an opening, and noble, free-born, high-born. KHURM means consecrated, devoted; in AEthiopic. It is the name of a city, [Josh. xix. 38]; and of a man, [Ezr. ii. 32, x. 31; Neh. iii. 11]. Khirah, means nobility, a noble race.It also means an Ancestor, Originator, Inventor, Head, Chief or Ruler, Manager, 
Overseer, Master, Priest, Prophet.

11]. Khirah, means nobility, a noble race. Buddha is declared to comprehend in his own person the essence of the Hindu Trimurti; 
and hence the tri-literal monosyllable Om or Aum is applied to him as being essentially 
the same as Brahma-Vishnu-Siva. He is the same as Hermes, Thoth, Taut, and 
Teutates. One of his names is Heri-maya or Hermaya, which are evidently the same 
name as Hermes and Khirm or Khurm. Heri, in Sanscrit, means Lord. A learned Brother places over the two symbolic pillars, from right to left, the two words 
IHU and BAL: followed by the hieroglyphic equivalent, of the Sun-God, Amun-ra. Is it an 
accidental coincidence, that in the name of each murderer are the two names of the 
Good and Evil Deities of the Hebrews; for Yu-bel is but Yehu-Bal or Yeho-Bal? and that 
the three final syllables of the names, a, o, um, make A.'.U.'.M.'. the sacred word of the 
Hindoos, meaning the Triune God, Life-giving, Life-preserving, Life-destroying: 
represented by the mystic character ? The genuine acacia, also, is the thorny tamarisk, the same tree which grew up around 
the body of Osiris. It was a sacred tree among the Arabs, who made of it the idol Al-Uzza, which Mohammed destroyed. It is abundant as a bush in the Desert of Thur: and 
of it the "crown of thorns" was composed, which was set on the forehead of Jesus of 
Nazareth. It is a fit type of immortality on account of its tenacity of life; for it has been 
known, when planted as a door-post, to take root again and shoot out budding boughs 
over the threshold. * * * * * 
Every commonwealth must have its periods of trial and transition, especially if it engages 
in war. It is certain at some time to be wholly governed by agitators appealing to all the 
baser elements of the popular nature; by moneyed corporations; by those enriched by 
the depreciation of government securities or paper; by small attorneys, schemers, 
money-jobbers, speculators and adventurers--an ignoble oligarchy, enriched by the 
distresses of the State, and fattened on the miseries of the people. Then all the deceitful 
visions of equality and the rights of man end; and the wronged and plundered State can 
regain a real liberty only by passing through "great varieties of untried being," purified in 
its transmigration by fire and blood. In a Republic, it soon comes to pass that parties gather round the negative and positive 
poles of some opinion or notion, and that the intolerant spirit of a triumphant majority will 
allow no deviation from the standard of orthodoxy which it has set up for itself. Freedom 
of opinion will be professed and pretended to, but every one will exercise it at the peril of 
being banished from political communion with those who hold the reins and prescribe the 
policy to be pursued. Slavishness to party and obsequiousness to the popular whims go 
hand in hand. Political independence only occurs in a fossil state; and men's opinions 
grow out of the acts they have been constrained to do or sanction. Flattery, either of 
individual or people, corrupts both the receiver and the giver; and adulation is not of more 
service to the people than to kings.Political independence only occurs in a fossil state; and men's opinions 
grow out of the acts they have been constrained to do or sanction. Flattery, either of 
individual or people, corrupts both the receiver and the giver; and adulation is not of more 
service to the people than to kings. A Ccesar, securely seated in power, cares less for it 
than a free democracy; nor will his appetite for it grow to exorbitance, as that of a people 
will, until it becomes insatiate. The effect of liberty to individuals is, that they may do what 
they please; to a people, it is to a great extent the same. If accessible to flattery, as this is 
always interested, and resorted to on low and base motives, and for evil purposes, either 
individual or people is sure, in doing what it pleases, to do what in honor and conscience 
should have been left undone. One ought not even to risk congratulations, which may 
soon be turned into complaints; and as both individuals and peoples are prone to make a 
bad use of power, to flatter them, which is a sure way to mislead them, well deserves to 
be called a crime. The first principle in a Republic ought to be, "that no man or set of men is entitled to 
exclusive or separate emoluments or privileges from the community, but in consideration 
of public services; which not being descendible, neither ought the omces of magistrate, 
legislature, nor judge, to be hereditary." It is a volume of Truth and Wisdom, a lesson for 
the study of nations, embodied in a single sentence, and expressed in language which 
every man can understand. If a deluge of despotism were to overthrow the world, and 
destroy all institutions under which freedom is protected, so that they should no longer be 
remembered among men, this sentence, preserved, would be sufficient to rekindle the 
fires of liberty and revive the race of freemen.11]. Khirah, means nobility, a noble race. Buddha is declared to comprehend in his own person the essence of the Hindu Trimurti; 
and hence the tri-literal monosyllable Om or Aum is applied to him as being essentially 
the same as Brahma-Vishnu-Siva. He is the same as Hermes, Thoth, Taut, and 
Teutates. One of his names is Heri-maya or Hermaya, which are evidently the same 
name as Hermes and Khirm or Khurm. Heri, in Sanscrit, means Lord. A learned Brother places over the two symbolic pillars, from right to left, the two words 
IHU and BAL: followed by the hieroglyphic equivalent, of the Sun-God, Amun-ra. Is it an 
accidental coincidence, that in the name of each murderer are the two names of the 
Good and Evil Deities of the Hebrews; for Yu-bel is but Yehu-Bal or Yeho-Bal? and that 
the three final syllables of the names, a, o, um, make A.'.U.'.M.'. the sacred word of the 
Hindoos, meaning the Triune God, Life-giving, Life-preserving, Life-destroying: 
represented by the mystic character ? The genuine acacia, also, is the thorny tamarisk, the same tree which grew up around 
the body of Osiris. It was a sacred tree among the Arabs, who made of it the idol Al-

The first principle in a Republic ought to be, "that no man or set of men is entitled to 
exclusive or separate emoluments or privileges from the community, but in consideration 
of public services; which not being descendible, neither ought the omces of magistrate, 
legislature, nor judge, to be hereditary." It is a volume of Truth and Wisdom, a lesson for 
the study of nations, embodied in a single sentence, and expressed in language which 
every man can understand. If a deluge of despotism were to overthrow the world, and 
destroy all institutions under which freedom is protected, so that they should no longer be 
remembered among men, this sentence, preserved, would be sufficient to rekindle the 
fires of liberty and revive the race of freemen. But, to preserve liberty, another must be added: "that a free State does not confer office 
as a reward, especially for questionable services, unless she seeks her own ruin; but all 
officers are employed by her, in consideration solely of their will and ability to render 
service in the future; and therefore that the best and most competent are always to be 
preferred." 
For, if there is to be any other rule, that of hereditary succession is perhaps as good as 
any. By no other rule is it possible to preserve the liberties of the State. By no other to 
intrust the power of making the laws to those only who have that keen instinctive sense 
of injustice and wrong which enables them to detect baseness and corruption in theirmost secret hiding-places, and that moral courage and generous manliness and gallant 
independence that make them fearless in dragging out the perpetrators to the light of 
day, and calling down upon them the scorn and indignation of the world. The flatterers of 
the people are never such men. On the contrary, a time always comes to a Republic, 
when it is not content, like Liberius, with a single Sejanus, but must have a host; and 
when those most prominent in the lead of affairs are men without reputation, 
statesmanship, ability, or information, the mere hacks of party, owing their places to 
trickery and want of qualification, with none of the qualities of head or heart that make 
great and wise men, and, at the same time, filled with all the narrow conceptions and 
bitter intolerance of political bigotry. These die; and the world is none the wiser for what 
they have said and done. Their names sink in the bottomless pit of oblivion; but their acts 
of folly or knavery curse the body politic and at last prove its ruin. Politicians, in a free State, are generally hollow, heartless, and selfish. Their own 
aggrandisement is the end of their patriotism; and they always look with secret 
satisfaction on the disappointment or fall of one whose loftier genius and superior talents 
overshadow their own self-importance, or whose integrity and incorruptible honor are in 
the way of their selfish ends. The influence of the small aspirants is always against the 
great man. His accession to power may be almost for a lifetime. One of themselves will 
be more easily displaced, and each hopes to succeed him; and so it at length comes to 
pass that men impudently aspire to and actually win the highest stations, who are unfit 
for the lowest clerkships; and incapacity and mediocrity become the surest passports to 
once.His accession to power may be almost for a lifetime. One of themselves will 
be more easily displaced, and each hopes to succeed him; and so it at length comes to 
pass that men impudently aspire to and actually win the highest stations, who are unfit 
for the lowest clerkships; and incapacity and mediocrity become the surest passports to 
once. The consequence is, that those who feel themselves competent and qualified to serve 
the people, refuse with digust to enter into the struggle for office, where the wicked and 
jesuitical doctrine that all is fair in politics is an excuse for every species of low villainy; 
and those who seek even the highest places of the State do not rely upon the power of a 
magnanimous spirit, on the sympathizing impulses of a great soul, to stir and move the 
people to generous, noble, and heroic resolves, and to wise and manly action; but, like 
spaniels erect on their hind legs, with fore-paws obsequiously suppliant, fawn, flatter, and 
actually beg for votes. Rather than descend to this, they stand contemptuously aloof, 
disdainfully refusing to court the people, and acting on the maxim, that "mankind has no 
title to demand that we shall serve them in spite of themselves." 
* * * * * * 
It is lamentable to see a country split into factions, each following this or that great or 
brazen-fronted leader with a blind, unreasoning, unquestioning hero-worship; it is 
contemptible to see it divided into parties, whose sole end is the spoils of victory, and 
their chiefs the low, the base, the venal and the snlall. Such a country is in the last stages 
of decay, and near its end, no matter how prosperous it may seem to be. It wrangles over 
the volcano and the earthquake. But it is certain that no government can be conducted 
by the men of the people, and for the people, without a rigid adherence to those 
principles which our reason commends as fixed and sound. These must be the tests of 
parties, men, and measures.The first principle in a Republic ought to be, "that no man or set of men is entitled to 
exclusive or separate emoluments or privileges from the community, but in consideration 
of public services; which not being descendible, neither ought the omces of magistrate, 
legislature, nor judge, to be hereditary." It is a volume of Truth and Wisdom, a lesson for 
the study of nations, embodied in a single sentence, and expressed in language which 
every man can understand. If a deluge of despotism were to overthrow the world, and 
destroy all institutions under which freedom is protected, so that they should no longer be 
remembered among men, this sentence, preserved, would be sufficient to rekindle the 
fires of liberty and revive the race of freemen. But, to preserve liberty, another must be added: "that a free State does not confer office 
as a reward, especially for questionable services, unless she seeks her own ruin; but all 
officers are employed by her, in consideration solely of their will and ability to render 
service in the future; and therefore that the best and most competent are always to be 
preferred." 
For, if there is to be any other rule, that of hereditary succession is perhaps as good as 
any. By no other rule is it possible to preserve the liberties of the State. By no other to 
intrust the power of making the laws to those only who have that keen instinctive sense 
of injustice and wrong which enables them to detect baseness and corruption in their

But it is certain that no government can be conducted 
by the men of the people, and for the people, without a rigid adherence to those 
principles which our reason commends as fixed and sound. These must be the tests of 
parties, men, and measures. Once determined, they must be inexorable in their 
application, and all must either come up to the standard or declare against it. Men may 
betray: principles never can. Oppression is one invariable consequence of misplaced 
confidence in treacherous man, it is never the result of the working or application of a 
sound, just, well-tried principle. Compromises which bring fundamental principles into 
doubt, in order to unite in one party men of antagonistic creeds, are frauds, and end in 
ruin, the just and natural consequence of fraud. Whenever you have settled upon your 
theory and creed, sanction no departure from it in practice, on any ground of expediency. It is the Master's word. Yield it up neither to flattery nor force ! Let no defeat or 
persecution rob you of it! Believe that he who once blundered in statesmanship will 
blunder again; that such blunders are as fatal as crimes; and that political near-
sightedness does not improve by age. There are always more impostors than seers 
among public men, more false prophets than true ones, more prophets of Baal than of 
Jehovah; and Jerusalem is always in danger from the Assyrians.Sallust said that after a State has been corrupted by luxury and idleness, it may by its 
mere greatness bear up under the burden of its vices. But even while he wrote, Rome, of 
which he spoke, had played out her masquerade of freedom Other causes than luxury 
and sloth destroy Republics. If small, their larger neighbors extinguish thelll by 
absorption. If of great extent, the cohesive force is too feeble to hold them together, and 
they fall to pieces by their own weight. The paltry ambition of small men disintegrates 
them. The want of wisdom in their councils creates exasperating issues. Usurpation of 
power plays its part, incapacity seconds corruption, the storm rises, and the fragments of 
the incoherent raft strew the sandy shores, reading to mankind another lesson for it to 
disregard. The Forty-seventh Proposition is older than Pythagoras. It is this: "In every right-angled 
triangle, the sum of the squares of the base and perpendicular is equal to the square of 
the hypothenuse." 
The square of a number is the product of that number, multiplied by itself. Thus, 4 is the 
square of 2, and 9 of 3. The first ten numbers are: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10; 
their squares are .........1, 4, 9,16,25,36,49,64,81,100; 
and ...........................3,5, 7, 9,11,13,15,17, 19 
are the differences between each square and that which precedes it; giving us the sacred 
numbers, 3, 5, 7, and 9 
Of these numbers, the square of 3 and 4, added together, gives the square of 5; and 
those of 6 and 8, the square of 10; and if a right-angled triangle be formed, the base 
measuring 3 or 6 parts, and the perpendicular 4 or 8 parts, the hypothenuse will be 5 or 
10 parts; and if a square is erected on each side, these squares being subdivided into 
squares each side of which is one part in length, there will be as many of these in the 
square erected on the hypothenuse as in the other two squares together.Thus, 4 is the 
square of 2, and 9 of 3. The first ten numbers are: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10; 
their squares are .........1, 4, 9,16,25,36,49,64,81,100; 
and ...........................3,5, 7, 9,11,13,15,17, 19 
are the differences between each square and that which precedes it; giving us the sacred 
numbers, 3, 5, 7, and 9 
Of these numbers, the square of 3 and 4, added together, gives the square of 5; and 
those of 6 and 8, the square of 10; and if a right-angled triangle be formed, the base 
measuring 3 or 6 parts, and the perpendicular 4 or 8 parts, the hypothenuse will be 5 or 
10 parts; and if a square is erected on each side, these squares being subdivided into 
squares each side of which is one part in length, there will be as many of these in the 
square erected on the hypothenuse as in the other two squares together. Now the Egyptians arranged their deities in Triads the FATHER or the Spirit or Active 
Principle or Generative Power; the MOTHER, or Matter, or the Passive Principle, or the 
Conceptive Power; and the SON, Issue or Product, the Universe, proceeding from the 
two principles. These were OSRIS, ISIS, and HORUS. In the same way, PLATO gives us 
thought the Father; Primitive Matter the Mother; and Kosmos the World, the Son, the 
Universe animated by a soul. Triads of the same kind are found in the Kabalah. PLUTARCH says, in his book De Iside et Osiride, "But the better and diviner nature 
consists of three,--that which exists within the Intellect only, and Matter, and that which 
proceeds from these, which the Greeks call Kosmos; of which three, Plato is wont to call 
the Intelligible, the 'Idea, Exemplar, and Father', Matter, 'the Mother, the Nurse, and the 
place and receptacle of generation'; and the issue of these two, 'the Offspring and 
Genesis,"' the KOSMOS, "a word signifying equally Beauty and Order, or the Universe 
itself." You will not fail to notice that Beauty is symbolized by the Junior Warden in the 
South.But it is certain that no government can be conducted 
by the men of the people, and for the people, without a rigid adherence to those 
principles which our reason commends as fixed and sound. These must be the tests of 
parties, men, and measures. Once determined, they must be inexorable in their 
application, and all must either come up to the standard or declare against it. Men may 
betray: principles never can. Oppression is one invariable consequence of misplaced 
confidence in treacherous man, it is never the result of the working or application of a 
sound, just, well-tried principle. Compromises which bring fundamental principles into 
doubt, in order to unite in one party men of antagonistic creeds, are frauds, and end in 
ruin, the just and natural consequence of fraud. Whenever you have settled upon your 
theory and creed, sanction no departure from it in practice, on any ground of expediency. It is the Master's word. Yield it up neither to flattery nor force ! Let no defeat or 
persecution rob you of it! Believe that he who once blundered in statesmanship will 
blunder again; that such blunders are as fatal as crimes; and that political near-
sightedness does not improve by age. There are always more impostors than seers 
among public men, more false prophets than true ones, more prophets of Baal than of 
Jehovah; and Jerusalem is always in danger from the Assyrians.

Triads of the same kind are found in the Kabalah. PLUTARCH says, in his book De Iside et Osiride, "But the better and diviner nature 
consists of three,--that which exists within the Intellect only, and Matter, and that which 
proceeds from these, which the Greeks call Kosmos; of which three, Plato is wont to call 
the Intelligible, the 'Idea, Exemplar, and Father', Matter, 'the Mother, the Nurse, and the 
place and receptacle of generation'; and the issue of these two, 'the Offspring and 
Genesis,"' the KOSMOS, "a word signifying equally Beauty and Order, or the Universe 
itself." You will not fail to notice that Beauty is symbolized by the Junior Warden in the 
South. Plutarch continues to say that the Egyptians compared the universal nature to 
what they called the most beautiful and perfect triangle, as Plato does, in that nuptial 
diagram, as it is termed, which he has introduced into his Commonwealth. When he adds 
that this triangle is right-angled, and its sides respectively as 3, 4, and 5; and he says, 
"We must suppose that the perpendicular is designed by them to represent the 
masculine nature, the base the feminine, and that the hypothenuse is to be looked upon 
as the offspring of both; and accordingly the first of them will aptly enough represent 
OSIRIS, or the prime cause; the second, ISIS, or the receptive capacity; the last, 
HORUS, or the common effect of the other two. For 3 is the first number which iscomposed of even and odd; and 4 is a square whose side is equal to the even number 2; 
but 5, being generated, as it were, out of the preceding numbers, 2 and 3, may be said to 
have an equal relation to both of them, as to its common parents." 
* * * * * * 
The clasped hands is another symbol which was used by PYTHAGORAS. It represented 
the number 10, the sacred number in which all the preceding numbers were contained; 
the number expressed by the mysterious TERACTYS, a figure borrowed by him and the 
Hebrew priests alike from the Egyptian sacred science, and which ought to be replaced 
among the symbols of the Master's degree, where it of right belongs. The Hebrews 
formed it thus, with the letters of the Divine name: 
The Tetractys thus leads you, not only to the study of the Pythagorean philosophy as to 
numbers, but also to the Kabalah, and will aid you in discovering the True Word, and 
understanding what was meant by "The Music of the Spheres." Modern science strikingly 
confirms the ideas of Pythagoras in regard to the properties of numbers, and that they 
govern in the Universe. Long before his time, nature had extracted her cube-roots and 
her squares. * * * * * * 
All the FORCES at man's disposal or under man's control, or subject to man's influence, 
are his working tools. The friendship and sympathy that knit heart to heart are a force like 
the attraction of cohesion, by which the sandy particles became the solid rock. If this law 
of attraction or cohesion were taken away, the material worlds and suns would dissolve 
in an instant into thin invisible vapor. If the ties of friendship, affection, and love were 
annulled, mankind would become a raging multitude of wild and savage beasts of prey.If this law 
of attraction or cohesion were taken away, the material worlds and suns would dissolve 
in an instant into thin invisible vapor. If the ties of friendship, affection, and love were 
annulled, mankind would become a raging multitude of wild and savage beasts of prey. The sand hardens into rock under the immense superincumbent pressure of the ocean, 
aided sometimes by the irresistible energy of fire; and when the pressure of calamity and 
danger is upon an order or a country, the members or the citizens ought to be the more 
closely united by the cohesion of sympathy and inter-dependence. Morality is a force. It is the magnetic attraction of the heart toward Truth and Virtue. The 
needle, imbued with this mystic property, and pointing unerringly to the north, carries the 
mariner safely over the trackless ocean, through storm and darkness, until his glad eyes 
behold the beneficent beacons that welcome him to safe and hospitable harbor. Then the 
hearts of those who love him are gladdened, and his home made happy; and this 
gladness and happiness are due to the silent, unostentatious, unerring monitor that was 
the sailor's guide over the weltering waters. But if drifted too far northward, he finds the 
needle no longer true, but pointing elsewhere than to the north, what a feeling of 
helplessness falls upon the dismayed mariner, what utter loss of energy and courage ! It 
is as if the great axioms of morality were to fail and be no longer true, leaving the human 
soul to drift helplessly, eyeless like Prometheus, at the mercy of the uncertain, faithless 
currents of the deep. Honor and Duty are the pole-stars of a Mason, the Dioscuri, by never losing sight of 
which he may avoid disastrous shipwreck. These Palinurus watched, until, overcome by 
sleep, and the vessel no longer guided truly, he fell into and was swallowed up by the 
insatiable sea.Triads of the same kind are found in the Kabalah. PLUTARCH says, in his book De Iside et Osiride, "But the better and diviner nature 
consists of three,--that which exists within the Intellect only, and Matter, and that which 
proceeds from these, which the Greeks call Kosmos; of which three, Plato is wont to call 
the Intelligible, the 'Idea, Exemplar, and Father', Matter, 'the Mother, the Nurse, and the 
place and receptacle of generation'; and the issue of these two, 'the Offspring and 
Genesis,"' the KOSMOS, "a word signifying equally Beauty and Order, or the Universe 
itself." You will not fail to notice that Beauty is symbolized by the Junior Warden in the 
South. Plutarch continues to say that the Egyptians compared the universal nature to 
what they called the most beautiful and perfect triangle, as Plato does, in that nuptial 
diagram, as it is termed, which he has introduced into his Commonwealth. When he adds 
that this triangle is right-angled, and its sides respectively as 3, 4, and 5; and he says, 
"We must suppose that the perpendicular is designed by them to represent the 
masculine nature, the base the feminine, and that the hypothenuse is to be looked upon 
as the offspring of both; and accordingly the first of them will aptly enough represent 
OSIRIS, or the prime cause; the second, ISIS, or the receptive capacity; the last, 
HORUS, or the common effect of the other two. For 3 is the first number which is

Honor and Duty are the pole-stars of a Mason, the Dioscuri, by never losing sight of 
which he may avoid disastrous shipwreck. These Palinurus watched, until, overcome by 
sleep, and the vessel no longer guided truly, he fell into and was swallowed up by the 
insatiable sea. So the Mason who loses sight of these, and is no longer governed by their 
beneficent and potential force, is lost, and sinking out of sight, will disappear unhonored 
and unwept. The force of electricity, analogous to that of sympathy, and by means of which great 
thoughts or base suggestions, the utterances of noble or ignoble natures, flash 
instantaneously over the nerves of nations; the force of growth, fit type of immortality, 
Iying dormant three thousand years in the wheat-grains buried with their mummies by the 
old Egyptians; the forces of expansion and contraction, developed in the earthquake andthe tornado, and giving birth to the wonderful achievements of steam, have their 
parallelisms in the moral world, in individuals, and nations. Growth is a necessity for 
nations as for men. Its cessation is the beginning of decay. In the nation as well as the 
plant it is mysterious, and it is irresistible. The earthquakes that rend nations asunder, 
overturn thrones, and engulf monarchies and republics, have been long prepared for, like 
the volcanic eruption. Revolutions have long roots in the past. The force exerted is in 
direct proportion to the previous restraint and compression. The true statesman ought to 
see in progress the causes that are in due time to produce them; and he who does not is 
but a blind leader of the blind. The great changes in nations, like the geological changes of the earth, are slowly and 
continuously wrought. The waters, falling from Heaven as rain and dews, slowly 
disintegrate the granite mountains; abrade the plains, leaving hills and ridges of 
denudation as their monuments; scoop out the valleys, fill up the seas, narrow the rivers, 
and after the lapse of thousands on thousands of silent centuries, prepare the great 
alluvia for the growth of that plant, the snowy envelope of whose seeds is to employ the 
looms of the world, and the abundance or penury of whose crops shall determine 
whether the weavers and spinners of other realms shall have work to do or starve. So Public Opinion is an immense force; and its currents are as inconstant and 
incomprehensible as those of the atmosphere. Nevertheless, in free governments, it is 
omnipotent; and the business of the statesman is to find the means to shape, control, 
and direct it. According as that is done, it is beneficial and conservative, or destructive 
and ruinous.Nevertheless, in free governments, it is 
omnipotent; and the business of the statesman is to find the means to shape, control, 
and direct it. According as that is done, it is beneficial and conservative, or destructive 
and ruinous. The Public Opinion of the civilized world is International Law; and it is so 
great a force, though with no certain and fixed boundaries, that it can even constrain the 
victorious despot to be generous, and aid an oppressed people in its struggle for 
independence. Habit is a great force; it is second nature, even in trees. It is as strong in nations as in 
men. So also are Prejudices, which are given to men and nations as the passions are,--
as forces, valuable, if properly and skillfully availed of; destructive, if unskillfully handled. Above all, the Love of Country, State Pride, the Love of Home, are forces of immense 
power. Encourage them all. Insist upon them in your public men. Permanency of home is 
necessary to patriotism. A migratory race will have little love of country. State pride is a 
mere theory and chimera, where men remove from State to State with indifference, like 
the Arabs, who camp here to-day and there to-morrow. If you have Eloquence, it is a mighty force. See that you use it for good purposes--to 
teach, exhort, ennoble the people, and not to mislead and corrupt them. Corrupt and 
venal orators are the assassins of the public liberties and of public morals. The Will is a force; its limits as yet unknown. It is in the power of the will that we chiefly 
see the spiritual and divine in man. There is a seeming identity between his will that 
moves other men, and the Creative Will whose action seems so incomprehensible. It is 
the men of will and action, not the men of pure intellect, that govern the world.Honor and Duty are the pole-stars of a Mason, the Dioscuri, by never losing sight of 
which he may avoid disastrous shipwreck. These Palinurus watched, until, overcome by 
sleep, and the vessel no longer guided truly, he fell into and was swallowed up by the 
insatiable sea. So the Mason who loses sight of these, and is no longer governed by their 
beneficent and potential force, is lost, and sinking out of sight, will disappear unhonored 
and unwept. The force of electricity, analogous to that of sympathy, and by means of which great 
thoughts or base suggestions, the utterances of noble or ignoble natures, flash 
instantaneously over the nerves of nations; the force of growth, fit type of immortality, 
Iying dormant three thousand years in the wheat-grains buried with their mummies by the 
old Egyptians; the forces of expansion and contraction, developed in the earthquake and

There is a seeming identity between his will that 
moves other men, and the Creative Will whose action seems so incomprehensible. It is 
the men of will and action, not the men of pure intellect, that govern the world. Finally, the three greatest moral forces are FAITH, which is the only true WISDOM, and 
the very foundation of all government; HOPE, which is STRENGTH, and insures 
success; and CHARITY, which is BEAUTY, and alone makes animated, united effort 
possible. These forces are within the reach of all men; and an association of men, 
actuated by them, ought to exercise an immense power in the world. If Masonry does 
not, it is because she has ceased to possess them. Wisdom in the man or statesman, in king or priest, largely consists in the due 
appreciation of these forces; and upon the general non-appreciation of some of them the 
fate of nations often depends. What hecatombs of lives often hang upon the not weighing 
or not sumciently weighing the force of an idea, such as, for example, the reverence for aflag, or the blind attachment to a form or constitution of government! What errors in political economy and statesmanship are committed in consequence of 
the over-estimation or under-estimation of particular values, or the non-estimation of 
some among them ! Everything, it is asserted, is the product of human labor; but the gold 
or the diamond which one accidentally finds without labor is not so. What is the value of 
the labor bestowed by the husbandman upon his crops, compared with the value of the 
sunshine and rain, without which his labor avails nothing? Commerce carried on by the 
labor of man, adds to the value of the products of the field, the mine, or the workshop, by 
their transportation to different markcts; but how much of this increase is due to the rivers 
down which these products float, to the winds that urge the keels of commerce over the 
ocean ! Who can estimate the value of morality and manliness in a State, of moral worth and 
intellectual knowledge ? These are the sunshine and rain of the State. The winds, with 
their changeable, fickle, fluctuating currents, are apt emblems of the fickle humors of the 
populace, its passions, its heroic impulses, its enthusiasms. Woe to the statesman who 
does not estimate these as values ! Even music and song are sometimes found to have an incalculable value. Every nation 
has some song of a proven value, more easily counted in lives than dollars. The 
Marseillaise was worth to revolutionary France, who shall say how many thousand men? Peace also is a great element of prosperity and wealth; a value not to be calculated. Social intercourse and association of men in beneficent Orders have a value not to be 
estimated in coin. The illustrious examples of the Past of a nation, the memories and 
immortal thoughts of her great and wise thinkers, statesmen, and heroes, are the 
invaluable legacy of that Past to the Present and Future.Social intercourse and association of men in beneficent Orders have a value not to be 
estimated in coin. The illustrious examples of the Past of a nation, the memories and 
immortal thoughts of her great and wise thinkers, statesmen, and heroes, are the 
invaluable legacy of that Past to the Present and Future. And all these have not only the 
values of the loftier and more excellent and priceless kind, but also an actual money-
value, since it is only when co-operating with or aided or enabled by these, that human 
labor creates wealth. They are of the chief elements of material wealth, as they are of 
national manliness, heroism., glory, prosperity, and immortal renown. Providence has appointed the three great disciplines of War, the Monarchy and the 
Priesthood, all that the CAMP, the PALACE, and the TEMPLE may symbolize, to train 
the multitudes forward to intelligent and premeditated combinations for all the great 
purposes of society. The result will at length be free governments among men, when 
virtue and intelligence become qualities of the multitudes; but for ignorance such 
governments are impossible. Man advances only by degrees. The removal of one 
pressing calamity gives courage to attempt the removal of the remaining evils, rendering 
men more sensitive to them, or perhaps sensitive for the first time. Serfs that writhe 
under the whip are not disquieted about tbeir political rights; manumitted from personal 
slavery, they be come sensitive to political oppression. Liberated from arbitrary power, 
and governed by the law alone, they begin to scrutinize the law itself, and desire to be 
governed, not only by law, but by what they deem the best law.There is a seeming identity between his will that 
moves other men, and the Creative Will whose action seems so incomprehensible. It is 
the men of will and action, not the men of pure intellect, that govern the world. Finally, the three greatest moral forces are FAITH, which is the only true WISDOM, and 
the very foundation of all government; HOPE, which is STRENGTH, and insures 
success; and CHARITY, which is BEAUTY, and alone makes animated, united effort 
possible. These forces are within the reach of all men; and an association of men, 
actuated by them, ought to exercise an immense power in the world. If Masonry does 
not, it is because she has ceased to possess them. Wisdom in the man or statesman, in king or priest, largely consists in the due 
appreciation of these forces; and upon the general non-appreciation of some of them the 
fate of nations often depends. What hecatombs of lives often hang upon the not weighing 
or not sumciently weighing the force of an idea, such as, for example, the reverence for a

Serfs that writhe 
under the whip are not disquieted about tbeir political rights; manumitted from personal 
slavery, they be come sensitive to political oppression. Liberated from arbitrary power, 
and governed by the law alone, they begin to scrutinize the law itself, and desire to be 
governed, not only by law, but by what they deem the best law. And when the civil or 
temporal despotism has been set aside, and the municipal law has been moulded on the 
principles of an enlightened jurisprudence, they may wake to the discovery that they are 
living under some priestly or ecclesiastical despotism, and become desirous of working a 
reformation there also. It is quite true that the advance of humanity is slow, and that it often pauses and 
retrogrades. In the kingdoms of the earth we do not see despotisms retiring and yielding 
the ground to self-governing communities. We do not see the churches and priesthoods 
of Christendom relinquishing their old task of governing men by imaginary terrors. Nowhere do we see a populace that could be safely manumitted from such a 
government. We do not see the great religious teachers aiming to discover truth for 
themselves and for others; but still ruling the world, and contented and compelled to rule 
the world, by whatever dogma is already accredited; themselves as much bound downby this necessity to govern, as the populace by their need of government. Poverty in all 
its most hideous forms still exists in the great cities; and the cancer of pauperism has its 
roots in the hearts of kingdoms. Men there take no measure of their wants and their own 
power to supply them, but live and multiply like the beasts of the field,--Providence 
having apparently ceased to care for them. Intelligence never visits these, or it makes its 
appearance as some new development of villainy. War has not ceased; still there are 
battles and sieges. Homes are still unhappy, and tears and anger aud spite make hells 
where there should be heavens. So much the more necessity for Masonry ! So much 
wider the field of its labors ! So much the more need for it to begin to be true to itself, to 
revive from its asphyxia, to repent of its apostasy to its true creed ! Undoubtedly, labor and death and the sexual passion are essential and permanent 
conditions of human existence, and render perfection and a millennium on earth 
impossible. Always,--it is the decree of Fate !--the vast majority of men must toil to live, 
and cannot find time to cultivate the intelligence. Man, knowing he is to die, will not 
sacrifice the present enjoyment for a greater one in the future. The love of woman cannot 
die out; and it has a terrible and uncontrollable fate, increased by the refinements of 
civilization. Woman is the veritable syren or goddess of the young. But society can be 
improved; and free government is possible for States; and freedom of thought and 
conscience is no longer wholly utopian. Already we see that Emperors prefer to be 
elected by universal suffrage; that States are conveyed to Empires by vote; and that 
Empires are administered with something of the spirit of a Republic, being little else than 
democracies with a single head, ruling through one man, one representative, instead of 
an assembly of representatives.But society can be 
improved; and free government is possible for States; and freedom of thought and 
conscience is no longer wholly utopian. Already we see that Emperors prefer to be 
elected by universal suffrage; that States are conveyed to Empires by vote; and that 
Empires are administered with something of the spirit of a Republic, being little else than 
democracies with a single head, ruling through one man, one representative, instead of 
an assembly of representatives. And if Priesthoods still govern, they now come before 
the laity to prove, by stress of argument, that they ougllt to govern. They are obliged to 
evoke the very reason which they are bent on supplanting. Accordingly, men become daily more free, because the freedom of the man lies in his 
reason. He can reflect upon his own future conduct, and summon up its consequences; 
he can take wide views of human life, and lay down rules for constant guidance. Thus he 
is relieved of the tyranny of sense and passion, and enabled at any time to live according 
to the whole light of the knowledge that is within him, instead of being driven, like a dry 
leaf on the wings of the wind, by every present impulse. Herein lies the freedom of the 
man as regarded in connection with the necessity imposed by the omnipotence and fore-
knowledge of God. So much light, so much liberty. When emperor and church appeal to 
reason there is naturally universal suffrage. Therefore no one need lose courage, nor believe that labor in the cause of Progress will 
be labor wasted. There is no waste in nature, either of Matter, Force, Act, or Thought. A 
Thought is as much the end of life as an Action; and a single Thought sometimes works 
greater results than a Revolution, even Revolutions themselves. Still there should not be 
divorce between Thought and Action. The true Thought is that in which life culminates. But all wise and true Thought produces Action.Serfs that writhe 
under the whip are not disquieted about tbeir political rights; manumitted from personal 
slavery, they be come sensitive to political oppression. Liberated from arbitrary power, 
and governed by the law alone, they begin to scrutinize the law itself, and desire to be 
governed, not only by law, but by what they deem the best law. And when the civil or 
temporal despotism has been set aside, and the municipal law has been moulded on the 
principles of an enlightened jurisprudence, they may wake to the discovery that they are 
living under some priestly or ecclesiastical despotism, and become desirous of working a 
reformation there also. It is quite true that the advance of humanity is slow, and that it often pauses and 
retrogrades. In the kingdoms of the earth we do not see despotisms retiring and yielding 
the ground to self-governing communities. We do not see the churches and priesthoods 
of Christendom relinquishing their old task of governing men by imaginary terrors. Nowhere do we see a populace that could be safely manumitted from such a 
government. We do not see the great religious teachers aiming to discover truth for 
themselves and for others; but still ruling the world, and contented and compelled to rule 
the world, by whatever dogma is already accredited; themselves as much bound down

The true Thought is that in which life culminates. But all wise and true Thought produces Action. It is generative, like the light; and light 
and the deep shadow of the passing cloud are the gifts of the prophets of the race. Knowledge, laboriously acquired, and inducing habits of sound Thought,--the reflective 
character,--must necessarily be rare. The multitude of laborers cannot acquire it. Most 
men attain to a very low standard of it. It is incompatible with the ordinary and 
indispensable avocations of life. A whole world of error as well as of labor, go to make 
one reflective man. In the most advanced nation of Europe there are more ignorant than 
wise, more poor than rich, more autornatic laborers, the mere creatures of habit, than 
reasoning and reflective men. The proportion is at least a thousand to one. Unanimity of 
opinion is so obtained. It only exists among the multitude who do not think, and the 
political or spiritual priesthood who think for that multitude, who think how to guide and 
govern them. When men begin to reflect, they begin to differ. The great problem is to find 
guides who will not seek to be tyrants. This is needed even more in respect to the heart 
than the head. Now, every man earns his special share of the produce of human labor, 
by an incessant scramble, by trickery and deceit. Useful knowledge, honorably acquired, 
is too often used after a fashion not honest or reasonable, so that the studies of youth 
are far more noble than the practices of manhood. The labor of the farmer in his fields,the generous returns of the earth, the benignant and favoring skies, tend to make him 
earnest, provident, and grateful; the education of the market-place makes him querulous, 
crafty, envious, and an intolerable niggard. Masonry seeks to be this beneficent, unambitious, disinterested guide; and it is the very 
condition of all great structures that the sound of the hammer and the clink of the trowel 
should be always heard in some part of the building. With faith in man, hope for the 
future of humanity, loving-kindness for our fellows, Masonry and the Mason must always 
work and teach. Let each do that for which he is best fitted. The teacher also is a 
workman. Praiseworthy as the active navigator is, who comes and goes and makes one 
clime partake of the treasures of the other, and one to share the treasures of all, he who 
keeps the beacon-light upon the hill is also at his post. Masonry has already helped cast down some idols from their pedestals, and grind to 
impalpable dust some of the links of the chains that held men's souls in bondage. That 
there has been progress needs no other demonstration than that you may now reason 
with men, and urge upon them, without danger of the rack or stake, that no doctrines can 
be apprehended as truths if they contradict each other, or contradict other truths given us 
by God. Long before the Reformation, a monk, who had found his way to heresy without 
the help of Martin Luther, not venturine to breathe aloud into any living ear his anti-papal 
and treasonable doctrines, wrote them on parchment, and sealing up theperilous record, 
hid it in the massive walls of his monastery. There was no friend or brother to whom he 
could intrust his secret or pour forth his soul. It was some consolation to imagine that in a 
future age some one might find the parchment, and the seed be found not to have been 
sown in vain. What if the truth should have to lie dormant as long before germinating as 
the wheat in the Egyptian mummy ?It was some consolation to imagine that in a 
future age some one might find the parchment, and the seed be found not to have been 
sown in vain. What if the truth should have to lie dormant as long before germinating as 
the wheat in the Egyptian mummy ? Speak it, nevertheless, again and again, and let it 
take its chance ! The rose of Jericho grows in the sandy deserts of Arabia and on the Syrian housetops. Scarcely six inches high, it loses its leaves after the flowering season, and dries up into 
the form of a ball. Then it is uprooted by the winds, and carried, blown, or tossed across 
the desert, into the sea. There, feeling the contact of the water, it unfolds itself, expands 
its branches, and expels its seeds from their seed-vessels. These, when saturated with 
water, are carried by the tide and laid on the sea-shore. Many are lost, as many 
individual lives of men are useless. But many are thrown back again from the sea-shore 
into the desert, where, by the virtue of the sea-water that they have imbibed, the roots 
and leaves sprout and they grow into fruitful plants, which will, in their turns, like their 
ancestors, be whirled into the sea. God will not be less careful to provide for the 
germination of the truths you may boldly utter forth. "Cast," He has said, "thy bread upon 
the waters, and after many days it shall return to thee again." 
Initiation does not change: we find it again and again, and always the same, through all 
the ages. The last disciples of Pascalis Martinez are still the children of Orpheus; but 
they adore the realizer of the antique philosophy, the Incarnate Word of the Christians. Pythagoras, the great divulger of the philosophy of numbers, visited all the sanctuaries of 
the world. He went into Judaea, where he procured himself to be circumcised, that he 
might be admitted to the secrets of the Kabalah, which the prophets Ezekiel and Daniel, 
not without some reservations, communicated to him.The true Thought is that in which life culminates. But all wise and true Thought produces Action. It is generative, like the light; and light 
and the deep shadow of the passing cloud are the gifts of the prophets of the race. Knowledge, laboriously acquired, and inducing habits of sound Thought,--the reflective 
character,--must necessarily be rare. The multitude of laborers cannot acquire it. Most 
men attain to a very low standard of it. It is incompatible with the ordinary and 
indispensable avocations of life. A whole world of error as well as of labor, go to make 
one reflective man. In the most advanced nation of Europe there are more ignorant than 
wise, more poor than rich, more autornatic laborers, the mere creatures of habit, than 
reasoning and reflective men. The proportion is at least a thousand to one. Unanimity of 
opinion is so obtained. It only exists among the multitude who do not think, and the 
political or spiritual priesthood who think for that multitude, who think how to guide and 
govern them. When men begin to reflect, they begin to differ. The great problem is to find 
guides who will not seek to be tyrants. This is needed even more in respect to the heart 
than the head. Now, every man earns his special share of the produce of human labor, 
by an incessant scramble, by trickery and deceit. Useful knowledge, honorably acquired, 
is too often used after a fashion not honest or reasonable, so that the studies of youth 
are far more noble than the practices of manhood. The labor of the farmer in his fields,

Pythagoras, the great divulger of the philosophy of numbers, visited all the sanctuaries of 
the world. He went into Judaea, where he procured himself to be circumcised, that he 
might be admitted to the secrets of the Kabalah, which the prophets Ezekiel and Daniel, 
not without some reservations, communicated to him. Then, not without some difficulty, 
he succeeded in being admitted to the Egyptian initiation, upon the recommendation of 
King Amasis. The power of his genius supplied the deficiencies of the imperfect 
communications of the Hierophants, and he himself became a Master and a Revealer. Pythagoras defined God: a Living and Absolute Verity clothed with Light. He said that the Word was Number manifested by Form. He made all descend from the Tetyactys, that is to say, from the Quaternary.God, he said again, is the Supreme Music, the nature of which is Harmony. Pythagoras gave the magistrates of Crotona this great religious, political and social 
precept: 
"There is no evil that is not preferable to Anarchy." 
Pythagoras said, "Even as there are three divine notions and free intelligible regions, so 
there is a triple word, for the Hierarehical Order always manifests itself by threes. There 
are the word simple, the word hieroglyphical, and the word symbolic: in other terms, 
there are the word that expresses, the word that conceals, and the word that signifies; 
the whole hieratic intelligence is in the perfect knowledge of these three degrees." 
Pythagoras enveloped doctrine with symbols, but carefully eschewed personifications 
and images, which, he thought, sooner or later produced idolatry. The Holy Kabalah, or tradition of the children of Seth, was carried from Chaldcea by 
Abraham, taught to the Egyptian priesthood by Joseph, recovered and purified by Moses, 
concealed under symbols in the Bible, revealed by the Saviour to Saint John, and 
contained, entire, under hieratic figures analogous to those of all antiquity, in the 
Apocalypse of that Apostle. The Kabalists consider God as the Intelligent, Animated, Living Infinite. He is not, for 
them, either the aggregate of existences, or existence in the abstract, or a being 
philosophically definable. He is in all, distinct from all, and greater than all. His name 
even is ineffable; and yet this name only expresses the human ideal of His divinity. What 
God is in Himself, it is not given to man to comprehend. God is the absolute of Faith; but the absolute of Reason is BEING, "I am that I am," is a 
wretched translation. Being, Existence, is by itself, and because it Is. The reason of Being, is Being itself.Pythagoras, the great divulger of the philosophy of numbers, visited all the sanctuaries of 
the world. He went into Judaea, where he procured himself to be circumcised, that he 
might be admitted to the secrets of the Kabalah, which the prophets Ezekiel and Daniel, 
not without some reservations, communicated to him. Then, not without some difficulty, 
he succeeded in being admitted to the Egyptian initiation, upon the recommendation of 
King Amasis. The power of his genius supplied the deficiencies of the imperfect 
communications of the Hierophants, and he himself became a Master and a Revealer. Pythagoras defined God: a Living and Absolute Verity clothed with Light. He said that the Word was Number manifested by Form. He made all descend from the Tetyactys, that is to say, from the Quaternary.

Being, Existence, is by itself, and because it Is. The reason of Being, is Being itself. We 
may inquire, "Why does something exist?" that is, "Why does such or such a thing exist?" 
But we cannot, without being absurd, ask, "Why Is Being?" That would be to suppose 
Being before Being. If Being had a cause, that cause would necessarily Be; that is, the 
cause and effect would be identical. Reason and science demonstrate to us that the modes of Existence and Being balance 
each other in equilibrium according to harmonious and hierarchic laws. But a hierarchy is 
synthetized, in ascending, and becomes ever more and more monarchial. Yet the reason 
cannot pause at a simle chief, without being alarmed at the abysses which it seems to 
leave above this Supreme Monarch. Therefore it is silent, and gives place to the Faith it 
adores. What is certain, even for science and the reason, is, that the idea of God is the grandest, 
the most holy, and the most useful of all the aspirations of man; that upon this belief 
morality reposes, with its eternal sanction. This belief, then, is in humanity, the most real 
of the phenomena of being; and if it were false, nature would affirm the absurd; 
nothingness would give form to life, and God would at the same time be and not be. It is to this philosophic and incontestable reality, which is termed The Idea of God, that 
the Kabalists give a name. In this name all others are contained. Its cyphers contain all 
the numbers; and the hieroglyphics of its letters express all the laws and all the things of 
nature. BEING IS BEING: the reason of Being is in Being: in the Beginning is the Word, and the 
Word in logic formulated Speech, the spoken Reason; the Word is in God, and is GodHimself, manifested to the Intelligence. Here is what is above all the philosophies. This 
we must believe, under the penalty of never truly knowing anything, and relapsing into 
the absurd skepticism of Pyrrho. The Priesthood, custodian of Faith, wholly rests upon 
this basis of knowledge, and it is in its teachings we must recognize the Divine Principle 
of the Eternal Word. Light is not Spirit, as the Indian Hierophants believed it to be; but only the instrument of 
the Spirit. It is not the body of the Protoplastes, as the Theurgists of the school of 
Alexandria taught, but the first physical manifestation of the Divine afflatus. God eternally 
creates it, and man, in the image of God, modifies and seems to multiply it. The high magic is styled "The Sacerdotal Art," and "The Royal Art." In Egypt, Greece, 
and Rome, it could not but share the greatnesses and decadences of the Priesthood and 
of Royalty. Every philosophy hostile to the national worship and to its mysteries, was of 
necessity hostile to the great political powers, whichlose their grandeur, if they cease, in 
the eyes of the multitudes, to be the images of the Divine Power. Every Crown is 
shattered, when it clashes against the Tiara. Plato, writing to Dionysius the Younger, in regard to the nature of the First Principle, 
says: "I must write to you in enigmas, so that if my letter be intercepted by land or sea, he 
who shall read it may in no degree comprehend it." And then he says, "All things 
surround their King; they are, on account of Him, and He alone is the cause of good 
things, Second for the Seconds and Third for the Thirds." 
There is in these few words a complete summary of the Theology of the Sephiroth. "The 
King" is AINSOPH, Being Supreme and Absolute. From this centre, which is everywhere, 
all things ray forth; but we especially conceive of it in three manners and in three different 
spheres."The 
King" is AINSOPH, Being Supreme and Absolute. From this centre, which is everywhere, 
all things ray forth; but we especially conceive of it in three manners and in three different 
spheres. In the Divine world (AZILUTH), which is that of the First Cause, and wherein the 
whole Eternity of Things in the beginning existed as Unity, to be afterward, during 
Eternity uttered forth, clothed with form, and the attributes that constitute them matter, 
the First Principle is Single and First, and yet not the VERY Illimitable Deity, 
incomprehensible, undefinable; but Himself in so far as manifested by the Creative 
Thought. To compare littleness with infinity,--Arkwright, as inventor of the spinning-jenny, 
and not the man Arkwright otherwise and beyond that. All we can know of the Very God 
is, compared to His Wholeness, only as an infinitesimal fraction of a unit, compared with 
an infinity of Units. In the World of Creation, which is that of Second Causes [the Kabalistic World BRIAH], 
the Autocracy of the First Principle is complete, but we conceive of it only as the Cause 
of the Second Causes. Here it is manifested by the Binary, and is the Creative Principle 
passive. Finally: in the third world, YEZIRAH, or of Formation, it is revealed in the perfect 
Form, the Form of Forms, the World, the Supreme Beauty and Excellence, the Created 
Perfection. Thus the Principle is at once the First, the Second, and the Third, since it is 
All in All, the Centre and Cause of all. It is not the genius of Plato that we here admire. We recognize only the exact knowledge of the Initiate. The great Apostle Saint John did not borrow from the philosophy of Plato the opening of 
his Gospel. Plato, on the contrary, drank at the same springs with Saint John and Philo; 
and John in the opening verses of his paraphrase, states the first principles of a dogma 
common to many schools, but in language especially belonging to Bhilo, whom it is 
evident he had read.Being, Existence, is by itself, and because it Is. The reason of Being, is Being itself. We 
may inquire, "Why does something exist?" that is, "Why does such or such a thing exist?" 
But we cannot, without being absurd, ask, "Why Is Being?" That would be to suppose 
Being before Being. If Being had a cause, that cause would necessarily Be; that is, the 
cause and effect would be identical. Reason and science demonstrate to us that the modes of Existence and Being balance 
each other in equilibrium according to harmonious and hierarchic laws. But a hierarchy is 
synthetized, in ascending, and becomes ever more and more monarchial. Yet the reason 
cannot pause at a simle chief, without being alarmed at the abysses which it seems to 
leave above this Supreme Monarch. Therefore it is silent, and gives place to the Faith it 
adores. What is certain, even for science and the reason, is, that the idea of God is the grandest, 
the most holy, and the most useful of all the aspirations of man; that upon this belief 
morality reposes, with its eternal sanction. This belief, then, is in humanity, the most real 
of the phenomena of being; and if it were false, nature would affirm the absurd; 
nothingness would give form to life, and God would at the same time be and not be. It is to this philosophic and incontestable reality, which is termed The Idea of God, that 
the Kabalists give a name. In this name all others are contained. Its cyphers contain all 
the numbers; and the hieroglyphics of its letters express all the laws and all the things of 
nature. BEING IS BEING: the reason of Being is in Being: in the Beginning is the Word, and the 
Word in logic formulated Speech, the spoken Reason; the Word is in God, and is God

The great Apostle Saint John did not borrow from the philosophy of Plato the opening of 
his Gospel. Plato, on the contrary, drank at the same springs with Saint John and Philo; 
and John in the opening verses of his paraphrase, states the first principles of a dogma 
common to many schools, but in language especially belonging to Bhilo, whom it is 
evident he had read. The philosophy of Plato, the greatest of human Revealers, could 
yearn toward the Word made man; the Gospel alone could give him to the world. Doubt, in presence of Being and its harmonies; skepticism, in the face of the eternal 
mathematics and the immutable laws of Life which make the Divinity present and visible 
everywhere, as the Human is known and visible by its utterances of word and act,--is this 
not the most foolish of superstitions, and the most inexcusable as well as the most 
dangerous of all credulities ? Thought, we know, is not a result or consequence of theorganization of matter, of the chemical or other action or reaction of its particles, like 
effervescence and gaseous explosions. On the contrary, the fact that Thought is 
manifested and realized in act human or act divine, proves the existence of an Entity, or 
Unity, that thinks. And the Universe is the Infinite Utterance of one of an infinite number 
of Infinite Thoughts, which cannot but emanate from an Infinite and Thinking Source. The 
cause is always equal, at least, to the effect; and matter cannot think, nor could it cause 
itself, or exist without cause, nor could nothing produce either forces or things; for in void 
nothingness no Forces can inhere. Admit a self-existent Force, and its Intelligence, or an 
Intelligent cause of it is admitted, and at once GOD Is. 
The Hebrew allegory of the Fall of Man, which is but a special variation of a universal 
legend, symbolizes one of the grandest and most universal allegories of science. 
Moral Evil is Falsehood in actions, as Falsehood is Crime in words.Injustice is the essence of Falsehood; and every false word is an injustice. 
Injustice is the death of the Moral Being, as Falsehood is the poison of the Intelligence. 
The perception of the Light is the dawn of the Eternal Life, in Being. The Word of God, 
which creates the Light, seems to be uttered by every Intelligence that can take 
cognizance of Forms and will look. "Let the Light BE! The Light, in fact, exists, in its 
condition of splendor, for those eyes alone that gaze at it; and the Soul, amorous of the 
spectacle of the beauties of the Universe, and applying its attention to that luminous 
writing of the Infinite Book, which is called "The Visible," seems to utter, as God did on 
the dawn of the first day, that sublime and creative word, "BE! LIGHT !" 
It is not beyond the tomb, but in life itself, that we are to seek for the mysteries of death. 
Salvation or reprobation begins here below, and the terrestrial world too has its Heaven 
and its Hell. Always, even here below, virtue is rewarded; always, even here below, vice 
is pwlished; and that which makes us sometimes believe in the impunity of evil-doers is 
that riches, those instruments of good and of evil, seem sometimes to be given them at 
hazard. But woe to unjust men, when they possess the key of gold ! It opens, for them, 
only the gate of the tomb and of Hell. 
All the true Initiates have recognized the usefulness of toil and sorrow. "Sorrow," says a 
German poet, "is the dog of that unknown shepherd who guides the flock of men." To 
learn to suffer, to learn to die, is the discipline of Eternity, the immortal Novitiate. 
The allegorical picture of Cebes, in which the Divine Comedy of Dante was sketched in 
Plato's time, the description whereof has been preserved for us, and which many 
painters of the middle age have reproduced by this description, is a monument at once 
philosophical and magical. It is a most complete moral synthesis, and at the same time 
the most audacious demonstration ever given of the Grand Arcanum, of that secret 
whose revelation would overturn Earth and Heaven. Let no one expect us to give them 
its explanation ! He who passes behind the veil that hides this mystery, understands that 
it is in its very nature inexplicable, and that it is death to those who win it by surprise, as 
well as to him who reveals it. 
This secret is the Royalty of the Sages, the Crown of the Initiate whom we see 
redescend victorious from the summit of Trials, in the fine allegory of Cebes. The Grand 
Arcanun1 makes him master of gold and the light, which are at bottom the same thing, 
he has solved the problem of the quadrature of the circle, he directs the perpetual 
movement, and he possesses the philosophical stone. Here the Adepts will understand 
us. There is neither interruption in the toil of nature, nor gap in her work. The Harmoniesof Heaven correspond to those of Earth, and the Eternal Life accomplishes its evolutions 
in accordance with the same laws as the life of a dog. "God has arranged all things by 
weight, number, and measure," says the Bible; and this luminous doctrine was also that 
of Plato. Humanity has never really had but one religion and one worship. This universal light has 
had its uncertain mirages, its deceitful reflections, and its shadows; but always, after the 
nights of Error, we see it reappear, one and pure like the Sun. The magnificences of worship are the life of religion, and if Christ wishes poor ministers, 
His Sovereign Divinity does not wish paltry altars. Some Protestants have not 
comprehended that worship is a teaching, and that we must not create in the imagination 
of the multitude a mean or miserable God. Those oratories that resemble poorly-
furnished offices or inns, and those worthy ministers clad like notaries or lawyer's clerks, 
do they not necessarily cause religion to be regarded as a mere puritanic formality, and 
God as a Justice of the Peace? We scoff at the Augurs. It is so easy to scoff, and so difficult well to comprehend. Did the 
Deity leave the whole world without Light for two score centuries, to illuminate only a little 
corner of Palestine and a brutal, ignorant, and ungrateful people? Why always 
calumniate God and the Sanctuary ? Were there never any others than rogues among 
the priests? Could no honest and sincere men be found among the Hierophants of Ceres 
or Diana, of Dionusos or Apollo, of Hermes or Mithras ? Were these, then, all deceived, 
like the rest? Who, then, constantly deceived them, without betraying themselves, during 
a series of centuries?--for the cheats are not immortal ! Arago said, that outside of the 
pure mathematics, he who utters the word "impossible," is wanting in prudence and good 
sense.Who, then, constantly deceived them, without betraying themselves, during 
a series of centuries?--for the cheats are not immortal ! Arago said, that outside of the 
pure mathematics, he who utters the word "impossible," is wanting in prudence and good 
sense. The true name of Satan, the Kabalists say, is that of Yahveh reversed; for Satan is not a 
black god, but the negation of God. The Devil is the personification of Atheism or Idolatry. For the Initiates, this is not a Person, but a Force, created for good, but which may serve 
for evil. It is the instrument of Liberty or Free Will. They represent this Force, which 
presides over the physical generation, under the mythologic and horned form of the God 
PAN; thence came the he-goat of the Sabbat, brother of the Ancient Serpent, and the 
Light-bearer or Phosphor, of which the poets have made the false Lucifer of the legend. Gold, to the eyes of the Initiates, is Light condensed. They style the sacred numbers of 
the Kabalah "golden numbers," and the moral teachings of Pythagoras his "golden 
verses." For the same reason, a mysterious book of Apuleius, in which an ass figures 
largely, was called "The Golden Ass." 
The Pagans accused the Christians of worshipping an ass, and they did not invent this 
reproach, but it came from the Samaritan Jews, who, figuring the data of the Kabalah in 
regard to the Divinity by Egyptian symbols, also represented the Intelligence by the figure 
of the Magical Star adored under the name of Remphan, Science under the emblem of 
Anubis, whose name they changed to Nibbas, and the vulgar faith or credulity under the 
figure of Thartac, a god represented with a book, a cloak, and the head of an ass. According to the Samaritan Doctors, Christianity was the reign of Thartac, blind Faith and 
vulgar credulity erected into a universal oracle, and preferred to Intelligence and Science.Injustice is the essence of Falsehood; and every false word is an injustice. 
Injustice is the death of the Moral Being, as Falsehood is the poison of the Intelligence. 
The perception of the Light is the dawn of the Eternal Life, in Being. The Word of God, 
which creates the Light, seems to be uttered by every Intelligence that can take 
cognizance of Forms and will look. "Let the Light BE! The Light, in fact, exists, in its 
condition of splendor, for those eyes alone that gaze at it; and the Soul, amorous of the 
spectacle of the beauties of the Universe, and applying its attention to that luminous 
writing of the Infinite Book, which is called "The Visible," seems to utter, as God did on 
the dawn of the first day, that sublime and creative word, "BE! LIGHT !" 
It is not beyond the tomb, but in life itself, that we are to seek for the mysteries of death. 
Salvation or reprobation begins here below, and the terrestrial world too has its Heaven 
and its Hell. Always, even here below, virtue is rewarded; always, even here below, vice 
is pwlished; and that which makes us sometimes believe in the impunity of evil-doers is 
that riches, those instruments of good and of evil, seem sometimes to be given them at 
hazard. But woe to unjust men, when they possess the key of gold ! It opens, for them, 
only the gate of the tomb and of Hell. 
All the true Initiates have recognized the usefulness of toil and sorrow. "Sorrow," says a 
German poet, "is the dog of that unknown shepherd who guides the flock of men." To 
learn to suffer, to learn to die, is the discipline of Eternity, the immortal Novitiate. 
The allegorical picture of Cebes, in which the Divine Comedy of Dante was sketched in 
Plato's time, the description whereof has been preserved for us, and which many 
painters of the middle age have reproduced by this description, is a monument at once 
philosophical and magical. It is a most complete moral synthesis, and at the same time 
the most audacious demonstration ever given of the Grand Arcanum, of that secret 
whose revelation would overturn Earth and Heaven. Let no one expect us to give them 
its explanation ! He who passes behind the veil that hides this mystery, understands that 
it is in its very nature inexplicable, and that it is death to those who win it by surprise, as 
well as to him who reveals it. 
This secret is the Royalty of the Sages, the Crown of the Initiate whom we see 
redescend victorious from the summit of Trials, in the fine allegory of Cebes. The Grand 
Arcanun1 makes him master of gold and the light, which are at bottom the same thing, 
he has solved the problem of the quadrature of the circle, he directs the perpetual 
movement, and he possesses the philosophical stone. Here the Adepts will understand 
us. There is neither interruption in the toil of nature, nor gap in her work. The Harmonies

They style the sacred numbers of 
the Kabalah "golden numbers," and the moral teachings of Pythagoras his "golden 
verses." For the same reason, a mysterious book of Apuleius, in which an ass figures 
largely, was called "The Golden Ass." 
The Pagans accused the Christians of worshipping an ass, and they did not invent this 
reproach, but it came from the Samaritan Jews, who, figuring the data of the Kabalah in 
regard to the Divinity by Egyptian symbols, also represented the Intelligence by the figure 
of the Magical Star adored under the name of Remphan, Science under the emblem of 
Anubis, whose name they changed to Nibbas, and the vulgar faith or credulity under the 
figure of Thartac, a god represented with a book, a cloak, and the head of an ass. According to the Samaritan Doctors, Christianity was the reign of Thartac, blind Faith and 
vulgar credulity erected into a universal oracle, and preferred to Intelligence and Science. Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemais, a great Kabalist, but of doubtful orthodoxy, wrote: 
"The people will always mock at things easy to be misunderstood; it must needs have 
impostures." 
"A Spirit," he said, "that loves wisdom and contemplates the Trufh close at hand, isforced to disguise it, to induce the multitudes to accept it.... Fictions are necessary to the 
people, and the Truth becomes deadly to those who are not strong enough to 
contemplate it in all its brilliance. If the sacerdotal laws allowed the reservation of 
judgments and the allegory of words, I would accept the proposed dignity on condition 
that I might be a philosopher at home, and abroad a narrator of apologues and 
parables..... In fact, what can there be in common between the vile multitude and sublime 
wisdom? The truth must be kept secret, and the masses need a teaching proportioned to 
their imperfect reason." 
Moral disorders produce physical ugliness, and in some sort realize those frightful faces 
which tradition assigns to the demons. The first Druids were the true children of the Magi, and their initiation came from Egypt 
and Chaldaea, that is to say, from the pure sources of the primitive Kabalah. They 
adored the Trinity under the names of Isis or Hesus, the Supreme Harmony; of Belerl or 
Bel, which in Assyrian means Lord, a name corresponding to that of ADONAI; and of 
Camul or Camael, a name that in the Kabalah personifies the Divine Justice. Below this 
triangle of Light they supposed a divine reflection, also composed of three personified 
rays: first, Teutates or Teuth, the same as the Thoth of the Egyptians, the Word, or the 
Intelligence formulated; then Force and Beauty, whose names varied like their emblems. Finally, they completed the sacred Septenary by a mysterious image that represented 
the progress of the dogma and its future realizations.Below this 
triangle of Light they supposed a divine reflection, also composed of three personified 
rays: first, Teutates or Teuth, the same as the Thoth of the Egyptians, the Word, or the 
Intelligence formulated; then Force and Beauty, whose names varied like their emblems. Finally, they completed the sacred Septenary by a mysterious image that represented 
the progress of the dogma and its future realizations. This was a young girl veiled, 
holding a child in her arms; and they dedicated this image to "The Virgin who will become 
a mother;--Virgini pariturae." 
Hertha or Wertha, the young Isis of Gaul, Queen of Heaven, the Virgin who was to bear a 
child, held the spindle of the Fates, filled with wool half white and half black; because she 
presides over all forms and all symbols, and weaves the garment of the Ideas. One of the most mysterious pantacles of the Kabalah, contained in the Enchiridion of Leo 
III., represents an equilateral triangle reversed, inscribed in a double circle. On the 
triangle are written, in such manner as to form the prophetic Tau, the two Hebrew words 
so often found appended to the Ineffable Name, and ALOHAYIM, or the Powers, and 
TSABAOTH, or the starry Armies and their guiding spirits; words also which symbolize 
the Equilibrium of the Forces of Nature and the Harmony of Numbers. To the three sides 
of the triangle belong the three great Names IAHAVEH, ADONAI, and AGLA. Above the 
first is written in Latin, Formatio, above the second Reformatio, and above the third, 
Transformatio. So Creation is ascribed to the FATHER, Redemption or Reformation to 
the SON, and Sanctification or Transformation to the HOLY SPIRIT, answering unto the 
mathematical laws of Action, Reaction, and Equilibrium.They style the sacred numbers of 
the Kabalah "golden numbers," and the moral teachings of Pythagoras his "golden 
verses." For the same reason, a mysterious book of Apuleius, in which an ass figures 
largely, was called "The Golden Ass." 
The Pagans accused the Christians of worshipping an ass, and they did not invent this 
reproach, but it came from the Samaritan Jews, who, figuring the data of the Kabalah in 
regard to the Divinity by Egyptian symbols, also represented the Intelligence by the figure 
of the Magical Star adored under the name of Remphan, Science under the emblem of 
Anubis, whose name they changed to Nibbas, and the vulgar faith or credulity under the 
figure of Thartac, a god represented with a book, a cloak, and the head of an ass. According to the Samaritan Doctors, Christianity was the reign of Thartac, blind Faith and 
vulgar credulity erected into a universal oracle, and preferred to Intelligence and Science. Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemais, a great Kabalist, but of doubtful orthodoxy, wrote: 
"The people will always mock at things easy to be misunderstood; it must needs have 
impostures." 
"A Spirit," he said, "that loves wisdom and contemplates the Trufh close at hand, is

Above the 
first is written in Latin, Formatio, above the second Reformatio, and above the third, 
Transformatio. So Creation is ascribed to the FATHER, Redemption or Reformation to 
the SON, and Sanctification or Transformation to the HOLY SPIRIT, answering unto the 
mathematical laws of Action, Reaction, and Equilibrium. IAHAVEH is also, in effect, the 
Genesis or Formation of dogma, by the elementary signification of the four letters of the 
Sacred Tetragram; ADONAI; is the realization of this dogma in the Human Form, in the 
Visible LORD, who is the Son of God or the perfect Man; and AGLA (formed of the 
initials of the four words Ath Gebur Laulaim Adonai) expresses the synthesis of the whole 
dogma and the totality of the Kabali.stic science, clearly indicating by the hieroglyphics of 
which this admirable name is formed the Triple Secret of the Great Work. Masonry, like all the Religions, all the Mysteries, Hermeticism and Alchemy, conceals its 
secrets from all except the Adepts and Sages, or the Elect, and uses false explanations 
and misinterpretations of its symbols to mislead those who deserve only to be misled; to 
conceal the Truth, which it calls Light, from tl1em, and todraw them away from it. Truth is 
not for those who are unworthy or unable to receive it, or would pervert it. So God 
Himself incapacitates many men, by color-blindness, to distinguish colors, and leads the 
masses away from the highest Truth, giving them the power to attain only so much of it 
as it is profitable to them to know. Every age has had a religion suited to its capacity.The Teachers, even of Christianity, are, in general, the most ignorant of the true meaning 
of that which they teach. There is no book of which so little is known as the Bible. To 
most who read it, it is as incomprehensible as the Sohar. 
So Masonry jealously conceals its secrets, and intentionally leads conceited interpreters 
astray. There is no sight under the sun more pitiful and ludicrous at once, than the 
spectacle of the Prestons and the Webbs, not to mention the later incarnations of 
Dullness and Commonplace, undertaking to "explain" the old symbols of Masonry, and 
adding to and "improving" them, or inventing new ones. 
To the Circle inclosing the central point, and itself traced between two parallel lines, a 
figure purely Kabalistic, these persons have added the superimposed Bible, and even 
reared on that the ladder with three or nine rounds, and then given a vapid interpretation 
of the whole, so profoundly absurd as actually to excite admiration.

MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE 
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry , prepared for the 
Supreme Council of the Thirty Third Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: 
Charleston, 1871. 
4º - Secret Master, 5º - Perfect Master, 6º - Intimate Secretary 
7º - Provost and Judge, 8º - Intendant of the Building, 9º - Elu of the NineIV. SECRET MASTER. MASONRY is a succession of allegories, the mere vehicles of great lessons in morality 
and philosophy. You will more fully appreciate its spirit, its object, its purposes, as you 
advance in the different Degrees, which you will find to constitute a great, complete, and 
harmonious system. If you have been disappointed in the first three Degrees, as you have received them, and 
if it has seemed to you that the performance has not come up to the promise, that the 
lessons of morality are not new, and the scientific instruction is but rudimentary, and the 
symbols are imperfectly explained, remember that the ceremonies and lessons of those 
Degrees have been for ages more and more accommodating themselves, by curtailment 
and sinking into commonplace, to the often limited memory and capacity of the Master 
and Instructor, and to the intellect and needs of the Pupil and Initiate; that they have 
come to us from an age when symbols were used, not to reveal but to conceal; when the 
commonest learning was confined to a select few, and the simplest principles of morality 
seemed newly discovered truths; and that these antique and simple Degrees now stand 
like the broken columns of a roofless Druidic temple, in their rude and mutilated 
greatness; in many parts, also, corrupted by time, and disfigured by modern additions 
and absurd interpretations. They are but the entrance to the great Masonic Temple, the 
triple columns of the portico. You have taken the first step over its threshold, the first step toward the inner sanctuary 
and heart of the temple. You are in the path that leads up the slope of the mountain of 
Truth; and it depends upon your secrecy, obedience, and fidelity, whether you will 
advance or remain stationary. Imagine not that you will become indeed a Mason by learning what is commonly called 
the "work," or even by becoming familiar with our traditions. Masonry has a history, a 
literature, a philosophy.MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE 
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry , prepared for the 
Supreme Council of the Thirty Third Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: 
Charleston, 1871. 
4º - Secret Master, 5º - Perfect Master, 6º - Intimate Secretary 
7º - Provost and Judge, 8º - Intendant of the Building, 9º - Elu of the Nine

Imagine not that you will become indeed a Mason by learning what is commonly called 
the "work," or even by becoming familiar with our traditions. Masonry has a history, a 
literature, a philosophy. Its allegories and traditions will teach you much; but much is to 
be sought elsewhere. The streams of learning that now flow full and broad must be 
followed to their heads in the springs that well up in the remote past, and you will there 
find the origin and meaning of Masonry. A few rudimentary lessons in architecture, a few universally admitted maxims of morality, 
a few unimportant traditions, whose real meaning is unknown or misunderstood, will no 
longer satisfy the earnest inquirer after Masonic truth. Let whoso is content with these, 
seek to climb no higher. He who desires to understand the harmonious and beautiful 
proportions of Freemasonry must read, study, reflect, digest, and discriminate. The true 
Mason is an ardent seeker after knowledge; and he knows that both books and the 
antique symbols of Masonry are vessels which come down to us full-freighted with the 
intellectual riches of the Past; and that in the lading of these argosies is much that sheds 
light on the history of Masonry, and proves its claim to be acknowledged the benefactor 
of mankind, born in the very cradle of the race. Knowledge is the most genuine and real of human treasures; for it is Light, as Ignoranceis Darkness. It is the development of the human soul, and its acquisition the growth of the 
soul, which at the birth of man knows nothing, and therefore, in one sense, may be said 
to be nothing. It is the seed, which has in it the power to grow, to acquire, and by 
acquiring to be developed, as the seed is developed into the shoot, the plant, the tree. "We need not pause at the common argument that by learning man excelleth man, in that 
wherein man excelleth beasts; that by learning man ascendeth to the heavens and their 
motions, where in body he cannot come, and the like. Let us rather regard the dignity and 
excellency of knowledge and learning in that whereunto man's nature doth most aspire, 
which is immortality or continuance. For to this tendeth generation, and raising of Houses 
and Families; to this buildings, foundations, and monuments; to this tendeth the desire of 
memory, fame, and celebration, and in effect the strength of all other human desires." 
That our influences shall survive us, and be living forces when we are in our graves; and 
no merely that our names shall be remembered; but rather that our works shall be read, 
our acts spoken of, our names recollected an mentioned when we are dead, as 
evidences that those influences live and rule, sway and control some portion of mankind 
and of the world,--this is the aspiration of the human soul. "We see then how far the 
monuments of genius and learning are more durable than monuments of power or of the 
hands. For have not the verses of Homer continued twenty-five hundred years or more, 
without the loss of a syllable or letter, during which time infinite palaces, temples, castles, 
cities, have decayed and been demolished? It is no possible to have the true pictures or 
statues of Cyrus, Alexander Caesar, no, nor of the Kings or great personages of much 
late years; for the originals cannot last, and the copies cannot but lose of the life and 
truth.For have not the verses of Homer continued twenty-five hundred years or more, 
without the loss of a syllable or letter, during which time infinite palaces, temples, castles, 
cities, have decayed and been demolished? It is no possible to have the true pictures or 
statues of Cyrus, Alexander Caesar, no, nor of the Kings or great personages of much 
late years; for the originals cannot last, and the copies cannot but lose of the life and 
truth. But the images of men's genius and knowledge remain in books, exempted from 
the wrong of time, and capable of perpetual renovation. Neither are they fitly to be called 
images, because they generate still, and cast their seeds in the minds of others, 
provoking and causing infinite actions and opinions in succeeding ages; so that if the 
invention of the ship was thought so noble, which carrieth riches and commodities from 
place to place, and consociateth the most remote regions in participation of their fruits, 
how much more are letters to be magnified which, as ships, pass through the vast seas 
of time, and make age so distant to participate of the wisdom, illumination, and 
inventions, the one of the other." 
To learn, to attain knowledge, to be wise, is a necessity for ever truly noble soul; to 
teach, to communicate that knowledge, to share that wisdom with others, and not 
churlishly to lock up his exchequer, and place a sentinel at the door to drive away the 
needy, is equally an impulse of a noble nature, and the worthies work of man. "There was a little city," says the Preacher, the son of David "and few men within it; and 
there came a great King against it and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it. Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet 
no man remembered that same poor man.Imagine not that you will become indeed a Mason by learning what is commonly called 
the "work," or even by becoming familiar with our traditions. Masonry has a history, a 
literature, a philosophy. Its allegories and traditions will teach you much; but much is to 
be sought elsewhere. The streams of learning that now flow full and broad must be 
followed to their heads in the springs that well up in the remote past, and you will there 
find the origin and meaning of Masonry. A few rudimentary lessons in architecture, a few universally admitted maxims of morality, 
a few unimportant traditions, whose real meaning is unknown or misunderstood, will no 
longer satisfy the earnest inquirer after Masonic truth. Let whoso is content with these, 
seek to climb no higher. He who desires to understand the harmonious and beautiful 
proportions of Freemasonry must read, study, reflect, digest, and discriminate. The true 
Mason is an ardent seeker after knowledge; and he knows that both books and the 
antique symbols of Masonry are vessels which come down to us full-freighted with the 
intellectual riches of the Past; and that in the lading of these argosies is much that sheds 
light on the history of Masonry, and proves its claim to be acknowledged the benefactor 
of mankind, born in the very cradle of the race. Knowledge is the most genuine and real of human treasures; for it is Light, as Ignorance

"There was a little city," says the Preacher, the son of David "and few men within it; and 
there came a great King against it and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it. Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet 
no man remembered that same poor man. Then said I, wisdom is better than strength 
nevertheless, the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard." If it 
should chance to you, my brother, to do mankind good service, and be rewarded with 
indifference and forgetfulness only, still be not discouraged, but remember the further 
advice of the wise King. "In the morning sow the seed, and in the evening withhold not 
thy hand; for thou knowest not which shall prosper, this or that, or whether both shall be 
alike good." Sow you the seed, whoever reaps. Learn, that you may be enabled to do 
good; and do so because it is right, finding in the act itself ample reward and 
recompense. To attain the truth, and to serve our fellows, our country, and mankind-- this is the noblest 
destiny of man. Hereafter and all your life it is to be your object. If you desire to ascend to 
that destiny, advance! If you have other and less noble objects, and are contented with a 
lower flight, halt here ! let others scale the heights, and Masonry fulfill her mission. If you will advance, gird up your loins for the struggle ! for the way is long and toilsome. Pleasure, all smiles, will beckon you on the one hand, and Indolence will invite you to 
sleep among the flowers, upon the other. Prepare, by secrecy, obedience, and fidelity, to 
resist the allurements of both !Secrecy is indispensable in a Mason of whatever Degree. It is the first and almost the 
only lesson taught to the Entered Apprentice. The obligations which we have each 
assumed toward every Mason that lives, requiring of us the performance of the most 
serious and onerous duties toward those personally unknown to us until they demand our 
aid,-- duties that must be performed, even at the risk of life, or our solemn oaths be 
broken and violated, and we be branded as false Masons and faithless men, teach us 
how profound a folly it would be to betray our secrets to those who, bound to us by no tie 
of common obligation, might, by obtaining them, call on us in their extremity, when the 
urgency of the occasion should allow us no time for inquiry, and the peremptory mandate 
of our obligation compel us to do a brother's duty to a base impostor. The secrets of our brother, when communicated to us, must be sacred, if they be such as 
the law of our country warrants us to keep. We are required to keep none other, when 
the law that we are called on to obey is indeed a law, by having emanated from the only 
source of power, the People. Edicts which emanate from the mere arbitrary will of a 
despotic power, contrary to the law of God or the Great Law of Nature, destructive of the 
inherent rights of man, violative of the right of free thought, free speech, free conscience, 
it is lawful to rebel against and strive to abrogate. For obedience to the Law does not mean submission to tyranny nor that, by a profligate 
sacrifice of every noble feeling, we should offer to despotism the homage of adulation. As 
every new victim falls, we may lift our voice in still louder flattery. We may fall at the 
proud feet, we may beg, as a boon, the honour of kissing that bloody hand which has 
been lifted against the helpless. We may do more we may bring the altar and the 
sacrifice, and implore the God not to ascend too soon to Heaven.We may fall at the 
proud feet, we may beg, as a boon, the honour of kissing that bloody hand which has 
been lifted against the helpless. We may do more we may bring the altar and the 
sacrifice, and implore the God not to ascend too soon to Heaven. This we may do, for 
this we have the sad remembrance that beings of a human form and soul have done. But 
this is all we can do. We can constrain our tongues to be false, our features to bend 
themselves to the semblance of that passionate adoration which we wish to express, our 
knees to fall prostrate; but our heart we cannot constrain. There virtue must still have a 
voice which is not to be drowned by hymns and acclamations; there the crimes which we 
laud as virtues, are crimes still, and he whom we have made a God is the most 
contemptible of mankind; if, indeed, we do not feel, perhaps, that we are ourselves still 
more contemptible. But that law which is the fair expression of the will and judgment of the people, is the 
enactment of the whole and of every individual. Consistent with the law of God and the 
great law of nature, consistent with pure and abstract right as tempered by necessity and 
the general interest, as contra-distinguished from the private interest of individuals, it is 
obligatory upon all, because it is the work of all, the will of all, the solemn judgment of all, 
from which there is no appeal. In this Degree, my brother, you are especially to learn the duty of obedience to that law. There is one true and original law, conformable to reason and to nature, diffused over all, 
invariable, eternal, which calls to the fulfillment of duty and to abstinence from injustice, 
and calls with that irresistible voice which is felt l in all its authority wherever it is heard. This law cannot be abrogated or diminished, or its sanctions affected, by any law of man. A whole senate, a whole people, cannot dissent from its paramount obligation."There was a little city," says the Preacher, the son of David "and few men within it; and 
there came a great King against it and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it. Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet 
no man remembered that same poor man. Then said I, wisdom is better than strength 
nevertheless, the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard." If it 
should chance to you, my brother, to do mankind good service, and be rewarded with 
indifference and forgetfulness only, still be not discouraged, but remember the further 
advice of the wise King. "In the morning sow the seed, and in the evening withhold not 
thy hand; for thou knowest not which shall prosper, this or that, or whether both shall be 
alike good." Sow you the seed, whoever reaps. Learn, that you may be enabled to do 
good; and do so because it is right, finding in the act itself ample reward and 
recompense. To attain the truth, and to serve our fellows, our country, and mankind-- this is the noblest 
destiny of man. Hereafter and all your life it is to be your object. If you desire to ascend to 
that destiny, advance! If you have other and less noble objects, and are contented with a 
lower flight, halt here ! let others scale the heights, and Masonry fulfill her mission. If you will advance, gird up your loins for the struggle ! for the way is long and toilsome. Pleasure, all smiles, will beckon you on the one hand, and Indolence will invite you to 
sleep among the flowers, upon the other. Prepare, by secrecy, obedience, and fidelity, to 
resist the allurements of both !

This law cannot be abrogated or diminished, or its sanctions affected, by any law of man. A whole senate, a whole people, cannot dissent from its paramount obligation. It requires 
no commentator to render it distinctly intelligible nor is it one thing at Rome, another at 
Athens; one thing now, and another in the ages to come; but in all times and in all 
nations, it is, and has been, and will be, one and everlasting;--one as that God, its great 
Author and Promulgator, who is the Common Sovereign of all mankind, is Himself One. No man can disobey it without flying, as it were, from his own bosom, and repudiating his 
nature; and in this very act he will inflict on himself the severest of retributions, even 
though he escape what is regarded as punishment. It is our duty to obey the laws of our country, and to be careful that prejudice or passion, 
fancy or affection, error and illusion, be not mistaken for conscience. Nothing is more 
usual than to pretend conscience in all the actions of man which are public and cannot 
be concealed. The disobedient refuse to submit to the laws, and they also in many casespretend conscience; and so disobedience and rebellion become conscience, in which 
there is neither knowledge nor revelation, nor truth nor charity, nor reason nor religion. Conscience is tied to laws. Right or sure conscience is right reason reduced to practice, 
and conducting moral actions, while perverse conscience is seated in the fancy or 
affections--a heap of irregular principles and irregular defects-- and is the same in 
conscience as deformity is in the body, or peevishness in the affections. It is not enough 
that the conscience be taught by nature; but it must be taught by God, conducted by 
reason, made operative by discourse, assisted by choice, instructed by laws and sober 
principles; and then it is right, and it may be sure. All the general measures of justice, are 
the laws of God, and therefore they constitute the general rules of government for the 
conscience; but necessity also hath a large voice in the arrangement of human affairs, 
and the disposal of human relations, and the dispositions of human laws; and these 
general measures, like a great river into little streams, are deduced into little rivulets and 
particularities, by the laws and customs, by the sentences and agreements of men, and 
by the absolute despotism of necessity, that will not allow perfect and abstract justice and 
equity to be the sole rule of civil government in an imperfect world; and that must needs 
be law which is for the greatest good of the greatest number. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it. It is better thou shouldest not vow 
than thou shouldest vow and not pay. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart 
be hasty to utter anything before God for God is in Heaven, and thou art upon earth; 
therefore let thy words be few. Weigh well what it is you promise; but once the promise 
and pledge are given remember that he who is false to his obligation will be false to his 
family, his friends, his country, and his God.Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart 
be hasty to utter anything before God for God is in Heaven, and thou art upon earth; 
therefore let thy words be few. Weigh well what it is you promise; but once the promise 
and pledge are given remember that he who is false to his obligation will be false to his 
family, his friends, his country, and his God. Fides servailda est Faith plighted is ever to be kept, was a maxim and an axiom even 
among pagans. The virtuous Roman said, either let not that which seems expedient be 
base, or if it be base, let it not seem expedient. What is there which that so-called 
expediency can bring, so valuable as that which it takes away, if it deprives you of the 
name of a good man and robs you of your integrity and honour? In all ages, he who 
violates his plighted word has been held unspeakably base. The word of a Mason, like 
the word of a knight in the times of chivalry, once given must be sacred; and the 
judgment of his brothers, upon him who violates his pledge, should be stern as the 
judgments of the Roman Censors against him who violated his oath. Good faith is 
revered among Masons as it was among the Romans, who placed its statue in the 
capitol, next to that of Jupiter Maximus Optimus; and we, like them, hold that calamity 
should always be chosen rather than baseness; and with the knights of old, that one 
should always die rather than be dishonoured. Be faithful, therefore, to the promises you make, to the pledges you give, and to the vows 
that you assume, since to break either is base and dishonourable. Be faithful to your family, and perform all the duties of a good father, a good son, a good 
husband, and a good brother.This law cannot be abrogated or diminished, or its sanctions affected, by any law of man. A whole senate, a whole people, cannot dissent from its paramount obligation. It requires 
no commentator to render it distinctly intelligible nor is it one thing at Rome, another at 
Athens; one thing now, and another in the ages to come; but in all times and in all 
nations, it is, and has been, and will be, one and everlasting;--one as that God, its great 
Author and Promulgator, who is the Common Sovereign of all mankind, is Himself One. No man can disobey it without flying, as it were, from his own bosom, and repudiating his 
nature; and in this very act he will inflict on himself the severest of retributions, even 
though he escape what is regarded as punishment. It is our duty to obey the laws of our country, and to be careful that prejudice or passion, 
fancy or affection, error and illusion, be not mistaken for conscience. Nothing is more 
usual than to pretend conscience in all the actions of man which are public and cannot 
be concealed. The disobedient refuse to submit to the laws, and they also in many cases

Be faithful, therefore, to the promises you make, to the pledges you give, and to the vows 
that you assume, since to break either is base and dishonourable. Be faithful to your family, and perform all the duties of a good father, a good son, a good 
husband, and a good brother. Be faithful to your friends; for true friendship is of a nature not only to survive through all 
the vicissitudes of life, but to continue through an endless duration; not only to stand the 
shock of conflicting opinions, and the roar of a revolution that shakes the world, but to 
last when the heavens are no more, and to spring fresh from the ruins of the universe. Be faithful to your country, and prefer its dignity and honour to any degree of popularity 
and honour for yourself; consulting its interest rather than your own, and rather than the 
pleasure and gratification of the people, which are often at variance with their welfare. Be faithful to Masonry, which is to be faithful to the best interests of mankind. Labour, by 
precept and example, to elevate the standard of Masonic character, to enlarge its sphere 
of influence, to popularize its teachings, and to make all men know it for the Great 
Apostle of Peace, Harmony, and Good-will on earth among men; of Liberty, Equality, andFraternity. 
Masonry is useful to all men to the learned, because it affords them the opportunity of 
exercising their talents upon subjects eminently worthy of their attention; to the illiterate, 
because it offers them important instruction; to the young, because it presents them with 
salutary precepts and good examples, and accustoms them to reflect on the proper 
mode of living; to the man of the world, whom it furnishes with noble and useful 
recreation; to the traveller, whom it enables to find friends and brothers in countries 
where else he would be isolated and solitary; to the worthy man in misfortune, to whom it 
gives assistance; to the afflicted, on whom it lavishes consolation; to the charitable man, 
whom it enables to do more good, by uniting with those who are charitable like himself; 
and to all who have souls capable of appreciating its importance, and of enjoying the 
charms of a friendship founded on the same principles of religion, morality, and 
philanthropy. 
A Freemason, therefore, should be a man of honour and of conscience, preferring his 
duty to everything beside, even to his life; independent in his opinions, and of good 
morals, submissive to the laws, devoted to humanity, to his country, to his family; kind 
and indulgent to his brethren, friend of all virtuous men, and ready to assist his fellows by 
all means in his power. 
Thus will you be faithful to yourself, to your fellows, and to God, and thus will you do 
honour to the name and rank of SECRET MASTER; which, like other Masonic honours, 
degrades if it is not deserved.

V. PERFECT MASTER.V. PERFECT MASTER.

The Master Khurum was an industrious and an honest man. What he was employed to 
do he did diligently, and he did it well and faithfully. He received no wages that were not 
his due. Industry and honesty are the virtues peculiarly inculcated in this Degree. They 
are common and homely virtues; but not for that beneath our notice. As the bees do not 
love or respect the drones, so Masonry neither loves nor respects the idle and those who 
live by their wits; and least of all those parasitic acari that live upon themselves. For 
those who are indolent are likely to become dissipated and vicious; and perfect honesty, 
which ought to be the common qualification of all, is more rare than diamonds. To do 
earnestly and steadily, and to do faithfully and honestly that which we have to do--
perhaps this wants but little, when looked at from every point of view, of including the 
whole body of the moral law; and even in their commonest and homeliest application, 
these virtues belong to the character of a Perfect Master.

Idleness is the burial of a living man. For an idle person is so useless to any purposes of 
God and man, that he is like one who is dead, unconcerned in the changes and 
necessities of the world; and he only lives to spend his time, and eat the fruits of the 
earth. Like a vermin or a wolf, when his time comes, he dies and perishes, and in the 
meantime is nought. He neither ploughs nor carries burdens: all that he does is either 
unprofitable or mischievous.

It is a vast work that any man may do, if he never be idle: and it is a huge way that a man 
may go in virtue, if he never go out of his way by a vicious habit or a great crime: and he 
who perpetually reads good books, if his parts be answerable, will have a huge stock of

knowledge.knowledge.

St. Ambrose, and from his example, St. Augustine, divided every day into these tertias of 
employment: eight hours they spent in the necessities of nature and recreation: eight 
hours in charity, in doing assistance to others, dispatching their business, reconciling 
their enmities, reproving their vices, correcting their errors, instructing their ignorance, 
and in transacting the affairs of their dioceses; and the other eight hours they spent in 
study and prayer.

We think, at the age of twenty, that life is much too long for that which we have to learn 
and do; and that there is an almost fabulous distance between our age and that of our 
grandfather. But when, at the age of sixty, if we are fortunate enough to reach it, or 
unfortunate enough, as the case may be, and according as we have profitably invested 
or wasted our time, we halt, and look back along the way we have come, and cast up 
and endeavour to balance our accounts with time and opportunity, we find that we have 
made life much too short, and thrown away a huge portion of our time. Then we, in our 
mind, deduct from the sum total of our years the hours that we have needlessly passed 
in sleep; the working-hours each day, during which the surface of the mind's sluggish 
pool has not been stirred or ruffied by a single thought; the days that we have gladly got 
rid of, to attain some real or fancied object that lay beyond, in the way between us and 
which stood irksomely the intervening days; the hours worse than wasted in follies and 
dissipation, or misspent in useless and unprofitable studies; and we acknowledge, with a 
sigh, that we could have learned and done, in half a score of years well spent, more than 
we have done in all our forty years of manhood.To learn and to do !--this is the soul's work here below. The soul grows as truly as an oak 
grows. As the tree takes the carbon of the air, the dew, the rain, and the light, and the 
food that the earth supplies to its roots, and by its mysterious chemistry transmutes them 
into sap and fibre, into wood and leaf, and flower and fruit, and colour and perfume, so 
the soul imbibes knowledge and by a divine alchemy changes what it learns into its own 
substance, and grows from within outwardly with an inherent force and power like those 
that lie hidden in the grain of wheat.

The soul hath its senses, like the body, that may be cultivated, enlarged, refined, as itself 
grows in stature and proportion; and he who cannot appreciate a fine painting or statue, 
a noble poem, a sweet harmony, a heroic thought, or a disinterested action, or to whom 
the wisdom of philosophy is but foolishness and babble, and the loftiest truths of less 
importance than the price of stocks or cotton, or the elevation of baseness to once, 
merely lives on the level of commonplace, and fitly prides himself upon that inferiority of 
the soul's senses, which is the inferiority and imperfect development of the soul itself.

To sleep little, and to study much; to say little, and to hear and think much; to learn, that 
we may be able to do, and then to do, earnestly and vigorously, whatever may be 
required of us by duty, and by the good of our fellows, our country, and mankind,-- these 
are the duties of every Mason who desires to imitate the Master Khurum.The duty of a Mason as an honest man is plain and easy. It requires of us honesty in 
contracts, sincerity in arming, simplicity in bargaining, and faithfulness in performing. Lie 
not at all, neither in a little thing nor in a great, neither in the substance nor in the 
circumstance, neither in word nor deed: that is, pretend not what is false; cover not what 
is true; and let the measure of your affirmation or denial be the understanding of your 
contractor; for he who deceives the buyer or the seller by speaking what is true, in a 
sense not intended or understood by the other, is a liar and a thief. A Perfect Master 
must avoid that which deceives, equally with that which is false.

Let your prices be according to that measure of good and evil which is established in the 
fame and common accounts of the wisest and most merciful men, skilled in that 
manufacture or commodity; and the gain such, which, without scandal, is allowed to 
persons in all the same circumstances.

In intercourse with others, do not do all which thou mayest lawfully do; but keep 
something within thy power; and, because there is a latitude of gain in buying and selling, 
take not thou the utmost penny that is lawful, or which thou thinkest so; for although it be 
lawful, yet it is not safe; and he who gains all that he can gain lawfully, this year, will 
possibly be tempted, next year, to gain something unlawfully.

Let no man, for his own poverty, become more oppressing and cruel in his bargain; but 
quietly, modestly, diligently, and patiently recommend his estate to God, and follow his 
interest, and leave the success to Him.

Detain not the wages of the hireling; for every degree of detention of it beyond the time, 
is injustice and uncharitableness, and grinds his face till tears and blood come out; but 
pay him exactly according to covenant, or according to his needs.Religiously keep all promises and covenants, though made to your disadvantage, though 
afterward you perceive you might have done better; and let not any precedent act of 
yours be altered by any after-accident. Let nothing make you break your promise, unless 
it be unlawful or impossible; that is, either out of your nature or out of your civil power, 
yourself being under the power of another; or that it be intolerably inconvenient to 
yourself, and of no advantage to another; or that you have leave expressed or 
reasonably presumed.

Let no man take wages or fees for a work that he cannot do, or cannot with probability 
undertake; or in some sense profitably, and with ease, or with advantage manage. Let no 
man appropriate to his own use, what God, by a special mercy, or the Republic, hath 
made common; for that is against both Justice and Charity.

That any man should be the worse for us, and for our direct act, and by our intention, is 
against the rule of equity, of justice, and of charity. We then do not that to others, which 
we would have done to ourselves; for we grow richer upon the ruins of their fortune.

It is not honest to receive anything from another without returning him an equivalent 
therefor. The gamester who wins the money of another is dishonest. There should be no 
such thing as bets and gaming among Masons: for no honest man should desire that for 
nothing which belongs to another. The merchant who sells an inferior article for a sound 
price, the speculator who makes the distresses and needs of others fill his exchequer are 
neither fair nor honest, but base, ignoble, unfit for immortality.It should be the earnest desire of every Perfect Master so to live and deal and act, that 
when it comes to him to die, he may be able to say, and his conscience to adjudge, that 
no man on earth is poorer, because he is richer; that what he hath he has honestly 
earned, and no man can go before God, and claim that by the rules of equity 
administered in His great chancery, this house in which we die, this land we devise to our 
heirs this money that enriches those who survive to bear our name, is his and not ours, 
and we in that forum are only his trustees. For it is most certain that God is just, and will 
sternly enforce every such trust; and that to all whom we despoil, to all whom we 
defraud, to all from whom we take or win anything whatever, without fair consideration 
and equivalent, He will decree a full and adequate compensation.

Be careful, then, that thou receive no wages, here or elsewhere, that are not thy due ! 
For if thou doest, thou wrongst some one, by taking that which in God's chancery 
belongs to him; and whether that which thou takest thus be wealth, or rank, or influence, 
or reputation or affection, thou wilt surely be held to make full satisfaction.

VI. INTIMATE SECRETARY. (Confidential Secretary.)

You are especially taught in this Degree to be zealous and faithful; to be disinterested 
and benevolent; and to act the peacemaker, in case of dissensions, disputes, and 
quarrels among the brethren.Duty is the moral magnetism which controls and guides the true Mason's course over the 
tumultuous seas of life. Whether the stars of honour, reputation, and reward do or do not 
shine, in the light of day or in the darkness of the night of trouble and adversity, in calm 
or storm, that unerring magnet still shows him the true course to steer, and indicates with 
certainty where-away lies the port which not to reach involves shipwreck and dishonour. 
He follows its silent bidding, as the mariner, when land is for many days not in sight, and 
the ocean without path or landmark spreads out all around him, follows the bidding of the 
needle, never doubting that it points truly to the north. To perform that duty, whether the 
performance be rewarded or unrewarded, is his sole care. And it doth not matter, though 
of this performance there may be no witnesses, and though what he does will be forever 
unknown to all mankind.

A little consideration will teach us that Fame has other limits than mountains and oceans; 
and that he who places happiness in the frequent repetition of his name, may spend his 
life in propagating it, without any danger of weeping for new worlds, or necessity of 
passing the Atlantic sea.If, therefore, he who imagines the world to be filled with his actions and praises, shall 
subduct from the number of his encomiasts all those who are placed below the flight of 
fame, and who hear in the valley of life no voice but that of necessity; all those who 
imagine themselves too important to regard him, and consider the mention of his name 
as a usurpation of their time; all who are too much or too little pleased with themselves to 
attend to anything external; all who are attracted by pleasure, or chained down by pain to 
unvaried ideas; all who are withheld from attending his triumph by different pursuits; and 
all who slumber in universal negligence; he will find his renown straitened by nearer 
bounds than the rocks of Caucasus; and perceive that no man can be venerable or 
formidable, but to a small part of his fellow-creatures. And therefore, that we may not 
languish in our endeavors after excellence, it is necessary that, as Africanus counsels his 
descendants, we raise our eyes to higher prospects, and contemplate our future and 
eternal state, without giving up our hearts to the praise of crowds, or fixing our hopes on 
such rewards as human power can bestow.

We are not born for ourselves alone; and our country claims her share, and our friends 
their share of us. As all that the earth produces is created for the use of man, so men are 
created for the sake of men, that they may mutually do good to one another. In this we 
ought to take nature for our guide, and throw into the public stock the ounces of general 
utility, by a reciprocation of duties; sometimes by receiving, sometimes by giving, and 
sometimes to cement human society by arts, by industry, and by our resources.Suffer others to be praised in thy presence, and entertain their good and glory with 
delight; but at no hand disparage them, or lessen the report, or make an objection; and 
think not the advancement of thy brother is a lessening of thy worth. Upbraid no man's 
weakness to him to discomfit him, neither report it to disparage him, neither delight to 
remember it to lessen him, or to set thyself above him; nor ever praise thyself or 
dispraise any man else, unless some sufficient worthy end do hallow it.

Remember that we usually disparage others upon slight grounds and little instances; and 
if a man be highly recommended, we think him sufficiently lessened, if we can but charge 
one sin of folly or inferiority in his account. We should either be more severe to 
ourselves, or less so to others, and consider that whatsoever good any one can think or 
say of us, we can tell him of many unworthy and foolish and perhaps worse actions of 
ours, any one of which, done by another, would be enough, with us, to destroy his

reputation.

If we think the people wise and sagacious, and just and appreciative, when they praise 
and make idols of us, let us not call them unlearned and ignorant, and ill and stupid 
judges, when our neighbour is cried up by public fame and popular noises.

Every man hath in his own life sins enough, in his own mind trouble enough, in his own 
fortunes evil enough, and in performance of his offices failings more than enough, to 
entertain his own inquiry; so that curiosity after the affairs of others can not be without 
envy and an ill mind. The generous man will be solicitous and inquisitive into the beauty 
and order of a well-governed family, and after the virtues of an excellent person; but 
anything for which men keep locks and bars, or that blushes to see the light, or that is 
either shameful in manner or private in nature, this thing will not be his care and 
business.It should be objection sufficient to exclude any man from the society of Masons, that he is 
not disinterested and generous, both in his acts, and in his opinions of men, and his 
constructions of their conduct. He who is selfish and grasping, or censorious and 
ungenerous, will not long remain within the strict limits of honesty and truth, but will 
shortly commit injustice. He who loves himself too much must needs love others too little; 
and he who habitually gives harsh judgment will not long delay to give unjust judgment.

The generous man is not careful to return no more than he receives; but prefers that the 
balances upon the ledgers of benefits shall be in his favour. He who hath received pay in 
full for all the benefits and favours that he has conferred, is like a spendthrift who has 
consumed his whole estate, and laments over an empty exchequer. He who requites my 
favours with ingratitude adds to, instead of diminishing, my wealth; and he who cannot 
return a favour is equally poor, whether his inability arises from poverty of spirit, 
sordidness of soul, or pecuniary indigence.

If he is wealthy who hath large sums invested, and the mass of whose fortune consists in 
obligations that bind other men to pay him money, he is still more so to whom many owe 
large returns of kindnesses and favours. Beyond a moderate sum each year, the wealthy 
man merely invests his means: and that which he never uses is still like favours 
unreturned and kindnesses unreciprocated, an actual and real portion of his fortune.Generosity and a liberal spirit make men to be humane and genial, open-hearted, frank, 
and sincere, earnest to do good, easy and contented, and well-wishers of mankind. They 
protect the feeble against the strong, and the defenceless against rapacity and craft. 
They succour and comfort the poor, and are the guardians, under God, of his innocent 
and helpless wards. They value friends more than riches or fame, and gratitude more 
than money or power. They are noble by God's patent, and their escutcheons and 
quarterings are to be found in heaven's great book of heraldry. Nor can any man any 
more be a Mason than he can be a gentleman, unless he is generous, liberal, and 
disinterested. To be liberal, but only of that which is our own; to be generous, but only 
when we have first been just; to give, when to give deprives us of a luxury or a comfort, 
this is Masonry indeed.

He who is worldly, covetous, or sensual must change before he can be a good Mason. If 
we are governed by inclination and not by duty; if we are unkind, severe, censorious, or 
injurious, in the relations or intercourse of life; if we are unfaithful parents or undutiful 
children; if we are harsh masters or faithless servants; if we are treacherous friends or 
bad neighbours or bitter competitors or corrupt unprincipled politicians or overreaching 
dealers in business, we are wandering at a great distance from the true Masonic light.

Masons must be kind and affectionate one to another. Frequenting the same temples, 
kneeling at the same altars, they should feel that respect and that kindness for each 
other, which their common relation and common approach to one God should inspire. 
There needs to be much more of the spirit of the ancient fellowship among us; more 
tenderness for each other's faults, more forgiveness, more solicitude for each other's

improvement and good fortune; somewhat of brotherly feeling, that it be not shame to 
use the word "brother."improvement and good fortune; somewhat of brotherly feeling, that it be not shame to 
use the word "brother."

Nothing should be allowed to interfere with that kindness and affection: neither the spirit 
of business, absorbing, eager, and overreaching, ungenerous and hard in its dealings, 
keen and bitter in its competitions, low and sordid in its purposes; nor that of ambition, 
selfish, mercenary, restless, circumventing, living only in the opinion of others, envious of 
the good fortune of others, miserably vain of its own success, unjust, unscrupulous, and 
slanderous.

He that does me a favour, hath bound me to make him a return of thankfulness. The 
obligation comes not by covenant, nor by his own express intention; but by the nature of 
the thing; and is a duty springing up within the spirit of the obliged person, to whom it is 
more natural to love his friend, and to do good for good, than to return evil for evil; 
because a man may forgive an injury, but he must never forget a good turn. He that 
refuses to do good to them whom he is bound to love, or to love that which did him good, 
is unnatural and monstrous in his affections, and thinks all the world born to minister to 
him; with a greediness worse than that of the sea, which, although it receives all rivers 
into itself, yet it furnishes the clouds and springs with a return of all they need. Our duty 
to those who are our benefactors is, to esteem and love their persons, to make them 
proportionable returns of service, or duty, or profit, according as we can, or as they need, 
or as opportunity presents itself; and according to the greatness of their kindnesses.The generous man cannot but regret to see dissensions and disputes among his 
brethren. Only the base and ungenerous delight in discord. It is the poorest occupation of 
humanity to labour to make men think worse of each other, as the press, and too 
commonly the pulpit, changing places with the hustings and the tribune, do. The duty of 
the Mason is to endeavour to make man think better of his neighbour; to quiet, instead of 
aggravating difficulties; to bring together those who are severed or estranged; to keep 
friends from becoming foes, and to persuade foes to become friends. To do this, he must 
needs control his own passions, and be not rash and hasty, nor swift to take offence, nor 
easy to be angered.

For anger is a professed enemy to counsel. It is a direct storm, in which no man can be 
heard to speak or call from without; for if you counsel gently, you are disregarded; if you 
urge it and be vehement, you provoke it more. It is neither manly nor ingenuous. It makes 
marriage to be a necessary and unavoidable trouble; friendships and societies and 
familiarities, to be intolerable. It multiplies the evils of drunkenness, and makes the 
levities of wine to run into madness. It makes innocent jesting to be the beginning of 
tragedies. It turns friendship into hatred; it makes a man lose himself, and his reason and 
his argument, in disputation. It turns the desires of knowledge into an itch of wrangling. It 
adds insolency to power. It turns justice into cruelty, and judgment into oppression. It 
changes discipline into tediousness and hatred of liberal institution. It makes a 
prosperous man to be envied, and the unfortunate to be unpitied.See, therefore, that first controlling your own temper, and governing your own passions, 
you fit yourself to keep peace and harmony among other men, and especially the 
brethren. Above all remember that Masonry is the realm of peace, and that "among 
Masons there must be no dissension, but only that noble emulation., which can best work 
and best agree." Wherever there is strife and hatred among the brethren, there is no 
Masonry; for Masonry is Peace, and Brotherly Love, and Concord.

Masonry is the great Peace Society of the world. Wherever it exists, it struggles to 
prevent international difficulties and disputes; and to bind Republics, Kingdoms, and 
Empires together in one great band of peace and amity. It would not so often struggle in 
vain, if Masons knew their power and valued their oaths.

Who can sum up the horrors and woes accumulated in a single war? Masonry is not 
dazzled with all its pomp and circumstance, all its glitter and glory. War comes with its 
bloody hand into our very dwellings. It takes from ten thousand homes those who livedthere in peace and comfort, held by the tender ties of family and kindred. It drags them 
away, to die untended, of fever or exposure, in infectious climes; or to be hacked, torn, 
and mangled in the fierce fight; to fall on the gory field, to rise no more, or to be borne 
away, in awful agony, to noisome and horrid hospitals. The groans of the battle-field are 
echoed in sighs of bereavement from thousands of desolated hearths. There is a 
skeleton in every house, a vacant chair at every table. Returning, the soldier brings 
worse sorrow to his home, by the infection which he has caught, of camp-vices. The 
country is demoralized. The national mind is brought down, from the noble interchange of 
kind offices with another people, to wrath and revenge, and base pride, and the habit of 
measuring brute strength against brute strength, in battle. Treasures are expended, that 
would suffice to build ten thousand churches, hospitals, and universities, or rib and tie 
together a continent with rails of iron. If that treasure were sunk in the sea, it would be 
calamity enough; but it is put to worse use; for it is expended in cutting into the veins and 
arteries of human life, until the earth is deluged with a sea of blood.

Such are the lessons of this Degree. You have vowed to make them the rule, the law, 
and the guide of your life and conduct. If you do so, you will be entitled, because fitted, to 
advance in Masonry. If you do not, you have already gone too far.

VII. PROVOST AND JUDGE.

THE lesson which this Degree inculcates is JUSTICE, in decision and judgment, and in 
our intercourse and dealing with other men.

In a country where trial by jury is known, every intelligent man is liable to be called on to 
act as a judge, either of fact alone, or of fact and law mingled; and to assume the heavy 
responsibilities which belong to that character.Those who are invested with the power of judgment should judge the causes of all 
persons uprightly and impartially, without any personal consideration of the power of the 
mighty, or the bribe of the rich, or the needs of the poor. That is the cardinal rule, which 
no one will dispute; though many fail to observe it. But they must do more. They must 
divest themselves of prejudice and preconception. They must hear patiently, remember 
accurately, and weigh carefully the facts and the arguments offered before them. They 
must not leap hastily to conclusions, nor form opinions before they have heard all. They 
must not presume crime or fraud. They must neither be ruled by stubborn pride of 
opinion, nor be too facile and yielding to the views and arguments of others. In deducing 
the motive from the proven act, they must not assign to the act either the best or the 
worst motives, but those which they would think it just and fair for the world to assign to 
it, if they themselves had done it; nor must they endeavour to make many little 
circumstances, that weigh nothing separately, weigh much together, to prove their own 
acuteness and sagacity. These are sound rules for every juror, also, to observe.

In our intercourse with others, there are two kinds of injustice: the first, of those who offer 
an injury; the second, of those who have it in their power to avert an injury from those to 
whom it is offered, and yet do it not. So active injustice may be done in two ways--by 
force and by fraud,--of which force is lion-like, and aud fox-like,--both utterly repugnant to 
social duty, but fraud the more detestable.

Every wrong done by one man to another, whether it affect his person, his property, his 
happiness, or his reputation, is an offense against the law of justice. The field of this 
Degree is therefore a wide and vast one; and Masonry seeks for the most impressive 
mode of enforcing the law of justice, and the most effectual means of preventing wrongand injustice.

To this end it teaches this great and momentous truth: that wrong and injustice once 
done cannot be undone; but are eternal in their consequences; once committed, are 
numbered with the irrevocable Past; that the wrong that is done contains its own 
retributive penalty as surely and as naturally as the acorn contains the oak. Its 
consequences are its punishment; it needs no other, and can have no heavier; they are 
involved in its commission, and cannot be separated from it. A wrong done to another is 
an injury done to our own Nature, an offence against our own souls, a disfiguring of the 
image of the Beautiful and Good. Punishment is not the execution of a sentence, but the 
occurrence of an effect. It is ordained to follow guilt, not by the decree of God as a judge, 
but by a law enacted by Him as the Creator and Legislator of the Universe. It is not an 
arbitrary and artificial annexation, but an ordinary and logical consequence; and therefore 
must be borne by the wrong-doer, and through him may flow on to others. It is the 
decision of the infinite justice of God, in the form of law.

There can be no interference with, or remittance of, or protection from, the natural effects 
of our wrongful acts. God will not interpose between the cause and its consequence; and 
in that sense there can be no forgiveness of sins. The act which has debased our soul 
may be repented of, may be turned from; but the injury is done. The debasement may be 
redeemed by after-efforts, the stain obliterated by bitterer struggles and severer 
sufferings; but the efforts and the endurance which might have raised the soul to the 
loftiest heights are now exhausted in merely regaining what it has lost. There must 
always be a wide difference between him who only ceases to do evil, and him who has 
always done well.He will certainly be a far more scrupulous watcher over his conduct, and far more careful 
of his deeds, who believes that those deeds will inevitably bear their natural 
consequences, exempt from after intervention, than he who believes that penitence and 
pardon will at any time unlink the chain of sequences. Surely we shall do less wrong and 
injustice, if the conviction is fixed and embedded in our souls that everything done is 
done irrevocably, that even the Omnipotence of God cannot uncommit a deed, cannot 
make that undone which has been done; that every act of ours must bear its allotted fruit, 
according to the everlasting laws, --must remain forever ineffaceably inscribed on the 
tablets of Universal Nature.

If you have wronged another, you may grieve, repent, and resolutely determine against 
any such weakness in future. You may, so far as it is possible, make reparation. It is well. 
The injured party may forgive you, according to the meaning of human language; but the 
deed is done; and all the powers of Nature, were they to conspire in your behalf, could 
not make it undone; the consequences to the body, the consequences to the soul, 
though no man may perceive them, are there, are written in the annals of the Past, and 
must reverberate throughout all time.

Repentance for a wrong done, bears, like every other act, its own fruit, the fruit of 
purifying the heart and amending the Future, but not of effacing the Past. The 
commission of the wrong is an irrevocable act; but it does not incapacitate the soul to do 
right for the future. Its consequences cannot be expunged; but its course need not be 
pursued. Wrong and evil perpetrated, though ineffaceable, call for no despair, but for 
efforts more energetic than before. Repentance is still as valid as ever; but it is valid to 
secure the Future, not to obliterate the Past.Even the pulsations of the air, once set in motion by the human voice, cease not to exist 
with the sounds to which they gave rise. Their quickly-attenuated force soon becomes 
inaudible to human ears. But the waves of air thus raised perambulate the surface of 
earth and ocean, and in less than twenty hours, every atom of the atmosphere takes up 
the altered movement due to that infinitesimal portion of primitive motion which has been 
conveyed to it through countless channels, and which must continue to influence its path 
throughout its future existence. The air is one vast library, on whose pages is forever 
written all that man has ever said or even whispered. There, in their mutable, but

unerring characters, mixed with the earliest, as well as the latest signs of mortality, stand 
forever recorded, vows unredeemed, promises unfulfilled; perpetuating, in the 
movements of each particle, all in unison, the testimony of man's changeful will. God 
reads that book, though we cannot.

So earth, air, and ocean are the eternal witnesses of the acts that we have done. No 
motion impressed by natural causes or by human agency is ever obliterated. The track of 
every keel which has ever disturbed the surface of the ocean remains forever registered 
in the future movements of all succeeding particles which may occupy its place. Every 
criminal is by the laws of the Almighty irrevocably chained to the testimony of his crime; 
for every atom of his mortal frame, through whatever changes its particles may migrate, 
will still retain, adhering to it through every combination, some movement derived from 
that very muscular effort by which the crime itself was perpetrated.What if our faculties should be so enhanced in a future life as to enable us to perceive 
and trace the ineffaceable consequences of our idle words and evil deeds, and render 
our remorse and grief as eternal as those consequences themselves? No more fearful 
punishment to a superior intelligence can be conceived, than to see still in action, with 
the consciousness that it must continue in action forever, a cause of wrong put in motion 
by itself ages before.

Masonry, by its teachings, endeavours to restrain men from the commission of injustice 
and acts of wrong and outrage. Though it does not endeavour to usurp the place of 
religion, still its code of morals proceeds upon other principles than the municipal law; 
and it condemns and punishes offences which neither that law punishes nor public 
opinion condemns. In the Masonic law, to cheat and overreach in trade, at the bar, in 
politics, are deemed no more venial than theft; nor a deliberate lie than perjury; nor 
slander than robbery; nor seduction than murder.

Especially it condemns those wrongs of which the doer induces another to partake. He 
may repent; he may, after agonizing struggles, regain the path of virtue; his spirit may 
reachieve its purity through much anguish, after many strifes; but the weaker fellow-
creature whom he led astray, whom he made a sharer in his guilt, but whom he cannot 
make a sharer in his repentance and amendment, whose downward course (the first step 
of which he taught) he cannot check, but is compelled to witness,-- what forgiveness of 
sins can avail him there? There is his perpetual, his inevitable punishment, which no 
repentance can alleviate, and no mercy can remit.Let us be just, also, in judging of other men's motives. We know but little of the real 
merits or demerits of any fellow creature. We can rarely say with certainty that this man is 
more guilty than that, or even that this man is very good or very wicked. Often the basest 
men leave behind them excellent reputations. There is scarcely one of us who has not, at 
some time in his life, been on the edge of the commission of a crime. Every one of us 
can look back, and shuddering see the time when our feet stood upon the slippery crags 
that overhung the abyss of guilt; and when, if temptation had been a little more urgent, or 
a little longer continued, if penury had pressed us a little harder, or a little more wine had 
further disturbed our intellect, dethroned our judgment, and aroused our passions, our 
feet would have slipped, and we should have fallen, never to rise again.

We may be able to say--"This man has lied, has pilfered, has forged, has embezzled 
moneys intrusted to him; and that man has gone through life with clean hands." But we 
cannot say that the former has not struggled long, though unsuccessfully, against 
temptations under which the second would have succumbed without an effort. We can 
say which has the cleanest hands before man; but not which has the cleanest soul 
before God. We may be able to say, this man has committed adultery, and that man has 
been ever chaste; but we cannot tell but that the innocence of one may have been due to 
the coldness of his heart, to the absence of a motive, to the presence of a fear, to the 
slight degree of the temptation; nor but that the fall of the other may have been preceded 
by the most vehement self-contest, caused by the most over-mastering frenzy, and 
atoned for by the most hallowing repentance. Generosity as well as niggardliness may bea mere yielding to native temperament; and in the eye of Heaven, a long life of 
beneficence in one man may have cost less effort, and may indicate less virtue and less 
sacrifice of interest, than a few rare hidden acts of kindness wrung by duty out of the 
reluctant and unsympathizing nature of the other. There may be more real merit, more 
self-sacrificing effort, more of the noblest elements of moral grandeur, in a life of failure, 
sin, and shame, than in a career, to our eyes, of stainless integrity.

When we condemn or pity the fallen, how do we know that, tempted like him, we should 
not have fallen like him, as soon, and perhaps with less resistance ? How can we know 
what we should do if we were out of employment, famine crouching, gaunt, and hungry, 
on our fireless hearth, and our children wailing for bread ? We fall not because we are 
not enough tempted! He that hath fallen may be at heart as honest as we. How do we 
know that our daughter, sister, wife, could resist the abandonment, the desolation, the 
distress, the temptation, that sacrificed the virtue of their poor abandoned sister of 
shame? Perhaps they also have not fallen, because they have not been sorely tempted! 
Wisely are we directed to pray that we may not be exposed to temptation.Human justice must be ever uncertain. How many judicial murders have been committed 
through ignorance of the phenomena of insanity ! How many men hung for murder who 
were no more murderers at heart than the jury that tried and the judge that sentenced 
them! It may well be doubted whether the administration of human laws, in every country, 
is not one gigantic mass of injustice and wrong. God seeth not as man seeth; and the 
most abandoned criminal, black as he is before the world, may yet have continued to 
keep some little light burning in a corner of his soul, which would long since have gone 
out in that of those who walk proudly in the sunshine of immaculate fame, if they had 
been tried and tempted like the poor outcast.

We do not know even the outside life of men. We are not competent to pronounce even 
on their deeds. We do not know half the acts of wickedness or virtue, even of our most 
immediate fellows. We cannot say, with certainty, even of our nearest friend, that he has 
not committed a particular sin, and broken a particular commandment. Let each man ask 
his own heart ! Of how many of our best and of our worst acts and qualities are our most 
intimate associates utterly unconscious ! How many virtues does not the world give us 
credit for, that we do not possess; or vices condemn us for, of which we are not the 
slaves ! It is but a small portion of our evil deeds and thoughts that ever comes to light; 
and of our few redeeming goodnesses, the largest portion is known to God alone.We shall, therefore, be just in judging of other men, only when we are charitable; and we 
should assume the prerogative of judging others only when the duty is forced upon us; 
since we are so almost certain to err, and the consequences of error are so serious. No 
man need covet the office of judge; for in assuming it he assumes the gravest and most 
oppressive responsibility. Yet you have assumed it; we all assume it; for man is ever 
ready to judge, and ever ready to condemn his neighbour, while upon the same state of 
case he acquits himself See, therefore, that you exercise your once cautiously and 
charitably, lest, in passing judgment upon the criminal, you commit a greater wrong than 
that for which you condemn him, and the consequences of which must be eternal.

The faults and crimes and follies of other men are not unimportant to us; but form a part 
of our moral discipline. War and bloodshed at a distance, and frauds which do not affect 
our pecuniary interest, yet touch us in our feelings, and concern our moral welfare. They 
have much to do with all thoughtful hearts. The public eye may look unconcernedly on 
the miserable victim of vice, and that shattered wreck of a man may move the multitude 
to laughter or to scorn. But to the Mason, it is the form of sacred humanity that is before 
him; it is an erring fellow-being; a desolate, forlorn, forsaken soul; and his thoughts, 
enfolding the poor wretch, will be far deeper than those of indifference, ridicule, or 
contempt. All human offences, the whole system of dishonesty, evasion, circumventing, 
forbidden indulgence, and intriguing ambition, in which men are struggling with each 
other, will be looked upon by a thoughtful Mason, not merely as a scene of mean toils 
and strifes, but as the solemn conflicts of immortal minds, for ends vast and momentous 
as their own being. It is a sad and unworthy strife, and may well be viewed withindignation; but that indignation must melt into pity. For the stakes for which these 
gamesters play are not those which they imagine, not those which are in sight. For 
example, this man plays for a petty once, and gains it; but the real stake he gains is 
sycophancy, uncharitableness, slander, and deceit.

Good men are too proud of their goodness. They are respectable; dishonour comes not 
near them; their countenance has weight and influence; their robes are unstained; the 
poisonous breath of calumny as never been breathed upon their fair name. How easy it 
is for them to look down with scorn upon the poor degraded offender; to pass him by with 
a lofty step; to draw up the folds of their garment around them, that they may not be 
soiled by his touch ! Yet the Great Master of Virtue did not so; but descended to familiar 
intercourse with publicans and sinners, with the Samaritan woman, with the outcasts and 
the Pariahs of the Hebrew world.

Many men think themselves better, in proportion as they can detect sin in others! When 
they go over the catalogue of their neighbour's unhappy derelictions of temper or 
conduct, they often, amidst much apparent concern, feel a secret exultation, that 
destroys all their own pretensions to wisdom and moderation, and even to virtue. Many 
even take actual pleasure in the sins of others; and this is the case with every one whose 
thoughts are often employed in agreeable comparisons of his own virtues with his 
neighbours' faults.The power of gentleness is too little seen in the world; the subduing influences of pity, the 
might of love, the control of mildness over passion, the commanding majesty of that 
perfect character which mingles grave displeasure with grief and pity for the offender. So 
it is that a Mason should treat his brethren who go astray. Not with bitterness; nor yet 
with good-natured easiness, nor with worldly indifference, nor with the philosophic 
coldness, nor with a laxity of conscience, that accounts everything well, that passes 
under the seal of public opinion; but with charity, with pitying loving-kindness.

The human heart will not bow willingly to what is infirm and wrong in human nature. If it 
yields to us, it must yield to what is divine in us. The wickedness of my neighbour cannot 
submit to my wickedness; his sensuality, for instance, to my anger against his vices. My 
faults are not the instruments that are to arrest his faults. And therefore impatient 
reformers, and denouncing preachers, and hasty reprovers, and angry parents, and 
irritable relatives generally fail, in their several departments, to reclaim the erring.

A moral offence is sickness, pain, loss, dishonour, in the immortal part of man. It is guilt, 
and misery added to guilt. It is itself calamity; and brings upon itself, in addition, the 
calamity of God's disapproval, the abhorrence of all virtuous men, and the soul's own 
abhorrence. Deal faithfully, but patiently and tenderly, with this evil ! It is no matter for 
petty provocation, nor for personal strife, nor for selfish irritation.

Speak kindly to your erring brother ! God pities him: Christ has died for him: Providence 
waits for him: Heaven's mercy yearns toward him; and Heaven's spirits are ready to 
welcome him back with joy. Let your voice be in unison with all those powers that God is 
using for his recovery!If one defrauds you, and exults at it, he is the most to be pitied of human beings. He has 
done himself a far deeper injury than he has done you. It is he, and not you, whom God 
regards with mingled displeasure and compassion; and His judgment should be your law. 
Among all the benedictions of the Holy Mount there is not one for this man; but for the 
merciful, the peacemakers, and the persecuted they are poured out freely.

We are all men of like passions, propensities, and exposures. There are elements in us 
all, which might have been perverted, through the successive processes of moral 
deterioration, to the worst of crimes. The wretch whom the execration of the thronging 
crowd pursues to the scaffold, is not worse than any one of that multitude might have 
become under similar circumstances. He is to be condemned indeed, but also deeply to 
be pitied.It does not become the frail and sinful to be vindictive toward even the worst criminals. 
We owe much to the good Providence of God, ordaining for us a lot more favourable to 
virtue. We all had that within us, that might have been pushed to the same excess: 
Perhaps we should have fallen as he did, with less temptation. Perhaps we have done 
acts, that, in proportion to the temptation or provocation, were less excusable than his 
great crime. Silent pity and sorrow for the victim should mingle with our detestation of the 
guilt. Even the pirate who murders in cold blood on the high seas, is such a man as you 
or I might have been. Orphanage in childhood, or base and dissolute and abandoned 
parents; an unfriended youth; evil companions; ignorance and want of moral cultivation; 
the temptations of sinful pleasure or grinding poverty; familiarity with vice; a scorned and 
blighted name; seared and crushed affections; desperate fortunes; these are steps that 
might have led any one among us to unfurl upon the high seas the bloody flag of 
universal defiance; to wage war with our kind; to live the life and die the death of the 
reckless and remorseless free-booter. Many affecting relationships of humanity plead 
with us to pity him. His head once rested on a mother's bosom. He was once the object 
of sisterly love and domestic endearment. Perhaps his hand, since often red with blood, 
once clasped another little loving hand at the altar. Pity him then; his blighted hopes and 
his crushed heart! It is proper that frail and erring creatures like us should do so; should 
feel the crime, but feel it as weak, tempted, and rescued creatures should. It may be that 
when God weighs men's crimes, He will take into consideration the temptations and the 
adverse circumstances that led to them, and the opportunities for moral culture of the 
offender; and it may be that our own offences will weigh heavier than we think, and the 
murderer's lighter than according to man's judgment.On all accounts, therefore, let the true Mason never forget the solemn injunction, 
necessary to be observed at almost every moment of a busy life: 'JUDGE NOT, LEST 
YOU YOURSELVES BE JUDGED FOR WHATSOEVER JUDGMENT YOU MEASURE 
UNTO OTHERS, THE SAME SHALL IN TURN BE MEASURED UNTO YOU. Such is the 
lesson taught the Provost and Judge. 
of man.

VIII. INTENDANT OF THE BUILDING.

IN this Degree you have been taught the important lesson, that none are entitled to 
advance in the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, who have not by study and 
application made themselves familiar with Masonic learning and jurisprudence. The 
Degrees of this Rite are not for those who are content with the mere work and 
ceremonies, and do not seek to explore the mines of wisdom that lie buried beneath the 
surface. You still advance toward the Light, toward that star, blazing in the distance, 
which is an emblem of the Divine Truth, given by God to the first men, and preserved 
amid all the vicissitudes of ages in the traditions and teachings of Masonry. How far you 
will advance, depends upon yourself alone. Here, as everywhere in the world, Darkness 
struggles with Light, and clouds and shadows intervene between you and the Truth.

When you shall have become imbued with the morality of Masonry, with which you yet 
are, and for some time will be exclusively occupied,--when you shall have learned to 
practice all the virtues which it inculcates; when they become familiar to you as your 
Household Gods; then will you be prepared to receive its lofty philosophical instruction, 
and to scale the heights upon whose summit Light and Truth sit enthroned. Step by step 
men must advance toward Perfection; and each Masonic Degree is meant to be one of 
those steps. Each is a development of a particular duty; and in the present you are 
taught charity and benevolence; to be to your brethren an example of virtue; to correct

your own faults; and to endeavour to correct those of your brethren.your own faults; and to endeavour to correct those of your brethren.

Here, as in all the degrees, you meet with the emblems and the names of Deity, the true 
knowledge of whose character and attributes it has ever been a chief object of Masonry 
to perpetuate. To appreciate His infinite greatness and goodness, to rely implicitly upon 
His Providence, to revere and venerate Him as the Supreme Architect, Creator, and 
Legislator of the universe, is the first of Masonic duties.

The Battery of this Degree, and the five circuits which you made around the Lodge, 
allude to the five points of fellowship, and are intended to recall them vividly to your mind. 
To go upon a brother's errand or to his relief, even barefoot and upon flinty ground; to 
remember him in your supplications to the Deity; to clasp him to your heart, and protect 
him against malice and evil speaking; to uphold him when about to stumble and fall; and 
to give him prudent, honest, and friendly counsel, are duties plainly written upon the 
pages of God's great code of law, and first among the ordinances of Masonry.

The first sign of the Degree is expressive of the diffidence and humility with which we 
inquire into the nature and attributes of the Deity; the second, of the profound awe and 
reverence with which we contemplate His glories; and the third, of the sorrow with which 
we reflect upon our insufficient observance of our duties, and our imperfect compliance 
with His statutes.The distinguishing property of man is to search for and follow after truth. Therefore, when 
relaxed from our necessary cares and concerns, we then covet to see, to hear, and to 
learn somewhat; and we esteem knowledge of things, either obscure or wonderful, to be 
the indispensable means of living happily. Truth, Simplicity, and Candor are most 
agreeable to the nature of mankind. Whatever is virtuous consists either in Sagacity, and 
the perception of Truth; or in the preservation of Human Society, by giving to every man 
his due, and observing the faith of contracts; or in the greatness and firmness of an 
elevated and unsubdued mind; or in observing order and regularity in all our words and in 
all our actions; in which consist Moderation and Temperance.Masonry has in all times religiously preserved that enlightened faith from which flow 
sublime Devotedness, the sentiment of Fraternity fruitful of good works, the spirit of 
indulgence and peace, of sweet hopes and effectual consolations; and inflexibility in the 
accomplishment of the most painful and arduous duties. It has always propagated it with 
ardor and perseverance; and therefore it labours at the present day more zealously than 
ever. Scarcely a Masonic discourse is pronounced, that does not demonstrate the 
necessity and advantages of this faith, and especially recall the two constitutive 
principles of religion, that make all religion,-- love of God, and love of neighbour. Masons 
carry these principles into the bosoms of their families and of society. While the 
Sectarians of former times enfeebled the religious spirit, Masonry, forming one great 
People over the whole globe, and marching under the great banner of Charity and 
Benevolence, preserves that religious feeling, strengthens it, extends it in its purity and 
simplicity, as it has always existed in the depths of the human heart, as it existed even 
under the dominion of the most ancient forms of worship, but where gross and debasing 
superstitions forbade its recognition.

A Masonic Lodge should resemble a bee-hive, in which all the members work together 
with ardor for the common good. Masonry is not made for cold souls and narrow minds, 
that do not comprehend its lofty mission and sublime apostolate. Here the anathema 
against lukewarm souls applies. To comfort misfortunes to popularize knowledge, to 
teach whatever is true and pure in religion and philosophy, to accustom men to respect 
order and the proprieties of life, to point out the way to genuine happiness, to prepare for 
that fortunate period, when all the factions of the Human Family, united by the bonds of 
Toleration and Fraternity, shall be but one household,--these are labours that may well 
excite zeal and even enthusiasm.We do not now enlarge upon or elaborate these ideas. We but utter them to you briefly, 
as hints, upon which you may at your leisure reflect. Hereafter, if you continue to

advance, they will be unfolded, explained, and developed.

Masonry utters no impracticable and extravagant precepts, certain, because they are so, 
to be disregarded. It asks of its initiates nothing that it is not possible and even easy for 
them to perform. Its teachings are eminently practical; and its statutes can be obeyed by 
every just, upright, and honest man, no matter what his faith or creed. Its object is to 
attain the greatest practical good, without seeking to make men perfect. It does not 
meddle with the domain of religion, nor inquire into the mysteries of regeneration. It 
teaches those truths that are written by the finger of God upon the heart of man, those 
views of duty which have been brought out by the meditations of the studious, confirmed 
by the allegiance of the good and wise, and stamped as sterling by the response they 
find in every uncorrupted mind. It does not dogmatize, nor vainly imagine dogmatic 
certainty to be attainable.Masonry does not occupy itself with crying down this world, with its splendid beauty, its 
thrilling interests, its glorious works, its noble and holy affections; nor exhort us to detach 
our hearts from this earthly life, as empty, fleeting, and unworthy, and fix them upon 
Heaven, as the only sphere deserving the love of the loving or the meditation of the wise. 
It teaches that man has high duties to perform, and a high destiny to fulfill, on this earth; 
that this world is not merely the portal to another; and that this life, though not our only 
one, is an integral one, and the particular one with which we are here meant to be 
concerned; that the Present is our scene of action, and the Future for speculation and for 
trust; that man was sent upon the earth to live in it, to enjoy it, to study it, to love it, to 
embellish it, to make the most of it. It is his country, on which he should lavish his 
affections and his efforts. It is here his influences are to operate. It is his house, and not a 
tent; his home, and not merely a school. He is sent into this world, not to be constantly 
hankering after, dreaming of, preparing for another; but to do his duty and fulfill his 
destiny on this earth; to do all that lies in his power to improve it, to render it a scene of 
elevated happiness to himself, to those around him, to those who are to come after him. 
His life here is part of his immortality; and this world, also, is among the stars.And thus, Masonry teaches us, will man best prepare for that Future which he hopes for. 
The Unseen cannot hold a higher place in our affections than the Seen and the Familiar. 
The law of our being is Love of Life, and its interests and adornments; love of the world in 
which our lot is cast, engrossment with the interests and affections of earth. Not a low or 
sensual love, not love of wealth, of fame, of ease, of power, of splendour. Not low 
worldliness; but the love of Earth as the garden on which the Creator has lavished such 
miracles of beauty; as the habitation of humanity, the arena of its conflicts, the scene of 
its illimitable progress, the dwelling-place of the wise, the good, the active, the loving, 
and the dear; the place of opportunity for the development by means of sin and suffering 
and sorrow, of the noblest passions the loftiest virtues, and the tenderest sympathies.

They take very unprofitable pains, who endeavour to persuade men that they are obliged 
wholly to despise this world, and all that is in it, even whilst they themselves live here. 
God hath not taken all that pains in forming and framing and furnishing and adorning the 
world, that they who were made by Him to live in it should despise it. It will be enough, if 
they do not love it too immoderately. It is useless to attempt to extinguish all those 
affections and passions which are and always will be inseparable from human nature. As 
long as he world lasts, and honour and virtue and industry have reputation in the world, 
there will be ambition and emulation and appetite in the best and most accomplished 
men in it; and if there were not, more barbarity and vice and wickedness would cover 
every nation of the world, than it now suffers under.Those only who feel a deep interest in, and affection for, this world, will work resolutely 
for its amelioration. Those who undervalue this rife, naturally become querulous and 
discontented, and lose their interest in the welfare of their fellows. To serve them, and so 
to do our duty as Masons, we must feel that the object is worth the exertion; and be 
content with this world in which God has placed us, until He permits us to remove to a 
better one. He is here with us, and does not deem this an unworthy world.

It a serious thing to defame and belie a whole world; to speak of it as the abode of a 
poor, toiling, drudging, ignorant, contemptible race. You would not so discredit your 
family, your friendly circle, your village, your city, your country. The world is not a 
wretched and a worthless one; nor is it a misfortune, but a thing to be thankful for, to be a 
man. If life is worthless, so also is immortality.In society itself, in that living mechanism of human relationships that spreads itself over 
the world, there is a finer essence within, that as truly moves it, as any power, heavy or 
expansive, moves the sounding manufactory or the swift-flying car. The man-machine 
hurries to and fro upon the earth, stretches out its hands on every side, to toil, to barter, 
to unnumbered labours and enterprises; and almost always the motive, that which moves 
it, is something that takes hold of the comforts, affections, and hopes of social existence. 
True, the mechanism often works with difficulty, drags heavily, grates and screams with 
harsh collision. True, the essence of finer motive, becoming intermixed with baser and 
coarser ingredients, often clogs, obstructs, jars, and deranges the free and noble action 
of social life. But he is neither grateful nor wise, who looks cynically on all this, and loses 
the fine sense of social good in its perversions. That I can be a friend, that I can have a 
friend, though it were but one in the world; that fact, that wondrous good fortune, we may 
set against all the sufferings of our social nature. That there is such a place on earth as a 
home, that resort and sanctuary of in-walled and shielded joy, we may set against all the 
surrounding desolations of life. That one can be a true, social man, can speak his true 
thoughts, amidst all the Tanglings of controversy and the warring of opinions; that fact 
from within, outweighs all facts from without.

In the visible aspect and action of society, often repulsive and annoying, we are apt to 
lose the due sense of its invisible blessings. As in Nature it is not the coarse and 
palpable, not soils and rains, nor even fields and flowers, that are so beautiful, as the 
invisible spirit of wisdom and beauty that pervades it; so in society, it is the invisible, and 
therefore unobserved, that is most beautiful.What nerves the arm of toil? If man minded himself alone, he would fling down the spade 
and axe, and rush to the desert; or roam through the world as a wilderness, and make 
that world a desert. His home, which he sees not, perhaps, but once or twice in a day, is 
the invisible bond of the world. It is the good, strong, and noble faith that men have in 
each other, which gives the loftiest character to business, trade, and commerce. Fraud 
occurs in the rush of business; but it is the exception. Honesty is the rule; and all the 
frauds in the world cannot tear the great bond of human confidence. If they could, 
commerce would furl its sails on every sea, and all the cities of the world would crumble 
into ruins. The bare character of a man on the other side of the world, whom you never 
saw, whom you never will see, you hold good for a bond of thousands. The most striking 
feature of the political state is not governments, nor constitutions, nor laws, nor 
enactments, nor the judicial power, nor the police; but the universal will of the people to 
be governed by the common weal. Take off that restraint, and no government on earth 
could stand for an hour.

Of the many teachings of Masonry, one of the most valuable is, that we should not 
depreciate this life. It does not hold, that when we reflect on the destiny that awaits man 
on earth, we ought to bedew his cradle with our tears; but, like the Hebrews, it hails the 
birth of a child with joy, and holds that his birthday should be a festival.

It has no sympathy with those who profess to have proved this life, and found it little 
worth; who have deliberately made up their minds that it is far more miserable than 
happy; because its employments are tedious, and their schemes often baffled, their 
friendships broken, or their friends dead, its pleasures palled, and its honours faded, and 
its paths beaten, familiar, and dull.Masonry deems it no mark of great piety toward God to disparage, if not despise, the 
state that He has ordained for us. It does not absurdly set up the claims of another world, 
not in comparison merely, but in competition, with the claims of this. It looks upon both as 
parts of one system. It holds that a man may make the best of this world and of another

at the same time. It does not teach its initiates to think better of other works and 
dispensations of God, by thinking meanly of these. It does not look upon life as so much 
time lost; nor regard its employments as trifles unworthy of immortal beings; nor tell its 
followers to fold their arms, as if in disdain of their state and species; but it looks soberly 
and cheerfully upon the world, as a theatre of worthy action, of exalted usefulness, and of 
rational and innocent enjoyment.

It holds that, with all its evils, life is a blessing. To deny that is to destroy the basis of all 
religion, natural and revealed. The very foundation of all religion is laid on the firm belief 
that God is good; and if this life is an evil and a curse, no such belief can be rationally 
entertained. To level our satire at humanity and human existence, as mean and 
contemptible; to look on this world as the habitation of a miserable race, fit only for 
mockery and scorn; to consider this earth as a dungeon or a prison, which has no 
blessing to offer but escape from it, is to extinguish the primal light of faith and hope and 
happiness, to destroy the basis of religion, and Truth's foundation in the goodness of 
God. If it indeed be so, then it matters not what else is true or not true; speculation is vain 
and faith is vain; and all that belongs to man's highest being is buried in the ruins of 
misanthropy, melancholy, and despair.Our love of life; the tenacity with which, in sorrow and suffering, we cling to it; our 
attachment to our home, to the spot that gave us birth, to any place, however rude, 
unsightly, or barren, on which the history of our years has been written, all show how 
dear are the ties of kindred and society. Misery makes a greater impression upon us than 
happiness; because the former is not the habit of our minds. It is a strange, unusual 
guest, and we are more conscious of its presence. Happiness lives with us, and we 
forget it. It does not excite us, nor disturb the order and course of our thoughts. A great 
agony is an epoch in our life. We remember our afflictions, as we do the storm and 
earthquake, because they are out of the common course of things. They are like 
disastrous events, recorded because extraordinary; and with whole and unnoticed 
periods of prosperity between. We mark and signalize the times of calamity; but many 
happy days and unnoted periods of enjoyment pass, that are unrecorded either in the 
book of memory, or in the scanty annals of our thanksgiving. We are little disposed and 
less able to call up from the dim remembrances of our past years, the peaceful moments, 
the easy sensations, the bright thoughts, the quiet reveries, the throngs of kind affections 
in which life flowed on, bearing us almost unconsciously upon its bosom, because it bore 
us calmly and gently.Life is not only good; but it has been glorious in the experience of millions. The glory of 
all human virtue clothes it. The splendours of devotedness, beneficence, and heroism 
are upon it; the crown of a thousand martyrdoms is upon its brow. The brightness of the 
soul shines through this visible and sometimes darkened life; through all its surrounding 
cares and labours. The humblest life may feel its connection with its Infinite Source. 
There is something mighty in the frail inner man; something of immortality in this 
momentary and transient being. The mind stretches away, on every side, into infinity. Its 
thoughts flash abroad, far into the boundless, the immeasurable, the infinite; far into the 
great, dark, teeming future; and become powers and influences in other ages. To know 
its wonderful Author, to bring down wisdom from the Eternal Stars, to bear upward its 
homage, gratitude, and love, to the Ruler of all worlds, to be immortal in our influences 
projected far into the slow-approaching Future, makes life most worthy and most 
glorious.

Life is the wonderful creation of God. It is light, sprung from void darkness; power, waked 
from inertness and impotence; being created from nothing; and the contrast may well 
enkindle wonder and delight. It is a rill from the infinite, overflowing goodness; and from 
the moment when it first gushes up into the light, to that when it mingles with the ocean 
of Eternity, that Goodness attends it and ministers to it. It is a great and glorious gift. 
There is gladness in its infant voices; joy in the buoyant step of its youth; deep 
satisfaction in its strong maturity; and peace in its quiet age. There is good for the good; 
virtue for the faithful; and victory for the valiant. There is, even in this humble life, an 
infinity for those whose desires are boundless. There are blessings upon its birth; there ishope in its death; and eternity in its prospect. Thus earth, which binds many in chains, is 
to the Mason both the starting-place and goal of immortality, Many it buries in the rubbish 
of dull cares and wearying vanities; but to the Mason it is the lofty mount of meditation, 
where Heaven, and Infinity and Eternity are spread before him and around him. To the 
lofty-minded, the pure, and the virtuous, this life is the beginning of Heaven, and a part of 
immortality.

God hath appointed one remedy for all the evils in the world; and that is a contented 
spirit. We may be reconciled to poverty and a low fortune, if we suffer contentedness and 
equanimity to make the proportions. No man is poor who doth not think himself so; but if, 
in a full fortune, with impatience he desires more, he proclaims his wants and his 
beggarly condition. This virtue of contentedness was the sum of all the old moral 
philosophy, and is of most universal use in the whole course of our lives, and the only 
instrument to ease the burdens of the world and the enmities of sad chances. It is the 
great reasonableness of complying with the Divine Providence, which governs all the 
world, and hath so ordered us in the administration of His great family. It is fit that God 
should dispense His gifts as He pleases; and if we murmur here, we may, at the next 
melancholy, be troubled that He did not make us to be angels or stars.We ourselves make our fortunes good or bad; and when God lets loose a Tyrant upon 
us, or a sickness, or scorn, or a lessened fortune, if we fear to die, or know not how to be 
patient, or are proud, or covetous, then the calamity sits heavy on us. But if we know how 
to manage a noble principle, and fear not death so much as a dishonest action, and think 
impatience a worse evil than a fever, and pride to be the greatest disgrace as well as the 
greatest folly, and poverty far preferable to the torments of avarice, we may still bear an 
even mind and smile at the reverses of fortune and the ill-nature of Fate.

If thou hast lost thy land, do not also lose thy constancy; and if thou must die sooner than 
others, or than thou didst expect, yet do not die impatiently. For no chance is evil to him 
who is content, and to a man nothing is miserable unless it be unreasonable. No man 
can make another man to be his slave, unless that other hath first enslaved himself to life 
and death, to pleasure or pain, to hope or fear; command these passions, and you are 
freer than the Parthian Kings.

When an enemy reproaches us, let us look on him as an impartial relator of our faults; for 
he will tell us truer than our fondest friend will, and we may forgive his anger, whilst we 
make use of the plainness of his declamation. The ox, when he is weary, treads truest; 
and if there be nothing else in abuse, but that it makes us to walk warily, and tread sure 
for fear of our enemies, that is better than to be flattered into pride and carelessness.If thou fallest from thy employment in public, take sanctuary in an honest retirement, 
being indifferent to thy gain abroad, or thy safety at home. When the north wind blows 
hard, and it rains sadly, we do not sit down in it and cry; but defend ourselves against it 
with a warm garment, or a good fire and a dry roof. So when the storm of a sad 
mischance beats upon our spirits, we may turn it into something that is good, if we 
resolve to make it so; and with equanimity and patience may shelter ourselves from its 
inclement pitiless pelting. If it develop our patience, and give occasion for heroic 
endurance, it hath done us good enough to recompense us sufficiently for all the 
temporal affliction; for so a wise man shall overrule his stars; and have a greater 
influence upon his own content, than all the constellations and planets of the firmament.

Compare not thy condition with the few above thee, but to secure thy content, look upon 
those thousands with whom thou wouldst not, for any interest, change thy fortune and 
condition. A soldier must not think himself unprosperous, if he be not successful as 
Alexander or Wellington; nor any man deem himself unfortunate that he hath not the 
wealth of Rothschild; but rather let the former rejoice that he is not lessened like the 
many generals who went down horse and man before Napoleon, and the latter that he is 
not the beggar who, bareheaded in the bleak winter wind holds out his tattered hat for 
charity. There may be many who are richer and more fortunate; but many thousands who 
are very miserable, compared to thee.After the worst assaults of Fortune, there will be something left to us,--a merry 
countenance, a cheerful spirit, and a good conscience, the Providence of God, our hopes 
of Heaven, our charity for those who have injured us; perhaps a loving wife, and many 
friends to pity, and some to relieve us; and light and air, and all the beauties of Nature; 
we can read, discourse, and meditate; and having still these blessings, we should be 
much in love with sorrow and peevishness to lose them all, and prefer to sit down on our 
little handful of thorns.

Enjoy the blessings of this day, if God sends them, and the evils of it bear patiently and 
calmly; for this day only is ours: we are dead to yesterday, and we are not yet born to the 
morrow. When our fortunes are violently changed, our spirits are unchanged, if they 
always stood in the suburbs and expectation of sorrows and reverses. The blessings of 
immunity, safeguard, liberty, and integrity deserve the thanksgiving of a whole life. We 
are quit from a thousand calamities, every one of which, if it were upon us, would make 
us insensible of our present sorrow, and glad to receive it in exchange for that other 
greater affliction.

Measure your desires by your fortune and condition, not your fortunes by your desires: 
be governed by your needs, not by your fancy; by nature, not by evil customs and 
ambitious principles. It is no evil to be poor, but to be vicious and impatient. Is that beast 
better, that hath two or three mountains to graze on, than the little bee that feeds on dew 
or manna, and lives upon what falls every morning from the store-houses of Heaven, 
clouds and Providence ?There are some instances of fortune and a fair condition that cannot stand with some 
others; but if you desire this, you must lose that, and unless you be content with one, you 
lose the comfort of both. If you covet learning, you must have leisure and a retired life; if 
honours of State and political distinctions, you must be ever abroad in public, and get 
experience, and do all men's business, and keep all company, and have no leisure at all. 
If you will be rich, you must be frugal; if you will be popular, you must be bountiful; if a 
philosopher, you must despise riches. If you would be famous as Epaminondas, accept 
also his poverty, for it added lustre to his person, and envy to his fortune, and his virtue 
without it could not have been so excellent. If you would have the reputation of a martyr, 
you must needs accept his persecution; if of a benefactor of the world, the world's 
injustice; if truly great, you must expect to see the mob prefer lesser men to yourself.

God esteems it one of His glories, that He brings good out of evil; and therefore it were 
but reason we should trust Him to govern His own world as He pleases; and that we 
should patiently wait until the change cometh, or the reason is discovered.

A Mason's contentedness must by no means be a mere contented selfishness, like his 
who, comfortable himself, is indifferent to the discomfort of others. There will always be in 
this world wrongs to forgive, suffering to alleviate, sorrow asking for sympathy, 
necessities and destitution to relieve, and ample occasion for the exercise of active 
charity and beneficence. And he who sits unconcerned amidst it all, perhaps enjoying his 
own comforts and luxuries the more, by contrasting them with the hungry and ragged 
destitution and shivering misery of his fellows, is not contented, but selfish and unfeeling.It is the saddest of all sights upon this earth, that of a man lazy and luxurious, or hard 
and penurious, to whom want appeals in vain, and suffering cries in an unknown tongue. 
The man whose hasty anger hurries him into violence and crime is not half so unworthy 
to live. He is the faithless steward, that embezzles what God has given him in trust for 
the impoverished and suffering among his brethren. The true Mason must be and must 
have a right to be content with himself; and he can be so only when he lives not for 
himself alone, but for others also, who need his assistance and have a claim upon his 
sympathy.

"Charity is the great channel," it has been well said, "through which God passes all His 
mercy upon mankind. For we receive absolution of our sins in proportion to our forgiving

our brother. This is the rule of our hopes and the measure of our desire in this world; and 
on the day of death and judgment, the great sentence upon mankind shall be transacted 
according to our alms, which is the other part of charity. God himself is love; and very 
degree of charity that dwells in us is the participation of the divine nature."

These principles Masonry reduces to practice. By them it expects you to be hereafter 
guided and governed. It especially inculcates them upon him who employs the labour of 
others, forbidding him to discharge them, when to want employment is to starve; or to 
contract for the labour of man or woman at so low a price that by over-exertion they must 
sell him their blood and life at the same time with the labour of their hands.These Degrees are also intended to teach more than morals. The symbols and 
ceremonies of Masonry have more than one meaning. They rather conceal than disclose 
the Truth. They hint it only, at least; and their varied meanings are only to be discovered 
by reflection and study. Truth is not only symbolized by Light, but as the ray of light is 
separable into rays of different colours, so is truth separable into kinds. It is the province 
of Masonry to teach all truths--not moral truth alone, but political and philosophical, and 
even religious truth, so far as concerns the great and essential principles of each. The 
sphynx was a symbol. To whom has it disclosed its inmost meaning? Who knows the 
symbolic meaning of the pyramids?

You will hereafter learn who are the chief foes of human liberty symbolized by the 
assassins of the Master Khurum; and in their fate you may see foreshadowed that which 
we earnestly hope will hereafter overtake those enemies of humanity, against whom 
Masonry has struggled so long.

IX. ELECT OF THE NINE. 
[Elu of the Nine.]

ORIGINALLY created to reward fidelity, obedience, and devotion, this Degree was 
consecrated to bravery, devotedness, and patriotism; and your obligation has made 
known to you the duties which you have assumed. They are summed up in the simple 
mandate, "Protect the oppressed against the oppressor; and devote yourself to the 
honour and interests of your Country."Masonry is not "speculative," nor theoretical, but experimental; not sentimental, but 
practical. It requires self-renunciation and self-control. It wears a stern face toward men's 
vices, and interferes with many of our pursuits and our fancied pleasures. It penetrates 
beyond the region of vague sentiment; beyond the regions where moralizers and 
philosophers have woven their fine theories and elaborated their beautiful maxims, to the 
very depths of the heart, rebuking our littlenesses and meannesses, arraigning our 
prejudices and passions, and warring against the armies of our vices.

It wars against the passions that spring out of the bosom of a world of fine sentiments, a 
world of admirable sayings and foul practices, of good maxims and bad deeds; whose 
darker passions are not only restrained by custom and ceremony, but hidden even from 
itself by a veil of beautiful sentiments. This terrible solecism has existed in all ages. 
Romish sentimentalism has often covered infidelity and vice; Protestant straightness 
often lauds spirituality and faith, and neglects homely truth, candor, and generosity; and 
ultra-liberal Rationalistic refinement sometimes soars to heaven in its dreams, and 
wallows in the mire of earth in its deeds.

There may be a world of Masonic sentiment; and yet a world of little or no Masonry. InThere may be a world of Masonic sentiment; and yet a world of little or no Masonry. In

many minds there is a vague and general sentiment of Masonic charity, generosity, and 
disinterestedness, but no practical, active virtue, nor habitual kindness, self sacrifice, or 
liberality. Masonry plays about them like the cold though brilliant lights that flush and 
eddy over Northern skies. There are occasional flashes of generous and manly feeling, 
transitory splendours, and momentary gleams of just and noble thought, and transient 
coruscations, that light the Heaven of their imagination; but there is no vital warmth in the 
heart; and it remains as cold and sterile as the Arctic or Antarctic regions. They do 
nothing; they gain no victories over themselves; they make no progress; they are still in 
the Northeast corner of the Lodge, as when they first stood there as Apprentices; and 
they do not cultivate Masonry, with a cultivation, determined, resolute, and regular, like 
their cultivation of their estate, profession, or knowledge. Their Masonry takes its chance 
in general and inefficient sentiment, mournfully barren of results; in words and formulas 
and fine professions.

Most men have sentiments, but not principles. The former are temporary sensations, the 
latter permanent and controlling impressions of goodness and virtue. The former are 
general and involuntary, and do not rise to the character of virtue. Every one feels them. 
They flash up spontaneously in every heart. The latter are rules of action, and shape and 
control our conduct; and it is these that Masonry insists upon.We approve the right; but pursue the wrong. It is the old story of human deficiency. No 
one abets or praises injustice, fraud, oppression, covetousness, revenge, envy or 
slander; and yet how many who condemn these things, are themselves guilty of them. It 
is no rare thing for him whose indignation is kindled at a tale of wicked injustice, cruel 
oppression base slander, or misery inflicted by unbridled indulgence; whose anger 
flames in behalf of the injured and ruined victims of wrong; to be in some relation unjust, 
or oppressive, or envious, or self-indulgent, or a careless talker of others. How 
wonderfully indignant the penurious man often is, at the avarice or want of public spirit of 
another!

A great Preacher well said, "Therefore thou art inexcusable. O Man, whosoever thou art, 
that judgest; for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself: for thou that 
judgest, doest the same things." It is amazing to see how men can talk of virtue and 
honour, whose life denies both. It is curious to see with what a marvellous facility many 
bad men quote Scripture. It seems to comfort their evil consciences, to use good words; 
and to gloze over bad deeds with holy texts, wrested to their purpose. Often, the more a 
man talks about Charity and Toleration, the less he has of either; the more he talks about 
Virtue, the smaller stock he has of it. The mouth speaks out of the abundance of the 
heart; but often the very reverse of what the man practises. And the vicious and sensual 
often express, and in a sense feel, strong disgust at vice and sensuality. Hypocrisy is not 
so common as is imagined.Here, in the Lodge, virtue and vice are matters of reflection and feeling only. There is 
little opportunity here, for the practice of either; and Masons yield to the argument here, 
with facility and readiness; because nothing is to follow. It is easy, and safe, here, too 
feel upon these matters. But to-morrow, when they breathe the atmosphere of worldly 
gains and competitions, and the passions are again stirred at the opportunities of 
unlawful pleasure, all their fine emotions about virtue, all their generous abhorrence of 
selfishness and sensuality, melt away like a morning cloud.

For the time, their emotions and sentiments are sincere and real. Men may be really, in a 
certain way, interested in Masonry, while fatally deficient in virtue. It is not always 
hypocrisy. Men pray most fervently and sincerely, and yet are constantly guilty of acts so 
bad and base, so ungenerous and unrighteous, that the crimes that crowd the dockets of 
our courts are scarcely worse.

A man may be a good sort of man in general, and yet a very bad man in particular: good 
in the Lodge and bad in the world; good in public, and bad in his family; good at home, 
and bad on a journey or in a strange city. Many a man earnestly desires to be a good 
Mason. He says so, and is sincere. But if you require him to resist a certain passion, to

sacrifice a certain indulgence, to control his appetite at a particular feast, or to keep his 
temper in a dispute, you will find that he does not wish to be a good Mason, in that 
particular case; or, wishing, is not able to resist his worst impulses.The duties of life are more than life. The law imposeth it upon every citizen, that he prefer 
the urgent service of his country before the safety of his life. If a man be commanded, 
saith a great writer, to bring ordnance or munition to relieve any of the King's towns that 
are distressed, then he cannot for any danger of tempest justify the throwing of them 
overboard; for there it holdeth which was spoken by the Roman, when the same 
necessity of weather was alleged to hold him from embarking: "Necesse est ut eam, non 
ut vivam :" it needs that I go: it is not necessary I should live.

How ungratefully he slinks away, who dies, and does nothing to reflect a glory to 
Heaven ! How barren a tree he is, who lives, and spreads, and cumbers the ground, yet 
leaves not one seed, not one good work to generate another after him ! All cannot leave 
alike; yet all may leave something, answering their proportions and their kinds. Those are 
dead and withered grains of corn, out of which there will not one ear spring. He will 
hardly find the way to Heaven, who desires to go thither alone.

Industry is never wholly unfruitful. If it bring not joy with the incoming profit, it will yet 
banish mischief from thy busied gates. There is a kind of good angel waiting upon 
Diligence that ever carries a laurel in his hand to crown her. How unworthy was that man 
of the world who never did aught, but only lived and died! That we have liberty to do 
anything, we should account it a gift from the favouring Heavens; that we have minds 
sometimes inclining us to use that liberty well, is a great bounty of the Deity.Masonry is action, and not inertness. It requires its Initiates to WORK, actively and 
earnestly, for the benefit of their brethren, their country, and mankind. It is the patron of 
the oppressed, as it is the comforter and consoler of the unfortunate and wretched. It 
seems to it a worthier honour to be the instrument of advancement and reform, than to 
enjoy all that rank and office and lofty titles can bestow. It is the advocate of the common 
people in those things which concern the best interests of mankind. It hates insolent 
power and impudent usurpation. It pities the poor, the sorrowing, the disconsolate; it 
endeavours to raise and improve the ignorant, the sunken, and the degraded.

Its fidelity to its mission will be accurately evidenced, by the extent of the efforts it 
employs, and the means it sets on foot, to improve the people at large and to better their 
condition; chiefest of which, within its reach, is to aid in the education of the children of 
the poor. An intelligent people, informed of its rights, will soon come to know its power, 
and cannot long be oppressed; but if there be not a sound and virtuous populace, the 
elaborate ornaments at the top of the pyramid of society will be a wretched compensation 
for the want of solidity at the base. It is never safe for a nation to repose on the lap of 
ignorance: and if there ever was a time when public tranquillity was insured by the 
absence of knowledge, that season is past. Unthinking stupidity cannot sleep, without 
being appalled by phantoms and shaken by terrors. The improvement of the mass of the 
people is the grand security for popular liberty; in the neglect of which, the politeness, 
refinement, and knowledge accumulated in the higher orders and wealthier classes will 
some day perish like dry grass in the hot fire of popular fury.It is not the mission of Masonry to engage in plots and conspiracies against the civil 
government. It is not the fanatical propagandist of any creed or theory; nor does it 
proclaim itself the enemy of kings. It is the apostle of liberty, equality, and fraternity; but it 
is no more the high-priest of republicanism than of constitutional monarchy. It contracts 
no entangling alliances with any sect of theorists, dreamers, or philosophers. It does not 
know those as its Initiates who assail the civil order and all lawful authority, at the same 
time that they propose to deprive the dying of the consolations of religion. It sits apart 
from all sects and creeds, in its own calm and simple dignity, the same under every 
government. It is still that which it was in the cradle of the human race, when no human 
foot had trodden the soil of Assyria and Egypt, and no colonies had crossed the 
Himalayas into Southern India, Media, or Etruria.

It gives no countenance to anarchy and licentiousness; and no illusion of glory, or 
extravagant emulation of the ancients inflames it with an unnatural thirst for ideal and 
Utopian liberty. It teaches that in rectitude of life and sobriety of habits is the only sure 
guarantee for the continuance of political freedom, and it is chiefly the soldier of the 
sanctity of the laws and the rights of conscience.It recognizes it as a truth, that necessity, as well as abstract right and ideal justice, must 
have its part in the making of laws, the administration of affairs, and the regulation of 
relations in society. It sees, indeed, that necessity rules in all the affairs of man. It knows 
that where any man, or any number or race of men, are so imbecile of intellect, so 
degraded, so incapable of self control, so inferior in the scale of humanity, as to be unfit 
to be intrusted with the highest prerogatives of citizenship, the great law of necessity, for 
the peace and safety of the community and country, requires them to remain under the 
control of those of larger intellect and superior wisdom. It trusts and believes that God 
will, in his own good time, work out his own great and wise purposes; and it is willing to 
wait, where it does not see its own way clear to some certain good.

It hopes and longs for the day when all the races of men, even the lowest, will be 
elevated, and become fitted for political freedom; when, like all other evils that afflict the 
earth, pauperism, and bondage or abject dependence, shall cease and disappear. But it 
does not preach revolution to those who are fond of kings, nor rebellion that can end only 
in disaster and defeat, or in substituting one tyrant for another, or a multitude of despots 
for one.

Wherever a people is fit to be free and to govern itself, and generously strives to be so, 
there go all its sympathies. It detests the tyrant, the lawless oppressor, the military 
usurper, and him who abuses a lawful power. It frowns upon cruelty, and a wanton 
disregard of the rights of humanity. It abhors the selfish employer, and exerts its 
influence to lighten the burdens which want and dependence impose upon the workman, 
and to foster that humanity and kindness which man owes to even the poorest and most 
unfortunate brother.It can never be employed, in any country under Heaven, to teach a toleration for cruelty, 
to weaken moral hatred for guilt, or to deprave and brutalize the human mind. The dread 
of punishment will never make a Mason an accomplice in so corrupting his countrymen, 
and a teacher of depravity and barbarity. If anywhere, as has heretofore happened, a 
tyrant should send a satirist on his tyranny to be convicted and punished as a libeller, in a 
court of justice, a Mason, if a juror in such a case, though in sight of the scaffold 
streaming with the blood of the innocent, and within hearing of the clash of the bayonets 
meant to overawe the court, would rescue the intrepid satirist from the tyrant's fangs, and 
send his officers out from the court with defeat and disgrace.

Even if all law and liberty were trampled under the feet of Jacobinical demagogues or a 
military banditti, and great crimes were perpetrated with a high hand against all who were 
deservedly the objects of public veneration; if the people, overthrowing law, roared like a 
sea around the courts of justice, and demanded the blood of those who, during the 
temporary fit of insanity and drunken delirium, had chanced to become odious to it, for 
true words manfully spoken, or unpopular acts bravely done, the Masonic juror, unawed 
alike by the single or the many-headed tyrant, would consult the dictates of duty alone, 
and stand with a noble firmness between the human tigers and their coveted prey.The Mason would much rather pass his life hidden in the recesses of the deepest 
obscurity, feeding his mind even with the visions and imaginations of good deeds and 
noble actions, than to be placed on the most splendid throne of the universe, tantalized 
with a denial of the practice of all which can make the greatest situation any other than 
the greatest curse. And if he has been enabled to lend the slightest step to any great and 
laudable designs; if he has had any share in any measure giving quiet to private property 
and to private conscience, making lighter the yoke of poverty and dependence, or 
relieving deserving men from oppression; if he has aided in securing to his countrymen

that best possession, peace; if he has joined in reconciling the different sections of his 
own country to each other, and the people to the government of their own creating; and 
in teaching the citizen to look for his protection to the laws of his country, and for his 
comfort to the good-will of his countrymen; if he has thus taken his part with the best of 
men in the best of their actions, he may well shut the book, even if he might wish to read 
a page or two more. It is enough for his measure. He has not lived in vain.Masonry teaches that all power is delegated for the good, and not for the injury of the 
People; and that, when it is perverted from the original purpose, the compact is broken, 
and the right ought to be resumed; that resistance to power usurped is not merely a duty 
which man owes to himself and to his neighbour, but a duty which he owes to his God, in 
asserting and maintaining the rank which He gave him in the creation. This principle 
neither the rudeness of ignorance can stifle nor the enervation of refinement extinguish. It 
makes it base for a man to suffer when he ought to act; and, tending to preserve to him 
the original destinations of Providence, spurns at the arrogant assumptions of tyrants and 
vindicates the independent quality of the race of which we are a part.

The wise and well-informed Mason will not fail to be the votary of Liberty and Justice. He 
will be ready to exert himself in their defence, wherever they exist. It cannot be a matter 
of indifference to him when, his own liberty and that of other men, with whose merits and 
capacities he is acquainted, are involved in the event of the struggle to be made; but his 
attachment will be to the cause, as the cause of man; and not merely to the country. 
Wherever there is a people that understands the value of political justice, and is prepared 
to assert it, that is his country; wherever he can most contribute to the diffusion of these 
principles and the real happiness of mankind, that is his country. Nor does he desire for 
any country any other benefit than justice.

The true Mason identifies the honour of his country with his own. Nothing more conduces 
to the beauty and glory of one's country than the preservation against all enemies of its 
civil and religious liberty. The world will never willingly let die the names of those patriots 
who in her different ages have received upon their own breasts the blows aimed by 
insolent enemies at the bosom of their country.But also it conduces, and in no small measure, to the beauty and glory of one's country, 
that justice should always be administered there to all alike, and neither denied, sold, nor 
delayed to any one; that the interest of the poor should be looked to, and none starve or 
be houseless, or clamor in vain for work; that the child and the feeble woman should not 
be overworked, or even the apprentice or slave be stinted of food or overtasked or 
mercilessly scourged; and that God's great laws of mercy, humanity, and compassion 
should be everywhere enforced, not only by the statutes, but also by the power of public 
opinion. And he who labours, often against reproach and obloquy, and oftener against 
indifference and apathy, to bring about that fortunate condition of things when that great 
code of divine law shall be everywhere and punctually obeyed, is no less a patriot than 
he who bares his bosom to the hostile steel in the ranks of his country's soldiery.

For fortitude is not only seen resplendent on the field of battle and amid the clash of 
arms, but he displays its energy under every difficulty and against every assailant. He 
who wars against cruelty, oppression, and hoary abuses, fights for his country's honour, 
which these things soil; and her honour is as important as her existence. Often, indeed, 
the warfare against those abuses which disgrace one's country is quite as hazardous and 
more discouraging than that against her enemies in the field; and merits equal, if not 
greater reward.For those Greeks and Romans who are the objects of our admiration employed hardly 
any other virtue in the extirpation of tyrants, than that love of liberty, which made them 
prompt in seizing the sword, and gave them strength to use it. With facility they 
accomplish the undertaking, amid the general shout of praise and joy; nor did they 
engage in the attempt so much as an enterprise of perilous and doubtful issue, as a 
contest the most glorious in which virtue could be signalized; which infallibly led to 
present recompense; which bound their brows with wreaths of laurel, and consigned their

memories to immortal fame.memories to immortal fame.

But he who assails hoary abuses, regarded perhaps with a superstitious reverence, and 
around which old laws stand as ramparts and bastions to defend them; who denounces 
acts of cruelty and outrage on humanity which make every perpetrator thereof his 
personal enemy, and perhaps make him looked upon with suspicion by the people 
among whom he lives, as the assailant of an established order of things of which he 
assails only the abuses, and of laws of which he attacks only the violations,--he can 
scarcely look for present recompense, nor that his living brows will be wreathed with 
laurel. And if, contending against a dark array of long-received opinions, superstitions, 
obloquy, and fears, which most men dread more than they do an army terrible with 
banners, the Mason overcomes, and emerges from the contest victorious; or if he does 
not conquer, but is borne down and swept away by the mighty current of prejudice, 
passion, and interest; in either case, the loftiness of spirit which he displays merits for 
him more than a mediocrity of fame. 
e has already lived too long who has survived the ruin of his country; and he who can 
enjoy life after such an event deserves not to have lived at all. Nor does he any more 
deserve to live who looks contentedly upon abuses that disgrace, and cruelties that 
dishonour, and scenes of misery and destitution and brutalization that disfigure his 
country; or sordid meanness and ignoble revenges that make her a by-word and a scoff 
among all generous nations; and does not endeavour to remedy or prevent either.

Not often is a country at war; nor can every one be allowed the privilege of offering his 
heart to the enemy's bullets. But in these patriotic labours of peace, in preventing, 
remedying, and reforming evils, oppressions, wrongs, cruelties, and outrages, every 
Mason can unite; and every one can effect something, and share the honour and glory of 
the result.For the cardinal names in the history of the human mind are few and easily to be counted 
up; but thousands and tens of thousands spend their days in the preparations which are 
to speed the predestined change, in gathering and amassing the materials which are to 
kindle and give light and warmth, when the fire from heaven shall have descended on 
them. Numberless are the sutlers and pioneers, the engineers and artisans, who attend 
the march of intellect. Many move forward in detachments, and level the way over which 
the chariot is to pass, and cut down the obstacles that would impede its progress; and 
these too have their reward. If they labour diligently and faithfully in their calling, not only 
will they enjoy that calm contentment which diligence in the lowliest task never fails to 
win; not only will the sweat of their brows be sweet, and the sweetener of the rest that 
follows; but, when the victory is at last achieved, they will come in for a share in the glory; 
even as the meanest soldier who fought at Marathon or at King's Mountain became a 
sharer in the glory of those saving days; and within his own household circle, the 
approbation of which approaches the nearest to that of an approving conscience, was 
looked upon as the representative of all his brother-heroes; and could tell such tales as 
made the tear glisten on the cheek of his wife, and ]it up his boy'.s eyes with an 
unwonted sparkling eagerness. Or, if he fell in the fight, and his place by the fireside and 
at the table at home was thereafter vacant, that place was sacred; and he was often 
talked of there in the long winter evenings; and his family was deemed fortunate in the 
neighbourhood, because it had had a hero in it, who had fallen in defence of his country.Remember that life's length is not measured by its hours and days but by that which we 
have done therein for our country and kind. A useless life is short. if it last a century; but 
that of Alexander was long as the life of the oak, though he died at thirty-five. We may do 
much in a few years, and we may nothing in a lifetime. If we but eat and drink and sleep, 
and everything go on around us as it pleases; or if we live but amass wealth or gain 
office or wear titles, we might as well not have lived at all; nor have we any right to 
expect immortality.

Forget not, therefore, to what you have devoted yourself in this Degree: defend 
weakness against strength, the friendless against the great, the oppressed against the 
oppressor ! Be ever vigilant and watchful of the interests and honour of your country! and

may the Grand Architect of the Universe give you that strength and wisdom which shall 
enable you well and faithfully to perform these high duties!

MORALS and DOGMA by ALBERT PIKE 
Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry , prepared for the 
Supreme Council of the Thirty Third Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States: 
Charleston, 1871. 
10º - Elu of the Fifteen, 11º - Elu of the Twelve, 12º - Master Architect 
13º - Royal Arch of Solomon, 14º - Perfect Elu

X. ILLUSTRIOUS ELECT OF THE FIFTEEN. 
[Elu of the Fifteen ]THIS Degree is devoted to the same objects as those of the Elu of Nine; 
and also to the cause of Toleration and Liberality against Fanaticism and 
Persecution, political and religious; and to that of Education, Instruction, 
and Enlightenment against Error, Barbarism, and Ignorance. To these 
objects you have irrevocably and forever devoted your hand, your heart, 
and your intellect; and whenever in your presence a Chapter of this 
Degree is opened, you will be most solemnly reminded of your vows here 
taken at the altar. Toleration, holding that every other man has the same right to his opinion 
and faith that we have to ours; and liberality, holding that as no human 
being can with certainty say, in the clash and conflict of hostile faiths and 
creeds, what is truth, or that he is surely in possession of it, so every one 
should feel that it is quite possible that another equally honest and sincere 
with himself, and yet holding the contrary opinion, may himself be in 
possession of the truth, and that whatever one firmly and conscientiously 
believes, is truth, to him - these are the mortal enemies of that fanaticism 
which persecutes for opinion's sake, and initiates crusades against 
whatever it, in its imaginary holiness, deems to be contrary to the law of 
God or verity of dogma. And education, instruction, and enlightenment are 
the most certain means by which fanaticism and intolerance can be 
rendered powerless. No true Mason scoffs at honest convictions and an ardent zeal in the 
cause of what one believes to be truth and justice. But he 
does absolutely deny the right of any man to assume the prerogative of 
Deity, and condemn another's faith and opinions as deserving to be 
punished because heretical.X. ILLUSTRIOUS ELECT OF THE FIFTEEN. 
[Elu of the Fifteen ]

No true Mason scoffs at honest convictions and an ardent zeal in the 
cause of what one believes to be truth and justice. But he 
does absolutely deny the right of any man to assume the prerogative of 
Deity, and condemn another's faith and opinions as deserving to be 
punished because heretical. Nor does he approve the course of those who 
endanger the peace and quiet of great nations, and the best interest of 
their own race by indulging in a chimerical and visionary philanthropy - a 
luxury which chiefly consists in drawing their robes around them to avoid 
contact with their fellows, and proclaiming themselves holier than they. For he knows that such follies are often more calamitous than the ambition 
of kings; and that intolerance and bigotry have been infinitely greater 
curses to mankind than ignorance and error. Better any error than 
persecution! Better any opinion than the thumb-screw, the rack, and the 
stake! And he knows also how unspeakably absurd it is, for a creature to 
whom himself and everything around him are mysteries, to torture and 
slay others, because they cannot think as he does in regard to the 
profoundest of those mysteries, to understand which is utterly beyond the 
comprehension of either the persecutor or the persecuted. Masonry is not a religion. He who makes of it a religious belief, falsifies 
and denaturalizes it. The Brahmin, the Jew, the Mahometan, the Catholic, 
the Protestant, each professing his peculiar religion, sanctioned by the 
laws, by time, and by climate, must needs retain it, and cannot have two 
religions; for the social and sacred laws adapted to the usages, manners, 
and prejudices of particular countries, are the work of men.But Masonry teaches, and has preserved in their purity, the cardinal tenets 
of the old primitive faith, which underlie and are the foundation of all 
religions. All that ever existed have had a basis of truth; and all have 
overlaid that truth with errors. The primitive truths taught by the Redeemer 
were sooner corrupted, and intermingled and alloyed with fictions than 
when taught to the first of our race. Masonry is the universal morality 
which is suitable to the inhabitants of every clime, to the man of every 
creed. It has taught no doctrines, except those truths that tend directly to 
the well-being of man; and those who have attempted to direct it toward 
useless vengeance, political ends, and Jesuitism, have merely perverted it 
to purposes foreign to its pure spirit and real nature. Mankind outgrows the sacrifices and the mythologies of the childhood of 
the world. Yet it is easy for human indolence to 
linger near these helps, and refuse to pass further on. So the 
unadventurous Nomad in the Tartarian wild keeps his flock in the same 
close-cropped circle where they first learned to browse, while the 
progressive man roves ever forth "to fresh fields and pastures new." 
The latter is the true Mason; and the best and indeed the only good 
Mason is he who with the power of business does the work of life; the 
upright mechanic, merchant, or farmer, the man with the power of thought, 
of justice, or of love, he whose whole life is one great act of performance 
of Masonic duty. The natural case of the strength of a strong man or the 
wisdom of a wise one, is to do the work of a strong man or a wise one. The natural work of Masonry is practical life; the use of all the faculties in 
their proper spheres, and for their natural function. Love of Truth, justice, 
and generosity as attributes of God, must appear in a life marked by these 
qualities; that is the only effectual ordinance of Masonry.The natural work of Masonry is practical life; the use of all the faculties in 
their proper spheres, and for their natural function. Love of Truth, justice, 
and generosity as attributes of God, must appear in a life marked by these 
qualities; that is the only effectual ordinance of Masonry. A profession of 
one's convictions, joining the Order, assuming the obligations, assisting at 
the ceremonies, are of the same value in science as in Masonry; the 
natural form of Masonry is goodness, morality, living a true, just, 
affectionate, self-faithful life, from the motive of a good man. It is loyal 
obedience to God's law. The good Mason does the good thing which comes in his way, and 
because it comes in his way; from a love of duty, and not merely because 
a law, enacted by man or God, commands his will to do it. He is true to his 
mind, his conscience, heart, and soul, and feels small temptation to do to 
others what he would not wish to receive from them. He will deny himself 
for the sake of his brother near at hand. His desire attracts in the line of 
his duty, both being in conjunction. Not in vain does the poor or the 
oppressed look up to him. You find such men in all Christian sects, 
Protestant and Catholic, in all the great religious parties of the civilized 
world, among Buddhists, Mahometans, and Jews. They are kind fathers, 
generous citizens, unimpeachable in their business, beautiful in their daily 
lives. You see their Masonry in their work and in their play. It appears in all 
the forms of their activity, individual, domestic, social, ecclesiastical, or 
political. True Masonry within must be morality without. It must become 
eminent morality, which is philanthropy. The true Mason loves not only his 
kindred and his country, but all mankind; not only 
the good, but also the evil, among his brethren. He has more goodness 
than the channels of his daily life will hold. It runs over the banks, to water 
and to feed a thousand thirsty plants.No true Mason scoffs at honest convictions and an ardent zeal in the 
cause of what one believes to be truth and justice. But he 
does absolutely deny the right of any man to assume the prerogative of 
Deity, and condemn another's faith and opinions as deserving to be 
punished because heretical. Nor does he approve the course of those who 
endanger the peace and quiet of great nations, and the best interest of 
their own race by indulging in a chimerical and visionary philanthropy - a 
luxury which chiefly consists in drawing their robes around them to avoid 
contact with their fellows, and proclaiming themselves holier than they. For he knows that such follies are often more calamitous than the ambition 
of kings; and that intolerance and bigotry have been infinitely greater 
curses to mankind than ignorance and error. Better any error than 
persecution! Better any opinion than the thumb-screw, the rack, and the 
stake! And he knows also how unspeakably absurd it is, for a creature to 
whom himself and everything around him are mysteries, to torture and 
slay others, because they cannot think as he does in regard to the 
profoundest of those mysteries, to understand which is utterly beyond the 
comprehension of either the persecutor or the persecuted. Masonry is not a religion. He who makes of it a religious belief, falsifies 
and denaturalizes it. The Brahmin, the Jew, the Mahometan, the Catholic, 
the Protestant, each professing his peculiar religion, sanctioned by the 
laws, by time, and by climate, must needs retain it, and cannot have two 
religions; for the social and sacred laws adapted to the usages, manners, 
and prejudices of particular countries, are the work of men.

He has more goodness 
than the channels of his daily life will hold. It runs over the banks, to water 
and to feed a thousand thirsty plants. Not content with the duty that lies 
along his track, he goes out to seek it; not only willing, he has a salient 
longing to do good, to spread his truth, his justice, his generosity, his 
Masonry over all the world. His daily life is a profession of his Masonry, 
published in perpetual good-will to men. He can not be a persecutor. Not more naturally does the beaver build or the mocking-bird sing his own 
wild, gushing melody, than the true Mason lives in this beautiful outward 
life. So from the perennial spring swells forth the stream, to quicken the 
meadow with new access of green, and perfect beauty bursting into 
bloom. Thus Masonry does the work it was meant to do. The Mason doesnot sigh and weep, and make grimaces. He lives right on. If his life is, as 
whose is not, marked with errors, and with sins, he ploughs over the 
barren spot with his remorse, sows with new seed, and the old desert 
blossoms like a rose. He is not confined to set forms of thought, of action, 
or of feeling. He accepts what his mind regards as true, what his 
conscience decides is right, what his heart deems generous and noble; 
and all else he puts far from him. Though the ancient and the honorable of 
the Earth bid him bow down to them, his stubborn knees bend only at the 
bidding of his manly soul. His Masonry is his freedom before God, not his 
bondage unto men. His mind acts after the universal law of the intellect, 
his conscience according to the universal moral law, his affections and his 
soul after the universal law of each, and so he is strong with the strength 
of God, in this four-fold way communicating with Him. The old theologies, the philosophies of religion of ancient times, will not 
suffice us now. The duties of life are to be done; we are to do them, 
consciously obedient to the law of God, not atheistically, loving only our 
selfish gain. There are sins of trade to be corrected. Everywhere morality 
and philanthropy are needed. There are errors to be made way with, and 
their place supplied with new truths, radiant with the glories of Heaven. There are great wrongs and evils, in Church and State, in domestic, 
social, and public life, to be righted and outgrown. Masonry cannot in our 
age forsake the broad way of life. She must journey on in the open street, 
appear in the crowded square, and teach men by her deeds, her life more 
eloquent than any lips. This Degree is chiefly devoted to TOLERATION; and it inculcates in the 
strongest manner that great leading idea of the Ancient Art, that a belief in 
the one True God, and a moral and virtuous life, constitute the only 
religious requisites needed to enable a man to be a Mason.She must journey on in the open street, 
appear in the crowded square, and teach men by her deeds, her life more 
eloquent than any lips. This Degree is chiefly devoted to TOLERATION; and it inculcates in the 
strongest manner that great leading idea of the Ancient Art, that a belief in 
the one True God, and a moral and virtuous life, constitute the only 
religious requisites needed to enable a man to be a Mason. Masonry has ever the most vivid remembrance of the terrible and artificial 
torments that were used to put down new forms of religion or extinguish 
the old. It sees with the eye of memory the ruthless extermination of all the 
people of all sexes and ages, because it was their misfortune not to know 
the God of the Hebrews, or to worship Him under the wrong name, by the 
savage troops of Moses and Joshua. It sees the thumb-screws and the 
racks, the whip, the gallows, and the stake, the victims of Diocletian and 
Alva, the miserable Covenanters, the Non-Conformists, Servetus burned, 
and the unoffending Quaker hung. It sees Cranmer hold his arm, now no 
longer erring, in the flame until the hand drops off in the consuming heat. It 
sees the persecutions of Peter and Paul, the martyrdom of Stephen, the 
trials of Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin, and Irenæus; and then in turn the 
sufferings of the wretched Pagans under the Christian Emperors, as of the 
Papists in Ireland and under Elizabeth and the bloated Henry. The Roman 
Virgin naked before the hungry lions; young Margaret Graham tied to a 
stake at low-water mark, and there left to drown, singing hymns to God 
until the savage waters broke over her head; and all that in all ages have 
suffered by hunger and nakedness, peril and prison, the rack, the stake, 
and the sword, - it sees them all, and shudders at the long roll of human 
atrocities.He has more goodness 
than the channels of his daily life will hold. It runs over the banks, to water 
and to feed a thousand thirsty plants. Not content with the duty that lies 
along his track, he goes out to seek it; not only willing, he has a salient 
longing to do good, to spread his truth, his justice, his generosity, his 
Masonry over all the world. His daily life is a profession of his Masonry, 
published in perpetual good-will to men. He can not be a persecutor. Not more naturally does the beaver build or the mocking-bird sing his own 
wild, gushing melody, than the true Mason lives in this beautiful outward 
life. So from the perennial spring swells forth the stream, to quicken the 
meadow with new access of green, and perfect beauty bursting into 
bloom. Thus Masonry does the work it was meant to do. The Mason does

It 
sees the persecutions of Peter and Paul, the martyrdom of Stephen, the 
trials of Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin, and Irenæus; and then in turn the 
sufferings of the wretched Pagans under the Christian Emperors, as of the 
Papists in Ireland and under Elizabeth and the bloated Henry. The Roman 
Virgin naked before the hungry lions; young Margaret Graham tied to a 
stake at low-water mark, and there left to drown, singing hymns to God 
until the savage waters broke over her head; and all that in all ages have 
suffered by hunger and nakedness, peril and prison, the rack, the stake, 
and the sword, - it sees them all, and shudders at the long roll of human 
atrocities. And it sees also the oppression still practised in the name of 
religion - men shot in a Christian jail in Christian Italy for reading the 
Christian Bible; in almost every Christian State, laws forbidding freedom of 
speech on matters relating to Christianity; and the gallows reaching its 
arm over the pulpit. The fires of Moloch in Syria, the harsh mutilations in the name of Astarte, 
Cybele, Jehovah; the barbarities of imperial Pagan Torturers; the still 
grosser torments which Roman-Gothic Christians in Italy and Spain 
heaped on their brother-men; the fiendish cruelties to which Switzerland, 
France, the Netherlands, England, Scotland, Ireland, America, have been 
witnesses, are none too powerful to warn man of the unspeakable evils 
which follow from mistakes and errors in the matter of religion, and 
especially frominvesting the God of Love with the cruel and vindictive passions of erring 
humanity, and making blood to have a sweet savor in his nostrils, and 
groans of agony to be delicious to his ears. Man never had the right to usurp the unexercised prerogative of God, and 
condemn and punish another for his belief. Born in a Protestant land, we 
are of that faith. If we had opened our eyes to the light under the shadows 
of St. Peter's at Rome, we should have been devout Catholics; born in the 
Jewish quarter of Aleppo, we should have contemned Christ as an 
imposter; in Constantinople, we should have cried "Allah il Allah, God is 
great and Mahomet is his prophet!" Birth, place, and education give us our 
faith. Few believe in any religion because they have examined the 
evidences of its authenticity, and made up a formal judgment, upon 
weighing the testimony. Not one man in ten thousand knows anything 
about the proofs of his faith. We believe what we are taught; and those are 
most fanatical who know least of the evidences on which their creed is 
based. Facts and testimony are not, except in very rare instances, the 
ground-work of faith. It is an imperative law of God's Economy, unyielding 
and inflexible as Himself, that man shall accept without question the belief 
of those among whom he is born and reared; the faith so made a part of 
his nature resists all evidence to the contrary; and he will disbelieve even 
the evidence of his own senses, rather than yield up the religious belief 
which has grown up in him, flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone. What is truth to me is not truth to another. The same arguments and 
evidences that convince one mind make no impression on another. This 
difference is in men at their birth. No man is entitled positively to assert 
that he is right, where other men, equally intelligent and equally wellinformed, 
hold directly the opposite opinion.This 
difference is in men at their birth. No man is entitled positively to assert 
that he is right, where other men, equally intelligent and equally wellinformed, 
hold directly the opposite opinion. Each thinks it impossible for 
the other 'to be sincere, and each, as to that, is equally in error. "What is 
truth?" was a profound question, the most suggestive one ever put to man. Many beliefs of former and present times seem incomprehensible. They 
startle us with a new glimpse into the human soul, that mysterious thing 
more mysterious the more we note its workings. Here is a man superior to 
myself in intellect and learning; and yet he sincerely believes what seems 
to me too absurd to merit confutation; and I cannot conceive, and 
sincerely do not believe,that he is both sane and honest. And yet he is both. His reason is as perfect as mine, and he is as honest as I. The fancies of a lunatic are realities, to him. Our dreams are realities while 
they last; and, in the Past, no more unreal than what we have acted in our 
waking hours. No man can say that he hath as sure possession of the 
truth as of a chattel. When men entertain opinions diametrically opposed 
to each other, and each is honest, who shall decide which hath the Truth; 
and how can either say with certainty that he hath it? We know not what is 
the truth. That we ourselves believe and feel absolutely certain that our 
own belief is true, is in reality not the slightest proof of the fact, seem it 
never so certain and incapable of doubt to us. No man is responsible for 
the rightness of his faith; but only for the uprightness of it. Therefore no man hath or ever had a right to persecute another for his 
belief; for there cannot be two antagonistic rights; and if one can 
persecute another, because he himself is satisfied that the belief of that 
other is erroneous, the other has, for the same reason, equally as certain 
a right to persecute him.It 
sees the persecutions of Peter and Paul, the martyrdom of Stephen, the 
trials of Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin, and Irenæus; and then in turn the 
sufferings of the wretched Pagans under the Christian Emperors, as of the 
Papists in Ireland and under Elizabeth and the bloated Henry. The Roman 
Virgin naked before the hungry lions; young Margaret Graham tied to a 
stake at low-water mark, and there left to drown, singing hymns to God 
until the savage waters broke over her head; and all that in all ages have 
suffered by hunger and nakedness, peril and prison, the rack, the stake, 
and the sword, - it sees them all, and shudders at the long roll of human 
atrocities. And it sees also the oppression still practised in the name of 
religion - men shot in a Christian jail in Christian Italy for reading the 
Christian Bible; in almost every Christian State, laws forbidding freedom of 
speech on matters relating to Christianity; and the gallows reaching its 
arm over the pulpit. The fires of Moloch in Syria, the harsh mutilations in the name of Astarte, 
Cybele, Jehovah; the barbarities of imperial Pagan Torturers; the still 
grosser torments which Roman-Gothic Christians in Italy and Spain 
heaped on their brother-men; the fiendish cruelties to which Switzerland, 
France, the Netherlands, England, Scotland, Ireland, America, have been 
witnesses, are none too powerful to warn man of the unspeakable evils 
which follow from mistakes and errors in the matter of religion, and 
especially from

No man is responsible for 
the rightness of his faith; but only for the uprightness of it. Therefore no man hath or ever had a right to persecute another for his 
belief; for there cannot be two antagonistic rights; and if one can 
persecute another, because he himself is satisfied that the belief of that 
other is erroneous, the other has, for the same reason, equally as certain 
a right to persecute him. The truth comes to us tinged and colored with our prejudices and our 
preconceptions, which are as old as ourselves, and strong with a divine 
force. It comes to us as the image of a rod comes to us through the water, 
bent and distorted. An argument sinks into and convinces the mind of one 
man, while from that of another it rebounds like a ball of ivory dropped on 
marble. It is no merit in a man to have a particular faith, excellent and 
sound and philosophic as it may be, when he imbibed it with his mother's 
milk. It is no more a merit than his prejudices and his passions. The sincere Moslem has as much right to persecute us, as we topersecute him; and therefore Masonry wisely requires no more than a 
belief in One Great All-Powerful Deity, the Father and Preserver of the 
Universe. Therefore it is she teaches her votaries that toleration is one of 
the chief duties of every good Mason, a component part of that charity 
without which we are mere hollow images of true Masons, mere sounding 
brass and tinkling cymbals. No evil hath so afflicted the world as intolerance of religious opinion. The 
human beings it has slain in various ways, if once and together brought to 
life, would make a nation of people; left to live and increase, would have 
doubled the population of the civilized portion of the globe; among which 
civilized portion it chiefly is that religious wars are waged. The treasure and the human labor 
thus lost would have made the earth a garden, in which, but for his evil 
passions, man might now be as happy as in Eden. No man truly obeys the Masonic law who merely tolerates those whose 
religious opinions are opposed to his own. Every man's opinions are his 
own private property, and the rights of all men to maintain each his own 
are perfectly equal. Merely to tolerate, to bear with an opposing opinion, is 
to assume it to be heretical; and assert the right to persecute, if we would; 
and claim our toleration of it as a merit. The Mason's creed goes further 
than that. No man, it holds, has any right in any way to, interfere with the 
religious belief of another. It holds that each mat] is absolutely sovereign 
as to his own belief, and that belief is a matter absolutely foreign to all who 
do not entertain the same belief; and that, if there were any right of 
persecution at all, it would in all cases be a mutual right; because one 
party has the same right as the other to sit as judge in his own case; and 
God is the only magistrate that can rightfully decide between them.No man, it holds, has any right in any way to, interfere with the 
religious belief of another. It holds that each mat] is absolutely sovereign 
as to his own belief, and that belief is a matter absolutely foreign to all who 
do not entertain the same belief; and that, if there were any right of 
persecution at all, it would in all cases be a mutual right; because one 
party has the same right as the other to sit as judge in his own case; and 
God is the only magistrate that can rightfully decide between them. To 
1hat great judge, Masonry refers the matter; and opening wide its portals, 
it invites to enter there and live in peace and harmony, the Protestant, the 
Catholic, the Jew, the Moslem; every man who will lead a truly virtuous 
and moral life, love his brethren, sinister to the sick and distressed, and 
believe in the ONE, All Powerful, All-Wise, everywhere - Present GOD, 
Architect, Creator, and Preserver of all things, by whose universal law of 
Harmony ever rolls on this universe, the great, vast, infinite circle of 
successive Death and Life:- to whose INEFFABLE NAME let all true 
Masons pay profoundest homage! for whose thousand blessings poured 
upon us, let us feel the sincerest gratitude, now, henceforth, and forever! We may well be tolerant of each other's creed; for in every faith there are 
excellent moral precepts. Far in the South of Asia, Zoroaster taught this 
doctrine: "On commencing a journey, the Faithful should turn his thoughts 
toward Ormuzd, and confess him, in the purity of his heart, to be King of 
the World; he should love him, do him homage, and serve him. He must 
be upright and charitable, despise the pleasures of the body, and avoid 
pride and haughtiness, and vice in all its forms, and especially 'falsehood, 
one of the basest sins of which man can be guilty. He must forget injuries  
and not avenge himself. He must honor the memory of 
his parents and relatives.No man is responsible for 
the rightness of his faith; but only for the uprightness of it. Therefore no man hath or ever had a right to persecute another for his 
belief; for there cannot be two antagonistic rights; and if one can 
persecute another, because he himself is satisfied that the belief of that 
other is erroneous, the other has, for the same reason, equally as certain 
a right to persecute him. The truth comes to us tinged and colored with our prejudices and our 
preconceptions, which are as old as ourselves, and strong with a divine 
force. It comes to us as the image of a rod comes to us through the water, 
bent and distorted. An argument sinks into and convinces the mind of one 
man, while from that of another it rebounds like a ball of ivory dropped on 
marble. It is no merit in a man to have a particular faith, excellent and 
sound and philosophic as it may be, when he imbibed it with his mother's 
milk. It is no more a merit than his prejudices and his passions. The sincere Moslem has as much right to persecute us, as we to

He must forget injuries  
and not avenge himself. He must honor the memory of 
his parents and relatives. At night, before retiring to sleep, he should 
rigorously examine his conscience, and repent of the faults which 
weakness or ill-fortune had caused him to commit." He was required to 
pray for strength to persevere in the Good, and to obtain forgiveness for 
his errors. It was his duty to confess his faults to a Magus, or to a layman 
renowned for his virtues, or to the Sun. Fasting and maceration were 
prohibited; and, on the contrary, it was his duty suitably to nourish the 
body and to maintain its vigor, that his soul might be strong to resist the 
Genius of Darkness; that he might more attentively read the Divine Word, 
and have more courage to perform noble deeds. And in the North of Europe the Druids taught devotion to friends, 
indulgence for reciprocal wrongs, love of deserved praise, prudence, 
humanity, hospitality, respect for old age, disregard of the future, 
temperance, contempt of death, and a chivalrous deference to woman.Listen to these maxims from the Hava Maal, or Sublime Book of Odin: 
"If thou hast a friend, visit him often; the path will grow over with grass, 
and the trees soon cover it, if thou dost not constantly walk upon it. He is a 
faithful friend, who, having but two loaves, gives his friend one. Be never 
first to break with thy friend; sorrow wrings the heart of him who has no 
one save himself with whom to take counsel. There is no virtuous man 
who has not some vice, no bad man who has not some virtue. Happy he 
who obtains the praise and good-will of men; for all that depends on the 
will of another is hazardous and uncertain. Riches flit away in the twinkling 
of an eye; they are the most inconstant of friends; flocks and herds perish, 
parents die, friends are not immortal, thou thyself diest; I know but one 
thing that doth not die, the judgment that is passed upon the dead. Be 
humane toward those whom thou meetest on the road. If the guest that 
cometh to thy house is a - cold, give him fire; the man who has journeyed 
over the mountains needs food and dry garments. Mock not at the aged; 
for words full of sense come often from the wrinkles of age. Be moderately 
wise, and not over-prudent. Let no one seek to know his destiny, if he 
would sleep tranquilly. There is no malady more cruel than to be 
discontented with our lot. The glutton eats his own death; and the wise 
man laughs at the fool's greediness. Nothing is more injurious to the 
young than excessive drinking;  
the more one drinks the more he loses his reason; the 
bird of forgetfulness sings before those who intoxicate themselves, and 
wiles away their souls. Man devoid of sense believes he will live always if 
he avoids war; but, if the lances spare him, old age will give him no 
quarter. Better live well than live long. When a man lights a fire in his 
house, death comes before it goes out." 
And thus said the Indian books: "Honor thy father and mother.Better live well than live long. When a man lights a fire in his 
house, death comes before it goes out." 
And thus said the Indian books: "Honor thy father and mother. Never 
forget the benefits thou hast received. Learn while thou art young. Be 
submissive to the laws of thy country. . Seek the company of virtuous 
men. Speak not of God but with respect. Live on good terms with thy 
fellow-citizens. Remain in thy proper place. Speak ill of no one. Mock at 
the bodily infirmities of none. Pursue not unrelentingly a conquered 
enemy. Strive to acquire a good reputation. Take counsel with wise men. The more one learns, the more he acquires the faculty of learning, 
Knowledge is the most permanent wealth. As well be dumb as ignorant. The true use of knowledge is to distinguish good from evil. Be not a 
subject of shame to thy parents. What one learns in youth endures like the 
engraving upon a rock. He is wise who knows himself. Let thy books be 
thy best friends. When thou attainest an hundred years, cease to learn. Wisdom is solidly planted, even on the shifting ocean. Deceive no one, not 
even thine enemy. Wisdom is a treasure that everywhere commands its 
value. Speak mildly, even to the poor. It is sweeter to forgive than to take 
vengeance. Gaming and quarrels lead to misery. There is no true merit 
without the practice of virtue. To honor our mother is the most fitting 
homage we can pay the Divinity. There is no tranquil sleep without a clear 
conscience. He badly understands his interest who breaks his word." 
Twenty-four centuries ago these were the Chinese Ethics: 
"The Philosopher [Confucius] said, 'SAN! my doctrine is simple, and easy 
to be understood.' THSENG-TSEU replied, 'that is certain.' The 
Philosopher having gone out, the disciples asked what their master had 
meant to say.He must forget injuries  
and not avenge himself. He must honor the memory of 
his parents and relatives. At night, before retiring to sleep, he should 
rigorously examine his conscience, and repent of the faults which 
weakness or ill-fortune had caused him to commit." He was required to 
pray for strength to persevere in the Good, and to obtain forgiveness for 
his errors. It was his duty to confess his faults to a Magus, or to a layman 
renowned for his virtues, or to the Sun. Fasting and maceration were 
prohibited; and, on the contrary, it was his duty suitably to nourish the 
body and to maintain its vigor, that his soul might be strong to resist the 
Genius of Darkness; that he might more attentively read the Divine Word, 
and have more courage to perform noble deeds. And in the North of Europe the Druids taught devotion to friends, 
indulgence for reciprocal wrongs, love of deserved praise, prudence, 
humanity, hospitality, respect for old age, disregard of the future, 
temperance, contempt of death, and a chivalrous deference to woman.

He badly understands his interest who breaks his word." 
Twenty-four centuries ago these were the Chinese Ethics: 
"The Philosopher [Confucius] said, 'SAN! my doctrine is simple, and easy 
to be understood.' THSENG-TSEU replied, 'that is certain.' The 
Philosopher having gone out, the disciples asked what their master had 
meant to say. THSENG--TSEU responded, 'The doctrine of our Master 
consists solely in being upright of heart, and loving our neighbor as we 
love ourself."' 
About a century later, the Hebrew law said, "If any man hate his neighbor 
... then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to 
do unto his brother . . . Better is a neighbor that is near, than a. brother 
afar off ... Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." 
In the same fifth century before Christ, SOCRATES the Grecian said, 
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."Three generations earlier, ZOROASTER had said to the Persians: "Offer 
up thy grateful prayers to the Lord, the most just and pure Ormuzd, the 
supreme and adorable God, who thus declared to his Prophet Zerdusht: 
'Hold it not meet to do unto others what thou wouldst not desire done unto 
thyself; do that unto the people, which, when done to thyself, is not 
disagreeable unto thee."' 
The same doctrine had been long taught in the schools of Babylon, 
Alexandria, and Jerusalem. A Pagan declared to the Pharisee HILLEL that 
he was ready to embrace the Jewish religion, if he could make known to 
him in a few words a summary of the whole law of Moses. "That which 
thou likest not done to thyself," said Hillel, "do it not unto thy neighbor. Therein is all the law: the rest is nothing but the commentary upon it." 
"Nothing is more natural," said CONFUCIUS, "nothing more simple, than 
the principles of that morality which I endeavor, by salutary maxims, to 
inculcate in you . . . It is humanity; which is to say, that universal charity 
among all of our species, without distinction. It is uprightness ; that is, that 
rectitude of spirit and of heart, which make; one seek for truth in 
everything, and desire it, without deceiving one's self or others. It is, 
finally, sincerity or good faith; which is to say, that frankness, that 
openness of heart, tempered by self-reliance, which excludes all feints 
and all disguising, as much in speech as in action." 
To diffuse useful information, to further intellectual refinement, sure 
forerunner of moral improvement, to hasten the coming of the great day, 
when the dawn of general knowledge shalt ,chase away the lazy, lingering 
mists of ignorance and error, even from the base of the great social 
pyramid, is indeed a high calling, in which the most splendid talents and 
consummate virtue may well press onward, eager to bear a part.It is uprightness ; that is, that 
rectitude of spirit and of heart, which make; one seek for truth in 
everything, and desire it, without deceiving one's self or others. It is, 
finally, sincerity or good faith; which is to say, that frankness, that 
openness of heart, tempered by self-reliance, which excludes all feints 
and all disguising, as much in speech as in action." 
To diffuse useful information, to further intellectual refinement, sure 
forerunner of moral improvement, to hasten the coming of the great day, 
when the dawn of general knowledge shalt ,chase away the lazy, lingering 
mists of ignorance and error, even from the base of the great social 
pyramid, is indeed a high calling, in which the most splendid talents and 
consummate virtue may well press onward, eager to bear a part. From the 
Masonic ranks ought to go forth those whose genius and not their 
ancestry ennoble them, to open to all ranks the temple of science, and by 
their own example to make the humblest men emulous to climb steps no 
longer inaccessible, and enter the unfolded gates burning in the sun. The highest intellectual cultivation is perfectly compatible with 
the daily cares and toils of working-men. A keen relish for the most 
sublime truths of science belongs alike to every class of Mankind. And, as 
philosophy was taught in the sacred groves of Athens, and under the 
Portico, and in the old Temples of Egypt and India, so in our Lodges ought 
Knowledge to be dispensed, the Sciences taught, and the Lectures 
become like the teachings of Socrates and Plato, of Agassiz and Cousin. Real knowledge never permitted either turbulence or unbelief; but its 
progress is the forerunner of liberality and enlightened toleration. Whoso 
dreads these may well tremble; for he may be well assured that their day 
is at length come, and must put to speedy flight the evil spirits of tyranny 
and persecution, which haunted the long night now gone down the sky.He badly understands his interest who breaks his word." 
Twenty-four centuries ago these were the Chinese Ethics: 
"The Philosopher [Confucius] said, 'SAN! my doctrine is simple, and easy 
to be understood.' THSENG-TSEU replied, 'that is certain.' The 
Philosopher having gone out, the disciples asked what their master had 
meant to say. THSENG--TSEU responded, 'The doctrine of our Master 
consists solely in being upright of heart, and loving our neighbor as we 
love ourself."' 
About a century later, the Hebrew law said, "If any man hate his neighbor 
... then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to 
do unto his brother . . . Better is a neighbor that is near, than a. brother 
afar off ... Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." 
In the same fifth century before Christ, SOCRATES the Grecian said, 
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."

Real knowledge never permitted either turbulence or unbelief; but its 
progress is the forerunner of liberality and enlightened toleration. Whoso 
dreads these may well tremble; for he may be well assured that their day 
is at length come, and must put to speedy flight the evil spirits of tyranny 
and persecution, which haunted the long night now gone down the sky. And it is to be hoped that the time will soon arrive, when, as men will no 
longer suffer themselves to be led blindfolded in ignorance, so will they no 
more yield to the vile principle of judging and treating their fellowcreatures, 
not according to the intrinsic merit of their actions, but 
according to the accidental and involuntary coincidence of their opinions. Whenever we come to treat with entire respect those who conscientiously 
differ from ourselves, the only practical effect of a difference will be, to 
make us enlighten the ignorance on one side or the other, from which it 
springs, by instructing them, if it be theirs; ourselves, if it be our own; to 
the end that the only kind of unanimity may be produced which is 
desirable among rational beings, - the agreement proceeding from full 
conviction after the freest discussion. The Elu of Fifteen ought therefore to take the lead of his fellow-citizen, not 
in frivolous amusements, not in the degrading pursuits of the ambitious 
vulgar; but in the truly noble task of enlightening the mass of his 
countrymen, and of leaving his own name encircled, not with barbaric 
splendor, or attached to courtly gewgaws, but illustrated by the honorsmost worthy of our rational nature; coupled with the diffusion of 
knowledge, and gratefully pronounced by a few, at least, whom his wise 
beneficence has rescued from ignorance and vice. We say to him, in the words of the great Roman: "Men in no respect so 
nearly approach to the Deity, as when they confer benefits on men. To 
serve and do good to as many as possible, - there is nothing greater in 
your fortune than that you should be able, 
and nothing finer in your nature, than that you should be desirous to do 
this." This is the true mark for the aim of every man and Mason who either 
prizes the enjoyment of pure happiness, or sets a right value upon a high 
and unsullied renown.We say to him, in the words of the great Roman: "Men in no respect so 
nearly approach to the Deity, as when they confer benefits on men. To 
serve and do good to as many as possible, - there is nothing greater in 
your fortune than that you should be able, 
and nothing finer in your nature, than that you should be desirous to do 
this." This is the true mark for the aim of every man and Mason who either 
prizes the enjoyment of pure happiness, or sets a right value upon a high 
and unsullied renown. And if the benefactors of mankind, when they rest 
from their noble labors, shall be permitted to enjoy hereafter, as an 
appropriate reward of their virtue, the privilege of looking down upon the 
blessings with which their exertions and charities, and perhaps their toils 
and sufferings have clothed the scene of their former existence, it will not, 
in a state of exalted purity and wisdom, be the founders of mighty 
dynasties, the conquerors of new empires, the Cæsars, Alexanders, and 
Tamerlanes; nor the mere Kings and Counsellors, Presidents and 
Senators, who have lived for their party chiefly, and for their country only 
incidentally, often sacrificing to their own aggrandizement or that of their 
faction the good of their fellow-creatures; - it will not be they who will be 
gratified by contemplating the monuments of their inglorious fame; but 
those will enjoy that delight and march in that triumph, who can trace the 
remote effects of their enlightened benevolence in the improved condition 
of their species, and exult in the reflection, that the change which they at 
last, perhaps after many years, survey, with eyes that age and sorrow can 
make dim no more, - of Knowledge become Power, - Virtue sharing that 
Empire, - Superstition dethroned, and Tyranny exiled, is, if even only in 
some small and very slight degree, yet still in some degree, the fruit, 
precious if costly, and though late repaid yet long enduring, of their own 
self-denial and strenuous exertion, of their own mite of charity and aid to 
education wisely bestowed, and of the hardships and hazards which they 
encountered here below.To 
serve and do good to as many as possible, - there is nothing greater in 
your fortune than that you should be able, 
and nothing finer in your nature, than that you should be desirous to do 
this." This is the true mark for the aim of every man and Mason who either 
prizes the enjoyment of pure happiness, or sets a right value upon a high 
and unsullied renown. And if the benefactors of mankind, when they rest 
from their noble labors, shall be permitted to enjoy hereafter, as an 
appropriate reward of their virtue, the privilege of looking down upon the 
blessings with which their exertions and charities, and perhaps their toils 
and sufferings have clothed the scene of their former existence, it will not, 
in a state of exalted purity and wisdom, be the founders of mighty 
dynasties, the conquerors of new empires, the Cæsars, Alexanders, and 
Tamerlanes; nor the mere Kings and Counsellors, Presidents and 
Senators, who have lived for their party chiefly, and for their country only 
incidentally, often sacrificing to their own aggrandizement or that of their 
faction the good of their fellow-creatures; - it will not be they who will be 
gratified by contemplating the monuments of their inglorious fame; but 
those will enjoy that delight and march in that triumph, who can trace the 
remote effects of their enlightened benevolence in the improved condition 
of their species, and exult in the reflection, that the change which they at 
last, perhaps after many years, survey, with eyes that age and sorrow can 
make dim no more, - of Knowledge become Power, - Virtue sharing that 
Empire, - Superstition dethroned, and Tyranny exiled, is, if even only in 
some small and very slight degree, yet still in some degree, the fruit, 
precious if costly, and though late repaid yet long enduring, of their own 
self-denial and strenuous exertion, of their own mite of charity and aid to 
education wisely bestowed, and of the hardships and hazards which they 
encountered here below. Masonry requires of its Initiates and votaries nothing that is impracticable.And if the benefactors of mankind, when they rest 
from their noble labors, shall be permitted to enjoy hereafter, as an 
appropriate reward of their virtue, the privilege of looking down upon the 
blessings with which their exertions and charities, and perhaps their toils 
and sufferings have clothed the scene of their former existence, it will not, 
in a state of exalted purity and wisdom, be the founders of mighty 
dynasties, the conquerors of new empires, the Cæsars, Alexanders, and 
Tamerlanes; nor the mere Kings and Counsellors, Presidents and 
Senators, who have lived for their party chiefly, and for their country only 
incidentally, often sacrificing to their own aggrandizement or that of their 
faction the good of their fellow-creatures; - it will not be they who will be 
gratified by contemplating the monuments of their inglorious fame; but 
those will enjoy that delight and march in that triumph, who can trace the 
remote effects of their enlightened benevolence in the improved condition 
of their species, and exult in the reflection, that the change which they at 
last, perhaps after many years, survey, with eyes that age and sorrow can 
make dim no more, - of Knowledge become Power, - Virtue sharing that 
Empire, - Superstition dethroned, and Tyranny exiled, is, if even only in 
some small and very slight degree, yet still in some degree, the fruit, 
precious if costly, and though late repaid yet long enduring, of their own 
self-denial and strenuous exertion, of their own mite of charity and aid to 
education wisely bestowed, and of the hardships and hazards which they 
encountered here below. Masonry requires of its Initiates and votaries nothing that is impracticable. It does not demand that they should undertake to climb to those lofty and 
sublime peaks of a theoretical and imaginary unpractical virtue, high and 
cold and remote as the eternal snows that wrap the shoulders of 
Chimborazo, and at least as inaccessible as they.Real knowledge never permitted either turbulence or unbelief; but its 
progress is the forerunner of liberality and enlightened toleration. Whoso 
dreads these may well tremble; for he may be well assured that their day 
is at length come, and must put to speedy flight the evil spirits of tyranny 
and persecution, which haunted the long night now gone down the sky. And it is to be hoped that the time will soon arrive, when, as men will no 
longer suffer themselves to be led blindfolded in ignorance, so will they no 
more yield to the vile principle of judging and treating their fellowcreatures, 
not according to the intrinsic merit of their actions, but 
according to the accidental and involuntary coincidence of their opinions. Whenever we come to treat with entire respect those who conscientiously 
differ from ourselves, the only practical effect of a difference will be, to 
make us enlighten the ignorance on one side or the other, from which it 
springs, by instructing them, if it be theirs; ourselves, if it be our own; to 
the end that the only kind of unanimity may be produced which is 
desirable among rational beings, - the agreement proceeding from full 
conviction after the freest discussion. The Elu of Fifteen ought therefore to take the lead of his fellow-citizen, not 
in frivolous amusements, not in the degrading pursuits of the ambitious 
vulgar; but in the truly noble task of enlightening the mass of his 
countrymen, and of leaving his own name encircled, not with barbaric 
splendor, or attached to courtly gewgaws, but illustrated by the honors

Masonry requires of its Initiates and votaries nothing that is impracticable. It does not demand that they should undertake to climb to those lofty and 
sublime peaks of a theoretical and imaginary unpractical virtue, high and 
cold and remote as the eternal snows that wrap the shoulders of 
Chimborazo, and at least as inaccessible as they. It asks that alone to be 
done which is easy to be done. It overtasks no one's strength, and asks no 
one to go beyond his means and capacities. It does not expect one whose 
business or profession yields him little more than the wants of himself and 
his family require, and whose time is necessarily occupied by his daily 
vocations, to abandon or neglect the business 
by which he and his children live, and devote himself and his means to the 
diffusion of knowledge among men. It does not expect him to publish 
books for the people, or to lecture, to the ruin of his private affairs, or to 
found academies and colleges, build up libraries, and entitle himself to 
statues. But it does require and expect every man of us to do something, within 
and according to his means; and there is no Mason who cannot do some 
thing, if not alone, then by combination and association. If a Lodge cannot aid in founding a school or an academy it can still do 
something. It can educate one boy or girl, at least, the child of some poor 
or departed brother. And it should never be forgotten, that in the poorest 
unregarded child that seems abandoned to ignorance and vice may 
slumber the virtues of a Socrates, the intellect of a Bacon or a Bossuet, 
the genius of a Shakespeare, the capacity to benefit mankind of a 
Washington; and that in rescuing him from the mire in which he is 
plunged, and giving him the means of education and development, the 
Lodge that does it may be the direct and immediate means of conferringupon the world as great a boon as that given it by John Faust the boy of 
Mentz; may perpetuate the liberties of a country and change the destinies 
of nations, and write a new chapter in the history of the world. For we never know the importance of the act we do. The daughter of 
Pharaoh little thought what she was doing for the human race, and the 
vast unimaginable consequences that depended on her charitable act, 
when she drew the little child of a Hebrew woman from among the rushes 
that grew along the bank of the Nile, and determined to rear it as if it were 
her own. How often has an act of charity, costing the doer little, given to the world a 
great painter, a great musician, a great inventor! How often has such an 
act developed the ragged boy into the benefactor of his race! On what 
small and apparently unimportant circumstances have turned and hinged, 
the fates of the world's great conquerors. There is no law that limits the 
returns that shall be reaped from a single good deed. The widow's mite 
may not only be as acceptable to God, but may produce as great results 
as the rich man's costly offering. The poorest boy, helped by benevolence, 
may come to lead armies, to control senates, to decide an peace and war, 
to dictate to cabinets; and his magnificent thoughts and noble words may  
be law many years hereafter to millions of men yet unborn. But the opportunity to effect a great good does not often occur to any one. It is worse than folly for one to lie idle and inert, and expect the accident to 
befall him, by which his influences shall live forever. He can expect that to 
happen, only in consequence of one or many or all of a long series of acts. He can expect to benefit the world only as men attain other results; by 
continuance, by persistence, by a steady and uniform habit of laboring for 
the enlightenment of the world, to the extent of his means and capacity.He can expect that to 
happen, only in consequence of one or many or all of a long series of acts. He can expect to benefit the world only as men attain other results; by 
continuance, by persistence, by a steady and uniform habit of laboring for 
the enlightenment of the world, to the extent of his means and capacity. For it is, in all instances, by steady labor, by giving enough of application 
to our work, and having enough of time for the doing of it, by regular 
pains-taking, and the plying of constant assiduities, and not by any 
process of legerdemain, that we secure the strength and the staple of real 
excellence. It was thus that Demosthenes, clause after clause, and 
sentence after sentence, elaborated to the uttermost his immortal orations. It was thus that Newton pioneered his way, by the steps of an ascending 
geometry, to the mechanism of the Heavens, and Le Verrier added a 
planet to our Solar System. It is a most erroneous opinion that those who have left the most 
stupendous monuments of intellect behind them, were not differently 
exercised from the rest of the species, but only differently gifted; that they 
signalized themselves only by their talent, and hardly ever by their 
industry; for it is in truth to the most strenuous application of those 
commonplace faculties which are diffused among all, that they are 
indebted for the glories which now encircle their remembrance and their 
name.Masonry requires of its Initiates and votaries nothing that is impracticable. It does not demand that they should undertake to climb to those lofty and 
sublime peaks of a theoretical and imaginary unpractical virtue, high and 
cold and remote as the eternal snows that wrap the shoulders of 
Chimborazo, and at least as inaccessible as they. It asks that alone to be 
done which is easy to be done. It overtasks no one's strength, and asks no 
one to go beyond his means and capacities. It does not expect one whose 
business or profession yields him little more than the wants of himself and 
his family require, and whose time is necessarily occupied by his daily 
vocations, to abandon or neglect the business 
by which he and his children live, and devote himself and his means to the 
diffusion of knowledge among men. It does not expect him to publish 
books for the people, or to lecture, to the ruin of his private affairs, or to 
found academies and colleges, build up libraries, and entitle himself to 
statues. But it does require and expect every man of us to do something, within 
and according to his means; and there is no Mason who cannot do some 
thing, if not alone, then by combination and association. If a Lodge cannot aid in founding a school or an academy it can still do 
something. It can educate one boy or girl, at least, the child of some poor 
or departed brother. And it should never be forgotten, that in the poorest 
unregarded child that seems abandoned to ignorance and vice may 
slumber the virtues of a Socrates, the intellect of a Bacon or a Bossuet, 
the genius of a Shakespeare, the capacity to benefit mankind of a 
Washington; and that in rescuing him from the mire in which he is 
plunged, and giving him the means of education and development, the 
Lodge that does it may be the direct and immediate means of conferring

It was thus that Newton pioneered his way, by the steps of an ascending 
geometry, to the mechanism of the Heavens, and Le Verrier added a 
planet to our Solar System. It is a most erroneous opinion that those who have left the most 
stupendous monuments of intellect behind them, were not differently 
exercised from the rest of the species, but only differently gifted; that they 
signalized themselves only by their talent, and hardly ever by their 
industry; for it is in truth to the most strenuous application of those 
commonplace faculties which are diffused among all, that they are 
indebted for the glories which now encircle their remembrance and their 
name. We must not imagine it to be a vulgarizing of genius, that it should be 
lighted up in any other way than by a direct inspiration from Heaven nor 
overlook the steadfastness of purpose, the devotion to some single but 
great object, the unweariedness of labor that is given, not in convulsive 
and preternatural throes, but by little and little as the strength of the mind 
may bear it; the accumulation of many small efforts, instead of a few grand 
and gigantic, but perhaps irregular movements, on the part of energies 
that are marvellous; by which former alone the great results are brought 
out that write their enduring records on the face of the earth and in the 
history of nations and of man. We must not overlook these elements, to which genius owes the best and 
proudest of her achievements; nor imagine that qualities so generally 
possessed as patience and pains-taking, and resolute industry, have no 
share in upholding a distinction so illustrious as that of the benefactor of 
his kind. We must not forget that great results are most ordinarily produced by anaggregate of many contributions and exertions; as it is the invisible 
particles of vapor, each separate and distinct from the other, that, rising 
from the oceans and their bays and gulfs, from lakes and rivers, and wide 
morasses and overflowed plains, float away as clouds, and distill upon the 
earth in dews, and fall in showers and rain and snows upon the broad 
plains and rude mountains, and make the great navigable streams that are 
the arteries along which flows the life-blood of a country. 
And so Masonry can do much, if each Mason be content to do his share, 
and if their united efforts are directed by wise counsels to a common 
purpose. "It is for God and for Omnipotency to do mighty things in a 
moment; but by degrees to grow to greatness is the course that He hath 
left for man." 
If Masonry will but be true to her mission, and Masons to their promises 
and obligations - if, re-entering vigorously upon a career of beneficence, 
she and they will but pursue it earnestly and unfalteringly, remembering 
that our contributions to the cause of charity and education then deserve 
the greatest credit when it costs us something, the curtailing of a comfort 
or the relinquishment of a luxury, to make them - if we will but give aid to 
what were once Masonry's great schemes for human improvement, not 
fitfully and spasmodically, but regularly and incessantly, as the vapors rise 
and the springs run, and as the sun rises and the stars come up into the 
heavens, then we may be sure that great results will be attained and a 
great work done. And then it will most surely be seen that Masonry is not 
effete or impotent, nor degenerated nor drooping to a fatal decay.

XI. SUBLIME ELECT OF THE TWELVE 
OR 
PRINCE AMETH. 
[Elu of the Twelve.]XI. SUBLIME ELECT OF THE TWELVE 
OR 
PRINCE AMETH. 
[Elu of the Twelve.]

The duties of a Prince Ameth are, to be earnest, true, reliable, and 
sincere; to protect the people against illegal impositions and exactions; to 
contend for their political rights, and to see, as far as he may or can, that 
those bear the burdens who reap the benefits of the Government. 
You are to be true unto all men. 
You are to be frank and sincere in all things. 
You are to be earnest in doing whatever it is your duty to do. 
And no man must repent that he has relied upon your resolve, your 
profession, or your word. 
The great distinguishing characteristic of a Mason is sympathy with his 
kind. He recognizes in the human race one great family, all connected 
with himself by those invisible links, and that mighty net-work of 
circumstance, forged and woven by God. 
Feeling that sympathy, it is his first Masonic duty to serve his fellow-man. 
At his first entrance into the Order, he ceases to be isolated, and 
becomes one of a great brotherhood, assuming now duties toward every 
Mason that lives, as every Mason at the same moment assumes them 
toward him. 
Nor are those duties on his part confined to Masons alone. He assumes 
many in regard to his country, and especially toward the great, suffering 
masses of the common people; for they too are his brethren, and God 
hears them, inarticulate as the moanings of their misery are. By all propermeans, of persuasion and influence, and otherwise, if the occasion  
and emergency require, he is bound to defend them against oppression,  
and tyrannical and illegal exactions. He labors equally to defend and to improve the people. He does not 
flatter them to mislead them, nor fawn upon them to rule them, nor 
conceal his opinions to humor them, nor tell them that they can never err, 
and that their voice is the voice of God. He knows that the safety of every 
free government, and its continuance and perpetuity depend upon the 
virtue and intelligence of the common people; and that, unless their liberty 
is of such a kind as arms can neither procure nor take away; unless it is 
the fruit of manly courage, of justice, temperance, and generous virtue - 
unless, being such, it has taken deep root in the minds and hearts of the 
people at large, there will not long be wanting those who will snatch from 
them by treachery what they have acquired by arms or institutions. He knows that if, after being released from the toils of war, the people 
neglect the arts of peace; if their peace and liberty be a state of warfare; if 
war be their only virtue, and the summit of their praise, they will soon find 
peace the most adverse to their interests. It will be only a more 
distressing war; and that which they imagined liberty will be the worst of 
slavery. For, unless by the means of knowledge and morality, not frothy 
and loquacious, but genuine, unadulterated, and sincere, they clear the 
horizon of the mind from those mists of error and passion which arise from 
ignorance and vice, they will always have those who will bend their necks 
to the yoke as if they were brutes; who, notwithstanding all their triumphs, 
will put them up to the highest bidder, as if they were mere booty made in 
war; and find an exuberant source of wealth and power, in the people's 
ignorance, prejudice, and passions.It will be only a more 
distressing war; and that which they imagined liberty will be the worst of 
slavery. For, unless by the means of knowledge and morality, not frothy 
and loquacious, but genuine, unadulterated, and sincere, they clear the 
horizon of the mind from those mists of error and passion which arise from 
ignorance and vice, they will always have those who will bend their necks 
to the yoke as if they were brutes; who, notwithstanding all their triumphs, 
will put them up to the highest bidder, as if they were mere booty made in 
war; and find an exuberant source of wealth and power, in the people's 
ignorance, prejudice, and passions. The people that does not subjugate the propensity of the wealthy to 
avarice, ambition, and sensuality, expel luxury from them and their 
families, keep down pauperism, diffuse knowledge among the poor, and 
labor to raise the abject from the mire of vice and low indulgence, and to 
keep the industrious from starving in sight of luxurious festivals, will find 
that it has cherished, in that avarice, ambition, sensuality, selfishness, 
and luxury of the one class, and that degradation, misery, drunkenness, 
ignorance, and brutalization of the other, more stubborn and intractable 
despots at home than it ever encountered in the field; and even its very  
bowels will be continually teeming with the intolerable progeny of tyrants. These are the first enemies to be subdued; this constitutes the campaign 
of Peace; these are triumphs, difficult indeed, but bloodless; and far more 
honorable than those trophies which are purchased only by slaughter and 
rapine; and if not victors in this service, it is in vain to have been 
victorious over the despotic enemy in the field.The people that does not subjugate the propensity of the wealthy to 
avarice, ambition, and sensuality, expel luxury from them and their 
families, keep down pauperism, diffuse knowledge among the poor, and 
labor to raise the abject from the mire of vice and low indulgence, and to 
keep the industrious from starving in sight of luxurious festivals, will find 
that it has cherished, in that avarice, ambition, sensuality, selfishness, 
and luxury of the one class, and that degradation, misery, drunkenness, 
ignorance, and brutalization of the other, more stubborn and intractable 
despots at home than it ever encountered in the field; and even its very  
bowels will be continually teeming with the intolerable progeny of tyrants. These are the first enemies to be subdued; this constitutes the campaign 
of Peace; these are triumphs, difficult indeed, but bloodless; and far more 
honorable than those trophies which are purchased only by slaughter and 
rapine; and if not victors in this service, it is in vain to have been 
victorious over the despotic enemy in the field. For if any people thinks that it is a grander; a more beneficial, or a wiser 
policy, to invent subtle expedients by stamps and imposts, for increasing 
the revenue and draining the life-blood of an impoverished people; to 
multiply its naval and military force; to rival in craft the ambassadors of 
foreign states; to plot the swallowing up of foreign territory; to make crafty 
treaties and alliances; to rule prostrate states and abject provinces by fear 
and force; than to administer unpolluted justice to the people, to relieve 
the condition and raise the estate of the toiling masses, redress the 
injured and succor the distressed and conciliate the discontented, and 
speedily restore to every one his own; then that people is involved in a 
cloud of error, and will too late perceive, when the illusion of these mighty 
benefits has vanished, that in neglecting these, which it thought inferior 
considerations, it has only been precipitating its own ruin and despair.The duties of a Prince Ameth are, to be earnest, true, reliable, and 
sincere; to protect the people against illegal impositions and exactions; to 
contend for their political rights, and to see, as far as he may or can, that 
those bear the burdens who reap the benefits of the Government. 
You are to be true unto all men. 
You are to be frank and sincere in all things. 
You are to be earnest in doing whatever it is your duty to do. 
And no man must repent that he has relied upon your resolve, your 
profession, or your word. 
The great distinguishing characteristic of a Mason is sympathy with his 
kind. He recognizes in the human race one great family, all connected 
with himself by those invisible links, and that mighty net-work of 
circumstance, forged and woven by God. 
Feeling that sympathy, it is his first Masonic duty to serve his fellow-man. 
At his first entrance into the Order, he ceases to be isolated, and 
becomes one of a great brotherhood, assuming now duties toward every 
Mason that lives, as every Mason at the same moment assumes them 
toward him. 
Nor are those duties on his part confined to Masons alone. He assumes 
many in regard to his country, and especially toward the great, suffering 
masses of the common people; for they too are his brethren, and God 
hears them, inarticulate as the moanings of their misery are. By all proper

These are the first enemies to be subdued; this constitutes the campaign 
of Peace; these are triumphs, difficult indeed, but bloodless; and far more 
honorable than those trophies which are purchased only by slaughter and 
rapine; and if not victors in this service, it is in vain to have been 
victorious over the despotic enemy in the field. For if any people thinks that it is a grander; a more beneficial, or a wiser 
policy, to invent subtle expedients by stamps and imposts, for increasing 
the revenue and draining the life-blood of an impoverished people; to 
multiply its naval and military force; to rival in craft the ambassadors of 
foreign states; to plot the swallowing up of foreign territory; to make crafty 
treaties and alliances; to rule prostrate states and abject provinces by fear 
and force; than to administer unpolluted justice to the people, to relieve 
the condition and raise the estate of the toiling masses, redress the 
injured and succor the distressed and conciliate the discontented, and 
speedily restore to every one his own; then that people is involved in a 
cloud of error, and will too late perceive, when the illusion of these mighty 
benefits has vanished, that in neglecting these, which it thought inferior 
considerations, it has only been precipitating its own ruin and despair. Unfortunately, every age presents its own special problem, most difficult 
and often impossible to solve; and that which this age offers, and forces 
upon the consideration of all chinking men, is this - how, in a populous 
and wealthy country, blessed with free institutions and a constitutional 
government, are the great masses of the manual-labor class to beenabled to have steady work at fair wages, to be kept from starvation, and 
their children from vice and debauchery, and to be furnished with that 
degree, not of mere reading and writing, but of knowledge, that shall fit 
them intelligently to do the duties and exercise the privileges of freemen; 
even to be intrusted with the dangerous right of suffrage? For though we do not know why God, being infinitely merciful as well as 
wise, has so ordered it, it seems to be unquestionably his law, that even 
in civilized and Christian countries, the large mass of the population shall 
be fortunate, if, during their whole life, from infancy to old age, in health 
and sickness, they have enough of the commonest and coarsest food to 
keep themselves and their 
children from the continual gnawing of hunger - enough of the commonest 
and coarsest clothing to protect themselves and their little ones from 
indecent exposure and the bitter cold; and if they have over their heads 
the rudest shelter. And He seems to have enacted this law - which no human community has 
yet found the means to abrogate - that when a country becomes 
populous, capital shall concentrate in the hands of a limited number of 
persons, and labor become more and more at its mercy, until mere 
manual labor, that of the weaver and ironworker, and other artisans, 
eventually ceases to be worth more than a bare subsistence, and often, in 
great cities and vast extents of country not even that, and goes or crawls 
about in rags, begging, and starving for want of work. While every ox and horse can find work, and is worth being fed, it is not 
always so with man. To be employed, to have a chance to work at 
anything like fair wages, becomes the great engrossing object of a man's 
life. The capitalist can live without employing the laborer, and discharges 
him whenever that labor ceases to be profitable.To be employed, to have a chance to work at 
anything like fair wages, becomes the great engrossing object of a man's 
life. The capitalist can live without employing the laborer, and discharges 
him whenever that labor ceases to be profitable. At the moment when the 
weather is most inclement, provisions dearest, and rents highest, he turns 
him off to starve. If the day-laborer is taken sick, his wages stop. When 
old, he has no pension to retire upon. His children cannot be sent to 
school; for before their bones are hardened they must get to work lest 
they starve. The man, strong and able-bodied, works for a shilling or two 
a day, and the woman shivering over her little pan of coals, when the 
mercury drops far below zero, after her hungry children have wailed 
themselves to sleep, sews by the dim light of her lonely candle, for a bare 
pittance, selling her life to him who bargained only for the work of her 
needle. Fathers and mothers slay their children, to have the burial-fees, that with 
the price of one child's life they may continue life in those that survive. Little girls with bare feet sweep the street-crossings, when the winter wind 
pinches them, and beg piteously for pennies of those who wear warm 
furs. Children grow up in squalid misery and brutal ignorance; want 
compels virgin and wife to prostitute themselves; women starve and 
freeze, and lean up against the walls of workhouses, like bundles of foul 
rags, all night long, and night after night, when the cold rain falls, and 
there chances to be no room for them within; and hundreds of families are 
crowded into a single building, rife with horrors and teeming 
with foul air and pestilence; where men, women and children huddle together 
in their filth; all ages and all colors sleeping indiscriminately together; while, in 
a great, free, Republican State, in the full vigor of its youth and strength, one 
person in every seventeen is a pauper receiving charity.These are the first enemies to be subdued; this constitutes the campaign 
of Peace; these are triumphs, difficult indeed, but bloodless; and far more 
honorable than those trophies which are purchased only by slaughter and 
rapine; and if not victors in this service, it is in vain to have been 
victorious over the despotic enemy in the field. For if any people thinks that it is a grander; a more beneficial, or a wiser 
policy, to invent subtle expedients by stamps and imposts, for increasing 
the revenue and draining the life-blood of an impoverished people; to 
multiply its naval and military force; to rival in craft the ambassadors of 
foreign states; to plot the swallowing up of foreign territory; to make crafty 
treaties and alliances; to rule prostrate states and abject provinces by fear 
and force; than to administer unpolluted justice to the people, to relieve 
the condition and raise the estate of the toiling masses, redress the 
injured and succor the distressed and conciliate the discontented, and 
speedily restore to every one his own; then that people is involved in a 
cloud of error, and will too late perceive, when the illusion of these mighty 
benefits has vanished, that in neglecting these, which it thought inferior 
considerations, it has only been precipitating its own ruin and despair. Unfortunately, every age presents its own special problem, most difficult 
and often impossible to solve; and that which this age offers, and forces 
upon the consideration of all chinking men, is this - how, in a populous 
and wealthy country, blessed with free institutions and a constitutional 
government, are the great masses of the manual-labor class to be

Little girls with bare feet sweep the street-crossings, when the winter wind 
pinches them, and beg piteously for pennies of those who wear warm 
furs. Children grow up in squalid misery and brutal ignorance; want 
compels virgin and wife to prostitute themselves; women starve and 
freeze, and lean up against the walls of workhouses, like bundles of foul 
rags, all night long, and night after night, when the cold rain falls, and 
there chances to be no room for them within; and hundreds of families are 
crowded into a single building, rife with horrors and teeming 
with foul air and pestilence; where men, women and children huddle together 
in their filth; all ages and all colors sleeping indiscriminately together; while, in 
a great, free, Republican State, in the full vigor of its youth and strength, one 
person in every seventeen is a pauper receiving charity. How to deal with this apparently inevitable evil and mortal disease is by far the 
most important of all social problems. What is to be done with pauperism and 
over-supply of labor? How is the life of any country to last, when brutality and 
drunken semi-barbarism vote, and hold offices in their gift, and by fit 
representatives of themselves control a government? How, if not wisdom and 
authority, but turbulence and low vice are to exalt to senatorships miscreants 
reeking with the odors and pollution of the hell, the prize-ring, the brothel, and 
the stock-exchange, where gambling is legalized and rascality is laudable?Masonry will do all in its power, by direct exertion and cooperation, to improve 
and inform as well as to protect the people; to better their physical condition, 
relieve their miseries, supply their wants, and minister to their necessities. Let 
every Mason in this good work do all that may be in his power. For it is true now, as it always was and always will be, that to be free is the 
same thing as to be pious, to be wise, to be temperate and just, to be frugal 
and abstinent, and to be magnanimous and brave; and to be the opposite of all 
these is the same as to be a slave. And it usually happens, by the 
appointment, and, as it were, retributive justice of the Deity, that that people 
which cannot govern themselves, and moderate their passions, but crouch 
under the slavery of their lusts and vices, are delivered up to the sway of those 
whom they abhor, and made to submit to an involuntary servitude. And it is also sanctioned by the dictates of justice and by the constitution of 
Nature, that he who, from the imbecility or derangement of his intellect, is 
incapable of governing himself, should, like a minor, be committed to the 
government of another. Above all things let us never forget that mankind constitutes one great 
brotherhood; all born to encounter suffering and sorrow, and therefore bound 
to sympathize with each other. For no tower of Pride was ever yet high enough to lift its possessor above the 
trials and fears and frailities of humanity. No human hand ever built the wall, 
nor ever shall, that will keep out 
affliction, pain, and infirmity. Sickness and sorrow, trouble and death, are 
dispensations that level everything. They know none, high nor low. The 
chief wants of life, the great and grave necessities of the human soul, give 
exemption to none. They make all poor, all weak. They put supplication in 
the mouth of every human being, as truly as in that of the meanest 
beggar. But the principle of misery is not an evil principle.They put supplication in 
the mouth of every human being, as truly as in that of the meanest 
beggar. But the principle of misery is not an evil principle. We err, and the 
consequences teach us wisdom. All elements, all the laws of things 
around us, minister to this end; and through the paths of painful error and 
mistake, it is the design of Providence to lead us to truth and happiness. If 
erring only taught us to err; if mistakes confirmed us in imprudence; if the 
miseries caused by vicious indulgence had a natural tendency to make us 
more abject slaves of vice, then suffering would be wholly evil. But, on the 
contrary, all tends and is designed to produce amendment and 
improvement. Suffering is the discipline of virtue; of that which is infinitely 
better than happiness, and yet embraces in itself all essential happiness. It nourishes, invigorates, and perfects it. Virtue is the prize of the 
severely-contested race and hard-fought battle; and it is worth all the 
fatigue and wounds of the conflict. Man should go forth with a brave and 
strong heart, to battle with calamity. He is to master it, and not let it 
become his master. He is not to forsake the post of trial and of peril; but to 
stand firmly in his lot, until the great word of Providence shall bid him fly, 
or bid him sink. With resolution and courage the Mason is to do the work 
which it is appointed for him to do, looking through the dark cloud of 
human calamity, to the end that rises high and bright before him. The lot 
of sorrow is great and sublime. None suffer forever, nor for nought, nor 
without purpose. It is the ordinance of God's wisdom, and of His Infinite 
Love, to procure for us infinite happiness and glory. Virtue is the truest liberty; nor is he free who stoops to passions; nor he in 
bondage who serves a noble master. Examples are the best and most 
lasting lectures; virtue the best example. He that hath done good deeds 
and set good precedents, in sincerity, is happy.Little girls with bare feet sweep the street-crossings, when the winter wind 
pinches them, and beg piteously for pennies of those who wear warm 
furs. Children grow up in squalid misery and brutal ignorance; want 
compels virgin and wife to prostitute themselves; women starve and 
freeze, and lean up against the walls of workhouses, like bundles of foul 
rags, all night long, and night after night, when the cold rain falls, and 
there chances to be no room for them within; and hundreds of families are 
crowded into a single building, rife with horrors and teeming 
with foul air and pestilence; where men, women and children huddle together 
in their filth; all ages and all colors sleeping indiscriminately together; while, in 
a great, free, Republican State, in the full vigor of its youth and strength, one 
person in every seventeen is a pauper receiving charity. How to deal with this apparently inevitable evil and mortal disease is by far the 
most important of all social problems. What is to be done with pauperism and 
over-supply of labor? How is the life of any country to last, when brutality and 
drunken semi-barbarism vote, and hold offices in their gift, and by fit 
representatives of themselves control a government? How, if not wisdom and 
authority, but turbulence and low vice are to exalt to senatorships miscreants 
reeking with the odors and pollution of the hell, the prize-ring, the brothel, and 
the stock-exchange, where gambling is legalized and rascality is laudable?

Examples are the best and most 
lasting lectures; virtue the best example. He that hath done good deeds 
and set good precedents, in sincerity, is happy. Time shall not outlive his 
worth. He lives truly after death, whose good deeds are his pillars of 
remembrance; and no day but adds some grains to his heap of glory. Good works are seeds, that after sowing return us a continual harvest; 
and the memory of noble actions is more enduring than monuments of 
marble. Life is a school. The world is neither prison nor penitentiary, nor a palaceof ease, nor an amphitheatre for games and spectacles; but a place of 
instruction, and discipline. Life is given for moral and spiritual training; 
and the entire course of the great school of life is an education for virtue, 
happiness, and a future existence. The periods of Life are its terms; all 
human conditions, its forms; all human employments, its lessons. Families 
are the primary departments of this moral education; the various circles of 
society, its advanced stages; Kingdoms and Republics, its universities. Riches and Poverty, Gayeties and Sorrows, Marriages and Funerals, the 
ties of life bound or broken, fit and fortunate, or untoward and painful, are 
all lessons. Events are not blindly and carelessly flung together. Providence does not school one man, and screen another from the fiery 
trial of its lessons. It has neither rich favorites nor poor victims. One event 
happeneth to all. One end and one design concern and urge all men. The prosperous man has been at school. Perhaps he has thought that it 
was a great thing, and he a great personage; but he has been merely a 
pupil. He thought, perhaps, that he was Master, and had nothing to do, 
but to direct and command; but there was ever a Master above him, the 
Master of Life. He looks not at our splendid state, or our many 
pretensions, nor at the aids and appliances of our learning; but at our 
learning itself. He puts the poor and the rich upon the same form; and 
knows no difference between them, but their progress. If from prosperity we have learned moderation, temperance, candor, 
modesty, gratitude to God, and generosity to man, then we are entitled to 
be honored and rewarded.He puts the poor and the rich upon the same form; and 
knows no difference between them, but their progress. If from prosperity we have learned moderation, temperance, candor, 
modesty, gratitude to God, and generosity to man, then we are entitled to 
be honored and rewarded. If we have learned selfishness, selfindulgence, 
wrong-doing, and vice, to forget and overlook our less 
fortunate brother, and to scoff at the providence of God, then we are 
unworthy and dishonored, though we have been nursed in affluence, or 
taken our degrees from the lineage of an hundred noble descents; as truly 
so, in the eye of Heaven, and of all right-thinking men, as though we lay, 
victims of beggary and disease, in the hospital, by the hedge, or on the 
dung-hill. The most ordinary human equity looks not at the school, but at 
the scholar; and the equity of Heaven will not look beneath that mark. The poor man also is at school. Let him take care that he 
learn, rather than complain. Let him hold to his integrity, his candor, and 
his kindness of heart. Let him beware of envy, and of bondage, and keep 
his self-respect. The body's toil is nothing. Let him beware of the mind's 
drudgery and degradation. While he betters his condition if he can, let 
him be more anxious to better his soul. Let him be willing, while poor, and 
even if always poor, to learn poverty's great lessons, fortitude, 
cheerfulness, contentment, and implicit confidence in God's Providence. With these, and patience, calmness, self-command, disinterestedness, 
and affectionate kindness, the humble dwelling may be hallowed, and 
made more dear and noble than the loftiest palace. Let him, above all 
things, see that he lose not his independence. Let him not cast himself, a 
creature poorer than the poor, an indolent, helpless, despised beggar, oft 
the kindness of others.Examples are the best and most 
lasting lectures; virtue the best example. He that hath done good deeds 
and set good precedents, in sincerity, is happy. Time shall not outlive his 
worth. He lives truly after death, whose good deeds are his pillars of 
remembrance; and no day but adds some grains to his heap of glory. Good works are seeds, that after sowing return us a continual harvest; 
and the memory of noble actions is more enduring than monuments of 
marble. Life is a school. The world is neither prison nor penitentiary, nor a palace

Let him, above all 
things, see that he lose not his independence. Let him not cast himself, a 
creature poorer than the poor, an indolent, helpless, despised beggar, oft 
the kindness of others. Every man should choose to have God for his 
Master, rather than man; and escape not from this school, either by 
dishonesty or alms-taking, lest he fall into that state, worse than disgrace, 
where he can have no respect for himself. The ties of Society teach us to love one another. That is a miserable 
society, where the absence of affectionate kindness is sought to be 
supplied by punctilious decorum, graceful urbanity, and polished 
insincerity; where ambition, jealousy, and distrust rule, in place of 
simplicity, confidence, and kindness. So, too, the social state teaches modesty and gentleness; and from 
neglect, and notice unworthily bestowed on others, and injustice, and the 
world's failure to appreciate us, we learn patience and quietness, to be 
superior to society's opinion, not cynical and bitter, but gentle, candid, 
and affectionate still. Death is the great Teacher, stern, cold, inexorable, irresistible; whom thecollected might of the world cannot stay or ward off. The breath, that 
parting from the lips of King or beggar, scarcely stirs the hushed air, 
cannot be bought, or brought back for a moment, with the wealth of 
Empires. What a lesson is this, teaching our frailty and feebleness, and 
an Infinite Power beyond us! It is a fearful lesson, that never becomes 
familiar. It walks through the earth in dread mystery, and lays it hands 
upon all. It is a universal lesson, that is read everywhere and by all men. Its message comes every year and every day. The past years are 
crowded with its sad and solemn mementoes; and death's finger traces its 
handwriting upon the walls of every human habitation. It teaches us Duty; to act our part well; to fulfill the work assigned us. When one is dying, and after he is dead, there is but one question: Has 
he lived well? There is no evil in death but that which life makes. There are hard lessons in the school of God's Providence; and yet the 
school of life is carefully adjusted, in all its arrangements and tasks, to 
man's powers and passions. There is no extravagance in its teachings; 
nor is anything done for 'the sake of present effect. The whole course of 
human life is a conflict with difficulties; and, if rightly conducted, a 
progress in improvement. It is never too late for man to learn. Not part 
only, but the whole, of life is a school. There never comes a time, even 
amidst the decays of age, when it is fit to lay aside the eagerness of 
acquisition, or the cheerfulness of endeavor. Man walks, all through the 
course of life, in patience and strife, and sometimes in darkness; for, from 
patience is to come perfection; from strife, triumph is to issue; from the 
cloud of darkness the lightning is to flash that shall open the way to 
eternity. Let the Mason be faithful in the school of life, and to all its lessons! Let 
him not learn nothing, nor care not whether he learns or not.Let the Mason be faithful in the school of life, and to all its lessons! Let 
him not learn nothing, nor care not whether he learns or not. Let not the 
years pass over him, witnesses of only his sloth and indifference; or see 
him zealous to acquire everything but virtue. Nor let him labor only for 
himself; nor forget that the humblest man that lives is his brother, and 
hath a claim on his sympathies and kind offices; and that beneath the 
rough garments which labor wears may beat hearts as noble as throb 
under the stars of princes. God, who counts by souls, not stations, 
Loves and pities you and me; 
For to Him all vain distinctions 
Are as pebbles on the sea. Nor are the other duties inculcated in this Degree of less importance. Truth, a Mason is early told, is a Divine attribute and the foundation of 
every virtue; and frankness, reliability, sincerity, straightforwardness, 
plain-dealing, are but different modes in which Truth develops itself. The 
dead, the absent, the innocent, and those that trust him, no Mason will 
deceive willingly. To all these he owes a nobler justice, in that they are 
the most certain trials of human Equity. Only the most abandoned of men, 
said Cicero, will deceive him, who would have remained uninjured if he had not 
trusted. All the noble deeds that have beat their marches through 
succeeding ages have proceeded from men of truth and genuine courage. The man who is always true is both virtuous and wise; and thus possesses 
the greatest guards of safety: for the law has not power to strike the 
virtuous; nor can fortune subvert the wise. The bases of Masonry being morality and virtue, it is by studying one and 
practising the other, that the conduct of a Mason becomes irreproachable. The good of Humanity being its principal object, disinterestedness is one of 
the first virtues that it requires of its members; for that is the source of 
justice and beneficence.Let him, above all 
things, see that he lose not his independence. Let him not cast himself, a 
creature poorer than the poor, an indolent, helpless, despised beggar, oft 
the kindness of others. Every man should choose to have God for his 
Master, rather than man; and escape not from this school, either by 
dishonesty or alms-taking, lest he fall into that state, worse than disgrace, 
where he can have no respect for himself. The ties of Society teach us to love one another. That is a miserable 
society, where the absence of affectionate kindness is sought to be 
supplied by punctilious decorum, graceful urbanity, and polished 
insincerity; where ambition, jealousy, and distrust rule, in place of 
simplicity, confidence, and kindness. So, too, the social state teaches modesty and gentleness; and from 
neglect, and notice unworthily bestowed on others, and injustice, and the 
world's failure to appreciate us, we learn patience and quietness, to be 
superior to society's opinion, not cynical and bitter, but gentle, candid, 
and affectionate still. Death is the great Teacher, stern, cold, inexorable, irresistible; whom the

The bases of Masonry being morality and virtue, it is by studying one and 
practising the other, that the conduct of a Mason becomes irreproachable. The good of Humanity being its principal object, disinterestedness is one of 
the first virtues that it requires of its members; for that is the source of 
justice and beneficence. To pity the misfortunes of others; to be humble, but without meanness; to 
be proud, but without arrogance; to abjure every sentiment of hatred and 
revenge; to show himself magnanimous and liberal, without ostentation and 
without profusion; to be the enemy of vice; to pay homage to wisdom andvirtue; to respect innocence; to be constant and patient in adversity, and 
modest in prosperity; to avoid every irregularity that stains the soul and 
distempers the body - it is by following these precepts that a Mason will 
become a good citizen, a faithful husband, a tender father, an obedient son, 
and a true brother; will honor friendship, and fulfill with ardor the duties 
which virtue and the social relations impose upon him. It is because Masonry imposes upon us these duties that it is properly and 
significantly styled work; and he who imagines that he becomes a Mason by 
merely taking the first two or three Degrees, and that he may, having 
leisurely stepped upon that small elevation, thenceforward worthily wear 
the honors of Masonry, without labor or exertion, or self-denial or sacrifice, 
and that there is nothing to be done in Masonry, is strangely deceived. Is it true that nothing remains to be done in Masonry? Does one Brother no longer proceed by law against another Brother of his 
Lodge, in regard to matters that could be easily settled within the Masonic 
family circle? Has the duel, that hideous heritage of barbarism, interdicted among 
Brethren by our fundamental laws, and denounced by the municipal code, 
yet disappeared from the soil we inhabit? Do Masons of high rank 
religiously refrain from it; or do they not, 
bowing to a corrupt public opinion, submit to its arbitrament, despite the 
scandal which it occasions to the Order, and in violation of the feeble 
restraint of their oath? Do Masons no longer form uncharitable opinions of their Brethren, enter 
harsh judgments against them, and judge themselves by one rule and their 
Brethren by another? Has Masonry any well-regulated system of charity? Has it done that which it 
should have done for the cause of education? Where are its schools, its 
academies, its colleges, its hospitals, and infirmaries? Are political controversies now conducted with no violence and bitterness?Where are its schools, its 
academies, its colleges, its hospitals, and infirmaries? Are political controversies now conducted with no violence and bitterness? Do Masons refrain from defaming and denouncing their Brethren who differ 
with them in religious or political opinions? What grand social problems or useful projects engage our attention at our 
communications? Where in our Lodges are lectures habitually delivered for 
the real instruction of the Brethren? Do not our sessions pass in the 
discussion of minor matters of business, the settlement of points of order 
and questions of mere administration, and the admission and advancement 
of Candidates, whom after their admission we take no pains to instruct? In what Lodge are our ceremonies explained and elucidated; corrupted as 
they are by time, until their true features can scarcely be distinguished; and 
where are those great primitive truths of revelation taught, which Masonry 
has preserved to the world? We have high dignities and sounding titles. Do their possessors qualify 
themselves to enlighten the world in respect to the aims and objects of 
Masonry? Descendants of those Initiates who governed empires, does your 
influence enter into practical life and operate efficiently in behalf of wellregulated 
and constitutional liberty? Your debates should be but friendly conversations. You need concord, 
union, and peace. Why then do you retain among you men who excite 
rivalries and jealousies; why permit great and violent controversy and 
ambitious pretensions'? Now do your own words and acts agree? If your 
Masonry is a nullity, how can you exercise any influence on others? Continually you praise each other, and utter elaborate and high 
wrought eulogies upon the Order. Everywhere you assume that you are 
what you should be, and nowhere do you look upon yourselves as you 
are. Is it true that all our actions are so many acts of homage to virtue?The bases of Masonry being morality and virtue, it is by studying one and 
practising the other, that the conduct of a Mason becomes irreproachable. The good of Humanity being its principal object, disinterestedness is one of 
the first virtues that it requires of its members; for that is the source of 
justice and beneficence. To pity the misfortunes of others; to be humble, but without meanness; to 
be proud, but without arrogance; to abjure every sentiment of hatred and 
revenge; to show himself magnanimous and liberal, without ostentation and 
without profusion; to be the enemy of vice; to pay homage to wisdom and

Everywhere you assume that you are 
what you should be, and nowhere do you look upon yourselves as you 
are. Is it true that all our actions are so many acts of homage to virtue? Explore the recesses of your hearts; let us examine ourselves with an 
impartial eye, and make answer to our own questioning! Can we bear to 
ourselves the consoling testimony that we always rigidly perform our 
duties; that we even half perform them?Let us away with this odious self-flattery! Let us be men, if we cannot be 
sages! The laws of Masonry, above others excellent, cannot wholly 
change men's natures. They enlighten them, they point out the true way; 
but they can lead them in it, only by repressing the fire of their passions, 
and subjugating their selfishness. Alas, these conquer, and Masonry is 
forgotten! 
After praising each other all our lives, there are always excellent Brethren, 
who, over our coffins, shower unlimited eulogies. Every one of us who 
dies, however useless his life, has been a model of all the virtues, a very 
child of the celestial light. In Egypt, among our old Masters, where 
Masonry was more cultivated than vanity, no one could gain admittance to 
the sacred asylum of the tomb until he had passed under the most solemn 
judgment. A grave tribunal sat in judgment upon all, even the kings. They 
said to the dead, "Whoever thou art, give account to thy country of thy 
actions! What hast thou done with thy time and life? The law interrogates 
thee, thy country hears thee, Truth sits in judgment on thee!" Princes 
came there to be judged, escorted only by their virtues and their vices. A 
public accuser recounted the history of the dead man's life, and threw the 
blaze of the torch of truth on all his actions. If it were adjudged that he 
had led an evil life, his memory was condemned in the presence of the 
nation, and his body was denied the honors of sepulture. What a lesson 
the old Masonry taught to the sons of the people! 
Is it true that Masonry is effete; that the acacia, withered, affords no 
shade; that Masonry no longer marches in the advance-guard of Truth? 
No. Is freedom yet universal? Have ignorance and prejudice disappeared 
from the earth? Are there no longer enmities among men? Do cupidity 
and falsehood no longer exist? Do toleration and harmony prevail among 
religious and political sects? There are works yet left for Masonry to 
accomplish, greater than the twelve labors of Hercules: to advance ever 
resolutely and steadily; to enlighten the minds of the people, to 
reconstruct society, to reform the laws, and to improve the public morals. 
The eternity in front of it is as infinite as the one behind. And Masonry 
cannot cease to labor in the cause of social progress, without ceasing to 
be true to itself, Masonry.XII. GRAND MASTER ARCHITECT.  
[Master Architect.]

THE great duties that are inculcated by the lessons taught by the workinginstruments  
of a Grand Master Architect, demanding so much of us, and  
taking for granted the capacity to perform them faithfully and fully, bring us  
at once to reflect upon the dignity of human nature, and the vast powers  
and capacities of the human soul; and to that theme we invite your  
attention in this Degree. Let us begin to rise from earth toward the Stars.  
Evermore the human soul struggles toward the light, toward God, and the  
Infinite. It is especially so in its afflictions. Words go but a little way into the  
depths of sorrow. The thoughts that writhe there in silence, that go into the  
stillness of Infinitude and Eternity, have no emblems. Thoughts enough  
come there, such as no tongue ever uttered. They do not so much want  
human sympathy, as higher help. There is a loneliness in deep sorrow  
which the Deity alone can relieve. Alone, the mind wrestles with the great  
problem of calamity, and seeks the solution from the Infinite Providence ofHeaven, and thus is led directly to God. There are many things in us of which we are not distinctly conscious. To  
waken that slumbering consciousness into life, and so to lead the soul up  
to the Light, is one office of every great ministration to human nature,  
whether its vehicle be the pen, the pencil, or the tongue. We are  
unconscious of the intensity and awfulness of the life within us. Health and  
sickness, joy and sorrow, success and disappointment, life and death,  
love and loss, are familiar words upon our lips; and we do not know to what  
depths they point within us. We seem never to know what any thing means or is worth until we have  
lost it. Many an organ, nerve, and fibre in our bodily frame performs its  
silent part for years, and we are quite unconscious of its value. It is not  
until it is injured that we discover that value, and find how essential it was  
to our happiness and comfort. We never know the full significance of the  
words “property," "ease," and "health;" the wealth of meaning in the fond  
epithets, "parent,” “child," "beloved," and "friend," until the thing or the  
person is taken away; until, in place of the bright, visible being, comes the  
awful and desolate shadow, where nothing is: where we stretch out our  
hands in vain, and strain our eyes upon dark and dismal vacuity. Yet, in  
that vacuity, we do not lose the object that we loved. It becomes only the  
more real to us. Our blessings not only brighten when they depart, but are  
fixed in enduring reality; and love and friendship receive their everlasting  
seal under the cold impress of death. A dim consciousness of infinite mystery and grandeur lies beneath all the  
commonplace of life. There is an awfulness and a majesty around us, in  
all our little worldliness.A dim consciousness of infinite mystery and grandeur lies beneath all the  
commonplace of life. There is an awfulness and a majesty around us, in  
all our little worldliness. The rude peasant from the Apennines, asleep at  
the foot of a pillar in a majestic Roman church, seems not to hear or see,  
but to, dream only of the herd he feeds or the ground he tills in the  
mountains. But the choral symphonies fall softly upon his ear, and the  
gilded arches are dimly seen through his half-slumbering eyelids. So the soul, however given up to the occupations of daily life, cannot quite  
lose the sense of where it is, and of what is above it and around it. The  
scene of its actual engagements may be small; the path of its steps,  
beaten and familiar; the objects it handles, easily spanned, and quite worn  
out with daily uses. So it may be, and amidst such things that we all live. So we live our little life; but Heaven is above us and all around and close  
to us; and Eternity is before us and behind us; and suns and stars are  
silent witnesses and watchers over us. We are enfolded by Infinity. Infinite  
Powers and Infinite spaces lie all around us. The dread arch of Mystery  
spreads over us, and no voice ever pierced it. Eternity is enthroned amid  
Heaven's myriad starry heights; and no utterance or word ever came from  
those far-off and silent spaces. Above, is that awful majesty; around us,  
everywhere, it stretches off into infinity; and beneath it is this little struggle  
of life, this poor day's conflict, this busy ant-hill of Time.THE great duties that are inculcated by the lessons taught by the workinginstruments  
of a Grand Master Architect, demanding so much of us, and  
taking for granted the capacity to perform them faithfully and fully, bring us  
at once to reflect upon the dignity of human nature, and the vast powers  
and capacities of the human soul; and to that theme we invite your  
attention in this Degree. Let us begin to rise from earth toward the Stars.  
Evermore the human soul struggles toward the light, toward God, and the  
Infinite. It is especially so in its afflictions. Words go but a little way into the  
depths of sorrow. The thoughts that writhe there in silence, that go into the  
stillness of Infinitude and Eternity, have no emblems. Thoughts enough  
come there, such as no tongue ever uttered. They do not so much want  
human sympathy, as higher help. There is a loneliness in deep sorrow  
which the Deity alone can relieve. Alone, the mind wrestles with the great  
problem of calamity, and seeks the solution from the Infinite Providence of

Eternity is enthroned amid  
Heaven's myriad starry heights; and no utterance or word ever came from  
those far-off and silent spaces. Above, is that awful majesty; around us,  
everywhere, it stretches off into infinity; and beneath it is this little struggle  
of life, this poor day's conflict, this busy ant-hill of Time. But from that ant-hill, not only the talk of the streets, the sounds of music  
and revelling, the stir and tread of a multitude, the shout of joy and the  
shriek of agony go up into the silent and all-surrounding Infinitude; but  
also, amidst the stir and noise of visible life, from the inmost bosom of the  
visible man, there goes up an imploring call, a beseeching cry, an asking,  
unuttered, and unutterable, for revelation, wailingly and in almost  
speechless agony praying the dread arch of mystery to break, and the  
stars that roll above the waves of mortal trouble, to speak; the enthroned  
majesty of those awful heights to find a voice; the mysterious and  
reserved heavens to come near; and all to tell us what they alone know; to  
give us information of the loved and lost; to make known to us what we  
are, and whither we are going. Man is encompassed with a dome of incomprehensible wonders. In him  
and about him is that which should fill his life with majesty and  
sacredness. Something of sublimity and sanctity has thus flashed down  
from heaven into the heart of every one that lives. There is no being sobase and abandoned but hath some traits of that sacredness left upon  
him; something, so much perhaps in discordance with his general repute,  
that he hides it from all around him; some sanctuary in his soul, where no  
one may enter; some sacred inclosure, where the memory of a child is, or  
the image of a venerated parent, or the remembrance of a pure love, or  
the echo of some word of kindness once spoken to him; an echo that will  
never die away. Life is no negative, or superficial or worldly existence. Our steps are  
evermore haunted with thoughts, far beyond their own range, which some  
have regarded as the reminiscences of a preexistent state. So it is with us  
all, in the beaten and worn track of this worldly pilgrimage. There is more  
here, than the world we live in. It is not all of life to live. An unseen and  
infinite presence is here; a sense of something greater than we possess; a  
seeking, through all the void wastes of life, for a good beyond it; a crying  
out of the heart for interpretation; a memory of the dead, touching  
continually some vibrating thread in this great tissue of mystery. We all not only have better intimations, but are capable of better things 
than we know. The pressure of some great emergency would develop in  
us powers, beyond the worldly bias of our spirits; and Heaven so deals  
with us, from time to time, as to call forth those better things.We all not only have better intimations, but are capable of better things 
than we know. The pressure of some great emergency would develop in  
us powers, beyond the worldly bias of our spirits; and Heaven so deals  
with us, from time to time, as to call forth those better things. There is  
hardly a family in the world go selfish, but that, if one in it were doomed to  
die - one, to be selected by the others, - it would be utterly impossible for  
its members, parents and children, to choose out that victim; but that each  
would say, "I will die; but I cannot choose." And in how many, if that dire  
extremity had come, would not one and another step forth, freed from the  
vile meshes of ordinary selfishness, and say, like the Roman father and  
son, "Let the blow fall on me!" There are greater and better things in us all,  
than the world takes account of, or than we take note of; if we would but  
find them out. And it is one part of our Masonic culture to find these traits  
of power and sublime devotion, to revive these faded impressions of  
generosity and self-sacrifice, the almost squandered bequests of God's  
love and kindness to our souls; and to induce us to yield ourselves to their  
guidance and control. Upon all conditions of men presses down one impartial law. To all  
situations, to all fortunes, high or low, the mind gives their character. They  
are, in effect, not what they are in themselves, but what they are to the  
feeling of their possessors. The King may be mean, degraded, miserable;  
the slave of ambition, fear, voluptuousness, and every low passion. The  
Peasant may be the real Monarch, the moral master of his fate, a free and  
lofty being, more than a Prince in happiness, more than a King in honor. Man is no bubble upon the sea of his fortunes, helpless and irresponsible  
upon the tide of events. Out of the same circumstances, different men  
bring totally different results.Eternity is enthroned amid  
Heaven's myriad starry heights; and no utterance or word ever came from  
those far-off and silent spaces. Above, is that awful majesty; around us,  
everywhere, it stretches off into infinity; and beneath it is this little struggle  
of life, this poor day's conflict, this busy ant-hill of Time. But from that ant-hill, not only the talk of the streets, the sounds of music  
and revelling, the stir and tread of a multitude, the shout of joy and the  
shriek of agony go up into the silent and all-surrounding Infinitude; but  
also, amidst the stir and noise of visible life, from the inmost bosom of the  
visible man, there goes up an imploring call, a beseeching cry, an asking,  
unuttered, and unutterable, for revelation, wailingly and in almost  
speechless agony praying the dread arch of mystery to break, and the  
stars that roll above the waves of mortal trouble, to speak; the enthroned  
majesty of those awful heights to find a voice; the mysterious and  
reserved heavens to come near; and all to tell us what they alone know; to  
give us information of the loved and lost; to make known to us what we  
are, and whither we are going. Man is encompassed with a dome of incomprehensible wonders. In him  
and about him is that which should fill his life with majesty and  
sacredness. Something of sublimity and sanctity has thus flashed down  
from heaven into the heart of every one that lives. There is no being so

Man is no bubble upon the sea of his fortunes, helpless and irresponsible  
upon the tide of events. Out of the same circumstances, different men  
bring totally different results. The same difficulty, distress, poverty, or  
misfortune, that breaks down one man, builds up another and makes him  
strong. It is the very attribute and glory of a man, that he can bend the  
circumstances of his condition to the intellectual and moral purposes of his  
nature, and it is the power and mastery of his will that chiefly distinguish  
him from the brute. The faculty of moral will, developed in the child, is a new element of his  
nature. It is a new power brought upon the scene, and a ruling power,  
delegated from Heaven. Never was a human being sunk so low that he  
had not, by God's gift, the power to rise, Because God commands him to  
rise, it is certain that he can rise. Every man has the power, and should use it, to make all situations, trials,  
and temptations instruments to promote his virtue and happiness; and is  
so far from being the creature of circumstances, that he creates and  
controls them, making them to be all that they are, of evil or of good, to  
him as a moral being. Life is what we make it, and the world is what we make it. The eyes of the  
cheerful and of the melancholy man are fixed upon the same creation; butvery different are the aspects which it bears to them. To the one, it is all  
beauty and gladness; the waves of ocean roll in light, and the mountains  
are covered with day. Life, to him, flashes, rejoicing, upon every flower  
and every tree that trembles in the breeze. There is more to him,  
everywhere, than the eye sees; a presence of profound joy on hill and  
valley, and bright, dancing water. The other idly or mournfully gazes at the  
same scene, and everything wears a dull, dim, and sickly aspect. The  
murmuring of the brooks is a discord to him, the great roar of the sea has  
an angry and threatening emphasis, the solemn music of the pines sings  
the requiem of his departed happiness; the cheerful light shines garishly  
upon his eyes and offends him. The great train of the seasons passes  
before him like a funeral procession; and he sighs, and turns impatiently  
away. The eye makes that which it looks upon; the ear makes its own  
melodies and discords; the world without reflects the world within. Let the Mason never forget that life and the world are what we make them  
by our social character; by our adaptation, or want of adaptation to the  
social conditions, relationships, and pursuits of the world. To the selfish,  
the cold, and the insensible, to the haughty and presuming, to the proud,  
who demand more than they are likely to receive, to the jealous, ever  
afraid they shall not receive enough, to those who are unreasonably  
sensitive about the good or ill opinions of others, to all violators of the  
social laws, the rude, the violent, the dishonest, and the sensual, - to all  
these, the social condition, from its very nature, will present annoyances,  
disappointments, and pains, appropriate to their several characters. The  
benevolent affections will not revolve around selfishness; the cold-hearted  
must expect to meet coldness; the proud, haughtiness; the passionate,  
anger; and the violent, rudeness.To the selfish,  
the cold, and the insensible, to the haughty and presuming, to the proud,  
who demand more than they are likely to receive, to the jealous, ever  
afraid they shall not receive enough, to those who are unreasonably  
sensitive about the good or ill opinions of others, to all violators of the  
social laws, the rude, the violent, the dishonest, and the sensual, - to all  
these, the social condition, from its very nature, will present annoyances,  
disappointments, and pains, appropriate to their several characters. The  
benevolent affections will not revolve around selfishness; the cold-hearted  
must expect to meet coldness; the proud, haughtiness; the passionate,  
anger; and the violent, rudeness. Those who forget the rights of others,  
must not be surprised if their own are forgotten; and those who stoop to  
the lowest embraces of sense must not wonder, if others are not  
concerned to find their prostrate honor, and lift it up to the remembrance 
and respect of the world. To the gentle, many will be gentle; to the kind, many will be kind. A good  
man will find that there is goodness in the world; an honest man will find  
that there is honesty in the world; and a man of principle will find principle  
and integrity in the minds of others. There are no blessings which the mind may not convert into the bitterest  
of evils; and no trials which it may not transform into the noblest and  
divinest blessings. There are no temptations from which assailed virtue  
may not gain strength, instead of falling before them, vanquished and  
subdued. It is true that temptations have a great power, and virtue often  
falls; but the might of these temptations lies not in themselves, but in the  
feebleness of our own virtue, and the weakness of our own hearts. We  
rely too much on the strength of our ramparts and bastions, and allow the  
enemy to make his approaches, by trench and parallel, at his leisure.Man is no bubble upon the sea of his fortunes, helpless and irresponsible  
upon the tide of events. Out of the same circumstances, different men  
bring totally different results. The same difficulty, distress, poverty, or  
misfortune, that breaks down one man, builds up another and makes him  
strong. It is the very attribute and glory of a man, that he can bend the  
circumstances of his condition to the intellectual and moral purposes of his  
nature, and it is the power and mastery of his will that chiefly distinguish  
him from the brute. The faculty of moral will, developed in the child, is a new element of his  
nature. It is a new power brought upon the scene, and a ruling power,  
delegated from Heaven. Never was a human being sunk so low that he  
had not, by God's gift, the power to rise, Because God commands him to  
rise, it is certain that he can rise. Every man has the power, and should use it, to make all situations, trials,  
and temptations instruments to promote his virtue and happiness; and is  
so far from being the creature of circumstances, that he creates and  
controls them, making them to be all that they are, of evil or of good, to  
him as a moral being. Life is what we make it, and the world is what we make it. The eyes of the  
cheerful and of the melancholy man are fixed upon the same creation; but

It is true that temptations have a great power, and virtue often  
falls; but the might of these temptations lies not in themselves, but in the  
feebleness of our own virtue, and the weakness of our own hearts. We  
rely too much on the strength of our ramparts and bastions, and allow the  
enemy to make his approaches, by trench and parallel, at his leisure. The  
offer of dishonest gain and guilty pleasure makes the honest man more  
honest, and the pure man more pure. They raise his virtue to the height of  
towering indignation. The fair occasion, the safe opportunity, the tempting  
chance become the defeat and disgrace of the tempter. The honest and  
upright man does not wait until temptation has made its approaches and  
mounted its batteries on the last parallel. But to the impure, the dishonest, the false-hearted, the corrupt, and the  
sensual, occasions come every day, and in every scene, and through  
every avenue of thought and imagination. He is prepared to capitulate  
before the first approach is commenced; and sends out the white flag  
when the enemy's advance comes in sight of his walls. He makes  
occasions; or, if opportunities come not, evil thoughts come, and he  
throws wide open the gates of his heart and welcomes those bad visitors,  
and entertains them with a lavish hospitality. The business of the world absorbs, corrupts, and degrades one mind,  
while in another it feeds and nurses the noblest independence, integrity,and generosity. Pleasure is a poison to some, and a healthful refreshment  
to others. To one, the world is a great harmony, like a noble strain of  
music with infinite modulations; to another, it is a huge factory, the clash  
and clang of whose machinery jars upon his ears and frets him to  
madness. Life is substantially 
the same thing to all who partake of its lot. Yet some rise to virtue and  
glory; while others, undergoing the same discipline, and enjoying the  
same privileges, sink to shame and perdition. Thorough, faithful, and honest endeavor to improve, is always successful,  
and the highest happiness. To sigh sentimentally over human misfortune,  
is fit only for the mind's childhood; and the mind's misery is chiefly its own  
fault; appointed, under the good Providence of God, as the punisher and  
corrector of its fault. In the long run, the mind will be happy, just in  
proportion to its fidelity and wisdom. When it is miserable, it has planted  
the thorns in its own path; it grasps them, and cries out in loud complaint;. and that complaint is but the louder confession that the thorns which grew  
there, it planted. A certain kind and degree of spirituality enter into the largest part of even  
the most ordinary life. You can carry on no business, without some faith in  
man. You cannot even dig in the ground, without a reliance on the unseen  
result. You cannot think or reason or even step, without confiding in the  
inward, spiritual principles of your nature. All the affections and bonds, and  
hopes and interests of life centre in the spiritual; and you know that if that  
central bond were broken, the world would rush to chaos.You cannot think or reason or even step, without confiding in the  
inward, spiritual principles of your nature. All the affections and bonds, and  
hopes and interests of life centre in the spiritual; and you know that if that  
central bond were broken, the world would rush to chaos. Believe that there is a God; that He is our father; that He has a paternal  
interest in our welfare and improvement; that He has given us powers, by  
means of which we may escape from sin and ruin; that He has destined us  
to a future life of endless progress toward perfection and a knowledge of  
Himself - believe this, as every Mason should, and you can live calmly,  
endure patiently, labor resolutely, deny yourselves cheerfully, hope  
steadfastly, and be conquerors in the great struggle of life. Take away any  
one of these principles, and what remains for us?Believe that there is a God; that He is our father; that He has a paternal  
interest in our welfare and improvement; that He has given us powers, by  
means of which we may escape from sin and ruin; that He has destined us  
to a future life of endless progress toward perfection and a knowledge of  
Himself - believe this, as every Mason should, and you can live calmly,  
endure patiently, labor resolutely, deny yourselves cheerfully, hope  
steadfastly, and be conquerors in the great struggle of life. Take away any  
one of these principles, and what remains for us? Say that there is no  
God; or no way opened for hope and reformation and triumph, no heaven  
to come, no rest for the weary, no home in the bosom of God for the  
afflicted and disconsolate soul; or that God is but an ugly blind Chance  
that stabs in the dark; or a somewhat that is, when attempted to be  
defined, a nowhat, emotionless, passionless, the Supreme Apathy to  
which all things, good and evil, are alike indifferent; or a jealous God who  
revengefully visits the sins of the fathers on the children, and when the  
fathers have eaten 
sour grapes, sets the children's teeth on edge; an arbitrary supreme Will,  
that has made it right to be virtuous, and wrong to lie and steal, because  
IT pleased to make it so rather than otherwise, retaining the power to  
reverse the law; or a fickle, vacillating, inconstant Deity, or a cruel,  
bloodthirsty, savage Hebrew or Puritanic one; and we are but the sport of  
chance and the victims of despair; hapless wanderers upon the face of a  
desolate, forsaken, or accursed and hated earth; surrounded by darkness,  
struggling with obstacles, toiling for barren results and empty purposes,  
distracted with doubts, and misled by false gleams of light; wanderers with  
no way, no prospect, no home; doomed and deserted mariners on a dark  
and stormy sea, without compass or course, to whom no stars appear;  
tossing helmless upon the weltering, angry waves, with no blessed haven  
in the distance whose guiding-star invites us to its welcome rest.Take away any  
one of these principles, and what remains for us? Say that there is no  
God; or no way opened for hope and reformation and triumph, no heaven  
to come, no rest for the weary, no home in the bosom of God for the  
afflicted and disconsolate soul; or that God is but an ugly blind Chance  
that stabs in the dark; or a somewhat that is, when attempted to be  
defined, a nowhat, emotionless, passionless, the Supreme Apathy to  
which all things, good and evil, are alike indifferent; or a jealous God who  
revengefully visits the sins of the fathers on the children, and when the  
fathers have eaten 
sour grapes, sets the children's teeth on edge; an arbitrary supreme Will,  
that has made it right to be virtuous, and wrong to lie and steal, because  
IT pleased to make it so rather than otherwise, retaining the power to  
reverse the law; or a fickle, vacillating, inconstant Deity, or a cruel,  
bloodthirsty, savage Hebrew or Puritanic one; and we are but the sport of  
chance and the victims of despair; hapless wanderers upon the face of a  
desolate, forsaken, or accursed and hated earth; surrounded by darkness,  
struggling with obstacles, toiling for barren results and empty purposes,  
distracted with doubts, and misled by false gleams of light; wanderers with  
no way, no prospect, no home; doomed and deserted mariners on a dark  
and stormy sea, without compass or course, to whom no stars appear;  
tossing helmless upon the weltering, angry waves, with no blessed haven  
in the distance whose guiding-star invites us to its welcome rest. The religious faith thus taught by Masonry is indispensable to the  
attainment of the great ends of life; and must therefore have been  
designed to be a part of it. We are made for this faith; and there must be  
something, somewhere, for us to believe in. We cannot grow healthfully,  
nor live happily, without it. It is therefore true.It is true that temptations have a great power, and virtue often  
falls; but the might of these temptations lies not in themselves, but in the  
feebleness of our own virtue, and the weakness of our own hearts. We  
rely too much on the strength of our ramparts and bastions, and allow the  
enemy to make his approaches, by trench and parallel, at his leisure. The  
offer of dishonest gain and guilty pleasure makes the honest man more  
honest, and the pure man more pure. They raise his virtue to the height of  
towering indignation. The fair occasion, the safe opportunity, the tempting  
chance become the defeat and disgrace of the tempter. The honest and  
upright man does not wait until temptation has made its approaches and  
mounted its batteries on the last parallel. But to the impure, the dishonest, the false-hearted, the corrupt, and the  
sensual, occasions come every day, and in every scene, and through  
every avenue of thought and imagination. He is prepared to capitulate  
before the first approach is commenced; and sends out the white flag  
when the enemy's advance comes in sight of his walls. He makes  
occasions; or, if opportunities come not, evil thoughts come, and he  
throws wide open the gates of his heart and welcomes those bad visitors,  
and entertains them with a lavish hospitality. The business of the world absorbs, corrupts, and degrades one mind,  
while in another it feeds and nurses the noblest independence, integrity,

We cannot grow healthfully,  
nor live happily, without it. It is therefore true. If we could cut off from any  
soul all the principles taught by Masonry, the faith in a God, in immortality,  
in virtue, in essential rectitude, that soul would sink into sin, misery,darkness, and ruin. If we could cut off all sense of these truths, the man  
would sink at once to the grade of the animal. No man can suffer and be patient, can struggle and conquer, can improve  
and be happy, otherwise than as the swine are, without conscience,  
without hope, without a reliance on a just, wise, and beneficent God. We  
must, of necessity, embrace the great truths taught by Masonry, and live  
by them, to live happily. "I put my trust in God," is the protest of Masonry  
against the belief in a cruel, angry, and revengeful God, to be feared and  
not reverenced by His creatures. Society, in its great relations, is as much the creation of Heaven as is the  
system of the Universe. If that bond of gravitation that holds all worlds and  
systems together, were suddenly severed, the universe would fly into wild  
and boundless chaos. And if we were to sever all the moral bonds that  
hold society together; if we could cut off from it every conviction of Truth  
and Integrity, of an authority above it, and of a conscience within it, it  
would immediately rush to disorder and frightful anarchy and ruin. The religion we teach is therefore as really a principle of things, and as  
certain and true, as gravitation. Faith in moral principles, in virtue, and in God, is as necessary for the  
guidance of a man, as instinct is for the guidance of an animal. And  
therefore this faith, as a principle of man's nature, has a mission as truly  
authentic in God's Providence, as the principle of instinct. The pleasures  
of the soul, too, must depend on certain principles. They must recognize a  
soul, its properties and responsibilities, a conscience, and the sense of an  
authority above us; and these are the principles of faith. No man can  
suffer and be patient, can struggle and conquer, can improve and be  
happy, without conscience, without hope, without a reliance on a just,  
wise, and beneficent God.They must recognize a  
soul, its properties and responsibilities, a conscience, and the sense of an  
authority above us; and these are the principles of faith. No man can  
suffer and be patient, can struggle and conquer, can improve and be  
happy, without conscience, without hope, without a reliance on a just,  
wise, and beneficent God. We must of necessity embrace the great truths  
taught by Masonry, and live by them, to live happily. Everything in the  
universe has fixed and certain laws and principles for its action;- the star in  
its orbit, the animal in its activity, the physical man in his functions. And he  
has likewise fixed and certain laws and principles as a spiritual being. His  
soul does not die for want of aliment or guidance. For the rational soul  
there is ample provision. From the lofty pine, rocked in the darkening  
tempest, the cry of the young raven is heard; and it would be most strange  
if there were no answer for the cry and call of the soul, tortured by want  
and sorrow and agony. The total rejection of all moral and religious belief  
would strike out a principle from human nature, as essential to it as  
gravitation to the stars, instinct to animal life, the circulation of the blood to  
the human body. God has ordained that life shall be a social state. We are members of a  
civil community. The life of that community depends upon its moral  
condition. Public spirit, intelligence, uprightness, temperance, kindness,  
domestic purity, will make it a happy community, and give it prosperity and  
continuance. Wide-spread selfishness, dishonesty, intemperance,  
libertinism, corruption, and crime, will make it miserable, and bring about  
dissolution and speedy ruin. A whole people lives one life; one mighty  
heart heaves in its bosom; it is one great pulse of existence that throbs  
there. One stream of life flows there, with ten thousand intermingled  
branches and channels, through all the homes of human love.We cannot grow healthfully,  
nor live happily, without it. It is therefore true. If we could cut off from any  
soul all the principles taught by Masonry, the faith in a God, in immortality,  
in virtue, in essential rectitude, that soul would sink into sin, misery,

A whole people lives one life; one mighty  
heart heaves in its bosom; it is one great pulse of existence that throbs  
there. One stream of life flows there, with ten thousand intermingled  
branches and channels, through all the homes of human love. One sound  
as of many waters, a rapturous jubilee or a mournful sighing, comes up from 
the congregated dwellings of a whole nation. The Public is no vague abstraction; nor should that which is done against  
that Public, against public interest, law, or virtue, press but lightly on the  
conscience. It is but a vast expansion of individual life; an ocean of tears,  
an atmosphere of sighs, or a great whole of joy and gladness. It suffers  
with the suffering of millions; it rejoices with the joy of millions. What a vast  
crime does he commit, - private man or public man, agent or contractor,  
legislator or magistrate, secretary or president,-who dares, with indignity  
and wrong, to strike the bosom of the Public Welfare, to encouragevenality and corruption, and shameful sale of the elective franchise, or of  
office; to sow dissension, and to weaken the bonds of amity that bind a  
Nation together! What a huge iniquity, he who, with vices like the daggers  
of a parricide, dares to pierce that mighty heart, in which the ocean of  
existence is flowing! What an unequalled interest lies in the virtue of every one whom we love! In his virtue, nowhere but in his virtue, is garnered up the incomparable  
treasure. What care we for brother or friend, compared with what we care  
for his honor, his fidelity, his reputation, his kindness? How venerable is  
the rectitude of a parent! How sacred his reputation! No blight that can fall  
upon a child, is like a parent's dishonor. Heathen or Christian, every  
parent would have his child do well; and pours out upon him all the  
fullness of parental love, in the one desire that he may do well; that he  
may be worthy of his cares, and his freely bestowed pains; that he may  
walk in the way of honor and happiness. In that way he cannot walk one  
step without virtue. Such is life, in its relationships. A thousand ties  
embrace it, like the fine nerves of a delicate organization; like the strings  
of an instrument capable of sweet melodies, but easily put out of tune or  
broken, by rudeness, anger, and selfish indulgence. If life could, by any process, be made insensible to pain and pleasure; if  
the human heart were hard as adamant, then avarice, ambition, and  
sensuality might channel out their paths in it, and make it their beaten  
way; and none would wonder or protest. If we could be patient under the  
load of a mere worldly life; if we could bear that burden as the beasts bear  
it; then, like beasts, we might bend all our thoughts to the earth; and no  
call from the great Heavens above us would startle us from our plodding  
and earthly course. But we art not insensible brutes, who can refuse the call of reason and  
conscience.If we could be patient under the  
load of a mere worldly life; if we could bear that burden as the beasts bear  
it; then, like beasts, we might bend all our thoughts to the earth; and no  
call from the great Heavens above us would startle us from our plodding  
and earthly course. But we art not insensible brutes, who can refuse the call of reason and  
conscience. The soul is capable of remorse. When the great  
dispensations of life press down upon us, we weep, and suffer and  
sorrow. And sorrow and agony desire other companionships than  
worldliness and irreligion. We are not willing to bear those burdens of the  
heart, fear, anxiety, disappointment, and trouble, without any object or  
use. We are not willing to suffer, to be sick and afflicted, to have our days  
and months lost to comfort and joy, and overshadowed with calamity and  
grief, without advantage or compensation; to barter away the dearest  
treasures, the very sufferings, of the heart; to sell the life-blood from failing  
frame and fading cheek, our tears of bitterness and groans of anguish, for  
nothing. Human nature, frail, feeling, sensitive, and sorrowing, cannot bear  
to suffer for nought. Everywhere, human life is a great and solemn dispensation. Man,  
suffering, enjoying, loving, hating, hoping, and fearing, chained to the  
earth and yet exploring the far recesses of the universe, has the power to  
commune with God and His angels. Around this great action of existence  
the curtains of Time are drawn; but there are openings through them  
which give us glimpses of eternity. God looks down upon this scene of  
human probation. The wise and the good in all ages have interposed for it  
with their teachings and their blood. Everything that exists around us,  
every movement in nature every counsel of Providence, every  
interposition of God, centres upon one point - the fidelity of man.A whole people lives one life; one mighty  
heart heaves in its bosom; it is one great pulse of existence that throbs  
there. One stream of life flows there, with ten thousand intermingled  
branches and channels, through all the homes of human love. One sound  
as of many waters, a rapturous jubilee or a mournful sighing, comes up from 
the congregated dwellings of a whole nation. The Public is no vague abstraction; nor should that which is done against  
that Public, against public interest, law, or virtue, press but lightly on the  
conscience. It is but a vast expansion of individual life; an ocean of tears,  
an atmosphere of sighs, or a great whole of joy and gladness. It suffers  
with the suffering of millions; it rejoices with the joy of millions. What a vast  
crime does he commit, - private man or public man, agent or contractor,  
legislator or magistrate, secretary or president,-who dares, with indignity  
and wrong, to strike the bosom of the Public Welfare, to encourage

The wise and the good in all ages have interposed for it  
with their teachings and their blood. Everything that exists around us,  
every movement in nature every counsel of Providence, every  
interposition of God, centres upon one point - the fidelity of man. And even  
if the ghosts of the departed and remembered could come at midnight  
through the barred doors of our dwellings, and the shrouded dead should  
glide through the aisles of our churches and sit in our Masonic Temples,  
their teachings would be no more eloquent and impressive than the Great  
realities of life; than those memories of misspent years, those ghosts of  
departed opportunities, that, pointing to our conscience and eternity cry  
continually in our ears, "Work while the day lasts! for the night of death  
cometh, in which no man can work.”  
There are no tokens of public mourning for the calamity of the soul. Men  
weep when the body dies; and when it is borne to its last rest, they followit with sad and mournful procession. But 
for the dying soul there is no open lamentation; for the lost soul there are  
no obsequies. And yet the mind and soul of man have a value which nothing else has. They are worth a care which nothing else is worth; and to the single,  
solitary individual, they ought to possess an interest which nothing else  
possesses. The stored treasures of the heart, the unfathomable mines  
that are in the soul to be wrought, the broad and boundless realms of  
Thought, the freighted argosy of man's hopes and best affections, are  
brighter than gold and dearer than treasure. And yet the mind is in reality little known or considered. It is all which man  
permanently is, his inward being, his divine energy, his immortal thought,  
his boundless capacity, his infinite aspiration; and nevertheless, few value  
it for what it is worth. Few see a brother-mind in others, through the rags  
with which poverty has clothed it, beneath the crushing burdens of life,  
amidst the close pressure of worldly troubles, wants and sorrows. Few  
acknowledge and cheer it in that humble blot, and feel that the nobility of  
earth, and the commencing glory of Heaven are there. Men do not feel the worth of their own souls. They are proud of their  
mental powers; but the intrinsic, inner, infinite worth of their own minds  
they do not perceive. The poor man, admitted to a palace, feels, lofty and  
immortal being as he is, like a mere ordinary thing amid the splendors that  
surround him. He sees the carriage of wealth roll by him, and forgets the  
intrinsic and eternal dignity of his own mind in a poor and degrading envy,  
and feels as an humbler creature, because others are above him, not in  
mind, but in mensuration. Men respect themselves, according as they are  
more wealthy, higher in rank or office, loftier in the world's opinion, able to  
command more votes, more the favorites of the people or of Power.He sees the carriage of wealth roll by him, and forgets the  
intrinsic and eternal dignity of his own mind in a poor and degrading envy,  
and feels as an humbler creature, because others are above him, not in  
mind, but in mensuration. Men respect themselves, according as they are  
more wealthy, higher in rank or office, loftier in the world's opinion, able to  
command more votes, more the favorites of the people or of Power. The difference among men is not so much in their nature and intrinsic  
power, as in the faculty of communication. Some have the capacity of  
uttering and embodying in words their thoughts. All men, more or less, feel  
those thoughts. The glory of genius and the rapture of virtue, when rightly  
revealed, are diffused and shared among unnumbered minds. When  
eloquence and poetry speak; when those glorious arts, statuary, painting,  
and music, take audible or visible shape; when patriotism, charity, and  
virtue 
speak with a thrilling potency, the hearts of thousands glow with a kindred  
joy and ecstasy. If it were not so, there would be no eloquence; for  
eloquence is that to which other hearts respond; it is the faculty and power  
of making other hearts respond. No one is so low or degraded, as not  
sometimes to be touched with the beauty of goodness. No heart is made  
of materials so common, or even base, as not sometimes to respond,  
through every chord of it, to the call of honor, patriotism, generosity, and  
virtue. The poor African Slave will die for the master. or mistress, or in  
defence of the children, whom he loves. The poor, lost, scorned,  
abandoned, outcast woman will, without expectation of reward nurse  
those who are dying on every hand, utter strangers to her, with a  
contagious and horrid pestilence. The pickpocket will scale burning walls  
to rescue child or woman, unknown to him, from the ravenous flames. Most glorious is this capacity!The wise and the good in all ages have interposed for it  
with their teachings and their blood. Everything that exists around us,  
every movement in nature every counsel of Providence, every  
interposition of God, centres upon one point - the fidelity of man. And even  
if the ghosts of the departed and remembered could come at midnight  
through the barred doors of our dwellings, and the shrouded dead should  
glide through the aisles of our churches and sit in our Masonic Temples,  
their teachings would be no more eloquent and impressive than the Great  
realities of life; than those memories of misspent years, those ghosts of  
departed opportunities, that, pointing to our conscience and eternity cry  
continually in our ears, "Work while the day lasts! for the night of death  
cometh, in which no man can work.”  
There are no tokens of public mourning for the calamity of the soul. Men  
weep when the body dies; and when it is borne to its last rest, they follow

The pickpocket will scale burning walls  
to rescue child or woman, unknown to him, from the ravenous flames. Most glorious is this capacity! A power to commune with God and His  
Angels; a reflection of the Uncreated Light; a mirror that can collect and  
concentrate upon itself all the moral splendors of the Universe. It is the  
soul alone that gives any value to the things of this world. and it is only by  
raising the soul to its just elevation above all other things, that we can look  
rightly upon the purposes of this earth. No sceptre nor throne, nor  
structure of ages, nor broad empire, can compare with the wonders and  
grandeurs of a single thought. That alone, of all things that have been  
made, comprehends the Maker of all. That alone is the key which unlocks  
all the treasures of the Universe; the power that reigns over Space, Time,  
and Eternity. That, under God, is the Sovereign Dispenser to man of allthe blessings and glories that lie within the compass of possession, or the  
range of possibility. Virtue, Heaven, and Immortality exist not, nor ever will  
exist for us except as they exist and will exist, in the perception, feeling,  
and thought of the glorious mind. My Brother, in the hope that you have listened to and understood the  
Instruction and Lecture of this Degree, and that you feel the dignity of your  
own nature and the vast capacities of your own soul for good or evil, I  
proceed briefly to communicate to you the remaining instruction of this  
Degree. The Hebrew word, in the old Hebrew and Samaritan character, suspended  
in the East, over the five columns, is ADONAÏ, one of the names of God,  
usually translated Lord; and which the 
Hebrews, in reading, always substitute for the True Name, which is for them  
ineffable. The five columns, in the five different orders of architecture, are emblematical to  
us of the five principal divisions of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite:  
1. - The Tuscan, of the three blue Degrees, or the primitive Masonry. 2. - The Doric, of the ineffable Degrees, from the, fourth to the fourteenth,  
inclusive. 3. - The Ionic, of the fifteenth and sixteenth, or second temple Degrees. 4. - The Corinthian, of the seventeenth and eighteenth Degrees, or those of the  
new law. 5. - The Composite, of the philosophical and chivalric Degrees intermingled, from  
the nineteenth to the thirty-second, inclusive. The North Star, always fixed and immutable for us, represents the point in the  
centre of the circle, or the Deity in the centre of the Universe. It is the especial  
symbol of duty and of faith. To it, and the seven that continually revolve around it,  
mystical meanings are attached, which you will learn hereafter, if you should be  
permitted to advance, when you are made acquainted with the philosophical  
doctrines of the Hebrews.It is the especial  
symbol of duty and of faith. To it, and the seven that continually revolve around it,  
mystical meanings are attached, which you will learn hereafter, if you should be  
permitted to advance, when you are made acquainted with the philosophical  
doctrines of the Hebrews. The Morning Star, rising in the East, Jupiter, called by the Hebrews Tsadõc or  
Tsydyk, Just, is an emblem to us of the ever approaching dawn of perfection and  
Masonic light. The three great lights of the Lodge are symbols to us of the Power, Wisdom, and  
Beneficence of the Deity. They are also symbols of the first three Sephiroth, or  
Emanations of the Deity, according to the Kabalah, Kether, the omnipotent divine  
will; Chochmah, the divine intellectual power to generate thought, and Binah, the  
divine intellectual capacity to produce it - the two latter, usually translated  
Wisdom and Understanding, being the active and the passive, the positive and  
the negative, which we do not yet endeavor to explain to you. They are the  
columns Jachin and Boaz, that stand at the entrance to the Masonic Temple. In another aspect of this Degree, the Chief of the Architects [ , Rab Banaim,]  
symbolizes the constitutional executive head and chief of a free government; and  
the Degree teaches us that no free government can long endure, when the  
people cease 
to select for their magistrates the best and the wisest of their statesmen;  
when, passing these by, they permit factions or sordid interests to select  
for them the small, the low, the ignoble, and the obscure, and into such  
hands commit the country's destinies. There is, after all, a "divine right" to  
govern; and it is vested in the ablest, wisest, best, of every nation. "Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding: I am power: by  
me kings do reign, and princes decree justice; by me princes rule, and  
nobles, even all the magistrates of the earth."  
For the present, my Brother, let this suffice.The pickpocket will scale burning walls  
to rescue child or woman, unknown to him, from the ravenous flames. Most glorious is this capacity! A power to commune with God and His  
Angels; a reflection of the Uncreated Light; a mirror that can collect and  
concentrate upon itself all the moral splendors of the Universe. It is the  
soul alone that gives any value to the things of this world. and it is only by  
raising the soul to its just elevation above all other things, that we can look  
rightly upon the purposes of this earth. No sceptre nor throne, nor  
structure of ages, nor broad empire, can compare with the wonders and  
grandeurs of a single thought. That alone, of all things that have been  
made, comprehends the Maker of all. That alone is the key which unlocks  
all the treasures of the Universe; the power that reigns over Space, Time,  
and Eternity. That, under God, is the Sovereign Dispenser to man of all

There is, after all, a "divine right" to  
govern; and it is vested in the ablest, wisest, best, of every nation. "Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding: I am power: by  
me kings do reign, and princes decree justice; by me princes rule, and  
nobles, even all the magistrates of the earth."  
For the present, my Brother, let this suffice. We welcome you among us,  
to this peaceful retreat of virtue, to a participation in our privileges, to a  
share in our joys and our sorrows.

XIII. ROYAL ARCH OF SOLOMON.WHETHER the legend and history of this Degree are historically true, or  
but an allegory, containing in itself a deeper truth and a profounder  
meaning, we shall not now debate. If it be but a legendary myth, you must  
find out for yourself what it means. It is certain that the word which the  
Hebrews are not now permitted to pronounce was in common use by  
Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Jacob, Laban, Rebecca, and even among tribes  
foreign to the Hebrews, before the time of Moses; and that it recurs a  
hundred times in the lyrical effusions of David and other Hebrew poets. We know that for many centuries the Hebrews have been forbidden to  
pronounce the Sacred Name; that wherever it occurs, they have for ages  
read the word Adonaï instead; and that under it, when the masoretic  
points, which represent the vowels, came to be used, they placed those  
which belonged to the latter word. The possession of the true  
pronunciation was deemed to confer on him who had it extraordinary and  
supernatural powers; and the Word itself, worn upon the person, was  
regarded as an amulet, a protection against personal danger, sickness,  
and evil spirits. We know that all this was a vain superstition, natural to a  
rude people, necessarily disappearing as the intellect of man became  
enlightened; and wholly unworthy of a Mason. It is noticeable that this notion of the sanctity of the Divine Name or  
Creative Word was common to all the ancient nations. The Sacred Word  
HOM was supposed by the ancient Persians (who were among the  
earliest emigrants from Northern India) to 
be pregnant with a mysterious power; and they taught that by its utterance  
the world was created. In India it was forbidden to pronounce the word  
AUM or OM, the Sacred Name of the One Deity, manifested as Brahma,  
Vishna, and Seeva.The Sacred Word  
HOM was supposed by the ancient Persians (who were among the  
earliest emigrants from Northern India) to 
be pregnant with a mysterious power; and they taught that by its utterance  
the world was created. In India it was forbidden to pronounce the word  
AUM or OM, the Sacred Name of the One Deity, manifested as Brahma,  
Vishna, and Seeva. These superstitious notions in regard to the efficacy of the Word, and the  
prohibition against pronouncing it, could, being errors, have formed no  
part of the pure primitive religion, or of the esoteric doctrine taught by  
Moses, and the full knowledge of which was confined to the Initiates;  
unless the whole was but an ingenious invention for the concealment of  
some other Name or truth, the interpretation and meaning whereof was  
made known only to the select few. If so, the common notions in regard to  
the Word grew up in the minds of the people, like other errors and fables  
among all the ancient nations, out of original truths and symbols and  
allegories misunderstood. So it has always been that allegories, intended  
as vehicles of truth, to be understood by the sages, have become or bred  
errors, by being literally accepted. It is true, that before the masoretic points were invented (which was after  
the beginning of the Christian era), the pronunciation of a word in the  
Hebrew language could not be known from the characters in which it was  
written. It was, therefore, possible for that of the name of the Deity to have  
been forgotten and lost. It is certain that its true pronunciation is not that  
represented by the word Jehovah; and therefore that that is not the true  
name of Deity, nor the Ineffable Word. The ancient symbols and allegories always had more than one  
interpretation. They always had a double meaning, and sometimes more  
than two, one serving as the envelope of the other.XIII. ROYAL ARCH OF SOLOMON.

The ancient symbols and allegories always had more than one  
interpretation. They always had a double meaning, and sometimes more  
than two, one serving as the envelope of the other. Thus the pronunciation  
of the word was a symbol; and that pronunciation and the word itself were  
lost, when the knowledge of the true nature and attributes of God faded  
out of the minds of the Jewish people. That is one interpretation - true, butnot the inner and profoundest one. Men were figuratively said to forget the name of God, when they lost that  
knowledge, and worshipped the heathen deities, and burned incense to  
them on the high places, and passed their children through the fire to  
Moloch. Thus the attempts of the ancient Israelites and of the Initiates to ascertain  
the True Name of the Deity, and its pronunciation, and the loss of the True  
Word, are an allegory, in which are 
represented the general ignorance of the true nature and attributes of  
God, the proneness of the people of Judah and Israel to worship other  
deities, and the low and erroneous and dishonoring notions of the Grand  
Architect of the Universe, which all shared except a few favored persons;  
for even Solomon built altars and sacrificed to Astarat, the goddess of the  
Tsidumm, and Malcüm, the Aamünite god, and built high places for  
Kamüs, the Moabite deity, and Malec the god of the Beni-Aamün. The true  
nature of God was unknown to them, like His name; and they worshipped  
the calves of Jeroboam, as in the desert they did that made for them by  
Aarün. The mass of the Hebrews did not believe in the existence of one only God  
until a late period in their history. Their. early and popular ideas of the  
Deity were singularly low and unworthy. Even while Moses was receiving  
the law upon Mount Sinai, they forced Aarün to make them an image of  
the Egyptian god Apis, and fell down and adored it. They were ever ready  
to return to the worship of the gods of the Mitzraim; and soon after the  
death of Joshua they became devout worshippers of the false gods of all  
the surrounding nations.Even while Moses was receiving  
the law upon Mount Sinai, they forced Aarün to make them an image of  
the Egyptian god Apis, and fell down and adored it. They were ever ready  
to return to the worship of the gods of the Mitzraim; and soon after the  
death of Joshua they became devout worshippers of the false gods of all  
the surrounding nations. "Ye have borne," Amos, the prophet, said to  
them, speaking of their forty years' journeying in the desert, under Moses,  
"the tabernacle of your Malec and Kaiün your idols, the star of your god,  
which ye made to yourselves."  
Among them, as among other nations, the conceptions of God formed by  
individuals varied according to their intellectual and spiritual capacities;  
poor and imperfect, and investing God with the commonest and coarest  
attributes of humanity, among the ignorant and coarse; pure and lofty  
among the virtuous and richly gifted. These conceptions gradually  
improved and became purified and ennobled, as the nation advanced in  
civilization - being lowest in the historical books, amended in the prophetic  
writings, and reaching their highest elevation among the poets. Among all the ancient nations there was one faith and one idea of Deity  
for the enlightened, intelligent, and educated, and another for the common  
people. To this rule the Hebrews were no exception. Yehovah, to the  
mass of the people, was like the gods of the nations around them, except  
that he was the peculiar God, first of the family of Abraham, of that of  
Isaac, and of that of Jacob, and afterward the National God; and, as they  
believed, more powerful than the other gods of the same nature  
worshipped 
by their neighbors - "Who among the Baalim is like unto thee, O  
Yehovah?" - expressed their whole creed.The ancient symbols and allegories always had more than one  
interpretation. They always had a double meaning, and sometimes more  
than two, one serving as the envelope of the other. Thus the pronunciation  
of the word was a symbol; and that pronunciation and the word itself were  
lost, when the knowledge of the true nature and attributes of God faded  
out of the minds of the Jewish people. That is one interpretation - true, but

To this rule the Hebrews were no exception. Yehovah, to the  
mass of the people, was like the gods of the nations around them, except  
that he was the peculiar God, first of the family of Abraham, of that of  
Isaac, and of that of Jacob, and afterward the National God; and, as they  
believed, more powerful than the other gods of the same nature  
worshipped 
by their neighbors - "Who among the Baalim is like unto thee, O  
Yehovah?" - expressed their whole creed. The Deity of the early Hebrews talked to Adam and Eve in the garden of  
delight, as he walked in it in the cool of the day; he conversed with Kayin;  
he sat and ate with Abraham in his tent; that patriarch required a visible  
token, before he would believe in his positive promise; he permitted  
Abraham to expostulate with him, and to induce him to change his first  
determination in regard to Sodom; he wrestled with Jacob; he showed  
Moses his person, though not his face; he dictated the minutest police  
regulations and the dimensions of the tabernacle and its furniture, to the  
Israelites; he insisted on and delighted in sacrifices and burnt-offerings; he  
was angry, jealous, and revengeful, as well as wavering and irresolute; he  
allowed Moses to reason him out of his fixed resolution utterly to destroy  
his people; he commanded the performance of the most shocking and  
hideous acts of cruelty and barbarity. He hardened the heart of Pharaoh;he repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto the people of  
Nineveh; and he did it not, to the disgust and anger of Jonah. Such were the popular notions of the Deity; and either the priests had  
none better, or took little trouble to correct these notions; or the popular  
intellect was not enough enlarged to enable them to entertain any higher  
conceptions of the Almighty. But such were not the ideas of the intellectual and enlightened few among  
the Hebrews. It is certain that they possessed a knowledge of the true  
nature and attributes of God; as the same class of men did among the  
other nations - Zoroaster, Menu, Confucius, Socrates, and Plato. But their  
doctrines on this subject were esoteric; they did not communicate them to  
the people at large, but only to a favored few; and as they were  
communicated in Egypt and India, in Persia and Phoenicia, in Greece and  
Samothrace, in the greater mysteries, to the Initiates. The communication of this knowledge and other secrets, some of which  
are perhaps lost, constituted, under other names, what we now call  
Masonry, or Free or Frank-Masonry. That knowledge was, in one sense,  
the Lost Word, which was made known to the Grand Elect, Perfect, and  
Sublime Masons. It would be folly to pretend that the forms of Masonry  
were the same in those ages as they are now. The present name of the  
Order, and its titles, and the names of the Degrees now in use, were not  
then known. Even Blue Masonry cannot trace back its authentic history, with its present  
Degrees, further than the year 1700, if so far. But, by whatever name it  
was known in this or the other country, Masonry existed as it now exists,  
the same in spirit and at heart, not only when Solomon builded the temple,  
but centuries before - before even the first colonies emigrated into  
Southern India, Persia, and Egypt, from the cradle of the human race.Even Blue Masonry cannot trace back its authentic history, with its present  
Degrees, further than the year 1700, if so far. But, by whatever name it  
was known in this or the other country, Masonry existed as it now exists,  
the same in spirit and at heart, not only when Solomon builded the temple,  
but centuries before - before even the first colonies emigrated into  
Southern India, Persia, and Egypt, from the cradle of the human race. The Supreme, Self-existent, Eternal, All-wise, All-powerful, Infinitely Good,  
Pitying, Beneficent, and Merciful Creator and Preserver of the Universe  
was the same, by whatever name he was called, to the intellectual and  
enlightened men of all nations. The name was nothing, if not a symbol and  
representative hieroglyph of his nature and attributes. The name AL  
represented his remoteness above men, his inaccessibility; BAL and  
BALA, his might; ALOHIM, his various potencies; IHUH, existence and the  
generation of things. None of his names, among the Orientals, were the  
symbols of a divinely infinite love and tenderness, and all-embracing  
mercy. As MOLOCH or MALEK he was but an omnipotent monarch, a  
tremendous and irresponsible Will; as ADONAÏ, only an arbitrary LORD  
and Master; as AL Shadaï, potent and a DESTROYER. To communicate true and correct ideas in respect of the Deity was one  
chief object of the mysteries. In them, Khürüm the King, and Khürüm the  
Master, obtained their knowledge of him and his attributes; and in them  
that knowledge was taught to Moses and Pythagoras. Wherefore nothing forbids you to consider the whole legend of this  
Degree, like that of the Master's, an allegory, representing the  
perpetuation of the knowledge of the True God in the sanctuaries of  
initiation. By the subterranean vaults you may understand the places of  
initiation, which in the ancient ceremonies were generally under ground.To this rule the Hebrews were no exception. Yehovah, to the  
mass of the people, was like the gods of the nations around them, except  
that he was the peculiar God, first of the family of Abraham, of that of  
Isaac, and of that of Jacob, and afterward the National God; and, as they  
believed, more powerful than the other gods of the same nature  
worshipped 
by their neighbors - "Who among the Baalim is like unto thee, O  
Yehovah?" - expressed their whole creed. The Deity of the early Hebrews talked to Adam and Eve in the garden of  
delight, as he walked in it in the cool of the day; he conversed with Kayin;  
he sat and ate with Abraham in his tent; that patriarch required a visible  
token, before he would believe in his positive promise; he permitted  
Abraham to expostulate with him, and to induce him to change his first  
determination in regard to Sodom; he wrestled with Jacob; he showed  
Moses his person, though not his face; he dictated the minutest police  
regulations and the dimensions of the tabernacle and its furniture, to the  
Israelites; he insisted on and delighted in sacrifices and burnt-offerings; he  
was angry, jealous, and revengeful, as well as wavering and irresolute; he  
allowed Moses to reason him out of his fixed resolution utterly to destroy  
his people; he commanded the performance of the most shocking and  
hideous acts of cruelty and barbarity. He hardened the heart of Pharaoh;

Wherefore nothing forbids you to consider the whole legend of this  
Degree, like that of the Master's, an allegory, representing the  
perpetuation of the knowledge of the True God in the sanctuaries of  
initiation. By the subterranean vaults you may understand the places of  
initiation, which in the ancient ceremonies were generally under ground. The Temple of Solomon presented a symbolic image of the Universe; and  
resembled, in its arrangements and furniture, all the temples of the ancient  
nations that practised the mysteries. The system of numbers was  
intimately connected with their religions and worship, and has come down  
to us in Masonry; though the esoteric meaning with which the numbers  
used by us are pregnant is unknown to the vast majority of those who use  
them. Those numbers were especially employed that had a reference to  
the Deity, represented his attributes, or figured in the 
frame-work of the world, in time and space, and formed more or less the  
bases of that frame-work. These were universally regarded as sacred,  
being the expression of order and intelligence, the utterances of DivinityHimself. The Holy of Holies of the Temple formed a cube; in which, drawn on a  
plane surface, there are 4 + 3 + 2 = 9 lines visible, and three sides or  
faces. It corresponded with the number four, by which the ancients  
presented Nature, it being the number of substances or corporeal forms,  
and of the elements, the cardinal points and seasons, and the secondary  
colors. The number three everywhere represented the Supreme Being. Hence the name of the Deity, engraven upon the triangular plate, and that  
sunken into the cube of agate, taught the ancient Mason, and teaches us,  
that the true knowledge of God, of His nature and His attributes is written  
by Him upon the leaves of the great Book of Universal Nature, and may be  
read there by all who are endowed with the requisite amount of intellect  
and intelligence. This knowledge of God, so written there, and of which  
Masonry has in all ages been the interpreter, is the Master Mason's Word. Within the Temple, all the arrangements were mystically and symbolically  
connected with the same system. The vault or ceiling, starred like the  
firmament, was supported by twelve columns, representing the twelve  
months of the year. The border that ran around the columns represented  
the zodiac, and one of the twelve celestial signs was appropriated to each  
column. The brazen sea was supported by twelve oxen, three looking to  
each cardinal point of the compass. And so in our day every Masonic Lodge represents the Universe. Each  
extends, we are told, from the rising to the setting sun, from the South to  
the North, from the surface of the Earth to the Heavens, and from the  
same to the centre of the globe.And so in our day every Masonic Lodge represents the Universe. Each  
extends, we are told, from the rising to the setting sun, from the South to  
the North, from the surface of the Earth to the Heavens, and from the  
same to the centre of the globe. In it are represented the sun, moon, and  
stars; three great torches in the East, West, and South, forming a triangle,  
give it light: and, like the Delta or Triangle suspended in the East, and  
inclosing the Ineffable Name, indicate, by the mathematical equality of the  
angles and sides, the beautiful and harmonious proportions which govern  
in the aggregate and details of the Universe; while those sides and angles  
represent, by their number, three, the Trinity of Power, Wisdom, and  
Harmony, which presided at the building of this marvellous work These  
three great lights also represent the 
great mystery of the three principles, of creation, dissolution or destruction,  
and reproduction or regeneration, consecrated by all creeds in their numerous  
Trinities. The luminous pedestal, lighted by the perpetual flame within, is a symbol of  
that light of Reason, given by God to man, by which he is enabled to read in  
the Book of Nature the record of the thought, the revelation of the attributes of  
the Deity. The three Masters, Adoniram, Joabert, and Stolkin, are types of the True  
Mason, who seeks for knowledge from pure motives, and that he may be the  
better enabled to serve and benefit his fellow-men; while the discontented  
and presumptuous Masters who were buried in the ruins of the arches  
represent those who strive to acquire it for unholy purposes, to gain power  
over their fellows, to gratify their pride, their vanity, or their ambition.Wherefore nothing forbids you to consider the whole legend of this  
Degree, like that of the Master's, an allegory, representing the  
perpetuation of the knowledge of the True God in the sanctuaries of  
initiation. By the subterranean vaults you may understand the places of  
initiation, which in the ancient ceremonies were generally under ground. The Temple of Solomon presented a symbolic image of the Universe; and  
resembled, in its arrangements and furniture, all the temples of the ancient  
nations that practised the mysteries. The system of numbers was  
intimately connected with their religions and worship, and has come down  
to us in Masonry; though the esoteric meaning with which the numbers  
used by us are pregnant is unknown to the vast majority of those who use  
them. Those numbers were especially employed that had a reference to  
the Deity, represented his attributes, or figured in the 
frame-work of the world, in time and space, and formed more or less the  
bases of that frame-work. These were universally regarded as sacred,  
being the expression of order and intelligence, the utterances of Divinity

The luminous pedestal, lighted by the perpetual flame within, is a symbol of  
that light of Reason, given by God to man, by which he is enabled to read in  
the Book of Nature the record of the thought, the revelation of the attributes of  
the Deity. The three Masters, Adoniram, Joabert, and Stolkin, are types of the True  
Mason, who seeks for knowledge from pure motives, and that he may be the  
better enabled to serve and benefit his fellow-men; while the discontented  
and presumptuous Masters who were buried in the ruins of the arches  
represent those who strive to acquire it for unholy purposes, to gain power  
over their fellows, to gratify their pride, their vanity, or their ambition. The Lion that guarded the Ark and held in his mouth the key wherewith to  
open it, figuratively represents Solomon, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who  
preserved and communicated the key to the true knowledge of God, of His  
laws, and of the profound mysteries of the moral and physical Universe. ENOCH [ Khanõc], we are told, walked with God three hundred years,  
after reaching the age of sixty-five - "walked with God, and he was no more,  
for God had taken him." His name signified in the Hebrew, INITIATE or  
INITIATOR. The legend of the columns, of granite and brass or bronze,  
erected by him, is probably symbolical. That of bronze, which survived the  
flood, is supposed to symbolize the mysteries, of which Masonry is the  
legitimate successor - from the earliest times the custodian and depository of  
the great philosophical and religious truths, unknown to the world at large,  
and handed down from age to age by an unbroken current of tradition,  
embodied in symbols, emblems, and allegories.The legend of this Degree is thus, partially, interpreted. It is of little  
importance whether it is in anywise historical. For its value consists in the  
lessons which it inculcates, and the duties which it prescribes to those who  
receive it. The parables and allegories of the Scriptures are not less valuable  
than history. Nay, they are more so, because ancient history is little  
instructive, and truths are concealed in and symbolized by the legend and the  
myth. There are profounder meanings concealed in the symbols of this Degree,  
connected with the philosophical system of the Hebrew 
Kabalists, which you will learn hereafter, if you should be so fortunate as  
to advance. They are unfolded in the higher Degrees. The lion [  
Arai, Araiah, which also means the altar] still holds in his mouth the key of  
the enigma of the sphynx. But there is one application of this Degree, that you are now entitled to  
know; and which, remembering that Khürüm, the Master, is the symbol of  
human freedom, you would probably discover for yourself. It is not enough for a people to gain its liberty. It must secure it. It must not  
intrust it to the keeping, or hold it at the pleasure, of any one man. The  
keystone of the Royal Arch of the great Temple of Liberty is a fundamental  
law, charter, or constitution; the expression of the fixed habits of thought of  
the people, embodied in a written instrument, or the result of the slow  
accretions and the consolidation of centuries; the same in war as in  
peace; that cannot be hastily changed, nor be violated with impunity, but is  
sacred, like the Ark of the Covenant of God, which none could touch and  
live.It must not  
intrust it to the keeping, or hold it at the pleasure, of any one man. The  
keystone of the Royal Arch of the great Temple of Liberty is a fundamental  
law, charter, or constitution; the expression of the fixed habits of thought of  
the people, embodied in a written instrument, or the result of the slow  
accretions and the consolidation of centuries; the same in war as in  
peace; that cannot be hastily changed, nor be violated with impunity, but is  
sacred, like the Ark of the Covenant of God, which none could touch and  
live. A permanent constitution, rooted in the affections, expressing the will and  
judgment, and built upon the instincts and settled habits of thought of the  
people, with an independent judiciary, an elective legislature of two  
branches, an executive responsible to the people, and the right of trial by  
jury, will guarantee the liberties of a people, if it be virtuous and temperate,  
without luxury, and without the lust of conquest and dominion, and the  
follies of visionary theories of impossible perfection. Masonry teaches its Initiates that the pursuits and occupations of this life,  
its activity, care, and ingenuity, the predestined developments of the  
nature given us by God, tend to promote His great design, in making the  
world; and are not at war with the great purpose of life. It teaches that  
everything is beautiful in its time, in its place, in its appointed office; that  
everything which man is put to do, if rightly and faithfully done, naturally  
helps to work out his salvation; that if he obeys the genuine principles of  
his calling, he will be a good man: and that it is only by neglect and nonperformance  
of the task set for him by Heaven, by wandering into idle  
dissipation, or by violating their beneficent and lofty spirit, that he becomes  
a bad man.Masonry teaches its Initiates that the pursuits and occupations of this life,  
its activity, care, and ingenuity, the predestined developments of the  
nature given us by God, tend to promote His great design, in making the  
world; and are not at war with the great purpose of life. It teaches that  
everything is beautiful in its time, in its place, in its appointed office; that  
everything which man is put to do, if rightly and faithfully done, naturally  
helps to work out his salvation; that if he obeys the genuine principles of  
his calling, he will be a good man: and that it is only by neglect and nonperformance  
of the task set for him by Heaven, by wandering into idle  
dissipation, or by violating their beneficent and lofty spirit, that he becomes  
a bad man. The appointed action of life is the great training of Providence;  
and if man yields himself 
to it, he will need neither churches nor ordinances, except for the  
expression of his religious homage and gratitude. For there is a religion of toil. It is not all drudgery, a mere stretching of the  
limbs and straining of the sinews to tasks. It has a meaning and an intent. A living heart pours life-blood into the toiling arm; and warm affections  
inspire and mingle with man's labors. They are the home affections. Labor  
toils a-field, or plies its task in cities, or urges the keels of commerce over  
wide oceans; but home is its centre; and thither it ever goes with its  
earnings, with the means of support and comfort for others; offerings  
sacred to the thought of every true man, as a sacrifice at a golden shrine. Many faults there are amidst the toils of life; many harsh and hasty words  
are uttered; but still the toils go on, weary and hard and exasperating as  
they often are. For in that home is age or sickness, or helpless infancy, or  
gentle childhood, or feeble woman, that must not want.The luminous pedestal, lighted by the perpetual flame within, is a symbol of  
that light of Reason, given by God to man, by which he is enabled to read in  
the Book of Nature the record of the thought, the revelation of the attributes of  
the Deity. The three Masters, Adoniram, Joabert, and Stolkin, are types of the True  
Mason, who seeks for knowledge from pure motives, and that he may be the  
better enabled to serve and benefit his fellow-men; while the discontented  
and presumptuous Masters who were buried in the ruins of the arches  
represent those who strive to acquire it for unholy purposes, to gain power  
over their fellows, to gratify their pride, their vanity, or their ambition. The Lion that guarded the Ark and held in his mouth the key wherewith to  
open it, figuratively represents Solomon, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who  
preserved and communicated the key to the true knowledge of God, of His  
laws, and of the profound mysteries of the moral and physical Universe. ENOCH [ Khanõc], we are told, walked with God three hundred years,  
after reaching the age of sixty-five - "walked with God, and he was no more,  
for God had taken him." His name signified in the Hebrew, INITIATE or  
INITIATOR. The legend of the columns, of granite and brass or bronze,  
erected by him, is probably symbolical. That of bronze, which survived the  
flood, is supposed to symbolize the mysteries, of which Masonry is the  
legitimate successor - from the earliest times the custodian and depository of  
the great philosophical and religious truths, unknown to the world at large,  
and handed down from age to age by an unbroken current of tradition,  
embodied in symbols, emblems, and allegories.

Many faults there are amidst the toils of life; many harsh and hasty words  
are uttered; but still the toils go on, weary and hard and exasperating as  
they often are. For in that home is age or sickness, or helpless infancy, or  
gentle childhood, or feeble woman, that must not want. If man had no  
other than mere selfish impulses, the scene of labor which we behold  
around us would not exist.The advocate who fairly and honestly presents his case, with feeling of  
true self-respect, honor, and conscience, to help the tribunal on towards  
the right conclusion, with a conviction that God's justice reigns there, is  
acting a religious part, leading that day religious life; or else right and  
justice are no part of religion Whether, during all that day, he has once  
appealed, in form or in terms, to his conscience, or not; whether he has  
once spoken of religion and God, or not; if there has been the inward  
purpose, the conscious intent and desire, that sacred justice should  
triumph, he has that day led a good and religious life, and made most a  
essential contribution to that religion of life and of society, the cause of  
equity between man and man, and of truth and right action in the world. Books, to be of religious tendency in the Masonic sense, need not be  
books of sermons, of pious exercises, or of prayers. Whatever inculcates  
pure, noble, and patriotic sentiments, or touches the heart with the beauty  
of virtue, and the excellence of an upright life, accords with the religion of  
Masonry, and is the Gospel of literature and art. That Gospel is preached  
from many a book and painting, from many a poem and fiction, and review  
and newspaper; and it is a painful error and miserable narrowness, not to  
recognize these wide-spread agencies of Heaven's providing; not 
to see and welcome these many-handed coadjutors, to the great and good  
cause. The oracles of God do not speak from the pulpit alone. There is also a religion of society. In business, there is much more than  
sale, exchange, price, payment; for there is the sacred faith of man in  
man.There is also a religion of society. In business, there is much more than  
sale, exchange, price, payment; for there is the sacred faith of man in  
man. When we repose perfect confidence in the integrity of another; when  
we feel that he will not swerve from the right, frank, straightforward,  
conscientious course, for any temptation; his integrity and  
conscientiousness are the image of God to us; and when we believe in it,  
it is as great and generous an act, as when we believe in the rectitude of  
the Deity. In gay assemblies for amusement, the good affections of life gush and  
mingle. If they did not, these gathering-places would be as dreary and  
repulsive as the caves and dens of outlaws and robbers. When friends  
meet, and hands are warmly pressed, and the eye kindles and the  
countenance is suffused with gladness, there is a religion between their  
hearts; and each loves and worships the True and Good that is in the  
other. It is not policy, or self-interest, or selfishness that spreads such a  
charm around that meeting, but the halo of bright and beautiful affection. The same splendor of kindly liking, and affectionate regard, shines like the  
soft overarching sky, over all the world; over all places where men meet,  
and walk or toil together; not over lovers' bowers and marriage-altars  
alone, not over the homes of purity and tenderness alone; but over all  
tilled fields, and busy workshops, and dusty highways, and paved streets. There is not a worn stone upon the sidewalks, but has been the altar of  
such offerings of mutual kindness; nor a wooden pillar or iron railing  
against which hearts beating with affection have not leaned. How many  
soever other elements there are in the stream of life flowing through these  
channels, that is surely here and everywhere; honest, heartfelt,  
disinterested, inexpressible affection. Every Masonic Lodge is a temple of religion; and its teachings are  
instruction in religion.Many faults there are amidst the toils of life; many harsh and hasty words  
are uttered; but still the toils go on, weary and hard and exasperating as  
they often are. For in that home is age or sickness, or helpless infancy, or  
gentle childhood, or feeble woman, that must not want. If man had no  
other than mere selfish impulses, the scene of labor which we behold  
around us would not exist.

How many  
soever other elements there are in the stream of life flowing through these  
channels, that is surely here and everywhere; honest, heartfelt,  
disinterested, inexpressible affection. Every Masonic Lodge is a temple of religion; and its teachings are  
instruction in religion. For here are inculcated disinterestedness, affection,  
toleration, devotedness, patriotism, truth, a generous sympathy with those  
who suffer and mourn, pity for the fallen, mercy for the erring, relief for  
those in want, Faith, Hope, and Charity. Here we meet as brethren, to  
learn to know and love each other. Here we greet each other gladly, are  
lenient to each other's faults, regardful of each other's feelings, ready to  
relieve 
each other's wants. This is the true religion revealed to the ancient  
patriarchs; which Masonry has taught for many centuries, and which it will  
continue to teach as long as time endures. If unworthy passions, or  
selfish, bitter, or revengeful feelings, contempt, dislike, hatred, enter here,they are intruders and n t welcome, strangers uninvited, and not guests. Certainly there are many evils and bad passions, and much hate and  
contempt and unkindness everywhere in the world. We cannot refuse to  
see the evil -that is in life. But all is not evil. We still see God in the world. There is good amidst the evil. The hand of mercy leads wealth to the  
hovels of poverty and sorrow. Truth and simplicity live amid many wiles  
and sophistries. There are good hearts underneath gay robes, and under  
tattered garments also. Love clasps the hand of love, amid all the envyings and distractions of  
showy competition; fidelity, pity, and sympathy hold the long night-watch  
by the bedside of the suffering neighbor, amidst the surrounding poverty  
and squalid misery. Devoted men go from city to city to nurse those  
smitten down by the terrible pestilence that renews at intervals its  
mysterious marches. Women well-born and delicately nurtured nursed the  
wounded soldiers in hospitals, before it became fashionable to do so; and  
even poor lost women, whom God alone loves and pities, tend the plaguestricken  
with a patient and generous heroism. Masonry and its kindred  
Orders teach men to love each other, feed the hungry, clothe the naked,  
comfort the sick, and bury the friendless dead. Everywhere God finds and  
blesses the kindly office, the pitying thought, and the loving heart. There is an element of good in all men's lawful pursuits and a divine spirit  
breathing in all their lawful affections. The ground on which they tread is  
holy ground. There is a natural religion of life, answering, with however  
many a broken tone, to the religion of nature. There is a beauty and glory  
in Humanity., in man, answering, with however many a mingling shade, to  
the loveliness of soft landscapes and swelling hills, and the wondrous  
Men may be virtuous, self-improving, and religious in their employments. Precisely for that, those employments were made.There is a beauty and glory  
in Humanity., in man, answering, with however many a mingling shade, to  
the loveliness of soft landscapes and swelling hills, and the wondrous  
Men may be virtuous, self-improving, and religious in their employments. Precisely for that, those employments were made. All their social relations,  
friendship, love , the ties of family, were made to be holy. They may be  
religious, not by a kind of protest 
and resistance against their several vocations; but by conformity to their  
true spirit. Those vocations do not exclude religion; but demand it, for their  
own perfection. They may be religious laborers, whether in field or factory;  
religious physicians, lawyers, sculptors, poets, painters, and musicians. They may be religious in all the toils and in all the amusements of life. Their life may be a religion; the broad earth its altar; its incense the very  
breath of life; its fires ever kindled by the brightness of Heaven. Bound up with our poor, frail life, is the mighty thought that spurns the  
narrow span of all visible existence. Ever the soul reaches outward, and  
asks for freedom. It looks forth from the narrow and grated windows of  
sense, upon the wide immeasurable creation; it knows that around it and  
beyond it lie outstretched the infinite and everlasting paths. Everything within us and without us ought to stir our minds to admiration  
and wonder. We are a mystery encompassed with mysteries. The  
connection of mind with matter is a mystery; the wonderful telegraphic  
communication between the brain and every part of the body, the power  
and action of the will. Every familiar step is more than a story in a land of  
enchantment. The power of movement is as mysterious as the power of  
thought. Memory, and dreams that are the indistinct echoes of dead  
memories are alike inexplicable. Universal harmony springs from infinite  
complication.How many  
soever other elements there are in the stream of life flowing through these  
channels, that is surely here and everywhere; honest, heartfelt,  
disinterested, inexpressible affection. Every Masonic Lodge is a temple of religion; and its teachings are  
instruction in religion. For here are inculcated disinterestedness, affection,  
toleration, devotedness, patriotism, truth, a generous sympathy with those  
who suffer and mourn, pity for the fallen, mercy for the erring, relief for  
those in want, Faith, Hope, and Charity. Here we meet as brethren, to  
learn to know and love each other. Here we greet each other gladly, are  
lenient to each other's faults, regardful of each other's feelings, ready to  
relieve 
each other's wants. This is the true religion revealed to the ancient  
patriarchs; which Masonry has taught for many centuries, and which it will  
continue to teach as long as time endures. If unworthy passions, or  
selfish, bitter, or revengeful feelings, contempt, dislike, hatred, enter here,

Memory, and dreams that are the indistinct echoes of dead  
memories are alike inexplicable. Universal harmony springs from infinite  
complication. The momentum of every step we take in our dwelling  
contributes in part to the order of the Universe. We are connected by ties  
of thought, and even of matter and its forces, with the whole boundless  
Universe and all the past and coming generations of men. The humblest object beneath our eye as completely defies our scrutiny as  
the economy of the most distant star. Every leaf and every blade of grass  
holds within itself secrets which no human penetration will ever fathom. No  
man can tell what is its principle of life. No man can know what his power  
of secretion is. Both are inscrutable mysteries. Wherever we place our  
hand we lay it upon the locked bosom of mystery. Step where we will, wetread upon wonders. The sea-sands, the clods of the field, the water-worn  
pebbles on the hills, the rude masses of rock, are traced over and over, in  
every direction, with a handwriting older and more significant and sublime  
than all the ancient ruins, and all the overthrown and buried cities that past  
generations 
have left upon the earth; for it is the handwriting of the Almighty.  
A Mason's great business with life is to read the book of its teaching; to  
find that life is not the doing of drudgeries, but the hearing of oracles. The  
old mythology is but a leaf in that book; for it peopled the world with  
spiritual natures; and science, many-leaved, still spreads before us the  
same tale of wonder.  
We shall be just as happy hereafter, as we are pure and upright, and no  
more, just as happy as our character prepares us to be, and no more. Our  
moral, like our mental character, is nut formed in a moment; it is the habit  
of our minds; the result of many thoughts and feelings and efforts, bound  
together by many natural and strong ties. The great law of Retribution is,  
that all coming experience is to be affected by every present feeling; every  
future moment of being must answer for every present moment; one  
moment, sacrificed to vice, or lost to improvement, is forever sacrificed  
and lost; an hour's delay to enter the right path, is to put us back so far, in  
the everlasting pursuit of happiness; and every sin, even of the best men,  
is to be thus answered for, if not according to the full measure of its illdesert,  
yet according to a rule of unbending rectitude and impartiality.  
The law of retribution presses upon every m an, whether he thinks of it or  
not. It pursues him through all the courses of life, with a step that never  
falters nor tires, and with an eye that never sleeps. If it were not so, God's  
government would not be impartial; 'there would be no discrimination; no  
moral dominion; no light shed upon the mysteries of Providence.  
Whatsoever a man soweth, that, and not something else, shall he reap.  
That which we are doing, good or evil, grave or gay, that which we do today  
and shall do to-morrow; each thought, each feeling, each action, each  
event; every passing hour, every breathing moment; all are contributing to  
form the character according to which we are to be[... text truncated due to length ...]